
Principles of Hearing 
Aid Audiology 

Principles of Hearing 
Aid Audiology 
Maryanne Tate 
I a 
11 I Springer-Science+Business Media, B. v. 

First edition 1994 
© Maryanne Tate 1994 
Originally published by Maryanne Tate in 1994 
ISBN 978-0-412-49070-5 
ISBN 978-1-4899-7152-4 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4899-7152-4 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private 
study, or criticism or review, as permitted under the UK Copyright 
Designs and Patents Act, 1988, this publication may not be reproduced, 
stored, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the prior 
permission in writing of the publishers, or in the case of reprographic 
reproduction only in accordance with the terms of the licences issued by 
the Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK, or in accordance with the 
terms of licences issued by the appropriate Reproduction Rights 
Organization outside the UK. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside 
the terms stated here should be sent to the publishers at the London 
address printed on this page. 
The publisher makes no representation, express or implied, with 
regard to the accuracy of the information contained in this book and 
cannot accept any legal responsibility or liability for any errors or 
omissions that may be made. 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
§ 
Printed on permanent acid-free text paper, manufactured in 
accordance with ANSIINISO 239.48-1992 and ANSI/NISO 239.48-1984 
(Permanence of Paper). 

Contents 
Foreword 
Acknowledgements 
PART ONE Fundamental Sciences 
1 Acoustics 
1.1 Physical properties of sound 
1.2 The measurement of sound 
1.3 The audiometer 
1.4 The psychological properties of sound 
1.5 Summary 
References 
Further reading 
2 Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
2.1 Anatomy of the ear 
2.2 The physiology of hearing 
2.3 Summary 
Further reading 
3 Medical aspects of hearing loss 
3.1 Introduction 
3.2 Pathology of the outer ear 
3.3 Pathology of the middle ear 
3.4 Pathology of the inner ear 
3.5 Other conditions of the ear 
3.6 Summary 
References 
Further reading 
4 Speech and intelligibility 
4.1 The speech chain 
ix 
X 
1 
3 
3 
10 
14 
17 
18 
19 
19 
20 
20 
32 
39 
40 
41 
41 
42 
46 
50 
57 
59 
60 
60 
61 
61 

vi 
Contents 
4.2 The vocal tract 
63 
4.3 Speech-reading 
64 
4.4 Speech sounds 
65 
4.5 Hearing loss and speech perception 
70 
4.6 Hearing loss and speech production 
71 
4. 7 Summary 
72 
Further reading 
72 
5 The hearing aid system 
73 
5.1 The basic components of a hearing aid 
73 
5.2 Elementary electricity and electronics 
84 
5.3 Signal processing 
86 
5.4 Summary 
93 
References 
94 
Further reading 
94 
PART TWO The Practice of Hearing Aid Audiology 
95 
6 The assessment procedure 
97 
6.1 Pre-selection management 
97 
6.2 Otoscopy 
101 
6.3 Tuning fork tests 
103 
6.4 Principal audiometric tests 
106 
6.5 Understanding audiograms 
117 
6.6 Room requirements for audiometry 
122 
6.7 Summary 
123 
References 
124 
Further reading 
125 
7 Hearing aids and their performance 
126 
7.1 Introduction 
126 
7.2 Types of hearing aid system 
127 
7.3 Specification and performance 
132 
7.4 Hearing aid standards 
139 
7.5 Measuring methods 
142 
7.6 Power sources 
146 
7.7 The National Health Service provision of hearing aids 
149 
7.8 Summary 
152 
References 
153 
Further reading 
153 
8 Selection and fitting 
155 
8.1 The choice of a hearing aid system 
155 
8.2 Hearing aid fitting 
163 

8.3 Summary 
References 
Further reading 
9 Earmoulds 
9.1 Making the impression 
9.2 Earmoulds 
9.3 Summary 
References 
Further reading 
10 Evaluation 
10.1 Introduction 
10.2 Insertion gain measurement 
10.3 Functional gain measurement 
10.4 Speech audiometry 
10.5 Subjective evaluation 
10.6 Summary 
References 
Further reading 
11 Client management and rehabilitation 
11.1 The rehabilitation process 
11.2 Practical aspects of rehabilitation 
11.3 Assistive devices for the hearing impaired 
11.4 Management practices 
11.5 Improving communications 
11. 6 The role of other specialists 
11.7 Summary 
References 
Further reading 
Contents 
vii 
171 
171 
172 
173 
173 
178 
185 
185 
186 
187 
187 
187 
190 
191 
197 
199 
199 
200 
201 
201 
207 
213 
214 
217 
219 
220 
220 
221 
PART THREE Special Aspects of Hearing Aid Audiology 
223 
12 Assessment and management of special problems 
225 
12.1 Tinnitus 
225 
References for section 12.1 
232 
Further reading for section 12.1 
232 
12.2 Impedance audiometry 
232 
Further reading for section 12.2 
240 
12.3 Specialized audiometric tests 
240 
References for section 12.3 
246 
Further reading for section 12.3 
246 
12.4 Non-organic hearing loss 
246 

viii 
Contents 
References for section 12.4 
Further reading for section 12.4 
12.5 Automatic audiometry 
References for section 12.5 
Further reading for section 12.5 
13 Paediatric provision 
13.1 The effect of hearing loss in children 
13.2 Habilitation of hearing impaired children 
13.3 Summary 
References 
Further reading 
Appendix Glossary 
Index 
249 
250 
250 
252 
252 
253 
253 
259 
264 
264 
265 
266 
277 

Foreword 
Both for those in training towards qualification in hearing aid audiology 
and for those simply wishing to revise and update their knowledge, 
it is a perennial problem to acquire one book which provides com-
prehensive and up-to-date material on hearing aid audiology. Principles 
of Hearing Aid Audiology meets the need for a text book which deals not 
only with the foundation sciences of hearing aid audiology but also the 
many and varied aspects of audiological practice where the objective 
is the rehabilitation of the hearing impaired through hearing aid 
prescription and fitting. In bringing together all the material contained 
in this book, Maryanne Tate has drawn on her considerable experience 
in the training of hearing aid audiologists as well as in dealing with the 
hearing impaired themselves. As a result, this book has total relevance 
to the needs of the many professional groups whose work brings them 
into contact with the hearing impaired. 
The very practical nature of hearing aid audiology is fully recognized 
so that the purely theoretical aspects are presented and explained with 
a view to supporting hearing aid audiology in practice. With so many 
audiology text books emanating from the USA, Principles of Hearing Aid 
Audiology will, I am sure, be greatly welcomed by readers in the UK. 
Undoubtedly, this book will feature prominently on any list of recom-
mended reading in audiology and, at the same time, will serve as a 
very useful work of reference. 
Barry Downes, LLB, FSHAA 
Registrar of the Society of 
Hearing Aid Audiologists, 1988-1993 

Acknowledgements 
Many colleagues and friends have helped and encouraged me to write 
this book. Dr Mark Lutman (Institute of Hearing Research, Nottingham) 
provided both critical comments and encouragement when I needed 
them in the early stages, and I am particularly grateful for the contri-
butions of: 
Dr Loraine Lawrence, S.C.M.O. Audiological Medicine, Tameside 
Area Health Services 
Mr Joseph Rumble, Consultant Oral Surgeon, North Middlesex 
Hospital 
Mr Peter Grimaldi, Consultant ENT Surgeon, StMary's Hospital, Isle 
of Wight 
Mr Robert Rendell, Training Officer, Hidden Hearing Ltd, and Re-
gistrar of the Society of Hearing Aid Audiologists 
Dr Derek Tate, Associate Head of Centre for Design, Manufacture 
and Technology, University College Salford. 
I appreciate the assistance given by Roy Sands (Special Projects 
Manager, Rayovac UK Ltd) and Julian Parmenter (Technical Sales 
Manager, Duracell UK Ltd) with regard to battery specifications. I 
should also like to express my sincere thanks to all those who read and 
commented on part, or all, of the manuscript, especially Neville Browne 
(Director, The London Otological Centre), Keith Attenborough (Pro-
fessor of Acoustics, The Open University), Barry Downes (Managing 
Director, SieTech Hearing Ltd), David Gaszczyk (Audiologist, BMI 
Healthcare), John Millership and Alan Hall (Hearing Aid Audiologists, 
Amplivox and Ultratone Ltd). 
Finally my thanks must go to Dorothy Rothwell who word-processed 
the manuscript and tolerated my many revisions without complaint, 
John Beeton and other colleagues and friends who helped me in many 
ways, and to all those friends and family who endured my preoccupa-
tion throughout 1992 and 1993, especially my children Kerry, Joanne, 
Christopher and Russell. 

PART ONE 
Fundamental Sciences 

Acoustics 
1 
1.1 PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF SOUND 
1.1.1 SOUND GENERATION 
Sound requires a source, a medium through which to travel and a 
detector. The detector is usually a listener but could be a sound mea-
suring device, a sound level meter. 
Sound is generated by a vibrating object and is transmitted through a 
medium or substance, which is generally air, but may be any elastic 
medium: gas, liquid or solid. In air, the sound source sets the air 
particles into vibration, in the same back and forth motion as that of 
the vibrating sound source. The medium itself is not transferred to the 
detector, as each particle is displaced only a very small distance 
from its resting position (equilibrium). The energy is passed across the 
medium as a series of compressions and rarefactions (Figure 1.1). This 
constitutes a sound wave. In compressions, the air particles move 
closer together and the air pressure is slightly higher than normal; in 
rarefaction, the particles move away from each other and the air 
pressure is slightly lower than normal. 
The speed of sound varies with the density of the medium through 
which it travels. The denser the medium, the faster sound travels. 
Sound becomes weaker with increasing distance from the source. If 
there are no obstacles to affect the progress of the sound waves, the 
decrease in intensity will be in accordance with the inverse square law. 
This states that the intensity varies inversely with the square of the 
distance from the sound source (Figure 1.2). 
1.1.2 PROPERTIES OF SOUND 
The simplest wave form is a sine wave, or sinusoid. A sine wave is 
produced by simple harmonic motion, where each vibration is repeated 

~ 
compressions 
D rarefactions 
Fig. 1.1 The tines of the tuning fork move alternately towards and apart from 
each other causing alternate regions of compression and rarefaction that move 
outwards through the air. 
110.-------.-------.-------.-----~ 
90 
ill 
32. 
"'0 
c: 
::J 
0 
70 
(/) 
0 
~ 60 
·u; 
c: 
Q) 
:f 
50 
40 
0 
2 
3 
4 
Distance (m) 
Fig. 1.2 As distance away from the sound source increases, the sound level 
falls, in accordance with the inverse square law. 
back and forth. This motion repeats itself exactly in equal periods of 
time and is known as periodic motion. Sine waves are very clean or 
pure sounds and are therefore termed simple or pure tones. A pure 
tone can be described by three characteristics: frequency, intensity and 
duration. 

Physical properties of sound 
5 
A 
Fig. 1.3 A complete cycle of the pendulum is shown by movement from A to B, 
from B to C and from C back to A. 
(a) Frequency 
The frequency of a sound is denoted by the number of cycles of 
vibration that occur in 1 second. A cycle consists of one compression 
and one rarefaction of air particles. It can perhaps be better visualized 
as the movement of a pendulum. In a complete cycle, the pendulum 
would move from its resting position A to a position to one side B, 
then back through the resting position A to the other side C, and back 
to the resting position (Figure 1.3). 
If it takes 1 second to complete one full cycle, the frequency is 1 cycle 
per second (cps), or 1 hertz (Hz); 10Hz, therefore, means 10cps. 
Cycles per second are termed hertz after Heinrich Hertz, a nineteenth-
century German physicist. The more cycles that occur in one second, 
the higher is the frequency of the sound. A stringed instrument can 
readily be heard to produce a higher frequency as the strings are 
shortened. 
Pitch is the subjective attribute of frequency and is closely related to 
frequency. The higher frequency, the higher the pitch. However, as 
pitch is subjective, it cannot be measured directly. 
The piano produces its lowest note at 27.5 Hz and its highest at 
4186Hz; Middle C is 261.63Hz (Somerfield, 1987). The human ear 
can detect a much wider frequency range than this and the young 
healthy ear can perceive a frequency range from approximately 20Hz 
to 20 000 Hz. Sounds below this frequency range are called infrasonic, 
and those above this range are called ultrasonic. 
Wavelength is inversely proportional to frequency. The wavelength 
is measured as the distance covered by one complete cycle. As fre-
quency increases, wavelength decreases. 
Wavelength can be determined using the formula: 
speed 
Wavelength (A) = f requency 

6 
Acoustics 
The speed of sound in air is approximately 340 metres per second. So, 
for example, if the frequency of a sound wave is 550Hz, the wave-
length in air will be: 
(b) Period 
340m/s _ 
6 
550Hz -
O. m 
The time required for one cycle is known as the period (Figure 1.4). 
The relationship between frequency and period can be expressed as: 
(c) Intensity 
1 
Frequency (f)= -p 
. d 
eno 
Intensity is defined as the amount of energy transmitted per second 
per unit area. 
In the 51 system, energy per second is measured in jouies per second 
(J/s) or watts (W), area is measured in square metres (m2), therefore 
the unit of intensity is the watt per square metre (W/m2). 
Frequently, we measure the sound pressure level at a given point 
and not the intensity, although it can be shown that, in free-field 
conditions, the intensity is proportional to the square of the pressure: 
Intensity oc (pressure )2 
+ 
High pressure {compression) 
Wavelength or period 
Distance or time 
Fig. 1.4 One cycle of a pure tone. 
Low pressure 
(rarefaction) 

Physical properties of sound 
7 
This is a little beyond the scope of this book so, to avoid confusion, we 
will consider only the sound pressure level. Sound pressure level is the 
amount of pressure variation about the mean ('amplitude' in Figure 
1.4). The greater the force or energy applied to the vibrating body, the 
more intense the vibrations. The intensity is governed by the distance 
the air particles move from their place of rest. With increased force, 
they will move further and thus cause increased compressions and 
rarefactions. In the 51 system, pressure is expressed in pascals (Pa). 
A vibrating source sets up tiny changes in air pressure. These 
changes are so small they are measured in terms of micro pascals 
(11Pa), which are millionths of a pascal. The human ear is sensitive to 
pressure changes from 20 11Pa to 20 Pa. In other words, the greatest 
pressure change the human ear can withstand is a million times greater 
than that which is just audible. 
Since the range of hearing is so great, the numbers involved are very 
large and it is more convenient to describe intensity using a logarith-
mic scale, the decibel scale. Decibels (dB) are units of relative intensity. 
The number of dB describes how much greater is the intensity of a 
measured sound than a fixed reference level. The dBSPL scale (decibels 
sound pressure level), for example, uses 0.00002 Pa as its fixed refer-
ence level, so that 0 dBSPL = 0.00002 Pa. 
OdBSPL 
30dBSPL 
60dBSPL 
90dBSPL 
120dBSPL 
approximates to the minimum audible sound pressure at 
1kHz 
approximates to a whisper 
approximates to quiet conversation 
approximates to shout 
is uncomfortably loud for most people 
Decibels are considered in more detail in section 1.2. 
1.1.3 COMPLEX SOUNDS 
Pure tones can be produced artifically using a tuning fork or an elec-
tronic sine-wave generator, but they rarely occur naturally. Most 
sounds consist of a number of different tones, although these can be 
broken down into the component pure tones using frequency analysis. 
Each component pure tone may vary in amplitude, frequency and 
phase. 
1.1.4 PHASE 
When we consider the phase of a sinusoidal wave, we are stating the 
position at any point in the cycle. 
Any circle corresponds to 360° rotation. The degrees of rotation are 
used to denote the course of travel, where 0° is the starting point, 90° is 

8 Acoustics 
+ 
Incident wave 
A 
A 
..... --, 
/ 
' 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
!!! 
I 
\ 
::J 
B 
B 
~ 
or-----+-----------~------------~----~ 
~ 
a. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
...... ~ 
Reflected wave 
' 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
/ 
' 
-#/ 
...... __ 
Time 
Fig. 1.5 Two pure tones of equal frequency and intensity, which are out of phase 
by 180°. This creates standing waves in which occur areas with increased 
sound (A) and areas without sound (B). 
a quarter of the way around the circle, 180° is half-way and so on. 
Tones are exactly out of phase if they differ from the standard starting 
point by 180°. Figure 1.5 illustrates tones that are out of phase. 
1.1.5 PERIODIC SOUNDS 
Complex sounds may have a waveform that repeats itself over time. 
Such sounds are called periodic. Periodic sounds are musical or 
harmonic. 
The lowest frequency of the tones presented determines the funda-
mental frequency. The pitch of a note is recognized by its fundamental 
frequency. Thus Middle C, for example, can be recognized regardless 
of whether it is played on a piano or a violin. 
In a periodic sound, all frequencies present are harmonics. These are 
whole number multiples (integers) of the fundamental frequency. A 
1 kHz tone has harmonics at 2kHz, 3kHz, 4kHz and so on, although 
not all the harmonics are necessarily present. Two instruments playing 
the same note sound different because their sound contains different 
harmonics, although the fundamental frequency remains the same. 
Harmonics are referred to by number. The fundamental frequency is 
the first harmonic (1 x 1). The second harmonic is twice the funda-
mental, the third harmonic is three times the fundamental. The 
fundamental frequency does not necessarily have to be heard for 
recognition. Our minds can determine the fundamental from the 
pattern of harmonics. 

Physical properties of sound 
9 
(a) 
Time 
(b) 
Time 
Fig. 1.6 Waveforms of noise and periodic sound: (a) an aperiodic (or noise) 
waveform; (b) a periodic waveform. 
1.1.6 APERIODIC SOUNDS 
Aperiodic or non-periodic sounds do not have a regularly repeating 
waveform. They consist of more than one frequency and are not har-
monically related. This random and unstable waveform has no stated 
period or repetition and is perceived as noise (Figure 1.6). Certain 
particular types of noise may be used in audiometry: 
• White noise consists of all the frequencies of the audible spectrum 
present at equal intensities. 
• Pink noise consists of equal energy per octave. This produces a 
lower frequency noise than white noise since each octave contains 
equal energy but a varying number of frequencies. For example, the 
octave 250Hz to 500Hz contains 250 discrete frequencies, whereas 
the octave 2kHz to 4kHz contains 2000 discrete frequencies; yet 
each of these contains the same amount of energy. 
1.1.7 WAVE MOTION 
In an environment where there is no interference from reflections (a 
'free-field'), sound waves will spread longitudinally and gradually lose 
energy as they move away from the sound source. 
The intensity of the sound decreases proportionally to the square of 
the distance from the sound source. This is the inverse square law 
(Figure 1.2) and in practice it means that a doubling of distance will 
produce a reduction of 6 dB in the sound pressure level. 
In an enclosed field, hard surfaces will reflect sound waves. Sound 
reflections can increase the sound level within a room, making it easier 
to hear, as long as the reflections follow the original sound very rapidly. 
When the time between the incident wave (sound source) and the 

10 
Acoustics 
reflection is prolonged to a degree that is noticeable, it is termed rever-
beration. A reflected sound that occurs some time after the original is 
heard as an echo. When a reflection follows closely, it adds to the 
direct sound; reverberation follows with a short time delay, which may 
be destructive to intelligibility; with a greater be delay, a distinct echo 
may be heard. This may be illustrated as follows: 
Reflection 
reverberation 
echo 
Reflection 
reverberation 
echo 
In a large, empty room, the reverberation effect may last for several 
seconds, which will make speech indistinct. Soft furnishings will absorb 
and help to reduce reverberation. Reverberation is particularly destruc-
tive to intelligibility for hearing aid users. It is not, however, desirable 
to cut out all reflection (except for research purposes, as in an anechoic 
chamber) as this makes the room very quiet and 'dead'. 
Standing waves are caused when incident waves and reflected waves 
meet and combine to affect the sound level at that particular point. The 
interference that this creates may be constructive (increase the sound 
level) or destructive (decrease the sound level) (Figure 1.5). When a 
standing wave is formed within the confines of an object, resonance 
occurs as, for example, in a pipe or in the ear canal. The length of the 
pipe or canal will affect the frequency of the standing waves formed 
within it. For example, if the length of a pipe is halved, the funda-
mental frequency of the air column within it is doubled and the 
resonant frequency will rise by one octave. 
1.1.8 WARBLE TONES 
Warble tones are often used in free-field audiometry to reduce the risk 
of standing waves affecting test results. 
A warble tone is a frequency modulated tone. The tone has a base or 
centre frequency, around which it varies. For example, a 1kHz warble 
tone might vary from 950Hz to 1050Hz, which would be a frequency 
deviation of ±50 Hz, or 5%. The tone therefore consists of frequencies 
above and below its centre frequency, and it changes rapidly between 
these limits. The number of frequency changes in one second is termed 
the 'modulation rate'. 
1.2 THE MEASUREMENT OF SOUND 
1.2.1 DECIBEL SCALES 
The decibel scales express a ratio between two numbers. 

The measurement of sound 
11 
Most quantities are measured in terms of fixed units, so, for example, 
when we say that the distance between two points is 10m, we mean 
the distance is ten times greater than 1 m. Logarithms are used as a 
convenient method of expressing the ratio. A logarithm (log) tells how 
many times the base number is multiplied by itself, 102 means 10 to the 
power of 2, that is, 10 is multiplied by itself once, and 103 is multiplied 
by itself twice, as follows: 
101 = 10 
therefore log10(10) 
= 1 
102 = 10 x 10 
therefore log10(100) = 2 
103 = 10 x 10 x 10 therefore log10(1000) = 3 
The wide range of intensities involved is compressed by transforming 
it to a logarithmic scale. The unit of relative intensity is the bel, named 
after Alexander Graham Bell, who first patented the telephone. One 
bel equals ten decibels. The bel is rather too large a unit to reflect the 
accuracy required for audiometry. In measuring sound intensity or 
sound pressure level, the decibel scale is therefore used. 
Any tenfold increase in sound pressure corresponds to 20 dB. For 
example, a noise level of 80 dB has a sound pressure that is 1000 times 
greater (103) than a noise of 20 dB. Subjectively, 10 dB appears as a 
doubling of loudness, whereas 1 dB is equivalent to the smallest change 
of intensity we can detect in ideal conditions. 
In mathematical terms, we can see that: 
pl 
dBSPL = 20 log10 -p 
ref 
where P1 = measured pressure 
and Pre£= the audiological reference pressure. 
The audiological reference pressure is 0.00002 pascals. 
So, for example, if: 
and 
using the formula 
gives us 
P1 = 0.002Pa 
Pre£= 0.00002Pa 
pl 
dBSPL = 20 log10-
Pre£ 
2 I 
0.002 
0 og100.00002 

12 
Acoustics 
100 
= 20 logw - 1-
= 20 X 2 = 40dB 
since the log of 100 to base 10 = 2 
For those who are less able mathematically, it may be helpful to show 
the relationship between dBSPL and pascals as follows: 
Sound pressure 
Sound 
Equivalent to: 
level: dBSPL 
pressure: Pa 
120 
= 20.0 
Discomfort 
100 
= 2.0 
Pneumatic drill 
80 
= 0.2 
Shouting 
60 
= 0.02 
Quiet conversation 
40 
= 0.002 
Loud whispering 
20 
= 0.0002 
Rustling leaves 
0 
0.00002 
(Standard audiological reference) 
The range of pressures to which the average normally hearing person 
is sensitive starts at 0 dBSPL (0.00002 Pa) and has a limit, where sound 
becomes uncomfortably loud, of 120 dBSPL (20 Pa). This range is called 
the dynamic range of hearing. 
Since decibels express a ratio between two sound pressures, their 
values in dB cannot simply be added together. Two sound sources of 
40 dBSPL, for example, do not equal 80 dBSPL; in fact, this results in 
an increase of 3 dB, producing 43 dBSPL overall. 
To be meaningful, a ratio must have a reference level. It is pointless 
to say that a sound is ten times greater, unless we also state what it is 
greater than. In audiometry, a number of different dB scales are used 
and each has its own reference level. For example, the dBSPL scale (dB 
sound pressure level) expresses the pressure of a sound in relation to 
the standard audiological reference pressure, 0.00002Pa, which is the 
minimum pressure required to cause the sensation of hearing in the 
midfrequency region. The dBSPL scale compares with a flat or 'absolute' 
reference: it takes no account of the way hearing varies with frequency. 
Other decibel scales used include dB(A), dB(B), dB(C), dB(D) and 
dBHL. A range of scales are used because the human ear is not equally 
sensitive at all frequencies or intensities. The different decibel scales 
attempt to reflect these changes. For audiometric purposes dB(A) and 
dBHL scales are important. The dBHL scale is used when sounds are 
presented monaurally through air conduction headphones or bone 
conduction transducers. The dB(A) scale is used when the sound level 
is presented 'free-field' in a room. The two scales are very similar, but 
the dB( A) scale provides values that are about 4 dB greater than dBHL 
values. 

The measurement of sound 
13 
120 
100 
80 
...J 
a.. 
Cl) 60 
ID 
'C 
40 
20 
0 
20 
125 
1 k 
Frequency (Hz) 
4k 10k 
Fig. 1.7 A diagrammatic representation of the dynamic range of human hearing. 
The SPL (sound pressure level) values for audiometric zero (0 dBHL) 
at each frequency are given in BS 2497: Part 5 (1988). The values are the 
recommended equivalent threshold sound pressure levels (RETSPL) in 
a 9 A acoustic coupler. The RETSPL values provide average minimum 
audible pressure (MAP) under headphones, which may be illustrated 
as a hearing threshold curve (Figure 1.7), or a table providing values at 
the various audiometric frequencies (Table 1.1). 
Table 
1.1 Recommended 
reference 
equivalent 
threshold sound pressure levels (RETSPL) in a 9 A 
coupler (British Standards Institution, 1988) 
Frequency Hz 
125 
250 
500 
1 k 
2k 
3k 
4k 
6k 
8k 
RETSPL dB (Reference: 20J1.Pa) 
45.0 
25.5 
11.5 
7.0 
9.0 
10.0 
9.5 
15.5 
13.0 
Pattern of earphone Telephonics TDH39 with MX41 I 
AR cushion 

14 
Acoustics 
The values were established on the basis of a statistical average 
obtained by testing many otologically normal people between the ages 
of 18 and 30 years. A similar method was used to obtain the Minimum 
Audible Field (MAF) which sets out thresholds obtained binaurally, 
in response to sound pressures presented through loudspeakers. 
Thresholds taken from the MAF curve are an average of about 6 dB 
more sensitive than the normal MAP thresholds. 
1.2.2 THE SOUND LEVEL METER 
A sound level meter is a precision instrument used for sound measure-
ment. A precision microphone converts the sound signal to an electrical 
signal, which is amplified by a pre-amplifier before being processed. 
The signal may be displayed in linear dBSPL, or it may pass through a 
weighting network. This is an electronic circuit that varies in sensitivity 
across the frequency range, to simulate the sensitivity of the human ear 
(Figure 1.8). 
The weighting networks are termed A, B, C and D. The A weighting 
network corresponds to an inverted equal loudness contour (section 
1.4.2) at low sound pressure levels. The B network corresponds to 
medium SPLs and the C network to high SPLs. The D network is used 
for aircraft noise measurements. 
1.3 THE AUDIOMETER 
1.3.1 THE AUDIOMETER AND ITS CALIBRATION 
Hearing is a subjective sensation and therefore cannot truly be 'mea-
sured'. Audiometry measures the stimulus which causes the sensation 
of hearing. 
An audiometer is an instrument of comparison, which indicates the 
difference between the sound pressure level required to produce hear-
Microphone Pre-amplifier 
Frequency (Hz) 
A 
w"i~ht 
1n 
scae 
Weighting networks 
58 
Amplifier 
Display 
Fig.1.8 Constituent parts of a sound level meter using the A weighting network. 

The audiometer 
15 
Switch 
Pure tone A pl'fier 
Atte~uator 
generator 
m 1 
dial 
Air conduction headband 
Fig. 1.9 Constituent parts of an audiometer. 
ing in the individual under test and that required to produce hearing in 
an average normal young person. An audiometer generates pure tones 
at specified points within a restricted range of frequencies considered 
important for communication, usually the octave intervals from 125Hz 
to 8kHz. 
An octave is a doubling of frequency. Most audiometers also produce 
tones at the half-octave intervals, 750Hz, 1.5kHz, 3kHz and 6kHz. The 
sound level can also be varied, usually in 5 dB steps, from -10 dBHL to 
110 dBHL or more. The duration of the tones is controlled by an 
interruptor switch. The audiometer is provided with two transducers, a 
pair of headphones and a bone vibrator. A block diagram of a basic 
audiometer is shown in Figure 1.9. 
An audiometer must be accurate to be of value and, to this end, all 
audiometers are calibrated to British Standards when new and the 
calibration should be re-checked at least once a year. BS 5966 (1980) 
defines the aspects of pure-tone audiometer accuracy with which 
manufacturers should comply. 
The main points of this standard, for our purposes, can be sum-
marized as follows: 
• Frequency accuracy must be ±3%. 
• Purity must be such that the total harmonic distortion does not 
exceed 5% (for air conduction). 
• The attenuator 5 dB steps must be correct within ±1 dB. 
• Unwanted sound from the audiometer should be inaudible up to 
and including the dial setting 50 dBHL. 
• The narrow band noise filters must be centred on the frequency 
(according to a given table). 
• The rise and fall times of the signal tone should be within specifi-
cation (section 1.3.3). 

16 
Acoustics 
• The hearing level must be accurate to within ±3 dB from 125Hz to 
4kHz and to within ±5dB at 6kHz and 8kHz. 
Laboratory calibration is carried out for the complete audiometer. 
The transducers (headphones and bone vibrator) are a part of the 
audiometer and should not be exchanged unless the audiometer is 
recalibrated with the new transducers. 
In addition to calibration, the audiometer should be checked daily as 
follows: 
1.3.2 DAILY AUDIOMETER CHECKS 
• Straighten any tangled leads. Ensure that all connections are firm 
and giving good contact. Flex the leads for possible intermittency. 
• Check that all knobs and switches are secure and function in a 
silent, smooth and click-free manner. 
• Check function of response button. 
• Check tension of AC and BC headbands. 
• Check output levels for all tones at 10-15 dB above own known 
threshold for AC (each earphone) and BC. Your own audiogram 
should be used for this approximate calibration check. 
• Check at 60 dBHL for all tones on AC (each earphone) for noticeable 
distortion, intermittency, etc. Repeat at 40dBHL for BC. 
• Check masking noise over a range of outputs, also loudness balance 
and other facilities, if to be used. 
• Check battery condition, if appropriate. 
• Generally ensure that the audiometer and all its attachments are 
clean. Wipe earphones and BC receiver with clean, dry tissues. 
1.3.3 RISE AND FALL TIMES 
The audiometer output signal is not an instantaneous event. The signal 
rises until it reaches its maximum and falls off in a similar manner 
when the tone is switched off (Figure 1.10). 
Rise time is defined as the time taken for the signal to rise from 
-60 dB (or -20 dB) to within 1 dB of its steady state. The time taken for 
the signal to rise from -60 dB to -1 dB of its steady state should not be 
more than 200 milliseconds. The time taken for the signal to rise from 
-20 dB to -1 dB of its steady state should be at least 20 milliseconds. 
(BS 5966: 1980). 
Fall time is defined as the time taken for the signal to decay by 60 dB 
from its steady state. Fall time should not exceed 200 milliseconds, nor 
be less than 20 milliseconds. (BS 5966: 1980). 
This rise and fall (decay) should be correctly timed or it may affect 
the results of the audiometric test: 

The psychological properties of sound 
17 
Overshoot 
/Switch off 
Time 
Fig. 1.10 The rise and fall envelope of test tones. Between the dotted lines 
sound should rise or fall in a progressive manner. (After BS 5966 (1980).) 
• Too slow a rise time may result in erroneously poor thresholds, 
because this does not elicit the maximum on-effect of the ear. 
• Too brief a rise time produces an overshoot which may be heard as a 
click. This may result in erroneously good thresholds if the patient 
responds to the click rather than the test tone. An overshoot should 
never be greater than 1 dB. 
1.4 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF SOUND 
1.4.1 PSYCHOACOUSTICS 
The study of the psychological properties of sound is known as 
psychoacoustics. 
The way in which we hear sound is subjective and cannot be directly 
measured. Subjective qualities are compared with reference levels 
obtained by averaging the judgements of a large number of normally-
hearing people. 
1.4.2 LOUDNESS 
Loudness is the subjective perception of sound in terms of intensity. 
The relative loudness of pure tones is normally expressed as equal 
loudness contours. Each contour represents sounds that appear equally 
loud. Each contour or curve has a loudness value given in phons, 
which can be defined as the sound pressure level of a 1 kHz tone 
judged to be of equal loudness. 
The 40phon curve, for example (Figure 1.7), represents pure tones 
across the frequency range, which are judged equally loud as a 1kHz 

18 
Acoustics 
tone at an intensity of 40 dBSPL. An inverted 40 phon curve is used for 
the A weighting scale of a sound level meter. 
Another unit of loudness, the sone, is used for the purpose of 
providing a scale to define loudness. This numerical scale of loudness 
is based on judgements of average listeners as to when sounds are 
'twice as loud' or 'half as loud'. One sone is taken to be the loudness 
of a 1kHz tone at 40 dBSPL. Thus, 1 sone has a loudness level of 
40 phons. A sound which has a loudness of 2 sones is one which is 
judged to be twice as loud. 
In terms of sound pressure level, an increase of 10 dB corresponds to 
a doubling of loudness. 
1.4.3 PITCH 
Pitch is the subjective perception of sound in terms of frequency. The 
unit of pitch used is the mel. One thousand mels represents the pitch 
of a 1kHz tone presented at 40 phons. The ability to recognize the pitch 
of sounds of different frequencies is known as 'frequency resolution'. 
The average normal person can discriminate a frequency difference 
where a change of 3Hz occurs, although this varies across the audible 
spectrum. 
1.4.4 TEMPORAL INTEGRATION 
The effect of duration on the recognition of sound is known as 'tem-
poral integration'. Tone presentations that are very brief may not be 
heard. The shorter a tone presentation, the more intense must be that 
sound if it is to be perceived. Duration also has an effect on the 
apparent pitch of a sound. Tones that are of very short duration will be 
perceived as a click. 
Sensorineural hearing loss may reduce the ability to discriminate 
pitch. It may also increase the sensation of loudness, such that a small 
increase in objective intensity results in a large increase in subjective 
loudness. This abnormal loudness growth is termed recruitment. 
1.5 SUMMARY 
For sound to exist it must be in our audible frequency range, which is 
normally 20-20000Hz, and there must be an elastic medium to convey 
the vibrations. 
Simple harmonic motion produces a pure tone, which is a sound of 
one frequency. Sound is created by a vibrating object, which prod-
uces alternate compressions and rarefactions in the medium, which is 
usually air. 

Further reading 
19 
The frequency of vibration is calculated by the number of vibrations, 
or cycles, in 1 second. The time taken for 1 cycle is known as the 
period. The unit of frequency is hertz; 1 Hz = 1 cycle per second. 
All sound can be broken down into its component pure tones. The 
decibel scale is used to describe the amplitude of sound. Decibels are 
not absolute units of measurement but provide a ratio between a 
measured quantity and an agreed reference level, which must be 
specified. 
An audiometer provides a comparison between the hearing of the 
subject under test and average normal hearing as set out in the relevant 
British Standard. Audiometers must be regularly checked and calibrated 
to ensure accuracy. 
Sound can be measured objectively in terms of frequency, intensity 
or pressure, and duration. Hearing is subjective and may be described 
in terms of pitch and loudness. 
REFERENCES 
British Standards Institution (1980) BS 5966: Specification for Audiometers, British 
Standards Institution, London. 
British Standards Institution (1988) BS 2497: Part 5: Standard Reference Zero for the 
Calibration of Pure-Tone Air Conduction Audiometers, British Standards Insti-
tution, London. 
Somerfield, Q. (1987) The Musician's Guide to Acoustics, Dent, London. 
FURTHER READING 
Foreman, J.E.K. (1990) Sound Analysis and Noise Control, Van Nostrand Rein-
hold, New York. 
Moore, B.C.J. (1989) An Introduction to the Psychology of Hearing, 3rd edn, 
Academic Press, London. 
Pickles, J.D. (1988) An Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing, 2nd edn, 
Academic Press, London. 
Speaks, C.E. (1992) Introduction to Sound, Chapman & Hall, London. 

Anatomy and 
physiology of the ear 
2.1 ANATOMY OF THE EAR 
2 
The ear (Figure 2.1) can be thought of as consisting of three parts, 
known as the outer, the middle and the inner ear. 
2.1.1 THE OUTER EAR 
The outer or external ear is divided into two parts: the pinna or auricle, 
and the external auditory meatus. 
(a) The pinna 
The first part of the external ear is the pinna or auricle. This is 
formed of irregular-shaped cartilage covered by firmly adherent skin. 
The dependent lobule is mainly fat. Anteriorly the cartilage forms the 
tragus, which covers the entrance of the external auditory meatus. 
The main anatomical features of the pinna are shown in Figure 2.2. 
Attached to the pinna are three vestigial muscles, all supplied by the 
facial nerve. In some animals they function to direct the pinna towards 
the direction of a sound source, in humans they are mostly redundant. 
(b) The external auditory meatus 
The cartilage of the pinna extends inwards to form the first one-third of 
the external auditory meatus (ear canal). This horizontal curved canal 
(Figure 2.3) is usually about 2.5 em long in an adult. It is closed at its 
medial end by the tympanic membrane (eardrum). The outer one-third 
curves inwards, slightly upwards and backwards, and is lined by skin 
richly endowed with hairs and apocrine (sweat), sebaceous (oil) and 

I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I~ 
Outer 
Semicircular canals 
Bone 
Tympanic I Middle I 
membrane! 
I 
External 
1 ear 
1 
auditory meatus! cav1ty I 
Sebaceous and 
I 
1 
ceruminous glands 
1 
Hairs 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
.. I ... 1. 
' Middle 
Inner 
Fig. 2.1 The outer, middle and inner ear. 
-!--Triangular fossa 
r-=-1--+--- lnferior crus 
of antihelix 
Fig. 2.2 Anatomical features of a left pinna. 

22 
Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
Fig. 2.3 Diagrammatic representation of the external auditory meatus. 
ceruminous (wax) glands. The inner two-thirds of the canal is bony, 
formed from the squamous temporal bone. This part of the canal runs 
downwards and forwards and is lined with thin, closely adherent skin, 
largely devoid of hairs and glands. About 5 mm from the tympanic 
membrane the floor of the canal dips to form a recess; debris often 
collects here and is difficult to remove. 
The external ear has an extensive sensory nerve supply from branches 
of three cranial nerves (V, VII and X). The inner part of the canal is 
particularly sensitive and can produce a cough reflex when stimulated 
due to its innervation from the tenth cranial nerve (Vagus). 
It is important to remember the close proximity to the external 
auditory meatus of three cranial structures: the mastoid air cells 
(behind), the middle cranial fossa (above) and the temporomandibular 
(jaw) joint (in front). Injury or infection in the canal can extend to 
involve these. 
2.1.2. THE MIDDLE EAR CLEFT 
The middle ear cleft is made up of five anatomical parts: the tympanic 
cavity, the auditory or Eustachian tube, the aditus, the mastoid antrum 
and the mastoid air cells. 
(a) The tympanic cavity 
The tympanic cavity is the part of the middle ear cleft which is usually 
thought of as 'the middle ear'. It is separated from the external ear by 
the tympanic membrane (eardrum), and from the internal ear by the 
round and oval windows. It has connections with the nasopharynx via 
the Eustachian tube and with the mastoid cavity via the aditus. It 

Superior malleal 
ligament 
~+--=-=---+-~· 
Tympanic membrane 
Posterior incus 
ligament 
Anatomy of the ear 
23 
Dural plate 
Brain 
~~~~~r-Malleus 
l2":'>(,;~~~......,,--- l ncus 
~--- Mastoid 
process 
_,---- Stapes 
IR.l>+-- -- Facial nerve 
...,==-----Oval window 
!-----Round window 
.J.lool----\ct------ Annular ligament 
Fig. 2.4 Diagrammatic representation of the tympanic cavity. 
houses the ossicles and their muscular attachments and has many 
important anatomical landmarks. 
The cavity (Figure 2.4) may be thought of as a narrow room, the 
height and length of which is about 15 mm, with medial and lateral 
walls which curve inwards towards the centre; this makes them about 
2 mm apart in the middle and 6 mm apart at the roof. 
The lateral wall is formed mainly by the tympanic membrane. This 
translucent membrane is set obliquely, such that the roof and posterior 
wall of the external auditory meatus are shorter than the floor and 
anterior wall. The membrane consists of three layers, that is, a middle, 
incomplete, fibrous layer, which is covered with skin on the outer 
surface, and the mucous membrane of the middle ear cavity on the 
inner surface. The area of drum containing the fibrous layer is known 
as the pars tensa (Figure 2.5), and where this is deficient, the pars 
flaccida. The handle of the first auditory ossicle, the malleus, is attached 
in the centre of the pars tensa on the medial surface and produces a 
small elevation on the drum, easily seen with an otoscope. 
The medial wall separates the middle from the inner ear. It has a 

24 
Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
Pars flaccida 
Incus 
Fig. 2.5 Right tympanic membrane. Broken lines indicate the ossicles in the 
middle ear cavity. 
central bulge, the promontory, which is formed by the first turn of 
the cochlea. Above and behind the promontory lies the oval window 
which is closed by the footplate of the stapes, the third of the auditory 
ossicles. This window separates the middle ear from the scala vestibuli 
of the cochlea. Below and behind the promontory is the round window 
which separates the middle ear from the scala tympani; this is closed 
by a fibrous disc. The seventh cranial nerve (facial) passes across the 
medial wall, lying in a bony canal above the promontory. 
The anterior wall has two important landmarks: 
• The opening of the Eustachian tube which connects the middle ear 
with the nasopharynx. 
• The bony canal for the tensor tympani muscle. This muscle attaches 
to the malleus and tenses the eardrum. The tensor tympani is 
innervated by the fifth (trigeminal) cranial nerve. 
High up on the posterior wall is the aditus, which connects the middle 
ear cavity with the mastoid antrum. Below this is the pyramid, a 
projection of bone from which the second muscle of the middle ear, the 
stapedius, arises. This muscle is attached to the third ossicle, the 
stapes, and is supplied with motor fibres from the seventh nerve 
(facial), which passes down this wall. A branch of the seventh nerve, 
the chorda tympani, comes out through a small hole lateral to the 

Anatomy of the ear 
25 
Fig. 2.6 The middle ear ossicles. 
pyramid. A further description of the middle ear muscles will be found 
in section 12.2.7. 
The roof separates the cavity from the middle cranial fossa and is 
formed from a thin plate of the petrous temporal bone. The floor is 
again only a thin plate of bone. Below and behind is the jugular 
foramen, through which passes the major vein of the head and neck. 
Below and in front is the canal containing the carotid artery. 
This four-walled 'room' is normally filled with air and contains the 
three auditory ossicles (Figure 2.6) that serve to transmit sound energy 
from the tympanic membrane across the middle ear cavity to the 
cochlea. The first, the malleus (hammer), is attached to the tympanic 
membrane laterally and articulates with the incus (anvil) medially. 
The incus has a body and two processes, one of which articulates with 
the stapes, the other rests on the posterior wall. Finally the part of the 
stapes (stirrup), known as the footplate, closes the oval window and 
therefore communicates with the perilymph of the cochlea. The two 
middle ear muscles, the tensor tympani and the stapedius, have already 
been described; these modify the transmission of sound energy across 
the ossicular chain. 
As with the external auditory meatus, it is very important to re-
member the close proximity of the middle ear cleft to several important 
anatomical structures: the temporal lobe of the brain lies above, and 
behind is the cerebellum, both separated only by a layer of bone; the 
facial nerve passes through the cleft in a bony canal, which may be 
very thin; both major vessels of the head and neck, the carotid artery 

26 
Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
and the jugular vein, run close to the floor of the cleft; and, of course, 
lying medially, is the inner ear. All these are susceptible to spread of 
infection or disease from the middle ear. 
(b) The Eustachian tube 
In an adult, the Eustachian tube is about 3.5cm long. It connects the 
nasopharynx with the tympanic cavity and in health provides regular 
ventilation of the middle ear. It also, however, provides a pathway for 
disease to spread from the nose and throat to the ear. It is normally 
closed at rest but opens temporarily during yawning or swallowing. At 
its lower end it is formed of cartilage and membrane and opens behind 
the nasal cavity; it then passes upwards and outwards and enters the 
tympanic cavity. This upper one-third of the tube is bony. In a young 
child the Eustachian tube is shorter, wider and more horizontal, and is 
much more prone to dysfunction. 
(c) The mastoid antrum and mastoid air cells 
A short tube, the aditus, leads from the back of the tympanic cavity to 
the mastoid antrum. 
The antrum is a cavity within the part of the bony skull known as the 
petrous temporal bone. It communicates posteriorly through several 
openings with the mastoid air cells (Figure 2.7). The number and size 
of these cells varies considerably among individuals. The mastoid air 
cells are very susceptible to spread of disease from the rest of the 
middle ear cleft. 
The whole of the middle ear cleft is lined with a continuous layer of 
cells (epithelium), some of which provide lubrication (in the Eustachian 
tube), and others of which are normally flattened and do not produce 
-
Internal carotid artery 
~ 
Styloid process 
Path of facial 
nerve 
Fig. 2.7 A deep section of the middle ear, showing the mastoid antrum, and the 
path of the facial nerve. 

Anatomy of the ear 
27 
mucus (for example, in the tympanic cavity). These cells are prone to 
change in shape and function if the cleft is unhealthy. 
2.1.3 THE INNER EAR 
The inner ear, known as the labyrinth because of its complicated 
structure, lies entirely within the temporal bone of the skull. It is 
comprised of a membranous sac filled with a clear fluid (endolymph) 
contained within a bony cavity. The space between the sac and the 
bone is also filled with fluid (perilymph). Endolymph is very similar 
to intracellular fluid and is therefore high in potassium and low in 
sodium; conversely, perilymph is similar to cerebrospinal fluid and, as 
with all extracellular fluid, is high in sodium and low in potassium. 
(a) The bony labyrinth 
The bony labyrinth is a continuous cavity that communicates function-
ally with the middle ear via the oval and round windows. It begins 
medially with the cochlea, which is about 1 mm wide at its base and 
5 mm high, and is best understood by considering the shell of a snail. 
Looking into the empty shell it is a tube which twists around a central 
pillar; the cochlea does exactly this, spiralling around a central bony 
pillar, the modiolus, for two and three-quarter turns. From the 
modiolus a narrow plate of bone, the spiral lamina, projects into the 
cavity of the tube along its whole length, partly dividing it into an 
upper and lower chamber. The basal end of the cochlea opens into 
the middle part of the cavity called the vestibule. There are several 
openings from the vestibule: two into the middle ear cleft, one closed 
by the foot of the stapes and its annular ligament (the oval window), 
the other by a fibrous disc (the round window); five into the three 
semicircular canals; and one into the intracranial cavity by a bony 
aqueduct allowing drainage of perilymph into the cerebrospinal fluid. 
The semicircular canals lie posteriorly, and each forms two-thirds 
of a circle. They lie in three planes at right angles to each other; 
the anterior and posterior canals are set vertically, and the lateral 
horizontally. 
(b) The membranous labyrinth 
This saccular membrane (Figure 2.8) forms a series of communicating 
sacs and ducts lying within the bony labyrinth. The utricle and saccule 
lie within the vestibule. They communicate with the three semicircular 
ducts, the Y-shaped endolymphatic duct and the duct of the cochlea. 
The whole labyrinth is filled with endolymph. 

28 
Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
Semicircular canals: 
"'r---- a Superior duct 
b Horizontal duct 
Cochlear duct 
Fig. 2.8 The right membranous labyrinth. 
The duct of the cochlea extends along the bony tube lying on the 
spiral lamina and stretches across to be attached to the outer wall by 
the spiral ligaments. This forms a triangular-shaped channel with its 
apex at the modiolus, which effectively forms three chambers within 
the cochlea (Figure 2.9). The middle chamber formed by the duct, and 
therefore filled with endolymph, is called the scala media. The upper 
chamber is called the scala vestibuli and the lower is the scala tympani; 
as these lie outside the membranous labyrinth they contain perilymph. 
These two connect at the apex of the cochlea via a small gap, the 
helicotrema, and at the basal end of the cochlea they end in the 
vestibule, the scala tympani at the round window and the scala 
vestibuli at the oval window. The upper wall of the membranous duct 
is called the vestibular, or Reissner's, membrane, and the lower wall, 
which extends from the free edge of the spiral lamina, is the basilar 
membrane. Lining the outer side of the duct is the stria vascularis 
which maintains the ionic concentration of the endolymph; as the 
name suggests, this area is very vascular being rich in capillaries. 
(c) The organ of Corti 
The organ of Corti is a specialized structure of cells that forms the 
sensory organ of hearing. It is situated within the scala media on the 
basilar membrane (Figure 2. 9). 
There are two rows of cells, known as hair cells, which have fine 
hair-like structures, stereocilia, projecting from their upper surface. 
These are arranged into an inner row of single hair cells and an outer 
row of three or four hair cells, separated from each other by a rigid 

Anatomy of the ear 
29 
&~--Stria vascularis 
,?'--:----:-:-- -"---T--Reissner's 
membrane 
.----~'""'=:-----t~-+--Tectorial membrane 
~~~7/~;.-..)f.:;~~ 
Spiral prominence 
~~~~~~~~~~l~~~1~~~-=-=-=-=-=-=1t-=Outer hair cell 
~ 
Supporting cell 
Basilar membrane 
'------T--
f----Corti's arch 
'--------+--+-Tunnel of Corti 
Fig. 2.9 Cross-section of the cochlear duct. 
triangular arch called Corti's arch. Within this arch is the cortilymph, a 
fluid that chemically resembles perilymph. The specialized hair cells 
are themselves surrounded by various supporting cells. Electron studies 
have shown the shape of the inner and outer hair cells to be different 
and also the arrangement of their stereocilia. The inner cells are fatter 
at the base, resembling a tenpin, and have 70 to 100 stereocilia in two 
rows forming a double 'V', with the apex directed away from the 
modiolus. The outer cells are more cylindrical, resembling a test tube, 
and have more stereocilia, arranged in three rows to form a wide 
triple 'W'; again the apices are directed away from the modiolus. The 
stereocilia are not all the same length, the longest being at the apices 
and gradually reducing in length. Lying over the top of the whole 
structure is the reticular lamina and above this a gelatinous 'membrane', 
the tectorial membrane, into which the longest of the stereocilia are 
embedded having passed through the lamina. The tectorial membrane 
is attached to the inner side of the cochlea just above the spiral lamina. 
The estimated number of hair cells is about 3000 to 4000 inner hair cells 
and about 10 000 to 12 000 outer hair cells. 
The shape of the organ of Corti, and the basilar membrane on which 
it lies, changes along the length of the cochlea, being widest at the 
apex and becoming progressively narrower towards the base. 
The nerve supply to the cochlea is via the eighth cranial nerve 
(vestibulocochlear). There are both afferent nerves, carrying information 
to the brain, and efferent nerves, taking information from the brain, 

30 
Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
serving the cochlea. This is unusual for a sensory organ with no motor 
function, as efferent nerves are mainly motor; the precise function of 
these efferent fibres is still being researched (section 2.2.2(a) ). They are 
fewer in number than the afferent fibres; approximately half connect 
with the inner cells, and half with the outer cells. They differ in that 
the terminal branches (dendrites) serving the inner hair cells end on 
the dendrites of the afferent fibres, and those serving the outer cells 
tend to envelop the base of the cell and its afferent fibres. Each inner 
hair cell has about 20 afferent nerve fibres synapsing with it, which 
account for 90-95% of the 30 000 to 40 000 afferent fibres leaving the 
cochlea. The remaining 5-10% synapse with the outer cells, each 
fibre being heavily branched and serving up to ten hair cells. The cell 
bodies of the afferent nerves are found grouped together in the spiral 
ganglion. 
(d) The vestibular organ of balance 
Each of the semicircular canals expands into an ampulla at one end. It 
is here that a special sensory epithelium called the crista is found. A 
patch of similar epithelium is found at the macula of the utricle and 
saccule, the former being on a horizontal plane and the latter vertical. 
Together these form the vestibular receptor organs. There are two 
types of specialized cells, type 1 and type 2. Type 1 cells are flask-like 
and surrounded at the base by a nerve ending shaped like a chalice. 
Type 2 cells are straighter and more cylindrical with no nerve chalice. 
Protruding from the cuticular plate is a bundle of sensory 'hairs'. 
This bundle is comprised of one kinocilium, an additional longer and 
thicker hair and 50 to 110 stereocilia. These project into a mucus-like 
substance which is dome-shaped in the ampullae and cylindrical in the 
utricle; a number of calcareous particles called the otoliths are also 
contained here. The stereocilia become progressively smaller with in-
creased distance from the kinocilium. This provides both a morpho-
logical and functional polarization of the sensory cells. When there 
is displacement towards the kinocilium the cell is depolarized and 
produces an increased discharge rate in the afferent nerve fibres; when 
displaced away from the kinocilium there is a decreased discharge rate. 
As with the cochlea there are both afferent and efferent fibres sup-
plying the vestibular sensory cells. These fibres gather together to 
become the vestibular branch of the eighth nerve. 
2.1.4 THE NASOPHARYNX 
The pharynx (Figure 2.10) is a fibromuscular tube that forms the upper 
part of the respiratory and digestive tract; in an adult the whole cavity 

Anatomy of the ear 
31 
Fig. 2.10 The nasopharynx. 
is about 10 em long. It opens into the nose, mouth and larynx and 
is thus divided downwards into three parts: the nasopharynx, the 
oropharynx and the laryngopharynx. 
The nasopharynx opens anteriorly into the nasal fossae, bounded 
above by the base of the skull and below by the soft palate. The 
lower opening of the Eustachian tube is situated in the lateral wall, 
and immediately adjacent is the nasopharyngeal tonsil (adenoids). 
The isthmus of the nasopharynx leads from the oropharynx and is 
closed during swallowing by raising the soft palate and contracting the 
palatopharyngeal muscles. 
The oropharynx opens anteriorly into the mouth and is bounded 
above by the soft palate and below by the upper border of the epi-
glottis. The only major anatomical structures are the palatine tonsils 
which lie between the muscular faucial pillars on the lateral walls. 
The laryngopharynx opens anteriorly into the larynx through a 
sloping laryngeal inlet. It is bounded above by the epiglottis and below 
by the cricoid cartilage. The pyriform fossae are small recesses lying on 
each side bounded by cartilaginous and membranous folds. 
Collectively the scattered lymphoid tissue throughout the naso-
pharynx forms a protective 'ring', known as Waldeyer's ring, which 

32 
Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
helps prevent the spread of infection into the middle ear and lower 
respiratory tract. 
2.2 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF HEARING 
The ear is a remarkable device that is able to detect, collect and encode 
acoustic information in order to transmit it to the centres of the brain 
where it can be decoded and utilized by the listerner. 
For physiological purposes the ear can be thought of as two func-
tional pieces of apparatus; one that conducts the sound, and another 
that perceives or 'analyses' the sound reaching it. 
2.2.1 THE CONDUCTION OF SOUND 
This apparatus consists of the pinna, the external auditory canal, the 
tympanic membrane, the chain of ossicles and the cochlear fluids. 
(a) The pinna 
The prime function of the pinna is to act as a sound collection device. It 
also aids localization of sound in both the horizontal and vertical 
planes. 
The shape of the pinna enables it to funnel the sound towards the 
external meatus and its forward-tilted angle helps to focus on sound 
from the front. The pinna also amplifies the sound signal slightly, to a 
maximum gain of about 10 dB, depending on the frequency of the 
sound. 
Vertical localization is helped by the difference in delay between the 
main signal and the pinna echoes. This can be as efficient monaurally 
as binaurally. The echoes result from reflections of sound within the 
pinna; sound arriving from above will produce an echo faster than that 
from below, at about 100 and 300 microseconds respectively. 
Horizontal localization is mainly a function of balanced binaural 
hearing and is due to: 
• The head shadow effect. This arises when short wavelength sound, 
that is the higher frequencies above approximately 1500Hz, are 
attenuated by reflection off the head. An average intensity differ-
ence of about 6 dB occurs between the two ears in this way. The 
longer wavelength lower frequencies tend to bend around the head 
(diffract) so are not attenuated significantly. 
• Difference in time of arrival. This has an effect on the lower fre-
quencies, which bend around the head to reach the opposite ear. A 
difference of about 600 milliseconds will arise between the ears. 

The physiology of hearing 
33 
• Phase difference. This only affects sound below 1500Hz as the 
wavelength must be greater than the distance between the ears. 
(b) The external auditory meatus 
The ear canal has two main functions. Firstly, it is involved in pro-
tection; the cerumen and hairs along its outer lining help to protect the 
ear from foreign bodies and to prevent dirt from reaching the tympanic 
membrane; also, being curved, it can protect the drum and middle ear 
from trauma. Secondly, the canal acts as a resonance tube. The average 
canal is about 2.5cm long, and at this length the resonant frequency 
lies at about 3kHz. Sound around this frequency is amplified, usually 
by about 10 dB to 15 dB, although wide inter-individual variations do 
occur. 
(c) The middle ear 
Once the sound has reached the tympanic membrane, the alternating 
compressions and rarefactions of the sound wave move the drum in 
and out, and with it the handle of the malleus. The actual movement of 
the drum is quite complex and varies with different frequencies. The 
incus moves with the malleus, rocking on a linear axis running through 
the neck of the malleus and the body and short process of the incus. 
These movements are transmitted to the stapes, which also has a 
complex mode of movement, sometimes in and out as a piston or more 
of a rocking action; this, too, is frequency and intensity dependent. 
The function of the middle ear is to conduct sound to the cochlea 
efficiently. In order to do this it must overcome the impedance mismatch 
between air and the cochlear fluids. It takes considerably more force to 
disturb fluid molecules than those of air, and the middle ear acts as a 
transformer to build up the pressure to a sufficient level. The overall 
gain is between 25 dB and 30 dB. This is achieved in several ways: 
• Areal ratio. The tympanic membrane has a much larger area than 
the oval window, 65 mm2 and 3.2 mm 2 respectively, which represents 
a ratio of 20:1. The effective area of the drum, that is excluding the 
pars flaccida, is about two-thirds of the total, giving an actual ratio 
of about 15: 1. The force is therefore concentrated on to a much 
smaller area. 
• Leverage action. Due to the relative position of the ossicles, the 
malleus and incus tend to move together as a single unit with the 
effective fulcrum lying nearer to the stapes. This produces an 
increase in leverage at the stapes footplate of 1.32:1. 
• Characteristics of the tympanic membrane itself. The conical shape 
of the drum tends to concentrate sound energy, particularly high 

34 
Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
frequencies, at the umbo. As the drum is set at an oblique angle 
in the meatus, this effectively increases the surface area. These 
contributions are fairly minimal. 
The two muscles of the middle ear, the stapedius and the tensor 
tympani, have an important role to play in the conductive function of 
the middle ear. They produce an increase in the impedance of the 
ossicular chain by introducing stiffness into the system. The overall 
acoustic impedance of the middle ear is dependent on both resistance, 
or friction, which is independent of frequency, and reactance, a com-
bination of stiffness and mass, which is frequency-dependent. A system 
with high reactance due to stiffness will impede the lower frequencies 
far more than the higher frequencies. 
The more important of the two muscles is the stapedius. On con-
traction, this pulls backwards and slightly outwards, thus reducing 
movement of the stapes in the oval window. This is most effective for 
lower frequency sounds. In normally-hearing ears, pure tone stimuli 
between the range 70 dB to 90 dB above threshold will cause the muscle 
to contract in both the ipsilateral and the contralateral ear; the level 
may be lower for noise. The predictable nature of this response, the 
stapedial reflex, is used diagnostically (section 12.2.7). More reliable 
contraction is obtained below 250Hz and attenuation here can be in 
the order of 20 dB to 30 dB. Above 1000Hz it becomes unreliable, 
producing minimal attenuation. 
The tensor tympani contracts as part of the overall 'startle' response. 
The muscle requires sound at high intensity to produce contraction, 
which then pulls forwards and slightly inwards, tensing the drum and 
producing more reflection of sound. The tensor tympani will also 
contract following tactile stimuli, such as puffing air on the cornea, or 
touching the meatus. It is less predictable than the stapedial reflex, but 
at high sound levels it is difficult to separate the two responses. 
The reflexes serve to protect the ear from high intensity sound. 
However, this is ineffective with very transient noise, such as gunfire, 
as there is a delay in muscle contraction. There is certainly a function in 
protecting the ears from continuous acoustic trauma and from one's 
own voice when shouting. The reflex is also thought to improve speech 
intelligibility in noise, as the higher frequencies are attenuated less and 
the masking effect is thus reduced. 
Most conduction of sound to the inner ear is by the route described, 
across the middle ear; this is called air conduction. Some sound energy, 
however, is transmitted directly to the cochlea through the bones of 
the skull, bypassing the middle ear. This fact is used clinically to assess 
the ability of the inner ear to hear sound without any interference 
from the outer or middle ear functions. Bone conduction is one of the 

The physiology of hearing 
35 
normal routes of hearing for some sound, particularly of one's own 
voice. The cochlea is stimulated by bone conduction in three ways: 
• By direct stimulation from vibrations of the skull. The round window 
is less rigid than the oval window, so pressure release is possible; 
this is the compression effect. 
• By vibration of the ossicular chain, hence the reduction in bone 
conduction thresholds with ossicular fixation, such as otosclerosis 
(Carhart's notch). This is known as the inertial effect. 
• From sound radiating into the meatus and producing pseudo-air 
conduction. This is linked with the occlusion effect, where occlusion 
of the meatus produces an enhancement of low frequency sound 
within the meatus, together with a reduction in masking by ambient 
noise. 
Malformation, damage or disease in any part of the conduction 
apparatus produces a conductive hearing loss. 
2.2.2 THE PERCEPTION OF SOUND 
The apparatus for perception of sound is the sense-organ of hearing, 
the organ of Corti, contained in the cochlea. Here sound is first analysed 
into its component frequencies before being relayed to the auditory 
areas of the brain via the cochlear nerve. 
Cochlear function can be thought of as two essential processes, 
transmission and transduction. Transmission is the transference 
of acoustic energy from the oval window to the organ of Corti. 
Transduction is the means by which this sound energy is converted to 
electrical impulses in the auditory nerve fibres. 
(a) The transmission process 
The theories of von Bekesy, first described in 1943, still form the basis 
of our understanding of this process. His 'travelling wave theory' 
describes how vibrations at the oval window of a frequency greater 
than 20Hz, set up a wave along the basilar membrane, beginning at 
the base of the cochlea and travelling towards the apex. At some point, 
this wave attains a maximum displacement. Where the peak displace-
ment of the wave arises is dependent on the frequency of the sound 
and how its passage is impeded by the varying mass and stiffness of 
the membrane. Lower frequencies pass further along the membrane 
and reach a peak nearer the apex, whereas the peak for high fre-
quencies lies nearer the base. The position of the peak is very highly 
tuned and is determined very precisely by the frequency of the sti-
mulating sound (Figure 2.11). 
This tuning of the basilar membrane is important for frequency 

36 
Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
Peak of travelling wave 
:!~_ ~~~ 
~ 
35mm 
(a) 
Peak of travelling wave 
Oval 
window--
~ 
.; 
___. 
Round 
/ 
window--1 , ______________ ___, 
(b) 
Fig. 2.11 Bekesy's travelling wave concept: the movement of the stapes in the 
oval window creates a travelling wave (a), which moves along the basilar 
membrane. Pressure is released via the round window (b). 
discrimination, although later experiments have shown that tuning is 
even more precise, involving individual groups of hair cells, and it 
appears that the cochlea is not a purely passive structure. The outer 
hair cells, activated by efferent nerve fibres, are thought to play a 
part in selectively stiffening the basilar membrane, thus sharpening 
its response by 'vibration amplification'. Otoacoustic emissions or 
'cochlear echoes', which are by-products of the outer hair cells' con-
tribution to vibration, can be measured in the ear canal. Otoacoustic 
emissions are linked to hearing ability and are currently used to provide 
an objective method of screening hearing in babies. For low intensity 
sound the hair cells are stimulated by individual frequencies. As 
the sound pressure level rises, there is a larger displacement of the 
membrane with more groups of hair cells being stimulated, and the 
fine tuning is thus reduced. Other mechanisms are then involved 
further along the auditory pathway, which increases the accuracy of 
information reaching the auditory cortex. 
(b) The transduction process within the cochlea 
The tectorial membrane does not move in the same way as the basilar 
membrane; when the wave travels along it causes the tectorial mem-
brane to move forwards as well as upwards, then backwards as well as 
downwards. The stereocilia of the hair cells are embedded in the 
tectorial membrane and this shearing motion bends them first one 
way, towards the tallest stereocilia, and then the other way, away from 
it. Joining their tips are 'transduction links' (Figure 2.12) and the tension 
on these is alternately tightened and released. Normally in the resting 

Tectorial 
membrane 
The physiology of hearing 
37 
-Cuticular plate 
Fig. 2.12 The transduction links between the stereocilia of a hair cell. (An inner 
hair cell is shown.) Shearing of the stereocilia is thought to cause a 'trap door' 
to open at the top of each stereocilium and the intracellular potential is driven 
more positive. 
position the endolymph outside the hair cell has a positive charge of 
approximately 80 millivolts, while the inside of the cell has a negative 
charge of approximately -60 millivolts. It is thought that as the trans-
duction links tighten a 'trap door' opens at the top of each cilia. 
An electrical potential gradient is thus set up, which causes an ionic 
intercharge and results in the hair cell becoming more positively 
charged. This, in turn, stimulates release of neurotransmitters at the 
base of the cell, which fire the nerve impulse; a wave of depolarization 
passes down the length of the axon. This nerve impulse is called 
the action potential and can be recorded by placing electrodes in the 
cochlea. The value of the potential is a few millivolts and is fixed; 
that is, a higher intensity sound produces more firing of the action 
potentials but not larger potentials. 
Other potentials have been found in the cochlea by using recording 
electrodes: 
• The cochlear microphonic. This has a maximum value of 3-4 milli-
volts and is an alternating current (AC) potential, which arises in 
the outer hair cells in response to a sound stimulus. It is a voltage 

38 
Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
analogue of the original waveform, which remains linear to about 
100 dBSPL and then saturates. It has proved valuable in research 
and also in assessing cochlear function in diagnostic investigation. 
• Summating potential. This again arises from the outer hair cells. It is 
a direct current (DC) potential that is usually negative. It tends 
to occur in response to high intensities and is the sum of various 
responses to the travelling waveform envelope. 
Understanding of the perception of sound is increasing with new 
research. Since the concept of von Bekesy was published there have 
been many refinements. It is now known that the nerve fibres them-
selves show frequency selectivity and that they have a spontaneous 
firing rate of just above 0-150 per second. Firing of the nerves occurs 
only at particular phases of the waveform, allowing a temporal re-
gularity in response to a periodic stimulus. The fibres themselves are 
distributed in an orderly manner in the main auditory nerve bundle. 
Fibres that respond to high frequencies are on the periphery, graduating 
to those responding to the lowest frequencies right in the centre. 
Malformation, damage or disease occurring in any part of the 
perceptive apparatus may cause sensorineural hearing loss. 
(c) The central connections of the cochlear nerve 
The nerve cells that supply the cochlea are described as bi-polar. That 
is they each have a body and two axons. One axon terminates at the 
base of a hair cell and the other in the cochlear nucleus of the brain-
stem. The cell bodies themselves are grouped together in the osseous 
spiral lamina of the cochlea and thus called the spiral ganglion. All 
groups of nerve cell bodies in the peripheral nervous system are 
called ganglia, whereas in the central nervous system they are called 
nuclei. 
From the spiral ganglion, the nerve fibres join together to form the 
cochlear nerve and pass through the internal auditory canal, to enter 
the brainstem. From here the nerve divides into two and terminates in 
the ventral and dorsal cochlear nuclei. Most fibres from these nuclei 
cross over to the superior olivary nucleus of the opposite hemisphere. 
The pathway continues via the lateral lemniscus, the inferior colliculus, 
the medial geniculate body and then on to the auditory cortex. There 
is also crossing of fibres at the level of the inferior colliculus. Some 
fibres follow this pathway on the same side, thus the cortex of each 
hemisphere receives information from both ears, but the majority of 
information received in the left auditory cortex will have originated in 
the right ear (Figure 2.13). 

The physiology of hearing 
39 
Medial 
'--.-----' geniculate 
body 
\ 
\ 
Dorsal 
cochlear 
nucleus 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
Ventral 
'r------'------, 
cochlear 
nucleus 
Fig. 2.13 The pathways to the auditory cortex. 
2.3 SUMMARY 
This chapter deals with the essential anatomical information required 
to understand the functioning of the human ear. Beginning with the 
only visible part of the ear, the pinna, it proceeds through each of 
the three parts: the external, middle and inner ear. Included are the 
essential relationships of the middle ear cavity, the complex anatomy 
of the cochlea and labyrinth and the organs of hearing and balance. 
Finally the chapter deals with the nasopharynx and the central connec-
tions of the cochlear nerve. 
The current understanding of the function of the human ear in 
receiving and perceiving sound can be described under two headings: 

40 
Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
• the conduction of sound- explaining how the conductive apparatus 
of the ear collects and transmits the sound from the air to the fluid 
of the inner ear; 
• the perception of sound - how the inner ear and the sensory organ 
of hearing convert the sound energy into nerve impulses for re-
laying to the auditory cortex. 
FURTHER READING 
Ballantyne, D. (1990) Handbook of Audiological Techniques, Butterworth-Heinne-
mann, London, pp. 28-51. 
McCormick, B. (1988) Paediatric Audiology 0-5 years, Taylor and Francis, 
London, pp. 221-46. 
Pickles, ].0. (1982) An Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing, Academic Press, 
London. 
von Bekesy, G. (1960) Experiments in Hearing, McGraw-Hill, New York. 

Medical aspects of 
hearing loss 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
3 
Hearing loss may be due to a wide variety of pathological processes 
occuring in any part of the ear. 'Pathology' means the study of disease. 
Diseases, or disorders, can be considered under the following headings: 
• traumatic, or from injury; 
• infective, or from micro-organisms; 
• tumours; 
• iatrogenic, caused by physician or surgeon, by use of inappropriate 
medication, surgical accident or unsterile operation; 
• idiopathic, or of unknown cause; 
• physiological disorders, including degenerative effects of ageing; 
• congenital, or from birth, whether inherited or caused by environ-
mental factors. 
Human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes. Twenty-two pairs are 
known as autosomes and are numbered 1 to 22. The remaining two 
chromosomes (one pair) are known as sex chromosomes. Abnormalities 
may involve the autosomes or the sex chromosomes, or they may in-
volve only individual genes. All hereditary characteristics, for example 
eye colour, are carried by genes on the chromosomes. 
Congenital defects may be due to 'environmental' factors (such as 
illness during pregnancy), but a high proportion of congenital deafness 
is inherited. In some inherited conditions the symptoms may not be 
apparent at birth, but may develop later in life. Many malformations or 
traits occur together and these may be termed as a syndrome. A family 
history will generally determine whether an inherited trait is dominant, 
recessive, or sex-linked. 

42 
Medical aspects of hearing loss 
3.2 PATHOLOGY OF THE OUTER EAR 
3.2.1 CONGENITAL CONDITIONS OF THE OUTER EAR 
(a) Malformation of the pinna 
Sometimes children are born with an accessory, or extra, pinna, or a 
tag of soft tissue and cartilage. This may be large or quite small, and it 
may be situated away from the normal site of ear formation. Treatment 
is by removal. Both microtia (poorly developed pinna) and anotia (no 
pinna) may be associated with other abnormalities of the conductive 
auditory system and are therefore an indicator for further investigation. 
(b) Aural fistula 
An aural fistula or sinus may be present. This can be quite a deep 
channel leading from the skin surface. Deep removal may be necessary 
or it can become cystic. The operation must be very carefully done as 
the facial nerve runs past this area and damage can lead to facial 
paralysis and permanent disfigurement. 
(c) Atresia 
Atresia can be present, in which case there is complete closure, or 
absence, of the external auditory meatus, and an operation is required 
to make an opening. There may be a partial closure or extreme narrow-
ness (stenosis) of the canal by an overgrowth of bone in or along the 
meatus, and this may go with a partial lack of development of the 
mid-face. 
(d) Hereditary conditions 
Hereditary conditions are those that are passed down to children from 
their parents due to genetic defects. There are a number of conditions 
that are hereditary and culminate in a lack of growth of parts of the 
face; probably the best example that affects the outer ear is Treacher 
Collin's syndrome. The main defects in this case may be poorly-formed 
cheek-bones, poorly-formed pinnae, sloping eyes with nicks in the 
eyelids (colobomas) and hearing impairment (see also section 3.3.1). 
3.2.2 ACQUIRED CONDITIONS OF THE OUTER EAR 
(a) Injury to the pinna 
The pinna may be damaged by injury or trauma. The most common 
injury is a bruising or haematoma, which is a collection of blood in the 

Pathology of the outer ear 
43 
tissues, often caused by boxing or an assault. Treatment should be 
carried out as early as possible, by aspirating away the blood with a 
syringe, or by making an incision to drain it. If this is not undertaken, 
the pressure of the contained blood can cause a local death of the 
tissues and formation of scar tissue, which may result in a 'cauliflower 
ear'. 
Sometimes an earlobe is torn, often when wearing ear-rings. There 
may even be the complete loss of a pinna. If possible, any cartilage 
should be retained for later plastic surgery reconstruction. It is difficult 
to apply a plastic false ear to the side of the head securely, so either a 
loop of tissue is formed, or dental osseo-integrated implants are in-
serted into the mastoid bone to aid retention. 
(b) Injury to the tympanic membrane 
Most commonly this is caused by children poking objects into their 
own or other people's ears. It can also be caused by unskilled treat-
ment or syringing, or by a slap or blow on the ear. Gunfire or explosion 
can cause even greater damage as the initial explosive pressure is 
followed by an air vacuum and suction. 
In a similar way, the eardrum can be damaged by barotrauma, which 
is a rapid alteration in air pressure caused by the sudden descent of an 
unpressurised aircraft or rapid ascent from deep sea diving. The drum 
may also be involved when the temporal bone of the skull is fractured 
by a sideways blow, when a car is hit by an object side on, for 
example. 
The symptoms are usually pain with minimal bleeding, deafness, 
tinnitus and vertigo. The signs are bleeding or a visible tear on the 
drum. It is best not to syringe or clear the ear but to give systemic 
antibiotics and leave it to heal. 
(c) Foreign bodies 
Objects in the ears are relatively common, especially in children. Hard 
objects, such as beads, can be hooked out. Soft objects of any sort, 
except vegetable matter, which can swell up when wetted, can all be 
syringed out, as shown in Figure 3.1. Forceps and tweezers are not 
generally used as these may push objects even further in, but a special 
loop can sometimes be used successfully. All such removals should be 
undertaken by a medically-qualified person. 
Insects occasionally enter the ear and cause intense irritation by their 
buzzing. This can be deadened by pouring warm olive oil into the 
canal. 

44 
Medical aspects of hearing loss 
Fig. 3.1 Syringing the ear. 
(d) Excessive wax 
Wax may accumulate in the external auditory meatus. New wax is soft 
and moist, and light in colour. With age, wax becomes dark and hard. 
It may sometimes block the meatus and, if impacted, it may press on 
the drum. Excessive wax can disturb hearing. 
Wax may be removed by syringing, often after it has been softened 
using drops of warmed olive oil, or similar, for a few days. Syringing 
should not be undertaken if there is any suspicion of a perforation, and 
otologists generally remove wax dry, often using a wax hook. 
(e) Infection of the outer ear 
Generally speaking, infections may be caused by all kinds of micro-
organisms, bacteria, viruses, fungi, lice, worms and so on. Infection in 
the nasal passages and sinuses is controlled by the mucous cells lining 
these areas, which have myriads of small moving hair-like processes 
called cilia. These all act in unison to clear bacteria away. In the ears, 
bacteria and dust are extruded in the soft wax. In the mouth and 
throat, bacteria can be washed away in the saliva which itself has some 
antiseptic properties, as do the tears in the eyes. 
The reaction of the tissues to infection is known as inflammation. 
The blood vessels enlarge, lymphocytes and macrophage cells collect in 
the area and migrate through the vessel walls to mop up the infective 
organisms (phagocytosis). Drainage of the infected area is via the 
lymphatic vessels to the relevant lymph nodes, which can become 
enlarged and tender. 

Pathology of the outer ear 
45 
Whether the inflammation controls the infection depends on the 
virulence of the organism, and also on the health and resistance of the 
individual. If the person is unfit, perhaps on a poor diet, anaemic or 
diabetic, resistance will be impaired and the infection could therefore 
worsen. Some bacteria give off toxins that lower the resistance of the 
tissues and facilitate the spread of the infection. 
Viruses are smaller particles than bacteria and have no cell mem-
brane of their own; they can only live and multiply in the cells of the 
host. Viruses do not respond to ordinary antibiotics. Treatment can be 
by antivirals and analgesics and by boosting the patient's general 
fitness. 
Otitis extema, or acute dermatitis of the outer ear, is an inflam-
mation of the skin covering the pinna or lining the external auditory 
meatus. The condition often occurs in conjunction with dandruff of the 
scalp. It can cause extreme irritation and scratching of the area, which 
may be due to staphylococcus, or to fungi, which collect in any cracks. 
This can be remedied by treating the dandruff and by local application 
of antibiotic creams or fungicides. 
Eczema or sensitization dermatitis, is an allergic form of skin inflam-
mation that can cause vesicles and oozing. (A vesicle is a small swelling 
filled with a clear exudate - not with pus.) The ear should be cleaned 
carefully and any general allergy should be treated. 
Herpes is an infection with a particular virus of the herpes family. 
Herpes simplex may cause a bright red inflammation and ulceration, 
but usually heals within ten days. Herpes zoster (shingles) is a much 
more virulent type similar to the virus of chicken-pox. It causes an 
acute inflammation of the sensory nerve ganglions, and when this 
occurs in the auditory, facial and trigeminal nerves it causes vesicles 
and severe pain in the area of the face that is innervated by the 
particular nerve affected. The disease may continue for a long time and 
may recur despite treatments. 
Furunculosis is the presence of a furuncle, or boil, which is caused 
by infection of the hair follicle by staphylococcus bacteria. Boils within 
the cartilage in the external auditory meatus are excruciatingly painful, 
and any swelling may cause a hearing loss. Treatment is with antibiotics 
and the application of warm glycerine and antiseptic on the area using 
a soft cotton wool wick in the ear passage. 
Otomycosis is a fungal infection and is treated by keeping the ear 
dry and applying nystatin or other antifungal ointments. 
(f) Tumours 
Tumours may be either benign or malignant (cancerous). 
Benign tumours are commonly exostoses, or outgrowths, of normal 

46 
Medical aspects of hearing loss 
bone and are usually referred to as osteoma. These may be left alone if 
small but, if large and interfering with hearing, they can be removed 
with a small dental-type drill, using an operating microscope. 
The most common malignant tumour in this area is the basal cell 
carcinoma, or rodent ulcer. This usually affects the upper edge of the 
pinna probably being brought on by ultraviolet sunlight. It may appear 
as an ulcer that fails to heal and, if left, it can spread to the scalp and 
inner ear, and cause great destruction of the tissues. 
Malignant skin cancer can spread via the lymphatic scavenger system 
and can appear in the auricular or cervical lymph nodes. Early removal 
is made by cutting a V-shaped notch in the pinna including a 10mm 
surround of healthy tissue to prevent recurrence. If left, it can involve 
the facial nerve and cause a facial palsy and unbearable pain. Any 
affected lymph nodes in the area of the neck must also be removed by 
an extensive operation. 
3.3 PATHOLOGY OF THE MIDDLE EAR 
3.3.1 CONGENITAL CONDITIONS OF THE MIDDLE EAR 
In certain disorders, which are mainly hereditary genetic abnormalities, 
there may be a malformation of the middle ear, such as a lack of, or 
malformation of, one or more of the ossicles. Some examples include: 
Treacher Collin's syndrome Autosomal-dominant 
genetic 
defect, 
leading to poorly-formed cheek-bones, 
fish-like mouth, sloping eyes, nicks 
in the eyelids (colobomas), 
poorly-
developed outer and middle ears, often 
with atresia of ear canals. Hearing 
defects are mainly conductive. 
Crouzon' s syndrome 
Autosomal-dominant. Lack of growth 
mid-face, abnormally-shaped head with 
central prominence in the frontal re-
gion. Hearing defects that are mainly 
conductive. 
Down's syndrome 
Chromosomal abnormality (the presence 
of an extra number 21 chromosome), 
resulting in learning difficulties and 
classic facial features including small 
pinnae and narrow ear canals. High in-
cidence, about 1 in 700 live births; risk 
increases with age of mother. Hearing 
defects may be conductive, sensorineural 
or mixed. 

Paget's disease 
Pathology of the middle ear 
47 
Autosomal-recessive skeletal disorder. 
Progressive deformities become apparent 
around the second year of life. Mixed 
progressive hearing loss due to con-
tinued new bone formation at base of 
skull. 
3.3.2 ACQUIRED CONDITIONS OF THE MIDDLE EAR 
(a) Traumatic conditions 
Trauma may be direct - for example, damage caused by poking an 
object into the middle ear - or it may be indirect, often due to a blow 
on the side of the head, which may cause damage to the temporal 
bone. Symptoms of the latter are usually bleeding from the ear, bruising 
over the mastoid bone, pain and deafness. Signs may include a split in 
the tympanic membrane, haemorrhage in the ear canal, facial palsy 
and other signs of local nerve damage. Radiographically there may 
be signs of fracture in the temporal area, which is confirmed by a 
computerized tomogram (CT) scan. Treatment is by cleaning the ear 
canal, and giving antibiotics systemically. Syringing should not be 
undertaken. 
(b) Infective conditions 
Otitis media Otitis media is an inflammation of the middle ear, which 
is usually accompanied by some temporary loss of hearing. 
Air enters the Eustachian tube during swallowing in order to balance 
the air pressure in the middle ear with ambient atmospheric pressure. 
If the Eustachian tube is blocked, which is often due to infection, 
normal middle ear pressure cannot be maintained because oxygen is 
absorbed by the tissues. The resultant negative pressure causes fluid to 
exude from the walls of the middle ear. The fluid may be sterile or 
infected (pus) and it may build up sufficiently to cause painful pressure 
on the eardrum. If the eardrum bursts, the fluid is released, the pain 
subsides, and the Eustachian tube gradually clears and opens again. A 
perforation in the lower part of the eardrum is considered safe and will 
usually heal uneventfully, although it may leave an area of weakened 
scar tissue. A perforation in the upper part of the eardrum is considered 
dangerous because of its close proximity to important structures. Middle 
ear infection is treated by antibiotics and painkillers. 
Children are very prone to otitis media because their Eustachian 
tubes are more horizontal than those of adults and their immune 
systems are less well developed. Where the condition is recurrent, a 

48 
Medical aspects of hearing loss 
Liquid level 
Incision to create 
drainage and 
ventilation 
of the middle ear 
Grommet inserted 
Fig. 3.2 'Glue ear' - secretory otitis media and its treatment. 
Fig. 3.3 Otitis media with complications. 
sticky residue may adhere to the ossicles, inhibiting their movement 
and causing a hearing loss. This condition is commonly known as 'glue 
ear'. Where otitis media is long-standing or repeated, or in cases of 
glue ear, a myringotomy may be undertaken. A small incision is made 
in the lower part of the drum to release the fluid and a plastic grommet 
may be inserted in the eardrum (Figure 3.2) to ventilate the middle ear 
and thus prevent recurrence. 
If not treated early enough, middle ear infection may spread and 
can result in major dangerous disease, such as meningitis or a brain 
abscess (Figure 3.3), symptoms being acute headache and very high 

Pathology of the middle ear 49 
temperature. Before the use of antibiotics, middle ear infection often 
caused an infection of the mastoid air cells (mastoiditis) and the best 
cure at that time was a mastoidectomy, which was a painful and 
dangerous operation to open up and drain the area. Early recognition 
and treatment with antibiotics is therefore of great importance and may 
be life-saving. 
Cholesteatoma Dangerous chronic (long-standing) otitis media 
usually occurs in a middle ear where the Eustachian tube is never fully 
open. The air pressure is lower in the middle ear than in the external 
ear canal, thus the greater external air pressure gradually pushes into 
the soft, flaccid upper part of the drum to form a pouch. Epithelial 
skin cells lining the ear canal are continually being shed and migrate 
naturally out of the ear canal, but those within this pouch cannot be 
cleared away by natural migration. Gradually an accumulation of skin 
cells, wax, dust and bacteria builds up into a sticky mass which is 
termed a cholesteatoma. This builds up further, becomes more infected, 
pushes into the outer attic wall (Figure 3.4) and begins to discharge a 
foul-smelling pus. As it enlarges further it can destroy the ossicular 
chain and may even erode the roof of the middle ear and cause intra-
cranial infections. It may also burst through and damage the labyrinth 
and/or the facial nerve to cause a facial palsy. Symptoms and signs are 
of a recurrent foul discharge, pain, deafness and possibly vertigo. 
Treatment is by operating, opening the area widely and cleaning the 
whole middle ear and mastoid air cells, cleaning out the cholesteatoma 
and drying up any discharge. If untreated, the complications can be 
very serious indeed. 
Cholesteatoma eroding 
into attic 
Fig. 3.4 Cholesteatoma following chronic suppurative otitis media. 

50 
Medical aspects of hearing loss 
(c) Facial paralysis 
Facial paralysis may arise from damage to the facial nerve via the 
mastoid air cells (Figure 2.7), or the nerve may be damaged in an 
accident or operation. Paralysis of the muscles of facial expression 
results, causing marked asymmetry of the face, with possible loss of 
taste and salivation. People thus affected cannot smile, raise their 
eyebrows or close the eye of the affected side. If long term, the eyelids 
may have to be sewn together to protect the eye. If the cause is 
unknown, it is termed a Bell's palsy. Treatment is often with steroids. 
There is also a surgical procedure, called facial hypoglossal anasto-
mosis, to re-route the facial nerve. In addition, these patients may be 
referred to a physiotherapist or speech and language therapist for facial 
exercises and/or electrical or thermal stimulation. 
(d) Otosclerosis 
Otosclerosis is an exuberant growth of normal bone, the cause of 
which is unknown. It usually affects the middle ear but may also affect 
the inner ear. Extra spongy-type bone is produced, especially around 
the oval and round windows. This spongy bone gradually hardens. 
The stapes may therefore become immoveable causing deafness. The 
condition occurs in young adults and there may be a family history. 
It may be accelerated during pregnancy, probably due to hormonal 
activity. 
A conductive hearing loss will be present, which is greatest in the 
low frequencies. A dip in the bone conduction threshold at 2kHz is 
often noted (Figure 3.5 (a)). This is known as Carhart's notch. In later 
stages of otosclerosis, there may be sensorineural involvement as the 
bony growth invades the inner ear. Treatment is by microscopic sur-
gery, the stapes being removed wholly or partly and replaced with a 
prosthesis, which may be a small metal or Teflon plunger wedged into 
place at the oval window with a piece of foam or fat (Figure 3.6). The 
operation is all done through an incision in the tympanic membrane, 
and the working end of the piston is usually hooked around the 
bottom end of the incus. The operation is termed a stapedectomy. 
3.4 PATHOLOGY OF THE INNER EAR 
In the inner ear, disease may produce dizziness due to a disturbance of 
fluid levels in the labyrinth, or it may affect the cochlea or the auditory 
nerve causing sensorineural hearing loss. As before, diseases may be 
classified as congenital or acquired. 

-10 
0 
10 
20 
30 
iD 40 
:2.. 50 
Qj 
> 60 
~ 70 
Ol 
c 
80 
-~ 90 
Q) 
I 
100 
110 
120 
130 
140 
(b) 
-10 
0 
10 
20 
30 
iii' 40 
:!2.. 50 
Qj 
> 60 
~ 70 
Ol 
c 
80 
-~ 
Q) 
90 
I 
100 
110 
120 
130 
140 125 
(a} 
[)-__ 
I -
I 
-
_.__ ,, 
' '\ ~' 
I 
~ 
' 
' 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
.I 
j 
• 
' 
Diseases of the inner ear 
51 
I _ 
'\ , ,., 
Key: 
-
~-1" 
Bone conduct1on 
J 
left ear 
X A1r conduction 
left ear 
250 500 1 000 2000 4000 8000 
Frequency (Hz} 
' 
I 
I 
I 
'"-"-
!"-
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
' ' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
' 
% 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
' . 
-10ror--r--,.ro~.-~~-.. 
0~~~--~~~~+-~~ 
10~~~~~--~~~-~_+-~-+~~~ 
20~~-r~~~~~+-~~ 
30r-r--+--~-r-~+f~,~~,~~r+~ 
iD 40r-r--+--~~+-+
1 -r·~~
·~'~+-~ 
:2.. 50~~-+--~~+-+-~-4-~~~ 
~ 60~~-+--~4-+-+-~-4-T~ 
~ 
Ol 
70~~-+--~~+-+-~-4-+~ 
c 
80~r--+--~;-+-+-~-4-T~ 
-~ 90~r--+--~--+-+-~-+-T~ 
I 
100~~~--+-~~-+~4-+-~ 
110~~~--+-~~-+~4-~~ 
120~--~--~-+~4-~~~ 
130ri--+--+~+-~~+-~4 
140~~-L--i-~~~~~~LJ 
125 250 500 1000 200040008000 
Frequency (Hz} 
125 250 500 1 000 2000 4000 8000 
Frequency (Hz) 
(c) 
Fig. 3.5 Audiograms for the left ear illustrating (a) otosclerosis, (b) typical 
noise damage, (c) presbyacusis. 
3.4.1 CONGENITAL CONDITIONS OF THE INNER EAR 
Congenital hearing loss may be caused by maldevelopment of the 
inner ear, as in hereditary genetic abnormalities, or by environmental 
damage such as occurs when infectious diseases in the mother cross 
over the placenta to affect the unborn child, for example, syphilis, 
CMV and German measles (rubella). Development can also be affected 
by severe jaundice, such as that due to rhesus factor antibodies in the 

52 
Medical aspects of hearing loss 
Stapes immoveably 
sclerosed in the 
oval window 
Stapes removed 
by microsurgery 
Replaced by metal 
piston and gelfoam 
Fig. 3.6 The middle-ear operation of stapedectomy. 
mother's blood, or by other neonatal/perinatal factors such as anoxia, 
or use of antibiotic drugs. Many congenital hearing losses of unknown 
cause are thought to be non-syndromic genetic losses. Examples of con-
genital conditions associated with sensorineural hearing loss include: 
Usher's syndrome 
Autosomal-recessive 
genetic 
condition. 
Moderate to severe bilateral sensorineural 
hearing loss is present at birth. Progres-
sive blindness usually starts in teens due 
to retinitis pigmentosa. 

Waardenburg's syndrome 
Turner's syndrome 
Rubella (German measles) 
Cytomegalovirus disease 
(CMV) 
Syphilis 
Diseases of the inner ear 
53 
Autosomal-dominant genetic condition. 
Features include white forelock, different 
coloured segments in the eyes and mild to 
profound hearing loss, which may be 
unilateral or bilateral, and sometimes 
progressive. 
Sex chromosome defect which is not in-
herited. Features include low hair-line, 
webbed neck, short stature, kidney de-
fects and mild sensorineural and conduc-
tive hearing loss. Occurs only in females. 
Viral infection contracted from the mother 
during pregnancy. Defects vary depend-
ing on the stage of development of the 
embryo/foetus when the infection occurs. 
Features include hearing loss, heart dis-
ease, eye disorders, psychomotor prob-
lems and behavioural disorders. 
Viral infection contracted from the mother 
during pregnancy or during birth. The 
disease in the mother may present very 
mild symptoms, such as a runny nose. 
In the baby, CMV affects the nervous 
system. Possible defects include hearing 
loss, learning difficulties, spasticity, con-
vulsions and hyperactivity. 
Bacterial infection contracted from the 
mother during pregnancy. Defects include 
slow progressive deafness and other 
sensory defects. 
3.4.2 ACQUIRED CONDITIONS OF THE INNER EAR 
Acquired inner ear diseases are those caused after birth, possibly by 
infection from mumps or meningitis, or they may be caused by an 
accident, blow or explosion, or by exposure to loud noise. 
(a) Noise damage 
Noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL) is caused by long exposure to high 
levels of noise, such as those found in certain industrial situations, 
especially prior to the Noise at Work regulations (Health and Safety 
Executive, 1989). 

54 
Medical aspects of hearing loss 
At first the noise will cause a temporary threshold shift (ITS), which 
is followed by full recovery after a period away from the noise, but 
after years of exposure the damage becomes permanent. The longer 
the duration and the more intense the noise, the greater will be the 
damage. Ear protection should be used and is now required by law 
above certain levels. 
The greatest effect on hearing is in the high frequency region. The 
audiogram often shows a 'notch' at 4kHz (Figure 3.5(b)), and the 
hearing loss is frequently accompanied by tinnitus. 
Acoustic trauma is caused by intense short-duration sound, such as 
gunfire, and results in a sudden high frequency hearing loss. 
(b) Presbyacusis and circulatory disorders 
Presbyacusis is the term given to degeneration of hearing in old age. 
This is the most common general cause of hearing loss and results in a 
progressive bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, mainly in the high 
frequencies (Figure 3.5(c)). Presbyacusis can be thought of as the 
cumulative effect of living, and may include a variety of causes, such 
as: 
• circulatory disorders, including arteriosclerosis, thrombosis and vas-
cular spasm; 
• noise damage, including long exposure at normal levels; 
• poor diet; 
• normal use of drugs; 
• lack of exercise; 
• stress. 
Circulatory disorders are the most common specific cause of hearing 
loss. The cochlea requires a constant, sufficient supply of oxygen and 
nutrients to maintain its function. This supply is dependent on the 
condition of the heart, the blood vessels and the stria vascularis. 
Degenerative changes in the blood vessels, blood clots, high or low 
blood pressure, and damage due to elevated blood glucose levels in 
diabetes, may all affect hearing. Even a brief interruption to the blood 
supply may cause permanent damage. 
(c) Infections 
Infections affecting the inner ear are mainly viral or bacterial, although 
they may be due to other micro-organisms (section 3.2.2(e) ). 
Viral infections include: 
• Mumps and measles may cause a sensorineural loss. The hearing 
loss caused by mumps is often unilateral. Measles may be com-
plicated by otitis media. 

Diseases of the inner ear 
55 
• Shingles (herpes zoster) causes inflammation of the nerves and, if 
this involves the auditory nerve, will cause sensorineural loss with 
pain. 
• Influenza can affect the cochlea via the bloodstream, often with an 
additional temporary conductive loss due to otitis media. 
Bacterial infections include: 
• Diphtheria may cause a sensorineural loss with secondary otitis 
media. 
• Meningitis may cause sensorineural loss, which can be total. The 
meninges, or brain lining, is inflamed due to direct infection or 
neglected otitis media. The condition can be life-threatening and is 
usually treated with antibiotics. Some cases of meningitis are of viral 
origin. 
Infections from the inner ear must be diagnosed and treated early 
because there can be a very dangerous spread of infection to the 
middle cranial fossa causing meningitis or a brain abscess, or the 
infection may spread into the neighbouring mastoid air cells, or infect 
the facial nerve to cause a palsy. Early treatment with antibiotics and 
surgical drainage may be life saving. 
(d) Ototoxic drugs 
Hearing loss due to drugs is usually bilateral, may be sudden or pro-
gressive, and is often accompanied by tinnitus. Some losses tend to 
recover (unless the dosage is very high) when the drug is withdrawn. 
For example, analgesics, such as aspirin, cause a reversible high fre-
quency loss; diuretics, such as frusemide, cause a reversible low to 
mid frequency loss; and quinine causes a reversible low frequency loss. 
Other drugs, such as the powerful antibiotic streptomycin, cause per-
manent damage. Ototoxic drugs include: 
streptomycin 
aspirin 
chloramphenicol 
mercury 
kanamycin 
chloroquine 
(e) Conditions involving vertigo 
quinine 
neomycin 
frusemide 
nitrogen mustard 
gentamicin 
thalidomide 
Vertigo may occur in a number of conditions, most commonly through 
blockage of the Eustachian tube, suppuration in the labyrinth, tumours 
affecting the VIII cranial nerve, after operations on the ear and when 
affected by Meniere's disorder. 

56 
Medical aspects of hearing loss 
Organ of 
Corti 
Scala tympani 
Distention of Reissner's 
membrane due to 
excess endolymph 
Fig. 3.7 Cross-section of the cochlea, to show expansion of the endolymphatic 
compartment in Meniere's disorder and vestibular neuronitis. 
Vertigo may be accompanied by nausea and vomiting, and nystagmus 
or vibrating movements of the eyes. Assessment will involve investi-
gation of auditory and vestibular function. Tests usually include noting 
spontaneous and induced nystagmus, which provides valuable diag-
nostic information. 
Meniere's disorder, also known as idiopathic episodic endolymphatic 
hydrops, usually occurs in middle age. It is idiopathic as the cause is 
unknown, but it is known to be associated with a raised pressure on, 
and distension of, the membranous labyrinth (hydrops) (Figure 3.7). 
Symptoms are recurrent sudden attacks of dizziness, tinnitus and deaf-
ness. Nystagmus may also be present, and attacks may be nocturnal. 
The hearing loss is sensorineural, fluctuating. It is usually low fre-
quency and may be unilateral. The condition must be referred for 
medical care. Hearing aids should only be recommended with the 
doctor's consent, as amplification can induce attacks. 
Treatment is usually by medication with anti-sickness and antide-
pressant drugs. Alternative treatment can be by surgical decompression 
or destruction of the labyrinth with an ultrasonic beam or a laser. 
Surgical destruction may stop the symptoms but deafness thereafter 
will be complete. Other treatment includes reduction of fluid, restricting 
salt in the diet and prescribing diuretics, which increase fluid excretion. 
Vestibular neuronitis is a condition similar to Meniere's disorder, 

Other conditions of the ear 
57 
but the cause, a virus, is known, and it normally affects younger 
people. 
Acoustic neuroma is a benign (local, slow-growing) tumour, or 
neuro-fibroma, of the VIII cranial nerve. The condition is relatively 
rare, having an incidence of 1 in 100000 population (O'Donoghue, 
1993), but may be fatal if it is not surgically treated. Its symptoms may 
be similar to Meniere's disorder, and clinical assessment includes tests 
(described in Chapter 12) to distinguish these conditions. Diagnosis is 
usually by a CT scan, and treatment is by neurosurgery. An acoustic 
neuroma is actually an overgrowth of the Schwann cells of the outer 
sheath of the nerve trunk, and has to be approached by drilling a hole 
in the skull. 
Other causes of vertigo with hearing loss can be: 
• postural after head injuries; 
• impaired blood supply to the brain; 
• infections such as syphilis; 
• tumours such as cancer; 
• obstructed Eustachian tubes; 
• build up of wax causing pressure; 
• the taking of ototoxic drugs. 
3.5 OTHER CONDITIONS OF THE EAR 
3.5.1 OPERATIONS ON THE EAR 
Myringotomy is an operation for treating secretory otitis media (glue 
ear), carried out under general anaesthetic, and in which a curved 
incision is made low down in the drum using a tiny, long-handled 
myringotomy knife. A Teflon drain or grommet may be put into the 
incision to keep the drain-hole open and thus provide ventilation 
(Figure 3.2). This grommet will normally be shed naturally within six 
months. If symptoms recur, the operation is repeated. 
A cortical mastoidectomy is not used as often since the advent of 
powerful antibiotics. A curved incision is made behind the ear down to 
the mastoid process. The mastoid air cells and antrum are removed 
with bone drills and the cavity is left to drain. Great care must be taken 
to avoid damage to the facial nerve. 
A radical mastoidectomy is undertaken in dangerous chronic dis-
ease. In this case, the entire mastoid and middle ear are drilled away 
including the malleus and incus. The base of the stapes is left sealing 
the oval window. The wound is protected with a gauze pad until the 
infection is controlled and then the area is grafted over with skin. 
Tympanoplasty is reconstructive surgery performed under an oper-

58 
Medical aspects of hearing loss 
ating microscope to replace the ossicles and to repair a tom or missing 
tympanic membrane. 
Stapedectomy is an operation undertaken using an operating mi-
croscope; the eardrum is removed to provide access to the ossicles. The 
stapes is broken off the oval window and an artificial stapes is inserted. 
This may be a stainless steel or Teflon piston held in place by a fat graft 
or foam pad. The other end of the piston is hooked on to the incus. 
The drum is then replaced and packed with a sterile dressing to keep 
it in place for 48 hours, after which time the dressing is carefully 
removed. Results are normally very good. 
Labyrinthectomy is usually undertaken to treat Meniere's disorder or 
intractable tinnitus or vertigo. The mastoid and horizontal semicircular 
canal are drilled open so that the membranous labyrinth can be picked 
up and destroyed. As the middle ear is not opened in this operation 
healing should be quite quick, but hearing loss will be permanent. 
All these operations have a much greater success rate since the 
advent of suitable antibiotics and with the use of operating microscopes 
and microsurgical techniques. 
3.5.2. PAIN IN THE EAR 
Otalgia or pain in the ear may be of local cause or referred from other 
areas. 
(a) Local pain 
The common local causes of earache are: 
• boils in the external auditory meatus (these are especially painful in 
the cartilage; they are caused by an infection in a hair follicle by 
staphylococcus bacteria); 
• otitis media, infection of the middle ear; 
• mastoiditis, infection of the mastoid air cells; 
• malignant disease of the ear. 
(b) Referred pain 
Pain may be referred from: 
• decayed and infected molar teeth; 
• impacted wisdom teeth; 
• sinusitis, particularly from the maxillary sinus; 
• herpes zoster (shingles), viral infection of the nerves; 
• neck lesions, such as trapped cervical nerves; 
• quinsy or tonsillar abscess; 
• tongue with posterior ulcers or cancer; 

Summary 
59 
• ulcers and cancers of the pharynx, larynx and palate; 
• glossopharyngeal neuralgia (this is extremely painful); 
• tempera-mandibular joint dysfunction; 
• temporal arteritis; 
• malignant diseased areas in close proximity to the ear. 
Tempero-mandibular joint dysfunction is also known as Costen's 
syndrome. In this disease, pain from the joint arises from a malfunction 
due to damage, malformation, poor dental occlusion, loss of teeth or 
over-closure. Cases should be referred to an oral surgeon. 
Temporal arteritis occurs when the outer wall of the temporal 
artery becomes diseased. The artery is swollen and painful to touch. A 
biopsy is taken and steroids prescribed or surgery advised. 
Malignant diseases of the neighbouring areas, in particular the naso-
pharynx, the back of the tongue, the palate or the floor of the mouth, 
may cause referred pain. A biopsy is required to confirm the diagnosis, 
followed by radiotherapy, chemotherapy, surgery or a combination 
thereof. Diagnosis must be early or the prognosis is very poor. 
3.5.3 CONDITIONS INVOLVING TINNITUS 
In these cases the clients complain of noises in the ear or head, possibly 
of pulsation, ringing, hissing or buzzing, usually associated with some 
loss of hearing. 
Any abnormal condition of the ear can bring this on but the main 
causes are: 
• otosclerosis - overgrowth of bone; 
• wax secretions; 
• tumours, benign and malignant; 
• Meniere's disorder; 
• fevers; 
• raised blood pressure (pulsating tinnitus); 
• anaemia; 
• nervous diseases (multiple sclerosis); 
• taking of drugs and alcohol; 
• over-smoking. 
Surgery is not usually required, treatment being with sedatives, psy-
chotherapy, kindness and care. For further information see section 
12.1. 
3.6 SUMMARY 
Hearing loss may be conductive or sensorineural in type, or a mixture 
of these two. 

60 
Medical aspects of hearing loss 
Conductive hearing loss is caused by some abnormality of the outer 
or middle ear. The principal causes are: 
• impacted wax blocking the ear canal; 
• otitis externa or inflammation of the outer ear; 
• otitis media or inflammation of the middle ear, glue ear if chronic; 
• otosclerosis; 
• atresia or stenosis; 
• foreign bodies in the ear canal. 
Treatment of any condition of the ears should only be undertaken by, 
or under the direction of, a medically-qualified person. 
Sensorineural hearing loss is caused by some abnormality of the 
cochlea, auditory nerve or the hearing centres of the brain. Most sen-
sorineural hearing loss is caused by defects or damage to the cochlea, 
due to: 
• presbyacusis or the effects of age; 
• vascular causes; 
• excessive noise; 
• hydrops or excessive fluid pressure in the inner ear; 
• ototoxic drugs; 
• congenital, hereditary and 'environmental' causes. 
REFERENCES 
Health and Safety Executive (1989) Noise at Work, HMSO, London. 
O'Donoghue, G.M. (1993) Acoustic Neuroma: Triumph and Disaster. British 
Journal of Hospital Medicine, 49(2), 86-7. 
FURTHER READING 
Birrell, J.F. (1982) Logan Turner's Diseases of the Nose, Throat and Ear, John Wright 
and Sons Ltd, Bristol. 
Bull, P.D. (1981) Lecture Notes on Diseases of the Ear, Nose and Throat, Blackwell 
Scientific Publications, Oxford. 
Ludman, H. (1988) ABC of Ear, Nose and Throat, British Medical Association, 
London. 
Simson Hall, I. and Colman, B.H. (1987) Diseases of the Nose, Throat and Ear, 
13th edn, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. 

Speech and 
intelligibility 
4.1 THE SPEECH CHAIN 
4 
Speech is a most efficient means of communication that is resilient to 
background noise, interference and distortion. It can be understood 
despite different voices and accents, even on the telephone with no 
visual cues and a very restricted frequency range. 
When most people consider speech, they think only of the lip and 
tongue movements and the sounds that they link with them; but 
speech is much more than just the act of speaking. It is concerned with 
both the production and the reception of spoken messages. 
The speaker must decide what he wants to say, and form it into 
words and sentences according to the rules of English. He must then 
send impulses via his nervous system to the vocal organs to produce 
the speech sounds that travel through the air to the listener. The 
listener's ear receives the sounds and passes the messages to the brain, 
where they are finally decoded. Speech is a chain of events linking the 
speaker and the listener and is often called the speech chain (Figure 
4.1). 
The study of speech, which is known as phonetics, can be broken 
down into three main parts: 
• articulatory phonetics is concerned with speech production; 
• acoustic phonetics is concerned with the waveform, which provides 
the link between the speaker and the listener; 
• auditory or perceptual phonetics is concerned with listening skills. 
Written language is made up of a series of symbols or letters joined 
together to form words. These words are both formed and used ac-
cording to certain rules, which are learned in early school and which 

62 
Speech and intelligibility 
Encoding-Speech-- Transmission-- Reception --Decoding 
Fig. 4.1 The speech chain. 
bricks 
phonemes 
walls 
~ 
~ 
syllables 
Fig. 4.2 The 'building bricks' that make up words. 
buildings 
words 
later can be used with ease. Similarly, speech is made up of a series 
of sounds, which are formed into words. The individual sounds are 
called phonemes and these are the smallest units of sound that carry 
meaning; for example, the words c-a-t, c-o-t, c-u-t, are all made up of 
three phonemes. In each of these words, it is the medial phoneme 
which alters the meaning. 
Phonemes are not identical to written letters, although there is much 
overlap. There are very approximately 40 phonemes in English, 20 
vowels and 20 consonants, and an international phonetic alphabet 
(IPA) exists to symbolize these. Phonemes are built up into syllables; 
for example, planet is one word, but made up of two syllables and six 
phonemes. The phonemes can be likened to the bricks that build up 
into the walls (syllables), that are linked to make the buildings (words) 
(Figure 4.2). 
In English, as in other languages, there are rules that constrain the 
way we build words from the individual sounds or phonemes, and we 
cannot use them in any order; for instance, 'klr' does not exist in 
English, while 'ng' only occurs at the end of a syllable, never at the 
beginning. Words, too, are joined together into sentences using certain 
rules of grammar (syntax) and meaning (semantics). Grammatical rules 
will tell us the order of words that is acceptable; for example, we know 
at once that 'Horse the I ride' is incorrect. However, grammar alone is 
not sufficient, as sentences must also make sense. 'The babysitting is 
high', for example, is meaningless, and so we can see that word order 
is constrained by both grammatical and semantic rules. 

The vocal tract 
63 
Most people could not state the rules of English but nevertheless 
rarely break them because they have an unconscious awareness of 
them. 
4.2 THE VOCAL TRACT 
The organs involved in speech production (Figure 4.3) are the lungs, 
trachea (windpipe), larynx (containing the vocal cords or folds), 
pharynx (throat), mouth and nose. The lungs produce the airstream, or 
power, to vibrate the vocal folds, which provide the source of sound. 
This is resonated by the vocal tract to produce recognizable speech 
sounds. 
The airstream travels from the lungs up the trachea, through the 
larynx to the nose and mouth. The larynx acts as a valve between the 
throat and the lungs, able to open and close to control the airflow from 
the lungs. This action is largely dependent on the vocal cords, which 
are really folds of ligament, hence they are also known as the vocal 
folds. The space between the vocal folds is called the glottis, and when 
the vocal folds are open the glottis forms a 'V' -shape (Figure 4.4) 
Turbinates--+-.= 
=--~ 
Hard palate-r-~=---.. 
Soft palate (velum) 
Pharynx ----,1--
-"-----+---Epiglottis 
Oesophagus 
(food pipe) 
(closed when 
swallowing) 
Speech signal 
Resonation 
~ 
Source of vibration 
(vocal folds) 
Power (from the lungs) I 
Fig. 4.3 The organs of the vocal tract and their role in the production of the 
speech signal. 

64 
Speech and intelligibility 
(b) 
Fig. 4.4 Opening the vocal cords. (a) When lightly closed, the cords vibrate. 
(b) When spaced apart, the airflow is unimpeded. 
because the vocal folds move away from each other only at the back of 
the trachea. As we speak, the air pressure from the lungs vibrates the 
vocal folds rhythmically. The frequency of the vibration depends upon 
how quickly the folds vibrate, and can be altered within a range of 
about an octave and a half. 
The pharynx or throat connects the larynx with the mouth and nose. 
The nasal cavity extends from the pharynx and is divided by the 
septum into two sections leading to the nostrils. The walls of the two 
sections are not flat but have ridges and folds known as the turbinates. 
At the back of the nose and throat are the tonsils and adenoids. The 
nasal cavities can be closed off by raising the soft palate, in which case 
the airflow is directed through the mouth. The shape and size of the 
cavities of the mouth can be widely varied by moving the lips, teeth 
and tongue. 
4.3 SPEECH-READING 
The lips can be rounded, spread or. closed, and in 'lip-reading' a deaf 
person watches the position of the lips and teeth to add information to 
the reduced sounds he or she hears. As well as watching the lip and 
teeth positions, most deaf people will also obtain other clues, or cues, 
from facial expression, posture, context and so on; this is often there-
fore called 'speech-reading'. Lip-reading is not sufficient alone because 
groups of sounds, known as visemes, look the same on the lips; 
for example 'p', 'b' and 'm' cannot be told apart by lip-reading. Dis-
criminating individual sounds is made even more difficult in running 
speech, where the amount of lip-read information diminishes as we 
run one sound into another. Running speech is only easier to under-
stand because other linguistic cues are present, not because of the lip-
read patterns available. 
When visual cues are combined with some hearing there can be very 
good speech perception; for example, lip-reading can disambiguate 
sentences that would sound the same, such as 'I'll have to see' and 'I'll 
have to sue'. These sentences can easily be differentiated by lip-reading. 
Other linguistic cues are also important to comprehension, and 
language is rich in cues that we, as hearing people, do not often need 

Speech sounds 
65 
to use. These cues are said to be redundant. Redundancy is present in 
all levels of language; for example, grammatical cues are signalled more 
than once in a sentence. The following sentences include a number of 
grammatical cues that signal plurality: 'This man is working', 'These 
m~n are working'. 
Redundant cues are used as and when they are needed, for example, 
in background noise. High redundancy makes language very efficient 
because if we do miss parts, we can still understand the whole. 
The hearing impaired cannot use all the cues available to the 
normally-hearing and evolve their own set, which is very individual. 
This is one reason why some hearing impaired people do so much 
better than others. 
4.4 SPEECH SOUNDS 
4.4.1 THE FORMATION OF VOWELS AND VOWEL-LIKE SOUNDS 
The vocal tract is really a tube running from the lips at one end to the 
vocal cords (or vocal folds) at the other (Figure 4.3). A steady airstream, 
provided by the lungs, is set into vibration by the vocal cords, which 
are part of the larynx. The vocal cords open and close rapidly to create 
a sound, rather like a low frequency buzz, which is known as the 
fundamental laryngeal tone. This is the fundamental frequency of 
speech and it determines the pitch of the speaker's voice. The actual 
frequency or pitch is not fixed and depends on the rate of vibration of 
the vocal cords - the faster they vibrate, the more cycles per second 
and the higher the pitch. The average pitch is given in Table 4.1, but 
individuals can vary their voice pitch within a certain range. 
Pure tones rarely occur in nature, and the sound source produced by 
vocal cord vibration contains nearly all possible harmonics. These 
reduce in intensity with increasing frequency, by about 12dB per 
octave. 
The vocal tract can be altered in shape by moving the lips, tongue 
and other articulators. The variation in shape modifies the sound spec-
trum by resonating some frequencies, thus increasing their amplitude, 
while damping, or reducing, others. 
Table 4.1 The average frequency of vocal cord vibration 
Subject 
Man 
Woman 
Child 
Frequency (Hz) 
120Hz (82) 
220Hz (A3) 
260Hz (C4) 

66 
Speech and intelligibility 
Fig. 4.5 The resonating cavities of the mouth. 
When the neck of an empty bottle is blown across and then that of 
one partially filled with liquid, the changing column of air alters the 
resonant frequency and the resulting difference in pitch can be readily 
heard. The sound from the vocal cords is modified in a similar manner, 
especially by the mouth. The tongue effectively divides the vocal tract 
into two cavities - front and back (Figure 4.5), and the bigger the 
cavity, the lower is the resonant frequency produced. 
The resonating cavities concentrate energy in particular frequency 
regions. These concentrations of energy into narrow bands are the 
basis of the vowel formants. The size and shape of the cavities deter-
mine the resonant frequencies, or formants. The vocal tract is highly 
variable and is changed primarily by the tongue and the lips. The first 
two formants are important in the recognition of vowels, the other 
formants are mainly used to distinguish who is speaking. Vowels are 
formed by altering the shape of the vocal tract without causing any 
constriction that would create friction, or aperiodic noise. 
The vocal cord vibration is known as the fundamental frequency, 
which gives rise to the pitch of the voice. The shape of the vocal tract 
resonates the fundamental frequency, concentrating energy into narrow 
bands- formants. The fundamental frequency is not a formant. 
Different speakers each produce slightly different sounds but we can 
interpret what we hear because the relationship between the formants 
remains unchanged. Each vowel can be likened to a chord in music, 
where the three notes played together can be recognized as a particular 
chord, no matter what key it is played in. Examples can be seen in 
Figure 4.6; the precise frequency values are not important. 
All vowels contain the low frequency voicing, below 400Hz, pro-
duced by the vocal cord vibration - the fundamental frequency - but 
they also have a formant structure, created by resonances of the vocal 
tract. The harmonics are still present but certain ones have been am-
plified by resonance into peaks of energy or formants, while others 
have been damped or filtered. 

:-1 r------: 
i 
L_j 
i 
1front 
back I 
: 
11 
! 
u 
L____j 
(a) 
Speech sounds 
67 
Amplitude ~ 
F2 
F 
~ '"'q""'cy !H>I 
360 
2280 3000 
Key: 
Amplitude 
F1 = Formant 1 
F2 = Formant 2 
~F~am3 
L-----'---...J----'-----Frequency(Hz) 
600 840 
2004 
Fig. 4.6 The cavities of the mouth and the resultant formants of the vowels 'ee' 
(a) and 'aw' {b). 
4.4.2 THE FORMATION OF APERIODIC CONSONANTS 
Some consonants, such as the nasal consonants 'm', 'n' and 'ng', are 
vowel-like, but most consonants are aperiodic, that is they have a noise 
component. There are two methods by which these consonants can be 
produced. 
1. The vocal tract is narrowed at some point so that the air has to push 
past, creating turbulence or friction. Consonants formed in this way 
are called fricatives. The waveform is irregular and aperiodic, that is 
it has a noise component. Some fricatives, such as 's', consist only 
of noise, others have a voiced component in addition, for example 
'z'. It is often helpful to think of consonants in terms of voiced and 
voiceless pairs, for example: 
Voiceless 
s 
f 
Voiced 
z 
v 
Voicing is a low frequency component caused by the vocal fold 
vibration. 
2. The vocal tract is blocked at some point, such as at the lips, allowing 
the air pressure to build up, followed by a sudden release or plosion 
(Figure 4.7). These sounds are called plosives, for example 'p', and 
again they can be formed with or without accompanying vocal cord 
vibration (voicing), for example: 

68 
Speech and intelligibility 
Hold 
Build-up 
(approach)>----------< 
Fig. 4.7 The basic phases of a plosive. 
Voiceless 
p 
t 
Voiced 
b 
d 
Consonants are usually described by the place and the manner in 
which they are formed. The important places of articulation in English 
are the lips, teeth, palate and glottis, although it is often sufficient to 
state the place of articulation as front, middle or back. 
The manner of articulation may be plosive, fricative, nasal or 'semi-
vowel'. Nasals and semi-vowels are produced without turbulence and 
closely resemble vowels. They are voiced and have a formant structure. 
Nasals are produced when the soft palate, or velum, is opened to 
permit airflow through the nose. 
The complete description should include whether the sound is voiced 
or not, for example: 
p can be described as a front voiceless plosive, 
b can be described as a front voiced plosive, 
f can be described as a front voiceless fricative. 
4.4.3 UNDERSTANDING RUNNING SPEECH 
In running speech, every sound is not formed carefully and precisely, 
but rather each individual sound is qualified by the sounds that come 
before and after. This requires less effort from the speaker, and in 
rapid speech a movement is often not finished but only started and 
then carried on towards the next. Speech is a continuum of rapid 
finely-skilled movements with much overlapping, of which the speaker 
is unaware but which is reflected in the acoustic spectrum. 
Time is a very significant aspect of sound perception and the sounds 
of speech change continually. The formants of the vowels show some 
variation depending on the adjoining sounds. The articulators do not 
move instantaneously but rather 'glide' from one position to another. 
This can be observed on a spectrogram. The middle of the vowel, 
where the frequency is relatively stable, is called the steady state. The 
changing part is called the transition or glide. The transitions (Figure 

Speech sounds 
69 
k, g, 'ng' 
k, g, 'ng' 
Vowel steady state 
t, d, n ----?--------=-----«:._--t, d, n 
p, b, m 
p, b, m 
'a' 
~--------n 
b 
'a' 
d----------n 
9~ 
----------------n 
'a' 
Fig. 4.8 Examples of transitions in the vowel formants. 
4.8) are most obvious in formant two of the vowel, but are present to a 
lesser extent in other formants. 
The transitions reflect the movement from one place of articulation to 
another. The noise of a consonant is normally the primary cue in 
recognition, but the transitions can be very important. Transitions exist 
in all formants but those in the second formant are the most important. 
However, it is likely that the hearing impaired may use the transitions 
in formant one, which are not important with normal hearing. 
Time factors are also important in the recognition of speech and 
these can be carried at all levels of signal, so should be useful even to 
profoundly deaf people. In general, vowels are longer than consonants, 
although of course not all are the same length; some are very long and 
some relatively short, so, for example, 'ee' is about twice the length of 
'i' ('ee' is approximately 285 milliseconds in length, 'i' is only approxi-
mately 147 milliseconds). Diphthongs are formed by the union of two 
vowel sounds and are therefore the longest of all vowel sounds. The 
length of a vowel is to some extent governed by the following con-
sonant. A vowel will be longer if it is followed by a short consonant, 
and vice versa (Figure 4.9). These relative intensity cues are very 
important, especially to the hearing impaired. 
Vowels have greater intensity than consonants. The strongest sound 
in English is the vowel 'aw', the weakest is the consonant 'th'; hence 
the word 'thaw' contains the greatest possible intensity variation, 
about 30 dB. The level of intensity varies constantly as we make our 
voices louder or quieter, but the relative difference between the sounds 
remains the same, whatever intensity is used. 

70 
Speech and intelligibility 
Knees: 
n. 
1 'ee' 
------~--~1 z 
Neice: 
I n 
I 'ee' 
Fig. 4.9 Vowel length is influenced by the length of the following consonants. 
The vowel in 'knees' is much longer than the same sound in 'niece', where the 
following consonant is long. 
The average intensity of speech ranges from about 35 dB A to 65 dB A, 
that is it has a range of about 30 dB. The following list gives the ap-
proximate order for intensity from loudest to quietest speech sounds: 
1. vowels, such as 'aw', 'ee'; 
2. vowel-like, such as '1', 'r'; 
3. nasals, such as 'm', 'n'; 
4. voiced plosives and fricatives, such as 'v', 'g'; 
5. voiceless plosives, such as 'p', 't'; 
6. voiceless fricatives, such as 'f', 's'. 
This varying intensity can also be shown in the 'average speech spec-
trum', which is sometimes drawn on the audiogram, where the average 
range of speech energy, expressed in dBHL, can be used to predict 
what a hearing impaired individual is likely to hear. This is shown in 
Figure 8.4. 
4.5 HEARING LOSS AND SPEECH PERCEPTION 
Most hearing impaired people have hearing for vowels but unfor-
tunately vowels give little meaning to the sentence. Although a gross 
over-simplification, it is often helpful to think of the written pattern, 
and if a sentence is presented without consonants it is very difficult to 
understand: 
__ e _u_ i ___ i_i__ 
If the same sentence is presented without vowels, the picture is much 
clearer: 
Th _ s _ n _ s sh _ n _ ng 
The high information content of consonants is unfortunate as they are 
largely also high in frequency and low in intensity, making it difficult 
for the hearing impaired to perceive speech clearly. Hearing for vowels 
is not enough, but even if hearing is defective, speech can be a suc-
cessful means of communication because it is so rich in redundant 
cues. 

Hearing loss and speech production 
71 
To some extent, it is possible to predict what a person can hear from 
the audiogram. 
(a) Vowels 
1. To hear vowels, the first two formants must be perceived and 
therefore hearing to 3kHz is needed. 
2. Hearing up to 2kHz only, cuts off formant two and therefore creates 
difficulties in hearing front vowels 'ee' and 'i'. 
3. With hearing only below 1kHz, vowel discrimination becomes very 
difficult as nearly all of the second formant is gone, but some back 
vowels can be discriminated. 
4. With hearing only below 500Hz, there remains a thread of pitch 
variation, and detection of whether a sound is voiced. 
(b) Fricatives 
Fricatives will only be heard with some high frequency hearing present 
since they have little energy below 2kHz and to hear them adequately 
hearing up to at least 6kHz is required. 
(c) Plosives 
These short bursts of sound are difficult to hear but cues are available 
in the preceding silence, or stop, in the length and in the transitions to 
the vowel formants. Hearing up to about 800Hz is required to hear 
front plosives, mid-plosives are higher in frequency, needing hearing 
up to about 2kHz, and back plosives higher still, up to about 4kHz. 
4.6 HEARING LOSS AND SPEECH PRODUCTION 
Where hearing is available it is used not only to hear others but, 
unconsciously, to monitor the speaker's own speech. This is known as 
auditory feedback. A speaker hears his or her own speech partly by air 
conduction, but also all voiced sounds are heard by bone conduction. 
This is the reason why people may not immediately recognize their 
own voice when it is played back from a tape recorder - they are not 
used to hearing it by air conduction only. 
If there is a hearing impairment auditory feedback is less reliable, 
and individuals with a sensorineural loss usually speak loudly, so they 
can hear themselves. Those with a conductive loss often speak too 
quietly because they continue to hear their own voice well by bone 

72 
Speech and intelligibility 
conduction, while hearing other people more quietly by air conduction. 
With a severe hearing loss, monitoring speech through auditory feed-
back becomes very difficult and speech production may be severely af-
fected. Some profoundly deaf people use their nasal and sinus cavities 
to resonate the lower frequency sounds, which may be audible to 
them. Other feedback mechanisms also become of greater importance. 
Tactile feedback uses the sense of touch and an unconscious knowl-
edge of where the speech organs should be positioned. The motion of 
the muscles and the joints can also be monitored, and this is known as 
kinaesthetic or proprioceptive feedback. 
4.7 SUMMARY 
Speech perception is really the recognition of patterns. All languages 
have a high degree of redundancy, which makes them easy to under-
stand. The speech message contains many redundant cues, both 
acoustic and non-acoustic, on which a person can draw when the need 
arises. The hearing impaired must process language in a different way, 
evolving their own set of cues to help them. It is possible to predict, to 
some extent, what a person can hear from their audiogram; it is much 
more difficult to predict how they will use what they may hear, because 
each person varies in their sensitivity to the cues available. 
FURTHER READING 
Moore, B.C.J. (1989) An Introduction to the Psychology of Hearing, 3rd edn, 
Academic Press, London, pp. 254-84. 
Sanders, D. (1982) Aural Rehabilitation, Parts I and II, Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, New Jersey. 
Schow, R.L. and Nerbonne, M.A. (1989) Introduction to Aural Rehabilitation, 2nd 
edn, Pro-Ed, Austen, Texas. 

The hearing aid 
system 
5.1 THE BASIC COMPONENTS OF A HEARING AID 
5.1.1 INTRODUCTION 
5 
A hearing aid is simply a miniature public address system (Figure 5.1). 
Sound waves strike a microphone, which converts energy into a weak 
electrical signal. The signal is fed into an amplifier. The amplifier signal 
is used to drive a loudspeaker, which converts the electrical signal back 
into acoustic energy. The sound waves generated are then 'piped' into 
the external ear canal. The acoustic energy delivered to the ear is 
always greater than that received by the microphone. This additional 
energy is provided by the battery. 
Hearing aids are signal processors in that they alter the input signal 
with the aim of improving it for the user. Unfortunately, it is not 
yet possible to increase the signal strength without introducing some 
distortion, that is the output signal differs from the input signal in 
parameters other than intensity. In some applications the signal is 
deliberately modified with the aim of improving speech intelligibility. 
The following sections describe the basic components used in a 
simple hearing aid system. 
5.1.2 THE MICROPHONE 
(a) Introduction 
A transducer is a device that converts energy from one form to another 
form. A microphone is a transducer. It converts acoustic energy into 
electrical power, either by direct contact with the vibrating source or, 
more usually, by intercepting sound waves radiating from a source. 

74 
The hearing aid system 
Microphone 
))) 
Inc ide~ 
sound 
Gain control 
Amplifier 
Battery 
Fig. 5.1 A hearing aid system. 
Microphones that pick up sound waves from the air have diaphragms 
to collect the acoustic energy. They fall into two basic categories ac-
cording to whether one or both sides of the diaphragm are exposed to 
sound waves. 
Pressure microphones 
Pressure operated microphones have only one side of their diaphragm 
exposed to the sound waves. The other side is sealed off, except for a 
small aperture to allow the atmospheric pressure to equalize on both 
sides on a long-term basis (like the Eustachian tube in the ear). These 
microphones respond to minute variations in the surrounding air 
pressure. They therefore operate irrespective of the direction of the 
sound source, unless their physical characteristics dictate otherwise, 
and are said to be omnidirectional. 
Pressure gradient microphones 
Microphones that have both sides of their diaphragms exposed to the 
sound waves operate by virtue of the difference in pressure existing 
between the front and the back at any given moment. This difference is 
a function of the different path length for the sound waves between 
the front and the back of the diaphragm. Obviously this path length 
difference will vary with the angle of incidence; this type of microphone 
has therefore a directional response. 
(b) Types of microphones 
There are four main types of microphone. 

The basic components of a hearing aid 
75 
Crystalline wafer 
Signal 
output 
Power 
input 
Fig. 5.2 A piezo-electric (crystal) microphone. (After Davis and Silverman, 
1978). 
The carbon microphone 
In the carbon microphone sound pressure variations, acting on a 
diaphragm, are applied to a collection of carbon granules, thereby 
varying their resistance to an electrical current due to an applied vol-
tage. This type of microphone has a high output and a non-linear 
characteristic, which tends to mute low level noise and saturate when 
subjected to very loud sounds. It is thus very suitable for use in 
telephones but, due to its high noise level and variable output, is not 
often used for other purposes. 
The piezo-electric (crystal) microphone 
The crystal microphone works on the principle that certain crystalline 
materials such as quartz generate small electrical signals when phy-
sically stressed. Various configurations are produced in which the 
movement of a diaphragm causes a wafer of the crystal to either twist 
or bend (Figure 5.2). 
Crystal microphones have a very high impedance, and when con-
nected to an amplifier (usually a field effect transistor- FET) with too 
low an input impedance will result in the loss of the high frequency 
response. Low frequency response is generally good, and the very 
nature of the design means that they are robust and stable. 
The dynamic (moving coil) microphone 
The dynamic or moving coil microphone consists of a fine coil of wire 
around a balanced armature, which is attached to a diaphragm and 
suspended in a permanent magnetic field (Figure 5.3). When sound 

76 
The hearing aid system 
Acoustic input 
nt----
Permane 
magn ets 
netic/ 
Non-mag 
spac ers 
~ 
-.J 
~ "N 
Coil 
-- ... 
Out ut 
p 
_.-Diaphragm 
--.-m 
f-Drive pin 
~ 
Armature--"' r,_ 
·Air gaps 
Fig. 5.3 A dynamic (moving coil/balanced armature) microphone. (After Davis 
and Silverman, 1978). 
pressure waves hit the diaphragm, the diaphragm moves the coil in 
proportion to the wave intensity and causes the coil to cut across the 
fixed lines of magnetic flux supplied by the permanent magnet. The 
amplitude of the current flow induced in the coil is proportional to the 
distance moved and the speed of movement. 
In order to reduce unwanted resonance (vibration) of the diaphragm, 
the coil must be kept light, consequently the impedance of moving 
coil microphones tends to be low. Stray magnetic fields can cause 
interference. 
The capacitor (condenser) microphone 
The capacitor microphone uses electrostatic principles rather than 
the electromagnetic principles used by a dynamic microphone. The 
microphone consists of two very thin plates, one moveable and one 
fixed, which form a capacitor (formerly called a condenser, hence the 
name condenser microphone). 
Variations in the sound pressure cause the diaphragm to move with 
respect to the back plate so that the capacitance varies in relation to 
the sound wave. The capacitance is determined by the composition 
and the surface area of the plates (which are fixed), the dielectric or 
substance between the plates (which is air and fixed), and the distance 
between the plates (which varies with sound pressure). 
In order to obtain an output, the variable capacitance must be turned 
into an electromotive force (emf). This is done by applying a polarizing 
potential through a high resistance. Variations in capacitance caused by 
the movement of the diaphragm are thus converted into a voltage 

The basic components of a hearing aid 
77 
Metallized plastic 
diaphragm 
>----Et-e Signal 
output 
Power 
L-------a-• input 
Fig. 5.4 An electret microphone. (After Davis and Silverman, 1978). 
across the resistor which is then applied to an amplifier (usually an 
FET). 
Some capacitor microphones employ electret diaphragms (Figure 
5.4). These are commonly known as 'electret microphones'. The term 
electret describes a dielectric substance that exhibits a continuing 
polarization after an electric field is applied and then withdrawn. 
The electret polarization is analogous to the magnetic retention of a 
permanent magnet. 
From the viewpoint of a designer, a significant advantage of the 
electret principle is that it obviates the need to supply the capacitor I 
diaphragm with a polarizing voltage. Compared to the conventional 
capacitor microphone the electret offers a potentially higher signal-to-
noise ratio, is less susceptible to arcing, and exhibits excellent frequency 
response characteristics. However, the performance tends to deteriorate 
with time. The electret microphone is the one most commonly used in 
modern hearing aids. It is particularly suitable for miniaturization. 
(c) Directional microphones 
Microphones that have two sound entry ports (Figure 5.5), are known 
as directional. Sound from the front is given prominence over that 
from the rear, by the inclusion of a time delay network, so that sound 
from the rear is slightly delayed. If the delay is such that sound from 
the rear enters both sound ports at the same time, the sound waves 
will cancel each other out. In addition, some low frequency reduction 
is built into the microphone. 
All hearing aids worn at the ear are directional to some extent, 
although a 'directional hearing aid' may be considered advantageous 
where a binaural hearing aid fitting is not possible. The degree of extra 

78 
The hearing aid system 
Sound from rear 
Rear microphone port 
I 
Time delay 
Diaphragm 
network 
Fig. 5.5 A directional microphone. 
Front inlet 
tube 
benefit afforded by a directional microphone in comparison with an 
omnidirectional microphone, at the ear, is small and is probably only 
about 3 dB or 4 dB in reverberant conditions (Madison and Hawkins, 
1983). 
5.1.3 THE AMPLIFIER 
(a) Introduction 
Amplifiers are one of the most common of all electric building blocks. 
By definition an amplifier is any circuit that provides gain, that is, a 
device that delivers a high energy output in relation to a small energy 
input. Of course, amplifiers do not produce energy! The energy source 
for the output power is an external one which, in the case of hearing 
aids, is a battery. It is useful to consider the amplifier as a control 
device; a small signal input controls an energy source such that it 
responds proportionately and provides a more powerful output. 
Hearing aids are complex pieces of equipment, and contain many 
electronic components. Among these components is the important 
semiconductor device called the transistor. This device is an amplifier 
in itself, but it needs to be connected to many other transistors, and 
other components, to provide the sophisticated level of control and 
amplification demanded of a modern hearing aid. 
The bi-polar junction transistor is an 'active' device that can be used 
to control the flow of current through a load resistor by means of a 
small power signal applied to its control terminal. One of the most 
common applications of the transistor is as a voltage amplifier. 
Modern amplifier circuitry often employs the use of a field effect 
transistor (FET, also known as a 'unipolar' transistor). The FET is a 
semiconductor device that depends for its operation on the control of a 

The basic components of a hearing aid 
79 
current by an electric field. The FET acts as a pre-amplifier because it is 
able to amplify small signals that are too weak for direct transmission 
to the amplifier. 
(b) Amplifier classification and specification 
In order to describe the requirements of an electronic amplifier for an 
application it is necessary to specify certain parameters and its class of 
operation. Amplifiers can be described according to: 
• the electrical quantity they amplify; 
• the frequency range over which they amplify; 
• their relative input and output impedance; 
• the class of operation. 
The 'class of operation' is of particular interest and is therefore con-
sidered in detail. 
Class A 
Class A operation of a power amplifying transistor is illustrated in 
Figure 5.6. With this class of operation the transistor is provided with a 
forward bias so that a current flows without any signal present. The 
bias current drain is related to the maximum current the receiver will 
handle. The bias, or no signal, current exists even when there is no 
signal input and remains independent of signal input level and of 
volume control setting. Theoretically, an efficiency of 50% is possible. 
However, actual operating efficiencies can be less than 25%. 
When signals are present, the current drain fluctuates within certain 
defined limits, but the average drain is still the same. Battery life is 
therefore fairly predictable. In the case of hearing aids, the fact that the 
power from the battery is being constantly dissipated, even where 
there is no input signal, is a major disadvantage. 
Class B 
A true class B amplifier is one in which the transistor is biased so that 
zero current flows when no signal is present. However, the device 
conducts on only one half cycle of the input signal and, because of the 
need for a small forward bias to produce current flow and initial non-
linearity of the characteristic, severe distortion of the half cycles occurs. 
In high power hearing aids, a modified version of the class B 
amplifier is used. This modified version is correctly known as a class 
AB amplifier (Duncan, 1988), but is more commonly referred to simply 
as class B. In a class AB amplifier (see Figure 5.6) the transistor is 

80 
The hearing aid system 
Class A 
Output 
ClassAB 
Amplified output signal 
-
Bias 
Fig. 5.6 Class A and class AB (class 'B') amplifiers. 
Phase splitter 
Output 1 
::.----f ~ 
_Q_ 
J-------l~v 
Output 2 
Fig. 5.7 A push-pull amplifier. 

The basic components of a hearing aid 
81 
provided with a small amount of bias, just sufficient to allow the device 
to conduct slightly. Compared to a true class B, there is no distortion; 
however, there is a low current drain when no signal is present. When 
a signal passes through, the current drain depends on the required 
output level. The higher the output required, the higher will be the 
current drain. 
To supply more power to the load than can be provided by a single-
ended amplifier (single-ended means that only one output transistor is 
used), two transistors can be connected in a push-pull circuit. The 
output from the previous amplifier stages passes to a phase splitter, 
which separates the positive and negative phases of the signal. The 
positive phase is fed to one output transistor, the negative phase is fed 
to the second output transistor. The positive and negative phases are 
amplified separately and then combined to deliver a full wave to the 
receiver. A push-pull circuit is shown in Figure 5.7. 
The advantages of class AB push-pull amplifiers are: 
• a greater power output is possible for a given transistor; 
• the efficiency is greater; 
• there is negligible power loss when the input signal is zero; 
• because of circuit symmetry, distortion is reduced since it may be 
shown that even harmonics cancel out. 
The current drain is proportional to the output signal. As a result, the 
gain control setting directly affects battery life. 
Class D 
Class A, B and AB amplifiers increase the input signal without signifi-
cantly altering its shape in the process. This is not so with the class 
D amplifier. The input signal is transformed into pulses, the time 
duration of which depends on the instantaneous amplitude of the 
signal. 
The process begins with a triangular wave with a frequency that is at 
least ten times that of the input signal, typically 500kHz. The input 
signal is then added to this triangular wave. The difference between 
the two signals emerges from a fast voltage comparator as a square 
wave with a duty cycle proportional to the amplitude. This square 
wave is then used to switch two output devices, which are either fully 
on or fully off, the difference being that the times they are on and the 
times they are off are varied so that the averaged effect can be made to 
replicate the input signal. 
Class D amplifiers are very efficient, particularly at high gain, and 
can produce something like a 50% increase in battery life. Class D 

82 
The hearing aid system 
amplifiers are increasingly being used in more complex hearing aid 
circuits. 
5.1.4 THE RECEIVER* 
(a) Introduction 
In principle, a receiver is a microphone in reverse. It converts the 
amplified signal into acoustic or sound energy, and transmits it to the 
ear. The receiver is the last, and often the weakest, link in the hearing 
aid system. Problems stem from the need to produce a relatively wide 
range of frequencies. 
(b) Air conduction receivers 
BTE and ITE receivers are generally of the balanced armature type 
(Figure 5.8). The alternating current output from the amplifier is fed to 
the coil surrounding the armature, which causes it to move within 
the permanent magnetic field. This movement is transferred to the 
diaphragm, which in tum generates sound pressure waves. 
An external button receiver, as used with bodywom aids, operates 
on a slightly different principle than that previously described. The 
signal current in a coil, which is fixed to a core of permeable magnetic 
metal, modulates the pull of a permanent magnet on a circular dia-
phragm made of thin magnetic metal. The modulation causes the 
diaphragm to vibrate, thus producing acoustic energy. 
(c) Bone conduction receivers 
Bone conduction receivers operate on the 'reaction' principle. A mass, 
free to vibrate inside an enclosed case, is caused to do so by a magnetic 
driving system (Figure 5.9). The vibrations are transmitted through the 
supporting spring to the case and then to the skin and the bony 
structure of the head. Essentially, a bone conduction receiver is the 
same as an external receiver, except that the diaphragm is fixed to the 
housing. 
5.1.5 CUSTOMER CONTROLS 
(a) Gain (volume) control 
Most hearing aids have a dial or serrated wheel that serves as a gain 
control. It does not alter the input sound to the aid, but adjusts the 
*In the hearing aid industry the output transducer is usually called the 'receiver', 
whereas in the audio industry it is usually called the 'loudspeaker'. 

The basic components of a hearing aid 
83 
Diaphragm 
Coil 
Magnets 
Fig. 5.8 A balanced armature air conduction receiver. (After Katz (1985).) 
Spring 
Spacer 
Armature 
Fig. 5.9 A bone conduction receiver. (After Katz (1985).) 
amount of amplification of the input signal. The gain control is a 
potentiometer, or variable resistor, consisting of a fixed circular carbon 
track. A sliding contact arm, connected to the dial, moves over the 
track and varies the resistance to input signal. An increase in resistance 
produces a decrease in amplification. 
The relationship between the movement of the wheel and the in-
crease in gain is not linear. Relatively little gain is available once the 
volume control is beyond 50% of its total range. Most of the gain 
(approximately 70%) is delivered in the lower half of the control, while 
only a limited amount is available in the top half. This is referred to as 
the 'taper effect'. Use of the upper half of the control may result in an 
unacceptably high increase in harmonic distortion. 

84 
The hearing aid system 
(b) 'T' switch 
A hearing aid can be equipped with a special circuit, which makes it 
sensitive to fluctuation in a given magnetic field. The circuit consists of 
a magnetic induction pickup coil mounted inside the case. A fluctuating 
magnetic field will generate a current in the coil, which is then used to 
produce acoustic energy. The coil takes the place of the microphone on 
the input component of the aid. If the 'T' position is chosen, the 
microphone is cut out of the circuit. For further information see section 
11.3.2. 
5.2 ELEMENTARY ELECTRICITY AND ELECTRONICS 
5.2.1 THE ELEMENTARY PRINCIPLES OF ELECTRICAL CONDUCTION 
All matter can be reduced to its atomic structure. An atom basically 
consists of a nucleus, which is positively charged, and orbiting elec-
trons, which are negatively charged. The nucleus takes its positive 
charge from its protons. The number of protons is the same as the 
number of electrons, which gives a state of electrical balance. 
It is a basic principle that opposite charges attract and like charges 
repel. In some materials the force of attraction is strong and the 
electrons cannot be detached from the nucleus. These materials are 
insulators. In other materials, the force of attraction is weak and the 
electrons are easily detached. These materials are conductors. Easily 
detached electrons are called free electrons. In order for free electrons 
to flow, an external force or electrical pressure must be applied. An 
electrical current is a flow of free electrons along a conductor. 
If the current flows only in one direction, it is a direct current (DC), 
such as a current from a battery. If the source of electrical pressure 
constantly changes its polarity, from negative to positive, the current 
flow is alternating. Alternating current (AC) has a frequency; for 
example mains electricity changes its polarity 50 times per second, its 
frequency is therefore 50 Hz. 
The direction and degree of AC current flow can be represented by a 
sine wave. This indicates a smooth flow of energy, first one way and 
then the other. This is the same representation as that used to show a 
pure-tone sound wave. 
Current is measured in amperes (amps), although the small flow of 
current found in hearing aids is measured in thousandths of an amp -
milliamperes. Electrical pressure is measured in volts. This is the force 
which drives the current around the circuit. Voltage is really a measure 
of how much energy is available to force the charge from one point to 
another. Voltage applied to a conductor in a circuit produces a current. 
If there were no other component in a circuit, the current flow would 

Elementary electricity and electronics 
85 
be controlled by the electrical pressure. Some resistance is essential to 
limit the current. Resistance can be likened to a tap that affects the 
mains water pressure and restricts the flow of water. 
In a DC circuit, the type of impedance is called a resistor, which has 
the electrical property of resistance. A resistor, as its name suggests, 
resists or impedes the current flow. It acts as a constriction and allows 
the current to flow less easily. Resistance is measured directly in ohms, 
for which the Greek letter omega (Q) is used as the symbol. 
The controlled passage of current through a resistance is expressed 
in Ohm's Law, which states that the current (I) is directly proportional 
to the voltage (V). 
The ratio of V to I for a particular conductor is called the resistance 
(R). This can be written as an equation: 
For example: 
R=~ 
I 
(i) Calculate the resistance of a conductor if a voltage of 20 V produces 
a current of 4 amps. 
v 
20 
R =- =- = 5n 
I 
4 
Resistance = 5 ohms 
(ii) A potential of 12 V is applied to a resistor of 6 n. Calculate the 
current. 
v 
12 
I = -
= -
= 2 amps 
R 
6 
The current = 2 amps 
In the second example, the equation has been rearranged. A triangle 
arrangement is useful in remembering the possible variants (Figure 
5.10). 
A high resistance restricts the current to a low value; when resistance 
is small, the current is large. Resistance is one type of impedance 
found in DC circuits. Electrical impedance is the responsiveness, or 
lack of responsiveness, of an electrical circuit. In an AC circuit the type 
of impedance is called reactance. Capacitors are passive components 
used in hearing aids and have the property that the greater the im-
pedance, the higher the frequency, as in a high-pass filter. 
Transistors are active components, which work on the principle that 
a small current flowing into a base, controls a much larger current 
flowing into a collector. 

86 
The hearing aid system 
If seeking to find I, 
cover I and the 
required equation 
remains 
Fig. 5.10 A triangular aid to memory. (This triangle can be adapted for other 
formulae, such as those used to calculate battery life, or wavelength.) 
5.3 SIGNAL PROCESSING 
5.3.1 INTRODUCTION 
Signal processing is a general term that includes everything beyond 
simple amplification (Wright, 1992). All hearing aids have some element 
of signal processing. 
An electric current is more readily altered than an acoustic signal. 
Sound is therefore transduced to electrical energy before it is processed 
in some way. Many electronic options are available as user or dispenser 
modifications in addition to the main hearing aid components. 
5.3.2. TONE CONTROLS 
Tone control is a process that provides either high (Figure 5.11) or low 
frequency emphasis, and is similar to the treble (high frequency) and 
bass (low frequency) adjustments on a stereo system. The tone control 
is a filter network, usually between amplifier stages, which allows only 
the desired frequency to pass through the system. If high frequency 
emphasis is required, a high-pass filter (low frequencies filtered) is 
used, and conversely, for low frequency emphasis, a low-pass filter 
(high frequencies filtered) is employed. The terminology can be very 
confusing, for example: 
• low-pass filter == low frequency emphasis == treble cut == high cut == 
L 
• high-pass filter == high frequency emphasis == bass cut == low cut == 
H 
Tone controls can be either a switch or a potentiometer (variable 
resistor), which is adjusted using a small screwdriver. In some cases 
the desired response can be specified and 'fixed' during manufacture, 

Signal processing 
87 
Gain (dB) 
'-----------+-Normal frequency 
40 
response 
30 
10 +------------.------------, Frequency (Hz) 
1k 
5k 
Fig. 5.11 The effect of a bass cut potentiometer on the frequency response. Re-
duction of the low frequencies provides a subjective high frequency emphasis. 
or during programming in the case of computer programmable hearing 
aids. 
5.3.3 VARIABLE OUTPUT LIMITING 
All hearing aids have a maximum output above which they cannot 
reach whatever the input level or the volume control setting. This level 
depends upon the characteristics of the microphone and the receiver. 
If the maximum output is such as to cause discomfort to the user, 
some form of output limiting should be used. There are two methods 
of limiting: peak dipping and automatic gain control. 
(a) Peak clipping 
Having been converted into electrical energy within the hearing aid, 
the intensity of a sound wave can be thought of as being represented 
by its amplitude (height). Peak clipping restricts the amplitude of 
the wave by cutting off its peaks and hence reducing its intensity 
(Figure 5.12). Whenever the peaks in the input signal exceed the 
pre-set maximum output limit, these peaks will be clipped off. Peak 
clipping distorts the waveform by producing something nearer to a 
square wave. This adds considerable harmonic and intermodulation 
distortion (section 7.3.5). The distortion produced by peak clipping 
has little effect on intelligibility because quiet sounds, including the 
information-carrying consonant sounds (section 4.5), remain unaltered; 
only intense sounds are reduced, but this may affect sound quality. 
In a class A amplifier, only the peaks on one side are clipped, which 

88 
The hearing aid system 
Time 
Clipped troughs 
Displacement 
/-
Compressed trough 
Fig. 5.12 The effect of peak clipping and compression on a waveform. 
produces odd and even harmonics. In a class AB (or 'B') amplifier, 
clipping is symmetrical, producing only odd harmonics. The resulting 
sound quality is generally more acceptable, although peak clipping 
should not result in the aid constantly going into saturation. If this 
occurs the hearing aid audiologist should consider automatic gain 
control. 
(b) Automatic gain control 
Automatic gain control (AGC) is also called compression and automatic 
volume control (AVC). Automatic gain control limits the output of the 
aid by reducing its gain or volume in the presence of intense sounds. 
The use of compression in a hearing aid is generally dependent on 
the user's dynamic range, that is the difference or span between his or 
her threshold of hearing and his or her uncomfortable loudness level. 
With severe recruitment, a narrow dynamic range will mean that if 

Signal processing 
89 
dBHL 
0 
Weak 
Weak 
"0 
-----
1---
Q) 
"0 
Q) 
Q) 
Moderate 
c 
.______ 
Q) 
r--
Cl 
ctl 
c 
0 
"(jj 
en 
~ Moderate 
a. 
E 
0 
0 
Intense 
Intense 
140 
I 
125 
Frequency (Hz) 
8k 
Fig. 5.13 Recruitment and the use of compression. In cases of recruitment, 
weak, moderate and intense signals all have to be compressed into a narrow 
dynamic range. 
peak clipping alone is used to limit the output, weak sounds will not 
be heard, intense sounds will be too loud (Figure 5.13) and the aid will 
be in frequent saturation, causing distortion and loss of information 
from the signal. The function of compression is to control the gain 
automatically as the signal level changes. Up to a certain point, which 
is known as the kneepoint, the gain increases linearly, that is a 1 dB 
increase in input results in a 1 dB increase in output. Beyond this point, 
the gain is automatically reduced as the sound level increases, 'corn-
pressing' the signal and avoiding saturation (Figure 5.14). Thus beyond 
the compression threshold or kneepoint, a 1 dB increase in input may 
result in, for example, a 0.5 dB increase in output. This produces a 
compression ratio of 2: 1, that is the ratio of input change to output 
change. Compression aids may be obtained with different compression 
ratios. 
Unlike peak clipping, compression has a finite onset and offset time, 
known as the attack and release times. Attack time is the length of time 
required for the controlling action to come into effect. Recovery or 
release time is the time taken to return to normal. The attack time 
should be as short as possible to provide protection quickly at the onset 
of an intense sound. The hearing aid should have its maximum output 
set such that it will provide protection against sudden intense sounds. 
The release time has to be slower than the attack time to prevent the 
aid from having an audible 'flutter' as the gain adjusts with the rapid 
changes that occur in a speech signal. An attack time of 5 milliseconds 
and a release time of 50 milliseconds could be typical for a hearing 

90 
The hearing aid system 
Maximum output 
:J" 
a.. 
C/) 
aJ 
~ 
"5 a. 
"5 
0 
120 
110 
100 
90 
80 
Sa~uration 
--------t----/ 
--------
/ 
~ /o<' 
/ 
=-~ 
/~~0.,; 
·~ 
"fp~ 
~ 
_,/ 
/ 
v 
~AGC 
'kneepoint' 
v 
50 
60 
70 
80 
Input (dBSPL) 
Peak 
clipping 
Fig. 5.14 An input-output graph for peak clipping and compression. 
aid, although there are wide variations and adaptive compression is 
available with automatically varying release times. 
Automatic gain control provides a feedback loop from a sampling 
point. Below the preset limit, or kneepoint, the feedback is too small 
to affect the circuit. When the kneepoint is reached the gain is auto-
matically adjusted. Automatic gain control may act on response to the 
input sound level or the output sound level. 
Output compression 
Output compression acts to control the gain of the aid in such a way 
that the higher the signal intensity at the output stage of the amplifier, 
the lower will be the gain. 
The kneepoint at which compression starts to operate depends upon 
the level of the output signal (Figure 5.15). Since the signal level is 
monitored after amplification, the maximum output is unaltered by the 
volume setting. Output compression is the simplest type of automatic 
gain control. 
Input compression 
Input compression differs in that the control threshold is part of the 
early stages of the amplifier. It is therefore the input signal level that 
acts to reduce the gain. The kneepoint is set on the input level, and 

Input 
Knee 
point 
Signal processing 
91 
OUTPUT CONTROLLED AGC 
INPUT CONTROLLED AGC 
AGC operation 
Feedback loop 
Feedback loop 
>-4t---Output 
t 
Output 
Volume control Sampling point 
Input 
Sampling po~t \ 
Volume control 
Output (dBSPL) 
LL..__L_-L ____ 
_; Input 
L.L...L._L-_-:-__ 
....J Input 
(dBSPL) 
t 
(dBSPL) 
Knee point 
The effect of varying volume control 
Fig. 5.15 The position and effect of the volume control in input and output 
AGC. 
is independent of the volume control setting. Whatever the volume 
setting the kneepoint remains the same, but the maximum output will 
be reduced with lower volume settings (Figure 5.15). This is unlike 
output compression, where the maximum output is unchanged by the 
volume setting. Input compression results in better sound quality than 
output compression because it acts prior to amplification and therefore 
produces less distortion. 
The choice between the various modes of output limiting depends 
upon the hearing loss and the client's acoustic environment (section 
8.2.2(d)). 
5.3.4 MULTICHANNEL SYSTEMS 
A multichannel hearing aid facilitates the division of the frequency 
response into sections or bands, which can then be treated differently 
to provide a precise and complex frequency response curve that may 
be able to match the client's needs more closely. The need for a 
multichannel system may be indicated by an unusual audiogram shape, 
which would benefit from varying treatment in the different frequency 
regions, as for example a steeply falling graph with a region of good 
low frequency hearing. 

92 
The hearing aid system 
The different channels may offer not only the facility to alter the 
gain, but also the output and any compression, in the various frequency 
bands. Where each channel has its own compression circuit, different 
attack and release times may be selected in the different bands. Shorter 
attack and release times are usually preferred in the higher frequencies 
than those used in the lower frequency bands. The kneepoint can also 
be altered in each frequency band to suit the user's dynamic range. 
Twin channel aids may be relatively simple and their adjustment can 
be effected using trimmer potentiometers. More complex multichannel 
systems are often programmed using a small computer. 
5.3.5 SIGNAL PROCESSING FOR NOISE REDUCTION 
A hearing aid with a frequency response that is well-suited to a quiet 
environment may be quite inadequate in situations of noise. Many 
hearing aids therefore offer some switched in bass cut or 'noise sup-
pression'. This means that the aid amplifies the full frequency response 
in quiet conditions, but operates a reduction in low frequency gain 
when it is necessary to reduce background noise. Some hearing aid 
systems provide automatic or adaptive signal processing (ASP) or 
automatic noise reduction (ANR), so that the aid automatically adapts 
to the level of background noise by reducing low frequency gain. 
When the background noise ceases, the aid returns to its normal state. 
This kind of ASP or ANR is only suited to clients who have a need for 
some low frequency gain; it cannot work where there is no gain in the 
low frequencies to reduce. 
Certain ASP systems use the temporal as well as the frequency 
characteristics to differentiate background noise. Background noise 
tends to produce a fairly steady sound signal, unlike speech, which 
fluctuates rapidly. The aid may therefore reduce low frequency ampli-
fication in the presence of steady state input signals, or may reduce all 
steady state signals regardless of frequency. 
Certain hearing aids offer a number of different frequency responses, 
which can be selected by the user according to the acoustic environ-
ment. The options may be selected using a switch, but a remote 
control is more usually employed where several options are available. 
Responses are most often programmed for quiet conditions, where the 
full frequency response is available, noisy conditions, where there will 
be some low frequency gain reduction, and for listening to music, 
where the low frequency gain is extended. A complex system does not 
suit every client; for some, the simpler systems are better. This is 
especially true when the client is unable to cope with the wider choice 
of options, or the extra rehabilitation that may be required. 

Summary 
93 
5.4 SUMMARY 
A hearing aid is comprised of four basic parts: 
1. the microphone; 
2. the amplifier; 
3. the receiver, or the bone conduction transducer; 
4. the power supply. 
A transducer is a device to convert energy from one form to another 
form. In a hearing aid, the microphone and the receiver are the principle 
transducers. 
There are four main types of microphones: carbon, piezo-electric, 
dynamic and capacitor microphones. Some capacitor microphones 
employ electret diaphragms. Electret is a term that describes a substance 
with a permanent electrical charge. Electret microphones are most 
widely used in hearing aids. 
The diaphragm and the back plate of an electret microphone es-
sentially form the two plates of a capacitor, separated by a small air 
space. The back plate is coated with an electret film, which has a 
permanent charge. Variation in sound pressure causes the diaphragm 
to move and thus varies the distance between the two plates. The 
varying distance causes a fluctuating voltage as an analogue of the 
acoustic signal. This is passed through a field effect transistor (FET) for 
pre-amplification, and then to the amplifier. The electret microphone 
has a wide, flat frequency response, is accurate and sensitive, has low 
internal noise and is easily miniaturized for use in hearing aids. 
A receiver transduces electrical energy into acoustic energy (or 
mechanical vibration, in the case of a bone conduction aid), which 
is the reverse function of the microphone. Internal air conduction 
receivers are generally of the rocking or balanced armature type. 
External receivers, as for bodyworn aids, are more usually of the 
'moving iron' type. Bone conduction receivers are essentially the same 
as the moving iron air conduction receiver, except that the metal 
diaphragm is directly connected to the receiver case, and therefore 
results in mechanical vibration. 
Electronic modifications to the hearing aid that may be available 
include tone controls and output limiting. Multichannel systems divide 
up the frequency response into frequency bands, each of which is 
treated separately. Automatic or adaptive signal processing aids auto-
matically adapt to the acoustic conditions in some way, most commonly 
by reducing the low frequency gain in conditions of background noise. 

94 
The hearing aid system 
REFERENCES 
Davis, H. and Silverman, S.R. (1978) Hearing and Deafness, Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, New York. 
Duncan, B. (1988) Which Amplifier Technology? Studio Sound, December Issue, 
60-2. 
Madison, T.K. and Hawkins, D.B. (1983) The Signal-to-Noise Ratio Advantage 
of Directional Microphones. Hearing Instruments, 34(18), 49. 
Wright, D. (1992) Signal Processing Hearing Aids: A Preview, Hearing Aid 
Audiology Group, British Society of Audiology, Reading. 
FURTHER READING 
Katz, J. (ed.) (1985) Handbook of Clinical Audiology, 3rd edn, Williams and 
Wilkins, Baltimore. 
Lybarger, S. (1985) The Physical and Electroacoustic Characteristics of Hearing 
Aids. Handbook of Clinical Audiology, 3rd edn (ed J. Katz), Williams and 
Wilkins, Baltimore, pp. 849-83. 
Tucker, I. and Nolan, M. (1984) Educational Audiology, Croom Helm, 
Beckenham. 

PART TWO 
The Practice Of Hearing Aid 
Audiology 

The assessment 
procedure 
6.1 PRE-SELECTION MANAGEMENT 
6.1.1 CASE HISTORIES 
6 
The case history forms an important part of the early management of 
the hearing impaired client. A structured interview establishes funda-
mental information, while at the same time allowing the hearing aid 
audiologist to build up rapport, which begins to break down barriers 
and reduce the client's fears. 
Hearing impaired adults usually seek help only when they have 
reached a stage at which they can no longer ignore their hearing loss. 
The case history can provide an insight into the client's reasons for 
attending, highlight particular areas of difficulty and reveal the client's 
attitudes and expectations. Such information is generally most readily 
obtained using an informal conversation approach, with careful listen-
ing, observation and gentle probing. A short form or list of questions 
to act as a prompt (Figure 6.1) is often very helpful. The essential 
information that should be recorded includes: 
• the duration of the hearing loss; 
• the rate of deterioration and any fluctuation in hearing levels; 
• the cause of loss, if known, and any family history in relation to this; 
• previous or current audiological, medical or surgical assessment or 
treatment; 
• any conditions necessitating medical referral; 
• previous or current experience with hearing aids; 
• situations causing hearing and listening difficulty. 
Any case history must attempt to identify those clients for whom 
medical treatment or advice should be sought and the Hearing Aid 

98 
The assessment procedure 
CASE HISTORY 
CONFIDENTIAL 
Date 
____ Tel NO-------~---- Age ___ 
_ 
Occupation--------- Previous Occupation ________ 
_ 
SYMPTOMS 
Duration of hearing problem?· _____ Cause? ___________ 
_ 
Any deafness in family?·---------------------
Any rapid worsening recently? 
Did deafness occur suddenly? _____ 
_ 
Earache L/R __ Discharge L/R __ Tirinitus L/R __ Headaches? _____ 
_ 
Vertigo?· ______ Better ear L/R ___ Paracusis Willisi? _____ 
_ 
Exposure to loud noise? 
Recruitment? ____ 
_ 
SURGICAL/MEDICAL RECORD 
Seen Doctor? ___ ENT Specialist? ___ Name of Specialist ______ 
_ 
When? 
Operation? 
Type? 
When? ____ 
_ 
Results, ________________________ 
_ 
HEARING CORRECTION RECORD 
Last hearing test?r ____ by? _________ Using Aid?, ____ 
_ 
Type? 
How long?· ___ Obtained from?·---------
Results? ________________________ 
_ 
Why didn't you investigate your hearing problem before today? ________ 
_ 
AREA OF DIFFICULTY 
Church 
Theatre 
Groups 
Work 
Meetings 
Shopping 
T.V. 
Children 
Car 
Other..__ ______________ 
_ 
AURISCOPIC EXAMINATION 
Lear ______________ R ear _________ 
_ 
Continue over 
Fig. 6.1 A typical case history form. (Courtesy of lngrams Hearing Aids Ltd.) 
Council (1990) provides guidance in clause six of its Code of Practice. 
This lists nine conditions that require referral for medical advice, and 
several of these can be discovered, or suspected, at the case history 
stage. The nine conditions are detailed below. 
(a) Exposure to loud noise at work or elsewhere 
Noise induced hearing loss (NIHL) may be caused by a single exposure 
to very high intensity noise (noise trauma) or by the effect of an otic 
blast injury, which is a combination of acoustic trauma and barotrauma. 
More usually, however, noise damage is caused by exposure to high 
levels of industrial noise over long periods of time. The effect of leisure 
noise, such as loud discotheques or personal cassette players, may add 
to the effect of noise at work. 

Pre-selection management 
99 
Noise damage usually results in a temporary hearing loss, known as 
temporary threshold shift (ITS), which recovers to normal after a 
period away from the noise. After repeated exposure, however, the 
shift becomes permanent. 
Referral for noise damage may lead to advice regarding ear pro-
tection, employer liability and compensation. Legislation (Health and 
Safety Executive, 1989) and increased public awareness mean that many 
clients will have already received advice prior to their visit to the 
hearing aid audiologist. 
(b) Excessive wax in the ear 
Cerumen, or wax, is a natural secretion that begins as light in colour, 
moist and sticky, but that dries out and darkens in time. Wax naturally 
works its way out of the ear unless abnormal conditions cause it 
to become hard and impacted. Previous problems may be revealed 
through the case history, but an otoscopic examination will be necessary 
to ascertain if the present level of wax is excessive. Referral is made to 
effect removal. 
(c) Discharge from the ear 
Discharge is a condition that may recur. The case history can be very 
important in identifying clients prone to discharging ears, for whom 
occluding the ears may induce or exacerbate discharge. Discharge may 
be caused by otitis externa or otitis media and, whenever discharge is 
present, extreme care must be taken to observe equipment sterilization 
and personal hygiene. Referral is necessary for relevant treatment. 
(d) Vertigo 
Vertigo is a hallucination of movement and refers to a vestibular balance 
disorder, not the unsteadiness of old age. Vertigo can be a symptom 
of several serious disorders, such as Meniere's disorder or of a 
tumour affecting the VIII cranial nerve. Referral is therefore required 
for investigation. 
(e) Earache 
Earache, or otalgia, may be due to a wide variety of causes. The pain 
may be directly related to the ear or may be referred from some other 
part, such as from the neck or from the teeth. Medical referral is 
required for investigation and treatment. 

100 
The assessment procedure 
(f) Deafness of short duration or sudden onset 
Most deafness is gradually progressive in nature. Any loss of hearing 
that can correctly be termed as sudden should give rise to concern, as it 
may be symptomatic of a serious disorder. 
Fluctuating hearing loss is a feature of many conductive problems, 
including Eustachian tube dysfunction; it may also be symptomatic 
of certain sensorineural conditions, such as Meniere's disorder and 
vascular problems. Cases of sudden or fluctuating loss require referral 
for medical investigation, although the hearing aid audiologist should 
be aware that some cases may be non-organic in nature (section 12.4). 
(g) Unilateral perceptive (sensorineural) deafness 
A unilateral loss, or a marked difference between the loss in each ear, 
may be associated with specific causes such as a tumour. Medical 
attention is therefore urgently required unless the cause has already 
been ascertained, for example a unilateral loss due to mumps. (When 
undertaking audiometry, it will usually be necessary to mask the better 
ear to establish the true threshold of the poorer ear.) 
(h) Conductive hearing loss 
A conductive element to the hearing loss is indicated by an air-bone 
gap on the audiogram; there may also, of course, be an indication from 
the case history and from otoscopic examination. Most conductive 
losses are treatable, and a hearing aid system will therefore only be 
considered after medical advice has been sought. 
(i) Tinnitus 
Tinnitus is a complaint of noises in the head or ears, which frequently 
accompanies hearing loss, but which may occur on its own. If tinnitus 
is present, the client must be referred for further investigation. If 
medical treatment is not indicated, masking with hearing aids or tin-
nitus masking instruments may be effective (section 12.1). 
The pre-audiometric assessment of the hearing impaired person is an 
important part of the auditory rehabilitation process. Discussion may 
help to break down any barriers to progress at later stages and help in 
establishing mutual understanding. Knowledge of the client's history 
may be particularly helpful if the client has received poor advice 
previously. A hearing aid audiologist, unless medically qualified, is 
not in a position to make a diagnosis or prescribe treatment, but the 

Otoscopy 
1 01 
case history provides an opportunity to explore the client's hearing 
and communication difficulties, and may also reveal certain problems 
necessitating medical referral. 
6.2 OTOSCOPY 
6.2.1 INTRODUCTION 
Otoscopy is usually performed prior to audiometry. Visual inspection 
of the ear is essential to detect abnormalities that should be referred to 
a medical practitioner, and to determine the size and shape of the 
pinna and external auditory meatus before taking impressions. 
6.2.2 THE OTOSCOPE 
An otoscope will provide both magnification and illumination. It should 
be supplied with at least three different-sized specula. The largest 
speculum that will fit comfortably into the external auditory meatus 
should be chosen from these, to provide a wide view of the eardrum, 
with as much illumination as possible. 
The specula should be sterilized by an accepted method. Most hearing 
aid audiologists use a mixture of 20% sterilizing fluid with 80% water. 
The solution should be changed regularly, preferably daily. Specula 
should be cleaned thoroughly before being put in the solution and 
should be left there for at least half an hour before re-use. When 
required, they should be removed from the solution using tweezers 
and dried with tissues, ensuring that the tips of the specula are not 
handled. 
When using the otoscope, it should be held in such a way as to 
minimize the possibility of discomfort or injury if the client moves. 
This can be achieved by holding the barrel of the otoscope like a pencil 
and resting a finger firmly but gently against the client's cheek or 
head. The barrel of the otoscope should not be held pointing down-
wards as it is more difficult to prevent the speculum accidentally being 
inserted deeper into the canal by a sudden movement of the head. 
6.2.3 THE EXAMINATION 
The client should be seated so as to be accessible. Ideally the hearing 
aid audiologist should also be seated to bring his or her eyeline to the 
level of the client's ear. All equipment required should be laid out in 
readiness on a clean towel, preferably white for reasons of hygiene. 
The client should be given a simple explanation of the procedure. 
After washing his or her hands, the hearing aid audiologist should 

102 
The assessment procedure 
inspect the pinna and the surrounding area for abnormalities, such as 
signs of tenderness, skin disorder, deformity or previous surgery. 
The external auditory meatus should be straightened by lifting the 
pinna upwards and backwards. If the client is a young child the angle 
of the meatus is likely to be more horizontal or downwards than that of 
the adult. In this case, therefore, the ear would be pulled gently 
downwards or horizontally backwards. 
The correct speculum should be chosen by noting the size of the 
meatal entrance. Having connected the speculum to the otoscope, the 
speculum should be placed gently into the meatal entrance. The best 
view can be obtained by taking the eye down to be on a level with, or 
looking slightly upwards into, the lens, and moving not only the 
otoscope but also the eye as necessary. After inspection, the speculum 
should be cleaned and returned to the sterilizing solution. 
Inspection with an otoscope should include viewing the external 
auditory meatus and the tympanic membrane. The meatus should 
be checked for signs of foreign bodies, wax, inflammation, growths 
and discharge. The tympanic membrane should be inspected for any 
variation from normal. 
The normal tympanic membrane appears pale grey and semitrans-
parent. On otoscopic examination the handle of the malleus can be 
seen extending downwards towards the centre of the drum. A cone of 
light extends from the umbo, following the direction of the jawline. 
This is light that is reflected back from the otoscope and is known as 
the 'light reflex'. The lateral process of the malleus can be seen as a 
white prominence at the upper end of the handle of the malleus, and 
the blood vessels which supply the tympanic membrane may also 
be seen. The tympanic membrane as viewed through an otoscope is 
outlined in Figure 6.2. 
Inspection should include noting the colour of the tympanic mem-
+-=d- Lateral process of malleus --h==-4 
cr-j'f--~--- Long process of incus--llr---'1~~"0 
Fig. 6.2 The normal tympanic membrane as viewed through an otoscope. 

Tuning fork tests 
103 
brane, the presence and position of the light reflex, any scarring or 
perforations and any other abnormalities. Early signs of otitis media 
may be found at the otoscopic examination. If there is infection present 
the tympanic membrane will often appear very red. Failure of the 
Eustachian tube to aerate the middle ear adequately, whether due 
to infection or other cause, will result in retraction of the tympanic 
membrane, which will also appear dull. When fluid begins to collect in 
the middle ear, the tympanic membrane may begin to bulge outwards 
and the fluid may sometimes be seen. If the tympanic membrane 
perforates, the fluid will discharge into the external ear. 
6.3 TUNING FORK TESTS 
6.3.1 INTRODUCTION 
Tuning forks may be used in simple brief tests to determine the type of 
hearing loss. The equipment is inexpensive, light, small and portable, 
and the results are reliable as far as the type of loss is concerned. The 
tests provide no reliable information with regard to the degree of 
hearing loss and the results are limited to the frequency of the tuning 
fork used. Tuning fork tests cannot be performed on patients whose 
loss is too severe to be able to hear the vibrations of the tines. 
Tuning fork tests are widely used by otologists to provide early 
diagnostic information prior to audiometric assessment. They may be 
used when audiometry is not available, when a full audiometric test is 
not possible, or as a preliminary indicator of the condition. 
A tuning fork is a simple device, made of steel, aluminium or 
magnesium, that vibrates when struck. Its prongs, or tines, move 
alternately away from and towards each other (Figure 1.1) and produce 
a relatively pure tone. The fork should not be struck heavily, or on a 
hard surface, since the tone would no longer be pure, as harmonics are 
introduced. Tuning forks for audiometric investigation require a flat 
base. 
A tuning fork should be held by the stem and struck, about two-
thirds of the way along the tines, on a rubber pad or on the knee or 
elbow. Alternatively, the fork may be plucked at the top of the tines. 
The preferred frequency of fork to be used is 512Hz (British Society 
of Audiology, 1987). Other frequencies may be used, but very high 
tones fade too quickly to be of much use, while very low tones may 
produce vibrotactile results, that is, they may be felt rather than heard. 
Whatever frequency is used, the results obtained apply only to that 
frequency. 
Several tuning fork tests exist, but those most widely used are the 

104 The assessment procedure 
Weber and Rinne tests, which together provide a reliable indication of 
the type of hearing loss. 
6.3.2 THE WEBER TEST 
The Weber test is a test of lateralization; it establishes in which ear a 
tone is perceived. 
The client is first asked if he has a poorer ear. The tuning fork is then 
struck, and its base placed on the midline, usually on the forehead, 
although it may be placed on the vertex, on the bridge of the nose, or 
on the teeth. A hand should be gently placed to support the back of 
the head. 
The client is asked where he or she hears the tone. 
1. With normal hearing or an equal loss the tone will be heard in the 
midline. 
2. With a unilateral or an unequal sensorineural loss the tone will be 
heard in the better ear (Figure 6.3(A) ). 
3. With a unilateral or unequal conductive loss, the tone will be heard 
in the poorer ear! (Figure 6.3(8).) This is likely to occur because the 
better ear is able to hear background noise, which masks the tone 
to some extent. The ear with the conductive loss has no such 
interference and hears the tone clearly by bone conduction. 
6.3.3 THE RINNE TEST 
The Rinne test compares sensitivity by air conduction and bone con-
duction in one ear at a time. 
The tuning fork is struck and held with the tines in line with, and 
about 25 mm from, the canal entrance for 2 seconds (Figure 6.4). The 
tuning fork is then held, without delay, so that the base is pressed 
A Heard in best ear 
suggests sensorineural 
loss (in the poor ear). 
Fig. 6.3 The Weber Test. 
--...-
noise 
B Heard in poor ear 
suggests conductive 
loss in this ear. 

A Louder by air conduction 
= Rinne positive; indicates 
normal or sensorineural 
loss . 
Tuning fork tests 
105 
8 Louder by bone 
conduction = 
Rinne negative; 
indicates 
... C False Rinne negative, where signal is cross-heard 
by good cochlea on opposite side; suspected 
when Weber test indicates sensorineural and 
Rinne suggests conductive loss. 
Fig. 6.4 The Rinne Test. 
firmly against the mastoid, again for 2 seconds . A hand should be held 
against the opposite side of the head to provide counter-pressure. 
The client is asked if he hears the tone louder at, or behind the ear. 
1. With normal hearing, air conduction is more efficient than bone 
conduction; the tone is therefore heard loudest at the ear. The same 
result is obtained with most sensorineural losses. This is known as a 
Rinne positive. 
2. With a conductive loss, the tone appears louder by bone conduction. 
This is a Rinne negative. 
3. Where there is a 'dead' ear or a severe to profound sensorineural 
loss on the test side the tone may also appear louder by bone 
conduction. This is known as a false Rinne negative. This result is 
due to cross-hearing. 
When a Rinne negative result appears to contradict the Weber test 
result, a false Rinne negative can be suspected. 
Masking of the non-test ear may prevent cross-hearing but cannot be 
carried out accurately. Tragal rubbing is the most widely used method. 
A Barany box can be used but this produces high sound levels and 
should therefore only be used with care. 
Tuning fork tests provide a quick indication of the type of hearing 
loss involved. They are not useful for determining the degree of hearing 
loss and should not be considered a substitute for pure-tone audiometry. 

106 
The assessment procedure 
6.4 PRINCIPAL AUDIOMETRIC TESTS 
6.4.1 PURE-TONE THRESHOLD DETERMINATION 
The method described here is based on the British Society of Audio-
logy's recommended procedure (British Society of Audiology, 1981) 
Test Method A. The threshold of hearing can be defined as the lowest 
level of a sound that is heard for 50% of the times it is presented. 
(a) Signals 
The test signals should be pure tones of 1 to 3 seconds duration with 
gaps of 1 to 3 seconds between signals. The tester should be careful to 
avoid a rhythmic presentation by using a wide variety of signal and 
gap lengths. 
(b) Instructions 
These should be as simple as possible to avoid confusing the client. 
In most cases, terms such as 'frequency' and 'pure-tone' should be 
avoided. All the client has to do is respond when a sound is heard, no 
matter how loud or quiet the sound is, and no matter in which ear it is 
heard. It must be stressed that it is important to respond to even the 
very quietest sounds when the client may not be absolutely sure that 
the sound was there. The importance of responding for the entire 
duration of the sound must also be stressed. 
(c) Response 
The client's response should be silent and not require excessive move-
ment; a raised finger is acceptable but a raised hand is not. A response 
button and light arrangement is fitted on most audiometers, and this is 
ideal as pressing a button is a positive response from the client that 
requires minimal effort. The response should last as long as the signal. 
Although not ideal, in some cases a verbal response or a response in 
the form of a tap on the table may be necessary, for example, with 
young children, the very elderly, or those with mental handicaps. 
(d) Threshold testing by air conduction 
Any spectacles or large ear-rings should be removed so that the head-
phones fit firmly but without discomfort. The headphones should also 
be positioned carefully so that the test tones will be presented directly 
into the meatal entrance. 

Principal audiometric tests 
107 
If the client reports a difference between ears, the better ear should 
be tested first. As it is usually an easily recognizable sound, 1 kHz 
should be tested first, followed by 2kHz, 4kHz, 8kHz, 500Hz and 
250Hz. The threshold at 1kHz should be checked again for the first ear 
and if the apparent threshold is 5 dB different from the first value, the 
better value should be recorded. If the difference between the first 
value and the re-checked value is greater than 5 dB, then re-testing at 
other frequencies should be considered, the client first having been re-
instructed. The intermediate or half-octave frequencies, that is, 750Hz, 
1.5 kHz, 3kHz and 6kHz, will normally not be tested unless there is a 
large difference (for example, 20dB or more) between the results at two 
adjacent octave frequencies, or in cases of suspected noise damage 
where the audiogram may dip at 3kHz or 6kHz, or in all cases for 
medico-legal purposes. 
The first tone presented should be well above threshold, without 
being uncomfortably loud, and this can be ascertained by asking the 
client if it was loud and clear. This lets the client know the type 
of sound being listened for, and the tester should ensure that the 
client responds correctly and for the full duration of this tone. With 
experience, the hearing aid audiologist will be able to predict an ap-
propriate starting point. In most cases a 50 dBHL tone will be effective 
and this will rarely be too loud. However, if there is no response, or 
the client claims that the sound is rather quiet, then the signal should 
be raised by 20 dB and the test started again. 
Each time the client hears a signal, the next signal should be pre-
sented at a level 10 dB lower, continuing until the level is below 
threshold and the client does not respond. After a null response the 
next signal should be 5 dB higher. This procedure must be strictly 
adhered to, down in 10 dB steps and up in 5 dB steps. 
Threshold is defined as the lowest level, at that frequency, responded 
to at least half the time in the ascending mode, that is, following a 5 dB 
increase. At least two responses are required at the same level, in the 
ascending mode, to define threshold. 
If the signals are presented in a rhythmic, and hence predictable, 
fashion clients may respond to signals actually below their threshold. 
Signals must be presented with no visual, auditory or other cues that 
might help clients guess when an 'inaudible' signal has been presented. 
(e) Threshold testing by bone conduction 
When testing by bone conduction, the bone conduction transducer is 
placed on the mastoid process behind the ear with the poorest air 
conduction threshold. The transducer must not touch the pinna. Only 
frequencies from 250Hz to 4kHz are used (section 6.5.2). While 

108 
The assessment procedure 
250Hz is included in the British Society of Audiology's recommended 
procedures (1981), this frequency is not always tested as responses 
may be due to feeling, rather than hearing, at low sound levels. 
Thresholds for air conduction reflect the total hearing loss, whereas 
thresholds by bone conduction reflect the degree of sensorineural prob-
lem. The difference between the two, which is known as the air-bone 
gap, indicates the degree of any conductive element. 
A purely conductive hearing loss produces thresholds by air con-
duction which are poorest in the low frequencies. The bone conduction 
thresholds should, theoretically, be 0 dBHL. However, this is not always 
true as the condition of the middle ear can have a slight effect on bone 
conduction sensitivity. For example, with otitis media, although low 
frequency hearing is good, there are often reduced high frequency 
thresholds, by bone conduction; with otosclerosis a dip in the bone 
conduction thresholds can often be seen at 2kHz; this is known as 
Carhart's notch. 
Signals routed by bone conduction will be conducted through the 
entire skull. It cannot therefore be said that the resultant thresholds 
necessarily apply to the ear behind which the bone conduction trans-
ducer is placed. If an unequal sensorineural loss exists bone conduction 
testing without masking will normally reflect the thresholds of the 
better cochlea. 
Bone conduction with masking must be carried out whenever it is 
necessary to determine precisely the degree of sensorineural hearing 
loss in each ear separately. 
The rules for masking are basically the same for bone conduction as 
for air conduction (section 6.4.2(b) ). However, masking noise may be 
applied to the non-test ear either via a headphone or an insert receiver. 
An insert receiver has the advantage of being physically easier to use, 
and the masking levels required may be lower. Where headphones are 
used, it is very important to ensure that the test ear is not covered. 
Covering the test ear will appear to improve the bone conduction 
thresholds of that ear, due to the occlusion effect. 
Occlusion occurs because a sound that is transmitted as a vibration 
Sound in this 
side (Input 60 
dB) 
Dead ear (R) 
Fig. 6.5 The problem of cross-hearing. 
Headphones 
Normal ear (L) 

Principal audiometric tests 
109 
through the skull not only travels to the cochlea directly, but will also 
reach the external auditory meatus by this route. Reflections from 
the walls of the canal enhance the sound, which is then passed via the 
tympanic membrane. Where there is a middle ear impairment, the 
occlusion effect may not be seen, as the transmission of sound through 
the middle ear is reduced. 
6.4.2 MASKING 
(a) Cross-hearing 
Generally, a client's left and right ears can be tested separately by 
using headphones. However, in certain cases, there is a danger that 
the sound may cross the head, by bone conduction, to be perceived by 
a better ear on the opposite side to that being tested. 
Air conducted sound has to be sufficiently intense to produce a bone 
conduction stimulus that will cross over. Some sound will be lost in 
crossing the head, so the signal will be heard at a quieter level on the 
opposite side. This is known as the transcranial transmission loss. The 
amount of sound lost in this way from an initially air conducted signal 
will be at least 40 dB, although on average it is more likely to be 60 dB 
and it can be even more. 
Cross-hearing only causes a problem in audiometry when the ears 
have very different thresholds. In fact, it will not cause a problem 
unless the difference between the ears is at least 40 dB (the minimum 
transcranial transmission loss) (Figure 6.5). 
It may help to clarify the situation to think of a client with one 
::J' 0 
:r: 
co 
:)2. 
"0 
0 
~ 20 
~ 
£ 
Q) 
c: 
0 
~ 40 
::J a. 
"E 
~ 
~60 
a. 
<( 
_L 
.L 
l 
: 
: 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
10 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
-
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
: 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
: 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
40d8 
Possibie shadow curves 
I 
I I 
' 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
\li 
I 
l 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i i 
I 
r-Possible shadow 
1-
curves 
: 
i 
'ii 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
30 
50 
'--' 
~ 
Rule 1 
Frequency (Hz) 
Rule 2 
Key: 
Right 
Left 
Air conduction, not-masked 
0 
X 
Bone conduction, not-masked 
/1.. 
: 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
40d8 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Frequency (Hz) 
Fig. 6.6 Examples of audiograms showing possible shadow curves. 

110 
The assessment procedure 
normal ear and one dead or profoundly deaf ear. A tone is fed into the 
dead ear and, since the client does not respond, the tone is raised. 
When the tone reaches a sufficient level, it will cross the skull, by bone 
conduction. The normal ear will now hear the tone as a very quiet 
sound and the client will respond. If the audiologist is not aware of the 
potential problem, he could think that it is the poorer ear which is 
responding. 
On the audiogram, the threshold of the poorer ear often appears to 
follow the shape of the better threshold, hence it is called a shadow 
curve (Figure 6.6). 
The problem of cross-hearing can be overcome by raising the 
threshold of the good ear so it can no longer respond, and the true 
threshold of the poorer ear can be determined. This is achieved by 
introducing a masking noise into the good ear. 
(b) The rules for masking 
Rule 1 -for air conduction tests 
Where there is a difference of 40 dB or more between the air conduction 
thresholds of the two ears, at any frequency, then the air conduction 
test should be masked at that frequency. The better hearing ear receives 
the masking noise, and the worse ear is re-tested. The assumption is 
that the better hearing ear is hearing the air conduction test signal by 
cross-hearing via bone conduction. The transcranial transmission loss 
for air conduction signals is at least 40 dB. This can be thought of as the 
intensity required to set the skull into vibration. 
Rule 2 -for bone conduction tests 
Where the not-masked bone conduction threshold is more acute than 
the worst air conduction threshold by 10 dB or more, at any frequency, 
the bone conduction test for the worst ear must be masked at that 
frequency in order to obtain results for each ear separately. 
It is possible that the not-masked bone conduction result refers to the 
ear with the worse air conduction threshold. If this is suspected then 
masked bone conduction thresholds will be required. 
Cross-hearing is a major problem with bone conduction. The trans-
cranial transmission loss with bone conduction is minimal, usually no 
more than 10 dB. This means that even if the difference between the 
two ears is as little as 10 dB, the bone conduction signal is likely to be 
heard more prominently in the better ear, wherever the vibrator is 
placed. Therefore it is necessary to mask on nearly all occasions where 
true bone conduction thresholds are required for an ear. Accurate, 

Principal audiometric tests 
111 
monaural bone conduction thresholds are often not required for 
suspected air-bone gaps as small as 10dB, as specified in the above 
rule. 
Rule 3 -for air conduction tests 
Where rule 1 has not been applied, but where the not-masked bone 
conduction threshold is more acute by 40 dB or more than the not-
masked air conduction threshold of the worst ear, the worst ear air 
conduction test will need to be masked. 
The explanation for this rule is that cross-hearing is occurring by 
bone conduction. The air conduction headphone is sending sound 
directly to the contralateral inner ear through the head. Cross-hearing 
is occurring because the contralateral ear has acute inner ear hearing 
(that is, hearing by bone conduction) relative to the air conduction 
thresholds of the test ear. The transcranial transmission loss by this 
route is at least 40 dB. 
(c) Method 
The thresholds for the masking noise must be determined, so that the 
level of masking applied is appropriate. Too little masking will not be 
effective. If too much masking is applied cross-masking might occur, 
where the masking noise is heard in the test ear and interferes with 
the pure-tone threshold determination. Though it is important to be 
accurate, extreme precision in determining the threshold for masking is 
not required. It is not necessary to perform a test such as that used for 
finding the pure-tone threshold in order to establish a masking noise 
threshold. The threshold of masking is denoted M, in the British 
Society of Audiology's recommendations (1986). This is found by in-
troducing the masking noise in steps, out of silence, and asking the 
client to indicate as soon as he can hear the 'rushing' noise. The 
audiologist can use any suitable wording of explanation. 
For air conduction tests, masking will be applied via the contralateral 
headphone. For bone conduction tests, an insert masker should be 
used to present the masking noise, but if this is unavailable a head-
phone can be used. The earphone on the side of the test ear should be 
positioned on the side of the head and not over the ear, as this will 
result in false bone conduction thresholds due to occlusion. Care must 
also be taken to ensure that the headphones do not touch the bone 
conduction transducer. 
Once the thresholds for masking have been established at the required 
frequencies, the client will need to be re-instructed to listen for, and 
respond to, the pure-tones while ignoring the masking noise, usually 

112 
The assessment procedure 
described as a rushing noise. Clients must not be told to expect the 
masking noise in one ear and the pure-tone in the other. If cross-
hearing is occurring the client may be hearing the tone contralaterally, 
and it is often difficult for a client to identify the ear in which a sound 
was actually heard. Clients must simply respond to the tone, wherever 
and however faintly it is heard, and ignore the masking noise. 
To start the masked threshold determination, masking noise is pre-
sented to the non-test ear at a level of 10 dB above the masking noise 
threshold, i.e. at M + 10dB. In the presence of masking the pure-tone 
threshold is re-established. Some testers prefer to follow the usual 
and full pure-tone threshold method for this re-establishment, that is, 
presenting a tone at a level estimated to be well above threshold and 
reducing it in 10 dB steps until the threshold is found (section 6.4.1). 
Other testers simply present the tone at the previously determined, 
not-masked level to establish if it is still audible while the non-test ear 
is being masked; if not heard the tone level is increased until the 
threshold is found. The method used may depend on the client being 
tested. 
Masking is then increased by 10 dB, to a level of M + 20 dB. The 
pure-tone threshold is again re-established by the chosen method. This 
procedure is repeated, with masking going up in 10 dB steps each time, 
until three pure-tone thresholds have been found at the same level for 
different levels of masking, and a masking level of at least M + 40 dB 
has been used. 
A certain amount of error is permitted in the pure-tone threshold 
determination, and if three pure-tone thresholds differ from one 
another by no more than ±SdB they are considered the same. This is 
the true, masked threshold. 
In some cases it will not be possible to obtain a masked threshold 
where three results are the same for different levels of masking. In 
these cases the true threshold is said to be at or greater than the highest 
threshold determination for that frequency, and marked appropriately 
on the audiogram. Examples of cases where the masking test cannot be 
completed include: 
• masking noise reaches an uncomfortably loud level; 
• masking noise reaches the limit of the audiometer before the pure-
tone threshold has been determined; 
• the audiometer's pure-tone limit is reached before the threshold has 
been determined. 
(d) A modified procedure for masking 
1. Find the threshold for masking (M) in the non-test ear. 
2. Increase the masking level by 20 dB (M + 20) 

Principal audiometric tests 
113 
3. Present the test tone at its original intensity. (When testing by bone 
conduction, the original threshold must be re-checked at this point.) 
4. If the test tone is heard, increase the masking by 10 dB. 
5. Present the test tone again at the same intensity as step 3. 
6. If the tone is still heard, increase the masking by a further 10 dB 
and present the tone again. 
7. If the tone is heard, despite 20 dB increase in masking (M + 40), 
the original threshold is confirmed. Cross-hearing did not occur. 
8. If increasing masking prevents hearing of the test tone, the tone 
must be increased. 
9. The procedure is continued until two 10dB increases in masking, 
that is three different levels, do not affect the audibility of the test 
tone. 
10. In some cases it may not be possible to find the true threshold 
either because the client experiences discomfort, or because the 
limits of the audiometer are reached. 
11. Masking at a level greater than 40 dB above the signal may itself 
cross over the head to the test ear. This is most likely to cause a 
problem where there is a conductive element of over 30 dB. 
It is not usually necessary to mask at all frequencies. Two or three 
frequencies are usually quite sufficient; often, 1 kHz and either 2kHz or 
4kHz are masked. 
It is often helpful to record the results of masking while the procedure 
is being performed. This may be done using a masking diagram, or in 
simple columns (Table 6.1). In either case, the audiologist is looking for 
a 'plateau'. This is where three consecutive masking levels have no 
effect on the threshold (or no more than SdB). A simplified masking 
diagram, in which the plateau can be seen, is shown in Figure 6.7. If 
high levels of masking noise are necessary the noise should be turned 
down while the results are being recorded in order to avoid discomfort. 
Table 6.1 An approach to recording masking results using columns 
Frequency (kHz) 
Pure-tone threshold (dB) 
40 
not-masked 
50 
60 
70} 
70 Plateau 
70 
Masking (dB) 
10 
+20 
30 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 

114 
The assessment procedure 
10 
30 
50 
70 
90 
Relative masking level (dB) 
Fig. 6.7 Simplified masking diagram. 
(e) Symbols 
Where a true, masked air conduction threshold differs from the original 
not-masked value, and the not-masked value appears on the audio-
gram, the not-masked value is a shadow and the symbol should be 
shaded in. The true threshold should then be drawn on the audiogram. 
If the masked and not-masked results are the same it is common in 
the UK to half-shade the symbol. Not-masked bone conduction results 
are identified by a triangle on the audiogram; masked bone conduction 
results use a special symbol: 
0, X True air conduction thresholds for right and left ears respectively, 
masked if appropriate. 
e, X Shadow, or possible shadow, results for right and left ears re-
spectively. Suspect results, identified by the rules for masking, 
that are not checked by masking should always be identified as 
shadows. 
g,)( Masked air conduction thresholds that are the same as the not-
masked thresholds. Could be left unshaded, but the half-shade 
indicates that masking has been performed. 
!:::, 
Not-masked bone conduction thresholds. 
[,] 
True, masked bone conduction thresholds for right and left ears 
respectively. 
A working audiogram may thus contain a plethora of results and 
symbols. Sometimes a final audiogram will be redrawn with the shadow 
results omitted, or the half-shaded air conduction symbols replaced 
with open symbols, so the chart shows simply those true results 

Principal audiometric tests 
115 
obtained with masking, and those for which masking was not required 
by the rules for masking. 
(f) Types of masking noise 
Masking is the raising of the threshold of hearing for one sound by the 
presence of another sound. In everyday life we are often aware of the 
effect of masking, for example, when trying to hear on the telephone 
against a background of noise from the television. 
For the purposes of masking in pure-tone audiometry, wide band 
and narrow band noise are equally effective, but narrow band noise is 
preferred since it is less fatiguing. Narrow band noise should be centred 
on the frequency of the test tone (Figure 6.8) and have a band width of 
between one-third and one-half of an octave (British Society of Audio-
logy, 1986). The reference levels for narrow band masking noise are 
specified in BS 7113 (British Standards Institution, 1989), amended in 
1991. 
Masking may also be required when carrying out speech audiometry. 
Speech-shaped or speech equivalent noise is normally used for this 
purpose. This type of noise is similar to pink noise in that it has its 
greatest intensity in the low frequencies. 
Amplitude 
t 
20 
20 
Wide band noise 
Filtered wide band noise 
Band 1 
100 
150 
3k 
Narrow band noise 
9k 
Frequency 
....... 
20kHz 
20kHz 
( t or f octave band width; centred on test frequency) 
20 
8001 k 1200 
20kHz 
Speech-shaped (or speech equivalent) noise 
20 
250 
1 k 
4k 
20kHz 
Fig. 6.8 Types of masking noise. 

116 
The assessment procedure 
(g) Masking for bone conduction 
A bone conducted signal is applied directly to the skull and can be 
picked up by either (or both) cochleae. The transcranial transmission 
loss by bone conduction is very small, between 0 dB and 15 dB ap-
proximately. Since there may be no transmission loss, cross-hearing 
must be assumed in every case. 
If thresholds are required for each ear separately by bone conduction, 
masking will be needed on almost every occasion. This will provide 
accurate information about the type of loss in each ear. The only 
exception to the requirement for masking to ascertain this is where 
both of the air conduction thresholds and the not-masked bone con-
duction threshold are within 10 dB of each other. This represents a 
bilateral sensorineural loss of equal degree and masked bone conduction 
will provide no further information. 
In practice, masked bone conduction is regularly required for 
diagnostic purposes. It is used less frequently for hearing aid selection, 
but ideally should be used (subject to the criteria discussed above) 
where a custom-built hearing aid is being prescribed. 
6.4.3 DETERMINATION OF THE PURE-TONE UNCOMFORATBLE 
LOUDNESS LEVEL (ULL) 
A client's dynamic range is bounded by the threshold of hearing and 
that level felt to be uncomfortable. A hearing aid system should fully 
utilize the dynamic range, and provide sufficient gain and output to 
make important sounds audible, up to but not exceeding the ULL. 
Accurate measurement of the ULL at different frequencies is con-
sequently of great importance. The method described here is based on 
that of the British Society of Audiology (1987). 
(a) Signals 
The test signals will normally be pure-tones, but the method is equally 
applicable to warble tones and narrow band noise. Signals should be of 
approximately 1 second duration with gaps of approximately 1 second 
between signals. 
(b) Instructions 
The ULL is very subjective, and it is very important that the client 
understands what is required. A level felt to be simply 'unpleasant' 
will be lower than the ULL, but similarly the test is not intended to 
discover the threshold of pain; the concept of an 'uncomfortable' level 
must be stressed to the client; it is not a test of endurance. 

Understanding audiograms 
117 
(c) The test 
The test should start at a level predicted to be comfortable, and the 
signals steadily increased in 5 dB steps until the client indicates that the 
ULL has been reached. The frequencies to be tested are 1kHz, 2kHz, 
4kHz and 500Hz, in that order, testing one ear completely before 
starting on the other. 
It may be necessary to repeat some frequencies after re-instructing 
the client, if the results are felt to be unreliable. 
6.5 UNDERSTANDING AUDIOGRAMS 
6.5.1 THE AUDIOGRAM 
The results of pure-tone audiometric tests are plotted on a graph 
known as an audiogram. The audiogram form recommended by the 
British Society of Audiology (1989) is shown in Figure 6.9. This provides 
a separate graph for each ear, although in some cases the results from 
both left and right ears are plotted on one graph. 
It is important to use standard symbols on an audiogram to avoid 
confusion. The standard symbol for the right ear is a circle, prefer-
ably drawn in red, and for the left ear the symbol is a cross, preferably 
-10 
0 
I 
' 
' 
I 
' 
' 
10 
20 
I 
fij' 30 
:Q. 40 
I 
' 
I 
' 
Qj 
50 
I 
' 
> 
60 
~ 
' 
Ol 70 
c: 
80 
-~ 
' 
' 
Q) 
90 
I 
100 
I 
' 
I 
110 
120 
130 
140 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
• 
125 250 500 1 000 2000 4000 8000 
Frequency (Hz) 
Key: 
A1r conduction, masked if necessary 
A1r conduction, not-masked (shadow point) 
Bone conduction, not-masked 
Bone conduct1on, masked 
Uncomfortable loudness level 
-10 
0 
10 
i 
' 
' 
I 
' 
I 
20 
I 
I 
fij' 
30 
:Q. 40 
Qj 
50 
I 
' 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
' 
> 
60 
~ 
Ol 70 
s 
80 
«; 
I 
' 
' 
I 
' 
; 
I 
' 
I 
' 
I 
Q) 
90 
I 
100 
I 
' 
' 
110 
120 
I 
. 
' 
I 
I 
I 
130 
140 
I 
' 
' 
l 
' 
I 
I 
' 
125 250 500 10002000 40008000 
Frequency (Hz) 
R1ght 
Left 
0 
X 
• 
I 
6 
c 
:::J 
L 
_j 
Fig. 6.9 The British Society of Audiology's recommended format for audio-
grams. (After BSA (1989).) 

118 
The assessment procedure 
drawn in green or blue. The symbols are joined up by a solid line 
of the appropriate colour. If the threshold shifts when masking is 
used, the symbol is completely shaded in. Where masking has been 
used but the threshold remains unchanged, the normal circle or cross 
is used. The fact that masking has been employed can be indicated, in 
writing, below the audiogram. Alternatively, the symbol can be half-
shaded, which is a widely accepted variation from the recommended 
symbols. 
Bone conduction (BC) thresholds are plotted with a triangular 
symbol, usually drawn in black. The BC results are drawn on the left or 
right graph according to the side on which the BC vibrator was placed. 
This indicates only the position of the vibrator, not which ear received 
the signal, since both ears will receive a bone conducted signal. Where 
masking has been used to obtain results from each ear separately, a 
square bracket is drawn, opening towards the test side. BC results are 
joined by a dotted line. 
Uncomfortable loudness level is shown by an 'L' drawn to face 
towards the test side. When there is no response at the highest output 
for the frequency under test, an arrow, pointing downwards from the 
appropriate symbol, is drawn to indicate no response. The symbol is 
drawn at the maximum level tested. 
6.5.2 AUDIOGRAM INTERPRETATION 
A basic audiogram will show thresholds by air and bone conduction. 
The results should be interpreted in terms of: 
• the total amount of hearing loss, that is, the loss by air conduction; 
• the sensorineural element, that is, the loss by bone conduction; 
• the conductive element, that is, the gap, if any, between the air 
conduction and bone conduction readings. This is known as the 
air-bone gap. Examples can be seen in Figure 6.10. 
Sometimes in an audiometric test, the responses obtained may be due 
to feeling vibrations, rather than true hearing. This is a particular 
problem when testing by bone conduction, since the levels that may 
produce 'vibrotactile' results are much lower than by air conduction 
(Figure 6.11). At high frequencies, it is also possible for the tone to 
radiate from the bone conductor such that the client may hear by air 
conduction, again producing a false air-bone gap. Bone conduction is 
not tested beyond 4kHz, but even at this frequency airborne signals 
may be heard near the maximum output of the audiometer. If the 
hearing aid audiologist is not aware of when there is a need to question 
the validity of test results, a sensorineural loss may be mistaken for a 
mixed loss. 

dBHL 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Understanding audiograms 
119 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Normal BC = normal cochlea 
therefore loss must be 
conductive 
AC = total loss 
I 
I 
I 
I 
F requency 
Difference between BC and AC = degree of conductive loss 
dBHL 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
dBHL 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
b--
--
I 
I 
I 
I 
-I- -1-
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
-I- J--1-
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
(}-I-b ..... ~ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
-1- ]~ 
I 
I 
I /. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
/ 
~ 
--
F 
v 
/ 
v 
Reduced BC = abnormal cochlea 
AC = total loss 
No significant difference between 
AC and BC therefore all loss is 
sensorineural 
requency 
Reduced BC = abnormal cochlea 
AC = total loss 
Difference between AC and BC 
over 10 dB therefore loss is mixed 
Frequency 
Amount of BC loss = degree of sensorineural loss 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
~~~--~----~~~----------~------------~ 
Middle ear 
Inner ear 
Conductive loss 
Sensorineural loss 
Fig. 6.10 Types and degrees of loss from the audiogram. 

120 
The assessment procedure 
250 
BC 
30 (5) 
AC 
95 
-10 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
m 50 
:g. 
60 
Qi > 
70 
.!!1 
Cl 
80 
c:: 
-~ 
90 
Q) 
100 
I 
110 
120 
130 
140 <c: 
Vibrotactile levels 
500 
60 (35) 
115 
,, 
(~ 
"' 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
-,j 
1k 
80 (65) 
125 
I 
i 
i', 
i 
i 
i 
i 
2k 
130 
I 
I 
i 
I 
I 
I 
I 
i 
i 
'~I 
125 250 500 1 000 2000 4000 8000 
Frequency (Hz) 
4k 
Fig. 6.11 Possible false audiometric results due to vibrotactile responses. 
Certain bone conduction transducers can elicit vibrotactile results at very low 
levels, indicated by the numbers given in brackets. 
An audiogram that illustrates normal hearing will show a line of both 
air and bone conduction symbols along, or close to, the 0 dBHL line 
near the top of the audiogram. All three lines of the air and bone 
conduction symbols appearing within 10 dB of each other indicate a 
purely sensorineural loss in each ear (except in the case of normal 
hearing). 
Where an air-bone gap is present, but air conduction readings in 
both ears are similar, it is usually unnecessary to obtain bone conduction 
readings for each ear separately for hearing aid fitting purposes. Where 
this information is required for diagnosis, or where the ears differ 
markedly from one another, bone conduction readings for each ear 
must be obtained by employing masking in the non-test ear. Masking 
for air conduction must be used if there is a gap of 40 dB or more 
between the not-masked bone conduction and the poorest air con-
duction readings on the audiogram. 

Understanding audiograms 
121 
No difficulty with 
very quiet speech 
dBHL 
0 Very quiet 
-------20 
Some difficulty 
Whisper 
~ 
h 
A ~ 
with quiet speech 
~------~0 
Frequent difficulty 
with normal speech 
especially in noisy 
conditions 
60 
.~ ~v~i~s~~ 
~ 
Cannot hear normal 
speech without 
amplification 
Hears amplified 
speech as very 
poor quality sound 
80 
100 
120 
Normal voice r.cL//: V//- ~ 
~~ice 
Very loud voice 
Hearing within 
normal limits 
------------
Mild hearing loss 
Moderate hearing 
loss 
Severe hearing 
loss 
Profound hearing 
loss 
125 250 
500 1 k 
2 k 
4 k 
8 k Hz 
Low frequency 
j High frequency 
(power) 
1 (intelligibility) 
I 
Fig. 6.12 Degree of hearing loss and its effect on hearing speech. 
6.5.3 DESCRIPTION OF THE HEARING LOSS 
It is often helpful to be able to describe the degree of hearing loss. 
There is no one standard description, but one classification recom-
mended by the British Association of Teachers of the Deaf (Taylor and 
Bishop, 1991), which relates well to the effect on the hearing of speech 
is as follows (Figure 6.12): 
• any hearing loss below 40 dBHL is described as mild loss; 
• from 41 dBHL to 70 dBHL is described as a moderate loss; 
• from 71 dBHL to 95 dBHL is described as a severe loss; 
• greater than 95 dBHL is described as a profound loss. 
The single figure of hearing loss can be obtained by taking an average 
over five frequencies, 250Hz, 500Hz, 1kHz, 2kHz and 4kHz. 
The concept of percentage is sometimes used to describe the degree 
of hearing loss. Percentage hearing loss is calculated according to 
formulae (King et al., 1992) for compensation claims, but the use of 
'percentage' in place of dB to describe the loss to a client is incorrect. A 
30 dB hearing loss, for example, is not a 30% impairment, neither is a 
100 dB loss total hearing loss. A 100% impairment does not necessarily 
mean an ear has no useful residual hearing. The term 'percentage' 
hearing loss, for rehabilitation purposes, can be very misleading and 
should not be used. 
A full description should include an indication of the audiometric 

122 
The assessment procedure 
configuration, which again is not standardized. The following terms 
are sometimes used: 
• Flat, to indicate a loss that does not rise or fall more than 5 dB per 
octave. 
• Gradually sloping, to indicate a loss that falls by 5 dB to 10 dB per 
octave. 
• Precipitously or sharply falling, to indicate a loss that falls 15 dB or 
more per octave. 
• Abruptly falling, to indicate a loss that is flat or gradual in the low 
frequency region, but then falls sharply. This configuration is also 
often referred to as a 'ski-slope', but this term is not recommended. 
• Rising or reverse audiogram, to indicate a loss that increases by 5 dB 
or more per octave. 
• Trough, to indicate a loss that falls in the midfrequency range 
(1kHz-2kHz) by 20dB or more in comparison with the loss at 
500Hz and 4kHz. Although not recommended, the American term 
'cookie bite' is very descriptive for this shape of loss. 
6.6 ROOM REQUIREMENTS FOR AUDIOMETRY 
Background noise can have a significant effect on audiometric results, 
particularly those obtained by bone conduction. It is therefore necessary 
to reduce background noise to a level that will not elevate the hearing 
thresholds of the person under test. Ideally the room is specially 
constructed, but often audiometric tests are undertaken in less than 
ideal conditions, for example in the home situation. Background noise 
should be reduced as far as is practicable and the use of specially 
designed earphones or of insert receivers may further assist in its re-
duction. Where background noise is sufficiently high to have a possible 
effect on the thresholds, this information should be recorded on the 
audiogram. A sound-proof room is not a necessity for audiometry, but 
the noise level should be below that which would cause masking and 
threshold shift in someone with normal hearing. 
Where a room is specially constructed for the purpose of audiometry, 
there are design recommendations that should be followed wherever 
possible (Department of Health and Social Security, 1974). The room 
should have an ambient noise level below 30 dBA. A prefabricated 
sound booth is sometimes used to guarantee a particular degree of 
sound attenuation. The booth must, however, be situated within a 
quiet room since it ensures only a certain degree of attenuation, not a 
particular sound level. 
A booth that is to be used only for adults should be a minimum size 
of 1.2 m by 1m with a height of 2m, but preferably the room size 

Summary 
123 
should be at least 2.4 m by 2.4 m, with a height of 2m. If children are to 
be tested, a room that is a minimum of 6.3 m by 4.8 m, with a height of 
2m is required. This allows space for free-field testing, and also for 
parents or other adults to be present. 
A sound-treated room should be situated away from obvious sources 
of noise and should be isolated from the rest of the building. This can 
be achieved by building the room of brick with a concrete skin and 
cavity, thus using the effect of mass and of dead-air space. Vibrations 
from the building can be deadened by mounting the whole interior on 
rubber shock absorbers. Solid double doors should be used to exclude 
noise. Preferably, the doors should be lead-lined and should close 
with magnetic seals. Ventilation will be needed because the room will 
rapidly become hot and airless, but the noise from the ventilation 
system must be minimized using acoustic filters to act as baffles. 
Tungsten lighting is preferable to fluorescent, which produces a 
hum, and if the latter is used the choke and starter should be mounted 
away from the room. If there are windows, double glazing should be 
used to reduce noise from outside. A much larger gap between the 
panes of glass is necessary than is required for heat retention. If the 
glass is 3 mm thick the gap should be at least 100 mm, and if the glass 
is 6 mm the gap should be at least 50 mm. In addition, where there is 
more than one window in the room, these should not be positioned 
opposite each other, as the creation of standing waves is more likely. 
This is important where free-field testing is carried out. 
A room for audiometry must not only be quiet, but also have a low 
reverberation time, that is, there must be very little 'echo'. Rooms in 
which reverberation is exceptionally low are called anechoic chambers; 
these are very quiet and unnaturally 'dead', and are used only for 
research purposes. For audiometric purposes a reverberation time 
between 0.2 and 0.25 seconds is ideal. This should be achieved by 
covering the walls and floor with soft, sound-absorbent materials, such 
as acoustic tiles fixed on battens to the walls and ceiling and a thick 
foam-backed carpet on the floor. These will absorb sound and limit 
reverberation. 
6.7 SUMMARY 
Tuning fork tests provide a quick indication of type of loss. They 
should not be considered as a substitute for pure-tone audiometry. 
Pure-tone tests are used to provide accurate hearing threshold levels by 
air and bone conduction, together with determination of ULLs, which 
are important for hearing aid fitting. 
Audiometric test results are recorded on a graph known as an 
audiogram. The audiologist must be able to interpret the results and to 

124 The assessment procedure 
realize when false results may have been recorded, in particular those 
due to possible: 
• cross-over of the signal; 
• vibrotactile response; 
• airborne radiation of a bone conducted signal. 
Cross-hearing is a response from the non-test side, rather than from 
the ear under test. It will result in a shadow curve on the audiogram. 
Masking is used whenever a shadow curve is suspected. It is also 
used to determine precisely the type of loss in each ear (using masked 
bone conduction). 
A shadow reading should always be suspected if the gap between 
the two air conduction curves is 40 dB or more, or if the gap between 
the not-masked bone conduction and the poorer air conduction curve 
is 40dB or more. 
Background noise must be at a sufficiently low level not to worsen 
hearing thresholds. Low frequency noise can be excluded by solid 
construction; high frequency can be excluded by adequately sealing the 
room. Building-borne vibrations can be excluded by isolating the floor, 
suspending it on rubber shock absorbers. The ambient noise level 
achieved should be below 30 dBA. 
Reverberation should be reduced through the use of sound absorbent 
materials, such as acoustic tiles. The reverberation time achieved should 
be between 0.2 and 0.25 seconds. 
REFERENCES 
British Society of Audiology (1981) Recommended Procedure for Pure-tone 
Audiometry using a Manually Operated Instrument. British Journal of Audio-
logy, 15, 213-16. 
British Society of Audiology (1986) Recommendations for Masking in Pure-tone 
Threshold Audiometry. British Journal of Audiology, 20, 307-14. 
British Society of Audiology (1987) Recommended Procedure for Rinne and 
Weber Tuning Fork Tests. British Journal of Audiology, 21, 229-30. 
British Society of Audiology (1987) Recommended Procedure for Uncomfort-
able Loudness Level (ULL). British Journal of Audiology, 21, 231. 
British Society of Audiology (1989) Recommended Format for Audiogram 
Forms. British Journal of Audiology, 23, 265-6. 
British Standards Institution (1989) BS 7113: Specification for Reference Levels for 
Narrow-band Masking Noise. (Amended 1991.) British Standards Institution, 
London. 
Department of Health and Social Security (1974) Hospital ENT Services. A Design 
Guide, Department of Health and Social Security. 
Health and Safety Executive (1989) Noise at Work, HMSO, London. 
Hearing Aid Council (1990) The Hearing Aid Council Code of Practice, Examinations 
and Registration, Hearing Aid Council, Milton Keynes. 

Further reading 
125 
King, P.F., Coles, R.R.A., Lutman, M.E. and Robinson, D.W. (1992) Assessment 
of Hearing Disability: Guidelines for Medicolegal Practice, Whurr Publishers, 
London. 
Taylor, G. and Bishop, J. (1991) Being Deaf: The Experience of Deafness, Pinter, 
London. 
FURTHER READING 
Brooks, D.N. (1989) Adult Aural Rehabilitation, Chapman and Hall, London. 

Hearing aids and 
their performance 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
7 
There are very few deaf people who have no hearing whatsoever; it is 
much more usual to have some remaining, or residual, hearing. 
The residual hearing area can be illustrated on an audiogram as the 
area between the threshold of hearing and the point at which sound 
becomes uncomfortable. In effect, this is the useful hearing area. A 
hearing aid system is a device to enable a hearing impaired person to 
make maximum use of this residual hearing area and should provide: 
• maximum speech clarity or intelligibility; 
• maximum useful information from environmental sounds, such as 
the sound of the doorbell, or of an approaching car; 
• minimum interference from unwanted background noise, par-
ticularly as hearing impairment restricts the ability to separate im-
portant sounds from background noise; 
• minimum distortion; some distortion will occur when sound is am-
plified but this should be minimized so that it does not affect clarity 
or sound quality. 
Several types of hearing aid system exist and selection from the range 
available involves weighing up the advantages and disadvantages of 
each type for the particular hearing impaired individual. 
Air conduction hearing aids present amplified sound to the external 
ear and use the whole auditory system (Figure 7.1). Bone conduction 
hearing aids bypass the middle ear and are therefore useful in con-
ditions that preclude the use of an air conduction system, for instance, 
if there is discharge from the ear, or the absence of an outer ear. 

Types of hearing aid system 
127 
Bone conduction route (via skull) 
r---------------------, 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Fig. 7.1 The air conduction and bone conduction routes through the auditory 
system. 
7.2 TYPES OF HEARING AID SYSTEM 
7.2.1 AIR CONDUCTION SYSTEMS 
(a) Bodyworn hearing aids 
In a bodyworn hearing aid (Figure 7.2) the microphone, amplifier and 
batteries are all housed within the hearing aid case, which is linked by 
a cord to an external receiver. The receiver attaches to a solid earmould 
supplied with a ring and clip for this purpose. 
Bodyworn hearing aids are relatively large and bulky and are usually 
Fig. 7.2 A range of air conduction hearing aids. (Photograph courtesy of Vien-
natone UK/Bonochord Hearing Aids Ltd.) 

128 
Hearing aids and their performance 
worn monaurally, although a Y-cord can be used to deliver sound to 
both ears. This does not allow each ear to function independently and 
is not therefore a true binaural fitting. Binaural body aids are some-
times provided for children, although the unnatural position of the 
microphone, high up on the chest, minimizes differences in the sound 
signal arriving at each ear and therefore reduces the binaural advantage 
of improved direction and discrimination. Positioning on the chest will 
provide good reception of the user's voice. A bodyworn aid may also 
readily be held by another person who can then speak close to the 
microphone to improve sound reception. 
The aid should not be placed under clothing as the clothes rubbing 
against the microphone would cause noise. If the aid is placed in the 
best position for sound reception, that is high up on the chest, spillage 
of food into the microphone can be a problem. This may be overcome 
by fitting a protective cover, which is known as a 'baby cover', but 
which is equally useful for elderly or physically disabled adults. 
There are two groups for whom the use of bodyworn aids may be 
particularly advantageous: 
1. For the very severely or profoundly deaf person, a bodyworn aid 
with its larger components can provide high gain and output, and a 
good low frequency response, which may be very important as an 
aid to lip-reading. The physical separation of the receiver from the 
microphone is a major factor in allowing the high gain to be utilized, 
as there is less risk of acoustic feedback. Acoustic feedback occurs 
when sound from the output leaks back to the microphone input, 
causing a high pitched whistle. 
2. For those with manual dexterity problems - a group which includes 
not only the physically disabled but also the very young and the 
very old - the larger controls and accessible position of the bodyworn 
aid make adjustment easier, whether this is undertaken by the user 
or by a carer. 
(b) Behind-the-ear hearing aids 
Behind-the-ear (BTE) or postaural hearing aids are those in which all 
the components are housed in a case that is situated behind the pinna 
and linked to the meatus by a tube and earmould (Figure 7.2). BTE aids 
are available in a wide variety, both in terms of size and performance. 
They are usually fitted with forward-facing microphones, which allow 
full use to be made of the advantages of binaural hearing when two 
aids are worn. The position of the aid behind the ear may be uncom-
fortable for spectacle wearers and may not remain secure during active 
pursuits. 

Types of hearing aid system 
129 
Various controls are available to facilitate modification of the hearing 
aid's performance and behind-the-ear aids provide an opportunity for 
early demonstration using temporary earfittings. All earfittings produce 
further changes in the response delivered to the ear, which may be 
desirable or undesirable. For instance, the external tubing adds un-
desirable peaks of resonance to the signal around 1 kHz and 2kHz, 
while careful use of acoustic modifications such as vents and filters can 
greatly improve a hearing aid fitting. The effect of acoustic modifications 
is not precise but can be evaluated when the aid is worn. 
(c) Spectacle hearing aids 
Air conduction spectacle aids are those in which all the components are 
housed within the spectacle arm (Figure 7.3) and linked to the ear 
canal by a tube and earmould. They overcome problems of comfort and 
space behind the ear when wearing both hearing aids and spectacles. 
They are not widely used because in-the-ear aids provide another 
option, one which does not remove the hearing if the spectacles are 
taken off. Spectacle hearing aids can be supplied as complete systems 
or may be fitted to many of the spectacles, or spectacle fronts, obtained 
from an optician. Spectacle aids may also be used for contralateral 
Fig. 7.3 Air conduction spectacle hearing aids. (Photograph courtesy of Vien-
natone UK/Bonochord Hearing Aids Ltd.) 

130 
Hearing aids and their performance 
routeing of signals (CROS). A basic CROS fitting may help in cases of 
unilateral hearing loss, where sound is carried from a very deaf ear for 
reception by the other, good ear. 
(d) In-the-ear hearing aids 
In-the-ear (ITE), also occasionally called intra-aural, hearing aids are 
those in which all the components are housed within the ear fitting 
itself, which is known as the shell of the aid. 'In-the-ear' is a generic 
term used to refer to the whole range of aids worn within the pinna 
but these are further differentiated into two main types (Figure 7.4): 
1. Full shell in-the-ear hearing aids fill the entire concha of the ear. 
Variations can be obtained in which part of the full shell is cut away, 
such as half-shell and helix variations. 
2. In-the-canal (lTC) hearing aids fit within the ear canal and may be 
situated near the canal entrance or well down the ear canal, near the 
eardrum, in which case they are known as deep canal or peri-
tympanic hearing aids. 
ITE and lTC hearing aids are available as simple insert aids used with a 
meatal tip but are most commonly provided with an individual shell 
Fig. 7.4 A range of in-the-ear hearing aids. (Photograph courtesy of Viennatone 
UK/Bonochord Hearing Aids Ltd.) 

Types of hearing aid system 
131 
made from an ear impression. The components can be standard or 
selected to produce an individual prescription hearing aid. 
Most hearing aid users prefer an aid which is small and fits within 
the ear. ITC aids are the most inconspicuous but, whereas the manipu-
lation of an ITE aid requires only a very simple movement (Upfold, 
May and Battaglia, 1990), the manipulation of the very small controls of 
an ITC aid is more difficult. The size of the aid also restricts the degree 
of modification which can be made by the hearing aid audiologist. 
The amount of gain and output from the aid is restricted by its size, 
and the close proximity of microphone and receiver increases the likeli-
hood of acoustic feedback. However, the position of an aid within the 
external ear makes it a very natural one, which allows it to take 
advantage of the natural forward focusing and acoustic properties of 
the ear. The further into the ear the microphone is positioned, the 
greater the natural benefit derived. Placement of the receiver within 
the ear canal also provides sound directly to the eardrum and the 
smaller the cavity between the sound outlet and the eardrum, the 
greater will be the sound intensity. These advantages of position will 
lead to an improvement in the amount of gain provided by the hearing 
aid of between SdB and 13dB approximately, especially in the high 
frequency region (Sullivan, 1989), and since the ear fitting is an integral 
Fig. 7.5 A range of bone conduction hearing aids. (Photograph courtesy of 
Viennatone UK/Bonochord Hearing Aids Ltd.) 

132 
Hearing aids and their performance 
part of the hearing aid, the frequency response measured is that of the 
entire system. 
7.2.2 BONE CONDUCTION HEARING AIDS 
The major difference between air conduction and bone conduction 
hearing aids lies in the receiver. Whereas an air conduction aid has 
only to set air, a low impedance medium, into vibration, a bone con-
duction aid requires a great deal of energy to set the bone, a high 
impedance medium, into vibration. The bone conduction receiver is 
therefore large and rigid and fitted with firm pressure to the mastoid. 
Bone conduction hearing aids have poor high frequency response. 
They are used mainly for conductive hearing losses in which the ear 
must not or cannot be blocked by an earmould. 
The mechanical transducer can be driven by a bodywom or by a 
powerful postaural or spectacle hearing aid (Figure 7.5). They are 
generally not considered attractive and even the spectacle option must 
be provided with heavy frames, which may require frequent adjust-
ment to maintain close contact with the mastoid. 
7.3 SPECIFICATION AND PERFORMANCE 
7.3.1 SPECIFICATION SHEETS 
A specification is the detailed description of a hearing aid, which is 
normally presented as a specification or performance data sheet. This 
describes the hearing aid model in terms of its physical and electro-
acoustic characteristics, together with any relevant information con-
cerned with the method and conditions that result in the publication of 
that specification. The main function of the data sheet is to provide 
information in the form of tables and graphs illustrating the results of 
performance tests carried out to comply with the requirements of 
relevant standards. The standards aim to achieve a uniformity of hearing 
aid performance description that facilitates vaild comparison between 
different models. Small deviations from the specification are to be 
found in individual examples of any particular hearing aid model, and 
the degree of deviation acceptable is known as the tolerance. 
When a purchaser receives a hearing aid from a manufacturer, the 
hearing aid's performance may be checked against that detailed on the 
specification, or on the individual data sheet that is delivered with a 
custom-made in-the-ear hearing aid (Figure 7.6). This is known as 
quality inspection on delivery and each hearing aid should perform 
within the tolerance stated by the manufacturer. Tolerances are not 
specified in the relevant British Standard. 

STARKEY 
Specification and performance 
133 
dB 
SPL 
100 
SSPL90 
........ / r\ 
Custom Data Sheet 
90 
" 
This CRR!FRC CHS Hearing Aid 
# 7193390565 
was custom designed for the right ear of 
MR.M. BRODERICK 
ACfiVE HEARING, 
THE HOLLIES, 
88 HIGH STREET, 
BOSTON SPA, 
NR WETHERBY. 
Matrix 
PeakSSPL90 
H.F A. SSPL 90 
Peak Gain 
H.FA. Gain 50 
Ref. Test Gain 
Eq. Input Noise 
Frequency Range 
107/35/10 
108.3 dBSPL 
105.6 dBSPL 
40.0 dB 
31.2 dB 
29.9 dB 
32.8 dBSPL 
200-7300 Hz 
Distortion: 100Hz Filtering 
500Hz ( 70dBSPL In) 
3.8% 
800Hz ( 70dBSPL In) 
3.6% 
1600 Hz ( 65 dBSPLin) 
1.8 % 
Battery Simulator: 
Voltage 
Impedance 
Current 
10/01/93 08:45 
1.25 Volts 
2.5 Q 
0.57 rnA 
80 
70 
200 
500 
1K 
2K 
SK Hz 
dB 
FuiiOnGein 
40 
30 
v \.. 
--
\., 
...-I-
20 
10 
200 
500 
1K 
2K 
SK Hz 
dB 
F 
R 
re uency esi)Cl nse 
30 
v, 
I--"" 
\ 
20 
10 
0 
200 
500 
1K 
2K 
SK Hz 
QUALITY CONTROL 
SIMPLY TilE BEST ......... K. W. 
Est. banery life in 16 hour days with a312 Zinc Air; 9- 12 days. 
All testing was performed iD <XX11pli1Dce with ANSI S3.22-1987 
CRR Canal Resoamce Respoase 
CRR is characterized by a primary frequency 
peak between 2.5 and 3 kHz. Placing tbe peak 
in this region helps to restore the ear canal 
resonance which is lost or diminished when a 
hearing aid is inserted into the ear. 
Fig. 7.6 An individual specification sheet for an ITE aid. (Courtesy of Starkey 
Ltd.) 
The standards (British Standards Institution, 1988) provide for a 
number of different characteristics to be measured, including gain, 
maximum output, frequency response, harmonic distortion and internal 
noise. Measurements are intended to be used for the purpose of: 
• technical comparison; 
• evaluation; 
• production control; 

134 
Hearing aids and their performance 
• delivery tolerances; 
• selection for procurement; 
• selection for pre-fitting; 
• training and teaching. 
7.3.2 GAIN 
The acoustic gain of an aid is the amount of amplification it provides. 
In simple terms, it is the difference between the input and the output 
SPL. For example, if: 
Input 
= 60dBSPL 
Output = 80 dBSPL 
Gain 
= 20dB 
Gain is always presented in dB without a suffix. It is measured under 
specified operating conditions and at a specified frequency or fre-
quencies. The British Standard defines acoustic gain as: 
The difference between the sound pressure level developed in the 
acoustic coupler by the hearing aid and the sound pressure level 
measured at the test point. 
British Standards Institution, 1984 
Gain is most usually presented as a single figure for 1kHz or 1.6 kHz, 
or as an average of several frequencies. Alternatively, a frequency 
response curve showing how the gain varies across the frequency 
range is more informative. 
A number of different types of acoustic gain are usually presented on 
a specification sheet. These include: 
• Full-on gain - this is the gain with the volume control turned fully 
on. 
• Maximum gain - this is the highest possible gain from the hearing 
aid. It is measured under specified conditions with an input that will 
not drive the aid into saturation, usually 60 dBSPL, and with the 
volume control fully on. 
• Reference test gain represents more of a 'user volume'. This is 
measured with an input of 60 dBSPL, with the volume control set so 
that the output is 15 dB less than the maximum output (OSPL 90) at 
the reference test frequency. If the aid will not permit this, the 
full-on gain position should be used. The reference test frequency 
is normally 1.6 kHz, but where high tone hearing aids are in 
use 2.5kHz may be more appropriate. This will be stated on the 
specification. 

Specification and performance 
135 
7.3.3 MAXIMUM OUTPUT 
All hearing aids have a maximum output limit, which is the most the 
hearing aid can handle, due mainly to limitations imposed by the 
output stage of the hearing aid (the receiver). The maximum output 
may be referred to in a number of different ways, all of which have 
very similar meanings. These include: 
• saturation sound pressure level (SSPL); 
• saturation sound pressure level with an input of 90 dBSPL (SSPL 90); 
• output sound pressure level (OSPL); 
• output sound pressure level with an input of 90 dBSPL (OSPL 90); 
• maximum power output (MPO); 
• maximum output. 
The British Standards define OSPL 90 as: 
The sound pressure level produced in an ear simulator with an 
input of 90dB at the specified frequency (or frequencies), the gain 
control being in the full-on position and all other controls being 
set for maximum gain. 
British Standards Institution, 1984 
Saturation is the condition in a circuit when an increase in the input 
signal produces no further increase in the output signal (Figure 7.7). 
Saturation sound pressure level is the highest possible SPL obtainable 
from the hearing aid. In order to measure this in the test situation, all 
the controls, including the volume, must be turned up to maximum 
and an acoustic signal must be produced that is sufficiently intense to 
drive the aid into saturation. This input signal is always 90 dBSPL. 
Output (dBSPL) 
130 
100 
Mal----
Sa~uration 
/ 
/ 
v 
v 
120 
110 
90 
80 40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
Input (dBSPL) 
Fig. 7.7 An input-output graph demonstrating saturation of a hearing aid. 

136 
Hearing aids and their performance 
Saturation is the highest possible sound pressure level that an aid is 
capable of producing, and it can be specified at one or more frequencies. 
7.3.4 FREQUENCY RESPONSE 
The frequency response of a hearing aid is presented as a line on a 
graph that shows how the aid performs over the frequency range. It is 
defined in BS 6083: Part 0 (1984) as: 
The sound pressure level developed in an ear simulator by the 
hearing aid expressed as a function of frequency under specified 
conditions. 
A frequency response may be obtained to show how the gain, or the 
output, varies with frequency and the term 'basic frequency response' 
may also be seen on a specification sheet. This illustrates the frequency 
response curve obtained at the reference test gain setting, with an 
input signal of 60 dBSPL. 
7.3.5 AMPLITUDE NON-LINEARITY OR DISTORTION 
An ideal hearing aid would produce an output that was identical to the 
input signal, only amplified. However, a hearing aid is not capable of 
doing this and when the output does not reproduce exactly the input, 
it is said to be distorted. 
(a) Harmonic distortion 
For the purpose of quality inspection of hearing aid performance on 
delivery only harmonic distortion is considered, since this is the easiest 
type of distortion to measure. It results when harmonics are present at 
the output that were not part of the input signal. Harmonics are 
multiples of the original frequency; for example, a pure tone of 2kHz 
would add harmonics at 4kHz, 6kHz, 8kHz and so on. The original 
tone, or fundamental frequency, is always the lowest frequency (Figure 
7.8). It is also the first harmonic since harmonics are multiples. In the 
example given above: 
The fundamental frequency 
= 2kHz 
The first harmonic = 1 x 2kHz 
= 2kHz 
The second harmonic = 2 x 2kHz = 4kHz 
The third harmonic = 3 x 2kHz = 6kHz 
The harmonic content decreases with increasing frequency and mea-
surements usually only consider the second and third harmonics. These 
may be considered separately, or together as 'total harmonic distortion'. 

Specification and performance 
137 
Input tones 
n 
L-.1...----LJL.......L.I...----l--Frequency 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
0.5 
1.5 2 
3.5 
(kHz) 
Harmonic distortion 
lntermodulation distortion 
Fig. 7.8 Harmonic and intermodulation distortion. 
A hearing aid should produce as little distortion as possible and this is 
expressed in one of two ways, as: 
1. a distortion ratio, where the distortion product is given as the 
number of dB below the total output signal; 
2. a distortion factor, where the distortion product is expressed as a 
percentage of the total output signal. 
If the response curve rises 12 dB or more between any test frequency 
and its second harmonic, the measurement may be omitted. 
There is no absolute agreed figure for maximum distortion but, as 
a general rule, a distortion ratio of 20 dB, or a distortion factor of 
10%, is considered to be the maximum acceptable. Harmonic distortion 
increases as the hearing aid nears saturation point and it is therefore 
normally measured below this point, at the reference test position, or, 
in the clinic, it may be measured at the wearer's volume setting. Other 
forms of distortion, such as intermodulation distortion and transient 
distortion, are less frequently measured but may also affect the sound 
quality. 
(b) lntermodulation distortion 
This occurs (Figure 7.8) when there are two or more input signals and 
this results in additional frequencies, which are the arithmetic sum or 
difference of the input frequencies. Intermodulation products, unlike 
harmonics, occur not only above the frequency of the fundamental but 
also below. BS 6083: Part 0 (1984) provides for the measurement of 
intermodulation distortion by the manufacturers; it is not a test under-
taken for quality control on delivery. 
(c) Transient distortion 
Transient distortion, sometimes known as 'ringing', occurs when there 
is a rapid change in the signal such that the hearing aid cannot re-

138 
Hearing aids and their performance 
produce the sharp rise and fall times. A lingering of the sound often 
results, which may interfere with speech intelligibility, but the effect of 
this on the listener is not fully understood and there are no standards 
for measuring transient distortion. 
7.3.6 EQUIVALENT INPUT NOISE LEVEL 
Hearing aid electronics generate internal random noise, which poses a 
potential source of masking and must therefore be minimized. Internal 
noise may be analysed in one-third octave bands or it may be expressed 
as an equivalent input noise level. It is calculated with the aid set 
approximately to the reference test gain position. 
To express the internal noise as an equivalent input noise level, the 
output sound pressure level with an input of 60 dBSPL is first noted. 
The output minus the input provides a measure of gain. The sound 
source of input is switched off. The sound pressure measured at this 
point is caused by internal noise. The equivalent input noise is cal-
culated by subtracting the gain from the sound pressure caused by 
internal noise. 
For example: 
1. OSPL60 = Ls = 100 
Input 60 = L1 
2. OSPL0 = Lz = 70 
3. Internal noise - Gain = Equivalent input noise level (LN) 
LN = L2 -
(Ls - L1) 
where LN = equivalent input noise level 
LN = 70 - (100 - 60) 
L2 = SPL caused by internal noise 
LN = 70 - 40 
Ls = OSPL with input 60 dBSPL 
LN = 30 
L1 = input of 60 dBSPL 
The internal noise generated in the example is equivalent to an input 
signal to the aid of 30 dBSPL. This measure applies only to essentially 
linear input/output conditions and where automatic gain control aids 
are involved, the input SPL may be reduced to ensure such conditions 
apply. 
7.3.7 DYNAMIC OUTPUT CHARACTERISTICS OF AGC CIRCUITS 
Automatic gain control (AGC) is employed to compress, or reduce, the 
dynamic range of the sound at the output. This prevents excessive 
output sound from the hearing aid from reaching the user's ear, while 
tending to preserve the waveform of the input signal. The dynamic 
characteristics of an AGC circuit, especially the attack and recovery 
times (see below), are important, and methods for the measurement of 
these and other electro-acoustical characteristics are given in BS 6083: 
Part 2 (1984) (Figure 7.9). 

~iooc~:l 
the signal is compressed 
(b) When the input signal decreases, 
compression ceases and the output 
signal assumes its new steady state level 
Hearing aid standards 
139 
Fig. 7.9 The effect of compression on the output signal. (After BS 6083: Part 2 
(1984).) 
Automatic gain control is not instantaneous and the attack time is 
the time interval it takes for the AGC circuit to stabilize when there is a 
sudden increase in input signal. The stabilized level is known as the 
steady state. 
Conversely, the recovery time is the time interval it takes for the 
AGC circuits to stabilize when the input signal is abruptly reduced. 
Both the attack and the recovery times are recorded as the time taken, 
when the signal is altered by a stated number of decibels, for the 
output to reach within 2 dB of its steady state level. 
Attack times should be as short as possible to avoid sudden loud 
sounds from being amplified to the extent that uncomfortable hearing 
occurs. An attack time of less than 10 milliseconds is ideal since 
the human ear cannot perceive temporal changes of less than 10 
milliseconds (Pollack, 1988). 
Short recovery times, however, may cause considerable distortion 
and the listener may hear an audible 'flutter' as the compression circuit 
reacts to the variations in intensity that occur in speech at normal 
levels. Release times are normally greater than 30 milliseconds in order 
to avoid 'flutter' but shorter than 150 milliseconds to maintain speech 
intelligibility. 
7.4 HEARING AID STANDARDS 
In the early days of electronic hearing aids manufacturers set their 
own standards and it was impossible to compare different models by 
looking at the data provided. As the number of hearing aids available 
grew, it became increasingly important that hearing aid measurements 
be standardized, and in 1959 the International Electrotechnical Com-
mission (IEC) produced the first European standards. Unfortunately, 
standards can still be confusing because there are major differences 
between European and American standards. Standards are constantly 

140 
Hearing aids and their performance 
revised and updated. In practice this means that the date, as well as 
the number, of the standard used on a specification sheet should be 
noted. The main standards are: 
1. European 
IEC International Electrotechnical Commission. 
BSI 
British Standards Institution. British Standards are generally 
IEC standards adopted and renumbered but retaining their 
original content. BS 6083 is an important standard relating 
to hearing aids; it is identical to IEC 118 and consists of a 
number of parts which are listed at the end of this chapter, in 
further reading. 
2. American 
HAIC Hearing Aid Industry Conference (1961). These early stan-
dards have mostly been superseded by ANSI, but are still in 
limited use. 
ANSI 
American National Standards Institute. 
HAIC specifications relate to average values over three test frequencies: 
500Hz, 1kHz and 2kHz. 
• HAIC gain is an average value derived from the maximum gain at 
each of the three test frequencies. 
Table 7.1 An outline comparison of certain hearing aid tests drawn from British 
and American standards (Source: ANSI 5322 (1987)) 
Characteristic 
Input 
Frequency 
Volume 
Basic ANSI differences 
(dBSPL) 
(Hz) 
control 
OSPL90 
90 
200-8 k 
Full-on 
Entitled SSPL90; frequency 
range if used 200-5kHz; 
tend to give as an 
average of 1 k, 1.6 k and 
2.5kHz 
Full-on 
Usually 
200-8 k 
Full-on 
Tend to give as an 
acoustic gain 
60 
average of 1 k, 1.6 k and 
2.5kHz 
Reference 
60 
Usually 
15dB less 
17 dB less than average 
test gain 
1.6 k 
than OSPL90 SSPL90 
Frequency 
Usually 
200-8 k 
Reference 
200-5kHz 
response 
60 
test position 
curve 
Total 
70 
200-5 k 
Reference 
Measured at 500, 800 and 
harmonic 
test position 
1. 6kHz presented as 
distortion 
percentage 

Hearing aid standards 
141 
• HAIC output is an average value derived from the maximum output 
at each of the three test frequencies. 
• HAIC frequency range provides for a standard method of defining 
the limits of the frequency range. In this method, 15dB is subtracted 
from the HAIC gain and a horizontal line is drawn across the 
frequency response curve at this level. The points at which the line 
cuts the response curve represent the limits of the frequency response. 
ANSI Standards, like British Standards, provide for measurements 
such as SSPL 90, full-on gain, and reference test gain. Some of the 
major differences between these standards are outlined in Table 7.1. 
ANSI also provides for a frequency range to be stated. This is obtained 
with the volume control at the reference test position. The output at 
1kHz, 1.6 kHz and 2.5 kHz is averaged and 20 dB subtracted. From the 
resulting figure, a straight horizontal line is drawn across the frequency 
response curve of the hearing aid. The two points at which this 
horizontal line intersects the frequency response represent the limits of 
the frequency range. 
Acoustic 
coupler 
Sound 
level 
meter 
and 
recording 
device 
Fig. 7.10 A suggested arrangement for a postaural aid in a hearing aid test 
box. 

142 
Hearing aids and their performance 
7.5 MEASURING METHODS 
7.5.1 THE TEST ENCLOSURE 
The basic principle of hearing aid measurement is that with the controls 
of the aid suitably adjusted, an appropriate input signal is applied to 
the microphone of the aid and the output from the receiver is measured 
and analysed on a standardized device. Test methods and equipment 
have been standardized to permit accurate comparison. 
The conditions under which the aids have been tested must be 
known and repeatable. The standards therefore use a specified test 
environment, which simulates essentially free-field conditions. This is 
a very quiet test space with sound absorbent walls and may be an 
anechoic chamber or a test box enclosure (Figure 7.10). 
The test signal is generated by a sine wave oscillator and is fed to a 
loudspeaker within the test space. The hearing aid is accurately located 
at a determined test point, known as the reference point. The SPL in 
the test space is measured using a control microphone. The output of 
the hearing aid is transmitted through a standardized coupler to a 
calibrated microphone. The output of this microphone is recorded over 
the frequency range or examined for other characteristics, such as 
harmonic distortion. 
7.5.2 COUPLERS IN USE 
(a) Ear simulator (IEC 711) 
The description of this coupler is contained in BS 6310 (1982). 
An ear simulator is a device for measuring the output sound pressure 
of an earphone under well-defined loading conditions in a specified 
frequency range. Essentially it consists of: 
• a principal cavity of specified volume; 
• acoustic load networks; 
• a calibrated microphone. 
The location of the microphone is chosen so that the sound pressure 
at the microphone corresponds approximately to the sound pressure 
existing at the human eardrum. Therefore the ear simulator (Figure 
7.11) is designed to simulate the average values of relevant acoustical 
characteristics of normal adult human ears. 
The occluded ear simulator does not simulate the leakage between 
an earmould and a human ear canal (the effects of venting are not 
measured). Therefore the results obtained may deviate from real ear 
performance, especially at low frequencies. Moreover, large per-

Measuring methods 
143 
Acoustic network 
-+---Calibrated pressure 
microphone 
Fig. 7.11 The basic parts of an occluded ear simulator. 
formance variations among individual ears will occur and this should 
be borne in mind when employing results obtained with an ear 
simulator. 
(b) Reference coupler (IEC 126) 
The reference coupler is also known as an acoustic coupler and as a 2cc 
coupler (Figure 7.12). 
The reference coupler is used as a simple and ready means of com-
parison of specifications and data on hearing aids. It does not allow the 
actual performance of a hearing aid on a person to be obtained. 
The reference coupler is a cavity of predetermined shape and volume, 
which is used for 'the testing of earphones', in conjunction with a 
calibrated microphone adapted to measure the pressure developed 
within the cavity. It is described in BS 6111 (1981). 
The SPL observed in an ear simulator compared to a 2cc coupler 
for any given input will show an increase of about 4 dB in the low 
frequencies, increasing gradually to about 15 dB higher at 10kHz. 
7.5.3 SIMULATED IN SITU WORKING CONDITIONS 
Most methods for measuring the performance of hearing aids do not 
take into account the acoustical influence of the head and body of the 
wearer. However, methods which do so are relevant in the fitting of 

144 
Hearing aids and their performance 
Airtight seal 
Button earphone 
(or acoustic 
Earmould substitute 
(or seal around ITE aid) 
tube to 
BTE) 
liN----Pressure equalization 
capillary 
N----Airtight seal 
--l?tr---Calibrated pressure 
microphone 
To amplifier 
and pen 
recorder 
Fig. 7.12 The basic parts of a 2cc (reference) coupler. 
hearing aids, since the results they produce relate to performance on 
the ear. 
Real ear procedures (described in Chapter 10) can be used to provide 
in situ measurements for individual patients, but in order for in situ 
measurements to be quoted on a specification sheet, they must be 
standardized. This is achieved using a manikin, or anatomical model, 
to simulate the acoustical effects of a median adult wearer on the 
performance of a hearing aid. 
The manikin simulates a head and torso and includes both an oc-
cluded ear simulator and an artificial pinna, or pinna simulator. Results 
using a manikin may be useful in assisting in hearing aid fitting, 
although care should still be taken when interpreting results. This is 
because results obtained from a manikin can be substantially different 
from those obtained on a real individual person, due to anatomical 
variations. 
KEMAR is the Knowles Electronics Manikin for Acoustic Research. 
The BS and IEC Standards do not relate specifically to KEMAR. KEMAR 
was one of the first manikins available and uses a Zwislocki coupler, 
which was an early form of ear simulator. 
The following parameters are considered essential for the evaluation 
of a hearing aid in simulated in situ conditions: 
• full-on simulated insertion gain; 
• insertion frequency response; 

Measuring methods 
145 
• directional characteristics; 
• simulated in situ OSPL 90. 
It may be noted that where simulated in situ conditions are used, the 
results may be presented in terms of in situ or insertion measures. 
In situ measures describe the sound pressure level recorded in the 
real ear or in the ear simulator of the manikin. Thus, simulated in situ 
OSPL 90 refers to the maximum output recorded in the ear simulator of 
the manikin under the conditions specified in the relevant British 
Standard, BS 6083: Part 8 (1985). 
Insertion measures consider the SPL in the ear, or ear simulator, of 
the manikin but under two different conditions - with and without a 
hearing aid. Insertion measures take account of the loss of natural 
amplification by making a simple comparison of the situation at the 
ear. 
In situ measurements take no account of the loss of natural resonance 
that the hearing aid must overcome before it provides any advantage to 
the patient. Insertion gain represents the benefit on the ear. This 
appears lower than in situ gain because account is taken of the lost 
natural amplification (Figure 10.1). 
Simulated in situ gain can be defined as the difference between the 
SPL in the ear simulator produced by the hearing aid and the reference 
input SPL. 
Simulator insertion gain can be defined as the difference between 
the SPL in the ear simulator produced by the hearing aid and the SPL 
in the ear simulator with the hearing aid absent. · 
7.5.4 MEASUREMENT OF BONE VIBRATOR OUTPUT 
Where a hearing aid employs a bone vibrator instead of an air con-
duction receiver a different method of measuring output must be used, 
and it becomes impractical to measure amplification directly in terms of 
acoustic gain. With bone conduction hearing aids, although the input 
is expressed in terms of sound pressure level, the output is described 
in terms of mechanical vibration. BS 6083: Part 9 (1986) defines a 
method of expressing the input/output ratio as an acoustic-mechanical 
sensitivity or force level. The mechanical coupler used to obtain this 
measurement is an artificial mastoid, or mastoid simulator (Figure 
7.13), as specified in BS 4009 (1991). 
The bone vibrator is secured to the artificial mastoid with a force of 
2.5 newtons. The exact test assembly varies according to the type of 
bone conduction hearing aid. The standard provides for measurement 
of the force level in terms of gain and output across the frequency 
range 200Hz to 5kHz, and for the determination of distortion and 
internal noise. 

146 
Hearing aids and their performance 
External loading 
--Calibration connection 
lr~ 
.. ·.· 
~ 
i 
.. 
Sponge rubber 
I .·.·· 
Transducer output 
Fig. 7.13 An artificial mastoid. 
7.6 POWER SOURCES 
7.6.1 HEARING AID BATTERIES 
A battery, or cell, is a package of chemically-stored energy that can be 
converted into electrical energy when the terminals are connected. 
Most batteries used in hearing aids are primary cells, that is they are 
used until the current is drained from them, at which point they are 
removed for disposal. 
There are five sizes of batteries used in conventional hearing aids. 
Bodyworn aids employ the large 'penlite' cell which are identified by 
the IEC code R6 (BSI, 1987). The penlite cells used in bodyworn aids 
are generally the alkaline manganese type. Secondary, or rechargeable, 
cells may be used but these are mainly employed in radio hearing aids. 
Rechargeable batteries are of the nickel cadmium type. 
Postaural and in-the-ear aids use button cells in one of four sizes, 
ranging from the largest, R44, commonly known as the 675 cell, to the 
smallest button cell, size 10, for which no IEC designation exists. The 
cells used in these aids are mercury or zinc air type. 
7.6.2 BATTERY CHARACTERISTICS 
There are certain characteristics of a battery that are important to 
hearing aid use. These include: 
• The capacity of the battery is the current the battery can deliver over 
time, which is expressed in milliampere-hours. 

Power sources 
147 
Voltage M 
0 L__--t-----+---+---+---1------+---+---.Time 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
Service life (hours) 
Fig. 7.14 Typical battery discharge characteristics on medium load (Duracell, 
1990). 
• The nominal voltage is a function of the chemistry of the battery and 
for new cells will be between 1.3 and 1.5 volts. 
• The discharge characteristic is a graph that illustrates the change in 
the nominal voltage over time as the hearing aid is used (Figure 
7.14). 
• The shelf life is the period over which a battery can be stored 
without a significant loss in capacity. After a period of time, the 
capacity of the battery will reduce and this should not be allowed to 
exceed 10%. 
• The battery life should be stated in the manufacturer's specification 
and will vary according to the capacity of the battery and the power 
requirement of the aid, which is mainly determined by the output 
stage of the amplifier. 
Class A or single-ended amplifiers draw a constant average current 
drain from the battery, whether or not a signal is present (Figure 5.6). 
Once the aid is switched on a constant, or bias, current drain occurs. 
The introduction of the signal produces some variation about the bias 
value but the average drain remains constant. It is therefore simple to 
calculate battery life using the following formula: 
B 
l.f (h 
) 
Capacity (milliampere-hours) 
attery 1 e 
ours = -"--~"---'--~'------'-
Current drain (milliamperes) 
Class AB (more commonly, if incorrectly, termed class B), or 'push-
pull' amplifiers draw very little current when there is no signal present 
(Figure 5.6). Battery drain increases as the output signal increases. 
Class AB, or B, amplifiers are more efficient but the variation in current 
drain makes it very difficult to predict the battery life with any degree 
of accuracy. The actual drain will vary with the signal level and with 
the volume setting. The life of the battery will be within a range that 
can be taken as the battery life with no signal present and the battery 
life with peak drain. 

148 
Hearing aids and their performance 
7.6.3 THE CHEMICAL COMPOSITION 
(a) Alkaline manganese batteries 
Alkaline manganese 'penlite' batteries used in hearing aids have a 
nominal voltage of 1.5 volts, a gradual discharge characteristic, a 
capacity of 2500 milliampere-hours and a shelf life of approximately 24 
months. 
The battery will recover slightly when left for a period without drain 
but, over time, it will gradually discharge. The gradual decay in use 
provides the adult user with some warning of the impending need to 
replace the battery, unlike the button cells which provide little or no 
warning. The quality of the output signal, however, also deteriorates 
as the battery runs down. The user can turn up the hearing aid to 
compensate for the battery decline but should certainly replace the 
battery if the sound quality is distorted. 
Zinc carbon batteries are no longer used in hearing aids, due to a 
short shelf life and reduced capacity. 
(b) Nickel cadmium batteries 
Nickel cadmium batteries provide a steady discharge characteristic but 
have a short life. The batteries are normally recharged overnight. These 
are widely used in radio hearing aids. 
(c) Mercuric oxide batteries 
Mercury cells (mercuric oxide) have a shelf life of approximately 18 
months and a nominal voltage of 1.3 volts. In use, after a slight initial 
reduction, the voltage remains constant for a long period. When the 
battery nears the end of its life the voltage decays very rapidly. The 
capacity of the cell depends upon its size; for example: 
• size 675 has a capacity of 180 milliampere-hours; 
• size 13 has a capacity of 90 milliampere-hours; 
• size 312 has a capacity of 45 milliampere-hours. 
Mercuric oxide batteries are extremely poisonous and should be kept 
out of the reach of children and animals. If a battery is swallowed 
medical attention must be sought promptly. The batteries should also 
be disposed of safely since they represent a source of pollution to the 
environment. The National Health Service collects all used batteries for 
return to the Department of Health for safe disposal. 

NHS provision of hearing aids 
149 
(d) Zinc air batteries 
Zinc air cells are supplied with an adhesive tab that must be removed 
to allow air to enter through small holes in the battery case. Once the 
tab is removed the battery will start to draw oxygen from the air and 
the life will start to reduce. Conventional cells contain both anode and 
cathode materials, but in zinc air batteries oxygen from the air reacts 
with a zinc anode via a thin catalytic cathode. This means the cell can 
contain much more anode material and that it can therefore produce 
more energy for the same volume of cell. The capacity of the cell is 
roughly double that of a mercury cell of the same size. The size 10 
battery is so small it can only provide an acceptable life for hearing aids 
using zinc air design. The capacity of a size 10 zinc air battery is 
approximately 50 milliampere-hours. 
Zinc air batteries have a shelf life of over two years and a very 
flat discharge profile. They are more 'environmentally friendly' than 
mercuric oxide batteries. However, if a high current drain is required, 
the battery may be unable to draw oxygen fast enough and a significant 
reduction in gain, or intermittency, may result. In these cases, usually 
where high gain and output or much filtering of the signal is required, 
mercury cells must be used. 
7.6.4 RULES OF BATTERY STORAGE 
1. Store in cool, dry conditions out of direct sunlight. 
2. Rotate battery stock so that older batteries are used first. 
3. Do not leave batteries in hearing aids if they are not in regular use. 
4. Remove any white deposit on the contacts using a dry cloth. 
5. Keep batteries away from fire. 
6. Dispose of batteries safely. 
7. Do not attempt to recharge primary cells. 
7.7 THE NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE PROVISION 
OF HEARING AIDS 
7.7.1 THE NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE RANGE OF HEARING AIDS 
The National Health Service (NHS) provides hearing aids free of charge 
to all patients considered to obtain benefit from the use of an aid. In 
the majority of cases these fittings are monaural (one ear only) because 
of financial restrictions, but exceptions can be made if the life-style and 
hearing loss of the patient indicate the need for binaural hearing aids. 
The NHS has a standard range of hearing aids, which includes a 

150 
Hearing aids and their performance 
number of different models within certain series or strengths. These 
are made by various manufacturers but all conform to government 
specifications. 
At present there are three behind-the-ear (BE) series: 
1. The BElO series provides moderate gain suitable for moderate 
hearing loss of up to 60 dBHL averaged over the essential speech 
frequencies from 500Hz to 4kHz. This series has five aids - the 16, 
17, 18, 19 and 101 for issue and repair, and the 11 and 14 for repair 
only. The BE101 was introduced in 1992; it is the only NHS aid to 
incorporate AGC. It also uses a size 13 battery and is therefore 
significantly smaller than other NHS aids. 
2. The BE30 series provides for moderate losses from 60 dBHL to 
80 dBHL, and has the 34, 35 and 36 aids for issue and repair, and 
the 31, 32 and 33 for repair only. The BE36 was added to the range 
in 1992 and is suitable for hearing losses covered by both the BE30 
and BE50 range. The BE36 is the only NHS aid to provide direct 
input, which enables it to be coupled directly to an FM radio system 
or other external audio source via an audio shoe and lead (Chapter 
13). The specifications of the BE36 can be summarized as: 
• Standard MTO switch; 
• Direct audio input; 
• Continually variable tone and power controls; 
• Maximum full-on gain 65 dB (IEC 126); 
• .Maximum output 136 dB (IEC 126); 
• Choice of tone hooks. 
3. The BE50 series is a higher powered series suitable for severe to 
profound hearing losses from 80 dBHL to 100 dBHL. This series has 
three aids, the 51, 52 and 53. 
Bodyworn (BW) aids provide for severe and profoundly deaf patients 
and those who are unable to manipulate a small aid behind the ear. 
The BW61 is recommended for severe losses from 80 dBHL to 100 dBHL, 
the BW81 for severe to profoundly deaf patients. The Philips 51594, 
which has become available on the NHS, covers the same range as the 
BW81 but is smaller and lighter in weight and, from reactions from 
patients, gives greater clarity. 
All these hearing aids are air conduction aids but a bone conductor 
on a headband can be fitted with the standard BW aids. 
When selecting the appropriate hearing aid for patients, several 
factors need to be considered. The type and degree of the hearing loss, 
the size of the ear, the life-style of the patient and the position and ease 
of manipulation of the controls. 
The earmould can have a considerable effect on the performance of a 

NHS provision of hearing aids 
151 
hearing aid, so care is therefore needed to select the most suitable 
mould for the hearing loss presented; also adjustments can be made to 
the aids to vary their frequency responses to match the hearing loss as 
closely as possible. However, if a patient's needs cannot be met from 
the standard range of NHS hearing aids other aids may be provided on 
the recommendation of the ENT consultant. 
In general, the range is probably least suited to the needs of: 
• very mild losses; 
• unusual audiometric configurations; 
• severe recruitment; 
• children. 
Policies vary throughout the country but in most regions children are 
provided with binaural hearing aids under the NHS. The facility of 
direct input (for radio hearing aids at school) can now be satisfied from 
the NHS range, but the BE36 will not be suitable for all children and 
commercial aids will still be required; for example, where a smaller aid 
is needed. However, when the child reaches the age of 18 and leaves 
school, funding for commercial aids is often no longer available. 
7.7.2 OBTAINING AN NHS HEARING AID 
A patient wishing to obtain an NHS hearing aid must first visit his or 
her doctor who will, if he or she considers it necessary, refer the 
patient to the ENT Department at the hospital. The patient will normally 
see the ENT consultant who will examine the patient's ears, take a case 
history and arrange for tests to be done to establish the type and 
degree of the hearing loss. An audiology technician will usually carry 
out these tests. The consultant will make the decision as to whether a 
hearing aid is indicated and appropriate, and which ear should be 
fitted. He or she may suggest which aid will be most suitable, but more 
commonly this is left to the discretion of the technician. 
An ear impression is taken by the audiology technician for the 
earmould. When this has been made, a further appointment will be 
sent to the patient for the hearing aid fitting. The patient will be 
instructed in the use of the aid, how to insert the mould into the ear, 
its care and cleaning, the correct battery to use and how and when to 
replace it. The patient will also be informed of where they can obtain 
the batteries. 
The degree of follow-up varies widely throughout the country de-
pending on the resources available in individual hearing aid depart-
ments, but follow-up is desirable to meet the rehabilitative needs of the 
patients and to enable and encourage them to obtain the best possible 
use from their hearing aid. 

152 
Hearing aids and their performance 
Hearing aid departments also provide facilities for repair and servic-
ing of aids and patients with bodyworn aids are able to obtain replace-
ment cords and receivers. It is essential that patients are encouraged to 
visit the departments regularly to have their aids and moulds checked, 
the tubing replaced and the aid upgraded when necessary. All these 
services, and supplies of replacement batteries, are free of charge 
under the NHS. 
7.8 SUMMARY 
Hearing aids may be air or bone conduction systems. The performance 
of each aid is described in a standardized manner in a specification 
sheet. Various standards are available, but in the UK British Standards 
or their European equivalent (IEC) are most widely used. Characteristics 
presented in the specification include gain, maximum output, frequency 
response, distortion and internal noise. The measurements will show 
some variation depending on the coupler employed in the hearing aid 
test system. An ear simulator is generally used by manufacturers, 
while a 2cc coupler, which is a cheaper and simpler device, provides 
repeatable results for quality control on delivery. 
A manikin may be used to simulate the results that would be obtained 
if a hearing aid was being worn by a median adult. Such results may be 
useful in hearing aid fitting but can be substantially different from 
some 'real life' clients due to anatomical variations. 
Bone conduction hearing aids are coupled to an artificial mastoid and 
measurements are expressed in terms of mechanical vibration, instead 
of acoustic gain. 
The batteries used in hearing aids vary in size and chemical corn-
position. A number of characteristics are important to hearing aid use; 
these include the shelf life, the discharge characteristic and the battery 
life, which can be calculated from the formula: 
B 
l.f (h 
) _ Capacity (milliampere-hours) 
attery 1 e 
ours - C 
d . ( .11. 
) 
urrent ram rn1 1arnperes 
The NHS provides a standard range of bodyworn and behind-the-ear 
hearing aids. There are three series of behind-the-ear aids, the BElO, 
BE30 and BESO series. Each comprises several different hearing aids, 
individually numbered, conforming to the required basic specification 
for the particular series. The BElO series provides for moderate losses, 
the BE30 for moderate to severe losses, and the BESO for severe to 
profound losses. NHS-provided hearing aids are supplied on loan 
without charge. 

References 
153 
REFERENCES 
ANSI (1987) ANSI 5322: Specification for Hearing Aid Characteristics, American 
National Standards Institute. 
BSI (1981) BS 6111: Specification for Reference Coupler for the Measurement of 
Hearing Aids using Earphones Coupled to the Ear by means of Ear Inserts, British 
Standards Institution. 
BSI (1982) BS 6310: Specification for Occluded Ear Simulator for the Measurement of 
Earphones Coupled to the Ear by Ear Inserts, British Standards Institution. 
BSI (1984) BS 6083: Part 0: Methods for Measurement of Electroacoustical Charac-
teristics, British Standards Institution. 
BSI (1984) BS 6083: Part 2: Methods for Measurement of Electroacoustical charac-
teristics of Hearing Aids with Automatic Gain Control Circuits, British Standards 
Institution. 
BSI (1985) BS 6083: Part 8: Methods for Measurement of the Performance Charac-
teristics of Hearing Aids under Simulated in situ Working Conditions, British 
Standards Institution. 
BSI (1986) BS 6083: Part 9: Methods for Measurement of Characteristics of Hearing 
Aids with Bone Vibrator Output, British Standards Institution. 
BSI (1987) BS 397: Part 2: Primary Batteries. Specification Sheets, British Standards 
Institution. 
BSI (1988) BS 6083: Part 10: Guide to Hearing Aid Standards, British Standards 
Institution. 
BSI (1991) BS 4009: An Artificial Mastoid for the Calibration of Bone Vibrators used in 
Hearing Aids and Audiometers, British Standards Institution. 
Duracell (1990) Guide for Designers, Duracell, Crawley. 
Pollack, M.C. (1988) Amplification for the Hearing-Impaired, 3rd edn, Grune & 
Stratton, Orlando. 
Sullivan, R. (1989) Custom Canal and Concha Hearing Instruments: A Real Ear 
Comparison. Hearing Instruments, 40(4), 29-9. 
Upfold, L.J., May, A.E. and Battaglia, J.A. (1990) Hearing Aid Manipulation 
Skills in an Elderly Population: A Comparison of ITE, BTE and ITC Aids. 
British Journal of Audiology, 24(5), 311-18. 
FURTHER READING 
BS 6083: Hearing aids: 
(1984) Part 0: Methods for measurement of electroacoustical characteristics. 
(1984) Part 1: Method for measurement of characteristics of hearing aids with 
induction pick-up coil input. 
(1984) Part 2: Methods for measurement of electroacoustical characteristics of 
hearing aids with automatic gain control circuits. 
(1984) Part 3: Methods for measurement of electroacoustical characteristics of 
hearing aid equipment not entirely worn on the listener. 
(1981) Part 4: Specification for magnetic field strength in audio-frequency in-
duction loops for hearing aid purposes. 
(1984) Part 5: Specification for dimensions of the nipple and sealing device for 
insert earphones. 
(1985) Part 6: Specification for characteristics of electrical input circuits for 
hearing aids. 

154 
Hearing aids and their performance 
(1985) Part 7: Methods for measurement of the performance characteristics of 
hearing aids for quality inspection on delivery. 
(1985) Part 8: Methods for measurement of the performance characteristics of 
hearing aids under simulated in situ working conditions. 
(1986) Part 9: Methods for measurement of characteristics of hearing aids with 
bone vibrator output. 
(1988) Part 10: Guide to hearing aid standards. 
(1984) Part 11: Specification for symbols and other markings on hearing aids 
and related equipment. 
EverReady (1980) Modern Portable Electricity, EverReady Company, London. 

Selection and fitting 
8 
8.1 THE CHOICE OF A HEARING AID SYSTEM 
8.1.1 INTRODUCTION 
The primary purpose and function of hearing aid systems is to enable 
hearing impaired people to make maximum use of their residual hearing 
area. A system should therefore provide maximum speech intelligi-
bility, maximum useful information from other sounds, minimum 
interference from unwanted noise, and minimum distortion. The aim 
will normally be to provide amplified speech that is as clear and 
intelligible as possible, with the provision also of important background 
sounds, such as a ringing doorbell, or the sound of an approaching car. 
These environmental sounds are important not only as warnings, but 
also as providers of general information about our environment, which 
is important psychologically. Unfortunately, background noise can, 
and does, interfere with the speech signal and it can be difficult, or 
even impossible, for hearing impaired people to separate the sounds 
they want to hear, from those they do not. This is partly due to 
the defective hearing mechanism, which is especially notable where 
cochlear damage has been sustained, and partly to the restrictions 
inherent in a hearing aid. 
A hearing aid system that will provide as little interference as possible 
from unwanted noise should be chosen. There are a number of fea-
tures that can be selected or modified to minimize the problems, 
although the degree of success that can be achieved may be limited by 
the type of hearing loss. The hearing aid itself is a piece of man-made 
equipment and, however good, sound that is amplified and passed 
through the system will be distorted to some extent. A hearing aid 
with unacceptably high distortion should not be selected; this generally 
means no more than 10% in terms of total harmonic distortion (Tucker 
and Nolan, 1984). 

156 
Selection and fitting 
The hearing aid fitting procedure includes the selection, 'fitting', 
evaluation and modification of a hearing aid system. Reliable audio-
metric information provides the starting point and information is 
required for threshold levels by air and bone conduction, most com-
fortable levels and uncomfortable loudness levels, across the appro-
priate frequency range (Chapter 6). The success of the fitting is 
dependent both on the reliable measurement of residual hearing and 
on an understanding of the electro-acoustic and other characteristics of 
hearing aids. It is also influenced by the effectiveness of the earmould. 
There are rules associated with the prescription and fitting of hearing 
aids. Although the amplification needs of the hearing impaired popu-
lation remain not fully known, and the area of hearing aid fitting is one 
in which options, attitudes and traditions vary widely, the following 
questions may provide a starting point for selection: 
• Is the fitting to be by air conduction or bone conduction? 
• Is the fitting to be monaural or binaural? 
• How much gain is needed? 
• What maximum power output is required? 
• Is there a need for automatic gain control? 
• What are the required frequency response characteristics? 
• What other facilities are needed? 
• Is the aid acceptable to the client? 
Client preference is an aspect of selection that should not be under-
estimated, for if a client does not accept the system, or if he or she 
cannot operate it with ease, its use will be seriously limited. 
8.1.2 AIR CONDUCTION AND BONE CONDUCTION 
Hearing aids can be obtained in the form of air conduction or bone 
conduction. Bone conduction aids are less efficient, require more power 
and have limited response capabilities; if bone conduction is necessary 
the choice will be extremely limited. Therefore, air conduction aids 
should be used whenever possible. Bone conduction fittings may have 
to be made because of certain conductive problems, for instance where 
there is a physical deformity, such as no pinna, a collapsed meatus, a 
tender post-operative condition, or where there is an active discharge 
from the ear. In such cases, there is often no real option. 
If there is a choice, an air conduction fitting will normally be prefer-
able for both sensorineural and conductive hearing losses. Occasionally 
there may be more benefit from a bone conduction hearing aid if there 
is a very severe conductive loss, caused by a gross obstruction or lesion 
in the middle ear, but it should never be assumed that bone conduction 

The choice of a hearing aid system 
157 
aids will necessarily provide the greater benefit. The efficiency of the 
coupling of an air conduction receiver to the meatus is greater than the 
mechanical coupling of a bone conduction vibrator to the mastoid, so 
that, in general terms, air conduction does not have to be as powerful 
as bone conduction to give the same effective output. It follows there-
fore that there is less risk of distortion in the output. 
Air conduction hearing aids also provide other advantages. They are 
smaller and lighter, the frequency range is significantly wider than that 
of bone conduction, especially at the higher frequencies that are im-
portant to most hearing impaired people, and the response is also 
more readily and easily modified. Great benefit should not be expected 
from a bone conduction hearing aid if the hearing loss by bone con-
duction is much greater than 30 dB over 50% or more of the audiometric 
measurement points between 250Hz and 5kHz. Little gain is provided 
at frequencies beyond 5kHz by a bone conduction aid and these aids 
are not helpful for sensorineural losses. In the case of mixed loss they 
will only be beneficial if the sensorineural element is not too great. 
Three types of bone conduction aids, spectacle, postaural with head-
band, and bodywom with cord and headband, are available; all employ 
a large, stiff receiver which must fit properly on the mastoid process 
and be under reasonable tension, or there will be a great tendency to 
mechanical and acoustic feedback. 
In practice, the user's needs can generally be met more efficiently 
with air conduction than bone conduction hearing aids, and as air con-
duction can be applied equally well to a conductive as a sensorineural 
loss, air conduction hearing aids should be selected every time, unless 
there are strong medical contra-indications. 
8.1.3 MONAURAL AND BINAURAL 
A binaural hearing aid system consists of two complete hearing aids so 
that each ear is provided with its own separate microphone, amplifier 
and receiver. A system that provides sound to each ear, but which 
utilizes only one microphone, cannot supply all the benefits of true 
binaural hearing (Figure 8.1). 
The benefit of binaural fitting, in suitable cases, greatly exceeds that 
of monaural, by providing more natural 'balanced' hearing with the 
advantages of: 
• improved localization of the sound; 
• improved sense of distance from the sound source; 
• improved speech discrimination in noise; 
• binaural summation; 
• binaural frequency advantage; 

158 
Selection and fitting 
Monaural 
Binaural 
Pseudo-binaural 
Fig. 8.1 Monaural, binaural and pseudo-binaural hearing aid fittings compared 
with spectacle fittings. The general public expects to have vision improved in 
both eyes, not only in one. Although hearing aids do not restore normal hearing 
in the same way as spectacles may restore normal vision, if both ears will 
benefit from amplification, two aids should be provided whenever practical. 
• improved quality with less distortion; 
• avoidance of abnormal headshadow effects; 
• a subjective feeling of balanced hearing; 
• masking for bilateral tinnitus; 
• reduced likelihood of ever being without an aid; 
• avoidance of auditory deprivation. 
Small differences in the information arriving at each ear allow the 
listener to localize the sound source and to determine its distance 
away. The use of behind-the-ear and in-the-ear hearing aids permits 
full advantage to be taken of phase, time and intensity differences in 
the auditory signal arriving at each ear. These directional clues assist the 
brain in the selection of meaningful signals from competing background 
noise (Carhart, 1965). Sounds heard binaurally are also perceived as 
louder, usually by about 3dB to 5dB, than when heard monaurally, 
due to 'binaural summation' (Dermody and Byrne, 1975). Similarly, 
where each ear has a different response across the frequency range of 
the audiogram, the brain may be able to add this information together 
to provide a much improved pattern of sound for the listener. Problems 
produced by the 'headshadow effect', when hearing is only possible 
through one ear, are avoided by binaural hearing aid fitting (Figure 
8.2). 
The headshadow effect can be explained as follows. The head blocks 
the passage of any sound waves that have a shorter wavelength than 
the width of the head. The average head width is approximately 20 em 

The choice of a hearing aid system 
159 
Fig. 8.2 The headshadow: the head blocks the passage of high frequency 
sound waves, preventing them from being heard on the other side. With a 
monaural loss, high frequencies from the deaf side will therefore tend not to 
reach the good ear. 
and this means that the listener is at a great disadvantage, particularly 
with the high frequencies of speech if the sound source is on the same 
side as the poor ear. There is generally no significant attenuation below 
about 1.5 kHz, and the average attenuation that can be expected is: 
1 dB at 250Hz 
2dB at 500Hz 
3dB at 1kHz 
6dB at 2kHz 
10dB at 4kHz 
25 dB at 6kHz. 
The higher the frequencies, the greater is the intensity difference be-
tween the two ears. With monaural hearing this creates problems that 
are heightened if background noise is present as this may mask the 
quieter high frequency sounds. 
Wernick (1985) suggests that a sufficient body of research literature 
now exists for it to be reasonable to assume a binaural fitting advantage 
exists unless there is evidence to the contrary. This is of particular 
importance since it is sometimes difficult to demonstrate binaural 
advantage in the fitting process. Many clients report subjective im-
provement of sound quality and a feeling of balance especially after a 
period of rehabilitation. The use of two hearing aids has the very 
practical advantage that the client is not without a hearing aid if one is 
sent for repair, and two hearing aids may also offer some relief to 
sufferers of bilateral tinnitus. Children are routinely fitted binaurally 
and, in addition to all the aforementioned advantages, it is thought 
that binaural stimulation will avoid the effects of 'auditory deprivation', 
where permanent changes may occur in the auditory pathways when 
auditory signals are not received (Fisch, 1983). These changes may 
render the child less able to make good use of auditory information at a 
later stage. Auditory deprivation may also occur in adults that are 
aided monaurally, although some of the poorer performance at high 

160 
Selection and fitting 
presentation levels appears to be due to acclimatization (Gatehouse, 
1990), that is the adult is used to listening to quiet signals in that ear, 
and therefore performs best at these levels, at least initially. 
Not every user is able to benefit from binaural amplification and 
there are a few instances where binaural use results in a decrease in 
ability to understand speech, but the vast majority of clients can obtain 
some advantage. Binaural fitting should therefore always be tried, 
unless there is a reason not to do so. Reasons would include when a 
binaural fitting has previously been shown to be without adequate 
benefit, when there is a medical contra-indication, such as an active 
discharge from one ear, when there is poor manual dexterity on one 
side, or when a client refuses to accept binaural aids. Obviously, 
binaural hearing aids are also inappropriate if one ear is normal, or 
very near normal, or if one ear is 'dead'. In some cases, a CROS fitting 
may be more beneficial. 
As a general rule, binaural fitting for adults with acquired hearing 
loss is likely to provide the greatest benefit when there is no more than 
a 20 dB gap between the two air conduction threshold curves at any 
frequency (Berger and Hagberg, 1989). The further apart the thresholds, 
the less benefit is likely to be achieved; but even grossly asymmetric 
ears can be successfully aided binaurally and a binaural fitting should 
only be dismissed if it is completely out of the question. Binaural 
fittings should be tried whenever possible, and the benefit assessed. 
If a binaural fitting is not possible or desirable, the ear to be aided 
must be selected and this should always be the one that will yield most 
benefit. There is no hard and fast rule that can be applied to decide 
which ear this will be and there are a number of factors that must be 
considered. Speech tests are sometimes used with the aim of fitting 
whichever ear has the better speech discrimination. Tests do not always 
indicate an obvious advantage, and if one ear has been unused for 
some time, as is usually the case with asymmetric loss, it is difficult to 
estimate the value of the unused ear because the listener cannot im-
mediately make use of the available information. Amplified sound fed 
to the better ear may at first appear more normal and easier to dis-
criminate but, after a period of rehabilitation, the poorer ear might add 
to the information provided by the unaided response of the better ear. 
As an alternative to speech discrimination testing, audiometric con-
siderations may be used to decide which ear is likely to provide most 
benefit, and a rule of thumb often used is to fit the ear with the air 
conduction threshold which is nearest to 50 dBHL at 1 kHz. Other 
considerations may also affect the choice of ear to fit, and if there is a 
difference in uncomfortable loudness levels it may be preferable to fit 
the ear with the most normal uncomfortable loudness level (ULL) since 
this will provide a wider dynamic range. If unilateral tinnitus is present, 

The choice of a hearing aid system 
161 
fitting the ear with the tinnitus may provide some masking through the 
amplification of ambient noise; with certain medical conditions, such as 
physical abnormalities or recurrent discharge, it may be better, or 
necessary, to fit the ear without the problem. 
The client's opinion and life-style should always be taken into con-
sideration as there may be other reasons for having a preference for a 
certain ear. Where a client already uses a monaural hearing aid it is 
usually best to continue to use the same ear, since the user has already 
been rehabilitated to hearing on that side; this does not, of course, 
prohibit fitting the other ear, or introducing binaural use. Some types 
of employment pose particular hearing requirements; for instance, 
driving instructors need to hear in the right ear so they can hear their 
clients, while lorry drivers would probably be better with the hearing 
aid in their left ear so as to avoid excessive road noise, which could be 
picked up by a fitting in the road-side ear. 
Clients may have a particular need or preference dictated by their 
life-style; this may be something as simple as the position of the 
television and chairs in the room and if audiometric and other con-
siderations allow it client preference should be accepted. However, 
there are occasions where new users mistakenly believe that fitting the 
worst ear will most nearly correct their hearing defect whatever the 
loss, and counselling may be required to overcome an inappropriate 
belief of which ear will provide the most benefit. 
8.1.4 CONTRALATERAL ROUTEING OF SIGNALS (CROS) 
A unilaterally impaired person will have problems in hearing from the 
'deaf' side and may need to turn the good ear towards the sound 
source. Such an impairment may cause particular hearing difficulty in 
background noise, hearing in groups, and in localization of sound. 
Slight differences in the time, frequency and phase of the signals 
reaching the left and right ears normally allow the selection of mean-
ingful signals from competing noise and facilitate the localization of 
sound. Unilaterally impaired people manage well in most situations; 
they produce good free-field speech test results in quiet conditions, 
have no speech production problems, can use the telephone, hear the 
television, and have no noticeable difficulty in understanding. Their 
problems are very specific and, while the general public makes no 
allowance for unilateral loss, the hearing aid audiologist should not 
underestimate their difficulties. If medical intervention is not appro-
priate, hearing aid fitting may be helpful and there are two possible 
systems, a monaural fitting or a CROS system. The CROS system was 
developed to help the unilaterally impaired person to hear sounds 
from the deaf side. In cases where a binaural fitting is not possible 

162 
Selection and fitting 
-10 
0 
10 
20 
1iJ 30 
:g. 40 
Qj 
50 
1i 
60 
Cl 
70 
c 
"iii 
80 
~ 90 
100 
110 
120 
130 
140 
l 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
' 
I 
' 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
' 
125 250 500 10002000 40008000 
-10 
0 
10 
20 
1iJ 30 
:g. 40 
~ 50 
~ 60 
Cl 
70 
c 
"iii 
80 
~ 90 
100 
110 
120 
130 
140 125 
Frequency (Hz) 
l 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
' 
' 
' 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
' 
250 500 1 000 2000 4000 8000 
Frequency (Hz) 
CROS 
Microphone 
via open 
t 
earmould 
8:-CROS 
t 
Microphone 
....,... 
Key: 
*Deaf 
./Normal 
Fig. 8.3 Typical audiograms for CROS and Bi-CROS fittings. 
because one ear is 'dead' or very severely impaired while the other has 
normal or at least much better hearing, a CROS or Bi-CROS system 
may be indicated (Figure 8.3). 
In a CROS fitting, the signal is routed from the side of the 'dead' or 
severely impaired ear, to the normal or near normal ear, where it is 
received in addition to direct sound received in the good ear. A Bi-
CROS fitting is used where the better ear is not normal and requires 
some amplification. 
The acronym CROS stands for contralateral routeing of signals and 
Bi-CROS stands for bilateral contralateral routeing of signals. In a 
CROS system the microphone is placed at the poor ear, the receiver is 
placed at the good ear and an open earmould is fitted to allow direct 
entry of sound to the good ear, in addition to sound received from the 
deaf side. The Bi-CROS system is similar, except that it amplifies the 

Hearing aid fitting 
163 
sound received. Two microphones are employed, one at each ear, both 
connected to a single amplifier, which feeds the sound to the better but 
impaired ear, usually via a closed earmould. Venting is sometimes 
possible but this will depend on the degree of hearing loss, as venting 
will make the hearing aid system prone to acoustic feedback. 
A CROS system offers some of the advantages of binaural fitting. It 
does not provide true binaural hearing but goes some way towards 
overcoming the problems of unilateral hearing, caused by the head-
shadow effect. Some ability to localize sound can also be developed 
utilizing the differences in sound quality and time of arrival at each ear 
(Pollack, 1988). The unavoidable difference in the quality of sound 
received through the CROS system, compared with the natural sound 
received directly by the good ear, is particulary useful in this respect. 
The option of fitting CROS and Bi-CROS hearing aids is not widely 
used. The advantages of fitting binaurally, even with gross asymmetry 
between the ears, is much more generally accepted and many ears that 
were previously viewed as unaidable are now shown to benefit from 
aiding. A CROS system can offer some of the advantages of binaural 
hearing to a client for whom only unilateral hearing would otherwise 
be possible, but it is a system that is physically more difficult to use 
and the client therefore needs to be highly motivated if the fitting is to 
be successful. 
8.2 HEARING AID FITTING 
8.2.1 THE REQUIREMENTS OF A ROOM FOR HEARING AID FITTING 
A room for hearing aid fitting should provide a more realistic ambient 
noise level than the very quiet conditions required for audiometric 
testing. However, it is not desirable that a person using an aid for the 
first time should be exposed to loud sounds or a variety of different 
stimuli at once, as this could adversely affect the client's attitude to 
using hearing aids. This is an aspect of hearing aid fitting reflected in 
the rehabilitation of adults, where first time users are encouraged to 
build up their experience of aided sounds gradually from quiet situ-
ations to more complex noisy situations. In 1991 the British Society of 
Audiology proposed that a room used for the fitting of hearing aids 
should therefore have an ambient noise level not exceeding 40 dBA. 
The reverberation time should not exceed 500 milliseconds at 500Hz to 
help avoid auditory confusion in the initial few minutes of hearing aid 
use. These acoustical requirements can normally be met by: 
• siting the room away from obvious sources of noise, such as ve-
hicular traffic, foot traffic (stairs, corridors), kitchens, toilets, door-
bells, reception areas, etc.; 

164 
Selection and fitting 
• having appropriate sound-excluding windows fitted and, if necess-
ary, a second entrance door; 
• ensuring that the floor is carpeted and the walls covered in absorbent 
material; 
• ensuring that the seating is soft and the windows covered by heavy 
curtains; 
• ensuring that the sound of any necessary ventilation equipment 
does not increase the overall ambient noise level. 
8.2.2 THE FITTING PROCEDURE 
(a) Gain 
Whatever type of hearing aid system is selected the gain of the aid 
should be sufficient to give an acoustic output level that provides 
optimum speech discrimination and is centred on the user's most 
comfortable level. We are normally most interested in speech as the 
input signal and all methods of hearing aid selection and fitting seek to 
amplify speech so that it is delivered at a comfortable level for the 
hearing aid user. The speech signal changes rapidly in frequency, time 
and intensity. There is an intensity range of approximately 28 dB 
between the strongest and weakest components of speech. The average 
range of speech energy expressed in dBHL is sometimes drawn on the 
audiogram (Figure 8.4). This, which is known as the long-term average 
speech spectrum, indicates the normal average variation that occurs in 
-10 
0 
10 
20 
en 
3o 
~ 40 
Qi 
50 
~ 60 
Ol 70 
c 
·~ 
80 
~ 90 
100 
110 
120 
130 
140 
: 
' 
I 
' 
""-· 
I 
I 
I 
•,(1 
~\\\" 
I 
I 
I 
~\\' 
'\'-: l\\ \'h. 
I 
' 
I 
1,<\\\\' 
!\\\\\Long-term speec~~ -
'\\\' l.ill.spectrum \\ ,\\: 
·m\~\\~\\W\\\\\\Y I 
--.... 
'I'J ....... 
-i-t 
' 
I 
' 
' 
' 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I ,. -,---
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
' 
I 
I 
-+--
-'-
-1-
I 
125 250 500 1 000 2000 4000 8000 
Frequency (Hz) 
Key: 
C 
Masked BC} 
o 
AC threshold 
~ 
l 
MCL 
CI: 
L 
ULL 
Dynamic range 
Fig. 8.4 An audiogram showing thresholds, MCL's and ULL's for the right ear. 
The gain of the hearing aid should be such that the output is centred on the 
user's most comfortable level (MCL). The maximum output should remain just 
below the user's uncomfortable loudness level (ULL). 

Hearing aid fitting 
165 
conversational speech. It can be a very useful check on the benefit that 
may be expected from the amplification to be provided. 
The amount of gain required by most hearing aid users is less than 
that which would appear to adjust the hearing thresholds to 'normal' 
levels, perhaps due to the effects of recruitment, where small increases 
in the objective intensity of a sound produce abnormally large increases 
in the subjective sensation of loudness. A client with a 60 dBHL hearing 
loss, for example, will neither require, nor be able to use, 60 dB of gain. 
Sensorineurally impaired people appear to require an amount of gain 
that is equivalent to about 50% of their hearing loss (Berger, Hagberg 
and Rane, 1980). 
Several prescriptive procedures, each based on this 50% or 'half 
gain' rule, are now widely used to suggest the amount of gain the 
client needs with the volume control set for normal use. A hearing aid 
should generally be worn with the volume control about half-way on, 
which will usually provide about two-thirds of the possible gain. This 
allows the user some degree of control, to turn the aid up or down as 
circumstances dictate, and avoids the necessity to use the aid at full-on 
volume, where distortion is highest. However, hearing aids are often 
chosen from the full-on volume given in the specifications and it is 
therefore usual to estimate the full-on requirements. These can be 
approximated by multiplying the required user gain by 1.5, or by 
adding an amount of 'reserve gain', which is usually about 10 dB. A 
single figure of gain can be used for the purpose of choosing an aid 
that is 'in the right ball park', and the single figure most usually used is 
the amount of gain required at 1kHz. This works well for reasonably 
'flat' audiograms, but where there is a great difference between the 
frequency points it is usually preferable to determine the maximum 
amount of gain required in the region 500Hz to 2kHz on the audiogram. 
It should be noted that if a client has a very steeply sloping audiogram 
culminating in a severe to profound loss in the higher frequencies, the 
dynamic range at these frequencies is often too restricted to make full 
use of amplification and in this case the only practical solution may be 
partial correction of the hearing loss, in order to avoid discomfort, 
distortion and feedback. The position is very different for a client with 
conductive hearing problems. Since the inner ear has not sustained 
damage, recruitment is not present and the user will both need, and be 
able to cope with, increased gain. 
There may also be some variation of the amount of gain required for 
those with very profound sensorineural loss. A client with a very 
profound loss may benefit from two-thirds gain, rather than only half, 
in order to receive speech at a more audible level (Libby, 1986). The 
use of a long-term average speech spectrum superimposed on the 
audiogram (Figure 8.4), will help to clarify whether the gain to be 

166 
Selection and fitting 
provided will amplify speech sufficiently to be audible. It is not unusual 
to have to provide a level of amplification that is at the bottom of the 
most comfortable area in order to achieve adequate hearing for more 
severe and profound losses. If the estimated gain is subtracted from 
the hearing threshold levels and placed on the audiogram, it will 
indicate the estimated aided threshold levels. The difference between 
the aided threshold levels and the lower limit of the speech spectrum 
will indicate the sensation level, or how much of the normal conver-
sational speech signal the client would be likely to hear. 
It is sometimes suggested that clients with a very mild loss require 
only one-third gain (Libby, 1986). From my own clinical observation, a 
starting point of insertion gain approximating to half the hearing loss 
for selection of a hearing aid works very satisfactorily for these clients 
as well, although less reserve gain may be required. It should be noted 
that the small in-the-canal aids, which are often used for very mild 
losses, appear to have a lower gain when tested using a 2cc coupler 
than when used on a real ear (Tate, 1990). When working with 2cc 
measurements rather than real ear gain, a one-third rule appears more 
appropriate. 
Prescriptive formulae are designed to provide a practical method of 
estimating the appropriate gain for a given hearing loss, and they can 
provide a starting point for the fitting procedure. There are several 
prescriptive formulae that may be used. There is no consensus as to 
which formula may be most appropriate, but in almost every case the 
hearing aid audiologist should expect to have to 'fine tune' the hearing 
aid at the evaluation stage. 
Most formulae present the gain requirements in terms of functional 
gain or insertion gain. Functional gain is the gain of the hearing aid on 
the ear and may be taken as the difference between aided and unaided 
hearing thresholds. Insertion gain is also a measure of functional gain, 
but it is less confusing to consider it separately. 
Insertion gain is the difference between the sound pressure level 
aided and unaided, measured with a probe microphone near the 
eardrum. It is the true or effective gain of the system and takes into 
account the natural amplifying effect of the normal open ear, which is 
lost or altered when the ear is blocked with the hearing aid. Hearing 
aid specification sheets do not always give insertion gain but, where it 
is not stated as such, insertion gain can be derived by subtracting the 
open ear response from the in situ gain or KEMAR gain. Similarly, 
insertion gain can be approximately established from 2cc measures of 
gain by adding a correction factor, which will vary according to the 
type of aid but at 1kHz is approximately 3 dB for a behind-the-ear aid 
and 4dB for an in-the-ear aid. 
The original half gain rule dates back to at least 1944, when Lybarger 

Hearing aid fitting 
167 
is said to have applied for a patent that specified an amplification range 
between one-third and two-thirds, although the patent was denied on 
legal grounds. In 1953, Lybarger published his fitting procedure in The 
Basic Manual for Fitting Radioear Hearing Aids, and in 1957 he presented 
the procedure at the American Speech and Hearing Association con-
vention. The formula still works well and is readily understandable in 
that it takes account of binaural advantage and of the need for increased 
gain with conductive losses: 
AC Loss 
AC - BC 
Required operating gain = 
2 
+ 
4 
+ 5 dB 
This provided a single figure of gain, which is often all that is required 
as a starting point, when the gain is to be considered together with the 
shape of the frequency response indicated from the audiogram. The 
constant of +5 dB was adjusted to a figure of -10 dB if the fitting was 
to be binaural, and finally 15 dB of reserve gain was added, although I 
have found the figure of 15 dB, both for binaural advantage and for 
reserve gain, to be generally more than is required. 
(b) Frequency response 
The shape of the frequency response curve must be suitable for the 
frequency characteristics of the hearing loss. Most clients with mild to 
severe hearing losses require a response from their hearing aids that 
'mirrors' the shape of the audiogram in as much as it provides most 
gain where the hearing loss is greatest. If a simple half gain rule is 
adopted, taking 50% of the hearing loss, each frequency point will 
automatically provide a frequency response characteristic which should 
be near to that required, although the gain at 500Hz and below has 
often to be further reduced in order that the higher frequencies may be 
perceived more clearly. Hearing aids may be obtained that provide 
adjustable tone controls (section 5.3). 
Where a single figure of gain is used to select possible hearing aids, 
whether this be from a single frequency point, usually 1kHz, or from 
an average across the midfrequency range, usually 500Hz to 2kHz, the 
slope of the audiogram must be further considered to ensure that the 
frequency characteristics of the aid are suitable across the amplification 
range. 
It is usual to provide less gain in the low frequency region (section 
5.3.2), except for clients with more severe and profound hearing losses 
who may rely upon amplification of this region, and, where low fre-
quency hearing is near normal, venting may be used to further reduce 
the low frequency gain. The degree of low frequency reduction sug-
gested by the various formulae varies somewhat. A reduction of 5 dB at 

168 
Selection and fitting 
500Hz is recommended by McCandless and Lyregaard (1983) in the 
'POGO' prescription of gain and output for hearing aids, whereas 
Libby (1986), in the 'one-third-two-thirds gain' rule, provides for 
slightly less low frequency reduction: 3 dB at 500Hz and only 5 dB at 
250Hz. This prescription provides for the use of the same correction 
factors with gain of one-third, half, or two-thirds, respectively, for 
mild, moderate, and severe to profound hearing losses. Libby also 
suggests that where the hearing loss is precipitously falling, a 'ski-
slope' type audiogram, patients usually prefer a gain of about one-
third, rather than half of the hearing loss. The formula presented by 
Berger (1988) is yet another variation of the half gain rule, but one 
which provides for slightly more than half gain in the midfrequency 
region (Table 8.1). 
High frequency amplification is important for clarity and intelligibility 
but over-amplification may produce an aid that sounds 'tinny' and too 
quiet and which is also prone to acoustic feedback. Clients who are 
new to hearing aids, particularly those who have been in need of 
amplification for some while, are sometimes unable, initially, to adjust 
to a level of high frequency amplification that should be beneficial to 
them. In such cases it is often possible to increase the high frequency 
amplification after a period of rehabilitation. 
(c) Maximum output 
The maximum power output must be selected and, if necessary, further 
set by the hearing aid audiologist so that the saturation sound pressure 
level (SSPL) is not capable of frequently exceeding the user's uncom-
fortable loudness level (ULL). 
All hearing aids have a limit to the maximum output they are able to 
provide and in many hearing aids with linear amplification this limit is 
Table 8.1 Examples of variation in prescription of insertion gain using different 
formulae 
Frequency (Hz) 
Predicted insertion gain (dB) 
250 
500 
1 k 
2k 
3k 
4k 
6k 
Libby 
(HTL* + 2)- 5 
(HTL + 2)- 3 
HTL + 2 
HTL + 2 
HTL + 2 
HTL + 2 
(HTL + 2)- 5 
* HTL = hearing threshold level 
POGO 
(HTL + 2)- 10 
(HTL + 2)- 5 
HTL + 2 
HTL + 2 
HTL + 2 
HTL + 2 
HTL + 2 
Berger 
HTL + 2 
HTL + 2 
HTL + 1.6 
HTL + 1.5 
HTL + 1.7 
HTL + 1.9 
HTL + 2 

Hearing aid fitting 
169 
Table 8.2 Factors that can be added to dBHL to 
convert thresholds to dBSPL (Based on recom-
mended reference equivalent threshold sound pres-
sure levels in a coupler in accordance with BS 2497: 
Part 5 ( 1988)) 
500Hz 
1kHz 
2kHz 
4kHz 
11.5 
7 
9 
9.5 
in the region of 120dBSPL, although it can be higher. The maximum 
output of the aid can often be reduced from its natural limit using peak 
clipping. The ULL may be used to guide the setting of the maximum 
output, which should be as high as possible while remaining at least 
5 dB below the ULL. This is not as straightforward as it would at first 
appear. The ULL in dBHL provides only a rough guide to the maximum 
output setting in dBSPL that will be required by the user in every-
day life. The ULL on the audiogram is recorded in dBHL, while the 
maximum output of the hearing aid is in dBSPL. Conversion factors 
can be added to dBHL thresholds to provide an approximation to 
dBSPL (Table 8.2). 
Also, ULL's from the audiogram have been obtained using pure 
tones while in everyday situations hearing aid users are hearing 
complex sounds, including speech, for which improved ULL thresholds 
would be obtained. Therefore, when estimating the maximum output 
from the ULL on the audiogram, a figure greater than the ULL shown 
on the audiogram can be assumed, although opinions vary on the 
degree of difference that can be added, and such correction factors 
range from 4 dB to 20 dB (McCandless and Lyregaard, 1983). 
The use of different couplers in the measurement of the output of 
the hearing aid also creates a significant variation. The maximum 
output of the hearing aid in dBSPL will appear higher with ear simu-
lator or in situ data than the same hearing aid measured using a 2cc 
coupler. It would therefore appear fairly logical to use a higher con-
version factor to add to the ULL from the audiogram when considering 
in situ data, and in clinical practice I have found that an addition of 
10 dB to 20 dB has generally been possible without discomfort, whereas 
an addition of only 5 dB to 10 dB is more usual when working from 2cc 
data. Adjustment may also be necessary because the instructions given 
in administering the subjective ULL test may influence the discomfort 
levels recorded. 
Whatever method is employed to select the maximum output to be 
used, it must always be evaluated when the hearing aid is worn by the 
client. The maximum output of an aid should never be set such that it 

170 
Selection and fitting 
causes discomfort in everyday use. Where a single figure is required 
for the maximum output, this can be obtained either by using the 
1 kHz reading or by averaging, usually over the frequencies 500Hz to 
2kHz. 
(d) Automatic gain control (AGC) 
The maximum output should ideally be set at least 30 dB above threshold 
as this will allow a range between threshold and discomfort that is 
sufficient to appreciate the different intensity levels in the speech 
signal. However, in some instances of very restricted dynamic range, 
an aid set such that the maximum output is 5 dB below discomfort 
cannot provide this difference. Amplification is then only likely to be 
successful if automatic gain control is utilized. 
Some form of automatic gain control, which is also known as com-
pression, may be needed to deal with a severe recruitment problem, 
and the choice between linear amplification and the use of compression 
is usually dependent on the dynamic range of the user, although some 
audiologists consider that all sensorineurally impaired users would 
benefit from compression with a high threshold or 'kneepoint' (Dillon, 
1988). The choice between compression and peak clipping will take 
account of both the audiogram and the client's needs and situation. 
Peak clipping provides an excellent and instantaneous safeguard 
against uncomfortably loud sounds, but with severe recruitment a 
small dynamic range will mean that, if peak clipping alone is used to 
limit the output, weak sounds will not be heard while intense sounds 
will be too loud (Figure 5.13). Automatic gain control compresses the 
signal within the available dynamic range. This avoids high distortion, 
which would occur with frequent peak clipping, yet retains the im-
portant information content of the signal. Comfort levels can provide a 
most useful guide to the likely benefit to be derived from automatic 
gain control and, as a general rule, if the difference between the MCL 
(most comfortable level) and the ULL is 25 dB or more, no compression 
is required. With a difference of less than 20 dB, compression will be 
beneficial. With a difference of less than 15 dB, compression is often 
essential. The AGC kneepoint should be set as high as possible to 
maintain the user's maximum dynamic range. Peak clipping offers 
sufficient protection for most hearing aid users against loud environ-
mental sounds. Peak clipping only affects intense sounds and therefore 
does not generally affect speech intelligibility. Although peak clipping 
does cause distortion, this usually occurs with environmental sounds, 
such as traffic noise, where distortion is largely irrelevant. But this is 
not always the case and, for example, lovers of loud music may prefer 
output compression to reduce the distortion that would occur with 
peak clipping alone. On the other hand, where a very restricted 

References 
171 
dynamic range means that amplified voices are likely to cause dis-
comfort, input compression will be considered an advantage for some 
patients. 
Whichever method of output limiting is selected, it is essential that 
uncomfortable loudness levels are an accurate measure of discomfort 
rather than unpleasantness. If not, too much limiting may be employed, 
resulting in an unnecessary restriction of the client's dynamic range. 
(e) Multichannel hearing aids 
Multichannel hearing aids attempt to match the needs of the user more 
closely by treating different frequency bands or channels separately to 
produce a complex frequency response, with the aim of providing a 
precise prescription fitting. If the audiogram shape varies widely in the 
different frequency regions, or if the configuration is unusual, it may 
be helpful to use a twin or multichannel system. However, such 
systems do not always result in the anticipated extra benefit, perhaps 
because of the problems of poor sound perception due to cochlear 
damage. 
8.3 SUMMARY 
Effective amplification is vital for the rehabilitation of the hearing 
impaired. Hearing aid fitting is a mixture of art and science- a chal-
lenge to the skills of the hearing aid audiologist. The overall aim of the 
fitting is to provide an amplified signal that will allow maximum benefit 
to be gained from the residual hearing area. Hearing aids are selected 
according to the medical, audiological and other needs of the individual. 
The basic priorities for the initial prescription of hearing aid charac-
teristics can be summarized as the provision of: 
1. the correct amount of gain, which is usually approximately equal to 
half the hearing loss by air conduction; 
2. a maximum output that is not higher than the genuine ULL; 
3. a frequency response that relates to the slope of the audiogram, 
without over-amplifying the low frequencies. 
The aid selected should ideally be sufficiently flexible to allow modi-
fications. These may be required especially in respect of the gain, 
frequency and maximum output. 
REFERENCES 
Berger, K.W. (1988) A Hearing Aid Fitting Method. Audiology in Practice, 5, 1. 
Berger, K.W. and Hagberg, E.N. (1989) An Examination of Binaural Selection 
Criteria. Hearing Instruments, 40(9), 32, 44-6. 

172 
Selection and fitting 
Berger, K.W., Hagberg, E.N. and Rane, R.L. (1980) A Re-examination of the 
One-Half Gain Rule. Ear and Hearing, 1, 223-5. 
British Society of Audiology (1991) Proposals for Recommendations for a Room for 
Hearing Aid Fitting, British Society of Audiology, Reading. 
British Standards Institution (1988) BS 2497: Part 5: Standard Reference Zero for 
the Calibration of Pure-Tone Air Conduction Audiometers, British Standards 
Institution. 
Carhart, R. (1965) Monaural and Binaural Discrimination against Competing 
Sentences. International Audiology, 4, 5-10. 
Dermody, P. and Byrne, D. (1975) Loudness Summation with Binaural Hearing 
Aids. Hearing Instruments, 26, 22-3. 
Dillon, H. (1988) Compression in Hearing Aids, in Handbook of Hearing Aid 
Amplification, Volume 1 (ed. R. Sandlin), College-Hill, Boston. 
Fisch, L. (1983) Integrated Development and Maturation of the Hearing System. 
British Journal of Audiology, 17, 137-54. 
Gatehouse, S. (1990) Acdimatisation and Auditory Deprivation as Explanations 
for Changes in Speech Identification Abilities in Hearing Aid Users. Pro-
ceedings of the Institute of Acoustics, 12(10), 31-7. 
Libby, R. (1986) The Insertion Gain Hearing Aid Selection Guide. Hearing Instru-
ments, 37(3), 27-8. 
McCandless, G. and Lyregaard, P. (1983) Prescription of Gain and Output 
(POGO) for Hearing Aids. Hearing Instruments, 34(1), 16-21. 
Pollack, M. (1988) Amplification for the Hearing-Impaired, 3rd edn, Grune and 
Stratton, Orlando. 
Tate, M. (1990) The Application of Real Ear Probe Tube Measurements to 
Hearing Aid Fitting. Acoustics Letters, 14(91), 1-6. 
Tucker, I. and Nolan, M. (1984) Educational Audiology, Croom Helm, London. 
Wernick, J.S. (1985) Use of Hearing Aids. Handbook of Clinical Audiology, 3rd 
edn, (ed. J. Katz), Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, pp. 911-35. 
FURTHER READING 
Byrne, D. (1987) Hearing Aid Selection Formulae: Same or Different? Hearing 
Instruments, 38(1), 5-11. 
Pollack, M. (1988) Amplification for the Hearing-Impaired, 3rd edn, Grune & 
Stratton, Orlando. 
Sandlin, R. (1988) Handbook of Hearing Aid Amplification, Volume 1, College-Hill, 
Boston. 

Earmoulds 
9 
9.1 MAKING THE IMPRESSION 
9.1.1 INTRODUCTION 
The purpose of an earmould is to secure the aid to the ear and convey 
sound into the ear canal. The mould may also have a significant effect 
on the frequency response of the aid. 
An earmould is the reverse duplication of the ear, obtained by taking 
an impression. The features of the impression are named after the 
parts of the pinna to which they relate, except that the helix is divided 
into the ball, waist and fan (Figure 9.1). 
The taking of an impression is a vitally important part of the hearing 
aid fitting procedure and one that can make the difference between 
success and failure, for if the impression does not accurately reflect the 
pinna contours and the meatal projection, the quality of the system in 
terms of comfort and acoustic performance may be adversely affected. 
9.1.2 IMPRESSION MATERIALS 
Silicone-based materials are recommended for the taking of ear impres-
sions (Nolan and Combe, 1985). There are two basic types currently 
available; condensation reaction silicone and addition cured silicone, 
and the choice will depend upon the requirements. Ideally, impression 
materials for making earmoulds should be easy to work with, including 
having suitable flow properties, and they should provide an accurate 
impression, which will be flexible but of sufficient mechanical strength 
not to deform or tear easily. They should not have undesirable side 
effects, such as producing heat, and they should remain stable over 
time. 

174 
Earmoulds 
~---Ball-----'~ 
----Bridge----4-
4---- Meatus 
Tubing 
Fig. 9.1 The features of an earmould in relation to the pinna. 
(a) Condensation reaction silicone 
Condensation reaction silicone is currently the most widely used 
material. This cures by a condensation polymerization reaction, in 
which alcohol is produced in by-products, which evaporate. A small 
amount of shrinkage, accompanied by a weight loss of about 1%, 
results within the first 48 hours (Tucker and Nolan, 1984). This re-
presents a great advance over acrylics, which are unstable and shrink 
about 6%, used prior to the introduction of silicone materials. However, 
even the small degree of shrinkage encountered with condensation 
reaction silicone can create a problem where a tight fitting earmould is 
required, namely where gain of over 50 dB is required, and for all 
children, especially during periods of rapid growth. 
Condensation reaction silicone is not particularly easy to mix since 
the ratio of base to hardener is imprecise. Use of inadequate hardener 
can result in very slow curing, while too much can result in the 
material hardening before the impression has been completed. This 
material is considerably less expensive than its addition cured counter-
part, provides a reasonably short setting time and results in a relatively 
elastic impression that travels well. This impression material is satis-
factory for earmoulds where a tight fit is not vital, but is less satisfactory 
for high gain requirements or for children. 
(b) Addition cured silicone 
Addition cured silicone has two major advantages over condensation 
reaction silicones: improved dimensional stability; and ease of measur-
ing the base and hardener mix. This material has no measurable 
shrinkage and is therefore able to produce very precise ear impressions. 

Making the impression 
175 
It is mixed using equal parts of base and hardener, which is fairly easy 
to estimate or which can be achieved accurately using measuring 
syringes. It is considerably slower in setting than condensation reaction 
silicone and it is also more expensive, although this is a minor dis-
advantage in comparison with the advantages where precision is 
required. The set impressions are elastic and do not recover well from 
deformation, particularly in the early stages of curing; they should 
therefore be removed from the ear with great care, using a gentle 
rocking motion to avoid tearing. 
If both addition cured and condensation reaction silicones are used, 
separate syringes must be kept for each material, as addition cured 
silicone is easily affected by contamination. 
When packaging, ideally the ear impression should be glued by 
its base to a rigid box and not surrounded by packaging material. 
Paperwork should be placed outside the box. The use of pins to affix 
impressions to the box is no longer acceptable. 
9.1.3 EAR IMPRESSION EQUIPMENT 
The equipment necessary for taking an impression should be laid out 
on a clean surface; a clean white towel is generally preferred for this 
purpose. The following items are required: 
• an otoscope with batteries to provide good illumination; 
• at least three sizes of specula, in sterilizing solution or another suit-
able sterilizing environment; 
• tweezers to remove the specula from the sterilizing solution; 
• paper tissues to dry the specula; 
• suitable impression material; 
• an impression syringe; 
• foam meatal blocks in three sizes; 
• an earlight; 
• a clean towel to place over the client's shoulder to protect clothing; 
• scissors (round-nosed) for trimming very excessive meatal hair and 
for trimming or 'pruning' foam meatal blocks; 
• lubricant (such as petroleum jelly) for smoothing down excessive 
meatal hair or remaining hair stubble after trimming. 
9.1.4 THE EAR EXAMINATION 
A thorough examination of the outer ear should always precede 
impression-taking (Chapter 6) to check for abnormalities that could 
necessitate referral to a medical practitioner, and to note any irregu-
larities that might affect the procedure. 

176 
Earmoulds 
• Excessive wax may cause a conductive loss if the meatus is completely 
blocked. The impression procedure would be likely to further com-
press the wax and the client should therefore be referred to a 
medically-qualified person for its removal before the impression is 
made. 
• The condition of the skin lining should be healthy and there should 
be no discharge, otherwise appropriate medical treatment is required 
prior to hearing aid fitting. 
• Irregularities in the shape of the pinna or the meatus should be 
noted and care taken to ensure the impression indicates any relevant 
abnormalities. Any malformations that might be considered to 
be errors in the impression should be noted for the earmould 
manufacturer. 
• Where there has been previous surgery, such as mastoidectomy, 
great care should be taken in the placement of the meatal block. A 
mastoidectomy involves the removal of diseased bone from behind 
the pinna, and this may affect the shape of the middle ear, including 
enlarging the external auditory meatus. In such a case particular care 
must be taken to ensure the impression material does not reach 
the wider parts, from which removal of the set material could be 
extremely difficult and might necessitate hospital treatment. The 
meatal block must be sufficiently large and placed with care, and 
syringing must be slow and careful, to avoid moving the block 
further down the meatus. In some extreme cases, the impression 
procedure could place the client at risk and should not be undertaken. 
• The condition of the tympanic membrane should be noted and 
special care taken if the membrane is scarred, as scar tissue is weak 
and may be perforated, or if the ear is already perforated, since air 
pressure into the middle ear may cause dizziness. Care should be 
taken in positioning the foam block, slowly injecting the impression 
material into the ear and, when set, in very slowly removing the 
impression, so breaking the airtight seal with the ear very gradually. 
9.1.5 THE EAR IMPRESSION TECHNIQUE 
1. The client should be provided with a brief explanation of the tech-
nique to be employed, and should be made aware that there may be 
a feeling of fullness experienced in the ear. The mouth should be 
kept in the normal, naturally closed position and there should be no 
talking or jaw movement, other than swallowing to relieve the 
feeling of pressure, until the impression is set. 
2. A towel or tissue should be placed over the client's shoulder and 
a suitably sized foam block should be selected, such that it will 
completely fill the meatus but without causing undue pressure. If 

Making the impression 
177 
Cartilage 
Tympanic membrane 
Fig. 9.2 Placement of the foam block when taking an impression. The block 
should be positioned just beyond the second bend, at the junction between the 
bone and the cartilage. 
the client has a very small ear canal the foam block may be 'pruned' 
or 'tapered' with scissors to fit. The cotton threads should be knotted 
to ensure these cannot be accidentally removed, and the block 
should be gently inserted into the ear canal. Ear impressions should 
be taken from a sitting or kneeling position, so that the client's ear is 
at, or above, eye level. A hand should be held against the client's 
head to prevent discomfort if the client moves and the earlight 
should be used to position the block just beyond the second bend 
(Figure 9.2) at the junction between bone and cartilage, which is 
approximately half-way down the meatus. Sufficient depth in the 
meatus is important to provide an accurate indication of the angle of 
the bends of the meatus, in order that the mould-maker can place 
the output tube at the required angle to direct sound to the tympanic 
membrane and not towards the canal wall. 
3. If spectacles or ear-rings are normally worn, these should not be 
removed and if the impression is being taken to produce an earmould 
for a behind-the-ear hearing aid, the aid should be placed on the 
pinna until the impression is set. If the ear is especially hairy a small 
amount of petroleum jelly can be applied to the hair to prevent 
it adhering to the set impression. Excessive hair can be carefully 
trimmed with scissors if the client gives permission, but this is only 
rarely necessary. 
4. The impression material should be mixed quickly but thoroughly, 
and placed in the syringe. The plunger should be depressed so that 
material begins to flow out of the nozzle, thus expelling any air. The 
syringe should be positioned as near as possible to the foam block 

178 
Earmoulds 
and the material should be syringed steadily into the ear. When it 
begins to flow out of the meatus, the syringe should be moved to fill 
the concha, but with the nozzle always remaining slightly embedded 
in the material. When the concha has been partially filled, the helix 
should be filled, returning to the concha until it is completely filled. 
The concha should be filled sufficiently to indicate its depth but 
not to the extent that the impression begins to sag. The impres-
sion should not normally be pressed or smoothed off as this may 
distort it. 
5. The impression material should be allowed to set until no mark is 
left if a finger-nail is lightly drawn across it. The impression may 
stretch if it is removed before it has fully set. 
6. The set impression should be eased slowly from the ear, lifting the 
helix out first and then pulling gently at the base, or using a gentle 
rocking motion, in such a way as to avoid causing discomfort to the 
client or distortion of the impression. 
7. The impression should not be trimmed but can be marked to indicate 
requirements, and should be carefully checked for accuracy before 
sending to the manufacturers. 
8. The ear should be examined with an otoscope to ensure that all the 
impression material and the foam block have been removed, and 
the client should be offered a tissue to wipe the ear, which may be 
greasy. 
9. The ear impression should be packaged carefully for transit, pre-
ferably glued to the base of a rigid box, and sent with its accom-
panying paperwork to specify the type of earmould and the material 
required. 
9.2 EARMOULDS 
9.2.1 EARMOULD MATERIALS 
There are a number of materials available for the manufacture of 
earmoulds, and the selection will depend on the requirements necessary 
for the mould. Every client wants an earmould that will fit well and be 
comfortable, easy to insert and remove, easy to clean, of acceptable 
appearance and that will not cause acoustic feedback (whistling). 
There is no one ideal; each available type has its own advantages and 
disadvantages. 
Hard acrylic is the most widely used material since it is an attractive 
product that is non-toxic, easy to clean, easy to work and can be 
produced in any configuration. It is not flexible and generally does not 
provide a sufficiently good acoustic seal for hearing aids with high 
gain, over approximately 50 dB. Soft acrylic is still a fairly hard material, 

Earmoulds 
179 
but provides a more efficient acoustic seal and has a little more flexi-
bility, which is often more comfortable and may also be advantageous 
for a client whose jaw moves to a greater than average extent. Soft 
acrylic is porous, not as easy to clean, and is stained by ear wax. It is a 
material that can be used on its own or as a soft tip in conjunction with 
a hard acrylic bowl. 
There are a number of true soft or 'all soft' materials available, which 
include vinyl and silicone products. These provide an improved acoustic 
seal and are more comfortable. They may be recommended for children 
as they offer more protection if the child is hit on the ear. Soft materials 
cannot be produced in skeleton form as they lack the required strength 
and rigidity. They are difficult to modify and to retube, and they need 
retubing at frequent intervals, ideally as often as every two months, 
because the tubing tends to collapse within the earmould. They are 
also porous and more difficult to clean, and have a shorter life as they 
tend to split. 
Soft materials, especially silicone, may be used in the manufacture 
of non-allergenic moulds, where these are required. True allergenic 
reactions to the materials used are rare and, more frequently, the 
irritation is due to the use of colourants or to oversized or rough 
earmoulds. 
9.2.2 EARMOULD TYPES 
The earmould type will be selected (Figure 9.3) first according to 
whether the hearing aid is of the bodyworn, behind-the-ear, or in-the-
ear type. A bodyworn aid requires a solid mould with a ring and clip 
fitting to accommodate the external receiver. Such a mould is usually 
supplied with a full helix to ensure that the extra weight of the receiver 
does not pull the mould out of the ear. It can be ordered in hard or soft 
materials and can be supplied with a wire to hook over the top of the 
pinna for further security if necessary. The style that can be selected for 
behind-the-ear aids is much wider and includes all those listed below. 
The earmould or shell of an in-the-ear aid contains the battery and 
workings of the aid, which restricts its size, but it can be produced as 
full shell, half shell, canal or helix fitting. 
• A full shell completely fills the concha and can provide a good 
acoustic seal for high gain. It can be obtained with or without a 
full helix, which improves retention in the ear but may not be 
comfortable. The full shell is the most common style for in-the-ear 
hearing aids. 
• A skeleton mould or invisimould is similar to the full shell but the 
centre of the concha portion is removed making the mould less 
conspicuous while remaining secure. 

180 
Earmoulds 
Ring and clip attaches 
to external receiver 
for bodyworn aid 
Solid mould 
Skeleton 
Half skeleton 
Full shell 
Half shell 
Quarter skeleton 
Meatal tip 
Open ear 
Fig. 9.3 Earmould types. (After Hearing Aid Audiology Group (1994).) 
• Half-skeleton and quarter-skeleton moulds are variations of the 
skeleton mould in which part, or most, respectively, of the outer 
perimeter is removed, for comfort, ease of insertion or cosmetic 
purposes. 
• A canal or meatal tip provides a less good acoustic seal and is less 

Earmoulds 
181 
secure in the ear, but is a very popular fitting because it is easy to 
insert and very inconspicuous. 
• An open canal or CROS mould has no meatus and is usually a 
skeleton fitting, but it may be a full concha, to hold the tube into the 
meatus without causing occlusion. 
• A helix in-the-ear aid provides an open canal fitting, in which the 
components of the aid are contained in the helix portion of the shell. 
9.2.3 MODIFICATION OF HEARING AID PERFORMANCE 
Modifications to the performance of a hearing aid may be made elec-
tronically and acoustically. Some hearing aids provide a number of 
electronic controls with which the hearing aid audiologist can adjust 
and modify the hearing aid's performance (section 5.3). 
Acoustic modifications (Figure 9.4) are those that occur beyond the 
receiver, that is in the elbow or earhook, the tubing and the earmould, 
which together are sometimes referred to as 'the earmould plumbing'. 
These modifications may take the form of alterations to the tubing 
length or diameter, or to the length of the meatal projection, the 
addition of filters in the sound path and venting the earmould. 
(a) Tubing modifications 
The tubing affects the frequency response of the aid due to resonance 
(Chapter 1), which creates peaks in the sound output at certain fre-
quencies. These frequencies are primarily dictated by the internal 
diameter of the tubing. The tubing length has some effect but is very 
difficult to adjust, as it is fixed by the size of the ear and the location of 
the hearing aid. The internal diameter of tubing can be readily used as 
a means of shifting the frequency emphasis. Decreasing the tubing 
diameter will lower the frequency emphasis, by lowering the frequency 
of the first resonant peak and reducing the mid- and high frequency 
Vents 
Filters 
Horns 
Reduces 
Extends 
Frequency (Hz) 
100 
Low 
1k 
Mid 
3k 
10k 
High 
Fig. 9.4 The effect of various acoustic modifications. Venting affects the low 
frequency region, filters smooth peaks in the response, and horns extend the 
high frequency amplification. 

182 
Earmoulds 
Fig. 9.5 A Libby horn. 
gain and output. Conventional fittings use constant bore tubing, but it 
is possible to increase the diameter of the tube towards the ear canal to 
produce a significant improvement in high frequency response. This 
increase in high frequency, which is due to a quarter wave resonance, 
is known as a horn effect (Figure 9.5); a horn that provides a 4mm final 
diameter will enhance the response above 3kHz by about lOdB, and 
extend the frequency limit, usually to about 8kHz. A 3 mm horn can 
provide a similar enhancement, but only up to about 6kHz. Increasing 
the high frequency response in this way may be very advantageous 
for some clients with high frequency hearing loss and, conversely, a 
tapered or reverse-horn arrangement, in which the diameter of the last 
section is reduced, may be used to attenuate the high frequencies, 
which may be helpful for some low frequency hearing losses. Where a 
higher frequency response is required from an in-the-ear hearing aid, 
some improvement may be achieved by increasing the diameter of the 
sound bore by 'belling' the end of the meatal projection. 
(b) Meatal projection length 
The length of the projection of the earmould into the ear varies the 
volume of the meatus, which has an effect on the output signal. A long 
earmould projection will reduce the meatal volume, which will increase 
the overall sound pressure level and will particularly enhance the low 
frequency response. A short earmould projection will maintain the 
volume of the meatus nearer to normal and will therefore provide 
some enhancement of the higher frequencies. 
(c) Venting the earmould 
A vent is a hole drilled through the earmould, usually parallel to the 
sound output channel, although if there is insufficient space in the 

Earmoulds 
183 
.-- D~gonal , • ., ~ 
P..-all~ ,M, 
====="" 
. . . . . . . . .. -. -Sound tube 
Fig. 9.6 Diagonal and parallel vents. These are used to provide intentional 
sound leakage, most commonly for the purpose of low frequency reduction. 
earmould a diagonal vent opening into the sound tube may be used 
(Figure 9.6). Venting provides intentional sound leakage and has the 
greatest effect on the low frequency region. It may be used to relieve a 
feeling of pressure in the ear or to modify the frequency response of 
the aid. A small'pinhole' vent of approximately 0.6mm will make very 
little difference to the frequency response but will be effective in al-
lowing pressure equalization, to reduce the feeling of fullness in the 
ear that many hearing aid users experience. 
Many clients have better hearing in the low frequency region and 
benefit from a reduction of low frequency amplification, which allows 
them to perceive the important high frequency sounds more clearly. 
New users also often complain of hearing their voice as hollow or 
echoing; this is the result of excessive low frequency amplification, 
generated in the occluded ear and transmitted by bone conduction. It 
has a noticeable effect on hearing one's own voice and is known as 'the 
occlusion effect'. Venting is commonly employed for low frequency 
reduction and is used in conjunction with a short meatal projection for 
this purpose. It is normal practice to order a vent that is small, medium, 
large or open ear. The size selected will take into account the gain of 
the aid and the hearing in the low frequency region, which should be 
no worse than 30 dBHL if a vent is to be used. In general, the better the 
hearing in the low frequencies, the larger will be the vent. However, 
amplified sound leaking from the vent may cause acoustic feedback. 
Venting can only be of benefit if the gain of the hearing aid is not 
sufficient to cause acoustic feedback. An open ear is the largest possible 
vent size and provides a non-occluding earmould that can only be used 
if low to moderate gain, over the mid- to high frequency region, is 
adequate. This type of earmould was originally designed for use with 
the CROS system and, where it is used on the same ear as the hearing 
aid, it is sometimes termed an IROS fitting, meaning 'ipsilateral routing 
of signals' or 'used on the same ear'. An open earmould allows entry 
of normal unamplified sound, which is useful in many cases of sen-
sorineural hearing loss where the low frequency hearing is good. At 
the same time, the open ear acts to reduce the amplification of low 

184 
Earmoulds 
frequencies below 1.5kHz, which is obviously not required. However, 
the open vent does not remove peaks in the frequency response of the 
aid and its tubing, and the primary peak around 2kHz can still provide 
excessive gain for the user unless the peak is damped using an ap-
propriate acoustic filter placed in the tubing or the earhook. 
A large vent is usually about 4 mm in diameter and provides strong 
low frequency reduction below 1kHz. It is used where the hearing loss 
below this frequency is not greater than 30 dBHL. If the hearing is good 
only to 500Hz, a medium vent with a diameter of 2 mm will reduce the 
gain adequately. However, the vent itself may resonate causing an 
increase in gain at a frequency just above the region being reduced, 
which in some cases may be very undesirable. The problem may be 
even worse where a small vent is used with the idea of reducing low 
frequency gain below 250Hz (Lybarger, 1985). Unless the meatal tip is 
short and hollowed out the low frequency attenuation is negligible, but 
there may be a considerable enhancement of perhaps 5 dB to 10 dB at 
frequencies just above 250Hz. This is usually not the result that was 
intended and damping the vent may be necessary to remove the 
offending peak. 
The effect of the vent is sometimes termed 'the vent response'. This 
is readily found using a probe microphone to measure the difference in 
sound pressure level in the ear with the earmould vented and with the 
vent blocked. The vent response interacts with other modifications 
to provide the required characteristics and it is therefore difficult to 
establish the precise effect without recourse to real ear measurement. 
One system that is extremely useful is that often known as the 'select-
a-vent' system. The earmould or in-the-ear hearing aid is obtained with 
a standard-sized hole for which a range of plugs are made. Each plug 
provides a different-sized vent. The hearing aid audiologist is then able 
to try various vent sizes without needing to remake the earmould. 
(d) Acoustic filters 
The frequency response of a hearing aid usually contains two or more 
peaks of gain. These are due to the effects of the hearing aid electronics 
and the resonance of the tubing which provides the link between the 
receiver and the meatus. Peaks of gain may be troublesome because 
they may cause the output to exceed the user's uncomfortable loudness 
level, in which case the volume of the aid may be set according to the 
level of these peaks rather than the overall response of the aid. Acoustic 
filters, or damping, add a resistance in the sound path, which has the 
effect of smoothing the resonant peaks. Filters located in the output 
path have the greatest effect on the midfrequency region between 
1kHz and 3kHz. The damping effect is maximal when the filter is at 

References 
185 
the meatal end of the tubing, but this is not very practical because the 
filter rapidly blocks with wax. For convenience, earhooks are often 
supplied with damping in place. 
The effect of the filters varies not only with their position but also 
with their acoustic resistance value, which is expressed in ohms. The 
higher the ohm value, the greater is the smoothing effect. Values from 
approximately 680 to 4700 ohms are available, but values over about 
1500 ohms tend to reduce the midfrequency response to a greater 
extent than is usually required. 
9.3 SUMMARY 
Silicone-based materials are recommended for impressions as they 
undergo little shrinkage. Where a particularly tight acoustic seal is 
required, addition cured silicone should be used. 
An ear examination is important prior to impression-taking and any 
abnormalities should be noted and, if necessary, referred for medical 
advice. 
Impressions ~hould be taken using the syringe and block method. 
Earmoulds can be obtained in a variety of configurations and ma-
terials. Hard acrylic is most widely used, since it is an attractive product 
which is both easy to look after and long-lasting. 'All-soft' materials 
provide a better acoustic seal but are more difficult to look after and 
have a much shorter life. Soft acrylic provides a 'half-way house' 
between hard and all soft materials. 
Acoustic modifications can be made to the earmould. These include: 
1. Tubing modifications to shift the frequency emphasis. A horn effect 
can be used to enhance the high frequency response significantly. 
2. Alteration to the meatal length. A long meatal length enhances the 
low frequencies and increases the output. A short meatal length 
improves the higher frequencies. 
3. Venting is commonly used to facilitate limited sound leakage in 
order to reduce low frequency amplification. 
4. Acoustic filters smooth resonant peaks in the frequency response. 
The earmould and its plumbing form an integral part of the hearing aid 
system and can improve or restrict its use. 
REFERENCES 
Hearing Aid Audiology Group (1994) The Earmould, Current Practice and Techno-
logy, revised edn (ed. M. Tate), Hearing Aid Audiology Group, British 
Society of Audiology, Reading. 
Lybarger, S. (1985) Earmoulds. Handbook of Clinical Audiology, 3rd edn (ed. J. 

186 
Earmoulds 
Katz), Williams and Wilkins, Baltimore, pp. 885-910. 
Nolan, M. and Combe, E.C. (1985) Silicone Materials for Ear Impressions. 
Scandinavian Audiology, 14, 35-9. 
Tucker, I. and Nolan, M. (1984) Educational Audiology, Croom Helm, London. 
FURTHER READING 
British Society of Audiology (1986) Recommended Procedure for Taking an 
Aural Impression. British Journal of Audiology, 20, 315-16. 
McHugh, E.R. and Morgan, R. (1988) Earmould/ITE Shell Technology and 
Acoustics. Amplification for the Hearing Impaired, 3rd edn (ed. M. Pollack), 
Grone and Stratton, Orlando, pp. 105-53. 
National Deaf Children's Society (1991) Recommendations from the Department of 
Health Seminar on the Production of Earmoulds and Tubing, July 1990, National 
Deaf Children's Society, London. 

Evaluation 
10 
10.1 INTRODUCTION 
The selection of an appropriate hearing aid and earmould for a client 
does not signify the end of the hearing aid fitting procedure. Some 
process must be employed to judge the benefit provided by the aid in 
terms of its effectiveness and acceptability. Hearing aid evaluation 
must consider not only the technical dimensions of the aid, but also the 
subjective opinion of the user, since a hearing aid will provide no 
benefit unless it is worn. 
The prime technical objective is to select and adjust a hearing aid 
system so that it provides the best possible hearing function. However, 
this will only be of real benefit if acceptability to the client is not 
forgotten. There are a number of approaches that can be used to 
assess: 
• the degree to which the aid meets the prescribed characteristics; 
• the functional benefits of the hearing aid system; 
• the degree to which the aid meets the client's needs and expectations; 
• the subjective opinion of the client in relation to sound quality and 
clarity. 
Hearing aid evaluation should be ongoing and viewed as part of an 
integral approach to audiological rehabilitation. 
10.2 INSERTION GAIN MEASUREMENT 
Insertion gain provides an objective measure of the gain provided by a 
hearing aid when worn. Insertion gain procedures involve the placing 
of a tiny flexible probe tube within the ear canal. The actual sound 

188 
Evaluation 
pressure level is then measured, first without a hearing aid, known as 
the open ear measurement, and then with the hearing aid in use. The 
difference between these two measurements is known as the 'insertion 
gain', and describes the benefit in terms of amplification for the user. 
A normal ear acts, in effect, as a natural resonator, amplifying sound 
entering from the environment or 'sound field'. This amplification is 
due mainly to ear canal resonance but with some influence from the 
effects of the pinna and concha (Chapter 2). The gain can vary widely 
between individuals and even between the left and right ears of 
the same patient (Tate, 1990). For most patients the gain is usually 
between 10 dB and 20 dB, but this author has found peak open ear gain 
to vary from as little as 5 dB to as much as 30 dB in different individuals. 
Ear canal resonance is not static throughout life, but changes as the 
ear grows. In newborn babies the natural resonant peak is near to 
6kHz, but this changes rapidly and the frequency is near that of an 
adult by about two years of age. The adult peak frequency is between 
about 2.5 kHz and 3.3 kHz. 
When the ear is occluded by an earmould, or an in-the-ear hearing 
aid, the open ear gain will be altered or lost. This means that when a 
hearing aid is placed on the ear, that aid has to overcome the loss of 
natural amplification before it provides any real benefit to the user. 
Insertion gain corresponds to this benefit. 
The terminology surrounding insertion gain (Figure 10.1) can be 
confusing. 
• Insertion gain is the difference between the unaided and aided 
sound pressure levels measured near the eardrum. The terms 
dB gain 
30 
20 
10 
0 
~--~------------------,_--------~Hz 
Key 
250 
--- Open ear gain 
---- In situ gain 
~ 
Insertion gain 
3k 
10k 
1 Typical peak of open ear canal 
response 
Fig. 10.1 The relationship between in situ gain, open ear gain and insertion 
gain. 

Insertion gain measurement 
189 
etymotic gain, transmission gain and real ear gain are sometimes 
used to describe insertion gain. 
• Open ear gain is the natural amplification afforded by the ear canal 
resonance and other factors. 
• In situ measurements are aided measurements taken at the ear with-
out making allowance for the loss of natural amplification. 
Insertion gain is the most useful probe tube measurement for hearing 
aid evaluation. An in situ output frequency response could have value 
in setting the maximum output limit of an aid, but is not generally 
used in this way. 
Prescription methods are often used in the selection of a hearing aid. 
Real ear gain can be predicted from corrected coupler measurements to 
provide an approximation that is close to that of the measured real ear 
gain of an average ear canal. It can be argued that real ear confirmation 
is not always necessary (Green, 1988), but the disadvantage of the 
prediction method is that it does not take individual differences into 
account. 
While most patients have an ear canal resonance acceptably close to 
the average, there are some who differ markedly from it. This will be 
particularly true at the extremes of age since the ear canals of both 
young children and the elderly are likely to differ in shape and size 
from those of the 'average' population. The effect of venting on real ear 
gain is also very variable, although correction factors appropriate to the 
vent size will improve the prediction. These problems can be avoided 
by measuring the real ear gain directly on the client; where a vented 
mould or shell is used, where the client is very young or very old, or 
where the results of the fitting appear at variance with the hearing aid 
audiologist's expectations, real ear insertion gain should be used to 
clarify the true gain at the ear. 
The specialized equipment required for insertion gain measurements 
can be obtained in a portable form, and for hearing aid fitting purposes 
may be used in a reasonably quiet, non-sound-treated room. The 
technique used should, however, be carefully controlled, so that con-
sistent results can be obtained on different test-retest occasions. 
As with any method of evaluation there are a number of advantages 
and disadvantages that should be considered: 
Advantages 
• Provides an objective measure of real ear performance; 
• produces quick and reliable results when used appropriately; 
• facilitates accurate modification of the frequency response of the 
hearing aid; 
• can be used with clients unable to perform behavioural tests. 

190 
Evaluation 
Disadvantages 
• Placement of the probe tube requires practice; 
• wax deposits in the ear canal may block the probe tube; 
• placement of the probe tube may cause unintentional venting leading 
to an effect on the low frequency response and acoustic feedback; 
• does not reduce the importance of more subjective results. 
Probe tube measurements can be used to assess how closely a selected 
hearing aid matches the requirements of gain and output prescribed for 
the user. If the response is unsatisfactory the effect of modifications, 
including those to the earmould, can be monitored. Ideally, after 
the characteristics have been selected and modified according to pre-
scription, a more subjective approach should be used to ensure the 
acceptance of the client is not overlooked. Insertion gain techniques 
can provide immediate visual feedback for both client and audiologist 
with regard to the effects of changes made in response to the client's 
reactions. 
10.3 FUNCTIONAL GAIN MEASUREMENT 
Functional gain measurements provide another method of assessing 
the gain provided to the hearing aid user. The method involves the 
comparison of unaided and aided hearing thresholds, obtained in the 
'free-field'. 
The difference between the unaided and aided thresholds is termed 
the 'functional gain'. Functional gain is based on behavioural responses 
and therefore reflects the efficiency of the auditory system in its entirety. 
An audiometer is used to feed warble tones, or narrow bands of 
noise, through an amplifier to a loudspeaker. This is normally posi-
tioned 1 metre in front of the client. The sound pressure level is 
measured at the client's position using a sound level meter and 
thresholds are expressed in dBA or dBSPL. 
Aided thresholds are sometimes plotted on a pre-printed chart show-
ing an average speech spectrum. This will readily indicate the ap-
proximate audibility of conversational speech sounds when the aid is 
worn. 
Behavioural thresholds, especially in the free-field, are subject to 
variability, generally in the order of 5 dB. The difference between 
unaided and aided thresholds provides an approximate measure of 
functional gain that correlates reasonably well with insertion gain and 
which can be usefully compared with prescribed real ear gain. 
The acceptability of the selected maximum output of the hearing aid 
can also be checked by presenting high sound inputs and observing 
the client's reactions. 

Speech audiometry 
191 
Functional gain measurements are most appropriate to use in a 
sound-treated room and are only widely used in the evaluation of 
hearing aids for children. Free-field testing of this nature is fairly time-
consuming, but can be used to compare the functional gain achieved 
with prescribed real ear gain, to confirm the adequacy of the aided 
threshold and to check the client's tolerance at maximum output. 
10.4 SPEECH AUDIOMETRY 
10.4.1 SPEECH DISCRIMINATION TESTS 
Speech discrimination tests are widely used in the evaluation of hearing 
aid benefit and in clinical diagnosis. The methods used are similar 
but more rigorously applied for diagnostic purposes. In hearing aid 
evaluation, the objective is usually: 
• to demonstrate the value of a hearing aid; 
• to choose the most beneficial aid; 
• to demonstrate the value of binaural hearing aids. 
Speech audiometry sets out to provide information about the in-
dividual's hearing for speech and uses tests given at above threshold 
intensities. Speech may be delivered to the individual by live voice or 
recordings. 
In the evaluation of a hearing aid system speech tests are undertaken 
in the free-field, whereas for diagnostic purposes they are usually 
presented under headphones. Speech audiometry in its broadest sense 
can provide information concerning hearing for speech, the type 
and degree of hearing impairment, and the reliability of pure-tone 
thresholds. Speech tests can provide a useful tool for demonstrating 
the effectiveness of an appropriately selected hearing aid to the client. 
Their value in the selection or modification of a hearing aid system is 
much less reliable. 
Speech test scores are very variable and results are not sufficiently 
precise to correspond to changes in hearing aid performance unless 
these are extreme. In current practice tests are often used in situations 
that render them insensitive and unreliable. Where a test is presented 
using live voice, for example, scores may vary due to uncontrolled 
changes in voice level. It is therefore important to use 'standardized' 
test conditions but, even under the most consistent conditions, small 
variations in speech scores do not indicate significant differences be-
tween hearing aid systems. If the limitations are recognized, speech 
audiometry can serve a useful purpose. 

192 
Evaluation 
10.4.2 SPEECH TEST MATERIALS 
An ideal speech test would: 
• be exactly repeatable; 
• be phonemically balanced; 
• contain words in common usage. 
Lists containing words or sentences of equal difficulty are presented. 
Scores will show some random variation from test to test, but this is 
minimized by using standardized tests under consistent conditions. 
Many tests also reflect the same relative balance of phonemes as found 
in a random sample of everyday speech. This is commonly known as 
'phonetic balance' (PB). 
Whole lists must be used on each occasion to retain equal difficulty 
and phonemic or 'phonetic' balance. Whole words are easy to score, 
but relatively long lists are required to achieve phonetic balance. In the 
Fry list, for example, Word List 1 consists of: 
cut 
near 
raw 
hut 
more 
sin 
keys 
tin 
ten 
thick 
bite 
lid 
sack 
less 
will 
deaf 
men 
face 
bone 
yard 
wish 
so 
now 
pays 
ton 
choice 
jam 
white 
good 
veal 
wrong 
heard 
dip 
there 
One entire list must be given at each intensity level in each situation 
(for instance without and with a hearing aid). This may create a rather 
long and tiring test. An alternative in widespread use is the presentation 
of the isophonemic lists of Arthur Boothroyd (1968), commonly known 
as the AB lists. Each list consists of only ten words, but each word is of 
consonant-vowel-consonant (CVC) composition. True phonetic balance 
is not possible within ten words but the same thirty common phonemes 
are repeated within each list in different combinations (isophonemic). 
Each of the separate sounds or phonemes scores one point so, 
for example, if the test word was 'well', possible verbal responses 
might be: 
Response 
Marking 
Score 
WELL 
WELL 
3 
BELL 
WELL 
2 
WON 
WELL 
1 
TAKE 
WELL 
0 

Speech audiometry 
193 
The nature of the scoring means that guessing should be encouraged, 
as single correct sounds can appreciably enhance the overall score. A 
total score of 30 is possible for each list, for example: 
AB Word Lists 
List 1 
List 2 
List 3 
List 4 
List 5 
--
--
--
ship 
fish 
thud 
fun 
fib 
rug 
duck 
witch 
will 
thatch 
fan 
gap 
wrap 
vat 
sum 
cheek 
cheese 
jail 
shape 
heel 
haze 
rail 
keys 
wreath 
wide 
dice 
hive 
vice 
hide 
rake 
both 
bone 
get 
guess 
goes 
well 
wedge 
shown 
comb 
shop 
jot 
moss 
hoof 
choose 
vet 
move 
tooth 
bomb 
job 
June 
In each case the score is presented as a percentage. Monosyllabic word 
lists are widely used in the UK. Spondees are less frequently used. 
These are words of two syllables with equal stress on each syllable, for 
example, 'playground', 'football', 'doorstep'. Spondees are easier to 
understand but therefore tend to be less sensitive. Maximum scores 
(100%) are on average achieved at levels 20 dB to 30 dB below those 
required to achieve maximum scores for monosyllabic words. 
Lists of sentences provide a more realistic task than single words. 
They are somewhat easier and may therefore be less tiring for the 
listener, but tend to be rather time-consuming. Sentence tests are 
normally scored by key words. The BKB Sentence Lists (Bench, Kowal 
and Bamford, 1979) each contain 50 key words, for example: 
BKB List 1 
The clown had a funny face. 
The car engine's running. 
She cut with her knife. 
Children like strawberries. 
The house had nine rooms. 
They're buying some bread. 
The green tomatoes are small. 
He played with his train. 
The postman shut the gate. 
They're looking at the clock. 

194 
Evaluation 
The bag bumps on the ground. 
The boy did a handstand. 
A cat sits on the bed. 
The lorry carried fruit. 
The rain came down. 
The ice cream was pink. 
The AB Word Lists and the BKB Lists are used with both older children 
and adults. Tests for use with younger children must be appropriate to 
their age and stage of development in terms of the vocabulary presented 
and the response required. 
An oral response is inappropriate for young children who may not 
have developed sufficient speech skills for the tester to be certain of the 
response. The Kendall Toy Test is widely used for children in the two-
and-a-half to four-year age range. In this test the words in each list are 
represented by small toys. Fifteen toys are placed on the table in front 
of the child, ten of which represent test items, the other five are 
distracters. The child has to point to the appropriate toy when he or 
she hears the instructions 'Show me the ... '. The items consist of 
common vowel and consonant sounds grouped according to the vowel 
sounds, for example: 
Test items: 
house, spoon, fish, duck, cow, shoe, brick, cup, gate, 
plate. 
Distracters: mouse, book, string, glove, plane. 
Picture tests, such as the Manchester Picture Test (Hickson, 1986), are 
used with slightly older children, from four to six years of age. In this 
test each word is presented as a multiple choice item. The child is 
asked 'Show me the ... 'and is required to point to one of four pictures. 
Each list is designed to test five vowel sounds and five consonant 
sounds, for example: 
Test sound: 
vowel e. 
Pictures presented: well, ball, wall, doll. 
Response required: well. 
10.4.3 THE SPEECH TEST PROCEDURE 
Word lists should be recorded and played through a calibrated system 
to provide accurate and reliable results. Live voice is prone to great 
variability in intensity even when it is monitored with a sound level 
meter, but because of the simplicity of live voice presentation it is 
widely used for the presentation of word lists in hearing aid evaluation. 
This should be viewed as informal speech testing; the term 'speech 

Speech audiometry 
195 
audiometry' should be reserved for tests presented under measurable 
and reproducible conditions. Speech audiometry generally makes use 
of an audiometer to pass the signal to the patient through headphones 
or via an amplifier and loudspeaker. Part 2 of IEC 645 (equivalent to BS 
5966) specifies the requirements for speech audiometers. 
An audiometer for speech tests will have the facility to accept the 
signal from a microphone or tape recorder and should also be able to 
provide masking for speech using white noise or speech spectrum 
noise, which contains more low frequency noise. IEC 645 and BS 5966 
(1980) provide for speech spectrum noise to fall by 12 dB per octave 
between 1kHz and 6kHz. Masking with both kinds of noise is equally 
effective, but speech spectrum noise is less fatiguing since it excludes 
unnecessary high frequency energy. Masking will be required in speech 
audiometry, if results are required for each ear separately, where the 
pure-tone audiogram suggests that cross-hearing may occur. 
Pre-recorded speech tests are prefaced with a 20 dBSPL, 1 kHz 
calibration tone of at least 1 minute in length; this is used to check that 
the input level to the audiometer is the same every time it is used 
and that the dial settings are therefore consistent. The calibration 
tone should measure 20 dBSPL when the hearing level control on the 
audiometer is set to zero, or the level indicator is set to its reference 
point. 
Speech audiometry should be carried out in quiet conditions to 
minimize the masking effects of background noise. This is particularly 
important for free-field tests. The background noise should be measured 
and should not be such as to interfere with a signal to noise ratio of 
45dB. 
A standard speech audiogram cannot be produced because dif-
ferences in test materials and conditions may affect results. Each speech 
set-up must therefore provide its own normal response curve to which 
patients' responses will be compared. This can be achieved by testing a 
group, usually of 20, normally-hearing adults under exactly the same 
test conditions as are to be used with all patients. A number of word 
lists must be given at different presentation levels and the results at 
each presentation level are averaged to produce a normal response 
curve. 
Patients should be given careful instructions. These should include 
that they will hear someone speaking single words (or sentences) and 
after each word they should repeat any parts of the word they heard. 
10.4.4 SPEECH TESTS FOR DIAGNOSTIC PURPOSES 
The first word list should be presented at a comfortable level and used 
for practice and to adjust the starting point if the patient is not scoring 
well. The intensity level is increased or decreased in 10 dB or 20 dB 

196 
Evaluation 
100 
80 
60 
;t?. 
~ 
8 40 
en 
20 
0 
1--- 1---
1---- t---
1----r---; 
t--- ~--/-
-/ k( __ 
Average normal 
articulation curve 
I 
-\; k=-- ---
~~- --- ---
1/ r----r--- --; 
1--- -- -I-
I 
--- -7 --
Conductive loss 
Sensorineural loss 
\ 
\ 
-\ V-
-- --\ -- 1--- 1----
-f 1---
-- 1---
-- 1--- ---
!lJ 
~ 
......... 
l\-R~~!!__ 
-- --
--
--- t--- --l -- -- 1--- ---
) 
---v --- -- -- f----- ---
(a) 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
120 
dBHL 
20 
40 
60 
80 
(b) 
l _______ HPLE ------
dB (dial) relative speech level 
HPLE = 500+1 k+2kHz:t 10d8 
3 
250 
500 
1 k 
2k 
4k 
8k Hz 
Fig. 10.2 A speech audiogram showing half-peak level elevation and its re-
lation to the pure-tone audiogram. 
steps, with one full list given at each level, and the scores are plotted 
on a speech audiogram. 
Where monosyllabic word lists are used in speech audiometry, half 
peak level (HPL) is proposed as a measure that agrees well with the 
pure-tone audiogram. HPL is the intensity (in dial units) at which 
the patient obtains half of his or her maximum score, whatever that 
maximum may be. Thus, if a patient has a maximum score of 100, the 
HPL will be 50, but if the maximum score is only 60, the HPL will be 
30. The difference between the normal HPL and the patient's HPL is 
known as the 'half peak level elevation' (HPLE) (Figure 10.2). 
The HPLE elevation should agree, within 10 dB, with the pure-tone 
audiogram averaged over 500Hz, 1kHz and 2kHz. Where the HPLE 
does not agree, a greater shift may indicate an inaccurate audiogram, 

Subjective evaluation 
197 
or, rarely, point towards a retrocochlear disorder. Where the shift is 
less than predicted, this is likely to indicate a non-organic disorder . 
• The shape of the speech curve for a typical conductive loss will 
follow the shape of the normal reference curve, but will be displaced or 
shifted along the audiogram. The patient will reach a score of 100% 
but at an intensity level that is elevated in comparison with the normal. 
In the case of a typical sensorineural loss the discrimination curve is 
again shifted but may never reach a 100% score. The patient achieves 
his or her maximum score at some lower percentage score and when 
the intensity is increased beyond this point, the score reduces, shown 
by a 'roll over' on the audiogram. 
Speech audiometry is a useful tool in the assessment of how an 
individual's hearing for speech varies with intensity, both with and 
without a hearing aid. 
A simplified procedure may be used to provide a simple comparison 
of hearing aid benefit, where the recorded material is delivered at a 
constant sound level, usually 60 dB or 70 dB, 1 metre from the loud-
speaker. At least one word list is presented at this level for each of the 
aids, or situations, to be compared. A comparison of unaided and 
aided discrimination scores is likely to show an improvement (except 
with a very mild hearing loss) even with a poorly selected hearing aid. 
Nevertheless, the comparison can be useful to demonstrate to a new 
client that it will be beneficial to wear a hearing aid. 
10.5 SUBJECTIVE EVALUATION 
A hearing aid system will only be of benefit if it is worn. Client 
acceptability must therefore be taken into account in any evaluation. A 
number of methods of obtaining the client's subjective opinion exists, 
with regard to both the sound quality of the aid and its functional 
benefit. 
In many cases, the information is obtained through interview or 
discussion with the client, informally structured to: 
• provide information regarding the sound quality; 
• provide information about the usefulness of the aid; 
• identify situations that remain problematic. 
The information obtained may lead to adjustment of the system or to 
further rehabilitation. Questions regarding sound quality can be tailored 
to provide information that will indicate the need for certain modifi-
cations, for example: 
Is the aid loud enough? 
-adjustment of gain 
Is the aid clear enough? 
-adjustment of bass cut (high-pass filter) 
Is the sound tinny or harsh?- adjustment of treble cut (low-pass filter) 

198 
Evaluation 
Quality judgements are not particularly useful for choosing between 
hearing aids as there is a marked tendency for clients to select the 
second of two aids, that is to select merely by order rather than due to 
any particular attributes of the aid itself (Green, Day and Bamford, 
1989). 
Quality judgements are useful in achieving hearing aid satisfaction 
and can be helpful in making decisions with regard to aid modifi-
cations. In some cases, a measurement scale may be used. The client is 
asked to listen to a passage of running speech and to judge sound 
quality between two examples, on a scale of one to five, for instance. 
This is completed for a number of paired attributes, such as loud/soft, 
clear /hazy, booming/shrill, pleasant/unpleasant. Alternatively, the 
client may be asked questions tailored to indicate the need for 
modifications. 
There is a tendency for clients to dislike high frequency emphasis at 
first fitting, even when this can be shown to improve their speech 
discrimination. With long-term experience of using hearing aids, many 
clients will come to accept a higher emphasis frequency response. 
Evaluation after an extended period of rehabilitation will allow 
maximum advantage to be taken of the client's gradual acclimatization 
to hearing aid use. 
A questionnaire may also form part of an evaluation after a period of 
rehabilitation, and should be designed to indicate particular problem 
areas, as well as the overall level of satisfaction. A disability question-
naire can be given before, and some time after, hearing aid fitting to 
indicate the difficulties the client originally had and to what extent the 
aid has reduced the client's problems. Questions are presented in a 
way that allows improvements to be readily noted, for example: 
Can you follow the television news when the volume is turned up 
only enough to suit other people? 
Easily 
With some difficulty 
With great difficulty 
Not at all 
Lutman, Brown and Coles, 1987 
If a simple individual questionnaire, or even a checklist, is to be de-
signed to identify particular difficulties it may be useful to indicate: 
• how long the aid is worn each day; 
• the ease of insertion, manipulation and removal; 
• comfort; 
• feedback problems; 
• satisfaction with the appearance; 

References 
199 
• perceived sound quality; 
• difficulties encountered in (a) the home; (b) at work; (c) socially; 
• satisfaction with the hearing aid; 
• satisfaction with the service. 
10.6 SUMMARY 
Evaluation is an important part of the overall process of hearing aid 
fitting. Methods in common use include: 
• insertion gain; 
• functional gain; 
• speech audiometry; 
• subjective evaluation. 
Methods of evaluation should be chosen to provide information about 
benefit in terms of: 
• adequacy of prescribed characteristics; 
• comfort; 
• reduction of handicap; 
• sound quality. 
The results should highlight any problem areas and lead to modifi-
cations and further rehabilitation where appropriate. 
REFERENCES 
Bench, J., Kowal, A. and Bamford, J.M. (1979) The BKB (Bamford-Kowal-
Hench) Sentence Lists for Partially Hearing Children. British Journal of 
Audiology, 13, 108-12. 
Boothroyd, A. (1968) The Arthur Boothroyd (AB) Word Lists, Manchester 
University, Manchester. 
British Standards Institution (1980) BS 5966: Specification for Audiometers, British 
Standards Institution, London. 
Green, R. (1988) The Relative Accuracy of Coupler and Behavioural Estimates 
of the Real Ear Gain of a Hearing Aid. British Journal of Audiology, 22, 35-44. 
Green, R., Day, S. and Bamford, J. (1989) A Comparative Evaluation of Four 
Hearing Aid Selection Procedures, II - Quality Judgements as Measures of 
Benefit. British Journal of Audiology, 23, 201-6. 
Hickson, F. (1986) The Manchester Picture Test, Manchester University. 
Lutman, M.E., Brown, E.J. and Coles, R.R.A. (1987) Self-Reported Disability 
and Handicap in the Population in Relation to Pure-Tone Threshold, Age, 
Sex and Type of Hearing Loss. British Journal of Audiology, 21(1), 45-58. 
Tate, M. (1990) The Application of Real Ear Probe Tube Measurements to 
Hearing Aid Fitting. Acoustic Letters, 14(1), 1-6. 

200 
Evaluation 
FURTHER READING 
Pollack, M.C. (1988) Amplification for the Hearing-Impaired, 3rd edn, Grune and 
Stratton, Orlando. 
Tucker, I. and Nolan, M. (1984) Educational Audiology, Croom Helm, Beckenham. 

Client management 
and rehabilitation 
11.1 THE REHABILITATION PROCESS 
11 
The most common cause of acquired hearing loss in adulthood is the 
result of the ageing process (presbyacusis). About 8% of the adult 
population have a hearing loss over 35 dB in the better ear (Haggard, 
Gatehouse and Davies, 1981), while approximately one-third of the 
population over 65 years old has some sort of hearing problem, and 
approximately half of the population over 80 years old has a severe 
hearing problem. Hearing losses of this type develop gradually over a 
period of years, with high frequency sounds reducing first. This means 
that speech can still be heard, but it loses its clarity. A binaural hearing 
loss of as little as 15 dBHL, averaged across the frequencies 500Hz 
to 2kHz, is likely to be significantly disabling for everyday speech 
(Lutman, Brown and Coles, 1987). An affected individual typically 
accuses others of mumbling or speaking quietly, and this leads to 
increased tensions within the family. Although hearing loss may be 
suspected, this is not usually a suggestion that is readily accepted by 
the hearing impaired person, who often prefers to cope with the 
restriction of personal and social life rather than admit to deafness. In 
many cases there may be a gap of as much as 15 years or more between 
noticing the problem and taking any action to deal with it. 
Hearing loss is an underestimated impairment that may lead to 
many secondary problems in addition to primary communication dif-
ficulties. Management of the hearing impaired client is extremely dif-
ficult and, unless the client accepts the problem, rejection of any form 
of hearing aid is very likely. Even when the need for amplification is 
understood, deafness remains an unacceptable condition and most 
people would prefer to use an inconspicuous hearing aid. Indeed, 
although commercial aids provide a wide choice of size, type and 

202 
Client management and rehabilitation 
frequency response, most of those people who choose to use private 
hearing aids do so for cosmetic reasons (Rendell et al., 1992). 
High expectations of the benefit to be derived from hearing aids add 
to the difficulties, especially as most adults do not realize hearing loss 
is not 'cured' by amplification. Hearing aids alone are not sufficient 
to overcome the consequences of the loss. Audiological rehabilitation 
involving a co-ordinated programme of evaluation and remedy is 
therefore appropriate. 
Aural rehabilitation begins with an evaluation of the hearing loss 
and its effect on the client's life-style. At this stage it is decided if 
remediation is necessary and, if it is, whether hearing aids should be 
considered. In some cases assistive devices may be sufficient to ful-
fil the client's needs. If hearing aids are to be considered, and fol-
lowing referral to a medical practitioner if indicated (section 6.1.1), the 
acoustical characteristics can be defined, together with any special 
rehabilitation measures required. It is usually helpful to include a 
member or members of the client's family in the process, as not only 
can they support the hearing impaired person far better if they under-
stand, but also concerns are more likely to be aired at an early stage. 
Rehabilitation is not really an area on its own but is interwoven into 
hearing aid fitting and evaluation. The success of the whole process is 
reliant on the sum of the individual parts. An error in any part may 
adversely affect the whole, for example, incorrect uncomfortable loud-
ness levels (ULLs) could lead to the fitting of a hearing aid that is too 
loud. The aid might appear suitable in the quiet of the fitting situation, 
but in the noise of the outside world prove unbearable. The client 
could turn it down but then would not hear adequately, leading to 
rejection of the aid. Another example could be where the hearing aid 
audiologist fails to consider the patient's dexterity, leading to the selec-
tion of an aid that the client is unable to insert or operate. 
The aid type suggested must be acceptable to the client such that he 
or she is both able and willing to wear it and, if it is a commercial aid, 
it must be affordable. These and many other factors interact in the 
audiological rehabilitation process. The client's attitude towards hearing 
impairment and amplification is crucial to the rehabilitative process, 
and four attitude types have been outlined (Goldstein and Stevens, 
1981): 
Type I - the patient has a very positive attitude towards hearing aids 
and aural rehabilitation. 
Type II - is an essentially positive attitude but with some complicating 
factors present. These might, for example, include a pre-
viously unfavourable hearing aid fitting experience, or a 
difficult-to-fit hearing loss. 

The rehabilitation process 
203 
I Definition of the problem I 
I 
I 
Remediation I 
I 
I 
11 Acceptance J 
2 Use of 
13 
Support of I 
residual 
family 
hearing 
I 
I 
I raining 
(a) Hearing 
(b) Operation of 
(c) 
hearing aid 
Tactics 
I 
Evaluation J 
I 
(a) Further rehabilitation 
(b) Adjustments to hearing aid 
(c) Additional (environmental) aids 
Fig. 11.1 A problem-solving model of the rehabilitation process. 
Type III - is an essentially negative attitude but with an element of 
co-operative intent. 
Type IV- consists of a small group who reject hearing aids completely. 
Unfortunately, rehabilitation is rarely successful with this 
group. 
A simple problem-solving model of the rehabilitation process is pre-
sented in Figure 11.1. The process begins with a definition of the 
problem. At this stage the hearing aid audiologist collects information 
regarding the client's hearing loss, his or her areas of difficulty, his or 
her attitude and related aspects. Informal discussion, a case history 
and audiological assessment are the most widely used tools for defining 
the problem. Handicap questionnaires and speech audiometry may 
add further depth to the investigations. 
The focus of any rehabilitation process should be on the needs of the 
individual, and aural rehabilitation can be defined as helping an indi-
vidual with a specific set of problems arising from an auditory disorder. 
Rehabilitation can therefore be considered as a process that is designed 
to minimize disability due to hearing loss or tinnitus (and to some 

204 
Client management and rehabilitation 
extent, balance) in order to prevent the condition from handicapping 
the client. 
The hearing problem can be viewed as a continuum in which dis-
ability and handicap represent different stages. Initially, damage to the 
auditory system leads to impairment or hearing loss. This creates a 
disability, but it is the degree to which this disability affects a person's 
quality of life and well-being that imposes the handicap. 
Thus, for example, a moderate hearing loss might have only a slight 
handicapping effect on an elderly client living alone, seeing few visitors 
and whose only real problem seems to be hearing the television. An 
identical degree of hearing loss in a young married man could cause a 
considerable handicap. The disability of the hearing impairment is 
likely to affect every aspect of his life-style and employment because of 
its impact on communication. Activities that were previously enjoy-
able become difficult and he is likely to experience embarrassment, 
irritation, frustration, anger and depression. He will almost certainly 
perceive a change in his status, at least in his own eyes, and will suffer 
a loss of self-esteem. 
The need to wear a hearing aid is generally regarded as related to the 
ageing process and society makes few allowances for hearing impair-
ment. Unlike wearing spectacles, where the individual may be con-
sidered intelligent and studious, hearing aids carry a stigma. They 
are an external sign of deafness, which many view as being accom-
panied by stupidity because of the communication problem it creates. 
Spectacles may result in perfect vision. A hearing aid rarely produces 
an immediate return to normal, but is much in parallel with the use of 
a wheelchair. Socially, hearing loss produces less sympathy and under-
standing than the loss of a limb. 
Hearing loss is rarely total, and the person who hears some things 
and not others is described as awkward, 'he hears when he wants to'. 
In background noise and group situations, following a conversation 
may be impossible. The hearing impaired person wants to maintain 
social interaction but restricted involvement in conversations has to be 
tolerated. Some attempt may be made at finding a way of controlling 
the social scene or avoiding it (Hallberg and Carlsson, 1991). Often, 
particularly in the early stages, the hearing impaired person will prefer 
to isolate himself socially. 
The objectives of the first stage in the rehabilitation process, then, 
are to assess the impairment through audiometry, and the nature of 
the handicap through investigation of the client's home, work and 
social environment, the activities in which he or she wishes or needs 
to participate and the difficulties being experienced. Only when the 
problem has been defined can a realistic approach to remediation be 
adopted. 

These are { 
faint levels 
of sound 
{
co 
These are 
32. 
'normal' 
Gi 
comfortable j1 
levels of 
Ol 
sound 
.§ 
These are {gj 
strong 
I 
levels of 
sound 
Atthese 
{ 
levels 
sounds may 
be painful 
-10 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
120 
130 Is 
140 125 
The rehabilitation process 
205 
T 
r 
! 
i 
r 
i 
i 
: 
i 
i 
: 
: 
i 
: 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
: 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
: 
i 
I 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
~· 
Normal 
} 
hearing 
Mild loss 
} 
Moderate 
loss 
} Severe loss 
} 
Profound 
loss 
250 500 1 000 2000 4000 8000 Hz 
Frequency (Hz) 
Low pitch 
High pitch 
Fig. 11.2 Audiometric information that can be readily explained to the client. 
The remediation process involves more than just hearing aid fitting. 
It involves setting the scene to facilitate the best possible use of ampli-
fication. There are some individuals for whom hearing aids may not be 
appropriate, and sometimes assistive devices, such as a television 
amplifier, may provide a successful answer to a specific need. Where 
hearing aids are appropriate, counselling is often required to help the 
person come to terms with his or her loss and accept realistically the 
impairment and ensuing handicap. If the client maintains a type III 
attitude, with perhaps only a grudging acceptance of a problem, much 
counselling may be needed to achieve acceptance. Even where clients 
maintain positive, type I, attitudes, counselling is equally required to 
help them understand the potential benefits and limitations of amplifi-
cation. The client needs to understand that hearing aids will not pro-
vide perfect hearing and, while they can be of great benefit, it will take 
time to relearn to associate sounds with meanings. A positive attitude 
is undoubtedly helpful but unrealistic expectations will lead to dis-
appointment and the possible rejection of any amplification system. 
Most adults are interested to know about their hearing loss and to 
understand the difficulties they experience. At an early stage the type 
and degree of loss and the audiogram can be explained (Figure 11.2). 
Understanding may help to increase acceptance. 
If the hearing loss is of sudden onset the impact is much greater than 
a loss that has developed slowly and insidiously over many years. The 
patient has not had time to compensate for the loss or to come to terms 
with it. The hearing impaired person (or the parents of the hearing 
impaired child) need time and empathetic counselling to move through 

206 
Client management and rehabilitation 
stages of grief and mourning at their loss before they are ready to 
understand or accept. Such stages can be identified as follows. 
Stage I- numbness 
It is usually the ENT surgeon or otolaryngologist that is involved at this 
point to provide direct advice on handling the impairment. Unfor-
tunately, the client is often unable to absorb much of the information 
given at this stage. 
Stage II - denial 
The client refuses to accept the diagnosis and searches for a second 
opinion or a miracle cure. The client is not yet ready for amplification 
and if hearing aids are prescribed they are unlikely to be used. 'Initial 
strategies involve denying disability, pretending to hear and avoidance 
of situations in which the disability will be exposed. The deafened 
person looks to medicine for a cure to problems which are seen as 
stemming from faults in the ear. When the cure is not forthcoming, the 
deafened person experiences a further loss- that of hope.' (Woolley, 
1991). 
Stage III - despair 
This is the stage at which the hearing loss is accepted but the problems 
often appear insurmountable. Positive but realistic counselling of the 
client and his or her family can help the client to move towards 
acceptance of the problems and a desire to try to overcome them. 
Stage IV - action 
The client is ready to accept amplification. Counselling and training 
now interlink to facilitate the client's adjustment to the impairment and 
to the use of amplification. 
Whatever the degree of loss and the pattern of its onset, involvement 
of the family or a 'significant other' is important as their help and 
support can be of immense value. A 'significant other' is anyone who 
is in close and frequent contact with the client and will often be the 
spouse or a son or daughter. Their presence throughout the rehabili-
tation process, at the assessment, hearing aid fitting and aftercare, can 
help them to understand the nature of the problem. Their expectations 
also have to be realistic and they need to realize that it takes time and 
effort to overcome the handicap of deafness. They also are affected by 

Practical aspects of rehabilitation 
207 
the loss and they need to understand the problems of poor speech 
discrimination, difficulty in noise, recruitment and so on if they are to 
be able to provide realistic support and encouragement to the hearing 
impaired person. They can also ensure that practical instructions have 
been understood and, if necessary, can help in inserting the aid and in 
its care. 
11.2 PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF REHABILITATION 
11.2.1 PRACTICAL INSTRUCTION 
First-time hearing aid users will require training in effective hearing aid 
use, which can be considered as 'informational counselling'. Such 
counselling is also required to a lesser extent when a client changes 
from one hearing aid system to another, or from monaural use to 
binaural. 
11.2.2 INSERTION AND REMOVAL OF THE AID 
Difficulty in inserting the earmould or hearing aid is the most common 
reason for lack of use. It is an activity that has to be learned through 
practice, and it is essential to ensure that the client or his or her carer is 
able to insert and remove the aid at the hearing aid fitting stage, while 
the hearing aid audiologist is on hand to provide guidance. It is a 
common fault for clients to leave the top part of the helix of the 
earmould outside the fold of the pinna. It may be helpful for the 
'significant other' to be shown how the aid should appear when pro-
perly inserted (Figure 11.3). 
Where there is some difficulty in manual ability half shell moulds 
may provide a useful option as these are easier to insert and a small 
handle can be fitted to help in removal. Very small hearing aids with 
very small controls and tiny batteries are only appropriate if the client 
can handle them satisfactorily - no matter how good the amplification 
or how much the client wants a small aid. 
11.2.3 OPERATING THE AID 
New users need precise simple instruction on operating and care of the 
hearing aid. They must be sure of the size and type of battery to use. If 
they are using zinc air batteries they need to be aware that removal of 
the tab will cause the battery to deteriorate. It is common for a user to 
try several new batteries, one after the other, if the hearing aid does 
not work. The use of a battery cell tester to ensure the adequacy of the 
battery current can avoid this problem since the client can then be 

208 
Client management and rehabi I itation 
Earmould 
must fit 
under helix 
Fig. 11.3 The appearance of an earmould when correctly inserted. (Photograph 
courtesy of P.C. Werth Ltd.) 
certain whether it is the battery at fault. Insertion of the battery can be 
difficult with poor eyesight or failing dexterity. It is sensible to change 
batteries over a towel (on the table or on the knees) as it is much easier 
to retrieve a small battery in this way. The client needs to realize that 
the battery has a positive flat side, and a negative rounded side. The 
battery must be in the drawer the correct way around, with the positive 
side matching the positive sign shown on the aid. If it is placed back to 
front the battery drawer will not close easily, and it should never be 
forced shut. Clients also need information about how to dispose of old 
batteries safely, where to obtain new supplies and how often they will 
need to replace them. The aid should be turned off when not in use to 
reduce battery consumption and it is sometimes helpful to suggest that 
the battery compartment be opened at night to ensure there is no 
unnecessary drain. Most clients will want to know how long a bat-
tery should last, and a reasonable indication of battery life should be 
possible, taking account of the hearing aid manufacturer's information 
and the client's probable usage. Further information on calculating 
battery life will be found in section 7.6.2. When the battery has run 
out, it should never be thrown in the fire or left where pets or children 
may swallow it. Swallowed batteries are extremely dangerous: inges-

Practical aspects of rehabilitation 
209 
tion of any battery is potentially lethal and medical attention should be 
obtained without delay. 
New users may be concerned about the volume at which to set their 
new aids, and without advice often set them too high or too low. They 
need to understand that the volume should be adjusted in different 
situations but, as a starting point, it is often helpful to encourage the 
client to rotate the volume control until the aid is a little too loud and 
then reduce it slightly. Alternatively, the aid may be pre-set using a 
test box or insertion gain. A prescription formula or the subtraction of 
an average conversational level (60 dB to 70 dB) from the most com-
fortable level may provide the basis for this approach. However, even 
when the gain is pre-set, the client should not normally use this setting 
in all situations. A spot of nail varnish to mark the appropriate volume 
setting can be helpful where a parent or carer sets the aid. Children 
should be encouraged to take responsibility for their own aids, in-
cluding setting the volume, as early as possible. Many children of five 
years old are able to approach this sensibly, although parents and 
teachers need to keep an eye on the situation! 
Binaural hearing aids can be adjusted in the same manner as mon-
aural aids, but both aids will then need to be turned down slightly and 
adjusted as necessary to ensure that sound is heard centrally. If the 
loss is very asymmetrical or the client has become used to listening 
monaurally over a long period of time, it may be better not to attempt 
to 'balance' the ears in this way, at least initially. 
If the hearing aid includes other client-operated controls, such as 
telecoil, tone controls or an on-off switch, these must be demonstrated 
and their use practised at the initial fitting stage. A common problem is 
where a client switches to the 'T' position for receiving from a loop, but 
forgets to return the aid to the normal 'M' position afterwards and 
therefore thinks the aid is faulty. Practice in use can be arranged at the 
fitting stage by attaching a telecoil adaptive coupler to the telephone, 
and using the speaking clock or similar service. 
Induction loops are frequently installed in churches and other public 
places but most modern domestic telephones do not have the telecoil 
facility, hence the need for a special adaptive coupler to provide prac-
tice at the early stages. 
A further aspect of hearing aid operation the client should under-
stand is when and why feedback may occur. A correctly-fitted hearing 
aid should not feedback in normal usage, but it is likely if the aid is not 
inserted correctly, if the microphone is covered with a hat or hand, or 
if the ear is blocked with wax. Clients can be helped to understand 
feedback by explaining that it occurs when amplified sound escapes 
from the ear canal and re-enters the microphone of the hearing aid 
such that it is re-amplified and heard as a high-pitched whistle. If the 
aid has to be turned down below the required volume to prevent 

210 
Client management and rehabilitation 
feedback, the hearing aid audiologist must find and rectify the cause, 
perhaps by reducing the vent size or making a new tighter-fitting 
earpiece. 
Feedback can be used to advantage in checking the battery. If the aid 
is held in a cupped hand, with the volume fully on, and the aid does 
not whistle the battery can usually be assumed to be dead. 
11.2.4 CARE OF THE AID 
Hearing aids are small, expensive items and new users need to ·be 
informed how to care for their aids. They may not realize that the aid 
should not come into contact with water, make-up, hair spray and 
perfume. Batteries should be removed if aids are not used for a long 
period and aids should be kept away from extreme temperatures. An 
earmould can be separated from the hearing aid and washed in warm 
water, although care should be taken to ensure no moisture remains in 
the tubing before reconnection to the aid. An air blower or 'puffer' can 
be used to remove moisture (including condensation after use) from 
the tubing. In-the-ear hearing aids must not be washed. Cleaning 
involves wiping them periodically with a dry tissue or cloth and check-
ing the sound outlet and vent, if applicable, for wax when the aid is 
removed each night. Wax can be removed carefully using a special wax 
tool or small cleaning brush, with the receiver outlet over a tissue to 
collect the debris as it falls out. Nothing should be inserted down the 
sound outlet further than about 5 mm as damage to the receiver could 
result. A small metal or plastic wax trap may be fitted by the manu-
facturer to prevent any wax particles finding their way into the receiver. 
This does not reduce the need for the client to clean the opening, but if 
the trap becomes blocked the hearing aid audiologist will usually need 
to clean it for the client. Cream or Vaseline, which some clients use to 
ease insertion of the aid, can also block and damage the aid unless 
used sparingly and with care. Dirt in the receiver and in the micro-
phone are common causes of hearing aid damage. The aid should 
therefore be handled with clean, dry hands and should be removed 
during potentially damaging situations, such as washing or shaving. 
For many first-time users there seems to be a great deal of infor-
mation to assimilate, and written instructions for operation and care 
should also be provided. Clients should be encouraged to read these in 
the first few days. 
11.2.5 TRAINING IN HEARING AND FIRST USE OF THE AID 
Most new users need to become acclimatized to hearing aid use over a 
period of time. They are usually advised to build up their use gradually 

Practical aspects of rehabilitation 
211 
from an hour or two in quiet surroundings. At first they are usually 
advised not to try to 'test' the aid, but to restrict use to reasonably easy 
situations, such as conversation with single members of the family, or 
listening to news programmes on the television. The news is helpful 
because the newsreader faces the audience and provides clear speech, 
without background noise or a complex story line to follow. It is 
usually inadvisable for the aids to be worn too soon in noisy situations, 
and it is therefore not sensible for the client to wear the hearing aid in 
the street immediately after fitting. Wind and traffic noise are parti-
cularly disconcerting. The approach should, however, be flexible and 
individual: not every client needs to build up use, and this is often 
particularly true of younger clients. A client should not be prevented 
from wearing the aid for as long as he or she likes, provided that it is 
turned down if the sound is too loud or taken off if the aid is uncom-
fortable or the client becomes tired. 
In the early stages of hearing aid use, or of change to a different 
system, the client may be unable to tolerate the prescribed pattern of 
amplification. A seemingly appropriate high-frequency emphasis may 
appear to sound 'tinny' or the aid may seem too loud. It may be 
necessary to provide a high frequency cut, or to reduce the output 
through peak clipping, or perhaps to provide some AGC. When the 
client becomes acclimatized to hearing aid use their tolerance will often 
increase, and it is usually possible with tone controls or programmable 
aids to alter the aid's controls gradually to maximize the client's benefit 
from the amplification system. 
After-care is an important part of the rehabilitation process. The 
client must be able to contact the hearing aid audiologist if problems 
or queries arise. A few clients do not need further help, but most 
appreciate subsequent information and attention, which may ease 
acceptance of the aid. Evaluation, whether formal or informal, should 
be built into the rehabilitation programme and lead on to adjustments 
to the hearing aids, further rehabilitation and perhaps the addition of 
other 'assistive' devices to help overcome specific problems. When the 
rehabilitation period is satisfactorily completed, contact with the client 
is usually maintained through servicing tasks, such as retubing or 
cleaning battery contacts, and providing regular hearing checks. Often 
the client will be interested in new products and the hearing aid 
audiologist should be ready to provide factual information about assis-
tive devices and new types of hearing aids. 
11.2.6 TACTICS 
Many of the difficulties caused by hearing loss can be minimized by the 
use of some simple hearing 'tactics'. Over time, the hearing impaired 

212 
Client management and rehabilitation 
person may develop his or her own set of tactics, but the hearing aid 
audiologist may help ease the early stages with a few practical sugges-
tions, which might include the following: 
1. Reduce background noise - turn off the radio or other competing 
noise, hold a conversation in the lounge rather than the hall, use a 
tablecloth to reduce the clatter of plates, and so on. The hearing aid 
volume may also be turned down a little in noisy situations. 
2. Ensure adequate lighting - the room should be well lit and the lights 
should fall on the speaker's face not in the client's eyes. 
3. Positioning - reduction of the distance between listener and speaker 
will improve hearing; a distance of about 1 metre is ideal for lip-
reading and is not uncomfortably dose. 
4. Encouraging others - it is helpful if the attention of the hearing 
impaired person is attracted, perhaps by calling a name and then 
pausing, before a conversation is started. The speaker should be 
encouraged to face the client and speak dearly, to make the subject 
of the conversation known and to rephrase anything not fully 
understood. Shouting and speaking very slowly with exaggerated 
lip movements do not help, but slowing speech slightly, using clear 
speech and a loud voice will help. Good communication demands 
an effort from both the listener and the speaker. 
Even people with a very mild hearing loss can benefit from the intro-
duction of hearing tactics. With a more severe loss, there may be an 
increased reliance not only on tactics but also on speech-reading. 
11.2.7 LIP-READING AND AUDITORY TRAINING 
Lip-reading can be a useful adjunct to a hearing aid user with any 
degree of impairment. Even with normal hearing we use lip-reading to 
some extent in difficult listening situations. Some individuals acquire 
great skill in lip-reading without conscious effort but, for most, lip-
reading is a difficult task. 
I tried to lip-read. I had not expected to understand much but the 
reality was a choking experience. I understood very little of what 
was said and, to add to my discomfort, I had no idea where to 
look. By the time I swivelled round to locate a speaker he would 
be half-way through his question; a brief one would be finished 
before I could start to make any sense of it ... As shadows flitted 
across the faces I was trying to lip-read they made a difficult task 
impossible. 
Ashley, 1991 

Assistive devices for the hearing impaired 
213 
Lip-reading classes are often provided through the local education 
authority, where the hearing impaired can obtain help in developing 
the skill. Although it would appear that lip-reading is 'caught' rather 
than taught, classes can provide graded practice and encouragement. 
In addition, bringing people with similar problems together provides a 
degree of group therapy, which may be very helpful in developing 
understanding, acceptance and a more positive and assertive attitude. 
Individuals who have a more severe or profound hearing loss of 
long-standing may benefit from auditory training. This is a series of 
exercises designed to help the deaf person to learn to listen and to 
build up the correct associations of sounds and their meanings. Sessions 
are usually individual and may be provided by hearing therapists, 
speech and language therapists or teachers of the deaf. Sign language 
and finger-spelling are rarely used by adults with acquired deafness 
because they are of little help in communicating with the hearing 
community. 
11.3 ASSISTIVE DEVICES FOR THE HEARING IMPAIRED 
11.3.1 AUXILIARY AIDS 
There are many devices to help the hearing impaired either in addition 
to, or in place of, hearing aids. Such devices are known as 'environ-
mental aids', 'assistive devices' or 'auxiliary aids', and they are designed 
to assist with specific everyday problems, such as listening to the 
television, or on the telephone. Many of these use an induction loop or 
an infra-red system, and for the more severely deaf visual or vibrating 
indicators are often used, particularly for alarm sounds and for the 
doorbell and telephone. Details of current assistive devices can be 
obtained from the RNID (Royal National Institute for Deaf People) or 
from the various manufacturers. Many of the special systems available 
may be obtained on free loan through the local social services depart-
ment, although availability depends on local finances and policies; 
alternatively clients may purchase devices privately. Where special 
systems are required to aid someone in employment, it may be 
possible to obtain these through the local Job Centre. 
11.3.2 THE INDUCTION LOOP SYSTEM 
An induction loop system is designed to enable a sound signal to be 
transmitted directly to the listener. This overcomes problems created 
by background noise, reverberation and increasing distance from 
the sound source. The loop utilizes the principle of electromagnetic 
induction. 

214 
Client management and rehabilitation 
(a) Electromagnetic induction 
A current flowing in a wire creates a magnetic field around it. The loop 
system involves a cable fitted around the required area and attached to 
an amplifier. The sound source is fed into the amplifier through a 
microphone, or by a direct connection from the television or other 
device. 
When a suitable pick-up receiver enters the magnetic field, the sound 
signals are transmitted to it by a fluctuating magnetic signal from the 
loop cable. Most behind-the-ear, and some in-the-ear hearing aids are 
fitted with this facility, which is known as the 'T' switch. (Modern 
telephones do not produce an adequate magnetic field for the operation 
of the induction loop, unless this is specifically designed for.) When 
the wearer switches to 'T', only signals from the loop system may be 
heard. If the wearer also wishes to hear sounds from the environment, 
to hear friends talking for instance, the aid must be fitted with a switch 
that allows the microphone to remain operative; this is known as an 
'MT' switch. Where a hearing aid is not in use, separate induction loop 
receivers can be supplied. 
(b) Loop design 
The installation of a domestic loop system is a relatively simple matter. 
For a loop system to operate successfully in a public place and to meet 
all the necessary requirements (British Standards Institution, 1981), 
specialized design and installation are essential. 
The major disadvantages of the loop system are: 
1. Overspill interference will result where two loop systems are used 
in adjacent rooms. 
2. The frequency response on 'T' may be different to the normal 
reception on 'M'. In particular the low frequency response may be 
less good. 
3. Weak or dead spots can arise within the looped area. 
4. There may be electrical interference that generates internal noise in 
the hearing aid, near fluorescent lights, for example. 
5. Orientation of the head may cause variation in the gain received of 
as much as 15dB (Tucker and Nolan, 1984). 
11.4 MANAGEMENT PRACTICES 
11.4.1 THE ROLE OF THE HEARING AID AUDIOLOGIST 
Hearing aid audiologists usually undertake the total aural rehabilitation 
of clients who have chosen to obtain a hearing aid through a private 
route. Their primary responsibility is therefore to ensure that hearing 

Management practices 
215 
impaired clients obtain maximum benefit from their hearing aid sys-
tem. In order to achieve this, they will determine: 
• the need for medical referral; 
• the hearing loss; 
• the client's difficulties and feelings in relation to the hearing problem; 
• the need for a hearing aid. 
The hearing aid audiologist should guide and support clients in their 
search for solutions to their hearing problems. This will usually, but 
not always, involve the selection and adjustment of a hearing aid 
system together with the provision of rehabilitation counselling and 
after-care service to ensure that the system provides maximum benefit 
to the client. 
11.4.2 THE HEARING AID COUNCIL CODE OF PRACTICE 
The Hearing Aid Council Act of 1968 provides for 'the establishment of 
a Hearing Aid Council, to register persons engaged in the supply of 
hearing aids, to advise on the training of persons engaged in such 
business, and to regulate trade practices'. The Hearing Aid Council 
(Amendment) Act of 1989 introduced changes to the composition of 
the council and extended its disciplinary powers. On a day-to-day 
basis the Hearing Aid Council (HAC) is administered by a Registrar, 
but the council itself consists of 12 members, four to represent the 
interests of the hearing impaired consumer, four with specialized 
medical or audiological technical knowledge and four to represent the 
interests of the private hearing aid dispenser. The council members are 
appointed by the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) and each 
serves a three-year term, although this may be followed by one further 
term of three years. The full council meets four times a year, and there 
are additional meetings of its standing committees - the Examining 
Committee, Complaints Investigating Committee and Disciplinary 
Committee. 
The main functions of the Hearing Aid Council are the establishment 
and maintenance of standards of competence and the regulation of 
trade practices. These are achieved through implementation of the 
HAC's Code of Practice and the complaints and disciplinary proce-
dures. Included in the Code of Practice (1990) are 29 numbered clauses 
that regulate all aspects of dispensing practice. The following provides 
a summary of the main provisions in relation to dispensers. 
(a) Self-representation 
Hearing aid dispensers may not use misleading or unqualified descrip-
tions such as 'consultant', 'specialist' or 'audiologist' unless preceded 

216 
Client management and rehabilitation 
by the words 'hearing aid', nor may they designate their premises as a 
clinic or institute, and specified wording, relating to registration under 
the Act, must be used. 
(b) Medical referral 
Dispensers must advise clients to seek medical advice (if they have not 
already done so) if they complain of or show any of the following: 
• excessive wax in the ear; 
• discharge from the ear; 
• vertigo; 
• earache; 
• deafness of short duration or of sudden onset; 
• unilateral sensorineural hearing loss; 
• conductive hearing loss; 
• tinnitus; 
• exposure to loud noise at work or elsewhere. 
(c) Facilities 
Premises must provide a suitable reception or waiting room, a self-
contained private examination room, a suitable storage system for 
confidential client records and a room for audiometry that is not sub-
ject to excessive noise. At every consultation, there must be available: 
• a regularly calibrated pure-tone audiometer with facilities for air and 
bone conduction with masking; 
• an otoscope and specula, with facilities for cleaning them; 
• aural impression material and equipment; 
• a range of air and bone conduction hearing aids. 
It must also be possible to arrange speech audiometry when required. 
Appropriate air and bone conduction audiometry must be carried out 
unless the dispenser has available an audiogram taken within the 
previous two months by or under supervision of an ENT surgeon. 
(d) Information for clients 
At all times dispensers should provide the best possible advice includ-
ing, where appropriate, that a hearing aid may not necessarily be of 
benefit. A copy of the Code of Practice should be made available on 
request, and this must be stated in any advertisement indicating that 
the dispenser is registered under the Hearing Aid Council Act. 
Written information must be given for any trial, guarantee, service 

Improving communications 
217 
arrangements, financial and other relevant details, as outlined in the 
current Code of Practice, before a client is committed to, or supplied 
with, a hearing aid. 
(e) Home visiting and exhibitions 
Home visiting is strictly regulated except where the visit is requested 
by the client or an appropriate person acting on his or her behalf. 
Where exhibitions are undertaken away from the permanent place of 
business, there must be adequate provision for after-care service and 
the full name and registered head office address must be prominently 
displayed. 
(f) After-care 
Service calls and complaints must always be dealt with promptly and 
efficiently. 
The clauses that form the Code of Practice, which regulates dis-
pensers of hearing aids, apply to all individuals who conduct or seek to 
conduct oral negotiations with a view to effecting the supply of a 
hearing aid for the use of a person with impaired hearing. The Code 
also regulates employers and trainees. All dispensers must therefore be 
conversant with the full current Code of Practice. 
11.5 IMPROVING COMMUNICATIONS 
11.5.1 COMMUNICATION 
Even with normal hearing, a person will look at a speaker whenever 
possible to aid the communication process. In noisy situations there 
may be some reliance on mouth movements and facial expression to 
increase understanding. 
With impaired hearing, there is likely to be some dependence on 
visual cues. Visual information may be through observing speech cues 
(speech-reading), or through a manual communication system (signing 
or finger-spelling). The degree of dependence is related to the degree 
of hearing impairment. Someone who is profoundly deaf is reliant 
on visual information, whereas with a mild loss hearing remains the 
primary communication channel. 
11.5.2 SPEECH-READING 
Speech-reading involves lip-reading together with observations of other 
visual cues, such as facial and hand movements. 

218 
Client management and rehabilitation 
Speech-reading is easier if the speaker: 
• uses appropriate facial expressions and 'body language'; 
• uses a normal or slightly slowed rate of utterance; 
• uses precise but not exaggerated articulation; 
• is someone with whom the 'listener' is familiar; 
• is positioned face to face at a distance of about 1.5 metres; 
• does not cover the lips or smoke or chew while talking. 
Many of the sounds of speech (phonemes) cannot be differentiated 
by the visual pattern alone. Groups of phonemes that look the same 
are known as a 'viseme'; for example, the bilabials 'p', 'b', 'm' form a 
viseme - a speech-reader could only conclude that one of that group 
had been spoken. 
It is thought that only about 50% of a spoken message can be 
understood through lip-reading alone. Connected speech provides 
more information than visible articulatory movements alone (Chapter 
4). When even significantly reduced hearing is coupled with speech-
reading, the listener's ability to comprehend may be greatly increased. 
Lip-reading classes provide activities to aid development of speech-
reading. It is debatable whether or not lip-reading is a skill that can be 
taught, but in many cases classes provide graded practice and have the 
additional benefit of the more general group therapy. 
11.5.3 AUDITORY TRAINING 
An auditory training programme provides a series of exercises designed 
to develop listening skills and is most generally used for adults with a 
long-standing severe or profound hearing loss. Listening is more than 
just hearing, it requires active participation. The hearing impaired need 
to regain meaningful hearing and listening by practice and relearning 
over a period of time. The longer a hearing loss has been sustained, the 
longer will be the time needed for relearning, and auditory training 
may be very beneficial, particularly in difficult cases. 
11.5.4 SPEECH THERAPY 
We all normally use hearing to monitor our own voice; this is known 
as auditory feedback. Even a slight delay in hearing our own speech 
will cause us to stutter; this is demonstrated in the delayed feedback 
test sometimes used with non-organic deafness (section 12.4). 
With impaired hearing there may also be a deterioration in speech 
and voice production, resulting in either poor articulation or an altera-
tion of intensity level. If the loss is conductive, speech production is 
usually quieter. This is because the speaker's own voice sounds louder 

The role of other specialists 
219 
by bone conduction, while the voices of others and general background 
noises are all reduced because of the hearing loss. 
If the loss is sensorineural, speech is usually louder as speakers 
cannot hear themselves or others, and often this is accompanied by 
poor consonant articulation since high frequency hearing is generally 
most affected. 
Speech therapy may be provided to help maximize communica-
tion skills. The effect of congenital hearing loss on speech is more 
pronounced and the development of language may be delayed 
(Chapter 13). 
11.6 THE ROLE OF OTHER SPECIALISTS 
11.6.1 THE SOCIAL WORKER WITH DEAF PEOPLE 
Social workers with deaf people undertake a specialist training in 
addition to that required for generic social work. This specialist training 
enables them to communicate and work effectively with deaf people. 
The role of these specialist social workers involves: 
• maintaining a voluntary register of deaf (with and without speech) 
and hard of hearing people for the local authority; 
• providing information to the deaf about statutory rights and entitle-
ment to benefits; 
• helping the deaf to resolve problems, whether these be physical, 
mental or financial. 
Most of the time of social workers for deaf people is taken up with 
helping the profoundly prelingually deaf, whose main avenue of com-
munication is sign language. This is a small minority group but com-
munication difficulties compound their problems. Social workers may 
therefore find themselves acting as interpreters in court, hospital, at 
job interviews and so on, and dealing with discrimination at work or 
home. 
11.6.2 HEARING THERAPISTS 
Hearing therapists are generally hospital-based and work as part of a 
multidisciplinary team, which will include clinical and social work 
staff. The hearing therapist is involved in the rehabilitation of patients 
over the age of 16 with acquired hearing loss; they do not usually work 
with congenitally deaf people. The role is wide but includes the assess-
ment of rehabilitative needs and the provision of programmes to 
maximize patients' communication skills. Such programmes may in-
clude instruction in the use of hearing aids and assistive devices, 

220 
Client management and rehabilitation 
counselling, hearing tactics, lip-reading and auditory training. Hearing 
therapists undertake a one-year full-time course. 
11.6.3 TEACHERS OF THE HEARING IMPAIRED 
Teachers of the hearing impaired, more commonly called 'teachers of 
the deaf', are teachers who hold an additional certificate in education 
of the hearing impaired. This specialist qualification may be gained 
after the successful completion of a one-year full-time or equivalent 
part-time course. Teachers of the deaf are involved with children from 
diagnosis to the end of their education. Many are peripatetic, working 
with a caseload of children based in different schools rather than being 
based with a class or unit in one single school. Peripatetic teachers of 
the deaf usually spend part of their time working with the class or 
subject teachers (or the parents in the case of a pre-school child), rather 
than necessarily in the direct teaching of the hearing impaired child. 
11.7 SUMMARY 
The hearing aid audiologist can make a significant contribution to the 
hearing impaired client's quality of life. The provision of hearing aids is 
only part of an overall rehabilitative process that should answer certain 
questions: 
• Is remediation necessary? 
• Is amplification appropriate? 
• What are the client's needs? 
• Is medical referral necessary? 
• What aids are needed? 
• What counselling procedures are necessary? 
• Has rehabilitation been successful? 
The rehabilitation process may be handled entirely by the hearing aid 
audiologist, who must comply with the Hearing Aid Council Code 
of Practice, or it may involve a number of different specialists. The 
habilitation of children is undertaken by specialist teachers of the hear-
ing impaired, while adult rehabilitation may involve a hearing therapist, 
within the health service. Ongoing support is provided for pre-
lingually deaf adults by a social worker for the deaf. 
REFERENCES 
Ashley, J. (1991) The Silent House. Being Deaf The Experience of Deafness, (eds 
G. Taylor and J. Bishop), The Open University, Milton Keynes. 
British Standards Institution (1981) BS 6083: Part 4, Hearing Aids: Specification for 

Further reading 
221 
Magnetic Field Strength in Audio-frequency Induction Loops for Hearing Aid 
Purposes, British Standards Institution. 
British Standards Institution (1988) BS 2497: Part 5, Standard Reference Zero for 
the Calibration of Pure-Tone Air Conduction Audiometers, British Standards 
Institution. 
Goldstein, D.P. and Stevens, S.D.G. (1981) Audiological Rehabilitation: Man-
agement Modell. Audiology, 20, 432-52. 
Haggard, M.P., Gatehouse, S. and Davies, A.C. (1981) The High Prevalence of 
Hearing Disorders and its Implications for Services in the UK. British Journal 
of Audiology, 15, 241-51. 
Hallberg, L.R.-M. and Carlsson, S.G. (1991) Qualitative study of strategies for 
managing a hearing impairment. British Journal of Audiology, 25(3), 201-11. 
Hearing Aid Council (1990) The Hearing Aid Council Code of Practice, Examinations 
and Registration, The Hearing Aid Council, Milton Keynes. 
Lutman, M.E., Brown, E.J. and Coles, R.R.A. (1987) Self-reported Disability 
and Handicap in the Population in Relation to Pure-Tone Threshold, Age, 
Sex and Type of Hearing Loss. British Journal of Audiology, 21, 45-58. 
Rendell, R.J., Williams, G., Vinton, M. and Croucher, L. (1992) Why Patients 
Choose to Purchase a Hearing Aid Privately. British Journal of Audiology, 
26(6), 325-7. 
Tucker, I. and Nolan, M. (1984) Educational Audiology, Croom Helm, London. 
Woolley, M. (1991) Acquired Hearing Loss: Acquired Oppression, in Being 
Deaf: The Experience of Deafness (eds G. Taylor and J. Bishop), The Open 
University, Milton Keynes. 
FURTHER READING 
Brooks, D.N. (1989) Adult Aural Rehabilitation, Chapman and Hall, London. 
Davies, H. and Fallowfield, L. (1991) Counselling and Communication in Health 
Care, J. Wiley & Sons, Chichester. 
Egan, G. (1990) The Skilled Helper, Model Skills and Methods of Effective Helping, 
4th edn, Brooks Cole, Pacific Grove, California. 
Pollack, M. (1988) Amplification for the Hearing Impaired, 3rd edn, Grune & 
Stratton, Orlando. 
Sandlin, R.E. (1990) Handbook of Hearing Aid Amplification, Volume II, College-
Hill Press, Boston. 

PART THREE 
Special Aspects of Hearing 
Aid Audiology 

Assessment and 
management of 
special problems 
12.1 TINNITUS 
12.1.1 INTRODUCTION 
12 
Tinnitus is a relatively common complaint, which the Oxford Textbook 
of Medicine (1983) describes as: 
A sensation of noise in the ears or head. It may be related to 
disease of the cochlea or of the eighth nerve and can be produced 
by certain drugs of which quinine and the salicylates are the most 
important. It may be faint and perceived only in quiet surround-
ings, or it may be loud and continuous. It is variously described as 
a high-pitched whistling or hissing sound or occasionally as a low-
pitched rumbling or machinery-like noise. 
Research in this country suggests that over 17% of the population have 
had an experience of troublesome tinnitus, and that as many as 300 000 
people in the UK have such severe tinnitus that they cannot work or 
function socially (Sheppard and Hawkridge, 1987). Tinnitus is always a 
symptom of some pathology and the first course of action must be the 
referral of the client for medical advice, in line with the Hearing Aid 
Council Code of Practice (1990). In the vast majority of cases there is no 
cure, and if medical and surgical treatment have been ruled out the 
hearing aid audiologist may try fitting maskers or hearing aids for relief 
from the tinnitus. 

226 
Assessment and management of special problems 
12.1.2 HEARING PROBLEMS AND TINNITUS 
Tinnitus is frequently linked with hearing disorders and investigations 
may show a degree of similarity between the frequency of the tinnitus 
and that of the hearing loss. Where tinnitus accompanies a conductive 
loss it is most likely to be low frequency in nature (this also tends to be 
true of Meniere's disorder). The tinnitus is often described as rumbling, 
humming or like the noise of machinery. Common causes include wax, 
fluid and otosclerosis. With the possible exception of the latter, medical 
treatment tends to be very effective for tinnitus which is linked with a 
conductive hearing problem. 
Tinnitus more frequently accompanies sensorineural hearing loss 
and we still know relatively little about the mechanisms that may cause 
it. The current theory detailed below (Hazell, 1987) may help to explain 
some types of sensorineural tinnitus. 
The outer, middle and inner ear concentrate sound energy to the 
hair cells in the cochlea. It is now thought that the organ of Corti is not 
a purely passive structure, but that it acts as a natural biomechanical 
hearing aid to focus sound energy efficiently on to the sensory hair 
cells. The inner hair cells appear to be passive receptors that fire the 
auditory nerve. The outer hair cells sharpen up the response of the 
basilar membrane, possibly utilizing: 
• muscle proteins (actin and myosin, produced in the outer hair cells); 
• the cuticular plate that surrounds the outer hair cells; 
• the supporting cells of Deiters. 
Selective stiffening of the basilar membrane actively sharpens the re-
sponse, particularly to low intensity sounds. It may be that if the organ 
of Corti is damaged in one area, there is over-activity of the control 
mechanism, which may stimulate relatively healthy areas in close 
proximity. This could give rise to tinnitus, which would be close in 
frequency to the area of greatest hearing loss. 
12.1.3 AIDS FOR THE RELIEF OF TINNITUS 
There are a number of possible methods of treatment for tinnitus, 
including the use of drugs, surgery and electrical stimulation or utilizing 
cochlear implants for the profoundly deaf. The most common treat-
ment, however, involves the use of masking instruments. These can 
be fitted by a hearing aid audiologist once medical and surgical inter-
vention have been ruled out. Masking instruments do not 'cure' 
tinnitus, and counselling, methods of relaxation and the support of 
self-help groups can be important if success is to be achieved. 
A tinnitus masker is a device, very similar to a hearing aid in ap-

Tinnitus 
227 
pearance, which presents another, external, sound to the client. This 
other sound may fully or partially mask the tinnitus and some inhibition 
of the tinnitus may occur. Inhibition is the absence or reduction of the 
tinnitus after the masker is removed, and may last for only a few 
seconds or for much longer periods. Hearing aids can be used in 
combination with masking devices, or on their own. Hearing aids 
alone may provide some masking through the amplification of back-
ground noise, but they do not appear to achieve residual inhibition. 
We do not know enough about tinnitus to do more than speculate why 
maskers can be effective. It may be because they provide auditory 
masking, because of phase cancellation of the tinnitus sound, or 
perhaps because the masking noise restores 'balance' to the damaged 
part of the basilar membrane, reducing over-activity in adjacent areas. 
Whatever the reason, masking can, in many cases, be effective, al-
though much rehabilitative counselling is usually needed. A correctly 
fitted masker, with or without a hearing aid as necessary, is the most ef-
fective method currently available for controlling sensorineural tinnitus. 
12.1.4 TINNITUS ASSESSMENT 
There are many ways of assessing tinnitus varying from recording the 
client's subjective account to lengthy simulations, perhaps involving 
use of a music synthesizer to match the frequency content. The methods 
used by hearing aid audiologists will reflect their equipment, personal 
interest and knowledge, and the time they have available. A reasonable 
match of the pitch and loudness of the client's tinnitus is important 
both for fitting and counselling. A more precise analysis of the nature 
of the sounds, while of interest, adds little of use to the fitting. An 
audiometer can be used quite successfully for tinnitus matching, al-
though some tinnitus sufferers do find the matching test very difficult 
to perform. 
The different stages involved in assessment (Figure 12.1) are as 
follows. 
(a) Pure-tone audiometry 
A not-masked pure-tone audiogram should be obtained prior to tinnitus 
matching. Uncomfortable loudness levels (ULLs) are important but 
should not be attempted at this stage because loud sounds may exacer-
bate tinnitus in a small proportion of cases. 
(b) Pitch matching 
A number of methods are available for pitch matching, but perhaps the 
most useful for the hearing aid audiologist's purposes is the adaptive 

228 
Assessment and management of special problems 
-10 
0 
' 
10 
' 
Client Details: 
20 
fil 30 
:Q. 40 
Name: 
50 
' 
Qi 
i 
i 
> 
60 
' 
Age: 
~ 
' 
"' 70 
__; 
c 
80 
Relevant History: 
.tij 
' 
Q) 
90 
: 
i 
I 
100 
I 
I 
: 
i 
~~gllllllf 
i 
! 
; !g 125 250 500 1000 2000 4000 8000 
Masker I Aid Ordered: 
Frequency (Hz) 
TINNITUS EVALUATION 
Pitch Matching 
Audiometer used: 
Low frequency 
Mid frequency 
High frequency 
(below 1KHz) 
(1-2KHz) 
(above 2KHz) 
Left 
Right 
Level Matching (dBHL) 
Left Ear --
Right Ear __ 
Binaural ---
Test procedure: 
Loudness Balance to opposite ear ___ 
Loudness Balance to same ear ---
Masking Evaluation 
Type of audiometer or tinnitus masker used 
Type of noise employed 
Masker control settings (if applicable) 
LEVELS REQUIRED (dBHL) TO MASK TINNITUS 
UNCOMFORTABLE LEVELS 
L 
R 
Hz ~ 
250 500 lK 
6K 
! SK 
~a'?king 
I---
o1se 
Tinnitus Partially 
u 
L 
Masked 
L 
L 
R 
Tinnitus Completely 
Masked 
Fig. 12.1 A suggested format for a tinnitus assessment form. 

Tinnitus 
229 
(bracketing) method. The client is asked to indicate whether his or her 
tinnitus is higher or lower in pitch than the test tone presented through 
the audiometer. A suitable explanation in layman's terms should be 
given, with examples or 'practice' as necessary. 
Ideally the test tone should be presented in the same ear as that in 
which the tinnitus occurs, but in some cases it is necessary to test 
contralaterally. The tone should be introduced at one extreme of the 
available frequency range and at a level estimated to be comfortable. 
The selection of 8kHz or 125Hz is made on the basis of the client's 
description of his or her tinnitus. The tone should be presented for 
about 2 seconds, and repeated as necessary allowing time between 
presentations for the client to make the necessary comparison. 
A practical example may help to clarify this. Suppose the client has 
described his tinnitus as a high-pitched noise, but when an 8kHz tone 
is presented he describes the tinnitus as 'lower'. The next step is to 
present the lowest available frequency, usually 125Hz. This time, the 
client describes his tinnitus as 'higher'. A 6kHz frequency tone is 
presented next, and the extremes are gradually eliminated until the 
frequency, or frequency range, nearest to the tinnitus has been located. 
Some clients confuse loudness with pitch. If this occurs, it may be 
necessary to perform some loudness matching at each frequency to be 
tested. Normally loudness matching is performed only at the frequency 
nearest that of the tinnitus. 
(c) Loudness matching 
A possible method for loudness matching is as follows. At the fre-
quency matched as the nearest to the pitch of the tinnitus, the tone is 
presented initially at threshold (based on the audiogram). The tone 
should be held for 2 seconds, and increased in 5 dB steps until the 
client judges it to be of equal loudness to the tinnitus. 
It is important to realize that severe tinnitus may appear very quiet 
when matched to external sounds. Levels as low in intensity as 10 dB 
above threshold can be perceived as being very severe, perhaps because 
of its inescapability or possibly due in part to the effects of recruitment. 
(d) Masking evaluation 
An indication of the likely benefit of masking may be obtained using 
wide band masking noise from the audiometer; alternatively narrow 
band masking or pure-tones may be used. The aim is to find the 
minimal level of masking that is effective. The masking noise is in-
troduced at or below threshold and increased in 5 dB steps until the 
client indicates he or she can no longer hear the tinnitus. At each step, 

230 
Assessment and management of special problems 
the noise should be held for 5 seconds. This is followed by a rest 
period of a further 5 seconds so that the client can again hear the 
tinnitus. When the minimal masking level (MML) has been found, it is 
maintained for up to 3 minutes. If, during this time, the tinnitus 
becomes audible again, the masking noise may be raised in 5 dB steps 
until it becomes effective once more. 
The difference between the initial level and the level required after 3 
minutes will indicate the masking decay. Where masking decays, it 
may be necessary to amend the aim of masking therapy, to effect 
partial masking for the client. 'Chasing' the tinnitus is not usually 
helpful and may result in high levels of masking noise being used. 
Generally, masking may be effective at low intensity levels, and the 
lower the level at which it is effective, the more likely it is to be 
accepted by the client. 
(e) Uncomfortable loudness level (ULL) 
ULLs must be obtained after all tinnitus investigations are completed, 
because loud sounds may heighten the tinnitus. If loud sounds do have 
this effect, the output of a hearing aid may be adjusted to minimize the 
problem, utilizing peak clipping, or automatic gain control as necessary. 
Testing for the ULLs is carried out according to the British Society of 
Audiology recommended method (1987), but ULLs must be found for 
the masking noise as well as the audiometric frequencies tested. 
12.1.5 THE REHABILITATION PROGRAMME 
The ideal tinnitus programme, which can be offered by a hearing aid 
audiologist after the client has obtained medical advice, will include: 
• consultation, assessment and impressions; 
• fitting; 
• follow-up, e.g. after one month or sooner; 
• further appointments as necessary for rehabilitation; 
• further audiometry, e.g. bi-annually, if high levels of masking are 
used or there is a progressive element to the hearing loss. 
(a) Consultation, assessment and impressions 
Tinnitus frequently causes stress, anxiety and poor concentration. 
Clients may feel their tinnitus impairs their ability to hear clearly. 
Often this is due to an associated hearing loss, rather than the tinnitus 
itself. Careful history-taking and assessment are important. The assess-
ment will provide an indication of the possible benefit of masking but, 
as with hearing aids, benefit may be greatest after a period of time has 

Tinnitus 
231 
allowed the client to adjust to its use. The ideal is always to facilitate a 
trial period with hearing aids or maskers. Where tinnitus is bilateral, 
two instruments will often be required. Even where the tinnitus is 
monaural, there are some cases in which bilateral masking is still 
required. 
Impressions should be taken for both ears and the ear moulds 
obtained should be of the skeleton open ear type or have a vent that is 
as large as possible. Solid moulds tend to increase the effect of the 
tinnitus by occlusion. 
(b) Fitting 
If a combination hearing aid and masker is used it is customary to fit 
the instrument as a hearing aid first. Masking is switched on at the 
lowest volume and raised until it is at threshold. It is then increased in 
small increments until the lowest intensity sufficient to just render the 
tinnitus inaudible is found. The lowest effective intensity should always 
be used. If tinnitus breaks through, it may be necessary to counsel the 
client to regard the masking as a distraction rather than relief. A 
masker that is adjustable by the audiologist permits trial with low, 
mid- and high frequency noise to establish which is most effective. A 
frequency similar to the tinnitus may be most effective in inhibiting the 
tinnitus, but in many cases the most effective masking noise is lower in 
frequency than the tinnitus. Selection of the noise to use generally 
involves an element of trial and error. 
The client needs to be instructed in the techniques of use, most of 
which are very similar to instructions for use of a hearing aid. The use 
of a masker, as of a hearing aid, is built up gradually. The client should 
be advised that, while a hearing aid may be used continuously, masking 
should be used only as much as required. A schedule for its use can be 
discussed with the client, for instance a period of masking at night is 
often helpful in relaxing the client ready for sleep. Other advice should 
include a recommendation to avoid loud sounds and to reduce intake 
of caffeine, alcohol and aspirin, since these can worsen tinnitus. Total 
abstinence, at least during the period of adjustment to masking, is the 
ideal. 
(c) Follow-up 
Hearing aid audiologists are well acquainted with the need for follow-
up to establish the effective use of hearing aids. Counselling and 
support, often over a prolonged period, are even more crucial to the 
tinnitus client. Thorough rehabilitation should be normal practice for 
new users of both hearing aids and masking instruments. 

232 
Assessment and management of special problems 
Masking has not been shown to cause any deterioration in hearing 
(Hazell, 1985), but if high levels are used, or if there is a progressive 
element to the hearing loss, it is prudent to carry out regular hearing 
checks. 
12.1.6 SUMMARY 
Tinnitus can be a troublesome condition from which some relief may 
be achieved through the use of masking instruments. Assessment and 
fitting are important aspects of the tinnitus programme, but support 
and counselling are also very necessary to the vast majority of clients. 
The success of masking instrument use varies widely, and success 
depends heavily on the techniques used by the hearing aid audiologist. 
REFERENCES FOR SECTION 12.1 
British Society of Audiology (1987) Recommended Method for Uncomfortable 
Loudness Level (ULL). British Journal of Audiology, 21, 231. 
Hazell, J.W.P. (1985) Management of Tinnitus: Discussion Paper. Journal of 
· Royal Society of Medicine, 78, 56-60. 
Hazell, J.W.P. (1987) Tinnitus, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. 
Hearing Aid Council (1990) The Hearing Aid Council Code of Practice, Examinations 
and Registration, Hearing Aid Council, Milton Keynes. 
Oxford Textbook of Medicine (1983) (eds D.J. Weatherall, J.G.G. Ledingham 
and D.A. Warrell), Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Sheppard, L. and Hawkridge, A. (1987) Tinnitus - Learning to Live with it, 
Ashgrove Press, Bath. 
FURTHER READING FOR SECTION 12.1 
Coles, R., Davis, A. and Smith, P. (1990) Tinnitus: Its Epidemiology and 
Management, in PresiJyacusis and other Age-Related Aspects, J.H. Jensen (ed.), 
14th Danavox Symposium, Copenhagen. 
Feldmann, H. (ed.) (1987) Proceedings of III International Tinnitus Seminar, 
1987, Munster, Germany. Harsch Verlag Karlsruhe, Munster, pp. 121-8. 
Hazell, J. (1987) Tinnitus, Churchill Livingstone, Edinburgh. 
12.2 IMPEDANCE AUDIOMETRY 
12.2.1 INTRODUCTION 
The role of the conductive pathway is to convey sound energy efficiently 
to the cochlea. If the sound wave finds it easy to set the eardrum into 
vibration, much energy is passed on and only a little is reflected. 
However, if it is difficult to set the eardrum into vibration, much 
energy is reflected. The difficulty or hindrance to the flow of energy is 

Impedance audiometry 233 
called impedance. The impedance at the eardrum tells us how well the 
middle ear is functioning. The aim of impedance measurements is to 
assess the efficiency of the middle ear mechanism at passing on sound 
energy. 
12.2.2 THE MIDDLE EAR AND ACOUSTIC IMPEDANCE 
When a sound wave reaches the eardrum some of the energy sets the 
drum vibrating and some is reflected. The eardrum movements are 
carried by the ossicles in the middle ear to the cochlea. The function of 
the middle ear is to act as a transformer, between the low pressure 
required to transmit sound through air and the relatively high pressure 
needed to transmit sound through the perilymph in the cochlea. In 
essence, the middle ear increases the pressure reaching the cochlea. 
This is achieved mainly by concentrating the sound energy arriving at 
the eardrum on to the much smaller stapes footplate. This is not unlike 
the effect of a stiletto heel (Figure 12.2), which concentrates the weight 
of the body on to a small area such that it may make a mark on the 
floor whereas a larger heel area does not have the same effect. In the 
middle ear, there is a small additional effect from the lever action 
of the ossicles, and a slight improvement, especially in the higher 
frequencies, due to the conical shape of the eardrum. 
Normally this system is very efficient and only a little sound is 
reflected by the eardrum. The major part of the sound energy is 
transformed into powerful vibrations to stimulate the cochlea. How-
ever, if the middle ear system is altered, for example as a result of 
disease, the proportion of sound transmitted through it may alter. The 
efficiency of the system is reduced and more energy is lost either by 
reflection from the eardrum or friction in the middle ear. Consequently 
less sound reaches the cochlea and the patient experiences a 'con-
ductive' hearing loss. 
The acoustic impedance of the middle ear is the term used to describe 
the resistance presented by the middle ear to the passage of sound. 
Fig. 12.2 The transformer action of the middle ear is similar in concept to the 
effect of a stiletto heel. 

234 
Assessment and management of special problems 
This varies according to the frequency of the sound passing through, 
and at high frequency the impedance is mainly due to the mass of the 
three bones. However, at low frequencies the acoustic impedance is 
mainly due to the stiffness of the eardrum and the ossicular chain. 
In most conductive conditions, the middle ear system becomes less 
mobile and the stiffness of the eardrum is increased. A greater than 
normal proportion of the acoustic energy is reflected by the stiffened 
eardrum and a smaller than usual proportion is passed on to the 
cochlea. 
Investigations into the proportion of sound reflected by the eardrum 
can give information about the acoustic impedance of the ear. 
12.2.3 THE CONCEPT OF IMPEDANCE 
Impedance in audiometry is simply the difficulty or hindrance to the 
flow of acoustic energy along the conductive pathway. Compliance or 
admittance is, conversely, the mobility or acceptance of the system. 
Impedance is not difficult to conceptualize. When you move a cricket 
bat through air it moves easily, but you would have to apply far more 
force to make the same stroke in a swimming pool. This is because air 
is a low impedance medium and water is a high impedance medium. 
A similar principle applies in the ear, where acoustic energy has to 
move from air to the liquid-filled inner ear. Only if the impedance of 
the two mediums are matched, will energy pass readily from one 
medium to the other. Impedance can be viewed as being influenced by 
the resistance of the system and the way it reacts (that is, its reactance). 
Resistance removes energy from the system and converts it to another 
form, as in friction, for example, between the joints of the ossicles. This 
is a very small component of the impedance of the middle ear. 
Reactance is made up of two elements, stiffness and inertia. The 
inertia of the system relates mainly to the mass of the ossicles and is of 
consequence for higher frequency sounds above about 1.5 kHz. 
Although the proportion of energy accepted or rejected by the middle 
ear is the result of a complex interaction of the three elements that 
make it up, only stiffness is of clinical importance. 
Impedance = resistance + reactance (made up of stiffness and inertia) 
Disorders of the conductive hearing mechanism generally cause changes 
in stiffness. Stiffness, like inertia, is frequency-dependent. Stiffness 
dominates in the low frequency region. 
12.2.4 PRINCIPLES AND EQUIPMENT 
The electro-acoustic impedance bridge, or admittance meter, is an in-
strument that provides information on the functioning of the middle 

Impedance audiometry 235 
ear. Impedance is resistance to the flow of energy, while admittance 
is the efficiency of the system to absorb such energy. The term 
'immitance' is sometimes used to mean the clinical application of 
impedance or admittance, but it is not a preferred term. 
Two tests widely used in audiometry are: 
1. tympanometry; 
2. acoustic reflex measurement. 
Each is an objective measure requiring little if any co-operation from 
the subject; both are quick, easy and non-invasive and are thus ap-
plicable to every age group, from babies to the oldest of senior citizens, 
and every degree of hearing loss. 
12.2.5 TYMPANOMETRY 
For the purposes of tympanometry a small probe made up of three 
tubes (Figure 12.3) is sealed in the ear canal using a small plastic cuff or 
tip. The first tube carries a continuous low frequency probe tone, 
which is passed into the ear canal by the miniature receiver. The 
second tube monitors the sound level and the third tube allows the 
pressure in the outer ear to be altered and measured. 
Tympanometry is the measurement of eardrum compliance as the air 
pressure is altered in the external ear canal. The eardrum is most 
compliant, that is, it moves most freely, when the air pressure in the 
middle ear is the same as that in the ear canal. This would normally be 
at atmospheric pressure, but for the purposes of tympanometry, the 
ear canal is blocked and the air pressure in the canal is artificially 
varied. When the pressure equalizes with that of the middle ear and 
the eardrum moves most freely, sound energy passes readily through 
the eardrum with little reflected. The level of reflected sound in the ear 
Oscillator 
Probe tone 
(226Hz) 
Sound level 
monitor 
Amplifier 
Speaker 
Rectifier 
Microphone External auditory meatus 
Fig. 12.3 An electro-acoustic impedance meter. 
Middle ear 

236 
Assessment and management of special problems 
canal is recorded, and will be at its lowest at the point of maximum 
compliance. 
Patients are usually told that the tympanogram is a record of how 
the eardrum moves, although it is really a graph showing how the SPL 
in the outer ear changes as the air pressure alters. From this we 
can draw conclusions about the mobility of the middle ear system. 
The compliance or mobility of the ear is usually expressed in cubic 
centimetres (cc) of equivalent volume. 
Sound pressure level is a function of a closed cavity volume. With a 
known probe tone, which in tympanometry is usually a 226Hz tone at 
65 dBSPL, the SPL will decrease as the cavity size increases. The com-
pliance of the middle ear is therefore expressed as an equivalent cavity 
volume. The intensity of the probe tone is such that it will not produce 
a reflex contraction of the stapedius muscles. 
The procedure followed in tympanometry can be summarized in a 
series of steps: 
1. The probe in the cuff is inserted into the ear canal so that an airtight 
seal is achieved. 
2. The middle ear canal pressure is altered between + 200 and 
-400 decapascals (daPa) or millimetres of water (mm H20). (1 daPa 
= 1mm H20). 
3. Compliance of the eardrum is measured as the relative change in 
sound pressure level in the ear canal, as the air pressure is increased 
and decreased. 
4. When the sound waves strike the eardrum, some of the energy will 
be reflected. If the eardrum is stiff, more of the energy will be 
reflected, causing a greater SPL in the cavity. 
5. Tympanometry starts with an increase in air pressure in the canal 
(+200daPa), which pushes the eardrum so that it cannot move 
freely. Much sound is therefore reflected and a high SPL recorded. 
6. The pressure is reduced and, as the eardrum begins to move more 
freely, little sound is reflected and a low SPL is recorded. 
7. The point of maximum compliance occurs when the lowest SPL is 
recorded in the ear canal. 
8. At the point of maximum compliance, middle ear pressure will be 
equal to the pressure in the ear canal. 
9. Compliance is measured in cc of equivalent canal volume. A much 
larger than normal static canal volume can identify a perforated 
eardrum. 
12.2.6 CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TYMPANOGRAM 
Two characteristics of the tympanogram are of interest: 

Impedance audiometry 237 
Condition 
Pressure 
Compliance 
Average (cc) 
Shape 
Normal 
Normal 
Normal 
0.3- 1.3 
/ ~ 
Otosclerosis 
Normal 
Low 
0.1 - 1.01 
~ 
~ 
Otitis media 
Low 
Low 
0.06-0.81 
......_ 
Discontinuity 
High 
/ 1\ 
Normal 
(can be 
0.76-3.66 
and scarring 
normal) 
l-2oo 
o 
+2oo I 
Fig. 12.4 Typical tympanogram configurations likely to be seen in a clinical 
population. Values of compliance from 0.3 cc to 1.3 cc obtained at a pressure 
between +30 daPa and -80 daPa are considered to be within the normal 
range. 
1. its shape; 
2. the air pressure at maximum compliance. 
The shape, rather than any absolute value, of the tympanogram is 
most important because wide variations occur within the various 
pathologies, and only the overall pattern is useful. 
Common shapes related to certain ear conditions are reasonably easy 
to recognize by comparison with the shape of an average normal 
tympanogram. For example, if a client has fluid in the middle ear the 
eardrum will not move freely at any point and the resultant shape is a 
flat graph indicating high impedance. Where low pressure, without 
fluid, is present in the middle ear the normal curve is displaced, and 
such a condition may be responsible for slight 'unexplained' conductive 
hearing loss. If the ear is perforated or a grommet is in place it will be 
impossible to maintain pressure unless the Eustachian tube is blocked; 
in this case the cavity volume will be abnormally large and the graph 
will be very flat. Some common shapes are shown in Figure 12.4. 
12.2.7 THE ACOUSTIC REFLEX 
The middle ear has two muscles. The stapedius muscle is approximately 
6 mm long and is located in a vertical hole in the bulge in the posterior 
wall of the middle ear, known as the pyramidal fossa. It is attached to 

238 
Assessment and management of special problems 
the neck of the stapes by a tendon that is about 2 mm long. On 
contraction it pulls the stapes outwards and backwards, which stiffens 
the ossicular chain, increasing the acoustic impedance. The nerve con-
trolling the stapedius muscle is the seventh cranial (facial) nerve. The 
tensor tympani muscle is about 20 mm long and lies in a bony canal 
alongside the Eustachian tube. It passes around a bony ledge before 
being attached to the upper part of the handle of the malleus by a 
6 mm tendon. It is controlled by the fifth cranial (trigeminal) nerve, 
which is mainly responsible for reporting sensation over the face. 
When the muscle contracts, it tends to pull the malleus forward and 
inward to stiffen the ossicular chain. The acoustic reflex is mainly the 
result of the stapedius muscles' contraction, and it is therefore often 
referred to as the stapedial reflex. Very loud sounds may cause a 
startle response that will involve the tensor tympani. When the muscles 
contract, low frequencies are attenuated by up to 20 dB. The function of 
the reflex is not certain, but it is probable that its main purpose is to 
filter out the most intense sounds in one's own speech. It also has a 
protective function, but this is probably a by-product. 
A loud sound, usually 70 to 90 dB above threshold, in either ear will 
cause a reflex contraction of both left and right stapedius muscles. This 
causes a slight increase in acoustic impedance. The acoustic reflex test 
is a measure of the threshold at which the stapedial reflex occurs. 
The acoustic reflex threshold for pure-tones is higher than the reflex 
threshold for white noise. Acoustic reflexes can be measured ipsi-
laterally (in the same ear) or contralaterally (in the opposite ear) because 
a signal applied to one ear causes a reflex contraction in both ears. The 
threshold of the tone used to elicit the reflex is always recorded for the 
ear to which the tone is presented. This is known as the stimulated ear. 
In order for an acoustic reflex to be obtained, the patient must: 
• perceive a 'loud' sound; 
• have a normal middle ear on the measuring probe side (the reflex 
response produces a small increase in impedance; if the eardrum 
already has a high impedance due to glue ear, for example, the 
reflex response will not be noticed); 
• have an intact reflex arc (Figure 12.5). 
A reflex becomes less likely if there is a conductive hearing loss. A 
conductive loss of 25 dB in the stimulated ear will usually abolish the 
reflex. A conductive loss of only 10 dB in the probe ear may prevent the 
reflex from being recorded, because the eardrum is already stiffened. 
The acoustic reflex indicates the loudness of the signal. A conductive 
loss of 25 dB or more is likely to prevent the patient from perceiving the 
signal as sufficiently loud to elicit the acoustic reflex. However, in the 
case of cochlear pathology, the patient often hears the sound as if it 

Auditory 
nerve 
Primary auditory 
centres 
Cochlea 
Sound stimulus 
Brain stem 
Superior 
olivary nucleus 
Fig. 12.5 The stapedial reflex arc. 
Impedance audiometry 239 
Facial motor nucleus 
("-'\. 
' ~·-.+------. 
,_/ 
Stapedius 
muscle 
--.Probe 
were much louder, due to recruitment. The acoustic reflex threshold 
then occurs at less than the normal 70 dB to 90 dB above the threshold 
of hearing. The gap between the threshold of hearing and the reflex 
threshold is known as the span. Where there is a cochlear disorder, an 
acoustic reflex may occur with a span of less than 60 dB. 
A low acoustic reflex threshold is a simple objective test to identify a 
cochlear disorder. With a cochlear hearing loss of 60 dB or less there is 
a 90% chance of observing an acoustic reflex. Naturally, as the hearing 
loss increases, the chance of observing a reflex decreases. However, 
when such a reflex does occur it indicates severe recruitment. 
Reflex thresholds have little value on their own but aid diagnosis in 
conjunction with other results. A span between the threshold of hearing 
and the reflex threshold of 60 dB or less indicates a cochlear loss; while 
a difference of greater than 15 dB between the reflex threshold of each 
ear may suggest a problem beyond the cochlea, that is, a retrocochlear 
disorder. 
If hearing thresholds have not been obtained, perhaps due to a 
severe loss in a young child, or a non-organic problem, reflex thresholds 
can be used to confirm that hearing is present at that level. Reflexes 
may also be used to suggest an appropriate uncomfortable loudness 
level where one cannot otherwise be obtained, as discomfort usually 
occurs approximately 10 dB above the acoustic reflex. 
12.2.8 SUMMARY 
The role of the conductive pathway is to convey sound energy ef-
ficiently to the cochlea. The tympanic membrane and ossicular chain 
present an impedance to incoming sound waves. At low frequencies, 

240 
Assessment and management of special problems 
the impedance is governed principally by the stiffness of the system. 
Most causes of conductive hearing loss affect the stiffness of the middle 
ear. If the stiffness can be measured it can provide valuable information 
about conditions of the middle ear. The function of tympanometry is 
to measure how the impedance alters with variation in air pressure in 
the ear canal. The shape of the compliance curve and the value of the 
middle ear pressure can be of great assistance in pin-pointing the 
nature of a middle ear disorder. 
An acoustic reflex is normally obtained at 70 dB to 90 dB above 
hearing threshold level. A sound stimulus applied to one ear will cause 
a bilateral reflex. A conductive loss in either ear reduces the likelihood 
of obtaining a reflex. Where there is a sensorineural hearing loss of 
cochlear origin, an acoustic reflex is likely to be present at sensation 
levels of 60 dB or less. This is because the acoustic threshold indicates 
the subjective loudness of a sound, not the objective intensity. Recruit-
ment is present with most, if not all, cochlear disorders and a reduced 
reflex threshold is therefore likely to be obtained. 
FURTHER READING FOR SECTION 12.2 
Arlinger, S. (1989) Manual of Practical Audiometry, Volume I, Whurr Publishers, 
London. 
British Society of Audiology (1992) Recommended Procedure for Tympano-
metry. British Journal of Audiology, 26, 255-7. 
Jerger, J. (1980) Clinical Impedance Audiometry, American Electromedics Corpor-
ation, Massachusetts. 
Tucker, I. and Nolan, M. (1984) Educational Audiology, Croom Helm, London. 
12.3 SPECIALIZED AUDIOMETRIC TESTS 
12.3.1 INTRODUCTION 
Conductive hearing loss can be separated from sensorineural loss re-
latively easily using pure-tone audiometry, but to differentiate the 
various types of sensorineural hearing loss is more difficult. 
A number of specialized audiometric tests are used to distinguish 
sensory (or cochlear) from neural (or retrocochlear) hearing disorders. 
These tests can provide powerful clues to the site and probable cause 
of sensorineural hearing loss. 
Individual test results are not always reliable and the results of a 
number of different audiometric tests are normally used in conjunction 
with information revealed from the case history and physical examin-
ation. Information that may help to distinguish cochlear disorders 
from those which occur beyond the cochlea, or retrocochlear, may be 
obtained from acoustic reflex measurement, speech audiometry, Bekesy 

Specialized audiometric tests 
241 
audiometry (section 12.5.2) and electric response audiometry. There is 
also a number of specialized audiometric tests that are used routinely 
in many clinics to aid diagnosis. These include the Short Increment 
Sensitivity Index (SISI) test, the Alternate Binaural Loudness Balance 
(ABLB) test and tests of auditory adaptation or tone decay. 
12.3.2 TESTS OF COCHLEAR FUNCTION 
(a) The Alternate Binaural Loudness Balance (ABLB) test 
In the normal ear a linear relationship exists between an increase in 
intensity and the related increase in perceived loudness. However, 
when damage has occurred in the hair cells of the cochlea, a loss of 
hearing sensitivity may be accompanied by an abnormality known as 
recruitment, in which the subjective sensation of loudness builds up at 
a more rapid rate than normal. For patients with recruitment, a small 
increase in intensity will produce an abnormally large increase in the 
subjective sensation of loudness. 
This abnormal growth in loudness is subjective and therefore cannot 
be directly measured. In cases of unilateral loss, the normal ear can be 
used as a reference for comparison. The Alternate Binaural Loudness 
Balance (ABLB) test compares loudness growth in the abnormal ear 
with loudness growth in the normal ear. There is no single recognized 
procedure and the following is an outline of one test method that may 
be used. 
A tone, 20 dB above the air conduction threshold, is introduced in 
the good ear and held for 1 second. A tone of the same frequency and 
estimated to be of equal loudness is introduced to the poorer ear and 
also held for 1 second. The tone is presented to each ear alternately 
and the intensity in the poorer ear is raised or lowered until the patient 
indicates that the tone in each ear is equally loud. This balancing 
continues at 20 dB intervals in the good ear until full recruitment is 
reached or the test is discontinued, either because discomfort is ex-
perienced, or because the maximum output of the audiometer has been 
reached. 
The test is performed at one or more frequencies, usually 1 kHz or 
2kHz and 4kHz. The results may be plotted on a laddergram, in which 
case, at each level tested, points are joined to illustrate sounds of equal 
loudness. Laddergrams are helpful in understanding the principle of 
the ABLB test, but graphs are most generally used to plot results in 
clinical practice. If, as in Figure 12.6, the left ear shows a hearing loss 
of 40 dB, a 40 dBHL tone will sound the same as a 0 dBHL tone in the 
normal ear. Taking these thresholds as a base line, any increase in 
intensity added identically to both left and right ears results in tones 

242 
Assessment and management of special problems 
dBHL 0 
0 dBHL 
20 
20 
41"l 
40 
60 
60 
80 
80 
Full 
recruitment- 100 
100 
(a) 
Better ear Poorer ear 
Full recruitment 
dBHLr----------------------+~ 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
(b) 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Fig. 12.6 Results of an ABLB test plotted both as a laddergram (a) and as a 
graph (b). 
that are heard as equally loud in both ears. This is normal loudness 
growth. In cases of recruitment an increase in intensity, applied iden-
tically to both ears, may appear as a much louder increase in the 
impaired ear. Full recruitment is a symptom of cochlear damage. It is 
possible for loudness to increase so rapidly that, beyond a certain 
intensity, a tone may appear louder to the poorer ear than it does to 
the better ear. This is known as hyper-recruitment. Where the damage 
to the ear is retrocochlear almost any pattern of loudness growth may 
occur, including derecruitment. Derecruitment is where loudness grows 

Specialized audiometric tests 
243 
1 . Normal - both ears are 
normal and hear a tone as 
equally loud in each ear. 
3. Complete recruitment- at 
some hearing level the 
good and the poor ear hear 
a tone as equally loud. 
5. Derecruitment- the poorer 
ear requires a continuously 
increasing intensity for a 
signal to sound equally 
loud. 
2. No recruitment- a hearing 
loss present at threshold 
remains unchanged at 
higher intensities. Equal 
sensation levels 
(i.e. amounts above 
threshold) are heard as 
equally loud. 
4. Partial recruitment. 
Fig. 12.7 Some possible outcomes of the ABLB test. 
more slowly than normal, and is most often found with eighth nerve 
damage. Some possible patterns of loudness growth are shown in 
Figure 12.7. 
A two-channel audiometer is required for the ABLB test, which may 
be carried out manually or automatically. The procedure is only really 
useful if the loss is unilateral. When the loss is bilateral, but each ear 
has normal hearing at some frequency, a monaural loudness balancing 
test can be attempted. This compares the loudness of a low frequency 
tone with the loudness of a higher frequency tone in the same ear. The 

244 
Assessment and management of special problems 
intensity is raised in 10 dB steps using a method similar to that in the 
ABLB test. However, judgement of equal loudness between different 
frequencies is much more difficult for the patient. 
(b) The Short Increment Sensitivity Index (SISI) 
Small changes in intensity cannot normally be detected at near threshold 
levels. Several decibels change in intensity are required before the 
listener can detect any change in loudness. As the tone becomes louder, 
small changes are much easier to detect. This is true for all listeners. 
The smallest change that can be detected is termed the difference limen 
for intensity. Very small changes in intensity at near threshold levels 
can only be detected in cochlear disorders. Both loudness recruitment 
and the ability to hear very small changes in intensity may be observed 
in cases of cochlear damage. 
The Short Increment Sensitivity Index (SISI) is designed to test the 
patient's ability to detect 1 dB changes in intensity superimposed on a 
tone presented 20 dB above threshold. The SISI test indicates the pre-
sence of cochlear damage but is not a direct indication of the presence 
of recruitment. 
A continuous tone is introduced at 20 dB above threshold. Every 5 
seconds the tone rises by 1 dB and this rise is held for one-fifth of a 
second (Figure 12.8). The patient signals whenever he or she hears a 
rise in the tone. After 20 rises in the tone have been presented the 
patient's score is multiplied by five to obtain a percentage. Patients 
with normal hearing, middle ear or retrocochlear disorders obtain very 
low scores, whereas patients with cochlear disorders usually score very 
highly. Typically, normal hearing, middle ear or retrocochlear disorders 
score between 0% and 30%, and cochlear disorders score between 70% 
and 100%. The higher the SISI score, the more likely it is that the 
pathology is cochlear. Frequencies tested are usually 1 kHz and 4kHz, 
because lower frequencies are less likely to show positive results. 
1 dB increase 
------ t 
1
dBHL 
I '--___,.'---.rl'----''---,..._ _ _,........__ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
... 
5 
1 0 
15 
20 
25 
30 
Time (seconds) 
Fig. 12.8 The SISI test: every 5 seconds the tone presented jumps by 1 dB. This 
is repeated 20 times. 

Specialized audiometric tests 
245 
(c) Tests of auditory adaptation 
It is a normal phenomenon of hearing that sounds appear loudest 
when they are first heard. A signal held for some time will appear to 
fade, or decay. Extremely rapid tone decay may indicate a retrocochlear 
disorder. Retrocochlear hearing loss can be due to damage anywhere 
from the eighth nerve to the brain. Retrocochlear disorders are relatively 
rare, but they may be very serious in nature. 
Several procedures exist for quantifying tone decay. In 1957, Carhart 
reported a tone decay technique that is still in use today. How-
ever, Carhart's tone decay test is time-consuming, and a modified 
version of it, proposed by Rosenberg, is more widely used in clinical 
practice. The Rosenberg modified procedure (1969) is carried out as 
follows. 
A tone is introduced at 5 dB above threshold and the patient is asked 
to signal whenever the tone disappears. Every time the tone fades and 
becomes inaudible, the intensity is raised by 5 dB. The test continues 
for 1 minute. At the end of this time, the degree of tone decay is 
expressed as the number of decibels by which the tone has been raised. 
Decay is considered significant if the tone has had to be raised by 20 dB 
or more. Extreme tone decay of over 30 dB is often found in eighth 
nerve pathology, although it can also be present with some cochlear 
disorders. It is usual to test at two or more frequencies, as decay 
is sometimes more marked at one frequency than another. The fre-
quencies most often used are 2kHz and 500Hz, or 1kHz and 4kHz. 
Retrocochlear disorders can be life-threatening, and as tone decay 
can be used to provide a screening test for retrocochlear pathology it is 
useful to include in a battery of clinical tests. 
12.3.3 SUMMARY 
Pure-tone thresholds provide a great deal of information about hearing 
loss, including the separation of conductive from sensorineural dis-
orders. Specialized tests are used to provide further information on the 
location of the damage within the auditory system. A number of 
specialized audiometric tests exists. 
Alternate Binaural Loudness Balance (ABLB) tests for recruitment in 
cases of unilateral hearing loss, by comparing the growth of loudness 
in the impaired ear with that in the normal ear. The Short Increment 
Sensitivity Index (SISI) determines the patient's ability to detect very 
small changes in intensity at near threshold levels. Tests of tone decay 
consider the degree to which audibility is lost when the ear is con-
tinuously stimulated with a pure-tone at near threshold levels. 
These tests help in the differentiation between cochlear and retro-

246 
Assessment and management of special problems 
cochlear hearing losses. The tests described are examples of those that 
may be used. They are not infallible diagnostic indicators and are not 
intended to be used on their own. Clinical diagnosis consists of applying 
a number or 'battery' of tests, and the results of specialized diagnostic 
tests are interpreted in the light of information provided during pure-
tone threshold tests and the case history. 
REFERENCES FOR SECTION 12.3 
Carhart, R. (1957) Clinical determination of abnormal auditory adaptation. 
Archives of Otolaryngology, 65, 32-9. 
Rosenberg, P.E. (1969) Tone Decay, Maico Audiological Library Series, Report 6. 
FURTHER READING FOR SECTION 12.3 
Arlinger, S. (1989) Manual of Practical Audiometry, Volume I, Whurr Publishers, 
London. 
Jacobsen, J.T. and Northern, J.L. (1991) Diagnostic Audiology, Pro-ed, Austen. 
Katz, J. (1985) Handbook of Clinical Audiology, 3rd edn., Williams & Wilkins, 
Baltimore. 
Martin, F. (1991) An Introduction to Audiology, Prentice Hall, New Jersey. 
12.4 NON-ORGANIC HEARING LOSS 
12.4.1 INTRODUCTION 
Non-organic hearing loss refers to a condition in which there is no 
apparent organic (bodily) disorder to explain the hearing problem. 
Non-organic hearing loss is also known as functional loss or pseudo-
hypacusis. These are general terms that can be used to describe an 
apparent hearing loss which may be either psychogenic (genuine) or 
malingering (false). 
12.4.2 PSYCHOGENIC HEARING LOSS 
Psychogenic hearing loss is genuine but of psychological origin. It is 
usually due to hysteria and at one time was termed 'hysterical deafness'. 
This kind of hearing loss is usually bilateral and profound; it persists 
even in sleep and the special tests for non-organic hearing loss are 
unlikely to provide much useful information. 
12.4.3 MALINGERING 
Malingering is the deliberate faking of a hearing loss for gain, most 
commonly for compensation purposes. Many malingerers do have a 

Non-organic hearing loss 
247 
genuine hearing loss but exaggerate the loss to increase their claim. 
Routine audiometry is of little value in obtaining correct thresholds, 
but there are signs that should alert the audiologist to the possibility of 
non-organic loss. The patient's behaviour may raise suspicions, for 
instance if the patient exaggerates their reliance on lip-reading, and test 
results are often inconsistent. A patient may have excellent speech 
discrimination despite a hearing loss that seems severe, or there may 
be no evidence of cross-hearing in an apparent unilateral hearing loss. 
It is not uncommon for children to manifest non-organic hearing loss 
under certain circumstances. The attention centred on them and the 
excuse the loss provides may help a child to overcome problems that 
are unrelated to a hearing difficulty. The audiologist must establish 
true thresholds but should take care to obtain further investigation and 
treatment for the child's underlying problems if this is required (Brooks 
and Geoghegan, 1992). 
Special 'attention raising' techniques are often used to obtain true 
thresholds. These are very simple, for example a child may be asked to 
say 'yes' when he or she hears a tone and 'no' when he or she does 
not. Many children will say 'no' to presented tones that are below their 
feigned threshold. As long as the audiologist is sure no visual or timing 
clues have been given, true thresholds may be obtained in this way. 
Older and more sophisticated children are less easy to deceive but 
often it is unnecessary to use the more complex tests required to 
ascertain true thresholds for the adult. Many (adult) tests for non-
organic hearing loss exist; some are listed below. 
(a) Repeat pure-tone threshold tests 
Many adults are unable to provide consistent false audiograms. If the 
thresholds on repeat tests vary by more than 10 dB, non-organic hearing 
loss may be suspected. (Children are often much better at maintaining 
consistent non-organic audiometric thresholds. This test is therefore 
unsuitable for children.) 
(b) The Lombard test 
This test is based on the principle that a normally hearing person will 
raise his or her voice in the presence of background noise. The patient 
is asked to read aloud and, at some unannounced time, masking noise 
is introduced and gradually increased in intensity. If the hearing loss is 
genuine, the noise will have no effect until it at least exceeds the 
deafness. If the hearing loss is fake, the patient may raise his or her 
voice without realizing it. 

248 
Assessment and management of special problems 
(c) Doerfler-Stewart test 
It is usually possible to respond to speech even when masking noise is 
10 dB to 15 dB greater than the intensity of the speech signals. The 
patient with a non-organic loss often assumes that any level of masking 
noise should prevent the hearing of speech. If a speech test is presented 
with masking, the non-organic patient will stop repeating words, 
sometimes even when the noise is less intense than the speech signal. 
A positive test suggests a non-organic loss but does not reveal the true 
threshold levels. 
(d) Delayed speech feedback test 
It is normal for speakers to monitor their own voice unconsciously as 
they speak, using their own hearing. If this auditory feedback mech-
anism is disturbed, speech is affected. This test involves the use of a 
tape recorder that has separate record and playback heads. The patient's 
voice is recorded as he or she speaks and played back with a very 
slight delay of 0.1 to 0.2 seconds. The creation of delayed feedback 
disturbs the speaker's speech pattern, causing slowing, stuttering or 
other difficulty. If the hearing loss is genuine, delayed feedback at 
intensities below threshold will have no effect on the speech. 
(e) The Stenger test 
This test is the most widely used to identify monaural non-organic 
hearing loss. It employs the principle that, where two tones of the 
same frequency are presented simultaneously, only the most intense 
one is heard. 
A two-channel audiometer is used to introduce a tone 10 dB above 
the threshold of the 'better' ear. The patient should respond. A tone is 
then presented to the 'deaf' ear 10 dB below its given threshold. Tones 
are presented simultaneously to both ears, 10 dB above the threshold of 
the better ear, and 10dB below the threshold of the 'deaf' ear. 
A patient with a genuine hearing loss will continue to respond to the 
tone that is 10 dB above threshold in the better ear. If the patient does 
not respond, this is because he or she can only hear the tone in the 
'deaf' ear, which he or she refuses to admit. The patient can only hear 
the loudest tone and does not realize there is still a tone above threshold 
in the 'better' ear. 
The test can be continued to reveal approximate true thresholds. For 
instance, the tone is presented at 10 dBHL above the threshold of the 
better ear and at 0 dBHL in the 'deaf' ear. The level in the 'deaf' ear is 
raised in 5 dB steps. The patient should continue to respond because 
the tone that is 10 dB above threshold in the better ear will be readily 

Reference for section 12.4 249 
Good ear threshold: 0 dBHL 
Good ear 
'Deaf' ear 
Introduce tone at: 
Step 1 (screening): 
10dBHL 
30dBHL 
To find approximate genuine threshold: 
Step 2: 
10dBHL 
Step 3: 
10dBHL 
OdBHL 
Step 4: 
10dBHL 
5dBHL 
Step 5: 
10dBHL 
10dBHL 
Step 6: 
10dBHL 
15dBHL 
Step 7: 
10dBHL 
20dBHL 
'Deaf' ear threshold 
obtained: 40 dBHL 
Responds 
Malingering 
Genuine 
No 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes? 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
No 
Yes 
Fig. 12.9 The Stenger test procedure, used to determine whether an apparent 
hearing loss of 40 dBHL is true or non-organic. 
heard (Figure 12.9). When the patient ceases to respond, the level in 
the 'deaf' ear is usually within 10 dB of its true threshold. 
12.4.4 SUMMARY 
Non-organic hearing loss is one that is not of organic origin. It may be 
feigned or exaggerated, often for financial gain, but it may also be of 
psychological origin. Non-organic hearing loss should be suspected 
whenever results of the different parts of the hearing assessment are at 
variance. The audiologist has to determine whether a hearing loss 
exists, and the true thresholds. A number of tests are available for 
suspected cases of non-organic hearing loss, for example the Lombard 
test and the delayed speech feedback test, which are based on inter-
fering with normal auditory monitoring. The most widely used test 
for unilateral non-organic hearing losses is the Stenger test, which is 
based on the principle that it is only possible to hear the most intense 
of two tones of the same frequency presented simultaneously. 
Most tests set out to confuse the patient in order to provide evidence of 
non-organic hearing loss. Some tests also indicate the approximate 
hearing threshold. 
REFERENCE FOR SECTION 12.4 
Brooks, D.N. and Geoghegan, P.M. (1992) Non-organic Hearing Loss in Young 
Persons: Transient Episode or Indicator of Deep-seated Difficulty. British 
Journal of Audiology, 26(6), 347-50. 

250 
Assessment and management of special problems 
FURTHER READING FOR SECTION 12.4 
Arlinger, S. (1989) Manual of Practical Audiometry, Volume I, Whurr Publishers, 
London. 
Northern, J.L. and Downs, M.P. (1984) Hearing in Children, 3rd edn, Williams & 
Wilkins, Baltimore. 
12.5 AUTOMATIC AUDIOMETRY 
12.5.1 INDUSTRIAL SCREENING 
Automatic audiometry allows the person under test to plot his or 
her own audiogram. The audiometer presents a tone that gradually 
increases in intensity. The patient presses a button as soon as the tone 
is heard and keeps it pressed for as long as the tone is heard. On 
pressing the button, the tone becomes fainter. As soon as the tone is 
inaudible, the patient releases the button. When the button is released, 
the intensity increases. 
The level of the tone is automatically traced on an audiogram, either 
as the frequency gradually changes, or at certain fixed frequencies. The 
resultant zigzag line indicates the swing-width, which is the difference 
between audibility and inaudibility. The threshold of hearing is taken 
as the mid-point between the extremes at each frequency and this 
produces thresholds that are almost identical to those obtained with 
manual audiometry. The width of the tracing is, on average, 6-lOdB, 
but can vary. In extreme cases it may be as little as 3 dB or as much as 
20 dB. Extremely narrow tracing widths were, at one time, thought to 
be related to the difference limen for intensity and so, indirectly, to 
recruitment. Most authorities now consider that the width of the tracing 
is really an indication of threshold doubt and certainty, although it may 
be suggestive of a cochlear lesion. 
12.5.2 BF:KESY AUDIOMETRY 
Bekesy audiometry goes beyond automatic recording of audiograms 
and can provide diagnostic information, although it is not widely 
used. The audiometer presents tones that may be continuous (C) or 
interrupted (I), typically with 2.5 interruptions per second. The inter-
rupted tracing obtained approximates to the pure-tone threshold. 
Clinical interpretation involves comparison of the continuous with the 
interrupted tone. Jerger (1960) classified the types of audiogram that 
may be obtained (Figure 12.10). These are as follows. 
Type I 
A type I audiogram is where the continuous and interrupted 
tracings overlap. In this case the threshold remains the same 
whether the tone is present continuously or pulsing on and 

0 
.....1 
I co 
"0 
80 
250 
0 
250 
1 k 
Type I 
1 k 
Type IIJ 
.....1 
I 
co 
"0 
0 
80 
4k 
4k 
250 
0 
.....1 
I 
co 
"0 
Hz 
0 
1k 
Type V 
Automatic audiometry 
251 
250 
1 k 
4k 
Hz 
Type II 
250 
1 k 
4k 
Type IV 
Fig. 12.10 Bekesy audiogram types, classified by Jerger (1960). 
off. Type I tracings are obtained in patients with normal ears 
or with middle ear disorders. 
Type II 
A type II audiogram shows the continuous and interrupted 
tracings often overlapping in the low frequencies. From ap-
proximately 1kHz the continuous tone appears to be more 
difficult to hear and the continuous trace drops below the 
interrupted trace. The continuous trace is rarely more than 

252 
Assessment and management of special problems 
20 dB below the interrupted trace, but the swing width may 
narrow. Type II audiograms are found mainly in patients 
with cochlear disorders. 
Type III 
At all frequencies the continuous tone falls dramatically 
below the interrupted tone. The patient appears to have 
marked adaptation and to find a continuous signal extremely 
difficult to hear. Type III audiograms are often found in 
patients with eighth nerve disorders. 
Type IV These audiograms are similar to type II except that the con-
tinuous tracing breaks away in the low frequency. These also 
tend to be obtained with eighth nerve disorders. 
Type V 
An audiogram in which the continuous tracing occurs above 
the interrupted tracing. This indicates a non-organic hearing 
loss. 
The Bekesy audiogram types provide useful clinical information but 
are not sufficiently precise for diagnosis unless supported by other test 
results. In clinical practice, the frequency at which separation occurs 
tends to be ignored. No separation points to a conductive disorder, 
type II with a separation of up to 20 dB suggests a cochlear lesion, 
whereas an audiogram (excluding type V) with a separation of over 
25 dB suggests a retrocochlear problem. 
12.5.3 SUMMARY 
Automatic audiometry allows patients to track their own pure-tone 
thresholds by pressing a button when the tone is audible and releasing 
the button when it is not. A pen tracks the resulting audiogram as a 
series of zigzag lines on a special audiogram form. Automatic audio-
meters are often used in industrial hearing conservation programmes. 
Clinical Bekesy audiometry provides diagnostic information through 
the comparison of the patient's response to continuous and to pulsed 
or interrupted tones. Five different audiogram types may be observed. 
These help in the differentiation of cochlear, retrocochlear and non-
organic hearing losses. 
REFERENCES FOR SECTION 12.5 
Jerger, J. (1960) Hearing Tests in Otologic Diagnosis. American Speech and 
Hearing Association, 4, 139-45. 
FURTHER READING FOR SECTION 12.5 
Arlinger, S. (1991) Manual of Practical Audiometry, Volume II, Whurr Publishers, 
London. 

Paediatric provision 
13 
13.1 THE EFFECT OF HEARING LOSS IN CHILDREN 
13.1.1 INTRODUCTION 
Language forms the basis of our communication and our education. 
We all use language to adjust to our world. Without language our 
experience would be very different and our lives would be very dif-
ficult. Children begin to learn language skills from the very earliest age 
and their ability to understand and to use speech develops naturally 
over a very short space of time. The normal baby progresses from 
babble to using complex sentences in a period of less than three years. 
However, this rapid natural development is interrupted if a child 
cannot hear normally. 
The age at which a hearing loss occurs is a critical factor in deter-
mining its effect on language development. Where a hearing loss 
occurs before the child has acquired speech it is termed 'prelingual'. 
Prelingual therefore covers a range of cases from those who were born 
deaf, to those who became deaf through illness, accident or other cause 
at an early stage - before about two years old. The term 'postlingual' is 
used where the child becomes deaf after learning to speak. Deafness 
from birth or acquired early in life has a serious effect on speech 
and language. The effect of a postlingual hearing loss on speech and 
language development is less serious, but in terms of education and 
social development may still be very traumatic. 
In general terms, hearing loss acquired in childhood may affect: 
• the development of speech and language; 
• the ability to think abstractly; 
• learning; 
• social integration; 
• social and emotional adjustment. 

254 
Paediatric provision 
Speech difficulties are often seen as the primary problem for hearing 
impaired children, but they are really a reflection of the more central 
problem of poor comprehension. Even with early diagnosis and ap-
propriate remediation, hearing impaired children's progress may be 
very delayed. Their inability to understand explanations, or to express 
their needs and feelings, may lead to frustration and socially unac-
ceptable behaviour. There is an understandable tendency for parents to 
be over-protective, and normally-hearing siblings may become jealous 
of the time and money they feel is being diverted away from them. 
The term 'hearing impaired' children includes all degrees of hearing 
loss from profound to very mild. As one would expect, the effects of 
such differing degrees of hearing loss may vary from marked to very 
slight. Many profoundly deaf children, for instance, fail to reach a 
reading level equivalent to that of an average eight-year-old by school 
leaving age (Conrad, 1977); the handicap of mild hearing loss is much 
less obvious. 
Approximately 4 in every 1000 children have a significant sensor-
ineural hearing loss (Haggard and Pullan, 1989). 
13.1.2 TEMPORARY CONDUCTIVE HEARING LOSS 
The most common cause of hearing loss in children is a temporary 
condition known as secretory or serous otitis media. It is so common 
that most children are affected by it at some stage in their early years 
(British Association of Audiological Physicians, 1990). It is a self-limiting 
condition and one out of which most children have grown by about 
eight years old. The problem is caused by fluid in the middle ear, 
which prevents the efficient passage of sound from the eardrum. In 
normality, the middle ear cavity is air-filled and it remains so because it 
is ventilated by the Eustachian tube. This tube runs from the middle 
ear to the back of the throat. In infants the Eustachian tubes are 
shorter, smaller and narrower than in adults, and they are positioned 
more horizontally. Ventilation and drainage of the ear of a child is 
therefore less efficient. If the Eustachian tube becomes blocked, air 
cannot enter the middle ear. Air is gradually absorbed by the lining of 
the middle ear cavity and cannot be replaced. The result is negative 
pressure in the middle ear and a thin watery fluid is secreted into the 
cavity. If the condition is not resolved the fluid may thicken and 
eventually become glue-like, hence the name 'glue ear', which is some-
times given to the disorder. Blockage of the Eustachian tube may be 
caused by a number of factors, including upper respiratory tract 
infections, enlarged tonsils and adenoids, allergies and malformations. 
The resulting hearing loss often fluctuates dramatically between a mild 
and a marked impairment. It is usually bilateral and rarely more than 

The effect of hearing loss in children 
255 
60 dBHL in degree. In general, temporary fluctuating losses create 
more difficulty in the noisy conditions of school than they do in the 
less adverse conditions of the home where speech can be clear and 
close to the child. Minor conductive losses may not require medical 
intervention but will usually be monitored. Tympanometry can provide 
a simple check of middle ear function, and if treatment is required this 
will usually be medical or educational. Where speech and language 
are delayed, a child may also be referred to a speech and language 
therapist. Hearing aids should only be fitted if medical advice has been 
sought. 
13.1.3 ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS OF HEARING LOSS 
IN CHILDREN 
Pure-tone audiometry is not appropriate for very young children, and 
different diagnostic tests may be used depending on the age and 
mental ability of the child. The principle tests in use are: 
1. brain stem evoked response (BSER); 
2. distraction tests; 
3. co-operative tests; 
4. performance tests; 
5. free-field visual response audiometry (VRA); 
6. pure-tone audiometry. 
Where ages are quoted these are only intended to provide a guide to 
the child's approximate stage of development. 
(a) Brain stem evoked response audiometry 
Brain Stem Evoked Response (BSER) is one type of evoked response 
audiometry (ERA) that can be used with young babies and other 
patients who are particularly difficult to test. Electrical potentials 
from the auditory pathways, in response to sounds, are recorded by 
electrodes attached to the baby's head. All levels of the sensorineural 
part of the auditory system, from the hair cells in the cochlea to 
the cortex of the brain, respond electrically to sound. The auditory 
responses are processed by a computer and displayed as a multiwave 
form. Changes in electrical potentials due to auditory activity are so 
small that they must be 'averaged' over a period of time in order that 
they can be singled out from the random activity of the brain. 
ERA provides valuable objective results for a population that could 
not provide this information in any other way. BSER is the most widely 
used ERA for children. It may also be used in some cases of suspected 
non-organic hearing loss since no co-operation is required. It provides 

256 
Paediatric provision 
a good estimate of threshold, especially in the 2kHz to 4kHz region, 
and should be interpreted in the context of other clinical information. 
(b) Distraction tests 
Distraction tests are used both as a screening and a diagnostic test. 
They are suited to children between the ages of approximately 6 to 18 
months, that is from the time the baby can sit unsupported and turn its 
head towards a sound, until it ceases to be sufficiently interested in the 
sounds to continue to turn reliably. 
Two testers work as a team, one positioned at the front to attract 
and manipulate the child's attention, the other stands behind the child 
and presents the sound signals (Figure 13.1). 
The object of the test is to record the quietest intensity at which the 
baby responds to a range of frequency-specific sounds. The sounds 
must be interesting to the baby and representative of low, mid- and 
high frequency ranges. Examples of those in common use include: 
• low frequency- the voiced sound 'oo-oo' (approximately 500Hz); 
• midfrequency- a G-chime bar (approximately 1600Hz); 
• high frequency- a special high frequency rattle (above approximately 
6.5 kHz) (Kettlety, 1987). 
Responses must be obtained at 30 dB to pass a screening test, but 
in the diagnostic situation the intensity is raised until a response is 
obtained. The intensity is measured using a sound level meter. 
It is extremely important to be certain that the child is really re-
sponding to the auditory signal and not to other clues. Some children 
are very quick to respond to the touch of the tester's breath, the sound 
of a footfall, the smell of perfume or the movement of a shadow. 
These are known, respectively, as tactile, auditory, olfactory or visual 
Tester 2 
Tester 1--.. 
~~..-.... 
~. 
'-" 
Front 
Fig. 13.1 The position of two testers carrying out a distraction test. The baby is 
sat upright on the mother's knee. Tester 1 manipulates the baby's attention, 
while tester 2 presents the sound signals. 

The effect of hearing loss in children 
257 
/' 
Olfactory cues 
;; I 
Fig. 13.2 A tester may obtain false positive responses during a distraction test 
if other cues are present; such cues may be auditory, visual, tactile or olfactory. 
(After Anon.) 
cues (Figure 13.2). Distraction tests appear very simple to the observer 
but they must be meticulously performed to be reliable. 
(c) Co-operative tests 
Co-operative tests are used for children aged between about 18 months 
and two and a half years, when the baby has become too 'grown up' to 
respond reliably to distraction techniques but is not yet able to perform 
the next level of test. This age group is, contrary to the name of the 
test, notoriously uncooperative. One tester is needed to carry out 
this simple speech test, which provides only limited low frequency 
information and is therefore used in conjunction with a brief high 
frequency distraction test. 
The child is supplied with bricks or similar toys and the tester gives 
simple instructions. There is a limited choice of instruction, such as 
'Give it to Mummy', 'Give it to Daddy', 'Give it to teddy', and the 
lowest intensity at which the child can respond accurately is found. A 
child with normal hearing should be able to achieve this at a level of 
40-45dBA. 
(d) Performance tests 
Performance tests can be useful from the age of about two and a half, 
until the child is able to undertake pure-tone audiometry. The child is 
trained or 'conditioned' to perform an action, such as placing a man in 
a boat, whenever he or she hears a 'command' sound, which for low 
frequencies is 'go', and for high frequencies is the sibilant 's'. The 
intensity of the command is gradually reduced until the child's hearing 
threshold is obtained. The intensity is measured, as in all free-field 
tests, using a sound level meter. 

258 
Paediatric provision 
Intensity (dBSPL) 
60 
40 
.___---+---~,....----~-• Distance 
(metres) 
Fig. 13.3 Intensity variation of a pure-tone due to standing waves. 
(e) Visual response audiometry 
Visual response audiometry, often known as 'VRA', is a technique that 
requires more complex equipment than distraction tests but that can be 
used for the whole age range, from about six months until the child 
can perform pure-tone audiometry. 
Loudspeakers are used to deliver frequency-specific signals, in the 
form of warble tones or narrow band noise. A warble tone is a sound 
that continually changes in frequency around a centre frequency. A 
1kHz warble tone could, for example, have a band width of 10% and 
vary between 950Hz and 1050Hz. Warble tones and narrow band 
noise are used in place of pure tones to avoid standing waves. If pure 
tones were used in the test room, reflections would cause interference 
with the intensity of the signal, creating standing waves (Figure 13.3). 
Young children do not find electronically-produced tones very 
interesting and some form of visual reinforcement is therefore used, 
often in the form of a toy that lights up when the child responds 
correctly. Since headphones are not worn, the information obtained 
will relate to the better ear and, when high intensities are used, the 
signal can be distorted and no longer frequency specific. Nevertheless, 
a limited audiogram may be obtained in this way, usually providing 
points at 500Hz, 1kHz, (2kHz) and 4kHz. 
(f) Pure-tone audiometry 
Pure-tone audiometry should be used as soon as the child is able to co-
operate reliably since the ears can be tested separately. Many children 
from around the age of three can be trained to carry out a pure-tone 
test if it is treated as a game. 'Play techniques' are used in which the 
child is taught to respond to the tones by performing some action, such 
as placing a peg in a board. 
A restricted range of frequencies is often tested, such as 500Hz, 
1 kHz and 4kHz, since the child may lose concentration before a full 

Habilitation of hearing impaired children 
259 
test can be completed. Masking is also usually possible with children 
from about five years old, if the instructions are simplified and the 
'play-like' nature of the test is retained. 
13.2 HABILITATION OF HEARING IMPAIRED CHILDREN 
13.2.1 THE HABILITATION PROCESS 
A multidisciplinary team is usually involved with the diagnosis and 
management of the hearing impaired child. Such a team may include: 
• audiological physician or otologist; 
• clinical or educational audiologist; 
• teacher of the deaf; 
• educational psychologist; 
• social worker; 
• other specialists. 
In the initial stages parents have to come to terms with the child's 
impairment, and it is usually the audiological physician or otologist 
who counsels the parents and who will answer any medical questions 
they may have. Parents may feel a sense of guilt, numbness, fear and 
isolation, feelings with which they have to come to terms before they 
can help their child. After the initial diagnosis, support and coun-
selling will be undertaken by a peripatetic teacher of the deaf, who 
will see the family on a regular basis, in the home and, later, in the 
school. 
The selection of appropriate hearing aids is central to the rehabili-
tation process in order to provide maximum use of residual hearing. 
The fundamental principles of hearing aid selection are the same 
for children as for adults, but provision should be made as early 
as possible, with binaural fitting considered as the norm. It is also 
important that hearing aids are worn constantly from the beginning, 
and that they are checked regularly by an adult to ensure they are 
working. 
Hearing aids for children usually need repairing at least once a 
year and replacing every three to four years (British Association of 
Audiological Physicians, 1990). In addition, new earmoulds are required 
several times a year and batteries need frequent replacement. 
There are three main types of personal hearing aid systems in use 
with hearing impaired children at present: bodyworn, postaural and 
in-the-ear aids. The most widely used system is currently the postaural 
hearing aid. In-the-ear hearing aids are increasing in popularity but 
these have to be replaced or re-shelled at frequent intervals as the child 
grows. 

260 
Paediatric provision 
Where audiological and other factors allow for choice of the hearing 
aid system, parental feelings should be taken into consideration. If the 
parents of the child are not happy with the hearing aid system, the 
child is unlikely to make the best use of it. Many children are provided 
with commercial hearing aids under the National Health Service when 
it is felt there is a need that cannot be met by the standard range. The 
reasons for this are varied but may include requirements for: 
• mini-postaural hearing aids for small ears; 
• compression or automatic gain control; 
• difficult audiometric configurations that cannot be adequately fitted 
with the standard range of frequency response; 
• direct input facility for radio hearing aids used mainly in education. 
Many children, particularly those with severe and profound losses, are 
provided with radio hearing aids in addition to their personal aids. 
These overcome some of the problems of interference from background 
noise. 
13.2.2 RADIO HEARING AID SYSTEMS 
Personal hearing aids depend for their effectiveness on being used 
close to the speaker, in order to achieve a high 'signal-to-noise' ratio. 
When the speaker moves away the increasing distance quickly results 
in a weak signal that is lost in the masking effect of background noise. 
In schools, background noise and reverberation are often such as to 
reduce the effectiveness of hearing aids significantly (Figure 13.4). 
Radio frequency modulated (FM) systems are used to provide a short 
microphone distance. The microphone is worn by the teacher and the 
pupil wears a radio receiver, which is linked to a hearing aid. The 
Speaker 
Voice 
level 
Noise 
level 
Radio waves 
Listener 
~----1 Distance 
Fig. 13.4 As the distance away from the speaker increases, the intensity of the 
signal falls (according to the inverse square law). Background noise then 
interferes with the speech signal received by the hearing aid. 

Habilitation of hearing impaired children 
261 
Speech-D-O JWW D-Do1 
Microphone + transmitter 
Receiver + hearing aid ~ 
worn by parent or 
worn by child 
teacher 
Fig. 13.5 The basic format of a radio hearing aid. 
Earpiece 
Type 1 
/) Hearing aid 
Shoe (/ 
Type 2 used with 'loop' 
Fig. 13.6 The child's unit in each of the types of radio system. 
signal is transmitted to the pupil, regardless of his or her position, up 
to a distance of about 100 metres from the microphone (Figure 13.5). 
Radio hearing aids are used at school and at home, and to a limited 
extent by adults, but their use is restricted by their expense and their 
appearance, which is similar to a large bodyworn aid. 
There are two types of radio systems (Figure 13.6). 
Type 1 is a complete radio hearing aid, in which the radio receiver is 
also a bodyworn hearing aid. These tend to by used by some 
profoundly deaf children, although they could equally well 
be used for children with mild hearing losses who do not 
otherwise use a hearing aid. The main reason for not doing so 
is the expense, as radio hearing aids are very costly. 
Type 2 is a system used in conjunction with the child's individual 
hearing aid. This is the type most widely used because it 
provides continuation of hearing through the same hearing 
aid. The radio receiver is usually linked directly into the 
personal hearing aid via a lead and shoe; this is known as 
'direct input'. In some cases the system is used with a neck 
loop which permits the whole receiving unit to be hidden 
under clothing, but the performance of the induction loop 
tends to be inferior to that of direct input due to a reduced 
low frequency response and an increased tendency to inter-

262 
Paediatric provision 
ference, mainly from fluorescent lights and other electrical 
sources. 
13.2.3 EDUCATIONAL PROVISION 
Many hearing impaired children will need educational support from 
the time of diagnosis throughout their education. Most hearing impaired 
children are educated within the ordinary, or 'mainstream', school 
system, with varying degrees of support. Ordinary schools provide 
an environment in which the child can gain experience of normal 
language and behaviour, benefit from a wide curriculum, make friends 
among local children and, in general, learn to adjust to being part 
of the hearing world. 
For children with a significant hearing loss support is usually pro-
vided in the form of personal hearing aids, a radio system and the 
services of a peripatetic, or visiting, teacher of the deaf. However, 
ordinary schools tend to be large, noisy and often intolerant places and 
some children are unable to cope. Hearing impaired children may be 
placed in: 
• normal 'mainstream' school; 
• special class, or 'unit', within the ordinary school; 
• special school. 
Children who need significant extra support may be provided with a 
'statement of educational needs', under the 1981 Education Act. A 
statement formalizes the child's special needs and ways of meeting 
these, while reinforcing the parent's right to be involved in the process. 
A special class or 'partially hearing unit' is an attempt to provide 'the 
best of both worlds', with children integrated into ordinary classes as 
far as possible, but having an individual programme tailored to their 
needs, and with access to a full-time teacher of the deaf. 
Special school provision has decreased, as children are increasingly 
placed within the normal school environment. Most of the special 
schools that do remain cater for the needs of particular groups of 
severely and profoundly deaf children, such as those who are: 
• in need of a high level of support; 
• of a particular religion; 
• academically very able; 
• using an alternative method of communication; 
• multiply handicapped. 
Children in special schools have less access to 'normal' patterns of 
speech and of behaviour and may be less prepared for coping with 
the demands of everyday life, but special schools can provide a con-

Habilitation of hearing impaired children 
263 
Fig. 13.7 A group hearing aid system, in use at St John's School for Deaf 
Children, Boston Spa, West Yorkshire. 
centration of specialist staff and facilities. Children are educated within 
a protected environment and in very small classes, consisting of 
not more than ten children. Classrooms can be sound-treated, and 
specialist equipment often includes group hearing aids and speech 
training units. A group hearing aid is a hard-wire system in which each 
child wears headphones linked to a desk unit capable of providing 
high output over an extended frequency range and, since the ear is not 
blocked, advantage is also taken of ear canal resonance. The teacher 
uses a microphone that is also wired into the system (Figure 13.7). 
Speech training equipment includes individual hard-wire hearing aid 
units, often with a visual display to help the child monitor his or her 
speech. 
Approaches to the education of very severely and profoundly deaf 
children vary markedly, especially between an 'oral' or 'manual' ap-
proach. All systems make use of hearing aids and strive to develop 
language and learning. Unfortunately, deep divisions exist between 
the supporters of the various approaches, which is often unhelpful to 
parents since they receive conflicting advice. Most hearing impaired 
children can learn to communicate by speech if their loss is diagnosed 
early and treated promptly with effective hearing aids and skilled 
guidance. In essence, 'oral' methods seek to develop speech in a 

264 
Paediatric provision 
natural manner, while manual or 'total' communication provides sup-
port to the spoken pattern in one of a number of ways, namely using: 
• sign language - this is often said to be the natural language of the 
deaf community, although unfortunately there is no one universally 
recognized sign language and few hearing people are able to sign, 
except in a slow and clumsy manner; 
• finger-spelling - this can be likened to the written pattern and is 
of limited use until the child has achieved some proficiency in 
language; 
• cued speech - this is a method of communication in which hand 
positions are used to supplement the information available through 
lip-reading. 
Special consideration must be given to the education of hearing im-
paired children. Hearing loss provides a starting point but is not a 
sufficient basis on which to make a decision. The child's whole devel-
opment and his or her family's wishes should be considered in selecting 
an appropriate school placement. 
13.3 SUMMARY 
Hearing impairment in childhood hinders development of the ability to 
communicate and to make normal progress in school. Early diagnosis 
and appropriate management are among the factors that can reduce 
the handicapping effect of hearing loss. Evaluation of hearing in early 
childhood necessitates the use of special techniques appropriate to a 
child's age and stage of development. Educational placement should 
take full account of the child's needs and the parents' wishes. Great 
emphasis is placed on the full use of residual hearing through ampli-
fication in all educational environments, and support is provided by 
specialist teachers of the deaf. Most hearing impaired children are able 
to receive their education with the normally-hearing in 'mainstream' 
school, with the necessary specialist support. 
REFERENCES 
Conrad, R. (1977) The Reading Ability of Deaf School Leavers. British Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 47, 138-48. 
British Association of Audiological Physicians (1990) Paediatric Audiological 
Medicine - Into the 1990s, Policy Document, The British Association of Audio-
logical Physicians. 
Haggard, M.P. and Pullan, C.R. (1989) The Staffing and Structure for Paediatric 
Audiology Services in Hospital and Community Units. British Journal of 
Audiology, 23(2), 99-116. 
Kettlety, A. (1987) The Manchester High Pitch Rattle. British Journal of Audiology, 
21, 73-4. 

References 
265 
FURTHER READING 
Davies, H. and Fallowfield, L. (1991) Counselling and Communication in Health 
Care, J. Wiley and Sons, Chichester. 
McCormick, B. (1988) Paediatric Audiology 0-5 years, Taylor and Francis, 
London. 
Murgatroyd, S. (1985) Counselling and Helping, Methuen, London. 
National Deaf Children's Society (1990) Audiological Services for Children -
Recommended Practice, The National Deaf Children's Society, London. 
Nolan, M. and Tucker, I. (1988) The Hearing Impaired Child and the Family, 
Souvenir Press, London. 
Northern, J.L. and Downs, M.P. (1984) Hearing in Children, 3rd edn, Williams 
and Wilkins, Baltimore. 
Tucker, I. and Nolan, M. (1984) Educational Audiology, Croom Helm, London. 

Appendix 
TERM 
A-Scale 
Acoustic feedback 
Acoustic neuroma 
Acoustic ohm 
Acoustic reflex 
Acoustic trauma 
Acoustics 
Action potential 
Acute 
Adaptation 
Adhesion 
Admittance 
Air-bone gap 
Alport' s syndrome 
Glossary 
MEANING 
The weighting network used with a sound 
level meter for free-field sound measure-
ments. The A-Scale approximates to the in-
verted 40phon equal loudness curve. 
The excitation of the microphone by sound 
generated from the receiver of the same 
system. 
Benign eighth nerve tumour. 
Unit of acoustic impedance. 
Contraction of middle ear muscles in response 
to loud sound. 
Noise damage due to sudden impulse noise of 
high intensity. 
Study of science of sound. 
Brief electrical discharge which occurs when a 
cell is activated. 
Short and severe. 
Reduction in hearing sensitivity within a brief 
time of the sound onset. 
New and abnormal tissue growth due to 
inflammation. 
The ease with which sound waves pass 
through. 
The difference in dB between the air conduc-
tion reading on an audiogram and the bone 
conduction reading for the same ear. If 
greater than 10 dB indicates a conductive 
element. 
Kidney disorder combined with hearing and 
sight defects. 

Ambient 
Amplitude 
Analgesic 
Anechoic 
Anoxia 
Aphasia 
Artificial ear 
Artificial mastoid 
Atresia 
Attenuation 
Audiogram 
Audiometry 
Auditory adaptation 
Auditory training 
Aural 
Aural-oral approach 
Auricle 
Auropalpebral reflex 
(APR) 
Automatic gain 
control (AGC) 
Azimuth 
Barotrauma 
Behavioural 
audiometry 
Bekesy audiometry 
Benign 
Binaural summation 
Brief tone 
Glossary 
267 
Surrounding or background. 
The maximum displacement of any wave from 
its equilibrium position. 
Pain-killing drug, e.g. aspirin. 
With no echoes or significant sound reflection: 
'dead'. 
Lack of oxygen. 
Disorder of central nervous system causing 
difficulty with speech and language. 
A 6 cc coupling device used in audiometer 
earphone calibration. 
Calibration device for bone vibrators, which 
simulates the mechanical impedance of an 
average normal human mastoid. 
Absence of an opening. 
Reduction. 
A graph showing a person's hearing thresholds 
for pure-tones. 
The measurement of hearing. 
Decrease in hearing sensitivity within a brief 
time of the sound onset. 
Teaching a hearing impaired person to make 
best use of residual hearing. 
Of the ear. 
A method of teaching hearing impaired chil-
dren using speech and hearing optimally. 
Pinna. 
Eye-blink in response to loud sound. 
Automatic reduction in gain of a hearing aid to 
avoid user discomfort and with minimum 
distortion of the sound signal. 
Distance in degrees, e.g. oo azimuth = straight 
ahead; 90° azimuth = to person's right. 
Injury to ear due to sudden pressure change. 
Assessment of hearing by noting bodily re-
sponses. 
Automatic audiometry. 
Not of cancer. 
Improvement in hearing threshold when hear-
ing via both ears. Usually at least 3 dB and 
may be much more. 
Tone of 500 milliseconds or less. 

268 
Glossary 
Calibration 
Central 
Cholesteatoma 
Chronic 
Click 
CMV 
Cochlear 
microphonic 
Compliance 
Compression 
Conditioning 
Congenital 
Contralateral 
Critical band 
Cross-hearing 
Derecruitment 
Dichotic 
Difference limen (e.g. 
of intensity or 
frequency) 
Digital hearing aid 
Diotic 
Diplacusis 
Directional 
microphone 
Distortion 
Diuretic 
Down's syndrome 
Checking, and adjusting if necessary, the 
output of a measurement device, e.g. 
audiometer. 
In brain and/or spinal cord. 
Cyst-like growth in the middle ear containing 
shed skin. 
Having lasted a long time. 
A short impulse of sound, too short in duration 
for its characteristics to be fully perceived. 
Cytomegalovirus disease. 
Electrical output from cochlear hair cells, fol-
lowing input signal. 
Opposite of stiffness; ability to give. 
Limiting of maximum output, using automatic 
gain control. 
Rewarding of required behaviour, used widely 
in assessment of children. 
Present at birth. 
On the opposite side. 
The narrow band of noise required to mask a 
pure-tone signal. 
Sound presented to one ear is perceived in the 
other by vibration of the skull. 
Abnormally slow growth of loudness, usually 
due to disorder of auditory nerve. 
Affecting each ear differently. 
The smallest detectable difference between two 
signals. 
The electrical signal is converted to digital 
values for modification before being con-
verted back to an electrical signal which is 
passed to the receiver. 
Identical signal to each ear. 
One pure-tone appears to the listener as two or 
more tones. 
One that is more responsive to sound from one 
direction - normally the front. 
Any unwanted sound present in the output 
that was not present in the input. 
Drug to increase urination. 
A congenital abnormality, formerly known as 
mongolism. Features include mental retar-

Dynamic range 
Ear hook 
Earphone 
Ear simulator 
Effective gain 
Effusion 
Electro-acoustic 
device 
Electrocochleography 
Environmental 
microphone 
Fall time 
Feedback (acoustic) 
Feedback 
Filter (acoustic) 
Formant 
Fossa 
Free-field 
Frequency analyser 
Glossary 269 
dation, Mongoloid eyes, flattened facial 
features, short, broad hands and feet, small 
pinnae, narrow ear canals and a high inci-
dence of conductive and sensorineural 
hearing loss. 
The difference in dB between the threshold of 
hearing and the threshold of discomfort. 
That part of a postaural aid that fits over the 
ear. The elbow. 
A loudspeaker at the ear. 
A coupler that simulates the acoustic charac-
teristics of an average adult ear. 
The difference between aided and unaided 
thresholds. 
An abnormal outpouring of fluid. 
A device that converts electrical to acoustic 
signals and vice versa. 
Recording electrical signals (action potentials) 
from the eighth nerve. 
A microphone that picks up airborne sound -
for example, an environmental microphone 
may be built into a radio hearing aid so 
the pupils can hear themselves and their 
colleagues as well as the teacher. 
The time needed for a signal to decay by 60 dB 
from its steady state. 
The whistling that occurs from a hearing aid 
when sound leaks from the receiver and 
is picked up and re-amplified via the 
microphone. 
Information that is used to maintain or modify 
performance. 
Allows some sounds to pass but attenuates 
others. 
A special pattern of speech sounds, determined 
by the vocal cords and the resonant cavities 
of the vocal tract, giving each vowel its 
recognizable quality. 
Groove. 
Open space - or an area with boundaries that 
are negligible for the test. 
A sound level meter with an octave band (or 

270 
Glossary 
Functional gain 
Functional hearing 
loss 
Fundamental 
Harmonic 
Haematoma 
Hertz 
High-pass filter 
Homeostasis 
Horn 
Hypacusis 
Idiopathic 
Immitance 
Impedance (acoustic) 
Impedance match 
Incidence 
Incident wave 
Induction coil 
Inflammation 
Insertion gain 
Insertion loss 
In situ 
Intelligibility 
Interaural attenuation 
other) filter. 
Displays amplitude versus 
frequency on graph of input. 
Real ear gain. 
Non-organic or psychogenic. 
The lowest frequency in a periodic waveform. 
A frequency that is a whole number multiple of 
the pure-tone to which it is related. 
Blood clot due to a break in a blood vessel. 
A unit used in the measurement of frequency 
of sound, equivalent to the number of cycles 
per second. 
Reduces low frequencies while allowing high 
frequencies to pass unaffected. 
Equilibrium- achieving a normal balance. 
A tapered sound tube. 
Loss of hearing. 
Cause unknown. 
Impedance or admittance. 
Resistance to the passage of sound. 
Making the resistance of two connecting parts 
equal. 
The number of cases in a given population 
(e.g. as a number of live births). 
Any wave that has its path interrupted by an 
object; the wave is then said to be incident 
on this object. 
Picks up electromagnetic signals from a loop 
amplifier; activated in a hearing aid by the 'T' 
switch. 
Sore, swollen, red area. 
The difference between the gain of the open 
ear and the gain of the ear wearing a hearing 
aid, i.e. aided - unaided real ear gain. 
The difference between the gain of the open 
ear and that of an occluded ear. 
In the natural position. 
The understanding of speech. 
The degree to which sound is reduced as 
it crosses the head. Minimum interaural 
attenuation is 40 dB for air conducted signals 
and 0 dB for bone conduction. 

Intermodulation 
Intonation 
Ipsilateral 
Isthmus 
Labyrinthitis 
Latency 
Lateralization 
Lesion 
Lexicon 
Linear 
Localization 
Loop (amplifier) 
Loudspeaker 
Low-pass filter 
Mainstream 
Malignant 
Mandibulofacial 
dysplasia 
Manometer 
Manual audiometry 
Masker 
Masking 
Maximum power 
output 
Glossary 
271 
Frequencies in the output that are the sum 
and the difference of two or more input 
frequencies and their harmonics. 
Pitch variation. 
On the same side. 
A narrowed part of an organ or tissue. 
Inflammation of the labyrinth. 
The time delay between a stimulus and the 
response to that stimulus. 
When sound appears to be heard on one side 
although the signal was placed on the other 
side or in the centre of the head (as in certain 
tuning fork tests). 
An injury. 
Vocabulary. 
A straight line, this applies when a change of 
input causes the same change in output. 
Ability to pin-point a sound source. 
An amplifying system which uses electromag-
netic induction. A loop of wire is placed 
around the room and a current is induced in 
a coil within the hearing aid. Helps to over-
come interference from background noise. 
Apparatus that converts electrical impulses into 
sound. 
Allows low frequency sound to pass, but at-
tenuates high frequencies. 
Education within a normal school. 
Cancerous, may cause death. 
Treacher Collin's syndrome. 
An instrument to measure pressure. 
As carried out by the hearing aid dispenser or 
audiologist by the normal methods. 
An instrument used in the management of tin-
nitus; produces a continuous masking noise. 
Raising of the threshold of hearing for one 
sound by the introduction of another. 
Saturation or output sound pressure level. The 
greatest amount of sound pressure or intensity 
the hearing aid can produce under any 
circumstances. 

272 
Glossary 
Meniere's disorder 
Meningitis 
Mixed loss 
Monaural 
Monitored 
Myringoplasty 
Myringotomy 
Narrow band 
Neck loop 
Neoplasm 
Neuroma 
Noise 
Non-invasive 
Non-organic 
Null 
Nystagmus 
Objective 
Occluded 
Occlusion effect 
Omnidirectional 
microphone 
On-effect 
Oscillator 
Osteogenesis 
imperfecta 
Otalgia 
Idiopathic episodic endolymphatic hydrops. 
A syndrome or disorder in which there is 
fluctuating sensorineural hearing loss, vertigo 
and tinnitus, due to excessive fluid pressure 
in the inner ear. 
Inflammation of the brain lining. 
A hearing loss that is a combination of con-
ductive and sensorineural type. 
One ear. 
Regulated - often of live voice using a sound 
level meter. 
Surgery to repair a perforated tympanic 
membrane. 
Surgical incision of tympanic membrane. 
A small range of frequencies. 
A small loop of wire worn around the user's 
neck, rather than having a loop placed around 
the room (see 'Loop'). 
A new tumour. 
A tumour. 
i ) Unwanted sound or unwanted electrical 
signal. 
ii) Aperiodic or non-periodic sound. 
Not involving surgery. 
Not of physical origin, as in psychological or 
fake. 
Negative (as in a negative response) or void. 
Involuntary beating movements of the eyes. 
Able to be observed or measured; not 
subjective. 
Closed. 
An apparent improvement in hearing by bone 
conduction when the external auditory 
meatus is occluded. 
Accepts sound equally from all directions. 
The greatest response, which occurs at the 
onset of a signal. 
A sound source. 
Brittle bones. 
Earache. 

Otitis 
Otitis media 
Otolaryngology 
Otology 
Otorrhoea 
Otosclerosis 
Ototoxic 
Over-masking 
Overshoot 
Paget's disease 
Palsy 
Paracusis 
Parameter 
Pascal 
Perinatal 
Peripheral 
Phase 
Phon 
Phoneme 
Phonetic balance 
Pip 
Polarity 
Pontine 
Postauricular 
Postlingual 
Potentiometer 
Prelingual 
Presbyacusis 
Probe (tube) 
microphone 
Prosthesis 
Glossary 273 
Inflammation of the ear. 
Inflammation of the middle ear. 
Ear, nose and throat (ENT) medical specialty. 
Ear medical specialty. 
Discharge from the ear. 
Bone growth disorder affecting stapes and 
causing conductive hearing loss. 
Potentially poisonous to the ear. 
Too much masking, which may affect the test 
ear and worsen its threshold. 
An initial level reached which is greater than 
the steady state of a signal. 
Thickening and softening of bones, especially 
of skull. 
Paralysis. 
Abnormal hearing (see Willis' paracusis). 
A variable or attribute. 
Unit of pressure equivalent to 1 newton per 
square metre. 
Around the time of birth. 
Not within the central nervous system. 
Part of the period of a sound wave - can be 
expressed in degrees. 
A unit of equal loudness. 
The smallest individual speech sound. 
Having the same distribution of speech sounds 
as a random sample of everyday conver-
sational English. 
A pure-tone with a rapid rise time and having 
a steady state that is no more than one cycle 
in length. 
Positive or negative (as in electricity). 
In that part of the brain stem known as the 
pons. 
Behind the ear. 
After the acquisition of speech. 
Variable control in a hearing aid. 
Before the acquisition of speech. 
Loss of hearing with old age. 
Used in real ear measurements to measure 
sound from near the tympanic membrane. 
An artificial replacement for an impaired body 
part. 

27 4 
Glossary 
Pseudohypacusis 
Psychoacoustics 
Quiescent current 
Receiver 
Recruitment 
Redundancy 
Rehabilitation 
Reliability 
Residual hearing 
Resonance 
Retrocochlear 
Reverberation 
Rise time 
Roll off 
Room acoustics 
Rubella 
Saturation 
Sensation level 
Sensorineural 
Sequelae 
Sibilant 
Signal to noise ratio 
Signs 
Non-organic or functional hearing loss. 
Concerned with the relationship between 
measured 
signals 
and 
their 
subjective 
attributes. 
Current in a transistor in the absence of a 
driving or input signal. 
A term coined by the hearing aid industry to 
mean loudspeaker. 
Abnormal loudness growth, usually found with 
cochlear impairment. 
Part of the speech message that can be omitted 
without loss of meaning. 
Therapy to help restore (normal) functioning. 
Consistency - how repeatable is a test. 
That part of the normal dynamic range that the 
impaired person is left with. 
Minimum acoustic impedance that occurs at a 
particular frequency, that is, a higher SPL 
will be recorded at this (resonant) frequency 
than at any other. 
Beyond the cochlea. 
Continuation of sound by reflecting or echoing. 
The time taken for a signal to reach its steady 
state. 
Rate of attenuation in dB per octave. 
How the design of a room affects the sound 
within it. 
German measles. 
Maximum - any further increase in input will 
cause no increase in output. 
Amount above the individual's threshold. 
Impairment caused in or beyond the cochlea. 
After effects of disease. 
High frequency consonant of a hissing nature, 
e.g. 's' as in ~ue, 'f' as in shoe. 
Signal level compared to the competing noise. 
Usually expressed as signal minus noise, e.g. 
a signal of 60 dB A with a competing noise 
level of 50 dB A gives S: N of + 10 dB. 
Signs of a disorder are whatever features are 
noted by the doctor, e.g. swelling, discharge, 
redness. 

Sintered mesh 
Sound field 
Sound level meter 
Sound pressure level 
Spectograph 
Speech spectrum 
Speech reception 
threshold 
Speech-reading 
Spondee 
Stapedectomy 
Stenosis 
Submucous 
Supra-aural 
Suprasegmental 
Supra threshold 
Sweep frequency 
Symptoms 
Syndrome 
Telecoil 
Temporal 
Tinnitus 
Tolerance 
Tone burst 
Tone decay 
Transducer 
Transient tone 
Trauma 
Trimmer 
Tympanometry 
Glossary 
275 
A filter made of partially-fused metal. 
Containing sound waves, e.g. in a room. 
A device to measure sound pressure in dB. 
SPL - a scale in which 0 dB = 20 micro Pascals. 
A three-dimensional display of the energy of 
speech. Frequency and time are represented 
by the two axes of the graph. Intensity is 
shown by the darkness of the trace. 
The average level of the speech sounds. 
The faintest level at which a person can identify 
50% in a speech test. 
Lip-reading - but includes use of all cues not 
just those visible on the lips. 
A two-syllable word with equal stress on each 
syllable, e.g. football. 
Removal of the stapes and replacement with a 
prosthesis. 
Narrowing of the canal, as in stenosis of the 
external auditory meatus. 
Below the skin and surface tissue. 
On (against) the ear. 
Features of speech that add to the phonemes, 
e.g. time, intonation, pitch, loudness. 
Above threshold. 
A tone that gradually changes across a fre-
quency range. 
Features that are complained of by a patient, 
e.g. pain, throbbing, heat, noises. 
A group of features that characterize a disorder. 
Induction coil in loop amplification system. 
Concerned with time. 
Noises in the ear or head with no external 
source. 
Ability to hear sound without discomfort. 
Tone with rapid rise time and short duration. 
Decrease in hearing sensitivity when a tone is 
held for a short time, e.g. 1-3 minutes. 
A device to change one type of energy to 
another, e.g. sound energy to electricity. 
A brief tone, of 500 milliseconds or less. 
Injury. 
An adjustable element. 
Measurement of the ease or difficulty with 
which sound passes through the eardrum. 

276 
Glossary 
Unilateral 
Unoccluded 
Upward spread of 
masking 
Validity 
Vent 
Vertigo 
Vibrotactile 
Viseme 
Warble tone 
Wavelength 
White noise 
Willis' paracusis 
Zwislocki coupler 
Of one side. 
Open. 
Low frequency sounds mask higher frequency 
sounds. 
The degree to which a test measures what it 
was intended to measure. 
A hole drilled through an ear mould, usually to 
release unwanted low frequency sounds. 
Disturbance of balance. 
Feeling vibration. 
Phonemes that appear the same to a lip-reader, 
e.g. 'p', 'b' and 'm'. 
A frequency modulated tone; the tone varies 
around a central frequency. Used to avoid 
standing waves in free-field testing. 
The distance covered in one cycle of a sound. 
Broad band noise in which each frequency is 
presented at equal intensity. 
An apparent ability to hear better in the pres-
ence of background noise. 
One particular model of occluded ear simulator. 
Simulates the acoustic impedance of the 
average adult ear. 

Index 
ABLB, see Alternate binaural loudness 
balance test 
AB word list 192-3 
Acoustic filters 184-5 
Acoustic impedance 233-4 
Acoustic neuroma 57 
Acoustic reflex 34, 235, 237-9 
Acoustics 3-19 
Acquired conditions of the ear 42-6, 
47-50, 53-7 
Adaptation 245 
Addition cured silicone 174-5 
Afferent nerve fibres 29-30 
AGC, see Automatic gain control 
Aided thresholds 190 
Air-bone gap 118-20 
Air conduction hearing aids 127-32 
Air conduction output transducer 
(hearing aid) 82, 83 
Air conduction threshold testing 106 
Alternate binaural loudness balance 
test 241-4 
American National Standards 
Institute 140, 141 
Amplifiers 
class A 79, 87, 147 
class AB 79-81, 87, 147 
class B, see class AB 
class D 81-2 
Anatomy 20-32 
ANSI, see American National 
Standards Institute 
Aperiodic sound 9 
Artificial mastoid 145-6 
'A' scale 12, 14, 18 
ASP, see Automatic signal processing 
Assistive devices 213-14 
Atresia 42 
Attack time 89, 138-9 
Audiogram 
interpretation 118-20 
pure tone 117 
speech 196 
symbols 114, 117-18 
Audiological assessment 
audiogram interpretation 118-21 
case history 97-8 
masking 109-16 
otoscopy 101-3 
pure tone audiometry 106-9 
referrable conditions 98-101 
tuning fork tests 103-5 
Audiological reference pressure 11 
Audiometer 14-17 
calibration 14-16 
configuration 15 
daily checks 16 
speech 195 
standards 15-16 
Audiometric room requirements 
122-3 
Audiometric symbols 114, 117-18 
Audiometric test frequencies 15, 
107-8 
Audiometric tests 106-8 
Audiometry 
automatic 250-2 
impedance 232-9 
masking 109-16 
paediatric 255-9 
pure tone 106-9 
speech 191-7 
Auditory adaptation 245 
Auditory deprivation 159 

278 
Index 
Auditory feedback 71-2 
Auditory pathways, see Central 
connections of cochlear nerve 
Auditory training 212-13, 218 
Auditory tube, see Eustachian tube 
Aural rehabilitation, see Rehabilitation 
Auricle, see Pinna 
Automatic audiometry 250-2 
Automatic gain control 88-91, 
138-9, 170-1 
Automatic signal processing 92 
Automatic volume control, see 
Automatic gain control 
Auxiliary aids, see Assistive devices 
Average speech spectrum 70, 164 
Background noise reduction 92 
see also Bass cut; Venting 
Bacterial conditions of the ear, see 
Infection 
Balance, organ of 30 
Basilar membrane 29, 35-6 
Bass cut 86-7 
see also Automatic signal processing; 
Venting 
Batteries, hearing aid 146-9 
Battery life 147 
Behind-the-ear hearing aid 128-9 
Bekesy audiometry 250-2 
Bekesy' s travelling wave theory 
35-6 
Bi-CROS hearing aids 162-3 
Binaural hearing 157 
advantages over monaural 157-60 
Bodyworn hearing aid 127-8 
Bone conduction hearing aid 132 
Bone conduction output transducer 
82,83 
Bone conduction threshold testing 
107-8 
Bone vibrator, see Bone conduction 
output transducer 
Bone vibrator output measurement 
145 
Brain stern evoked response 
audiometry 255-6 
British Standards Institution 140 
BTE, see Behind-the-ear hearing aid 
Canal hearing aid, see In-the-canal 
hearing aid 
Carhart's notch 50, 108 
Case history 97-8 
Causes of hearing loss, see Medical 
aspects of hearing loss 
Central connections of cochlear nerve 
38-9 
Cholesteatoma 49 
Cochlea 27-30 
Cochlear fluids 27 
Cochlear hearing loss, see 
Sensorineural hearing loss 
Cochlear hearing loss, tests of 241-5 
Cochlear innervation 29 
Cochlear potentials 37-8 
Code of practice 215-17 
referrable conditions 98-101 
Complex sound 7 
Compliance 235-7 
Compression 89, 91 
Condensation reaction silicone 174 
Conductive hearing loss 42-50, 60, 
108, 118-19, 238, 254-5 
Congenital conditions of the ear 42, 
46-7,51-3 
Consonants 67-8 
Contralateral routeing of signals 
130, 161-3 
Corti, organ of 28-9 
Counselling, see Rehabilitation 
Coupler, 2cc 143, 144, 166 
Couplers 142-3 
CROS hearing aid 130, 161-3 
Cross hearing 108, 109-10 
Crouzon' s syndrome 46 
Current, electrical 84-5 
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) 53 
dBHL, see Decibel, hearing level 
dBSPL; see Decibel, sound pressure 
level 
Decibel 
hearing level 12 
scales 7, 10-12 
sound pressure level 7 
Delayed speech feedback test 248 
Directional microphone 77-8 
Disease, see Pathology 
Discharge, ear 99 
see also Otitis externa; Otitis media 
Distortion 136-8 
Doerfler-Stewart test 248 
Down's syndrome 46 
Drugs, see Ototoxic drugs 

Dynamic range of hearing 12, 13, 
116 
Ear 
anatomy 20-32 
canal, see External auditory meatus 
canal resonance 188 
physiology 32-40 
simulator 142-3 
Earache 58-9, 99 
Ear examination 175-6 
see also Otoscopy 
Earmould 
materials 178-9 
types 179-81 
Earmoulds 173, 174, 178-85 
Ear impression 173 
equipment 175 
technique 176-8 
Echo 10 
Eczema 45 
Educational audiology 262-4 
Efferent nerve fibres 29-30 
Electret microphone 77 
Electrical conduction 84-5 
Electricity, elementary theory 84-5 
Electro-acoustic impedance 234-5 
Endolymph 27 
Equivalent input noise level 138 
ERA, see Evoked response audiometry 
Eustachian tube 24, 26, 47-9, 254 
Evaluation of hearing aids 187-99 
Evoked response audiometry 255-6 
Excessive wax 44, 99, 176 
External auditory meatus 20, 22, 33 
see also Otoscopy 
Falltime 16-17 
Feedback 
acoustic 209-10 
auditory 71-2 
Filters, acoustic 184-5 
Fluctuating hearing loss 100 
Formants 66 
Frequency 
audible range 5 
fundamental 8 
of sound 5-6 
of speech 66-7, 71 
of vocal cords 65 
Frequency response of hearing aids 
133, 136, 167 
Index 279 
Fricatives 67, 71 
Functional gain 190-1 
Fundamental frequency 8 
Gain 134, 164-7 
functional 190-1 
insertion 187-90 
open ear 188, 189 
Gain control (volume) 82-3 
Genetic conditions of the ear 52-3 
Genetics 41 
German measles 53 
Glue ear 48 
see also Otitis media 
Grommet 48 
Hair cells 28-9, 37 
Half gain rule 165 
Half peak level (HPL) 196 
Half peak level elevation (HPLE) 196 
Hard acrylic earmould 178 
Harmonic distortion 136-7 
Harmonics 8 
Head shadow effect 32, 158-9 
Hearing aid(s) 
advantages of binaural 157-60 
care and cleaning 210 
evaluation 187-99 
fitting 163-71 
fitting room requirements 163-4 
modification 181-5 
National Health Service 149-52 
practical instruction to 
patients 207-13 
purpose 155 
requirements 155-6 
selection and fitting 155-71 
standards 139-41 
test box 141, 142 
Hearing aid components 
amplifier 78-82 
battery 146-9 
microphone 73-8 
output transducer 82 
transistor 78-9 
Hearing Aid Council Code of Practice 
215-17, 98-101 
Hearing aid performance 
frequency response 133, 136, 167 
gain 134 
maximum output 135, 168-70 
specification sheets 132-3 

280 
Index 
Hearing aid types 
aid conduction 127-32, 156-7 
behind-the-ear 128-9 
bi-CROS 162-3 
bodyworn 127-8 
bone conduction 132, 156-7 
CROS 161 
in-the-canal 130-1 
in-the-ear 130-1 
spectacle 129-30 
Hearing loss 
causes, see Medical aspects of 
hearing loss 
in children 253-64 
classification 121-2, 205 
conductive 42-50,60,108,118-
19, 238, 254-5 
description 121-2 
fluctuating 100 
noise induced 53-4, 98-9 
sensorineural 50-7, 60, 100, 118-
19 
and speech perception 70-1 
and speech production 71-2, 121 
unilateral 161 
Hearing tactics 211-12 
Hearing therapist 219-20 
Hereditary conditions 42 
High frequency emphasis 86-7 
see also Automatic signal processing; 
Venting; Horns 
Horns 181, 182 
Hydrops, see Meniere's disorder 
IEC, see International Electrotechnical 
Commission 
Impedance 
acoustic 234 
bridge 234-6 
Impedance audiometry 232-9 
Impression 
of the ear 173 
materials 173-5 
technique 176-8 
Incus 25 
Induction loop system 213-14 
Industrial hearing loss, see Noise 
induced hearing loss 
Industrial screening 250 
Infection 
inner ear 54-5 
middle ear 47-9 
outer ear 44-5 
Inner ear 
anatomy 27-30 
congenital conditions 51-3 
pathology 50-7 
physiology 35-9 
Innervation of the cochlea 29, 36-9 
Input compression 90-1 
Insertion gain 145, 166 
Insertion gain measurement 187-90 
In situ measurement 143-5, 189 
Intensity 
sound 6-7 
speech 69-70 
Intermodulation distortion 137 
Internal noise 138 
International Electrotechnical 
Commission 139-40 
In-the-canal hearing aid 130-1 
In-the-ear hearing aid 130-1 
Inverse square law 3, 4, 9 
ITE, see In-the-ear hearing aid 
KEMAR (Knowles Electronic Manikin 
for Acoustic Research) 144 
Kendall toy test 194 
Labyrinth 27-8 
Labyrinthectomy 58 
Libby horn 181 
Lip reading 64, 212-13 
Localization of sound 32-3 
Lombard test 247 
Loop system 213-14 
Loudness 17 
see also Intensity 
Loudspeaker, see Receiver 
Low frequency emphasis 86-7 
MAF, see Minimum audible field 
Malingering deafness 246-7 
Malleus 23-5 
MAP, see Minimum audible pressure 
Maskers, tinnitus 226-7 
Masking 
bone conduction 116 
need for 109-10 
noise 115 
procedure 111-13 
rules 110-11 
symbols 114 

Mastoid 26 
Mastoidectomy 57 
Mastoid simulator 145-6 
Maximum output 135, 168-70 
Maximum power output, see 
Maximum output 
Meatal projection of earmould 182 
Meatus, see External auditory meatus 
Medical aspects of hearing loss 41-
60 
inner ear pathology 50-7 
middle ear pathology 46-50 
outer ear pathology 42-6 
Medical referral 98-101, 216 
Mel, the 17 
Meniere's disorder 56 
Mercury (mercuric oxide) batteries 
148 
Microphone 
capacitor (condenser) 76 
carbon 75 
directional 77-8 
dynamic (moving coil) 75-6 
electret 77 
hearing aid 73-8 
piezo-electric (crystal) 
75 
pressure 74 
Middle ear 
anatomy 22-7 
function 33 
muscles 34 
pathology 46-50 
physiology 33-5 
transformer action 33, 233-4 
Minimum audible field 13, 14 
Minimum audible pressure 13 
Multichannel hearing aid systems 
91-2, 171 
Myringotomy 48, 57 
Nasopharynx 30-2 
National Health Service hearing aids 
149-52 
Nerve supply, see Innervation of the 
cochlea 
NIHL, see Noise induced hearing loss 
Noise induced hearing loss 53-4, 
98-9 
Noise reduction in hearing aids, see 
Automatic signal processing; Bass 
cut; Venting 
Non-organic hearing loss 246-9 
Index 
281 
Occluded ear simulator 142-3 
Occlusion effect 35, 108-9 
Octave 15 
Ohm's Law 85-6 
Open ear gain 188, 189 
Operations on the ear 57-9 
Organ of Corti 28-9 
Ossicles 25 
Otalgia, see Pain in the ear 
Otitis externa 45 
Otitis media 47-9, 254-5 
Otorrhoea, see Discharge, ear 
Otosclerosis 50 
Otoscope 101 
Otoscopy 101-3 
Ototoxic drugs 55 
Outer ear 
anatomy 20-22 
excessive wax 44 
foreign bodies 43 
furunculosis 45 
infection 44-5 
pathology 42-6 
physiology 32-3 
tumours 45-6 
Output compression 90, 91 
Output limiting 87-92 
Output sound pressure level, see 
Maximum output 
Output transducer 82, 83 
Paediatric hearing loss 253-64 
Paget's disease 47 
Pain in the ear 58-9 
Pathology 
inner ear 50-7 
middle ear 46-50 
outer ear 42-6 
Patient management, see 
Rehabilitation 
PB words 192 
PC, see Peak clipping 
Peak clipping 87-8, 170 
Perilymph 27 
Period 6 
Periodic sound 8-9 
Phase of sound 7-8 
Phon, the 17-18 
Phonemes 62, 192 
Phonetically balanced (PB) words 
192 
Physiology of the ear 32-40 

282 
Index 
Pink noise 9 
Pinna 
anatomy 20-1 
injury to 42-3 
physiology 32 
Pitch 17 
see also Frequency 
Plosives 67-8, 71 
Pre-lingual deafness 253 
Presbyacusis 54 
Prescription formulae 168 
Prescriptive procedures 164-71 
Pressure 
audiological reference 11 
minimum audible 7, 13 
sound 6-7 
Pseudohypacusis, see Non-organic 
hearing loss 
Psychoacoustics 17-18 
Psychogenic hearing loss 246 
Pure tone audiogram 117 
Pure tone audiometry 106-9 
Push pull amplifier, see Amplifiers, 
class AB 
Radio hearing aid 260-2 
Receiver 82, 83 
Recommended equivalent threshold 
sound pressure levels 13 
Recovery time 139 
Recruitment 17 
see also Cochlear hearing loss, tests 
of 
Reference couple~ 143, 144 
Referrable conditions 98-101, 216 
Reflex arc 238-9 
Rehabilitation 
attitude types 202-3 
practical aspects of 207-13 
process 201-7 
tinnitus 230-2 
see also Hearing aid fitting; 
Subjective evaluation of hearing 
aids 
Release time 89, 139 
Residual hearing 126 
Resistance, electrical 84-5 
RETSPL, see Recommended 
equivalent threshold sound 
pressure levels 
Reverberation 10 
Reverberation time for audiometric 
rooms 123 
Rinne test 104-5 
Rise time 16-17 
Room requirements 
for audiometry 122-3 
for hearing aid fitting 163-4 
Rubella 53 
Saturation sound pressure level, see 
Maximum output 
Semicircular canals 27-8 
Sensorineural hearing loss 50-7, 60, 
100, 118-19 
Shadow curve 109, 110 
Short increment sensitivity index test 
244 
Signal processing 86-92 
SISI test, see Short increment 
sensitivity index test 
Social worker 219 
Soft acrylic 179 
Sone, the 17-18 
Sound 
aperiodic 9 
complex 7 
frequency 5-6 
generation 3 
intensity 6-7 
localization 32-3 
measurement 10-14 
perception 35-8 
periodic 8-9 
pressure 6-7 
psychological properties of 17-18 
speed of 3, 6 
rransduction 36-8 
transmission 35-6 
wave 3 
wavelength of 5-6 
Sound level meter 14 
Specification sheets, hearing aid 
132-4 
Spectacle hearing aid 129 
Specula sterilization 101 
Speech 
audiogram 196 
audiometry 191-7 
frequency 65-7 
intensity 69-70 
perception 70-1 
production 63-4, 71-2 
reading 64-5, 217-18 

tests 191, 194-7 
therapy 218-19 
Speech and intelligibility 61-72 
Speech sounds 
vowels 65-7, 71 
consonants 67-8 
Speed of sound 3, 6 
Spondees 193 
Standing waves 8, 10 
Stapedectomy 50, 52, 58 
Stapedial reflex, see Acoustic reflex 
Stapedius 34, 237-8 
Stapes 25 
Stenger test 248 
Sterilization of specula 101 
Subjective evaluation of hearing aids 
197-9 
Surgical treatment, see Operations on 
the ear 
Syphilis 53 
Tactics for new hearing aid users 
211-12 
Teacher of the deaf 220 
Telecoil switch 84 
Telecoil system 213-14 
Temporal integration 17 
Temporary threshold shift 54 
Tensor tympani 34, 238 
Test box, hearing aid 141, 142 
Test frequencies, audiometric 15 
Tinnitus 100, 225 
assessment 227-30 
and associated hearing problems 
226 
conditions involving 59 
loudness matching 229 
maskers 226, 231 
masking evaluation 229-30 
pitch matching 227-8 
rehabilitation 230-2 
relief 226 
Tone controls, hearing aid 86-7 
Tone decay, see Auditory adaptation 
Transient distortion 137-8 
Transistor 78-9, 85 
Travelling wave theory 35-6 
Treacher Collins syndrome 42, 46 
Treble cut 86-7 
'T' switch 84, 214 
Index 283 
TIS, see Temporary threshold shift 
Tubing modification 181-2 
Tuning fork 103 
Tuning fork tests 104-5 
Turner's syndrome 53 
Twin channel systems 92 
Tympanic cavity 22-6 
Tympanic membrane 
anatomy 23-4 
injury to 43 
physiology 33-4 
see also Otoscopy 
Tympanogram 236-7 
Tympanometer 235-6 
Tympanometry 235-9 
Tympanoplasty 57-8 
ULL, see Uncomfortable loudness 
level 
Uncomfortable loudness level 116-
17, 168-70 
Unilateral hearing loss 161 
Usher's syndrome 52 
Venting 181, 182-4 
Vertigo 55-7, 99 
Vestibular system, see Semicircular 
canals 
Vibrotactile levels 120 
Viruses 45 
Vocal cords 63 
Vocal tract 63 
Voltage 84-5 
Volume, see Gain; Intensity; Loudness 
Volume control, hearing aid 82-3 
Vowels 65-7, 71 
Waardenburg's syndrome 53 
Warble tone 10 
Wavelength of sound 5-6 
Wave motion 9-10 
Waves 
sound 3, 9-10 
standing 8, 10 
Wax, excessive 44, 99, 176 
Weber test 104 
White noise 9 
Zinc air batteries 149 

