Principles of 
Transistor 
Circuits 
E I G H T H E D I T I O N 
INTRODUCTION TO THE DESIGN OF 
AMPLIFIERS, RECEIVERS AND DIGITAL CIRCUITS 
S W A M O S , BSc, CENG, M I E E 
formerly Head of Technical Publications Section, 
Engineering Training Department, 
British Broadcasting Corporation 
Newnes 

Newnes 
An imprint of Butterworth-Heinemann 
Linacre House, Jordan Hill, Oxford OX2 8DP 
225 Wildwood Avenue, Woburn, M A 01801 -2041 
A division of Reed Educational and Professional Publishing Ltd 
ν A member of the Reed Elsevier pic group 
OXFORD 
BOSTON 
JOHANNESBURG 
MELBOURNE 
NEW DELHI 
SINGAPORE 
First published by Iliffe Books Ltd 1959 
Second edition 1961 
Third edition 1965 
Fourth edition 1969 
Fifth edition 1975 
Sixth edition 1981 
Seventh edition 1990 
Eighth edition 1994 
Reprinted 1995, 1997, 1998 
©S.W.Amos 1994 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication 
may be reproduced in any aterial form (including 
photocopying or storing in any medium by electronic 
means and whether or not transiently or incidentally 
to some other use of this publication) without the 
written permission of the copyright holder except in 
accordance with the provisions of the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the tenus of a 
licence issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency Ltd, 
90 Tottenham Court Road, London, England W1Ρ 9HE. 
Application for the copyright holder's written permission 
to reproduce any part of this publication should be addressed 
to the publishers 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Amos, S. W. 
Principles of transistor circuits. - 8th ed. 
1. Transistor circuits 
2. Electronic circuit design 
I. Title 
621.3815'30455 
TK7871.9 
ISBN 0 7506 1999 6 
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Amos, S. W. (Stanley William) 
Principles of transistor circuits/S. W. Amos. - 8th ed. 
p. cm. 
ISBN 0 7506 1999 6 
1. Transistor circuits. I. Title 
TK7871.9A45 
1994 
621.381 '528—dc20 
93-50682 
Printed and bound in Great Britain 

Preface to the Eighth Edition 
The principal changes introduced in this new edition were made to keep 
the book abreast of progress in electronics. To this end material has 
been added on new components such as h.e.m.t.s and to illustrate the 
use of transistors in modern equipment such as camcorders, video 
recorders, CD players and satellite receivers. 
The preparation of this edition was undertaken by the author's friend 
and colleague Eugene Trundle, who selected the new material and 
wrote the associated text. He also made minor rearrangements of 
chapter contents to improve the clarity of presentation. The author 
gratefully acknowledges this help. 
S.W. Amos, 
Broadway, September 1993 
vi 

CHAPTER 1 
Semiconductors and Junction 
Diodes 
INTRODUCTION 
The 1950s marked the beginning of a revolution in electronics. It 
started with the invention by William Shockley of the transistor, a 
minute three-terminal device which could switch, amplify 
and 
oscillate yet needed only a few microwatts of power; it was also robust 
and virtually everlasting. Inevitably the transistor replaced the 
electron tube (valve) in all except very high power applications. 
The pace of the revolution was accelerated a decade later by the 
development of the integrated circuit or i.e. (popularly known as the 
silicon 
chip) 
in which 
transistors and 
other components 
are 
manufactured 
and 
interconnected 
by the planar process 
(see 
Appendix A) to form amplifiers, signal stores and other functional 
units on a single silicon slice. The miniaturisation now possible is such 
that several million transistors can be accommodated on an i.e. less 
than 1cm
2
. 
The applications of i.e.s seem boundless. They feature in activities 
as diverse as satellite communication and control of model railways. 
They are widely used in audio, video and radio equipment and they 
made possible the computers and microprocessors now universally 
employed in commerce and industry. Perhaps their most familiar 
applications are in digital watches, calculators and toys. 
This book describes the properties of the various types of transistor 
and shows how they can be used in the design of electronic circuits. 
The 
principles described 
apply to circuits employing 
discrete 
transistors and those embodied in i.c.s. To explain the properties of 
transistors it is useful to begin with an account of the physics of 
1 

2 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
semiconductors because all transistors, irrespective of type, depend 
on semiconducting material for their action. 
MECHANISM OF SEMICONDUCTION 
As the name suggests a semiconducting material is one with a 
conductivity lying between that of an insulator and that of a 
conductor: that is to say one for which the resistivity lies between, say 
10
1 2
Q-cm (a value typical of glass) and 10~
6
Ω-αη (approximately the 
value for copper). Typical values for the resistivity of a semiconduct-
ing material lie between 1 and 100 Ω-cm. 
Such a value of resistivity could, of course, be obtained by mixing 
a conductor and an insulator in suitable proportions but the 
resulting material would not be a semiconductor. Another essential 
feature of a semiconducting material is that its electrical resistance 
TEMPERATURE 
Fig. 1.1. Resistance-temperature 
relationship 
for 
a conductor and a 
semiconductor 
decreases with increase in temperature over a particular tem-
perature range which is characteristic of the semiconductor. This 
behaviour contrasts with that of elemental metallic conductors 
for which the resistance increases with rise in temperature. This is 
illustrated in Fig. 1.1, which gives curves for a conductor and a 
semiconductor. The resistance of the conductor increases linearly, 
whereas that of the semiconductor decreases exponentially, as 
temperature rises. Over the significant 
temperature range the 
relationship 
between 
resistance 
and 
temperature 
for 
a 
semiconductor could be written 
R( = ae
h 
T 
where R, is the resistance at an absolute temperature 7\ a and b are 
constants characteristic of the semiconductor material and e is the 

Semiconductors 
and Junction 
Diodes 
3 
base of the natural logarithms, i.e. 2.81828 . . . The two curves in 
Fig. 1.1 are not to the same vertical scale of resistance. 
All semiconducting materials exhibit the temperature dependence 
discussed in the paragraphs above in the pure state: the addition 
of impurities raises the temperature at which the material exhibits 
this behaviour, i.e. the region of negative temperature coefficient. 
The element most widely used in transistor manufacture is silicon. 
It has largely replaced germanium which was also used in early 
transistors. When pure both elements have very poor conductivity and 
are of little direct use in transistor manufacture. But by the addition of 
a very small but controlled quantity of a particular type of impurity 
the conductivity can be increased and the material made suitable for 
use in transistors. 
The behaviour of semiconductors can be explained in terms of 
atomic theory. The atom is assumed to have a central nucleus 
which carries most of the mass of the atom and has a positive charge. 
A number of electrons carrying a negative charge revolve around 
the nucleus. The total number of electrons revolving around a 
particular nucleus is sufficient to offset the positive nuclear charge, 
leaving the atom electrically neutral. The number of electrons 
associated with a given nucleus is equal to the atomic number of 
the element. The electrons revolve in a number of orbits and, for 
the purpose of this discussion, the orbits may be regarded as 
concentric, the nucleus being at the centre, as shown in Fig. 1.2. 
This diagram is greatly simplified ; the orbits are in practice neither 
concentric nor co-planar. 
The first orbit (sometimes called a ring or a shell) is complete when 
it contains 2 electrons, and an atom with a single complete shell is 
that of the inert gas, helium. The second ring is complete when 
it has 8 electrons, and the atom with the first 2 rings complete is 
that of the inert gas, neon. The third ring is stable when it has 8 
or 18 electrons, and the atom having 2, 8 and 8 electrons in the 
NUCLEUS 
(POSITIVELY 
CHARGED) 
^ > 
ELECTRONS 
(NEGATIVELY 
CHARGED) 
O R B I T S OF ELECTRONS 
Fig. 1.2. Simplified 
diagram 
of structure 
of atom: 
for 
simplicity, 
electron orbits are shown as circular and 
co-planar 

4 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
1st, 2nd and 3rd rings is that of the inert gas, argon. All the inert 
gases have their outermost shells stable. It is difficult to remove 
any electrons from a stable ring or to insert others into it. Atoms 
combine by virtue of the electrons in the outermost rings: for 
example an atom with one electron in the outermost ring will 
willingly combine with another whose outermost ring requires 
one electron for completion. 
The inert gases, having their outer shells stable, cannot combine 
with other atoms or with each other. The number of electrons in 
the outermost ring or the number of electrons required to make 
the outermost ring complete has a bearing on the chemical valency 
of the element and the outermost ring is often called the valence ring. 
Now consider the copper atom: it has 4 rings of electrons, the 
first 3 being complete and the 4th containing 1 electron, compared 
with the 32 needed for completion. Similarly the silver atom has 
5 rings, 4 stable and the 5th also containing 1 out of 50 needed 
for completion. The atoms of both elements thus contain a single 
electron and this is loosely bound to the nucleus. It can be removed 
with little effort and is termed a free electron. A small e.m.f. applied 
to a collection of these atoms can set up a stream of free electrons, 
i.e. an electric current through the metal. Elements in which such 
free electrons are available are good electrical conductors. 
It might be thought that an atom with 17 electrons in the outer-
most orbit would be an even better conductor, but this is not so. 
If one electron is added to such an orbit it becomes complete and 
a great effort is needed to remove it again. 
The arrangement of orbital electrons in a silicon atom is pictured in 
Fig. 1.3. There are three rings, the first containing 2 electrons, the 
ο . 
NUCLEUS 
Ο 
ο ;< 
ο 
ο 
ο 
st
 
RING 
I ELECTRONS 
β 
rd 
4 
Fig. 1.3 Structure of silicon 
atom 

Semiconductors 
and Junction 
Diodes 
5 
second 8 and the third 4. The total number of electrons is 14, the 
atomic number of silicon. For comparison the germanium atom has 
four rings containing 2, 8, 18 and 4 electrons. These total 32, the 
atomic number for germanium. A significant feature of both atomic 
structures is that the outermost ring contains 4 electrons, a property of 
elements belonging to Group IV of the Periodic Table. 
Covalent 
Bonds 
It might be thought that some of the 4 electrons in the valence ring of 
the silicon atom could easily be displaced and that these elements 
would therefore be good conductors. In fact, crystals of pure silicon 
are very poor conductors. To understand this we must consider the 
relationships between the valence electrons of neighbouring atoms 
when these are arranged in a regular geometric pattern as in a crystal. 
The valence electrons of each atom form bonds, termed 
covalent 
bonds, with those of neighbouring atoms as suggested in Fig. 1.4. It is 
difficult to portray a three-dimensional phenomenon in a two-
dimensional diagram, but the diagram does show the valence 
electrons oscillating between two neighbouring atoms. The atoms 
behave in some respects as though each outer ring had 8 electrons and 
was stable. There are no free electrons and such a crystal is therefore 
an insulator: this is true of pure silicon at a very low temperature. 
At room temperatures, however, silicon crystals do have a small 
conductivity even when they are as pure as modern chemical methods 
can make them. This is partly due to the presence of minute traces of 
Fig 1.4. Illustrating covalent bonds in a crystal of 
pure silicon: for simplicity only electrons in the 
valence rings are shown 

6 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Donor 
Impurities 
Suppose an atom of a Group-V element such as arsenic is intro-
duced into a crystal of pure silicon. The atom enters into the lattice 
structure, taking the place of a silicon atom. Now the arsenic atom 
has 5 electrons in its outermost orbit and 4 of these form covalent 
bonds with the electrons of neighbouring atoms as shown in 
Fig. 1.5. The remaining (5th) electron is left unattached; it is a free 
electron which can be made to move through the crystal by an 
e.m.f., leaving a positively charged ion. These added electrons give 
the crystal much better conductivity than pure silicon and the 
Fig. 1.5. 
Illustrating 
covalent 
bonds 
in the 
neighbourhood 
of an atom 
of a 
Group-V 
element introduced into a crystal of pure silicon. 
For simplicity only electrons in the valence rings 
are shown 
impurities (the way in which these increase conductivity is explained 
later) and partly because thermal agitation enables some valence 
electrons to escape from their covalent bonds and thus become 
available as charge carriers. They are able to do this by virtue of their 
kinetic energy which, at normal temperatures, is sufficient to allow a 
very small number to break these bonds. If their kinetic energy is 
increased by the addition of light or by increase in temperature, more 
valence electrons escape and the conductivity increases. If the 
temperature is raised sufficiently conductivity becomes so great that it 
swamps semiconductor behaviour. This sets an upper limit to the 
temperature at which semiconductor devices can operate normally. 
For silicon devices the limit is sometimes quoted as 150°C. 

Semiconductors 
and Junction Diodes 
7 
added element is termed a donor because it gives free electrons to 
the crystal. Silicon so treated with a Group-V element is termed 
η-type because negatively charged particles are available to carry 
charge through the crystal. It is significant that the addition of the 
arsenic or some other Group-V element was necessary to give this 
improvement in conductivity. The added element is often called an 
impurity and in the language of the chemist it undoubtedly is. 
However, the word is unfortunate in this context because it suggests 
that the pentavalent element is unwanted ; in fact, it is essential. 
When a battery is connected across a crystal of η-type semi-
conductor the free electrons are attracted towards the battery 
positive terminal and repelled from the negative terminal. These 
forces cause a drift of electrons through the crystal from the 
negative to the positive terminal: for every electron leaving the 
crystal to enter the positive terminal another must be liberated 
from the negative terminal to enter the crystal. The stream of 
electrons through the crystal constitutes an electric current. If the 
voltage applied to the crystal is varied the current varies also in 
direct proportion, and if the battery connections are reversed the 
direction of the current through the crystal also reverses but it does 
not change in amplitude ; that is to say the crystal is a linear con-
ductor. 
Acceptor 
Impurities 
Now suppose an atom of a Group-Ill element such as boron is 
introduced into a crystal of pure silicon. It enters the lattice 
structure, taking the place of a silicon atom, and the 3 electrons 
in the valence ring of the boron atom form covalent bonds with 
the valence electrons of the neighbouring silicon atoms. To make 
up the number of covalent bonds to 4, each boron atom competes 
with a neighbouring atom and may leave this deficient of one electron 
as shown in Fig. 1.6. A group of covalent bonds, which is deficient 
of one electron, behaves in much the same way as a positively 
charged particle with a charge equal in magnitude to that of an 
electron. Such a particle is called a hole in semiconductor theory, 
and we may say that the introduction of the Group-Ill impurity 
gives rise to holes in a crystal of pure silicon. These can carry 
charge through the crystal and, because these charge carriers have 
a positive sign, silicon treated with a Group-Ill impurity is termed 
p-type. Such an impurity is termed an acceptor impurity because 
it takes electrons from the silicon atoms. Thus the introduction of 
the Group-Ill element into a crystal lattice of pure silicon also 

8 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
;:(©}ï; 
/ 
Vex 
<
y
\
. 
/ © 
\ 
\ 
/ o' 
\ 
\ 
/\rg. 7.6. Illustrating 
covalent 
bonds 
in the 
neighbourhood 
of an atom 
of a G roup-1 H 
element, 
introduced 
into a crystal 
of 
pure 
si/icon. 
For simplicity, 
only electrons 
in the 
valence rings are shown 
increases the conductivity considerably and, when a battery is 
connected across a crystal of p-type silicon, a current can flow 
through it in the following manner. 
The holes have an effective positive charge, and are therefore 
attracted towards the negative terminal of the battery and repulsed 
by the positive terminal. They therefore drift through the crystal 
from the positive to the negative terminal. Each time a hole reaches 
the negative terminal, an electron is emitted from this terminal 
into the hole in the crystal to neutralise it. At the same time an 
electron from a covalent bond enters the positive terminal to leave 
another hole in the crystal. This immediately moves towards the 
negative terminal, and thus a stream of holes flows through the 
crystal from the positive to the negative terminal. The battery thus 
loses a steady stream of electrons from the negative terminal and 
receives a similar stream at its positive terminal. It may be said 
that a stream of electrons has passed through the crystal from the 
negative to the positive terminal. A (low of holes is thus equivalent 
to a (low of electrons in the opposite direction. 
If the battery voltage is varied the current also varies in direct 
proportion : thus p-type silicon is also a linear conductor. 
It is astonishing how small the impurity concentration must be 
to make silicon suitable for use in transistors. A concentration 
of 1 part in 10
6
 may be too large, and concentrations commonly 
used are of a few parts in 10
8
. A concentration of 1 part in 10
8 
increases the conductivity by 16 times. Before such a concentration 

Semiconductors 
and Junction 
Diodes 
9 
can be introduced, the silicon must first be purified to such an 
extent that any impurities still remaining represent concentrations 
very much less than this. Purification is one of the most difficult 
processes in the manufacture of transistors. The addition of the 
impurity is commonly termed doping. 
Intrinsic and Extrinsic 
Semiconductor 
If a semiconductor crystal contains no impurities, the only charge 
carriers present are those produced by thermal breakdown of the 
covalent bonds. The conducting properties are thus characteristic of 
the pure semiconductor. Such a crystal is termed an 
intrinsic 
semiconductor. 
In general, however, the semiconductor crystals contain some 
Group-Ill and some Group-V impurities, i.e. some donors and some 
acceptors. Some free electrons fit into some holes and neutralise them 
but there are some residual charge carriers left. If these are mainly 
electrons they are termed majority carriers (the holes being minority 
carriers), and the material is η-type. If the residual charge carriers are 
mainly holes, these are majority carriers (the electrons being minority 
carriers) and the semiconductor is termed p-type. In an η-type or 
p-type 
crystal 
the 
impurities 
are 
chiefly 
responsible 
for 
the 
conduction, and the material is termed an extrinsic semiconductor. 
C O M P O U N D 
SEMICONDUCTORS 
In a silicon crystal covalent bonds between the valence electrons of 
neighbouring atoms cause the atoms to behave as though the 
outermost electron orbits were complete. The crystal is therefore 
effectively a non-conductor until an impurity is introduced. A similar 
process can occur in a compound of a trivalent and a pentavalent 
element. Here, too, sharing of the valence electrons yields an 
effectively complete outer shell and the resulting insulating property 
can again be destroyed by the introduction of a suitable impurity. 
There are a number of such compound semiconductors (known as 
III—V compounds from the columns of the Periodic Table) but the 
most widely used is gallium arsenide, GaAs. This has a number of 
advantages over silicon. For example, the mobility of electrons in 
GaAs is five times that in silicon, making GaAs transistors suitable for 
use at microwave frequencies and in computers where high-speed 
switching is required. Moreover intrinsic GaAs is a better insulator 
than silicon which helps in the manufacture of integrated circuits. 
Thirdly GaAs retains its semiconducting properties up to a higher 

10 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
temperature. GaAs is widely used in the manufacture of light-emitting 
diodes. 
Other compound semiconductors contain divalent and hexavalent 
elements. An example of a II-VI compound is cadmium sulphide 
CdS. 
PN JUNCTIONS 
As already mentioned, an η-type or p-type semiconductor is a 
linear conductor, but if a crystal of semiconductor has n-type 
conductivity at one end and p-type at the other end, as indicated 
in Fig. 1.7, the crystal so produced has asymmetrical conducting 
properties. That is to say, the current which flows in the crystal 
when an e.m.f. is applied between the ends depends on the polarity 
of the e.m.f., being small when the e.m.f. is in one direction and 
large when it is reversed. Crystals with such conductive properties 
have obvious applications as detectors or rectifiers. 
It is not possible, however, to produce a structure of this type by 
placing a crystal of η-type semiconductor in contact with a crystal 
f .. 
- 
INTERNAL 
, 
-,;0~ 
». 
POTENTIAL BARRIER 
• 
i 
ί 
* 
-
-
-
! 
+ 
+ 
© 
Θ 
© ί Θ 
Θ 
© 
© 
© ! Θ 
Θ 
© 
© 
© 
ί Θ 
Θ 
+ 
+ —
+ 
+ 
J 
p n - J U N C T I O N 
Γι-ΤΥΡΕ SEMICONDUCTING 
p - T Y P E SEMICONDUCTING 
MATERIAL 
MATERIAL 
Fig. 1.7. Pattern of fixed and mobile charges in the region of a pn junction 
of p-type semiconductor. No matter how well the surfaces to be 
placed together are planed, or how perfect the contact between the 
two appears, the asymmetrical conductive properties are not 
properly obtained. The usual way of achieving a structure of this 
type is by treating one end of a single crystal of η-type semiconductor 
© 
FIXED DONOR ATOMS 
- 
FREE ELECTRONS 
© 
FIXED ACCEPTOR ATOMS 
+ 
HOLES 

Semiconductors 
and Junction 
Diodes 
11 
with a Group-HI impurity so as to offset the η-type conductivity 
at this end and to produce p-type conductivity instead at this 
point. Alternatively, of course, one end of a p-type crystal could 
be treated with a Group-V impurity to give η-type conductivity at 
this end. The semiconducting device so obtained is termed a junction 
diode, and the non-linear conducting properties can be explained in 
the following way. 
Behaviour ojfa pn Junction 
Fig. 1.7 represents the pattern of charges in a crystal containing 
a pn junction. The ringed signs represent charges due to the 
impurity atoms and are fixed in position in the crystal lattice: the 
unringed signs represent the charges of the free electrons and holes 
(majority carriers) which are liberated by the impurities. The 
η-region also contains a few holes and the p-region also a few free 
electrons: these are minority carriers which are liberated by thermal 
dissociation of the covalent bonds of the semiconducting element 
itself. 
Even when no external connections are made to the crystal, there 
is a tendency, due to diffusion, for the free electrons of the n-region 
to cross the junction into the p-region: similarly the holes in the 
p-region tend to diffuse into the η-region. However, the moment 
any of these majority carriers cross the junction, the electrical 
neutrality of the two regions is upset : the η-region loses electrons 
and gains holes, both causing it to become positively charged with 
respect to the p-region. Thus a potential difference is established 
across the junction and this discourages further majority carriers 
from crossing the junction: indeed only the few majority carriers 
with sufficient energy succeed in crossing. The potential difference 
is, however, in the right direction to encourage minority carriers 
to cross the junction and these cross readily in just 
sufficient 
numbers to balance the subsequent small flow of majority carriers. 
Thus the balance of charge is preserved even though the crystal 
has a potential barrier across the junction. In Fig. 1.7 the internal 
potential barrier is represented as an external battery and is shown 
in dashed lines. 
The potential barrier tends to establish a carrier-free zone, known 
as a depletion area, at the junction. The depletion area is similar to 
the dielectric in a charged capacitor. 
Reverse-bias 
Conditions 
Suppose now an external battery is connected across the junction, 
the negative terminal being connected to the p-region and the 

12 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
EXTERNAL BATTERY-
INTERNAL 
_; 
POTENTIAL BARRIER 
-4 
® 
Θ 
® 
® 
Θ 
® 
Θ 
® 
® 
+ 
+ 
Θ 
Θ 
+ 
+ 
Θ 
Θ 
+ 
+ 
Θ 
Θ 
MINORITY-
CARRIER 
CURRENT 
JUNCTION 
η-ΤΥΡΕ 
SEMICONDUCTING 
MATERIAL 
p - T Y P E 
SEMICONDUCTING 
MATERIAL 
Fig. 1.8. Reverse-bias 
conditions in a pn 
junction 
positive terminal to the η-region as shown in Fig. 1.8. This con-
nection gives a reverse-biased 
junction. The external battery is in 
parallel with and aiding the fictitious battery, increasing the potential 
barrier across the junction and the width of the depletion area. 
Even the majority carriers with the greatest energy now find it 
almost impossible to cross the junction. On the other hand the 
minority carriers can cross the junction as easily as before and a 
steady stream of these flows across. When the minority carriers 
cross the junction they are attracted to the battery terminals and 
can then flow as a normal electric current in a conductor. Thus a 
current, carried by the minority carriers and known as the reverse 
current, flows across the junction. It is a small current because the 
number of minority carriers is small: it increases as the battery 
voltage is increased as shown in Fig. 1.9 but at a reverse voltage 
VOLTAGE 
Fig. 1.9. Current-voltage 
relationship for a 
reverse-biased 
pn 
junction 

Semiconductors 
and Junction 
Diodes 
13 
of less than 1 V becomes constant : this is the voltage at which the 
rate of flow of minority carriers becomes equal to the rate of 
production of carriers by thermal breakdown of covalent bonds. 
Increase in the temperature of the crystal produces mote minority 
carriers and an increase in reverse current. A significant feature of 
the reverse-biased junction is that the width of the depletion area 
is controlled by the reverse bias, increasing as the bias increases. 
Forward-bias 
Conditions 
If the external battery is connected as shown in Fig. 1.10 with 
the positive terminal connected to the p-region and the negative 
terminal to the η-region, the junction is said to be 
forward-biased. 
The external battery now opposes and reduces the potential barrier 
EXTERNAL BATTERY -
INTERNAL 
Γ ; — P O T E N T I A L 
BARRIER 
+ 
+ 
© 
© 
Θ ; Θ 
Θ 
© 
© 
© ; Θ * Θ * 
© 
© 
© ; Θ 
Θ 
j 
+ 
+ 
——*• 
+ 
M A J O R I T Y -
CARRIER 
CURRENT 
+ Ί MINORITY-
CARRIER 
CURRENT 
JUNCTION 
n-TYPE SEMICONDUCTING 
MATERIAL 
p - T Y P E 
SEMICONDUCTING 
MATERIAL 
Fig. 1.10. Forward-bias conditions in a pn junction 
due to the fictitious battery and the majority carriers are now able to 
cross the junction more readily. The depletion area has now 
disappeared. Some of the holes and electrons recombine in the 
junction area so that the current flowing through the device (which 
can be very large) is carried by holes in the p-region and electrons in 
the η-region. If the semiconductor regions are equally doped the 
number of holes is equal to the number of electrons but the 
contribution to the forward current made by the holes and electrons 

14 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
depends on the degree of doping of the p- and η-regions. For 
example, if the doping of the p-region is much heavier than that of the 
η-region, the forward current will be carried mostly by holes. 
The flow of minority carriers across the junction also continues 
as in reverse-bias conditions but at a reduced scale and these give 
rise to a second current also taken from the battery but in the 
opposite direction to that carried by the majority carriers. Except 
for very small external battery voltages, however, the minority-
carrier current is very small compared with the majority-carrier 
current and can normally be neglected in comparison with it. 
The relationship between current and forward-bias voltage is 
illustrated in Fig. 1.11. The curve has a small slope for small voltages 
because the internal potential barrier discourages movements of 
majority carriers across the junction. Increase in applied voltage 
tends to offset the internal barrier and current increases at a greater 
rate. Further increase in voltage almost completely offsets the barrier 
and gives a steeply-rising current. The curve is, in fact, closely 
exponential in form. 
A pn junction thus has asymmetrical conducting properties, 
allowing current to pass freely in one direction but hardly at all in 
the reverse direction. 
VOLTAGE 
Fig. 1.11. 
Current-voltage 
relationship 
for a forward-biased 
pn junction 
JUNCTION DIODES 
Small-signal diodes, i.e. those used for detection, mixing and 
switching, require a small junction area to minimise capacitance and 

Semiconductors 
and Junction 
Diodes 
15 
are usually encapsulated in a cylindrical glass or plastic envelope with 
coaxial leads which are soldered directly into circuit. Germanium was 
used in the 1950s and the diodes were manufactured by the 
alloy-junction process described in Appendix A but this was later 
superseded by a process using diffusion. Silicon junction diodes 
manufactured by the planar process were introduced in the 1960s. 
Germanium diodes have a much greater reverse current than silicon 
but conduction occurs at a lower forward voltage (0.2 V) compared 
with 0.7 V for silicon and they are preferred to silicon where this smaller 
voltage drop is important. 
In rectifier diodes used for the production of d.c. supplies from a.c. 
sources the junction area must be large enough to carry the output 
current required and the chief problems are minimising the rise in 
junction temperature (a heat sink may be necessary to limit this) and 
the prevention of breakdown under the stress of the peak inverse 
voltage. Mains-voltage types are capable of handling currents of tens 
of amperes. 
Recovery 
Time 
When a conventional pn diode is forward biased some of the majority 
carriers crossing the junction are neutralised by combination with 
majority carriers of opposite polarity. Others remain (as minority 
carriers) and, when the applied voltage is reversed, return across the 
junction in the form of a substantial pulse of reverse current which 
takes a significant time to decay to the normal value of reverse 
current. This delay is a serious disadvantage in diodes required for 
operation at microwave frequencies or in high-speed switching. 
Schottky Diode ('Hot-carrier' or 'Hot-electron 
Diode) 
A diode which overcomes this recovery-time difficulty is the Schottky 
diode which uses a metal-semiconductor contact instead of a pn 
junction. For example, in one form of construction a region of 
epitaxial* η-type GaAs is grown on a GaAs substrate and a metallic 
layer is deposited on this. Ohmic connections are made to the 
substrate and the metallic layer. Only one type of charge carrier is 
involved in operation of the diode. When the metal is biased 
positively electrons from the η-region are attracted to it to neutralise 
the charge so giving rise to the forward current. When the metal is 
*See Appendix A. p. 368 

16 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
negatively charged electrons are repelled and there is no reverse 
current. There is no p-layer in which electrons could be stored and the 
resulting diode is highly efficient at frequencies as high as 20 GHz. 
Avalanche 
Effect 
When a pn junction is reverse-biased the current is carried solely 
by the minority carriers, and at a given temperature the number of 
minority carriers is fixed. Ideally, therefore, we would expect the 
reverse current for a pn junction to rise to a saturation value as the 
voltage is increased from zero and then to remain constant and 
independent of voltage, as shown in Fig. 1.9. In practice, when the 
reverse voltage reaches a particular value which can be 100 V or 
more the reverse current increases very sharply as shown in Fig. 
1.12, an effect known as breakdown. The effect is reproducible, 
breakdown in a particular junction always occurring at the same 
value of reverse voltage. This is known as the Avalanche 
effect 
and reversed-biased diodes known as Avalanche diodes (sometimes 
called—perhaps incorrectly—Zener diodes) 
can be used as the 
basis of a voltage stabiliser circuit. The junction diodes used 
for this purpose are usually silicon types and examples of 
voltage stabilising circuits employing such diodes are given in 
Chapter 16. 
VOLTAGE 
0 
B R E A K D O W N ^ 
V O L T A G E 
ι 
J 
B R E A K D O W N ^ 
V O L T A G E 
ι 
CURRENT 
1 
Fig. 1.12. Breakdown 
in a reverse-biased 
pn 
junction 
The explanation of the Avalanche effect is thought to be as 
follows. The reverse voltage applied to a junction diode establishes 
an electric field across the junction and minority electrons entering 
it from the p-region are accelerated to the η-region as illustrated 
in Fig. 1.8. When this field exceeds a certain value some of these 
electrons collide with valence electrons of the atoms fixed in the 

Semiconductors 
and Junction Diodes 
17 
crystal lattice and liberate them, thus creating further hole-electron 
pairs. Some new carriers are themselves accelerated by the electric 
field due to the reverse bias and in turn collide with other atoms, 
liberating still further holes and electrons. In this way the number 
of charge carriers increases very rapidly : the process is, in fact, 
regenerative. This multiplication in the number of charge carriers 
produces the sharp increase in reverse current shown in Fig. 1.12. 
Once the breakdown voltage is exceeded, a very large reverse 
current can flow and unless precautions are taken to limit this 
current the junction can be damaged by the heat generated in it. 
Voltage stabilising circuits using Avalanche diodes must therefore 
include protective measures to avoid damage due to this cause. 
Capacitance 
Diode ( Varactor Diode) 
As pointed out above, the application of reverse bias to a pn junction 
discourages majority carriers from crossing the junction, and pro-
duces a depletion area, the width of which can be controlled by the 
magnitude of the reverse bias. Such a structure is similar to that of 
a charged capacitor and, in fact, a reverse-biased junction diode has 
the nature of a capacitance shunted by a high resistance. The value 
-15 
-to 
- 5 
ο 
VOLTAGE 
• 
Fig. 1.13. Symbol and typical 
capacitance-
voltage 
characteristic 
for 
a 
capacitance 
diode 
of the capacitance is dependent on the reverse-bias voltage and can be 
varied over wide limits by alteration in the bias voltage. This is 
illustrated in the curve of Fig. 1.13: the capacitance is inversely 
proportional to the applied voltage. A voltage-sensitive capacitance 
such as this has a number of useful applications: it can be used as a 

18 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Zener Effect 
Some reverse-biased junction diodes exhibit breakdown at a very 
low voltage, say below 5 V. In such examples breakdown is thought 
to be due, not to Avalanche effect, but to Zener effect which does 
not involve ionisation by collision. Zener breakdown is attributed 
to spontaneous generation of hole-electron pairs within the junction 
region from the inner electron shells. Normally this region is carrier-
free but the intense field established across the region by the reverse 
bias can produce carriers which are then accelerated away from the 
junction by the field, so producing a reverse current. The graphical 
symbol for a Zener diode is given in Fig. 1.14. 
Voltage Reference 
Diode 
The breakdown voltage of a reverse-biased junction diode can be 
placed within the range of a few volts to several hundred volts but 
for stabiliser and voltage reference applications it is unusual to em-
ploy a diode with a breakdown voltage exceeding a few tens of volts. 
Some of the reasons for this are given below. 
The breakdown voltage varies with temperature, the coefficient 
of variation being negative for diodes with breakdown voltages less 
than approximately 5.3 V and positive for diodes with breakdown 
voltages exceeding approximately 6.0 V. Diodes with breakdown 
voltages between these two limits have very small coefficients of 
variation and are thus well suited for use in voltage stabilisers. 
However, for voltage reference purposes, the slope resistance of the 
breakdown characteristic must be very small and the slope resistance 
is less for diodes with breakdown voltages exceeding 6 V than for 
those with lower breakdown voltages. Where variations in tempera-
ture are likely to occur it is probably best to use a diode with a 
breakdown voltage between 5.3 and 6.0V for voltage reference 
Fig. 1.14. Graphical symbol for a Zener diode 
frequency modulator, as a means of remote tuning in receivers or for 
automatic frequency control (a.f.c.) purposes in receivers. An 
example of one of these applications of the reverse-biased junction 
diode is given in Chapter 16. 

Semiconductors 
and Junction 
Diodes 
19 
purposes but if means are available for stabilising the temperature 
it is probably better to use a diode with a higher breakdown voltage 
to obtain a lower slope resistance. Diodes with breakdown voltages 
around 6.8 V have a temperature coefficient (2.5mV/°C) which 
matches that of forward-biased diodes. Voltage reference diodes 
therefore often consist of two Zener diodes connected in series 
back-to-back as shown in Fig. 1.15. Dl is reverse-biased when voltage 
is applied and this has a positive temperature coefficient. D2 is 
forward-biased and has an equal negative temperature coefficient. 
The voltage across D2 is small compared with that across Dl and thus 
the voltage across the device is substantially the Zener voltage of Dl 
but independent of temperature. 
Voltage reference diodes are usually marketed with preferred 
values of breakdown voltage (4.7, 5.6, 6.8 V, etc.) and with tolerances 
of 5 per cent or 10 per cent. 
Early voltage reference 
diodes were rated for only 30 mW 
dissipation but modern types can withstand a pulse power up to 
2.5 kW for a duration of 1ms provided the pulse is not repetitive. 
Large diodes are used to protect radars, communications systems and 
delicate instruments from large electrical transients from nearby 
electrical equipment. 
Backward 
Diode 
If the breakdown voltage of a germanium diode is made very low, the 
region of low slope resistance virtually begins at the origin. Such a 
junction has a reverse resistance lower than the forward resistance 
and can be used as a diode which, by contrast with normal diodes, has 
low resistance when the p-region is biased negatively relative to the 
η-region. Such backward diodes, manufactured with low capacitance, 
make highly efficient detectors up to 40 GHz. The current-voltage 
characteristic for a backward diode is shown in Fig. 1.16 and for 
comparison the curve for a normal junction diode is also included. 
Dl 
D2 
Fig. 1.15. Construction 
of a voltage reference 
diode 

20 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
NORMAL OIOOE 
NORMAL 
'JUNCTION OIOOE 
BACKWARD OIOOE 
VOLTAGE 
BACKWARD OIOOE 
Fig. 1.16. Characteristic curves for a backward diode and 
normal junction diode. Inset shows graphical symbols used 
in circuit diagrams 
Gunn-effect 
Diode 
In certain semiconductors, notably GaAs, electrons can exist in a 
high-mass low-velocity state as well as their normal low-mass 
high-velocity state and they can be forced into the high-mass state by a 
steady electric field of sufficient strength. In this state they form 
clusters or domains which cross the field at a constant rate causing 
current to flow as a series of pulses. This is the Gunn effect and one 
form of diode which makes use of it consists of an epitaxial layer of 
η-type GaAs grown on a GaAs substrate. A potential of a few volts 
applied between ohmic contacts to the η-layer and substrate produces 
the electric field which causes clusters. The frequency of the current 
pulses so generated depends on the transit time through the n-layer 
and hence on its thickness. If the diode is mounted in a suitably tuned 
cavity resonator, the current pulses cause oscillation by shock 
excitation and r.f. power up to 1W at frequencies between 10 and 
30GHz is obtainable. 
Pin Diode 
As its name suggests, this is a junction diode with a region of intrinsic 
semiconductor between the n- and p-regions. When such a diode is 
reverse-biased the intrinsic layer is depleted of carriers and the diode 
behaves as a capacitor. When it is forward-biased carriers are injected 
into the intrinsic region to give a forward resistance which varies 
linearly between, say, 1 ohm and lOkilohms with the current through 

Semiconductors 
and Junction Diodes 
21 
the device. This property makes the diode useful as a modulator or 
switch in microwave systems and at frequencies between 1 MHz and 
20 GHz. 
Light-emitting 
Diodes 
(LEDs) 
When a pn junction is forward-biased electrons are driven into the 
p-region and holes into the η-region as shown in Fig. 1.10. Some of 
these charge carriers combine in the junction area and in some of 
the combinations energy is given out in the form of light. By using 
an alloy of gallium, arsenic and phosphorus as the semiconducting 
material the emitted light can be made any colour between red and 
green but maximum electrical-optical efficiency is obtained when 
the light is red. Lamps and digital displays using this principle are 
known as light-emitting 
diodes. 
Such lamps typically consume 
25 mA at 4 V and have a very long life. 
Blue-emitting LEDs use more exotic semiconductors such as silicon 
carbide, and are more expensive and less efficient than red and green 
emitters. They have forward voltages in the region of 5 V. 
Laser Diodes 
When high-energy photons pass through a material some are absorbed 
by atoms, which acquire a higher energy level as a result. Normally the 
excited atoms quickly return to their normal state by re-emitting a 
photon. In some semiconductors the high energy level can be sustained 
so that a photon released from one atom can stimulate the release of 
another from an adjacent atom, and so on. The process is triggered by 
normal LED action and builds up to a point governed by the current 
available from the diode supply. In an injection-laser LED a pn 
junction is formed in a GaAs crystal, the end faces of which (parallel to 
the junction plane) are polished so that they act as semi-transparent 
mirrors and feed back into the junction region some of the emitted light. 
The photons bounce back and forth in what amounts to an optical 
cavity resonator, and above a certain threshold bias current they are 
released in a continuous stream of coherent light from the end of the 
crystal; a typical operating curve is shown in Fig. 1.17. The most 
popular application for laser diodes is in audio compact disk (CD) 
players, where they provide a very narrow infra-red light beam to read 
the information from micro-pits on the disk surface. 

22 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
6 r 
5 -
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
L A S E R C U R R E N T ( m A ) 
Fig. 1.17. Laser diode operating curve: note the abrupt threshold region at point Τ 

CHAPTER 2 
Basic Principles of Transistors 
BIPOLAR TRANSISTORS 
Introduction 
Chapter 1 showed that ajunction between η-type and p-type materials 
has asymmetrical conducting properties enabling it to be used for 
rectification. A bipolar transistor includes two such junctions 
arranged as shown in Fig. 2.1. Fig. 2.1(a) illustrates one basic type 
consisting of a layer of η-type material sandwiched between two 
Π-ΤΥΡΕ MATERIAL -
p - T Y P E MATERIAL 
p - T Y P E 
MATERIAL^ 
- η - T Y P E MATERIAL 
u) 
(b) 
Fig. 2.1. Theoretical 
diagrams 
illustrating 
the structure 
of (a) a pnp and (b) an 
npn 
transistor 
layers of p-type material: such a transistor is referred to as a pnp-
type. 
A second type, illustrated in Fig. 2.1(b), has a layer of p-type 
material sandwiched between two layers of η-type semiconducting 
material : such a transistor is referred to as an 
npn-type. 
In both types, for successful operation, the central layer must be 
thin. However, it is not possible to construct bipolar transistors by 
placing suitably treated layers of semiconducting material in con-
23 

24 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
tact. One method which is employed is to start with a single crystal 
of, say, η-type germanium and to treat it so as to produce regions 
of p-type conductivity on either side of the remaining region of 
η-type conductivity. 
Electrical connections are made to each of the three different 
regions as suggested in Fig. 2.2. The thin central layer is known as 
EMITTER · 
• COLLECTOR 
BASE 
Fig. 2.2. Electrical connections to a bipolar 
transistor 
the base of the transistor, one of the remaining two layers is known as 
the emitter and the remaining (third) layer is known as the collector. 
The transistor may be symmetrical and either of the outer layers may 
then be used as emitter: the operating conditions determine which of 
the outer layers behaves as emitter, because in normal operation the 
emitter-base junction is forward-biased whilst the base-collector 
junction is reverse-biased. In practice most bipolar transistors are 
unsymmetrical with the collector junction larger than the emitter 
junction and it is essential to adhere to the emitter and collector 
connections prescribed by the manufacturer. 
C O L L E C T O R 
C O L L E C T O R 
B A S E 
f-T) 
B A S E - 4 
E M I T T E R 
(b) 
Fig. 2.3. Circuit diagram 
symbols for (a) pnp and 
(b) 
an npn bipolar 
transistor 
The symbols used for bipolar transistors in circuit diagrams are 
given in Fig. 2.3. The symbol shown at (a), in which the emitter arrow 
is directed towards the base, is used for a pnp transistor and the 
symbol shown at (b), in which the emitter arrow is directed away from 
the base, is used for an npn transistor. 
An account of the principal methods used in the manufacture of 
transistors is given in Appendix A. 

Basic Principles of 
Transistors 
25 
Operation of a pnp 
Transistor 
Fig. 2.4 illustrates the polarity of the potentials which are necessary 
in a pnp-transistor amplifying circuit. The emitter is biased slightly 
positively with respect to the base: this is an example of forward 
bias and the external battery opposes the internal potential barrier 
associated with the emitter-base junction. A considerable current 
therefore flows across this junction and this is carried by holes from 
p - T Y P E 
MATERIAL 
Π - Τ Υ Ρ Ε 
MATERIAL 
E M I T T E R 
BASE 
Η«Ι·-
p - T Y P E 
MATERIAL 
- + 
1 
— + *-
1 
— + *• 
—+ -»-
1 
—+*-I 
—+ 
- + *» HOLE PATH 
— 1 - ^ ELECTRON PATH 
COLLECTOR 
Fig. 2.4. Hole and electron paths in a pnp transistor 
connected for 
amplification 
the p-type emitter (which move to the right into the base) and by 
electrons from the η-type base (which move to the left into the 
emitter). However, because the impurity concentration in the emitter 
is normally considerably greater than that of the base (this is adjusted 
during manufacture), the holes carrying the emitter-base current 
greatly outnumber the electrons and we can say with 
little 
error that the current flowing across the emitter-base junction is 
carried by holes moving from emitter to base. Because holes and 
electrons play a part in the action, this type of transistor is known 
as bipolar. 
The collector is biased negatively with respect to the base: this 
is an example of reverse bias and the external battery aids the 
internal potential barrier associated with the base-collector junction. 
If the emitter-base junction were also reverse-biased, no holes would 
be injected into the base region from the emitter and only a very 
small current would flow across the base-collector junction. This 
is the reverse current (described in Chapter 1): it is a saturation 
current independent of the collector-base voltage. However, when 
the emitter-base junction is forward-biased, the injected holes have 
a marked effect on the collector current. Because the base is a 

26 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
particularly thin layer most of the injected holes cross the base by 
diffusion and on reaching the collector-base junction are swept into 
the collector region. The reverse bias of the base-collector junction 
ensures the collection of all the holes crossing this junction, whether 
these are present in the base region as a result of breakdown of 
covalent bonds by virtue of thermal agitation or are injected into 
it by the action of the emitter. A few of the holes which leave the 
emitter combine with electrons in the base and so cease to exist but 
the majority of the holes (commonly more than 95 per cent) succeed 
in reaching the collector. Thus the increase in collector current 
due to hole-injection by the emitter is nearly equal to the current 
flowing across the emitter-base junction. The balance of the emitter 
carriers (equal to, say, 5 per cent) is neutralised by electrons in the 
base region and to maintain charge neutrality more electrons flow 
into the base, constituting a base current. 
Thus a small current flowing in the base controls a much larger 
collector current: this is the essence of transistor action and from what 
has been said above it is clear that to achieve high current gain we 
need a heavily doped emitter area and a very thin but lightly doped 
base region. In early alloy-junction transistors the base thickness 
exceeded 10~
4
cm but in more modern planar types it is less than 
10"
5
cm. 
The collector current, even though it may be considerably increased 
by forward bias of the emitter-base junction, is still independent of the 
collector voltage. This is another way of saying that the output 
resistance of the transistor is extremely high: it can in fact be several 
megohms. The input resistance is approximately that of a forward-
biased junction diode and is commonly of the order of 25 Ω. A small 
change in the input (emitter) current of the transistor is faithfully 
reproduced in the output (collector) current but, of course, at a 
slightly smaller amplitude. Clearly such an amplifier has no current 
gain but because the output resistance is many times the input 
resistance it can give voltage gain. To illustrate this suppose a 1-mV 
signal source is connected to the 25-Ω input. This gives rise to an 
emitter current of 1/25 mA, i.e. 40 μΑ. The collector current is slightly 
less than this but as an approximation suppose the output current is 
also 40 μΑ. A common value of load resistance is 5kQ and for this 
value the output voltage is given by 5,000 x 40 x 10"
6
, i.e. 200mV, 
equivalent to a voltage gain of 200. 
Bias Supplies for a pnp Transistor 
Fig. 2.5 shows a pnp transistor connected to supplies as required 
in one form of amplifying circuit. For forward bias of the emitter-

Basic Principles of 
Transistors 
27 
base junction, the emitter is made positive with respect to the base ; 
for reverse bias of the base-collector junction, the collector is made 
negative with respect to the base. Fig. 2.5 shows separate batteries 
used to provide these two bias supplies and it is significant that the 
batteries are connected in series, the positive terminal of one being 
connected to the negative terminal of the other. The base voltage 
in fact lies between that of the collector and the emitter and thus a 
single battery can be used to provide the two bias supplies by con-
necting it between emitter and collector, the base being returned to 
S O U R C E 
O F 
I N P U T 
S I G N A L 
E M I T T E R 
B I A S 
B A T T E R Y 
τ ® 
I C O L L E C T O R 
L O A D 
j 
; C O L L E C T O R 
B I A S 
B A T T E R Y 
O U T P U T 
S I G N A L 
Fig. 2.5. Basic circuit for using a pnp transistor as an amplifier 
a tapping point on the battery or to a potential divider connected 
across the battery. The potential divider technique (Fig. 2.6) is often 
used in transistor circuits and a pnp transistor operating with the 
emitter circuit earthed requires a negative collector voltage. The 
Fig. 2.6. The circuit of Fig. 2.5 using a single 
battery and a potential divider providing base bias 
arrow in the transistor symbol shows the direction of conventional 
current flow, i.e. is in the opposite direction to that of electron flow 
through the transistor. 

28 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Operation of an npn Transistor 
The action of an npn junction transistor is similar to that of a pnp 
type just described but the bias polarities and directions of current 
flow are reversed. Thus the charge carriers are predominantly 
electrons and the collector bias voltage for an earthed-emitter circuit 
must be positive. 
Common-base, 
Common-emitter 
and Common-collector 
Amplifiers 
So far we have described amplifying circuits in which the emitter 
current determines the collector current : it is, however, more usual 
in transistor circuits to employ the external base current to control 
the collector or emitter current. Used in this way the transistor is 
a current amplifier because the collector (and emitter) current can 
easily be 100 times the controlling (base) current and variations in 
the input current are faithfully portrayed by much larger variations 
in the output current. 
Thus we can distinguish three ways in which the transistor may 
be used as an amplifier : 
(a) with emitter current controlling collector current, 
(b) with base current controlling collector current, 
(c) with base current controlling emitter current. 
It is significant that in all these modes of use, operation of the 
transistor is given in terms of input and output current. This is an 
( a ) 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 2.7. 
The three basic forms 
of transistor 
amplifier; 
(a) 
common-base, 
(b) 
common-emitter 
and (c) common-collector 
(emitter 
follower). 
For simplicity 
base 
d.c. bias is omitted 
inevitable consequence of the physics of the bipolar transistor: such 
transistors are current-controlled 
devices: by contrast 
field-effect 
transistors are voltage-controlled devices. 

Basic Principles of 
Transistors 
29 
Corresponding to the three modes of operation listed above there 
are three fundamental transistor amplifying circuits : these are shown 
in Fig. 2.7. At signal frequencies the impedance of the collector 
voltage supply is assumed negligibly small and thus we can say for 
circuit (a) that the input is applied between emitter and base and 
that the output is effectively generated between collector and base. 
Thus the base connection is common to the input and output circuits: 
this amplifier is therefore known as the common-base type. 
Fig. 2.5 illustrates one significant feature of the common-base 
circuit, namely that the base acts as a screen between the input and 
output circuits. The elimination of capacitive coupling between them 
makes stable v.h.f. and u.h.f. amplification possible. 
In (b) the input is again applied between base and emitter but the 
output is effectively generated between collector and emitter. This 
is therefore the common-emitter 
amplifier, probably the most used 
of all transistor amplifying circuits. 
In (c) the input is effectively between base and collector, the 
output being generated between emitter and collector. This is the 
common-collector 
circuit but it is better known as the emitter 
follower. 
Current Amplification 
Factor 
In a common-base amplifier the ratio of a small change in collector 
current ic to the small change in emitter current ie which gives rise 
to it is known as the current amplification factor a. It is measured 
with short-circuited output. Thus we have 
As we have seen ic is very nearly equal to ie. Thus α is nearly equal 
to unity and is seldom less than 0.95. In approximate calculations 
α is often taken as unity. 
In a common-emitter amplifier the ratio of a small change in 
collector current ic to the small change in base current ib which 
gives rise to it is represented by β. It is also measured with short-
circuited output and indicates the maximum possible current gain 
of the transistor. Thus 
We have seen how the emitter current of a transistor effectively 
divides into two components in the base region. Most of it passes 
(2.1) 
(2.2) 

30 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
into the collector region and emerges as external collector current. 
The remaining small fraction forms an external base current. This 
division applies equally to steady and signal-frequency currents. 
Thus we have 
i . 
= 
«c + i * 
(2.3) 
From Eqns 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3 we can deduce a relationship between 
α and β thus 
l
b 
' e - ' c 
But ic = 
aie 
Λ /* = 
i 
ie-ocie 
α 
1 - α 
As α is nearly equal to unity there is little error in taking β as given by 
β = Γ~ 
(2-5) 
1 - α 
Thus for a transistor for which α = 0-98 
μ
 
1-0-98 
002 
In practice values of β lie between 20 and 500. β is one of the pro-
perties of a transistor normally quoted in manufacturer's literature: 
here it is usually known as hft. 
Collector Current—Collector 
Voltage 
Characteristics 
Fig. 2.8(a) illustrates the way in which the collector current of a 
bipolar transistor varies with collector voltage for given values of 
the emitter current. The characteristics are straight, horizontal and 
equidistant. The fact that the the curves are horizontal shows that 
collector current is independent of collector voltage: in other words, 
the collector a.c. resistance is very high. The regular spacing implies 
low distortion if the device is used as an analogue amplifier. Fig. 
2.8(b) illustrates the way in which the collector current of a bipolar 
transistor varies with collector voltage for given values of base 
current. These characteristics are of the same general shape as those 
of Fig. 2.8(a). 

Basic Principles of Transistors 
31 
12 • 
1 0 -
S 
0-6-
S 
Ο 
Ui 
-· 
0 4 -
7 
7 
7 
7 
7 
V 
I 2mA 
« I OmA 
« 0 8mA 
* 0 6 mA 
• 0 4 m A 
8
0 
2mA 
I 
2 
3 
4 
COLLECTOR 
VOLTAGE 
Fig. 2.8(a) 
Λ set of Ic— Vc characteristics 
for a common-base 
amplifier 
. 9 0 μ Α 
BASE 
CURRENT 
1
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
COLLECTOR 
VOLTAGE 
Fig. 2.8(b) 
Typical collector current-collector 
voltage characteristics 
for 
common-emitter 
connection 

32 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
A number of parameters of the transistor can be obtained from 
these characteristics. For example the slope of the curves is not so 
low as for the common-base connection showing that the collector 
a.c. resistance is smaller : it is in fact approximately 30 k i l To deduce 
β consider the intercepts made by the characteristics on the vertical 
line drawn through Vc = 4 V. When the base current is 40 μΑ (point 
A) the collector current is 2.5 mA and when Ib is 50 μΑ (point B) Ic is 
3.5 mA. A change of base current of 10 μΑ thus causes a change in 
collector current of 1 mA: this corresponds to a value of β of 100. 
Collector Current-Base 
Voltage Characteristics 
Fig. 2.9 gives the lc-Vbe
 
characteristics for a silicon transistor. This 
shows that the relationship between base voltage and collector current 
is not linear. It also shows that collector current does not start until 
the base voltage exceeds about 0.7 V. This was pointed out in Chapter 
1 in respect of silicon junction diodes. 
Î 
0 
02 
0 4 
0 6 
0 8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
V. 
(VOLTS) 
• 
09 
Fig. 2.9. Ic- Vbe
 curves for a silicon transistor 
Equivalent Circuit of a Transistor 
For calculating the performance of transistor circuits, it is useful 
to regard the transistor as a three-terminal network which is specified 
in terms of its input resistance, output resistance and current gain— 
all fundamental properties which can readily be measured. The 
properties of such a network are expressed in a number of ways 
notably as ζ parameters, y parameters or h parameters. The basic 

Basic Principles of 
Transistors 
equations for these parameters are given in Appendix Β and this 
shows that these parameters, in spite of their variety, express the 
same four properties of the network, namely its input resistance, 
output resistance, forward gain and reverse gain. 
One of the disadvantages of this method of expressing transistor 
properties is that the values of the fundamental properties which 
apply to the common-base connection do not apply to the common-
emitter connection or to the common-collector connection and three 
sets of values are therefore required in a complete expression of a 
transistor's properties. Moreover the numerical values of these pro-
perties vary with emitter current and frequency and can be regarded 
as constant only over a narrow frequency and emitter-current range. 
An alternative approach to the problem of calculating transistor 
performance is to deduce an equivalent network which has a be-
haviour similar to that of the transistor. The constants of such a 
network can often be directly related to the physical construction 
of the transistor but they cannot be directly measured: they can, 
however, be deduced from measurements on the transistor. If the 
network is truly equivalent it will hold at all frequencies and by 
applying KirchhofTs laws or other network theorems to this equiva-
lent circuit we can calculate the performance of the circuit. Much 
useful work is possible by representing a transistor as a simple 
T-network of resistance as shown in Fig. 2.10. 
The transistor cannot, however, be perfectly represented by three 
resistances only because such a network cannot generate power 
(as a transistor can) but can only dissipate power. In other words 
the network illustrated in Fig. 2.10 is a passive network and to be 
accurate the equivalent network must include a source of power, 
i.e. must be active. 
The source of power could be shown as a constant-current source 
connected in parallel with the collector resistance rc as in Fig. 2.11(a) 
and the current so supplied is, as we have already seen, equal to 
<xie, where α is the current amplification factor of the transistor 
b 6 BASE 
Fig. 2.10. 
A three-terminal 
passive 
network 
which can be used to build an equivalent 
circuit 
for a transistor 

34 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Fig. 2.11. A three-terminal 
active network which can be used as an equivalent 
circuit 
for a transistor 
(a) 
including a constant-current 
generator, 
and (b) a 
constant-
voltage 
generator 
and ie is the current in the emitter circuit, i.e. in the emitter resistance 
re. Alternatively the source of power can be represented as a constant-
voltage generator connected in series with rc as shown in Fig. 2.11(b). 
Such a voltage has precisely the same effect as the constant-
current generator, provided the voltage is given the correct value, 
and the value required is equal to <xierc as can.be shown by applying 
Thevenin's theorem to Fig. 2.11(a). 
In some books on transistors the voltage generator is given as 
rje, 
where rm is known as the mutual or transfer resistance* 
and 
is equal to arc. The mutual resistance may be defined as the ratio 
of the e.m.f. in the collector circuit to the signal current in the emitter 
circuit which gives rise to it. This may be regarded as the dual of 
the mutual conductance gm of a field-effect transistor which is defined 
as the ratio of the current in the drain circuit to the signal voltage in 
the gate circuit which causes it. 
This network is quite satisfactory for calculating the performance 
of transistor amplifiers at low frequencies such as audio amplifiers 
because the reactances of the internal capacitances have, in general, 
negligible effects on performance. 
At higher frequencies, however, and in particular at 
radio 
frequencies, it is necessary to include such capacitances in the 
T-network to obtain accurate answers. 
Of the various internal capacitances within a bipolar transistor, 
that between the collector and the base has the greatest effect on 
the high-frequency performance. 
In a transistor r.f. amplifier the capacitance between collector and 
base provides feedback from the output to the input circuit. This is 
* The word transistor is, in fact, derived from transfer resistance*. 

Basic Principles of 
Transistors 
35 
Cb'c 
( a ) 
( b ) 
Fig. 2.12. T-section equivalent 
circuit of a transistor 
showing collector 
capacitance, 
(a) returned to base input terminal and (b) returned to a tapping point on the base 
resistance 
illustrated in Fig. 2.12(a) in which the capacitance 
is shown 
connected directly between collector and base terminals. However, 
a better approximation to the performance of a transistor at high 
frequencies is obtained by assuming that the collector capacitance 
is returned to a tapping point b' on the base resistance as shown in 
Fig. 2.12(b). 
This modifies the feedback which now occurs via chc 
and rbb> 
in series and the high-frequency performance of the transistor is 
now dependent on the time constant rbb. cbc 
which is probably the 
most important characteristic of a transistor intended for high-
frequency use. 
Values of re, rb and rc 
The networks of Fig. 2.11 can be used in analyses of transistor 
circuits. The resistances represent differential, i.e. a.c. quantities and, 
for a given value of mean emitter current Ie>
 are constant provided 
that the variations in voltage or current which occur during operation 
of the transistor are small. 
The value of re for all bipolar transistors, irrespective of size and 
type, is given by 
where k = Boltzmanns constant, i.e. 1-374 χ 1 0 "
23
 J/°C 
e = charge on the electron, i.e. 1 59 χ 10"
 19
 C 
and 
Τ = absolute temperature. 

36 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Thus re is directly proportional to the absolute temperature and 
inversely proportional to the emitter current. The coefficient kT/e 
has the dimensions of a voltage and if we substitute numerical 
values for k and e this voltage is 25 mV at a temperature of 20°C. 
Thus we have 
,o>
 
2
5
 <
m V
> 
Γ<
( Ω ) = ΰ^ΑΪ 
If/e = 1 mA, re is 25 Ω (at 20 C). 
The value of rc is also inversely proportional to Ie in simple 
transistors but the value depends on the impurity grading in the 
base region and is very high for difiused-base transistors. 
The value of rb is largely independent of Ie and is a function of 
the size and geometry of the transistor. For small silicon transistors it 
is unlikely to exceed 100 Ω but for a large power transistor rb may be 
as low as 5Ω. 
The values of re, rb and rc cannot be measured directly because 
it is impossible to obtain a connection to the point Ο (in Fig. 2.12) 
but the values can be deduced from measurements made at the 
transistor terminals. 
Although the bipolar transistor is a current-controlled device 
there are occasions (e.g. when it is used as a voltage amplifier) 
when it is useful to be able to express the performance in terms 
of the signal voltage applied between base and emitter. For such 
calculations we need to know the mutual conductance gm of the 
transistor: this is the ratio of a small change in collector current 
to the change in base-emitter voltage which causes it. 
The mutual conductance of a transistor is given by 
9m = — 
r* 
where a0 is the current amplification factor at low frequencies. 
OL0 is very nearly equal to unity and thus we may say 
1 
9m *» -
We know, from the top of this page that re is inversely proportional to 
the mean emitter current le according to the relationship 
ro>
 
2
5
 <
m V
> 
''
, Ω ) = ΰ^Α) 

Basic Principles of Transistors 
37 
Eliminating re between the last two expressions we have 
which is perhaps more conveniently expressed 
gm (mA/V) ^ 40/e(mA) 
Thus for an emitter current of 1 mA the mutual conductance is 
40 mA/V. 
Frequency 
fT 
Modern circuitry makes extensive use of silicon planar transistors as 
common-emitter amplifiers and the high-frequency performance is 
usually expressed in terms of the parameter fT, 
the transition 
frequency. This is defined as the frequency at which the modulus of β 
(the current gain of the common-emitter amplifier) has fallen to unity. 
It thus measures the highest frequency at which the transistor can be 
used as an amplifier: it also gives the gain-bandwidth product for the 
transistor. 
FIELD-EFFECT TRANSISTORS 
Introduction 
Field-effect transistors operate on principles quite different from 
those of bipolar transistors. They consist essentially of a channel 
of semiconducting material, the charge-carrier density of which is 
controlled by the input signal. The input signal thus determines the 
conductivity of the channel and hence the current which flows 
through it from the supply. The connections from the ends of the 
channel to the supply are known as the source and drain terminals 
and they correspond to the emitter and collector terminals of a 
bipolar transistor. The control terminal is known as the gate. The 
potential on the gate can control the channel conductivity via a 
reverse-biased pn junction: transistors using this principle are 
termed junction-gate 
field-effect 
transistors 
(j.u.g.f.e.t.s). Alterna-
tively the gate potential can control the channel conductivity via 
a capacitance link: transistors using this principle are termed in-
sulated-gate 
field-effect 
transistors 
(i.g.f.e.t.s). F.e.t.s in general can 
be regarded as voltage-controlled variable resistors. 

38 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
There is only one type of charge carrier in an f.e.t. namely electrons 
in an η-channel device and holes in a p-channel device. Thus f.e.t.s 
can be termed unipolar* transistors : those previously described in 
this chapter are, of course, bipolar. An important consequence of 
the single type of charge carrier is that an f.e.t. can introduce less 
noise than bipolar types. Because there are no minority carriers, 
f.e.t.s are also free of the carrier-storage effects which limit the 
switching times of bipolar transistors. 
Junction-gate 
Field-effect 
Transistors 
(j.u.g.f.e.t.s) 
The structure of an η-channel j.u.g.f.e.t. is illustrated in Fig. 2.13. 
This shows a slice of high-resistance η-type silicon with ohmic 
contacts formed by highly doped (n + ) regions near the two ends : 
these provide the source and drain connections to the external 
9 - 
+9 
( 
SOURCE 
+ 
-
— Ο 
Ο — η 
GATE 
DRAIN 
n - C H 
> „ „ „ / 
ANNEL
 
] 
r n -
Fig. 2.13. Structure of an n~channel 
j.u.g.f.e.t. 
with bias polarities 
indicated 
circuit. A region of p-type conductivity is formed between the ohmic 
contacts: this forms the gate connection and is reverse-biased, i.e. 
negatively biased with respect to the source connection. When the 
source and drain terminals are connected to a supply, current (lows 
longitudinally through the slice, being carried by the free electrons 
of the n-type material. However, near the p-region there is a depletion 
area, i.e. an area free of charge carriers and if the reverse bias of the 
gate is increased the depletion area spreads, confining the longi-
tudinal current to a small cross-sectional area of the slice and 
reducing its amplitude. If the reverse bias is increased sufficiently 
the depletion area spreads to the whole cross-section of the slice 
and cuts off the current completely. The gate-source voltage required 
to do this is known as the pinch-off voltage. By connecting a signal 
* Strictly this should be monopolar if we are using Greek prefixes. 

Basic Principles of 
Transistors 
39 
source in series with the gate bias the effective width of the channel 
can be modulated and the signal waveform is impressed on the 
current. If the current is passed through a suitable external impedance, 
the voltage generated across it is a magnified version of that of the 
signal source. 
The input resistance of a j.u.g.f.e.t. is that of a reverse-biased pn 
junction and can be very high : a typical value is ΙΟ
10
 Ω with a shunt 
capacitance of say 5pF. The characteristics have the same general 
shape as those of a bipolar transistor (Fig. 2.14) but, of course, the 
control parameter here is the gate voltage not current. If the gate 
terminal of the transistor illustrated in Fig. 2.13 is biased positively 
with respect to the source, the pn junction is forward biased giving a 
very low input resistance. 
GATE-SOURCE 
VOLTAGE 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
DRAIN-SOURCE VOLTAGE 
Fig. 2.14. Typical characteristics 
for a 
field-effect 
transistor 
There is a complementary type of j.u.g.f.e.t. with a p-type channel 
and η-type gate : this requires a positive gate-source voltage to cut 
off the channel current. The graphical symbols for both types of 
j.u.g.f.e.t. are given in Fig. 2.15. 
The j.u.g.f.e.t. takes a significant drain current with zero gate bias 
and, for an η-channel device, a negative bias is required to cut the 
current off. When the f.e.t. is used as an amplifier the gate bias is 
normally between zero and cut off and lies outside the range of the 
drain-source voltage; for example typical voltages are Vg = — 1V, V5 
= 0 and Vd = + 20 V. Devices with this property are said to operate in 
the depletion mode. The base bias voltage for a bipolar transistor lies 
between that of the emitter and the collector. 

40 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
G A T E 
G A T E - 0 
S O U R C E 
S O U R C E 
n - C H A N N E L 
p - C H A N N E L 
Fig. 2.15. Graphical symbols for 
j.u.g.f.e.t.s 
Insulated-gate 
Field-effect 
Transistors 
(i.g.fe.t.s) 
A cross-section of an i.g.f.e.t. is shown in Fig. 2.16. It consists of a 
base (substrate) layer of p-type silicon into the surface of which two 
GATE 
SOURCE 
Sl02 
LAYER 
\ 
hid 
, A l LAYER 
I DRAIN 
bJLd 
Si02^LAYER 
P — 
11 BASE 
Fig. 2.16. Structure of enhancement-type 
η-channel 
i.g.f.e.t. 
closely spaced stripes of η-type conductivity are diffused. Ohmic 
connections are made to the η-regions to give source and drain 
connections, and to the p-type substrate to give a base connection. 
The device is sealed by a silicon dioxide coating and a thin layer of 
aluminium between the η-regions provides a gate connection. The 
device can be manufactured by the techniques used for planar 
transistors described in Appendix A. 
The substrate, the silicon dioxide layer and the aluminium skin 
form a parallel-plate capacitor. The voltage applied between gate 
and base controls the conductivity of the surface area of the substrate 
between the η-regions and hence the current which flows between 
source and drain when these are connected to a supply. If the gate-
base voltage is zero the only drain current is the leakage current of 
one of the pn junctions and this, in a silicon device, is very small 
indeed. If the gate is made positive with respect to the base, positive 
charge carriers are repelled into the body of the substrate and 
D R A I N 
D R A I N 

Basic Principles of Transistors 
41 
negative charge carriers are attracted to its surface either from 
thermal breakdown of the p-material or from the η-regions. In this 
way a layer of mobile charge carriers is induced on the surface of 
the substrate and this makes ohmic contact with the diffused n-
regions. The induced layer provides the conducting channel between 
the source and drain terminals and permits drain current to flow. 
The induced layer is known as an inversion layer because it changes 
its conductivity from p-type to η-type as the gate voltage is increased 
positively from zero. Increase in gate voltage increases the number 
of charge carriers in the induced layer, increasing channel conduct-
ivity and drain current. The gate voltage thus controls the drain 
current and the characteristics have a form similar to those of a 
j.u.g.f.e.t. A significant feature of the behaviour of this type of i.g.f.e.t. 
is that drain current is zero in the absence of a gate voltage and that 
a forward (positive for an η-channel device) gate bias is necessary 
to give working values of drain current : this type of operation is 
known as the enhancement 
mode. 
For an enhancement i.g.f.e.t. to obtain a working value of drain 
current, the gate voltage must lie between the source and drain 
potentials. This compares with bipolar transistors and contrasts 
with depletion devices such as j.u.g.f.e.t.s. 
It is, however, possible in the manufacture of an i.g.f.e.t. to produce 
a thin η-type layer on the surface of the p-type substrate. This 
provides a conducting channel between source and drain and ensures 
that a useful drain current flows even at zero gate-base voltage. 
Negative gate bias reduces channel conductivity and drain current 
and in the limit will change the conductivity of the channel to ρ 
type, reducing drain current to zero: this is the depletion mode of 
operation again. Positive voltages on the gate increase channel 
conductivity and drain current as in enhancement-mode operation. 
I.g.f.e.t.s of this type can thus operate in depletion and enhancement 
modes. 
Complementary i.g.f.e.t.s with an η-type substrate and p-type 
channel are also available, giving a total of four basic types of 
i.g.f.e.t.: the graphical symbols are shown in Fig. 2.17. The 
non-conductivity of the enhancement type for zero gate bias is 
indicated in the symbol by breaks in the rectangle representing the 
channel. 
Input resistances greater than ΙΟ
12
 Ω have been achieved in 
i.g.f.e.t.s and input capacitances may be as low as 1 pF. 
The connection to the substrate provides a second input terminal 
(the base) to an i.g.f.e.t. and the potential applied to it with respect 
to the source controls the drain current in the same way as a potential 
on the gate of a j.u.g.f.e.t. The base terminal is not so sensitive a 

42 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
GATE-
-BASE 
GATE-
-BASE 
SOURCE 
SOURCE 
n-CHANNEL 
p-CHANNEL 
DEPLETION TYPE 
DRAIN 
DRAIN 
GATE-
-BASE 
GATE- 41 
•BASE 
SOURCE 
SOURCE 
n-CHANNEL 
p-CHANNEL 
ENHANCEMENT 
TYPE 
Fig. 2.Π. Graphical symbols for 
i.g.f.e.t.s. 
control electrode as the gate terminal but is used in certain types of 
circuit. In many i.g.f.e.t. applications the base terminal is connected 
to the source terminal internally or externally. 
Because of the form of construction of i.g.f.e.t.s they are sometimes 
known as m.o.s. transistors (metal oxide semiconductor). 
The silicon dioxide dielectric of the i.g.f.e.t. is very thin and can 
easily be broken down by transient voltages on the gate terminal. A 
practical precaution normally taken in handling such transistors is to 
keep the leads short-circuited whilst the transistor is being connected 
into circuit. 
Short-channel 
f.e.t.s 
I.g.f.e.t.s can be manufactured by the planar process and they can be 
made so small that thousands can be accommodated on a single silicon 
chip. They are therefore widely used for digital signal storage in 
computers and similar equipment: typical circuits are described later. 
In i.g.f.e.t.s used for switching, the length of the conducting channel is 
important because it controls the switching speed. The length of the 
channel determines the drain-source resistance when the transistor is 
conducting and in the type of construction shown in Fig. 2.16 the 
channel is of considerable length, occupying the whole of the distance 
between the two η-regions. Much shorter channels are needed in 
switching transistors and the manufacturers have adopted a number of 
DRAIN 
DRAIN 

Basic Principles of Transistors 
43 
different 
geometries to achieve them. 
In the 
double-diffused 
metal-oxide-semiconductor transistor (DMOS) successive diffusions 
by opposite types of impurity through the same opening in the 
silicon dioxide layer are used to produce a very short channel the 
length of which can be closely controlled during manufacture (Fig. 
2.18). The channel occupies only a small fraction of the distance 
c h a n n e l 
Fig. 2.18. Simplified construction 
of DMOS 
transistor 
between the η-regions, the remainder being a drift space. In the 
T-metal-oxide-semiconductor transistor (TMOST) the current flow is 
normal to the plane of the layers as in bipolar transistors, the source 
being on top and the drain underneath. The source consists of a 
number of sites, each associated with a short channel, the parallel 
connection of which yields the desired low resistance and switching 
times. A somewhat similar approach is used in the vertical-groove 
metal-oxide-semiconductor transistor (VMOST) designed to deliver 
substantial output power, e.g. in audio amplifiers. In this type of 
transistor a groove-shaped gate projects into the η-Η, ρ and epitaxial 
layers giving very short channel lengths as shown in Fig. 2.19. 
source 
gate 
source 
S1O2 
drain 
Fig. 2.19. Simplified construction 
of VMOS 
transistor 

44 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
F.e.t. as a Linear Resistor 
The internal drain-source path of an f.e.t. differs in nature from the 
corresponding path of a bipolar transistor. It has no rectifying 
properties and conducts irrespective of the polarity of the applied 
drain-source voltage. Thus the Id~Vds 
characteristics occupy two 
quadrants of the current-voltage graph as shown in Fig. 2.20. The 
characteristics for low voltages are almost straight and all pass through 
the origin, showing the f.e.t. to be a good approximation to a linear 
conductor. Its resistance is, of course, measured by the slope of the 
characteristics and varies greatly depending on the gate voltage. In 
practice a range from a few hundred ohms to as many megohms can 
be achieved. To obtain this near-linear behaviour, however, applied 
voltages must be confined to a small range centred on zero. Suitable 
inputs are alternating signals with an amplitude small compared with 
1 V. The circuit diagram of an attenuator using this principle is given 
on page 358. 
Dual-gate 
m.o.s.f.e.t.s 
Dual-gate field effect transistors are of the same construction as those 
already described but have a second separate insulated gate. Initially 
intended for linear applications at v.h.f. as described on page 185, they 
have low feedback capacitance (cr s) and high transconductance (yf s) 
and so find their main uses in high-gain, high-frequency amplifiers. The 
I N C R E A S I N G 
I N C R E A S I N G 
Fig. 2.20. ldVd characteristics of an f.e.t. 
near the origin 

Basic Principles of 
Transistors 
45 
transconductance can be controlled by varying the bias voltage on the 
gate which is not used for signal input, permitting a simple system of 
automatic gain control (a.g.c). 
Increasingly, dual-gate f.e.t.s are being used as mixers: an example of 
this application is given in Chapter 12. 
Insulated-gate 
Bipolar Transistor 
(i.g.b.p.t.) 
A relatively recently developed semiconductor type is the insulated-
gate bipolar transistor. It combines the input characteristics of an 
i.g.f.e.t. with the output performance of a bipolar device and offers 
greater power gain than the bipolar type together with the higher 
voltage operation and lower losses of the i.g.f.e.t. In effect it is an f.e.t. 
integrated with a bipolar transistor in a form of Darlington configur-
ation: see page 127. 
Gallium Arsenide 
f.e.t.s 
Electron mobility in gallium arsenide is about five times that in silicon, 
an important factor in s.h.f. (super high frequency) applications, 
mentioned in Chapter 1. The physical construction of a g.a.s.f.e.t. is 
relatively simple: for low-noise performance the epitaxial layer under 
the gate is etched into a recess, and the gate length made very short; this 
calls for use of an ion-implantation technique in manufacture (see 
Appendix A). 
At s.h.f. the performance of a g.a.s.f.e.t. is superior to that of a silicon 
transistor by virtue of the lower parasitic capacitance due to the 
isolation effect of a layer of semi-insulating GaAs, the decrease of series 
resistance and the increase in transconductance gm caused by the 
greater electron mobility inherent in GaAs devices. 
H.E.M.T. 
A development of the GaAs f.e.t. is the h.e.m.t. (high electron-
mobility transistor), now used almost exclusively in the front ends 
(low-noise blocks, l.n.b.s) of satellite receivers working in the 12-GHz 
band for direct-to-home broadcasts from space. 
The h.e.m.t. has a hetero-structure (junction of different semiconduc-
tors) of aluminium-gallium-arsenide (AlGaAs) and GaAs, doubling the 
electron-mobility of a Schottky-barrier junction. Manufacture of a 
h.e.m.t. uses a similar process to that of the GaAs f.e.t., but because of 

46 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
its superior transconductance the h.e.m.t. has a very good low-noise 
performance: the best yields in production have a noise factor of 0.6 dB, 
making it possible to construct a head-end (dish-mounted) frequency 
converter with an overall noise factor of less than 0.8 dB. This is 
important because the better the noise performance of the head-end, 
the smaller need be the receiving dish for a given field strength of the 
broadcast satellite. 
Equivalent Circuit for an f.e.t. 
Fig. 2.21 (a) gives the equivalent circuit of an f.e.t. working at very high 
frequency. At radio frequencies the representative diagram of Fig. 
2.21 (b) is adequate while at low frequencies and for d.c. applications the 
effects of internal capacitances can usually be ignored and the input 
resistance assumed to be infinité as shown in the further simplified 
diagram of Fig. 2.21(c). 
(b) 
(c) 
Fig. 2.21. Equivalent circuit for an f.e.t. for use at {a) very high frequencies; 
(b) radio 
frequencies; 
(c) low frequencies 
and d.c. 

Basic Principles of Transistors 
47 
T H Y R I S T O R S 
These are four-layer devices of pnpn structure, the outer layers being 
known as anode and cathode, as indicated in Fig. 2.22. They are 
bistable, having very low resistance between anode and cathode in one 
state and very high resistance in the other state. Changes of state are 
very rapid, being accelerated by regenerative action within the device, 
and very little power is required to initiate a change of state. Their chief 
applications are in switching and power control. They are sometimes 
known as semiconductor-controlled rectifiers or, more accurately, 
controlled semiconductor rectifiers. There are many different types of 
thyristor and they can be classified according to the number of external 
connections to the layers. 
ANOOE 
η 
Ρ 
η 
Fig. 2.22. Structure of a 
thyristor 
CATHOOE 
Diode (two-terminal) 
Thyristor 
The simplest type of thyristor has the two external connections 
indicated in Fig. 2.22. When the anode is made positive with respect to 
the cathode the two outer junctions are forward-biased and the centre 
junction is reverse-biased. Because the outer junctions are therefore of 
low resistance most of the applied voltage appears across the centre 
junction. As the applied voltage is increased the electric field across this 
junction increases and a value is reached at which it breaks down. The 
few charge carriers released by the intense field generate further carriers 
as a result of collisions and current therefore increases very rapidly to a 
value limited only by the applied voltage and the resistance of the 
external circuit: the device is now in its on-state. The applied voltage 
can now be reduced to a low value but the on-state persists until the 
current through the device has fallen below a critical value (known as 
the holding current) when the device becomes non-conductive again. If 

48 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
the anode is maintained at a voltage just below the critical value which 
causes breakdown, then a small superimposed voltage pulse can initiate 
the change to the on-state. 
If the anode is made negative with respect to the cathode the two 
outer junctions are reverse-biased and the centre junction is forward-
biased. The applied voltage is now shared between the outer junctions 
and the device has the properties of a reverse-biased pn junction, i.e. is 
non-conductive. The I-V characteristic of a diode thyristor has the form 
shown in Fig. 2 23. The device can be regarded as a diode with an 
exceptionally low forward resistance. 
HOLOING — 
CURRENT 
Fig. 2.23. I-V characteristic 
of a reverse-blocking 
diode 
thyristor 
Such a thyristor is known as a reverse-blocking diode thyristor and 
two such devices connected in reverse parallel form a bidirectional 
diode thyristor sometimes called a diac. By suitable treatment of the 
outer junctions it is possible to arrange for these to break down at a very 
low value of negative anode voltage. These devices are known as 
reverse-conducting 
diode thyristors and the graphical symbols for all 
these types of diode thyristor are shown in Fig. 2.24. Diode thyristors 
are not so widely used as the triode types now to be described. 
—
0
1
— 
REVERSE 
BLOCKING 
pkJ 
Fig. 2.24. Graphical 
symbols 
for diode 
thyristors 
REVERSE 
CONDUCTING 
BIDIRECTIONAL 
(DIAC) 

Basic Principles of Transistors 
49 
Triode (three-terminal) 
Thyristors 
These have an external connection, known as a gate, to the inner p- or 
η-region and the behaviour of the device is best understood by 
regarding it as made up of two direct-coupled complementary bipolar 
transistors as shown in Fig. 2.25(a) which shows a gate connection to 
the inner p-region. Redrawn in the form shown in Fig. 2.25(b) the 
circuit can be recognised as that of a complementary bistable multivib-
rator similar to that shown in Fig. 13.5 but without the four resistors. 
One of the features of the complementary circuit, as pointed out on 
page 254, is that in one of the stable states both transistors are cut off 
and in the other both are conductive. 
When the anode is made negative with respect to the cathode the 
outer two junctions are reverse-biased: these are the base-emitter 
junctions of the constituent bipolar transistors and thus both transis-
tors are cut off. Very little current can flow through the device, which is 
therefore in its off-state. 
When the anode is made positive with respect to the cathode the 
outer two junctions of the device are forward biased whilst the centre 
junction (which is the base-collector junction for both transistors) is 
reverse-biased. These are the normal conditions for the two transistors 
to operate as amplifiers. If a positive voltage is applied to the inner 
p-region, so injecting a base current ib, this increases the forward bias of 
the npn transistor with the result that current crosses the centre 
junction to give rise to a collector current of 
in the inner n-region, 
where βί is the current gain of the npn transistor. The inner η-region is, 
however, the base region of the pnp transistor and this increase in its 
forward bias gives rise to a collector current of βχβ21*
 
m
 
t
n
e
 inner 
p-region, where β2 is the current gain of the pnp transistor. The inner 
p-region is, however, the base region of the npn transistor. In this way 
ANODE 
CATHODE 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 2.25. Triode thyristor 
regarded as two direct-coupled 
complementary 
bipolar 
transistors 

50 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
positive feedback occurs and if βιβ2 
exceeds unity the feedback is 
regenerative, causing a very rapid build-up of current, so putting the 
device into the on-state. The current through the thyristor when 
regeneration starts is known as the latching current and it is greater 
than the holding current. The current gain of a bipolar transistor 
increases with increase in forward bias and thus regeneration can 
always be produced by increasing the external voltage applied to the 
inner p-region. Once regeneration has started, the external voltage 
which initiated it can be removed but the thyristor will remain in the 
on-state until the current through it has fallen below the holding value. 
Thus the thyristor can be triggered into conduction by a short-duration 
pulse applied to the gate. 
The advantage of the gate control is that it enables the anode 
breakdown voltage of the thyristor to be reduced considerably - down 
to a few volts in fact. This is illustrated in the characteristics of a triode 
thyristor shown in Fig. 2.26. Typically a pulse of 100 mA at 5 V on the 
gate can control a current of 50 A at 250 V and the voltage drop across 
the thyristor can be less than 2 V. Modern thyristors can carry currents 
of up to 1,000 A at voltages up to 2.5 kV, and thus find applications, for 
instance, in electric traction and lift control. 
"AH 
ioAH 
20mA hh -, 
10mA 
- 10mA 
Fig. 2.26. Anode characteristics 
of a triode 
thyristor 

Basic Principles of Transistors 
51 
From the symmetry of the device it is clear that the thyristor could 
alternatively be triggered into conduction by a negative signal applied 
to the inner η-region. Thus there are two basic types of reverse-
blocking triode thyristor, one with a p-gate (cathode gate) and the 
other with an η-gate (anode gate). There are corresponding reverse-
conducting triode thyristors. A useful bidirectional thyristor, known as 
a triac, can be made by connecting two reverse-blocking triode 
thyristors in reverse parallel with a common gate connection: this can 
be triggered into conduction by positive or negative voltages applied to 
the gate terminal. The graphical symbols for the various types of triode 
thyristor are given in Fig. 2.27. 
GENERAL 
SYMBOL 
REVERSE-BLOCKING 
n-GATE 
(ANODE GATE) 
REVERSE-BLOCKING 
p-GATE 
(CATHODE GATE) 
REVERSE-CONDUCTING 
n-GATE 
(ANODE 
GATE) 
Ν DUCTING REVERSE-CONDUCTING 
TE 
p-GATE 
GATE) 
(CATHODE 
GATE) 
BIDIRECTIONAL 
(TRIAC) 
Fig. 2.27. Graphical symbols for triode 
thyristors 
ANODE 
Ρ 
n-GATE 
η 
Ρ 
p-GATE 
η 
CATHODE 
(α) 
(b) 
Fig. 2.28. 
Structure 
(a) and graphical 
symbol 
(b) for a tetrode 
thyristor 
{silicon-
controlled 
switch) 

52 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Tetrode {four-terminal) 
Thyristor 
If a thyristor has separate gate connections to both the inner regions, as 
shown in Fig. 2.28, then it can be triggered into conduction by a 
positive signal applied to the p-gate or a negative signal applied to the 
η-gate. It also has the property that it can be switched from the on-state 
to the off-state by applying a positive signal to the η-gate or a negative 
signal to the p-gate. Such a thyristor is usually known as a silicon-
controlled 
switch. 

CHAPTER 3 
Common-base and Common-gate 
Amplifiers 
COMMON-BASE AMPLIFIERS 
Introduction 
It was shown in the previous chapter that the common-base amplifier 
has a current gain of just less than unity, that its input resistance is 
low, output resistance high and that it can give substantial voltage 
gain. In this chapter we shall show how these resistances and the 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 
Simplified 
circuit of a common-base 
amplifier 
(a), and its electrical 
equi-
valent 
(b) 
voltage gain depend on the values of re1 rb and rc and on the value 
of the source and load resistance. 
A simplified circuit of a transistor common-base amplifier is given 
in Fig. 3.1(a) in which Rs represents the internal resistance of the 
signal source and Rt represents the collector load for the amplifier. 
53 

54 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
For the sake of simplicity, methods of applying bias are not indicated. 
Fig. 3.1(b) represents the same circuit in which the transistor is 
represented by its equivalent T-section network. The directions of 
the currents in the two meshes of this network can be determined 
by considering the physical processes occurring in a transistor. From 
Chapter 2 we know that the emitter current ie is equal to the sum 
of the collector current ic and the base current ib. If, therefore, ie 
and z"f are given clockwise directions as shown in Fig. 3.1(b), then 
the current in rb is (ie- 
ic) which is equal to ib: all conventions are 
therefore satisfied in this diagram. 
Input 
Resistance 
Applying KirchhofTs laws to the circuit of Fig. 3.1(b) we have 
To obtain an expression for the input resistance we can eliminate 
ic between these two equations to obtain a relationship between ie 
and vin. 
From Eqn 3.2 
vin
 
= ie{Rs +
 
r
e + 
rb)-icrb 
0 = ic(rb + rc + 
Rl)-ierb-cxierc 
(3.1) 
(3.2) 
rb + <xrc 
rh + rc + R{ 
Substituting for ic in Eqn 3.1 
Vin = UKS +
 R
E + 
ri>) 
rb(rb + (*rc) . 
in r
b(
r
b 
+ 
ftp 
(3.3) 
+ '", + ' * -
fe 
Fig. 3.2. 
Circuit 
illustrating 
the 
meaning of input 
resistance 

Common-base 
and Common-gate 
Amplifiers 
55 
If we represent the input resistance of the transistor by r, the circuit 
of Fig. 3.1(b) takes the form shown in Fig. 3.2. For this circuit 
we have 
(3.4) 
e
 
Rs + n 
Comparing Eqns 3.3 and 3.4 
rb{rb + arc) 
η = re + rb- 
(3.5) 
r
b +
 r
c +
 
R
l 
K/ + r c( l - g ) 
rfc + rc + H, 
= 
+ 
· 
: 
7~W- 
(
3
·
6
) 
For a given transistor operating under constant d.c. conditions, rbf 
re, 
rc and α are constant, and r, therefore depends solely on /?/, increasing 
as R{ increases. 
The range of input resistance can be calculated from Eqn 3.5. 
First consider Eqn 3.5 when Rt is made vanishingly small 
rb(rb + otrc) 
Now for bipolar transistors rc and art. are both large compared 
with rb and the input resistance is approximately given by 
η = re + rb-rb. 
^ 
= re + 
rb(\-x) 
From Eqn 2.5 
(1 - a) = ^ 
r. + 'j 
(3-7) 
and this gives the value of the input resistance of the common-base 
amplifier when the output terminals are short-circuited. 
Frequently rb/p 
can be neglected in comparison with re and 
thus we can say 
As we have seen re is inversely proportional to emitter current. 
It follows that the input resistance for the common-base amplifier 
(for low values of collector load resistance) is inversely proportional 

56 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
to emitter current and thus to collector current. This has important 
consequences. For example suppose a series of steady potentials 
is applied between base and emitter as in plotting the 
Ic-Vbe 
curves for the transistor. Each time the voltage is increased, the 
emitter current increases and re decreases with the result that the 
final increase in Ie is more than proportional to the voltage increase. 
Similarly if Vhe is decreased Ie decreases and re increases, the effect 
being that the final decrease in Ie is less than proportional to the 
change in voltage. Thus the Ic — Vbe curve is far from linear: indeed 
it approximates to exponential form as shown in Fig. 2.9. 
Changes in input resistance also occur when emitter current varies 
during signal amplification. If the input signal is from a high-resistance 
source then variations in input resistance have little effect on input 
current and amplification is linear. If however the transistor is used as 
a voltage amplifier and the input signal is from a low-resistance 
source, variations in input resistance can cause severe distortion; this 
is to be expected from a device with a characteristic as non-linear as 
that shown in Fig. 2.9. To minimise this distortion as required in an 
analogue amplifier the effects of the input-resistance variation must 
be eliminated and one way of achieving this is to ensure that the 
internal resistance of the signal source is large compared with the 
average value of the input resistance of the transistor. If this is 
impossible and the source resistance is small, it can effectively be 
increased by connecting an external resistance in series with the signal 
source. By making Rs large we reduce gain, of course, but we ensure 
that the transistor is fed with a current that is a substantially 
undistorted copy of the voltage to be amplified: thus we still use the 
transistor as a current amplifier even though the input and output 
signals are in the form of voltages. 
Now consider the input resistance when R, is made very large. 
The final term in Eqn 3.5 vanishes leaving 
ri = re + rb 
(3.8) 
which gives the value of the input resistance when the output 
terminals are open-circuited. 
Input Resistance for a Bipolar Transistor as Common-base 
Amplifier 
To obtain an estimate of practical values of input resistance for 
a bipolar transistor we can substitute re = 25 Ω, rb = 300 Ω and 
β = 50 and from Eqn 3.7 we find that the input resistance for short-
circuited output terminals is given by 

Common-base 
and Common-gate 
Amplifiers 
57 
1C 
300 
r
' =
 
2
5
+
l ô 
= 31 Ω 
From Eqn 3.8 the input resistance for open-circuited 
output 
terminals is given by 
r, = 25 + 300 
= 325 Ω 
Thus the input resistance of a bipolar transistor used as a 
common-base amplifier varies between a minimum value for 
350 
Ik 
10k 
100k 
IM 
lOM 
LOAD RESISTANCE (OHMS) 
Fig. 3.3 Variation oj input resistance 
with 
load resistance for a common-base 
ampli-
fier 
short-circuited output terminals to a maximum value for open-
circuited terminals. The dependence of input resistance on output 
load is illustrated in Fig. 3.3. 
Output 
Resistance 
To obtain an expression for the output resistance of the common-
base amplifier we can eliminate ie between Eqns 3.1 and 3.2 to 
obtain a relationship between ic and vin. 
From Eqn 3.2 
r» + ' c + *i . 
ie = 
Λ 
rb + otrc 

58 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
.'. ir = 
c
 
( r . 
+ 
rç + R^Rs 
+ re + 
r , ) 
r 
rb + arc 
(rb + arc)viH 
(rb + rc + Rt) (R5 + re + r6) - rb(rb + arc) 
•M-
 
R-
 + ,-
 + f; I 
• 
,3.9, 
R , + rb + 
r^K^T7b 
If we represent the output resistance of the transistor amplifier 
Ί 
Fig. 3.4. 
Circuit 
illustrating 
the 
meaning of output 
resistance 
by rQ the circuit of Pig. 3.1(b) has the form shown in Fig. 3.4. For 
this circuit we have 
(3.10) 
Comparing Eqns 3.9 and 3.10 we have that v, the e.m.f. effectively 
acting in the output circuit, is given by 
R+r+rh
Vi
' 
Making the normally-justified assumptions that rb is negligible 
compared with arc, that α can be taken as unity and that (re + rb) 
can be neglected in comparison with Rs we have 
Substituting for ie in Eqn 3.1 
(rfc + r f+ /?,)(Ks + re + r6) . 
. 
V
>"
 =
 
V~Z7r
 
K
~
lcf
'
b 

Common-base 
and Common-gate 
Amplifiers 
59 
Eqn 3.10 thus becomes 
i . - ^ 
Comparing Eqns 3.9 and 3.10, we have 
1 3 1 1
1 
For a given transistor operating with fixed d.c. conditions, 
rb, re, rc and α are fixed and ra then depends on Ks, increasing as Λ, 
is increased. The range over which r0 varies can be estimated as 
follows. First let Rs = 0. Eqn 3.12 then becomes 
re-rc<x 
which, if the relatively small term rbrj(re 
+ rb) is neglected, gives 
r
e~*~
r
b 
Now let Rs approach infinity. The final term in Eqn 3.11 then 
vanishes, leaving the output resistance as 
rc = rc + rb 
(3.14) 
^
 
r
c 
because rb is small compared with rc. 
Output Resistance of a Bipolar Transistor as Common-base 
Amplifier 
To obtain a numerical estimate of the range of output resistance 
for a bipolar transistor let re = 25 Ω, rb = 300 Ω, rc = 1 ΜΩ 
and α = 0*98. Substituting these values in Eqn 3.13 we find the 
output resistance for short-circuited input terminals is given by 
< 
ΛΛ
Λ 
f\/\f\ Γ
2 5 ^
 3
0
0
 (
1
 - 098)Ί 
Λ 
r ^ l , 0 0 0 , 0 0 0 x [ 
2
S
^ 3
(
X
) 
JQ 
= 100 VSl approximately 

60 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
IM 
900 k 
~ 
800k 
1/1 
Σ 
o 
700 k 
3 
600 k 
< 
5 
500k 
CO 
« 
400 k 
£ 
500k ; — 
E
 
200k [ 
100 k r 
0 
1 
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 
i i 
j 
I 
L 
! 
10 
100 
Ik 
SOURCE RESISTANCE (OHMS) 
10k 
Fig. 3.5. Variation of output resistance 
with source 
resist-
ance for a common-base 
amplifier 
The variation of output resistance with source resistance for a 
common-base amplifier is illustrated in Fig. 3.5. 
Voltage Gain 
From Fig. 3.1(b) we can see that the output voltage is given by 
ι'Α· The voltage gain vout
/vin 
is hence equal to J ' A / ^ v 
From 
Eqn 3.9 if is given by 
(Rl + rb + rc ) (R, + re + rb) - rb(rb + arc) 
Hence 
l'A 
(rè + arr)R, 
ι\„ 
(«i + rA + rc)(Rs + re + rf c)-rè(rè + arc) 
^
3
'
1 5
^ 
The dependence of the voltage gain on the value of Rt is illustrated 
in Fig. 3.6, which shows gain increasing with Rh linearly for small 
The output resistance for open-circuited input terminals is, from 
Eqn 3.14, given by 
rQ = 1,000,000 + 300 Ω 
= 1 ΜΩ approximately 

Common-base 
and Common-gate 
Amplifiers 
61 
1.000 
100 
ζ 
< 
ο 
Sj 
io 
1 
ΛΙ 
1.000 
100 
ζ 
< 
ο 
Sj 
io 
1 
ΛΙ 
1.000 
100 
ζ 
< 
ο 
Sj 
io 
1 
ΛΙ 
1.000 
100 
ζ 
< 
ο 
Sj 
io 
1 
ΛΙ 
Fig. 3.6. 
Variation 
of voilage 
gain with 
load 
resistance for a common-base 
amplifier 
values of Λ, but becoming asymptotic to a limiting value of gain 
as Rt becomes large. 
For a bipolar transistor rc is normally large compared with all 
other resistances in the expression, and it is possible to simplify 
Eqn 3.IS as follows: 
t>«v 
rc(R, + r€ + 
rb)-arbrc 
_ 
<xRl 
~ * s + r€ + r b( l - a ) 
If α in the numerator is taken as unity, this may be written 
vin 
R* + rt + rJfi 
From Eqn 3.7 
r
'
 
=
 
r
< + 
t ' 
Λ ^ 
= ΤΓ~~~— 
(3.16) 
Now 
is the voltage of the input-signal generator and in a practical 
circuit the terminals of vin are not normally accessible. It is more 
useful therefore to express the voltage gain of the amplifier as the 
ratio of the signal voltage at the collector to that at the emitter 
because these two voltages can readily be measured. Reference to 
Fig. 3.1 shows that if we make Rs equal to zero, vin equals vbei
 
the 

62 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
signal voltage at the emitter terminal. Thus to obtain this more 
practical expression for the voltage gain all that is necessary is to 
put JRs = 0 in the above expression and we have 
"out 
=
 
*l 
"be
 
r
i 
This gives the voltage gain between collector and emitter terminals 
and Rs does not enter into it. As indicated earlier, however, Rs 
should be large compared with rt to minimise distortion in a class-A 
amplifier. 
In a typical common-base amplifier 
= 10 kΩ and r, = 40 Ω 
giving VoJVfr 
as 250. If the source resistance Rs is taken as 400 Ω 
(ten times rin) then vout
/vin 
is 25. 
To obtain an indication of the maximum voltage gain available 
from a bipolar transistor as a common-base amplifier suppose Rt is 
made large compared with rc. With a few simplifications Eqn 3.15 
reduces to the form 
"ο* 
=
 
rc 
vin 
R5 + re + rb 
from which 
(3.17) 
"be
 
r
e + rb 
Substituting rt = 1 ΜΩ, r e = 25 Ω and rb = 300 Ω we have that the 
maximum value of ν Ο
Μ
/ ν ^ is given by 10
6
/(25 + 300), approximately 
3,000, a much larger value than is obtainable from an f.e.t. 
Applications 
of Common-base 
Amplifiers 
The common-base amplifier has a very low input resistance, a very 
high output resistance, high voltage gain and unity current gain. 
It is widely used as an r.f. stage in v.h.f. and u.h.f. receivers, often as 
part of a cascode stage. Typical circuits are given in later chapters. 
COMMON-GATE AMPLIFIERS 
Amplifier 
Properties 
Fig. 3.7(a) shows the basic form of the common-gate amplifier and 
Fig. 3.7(b) gives the (low-frequency) equivalent circuit for an f.e.t. 

Common-base 
and Common-gate 
Amplifiers 
63 
9m Vg, 
Fig. 3.7. Basic connections for a common-gate 
amplifier ( a) and the electrical 
equivalent 
with source and load circuit 
(b) 
connected to a signal source and to a load resistor. Because of the 
very high resistance of the gate circuit, the gate connection is shown 
as an open circuit in Fig. 3.7(b). The output of the constant-current 
generator gj)^ 
divides between ris 
and (R$ + R,) but normally 
(Rs + R,) is small compared with rds and it can thus be assumed that 
the current gmvgs 
flows wholly through Rs and R,. 
The input resistance of the common-gate amplifier r, is the ratio 
of the voltage across the source and gate terminals (vgs) to the current 
flowing through these terminals (gmvgs) 
and is thus equal to 
l/gm—a. 
very low resistance. If gm = 2 mA/V, a typical value, r, is 1/(2 χ 10"
 3
), 
i.e. 500 Ω. 
The output resistance ra can be seen from inspection of Fig. 3.7(b) 
to be (rds + Rs) but as rd5 is normally large compared with Rs, ra 
can usually be taken as approximately equal to rds. 
The output voltage v0 of the common-gate amplifier can be seen 
from inspection of Fig. 3.7(b) to be /R, where i is the current 
(gmvgs) 
in the circuit. Thus the voltage gain is given by 
The current in the circuit (gmvgs) 
flows in the input and output 
circuits and the current gain of the common-gate amplifier is 
therefore unity. 
Applications 
The common-gate amplifier has output resistance and voltage gain 
similar to those of the common-source amplifier but its input 

64 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
resistance is low. This particular type of amplifier therefore lacks 
the most attractive feature of the f.e.t. namely its very high input 
resistance and is consequently not widely used. Its chief application 
is in wideband v.h.f. and u.h.f. amplifiers (often as part of a cascode 
circuit) where the low input resistance is no disadvantage. 

CHAPTER 4 
Common-emitter and 
Common-source Amplifiers 
COMMON-EMITTER AMPLIFIERS 
Introduction 
We have already seen (page 30) that the common-emitter amplifier 
has a considerable current gain β. In the following analysis we 
shall derive expressions for the input resistance, output resistance 
and voltage gain for this circuit in terms of the parameters of the 
equivalent T-network, the source resistance Rs and the output 
load Rt. 
Fig. 4.1. Basic form of common-emitter 
amplifier 
(a), and its equivalent 
circuit 
(b) 
The basic circuit for a common-emitter amplifier is given in 
Fig. 4.1(a), in which Λ, is the resistance of the signal source and 
Rt is the collector load resistance. Bias sources are omitted from this 
diagram for the sake of simplicity. Fig. 4.1(b) gives the equivalent 
65 

66 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
circuit in which the transistor is represented by the T-network 
of resistances re, rh and rc introduced in Chapter 2. If the base 
current ih is shown acting in a clockwise direction and the collector 
current ic in an anticlockwise direction as indicated in Fig. 4.1(b), 
then the current in the common-emitter resistance re is the sum 
{ih + ic\ From Chapter 2 we know that the sum of these two cur-
rents is the emitter current ie: all conventions are therefore satisfied 
in this diagram. 
Applying KirchhofTs laws to the circuit of Fig. 4.1(b) we have 
vin = ib(Rs + rb + re) + icre 
(4.1) 
0 = ic (Rt + rc + re) + ibre - <xrcie 
(4.2) 
Now ie — ib + ic and Eqn 4.2 may therefore be written in the form 
0 = ic (Rt + rc + re) + ibre - ccrcib - arf if 
= ic l
R
i +
 r
e + re ( 1 - a)] + ib(re - arf) 
(4.3) 
Current Gain 
From Eqn 4.3 we can say 
ib 
/?f + re + r t( l - a ) 
Now re may be neglected in comparison with art: normal values 
of R, and re can be neglected in comparison with rc(l — a). We thus 
have 
α 
1 
Values of j5 lie between 20 and 500 and tend to fall off at low and high 
values of emitter current. 
Input 
Resistance 
As in the analysis of the common-base amplifier, we can obtain 
an expression for the input resistance of the amplifier by eliminating 

Common-emitter 
and Common-source 
Amplifiers 
67 
Re-arranging 
* 
r . ( « r c- r . ) 
(4.4) 
Λ, + Γ» + Γ , + R, + r, + ( l - a ) r f 
If the input resistance of the amplifier is represented by r, the 
input current ib can be expressed 
Comparing this with Eqn 4.4 we have 
„ - „ + , , + 
(4.6) 
Λι + ΓΒ + ( 1 - α ) Γ Γ 
which is a useful expression because it shows that ri increases as R{ 
decreases. Eqn 4.6 can be simplified thus 
The denominator can be simplified by neglecting re in comparison 
with the other terms which are much larger in practice. We then 
have the result 
h 
= 
. R. 4- R — -
re(r€-(xrc) 
ic between Eqns 4.1 and 4.3 to obtain a relationship between 
ib and viH. From Eqn 4.3 
i = 
ι 
/?( + r, + ( l - a ) r / * 
Substituting for i
f
 in Eqn 4.1 

68 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Normally K, is small compared with rc and ( l - a ) r f. The input 
resistance is then given by 
r
c
 
e 
f
i 
=
 
Γ
» +
 
Γ
« - - / , 
=
 
Γ
> 
+ 
r f( l - a )
 
0
 ' 1 - α 
= r* + 0r, 
(4.8) 
We have already shown that re is inversely proportional to the mean 
emitter current Ie and we can thus say 
ο 25 (mV) 
For high values of β such as commonly encountered in silicon 
transistors the second term is large compared with the first. Thus 
R 25 (mV) 
β 
1 
P
 
/.(mA) 
<?m 
This is a useful result which shows that the input resistance is 
approximately 
inversely 
proportional 
to emitter current 
and 
directly proportional to β. Thus for a given emitter current the 
input resistance gives a direct measure of β for the transistor. 
The above expression also shows that the input resistance of the 
common-emitter amplifier varies with emitter current (as in the 
common-base amplifier) and can cause distortion in a voltage 
amplifier if the source resistance is not large compared with the 
average value of input resistance. 
When Rt is large compared with rf and ( 1 — <x)rc the input resistance 
has a value given by 
Ri 
r
'~
r
> 
+
 
r
-R9 
= r, + re 
(4.9) 
Input Resistance of a Bipolar Transistor as Common-emitter 
Amplifier 
To illustrate the range of values of input resistance likely to be 
encountered in practice in a common-emitter bipolar transistor 
amplifier, let us assume that re = 25 Ω, rb = 300 Ω and β = 100. 
Substituting in Eqn 4.8 to find the input resistance for short-
circuited output terminals we have 
r, = 3 0 0 + 1 0 0 x 2 5 
= 2,800 Ω 

Common-emitter 
and Common-source 
Amplifiers 
69 
Substituting in Eqn 4.9 to obtain the input resistance for open-
circuited output terminals we have 
r, = 300 + 25 Ω 
= 325 Ω 
These numerical examples show that the common-emitter amplifier 
has a higher input resistance than the common-base amplifier and 
that it decreases with increase in load resistance. 
1,600 
Ik 
10k 
100k 
lM 
LOAD RESISTANCE (OHMS) 
Fig. 4.2. Variation of input resistance 
with load 
resistance 
for a common-emitter 
amplifier 
The variation of input resistance with output collector load for 
bipolar transistors is illustrated in Fig. 4.2. 
Output 
Resistance 
We can obtain an expression for the output resistance of the 
common-emitter amplifier by eliminating ib between Eqns 4.1 and 
4.3 to obtain a relationship between vin and ic. From Eqn 4.3 we 
have 
*, + re + r c( l - a ) . 
h = 
re-otrc 
Substituting in Eqn 4.1 
R, + re + r f( l - a ) 
" i n = - ~ 
—— 
(R, + rb + re)ic + icre 
re-<xrc 
[R, + r, + r f( l - a) ] (Rs + rh + re) 
+ 'e 
re-arc 

70 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
r
'-*
r
< 
v
. 
R, + rb + rt 
'" 
- [ R 1 +
 r, + r c( l - a) ] + 
£
%
^ 
R, +
 r
b +
 r
, 
This can be more conveniently written in the form 
<trr-r. 
, , - 
j 
(4.10, 
Ks + rb + re 
In a simple circuit containing a signal source of voltage ν and of 
internal resistance r0 feeding a load resistance /?, the current ic is 
given by 
••-ik
 
<4"> 
Comparison between Eqns 4.10 and 4.11 shows that the effective 
voltage acting in the equivalent circuit is given by 
Rs + rb + 
re'
Vin 
and it is normally justifiable to assume that r9 is negligible compared 
with arf, that α can be taken as unity and that (rb + re) can be 
neglected in comparison with Rr 
Making these assumptions 
we have 
rc 
R,
 
w 
and Eqn 4.11 now becomes 
Ri + r0 
both results identical to those for the common-base amplifier. But r0 
for the common-emitter amplifier (see expression (4.15), p. 71) is 
approximately l/β that for the common-base amplifier whereas Rs for 
the common-emitter amplifier must be approximately β times that for 
the common-base amplifier to limit distortion in a class-Α amplifier to 
an acceptable level. These two effects cancel and the net result is that 
ic has approximately the same value for a given value of vin 
for 
common-emitter and common-base amplifiers. 

Common-emitter 
and Common-source 
Amplifiers 
71 
'e + r* h 
= r f A
±
^ 
(4.14) 
r* + rb 
if we neglect the term rerh/{re + rb) which is small compared with the 
others. 
To find an expression for the output resistance for open-circuited 
input terminals let R5 approach infinity in Eqn 4.12. We then have 
r
o = r, + r , ( l - a ) 
= rr + rf/0 
and as re is small compared with rjfi we can say 
rQ = rjfi 
(4.15) 
Output 
Resistance 
of a Bipolar 
Transistor 
as 
Common-emitter 
Amplifier 
We can determine the range of values of output resistance for a 
common-emitter bipolar transistor amplifier by substituting the 
typical practical values re = 25 Ω, rb = 300 Ω, rt = 1 ΜΩ and 
β = 50 in Eqns 4.14 and 4.15. 
If we compare Eqns 4.10 and 4.11 we obtain the following 
expression for the output 
resistance of the common-emitter 
amplifier: 
r, = rr + r c( l - g) / '
(
^ ;
r J
 
(4.12) 
Rs + r„ + re 
This expression shows that the output resistance depends on the 
source resistance (for a given transistor), decreasing as the source 
resistance is increased. 
This expression can be simplified by combining the first term 
with the third; this gives the result 
' 0 = r f( l - a ) + r
,
.
^
t
^ 
(4.13) 
To find an expression for the output resistance for short-circuited 
input terminals, let Rs approach zero in Eqn 4.13. We then have 
r0 = rt (1 - a ) + 
re.—•— 
rt + r* 
rf + r f c
( l - g ) 

72 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
10 
100 
Ik  
10k 
SOURCE RESISTANCE (OHMS) 
Fig. 4.3. 
Variation 
of output 
resistance 
with 
source 
resistance for a common-emitter 
amplifier 
From Eqn 4.14 the output resistance for short-circuited input 
terminals is given by 
ι ΛΛΛ f\f\/\ 25 + 300/50 
Λ 
r„ = 1,000,000. 
— Ω 
° 
' 
* 
25 + 300 
= 95 kQ 
From Eqn 4.15 the output resistance for open-circuited input 
terminals is given by 
1,000,000 
Λ 
= 20 kQ 
The variation in output resistance with source resistance for 
bipolar transistors is illustrated in Fig. 4.3. 
Voltage Gain 
From Fig. 4.1(b) we can see that the output voltage is given by 
icRt. 
The voltage gain vout
/vin 
is thus given by icRt/vin. 
From Eqn 
4.10 if is given by 
100k 
80k 
60k 
40k 

Common-emitter 
and Common-source 
Amplifiers 
73 
(4.16) 
Normally <xrf greatly exceeds re and this expression therefore gives 
a positive value for the voltage gain. But, to agree with the physics 
of the transistor, the collector current in Fig. 4.1(b) was assumed 
to be flowing in an anticlockwise direction whereas the base 
current was shown flowing in a clockwise direction. A positive 
value for the voltage gain thus implies that the output voltage is 
inverted with respect to the input voltage. Eqn 4.16 can be simplified 
by neglecting re in comparison with R,+ rf(l - a) in numerator and 
denominator. 
We then have 
Vaut 
0"Ά 
vin 
[Λ, + re ( 1 - a)] (Rs + rh + re) + arerc 
For values of R, and re small compared with r f( l - a ) Eqn 4.16 
may be written 
*-out 
*rcRt 
vin 
rc ( 1 - a) (Rs + rb + re) + <xrerc 
aR, 
~ R s( l - a ) + r<,(l-a) + re~ 
If a in the numerator is taken as unity, this may be written 
Rs + rh + βre 
From Eqn 4.8 we can say 
Vqu, 
=
 
fiRl 
Vin 
Rs +
 
r
i 
which compares with Eqn 3.16 in the previous chapter for the 
common-base amplifier. 
As pointed out in the previous chapter it is more useful to express 
(4.17) 
Hence 

74 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
voltage gain as the ratio of voui
 to vhe and that an expression for this 
ratio can be obtained by putting Rs = 0. Thus we have 
= /J — 
"be 
'
 
r
i 
and from page 68 
= gm 
vbe
 
y
m 
1 
a useful result which compares directly with that for an f.e.t. and is 
used later. It should always be remembered, of course, that Rs 
must be large compared with r, for linear operation even though Rs 
does not enter into the expression for vo l 4 f
/v^. 
We have seen that a typical value for the input resistance of a 
transistor with β = 100 is 2-8 kQ. Such a transistor if used for 
voltage amplification will require Rs to be at least 30 kO to minimise 
distortion due to input-resistance variation. A typical value for 
Rt is 5 kQ and hence the voltage gain is given by 
— =
 
1
0
° χ ^ 
vin 
30 
= 17. 
The voltage gain v0Jvbe 
is given by 
Rt 
5,000 
β.-
1
 
= 100 x - ^ — 
H
 
rt 
2,800 
= 180 approximately. 
Both values of gain are of the same order as those for the common-
base amplifier. 
Consider now the voltage gain of the common-emitter amplifier 
for load resistor values which are very large compared with 
rc (1 — a). If re is neglected in comparison with rc, Eqn 4.16 becomes 
The second term in the denominator can be neglected in comparison 
with the first and α may be taken as unity giving 
w
out 
fi» 
Rs + h + r* 
which is identical with Eqn 3.17 for the common-base amplifier. 

Common-emitter 
and Common-source 
Amplifiers 
Thus the voltage gain of a given transistor with a given large value 
of collector load resistance is approximately the same, no matter 
whether the transistor is connected up as a common-base or a 
common-emitter amplifier. The curve relating voltage gain with 
1,000 
100 
Ik 
10k 
100k 
iM 
LOAD RESISTANCE (OHMS) 
Fig. 4.4. 
Variation 
of voltage 
gain 
with 
load 
resistance 
for 
a 
common-emitter 
amplifier 
load resistance is similar to that for the common-base amplifier 
and is given in Fig. 4.4. 
Applications 
of Common-emitter 
Amplifiers 
The common-emitter amplifier has a high output resistance and a low 
input resistance but the ratio of the two is not so high as for the 
common-base amplifier. It also has high voltage gain and high current 
gain which accounts for it being the most widely used of the three 
fundamental bipolar transistor circuits. It forms the basis of most 
types of amplifier, oscillator and pulse generator. Numerous examples 
of its applications are given in the remaining chapters of this book. 
COMMON-SOURCE AMPLIFIERS 
Amplifier 
Properties 
The basic connections for the common-source amplifier are shown 
in Fig. 4.5(a). Fig. 4.5(b) shows the low-frequency equivalent circuit 
of the transistor with signal-source and load circuits. 
The input resistance of the transistor, i.e. the resistance between 
gate and source terminals, is clearly infinite: there is hence no possi-
bility of feeding any current into the input terminals and we are 
concerned only with the performance of the transistor as a voltage 
amplifier. 

76 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
The output resistance, i.e. the resistance between the drain and 
source terminals, is simply rds the drain a.c. resistance, the constant-
current generator being assumed to have infinite resistance. 
go-
- O S 
( a ) 
Fig. 4.5. Basic connections for a common-source 
amplifier 
(a) and the 
electrical 
equivalent with source and load circuit 
(b) 
Because of the infinite input resistance there is no input current 
and hence no loss of input signal across Rs. Thus vgs = vin and the 
current gmvin 
divides between 
and Rt. The fraction i^ 
which 
enters Rt is given by 
But vout
 = 
iout
Rt 
= Qns 
vin 
rds + Rl 
Often Rj is small compared with rds and this can be simplified to 
νίΛ
 
y
m 
1 
Applications 
The common-source amplifier has infinite input resistance and 
appreciable voltage gain. Both properties are useful and this is the 
most used of the f.e.t. linear circuits. Because of its low noise f.e.t.s 
are often used in low-level a.f. applications, e.g. in microphone head 
amplifiers where the high input resistance makes such amplifiers 
particularly suitable for following capacitor and 
piezo-electric 
microphones. 

C H A P T E R 
5 
Common-collector and Common-
drain Amplifiers (Emitter and 
Source Followers) 
COMMON-COLLECTOR AMPLIFIERS 
Introduction 
The fundamental 
circuit 
of a common-collector 
amplifier 
is 
given in Fig. 5.1(a) in which Rs represents the resistance of the 
signal source and Rt represents the load resistance. For simplicity, 
Fig. 5 1. The basic circuit for the common-collector 
transistor 
amplifier 
is given at 
(a), and the equivalent circuit at (b) 
bias sources are omitted from this diagram. In Fig. 5.1(b) the 
transistor is represented by an equivalent network of resistances 
ret rh and rc together with a voltage generator of e.m.f. arcie where it 
(a) 
(b) 
77 

78 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
is the alternating current in the emitter circuit. If the base current 
ib and emitter current ie are both shown acting in clockwise 
directions as in Fig. 5.1(b), then the current in the common-collector 
resistance rc is the difference (îe —i*). From Chapter 2 we know 
that this difference is the collector current ic: all conventions are 
therefore satisfied in this diagram. 
Normally re and Rt are both small compared with rf(l—a) and 
may be neglected in comparison with it. Thus the current gain of 
the common-collector circuit is given approximately by 
As we have seen this is the approximation often used for β, the 
current gain of the common-emitter circuit. Thus the current gains 
of the common-collector and common-emitter circuit are very 
nearly equal: because if is only very slightly smaller than ie this 
is not an unexpected result. 
Input 
Resistance 
We can obtain an expression for the input resistance if ι, is eliminated 
between Eqns 5.1 and 5.2 to obtain a relationship between t;^ and 
ib. From Eqn 5.2 
(5.1) 
(5.2) 
Applying KirchhofTs laws to the circuit of Fig. 5.1(b) we have 
Current Gain 

Common-collector 
and Common-drain 
Amplifiers 
79 
Substituting for ie in Eqn 5.1 
vin = ib(rb + rc + 
Rs)-rc(l-*). 
r,H-») 
rb + rc + 
Rs-
rc(l-a) 
+ rt + R, 
(5.3) 
φ-a) 
+ re + Rt 
In a simple circuit containing a generator of resistance Rs and a 
load of resistance r, the current is given by 
Comparison of Eqns 5.3 and 5.4 gives the input resistance as 
rf
2(l-a) 
which shows that the input resistance of the common-collector 
10 
100 
Ik 
10k 
100k 
(M 
LOAD RESISTANCE (OHMS) 
Fig. 5.2. Variation of input resistance 
with load resistance 
for 
a common-collector 
amplifier 
amplifier depends on the parameters of the transistor (rb, re, re 
and a) and on the load resistance Rh Fig. 5.2. 
This expression can be simplified slightly by combining the 
second and third terms. We then have 
INPUT RESISTANCE (OHMS) 

80 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
re + R, 
(5.6) 
*
 
r
< r f( l - a) + r, + K, 
Consider the limiting value of input resistance as R, approaches 
zero and in addition neglect re in comparison with rc(l 
-a) 
Γ
'
 
=
 
Γ
^ 
(5.7) 
which is, of course, the same result as for the common-emitter 
amplifier. 
In practice values of Rt are likely to be large compared with re 
but small compared with rc|β. If we neglect re in comparison with 
Ri in the numerator of Eqn 5.6 and Rt in comparison with rc(l — a) 
in the denominator we have 
η = r^fiRt 
(5.8) 
^ 
a simple and useful result. Although it does not include re (as 
for the common-base and common-emitter amplifiers) the input 
resistance of the emitter follower is nevertheless dependent on 
emitter current because β normally varies with Ie. This does not 
mean however that the source resistance must be large compared 
with r, when the emitter follower is used as a voltage amplifier. 
The circuit has a very large degree of negative feedback (sufficient, 
in fact, to reduce the voltage gain to less than unity) and this reduces 
distortion to a small value. 
If Rf is large compared with rf( 1 - a) the input resistance is given by 
η = rh + rc 
but, of course, rc is very large compared with rb and thus we may say 
Numerical 
Examples 
Consider a transistor with rb = 300 Ω, re = 25 Ω, rc = 1 ΜΩ and 
β = 50. From Eqn 5.7 the input resistance for 
short-circuited 
output terminals is given by 
r, = 300 + 2 5 x 5 0 Ω 
= 1,550 Ω 

Common-collector 
and Common-drain 
Amplifiers 
81 
which is the same value as for the common-emitter circuit. Suppose 
a load resistance of 1 kQ is used in the emitter circuit. The input 
resistance is now given by Eqn 5.8 
r, = 50 χ 1,000 Ω 
= 50 kQ 
For open-circuited output terminals the input resistance is equal 
to rf, i.e. 1 ΜΩ. 
These numerical examples show that the emitter follower can 
provide input resistances of 50 lei} or more for load resistors of the 
order of 1 kil. 
Output 
Resistance 
We can obtain an expression for the output resistance of a com-
mon-collector transistor amplifier by eliminating ih between Eqns 
5.1 and 5.2, so as to obtain a relationship between ie and vin. From 
Eqn 5.2 we have 
. _ r c(l-q) + re + Rt . 
h - 
- 
. 1 , 
Substituting for ib in Eqn 5.1 
(rb + rc + R5) [ r c( l - « ) + r, + R j 
vin = 
' , - ' Λ ΐ
1
 ~
α
) 
. 
ι
 
=
 
Vin 
'< 
(r. + r. + R J C M l - ^ - l - r . - H t J 
g
) 
Multiplying numerator and denominator by rj(rb4-rc 
+ Rs) 
we 
have 
< " 
, 
(5.9) 
R/ +
 r ^ r f( l - a ) -
 
r
<
 0
 
*
] 
r, + rr + K, 
In a simple circuit containing a signal source of voltage ν and 
internal resistance ra feeding a load resistance Rh the current ie is 
given by 
(5.10) 

82 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
and, from Eqn 5.13, r0 ^ l/gm. 
Thus we have the final important 
result that 
Thus the current in the load resistance Ri is the value which would 
flow if the signal input to the emitter follower acted directly on the 
load resistance and had a source resistance of 
l/gm. 
Comparing Eqns 5.9 with 5.10 we obtain the following expression 
for the output resistance ra of the emitter follower 
r ^ r , 4 M l - « ) -
r {
( ' "
g J 
(5.11) 
rb + rc + K5 
Combining the second and third terms 
r . - r . + M l - a ) 
(5.12) 
When the source resistance is very small we have, neglecting rh in 
comparison with rc 
r0 = re + r>(l-a) 
It is often permissible to neglect r h( l - a ) in comparison with re. 
We then have 
^ — 
(5.13) 
Normal values of source resistance are large compared with rb but 
small compared with rc 
.·. r0 = re + R s( l - a) 
Comparison between Eqns 5.9 and 5.10 shows that the signal voltage 
effectively acting in the equivalent circuit is given by 
V
 = rb + rc + 
R5'
Vin 
Normally rc is large compared with (rh + R5) and 
Thus Eqn 5.10 becomes 

Common-collector 
and Common-drain 
Amplifiers 
83 
When Rs is large compared with rc 
r
o = re + rc( l - a ) 
β 
(5.14) 
Some Numerical 
Examples 
For a transistor with rh = 300 Ω, re = 25 Ω, rc = 1 ΜΩ and β = 50 
we have, using the above three simple approximations : 
For very small source resistances 
r0 = 25 Ω 
For a source resistance of 1 kil 
1,000 
Λ 
Γ
^
 
=
 
2
5 
+
 
- 5 ^
Ω 
= 45 Ω 
For a very high source resistance 
1,000,000 
rn = 
50 
= 20 kil 
Ω 
100k 
Ί 0 
100 
Ik 
10k 
100k 
(Μ 
lOM 
SOURCE RESISTANCE (OHMS) 
Fig. 5.3. 
Variation 
of output resistance 
with source resistance for a 
common-collector 
amplifier 
— 
M Ο Q Ο Ο — KIEV* Ο Ο Ο Ο 
ο 
ο ο ο 
ο 
ο ο ο Χ- 
Χ· Χ- Χ· Χ" Τ Χ- Χ-

84 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
The variation of output resistance with generator resistance is 
illustrated in Fig. 5.3. For small values of generator resistance, the 
output resistance is very low, being only slightly greater than the 
emitter resistance re. It is possible, for example, to have an output 
resistance of less than 50 Ω: a value as low as this is impossible 
from common-base or common-emitter transistor amplifiers. 
Thus a common-collector amplifier with a low value of generator 
resistance and a high value of emitter load resistance can have a 
high value of input resistance and a low value of output resistance, 
conditions opposite to those normally encountered in transistor 
amplifiers. 
Voltage Gain 
From Fig. 5.1(b) we can see that the output voltage is given by 
ieRt. 
The voltage gain νΟΜ
/υ^ 
is thus given by i€RJvin. 
From Eqn 
5.9 ie is given by 
re 
rb + rc + Rs 
R, + r, + r f( l - a ) -
r
<
2
(
1
-
a) 
Hence 
r„ + rc + Rs 
rcR, 
v
OUt 
r, + rc + Rs 
Κ, + Γ, + Μ1-«)-
Γ<
2 ( 1-
α ) 
r„ + rc + Rs 
rcRt 
[/?( + r, + r c( l - a ) ] ( r fc + rc + « 5) - r t
2
( l - a) 
(5.15) 
This can be simplified by ignoring re in comparison with the other 
terms in the first bracket of the denominator and by ignoring rb 
in the second bracket. After further evaluation this gives 
rcR, 
R,rc + R,R, + rc(l 
-a)Rs 
R, 
R, + 
RJfi+R,RJrc 

Common-collector 
and Common-drain 
Amplifiers 
85 
"out
 
R
i 
(5.16) 
Thus the voltage gain is less than unity but RJfi is small compared 
with Ri and the gain can usually be taken as unity with very little 
error. 
Applications 
of Emitter 
Followers 
The emitter follower has a high input resistance, a low output 
resistance, high current gain and unity voltage gain. Its main applica-
tion is as a resistance converter, e.g. an emitter follower is often used 
as the first stage of a voltage amplifier to give a high input resistance 
and as the final stage to give a low output resistance. This may 
alternatively be regarded as a buffering action, e.g. the emitter 
follower first stage prevents the low input resistance of the second 
stage shunting the input signal source. Typical practical circuits 
for emitter followers are given in Chapter 7. 
C O M P A R I S O N O F B I P O L A R T R A N S I S T O R 
A M P L I F I E R S 
To facilitate comparisons between the three fundamental types of 
transistor amplifier, the principal properties are summarised in 
Table 5.1. An approximate expression for each parameter is given 
in brackets. 
Tabic 5.1 
Fundamental properties of bipolar transistor amplifiers 
common-base 
common-emitter 
emitter Jollower 
Input resistance 
very low 
low 
high 
( = rr) 
(=ftv) 
(= fiRi) 
Output resistance 
very high 
high 
very low 
(= r J 
( = 
rjfi) 
( = 1/0J 
Current gain 
unity 
high 
high 
( = 
at) 
(-ft 
(-ft 
Voltage gam 
high 
high 
unity 
Polarity of output signal) 
relative to input signal 
f 
in phase 
antiphase 
in phase 
The third term in the denominator is normally negligible com-
pared with the other two and thus we have 

86 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
do-
(a) 
Fig. 5.4. Basic connections for a source follower amplifier (a) and the electrical 
equivalent with source and load circuit 
(b) 
shows that the input resistance is infinite : the output resistance can 
be calculated in the following way. 
As in the common-source circuit the current gmv 
splits between 
rds and Rt the fraction (iout
) entering Rt being given by 
'out 
Gm^gs ' 
Normally Rt is small compared with rds and thus we can say 
= θ**»* 
(5.17) 
Now vout
 = 
iout
R( 
•
 
V
o
u
t
 
— 
Ω 
R 
This is, of course, the voltage gain of the common-source amplifier. 
Adding unity to both sides we have 
Now, from Fig. 5.4(a), (ι;,,,, + vls) = vin 
••vin 
= v,s(l+gmR,) 
(5.18) 
COMMON-DRAIN AMPLIFIERS 
Circuit 
Properties 
The basic circuit for a common-drain amplifier (source follower) 
is given in Fig. 5.4(a) and its electrical equivalent at (b). Fig. 5.4(a) 
_ ** 
g 
go 
Ç£) 
[ 
os 

Common-collector 
and Common-drain 
Amplifiers 
87 
Substituting for vgs in Eqn 5.17 
Our
 
=
 
9m · 
Vin 
which shows that the load is effectively fed from a generator of 
voltage vin and output resistance \/gm. The source follower thus has 
unity voltage gain and an output resistance of l/gm. 
The voltage 
gain can alternatively be calculated thus. From Fig. 5.4(a) 
Vin
 
= 
Vgs
 + 
Vout 
Substituting for vgs from Eqn 5.18 
\+9m
R
l 
from which 
9m
R
l 
1
 out 
Now gmRt 
is the voltage gain of the common-source stage and is 
normally large compared with unity. Thus the voltage gain of the 
source follower is very nearly unity. 
Applications 
The source follower has an infinite input resistance, a low output 
resistance and a voltage gain of approximately unity. Its only 
advantage over the common-source amplifier is the low output 
resistance and it is used wherever such a property is essential: 
otherwise the common-source amplifier is preferred. 
COMPARISON OF FIELD-EFFECT TRANSISTOR AMPLIFIERS 
To facilitate comparisons between the three fundamental types of 
f.e.t. amplifier the principal properties are summarised in Table 
5.2. An approximate expression for each parameter is given in 
brackets. 

88 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Ttble 5.2 
Fundamental properties of f.e.t. amplifiers 
common-gate 
common-source 
source follower 
Input resistance 
very low 
(= 
l/gm) 
infinite 
infinite 
Output resistance 
high 
( « r4>) 
high 
very low 
(= 
\lgJi 
Current gain 
unity 
— 
— 
Voltage gain 
fair 
( = gmRi) 
fair 
( = QmRl) 
unity 
Polarity of output signal] 
relative to input signal 
f 
in phase 
antiphase 
in phase 

C H A P T E R 
6 
Bias and D.C. Stabilisation 
B I P O L A R 
T R A N S I S T O R S 
Introduction 
It is usual to begin the design of a bipolar transistor amplifying 
stage by choosing a value of mean collector current which enables 
the required current swing and/or voltage swing to be delivered 
with an acceptable degree of linearity. The next step is to devise a 
biasing circuit to give this particular value of mean collector 
current. 
The most obvious way of biasing a bipolar transistor is by the 
simple circuit of Fig. 6.1 in which a resistor Rb is connected between 
the base of the transistor and source of steady voltage Vbb. Certainly 
it is possible by adjustment of Rb and/or νΜ to set the mean collector 
current at the desired value but such adjustments to individual 
transistors would be tedious if the amplifiers are to be produced 
in any quantity. The fundamental disadvantage of the circuit of 
Fig. 6.1 is that it fixes the base current* not the collector 
current. 
• Provided 
is large compared with V^, and Rh is large compared with the 
transistor input resistance the base current is given approximately by 
Fig. 6.1. Simple bias circuit 
which fixes base current 
89 

90 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
The collector current is β times the base current and values of β 
for a given type of transistor can differ by ± 50% from the nominal 
value. Thus if the nominal β is 100, values as low as 50 and as high 
as 150 are possible and, for a given base current, the collector 
current can have any value within a range of 3 :1. Smaller variations 
in β also occur as a result of temperature changes. Moreover in 
certain circuits, particularly those using power transistors, the 
collector current can increase significantly with temperature as a 
result of variations in the value of K6e which, for all bipolar transistors, 
increases at the rate of 2.5 mV per °C. It is these variations in β and 
Vbe which make the circuit of Fig. 6.1 unsuitable for use in mass-
produced equipment. What is wanted for this purpose is a biasing 
circuit which, without using preset components : 
(a) gives the desired value of mean collector current in spite of 
manufacturing spreads in transistor parameters and 
(b) maintains this mean current in spite of variations in parameters 
due to temperature changes. 
Circuits which fulfil these two purposes are said to provide d.c. 
stabilisation 
of the operating point and this chapter describes the 
most commonly-used circuits. 
Leakage 
Current 
Unfortunately the amplified input current is not the only component 
of the collector current of a bipolar transistor. There is also an 
unwanted component, known as the leakage 
current, 
which is 
generated by thermal breakdown of covalent bonds in the collector-
base junction and is independent of the input current. Leakage 
current increases rapidly with rise in temperature and, in germanium-
transistor common-emitter amplifiers, can be large enough to 
seriously impair performance even at normal operating temperatures. 
In fact, unless checked by a stabilising circuit, it can increase 
regeneratively (an effect known as thermal runaway) to a value at 
which the transistor is destroyed. 
Leakage current is negligible in silicon transistors at normal 
temperatures but d.c. stabilisation is still necessary to minimise the 
effects of the spreads in transistor parameters and the temperature 
dependence of β and Vbe. 
Stability 
Factor 
The effectiveness of circuits for stabilising mean collector current 
can be expressed by a stability factor Κ which may be defined in 
the following way : 

Bias and D. C. 
Stabilisation 
91 
Κ = 
collector current in stabilised circuit 
collector current in unstabilised circuit 
Κ is thus unity for an unstabilised circuit and is less than unity for 
stabilised circuits, the smallness of Κ being a measure of the success 
of the circuit in limiting changes in mean current. 
Basic Circuits for d.c. 
Stabilisation 
Most stabilising circuits achieve their object by d.c. negative feed-
back : the collector or emitter current is used to generate a signal 
which is returned to the base so as to oppose any changes in the 
mean value of the collector or emitter current. In practice the 
transistor current is passed through a resistor and the voltage 
generated across the resistor is used as a source of base bias current. 
The resistor can be in the emitter circuit as shown in Fig. 6.2(a) or 
in the collector circuit as in Fig. 6.2(b). The way in which these 
circuits achieve stabilisation is perhaps more easily understood from 
Fig. 6.2(b): any increase in collector current causes an increased 
voltage across Rn 
a decrease in the collector-emitter voltage and 
thus a smaller base current which opposes the initial rise in collector 
current. Provided Rc equals Re the two circuits of Fig. 6.2 have 
identical performances: this can be shown by redrawing the two 
circuits in the form given in Fig. 6.3 from which it is clear that if 
the d.c. resistance of the batteries is neglected the two circuits are 
identical. 
(o) 
o) 
(b) 
Fig. 6.2. The two basic circuits for d.c. 
stabilisation 

92 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
(α) 
( b ) 
Fig. 6.3. The two basic circuits redrawn to show their 
similarity 
Calculation of Stability 
Factor 
Provided Rc equals Re therefore both circuits have the same stabilis-
ing effect and the stability factor can be calculated in the following 
way in which the equations apply to Fig. 6.2(b). The calculation 
applies equally to the circuit of Fig. 6.2(a) if Rc = Re and Vbb = Vcc. 
For an unstabilised common-emitter amplifier we have 
where Vcc is the supply voltage and Vbe is the base-emitter voltage 
of the transistor. 
From Eqn 6.1 we have 
Substituting for Ib in Eqn 6.2 
Summing steady potentials in Fig. 6.2(b) 
Rc(/f + /») + V * + ^ 
= 
Κ ce 
(6.1) 
(6.2) 
Itl(fi+l)Re 
+ Rb] = 
&VCC
-Vbe) 
Rearranging 
! + (/?+l)*c/Kb 
(6.3) 
Expression 6.3 shows how the mean value of collector current 
increases with increase in β. 

Bias and D. C. Stabilisation 
93 
If Rc is very small or if Rb is very large (to eliminate feedback) we have 
mean value of Ic = P
{V
«~
V
*1 
(6.4) 
showing that this component is directly proportional to β as would 
be expected in an unstabilised circuit. On the other hand if Rb is 
very small or R.. is very large we have 
V - V 
mean value of Ic = — 
— 
i.e. the current is independent of β and stabilisation is perfect. 
Expression 6.4 is the numerator of expression 6.3 and thus we have 
that the stabilisation factor is given by 
Κ = 
- 
(6.5) 
!+(/*+1)KC/R> 
Estimation 
of Stability 
Factor from Circuit 
Diagram 
Eqn 6.5 is of the form 
K
 
- ΊΤΡ
 
) 
where F is the fraction of the collector current which is fed back to 
the base. In Fig. 6.2(b) the collector current Ic splits at the junction 
of Rc and Rb. The current entering Rb is given by 
f
 Rb + Rc 
and this, of course, is the base current Ib. Thus the fraction of Ic 
used as feedback is Rc/(Rb 
+ Rc) which agrees with expression 6.3. 
This is a useful method of deriving stability factors which often 
enables the factor to be calculated directly from the component 
values on a circuit diagram. The circuit diagram should be reduced 
to the form shown in Fig. 6.3 which shows the split of collector 
current and enables F to be computed from the ratio Rc/(RC + Rb). 
The stability factor is then given by Eqn 6.6. 

94 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Minimising 
Signal-frequency 
Feedback 
In Fig. 6.2 the feedback circuit cannot distinguish between direct 
current and signal-frequency current. Thus the gain of wanted signals 
c, * 
Fig. 6.4. To avoid signal-frequency 
negative feedback 
due to Rb, 
decoupling may be introduced as shown here 
is reduced in the same ratio as any increase in mean current due to 
increase in β. If this reduction in signal-frequency gain is not wanted it 
may be minimised by decoupling. If the signal-frequency output is 
taken from the collector circuit in Fig. 6.2(a) Re can be shunted by a 
Fig. 6.5. Method of decoupling 
which can be used with trans-
former 
coupling 
low-reactance capacitor to minimise signal-frequency feedback. If the 
signal-frequency output is taken from the collector circuit in Fig. 
6.2(b) it is not practical to decouple Rc and a more usual method is to 
construct Rb of two resistors Rx and R2 in series, the junction being 

Bias and D. C. Stabilisation 
95 
decoupled to emitter as shown in Fig. 6.4. If Rx is small it reduces the 
effective collector load resistance of the amplifier and if R2 is small it 
lowers the input resistance. Usually therefore Rx and R2 are made 
approximately equal and 
the 
capacitor is chosen 
to have 
a 
reactance small compared with the resistance value at the lowest 
signal frequency. For example if Rb has a value of 100 kQ /?! and R2 
can each be 50 kQ and for an a.f. amplifier Cx can be 2 μ¥ which has a 
reactance of 1.6 kQ at 50 Hz. 
If the transistor is fed from a transformer one end of Rb can be 
decoupled as shown in Fig. 6.5. Signal-frequency feedback is mini-
mised by the decoupling capacitor C, but in this circuit Rb has no 
shunting effect on the input resistance. 
If a large output voltage swing is required the quiescent collector 
potential should be made one-half the supply voltage. Thus if in 
an npn circuit Vcc = 12 V the quiescent potential should be made 
6 V. Suppose the mean collector current is required to be 3 mA. 
We have immediately that Rc is 6/(3 x 10~
3
) = 2 kQ. Because a silicon 
transistor requires a forward bias of 0.7 V, the voltage across Rb is 5.3. 
Suppose β is 100. Ib is then 3mA/100, i.e. 30 μΑ and Rb is given by 
5.3/(30 x 10"
6
) = 180 kQ approx. The stability factor for this circuit 
is, from Eqn 6.6, given by 
K_
 
1 
1 + 100 x 2/(180 + 2) 
= 0.48 
Without stabilisation Κ = 1 and thus this circuit has succeeded only in 
halving any unwanted change in mean current—a very poor 
performance. 
The stabilising circuit of Fig. 6.2(a) is more used because signal-
frequency decoupling is simple and because the collector is free for 
signal-frequency components. Most d.c. stabilising circuits are based 
on Fig. 6.2(a). 
Use of Tapped 
Battery 
We have seen that maximum d.c. stability is obtained from the 
circuit of Fig. 6.2(a) by making Rb = 0. This means that the transistor 
base is connected directly to the base bias supply which can be a 
tapping on the collector supply battery. A practical example of 
such a circuit is given in Fig. 6.6. 
To estimate the component values needed and stability factor 
obtainable suppose the transistor is required to have a mean collector 

96 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
current of 5 mA. Suppose also that a 3-volt tapping on the battery is 
chosen for base bias. The base-emitter voltage is 0.7 and the voltage 
across Re is 2.3 giving Re as 2.3/(5 x 10"
3
) = 460 ohms. Rb is 
effectively the d.c. resistance of the transformer secondary winding 
and a typical value is 100 ohms. From Eqn 6.6 we can calculate the 
stability factor as follows: 
1 + 100 x 460/(4604-100) 
= 0012 
a reduction of variations in collector current to less than one-
eightieth of their unstabilised value, a very satisfactory performance 
which is not far short of the maximum obtainable (K = 0.01). 
Fig. 
6.6. 
Tapped-battery 
method 
of 
Fig. 6.7. Tapped-battery 
method of 
d.c. 
stabilisation 
in 
a 
transformer- 
d.c. stabilisation 
in an 
RC-coupled 
coupled amplifier 
amplifier 
Even if the transformer is replaced by a base bias resistor (as shown 
in Fig. 6.7) a worthwhile reduction in collector current variations 
can be achieved. Rb can be as low as 3.3 kQ without too drastic a 
reduction in the input resistance of the amplifier. For the same values 
of β and Re as before 
14-100 x 460/(460 + 3,300) 
= 0076 
a reduction of collector current variations to less than one-tenth of 
their unstabilised value. 

Bias and D. C. 
Stabilisation 
97 
Potential Divider and Emitter Resistor Circuit 
It is not always possible or convenient to tap the supply battery to 
obtain base bias but an alternative source of steady potential is a 
potential divider RlR2 
connected across the collector supply as 
shown in Fig. 6.8. 
Two basic types of this circuit exist. In Fig. 6.8(a) the circuit is 
arranged for RC coupling from the previous stage: a feature of this 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 6.8. Potential-divider 
method 
of stabilising 
the d.c. conditions 
in a 
common-
emitter 
amplifier 
(a) in an RC-coupled 
amplifier and (b) in a 
transformer-coupled 
amplifier 
arrangement is that the resistance of Rx and R2 in parallel is effect-
ively shunted across the input circuit of the transistor. This parallel 
resistance should not, therefore, be too small. In Fig. 6.8(b) the 
circuit is arranged for transformer coupling from the previous stage : 
the parallel resistance of 
and R2 does not now enter into input-
resistance considerations. 
If these circuits are redrawn in the form shown in Fig. 6.9 we can 
see immediately that they are of the same type as Figs. 6.2 and 6.3 
in which R'b is made up of Rt and R2 in parallel. Thus we can at 
once estimate the stability factor. The output current division ratio 
F (Eqn 6.7) is RJ{Rb + Re) and hence 

98 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Fig. 6.9. The circuit of Fig. 
6.8 redrawn 
to illustrate 
the 
feedback 
due to Re 
Good stability thus requires low values of Rx and Λ2 but this means 
a heavy drain on the supply. In practice a compromise solution is 
adopted as indicated in the following numerical example. 
Design of a Potential-divider 
Circuit 
Let us assume Re to be 1 kQ: this is a convenient value because, 
for an emitter current of 1 mA, only 1 V of the collector supply 
voltage is lost. This leaves in a typical circuit with a 6 V supply, 
5 V for the transistor and its load resistor. If β = 50 the base current 
is 1/50 m A, i.e. 20 μΑ. This flows through Rt in addition to the bleed 
current which flows through Rx and R2 from the collector supply. 
For good d.c. stability the potential at the junction of Rx and R2 
must be steady in spite of variations in base current and this is 
achieved by making the parallel resistance of K, and R2 small: this 
implies that the bleed current must be large compared with the base 
current. The bleed current can therefore be 200 μΑ which is ten 
times the base current but is only one-fifth the collector current. 
Thus the total current in Rx is 220 μΑ. 
Ci should have a reactance small enough to avoid negative feedback 
and consequent fall in signal-frequency gain even at the lowest 
operating frequency. To achieve this the reactance must be small 
compared with re, say 25 Ω. In an a.f. amplifier Cx may be 500 μΡ 
which has a reactance of 6.5 Ω at 50Hz. 
The base-emitter voltage is 0.7 (a silicon transistor is assumed) and 
thus the voltage drop across Rx is 4.3, giving the value of Rx as 
4.3/(220 χ 10"
6
) = 20 kQ approx. The voltage across R2 is 1.7 and the 
current 290μΑ, making the resistance 8.5 kQ. 
For this circuit Rb' 
is given by RXR2/(RX 
+ R2), 
i.e. 20k x 
8.5k/28.5k = 6kQ approx. The stability factor is thus given by 

Bias and D. C. 
Stabilisation 
99 
k = 
1 
1 + 50 x 1/(6 + 1) 
= 0.12 
implying that variations in mean emitter current are reduced to one 
eighth of their unstabilised value. 
Better stability could be obtained if a greater supply voltage is 
available and if the value of β is higher. For example, in mains-driven 
equipment with a 24-V supply and a mean emitter current of 4 mA, a 
stability factor of 0.034 can be achieved, using a 1.8 kQ emitter 
resistor and a potential divider made up of 32 kQ and 15 kQ β is 
assumed to be 150. 
D.C. Stability in Two-stage 
Amplifiers 
It is clear from Fig. 6.9 that the performance of the potential-divider 
circuit could be improved by returning Rl to the collector: by so 
doing we ensure that Rc makes a contribution to the d.c. feedback 
in addition to that provided by Re. The circuit so produced is shown 
in Fig. 6.10: in Fig. 6.11 it is redrawn to make the feedback paths 
more obvious. The improvement in stability obtained in this circuit 
can be estimated in the following way. 
D 
Fig. 6.10. Potential 
divider 
returned to 
collector 
Fig. 6.11. The circuit of Fig. 
6.10 redrawn to show 
feedback 
paths 

100 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
The current Ic leaving the collector in Fig. 6.11 splits between Rc 
and 
The current It entering R1 is given approximately by 
/ 
- 
/
 
R
< +
 
R
< 
1
1 — *c ' Re + Rc + Rl 
in which, for simplicity, the shunting effect of R2 on Re is neglected. 
The current in Rc is now 
c
 R€ + Rc + Rl 
and this splits at the junction of Re and R2. The current I2 in R2 
is given by 
/ , - / . . . 
«•
 
κ 
c
 Re + Rc + Ri 
Re + R2 
Ib is the sum of lx and I2. Thus the feedback fraction F is given by 
Ρ _ h _ 
Re + Rc 
(
 
^ i 
and the stability factor is, from Eqn 6.6: 
K 
=
 TV&F 
Typical component values are Re = 1 kQ, Rc = 5 kQ, Rl = 10 kQ, 
R2 
= 5 kQ and /? = 100. Substituting these values in the above 
expressions we have 
1 + 5 
10 
1 
" 
1 + 5 + 1 0
+
1 + 5 + 1 θ ' Γ + 5 
= 0-48 
Î 
1 + 100 x 0.48 
= 0.02 
a considerable improvement in stability over the value obtained 
when the potential divider is returned to the supply terminal. 
Thus this form of potential-divider circuit can give excellent 
stability. To obtain it, however, the shunting effect of Rt on Rc 
must be tolerated. Moreover if signal-frequency feedback via Rx is 
to be avoided Rx must be constructed of two resistors in series with 
their junction decoupled as shown in Fig. 6.4. Both disadvantages 

Bias and D. C. 
Stabilisation 
Fig. 6.12. Potential-divider 
circuit 
Fig. 6.13. 
Fig. 6.12 
redrawn 
using an emitter follower 
to facilitate 
calculation 
of sta-
bility 
factor 
can be overcome by the use of an emitter follower as shown in Fig. 
6.12. The high input resistance of TR2 minimises the shunting effect 
on Rc and the low output resistance makes possible low values of 
/?! and R2. 
If the emitter circuit of TR2 is decoupled at signal 
frequencies, this transistor can be used as a common-emitter ampli-
fier and there is no need to include an additional transistor in the 
circuit purely to give good d.c. stabilisation. If, however, (Rx+ 
R2) 
is decoupled it is necessary to introduce a series resistor Rb to avoid 
decoupling TR1 base as shown in Fig. 6.12. Some examples of this 
circuit are given in the next chapter. 
The stability factor obtainable from the circuit of Fig. 6.12 can 
be calculated from the redrawn version of the circuit shown in 
Fig. 6.13. 
There is effectively no split of collector current at the junction of 
Rc and the emitter follower because of the high resistance of the 
emitter follower. It is best to calculate lb from a knowledge of the 
voltage applied to Rb. From the emitter follower one component of 
this voltage is R2/(Ri 
+ R2) of that generated across Rc by Ic: this 
we can call rJcRc. 
The second component of the voltage is that 
generated across the parallel resistance of Re and Rb by Ic: it is 
assumed that R{ is negligibly small. Thus we have 

102 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
giving 
Thus the stability factor is given by 
1 
Typical practical values are r = 0-5, Rc = 5 kQ, Re = 5 kQ, 
Rb = 3.3 kQ and β = 100. Substituting in the above expression 
This represents exceptionally good stability, variations in mean 
collector current in TR1 being reduced to less than one-hundredth 
of their unstabilised value. Transistors are often used in cascade in 
amplifiers and it is common practice to adopt the circuit of Fig. 6.12 
to achieve high d.c. stability. 
Use of Diodes to Compensate for Falling Battery 
Voltage 
The stabilising circuits described above are useful in reducing the 
effects of spreads in β but they do nothing towards making the mean 
collector current independent of the supply voltage. Such circuits are 
useful therefore when a stabilised supply is available but in 
battery-operated equipment some means is required of compensating 
for the effects of falling battery voltage. One method which uses the 
circuit of Fig. 6.8 is to arrange for the resistance of R2 to increase as 
the current through it falls, e.g. by using a non-linear device in place 
of R2 (or in parallel with it): a suitable device is a forward-biased 
semiconductor diode. Such diodes are used in battery-operated 
portable receivers to stabilise the quiescent current of class-B output 
stages. 
Use of Diodes for Temperature 
Compensation 
Κ = 
1 
= 0.0073 
Diodes connected in the base circuits of transistors are also used 
to stabilise the collector current against temperature changes. Very 

Bias and D. C 
Stabilisation 
good stabilisation can be achieved by using in the compensating 
circuit a diode of the same material as the transistors to be stabilised. 
As temperature changes the voltage across the diode changes by 
the right amount to keep the current constant in the transistors. 
If the transistors are mounted on a heat sink the diodes should 
preferably be mounted close to them on the same heat sink. 
Diodes are extensively used in integrated circuits for stabilising 
collector currents and here, of course, they share a silicon chip with 
the transistors to be stabilised. They are thus in intimate thermal 
contact with the circuit to be monitored and are capable of main-
taining satisfactory performance over a temperature range as wide 
as - 5 5 ° C to 125
C
C 
Use of Temperature-dependent 
Resistor for 
Temperature 
Compensation 
As an alternative to using a diode in the base circuit it is possible 
to use a resistor with a positive temperature coefficient in the emitter 
circuit of the transistor to be stabilised. The technique is often used 
with power transistors as a means of stabilising collector currents 
of the order 0.5 A where variations in collector current are due to 
changes in Vbe 
with temperature. The mean value of the emitter 
current can be kept constant by adjustment of the base-emitter 
voltage and a change of approximately 2.5 mV per °C is required. 
Thus the stabilising circuits for power transistors should be designed 
to apply a correction of this value to the base-emitter voltage. 
A simple method of effecting this compensation is to use an 
external emitter resistor of pure metal. Such resistors have a positive 
temperature coefficient and a rise in temperature causes the external 
emitter resistance to increase, thus increasing the voltage across this 
resistance. This in turn reduces the base-emitter voltage and, if the 
base potential is constant, tends to maintain the collector current 
constant. 
The temperature coefficient of electrical resistance of copper is 
approximately 0.004 per °C: if the emitter current is assumed con-
stant, the voltage across a copper emitter resistor therefore increases 
by 0.004 of its initial value per °C. If the initial voltage is unity the 
change in emitter voltage is 4mV per °C. To offset a 2.5 mV change 
in base-emitter voltage, an initial emitter voltage of 2.5/4, i.e. approxi-
mately 0.6 V, is needed. If the mean emitter current is 0.5 A (as is 
likely in a transistor with 5W dissipation) the emitter resistance 
should be 0.6/0.5, i.e. 1.2 Ω, a convenient value to construct of copper 
wire. The fixed base potential is usually achieved by the use of a 
resistive potential divider. 
103 

104 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
F I E L D - E F F E C T 
T R A N S I S T O R S 
Introduction 
It is usual to begin the design of an amplifying circuit using an f.e.t. 
by choosing a value of mean drain current which will enable the 
required output current swing and/or output voltage swing to be 
achieved with an acceptable degree of linearity. The next step is to 
devise a biasing circuit to give the required value of mean drain 
current. 
The obvious way to bias an f.e.t. is by the simple circuit of Fig. 6.14 
which contains a resistor Rg connected between the gate and a 
source of constant voltage VM. The gate current in an f.e.t. is very 
small indeed and Rg can be very high, e.g. 100 ΜΩ, without 
significantly affecting the gate voltage. As pointed out in Chapter 2 
the bias voltage for an enhancement f.e.t. lies between the source and 
drain voltages whereas for a depletion f.e.t. it lies outside the range 
of the drain-source voltage. Typical figures for both types of f.e.t. 
are given in Fig. 6.14. 
Certainly by adjusting Kw it is possible to set the mean drain 
current at the desired value but such adjustments to individual 
transistors would be tedious if the circuits are to be produced in 
any quantity. The fundamental disadvantage of this simple biasing 
circuit is that it fixes the gate voltage not the drain current. The 
drain current for a given type of f.e.t. and a given gate-source voltage 
can have any value within a range of 3:1 due to manufacturing 
spreads in transistor parameters and to changes in parameters with 
temperature. In fact drain current may increase or decrease as 
temperature changes. Ideally what is wanted is a biasing circuit which 
ο 
ο 
(a) 
( b ) 
Fig. 6.14. Simple bias circuit for fixing gate-source 
voltage 
(a) in depletion and (b) in enhancement 
f.e.t.s 

Bias and D. C Stabilisation 
105 
will enable a desired value of mean drain current to be obtained in 
spite of manufacturing spreads and which will also maintain this mean 
current in spite of changes in parameters. 
Such d.c. stabilisation can be achieved, as for bipolar transistors, 
by d.c. negative feedback, e.g. by passing the drain current through 
a resistor and by using the voltage generated across the resistor as 
the source of gate bias. The two basic circuits of Fig. 6.2 can be used. 
Stabilisation of Depletion 
f.e.t.s 
For depletion f.e.t.s bias and a measure of d.c. stabilisation can be 
obtained by including a resistor Rs in the source circuit and by 
returning Rg to the source supply terminal as shown in Fig. 6.15. 
Any changes in Id cause corresponding changes in the voltage across 
Rs which are applied directly between gate and source so minimising 
the original change in drain current. 
tv 
9 
Fig. 6.15. Simple d.c. stabilising 
circuit 
which can be used with a depletion 
f.e.t. 
•o 0 
The required value of Rs is determined in the following manner. 
Firstly the mean drain current which will give the desired perform-
ance is chosen. Next the gate bias voltage Vg which gives the chosen 
value of ld is determined from the Id — Vg characteristics of the tran-
sistor. The required value of Rs is given by Vg/Id. For example if 
Id is 5 m A and Vg is 2 V, Rs is given by 2/(5 Χ 10"
3
), i.e. 400 Ω. 
Calculation of Stability 
Factor 
For a field-effect transistor without stabilisation the relationship 
between changes of drain current id and changes in gate voltage 
vg is simply 
U = 9m»g 
(
6
·
7
) 
i.e. the drain current is directly proportional to gm for a given gate 
voltage and thus varies with temperature or with change of tran-
sistor in the same way and to the same extent as gm. 

106 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
For an f.e.t. with a source resistance Rs the relationship between 
id and input voltage vin can be deduced in the following way : 
"in = 
Vgs+Vfb 
Substituting idRs for vfb and id/gm for vgs we have 
vin = — + /Λ 
from which 
" - n &
 
(6·
8) 
Comparison of Eqns 6.7 and 6.8 shows that the effect of the source 
resistance is to reduce variations in drain current for a given input 
signal to 1/(1 + gmR5) 
of their unstabilised value. The stability factor 
for this circuit is thus given by 
Κ = 
! 
(6.9) 
The value of R5 is, of course, fixed by bias considerations and thus 
the stability factor for the simple circuit of Fig. 6.15 is automatically 
determined. For example if Rs is 400 Ω as in the last numerical 
example and if gm is 2 mA/V, the stability factor is given by 1/(1 + 
2 x 10"
3
 x 400) = 1/1.8 = 0.55. This is a very poor performance. 
However, greater stability can be obtained, without effect on bias, 
by using two resistors Rsl and Rs2 in series in the source circuit and 
by returning Rg to their junction as shown in Fig. 6.16. Bias is 
• v 
9 
Fig. 6.16. Modification of the previous circuit 
to give better d.c. stabilisation 
than is obtain-
able with the normal value of automatic 
bias 
resistor 
determined by the value of Rsl 
but stability by {Rsi + Rs2)- 
High 
stability can thus be obtained by using large values for Rs2 but such 
values reduce the voltage available across the transistor and its load 
resistor. 

Bias and D. C. Stabilisation 
107 
Minimising 
Signal-frequency 
Feedback 
Resistors included in the source circuit give signal-frequency negative 
feedback (and hence reduced gain) in addition to the d.c. feedback 
which is responsible for the stabilising effect. Signal-frequency feed-
back can be minimised by decoupling the source resistors by a 
low-reactance capacitor as shown in Fig. 6.17. 
Stabilisation of Enhancement 
f.e.t.s 
The stabilising circuit of Fig. 6.2(b) is suitable for enhancement 
f.e.t.s because it gives a gate bias voltage between that of the source 
and the drain. Fig. 6.18 shows the circuit applied to an n-channel 
9 
Fig. 6.17. Decoupling to minimise 
signal-frequency 
feedback 
in the circuit of Fig. 6.15 
•oO 
o O 
•ο ο 
Fig. 6.18. Simple d.c. stabilis-
ing circuit for an 
enhance-
ment 
f.e.t. 
Fig. 6.19. Method 
of mini-
mising signal-frequency 
feed-
back 
in the circuit 
of the 
previous 
diagram 

108 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
i.g.f.e.t. The stability factor is given by Eqn 6.9 by substituting Rd for 
Rs. If the output of the transistor is taken from the drain circuit Rg 
must be decoupled: this can be done as suggested in Fig. 6.19. 
Potential Divider and Source Resistor 
Circuit 
This circuit (illustrated in Fig. 6.20) can be used for enhancement 
and depletion f.e.t.s and the stability factor obtained is given by 
expression 6.9. It is possible to use higher values of Rs than in the 
simple circuit of Fig. 6.15 and higher values of Κ are obtainable. 
This is illustrated in the following numerical example. 
Suppose the chosen mean drain current is 1.5 mA and that the 
gate bias necessary to give this current is - 2 V. If the supply voltage 
is 15, a suitable value for the voltage at the junction of Rx and R2 
is 3 V. This requires R{ to be four times R2. The sum of Ri and R2 
determines the current taken by the potential divider and this can 
be kept low in this circuit without sacrificing stability (cf. page 97). 
For example R{ could be 4 ΜΩ and R2 10 ΜΩ. 
To give the required gate-source voltage the source potential 
must be 5 V. This gives Rs as 5/(1 5 χ 10"
3
), i.e. 3 3 kΩ. If the mutual 
conductance of the f.e.t. is 2 mA/V the stability factor is given by 
Fig. 6.20. 
Potential 
divider 
and 
source resistor method of d.c. stabilis-
ing an f.e.t. 
Κ = 1+ 2x 1 0 '
3
 χ 3,300 
= 0.13 
Signal-frequency feedback can be minimised by decoupling R5 as 
in Fig. 6.17. 

C H A P T E R 
7 
Small-signal A.F. Amplifiers 
D E F I N I T I O N O F S M A L L - S I G N A L 
A M P L I F I E R 
Some amplifiers are required to deliver an output voltage or output 
current which is small compared with the maximum that the ampli-
fier could deliver. When a voltage output is wanted, the magnitude 
of the current output is usually of little consequence provided the 
transistor(s)can supply it without distortion. Similarly if the amplifier 
is designed to supply a current output, the magnitude of the voltage 
output is of secondary importance provided it is not sufficient to 
cause overloading and distortion. Such amplifiers are termed small-
signal amplifiers: typical examples are microphone head amplifiers 
and the r.f. and early i.f. stages in a receiver. 
D I S T I N C T I O N B E T W E E N V O L T A G E A N D C U R R E N T 
A M P L I F I E R S 
If a stage is to be regarded as a voltage amplifier, the voltage of the 
signal source must not be affected by the connection of the amplifier 
across it; thus the input resistance of the amplifier must be high 
compared with the resistance of the signal source. Moreover the 
output voltage of the amplifier must be substantially unaffected by 
the connection of the load : thus the output resistance must be low 
compared with the load resistance. Provided these resistance re-
quirements are satisfied the voltage gains of the individual stages 
of an amplifier can be multiplied to give the overall voltage gain of 
the amplifier or (and this is another way of expressing the same fact) 
the voltage gains of the individual stages, when expressed in decibels, 
can simply be added to give the overall gain of the amplifier. 
When a current amplifier is connected to a signal source the 
109 

110 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
current from the source must not be affected by the connection of 
the amplifier: thus the input resistance of the amplifier must be 
small compared with the resistance of the signal source. The output 
current from the amplifier should not be affected by the connection 
of the load resistance: thus the output resistance should be high 
compared with the load resistance. Provided these resistance require-
ments are met the current gains of the individual stages of an ampli-
fier can be multiplied to give the overall current gain of the amplifier 
or (and this is another way of expressing the same fact) the current 
gains of the individual stages, when expressed in decibels, can simply 
be added to give the overall gain of the amplifier. 
These resistance requirements for voltage and current amplifiers 
are summarised in Table 7.1. From this it can be deduced that a 
given amplifier can behave as a voltage or current amplifier. For 
example if the input and output resistances of the amplifier are both 
1 kQ, then if Rs = 100 Ω and /?, = 10 kQ, the amplifier is best 
regarded as a voltage amplifier whereas if R5 = 10 kΩ and Rt = 
100 Ω it is best regarded as a current amplifier. 
Table 7.1 
Source and load resistance considerations 
in voltage and current amplifiers 
source resistance R% 
load resistance R, 
voltage amplifier 
< rin 
current amplifier 
> r,„ 
< 
'ou, 
In applying these theoretical considerations to practical transistor 
circuits, a number of precautions must be taken. For example if 
a bipolar transistor is fed from a low-resistance signal source (to 
give a voltage amplifier) severe distortion can occur. To minimise this 
the source resistance must be made large compared with the input 
resistance: this is a reminder that the bipolar transistor is inherently a 
current amplifier. The resistance of an f.e.t. is so high that it is 
impractical to feed it from an even higher source resistance (to give a 
current amplifier). The input of the f.e.t. could, of course, be shunted by 
a low resistance but this wastes the most important property of the f.e.t. 
namely its high input resistance: this is a reminder that the f.e.t. is 
essentially a voltage amplifier. 

Small-signal 
A.F. 
Amplifiers 
111 
T R A N S I S T O R P A R A M E T E R S IN S M A L L - S I G N A L 
A M P L I F I E R S 
It is characteristic of transistors used as small-signal amplifiers that 
the signal voltages at the transistor terminals are small compared 
with the steady potentials at these points. Similarly the signal currents 
have a magnitude small compared with that of the steady currents 
on which they are superimposed. When operation is thus confined 
to small excursions about a mean value, a transistor may be regarded 
as having substantially constant input resistance, output resistance 
and current gain. 
Bipolar 
Transistor 
The circuit diagram for a single-stage bipolar-transistor amplifier 
is given in Fig. 7.1. It uses the potential divider method of d.c. 
stabilisation and a method of calculating values for Rly 
R2 and Re 
to give a required mean value of collector current is given on page 98. 
It now remains to calculate the value of Rc. 
The value of Rc depends primarily on whether the amplifier is 
required to deliver a current or voltage output. If a current output 
is required, as much as possible of the output current must enter the 
external load resistor (shown in dashed lines). Rc must hence be 
large compared with this external load and in practice it is given 
the highest value possible consistent with maintaining an adequate 
steady voltage on the collector. For example if the mean collector 
current is 1 mA, if the base potential is 2 V and if the supply 
voltage is 9 V, then a suitable value for the collector potential is 
3 V (giving a collector-base voltage of 1 V). There are hence 6 V 
S I N G L E - T R A N S I S T O R 
S T A G E S 
Fig. 7.1. Single-stage 
bipolar transistor 
amplifier 

112 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
across RL and its value is 6/(1 χ 10~
3
), i.e. 6 kQ. The value of Rc is 
not. however, critical provided 
(a) it is large compared with the external resistor 
(b) it does not greatly exceed 6 kQ. 
Provided the parallel resistance of Rl and R2 is large compared 
with the input resistance of the transistor and that Rc is large com-
pared with the external load, the current gain of the amplifier is 
almost equal to β. 
If, however, the transistor is required to give a voltage output 
then the external resistance will be large compared with Rc\ thus 
Rc is effectively the load into which the transistor is operating. The 
precise value of Rc is now important and the value of the external 
resistance is non-critical provided it is large compared with 
Rc. 
The value to be given to Rc depends on the magnitude of the output 
voltage required. If the largest possible voltage swing is required 
RL should be given the value which makes the quiescent collector 
voltage midway between the supply and emitter potentials. Using 
the values quoted for the current amplifier, the quiescent voltage 
should be made 6 V which permits upward and downward swings 
of 3 V amplitude. This fixes the value of Rc at 3/(1 χ 10"
3
) = 3 kQ. 
To minimise distortion it is necessary to include in series with the 
base a resistor that is large compared with the transistor input 
resistance. If this resistor is made 30 kQ and if β is 100, the voltage 
gain of the amplifier is, from the first equation on page 74, given by 
100 χ 3.30, i.e. 10. 
If a smaller voltage output, say 1 V amplitude, is acceptable 
then Rc can be increased to 6 kQ. This makes the quiescent collector 
voltage 3 V so that swings to 2 V and 4 V are possible. The advantage 
of so increasing Rc is that it doubles the voltage gain. 
The operation of the circuit of Fig. 7.1 for various values of Rt 
can be illustrated by superimposing load lines on the l-Vc 
char-
acteristics as shown in Fig. 7.2. ABC is the load line for a 3-kQ 
load. It is drawn through that point on the Vc axis which corresponds 
to the supply voltage (9 V) to that point on the /t axis which cor-
responds to the current (3 mA) which the supply voltage would 
drive through the load resistance. The intersections of the load line 
with the Ib characteristics indicate the current through the series 
combination of transistor and load, and the voltages across each 
component. For example point Β shows that for a base current of 
15 μΑ, 6 V is developed across the transistor and 3 V across the load 
resistor. These are, of course, the quiescent conditions required 
for maximum output voltage. If the input current rises to 32 μΑ 
the collector voltage falls to 3 V (point D) and if the input current 
falls to zero the collector voltage rises to 9 V. During amplification, 

Small-signal 
A. F. Amplifiers 
113 
I 
, 
• 
, 
L _ 
Ζ ^ , Α 
Ο 
2 
J 
4 
6 
8 
9 
COLLECTOR VOLTAGE 
Ib= 
20/iA 
7 Δ= 30mA 
Ib
s
 
40/iA 
Fig. 7.2. Load lines superimposed 
on Ic— V( 
characteristics 
therefore, the operating point swings between the limits of A 
and D. 
If the load resistance is increased to 6 kQ the load line becomes 
AEFGH and the quiescent point is at F corresponding to a collector 
current of 1 mA and a collector voltage of 3 V. The base current is 
about 17 μΑ and when this swings down to 14 μΑ and up to 19 μΑ 
the collector voltage swings up to 4 V and down to 2 V. 
The operation of the current amplifier can also be represented 
on this diagram. The operating point is still at F because the 
direct-coupled collector resistor is still 6 kQ for this amplifier. 
However 
the external 
load 
resistance 
(assumed 
capacitance-
coupled) is very low and the load line JFK is therefore nearly 
vertical and passes through F as shown. The intercepts made on 
this load line by the Ih characteristics show that if the base current 
changes from 10 μΑ to 30 μΑ, the collector current changes from 
0-6 mA to 1-9 mA, a current gain of 65 almost equal to β. 
Field-effect 
Transistor 
The circuit diagram of a single-stage amplifier using a depletion 
j.u.g.f.e.t. is given in Fig. 7.3. Because of the extremely-high input 
resistance such a stage is unlikely to be used for current amplification 
and we shall assume that voltage amplification is required. The 
method of choosing the value of Rs is described on page 105 and it 
remains to calculate the value of Rd. The same technique can be 

114 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Fig. 7.3 Single-stage 
amplifier 
using a 
j.u.f.g.e.t. 
value for gm is 2 mA/V giving the voltage gain as 3 χ ΙΟ
3
 χ 2 χ 10~
3
, 
i.e. 6. This is not a high gain and in general it is true that bipolar 
transistors, although inherently current amplifiers, can give higher 
voltage gains than f.e.t.s. 
T W O - S T A G E 
A M P L I F I E R S 
If a single-stage amplifier gives insufficient gain two stages can be 
connected in cascade and Fig. 7.4 gives the circuit diagram of a 
two-stage amplifier using a transformer to couple the stages, each 
Fig. 7.4. A two-stage small-signal amplifier with transformer 
coupling 
adopted as for the circuit of Fig. 7.1 : if the largest possible voltage 
swing is required Rd is chosen to make the quiescent drain potential 
midway between the supply and source potentials but if a smaller 
voltage swing is acceptable Rd can be increased to give higher gain. 
Suppose Rd is 3 kQ. The voltage gain is given by gmRd 
and a typical 

Small-signal 
A.F. 
Amplifiers 
115 
of which is independently stabilised by the potential divider method. 
Maximum gain would be obtained from the amplifier if the turns ratio 
of the transformer were chosen to match the output resistance of TR1 
to the input resistance of TR2. This would, however, be a most 
unsatisfactory design for the following reasons: 
(a) TR1 would effectively have a load resistance equal to its 
output resistance and this large load resistance would seriously 
limit its output signal amplitude (see page 112). 
(b) TR2 would have an effective signal source resistance equal 
to its input resistance. A larger value of source resistance is 
necessary to minimise distortion in TR2. 
(c) If the amplifier is used at a.f. the transformer would need an 
inconveniently-large primary inductance to maintain a good 
bass response. TR1 is likely to have an output resistance of an 
appreciable fraction 
of a megohm as for some silicon 
transistors. 
To avoid all these disadvantages the transformer turns ratio is 
kept small, e.g. 3 to 1. If the input resistance of TR2 is 1 kQ there will 
be a loss of 3 dB at the frequency for which the reactance of the 
secondary winding equals this. If the frequency is made 50 Hz we 
have 
InfL 
= 
1,000 
1,000 
'
 
L
 
=
 6 J 8 4 ï ï m
H 
=
 
3
2
H
a
p p
r
o
x
i
m
a
t
e
|
y -
If the turns ratio is 3 to 1 the primary inductance is 3 2 x 3.2 = 29 H. 
U S E O F N E G A T I V E 
F E E D B A C K 
Circuits such as that of Fig. 7.4 suffer from the disadvantage that 
their properties (gain, input resistance, output resistance, distortion, 
signal-to-noise ratio, etc.) depend on the characteristics of the 
transistors. It is thus difficult to make a number of amplifiers with 
substantially the same performance without very careful choice of 
transistors and components. Moreover such circuits are wasteful 
of components : there are simpler circuits giving better d.c. stability. 
The difficulties caused by spreads in transistor parameters can 
be minimised by negative feedback. This technique enables the gain 
and frequency response to be determined by the constants of a 
passive network : they are then independent of transistor parameters 
and hence of changes in temperature. Negative feedback reduces 
distortion and can be arranged to increase or decrease input and 
output resistance as desired. The cost of these benefits is reduced 

116 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
gain but the required gain can be restored by the use of additional 
stages of amplification. The two basic circuits for negative feedback 
were introduced at the beginning of Chapter 6 and are reproduced 
in Fig. 7.5. It was shown that these are, in fact, two versions of the 
-o-v 
o-v 
'Vout 
-oo 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 7.5. The two basic circuits for applying negative feedback 
to a 
common-emitter 
amplifier 
same circuit and, for a given value of Rb, give identical performances 
in respect of d.c. stabilisation provided Rc equals Re. D.C. feedback 
is, however, independent of external signal-frequency circuits. When 
the circuits of Fig. 7.5 are used to provide feedback at signal fre-
quencies, account must be taken of the way in which the input 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 7.6. Rb in (a) gives parallel-derived 
parallel-injected 
feedback 
whereas R0 in (b) 
gives series-derived 
series-injected 
feedback 
signal is fed into the transistor and in which the output signal is 
taken from it. In fact, as shown in Fig. 7.6 Rh and Re provide quite 
different types of signal-frequency feedback. 
In Fig. 7.6(a) Rb connects the load resistor Rc and the source 

Small-signal 
A. F. Amplifiers
 
1 
Effects of negative feedback on input and output resistance 
Type of feedback 
Effect on input 
Effect on output 
connection 
resistance 
resistance 
series-derived 
increased 
parallel-derived 
decreased 
series-injected 
increased 
parallel-injected 
decreased 
Approximate expressions for the essential properties of these two 
fundamental feedback circuits can be deduced as follows. 
Current-to-voltage 
Converter 
From Figs. 7.5(a) and 7.6(a) the input current iin is given by 
hn = i/b + h 
where i^ is given by vout
/(Rh 
+ hie*). 
Rb is normally very large 
compared with hie and thus ifb is approximately equal to v0JRh. 
If 
is large ib can >~ neglected in comparison with it and we have 
· 
^out 
from which 
~ 
= 
(7.1) 
* hie is the common-emitter input resistance. See A p p e n d i x B . 
resistor Rs in parallel : in effect it introduces into the input circuit 
a current proportional 
to the output voltage. Such 
feedback 
effectively decreases the input resistance and the output resistance of 
the amplifier, making the circuit suitable as a current-to-voltage 
converter. In Fig. 7.6(b) the output circuit of the transistor consists 
of Rc and Re in series and the input circuit consists of vin and 
in 
series. 
Re 
thus 
introduces 
into 
the 
input 
circuit 
a 
voltage 
proportional 
to the output current. Such feedback 
effectively 
increases the input resistance and the output resistance of the 
amplifier, making this circuit suitable as a 
voltage-to-current 
converter. To facilitate reference to the effects of parallel- and series-
derived and -injected feedback, these are summarised in Table 7.2. 
Table 7.2 

118 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Thus the ratio of output voltage to input current for the current-to-
voltage converter is given approximately by the value of the 
feedback resistor Rb. 
Now vwt = iout
Rc. 
Substituting for vout
 in Eqn 7.2 
= ^ 
(7.2) 
l
in
 
K
c 
If Rs is large compared with the input resistance (as it should be to 
minimise distortion) 
'" 
R, 
Substituting for /,„ in Eqn 7.1 
5 a . £ 
7.3) 
Vin 
Rs 
Eqns 7.2 and 7.3 can be derived from inspection of the circuit 
diagram. In Fig. 7.6(a) the output current from the transistor divides 
at the junction of Rc and Rb so that a fraction RC/(RC + Rb) enters 
Rb and is returned to the base as feedback. Normally Rb is large 
compared with Rc and the current division ratio is approximately 
Rc/Rb. 
These two resistors determine the current gain of the 
amplifier which is given by the reciprocal of the current division 
ratio, i.e. by 
Rb/Rc. 
In Fig. 7.6(a) Rb and Rs form a potential divider across the load 
resistor Rc and it returns to the base a fraction RJ(RS + Rb) of the 
output voltage. If Rb is large compared with Rs the fraction is 
approximately RJRb. 
This potential divider determines the voltage 
gain of the circuit which is given by the reciprocal of the division 
ratio, i.e. by 
Rb/Rs. 
Voltage-to-current 
Converter 
From Figs. 7.5(b) and 7.6(b) the signal-frequency feedback voltage 
Vfl, returned to the input circuit is equal to iout
Re 
and the input 
voltage is given by 
vin = vfb + vbe 
If vfb is large, i;^ can be neglected in comparison and we have 
v
in =
 
V
fb 
= 
iout
Re 
from which 
(7.4) 

Small-signal A. F. Amplifiers 
119 
Thus the ratio of output current to input voltage for the voltage-to-
current converter is given by the reciprocal of the feedback resistor 
Re 
Now vout
 = /O M i
Rt. Substituting for iout 
US- = * £ 
(7.5) 
If Rs determines the base current iin = vJR^ 
Substituting for vin 
in Eqn 7.4 we have 
l
- 
» £ 
(7.6) 
Eqns 7.5 and 7.6 can be confirmed from inspection of the circuit 
diagram, Rc and Re constituting the potential divider, R5 and Re 
forming the current divider. 
From Eqn 7.4 we can obtain a simple expression for the input 
resistance of the circuit of Fig. 7.6(b). We know that 
'oui = 
fihn 
and by eliminating iout
 between this equation and Eqn 7.4 we have 
rin =
 υ
± = βRe 
(7.7) 
in 
Thus if β = 100 and Re = 1 kQ the input resistance is 100 kQ. In 
practice, of course, this may be effectively reduced by other resistors 
such as those of a potential divider connected to the base. 
TWO-STAGE AMPLIFIERS 
Current 
Amplifier 
If a current-to-voltage converter is followed by a voltage-to-current 
converter, the low output resistance of the first stage feeds into the 
high input resistance of the second : these are the conditions required 
to transfer the output voltage of the first stage to the input of the 
second with little loss. The basic form of the amplifier is shown in 
Fig. 7.7 in which, for simplicity, direct coupling is employed between 
the stages. The amplifier so constructed has a low input resistance 
and a high output resistance and is therefore suitable as a current 
amplifier. 
If we represent the signal voltage developed across Rcl as i>, 

120 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Fig. 7.7. Skeleton form of two-stage 
current 
amplifier 
this is the output voltage of TR1 and the input voltage of TR2. 
For TR1 we have, from Eqn 7.1 
For TR2 we have, from Eqn 7.4 
ν 
"RT2 
Eliminating υ 
Because of the undecoupled emitter resistor Re2 
TR2 behaves as 
an emitter follower and Rb can be connected to the emitter of TR2 
instead of to the collector of TR1 with little effect on the performance 
of the circuit which now has the form shown in Fig. 7.8. 
To make a practical version of this circuit we now need to add 
measures to ensure d.c. stability of both transistors. One of the 
most successful methods of stabilisation is that illustrated in Fig. 
6.12 and it is easy to add to Fig. 7.8 the few components necessary 
to give this type of stabilisation. These include a decoupled emitter 
resistor Rei 
for TR1 and a decoupled potential divider R XR2 
in 
the emitter circuit of TR2. With these additions the circuit has 
the final form given in Fig. 7.9. 
The current gain of the amplifier is given by Rb/Re2 
and the 
resistance values should be chosen to give the required gain. Rb 

Small-signal A.F. 
Amplifiers 
i L . 
U2Skn 
TRI 
S IOOMF 
-<0*24V 
2 
kù 
TR2 
out 
2-21011 
A l l 
22kAl 
IOOJIF 
Α,2Γ 
100 Ω 
-OO 
Fig. 7.9. Practical form of the amplifier of Fig. 7.8 designed for a current 
gain of 50 
OUTPUT 
INPUTc 
Fig. 7.8. Modification 
of the circuit diagram of Fig. 7.7 
121 
T R 2 
* c 2 
TRI 
* 6 

122 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Voltage 
Amplifier 
If the two stages in Fig. 7.7 are interchanged so that the voltage-to-
current converter is followed by the current-to-voltage converter, 
the high output resistance of the first stage feeds into the low input 
Fig. 7.10. Skeleton form of two-stage 
voltage 
amplifier 
should be small to give good stability and a value of 5 kQ is 
suitable. For a current gain of 50 Re2 
should then be 100 Ω as 
indicated in Fig. 7.9. The remaining component values can be 
selected in the following way. It is assumed that the transistors are 
silicon with offset voltages of 0.7 V. 
Suppose TR1 is to take 0.5 mA and that the supply voltage is 
24V. Let TR1 collector potential be 10V. There is then a 14V 
drop across Rcl 
and this resistance is thus 28kQ. TR2 base voltage 
is 10 but, because of the offset voltage, the emitter potential is 
9.3 V. If TR2 is required to take 2 mA collector current, the total 
emitter resistance must be 4.65 kQ. It would probably be sufficiently 
accurate for R} and R2 to be each 2.2 kQ and Re2 
100 Ω. We can 
neglect the very small voltage drop across Rb due to TR1 base 
current and the base potential is therefore approximately 4.65 V. 
TR1 emitter voltage is then 3.95 V and the emitter resistance is 
8 kQ. It is probably best however to adjust Rel 
on test to give the 
required quiescent currents in TR1 and TR2. As this is a current 
amplifier Rt2 should be as large as possible provided distortion 
does not occur as a result of TR2 collector potential approaching 
the base potential too closely. A value of 6 kQ should be suitable. 

Small-signal 
A.F. 
Amplifiers 
resistance of the second. These are the conditions required to 
transfer the output current of the first stage into the input of the 
second stage with little loss. The basic form of the amplifier so 
derived is shown in Fig. 7.10 in which, for simplicity, direct coupling 
is employed between the stages. The amplifier so constructed has a 
high input resistance and a low output resistance and is therefore 
suitable as a voltage amplifier. 
If we represent the output current of TRI and the input current 
of TR2 by i, we have, applying Eqn 7.4 to TRI 
ι 
1 
"
 
R
e l 
For TR2 we have from Eqn 7.1 
Eliminating i between these equations 
V
out _ ^±2 
V
i n 
Rel 
As shown in Fig. 7.11 it is more usual to connect Rb2 
to TRI 
emitter instead of to TR2 base. This makes little difference to the 
performance of the circuit because the current injected by 
Rb2 
for the most part enters TRI (the resistance Rel 
being large com-
pared with the internal emitter resistance re of TRI). At the collector 
1 
1 — 
1 
1—δ 
Fig. 7.11. Modification 
of the circuit diagram of Fig. 7.10 
of TRI this current mostly enters TR2 base because Rcl 
is, with 
proper design, large compared with TR2 input resistance. Thus the 
feedback current, though injected into TRI emitter, mostly enters 

124 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Fig. 7.12. Practical form of the amplifier of Fig. 7.11 designed for a voltage gain of 100 
these resistors constitute a potential divider across the output circuit 
returning a fraction of the output voltage to TR1 emitter. 
Suppose that a voltage gain of 100 is required. The amplifier 
can be designed to have the same mean collector currents and supply 
voltage as for the current amplifier. As before TR1 quiescent collector 
potential can be taken as 10 V which gives Rcl as 28 kQ. TR2 base 
potential is also 10 V, giving the emitter potential as 9.3 V (silicon 
transistors are assumed) so that Rx and R2 can each be 2.2 kQ as 
before. The amplifier is required to give a voltage output and TR2 
quiescent collector potential can be 17 V permitting upward and 
downward swings of 7 V amplitude. This gives Rc2 
as 3.5 kQ. 
Rb2 
should not unduly shunt Rc2 (or the supply!) and a suitable value is 
50kQ. For a voltage gain of 100, Rel must hence be 500 Ω. The total 
resistance in TR1 emitter circuit should be 8kQ to give the required 
quiescent emitter potential and R4 should hence be approximately 
7.5 kQ. RA should preferably be made adjustable (with a range of say 
5 kQ to 10 kQ) to enable the desired working voltages and currents to 
TR2 base and, of course, the feedback current suffers no phase 
inversion or current gain in TR1. To signals injected at the emitter, 
TR1 behaves as a common-base amplifier, the base being effectively 
earthed by the low resistance of the signal source. 
Finally it is necessary to add means for d.c. stabilisation and once 
again we can employ the potential divider circuit of Fig. 6.12 as 
indicated in Fig. 7.12. The gain of the amplifier is given by 
Rb2/Rei
: 

Small-signal 
A.F. 
Amplifiers 
125 
be set up. Rbl 
should be small to give good d.c. stability but, as it 
shunts the input to TRI, it should be large to give a high input 
resistance to the amplifier. The input resistance of TRI is given by 
fiRel 
(Eqn 7.7), i.e. 50kQ if β is 100. To keep the amplifier input 
resistance above 10kQ, Rbl 
should not be less than 12.5 kQ. 
COMPLEMENTARY AMPLIFIERS 
There are advantages in using complementary transistors in a two-
stage amplifier. For example this simplifies the provision of negative 
feedback as shown in the circuit diagram of Fig. 7.13. The npn 
common-emitter stage TRI is direct-coupled to the pnp common-
emitter stage TR2. The potential divider Rc2Rel
 
l
s 
t
n
e
 collector 
Fig. 7.13. Simple two-stage 
voltage amplifier using complementary 
transistors 
load of TR2 and returns the fraction Ke l/ ( Kel + Rc2) 
of the output 
voltage to TRI as negative feedback. This parallel-derived series-
injected feedback gives the amplifier a high input resistance and a 
low output resistance so that the amplifier is best suited to voltage 
amplification. The voltage gain is given by (Rc2 +Rei)/Rei
 
a n c
* if 
Rc2 is large compared with Rel, 
as is likely, the gain is given approxi-
mately by Rc2/Rei. 
This can be regarded as a complementary form of 
the amplifier of Fig. 7.11. 
EMITTER FOLLOWER 
An emitter follower is often used as the first stage of a voltage 
amplifier to provide the required high input resistance. Such a stage 
is also often employed as the final stage of a voltage amplifier to 
give a low output resistance. 

126 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Fig. 7.14. Simple emitter follower 
circuit 
A typical emitter follower circuit is given in Fig. 7.14 and the 
resistor values can be estimated in the following way. The aim is to 
provide a high input resistance and so a good starting point is to 
make Rl and R2 equal and to give them a reasonably high value 
such as 100 kQ. This will ensure an input resistance of 50 kil. 
Suppose a 15-V supply is available and that the transistor is a 
silicon type with β = 100. If a mean emitter current of 1 mA is 
assumed then the mean base current is 10 μΑ and this will flow 
through R{ (in addition to the bleed current) giving a voltage drop 
of 10 χ 1 0 "
6
 χ 10
5
, i.e. 1 volt. The bleed current on its own would 
give a base voltage of 7.5 V but the base current will reduce this to 
Fig. 7.15. Illustrating 
the addition of a direct-coupled 
emitter follower 
to the output of 
the circuit of Fig. 7.12 

Small-signal 
A. F. 
Amplifiers 
127 
6.5 V. Because of the 0.7 V offset voltage in silicon transistors, the 
emitter voltage is hence 5.8 V and the emitter resistor value is thus 
5.8kQ. 
With a mean emitter current of 1 mA the transistor has a mutual 
conductance of approximately 40 mA/V and the output resistance 
of the circuit is given by l/g^ 
i.e. 25 Ω. 
The stability of the circuit can be calculated from Eqn 6.6 and is 
approximately 0.08. Though satisfactory this is not as good as can 
be achieved by the potential divider circuit but is limited in this 
circuit by the need to keep R{ and R2 high to achieve the required 
high input resistance. 
A circuit similar to that of Fig. 7.14 could be used in an emitter 
follower at the output of an amplifier but it is simpler to use a 
direct-coupled circuit such as that shown in Fig. 7.15. This is based 
on the circuit of Fig. 7.12 with an emitter follower stage added. 
The signal-frequency feedback resistor is taken from TR3 emitter 
at which the signal voltage is equal to that at TR2 collector. 
DARLINGTON CIRCUIT 
A simple and convenient method of connecting two transistors in 
cascade is the Darlington or super-alpha circuit shown in Fig. 7.16. 
TR1 is an emitter follower and TR2 a common-emitter amplifier. 
COLLECTOR 
Fig. 7.16. Basic connections 
for 
the 
Darlington or super-alpha 
circuit 
EMITTER 
The collector current of TR1 is in phase with that of TR2 and 
thus the two collectors can be bonded as shown. The current gain 
of the emitter follower and the common-emitter amplifier are 
both approximately equal to β and thus the current gain of the 
Darlington circuit is given by βχβ2. 
The emitter current of TR1 
is the base current for TR2: it follows that the collector current 
of TR2 is β2 times that of TR1. If TR1 is to have a useful value of 
βχ the collector current for TR1 should not be too small. TR2 
should preferably therefore have a collector current of at least 
some tens of mA. This circuit arrangement is well suited for 
applications where TR2 has to supply appreciable output power. 

128 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Ù 
Î 
INPUT o -
- o OUTPUT 
Fig. 7.17. A cur rem amplifier employing a Darlington 
circuit 
LOW-NOISE TRANSISTOR AMPLIFIERS 
For certain a.f. amplifiers the input signal is very small and, to 
obtain a good signal-to-noise ratio at the amplifier output, care 
must be taken to minimise noise generated in the amplifier itself. 
An example of such an amplifier is one intended to follow a high-
quality microphone. The first stage of an amplifier is, of course, 
the most likely source of noise and here it is advisable to use a 
transistor specially selected for use as a low-noise amplifier. It is 
possible by careful selection of a bipolar transistor and by optimum 
choice of operating conditions to achieve a noise factor as low as 
2 dB. The noise factor is a direct measure of the added noise : thus if 
The combination can be regarded as a single transistor with a 
very high value of β and consequently a high input resistance. 
Where more gain is required than is available without undue 
sacrifice of feedback from the two-stage amplifiers of Figs. 7.9 and 
7.12 a convenient method of increasing gain is to replace one of 
the transistors by a Darlington pair. As an example Fig. 7.17 gives 
the circuit diagram of a current amplifier using a Darlington pair 
as a second stage. Such an amplifier should easily be capable of a 
gain of 1,000 whilst still retaining considerable feedback. The values 
of Rb and Re2 should be chosen to give the required value of gain. 

Small-signal 
A. F. Amplifiers 
129 
the signal-to-noise ratio is 50 dB at the input to an amplifier and 
47 dB at the output, the noise factor of the amplifier is 3 dB. 
F.e.t.s are however preferable for use in low-level stages. Firstly 
because they use only one type of charge carrier they tend to be 
quieter than bipolar transistors which employ both types of charge 
carrier. J.u.g.f.e.t.s are in general quieter than i.g.f.e.t.s. Secondly the 
ld-Vg 
characteristics of f.e.t.s are not linear (they are of square-law 
shape) so that to minimise distortion the amplitude of the input 
signal should be kept low. In analogue equipment, therefore, f.e.t.s 
should be confined to the early stages where signal levels are lowest. 
CIRCUITS EMPLOYING F.E.T. AND BIPOLAR TRANSISTORS 
For the reasons just given an f.e.t. is often used as the input stage of 
a.f. equipment and is followed by a bipolar transistor. A typical 
circuit is illustrated in Fig. 7.18. TR1 is a p-channel enhancement 
f.e.t. used as a common-source amplifier feeding into an npn emitter 
* 3 
R, 
INPUT—1|-
, T R 1 
R2\] 
T R 2 f 
- O U T P U T 
e£5 
- N E G A T I V E 
F E E D B A C K 
Fig. 7.18. An f.e.t. 
in the input stage of an a.f. 
amplifier 
follower stage TR2. The input resistance is determined by R, 
which can be given a high value such as 1 ΜΩ to make the amplifier 
suitable for following crystal pickups or microphones. As shown by 
the dashed lines the combination of TRI, TR2 and R2 is available as 
an integrated circuit. 
A similar combination of f.e.t. and bipolar techniques is embodied in 
the i.g.b.p.t. described on page 45. 

CHAPTER 8 
Large-signal A.F. Amplifiers 
DEFINITION OF A LARGE-SIGNAL 
AMPLIFIER 
The final stage of an amplifier may be required to drive a loud-
speaker, a recording head or some other load requiring appreciable 
power for its operation. Such stages must give the required power 
and to obtain it full advantage must be taken of the voltage swing 
and current swing available from the output transistor(s). Such stages 
are known as large-signal amplifiers. There is a danger of overloading 
and one of the problems in designing large-signal amplifiers is how 
to obtain the maximum power output from the transistors without 
distortion. 
TRANSISTOR PARAMETERS IN LARGE-SIGNAL 
AMPLIFIERS 
Because of the very large current swings in a large-signal amplifier 
it is not possible to assume, as in a small-signal amplifier, that the 
transistor parameters are constant. The input resistance, output 
resistance and current gain all depend on emitter current and in 
a large-signal amplifier the variations of these parameters which 
occur during each cycle of input signal can be very great. Design 
of such stages must hence be carried out in terms of the mean 
value of the input resistance, etc., or, better, by evaluation of the 
extreme values of each parameter and ensuring that the desired 
performance can be obtained even at the extreme values. 
130 

Large-signal 
A. F. Amplifiers 
131 
Fig. 8.1. 
Essentia/ 
features 
of a 
single-ended 
class-A transistor output 
stage 
COLLECTOR CURRENT SWING 
FOR MAXIMUM 
UNOISTORTED 
POWER OUTPUT 
LOAD LINE 
INPUT BASE-CURRENT SWING 
FOR MAXIMUM 
UNOISTORTED 
POWER OUTPUT 
MEAN CURRENT 
MEAN VOLTAGE 
COLLECTOR VOLTAGE SWING 
FOR MAXIMUM 
UNOISTORTED POWER OUTPUT 
Fig. 8.2. Conditions in a class-A transistor output 
stage 
8.2. The problem is to obtain maximum undistorted power from 
the transistor without exceeding the maximum safe dissipation 
prescribed by the manufacturers. 
EXTERNAL 
LOAO 
RESISTANCE 
CLASS-A AMPLIFIERS 
The circuit of a class-Α common-emitter output stage is given in 
Fig. 8.1, and a typical set of Ic- 
Vc characteristics is given in Fig. 

13 2 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Efficiency 
Suppose the supply voltage is Vcc and the steady collector current 
in the absence of an input signal is l0. Then the power taken from 
the supply is VCC
I0 and most of this is dissipated as heat in the 
transistor. This static dissipation must not exceed the maximum 
value quoted by the manufacturers. If a sinusoidal input signal 
is applied to the transistor, power is supplied to the load but the 
power taken from the supply remains constant because no change 
has taken place in the average or d.c. component of the collector 
current. 
It follows that the power dissipated in the transistor becomes less 
when the input signal is applied. If, therefore, the transistor does 
not become too hot in the absence of an input signal, there will 
be no danger of damaging it by heat when the signal is applied. 
In simple generator and load circuits maximum power is delivered 
to the load when its resistance equals that of the generator. It might be 
thought, therefore, that maximum power would be obtained from a 
common-emitter amplifier by making the collector load resistance 
equal to r0, the collector a.c. resistance of the transistor (typically 
several hundred thousand ohms). However, a transistor is not a 
simple a.c. generator. Its operation depends on a d.c. supply, the 
voltage of which affects power output. For example, for linear 
amplification the collector-voltage swing must not exceed the supply 
voltage and, if the load has a high value, the current swing is limited to 
a small fraction of what would otherwise be possible. The power 
output is correspondingly limited. Maximum power output is obtained 
with a load resistance which makes full use of the voltage and current 
swings available at the collector: this is known as the optimum load. 
When the transistor is delivering its maximum 
undistorted 
power, the peak value of the collector voltage is nearly equal to VCL
. 
and the peak collector current is I0. The output power is obtained 
by multiplying the r.m.s. collector voltage by the r.m.s. collector 
current : for a sinusoidal output signal these are VJyjl 
and 
IJyJl 
and thus 
Kc 
κ 
maximum power output = -τ- . -— 
V
2
 
V
2 
= 
2 
The power taken from the supply is VCiI0 and thus the efficiency 
is 50 per cent. 

Large-signal 
A.F. 
Amplifiers 
133 
This is the theoretical maximum and in practice a transistor 
class-Α stage can approach it very closely. This efficiency applies 
only for sinusoidal signals and when the transistor is driven to the 
limit of its output power. For smaller input signals the efficiency 
is less. 
The amplitude of an a.f. signal varies over a range depending 
on the nature of the signal. For orchestral music the range between 
the maximum and minimum amplitudes may be as much as 60 dB. 
For pop music and speech the range is much less. 
It can therefore be seen that the efficiency of a class-Α amplifier 
with an a.f. input varies from instant to instant and the average 
efficiency is in practice much less than the theoretical maximum 
of 50 per cent. 
Optimum 
Load 
As can be seen from Fig. 8.2 the slope of the load line for maximum 
power output is given by VJl0 : this is then the value of the optimum 
load resistance. 
As a numerical example, consider a transistor rated for 100 mW 
maximum collector dissipation and operating as a class-Α output 
stage from a 6-V supply. 
The maximum undistorted output power is 50 mW and the mean 
collector current Ιυ is given by 
/ αχ 6 = 100 χ 10
 
Λ 
100 χ 1 0 "
3 
• '· = 
—
 
A 
= 17 mA 
Κ 
*' 
" 
t 
6 
= 350 Ω 
One practical point is that the supply voltage must exceed 6 V 
to give a 6-V swing of collector potential. This is because the steady 
voltage across the emitter resistor, that across the 
transformei 
primary resistance and the transistor knee voltage must be subtracted 
from the supply voltage to give the effective collector-emitter voltage. 

134 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Output 
Transformer 
The output transformer must match the optimum load to the 
load resistance. Therefore, if the load resistance is 3 Ω, the trans-
former must have a ratio of 
V'(350/3):l 
= >
/ 1 1 7 : l 
= 11:1, approximately 
The primary inductance determines the low-frequency response 
which is 3 dB down at the frequency for which the inductive 
reactance is equal to the optimum load. In an a.f. amplifier the 
3 dB loss frequency may be 50 Hz and we have 
InjL 
= R 
R 
L
- 2 « , 
350 
, 
henrys 
6.28 x 50 
= 1.1 henrys 
The transformer should have a primary inductance of this value 
with 17 mA direct current flowing. 
Push-pull 
Operation 
Two transistors may be operated in class-Α push-pull and a typical 
circuit is given in Fig. 8.3. The collector-to-collector optimum 
load is twice that for a single class-Α transistor and the output 
transformer needs twice the primary inductance. Its design is 
simpler, however, because it is not polarised, the d.c. components 
of the collector currents flowing in opposite directions in the two 
halves of the primary winding. There is, however, considerable 
dissipation in a class-Α stage and if push-pull operation is used, 
advantage may be taken of the cancellation of distortion by biasing 
back the transistors to obtain class-B operation. 
CLASS-B AMPLIFIERS 
In a class-B amplifier the base is biased almost to the point of 
collector current cut-off. In the absence of an input signal, therefore, 

Large-signal 
A.F. Amplifiers 
135 
Fig. 8.3. Circuit for a push-pull class-A transistor output 
stage 
very little collector current flows but the current increases as the 
amplitude of the input signal increases. This leads to economy in 
running costs because the current taken from the supply tends to 
be proportional to the signal amplitude and not independent of 
it as in a class-Α amplifier. Alternate half-cycles of the input signal 
are, however, not reproduced in a single class-B amplifier and it 
is essential to use two transistors in push-pull. Such a pair of 
transistors can give a power output of 2.5 times the maximum 
permissible collector dissipation of the two transistors: this is 5 
times the power output available from the same two transistors 
operating in class-Α push-pull. This may be shown in the following 
way. Let the peak collector current of each transistor be Ip and 
the supply voltage Vcc. Then the peak collector-voltage swing Vp 
is equal to ViC. The power output from a push-pull stage is given 
by the product of the r.m.s. collector current (IJyJl) 
and the r.m.s. 
collector voltage (VJyJl) 
and is thus given by IpVp/2. 
If the input 
signal is sinusoidal, the combined collector current is sinusoidal 
in waveform as pictured in Fig. 8.4. Such a waveform has a mean 
value, or d.c. component, equal to 2/π of the peak value (/p) and 
the power taken from the supply is thus equal to 2VccIp/n, 
giving 
efficiency as 
power output from transistors 
IpVp 
π 
power taken from supply 
2 
2IpVp 
π 
=
 4 
= 78.54 per cent 
EXTERNAL 
LOAD 
INPUT 

136 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
This is the maximum efficiency of which the stage is capable and 
to obtain it the optimum load per transistor must be equal to 
(peak voltage)/(peak current). For class-B push-pull the collector-
to-collector load is given by 4Kp//p. 
If the load and supply voltage are kept constant and the input 
signal amplitude is reduced the efficiency falls linearly due to the 
increasing failure to make use of the voltage swing available. This 
is easily shown. Suppose the input voltage is reduced to a times 
the value which gives maximum output. Then the collector-current 
swing falls to alp and (since the load is constant) the collector-
voltage swing falls to aVpy giving the power output per pair of 
transistors as a
2
IpVp/2. 
The mean value of the collector current is 
now 2αΙρ/π and the power taken from the supply is lalpVJn. 
The 
efficiency for the reduced input signal is given by 
power output from transistors _ o
2
IpVp 
π 
power taken from supply 
2 
2a/pKp 
π 
= 
α
4 
CHARACTERISTIC 
OF TRANSISTOR I 
HALF SINE-WAVE PULSE 
-.OF 
COLLECTOR CURRENT 
IN TRANSISTOR I 
\ 
CHARACTERISTIC 
OF TRANSISTOR 2 
HALF SINE-WAVE PULSE 
OF COLLECTOR CURRENT 
IN TRANSISTOR 2 
- INPUT CURRENT 
WAVEFORM 
Fig. 8.4. Operation of a push-pull class-Β transistor 
amplifier 

Large-signal A.F. 
Amplifiers 
137 
The efficiency is thus directly proportional to the input signal 
amplitude. 
In transistor amplifiers we are particularly interested in the 
power Pt dissipated in the transistors themselves, for it is this 
which causes heating of the junctions and can damage them. 
Now 
power dissipated 
= 
power taken 
- 
power output 
in transistors 
from supply 
i.e. Pt 
Differentiating this 
4P, 
2iDVD 
σα 
π
 
p
 
p 
Equating this to zero to find the maximum, 
2 
a — -π 
The heat in the transistors is thus a maximum when the signal 
amplitude is 21 π (approximately 0.63) times that giving maximum 
output power. Substituting this particular value of a in the general 
expression given above we have 
power output from amplifier = 
power taken from supply 
«
2'Λ 
π
2 
41 V 
— 
Ρ 
Ρ 
By subtraction, 
21 V 
power dissipated in transistors = —
ρ
γ
Ε
-
71 
These results show that this particular value of a makes the power 
output one-half that taken from the supply: in other words it 
coincides with an efficiency of 50 per cent. The maximum power 
output from theclass-B pair is IpVp/2. The maximum power dissipated 

13 8 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
in the transistors is 2lpVp/n
2
. 
The ratio of these two quantities is 
π
2
/4, approximately 2.5:1, showing that it is possible to obtain an 
undistorted output of 2.5 times the rated maximum collector dissipa-
tion of the two transistors, i.e. 5 times the maximum collector 
dissipation of one of them. This applies only for a sinusoidal input. 
As a numerical example, consider two transistors each with a 
maximum collector dissipation of 100 mW. In class-B push-pull it 
is possible to obtain from these an output power of 500 mW. If the 
supply voltage is 6 V, this is also the peak value of the collector 
voltage, and the peak current is given by Ip where 
1 
Ρ = - V I 
2 
2P 
' - τ 
2 x 5 0 0 
= — - — mA 
6 
= 170 mA approximately 
The collector-to-coliector load is given by 
«' = τ 
4 x 6 
= 140 Ω approximately 
Driver Stage 
The transistor feeding a class-B output stage may be regarded as a 
large-signal amplifier because it must supply appreciable power to 
the base circuits of the output stage. The design of the driver stage 
and the transformer coupling it to the output stage depends on the 
input resistance of the output stage. 
It was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter that the 
transistor parameters cannot be taken as constant in large-signal 
amplifiers. This is particularly true of the input resistance of a 
class-B amplifier. Such an amplifier is biased almost to cut off of 
collector current in the absence of an input signal and its input 
resistance is then high. On peaks of input signal, however, the 

Large-signal 
A. F. Amplifiers 
139 
amplifier is driven to large collector currents and at these instants 
the input resistance is low. The variation may be from, say, 2 kQ 
for small signals to less than 100 Ω for large signals. 
We have seen in earlier chapters that to obtain an undistorted 
input current in such circumstances the transistors must be driven 
from a high-resistance source. If too low a source resistance is 
used, the input current tends to be too low at low values of input. 
Thus a sine-wave input signal is reproduced with a waveform 
similar to that shown in Fig. 8.5. This shows symmetrical distortion: 
such a waveform is typical of odd-order harmonic distortion, i.e. 
3rd, 5th, 7th, etc., and unlike even-harmonic distortion is not 
cancelled out in a push-pull stage. Fig. 8.5 represents the input and 
output waveforms for an amplifier giving cross-over distortion, 
so 
called because it occurs when one transistor is being cut off and the 
other turned on, i.e. when the state of conduction is being transferred 
from one transistor to the other. 
Unfortunately transistors giving appreciable power output often 
have significant fall off in current gain at high collector currents and 
this can cause distortion of the output when the signal source is 
of high resistance. To minimise distortion due to this cause the 
Fig. 8.5. Input and output waveforms for an amplifier giving 
cross-
over 
distortion 
source resistance should not be too great: on the other hand jt 
should not be too low otherwise cross-over distortion occurs. 
Between these limits there is a range of source resistance which is 
satisfactory. Suitable values for a particular class-B amplifier are 
quoted below. 
For transistors rated for 100 mW maximum collector dissipation, 
the input resistance falls to approximately 100 Ω at minimum and 
is probably around 1 kΩ for a standing collector current of 2 mA, 
a typical value for a class-B output stage for a portable receiver. 

140 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
SYMMETRICAL CLASS-B AMPLIFIER 
The circuit of the driver stage and class-B output stage of an amplifier 
is given in Fig. 8.6. The driver stage operates in class A and the 
collector current is stabilised at, say, 3 mA by the potential-divider 
method. A similar technique is applied to the output stage which 
has a common-emitter resistance, the potential divider being adjusted 
.DRIVER 
S T A G E 
O U T P U T 
S T A G E 
Fig. 8.6 
Circuit for a driver and a symmetrica/ 
class-B output stage. Dotted 
lines 
show how negative feedback can be applied when the driver stage has a current input 
to give the required standing collector current. The emitter resistance 
of a class-B amplifier cannot be decoupled because the mean-emitter 
DRIVER 
T R A N S F O R M E R -
E X T E R N A L 
LOAD 
If the driver stage operates in class-Α with 3-mA mean collector 
current then for a 6-V supply the optimum load is approximately 
2 kQ. If this is accurately matched to 100 Ω we can ensure that the 
driver delivers maximum power to the output stage just when it is 
needed. The turns ratio required is given by v
 (2,000/100) :1 = 4.5:1. 
The effective source resistance (if the driver output resistance is 
30 kQ) is then 1.5 kQ which is certainly not large compared with the 
maximum input resistance (1 kQ) of the output stage for small 
inputs. Any cross-over distortion which occurs can probably be 
minimised by reducing the transformer turns ratio to 3:1 or even 
2:1. For 2:1 the effective source resistance is 7.5kQ. 

Large-signal 
A.F. 
Amplifiers 
current is not constant (as in a class-Α amplifier) but varies over a 
wide range depending on the instantaneous amplitude of the input 
signal. A capacitor in parallel with the emitter resistor would acquire 
charge on current peaks and discharge in the intervals between peaks, 
thus introducing unwanted exponential signals into the amplifier. 
The emitter resistance must moreover be kept small to minimise the 
negative feedback which would reduce the gain of the output stage. 
The emitter resistance is commonly as low as 5 Ω: nevertheless, 
it gives some measure of stabilisation of the standing collector current 
and it helps to equalise differences in parameters of the two output 
transistors. Another resistance which must be small is the lower arm 
of the potential divider feeding the bases of the output transistors. 
The input currents of the output stage flow in this resistor and a 
large value would severely reduce the signal input to the output 
stage. It is not advisable to decouple this resistance by a low-reactance 
capacitor because on large input signals the capacitor becomes 
charged by the unidirectional input current flow for the output stage 
and on small input signals it discharges through the resistance, thus 
also superimposing unwanted exponential signals on the input to the 
output stage. 
Class-B output stages tend to give unwanted ripples on the output 
signal: these are caused by ringing of the secondary winding of 
the driver transformer when the associated transistor is cut off. 
This tendency can be reduced by so constructing the transformer 
that the two secondary windings are closely coupled, e.g. by winding 
the secondaries in a bifilar manner. This discourages ringing because 
the undamped secondary winding is effectively damped by its close 
coupling to the damped winding. The network R\Ct 
is included to 
attenuate unwanted high-frequency components such as harmonics 
of the input signal or oscillations due to ringing. This network 
together with the leakage inductance L of the output transformer 
and the resistance Rt of the external load form an LCR combination. 
Such a network can give an input resistance independent of frequency 
if the product R, Rt is made equal to L/C. 
Distortion introduced by the class-B output stage can be reduced 
by negative feedback. The feedback voltage can be taken from the 
secondary winding of the output transformer and applied to the 
driver stage. It should be applied to the base if the driver stage is 
required to operate with a current input, and to the emitter if the 
driver stage is required to operate with a voltage input. The latter 
alternative is preferable if the driver stage directly follows a detector, 
as may occur in a receiver. The degree of feedback which can be 
applied is limited by the phase shifts introduced by the driver and 
output transformers at the extremes of the passband and in practice 

142 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
rarely exceeds 6 dB: even this small degree halves the harmonic 
distortion of the amplifier. 
ASYMMETRICAL C L A S S - B 
AMPLIFIER 
An interesting variant of the class-B push-pull circuit is the so-called 
single-ended or asymmetrical circuit illustrated in Fig. 8.7. The output 
transistors are connected in series across the collector supply battery 
and the load resistance is connected between their junction and a centre 
tap on the battery. Separate secondary windings are required for the 
two bases because there is now a difference in the steady voltage of the 
two. The optimum load equals (peak collector voltage swing)/(peak 
collector current swing), and for output transistors operating from a 
4.5 V supply and taking a peak collector current of 120 mA may be as 
low as 37 Ω. A loudspeaker speech coil can readily be wound to have an 
impedance of this value and thus there is no need for a loudspeaker 
Fig. 8.7. Circuit for a driver and asymmetrical class-B output stage. Dotted lines show how 
negative feedback 
can be applied when the driver stage has a voltage input 

Large-signal 
A. F. 
Amplifiers 
143 
matching transformer: this is one of the great advantages of this circuit. 
It does, however, require a collector supply of higher voltage than a 
symmetrical circuit and the input transformer must have isolated 
secondary windings. The elimination of the output transformer is a 
great asset, however, and makes this circuit particularly suitable for 
miniature receivers. The use of a centre-tapped battery (as in Fig. 8.7) is 
not essential. The external load may alternatively be returned to the 
positive battery terminal (usually at earth potential) provided a 
capacitor is connected in series with the load to avoid disturbance of 
d.c. conditions. In an a.f. amplifier employing a 37 Ω load, the 
capacitance should be not less than 100 μ¥ to avoid loss of bass. 
In the circuit of Fig. 8.7 the output transistors must be driven by 
antiphase signals to obtain push-pull action: thus a transformer 
or some other phase-splitting device is needed to provide suitable 
input signals. An alternative possibility is to use two complementary 
transistors as an output stage as suggested in the simplified diagram 
of Fig. 8.8. This circuit has the advantage that no phase splitter is 
necessary. A positive-going signal applied to the base of the pnp 
transistor reduces its collector current and at the base of the npn 
transistor increases collector current. The pnp transistor is in fact 
turned off and the npn transistor is turned on : thus the potential 
of their common connection point moves towards that of the positive 
supply terminal. Similarly a negative-going input signal causes the 
potential of the common point to move towards the negative supply 
terminal. Both transistors contribute towards the output voltage 
and push-pull action is obtained by applying the same input signal 
C O M P L E M E N T A R Y C L A S S - B 
A M P L I F I E R 
Fig. 8.8. Basic form of comple-
mentary 
single-ended 
push-pull 
output 
stage 

144 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
to both bases. This basic circuit has something in common with 
the complementary emitter follower of Fig. 9.12 but in Fig. 8.8 the 
transistors are used as common-emitter amplifiers by applying the 
common input between base and emitter of both transistors. 
The circuits described so far in this chapter contain transformers for 
inter-stage or output-load coupling. The use of such components is 
now avoided because of their bulk, cost and the inevitable, if slight, 
distortion they introduce. The gain provided by transformers can 
more readily be obtained from additional transistors as indicated in 
the circuits now to be described. 
A complementary class-B output stage of the type shown in Fig. 8.8 
can be used to supply up to approximately 1 W but it is not easy to find 
a pair of accurately matched pnp and npn transistors to supply 10 W 
or more. This difficulty can be overcome by using matched output 
transistors of the same type and making the driver stage of comple-
mentary transistors as shown in the simplified diagram of Fig. 8.9. 
TR3 is an emitter follower : its output is in phase with its input and 
is connected directly between base and emitter of TR5. TR4 has 
the same input as TR3 but is a common-emitter amplifier: its output 
is in antiphase with the input and is connected directly between base 
and emitter of TR6. We have seen earlier that the current gain of 
the emitter follower and the common-emitter amplifier are both 
approximately equal to β. Thus by choosing complementary tran-
sistors with equal /ifs Tor TR3 and TR4, and by making Ri0 
equal 
to Rl2 
we can arrange for TR5 and TR6 to receive equal-amplitude 
but antiphase signals so that the output stage operates in push-pull. 
A technique commonly employed to drive TR3 and TR4 is 
indicated in Fig. 8.10 which gives the circuit diagram with most 
component values for an amplifier capable of supplying an output 
of the order of 10 W. TR2 is a common-emitter pnp stage, R1 is 
its collector load and Rb a decoupling resistor. The decoupling 
capacitor C3 is, however, returned to the emitters of TR3 and TR4: 
this ensures that the signals generated by TR2 are applied between 
base and emitter of TR3 and TR4 as required. R9 determines the 
standing voltages on the bases of TR3 and TR4 which in turn control 
the collector current of the output stage: R9 is adjusted to give a 
standing current in TR5 and TR6 sufficient to minimise cross-over 
distortion. The forward-biased diode Dl in conjunction with the 
emitter resistors K 13 and K 14 stabilise the quiescent current of the 
output stage as explained in Chapter 6. 
TRI is a common-emitter npn stage used for signal amplification, 
the collector load R5 being connected directly between TR2 base 
and emitter. TRI is also used as a d.c. amplifier to ensure stability of 
the quiescent voltage at the amplifier output point P. This voltage 

Large-signal 
A. F. Amplifiers 
145 
π 
INPUT 
TFU 
TR6 
6 
OUTPUT 
Fig 
8.9. 
A single-ended 
push-pull 
stage 
with a 
complementary 
driver 
stage 
Cu
 
0 
Fig. 8.10. Circuit diagram of an amplifier capable of more than 10 W output 

146 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
must be accurately maintained at VJ2 where Vcc is the supply 
voltage, otherwise the amplifier cannot deliver its maximum output 
without distortion. The potential at point Ρ is applied to TR1 emitter 
via R5, a.f. signals being attenuated by C2. TR1 base is fed from the 
potential divider R {R2 which provides a constant reference potential. 
Any variation in the quiescent voltage at point Ρ is amplified by 
TR1 and the subsequent stages, all of which are direct coupled, so 
as to minimise the change in potential at P. 
Signal-frequency negative feedback is provided by R 15 and R 4 
which return a fraction of approximately l/9th of the output voltage 
to TR1 emitter. This means that the overall voltage gain of the 
amplifier is approximately 9. As the maximum excursion of output 
voltage is 22.5 V (i.e. Vcc/2) the input required is approximately 2.5 V 
peak. C 4 corrects the negative feedback for phase shifts in the 
amplifier at high frequencies and so avoids a peak in the frequency 
response curve or possible instability at or above the upper limit 
of the passband. 
In general the maximum peak output voltage is VJ2 and thus the 
r.m.s. voltage is VJ2^2. 
If the load resistance is Rx the maximum 
power output is given by V
2
/Rh 
i.e. 
The current in the load for maximum output is 1 A r.m.s. and the 
output transistors should be capable of supplying this without too 
great a fall in β. 
This circuit has been widely used for high-fidelity and public 
address amplifiers where large power output is required. Direct 
coupling is used throughout and there are no transformers. As a 
result, considerable feedback can be used and it is possible to reduce 
the total harmonic distortion to less than 1%. The circuit was first 
described by Tobey and Dinsdale.* 
Power f.e.t.s such as VMOSTs can be used in the output stage of an 
audio amplifier. 
* Tobey, R. and Dinsdale, J. Transistor Audio Power Amplifiers*, Wireless 
World 
67, No. 11, 565(1961). 
V
 
2 
For Vcc = 45 and R, = 15 we have 

Large-signal 
A. F. Amplifiers 
147 
+ 
è 
è 
è 
Ο -
Fig. 8.11. Principle of a current-dumping 
amplifier 
The advantages of this type of circuit, which has also been used in the 
field output stages of television receivers, are good linearity, no need for 
closely matched output transistors, good stability and low power 
consumption. 
B R I D G E O U T P U T 
STAGE 
The use of four transistors in a bridge circuit of the type shown in Fig. 
8.12 eliminates the need for loudspeaker coupling capacitors, permit-
C U R R E N T - D U M P I N G 
AMPLIFIERS 
In conventional push-pull transistor a.f. output stages the quiescent 
current in the output pair must be carefully controlled to minimise 
cross-over distortion. In a high-power stage it can be difficult to 
stabilise the quiescent current against temperature changes. These 
difficulties can be overcome by use of the so-called current-dumping 
technique. A skeleton circuit is shown in Fig. 8.11 and uses a 
feed-forward system in which a class-A amplifier (or an i.e.) feeds the 
loudspeaker via resistor Rt for small input signals. As the signal level 
increases, a point is reached on the positive half-cycles where the signal 
voltage generated across Rx is sufficient to drive TR2 into conduction: 
this then feeds current into the loudspeaker via coupling capacitor Cl. 
At the same time TR3 is driven into conduction on the negative 
half-cycles. Thus TR2 and TR3 operate in class Β at high signal levels. 
In fact the two transistors form a complementary emitter follower (see 
page 168) and the 100 per cent negative feedback implicit in the circuit 
ensures low distortion on high signal levels. 

148 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
-o 
f ν 
1
 
* 
Ο 0 V 
Fig. 8.12. Bridge circuit configuration for a power 
amplifier 
ting the low-frequency response to extend to d.c. This type of circuit 
greatly reduces the effect of supply-line hum on the signal and can be 
used for output powers up to hundreds of watts. Its disadvantage is that 
any bias or semiconductor failure can cause large direct currents to flow 
in the loudspeaker, necessitating elaborate protection circuits to 
remove the supply voltage whenever a steady out-of-balance current 
flows through the loudspeaker. The same bridge configuration can be 
used with i.c.s as described below. 
INTEGRATED-CIRCUIT A.F. POWER AMPLIFIER 
Fig. 8.13 gives the circuit diagram of a monolithic complementary 
push-pull amplifier capable of 1 W output and designed to operate 
with a supply balanced about earth potential. TR7 and TR8 form 
a complementary output pair which, unlike the amplifier just 
described, share a common-collector connection, the emitters being 
connected to the terminals of the supply. Because of the small voltage 
drop across the base-emitter path of transistors, there is a consider-
able difference in voltage between the bases of TR7 and TR8. This 
voltage is used as the collector supply for the complementary drivers 
TR5 and TR6 which are direct coupled to the output stage and have 
no load resistors. TR5 and TR6 have a common-emitter connection 
at earth potential and the small difference in voltage between the 

Large-signal 
A.F. A mplifiers 
149 
bases is provided by the voltage drop across the forward-biased 
diode Dl which, together with D2, D3 and the transistors TR3 and 
TR4, ensures d.c. stability in the amplifier. 
TR5 and TR6 are driven in phase by the common-base stage TR3 
which is fed from the long-tailed pair TR1 and TR2. The advantages 
of this circuit are discussed in the next chapter. Negative feedback 
is applied to the base of TR2 by a potential divider across the output 
terminals of the amplifier. The upper arm of the potential divider 
is R5 (10 kQ) which is connected into circuit by strapping terminals 
5 and 7 : the lower arm can be made 1 kQ by strapping 8 to earth, 
500 Ω by strapping 9 to earth or 250 Ω by strapping 8 and 10 and 
earthing 9. Thus there are three possible values of voltage gain and 
from inspection of the component values we can see that these are 
approximately 10, 20 or 40. 
The amplifier has an input resistance of approximately 8-5 kQ 
and an output resistance of approximately 0-5 Ω. A supply of ± 6 V 
FEEDBACK 
CONNECTIONS 
Fig. 8.13. Circuit diagram of a monolithic a.f. power 
amplifier 

150 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
can be used and 1 W can be delivered to a 16-Ω load. The amplifier 
is contained in a can about $-in in diameter which should preferably 
be cooled by a heat sink. 
H E A T S I N K S 
As we have seen, transistors used in output stages are often required 
to dissipate appreciable power in the transistors themselves. In a 
class-Α stage this internal dissipation is a maximum at the instants 
when there is no input signal: the power given by the product of 
the standing collector current and the collector-emitter voltage is 
then entirely dissipated in the transistor. In a class-B stage with a 
sinusoidal input signal, dissipation in the transistors is a maximum 
when the input-signal amplitude is 21 π (approximately 0.63) of that 
for maximum power output. 
With such dissipations there is a real danger of thermal runaway 
and it is advisable to provide some method of removing heat from 
the transistors. The usual method is to mount the transistors on a 
sheet of metal, known as a heat sink, which should have adequate 
thermal capacity (mass χ specific heat) and the transistors are usually 
so designed that it is easily possible to bring the collector electrode 
into good thermal contact with the heat sink. 
The primary limitation on the power which can safely be dissipated 
in a transistor is set by the temperature within the semiconducting 
material of the transistor. This is known as the collector junction tem-
perature Tj and its maximum value is decided after life tests on the 
transistor. Operation of the transistor above this maximum value may 
seriously damage or even destroy the transistor. The circuit designer is 
not required to measure the junction temperature but it is helpful if he 
can estimate it. A method of doing this is suggested below. 
The junction temperature of a transistor is always higher than 
that of the air immediately adjacent to the transistor case (the 
ambient temperature Tamh
) the difference being proportional to the 
power dissipated in the transistor. Thus 
Tj-Tamb
 
= Pcx a constant 
The constant has the dimensions of a thermal resistance (the 
reciprocal of thermal conductivity) and is commonly represented 
by Θ. It may be defined as the temperature rise for unit dissipation 
and is commonly expressed in "C per mW. 
Tj = Tamb+pce 

Large-signal 
A. F. Amplifiers 
151 
θ depends on the conductivity between the collector electrode and 
the external surrounds and is thus a function of the physical con-
struction of the transistor. For a given transistor θ and 7} are constant 
and the maximum power dissipation decreases linearly with rise in 
ambient temperature. 
For small transistors θ depends almost entirely on the conductivity 
of the material between the semiconducting material and the case. 
For such transistors there is little reduction in θ by mounting the 
case on a heat sink and cooling is by convection through the air. 
A typical value for Θ for such transistors is 0.35°C/mW and if we 
250 
200 
Pc 
( m W ) 
100 
50 
Γ Γ Γ Γ
1 
1 
i 
1 
i 
^^^^^^^^ 
! j 
1 
; 
> i l l ! 
ί 
! 
; 
! J 
t
i
l
l 
10 
20 
30 
40 
SO 
«0 
70 
80 
7"amb 
CO 
Fig. 8.14. Relationship 
between Pc and Tamb
for 
a transistor for which Τ = 75°C 
and Θ = 
0.35°C/mW 
take Tj as 75°C we can plot Pc against Tamb
 as shown in Fig. 8.14. 
This is a useful curve for it enables us to calculate the power dissipa-
tion permissible at any given value of ambient temperature. At 
20°C, for example, the dissipation is 160 mW but at 40°C it has fallen 
to 100 mW. 
For transistors intended for larger power outputs the collector 
electrode is in direct metallic contact with the case which is designed 
for bolting to a large block of metal such as a chassis to act as a 
heat sink. This is an example of conduction cooling. The thermal 
resistance between collector and case of such transistors is very low 
and the overall thermal resistance depends very largely on the 
properties of the heat sink. 

152 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
The total or effective thermal resistance between collector junction 
and the outside air is made up of the following components : 
1. the thermal resistance θ{ between collector junction and tran-
sistor cases: a typical value is 1.2°C/W; 
2. the thermal resistance θ2 across the mica washer which is 
generally used between case and heat sink to isolate the case 
electrically from the heat sink: a typical value is 0.5°C/W; 
3. the thermal resistance 03 of the heat sink itself. This depends 
on the mass and area of the sink. 
The total thermal resistance is given by 
θ = 0,-f fl, + 03 
= 1.7 + 03 
Suppose, as a numerical example, a dissipation of 6 W is required, 
that Tj is limited to 8 0 C and that the ambient temperature is 50°C. 
These values might be encountered in the design of the output stage 
of a car radio. From the expression 
we have 
Tj = Tomb
 + e.PL 
Τ — τ 
β 
*j 
' amb 
But 0 = 1.7 + 03 
Pc 
6 
= 3.3°C/W 
To give a thermal resistance of this order, the heat sink can take 
the form of a sheet of aluminium about 40 in
2
 in area and at least 
γ$ in thick. If the equipment has a chassis this may satisfy these 
requirements and the output transistor can be mounted on it. If, 
however, the equipment has printed wiring and requires no chassis, 
then a separate heat sink is necessary: the size of the sink can be 
reduced by providing it with cooling fins to give the required area. 
Temperatures at the various junctions in the thermal circuit, e.g. 
at the junction between chassis and washer or between washer and 
transistor case, can be calculated in the following manner. As already 
shown the thermal resistance of the heat sink is 3.3°C/mW. The power 
transmitted through it is 6 W and thus from the general expression 
temp, difference = power χ thermal resistance 

Large-signal 
A.F. Amplifiers 
153 
we have 
temp, difference = 6 x 3.3 
= 20 C approximately 
The temperature of the air is 50 C, that of the chassis at the point 
of contact with the washer will be 50 + 20 = 70 C For the mica 
washer itself the temperature difference across it is given by 6 χ 0-5 = 
3 C giving the temperature at the junction between washer and 
transistor case as 73 C. 
DARLINGTON POWER TRANSISTORS 
An output transistor supplying considerable power such as 100 W 
requires a large heat sink. The transistor driving it is likely to have a 
dissipation of several watts and it, too, requires a heat sink. The space 
occupied by the two heat sinks can be reduced by using a single sink 
carrying an integrated circuit which consists of the output transistor 
and driver arranged in a Darlington circuit (p. 127) on a single silicon 
slice and within a single encapsulation. Such an i.e. can be treated as a 
single power transistor with very high current gain (2,000 is common). 

C H A P T E R 
9 
D.C. and Pulse Amplifiers 
INTRODUCTION 
The fundamental circuits of Figs. 7.7 and 7.10 for two-stage current 
and voltage amplifiers are also used for d.c. and pulse amplification. 
Voltage amplifiers often include an emitter-follower stage to give 
a high input resistance or a low output resistance, and negative 
feedback is commonly applied over the three stages. 
D.C. AMPLIFIERS 
These are amplifiers used for magnifying small voltages or currents 
so that slow variations in them can be more readily seen and 
measured. To ensure a good response at the very low frequencies 
of interest the amplifiers are usually direct-coupled. 
D.C. amplifiers are used in electro-cardiographs, computers, 
oscilloscopes, pyrometers and in sensitive measuring instruments such 
as milli-microammeters. 
Direct-coupled 
Cascaded 
Circuit 
A simple d.c. amplifier could be constructed as suggested in Fig. 
9.1 by using a number of transistors in cascade, each collector being 
direct-coupled to the base of the following transistor. Such a circuit 
would, however, suffer from the following serious limitations : 
(1) Any variations in the collector current of any of the transistors not 
caused by an input signal will, of course, give rise to a spurious output 
154 

D. C. and Pulse Amplifiers 
\ 5 5 
from the amplifier. Clearly variations in the first transistor are the 
most important because they are amplified by the two following 
transistors. Now the collector current of a transistor is given by filb 
and one possible cause of unwanted variations in Ic is drift in the value 
of lh. Such drift occurs and is particularly serious when the external 
base circuit is of low resistance for there is then no means of defining 
\b. Spurious output from this cause can be minimised by arranging for 
the 
input signal for 
each 
transistor 
to be supplied 
from 
a 
high-resistance source: the standing base current is then largely 
determined by the external source voltage and resistance. 
(2) The gain of a common-emitter stage is determined by the value 
of β which is itself dependent on mean-emitter current and on 
INPUT s~*< 
TRl 
OUTPUT 
TR2 
TR3 
Fig. 9.1. 
Basic circuit for 
a three-stage 
d.c. amplifier. 
The 
performance 
is unsatisfactory 
for reasons given in the text 
temperature. The gain of a simple amplifier such as that illustrated 
in Fig. 9.1 thus depends on the magnitude of the input signal with 
the result that the output-input characteristic of the amplifier is 
non-linear. By sacrificing sensitivity the characteristic can be made 
as linear as desired by use of negative feedback. 
Provided all the precautions mentioned under (1) and (2) above 
are taken a circuit based on Fig. 9.1 can be made to give a satisfactory 
performance. A suitable circuit diagram is given in Fig. 9.2. The 
emitter bias voltages for TR2 and TR3 must be steady because 
changes in these would be interpreted by the transistors as input 
signals. Resistors, if used in each emitter circuit to give the required 
emitter voltage, would reduce gain by introducing negative feed-
back. Individual batteries could be used but this is hardly a satis-
factory arrangement because changes in battery voltage and internal 
resistance with age would upset operation. 

156 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
A solution to the problem is to use voltage reference diodes with 
suitable voltage ratings in the emitter circuits. The voltage developed 
Fig. 9.2. 
This modification 
to the circuit of Fig. 9.1 is 
satisfactory 
across such a diode is independent of the current in it : thus the diode 
behaves as a battery with constant e.m.f. and negligible internal 
resistance. There is minimal loss of signal amplification by negative 
feedback due to the diodes in the emitter circuits. 
To give the required gain and linearity, overall negative feedback 
can be applied to the amplifier by a resistor R2 connected between 
TR3 collector and TRI base. The collector resistors for TRI and 
TR2 must be high in value to minimise drift in TR2 and TR3, and 
this necessitates a fairly high supply voltage. Drift in TR1 is minimised 
by introducing a high-value series resistor K,. The feedback circuit 
is of the type used in the basic current amplifier of Fig. 7.8 and we 
can therefore say immediately that the current gain from TRI base 
to TR3 collector is given by R2/Ry.'Alternatively 
if the source of 
input voltage ι\, is assumed to be of low resistance we can say that 
R\ and R2 constitute a feedback potential divider connected across 
The output voltage vout
 and the voltage gain vout
/vin 
is given by 
R2/Ri. 
Differential Amplifier (Long-tailed 
Pair) 
An alternative method of minimising drift in direct-coupled ampli-
fiers is to use two similar transistors in a balanced circuit such as 
that illustrated in Fig. 9.3. The transistors are connected in the 
common-emitter mode and base bias is provided by similar potential 

D. C. and Pulse Amplifiers 
157 
dividers across the supply. The transistors share a common emitter 
resistor, and a potentiometer enables the emitter currents to be 
equalised so that equal push-pull signals are received from the output 
terminals when an input is applied to, say, TR1. The outputs can be 
applied to a further balanced stage to increase the gain of the 
amplifier. The merit of this arrangement is that any change in TR1 
collector current (caused by an increase in ambient temperature, 
for example) is accompanied by an equal increase in TR2 collector 
current because this transistor is of the same type as TR1 and shares 
the same environment. Equal increases in the collector currents 
cause equal increases in the voltages across the collector resistors. 
There is therefore no change in voltage between the output terminals 
as a result of the temperature change. The output of the amplifier is 
measured by the voltage between the output terminals and such an 
output can only be produced by an input applied to one of the 
transistors. A technique sometimes employed in differential amplifiers 
is to apply the input signal to TR1 base and a linearising negative 
feedback voltage to TR2 base (as in Fig. 8.11, for example). 
Chopper 
Amplifier 
When drift must be kept very low or where high d.c. gain is required, 
a chopper amplifier is sometimes used. In this the signal to be 
amplified is interrupted, i.e. chopped at regular intervals to produce 
an alternating signal with an amplitude proportional to the d.c. 
signal. The alternating signal is then amplified to the required degree 
Fig. 9.3. A differential amplifier or long-tailed 
pair' 
ADJUST 
BALANCE 

158 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIERS 
General 
With modern transistors it is not difficult to extend the response of a 
d.c. amplifier to frequencies of the order of 1 MHz. Such amplifiers 
are 
available in integrated-circuit 
form. 
They are known 
as 
operational amplifiers, have high input resistance, low output 
resistance and very high voltage gain. A typical value for the d.c. gain 
is 500,000 but the gain falls as frequency rises and may reach unity at, 
say, 1 MHz. This figure can be treated as the gain-bandwidth product 
for the amplifier. If a gain of 1,000 is wanted, the amplifier can 
maintain this up to 500 Hz: if a frequency response up to 10 kHz is 
wanted, the gain of the amplifier is limited to 50. Operational 
amplifiers were originally used in analogue computers to carry out 
mathematical operations such as addition, subtraction and integration 
but are now widely used for analogue-signal processing. 
The circuit diagram of a monolothic operational amplifier is given 
in Fig. 9.4. To minimise drift the first stage consists of a balanced pair 
TR2, TR3 direct-coupled to a second pair TR8, TR9. To give a high 
input resistance the first pair is preceded by emitter followers TR1, 
TR4. TR9 is followed by two common-emitter stages TRIO, TR12 
in cascade which drive the complementary output pair TR13, TR14. 
Direct coupling is used throughout to extend the response to zero 
frequency : this is essential if the amplifier is to be used for mathe-
matical operations on steady potentials. 
It is normally necessary for the output potential to be zero when 
both inputs are at zero potential. It is difficult to achieve this in mass 
production and there is normally an output voltage, known as the 
offset voltage, which arises from inherent unbalance in the amplifier. 
This can be reduced to zero by adjustment of the collector supply 
voltage for TR2 and the lead from Rx is brought out to an external 
connection for this purpose. 
The circuit comprising R3 to R8 and TR5 to TR7 provides further 
protection against drjft. The stabilisation for the remaining part of 
the amplifier has something in common with that of the Tobey and 
in a pulse amplifier, which need not be direct coupled. The output is 
restored to d.c. form by simple rectification or by commutation which 
must be synchronous with the interruption of the original signal. 
Chopping of the input and output signals can be achieved by 
mechanical means, e.g. by a vibrating reed, or electronically, for 
example by a gate circuit driven from a multivibrator. 

Fig. 9.4 Circuit diagram of a monolithic operational 
amplifier 
D. C. and Pulse Amplifiers

160 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Dinsdale amplifier described on page 144. Rl0, 
Ri5 
and Ril 
con-
stitute a potential divider connected across the output of the 
amplifier which apply to TRIO emitter a fraction of the output 
voltage. TRIO compares this fraction with the voltage at TR9 
collector and any errors are corrected by TR11 which adjusts its 
collector current to maintain the standing output voltage at V/2. 
Rl0, 
Rl5 
and Rxl 
also provide signal-frequency feedback and the 
voltage gain of the amplifier from TRIO to TR14 is given approxi-
mately by Λ ι ι / ( Κ ι ο + Κ 1 5
) , i-
e
- 8-2 for the resistor values shown. 
The connections to K ,0 are brought out to external terminals to 
enable this resistor to be short-circuited. By so doing the gain of the 
latter half of the amplifier can be increased to approximately /<u//?i5, 
As Fig. 9.4 shows, the amplifier has inputs to both bases of the first 
long-tailed pair. To obtain a positive signal at the amplifier output 
requires a negative signal at one input or a positive signal at the other: 
these are known as the inverting and non-inverting inputs and are 
marked by minus and plus signs on the block symbol for an 
operational amplifier. Negative feedback signals are, of course, 
applied to the inverting input. The same signal applied to both inputs 
gives no output from the amplifier, a property known as common-
mode rejection. The amplifier responds only to the 
difference 
between the input signals: it could be described as a differential 
amplifier. 
Applications 
It is sometimes necessary to know when a varying signal voltage has a 
particular value. An operational amplifier can be used to give this 
information by applying the varying voltage to one input and the fixed 
voltage to the other. Zero output occurs when the two voltages are 
i.e. 50. 
I N P U T o -
-OOUTPUT 
Fig. 9.5. An operational amplifier used for non-inverting 
amplification 

D. C. and Pulse Amplifiers 
161 
equal. This is an example of the use of an operational amplifier as a 
comparator. 
Fig. 9.5 illustrates the use of an operational amplifier 
for 
non-inverting amplification. Negative feedback is applied via ϋλ and 
R3, 
fixing 
the voltage gain at (Rl + R3)/Rl. 
The diagram for a 
corresponding inverting amplifier is given in Fig. 9.6. An interesting 
feature of this circuit is that the input voltage applied to Rj is largely 
neutralised by the negative-feedback signal from the output via R3. 
The signal voltage at the amplifier input terminal itself is very small. 
In fact, for an amplifier output of 1 V, the input voltage may be only 
2 μ ν (corresponding to a voltage gain of 500,000). Thus the voltage at 
the input terminal hardly moves from zero and can be treated as a 
source of almost steady potential - a virtual earth, in fact. 
I N P U T 
* — Ο 
O U T P U T 
Fig. 9.6. An operational amplifier used for inverting 
amplification 
Fig. 9.7. Principle of the summing 
amplifier 
This is a useful concept for it shows us immediately that the input 
resistance in Fig. 9.6 is equal to Rj. It also provides us with a neat 
solution to Fig. 9.7 in which there are two inputs v{ and v2 applied to 
the same input terminal via equal resistors of value R. As the inverting 
input terminal is a virtual earth the current flowing into it from the 
two inputs must equal the current flowing out via the negative 
feedback resistor, also equal to R. 

162 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
giving 
V
l 
,
 
V
2 
=
 
V
o u t 
R 
R 
R 
Vnut 
= 
V i 
v2 
i.e. the output voltage is the sum of the two input voltages. Clearly 
this circuit arrangement can be extended to embrace any number of 
inputs and, by reversing the polarity of the inputs, subtraction can be 
performed. 
INPUT ο—I 
V 
ο OUTPUT 
Fig. 9.8. Operational amplifier used for integration 
In the circuit of Fig. 9.8 the feedback current is given by âQ/dt = 
Cdvo u t
/d/ and thus we have, again using the virtual-earth concept 
R 
~ 
d r 
from which 
d r 
RC 
·'•
Vout
 
=
 l k I
v*
nd' 
Thus the output of the amplifier is equal to the time integral of the 
input voltage. This is, of course, the principle of the Miller integrator 
described on page 276. 
As in Fig. 9.4 operational amplifiers may require a positive and a 
negative supply voltage in order that the input and output terminal 
voltages shall be near zero. It is possible, however, to use a single 
supply if the amplifier is to be used for alternating signals thus 
permitting capacitive coupling at the input and the output terminals. 
As an example Fig. 9.9 shows a non-inverting amplifier designed for a 
voltage gain of 100. The non-inverting input is biased to mid-supply 
voltage by the potential divider RXR2 
(in which R{ = R2). 
Negative 

D. C. and Pulse 
Amplifiers 
163 
*<0 
INPUT ο—Il—i 
I 
Ο OUTPUT 
ο 
-ο 
— 
Fig. 9.9. Operational amplifier with a single supply voltage used for 
alternating-signal 
feedback is applied to the inverting input by R3R4 
(R3 being 100 times 
R4 to set the required gain). D.C. isolation at the input and output is 
provided by Cx and C2. 
Amplifiers such as oscilloscope Y-amplifiers and video amplifiers 
are required to handle signals which may have steep, almost vertical 
edges and also long, almost horizontal sections. A signal which has 
both features is a rectangular pulse and is commonly used in tests of 
such amplifiers which are usually known as pulse amplifiers. 
The ability of an amplifier to reproduce rapid changes such as a 
steep edge in a signal waveform is determined by the high-frequency 
response of the amplifier : in fact such amplifiers must have a response 
good up to the frequency given by 
where t is the rise time* of the steepest edge. If the rise time is 0.1 μ8 
the upper frequency limit is given by 
amplification 
P U L S E A M P L I F I E R S 
General 
f = 2 x 0 . 1 x 1 0
-6 Hz 
= 5 MHz 
* The rise time of a step is defined as the time taken for the signal to rise from 
10 to 90 per cent of the final steady value 

164 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
The ability of an amplifier to reproduce very slow changes such 
as an almost horizontal section in a signal waveform is determined 
by the low-frequency response of the amplifier: the longer the 
section of the waveform, the better must be the low-frequency 
response of the amplifier to reproduce it without distortion. As a 
numerical example, an amplifier required to reproduce a 50-Hz 
square wave with less than 2 per cent sag in the horizontal sections 
must have a low-frequency response which is good down to at 
least 1 Hz. Sometimes pulse amplifiers are direct-coupled to extend 
the low-frequency response to zero frequency. 
To summarise the above we may say that pulse amplifiers are 
characterised by an extremely wide frequency response: for a 
video amplifier, for example, the useful frequency response may 
extend from very low frequencies to 5.5 MHz. A statement such 
as this of the steady-state amplitude response of the amplifier does 
not, however, give complete information about its performance 
as a pulse amplifier. In general a pulse signal contains many 
components which must not only undergo similar magnification 
but also must be maintained in their original phase relationship 
when distortionless amplification is required. The shunt capacitance 
which is inevitable in any amplifier causes the phase of high-
frequency components of a complex signal such as a pulse to lag 
behind that of low-frequency components. Such a lag would be 
comparatively unimportant in an a.f. amplifier but can seriously 
degrade the performance of a pulse amplifier by increasing the 
rise time. Phase response is thus important in pulse amplifiers 
and for a good performance both the amplitude and the phase 
response must satisfy certain stringent requirements over the 
spectrum occupied by the signals to be amplified. 
For amplifiers using simple inter-transistor coupling networks, 
such as are likely to be used for pulse amplification, there is a 
mathematical relationship between the amplitude response and 
the phase response so that, given one, it is possible to deduce the 
other. In general the flatter the frequency response the better is 
the phase response also and it is thus possible to ensure an adequate 
phase response by making the amplitude response of the amplifier 
sufficiently good. When a pulse amplifier is designed in this way 
the amplitude response must satisfy standards far more exacting 
than if phase response were not under consideration. For example 
to design a video amplifier with a passband extending to 5.5 MHz it 
may be necessary to make the amplitude response of the amplifier flat 
to say 35 MHz. 

D. C. and Pulse Amplifiers 
165 
Use of 
Transistors 
There is no difficulty in achieving bandwidths of this order using 
planar transistors as conventional RC-coupled amplifiers: even 
the transistors 
intended 
for 
a.f. 
applications 
have 
transition 
frequencies of about 200 MHz and transistors with fT greater than 
1GHz, i.e. 1,000 MHz, are available. 
The transition frequency fT 
specifies the product of the current 
gain and bandwidth of the transistor. As an example if a transistor 
with fT 
= 500 MHz is required to give a current gain of 100, it 
can do this up to 5 MHz. If, on the other hand, the response must 
be maintained up to 25 MHz the current gain is limited to 20.* 
Clearly in designing pulse amplifiers some means is required of 
dividing the product fT 
between gain and bandwidth as required. 
This is possible by choice of load-resistor value but a better method 
is by use of negative feedback. 
Use of Negative 
Feedback 
Feedback is extensively used in pulse amplifiers principally to 
make the performance independent of the inevitable differences in 
characteristics between transistors of the same type and hence to 
make performance also independent of temperature. If a large 
degree of feedback is used the gain and bandwidth are largely 
determined by the constants of the feedback loop. Thus the per-
formance of the amplifier can be predetermined and it is possible 
to manufacture a number of amplifiers all having the same per-
formance within very close limits. This is important, for example, 
in colour television where the amplifiers handling the red, green 
and blue components of the colour signal must have identical 
performances. 
It is not easy to apply a large degree of feedback to an amplifier 
without producing oscillation or a sharp peak in the frequency-
response curve at frequencies near the extremes of the passband. 
One method of avoiding such effects in a multi-stage amplifier is 
to employ a number of independent feedback loops each em-
bracing only two stages (three if one is an emitter follower). 
Negative feedback reduces the gain and extends the bandwidth 
of an amplifier in approximately the same ratio: thus a 6 dB 
* In tuned amplifiers it is possible to achieve some current or voltage gain in the 
inter-transistor coupling circuits and this enables a transistor stage to give worth-
while gain above j t : in pulse amplifiers, however, extra gain cannot be obtained 
from the resistance coupling normally used and j r may be taken as the highest 
usable frequency. 

166 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
reduction in gain is accompanied by a doubling of bandwidth. 
This is illustrated in Fig. 9.10. The upper frequency-response curve 
is that of an amplifier without feedback and is 3 dB down at the 
frequency/T which can be taken as the limit of the passband. When 
feedback is applied the gain falls at all frequencies but the fall is 
greater at middle than at high and low frequencies and the new 
3-dB loss point is now at f2 representing an upwards extension of 
the passband. The low-frequency response is similarly extended 
but this is not illustrated in Fig. 9.10. 
If the negative feedback circuit is so designed that the feedback 
voltage or current becomes less as frequency approaches the 
limits of the passband it is possible to achieve a greater extension 
of frequency response as suggested by the dotted line in Fig. 9.10. 
This, however, is usually accompanied by a deterioration in phase 
response, manifested by overshoot in reproduced pulses. Where a 
very good pulse response is essential it is advisable to adhere to 
the aperiodic, i.e. non-frequency-discriminating, 
feedback 
repre-
sented by the solid curve. In a television receiver slight overshoot 
in the video amplifier may be tolerable (even advantageous by 
slightly exaggerating the transitions), and frequency-discriminating 
feedback is often used. 
Fig. 9.10 Effect of negative feedback on the frequency response of an amplifier 
A number of examples of typical pulse amplifier circuits will 
now be considered. 
Fig. 9.11 shows the circuit diagram of a voltage pulse amplifier 
designed to give a gain of 20 dB from a very low frequency up to 
RESPONSE WITHOUT 
FEEDBACK 
RESPONSE WITH FREQUENCY-
DISCRIMINATING 
FEEDBACK 
FREQUENCY 
»-
V O L T A G E P U L S E A M P L I F I E R S 
\ 
RESPONSE WITH NON-FREQUENCY 
DISCRIMINATING 
FEEDBACK 

D. C. and Pulse Amplifiers 
167 
approximately 6.6 MHz. Two common-emitter stages in the basic 
arrangement of Fig. 7.15 provide the required voltage gain and an 
emitter follower gives the required low output resistance. Direct 
coupling is used throughout and signal-frequency feedback is 
injected into the emitter circuit of TRI to give the required high 
input resistance (approximately 10 kQ). 
Signal-frequency feedback is provided by two loops : 
(a) R9, Rl0, 
Rl5 
between TR3 emitter and TRI emitter 
(b) C3, C 4 between TR2 collector and base. 
Resistors Rg, Rl0 
and Rl5 
together with R6 determine the gain of 
the amplifier over the lower middle of the passband and / ? 15 is 
adjusted to give the required gain at 10 kHz. The same value of 
gain at 5.5 MHz is obtained by adjusting C 4 which, with C3, determines 
the gain near the top of the passband. This rather complex feedback 
circuit is used to control the phase response of the amplifier at and 
above the upper extreme of the passband so as to eliminate any 
possibility of instability at these frequencies. 
An essential requirement of this amplifier is that the mean output 
voltage should not depart significantly from zero. It is designed to 
Fig. 9.11. A voltage pulse 
amplifier 

168 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
COMPLEMENTARY EMITTER FOLLOWER 
Simple emitter followers such as that illustrated in Fig. 7.14 are 
satisfactory with sinusoidal signals but may not be suitable for 
use with pulse signals. Consider, for example, a rectangular-wave 
voltage input : the output waveform is produced by the sequential 
operate from a supply unit giving stabilised voltages of —10 and 
+ 14, and a very high degree of d.c. stability in the amplifier is 
clearly necessary. In a direct-coupled amplifier any variations in 
collector current of the first stage (due to changes in ambient 
temperature, for example) are interpreted as signals and 
are 
amplified by the following stages to give large unwanted changes 
in voltage at the output. To achieve high stability therefore a very 
low value of zero-frequency gain is wanted. For this purpose the 
zero-frequency gain is reduced to a very low value by the direct-
coupled feedback loop R2, R4, R5, R 12 between TR3 collector 
and TR1 base. This loop must not, however, affect the gain of the 
amplifier in the passband (which extends to a very low frequency) 
and accordingly R 12 
is bypassed by the 1,000-μΡ decoupling 
capacitor C6. The degree of direct-coupled feedback can be adjusted 
within limits by the preset potentiometer R2 which is set to give 
zero voltage output from TR3 emitter. Although this feedback 
reduces amplification of unwanted changes in TRl collector current, 
it is still possible for zero-frequency voltages in the amplifier to 
drift and there is need to stabilise the potential at some point in 
the signal path. Applying the technique mentioned at the beginning 
of this chapter, such stabilisation is achieved by including a voltage 
reference diode in TR2 emitter circuit. With the assistance of 
feedback this method restricts the variations of mean voltage output 
to less than 0.03 V in the circuit shown. 
The low-frequency response of the amplifier is not required to 
extend to zero frequency but must nevertheless be very good. As 
just explained C 6 causes some fall-off in low-frequency response 
and the only other source of low-frequency loss is Cx which is 
made very large (100 μΡ). The frequency for 3dB loss is 0.4 Hz 
and the amplifier can reproduce a 50-Hz square wave with less than 
1 per cent sag on the horizontal sections. 
Diode Dl is included to prevent the base of TRl being driven 
appreciably positive with respect to its emitter potential. Such 
input voltages can occur and if they exceed a particular value can 
damage or even destroy TRl by taking the base-emitter potential 
past the breakdown voltage for this junction. 

Ζλ C. and Pulse 
Amplifiers 
169 
charge and discharge of the shunt capacitance in the output by 
the emitter current of the transistor. Provided the transistor remains 
conductive throughout the cycle, the charge and discharge time 
constants are equal. The output waveform is then symmetrical and 
a reasonable copy of the input. If, however, the output time constant 
is comparable with the rise or fall times of the input, the output 
cannot change as rapidly as the input. It is then possible for positive-
going input steps to cut off the transistor (assumed pnp). This 
considerably increases the output time constant by making rc 
effectively infinite, leaving only Re as the discharge path for the 
output capacitance. Thus for steep-sided input signals the output 
can have markedly dissimilar rise and fall times. 
This effect can be eliminated by using a symmetrical circuit, e.g. 
a complementary pair consisting of one pnp and one npn transistor 
feeding the same output terminal as suggested in the basic circuit 
of Fig. 9.12. Positive-going input steps, even if they cut the pnp 
transistor off, drive the npn transistor into conduction: similarly 
negative-going input steps turn the pnp transistor on. In a practical 
version of this circuit it is necessary to provide the transistors with 
base bias: a suitable circuit is applied to TR3 and TR4 in Fig. 8.10. 
As an example of another type of pulse amplifier we will consider 
the design of a video amplifier for a 625-line monochrome television 
receiver. This has to supply a maximum voltage swing of about 
70 to the cathode of the picture tube and an output of 1.5 V (from 
black to white level) can be expected from the vision detector. The 
input resistance of the amplifier must be at least 30 kQ to minimise 
damping of the detector circuit. We therefore need a voltage 
amplifier with a gain of approximately 45, high input resistance and a 
response up to 5.5 MHz. 
Fig. 9.12 Basic form of comple-
mentary emitter 
follower 
V I D E O A M P L I F I E R FOR T E L E V I S I O N 
RECEIVER 

170 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
A single common-emitter stage could provide the voltage gain 
and frequency response but a second stage is needed to give the 
high input resistance and this is usually in the form of an emitter 
follower preceding the common-emitter stage. Thus the amplifier 
has the basic form shown in Fig. 9.13. To keep dissipation in the 
output stage at a minimum it is usual to arrange for TR2 to be 
almost cut off for black-level signals and to be driven into con-
duction by the picture signal. As the collector is direct-coupled 
to the tube cathode it follows that TR2 must have a positive h.t. 
supply and must be of npn type. TRl gives no phase inversion 
and thus the diode must give an output in which increasing white-
ness is portrayed by a positive excursion of voltage. This is achieved 
by arranging for the diode to give a negative output voltage : with 
Fig. 9.13. Basic form of video 
amplifier 
negative modulation this voltage approaches zero for peak white 
signals and this is the required form of operation. 
The component values required in the circuit which couples 
TR2 to the picture tube are determined by the total shunt capaci-
tance Cs at this point. An approximate value for Cs is 10 pF made 
up of contributions from tube input, TR2 output and strays. At 
5.5MHz the reactance of 10pF is nearly 3kQ. If R6 is made 3kQ 
the frequency response of the output circuit is 3dB down at 5.5 
MHz. It is preferable, however, to use a larger value for R6 to reduce 
the current swing required from TR2 and to improve the gain at 
low and medium frequencies. A value of 3-9 kQ is suitable. Knowing 
this we can determine the value of the undecoupled emitter resistor 
R7. TRl gives unity voltage gain and thus TR2 must provide the 
gain of 45 required. From Eqn 7.5 the gain is given approximately 
by R6/ R7 Thus R7 is equal to R6/gain, i.e. 3,900/45 about 87 Ω. 
With R6 equal to 3-9 kQ the 3-dB loss frequency is 4 MHz but 
the response can be extended to the required 5-5 MHz in two ways: 

D. C. and Pulse Amplifiers 
171 
(a) by use of an inductor L 2 in series with R6. This offsets the 
effect of the shunt capacitance as frequency rises. The value of L2 
can be calculated from the expression 
L2 = 
aR\Cs 
By putting a = 0.5 the response can be levelled at 4 MHz at the 
cost of approximately 7 per cent overshoot. If R6 = 3.9kQ and 
Cs = 10 pF L2 is 80 μΗ. 
(b) by shunting R7 by a capacitor C4. This reduces the feedback 
due to R1 as frequency rises. A suitable value for C 4 can be found 
by equating the time constants of the collector and emitter circuits 
of TR2. We thus have 
R 7C 4 = 
R6CS 
= voltage gain χ Cs 
= 45 χ 10 pF 
= 450 pF 
The output from the detector varies between a minimum value 
for peak white signals and - 1 . 5 V at the tips of synchronising 
pulses. When the detector output is almost zero, the voltage across 
R6 must be 70 V and across R7 1.5 V. If, as likely, TR2 is a silicon 
planar transistor, the base-emitter voltage is, say, 0.7 so that the 
voltage across R5 is 2.2 V. A suitable value for R5 is 1.5 kQ and 
the current in this resistor is then 1.5 mA. If TRI is also silicon 
planar the base-emitter voltage is again 0.7 and the base-earth 
input voltage for the amplifier is 2.9 V. As the detector provides 
almost zero voltage approximately 2.9 V must be obtained from 
K4. The potential divider R3R^ 
must be proportioned to give this 
voltage. It is usual to make one of the resistors preset so that correct 
operation of the amplifier can be obtained in spite of differences 
in the parameters of the transistors used. 
The input resistance of TR2 is given approximately by fiRn and 
if β is taken as 50, is equal to 4.35 kQ. This is in parallel with R5 
(1.5 kQ) giving a net external emitter resistance for TRI of 1.1 kQ. 
If β for TRI is also taken as 50 the input resistance of the amplifier 
is given by 50 x 1.1 = 55 kQ, nearly double the minimum value 
required. This is, of course, the input resistance to alternating 
signals but the resistance for zero-frequency signals is of the same 
order. We have assumed that β for both transistors is maintained 
at 50 up to 5.5 MHz, equivalent to /, = 275 MHz. It would prob-

172 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Fig. 9.14. Basic form of video amplifier with provision for increasing the charging 
current 
for the stray 
capacitance 
CATHODE 
" O F 
P I C T U R E 
T U B E 
ably be satisfactory, however, to use transistors with fT 
= 200 MHz 
because the only effect of this reduction would be to lower the 
input resistance of the amplifier at the upper end of the video-
frequency range : a little reduction is acceptable. 
To deliver the required output of 70 V TR2 requires an h.t. 
supply of, say, 80 V. The collector-current swing required is 18 mA 
and a dissipation of approximately 0-5 W is likely. TR2 must 
hence be capable of working under these conditions. If the receiver 
is intended for operation from a 12-V battery the 80-V supply can 
be obtained by rectifying the output of a winding on the line output 
transformer. TRl can operate satisfactorily from a 12-V supply. 
As pointed out above, the limiting factor in the design of video 
amplifiers is the capacitance shunting the output. This capacitance is 
rapidly discharged by the collector current of the video stage when 
this is driven into the increasing conduction by a positive-going input 
signal (corresponding to increasing brightness). But on negative-going 
input signals (decreasing brightness) the rise in collector voltage is 
controlled by the shunt capacitance as this is charged from the supply 
via the collector load resistor. The video transistor can usually 
discharge the shunt capacitance more rapidly than the load resistor 
can charge it and as a result reproduced images tend to be blurred. 
To overcome this in many video amplifiers provision is made to 
provide increased charging current on negative-going input signals. 
For example, single-ended push-pull can be used as in Fig. 8.8: here 
one output transistor is conductive on positive input signals and the 

D. C. and Pulse 
Amplifiers 
other on negative signals. In an alternative circuit shown in basic form 
in Fig. 9.14 the collector load RI is paralleled by a transistor TR2 
arranged to conduct on negative input signals and thus to connect a 
low-value resistor R2 in parallel with TRl load resistor. A diode D l is 
connected in series with the amplifier output and TR2 base-emitter 
junction is connected across D l . When TRl base is driven positive its 
collector voltage falls and Dl conducts: when TRl base is driven 
negative its collector voltage rises and Dl is cut off, causing TR2 to be 
turned on and R2 to be connected in parallel with RI to provide the 
increased charging current required for C. This circuit enables values 
of RI approaching 10 kQ to be used whilst still permitting a frequency 
response extending to 5 MHz. 
In a black-and-white receiver the only input to the picture-tube 
cathode is the luminance signal as just described. In a colour receiver, 
however, the picture tube requires inputs representing the three 
television primary colours red, green and blue. These inputs are 
applied to the three cathodes of the electron gun in the tube, the three 
corresponding grids being commoned and held at a fixed voltage 
which determines the brightness of the picture. Thus three video 
amplifiers are required and these must be closely matched in gain and 
output level to ensure that the colour components are correctly 
balanced throughout the amplitude range of the amplifiers. Preset 
controls are included to permit these adjustments. The circuits used 
are often based on that in Fig. 9.15 which can give the required 
frequency response without need for peaking inductors provided that 
frequency-discriminating negative feedback is used in the emitter 
circuit of the video amplifier. 
A desirable precaution against possible damage to the video 
output transistors by internal flash-over in the picture tube is to 
include resistors in the tube driving circuits. Most picture tubes 
have spark gaps around the electrode pins which are connected via 
low-inductance paths to the earthed conductive coating of the tube. 
This arrangement ensures that transient currents due to flash-overs 
are confined to the low-inductance paths. 
I N T E G R A T E D - C I R C U I T P U L S E 
A M P L I F I E R 
Fig. 9.15 gives the circuit diagram of a voltage pulse amplifier 
manufactured in monolithic form. It is contained in a can ^-in 
in diameter. 
The circuit consists of three common-emitter stages and an 
emitter 
follower 
all direct-coupled. 
Signal-frequency 
negative 

174 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Γ 
INPUT 
9ku 
V 
Μ 5 0 0 U 
C, 
TR2 
η
2 
50 Ω Π "
3 
1 4kn 
L._._U 
26 
EARTH 
30 
40 
GAIN 
CONTROL 
RESISTOR 
50 
DECOUPLING 
CAPACITOR 
9 
- O 
• 9V 
7 
- O 
'OUTPUT 
6 
-o 
ov 
Fig. 9.15. Circuit diagram of a monolithic pulse 
amplifier 
The large degree of direct-coupled feedback provided by 
Ri0 
reduces the zero-frequency gain of the amplifier to a very small 
value. (An external decoupling capacitor connected between pins 
5 and 6 eliminates this feedback loop at signal frequencies.) The 
diodes Dl and D2 in conjunction with R9, determine the base 
bias on TR5 and TR6. By suitable choice of diode characteristics 
the current in TR5 and TR6 can be kept constant in spite of 
variations in temperature. In this way the current in the emitter 
follower is stabilised as well as the d.c. conditions throughout the 
amplifier. So effective is this circuit that the amplifier operates 
satisfactorily at any temperature between — 55°C and +125°C, 
the variation in standing output voltage being less than 005%. 
feedback is applied by the network R2, R3, RA and the resistor R7: 
the connections to R 4 are brought out to pins 3 and 4 to enable 
gain to be adjusted by an external feedback resistor. 
The method of ensuring stability of d.c. operating conditions has 
something in common with that used in Fig. 9.11 on page 167. 

D.C. and Pulse 
Amplifiers 
175 
The upper frequency limit of the amplifier depends on the values 
of fT 
for the transistors TRl to TR4: it extends to 35 MHz at a 
gain of 200 and to 15 MHz at a gain of 400. The low-frequency 
response depends on the value of the external decoupling capacitor 
and on the values of any capacitors connected in series with the 
input or output. The input resistance of the amplifier is 10 kQ and 
the output resistance 16 Ω. The maximum output voltage swing 
is 4-2 into the recommended load resistance of 1 kil. 

CHAPTER 10 
R.F. and LF. Amplifiers 
INTRODUCTION 
The amplifiers discussed so far have had a passband beginning at zero 
or a very low frequency and extending over several octaves. Such a 
passband is termed the baseband 
and baseband amplifiers are 
characterised by their use of direct or RC inter-stage couplings 
(aperiodic couplings, in fact). We shall now consider amplifiers in 
which the passband is small compared with the mid-band frequency. 
Here LC circuits can be used as coupling elements. If the r.f. signal to 
be amplified is sinusoidal and of fixed frequency, the passband can be 
made as narrow as desired: this is possible in the carrier-wave 
amplifiers in transmitters. If, however, the r.f. signal is modulated, 
the passband must be wide enough to accept the significant side 
frequencies of the signal. This is necessary in the r.f. and 
i.f. 
amplifiers of radio receivers. The r.f. amplifiers are required to have a 
little gain so as to improve the signal-to-noise ratio by raising the 
signal level at the input to the frequency changer. They also provide 
some protection against second-channel interference and contribute 
to the selectivity of the receiver although most of the adjacent-channel 
selectivity is achieved in the i.f. amplifier. 
CLASS-C OPERATION 
The r.f. and i.f. amplifiers used in receivers generally operate in class 
A. The low efficiency of such stages is no disadvantage because only a 
small output power is required. By contrast, the r.f. amplifiers in 
transmitters may be required to give considerable output power and 
176 

R. F. and I. F. Amplifiers 
177 
the use of class A would be uneconomic. Higher efficiency is possible 
by using class-B push-pull and such stages were at one time used to 
amplify 
amplitude-modulated 
r.f. 
signals in transmitters 
where 
modulation was carried out at a low power level. Linearity is essential 
in such amplifiers to minimise distortion of the modulation envelope 
but it limits efficiency to, say, 35%. Much higher efficiency is possible 
where constant-amplitude r.f. signals are to be amplified and a class-C 
amplifier can be used. In this mode of operation the active device is 
biased beyond the point of output-current cut-off and is driven into 
conduction by the peaks of the sinusoidal input signals as suggested in 
Fig. 10.1. The output of the device thus consists of a series of rounded 
t 
OUTPUT 
CURRENT 
Fig. 10.1. Illustrating the principle of class-C amplification 
pulses with a waveform bearing little resemblance to that of the input 
signals. The output has, however, a large fundamental component at 
the frequency of the input signal accompanied by a host of harmonics. 
The fundamental component can be selected at the device output by 
use of a tuned circuit resonant at the fundamental frequency. The 
signal generated across this tuned circuit is, of course, sinusoidal in 
form so that, in effect, distortion-free amplification is obtained. 
Efficiencies approaching 80 per cent can be obtained from a class-C 
amplifier and medium-frequency transmitters often use one as the 
final stage, amplitude modulation being achieved at very high power 
level by varying the supply voltage to the amplifier. 

178 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
COMMON-EMITTER R.F. AMPLIFIERS 
The common-emitter amplifier with its ability to give current gain and 
voltage gain simultaneously is the obvious first choice for 
r.f. 
amplification 
and the narrow-band frequency 
response can be 
obtained by tuning one or both windings of the inter-transistor 
coupling transformers. The resonance frequencies, coupling coeffi-
cients and Q values can be chosen to give an approximation to the 
wanted shape and extent of the frequency response. The effective Q 
value of an inductor depends on its physical construction and also on 
any damping caused by the components connected to it. Transistor 
damping is sometimes heavy and, to obtain a desired Q value, the 
designer must know the input and output resistances of the 
transistors. Transistor manufacturers usually quote these parameters 
at frequencies of interest. Over the restricted passband of an r.f. or i.f. 
amplifier the input and output resistances of a transistor may usually 
be taken as constant. Thus a bipolar transistor used for such 
amplification may be represented by the simple equivalent circuit of 
Fig. 10.2. The resistances r, and r0 can be used to provide the required 
O e 
Fig. 10.2. Equivalent circuit of a bipolar transistor used as an r.f or 
i.f 
amplifier 
damping whilst the capacitances c, and c0 can be used to provide some 
of the capacitance required in the input and output tuned circuits. The 
components r and c represent the internal collector-base resistance 
and capacitance. These provide feedback between the output and 
Still higher efficiency is possible if the peaks of the input signal to a 
class-C amplifier are flattened (by the addition of, say, 15 per cent of 
third harmonic) so that the active device is switched on and off very 
rapidly, its output current approximating to a train of rectangular 
pulses. The device is thus used as a switch and is at all times either off 
(with zero output current) or on (with zero voltage across it). 
Dissipation is zero in both states and the only losses occur during the 
brief instants of transition, making possible efficiencies approaching 
90%. 

/?. F. and I. F. Amplifiers 
179 
input of a common-emitter 
amplifier, 
feedback 
which 
clearly 
increases as frequency rises. Its effect on an amplifier with a tuned 
collector circuit can be assessed in the following way. 
At resonance the external collector circuit is effectively resistive 
and the signal voltage at the collector is in antiphase with the 
collector current. The current fed back to the base via the reactive 
path provided by c is therefore in quadrature with the external base 
input current. 
Above the resonance frequency the external collector circuit is 
effectively capacitive and the phase of the collector voltage, with 
respect to the collector current, lags the antiphase condition by 
90°. The current in c is in antiphase with the external base current, 
giving negative feedback and reduced gain from the transistor. 
Below the resonance frequency the external collector circuit is 
effectively inductive. The phase of the collector voltage relative 
to the collector current leads the antiphase condition by 90°. The 
current in c is in phase with the external base current giving positive 
feedback and increased gain from the transistor. If the feedback 
current exceeds the external input the circuit will oscillate. Even when 
the feedback is insufficient to cause oscillation, the change from 
positive to negative feedback at the resonance frequency of the 
collector circuit can cause asymmetry in the frequency-response curve. 
The precise condition for instability in a common-emitter amplifier 
is evaluated in Appendix C. 
Use of a field-effect transistor in place of a bipolar does not solve 
the instability problem because the drain-gate capacitance is of the 
same order as the collector-base capacitance, causing the common-
source r.f. amplifier also to be inherently unstable. 
The problems caused by this instability can be solved in several 
ways (described later in this chapter) but at v.h.f. and u.h.f. they can 
be dodged by using the transistor as a common-base (or common-
gate) amplifier. 
COMMON-BASE R.F. AMPLIFIER 
In this arrangement (Fig. 10.3) any positive feedback occurs via the 
collector-emitter capacitance of the transistor and this is effectively 
eliminated by the base region which screens the emitter from the 
collector, making stable amplification possible up to thousands of 
MHz. Conventional inductors and capacitors can be used for tuning 
up to v.h.f., the inductance and capacitance becoming smaller as 
frequency is raised. Above about 600MHz, however, 
lumped 
components can no longer be used for tuning and are replaced by 

180 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
INPUT 
SIGNALV 
OUTPUT 
LOAD 
Fig. 10.3. In the common-base circuit the base acts as a screen between input and output 
circuits 
distributed inductance and capacitance in the form of lengths of u.h.f. 
transmission line. These can be used with silicon planar transistors for 
which the dimensions and physical construction are designed to fit the 
line exactly so avoiding the need for connections which would add 
undesirable reactance. Even transmission lines have to be abandoned 
above about 2,000 MHz and cavity resonators are used in their place. 
Again the transistors are designed for direct connection to the 
resonator. At these frequencies gallium arsenide transistors are 
preferred to silicon to take advantage of the better electron mobility 
in GaAs. These transistors have a reversed Schottky diode as the gate 
and are known as m.e.s.f.e.t.s (metal-semiconductor 
field-effect 
transistors). 
Fig. 10.4. Basic form of tuned common-base 
amplifier 
The basic form of circuit for a common-base r.f. amplifier is given in 
Fig. 10.4. It normally delivers its output signal into a resistive load, 
often the input resistance of the following stage. Thus the inductor LI 
of the collector tuned circuit is used as the primary winding of a 
matching transformer coupling the external load to the transistor. The 
turns ratio of the transformer should be chosen to ensure that the 
collector circuit is presented with a load value into which the transistor 
can deliver the required output-signal amplitude. 
Insertion 
Loss 
The amplifier has a low-frequency loss caused by the shunting effect 
of the low reactance of Lx\ there is also a loss at high frequencies 
because of the low reactance of Cx. Ideally there should be no loss 
around the resonance frequency of LXCX 
because these frequencies 

R. F. and I. F. Amplifiers 
181 
constitute the required passband. However, the dynamic resistance of 
LXCX would need to be infinite to give zero loss in the passband. In 
practice the finite value of the dynamic resistance 
inevitably 
introduces a loss, known as the insertion loss. 
If the dynamic resistance of the tuned circuit is equal to the load 
resistance, its effective value is halved by the connection of the load. 
The effective resistance into which the transistor feeds is also halved, 
giving a loss of 6dB in the level of the output signal. This is therefore 
the insertion loss. If the undamped dynamic resistance is much greater 
than the load resistance, the effect of connecting the tuned circuit to 
the transistor is to reduce Q considerably (equivalent to very heavy 
damping) but the effective resistance into which the transistor works is 
only slightly reduced, implying a small insertion loss. For very heavy 
damping the insertion loss is often negligible. 
In general the inclusion of the tuned circuit reduces the transistor 
load from Rc to RcRd/(Rc 
+ Rd) where Rd is the dynamic resistance of 
the tuned circuit. The factor by which the load is reduced is therefore 
Rd/(RC 
+ Rd)- W constant-current operation is assumed this is also the 
factor by which the gain is reduced, i.e. the insertion loss. We thus 
have 
insertion loss = 201og10 Rdl(Rc 
+ Rd) 
= 201og1 0
[l-/V(/ic+ 
= 201og10 (Qu - 
Qd)IQu 
where Qu is the undamped value of Q and Qd is the damped value. 
V.H.F. 
Amplifier 
As an example of a small-signal r.f. amplifier Fig. 10.5 gives the circuit 
diagram of the first stage of a v.h.f. f.m. receiver. The common-base 
stage TRl is stabilised by the potential-divider method, the lower arm 
of the divider consisting of the two series-connected diodes D2 and 
D3. R 10 is the upper arm. As mentioned on page 102, this technique is 
used to compensate for fall in battery voltage. Rx is the emitter 
resistor. The base is decoupled to chassis by C5 and biased by R2. 
T R l input resistance is, of course, very low, say 25 ohms, which 
would give very heavy damping of the input tuned circuit LXC2 
if 
connected directly across it. Damping is therefore reduced by using a 
low-value (30pF) capacitor C3 to couple LXC2 to the emitter. C3 and 
the input capacitance of TRl form a capacitive tapping across the 
tuned circuit so that the resistance effectively damping L1C2 
is 
greater than the emitter a.c. resistance and may be, say, 150 ohms. 
This still constitutes fairly heavy damping and advantage is taken of it 

18 2 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
7?7 
TO f.c. 
Fig. 10.5. V.H.F. r.f. stage using a common-base 
amplifier 
by adopting fixed tuning for the damping, broadening the response to 
cover the whole of Band II (87.5 to 108MHz). An estimate of the 
value of C2 required can be obtained as follows. 
Because of the heavy damping the effective dynamic resistance of 
LXC2 is 150 ohms. The required damped value of Q is given by 
0 = 
centre frequency 
bandwidth 
97.75 
20.5 
4.77. 
Now 
which gives 
Q_ 
oiC 
_Q_ 
Substituting numerical values 
C = 
4.77 
6.284 x 97.75 x 10
6
 x 150 
= 52 pF. 

R.F. and I.F. 
Amplifiers 
183 
Towards this capacitance the coupling to the aerial and to TRI 
together with the inevitable stray capacitance probably contribute 
about one third and C2 (at 35 pF) provides the rest. 
There is unity current gain in a common-base amplifier and the 
voltage gain, between emitter and collector terminals, is equal to the 
ratio of the collector load to emitter a.c. input resistance r,. If the load 
is 2,000 ohms the voltage gain is approximately 80 from the emitter 
terminal. The capacitive attenuator at the transistor input reduces the 
signal input by a factor of, say, 3 so that the net voltage gain is 27. 
Cascode 
One way of avoiding the instability of the common-emitter amplifier 
at r.f. is to use it to drive a common-base stage and the two stages can 
conveniently be connected in series across the supply as shown in Fig. 
10.6. The collector load for the common-emitter stage is the input 
INPUT 
φ 
ι . τ 
ι 
χ 
: 
ΠτΤΊ 
Fig. 10.6. Λ cascode r.f. or i.f. amplifier using two bipolar 
transistors 
resistance of the common-base stage which is so low that the gain of 
the first stage is insufficient to sustain oscillation. The base of the 
common-base stage is earthed at r.f. so this stage, too, is stable. The 
combination is thus a stable r.f. amplifier with the input resistance, 
the current gain and the voltage gain of a common-emitter amplifier. 
It is known as a cascode. 

Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
OUTPUT 
~i — 
— 
Fig. 10.7. A cascode formed of two discrete 
i.g.f.e.t.s 
Fig. 10.8. An r.f. amplifier using a dual-gate 
i.g.f.e.t. 

R. F. and I. F. Amplifiers 
18 5 
F.e.t.s can also be used in a cascode. A common-source stage 
feeding into a common-gate stage forms a stable r.f. amplifier with an 
input resistance much higher than that of a bipolar cascode. In the 
arrangement shown in Fig. 10.7 using i.g.f.e.t.s it is significant that 
there is no external connection to the inter-transistor link. This 
suggests that there is no need for two separate transistors. The same 
effect, i.e. stable r.f. amplification, can be achieved using a single 
transistor with two gates controlling the channel conductivity as in 
Fig. 
10.8. Such dual-gate f.e.t.s are frequently 
used for 
r.f. 
amplification in Band-Η receivers. The circuit bears a striking 
resemblance to that of a tetrode or pentode valve r.f. amplifier: in fact 
dual-gate f.e.t.s are often termed tetrode transistors. An advantage of 
the circuit is that its gain can be controlled by adjustment of the 
upper-gate voltage - useful for a.g.c. purposes. 
I . F . 
AMPLIFIERS 
The i.f. amplifier in a superheterodyne receiver uses principles similar 
to those of an r.f. amplifier but the tuning is fixed and it has the task of 
providing most of the gain and the adjacent-channel selectivity of the 
receiver. The shape of the passband is thus very important. Moreover 
the final i.f. stage has to deliver appreciable power into the detector if 
this is a diode. The coupling to the diode must therefore be designed 
to present the final i.f. stage with its optimum load (i.e. the quotient 
of available voltage swing and available current swing). 
Neutralisation and 
Unilateralisation 
The 
i.f. 
amplifiers 
in early 
transistor 
receivers 
used 
bipolar 
common-emitter 
stages and stable operation was achieved 
by 
neutralisation, a technique in which the internal positive feedback in 
the transistors was offset by an equal amount of external negative 
feedback. This is the second method of avoiding the instability of 
common-emitter r.f. amplifiers. 
One popular circuit which was used for neutralisation is shown in 
Fig. 10.9. The collector supply voltage is introduced via a centre tap 
on the inductor. At the top end of the inductor the signal voltage is in 
antiphase with that at the collector and a signal taken from this point 
gives negative feedback when applied to the base. To make this signal 
equal to the positive feedback, the negative-feedback path must 
include a neutralising capacitor Cn 
equal to the collector-base 
capacitance. In fact, as shown in Fig. 10.2, the internal feedback path 
includes resistance in series with the capacitance and to make 

186 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
OUTPUT 
Fig. 10.9. Neutralisation of common-emitter 
i.f. amplifier using a centre-tapped 
primary 
winding in the i.f. transformer. 
The resistor in dashed lines may be used to 
improve 
neutralisation 
neutralisation more perfect an equal resistor Rn 
was sometimes 
included in series with Cn as shown in dashed lines: this process was 
termed unilaterisation since it made the transistor truly a one-way 
device with no feedback from output to input. 
456 kHz /. F. Amplifier 
As a numerical example let us consider the design of a 465 kHz i.f. 
transformer required to couple one common-emitter stage to another 
in an a.m. medium-wave and long-wave receiver as shown in Fig. 
Fig. 10.10. Simplified circuit diagram of two successive stages of i.f. 
amplification 
10.10. 

R. F. and I. F. Amplifiers 
187 
A suitable value for the passband is 7 kHz and the required damped 
value of Q is given by 
Λ 
centre frequency 
465 
Qd = 
3
 
1
 = — 
= 66.5 
passband 
7 
The turns ratio of the transformer should be chosen to present the 
collector with a suitable value of load, say 10 kQ. The input resistance 
of the following stage is taken as 3.3 kQ. This gives us immediately 
that the turns ratio of the transformer from TRl collector to TR2 base 
is given by ./(10/3.3) = 1.74. 
For a practical miniature inductor of the type likely to be used in an 
i.f. transformer a typical value of undamped Q is 100. We can now 
calculate the required value of inductance and capacitance in the 
following way. The dynamic resistance R D of an undamped tuned 
circuit is given by 
R D = 
LiûQu 
where QU is the undamped Q value. When a resistance R is connected 
across the tuned circuit the dynamic resistance falls to 
RDR 
=
 
RL(ÛQU 
R D + R 
R + 
LiuQu 
This is therefore the damped value of dynamic resistance LwQd where 
Qd is the damped Q value 
LiûQd = 
which gives 
L = 
Now 
RLuQu 
R + 
LuQu 
R(QU - 
Qé) 
uQuQd 
C = l / t o
2
L 
QuQd 
c = «>R{Qu - 
Qd) 
In this derivation we have assumed that R (effectively the input 
resistance of TR2) is the only resistance damping the tuned circuit. In 
practice the output resistance of TRl is also in parallel with LC but 
practical values of output resistance are likely to be very large 
compared with R and damping from this source has therefore been 
neglected. 

188 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Substituting the values appropriate to our numerical example we 
have 
c _ 
66.5 x 100 
ρ 
~~ 6.284 x 465 χ 10
3
 x 10
4
 x 35.5 
= 6790 pF. 
This is the value of capacitance needed in the circuit of Fig. 10.10. 
There is, however, no need to use such an awkward value. A more 
convenient value such as 250 pF can be used if the collector is 
connected to a tapping point on the inductor as shown in Fig. 10.11. L 
TR1 
Fig. 10.11. Modification of Fig. 10.10 to permit use of a standard value of tuning capacitor 
is, of course, adjusted empirically to give resonance at 465 kHz but we 
can calculate its value by substitution in the expression l/a)
2
C which 
gives L as approximately 500 μΗ. The position of the tapping point 
must be such that the collector is presented with an effective 
capacitance of 6,790 pF. The position is given by v(250/6,790), i.e. 
approximately 0.2, implying that the collector tap should be at l/5th 
the length of the coil measured from the earthy end. 
To calculate the voltage stage gain we must know the effective 
collector load resistance. TR2 input resistance appears at TRI 
collector as a resistance of 10 kQ but we must also take into account 
the dynamic resistance of the tuned circuit. This is given by QlwC and 
for a Q value of 100 and a capacitance of 6,790 pF gives a dynamic 
resistance of about 5 kQ. The effective load resistance is thus 10 kQ in 
parallel with 5kQ, i.e. 3.3 kQ. If we assume TRI mean emitter 
current to be 1 mA its mutual conductance is approximately 40 mA/V, 
giving the voltage gain from base to collector as 40 x 3.3, i.e. 132. The 

R.F. and I.F. 
Amplifiers 
189 
transformer reduces this to 132/1.74 approximately 75 at TR2 base. If 
the theoretical value of collector load resistance of 10 kQ could be 
realised the voltage gain would be 40 x 10, i.e. 400 to TRI collector 
and 230 at TR2 base. The insertion loss is hence considerable, 
reducing the gain to one third. This agrees with the factor deduced 
earlier (Qu - Qd) Qu which, if we substitute the appropriate values, 
gives 0.33. 
Stability by Gain 
Limitation 
The third method of avoiding the instability of tuned common-emitter 
amplifiers is to limit the gain, by choice of source and load resistance, 
to values at which instability cannot occur. Although gain is limited it 
is still possible using this design technique to obtain adequate i.f. gain 
for a television receiver from three cascaded stages. 
Stability 
Factor 
Appendix C shows that a transistor with similar tuned circuits 
tuned to the same frequency in collector and base circuits will 
oscillate if 
ucgmRbRc 
= 2 
(10.1) 
where Rb and Rc are the resistances effectively in parallel with the 
base and collector circuits and c is the internal base-collector 
capacitance. 
To be certain of stability the left-hand side of Eqn 10.1 must be less 
than two and the factor by which the expression must be multiplied to 
give two is known as the stability factor. For a stability factor of 4 
u>cgmRbRc 
= 0.5 
Stability factors between 2 and 8 are used in designing amplifiers 
without neutralising, the chosen value depending on likely spreads 
in gm and c and on such considerations as whether single or double-
tuned circuits are used. Such amplifiers are said to be designed to 
have stability-limited 
gain. We shall now consider the design of an 
i.f. amplifier of this type for an f.m. sound receiver. 
10.7MHz 
I.F. Stage 
For f.m. receivers the standard intermediate frequency is 10.7 MHz 
and for transmissions with a maximum rated deviation of ± 7 5 kHz 

190 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
a bandwidth (to the — 3 dB points) of 200 kHz is needed to accept 
the significant sidebands of the transmission. For adequate selectivity 
the response is required to be - 40 dB at 600 kHz bandwidth. To 
give such a response it is common to use ceramic filters but three 
double-tuned transformers can be used instead. Each transformer is 
thus required to be - l d B at 200 kHz and -13.3dB at 600kHz 
bandwidth. The flattest response is obtained from a pair of identical 
coils when these are critically coupled and for this degree of coupling, 
universal selectivity curves show that the response is - 1 dB when 
Q χ bandwidth 
centre frequency 
This gives the required value of damped Q as 
_ centre frequency _ 10.7 
d
 
bandwidth 
~ 0.2 
= 53 
Consider now one of the i.f. transistors situated between two of the 
critically coupled bandpass filters. 
For a stability factor of 4 we have 
0.5 
ucgm 
and for the type of transistor likely to be used for such an i.f. amplifier 
a value of c of possibly 0.15pF can be assumed. We can also assume 
t h a t g m is 35mA/V. Substituting these values in the above expression 
we have 
RbRc 
= 1.42 x 10
6 
We can let Rc be 8 kQ for this enables the transistor to deliver a good 
output-signal amplitude. This gives Rb as approximately 180ohms. 
The problem now is to design the bandpass filters to present the 
transistor with these values of source and load resistance. An 
important point is that the dynamic resistance of a tuned circuit is 
halved when a similar circuit is critically coupled to it. If therefore 
we design the tuned circuits to give the required source and load 
resistances in the absence of coupling to their companion tuned 
circuits, the resistances decrease and stability increases when the 
couplings are present. This means that instability is not possible 
even if the tuned circuits are grossly mistuned (as during alignment), 
mistuning being equivalent to reduction of coupling coefficient. 
Decrease of load resistance means that the transistor cannot deliver 
its maximum power but this is unlikely to cause difficulty in early 

R.F. and I.F. 
Amplifiers 
191 
i.f. stages. For the final stage the design should aim at maintaining 
the optimum load. 
The calculated source resistance is small compared with the input 
resistance of the transistor and the chosen load resistance is small 
compared with the output resistance. Thus the transistor does not 
significantly damp the preceding or following tuned circuit and to 
give the required passband the coils can be designed to have un-
damped Q values of 53. 
If the whole of the tuned circuit is connected directly in the 
collector circuit Rd must be 8 kQ. As Q is 53 we can calculate the 
required tuning capacitance as follows : 
• c=&- 
= 
* 
F 
œRd 
6-284 χ 10 7 χ ΙΟ
6
 χ 8 χ ΙΟ
3 
= 100 pF approximately. 
The inductance can similarly be calculated 
Rd = 
LœQd 
. 
L
 _ 
Kd 
8 x l 0
3 
œQd 
6-284 χ 10-7 χ 1 0
6
x 53 
= 2-245 μΗ 
A tuned circuit with these values of L and C is also used to feed the 
base of the transistor. The circuits have an (uncoupled) dynamic 
resistance of SkQ and to obtain the 180 Ω effective source resistance 
the secondary winding must be tapped, the position of the tapping 
point being given by 
l(-) 
- 0-15 
VV8,ooo/ 
from the earthy end of the tuned circuit. 
Calculation of Gain 
To calculate the gain of the 10-7-M Hz stage suppose that the 
following stage has a similar transistor fed from a similar tapping 
point on the secondary winding of the double-tuned transformer. 
The effective resistance of the primary circuit is 4kQ so that the 
voltage gain between base and collector is given by 
gmRc
 
= 35 χ 1 0 "
3
x 4 x 10
3
 = 140 

192 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Use of Capacitance 
Tapping 
Inductors of the order of 2μΗ such as are required in 10.7 MHz 
i.f. amplifiers are unlikely to have more than approximately 10 turns 
and it is therefore difficult to obtain desired positions of tapping 
points with precision. An alternative solution is to tap the capacitive 
branch of the tuned circuit instead. For example to obtain a tapping 
point 0.15 along an inductor as required in the last numerical example 
we can proceed thus. If the capacitor of 100 pF is replaced by a series 
combination of two capacitors Ca and Cb then to keep the tuning 
capacitance at 100 pF we have 
•β%τ 
= 100 pF 
(10.2) 
The Happed down' output is of course taken from the larger of the 
two capacitors. If this is Cb we have 
100 
7 ^ = 0.15 
*~b 
This gives 
Cb = 650 pF 
Substituting in Eqn 10.2 above 
6 5 0 C 
6 5 0 - f C = 100 
from which 
Ca = 120 pF 
A typical 10.7 MHz i.f. stage using capacitance tapping is shown in 
Fig. 10.12. 
Television i.f. 
Amplifiers 
Television i.f. amplifiers require bandwidths wider than any so far 
described. For example, for 625-line television a bandwidth of 
approximately 5.5 MHz is required to accommodate the vision 
The voltage across the secondary winding is equal to that across the 
primary and the gain to the tapping point is thus 140 χ ΟΌ337 = 
9-13 (18 dB). 

R. F. and I. F. Amplifiers 
193 
Fig. 10.12. A stage of a 10.7 MHz i.f. amplifier using double-tuned 
transformers and 
capacitive 
tapping 
sidebands but the sound signal is also normally included and this 
extends the bandwidth to 6 MHz. The intermediate 
frequency 
(corresponding to the vision carrier frequency) is 39.5 MHz and the 
required passband is from 33.5 to 39.5 MHz, the centre frequency 
being 36.5 MHz. 
The i.f. amplifiers so far considered have required a symmetrical 
frequency response: in fact their ideal shape would be a rectangle. 
However, the frequency response of a television i.f. amplifier must 
satisfy particular requirements. For example, the vestigial sideband 
transmission used for television broadcasting requires the low-
frequency response to fall off according to a particular law and to be 
6dB down at the frequency corresponding to the vision carrier. Steep 
notches are also required to reject the vision and sound transmissions 
on adjacent channels. These requirements dictate the shape of the i.f. 
response which is achieved in modern receivers by the use of a s.a.w. 
(surface-acoustic-wave) filter, the frequency characteristics of which 
can be controlled during manufacture. 
In earlier receivers an approximation to the ideal i.f. response was 
achieved by use of conventional LC circuits in a three-stage 
common-emitter i.f. 
amplifier with some rejectors to give the 
necessary notches. Some idea of the L and C values required can be 
obtained in the following manner. 
A single tuned circuit with a centre frequency of 36.5 MHz and a 
bandwidth of 6 MHz needs a damped Q value given by 36.5/6, i.e. 6.1, 
much lower than any so far considered. Undamped Q values are very 
large compared with this and thus insertion losses are low. 
In a mains-driven receiver the final i.f. stage might be designed 
to take a mean collector current of 10 mA from a 20-V supply. 

194 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
The optimum load is then approximately 2 kQ, and this is also the 
approximate input resistance of the vision detector (a load resistance 
of 4 kQ is assumed). The coupling circuit can thus take the form of a 
1:1 transformer with the detector circuit providing the damping. 
The output resistance of the final i.f. stage, even at 10-mA collector 
current, is likely to be very large compared with 2 kQ. The damped 
dynamic resistance of the collector load is thus 2 kQ : from this and 
the damped Q value of 6 1 we can calculate the tuning capacitance 
and inductance required in the following way : 
Q± 
o)C 
a)Rd 
6.1 
6.284 x 36.5 x 10
6
 x 2 x 10
3 
= 13.3 pF 
a small capacitance but a feasible value to use in view of the extremely 
low values of output capacitance of silicon planar transistors. The 
inductance value can be calculated thus 
Ré 
L = 
Η 
6.284 x 36.5 x ΙΟ
6
 x 6.1 
= 1.43 μΗ 
As the transformer has unity turns ratio the current gain of the 
final i.f. stage is equal to /J, e.g. 50. To avoid instability in an un-
neutralised stage (as this is assumed to be) the effective value of the 
source resistance should be calculated as indicated earlier in this 
chapter and the input circuit designed to provide this. 
The earlier stages of the i.f. amplifier could be designed in a similar 
manner to that just described, using the input resistance of the 
following stage to provide the required damping. It would be difficult 
however with a succession of synchronously tuned circuits each with 
a β of 6, even with additional rejector tuned circuits, to provide the 
required shape of response curve. This difficulty can be resolved by 
using higher Q values such as 20 or 30 in the earlier i.f. stages and by 
tuning them to frequencies displaced from the centre frequency. By 
suitable choice of Q values and resonance frequencies, this method of 

R.F. and I.F. 
Amplifiers 
195 
stagger tuning can give an approach to the required shape of response 
curve although it is still necessary to use additional rejector circuits. 
The design of these earlier stages can follow the procedure indicated 
above for 'stability limited gain' stages, the external collector 
resistance being so chosen that the transistor can supply the required 
amplitude of signal, the external base resistance being made low 
enough to provide an adequate margin of protection 
against 
instability. 
Typical values of Q and resonance frequencies are given in Table 
10.1. 
Table 10.1 
Position 
Type of tuned 
circuit 
Resonance 
frequency 
(MHz) 
Q 
Between tuner and 1st i.f. stage 
Bandpass pair 
36.5 
6 
Between 1st and 2nd i.f. stages 
Single 
36.0 
20 
Between 2nd and 3rd i.f. stages 
Single 
38.0 
20 
Between 3rd i.f. stage and det. 
Single 
36.5 
6 
AUTOMATIC GAIN CONTROL (A.G.C.) 
Most receivers use some form of automatic gain control to minimise 
the effects of ionospheric or man-made* fading and to ensure that 
all signals, irrespective of their input amplitude, are reproduced at 
substantially constant amplitude. A.g.c. is achieved by controlling 
the gain of i.f. and r.f. stages by a voltage (or current) derived from 
the signal at the detector output or at a post-detector point. Some 
means is therefore required of adjusting the gain of a transistor 
amplifier by a control signal. 
The gain of a transistor falls at low collector currents and at low 
collector-emitter voltages and there are two corresponding ways 
of achieving gain control. The first is by applying the control signal 
to the base as a reverse bias : this is known as reverse control and 
an example, using a pnp transistor and positive-going control bias, 
is given in Fig. 10.13. An npn transistor would, of course, require 
a negative-going bias for reverse control. For both types of transistor 
the control bias increases when a strong signal is received thus 
biasing back the transistor and reducing the gain. An unfortunate 
feature of this type of control is that the signal-handling capacity of 
* e.g. aircraft flutter in television reception. 

196 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
INPUT 
OUTPUT 
POSITIVE-GOING 
CONTROL B I A S 
FROM 
DETECTOR 
OUTPUT OR 
POST-DETECTOR 
CIRCUITS 
Fig. 10.13. An example of reverse 
a.g.c. 
a transistor is reduced by reverse bias but the circuit has the advantage 
that collector current is reduced when strong signals are received : 
this is important in battery-operated receivers where current 
economy is desirable. 
INPUT D
C 
-Uth 
OUTPUT 
NEGATIVE-GOING 
CONTROL BIAS 
v
F R O M 
DETECTOR 
OUTPUT OR 
POST-OETEC TOR 
CIRCUITS 
Fig. 10.14. An example of forward 
a.g.c. 

R.F. and I.F. 
Amplifiers 
197 
In the second method, known as forward control, the gain of the 
transistor is reduced by increasing the forward bias, thus increasing 
collector current. An essential feature of the circuit, illustrated in 
Fig. 10.14, is the decoupling circuit R2C2: 
as the collector current 
increases, the voltage drop across R2 is increased thus reducing the 
collector-emitter voltage and forcing the operating point to move 
into the knee of the Ic- Vc characteristics where the characteristics 
are more crowded and the gm therefore lower. For this type of control 
a pnp transistor requires a negative-going bias and an npn a positive-
going bias. Forward control has the advantage of increasing the 
signal-handling capacity of the transistor when this is needed for 
large-amplitude signals. Not all transistors are suitable for forward 
control and it is important to select a type which has been specifically 
designed for use in this type of circuit. By increasing the collector 
current of a suitable transistor from 4 to 13 m A, it is possible to 
reduce the gain by more than 40 dB. 
Both methods of a.g.c. are in common use, sometimes in the same 
receiver. Both forms of control reduce the power output of the 
controlled stage. This is of little significance in early i.f. stages but 
it is not usual to apply a g e . to the final i.f. stage because this is 
required to supply appreciable power to the detector. 
D E C O U P L I N G 
In Fig. 10.12 the source of base input signal (i.e. the secondary 
winding of the i.f. transformer) and the emitter decoupling capacitor 
are both returned to the positive terminal of the power supply. This 
minimises the impedance of the external base-emitter circuit which 
is essential for maximum performance. The primary winding of the 
i.f. transformer must be returned to the negative terminal of the supply 
to provide the necessary collector bias but should be returned to the 
positive terminal of the supply in order to minimise the impedance 
of the external collector-emitter circuit which is also essential for 
best results. This difficulty is usually overcome by connecting a low-
reactance capacitor C 3 (the collector decoupling capacitor) between 
the primary winding and the emitter (or the positive terminal of the 
supply which is in turn connected to the emitter via the low-reactance 
emitter decoupling capacitor). If the collector decoupling capacitor 
is omitted, the signal output current of the transistor must flow 
through the impedance of the supply in addition to the primary 
winding of the transformer. In this way signal voltages are developed 
across the battery and these, if impressed upon other stages of the 
amplifier or receiver of which this stage is part, can distort the shape 

198 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
of the frequency-response curve or even cause instability. To avoid 
this the collector decoupling capacitor C 3 is included to short-circuit 
the supply at signal frequencies. 
Fig. 10.15. A modified version of the circuit of Fig. 10.12 which eliminates the 
need for collector decoupling 
components 
However, by a simple alteration to the circuit such a capacitor 
becomes unnecessary. If the source of base input signal (i.e. the 
secondary winding) and the emitter decoupling capacitor are both 
returned to the negative terminal of the supply, as shown in Fig. 
10.15, then the impedance of the external base-emitter circuit and of 
the external collector-emitter circuit are minimised simultaneously 
and no additional decoupling capacitor is necessary. 
USE OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS 
Modern radio and television receivers and video recorders use 
integrated circuits to provide the i.f. gain. These i.e.s embody several 
stages of amplification and often contain circuitry for other functions 
such as detection, a.g.c, a.f.α, limiting and noise reduction. External 
components provide the i.f. selectivity. LC circuits are still used at 
465 kHz in spite of the need for alignment. They are also used at 
10.7MHz but are often supplemented by ceramic filters which have 
sharper cut-offs at the edges of the passband and do not require 
alignment. In television receivers and video recorders the 
i.f. 
selectivity is commonly provided by a surface-acoustic-wave filter 
which is manufactured to have the particular shape of passband 
required and needs no subsequent adjustment. A ceramic filter is used 
in the 6 MHz inter-carrier sound i.f. amplifier. 
The circuit diagram of an i.f. integrated circuit is far too complex to 
reproduce here but an illustration of the type of circuitry employed 

R. F. and L F. Amplifiers 
199 
10 
/77Π 
ίΤΤΠ 
H f—ο-
ίοι 
INPUT < L 
5 0 
POSITIVE-GOING 
SUPPLY POSITIVE 
A.G.C. VOLTAGE IN 
A 
i r 
il"-
M 3 k n 
M 1 8 
* 3 
3 k n 
8 k n 
T R 3 
I 
>0UTPUT 
T R 2 
I 
\\
R2 
T R I 
ψ 
Dl 
3 
•SUPPLY NEGATIVE 
Fig. 10.16. Circuit diagram of a monolithic i.f. or r.f. amplifier 
can be gained from the diagram of an early and very simple i.e. given 
in Fig. 10.16. This has only a single stage of amplification. 
TRl and TR2 form a cascode amplifier and TR3, the a.g.c. 
transistor, is in parallel with TR2 and its output load. TR2 and TR3 
are biased from the same point on the potential divider R\R2 and TRl 
is biased from the diode Dx which ensures constancy of mean current 
in TRl. 
When TR3 is forward biased it shunts the output load and reduces 
the output-signal level. The shunting effect becomes more significant 
as the positive a.g.c. voltage on TR3 base is increased. This is an 
effective method of controlling gain and has the merit of leaving the 
input resistance and input capacitance of the amplifier substantially 
constant. 
A block diagram of a typical a.m./f.m. receiver i.e. together with 
some of the associated external circuitry is given in Fig. 10.17. The i.e. 
incorporates all the a.m. stages from aerial input to demodulated audio 
output, together with a four-stage f.m. amplifier/limiter and quadrature 
synchronous demodulator (see page 228) for f.m. reception. The 
complete circuit diagram of a receiver using a similar i.e. is given in Fig. 
12.21. 

Fig. 10.17. Internal block diagram of an a.m./f.m. radio receiver 
i.e. 
198 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 

CHAPTER 11 
Sinusoidal Oscillators 
INTRODUCTION 
Sinusoidal oscillators have widespread applications in electronics. To 
name only a few obvious examples, they provide the carrier source in 
transmitters and form part of the frequency changer in superhet 
receivers. They are used for erasing and biasing in magnetic recording 
and time the clock pulses in computers. Many electronic measuring 
instruments incorporate oscillators and a variable-frequency oscillator 
forms part of a phase-locked-loop detector. 
There are many different types of sinusoidal oscillator but all 
consist essentially of two parts: 
1. A frequency-determining section which may be a resonant circuit 
or an RC network. The resonant circuit can be a combination of 
lumped inductance and capacitance, a length of transmission line 
or a cavity resonator depending on the frequency required. 
RC networks have, of course, no natural resonance but the 
phase shift of the network can be used to determine the frequency 
of oscillation. 
2. A maintaining section which supplies energy to the resonant circuit 
to keep it in oscillation. The maintaining section itself requires a 
d.c. source of power. In many oscillators this section is an active 
device, e.g. a transistor which delivers regular pulses to the 
resonant circuit. 
An alternative form of maintaining section for a resonant 
oscillator is a source of negative resistance, i.e. a device or an 
electronic circuit for which an increase in applied voltage brings 
about a decrease in current through it. There are a number of 
semiconductor devices or circuits with such a characteristic. 
201 

202 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
The maintaining section of an RC oscillator must provide the 
energy needed to sustain the oscillation controlled by the 
phase-shift network and sufficient gain to offset the attenuation in 
the network. 
POSITIVE-FEEDBACK 
OSCILLATORS 
Hartley Oscillator 
This is an example of a low-frequency oscillator using an LC circuit 
for frequency determination and a transistor supplying maintaining 
pulses. The circuit diagram (Fig. 11.1) shows a common-emitter 
amplifier with the LC circuit connected between collector and base, 
Ï33 
OUTPUT 
Fig. 11.1. One form of Hartley oscillator using a bipolar 
transistor 
the centre tap of the inductor being effectively connected to the 
emitter (the power supply being regarded as having zero resistance). 
A common-emitter amplifier inverts its input signal and its output 
signal is inverted by the centre-point-earthed inductor before it is 
applied to the base. The circuit can thus be regarded as that of an 
amplifier which supplies its own input: in other words there is 
considerable positive feedback 
and this causes oscillation, the 
amplitude of the signal (at the resonance frequency of LXC\) building 
up rapidly. The resulting pulses of base current charge up Cb> the 
polarity of the voltage thus generated biasing the base negatively. As 
the signal amplitude grows, so does the voltage across Cb until 
equilibrium is reached when the losses from the LC circuit due to 
output loading, ohmic resistance and base current equal the energy 
supplied to it from the collector. In this final condition the transistor 
may well be cut off for most of each cycle of oscillation, taking a burst 
of base current (and collector current) on each positive peak at the 

Sinusoidal 
Oscillators 
203 
base. In the interval between successive peaks Cb begins to discharge 
through Rb but, if the time constant RbCb 
is large compared with the 
period of oscillation, little of the voltage across Cb is lost in the 
interval and Cb can be regarded as a source of steady negative bias. 
Such a biasing system is used in many oscillators. It has the advantage 
of compensating to some extent for any reduction in oscillation 
amplitude caused, for example, by increased output loading or a fall 
in supply voltage. Reduction in oscillation amplitude causes reduced 
bias so that the transistor takes larger current pulses which tend to 
maintain the amplitude. 
Colpitis 
Oscillator 
It is significant that three connections were needed between tuned 
circuit and transistor in Fig. 11.1 to provide positive feedback. The 
emitter connection is effectively connected to the centre point of the 
inductor but it could equally well be connected to the capacitive 
branch of the LC circuit by using two equal capacitors in series as 
shown in Fig. 11.2(a). This oscillator uses a j.u.g.f.e.t. with a resistor 
Rd in the drain circuit, the LC circuit being coupled to the drain by a 
capacitor Cd. Thus the LC circuit is shunt-fed by contrast with the 
direct feed of Fig. 11.1. 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 11.2. A Colpitis oscillator using (a) a j.u.g.f.e.t. 
and (b) a bipolar 
transistor 
The frequency-determining capacitors Cx and C2 are in parallel with 
the input and output capacitances of the transistor which therefore 
have an effect on oscillation frequency. The effect can be minimised 
by making C\ and C2 as large as possible. On the other hand if 
oscillation is required at a high frequency necessitating a very small 

204 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
tuning capacitance, the input and output capacitances of a transistor 
can be used as Q and C2, a small variable capacitor being connected 
across L for tuning as shown in Fig. 11.2(b). This technique is 
sometimes used in v.h.f. and u.h.f. oscillators. Biasing is again 
automatically provided by Cb which is charged by pulses of gate 
current and discharges through Rb. To permit the moving vanes of the 
tuning capacitor (and hence the transistor base) to be earthed, an r.f. 
choke with high impedance at the operating frequency is included in 
the emitter circuit. 
All three oscillators described above operate in class C for large 
oscillation amplitudes. To obtain a sinusoidal waveform the output 
must be taken from the LC circuit, e.g. by a coil inductively coupled 
to the LC circuit as shown in Figs. 11.1 and 11.2. If the output is taken 
from the transistor itself, e.g. from a resistor in the emitter or source 
circuit, it would consist of a pulse train with a pulse repetition 
frequency equal to the resonance frequency of LC. 
The automatic bias system used in the above oscillators, relying as it 
does on the flow of base or gate current, clearly cannot be used with 
i.g.f.e.t.s which do not take gate current. Instead bias can be provided 
by the potential-divider circuit of Fig. 6.8 and, for small oscillation 
amplitudes, the transistor operates in class A. 
Reinartz 
Oscillator 
The Reinartz oscillator (Fig. 11.3) is of interest because it, or a 
derivative of it, is frequently used in transistor receivers. Positive 
feedback is achieved here by coupling the collector circuit to the 
emitter circuit via the mutual inductance between L, and L2. Both 
Fig. 11.3. Reinartz 
oscillator 

Sinusoidal 
Oscillators 
205 
inductors are also coupled to the frequency-determining 
circuit 
L3C3. This oscillator is stabilised by the potential-divider method but 
in this circuit the lower arm of the potential divider must be decoupled 
by a low-resistance capacitor as shown to ensure that the signals 
developed across L2 are applied directly between base and emitter. 
The frequency-determining section of the Reinartz oscillator appears 
at first sight to have four connections (two from Lx and two from L2) 
but the connections to the positive and negative terminals of the 
supply are effectively common because the supply has, or should 
have, negligible impedance at the frequency of oscillation. 
This circuit can be simplified by omitting the components L 3 
and C 3 and connecting a tuning capacitor across Lx or L2 but the 
form illustrated here is often preferred in receivers because it permits 
the moving vanes of the tuning capacitor to be earthed : in addition 
the loose coupling between L 3C 3 and the transistor helps to improve 
frequency stability. 
Crystal-controlled 
Oscillator 
There are certain applications in which oscillators require great 
frequency stability. Examples are carrier sources in transmitters, 
clock source generators in computers, and in frequency-synthesis 
tuning systems in receivers. A common method of achieving the 
required stability is by using a piezoelectric crystal to control the 
frequency of oscillation. Such crystals have a natural frequency of 
Fig. 11.4. Example of a crystal-controlled 
oscillator circuit 

206 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
resonance (depending on the size and shape) and at that frequency 
behave as a tuned circuit with a very high Q. In use a crystal is 
mounted between two metal plates (sometimes in the form of a 
metallic coating on the faces) which provide electrical contact with the 
crystal. There are many ways in which a crystal can be connected into 
an oscillator circuit: one example is given in Fig. 11.4. Here the crystal 
is connected between collector and base of a bipolar transistor to form 
a Colpitis oscillator, the collector-base and base-emitter internal 
capacitances providing positive feedback. The collector circuit need 
not be tuned but the secondary winding of the transformer provides a 
convenient output point. 
Dielectric Resonator 
Oscillator 
Allied to the crystal oscillator is the type used as local oscillator in 
first-stage converters sited at the head-end of satellite broadcast 
receivers, a typical circuit for which is given in Fig. 11.5. TRI is a GaAs 
f.e.t. working on the principle of reflection or feedback oscillation. Its 
operating frequency is typically 10 GHz, stabilised by the dielectric 
resonator located in the region of the microstrip line in its gate circuit; it 
has no electrical connection to the circuit at all, mutual coupling being 
achieved by radiation from the stripline. A characteristic of the 
dielectric resonator is its excellent frequency stability, in spite of wide 
temperature changes : drift is held below 1 MHz, representing a stability 
of 100 parts per million. 
rhfh 
DIELECTRIC 
RESONATOR 
X 
Γ/7 
/} / 
Fig. 11.5. Microwave 
oscillator for low-power use at 10 GHz 

Sinusoidal 
Oscillators 
207 
The dielectric resonator is formed as a small circular pill of high-Q 
ceramic material with a high dielectric constant; it simulates a cavity 
resonator and is usually inductively coupled into the circuit so that the 
adjacent stripline takes on the characteristics of a circuit tuned to the 
frequency of the resonator. 
P H A S E - S H I F T OSCILLATORS 
Introduction 
In all the oscillators so far described, apart from the dielectric resonator 
type, three connections are necessary to the frequency-determining 
section to achieve the signal inversion which, with the inversion in the 
maintaining section, gives the positive feedback essential for oscilla-
tion. For a sinusoidal signal the effect of 180° phase shift is identical to 
that of waveform inversion. This suggests that an oscillator could be 
constructed by using a 180°-phase-shift network as a frequency-
determining section provided that the maintaining section can offset 
the attenuation of the phase-shift network at the operating frequency. 
An alternative approach is to use a non-inverting amplifier as 
maintaining section and a phase-shift network which gives zero phase 
shift at the wanted oscillation frequency. 
Both principles can be used successfully in oscillators as the 
following descriptions show. And again three connections are needed 
between phase-shift network and maintaining system. 
RC 
Oscillators 
A single RC circuit such as that illustrated in Fig. 11.6(a) introduces 
a phase shift which increases as frequency falls and approaches a 
limiting value of 90° as frequency approaches zero. At such low 
frequencies, however, the attenuation introduced by the circuit is 
very great. Two such sections in cascade could produce 180° phase 
shift but the attenuation would be enormous. To give 180° phase shift 
with reasonably small attenuation, a network of at least three 
sections is necessary as shown in Fig. 11.6(b). For successful results 
end A of this network should be terminated in a low resistance and 
end Β in a high resistance. Thus if the input resistance of the 
amplifier is large compared with its output resistance, as in a voltage 
amplifier such as a field-effect transistor, A should go to the output and 
Β to the input. 
If, however, the amplifier input resistance is small compared with 

208 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
(b) 
Fig. 11.6. A simple section of an RC network (a), and a three-section 
network 
(b) 
its output resistance, as in a current amplifier such as a bipolar 
transistor, A should go to the input and Β to the output as shown in 
the circuit diagram of a complete RC oscillator shown in Fig. 11.7. 
The frequency of oscillation and the attenuation of the network 
can be determined as follows. To simplify the analysis we shall 
assume the network to be supplied from a constant-current source 
and that the network is terminated in a short circuit. Thus the circuit 
has the form shown in Fig. 11.8 in which it is the signal current from 
OUTPUT 
Fig. 11.7. Simple phase-shift oscillator suitable for single 
frequency 
operation 

Sinusoidal 
Oscillators 
209 
c 
c 
7 
7 
? 
Fig. 11.8. A three-section 
RC 
network 
the collector circuit and i4 is the signal current into the base circuit. 
From KirchhofTs law we have 
ί,Λ = 
i2(2R+)X)-i3R 
i2R = 
i3(2R+)X)-i4R 
i3R = 
i4(R+)X) 
where X = - l/coC. 
Eliminating i2 between Eqns 11.1 and 11.2 
(2R+JX)
2
 
: 
i,R = 
R 
•i3-(2R+)X)U-i3R 
(111) 
(11.2) 
(113) 
(114) 
Eliminating i3 between Eqns 11.3 and 11.4 
(2R+)X)
2
{R+)X) 
itR 
= 
from which 
R
2 
it-{2R+jX)U-(R+)X)U 
(11.5) 
ι, 
R
i
 + 
6)XR
2
-5RX
2
-jX
3 
For 180° phase shift between i4 and i,, the terms in j vanish and 
we have 
6)XR
2
 
= j X
3 
giving 
X 
J6R 
(116) 
and 
ω 
= 
V 
1 
'6RC 

210 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
The frequency of oscillation is thus given by 
At this frequency we have, from Eqn 11.5 
L 
R
1 
But, from Eqn 11.6 
ι, 
R*-5RX
2 
X
2
 = 6R
2 
R 3 
ii 
K
3
- 3 0 K
3 
1 
~ 
~ 2 9 
(Π.8) 
Thus the transistor must give a current gain of at least 29 to achieve 
oscillation. This is the ratio of base current to current in the 
collector load resistor and some of the output current is shunted 
through the parallel paths presented by the network. A ratio of i4 
to /, of 29 thus represents a high order of gain and it is desirable to 
select a transistor with a high value of β to give oscillation. On the 
other hand, to obtain a sinusoidal output the transistor must not 
oscillate too strongly and the gain should be adjusted to give only a 
small amplitude of oscillation. One way of controlling the gain is by 
adjustment of the value of emitter resistor Re as shown in Fig. 11.7. 
Reduction in Re 
increases /e, hence increases gm 
and gain. If 
excessive gain is used the oscillation amplitude will be checked by 
the collector current reaching zero or the collector voltage reaching 
the base voltage and the output waveform then contains some linear 
sections and is distorted. 
A convenient value for the frequency-determining resistors is 
4.7 kQ because this permits a collector current of 1 or 2 mA with 
a low supply voltage. To give oscillation at say 1 kHz the capacitance 
required can be calculated from Eqn 11.7 thus 
c -
 
1 
2nj6fR 
1 
6.284 x 2.45 x ΙΟ
3
 χ 4.7 x 10
3 
= 0.015 μΡ approximately. 

Sinusoidal 
Oscillators 
211 
In practice the frequency is unlikely to be precisely 1 kHz because 
the transistor output resistance is not infinite and its input resistance 
is not zero as assumed in the analysis. 
A good way of ensuring purity of waveform in the output of such 
an oscillator would be to add an a.g.c. system, e.g. a shunt-diode 
detector fed via its series capacitor from the collector, and apply 
its output as positive bias to the base via a long-time-constant circuit. 
This would avoid the need for an adjustable emitter resistor. 
Wien-bridge 
Oscillator 
This is an example of an oscillator in which both sections introduce 
zero phase shift. The frequency-determining network employed has 
the form illustrated in Fig. 11.9. The upper arm consists of resistance 
and capacitance in series, the lower arm of an equal resistance and an 
equal capacitance in parallel. The network is supplied from a 
constant-voltage source and is terminated in an infinite impedance : 
the phase shift and attenuation introduced by the network can 
then be calculated as follows. The impedance of the parallel RC 
network is R)X/(R + jX) and thus 
Fig. 11.9. Basic 
frequency-
determining 
circuit in Wien-
bridge 
oscillator 
RjX 
v. 
out 
R+)X 
in 
RjX 
R+)X 

212 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
where X = - 1/wC Simplifying we have 
vin 
(R + '}X)
2
 + R)X 
R)X 
Rationalising 
w
out 
R
2
-X
2
+3RJX 
RjX(R
2
-X
2
) 
+ 
3R
2
X
2 
(119) 
»,.„ 
(R
2
-X
2
)
2
 
+ (3RX)
2 
When there is zero phase shift the terms in j vanish and we have 
R
2
 = X
2 
giving the frequency of zero phase shift as 
1 
W 
=
 RC 
J 
InRC 
Substituting R = X in Eqn 11.9 to find the attenuation at this 
frequency we have 
vout
 
=
 3R2X2 
=
 1 
vin
 
9R
2
X
2
 
3 
The maintaining amplifier thus requires a gain just exceeding 3 to 
sustain oscillation. Such a low voltage gain could readily be 
obtained from a single transistor but it is difficult in such a simple 
amplifier to obtain the desired terminating resistances. Usually, 
therefore, a two- or even three-stage amplifier is used and the gain is 
reduced to the required value by negative feedback. 
Wien-bridge oscillators are frequently 
used for a.f. 
testing 
purposes. The oscillation frequency can be readily adjusted if a 
two-gang variable capacitor is used for Cx and C2 (giving a 10:1 
change in frequency), the resistors Rl and R2 being switched in 
decade steps to give different frequency ranges. By this means it 
is possible to design an oscillator with a frequency range from say 
30 Hz to 30 kHz. 
The capacitors used for Cx and C 2 must be variable and are 
unlikely therefore to have a maximum capacitance greater than 
500 pF. For this capacitance value the values of Rx and R2 required 

Sinusoidal 
Oscillators 
213 
to give oscillation at 30 Hz can be calculated by substitution in the 
above expression. We have 
R 
InfC 
1 
6.284 x 30 x 500 x Η Γ
12 
= 10 ΜΩ approximately. 
Ω 
Fig. 11.10 gives the circuit diagram of one possible form for an 
oscillator of this type. The amplifier has three transistors including 
one common-source stage, one common-emitter stage and an emitter 
O + 20V 
| — ο OUTPUT 
ο ov 
Fig. 11.10. Circuit diagram for a Wien-bridge oscillator with range 
switching 
follower output stage. The first two stages give signal inversion and 
the third does not, so that the required phase characteristic is 
obtained. The emitter follower gives a low output resistance for 
feeding the frequency-determining network and the output ter-
minals of the oscillator. As already shown the resistance in the 
lower arm of the frequency-determining network must be several 
megohms to give oscillation at low audio frequencies. To avoid 
resistive shunting of this arm (which would raise the oscillation 
frequency) the input resistance of the amplifier must be very high 
and an f.e.t. is the obvious choice for TRI. TRI and TR2 can, of 
course, give voltage gain far greater than the value of 3 required 
to sustain oscillation and it is essential to reduce the gain to this 

214 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
value otherwise oscillation amplitude grows until limited by 
transistor current cut-off and the required sinusoidal waveform is 
not obtained. Negative feedback is used to reduce the gain to the 
required value and to stabilise the amplitude of the output signal. 
Direct coupling is used throughout the amplifier. This gives 
simplicity of design and ensures a good low-frequency response. 
The low value of zero-frequency gain also ensures good stability 
of mean transistor currents. 
The output amplitude of the oscillator is stabilised by making the 
negative feedback dependent on it. This could be achieved by using 
a resistor with a negative resistance-temperature coefficient (e.g. a 
thermistor) for R9. R9 is fed from the amplifier output via C3 and 
the dissipation in it and hence its resistance is entirely dependent on 
the oscillation amplitude. Alternatively a resistor with a positive 
resistance-temperature coefficient (e.g. a lamp with a metal filament) 
could be used for Rs, 
R9 
being a non-temperature-dependent 
resistor. In both circuits any tendency for the output amplitude 
to increase, increases negative feedback, decreases amplifier gain 
and thus checks the rise in amplitude. 
NEGATIVE-RESISTANCE 
OSCILLATORS 
Introduction 
As implied at the beginning of this chapter, a resonant circuit will 
oscillate if connected to a suitable source of negative resistance. Such 
an oscillator differs from those described earlier in requiring only two 
connections to the frequency-determining section. Two possible 
shapes of negative-resistance characteristic are shown in Fig. 1 1 . 1 1 . In 
both the negative-resistance region is confined to a limited range of 
voltage and current. For characteristic (a) a particular value of applied 
voltage could produce two or even three current values whilst a 
particular value of applied current can produce only one voltage 
value. Such a characteristic is termed current-controlled. Characteris-
tic (b) - a much more familiar shape - is voltage-controlled. In both 
the negative resistance is a differential quantity, i.e. it is the ratio of a 
small change in voltage to the resulting change in current. 
To use a device with such a characteristic in an oscillator the 
negative resistance must be sufficient to offset the positive resistance 
of the resonant circuit connected to it. Thus for characteristic (a), 
which is most likely to be used with a series tuned circuit, the negative 
resistance must be numerically greater than the positive resistance of 

Sinusoidal 
Oscillators 
215 
v—• 
ν 
• 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 11.11. Examples 
of current-voltage 
characteristics 
with a 
negative-resistance 
region, (a) current-controlled, 
(b) 
voltage-controlled 
the tuned circuit. Characteristic (b) is normally used with a parallel 
tuned circuit and the negative resistance must be numerically less than 
the parallel (i.e. dynamic) resistance of the tuned circuit. If the 
negative resistance is much smaller than this the oscillation amplitude 
grows until it occupies a voltage range greater than that of the 
negative-resistance region. In fact the peaks of the oscillation enter 
the regions of positive resistance at each end of the negative-
resistance region. These apply damping to the tuned circuit, taking 
power from it and so limiting the amplitude of the oscillation. In this 
way the oscillation amplitude is limited to the value for which the 
average slope of that part of the characteristic which is used in the 
oscillation process corresponds to the dynamic resistance of the tuned 
circuit. 
Tunnel Diode 
One semiconductor device which has a characteristic similar to that of 
Fig. 11.11(b) is a tunnel diode. This is a heavily doped pn diode with a 
very thin junction region. A typical characteristic is shown in Fig. 
11.12 and, for comparison, the characteristic for a normal diode with a 
thicker junction is shown dashed. As would be expected, breakdown 
for the tunnel diode occurs at a very low value of reverse bias and, in 
effect, there is no region of high reverse resistance. The region of 
negative slope which occurs at a low forward bias, typically between 
0.1 and 0.3 V, was first reported by Esaki in 1958. This anomaly in the 
shape of the forward characteristic is caused by penetration of the 
potential barrier at the junction by electrons with insufficient energy 
to surmount the barrier. This effect - the tunnel effect - is impossible 
to explain in terms of classical physics but is in agreement with 

216 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Fig. 11.12. Characteristic 
of a tunnel diode {solid) compared with that 
of a normal junction diode 
(dashed) 
quantum mechanics. Tunnel diodes can be manufactured with very 
low capacitance and oscillators making use of the negative-resistance 
kink can function at frequencies as high as thousands of MHz. To 
obtain maximum output the quiescent point must be accurately placed 
at the centre of the negative-resistance region but the amplitude of the 
output obtainable from such an oscillator is clearly limited to a 
fraction of a volt. 
Push-pull 
Oscillator 
A negative-resistance characteristic can also be obtained from a 
circuit using two transistors. The example shown in Fig. 11.13 consists 
basically of an astable multivibrator which, in the absence of the LC 
combination, would produce square-wave outputs at both collectors, 
the transistors switching alternately between cut-off and saturation.* 
* See Chapter 13 for a detailed description of multivibrators. 

Sinusoidal 
Oscillators 
217 
Fig. 11.13. Negative-resistance 
or push-pull oscillator using two bipolar 
transistors 
The presence of the tuned circuit modifies the action because the 
inductor provides a low-impedance path between the collectors at low 
frequencies whilst the capacitor does so at high frequencies, both 
inhibiting normal multivibrator behaviour. Operation is confined to 
the resonance frequency of the tuned circuit at which it presents 
maximum impedance and the output of the circuit is thus sinusoidal. 
At this frequency the effective resistance between the collectors is 
approximately —2/gmfi where gm is the mutual conductance of the 
transistors and β is the attenuation of the inter-transistor coupling 
circuits. One such circuit is CXRX but Rx is shunted by the input 
capacitance of TRI and this may affect the attenuation. For oscillation 
the dynamic resistance of the tuned circuit must be greater than 2/gm/J. 
Impatt 
Diode 
Suppose an alternating voltage is applied to a device and that 
electrons take an appreciable time to cross a particular region of it 
(known as the drift space). The delay is known as the transit time and 
at very high frequencies it can be a significant fraction of the period of 
the applied voltage. Because of the resulting phase 
difference 
between applied voltage and resulting current it is possible at a 
particular frequency for the current to be decreasing at the same time 
as the voltage is increasing, i.e. the device presents a negative 
resistance. This form of negative resistance is used to give oscillation 
in the impatt diode. This is a four-layer device of pnin construction 

218 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
and reverse bias causes avalanche breakdown at the pn junction. 
Electrons cross the i-region which acts as a drift space and the transit 
time is arranged to be one half the period of the required oscillation. 
The resulting negative resistance causes oscillation in a resonant load 
and power outputs up to 50 W at 10 GHz can be obtained. 
Trapatt Diode 
If the reverse bias of a four-layer two-terminal device as described 
above is increased until the avalanche region fills the former drift space, 
operation in the Trapatt (trapped plasma avalanche transit time) mode 
occurs. The process is similar to that of a relaxation oscillator: the 
terminal voltage rises as the plasma region extends across the drift 
region, so the shunt capacitance is charged. When the plasma reaches 
the end of the drift space a large current pulse is triggered, discharging 
the capacitance and destroying the plasma. The terminal voltage falls 
suddenly, and then begins to build up in the next cycle of oscillation. 

CHAPTER 
12 
Modulators, Demodulators, Mixers 
and Receivers 
INTRODUCTION 
The first step in communicating by radio is to establish a carrier-signal 
link between the two points. One characteristic of this signal is then 
varied to send information over the link. In radio and television 
broadcasting the amplitude or the frequency of the carrier is varied in 
accordance with the instantaneous value of the audio or video signal, 
a process known as modulation. Alternatively the carrier can be 
amplitude-modulated by a pulse train and a characteristic of the 
pulses can be varied to achieve modulation. For example, the pulse 
amplitude can be varied but there are other methods of modulation in 
which the amplitude is kept constant and the information 
is 
transmitted by varying the frequency, the width or the position of the 
pulses or by the use of pulse code modulation (see Chapter 15). In this 
chapter we are primarily concerned with the way in which transistors 
are used for modulation and demodulation of sinusoidal carriers. 
A M P L I T U D E 
MODULATORS 
One way in which amplitude modulation could be achieved is by 
introducing the modulating signal into the base circuit of a 
bipolar-transistor r.f. amplifier as indicated in the simplified diagram 
of Fig. 12.1. The modulating signal must have sufficient amplitude to 
cause significant 
variations in the mutual conductance of the 
transistor. Thus the gain to which the carrier signal is subjected 
219 

220 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Fig. 12.1. One possible circuit for achieving amplitude 
modulation 
depends on the instantaneous value of the modulating signal causing 
the carrier amplitude at the amplifier output to vary in accordance 
with the waveform of the modulating signal. The gain is unlikely to be 
linearly related to the modulating-signal amplitude and a degree of 
distortion is inevitable in the modulation process but the circuit 
illustrates one principle which can be used to effect amplitude 
modulation. 
FREQUENCY 
MODULATORS 
Frequency modulation by a speech signal could be achieved very 
simply by connecting a capacitor microphone across an oscillating 
tuned circuit. But practical frequency modulators need a better 
degree 
of 
linearity 
and 
provision 
for 
controlling 
the 
centre 
(unmodulated) frequency. A varactor diode can be used as a 
modulator and in one arrangement two such diodes are connected 
across the frequency-determining circuit. The modulating signal is 
applied to one diode and a control signal is applied to the other to 
stabilise the centre frequency. The control signal is derived by 
comparing a sample of the frequency-modulated output with a stable 
frequency source and is a measure of the frequency error. 
A transistor can be used as a frequency modulator and one basic 
circuit is shown in Fig. 12.2. Feedback from collector to base of the 
common-emitter stage is applied by R\CX and Q is small so that its 
reactance at the operating frequency is large compared with Rv 
The 

Modulators, 
Demodulators, 
Mixers and Receivers 
221 
Fig. 12.2. Basic circuit of a bipolar transistor used as a reactance modulator 
current ip, in RXC\ 
therefore leads the collector alternating signal 
voltage vc by 90° and is given approximately by 
ifb = vJcoCj 
The signal voltage generated across Rx by this current is thus 
ifbR\ = vJcoQfl! 
and this voltage is applied between base and emitter, generating a 
collector current ic given by 
which also leads the collector voltage by 90°. The impedance 
presented at the collector is hence given by 
This is a capacitive reactance and corresponds to a capacitance of 
gmR\Cx. 
The capacitance can therefore be varied by alteration of gm 
which, in turn, depends on the base-emitter voltage. Thus by 
connecting the collector and emitter across an oscillating tuned circuit 
and by applying the modulating signal between base and emitter, 
frequency modulation can be achieved. 
If the positions of Rx and Cx are reversed and if the reactance of Cx 
is small compared with Ru a repeat of the above argument shows that 
the collector circuit now has an effective 
inductive 
reactance 
corresponding to an inductance value of RiCl/gm, 
again controllable 
by alteration of gm. 
Circuits of this type are known as reactance modulators and are used 
in f.m. transmitters. To obtain the required degree of linearity of 
modulation two such circuits are used in a balanced push-pull 
arrangement and modulation-frequency negative feedback is applied 
MODULATING 
SIGNAL INPUT 
ic = 
gmJUVçR^ 
ic 
gm)uR\Cx 

222 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
from the output of a high-grade demodulator fed from the output of 
the transmitter. A second feedback loop is used to stabilise the centre 
frequency. 
An example of a u.h.f. TV picture and sound modulator is given in 
Chapter 16. 
A . M . 
DETECTORS 
The function of the detector in.a receiver is to abstract information 
from a modulated input. The information may be a replica of the 
original modulating waveform and the detector is then alternatively 
known as a demodulator; 
or the information abstracted may be a 
signal suitable for a.g.c, a.f.c. or some other purpose. 
Series-diode 
Detector 
A semiconductor diode is commonly used as an a.m. detector and the 
basic circuit for a series-diode detector is given in Fig. 12.3. In this 
basic diagram it is assumed, for simplicity, that the diode is ideal and 
starts to conduct at zero bias. In practice, as we have seen, a silicon 
junction diode needs a forward bias of approximately 0.7 V to 
promote conduction and a later circuit diagram shows one way in 
which such bias can be applied. 
Dl 
MODULATED 
R.F OR I.F. 
^ 
INPUT 
C]T 
MODULAT I ON -
FREQUENCY 
OUTPUT 
Fig. 12.3. Basic form of series-diode 
detector 
circuit 
The diode Dl conducts during positive half-cycles of modulated-
r.f. input and charges the reservoir capacitor C2 to a voltage 
approximately equal to the peak value of the signal across L2. 
During negative half-cycles Dl is cut off and C2 discharges through 
the load resistor Rx. 
The time constant R{C2 
however is large 
compared with the period of the r.f. input, and C2 loses very little of 
its voltage during the non-conduction 
period. The period of 
conduction is only a small fraction of the r.f. period and for most of 
each cycle Dl is cut off, thus isolating the load circuit from the 
source of r.f. input. 

Modulators, 
Demodulators, 
Mixers and Receivers 
223 
Detection by this circuit can be regarded as a sampling process: 
the circuit samples each positive peak of r.f. input and impresses its 
value on C2. Thus a voltage is developed across C 2 which rises and 
falls in sympathy with the modulation waveform but never reverses 
in polarity as shown in Fig. 12.4. This illustrates sinusoidal 
modulation and the voltage output is at all times positive. In 
practice the frequency of the r.f. ripple is very much greater than is 
suggested in this diagram. 
t 
TIME 
Fig. 12.4. Output waveform from a series-diode 
detector for a 
sinusoidally-modulated 
input signal 
Choice of Time 
Constant 
The time constant RXC2 
is important: if it is too small C 2 dis-
charges too rapidly and the detector output is unnecessarily low; 
if it is too large C 2 cannot discharge rapidly enough to follow the 
most rapid falls in the modulation waveform and distortion results. 
The optimum value of the time constant is the largest which just fails 
to cause distortion: this value can be calculated in the following way. 
If the detector is perfect, an unmodulated carrier of amplitude 
vin gives a steady voltage of vin across the load. In practice the output 
voltage has a ripple made up of a succession of exponential rises 
and falls, the rises being governed by the time constant rdC2 
(rd 
is the diode forward resistance) and the falls by time constant 
R\C2. 
Normally Rx 
is large compared with rd and the falls are 
slower than the rises. The ripple is usually eliminated by a simple 
RC filter in the detector output circuit. 
If the carrier input is sinusoidally modulated to a depth m, a 
sinusoidal signal of mvin amplitude is superimposed on the steady 

224 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
voltage vin across the detector load and this too is composed of 
exponential rises and falls. To avoid a distorted output the ex-
ponential falls must be rapid enough to follow the sinusoidal form. 
If the modulation waveform has the equation 
ν = mvin sin œt 
the rate of change is given by 
dv 
— = mvinœ cos cot 
at 
The greatest value this can have occurs when cos œt = 1 and is 
equal to mvlnœ: 
the sine wave has this slope where it crosses the 
datum line. 
The voltage at the datum line is vin and the slope of the ex-
ponential fall which commences at this point is given by 
viJRlC2 
as shown on page 268. Equating slopes we have 
mvino 
= 
— 
RC 
- - L - J -
ηχω 
Znfm 
The time constant is thus inversely proportional to frequency 
and we must choose a value which will not cause distortion at 
the highest modulating frequency: it will then automatically be 
suitable for lower frequencies. 
In a 625-line television receiver the upper limit of the video band 
is approximately 5 MHz and signals at this end of the band can 
be 100 per cent modulated. Thus / = 5 x 10
6
, m = 1 and we have 
RXC2 = 
s 
6.284 x 5 x 10
6 
= 0.032 us 
In high-quality sound broadcasting the upper frequency limit is 
15 kHz and if signals at this extreme were 100 per cent modulated 
the required time constant would be given by 
RXC2 = 
r s 
6.284 x 15 x ΙΟ
3 
= 10.6 μ* 

Modulators, 
Demodulators, 
Mixers and Receivers 
225 
However in sound broadcasting the high modulating frequencies 
are harmonics and have amplitudes small compared with those of 
lower-frequency fundamental signals. Moreover in a.m. receivers 
the i.f. amplifier usually restricts the upper frequency limit to 3 or 
4 kHz by sideband cutting. Thus it is quite permissible to increase 
RXC2 
in an a.m. sound receiver to 50 us or more. 
When the time constant has been decided we can consider the 
individual values of Rx and C2. Ri must not be too small otherwise 
C 2 cannot charge up to the peak value of the input signal and the 
output of the detector is unnecessarily low: to minimise this loss 
Rx should be large compared with rd the forward resistance of the 
diode. On the other hand Rx must not be too large otherwise the 
shunting effect of the following stages becomes serious : moreover 
in television receivers large values of Rx 
can lead to impossibly 
low values for C2. A compromise value of Rx commonly adopted 
in sound receivers is 5kQ but in television receivers slightly lower 
values such as 3.3 kQ were sometimes used. 
If Ri for a television receiver is 3.3 kQ we can calculate C2 from the 
time constant thus 
_ 
0.032 x 10"
6 
C2 — 
ς— F 
3.3 x ΙΟ
3 
= 10 pF 
If Rx for a sound receiver is 5 kQ we can calculate C2 from the 
time constant thus 
5 0 χ Π Γ * 
Q
~ 
5 x l 0
3 
F 
= 0.01 μΡ 
Input 
Resistance 
If the detector is 100 per cent efficient C2 is charged up to the peak 
value vin 
{pk)
 
of the input signal. Thus the output power delivered by 
the detector to the load resistor is given by vin{pk)
2
/Rx. 
If the input 
resistance of the detector is r, the input power supplied to the 
detector by the signal source is given by i>i,,(r.mS
)
2
/
r
». If
 no
 power is 
lost in the diode we can equate these two expressions thus 
ν
 
2
 
r
 
2 
v
in jrms) 
_
 
v
in (pk) 
r, 
~ 
Rl 

226 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
For a sinusoidal signal 
—
 
V
in(pk)/\j2 
and thus 
~2 
In practice some power is inevitably lost in the forward resistance 
of the diode and the output voltage is less than expected : r, then 
is larger than RJ2 and a value of 3 kQ is commonly assumed when 
Rl is 5 kQ. 
A.G.C 
Provision 
The voltage required for a.g.c. may be positive or negative de-
pending whether pnp or npn transistors are to be controlled and 
on whether forward or reverse control is required. Either polarity 
can be obtained by suitable design of the detector circuit. For 
example Fig. 12.5 gives the complete circuit of a detector for a sound 
receiver. R2C3 
attenuates i.f. ripple in the detector output and the 
diode load R3 functions also as the volume control. R4C4 
is an a.f. 
filter which minimises a.f. content in the a.g.c. voltage which in this 
circuit is positive-going. The potential divider R5R6 
provides the 0.7 V 
forward bias required by a silicon junction diode, and C6 decouples 
R6 
+ 
* 2 
-cz> 
330 
I 
I 
MODULATED, 
i.f. INPUT 
Τ 
001 
L £ ~ l r 
± c 2 
T O 01 
a.f. 
OUTPUT 
CD 
20k 
Fig. 12.5. Complete circuit diagram for a series-diode detector in a sound receiver 

Modulators, 
Demodulators, 
Mixers and Receivers 
227 
Shunt-diode 
Detector 
In Fig. 12.3 the output is taken from C2 but it could alternatively be 
taken from D l , the circuit being rearranged as shown in Fig. 12.6 to 
enable one terminal of the output to be earthed. The output signal is 
now made up of the modulation-frequency signal from C 2 plus the 
modulated-r.f. signal across L2 and hence has a greater r.f. ripple 
content than for the series-diode circuit. As before, the diode is driven 
into conduction for a brief fraction of each cycle by positive peaks of the 
r.f. input and at these instants the diode effectively short-circuits the 
detector output. Thus the waveform of the output is similar to that of 
the modulated-r.f. input with each r.f. cycle displaced vertically so that 
all positive peaks are aligned or clamped at zero volts as shown in 
Fig. 12.7: shunt-diode detectors are sometimes called 
clamping 
detectors. By reversing the diode all negative peaks can be clamped at 
zero volts. 
ο 
ι 
» 
ι 
i 
* 
ο 
Fig. 12.6. Basic form of shunt-diode 
detector. Again an ideal diode is 
assumed 
TIME 
0 
3 
Ο 
Fig. 12.7. Output waveform from a shunt-diode detector for a 
sinusoidally-modulated 
input signal 

228 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
The time constant R\C2 
should have the same value as for the 
series-diode circuit but the input resistance of the shunt-diode circuit 
is lower (approximately Rx/3) 
because the load resistor Rx 
is 
effectively connected across the input terminals for the whole of each 
r.f. cycle. 
An advantage of the shunt-diode circuit is that C2 provides d.c. 
isolation between the input-signal source and the load circuit. 
Synchronous 
Detectors 
In an a.m. transmission (Fig. 12.8a) the carrier-frequency component 
is of constant amplitude and independent of the modulation. It can 
therefore be suppressed and the effect of so doing is shown at (b): the 
shape of the envelope of the waveform is completely changed. Simple 
detectors of the type described above which respond to the peak 
values of the waveform would clearly give very distorted results if 
used to demodulate a carrier-suppressed signal. 
Synchronous detectors overcome this difficulty by use of a second 
input consisting of a constant-amplitude sinusoidal signal synchron-
ised with the (suppressed) carrier frequency of the modulated r.f. 
signal to be demodulated. The second input determines the instants at 
which the detector samples the amplitude of the modulated r.f. signal. 
These instants, shown by vertical dashed lines in Fig. 12.8, occur 
strictly at carrier-frequency intervals and thus the detector samples 
the positive peaks during one half-cycle of the modulating signal and 
negative peaks during the other half-cycle, thus correctly reconstitut-
ing the waveform of the modulating signal. The output has positive 
and negative swings and, for a symmetrical modulating signal such as 
a sine wave, has a mean value of zero, i.e. there is no d.c. component 
as in the output of a simple diode detector. 
One possible circuit for a synchronous sampling detector is given in 
Fig. 12.9. The single series diode of the prototype a.m. detector is 
replaced by two diodes and a centre-tapped transformer. Both diodes 
conduct together to produce the low-impedance path which connects 
the source of modulated r.f. to the capacitor C4. When the diodes are 
non-conductive the path is open-circuited and C4 retains its charge. 
The diodes must be driven into conduction and non-conduction by the 
carrier input and not by the modulated r.f. input and thus the carrier 
input must be large compared with the other input signal. The 
balanced form of the carrier circuit is adopted to minimise any carrier 
component which may reach C4. The time-constant circuits RxCi and 
R2C2 are included as diode loads to ensure that the diodes conduct for 
only a small fraction of each cycle, i.e. when sampling is required. 

Modulators, 
Demodulators, 
Mixers and Receivers 
229 
(a) 
CARRIER 
•SUPPRESSED 
WAVE 
(b) 
CARRIER WAVE 
(c) 
MODULATING 
WAVEFORM 
(d) 
Fig. 12.8. An amplitude-modulated 
wave (a), and the 
correspond-
ing carrier-suppressed 
wave (b). 
The action of a 
synchronous 
detection is shown at (c) and (d) 
For some applications the components R1Cl 
and R2C2 
can be 
omitted. The diodes then connect C 4 to the source of modulated r.f. 
for the whole of one carrier half-cycle. 
This type of circuit can be used to demodulate the quadrature-
modulated colour-difference signals in a colour television receiver. 
Here the modulated signal has two carrier components in quadrature, 

230 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Ci 
MODULATION-
FREQUENCY 
OUT 
Fig. 12.9. Synchronous sampling detector using a diode bridge 
each amplitude modulated by a different signal. The circuit of Fig. 
12.9 can demodulate one of these signals without interference from 
the other because, during the time it is sampling the peaks of one 
signal, the other is passing through zero and so has no effect on the 
detector output. A second detector with its carrier input in quadrature 
with that of the first is required to demodulate the second 
colour-difference signal. 
F.M. DETECTORS 
There are many types of f.m. detector and we shall describe two which 
are in common use, namely the ratio detector (generally constructed of 
discrete components) and the balanced product or quadrature 
detector (usually forming part of an i.e.). 
Ratio 
Detector 
Many f.m. detector circuits make use of the phase angle between the 
primary and secondary voltages of a transformer when the secondary 
winding is tuned to the centre frequency, e.g. the midband frequency of 
the i.f. amplifier. The phase angle is 90° at the resonance frequency of 
the secondary winding, is greater at higher frequencies and smaller at 
lower frequencies. By injecting a sample of the primary voltage via L3 
into the centre tap of the secondary winding as shown in Fig. 12.10, the 
voltages at the ends of the secondary winding are made dependent on 

Modulators, 
Demodulators, 
Mixers and Receivers 
231 
this phase difference and hence on signal frequency. As frequency 
increases from the centre value the voltage increases at one secondary 
terminal and decreases at the other: these changes are reversed if 
frequency decreases from the centre value. 
In the ratio detector the secondary winding is connected to two 
series-aiding diodes with individual reservoir capacitors C\ and C2 and 
a common load resistor Rx. As frequency increases from its centre 
value the voltage across one reservoir capacitor (say C\) increases 
whilst that across C2 decreases. When frequency decreases from the 
centre value the voltage across Cx falls and that across C2 increases. 
The voltage across either capacitor thus varies with modulation and 
can be used as the modulation-frequency output. In Fig. 12.10 the 
voltage across C2 is used as output. 
The sum of the voltages across Cx and C2 tends to be constant 
during modulation and in the ratio detector is stabilised by the 
inclusion of the capacitor C3 across /?,, the combination having a long 
time constant. 
FREQUENCY-
MODULATED 
INPUT 
Fig. 12.10. One circuit for a ratio detector 
A.F. 
OUTPUT 
Oneofthe reasons for the popularity of the ratio detector is that itcan 
be made relatively insensitive to amplitude modulation of the input 
signal. This is achieved by making the detector act as a dynamic 
limiter. 
R, is made small so that the secondary winding is heavily damped. By 
normal diode detector action the voltage across 
, C 3 is equal to the 
peak value of the input signal but, because of the long time constant, the 
voltage cannot adjust immediately to any sudden change in the 
amplitude of the input signal although it can follow slow changes. Any 
momentary increase in input-signal amplitude, e.g. a noise 'spike', 
causes the diodes to conduct more heavily than normal, thus increasing 
the damping on the secondary winding and momentarily reducing the 
gain of the previous stage, so offsetting the effect of the spike. Any 

232 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
momentary fall in input-signal amplitude, e.g. a negative spike, causes 
the diodes to be cut off, thus removing the damping of the tuned 
circuit and increasing the gain. Thus the effects of sudden increases 
and decreases in input-signal amplitude can be reduced. 
Phase Detector or Comparator 
A type of f.m. detector favoured by i.e. manufacturers consists in 
essence of two transistors connected in series across the supply. Signals 
from the i.f. amplifier (usually included in the i.e. also) are limited to 
form pulses and are applied to the base of one transistor. They are also 
applied to a network, the phase shift of which is dependent on frequency 
and is 90° at the centre frequency. An example of such a network is 
shown dashed in Fig. 12.11 in which LXC} 
is resonant at the centre 
frequency, C2 and C 3 being small capacitances. The output of this 
quadrature network is applied to the base of the second transistor. The 
π 
- o - v 
-O PUSH-PULL 
MODULATION 
-OFREQUENCY 
OUTPUT 
• 
I 
« 
I F 
! 
INPUT 
_4 
o -
- t - 
t 
-o 
1 
ι 
ι 
ι 
I 
1 
· 
1 
OUAORATURE 
J 
INPUT 
ι 
r 
π 
- t - 
t 
-o 
1 
ι 
ι 
ι 
I 
1 
· 
1 
OUAORATURE 
J 
INPUT 
1
 
1 
ι 
ι 
ι 
1 
1 1 
! 
- o o 
Fig. 12.11. Simplified circuit diagram of a phase detector or comparator of the type used 
for f.m. 
detection 

Modulators, 
Demodulators, 
Mixers and Receivers 
233 
polarity of the pulses is such that the current through the transistors is 
increased when the pulses overlap and as the period of overlap varies 
with frequency modulation the mean current through the transistors 
varies correspondingly and so has a strong modulation-frequency 
component which can be extracted as output. 
In practice the circuit is more complex than this, the lower transistor 
being replaced by a long-tailed pair (see page 156), the two collector 
circuits each containing another such pair as shown in Fig. 12.11. Pulses 
from the i.f. output are applied in push-pull to the lower pair and pulses 
from the quadrature network are applied to the other pairs in a parallel 
push-pull arrangement. This balanced circuit is adopted to minimise 
output at the pulse frequency and drift of operating currents and 
voltages. For simplicity, means for stabilisation of operating currents 
are omitted from Fig. 12.11. 
PhaseAockedAoop 
Detector 
A type of f.m. detector often used in i.e. form is the phase-locked-
loop illustrated in the block diagram of Fig. 12.12. It consists of a 
phase detector (with a circuit diagram similar to that of Fig. 12.11) 
which compares the frequency and phase of the frequency-modulated 
input with those of a voltage-controlled oscillator (v.c.o.). The d.c. 
output of the phase detector is used to control the v.c.o. so as to 
frequency -
or phase -
modulated 
R F input 
voltage-
controlled 
oscillator 
Fig. 12.12. Block diagram of a phase-locked 
loop 
minimise any difference in frequency or phase between the two 
inputs. In this way the v.c.o. accurately tracks the variations in 
frequency and phase of the f.m. input and the control voltage for the 
v.c.o. is a faithful reproduction of the modulation waveform. The 
low-pass filter is used to suppress all the components of the 
phase-detector output except the modulation frequency and the d.c. 
output. Many types of oscillator can be used for the v.c.o. but one 
well suited for incorporation in an i.e. is an astable multivibrator (see 
page 261). 
phase 
comparator 
l o w - p a s s 
filter 
modulation 
phase 
comparator 
l o w - p a s s 
filter 
1
 * 
frequency 
output 

234 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
M I X E R S 
In a superheterodyne receiver the carrier and sidebands constituting 
the received signal are in effect translated in frequency to give a 
new signal with a carrier at the intermediate frequency. This is 
achieved in a mixer stage in which the received signal is combined 
with the output of a local oscillator, thereby producing a resultant 
signal at the sum or difference of the received carrier and oscillator 
frequencies. 
If two signals at frequencies fx and f2 are connected in series or 
parallel and are applied to a device with a linear input-output 
characteristic the output consists only of signals at fx and f2 (of larger 
amplitude than at the input if the device amplifies). No new 
frequencies are introduced. But if the device has a non-linear 
characteristic the output has components at several frequencies, 
known as combination frequencies, which can be represented as 
(mfi ± nf2) where m and η are the integers 1, 2, 3 etc. One of these 
components is the difference frequency (/\ 
— f2) 
required in 
superheterodyne reception. Mixers operating on this principle are 
termed additive and the most obvious device to use as an additive 
mixer is a diode. Another possibility is a transistor biased near cut-off 
to give the required non-linearity. 
In a second principle which can be used in a mixer the two signals 
are in effect multiplied together. This is achieved practically in an 
active device by arranging for one input to control the gain to which 
the other input is subjected. For example the two inputs can be 
applied to the two gates of a dual-gate i.g.f.e.t. No non-linearity is 
required in this form of mixer and only the sum and difference 
frequencies are generated as shown in the identity: 
2 cos 
cos ω2ί = cos (a^ + ω2)ί + cos (ω! - ω2)ί 
Mixers using this principle are termed multiplicative. 
Fig. 12.13 gives an example of a mixer circuit using a diode (a 
Schottky type is usually chosen). The modulated-r.f. and oscillator 
inputs are connected in parallel for application to the diode and 
interaction between the tuned circuits providing the inputs is 
minimised by using series inductance and series capacitance. 
As mentioned earlier, a bipolar transistor can be used as a mixer, 
the oscillator input being provided by a second transistor, the 
combination forming a two-transistor frequency changer. It is, 
however, more usual to use a single transistor to perform both 
functions and such self-oscillating mixers can give a frequency-
changing efficiency little short of that obtainable from the two-
transistor circuit. The bias for a self-oscillating mixer must be chosen 

Modulators, 
Demodulators, 
Mixers and Receivers 
235 
SIGNAL -
FREQUENCY j 
TUNED 
CIRCUIT 
X 
H4-
X 
OSCILLATOR ( 
TUNED 
CIRCUIT 
X 
TT7 
i.f. 
OUTPUT 
Fig. 12.13. An example of a diode mixer circuit 
with care. The mutual conductance must be sufficient to sustain 
oscillation over the frequency bands to be covered and this requires a 
reasonable collector current. On the other hand the bias must be 
sufficiently near cut-off to provide the non-linearity required for 
efficient mixing. Clearly a compromise is called for. A typical circuit 
diagram for a self-oscillating mixer is given in Fig. 12.14. 
Fig. 12.14. One possible circuit for a self-oscillating 
mixer 
This may be regarded as a Reinartz oscillator of the type shown in 
Fig. 
11.3 in which the base circuit is tuned to accept 
the 
signal-frequency input and the output circuit is tuned to select the 
difference-frequency output. The oscillator signal and the signal-
frequency input are connected in series between base and emitter to 
enable the transistor to operate as an additive mixer. Circuits of this 
type are commonly employed in transistor superheterodyne receivers 
for a.m. reception. 

Κ ) 
Fig. 12.15. F.e.t. mixer used for stereo carrier tuning in a satellite 
receiver 
5 
•e-
ί 
G-
FROM LOCAL 
OSCILLATOR 
F.M. DEMODULATOR 
FOR R.H. CHANNEL 
F.M. DEMODULATOR 
FOR L.H. CHANNEL 
10.52-MHz 
FILTER 
dULTI-CARRIER 

Modulators, 
Demodulators, 
Mixers and Receivers 
237 
Dual-gate f.e.t. 
Mixer 
An example of a multiplicative mixer-circuit is given in Fig. 12.15. The 
lower gate of the f.e.t. TR2 is fed with a wide spectrum of f.m. sound 
carriers at frequencies ranging from 6.5 MHz to 10 MHz derived from 
the baseband video signal in a satellite receiver. The upper gate is 
supplied with a sinusoidal signal from a local oscillator, the frequency 
of which is governed by the user's sound channel selector. The mixer 
output contains all the sound carriers, converted to frequencies in the 
8-13 MHz range. Those centred on 10.52 and 10.7 MHz are selected by 
narrow-band ceramic filters for subsequent demodulation and amplifi-
cation to form the right- and left-hand channels of the stereo sound 
output. 
By suitable choice of the local-oscillator frequency, any pair of sound 
carriers 180 kHz apart can be brought into line with the filters and 
demodulators: in this f.m. transmission system the L and R sound 
carriers are always broadcast 180 kHz apart, though several pairs can 
accompany each vision carrier, the 'spares' carrying alternative 
languages or radio programmes. 
U.H.F. Television 
Tuner 
Fig. 12.16 gives the circuit diagram of a commercial television tuner 
covering Bands IV and V (470 to 860MHz). Basically it comprises a 
dual-gate f.e.t. (TRl) as r.f. amplifier, a bipolar transistor (TR2) as 
oscillator, a Schottky diode (D2) as mixer and two bipolar transistors 
(TR3 and TR4) in cascade forming an i.f. pre-amplifier. The tuner is 
mounted on a printed wiring card contained within a metal housing 
measuring approximately 80 mm by 50 mm by 18 mm. 
The aerial input circuit is not tuned but is designed as a high-pass 
filter. The gain of the r.f. stage TRl can be controlled by a voltage 
applied to gate 2. This voltage, which is normally supplied by an 
external a.g.c. circuit, has a maximum range of 0 to 10 V and can vary 
the gain by 30dB. 
TRl feeds a bandpass r.f. filter incorporating the two inductors L N 
and L1 2
. These are not conventional coils but lengths of transmission 
line. Α λ/4 length of line, if short-circuited at one end, presents a high 
impedance at the other. This is a resonant condition and the open-end 
impedance is analogous to the dynamic resistance of a parallel-tuned 
circuit at resonance. If the line is shortened to less than λ/4 the open 
end becomes effectively inductive and a capacitor can be connected 
across it to give resonance. Transmission lines can take many forms. 
In some tuners a box chassis is divided by partitions into rectangular 

Fig. 12.16. Circuit diagram of a television u.h.f. tuner 
S' 
to 
S 
δ " 
Ο 
^ * 
6 
TUNING VOLTAGE 
(•IV TO *28V) 
A 
OSCILLATOR 
i.f 
SUPPLY 
VOLTAGE (•!2V) 
ο 
r f STAGE SUPPLY 
VOLTAGE U12V) 
a g e 
VOLTAGE 
(•9 2V TO +1V) 
198 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 

Modulators, 
Demodulators, 
Mixers and Receivers 
239 
sections, each of which can act as the outer conductor of a trough line, 
a stout wire forming the centre conductor. In others the lines are 
printed directly onto the glass fibre substrate on which the tuner is 
based, making for a compact and stable unit needing no alignment in 
production or subsequent service. In this particular tuner the lines are 
copper strips shaped like goalposts standing on the printed card on 
either side of a vertical earthed plane. The two adjustable inductors L 6 
and L 7 effectively in parallel with L n and L 12 are used to align the 
resonance frequencies of the two tuned circuits. L1X
 and L 12 are tuned 
by capacitance diodes D3 and D4 which are adjusted by a common 
tuning voltage which also controls the oscillator frequency. The 
coupling between L n and L 1
2
, which determines the passband of the 
double-tuned circuits, is controlled by L 6, C 1
0
, C n and C 12 the values 
of which are chosen to minimise variation in the passband over the 
tuning range. C 15 provides a dip in the r.f. response of the tuner at 
about 79 MHz above the wanted vision carrier to minimise image-
frequency interference. 
TR2 is a common-base stage acting as a Colpitts oscillator, internal 
capacitances providing the positive feedback. The inductor L 14 is 
conventional but has only IV2 turns and a diameter of a few mm. It is 
tuned by capacitance diode D5 and there is a parallel-connected coil 
L 15 which can be adjusted (in addition to L 14 itself) to give correct 
tracking between oscillator and r.f. circuits. The mixer diode D2 is fed 
with r.f. signal via L 8 and oscillator output via C2 3
. D2 output, after 
r.f. filtering, is applied to the emitter of the common-base stage TR3. 
TR3 is coupled to the common-emitter stage TR4 via L 18 and L 19 
which together constitute an i.f. bandpass filter, the shunt coupling 
capacitor C30 determining the width of the passband. The output of 
TR4 is choke-capacitance coupled to the i.f. output pin of the tuner. 
R22 and C32 apply negative feedback to TR4 to stabilise its gain. 
In all three bipolar-transistor stages the mean-emitter current is 
stabilised by the technique described in Chapter 6 in which a potential 
divider fixes the base voltage, the value of the emitter resistor then 
determining the mean current through the transistor. D.C. stability of 
the oscillator circuit is further improved by using a temperature-
dependent resistor for 
Ru. 
SATELLITE LOW NOISE BLOCK 
It is not practical to convey a 12-GHz satellite carrier signal directly 
from the receiving dish to the indoor receiver so the frequency of the 
signal is downconverted in a dish-mounted low noise block (l.n.b.). The 
l.n.b. contains an amplifier, oscillator and mixer which together 

L O W - N O I S E A M P . 
(L.N.A.) 
ι 
1 
L1 
-4-
12 G H z 
1 
S . H . F . 
\Y 
S I G N A L 
W A V E G U I D E -
M I C R O S T R I P L I N E 
T R A N S I T I O N 
M I X E R 
B P F 
M i x e r 
1 S T I.F. A M P . (I.F.A.) 
Fig. 12.17. The essentials of a head-end unit for satellite 
reception 
to 
è 
S' 
Ci 
•5' 
5" 
S 
r-»
. 
Ο 
*t 
η 
Ci 
S. 
00 
198 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 

Modulators, 
Demodulators, 
Mixers and Receivers 
241 
transfer the whole spectrum of received carriers to first intermediate 
frequencies in the range of950 MHz to 1.7 GHz, which can be conveyed 
without excessive loss in a high-quality coaxial downlead to the indoor 
tuner unit. 
Fig. 12.17 gives an overall block diagram of a typical l.n.b., which 
follows conventional superhet practice albeit at very high frequency. 
The low-noise r.f. amplifier depends on the waveguide or other input 
coupler to provide image rejection of over 50 dB. It uses two or three 
GaAs f.e.t.s or h.e.m.t.s to provide an overall gain of about 20 dB to 
bring the signal up to a level suitable for presentation to the mixer, a 
Schottky-type diode of silicon or GaAs. 
As with a conventional u.h.f. tuner the local oscillator must generate 
as little noise as possible: any noise superimposed on the oscillator 
output is added to the wanted i.f. signal. The oscillator transistor is 
again a GaAs f.e.t., operating in conjunction with a stripline and 
dielectric resonator as described in Chapter 11 and Fig. 11.5. The 
required mixer output (1st i.f., 0.95-1.7 GHz) is selected by a bandpass 
filter and passed to a four- or five-stage low-noise amplifier with a gain 
of about 35 dB for launch into the transmission cable, which also carries 
the d.c. operating power up to the l.n.b. unit. 
S.H.F. 
Amplifier 
An arrangement of low-noise amplifier for use at 12 GHz in a l.n.b. is 
shown in Fig. 12.18; it is fabricated by printed-circuit techniques on a 
low-loss substrate of glass fibre or similar material. The signal collected 
by the receiving dish is reflected through a waveguide and impedance-
matching feedhorn to a pick-up probe consisting of a metal pin or a 
micropatch on the l.n.b. substrate. Printed micropatches and stubs are 
used for impedance matching between the stages of the low-noise 
amplifier and to form couplers and bandpass filters. 
The l.n.b. is followed by a filter and a mixer, both of which introduce 
some signal loss, but the overall noise figure is largely governed by the 
noise factor of the first two amplifier stages, which provide sufficient 
gain to override noise in the following circuits and to overcome losses in 
the transmission cable from dish to indoor tuner. Fig. 12.19(a) shows 
the layout of a commercial l.n.b. for consumer use. The square 
micropatch on the right intercepts the microwave signal, whence it is 
transferred to one or other of the adjacent (90° apart) striplines, 
depending on the polarisation of the required signal. Each stripline has 
its own GaAs f.e.t. pre-amplifier (selected by the viewer) passing its 
output to the further two transistor amplifiers visible at the bottom of 
the picture and shown enlarged in Fig. 12.19(b). The slanted and 

242 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
50 il 
INPUT , 
DC REGULATOR 
Fig. 12.18. Two-stage 
low-noise amplifier working at 11-12 
GHz 
stepped microstrips near the left of Fig. 12.19(a) form the bandpass 
filter for the s.h.f. signal on its way to the mixer at the far left. The 
oscillator can be seen at bottom left with its circular dielectric resonator 
while the large three-legged heat-sinked device near top centre is a 
series-regulator i.e. which stabilises the supply voltages to the l.n.b. 
circuits. 
Indoor Tuner 
The block-converting action of the outdoor l.n.b. produces a spectrum 
of transmissions differing only in carrier frequency from those arriving 
at the receiving dish. They must now be tuned to select the required 
programme and the first indoor stage consists of a selector very similar 
to the u.h.f. tuner described earlier and illustrated in Fig. 12.16. A block 
diagram of a satellite tuner is given in Fig. 12.20, showing the same 
gain-control and stripline tuning techniques as used in tuners for u.h.f. 
Bands IV and V. The blocks at centre right form a prescaler and 
phase-lock-loop, part of the microprocessor-controlled tuning system 
currently fitted to all satellite tuners. Also incorporated in this tuner 
module is the bandpass s.a.w. filter and the second i.f. amplifier, so that 
the emerging signal is ready for demodulation in a p.1.1. detector similar 
to that shown in Fig. 12.12. In satellite receivers the second i.f. 

Fig. 12.19. {a) Inside an l.n.b. for domestic satellite broadcast 
reception; (b) enlarged 
view of tuned s.h.f 
amplifier 
243 
Modulators, 
Demodulators, 
Mixers and 
Receivers 

R F 
A M P 1 
A . G . C . 
R F 
P R E S E L E C T O R 
F R E Q . 
I.F. 
B A N D P A S S 
I.F. 
A M P 2 
C H A N G E R 
A M P 1 
S A W 
A M P 2 
F I L T E R 
Ô 
A . G . C . 
7-3 V 
O U T P U T F R O M M I C R O P R O C E S S O R 
Fig. 12.20. Indoor 
tuner for a satellite 
receiver. 
The C, D, L lines control 
the phase-lock-loop 
tuning 
system 
244 
Principles of Transistor Circuits 

Modulators, 
Demodulators, 
Mixers and Receivers 
245 
frequency is typically 480 MHz and careful design and shielding of the 
demodulator v.c.o. is necessary to avoid radiation and interference 
effects. 
COMPLETE RECEIVERS 
We have now considered how transistors can be used to perform many 
of the functions required in radio and television receivers. In modern 
equipment much of the circuitry is embodied in i.e.s. This is illustrated 
in Fig. 12.21 which gives the circuit diagram of an f.m.-a.m. radio 
receiver designed for operation from batteries or mains. The only 
functions 
not carried out by i.e.s are r.f. 
amplification 
and 
frequency-changing for f.m. reception. The design of the r.f. amplifier 
circuit TRI 
was described earlier (page 
181) and TR2 is a 
self-oscillating mixer. It is basically a Colpitis oscillator, the two 
fundamental 
capacitors providing positive feedback 
being 
C n 
between collector and emitter (the tuning capacitor of the 
i.f. 
transformer primary winding has negligible reactance at oscillation 
frequency) and C19 between base and emitter ( C10 and C12 having 
very low reactance). The r.f. input is injected into the emitter circuit 
and the i.f. output is taken from the i.f. transformer via a ceramic 
filter. On mains operation the 9-V supply is derived from a full-wave 
rectifying circuit so arranged that insertion of the mains plug into the 
receiver disconnects the internal batteries. 
The complete circuit diagram of a colour television receiver would 
be formidably complicated, particularly if it had provision for remote 
control, teletext, display of information on screen or LED panel and 
stereo sound. But most of the complexities are embodied in i.c.s some 
of which, as mentioned earlier, can contain more than 100,000 
components. If the i.c.s are shown as block symbols the diagram is 
considerably simplified, containing a few inter-connected i.c.s and a 
little discrete-transistor circuitry. Much the same can be said of the 
circuit diagram for a video cassette recorder. This, too, contains a 
colour television receiver and a display of information. 

Κ ) 
Fig. 12.21. Circuit diagram of an a.m.-fm. 
radio receiver for operation from mains or batteries 
Principles of Transistor Circuits 
ι ci 
A M
 AN
D 
F
M 
DETECTOR
S 
A M
 
AN
D 
F
M 
I
F AMPLIFIER
S 
A M
 OSCILLATO
R AN
D MIXE
R 

C H A P T E R 
13 
Pulse Generators 
INTRODUCTION: THE TRANSISTOR AS A SWITCH 
So far in this book we have discussed the use of transistors as 
amplifiers of pulses or sinusoidal signals. In class-Α and class-B 
amplifiers the transistor is used as a linear amplifier in which every 
change in input signal brings about a corresponding 
change 
in output signal. In this type of operation (typical of analogue 
equipment) the shape of the input-output characteristic is all-
important and any deviations from linearity must be compensated 
by negative feedback or other means to give an acceptable per-
formance. 
In pulse or digital circuits, however, transistors are used in a 
completely different type of operation in which the shape of the 
input-output characteristic is of minor significance. The transistor 
is, in fact, used as a switch with only two states usually termed on 
and off. In the on state the transistor is conductive, having a signifi-
cant collector (or drain) current, the collector-emitter (or drain-
source) voltage being very low. In the off state the transistor is 
non-conductive, having negligible collector (or drain) current, the 
collector-emitter (or drain-source) voltage being practically equal 
to that of the supply. In both states dissipation in the transistor is 
low, in the on state because of the low collector (or drain) voltage 
and in the off state because of the low collector (or drain) current. 
In the on state, however, there is appreciable dissipation in the 
base circuit of a bipolar transistor for this is usually fed via a series 
resistor. There is no corresponding dissipation in the f.e.t. which 
gives it one advantage over the bipolar transistor in digital 
applications. 
247 

248 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Stable and Unstable States 
A state may be such that a transistor switched into it by an external 
signal remains in that state indefinitely provided that the supply to the 
transistor is maintained: such a state is termed stable. On the other 
hand there are states which will not persist. When a transistor is put 
into one of these by an external signal it remains in it for a limited 
period only and then reverts automatically to its original state without 
assistance from external signals. The temporary state is termed 
unstable. 
So far we have spoken of the two possible states of a single 
transistor but a circuit containing several transistors may also 
possess stable and/or unstable states. In both states some of the 
transistors may be on whilst others are off but it is still true that the 
states of the circuit as a whole may be stable or unstable. 
Bistable, Monostable 
and Astable 
Circuits 
In some pulse circuits both states are stable. Such a circuit is termed 
bistable and it requires an external triggering signal to compel it 
to leave one state and enter the other. A further external signal is 
then required to compel the circuit to return to the original state 
again. Two triggering signals are thus necessary for each cycle of 
operation of the circuit which therefore has applications as a counter 
or frequency divider. 
In other circuits one state is stable and the other unstable. Such 
a circuit is termed monostable 
and it always reverts to its stable 
state. An external signal is needed to make the circuit enter the 
unstable state but, after such stimulus, the circuit automatically 
reverts to the stable state without need of external signals. The time 
taken to reach the stable state after triggering can be given any desired 
value within wide limits by appropriate choice of time constants. 
Circuits of this type are often used to give accurately-timed delays and 
are sometimes called delay 
generators. 
In a further class of circuits both states are unstable. Such a circuit 
is termed free-running 
or astable and will not remain permanently in 
either state. Without need of external signals an astable circuit auto-
matically switches between the two states at a frequency determined 
by the time constants of its circuitry. Although an astable circuit 
does not need external signals to make it operate, it can readily be 
synchronised at the frequency of a recurrent external signal. 
Some circuits can be made bistable, monostable or astable by 
simple changes in circuitry, sometimes even by altering bias con-
ditions. One circuit of this type is the multivibrator. 

Pulse 
Generators 
249 
MULTIVIBRATOR: BISTABLE 
The basic circuit for a collector-coupled 
bistable 
multivibrator 
is given in Fig. 13.1. This shows two transistors with resistive 
collector loads, each collector being connected to the other base 
by a resistive potential divider. The arrangement is such that when 
one transistor is conducting, its collector potential ensures that 
the other transistor is cut off. The two possible states of the circuit 
are thus : 
(1) TRl on andTR2off. 
(2) TR2 on and TRl off. 
If the circuit is initially in state (1), an external signal will cause 
it to enter state (2) and the change of state is accomplished with 
great rapidity. The speed of transition is due to the positive feedback 
inherent in the circuit: this feedback is obvious if the circuit is 
regarded as that of a two-stage direct-coupled amplifier with the 
output signal returned to the input. A second external signal applied 
to the circuit will cause it to return to state (1) again. 
During these changes of state the collector potentials of TRl and 
TR2 alternate between a negative value when the transistor is cut 
off and almost zero when it is fully conducting. 
If a recurrent triggering signal is applied to the circuit, the voltage 
waveform generated at each collector is approximately rectangular 
in form. Moreover, the frequency of the rectangular signal is half 
that of the triggering signal, enabling such circuits to be used in 
frequency dividers or binary counters. 
oo 
+ 
Fig. 13.1. Basic circuit of bistable 
multivibrator 
using bipolar 
transistors 

250 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Speed-up 
Capacitors 
In the simple form illustrated in Fig. 13.1 the waveforms generated 
at the collectors during changes of state have poor rise times. This 
is because the circuit coupling each collector to the other base 
consists of a series resistor feeding into the parallel RC combination 
of the transistor input impedance. Such a network has a response 
which falls as frequency rises and thus the positive feedback in the 
circuit is more marked at low than at high frequencies. To achieve 
steep edges (small rise times) in the output signals the degree of 
feedback should be independent of frequency: thus the coupling 
circuits should not have a high-frequency loss. The coupling circuits 
can be made aperiodic (i.e. non-frequency-discriminating) 
by 
shunting the series resistors with capacitors as shown in Fig. 13.2 
Nil • 
Fig. 13.2. 
Transistor 
bistable 
multivibrator 
with 
speed-up 
capacitors 
and the condition for an aperiodic response is that the time constant 
of the coupling resistor-coupling capacitor combination should 
equal that of the transistor input impedance. If a smaller value of 
capacitor is used the rise time of the multivibrator output signals is 
not improved as much as is possible : if a larger value of capacitor 
is used the capacitance placed in parallel with the collector load 
becomes significant and it slows up the speed with which the 
collector potential approaches the negative supply potential when 
the collector current is cut off : in other words the rise time of the 
negatively-going collector potential changes is impaired. 
To avoid the necessity for the separate positive supply for the 

Pulse Generators 
251 
bases shown in Fig. 13.1, the two emitters may be bonded and 
connected to the earth line via an RC circuit as shown in Fig. 13.2. In 
this circuit the emitter current of the conductive transistor ensures 
that the other is cut off by making its emitter potential more negative 
than its base potential. It is advisable to decouple the common-emitter 
resistance to preserve steep edges in the output waveform. 
The triggering signals needed to bring about a change of state in a 
multivibrator can be applied to the base of either transistor and can be 
positive or negative so that the transistor is cut off if conductive or 
switched on if non-conductive. It is preferable, however, to apply the 
signals to the base of a conductive transistor rather than that of a 
non-conductive one. This is because a smaller trigger amplitude is 
required, there being no bias to overcome, and also because the 
conductive transistor amplifies the trigger so applying a much larger 
trigger to the non-conductive transistor. 
In counter circuits it is usual to inject a series of unidirectional 
TRIGGER 
INPUT 
Fig. J3.3. The circuit of Fig. 13.2 with diode triggering 
gate 
pulses into a bistable circuit and some means is required of directing 
the pulses alternately to the base circuits of the two transistors. 
One method of achieving this is by the use of the diode gate circuit 
illustrated in Fig. 13.3. The input signals are applied to the two 
capacitors Cx and C2 and then to the two base circuits via diodes 
Dl and D2. The switching action of the diodes can be followed 
from the following section. 

252 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Diode Gate Circuit 
Suppose TRl is conductive. The collector current is a maximum 
and the collector potential is very low so that there is little difference 
between the collector and base potentials. The diode Dl is con-
nected between collector and base (via Rx) and there is little poten-
tial difference across the diode. The diode is so connected that 
any positive-going edge applied to capacitor Cx makes the diode 
conduct, i.e. low-resistance, and the edge is conducted to the base 
of TRl. The edge cannot, however, reach the base of TR2: this 
transistor is cut off and its collector current is a minimum. The 
collector potential of TR2 is very high and nearly equal to the supply 
voltage. There is thus a maximum potential difference across the 
diode D2 which is connected between collector and base (via 
R9). 
Moreover this potential difference biases D2 in the reverse direction 
so that it does not conduct when a positive-going edge is applied to C2 
unless this edge has sufficient voltage to offset the static bias (and the 
amplitude of the edge must be controlled to avoid this). 
A positive-going edge applied to Cx and C2 thus reaches the base 
of TRl but not that of TR2. This edge initiates the regenerative 
change of state characteristic of multivibrators which ends with 
TRl cut off and TR2 conducting. A second positive-going edge 
applied to the circuit is now conducted to the base of TR2 but not 
to that of TRl. This triggers off a second change of state, hastened 
by regeneration, which ends with TR2 cut off and TRl conductive. 
This is the state originally postulated. 
Waveforms 
The waveforms for a triggered bistable multivibrator are given 
in Fig. 13.4. At tx TRl is conductive and its base and collector 
potentials are slightly negative with respect to emitter potential. 
At the same instant TR2 is cut off : its base potential is considerably 
positive with respect to emitter potential and the collector potential 
is almost at supply potential - Vcc. When t = t2 a triggering pulse 
is received by TRl and interchanges the states. At t = f3 a second 
triggering edge is received (by TR2 this time) and interchanges the 
states again. Two triggering signals are thus required to produce one 
complete cycle of rectangular wave from TRl or TR2 collector circuit. 
Complementary 
Bistable 
Multivibrator 
The transistors in a multivibrator must provide the two essentials 
of signal inversion and gain. A bistable circuit can therefore consist 

Pulse Generators 
253 
TRIGGERING 
SIGNALS 
TRl 
BASE -
EMIT ifcK 
POTENTIAL 
TRl 
COLLECTOR-
EMITTER 
POTENTIAL 
TR2 
B A S E -
EMITTER 
POTENTIAL 
ο 
TR2 
COLLECTOR-
EMITTER 
POTENTIAL 
TIME -
Fig. 13.4. Base and collector 
waveforms 
for 
the bistable 
multivibrator 
of 
Fig. 13.3 
Ο 
+ 
(a) 
1 
OUTPUT 
OUTPUT 
ο -
Fig. 13.5. Two ways of representing the circuit diagram of a complementary 
bistable 
multivibrator 

254 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
MULTIVIBRATOR: MONOSTABLE 
The bistable circuit of Fig. 13.2 can be made monostable by replacing 
one of the direct inter-transistor couplings by a capacitance coupling 
and by suitable choice of bias. One possible circuit for a monostable 
collector-coupled multivibrator is that shown in Fig. 13.6. TRl is 
Fig. 13.6. Transistor monostable 
multivibrator 
biased by the potential divider R XR2 but TR2 has no bias components 
other than R6 which connects the base to the negative supply line. 
Clearly any positive potential applied to TR2 base (to cut this 
transistor off) cannot remain there indefinitely but will leak away 
as Cx discharges and thus the circuit will always revert to the state 
in which TR2 is on (and TRl therefore cut off). Thus we have 
stable state : TRl off and TR2 on 
from which it follows that 
unstable state: TR2 off and TRl on. 
of a pnp and an npn transistor. Such a complementary multivibrator 
has the unusual feature that in one state both transistors are on 
and in the other both are off. Direct coupling can be used between 
collectors and bases and as a result the circuit is particularly simple 
containing only five resistors as shown in Fig. 13.5(a): here the 
output is taken from the emitter circuit of the npn transistor. It is 
perhaps easier to visualise operation of the circuit by drawing it as 
shown in Fig. 13.5(b) although this loses the familiar crossed lines 
of the multivibrator circuit. 

Pulse Generators 
255 
The operation of the circuit is illustrated by the waveforms of 
Fig. 13.7. At time tx the circuit is assumed here to be in the stable state. 
At t2 TRl is made conductive by applying a negative-going edge 
to its base or preferably (as shown in Fig. 13.7) by applying a 
positive-going edge to TR2 base. The collector potential of TRl 
makes a positive excursion (AB in Fig. 13.7). The voltage across a 
TRIGGERING 
WAVEFORM 
UNSTABLE 
STABLE 
STATE 
STATE 
TR2 
BASE 
POTENTIAL 
T R l 
COLLECTOR 
POTENTIAL 
Fig. J3.7. Base and collector 
potential 
waveforms 
for 
the multivibrator 
of 
Fig. 13.6 

256 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
capacitor cannot be changed instantaneously and this edge is trans-
ferred without loss in amplitude by CY to the base of TR2 (ab\ 
cutting TR2 off. The circuit is now in the second of its two possible 
states (TRl conductive and TR2 cut off) but it cannot remain in it 
permanently because Cx begins immediately to discharge through 
R6 and the output circuit of TRl. As the discharge proceeds the 
potential at the base of TR2 becomes less positive (be) until a point 
(c) is reached at which TR2 begins to conduct This causes the 
collector potential of TR2 to move positively, generating an edge 
CD which is transferred simultaneously, without change in ampli-
tude, to TRl base (cd) cutting TRl off. This in turn causes the 
collector potential of TRl to move negatively which accelerates the 
onset of conduction in TR2. 
The process becomes regenerative, in fact, as soon as the overall 
gain of the two transistor stages exceeds unity, and the change of 
state is then very rapid. After the change, TRl is off and TR2 on. 
The potential at TRl base now falls to near zero as C 2 discharges 
through R4, R5 and the output circuit of TR2. The potential at TRl 
collector moves exponentially towards - Vcc as Cx charges through 
R3. When these two changes have ceased the circuit rests and no 
further action occurs unless further triggering signals are received : 
in other words this is the stable stage again. 
When a monostable multivibrator is used as a delay generator, 
the delay is equal to the period of the unstable state and we thus 
need to be able to calculate the component values needed to produce 
a wanted delay. This can be achieved as follows. 
Duration of Unstable 
State 
The duration of the unstable state is equal to the time taken for the 
potential at the base of the non-conductive transistor to fall to just 
beyond cut-off value. 
First consider the conditions in the circuit in the stable state: 
TRl is cut off and TR2 conductive. TRl collector potential is equal to 
that of the supply — Vcc. TR2 is conductive and its base potential is at 
the cut-off voltage —Vbe. Thus the voltage across C\ is equal to 
(^cc ~ Vbe),
 
t
n
e
 right-hand plate being positive with respect to the 
other. 
The unstable period begins when TRl is suddenly switched on. 
The collector current rises at this instant to a value which is sufficient 
with proper design to bring the collector potential very nearly to 
TRl emitter potential Vel. The change in TRl collector potential 
is thus (Vcc - Vel) and this is transferred by C1 to TR2 base, causing 
the potential here to rise from - Vbe to (Vcc- 
Vei - Vbe). Cl 
now 

Pulse Generators 
257 
begins to discharge through R6 and the output circuit of TRl but 
the resistance of this circuit (with TRl conductive) is small compared 
with R6 
and can be neglected. If the discharge were completed 
TR2 base potential would fall from its initial (positive) value of 
(Ycc ~~ Ve\ "~ V b e )
to z
e
r
o 
a n c
* would then reverse in polarity and reach 
the (negative) supply voltage of — Vcc. However, as soon as TR2 base 
potential reaches - V^, the cut-off value, TR2 begins to conduct and 
the unstable period is abruptly terminated. 
The rate of discharge of Cx is determined by the discharge current. 
This flows in R6 and thus the current can be measured by the voltage 
across R6. At the beginning of the discharge TR2 base has a potential 
of (Vcc— Vel — Vb€) and as the supply voltage is — VCCJ
 the voltage 
across R6 is (2VCC
- Vel - Vbe). At the moment when TR2 becomes 
conductive the voltage across R6 is (Vcc- 
Vbe). The duration of the 
unstable state is approximately equal to the time taken for this fall 
of voltage to occur in a circuit of time constant R6CV 
In general 
the fall of voltage is given by 
Vt = vee-
| / J I
*
c
' 
where Vt is the voltage after a time t and V0 is the initial voltage. 
This may be written in the form 
l O g e 
Κ 
ReCï 
from which 
t = R6Cl 
log, VJVt 
Substituting for V0 and Vt 
t = R6CX 
log, (2VCC
-Vel 
- Vbe)/(Kc~ 
Ke) 
As typical practical values we may have Vcc = 12 V, Vce = 3 V and Vbe 
= 0.7 V. For these 
t = R6d 
log, 1-8 = 0.587 R6CX 
to obtain approximate answers it is often possible to neglect Vel and 
Veb in comparison with Vcc: we then have 
/ = ReC, log, 2 = 0.6931 
R6d 
Thus to obtain a duration of say 1 ms 

258 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
1 
ms 
0.6931 
= 1.44 ms 
Any values of R6 and C\ would thus appear to be suitable provided 
their product (time constant) is 1.44 ms. In fact there are limitations 
to the values of R6 and Cx which can be used. 
For example, R6 supplies the base current to TR2 when TR2 is 
conductive and this sets an upper limit to the value of R6 which 
can be used. If TR2 is to take 2 mA collector current and if β is 
50, the base current is given by 2/50 mA, i.e. 40 μΑ. If the supply 
voltage is 12 V R6 is given by 11 3/(40 χ 10"
6
), i.e. 280 kO. This 
is the maximum permissible value and it is advisable to use a smaller 
value, say, 200 kiî to ensure that the collector potential is near zero 
when TR2 conducts. Thus the minimum value of Cx which can be 
used is given by 
The end of the unstable period is marked by the abrupt start of 
collector current in TR2 and the sudden cut-off of collector current 
in TRl. At this instant, therefore, a positive-going step is generated 
at TR2 collector and a negative-going step at TRl collector. Either 
of these steps could be used as the output of the circuit but the output 
at TR2 collector is, in general, preferred because it has a shorter 
rise time. This is borne out by the following calculations. 
When TR2 is turned on, its collector potential goes positive and 
cuts TRl off by driving its base positive. There is little change in 
voltage across the coupling capacitor C2 and the only capacitance 
which has to be charged or discharged by the collector current of 
TR2 is the output capacitance of TR2 with possibly a contribution 
of capacitance from TRl input. The relationship between the voltage 
across a capacitor and the current flowing into it is given by 
C, = 
1.44 x 10~
3 
Re 
1.44 x 10"
3 
200 x 10
3 
= 0.007 μ¥ 
from which 
dV 
d7 
C 

Pulse Generators 
259 
Suppose the capacitance at TR2 collector is 20 pF and that the 
collector current of TR2 is 2 mA. We have 
dV 
_ 
j _ 
~dt ~ C 
_ 
2 x l 0 '
3 
~ 2 0 x 1 0 "
12 
= 10
8
 V/s 
= 100 V ^ s 
If the supply to TR2 is 12 V the collector potential excursion is 
limited to this value and occupies only approximately 0.1 us. The 
rise time of this potential step is thus of the order of 0.1 μ8. This is 
perhaps an optimistic value because we have neglected any effect 
due to TR2 collector resistor RA which tends to slow up the discharge 
of TR2 collector capacitance by charging it from the supply. 
Alternatively, of course, the potential step generated at TRl 
collector may be used as output. When TRl is cut off at the end 
of the unstable period, the collector potential approaches that of 
the negative terminal of the supply. This tends to drive the base 
of TR2 negative but as soon as TR2 starts to conduct, its input 
resistance becomes very low and its base potential is thus effectively 
stabilised near emitter potential. Thus TRl collector potential can 
only go negative as Cx charges from the supply through R3. 
The 
voltage-time relationship is exponential and the time taken for the 
voltage to change from 10% to 90% of its final value (i.e. the rise 
time) is 2.2 times the time constant RC governing the change. For an 
approximate calculation it is often taken as twice the time constant. 
Thus in this particular example the time constant is R3CX and the rise 
time is approximately 2R3CX. 
A suitable value for R3 is 5 kQ because 
this permits a collector current of 2 mA with a supply of 12 V (2 V 
being assumed lost across TR2 emitter resistor). Cx has already been 
calculated as 0.007 μΡ and thus we have 
rise time = 
2R3CX 
= 2 x 5 χ 10
3
 x 0.007 x 10~
6
s 
= 70 Lis 
which is considerably greater than the rise time of the step at TR2 
collector. 

260 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Hole 
Storage 
The difference between the rise times of the voltage steps at TRl 
and TR2 collectors is in practice likely to be greater than suggested 
by the above calculations. This is because of an effect, known as 
hole storage, which tends to degrade the rise time of the collector-
potential step when a transistor is cut off. Hole storage is an effect, 
internal to the transistor, which causes the collector current to 
persist for a few microseconds after the emitter current has been 
cut off. This occurs in transistors which have been driven hard into 
conduction so that the collector-emitter potential is nearly zero. In 
these circumstances the emitter injects more charge carriers (holes 
in a pnp transistor) into the base region than are required to give 
the collector current, and the excess carriers are stored ready to be 
swept into the collector region to prolong the collector current for 
a short period after the emitter current has been cut off. This hole-
storage effect can be avoided by so designing the circuits that the 
collector-emitter potential does not approach zero but is limited to 
a value such as 1 V: this can be achieved by the use of diodes known as 
catcher diodes because they catch the collector voltage and hold it at a 
value above saturation. 
Control of Duration of Unstable State 
In the deduction of an expression for the duration of the unstable 
state it was assumed that R6 was returned to the negative supply 
line (Fig. 13.6). When TRl is suddenly switched on Cx causes TR2 
base voltage to jump instantaneously to + Vcc approximately. At this 
instant the voltage across R6 is approximately 2VCC
 and this determines 
the rate of discharge of Cx. As Cx discharges TR2 base voltage moves 
towards - Vcc (supply voltage) but never reaches it because TR2 starts 
to conduct when its base voltage reaches - 0 . 7 V approximately. Thus 
only about one half of the possible extent of the voltage change at 
TR2 base is in fact realised. This accounts for the factor 0.6931 in the 
expression 0.6931/?6C1 for the duration of the unstable state. 0.6931 is 
k>ge2. 
Now suppose R6 is returned to a source of negative voltage equal to 
one half the supply voltage, i.e. -VCC
J2. 
TR2 base voltage still jumps 
to approximately +VCC
 when TRl is abruptly switched on but the 
instantaneous voltage across R6 is now only 1.5 Vcc approximately, 
implying a slower rate of discharge of Cx. As Cx discharges TR2 base 
voltage moves towards -Vcc/2. 
Again it never reaches this value 
because TR2 starts to conduct before the discharge is completed. But 

Pulse Generators 
261 
now two thirds of the discharge is achieved and, as the time constant is 
still R6Cu this takes longer than before. In fact the expression for the 
duration of the unstable state is now approximately \AR6Ci, 
the 
natural logarithm of 3 being 1.0986. 
As the voltage to which R6 is returned is moved towards zero more 
of the discharge of Cx is achieved and the longer is the duration of the 
unstable state. If R6 is returned to the slider of a potentiometer across 
the supply, this control can in fact be used as a means of adjusting the 
duration to a desired value. 
MULTIVIBRATOR: ASTABLE 
The bistable circuit of Fig. 13.2 can be made astable by replacing 
both of the direct inter-transistor couplings by capacitance couplings 
and by suitable choice of bias. One possible circuit for an astable 
collector-coupled multivibrator is given in Fig. 13.8. 
No emitter bias is used and both bases are returned via resistors 
to the negative supply line. The behaviour of the circuit will be 
illustrated by the waveforms shown in Fig. 13.9. Ai t{ TRl is cut off 
by a positive signal at the base and the collector potential is a negative 
maximum. At the same time TR2 is conducting, having minimum 
negative values of base and collector potentials. TR2 is in a stable 
state but TRl is not, because the potential at its base is moving 
negatively as C2 discharges through R2. At r2 the potential at TRl 
base is low enough for TRl to start conducting. As explained for the 
monostable multivibrator, this starts a regenerative action which 
causes TRl to become abruptly conductive. The resultant steep 
positive-going voltage (AB) at TRl collector is transferred by Cx to 
the base of TR2 (ab\ cutting TR2 off. There now follows the exponen-
tial change in base potential (be) previously described. It keeps TR2 
cut off for a period given approximately by 069R2C{ 
which ter-
minates at time i3 when TR2 becomes abruptly conductive. TR2 is 
now in a stable state but TRl is not, being cut off by a positive edge 
(de) which decays exponentially (ef). This keeps TRl cut off for a 
period given approximately by 0.69 R2C2. 
This is the circuit condition 
assumed initially. Thus the cycle continues, the period of oscillation Τ 
being equal to the sum of the durations of the two unstable periods 
Τ = 0 . 6 9 ( ^ 3 ^ +/?2C2) 
If R2 — R3 = R and C, = C2 = C the multivibrator is symmetrical 
and generates square waves (equal mark space ratio) at both collec-
tors. The period of oscillation is given by 
T= 
1.38 RC 

Fig. 13.9. Base and collector 
waveforms for the astable 
multivibrator 
of 
Fig. 13.8. 
262 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Fig. 13.8. Transistor astable 
multivibrator 
TRl 
BASE 
POTENTIAL 
TRl 
COLLECTOR 
POTENTIAL 
TR2 
BASE 
POTENTIAL 
TR2 
COLLECTOR 
POTENTIAL 

Pulse Generators 
263 
The free-running frequency of such a multivibrator is given by 
1 
~ 
1.3SRC 
A multivibrator required to be synchronised at the line frequency 
(approximately 15 kHz) of a 625-line television system would be 
designed to have a natural frequency somewhat lower than this— 
say 10 kHz. We have already seen that suitable values for the load 
resistors and base resistors are 5 kO and 200 kQ: we have now to 
determine a suitable value for the coupling capacitors. From the 
above expression we have 
c « - L -
1.38/?/ 
1 
= 
ρ 
1.38 x 2 χ 105 x 104 
= 360 pF approximately 
Control of Free-running 
Frequency 
In Fig. 13.8 the base resistors R2 and R3 are shown returned to the 
negative supply line but either or both could alternatively be returned 
to a source of voltage nearer zero and, as explained for the 
monostable circuit (page 260), this has the effect of increasing the 
duration of the unstable period(s). For an astable multivibrator this 
implies a decrease in the free-running frequency. In this way the 
frequency of operation can be controlled by adjustment of the voltage 
to which the base resistors are returned. The astable multivibrator can 
thus be used as a voltage-controlled oscillator and has applications in 
phase-locked-loop circuits (page 233). 
S Y N C H R O N I S I N G OF 
M U L T I V I B R A T O R S 
Bistable and monostable multivibrators are triggered by signals 
which cause the circuit to leave a stable state. Such a technique 
cannot be applied to astable circuits because these have no stable 
states. The synchronising signals injected into an astable circuit 

264 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
are designed to terminate the unstable periods earlier than would 
occur naturally. It follows that the natural frequency of the circuit 
must be lower than the frequency of the synchronising signals. 
To terminate the unstable periods unnaturally early the syn-
chronising signals can take the form of negative-going pulses applied 
to one or both of the bases of pnp transistors. The amplitude of the 
edges is important. If the natural frequency of the multivibrator is 
small compared with that of the synchronising signals, the amplitude 
of these signals, if small, may be such that every fifth one terminates 
an unstable period. The multivibrator then runs at one fifth of the 
sync-pulse frequency. Increase in the amplitude of the sync signal may 
cause every fourth signal to trip the multivibrator so that its frequency 
is now one quarter that of the sync signals. Further increase in 
sync-pulse amplitude may cause the multivibrator frequency to jump 
to one third the synchronising frequency. Thus a synchronised 
multivibrator can be used as a frequency divider but close control over 
the sync-pulse amplitude is necessary to obtain a consistent large 
division ratio. 
All the 
multivibrators 
described 
above 
have employed 
two 
collector-to-base coupling circuits. One of these can be replaced by 
an emitter-to-emitter coupling without significantly altering the 
principles of operation and Fig. 13.10 gives the circuit diagram of 
a bistable emitter-coupled multivibrator. When TR2 is turned on, 
its emitter current, in flowing through the common-emitter resistor 
Re, makes the emitter of TRl negative with respect to the fixed 
base potential and thus cuts TRl off. The effect of Re is hence similar 
to that of a direct coupling between TR2 collector and TRl base. 
E M I T T E R - C O U P L E D 
M U L T I V I B R A T O R 
D 
I N P U T O -
O O U T P U T 
D 
4· 
Fig. 13.10. A bistable emitter-coupled 
transistor 
multivibrator 

Pulse Generators 
265 
One advantage of this circuit over the collector-coupied version 
is that the collector of TR2 plays no part in the mechanism of 
operation. It is free and can provide an output, the loading on 
which has no significant effect on the performance of the circuit. 
Collector-coupled multivibrators can be symmetrical but emitter-
coupled types cannot. This can easily be seen for in one of the two 
possible states of the circuit the voltage across Re must be less than 
that across R2 to give the negative base-emitter voltage which keeps 
TRl conductive. In the other state, however, the voltage across Re 
must be greater than that across R2 to give the positive base-emitter 
voltage which keeps TRl cut off. In the first state the only current 
in Re is that due to TRl whereas in the second state the current in 
Re is due entirely to TR2. It follows that TR2 must take a larger 
collector current (when conductive) than TRl (when conductive) 
and the circuit is hence asymmetrical. 
The circuit can be triggered by positive-going or negative-going 
signals applied to TRl or TR2 base and is sometimes used as a 
limiter by applying, say, a sinusoidal input to TRl base. The output 
is then rectangular at the frequency of the input with an amplitude 
substantially independent of that of the input provided this exceeds 
a certain minimum value. 
INPUT O-
Fig. 13.11. An astable emiuer-coupled 
transistor 
multivibrator 
A monostable version of the emitter-coupled multivibrator of 
Fig. 13.10 can be obtained by replacing one of the direct inter-
transistor couplings by a capacitance coupling. This can be achieved 
by replacing R3 in Fig. 13.10 by a capacitor and by returning R4 
to a source of negative voltage such as the supply line. 
An astable version of the multivibrator is obtained if capacitors 
are included in both inter-transistor couplings. This may be achieved 

266 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
by modifying the collector-to-base coupling as for the monostable 
circuit and in addition using individual emitter resistors coupled 
by a capacitor as shown in Fig. 13.11. 
As we have seen, a multivibrator consists essentially of two tran-
sistors so connected that the output of each is coupled to the input 
of the other. Each transistor introduces a signal inversion, a condition 
essential to give the positive feedback which accelerates the changes 
of state. If one of the transistors is replaced by a transformer con-
nected so as to give signal inversion, the resulting circuit will still 
generate pulses. The circuit derived in this way is termed a blocking 
oscillator and is extensively employed as a pulse generator and as 
a sawtooth generator. Two forms of blocking oscillators are in 
common use, an astable or free-running circuit and a monostable 
circuit: a bistable circuit is not possible because the transformer 
cannot maintain a signal across the windings indefinitely. 
Astable 
Circuits 
One form of transistor blocking oscillator is illustrated in the circuit 
diagram of Fig. 13.12. The primary winding of the transformer is 
included in the collector circuit and the secondary winding in the 
base circuit. The black dots indicate points of similar instantaneous 
polarity and show the winding sense required for the required signal 
B L O C K I N G 
O S C I L L A T O R 
Fig. 
13.12. 
An astable 
blocking 
oscillator 
OUTPUT 

Pulse Generators 
267 
inversion in the transformer. Base bias is provided by the resistor 
Rx and in this circuit Rx is returned to a source of negative voltage: 
the transistor is a pnp type and this bias voltage ensures that the 
circuit will always revert to the state in which the transistor is 
conductive. As soon as conduction starts, however, positive feedback 
causes oscillation at the resonance frequency of the primary winding 
(assumed the larger of the windings). The design of the circuit is such 
that the oscillation amplitude builds up very rapidly and as it does 
so the capacitor Cx is charged by the base current in the transistor. 
The voltage generated across Cx by this current is such as to bias 
the base of the transistor positively with respect to the emitter. Such 
a polarity cuts a pnp transistor off, of course, and one of the aims in 
the design of blocking oscillators is to cut the transistor off in 
the first half-cycle of oscillation. 
After cut-off there is a period of relaxation in the circuit whilst 
Cx discharges through Rx. As soon as the voltage across Cx has 
fallen to a value at which the transistor starts to conduct, oscillation 
begins again and the cycle is repeated. Thus the circuit is astable 
(free-running) and takes simultaneous bursts of base and collector 
current at a repetition frequency governed by the time constant 
RXCX, 
the duration of the burst being determined by the resonance 
frequency of the transformer primary winding. Provided the burst 
of collector current is large enough to bring the collector-emitter 
voltage down to nearly zero, pulses of substantially rectangular 
waveform can be obtained from the collector terminal as suggested 
in Fig. 13.12. 
Very close coupling is desirable between the two windings of the 
-Vbb
 
-vce 
Fig. 
13.13. 
An 
astable 
blocking 
oscillator 
with 
a diode 
to 
suppress 
overshoot 

268 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
transformer to give a large degree of positive feedback and heavy 
damping of the windings is sometimes arranged to discourage 
ringing at the resonance frequency of the primary winding. A practi-
cal precaution which is usually desirable is to connect a diode across 
the primary winding as shown in Fig. 13.13. This has the effect of 
eliminating the large overshoot which would otherwise be generated 
across the primary winding when the collector current is suddenly 
cut off. Such overshoots could cause the collector-emitter voltage 
to exceed the safe rating for the transistor. 
We can obtain an estimate of the natural frequency of the blocking 
oscillator in the following way. If the collector supply voltage is Vcc 
then a voltage with a peak value of nearly Vcc is generated across the 
primary winding when the transistor is suddenly turned on. We will 
assume the transformer to be a step-down type with a turns ratio 
of η :1. The voltage generated across the secondary winding when 
the transistor is turned on is then approximately VcJn. This is also 
the voltage generated across the capacitor Cx because the base-
emitter circuit of the blocking oscillator behaves in a manner similar 
to that of a diode detector and a capacitor in the circuit is charged 
up to the peak value of the applied signal. Initially the voltage across 
Cj biases the base positively but Cx is connected via Rx to a source 
of negative voltage Vbb. Thus in the absence of the transistor the 
voltage across Cx would initially fall to zero and then change sign, 
ultimately reaching the value Vbby
 the curve following an exponential 
law. However, the moment the voltage reaches the cut-off value Vbe 
(approximately - 0 . 7 V for a pnp silicon transistor) the transistor 
begins to conduct. Oscillation then occurs and Cx is again charged 
to VJn volts. Thus only the initial part of the exponential change in 
voltage across Cx is therefore achieved and the interval between 
successive bursts of oscillation (which, of course, determines the 
natural frequency of the blocking oscillator) is equal to the time 
taken for a voltage initially equal to (VJn + Vbb) to fall by VJn + Vbet 
the time constant being 
RXCX. 
Now the initial part of an exponential curve is nearly linear and 
has a slope given by VJRlCl 
where V0 is the initial voltage. Thus the 
fall in voltage in a time t is given by 
and if we equate this to VJn + Vbe we can obtain an estimate of the 
natural frequency of the oscillator. We have 

Pulse Generators 
269 
giving 
natural frequency = 
| 
V+nVJVJ 
1 
Control of Natural 
Frequency 
If 
is returned to the collector supply voltage, Vhb = Vcc: if, in 
addition, Kcc/n is large compared with Vbe the natural frequency is 
given by 
The natural frequency is now independent of the supply voltage 
and, for a given oscillator with a fixed value of n, can be controlled 
by adjustment of Rx or Cx. 
As a numerical example suppose a blocking oscillator is required 
to operate at 10 kHz. Such an oscillator is required in a 625-line 
television receiver, the synchronised frequency being 15 kHz. A 
typical value for the turns ratio of the transformer is 5:1 and 
rearranging the above expression we have 
R{C{ 
= n+l 
f 
_6_ 
î ô *
s 
= 600 μ 8 
If we wish the collector current to peak to 5 mA, the base current 
should preferably be not less than, say, 0.3 mA. Rx must then be 
80 kQ to give such a base current with a 24-V supply. C, is then 
given by 
^ 
time constant 
c—— 
_ 600x I P "
6 
8 0 x l 0
3 
= 0008 μΡ 

270 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
It is probably better, however, to have separate supplies for 
collector and base as shown in Fig. 13.13 and to control the natural 
frequency by adjustment of Vbb using fixed values of Rx and Cj. 
The way in which this controls the natural frequency of oscillation is 
discussed for monostable and astable multivibrators on pages 254 and 
261. Such control has the advantage that the natural frequency can be 
adjusted by a potentiometer (as shown in Fig. 13.14) which need carry 
only direct current and can therefore be situated at some distance 
from the blocking oscillator itself. This could be useful, for example, 
in the design of a television receiver. 
Control of Pulse 
Duration 
The duration of the burst of conduction is governed by the resonance 
frequency of the primary winding of the transformer, being approxi-
mately equal to half the period of oscillation. For example, if the 
winding resonates at 50 kHz the period is given by 
and the burst of conduction is approximately 10 μ$ duration. Often 
blocking-oscillator transformers are designed to have a primary 
inductance and self-capacitance which will give the required duration. 
Alternatively precautions can be taken to keep self-capacitance to 
a minimum and the required duration can be obtained by adding a 
physical component of the correct capacitance across the primary 
winding. 
D 
OUTPUT 
Fig. 13.14. Control of natural frequency 
of a blocking 
oscillator by adjustment of Vbb 

Pulse 
Generators 
Output Terminals of the Blocking 
Oscillator 
The output of a blocking oscillator can be taken from the collector 
terminal as suggested in Fig. 13.12 but external loads added at this 
point could affect operation of the oscillator and it is better to include 
a resistor in the collector circuit as shown in Figs. 13.13 and 13.14. 
This gives positive-going output pulses (if the transistor is a pnp 
type). If negative-going output pulses are required an npn transistor 
can be used, the supply voltage being positive. 
Synchronisation 
of Blocking 
Oscillators 
Blocking oscillators can readily be synchronised at the frequency 
of any recurrent signal. Synchronisation is achieved by terminating 
the non-conductive period earlier than would occur naturally. Thus 
the natural frequency must be lower than the frequency of the sync 
pulses. To terminate the non-conductive period a negative-going 
signal can be applied to the base of the transistor (assumed pnp) or 
a positive-going signal can be applied to the collector. Alternatively 
if the transistor is an npn type, a positive-going signal is required at 
the base or a negative-going signal at the collector. The precise 
waveforms of the sync pulses are not important provided they have 
a steep leading edge. 
Monostable 
Blocking 
Oscillator 
The blocking oscillator circuits so far described are essentially 
astable because the transistor always reverts to the conductive state 
as Cj discharges and in this state the transistor bursts into oscil-
lation because of the inherent positive feedback in the circuit. If, 
however, Rx 
is returned to a point positive with respect to the 
emitter potential, when the circuit is triggered into oscillation, e.g. 
by a negative-going signal applied to the base, it will revert to the 
state where the base is positive with respect to the emitter. In this 
state the transistor is cut off and the circuit will remain indefinitely 
in this state unless triggered out of it by another sync signal. This is 
therefore now a monostable circuit which requires a triggering 
signal to initiate each output pulse. 
271 

C H A P T E R 
14 
Sawtooth Generators 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
Sawtooth or ramp waveforms are extensively employed in electronic 
equipment. Two obvious applications are as sources of deflecting 
signals in oscilloscopes, television cameras and television receivers but 
they are also used in radar, in test equipment and in analogue-to-
digital converters. 
Usually sawtooth generators are classified as free-running 
(astable) 
which do not require external signals (but can readily be synchronised 
by such signals) and driven (monostable) which will not operate 
without external signals. 
We can distinguish three principles which can be used to generate a 
sawtooth waveform. The first uses the initial part of an exponential 
curve as an approximation to the required linear change. The second 
principle is a more fundamental solution to the problem: if a constant 
current is applied to a capacitor the rise in voltage across it is linear. 
The third principle can be derived from the second by using the 
concept of duality,* i.e. by substituting voltage for current, current for 
voltage and inductance for capacitance: if a constant voltage is applied 
to an inductor the current in it grows linearly with time. All three 
principles are used in practice as the following examples of sawtooth 
generators illustrate. In some of these transistors are used as switches 
and in others as linear amplifiers. 
* The inductive circuit is said to be a dual of the capacitive one and the concept of 
duality can be applied generally to electronic circuits. 
272 

Sawtooth 
Generators 
273 
S I M P L E D I S C H A R G E R 
C I R C U I T 
It was mentioned in the previous paragraph that the initial part of 
an exponential curve is almost linear and in many sawtooth genera-
tors this part of such a curve is used as the working stroke, a faster 
exponential change providing the rapid flyback which terminates 
this stroke. 
One form of sawtooth generator operating on this principle is 
illustrated in the circuit of Fig. 14.1. TRl has an input consisting of 
widely spaced negative-going pulses. In the intervals between the 
pulses TRl is cut off and Cx charges through Rx to provide the 
working stroke of the output. When, however, TRl is turned on by 
the input pulses TRl takes collector current from Cx and discharges 
it to produce the flyback. 
This is essentially a driven circuit because there is no output in the 
absence of input pulses. Increase in Rx or Cx reduces the rate of 
charge of Cx with the result that a smaller voltage builds up across 
Cx during the interval between successive pulses: in other words 
increase in the time constant RXCX 
reduces the amplitude of the 
sawtooth output. Similarly reduction in the time constant increases 
the output amplitude but, if good linearity of forward stroke is 
required, the output should be kept small compared with the supply 
voltage to ensure that only the initial part of the exponential curve 
is used as output. 
As an illustration the departure from linearity is 5 per cent if the 
output swing is restricted to 10 per cent of the supply voltage. The 
time constant of an RC combination is, by definition, the time taken 
for the voltage across a capacitor to rise to 63 per cent of the final 
value. The time taken for the voltage to rise to only 10 per cent of 
the final value is approximately 0.1 RC. Expressed differently the 
time constant of the network required in a simple discharger should 
be approximately 10 times the duration of the forward stroke. 
Fig. 14.1. A simple transistor 
discharger 

274 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Thus if the forward stroke is 50 μϊ, a time constant of 500 us is 
required. 
There is, of course, an unlimited number of combinations of 
resistance and capacitance with this value of time constant but there 
are limitations on the values which can be successfully used and a 
decision can usually be made by considering the charging and dis-
charging currents. The capacitor is charged via the resistor during 
the forward stroke and is discharged by the transistor during flyback. 
The ratio of average discharge current to average charge current is 
thus equal to the ratio of forward stroke period to flyback period 
and may be 10 or 20:1 in a practical circuit. Suppose the forward 
stroke is to occupy 50 us and the flyback 3 μϊ. It is convenient to take 
the average discharge current as 20 mA for this is easily within the 
capability of even a small transistor. The sawtooth amplitude is to 
be 10 per cent of the supply voltage and we will assume an amplitude 
of 2 V. We can now calculate the capacitance required from the 
relationship 
c = 
e 
=
 ii 
V 
V 
Substituting for i, f and V for the discharge of C 
„ 
20x 1 0 "
3
x 3 x 1 0 "
6
 „ 
c - 
F 
= 003 μ¥ 
The average charging current is 3/50 of 20 mA, i.e. 1.2mA. The 
supply voltage is 20 V and the average value of voltage across the 
charging resistor during the forward stroke is 19 V. The current is 
1.2 mA and the resistor value is clearly 16 kQ approximately. 
We can check the validity of this calculation from the time constant 
of the combination. This is 16 χ 10
3
 x 0.03 x 10~
6
, i.e. 480 us, 
approximately 10 times the duration of the forward stroke as 
required. 
The simple discharger circuit has a rectangular input signal from 
which it develops a sawtooth output signal of the same frequency. 
Mathematically the output waveform is the time integral of the 
input waveform and the circuit may therefore be described as an 
integrator. 
The collector current of TRl is, of course, turned on at regular 
intervals by the input signal and it follows that any circuit in which 
current flows as a series of recurrent bursts can be connected to 
a resistor and capacitor combination (an integrating circuit, in 
fact) such as Rx and C t in Fig. 14.1 to produce a sawtooth output. 

Sawtooth 
Generators 
275 
For example, an RC combination can be added to the output circuit 
of a multivibrator. Fig. 14.2 gives the circuit diagram of a monostable 
emitter-coupled multivibrator modified in this way to produce a 
Fig. 14.2. A driven multivibrator 
sawtooth 
generator 
sawtooth output. The time constant R3CX 
determines the duration 
of each forward stroke of the sawtooth output whilst the time 
constant R4C2 
determines the amplitude of the output. 
Fig. 14.3 gives the circuit of an astable blocking oscillator used as a 
Fig. 14.3. Basic circuit of a blocking 
oscillator 
sawtooth 
generator 
discharger. This is a free-running circuit, the natural frequency of 
which is determined by the time constant R x Cx. The output amplitude 
is determined by both RlC1 
and R2C2 
and the ratio of these quantities 

276 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
should be kept constant if the output amplitude is required to be 
constant when the natural frequency is varied. This circuit can, 
however, be synchronised at the frequency of any recurrent signal 
applied to it as explained in the previous chapter. 
Perhaps the most serious disadvantage of the simple discharger 
circuit is that the output obtainable with good linearity is limited 
to a small fraction of the supply voltage. Thus to give a reasonable 
output with good linearity a large supply voltage is required. One 
circuit which is free from this limitation is the Miller integrator 
which can give a sawtooth output nearly equal to the supply voltage 
and with good linearity. 
As shown in Fig. 14.4 the circuit is similar to that of the simple 
discharger but the capacitor Cx is returned to the base instead of 
to the emitter. This introduces negative feedback and makes the 
operation of this circuit quite different from that of the simple 
discharger. For example the transistor in the Miller integrator is 
conductive throughout the cycle and is used as a class-Α amplifier : 
in fact the transistor is used as an operational amplifier and this 
approach is described on page 162. Suppose that Cx is fully charged 
and that the transistor (assumed pnp) has suddenly been turned on by 
a negative-going pulse applied to the base. The immediate tendency is 
for the collector potential to approach the emitter potential as Cx 
begins to be discharged. As the collector potential changes, however, 
the change is transferred by Cx to the base. The resulting feedback 
reduces the collector current and slows up the discharge of Cx. In fact 
M I L L E R - I N T E G R A T O R 
C I R C U I T 
Fig. 
14.4. 
Fundamental 
circuit 
of 
a 
transistor 
Miller 
integrator 

Sawtooth 
Generators 
277 
the effective time constant is increased by the feedback from R2Cl 
to 
AR2Cl 
where A is the voltage gain of the transistor with Rx as load. In 
addition to slowing up the discharge of Q , the feedback exerts a 
powerful linearising effect and the sawtooth generated at the collector 
terminal is a much better approximation to the ideal than that 
obtained trom the simple discharger circuit. 
The reduction in the speed of the collector-voltage change is 
undesirable during the flyback period, which is usually required to 
be as short as possible, and a common technique is to include a 
second transistor in practical Miller-integrator sawtooth generators 
to interrupt the feedback circuit for the duration of the flyback 
period. One circuit of this type is illustrated in Fig. 14.5. The two 
transistors TRl and TR2 are connected in series as a cascode but 
the input is applied to TR2 base, not TRl base as in r.f. applications. 
The overall gain is approximately equal to that of a single transistor 
and there is also a signal reversal between the signals at TRl base 
and TR2 collector. Thus the fundamental components Ru 
R2 and 
Cx can be connected as shown, these corresponding with those of 
the previous diagram. During the period when the base is biased 
negatively by the input both transistors conduct and the circuit 
operates in the manner already described for Fig. 14.4, negative 
feedback slowing down the discharge of Cx and linearising the 
JT 
TL ο 
Fig. 14.5. Transistor 
Miller-integrator 
circuit 
with fast 
flyback 
sawtooth generated at TR2 collector. When, however, TR2 base is 
held positive by the input signal, TR2 is cut off. This removes 
negative feedback from the circuit and C{ now charges through 
Rx and the base-emitter junction of TRl at a rate probably 40 or 
50 times that which applies with feedback. In this way, therefore, a 
rapid flyback is obtained. 

278 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
C O N S T A N T - C U R R E N T C H A R G E R 
If the base voltage of a transistor is held at a fixed and stable voltage, its 
emitter takes up a corresponding voltage less the drop in the 
base-emitter junction. The current flowing in the external emitter 
circuit then depends entirely on the value of resistance it contains. The 
emitter current also flows in the external collector circuit so long as its 
resistance is low enough to sustain it. Thus the collector represents a 
constant-current 
source. 
A linear rise of voltage takes place across a capacitor when it is 
charged from a constant-current source. In the circuit of Fig. 14 1, Rx 
can be replaced by a constant-current generator as shown in Fig. 14.6. 
TR2 generates a current determined by ZD1 and Re; it flows to charge 
C until TRl switches on to discharge the capacitor. When TRl turns off 
again another linear positive-going ramp is generated, and so on. This 
principle is often used in i.e. field scan generator circuits, with switch 
TRl being closed momentarily once per 20ms by the field oscillator, 
itself locked to incoming field sync pulses. 
f V 
FIELD 
OSCILLATOR 
SAWTOOTH 
° 
OUTPUT 
ΛΛ 
Fig. 14.6. Generation of a linear sawtooth by constant-current 
charging of a capacitor. 
This circuit works from a positive supply line but is otherwise similar to that of Fig. 14.1, 
with TR2 taking the place of Rx 
L I N E O U T P U T S T A G E FOR T E L E V I S I O N R E C E I V E R 
The principles of the method of generating a sawtooth current 
commonly used in television receivers are quite different 
from 
those so far described. At frequencies of the order of 15 kHz the 

Sawtooth 
Generators 
279 
-ο 
ι j 
Fig. 14.7. Basic 
cir-
cuit for 
line 
output 
stage 
Ο 
scanning coils are predominantly inductive and are represented by 
Lx in Fig. 14.7. The parallel capacitor is chosen to resonate with 
Lx at a frequency such that the period is double the required fly-
back time. 
When S is closed (tx in Fig. 14.8) it connects Lx across the supply. 
Current in Lx, initially zero, starts to grow and rises linearly with 
Fig. 14.8. Voltage and current waveforms for the circuit of Fig. 14.7 
time: the voltage across an inductor is related to the rate of change 
of current in it according to the expression 
V in this circuit is the supply voltage and is constant: Lx is also 
constant. Thus d//di is constant, i.e. the current changes linearly 
with time as required for the working stroke of the scanning system. 
When the working stroke is completed, S is opened (r2), isolating 
LXCX 
from the supply. LXCX 
now begins to oscillate freely and the 
following voltage and current changes occur. 
Current continues to flow in Lx but is now taken from Cx instead 
0
 
CURRENT 
IN 

280 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
LINE 
DRIVE 
J U T . 
L.O.P.T. 
TR1 
D1 
i i SCAN 
' ? COIL 
Fig. 14.9. Skeleton circuit of a television receiver line output 
stage 
of from the supply. This discharges Cx reducing the voltage across 
Lj and thus reducing the rate of rise of current in Lx. When Cx is 
completely discharged, the current in Ll has zero rate of rise, being 
now at a maximum. As current continues to flow Cx begins to 
charge up with the opposite polarity. This causes current in Lx to 
decrease and it falls to zero and builds up in the opposite direction. 
At the instant (r3) when the current is zero, the voltage across C{ 
is a maximum. As soon as the current has reached a value equal to 
the previous maximum, S is closed again (r4). At this instant the 
voltage across Cx is equal to the supply voltage. Current now flows 
from Lx into the supply and because the supply voltage is constant 
the current falls linearly with time to zero (t5). This completes the 
first half of the working stroke and current now begins to increase 
linearly, as described initially, to complete the second half of the 
stroke. The current and voltage waveforms are given in Fig. 14.8: the 
voltage waveform is of course proportional to the rate of change of the 
current waveform. 
Fig. 14.9 shows, in basic form, a practical line output stage for a 
television receiver. The switch has been replaced by an npn power 
transistor TRl and the inductor L by the parallel combination of line 
output transformer (l.o.p.t.) primary winding Lx and scanning coil L2: 
large capacitors C2 and C3 may be regarded as short-circuits at 
line-scanning frequency. At about the middle of each scanning stroke 
TR1 is switched on by the line drive waveform at its base, grounding the 
bottom end of Lj to give a linear build-up of current within it as already 
described. Line flyback is initiated by the sudden turn-off of TRl, 

Sawtooth 
Generators 
281 
whereupon the magnetic field collapsing about LJL2 
causes an 
immediate reversal of the direction of magnetic flux and coil current, 
which now flows into tuning capacitor C\, charging it. At a time 
determined by the period of resonant circuit LC (r4 in Fig. 14.8) one 
half-cycle of oscillation has taken place and the energy stored in Q has 
been transferred back into L1/L2. 
Further oscillation would involve the 
bottom end of Lx moving negatively with respect to ground to recharge 
Cj but this is prevented by the action of clamp or efficiency diode Dl 
which conducts at r4 to clamp the bottom end of Lx to ground. The 
magnetic energy stored in the inductors now decays linearly to zero 
during the period i4-f 5, feeding energy back into reservoir capacitor C 3 
and providing deflection energy for the first half of the active scanning 
line. At f 5 the circuit is at rest with no energy left in Cx or Ll/L1, 
and the 
scanning spot has once again reached screen centre, corresponding to 
the situation at ij, and at this point TRl switches on again to repeat the 
cycle. In this way a sawtooth current is built up in the l.o.p.t. Lx and 
scan coil L2 ; in practice L2 consists of a pair of coils in a saddle-wound 
ferrite deflection yoke. 
The voltage generated across an inductor is proportional to the rate 
of change of current within it. Thus the voltage across the l.o.p.t. 
primary winding and scan yoke is steady and relatively low during the 
forward scanning stroke but high during the flyback period when the 
rate of change of magnetic flux is high and varying, as shown by the 
collector voltage waveform of Fig. 14.8. Thus the voltage waveform 
across the l.o.p.t. and scan coil is a series of pulses about 12 μ$ wide 
recurring at 64-μ8 intervals. As is now plain, the flyback period is 
governed by the LC product of the components in the line output stage 
rather than by any characteristic of the line drive waveform. The 
currents in the transistor and the diode charge and discharge the 
decoupling/storage capacitor equally and there would appear to be no 
net current drawn from the supply line +V. In practice the losses 
contributed by coil resistance, the finite switching time of TRl and Dl, 
and the extra loads imposed on the l.o.p.t. by the various auxiliary 
power feeds taken from it create a considerable current demand from 
the power supply. 
The amplitude of the sawtooth current (which determines the picture 
width) is directly dependent on the supply voltage and is normally 
controlled by adjustment of this voltage. 
So far, for the purpose of circuit explanation, we have assumed 
scan-coil coupling capacitor C2 to be infinitely large. In practice, in 
addition to providing d.c. isolation of the yoke coil, it performs the 
function of S-correction. In scanning a large flat screen a linear 
deflection current would result in a picture cramped in the centre and 
stretched at the ends of the scan. This is caused by the variation in 

282 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
distance between the deflection centre and the picture-tube screen. 
Critical selection of the value of the coupling capacitor C2 has the 
compensating effect of reducing scan speed at the start and end of each 
sweep as shown in Fig. 14.10. 
B Y C O U P L I N G 
C A P A C I T O R 
Fig. 14.10. S-correction introduced by the yoke coupling 
capacitor 
The line output transistor is normally a large high-voltage silicon 
type with high Ic and Kce ratings: peak collector voltage during flyback 
can exceed 1000 V. The construction of such a transistor requires a 
large base region to carry the heavy current. To overcome the inherent 
hole-storage effect (see page 260) the drive waveform must remove the 
charge built up in the current-saturated base junction very quickly. 
This is usually achieved by using a transformer to drive the line output 
transistor base. The negative voltage pulse at the instant of switching 
off removes the charge from the transistor base. Even so there is a delay 
of about 8 /zs from the start of the turn-off pulse to the time when the 
transistor starts to cut off and this must be allowed for in the phasing of 
the line drive pulse relative to that of the picture signal. Some receivers, 
generally small-screen models, use a compound (e.g. Darlington-type) 
transistor for line deflection, rendering a driver transformer unnecess-
ary. In some transistors designed for 90° line deflection the clamp/ 
efficiency diode is encapsulated with the transistor in the same package. 
Practical Design 
Mention has already been made of the auxiliary uses to which the 
l.o.p.t. is put in a television receiver. In the complete circuit diagram of 
Fig. 14.11 the elements already described can readily be seen: they are 
the line output transistor TR11; the line output transformer T5 (with 
^ 
ι 
\ 
S A W T O O T H G E N E R A T E D 
\ 
B Y I N D U C T A N C E 
ι 

Sawtooth 
Generators 
283 
Fig. 14.11. Complete circuit diagram of commercially 
produced line-scanning 
stage 
primary winding 13-15); tuning capacitor C3JC35; 
clamp diode 
D33/D34; and scan coil with S-correction coupling capacitor C 3 8
, here 
inserted in the earthy side of the yoke circuit. Also in series with the 
deflection coil is L4, the saturable magnetic core of which is biased by a 
permanent magnet for correction of horizontal scanning linearity. 
Windings 8-11 and 4-12 on the l.o.p.t., with D39 and D40, provide 
± 12-V power lines for the field timebase, whilst winding 1-3 generates 
a 6.3-V r.m.s. supply for the heaters of the picture tube. The other 
secondary windings on T5 provide high voltages for beam acceleration 
and focus electrodes in the tube. The winding connected to pin 7 feeds 
the anode of the (inbuilt) diode which provides a 7-kV voltage for focus 

284 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
control, adjustable by the potentiometer built into the l.o.p.t. In its 
bottom leg is a second moulded-in potentiometer from which is tapped 
off about 1 kV for the first anode of the picture tube. The diode 
conducts on the flyback pulses and the associated reservoir capacitance 
is formed by the inter-layer capacitance of the l.o.p.t. windings. The 
components connected to transformer pin 6 provide a control voltage 
for beam-current limiting via the luminance drive circuit. Further 
diodes leading upwards from pin 7 provide a 25-kV supply for the final 
anode of the tube, each separate coil/diode combination forming, in 
conjunction 
with 
the 
carefully 
designed 
inter-winding-layer 
capacitance, a voltage-generating 'cell', three of which are stacked in 
series to form a voltage multiplier. 
Diode 
Modulator 
In the circuit of Fig. 14.11 both the tuning capacitor and clamp diode 
are split to facilitate the insertion of a diode modulator circuit which 
amplitude-modulates the line scan current to compensate for the 
pincushion distortion inherent in wide-angle picture tubes. A 50-Hz 
parabolic waveform derived from the field timebase is fed via D38 
(bottom left-hand side of diagram) to a direct-coupled class-Α amplifier 
made up of TR12, TR13 and TR14 with feedback stabilisation via R6Q
. 
TR14 is a medium-power transistor, usually heat-sinked. It acts as a 
variable load which governs the distribution of current in the yoke, part 
of tuned circuit L 5C 3 4
, and winding 1-2 on the EW transformer T6, 
which is part of tuned circuit T6 (1-2) C 3 5
. Injection coil L5 and 
capacitor C 43 decouple modulator transistor TR14 from line pulses. In 
addition to dynamic modulation of scan amplitude, picture width can 
be controlled by adjustment of the d.c. voltage on which the parabolic 
waveform sits at D38 anode. 

C H A P T E R 
IS 
Digital Circuits 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
As mentioned in the previous two chapters, transistors in multi-
vibrators and other pulse circuits are used as switches, i.e. except 
for the brief periods during which the transistors are changing state 
they are either on (taking considerable current) or off (non-con-
ductive). For most of the time therefore the collector (or drain) 
voltage has one of two possible values namely a low value near 
emitter or source potential (when the transistor is on) and a high 
value near the supply potential (when the transistor is off). 
A vast range of circuits has been developed during the past decade 
or two in which diodes and transistors are used as switches and in 
which the signal paths have at all times one or other of two possible 
voltage levels. Such circuits are used to perform mathematical and 
logical operations on signals in computers and similar equipment. 
Circuits used in this manner are known as digital (strictly binary 
digital) or logic circuits and the principal types are described briefly in 
this chapter. 
L O G I C LEVELS 
The two significant values of voltage on the signal-carrying lines are 
referred to as logic level 0 and logic level 1* If level 1 is more positive 
than level 0 the circuit is said to use the positive logic 
convention 
and if level 1 is more negative than level 0 the circuit is said to use 
the negative logic convention. The distinction is important because 
circuits can behave differently according to the logic convention 
* The two levels could alternatively be values of current or more generally of air 
pressure in pneumatic systems or fluid pressure in hydraulic systems. 
285 

286 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
chosen. This is illustrated below but it is worth stressing now that 
the logic convention chosen should always be stated or implicit on 
diagrams of logic circuits. The tendency in the design of digital 
equipment is to favour positive logic and if no logic convention is 
indicated on a diagram it can normally be assumed that positive logic is 
used. Positive logic is used in all the diagrams in this chapter. 
B I N A R Y 
S C A L E 
The advantage of labelling the two significant voltage levels 0 and 
1 is that it simplifies the process by which logic circuits are able to 
carry out mathematical and other operations. Arithmetical opera-
tions, for example, can be performed by using the binary scale of 
numbers which has only two digits 0 and 1. 
Conventional counting uses the scale of 10 (the decimal scale) and 
in numbers the digits are arranged according to the power of 10 
they represent. For example the number 4 721 (four thousand, 
seven hundred and twenty-one) means, if written out in full : 
4 x l 0
3
 + 7 x l 0
2
 + 2 x l 0
1
 + l x l 0 ° 
i.e. 4000 + 
700 + 
20 
+ 
1 
= 4 721 
Similarly in the binary scale of counting, the digits (0 or 1) in a 
number are arranged according to the power of 2 they represent. 
For example the binary number 110101 means, if written out in full : 
1 x 2
5
 + 1 x 2
4
 + 0 x 2
3
 + l x 2
2
+ 0 x 2
!
 + l χ 2° 
i.e. 
3 2 + 1 6 + 0 
+ 
4 
+ 
0 
+ 1 
= 53 
The first nine numbers in the binary scale are as follows: 
binary number 
decimal 
equivalent 
1 
1 
10 
2 
11 
3 
100 
4 
101 
5 
110 
6 
111 
7 
1000 
8 
1001 
9 

Digital Circuits 
287 
It is common practice, however, with very large numbers to translate 
each digit of the decimal number separately into the binary scale. 
This is known as the binary-coded 
decimal system and in it the 
number 4 721 would be coded as follows: 
100 : 111 : 10 : 1 
i.e. 
4 : 7 : 2 : 1 
This system has the advantage that after a little experience binary-
coded numbers can be translated into decimal form on inspection. 
It also simplifies the design of equipment for coding decimal numbers 
into binary form and for decoding and displaying binary-coded 
numbers in decimal form. 
L O G I C G A T E S 
A simple logic circuit employing two diodes is illustrated in Fig. 15.1. 
Input A is at all times at +10 V or 0 V, these being the standard 
voltage levels chosen for use in this circuit. Input Β is similarly at 
0 
INPUT 
A Ο 
fO-
-O-H0V 
>OUTPUT 
Fig. 15.1. Simple diode gate circuit. 
It can be an AND gate or an OR 
gate depending 
on the logic 
con-
vention 
adopted 
INPUT 
Β 
ο — | ^ — I 
-h 10 V or 0 V. If either input is at 0 V the associated diode conducts 
and, if the forward resistance of the diode is neglected, 0 V appears 
at the output. A diode with an input at + 10 V does not conduct and 
Table 15.1 
Voltages m the circuit of Fig. 15.1 
Input volts 
Output volts 
A 
Β 
0 
0 
0 
0 
+ 1 0 
0 
+ 10 
0 
0 
+ 10 
+ 1 0 
+ 10 

288 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
the output is isolated from this input. For two inputs there are four 
possible combinations of input voltage. They are shown in Table 
15.1 together with the value of the output voltage. This table shows 
that the output is 0 V if either or both of the inputs is at 0 V and 
that the only way to obtain -I-10 V at the output is for both of the 
inputs to be at + 10 V. 
If the positive logic convention is used + 10 V is logic level 1 and 
0 V is logic level 0. If Table 15.1 is repeated in terms of logic levels, 
Table 15.2 
Truth table for an A N D gate 
Input 
Output 
A 
Β 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
the result is as shown in Table 15.2. Such a table is known as a truth 
table and it shows that a logic 1 is obtained at the output of the 
circuit of Fig. 15.1 only when input A and input Β have a logic 1 
signal. A circuit such as this which requires a logic 1 signal at all the 
inputs to give a logic 1 signal at the output is known as an AND 
gate. 
Suppose negative logic is used in the circuit of Fig. 15.1. Now 
+10 V represents logic level 0 and 0 V represents logic level 1. 
Table 15.3 
Truth table for an OR gate 
Input 
Output 
A 
Β 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
The truth table now has the form shown in Table 15.3. A logic 1 
is obtained at the output of the gate when either input A or input Β 
has a logic 1 signal. A gate which requires a logic 1 signal at any one 
input to give a logic 1 at the output is known as an OR gate. 

Digital Circuits 
289 
Thus the circuit illustrated in Fig. 15.1 can behave as an AND 
gate or an OR gate depending on the logic convention used. In 
general it is not possible to state the nature of a logic circuit until 
the logic convention to be used with it is known. 
Suppose a common-emitter amplifier is added after the diode 
gate as shown in Fig. 15.2. The transistor circuit is so designed that 
INPUT Β Ο 
Ο 
-O0V 
Fig. 15.2. An inverter stage following 
the 
diode gate gives a circuit which can be a 
Ν AND gate or a NOR gate depending on 
the logic convention 
adopted 
its collector voltage is always at one or other of the two chosen 
voltage levels. The signal inversion introduced by the amplifier 
gives yet another type of behaviour and the relationship between 
the inputs and output, for positive logic, is as given in Table 15.4. 
Table 15.4 
Truth table for a Ν A N D gate 
Input 
Output 
A 
Β 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
This shows that the only way to obtain a logic 0 at the output is for 
all the input signals to be at logic 1. This behaviour is not surprisingly 
the inverse of that of the A N D gate: this circuit, for positive logic, 
is therefore known as a NOT-AND or more simply a N A N D gate. 
For negative logic the behaviour of the circuit of Fig. 15.2 is as 

290 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Table 15.5 
Truth table for a NOR gate 
Input 
Output 
A 
Β 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
behaviour is the inverse of that of the OR gate and this circuit, for 
negative logic, is known as a NOT-OR or NOR gate. 
Gate 
Symbols 
For simplicity only two inputs are shown in Figs. 15.1 and 15.2 but 
there can, of course, be more. The block symbols for the four basic 
types of gate so far introduced are shown in Fig. 15.3 and here three 
Fig. 15.3. Block (or logic) 
symbols 
for the four basic types of gate 
AND 
& te-
HAND 
OR 
1 
&
-
NOR 
inputs are shown. The circle at the output of the NOR and NAND 
gates indicates the inversion of the output relative to that of the OR 
and AND gates. 
Integrated Circuit 
Gates 
Gate circuits can be constructed of discrete components but 
normally they are in the form of integrated circuits. For example a 
single i.e. may contain three 3-input gates. To use such an i.e. in an 
equipment it is not necessary to know details of the circuitry of the 
illustrated in the truth table of Table 15.5. When any of the input 
signals is at logic 1 the output is at logic 0. The only way to obtain 
a logic 1 at the output is for all the inputs to be at logic 0. This 

Digital Circuits 
291 
device. All the designer needs to know to be able to use the i.e. 
successfully are details of input and output signal levels, polarities, 
impedances and supply voltages. In preparing diagrams of computers 
and computer-like equipments the gates and other functional units 
are represented by block symbols such as those given for gates in 
Fig. IS.3. To help in the layout of printed wiring cards and in 
maintenance the inputs, outputs and supply points of the gates can 
be identified in the block diagram by giving the pin numbers of the 
i.c.s. Block diagrams of logic equipment are usually known as logic 
diagrams. 
To illustrate the versatility of logic gates a number of applications 
will now be considered 
Gates as Switches 
Table 15.2 shows that when input A is at logic 0, the output is also 
at logic 0 (irrespective of the signal on input B) whereas if input A 
is at logic 1 the output signal is the same as the signal on input B. 
Thus an AND gate can be used as a switch, a logic 1 signal on input 
A allowing the signal on input Β to pass through the gate, a logic 0 
signal on input A blocking the signal on input B. 
An OR gate can be used similarly but here a logic 0 on one input 
allows the signal on the other input to pass through the gate. 
Inverters 
Table 15.4 shows an interesting property of a Ν A N D gate. When 
there is a logic 1 signal on input A the output from the gate is the 
inverse of that on input B. A N A N D gate is frequently so used, 
input A being connected permanently to a source of logic 1 voltage 
as shown in Fig. 15.4. For some types of N A N D gate i.c.s it is suffi-
cient simply to leave input A unconnected : this has the same effect 
as connecting it to a logic 1 source. A gate with this property is known 
as a NOT gate. 
A NOR gate can also be used as an inverter but one input must be 
connected to a source of logic 0 voltage to obtain inversion of the 
signal on the other input. 
LOGIC ι 
Fig. 15.4. A NAND 
gate used as 
an inverter 
& Β—ο 
OUTPUT 
INPUT< 

292 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Inhibiting 
Input 
Reference to Table 15.5 shows that if one input is at logic 1, the output 
of the gate is prevented from taking up the logic 1 state irrespective 
of the signal on the other input. This ability of an input of a device 
to prevent the output taking up the logic 1 state is sometimes 
exploited in logic circuitry and an input so used is then known as an 
inhibiting input : it is indicated on logic diagrams by a short stroke 
across the signal line to that input. 
Exclusive-OR 
Gate 
Combinations of gates can be used to perform desired operations. 
For example suppose a circuit is required to give a logic 1 output 
when either of two inputs is at logic 1 but not when both are at logic 
1. Such a circuit is known as an exclusive-OR 
gate. 
1 
te 
ι te 
1 U>0UTPUT 
Fig. 15.5. One possible logic circuit for an exclusive-OR 
gate 
There are a number of possible circuits and one is given in Fig. 
15.5. That this circuit gives the required performance can be checked 
from the truth table of Table 15.6 or by the use of Boolean algebra 
and this second method is the one normally used in designing logic 
Table 15.6 
Truth table for an exclusive-OR gate 
Input 
Output oj 
inverter A 
Output oj 
inverter Β 
Output oj 
AND gale A 
Output of 
AND gate Β 
Output of 
OR gate 

Digital 
Circuits 
293 
=1 
Fig. 
15.6. 
Logic 
symbol 
for 
an 
exclusive-OR 
gate 
gate circuits. The exclusive-OR gate is usually represented by the 
logic symbol of Fig. 15.6. 
Equivalence 
Element 
It is sometimes necessary to compare two binary digits and to give 
an indication when they are the same. A circuit used for this purpose 
is known as an equivalence element or a comparator 
and is required 
to give a logic 1 output when the two inputs are both at logic 1 or 
both at logic 0. The required output is the inverse of that of the 
exclusive-OR gate and can be obtained from a combination of 
gates similar to that shown in Fig. 15.5 but with the OR gate replaced 
by a NOR gate. 
Practical NAND 
Gate Circuit 
The circuit shown in Fig. 15.2 has a number of disadvantages. One 
is that the speed with which the output changes from the 0 state to 
the 1 state (positive logic assumed) is low compared with that of the 
reverse transition. This is because a bipolar transistor can be switched 
on quickly but the time of switch off is appreciable. The delay in 
switch off slows up the rate at which logic operations can be carried 
out. The effect can be avoided by using an output stage with two 
-O0UTPUT 
ο 
0 
Fig. 15.7. Circuit diagram of an i.e. NAND 
gate 

294 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
transistors in series, one of which is switched on to perform one 
transition, the other being switched on to give the opposite transition. 
The push-pull output circuit shown in Fig. 15.7 fulfils these con-
ditions. The input diodes of Fig. 15.2 have been replaced by a 
common-base stage in which the transistor has a number of emitters, 
each providing one gate input. It is easy to fabricate such transistors 
using i.e. techniques but if discrete components are used one 
transistor would be required for each emitter. The second transistor 
in Fig. 15.7 is a phase splitter driving the push-pull output stage. 
Diode D provides base bias for TR3. 
For positive logic this circuit is a N A N D gate. To confirm this, 
assume the output to be at logic 0. This requires TR3 to be off and 
TR4 on. This, in turn, requires TR2 to be on. TR2 must therefore 
have a high base potential which requires TRl to be off. The only 
way for TRl to be off is for all the emitters to be at positive supply 
potential, i.e. at logic 1. By definition a gate which requires all inputs 
to be at logic 1 to give a logic 0 output is a N A N D gate. 
This circuit is an example of transistor-transistor logic, usually 
abbreviated to TTL. 
Fan In 
In circuits containing numerous gates it may happen that several 
gates feed one particular gate. Several output circuits are then con-
nected in parallel across one input circuit and it is essential that this 
loading should not affect the voltage level at the junction point, no 
matter whether this is the logic 1 or logic 0 voltage. There is normally 
a tolerance on the voltage levels but if too many circuits are connected 
together the junction voltage may be outside the tolerance and 
normal circuit behaviour becomes impossible. The greatest number 
of outputs which may be connected to a gate input whilst still per-
mitting normal behaviour is known as the fan in. This may in practice 
be as high as 12 but in the gate circuits and symbols given earlier 
the number of inputs was shown for simplicity as only 2 or 3. 
Fan Out 
A junction between input and output circuits also occurs when one 
gate is required to feed a number of others: one output circuit is 
then connected to several input circuits. Current is required to 
operate an input circuit using bipolar transistors. For example in 
Fig. 15.7, to put a logic 0 signal on an emitter of TRl, the emitter 
potential must be lowered to that of the supply negative voltage 

Digital Circuits 
295 
(positive logic is assumed). An emitter current (determined by Ri 
and the supply voltage) of, for example, 1.5 mA then flows in the 
input circuit and the output circuit feeding it. The conductive 
transistor in the output circuit must be capable of passing this current 
without undue rise in the voltage across it. Any significant rise may 
cause this voltage to fall outside the range recognised as a logic 0 
signal. The maximum collector current through the output transistor 
may be, say, 30 mA, which enables up to 20 gate circuits to be fed 
satisfactorily. This maximum number is known as the fan out of the 
circuit. 
Distributed AND 
Connection 
It is sometimes possible, when the outputs of two or more gates are 
paralleled, to achieve a logic A N D function at the connection point 
without including a gate circuit at the point for the purpose. As an 
example suppose in a positive logic system the output circuit of a 
number of gates consists simply of an npn transistor without a 
collector load resistor: two such output stages are shown in Fig. 
15.8. If the collectors are connected to the positive supply terminal 
- o + V 
- O OUTPUT 
- 0 0 
Fig. 15.8. Illustrating 
a 
distributed 
AND 
connection 
Fig. 15.9. Logic symbol for a distri-
bution AND 
connection 
via a common load resistor then the only way in which a logic 1 
signal can be obtained at the common connection point is by cutting 
off all the transistors. Thus all the output transistors must be in a 
logic 1 state to give a logic 1 at the common output point. An AND 
function is thus obtained at the interconnection point irrespective 

296 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Distributed OR 
Connection 
The circuit of Fig. 15.8 can also be used to give an effective OR 
function at the common connection point. One simple way of 
achieving this is to use negative logic. When any of the output 
transistors is conductive the potential of the common 
point 
Fig. 15.10. Illustrating a distributed 
OR 
connection 
approaches that of supply negative, i.e. when any of the transistors 
is in the 1 state, the output is in the 1 state: this is the OR function. 
Alternatively a distributed OR connection can be obtained by 
use of different circuitry and one possible circuit is shown in Fig. 
15.10. The output stages are emitter followers and the emitter 
Fig. 15.11. Logic symbol for a distri-
buted OR 
connection 
of the nature of the individual gates shown by the dashed lines in the 
diagram. 
An AND function so obtained is known as a distributed or wired 
A N D : it is represented in logic diagrams by the symbol given in 
Fig. 15.9. 

Digital Circuits 
297 
connections are brought out to an external load resistor which is 
returned to supply negative. We now obtain a logic 1 output signal 
(positive logic assumed) when any one output stage is at logic 1. 
The distributed or wired OR connection is represented by the logic 
symbol shown in Fig. 15.11. 
Insulated-gate 
f.e.t. i.c.s as Logic Gates 
I.C.s using bipolar transistor techniques as so far discussed in this 
chapter are extensively used. They have the advantages that they 
operate satisfactorily with low collector voltages, switch-on times 
are low and they have a high current-handling capacity. Dissipation 
in the collector circuits is low in the off state because the collector 
current is nearly zero and in the on state because the collector voltage 
is nearly zero. However appreciable power is required in the base 
circuit to keep a bipolar transistor in the on state. 
Insulated-gate f.e.t.s have a number of advantages over bipolar 
transistors in logic-gate i.c.s and are now being used. One advantage 
is that f.e.t.s can be manufactured much smaller than bipolar 
transistors and thus greater miniaturisation is possible. Secondly 
because of the very high input resistance of f.e.t.s it is possible to 
parallel a large number of gate inputs on one gate output, i.e. a very 
high fan out can be achieved. Thirdly there is no dissipation in an 
f.e.t. in the on or off state. A disadvantage of the f.e.t. is that it can 
easily be damaged by excess voltages and its current-handling 
capacity is less than that of bipolar transistors. 
An example of an inverter circuit using i.g.f.e.t.s is given in Fig. 
15.12. It could hardly be simpler and no resistors (to dissipate 
power) are necessary. Two complementary i.g.f.e.t.s are connected 
in series across the supply and the gates are connected to the input 
INPUT 
-oOUTPUT 
Fig. 15. J2. Complementary 
i.g.f.e.t.s 
used in an i.e. inverter 
TR2 

298 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
signal. A logic 1 signal (positive logic assumed) cuts TRl off and 
turns TR2 on so that a logic 0 signal appears at the output. A logic 0 
input turns TRl on and cuts TR2 off so that a logic 1 output is 
obtained. No current is taken from the supply in either state but only 
at the instants of switching. 
This is an example of a complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor 
circuit, usually abbreviated to COSMOS or CMOS. 
B I S T A B L E S 
In general the output of a gate circuit may change when the inputs 
are removed : in other words gates have no memory. Logic opera-
tions must frequently be carried out in sequence and thus there is 
a need for a device with a memory, i.e. which can store logic informa-
tion. Bistable multivibrators (usually abbreviated simply to bistables) 
are commonly used for this purpose. It was pointed out in the 
description of the multivibrators that the two transistors alternate 
between the on and off states. Thus the collector potential is either 
near that of the supply positive or the supply negative and if the 
supply potentials are taken as logic levels we can say that at any 
moment one collector voltage will be at logic 1 level whilst the other 
is at logic 0 level. After a change of state the collector potentials are 
reversed. The collectors provide the outputs of the bistable circuits 
and these are always in complementary states: the outputs are 
denoted by Q and Q. 
RS Bistable 
A simple form of bistable circuit is illustrated in Fig. 15.13. Outputs 
are taken from the collectors of the transistors and two inputs known 
as S (set) and R (reset) are connected to the bases via diodes arranged 
to conduct positive-going signals. A positive-going signal applied to 
the S input cuts off TRl (and hence turns TR2 on) and the circuit 
will now remain in this state indefinitely if need be, so storing 
information. To remove the information and restore the circuit to 
the state it had originally, a positive-going signal is applied to the R 
terminal which cuts off TR2 and turns TRl on. 
If positive-going inputs are applied to the R and 5 terminals 
simultaneously there is no way of knowing what the resultant state 
of the circuit will be. RS bistables are therefore never used in 
circumstances where simultaneous positive-going R and S inputs are 
possible. Negative-going signals applied to the R and S inputs have 
no effect on the circuit which remains in its previous state. 

Digital Circuits 
299 
Thus for three of the four possible combinations of R and S 
inputs, the resultant state of the bistable is predictable : for the fourth 
combination the output is indeterminate. This behaviour is sum-
marised in the following table in which a logic 1 signal is taken to be 
a change to the more positive voltage level and a logic 0 signal is a 
change to the less positive level. 
The RS bistable can also be used in a clocked mode. For this 
purpose a diode gate (see page 251) is included and a regular train 
of pulses, known as clock pulses, is fed to the gate. The circuit is so 
arranged that the clock pulses have no effect on the circuit until an 
input is applied to the R or S terminals, after which the next clock 
Table 15.7 
Truth table for an RS bistable 
R input 
S input 
Q output 
0 
0 
no change 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1 
1 
indeterminate 
Fig. 15.13. Basic RS bistable circuit

300 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
pulse initiates the change of state of the bistable. The behaviour of 
the bistable is still as indicated in Table 15.7 but the third column 
should be interpreted as giving the logic level of the Q output after 
receipt of a clock pulse. Another example of a clocked bistable is given 
later in this chapter. 
J Κ Bistable 
The JK bistable may be regarded as an improved form of the RS 
bistable in which there is no indeterminate state. The improvement 
is achieved by arranging for the signal inputs to operate on the 
gating diodes Dl and D2 to which the clock pulses are applied. 
o-v 
INDEPENDENT 
S E T 
DEPENDENT 
J— 
DEPENDENT Κ 
CLOCK 
INDEPENDENT 
R E S E T 
Fig. 15.14. Circuit diagram of a typical clocked JK 
bistable 
A typical circuit diagram is given in Fig. 15.14. It is very similar to 
that of Fig. 13.3. Dl and D2 are biased by the difference between the 
collector and base potentials of the associated transistor. If the 

Digital Circuits 
301 
transistor is on, there is little potential difference and the diode can 
conduct positive-going clock signals to the base to cut the transistor 
off. When the transistor is off, the considerable difference between 
collector and base potentials reverse-biases Dl or D2 so that clock 
signals cannot reach the base. A negative signal on the J input 
forward biases D3 and reverse-biases the clock-pulse diode Dl and 
thus prevents TRl being cut off by the clock pulses. Similarly a 
negative signal on the Κ input forward biases D4 and reverse-biases 
Table 15.8 
Truth table for a JK bistable 
Q output 
J input 
Κ input 
after receipt of 
a clock pulse 
0 
0 
no effect 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
C 
C = complement of the state before the 
clock pulse 
D2, so preventing TR2 being cut off by the clock pulses. If J and Κ 
inputs are made negative simultaneously clock pulses are prevented 
from reaching either base and have therefore no effect on the bistable 
which remains in its former state. Positive-going signals on the J and 
Κ inputs are blocked by D3 and D4 so that clock pulses operate on 
the bistable and the outputs alternate between supply positive and 
earth at the clock frequency. The behaviour of the bistable is thus 
predictable for all four combinations of J and Κ inputs and is 
summarised in Table 15.8 in which the logic 1 signal is regarded as a 
change to the more positive level and a logic 0 signal as a change to 
the less positive level. A further example of a clocked JK bistable is 
given later. 
The information to be stored in the bistable is fed in via the signal 
inputs Λ Κ, Κ or S and the convention adopted is that a logic 1 
signal on the J or S input gives a logic 1 output from the Q terminal 
(and hence a logic 0 output from the Q terminal) on receipt of a 
clock pulse. A logic 1 signal on the Κ or R input gives a logic 1 
output from the Q terminal (and hence a logic 0 output from the Q 
terminal) when a clock pulse is received. 
This convention is indicated on the block symbol used to 
represent a bistable on logic diagrams. As shown in Fig. 15.15 the 
symbol is a rectangle, the upper half of which carries the J and S 

302 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
inputs and the Q output, the lower half carrying the Κ and R inputs 
and the Q output. The clock input is applied to the midpoint of the 
leading vertical side. Any logic 1 signal applied to an input on the 
upper half of the symbol gives a logic 1 output from that half i.e. 
from Q : similarly, any logic 1 signal applied to an input on the lower 
half of the symbol gives a logic 1 output from that half, i.e. from Q. 
Where there is more than one set of clock-dependent signal inputs 
and more than one clock input, the interdependence is indicated by 
a numerical code. For example two clock inputs are known as CI 
and C2, and the inputs dependent on CI are designated 1J, IK, IR 
and 15; those dependent on C2 are similarly designated 2J, 2K, 2R 
and 2S. 
(INDEPENDENT) SET 
(CLOCK-DEPENDENT) JORS 
CLOCK 
(CLOCK-DEPENDENT) KORR-
(INDEPENDENT )RESET-
Fig. 15.15. Logic symbol for a bistable 
Q 
Q 
Independent Set and Reset 
Inputs 
RS and JK bistables commonly have two further inputs which 
override the signal and clock inputs and are used to put the bistable 
into a desired state. These are known as the independent set and 
reset inputs and one way in which such inputs could be applied is 
indicated by dashed lines in Fig. 15.14. To give a logic 1 output at Q, 
TR2 must be turned on and TRl turned off. To cut off TRI a 
positive-going input is required at TRl base and this is applied via 
the diode D5. To restore the circuit to its original state and give a 
logic 1 output from Q a positive signal is required at TR2 base and 
this can be applied via D6. In this example a logic 1 signal applied to 
the independent set input gives a logic 1 output at Q. This applies 
also to C M O S logic circuits and agrees with the convention for 
clock-dependent J, K, R and 5 inputs. 
In other types of logic circuit, notably TTL, the independent set 
input requires a logic 0 signal to give a logic 1 output at Q and a 
logic 0 input is also required at the independent reset input to restore 
the circuit to its original state and to give a logic 1 output at Q. To 
indicate when logic 0 signals are required to operate 
these 
independent inputs, a circle is placed on the independent set and 
reset signal lines to the block symbol as shown in Fig. 15.15. 

Digital Circuits 
303 
These independent inputs were formerly known as the clear and 
preset inputs. 
Use of Gates to form 
Bistables 
The bistable circuits of Figs. 15.13 and 15.14 are suitable for 
construction with discrete transistors but the manufacturer of 
integrated circuits can make up bistables by interconnecting gates. For 
example, two NAND gates of the type shown in Fig. 15.7 can be 
interconnected as shown in Fig. 15.16(a). 
Suppose a logic 0 signal is applied to input Al. Then, irrespective 
of the logic state of the signal on input /42, the output Ao goes to 
logic 1. This is also the signal on input B2 of gate Β and we will 
assume the signal on input B\ also to be at logic 1 so that the output 
Bo is at logic 0. Output Bo is connected to input A2 so this is also at 
logic 0. In this state the circuit is stable and the outputs Ao and Bo 
remain at logic 1 and logic 0 indefinitely unless an input is applied to 
change the output of one of the gates. Gate A is unaffected by 
changing input A\ to logic 1 and the only way to switch the bistable 
is to apply a logic 0 input to Bl. This causes output Bo to go to logic 
1 and Ao to logic 0 and this again is a stable state which can be 
changed only by a further logic 0 signal applied to input Al. Thus 
this combination of gates behaves as a bistable and changes of state 
can be brought about by logic 0 signals applied to inputs Al and Bl. 
The operation of the circuit is illustrated by the waveform diagram 
of Fig. 15.16(b). 
A 
A) 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 15.16. {a) A bLtable formed 
of two NAND gates. This requires logic 0 input 
signals for its operation as indicated in the idealised waveform diagram 
(b) 
It is preferable to have logic 1 input signals to operate a bistable 
which then conforms with the signal conventions of the block 
symbol of Fig. 15.15. This can be achieved by adding a further pair 

304 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
of N A N D gates D and £ before A and Β as shown in Fig. 15.17. This 
arrangement 
also 
has 
the 
advantage 
of 
permitting 
clocked 
operation. If input Dl and the clock pulse input on D2 are both at 
logic 1 then the output Do of gate D is at logic 0. This is also the 
input Al 
and leads to an output at Ao of logic 1 as already 
explained. Similarly, if input £1 and the clock pulse input at £2 are 
both at logic 1 then output £o goes to logic 0 causing output Bo to 
go to logic 1. Thus a logic 1 input to the upper or lower row of gates 
gives a logic 1 output from that row : each row can thus be 
represented by the upper or lower half of the bistable block symbol 
of Fig. 15.15. 
The dashed lines in Fig. 15.17 indicate how independent set and 
reset inputs can be applied. They form third inputs A3 and B3 to the 
A and Β N A N D gates. When the output Ao of gate A is at logic 0 the 
two inputs A1 and A2 are at logic 1. Thus a logic 1 signal to terminal 
A3 from the independent set input leaves the bistable unaffected but 
a logic 0 input instantly changes the state of gate A to give a logic 1 
output at Q and,_of course, a logic 0 output from Bo (Q). By 
symmetry, when Q is at logic 0, a logic 0 signal applied to the 
independent reset terminal (B3) switches the bistable to give a logic 1 
output at Q. This bistable is thus switched by logic 0 signals at the 
independent set and reset inputs and conforms to the block symbol 
of Fig. 15.15. 
INDEPENDENT 5ET-
DEPENDENT 
Dl 
OS) 
CLOCK (CD 
DEPENDENT El 
(1/?) 
INDEPENDENT 
R E S E T • 
AO 
(Q) 
βο(δ) 
83 
Γ 
Fig. 15.17. An improved bistable with four NAND gates which operates with logic 1 
signals and with provision for a clock input. The independent set and reset inputs 
(requiring logic 0 signals) are shown in dashed lines 
Master and Slave 
Bistables 
As a further stage of elaboration the gate arrangement of Fig. 15.17 
can be followed by an identical arrangement driven from the clock 
pulses via an inverter stage as shown in Fig. 15.18. When the clock 

μ 
MASTER 
SLAVE 
» j 
INDEPENDENT S -
DEPENDENT 1S OR \ J 
CLOCK (Cl) 
DEPENOENT I P OR \K 
INDEPENDENT R 
Fig. 15.18. Eight NAND gates arranged to form an RS or JK. master/slave 
bistable. 
The dashed connections are required for the J Κ circuit 
Digital Circuits 
305 

306 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
input is at logic 1 a logic 1 input on Dl sets the first bistable (the 
master) so that output Ao is also at logic 1. This cannot, however, be 
accepted by the second bistable (the slave) because the clock input to 
this stage is at logic 0. But when the clock signal changes (to logic 0 
for the master stage and to logic 1 for the slave stage) the logic 1 
output at Ao sets the slave stage so that its Q output is at logic 1. If 
the clock input is in the form of rectangular pulses the signal input is 
accepted by the master stage on the positive-going edge of the clock 
pulse and is transferred to the slave stage on the negative-going edge 
as shown in Fig. 15.19. 
A disadvantage of this circuit is that the output cannot be 
predicted if logic 1 signals are applied simultaneously to the two 
signal inputs : in other words this is an RS master-slave bistable. The 
difficulty can be resolved by adding the connections shown in 
dashed lines in Fig. 15.18. The two outputs of the bistable are, of 
course, complementary and this feedback therefore applies a logic 0 
signal to one of the input gates so preventing it from responding to a 
logic 1 clock signal. At the same time the feedback applies a logic 1 
signal to the other input gate, enabling this to respond to a logic 1 
clock signal which therefore causes the bistable to change state. The 
bistable outputs now reverse and the input gate which was formerly 
inhibited by the feedback connection can now respond to the next 
clock pulse whilst the other input gate is inhibited. Thus if both 
signal inputs are held at logic 1 the clock pulses will cause the 
bistable to switch regularly between its two possible states. This 
feedback connection makes the circuit that of a JK master-slave 
bistable. 
Binary Counters and Dividers 
Bistables give one complete cycle of output-signal variation (at Q 
and Q) for every two clock input signals. They can therefore be used 
as basic elements in binary counters and dividers. 
Consider a cascade of bistables AnB,C in which the Q output of 
each bistable is connected to the clock input of the next as shown in 
Fig. 15.20. Suppose that the Q outputs are all initially at logic 0: this 
MASTER 
SLAVE 
OPERATES 
OPERATES 
Fig. 15.19. Operation of master/slave 
bistables 
TIME 
• 
CLOCK 
PULSES 

Digital 
Circuits 
OUTPUT 
— Q 
Fig. 15:20. Logic diagram of a .simple cascaded 
counter 
can be arranged by use of the independent set inputs. The first clock 
pulse (equivalent to a logic 1 signal) applied to bistable A sets its Q 
output to logic 1 and this, in turn, sets the Q outputs of bistables Β 
and C also to logic 1. So all Q outputs are at logic 1 after the first clock 
pulse. The changes of state which occur after the next few successive 
clock pulses are detailed in Table 1S.9. It is assumed that the state of 
each bistable is switched when the clock input changes from logic 0 
to logic 1 and that the changes from logic 1 to logic 0 have no effect. 
In other words the bistables are assumed to be switched by the 
positive-going edges of the clock pulses: the circuit of Fig. 15.14 is 
an example of such a bistable. 
After the eighth clock pulse the bistables are in the states assumed 
initially and thereafter the cycle repeats itself indefinitely. Such an 
arrangement is known as a counter and this particular counter gives 
one complete cycle of output for every eight input pulses. If the Q 
outputs of the bistables are read in the order C,fM they are in fact 
the numbers from 7 to 1 in the binary scale. This circuit can 
therefore be described as that of a down counter. 
Table 15.9 also shows the way in which the Q outputs of the 
bistables change on receipt of the successive clock pulses. The Q 
outputs are, of course, the complements of the Q outputs. If the Q 
outputs are read in the order C,B^4 they represent the numbers from 
1 to 7 in the binary scale. These outputs could therefore be described 
as those of an up counter. 
Table 15.9 
INPUT-
TU 
J - Q 
Q outputs 
Q outputs 
A 
Β 
c 
A 
Β 
c 
Initial state 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
After 1st clock pulse 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
2nd 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
3rd 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
4th 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
5th 
1 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
6th 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
1 
7th 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
8th 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 
307 

308 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Some bistables change state on the negative-going edges of the 
clock input pulses: an example is the master-slave bistable of 
Fig. 15.18 with both J and Κ inputs held at logic 1. A cascade of 
bistables of this type behaves differently from the type just described. 
If all the Q outputs are initially at logic 0, the first negative-going 
clock signal gives a Q output from bistable A of logic 1. These 
bistables respond only to changes from logic 1 to logic 0 in the clock 
input and thus bistables Β and C are not affected by this change in 
the Q output from A. The next clock pulse switches the Q output of A 
back to logic 0 and in so doing switches Β so that its Q output goes 
to logic 1. The changes brought about by the next few clock pulses 
follow the pattern shown for the Q outputs in Table 15.9: in other 
words the Q outputs for a cascade of bistables operating on negative-
going clock pulses form an up counter. The Q outputs therefore 
form a down counter. 
By cascading η bistables in this manner it is possible to realise an 
up or down counter with a ratio of 2". Such an arrangement is of 
limited application because the count ratio can be only a power of 2 
but by use of feedback any desired count ratio can be obtained. 
Feedback 
Counter 
One method of modifying the count ratio is by feedback to the 
independent set or reset inputs. For example a divide-by-four 
counter incorporating two bistables can be converted to a divide-by-
three counter by detecting the bistable outputs which correspond to 
count three and then resetting the bistables to count zero. The 
operation of this example will now be examined in detail because, 
though simple, it illustrates the principles employed in this type of 
feedback counter. 
The logic diagram is shown in Fig. 15.21. It is assumed that the 
bistables are triggered by the positive-going edges of the clock pulses 
and that counting begins when both bistables have a logic 1 output. 
θ 
Q 
S 
O U T P U T 
A 
0 
s 
Q 
I N P U T 
Û 
& 
Fig. 15.2J. A divide-by-four 
counter modified by feedback 
to 
divide-by-three 

Digital Circuits 
309 
The changes which occur with each subsequent clock pulse are 
indicated in the waveform diagrams of Fig. 15.22, the upper 
waveforms applying in the absence of feedback and showing one 
complete cycle of output for every four input pulses. The lower 
waveforms apply when feedback is present. When the Q outputs of 
both bistables are at logic 0 (representing count 3) the bistables are 
reset to logic 1 and the cycle recommences. There is now one output 
cycle for every three input pulses. 
CLOCK 
PULSE 
INPUT 
Fig. 15.22. Idealised waveforms 
illustrating 
the operation of the logic circuit of Fig 
15.21 
The operation of the circuit can alternatively be represented as in 
Table 15.10. This also shows that in the absence of feedback four 
input pulses are required to give one complete cycle of output 
whereas if feedback is present only three input pulses are required. 
Possibly the simplest way of achieving the desired feedback is to 
use a gate to provide the signal for the independent set terminals and 
if we assume that a logic 0 set signal is needed then a N A N D gate is 
necessary. This requires two logic 1 inputs to operate it and these 
signals can be obtained from the Q outputs of the two bistables. 
Thus the counter has the logic diagram shown in Fig. 15.21. 
XDV9033d ΐηΟΗΙΙΑΛ 
XDV9033J HUM 
OUTPUT OF 
B I S T A B L E B_ 
GATE 
OPERATES 
GATE 
OPERATES 
GATE 
OPERATES 
OUTPUT OF 
B I S T A B L E A 
OUTPUT OF 
B I S T A B L E B _ 
OUTPUT OF 
B I S T A B L E A 

310 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Without feedback 
With feedback 
Output of 
Output of 
Output of 
Output of 
bistable A 
bistable Β 
bistable A 
bistable Β 
Initial state 
1 
1 
1 
1 
After 1st clock pulse 
0 
1 
0 
1 
2nd 
1 
0 
1 
0 
3rd 
0 
0 
1 
1 
4th 
1 
1 
Waveform Generators using Counting 
Techniques 
Combinations of bistables and gates can be used to generate 
recurrent waveforms containing a number of transitions between the 
logic levels. Such waveforms are often used for control purposes in 
analogue and digital equipment : one example is the television sync 
waveform. 
We will consider the generation of a simple recurrent pulse. As 
before the counter consists of a cascade of bistables operated from a 
master- or clock-pulse source (and triggering on positive-going 
edges), the count ratio being so chosen that the output of the 
cascade is at the desired pulse frequency. A divide-by-eight counter 
is illustrated in Figs. 15.23 and 15.24. 
CLOCK 
PULSE 
.OUTPUT 
Fig. 15.23. A combination 
of bistables and gates suitable for generating 
the 
waveform shown in Fig. 
15.24 
Table 15.10 

Digital Circuits 
311 
Suppose the transitions in the pulse to be generated are required 
to be at ti and t2. The instant tx can be identified by the fact that it is 
the only time in the output cycle at which the clock pulse is at logic 
0, the Q output of bistable A is also at logic 0 but the Q outputs of 
bistables Β and C are both at logic 1. The A N D gate D is designed to 
detect these levels, an inverter being used to provide the logic 1 input 
from the clock pulses and the Q output from bistable Β providing the 
logic 1 output from that source. At t2 the clock pulse and the Q 
outputs from bistables A, Β and C are at logic 1, 0, 1 and 0 
respectively. Gate £ is designed to detect this combination of levels, 
the outputs from bistables A and C being taken from the Q terminals 
to give the required logic 1 inputs for the gate. The required 
waveform can now be generated in a bistable F which is turned on 
by the output of gate D and off by the output of gate £ as shown in 
Fig. 15.23. 
CLOCK P U L S E S 
OUTPUT 
OF BISTABLE A 
OUTPUT 
OF BISTABLE β 
_
J 
OUTPUT 
OF 31 STABLE C
 
_
J 
OUTPUT 
OF BISTABLE F 
[«. 
ONE C Y C L E - 
* j 
Fig. 15.24. Idealised waveforms illustrating 
the action of the circuit of Fig. 15.23 
Delay in Bistables 
In the descriptions of Figs. 15.21 and 15.23 it was assumed, for 
simplicity, 
that all changes of state in the bistables 
occur 
coincidently with the edge of the clock pulse which initiates them. In 
practice there is inevitably a slight delay in a bistable : in other words 
there is a significant time lag between the triggering edge of the clock 

312 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Shift 
Registers 
An assembly of J Κ bistables is often used as a temporary store for 
binary information. For example suppose the binary signal 11001 
is to be stored. Five bistables are needed (one for each binary digit) 
and the information could be fed simultaneously into the bistables via 
the independent set and reset inputs. The information can now be 
stored for the necessary period and then simultaneously read out by 
operation of the clock inputs. This is the parallel method of feeding in 
(writing) and feeding out (reading) the information. 
Alternatively the bistables may be connected in cascade as 
shown in Fig. 15.25 and the information can be fed into the input 
of the first bistable one digit at a time. The clock inputs of all bistables 
are commoned and the clock rate must be the same as the rate of 
receipt of the digits in the incoming information (the bit rate). On 
SKNAL, 
m PUT ' 
CLOCK , 
INPUT ' 
Fig. 15.25. A five-stage shift register using JK. bistables 
pulse and the corresponding edge in the output signal. In a cascade 
of bistables this delay can be appreciable and must be allowed for in 
the design of circuits. For example a gate responding to logic 1 
outputs from the clock pulses and from all three bistables in 
Fig. 15.24 would operate appreciably later than the leading edge of 
the clock pulse because of the cumulative delays in operating 
bistables A, Β and C. Such a gate would also operate at *3 in 
Fig. 15.24 because at this instant the output of bistable C is still at 
logic 1 although the outputs of the other two bistables have changed 
to logic 1. 
If the delay through bistables A, Β and C is less than the duration 
of a clock pulse, the possibility of false outputs from gate Ε can be 
eliminated by using a circuit similar to that of gate D which is 
arranged to operate after the trailing edge of the clock pulse. 

Digital Circuits 
313 
the first clock pulse the first binary digit (1) is transferred to the first 
bistable, its Q output registering logic 1. On the second clock pulse 
the first digit is transferred to the second bistable and the second 
digit (also 1) is transferred to the first bistable. Thus the process 
continues, the stored information moving to the right in the cascade 
of bistables until, after the fifth clock pulse, the whole binary word 
has entered the register. The Q outputs, in order, now read 11001. 
At this point the clock pulses can be stopped and the word stored for 
as long as necessary. When the word is required to be read out, the 
clock pulses are restarted and the stored information again moves 
to the right at clock rate and can be read at the Q output of the fifth 
bistable. This is the serial method of storing and reading information 
in a shift register. 
It is possible to write the information into the register by parallel 
methods and to read it out serially : the converse is also possible. 
Thus there are serial/parallel and parallel/serial shift registers. 
DIGITAL REPRESENTATION OF INFORMATION 
The various processes (including transmission and storage) of data 
required in computers and similar equipments are carried out by 
binary digital techniques but operations cannot be performed on an 
individual bit. Bits are commonly organised into groups of 8 (known 
as bytes) and a byte is the smallest item of information which can be 
operated upon. Between 00000000 and 11111111 there are 2
8
, i.e. 256 
unique combinations of 0 and 1 in an 8-bit byte which can be used to 
represent different items of information. Data is commonly fed into a 
computer via a keyboard similar to that of a typewriter and appears on 
a c.r.t. screen (a visual display unit or v.d.u.) also used to display the 
computer output. The data is expressed in alphanumeric symbols and 
the 256 possible bit combinations available in a byte are sufficient to 
represent the upper-case and lower-case letters of two different 
alphabets, the figures from 0 to 9, punctuation marks and various 
control codes (such as 'start a new line' equivalent to 'carriage return' 
on a typewriter), still leaving combinations for other characters such 
as graphics (e.g. blocks with various outlines which can be used to 
make up diagrams). The American Standard Code for Information 
Interchange (ASCII) relates the bit arrangement within the byte with 
the symbol represented. When the arrangement of bits in a byte is 
recognised, the character represented is displayed on a v.d.u. as a 
pattern of dots on adjacent scanning lines. 

314 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
STORES 
The shift register is one of a number of types of store needed in a 
computer. We shall now consider how transistors can be used in other 
types. 
Static Random Access Memories 
(SRAMs) 
When a bistable is triggered from one state to the other, the collector 
(or drain) voltage switches from a low value (for the 'on' transistor) to 
a high value (for the 'off transistor). If these two voltage values are 
taken as logic levels a trigger can be said to cause one collector voltage 
to take up its 1-state. Moreover this state will persist indefinitely if no 
further triggers are received. In other words the bistable is capable of 
storing one binary digit. A group of 8 bistables can thus store a byte. 
To achieve the storage capacity required in a digital computer, 
bistables are needed by the thousand and are available in the form of 
i.c.s. Early storage i.c.s held 1,000 bistables but as technology 
improved and greater miniaturisation became possible, the capacity of 
the i.c.s increased to 64,000 bistables (and more recently much greater 
than this). The bistables are usually m.o.s. types which are more 
economical of power than bipolar transistors, requiring no base 
current to hold them in the conductive state. The bistables are 
arranged in a rectangular array or matrix with leads from every row 
and column. A 16-kbit i.e., for example, may have 128 rows and 128 
columns. A wanted bistable can be switched by signals applied to the 
appropriate horizontal and vertical leads. At each lead intersection 
there are, in addition to the bistable itself, up to four other transistors, 
the whole forming a group known as a memory cell. Fig. 15.26 gives 
one possible circuit diagram for a memory cell. 
TRl and TR2 form the bistable and transistors TR3 and TR4 act as 
drain loads. TR5 and TR6 are used to connect the bistable to the 
vertical lines (bit lines) which convey the input (write) signals to and 
the output (read) signals from the bistable. TR5 and TR6 are switched 
on by signals applied to the horizontal (row select) line - sometimes 
called the word line. In the absence of a signal on the horizontal line 
the bistables are isolated and so maintain their states. 
If the supply to a store of bistables is removed, the stored 
information is lost. Such storage is termed volatile and is used in 
digital computers to store information which frequently needs to be 
changed such as the data and program for the operations on which the 
computer is currently engaged. In general each new problem 
necessitates a different input so the loss of information on switch-off is 

Digital Circuits 
315 
ROW SELECT 
(WORD LINE) 
INPUT/ 
OUTPUT I 
(BIT LINE) 
TR5 
TR1 
INPUT/ 
IOUTPUT 
(BIT LINE) 
Fig. 15.26. Circuit of a memory cell in a static RAM 
no disadvantage. Such volatile stores are called read/write stores, 
direct-access or random-access stores (RAMs) and those using 
bistables are known as static RAMs (SRAMs). 
Dynamic Random Access Memories 
(DRAMs) 
In an alternative form of RAM the basic storage element is a capacitor 
which, in some stores, is the internal gate-source capacitance of a 
m.o.s. transistor. A charge placed on the capacitor can represent logic 
1 and the absence of a charge logic 0. Cell circuits can be very simple, 
only one m.o.s. transistor being required in addition to the storage 
capacitor as shown in Fig. 15.27. The transistor acts as a switch, 
NEW SELECT 
(WORO LINE) 
STORAGE 
CAPACITOR 
INPUT/OUTPUT 
(BIT LINE) 
Fig. 15.27. Circuit of a memory cell in a dynamic RAM 

316 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Read-only Memories 
(ROMs) 
A computer needs a store to hold the information which enables it to 
carry out routine tasks such as the generation and display of 
alphanumeric characters. This information is required irrespective 
of the task currently being worked on by the computer and must not 
be lost when the computer is switched off: in other words the store for 
this essential information must be non-volatile. Storage of this kind is 
termed fixed, permanent or - more commonly - read-only memory 
(ROM). 
Some ROMs are programmed by masking operations during 
manufacture of the i.e. In others (programmable ROMs or PROMs) 
the program is put in by the user in a once-and-for-all operation: each 
cell in the i.e. contains a fusible link which can be destroyed (to give a 
logic 0, say) by the application of a higher-than-normal voltage or left 
intact (to give a logic 1) so enabling the i.e. to be programmed. Yet 
another type (electrically-programmable ROM or EPROM) can be 
repeatedly reprogrammed by the user by use of high voltages but 
erasure of existing programs involves irradiation by u.v. light and the 
inconvenient removal of the i.e. from the equipment. More recent 
types of ROM (electrically-erasable and programmable ROM or 
EEPROM) can be erased and reprogrammed electrically in whole or 
part (even a single byte can be changed) with the i.e. in situ. 
The need for ROMs to retain their information in the absence of a 
power supply has led to the introduction of the floating-gate transistor 
and the construction of one type of such a transistor is shown in Fig. 
15.28. It is similar to the η-channel f.e.t. of Fig. 2.16 but has two 
gates, that nearest the channel being floating, i.e. completely 
surrounded by silicon dioxide and thus highly insulated. Before the 
transistor can be programmed (written) it must first be erased. To do 
this a voltage of, say, 20 is applied to the outer gate. This causes 
electrons to be forced through the thin silicon dioxide layer to charge 
connecting the capacitor to the input/output line when turned on by a 
signal on the word line. A disadvantage of such a circuit is that the 
charge leaks away through the inevitable resistance present but this 
can be overcome by a process termed refreshing in which the charge 
on each capacitor is regularly topped up*. The charge is compared 
with a standard value accepted as representing logic 1 and, if 
necessary, charge is added to restore the stored charge to this value. 
The simplicity of the cell circuit gives this arrangement an enormous 
advantage over the static RAM even though refresh circuits are 
needed and most RAMs in modern computers are of this type. 

Digital Circuits 
317 
the floating gate. This has the effect of rendering the transistor 
immune to outer-gate voltages of about 6: it will not now respond to 
normal operating voltages of 3.5. But if the 20 V between outer gate 
and drain is reversed, most of the electrons on the floating gate are 
forced to return to the drain and the transistor can now be switched by 
normal operating voltages on the outer gate. 
Charging and discharging of the floating gate is achieved by virtue 
of an effect known as Fowler-Nordheim tunnelling whereby certain 
electrons subjected to an electric field can cross the forbidden gap of 
an insulator to enter the conduction band and can thus flow a short 
distance to a positively charged electrode. To make use of this effect 
using voltages as low as 20 requires the insulating layer to be very thin: 
hence the narrowing of the silicon dioxide layer near the drain 
connection in Fig. 15.28. 
In a typical EEPROM each memory cell comprises a 
floating-gate 
(storage) transistor and a select transistor connected in series to form 
a cascode as shown in Fig. 15.29. To erase the cell the select line and 
the word line are biased to +20 V whilst the column is grounded. To 
write, the select line is held at +20 V, the word line is grounded and 
the column is raised to +20 V. For reading, the select and word lines 
have normal operating voltages of 3.5 and the column is grounded. 
The read pulse will switch a written cell so sending a current pulse to 
the output via the column but it has no effect on an erased cell. 
The preferred word 'store' has been used throughout this section 
but the alternative 'memory' is likely to persist because of its use in 
the acronyms RAM, ROM etc. 
FLOATING GATE 
I 
I 
S i 0 2 
n - T Y P E Si 
E 3 
p - T Y P E Si 
NARROW S i 0 2 
LAYER FOR 
TUNNELLING 
Fig. 15.28. Construction of one type of floating-gate 
transistor 

318 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
COLUMN 
SELECT 
LINE 
WORD 
LINE 
Fig. 15.29. Circuit of EEPROM memory cell 
Digital Transmission of Analogue 
Signals 
We have shown how digital techniques can be used to transmit 
information for display in alphanumeric form on a v.d.u. but there are 
other ways in which these techniques can be used for communication. 
Any analogue signal can be converted into a stream of constant-
amplitude pulses and transmission of such pulses has a number of 
advantages over transmission of the analogue signal itself. For 
example, pulses received over a long link can, provided they exceed 
the noise level, be used to trigger a pulse generator which will deliver 
a replica of the received signal but with clean pulses, i.e. with a greatly 
enhanced signal-to-noise ratio. Secondly a signal in pulse form can 
readily be held in a static store thus effectively allowing the analogue 
signal to be delayed. Moreover a stored video signal can be read out at 
any desired speed so permitting a number of effects in television 
picture display. On the other hand certain types of signal processing, 
e.g. emphasis of higher frequencies to add crispness to speech or to 
enhance detail in television pictures, is easier to accomplish with the 
signal in analogue form. 
One method of converting an analogue signal to digital form is by 
the use of pulse code modulation (p.cm.). Briefly the technique is to 
sample the analogue waveform at a frequency high enough to resolve 
the highest-frequency component. The instantaneous amplitude of 
the waveform at the sampling instant is stored on a capacitor in a 
sample-and-hold circuit. For high-quality sound transmission these 
amplitudes vary over an enormous range. Only a limited number of 
different amplitudes can be accepted and the amplitude nearest the 
stored value is selected for transmission. This value is expressed as a 
binary number and the stream of binary numbers is transmitted as the 

Digital 
Circuits 
319 
digital representation of the analogue signal. Synchronising signals are 
included in the bit stream to enable receiving equipment to identify 
the pulses constituting each binary number. 
This technique is used by the broadcasting authorities to distribute 
high-quality stereo sound signals over the transmitter network. It is 
also used for the distribution of television sound, the digital signals 
being included in the video signal during the period of sync level 
within the line sync signals (sound-in-syncs). Compact disk recording 
also uses p.cm. and more recently the system has been extended to 
domestic audio tape recorders and the NICAM system of televison 
stereo sound. 
Sample-and-hold 
Circuit 
The purpose of a sample-and-hold circuit is to take 'snapshots' of the 
instantaneous values of an analogue signal at regular intervals. One 
technique for doing this is to connect a capacitor to the input-signals 
source via a switch which closes for the duration of the sampling 
periods. To ensure that the capacitor charges rapidly to the signal 
value the signal source needs a low output resistance and is 
represented in Fig. 15.30 by an emitter follower. It is also essential to 
minimise charge loss in the intervals between sampling periods and 
the amplifier which reads the voltages on the capacitor requires a high 
input resistance. Another emitter follower is therefore shown in Fig. 
15.30, which illustrates the essential features of a sample-and-hold 
circuit. To avoid negative amplitudes a steady bias can be added to the 
analogue signal before its application to TRl. 
INPUT SIGNAL 
A NO BIAS 
SWITCHING 
SIGNAL 
Fig. 15.30. Basic principle of a sample-and-hold 
circuit 

320 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
In a practical circuit TRl and TR2 are replaced by operational 
amplifiers with a large degree of negative feedback giving a much 
lower output resistance and input resistance than is possible from 
simple emitter followers. 

C H A P T E R 
16 
Further Applications of Transistors 
and other Semiconductor Devices 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
In this chapter we shall describe a number of applications of junction 
diodes and transistors which do not properly belong in earlier chapters. 
S U P P L Y - V O L T A G E S T A B I L I S I N G 
C I R C U I T S 
As we have seen, many of the properties of transistors depend on the 
current in them and hence on the supply voltage. To ensure consistency 
in the performance of transistor equipment it is therefore common 
practice to stabilise the supply voltage. 
Simple Circuit using a Voltage Reference Diode 
Fig. 16.1 gives the diagram of a simple circuit suitable for use where 
only a small current is required from the stable voltage source. 
An example of such a requirement may occur in a transistor car radio 
where the supply for the oscillator may require stabilising against 
changes in car battery voltage to secure good frequency stability and 
hence stable tuning. A suitable circuit is illustrated in Fig. 16.1. The 
junction diode must have a breakdown voltage equal to the value of the 
stabilised voltage required and the value of R x must be chosen to give 
an operating point on the nearly vertical part of the diode characteristic 
(Fig. 16.2). The diagram represents conditions in the circuit. The load 
line AB meets the axis at A at a voltage equal to the supply voltage, say 
12 V. AB meets the diode characteristic at Β and this point corresponds 
321 

322 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
0 - 1 2 V , N O M I N A L 
2 m A 
Fig. 16.1. Simple junction-diode 
vol tage-
- 6 8 V , S T A B I L I S E D stabilising 
circuit 
suitable 
for 
small 
currents 
V O L T A G E -
R E F E R E N C E 
V 
D I O D E 
Ό OV 
with the stabilised output voltage. OC represents the voltage drop 
across the diode and AC the voltage drop across Rx. In the chosen 
example the stabilised voltage is 6.8 V. 
The slope of AB corresponds to the resistance Rt and this clearly may 
vary within limits (as suggested by the dotted lines AD and AE) without 
much effect on the value of the stabilised voltage but it is preferable to 
choose a value for Rx which keeps the dissipation in the diode well 
within the maximum value prescribed by the makers. For example, if 
the maximum dissipation is 50 mW we can choose to dissipate half of 
this, 25 mW, at a battery voltage of 12 V. The voltage across the diode is 
6.8 V and the diode current must be 25/6.8, i.e. 3.7 mA. This current is 
supplied via Rx together with the current for the load (the oscillator 
V O L T A G E 
G^ 
D I O D E 
C H A R A C T E R I S T I C 
0 
C U R R E N T 
Ν 
Fig. 16.2. Illustrating the operation of a simple voltage-stabilising 
circuit 

Further Applications 
323 
transistor). If the load current is 2 mA, the total current in Rt is 5.7 mA. 
The voltage across Rx is 5.2 V and the required value of Rx is given by 
R
 
5
2 
1
 
5.7 χ 
10'
3 
= 900 Ω approximately 
The supply voltage may easily rise to 14 V when the car alternator is 
running. The effect such a voltage rise has on the stabilised voltage is 
illustrated by the load line F G which is parallel to AB (thus representing 
the same value of resistance 
but meets the axis at F corresponding 
to 14 V. FG meets the diode characteristic at G, representing a greater 
diode current than before (point B). The new stabilised voltage 
corresponds to point G which, because of the extreme steepness of the 
diode breakdown characteristic, is at almost the same voltage as before 
(point B). The dissipation in the diode is now greater than before the 
increase in supply voltage and care must be taken to see that the 
maximum safe dissipation is not exceeded when the supply voltage is at 
its maximum. 
The effectiveness of the circuit depends on the steepness of the diode 
characteristic which is usually expressed as a slope resistance. This may 
be as low as 5 Ω, showing that a change of diode current of 10 mA gives 
an alteration in breakdown voltage of only 5 χ 10 = 50 mV. 
High-stability 
stabiliser IC 
A Zener-like device has been developed for the special application of 
voltage supply for varicap tuners for radio and television. It is a 
multi-semiconductor combination in the form of an i.e. with two 
terminals, and has a closely stabilised reverse breakdown voltage of 
33 V, chosen to suit the characteristics of the varicap diodes used for 
tuning. It has a slope resistance of typically < 5 Ω and a very low 
temperature coefficient of — 10 mV per °C. It is used in a circuit similar 
to that of Fig. 16.1. 
Series Voltage 
Stabilisers 
More complex power-supply circuits are used to supply transistor 
equipments with current. For example, portable television receivers 
designed for operation from the mains or from car batteries incorporate 
a constant-voltage supply circuit which must be capable of operating 
satisfactorily with an input as low as 12 V. 

324 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Such a supply circuit has two distinct functions. Firstly it must 
maintain the output voltage at a particular wanted value (which can be 
predetermined) despite variations in input voltage whether from the 
mains or batteries. This is known as stabilisation of the output voltage. 
Secondly it must maintain that particular value of output voltage 
despite variations in the current drawn by the equipment. This latter 
quality is termed regulation and good regulation is achieved by giving 
the power supply circuit a low output impedance. This has the 
incidental advantage of minimising any tendency to instability in the 
equipment caused by the common impedance of the power-supply 
circuits. Regulation is an inherent feature of stabilisation. 
In one commonly used stabiliser circuit the stabilised output is 
derived from the unstabilised input via a series element, the resistance 
of which is controlled so as to maintain a constant output voltage. The 
signal controlling this element is obtained from a comparator stage 
which compares a sample of the output voltage with a constant 
reference voltage. The sample of output voltage is usually obtained 
from a preset potentiometer which is adjusted to give the desired value 
of output voltage. The reference voltage is normally obtained from a 
Zener diode which is fed via a series resistor from the stabilised or 
unstabilised supply. 
The comparator stage can be a single npn transistor, as shown in Fig. 
16.3, in which the sample voltage is applied to the base and the reference 
voltage to the emitter. The Zener diode effectively presents the emitter 
with a very low impedance so that the full gain of a common-emitter 
TR2 
UNSTABILISED o-
SUPPLY 
Ο 
STABILISED 
4
 
SUPPLY 
Fig. 16.3. Series stabiliser with zener diode in emitter circuit of the 
comparator 
transistor 

Further Applications 
325 
amplifier is available from the comparator transistor. If there is an 
increase in the current drawn from the output of the unit there is a 
tendency for the output voltage to fall. This causes a fall in the base 
voltage of the comparator transistor and its collector voltage therefore 
rises. This positive voltage change is applied to the base of the stabiliser 
transistor to enable it to supply the additional current required. The 
stabiliser transistor must hence be an npn type. A second requirement 
of the stabiliser transistor is that it must not invert the input signal: the 
positive voltage step applied to the base must give a positive step in 
output voltage. An emitter follower is therefore the obvious choice for 
the stabiliser stage and the circuit so deduced has the form shown in 
Fig. 16.3. 
The potentiometer Rx controls the fraction of the output voltage fed 
back, after amplification by TRl, to the base of TR2. As Rx slider is 
moved upwards the degree of negative feedback is increased and 
variations in output voltage are decreased: such slider movement also 
decreases the stabilised voltage. If, in Fig. 16.3, the Zener diode has a 
reference voltage of 6.3, and if TRl is a silicon transistor, then its base 
voltage must be approximately 7 for TRl to conduct. If the poten-
tiometer is at its midpoint, the stabilised output voltage must be 14. If 
the slider is lowered to give, for example, a 3:1 potential division ratio 
the output voltage rises to 21. If the upper arm of Rx is shunted by a 
capacitor (as shown dashed in Fig. 16.3) the degree of negative 
feedback is increased for any alternating voltage components at the 
output terminals. If the capacitance is made large enough for its 
reactance at 50 Hz or 100 Hz to be negligible compared with the 
resistance of the lower arm of R x, any ripple on the stabilised supply can 
be minimised. 
Suppose we interchange the positions of the Zener diode and its feed 
resistor R4 as shown in Fig. 16.4. By doing this we ensure that any 
changes in output voltage are fed back, without loss, to TRl emitter by 
the Zener diode. They are also fed back, attenuated by Rl, to TRl base. 
The effects of these two inputs on TRl collector current are, of course, 
opposite, but the emitter input, being the larger of the two, dictates the 
phase of collector-current changes. The potentiometer K4 is, however, 
still necessary to enable the output voltage to be adjusted to the desired 
value. In this circuit a sudden increase in output current causes a 
decrease in output voltage and thus in TRl emitter voltage. This results 
in a decrease in TRl collector voltage and therefore in TR2 base 
voltage. This input to the regulator stage must give increased current 
output and TR2 must hence be a pnp type. And because a decrease in 
base voltage must give increased output voltage TR2 must be 
connected as a common-emitter stage as shown in Fig. 16.4. 
This circuit also minimises ripple on the output because the Zener 

326 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
* 3 
Fig. 16.4. Improved performance 
can be obtained 
by interchanging 
the positions 
of 
Zener diode and feed resistor K4, as shown here 
diode has very low impedance at ripple frequencies. It also has another 
advantage over the circuit of Fig. 16.3 and this concerns the value of R2, 
which must be large compared with the input resistance of the regulator 
stage in order to direct all the changes in current from the comparator 
stage into it - a normal requirement, of course, in any current amplifier. 
Now if TR2 is an emitter follower supplying, say, 100 mA its input 
resistance could be as high as 1 kQ, and R2 should ideally be large 
compared with this. Thus if TRl has a mean current of 5 m A the voltage 
drop across R2 could be considerable: indeed it could be comparable 
with the unstabilised input voltage! If, however, TR2 is a common-
emitter amplifier its input resistance could be as low as 25 ohms and R2 
need only be 100 ohms or so, so that the voltage drop across it can be 
less than 1 V. This circuit is, therefore, better suited for use with low 
values of unstabilised input voltage such as the nominal 12 V from a car 
battery. In such stabilisers it is also desirable to minimise the voltage 
drop across the regulator transistor and a common technique is to 
connect a low-value resistor, e.g. 10 ohms across TR2 as shown as R3 in 
Fig. 16.4. This necessarily reduces the degree of stabilisation achievable 
and emphasises the need for high gain in TRl and TR2. 
To determine the type of circuit required in a stabiliser we have so far 
discussed the circuits in terms of voltage changes but the comparator 
and regulator stages should, in fact, be designed as a current amplifier. 
The overall current gain is independent of whether TR2 is an emitter 

Further Applications 
327 
follower or a common-emitter amplifier because both have approxi-
mately equal values of current gain. From a knowledge of the current 
gain the output resistance of the stabiliser can be assessed in the 
following manner. Suppose the mean collector current of TRl is 5 mA. 
Its mutual conductance is thus 200 mA/V and a voltage change of 5 mV 
at the base (or emitter) changes the collector current by 1 mA. Suppose 
this is handed on to TR2 without loss and that TR2 has a current gain of 
50. Then TR2 current changes by 50 mA. We must now make an 
assumption about the transfer of changes in output voltage to the input 
of TRl. This depends on the setting of the potentiometer but assume 
that half the changes are effectively transferred to the comparator stage. 
Then for a change in output voltage of 10 mV, the output current can 
change by 50 mA, representing an output impedance of 0.2 ohm. Even 
lower values can be achieved by adding extra stages of current 
amplification between comparator and regulator. 
Shunt Voltage 
Stabilisers 
There is an alternative form of voltage stabiliser in which the stabilised 
supply is derived from the unstabilised supply via a fixed series 
resistance, control being achieved by an element across the output, the 
resistance of which is varied automatically so as to give a constant 
output voltage. The circuit of Fig. 16.1 is, of course, a simple example of 
such a stabiliser. 
Switch-mode Power Supplies 
The type of power supplier just described has a number of disadvan-
tages. For example, the stabilised output voltage is necessarily less than 
the unstabilised input voltage. Moreover the regulating transistor is 
always conducting, and dissipation in it, and in any parallel-connected 
resistor, can be considerable. Both disadvantages can be overcome by 
arranging for the regulating transistor to be regularly switched between 
saturation and cut-off. This minimises dissipation in the transistor, in 
the on-state because of the low voltage across it and in the off-state 
because of the absence of current in it. Moreover regulation can be 
achieved by controlling the duration of the on-periods, an example of 
pulse-width modulation. As the regulating-transistor current is in pulse 
form the output can be obtained from a transformer-rectifier combina-
tion, so enabling output voltages greater than the input voltage to be 
obtained. The transformer need not be a bulky component: by 
arranging for the regulating transistor (known usually as a chopper) to 

328 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
be switched at a high frequency such as 15 kHz its inductance need only 
be l/300th that of a 50 Hz component. The smoothing components are 
also correspondingly smaller. 
A simplified circuit diagram of a switch-mode power supplier typical 
of those used in television receivers is given in Fig. 16.5. The mains 
input is rectified by a full-wave rectifier to produce a supply at about 
320 V which feeds the chopper transistor TR4 and its transformer T3. 
The chopper is switched at 15 kHz (sometimes synchronised at 
television line frequency) and is driven by the complementary stage 
TR2, TR3 which, in turn, is driven by the common-emitter stage TRl. 
TRl input is a rectangular-wave signal pulse-width modulated by a 
sample of the output voltage of the power supplier. T3 has a number of 
secondary windings proportioned to supply the various steady voltages 
required by the receiver, including the chopper amplifier TRl to TR4 
itself. This poses a problem: the supply for the chopper amplifier is not 
available until the chopper is working but the chopper cannot work 
until it has a supply! This impasse is solved by providing an alternative 
supply for the chopper from the rectified mains supply via R2 and C3. 
D.C. 
SUPPLIES 
Fig. 16.5. Simplified switch-mode power supplier for a television 
receiver 

Further Applications 
329 
This supply is available immediately after switch-on and is overtaken, 
as soon as the chopper is operating, by the supply from T3 and D6. 
TR5 and TR6 constitute a direct-coupled complementary bistable 
(similar to that described on page 252) which is normally in the state in 
which both transistors are off. If, for any reason, the chopper transistor 
passes excess current, the voltage across R5 turns TR6 (and hence TR5) 
on and both transistors remain on. TR6 now short-circuits the output 
of TRl, so switching off the chopper and protecting the power supplier 
from possible damage. The charging of C7 plays an essential role in this 
protective circuit. 
One way in which the pulse-width modulation can be achieved is 
illustrated in the block diagram of Fig. 16.6 and the associated 
waveforms in Fig. 16.7. A square-wave signal at chopper frequency is 
SAMPLE 
OUTPUT 
VOLTAGE 
SAWTOOTH—\-y 
WAVEFORM 
PULSE-WIDTH 
MODULATED 
OUTPUT 
REFERENCE 
VOLTAGE 
Fig. 16.6. Two operational amplifiers used to give a pulse-width-modulated 
output for a 
switch-mode power 
supplier 
Fig. 16.7. Waveforms illustrating the operation of the circuit of Fig. 16.6 

330 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
integrated to give the symmetrical sawtooth (b) which is applied to one 
input of operational amplifier A2. A sample of the output voltage of the 
power supplier is compared with a reference voltage in operational 
amplifier Al and its output forms the second input for amplifier A2. If 
this input increases it rises further up the sawtooth waveform, so 
increasing the output of A2 for a shorter period in each cycle. This 
output signal is the input for the chopper amplifier TRl. The diagram 
shows a high sample voltage leading to a short on-period and a lower 
voltage giving a longer period. 
There are many variations of mains-driven switch-mode power-
supply circuits. That shown in Fig. 16.8 is based on the astable 
relaxation oscillator described on page 266, in which chopper transistor 
TRl and switching transformer Tl form the basic oscillator. The 
energy in Tl is tapped off by the rectifier-diodes at the top left of the 
diagram. 
When mains voltage is first applied, base-emitter current flows in 
TRl via the resistor Rx. As a result the transistor is turned on and 
collector current flows through Tl primary winding Lx. This current 
induces a voltage in feedback winding L2 which is passed on to TRl 
base via Cx and K2, turning the transistor hard on. As soon as the 
current in Lx stabilises, the positive pulse across L2 falls to zero and 
then reverses rapidly, turning TRl off. When the magnetic field of Tl 
Fig. 16.8. Self-oscillating switch-mode power-supply 
circuit. Note the different 'ground' 
symbols used for isolated and mains-live 
sections 
STABILIZED 
OUTPUTS 

Further Applications 
331 
has collapsed, the process repeats itself, giving continuous oscillation 
and feeding energy to the loads on the secondary windings. 
Regulation is achieved by monitoring the voltage developed across 
feedback winding L 3 on Tl. The alternating voltage it produces is 
rectified by diode Dl and smoothed by C2 to produce a negative 
voltage proportional to that on the secondary supply lines. It is fed to 
TR2 emitter via Zener diode D2 and to TR2 base via potential divider 
R 3R 4R 5. The result is that conduction in TR2 is governed by the 
negative voltage on C2: the greater the voltage, the greater the 
conduction. The basic operating point is set by R4, the set H.T. control. 
Conduction in TR2 governs the base-emitter current of transistor 
TR3 which shunts the base-emitter junction of the oscillator TRl. The 
effect is to control the turn-on time of TRl and hence the duty cycle of 
the oscillator. A complete control loop is thus set up to regulate and 
stabilise all three output voltages. 
The resistor R6 develops a voltage proportional to the current 
flowing in Tl and TRl and forms part of an overload protection circuit 
(not shown here) which removes the base drive from TRl to shut 
down the oscillator in the event of a current overload. O ver-voltage 
protection is effected by a 'crowbar' device (not shown here) at the 
secondary side of transformer Tl. Its operation is described later in this 
chapter. 
Many types of switch-mode power-supply circuits use purpose-
designed i.c.s incorporating 'soft-start', overload protection and 
standby facilities, the last-mentioned being governed by an infra-red 
remote-control system. One very efficient i.c.-based system directly 
drives the chopper transistor at frequencies between 22 kHz and 
35 kHz, depending on input voltage and load conditions. It forms a 
self-oscillating, non-synchronous blocking converter, the frequency 
and duty cycle of which automatically adjust to variations in mains 
supply voltage and loading of the secondary windings. The secondary 
voltages are stabilised to ±0.5 per cent over a mains input voltage 
range of 185 V to 265 V, while for load variations between 30 W and 
100 W the output voltages are held to within 1 per cent variation. 
Power 
m.o.s.f.e.t.s 
The higher the operating frequency of a switch-mode power supply 
unit, the more efficient it becomes. The two limitations on operating 
frequency are hysteresis in the core of the chopper transformer and the 
switching speed of bipolar power transistors of the type required in the 
circuits described above. These difficulties have led to the development 
of ferrite transformer cores designed to meet the needs of high-power 

Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
switching and of power m.o.s.f.e.t.s capable of operating at frequencies 
of 100 kHz or more. Such f.e.t.s have the advantages over bipolar 
transistors of lower losses, greater immunity to current overload and 
reduced drive power. On the debit side they are more expensive than 
similarly rated conventional transistors. 
For a high current to flow in an f.e.t. the channel area must be large, 
making it difficult to create a depletion region wide enough to cut off 
the current flow between the source and drain terminals. In a power 
m.o.s.f.e.t. this problem is overcome by fabricating a large number of 
separate f.e.t.s on a single substrate and connecting all their source, 
drain and gate terminals in parallel. Over 20,000 separate transistors 
may typically be formed inside a single package. With such construc-
tion the total current may be as high as 10 A and the 'on' resistance as 
low as 10 ιηΩ, depending on ambient temperature. With a drain-
source rating of 1 kV during cut-off, these devices are ideal for 
switch-mode power-supply applications at high switching speeds. 
A power m.o.s.f.e.t. has a larger safe operating area (s.o.a.r.) than a 
similarly-rated bipolar device. The s.o.a.r. includes all the possible 
combinations of drain-source (collector-emitter) voltages and drain 
(collector) current values with which the device can operate without 
risk of breakdown. Outside the s.o.a.r. there is a likelihood that a 
destructive hot-spot may develop in a bipolar transistor, resulting in 
breakdown of the junction. The channels of a power f.e.t. have a 
positive temperature coefficient and the formation of hot-spots is less 
likely. If local overheating occurs the resistance in the region increases, 
diverting current to surrounding areas, so inhibiting further rise in 
hot-spot temperature and preventing breakdown. 
The use of power m.o.s.f.e.t.s in switch-mode power-supply units 
began in computer applications where reliability, efficiency and 
minimum bulk are required. Their use has now spread to include 
domestic television receivers. The circuits are similar to those using 
conventional transistors as shown in Fig. 16.9. The main difference is 
that no drive current is required by the power f.e.t. The drive device i.e. 
generates at pin 5 a square wave with a mark-space ratio (duty cycle) 
governed by the voltage applied to pin 1: this is generated by a 
secondary winding on the chopper transformer and preset to the 
required level by the trimmer resistor 
at Dl cathode, so setting up a 
control loop. 
Switch-mode power supplies have the advantage of isolating the load 
(e.g. television receiver) circuits from the mains supply at less expense 
and with greater efficiency than circuits using heavy iron-cored 50-Hz 
mains transformers. For this reason they are widely used in home-
entertainment equipment of all kinds as well as in industrial, instru-
mentation and test-gear applications. 
332 

Further Applications 
333 
Fig. 16.9. Television power supply using a purpose-designed 
i.e. and a 
power-f.e.t. 
switching element 
TRl 
D . C . TO D . C . 
C O N V E R T E R S 
Akin to switch-mode power supplies but smaller, lighter and generally 
working from very low voltage supplies are d.c.-d.c. converters. 
Typical applications are in domestic video recorders to generate 
medium-voltage auxiliary supplies and memory over-write voltages, 
and in video cameras to supply the operating voltages required by 
image-sensing devices. 
An example from a home video recorder is given in Fig. 16.10, where 
transistors TRl and TR2 form a 30-kHz oscillator with a feedback via 
C5. A square-wave voltage is developed across the primary winding of 
transformer Tl and the secondary winding develops a 4-V heater 
supply for the fluorescent display panel (f.d.p.) via the voltage-doubler 
rectifier D1D2C1C2. A second voltage-doubler rectifier D 3 D 4 C3C4 is 
led from TRl collector to provide a supply at —35 V for use as 
accelerating voltage within the f.d.p. The square waveform at the 
collector of TRl is also rectified by D5 and smoothed by C 6 to provide a 
37-V tuning-voltage source for the channel-selecting section of the 
receiver within the video recorder. This 37-V source also provides the 
collector supply for TR2. 

334 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
- 35 V 
Fig. 16.10. Low-power 
d.c.-d.c. converter used for auxiliary power supply in a domestic 
video 
recorder 
D.C. Power 
Converters 
Transistors are particularly useful in the construction of d.c. conver-
ters, units which can be made remarkably compact and which can 
convert power from a low-voltage source (e.g. 6 V) to a higher voltage 
(e.g. 120 V) with an efficiency which can approach 85 per cent and is 
seldom less than 60 per cent. 
The transistor in such a converter is used as a switch which interrupts 
the d.c. supply from the low-voltage source to produce an alternating 
current. This is stepped up in voltage by a transformer or resonant 
circuit to give a high-voltage supply which is rectified and smoothed to 
obtain the high-voltage output. For high efficiency the power dissi-
pated in the transistor itself must be small. The power dissipated in a 
transistor is of course given by the product of the collector current and 

Further Applications 
335 
the collector-emitter voltage. The power is therefore small when the 
collector current is nearly zero, that is to say when the transistor is cut 
off and also when the collector-emitter voltage is nearly zero, i.e. when 
the transistor is fully conducting. Thus the design of the d.c. converter 
must be such that the transistor is always either fully conducting or cut 
off. This is achieved by using the transistor as an astable relaxation 
oscillator which generates rectangular waves. 
The circuit of one type of d.c. converter is given in Fig. 16.11. The 
collector and base circuits of the transistor are coupled to give positive 
feedback and consequent oscillation. Considerable feedback is necess-
ary to drive the transistor hard into conduction and cut-off. The ratio of 
the periods of conduction and non-conduction can be controlled by 
adjustment of the value of the resistor Rl9 which determines the base 
bias of the transistor. Frequently d.c. converters employ two transistors 
operating in push-pull. 
LOAD 
Fig. 16.11. Complete circuit of transistor d.c. 
converter 
Oscillation frequencies in d.c. converters may lie between 500 Hz and 
10 kHz. If a converter is required to be particularly compact the 
transformer and smoothing capacitor must be small. This is practi-
cable, provided the working frequency is high, and the tendency is 
therefore to have high working frequencies in compact converters. 
P H O T O - D I O D E 
It is shown in Chapter 1 that the current which flows across a 
reverse-biased pn junction is carried by minority carriers, i.e. by the 
electrons and holes liberated by breakdown of the covalent bonds of the 
intrinsic semiconducting material. This current is substantially inde-
pendent of the reverse-bias voltage, provided this exceeds approximate-
ly 1 V, but can be increased by heating the material or by allowing light 
to fall on it: both give the semiconductor atoms more energy and cause 
more covalent bonds to break. Where sensitivity to light is undesirable 

336 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
junction diodes and bipolar transistors are sealed in opaque containers: 
if sensitivity to light is required a transparent container is employed. 
A junction diode in a transparent container is known as a photo-
diode and can be used to indicate the presence of light. An obvious form 
of circuit is that illustrated in Fig. 16.12. The current which flows in 
such a circuit when the diode is in darkness is due entirely to thermal 
dissociation of covalent bonds and increases rapidly as temperature 
rises. It was known as the reverse current in Chapter 1 but in 
photo-diodes is usually known as the dark current. The ratio of light to 
dark current thus decreases as temperature rises. For a germanium 
photo-diode the dark current is typically a few μΑ and the light current 
150μΑ for an incident illumination of 150 lumens per sq. ft. For a 
silicon photo-diode the dark current is unlikely to exceed 0.1 μΑ and 
the light current is similar in value to that for the germanium 
photo-diode. 
LIGHT 
Fig. 16.12. Simple light-meter 
circuit 
using a 
photo-diode 
The output power from a photo-diode is limited and amplification is 
essential if greater power is required, e.g. to operate a milliammeter or a 
relay. Amplification can be provided by a transistor direct-coupled to 
the photo-diode as shown in Fig. 16.13. In this circuit two photo-diodes 
and two transistors are used in a balanced circuit which largely 
eliminates the effects of temperature changes and gives a meter reading 
which depends only on the illumination falling on one of the 
photo-diodes. 
To set up the circuit the two photo-diodes are screened from light 
and the potentiometer is adjusted to give zero meter reading. When one 
of the photo-diodes is now exposed to light the meter gives an 
indication proportional to the illumination and the meter can, in fact, 
be calibrated in terms of illumination. 
P H O T O - T R A N S I S T O R S 
In a common-emitter amplifier the collector-base junction is, of course, 
reverse-biased and acts as a photo-diode if illuminated. The reverse 
current of this junction (i.e. the light current) flows through the 
forward-biased base-emitter junction and is amplified by normal 

lOOkn 
Further 
Applications 
lOOkn 
337 
OOV 
Fig. 16.13. 
Light-meter 
circuit employing 
two 
photo-
diodes and two 
transistors 
transistor action, giving a light output from the collector β times that 
from a simple photo-diode. The dark current is also amplified and, for a 
germanium photo-transistor, can amount to 0.5 mA but is unlikely to 
exceed 10 μΑ for a silicon photo-transistor. The collector current-
collector voltage characteristics for a photo-transistor with incident 
illumination as the parameter are plotted in Fig. 16.14. The curves are 
similar in shape to those for a common-emitter amplifier. They show 
that a change in collector current of 0.5 mA can be produced by a 
change in illumination of 20 lumens per sq. ft. 
A typical circuit using a photo-transistor is given in Fig. 16.15. This 
employs the potential-divider method of dark-current stabilisation (see 
Chapter 6). Such a circuit might be employed as a punched paper tape 
Fig. 
16.15. 
Circuit 
using 
a 
photo-transistor 
with an 
inter-
rupted light input 
COLLECTOR VOLTAGE ( V ) 
Fia. 16.14. 
Characteristics 
of a 
Dhoto-transistor 
(V<«) 1N3MW3 H01391103 
0 - 6 V 

338 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
reader where an electrical response is required from light passing 
through the holes in the tape. 
O P T O C O U P L E R S 
Where signals or commands are passed between two isolated electrical 
circuits an inexpensive and reliable alternative to transformers or relays 
is the optocoupler, an encapsulated combination of spectrally-matched 
LED and photo-diode as shown in Fig. 16.16(a). Complete electrical 
isolation between the two halves of the device permits them to operate 
in circuits 1 kV or more apart in potential. Amongst their applications 
are feedback couplers between live and 'earthy' sections of power 
supplies, e.g. in television receivers. 
Split optocouplers also find applications as movement sensors; when 
the beam is broken the photo-diode cuts off to signal the fact. Fig. 
16.16(b) shows the use of such an optocoupler to detect rotation in the 
cassette spool of a video recorder. If the output from the photo-sensor 
ceases to alternate, the system-control sensor shuts down the deck to 
prevent tape spillage. 
Fig. 16.16. (a) Optocoupler 
circuit symbol, (b) Used as rotation sensor. An 
alternative 
version of {b) has both emitter and sensor side by side, scanning alternate 
black and 
reflective segments of the underside of the spool 
turntable 
LASER D I O D E IN A C D 
PLAYER 
The operating principle of a solid-state laser was described in Chapter 
1. For use in audio compact disk players the laser diode is a miniature 
type with an output power of a few mW. As Fig. 1.17 shows, its current 
must be closely controlled for reliability, longevity and constant light 
C A S T E L L A T I O N S 
P H O T O - S E N S O R 
L E D 
S P O O L 
T U R N T A B L E 

Further Applications 
339 
output. In Fig. 16.17 the radiation from the laser diode LD (top left) is 
monitored by photo-diode PD which controls the current in the laser 
via ICI and regulator TRl. This closed loop ensures constant emission 
under all circumstances of temperature and ageing. LD and PD share 
the same encapsulation and have a common cathode connection. 
Fig. 16.17. Opto-electronics 
inside an audio compact disk player: the components 
inside 
the dotted box scan across the rotating 
disk 
The other photo-diodes, A-F, are at the opposite end of the optical 
path, and read the data from the reflective surface of the disk. The 
bottom-most pair, Ε and F, are concerned only with providing tracking 
information to guide the optical assembly across the disk surface, while 
photo-diodes A-D provide signal data and focus-feedback informa-
tion. 
U N I J U N C T I O N T R A N S I S T O R ( D O U B L E - B A S E 
D I O D E ) 
This device has a filament of, say, η-type silicon with ohmic contacts at 
each end and a p-type junction near the centre. If the junction is 
reverse-biased the filament may have a resistance of, say, 10 kQ but this 
can be substantially reduced by forward biasing the junction. The 
device makes possible the simple pulse-generating circuit shown in Fig. 
16.18. 

340 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
U — I f 
Bo 
IL 
IL 
Ao 
OV 
Fig. 16.18. Simple pulse-generating 
circuit using a unijunction 
transistor, 
i.e. double-base 
diode 
For simplicity we will assume that the filament contacts are 
connected to a 10-V source and that the pn junction is at the centre of 
the filament. Thus the base at the junction has a bias of + 5 V. Initially 
the capacitor C is uncharged and the emitter potential is 0 V. The pn 
junction is thus reverse-biased and a steady current of 1 mA flows 
through the filament via Rx and R2 (both assumed small compared 
with 10 kQ). 
As C charges through R the potential of the emitter moves positively, 
following an exponential law, until it reaches the value +5.7 V. Any 
further rise in voltage across C causes the junction to conduct. The 
charge carriers are chiefly holes which are injected by the emitter 
p-region across the junction into the filament. Here the holes tend to 
move towards the most negative part of the filament and in doing so 
reduce the effective resistance of its lower half. This in turn increases the 
current crossing the junction and encourages the injection of further 
holes. Thus a regenerative process is set up which culminates in the 
rapid discharge of C by the current flowing across the junction and 
through the lower half of the filament and R x. The burst of current in R x 
generates a positive-going pulse at terminal A. The momentary 
reduction in filament resistance due to hole injection causes a transient 
increase in current in R2 and thus generates a negative-going pulse at 
terminal B. 
The collapse in voltage across C causes the pn junction to become 
reverse-biased again and the circuit is back in the original state. The 
cycle then restarts and continues at a rate dependent on the time 
constant RC. This simple circuit thus gives pulses of both polarities and 
an approximation to a sawtooth output. 

Further 
Applications 
I N V E R T E R U S I N G 
T H Y R I S T O R S 
An account of the construction and principal properties of thyristors is 
given in Chapter 2. One application for such devices is in inverters, i.e. 
equipments which generate alternating supplies from a direct-current 
supply. Inverters enable mains-voltage apparatus, e.g. 
fluorescent 
lamps, to be operated where only a low-voltage d.c. supply is available. 
The circuit diagram for a push-pull inverter is given in Fig. 16.19(a). 
This has two thyristors which conduct alternately to interrupt a d.c. 
supply at a rate determined by an astable multivibrator. The interrup-
ted supply is fed to the primary winding of a step-up transformer T, 
from the secondary of which the high-voltage a.c. supply is obtained. 
The multivibrator is of the collector-coupled type illustrated in Fig. 
13.8 and the outputs, taken from resistors in the emitter circuits of TRl 
and TR2, are directly applied to the gates of the thyristors; Fig. 
16.19(b). Consider conditions in the circuit during the period when 
L 
0.C 
INPUT 
CSR2 
Γ 
Γ 
A.C. 
OUTPUT 
a 
C S R I 
b 
68Ω 
TR1 
GATE a 
GATE b 
33Ω 
33Ω 
ο 
Fig. 16.19. (a) An inverter using thyristors; 
(b) the associated multivibrator 
switching 
circuit. Component values shown are suitable for an operating frequency of about 1 kHz 
341 

342 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
CSR1 is on. The voltage across CSR1 is negligibly low and the full 
battery voltage V appears across the lower half of Τ primary winding. 
By auto-transformer action an equal voltage appears across the upper 
half of this winding and thus the capacitor C is charged to 2V. When 
CSR2 is abruptly switched on by the multivibrator, the voltage across it 
suddenly falls to zero. The voltage across a capacitor cannot change 
instantaneously and the effect is that the anode of CSR1 is immediately 
driven to — 2 V volts, so switching the thyristor off. Thus the states of 
CSR1 and CSR2 are now interchanged and the voltage across Τ 
primary winding therefore reverses. C discharges and is recharged to 
2Kin the opposite direction. Half a cycle later CSR1 is turned on by the 
multivibrator, its voltage falls to zero and the capacitor C ensures that 
CSR2 is turned off. Thus the cycle continues. There is a brief period in 
each cycle when both thyristors are conducting and the choke L is 
included to limit the current taken from the battery during this period. 
The multivibrator is usually designed to run at a frequency around 
1 kHz, thus enabling much smaller transformers to be used than are 
necessary at 50 Hz. For operating fluorescent lamps or other mains 
equipment a sinusoidal output is desirable: capacitance C and the 
primary inductance of Τ are thus chosen to resonate at the operating 
frequency. If it is intended to rectify the inverter output, a square-
wave output is preferable and can be obtained by choosing C and the 
primary inductance of Τ so as to avoid resonance. 
Thyristor Control for Small Electric 
Motors 
Thyristors can be used to control small electric motors such as those 
used in hand drills and food mixers where there is a need for several 
operating speeds. Using a simple circuit a thyristor can determine the 
motor speed by control of the fraction of each cycle during which mains 
current is allowed to flow (known as the conduction angle) and the speed 
can be maintained, in spite of varying mains voltage or changing 
mechanical load on the motor, by feedback from the back-e.m.f. from 
the motor. 
One possible circuit is shown in Fig. 16.20. When the thyristor anode 
is negative with respect to the cathode, the thyristor is non-conductive: 
thus for one-half of each mains cycle the motor receives no power. 
Nevertheless the motor is rotating as a result of the power received 
during the other half-cycle and generates a back-e.m.f. proportional to 
speed (and residual flux) which biases the thyristor cathode positively. 
When the thyristor anode is positive with respect to the cathode, the 
thyristor conducts if the gate is suitably biased: thus for this half of each 
mains cycle the motor receives power controlled by the gate circuit. The 

Further Applications 
343 
6-
Fig. 16.20. Basic circuit for thyristor control of electric-motor 
speed 
diode Dl conducts positive-going trigger voltages to the gate but when 
the thyristor conducts, the thyristor cathode potential takes up the 
anode value, so reverse-biasing Dl and isolating the thyristor from the 
trigger circuit. The gate voltage must exceed the cathode bias by a fixed 
amount to turn the thyristor on and the gate voltage is determined by 
the setting of R2. The more positive the gate is made, the larger is the 
conduction angle and the higher the motor speed. 
This simple circuit has disadvantages: the chief are that the range of 
conduction angle achievable by adjustment of R2 is limited and that 
dissipation in the potential divider is high. 
A better circuit is illustrated in Fig. 16.21. The gate circuit operates as 
a diode detector (see page 222). On positive half-cycles Dl conducts 
and charges C1. On negative half-cycles Dl is non-conductive and Cx 
discharges through (R2 + R3). On the next positive half-cycle Dl 
Fig. 16.21. 
Practical circuit for thyristor control of motor speed 
ο 
R2 
A C 
MAINS 
* 3 

344 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
+ 125 ν σ-
ο 
C S R 
ψ 
A 
Z D 
9 
F R O M 
P O W E R 
S U P P L Y 
U N I T 
T O L O A D 
V 
IS 
ô 
(a) 
(b) 
Fig. 16.22. (a) 'Crowbar' 
protection 
circuit 
with thyristor 
and Zener 
diode, 
(b) 
Breakover diode for crowbar 
protection 
conducts again and the charge lost from Cx is restored. The extent of 
the discharge of Cx depends on the value of (R2 + R3) and can be 
controlled over a wide range by adjustment of R2. The smaller jR2 is 
made, the more complete is the discharge of Cx during negative 
half-cycles and the longer is the charging period during positive 
half-cycles. In fact the charging of Cx begins early in the positive 
half-cycle and by adjustment of R2 can be made to last from a small 
fraction to three-quarters of the half-cycle. The charging current flows 
through Rx 
and generates across it a negative-going pulse which 
reverse-biases D2, isolating the thyristor gate and preventing the 
thyristor from conducting. Thus the thyristor becomes conductive as 
the charging current ceases and is cut off when the anode voltage swings 
to zero at the end of the positive half-cycle. R2 controls the duration of 
the charging process and hence the conduction angle of the thyristor. 
Thyristor as Crowbar 
An effective (if crude) way to protect a circuit from voltage overload 
and consequent damage is to short-circuit its power supply line. An 
example of this 'crowbar' technique is given in Fig. 16.22(a), where 
Zener diode ZD monitors the 125-V line produced by a switch-mode 
power supply unit. If, due to a regulator fault, the line voltage rises to 
130 V, the Zener diode breaks down and passes current into the 
thyristor gate. The resulting short-circuit through the thyristor shuts 
down the p.s.u., removing the risk of damage. The protection circuit is 
reset by switching the power off and on again. 
There are two-terminal devices made to do this job, consisting 
internally of a thyristor-Zener diode or a form of diac. Their circuit 
symbol is shown in Fig. 16.22(b). 

Further Applications 
345 
Thyristor Field Timebase 
The field timebase section of a television receiver or monitor is required 
to produce a linear sawtooth current in the scanning yoke. In many 
designs a complementary Class-B output stage is used for this purpose; 
the circuits are similar to those described in Chapter 8. 
An alternative and more efficient circuit using a thyristor is depicted 
in block form in Fig. 16.23. The vertical scan coils have one end (A) 
permanently connected to a source of + 21 V d.c, so that by varying the 
charge in Cx (point B) between, say, 10 V and 30 V, current can be made 
to flow in either direction in the scan coils. The necessary energy comes 
from coil X-Y, which is a secondary winding on the line output 
transformer, so phased that during each line flyback point X goes 190 V 
positive of point Y. The active element is thyristor TH1, connected 
between point Y and ground. If TH1 remains permanently off, diode 
Dl rectifies the flyback pulses to charge Cx to the peak voltage of 
+ 190 V. If TH1 stays permanently on, point Y is grounded, with the 
result that the pulses at point X position themselves symmetrically 
A 
I 
+ 21 V 
I.C.2 
V E R T I C A L 
S C A N C O I L S 
S A W T O O T H 
G E N E R A T O R 
P L L 
L O G I C 
P L L 
T I M I N G 
V C O 
I 
V C O 
\ 
THI 
P A R T O F 
L.O.P.T. 
m 
η 
C V B S IN 
S Y N C . 
S E P A R A T O R 
HOH 
C R Y S T A L 
500 kHz 
P H A S E 
M O D U L A T O R 
Fig. 16.23. Principle of thyristor-controlled 
field-scan 
current 
generator 

346 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
about ground potential: the charge on Cx 
is zero under these 
circumstances. 
If the conduction period of TH1 is varied throughout the field period, 
the charge on Cx varies likewise and so does the scan-coil current. At 
the beginning of each field scan the thyristor is pulsed on relatively late 
in each line scan period so that it has a short duty cycle before being cut 
off at line flyback by the negative pulse at point Y. As field scan 
continues, the thyristor trigger point is progressively advanced so as to 
reduce the charge on C1 linearly; at the end of the field scan it has 
dropped to around 10 V and maximum current flows in the scan coils. 
Now the thyristor gate pulses are suddenly retarded so that Cl charge 
reverts to a high voltage, a large reverse current flows in the scan coils 
and field flyback takes place. As Fig. 16.23 shows, the thyristor trigger 
pulses are generated inside a purpose-designed i.e. which also generates 
line-scan drive pulses. 
T R I A C C O N T R O L OF A . C . E N E R G Y 
The advantage of a bidirectional thyristor (triac) is that it works on 
both half-cycles of an alternating waveform so that all the energy of, for 
example, the mains supply is available to the load if required. Triacs can 
be used, then, as contactless switches for on-off control of inductive and 
resistive loads and, by varying the phase of their triggering pulses, as a 
continuously variable motor-speed or lamp-dimmer control. The 
gate-drive circuit is the same in principle as those given in Figs. 16.20 
and 16.21. 
R E S I S T A N C E - T O - V O L T A G E 
C O N V E R T E R 
The principle of constant-current generators was described in Chapter 
14 and Fig. 14.6. Another of their many possible applications is given in 
Fig. 16.24, where the collector load is a thermistor, a component with a 
resistance proportional to temperature. With a constant current 
flowing in it, the thermistor generates a voltage across it proportional 
to its resistance and hence to temperature, facilitating direct readout of 
temperature by a voltmeter. 
M O T O R - D R I V E 
C I R C U I T S 
A common application of bipolar transistors is in control of small d.c. 
electric motors, usually in closed-loop servo systems. An example is 
given in Fig. 16.25. OM1 is a miniature brush-type motor driving a 
long spiral worm mounted along the rear of a disk-reproducing deck. It 

Further Applications 
347 
+ σ 
ο) T H E R M I S T O R 
Fig. 16.24. Constant-current 
source used in thermometer 
circuit 
drives a tangential pickup arm across the audio disk surface and must 
be capable of moving it at varying speeds in either direction. 
The drive circuit is in the form of a bridge made up of two 
complementary pairs of medium-power silicon transistors, TR3TR4 
and TR5TR6, arranged as emitter followers. Each pair is controlled by 
two further complementary emitter followers, TR1TR2 and TR7TR8. 
The voltages at the bases of TRl and TR8 are driven in opposite 
• 5 V O 
DRIVE 
SIGNAL 
DRIVE 
SIGNAL 
Ο 
Τ I 
Φ ι ι 
Fig. 16.25. Motor-drive 
circuit using a transistor 
bridge 

348 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
directions by the control signals. The polarity of the drive signals 
determines the direction of rotation of the motor whilst their amplitude 
controls the motor speed and hence the lateral speed of movement of 
the audio pickup arm. 
There is no standing current through the output transistor pairs in 
Fig. 16.25 and as a result there is a little lag in operation of the motor, 
not detrimental in this application. Fig. 16.26 shows a more precise 
motor-drive circuit used in the auto-focus section of a camcorder. The 
drive motor is smaller than a thimble and rotates the focus barrel of the 
lens via a slipping clutch. Again the bridge configuration is used, this 
time with each of the complementary pairs TR2/TR3 and TR5/TR6 
having a common collector connection, the emitters being connected 
directly across a 5-V supply derived from a stabiliser i.e. The pnp 
transistor of each pair is driven directly by the auto-focus control signal 
whilst the npn 'bottom legs' TR3 and TR6 are fed from driver 
transistors TRl and TR4 respectively. Battery power is at a premium in 
camcorders and no power is therefore wasted in quiescent current in the 
drive transistors: TR2 and TR5 are biased just into conduction but TR3 
and TR6 are held just below the threshold of conduction whenever the 
motor is stationary. The complementary drive-control voltages are 
derived from focus-feedback signals from a piezo-sensor or a through-
the-lens (TTL) sharpness sensor circuit so that the motor and its drive 
circuit form part of a servo-loop embracing the subject or object at 
which the camera is pointed. 
Fig. 16.26. Drive circuit for a camcorder auto-focus motor: TRl to TR6 control speed 
and direction of the focus lens 

Further Applications 
349 
Other motor-drive transistor circuits involve simple speed-stabiliser 
configurations in which a single transistor controls the armature 
current in a small brush motor with back-e.m.f. control of speed to cope 
with varying mechanical loads. These are often used for capstan drive in 
cassette tape recorders. 
T E L E V I S I O N P I C T U R E 
E N H A N C E M E N T 
Fig. 16.27(a) illustrates one circuit for vertical contour enhancement of 
a televison picture; the associated waveforms are given at (b). The input 
video signal (1) at the left is buffered in npn emitter follower TRl and 
passes through a 100-ns delay line DL1, emerging as waveform (2). 
From TR2, a second emitter follower (pnp), it enters a second 100-ns 
delay line DL2, arriving at TR3 base as waveform (3). TR3 is a third 
emitter follower (npn) and to the doubly delayed signal at its emitter a 
sample of the original input waveform (1) is added via R3. The result, at 
TR4 base, is waveform (4), a combination of waveforms (1) and (3). In 
TR4 (a common-emitter amplifier) waveform (4) is subtracted from 
waveform (2), which arrives at its emitter via R7. TR4 collector 
waveform thus has the form shown at (5), at TR5 base, to waveform (2) 
derived from TR2 emitter via R6. Thus the output from TR5 (the final 
emitter follower) has the waveform shown at (6). It has overshoots and 
negative preshoots, the subjective effect of which is to sharpen or 
crispen the displayed picture. Circuits of this type are much used in 
television and video equipment, particularly in the replay circuits of 
domestic video recorders where they help to compensate for the slow 
rise and fall times due to the restricted bandwidth of the reproduced 
video signal. 
R E C O R D I N G H E A D 
D R I V E 
In a video recorder the spinning video heads are driven, via a rotary 
transformer, with a frequency-modulated luminance writing signal to 
which is added a relatively low-frequency chrominance signal. In Fig. 
16.28 the luminance carrier enters as REC-Y to preset potentiometer 
Rj, from which the correct level of signal is tapped off for passage 
through a filter to the base of amplifier TRl. Here the chrominance 
signal REC-C (applied to the emitter) is superimposed upon the 
luminance signal. The response of TRl is tailored by frequency-
discriminating networks in emitter and collector circuits. The output is 
passed to complementary output pair TR2, TR3, the quiescent current 
being set by R6, R9 and R 1 0
. The output passes via C 10 into the 
recording heads, which are effectively paralleled during recording by 

350 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
(a) 
t (= 100 ns) 
( ? ) INPUT SIGNAL 
@ 
f DELAYED SIGNAL 
@ 
2f DELAYED SIGNAL 
- H f K l 
1
 ι ι 
I I 
I I 
! I 
I I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
©
= 
©
-
© 
i Π 
(CONTOUR COMPENSATIO
N 
\J 
Γ 
SIGNAL) 
®
=
©
+ 0 
ι ι ' 
< 
: 
! 
ι ι 
I 
ι I 
ι I 
I I ι 
i i 
Η 
(b) 
Fig. 16.27. (a) Vertical contour enhancer using two delay lines; (b) circuit waveforms and 
timings 

Further Applications 
351 
Λ3ρΛ009Λ odpm Ό jof nnDjp aaup pu3l{-ÔUjpJ0Da}J 
SZ'9l 
D
\d 
^ DC 
U Li. 
< 
Œ 
Dû -
CL < 
Q < 
rr LU 
> 
X 
y LU ; 
Q < 
LU CD 
CO > 
o < 
_l —I 
(J CL 

352 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
switches TR4 and TR5, both turned on by the + 12-V line applied to the 
bases. The recording current passes through R 15 and R 1 6
, developing a 
proportional voltage across them which enables the recording current 
to be set by monitoring the voltage between test points TP1 and TP2 
with an oscilloscope or millivoltmeter. 
T R A N S I S T O R S AS S W I T C H E S 
Transistors are widely used in electronic equipment as switches, 
examples of which are TR4 and TR5 in Fig. 16.28. Very common are 
sub-miniature devices with built-in resistors for direct connection to, 
for example, a 5-V switching line from a microprocessor control i.e. Fig. 
16.29 gives a typical application using both inverting and direct switch 
transistors which close on high or low inputs respectively. They are 
used for function and route switching through the video recorder, of 
which this diagram shows a small section of the systems-control circuit. 
V I D E O C L A M P 
Analogue television transmissions from satellites have an energy 
dispersal waveform superimposed on the baseband video signal to 
prevent spot frequencies appearing in the f.m. carrier signal. It takes the 
form of a triangular waveform at 25 Hz, half the field frequency. After 
demodulation it is removed to prevent flicker on the picture. The action 
is carried out by a clamping circuit as shown in Fig. 16.30. Diagram (a) 
depicts a peak clamp or d.c. restorer, in which the negative peaks of the 
incoming signal are held at a fixed potential by the action of clamp 
diode D and a source of fixed negative voltage — E. Fig. 16.30(b) 
illustrates a driven clamp in which a pulse, timed to coincide with some 
particular level in the video waveform (e.g. front porch, black level or 
sync tip), restores the charge on the right-hand plate of coupling 
capacitor C to a reference potential once per television line. These 
clamp circuits are useful wherever the d.c. level of a video waveform is 
liable to vary: they prevent changes in black level and brightness in 
reproduced pictures. 
U . H . F . 
M O D U L A T O R 
Video recorders, computers and games for use with home television 
receivers are often provided with r.f. modulators, the output of which 
can be directly connected to the aerial socket of the receiver. Their 
output power is only a few microwatts and the carrier frequency is 
adjustable over a small range centred on u.h.f. channel 36 (591 MHz). A 
circuit diagram of such a modulator is given in Fig. 16.31. 

LOADING VOLTAGE CONTROL 
LOADING 
FRONT LOADING 
ROTARY DIRECTION CONTROL 
S E N S O R LED 
AUDIO 
MUTING 
EE 
REC 
DURING UNLOAD (2) 
DURING UNLOAD (1) 
COUNTER M E M O R Y 
PICTURE CONTROL 
SERIAL CLOCK 
DELAYED REC 
VIDEO 
C A P S T A N χ 8 
C A P S T A N χ 4 
C A P S T A N R E V E R S E 
C A P S T A N ON 
S P / S L P 
REC MUTING 
F F / R E W - P L A Y 
©(§> 
Fig. 16.29. System-switching 
by transistors. 
The circled numbers at left are the output 
pins of the control 
microprocessor 
Further Applications 
353 

Fig. 16.30. 
Video clamping circuits: (a) d.c. restorer; (b) driven clamp 
354 
Principles of Transistor Circuits 
(a) 
(b) 

Fig. 16.31. Low-power 
u.h.f. sound and vision modulator 
for home 
entertainment 
equipment and 
computers 
Further Applications

356 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
TRl is a common-base oscillator, base-biased by R 50 and R 5 1
, the 
collector supply being via feed choke L 5 0
. The resonant circuit is 
formed by stripline L 5 1
, series-resonant with C 51 and VC, a carrier-
frequency preset trimmer. Feedback coupling is by C52 to the emitter to 
form a stable low-power oscillator. The output is taken from the 
adjacent stripline via pins 1, 2 and 3 on the screened box housing the 
oscillator. Pin 2 is effectively grounded and provides a bias-injection 
point (from RV1) for amplitude modulator pin diodes D2 and D3, 
through which video signal flows via R8 from the amplifier i.e. ICI.* 
The modulated u.h.f. carrier is passed via Ct 
7
 to load resistor R9 and to 
the aerial output circuit. Broadcast television transmitters produce a 
vestigial sideband signal but this miniature modulator generates a 
double-sideband signal, not detrimental in this application because the 
i.f. filter of the tele vison receiver rejects the lower sideband. 
The method of f.m. sound modulation is unlike that used in a 
conventional television transmitter. Here the audio signal is frequency-
modulated onto a 6-MHz carrier generated by tuned circuit T 1 C 12 and 
the resulting carrier is simply added to the baseband video signal via 
R7, C n and Ll. It is seen by the modulator merely as a component of 
the video signal for which sidebands are generated, a characteristic of 
an a.m. modulating system. The sideband is spaced 6 MHz from the 
vision carrier and appears to the television receiver as a separate 
carrier: it is processed as such. 
ICI in Fig. 16.31 also contains a simple pattern generator controlled 
by the TSG switch connected to pin 9. An oscillator, based on the 
crystal at pin 11, generates simple line sync pulses and a white bar video 
pulse for injection into the r.f. modulator. This provides a clearly 
identifiable pattern for easy tuning of a television receiver to the output 
channel of the modulator. Supply voltage for the circuit is provided via 
Rj, stabilised by Zener diode Dl and decoupled by C 1 0
. 
C A P A C I T A N C E - D I O D E A . F . C . 
C I R C U I T 
As mentioned in Chapter 1 the capacitance of a reverse-biased junction 
diode varies with the bias voltage. Such a diode can therefore be used 
for automatic frequency control and Fig. 16.32 gives a circuit diagram 
which can be used in an f.m. receiver for this purpose. Not all junction 
diodes are suitable for this application: for some types the damping due 
to the resistive component of the diode impedance may be sufficient to 
reduce the oscillation amplitude to a low value or even to prevent 
* Reference is made to the characteristics of pin diodes in Chapter 1. 

Further Applications 
357 
Fig. 16.32. Circuit illustrating 
the use of a capacitance 
diode to give 
a.fc. 
oscillation altogether. Diodes with very low damping have been 
developed for use in a.f.c. circuits. 
LlC1 
is the oscillator tuned circuit and the junction diode is 
connected across the circuit via the isolating capacitors C2 and C3. The 
diode is reverse-biased from the supply by the potential divider 
RiR2 
and provided that Rx is reasonably high in value, say, more than 40 kQ, 
the damping of the oscillator circuit by this resistor should not seriously 
reduce the oscillation amplitude. The capacitance of the diode is 
effectively in parallel with Cx and alteration in diode bias causes an 
alteration in oscillator frequency. To obtain a.f.c. the diode bias must 
be controlled automatically by the degree of mistuning and this can be 
achieved by returning R2 to the d.c. output of a suitable f.m. detector, 
i.e. to its output before the capacitor which couples the detector output 
to the following a.f. amplifier. 
The a.f.c. voltage required from the detector is one which represents 
by its polarity the direction of any mistuning and by its magnitude the 
extent of the mistuning, the voltage being zero at the correct tuning 
point. The most popular form of f.m. detector is the ratio detector 
described on page 230 but the circuit diagram of Fig. 12.10 must be 
modified to give an output of this form. The difficulty is caused by the 
earthing of one end of the long-time-constant combination RlC3. 
As 
tuning is swept through the correct tuning point the voltage across 
RxC3 
rises to a maximum and this voltage also appears in the detector 
output, masking the wanted a.f.c. voltage. However, the voltage across 

358 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
It was pointed out on page 44 that an f.e.t. can be used as a 
voltage-controlled resistor with an enormous range of variation. The 
resistance is that of the drain-source path and the control voltage is 
applied to the gate. Fig. 16.33 gives the circuit diagram of an a.f. or r.f. 
attenuator based on this principle. The j.u.g.f.e.t. forms with Rx a 
A T T E N U A T O R U S I N G A N F . E . T . 
Fig. 16.33. An f.e.t. 
used as a variable 
resistance in a 
voltage-controlled 
attenuator 
VE 
CONTROL VOLTAGE 
RiC3 
can be eliminated from the detector output by transferring the 
earth connection to the midpoint of the resistor of the long-time-
constant combination as shown in Fig. 16.32, in which the equal 
resistors R3 and R4 replace Rx of Fig. 12.10. This change has no effect 
on the a.f. output of the detector but it turns the detector into a 
balanced circuit, the two diodes acting as equal impedances connected 
in series across C4. The a.f.c. voltage must not be affected by a.f. signals 
in the detector output and these are therefore prevented from reaching 
the diode by the capacitor C3, which forms with R2 a potential divider 
which considerably attenuates all audio frequency signals. 
A.f.c. circuits of this type can be extremely effective, reducing 
mistuning effects by a factor of as much as 10:1. Manual tuning can be 
very difficult with a.f.c. and it is desirable to have some means of 
switching a.f.c. off whilst tuning is being carried out. As soon as the 
wanted signal is tuned in, a.f.c. is switched on to minimise subsequent 
tuning drift. Fig. 16.32 indicates one method of switching a.f.c. off. The 
resistor R5 is approximately equal to the d.c. resistance of the ratio 
detector. Such a resistor is necessary to enable the a.f.c. to be switched 
off and on when the receiver is accurately in tune, without alteration of 
the bias across the capacitance diode. 

Further Applications 
359 
potential divider, the attenuation of which can be controlled (remotely 
if desired) by adjustment of the negative voltage applied to the gate. 
R2Cr 
are decoupling components. Because of the very high input 
resistance of the j.u.g.f.e.t., negligible power is needed to adjust the 
attenuator. The transistor behaves as a near-linear resistor provided 
the voltages applied between drain and source are small compared with 
1 V. Thus the attenuator is suitable only for use with small-amplitude 
signals. 
B I A S / E R A S E OSCILLATOR 
In magnetic tape recorders a medium-power oscillator is required to 
provide bias for the signal current in the recording head and to energise 
the erase head which, in a video recorder, must cover the entire 
12.5-mm tape width with sufficient flux to wipe out completely any 
previous recording. Fig. 16.34 shows an arrangement commonly used 
in domestic video recorders. TRl is a Hartley oscillator supplied with 
collector current via decoupling components Ll and C\ which feed 
tapping point 3 of the transformer Tl. Positive feedback from winding 
3-1 is applied to TRl base via Rx and C3 to maintain oscillation at a 
frequency of about 60 kHz, determined mainly by the tuning capacitor 
C 4 across the secondary winding of the transformer. A sinusoidal 
voltage of 60 V peak-to-peak is generated for application to the 
Fig. 16.34. Bias/erase oscillator used in a home video recorder deck 
E R A S E 
H E A D 
A U D I O 
R E C . 
H E A D 
A U D I O I N P U T 

360 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
ferrite-cored erase head connected between pins 6 and 7 of Tl, while 
some 80 V peak-to-peak appears at pin 5 for application via C5 and 
bias-level preset resistor R2 to the audio recording head. The 12-V 
supply to Li is available only in the recording mode. 

A P P E N D I X A 
The Manufacture of Transistors 
and Integrated Circuits 
This appendix surveys the various methods which have been used to 
manufacture transistors and semiconductor diodes, beginning with the 
'dope-growing' and alloy-junction process used for the first germa-
nium transistors and ending with the planar process now used to 
manufacture silicon transistors and i.c.s. 
P R E P A R A T I O N OF G E R M A N I U M FOR 
T R A N S I S T O R 
M A N U F A C T U R E 
Germanium is obtained as a byproduct of metal refining, e.g. zinc-
refining, in the U.S.A. and can also be obtained from the flue dust of 
certain coals in the U.K. After extraction by chemical methods, the 
germanium is usually marketed in the form of the dioxide G e 0 2 , 
a white powder. 
The first step in the production of germanium for semiconductor 
manufacture is the reduction of the oxide to the element. This is 
achieved by heating the oxide to 650°C in a stream of pure hydrogen. 
The germanium powder so obtained is melted in an inert atmosphere 
and then cast into bars. 
The bars are not pure enough for use in semiconductors: moreover, 
their crystalline form is unlikely to be suitable. Further purification 
is therefore carried out by the process known as zone refining. This 
relies for its success on the fact that, at the melting point of german-
ium, most of the impurities are more soluble in the liquid than in the 
solid form of the element. Thus, if a short length of a germanium bar 
is melted and if the molten portion is caused to move along the bar, 
361 

362 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
P R E P A R A T I O N OF S I L I C O N FOR 
T R A N S I S T O R 
M A N U F A C T U R E 
Silicon forms approximately 25 per cent of the earth's crust but 
it is difficult to extract the element in a form pure enough for use 
in transistors, primarily because silicon melts at a very high tempera-
ture (1,400 C) and it is very reactive when molten, attacking most 
crucible materials. In particular, the removal of the last traces of 
boron is most troublesome. 
Silicon occurs widely as the dioxide (sand) and the first stage in 
the extraction is the reduction of this oxide in an arc between 
carbon electrodes. The low-grade silicon so obtained is purified 
by a number of chemical processes and is then subjected to a 
zone-refining process similar to that used for germanium. To avoid 
contamination from containing vessels, however, the silicon, in the 
form of a bar, is supported vertically by its ends whilst heated 
locally by r.f. induction—a technique known as vertical or floating 
zone refining. Finally crystals of silicon can be obtained by the 
method of pulling or growing. 
G R O W N 
T R A N S I S T O R S 
The first method of manufacturing transistors was the so-called 
dope-growing method described by Shock ley in 1951. In this method 
the molten semiconductor is first treated with sufficient 
n-type 
impurity to give the required collector resistivity (say, 1 to 2 Ω-cm) 
and an η-type ingot of the required crystalline form and resistivity 
say, from right to left, the impurities tend to follow the movement 
and concentrate at the left-hand end of the bar. The localised heating 
is usually carried out by r.f. induction, the germanium bar being 
supported in an inert atmosphere in a graphite boat which is slowly 
moved along a silica tube contained within the loops of the r.f. 
supply. By repeating the zone-refining process a number of times, 
the purity of the bar (except for the left-hand end, of course) can be 
raised to the degree required. 
The single crystals required can be grown by dipping a small seed 
crystal into a bath of molten zone-refined germanium and slowly 
withdrawing, i.e. pulling the seed as the crystal grows and cools. 
Controlled amounts of ρ or η impurities can be added to the molten 
material to give the type of germanium required. 

Appendix 
A 
363 
is obtained by pulling or growing as described above. After a suitable 
length of crystal has been grown, a pellet of p-type impurity is added 
to the molten material and this is of sufficient mass to neutralise 
the η-type impurity and to give the p-type resistivity required in 
the base region (say, 1 to 2 Ω-cm). The ingot is now grown only a 
very short distance (equal to the thickness of base layer required-
say, 0.001 in) and a second pellet, this time of η-type impurity, is 
added to the molten material to give the required resistivity of 
emitter region—say, 0*01 Ω-cm or less. After a suitable length of the 
emitter region has been grown the ingot is withdrawn from the 
molten material. 
The ingot (Fig. A.l) is now cut in directions parallel to the 
direction of growth to produce transistors approximately 0.02 in 
square and 0.2 in long. Several hundred transistors can be obtained 
from one ingot. The emitter and collector ends can be distinguished 
by etching the transistors with a material which affects these ends 
at different rates. Connecting leads can then be soldered to the 
emitter and collector regions but the connection to the thin base 
region is difficult to make because, of course, this region cannot 
be seen. It can, however, be detected by exploring the surface of the 
transistor with a fine wire contact which is included in a circuit 
designed to give a signal when the base region is touched. An electric 
discharge can then be used to secure the wire to the base region. 
The starting point of this method of manufacture of germanium 
transistors is a wafer of crystalline semiconductor, say, η-type, of 
Fig. A.J. A grown 
crystal 
ALLOY J U N C T I O N 
T R A N S I S T O R S 
ORIGINAL 
CRYSTAL 
COLLECTOR 
REGION 
~~ 
EASE _ 
REGION 
EMITTER 
REGION 

364 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
5 Ω-cm resistivity. The wafers are approximately 0.1 in square and 
0.003 in thick. A pellet of a group-Ill element such as indium is 
placed at the centre of each face of the wafer which is then heated 
to a few hundred degrees Centigrade, well above the melting point 
of indium (155 C) but well below that of germanium (940°C). The 
indium melts and continues to dissolve germanium until a saturated 
solution is obtained. The wafer is now allowed to cool slowly and 
the dissolved germanium crystallises out. The recrystallised ger-
manium retains some indium and thus forms a region of p-type 
germanium on either face of the wafer as shown in Fig. A.2. These 
METAL RING TO WHICH 
GERMANIUM CRYSTAL IS SOLDERED 
SMALL INDIUM PELLET 
EMITTER 
CONNECTION 
p - T Y P E 
GERMANIUM 
(DUE TO DIFFUSION OF INDIUM) 
CRYSTAL OF Π - Τ Υ Ρ Ε 
GERMANIUM 
LARGE INDIUM PELLET 
COLLECTOR 
CONNECTION 
p - T Y P E 
GERMANIUM 
(DUE TO ALLOYING OF INDIUM) 
BASE 
CONNECTION 
Fig. A.2. Construct ion of a germanium alloy-junction 
pnp 
transistor 
regions are separated by a region with the η-type conductivity of 
the original material, thus giving a pnp transistor. The final diameters 
of the indium regions are commonly of the order of 0.015 in (emitter) 
and 0.03 in (collector). Connections are soldered to both regions 
and the base connection is often made to a metal ring soldered to the 
wafer and closely surrounding the emitter region. After cleaning the 
assembly is hermetically sealed in a light-proof container. 
A similar technique can be used to manufacture npn germanium 
transistors: a wafer of p-type germanium is used and pellets of a 
group-V element such as arsenic or antimony, carried in a neutral 
(group-IV) element such as lead, are alloyed to it. 
Very large numbers of pnp germanium transistors were manufac-
tured by this method and they can operate up to frequencies of the 
order of 5 to 7 MHz but to obtain reasonably consistent base 
thicknesses close control is required over the thickness of the wafers 
and the time and temperature of the processing. 
Silicon transistors can also be made by this method, the usual 
alloying metal being aluminium but the very different coefficients 
of expansion of aluminium and silicon caused difficulties. 

Appendix 
A 
The principal factor limiting the performance of a transistor at 
high frequencies is the time taken for charge carriers to cross the 
base region and to obtain a good performance this time must be 
reduced to a minimum. The obvious way to improve the high-
frequency performance is to reduce the thickness of the base region 
even though this may limit the maximum permitted collector voltage 
to a few volts. This is the technique employed in the surface-barrier 
transistor pioneered by Philco in 1953. 
S U R F A C E - B A R R I E R 
T R A N S I S T O R 
The starting point of the process is a wafer of η-type germanium 
to which a ring is soldered to form the base connection. Both faces 
of the wafer are then etched electrolytically by jets of solution of 
precise cross-section which are directed against the surfaces, current 
being passed between the solution and the wafer so as to cause the 
germanium to dissolve. Etching is stopped when the required base 
thickness is reached: this can be determined by the transparency of 
the base region to light. The direction of the current is now reversed 
and the metal in the solution (commonly indium) is deposited on the 
faces of the wafer to form emitter and collector regions to which 
connections are made. This process is well suited to automatic 
operation and large numbers of transistors were produced. They were 
not so robust as those produced by other processes but operated at 
frequencies up to 50 MHz. The robustness of the transistors can be 
improved by lightly alloying the layers of indium to the base region by 
heating: the resulting transistors are termed micro-alloy types. 
Another method of reducing transit time in a transistor is to vary 
the impurity concentration in the base region so as to produce an 
electric field which aids the passage of charge carriers across the 
region. To give this effect the impurity concentration must be a 
maximum near the emitter junction and a minimum near the 
collector junction; an exponential distribution or one approaching 
exponential form is desirable. 
The technique of solid-state diffusion may be employed to produce 
such a graded base region. One method is to expose the semiconductor 
material to a vapour of the desired impurity in a furnace. This causes 
impurity atoms to diffuse into the crystal structure to give an im-
purity concentration which falls off as depth of penetration increases. 
If a germanium wafer with such a graded impurity concentration is 
used as the starting point in the manufacture of a micro-alloy 
transistor, a much-reduced transit time can be obtained and the 
transistor has a better high-frequency response than one with a 
365 

366 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
uniform base region. In theory the cut-off frequency of a transistor 
can be improved by up to eight times by grading the impurity 
concentration in the base region but in practice the improvement 
is normally less than this. Graded-base micro-alloy transistors, 
known as micro-alloy diffused transistors (MADTs), operate at fre-
quencies up to 300 MHz. 
Wafers of graded impurity concentration can also be used as the 
starting point in making alloy-junction transistors. The resulting 
transistors are known as drift types and operate at frequencies up 
The technique of solid-state diffusion was mentioned above as a 
means of producing a semiconductor with a graded impurity con-
centration. This technique is also extensively used as a means of 
producing layers of p-type and η-type conductivity of very thin 
but controllable thickness which can be used as the emitter, base 
and sometimes collector regions of a transistor. There are many 
methods of manufacturing transistors using such layers: two will 
now be described. 
In one method, introduced during 1956, the starting point is a wafer 
of p-type germanium which ultimately forms the collector region. To 
this, two pellets are alloyed in close proximity: one pellet is of a 
group-V element such as antimony and the other is of mixed group-Ill 
and group-V elements (e.g. antimony and aluminium). The wafer is 
D R I F T 
T R A N S I S T O R S 
to 100 MHz. 
D I F F U S E D 
T R A N S I S T O R S 
RECAYSTALLISED TVREGION —^jF* 
HEAT SINK 
PELLET 1 
<V* 
DIFFUSED 
TVREGION 
RECRYSTALLISED p-REGIGW 
Ρ 
COLLECTOR 
Fig. A3. Construction 
of PADT pnp germanium 
transistor 
PELLET 2 
'EMITTER 
BASE 
\ 

Appendix 
A 
367 
now heated causing the elements in the pellets to diffuse into the ger-
manium. Only η-type impurities diffuse from the first pellet but both 
η-type and p-type from the second. However, in p-type germanium, 
η-type impurities diffuse more rapidly than the p-type and thus, after 
diffusion, we obtain a structure such as that illustrated in Fig. A.3 : 
the two diffused η-regions merge to form a base layer (to which the 
first pellet gives ohmic contact) whilst the recrystallised p-region 
acts as the emitter region (to which the second pellet gives ohmic 
contact). Finally the diffused η-type layer is etched away except 
around the two pellets which are masked during this operation. 
This leaves the active part of the transistor in the form of a mesa 
projecting from the collector material as shown in the diagram. 
This particular method of manufacture yields types of transistor 
known as post-alloy diffused transistors (PADTs). 
The difficulty of manufacturing alloy-junction silicon transistors 
has already been mentioned. Many silicon transistors are now 
manufactured by other techniques which include solid-state diffusion. 
In one method the starting point is a crystal of η-type silicon with 
a uniform resistivity of, say, 1 Ω-cm. This is cut into slices about 
0.015 in thick each of which finally yields 100 or more transistors. 
The slices are heated to around 1,250°C in a furnace with a source 
of p-type impurity. The impurity volatilises to produce an atmosphere 
which diffuses into the surface of the slice to a small but controllable 
depth to give a p-region'which is later used as the base areas of the 
COLLECTOR 
Fig. A4. Construction 
of a diffused silicon 
transistor 
transistors. The slice is now covered with a mask containing 100 
or more apertures and is again heated, this time in an atmosphere 
of an η-type impurity. This diffuses to form a number of n-regions 
which are used as the emitter areas of the transistors. The slice is 
afterwards cut to separate the individual transistors. A sectional 
view of one transistor is given in Fig. A.4. 
Connections are now made to the three regions of each transistor. 
HEAT SINK 
B A S E
N 
A l 
S T R I P -
A u 
STRIP 
'EMITTER 

368 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
The body of the semiconductor is soldered to a heat sink which 
provides electrical connection to the collector. Contact to the 
emitter region is obtained by depositing a thin gold strip on the 
region by evaporation via a mask and finally lightly alloying it to 
the η-region by heating. The base connection is obtained by similarly 
depositing a thin strip of aluminium on the exposed p-region and 
once again lightly alloying it to provide an ohmic contact. 
Only the base region between the emitter and collector junctions 
is vital to the action of the transistor and surplus base-collector 
junction area causes unnecessary collector capacitance. This capaci-
tance is minimised by etching away the base material except that 
near the gold and aluminium, leaving the active part of the transistor 
standing up from the collector region in the form of a mesa. Such 
transistors operate at frequencies up to 500 MHz. 
E P I T A X I A L D I F F U S E D 
T R A N S I S T O R S 
The performance of silicon and germanium diffused 
transistors 
manufactured by the above processes is partly limited by the 
resistance of that part of the wafer forming the collector region. 
Only the upper crust of the wafer, containing the junctions, is 
effective in providing transistor action and the thickness of the 
collector region should be as thin as possible to minimise its resis-
tance. However, it is difficult to work with a thickness less than 
about 0.003 in, yet such a thickness gives too high a resistance for 
some applications. If most of the semiconductor below the junctions 
could be replaced by low-resistivity material, the performance of the 
transistor could be greatly improved. This was effectively achieved 
around 1962 by using the technique known as epitaxy. 
In a silicon epitaxial transistor the starting point is a wafer of very 
low resistivity, e.g. 0.002Ω-cm. A thin skin of silicon of resistivity 
suitable for transistor action is deposited on the face of the wafer 
in such a way that it takes up the same crystalline structure as the 
wafer. The added layer is termed the epitaxial layer and is produced 
by heating the wafer to about 1,200°C in a furnace whilst it is exposed 
to an atmosphere of, for example, silicon tetrachloride and hydrogen. 
The hydrogen reduces the chloride to silicon which is deposited on 
the wafer. At the temperature used, the silicon atoms are mobile 
and take up their correct orientation relative to the crystalline 
structure of the wafer. A halide of a group-V impurity is also added 
to give the epitaxial layer the required η-type conductivity of about 
1 Ω-cm. A typical thickness of an epitaxial layer is 10 microns. 
The wafer, thus treated, can now be used for the manufacture of 

Appendix 
A 
369 
diffused transistors by the method described above, the diffusion 
occurring within the epitaxial layer. The characteristics of the 
transistors so produced are much better than those of a transistor 
without the epitaxial layer because of the much-reduced collector 
series resistance. 
P L A N A R 
T R A N S I S T O R S 
When a silicon wafer is heated to about 1,200"C in an atmosphere 
of water vapour or oxygen a skin of silicon dioxide S1O2 forms on 
the surface. This skin is a most effective seal against the ingress 
of moisture at room temperatures and has made possible the method 
of manufacture of planar transistors which is described below. 
A crystal of η-type silicon, about 1 in in diameter, is cut into 
slices about 0.008 in thick. The slices are lapped and etched to 
approximately 0.003 in thickness and, if required, an epitaxial layer 
can be formed on one surface. The slices are now heated in an 
oxidising atmosphere to acquire a protective coating of silicon 
dioxide. At this stage each slice has a sectional view similar to 
that shown in Fig. A.5(a). Each slice yields ultimately up to 1,000 
transistors and the next stage is to mark off the individual transistors. 
This is achieved by a photo-lithographic process: each slice is 
coated in a dark room with a photo-sensitive material (known as 
photo-resist) and is then exposed to ultra-violet light via a mask 
containing an array of apertures corresponding to the base areas 
of the 1,000 transistors. The slice is now developed to remove the 
photo-resist from these regions thus exposing the silicon dioxide 
coating. Next the slice is treated with an etch which removes the 
silicon dioxide from the exposed regions. The remainder of the 
photo-resist is now dissolved: the cross-section of the slice now 
appears as in Fig. A.5(b) which shows a gap in the layer of silicon 
dioxide defining the base area for a single transistor. 
The slice is now exposed at a high temperature to a boron-rich 
atmosphere. The silicon dioxide coating protects the slice against 
diffusion of boron except at the exposed areas and here boron 
diffuses isotropically, i.e. horizontally under the protective coating 
as well as vertically into the crystal, thus forming a p-type base 
region. Other more precise ways of forming such a region have been 
developed, for example by ion implantation. This involves a sharply 
defined bombardment of the substrate by a beam from an ion gun 
which enables the active base area to be closely controlled in area and 
shape, a process which can be compared with precision etching. The 
slice is now returned to the oxidising atmosphere and a coating of 

370 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
(b) 
- BASE AREA -
1/·—St02
 LAYER 
( C ) 
EMITTER 
AREA 
Ρ 
Τ) 
(e) 
111! 
P 
L - s - J 
Ρ 
η 
( f ) 
BASE 
EMITTER 
η 
ι;;, " Η ' } 
(ς) 
η 
ρ 
Ρ 
η 
Α/0. Α.5. Stages in the manufacture of planar 
transistors 

Appendix 
Λ 
21 \ 
silicon dioxide is formed over the base areas (and the rest of the slice) to 
give a cross-section similar to that shown in Fig. A.5(c). 
The emitter areas are now defined by a similar process of masking, 
photo-lithography, exposure to ultra-violet light, etching, etc., and 
the silicon dioxide is removed from the emitter areas to give a cross-
section such as that shown in Fig. A.5(d). The slice is now heated 
whilst exposed to an atmosphere rich in phosphorus. This forms an 
η-type emitter region by diffusion and the exposed area is again 
sealed by heating the slice in an oxidising atmosphere to form a layer 
of silicon dioxide. See Fig. A.5(e). 
Holes are now made in the silicon dioxide coating as shown in 
Fig. A.5(f) to permit ohmic contacts to be made to the base and 
emitter areas, the position of the holes being again determined by 
a mask. Contacts are then made to the transistors by a process of 
evaporation: the slice is placed in a vacuum chamber in which 
aluminium is evaporated, e.g. from a hot filament. This results in 
a deposition of a thin coating of aluminium over the entire face 
of the slice. Finally the aluminium is removed from the areas in 
which it is not required by a masking and selective etching opera-
tion. The slice is now divided up into individual transistors and 
connections are made to the base and emitter regions of each 
transistor as shown in Fig. A.5(g). The base area of each transistor 
is sometimes of approximately annular shape surrounding a circular 
emitter area but in power transistors both base and emitter areas 
may be in the form of parallel strips. 
The process described above produces planar transistors in large 
numbers and is well suited to mass production. Its introduction during 
the early 1960s revolutionised silicon transistor manufacture. The 
transistors 
are particularly 
robust 
and 
the 
protection 
of 
the 
silicon dioxide coating is such that even without sealing in cans the 
transistors will operate well under boiling water! Leakage currents are 
very low and the transistors can be designed to work at frequencies 
well over 1 GHz. In 1963 the process also made possible for the first 
time mass production of f.e.t.s although the principle of this type of 
transistor had been described by Shockley 11 years earlier. 
I N T E G R A T E D ( M O N O L I T H I C ) 
C I R C U I T S 
The method of manufacture of planar transistors lends itself well 
to the production of integrated circuits. These are circuits designed 
to carry out a particular function; or group of functions and may 
embody several transistors (bipolar or field-effect), diodes, resistors 
and all the necessary interconnections. All are produced on a single 

372 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
chip of silicon measuring perhaps less than V^in square by the 
photo-lithographic, masking, diffusion and evaporation processes 
described above. Resistors are areas of p-type or η-type silicon, the 
dimensions and impurity concentration being chosen to give the 
required value of resistance. Small capacitors, of the order of a few pF, 
can consist of reverse-biased pn junctions as suggested in Chapter 1. It 
is inconvenient, however, to make large capacitances and integrated 
circuits are usually designed with direct couplings, often using emitter 
followers, to avoid the need for such capacitances. This is illustrated 
in the examples of monolithic circuits described in earlier chapters of 
this book. 
Most i.c.s are embodied in a rectangular container known as a 
dual-in-line package with contacts spaced at 0.1 in intervals down the 
two longer sides, this spacing agreeing with that of the copper tracks 
on the printed wiring boards to which the i.c.s are soldered. 
Attempts were made to produce i.c.s in the 1950s but it was not 
until the planar process was developed in 1960 that they became 
practical. Early i.c.s were digital circuits (RTL, TIL, ECL etc.) 
composed largely of bipolar transistors and resistors. The number of 
components per chip was less than 100, a density known as small-scale 
integration (SSI). 
The m.o.s. transistors introduced in 1966 required fewer diffusions 
in manufacture and occupied less area on the chip but were slower in 
operation than bipolar transistors. Using the m.o.s. technique 
enabled the component density to be increased to a few hundred per 
chip (medium-scale integration, MSI). 
The computer industry demanded still greater component density 
and by 1969 an i.e. containing more than 10,000 m.o.s. transistors was 
available, this development being known as large-scale integration 
(LSI). By 1975 component densities were approaching 100,000 per 
chip. 
Since 1980 further miniaturisation has made possible component 
densities of half a million components per chip (very-large-scale 
integration, VLSI). I.C.s now require more input and output leads 
than the 32 per side which can be accommodated on a reasonably 
sized dual-in-line package. Alternative methods of packaging are 
being introduced such as the chip carrier which has contacts on all four 
sides and smaller pin spacing. 
There have been significant developments in i.c.s for linear 
equipment. The first linear i.c.s were operational amplifiers and 
towards the end of 1960 i.c.s were developed for use in radio and 
television receivers. There is little limit to the complexity of i.c.s which 
can therefore be developed to perform nearly all the functions 
required in receivers, high-fidelity equipments and video cassette 

Appendix 
A 
373 
recorders to improve their performance, their reliability and ease of 
operation. 
Integrated circuits are now extensively used in linear and pulse 
equipment and their use is introducing a new design philosophy into 
electronics. Designers using monolithic devices are little concerned 
with components such as resistors, diodes and transistors: their 
main interest is in the function of the integrated circuits and their 
task is to choose devices with the functions necessary to carry out 
the purpose of the equipment and to combine them, ensuring that 
the impedances, signal levels, gains, bandwidths, etc., are correctly 
matched. 

A P P E N D I X Β 
Transistor Parameters 
I N T R O D U C T I O N 
There are three main systems of expressing the properties of a four-
terminal network. In each the network is regarded as having an 
lo 
T 
I 
\ 
jo 
- tig. 
B.l. 
input voltage ι;,·, an input current 
an output voltage v0 and output 
current ic as illustrated in Fig. B.l. 
Z 
P A R A M E T E R S 
In the first system the input and output voltages are expressed in 
terms of the input and output currents thus : 
ι;,· = 
Ziii + Zrio 
(B.l) 
v0 
~ 
Zfii 
+ z0io 
(B.2) 
The factors zh zr, etc., have the nature of impedances because, when 
multiplied by currents, they give voltages. The impedances can, in 
fact, be represented in the equivalent circuit for the transistor or shown 
in Fig. B.2. z, represents the input impedance of the transistor and 
z0 the output impedance. zf can be called the forward impedance 
and zr the reverse impedance. 
374 

Appendix 
Β 
375 
Fig. 
B.2 
the difficulty of measuring them, y and h parameters are generally 
preferred. 
Y P A R A M E T E R S 
In this second system the input and output currents are expressed 
in terms of the input and output voltages thus: 
h = yiVi + yrv0 
(B.5) 
io = y/Vi + yoVo 
(B.6) 
The factors vt, >v, etc., have the nature of admittances because 
when multiplied by voltages, they give currents. The admittances 
can be represented in the equivalent circuit for the transistor shown 
in Fig. B.3. 
J 
Fig. B3. 
y Λ 
Yf
v
i 
At low frequencies the impedances can usually be replaced by 
resistances and the two fundamental equations become 
Vi 
= Γ,·ι,· + ΓΓιβ 
(B.3) 
v0 = rfii + r0i0 
(B.4) 
in which the factors are known as r parameters, 
ζ and r parameters are not greatly favoured largely because of 

376 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
The y parameters are more easily measured than the ζ parameters. 
If the output voltage v0 is made zero (to alternating signals) by 
connecting a low-reactance capacitor across the output terminals, 
we then have, putting v0 = 0 in Eqn B.5 
ii 
= 
yiVi 
giving 
ii 
y* = -
Vi 
i.e. >>, is the ratio of the input current to the input voltage. 
y parameters are used in radio-frequency applications of tran-
sistors. 
H Y B R I D 
P A R A M E T E R S 
These parameters combine some of the properties of the ζ and y 
parameters. In this system the input voltage and output current 
are both expressed in terms of input current and output voltage. 
The fundamental equations are as follows : 
vi 
= 
hiU + hrVo 
(B.7) 
ίο = 
hfii 
+ hoV0 
(B.8) 
By inspection of these equations we can see that hx has the 
dimensions of an impedance and Κ has the dimensions of an 
Fig. B.4. 
admittance. Κ and hf are, however, both pure numbers. For this 
reason these parameters are known as hybrid. The parameters can 
be represented in an equivalent circuit for the transistor such as that 
shown in Fig. B.4. 

Appendix 
Β 
377 
The h parameters are quite simple to measure. For if the output 
terminals are short circuited we have v0 = 0 and from Eqn B.7 
we have 
*.· = - 
(B.9) 
whilst from Eqn B.8 we have 
h f = - 
(B.10) 
If the input terminals are open-circuited ι,· = 0 and from Eqn B.7 
we have 
K = - 
(B.il) 
whilst from Eqn B.8 we have 
ho = - 
(B.12) 
These parameters give useful information on the transistor per-
formance. For example from Eqn B.9 h t is equal to the transistor 
input impedance for short-circuited output. From Eqn B.12 the 
reciprocal of h Q is equal to the output impedance for open-circuited 
input. From Eqn B.10 h f gives the current gain of the transistor. 
From Eqn B.ll Κ is equal to the ratio of the input voltage to the 
output voltage: this is known as the voltage feedback 
ratio of the 
transistor. These parameters are often quoted in transistor manu-
facturers
1
 data sheets. 
It is easily possible to convert from one set of parameters to 
another. For example if v„ is put equal to 0 in Eqns B.5 and B.7 
we can easily show that 
The parameters for a particular type of circuit configuration are 
generally distinguished by placing a suffix b for common-base, e for 
common-emitter and c for common-collector connection although 
the last-mentioned is not greatly used. For example h ib is the input 
resistance (for short-circuited output) of a common-base circuit and 
hfe is the current gain of a common-emitter circuit. 

378 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
.·. 
h fb 
r*> + rt 
Normally, of course, rb is very small compared with α/\ and /γ. We 
can therefore write 
h fb = α 
(Β. 14) 
and a typical value for h fb is 0-98. 
The output resistance for open-circuited input terminals is given 
by Eqn 3.14. Thus we have 
ΙΌ = 
rb + i\ 
This is, by definition, equal to the reciprocal of h o b
. Thus 
h ob = — — 
(B.15) 
η + >\ 
As rh is very small compared with i\ this may be simplified to 
hob 
= 
— 
A typical value for rt is 1 ΜΩ and thus h ob is equal to 1 0 "
6
 mho 
or 1 μηιηο. 
Finally the ratio of input voltage to output voltage for open-
circuited input terminals is given by 
R E L A T I O N S H I P B E T W E E N H Y B R I D P A R A M E T E R S A N D T H E 
T - S E C T I O N E Q U I V A L E N T 
C I R C U I T 
From Eqn 3.7, we know that the input resistance of a common-base 
transistor circuit, for short-circuited output terminals, is given by 
r, = re + rb/fi 
This, by definition, is the parameter h i b. 
Λ hib = re + rb/fi 
(B.13) 
and, as we have seen, a typical value for this quantity is 31 Ω. 
Also from Eqn 3.2 we know that the current gain for short-
circuited output terminals is given by 
L _ rh + <xrt 
ie 
I'b +1\ 
This, by definition, is h J
b
. 

Appendix 
Β 
379 
This result can be obtained by inspection from Fig. 2.10 on page 33. 
Normally rb may be neglected in comparison with r. and this 
result can thus be simplified to 
h 
-
 
Vb 
nrb 
— — 
Typical values of rh and rK are 300 Ω and 1 ΜΩ, giving hrh as 3 χ 10"
 4
. 

A P P E N D I X C 
The Stability of a Transistor 
Tuned Amplifier 
Fig. C.l represents a transistor with input and output tuned circuits 
damped by parallel-connected resistances. As explained on page 
178 feedback occurs via the internal collector-base capacitance cre 
and this can cause oscillation at a frequency below the resonance 
value for the tuned circuits. Oscillation is most likely when the 
Fig. C.l. Essential features of a transistor 
tuned 
amplifier 
phase shift introduced by the tuned circuits totals 90~ : if the circuits 
are similar and resonant at the same frequency oscillation occurs at 
the frequency for which each circuit gives 45° phase shift. From this 
information it is possible to arrive at a simple expression for the 
stability of the amplifier. 
380 

Appendix 
C 
381 
Fig. C.l may be redrawn as in Fig. C.2 in which Zs is the imped-
ance of cre. An alternating base input voltage vb gives rise to a collector 
current of gmvb. This current flows through the transistor load which 
BASE 
9m *6 
COLLECTOR a 
EMITTER 
EMITTER 
Fig. C.2. Equivalent circuit for Fig. C.J 
is composed of Zt in parallel with the series combination of 
Zf 
and Zb. Thus the voltage generated across Zt is given by 
Z t( Z , + Z 6) 
y»,Vb • 
-—-—— 
z. + Zj- + Zb 
Zf and Zb constitute a potential divider across Zt and the voltage 
appearing across Zb is equal to 
g,nvb · 
Now cre is normally a very small capacitance and its reactance is 
large compared with Zt and Zb. Thus the voltage across Zb is given 
approximately by 
z:zb 
g,,,vb · —— 
z
/ 
if this is equal to vb, oscillation can occur. The condition for oscilla-
tion is thus 
= 1 
(C.l) 
Zj 

382 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
To give 45 phase shift between the current in Z„ and the voltage 
across it, X, must equal R, and we have 
_ ji<L _ j(l-j)Rt 
Similarly 
-, 
J(l-J>K/> 
z„ = 
—— 
Z / = l / j a > ir t
, . Substituting in Eqn C.l we have 
jOKYe0,„j(l - j ) f l t j(l 
- j ) / ? / , 
4 
which on simplification gives 
œcreg,nRbR, 
= 2 
The condition for stability is thus 
Ù)Cregm
RbRi 
< 
2 
= 1 
Now Z, is composed of R , in parallel with X, the net reactance of 
Lt and C\. We can thus say 

A P P E N D I X 
D 
Semiconductor Letter Symbols 
Bipolar 
cc b
, cc e
, c eb Inter-terminal capacitance (collector-to-base, collector-
to-emitter, emitter-to-base). 
c
ibo>
 
c
i e o Open-circuit input capacitance (common-base, common-
emitter). 
c
ibs>
 
c
i e o Short-circuit input capacitance (common-base, common-
emitter). 
co b o
, co e
o Open-circuit output capacitance (common-base, common-
emitter). 
co b s
, co e
s Short-circuit output capacitance (common-base, common-
emitter). 
c
r bS'
 
c
r e s Short-circuit reverse transfer capacitance (common-base, 
common-emitter). 
ct c, cte Depletion-layer capacitance (collector, emitter). 
/hfb> ^ f e Small-signal short-circuit forward current transfer ratio cut-off 
frequency (common-base, common-emitter). 
fmax
 
Maximum frequency of oscillation. 
fT Transition frequency or frequency at which small-signal forward 
current transfer ratio (common-emitter) extrapolates to unity. 
j \ Frequency of unity current transfer ratio. 
#PB> 9?E Large-signal insertion power gain (common-base, common-
emitter). 
#P
b> GPe Small-signal insertion power gain (common-base, common-
emitter). 
# T B > # T F Large-signal transducer power gain (common-base, common-
emitter) 
#{b, gxc Small-signal transducer power gain (common-base, common-
emitter). 
383 

384 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
ftFB
, hFE 
Static forward current transfer ratio (common-base, common-
emitter). 
frft» hfe Small-signal short-circuit forward current transfer ratio (com-
mon-base, common-emitter). 
/ii b,ftie Small-signal short-circuit input impedance 
(common-base, 
common-emitter). 
^ i e ( i m a g )
or
 Im(/ii e) Imaginary part of the small-signal short-circuit input 
impedance (common-emitter). 
^ie(reai)
 
o
r
 
^
e
( ^ i e ) ^
e a
l P
a rt
 
° f
 
t
n
e
 small-signal short-circuit input 
impedance (common-emitter). 
Kb* Ke Small-signal open-circuit output admittance (common-base, 
common-emitter). 
^oeOmag)
 
o
r
 
^
m
(Ke) 
Imaginary part of the small-signal open-circuit 
output admittance (common-emitter). 
^oe(reai)
 or
 R e ^ o e ) R
e a
l P
a rt
 °f
 t
n
e
 small-signal open-circuit output 
admittance (common-emitter). 
ftrb, hrc 
Small-signal open-circuit reverse voltage transfer ratio (com-
mon-base, common-emitter). 
Je* J O 
Current, d.c. (base-terminal, collector-terminal, emitter-
terminal). 
7B, 7C, 7E Current, r.m.s. value of alternating component (base-
terminal, collector-terminal, emitter-terminal). 
*'B» *c» *E Current, instantaneous total value (base-terminal, collector-
terminal, emitter-terminal). 
/ B E
V Base cut-off current, d.c. 
/ C B
O Collector cut-off current, d.c, emitter open. 
7E 1 E
2(0ff) Emitter cut-off current. 
7 E B
O Emitter cut-off current, d.c, collector open. 
/E c ( o f s
) Emitter-collector offset current. 
7 E C
S Emitter cut-off current, d.c, base-short-circuited to collector. 
P,B, P IE Large-signal input power (common-base, common-emitter). 
ΛΙ>» ΛΒ Small-signal input power (common-base, common-emitter). 
P O B
, P OE Large-signal output power (common-base, common-emit-
ter). 
^ob» 
Small-signal output power (common-base, common-emitter). 
P T Total non-reactive power input to all terminals. 
Pt ot m a
x Maximum total dissipation. 
rb'Cc Collector-base time constant. 
r
ce(Sat) Saturation resistance, collector-to-emitter. 
Re(yi c) 
Re(>>oe) 
r
e i e 2 ( o n ) Small-signal emitter-emitter on-state resistance. 
RQ Thermal resistance. 
r a m
b Ambient temperature. 

Appendix D 
385 
Tj Junction temperature. 
td Delay time. 
t( Fall time. 
io ff Turn-off time. 
ion Turn-on time. 
ip Pulse time. 
tT Rise time. 
ts Storage time. 
iw Pulse average time. 
KB B
, Kc c
, KEE Supply voltage, d.c. (base, collector, emitter). 
v
bc>
 
v
be>
 
v
cb>
 
v
ce>
 
v
eb, 
^ec Voltage, d.c. or average (base-to-
collector, base-to-emitter, collector-to-base, collector-to-emitter, emit-
ter-to-base, emitter-to-collector). 
^bc»
 
y
be»
 
y
cb» ^ce»
 
v
eb>
 
v
cc Voltage, instantaneous value of alternating 
component (base-to-collector, base-to-emitter, collector-to-base, col-
lector-to-emitter, emitter-to-base, emitter-to-collector). 
^(br)cbo (formerly BVC B O
) Breakdown voltage, collector-to-base, 
emitter open. 
VRT
 Reach-through (punch-through) voltage. 
yfb> ^fe Small-signal short-circuit forward-transfer admittance (com-
mon-base, common-emitter). 
yibi 
yiç Small-signal short-circuit input admittance (common-base, 
common-emitter). 
yie(imag)
or
 Im(yi e) Imaginary part of the small-signal short-circuit input 
admittance (common-emitter). 
^ieireai)
 
o
r
 R
e
(yie) R
e a
l P
a rt
 °f
 t
n
e
 small-signal short-circuit input 
admittance (common-emitter). 
y0bi 
^oe Small-signal short-circuit output admittance (common-base, 
common-emitter). 
^oeomag)
 or
 Im(yo e
) Imaginary part of the small-signal short-circuit 
output admittance (common-emitter). 
}Weai)
 
o
r
 ^ ( ^ o e ) R
e a
l P
a rt
 °f
 t
n
e
 small-signal short-circuit output 
admittance (common-emitter). 
y λ* yTe Small-signal short-circuit reverse transfer admittance (com-
mon-base, common-emitter). 
Unijunction 
η Intrinsic stand-off ratio. 
/ B 2 ( m o d
) Interbase modulated current. 
7E B 2
o Emitter reverse current. 
Ip Peak-point current. 
Iy 
Valley-point current. 
rBB Interbase resistance. 

386 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Tj Junction temperature. 
ip Pulse time. 
tw Pulse average time. 
Vb2b1 
Interbase voltage. 
^ E B , ( s a t ) Emitter saturation voltage. 
VOBI
 
Base-1 peak voltage. 
VP Peak-point voltage. 
Kv Valley-point voltage. 
Field Effect 
frfs, bis, bos, bTS
 Common-source small-signal (forward transfer, input, 
output, reverse transfer) susceptance. 
cds Drain-source capacitance. 
cdu Drain-substrate capacitance. 
ci ss Short-circuit input capacitance, common-source. 
co s
s Short-circuit output capacitance, common-source. 
csss
 
Short-circuit reverse transfer capacitance, common-source. 
F or F Noise figure, average or spot. 
0fS> 0iS> 0os> 9TS
 Signal (forward transfer, input, output, reverse transfer) 
conductance. 
gm 
Transconductance. 
#pg
, gps Small-signal insertion power gain (common-gate, common-
source). 
#t g, #ts Small-signal transducer power gain (common-gate, common-
source). 
7D(off) Drain cut-off current. 
7D(on) On-state drain current. 
JD S
S Zero-gate-voltage drain current. 
IG Gate current, d.c. 
7GF 
Forward gate current. 
7GR 
Reverse gate current. 
7GSS Reverse gate current, drain short-circuited to source. 
7GSSF Forward gate current, drain short-circuited to source. 
7GSSR Reverse gate current, drain short-circuited to source. 
7n Noise current, equivalent input. 
Im(vr s), Im(yi s), Im(>;os), 
lm(yrs). 
7S Source current, d.c. 
7S(off) Source cut-off current. 
7SDS Zero-gate-voltage source current. 
r
dS
( o n ) Small-signal drain-source on-state resistance. 
r
D S ( o n ) Static drain-source on-state resistance. 
id ( o n
) Turn-on delay time. 
if Fall time. 

Appendix 
D 
387 
io ff Turn-off time. 
ton 
Turn-on time. 
ip Pulse time. 
tT Rise time. 
£w Pulse average time. 
^(BR)GSS Gate-source breakdown voltage. 
^(BR)GSSF Forward gate-source breakdown voltage. 
^(BR)GSSR Reverse gate-source breakdown voltage. 
^ D D *
 
v
ggi 
^ss Supply voltage, d.c. (drain, gate, source). 
VDG
 
Drain-gate voltage. 
VDS
 
Drain-source voltage. 
^DS(on) Drain-source on-state voltage. 
VDV
 
Drain-substrate voltage. 
VGS
 
Gate-source voltage. 
VGSF Forward gate-source voltage. 
KG S
R Reverse gate-source voltage. 
^GS(off) Gate-source cut-off voltage. 
KG S ( t h
) gate-source threshold voltage. 
VGV
 
Gate-substrate voltage. 
Vn Noise voltage equivalent input. 
Vsv 
Source-substrate voltage. 
>fs Common-source small-signal short-circuit forward transfer admit-
tance. 
yis Common-source small-signal short-circuit input admittance. 
yos 
Common-source small-signal short-circuit admittance. 
Diodes 
Diss Dissipation, watts. 
cT Barrier-layer capacitance. 
7F Forward current. 
7F ( A V
) Average forward current. 
J F R
M Repetitive peak forward current. 
7FM Peak forward current. 
7F S
M Surge (non-repetitive) forward current. 
IG 
Gate current. 
/ GT 
Gate trigger current. 
I0 Continuous average forward current (in half-wave rectification). 
IR Reverse current. 
I7 Max. current in breakdown region (Zener diodes). 
TK Temperature coefficient of Zener voltage. 
UF Forward voltage. 
UR Blocking (inverse) voltage. 
URM
 
Peak blocking voltage. 

388 
Principles of Transistor 
Circuits 
Uz 
Breakdown voltage (Zener diodes). 
VF Forward voltage. 
VlRM
 Input repetitive peak voltage. 
Vz 
Breakdown voltage (Zener diodes). 
N.B. U and V are generally interchangeable. 

Index 
Acceptor impurities, 7 
Additive mixer, 234 
A.F.C, 356 
A.G.C, 226 
forward control, 197 
reverse control, 195 
Alloy-junction transistor, 363 
A.M. detector, 220 
A.M. - F.M. radio receiver, 245 
Amplitude modulator, 219 
A N D gate, 288 
Anode-gate thyristor, 51 
ASCII code, 313 
Astable blocking oscillator, 266 
Astable circuit, 248 
Astable multivibrator, 261 
Asymmetrical class-B amplifier, 142 
Atomic number, 3, 4, 5 
Auto focus, 348 
Avalanche effect, 16 
Backward diode, 19 
Base: 
bipolar transistor, 24 
f.e.t., 41 
Baseband, 176 
Bias/erase oscillator (audio), 359 
Binary-coded decimal, 287 
Binary counter, 306 
Binary divider, 306 
Binary numbering scale, 286 
Bipolar transistor: 
amplifier types, 28 
d.c. stabilisation, 91 
Bistable circuit, 248, 298, 303, 311 
JK, 300, 312 
master and slave, 304 
RS, 298 
Bistable multivibrator, 249, 252 
Blocking oscillator: 
astable, 266 
monostable, 271 
sawtooth generator, 275 
Bridge output stage, 147, 347, 348 
Byte, 313 
Capacitance diode, 17, 356 
Capacitance tapping, 192 
Capacitor, speed-up, 250 
Cascode, 183 
Cathode-gate thyristor, 51 
C D player, 21, 338 
Ceramic filter, 190 
Characteristics: 
collector current - base current, 31 
collector current - base voltage, 32 
collector current - collector voltage, 
30 
drain current - drain voltage, 39 
thyristor, 48, 50 
Chip carrier, 372 
Chopper amplifier, 157 
389 

390 
Index 
Class-Α operation, 131 
Class-B operation, 134, 140, 143 
Class-C operation, 176 
Clear input, 303 
Clock pulses, 299, 301 
CMOS, 298 
Colpitis oscillator, 203 
Common-mode rejection, 160 
Comparator, (operational amplifier), 
161 
Comparator (phase), 231 
Complementary amplifier, 125, 143, 
168 
Complementary multivibrator, 252 
Compound semiconductors, 9 
Constant-current generator, 278 
Controlled semiconductor rectifier, 47 
COSMOS, 298 
Counter circuit, 306, 308 
Covalent bonds, 5 
Critical coupling, 190 
Crossover distortion, 139 
Crowbar thyristor, 344 
Current amplification factor, 29 
Current amplifier: 
definition, 109 
single-stage, 111 
two-stage, 119 
Current-dumping amplifier, 147 
Current gain: 
common-emitter amplifier, 66 
common-gate amplifier, 63 
emitter follower, 78 
Current-to-voltage converter, 117 
Crystal-controlled oscillator, 205 
Dark current, 336 
Darlington circuit, 127, 153 
D.C. converter, 334 
Decoupling, 197 
Delay generator, 248 
Depletion area, 11 
Depletion-mode operation, 39, 105 
Detector: 
a.m., 222 
f.m., 230 
phase, 232 
phase-locked loop, 233 
ratio, 230 
series diode, 222 
shunt diode, 227 
synchronous, 228 
Diac, 47, 344 
Dielectric resonator oscillator, 206 
Differential amplifier, 156 
Diffused transistors, 366 
Digital representation of information, 
313 
Digital transmission of analogue 
signals, 318 
Diode: 
backward, 19 
double-base, 339 
gate, 252 
Gunn effect, 20 
hot-carrier, 15 
hot-electron, 15 
impatt, 217 
light-emitting, 21 
modulator, 284 
photo, 335 
pin, 20 
rectifier, 15 
Schottky, 15 
small-signal, 14 
thyristor, 47 
tunnel, 215 
varactor, 17 
voltage-reference, 18 
Zener, 18 
Discharger circuit, 273 
Distributed AND, 295 
Distributed OR, 296 
Divider: 
binary, 306 
capacitance, 192 
frequency, 248, 264 
DMOS, 43 
Donor impurities, 6 
Doping, 9 
Down counter, 308 
Double-base diode, 339 
DRAM, 315 
Drift transistors, 366 
Driver (for Class Β stage), 138 
Dual-gate m.o.s .f.e.t., 44 
mixer, 237 
Dual-in-line package, 372 
Duality, 272 
Dynamic limiter, 231 
EEPROM, 316 
EPROM, 316 

Index 
391 
Efficiency : 
Class A, 132 
Class B, 136 
Class C, 177 
Efficiency diode, 281 
Emitter-coupled multivibrator, 264 
Emitter follower, 77, 125, 168 
Enhancement-mode operation, 41, 107 
Epitaxy, 368 
Equivalence element, 293 
Equivalent circuit: 
bipolar transistor, 32, 178 
f.e.t., 44 
Exclusive-OR gate, 292 
Extrinsic semiconductor, 9 
E-W correction, 284 
Fan in, 294 
Fan out, 294 
Feedback counter, 308 
F.E.T.: 
d.c. stabilisation, 104 
insulated-gate, 40 
junction-gate, 38 
short-channel, 42 
Floating-gate transistor, 316 
F.M. detector, 230 
Fowler-Nordheim tunnelling, 317 
Free-running circuit, 248, 263 
Frequency divider, 248, 264 
Frequency modulator, 220 
Λ . 37 
I.F. amplifier: 
465-KHz, 186 
10.7-MHz, 189 
television, 192 
Impatt diode, 217 
Independent reset input, 302 
Independent set input, 302 
Inductance compensation, 171 
Inhibiting input, 292 
Input resistance: 
common-base amplifier, 54 
common-emitter amplifier, 66 
common-gate amplifier, 63 
emitter follower, 78 
Insertion loss, 180 
Insulated gate bipolar transistor, 45 
Integrated circuit: 
a.f. amplifier, 148 
i.f. amplifier, 198 
logic gates, 290 
manufacture, 371 
operational amplifier, 158 
pulse amplifier, 173 
Intrinsic semiconductor, 9 
Inversion layer, 41 
Inverter: 
d.c. to a.c. converter, 341 
logic, 291 
Inverting input (operational amplifier), 
160 
Ion implantation, 369 
JK bistable, 300 
GaAs, 10, 20 
GaAs f.e.t., 45 
Gate, diode, 252 
Grown transistors, 362 
Gunn-effect diode, 20 
Hartley oscillator, 202 
Heat sink, 150 
HEMT, 45 
Holding current, 47 
Hole, 7 
Hole storage, 260 
Hot-carrier diode, 15 
Hot-electron diode, 15 
h parameters, 376 
Hybrid parameters, 376 
Laser diode, 21, 338 
Latching current, 50 
Leakage current, 90 
Light-emitting diode, 21 
Line output stage, 278 
LNB, 239 
Load line, 112 
Logic gates, 287 
Logic levels, 285 
Logic inverter, 291 
Long-tailed pair, 156 
LOPT, 280 
Low-noise amplifier, 128 
LSI, 372 
MADT, 365 

392 
Index 
Majority carriers, 9 
Master bistable, 304 
Memory cell, 314 
Mesa transistors, 367 
Micro-alloy transistors, 365 
Micropatch, 241 
Miller-integrator circuit, 276 
Minority carriers, 9 
Mixer, 233 
additive, 234 
dual-gate f.e.t., 237 
multiplicative, 234 
self-oscillating, 235 
Modulator, UHF, 352 
Monostable blocking oscillator, 271 
Monostable circuit, 248 
Monostable multivibrator, 254 
MOSFET, power, 331 
Motor-drive circuits, 346 
MSI, 372 
Multiplicative mixer, 234 
Multivibrator: 
astable, collector-coupled, 261 
astable, emitter-coupled, 265 
bistable, collector-coupled, 249 
bistable, complementary, 252 
bistable, emitter-coupled, 264 
in logic circuits, 298 
monostable, collector-coupled, 254 
monostable, emitter-coupled, 264 
monostable, sawtooth generator, 275 
Mutual conductance, 36 
N A N D gate, 289, 293, 303 
Negative feedback, 115, 165 
parallel-derived, 116 
series-derived, 116 
Negative logic, 285 
Negative-resistance oscillators, 214 
Neutralisation, 185 
η-gate thyristor, 51 
NICAM, 219 
Noise factor, 128 
Non-inverting input (operational 
amplifier), 160 
Non-volatile store, 316 
NOR gate, 290 
Off state, 247 
Offset voltage (operational amplifier), 
158 
On state, 247 
Operational amplifier, 158 
Optimum load, 133 
Optocouplers, 338 
OR gate, 288 
Oscillator: 
Colpitts, 203 
crystal-controlled, 205 
dielectric resonator, 206 
Hartley, 202 
impatt, 217 
negative-resistance, 214 
phase-shift, 207 
positive-feedback, 202 
push-pull, 216 
RC, 207 
Reinartz, 204 
tunnel-diode, 215 
Wien-bridge, 211 
Output resistance: 
common-base amplifier, 57 
common-emitter amplifier, 69 
common-gate amplifier, 63 
emitter follower, 81 
source follower, 87 
PADT, 367 
P.C.M., 318 
p-gate thyristor, 51 
Phase comparator, 232 
Phase detector, 232 
Phase-locked loop, 233 
Phase-shift oscillator, 207 
Photo diode, 335 
Phototransistor, 336 
Pinch-off voltage, 38 
Planar transistors, 369 
pn junctions, 10 
Positive logic, 285 
Preset input, 303 
PROM, 316 
Push-pull operation, 134 
PWM, 329 
Radio receiver, 245 
RAM, 314 
RC oscillator, 207 
Reactance modulator, 221 
Recording head drive, 349 
Recovery time, 15 
Rectifier diode, 15 

Index 
Refreshing, 316 
Regulation, 324 
Reinartz oscillator, 204 
Reset input, 298 
Reverse current, 336 
Rise time, 163 
ROM, 316 
RS bistable, 298 
Sample-and-hold circuit, 319 
Sampling, 319 
Satellite receiver head-end, 241 
Satellite sound system, 237 
Satellite tuner, 242 
S.A.W. filter, 193 
Schottky diode, 15 
Self-oscillating mixer, 235 
Series-diode detector, 222 
Series voltage stabiliser, 323 
Set input, 298 
SHF amplifier, 241 
Shift register, 312 
Short-channel f.e.t.s, 42 
Shunt-diode detector, 227 
Shunt voltage stabiliser, 327 
Signal-to-noise ratio, 128 
Silicon controlled switch, 52 
Single-ended push-pull, 142 
Slave bistable, 304 
Small-signal diode, 14 
Sound-in-syncs, 319 
Speed-up capacitor, 250 
SRAM, 314 
SSI, 372 
Stabilisation (of power supply), 323 
Stability factor, 90, 189 
Stable state, 248 
Stagger tuning, 195 
Summing amplifier, 161 
Surface-barrier transistors, 365 
Switching transistor, 352 
Switch-mode power supplier, 327 
Symmetrical push-pull, 134, 140 
Synchronisation : 
blocking oscillator, 271 
multivibrator, 263 
Synchronous detector, 228 
Television line scanning, 280 
Television picture enhancement, 349 
Television tuner, 237 
Temperature compensation, 102 
Tetrode f.e.t., 185 
Thermal capacity, 150 
Thermal resistance, 150 
Thermal runaway, 150 
Thyristor: 
diode, 47 
field timebase, 345 
tetrode, 52 
triode, 49 
TMOST, 43 
Tobey and Dinsdale amplifier, 144 
Transit time, 20, 217 
Transition frequency, 37 
Trapatt diode, 218 
Triac, 49, 346 
Triode thyristor, 49 
Trough line, 239 
Truth table, 288 
TTL, 294 
Tunnel diode, 215 
U.H.F. tuner, 237 
Unijunction transistor, 339 
Unilateralisation, 185 
Unipolar transistor, 38 
Unstable state, 248, 256 
Up counter, 307 
Valence ring, 4 
Valley point, 216 
Varactor diode, 17 
VDU, 313 
V.H.F. amplifier, 181 
Video amplifier, 169 
Video clamp, 352 
Virtual earth, 161 
VLSI, 372 
VMOST, 43 
Volatile store, 314 
Voltage amplifier: 
definition, 109 
single-stage, 111 
two-stage, 122 
Voltage gain: 
common-base amplifier, 60 
common-emitter amplifier, 72 
common-gate amplifier, 63 
common-source amplifier, 76 
emitter follower, 84 
source follower, 86 
393 

394 
Index 
Voltage reference diode, 18 
Voltage-stabilising circuits, 321 
Voltage-to-current converter, 118 
Wien-bridge oscillator, 211 
y parameters, 375 
Zener diode, 18 
Zone refining, 361 
ζ parameters, 374 

