Principles of
Hearing Aid
Audiology,
Second Edition
MARYANNE TATE MALTBY
WHURR PUBLISHERS

Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Second Edition

This page intentionally left blank 

Principles of 
Hearing Aid
Audiology
MARYANNE TATE MALTBY
DASED, BA, MEd, MSc, FSHAA, EdD, RHAD.
HEARING  AID AUDIOLOGIST AND AUDIOLOGICAL SCIENTIST 
Active Hearing, Boston Spa, W. Yorkshire 
and
TRAINING OFFICER
Ultravox Group, Wilmslow, Cheshire.
W
W H U R R  P U B L I S H E R S
L O N D O N  A N D  P H I L A D E L P H I A

First Edition published 1994 by Chapman & Hall
© Second edition 2002 Whurr Publishers 
Second edition published by 
Whurr Publishers Ltd
19b Compton Terrace, London N1 2UN, England and 
325 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia PA 19106, USA
All rights reserved.  No part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the
prior permission of Whurr Publishers Limited.
This publication is sold subject to the conditions that it
shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, resold,
hired out, or otherwise circulated without the
publisher’s prior consent in any form of binding or
cover other than that in which it is published and
without a similar condition including this condition
being imposed upon any subsequent purchaser.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the
British Library.
ISBN: 1 86156 257 8
Printed and bound in the UK by Athenaeum Press Ltd,
Gateshead, Tyne & Wear

v
Contents
Foreword
vii
Acknowledgements
ix
Part one: Fundamental Sciences
1
1 Acoustics
3
2
Anatomy and physiology of the ear
21
3 Medical aspects of hearing loss
45
4 Speech and intelligibility
67
5 The basic hearing aid system
80
6 Digital hearing aids
106
Part two: The Practice of Hearing Aid Audiology
123
7 The assessment procedure
125
8 Hearing aids and their performance
154
9 Selection and fitting
185
10 Earmoulds
204
11 Evaluation
219
12 Client management and rehabilitation
235
Part three: Special Aspects of Hearing Aid Audiology
257
13 Assessment and management of special problems
259
14 Paediatric provision
290
Glossary
314
References
325
Index
331

This page intentionally left blank 

vii
Foreword
The second edition of Maryanne Maltby’s text Principles of Hearing Aid
Audiology is both welcome and timely. At a time when we are seeing major
changes in the UK in provision, technology and rehabilitative approaches
in hearing aid audiology, students in training and experienced practi-
tioners alike will find this text a mine of useful information.
The text has been totally rewritten and updated from the first edition
and contains elements basic to the practice of hearing aid audiology,
together with a clear exposé of advanced modern thinking. 
Written by a person with a wealth of experience in both training and
practical hearing aid fitting, Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology is a must
for all prospective and practising hearing aid audiologists. It is absolutely
relevant to the needs of today’s hearing aid dispenser who has a responsi-
bility to furnish patients with ongoing experiences of excellence in clinical
practice. 
The presentation of the material is clear and precise yet not excessively
technical in style. 
A welcome addition to the recommended reading list of all major
training courses for hearing aid dispensers, Principles of Hearing Aid
Audiology will prove to be a cornerstone in training and ongoing educa-
tion in both the UK and further afield. 
Michael Nolan BSc, PhD, MSHAA
Registrar of the British Society of
Hearing Aid Audiologists

This page intentionally left blank 

ix
Acknowledgements
I greatly appreciate the assistance given in the preparation of this new
edition by:
David Gaszczyk (BMI Healthcare) – graphs, computer diagrams and index.
Karen Shepherd (A&M Hearing Ltd) – digital hearing aids.
Roger Lewin (Phonak UK Ltd) – algorithms.
Lesley Pestell (Starkey Ltd) – impressions.
Peter Bodo (Rayovac UK Ltd) – battery specifications.
I should also like to express my sincere thanks to all those who helped or
encouraged me in any way and especially to Roger Lewin, David Gaszczyk,
Paul Weston and Robert Rendell for their comments.
Maryanne Tate Maltby

This page intentionally left blank 

PART ONE
Fundamental Sciences
1

This page intentionally left blank 

3
Chapter 1
Acoustics
1.1 PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF SOUND
1.1.1 Sound generation
Sound requires a source, a medium through which to travel and a
detector. The detector is usually a listener but could be a sound measuring
device (for example, a sound level meter).
Sound is generated by a vibrating object and is transmitted through an
elastic medium or substance: gas, liquid or solid. In air, the sound source
sets the air particles into vibration, in the same back and forth motion as
that of the vibrating sound source. The medium itself is not transferred to
the detector; each particle is displaced only a very small distance from its
resting position (equilibrium). The energy is passed across the medium as
a series of compressions and rarefactions (Figure 1.1). This constitutes a
sound wave. In compressions, the air particles move closer together and
the air pressure is slightly higher than normal; in rarefactions, the particles
move away from each other and the air pressure is slightly lower than
normal.
The speed of sound varies with the density of the medium through
which it travels. The denser the medium, the faster sound travels. For
example, the speed of sound in air is approximately 340 metres per
second but in water, which is a denser medium, sound travels at approxi-
mately 1450 metres per second. Sound becomes weaker with increasing
distance from the source. If there are no obstacles to affect the progress of
the sound waves, the decrease in intensity will be in accordance with the
inverse square law. This states that the intensity varies inversely with the
square of the distance from the sound source (Figure 1.2). In other words,
doubling the distance decreases the intensity by a factor of 4 (22).

4
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Figure 1.1. The tines of the tuning fork move alternately towards and apart from each
other causing alternate regions of compression and rarefaction that move outwards
through the air.
Figure 1.2. As distance away from the sound source increases, the sound level falls in
accordance with the inverse square law.

Acoustics 
5
1.1.2 Properties of sound
The simplest waveform is a sine wave or sinusoid. A sine wave is produced
by simple harmonic motion, where each vibration is repeated back and
forth. This motion repeats itself exactly in equal periods of time and is
known as periodic motion. Sinusoidal sound waves are very clean or pure
sounds and are therefore termed simple or pure tones. A pure tone can be
described by three characteristics: frequency, intensity and duration.
(a) Frequency
The frequency of a sound is denoted by the number of cycles of vibration
that occur in one second. A cycle consists of one compression and one
rarefaction of air particles. It can perhaps be better visualized as the
movement of a pendulum. In a complete cycle, the pendulum would
move from its resting position A to a position to one side B, then back
through the resting position A to the other side C, and back to the resting
position (Figure 1.3).
If it takes one second to complete one full cycle, the frequency is 1
cycle per second (cps) or 1 hertz (Hz); 10 Hz, therefore, means 10 cps.
Cycles per second are termed hertz after Heinrich Hertz, a nineteenth-
century German physicist. The more cycles that occur in one second, the
higher is the frequency of the sound. An electric motor, for example, can
readily be heard to produce a higher frequency sound as its speed is
increased. Pitch is the subjective attribute of frequency and is closely
related to frequency. The higher the frequency, the higher the pitch.
However, as pitch is subjective, it cannot be measured directly.
The piano produces its lowest note at 27.5 Hz and its highest at 4186
Hz; middle C is 261.63 Hz (Somerfield, 1987). The human ear can detect a
Figure 1.3. A complete cycle of the pendulum is shown by movement from A to B,
from B to C and from C back to A.

6
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
much wider frequency range than this and the young healthy ear can
perceive a frequency range from approximately 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz 
(20 kHz). Sounds below this frequency range are called infrasonic and
those above this range are called ultrasonic.
The wavelength is defined as the distance covered by one complete cycle.
Wavelength is inversely proportional to frequency and can be determined
using the formula:
speed (v)
wavelength (λ) = 
frequency (f)
As frequency increases, wavelength decreases.
The speed of sound in air is approximately 340 metres per second (m/s).
So, for example, if the frequency of a sound wave is 850 Hz, the
wavelength in air will be:
340 m/s
= 0.4 m
850 Hz 
(b) Period
The time required for one cycle is known as the period (Figure 1.4). The
relationship between frequency and period can be expressed as: 
Frequency =           1
period
Figure 1.4. One cycle of a pure tone.

Acoustics 
7
(c) Intensity
Intensity is defined as the amount of energy transmitted per second per
unit area. In the SI system, energy per second is measured in joules per
second (J/s) or watts (W), area is measured in square metres (m2), there-
fore the unit of intensity is the watt per square metre (W/m2).
Frequently, we measure the sound pressure level at a given point and
not the intensity, although it can be shown that, in free-field conditions,
the intensity is proportional to the square of the pressure:
intensity α (pressure)2
This is a little beyond the scope of this book so, to avoid confusion, we
will consider only the sound pressure level. Sound pressure level is the
amount of pressure variation about the mean (shown by ‘amplitude’ in
Figure 1.4). The greater the force or energy applied to the vibrating body,
the more intense the vibrations. The intensity is governed by the distance
the air particles move from their place of rest. With increased force, they
will move further and thus cause increased compressions and rarefactions.
In the SI system, pressure is expressed in pascals (Pa).
A vibrating source sets up small, localized changes in the air pressure.
These changes can be so small they are measured in terms of micro pascals
(µPa), which are millionths of a pascal. The human ear can accommodate
pressure changes from approximately 20 µPa to approximately 20 Pa. In
other words, the greatest pressure change the human ear can withstand is
a million times greater than that which is just audible.
The range of hearing is so great that the numbers involved are very
large and it is more convenient to describe intensity using a logarithmic
scale – the decibel scale. Decibels (dB) are units of relative intensity. The
number of dB describes how much greater is the intensity of a measured
sound than a fixed reference level. The dBSPL scale (decibels sound
pressure level), for example, uses 0.00002 Pa as its fixed reference level, so
that 0 dBSPL = 0.00002 Pa.
0 dBSPL approximates to the minimum audible sound pressure at 1 kHz
30 dBSPL approximates to a whisper
60 dBSPL approximates to quiet conversation
90 dBSPL approximates to a shout
120 dBSPL is uncomfortably loud for most people.
Decibels are considered in more detail in section 1.2.

8
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Figure 1.5. Pure tones out of phase by 180˚.
1.1.3 Complex sounds
Pure tones can be produced artificially using a tuning fork or an electronic
sine-wave generator, but they rarely occur naturally. Most sounds consist
of a number of different tones, although these can be broken down into
the component pure tones using frequency analysis. Each component
pure tone may vary in amplitude, frequency and phase.
1.1.4 Phase
When we consider the phase of a wave, we are simply referring to the
position at any point in its cycle. Generally, it is of more relevance to
consider phase differences between waves. Phase and phase difference are
expressed in degrees (˚), analogous to the mathematical relationship
between circles and sine waves.
Any circle corresponds to 360˚ rotation. The degrees of rotation are
used to denote the position in the cycle, where 0˚ is the starting point, 90˚
is a quarter of the way around the circle, 180˚ is half-way around and so
on. Thus, a quarter of a cycle of a (sine) wave is denoted by 90˚, half a
cycle by 180˚ and so forth. Tones are exactly out of phase if they differ
from the standard starting point by 180˚. Figure 1.5 illustrates tones that
are out of phase.
1.1.5 Periodic sounds
Complex sounds may have a waveform that repeats itself over time. Such
sounds are called periodic. Periodic sounds are musical or harmonic. 
Musical notes are an example of complex periodic sounds. In such
sounds, all frequencies present are harmonics. These are whole number
multiples (integers) of the fundamental frequency. The lowest frequency

Acoustics 
9
of the tones presented determines the fundamental frequency. A 1 kHz
tone has harmonics at 2 kHz, 3 kHz, 4 kHz and so on, although not all the
harmonics are necessarily present. Two instruments playing the same note
sound different because their sound contains different harmonics,
although the fundamental frequency remains the same. The pitch of a
note is recognized by its fundamental frequency. Thus middle C, for
example, can be recognized regardless of whether it is played on a piano
or a violin. Harmonics are denoted by number. The fundamental
frequency (f) is the first harmonic (1 × f). The second harmonic is twice the
fundamental (2 × f); the third harmonic is three times the fundamental
(3 × f). The fundamental frequency does not necessarily have to be heard
for recognition. Our minds can determine the fundamental from the
pattern of harmonics.
1.1.6 Aperiodic sounds
Aperiodic or non-periodic sounds do not have regularly repeating
waveforms. They consist of more than one frequency and are not harmon-
ically related. This random and unstable waveform has no stated period or
repetition and is perceived as noise (Figure 1.6). Certain particular types
of noise may be used in audiometry, for example:
• White noise consists of all the frequencies of the audible spectrum
present at equal intensities.
• Pink noise consists of equal energy per octave (an octave interval is
given by the doubling of frequency). This is perceived as a lower
frequency noise than white noise since each octave contains equal
energy but the octave intervals are wider at higher frequencies
resulting in less energy at any single frequency. For example, the octave
250 Hz to 500 Hz contains 250 discrete frequencies, whereas the
Figure 1.6. Waveforms of noise and periodic sound: (a) an aperiodic (or noise)
waveform (b) a periodic waveform.

10
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
octave 2 kHz to 4 kHz contains 2000 discrete frequencies; yet each of
these contains the same amount of energy.
1.1.7 Wave motion
In an environment where there is no interference from reflections (a free
sound field or ‘free-field’), sound waves will spread in all directions and
gradually lose energy as they move away from the sound source.
The intensity of the sound decreases proportionally to the square of
the distance from the sound source. This is the inverse square law (Figure
1.2) and in practice it means that a doubling of distance will produce a
reduction of 6 dB in the sound pressure level.
In an enclosed field, hard surfaces will reflect sound waves. Sound
reflections can increase the sound level within a room, making it easier to
hear, as long as the reflections follow the original sound very rapidly.
When the time between the incident wave (sound source) and the reflec-
tion is prolonged to a degree that is noticeable, it is termed reverberation.
A reflected sound that occurs some time after the original is heard as an
echo. When a reflection follows closely, it adds to the direct sound; rever-
beration follows with a short time delay, which may be destructive to intel-
ligibility; with a greater delay, a distinct echo may be heard.
In a large, empty room, the reverberation effect may last for several
seconds, which will make speech indistinct. Soft furnishings will absorb
sound and help to reduce reverberation. Reverberation is particularly
destructive to intelligibility for hearing aid users. It is not, however, desir-
able to cut out all reflection (except for research purposes, as in an
anechoic chamber) as this makes the room very quiet and ‘dead’.
Standing waves are caused when incident waves and reflected waves
meet and combine to affect the sound level at that particular point. The
interference that this creates may be constructive (increase the sound
level) or destructive (decrease the sound level) (Figure 1.5). When a
standing wave is formed within the confines of an object, resonance
occurs as, for example, in a pipe or in the ear canal. The length of the pipe
or canal will affect the frequency of the standing waves formed within it.
For example, if the length of a pipe is halved, the fundamental frequency
of the air column within it is doubled and the resonant frequency will rise
by one octave.
1.1.8 Warble tones
Warble tones are often used in free-field audiometry to reduce the risk of
standing waves affecting test results.
A warble tone is a frequency modulated tone. The tone has a base or
centre frequency, around which it varies. For example, a 1 kHz warble

Acoustics 
11
tone might vary from 950 Hz to 1050 Hz, which would be a frequency
deviation of ±50 Hz or 5%. The tone therefore consists of frequencies
above and below its centre frequency and it changes rapidly between
these limits. The number of frequency changes occurring in one second is
termed the ‘modulation rate’ and is itself quoted in hertz (Hz).
1.2 THE MEASUREMENT OF SOUND
1.2.1 Decibel scales
The decibel scales express a ratio between two numbers.
Logarithms are used as a convenient method of expressing a ratio. A
logarithm (log) tells us how many times the base number is multiplied by
itself, 102 means 10 to the power of 2, that is, 10 is multiplied by itself
once, and 103 is multiplied by itself twice, as follows:
101 = 10
therefore log10(10) = 1
102 = 10 × 10
therefore log10(100) = 2
103 = 10 × 10 × 10
therefore log10(1000) = 3
The wide range of intensities involved is compressed by transforming it to
a logarithmic scale. The unit of relative intensity is the bel, named after
Alexander Graham Bell, who first patented the telephone. One bel equals
ten decibels. The bel is rather too large a unit to reflect the accuracy
required for audiometry. In measuring sound intensity or sound pressure
level, the decibel scale is therefore used.
Any tenfold increase in sound pressure corresponds to 20 dB. For
example, a noise level of 80 dB has a sound pressure that is 1000 times
greater (103) than a noise of 20 dB. Subjectively, 10 dB appears as a
doubling of loudness, whereas 1 dB is equivalent to the smallest change of
intensity we can detect in ideal conditions.
In mathematical terms, for a measured sound pressure P1 (in pascals)
the dBSPL value is given by the formula:
20 log10 
P1
Pref
where Pref = the audiological reference pressure = 0.00002 pascals. 
So, for example, if:
P1 = 0.002 Pa 
(   )

12
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
using the formula:
dBSPL = 20 log10            P1
Pref
gives us
20 log10
0.002
0.00002
= 20 log10 100 
= 20 × 2 (since the log of 100 to base 10 = 2)
= 40 dBSPL.
For those who are less able mathematically, it may be helpful to show
the relationship between dBSPL and pascals as follows:
Sound pressure 
Sound pressure
Equivalent to
level (dBSPL)
(Pa)
120
20.0
Discomfort
100
2.0
Pneumatic drill
80
0.2
Shouting
60
0.02
Quiet conversation
40
0.002
Loud whispering
20
0.0002
Rustling leaves
0
0.00002
(Standard audiological reference)
The range of pressures to which the average normally hearing person is
sensitive starts at just above 0 dBSPL (0.00002 Pa) and has a limit, where
sound becomes uncomfortably loud, of 120 dBSPL (20 Pa). This range is
called the dynamic range of hearing.
Since decibels express a ratio between two sound pressures, their
values in decibels cannot simply be added together. Two sound sources of
40 dBSPL, for example, do not equal 80 dBSPL; in fact, this results in an
increase of 3 dB, producing 43 dBSPL overall.
To be meaningful, a ratio must have a reference level. It is pointless to
say that a sound is 10 times greater unless we also state what it is greater
than. In audiometry, a number of different decibel scales are used and
each has its own reference level. For example, the dBSPL scale (dB sound
pressure level) expresses the pressure of a sound in relation to the
(  )
(     )

Acoustics 
13
standard audiological reference pressure, 0.00002 Pa, which is the
minimum pressure required to cause the sensation of hearing in the mid-
frequency region. The dBSPL scale compares with a flat or ‘absolute’ refer-
ence: it takes no account of the way hearing varies with frequency.
Other decibel scales used include dB(A), dB(B), dB(C), dB(D) and 
dBHL. A range of scales are used because the human ear is not equally
sensitive at all frequencies or intensities. The different decibel scales
attempt to reflect these changes. For audiometric purposes dB(A) and 
dBHL (dB hearing level) scales are important. The dBHL scale is used
when sounds are presented monaurally through air conduction
headphones or bone conduction transducers. The dB(A) scale is used
when the sound level is presented ‘free-field’ in a room. The two scales are
very similar but the dB(A) scale provides values that are about 4 dB greater
than dBHL values.
The SPL (sound pressure level) values for audiometric zero (0 dBHL)
for people aged 18 to 30 years at each frequency are given in BS EN ISO
389-1: 2000. The values are the recommended equivalent threshold sound
pressure levels (RETSPL) in a 9A acoustic coupler. The RETSPL values
provide average minimum audible pressure (MAP) under headphones,
which may be illustrated as a hearing threshold curve (Figure 1.7) or a
table providing values at the various audiometric frequencies (Table 1.1).
Figure 1.7. A diagrammatic representation of the dynamic range of normal human
hearing.

14
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
The values were established on the basis of a statistical average
obtained by testing many otologically normal people between the ages of
18 and 30 years. A similar method was used to obtain the minimum
audible field (MAF), which sets out thresholds obtained binaurally, in
response to sound pressures presented through loudspeakers.
Thresholds taken from the MAF curve are an average of about 6 dB more
sensitive than the normal MAP thresholds.
The normal increase observed in the threshold of hearing with age can
be found in ISO 7029 ‘Statistical distribution of hearing thresholds as a
function of age’.
1.2.2 The sound level meter
A sound level meter is a precision instrument used for sound measure-
ment. A precision microphone converts the sound signal to an electrical
signal, which is amplified by a pre-amplifier before being processed. The
signal may be displayed in dBSPL or it may pass through a weighting
network. This is an electronic circuit that varies in sensitivity across the
frequency range to simulate the sensitivity of the human ear (Figure 1.8).
The weighting networks are termed A, B, C and D. The A weighting
network corresponds to an inverted equal loudness contour (section
1.4.2) at low sound pressure levels. The B network corresponds to
medium SPLs and the C network to high SPLs. The D network is used for
aircraft noise measurements.
Table 1.1. Recommended reference equivalent threshold sound pressure levels
(RETSPL) in a 9A coupler (British Standards Institution, 2000)
Frequency (Hz)
RETSPL dB (Reference 20 µPa)
125
45.0
250
25.5
500
11.5
1 k
7.0
2 k
9.0
3 k
10.0
4 k
9.5
6 k
15.5
8 k
13.0
Pattern of earphone: Telephonics TDH39 with MX41/ AR cushion

Acoustics 
15
1.3 THE AUDIOMETER
1.3.1 Introduction
Hearing is a subjective sensation and therefore cannot truly be
‘measured’. Audiometry measures the stimulus that causes the sensation
of hearing.
An audiometer is an instrument of comparison, which indicates the
difference between the sound pressure level required to produce hearing
in the individual under test and that required to produce hearing in an
average normal young person. An audiometer generates pure tones at
specified points within a restricted range of frequencies considered impor-
tant for communication, usually the octave intervals from 125 Hz to 8 kHz.
An octave is a doubling of frequency. Most audiometers also produce
tones at the half-octave intervals, 750 Hz, 1.5 kHz, 3 kHz and 6 kHz. The
sound level can also be varied, usually in 5 dB steps, from –10 dBHL to
110 dBHL or more. An interrupter switch controls the duration of the
tones. The audiometer is provided with two types of transducer: a pair of
headphones and a bone vibrator. A block diagram of a basic audiometer is
shown in Figure 1.9.
1.3.2 Audiometer calibration 
An audiometer must be accurate to be of value and, to this end, all
audiometers are calibrated to British Standards when new and the calibra-
tion should be re-checked at least once a year. The standard BS EN 60645-
1: 1995 defines the levels of pure-tone audiometer accuracy with which
manufacturers should comply.
Figure 1.8. Constituent parts of a sound level meter using the A weighting network.

16
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
The main points of this standard, for our purposes, can be summarized
as follows:
• The attenuator 5 dB steps must be correct within ±1 dB.
• Unwanted sound from the audiometer should be inaudible up to and
including the dial setting 50 dBHL over the main frequency range. 
• The narrow band noise filters must be centred on the frequency
(according to a given table).
• The rise and fall times of the signal tone for air conduction should not
exceed 200 ms and for bone conduction should be at least 20 ms. 
• The hearing level (reference tone) must be accurate to within ±3 dB
from 500 Hz to 4 kHz and to within ±5 dB at the remaining frequen-
cies.
• Total harmonic distortion (THD) should not exceed 2.5% for air
conduction and 5.5% for bone conduction.
Laboratory calibration is carried out for the complete audiometer. The
transducers (headphones and bone vibrator) are a part of the audiometer
and should not be exchanged unless the audiometer is recalibrated with
the new transducers.
In addition to calibration, the audiometer should be checked daily as
described in the following section.
1.3.3 Daily audiometer checks
• Straighten any tangled leads. Ensure that all connections are firm and
giving good contact. Flex the leads for possible intermittency.
• Check that all knobs and switches are secure and function in a silent,
smooth and click-free manner.
Figure 1.9. Constituent parts of an audiometer.

Acoustics 
17
Figure 1.10. The rise and fall envelope of test tones. Between the dotted lines sound
should rise or fall in a progressive manner. (After BS EN 60645-1: 1995.)
• Check function of response button.
• Check tension of AC and BC headbands.
• Check output levels for all tones at 10–15 dB above own known
threshold for AC (each earphone) and BC. Your own audiogram should
be used for this approximate calibration check.
• Check at 60 dBHL for all tones on AC (each earphone) for noticeable
distortion, intermittency and so forth. Repeat at 40 dBHL for BC.
• Check masking noise over a range of outputs, also loudness balance
and other facilities, if they are to be used.
• Check battery condition, if appropriate.
• Generally ensure that the audiometer and all its attachments are clean.
Wipe earphones and BC receiver with clean, dry tissues. Alcohol wipes
may also be used as necessary.
1.3.4 Rise and fall times
The audiometer output signal is not an instantaneous event. The signal
rises until it reaches its maximum and falls off in a similar manner when
the tone is switched off (Figure 1.10).
Rise time is defined as the time taken for the signal to rise from –60 dB
to within 1 dB of its steady state. 
Fall time is defined as the time taken for the signal to decay by 60 dB
from its steady state. 
This rise and fall (decay) should be correctly timed or it may affect the
results of the audiometric test.
Too slow a rise time may result in erroneously poor thresholds,
because this does not elicit the maximum on-effect of the ear. (The on-
effect is the phenomenon whereby the initial onset of a sound is, subjec-
tively, the loudest).

18
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Too brief a rise time produces an overshoot that may be heard as a
click. This may result in erroneously good thresholds if the patient
responds to the click rather than the test tone. An overshoot should never
be greater than 1 dB.
1.4 THE PSYCHOLOGICAL PROPERTIES OF SOUND
1.4.1 Psychoacoustics
The study of the psychological properties of sound is known as psycho-
acoustics. The way in which we hear sound is subjective and cannot be
directly measured. Subjective qualities are compared with reference levels
obtained by averaging the judgements of a large number of normally
hearing people.
Sensorineural hearing loss may reduce the ability to discriminate pitch.
It may also increase the sensation of loudness, such that a small increase in
objective intensity results in a large increase in subjective loudness. This
abnormal loudness growth is termed recruitment.
1.4.2 Loudness
Loudness is the subjective perception of sound in terms of intensity. The
relative loudness of pure tones is normally expressed as equal loudness
contours. Each contour represents sounds that appear equally loud. Each
contour or curve has a loudness value given in phons, which can be
defined as the sound pressure level of a 1 kHz tone judged to be of equal
loudness.
The 40 phon curve, for example (Figure 1.7), represents pure tones
across the frequency range, which are judged equally loud as a 1 kHz tone
at an intensity of 40 dBSPL. An inverted 40 phon curve is used for the A
weighting scale of a sound level meter. ISO 389-7 gives normal equal
loudness contours.
Another unit of loudness, the sone, is used for the purpose of
providing a scale to define loudness. This numerical scale of loudness is
based on judgements of average listeners as to when sounds are ‘twice as
loud’ or ‘half as loud’. One sone is taken to be the loudness of a 1 kHz
tone at 40 dBSPL. Thus, 1 sone has a loudness level of 40 phons. A sound
that has a loudness of 2 sones is one that is judged to be twice as loud.
In terms of sound pressure level, an increase of 10 dB corresponds to a
doubling of loudness.

Acoustics 
19
1.4.3 Pitch
Pitch is the subjective perception of sound in terms of frequency. The
unit of pitch used is the mel. One thousand mels represents the pitch of
a 1 kHz tone presented at 40 phons. The ability to recognize the pitch
of sounds of different frequencies is known as ‘frequency resolution’.
The average normal person can discriminate a frequency difference
where a change of 3 Hz occurs, although this varies across the audible
spectrum.
1.4.4 Temporal integration
The effect of duration on the recognition of sound is known as
‘temporal integration’. Tone presentations that are very brief may not
be heard. The shorter a tone presentation, the more intense must be
that sound if it is to be perceived. Duration also has an effect on the
apparent pitch of a sound. Tones that are of very short duration will be
perceived as a click.
1.5 SUMMARY
For sound to exist it must be in our audible frequency range, which is
normally 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz, and there must be an elastic medium to
convey the vibrations.
Simple harmonic motion produces a pure tone, which is a sound of
one frequency. Sound is created by a vibrating object, which produces
alternate compressions and rarefactions in the medium, which is usually
air.
The frequency of vibration is calculated by the number of vibrations or
cycles in 1 second. The time taken for 1 cycle is known as the period. The
unit of frequency is hertz; 1 Hz = 1 cycle per second.
The decibel scale is used to describe the intensity of sound. Decibels
are not absolute units of measurement but provide a ratio between a
measured quantity and an agreed reference level, which must be specified.
An audiometer provides a comparison between the hearing of the
subject under test and average normal hearing as set out in the relevant
British Standard. Audiometers must be regularly checked and calibrated to
ensure accuracy.
Sound can be measured objectively in terms of frequency, intensity or
pressure and duration. Hearing is subjective and may be described in
terms of pitch and loudness.

20
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
FURTHER READING
Foreman, JEK (1990) Sound Analysis and Noise Control. New York: Van Nostrand
Reinhold.
Moore, BCJ (1997) An Introduction to the Psychology of Hearing. 4 edn. San Diego:
Academic Press.
Pickles, JD (1988) An Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing. 2 edn. London:
Academic Press.
Speaks, CE (1992) Introduction to Sound. London: Chapman & Hall.

21
Chapter 2
Anatomy and physiology of
the ear
2.1 ANATOMY OF THE EAR
The ear (Figure 2.1) can be thought of as consisting of three parts known
as the outer, the middle and the inner ear.
Figure 2.1. The outer, middle and inner ear.
Sebaceous,
apocrine and 
ceruminous glands
Hairs

22
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
2.1.1 The outer ear
The outer or external ear is divided into two parts: the pinna or auricle
and the external auditory meatus.
(a) The pinna
The first part of the external ear is the pinna or auricle. This is formed of
irregular-shaped cartilage covered by firmly adherent skin. The dependent
lobule is mainly fat. Anteriorly the cartilage forms the tragus, which covers
the entrance of the external auditory meatus. The main anatomical
features of the pinna are shown in Figure 2.2. Attached to the pinna are
three vestigial muscles, all supplied by the facial nerve. In some animals
they function to direct the pinna towards the direction of a sound source
but in humans they are mostly redundant.
Figure 2.2. Anatomical features of a right pinna.
(b) The external auditory meatus
The cartilage of the pinna extends inwards to form the first one-third of the
external auditory meatus (ear canal). This horizontal curved canal (Figure
2.3) is usually about 2.5 cm long in an adult. It is closed at its medial end by
the tympanic membrane (eardrum). The outer one-third curves inwards,
slightly upwards and backwards, and is lined by skin richly endowed with

Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
23
Figure 2.3. Diagrammatic representation of the external auditory meatus.
The external ear has an extensive sensory nerve supply from branches
of three cranial nerves (V, VII and X). The inner part of the canal is particu-
larly sensitive and can produce a cough reflex when stimulated due to its
innervation from the tenth cranial (Vagus) nerve.
It is important to remember the close proximity to the external
auditory meatus of three cranial structures: the mastoid air cells (behind),
the middle cranial fossa (above) and the temporomandibular (jaw) joint
(in front). Injury or infection in the canal can extend to involve these.
2.1.2 The middle ear cleft
The middle ear cleft is made up of five anatomical parts: the tympanic
cavity, the auditory or Eustachian tube, the aditus, the mastoid antrum and
the mastoid air cells.
(a) The tympanic cavity
The tympanic cavity is the part of the middle ear cleft, which is usually
thought of as ‘the middle ear’. It is separated from the external ear by the
tympanic membrane (eardrum) and from the internal ear by the round
and oval windows of the cochlea (see 2.1.3). It has connections with the
Tympanic
membrane
hairs and apocrine (sweat), sebaceous (oil) and ceruminous (wax) glands.
The inner two-thirds of the canal is bony, formed from the squamous
temporal bone. This part of the canal runs downwards and forwards and is
lined with thin, closely adherent skin, largely devoid of hairs and glands.
About 5 mm from the tympanic membrane the floor of the canal dips to
form a recess; debris often collects here and is difficult to remove.

24
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
nasopharynx via the Eustachian tube and with the mastoid cavity via the
aditus. It houses the ossicles and their muscular attachments and has
many important anatomical landmarks.
The cavity (Figure 2.4) may be thought of as a narrow room, the height
and length of which is about 15 mm, with medial and lateral walls that
curve inwards towards the centre; this makes them about 2 mm apart in
the middle and 6 mm apart at the roof.
The lateral wall is formed mainly by the tympanic membrane. This
translucent membrane is set at an angle of about 55°, such that the roof
and posterior wall of the external auditory meatus are shorter than the
floor and anterior wall. The membrane consists of three layers – that is, a
middle (incomplete) fibrous layer, which is covered with skin on the outer
surface, and the mucous membrane of the middle-ear cavity on the inner
surface. The area of drum containing the fibrous layer is known as the pars
tensa (Figure 2.5) and, where this is deficient, the pars flaccida. The
Figure 2.4. Diagrammatic representation of the tympanic cavity.

Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
25
handle of the first auditory ossicle, the malleus, is attached in the centre of
the pars tensa on the medial surface and produces a small elevation on the
drum, easily seen with an otoscope.
The medial wall separates the middle ear from the inner ear. It has a
central bulge, the promontory, which is formed by the first turn of the
cochlea. Above and behind the promontory lies the oval window, which is
closed by the footplate of the stapes, the third of the auditory ossicles. This
window separates the middle ear from the scala vestibuli of the cochlea.
Below and behind the promontory is the round window, which separates
the middle ear from the scala tympani; this is closed by a fibrous disc. The
seventh cranial (facial) nerve passes across the medial wall, lying in a bony
canal above the promontory.
The anterior wall has two important landmarks:
• The opening of the Eustachian tube, which connects the middle ear
with the nasopharynx.
• The bony canal for the tensor tympani muscle. This muscle attaches to
the malleus and tenses the eardrum. The tensor tympani is innervated
by the fifth cranial (trigeminal) nerve.
Figure 2.5. Right tympanic membrane. Broken lines indicate the ossicles in the middle
ear cavity.
Long process of incus
Lateral or short process
of the malleus

26
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
High up on the posterior wall is the aditus, which connects the middle
ear cavity with the mastoid antrum. Below this is the pyramid, a projection
of bone from which the second muscle of the middle ear, the stapedius,
arises. This muscle is attached to the third ossicle, the stapes, and is
supplied with motor fibres from the seventh nerve (facial), which passes
down this wall. A branch of the seventh nerve, the chorda tympani, comes
out through a small hole lateral to the pyramid and runs across the
eardrum to the tongue. A further description of the middle ear muscles
will be found in section 13.2.7.
The roof separates the cavity from the middle cranial fossa and is
formed from just a thin plate of the petrous temporal bone. The floor is
only a thin plate of bone. Below and behind is the jugular foramen,
through which passes the major vein of the head and neck. Below and in
front is the canal containing the carotid artery.
This four-walled ‘room’ is normally filled with air and contains the
three auditory ossicles (Figure 2.6) that serve to transmit sound energy
from the tympanic membrane across the middle ear cavity to the cochlea.
The first, the malleus (hammer), is attached to the tympanic membrane
laterally and articulates with the incus (anvil) medially. The incus has a
body and two processes, one of which articulates with the stapes, the
other rests on the posterior wall. Finally the part of the stapes (stirrup),
known as the footplate, closes the oval window and therefore communi-
cates with the perilymph of the cochlea. The two middle ear muscles, the
Figure 2.6. The middle ear ossicles.

Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
27
tensor tympani and the stapedius, have already been described; these
modify the transmission of sound energy across the ossicular chain.
As with the external auditory meatus, it is very important to remember
the close proximity of the middle ear cleft to several important anatomical
structures:
• the temporal lobe of the brain lies above and behind is the cerebellum,
both separated only by a layer of bone; 
• the facial nerve passes through the cleft in a bony canal, the bone may
be very thin; 
• both major vessels of the head and neck, the carotid artery and the
jugular vein, run close to the floor of the cleft; 
• lying medially is the inner ear. 
All these are susceptible to spread of infection or disease from the middle
ear.
(b) The Eustachian tube
In an adult the Eustachian tube is about 3.5 cm long. It connects the
nasopharynx with the tympanic cavity and in health provides regular venti-
lation and mucosal drainage of the middle ear. It also, however, provides a
pathway for disease to spread from the nose and throat to the ear. It is
normally closed at rest but opens temporarily during yawning or
swallowing. At its lower end it is formed of cartilage and membrane. It
opens behind the nasal cavity and then passes upwards and outwards and
enters the tympanic cavity. The upper one-third of the tube is bony. In a
young child the Eustachian tube is shorter, narrower, more horizontal and
less rigid and is much more prone to dysfunction.
(c) The mastoid antrum and mastoid air cells
A short tube, the aditus, leads from the back of the tympanic cavity to the
mastoid antrum.
The antrum is a cavity within the part of the bony skull known as the
petrous temporal bone. It communicates posteriorly through several
openings with the mastoid air cells (Figure 2.7). The number and size of
air cells varies considerably among individuals. The mastoid air cells are
very susceptible to spread of disease from the rest of the middle ear cleft.
The whole of the middle ear cleft is lined with a continuous layer of
cells (epithelium), some of which provide lubrication (in the Eustachian
tube), and others of which are normally flattened and do not produce
mucus (for example, in the tympanic cavity). These cells are prone to
change in shape and function if the cleft is unhealthy.

28
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
2.1.3 The inner ear
The inner ear, known as the labyrinth because of its complicated structure,
lies entirely within the temporal bone of the skull. It comprises a membra-
nous sac filled with a clear fluid (endolymph) contained within a bony
cavity. The space between the sac and the bone is also filled with fluid
(perilymph). Endolymph is very similar to intracellular fluid and is there-
fore high in potassium and low in sodium; conversely, perilymph is similar
to cerebrospinal fluid and, as with all extracellular fluid, is high in sodium
and low in potassium.
(a) The bony labyrinth
The bony labyrinth is a continuous cavity that communicates functionally
with the middle ear via the oval and round windows. It begins medially
with the cochlea, which is about 1 mm wide at its base and 4 mm high and
is best understood by considering the shell of a snail. Looking into the
empty shell it is a tube that twists around a central pillar; the cochlea does
exactly this, spiralling around a central bony pillar, the modiolus, for two
and three-quarter turns. From the modiolus, a narrow plate of bone, the
spiral lamina, projects into the cavity of the tube along its whole length,
partly dividing it into an upper and lower chamber. The basal end of the
cochlea opens into the middle part of the cavity called the vestibule. There
are several openings from the vestibule: two into the middle ear cleft, one
closed by the foot of the stapes and its annular ligament (the oval
window), the other by a fibrous disc (the round window); five into the
three semicircular canals; and one into the intracranial cavity by a bony
aqueduct allowing drainage of perilymph into the cerebrospinal fluid.
Figure 2.7. A deep section of the middle ear, showing the mastoid antrum and the
path of the facial nerve.

Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
29
The semicircular canals lie posteriorly and each forms two-thirds of a
circle. They lie in three planes at right angles to each other; the anterior
and posterior canals are set vertically and the lateral horizontally.
(b) The membranous labyrinth
This saccular membrane (Figure 2.8) forms a series of communicating sacs
and ducts lying within the bony labyrinth. The utricle and saccule lie
within the vestibule. They communicate with the three semicircular ducts,
the Y-shaped endolymphatic duct (which ends in the endolymphatic sac)
and the duct of the cochlea. The whole labyrinth is filled with endolymph.
The cochlear duct extends along the bony tube lying on the spiral
lamina and stretches across to be attached to the outer wall by the spiral
ligaments. This forms a triangular-shaped channel with its apex at the
modiolus, which effectively forms three chambers within the cochlea
(Figure 2.9). The middle chamber formed by the duct and therefore filled
with endolymph is called the scala media. The upper chamber is called the
scala vestibuli and the lower is the scala tympani; as these lie outside the
membranous labyrinth they contain perilymph. These two connect at the
apex of the cochlea via a small gap, the helicotrema, and at the basal end of
the cochlea they end in the vestibule, the scala tympani at the round
window and the scala vestibuli at the oval window. The upper wall of the
membranous duct is called the vestibular or Reissner’s membrane and the
lower wall, which extends from the free edge of the spiral lamina, is the
basilar membrane. Lining the outer side of the duct is the stria vascularis,
Figure 2.8. The right membranous labyrinth.

30
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
which maintains the ionic concentration of the endolymph; as the name
suggests, this area is very vascular being rich in capillaries.
(c) The organ of Corti
The organ of Corti is a specialized structure of cells that forms the sensory
organ of hearing. It is situated within the scala media on the basilar
membrane (Figure 2.9).
Between the basilar membrane and the tectorial membrane are hair
cells, so called because they have fine hair-like structures, stereocilia,
projecting from their upper surface. These cells are arranged into a single
row of inner hair cells and three to five rows of outer hair cells, separated
from each other by a rigid triangular arch called Corti’s arch. Within this
arch is cortilymph, a fluid that chemically resembles perilymph. The
specialised hair cells are themselves surrounded by various supporting
cells. Electron studies have shown the shape of the inner and outer hair
cells to be different and also the arrangement of their stereocilia. The inner
cells are fatter at the base, resembling a tenpin, and have about 40 stere-
ocilia in two rows forming a double V, with the apex directed away from the
modiolus. The outer cells are more cylindrical, resembling a test tube, and
have more stereocilia, about 140, arranged to form a wide triple ‘W’; again
the apices are directed away from the modiolus. The stereocilia gradually
Figure 2.9. Cross-section of the cochlear duct.

Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
31
reduce in height, the tallest being on the outside of the V or W. Lying over
the top of the whole structure is the reticular lamina and above this a gelati-
nous membrane, the tectorial membrane, with which the outer hair cells
make contact and into which the longest of the stereocilia are embedded.
The tectorial membrane is attached to the inner side of the cochlea just
above the spiral lamina. The estimated number of hair cells per ear is about
3,500 inner hair cells and about 12,000 outer hair cells (Wright, 2001).
The shape of the organ of Corti, and the basilar membrane on which it
lies, changes along the length of the cochlea, being widest (and most
flaccid) at the apex and becoming progressively narrower (and stiffer)
towards the base.
The nerve supply to the cochlea is via the eighth cranial nerve (vestibu-
locochlear). There are both afferent nerves, carrying information to the
brain, and efferent nerves, taking information from the brain, serving the
cochlea. Efferent nerves are mainly motor in function. They are fewer
(about 1800) than the afferent fibres; approximately half connect with the
inner cells, and half with the outer cells. They also differ in that the
terminal branches (dendrites) serving the inner hair cells end on the
dendrites of the afferent fibres, and those serving the outer cells tend to
envelop the base of the cell and its afferent fibres. Each inner hair cell has
about 20 afferent nerve fibres synapsing with it, which account for 90% to
95% of the 30,000 to 40,000 afferent fibres leaving the cochlea. The
remaining 5% to 10% synapse with the outer cells, each fibre being heavily
branched and serving up to ten hair cells. The cell bodies of the afferent
nerves are found grouped together in the spiral ganglion.
(d) The vestibular organ of balance
Each of the semicircular canals expands into an ampulla at one end. It is
here that a special sensory epithelium called the crista is found. A patch of
similar epithelium is found at the macula of the utricle and saccule, the
former being on a horizontal plane and the latter vertical.
Together these form the vestibular receptor organs. There are two
types of specialized cells, type 1 and type 2. Type 1 cells are flask-like and
surrounded at the base by a nerve ending shaped like a chalice. Type 2
cells are straighter and more cylindrical with no nerve chalice. Protruding
from the cuticular plate is a bundle of sensory ‘hairs’. This bundle consists
of one kinocilium, an additional longer and thicker hair, and 50 to 110
stereocilia. These project into a mucus-like substance, which is dome-
shaped in the ampullae and cylindrical in the utricle; a number of
calcareous particles called the otoliths are also contained here. The stere-
ocilia become progressively smaller with increased distance from the
kinocilium. When there is displacement towards the kinocilium the cell is

32
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
depolarized and produces an increased electrical discharge rate in the
afferent nerve fibres; when displaced away from the kinocilium there is a
decreased discharge rate.
As with the cochlea, there are both afferent and efferent fibres
supplying the vestibular sensory cells. These fibres gather together to
become the vestibular branch of the eighth nerve.
2.1.4 The pharynx
The pharynx (Figure 2.10) is a fibromuscular tube that forms the upper
part of the respiratory and digestive tract (see also Figure 4.3); in an adult
the whole is about 10 cm long. It opens into the nose, mouth and larynx
and is thus divided downwards into three parts: the nasopharynx, the
oropharynx and the laryngopharynx.
The nasopharynx opens anteriorly into the nasal fossae, bounded
above by the base of the skull and below by the soft palate. The lower
opening of the Eustachian tube is situated in the lateral wall and
immediately adjacent is the nasopharyngeal tonsil (adenoids). The
isthmus of the nasopharynx leads from the oropharynx and is closed
during swallowing by raising the soft palate and contracting the
palatopharyngeal muscles.
The oropharynx opens anteriorly into the mouth and is bounded above
by the soft palate and below by the upper border of the epiglottis. The
only major anatomical structures are the palatine tonsils, which lie
between the muscular faucial pillars on the lateral walls.
The laryngopharynx opens anteriorly into the larynx through a sloping
laryngeal inlet. It is bounded above by the epiglottis and below by the
cricoid cartilage. The pyriform fossae are small recesses lying on each side
bounded by cartilaginous and membranous folds.
Collectively the scattered lymphoid tissue throughout the nasopharynx
forms a protective ‘ring’, known as Waldeyer’s ring, which helps prevent
the spread of infection into the middle ear and lower respiratory tract. 
2.2 THE PHYSIOLOGY OF HEARING
The ear is a remarkable device that is able to detect, collect, amplify and
encode acoustic information in order to transmit it to the centres of the
brain where it can be decoded and utilized by the listener.
For physiological purposes the ear can be thought of as two functional
pieces of apparatus; one that conducts the sound and another that
perceives or ‘analyses’ the sound reaching it.

Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
33
2.2.1 The conduction of sound
This apparatus consists of the pinna, the external auditory canal, the
tympanic membrane, the chain of ossicles and the cochlear fluids.
(a) The pinna
The prime function of the pinna is to act as a sound collection device. It
also aids localization of sound in both the horizontal and vertical
planes.
The shape of the pinna enables it to funnel the sound towards the
external meatus and its forward-tilted angle helps to focus on sound from
the front. The pinna also amplifies the sound signal slightly, providing gain
of about 5 dB, depending on the frequency of the sound.
Vertical localization is helped by the time delay between the main signal
and the pinna echoes. This can be as efficient monaurally as binaurally.
Figure 2.10. The pharynx.

34
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
The echoes result from reflections of sound within the pinna; sound
arriving from above will produce an echo faster than that from below, at
about 100 and 300 microseconds respectively.
Horizontal localization is mainly a function of balanced binaural
hearing and is due to:
• The head shadow effect (see also section 9.1.3). This arises when short
wavelength sound, that is the higher frequencies above approximately
1500 Hz, are attenuated by reflection off the head. An average intensity
difference of about 6 dB occurs between the two ears in this way. The
longer wavelength lower frequencies tend to bend around the head
(diffract) so are not attenuated significantly.
• Difference in time of arrival. This has an effect on the lower frequen-
cies, which bend around the head to reach the opposite ear. A differ-
ence of about 600 microseconds will arise between the ears.
• Phase difference. As a consequence of difference in time of arrival, sound
waves will be at different phases in their progression. This provides
useful localization information for sounds below 1500 Hz – that is those
with a wavelength greater than the distance between the ears.
(b) The external auditory meatus
The ear canal has two main functions. Firstly, it is involved in protection;
the cerumen and hairs along its outer lining help to protect the ear from
foreign bodies and to prevent dirt from reaching the tympanic membrane.
Being curved, it can also protect the drum and middle ear from trauma.
Secondly, the canal acts as a resonance tube. The average canal is about 2.5
cm long, and at this length the resonant frequency lies at about 3 kHz.
Sound around this frequency is amplified, usually by about 10 dB to
15 dB, although wide inter-individual variations do occur.
(c) The middle ear
Once the sound has reached the tympanic membrane, the alternating
compressions and rarefactions of the sound wave move the drum in and
out and with it the handle of the malleus. The actual movement of the
drum is quite complex and varies with different frequencies. The incus
moves with the malleus, rocking on a linear axis running through the neck
of the malleus and the body and short process of the incus. These
movements are transmitted to the stapes, which also has a complex mode
of movement, sometimes in and out as a piston or more of a rocking
action; this, too, is frequency and intensity dependent.

Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
35
The function of the middle ear is to conduct sound to the cochlea
efficiently. In order to do this it must overcome the impedance mismatch
between air and the cochlear fluids. It takes considerably more force to
disturb fluid molecules than those of air and the middle ear acts as a trans-
former to build up the pressure to a sufficient level. The overall gain is
between 25 dB and 30 dB. This is achieved in several ways:
• Areal ratio. The tympanic membrane has a much larger area than the
oval window, 65 mm2 and 3.2 mm2 respectively, which represents a
ratio of 20:1. The effective area of the drum, that is excluding the pars
flaccida, is about two-thirds of the total, giving an actual ratio of about
14:1. The force is therefore concentrated on to a much smaller area.
• Leverage action. Due to the relative position of the ossicles, the malleus
and incus tend to move together as a single unit with the effective
fulcrum lying nearer to the stapes. This produces an increase in
leverage at the stapes footplate of 1.32:1.
• Characteristics of the tympanic membrane itself. The conical shape of
the drum tends to concentrate sound energy, particularly high frequen-
cies, at the umbo. As the drum is set at an oblique angle in the meatus,
this effectively increases the surface area. These contributions are fairly
minimal.
The two muscles of the middle ear, the stapedius and the tensor tympani,
have an important role to play in the conductive function of the middle
ear. They produce an increase in the impedance of the ossicular chain by
introducing stiffness into the system. The overall acoustic impedance of
the middle ear is dependent on the resistance or friction, which is
independent of frequency, and reactance (a combination of stiffness and
mass), which is frequency dependent. A system with high reactance due to
stiffness will impede the lower frequencies far more than the higher
frequencies.
The more important of the two muscles is the stapedius. On contrac-
tion, this pulls backwards and slightly outwards, thus reducing movement
of the stapes in the oval window. This is most effective for lower frequency
sounds. In normally hearing ears, pure tone stimuli between the range
70 dB to 90 dB above threshold will cause the muscle to contract in both
the ipsilateral and the contralateral ear; the level may be lower for noise.
The predictable nature of this response, the stapedial reflex, is used
diagnostically (section 13.2.7). More reliable contraction is obtained
below 250 Hz and attenuation here can be in the order of 20 dB to 30 dB.
Above 1000 Hz it becomes unreliable, producing minimal attenuation.

36
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
The tensor tympani contracts as part of the overall ‘startle’ response.
The muscle requires sound at high intensity to produce contraction,
which then pulls forwards and slightly inwards, tensing the drum and
producing more reflection of sound. The tensor tympani will also contract
following tactile stimuli, such as puffing air on the cornea or touching the
meatus. It is less predictable than the stapedial reflex but at high sound
levels it is difficult to separate the two responses.
The reflexes serve to protect the ear from high-intensity sound.
However, this is ineffective with very transient noise, such as gunfire, as
there is a delay in muscle contraction. There is certainly a function in
protecting the ears from continuous acoustic trauma and from one’s own
voice when shouting. The reflex is also thought to improve speech intelli-
gibility in noise, as the higher frequencies are attenuated less and the
masking effect is thus reduced.
Most conduction of sound to the inner ear is by the route described,
across the middle ear; this is called air conduction. Some sound energy,
however, is transmitted directly to the cochlea through the bones of the
skull, bypassing the middle ear. This fact is used clinically to assess the
ability of the inner ear to hear sound without any interference from the
outer or middle ear functions. Bone conduction is one of the normal
routes of hearing for some sound, particularly for hearing one’s own
voice. The cochlea is stimulated by bone conduction in three ways:
• Direct stimulation from vibrations of the skull. The round window is
less rigid than the oval window, so pressure release is possible; this is
the compression effect.
• The natural resonance of the ossicular chain (around 2kHz) adds to
sound reaching the cochlea directly via the skull. This is known as the
inertial effect. The effect is lost with otosclerosis (Carhart’s notch).
• Sound radiates into the meatus and produces pseudo-air conduction.
This is linked with the occlusion effect, where occlusion of the meatus
produces an enhancement of low frequency sound within the meatus,
together with a reduction in masking by ambient noise.
Malformation, damage or disease in any part of the conduction apparatus
produces a conductive hearing loss.
2.2.2 The perception of sound
The apparatus for perception of sound is the sense organ of hearing, the
organ of Corti, contained in the cochlea. Here sound is first analysed into
its component frequencies before being relayed to the auditory areas of
the brain via the cochlear nerve.

Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
37
Cochlear function can be thought of as two essential processes, trans-
mission and transduction. Transmission is the transference of acoustic
energy from the oval window to the organ of Corti. Transduction is the
means by which this sound energy is converted to electrical impulses in
the auditory nerve fibres.
(a) The transmission process
The theories of von Békésy, first described in 1943, still form the basis of
our understanding of this process. His ‘travelling wave theory’ describes
how vibrations at the oval window of a frequency greater than 20 Hz, set
up a wave along the basilar membrane beginning at the base of the
cochlea and travelling towards the apex. At some point, the wave attains a
maximum displacement. The mechanical properties of the basilar
membrane vary along its length. The point at which the peak displacement
of the wave arises is dependent on the frequency of the sound and how
the varying mass and stiffness of the membrane impede its passage. The
base of the basilar membrane is relatively narrow and stiff, which causes it
to respond best to high frequencies. The apex of the basilar membrane is
wider and less stiff, which causes it to respond best to low frequencies.
Thus, lower frequencies pass further along the membrane and reach a
peak nearer the apex, whereas the peak for high frequencies lies nearer
the base. The narrowness of the peak or area on the basilar membrane that
responds indicates the sharpness of the tuning. The position of the peak is
normally very highly tuned and is determined very precisely by the
frequency of the stimulating sound (Figure 2.11). This is known as the
characteristic frequency (CF). The basilar membrane may be likened to a
piano keyboard in as much as one end is concerned with the high frequen-
cies and the other with the low frequencies. The tuning of the basilar
membrane is important for frequency discrimination. In effect the basilar
membrane works as a frequency analyser. 
Experiments have shown that tuning is even more precise, actively
involving groups of outer hair cells in addition to the ‘passive’ mechanical
properties of the basilar membrane. The outer hair cells, activated by
efferent nerve fibres, contract and selectively stiffen the basilar membrane,
which sharpens its response by ‘vibration amplification’. This causes a
small region of the cochlea to vibrate in response to low intensity (weak)
sounds. In other words, with weak sounds the cochlea is finely tuned to
individual frequencies. High intensity (strong) sounds cause a wider
region to vibrate and fine-tuning is reduced. The pattern of vibration on
the basilar membrane is resolved as an excitation pattern of neural firing.
The wide range of signals encountered in daily life cannot be encoded
directly into neural responses since most neurons have a dynamic range in

38
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
the order of 30 dB. The cochlea provides compressive action through the
mechanical effects of the outer hair cells. The structural role of the outer
hair cells results in the cochlea having greater basilar membrane
movement with low input levels. With a low sound input level (below
30 dBSPL) the active outer hair cell mechanism amplifies the response on
the basilar membrane by a maximum of about 50 dB. Thus the system is
most sensitive in quiet and compresses at a ratio of about 3:5 for mid level
inputs. As the sound input level increases the amplification decreases
until, with a sound input greater than about 90 dBSPL, there is no
additional amplification and the response is linear once more (Ruggero
and Rich, 1991). Damage to the outer hair cells will therefore result not
only in reduced audibility but also in a loss of compression giving rise to
recruitment.
Tuning curves (Figure 2.12) are graphs that show how finely tuned are
the nerve fibres of the cochlea. Each tuning curve refers to the threshold of
a single fibre and is usually plotted as a function of frequency. The
frequency at which the threshold is lowest is known as the characteristic
frequency. A logarithmic scale is used for tuning curves because the
frequency response relates to distance on the basilar membrane in a way
that is approximately logarithmic. The tuning curve will therefore usually
appear steeper on the high frequency side than on the low frequency side.
Curves obtained above threshold are known as iso-rate contours. 
Figure 2.11. Békésy’s travelling wave concept: the movement of the stapes in the oval
window creates a travelling wave (a), which moves along the basilar membrane.
Pressure is released via the round window (b).

Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
39
A normal tuning curve will have a sharply tuned tip and a broadly tuned
tail. The outer hair cells are responsible for the sharp tips of the tuning
curves. When outer hair cells are damaged, the active amplification is
reduced. Sensitivity to weak sounds is reduced and sounds must be more
intense to be heard. The tuning curve will lose its sharp tip and appear
more broadly tuned. The shape of the tuning curves can be associated
with certain types of damage (see Figure 2.13). 
Otoacoustic emissions or ‘cochlear echoes’, which are by-products of the
outer hair cells’ contribution to vibration, can be measured in the ear canal.
Otoacoustic emissions are linked to hearing ability and are used to provide
an objective method of screening hearing in babies, see Chapter 14.
When two tones are close in frequency, the nerve fibre firing rate
increases. However, if the frequency of the second tone is just outside the
area covered by the tuning curve, the first tone will be reduced; this is
known as two-tone suppression. Where tones are below about 5 kHz the
nerve fibres appear to fire at the same time, which is known as being
phase-locked. This is thought to be important in localization and in coding
Figure 2.12. A tuning curve. This single nerve fibre is finely tuned to around 4 kHz
threshold but will respond to a wider range of frequencies when the sound level is
greater.

40
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
the formant frequencies in speech. Damage to the outer hair cells may
affect speech understanding as well as hearing threshold levels.
Other mechanisms are involved further along the auditory pathway to
increase the accuracy of information reaching the auditory cortex.
(b) The transduction process within the cochlea
The tectorial membrane does not move in the same way as the basilar
membrane; when the wave travels along it causes the tectorial membrane
to move forwards as well as upwards, then backwards as well as
downwards. The stereocilia of the hair cells are embedded in the tectorial
membrane and this shearing motion bends them first one way, towards
the tallest stereocilia, and then the other way, away from it. Joining their
tips are transduction links (Figure 2.14) and the tension on these is alter-
nately tightened and released. Normally in the resting position the
Figure 2.13. Abnormal tuning curves associated with (a) intact inner hair cells, and
widespread loss of outer hair cells and (b) severe damage to both inner and outer hair
cells. (After Moore, 1998.)

Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
41
endolymph outside the hair cell has a positive charge of approximately 
80 millivolts (mV), while the inside of the cell has a negative charge of
approximately –60 mV. It is thought that as the transduction links tighten it
is as if a ‘trap door’ opens at the top of each cilia. An electrical potential
gradient is thus set up, which causes an ionic interchange and results in
the hair cell becoming more positively charged. This, in turn, stimulates
release of neurotransmitters at the base of the cell, which fire the nerve
impulse; a wave of depolarization passes down the length of the axon.
This nerve impulse is called the action potential and can be recorded by
placing electrodes in the cochlea. The value of the potential is a few mV
and is fixed; that is, a higher intensity sound produces more firing of the
action potentials but not larger potentials.
Figure 2.14. The transduction links between the stereocilia of a hair cell (an inner hair
cell is shown). Shearing of the stereocilia is thought to cause ‘trapdoors’ to open and
the intracellular potential is driven more positive.
mV
mV

42
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Other potentials have been found in the cochlea by using recording
electrodes:
• The cochlear microphonic. This has a maximum value of 3 or 4 mV and
is an alternating current (AC) potential, which arises in the outer hair
cells in response to a sound stimulus. It is a voltage analogue of the
original waveform, which remains linear to about 100 dBSPL and then
saturates. It has proved valuable in research and also in assessing
cochlear function in diagnostic investigation. 
• Summating potential. This again arises from the outer hair cells. It is a
direct current (DC) potential that is usually negative. It tends to occur
in response to high intensities and is the sum of various responses to
the travelling waveform envelope.
Understanding of the perception of sound is increasing with new
research. Since the concept of von Békésy was published there have been
many refinements. It is now known that the nerve fibres themselves show
frequency selectivity and that they have a spontaneous firing rate of just
above 0 to 150 per second. Firing of the nerves occurs only at particular
phases of the waveform, allowing a temporal regularity in response to a
periodic stimulus. The fibres themselves are distributed in an orderly
manner in the main auditory nerve bundle. Fibres that respond to high
frequencies are on the periphery, graduating to those responding to the
lowest frequencies right in the centre. This is known as tonotopic organi-
sation.
Malformation, damage or disease occurring in any part of the percep-
tive apparatus may cause sensorineural hearing loss.
(c) The central connections of the cochlear nerve
The nerve cells that supply the cochlea are described as bipolar. That is,
they each have a body and two axons. One axon terminates at the base of a
hair cell and the other in the cochlear nucleus of the brainstem. The cell
bodies themselves are grouped together in the osseous spiral lamina of
the cochlea and therefore called the spiral ganglion. All groups of nerve
cell bodies in the peripheral nervous system are called ganglia, whereas in
the central nervous system they are called nuclei.
From the spiral ganglion, the nerve fibres join together to form the
cochlear nerve and pass through the internal auditory canal to enter the
brainstem. From here the nerve divides into two and terminates in the
ventral and dorsal cochlear nuclei. Most fibres from these nuclei cross
over to the superior olivary nucleus of the opposite hemisphere. The

Anatomy and physiology of the ear 
43
Figure 2.15. The pathways to the auditory cortex.
pathway continues via the lateral lemniscus, the inferior colliculus, the
medial geniculate body and then on to the auditory cortex. There is also
crossing of fibres at the level of the inferior colliculus. Some fibres follow
this pathway on the same side, thus the cortex of each hemisphere
receives information from both ears, but the majority of information
received in the left auditory cortex will have originated in the right ear
(Figure 2.15).
Superior
olivary
nucleus

44
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
FURTHER READING
Berlin CI (1997) Neurotransmission and Hearing Loss. Basic science, diagnosis and
management. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group.
Graham J, Martin, M (eds) (2000) Ballantyne’s Deafness. 6 edn. London: Whurr.
Luxon, LM, Davies, RA (1997) Handbook of Vestibular Rehabilitation. London: Whurr.
Moore BCJ (1998) Cochlear Hearing Loss. London: Whurr.
Pickles JO (1988) An Introduction to the Physiology of Hearing. 2 edn. London:
Academic Press.
Sahley TL, Nodar RH, Musiek FE (1997) Efferent Auditory System. Structure and func-
tion. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group.

45
Chapter 3
Medical aspects of hearing
loss
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Hearing loss may be due to a wide variety of pathological processes occur-
ring in any part of the ear. ‘Pathology’ means the study of disease. Diseases
or disorders can be considered under the following headings:
• traumatic or from injury;
• infective or from micro-organisms;
• tumours;
• iatrogenic caused by physician or surgeon by use of medication,
surgical accident or unsterile operation;
• idiopathic or of unknown cause;
• physiological disorders including degenerative effects of ageing;
• congenital or from birth whether inherited or caused by environmental
factors.
Human cells contain 23 pairs of chromosomes. Twenty-two pairs are
known as autosomes and are numbered 1 to 22. The remaining two
chromosomes (one pair) are known as sex chromosomes. Abnormalities
may involve the autosomes or the sex chromosomes or they may involve
only individual genes. All hereditary characteristics, for example eye
colour, are carried by genes on the chromosomes.
Congenital defects may be due to ‘environmental’ factors (such as
illness during pregnancy), but a high proportion of congenital deafness is
inherited. In some inherited conditions the symptoms may not be
apparent at birth but may develop later in life. Many malformations or
traits occur together and these may be termed as a syndrome. A family
history will generally determine whether an inherited trait is dominant,
recessive, or sex-linked.

46
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
3.2 PATHOLOGY OF THE OUTER EAR
3.2.1 Congenital conditions of the outer ear
(a) Malformation of the pinna
Sometimes children are born with an accessory or extra pinna or with a
tag of soft tissue and cartilage. This may be large or quite small and it
may be situated away from the normal site of ear formation. Treatment
is by removal. Both microtia (poorly developed pinna) and anotia (no
pinna) may be associated with other abnormalities of the conductive
auditory system and are therefore indicators for further investigation.
(b) Aural fistula
An aural fistula or sinus may be present. This can be quite a deep
channel leading from the skin surface. Deep removal may be necessary
or it can become cystic. The operation must be very carefully done as
the facial nerve runs past this area and damage can lead to facial paral-
ysis and permanent disfigurement.
(c) Atresia
Atresia can be present, in which case there is complete closure or
absence of the external auditory meatus, and an operation is required
to make an opening. There may be a partial closure or extreme narrow-
ness (stenosis) of the canal by an overgrowth of bone in or along the
meatus, and this may go with a partial lack of development of the mid-
face.
(d) Hereditary conditions
Hereditary conditions are those that are passed down to children from
their parents due to genetic defects. There are a number of conditions
that are hereditary and culminate in a lack of growth of parts of the face;
probably the best example that affects the outer ear is Treacher Collin’s
syndrome. The main defects in this case may be poorly formed cheek
bones, poorly formed pinnae, sloping eyes with nicks in the eyelids
(colobomas) and hearing impairment (see also section 3.3.1).

Medical aspects of hearing loss 
47
3.2.2 Acquired conditions of the outer ear
(a) Injury to the pinna
The pinna may be damaged by injury or trauma. The most common injury
is a bruising or haematoma, which is a collection of blood in the tissues,
often caused by boxing or an assault. Treatment should be carried out as
early as possible, by aspirating away the blood with a syringe or by making
an incision to drain it. If this is not undertaken, the pressure of the
contained blood can cause a local death of the tissues and formation of
scar tissue, which may result in a ‘cauliflower ear’.
Sometimes an earlobe is torn, often when wearing earrings. There may
even be the complete loss of a pinna. If possible, any cartilage should be
retained for later plastic surgery reconstruction. It is difficult to apply a
plastic false ear to the side of the head securely, so either a loop of tissue is
formed or dental osseo-integrated implants are inserted into the mastoid
bone to aid retention.
(b) Injury to the tympanic membrane
Most commonly this is caused by children poking objects into their own or
other people’s ears. It can also be caused by unskilled treatment or syringing,
or by a slap or blow on the ear. Gunfire or explosion can cause even greater
damage as the initial explosive pressure is followed by an air vacuum and
suction, (blast trauma).
In a similar way, the eardrum can be damaged by barotrauma, which is a
rapid alteration in air pressure caused by the sudden descent of an unpres-
surized aircraft or rapid ascent from deep sea diving. The drum may also be
involved when the temporal bone of the skull is fractured by a sideways blow.
The symptoms are usually pain with minimal bleeding, deafness, tinnitus
and vertigo. The signs are bleeding or a visible tear on the drum. It is best not
to syringe or clear the ear but to give systemic antibiotics and leave it to heal.
(c) Foreign bodies
Objects in the ears are relatively common, especially in children. Hard
objects, such as beads, can be hooked out. Soft objects of any sort, except
vegetable matter, which can swell up when wetted, can all be syringed out,
as shown in Figure 3.1. Forceps and tweezers are not generally used as

48
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
these may push objects even further in but a special loop can sometimes
be used successfully. All such removals should be undertaken by a
medically qualified person.
Insects occasionally enter the ear and cause intense irritation by their
buzzing. This can be deadened by pouring warm olive oil into the canal.
(d) Excessive wax
Wax may accumulate in the external auditory meatus. New wax is soft and
moist, and light in colour. With age, wax becomes dark and hard. It may
sometimes block the meatus and, if impacted, it may press on the drum.
Excessive wax can disturb hearing. Tinnitus may also occur, usually of low
frequency.
Wax may be removed by syringing, (Figure 3.1) often after it has been
softened using drops of warmed olive oil, or similar, for a few days.
Syringing should not be undertaken if there is any suspicion of a perfora-
tion and otologists generally remove wax dry, often using a wax hook or by
suction.
Figure 3.1. Syringing the ear.
(e) Infection of the outer ear
Generally speaking, infections may be caused by all kinds of micro-organ-
isms, bacteria, viruses, fungi, lice, worms and so on. Infection in the nasal
passages and sinuses is controlled by the mucous cells lining these areas,
which have myriads of small moving hair-like processes called cilia. These

Medical aspects of hearing loss 
49
all act in unison to clear bacteria away. In the ears, bacteria and dust are
extruded in the soft wax. In the mouth and throat, bacteria can be washed
away in the saliva, which itself has some antiseptic properties as do the
tears in the eyes.
The reaction of the tissues to infection is known as inflammation. The
blood vessels enlarge, lymphocytes and macrophage cells collect in the
area and migrate through the vessel walls to mop up the infective organ-
isms (phagocytosis). Drainage of the infected area is via the lymphatic
vessels to the relevant lymph nodes, which can become enlarged and
tender.
Whether the inflammation controls the infection depends on the
virulence of the organism and also on the health and resistance of the
individual. If the person is unfit, perhaps on a poor diet, anaemic or
diabetic, resistance will be impaired and the infection could therefore
worsen. Some bacteria give off toxins that lower the resistance of the
tissues and facilitate the spread of the infection.
Viruses are smaller particles than bacteria and have no cell membranes
of their own; they can only live and multiply in the cells of the host.
Viruses do not respond to ordinary antibiotics. Treatment can be by anti-
virals and analgesics and by boosting the patient’s general fitness.
Otitis externa or acute dermatitis of the outer ear is an inflammation 
of the skin covering the pinna or lining the external auditory meatus. 
The condition often occurs in conjunction with dandruff of the scalp. 
It can cause extreme irritation of the area, which may be due to 
staphylococcus, or to fungi, which collect in any cracks. This can be
remedied by treating the dandruff and by local application of antibiotic
creams or fungicides.
Eczema or sensitization dermatitis is an allergic form of skin inflamma-
tion that can cause vesicles and oozing. (A vesicle is a small swelling filled
with a clear exudate – not with pus.) The ear should be cleaned carefully
and any general allergy should be treated.
Herpes is an infection with a particular virus of the herpes family.
Herpes simplex may cause a bright red inflammation and ulceration but
usually heals within 10 days. 
Furunculosis is the presence of a furuncle or boil, which is caused by
infection of the hair follicle by staphylococcus bacteria. Boils within the
cartilage in the external auditory meatus are excruciatingly painful and any
swelling may cause a hearing loss. Treatment is with antibiotics and the
application of warm glycerine and antiseptic on the area using a soft
cotton wool wick in the ear passage.
Otomycosis is a fungal infection and is treated by keeping the ear dry
and applying nystatin or other antifungal ointments.

50
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
(f) Tumours
Tumours may be either benign or malignant (cancerous). Benign tumours
are commonly exostoses or outgrowths of normal bone and are usually
referred to as osteoma. These may be left alone if small but, if large and
interfering with hearing, they can be removed with a small dental-type
drill, using an operating microscope.
The most common malignant tumour in this area is the basal cell carci-
noma, or rodent ulcer. This usually affects the upper edge of the pinna
probably being brought on by ultraviolet sunlight. It may appear as an
ulcer that fails to heal and, if left, it can spread to the scalp and inner ear
and cause great destruction of the tissues.
Malignant skin cancer can spread via the lymphatic scavenger system
and can appear in the auricular or cervical lymph nodes. Early removal is
made by cutting a V-shaped notch in the pinna including a 10 mm
surround of healthy tissue to prevent recurrence. If left, it can involve the
facial nerve and cause a facial palsy and unbearable pain. Any affected
lymph nodes in the area of the neck must also be removed by an extensive
operation.
3.3 PATHOLOGY OF THE MIDDLE EAR
3.3.1 Congenital conditions of the middle ear
In certain disorders, which are mainly hereditary genetic abnormalities,
there may be a malformation of the middle ear, such as a lack of, or malfor-
mation of, one or more of the ossicles. Some examples include:
• Treacher Collin’s syndrome. Autosomal-dominant genetic defect,
leading to poorly formed cheek-bones, fish-like mouth, sloping eyes,
nicks in the eyelids (colobomas), poorly developed outer and middle
ears, often with atresia of ear canals. Hearing defects are mainly
conductive.
• Crouzon’s syndrome. Autosomal-dominant. Lack of growth mid-face,
abnormally shaped head with central prominence in the frontal region.
Hearing defects that are mainly conductive.
• Down’s syndrome. Chromosomal abnormality (the presence of an
extra number 21 chromosome), resulting in learning difficulties and
classic facial features including small pinnae and narrow ear canals.
High incidence: about 1 in 700 live births; risk increases with age of
mother. Hearing defects may be conductive, sensorineural or mixed.

Medical aspects of hearing loss 
51
• Paget’s disease. Autosomal-recessive skeletal disorder. Although the
condition is present from birth, the progressive deformities only
become apparent around the second year of life. Mixed progressive
hearing loss due to continued new bone formation at base of skull.
3.3.2 Acquired conditions of the middle ear
(a) Traumatic conditions
Trauma may be direct – for example damage caused by poking an object
into the middle ear – or it may be indirect, often due to a blow on the side
of the head, which may cause damage to the temporal bone. Symptoms of
the latter are usually bleeding from the ear, bruising over the mastoid
bone, pain and deafness. Signs may include a split in the tympanic
membrane, haemorrhage in the ear canal, facial palsy and other signs of
local nerve damage. Radiographically there may be signs of fracture in the
temporal area, which is confirmed by a computerized tomogram (CT)
scan. Treatment is by cleaning the ear canal and giving antibiotics systemi-
cally. Syringing should not be undertaken.
(b) Infective conditions
Otitis media
Otitis media is an inflammation of the middle ear, which is usually accom-
panied by some temporary loss of hearing.
Air enters the Eustachian tube during swallowing in order to balance
the air pressure in the middle ear with ambient atmospheric pressure. If
the Eustachian tube is blocked, which is often due to infection, normal
middle ear pressure cannot be maintained because oxygen is absorbed by
the tissues. The resultant ‘negative pressure’ (or partial vacuum) causes
fluid to exude from the walls of the middle ear. The fluid may be sterile or
infected (pus) and it may build up sufficiently to cause painful pressure on
the eardrum. If the eardrum bursts, the fluid is released, the pain subsides,
and the Eustachian tube gradually clears and opens again. A perforation in
the lower part of the eardrum is considered safe and will usually heal
uneventfully, although it may leave an area of weakened scar tissue. A
perforation in the upper part of the eardrum is considered dangerous
because of its close proximity to important structures (see Figure 3.2).
Middle ear infection is treated by antibiotics and painkillers.
Children are very prone to otitis media because their Eustachian tubes
are more horizontal and less rigid than those of adults and their immune

52
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
systems are less well developed. Where the condition is recurrent, a sticky
residue may adhere to the ossicles, inhibiting their movement and causing
a hearing loss. This condition is commonly known as ‘glue ear’. Where
otitis media is long-standing or repeated, or in cases of glue ear, a
myringotomy may be undertaken. A small incision is made in the lower
part of the drum to release the fluid and a plastic grommet may be
inserted in the eardrum (Figure 3.2) to ventilate the middle ear and thus
prevent recurrence.
Figure 3.2. ‘Glue ear’ – secretory otitis media and its treatment.
If not treated early enough, middle ear infection may spread and can
result in major dangerous disease, such as meningitis or a brain abscess
(see Figure 3.3), symptoms being acute headache and very high tempera-
ture. Before the use of antibiotics, middle ear infection often caused an
infection of the mastoid air cells (mastoiditis) and the best cure at that
time was a mastoidectomy, which was a painful and dangerous operation
to open up and drain the area. Early recognition and treatment with
antibiotics is therefore of great importance and may be life saving.
Cholesteatoma
Dangerous chronic (long-standing) otitis media usually occurs in a middle
ear where the Eustachian tube is never fully open. The air pressure is lower
in the middle ear than in the external ear canal, thus the greater external air
pressure gradually pushes into the soft, flaccid upper part of the drum to

Medical aspects of hearing loss 
53
form a pouch. Epithelial skin cells lining the ear canal are continually being
shed and migrate naturally out of the ear canal, but those within this pouch
cannot be cleared away by natural migration. Gradually an accumulation of
skin cells, wax, dust and bacteria builds up into a sticky mass, which is
termed a cholesteatoma. This builds up further, becomes more infected,
pushes into the outer attic wall and begins to discharge a foul-smelling pus.
As it enlarges further it can destroy the ossicular chain and may even erode
the roof of the middle ear and cause intracranial infections. It may also
burst through and damage the labyrinth and/or the facial nerve to cause a
facial palsy. Symptoms and signs are of a recurrent foul discharge, pain,
deafness and possibly vertigo. Treatment is by operating, opening the area
widely and cleaning the whole middle ear and mastoid air cells, cleaning
out the cholesteatoma and drying up any discharge. If untreated, the
complications can be very serious indeed.
(c) Facial paralysis
Facial paralysis may arise from damage to the facial nerve via the mastoid air
cells (Figure 2.7), or the nerve may be damaged in an accident or opera-
tion. Paralysis of the muscles of facial expression results, causing marked
asymmetry of the face with possible loss of taste and salivation. People thus
affected cannot smile, raise their eyebrows or close the eye of the affected
side. If long term, the eyelids may have to be sewn together to protect the
Figure 3.3. Otitis media with complications.

54
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
eye. If the cause is unknown, it is termed a Bell’s palsy. Treatment is often
with steroids. There is also a surgical procedure, called facial hypoglossal
anastomosis, to re-route the facial nerve. In addition, these patients may be
referred to a physiotherapist or speech and language therapist for facial
exercises and/or electrical or thermal stimulation.
(d) Otosclerosis
Otosclerosis is an exuberant growth of normal bone, the cause of which is
unknown. It usually affects the middle ear but may also affect the inner
ear. Extra spongy-type bone is produced, especially around the oval and
round windows. This spongy bone gradually hardens.
The stapes may therefore become immovable causing deafness. The
condition occurs in young adults and there may be a family history. It may
be accelerated during pregnancy, probably due to hormonal activity.
A conductive hearing loss will be present, which is greatest in the low
frequencies. A dip in the bone conduction threshold at 2 kHz is often
noted (Figure 3.4 (a)). This is known as Carhart’s notch. In later stages of
otosclerosis, there may be sensorineural involvement as the bony growth
invades the inner ear. Treatment is by microscopic surgery, the stapes
being removed wholly or partly and replaced with a prosthesis, which may
be a small metal or Teflon plunger wedged into place at the oval window
with a piece of foam or fat (Figure 3.5). The operation is all done through
an incision in the tympanic membrane and the working end of the piston
is usually hooked around the bottom end of the incus. The operation is
termed a stapedectomy.
3.4 PATHOLOGY OF THE INNER EAR
In the inner ear, disease may produce dizziness due to a disturbance of
fluid levels in the labyrinth, or it may affect the cochlea or the auditory
nerve causing sensorineural hearing loss. As before, diseases may be classi-
fied as congenital or acquired. 
3.4.1 Congenital conditions of the inner ear
Congenital hearing loss may be caused by maldevelopment of the inner
ear, as in hereditary genetic abnormalities, or by environmental damage
such as occurs when infectious diseases in the mother cross over the
placenta to affect the unborn child – for example, syphilis,
cytomegalovirus (CMV), or German measles (rubella). Development can
also be affected by severe jaundice, such as that due to rhesus factor
antibodies in the mother’s blood, or by other neonatal/perinatal factors
such as anoxia, or use of antibiotic drugs. Many congenital hearing losses

Medical aspects of hearing loss 
55
Figure 3.4. Audiograms for the left ear illustrating (a) otosclerosis. (b) typical noise
damage. (c) presbyacusis.
(a)
(b)
(c)

56
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
of ‘unknown’ cause are non-syndromic genetic losses. Examples of
congenital conditions associated with sensorineural hearing loss include:
• Usher’s syndrome. Autosomal recessive genetic condition. Moderate to
severe bilateral sensorineural hearing loss is present at birth.
Progressive blindness usually starts in teens due to retinitis pigmentosa.
• Waardenburg’s syndrome. Autosomal dominant genetic condition.
Features include a white forelock of hair, different coloured segments
in the eyes, and mild-to-profound hearing loss, which may be unilateral
or bilateral and sometimes progressive.
• Turner’s syndrome. Sex chromosome defect, which is not inherited.
Features include low hairline, webbed neck, short stature, kidney
Figure 3.5. The middle-ear operation of stapedectomy.

Medical aspects of hearing loss 
57
defects and mild sensorineural and conductive hearing loss. Occurs
only in females.
• Rubella (German measles). Viral infection contracted from the mother
during pregnancy. Defects vary depending on the stage of development
of the embryo/foetus when the infection occurs. Features include
hearing loss, heart disease, eye disorders, psychomotor problems and
behavioural disorders.
• Cytomegalovirus (CMV). Viral infection contracted from the mother
during pregnancy or during birth. The disease in the mother may
present very mild symptoms, such as a runny nose. In the baby, CMV
affects the nervous system. Possible defects include hearing loss,
learning difficulties, spasticity, convulsions and hyperactivity.
• Syphilis. Bacterial infection contracted from the mother during
pregnancy. Defects include slow progressive deafness and other
sensory defects.
3.4.2 Acquired conditions of the inner ear
Acquired inner ear diseases are those caused after birth, possibly by infec-
tion from mumps or meningitis, or they may be caused by an accident,
blow or explosion, or by exposure to loud noise.
(a) Noise damage
Noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL)
This is caused by long exposure to high levels of noise, such as those
found in certain industrial situations, especially prior to the Noise at Work
regulations (Health and Safety Executive, 1989).
At first the noise will cause a temporary threshold shift (TTS), which is
followed by full recovery after a period away from the noise, but after years
of exposure the damage becomes permanent. The longer the duration and
the more intense the noise, the greater will be the damage. All possible
steps should be taken to reduce noise at source and ear protection should
be used where noise exceeds certain levels. These are specified by law. The
protection offered by different types of ear protection varies widely and
the type of protection used should be chosen according to the attenuation
required, based on an analysis of the noise.
Types of noise protection include:
• Disposable earplugs. These are commonly made of plastic foam, which
can be squashed to fit the ear and which then expands to fit the shape
of the individual ear canal. The degree of attenuation will vary. The
maximum attenuation of low frequency will usually be less than 30 dB.

58
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
• Prefabricated earplugs. These are commonly made of soft flexible
plastic. They can be washed with soap and water, although they will
harden over time. Attenuation is similar to disposable plugs.
• Personally moulded plugs. These are commonly made of silicone
rubber and are produced in the same way as an earmould. Some
earplugs are manufactured specifically for certain noises. The limit of
attenuation of low frequency noise is usually around 35dB.
• Ear defenders or ear muffs. These have the appearance of headphones.
The headband is spring loaded to maintain pressure against the sides of
the head and maintain a seal. The degree of attenuation is usually in the
region of 50 dB at certain frequencies. These are the most effective
general type of ear protection. However, if the fit is not tight, air leaks
may typically reduce attenuation by about 5 dB to 15 dB. Some ear
defenders are manufactured for certain noise situations – for example
they could include a peak limiting device to allow speech to be heard
whilst protecting against intermittent loud noise. Such ear defenders
must only be used for the situations for which they are intended.
The European Commission’s Physical Agents Directive applying to noise
(2001) specifies action levels for employers:
• The first action level is 80dB(A), at which ear protection must be made
available.
• The second action level is 85dB(A), at which ear protection must be
worn and, where practicable, noise must be reduced.
• The equivalent action levels for impulse noise are 112Pa and 200Pa.
• There is a limit on personal noise exposure (taking ear protection into
account) of 87dB(A). For impulse noise the limitation is 200Pa. 
The greatest effect on hearing is in the high frequency region. The audio-
gram often shows a ‘notch’ at 4 kHz (Figure 3.4(b)) and the hearing loss is
frequently accompanied by tinnitus, which is often near in frequency to
the area of greatest hearing loss. One theory to help explain the ‘notch’ is
that the natural resonant frequency of the cochlea may be at 4kHz.
Acoustic trauma
This is a term normally reserved (Martin and Summers, 1999) for damage
caused by intense short-duration sound, such as gunfire and resulting in a
sudden high frequency hearing loss. The 4 kHz ‘notch’ is usually present.
(b) Presbyacusis and circulatory disorders
Presbyacusis is the term given to degeneration of hearing in old age. This
is the most common general cause of hearing loss and results in a progres-

Medical aspects of hearing loss 
59
sive bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, mainly in the high frequencies
(Figure 3.4(c)). Presbyacusis can be thought of as the cumulative effect of
living and may include a variety of causes, such as:
• circulatory disorders, including arteriosclerosis, thrombosis and
vascular spasm;
• noise damage, including long exposure at normal levels;
• poor diet;
• normal use of drugs;
• lack of exercise;
• stress.
Circulatory disorders are the most common specific cause of hearing loss.
The cochlea requires a constant, sufficient supply of oxygen and nutrients
to maintain its function. This supply is dependent on the condition of the
heart, the blood vessels and the stria vascularis. Degenerative changes in
the blood vessels, blood clots, high or low blood pressure, and damage due
to elevated blood glucose levels in diabetes may all affect hearing. Even a
brief interruption to the blood supply may cause permanent damage.
(c) Infections
Infections affecting the inner ear are mainly viral or bacterial, although
they may be due to other micro-organisms (section 3.2.2(e)).
Viral infections include:
• Mumps and measles may cause a sensorineural loss. The hearing loss
caused by mumps is often unilateral. Measles may be complicated by
otitis media.
• Shingles (herpes zoster) causes inflammation of the nerves and, if this
involves the auditory nerve, will cause sensorineural loss with pain.
Herpes zoster (shingles) is similar to the virus of chickenpox. It causes
an acute inflammation of the sensory nerve ganglions and when this
occurs in the auditory, facial and trigeminal nerves it causes vesicles
and severe pain in the area of the face that is innervated by the partic-
ular nerve affected. The disease may continue for a long time and may
recur despite treatments.
• Influenza can affect the cochlea via the bloodstream, often with an
additional temporary conductive loss due to otitis media.
Bacterial infections include:
• Diphtheria may cause a sensorineural loss with secondary otitis media.

60
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
• Meningitis may cause sensorineural loss, which can be total. The
meninges or brain lining is inflamed due to direct infection or neglected
otitis media. The condition can be life threatening and is usually treated
with antibiotics. Some cases of meningitis are of viral origin.
Infections from the inner ear must be diagnosed and treated early because
there can be a very dangerous spread of infection to the middle cranial fossa
causing meningitis or a brain abscess, or the infection may spread into the
neighbouring mastoid air cells, or infect the facial nerve to cause a palsy. Early
treatment with antibiotics and surgical drainage may be life saving.
(d) Ototoxic drugs
Hearing loss due to drugs is usually bilateral, may be sudden or progres-
sive, and is often accompanied by tinnitus. Some losses tend to recover
(unless the dosage is very high) when the drug is withdrawn. For example,
analgesics, such as aspirin, cause a reversible high frequency loss;
diuretics, such as frusemide, cause a reversible low to mid frequency loss;
and quinine causes a reversible low frequency loss. Other drugs, such as
the powerful antibiotic streptomycin, cause permanent damage. Some
examples of ototoxic drugs are given in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1. Some examples of ototoxic drugs
Drug type
Examples
Analgesics & anti-inflammatories
Salicylates – Aspirin
Ibuprofen – Motrin, Advil etc.
Naproxen – Anaprox, Naprosyn
Antibiotics
Aminoglycosides – Streptomycin, 
Kanamycin, Neomycin, 
Gentamycin,Tobramysin, Amikacin, 
Nentimicin
Erythromycin – EES, ERY-C, E-mycin, 
llosone, Pediazole
Vancomycin – Vancocin
Loop diuretics
Ethacrynic acid – Edecrin
Frusemide – Lasix
Bumetanide – Bumex
Chemotherapeutic agents
Cisplatin
Nitrogen mustard
Vincristine
Other
Quinine
Steroids
Alcohol

Medical aspects of hearing loss 
61
(e) Conditions involving vertigo
Vertigo may occur in a number of conditions, most commonly through
blockage of the Eustachian tube, suppuration in the labyrinth, tumours
affecting the VIII cranial nerve, after operations on the ear and when
affected by Ménière’s disorder.
Vertigo may be accompanied by nausea and vomiting, and nystagmus
or vibrating movements of the eyes. Assessment will involve investigation
of auditory and vestibular function. Tests usually include noting sponta-
neous and induced nystagmus, which provides valuable diagnostic infor-
mation.
Ménière’s disorder
This is also known as idiopathic episodic endolymphatic hydrops and
usually occurs in middle age. It is idiopathic as the cause is unknown but it
is known to be associated with a raised pressure on, and distension of, the
membranous labyrinth (hydrops) (Figure 3.6). 
Figure 3.6. Cross-section of the cochlea to show expansion of the endolymphatic
compartment in Ménière’s disorder and vestibular neuronitis.
Symptoms are recurrent sudden attacks of dizziness, tinnitus and
deafness. Nystagmus may also be present and attacks may be nocturnal.
The hearing loss is sensorineural and fluctuating. It is usually low
frequency and may be unilateral. The condition must be referred for

62
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
medical care. Hearing aids should only be recommended with the
doctor’s or ENT consultant’s consent, as amplification can induce attacks.
Treatment is usually by medication with anti-sickness and antidepressant
drugs. Alternative treatment can be by surgical decompression or by destruc-
tion of the labyrinth e.g. with an ultrasonic beam or a laser. Surgical decom-
pression involves making an incision in the endolymphatic sac (Figure 2.8) to
increase drainage. An endolymphatic-mastoid shunt may be used. Surgical
decompression often provides remission, sometimes for a number of years.
Surgical destruction may stop the symptoms but deafness thereafter will be
complete. Other treatment includes reduction of fluid, restricting salt in the
diet and prescribing diuretics, which increase fluid excretion.
Vestibular neuronitis
This is a condition similar to Ménière’s disorder but the cause (a virus) is
known and it normally affects younger people.
Acoustic neuroma
Acoustic neuroma is a benign (local, slow-growing) tumour or neuro-
fibroma of the VIII cranial nerve. The condition is relatively rare, having an
incidence of 1 in 100,000 population (O’Donoghue, 1993) but may be
fatal if it is not surgically treated. Its symptoms may be similar to Ménière’s
disorder and clinical assessment includes tests (described in Chapter 13)
to distinguish these conditions. Diagnosis is usually by a CT scan and treat-
ment is by neurosurgery. An acoustic neuroma is actually an overgrowth of
the Schwann cells of the outer sheath of the nerve trunk and has to be
approached by drilling a hole in the skull.
Other causes of vertigo with hearing loss can be:
• postural after head injuries;
• impaired blood supply to the brain;
• infections such as syphilis;
• tumours such as cancer;
• obstructed Eustachian tubes;
• build up of wax causing pressure;
• the taking of ototoxic drugs.
3.5 OTHER CONDITIONS OF THE EAR
3.5.1 Operations on the ear
• Myringotomy is an operation for treating secretory otitis media (glue
ear), carried out under general anaesthetic, in which a curved incision
is made low down in the drum using a tiny, long-handled myringotomy

Medical aspects of hearing loss 
63
knife. A Teflon drain or grommet may be put into the incision to keep
the drain-hole open and thus provide ventilation (Figure 3.3). This
grommet will normally be shed naturally within six months. If
symptoms recur, the operation is repeated and in some cases ‘long
stay’ grommets or tympanostomy tubes (‘T’ tubes) may be used.
• A cortical mastoidectomy is not often used since the advent of
powerful antibiotics. A curved incision is made behind the ear down to
the mastoid process. The mastoid air cells and antrum are removed
with bone drills and the cavity is left to drain. Great care must be taken
to avoid damage to the facial nerve.
• A radical mastoidectomy is undertaken in dangerous chronic disease.
In this case, the entire mastoid and middle ear are drilled away,
including the malleus and incus. The base of the stapes is left sealing
the oval window. The wound is protected with a gauze pad until the
infection is controlled and then the area is grafted over with skin.
• Tympanoplasty is reconstructive surgery performed under an
operating microscope to repair problems within the tympanic cavity
and/or to repair a torn or missing tympanic membrane.
• Stapedectomy is an operation in which the eardrum is removed to
provide access to the ossicles. It is undertaken using an operating
microscope. The stapes is broken off the oval window and an artificial
stapes is inserted. This may be a stainless steel or Teflon piston held in
place by a fat graft or foam pad. The other end of the piston is hooked
on to the incus. The drum is then replaced and packed with a sterile
dressing to keep it in place for 48 hours, after which time the dressing
is carefully removed. Results are normally very good.
• Labyrinthectomy is usually undertaken to treat Ménière’s disorder or
intractable tinnitus or vertigo. The horizontal semicircular canal is
drilled open so that the membranous labyrinth can be removed. As the
middle ear is not opened in this operation healing should be quite
quick, but hearing loss will be permanent. Alternatively, the labyrinth
may be destroyed by lasers or drugs; hearing loss is still permanent.
All these operations have a much greater success rate since the advent of
suitable antibiotics and with the use of operating microscopes and micro-
surgical techniques.
3.5.2 Pain in the ear
Otalgia or pain in the ear may be of local cause or referred from other areas.
(a) Local pain
The common local causes of earache are:

64
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
• a boil in the external auditory meatus (a boil in the cartilage is
especially painful); it is caused by an infection of a hair follicle by
staphylococcus bacteria;
• otitis media, infection of the middle ear;
• mastoiditis, infection of the mastoid air cells;
• malignant disease of the ear.
(b) Referred pain
Pain may be referred from:
• decayed and infected molar teeth;
• impacted wisdom teeth;
• sinusitis, particularly from the maxillary sinus;
• herpes zoster (shingles), viral infection of the nerves;
• neck lesions, such as trapped cervical nerves;
• quinsy or tonsillar abscess;
• tongue with posterior ulcers or cancer;
• ulcers and cancers of the pharynx, larynx and palate;
• glossopharyngeal neuralgia (this is extremely painful);
• tempero-mandibular joint dysfunction – also known as Costen’s
syndrome. In this disease, pain from the joint arises from a malfunction
due to damage, malformation, poor dental occlusion, loss of teeth or
over-closure. Cases should be referred to an oral surgeon;
• temporal arteritis occurs when the outer wall of the temporal artery
becomes diseased. The artery is swollen and painful to touch. A biopsy
is taken and steroids prescribed or surgery advised;
• malignant diseases of the neighbouring areas, in particular the
nasopharynx, the back of the tongue, the palate or the floor of the
mouth, may cause referred pain. A biopsy is required to confirm the
diagnosis, followed by radiotherapy, chemotherapy, surgery or a combi-
nation thereof. Diagnosis must be early or the prognosis is very poor.
3.5.3 Conditions involving tinnitus
In these cases the clients complain of noises in the ear or head, possibly of
pulsation, ringing, hissing or buzzing, usually associated with some loss of
hearing. Any abnormal condition of the ear can bring this on but the main
causes are:
• otosclerosis – overgrowth of bone;
• wax secretions;

Medical aspects of hearing loss 
65
• tumours, benign and malignant;
• Ménière’s disorder;
• fevers;
• raised blood pressure (pulsating tinnitus);
• anaemia;
• nervous diseases (such as multiple sclerosis);
• taking drugs and alcohol;
• over-smoking.
Surgery is not usually required, treatment being with sedatives,
psychotherapy, kindness and care. For further information see section 
13.1.
3.6 SUMMARY
Hearing loss may be conductive or sensorineural in type, or a mixture of
these two. Conductive hearing loss is caused by some abnormality of the
outer or middle ear. The principal causes are:
• impacted wax blocking the ear canal;
• otitis externa or inflammation of the outer ear;
• otitis media or inflammation of the middle ear, glue ear if chronic;
• otosclerosis;
• atresia or stenosis;
• foreign bodies in the ear canal.
Treatment of any condition of the ears should only be undertaken by, or
under the direction of, a medically qualified person.
Sensorineural hearing loss is caused by some abnormality of the
cochlea, auditory nerve or the hearing centres of the brain. Most
sensorineural hearing loss is caused by defects or damage to the cochlea,
due to:
• presbyacusis or the effects of age;
• vascular causes;
• excessive noise;
• hydrops or excessive fluid pressure in the inner ear;
• ototoxic drugs;
• congenital, hereditary and ‘environmental’ causes.

66
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
FURTHER READING
Health and Safety Executive, (1989) Noise at Work. London: Her Majesty’s Stationery
Office.
Ludman H (1988) ABC of Ear, Nose and Throat. London: British Medical Association.
Luxon L, Hinchcliffe R, Williams RG (2000) Noise Induced Hearing Loss. London:
Whurr.
Martini A, Stephens D, Read A (1996) Genetics and Hearing Impairment, London:
Whurr.
Prasher D, Luxon L (eds) (1998) Biological Effects of Noise. London: Whurr.
Prasher D, Luxon L (eds) (1998) Protection Against Noise. London: Whurr.
Simson Hall I, Colman BH (1987) Diseases of the Nose, Throat and Ear. 13 edn.
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.

67
Chapter 4
Speech and intelligibility
4.1 THE SPEECH CHAIN
Speech is an efficient means of communication that is resilient to
background noise, interference and distortion. It can be understood
despite different voices and accents, even on the telephone with no visual
cues and a very restricted frequency range.
When most people consider speech, they think only of the lip and
tongue movements and the sounds that they link with them; but speech is
much more than just the act of speaking. It is concerned with both the
production and the reception of spoken messages.
The speaker must decide what he wants to say and form it into words
and sentences according to the rules of English. He must then send
impulses via his nervous system to the vocal organs to produce the speech
sounds that travel through the air to the listener. The listener’s ear
receives the sounds and passes the messages to the brain, where they are
finally decoded. Speech is a chain of events linking the speaker and the
listener and is often called the speech chain (Figure 4.1).
Figure 4.1. The speech chain. (Diagram by Russ Tate.)
The study of speech, which is known as phonetics, can be broken down
into three main parts:
• articulatory phonetics is concerned with speech production;

68
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
• acoustic phonetics is concerned with the waveform, which provides the
link between the speaker and the listener;
• auditory or perceptual phonetics is concerned with listening skills.
Written language is made up of a series of symbols or letters joined
together to form words. These words are both formed and used according
to certain rules, which are learned in early school and which can be used
later with ease. Similarly, speech is made up of a series of sounds, which
are formed into words. The individual sounds are called phonemes and
these are the smallest units of sound that carry meaning; for example, the
words c-a-t, c-o-t, c-u-t, are all made up of three phonemes. In each of
these words, it is the medial phoneme which alters the meaning.
Phonemes are not identical to written letters, although there is much
overlap. There are very approximately 40 phonemes in English, 20 vowels
and 20 consonants, and an international phonetic alphabet (IPA) exists to
symbolize these. Phonemes are built up into syllables; for example, planet
is one word but made up of two syllables and six phonemes. The
phonemes can be likened to the bricks that build up into the walls (sylla-
bles), which are linked to make the buildings (words) (Figure 4.2).
Figure 4.2. The ‘building bricks’ that make up words.
In English, as in other languages, there are rules that constrain the way
we build words from the individual sounds or phonemes and we cannot
use them in any order; for instance, ‘klr’ does not exist in English, while
‘ng’ only occurs at the end of a syllable, never at the beginning. Words too
are joined together into sentences using certain rules of grammar (syntax)
and meaning (semantics). Grammatical rules will tell us the order of
words that is acceptable; for example, we know at once that ‘horse the I
ride’ is incorrect. However grammar alone is not sufficient, as sentences
must also make sense. ‘The babysitting is high’, for example, is meaning-
less, and so we can see that word order is constrained by both grammatical
and semantic rules.

Speech and intelligibility 
69
Most people could not state the rules of English but nevertheless rarely
break them because they have an unconscious awareness of them.
4.2 THE VOCAL TRACT
The organs involved in speech production (Figure 4.3) are the lungs,
trachea (windpipe), larynx (containing the vocal cords or folds), pharynx
(throat), mouth and nose. The lungs produce the airstream or power to
vibrate the vocal folds, which provide the source of sound. This is
resonated by the vocal tract to produce recognizable speech sounds.
Figure 4.3. The organs of the vocal tract and their role in the production of the speech
signal.
The airstream travels from the lungs up the trachea, through the larynx
to the nose and mouth. The larynx acts as a valve between the throat and
the lungs, able to open and close to control the airflow from the lungs.
This action is largely dependent on the vocal cords, which are really folds
of ligament, hence they are also known as the vocal folds. The space
between the vocal folds is called the glottis and when the vocal folds are
open the glottis forms a ‘V’-shape (Figure 4.4) because the vocal folds
move away from each other only at the back of the trachea. As we speak,

70
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
the air pressure from the lungs vibrates the vocal folds rhythmically. The
frequency of the vibration depends upon how quickly the folds vibrate
and can be altered within a range of about an octave and a half.
The pharynx or throat connects the larynx with the mouth and nose.
The nasal cavity extends from the pharynx and is divided by the septum
into two sections leading to the nostrils. The walls of the two sections are
not flat but have ridges and folds known as the turbinates. At the back of
the nose and throat are the tonsils and adenoids. The nasal cavities can be
closed off by raising the soft palate, in which case the airflow is directed
through the mouth. The shape and size of the cavities of the mouth can be
widely varied by moving the lips, teeth and tongue.
4.3 SPEECH READING
The lips can be rounded, spread or closed and in ‘lip-reading’ a deaf
person watches the position of the lips and teeth to add information to the
reduced sounds he or she hears. As well as watching the lip and teeth
positions, most deaf people will also obtain other clues or cues from facial
expression, posture, context and so on; this is often therefore called
‘speech reading’. Lip-reading alone is not sufficient because groups of
sounds, known as visemes look the same on the lips; for example ‘p’, ‘b’
and ‘m’ cannot be told apart by lip-reading. Discriminating individual
sounds is made even more difficult in running speech, where the amount
of lip-read information diminishes as we run one sound into another.
Running speech is only easier to understand because other linguistic cues
are present, not because of the lip-read patterns available.
When visual cues are combined with some hearing, there can be very
good speech perception; for example, lip-reading can disambiguate
sentences that would sound the same, such as ‘I’ll have to see’ and ‘I’ll
have to sue’. These sentences can easily be differentiated by lip-reading.
Other linguistic cues are also important to comprehension, and
language is rich in cues that we, as hearing people, do not often need to
use. These cues are said to be redundant. Redundancy is present in all
Figure 4.4. Opening the vocal cords. (a) When lightly closed the cords vibrate. (b)
When spaced apart, the airflow is unimpeded.

Speech and intelligibility 
71
levels of language; for example, grammatical cues are signalled more than
once in a sentence. The following sentences include a number of
grammatical cues that signal plurality:
This man is working.
These men are working.
Redundant cues are used as and when they are needed, for example, in
background noise. High redundancy makes language very efficient
because if we do miss parts, we can still understand the whole.
The hearing-impaired cannot use all the cues available to the normally
hearing and evolve their own set, which is very individual. This is one
reason why some hearing-impaired people do so much better than others.
4.4 SPEECH SOUNDS
4.4.1 The formation of vowels and vowel-like
sounds
The vocal tract is really a tube running from the lips at one end to the vocal
cords (or vocal folds) at the other (Figure 4.3). A steady airstream,
provided by the lungs, is set into vibration by the vocal cords, which are
part of the larynx. The vocal cords open and close rapidly to create a
sound, rather like a low frequency buzz, which is known as the funda-
mental laryngeal tone. This is the fundamental frequency of speech and it
determines the pitch of the speaker’s voice. The actual frequency or pitch
is not fixed and depends on the rate of vibration of the vocal cords – the
faster they vibrate, the more cycles per second and the higher the pitch.
The average pitch is given in Table 4.1 but individuals can vary their voice
pitch within a certain range.
Pure tones rarely occur in nature and the sound source produced by
vocal cord vibration contains nearly all possible harmonics. These reduce
in intensity with increasing frequency, by about 12 dB per octave.
Table 4.1. The average frequency of vocal cord vibration.
Subject
Frequency (Hz)
Man
120 (B2)
Woman
220 (A3)
Child
260 (C4)

72
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
The vocal tract can be altered in shape by moving the lips, tongue and
other articulators. The variation in shape modifies the sound spectrum by
resonating some frequencies, thus increasing their amplitude, while
damping, or reducing, others.
When the neck of an empty bottle is blown across and then that of one
partially filled with liquid, the changing column of air alters the resonant
frequency and the resulting difference in pitch can readily be heard. The
sound from the vocal cords is modified in a similar manner, especially by
the mouth. The tongue effectively divides the vocal tract into two cavities –
front and back (Figure 4.5), and the bigger the cavity, the lower is the
resonant frequency produced.
The resonating cavities concentrate energy in particular frequency
regions. These concentrations of energy into narrow bands are the basis of
the vowel formants. The size and shape of the cavities determine the
resonant frequencies or formants. The vocal tract is highly variable and is
changed primarily by the tongue and the lips. The first two formants are
important in the recognition of vowels, the other formants are mainly
used to distinguish who is speaking. Vowels are formed by altering the
shape of the vocal tract without causing any constriction that would create
friction or aperiodic noise.
Figure 4.5. The resonating cavities of the mouth.
The vocal cord vibration is known as the fundamental frequency, which
gives rise to the pitch of the voice. The shape of the vocal tract resonates
the fundamental frequency, concentrating energy, into narrow bands –
formants. The fundamental frequency is not a formant.
Different speakers each produce slightly different sounds but we all
interpret what we hear because the relationship between the formants
remains unchanged. Each vowel can be likened to a chord in music, where
the three notes played together can be recognized as a particular chord,

Speech and intelligibility 
73
no matter in what key it is played. Examples can be seen in Figure 4.6; the
precise frequency values are not important.
All vowels contain the low frequency voicing, below 400 Hz, produced
by vocal cord vibration – the fundamental frequency – but they also have a
formant structure, created by resonances of the vocal tract. The harmonics
are still present but certain ones have been amplified by resonance into
peaks of energy or formants, whereas others have been damped or filtered.
Figure 4.6. The cavities of the mouth and the resultant formants of the vowels (a) ‘ee’
and (b) ‘aw’.
4.4.2 The formation of aperiodic consonants
Some consonants, such as the nasal consonants ‘m’, ‘n’ and ‘ng’, are vowel-
like but most consonants are aperiodic – that is they have a noise compo-
nent. There are two methods by which these consonants can be produced.
• The vocal tract is narrowed at some point so that the air has to push
past, creating turbulence or friction. Consonants formed in this way are
called fricatives. The waveform is irregular and aperiodic, that is it has a
noise component. Some fricatives, such as ‘s’, consist only of noise,
others have a voiced component in addition, for example, ‘z’. It is often
helpful to think of consonants in terms of voiced and voiceless pairs,
for example: ‘s, z’ and ‘f, v’. Voicing is a low frequency component
caused by the vocal fold vibration.

74
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
• The vocal tract is blocked at some point, such as at the lips, allowing
the air pressure to build up, followed by a sudden release or plosion
(Figure 4.7). These sounds are called plosives, for example ‘p’, and
again they can be formed with or without accompanying vocal cord
vibration (voicing), for example ‘b, p’ and ‘d, t’.
Figure 4.7. The basic phases of a plosive.
Consonants are usually described by the place and the manner in which
they are formed. The important places of articulation in English are the
lips, teeth, palate and glottis, although it is often sufficient to state the
place of articulation as front, middle or back.
The manner of articulation may be plosive, fricative, nasal or ‘semi-
vowel’. Nasals and semi-vowels are produced without turbulence and
closely resemble vowels. They are voiced and have a formant structure.
Nasals are produced when the soft palate, or velum, is opened to permit
airflow through the nose.
The complete description should include whether the sound is voiced
or not, for example:
p can be described as a front voiceless plosive;
b can be described as a front voiced plosive;
f can be described as a front voiceless fricative.
4.4.3 Understanding running speech
In running speech, not every sound is formed carefully and precisely, but
rather each individual sound is qualified by the sounds that come before
and after. This requires less effort from the speaker and, in rapid speech, a
movement is often not finished but only started and then carried on
towards the next. Speech is a continuum of rapid finely skilled movements
with much overlapping, of which the speaker is unaware but which is
reflected in the acoustic spectrum.

Speech and intelligibility 
75
Time is a very significant aspect of sound perception and the sounds of
speech change continually. The formants of the vowels show some varia-
tion depending on the adjoining sounds. The articulators do not move
instantaneously but rather ‘glide’ from one position to another. This can
be observed on a spectrogram. The middle of the vowel, where the
frequency is relatively stable, is called the steady state. The changing part is
called the transition or glide. The transitions (Figure 4.8) are most obvious
in formant two of the vowel, but are present to a lesser extent in other
formants.
Figure 4.8. Examples of transitions in the vowel formants.
The transitions reflect the movement from one place of articulation to
another. The noise of a consonant is normally the primary cue in recogni-
tion, but the transitions can be very important. Transitions exist in all
formants but those in the second formant are the most important.
However, it is likely that the hearing-impaired may use the transitions in
formant one, which are not important with normal hearing.
Time factors are also important in the recognition of speech and these
can be carried at all levels of signal, so should be useful even to profoundly
deaf people. In general, vowels are longer than consonants, although of
course not all are the same length; some are very long and some relatively
short, so, for example, ‘ee’ is almost twice the length of ‘i’ (‘ee’ is approxi-
mately 180 milliseconds in length, ‘i’ is only approximately 100 millisec-
onds). Diphthongs are formed by the union of two vowel sounds and are
therefore the longest of all vowel sounds. The length of a vowel is to some

76
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
extent governed by the following consonant. A vowel will be longer if it is
followed by a short consonant, and vice versa (Figure 4.9). These relative
intensity cues are very important, especially to the hearing-impaired.
Vowels have greater intensity than consonants. The strongest sound in
English is the vowel ‘aw’, the weakest is the consonant ‘th’; hence the
word ‘thaw’ contains the greatest possible intensity variation, about
30 dB. The level of intensity varies constantly as we make our voices
louder or quieter but the relative difference between the sounds remains
the same, whatever intensity is used.
Figure 4.9. Vowel length is influenced by the length of the following consonants. The
vowel in ‘knees’ is much longer than the same sound in ‘niece’ where the following
consonant is long.
The average intensity of speech ranges from about 35 dBA to 65 dBA,
that is, it has a range of about 30 dB. This varying intensity can also be
shown in the ‘average speech spectrum’, which is sometimes drawn on
the audiogram, where the average intensity range of speech energy,
expressed in dBHL, can be used to predict what a hearing impaired
individual is likely to hear (see Figure 7.12). The following list gives the
approximate order for intensity from loudest to quietest speech
sounds:
1. vowels such as ‘aw,’ ‘ee’; 
2. vowel-like, such as ‘l’, r’; 
3. nasals, such as ‘m’, ‘n’; 
4. voiced plosives and fricatives, such as ‘v’, ‘g’; 
5. voiceless plosives, such as ‘p’, ‘t’; 
6. voiceless fricatives, such as ‘f’, ‘s’.
4.5 HEARING LOSS AND SPEECH PERCEPTION
Most hearing-impaired people have hearing for vowels but unfortunately
vowels give little meaning to the sentence. Although a gross oversimplifi-
cation, it is often helpful to think of the written pattern, and if a sentence is
presented without consonants it is very difficult to understand:

Speech and intelligibility 
77
- - e  -u-  i-  - -i-i- -
If the same sentence is presented without vowels, the picture is much
clearer:
Th- s-n -s sh-n-ng
The high information content of consonants is unfortunate as they are
largely high in frequency and low in intensity, making it difficult for the
hearing impaired to perceive speech clearly. Vowels are largely low in
frequency and high in intensity. They are easier to hear than consonants
and they may also make hearing of consonants more difficult through the
upward spread of masking (low frequency sounds may linger and tend to
mask weak high frequency sounds). Hearing for vowels alone is not
enough but even if hearing is defective, speech can be a successful means
of communication because it is so rich in redundant cues.
To some extent, it is possible to predict what a person can hear from
the audiogram.
(a) Vowels
• To hear vowels, the first two formants must be perceived and therefore
hearing to 3 kHz is needed.
• Hearing up to 2 kHz only, cuts off formant two and therefore creates
difficulties in hearing front vowels ‘ee’ and ‘i’.
• With hearing only below 1 kHz, vowel discrimination becomes very
difficult as nearly all of the second formant is gone, but some back
vowels can be discriminated.
• With hearing only below 500 Hz, there remains a thread of pitch varia-
tion and detection of whether a sound is voiced.
(b) Fricatives
Fricatives will only be heard with some high-frequency hearing present
since they have little energy below 2 kHz. To hear fricatives adequately,
hearing up to at least 6 kHz is required.
(c) Plosives
These short bursts of sound are difficult to hear but cues are available in
the preceding silence or stop, in the length and in the transitions to the
vowel formants. Hearing up to about 800 Hz is required to hear front
plosives, mid-plosives are higher in frequency, needing hearing up to
about 2 kHz, back plosives higher still, up to about 4 kHz.

78
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
The articulation index (AI) (Pavlovic, Studebaker and Sherbecoe,
1986) or speech intelligibility index (SII) can also be used to predict intel-
ligibility from the audiogram – see Figure 4.10. An AI of 0.40, for example,
means that approximately 60% of the speech signal should be available to
the listener at normal conversational levels.
Figure 4.10. The count-the-dot audiogram form for calculation of the Articulation
Index (after Mueller and Killion, 1990). The number of dots falling within the residual
hearing area indicates the percentage of the speech signal available to the listener.
4.6 HEARING LOSS AND SPEECH PRODUCTION
Where hearing is available it is used not only to hear others but, uncon-
sciously, to monitor the speaker’s own speech. This is known as auditory
feedback. A speaker hears his or her own speech partly by air conduction
but also all voiced sounds are heard by bone conduction. This is the
reason why people may not immediately recognize their own voices when
they are played back from a tape recorder – they are not used to hearing
them by air conduction only.
If there is a hearing impairment, auditory feedback is less reliable and
individuals with a sensorineural loss usually speak loudly, so they can hear
themselves. Those with a conductive loss often speak too quietly because
they continue to hear their own voice well by bone conduction, whilst
hearing other people more quietly by air conduction. With a severe

Speech and intelligibility 
79
hearing loss, monitoring speech through auditory feedback becomes very
difficult and speech production may be severely affected. Some
profoundly deaf people use their nasal and sinus cavities to resonate the
lower frequency sounds, which may be audible to them. Other feedback
mechanisms also become of greater importance. Tactile feedback uses the
sense of touch and an unconscious knowledge of where the speech organs
should be positioned. The motion of the muscles and the joints can also
be monitored and this is known as kinaesthetic or proprioceptive
feedback.
4.7 SUMMARY
Speech perception is really the recognition of patterns. All languages have
a high degree of redundancy, which makes them easy to understand. The
speech message contains many redundant cues, both acoustic and non-
acoustic, on which a person can draw when the need arises. The hearing
impaired must process language in a different way, evolving their own set
of cues to help them. It is possible to predict, to some extent, what a
person can hear from their audiogram; it is much more difficult to predict
how they will use what they may hear because each person varies in their
sensitivity to the cues available.
FURTHER READING
Martin M (ed.) (1997) Speech Audiometry. 2 edn. London: Whurr.
Moore BCJ (1997) An Introduction to the Psychology of Hearing. 4 edn. San Diego:
Academic Press.
Sanders D (1982) Aural Rehabilitation. Parts I and II. Englewood Cliffs NJ: Prentice-
Hall.
Schow RL, Nerbonne MA (1996) Introduction to Aural Rehabilitation. 3 edn. Boston
MA: Allyn & Bacon.

Figure 5.1. A hearing aid system.
80
Chapter 5
The basic hearing aid
system
5.1 THE BASIC COMPONENTS OF A HEARING AID
5.1.1 Introduction
A hearing aid is simply a miniature public address system (Figure 5.1).
Sound waves strike a microphone, which converts this energy into a weak
electrical signal. The signal is fed into an amplifier. The amplified signal is
used to drive a loudspeaker, which converts the electrical signal back into
acoustic energy. The sound waves generated are then ‘piped’ into the
external ear canal. The acoustic energy delivered to the ear is always
greater than that received by the microphone. This additional energy is
provided by the battery.

The basic hearing aid system 
81
Hearing aids are signal processors in that they alter the input signal
with the aim of improving it for the user. Unfortunately it is not yet
possible to increase the signal strength without introducing some distor-
tion – that is, the output signal differs from the input signal in parameters
other than intensity. In some applications the signal is deliberately
modified with the aim of improving speech intelligibility.
The following sections describe the basic components used in a simple
hearing aid system.
5.1.2 The microphone
(a) Introduction
A transducer is a device that converts energy from one form to another
form. A microphone is a transducer. It converts acoustic energy into
electrical energy, either by direct contact with the vibrating source or,
more usually, by intercepting sound waves radiating from a source.
Microphones that pick up sound waves from the air have diaphragms
to collect the acoustic energy. They fall into two basic categories according
to whether one or both sides of the diaphragm are exposed to sound
waves.
Pressure microphones
These are microphones that have only one side of their diaphragm
exposed to the sound waves. The other side is sealed off, except for a small
aperture to allow the atmospheric pressure to equalize on both sides on a
long-term basis (like the Eustachian tube in the ear). These microphones
respond to minute variations in the surrounding air pressure. They there-
fore operate irrespective of the direction of the sound source – unless
their physical characteristics dictate otherwise – and are said to be omni-
directional.
Pressure gradient microphones
These are microphones that have both sides of their diaphragms exposed
to the sound waves. They operate by virtue of the difference in pressure
existing between the front and the back at any given moment. This differ-
ence is a function of the different path length for the sound waves
between the front and the back of the diaphragm. Obviously this path
length difference will vary with the angle of incidence; this type of micro-
phone has therefore a directional response.

82
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
(b) Types of microphones
There are four main types of microphone:
• The carbon microphone. In the carbon microphone sound pressure
variations, acting on a diaphragm, are applied to a collection of carbon
granules, thereby varying their resistance to an electrical current due to
an applied voltage. This type of microphone has a high output and a
non-linear characteristic, which tends to mute low level noise and
saturate when subjected to very loud sounds. It is thus very suitable for
use in telephones but, due to its high noise level and variable output, is
not often used for other purposes.
• The piezo-electric (crystal) microphone. The crystal microphone works
on the principle that certain crystalline materials such as quartz
generate small electrical signals when physically stressed. Various
configurations are produced in which the movement of a diaphragm
causes a wafer of the crystal to either twist or bend (Figure 5.2). Crystal
microphones have a very high impedance. They must be connected to
an amplifier (usually a field effect transistor – FET) with a matched
impedance otherwise the high frequency response will be lost. Low
frequency response is generally good and the very nature of the design
means that they are robust and stable.
Figure 5.2. A piezo-electric (crystal) microphone. (After Davis and Silverman, 1978.)
• The dynamic (moving coil) or electromagnetic microphone. The
dynamic microphone consists of a fine coil of wire around a balanced
armature, which is attached to a diaphragm and suspended in a perma-
nent magnetic field (Figure 5.3). When sound pressure waves hit the
diaphragm, the diaphragm moves the coil in proportion to the wave

The basic hearing aid system 
83
intensity and causes the coil to cut across the fixed lines of magnetic
flux supplied by the permanent magnet. This induces a current in the
coil, the amplitude of which is proportional to the distance moved and
the speed of movement. In order to reduce unwanted resonance
(vibration) of the diaphragm, the coil must be kept light, consequently
the impedance of moving coil microphones tends to be low. Stray
magnetic fields can cause interference.
Figure 5.3. A dynamic (moving coil/balanced armature) microphone (After Davis and
Silverman, 1978.)
• The capacitor (condenser) microphone. The capacitor microphone uses
electrostatic principles rather than the electromagnetic principles used
by a dynamic microphone. The microphone consists of two very thin
plates, one moveable and one fixed, which form a capacitor (formerly
called a condenser, hence the name condenser microphone). Variations
in the sound pressure cause the diaphragm to move with respect to the
back plate so that the capacitance varies in relation to the sound wave.
The capacitance is determined by the composition and the surface area
of the plates (which are fixed), the dielectric or substance between the
plates (which is air and fixed), and the distance between the plates
(which varies with sound pressure). In order to obtain an output, the
variable capacitance must be turned into an electromotive force (emf).
This is done by applying a polarizing potential through a high resis-
tance. Variations in capacitance caused by the movement of the
diaphragm are thus converted into a voltage across the resistor, which is
then applied to an amplifier (usually an FET). Some capacitor micro-

84
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
phones employ electret diaphragms (Figure 5.4). These are commonly
known as ‘electret microphones’. The term ‘electret’ describes a dielec-
tric substance that exhibits a continuing polarization after an electric
field is applied and then withdrawn. The electret polarization is analo-
gous to the magnetic retention of a permanent magnet. From the
viewpoint of a designer, a significant advantage of the electret principle
is that it obviates the need to supply the capacitor/diaphragm with a
polarizing voltage. Compared to the conventional capacitor micro-
phone, the electret offers a potentially higher signal-to-noise ratio, is
less susceptible to arcing and exhibits excellent frequency response
characteristics. However, the performance tends to deteriorate with
time. The electret microphone is the one most commonly used in
modern hearing aids. It is particularly suitable for miniaturization.
Figure 5.4. An electret microphone. (After Davis and Silverman, 1978.)
(c) Directional microphones
Directional microphones can improve speech recognition in noise by
improving the signal-to-noise ratio. Directional microphones may consist of: 
• One directional microphone, which has two sound entry ports
(Figure 5.5). Sound from the front is given prominence over that
from the rear by the inclusion of a time-delay network so that sound
from the rear is slightly delayed. If the delay is such that sound from
the rear enters both sound ports at the same time, the sound waves
will cancel each other out. Some low-frequency reduction is also built
into the microphone. The degree of extra benefit afforded is probably

The basic hearing aid system 
85
only about 3 dB or 4 dB in reverberant conditions (Madison and
Hawkins, 1983).
Figure 5.5. A directional microphone system.
• One directional and one omnidirectional microphone. This system
switches between the microphones so that only one microphone is
effective at any one time. 
• Two omnidirectional microphones. This dual microphone system
(Figure 5.6) replicates the directional microphone with a time delay to
the rear microphone. The directional pattern is determined by the
distance between the two microphones and by the internal time delay.
Variations in the time delay can produce different directional
responses. An adaptive digital microphone system is one in which the
directional response pattern is automatically altered so that the area of
Figure 5.6. A dual microphone system. (After Csermak, 2000)

5.1.3 The amplifier
(a) Introduction
Amplifiers are one of the most common of all electrical building blocks. By
definition an amplifier is any circuit that provides gain – that is a device
86
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Figure 5.7. A polar plot illustrating a ‘cardioid’ directional response. A cardioid
response is one with maximum suppression to the rear (180˚).
minimum sensitivity is always directed at the most dominant noise
source in the rear plane. A single omnidirectional microphone is
preferable in some situations (for example in the street or listening to
music) and produces less circuit noise than a directional microphone.
One of the dual microphones can be switched off to give an omnidirec-
tional response.
• A microphone array, which can ‘beam’ into the sound giving an advan-
tage of several decibels.
A polar plot, Figure 5.7, is often used to illustrate the effect of a (single or
dual) directional microphone. A polar plot is a graph showing the output
of the hearing aid, whilst a sound source rotates from 0˚ to 360˚ around
the microphone of the aid. Sound arriving at the front, that is at 0˚, is used
as the reference point. 
degrees angle of rotation

The basic hearing aid system 
87
that delivers a higher energy output than the energy input. Of course,
amplifiers do not produce energy! The energy source for the output
power is an external one, which in the case of hearing aids is a battery.
Electronic amplifiers are not used with digital circuitry.
Hearing aids are complex pieces of equipment and contain many
electronic components. Among these components is the important semicon-
ductor device called the transistor. This device is an amplifier in itself, but it
needs to be connected to many other transistors and other components to
provide the sophisticated level of control and amplification demanded of a
hearing aid. Many transistors are housed in a single ‘integrated circuit’
component in modern electronics.
The bipolar junction transistor is an ‘active’ device that can be used to
control the flow of current through a load resistor by means of a small power
signal applied to its control terminal. One of the most common applications
of the transistor is as a voltage amplifier.
Modern amplifier circuitry often employs the use of a field effect transistor
(FET, also known as a ‘unipolar’ transistor). The FET is a semiconductor
device that depends, for its operation, on the control of a current by an
electric field. The FET acts as a pre-amplifier because it is able to amplify small
signals that are too weak for direct transmission to the amplifier.
(b) Amplifier classification and specification
In order to describe the requirements of an electronic amplifier for an appli-
cation it is necessary to specify certain parameters and its class of operation.
Amplifiers can be described according to:
• the electrical quantity they amplify;
• the frequency range over which they amplify;
• their relative input and output impedance;
• the class of operation.
The ‘class of operation’ is of particular interest and is therefore considered in
detail.
Class A
Class A operation of a power amplifying transistor is illustrated in Figure
5.8. With this class of operation the transistor is provided with a forward
bias so that a current flows without any signal present. The bias current
drain is related to the maximum current the receiver will handle. The bias,
or no signal, current exists even when there is no signal input and remains
independent of signal input level and of volume control setting.

88
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Theoretically, an efficiency of 50% is possible. However, actual operating
efficiencies can be less than 25%.
When signals are present, the current drain fluctuates within certain
defined limits, but the average drain is still the same. Battery life is there-
fore fairly predictable. In the case of hearing aids, the fact that the power
from the battery is being constantly dissipated, even where there is no
input signal, is a major disadvantage.
Figure 5.8. Class A and class AB (class B) amplifiers.
Class B
A true class B amplifier is one in which the transistor is biased so that zero
current flows when no signal is present but there is considerable distortion.

The basic hearing aid system 
89
In high-power hearing aids, a modified version of the class B amplifier
is used. This modified version is correctly known as a class AB amplifier
(Duncan, 1988) but is more commonly referred to simply as class B. In a
class AB amplifier (see Figure 5.8) the transistor is provided with a small
amount of bias, just sufficient to allow the device to conduct slightly.
Compared to a true class B, there is no distortion; however there is a low
current drain when no signal is present. When a signal passes through, the
current drain depends on the required output level. The higher the
output required, the higher will be the current drain.
Two transistors can be connected in a push–pull circuit in order to
supply more power to the load than can be provided by a single-ended
amplifier (single-ended means that only one output transistor is used).
The output from the previous amplifier stages passes to a phase splitter,
which separates the positive and negative phases of the signal. The
positive phase is fed to one output transistor, the negative phase is fed to
the second output transistor. The positive and negative phases are ampli-
fied separately and then combined to deliver a full wave to the receiver. A
push–pull circuit is shown in Figure 5.9.
Figure 5.9. A push–pull amplifier.
The advantages of class AB push–pull amplifiers are:
• a greater power output is possible for a given transistor;
• the efficiency is greater;

90
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
• there is negligible power loss when the input signal is zero;
• because of circuit symmetry, distortion is reduced since it may be
shown that even numbered harmonics cancel out.
The current drain is proportional to the output signal. As a result, the gain
control setting directly affects battery life.
Class D
Classes A, B and AB amplifiers increase the input signal without signifi-
cantly altering its shape in the process. This is not so with the class D
amplifier. The input signal is transformed into pulses, the time duration of
which depends on the instantaneous amplitude of the signal.
The process begins with a triangular wave with a frequency that is at
least 10 times that of the input signal, typically 500 kHz. The input signal is
then added to this triangular wave. The difference between the two signals
emerges from a fast voltage comparator as a square wave with a duty cycle
proportional to the amplitude. This square wave is then used to switch
two output devices, which are either fully on or fully off, the difference
being that the times they are on and the times they are off are varied so
that the averaged effect can be made to replicate the input signal.
Class D amplifiers are very efficient, particularly at high gain, and can
produce something like a 50% increase in battery life. Class D amplifiers are
increasingly being used in more complex analogue hearing aid circuits. The
‘K-amp’ is not a class of amplifier but uses a class D output amplifier.
5.1.4 The receiver
(a) Introduction
In the hearing aid industry, the output transducer is usually called the
‘receiver’, whereas in the audio industry it is usually called the ‘loudspeaker’.
In principle, a receiver is a microphone in reverse. It converts the
amplified electrical signal into acoustic or sound energy and transmits it to
the ear. The receiver is the last and often the weakest link in the hearing
aid system. Problems stem from the need to produce a relatively wide
range of frequencies from such a small component.
(b) Air conduction receivers
The BTE and ITE receivers are generally of the balanced-armature type
(Figure 5.10). The alternating current output from the amplifier is fed to
the coil surrounding the armature, which causes it to move within the

The basic hearing aid system 
91
permanent magnetic field. This movement is transferred to the
diaphragm, which in turn generates sound pressure waves.
An external button receiver, as used with body-worn aids, operates on a
slightly different principle than that previously described. The signal
current in a coil, which is fixed to a core of permeable magnetic metal,
modulates the pull of a permanent magnet on a circular diaphragm made
of thin magnetic metal. The modulation causes the diaphragm to vibrate,
thus producing acoustic energy.
Figure 5.10. A balanced armature air conduction receiver. (After Katz, 1994.)
(c) Bone conduction receivers
Bone conduction receivers operate on the ‘reaction’ principle. A mass,
free to vibrate inside an enclosed case, is called to do so by a magnetic
driving system (Figure 5.11). The vibrations are transmitted through the
Figure 5.11. A bone conduction receiver (After Katz, 1994).

92
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
supporting spring to the case and then to the skin and the bony structure
of the head. Essentially, a bone conduction receiver is the same as an
external receiver, except that the diaphragm is fixed to the housing.
5.1.5 Client controls
(a) Gain (volume) control
Many hearing aids have a dial or serrated wheel that serves as a gain
control. It does not alter the input sound to the aid but adjusts the amount
of amplification of the input signal. The gain control is a potentiometer or
rheostat consisting of a fixed circular carbon track. A sliding contact arm
connected to the dial moves over the track and varies the resistance to the
input signal. An increase in resistance produces a decrease in amplifica-
tion.
The relationship between the movement of the wheel and the increase
in gain is not linear. Relatively little gain is available once the volume
control is beyond 50% of its total range. Most of the gain (approximately
70%) is delivered in the lower half of the control, while only a limited
amount is available in the top half. This is referred to as the ‘taper effect’.
Use of the upper half of the control may result in an unacceptably high
increase in harmonic distortion.
(b) ‘T’ switch
A hearing aid can be equipped with a special circuit, which makes it sensi-
tive to fluctuation in a given magnetic field. The circuit consists of a
magnetic induction pickup coil mounted inside the case. A fluctuating
magnetic field will generate a current in the coil, which is then used to
produce acoustic energy. The coil takes the place of the microphone on
the input component of the aid. If the ‘T’ position is chosen, the micro-
phone is cut out of the circuit. For further information see section 12.3.2.
5.2 ELEMENTARY ELECTRICITY AND ELECTRONICS
All matter can be reduced to its atomic structure. An atom consists of a
nucleus, which is positively charged, and orbiting electrons, which are
negatively charged. The nucleus takes its positive charge from its protons.
The number of protons is the same as the number of electrons, which
gives a state of electrical balance.
It is a basic principle that opposite charges attract and like charges
repel. In some materials, the force of attraction is strong and the electrons

The basic hearing aid system 
93
cannot be detached from the nucleus. These materials are insulators. In
other materials, the force of attraction is weak and the electrons are easily
detached. These materials are conductors. Easily detached electrons are
called free electrons. In order for free electrons to flow, an external force
or electrical pressure must be applied. An electrical current is a flow of
free electrons along a conductor.
If the current flows only in one direction, it is a direct current (DC),
such as a current from a battery. If the source of electrical pressure
constantly changes its polarity from negative to positive, the current flow
is alternating. Alternating current (AC) has a frequency; for example mains
electricity changes its polarity 50 times per second and its frequency is
therefore 50 Hz.
The direction and degree of AC current flow can be represented by a
sine wave. This indicates a smooth flow of energy, first one way and then
the other. This is the same representation as that used to show a pure tone
sound wave.
Current is measured in amperes (amps), although the small flow of
current found in hearing aids is measured in thousandths of an amp –
milliamperes. Electrical pressure is measured in volts. This is the force that
drives the current around the circuit. Voltage is really a measure of how
much energy is available to force the charge from one point to another.
Voltage applied to a conductor in a circuit produces a current. If there
were no other component in a circuit, the current flow would be
controlled by the electrical pressure. Some resistance is essential to limit
the current. Resistance can be likened to a tap that affects the mains water
pressure and restricts the flow of water.
A resistor, as its name suggests, resists or impedes the current flow. It
acts as a constriction and allows the current to flow less easily. Resistance
is measured directly in ohms, for which the Greek letter omega (Ω) is used
as the symbol.
The controlled passage of current through a resistance is expressed in
Ohm’s law, which states that the current (I) is directly proportional to the
voltage (V).
The ratio of V to I for a particular conductor is called the resistance (R).
This can be written as an equation: 
R = 
A triangle arrangement is useful in remembering the possible variants
(Figure 5.12).
V
I

94
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
A high resistance restricts the current to a low value; when resistance is
small, the current is large. Resistance is one type of impedance found in
DC circuits. Electrical impedance is the responsiveness, or lack of respon-
siveness, of an electrical circuit. In an AC circuit, impedance is termed
reactance. Capacitors are passive components used in hearing aids and
have the property that the greater the impedance, the higher the
frequency, as in a high-pass filter.
Transistors are active components, which work on the principle that a
small current flowing into a base, controls a much larger current flowing
into a collector.
5.3 SIGNAL PROCESSING
5.3.1 Introduction
Signal processing is a generic term that includes everything beyond simple
amplification (Wright, 1992). All hearing aids have some element of signal
processing. Many hearing aids provide automatic signal processing (ASP).
An electric current is more readily altered than an acoustic signal.
Sound is therefore transduced to electrical energy before it is processed in
some way. Many electronic options are available as user or dispenser
modifications in addition to the main hearing aid components.
5.3.2 Tone controls
Tone control is a process that provides either high (Figure 5.13) or low
frequency emphasis, and is similar to the treble (high frequency) and
Figure 5.12. A triangular aid to memory. (This triangle can be adapted for other
formulae such as those used to calculate battery life or wavelength.)

The basic hearing aid system 
95
bass (low frequency) adjustments on a stereo system. The tone control is
a filter network, usually between amplifier stages, which allows only the
desired frequency to pass through the system. If high frequency
emphasis is required, a high-pass filter (low frequencies attenuated) is
used, and conversely, for low frequency emphasis, a low-pass filter (high
frequencies attenuated) is employed. The terminology can be very
confusing, for example:
• low-pass filter = low frequency emphasis = treble cut = high cut = L.
• high-pass filter = high frequency emphasis = bass cut = low cut = H.
Tone controls can be either a switch or a potentiometer (variable
resistor), which is adjusted using a small screwdriver, or a computer
programmable control.
Figure 5.13. The effect of a bass cut potentiometer on the frequency response.
Reduction of the low frequencies provides a subjective high frequency emphasis.
5.3.3 Variable output limiting
All hearing aids have a maximum output, which cannot be exceeded
whatever the input level or the volume control setting. This level is often
restricted by the characteristics of the receiver.
If the maximum output is such as to cause discomfort to the user, some
form of output limiting should be used. There are two methods of
limiting: peak clipping and automatic gain control.

96
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Peak clipping
Having been converted into electrical energy within the hearing aid, the
intensity of a sound wave can be thought of as being represented by its
amplitude. Peak clipping restricts the amplitude of the wave by cutting off
its peaks and hence reducing its intensity (Figure 5.14). Whenever the
peaks in the input signal exceed the pre-set maximum output limit, these
peaks will be clipped off. Peak clipping distorts the waveform by
producing something nearer to a square wave. This adds considerable
harmonic and intermodulation distortion (section 8.3.5). The distortion
produced by peak clipping has little effect on intelligibility because quiet
sounds, including the information-carrying consonant sounds (section
4.5), remain unaltered; only intense sounds are reduced, but this may
affect sound quality.
Figure 5.14. The effect of peak clipping and compression on a waveform.
Compressed wave

The basic hearing aid system 
97
In a class A amplifier, only the peaks on one side are clipped, which
produces odd and even harmonics. In a class AB (or ‘B’) amplifier,
clipping is symmetrical, producing only odd harmonics. The resulting
sound quality is generally more acceptable. Peak clipping should not
result in the aid constantly going into saturation; if this occurs the hearing
aid audiologist should consider automatic gain control.
Automatic gain control
Automatic gain control (AGC) is also called compression and, less
commonly automatic volume control (AVC). Automatic gain control limits
the output of the aid by reducing its gain or volume in the presence of
sounds above a pre-set limit (the ‘kneepoint’).
The use of compression in a hearing aid is generally dependent on the
user’s dynamic range, that is the difference or span between his or her
threshold of hearing and his or her uncomfortable loudness level. With
severe recruitment, a narrow dynamic range will mean that if peak
clipping alone is used to limit the output, weak sounds will not be heard,
intense sounds will be too loud and the aid will be in frequent saturation,
causing distortion and loss of information from the signal. 
The function of compression is to control the gain automatically as the
signal level changes. Up to a certain point, known as the kneepoint, the
gain increases linearly, that is a 1 dB increase in input results in a 1 dB
increase in output. Beyond this point, the gain is automatically reduced as
the sound level increases ‘compressing’ the signal and avoiding saturation
(Figure 5.15). Thus beyond the compression threshold or kneepoint, a
1 dB increase in input may result in, for example, a 0.5 dB increase in
output. This produces a compression ratio of 2:1, that is the ratio of input
change to output change. (For example, a compression ratio of 3:1 means
that an increase of 3 dB in input produces only a 1 dB increase in output.)
Compression aids may be obtained with different compression ratios or
where appropriate these may be digitally programmed.
Unlike peak clipping, compression has a finite onset and offset time,
known as the attack and release times. Attack time is the length of time
required for the controlling action to come into effect. Recovery or release
time is the time taken to return to normal. The attack time should be as
short as possible if it is to provide protection quickly at the onset of an
intense sound. The hearing aid should also have its maximum output set
such that it will provide protection against sudden intense sounds.
The release time has to be slower than the attack time to prevent the
aid from having an audible ‘flutter’ as the gain adjusts with the rapid
changes that occur in a speech signal. An attack time of 5 milliseconds and

98
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
a release time of 50 milliseconds could be typical for a hearing aid,
although there are wide variations and adaptive compression is available
with automatically varying release times.
Automatic gain control provides a feedback loop from a sampling
point. Below the preset limit or kneepoint the feedback is too small to
affect the circuit. When the kneepoint is reached the gain is automatically
adjusted. Automatic gain control may act in response to the input sound
level or the output sound level.
5.3.4 Types of compression
(a) Output compression
Output compression acts to control the gain of the aid in such a way that
the higher the signal intensity at the output stage of the amplifier, the
lower will be the gain. Output compression is the simplest type of
automatic gain control.
The kneepoint at which compression starts to operate depends upon
the level of the output signal (Figure 5.16). Reducing the kneepoint will
reduce the maximum output. However, since the signal level is monitored
after amplification, the maximum output is unaltered by the volume
Figure 5.15. An input–output graph for peak clipping and compression.
Input (dB SPL)
Output (dB SPL)
a

The basic hearing aid system 
99
control setting. Output compression is suitable for severe to profound
hearing losses as the volume control does not reduce the maximum
output. The kneepoint of compression is set at a high input level and
thereafter there is a high ratio (greater degree) of compression, usually 5:1
or greater. Clients with this level of hearing loss usually have a narrow
dynamic range and this type of compression gives them maximum (linear)
gain until the output is close to the uncomfortable level when compres-
sion cuts in to limit the output without the distortion of peak clipping.
Hearing aids with output compression cannot achieve normal loudness
growth but provide strong amplification with comfort.
(b) Input compression
Input compression differs in that the control threshold is part of the early
stages of the amplifier. It is therefore the input signal level that acts to reduce
the gain. The kneepoint is set on the input level and is independent of the
volume control setting. Whatever the volume setting the kneepoint remains
the same. The compression kneepoint does not affect the maximum output,
however the maximum output will be reduced with lower volume settings
(Figure 5.16). This is unlike output compression, where the maximum
output is unchanged by the volume setting. Input compression results in
better sound quality than output compression because it acts prior to ampli-
fication and therefore produces less distortion.
Figure 5.16. The position and effect of the volume control in input and output AGC.
Output (dB SPL)
Output (dB SPL)
Input 
(dB SPL)
Input 
(dB SPL)

100
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Figure 5.17. Wide dynamic range compression seeks to correct abnormal loudness
growth by providing (a) more amplification to low levels of sound and (b) relatively
less amplification as the input sounds become louder.
(c) Special types of compression
Wide dynamic range compression
Wide dynamic range compression (WDRC) uses input compression with a
low kneepoint and a low compression ratio in order that the full range of
sounds is ‘shrunk’ to fit within the reduced dynamic range of the listener.
The hearing aid is in a ‘mild’ compression mode most of the time and weak
sounds are amplified much more than loud sounds. As with all compres-
sion aids, maximum (linear) gain is provided below the kneepoint. Because
the kneepoint is low in WDRC aids the compression control (sometimes
also called the TK or threshold kneepoint control) is viewed as a gain
booster for weak sounds. This means that weak sounds can be heard whilst
loud sounds are not uncomfortable for the listener. This is an attempt to
correct abnormal loudness growth (see Figure 5.17). Wide dynamic range
compression is ideal for mild to moderate hearing losses.
Level dependent frequency response
Level dependent frequency response (LDFR). These compression circuits
vary the frequency response with the input level. There are two basic LDFR
circuits: BILL (bass increases at low levels) and TILL (treble increases at low
levels). Some hearing aids use both BILL and TILL, for example using BILL in
the low frequency channels and TILL in the high frequency channels. 
Hearing level (dBHL)
Sensation level (dBHL)
Abnormal loudness growth
(sensorineural hearing loss)

The basic hearing aid system 
101
• BILL has a wide frequency response in quiet surroundings but activates
a low cut filter when the input reaches a certain level. This kind of
circuit is most suitable for flat or gently sloping losses and gives a high
frequency emphasis to high level signals which helps in background
noise.
• TILL is the opposite of the BILL circuit. It provides high frequency
emphasis at low input levels and a flat frequency response with high
input levels. This kind of circuit provides more gain for the high
frequency consonant sounds in speech than for the louder vowels,
which have less information content (see Chapter 4).
Frequency dependent compression
In frequency dependent compression the kneepoint or threshold is not
fixed but alters according to frequency. This means that compression is
only used in those frequency bands where it is necessary, rather than the
whole circuit going into compression. 
Curvilinear compression
Curvilinear compression has a compression ratio that increases as the
input increases, giving the characteristic curvilinear shape, see Figure
5.18. In effect, curvilinear compression combines wide range compression
Figure 5.18. An input–output graph showing curvilinear compression.
Input dB SPL
Output dB SPL

102
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
for low intensity sounds with compression limiting (avoiding saturation)
for high intensity sounds. 
The choice between the various modes of output limiting depends
upon the hearing loss and the client’s acoustic environment (section
9.2.2(d)).
5.3.5 Multi-channel systems
A multi-channel hearing aid facilitates the division of the frequency
response into sections or bands, which can then be treated differently to
provide a precise and complex frequency response curve that may be able
to match the client’s needs more closely. ‘Channel’ refers to a frequency
region that is processed independently. A ‘band’ refers to a frequency
region that is filtered. Where two channels meet, the processing will be
affected, which is known as ‘cross-channel coupling’. 
The need for a multi-channel system may be indicated by an unusual
audiogram shape, which would benefit from varying treatment in the
different frequency regions, as for example a steeply falling graph with a
region of good low frequency hearing. More than three channels in a
hearing aid may not necessarily be advantageous as, if the crossover
frequencies are too close together, the same speech sounds may be acted
upon in different ways causing confusion to the listener.
The different channels may offer not only the facility to alter the gain
but also the output and any compression in the various frequency bands.
Where each channel has its own compression circuit, different kneepoints,
compression ratios and attack and release times may be selected in the
different bands. Shorter attack and release times are usually preferred in
the higher frequencies than those used in the lower frequency channels.
The kneepoint can be altered in each frequency channel to suit the user’s
dynamic range. The frequency that marks each change in frequency
channel is known as the ‘crossover frequency’.
Twin channel aids may be relatively simple and their adjustment can be
effected using trimmer potentiometers. Multi-channel systems are usually
programmed via a computer, although such aids may be digitally program-
mable (analogue aids), most are fully digital.
5.3.6 Signal processing for noise reduction
Low frequency reduction 
A hearing aid with a frequency response that is well suited to a quiet
environment may be quite inadequate in situations of noise. Many hearing
aids therefore offer some switched in bass cut or ‘noise suppression’. This

The basic hearing aid system 
103
means that the aid amplifies the full frequency response in quiet condi-
tions but operates a reduction in low frequency gain when it is necessary
to reduce background noise. Some hearing aid systems provide automatic
noise reduction (ANR), so that the aid automatically adapts to the level of
background noise by reducing low frequency gain. When the background
noise ceases, the aid returns to its normal state. This kind of ANR is only
suited to clients who have a need for some low frequency gain; it cannot
work where there is no gain in the low frequencies to reduce.
Speech recognition
Certain ASP systems use the temporal as well as the frequency characteris-
tics to differentiate background noise. Background noise tends to produce
a fairly steady sound signal unlike speech, which fluctuates rapidly. The aid
may therefore reduce low frequency amplification in the presence of
steady state input signals, or may reduce all steady state signals regardless
of frequency.
Noise reduction programmes
Certain hearing aids offer a number of different frequency responses,
which can be selected by the user according to the acoustic environment.
The options may be selected using a switch or a remote control.
Responses are often programmed for:
• quiet conditions, where the full frequency response is available; 
• noisy conditions, where there will be some low frequency gain reduction;
• listening to music, where a full flat frequency response is provided and
any speech processing is inactive. 
Digital hearing aids are discussed further in Chapter 6. 
5.4 SUMMARY
A hearing aid consists of four basic parts:
• microphone;
• amplifier (or digital ‘chip’);
• receiver or bone conduction transducer;
• power supply.
A transducer is a device that converts energy from one form to another
form. In a hearing aid, the microphone and the receiver are the principle
transducers.

104
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
There are four main types of microphones: 
• carbon; 
• piezo-electric; 
• dynamic;
• capacitor. 
Some capacitor microphones employ electret diaphragms. ‘Electret’ is a
term that describes a substance with a permanent electrical charge.
Electret microphones are most widely used in hearing aids. The
diaphragm and the back plate of an electret microphone essentially form
the two plates of a capacitor separated by a small air space. The back plate
is coated with an electret film, which has a permanent charge. Variation in
sound pressure causes the diaphragm to move and thus varies the distance
between the two plates. The varying distance causes a fluctuating voltage
as an analogue of the acoustic signal. This is passed through a field effect
transistor (FET) for pre-amplification and then to the amplifier. The
electret microphone has a wide, flat frequency response, is accurate and
sensitive, has low internal noise and is easily miniaturized for use in
hearing aids.
A receiver transduces electrical energy into acoustic energy (or mechan-
ical vibration, in the case of a bone conduction aid), which is the reverse
function of the microphone. Internal air conduction receivers are generally
of the rocking or balanced armature type. External receivers, as for
bodyworn aids, are more usually of the ‘moving iron’ type. Bone conduc-
tion receivers are essentially the same as the moving iron air conduction
receiver, except that the metal diaphragm is directly connected to the
receiver case and therefore results in mechanical vibration.
Modifications to the hearing aid that may be available include tone
controls and output limiting. Multi-channel systems divide up the
frequency response into frequency bands, each of which is treated
separately. Automatic or adaptive signal processing aids automatically
adapt to the acoustic conditions in some way, this usually includes
reducing the low frequency gain in conditions of background noise. Input
compression is widely used in digital hearing aids. Where wide dynamic
range compression is used the aid is in a state of ‘mild’ compression most
of the time. This is most suited to mild and moderate hearing losses.
Output compression tends to be used for more severe and profound
losses. Output compression provides linear gain until near maximum
output but then goes into ‘strong’ compression to keep the output below
discomfort with the least possible distortion.

The basic hearing aid system 
105
FURTHER READING
Chasin M (1997) CIC Handbook. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group.
Katz J (ed.) (1999) Handbook of Clinical Audiology. 4 edn. Baltimore: Williams &
Wilkins.
Venema TH (1998) Compression for Clinicians. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group.
Volanthen A (1995) Hearing Instrument Technology for the Hearing Healthcare
Professional. Switzerland: Phonak.

106
Chapter 6
Digital hearing aids
6.1 ANALOGUE AND DIGITAL
Since the introduction of digital hearing aids, traditional hearing aids have
become known as ‘analogue’ hearing aids in order to differentiate the
different type of signal processing involved. 
Acoustic energy is difficult to process directly. In an analogue hearing
aid the acoustic signal is converted or ‘transduced’ into an analogous
electrical signal, that is an electrical signal with the same waveform as the
original signal. The acoustic waveform and its analogue electrical
waveform are continuous signals. A digital waveform is not a continuous
signal but is made up of discrete (separate) values. Digits or numbers are
used to represent the electrical signal, not varying voltages as used in
analogue aids. In effect, a digital hearing aid uses a computer to process
the signal, which facilitates the use of mathematical techniques that would
be impossible with analogue electronics. The electric current passes
through the silicon chip of the computer as a series of pulses and these
form a very simple code, which consists of only two signals. These are
either off (no pulse) or on (a pulse). This is known as the binary code and
the signals are commonly written as 0 (off) and 1 (on). 
Amplification and other processing of the signal takes place before the
signal is converted back to an acoustic signal at the receiver. Signal
processing is a general term, which is generally taken to include every-
thing beyond straightforward amplification (Wright, 1992). All hearing
aids include an element of signal processing but in digital hearing aids the
signal processing is very sophisticated.
A conventional analogue hearing aid can offer adjustments using
resistor or ‘trimmer’ controls. However, the space required by the resis-
tors restricts the degree of flexibility. Digital signal processing (DSP) is
controlled within a tiny silicon ‘chip’ and can offer numerous strategies,
parameters and programs without compromising space. The increased

Digital hearing aids 
107
flexibility and accuracy offered by digital signal processing means that one
digital hearing aid fulfils the requirements previously met only with
several different analogue hearing aids. 
6.2 SAMPLING AND QUANTIZATION
6.2.1 Introduction
Digital signal processing involves converting an analogue signal into a
digital format. This occurs in an analogue to digital converter (A/D)
located at the beginning of the circuit, see Figure 6.1. The process consists
of two parts: 
• sampling (concerned with time); 
• quantization (concerned with amplitude).
When the signal has been converted or digitized, it can be processed by
predetermined instructions, which are referred to as algorithms. 
Figure 6.1. Block diagram of a digital hearing aid. (After diagram supplied by A&M
Hearing Ltd.)
6.2.2 Sampling
Sampling measures the signal at equally spaced moments of time. Any
amplitude values that occur between these spaces of time are not
measured and this information is lost. The sampling rate is important as
the signal must be sampled often enough to provide sufficient information
to recognize the original signal. The sampling frequency is the number of
Software
(alrorithm)
Analogue–
digital
converter
Digital–
analogue
converter

108
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Figure 6.2. Although two sampling points are the minimum to allow us to recognize a
particular frequency component more sampling is required to represent the wave
shape. (After diagram supplied by A&M Hearing Ltd.)
times per second that the amplitude value of the signal is measured. Each
cycle of a wave must be represented by at least two sampling points (at the
peak and at the trough) to recognize the presence of a particular
frequency component. Many more samples are required to capture the
wave shape, see Figure 6.2.
The Nyquist frequency is the highest frequency component that can be
captured by a given sampling rate. For example, with a sampling rate of
2 kHz, the Nyquist frequency is 1 kHz. The minimum sampling rate must
be more than twice the Nyquist frequency (called after Harry Nyquist who
observed and published his sampling theorem in 1928 after work with
maximum transmission rates of telephone channels). 
A sampling rate that is too low will result in the points being joined up
in such a way that they represent a completely different frequency.
Transformation of sinusoids into different frequencies in this way is
referred to aliasing and obviously is not desirable, see Figure 6.3.
When considering complex sound made up of multiple frequencies it is
necessary to decide what bandwidth of frequency is required. Any frequen-
cies that are higher in frequency than the half sampling frequency will be
aliased (transformed into another frequency) causing error. An anti-aliasing

Digital hearing aids 
109
filter (low pass filter) is used to filter away signals of frequency above half the
sampling rate. Obviously the rate must be set so that important information
will be available and what is filtered away is of little consequence. 
In a compact disc recording, information is required up to 20 kHz so
the sampling rate must be higher than 40 kHz (twice the highest frequency
to be preserved: 2 × 20 kHz) and usually the rate chosen is 44.1 kHz.
In hearing instrument technology, where the bandwidth of speech
preservation is important, the sampling frequency rate is typically between
10 kHz and 20 kHz.
Figure 6.3. An aliased signal. (a) A very slow sampling rate is used. (b) Under-sampling
produces too few points to provide an accurate representation of the original signal.
(c) Errors arise when the points are joined together. (After diagram supplied by A&M
Hearing Ltd.)

110
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
6.2.3 Quantization
The purpose of quantization is to assign a recognizable mathematical
value to the amplitude of the sinusoidal wave at each point of time.
Whereas we usually count in base 10 (which involves using numbers 0 to
9), it would be difficult for a machine to work in a complex number base.
However, the binary (or base 2) system of counting uses only noughts and
ones. As it is easy for a machine to detect whether a signal is off or on, this
is used to represent 0 or 1. 
For example:
0 in base 10 is 0 in binary format
1 in base 10 is 1 in binary format
2 in base 10 is 10 in binary format
3 in base 10 is 11 in binary format 
4 in base 10 is 100 in binary format
5 in base 10 is 101 in binary format
6 in base 10 is 110 in binary format
7 in base 10 is 111 in binary format
8 in base 10 is 1000 in binary format.
Just as in base 10 we can create very complex numbers with a series of digits
between 0 and 9, so in base 2 very complex numbers can be created with a
series of noughts and ones. Figure 6.4 shows this graphically. The term ‘bit’
is used to refer to how many binary digits are available to represent a value.
The number of bits corresponds to the power of the number in base 2. For
example, three-bit processing would mean there were 23 (2 × 2 × 2 = 8)
quantization levels available. Ten-bit processing would mean there were 210
(1024) quantization levels available. The more levels there are available, the
more accurate will be the representation of the original signal. At present,
digital hearing aids use between 16-bit and 32-bit processing.
The flow of pulses is controlled by transistors or ‘gates’, which switch
the flow off and on. Thousands of gates are arranged in circuits to create
patterns of pulses that can carry out very complex calculations by working
through them step by step (Reffin-Smith and Watts, 1992).
A sound wave (sinusoidal signal) is converted into a series of levels that
correspond to specific amplitude values. The more levels there are, the
more amplitude values can be represented. Low quantization levels means
less accurate representation of the original signal as information is lost
and therefore errors can be observed in the quantized signal, see Figure
6.4. A high bit system will produce a highly quantized signal that can be

Digital hearing aids 
111
Figure 6.4. Quantization error (or quantization noise) reduces as the number of
quantization levels used increases. Each diagram shows different quantization levels
with the same sampling rate. If a signal is highly quantized, it can be viewed as a
continuous signal. (After diagram supplied by A&M Hearing Ltd.)

112
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
viewed as a continuous signal, although each amplitude measurement is
represented in binary format.
6.3 PROCESSING THE DIGITAL SIGNAL
As the information entered into the system exists as mathematical values
occurring at discrete time intervals, it is much easier to identify exact sections
of the signal. Decisions or instructions can be made based on the mathemat-
ical identification. Instructions referred to as processing ‘algorithms’ are
programmed into the chip and will dictate how the hearing aid treats the
incoming signals. Some of the instructions are ‘built in’ but many of the
processing strategies can be configured by the hearing aid audiologist to
meet the individual’s requirements. The hearing aid is programmed via a
personal computer (PC) using the industry standard ‘Hi-pro’ box as the inter-
face between the hearing instruments and the PC, see Figure 6.5. The
software database used as standard in the hearing aid industry is ‘NOAH’.
NOAH is the platform on to which hearing instrument software is loaded.
Each manufacturer has its own fitting software with associated ‘first fit’
algorithms, see Figure 6.6. After the entry of the audiogram the selected
hearing instruments are connected to the Hi-pro by the appropriate cables. It
is usual for the software to compute the setting of the hearing instrument as
governed by the fitting philosophy or algorithm being observed. Thereafter it
is the hearing aid audiologist’s role to evaluate the effectiveness of that first fit
and make any parameter adjustments required.
Figure 6.5. The ‘Hi-pro’ interface. ‘Hi-pro’ is short for ‘hearing instrument program-
ming’.(Photograph courtesy of A&M Hearing Ltd.)

Digital hearing aids 
113
Figure 6.6. Software showing the first fit response of a digital hearing aid using DSL
I/O targets. (Photograph courtesy of A&M Hearing Ltd.)
In DSP hearing aids, the input signal is filtered into distinct areas or
channels. Different processing can then take place in each defined
channel. The use of multi-channels is not particular to digital instruments
but the accuracy is greater than in analogue counterparts. Having discrete
areas or channels in which to operate provides the flexibility to reduce or
enhance specific parts of the signal. Although sometimes used inter-
changeably, the term:
• ‘channel’ refers to a frequency region where there is active automatic
signal processing;
• ‘band’ refers to a frequency region that is shaped by passive filters. 
A positive speech-to-noise ratio (to provide the optimum listening
environment for hearing impaired users) is partly achieved in DSP instru-
ments by noise reduction algorithms. Different strategies exist but most
noise reduction algorithms will identify the spectral frequency of noise

114
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
and that of speech in each channel. Where noise only is detected the gain
for that channel will be reduced. Multiple channels make it easier to act
independently on speech and noise. There is disagreement as to how
many channels are required to optimize listening. 
A variety of strategies are used in the different systems. These involve
combinations of some or all of the following:
• input compression (AGCi); 
• output compression (AGCo); 
• kneepoints;
• compression ratios; 
• attack/release timings; 
• cross-channel coupling; 
• feedback management systems;
• twin microphone systems;
• transient speech enhancement. 
Some of these features are available in analogue systems but the flexibility
and accuracy are much improved when used with DSP. Noise reduction
strategies aim to preserve the speech components comfortably within the
wearer’s dynamic range and to mimic normal cochlear function. There is
some disagreement regarding the number of AGC regions and the
attack/release times that should be employed. Other strategies may also be
used to enhance various speech components, for example by detecting
specific soft components of speech such as plosives and fricatives and
enhancing them with a short-term boost of gain.
Digital signal processing works to enhance signal quality and to
maximize speech intelligibility in noise. Processes can be accurately
applied to specified regions because DSP identifies exact frequency
domains in the same way as the grid reference on a map. However, DSP
strategies are of no help if the surrounding noise is speech (‘cocktail party’
noise). To combat this situation a dual microphone option (see section
5.1.2) is often used in DSP instruments. This provides the flexibility of
switching between omnidirectional and directional microphones. If users
can position themselves directly in front of their conversational partners,
use of directional microphones will give enhanced gain to their partner’s
speech even in situations of ‘cocktail party’ noise. 
After the signal has been processed it must be converted back to
analogue format before being sent to the receiver. This is essentially the
reverse of analogue-to-digital conversion:
• The processed signal is converted back to quantized levels by reversing
the effect of the sampler using the same sampling rate. The resultant

Digital hearing aids 
115
waveform will show steps, not because of the quantization levels,
which are fine enough not to be noticed, but because the signal was
digital and as such only exists at specified times not continuously as the
original analogue signal. 
• The steps are smoothed out. This is achieved using a low pass filter, set
to half the sampling rate such that only the original waveform content
remains.
6.4 FITTING PHILOSOPHIES
6.4.1 Introduction
The aim of fitting a hearing instrument is to compensate for the individual
hearing loss and to resolve the issues of handicap that arise as a conse-
quence. Despite the fact that the hearing loss itself can be described objec-
tively by measuring threshold, loudness sensation and uncomfortable
loudness levels (ULLs), the individual needs of the client cannot be easily
predicted. Fitting based on the description of the hearing loss can there-
fore only be the start of a fine-tuning process, which takes into considera-
tion the individual needs of the hearing-impaired person.
For the fitting of hearing instruments two different basic forms of
algorithms can be distinguished (see Table 6.1): 
• The prescriptive algorithms based on the mathematical calculation of
the hearing instrument settings from audiogram data. BERGER, POGO
and NAL (original) are the best known of this kind of algorithms.
These well-established fitting rules are not suitable to prescribe multi-
target gains for various input levels. They are based upon prescribing
gain for linear amplification on a basis of either a third or half
threshold.
• The adaptive algorithms take into consideration individual sound
perception of the instrument user. Most non-linear approaches are
based upon the premise of normalizing loudness. This means that the
prescribed gain for input sounds allows the hearing-impaired person
to perceive those input sounds at the same loudness as a normally
hearing person would perceive them. These approaches also attempt
to restore the normal perceived loudness relationships between
different frequency regions within speech. The hearing aid setting is
calculated from the difference between the individual sensation of the
hearing-impaired person and the statistical average of the hearing
sensation values of normally hearing persons. Examples of adaptive
algorithms include desired sensation level input/output (DSL I/O) and
National Acoustic Laboratory non-linear (NAL-NL1).

Table 6.1. Examples of prescriptive and adaptive algorithms
Gain rule
Derivation
Application 
Reference
Prescriptive algorithms
Half Gain Rule
Calculation from audiogram
linear hearing instruments 
Lybarger (1963)
Third Gain Rule
Calculation from audiogram
linear in-the-ear hearing instruments
Libby (1986)
Berger
Calculation from audiogram
linear hearing instruments 
Berger et al. (1989)
Pogo/Pogo 2
Calculation from audiogram
linear hearing instruments 
McCandless & Lyregaard (1983)
NAL (R)
Calculation from audiogram for
linear hearing instruments 
Byrne & Dillon (1986)
loudness equalization of speech 
+ statistical gain acceptance
NAL (RP)
Calculation from audiogram for
linear hearing instruments
Byrne et at (1991)
loudness equalization of speech 
for profound hearing loss
+ statistical gain acceptance
Fig 6
Calculation from audiogram 
non-linear hearing instruments
Killion & Fikret-Pasa (1993)
+ statistical gain acceptance
mild to moderate hearing losses
DSL
Calculation from audiogram and
predicted loudness growth taking
non-linear hearing instruments
Seewald (1988)
into consideration age related 
insertion gain differences
DSL 1/0
Calculation from audiogram and
WDRC non-linear instruments
Cornelisse et al. (1994)
predicted loudness growth allowing
calculation of desired compression
ratio values
NAL-NLl
Calculation from audiogram for
non-linear hearing instruments
Dillon (1999)
loudness equalization of speech 
+ statistical gain acceptance
LGOB Test
Calculation based on individual
non-linear hearing instruments 
Alien & Jeng (1990)
loudness sensation measured  
on a 7-point loudness scale
116
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology

Table 6.1. Continued
Gain rule
Derivation
Application 
Reference
Interactive algorithms
Scal Adapt 
Fitting based on matching
non-linear hearing instruments
Kiessling et al. (1996)
(GN Resound)
individual sound perception
Loudness Perception
Fitting based on matching
non-linear hearing instruments
Launer (1995)
Profile (Phonak)
individual sound perception*
Sensogram (Widex) 
Fitting based on matching 
non-linear hearing instruments
Ludvigsen et al. (1997)
individual sound perception*
* (loudness mapping)
Digital hearing aids
117

118
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
6.4.2 DSL I/O
One of the most popular loudness normalization procedures is DSL I/O
(desired sensation level input/output). This is specifically designed to fit
non-linear hearing instruments, providing compression over the entire
dynamic range. In the case of multi-channel instruments it will provide
different compression strategies in each channel based upon the corre-
sponding differing dynamic ranges across the audiogram. 
The rationale of DSL I/O is to adjust the hearing instrument parameters
so that the acoustic dynamic range of a normally hearing person is
compressed into the residual dynamic range of the hearing impaired
person to be fitted. The objective is to make all sounds audible to the
hearing impaired user at the same loudness as they would be to the
normally hearing person.
The DSL I/O procedure requires threshold and uncomfortable
loudness level information at each frequency to determine residual
dynamic range and hence the compression strategy to be employed. The
maximum output of the amplifier is kept constant at the ULL so that ULL
values are not exceeded. If ULL values are not measured, they can be
predicted from the measured thresholds based on mean values from a
study group of hearing impaired subjects. In this case, the prescribed
targets are an approximation and adjustments may be required for the
individual fitting. 
The DSL I/O procedure is described as a level-dependent approach.
Three target curves are generated for fitting the hearing instrument. These
are for inputs of 40 dBSPL, 65 dBSPL and 90 dBSPL. Different values can
be determined within each channel. In the case of a single channel instru-
ment the values may be determined from 2 kHz or from average values
over several frequencies.
6.4.3 NAL-NL1
National Acoustic Laboratory non-linear (NAL-NL1) works on a different
premise from most other approaches. The methodology is comparable to
that employed for NAL-R and NAL-RP (see Table 6.1). The fundamental
objective of this approach is to provide gain to the speech frequency areas
such that it maximizes speech intelligibility but does not present speech
any louder than a normally hearing person would perceive it. It works on
ensuring that overall loudness is no greater than that perceived by a
normally hearing person listening to the same sound. 
Some methods, in their effort to restore normal loudness across all
frequencies, purposefully prescribe more gain for the lower frequencies as
these are perceived to be louder by the normally hearing person. However

Digital hearing aids 
119
this conflicts with what we understand to be better for speech intelligi-
bility, in that if low frequencies are amplified too much there is a chance
that these will mask the higher frequencies. NAL works to provide equal
loudness perception across all frequency regions. Some variation from
equal loudness is applied for severe to profound losses as research
suggests that this group of people use different cues for intelligibility
compared with lesser hearing losses.
A complex mathematical formula is used to give prescribed targets
based on input levels of 40 dBSPL, 65 dBSPL and 90 dBSPL.
The formula for NAL-NL1 is based on hearing thresholds, audiogram
slope and the level of the speech input signal. The way in which the
formula manipulates this data is based upon a total loudness calculation
and on the speech intelligibility or articulation index (see section 4.5). The
result of this formula is a prescription of gain at each of the frequencies
and speech levels.
6.4.4 Computer assisted ‘first fit’
Having selected the desired prescriptive approach, fitting systems will
automatically calculate the target gains. The hearing instrument’s parameters
will be programmed to comply with the input/output function prescribed. 
Most systems will give the option to enter other information, which can
be incorporated into the first fit algorithm. Details (such as whether the fit
is monaural or binaural, for adult or child, and, what tubing and venting is
to be used) can all be accounted for in the prescribed targets. Some
systems will provide for additional gain requirements if the hearing loss
entered is of a mixed or conductive origin.
First fit algorithms are based on objective research and mathematical
models. They provide a very good starting point for the setting of the
hearing instruments. The fitting must be verified and the aid fine-tuned to
take account of the client’s needs, experiences and satisfaction levels.
6.5 EVALUATION OF DSP INSTRUMENTS
Evaluating digital hearing instrument fittings may be achieved in the same
way as with any conventional hearing instruments, see Chapter 11, but the
stimuli used for testing digital hearing aids must be chosen with care as
traditional test signals may not be appropriate. The sweep or composite
noise signals routinely used in probe microphone, functional gain or
hearing instrument test box measurements are often detected by DSP
hearing instruments as noise. When these signals are used, the measured
performance of the hearing instrument will reflect the noise adaptive
parameters and not the gain supplied to speech. 

120
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Most probe microphone systems offer ‘speech noise’ as a stimulus type
but this will also give rise to erroneous representation. Speech noise is
derived from the long-term average speech spectrum and is presented as a
composite speech noise signal, which is presented at a constant sound
level. Digital signal processing interprets this signal as noise because it is at
a constant level whereas the intensity of real speech fluctuates randomly.
Many digital hearing aids recognize the difference between speech and
noise by detecting the spectral shape (frequencies) and the modulation
characteristics. 
For this reason the working group HACTES (Hearing Aid Clinical Test
Environment Standardization) has developed a series of test stimuli for
the International Collegium of Rehabilitative Audiology (ICRA). These test
stimuli are referred to as ICRA noise signals.
They have been developed in an effort to establish standards for evalu-
ating the performance of hearing instruments in background noise and
their non-linear characteristics. The ICRA noise signals are based on live
English speech and are formatted to result in a long-term average speech
spectrum (LTASS) with the modulation characteristics of natural speech.
There are 10 ICRA noise signals including combinations of:
• male speaker; 
• female speaker;
• average speech levels; 
• raised speech levels;
• loud speech levels. 
Using these test signals provides information about how the DSP instru-
ment is responding to incoming speech levels. 
Some hearing aids provide the facility to switch off the adaptive
parameters of the hearing instrument so that gain can be directly
measured using any stimulus type. However, this will not demonstrate
how the DSP is working with background noise and various speech levels. 
6.6 SUMMARY
Digital signal processing offers increased flexibility due to a greater
number of filters (trimmer equivalents) giving:
• wide range of options; 
• accurate reproducibility; 
• calibrated alterations; 

Digital hearing aids 
121
• combinations of processing strategies; and 
• greater control. 
Digital processing can be used to produce a linear hearing aid but it is
most commonly used to provide non-linear compression to compensate
for cochlear hearing loss. Adaptive algorithms provide multi-target gains
(for soft, medium and loud input sounds) in order to restore normal
loudness perception. Thresholds (by air conduction) and ULLs (measured
or assumed from statistical data) are required for this. Loudness mapping
is sometimes also used to obtain more accurate individual data from the
client regarding the level of sound they perceive as soft, medium or loud.
The final result should improve acceptability by users as they are able to
hear more effectively in a greater number of situations. As with all hearing
aids, rehabilitation and after-fitting support are vital (see Chapter 12).
FURTHER READING
Johnson K (1997) Acoustic and Auditory Phonetics. Oxford: Blackwell, Chapter 2.
Rosen S, Howell P (1991) An Introduction to Digital Signals and Systems for Speech
and Hearing. New York: Academic Press.
Venema TH (1998) Compression for Clinicians. San Diego: Singular Publishing.

This page intentionally left blank 

PART TWO
The Practice of Hearing Aid
Audiology
123

This page intentionally left blank 

125
Chapter 7
The assessment procedure 
7.1 CASE HISTORIES
The case history forms an important part of the early management of the
hearing-impaired client. A structured interview establishes fundamental
information, whilst allowing the hearing aid audiologist to build up
rapport, which begins to break down barriers and reduce the client’s
fears.
Hearing-impaired adults usually seek help only when they have
reached a stage at which they can no longer ignore their hearing loss. The
case history can provide an insight into the client’s reasons for attending,
highlight particular areas of difficulty and reveal the client’s attitudes and
expectations. Such information is generally most readily obtained using an
informal conversational approach, with careful listening, observation and
gentle probing. A short form or list of questions to act as a prompt (Figure
7.1) is often very helpful. The essential information that should be
recorded includes:
• the duration of the hearing loss;
• the rate of deterioration and any fluctuation in hearing levels;
• the cause of loss, if known, and any family history in relation to this;
• previous or current audiological, medical or surgical assessment or
treatment;
• any conditions necessitating medical referral;
• previous or current experience with hearing aids;
• situations causing hearing and listening difficulty.
The pre-audiometric assessment of the hearing-impaired person is an
important part of the auditory rehabilitation process. Discussion may help
to break down any barriers to progress at later stages and help in estab-
lishing mutual understanding. Knowledge of the client’s history may be

126
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Figure 7.1. A typical case history form.

The assessment procedure 
127
particularly helpful if the client has received poor advice previously. A
hearing aid audiologist, unless medically qualified, is not in a position to
make a diagnosis or prescribe treatment, but the case history provides an
opportunity to explore the client’s hearing and communication difficulties
and may also reveal certain problems necessitating medical referral.
Any case history must attempt to identify those clients for whom
medical treatment or advice should be sought and the Hearing Aid
Council (1999) provides guidance in clause five of its Code of Practice.
This lists 12 conditions that require referral for medical advice and several
of these can be discovered or suspected at the case history stage. The 12
conditions are detailed below.
1. Whole or partial obstruction of the external auditory canal that
would not allow proper examination of the eardrum and/or the
proper and accurate taking of an ear impression. Common obstruc-
tions include wax, foreign bodies, build up of dead skin (keratin),
outgrowths of bone and otitis externa. Medical referral is made to effect
treatment/ removal. An impression should never be taken if there is a
risk of pushing the blockage further down. A good view of the tympanic
membrane is required to ensure no conditions exist that should be
referred under rule 2.
2. Abnormal appearance of the eardrum and/or the outer ear. This rule
covers all abnormalities of the pinna, canal and eardrum. Examples
affecting the outer ear include conditions such as otitis externa, frost-
bite, haematoma, carcinoma. Examples of abnormalities of the
tympanic membrane include perforations, inflammation and fluid
behind the drum. Referral is important to obtain the correct advice
and/or treatment.
3. Earache. Earache or otalgia may be due to a wide variety of causes. The
pain may be directly related to the ear or may be referred from some
other part such as from the neck or the teeth. Medical referral is
required for investigation and treatment.
4. Discharge from the ear. Discharge may be caused by otitis externa or
otitis media. Medical treatment is required. Whenever discharge is
present, extreme care must be taken to observe appropriate equipment
sterilisation or safe disposal.
5. Conductive hearing loss where audiometry shows 25dB or greater
air/bone gap at two or more of the following frequencies: 500 Hz, 
1 kHz, 2 kHz. Most conductive losses are treatable and a hearing aid
system will therefore only be considered after medical advice has been
sought. Examples include otosclerosis and ‘glue ear’.

128
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
6. A unilateral or asymmetrical (sensorineural) hearing loss as
indicated by a difference in left/right bone conduction thresholds of
25dB or greater at two or more of the following frequencies: 500 Hz, 
1 kHz, 2 kHz, 4 kHz. A marked difference between the hearing in each
ear may be associated with specific causes such as a tumour or
Ménière’s disorder in the early stages. Medical attention is therefore
urgently required unless the cause has already been ascertained, for
example a unilateral loss due to mumps.
7. Hearing loss of sudden onset and 8. Sudden worsening of an existing
hearing loss. Most deafness is gradually progressive in nature. Any
hearing loss that can be correctly termed as sudden or suddenly
worsening should give rise to concern as it may be symptomatic of a
serious disorder. Examples include viral infections, tumours, acoustic
trauma, interruption of the blood supply and ototoxic drugs. The
hearing aid audiologist should also be aware that some cases may be
non-organic in nature.
9. Hearing loss subject to fluctuation beyond that associated with a
common cold. Fluctuating hearing loss is a feature of many conductive
problems, including Eustachian tube dysfunction. It may also be
symptomatic of certain sensorineural disorders, such as Ménière’s
disorder and vascular problems. Cases of fluctuating loss require
medical investigation.
10. A hearing loss that may be associated with noise exposure. Damage to
the auditory system may be caused by a single exposure to very high
levels of noise (noise trauma). More usually, noise induced hearing loss
is caused by exposure to high levels of industrial noise over long
periods of time. The effect of leisure noise, such as loud discotheques
or personal stereos, may add to the effect of noise at work. Referral for
noise damage may lead to advice regarding ear protection, employer
liability and compensation.
11. Tinnitus (noises in the ear(s) or head). Tinnitus frequently accompa-
nies hearing loss but may also occur on its own. Tinnitus is a symptom
of many auditory disorders, for example otosclerosis, Ménière’s
disorder and noise induced hearing loss. If tinnitus is present, the
client must be referred for medical investigation. If medical treatment
is not indicated, masking with hearing aids or tinnitus maskers may be
helpful.
12. Vertigo, dizziness or imbalance. Vertigo is a hallucination of
movement and refers to a vestibular disorder, such as Ménière’s
disorder, labyrinthitis or a tumour of the VIII cranial nerve. Urgent
referral is therefore required for investigation.

The assessment procedure 
129
7.2 OTOSCOPY
7.2.1 Introduction
Otoscopy is usually performed prior to audiometry. Visual inspection of
the ear is essential to detect abnormalities that should be referred to a
medical practitioner, and also to determine the size and shape of the
pinna and external auditory meatus before taking impressions.
7.2.2 The otoscope
An otoscope will provide both magnification and illumination. It should
be supplied with at least three different sized specula. The largest
speculum that will fit comfortably into the external auditory meatus
should be chosen from these, to provide a wide view of the eardrum, with
as much illumination as possible.
When using the otoscope, it should be held in such a way as to
minimize the possibility of discomfort or injury if the client moves. This
can be achieved by holding the barrel of the otoscope like a pencil and
resting a finger firmly but gently against the client’s cheek or head. The
barrel of the otoscope should not be held pointing downwards as it is
more difficult to prevent the speculum accidentally being inserted deeper
into the canal by a sudden movement of the head.
The specula should be sterilized by an accepted method. There is a
legal duty of care with regard to the health and safety of clients (Health
and Safety Executive, 1992). The following is the recommended
minimum standard for cleaning specula (British Society of Audiology,
1998):
1. Wash thoroughly in fresh hot water and detergent to remove any
visible contamination.
2. Soak in appropriate sterilizing solution, diluted according to the
manufacturer’s instructions, for 20 minutes. The active chemicals in
these solutions include chlorhexidine gluconate, cetrimide,
dichlorometaxylenol and sodium hypochlorite.
3. Rinse in fresh water.
4. Store dry in a clean container.
5. Hands should be washed thoroughly before handling clean items.
6. It is good practice to wipe clean specula with a suitable swab,
saturated with isopropyl alcohol, before use. 

130
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
7. The same speculum may be used on both the ears of one client, unless
there is a risk of cross-infection. 
8. A speculum must never be used on more than one patient without
being appropriately cleaned. 
9. Used items should be stored in a sealed container away from clean
items.
10. Specula used on patients with discharge or blood in the ear should be
stored in a sealed container and disposed of safely, usually via a local
health centre or hospital. Rubber gloves should ideally be worn when
working on bleeding or discharging ears and such gloves must also be
disposed of safely.
The above procedure should also be used for cleaning and disinfection of
earlight probe tips and all other tools used in contact with the outer ear.
Discarded impressions where there is blood or discharge, or bite blocks
used for open jaw impressions (contact with saliva), must also be disposed
of safely in line with point 10 above. There are also restrictions on items
sent by post (HMSO, 1969) – for example, used hearing aids and impres-
sions should be disinfected before posting.
7.2.3 The examination
The client should be seated so as to be accessible. Ideally the hearing aid
audiologist should also be seated to bring his or her eye-line to the level of
the client’s ear. All equipment required should be laid out in readiness on
a clean towel, preferably white for reasons of hygiene.
The client should be given a simple explanation of the procedure. After
washing his or her hands, the hearing aid audiologist should inspect the
pinna and the surrounding area for abnormalities, such as signs of tender-
ness, skin disorder, deformity or previous surgery.
The external auditory meatus should be straightened by lifting the
pinna upwards and backwards. If the client is a young child the angle of
the meatus is likely to be more horizontal or downwards than that of the
adult. In this case, therefore, the ear would be pulled gently downwards
or horizontally backwards.
The correct speculum should be chosen by noting the size of the
meatal entrance. Having connected the speculum to the otoscope, the
speculum should be placed gently into the meatal entrance. The best view
can be obtained by taking the eye down to be on a level with, or looking
slightly upwards into, the lens and moving not only the otoscope but also
the eye as necessary. After inspection, the speculum should be cleaned and
sterilized.

The assessment procedure 
131
Inspection with an otoscope should include viewing the external
auditory meatus and the tympanic membrane. The meatus should be
checked for signs of foreign bodies, wax, inflammation, growths and
discharge. The tympanic membrane should be inspected for any variation
from normal.
The normal tympanic membrane appears pale grey and semi-
transparent. On otoscopic examination, the handle of the malleus can be
seen extending downwards towards the centre of the drum. A cone of light
extends from the umbo, following the direction of the jawline. This is light
that is reflected back from the otoscope and is known as the ‘light reflex’.
The lateral or short process of the malleus can be seen as a white promi-
nence at the upper end of the handle of the malleus, and the blood vessels
that supply the tympanic membrane may also be seen. The tympanic
membrane as viewed through an otoscope is outlined in Figure 7.2.
Inspection should include noting the colour of the tympanic
membrane, the presence and position of the light reflex, any scarring or
perforations and any other abnormalities. Early signs of otitis media may
be found at the otoscopic examination. If there is infection present the
tympanic membrane will often appear very red. Failure of the Eustachian
tube to aerate the middle ear adequately, whether due to infection or
other cause, will result in retraction of the tympanic membrane, which will
also appear dull. When fluid begins to collect in the middle ear, the
tympanic membrane may begin to bulge outwards and the fluid may
sometimes be seen. If the tympanic membrane perforates, the fluid will
discharge into the external ear.
Figure 7.2. The normal tympanic membrane as viewed through an otoscope.
Handle of malleus
Umbo

132
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
7.3 TUNING FORK TESTS
7.3.1 Introduction
Tuning forks may be used in simple brief tests to determine the type of
hearing loss. The equipment is inexpensive, light, small and portable and
the results are reliable as far as the type of loss is concerned. The tests
provide no reliable information with regard to the degree of hearing loss
and the results are limited to the frequency of the tuning fork used. Tuning
fork tests cannot be performed on patients whose loss is too severe to be
able to hear the vibrations of the tines.
Tuning fork tests are widely used by otologists to provide early
diagnostic information prior to audiometric assessment. They may be
used when audiometry is not available, when a full audiometric test is not
possible, or as a preliminary indicator of the condition.
A tuning fork is a simple device, made of steel, aluminium or magne-
sium, which vibrates when struck. Its prongs, or tines, move alternately
away from and towards each other (Figure 1.1) and produce a relatively
pure tone. The fork should not be struck heavily or on a hard surface, as
this would introduce harmonics and the tone would no longer be pure.
Tuning forks for audiometric investigation require a flat base.
A tuning fork should be held by the stem and struck, about two-thirds
of the way along the tines, on a rubber pad or on the knee or elbow.
Alternatively, the fork may be plucked at the top of the tines.
The preferred frequency of fork to be used is 512 Hz (British Society of
Audiology, 1987). Other frequencies may be used, but very high tones fade
too quickly to be of much use, while very low tones may produce vibrotac-
tile results – that is, they may be felt rather than heard. Whatever frequency
is used, the results obtained apply only to that frequency.
Several tuning fork tests exist, but those most widely used are the
Weber and Rinne tests, which together provide a reliable indication of the
type of hearing loss.
7.3.2 The Weber test
The Weber test is a test of lateralization; it establishes in which ear a tone is
perceived. The client is first asked if he has a poorer ear. The tuning fork is
then struck, and its base placed on the midline, usually on the forehead,
although it may be placed on the vertex, on the bridge of the nose or on
the chin. A hand should be gently placed to support the back of the head.
The client is asked where he or she hears the tone:
• With normal hearing or an equal loss the tone will generally be heard in
the midline.

The assessment procedure 
133
• With a unilateral or an unequal sensorineural loss the tone will be
heard in the better ear (Figure 7.3(a)).
• With a unilateral or unequal conductive loss, the tone will be heard in
the poorer ear (Figure 7.3(b)). This is likely to occur because the better
ear is able to hear background noise, which masks the tone to some
extent. The ear with the conductive loss has no such interference and
hears the tone clearly by bone conduction.
Figure 7.3. The Weber test.
(a)
(b)
7.3.3 The Rinne test
The Rinne test compares sensitivity by air conduction and bone conduc-
tion in one ear at a time.
The tuning fork is struck and held with the tines in line with, and about
25 mm from, the canal entrance for 2 seconds (Figure 7.4). The tuning
fork is then held, without delay, so that the base is pressed firmly against
the mastoid, again for 2 seconds. A hand should be held against the
opposite side of the head to provide counter-pressure.
The client is asked if he hears the tone louder at or behind the ear:
• With normal hearing air conduction is more efficient than bone
conduction; the tone is therefore heard loudest at the ear. The same
result is obtained with most sensorineural losses. This is known as a
Rinne positive. 
• With a conductive loss the tone appears louder by bone conduction.
This is a Rinne negative.
• Where there is a ‘dead’ ear or a severe to profound sensorineural loss on
the test side the tone may also appear louder by bone conduction. This
is known as a false Rinne negative. This result is due to cross-hearing.

134
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
When a Rinne negative result appears to contradict the Weber test
result, a false Rinne negative can be suspected.
Masking of the non-test ear may prevent cross-hearing but cannot be
carried out accurately. Tragal rubbing is the most widely used method. A
Barany box can be used but this produces high sound levels and should
therefore only be used with care.
Tuning fork tests provide a quick indication of the type of hearing loss
involved. They are not useful for determining the degree of hearing loss
and should not be considered a substitute for pure tone audiometry.
7.4 PRINCIPAL AUDIOMETRIC TESTS
7.4.1 Pure tone threshold determination
The method described here is based on the British Society of Audiology’s
recommended procedure (British Society of Audiology, 1981) Test Method
A. The threshold of hearing can be defined as the lowest level of a sound
that is heard for 50% of the times it is presented.
Figure 7.4. The Rinne test.
(a)
(b)
(c)

The assessment procedure 
135
(a) Signals
The test signals should be pure tones of 1 to 3 seconds duration with gaps
of 1 to 3 seconds between signals. The tester should be careful to avoid a
rhythmic presentation by using a wide variety of signal and gap lengths.
(b) Instructions
These should be as simple as possible to avoid confusing the client. In
most cases, terms such as ‘frequency’ and ‘pure tone’ should be avoided.
All the client has to do is respond when a sound is heard, no matter how
loud or quiet the sound is and no matter in which ear it is heard. It must
be stressed that it is important to respond to even the very quietest sounds
when the client may not be absolutely sure that the sound was there. The
importance of responding for the entire duration of the sound must also
be stressed.
(c) Response
The client’s response should be silent and not require excessive
movement; a raised finger is acceptable but a raised hand is not. A
response button and light arrangement is fitted on most audiometers and
this is ideal as pressing a button is a positive response from the client that
requires minimal effort. The response should last as long as the signal.
Although not ideal, in some cases a verbal response or a response in the
form of a tap on the table may be necessary, for example, with young
children, the very elderly, or those with mental handicaps.
(d) Threshold testing by air conduction
Any spectacles or large earrings should be removed so that the
headphones fit firmly but without discomfort. The headphones should
also be positioned carefully so that the test tones will be presented directly
into the meatal entrance.
If the client reports a difference between the ears, the better ear
should be tested first. As it is usually an easily recognizable sound, 1 kHz
should be tested first, followed by 2 kHz, 4 kHz, 8 kHz, 500 Hz and
250 Hz. The threshold at 1 kHz should be checked again for the first ear
and if the apparent threshold is 5 dB different from the first value, the
better value should be recorded. If the difference between the first value
and the rechecked value is greater than 5 dB, then retesting at other
frequencies should be considered, the client first having been
reinstructed. The intermediate or half-octave frequencies, that is,
750 Hz, 1.5 kHz, 3 kHz and 6 kHz, will normally not be tested unless
there is:

136
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
• a large difference (for example, 20 dB or more) between the results at
two adjacent octave frequencies; 
• suspected noise damage (3 kHz and 6 kHz as the audiogram may dip at
these frequencies); 
• a medico-legal purpose (3 kHz and 6 kHz);
• a custom hearing aid prescription (6 kHz and sometimes 3 kHz).
The first tone presented should be well above threshold, without being
uncomfortably loud, and this can be ascertained by asking the client if it
was loud and clear. This lets the client know the type of sound being
listened for. The tester should ensure that the client responds correctly and
for the full duration of this tone. With experience, the hearing aid audiolo-
gist will be able to predict an appropriate starting point. In most cases a
50 dBHL tone will be effective and this will rarely be too loud. However, if
there is no response or the client claims that the sound is rather quiet, then
the signal should be raised by 20 dB and the test started again.
Each time the client responds to a signal, the next signal should be
presented at a level 10 dB lower, continuing until the level is below
threshold and the client does not respond. After a null response the next
signal should be 5 dB higher. This procedure must be strictly adhered to,
down in 10 dB steps and up in 5 dB steps.
Threshold at each frequency is defined as the lowest level responded to
at least half the time in the ascending mode. At least two responses are
required at the same level, in the ascending mode, to define threshold.
If the signals are presented in a rhythmic and hence predictable fashion
clients may respond to signals actually below their threshold. Signals must
be presented with no visual, auditory or other cues that might help clients
guess when an ‘inaudible’ signal has been presented.
(e) Threshold testing by bone conduction
When testing by bone conduction, the bone conduction transducer is
placed on the mastoid process behind the ear with the poorest air conduc-
tion threshold. The transducer must not touch the pinna. Only frequen-
cies from 250 Hz to 4 kHz are used (section 7.5.2). While 250 Hz is
included in the British Society of Audiology’s recommended procedures
(1981), this frequency is not always tested as, even at low sound levels,
responses may be due to feeling rather than hearing (vibrotactile) and
harmonic distortion may also occur. 
Thresholds for air conduction reflect the total hearing loss, whereas
thresholds by bone conduction reflect the degree of sensorineural
problem. The difference between the two, which is known as the air–bone
gap, indicates the degree of any conductive element.

The assessment procedure 
137
A purely conductive hearing loss produces thresholds by air conduc-
tion, which are poorest in the low frequencies. The bone conduction
thresholds should theoretically be 0 dBHL. However, this is not always
true as the condition of the middle ear can have a slight effect on bone
conduction sensitivity. For example, with otitis media, although low
frequency hearing is good, there are often reduced high frequency thresh-
olds by bone conduction; with otosclerosis a dip in the bone conduction
thresholds can often be seen at 2 kHz; this is known as Carhart’s notch.
Signals routed by bone conduction will be conducted through the
entire skull. It cannot therefore be said that the resultant thresholds neces-
sarily apply to the ear behind which the bone conduction transducer is
placed. If an unequal sensorineural loss exists bone conduction testing
without masking will normally reflect the thresholds of the better cochlea.
Bone conduction with masking must be carried out whenever it is
necessary to determine precisely the degree of sensorineural hearing loss
in each ear separately.
The rules for masking are basically the same for bone conduction as for
air conduction (section 7.4.2(b)). Masking noise may be applied to the
non-test ear either via a headphone or an insert receiver. An insert receiver
has the advantage of being physically easier to use and the masking levels
required may be lower. Where headphones are used, it is very important
to ensure that the test ear is not covered. Covering the test ear will appear
to improve the bone conduction thresholds of that ear, due to the occlu-
sion effect.
Occlusion occurs because a sound that is transmitted as a vibration
through the skull not only travels to the cochlea directly but will also reach
the external auditory meatus by this route. Reflections from the walls of
the canal enhance the sound, which is then passed via the tympanic
membrane. Where there is a middle ear impairment, the occlusion effect
may not be seen as the transmission of sound through the middle ear is
reduced.
7.4.2 Masking
(a) Cross-hearing
Generally, a client’s left and right ears can be tested separately by using
headphones. However, in certain cases, there is a danger that the sound
may cross the head by bone conduction to be perceived by a better ear on
the opposite side to that being tested.
Air conducted sound has to be sufficiently intense to produce a bone
conduction stimulus that will cross over. Some sound will be lost in

138
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
vibrating the skull, so the signal will be heard at a quieter level on the
opposite side. This is known as the transcranial transmission loss. The
amount of sound lost in this way from an initially air conducted signal will
be at least 40 dB, although on average it is more likely to be 60 dB and it
can be even more.
Cross-hearing only causes a problem in audiometry when the ears have
very different thresholds. In fact, it will not cause a problem unless the
difference between the ears or between the bone conduction and air
conduction is at least 40 dB (the minimum transcranial transmission loss)
(Figure 7.5).
Figure 7.5. The problem of cross-hearing.
It may help to clarify the situation to think of a client with one normal
ear and one dead or profoundly deaf ear. A tone is fed into the dead ear
and, since the client does not respond, the intensity of the tone is raised.
When the tone reaches a sufficient level, it will cross the skull by bone
conduction. The normal ear will now hear the tone as a very quiet sound
and the client will respond. If the audiologist is not aware of the potential
problem, she or he could think that it is the poorer ear that is responding.
On the audiogram, the threshold of the poorer ear often appears to
follow the shape of the better threshold and hence it is called a shadow
curve (Figure 7.6).
The problem of cross-hearing can be overcome by raising the threshold
of the good ear so it can no longer respond and the true threshold of the
poorer ear can be determined. This is achieved by introducing a masking
noise into the good ear.
(Input 60 dBHL)
(May be heard as 20 dBHL)

The assessment procedure 
139
(b) The rules for masking
Rule 1 – for air conduction tests
Where there is a difference of 40 dB or more between the air conduction
thresholds of the two ears at any frequency, the air-conduction test should be
masked at that frequency. The better hearing ear receives the masking noise
and the worse ear is retested. The assumption is that the better hearing ear is
hearing the air conduction test signal by cross-hearing via bone conduction.
The transcranial transmission loss for air conduction signals is at least 40 dB.
This can be thought of as the intensity required to set the skull into vibration.
Rule 2 – for bone conduction tests
Where the not-masked bone conduction threshold is more acute than the
worst air conduction threshold by 10 dB or more at any frequency, the
bone conduction for the worst ear must be masked at that frequency in
order to obtain results for each ear separately.
It is possible that the not-masked bone conduction result refers to the
ear with the worst air conduction threshold. If this is suspected then
masked bone conduction thresholds will ascertain this.
Cross-hearing is a major problem with bone conduction. The trans-
cranial transmission loss with bone conduction is minimal, usually no
Figure 7.6. Examples of audiograms showing possible shadow curves.

140
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
more than 10 dB. This means that even if the difference between the two
ears is as little as 10 dB, the bone conduction signal is likely to be heard
more prominently in the better ear, wherever the vibrator is placed.
Therefore it is necessary to mask on nearly all occasions where true bone
conduction thresholds are required for an ear. It should also be noted that
if the masked bone conduction threshold does not change by more than
10 dB, the other ear (BC) should also be tested with masking.
Rule 3 – for air conduction tests
Where rule 1 has not been applied, but where the not-masked bone
conduction threshold is more acute by 40 dB or more than the not-
masked air conduction threshold of the worse ear, the worse ear air
conduction test will need to be masked.
The explanation for this rule is that cross-hearing is occurring by bone
conduction. The air conduction headphone is sending sound directly to
the contralateral inner ear through the head. Cross-hearing is occurring
because the contralateral ear has acute inner ear hearing (that is, hearing
by bone conduction) relative to the air conduction thresholds of the test
ear. The transcranial transmission loss by this route is at least 40 dB.
(c) Method
The thresholds for the masking noise must be determined so that the level
of masking applied is appropriate. Too little masking will not be effective. If
too much masking is applied cross-masking might occur, where the masking
noise is heard in the test ear and interferes with the pure-tone threshold
determination. Although it is important to be accurate, extreme precision in
determining the threshold for masking is not required. It is not necessary to
perform a test such as that used for finding the pure-tone threshold in order
to establish a masking noise threshold. The threshold of masking is denoted
M, in the British Society of Audiology’s recommendations (1986). This is
found by introducing the masking noise in steps, out of silence and asking
the client to indicate as soon as he can hear the ‘rushing’ noise. The audiolo-
gist can use any suitable wording of explanation.
For air conduction tests, masking will be applied via the contralateral
headphone. For bone conduction tests, an insert masker should be used to
present the masking noise but if this is unavailable a headphone can be
used. The earphone on the side of the test ear should be positioned on the
side of the head and not over the ear as this will result in false bone conduc-
tion thresholds due to occlusion. Care must also be taken to ensure that
the headphones do not touch the bone conduction transducer.
Once the thresholds for masking have been established at the required
frequencies, the client will need to be re-instructed to listen for, and

The assessment procedure 
141
respond to, the pure-tones while ignoring the masking noise, usually
described as a rushing noise. Clients must not be told to expect the
masking noise in one ear and the pure tone in the other. If cross-hearing is
occurring the client may be hearing the tone contralaterally and it is often
difficult for a client to identify the ear in which a sound was actually heard.
Clients must simply respond to the tone wherever and however faintly it is
heard and ignore the masking noise.
The client is first reminded of the sound he is meant to respond to, by
quickly re-establishing threshold without masking.
To start the masked threshold determination, masking noise is
presented to the non-test ear at a level of 10 dB above the masking noise
threshold, at M + 10 dB. In the presence of masking the pure-tone
threshold is re-established. It is sufficient to present the tone at the previ-
ously determined not-masked level to establish if it is still audible while
the non-test ear is being masked; if not heard the tone level is increased
until the threshold is found. The method used may depend on the client
being tested.
Masking is then increased by 10 dB, to a level of M + 20 dB. The pure
tone threshold is again re-established by the chosen method. This proce-
dure is repeated, with masking going up in 10 dB steps each time, until
three pure tone thresholds have been found at the same level for different
levels of masking and a masking level of at least M + 40 dB has been used.
A certain amount of error is permitted in the pure tone threshold 
determination and if three pure tone thresholds differ from one another
by no more than ±5 dB they are considered the same. This is the true
masked threshold.
(d) A modified procedure for masking
1. Find the threshold for masking (M) in the non-test ear.
2. Increase the masking level by 20 dB (M + 20).
3. Present the test tone at its original intensity. (When testing by bone
conduction, the original threshold must be re-checked at this point.)
4. If the test tone is heard, increase the masking by 10 dB.
5. Present the test tone again at the same intensity as step 3.
6. If the tone is still heard, increase the masking by a further 10 dB and
present the tone again.
7. If the tone is heard, despite 20 dB increase in masking (M + 40), the
original threshold is confirmed. Cross-hearing did not occur.
8. If increasing masking prevents hearing of the test tone, the tone must
be increased.
9. The procedure is continued until two 10 dB increases in masking, that is
three different levels, do not affect the audibility of the test tone.

142
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
It is not usually necessary to mask at all frequencies. Two or three frequencies
are usually quite sufficient; often 1 kHz and either 2 kHz or 4 kHz are
masked.
It is often helpful to record the results of masking while the procedure
is being performed. This may be done using a masking diagram or in
simple columns (Table 7.1). In either case, the audiologist is looking for a
‘plateau’. This is where three consecutive masking levels have no effect on
the threshold (or no more than 5 dB). A simplified masking diagram, in
which the plateau can be seen, is shown in Figure 7.7. If high levels of
masking noise are necessary the noise should be turned down while the
results are being recorded in order to avoid discomfort.
Table 7.1. An approach to recording masking results using columns
Frequency (kHz)
Pure-tone threshold (dB)
Masking (dB)
1
40
10
(not masked)
+ 20
30
50
30
60
40
70
50
70
60
70
70
In some cases it is not possible to obtain true masked thresholds
because audiometric limits are reached or because the required masking
level is so high that it crosses the head and raises the threshold of the test
ear. Generally, this occurs in conductive and mixed hearing losses. 
For example, a bilateral 50 dBHL pure conductive hearing loss indicates
that both air conduction and bone conduction masking should be
performed. If we assume that the threshold of masking M = 50 dB, then
applying the procedure as set out, the initial masking level will be 70 dB.
Any level of masking that is at least 40 dB greater than the bone conduction
threshold of the test ear may be perceived by the test ear and thus raise its
threshold. The subsequent increases in masking noise required may then
further raise the threshold resulting in an inability to establish a plateau.
Also, at this level of masking, the audiometric limit for masking (which is 100
dB on many audiometers) will soon be reached and once again a plateau
cannot be established. It should also be noted that in some cases the
masking level may be uncomfortably loud and testing cannot be completed.

The assessment procedure 
143
(e) Symbols
Where a true masked air conduction threshold differs from the original
not-masked value and the not-masked value appears on the audiogram,
the not-masked value is a shadow and the symbol should be shaded in.
The true threshold should then be drawn on the audiogram.
If the masked and not-masked results are the same it is common in the
UK to half-shade the symbol. Not-masked bone conduction results are
identified by a triangle on the audiogram; masked bone conduction
results use special symbols: 
•×
True air conduction thresholds for right and left ears respectively,
masked if appropriate.
•×
Shadow, or possible shadow, results for right and left ears respec-
tively. Suspect results identified by the rules for masking that have
not been checked by masking should always be identified as
shadows.
×
Masked air conduction thresholds that are the same as the not-
masked thresholds. These could be left unshaded but the half-shade
indicates that masking has been performed.
Not-masked bone conduction thresholds.
[   ]
True, masked bone conduction thresholds for right and left ears
respectively.
Figure 7.7. Simplified masking diagram.
◗
◗
Relative masking level (dB)
Apparent pure tone threshold (dBHL)

144
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
A working audiogram may thus contain a plethora of results and symbols.
Sometimes a final audiogram will be redrawn with the shadow results
omitted or the half-shaded air conduction symbols replaced with open
symbols, so the chart shows simply those true results obtained with masking
and those for which masking was not required by the rules for masking.
(f) Types of masking noise
Masking is the raising of the threshold of hearing for one sound by the
presence of another sound. In everyday life we are often aware of the
effect of masking, for example when trying to hear a voice on the
telephone against a background of noise from the television.
For the purposes of masking, in pure tone audiometry wide band and
narrow band noise are equally effective but narrow band noise is
preferred because it is less fatiguing. Narrow band masking thresholds
vary across the frequency range, particularly with sloping losses. Narrow
band noise should be centred on the frequency of the test tone (Figure
7.8) and have a bandwidth of between one-third and one-half of an octave
(British Society of Audiology, 1986). The reference levels for narrow band
masking noise are specified in BS EN ISO 389-4:1999. 
Masking may also be required when carrying out speech audiometry.
Speech-shaped or speech equivalent noise is normally used for this
purpose. This type of noise is similar to pink noise in that it has its greatest
intensity in the low frequencies.
(g) Masking for bone conduction
A bone-conducted signal is applied directly to the skull and can be picked
up by either cochlea or both cochleae. The transcranial transmission loss
by bone conduction is very small, between 0 dB and 15 dB approximately.
Since there may be no transmission loss, cross-hearing must be assumed
in every case.
If thresholds are required for each ear separately by bone conduction,
masking will be needed on almost every occasion. This will provide accurate
information about the type of loss in each ear. The only exception to the
requirement for masking to ascertain this is where both of the air conduc-
tion thresholds and the not-masked bone conduction threshold are less
than 10 dB apart. This represents a bilateral sensorineural loss of equal
degree and masked bone conduction will provide no further information.
In practice, masked bone conduction is regularly required for
diagnostic purposes. It is used less frequently for hearing aid selection but
ideally should be used (subject to the criteria discussed above) where a
custom-built hearing aid is being prescribed.

The assessment procedure 
145
Figure 7.8. Types of masking noise.
7.4.3 Determination of the pure tone
uncomfortable loudness level (ULL)
A client’s dynamic range is bounded by the threshold of hearing and that
level felt to be uncomfortable. A hearing aid system should fully utilize the
dynamic range and provide sufficient gain and output to make important
sounds audible up to but not exceeding the ULL. Accurate measurement
of the ULL at different frequencies is consequently of great importance.
The method described here is based on that of the British Society of
Audiology (1987).
(a) Signals
The test signals will normally be pure tones, but the method is equally
applicable to warble tones and narrow band noise. Signals should be of
approximately 1 second duration with gaps of approximately 1 second
between signals.
Wide-band noise
Filtered wide-band noise
Narrow-band noise
(1/3 or 1/2 octave band width; centred on test frequency

146
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
(b) Instructions
The ULL is very subjective and it is very important that the client under-
stands what is required. A level felt to be simply ‘unpleasant’ will be lower
than the ULL but the test is not intended to discover the threshold of pain;
the concept of an ‘uncomfortable’ level must be stressed to the client; it is
not a test of endurance.
(c) The test
The test should start at a level predicted to be comfortable and the signals
steadily increased in 5 dB steps until the client indicates that the ULL has
been reached. The frequencies to be tested are 1 kHz, 2 kHz, 4 kHz and
500 Hz, in that order, testing one ear completely before starting on the
other.
It may be necessary to repeat some frequencies after re-instructing the
client, if the results are felt to be unreliable.
7.5 UNDERSTANDING AUDIOGRAMS
7.5.1 The audiogram
The results of pure tone audiometric tests are plotted on a graph known as
an audiogram. The audiogram form recommended by the British Society
of Audiology (1989) is shown in Figure 7.9. This provides a separate graph
for each ear, although in some cases the results from both left and right
ears are plotted on one graph.
It is important to use standard symbols on an audiogram to avoid
confusion. The standard symbol for the right ear is a circle, preferably
drawn in red, and for the left ear the symbol is a cross, preferably drawn in
green or blue. The symbols are joined up by a solid line of the appropriate
colour. If the threshold shifts when masking is used, the symbol is
completely shaded in. Where masking has been used but the threshold
remains unchanged, the normal circle or cross is used. The fact that
masking has been employed can be indicated in writing below the audio-
gram. Alternatively the symbol can be half-shaded, which is a widely
accepted variation from the recommended symbols.
Bone conduction (BC) thresholds are plotted with a triangular symbol,
usually drawn in black. The BC results are drawn on the left or right graph
according to the side on which the BC vibrator was placed. This indicates
only the position of the vibrator not which ear received the signal, since
both ears can receive a bone conducted signal. Where masking has been
used to obtain results from each ear separately, a square bracket is drawn
opening towards the test side. BC results are joined by a dotted line.

The assessment procedure 
147
Uncomfortable loudness level is shown by an ‘L’ drawn to face towards
the test side. When there is no response at the highest output for the
frequency under test, an arrow pointing downwards from the appropriate
symbol is drawn to indicate no response. The symbol is drawn at the
maximum level tested.
7.5.2 Audiogram interpretation
A basic audiogram will show thresholds by air and bone conduction. The
results should be interpreted in terms of the:
• total amount of hearing loss – that is the loss by air conduction;
• sensorineural element – that is the loss by bone conduction;
• conductive element – that is the gap, if any, between the air conduction
and bone conduction readings. This is known as the air–bone gap.
Examples can be seen in Figure 7.10.
Sometimes in an audiometric test, the responses obtained may be due to
feeling vibrations rather than true hearing. This is a particular problem when
Figure 7.9. The British Society of Audiology’s recommended format for audiograms.
(After BSA, 1989.)

148
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Figure 7.10. Types and degrees of loss from the audiogram.
Amount of BC loss = degree of sensorineural loss
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL

The assessment procedure 
149
testing by bone conduction since the levels that may produce ‘vibrotactile’
results are much lower than by air conduction (Figure 7.11). In addition,
measured bone conduction thresholds at 250 Hz of 20 dBHL or more may
relate to harmonic distortion products at higher frequencies, rather than the
fundamental frequency being tested. At high frequencies, it is also possible
for the tone to radiate from the bone conductor such that the client may hear
by air conduction again producing a false air–bone gap. Bone conduction is
not tested beyond 4 kHz but even at this frequency airborne signals may be
heard near the maximum output of the audiometer. If the hearing aid audiol-
ogist is not aware of when there is a need to question the validity of test
results a sensorineural loss may be mistaken for a mixed loss.
Figure 7.11. Possible false audiometric results due to vibrotactile responses. Certain
bone conduction transducers can elicit vibrotactile results at very low levels, indicated
by the numbers given in brackets.
Vibrotactile levels
250
500
1k
2k          4k
BC
30 (5)
60 (35)
80 (65)
–
–
AC
95
115
125
130
–
An audiogram that illustrates normal hearing will show a line of both
air and bone conduction symbols along or close to the 0 dBHL line near
the top of the audiogram. 

150
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Figure 7.12. Degree of hearing loss and its effect on hearing speech. The speech
‘banana’ indicates the level of normal conversational speech. Plotting a client’s audio-
gram on this template will provide information on how much of normal conversational
speech will be heard.
All three lines of the air and bone conduction symbols appearing
within 10 dB indicate a purely sensorineural loss in each ear (except in
the case of normal hearing).
Bone conduction readings for both ears separately are required for
accurate diagnosis and in all situations where the ears differ markedly
from one another. Bone conduction readings for each ear are obtained by
employing masking in the non-test ear. Masking for air conduction must
be used if there is a gap of 40 dB or more between the not-masked bone
conduction and the poorest air conduction readings on the audiogram.
7.5.3 Description of the hearing loss
It is often helpful to be able to describe the degree of hearing loss. There is
no one standard description, but one classification recommended by the
British Association of Teachers of the Deaf (Taylor and Bishop, 1991),
which relates well to the effect on the hearing of speech is as follows
(Figure 7.12):
• any hearing loss below 41 dBHL is described as mild loss;
• from 41 dBHL to 70 dBHL is described as a moderate loss;
• from 71 dBHL to 95 dBHL is described as a severe loss;
• greater than 95 dBHL is described as a profound loss.

The assessment procedure 
151
The single figure of hearing loss can be obtained by taking an average
over five frequencies, 250 Hz, 500 Hz, 1 kHz, 2 kHz and 4 kHz.
The concept of percentage is sometimes used to describe the degree of
hearing loss. Percentage disability is calculated according to formulae
(King, Coles, Lutman and Robinson, 1992) for compensation claims but
the use of ‘percentage’ in place of dB to describe the loss to a client is
incorrect. A 30 dB hearing loss, for example, is not a 30% impairment,
neither is a 100 dB loss total hearing loss. A 100% impairment does not
necessarily mean an ear has no useful residual hearing. The term
‘percentage’ hearing loss for rehabilitation purposes can be very
misleading and should not be used.
A full description should include an indication of the audiometric
configuration, which again is not standardized. The following terms are
sometimes used:
• ‘Flat’, to indicate a loss that does not rise or fall more than 5 dB per
octave.
• Gradually sloping, to indicate a loss that falls by 5 dB to 10 dB per
octave.
• Precipitously or sharply falling, to indicate a loss that falls 15 dB or
more per octave.
• Abruptly falling, to indicate a loss that is flat or gradual in the low
frequency region but then falls sharply. This configuration is also often
referred to as a ‘ski slope’ but this term is not recommended.
• Rising or reverse audiogram, to indicate a loss that increases by 5 dB or
more per octave.
• Trough, to indicate a loss that falls in the mid-frequency range
(1–2 kHz) by 20 dB or more in comparison with the loss at 500 Hz and
4 kHz. Although not recommended, the American term ‘cookie bite’ is
very descriptive for this shape of loss.
7.6 ROOM REQUIREMENTS FOR AUDIOMETRY
Background noise can have a significant effect on audiometric results,
particularly those obtained by bone conduction. It is therefore necessary to
reduce background noise to a level that will not elevate the hearing thresh-
olds of the person under test. Ideally the room is specially constructed but
often audiometric tests are undertaken in less than ideal conditions, for
example in the home situation. Background noise should be reduced as far
as is practicable and the use of specially designed earphones or of insert
receivers may further assist in its reduction. Where background noise is
sufficiently high to have a possible effect on the thresholds, this information

152
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
should be recorded on the audiogram. A soundproof room is not a necessity
for audiometry but the noise level should be below that which would cause
masking and threshold shift in someone with normal hearing. Where a
room is specially constructed for the purpose of audiometry there are
design recommendations that should be followed wherever possible
(Department of Health, 1974, 1994). The room should have an ambient
noise level below 30 dBA. A prefabricated sound booth is sometimes used to
guarantee a particular degree of sound attenuation. The booth must,
however, be situated within a quiet room since it ensures only a certain
degree of attenuation not a particular sound level. A booth that is to be used
only for adults should be a minimum size of 1.2 m by 1 m with a height of
2 m, but preferably the room size should be at least 2.4 m by 2.4 m, with a
height of 2 m. If children are to be tested, a room that is a minimum of 6.3 m
by 4.8 m, with a height of 2 m is required. This allows space for free-field
testing and also for parents or other adults to be present.
A sound-treated room should be situated away from obvious sources of
noise and should be isolated from the rest of the building. This can be
achieved by building the room of brick with a concrete skin and cavity,
thus using the effect of mass and of dead-air space. Mounting the whole
interior on rubber shock absorbers can deaden vibrations from the
building. Solid double doors should be used to exclude noise. Preferably,
the doors should be lead-lined and should close with magnetic seals.
Ventilation will be needed because the room will rapidly become hot and
airless. The noise from the ventilation system must be minimized using
acoustic filters to act as baffles.
Tungsten lighting is preferable to fluorescent, which produces a hum, and
if the latter is used the choke and starter should be mounted away from the
room. If there are windows, double glazing should be used to reduce noise
from outside. A much larger gap between the panes of glass is necessary than
is required for heat retention. If the glass is 3 mm thick the gap should be at
least 100 mm and if the glass is 6 mm the gap should be at least 50 mm. In
addition, where there is more than one window in the room, these should
not be positioned opposite each other as the creation of standing waves is
more likely. This is important where free-field testing is carried out.
A room for audiometry must not only be quiet but must also have a low
reverberation time – that is, there must be very little ‘echo’. Rooms in which
reverberation is exceptionally low are called anechoic chambers; these are
very quiet and unnaturally ‘dead’ and are used only for research purposes.
For audiometric purposes a reverberation time between 0.2 seconds and
0.25 seconds is ideal. This should be achieved by covering the walls and
floor with soft, sound-absorbent materials such as acoustic tiles fixed on
battens to the walls and ceiling and a thick foam-backed carpet on the floor.
These will absorb sound and limit reverberation.

The assessment procedure 
153
7.7 SUMMARY
Tuning fork tests provide a quick indication of type of loss. They should
not be considered as a substitute for pure tone audiometry. Pure tone
audiometric tests are used to provide accurate hearing threshold levels by
air and bone conduction together with determination of ULLs, which are
important for hearing aid fitting.
Audiometric test results are recorded on a graph known as an audio-
gram. The audiologist must be able to interpret the results and to realize
when false results may have been recorded, in particular those due to
possible:
• crossover of the signal;
• vibrotactile response;
• airborne radiation of a bone conducted signal.
Cross-hearing is a response from the non-test side, rather than from the
ear under test. It will result in a shadow curve on the audiogram.
Masking is used whenever a shadow curve is suspected. It is also used
to determine precisely the type of loss in each ear (using masked bone
conduction).
A shadow reading should always be suspected if the gap between the
two air conduction curves is 40 dB or more, or if the gap between the not-
masked bone conduction and the poorer air conduction curve is 40 dB or
more.
Background noise must be at a sufficiently low level not to worsen
hearing thresholds. Low frequency noise can be excluded by solid
construction; high frequency can be excluded by adequately sealing the
room. Building-borne vibrations can be excluded by isolating the floor,
suspending it on rubber shock absorbers. The ambient noise level
achieved should be below 30 dBA.
Reverberation should be reduced through the use of sound absorbent
materials, such as acoustic tiles. The reverberation time achieved should
be between 0.2 seconds and 0.25 seconds.
FURTHER READING
Arlinger S (1989) Manual of Practical Audiology: Volume 1. London: Whurr.
Arlinger S (1991) Manual of Practical Audiology: Volume 2. London: Whurr.
Hawke M, Keene M, Alberti PW (1990) Clinical Otoscopy: An introduction to ear dis-
eases. 2 edn. London: Churchill Livingstone.
Martin FN (1994) Introduction to Audiology. 5 edn. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Wormald PJ, Browning GG (1996) Otoscopy. A Structured Approach. London: Arnold.

154
Chapter 8
Hearing aids and their
performance
8.1 INTRODUCTION
There are very few deaf people who have no hearing whatsoever; it is
much more usual to have some remaining or residual hearing.
The residual hearing area (Figure 8.1) can be illustrated on an audio-
gram as the area between the threshold of hearing and the point at which
sound becomes uncomfortable. In effect, this is the useful hearing area.
Figure 8.1. The residual hearing area. (Threshold 30 dBHL; ULL 100 dBHL).
A hearing aid system is a device to enable a hearing-impaired person to
make maximum use of the residual hearing area and should provide:
• maximum speech clarity or intelligibility;
• maximum useful information from environmental sounds, such as the
sound of the doorbell, or of an approaching car;

Hearing aids and their performance 
155
Figure 8.2. The air conduction and bone conduction routes through the auditory system.
• minimum interference from unwanted background noise, particularly
as hearing impairment restricts the ability to separate important
sounds from background noise;
• minimum distortion; some distortion will occur when sound is ampli-
fied but this should be minimized so that it does not affect clarity or
sound quality.
Several types of hearing aid system exist and selection from the range
available involves weighing up the advantages and disadvantages of each
type for the particular hearing-impaired individual.
Air conduction hearing aids present amplified sound to the external ear
and use the whole auditory system (Figure 8.2). Bone conduction hearing
aids bypass the outer and middle ear and are therefore useful in condi-
tions that preclude the use of an air conduction system – for instance, if
there is discharge from the ear or the absence of an outer ear.
8.2 TYPES OF HEARING AID SYSTEM
8.2.1 Air conduction systems
(a) Bodyworn hearing aids
In a bodyworn hearing aid (Figure 8.3) the microphone, amplifier and
batteries are all housed within the hearing aid case, which is linked by a
cord to an external receiver. The receiver attaches to a solid earmould
supplied with a ring and clip for this purpose.
Bodyworn hearing aids are relatively large and bulky and are usually
worn monaurally, although a Y-cord can be used to deliver sound to both
ears. This does not allow each ear to function independently and is not
therefore a true binaural fitting. Binaural body aids are sometimes
provided for children, although the unnatural position of the micro-

156
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
phone, high up on the chest, minimizes differences in the sound signal
arriving at each ear and therefore reduces the binaural advantage of
improved direction and discrimination. Positioning on the chest will
provide good reception of the user’s voice. A bodyworn aid may also
readily be held by another person who can then speak close to the micro-
phone to improve sound reception.
The aid should not be placed under clothing as the clothes rubbing
against the microphone would cause noise. If the aid is placed in the best
position for sound reception, that is high up on the chest, spillage of food
into the microphone can be a problem. This may be overcome by fitting a
protective cover, which is known as a ‘baby cover’, but which is equally
useful for elderly or physically disabled adults.
There are two groups for whom the use of bodyworn aids may be
particularly advantageous:
• For the very severely or profoundly deaf person, a bodyworn aid with
its larger components can provide high gain and output and a good
low frequency response, which may be very important as an aid to lip-
reading. The physical separation of the receiver from the microphone is
a major factor in allowing the high gain to be utilized, as there is less
risk of acoustic feedback. Acoustic feedback occurs when sound from
the output leaks back to the microphone input, causing a high-pitched
whistle.
• For those with manual dexterity problems – a group that includes not
only the physically disabled but also the very young and the very old –
the larger controls and accessible position of the bodyworn aid make
adjustment easier, whether this is undertaken by the user or by a carer.
(b) Behind-the-ear hearing aids
Behind-the-ear (BTE) or postaural hearing aids are those in which all the
components are housed in a case that is situated behind the pinna and
linked to the meatus by a tube and earmould (Figure 8.3). The BTE aids
are available in a wide variety, both in terms of size and performance. They
are usually fitted with forward-facing microphones, which allow full use to
be made of the advantages of binaural hearing when two aids are worn.
The position of the aid behind the ear may be uncomfortable for spectacle
wearers and may not remain secure during active pursuits.
Various controls are available to facilitate modification of the hearing
aid’s performance and behind-the-ear aids provide an opportunity for
early demonstration using temporary earfittings. All earfittings produce
further changes in the response delivered to the ear, which may be desir-
able or undesirable. For instance, the external tubing adds undesirable

Hearing aids and their performance 
157
peaks of resonance to the signal around 1 kHz and 2 kHz, although careful
use of acoustic modifications such as vents and filters can greatly improve
a hearing aid fitting. The effect of acoustic modifications is not precise but
can be evaluated when the aid is worn.
(c) Spectacle hearing aids
Air conduction spectacle aids are those in which all the components are
housed within the spectacle arm (Figure 8.4) and linked to the ear canal
Figure 8.3. A range of air conduction hearing aids. (Photograph courtesy of
Viennatone.)
Figure 8.4. Air conduction spectacle hearing aids. (Photograph courtesy of Viennatone.)

158
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
by a tube and earmould. They overcome problems of comfort and space
behind the ear when wearing both hearing aids and spectacles. They are
not widely used because in-the-ear aids provide another option – one that
does not remove the hearing if the spectacles are taken off. Spectacle
hearing aids can be supplied as complete systems or may be fitted to many
of the spectacles, or spectacle fronts, obtained from an optician. Spectacle
aids may also be used for contralateral routeing of signals (CROS). A basic
CROS fitting may help in cases of unilateral hearing loss, where sound is
carried from a very deaf ear for reception by the other, good ear.
(d) In-the-ear hearing aids
In-the-ear (ITE), also occasionally called intra-aural, hearing aids are those
in which all the components are housed within the ear fitting itself, which
is known as the shell of the aid. ‘In-the-ear’ is a generic term used to refer
to the whole range of aids worn within the pinna but these are further
differentiated into three main types (Figure 8.5):
• Full shell in-the-ear hearing aids fill the entire concha of the ear.
Variations can be obtained in which part of the full shell is cut away,
such as half-shell and helix variations.
• In-the-canal (ITC) hearing aids fit within the ear canal and the area
around the canal entrance.
• Completely-in-the-canal (CIC) hearing aids fit fully within the ear canal.
The faceplate will be positioned flush with or deeper than the opening
of the ear canal. CIC aids terminate well down the ear canal beyond the
second bend (‘semi-deep’). CIC hearing aids that terminate within 5
mm of the eardrum may be termed ‘deep canal’ or peri-tympanic.
ITE hearing aids are most commonly provided with an individual shell
made from an ear impression. ITEs can be standard or individual prescrip-
tion hearing aids.
Figure 8.5. A range of in-the-ear hearing aids. (Diagram courtesy of Starkey Ltd.)
ITE
ITC
CIC

Hearing aids and their performance 
159
Most hearing aid users prefer an aid that is small and fits within the ear.
However, if an aid is very small it may be difficult to manage, particularly
for anyone with arthritis or poor hand control. Digital hearing aids have
the advantage of automatic volume adjustment but insertion and removal
and battery replacement may still be problematic.
The amount of gain and output from the aid is restricted by its size, and
the close proximity of microphone and receiver increases the likelihood of
acoustic feedback. However, the position of an aid within the external ear
makes it a very natural one, which allows it to take advantage of the natural
forward focusing and acoustic properties of the ear. The further into the
ear the microphone is positioned, the greater the natural benefit derived.
Placement of the receiver within the ear canal also provides sound directly
to the eardrum and the smaller the cavity between the sound outlet and
the eardrum the greater will be the sound intensity and occlusion will be
reduced. These advantages of position will lead to an improvement in the
amount of gain provided by the hearing aid of between 5 dB and 13 dB
approximately (Sullivan, 1989), especially in the high-frequency region
between 3 kHz and 6 kHz. The ear fitting is an integral part of the hearing
aid, so the frequency response measured is that of the entire system. Other
potential advantages of microphone positioning within the ear canal
include: 
• increased gain without feedback (5 dB to 10 dB or more) can be
achieved with telephone use;
• wind noise may be reduced, Mueller and Ebinger (1997)suggest by up
to 20 dB.
8.2.2 Bone conduction hearing aids
The major difference between air conduction and bone conduction
hearing aids lies in the receiver. Whereas an air conduction aid has only to
set air, a low impedance medium, into vibration, a bone conduction aid
requires a great deal of energy to set the bone, a high impedance medium,
into vibration. The bone conduction receiver is therefore large and rigid
and fitted with firm pressure to the mastoid. Bone conduction hearing
aids have a poor high frequency response. They are used mainly for
conductive hearing losses in which the ear must not or cannot be blocked
by an earmould.
The mechanical transducer can be driven by a bodyworn or by a
powerful postaural or spectacle hearing aid (Figure 8.6). Such aids are
generally not considered attractive and even the spectacle option must be
provided with heavy frames, which may require frequent adjustment to
maintain close contact with the mastoid.

160
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
8.3 SPECIFICATION AND PERFORMANCE
8.3.1 Specification sheets
A specification is the detailed description of a hearing aid, which is
normally presented as a specification or performance data sheet. This
describes the hearing aid model in terms of its physical and electro-
acoustic characteristics together with any relevant information concerned
with the method and conditions that result in the publication of that speci-
fication. The main function of the data sheet is to provide information in
the form of tables and graphs illustrating the results of performance tests
carried out to comply with the requirements of relevant standards. The
standards aim to achieve a uniformity of hearing aid performance descrip-
tion that facilitates valid comparison between different models. Small
deviations from the specification are allowed and will be found in
individual examples of any particular hearing aid model. The degree of
deviation acceptable is known as the tolerance.
When a purchaser receives a hearing aid from a manufacturer, the
hearing aid’s performance may be checked against that detailed on the
specification or on the individual data sheet that is delivered with a
custom-made in-the-ear hearing aid (Figure 8.7). This is known as quality
inspection on delivery and each hearing aid should perform within the
tolerance stated by the manufacturer. Tolerances are not specified in the
relevant British Standard.
Figure 8.6. A range of bone conduction hearing aids. (Photograph courtesy of
Viennatone.)

Hearing aids and their performance 
161
The relevant British Standard (BS EN 60118-7: 1993) provides for a
number of different characteristics to be measured, including gain,
maximum output, frequency response, harmonic distortion and internal
noise. Measurements are intended for the purposes of:
• technical comparison; 
• evaluation;
• production control;
• delivery tolerances;
• selection for procurement;
• selection for pre-fitting;
• training and teaching.
8.3.2 Gain
The acoustic gain of an aid is the amount of amplification it provides. In
simple terms, it is the difference between the input and the output SPL.
For example, if:
Input = 60 dBSPL
Output = 80 dBSPL
Gain = 20 dB
Gain is always presented in dB without a suffix. It is measured under speci-
fied operating conditions and at a specified frequency or frequencies. The
British Standard defines acoustic gain as: ‘The difference between the
sound pressure level developed in the acoustic coupler by the hearing aid
and the sound pressure level measured at the test point.’
Gain is most usually presented as a single figure for 1 kHz or 1.6 kHz,
or as an average of several frequencies. Alternatively, a frequency response
curve showing how the gain varies across the frequency range is more
informative.
A number of different types of acoustic gain are usually presented on a
specification sheet. These include:
• Full-on gain – this is the gain with the volume control turned fully on.
• Maximum gain – this is the highest possible gain from the hearing aid.
It is measured under specified conditions with an input that will not
drive the aid into saturation, usually 60 dBSPL, and with the volume
control fully on and with all the trimmers set to give maximum output.
• Reference test gain represents more of a ‘user volume’. This is usually
measured with an input of 60 dBSPL, with the volume control set so
that the output is 15 dB less than the maximum output (OSPL90) at the

162
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Figure 8.7. An individual specification sheet for an ITE aid. (Courtesy of Starkey Ltd.)
(cont’d.)

Hearing aids and their performance 
163
Figure 8.7. (cont’d).

164
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
reference test frequency. If the aid will not permit this with a margin of
at least 7 dB, a position corresponding to a gain 7 dB below the gain at
the reference test frequency should be used. The volume control
position should be stated. Reference test gain is normally OSPL90 –
75 dB.
For example, suppose that an aid has an output of 120 dBSPL with an
input of 90 dBSPL. When the volume control is reduced such that the
output is 15 dB below this (105 dBSPL) the gain will be 45 dB. This is the
same as OSPL90 (120) – 75.
Input
Gain
Output
90 
→
30
→
120
60
→
45
→
105
The reference test frequency is normally 1.6 kHz but where high tone
hearing aids are in use 2.5 kHz may be more appropriate. This will be
stated in the specification.
8.3.3 Maximum output
All hearing aids have a maximum output limit, which is the most the
hearing aid can handle, due mainly to limitations imposed by the output
stage of the hearing aid (the receiver). The maximum output may be
referred to in a number of different ways, all of which have very similar
meanings. These include:
• saturation sound pressure level (SSPL);
• saturation sound pressure level with an input of 90 dBSPL (SSPL90 or
SSPL90);
• output sound pressure level (OSPL);
• output sound pressure level with an input of 90 dB SPL (OSPL90 or
OSPL90);
• maximum power output (MPO);
• maximum output.
The British Standard defines OSPL90 as:
The sound pressure level produced in an ear simulator with an input of 90 dB SPL at
the specified frequency (or frequencies), the gain control being in the full-on
position and all other controls being set for maximum gain.
Saturation is the condition in a circuit when an increase in the input signal
produces no further increase in the output signal (Figure 8.8). Saturation

Hearing aids and their performance 
165
sound pressure level is the highest possible SPL obtainable from the
hearing aid. In order to measure this in the test situation, all the controls,
including the volume, must be turned up to maximum and an acoustic
signal must be produced that is sufficiently intense to drive the aid into
saturation. This input signal is always 90 dB SPL.
Saturation is the highest possible sound pressure level that an aid is
capable of producing, and it can be specified at one or more frequencies.
Figure 8.8. An input–output graph demonstrating saturation of a hearing aid. Input/
output graphs are also often used to demonstrate the effects of the hearing aid controls
with the aid set at the reference test frequency.
8.3.4 Frequency response
The frequency response of a hearing aid is presented as a line on a graph
that shows how the aid performs over the frequency range. It is defined as
the sound pressure level developed in an ear simulator by the hearing aid
expressed as a function of frequency under specified conditions.
A frequency response may be obtained to show how the gain, or the
output, varies with frequency, and the term ‘basic frequency response’
may also be seen on a specification sheet. This illustrates the frequency
response curve obtained at the reference test gain setting, with an input
signal of 60 dB SPL.
Output (dB SPL)
Input (dB SPL)

166
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
8.3.5 Amplitude non-linearity or distortion
An ideal hearing aid would be capable of producing an output that was
identical to the input signal, only amplified. However, a hearing aid is not
capable of doing this and when the output does not reproduce exactly the
input it is said to be distorted. Uneven amplification across the frequency
range is a type of desirable frequency distortion, which is built into hearing
aids to help compensate for the individual’s hearing loss. However, the
term ‘distortion’ is usually used only to describe unwanted non-linearity. A
hearing aid should produce as little unwanted distortion as possible and
the degree of distortion is expressed in one of two ways, as a:
• distortion ratio, where the distortion product is given as the number of
dB below the total output signal; or as a
• distortion factor, where the distortion product is expressed as a
percentage of the total output signal.
(a) Harmonic distortion
For the purpose of quality inspection of hearing aid performance on
delivery only harmonic distortion is considered, since this is the easiest
type of distortion to measure. It results when harmonics are present at the
output that were not part of the input signal. Harmonics are multiples of
the original frequency; for example, a pure tone of 2 kHz has harmonics at
4 kHz, 6 kHz, 8 kHz and so on. The original tone, or fundamental
frequency, is always the lowest frequency (Figure 8.9). It is also the first
harmonic since harmonics are multiples. In the example given above:
The fundamental frequency = 2 kHz.
The first harmonic = 1 × 2 kHz = 2 kHz.
The second harmonic = 2 × 2 kHz = 4 kHz.
The third harmonic = 3 × 2 kHz = 6 kHz.
Figure 8.9. Harmonic and intermodulation distortion.
Output (dBSPL)

Hearing aids and their performance 
167
Harmonic distortion is measured by filtering out the fundamental
frequency and measuring the remaining harmonic content. The harmonic
content decreases with increasing frequency and measurements usually
only consider the second and third harmonics. These may be considered
separately, or together as ‘total harmonic distortion’. 
If, however, the response curve rises 12 dB or more between any test
frequency and its second harmonic, the measurement may be omitted.
There is no absolute agreed figure for maximum harmonic distortion
but, as a general rule, a distortion ratio of 20 dB or a distortion factor of 10%
(5% in the case of children) is considered to be the maximum acceptable.
Harmonic distortion increases as the hearing aid nears saturation point. It is
therefore normally measured below this point at the reference test gain
position with an input of 70 dBSPL or as assigned by the manufacturer. In
the clinic it may be measured at the wearer’s volume setting. Harmonic
distortion is not normally a problem except near to saturation. 
(b) Intermodulation distortion
This occurs (Figure 8.9) when there are two or more input signals and this
results in additional frequencies, which are the arithmetic sum or differ-
ence of the input frequencies. Intermodulation products, unlike
harmonics, occur not only above the frequency of the fundamental but
also below it. This form of distortion can be quite disruptive to speech
perception and may cause fatigue and annoyance to the listener. It is diffi-
cult to measure because there are an almost infinite number of possibili-
ties for combining tones. BS EN 60118-0 (1993) provides for a
measurement of intermodulation distortion by the manufacturers; it is not
a test undertaken for quality control on delivery. Intermodulation distor-
tion should be less than 2%.
(c) Transient distortion
Transient distortion, sometimes known as ‘ringing’ or ‘overshoot’, occurs
when there is a rapid change in the signal such that the hearing aid cannot
reproduce the sharp rise and fall times. A lingering of the sound can result,
which may lead to lack of speech clarity and may cause annoyance to the
listener. However, transient distortion is not usually a major problem.
There are no standards for measuring transient distortion.
(d) Other types of distortion
Unwanted frequency distortion includes sharp peaks in the frequency
response. These are often caused by resonance in the receiver. Reducing
the bandwidth of the signal also produces frequency distortion. The

168
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
bandwidth is primarily reduced by the limitations of the receiver and most
hearing aids do not provide effective amplification above about 5 kHz.
This may affect the sound quality and may particularly affect listening to
music but it does not affect the intelligibility of speech as most important
speech sounds fall below about 3.5 kHz.
Phase distortion occurs when there is an alteration in the timing
relationship between frequencies, such that different frequencies may not
arrive at the ear with the same time delay. Severe phase distortion could
theoretically affect localization but in general phase distortion is insignifi-
cant.
8.3.6 Equivalent input noise level
Hearing aid electronics generate internal random noise, which poses a
potential source of masking and must therefore be minimized. Internal
noise may be analysed in one-third octave bands or it may be expressed as
an equivalent input noise level which would produce the amount of signal
in the output. It is calculated with the aid set approximately to the refer-
ence test gain position. 
To express the internal noise as an ‘equivalent input noise level’, the
output with an input of 60 dBSPL is first noted. The output minus the
input provides a measure of gain. The sound source is then switched off.
Any sound pressure measured at this point is caused by internal noise. 
The equivalent input noise is calculated by subtracting the reference
test gain from the sound pressure caused by internal noise.
For example:
1. OSPL60 = LS = 100
Input 60 = L1
2. OSPL0 = L2 = 70
3. Internal noise – Gain = Equivalent input noise level (LN)
LN = L2 – (LS–L1)
where LN = equivalent input noise level
LN = 70 – (100–60)
L2 = SPL caused by internal noise
LN = 70 – 40
LS = OSPL with input 60 dB SPL
LN = 30
L1 = input of 60 dB SPL
The equivalent input noise level should be considerably less than the
average speech input level of around 60 dBSPL. The internal noise gener-
ated in the example is equivalent to an input signal to the aid of 30 dBSPL.
This measure applies only to essentially linear input/output conditions
and where automatic gain control aids are involved, the input SPL may be
reduced to ensure such conditions apply.

Hearing aids and their performance 
169
8.3.7 Dynamic output characteristics of AGC
circuits
Automatic gain control (AGC) is employed to compress or reduce the
dynamic range of the sound at the output. This prevents excessive output
sound from the hearing aid from reaching the user’s ear, while tending to
preserve the waveform of the input signal. The dynamic characteristics of an
AGC circuit, especially the attack and recovery times (see below), are impor-
tant and methods for measuring these and other electro-acoustical charac-
teristics are given in BS EN 60118-2 (1996) (Figure 8.10, on page 170).
Automatic gain control is not instantaneous and the attack time is the
time interval it takes for the AGC circuit to stabilize when there is a sudden
increase in input signal. The stabilized level is known as the steady state.
Conversely, the recovery time is the time interval it takes for the AGC
circuits to stabilize when the input signal is abruptly reduced. Both the
attack and the recovery times are recorded as the time taken for the output
to reach within 2 dB of its steady state level when the signal is altered by a
stated number of decibels.
Attack times should be as short as possible to avoid sudden loud sounds
from being amplified to the extent that uncomfortable hearing occurs. An
attack time of less than 10 milliseconds is ideal since the human ear cannot
perceive temporal changes of less than 10 milliseconds (Pollack, 1988).
Short recovery times, however, may cause considerable distortion and
the listener may hear an audible ‘flutter’ as the compression circuit reacts
to the variations in intensity that occur in speech at normal levels. Release
times are normally greater than 30 milliseconds in order to avoid ‘flutter’
but shorter than 150 milliseconds to maintain speech intelligibility.
8.4 HEARING AID STANDARDS
In the early days of electronic hearing aids manufacturers set their own
standards and it was impossible to compare different models by looking at the
data provided. As the number of hearing aids available grew, it became increas-
ingly important that hearing aid measurements be standardized, and in 1959
the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) produced the first
European standards. Unfortunately, standards can still be confusing because
there are major differences between European and American standards.
Standards are constantly revised and updated. In practice this means that the
date, as well as the number, of the standard used on a specification sheet
should be noted. In some cases in the text IEC standards have been given in
preference to British Standards. This is because the relevant British Standards
are expected to be renumbered in the near future. The main standards are:

170
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Figure 8.10. The effect of compression on the output signal. (After BS EN 60118-2, 1996.)

Hearing aids and their performance 
171
European
• IEC – International Electrotechnical Commission.
• BSI – British Standards Institution. British Standards (BS) are generally
IEC standards adopted and renumbered but retaining their original
content. EN shows that the standard has a European number. BS EN
60118 is an important standard relating to hearing aids. It consists of a
number of parts many of which are listed at the end of this chapter in
further reading. 
• ISO International Standards Organization. An ISO standard is an inter-
national standard. A British Standard may have European numbering
and be an international standard, for example, BS EN ISO 389.
American
• HAIC Hearing Aid industry Conference (1961). These early standards
have mostly been superseded by ANSI. HAIC gain is an average value
derived from the maximum gain at each of three test frequencies
(500 Hz, 1 kHz and 2 kHz). HAIC output is an average value derived
from the maximum output at each of the three test frequencies. The
HAIC frequency range provides for a standard method of defining the
limits of the frequency range. In this method, 15 dB is subtracted from
the HAIC gain and a horizontal line is drawn across the frequency
response curve at this level. The points at which the line cuts the
response curve represent the limits of the frequency response.
• ANSI – American National Standards Institute. ANSI Standards, like
British Standards, provide for measurements such as SSPL90, full-on
gain, and reference test gain. Some of the major differences between
these standards are outlined in Table 8.1. ANSI also provides for a
frequency range to be stated. This is obtained with the volume control
at the reference test position. The output at 1 kHz, 1.6 kHz and 2.5 kHz
is averaged and 20 dB subtracted. From the resulting figure, a straight
horizontal line is drawn across the frequency response curve of the
hearing aid. The two points at which this horizontal line intersects the
frequency response represent the limits of the frequency range.
8.5 MEASURING METHODS
8.5.1 The test enclosure
The basic principle of hearing aid measurement is that with the controls of
the aid suitably adjusted, an appropriate input signal is applied to the
microphone of the aid and the output from the receiver is measured and

172
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Table 8.1. An outline comparison of certain hearing aid tests drawn from British and American standards (source: ANSI S3.22, 1987)
Characteristic
Input (dBSPL)
Frequency (Hz)
Volume control
Basic ANSI differences
OSPL90
90
200–8 k
Full-on
Entitled SSPL 90; frequency range if used
200–5 kHz; tend to give as an average of 1 k, 1.6 k 
and 2.5 kHz
Full-on acoustic gain
Usually 60
200–8 k
Full-on
Tend to give as an average of 1 k, 1.6 k and 2.5 kHz
Reference test gain
60
Usually 1.6 k
15 dB less than
17 dB less than average SSPL90
OSPL90
Frequency response curve Usually 60
200–8 k
Reference test
200–5 kHz
position
Total harmonic distortion
70
200–5 k
Reference test
Measured at 500, 800 and 1.6 kHz presented as
position
percentage

Hearing aids and their performance 
173
analysed on a standardized device. Test methods and equipment have
been standardized to permit accurate comparison.
The conditions under which the aids have been tested must be known
and repeatable. The standards therefore use a specified test environment,
which simulates essentially free-field conditions. This is a very quiet test
space with sound absorbent walls and may be an anechoic chamber or a
test box enclosure (Figure 8.11).
The test signal is generated by a sine wave oscillator and is fed to a
loudspeaker within the test space. The hearing aid is accurately located at
a determined test point, known as the reference point. The SPL in the test
space is measured using a control microphone. The output of the hearing
aid is transmitted through a standardized coupler to a calibrated micro-
phone. The output of this microphone is recorded over the frequency
range or examined for other characteristics, such as harmonic distortion.
Figure 8.11. A suggested arrangement for a postaural aid in a hearing aid test box.
8.5.2 Couplers in use
(a) Ear simulator 
The description of this coupler is contained in BS EN 60318-4: 1998.
Measurements obtained with an ear simulator relate approximately to an
average human ear. Results obtained in the high frequency region are

174
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
nearer to real ear measurements than those obtained using a reference 
(2 cc) coupler. Essentially the ear simulator consists of:
• a principal cavity of specified volume;
• acoustic load networks;
• a calibrated microphone.
The location of the microphone is chosen so that the sound pressure at
the microphone corresponds approximately to the sound pressure
existing at the human eardrum. Therefore the ear simulator (Figure 8.12)
is designed to simulate the average values of relevant acoustical character-
istics of normal adult human ears.
Figure 8.12. The basic parts of an occluded ear simulator.
The occluded ear simulator does not simulate the leakage between an
earmould and a human ear canal (the effects of venting are not measured).
Therefore the results obtained may deviate from real ear performance,
especially at low frequencies. Moreover, large performance variations
among individual ears will occur and this should be borne in mind when
employing results obtained with an ear simulator.
(b) Reference coupler
The reference coupler is also known as an acoustic coupler and as a 2 cc
coupler (Figure 8.13). The reference coupler is used as a simple and ready

Hearing aids and their performance 
175
Figure 8.13. The basic parts of a 2 cc (reference) coupler.
means of comparison of specifications and data on hearing aids. It does
not allow the actual performance of a hearing aid on a person to be
obtained.
The reference coupler is a cavity of predetermined shape and volume,
which is used for ‘the testing of earphones’, in conjunction with a
calibrated microphone adapted to measure the pressure developed within
the cavity. It is described in IEC 60318-5.
The SPL observed in an ear simulator compared to a 2 cc coupler for
any given input will show an increase of about 4 dB in the low frequen-
cies, increasing gradually to about 15 dB higher at 10 kHz, see Figure 8.14.
8.5.3 Simulated in situ working conditions
Most methods for measuring the performance of hearing aids do not take
into account the acoustical influence of the head and body of the wearer.
However, methods that do so are relevant in the fitting of hearing aids,
because the results that they produce relate to performance on the ear.
Real ear procedures (described in Chapter 11) can be used to provide
in situ measurements for individual patients, but in order for in situ
measurements to be quoted on a specification sheet, they must be

176
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
standardized. This is achieved using a manikin or anatomical model to
simulate the acoustical effects of a median adult wearer on the perfor-
mance of a hearing aid.
The manikin simulates a head and torso and includes both an occluded
ear simulator and an artificial pinna or pinna simulator. Results using a
manikin may be useful in assisting in hearing aid fitting, although care
should still be taken when interpreting results. This is because results
obtained from a manikin can be substantially different from those
obtained on a real individual person, due to anatomical variations.
KEMAR (the Knowles Electronics Manikin for Acoustic Research) is one
manufacturer’s version of the head and torso. KEMAR was one of the first
manikins available. The standards (IEC 60959) do not relate specifically to
KEMAR.
The following parameters are considered essential for the evaluation of
a hearing aid in simulated ‘in situ’ conditions:
• full-on simulated insertion gain;
• insertion frequency response; 
• directional characteristics;
• simulated in situ OSPL90.
It may be noted that where simulated in situ conditions are used, the
results may be presented in terms of in situ or insertion measures.
In situ measures describe the sound pressure level recorded in the real
ear or in the ear simulator of the manikin. Thus, simulated in situ OSPL90
Figure 8.14. Comparison of the SPL in a reference coupler (2 cc) and an occluded ear
simulator (OES).
Frequency/Hz
OES
2 cc
Output/dB SPL

Hearing aids and their performance 
177
refers to the maximum output recorded in the ear simulator of the manikin
under the conditions specified in the relevant standard (IEC 60118-8).
Insertion measures consider the SPL in the ear or ear simulator of the
manikin but under two different conditions – with and without a hearing
aid. Insertion measures take account of the loss of natural amplification by
making a simple comparison of the situation at the ear.
In situ measurements take no account of the loss of natural resonance
that the hearing aid must overcome before it provides any advantage to
the patient. Insertion gain represents the benefit on the ear. This appears
lower than in situ gain because account is taken of the lost natural amplifi-
cation (Figure 11.1).
Simulated in situ gain can be defined as the difference between the SPL in
the ear simulator produced by the hearing aid and the reference input SPL.
Simulated insertion gain can be defined as the difference between the
SPL in the ear simulator produced by the hearing aid and the SPL in the ear
simulator with the hearing aid absent.
8.5.4 Measurement of bone vibrator output
Where a hearing aid employs a bone vibrator instead of an air conduction
receiver a different method of measuring output must be used and it
becomes impractical to measure amplification directly in terms of acoustic
gain. With bone conduction hearing aids, although the input is expressed in
terms of sound pressure level, the output is described in terms of mechan-
ical vibration. The standard IEC 60118-9 defines a method of expressing the
input/output ratio as an acoustic–mechanical sensitivity or force level. The
mechanical coupler used to obtain this measurement is an artificial mastoid,
or mastoid simulator (Figure 8.15), as specified in IEC 60318-6.
Figure 8.15. An artificial mastoid.

178
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
The bone vibrator is secured to the artificial mastoid with a force of 
2.5 Newtons. The exact test assembly varies according to the type of bone
conduction hearing aid. The standard provides for measurement of the
force level in terms of gain and output across the frequency range 200 Hz
to 5 kHz, and for the determination of distortion and internal noise.
8.6 POWER SOURCES
8.6.1 Hearing aid batteries
A battery or cell is a package of chemically stored energy that can be
converted into electrical energy when the terminals are connected. Most
batteries used in hearing aids are primary cells – that is they are used until the
current is drained from them, at which point they are removed for disposal.
There are six sizes of batteries used in conventional hearing aids.
Bodyworn aids employ the large ‘penlite’ cells which are identified by the
IEC code R6 (BS EN 60086-2) and which are commonly known as AA
batteries. The penlite cells used in bodyworn aids are generally the
alkaline manganese type. Secondary or rechargeable cells may be used but
these are mainly employed in radio hearing aids. Rechargeable batteries
are of the nickel cadmium type.
Postaural and in-the-ear aids use button cells in one of five sizes,
ranging from the largest, R44, commonly known as the 675 cell, to the
smallest button cell, size 5, for which no IEC designation exists yet. The
cells used in these aids are of the zinc air type. 
8.6.2 Battery characteristics
There are certain characteristics of a battery that are important to hearing
aid use. These include:
• The capacity of the battery is the current the battery can deliver over
time, which is expressed in milliampere-hours.
• The nominal voltage is a function of the chemistry of the battery and
for new cells will be between 1.3 and 1.5 volts.
• The discharge characteristic is a graph that illustrates the change in the
nominal voltage over time as the hearing aid is used (Figure 8.16).
• The shelf life is the period over which a battery can be stored without a
significant loss in capacity. After a period of time, the capacity of the
battery will reduce and this should not be allowed to exceed 10%.
• The battery life should be stated in the manufacturer’s specification
and will vary according to the capacity of the battery and the power

Hearing aids and their performance 
179
requirement of the aid, which is mainly determined by the output stage
of the amplifier.
Class A or single-ended amplifiers draw a constant average current drain
from the battery, whether or not a signal is present (Figure 5.6). Once the
aid is switched on a constant or bias current drain occurs. The introduc-
tion of the signal produces some variation about the bias value but the
average drain remains constant. It is therefore simple to calculate battery
life using the following formula: 
battery life (hours)
=
capacity (milliampere hours)
current drain (milliamperes).
Class AB (more commonly, if incorrectly, termed class B), or ‘push–pull’
amplifiers draw very little current when there is no signal present (Figure
5.9). Battery drain increases as the output signal increases. Class AB ampli-
fiers are more efficient but the variation in current drain makes it very diffi-
cult to predict the battery life with any degree of accuracy. The actual drain
will vary with the signal level and with the volume setting. The life of the
battery will be within a range that can be taken as the battery life with no
signal present and the battery life with peak drain.
8.6.3 The chemical composition
(a) Alkaline manganese batteries
Alkaline manganese ‘penlite’ (AA or LR6) batteries used in hearing aids
have a nominal voltage of 1.5 volts, a gradual discharge characteristic, a
Figure 8.16. Typical battery discharge characteristics on medium load (Duracell, 1990).

180
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
capacity of approximately 2850 milliampere hours and a shelf life of
approximately 24 months.
The battery will recover slightly when left for a period without drain
but, over time, it will gradually discharge. The gradual decay in use
provides the adult user with some warning of the impending need to
replace the battery, unlike the button cells, which provide little or no
warning. The quality of the output signal, however, also deteriorates as the
battery runs down. The user can turn up the hearing aid to compensate
for the battery decline but should certainly replace the battery if the sound
quality is distorted.
(b) Nickel cadmium batteries
Nickel cadmium batteries provide a steady discharge characteristic but
have a relatively short life. The batteries are normally recharged overnight.
Two sizes are widely used in radio hearing aids. These are:
• ‘Penlite’ AA or LR6 cells, which have a capacity of 1200 milliampere
hours and a nominal voltage of 1.2 V. 
• ‘Square’ 9 V cells, which have a capacity of 150 milliampere hours and a
nominal voltage of 7.2 V.
(c) Zinc air batteries
Zinc air cells have a shelf life of over two years and a nominal voltage of 
1.4 V. In use, zinc air batteries have a very flat discharge profile. When the
battery nears the end of its life the voltage decays very rapidly. The capacity
of the cell depends upon its size, for example:
• size 675 has a capacity of approximately 630 milliampere hours;
• size 13 has a capacity of approximately 290 milliampere hours;
• size 312 has a capacity of approximately 160 milliampere hours;
• size 10 has a capacity of approximately 90 milliampere hours;
• size 5 has a capacity of approximately 36 milliampere hours.
Zinc air cells are supplied with an adhesive tab that must be removed to
allow air to enter through small holes in the battery case. Conventional
cells contain both anode and cathode materials, but in zinc air batteries
oxygen from the air reacts with a zinc anode via a thin catalytic cathode.
This means the cell can contain much more anode material and that it can
therefore deliver increased capacity for the same volume of cell. 

Hearing aids and their performance 
181
8.6.4 Rules of battery storage
• Store in cool, dry conditions out of direct sunlight.
• Rotate battery stock so that older batteries are used first.
• Do not leave batteries in hearing aids if they are not in regular use. 
• Remove any white deposit on the contacts using a dry cloth.
• Do not open batteries.
• Keep batteries away from fire.
• Dispose of batteries safely.
• Do not attempt to recharge primary cells.
8.7 NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE HEARING AIDS
8.7.1 The National Health Service provision of
hearing aids
The National Health Service (NHS) provides hearing aids free of charge to
all patients considered likely to obtain benefit from the use of an aid. In
the majority of cases these fittings are monaural (one ear only) because of
financial restrictions but exceptions can be made if the lifestyle and
hearing loss of the patient indicate the need for binaural hearing aids.
The NHS has a standard range of hearing aids, which includes a
number of different models within certain series or strengths. Various
manufacturers make these but all conform to government specifications.
Amongst the hearing aids that are available there are models that provide
for AGC, direct input and CROS fittings. Both analogue and digital hearing
aids are available. The analogue behind-the-ear (BE) series consists of:
• The BEI0 series provides medium gain suitable for moderate hearing
loss of up to 60 dBHL averaged over the essential speech frequencies
from 500 Hz to 4 kHz. The series also includes some mini hearing aids
(BE101 – BE 105) using a size 13 battery. 
• The BE30 series provides for losses from 60 dBHL to 80 dBHL and also
includes the BE300 compact hearing aids (BE301).
• The BE50 series is a higher-powered series suitable for severe to
profound hearing losses from 80 dBHL to 100 dBHL. 
Bodyworn (BW) aids provide for severe and profoundly deaf patients and
those who are unable to manipulate a small aid behind the ear. Bodyworn
hearing aids are normally air conduction aids but a bone conductor on a
headband can be fitted. Tinnitus maskers are also available.

182
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
When selecting the appropriate hearing aid for patients, several factors
need to be considered. The type and degree of the hearing loss, the size of
the ear, the lifestyle of the patient and the position and ease of manipula-
tion of the controls.
The earmould can have a considerable effect on the performance of a
hearing aid (see Chapter 10) so care is needed to select the most suitable
mould for the hearing loss presented. Adjustments can also be made to
the aids to vary their frequency responses to match the hearing loss as
closely as possible. However, if a patient’s needs cannot be met from the
standard range of NHS hearing aids other aids may be provided on the
recommendation of the ENT consultant and the agreement of the
fundholder. Policies vary throughout the country but in most regions
children are provided with binaural hearing aids under the NHS. The
facility of direct input (for radio hearing aids at school) can now be satis-
fied with the NHS range. The introduction of a range of digital hearing aids
within the NHS (currently as a trial project) should also provide the facility
to meet the needs of very mild losses, unusual configurations and severe
recruitment.
8.7.2 Obtaining an NHS hearing aid
A patient wishing to obtain an NHS hearing aid must first visit his or her
doctor who will, if he or she considers it necessary, refer the patient to the
ENT Department at the hospital. The patient will normally see the ENT
consultant who will examine the patient’s ears, take a case history and
arrange for tests to be done to establish the type and degree of the hearing
loss. An audiology technician will usually carry out these tests. Each case is
looked at individually at local level and a decision made as to whether a
hearing aid is appropriate. The ENT consultant may suggest which aid will
be most suitable but more commonly this is left to the discretion of the
technician. Some areas also operate ‘direct referral’, where straightfor-
ward hearing aid cases are not seen by the ENT consultant, which reduces
the waiting list.
The audiology technician takes an ear impression for the earmould.
When this has been made, a further appointment will be sent to the
patient for the hearing aid fitting. The patient will be instructed in the use
of the aid, how to insert the mould into the ear, its care and cleaning, the
correct battery to use and how and when to replace it. The patient will also
be informed of where he or she can obtain the batteries.
The degree of follow-up varies widely throughout the country
depending on the resources available in individual hearing aid depart-
ments but follow-up is desirable to meet the rehabilitative needs of the

Hearing aids and their performance 
183
patients and to enable and encourage them to obtain the best possible use
from their hearing aids.
Hearing aid departments also provide facilities for repair and servicing
of aids and patients with bodyworn aids are able to obtain replacement
cords and receivers. It is essential that patients are encouraged to visit the
departments regularly to have their aids and moulds checked, the tubing
replaced and the aid upgraded when necessary. All these services, and
supplies of replacement batteries, are free of charge under the NHS.
8.8 SUMMARY
Hearing aids may be air or bone conduction systems. The performance of
each aid is described in a standardized manner in a specification sheet.
Various standards are available, but in the UK British Standards are most
widely used. Characteristics presented in the specification include gain,
maximum output, frequency response, distortion and internal noise. The
measurements will show some variation depending on the coupler
employed in the hearing aid test system. An ear simulator is generally used
by manufacturers, while a 2cc coupler, which is a cheaper and simpler
device, provides repeatable results for quality control on delivery.
A manikin may be used to simulate the results that would be obtained if
a hearing aid was being worn by a median adult. Such results may be
useful in hearing aid fitting but can be substantially different from some
‘real life’ clients due to anatomical variations.
Bone conduction hearing aids are coupled to an artificial mastoid and
measurements are expressed in terms of mechanical vibration, instead of
acoustic gain.
The batteries used in hearing aids vary in size and chemical composi-
tion. A number of characteristics are important to hearing aid use; these
include the shelf life, the discharge characteristic and the battery life,
which can be calculated from the formula: 
battery life (hours)
=
capacity (milliampere hours)
current drain (milliamperes).
The NHS provides a standard range of bodyworn and behind-the-ear
hearing aids. Both analogue and digital aids are available. NHS-provided
hearing aids are supplied on loan without charge.
FURTHER READING
BS 60118: Hearing aids.
BS EN 60118-0: 1993: Measurement of electroacoustical characteristics.

184
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
BS EN 60118-1: 1995: Hearing aids with induction pick-up coil input.
BS EN 60118-2: 1996: Hearing aids with automatic gain control circuits.
BS EN 60118-3: 1991: Hearing aid equipment not entirely worn on the listener.
BS EN 60118-4: 1998: Magnetic field strength in audio-frequency induction loops for
hearing aid purposes.
BS 6083: Part 5: 1984: Nipples for insert earphones.
BS EN 60118-6: 1999: Characteristics of electrical input circuits for hearing aids.
BS EN 60118-7: 1993: Measurement of the performance characteristics of hearing aids
for quality inspection for delivery purposes.
BS 6083: Part 8: 1985: Methods of measurement of performance characteristics of
hearing aids under simulated in situ working conditions.
BS 6083: Part 9: 1986: Methods of measurement of characteristics of hearing aids with
bone vibrator outputs.
BS 6083: Part 10: 1988: Guide to hearing aid standards.
BS 6083: Part 11: 1988: Symbols and other markings on hearing aids and related
equipment.

185
Chapter 9
Selection and fitting
9.1 THE CHOICE OF A HEARING AID SYSTEM
9.1.1 Introduction
The primary purpose and function of hearing aid systems is to enable
hearing-impaired people to make maximum use of their residual hearing
area. A system should therefore provide maximum speech intelligibility,
maximum useful information from other sounds, minimum interference
from unwanted noise and minimum distortion. The aim will normally be
to provide amplified speech that is as clear and intelligible as possible,
with the provision also of important background sounds, such as a ringing
doorbell or the sound of an approaching car. These environmental sounds
are important not only as warnings but also as providers of general infor-
mation about our environment, which is important psychologically.
Unfortunately background noise can, and does, interfere with the speech
signal and it can be difficult or even impossible for hearing-impaired
people to separate the sounds they want to hear from those they do not.
This is partly due to the defective hearing mechanism, which is especially
notable where cochlear damage has been sustained, and partly to the
restrictions inherent in a hearing aid.
A hearing aid system that will provide as little interference as possible
from unwanted noise should be chosen. There are a number of features
that can be selected or modified to minimize the problems, although the
type of hearing loss may limit the degree of success that can be achieved.
The hearing aid itself is a piece of man-made equipment and, however
good, sound that is amplified and passed through the system will be
distorted to some extent. A hearing aid with unacceptably high distortion
should not be selected; this generally means no more than 10%, in terms
of total harmonic distortion (see section 8.3.5).

186
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
The hearing aid fitting procedure includes the selection, ‘fitting’,
evaluation and modification of a hearing aid system. Reliable audio-
metric information provides the starting point and information is
required for threshold levels by air and bone conduction, most comfort-
able levels and uncomfortable loudness levels, across the appropriate
frequency range (Chapter 7). The success of the fitting is dependent
both on the reliable measurement of residual hearing and on an under-
standing of the electro-acoustic and other characteristics of hearing aids.
It is also influenced by the effectiveness of the earmould. There are rules
associated with the prescription and fitting of hearing aids. Although the
amplification needs of the hearing-impaired population remain not fully
known and the area of hearing aid fitting is one in which options,
attitudes and traditions vary widely, the following questions may provide
a starting point for selection:
• Is the fitting to be by air conduction or bone conduction? 
• Is the fitting to be monaural or binaural? 
• How much gain is needed? 
• What maximum power output is required? 
• Is there a need for automatic gain control? 
• What are the required frequency response characteristics? 
• What other facilities are needed? 
• Is the aid acceptable to the client?
Client preference is an aspect of selection that should not be underesti-
mated, for if a client does not accept the system or if he or she cannot
operate it with ease its use will be seriously limited.
9.1.2 Air conduction and bone conduction
Hearing aids can be obtained in the form of air conduction or bone
conduction. Bone conduction aids are less efficient, require more power
and have limited frequency response capabilities; if bone conduction is
necessary the choice will be extremely limited. Therefore, air conduction
aids should be used whenever possible. Bone conduction fittings may
have to be made because of certain conductive problems, for instance
where there is a physical deformity, such as no pinna, a collapsed meatus,
a tender post-operative condition, or where there is an active discharge
from the ear. In such cases, there is often no real option.
If there is a choice, an air conduction fitting will normally be preferable
for both sensorineural and conductive hearing losses. Occasionally there
may be more benefit from a bone conduction hearing aid if there is a very
severe conductive loss caused by a gross obstruction or lesion in the outer

Selection and fitting 
187
or middle ear but it should never be assumed that bone conduction aids
will necessarily provide the greater benefit. The efficiency of the coupling
of an air conduction receiver to the meatus is greater than the mechanical
coupling of a bone conduction vibrator to the mastoid, so that, in general
terms, air conduction does not have to be as powerful as bone conduction
to give the same effective output. It follows therefore that there is less risk
of distortion in the output.
Air conduction hearing aids also provide other advantages. They are
smaller and lighter, the frequency range is significantly wider than that of
bone conduction especially at the higher frequencies that are important to
most hearing-impaired people, and the response is also more readily and
easily modified. Great benefit should not be expected from a bone
conduction hearing aid if the hearing loss by bone conduction is much
greater than 30 dB over 50% or more of the audiometric measurement
points between 250 Hz and 5 kHz. Little gain is provided at frequencies
beyond 5 kHz by a bone conduction aid and these aids are not helpful for
sensorineural losses. In the case of mixed loss they will only be beneficial
if the sensorineural element is not too great.
Three main types of bone conduction aids, spectacle, postaural with
headband, and bodyworn with cord and headband, are available; all
employ a large, stiff receiver that must fit properly on the mastoid process
and be under reasonable tension or there will be a great tendency for
mechanical and acoustic feedback. An alternative type of bone conduc-
tion aid is the bone-anchored hearing aid. Bone-anchored hearing aids
(BAHAs) are bone conduction hearing aids that are attached, via an
abutment, to a titanium screw placed in the temporal bone behind the
ear. Bone-anchored hearing aids (Figure 9.1) are more cosmetically
appealing and may produce better amplification because they are in
direct contact with the bone. Ear level bone-anchored hearing aids are
used for conductive hearing losses up to approximately 45 dBHL. For
more severe conductive losses a bone-anchored hearing aid may be
powered by a bodyworn amplifier. The procedure for placement of a
bone-anchored hearing aid is:
1. The titanium screw is implanted in the bone.
2. A three-month gap is allowed for healing and osseo-integration.
3. An abutment is attached to the screw.
4. The bone-anchored hearing aid is fitted to the abutment by means of an
insert.
In practice, most hearing aid users’ needs can be met more efficiently with
air-conduction than bone-conduction hearing aids. Air conduction can be

188
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
applied equally well to a conductive loss and a sensorineural loss so air-
conduction hearing aids should be selected every time unless there are
strong medical contra-indications.
9.1.3 Monaural and binaural
A binaural hearing aid system consists of two complete hearing aids so that
each ear is provided with its own separate microphone, amplifier and
receiver. A system that provides sound to each ear but uses only one micro-
phone cannot supply all the benefits of true binaural hearing (Figure 9.2).
The benefit of binaural fitting, in suitable cases, greatly exceeds that of
monaural by providing more natural ‘balanced’ hearing with the advan-
tages of:
• improved localization of the sound;
• improved sense of distance from the sound source;
• improved speech discrimination in noise;
• binaural summation;
• binaural frequency advantage;
• improved quality with less distortion;
Figure 9.1. The main parts of a bone anchored hearing aid.
Bone anchored
hearing aid
Titanium
screw
Temporal
bone
Inset
Abutment

Selection and fitting 
189
• avoidance of abnormal head-shadow effects (see Figure 9.3);
• a subjective feeling of balanced hearing;
• masking for bilateral tinnitus;
• reduced likelihood of ever being without an aid;
• avoidance of auditory deprivation.
Figure 9.2. Monaural, binaural and pseudo-binaural hearing aid fittings compared
with spectacle fittings. The general public expects to have vision improved in both
eyes, not only in one. Although hearing aids do not restore normal hearing in the same
way as spectacles may restore normal vision, if both ears will benefit from amplifica-
tion, two aids should be provided whenever practical.
Small differences in the information arriving at each ear allow the listener
to localize the sound source and to determine its distance away. The use of
behind-the-ear and in-the-ear hearing aids permits full advantage to be
taken of phase, time and intensity differences in the auditory signal
Figure 9.3. The head shadow: the head blocks the passage of high frequency sound
waves, preventing them from being heard on the other side. With a monaural loss, high
frequencies from the deaf side will therefore tend not to reach the good ear.

190
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
arriving at each ear. These directional clues assist the brain in the selection
of meaningful signals from competing background noise (Carhart, 1965).
Sounds heard binaurally are also perceived as louder, usually by about
3 dB to 5 dB than when heard monaurally due to ‘binaural summation’
(Dermody and Byrne, 1975). Similarly, where each ear has a different
response across the frequency range of the audiogram, the brain may be
able to add this information together to provide a much improved pattern
of sound for the listener. Problems produced by the ‘head shadow effect’,
when hearing is only possible through one ear, are avoided by binaural
Hearing aid fitting (Figure 9.3).
The head shadow effect can be explained as follows. The head blocks
the passage of any sound waves that have a shorter wavelength than the
width of the head. The average head width is approximately 20 cm and
this means that the listener is at a great disadvantage, particularly with the
high frequencies (i.e. those with a wave length < 20 cm) of speech if the
sound source is on the same side as the poor ear. There is generally no
significant attenuation below about 1.5 kHz and the average attenuation
that can be expected is:
1 dB at 250 Hz
2 dB at 500 Hz
3 dB at 1 kHz
6 dB at 2 kHz
10 dB at 4 kHz
25 dB at 6 kHz.
The higher the frequencies, the greater is the intensity difference between
the two ears. With monaural hearing this creates problems that are height-
ened if background noise is present as this may mask the quieter high
frequency sounds.
Wernick (1985) suggests that a sufficient body of research literature
now exists for it to be reasonable to assume a binaural fitting advantage
unless there is evidence to the contrary. This is of particular importance
because it is sometimes difficult to demonstrate binaural advantage in the
fitting process. Many clients report subjective improvement of sound
quality and a feeling of balance, especially after a period of rehabilitation.
The use of two hearing aids has the very practical advantage that the client
still has a hearing aid if one is sent for repair. Two hearing aids may also
offer some relief to sufferers of bilateral tinnitus. Children are routinely
fitted binaurally and, in addition to all the aforementioned advantages, it is
thought that binaural stimulation will avoid the effects of ‘auditory depri-
vation’, where permanent changes may occur in the auditory pathways

Selection and fitting 
191
when auditory signals are not received (Fisch, 1983). These changes may
render the child less able to make good use of auditory information at a
later stage. Auditory deprivation may also occur in adults who are aided
monaurally, although some of the poorer performance at high presenta-
tion levels appears to be due to acclimatization (Gatehouse, 1990) – the
adult is used to listening to quiet signals in that ear and therefore performs
best at these levels, at least initially.
Not every user is able to benefit from binaural amplification and there
are a few instances where binaural use results in a decrease in ability to
understand speech, but the vast majority of clients can obtain some advan-
tage. Binaural fitting should therefore always be tried, unless there is a
reason not to do so. Reasons would include when a binaural fitting has
previously been shown to be without adequate benefit, when there is a
medical contra-indication, such as an active discharge from one ear, when
there is poor manual dexterity on one side, or when a client refuses to
accept binaural aids. Obviously, binaural hearing aids are also inappro-
priate if one ear is normal, or very near normal, or if one ear is ‘dead’. In
some cases, a CROS fitting (see section 9.1.4) may be more beneficial.
As a general rule, binaural fitting for adults with acquired hearing loss is
likely to provide the greatest benefit when there is no more than a 20 dB
gap between the two air conduction threshold curves at any frequency
(Berger and Hagberg, 1989). The further apart the thresholds, the less
benefit is likely to be achieved; but even grossly asymmetric ears can be
successfully aided binaurally and a binaural fitting should only be
dismissed if it is completely out of the question. Binaural fittings should be
tried whenever possible and the benefit assessed.
If a binaural fitting is not possible or desirable, the ear to be aided must
be selected and this should always be the one that will yield most benefit.
There is no hard and fast rule that can be applied to decide which ear this
will be and there are a number of factors that must be considered. Speech
tests are sometimes used with the aim of fitting whichever ear has the
better speech discrimination. Tests do not always indicate an obvious
advantage and if one ear has been unused for some time, as is usually the
case with asymmetric loss, it is difficult to estimate the value of the unused
ear because the listener cannot immediately make use of the available
information. Amplified sound fed to the better ear may at first appear
more normal and easier to discriminate but after a period of rehabilitation
the poorer ear might add significantly to the information provided. As an
alternative to speech discrimination testing, audiometric considerations
may be used to decide which ear is likely to provide most benefit and a
rule of thumb often used is to fit the ear with the air conduction threshold
which is nearest to 50 dBHL at 1 kHz. Other considerations may also affect

192
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
the choice of ear to fit, and if there is a difference in uncomfortable
loudness levels it may be preferable to fit the ear with the most normal
uncomfortable loudness level (ULL) since this will provide a wider
dynamic range. If unilateral tinnitus is present, fitting the ear with the
tinnitus may provide some masking through the amplification of ambient
noise; with certain medical conditions, such as physical abnormalities or
recurrent discharge, it may be better, or necessary, to fit the ear without
the problem.
The client’s opinion and lifestyle should always be taken into consider-
ation as there may be other reasons for having a preference for a certain
ear. Where a client already uses a monaural hearing aid it is usually best to
continue to use the same ear because the user has already been rehabili-
tated to hearing on that side; this does not, of course, prohibit fitting the
other ear or introducing binaural use. Some types of employment pose
particular hearing requirements; for instance, driving instructors need to
hear in the right ear so they can hear their clients, whereas lorry drivers
would probably be better with the hearing aid in their left ear so as to
avoid excessive road noise, which could be picked up by a fitting in the
road-side ear.
Clients may have a particular need or preference dictated by their
lifestyle; this may be something as simple as the position of the television
and chairs in the room and, if audiometric and other considerations allow
it, client preference should be accepted. However, there are occasions
where new users mistakenly believe that fitting the worst ear will most
nearly correct their hearing defect whatever the loss. Counselling may be
required to overcome an inappropriate belief about which ear will provide
the most benefit.
9.1.4 Contralateral routeing of signals (CROS)
A unilaterally impaired person will have problems in hearing from the ‘deaf’
side and may need to turn the good ear towards the sound source. Such
impairment may cause particular hearing difficulty in background noise,
hearing in groups, and in localization of sound. Slight differences in the
time, frequency and phase of the signals reaching the left and right ears
normally allow the selection of meaningful signals from competing noise
and facilitate the localization of sound. Unilaterally impaired people manage
well in most situations; they produce good free-field speech test results in
quiet conditions, have no speech production problems, can use the
telephone, hear the television and have no noticeable difficulty in under-
standing. Their problems are very specific and, while the general public
makes no allowance for unilateral loss, the hearing aid audiologist should

Selection and fitting 
193
not underestimate their difficulties. If medical intervention is not appro-
priate, hearing aid fitting may be helpful and there are two possible systems,
a monaural fitting or a CROS system. The CROS system was developed to
help the unilaterally impaired person to hear sounds from the deaf side. In
cases where a binaural fitting is not possible because one ear is ‘dead’ or
very severely impaired while the other has normal or at least much better
hearing, a CROS or Bi-CROS system may be indicated (Figure 9.4).
In a CROS fitting, the signal is routed from the side of the ‘dead’ or
severely impaired ear to the normal or near normal ear, where it is
received in addition to direct sound received in the good ear. A Bi-CROS
fitting is used where the better ear is not normal and requires some ampli-
fication.
Figure 9.4. Typical audiograms for CROS and Bi-CROS fittings.
Impaired
Normal

194
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
The acronym CROS stands for contralateral routing of signals and Bi-
CROS stands for bilateral contralateral routing of signals. In a CROS
system the microphone is placed at the poor ear, the receiver is placed at
the good ear and an open earmould is fitted to allow direct entry of sound
to the good ear, in addition to sound received from the deaf side. The Bi-
CROS system is similar, except that it amplifies the sound received at the
better ear. Two microphones are employed, one at each ear, both
connected to a single amplifier, which feeds the sound to the better but
impaired ear, usually via a closed earmould. Venting is sometimes possible
but this will depend on the degree of hearing loss, as venting will make the
hearing aid system prone to acoustic feedback.
A CROS system offers some of the advantages of binaural fitting. It does
not provide true binaural hearing but goes some way towards overcoming
the problems of unilateral hearing, caused by the head-shadow effect.
Some ability to localize sound can also be developed utilizing the differ-
ences in sound quality and time of arrival at each ear (Pollack, 1988). The
unavoidable difference in the quality of sound received through the CROS
system, compared with the natural sound received directly by the good
ear, is particularly useful in this respect.
The option of fitting CROS and Bi-CROS hearing aids is not widely used.
The advantages of fitting binaurally, even with gross asymmetry between the
ears, is much more generally accepted and many ears that were previously
viewed as unaidable are now shown to benefit from aiding. A CROS system
can offer some of the advantages of binaural hearing to a client for whom
only unilateral hearing would otherwise be possible. However, it is a system
that is physically more difficult to use and the client therefore needs to be
highly motivated if the fitting is to be successful.
9.1.5 Transposition aids
Transposition aids are air conduction hearing aids designed for clients
who have little or no high frequency hearing above 2 kHz. These aids
compress the entire frequency band of the signal so that it can be placed
within a narrower and lower frequency band, which is audible to the
client. Possible benefits include:
• improved speech discrimination;
• increased awareness of high frequency cues;
• detection and identification of consonants;
• improved monitoring of one’s own speech.
However, the effectiveness of transposition is variable and intensive
training is usually required.

Selection and fitting 
195
9.2 HEARING AID FITTING
9.2.1 The requirements of a room for hearing aid
fitting
A room for hearing aid fitting should provide a more realistic ambient
noise level than the very quiet conditions required for audiometric testing.
However, it is not desirable that a person using an aid for the first time
should be exposed to loud sounds or a variety of different stimuli at once,
as this could adversely affect the client’s attitude to using hearing aids.
This is an aspect of hearing aid fitting reflected in the rehabilitation of
adults, where first time users are encouraged to build up their experience
of aided sounds gradually from quiet situations to more complex noisy
situations. In 1991 the British Society of Audiology proposed that a room
used for the fitting of hearing aids should therefore have an ambient noise
level not exceeding 40 dBA. The reverberation time should not exceed
500 milliseconds at 500 Hz to help avoid auditory confusion in the initial
few minutes of hearing aid use. These acoustical requirements can
normally be met by:
• siting the room away from obvious sources of noise, such as vehicular
traffic, foot traffic (stairs, corridors), kitchens, toilets, doorbells, or
reception areas;
• having appropriate sound-excluding windows fitted and, if necessary, a
second entrance door;
• ensuring that the floor is carpeted and the walls covered in absorbent
material;
• ensuring that the seating is soft and the windows covered by heavy
curtains;
• ensuring that the sound of any necessary ventilation equipment does
not increase the overall ambient noise level.
9.2.2 The fitting procedure
(a) Gain
The fitting procedure is somewhat different depending on whether the
aids being fitted are basically linear hearing aids (or simple compression
systems) or digital wide dynamic range compression (WDRC) hearing aids.
Hearing aids that use WDRC use varying amounts of gain depending on
the level of the input signal (see section 6.4). The complex algorithms
utilised by different hearing aid manufacturers have usually been 

196
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
developed for their specific digital products. However, the research under-
pinning these has evolved with the knowledge obtained from the earlier
work concerning the half-gain and one-third gain rules. These simple rules
state that the amount of gain required by most hearing aid users is less
than that which would appear to adjust the hearing thresholds to ‘normal’
levels. This is due to the effects of recruitment, where small increases in
the objective intensity of a sound produce abnormally large increases in
the subjective sensation of loudness. A client with a 60 dBHL hearing loss,
for example, will neither require, nor be able to use, 60 dB of gain. The
‘half gain rule’ suggests that sensorineurally impaired people appear to
require an amount of gain that is equivalent to about 50% of their hearing
loss (Berger, Hagberg and Rane, 1980).
Hearing aid selection and fitting seek to amplify speech so that it is
delivered at a comfortable level for the hearing aid user. The speech signal
changes rapidly in frequency, time and intensity. There is an intensity
range of approximately 28 dB between the strongest and weakest compo-
nents of speech. The average range of speech energy expressed in dBL is
sometimes drawn on the audiogram (Figure 9.5). This is known as the
long-term average speech spectrum and indicates the normal average
variation that occurs in conversational speech. It can provide a useful
simple check on the benefit that may be expected from amplification.
Figure 9.5. An audiogram showing thresholds, MCLs and ULLs for the right ear. The
gain of the hearing aid should be such that the output is centred on the user’s most
comfortable level (MCL). The maximum output should remain just below the user’s
uncomfortable loudness level (ULL).
Frequency (Hz)
Dynamic range
Hearing level (dB)

Selection and fitting 
197
Many prescriptive formulae and algorithms (section 6.4) are available
to suggest the amount of gain the client needs from a hearing aid under
certain conditions. All of these are designed to provide a method of calcu-
lating the appropriate gain for a hearing aid and they provide a starting
point for the fitting procedure. Whatever formula or algorithm is used, the
hearing aid audiologist should expect to have to 'fine tune' the hearing aid
at the evaluation stage to meet the user's individual requirements.
Most formulae and algorithms present the gain requirements in terms
of functional gain or insertion gain. Functional gain is the gain of the
hearing aid on the ear and may be taken as the difference between aided
and unaided hearing thresholds. Insertion gain is also a measure of
functional gain but it is less confusing to consider it separately.
Insertion gain is the difference between the sound pressure level aided
and unaided, measured with a probe microphone near the eardrum. It is
the true or effective gain of the system and takes into account the natural
amplifying effect of the normal open ear, which is lost or altered when the
ear is blocked with the hearing aid. Hearing aid specification sheets do not
always give insertion gain but, where it is not stated as such, insertion gain
can be derived by subtracting the open ear response from the in situ gain
or KEMAR gain (see section 8.5). Similarly, insertion gain can be approxi-
mately established from 2 cc measures of gain by adding a correction
factor, which will vary according to the type of aid but is approximately 
3 dB for a behind-the-ear aid and 4 dB for an in-the-ear aid.
An understanding of linear prescription formulae may be helpful even
when fitting WDRC. The hearing aid audiologist must usually accept the
complex algorithms used by the manufacturers and make choices amongst
them based upon the various claims made about the different products.
The level of gain suggested by a ‘standard’ gain rule may at least provide a
very basic tool of verification (for medium input levels).
Lybarger published the ‘half gain rule’ in 1953, in The Basic Manual for
Fitting Radioear Hearing Aids. A single figure of gain, usually at 1 kHz,
can be calculated according to the formula:
Required operating gain   =   AC loss + AC-BC + 5 dB
2 
4
This should be considered together with the shape of the frequency
response. Allowance can be made for binaural fittings by adjustment of the
constant to –10. The formula still works well for linear hearing aids.
Many formulae also provide for less than half-gain in the low frequen-
cies in order to prevent over-amplification in this region and the upward
spread of masking.

198
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
These prescriptive formulae provide a single figure of gain, unlike the
multi-target gain figures provided for WDRC hearing aids. Prescriptive
formulae based on the half gain rule suggest the amount of gain a client
needs from a linear hearing aid with the volume control set for normal
use. A linear hearing aid should generally be worn with the volume
control about halfway on which will usually provide about two-thirds of
the possible gain. This allows the user some degree of control to turn the
aid up or down as circumstances dictate and avoids the necessity to use
the aid at full on volume, where distortion is highest. However, hearing
aids are often selected from the full on volume given in the specifications
and this can be estimated by multiplying the user gain by 1.5 or by adding
an amount of ‘reserve gain’, which is usually about 10 dB.
The gain requirements for profound sensorineural hearing loss may be
greater and two-thirds gain rather than half gain may provide speech at a
more audible level (Libby, 1986). It is not unusual to have to provide a
level of amplification that is near the maximum of the most comfortable
level area in order to achieve adequate hearing for more severe and
profound losses.
It is sometimes also suggested that clients with a very mild loss require
one-third gain (Libby, 1989). A starting point of insertion gain approxi-
mating to half the hearing loss for selection of a hearing aid generally
works satisfactorily for these clients as well, although less reserve gain may
be required. It should be noted that ITC and CIC aids appear to have a
lower gain when tested using a 2 cc coupler than when used on a real ear
(Tate, 1990). When working with 2 cc measurements rather than real ear
gain, a one-third rule is therefore more appropriate.
(b) Frequency response
The shape of the frequency response curve must be suitable for the
frequency characteristics of the hearing loss. Most clients with mild to
severe hearing losses require a response from their hearing aids that
‘mirrors’ the shape of the audiogram in as much as it provides most gain
where the hearing loss is greatest. If a simple half gain rule is adopted,
taking 50% of the hearing loss, each frequency point will automatically
provide a frequency response characteristic, which should be near to that
required. The gain at 500 Hz and below has often to be further reduced in
order that the higher frequencies may be perceived more clearly (to avoid
the upward spread of masking). Hearing aids are usually provided with
adjustable tone controls (section 5.3).
Where a single figure of gain is used to select possible hearing aids,
whether this be from a single frequency point, which is usually 1 kHz, or
from an average across the mid-frequency range, usually 500 Hz to 2 kHz,

Selection and fitting 
199
the slope of the audiogram must be further considered to ensure that the
frequency characteristics of the aid are suitable across the amplification
range.
It is usual to provide less gain in the low frequency region (section
5.3.2), except for clients with more severe and profound hearing losses
who may rely upon amplification of this region, and, where low frequency
hearing is near normal, venting may be used to further reduce the low
frequency gain. The degree of low frequency reduction suggested by the
various formulae varies somewhat. A reduction of 5 dB at 500 Hz is recom-
mended by McCandless and Lyregaard (1983) in the ‘POGO’ prescription
of gain and output for hearing aids, whereas Libby (1986), in the ‘one-
third–two-thirds gain’ rule, provides for slightly less low-frequency reduc-
tion: 3 dB at 500 Hz and 5 dB at 250Hz. This prescription provides for the
use of the same correction factors with gain of one-third, half, or two-
thirds, respectively, for mild, moderate, and severe-to-profound hearing
losses. Libby also suggests that where the hearing loss is precipitously
falling, a ‘ski slope’ type audiogram, patients usually prefer a gain of about
one-third, rather than half of the hearing loss. The formula presented by
Berger (1988) is yet another variation of the half gain rule but one that
provides for slightly more than half gain in the mid frequency region. 
High frequency amplification is important for clarity and intelligibility
but over-amplification may produce an aid that sounds ‘tinny’ and too
quiet and that is also prone to acoustic feedback. Clients who are new to
hearing aids, particularly those who have been in need of amplification for
some time, are sometimes unable initially to adjust to a level of high
frequency amplification that should be beneficial to them. In such cases it
is often possible to increase the high frequency amplification after a
period of rehabilitation.
(c) Maximum output
The maximum power output must be selected and, if necessary, further set
by the hearing aid audiologist so that the saturation sound pressure level
(SSPL) is not capable of frequently exceeding the user’s uncomfortable
loudness level (ULL).
All hearing aids have a limit to the maximum output they are able to
provide and in many hearing aids with linear amplification this limit is in
the region of 120 dBSPL, although it can be higher. The maximum output
of the aid can often be reduced from its natural limit using peak clipping.
The ULL may be used to guide the setting of the maximum output, which
should be as high as possible while remaining at least 5 dB below the ULL.
This is not as straightforward as it would at first appear. The ULL in dBHL
provides only a rough guide to the maximum output setting in dBSPL that

200
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
will be required by the user in everyday life. The ULL on the audiogram is
recorded in dBHL, whereas the maximum output of the hearing aid is in
dBSPL. Conversion factors can be added to dBHL thresholds to provide an
approximation to dB SPL (Table 9.1).
Table 9.1. Factors that can be added to dBHL to convert thresholds to dBSPL. (Based
on recommended reference equivalent threshold sound pressure levels in a coupler in
accordance with BS EN ISO 389-1: 2000.)
500 Hz
1 kHz
2 kHz
4 kHz
11.5
7
9
9.5
Moreover, ULLs from the audiogram have been obtained using pure
tones whereas in everyday situations, hearing aid users are hearing
complex sounds, including speech, for which improved ULL thresholds
would be obtained. Therefore, when estimating the maximum output
from the ULL on the audiogram, a figure greater than the ULL shown on
the audiogram can be assumed. Opinions vary on the degree of difference
that can be added, and such correction factors range from 4 dB to 20 dB
(McCandless and Lyregaard, 1983).
The use of different couplers in the measurement of the output of the
hearing aid also creates a significant variation. The maximum output of the
hearing aid in dBSPL will appear higher with ear simulator or in situ data
than the same hearing aid measured using a 2 cc coupler. It would there-
fore appear fairly logical to use a higher conversion factor to add to the
ULL from the audiogram when considering in situ data. An addition of
10 dB to 20 dB may be possible without discomfort when using ear
simulator data, whereas an addition of only 5 dB to 10 dB is more usual
when working from 2 cc data. Adjustment may also be necessary because
the instructions given in administering the subjective ULL test may influ-
ence the discomfort levels recorded.
Whatever method is employed to select the maximum output to be
used, it must always be evaluated when the hearing aid is worn by the
client. The maximum output of an aid should never be set such that it
causes discomfort in everyday life. Where a single figure is required for the
maximum output, this can be obtained either by using the 1 kHz reading
or by averaging, usually over the frequencies 500 Hz to 2 kHz.
(d) Automatic gain control (AGC)
The maximum output of a hearing aid should be set to provide as wide a
dynamic range as possible whilst keeping the sound level below discom-
fort (ULL). A dynamic range of 30 dB between threshold and discomfort

Selection and fitting 
201
can be viewed as a minimum for successful linear amplification. The
choice between linear amplification and the use of compression (see
section 5.3) may depend upon a number of factors but all sensorineurally
impaired users are likely to benefit from compression. The choice
between compression and peak clipping alone will take account of both
the audiogram and the client’s needs and situation.
Peak clipping provides an excellent and instantaneous safeguard
against uncomfortably loud sounds. Compression is not instantaneous.
Peak clipping is therefore also used in conjunction with compression.
Peak clipping alone should not be used in cases of severe recruitment as,
with a very narrow dynamic range, information may be lost and intense
sounds may still be too loud. Automatic gain control compresses the signal
within the available dynamic range. This avoids high distortion, which
would occur with frequent peak clipping, yet retains the important infor-
mation content of the signal. Peak clipping offers sufficient protection for
most hearing aid users against sudden loud sounds. Peak clipping only
affects intense sounds and therefore does not generally affect speech intel-
ligibility. Although peak clipping does cause distortion, this usually occurs
with environmental sounds, such as traffic noise, where distortion is
largely irrelevant. Digital programming has opened up great possibilities
with regard to compression.
It is essential that uncomfortable loudness levels are an accurate
measure of discomfort rather than unpleasantness. If not, too much
limiting may be employed, resulting in an unnecessary restriction of the
client’s dynamic range.
(e) Multi-channel hearing aids
Multi-channel hearing aids attempt to match the needs of the user more
closely by treating different frequency bands or channels separately to
produce a complex frequency response with the aim of providing a
precise prescription fitting. If the audiogram shape varies widely in the
different frequency regions or if the configuration is unusual, it may be
very helpful to use a twin or multichannel system. However, such systems
do not result in the anticipated extra benefit in every case, perhaps
because of the problems of poor sound perception due to cochlear
damage.
9.3 TACTILE AIDS AND COCHLEAR IMPLANTS
There remain a small number of profoundly deaf people who cannot
benefit from conventional hearing aids. Access to acoustic signals for this
group is usually provided through cochlear implants or through tactile

202
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
aids. Cochlear implants provide electrical stimulation within the cochlea.
Tactile aids use mechanical transducers to present patterns of vibration to
the skin, usually on the wrist. The basic processing strategies are similar
for tactile aids and cochlear implants, in as far as either:
• all speech information is presented; or
• important speech features are extracted and presented in a coded
form.
Results with cochlear implants are much more successful than with
hearing aids for profound deafness. Adults will have had previous experi-
ence of speech and language on which to build and rehabilitation involves
learning to recognize speech using the electrical signals. After an appro-
priate period of rehabilitation many adults achieve a high degree of open
set speech discrimination. Further information regarding cochlear
implants is to be found in section 14.3.4.
Tactile aids have one advantage over cochlear implants in that they are
non-invasive. Profoundly deaf people who are unable or unwilling to have
a cochlear implant may use them to gain additional information to assist
speech reading. The aspects of speech most accessible through tactile aids
include:
• presence or absence of sound;
• duration;
• intensity;
• rhythm;
• presence or absence of voicing.
The ability to receive and discriminate rate and amplitude changes
through the skin is relatively poor and multi-channel tactile aids provide
limited pitch information by using the skin’s sensitivity to differences in
the location of stimulation. Rehabilitation involves learning to interpret
the patterns of vibration presented to the skin.
9.4 SUMMARY
Effective amplification is vital for the rehabilitation of the hearing
impaired. Hearing aid fitting is a mixture of art and science – a challenge to
the skills of the hearing aid audiologist. The overall aim of the fitting is to
provide an amplified signal that will allow maximum benefit to be gained
from the residual hearing area. Hearing aids are selected according to the
medical, audiological and other needs of the individual.

Selection and fitting 
203
The basic priorities for the initial prescription of hearing aid character-
istics can be summarized as the provision of:
• the correct amount of gain, which is usually approximately equal to half
the hearing loss by air conduction;
• a maximum output that is not higher than the genuine ULL;
• a frequency response that relates to the slope of the audiogram,
without over-amplifying the low frequencies.
Prescriptive formulae can provide a starting point for hearing aid fitting
and facilitate the choice of suitable circuitry. Fine-tuning should then meet
the needs of the individual client. The aid selected should be sufficiently
flexible to allow modifications that may be required especially in respect
of the gain, frequency and maximum output. 
FURTHER READING
Allum DJ (1996) Cochlear Implant Rehabilitation in Children and Adults. London:
Whurr.
Byrne D (1987) Hearing aid selection formulae: same or different? Hearing
Instruments 38(1): 5–11.
Plant G, Spens KE (eds) (1995) Profound Deafness and Speech Communication.
London: Whurr.
Pollack M (1988) Amplification for the Hearing Impaired. 3 edn. Orlando FL: Grune &
Stratton.
Ringdahl A, Esraelsson B, Caprin L (1995) Paired comparison between the Classic 300
bone-anchored and conventional bone-conduction hearing aids in terms of sound
quality and speech intelligibility. British Journal of Audiology 29: 299–307.
Sandlin R (1988) Handbook of Hearing Aid Amplification. Volume 1. Boston: College-
Hill Press. 
Summers IR (ed.) (1992) Tactile Aids for the Hearing Impaired. London: Whurr 
Tyker RS (1992) Cochlear Implants: Audiological Foundations. London: Whurr.
Venema TH (1998) Compression for Clinicians. San Diego: Singular.

204
Chapter 10
Earmoulds
10.1 MAKING THE IMPRESSION
10.1.1 Introduction
The purpose of an earmould is to secure the aid to the ear and convey
sound into the ear canal. The mould may also have a significant effect on
the frequency response of the aid.
An earmould is the reverse duplication of the ear, obtained by taking an
impression. The features of the impression and of the earmould are
named after the parts of the pinna to which they relate, except the helix,
which is divided into the ball, waist and fan (Figure 10.1).
The taking of an impression is a vitally important part of the hearing aid
fitting procedure and one that can make the difference between success
and failure. The impression should show any abnormalities in the ear – for
Figure 10.1. The features of an earmould in relation to the pinna.
Helix of pinna
Helix of earmould

Earmoulds  
205
example any unusual lumps – and these should be marked so that the
earmould manufacturer notes them. In cases where there is stenosis due
to collapse of the cartilage in the meatus the earmould may appear shaped
like a funnel or like an hourglass. If the impression does not accurately
reflect the pinna contours and the meatal projection, the quality of the
hearing aid system in terms of comfort and acoustic performance may be
adversely affected.
10.1.2 Impression materials
Silicone-based materials are recommended for the taking of ear impres-
sions (Nolan and Combe, 1985). There are two basic types currently avail-
able; condensation reaction silicone and addition cured silicone, and the
choice will depend upon the requirements. Ideally, impression materials
for making earmoulds should be easy to work with, including having
suitable flow properties, and they should provide an accurate impression,
which will be flexible but of sufficient mechanical strength not to deform
or tear easily. They should not have undesirable side effects, such as
producing heat, and they should remain stable over time.
(a) Condensation reaction silicone
Condensation reaction silicone is currently the most widely used
material. This cures by a condensation polymerization reaction, in which
alcohol is produced in by-products, which evaporate. A small amount of
shrinkage, accompanied by a weight loss of about 1%, results within the
first 48 hours (Tucker and Nolan, 1984). This represents a great advance
over acrylics, which are unstable and shrink about 6%, used prior to the
introduction of silicone materials. However, even the small degree of
shrinkage encountered with condensation reaction silicone can create a
problem where a tight-fitting earmould is required, namely where gain of
over 50 dB is required, and for all children especially during periods of
rapid growth.
Condensation reaction silicone is not particularly easy to mix since the
ratio of base to hardener is imprecise. Use of inadequate hardener can
result in very slow curing, whereas too much can result in the material
hardening before the impression has been completed. This material is
considerably less expensive than its addition cured counterpart, provides
a reasonably short setting time and results in a relatively elastic impression
that travels well. This impression material is satisfactory for earmoulds
where a tight fit is not vital, but is less satisfactory for high gain require-
ments or for children.

206
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
(b) Addition cured silicone
Addition cured silicone has two major advantages over condensation
reaction silicones: improved dimensional stability and ease of measuring
the base and hardener mix. This material has no measurable shrinkage
and is therefore able to produce very precise ear impressions.
It is mixed using equal parts of base and hardener, which is fairly easy
to estimate or which can be achieved accurately using measuring syringes.
It is considerably slower in setting than condensation reaction silicone
and it is also more expensive, although this is a minor disadvantage in
comparison with the advantages where precision is required. The set
impressions are elastic and do not recover well from deformation, particu-
larly in the early stages of curing; they should therefore be removed from
the ear with great care, using a gentle rocking motion to avoid tearing.
If both addition cured and condensation reaction silicones are used
separate syringes must be kept for each material, as addition cured
silicone is easily affected by contamination.
When packaging, ideally the ear impression should be glued by its base
to a rigid box and not surrounded by packaging material. Paperwork
should be placed outside the box. Sterilisation of the ear impressions is
recommended where necessary to avoid any risk of cross-infection.
10.1.3 Ear impression equipment
The equipment necessary for taking an impression should be laid out on a
clean surface; a clean white towel is generally preferred for this purpose.
The following items are required:
• an otoscope with batteries to provide good illumination;
• a sufficient supply of suitably sterilised specula in at least three sizes; 
• suitable impression material;
• an impression syringe;
• foam or cotton meatal tamps in at least three sizes;
• an earlight and suitably sterilised probe tips;
• a clean towel to place over the client’s shoulder to protect clothing;
• scissors (round-nosed) for trimming excessive meatal hair and for
trimming or ‘pruning’ foam meatal blocks;
• lubricant (petroleum jelly) for smoothing down excessive meatal hair
or remaining hair stubble after trimming; olive oil or baby oil may be
required when taking impressions for CIC hearing aids.
• bite blocks as required;
• 3 clean sealable containers-for clean and used specula and a dispos-
able container for ‘medical waste’;
• rubber examination gloves should be available.

Earmoulds 
207
10.1.4 The ear examination
A thorough examination of the outer ear should always precede impres-
sion taking (section 7.1) to check for abnormalities that could necessitate
referral to a medical practitioner and to note any irregularities that might
affect the procedure:
• In cases of excessive wax the impression procedure would be likely to
further compress the wax and its removal is necessary before the
impression is made.
• The condition of the skin lining should be healthy and there should be
no discharge, otherwise appropriate medical treatment is required
prior to hearing aid fitting.
• Irregularities in the shape of the pinna or the meatus should be noted
and care taken to ensure the impression indicates any relevant abnor-
malities. Any malformations that might be considered to be errors in
the impression should be noted for the earmould manufacturer.
• Where there has been previous surgery, such as mastoidectomy, great care
should be taken in the placement of the meatal tamp. A mastoidectomy
involves the removal of diseased bone from behind the pinna and this may
affect the shape of the middle ear, including enlarging the external auditory
meatus. In such a case particular care must be taken to ensure the impres-
sion material does not reach the wider parts, from which removal of the set
material could be extremely difficult and might necessitate hospital treat-
ment. The meatal tamp must be sufficiently large and placed with care, and
syringing must be slow and careful, to avoid moving the tamp further
down the meatus. In some extreme cases, the impression procedure could
place the client at risk and should not be undertaken.
• The condition of the tympanic membrane should be noted and special
care taken if the membrane is scarred, as scar tissue is weak and may be
perforated, or if the ear is already perforated air pressure into the
middle ear may cause dizziness. Care should be taken in positioning
the tamp, slowly injecting the impression material into the ear and,
when set, in very slowly removing the impression, so breaking the
airtight seal with the ear very gradually.
10.1.5 The basic (relaxed closed jaw) ear
impression technique
1.
The client should be provided with a brief explanation of the
technique to be employed and should be made aware that there may
be a feeling of fullness experienced in the ear. The mouth should be
kept in the normal, naturally relaxed closed position and there should

208
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
be no talking or jaw movement, other than swallowing to relieve the
feeling of pressure, until the impression is set.
2.
A towel or tissue should be placed over the client’s shoulder and a
suitably sized tamp should be selected, so that it will completely fill
the meatus but without causing undue pressure. If the client has a
very small ear canal a foam block may be ‘pruned’ or ‘tapered’ with
scissors to fit or a cotton otoblock may be preferred as these can be
obtained in very small sizes. The cotton threads should be knotted to
ensure these cannot be accidentally removed and the block should be
gently inserted into the ear canal. This should be done from a sitting
or kneeling position, so that the client’s ear is at, or above, eye level. A
hand should be held against the client’s head to prevent discomfort if
the client moves and the earlight should be used to position the block
just beyond the second bend (Figure 10.2) at the junction between
bone and cartilage, which is approximately half-way down the meatus.
Sufficient depth in the meatus is important to provide an accurate
indication of the angle of the bends of the meatus, in order that the
mould-maker can place the output tube at the required angle to direct
sound to the tympanic membrane and not towards the canal wall.
Figure 10.2. Placement of the tamp just beyond the second bend at the junction
between the bone and the cartilage.
3.
Where the impression is for a CIC hearing aid, cotton otoblocks are
preferred, often with a light coating of oil to help insertion and
removal. The block should be ‘fluffed’ out slightly at all sides and
placed about 5 mm beyond the second bend. See also section 10.1.6
(open jaw impressions).
Position of block

Earmoulds 
209
4.
If spectacles or earrings are normally worn, these should not be
removed and if the impression is being taken to produce an earmould
for a behind-the-ear hearing aid, the aid should be placed on the pinna
until the impression is set. If the ear is especially hairy a small amount
of petroleum jelly can be applied to the hair to prevent it adhering to
the set impression. Excessive hair can be carefully trimmed with
scissors, if the client gives permission, but this is rarely necessary.
5.
The impression material should be mixed quickly but thoroughly and
placed in the syringe. The plunger should be depressed so that
material begins to flow out of the nozzle, thus expelling any air. The
syringe should be positioned as near as possible to the tamp and the
material should be syringed steadily into the ear. When it begins to
flow out of the meatus, the syringe should be moved to fill the concha,
but with the nozzle always remaining slightly embedded in the
material. When the concha has been partially filled, the helix should
be filled, returning to the concha until it is completely filled. The
concha should be filled sufficiently to indicate its depth but not to the
extent that the impression begins to sag. The impression should not
normally be pressed or smoothed off as this may distort it.
6.
The impression material should be allowed to set until no mark is left
if a fingernail is lightly drawn across it. The impression may stretch if it
is removed before it has fully set.
7.
The set impression should be eased slowly from the ear, lifting the
helix out first and then pulling gently at the base, or using a gentle
rocking motion, in such a way as to avoid causing discomfort to the
client or distortion of the impression.
8.
The impression should be marked to indicate requirements and
should be carefully checked for accuracy before sending to the
manufacturers.
9.
The ear should be examined with an otoscope to ensure that all is well
and the client should be offered a tissue to wipe the ear, which may be
greasy.
10. The ear impression should be cleaned as necessary and packaged
carefully for transit, preferably glued to the base of a rigid box, and
sent with its accompanying paperwork to specify the type of
earmould and the material required.
10.1.6 Open jaw impressions
Jaw movement causes changes in the shape of the ear canal (Figure 10.3).
Opening the mouth causes the facial muscles and the cartilage of the ear
to move forward and the ear canal to widen. Biting or chewing makes the
ear canal narrower. The degree of change varies significantly between

210
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
individuals but extensive jaw movement may cause the following
problems:
• feedback, especially when talking, eating or laughing;
• movement of the hearing aid in the ear canal causing discomfort and/or
affecting retention;
• fluctuations in volume and reduced intelligibility; 
• increased occlusion effect in CIC fittings.
Figure 10.3. Differences in the impression due to jaw movement. (a) impression taken
whilst chewing. (b)impression taken with normal relaxed (closed) jaw. (c) open jaw
impression. (Photograph courtesy of Starkey Laboratories Ltd.)
Figure 10.4. The ‘bite block’. (Diagram courtesy of Starkey Laboratories Ltd.)
In cases where jaw movement affects the ongoing shape of the ear canal,
and for all CIC fittings, it is necessary to take impressions with the jaw in a
relaxed jaw position (closed) and with the jaw open (using special ‘bite
blocks’, see Figure 10.4). Both impressions should be sent to the
earmould manufacturer. The bite block should be disposed of in an appro-
priate manner, see section 7.2.2.

Earmoulds 
211
10.2 EARMOULDS
10.2.1 Earmould materials
There are a number of materials available for the manufacture of earmoulds
and the selection will depend on the requirements necessary for the
mould. Every client wants an earmould that will fit well and be comfort-
able, easy to insert and remove, easy to clean, of acceptable appearance and
that will not cause acoustic feedback (whistling). There is no one ideal;
each available type has its own advantages and disadvantages.
Hard acrylic is the most widely used material because it is an attractive
product that is non-toxic, easy to clean, easy to work and can be produced
in any configuration. It is not flexible and generally does not provide a
sufficiently good acoustic seal for hearing aids with high gain, over approx-
imately 50 dB. Soft acrylic is still a fairly hard material but provides a more
efficient acoustic seal and has a little more flexibility, which is often more
comfortable and may also be advantageous for a client whose jaw moves
to a greater than average extent. Soft acrylic is porous, not as easy to clean
and is stained by ear wax. It is a material that can be used on its own or as
a soft tip in conjunction with a hard acrylic bowl.
There are a number of true soft or ‘all soft’ materials available, which
include vinyl and silicone products. These provide an improved acoustic
seal and are more comfortable. They may be recommended for children as
they offer more protection if the child is hit on the ear. Soft materials are
not usually produced in skeleton form as they lack the required strength
and rigidity. They are difficult to modify and to retube and they need
retubing at frequent intervals, ideally as often as every two months, because
the tubing tends to collapse within the earmould. They are also porous and
more difficult to clean and have a shorter life as they tend to split.
Soft materials, especially silicone, may be may be used in the manufac-
ture of non-allergenic moulds, where these are required. True allergenic
reactions to the materials used are rare and, more frequently, the irritation
is due to the use of colourants or to oversized or rough earmoulds.
10.2.2 Earmould types
The earmould type will be selected (Figure 10.5) first according to
whether the hearing aid is of the bodyworn, behind-the-ear, or in-the ear
type. A bodyworn aid requires a solid mould with a ring and clip fitting to
accommodate the external receiver. Such a mould is usually supplied with
a full helix to ensure that the extra weight of the receiver does not pull the
mould out of the ear. It can be ordered in hard or soft materials and can be
supplied with a wire to hook over the top of the pinna for further security

212
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
if necessary. The style that can be selected for behind-the-ear aids is much
wider and includes all those listed in Figure 10.5.
Figure 10.5. Earmould types. (After Tate, 1994.)

Earmoulds 
213
The earmould or shell of an in-the-ear aid contains the battery and
workings of the aid, which restricts its size, but it can be produced as full
shell, half shell, canal or helix fitting.
• A full shell completely fills the concha and can provide a good acoustic
seal for high gain. It can be obtained with or without a full helix, which
improves retention in the ear but may not be comfortable. The full
shell is the most common style for in-the-ear hearing aids.
• A skeleton mould or invisimould is similar to the full shell but the
centre of the concha portion is removed making the mould less
conspicuous while remaining secure.
• A half shell mould is similar to a full shell but has the helix and upper
part of the concha removed.
• Half skeleton and quarter skeleton moulds are variations of the skeleton
mould in which part, or most, respectively, of the outer perimeter is
removed, for comfort, ease of insertion or cosmetic purposes.
• A canal or meatal tip provides a less good acoustic seal and is less
secure in the ear, but is a popular fitting because it is easy to insert and
very inconspicuous.
• An open canal or CROS mould has no meatus and is usually a skeleton
fitting, but it may be a full concha, to hold the tube into the meatus
without causing occlusion.
• A helix in-the-ear aid provides an open canal fitting and the compo-
nents of the aid are contained in the helix portion of the shell.
10.2.3 Modification of hearing aid performance
Modifications to the performance of a hearing aid may be made electroni-
cally and acoustically. Some hearing aids provide a number of electronic
controls with which the hearing aid audiologist can adjust and modify the
hearing aid’s performance (section 5.3). Acoustic modifications (Figure
10.6) are those that occur beyond the receiver, that is in the elbow or
earhook, the tubing and the earmould, which together are sometimes
referred to as ‘the earmould plumbing’. These modifications may take the
form of alterations to the tubing length or diameter, or to the length of the
meatal projection, the addition of filters in the sound path and venting the
earmould.
(a) Tubing modifications
The tubing affects the frequency response of the aid due to resonance
(Chapter 1), which creates peaks in the sound output at certain frequen-
cies. These frequencies are primarily dictated by the internal diameter of

214
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Figure 10.6. The effect of various acoustic modifications. Venting affects the low
frequency region, filters smooth peaks in the response, and horns extend the high
frequency amplification.
the tubing. The tubing length has some effect but is very difficult to adjust,
as it is fixed by the size of the ear and the location of the hearing aid. The
internal diameter of tubing can be readily used as a means of shifting the
frequency emphasis. Decreasing the tubing diameter will lower the
frequency emphasis, by lowering the frequency of the first resonant peak
and reducing the mid and high frequency gain and output. Conventional
fittings use constant bore tubing but it is possible to increase the diameter
of the tube towards the ear canal to produce a significant improvement in
high frequency response. This increase in high frequency, which is due to
a quarter wave resonance, is known as a horn effect (Figure 10.7). A horn
that provides a 4 mm final diameter will enhance the response above
3 kHz by about 10 dB and extend the frequency limit, usually to about
8 kHz. A 3 mm horn can provide a similar enhancement but only up to
about 6 kHz. Increasing the high frequency response in this way may be
very advantageous for some clients with high frequency hearing loss.
Conversely, a tapered or reverse-horn arrangement, in which the diameter
of the last section is reduced, may be used to attenuate the high frequen-
cies, which may be helpful for some low frequency hearing losses. Where a
higher frequency response is required from an in-the-ear hearing aid, some
improvement may be achieved by increasing the diameter of the sound
bore by ‘belling’ (a concave profile) the end of the meatal projection.
(b) Meatal projection length
The length of the projection of the earmould into the ear varies the
volume of the meatus, which has an effect on the output signal. A long
earmould projection will reduce the meatal volume, which will increase
the overall sound pressure level and will particularly enhance the low

Earmoulds 
215
frequency response. A short earmould projection will maintain the
volume of the meatus nearer to normal and will therefore provide some
enhancement of the higher frequencies.
(c) Venting the earmould
A vent is a hole drilled through the earmould, usually parallel to the sound
output channel, although if there is insufficient space in the earmould a
diagonal vent opening into the sound tube may be used (Figure 10.8).
Venting provides intentional sound leakage and has the greatest effect on
the low frequency region. It may be used to relieve a feeling of pressure in
the ear or to modify the frequency response of the aid. A small ‘pinhole’
vent of approximately 0.6 mm will make very little difference to the
frequency response but will be effective in allowing pressure equalization
to reduce the feeling of fullness in the ear that many hearing aid users
experience.
Figure 10.7. A Libby horn.
Figure 10.8. Diagonal and parallel vents. These are used to provide intentional sound
leakage, most commonly for the purpose of low frequency reduction.

216
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Many clients have better hearing in the low frequency region and
benefit from a reduction of low frequency amplification, which allows
them to perceive the important high frequency sounds more clearly. New
users also often complain of hearing their voice as hollow or echoing; this
is the result of excessive low frequency amplification, generated in the
occluded ear and transmitted by bone conduction. It has a noticeable
effect on hearing one’s own voice and is known as ‘the occlusion effect’.
Venting is commonly employed for low frequency reduction and is used in
conjunction with a short meatal projection for this purpose. It is normal
practice to order a vent that is small, medium, large or open ear. The size
selected will take into account the gain of the aid and the hearing in the
low frequency region, which should be no worse than 30 dBHL if a vent is
to be used. In general, the better the hearing in the low frequencies, the
larger will be the vent. However, amplified sound leaking from the vent
may cause acoustic feedback.
Venting can only be of benefit if the gain of the hearing aid is not suffi-
cient to cause acoustic feedback. An open ear is the largest possible vent
size and provides a non-occluding earmould that can only be used if low
to moderate gain, over the mid to high frequency region, is adequate.
This type of earmould was originally designed for use with the CROS
system and, where it is used on the same ear as the hearing aid, it is
sometimes termed an IROS fitting, meaning ‘ipsilateral routing of signals’
or ‘used on the same ear’. An open earmould allows entry of normal
unamplified sound, which is useful in many cases of sensorineural hearing
loss where the low frequency hearing is good. At the same time, the open
ear acts to reduce the amplification of low frequencies below 1.5 kHz,
which is obviously not required. However, the open vent does not remove
peaks in the frequency response of the aid and its tubing and the primary
peak around 2 kHz can still provide excessive gain for the user unless the
peak is damped using an appropriate acoustic filter placed in the tubing or
the earhook.
A large vent is usually about 4 mm in diameter and provides strong low
frequency reduction below 1 kHz. It is used where the hearing loss below
this frequency is not greater than 30 dBHL. If the hearing is good only to
500 Hz, a medium vent with a diameter of 2 mm will reduce the gain
adequately. However, the vent itself may resonate causing an increase in
gain at a frequency just above the region being reduced, which in some
cases may be very undesirable. The problem may be even worse where a
small vent is used with the idea of reducing low frequency gain below
250 Hz (Lybarger, 1985). Unless the meatal tip is short and hollowed out
the low frequency attenuation is negligible but there may be a consider-

Earmoulds 
217
able enhancement of perhaps 5 dB to 10 dB at frequencies just above
250 Hz. This is usually not the result that was intended and damping the
vent may be necessary to remove the offending peak.
The effect of the vent is sometimes termed ‘the vent response’. This
may be found using a probe microphone to measure the difference in
sound pressure level in the ear with the earmould vented and with the
vent blocked. The vent response interacts with other modifications to
provide the required characteristics and it is therefore difficult to establish
the precise effect without recourse to real ear measurement. A venting
system that is extremely useful is that often known as the ‘select-a-vent’
system. The earmould or in-the-ear hearing aid is obtained with a
standard-sized hole for which a range of plugs are made. Each plug
provides a different-sized vent. The hearing aid audiologist is then able to
try various vent sizes without needing to remake the earmould.
(d) Acoustic filters
The frequency response of a hearing aid usually contains two or more
peaks of gain. These are due to the effects of the hearing aid electronics
and the resonance of the tubing that provides the link between the
receiver and the meatus. Peaks of gain may be troublesome because they
may cause the output to exceed the user’s uncomfortable loudness level,
in which case the volume of the aid may be set according to the level of
these peaks rather than the overall response of the aid. Acoustic filters or
damping add a resistance in the sound path, which has the effect of
smoothing the resonant peaks. Filters located in the output path have the
greatest effect on the mid-frequency region between 1 kHz and 3 kHz. The
damping effect is maximal when the filter is at the meatal end of the tubing
but this is not very practical because the filter rapidly blocks with wax. For
convenience, earhooks are often supplied with damping in place.
The effect of the filters varies not only with their position but also with
their acoustic resistance value, which is expressed in ohms. The higher the
ohm value, the greater is the smoothing effect. Values from approximately
680 ohms to 4700 ohms are available but values over about 1,500 ohms
tend to reduce the mid-frequency response to a greater extent than is
usually required.
10.3 SUMMARY
Silicone-based materials are recommended for impressions as they
undergo little shrinkage. Where a particularly tight acoustic seal is
required, addition cured silicone should be used.

218
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
An ear examination is important prior to impression taking. Any abnor-
malities should be noted and if necessary referred for medical advice.
Impressions should be taken using the syringe and block/tamp
method. Open jaw impressions are used where jaw movement signifi-
cantly affects the shape of the ear canal and for all CIC aids.
Earmoulds can be obtained in a variety of configurations and materials.
Hard acrylic is most widely used because it is an attractive product, which
is both easy to look after and long-lasting. ‘All-soft’ materials provide a
better acoustic seal but are more difficult to look after and have a much
shorter life. Soft acrylic provides a ‘half-way house’ between hard and all
soft materials.
Acoustic modifications can be made to the earmould. These include:
• Tubing modifications to shift the frequency emphasis. A horn effect can
be used to enhance the high frequency response significantly. 
• Alteration to the meatal length. A long meatal length enhances the low
frequencies and increases the output. A short meatal length improves
the higher frequencies. 
• Venting is commonly used to facilitate limited sound leakage in order
to reduce low frequency amplification. 
• Acoustic filters smooth resonant peaks in the frequency response.
The earmould and its plumbing form an integral part of the hearing aid
system and can improve or restrict its use.
FURTHER READING
British Society of Audiology (1986) Recommended procedure for taking an aural
impression. British Journal of Audiology 20: 315–16.
National Deaf Children’s Society (1991) Recommendations from the Department of
Health Seminar on the Production of Earmoulds and Tubing, July 1990. London:
National Deaf Children’s Society.
Pollack M (ed.) (1988) Amplification for the Hearing Impaired. 3 edn. Orlando FL:
Grune & Stratton.
Tate M (ed.) (1994) The Earmould, Current Practice and Technology. Revised edition.
Reading: Hearing Aid Audiology Group, British Society of Audiology.

219
Chapter 11
Evaluation
11.1 INTRODUCTION
The selection of an appropriate hearing aid and earmould for a client does
not signify the end of the hearing aid fitting procedure. Some process
must be employed to judge the benefit provided by the aid in terms of its
effectiveness and acceptability. Hearing aid evaluation must consider not
only the technical  specifications of the aid but also the subjective opinion
of the user, because a hearing aid will provide no benefit unless it is worn.
The prime technical objective is to select and adjust a hearing aid
system so that it provides the best possible hearing function. However, this
will only be of real benefit if acceptability to the client is not forgotten.
There are a number of approaches that can be used to assess:
• the degree to which the aid meets the prescribed characteristics;
• the functional benefits of the hearing aid system;
• the degree to which the aid meets the client’s needs and expectations;
• the subjective opinion of the client in relation to sound quality and
clarity.
Hearing aid evaluation should be ongoing and viewed as part of an
integral approach to audiological rehabilitation.
11.2 INSERTION GAIN MEASUREMENT
Insertion gain provides an objective measure of the gain provided by a
hearing aid when worn. Insertion gain procedures involve the placing of a
tiny flexible probe tube within the ear canal. The actual sound pressure
level is then measured, first without a hearing aid, known as the open-ear
measurement, and then with the hearing aid in use. The difference
between these two measurements is known as the ‘insertion gain’ and
describes the benefit in terms of amplification for the user.

220
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
A normal ear acts, in effect, as a natural resonator, amplifying sound
entering from the environment or ‘sound field’. This amplification is due
mainly to ear canal resonance but with some influence from the effects of
the pinna and concha (Chapter 2). The gain can vary widely between
individuals and even between the left and right ears of the same patient
(Tate, 1990). For most patients the gain is usually between 10 dB and
20 dB, but this author has found peak open ear gain to vary from as little
as 5 dB to as much as 30 dB in different individuals.
Ear canal resonance is not static throughout life but changes as the ear
grows. In new-born babies the natural resonant peak is near to 6 kHz but
this changes rapidly and the frequency is near that of an adult by about
two years of age. The adult peak frequency is between about 2.5 kHz and
3.3 kHz.
When an earmould or an in-the-ear hearing aid occludes the ear, the
open ear gain will be altered or lost. This means that when a hearing aid is
placed on the ear, that aid has to overcome the loss of natural amplifica-
tion before it provides any real benefit to the user. Insertion gain corre-
sponds to this benefit.
The terminology surrounding insertion gain (Figure 11.1) can be
confusing:
• Open ear gain is the natural amplification afforded by the ear canal
resonance and other factors. A graph that shows the open ear gain is
known as the real ear unaided response (REUR).
• In situ measurements are aided measurements taken at the ear without
making allowance for the loss of natural amplification. A graph that
shows the real ear aided measurements is known as the real ear aided
response (REAR).
• Insertion gain is the difference between the unaided and aided sound
pressure levels measured near the eardrum. A graph that shows this is
known as the real ear insertion response (REIR).The terms etymotic
gain, transmission gain and real ear gain are sometimes used to
describe insertion gain.
Insertion gain is the most useful probe tube measurement for hearing
aid evaluation and is often compared with a target derived from one of
the prescriptive formulae. Ideally the insertion gain should match to
within about 5 dB of the target. However targets are only starting points
and fine-tuning may be required to meet the needs of the individual
client. 
An in situ output frequency response may have value in setting the
maximum output limit of an aid but is not generally used in this way.

Evaluation 
221
Prescription methods are often used in the selection of a hearing aid –
see section 6.4. Real ear gain can be predicted from corrected coupler
measurements. This is known as the real ear to coupler difference (RECD).
This can be used to provide an approximation that is close to that of the
measured real ear gain of an average ear canal. The desired sensation level
(DSL) (Seewald, 1994), for example, makes particular use of the real ear to
coupler difference to predict the real ear performance of the hearing aids
for children. It can be argued that real ear confirmation is not always
necessary (Green, 1988) but the disadvantage of the prediction method is
that it does not take individual differences into account.
While most patients have an ear canal resonance acceptably close to the
average, there are some who differ markedly from it. This will be particu-
larly true at the extremes of age since the ear canals of both young children
and the elderly are likely to differ in shape and size from those of the
‘average’ population. The effect of venting on real ear gain is also very
variable, although correction factors appropriate to the vent size will
improve the prediction. These problems can be avoided by measuring the
real ear gain directly on the client. Real ear insertion gain should be used
to clarify the true gain at the ear where: 
• a vented mould or shell is used; 
• the client is very young or very old; 
• the results of the fitting appear at variance with the hearing aid audiolo-
gist’s expectations. 
The specialized equipment required for insertion gain measurements can
be obtained in a portable form and for hearing aid fitting purposes may be
Figure 11.1. The relationship between in situ gain, open ear gain and insertion gain.

222
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
used in a reasonably quiet, non-sound-treated room. The technique used
should, however, be carefully controlled, so that consistent results can be
obtained on different test/re-test occasions.
As with any method of evaluation there are a number of advantages and
disadvantages that should be considered. The advantages include:
• Provides an objective measure of real ear performance.
• Produces quick and reliable results when used appropriately.
• Facilitates accurate modification of the frequency response of the
hearing aid.
• Can be used with clients unable to perform behavioural tests.
Disadvantages:
• Placement of the probe tube requires practice.
• Wax deposits in the ear canal may block the probe tube.
• Placement of the probe tube may cause unintentional venting leading
to an effect on the low frequency response and acoustic feedback.
• Does not reduce the importance of more subjective results.
Probe tube measurements can be used to assess how closely a selected
hearing aid matches the requirements of gain and output prescribed for
the user. If the response is unsatisfactory the effect of modifications,
including those to the earmould, can be monitored. Ideally, after the
characteristics have been selected and modified according to prescrip-
tion, a more subjective approach should be used to ensure the accep-
tance of the client is not overlooked. Insertion gain techniques can
provide immediate visual feedback for both client and audiologist with
regard to the effects of changes made in response to the client’s
reactions.
11.3 FUNCTIONAL GAIN MEASUREMENT
Functional gain measurements provide another method of assessing the
gain provided to the hearing aid user. The method involves the compar-
ison of unaided and aided hearing thresholds, obtained in the ‘free-
field’.
The difference between the unaided and aided thresholds is termed
the ‘functional gain’. Functional gain is based on behavioural responses
and therefore reflects the efficiency of the auditory system in its
entirety.
An audiometer is used to feed warble tones, or alternatively narrow
bands of noise, through an amplifier to a loudspeaker. This is normally

Evaluation 
223
positioned 1 metre in front of the client. The sound pressure level is
measured at the client’s position using a sound level meter and thresholds
are expressed in dBA or dBSPL.
Aided thresholds are sometimes plotted on a pre-printed chart showing
an average speech spectrum, see Figure 11.2. This will readily indicate the
approximate audibility of conversational speech sounds when the aid is
worn.
Behavioural thresholds, especially in the free field, are subject to
variability, generally in the order of 5 dB. The difference between unaided
and aided thresholds provides an approximate measure of functional gain
that correlates reasonably well with insertion gain and which can be
usefully compared with prescribed real ear gain.
The acceptability of the selected maximum output of the hearing aid
can also be checked by presenting high sound inputs and observing the
client’s reactions.
Functional gain measurements are most appropriate to use in a sound-
treated room and are only widely used in the evaluation of hearing aids for
children. Free-field testing of this nature is fairly time-consuming, but can
be used to compare the functional gain achieved with prescribed real ear
gain, to confirm the adequacy of the aided threshold and to check the
client’s tolerance at maximum output.
Figure 11.2. An example of an aided audiogram (expressed in dBSPL). (After Maltby
and Knight, 2000, with permission).
Aided threshold (dBSPL)
Long term speech spectrum in dBSPL
Aided threshold (dBSPL)

224
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
11.4 SPEECH AUDIOMETRY
11.4.1 Speech discrimination tests
Speech discrimination tests are widely used in the evaluation of hearing
aid benefit and in clinical diagnosis. The methods used are similar but
more rigorously applied for diagnostic purposes. In hearing aid evalua-
tion, the objective is usually:
• to demonstrate the value of a hearing aid;
• to choose the most beneficial aid;
• to demonstrate the value of binaural hearing aids.
Speech audiometry sets out to provide information about the individual’s
hearing for speech and uses tests given at above threshold intensities.
Speech may be delivered to the individual by live voice or recordings.
In the evaluation of a hearing aid system, speech tests are undertaken
in the free-field, whereas for diagnostic purposes they are usually
presented under headphones. Speech audiometry in its broadest sense
can provide information concerning hearing for speech, the type and
degree of hearing impairment and the reliability of pure-tone thresholds.
Speech tests can provide a useful tool for demonstrating the effectiveness
of an appropriately selected hearing aid to the client. Their value in the
selection or modification of a hearing aid system is much less reliable.
Speech test scores are very variable and results are not sufficiently
precise to correspond to changes in hearing aid performance unless these
are extreme. In current practice, tests are often used in situations that
render them insensitive and unreliable. Where a test is presented using
live voice, for example, scores may vary due to uncontrolled changes in
voice level. It is therefore important to use ‘standardized’ test conditions
but, even under the most consistent conditions, small variations in speech
scores do not indicate significant differences between hearing aid systems.
If the limitations are recognized, speech audiometry can serve a useful
purpose.
11.4.2 Speech test materials
An ideal speech test would:
• be exactly repeatable;
• be phonemically balanced;
• contain words in common usage.

Evaluation 
225
Lists containing words or sentences of equal difficulty are presented. Scores
will show some random variation from test to test but using standardized
tests under consistent conditions minimizes this. Many tests also reflect the
same relative balance of phonemes as found in a random sample of everyday
speech. This is commonly known as ‘phonetic balance’ (PB).
Whole lists must be used on each occasion to retain equal difficulty and
phonemic or ‘phonetic’ balance. Whole words are easy to score but
relatively long lists are required to achieve phonetic balance. In the Fry list,
for example, Word List 1 consists of:
cut
near
raw
dip
there
sin
keys
tin
hut
more
bite
lid
right
ten
thick
will
deaf
sack
less
bone
yard
men
face
now
pays
wish
so
jam
white
ton
choice
wrong
heard
good 
veal
One entire list must be given at each intensity level in each situation (for
instance without and with a hearing aid). This may create a rather long and
tiring test. An alternative in widespread use is the presentation of the
isophonemic lists of Arthur Boothroyd (1968), commonly known as the
AB lists. Each list consists of only 10 words but each word is of consonant–
vowel–consonant (CVC) composition. True phonetic balance is not
possible within 10 words but the same 30 common phonemes are
repeated within each list in different combinations (isophonemic).
Each of the separate sounds or phonemes scores one. The nature of the
scoring means that guessing should be encouraged, as single correct
sounds can appreciably enhance the overall score. A total score of 30 is
possible for each list. In each case the score is presented as a percentage.
Monosyllabic word lists are widely used in the UK. Spondees are less
frequently used. These are words of two syllables with equal stress on each
syllable, for example, ‘playground’, ‘football’, ‘doorstep’. Spondees are
easier to understand but tests therefore tend to be less sensitive.
Maximum scores (100%) are on average achieved at levels 20 dB to 30 dB
below those required to achieve maximum scores for monosyllabic words.
Lists of sentences provide a more realistic task than single words. They
are somewhat easier and may therefore be less tiring for the listener but
tend to be rather time consuming. Sentence tests are normally scored by
key words. The BKB Sentence Lists (Bench, Kowal and Bamford, 1979)
each contain 50 key words, for example:

226
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
BKB List 1
The clown had a funny face.
The car engine’s running.
She cut with her knife.
Children like strawberries.
The house had nine rooms.
They’re buying some bread.
The green tomatoes are small.
He played with his train.
The postman shut the gate.
They’re looking at the clock.
The bag bumps on the ground.
The boy did a handstand.
A cat sits on the bed.
The lorry carried fruit.
The rain came down.
The ice cream was pink.
The AB Word Lists and the BKB Lists are used with both older children and
adults. Tests for use with younger children must be appropriate to their
age and stage of development in terms of the vocabulary presented and
the response required.
An oral response is inappropriate for young children who may not have
developed sufficient speech skills for the tester to be certain of the
response. The Kendall Toy Test, Figure 11.3, is widely used for children in
the two-and-a-half to four year age range. In this test small toys represent
the words in each list. Fifteen toys are placed on the table in front of the
child, 10 of which represent test items. The other five are distractors. The
child has to point to the appropriate toy when he or she hears the instruc-
tions ‘Show me the . . .’ The items consist of common vowel and conso-
nant sounds grouped according to the vowel sounds, for example:
Test items: house, spoon, fish, duck, cow, shoe, brick, cup, gate, plate.
Distractors: mouse, book, string, glove, plane.
Picture tests, such as the Manchester Picture Test (Hickson, 1986), see
Figure 11.4, are used with slightly older children, from four to six years of
age. In this test each word is presented as a multiple-choice item. The
child is asked ‘Show me the . . .’ and is required to point to one of four
pictures. Each list is designed to test five vowel sounds and five consonant
sounds, for example:

Evaluation 
227
Test sound: vowel oo.
Pictures presented: spoon, sun, cup, gun.
Response required: spoon.
Figure 11.3. Toys for the Kendall toy test. (Diagram from Maltby and Knight (2000),
with permission.)
Figure 11.4. A page from the Manchester picture test. (Hickson, 1986.)

228
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Where a person is very severely or profoundly deaf, it may not be possible
to use the usual speech test materials. Very low or zero scores on traditional
materials do not usually mean that nothing useful can be heard of the
speech signal. Even minimal hearing can be useful when it is combined
with lip-reading. Different tests are therefore used for this group. These
tests are often ‘distinctive feature’ tests that set out to measure the ability to
perceive certain aspects of speech perception that are important in distin-
guishing one word from another, for example variations in the:
• frequency of the first formant;
• vowel length;
• number of syllables;
• voicing;
• frequency of the second formant;
• finer aspects of discrimination (for example, manner and place of artic-
ulation) may also be explored with persons with residual hearing in the
higher frequency region.
Figure 11.5. An example of one of the word pairs presented in the Maltby Speech
Perception Test, which is a distinctive feature test.

Evaluation 
229
Distinctive feature tests, for example the Maltby Speech Perception Test
(Maltby, 2000) can be used with adults and with children. This test was
developed for severely and profoundly deaf people from the age of five to
adulthood. It is divided into two parts. The first part of the test is
concerned with the detection of sound, whereas the second part is
concerned with discrimination. The test requires the person to respond to
sounds in the first part of the test and, in the second part, to choose
between pairs of pairs of words (Figure 11.5), for example:
Length and intensity: hat/heart, ship/sheep
Second formant: tea/two, log/leg
Voicing: pear/bear, van/fan
The test indicates which speech features can be perceived and discrimi-
nated between using audition alone. The results can be presented as a
profile to highlight areas of strength and weakness.
11.4.3 The speech test procedure
Word lists should be recorded and played through a calibrated system to
provide accurate and reliable results. Live voice is prone to great variability
in intensity even when it is monitored with a sound level meter, but because
of the simplicity of live voice presentation it is widely used for the presenta-
tion of word lists in hearing aid evaluation. This should be viewed as
informal speech testing; the term ‘speech audiometry’ should be reserved
for tests presented under measurable and reproducible conditions. Speech
audiometry generally makes use of an audiometer to pass the signal to the
patient through headphones or via an amplifier and loudspeaker. BS EN
60645-2 specifies the requirements for speech audiometers.
An audiometer for speech tests will have the facility to accept the signal
from a microphone or tape recorder and should also be able to provide
masking for speech using white noise or speech spectrum noise, which
contains more low frequency noise. The British Standards provide for
speech spectrum noise to fall by 12 dB per octave between 1 kHz and
6 kHz. Masking with both kinds of noise is equally effective but speech
spectrum noise is less fatiguing because it excludes unnecessary high-
frequency energy. Masking will be required in speech audiometry if results
are required for each ear separately, where the pure tone audiogram
suggests that cross-hearing may occur.
Pre-recorded speech tests are usually prefaced with a 20 dBSPL 1 kHz
calibration tone of at least 1 minute in length. This is used to check that
the input level to the audiometer is the same every time it is used and that

230
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
the dial settings are therefore consistent. The calibration tone should
measure 20 dBSPL when the hearing level control on the audiometer is set
to zero or the level indicator is set to its reference point.
Speech audiometry should be carried out in quiet conditions to
minimize the masking effects of background noise. This is particularly
important for free-field tests. The background noise should be measured
and should not be such as to interfere with a signal-to-noise ratio of 45 dB.
A standard speech audiogram cannot be produced because differ-
ences in test materials and conditions may affect results. Each speech
setup must therefore provide its own normal response curve to which
patients’ responses will be compared. This can be achieved by testing a
group, usually of 10, normally hearing adults under exactly the same
test conditions as are to be used with all patients. A number of word
lists must be given at different presentation levels and the results at
each presentation level are averaged to produce a normal response
curve.
Patients should be given careful instructions. These should include that
they will hear someone speaking single words (or sentences) and after
each word they should repeat any parts of the word they heard.
11.4.4 Speech tests for diagnostic purposes
The first word list should be presented at a comfortable level and used for
practice and to adjust the starting point if the patient is not scoring well.
The intensity level is increased or decreased in 10 dB or 20 dB steps, with
one full list given at each level, and the scores are plotted on a speech
audiogram.
Where monosyllabic word lists are used in speech audiometry, half-
peak level (HPL) is proposed as a measure that agrees well with the pure
tone audiogram. Half-peak level is the intensity (in dial units) at which the
patient obtains half of his or her maximum score, whatever that maximum
may be. Thus, if a patient has a maximum score of 100, the HPL will be 50
but if the maximum score is only 60, the HPL will be 30. The difference
between the normal HPL and the patient’s HPL in decibels is known as the
‘half peak level elevation’ (HPLE) (Figure 11.6).
The HPLE elevation should agree, within 10 dB, with the pure tone
audiogram averaged over 500 Hz, 1 kHz and 2 kHz. Where the HPLE does
not agree, a greater shift may indicate an inaccurate audiogram, or, rarely,
point towards a retrocochlear disorder. Where the shift is less than
predicted, this is likely to indicate a non-organic disorder.
The shape of the speech curve for a typical conductive loss will follow
the shape of the normal reference curve but will be displaced or shifted

Evaluation 
231
along the audiogram. The patient will reach a score of 100% but at an
intensity level that is elevated in comparison with the normal.
In the case of a typical sensorineural loss the discrimination curve is
again shifted but may never reach a 100% score. The patient achieves his
or her maximum score at some lower percentage score and when the
intensity is increased beyond this point, the score reduces, shown by a
‘roll over’ on the audiogram.
Speech audiometry is a useful tool in the assessment of how an
individual’s hearing for speech varies with intensity, both with and without
a hearing aid.
A simplified procedure may be used to provide a simple comparison of
hearing aid benefit, where the recorded material is delivered at a constant
Figure 11.6. A speech audiogram showing half-peak level elevation and its relation to
the pure-tone audiogram.

232
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
sound level, usually 60 dB(A) or 70 dB(A), 1 m from the loudspeaker. At
least one word list is presented at this level for each of the aids or situa-
tions to be compared. A comparison of unaided and aided discrimination
scores is likely to show an improvement (except with a very mild hearing
loss) even with a poorly selected hearing aid. Nevertheless, the compar-
ison can be useful to demonstrate to a new client that it will be beneficial
to wear a hearing aid.
11.5 SUBJECTIVE EVALUATION
A hearing aid system will only be of benefit if it is worn. Client acceptability
must therefore be taken into account in any evaluation. A number of
methods of obtaining the client’s subjective opinion exists, with regard to
both the sound quality of the aid and its functional benefit.
In many cases, the information is obtained through interview or discus-
sion with the client, informally structured to:
• provide information regarding the sound quality;
• provide information about the usefulness of the aid;
• identify situations that remain problematic.
The information obtained may lead to adjustment of the system or to
further rehabilitation. Questions regarding sound quality can be tailored
to provide information that will indicate the need for certain modifica-
tions, for example:
• Is the aid loud enough? Adjustment of gain.
• Is the aid clear enough? Adjustment of bass cut (high-pass filter) .
• Is the sound tinny or harsh? Adjustment of treble cut (low-pass filter).
Quality judgements are not particularly useful for choosing between
hearing aids as there is a marked tendency for clients to select the second
of two aids, that is to select merely by order rather than due to any partic-
ular attributes of the aid itself (Green, Day and Bamford, 1989).
Quality judgements are useful in achieving hearing aid satisfaction and
can be helpful in making decisions with regard to aid modifications. In
some cases, a measurement scale may be used. The client is asked to listen
to a passage of running speech and to judge sound quality between two
examples, on a scale of one to five, for instance. This is completed for a
number of paired attributes, such as loud/soft, clear/hazy, booming/shrill,
pleasant/unpleasant. Alternatively, the client may be asked questions

Evaluation 
233
tailored to indicate the need for modifications or to rate the appropriate-
ness of statements, as in the Abbreviated Profile of Hearing Aid Benefit
(APHAB) questionnaire (Cox and Alexander, 1995), for example: 
‘Unexpected sounds, like an alarm or smoke detector are uncomfortable.
(Always/almost always/generally/half the time/occasionally/seldom/ never.)’
There is a tendency for clients to dislike high frequency emphasis at 
first fitting, even when this can be shown to improve their speech
discrimination. With long-term experience of using hearing aids, 
many clients will come to accept greater high frequency emphasis.
Evaluation after an extended period of rehabilitation will allow
maximum advantage to be taken of the client’s gradual acclimatization to
hearing aid use.
A questionnaire may also form part of an evaluation after a period of
rehabilitation and should be designed to indicate particular problem
areas as well as the overall level of satisfaction. A disability questionnaire
can be given before, and some time after, hearing aid fitting to indicate
the difficulties the client originally had and to what extent the aid has
reduced the client’s problems. Questions are presented in a way that
allows improvements to be readily noted, for example Lutman, Brown
and Coles (1987):
Can you follow the television news when the volume is turned up only enough to
suit other people? 
Easily 
With some difficulty 
With great difficulty 
Not at all
If a simple individual questionnaire, or even a checklist, is to be designed
to identify particular difficulties it may be useful to indicate:
• how long the aid is worn each day;
• the ease of insertion, manipulation and removal;
• comfort;
• feedback problems;
• satisfaction with the appearance; 
• perceived sound quality; 
• difficulties encountered in (a) the home; (b) at work; (c) socially; 
• satisfaction with the hearing aid; 
• satisfaction with the service.

234
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
11.6 SUMMARY
Evaluation is an important part of the overall process of hearing aid fitting.
Methods in common use include:
• insertion gain; 
• functional gain; 
• speech audiometry; 
• subjective evaluation.
Methods of evaluation should be chosen to provide information about
benefit in terms of:
• adequacy of prescribed characteristics;
• comfort;
• reduction of handicap;
• sound quality.
The results should highlight any problem areas and lead to modifications
and further rehabilitation where appropriate.
FURTHER READING
Hull RH (1997) Aural Rehabilitation. 3 edn. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group.
Maltby MT, Knight P (2000) Audiology. An introduction for teachers and other profes-
sionals. London: David Fulton.
Martin, M. (ed.) (1997) Speech Audiometry. 2 edn. London: Whurr.
Pollack MC (1988) Amplification for the Hearing Impaired. 3 edn. Orlando: Grune &
Stratton.
Tye-Murray N (1998) Foundations of Aural Rehabilitation. San Diego: Singular
Publishing Group.

235
Chapter 12
Client management and
rehabilitation
12.1 THE REHABILITATION PROCESS
12.1.1 Hearing impairment in the population
The most common cause of acquired hearing loss in adulthood is the
ageing process (presbyacusis). About 8% of the adult population have a
hearing loss of over 35 dBHL in the better ear (Haggard, Gatehouse and
Davies, 1981). Approximately one-third of the population over 65 years
old has some sort of hearing problem and approximately half of the
population over 80 years old has a severe hearing problem. Hearing losses
of this type develop gradually over a period of years, with high frequency
sounds reducing first. This means that speech can still be heard but it loses
its clarity. A binaural hearing loss of as little as 15 dBHL, averaged across
the frequencies 500 Hz to 2 kHz, is likely to be significantly disabling for
everyday speech (Lutman, Brown and Coles, 1987). An affected individual
typically accuses others of mumbling or speaking quietly and this leads to
increased tensions within the family. Although hearing loss may be
suspected, this is not usually a suggestion that is readily accepted by the
hearing-impaired person, who often prefers to cope with the restriction of
personal and social life rather than admit to deafness. In many cases there
may be a gap of as much as 15 years or more between noticing the
problem and taking any action to deal with it.
12.1.2 Hearing aids and aural rehabilitation
Hearing loss is an underestimated impairment that may lead to many
secondary problems in addition to primary communication difficulties.
Management of the hearing-impaired client is extremely difficult and,
unless the client accepts the problem, rejection of any form of hearing aid
is very likely. Even when the need for amplification is understood,

236
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
deafness remains an unacceptable condition and most people would
prefer to use an inconspicuous hearing aid. 
High expectations of the benefit to be derived from hearing aids add to
the difficulties, especially as most adults do not realize that hearing loss is
not ‘cured’ by amplification. Hearing aids alone are not sufficient to
overcome the consequences of the loss. Audiological rehabilitation
involving a co-ordinated programme of evaluation and remedy is there-
fore appropriate.
Aural rehabilitation begins with an evaluation of the hearing loss and its
effect on the client’s lifestyle. At this stage it is decided if remediation is
necessary and, if it is, whether hearing aids should be considered. In some
cases assistive devices may be sufficient to fulfil the client’s needs. If
hearing aids are to be considered, and following referral to a medical
practitioner if indicated (section 7.1), the acoustical characteristics can be
defined, together with any special rehabilitation measures required. It is
usually helpful to include a member or members of the client’s family in
the process, as not only can they support the hearing-impaired person far
better if they understand, but also concerns are more likely to be aired at
an early stage. Rehabilitation is not really an area on its own but is inter-
woven into hearing aid fitting and evaluation. The success of the whole
process is reliant on the sum of the individual parts. An error in any part
may adversely affect the whole – for example, incorrect uncomfortable
loudness levels (ULLs) could lead to the fitting of a hearing aid that is too
loud. The aid might appear suitable in the quiet of the fitting situation but
in the noise of the outside world it could prove unbearable. The client
could turn it down but then would not hear adequately, leading to rejec-
tion of the aid. Another example could be where the hearing aid audiolo-
gist fails to consider the client’s dexterity, leading to the selection of an aid
that the client is unable to insert or operate. The aid type suggested must
be acceptable to the client so that he or she is both able and willing to
wear it and, if it is a commercial aid, it must be affordable. These and many
other factors interact in the audiological rehabilitation process. 
12.1.3 Attitudes to hearing impairment and the
remediation process
The client’s attitude towards hearing impairment and amplification is
crucial to the rehabilitative process and four attitude types have been
outlined (Goldstein and Stevens, 198l):
• Type I – the patient has a very positive attitude towards hearing aids
and aural rehabilitation.

Client management and rehabilitation  
237
• Type II – is an essentially positive attitude but with some complicating
factors present. These might, for example, include a previously
unfavourable hearing aid fitting experience or a difficult-to-fit hearing
loss.
• Type III – is an essentially negative attitude but with an element of co-
operative intent.
• Type IV – consists of a small group that rejects hearing aids completely.
Unfortunately, rehabilitation is rarely successful with this group.
A simple problem-solving model of the rehabilitation process is presented
in Figure 12.1. The process begins with a definition of the problem. At this
stage the hearing aid audiologist collects information regarding the
client’s hearing loss, his or her areas of difficulty, his or her attitude and
related aspects. Informal discussion, a case history and audiological
assessment are the most widely used tools for defining the problem.
Handicap questionnaires and speech audiometry may add further depth
to the investigations.
Figure 12.1. A problem-solving model of the rehabilitation process.

238
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
The focus of any rehabilitation process should be on the needs of the
individual and aural rehabilitation can be defined as helping an individual
with a specific set of problems arising from an auditory disorder.
Rehabilitation can therefore be considered as a process that is designed to
minimize disability due to hearing loss or tinnitus (and to some extent
balance) in order to prevent the condition from handicapping the client.
The hearing problem can be viewed as a continuum in which disability
and handicap represent different stages. Initially, damage to the auditory
system leads to impairment or hearing loss. This creates a disability but it
is the degree to which this disability affects a person’s quality of life and
well-being that imposes the handicap.
Thus, for example, a moderate hearing loss might have only a slight
handicapping effect on an elderly client living alone, seeing few visitors
and whose only real problem seems to be hearing the television. An
identical degree of hearing loss in a young married man could cause a
considerable handicap. The disability of the hearing impairment is likely
to affect every aspect of his lifestyle and employment because of its impact
on communication. Activities that were previously enjoyable become diffi-
cult and he is likely to experience embarrassment, irritation, frustration,
anger and depression. He will almost certainly perceive a change in his
status, at least in his own eyes, and will suffer a loss of self-esteem.
The need to wear a hearing aid is generally regarded as related to the
ageing process and society makes few allowances for hearing impairment.
Unlike wearing spectacles, where the individual may be considered intelligent
and studious, hearing aids carry a stigma. Hearing aids are an external sign of
deafness, which many view as being accompanied by stupidity because of the
communication problem it creates. Spectacles may result in perfect vision. A
hearing aid rarely produces an immediate return to normal and is much more
in parallel with the use of a wheelchair. Also, hearing loss produces less
sympathy and understanding socially than for example the loss of a limb.
Hearing loss is rarely total and the person who hears some things and
not others is often described as awkward – ‘he hears when he wants to’.
The hearing-impaired person, on the other hand, believes that people are
mumbling or not speaking clearly. In background noise and group situa-
tions, following a conversation may be impossible. The hearing-impaired
person wants to maintain social interaction but restricted involvement in
conversations has to be tolerated. Some attempt may be made at finding a
way of controlling the social scene or avoiding it (Hallberg and Carlsson,
1991). Often, particularly in the early stages, the hearing-impaired person
will prefer to isolate himself socially.
The objectives of the first stage in the rehabilitation process, then, are
to assess the impairment through audiometry and the nature of the

Client management and rehabilitation 
239
handicap through investigation of the client’s home, work and social
environment, the activities in which he or she wishes or needs to partici-
pate and the difficulties being experienced. Only when the problem has
been defined can a realistic approach to remediation be adopted.
The remediation process involves more than just hearing aid fitting. It
involves setting the scene to facilitate the best possible use of amplification.
There are some individuals for whom hearing aids may not be appropriate
and sometimes assistive devices, such as a television amplifier, may provide
a successful answer to a specific need. Where hearing aids are appropriate,
counselling is often required to help the person come to terms with his or
her loss and accept realistically the impairment and ensuing handicap. If the
client maintains a type III attitude, with perhaps only a grudging acceptance
of a problem, much counselling may be needed to achieve acceptance. Even
where clients maintain positive type I attitudes, counselling is required to
help them understand the potential benefits and limitations of amplifica-
tion. The client needs to understand that hearing aids will not provide
perfect hearing and, while they can be of great benefit, it will take time to
relearn to associate sounds with meanings. A positive attitude is undoubt-
edly helpful but unrealistic expectations will lead to disappointment and the
possible rejection of any amplification system. Most adults are interested to
know about their hearing loss and to understand the difficulties they experi-
ence. At an early stage the type and degree of loss and the audiogram can be
explained (Figure 12.2). Understanding may help to increase acceptance.
Figure 12.2. Audiometric information that can be readily explained to the client.

240
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
12.1.4 Stages of grief and family involvement
If the hearing loss is of sudden onset the impact is much greater than a loss
that has developed slowly and insidiously over many years. The patient
has not had time to compensate for the loss or to come to terms with it.
The hearing-impaired person (or the parent of the hearing-impaired child)
needs time and empathetic counselling to move through stages of grief
and mourning at their loss before they are ready to understand or accept.
Such stages can be identified as follows:
Stage I – numbness
It is usually the ENT surgeon or otolaryngologist who is involved at this point
to provide direct advice on handling the impairment. Unfortunately, the
client is often unable to absorb much of the information given at this stage.
Stage II – denial
The client refuses to accept the diagnosis and searches for a second
opinion or a miracle cure. The client is not yet ready for amplification and
if hearing aids are prescribed they are unlikely to be used:
‘Initial strategies involve denying disability, pretending to hear and avoidance of
situations in which the disability will be exposed. The deafened person looks to
medicine for a cure to problems, which are seen as stemming from faults in the ear.
When the cure is not forthcoming, the deafened person experiences a further loss –
that of hope’ (Woolley, 1991).
Stage III – despair
This is the stage at which the hearing loss is accepted but the problems
often appear insurmountable. Positive but realistic counselling of the
client and his or her family can help the client to move towards acceptance
of the problems and a desire to try to overcome them.
Stage IV – action
The client is ready to accept amplification. Counselling and training now
interlink to facilitate the client’s adjustment to the impairment and to the
use of amplification.
Whatever the degree of loss and the pattern of its onset, involvement of
the family or a ‘significant other’ is important as their help and support
can be of immense value. A ‘significant other’ is anyone who is in close
and frequent contact with the client and will often be the spouse or a son
or daughter. Their presence throughout the rehabilitation process, at the
assessment, hearing aid fitting and aftercare, can help them to understand

Client management and rehabilitation 
241
the nature of the problem. Their expectations also have to be realistic and
they need to realize that it takes time and effort to overcome the handicap
of deafness. They too are affected by the loss and they need to understand
the problems of poor speech discrimination, difficulty in noise, recruit-
ment and so on if they are to be able to provide realistic support and
encouragement to the hearing-impaired person. They can also ensure that
practical instructions have been understood and, if necessary, can help in
inserting the aid and in its care.
12.2 PRACTICAL ASPECTS OF REHABILITATION
12.2.1 Practical instruction
First-time hearing aid users will require training in effective hearing aid
use, which can be considered as ‘informational counselling’. Such
counselling is also required to a lesser extent when a client changes from
one hearing aid system to another, or from monaural use to binaural.
12.2.2 Insertion and removal of the aid
Difficulty in inserting the earmould or hearing aid is the most common
reason for lack of use. It is an activity that has to be learned through
practice and it is essential to ensure that the client or his or her carer is
able to insert and remove the aid at the hearing aid fitting stage, while the
hearing aid audiologist is on hand to provide guidance. It is a common
fault for clients to leave the top part of the helix of the earmould outside
the fold of the pinna. It may be helpful for the ‘significant other’ to be
shown how the aid should appear when properly inserted (Figure 12.3).
Figure 12.3. The appearance of an earmould when correctly inserted. (Photograph
courtesy of PC Werth Ltd.)

242
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Where there is some difficulty in manual ability, half shell moulds may
provide a useful option as these are easier to insert and a small handle can
be fitted to help in removal. Very small hearing aids with very small
controls and tiny batteries are only appropriate if the client can handle
them satisfactorily – no matter how good the amplification or how much
the client wants a small aid.
12.2.3 Operating the aid
New users need precise simple instruction on operating and care of the
hearing aid. They must be sure of the size and type of battery to use. They
need to be aware that removal of the tab from a zinc air battery will cause it
to deteriorate. It is common for a user to try several new batteries, one after
the other, if the hearing aid does not work. The use of a battery cell tester to
ensure the adequacy of the battery current can avoid this problem because
the client can then be certain whether it is the battery at fault. Insertion of
the battery can be difficult with poor eyesight or failing dexterity. It is
sensible to change batteries over a towel (on the table or on the knees) as it
is much easier to retrieve a small battery in this way. The client needs to
realize that the battery has a positive flat side and a negative rounded side.
The battery must be in the drawer the correct way around, with the positive
side matching the positive sign shown on the aid. If it is placed back to front
the battery drawer will not close easily and it should never be forced shut.
Clients also need information about how to dispose of old batteries safely,
where to obtain new supplies and how often they will need to replace
them. The aid should be turned off when not in use to reduce battery
consumption and it is sometimes helpful to suggest that the battery
compartment be opened at night to ensure there is no unnecessary drain.
Most clients will want to know how long a battery should last and a reason-
able indication of battery life should be possible, taking account of the
hearing aid manufacturer’s information and the client’s probable usage.
Further information on calculating battery life will be found in section
8.6.2. When the battery has run out, it should never be thrown in the fire or
left where pets or children may swallow it. Swallowed batteries are
dangerous and medical advice should be obtained without delay.
New users may be concerned about the volume at which to set their
new aids. Digital hearing aids can adjust the volume automatically but new
users of analogue hearing aids often tend to set them too high or too low.
These clients need to understand that the volume should be adjusted in
different situations but, as a starting point, it is often helpful to encourage
clients to rotate the volume control until the aid is a little too loud and
then reduce it slightly. 

Client management and rehabilitation 
243
Binaural hearing aids can be adjusted in the same manner as monaural
aids, but both aids will then need to be turned down slightly and adjusted
as necessary to ensure that sound is heard centrally. If the loss is very
asymmetrical or the client has become used to listening monaurally over a
long period of time, it may be better not to attempt to ‘balance’ the ears in
this way, at least initially.
If the hearing aid includes other client-operated controls, such as
telecoil, tone controls or an on-off switch, these must be demonstrated
and their use practised at the initial fitting stage. A common problem
occurs where a client switches to the ‘T’ position for receiving from a loop
but forgets to return the aid to the normal ‘M’ position afterwards and
therefore thinks the aid is faulty. Practice in use can be arranged at the
fitting stage by attaching a telecoil adaptive coupler to the telephone and
using the speaking clock or similar service.
Induction loops are frequently installed in churches and other public
places. Most modern domestic telephones do not have the telecoil facility,
however a suitably designed telephone or a special adaptive coupler can
easily be obtained.
A further aspect of hearing aid operation that the client should under-
stand is when and why feedback may occur. A correctly fitted hearing aid
should not produce feedback in normal usage but feedback is likely if the
aid is not inserted correctly, if the microphone is covered with a hat or
hand, or if the ear is blocked with wax. Clients can be helped to under-
stand feedback by explaining that it occurs when amplified sound escapes
from the ear canal and re-enters the microphone of the hearing aid such
that it is reamplified and heard as a high-pitched whistle. If the aid has to
be turned down below the required volume to prevent feedback, the
hearing aid audiologist must find and rectify the cause, perhaps by
reducing the vent size or making a new tighter fitting earmould.
Feedback can be used to advantage in checking the battery. If the aid is
held in a cupped hand, with the volume fully on, and the aid does not
whistle the battery can usually be assumed to be dead.
12.2.4 Care of the aid
Hearing aids are small, expensive items and new users need to be
informed how to care for their aids. They may not realize that the aid
should not come into contact with water, make-up, hair spray, and
perfume. Batteries should be removed if aids are not used for a long
period and aids should be kept away from extreme temperatures. An
earmould can be separated from the hearing aid and washed in warm
water, although care should be taken to ensure no moisture remains in the

244
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
tubing before reconnection to the aid. An air blower or ‘puffer’ can be
used to remove moisture (including condensation after use) from the
tubing. In-the-ear hearing aids must not be washed. Cleaning involves
wiping them periodically with a dry tissue or cloth. Alcohol spray or wipes
can also be used to wipe the outside shell of the aid. The sound outlet and
vent, if applicable, must be checked for wax when the aid is removed each
night. Wax can be removed carefully using a special wax tool or small
cleaning brush, with the receiver outlet over a tissue to collect the debris
as it falls out. Nothing should be inserted down the sound outlet further
than about 5 mm as damage to the receiver could result. A small metal or
plastic wax trap may be fitted by the manufacturer to prevent any wax
particles finding their way into the receiver. This does not reduce the need
for the client to clean the opening. If the trap becomes blocked the
hearing aid audiologist will usually need to clean it for the client. Cream or
Vaseline, which some clients use to ease insertion of the aid, can also block
and damage the aid unless used sparingly and with care. Dirt in the
receiver and in the microphone are common causes of hearing aid
damage. The aid should therefore be handled with clean, dry hands and
should be removed during potentially damaging situations, such as
washing or shaving. 
For many first-time users there seems to be a great deal of information
to assimilate and written instructions for operation and care should also
be provided. Clients should be encouraged to read these in the first few
days.
12.2.5 Training in hearing and first use of the aid
Most new users need to become acclimatized to hearing aid use over a
period of time. They are often advised to build up their use gradually from
an hour or two in quiet surroundings. They may be advised not to try to
‘test’ the aid but to restrict use at first to reasonably easy situations, such as
conversation with single members of the family or listening to news
programmes on the television. The news is helpful because the
newsreader faces the audience and provides clear speech, without
background noise or a complex plot to follow. It is usually inadvisable for
the aids, particularly linear hearing aids, to be worn too soon in noisy
situations and it is therefore not sensible for the client to wear the hearing
aid in the street immediately after fitting. Wind and traffic noise are partic-
ularly disconcerting. The approach should, however, be flexible and
individual: not every client needs to build up use and this is often particu-
larly true of younger clients. A client should not be prevented from
wearing the aid for as long as he or she likes, provided that the sound is

Client management and rehabilitation 
245
not too loud and that the aid is taken off if it is uncomfortable or the client
becomes tired.
In the early stages of hearing aid use, or of change to a different system,
the client may be unable to tolerate the prescribed pattern of amplifica-
tion. A seemingly appropriate high frequency emphasis may appear to
sound ‘tinny’ or the aid may seem too loud. It may be necessary to provide
a high frequency cut or to reduce the output through peak clipping or
AGC. When the client becomes acclimatized to hearing aid use their toler-
ance will often increase and it is usually possible to alter the aid’s controls
gradually to maximize the client’s benefit from the amplification system.
After-care is an important part of the rehabilitation process. The client
must be able to contact the hearing aid audiologist if problems or queries
arise. A few clients do not need further help but most appreciate subse-
quent information and attention, which may ease acceptance of the aid.
Evaluation, whether formal or informal, should be built into the rehabilita-
tion programme and lead on to adjustments to the hearing aids, further
rehabilitation and perhaps the addition of other ‘assistive’ devices to help
overcome specific problems. When the rehabilitation period is satisfacto-
rily completed, contact with the client is usually maintained through
servicing tasks, such as retubing or cleaning battery contacts and
providing regular hearing checks. Often the client will be interested in
new products and the hearing aid audiologist should be ready to provide
factual information about assistive devices and new types of hearing aids.
12.2.6 Tactics
Many of the difficulties caused by hearing loss can be minimized by the use
of some simple hearing ‘tactics’. Over time, the hearing-impaired person
may develop his or her own set of tactics, but the hearing aid audiologist
may help ease the early stages with a few practical suggestions, which
might include the following:
1. Reduce background noise – turn off the radio or other competing
noise, hold a conversation in the lounge rather than the hall, use a
tablecloth to reduce the clatter of plates, and so on. The hearing aid
volume may also be turned down a little in noisy situations.
2. Ensure adequate lighting – the room should be well lit and the lights
should fall on the speaker’s face not in the client’s eyes.
3. Positioning – reduction of the distance between listener and speaker
will improve hearing; a distance of about 1 metre is ideal for lip-reading
and is not uncomfortably close.
4. Encouraging others – it is helpful if the attention of the hearing-
impaired person is attracted, perhaps by calling their name and then

246
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
pausing, before a conversation is started. The speaker should be
encouraged to face the client and speak clearly, to make the subject of
the conversation known and to rephrase anything not fully under-
stood. Shouting and speaking very slowly with exaggerated lip
movements do not help but slowing speech slightly, using clear speech
and a loud voice will help. Good communication demands an effort
from both the listener and the speaker.
Even people with a very mild hearing loss can benefit from the introduction
of hearing tactics. With a more severe loss, there may be an increased
reliance not only on tactics but also on speech reading (see section 12.5.2).
12.3 ASSISTIVE DEVICES FOR THE HEARING
IMPAIRED
12.3.1 Auxiliary aids
There are many devices to help the hearing impaired either in addition to,
or in place of, hearing aids. Such devices are known as ‘environmental
aids’, ‘assistive devices’ or ‘auxiliary aids’ and they are designed to assist
with specific everyday problems, such as listening to the television or on
the telephone. Many of these use an induction loop or an infra-red system.
For the more severely deaf, visual or vibrating indicators are often used,
particularly for alarm sounds and for the doorbell and telephone. Details
of current assistive devices can be obtained from the RNID (Royal National
Institute for Deaf People) or from the various manufacturers. Many of the
special systems available may be obtained on free loan through the local
social services department, although availability depends on local finances
and policies; alternatively clients may purchase devices privately. Where
special systems are required to aid someone in employment, it may be
possible to obtain these through the local job centre.
12.3.2 The induction loop system
An induction loop system is designed to enable a sound signal to be trans-
mitted directly to the listener. This overcomes problems created by
background noise, reverberation and increasing distance from the sound
source. The loop utilizes the principle of electromagnetic induction.
(a) Electromagnetic induction
A current flowing in a wire creates a magnetic field around it. The loop
system involves a cable fitted around the required area and attached to an

Client management and rehabilitation 
247
amplifier. The sound source is fed into the amplifier through a micro-
phone or by a direct connection from the television or other device.
When a suitable pick-up receiver enters the magnetic field, the sound
signals are transmitted to it by a fluctuating magnetic signal from the loop
cable. Most behind-the-ear and some in-the-ear hearing aids are fitted with
this facility, which is known as the ‘T’ switch. When the wearer switches to
‘T’, only signals from the loop system may be heard. If the wearer also
wishes to hear sounds from the environment, to hear friends talking for
instance, the aid must be fitted with a switch that allows the microphone
to remain operative; this is known as an ‘MT’ switch. 
Public telephone boxes facilitate use of the ‘T’ switch but modern
telephones in the home do not produce an adequate magnetic field for
the operation of the induction loop unless they are specifically designed
for this.
(b) Loop design
The installation of a domestic loop system is a relatively simple matter. For
a loop system to operate successfully in a public place and to meet all the
necessary requirements (IEC 60118-4), specialized design and installation
are essential.
The major disadvantages of the loop system are:
• Overspill interference will result where two loop systems are used in
adjacent rooms.
• The frequency response on ‘T’ may be different to the normal recep-
tion on ‘M’. In particular the low frequency response may be less good.
• Weak or dead spots can arise within the looped area.
• There may be electrical interference that generates internal noise in the
hearing aid, near fluorescent lights for example.
• Orientation of the head may cause variation in the gain received of as
much as 15 dB (Tucker and Nolan, 1984).
12.4 MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
12.4.1 The role of the hearing aid audiologist
Hearing aid audiologists usually undertake the total aural rehabilitation of
clients who have chosen to obtain a hearing aid through a private route.
Their primary responsibility is therefore to ensure that hearing-impaired
clients obtain maximum benefit from their hearing aid system. In order to
achieve this, they will determine:

248
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
• the need for medical referral;
• the hearing loss;
• the client’s difficulties and feelings in relation to the hearing problem;
• the need for a hearing aid.
The hearing aid audiologist should guide and support clients in their
search for solutions to their hearing problems. This will usually, but not
always, involve the selection and adjustment of a hearing aid system
together with the provision of rehabilitation counselling and after-care
service to ensure that the system provides maximum benefit to the client.
12.4.2 The Hearing Aid Council Code of Practice
The Hearing Aid Council Act of 1968 provides for ‘the establishment of a
Hearing Aid Council, to register persons engaged in the supply of hearing
aids, to advise on the training of persons engaged in such business, and to
regulate trade practices’. The Act relates to hearing aid dispensers and
employers of dispensers. The Hearing Aid Council (Amendment) Act of 1989
introduced changes to the composition of the council and extended its disci-
plinary powers. On a day-to-day basis the Hearing Aid Council (HAC) is
administered by a Registrar. However, the council itself consists of 12
members, four to represent the interests of the hearing-impaired consumer,
four with specialized medical or audiological technical knowledge and four
to represent the interests of the private hearing aid dispenser. The council
members are appointed by the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) and
each serves a three-year term, although this may be followed by one further
term of three years. The full council meets four times a year and there are
additional meetings of its standing committees – the Examining Committee,
Complaints Investigating Committee and Disciplinary Committee.
The main functions of the Hearing Aid Council are the establishment
and maintenance of standards of competence and the regulation of trade
practices. These are achieved through implementation of the HAC’s Code
of Practice and the complaints and disciplinary procedures. Included in
the Code of Practice (1999) are 30 numbered clauses that regulate all
aspects of dispensing practice. The clauses apply to all individuals who
conduct or seek to conduct oral negotiations with a view to effecting the
supply (whether by him or another) of a hearing aid for the use of a
person with impaired hearing. The Code also regulates employers and
trainees. All dispensers must therefore be conversant with the full current
Code of Practice. The following provides a summary of the main provi-
sions in relation to dispensers.

Client management and rehabilitation 
249
(a) Self-representation
Hearing aid dispensers may not describe themselves as consultants or
specialists or audiologists unless immediately preceded by the words
‘hearing aid’, neither may they designate their premises as a clinic or insti-
tute, and specified wording must be used when indicating that they are
registered under the Hearing Aid Council Act. This wording includes:
• registered hearing aid dispenser(s);
• RHAD (following the registered name);
• registered under the Hearing Aid Council Act 1968;
• all hearing aid dispensers are required to be registered with the
Hearing Aid Council.
(b) Medical referral
Hearing aid dispensers who are not medically qualified must not repre-
sent themselves as such or practise any medical or surgical treatment for
deafness. Dispensers must advise clients to seek medical advice (if they
have not already done so) if they report or if the dispenser finds any of the
following (see also section 7.1):
• obstruction of the ear canal, preventing proper examination and/or
impression-taking;
• abnormal appearance of the eardrum or outer ear;
• earache;
• discharge from the ear;
• conductive hearing loss of 25 dB or more at two or more frequencies in
the range 500 Hz–2 kHz;
• unilateral or asymmetrical sensorineural hearing loss of 25 dB or more
at two or more frequencies in the range 500 Hz–4 kHz;
• hearing loss of sudden onset;
• hearing loss that has suddenly worsened;
• fluctuating hearing loss (other than that due to head colds);
• hearing loss associated with noise exposure;
• tinnitus;
• vertigo.
A record of the condition(s) found must be kept and a copy may be sent to
the client’s GP or appropriate medical specialist if the client agrees.

250
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
(c) Facilities
At every consultation, there must be available:
• an annually calibrated pure tone audiometer with facilities for air and
bone conduction with masking (the calibration certificate must be
retained for five years and produced if required by the Hearing Aid
Council);
• an otoscope and a supply of clean specula; 
• aural impression material and equipment with appropriate cleaning
facilities.
Appropriate air and bone conduction audiometry must be carried out
before a hearing aid is supplied. All audiograms must include sufficient
details to identify the specific audiometer used. An audiogram taken
within the previous two months by or under supervision of a suitably
qualified person may be taken into consideration.
(d) Home visiting, exhibitions and surveys
Home visiting is strictly regulated and no client may be visited at his or her
home unless the visit has been requested or agreed to and certain require-
ments met. In brief these are: 
• the visit is for a given date, which must be within three months;
• the details of the visit should be sent to the client as a written notice
(where this is not done, a record must be kept of why it was not
practical or appropriate to do so – this record is to be made available to
the HAC on request);
• if a visit results from a telephone approach to a client, a written notice
must be sent together with a reply-paid card providing the opportunity
to decline or alter the appointment and the appointment must be at
least 10 days after despatch of the notice by first class post;
• if a visit results from a written approach to a client, the dispenser may
only visit if the client has agreed in writing to a visit on the given date;
• no charge may be made for a visit or test unless the client has agreed to
it before the date of the visit and a written notice including the charge
must have been sent.
Where exhibitions are undertaken away from the permanent place of
business, there must be adequate provision for after-care service and the full
name and registered head office address must be prominently displayed.

Client management and rehabilitation 
251
Dispensers may not, directly or indirectly, undertake survey enquiries
of members of the public regarding deafness or the sale of hearing aids
with a view to securing business.
(e) Information for clients
At all times dispensers should maintain a high standard of ethical conduct
and provide the best possible advice including, where appropriate, that a
hearing aid may not necessarily be of benefit. 
Written information must be given as outlined in the current Code of
Practice before a client has entered into any commitment or been supplied
with a hearing aid. This information must include:
• make and model of the aid to be supplied;
• financial details;
• terms of any trial offered;
• conditions for cancellation and refund;
• name and address and telephone number of the dispenser (and of the
firm if different);
• terms of any guarantee;
• an undertaking to arrange a further consultation at no charge within six
weeks;
• a statement that the client’s rights are not affected;
• a statement that ‘All hearing aid dispensers are required to be 
registered with the Hearing Aid Council and a copy of the Council’s
Code of Practice may be seen on request. The Council’s duties include
ensuring adequate standards in dispensers’ conduct and competence.’
The address of the Hearing Aid Council must also be given.
Clients must be given the benefit of any guarantee provided by the
manufacturer and no guarantee may in any way infringe the client’s statu-
tory rights.
(f) After-care
Dispensers must make adequate provision for servicing of the hearing aids
and ancillary equipment they supply.
Any enquiries that are made to dispensers by the Hearing Aid Council
registrar in connection with complaints made to the Council must be dealt
with reasonable expedition and in a proper manner.

252
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
12.5 IMPROVING COMMUNICATIONS
12.5.1 Communication
Even with normal hearing, a person will look at a speaker whenever
possible to aid the communication process. In noisy situations there may
be some reliance on mouth movements and facial expression to increase
understanding.
With impaired hearing, there is likely to be some dependence on visual
cues. Visual information may be through observing speech cues (speech
reading) or through a manual communication system (signing or finger-
spelling). The degree of dependence is related to the degree of hearing
impairment. Someone who is profoundly deaf is reliant on visual informa-
tion, whereas with a mild loss hearing remains the primary communica-
tion channel.
12.5.2 Speech reading
Lip-reading and auditory training
Lip-reading can be a useful adjunct to a hearing aid user with any degree
of impairment. Even with normal hearing we use lip-reading to some
extent in difficult listening situations. Some individuals acquire great skill
in lip-reading without conscious effort but, for most, lip-reading is a diffi-
cult task.
I tried to lip-read. I had not expected to understand much but the reality was a
choking experience. I understood very little of what was said and, to add to my
discomfort, I had no idea where to look. By the time I swivelled round to locate a
speaker he would be half-way through his question; a brief one would be finished
before I could start to make any sense of it . . . As shadows flitted across the faces I
was trying to lip-read they made a difficult task impossible.
(J. Ashley, 1991)
Speech reading involves lip-reading together with observations of other
visual cues, such as facial and hand movements. Speech reading is easier if
the speaker:
• uses appropriate facial expressions and ‘body language’;
• uses a normal or slightly slowed rate of utterance;
• uses precise but not exaggerated articulation;
• is someone with whom the ‘listener’ is familiar;
• is positioned face to face at a distance of about 1.5 m;
• does not cover the lips or smoke or chew while talking.

Client management and rehabilitation 
253
Many of the sounds of speech (phonemes) cannot be differentiated by the
visual pattern alone. Groups of phonemes that look the same are known
as a ‘viseme’; for example, the bilabials ‘p’, ‘b’, ‘m’ form a viseme – a
speech reader could only conclude that one of that group had been
spoken.
It is thought that only about 50% of a spoken message can be under-
stood through lip-reading alone. Connected speech provides more infor-
mation than visible articulatory movements alone (see Chapter 4). When
even significantly reduced hearing is coupled with speech reading, the
listener’s ability to comprehend may be greatly increased.
Lip-reading classes are often provided through the local education
authority, where the hearing-impaired can obtain help in developing the
skill. It is debatable whether or not lip-reading is a skill that can be taught
but classes can certainly provide graded practice. In addition they bring
people with similar problems together which provides a degree of group
therapy. This may be very helpful in developing understanding, accep-
tance, encouragement and a more positive and assertive attitude.
12.5.3 Auditory training
Individuals who have a more severe or profound hearing loss of long-
standing may benefit from auditory training. Sessions are usually
individual and may be provided by hearing therapists, speech and
language therapists or teachers of the deaf. Sign language and finger
spelling are rarely used by adults with acquired deafness because they are
of little help in communicating with the hearing community. An auditory
training programme provides a series of exercises designed to develop
listening skills and to build up the correct associations of sounds and their
meanings. Listening is more than just hearing, it requires active participa-
tion. The hearing-impaired person needs to regain meaningful hearing
and listening by practice and relearning over a period of time. The longer
a hearing loss has been sustained, the longer will be the time needed for
relearning and auditory training may be very beneficial, particularly in
difficult cases.
12.5.4 Speech therapy
We all normally use hearing to monitor our own voice; this is known as
auditory feedback. Even a slight delay in hearing our own speech will
cause us to stutter; this is demonstrated in the delayed feedback test
sometimes used with non-organic deafness (section 13.4).
With impaired hearing there may also be a deterioration in speech and
voice production, resulting in either poor articulation or an alteration of

254
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
intensity level. If the loss is conductive, speech production is usually
quieter. This is known as Paracusis Willisi and is because the speaker’s own
voice sounds louder by bone conduction, while the voices of others and
general background noises are all reduced because of the hearing loss.
If the loss is sensorineural, speech is usually louder as hearing-
impaired people cannot hear themselves speak (in addition to not being
able to hear other people) and often this is accompanied by poor conso-
nant articulation because high frequency hearing is generally most
affected. Speech therapy may be provided by a speech and language thera-
pist (SLT) to help maximize communication skills. 
The effect of congenital hearing loss on speech is more pronounced
and the development of language may be delayed (Chapter 14).
12.6 THE ROLE OF OTHER SPECIALISTS
12.6.1 The social worker with deaf people
Social workers with deaf people undertake a specialist training in addition
to that required for generic social work. This specialist training enables
them to communicate and work effectively with deaf people. The role of
these specialist social workers involves:
• maintaining a voluntary register of deaf (with and without speech) and
hard-of-hearing people for the local authority;
• providing information to the deaf about statutory rights and entitle-
ment to benefits;
• helping the deaf to resolve problems, whether these be physical,
mental or financial.
Most of the time of social workers for deaf people is taken up with helping
the profoundly prelingually deaf, whose main avenue of communication is
sign language. This is a small minority group but communication difficul-
ties compound their problems. Social workers may therefore find
themselves acting as interpreters in court, hospital, at job interviews and
so on, and dealing with discrimination at work or home.
12.6.2 Hearing therapists
Hearing therapists are generally hospital-based and work as part of a
multidisciplinary team, which will include clinical and social work staff.
The hearing therapist is involved in the rehabilitation of patients over the
age of 16 with acquired hearing loss; they do not usually work with

Client management and rehabilitation 
255
congenitally deaf people. The role is wide but includes the assessment of
rehabilitative needs and the provision of programmes to maximize
patients’ communication skills. Such programmes may include instruction
in the use of hearing aids and assistive devices, counselling, hearing
tactics, lip-reading and auditory training. Hearing therapists undertake a
one-year full-time course.
12.6.3 Teachers of the deaf
Teachers of the deaf are teachers who hold an additional certificate in
education of deaf children. This specialist qualification may be gained after
the successful completion of a one-year full-time or equivalent part-time
course. Teachers of the deaf are involved with children from diagnosis to
the end of their education (see Chapter 14). Many are peripatetic, working
with a caseload of children based in different schools rather than being
based with a class or unit in one single school. Peripatetic teachers of the
deaf usually spend part of their time working with the class or subject
teachers (or the parents in the case of a pre-school child), rather than
necessarily in the direct teaching of the hearing-impaired child.
12.7 SUMMARY
The hearing aid audiologist can make a significant contribution to the
hearing-impaired client’s quality of life. The provision of hearing aids is
only part of an overall rehabilitative process that should answer certain
questions:
• Is remediation necessary?
• Is amplification appropriate?
• What are the client’s needs?
• Is medical referral necessary?
• What aids are needed?
• What counselling procedures are necessary?
• Has rehabilitation been successful?
The rehabilitation process may be handled entirely by the hearing aid
audiologist, who must comply with the Hearing Aid Council Code of
Practice, or it may involve a number of different specialists. The habilita-
tion of children is undertaken by specialist teachers of the deaf, whereas
adult rehabilitation may involve a hearing therapist within the health
service. Ongoing support is provided for prelingually deaf adults by a
social worker for the deaf.

256
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
FURTHER READING
Davies H, Fallowfield L (1991) Counselling and Communication in Health Care.
Chichester: Wiley & Sons.
Egan G (1990) The Skilled Helper, Model Skills and Methods of Effective Helping. 4
edn. Pacific Grove CA: Brooks Cole.
Hearing Aid Council (1999 or latest edition) Code of Practice, Examinations and
Registration. Milton Keynes: Hearing Aid Council.
Hosford-Dunn H, Roeser RJ, Valente M (2000) Audiology Practice Management. New
York: Thieme.
Hull RH (1997) Aural Rehabilitation. 3 edn. San Diego: Singular.
Morgan-Jones R (2000) Hearing Differently. London: Whurr.
Pollack M (1988) Amplification for the Hearing Impaired. 3 edn. Orlando FL: Grune &
Stratton.
Sandlin RE (1990) Handbook of Hearing Aid Amplification. Volume II. Boston: College-
Hill Press.
Summers I (1992) Tactile Aids for the Hearing Impaired. London: Whurr.
Tye-Murray N (1998) Foundations of Aural Rehabilitation. San Diego: Singular.

257
PART THREE
Special Aspects of
Hearing Aid Audiology

This page intentionally left blank 

259
Chapter 13
Assessment and
management of special
problems
13.1 TINNITUS
13.1.1 Introduction
Tinnitus is a relatively common complaint, which the Oxford Textbook of
Medicine (Weatherall, Ledingham and Warrell, 1983) describes as:
A sensation of noise in the ears or head. It may be related to disease of the cochlea or
of the eighth nerve and can be produced by certain drugs of which quinine and the
salicylates are the most important. It may be faint and perceived only in quiet
surroundings, or it may be loud and continuous. It is variously described as a high-
pitched whistling or hissing sound or occasionally as a low-pitched rumbling or
machinery-like noise.
Research in the UK suggests that over 17% of the population have had an
experience of troublesome tinnitus and that as many as 300,000 people in
the UK have such severe tinnitus that it interferes with work or social
functioning (Sheppard and Hawkridge, 1987). Tinnitus is always a
symptom of some pathology and the first course of action must be the
referral of the client for medical advice, in line with the Hearing Aid Council
Code of Practice (1999). In the vast majority of cases there is no cure and if
medical and surgical treatment have been ruled out the hearing aid audiol-
ogist may try fitting maskers or hearing aids for relief from the tinnitus.
13.1.2 Hearing problems and tinnitus
Tinnitus is frequently linked with hearing disorders and investigations
may show a degree of similarity between the frequency of the tinnitus and
that of the hearing loss. Where tinnitus accompanies a conductive loss it is
most likely to be low frequency in nature (this also tends to be true of
Ménière’s disorder). The tinnitus is often described as rumbling,

260
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
humming or like the noise of machinery. Common causes include wax,
fluid and otosclerosis. With the possible exception of the latter, medical
treatment tends to be very effective for tinnitus that is linked with a
conductive hearing problem.
The origin of tinnitus may be considered as:
• conductive – linked with, for example, impacted wax, middle ear
effusion, stapes fixation, cholesteatoma;
• sensorineural – due to, for example, noise exposure, ototoxic drugs.
Almost all pathologies with hearing loss can have associated tinnitus;
• non-auditory – arising from normal or abnormal bodily function, for
example, vascular causes, temporo-mandibular joint causes.
Most tinnitus is linked to a physical disorder in the hearing system and it
may be started by a ‘trigger’ such as stress, noise, drugs, syringing. In some
cases, the tinnitus may also be accompanied by headaches and pain in the
neck, ear or jaw, which may be due to muscle tension.
13.1.3 A theory of tinnitus
The outer, middle and inner ears concentrate sound energy to the hair
cells in the cochlea. The organ of Corti is not a purely passive structure but
acts as a natural biomechanical hearing aid to focus sound energy
efficiently on to the sensory (inner) hair cells. The inner hair cells appear
to be passive receptors that fire the auditory nerve. The outer hair cells
sharpen up the response of the basilar membrane, possibly utilizing:
• contractile muscle proteins (actin and myosin, produced in the outer
hair cells); 
• the cuticular plate that surrounds the outer hair cells;
• the supporting cells of Deiters.
Selective stiffening of the basilar membrane actively sharpens the
response, particularly to low intensity sounds. With very low sound levels,
the outer hair cells vibrate to enhance the movement of the basilar
membrane and increase stimulation of the inner hair cells. Damage to the
outer hair cells results in irregularities in the amplification effect.
Inappropriate trains of nerve impulses result and the brain interprets
these as sound. It may also be that if the organ of Corti is damaged in one
area there is overactivity of the control mechanism, which may stimulate
relatively healthy areas in close proximity. This could give rise to tinnitus,
which would be close in frequency to the area of greatest hearing loss.

Assessment and management of special problems 
261
13.1.4 Aids for the relief of tinnitus
There are a number of possible methods of treatment for tinnitus,
including the use of drugs, surgery and electrical stimulation, or utilizing
cochlear implants for the profoundly deaf. The most common treatment,
however, involves the use of masking instruments. These can be fitted by a
hearing aid audiologist once medical and surgical intervention have been
ruled out. Masking instruments do not ‘cure’ tinnitus and counselling,
methods of relaxation and the support of self-help groups can be impor-
tant if success is to be achieved.
A tinnitus masker is a device, very similar to a hearing aid in appearance,
which presents another, external, sound to the client. This other sound
may fully or partially mask the tinnitus and some inhibition of the tinnitus
may occur. Inhibition is the absence or reduction of the tinnitus after the
masker is removed and may last for only a few seconds or for much longer
periods. Hearing aids can be used in combination with masking devices or
on their own. Hearing aids alone may provide some masking through the
amplification of background noise but they do not appear to achieve
residual inhibition. We do not know enough about tinnitus to do more
than speculate about why maskers can be effective. It may be that they
provide auditory masking because of phase cancellation of the tinnitus
sound, or perhaps the masking noise restores ‘balance’ to the damaged
part of the basilar membrane, reducing over-activity in adjacent areas.
Whatever the reason, masking can in many cases be effective, although
much rehabilitative counselling is usually needed. A correctly fitted masker,
with or without a hearing aid as necessary, is the most effective method
currently available for controlling sensorineural tinnitus.
13.1.5 Tinnitus assessment
There are many ways of assessing tinnitus varying from recording the client’s
subjective account to lengthy simulations, perhaps involving use of a music
synthesizer to match the frequency content. The methods used by hearing
aid audiologists will reflect their equipment, personal interest and knowl-
edge, and the time they have available. A reasonable match of the pitch and
loudness of the client’s tinnitus is important both for fitting and counselling.
An audiometer can be used quite successfully for tinnitus matching, although
some tinnitus sufferers do find the matching test very difficult to perform. 
The different stages involved in assessment (Figure 13.1) are as follows:
(a) Pure tone audiometry
A not-masked pure tone audiogram should be obtained prior to tinnitus
matching. Uncomfortable loudness levels (ULLs) are important but should

262
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Figure 13.1. A suggested format for a tinnitus assessment form.

Assessment and management of special problems 
263
not be attempted at this stage because loud sounds may exacerbate
tinnitus.
(b) Pitch matching
A number of methods are available for pitch matching but perhaps the
most useful for the hearing aid audiologist’s purposes is the adaptive
(bracketing) method. The client is asked to indicate whether his or her
tinnitus is higher or lower in pitch than the test tone presented through
the audiometer. A suitable explanation in layman’s terms should be given,
with examples or ‘practice’ as necessary.
Ideally the test tone should be presented in the same ear as that in
which the tinnitus occurs but in some cases it is necessary to test contralat-
erally. The tone should be introduced at one extreme of the available
frequency range and at a level estimated to be comfortable. The selection
of 8 kHz or 125 Hz is made on the basis of the client’s description of his or
her tinnitus. The tone should be presented for about 2 seconds and
repeated as necessary allowing time between presentations for the client
to make the necessary comparison.
A practical example may help to clarify this. Suppose the client has
described his or her tinnitus as a high-pitched noise, but when an 8 kHz
tone is presented he or she describes the tinnitus as ‘lower’. The next step
is to present the lowest available frequency, usually 125 Hz. This time, the
client describes their tinnitus as ‘higher’. A 6 kHz frequency tone is
presented next and the extremes are gradually eliminated until the
frequency or frequency range nearest to the tinnitus has been located.
Some clients confuse loudness with pitch. If this occurs, it may be
necessary to perform some loudness matching at each frequency to be
tested. Normally loudness matching is performed only at the frequency
nearest that of the tinnitus.
(c) Loudness matching
A possible method for loudness matching is as follows. At the frequency
matched as the nearest to the pitch of the tinnitus, the tone is presented
initially at threshold (based on the audiogram). The tone should be held
for 2 seconds and increased in 5 dB steps until the client judges it to be of
equal loudness to the tinnitus.
It is important to realize that severe tinnitus may appear very quiet
when matched to external sounds. Levels as low in intensity as 10 dB
above threshold can be perceived as being very severe, perhaps because of
its inescapability or possibly due in part to the effects of recruitment.

264
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
(d) Masking evaluation
An indication of the likely benefit of masking may be obtained using wide-
band masking noise from the audiometer; alternatively narrow band
masking or pure tones may be used. The aim is to find the minimal level of
masking that is effective. The masking noise is introduced at or below
threshold and increased in 5 dB steps until the client indicates that he or
she can no longer hear the tinnitus. At each step, the noise should be held
for 5 seconds. This is followed by a rest period of a further 5 seconds so
that the client can again hear the tinnitus. When the minimal masking level
(MML) has been found, it is maintained for up to 3 min. If, during this
time, the tinnitus becomes audible again, the masking noise may be raised
in 5 dB steps until it becomes effective once more.
The difference between the initial level and the level required after
3 min will indicate the masking decay. Where masking decays, partial
masking should be used. ‘Tinnitus retraining therapy’ (based on the work
of Jastreboff) always uses partial masking, with the aim that the client will
eventually habituate to their tinnitus noise and not worry about it or even
notice it any more. In all cases, masking should be used at low intensity
levels (not much above the client’s threshold).
(e) Uncomfortable loudness level (ULL)
Uncomfortable loudness levels must be obtained after all tinnitus investi-
gations are completed because loud sounds may heighten the tinnitus. If
loud sounds do have this effect, the output of a hearing aid may be
adjusted to minimize the problem, utilizing peak clipping or automatic
gain control. Testing for the ULLs is carried out according to the British
Society of Audiology (1987) recommended method.
13.1.6 The rehabilitation programme
The ideal tinnitus programme, which can be offered by a hearing aid
audiologist after the client has obtained medical advice (Figure 13.2) will
include:
• consultation, assessment and impressions;
• fitting;
• follow-up, for example, after one month or sooner;
• further appointments as necessary for rehabilitation;
• further audiometry, especially if there is a progressive element to the
hearing loss.

Assessment and management of special problems 
265
Figure 13.2. A possible route for tinnitus sufferers.
Hearing aid
dispenser
Refer to
ENT
consultant
Counselling: explanations,
reassurance, treatment
available, relaxation…etc
Need for
hearing aid
Long-term
follow-up

266
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
(a) Consultation, assessment and impressions
Tinnitus frequently causes stress, anxiety, and poor concentration. Clients
may feel their tinnitus impairs their ability to hear clearly. Often this is due
to an associated hearing loss, rather than the tinnitus itself. Careful
history-taking and assessment are important. The case history may include
such questions as:
• How long have you had tinnitus?
• What does it sound like? (For example, ringing/ whistling/ whining/
humming/ buzzing/ roaring/ rushing/ ticking/ clicking?)
• Is it pulsating/continuous/occasional?
• Is it in one or both ears or centrally in the head?
• How severe is it and how does this affect you? (For example, does it
stop you from sleeping/prevent you from concentrating/cause stress?)
• When is it most troublesome?
• What, if anything, makes the tinnitus worse? (For example, silence/loud
noise/stress/certain foods?)
• Have you received any medical advice or help with regard to your
tinnitus?
• Have you been exposed to any loud noise or taken any relevant medica-
tion? (For example, any ototoxic drugs, see section 3.4.2(d).)
The assessment will provide an indication of the possible benefit of
masking but, as with hearing aids, benefit may be greatest after a period of
time has allowed the client to adjust to its use. The ideal is always to facili-
tate a trial period with hearing aids or maskers. Where tinnitus is bilateral,
two instruments will often be required. Even where the tinnitus is
monaural, there are many cases in which bilateral masking is still required.
Impressions should be taken for both ears and the ear moulds obtained
should be of the skeleton open ear type or have a vent that is as large as
possible. Solid moulds tend to increase the effect of the tinnitus by occlu-
sion. The use of non-wearable maskers (for example, clocks, tape record-
ings, under-pillow maskers) should also be explored.
(b) Fitting
If a combination hearing aid and masker is used, it is customary to fit the
instrument as a hearing aid first. Masking is switched on at the lowest
volume and raised until it is at threshold. It is then increased in small
increments until the required level (low intensity) is reached. The lowest
effective intensity should always be used. A masker that is adjustable by the

Assessment and management of special problems 
267
audiologist permits trial with low, mid and high frequency noise to estab-
lish which is most effective. A frequency similar to the tinnitus may be
most effective in inhibiting the tinnitus but in many cases the most effec-
tive masking noise is lower in frequency than the tinnitus. Selection of the
noise to use generally involves an element of trial and error. Client prefer-
ence is also very important. The client must like ‘his/her’ masking noise.
The client needs to be instructed in the techniques of use, most of
which are very similar to instructions for use of a hearing aid. The use of a
masker, as of a hearing aid, is built up gradually. The client should be
advised that, while a hearing aid may be used continuously, masking
should be used only as much as required. A schedule for its use can be
discussed with the client, for instance a period of masking at night is often
helpful in relaxing the client ready for sleep. Other advice should include
a recommendation to avoid both silence and loud sounds and to reduce
intake of caffeine, alcohol and aspirin, since these can worsen tinnitus.
Total abstinence, at least during the period of adjustment to masking, is
the ideal.
(c) Follow-up
Hearing aid audiologists are well acquainted with the need for follow-up
to establish the effective use of hearing aids. Counselling and support,
often over a prolonged period, are even more crucial to the tinnitus client.
Thorough rehabilitation should be normal practice for new users of both
hearing aids and masking instruments.
Relaxation training therapy may be particularly helpful for tinnitus
sufferers. Relaxation does not act directly on the tinnitus and can be most
successful if relaxation techniques are used generally by the client, not
only when the tinnitus is bad. Relaxation tapes and classes are widely avail-
able. If the tinnitus seems intrusive during the quiet of relaxation sessions,
a background of quiet music will usually help to overcome this problem. 
Masking of tinnitus has not been shown to cause any deterioration in
hearing (Hazell, 1985), but high levels should not be used.
13.1.7 SUMMARY
Tinnitus can be a troublesome condition from which some relief may be
achieved through the use of masking instruments. Assessment and fitting
are important aspects of the tinnitus programme but support and
counselling are also very necessary to the vast majority of clients. The
success of masking instrument use varies widely and success depends
heavily on the techniques used by the hearing aid audiologist.

268
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
FURTHER READING FOR SECTION 13.1
Coles R, Davis A and Smith P (1990) Tinnitus: its epidemiology and management. In
Jensen, JH (ed.) Presbyacusis and Other Age-related Aspects. 14th Danavox
Symposium, Copenhagen.
Feldmann H (ed.) (1987) Proceedings of III International Tinnitus Seminar. Karlsruhe,
Munster, Germany: Harsch Verlag, pp. 121–8.
Hazell J (1987) Tinnitus. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Moore BCJ (1998). Cochlear Hearing Loss. London: Whurr.
Shulman A (1997) Tinnitus: Diagnosis and Treatment. London: Singular.
13.2 IMPEDANCE AUDIOMETRY
13.2.1 Introduction
The role of the conductive pathway is to convey sound energy efficiently
to the cochlea. If the sound wave finds it easy to set the eardrum into vibra-
tion, much energy is passed on and only a little is reflected. However, if it
is difficult to set the eardrum into vibration, much energy is reflected. The
difficulty or hindrance to the flow of energy is called impedance. The
impedance at the eardrum tells us how well the middle ear is functioning.
The aim of impedance measurements is to assess the efficiency of the
middle ear mechanism at passing on sound energy.
13.2.2 The middle ear and acoustic impedance
When a sound wave reaches the eardrum some of the energy sets the
drum vibrating and some is reflected. The eardrum movements are carried
by the ossicles in the middle ear to the cochlea. The function of the middle
ear is to act as a transformer between the low pressure required to
transmit sound through air and the relatively high pressure needed to
transmit sound through the perilymph in the cochlea. In essence, the
middle ear increases the pressure reaching the cochlea. This is achieved
mainly by concentrating the sound energy arriving at the eardrum on to
the much smaller stapes footplate. This is like the effect of a stiletto heel
(Figure 13.3), which concentrates the weight of the body on to a small
area such that it may make a mark on the floor whereas a larger heel area
does not have the same effect. In the middle ear, there is a small additional
effect from the lever action of the ossicles and a slight improvement,
especially in the higher frequencies, due to the conical shape of the
eardrum.
Normally this system is very efficient and only a little sound is reflected
by the eardrum. The major part of the sound energy is transformed into

Assessment and management of special problems 
269
powerful vibrations to stimulate the cochlea. However, if the middle ear
system is altered, for example as a result of disease, the proportion of
sound transmitted through it may alter. The efficiency of the system is
reduced and more energy is lost either by reflection from the eardrum or
friction in the middle ear. Consequently less sound reaches the cochlea
and the patient experiences a ‘conductive’ hearing loss.
The acoustic impedance of the middle ear is the term used to describe
the resistance presented by the middle ear to the passage of sound. This
varies according to the frequency of the sound passing through and at
high frequencies the impedance is mainly due to the mass of the three
bones. However, at low frequencies the acoustic impedance is mainly due
to the stiffness of the eardrum and the ossicular chain. In most conductive
conditions, the middle ear system becomes less mobile and the stiffness of
the eardrum is increased. A greater than normal proportion of the acoustic
energy is reflected by the stiffened eardrum and a smaller than usual
proportion is passed on to the cochlea.
Investigations into the proportion of sound reflected by the eardrum
can give information about the acoustic impedance of the ear.
13.2.3 The concept of impedance
Impedance in audiometry is simply the difficulty or hindrance to the flow
of acoustic energy along the conductive pathway. Compliance or admit-
tance is conversely the mobility or acceptance of the system.
Impedance is not difficult to conceptualize. When you move a cricket
bat through air it moves easily, but you would have to apply far more force
to make the same stroke in a swimming pool. This is because air is a low
impedance medium and water is a high impedance medium.
Figure 13.3. The transformer action of the middle ear is similar in concept to the effect
of a stiletto heel.

270
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
A similar principle applies in the ear where acoustic energy has to move
from air to the liquid-filled inner ear. Only if the impedance of the two
mediums is matched will energy pass readily from one medium to the
other. Impedance can be viewed as being influenced by the resistance of
the system and the way it reacts (that is, its reactance).
Resistance removes energy from the system and converts it to another
form, as in friction between the joints of the ossicles. This is a very small
component of the impedance of the middle ear.
Reactance is made up of two elements, stiffness and inertia. The inertia
of the system relates mainly to the mass of the ossicles and is of conse-
quence for higher frequency sounds above about 1.5 kHz.
Although the proportion of energy accepted or rejected by the middle
ear is the result of a complex interaction of the three elements that make it
up, only stiffness is of clinical importance.
Impedance = resistance + reactance 
Disorders of the conductive hearing mechanism generally cause changes
in stiffness. Stiffness, like inertia, is frequency-dependent. Stiffness
dominates in the low frequency region.
13.2.4 Principles and equipment
The electro-acoustic impedance bridge or admittance meter (also
commonly called a tympanometer) is an instrument that provides informa-
tion on the functioning of the middle ear. Impedance is resistance to the
flow of energy, while admittance is the efficiency of the system to absorb
such energy. The term ‘immitance’ is sometimes used to mean the clinical
application of impedance or admittance but it is not a preferred term.
Two tests widely used in audiometry are:
• tympanometry; 
• acoustic reflex measurement.
Each is an objective measure requiring little if any co-operation from the
subject; both are quick, easy and non-invasive and are thus applicable to
every age group, from babies to the oldest of senior citizens, and every
degree of hearing loss.
13.2.5 Tympanometry
For the purposes of tympanometry, a small probe made up of three tubes
(Figure 13.4) is sealed in the ear canal using a small plastic cuff or tip. The

Assessment and management of special problems 
271
first tube carries a continuous low frequency probe tone, which is passed
into the ear canal by the miniature receiver. The second tube monitors the
sound level and the third tube allows the pressure in the outer ear to be
altered and measured.
Tympanometry is the measurement of eardrum compliance as the air
pressure is altered in the external ear canal. The eardrum is most
compliant, that is, it moves most freely, when the air pressure in the
middle ear is the same as that in the ear canal. This would normally be at
atmospheric pressure but, for the purposes of tympanometry, the ear
canal is blocked and the air pressure in the canal is artificially varied. When
the pressure equalizes with that of the middle ear and the eardrum moves
most freely, sound energy passes readily through the eardrum with little
reflected. The level of reflected sound in the ear canal is recorded and will
be at its lowest at the point of maximum compliance.
Patients are usually told that the tympanogram is a record of how the
eardrum moves, although it is really a graph showing how the SPL in the
outer ear changes as the air pressure alters. From this we can draw conclu-
sions about the mobility of the middle ear system. The compliance or
mobility of the ear is usually expressed in cubic centimetres (cc) of equiva-
lent volume.
Sound pressure level is a function of a closed cavity volume. With a
known probe tone, which in tympanometry is usually a 226 Hz tone at
65 dBSPL, the SPL will decrease as the cavity size increases. The compli-
ance of the middle ear is therefore expressed as an equivalent cavity
volume. The intensity of the probe tone is such that it will not produce a
reflex contraction of the stapedius muscles.
The procedure followed in tympanometry can be summarized in a
series of steps:
Figure 13.4. An electro-acoustic impedance meter.

272
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
1. The probe in the cuff is inserted into the ear canal so that an airtight
seal is achieved.
2. The middle ear canal pressure is altered between +200 and –400
decapascals (daPa) or millimetres of water (mmH2O). (1 daPa ~
1 mmH2O).
3. Compliance of the eardrum is measured as the relative change in
sound pressure level in the ear canal as the air pressure is increased
and decreased.
4. When the sound waves strike the eardrum, some of the energy will be
reflected. If the eardrum is stiff, more of the energy will be reflected
causing a greater SPL in the cavity.
5. Tympanometry starts with an increase in air pressure in the canal
(+200 daPa), which pushes the eardrum so that it cannot move freely.
Much sound is therefore reflected and a high SPL recorded.
6. The pressure is reduced and, as the eardrum begins to move more
freely, little sound is reflected and a low SPL is recorded.
7. The point of maximum compliance occurs when the lowest SPL is
recorded in the ear canal.
8. At the point of maximum compliance, middle ear pressure will be
equal to the pressure in the ear canal.
9. Compliance is measured in cc of equivalent canal volume. A much larger
than normal static canal volume can identify a perforated eardrum.
13.2.6 Characteristics of the tympanogram
Two characteristics of the tympanogram are of interest: its shape and the
air pressure at maximum compliance.
The shape, rather than any absolute value, of the tympanogram is most
important because wide variations occur within the various pathologies
and only the overall pattern is useful.
Common shapes related to certain ear conditions are reasonably easy
to recognize by comparison with the shape of an average normal
tympanogram. For example, if a client has fluid in the middle ear the
eardrum will not move freely at any point and the resultant shape is a flat
graph indicating high impedance. Where low pressure without fluid is
present in the middle ear, the normal curve is displaced and such a condi-
tion may be responsible for slight ‘unexplained’ conductive hearing loss. If
the ear is perforated or a grommet is in place it will be impossible to
maintain pressure unless the Eustachian tube is blocked; in this case the
cavity volume will be abnormally large and the graph will be very flat.
Some common shapes are shown in Figure 13.5.

Assessment and management of special problems 
273
13.2.7 The acoustic reflex
The middle ear has two muscles. The stapedius muscle is approximately
6 mm long and is located in a vertical hole in the bulge in the posterior
wall of the middle ear, known as the pyramidal fossa. It is attached to the
neck of the stapes by a tendon that is about 2 mm long. On contraction it
pulls the stapes outwards and backwards, which stiffens the ossicular
chain increasing the acoustic impedance. The nerve controlling the
stapedius muscle is the seventh cranial (facial) nerve. The tensor tympani
muscle is about 20 mm long and lies in a bony canal alongside the
Eustachian tube. It passes around a bony ledge before being attached to
the upper part of the handle of the malleus by a 6 mm tendon. It is
controlled by the fifth cranial (trigeminal) nerve, which is mainly respon-
sible for reporting sensation over the face. When the muscle contracts, it
tends to pull the malleus forward and inward to stiffen the ossicular chain.
The acoustic reflex is mainly the result of the stapedius muscle’s contrac-
tion and it is therefore often referred to as the stapedial reflex. Very loud
sounds may cause a startle response that will involve the tensor tympani.
When the muscles contract, low frequencies are attenuated by up to
20 dB. The function of the reflex is not certain but it is probable that its
Figure 13.5. Typical tympanogram configurations likely to be seen in a clinical popula-
tion. Values of compliance from 0.3 cc to 1.3 cc obtained at a pressure between
+30 daPa and –80 daPa are considered to be within the normal range.

274
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
main purpose is to filter out the most intense sounds in one’s own speech.
It also has a protective function but this is probably a by-product.
A loud sound, usually 70 dB to 90 dB above threshold, in either ear will
cause a reflex contraction of both left and right stapedius muscles. This
causes a slight increase in acoustic impedance. The acoustic reflex test is a
measure of the threshold at which the stapedial reflex occurs. The acoustic
reflex threshold for pure tones is higher than the reflex threshold for
white noise. Acoustic reflexes can be measured ipsilaterally (in the same
ear) or contralaterally (in the opposite ear) because a signal applied to one
ear causes a reflex contraction in both ears. The threshold of the tone used
to elicit the reflex is always recorded for the ear to which the tone is
presented. This is known as the stimulated ear.
In order for an acoustic reflex to be obtained, the patient must:
• perceive a ‘loud’ sound;
• have a normal middle ear on the measuring probe side (the reflex
response produces a small increase in impedance; if the eardrum
already has a high impedance, due to glue ear for example, the reflex
response will not be noticed);
• have an intact reflex arc (Figure 13.6).
A reflex becomes less likely if there is a conductive hearing loss. A conduc-
tive loss of 25 dB in the stimulated ear will usually abolish the reflex. A
conductive loss of only 10 dB in the probe ear may prevent the reflex from
being recorded because the eardrum is already stiffened.
The acoustic reflex indicates the loudness of the signal. A conductive
loss of 25 dB or more is likely to prevent the patient from perceiving the
Figure 13.6. The stapedial reflex arc.
Brainstem

Assessment and management of special problems 
275
signal as sufficiently loud to elicit the acoustic reflex. However, in the case
of cochlear pathology, the patient often hears the sound as if it was much
louder, due to recruitment. The acoustic reflex threshold then occurs at
less than the normal 70 dB to 90 dB above the threshold of hearing. The
gap between the threshold of hearing and the reflex threshold is known as
the span. Where there is a cochlear disorder, an acoustic reflex may occur
with a span of less than 60 dB.
A low acoustic reflex threshold is a simple objective test to identify a
cochlear disorder. With a cochlear hearing loss of 60 dB or less there is a
90% chance of observing an acoustic reflex. Naturally, as the hearing loss
increases, the chance of observing a reflex decreases. However, when such
a reflex does occur it indicates severe recruitment.
Reflex thresholds have little value on their own but aid diagnosis in
conjunction with other results. A span between the threshold of hearing
and the reflex threshold of 60 dB or less indicates a cochlear loss whereas
a difference of greater than 15 dB between the reflex threshold of each ear
may suggest a problem beyond the cochlea, that is a retrocochlear
disorder.
If hearing thresholds have not been obtained, perhaps due to a severe
loss in a young child, or a non-organic problem, reflex thresholds can be
used to confirm that hearing is present at that level. Reflexes may also be
used to suggest an appropriate uncomfortable loudness level where one
cannot otherwise be obtained, as discomfort usually occurs approximately
10 dB above the acoustic reflex.
13.2.8 Summary
The role of the conductive pathway is to convey sound energy efficiently
to the cochlea. The tympanic membrane and ossicular chain present an
impedance to incoming sound waves. At low frequencies, the impedance
is governed principally by the stiffness of the system. Most causes of
conductive hearing loss affect the stiffness of the middle ear. If the stiffness
can be measured it can provide valuable information about conditions of
the middle ear. The function of tympanometry is to measure how the
impedance alters with variation in air pressure in the ear canal. The shape
of the compliance curve and the level of the middle ear pressure can be of
great assistance in pin-pointing the nature of a middle ear disorder.
An acoustic reflex is normally obtained at 70 dB to 90 dB above hearing
threshold level. A sound stimulus applied to one ear will cause a bilateral
reflex. A conductive loss in either ear reduces the likelihood of obtaining a
reflex. Where there is a sensorineural hearing loss of cochlear origin, an
acoustic reflex is likely to be present at sensation levels of 60 dB or less.
This is because the acoustic threshold indicates the subjective loudness of

276
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
a sound, not the objective intensity. Recruitment is present with most, if
not all, cochlear disorders and a reduced reflex threshold is therefore
likely to be obtained.
FURTHER READING FOR SECTION 13.2
Arlinger S (1989) Manual of Practical Audiometry. Volume 1. London: Whurr.
British Society of Audiology, (1992) Recommended procedure for tympanometry.
British Journal of Audiology 26(25): 5–7.
Jerger J (1980) Clinical Impedance Audiometry. 2 edn. Stuttgart: George Thieme.
13.3 SPECIALIZED AUDIOMETRIC TESTS
13.3.1 Introduction
Conductive hearing loss can be separated from sensorineural loss
relatively easily using pure tone audiometry but to differentiate the
various types of sensorineural hearing loss is more difficult.
A number of specialized audiometric tests are used to distinguish
sensory (or cochlear) from neural (or retrocochlear) hearing disorders.
There is also a test to find dead regions in the cochlea. These tests can
provide powerful clues to the site and probable cause of sensorineural
hearing loss.
Individual test results are not always reliable and the results of a
number of different audiometric tests are normally used in conjunction
with information revealed from the case history and physical examination.
Information that may help to distinguish cochlear disorders from those
that occur beyond the cochlea (retrocochlear) may be obtained from
acoustic reflex measurement, speech audiometry, Békésy audiometry
(section 13.5.2) and evoked response audiometry. There are also a
number of specialized audiometric tests that are used routinely in many
clinics to aid diagnosis. These include the Short Increment Sensitivity
Index (SISI) test, the Alternate Binaural Loudness Balance (ABLB) test and
tests of auditory adaptation or tone decay.
13.3.2 Tests of cochlear function
(a) The Alternate Binaural Loudness Balance (ABLB) test
In the normal ear, a linear relationship exists between an increase in inten-
sity and the related increase in perceived loudness. However, when
damage has occurred in the hair cells of the cochlea, a loss of hearing

Assessment and management of special problems 
277
sensitivity may be accompanied by an abnormality known as recruitment,
in which the subjective sensation of loudness builds up at a more rapid
rate than normal. For patients with recruitment, a small increase in inten-
sity will produce an abnormally large increase in the subjective sensation
of loudness.
This abnormal growth in loudness is subjective and therefore cannot
be directly measured. In cases of unilateral loss, the normal ear can be
used as a reference for comparison. The Alternate Binaural Loudness
Balance (ABLB) test compares loudness growth in the abnormal ear with
loudness growth in the normal ear. There is no single recognized proce-
dure and the following is an outline of one test method that may be
used.
A tone 20 dB above the air conduction threshold, is introduced in the
good ear and held for one second. A tone of the same frequency and
estimated to be of equal loudness is introduced to the poorer ear and also
held for one second. The tone is presented to each ear alternately and the
intensity in the poorer ear is raised or lowered until the patient indicates
that the tones in each ear are equally loud. This balancing continues at
20 dB intervals in the good ear until full recruitment is reached or the test
is discontinued, either because discomfort is experienced or because the
maximum output of the audiometer has been reached.
The test is performed at one or more frequencies, usually 1 kHz or
2 kHz and 4 kHz. The results may be plotted on a laddergram, in which
case points are joined to illustrate sounds of equal loudness at each
level tested. Laddergrams are helpful in understanding the principle of
the ABLB test but graphs are most generally used to plot results in
clinical practice. If, as in Figure 13.7, the left ear shows a hearing loss of
40 dBHL, a 40 dBHL tone should theoretically sound the same as a
0 dBHL tone in the normal ear. Taking these thresholds as a base line,
any increase in intensity added identically to both left and right ears
results in tones that are heard as equally loud in both ears. This is
normal loudness growth. In cases of recruitment an increase in inten-
sity, applied identically to both ears, may appear as a much louder
increase in the impaired ear. Full recruitment is a symptom of cochlear
damage. It is possible for loudness to increase so rapidly that, beyond a
certain intensity, a tone may appear louder to the poorer ear than it
does to the better ear. This is known as hyper-recruitment. Where the
damage to the ear is retrocochlear almost any pattern of loudness
growth may occur, including de-recruitment. De-recruitment is where
loudness grows more slowly than normal and is most often found with
eighth nerve damage. Some possible patterns of loudness growth are
shown in Figure 13.8.

278
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
A two-channel audiometer is required for the ABLB test, which may be
carried out manually or automatically. The procedure is most useful if the
loss is unilateral. When the loss is bilateral but each ear has normal
hearing at some frequency, a monaural loudness balancing test can be
attempted. This compares the loudness of a low frequency tone with the
loudness of a higher frequency tone in the same ear. The intensity is raised
Figure 13.7. Results of an ABLB test plotted both (a) as a laddergram and (b) as a graph.
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL Poorer ear
Better ear
dBHL

Assessment and management of special problems 
279
in 10 dB steps using a method similar to that in the ABLB test. However,
judgement of equal loudness between different frequencies is much more
difficult for the patient.
Figure 13.8. Some possible outcomes of the ABLB test.

280
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
(b) The Short Increment Sensitivity Index (SISI)
Small changes in intensity cannot normally be detected at near threshold
levels. A change in intensity of several decibels is required before the
listener can detect any change in loudness. As the tone becomes louder,
small changes are much easier to detect. This is true for all listeners. The
smallest change that can be detected is termed the difference limen for
intensity. Very small changes in intensity at near threshold levels can only
be detected in cochlear disorders. Both loudness recruitment and the
ability to hear very small changes in intensity may be observed in cases of
cochlear damage.
The Short Increment Sensitivity Index (SISI) is designed to test the
patient’s ability to detect 1 dB changes in intensity superimposed on a
tone presented 20 dB above threshold. The SISI test indicates the
presence of cochlear damage but is not a direct indication of the presence
of recruitment.
A continuous tone is introduced at 20 dB above threshold. Every
5 seconds the tone rises by 1 dB and this rise is held for one-fifth of a
second (Figure 13.9). The patient signals whenever he or she hears a rise
in the tone. After 20 rises in the tone have been presented the patient’s
score is multiplied by five to obtain a percentage. Patients with normal
hearing, middle ear or retrocochlear disorders obtain very low scores,
whereas patients with cochlear disorders usually score very highly.
Typically, normal hearing, middle ear or retrocochlear disorders score
between 0% and 30%, whilst cochlear disorders score between 70% and
100%. The higher the SISI score, the more likely it is that the pathology is
cochlear. Frequencies tested are usually 1 kHz and 4 kHz, because lower
frequencies are less likely to show positive results.
Figure 13.9. The SIS1 test. Every 5 seconds the tone presented jumps by 1 dB. This is
repeated 20 times.
(c) Tests of auditory adaptation
It is a normal phenomenon of hearing that sounds appear loudest when
they are first heard. This is also known as the ‘on-effect’. A signal held for

Assessment and management of special problems 
281
some time will appear to fade or decay. Extremely rapid tone decay may
indicate a retrocochlear disorder. Retrocochlear hearing loss can be due to
damage anywhere from the eighth nerve to the brain. Retrocochlear disor-
ders are relatively rare but they may be very serious in nature.
Several procedures exist for quantifying tone decay. In 1957, Carhart
reported a tone decay technique that is still in use today. However,
Carhart’s tone decay test is time consuming and a modified version of it,
proposed by Rosenberg (1969), is more widely used in clinical practice.
The Rosenberg modified procedure is carried out as follows.
A tone is introduced at 5 dB above threshold and the patient is asked to
signal whenever the tone disappears. Every time the tone fades and
becomes inaudible, the intensity is raised by 5 dB. The test continues for 1
min. At the end of this time, the degree of tone decay is expressed as the
number of decibels by which the tone has been raised. Decay is consid-
ered significant if the tone has had to be raised by 20 dB or more. Extreme
tone decay of over 30 dB is often found in eighth nerve pathology,
although it can also be present with some cochlear disorders. It is usual to
test at two or more frequencies, as decay is sometimes more marked at
one frequency than another. The frequencies most often used are 2 kHz
and 500 Hz, or 1 kHz and 4 kHz.
Retrocochlear disorders can be life threatening and as tone decay can
be used to provide a screening test for retrocochlear pathology it is useful
to include it in a battery of clinical tests.
(d) Test for dead regions of the cochlea
Areas in the cochlea where there are no surviving inner hair cells are
known as ‘dead regions’ and basilar membrane activity in this region does
not lead to any firing of the nerve fibres. Dead regions may be anticipated
when the threshold is over 80 dBHL and there is a lower threshold at the
adjacent half-octave frequency, especially where there is an abrupt drop
(30 dB or more). Dead regions may also occur with moderate to severe
hearing loss but this may not be apparent from the audiogram because a
tone that falls in a dead region may be detected in adjacent regions of the
basilar membrane due to the spread of basilar membrane vibration (see
section 2.2.2). In effect, the client is hearing the tone but as a different
frequency and there is no way of knowing this from the audiogram.
However, it is very important to know as amplification of the frequencies
within a dead region is not beneficial. The frequencies within the dead
region should ideally be filtered out.
The test for dead regions (Moore, 2000; Moore et al., 2000) uses
‘threshold equalizing noise’ (TEN), which is a spectrally shaped noise that
gives equal masked thresholds (for normally hearing people) over the

282
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
frequency range. Pure tone thresholds are obtained for each ear using
recorded test signals. Masked thresholds in threshold equalizing noise, at
levels that produce significant masking, are then obtained for the same
frequencies. Where inner hair cells exist, the pure-tone threshold in
threshold equalizing noise remains much the same as for normally hearing
listeners. Where there are dead regions, the pure-tone threshold in
threshold equalizing noise will be much higher than normal because the
signal is being detected only by inner hair cells in adjacent frequency areas. 
Dead regions are relatively common with hearing loss caused by:
• sudden noise exposure, such as shooting;
• Ménière’s disorder;
• genetic disorder, especially low frequency moderate losses and those
with a ‘cookie bite’ configuration.
13.3.3 Summary
Pure tone thresholds provide a great deal of information about hearing
loss, including the separation of conductive from sensorineural disorders.
Specialized tests are used to provide further information on the location
and extent of the damage within the auditory system. A number of special-
ized audiometric tests exist.
Alternate Binaural Loudness Balance (ABLB) tests for recruitment in
cases of unilateral hearing loss, by comparing the growth of loudness in
the impaired ear with that in the normal ear. The Short Increment
Sensitivity Index (SISI) determines the patient’s ability to detect very small
changes in intensity at near threshold levels. Tests of tone decay consider
the degree to which audibility is lost when the ear is continuously stimu-
lated with a pure tone at near threshold levels. These tests help in the
differentiation between cochlear and retrocochlear hearing losses.
Moore’s test of dead regions indicates frequency areas where there is no
inner hair cell activity.
The tests described are examples of those that may be used. They are
not infallible diagnostic indicators and are not intended to be used on
their own. Clinical diagnosis consists of applying a number or ‘battery’ of
tests and the results of specialized diagnostic tests are interpreted in the
light of information provided during pure tone threshold tests and the
case history.
FURTHER READING FOR SECTION 13.3
Arlinger S (1989) Manual of Practical Audiometry. Volume 1. London: Whurr.
Jacobsen JT, Northem JL (1991) Diagnostic Audiology. Austen: Pro-ed.

Assessment and management of special problems 
283
Katz J (1994) Handbook of Clinical Audiology. 4 edn. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
Martin F (1994) An Introduction to Audiology. 5 edn. Englewood Cliffs, London:
Prentice-Hall.
Moore BCJ (1998) Cochlear Hearing Loss. London: Whurr.
13.4 NON-ORGANIC HEARING LOSS
13.4.1 Introduction
Non-organic hearing loss refers to a condition in which there is no
apparent organic (bodily) disorder to explain the hearing problem. Non-
organic hearing loss is also known as functional loss or pseudo-hypacusis.
These are general terms that can be used to describe an apparent hearing
loss which may be either psychogenic (genuine) or malingering (false).
13.4.2 Psychogenic hearing loss
Psychogenic hearing loss is genuine but of psychological origin. It is
usually due to hysteria and at one time was termed ‘hysterical deafness’.
This kind of hearing loss is usually bilateral and profound; it persists even
in sleep and the special tests for non-organic hearing loss are unlikely to
provide much useful information.
13.4.3 Malingering
Malingering is the deliberate faking of a hearing loss for personal gain,
most commonly for compensation purposes. Many malingerers do have a
genuine hearing loss but exaggerate the loss to increase their claim.
Routine audiometry is of little value in obtaining correct thresholds but
there are signs that should alert the audiologist to the possibility of non-
organic loss. The patient’s behaviour may raise suspicions, for instance if
patients exaggerate their reliance on lip-reading, and test results are often
inconsistent. A patient may have excellent speech discrimination despite a
hearing loss that seems severe or there may be no evidence of cross-
hearing in an apparent unilateral hearing loss. ERA may be required to
estimate thresholds.
It is common for children to manifest non-organic hearing loss under
certain circumstances. The attention centred on them and the excuse the
loss provides may help a child to overcome problems that are unrelated to
a hearing difficulty. The audiologist must establish true thresholds but
should take care to obtain further investigation and treatment for the
child’s underlying problems if this is required (Brooks and Geoghegan,
1992).

284
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Special ‘attention raising’ techniques are often used to obtain true
thresholds. These are very simple: for example a child may be asked to say
‘yes’ when he or she hears a tone and ‘no’ when he or she does not. Many
children will say ‘no’ to presented tones that are below their feigned
threshold. As long as the audiologist is sure no visual or timing clues have
been given, true thresholds may be obtained in this way. Older and more
sophisticated children are less easy to deceive but often it is unnecessary
to use the more complex tests required to ascertain true thresholds for the
adult. Many (adult) tests for non-organic hearing loss exist; some are listed
below.
(a) Repeat pure tone threshold tests
Many adults are unable to provide consistent false audiograms. If the
thresholds on repeat tests vary by more than 10 dB, non-organic hearing
loss may be suspected. (Children are often much better at maintaining
consistent non-organic audiometric thresholds. This test is therefore
unsuitable for children.)
(b) The Lombard test
This test is based on the principle that a normally hearing person will raise
his or her voice in the presence of background noise. The patient is asked
to read aloud and, at some unannounced time, masking noise is intro-
duced and gradually increased in intensity. If the hearing loss is genuine,
the noise will have no effect until it at least exceeds the deafness. If the
hearing loss is fake, the patient may raise his or her voice without realizing
it.
(c) Doerfler–Stewart test
It is usually possible to respond to speech even when masking noise is
10 dB to 15 dB greater than the intensity of the speech signals. The patient
with a non-organic loss often assumes that any level of masking noise
should prevent the hearing of speech. If a speech test is presented with
masking, the non-organic patient will stop repeating words, sometimes
even when the noise is less intense than the speech signal. A positive test
suggests a non-organic loss but does not reveal the true threshold levels.
(d) Delayed speech feedback test
It is normal for speakers to monitor their own voices unconsciously as
they speak, using their own hearing. If this auditory feedback mechanism
is disturbed, speech is affected. This test involves the use of a tape
recorder that has separate record and playback heads. The patient’s voice

Assessment and management of special problems 
285
is recorded as he or she speaks and played back with a very slight delay of
0.1 to 0.2 seconds. The creation of delayed feedback disturbs the
speaker’s speech pattern, causing slowing, stuttering or other difficulty. If
the hearing loss is genuine, delayed feedback at intensities below
threshold will have no effect on the speech.
(e) The Stenger test
Figure 13.10. The Stenger test procedure being used to determine whether an
apparent hearing loss of 40 dBHL is true or non-organic.
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL
dBHL
This test is the most widely used to identify monaural non-organic hearing
loss. It employs the principle that, where two tones of the same frequency
are presented simultaneously, only the most intense one is heard.
A two-channel audiometer is used to introduce a tone 10 dB above the
threshold of the ‘better’ ear. The patient should respond. A tone is then
presented to the ‘deaf’ ear 10 dB below its given threshold. Tones are
presented simultaneously to both ears, 10 dB above the threshold of the
better ear and 10 dB below the threshold of the ‘deaf’ ear.
A patient with a genuine hearing loss will continue to respond to the
tone that is 10 dB above threshold in the better ear. If the patient does not
respond, this is because he or she can only hear the tone in the ‘deaf’ ear,
which he or she refuses to admit. The patient can only hear the loudest
tone and does not realize there is still a tone above threshold in the
‘better’ ear.

286
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
The test can be continued to reveal approximate true thresholds. For
instance, the tone is presented at 10 dB above the threshold of the better
ear and at 0 dBHL in the ‘deaf’ ear. The level in the ‘deaf’ ear is raised in
5 dB steps. The patient should continue to respond because the tone that
is 10 dB above threshold in the better ear will be readily heard (Figure
13.10). When the patient ceases to respond, the level in the ‘deaf’ ear is
usually within 10 dB of its true threshold.
13.4.4 Summary
Non-organic hearing loss is one that is not of organic origin. It may be
feigned or exaggerated, often for financial gain, but it may also be of
psychological origin. Non-organic hearing loss should be suspected
whenever results of the different parts of the hearing assessment are at
variance. The audiologist has to determine whether a hearing loss exists
and what are the true threshold levels. A number of tests are available for
suspected cases of non-organic hearing loss, for example the Lombard test
and the delayed speech feedback test, which are based on interfering with
normal auditory monitoring. The most widely used test for unilateral non-
organic hearing losses is the Stenger test, which is based on the principle
that it is only possible to hear the most intense of two tones of the same
frequency presented simultaneously. Most tests set out to confuse the
patient in order to provide evidence of non-organic hearing loss. Some
tests also indicate the approximate hearing threshold.
FURTHER READING FOR SECTION 13.4
Arlinger S (1989) Manual of Practical Audiometry. Volume 1. London: Whurr.
Northern JL and Downs MP (1991) Hearing in Children. 4 edn. Baltimore: Williams &
Wilkins.
13.5 AUTOMATIC AUDIOMETRY
13.5.1 Industrial screening
Automatic audiometry allows the person under test to plot his or her own
audiogram. The audiometer presents a tone that gradually increases in
intensity. The patient presses a button as soon as the tone is heard and
keeps it pressed for as long as the tone is heard. On pressing the button,
the tone becomes fainter. As soon as the tone is inaudible the patient
releases the button. When the button is released, the intensity increases.
The level of the tone is automatically traced on an audiogram, either as
the frequency gradually changes, or at certain fixed frequencies. The

Assessment and management of special problems 
287
resultant zigzag line indicates the swing width, which is the difference
between audibility and inaudibility. The threshold of hearing is taken as
the mid-point between the extremes at each frequency and this produces
thresholds that are almost identical to those obtained with manual
audiometry. The width of the tracing is, on average, 6–10 dB but can vary.
In extreme cases it may be as little as 3 dB or as much as 20 dB. Extremely
narrow tracing widths were thought to be related to the difference limen
for intensity and so, indirectly, to recruitment but most authorities now
consider that the width of the tracing is really an indication of threshold
doubt and certainty, although it may be suggestive of a cochlear lesion.
Too large a deviation is usually due to incorrect patient response, e.g.
holding the button down for too long or not reacting as soon as the tone
is heard.
13.5.2 Békésy audiometry
Békésy audiometry goes beyond automatic recording of audiograms and
can provide diagnostic information, although it is not widely used. The
audiometer presents tones that may be continuous (C) or interrupted (I),
typically with 2.5 interruptions per second. The interrupted tracing
obtained approximates to the pure tone threshold. Clinical interpretation
involves comparison of the continuous with the interrupted tone. Jerger
(1960) classified the types of audiogram that may be obtained (Figure
13.11). These are as follows:
• Type I. A type I audiogram is where the continuous and interrupted
tracings overlap. In this case, the threshold remains the same whether
the tone is present continuously or pulsing on and off. Type I tracings
are obtained in patients with normal ears or with middle ear disorders.
• Type II. A type II audiogram shows the continuous and interrupted
tracings often overlapping in the low frequencies. From approximately
1 kHz, the continuous tone appears to be more difficult to hear and the
continuous trace drops below the interrupted trace. The continuous
trace is rarely more than 20 dB below the interrupted trace, but the
swing width may narrow. Type II audiograms are found mainly in
patients with cochlear disorders.
• Type III. At all frequencies the continuous tone falls dramatically below
the interrupted tone. The patient appears to have marked adaptation
and to find a continuous signal extremely difficult to hear. Type III
audiograms are often found in patients with eighth nerve disorders.
• Type IV. These audiograms are similar to type II except that the contin-
uous tracing breaks away in the low frequency. These also tend to be
obtained with eighth nerve disorders.

288
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
• Type V. An audiogram in which the continuous tracing occurs above the
interrupted tracing. This indicates a non-organic hearing loss.
Figure 13.11. Békésy audiogram types, classified by Jerger (1960).
(dBHL)
(dBHL)
(dBHL)
(dBHL)
(dBHL)

Assessment and management of special problems 
289
The Békésy audiogram types provide useful clinical information but are
not sufficiently precise for diagnosis unless supported by other test
results. In clinical practice, the frequency at which separation occurs tends
to be ignored. No separation points to a conductive disorder, type II with a
separation of up to 20 dB suggests a cochlear lesion, whereas an audio-
gram (excluding type V) with a separation of over 25 dB suggests a retro-
cochlear problem.
13.5.3 Summary
Automatic audiometry allows patients to track their own pure tone thresh-
olds by pressing a button when the tone is audible and releasing the
button when it is not. A pen tracks the resulting audiogram as a series of
zigzag lines on a special audiogram form. Automatic audiometers are often
used in industrial hearing conservation programmes. Clinical Békésy
audiometry provides diagnostic information through the comparison of
the patient’s response to continuous and to pulsed or interrupted tones.
Five different audiogram types may be observed. These help in the differ-
entiation of cochlear, retrocochlear and non-organic hearing losses.
FURTHER READING FOR SECTION 13.5
Arlinger S (1991) Manual of Practical Audiometry. Volume II. London: Whurr
Publishers.

Chapter 14
Paediatric provision
14.1 THE EFFECT OF HEARING LOSS IN CHILDREN
14.1.1 Introduction
Language forms the basis of our communication and our education. We all
use language to adjust to our world. Without language our experience
would be very different and our lives would be very difficult. Children
begin to learn language skills from the very earliest age and their ability to
understand and to use speech develops naturally over a very short space
of time. The normal baby progresses from babble to using complex
sentences in a period of less than three years. However, this rapid natural
development is interrupted if a child cannot hear normally.
The age at which a hearing loss occurs is a critical factor in determining
its effect on language development. Where a hearing loss occurs before
the child has acquired speech it is termed ‘prelingual’. Prelingual there-
fore covers a range of cases from those who were born deaf to those who
became deaf through illness, accident or other cause at an early stage –
before about two years old. The term ‘postlingual’ is used where the child
becomes deaf after learning to speak. Deafness from birth or acquired
early in life has a serious effect on speech and language. The effect of a
postlingual hearing loss on speech and language development is less
serious but in terms of education and social development may still be very
traumatic.
In general terms, hearing loss acquired in childhood may affect:
• the development of speech and language;
• the ability to think abstractly;
• learning;
• social integration;
• social and emotional adjustment.
290

Assessment and management of special problems 
291
Speech difficulties are often seen as the primary problem for 
hearing-impaired children but they are really a reflection of the more
central problem of poor comprehension. Even with early diagnosis and
appropriate remediation, hearing-impaired children’s progress may be
very delayed. Their inability to understand explanations or to express their
needs and feelings may lead to frustration and socially unacceptable
behaviour. There is an understandable tendency for parents to be overpro-
tective, and normally hearing siblings may become jealous of the time and
money they feel is being diverted away from them.
The terms ‘hearing-impaired children’ and ‘deaf children’ are often
used interchangeably. Deafness includes all degrees of hearing loss from
profound to very mild. As one would expect, the effects of such differing
degrees of hearing loss may vary from marked to very slight. Many
profoundly deaf children, for instance, fail to reach a reading level equiva-
lent to that of an average eight-year-old by school leaving age (Conrad,
1977). The handicap of mild hearing loss is much less obvious.
Approximately four in every 1000 children have a significant bilateral
sensorineural hearing loss (Haggard and Pullan, 1989).
14.1.2 Unilateral hearing loss
Approximately three in every 1000 school children have a unilateral
hearing loss greater than 45 dBHL (Bess and Tharpe, 1986).
Unilaterally hearing-impaired children have problems in:
• hearing from the deaf side (head-shadow);
• locating sound;
• hearing in noise.
They may be disadvantaged by as much as 19 dB (Giolas and Wark, 1968) in
the noisy conditions of the classroom. Amplification in the form of a
personal hearing aid and/or a radio hearing aid system may be appropriate.
These children are more likely to be inattentive, distractible, lacking in
confidence, withdrawn or anti-social. Preferential seating should be
provided to give a good view of the teacher and to minimize interference
from noise in the good ear. The child’s audiological, academic and social
progress should be monitored so that if necessary intervention can occur
at an early stage. 
14.1.3 Tinnitus in children
Tinnitus is common in hearing-impaired children. However very few
children complain of tinnitus. This may be because children think it is

292
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
normal or because they cannot distinguish it from environmental sounds.
Tinnitus may affect audiometric results as children do not realize when they
are responding to tinnitus rather than test tones. It is possible for unreliable
pure tone thresholds to lead to fitting of inappropriate hearing aids and
consequent non-compliance with using aids. Children rarely receive help
with their tinnitus (apart from hearing aids) and troublesome tinnitus
amongst children is almost certainly underestimated. Tinnitus in children
should be diagnosed and managed appropriately (see section 13.1).
14.1.4 Temporary conductive hearing loss
The most common cause of hearing loss in children is a temporary condi-
tion known as secretory or serous otitis media. It is so common that most
children are affected by it at some stage in their early years (British
Association of Audiological Physicians, 1990). It is a self-limiting condition
and most children grow out of it by about eight years old. The problem is
caused by fluid in the middle ear, which prevents the efficient passage of
sound from the eardrum. In normality, the middle ear cavity is air-filled
and it remains so because it is ventilated by the Eustachian tube. This tube
runs from the middle ear to the back of the throat. In infants the
Eustachian tubes are shorter, narrower and less rigid than in adults and
they are positioned more horizontally. Ventilation and drainage of the ear
of a child is therefore less efficient. If the Eustachian tube becomes
blocked, air cannot enter the middle ear. Air is gradually absorbed by the
lining of the middle ear cavity and cannot be replaced. 
The result is relative negative pressure in the middle ear and a thin
watery fluid is secreted into the cavity. If the condition is not resolved the
fluid may thicken and eventually become glue-like, hence the name ‘glue
ear’, which is sometimes given to the disorder. Blockage of the Eustachian
tube may be caused by a number of factors, including upper respiratory
tract infections, enlarged tonsils and adenoids, allergies and malforma-
tions. The resulting hearing loss often fluctuates dramatically between a
mild and a marked impairment. It is usually bilateral and rarely more than
60 dBHL in degree. Fluctuating hearing loss may affect the ability to
localize who is speaking and this may mean that the child misses some of
the spoken message. The same words may also appear different from one
occasion to the next and this may affect not only the child’s ability to
process sound but also their development of reading and spelling. 
In general, temporary fluctuating losses create more difficulty in the
noisy conditions of school than they do in the less adverse conditions of
the home where speech can be clear and close to the child. Minor conduc-
tive losses may not require medical intervention but will usually be
monitored. Tympanometry (see section 13.2) can provide a simple check

Paediatric provision 
293
of middle ear function and if treatment is required this will usually be
medical (see section 3.3.2) or educational. Behavioural problems are
common as a result of misunderstanding and difficulty in following
lessons. One possible solution to the problems of ‘slight’ hearing loss is
the introduction of a sound field system into the classroom. This is a
loudspeaker system for the class teacher (see section 14.4.3). Where
speech and language development are delayed, a child may also be
referred to a speech and language therapist. Personal hearing aids should
only be fitted if medical advice has been sought.
14.2 ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS OF HEARING
LOSS IN CHILDREN
14.2.1 Testing in sound field conditions
(a) Stimuli used
Sound field audiometric procedures are frequently used with young
children and those who cannot tolerate headphones. They are also used
to obtain measures (aided thresholds) from the child when wearing
hearing aids. The stimuli used must be relatively frequency specific. Pure
tones cannot be used because reflections would cause interference with
the intensity of the signal. There could then be considerable variation in
the signal strength at different locations in the room such that even a slight
head movement could have a significant effect on the results (see Figure
14.1). The stimuli used must also be of some interest to the child under
test. Warble tones and narrow-band noise are thought to be more inter-
esting to children than pure tones. Stimuli used include:
Figure 14.1. Intensity variation of a 50 dBSPL pure-tone due to standing waves. The
diagram shows the sound level measured at various points in the room.
Intensity (dB SPL)

294
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
• frequency modulated or ‘warble’ tones (see section 1.1.8); 
• narrow-band noise; 
• noise makers – for example, chime bars;
• speech.
(b) The room acoustics
The sound field in the test room is not a true free sound field (BS
7636:1993). 
A room with a true free sound field is one in which the direct field is the
predominant influence in the room (an anechoic room). In a normal test
room, the direct field only extends about 1 m from the sound source. The
room in which testing is carried out is usually a quasi-free sound field. Its
sound field is composed of direct and reverberant components. The type
of room used for sound field measurements will affect the accuracy of the
results. The room should be adequately sound treated. Furniture in the
room should be kept to a minimum.
Sound measurements must be obtained at the test position. Sound
field audiometric equipment should be calibrated in the position in which
it is to be used. Appropriate calibration is essential to obtain reasonably
accurate hearing thresholds. Calibration involves measuring the sound
pressure level at the test position and noting the difference between the
audiometer dial setting and the measured values across the frequency
range. A sound level meter with a remote microphone on a headband may
be used to improve the accuracy of measurements, see Figure 14.2.
(c) Conversion of dB(A) measurements
Where testing is carried out via loudspeakers rather than using earphones,
measurements may be taken in dBSPL or dB(A). An example of this is in
distraction testing.
The dB(A) scale is more generally used because it is less sensitive to low
frequency background noise, which may interfere with recording low
stimulus levels on the dBSPL scale. Measurements can only be made
directly in dBHL if the speakers in the room are calibrated so that the dial
reading is in dBHL. If the position of the speakers or the child being tested
is changed, the set up must be re-calibrated. 
As we are generally most interested in results in dBHL, converting dBA
results may assist in standardizing test results.
Conversion of dB(A) to dBHL involves a degree of error as there will be
some variation depending on:

Paediatric provision 
295
• the actual sound field in which the measurements take place; 
• the stimuli used;
• the angle of the sound signal;
• the age of the children tested. 
Conversion from dB(A) to dBSPL is straightforward and involves adding
the figures shown in Table 14.2 to the dBA reading.
Various studies have put forward results and in general differences are
relatively small (Benyon and Munroe, 1993). Table 14.1 shows conversion
figures.
Figure 14.2. A sound level meter with remote microphone used for measurements
during sound field audiometry.

296
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Table 14.1. Possible conversion figures (rounded to the nearest 5 dB) for dBA to
dBHL. These figures should be subtracted from the dB(A) readings
250
500
1 k
2 k
4 k
8 k
Hz
5
0
0
0
5
10
dBSPL
Table 14.2. Conversion of dB(A) readings to dBSPL. These figures should be added to
the dBA readings
250
500
1 k
2 k
4 k
8 k
Hz
5
0
0
0
5
10
dBSPL
14.2.2 Paediatric tests of hearing function
Pure tone audiometry is not appropriate for very young children and
different diagnostic tests may be used depending on the age and mental
ability of the child. The principle tests in use are:
• otoacoustic emissions; 
• brainstem evoked response (BSER) or auditory brainstem response
(ABR); 
• distraction tests; 
• co-operative tests; 
• performance tests; 
• free-field visual response audiometry (VRA); 
• pure tone audiometry.
Where ages are quoted these are intended only to provide a guide to the
child’s approximate stage of development.
14.2.3 Otoacoustic emissions
Otoacoustic emissions or ‘cochlear echoes’ are weak sounds produced by
outer hair cell vibration of the cochlea (see section 2.2.2). The outer hair
cells generate vibration that amplifies the peaks in the sound wave as it
travels along the basilar membrane. A tiny amount of the vibration is
‘reflected’ back out of the cochlea and through the middle ear to the ear
canal, where it can be measured as sound. 
Where there is an outer hair cell disorder, as is the case in most
sensorineural hearing loss, otoacoustic emissions (OAEs) or cochlear
echoes do not occur. Conductive hearing loss will also abolish the

Paediatric provision 
297
otoacoustic emissions because a healthy middle ear is required to
conduct them to the ear canal. The existence of otoacoustic emissions
therefore indicates normal or near normal middle ear and cochlear
function. Emissions can be absent even though hearing is normal but
where there are no otoacoustic emissions and tympanometry has been
used to rule out conductive loss, this is usually indicative of cochlear
damage.
Otoacoustic emissions are used in screening the hearing of newborn
babies. A probe containing a microphone and a miniature loudspeaker is
sealed in the ear canal, see Figure 14.3. The loudspeaker delivers a series
of clicks (brief broadband signals) and the microphone picks up the
evoked otoacoustic emissions. These are relayed to a computer for
analysis and display of the results. The presence of evoked otoacoustic
emissions (also called transient evoked otoacoustic emissions or TEOAEs)
is a strong indicator of hearing thresholds better than 25 dBHL. However,
otoacoustic emissions cannot be used to indicate hearing thresholds. The
test usually used to obtain some indication of threshold is auditory brain-
stem response (ABR) testing also called brainstem evoked response
(BSER) audiometry.
Figure 14.3. Otoacoustic emissions being used to screen a newborn baby.
(Photograph courtesy of Otodynamics.)

298
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
14.2.4 Auditory brainstem response (ABR) or 
brainstem evoked response (BSER) audiometry
Auditory brainstem response (ABR) or brainstem evoked response (BSER)
is one type of evoked response audiometry (ERA) that can be used with
young babies and other patients who are particularly difficult to test.
Electrical potentials from the auditory pathways, in response to sounds,
are recorded by electrodes attached to the baby’s head. All levels of the
sensorineural part of the auditory system, from the hair cells in the
cochlea to the cortex of the brain, respond electrically to sound. The
auditory responses are processed by a computer and displayed as a multi-
wave form. Changes in electrical potentials due to auditory activity are so
small that they must be ‘averaged’ over a period of time in order that they
can be singled out from the random activity of the brain.
Evoked response audiometry provides valuable objective results for a
population that could not provide this information in any other way.
Auditory brainstem response is the most widely used ERA for children. It
may also be used in some cases of suspected non-organic hearing loss
because no co-operation is required. The child has only to be still and may
be sedated if necessary. Brainstem evoked response audiometry provides a
good estimate of threshold, especially in the 2 kHz to 4 kHz region, and
should be interpreted in the context of other clinical information.
14.2.5 Distraction tests
Distraction tests are used both as a screening and a diagnostic test. They
are suited to children between the ages of approximately six to eighteen
months, that is from the time the baby can sit unsupported and turn its
head towards a sound, until it ceases to be sufficiently interested in the
sounds to continue to turn reliably.
Two testers work as a team, one positioned at the front to attract and
manipulate the child’s attention, the other stands behind the child and
presents the sound signals (Figure 14.4).
The object of the test is to record the quietest intensity at which the
baby responds to a range of frequency-specific sounds. The sounds must
be interesting to the baby and representative of low, mid and high
frequency ranges. Examples of those in common use include:
• low frequency – the voiced sound ‘oo-oo’ (approximately 500 Hz);
• mid frequency – a G-chime bar (approximately 1600 Hz);
• high frequency – a special high frequency rattle (above approximately
6.5 kHz) (Kettlety, 1987).

Paediatric provision 
299
Responses must be obtained at 30 dB(A) to pass a screening test but in the
diagnostic situation the intensity is raised until a response is obtained. The
intensity is measured using a sound level meter.
It is extremely important to be certain that the child is really
responding to the auditory signal and not to other clues. Some children
are very quick to respond to the touch of the tester’s breath, the sound of
a footfall, the smell of perfume or the movement of a shadow. These are
known, respectively, as tactile, auditory, olfactory or visual cues (Figure
14.5). Distraction tests appear very simple to the observer but they must
be meticulously performed to be reliable.
Figure 14.4. The position of two testers carrying out a distraction test. The baby sits
upright on the mother’s knee. Tester 1 manipulates the baby’s attention while tester 2
presents the sound signals.
Figure 14.5. A tester may obtain false positive responses during a distraction test if other
cues are present, such cues may be auditory, visual, tactile or olfactory. (After Anon).

300
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
14.2.6 Co-operative tests
Co-operative tests are used for children aged between about 18 months
and two-and-a-half years, when the baby has become too ‘grown up’ to
respond reliably to distraction techniques but is not yet able to perform
the next level of test. This age group is, contrary to the name of the test,
notoriously unco-operative. One tester is needed to carry out this simple
speech test, which provides only limited low frequency information and is
therefore used in conjunction with a brief high frequency distraction test.
The child is supplied with bricks or similar toys and the tester gives
simple instructions. There is a limited choice of instruction, such as ‘Give
it to Mummy’, ‘Give it to Daddy’, ‘Give it to teddy’, and the lowest inten-
sity at which the child can respond accurately is found. A child with
normal hearing should be able to achieve this at a level of 40–45 dBA.
14.2.7 Performance tests
Performance tests can be useful from the age of about two-and-a-half until
the child is able to undertake pure tone audiometry. The child is trained or
‘conditioned’ to perform an action, such as placing a man in a boat,
whenever he or she hears a ‘command’ sound, which for low frequencies is
‘go’ and for high frequencies is the sibilant ‘s’. The intensity of the command
is gradually reduced until the child’s hearing threshold is obtained. The
intensity is measured, as in all free-field tests, using a sound level meter.
14.2.8 Free-field visual response audiometry
Visual response audiometry, often known as VRA, is a technique that
requires more complex equipment than distraction tests but that can be
used for the whole age range, from about six months until the child can
perform pure tone audiometry. Loudspeakers are used to deliver frequency-
specific signals, in the form of warble tones or narrow-band noise. 
Young children do not find electronically produced tones very interesting
and some form of visual reinforcement is therefore used, often in the form
of a toy that lights up when the child responds correctly. If headphones are
not worn, the information obtained will relate to the better ear and, when
high intensifies are used, the signal can be distorted and no longer
frequency specific. Nevertheless, a limited audiogram may be obtained in
this way, usually providing points at 500 Hz, 1 kHz, (2 kHz) and 4 kHz.
14.2.9 Pure tone audiometry
Pure tone audiometry should be used as soon as the child is able to co-
operate reliably since the ears can be tested separately. Many children

Paediatric provision 
301
from around the age of three can be trained to carry out a pure tone test if
it is treated as a game. ‘Play techniques’ are used in which the child is
taught to respond to the tones by performing some action, such as placing
a peg in a board.
A restricted range of frequencies is often tested, such as 500 Hz, 1 kHz,
(2 kHz) and 4 kHz, because the child may lose concentration before a full
test can be completed. Masking is also usually possible with children from
about five years old, if the instructions are simplified and the ‘play-like’
nature of the test is retained.
14.3 HABILITATION OF HEARING-IMPAIRED
CHILDREN
14.3.1 The habilitation process
A multidisciplinary team is usually involved with the diagnosis and
management of the hearing-impaired child. Such a team may include:
• audiological physician or otologist;
• clinical or educational audiologist;
• teacher of the deaf;
• educational psychologist;
• social worker;
• other specialists.
In the initial stages, parents have to come to terms with the child’s impair-
ment and it is usually the audiological physician or otologist who counsels
the parents and who will answer any medical questions they may have.
Parents may feel a sense of guilt, numbness, fear and isolation, feelings
with which they have to come to terms before they can help their child
(see section 12.1.4). After the initial diagnosis, support and counselling
will be undertaken by a peripatetic teacher of the deaf, who will see the
family on a regular basis, in the home and later in the school. The
counselling needed to support parents is of great importance.
The selection of appropriate hearing aids is central to the habilitation
process in order to provide maximum use of residual hearing. The funda-
mental principles of hearing aid selection are the same for children as for
adults but provision should be made as early as possible, with binaural
fitting considered as the norm. It is also important that hearing aids are
worn constantly from the beginning and that they are checked regularly by
an adult to ensure they are working. Hearing aids must therefore be
manageable for the family and child.

302
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Hearing aids for children usually need repairing at least once a year and
replacing every three to four years (British Association of Audiological
Physicians, 1990). In addition, new earmoulds are required several times a
year and batteries need frequent replacement.
There are three main types of personal hearing aid systems in use with
hearing-impaired children at present: bodyworn, postaural and in-the-ear
aids. The most widely used system is currently the postaural hearing aid.
In-the-ear hearing aids are increasing in popularity but these have to be
replaced or re-shelled at frequent intervals as the child grows.
Where audiological and other factors allow for choice of the hearing aid
system, parental feelings should be taken into consideration. If the
parents of the child are not happy with the hearing aid system, the child is
unlikely to make the best use of it. Many children are provided with
commercial hearing aids under the National Health Service when it is felt
there is a need that cannot be met by the standard range. 
Many deaf children are provided with radio hearing aids (see section
14.4.2) in addition to their personal aids. These overcome some of the
problems of interference from background noise.
14.3.2 Fitting hearing aids to very young children
The choice of hearing aids for very young children is difficult because
audiometric information will be limited. The hearing aids must therefore
be very flexible and the fitting must not be seen as being final. Frequent
review appointments will be required in the early stages.
The size of a small child’s ear canals has to be taken into account in the
fitting, because there will be important differences from average adult ear
canal data. A baby’s ear canal could have, for example, a volume of 0.5 cc
whereas an ear simulator has a volume of 2 cc. The smaller ear canal
volume will lead to a significant increase in sound pressure over that in the
ear simulator. Insertion gain measurements using a probe tube micro-
phone (see section 11.2) are very helpful in quantifying the baby’s real ear
gain. The DSL (desired sensation level) prescription formula (Seewald,
1994 and 2000) is often used with children as it includes predicted values
for children of varying age. 
Behind-the-ear or postaural hearing aids are routinely fitted to
children. Where these are to be fitted to small children and babies, minia-
ture postaural hearing aids should be used. Specific hearing aid features
that may be desirable include:
• direct audio input (for radio hearing aids);
• M-T switch (for hearing own voice as well as telecoil or audio input);
• locking battery drawer;
• locking volume control or automatic digital volume control.

Paediatric provision 
303
Difficulties of fitting include creating satisfactory earmoulds and retention
of the aids on tiny ears.
Earmoulds should be made in a soft material and may need replace-
ment as often as every 10 to 14 days in the early months when the baby is
growing quickly. Impressions can be taken whilst the baby is asleep or
being fed, as at this time the baby will be relatively still. Impressions
should be taken slowly and carefully, using an addition cured silicone
material (see section 10.1.2). Older children enjoy playing with the excess
impression material; the task of making hedgehogs, worms and balls
usually very successfully keeps them occupied while the impressions are
setting. If children are not used to having impressions taken, it may help
for them to watch first while the audiologist takes or pretends to take an
impression of Mummy’s ear or even of a teddy bear’s or doll’s ear.
Retention of the hearing aids on small ears can be facilitated using
plastic rings or ‘huggies’ to which the hearing aids are attached – see
Figure 14.6. The ring is fitted around the ear. Double-sided toupee tape is
sometimes used to stick the aids to the head but this is not really suitable
as a baby’s skin is very delicate.
Figure 14.6. (a) Hearing aid retention rings. (b) With the aid attached. (c) Placed on
the child’s ear.
(a)
(b)
(c)

304
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
14.3.3 Children with complex needs
The National Deaf Children’s Society (NDCS, 1996) suggests that up to
49% of children born with permanent bilateral hearing loss of moderate or
greater degree will have additional needs such as visual problems or devel-
opmental delay. Most of these children can be assessed by modifying
normal audiometric procedures. This could, for example, involve using
play audiometry techniques at an older than normal age or accepting
unusual responses. A response may be any change in the pre-stimulus
state of behaviour. Extra and novel reinforcement of correct responses are
often required to maintain the child’s attention, for example, using visual
reinforcers such as colourful toys and puppets or flashing lights. It is also
important to include ‘no sound’ trials to take account of any checking
behaviour from the child.
Tympanometry can be used to screen for middle ear problems and
evoked response audiometry may be used where other forms of threshold
testing are not possible. Sedation may be necessary and the results have to
be interpreted cautiously as they may be influenced by sleep and sedation
and also by neurological factors.
Fitting and managing hearing aids may also call for creative thinking.
Amplification must be seen in context and hearing aids must meet the
needs of both the child and of his or her family.
14.3.4 Cochlear implants
Cochlear implants are hearing aids that electrically stimulate the auditory
nerve to produce a sensation of sound. Implantation involves a surgical
procedure in which an electrode array is implanted into the cochlea.
Different speech processing strategies are used in the various cochlear
implants available, for example, the whole speech signal may be delivered
or specific features of speech may be extracted. The components of the
cochlear implant system are shown in Figure 14.7. The microphone of the
unit is carried at ear level but the sound processor may be postaural or
bodyworn. 
Following the operation and time for healing, the external parts of 
the implant system are attached and programmed. The programme is 
fine-tuned over several visits. The programme is often referred to as a
‘map’. This is really an electrical audiogram that shows electrical thresh-
olds (T) and electrical comfort levels (C) for each electrode. The T and C
levels may appear to change in the first few months after ‘switch-on’ as the
child becomes accustomed to the signal and to the testing routine. When
changes are made to the map these may alter the perceived sound quality
of the implant signal. Young children are not able to give appropriate

Paediatric provision 
305
feedback and, for these children, changes to the map will be based on
behavioural observations made by parents and teachers. Sound field
thresholds may also used to monitor the appropriateness of the map.
Children who are implanted at an early age may develop speech and
language in the same way as normal infants without active intervention.
Older children and adults will need ongoing rehabilitation directed
towards developing listening skills and spoken language.
Each implant centre has guidelines as to who may benefit from implan-
tation. Guidelines are continually being revised but currently (Archbold,
2000) children are being considered whose aided responses to sound field
audiometry are worse than 55 dB(A) at 2 kHz and 4 kHz. Most centres
require that children have worn hearing aids with well-fitting earmoulds
for at least several months and that they show little functional benefit from
their aids. Children with additional needs are considered by many but not
all centres. Good educational support and a supportive motivated family
with realistic expectations are both factors seen as likely to affect the long-
term outcome. It is recognized that children born with profound hearing
Figure 14.7. Components of a cochlear implant. (After Maltby and Knight, 2000.)
Transmitter
Microphone
Leads
Speech
processor
Magnet
Decoder
Electrodes
External parts                          Implanted parts

306
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
loss need to receive an implant early and many centres implant children at
less than two years old. Some older children are being implanted but
these are generally children who were born hearing and then became
profoundly deaf following an accident or illness such as meningitis. It is
now evident that the majority of profoundly deaf children will hear more
with a cochlear implant than with hearing aids and some centres are
considering implants for severely deaf people.
14.4 CLASSROOM LISTENING
14.4.1 Classroom conditions
The classroom presents a complex listening environment for children.
They are expected to pay attention to the teacher’s speech and ignore
irrelevant conversations and instructions, often in noisy conditions with
several different activities going on simultaneously. The ‘soundscape’
(listening environment) is constantly changing. The signal-to-noise ratio
changes as activities go from quiet to noisy and reverberation times vary as
children move from classroom to, for example, hall or gymnasium. The
signal children receive in the classroom may often be distorted by long
reverberation times and masked by background noise. Children who have
a hearing loss will have difficulty in interpreting speech in these difficult
conditions. Even children with mild hearing losses may need a signal-to-
noise ratio of as much as +30 dB to hear well. In a well-disciplined class-
room the background noise is likely to be at least 60 dB(A) and the teacher
would have to speak at around 90 dB(A) to achieve this. Personal or sound
field radio hearing aid systems (see sections 14.4.2 and 14.4.3) can help to
improve the signal-to-noise ratio and reduce strain on the teacher’s voice.
The signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio is the ratio between the signal level and
the level of the background noise. It is expressed in dB. A positive value
indicates that the signal is higher than the background noise. A negative
value indicates that it is lower than the background noise. An adult with
normal hearing can usually discriminate speech adequately in situations
where the signal-to-noise ratio is 0 dB and sometimes even less. However
to discriminate speech comfortably a signal-to-noise ratio of approxi-
mately +15 dB is needed. When hearing aids are being used, a higher
signal-to-noise ratio is required than with normal hearing. This is probably
due to distortion in the hearing aids (see section 8.3.5) and loss of infor-
mation due to hair cell loss in the cochlea (see section 2.2.2).
Classrooms in which deaf children are being taught should provide a
signal-to-noise ratio of at least +15 dB and a reverberation time no greater
than 0.4 seconds. This is often not the case. For example, in a recent

Paediatric provision 
307
survey of acoustic conditions in one particular secondary school (Maltby,
1999) the author found signal-to-noise ratios in normal classrooms were
between +5 dB and +10 dB but the most destructive feature of the school
acoustic environment was the high level of reverberation. Reverberation
times measured in normal classrooms varied from 0.77 seconds to
2.2 seconds (in a science laboratory). 
Reverberation is the reflection of sound. With normal hearing, rever-
beration is only a problem if the reverberation time is very long. The
ability to hear clearly is compromised if the direct signal and the reflected
signal arrive at the hearing aid microphone at different times (see section
1.1.7). Reverberation time can be measured as the time it takes for a
sound to cease reflecting and it can also be calculated mathematically
using the Sabine formula to provide a fairly accurate measure of RT60.
RT60 is the time taken for the sound level to drop by 60 dB.
Reverberation time is dependent upon the volume of the room and the
absorption of the materials within it. One sabin is equivalent to one
square foot of material with perfect absorption. This is given a coefficient
of 1. Absorption coefficients vary between 0, which is fully reflective, and
1, which is fully absorbent. The absorption is calculated as the sum of all
the separate frequency absorption values of each surface material within
the room. Reduction in reverberation time in the classroom may be
achieved by:
• Siting the classroom away from sources of noise.
• Careful use of acoustic materials. Absorbent materials tend to absorb
high frequencies to a much greater extent than low frequencies.
Acoustic treatment of the floor and back wall of the classroom is usually
very successful. Reflected sound from the ceiling and side walls gener-
ally have a positive rather than a negative effect.
• Good classroom management by the teacher.
• Appropriate hearing aid technology – for example, sound field amplifi-
cation. 
Degradation of the speech signal for the individual can be measured to
some extent using speech perception tests (see section 11.4.2).
Alternatively, Bruel and Kjaer’s Rapid Speech Transmission Index (RASTI)
can be used to measure the effect of the acoustic environment on a
speech-like signal. Perfect reception of the RASTI signal is given a score of
1.0. Leavitt and Flexer (1991) took RASTI measurements at 17 seating
positions in an occupied classroom. They demonstrated that a perfect
RASTI score of 1.0 could only be achieved at about 15 cm from the teacher.
The best seating position was the centre seat in the front row, which gave a

308
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
RASTI score of 0.83. In the back row, the RASTI score dropped to 0.55,
which is equivalent to a loss of 45% in speech intelligibility.
14.4.2 Radio hearing aid systems
Personal hearing aids depend for their effectiveness on being used close to
the speaker, in order to achieve a high signal-to-noise ratio. When the
speaker moves away the increasing distance quickly results in a weak
signal that is lost in the masking effect of background noise.
In schools, background noise and reverberation are often such as to
reduce the effectiveness of hearing aids significantly (Figure 14.8).
Figure 14.9. The basic format of a radio hearing aid.
Figure 14.8. As the distance away from the speaker increases, the intensity of the
signal falls (according to the inverse square law). Background noise then interferes
with the speech signal received by the hearing aid.
Radio frequency modulated (FM) systems are used to provide a short
microphone distance. The teacher wears the microphone and the pupil
wears a radio receiver, which is linked to a hearing aid. The signal is trans-
mitted to the pupil (Figure 14.9), regardless of his or her position, up to a
distance of about 100 m from the microphone. Radio hearing aids are used
at school and at home but their use is restricted by their expense and their
appearance, which is in most cases similar to a bodyworn hearing aid.

Paediatric provision 
309
There are two basic types of radio systems (Figure 14.10). Type 1 is a
complete radio hearing aid, in which the radio receiver is also a bodyworn
hearing aid. These tend to by used by some profoundly deaf children,
although they could equally well be used for children with mild hearing
losses who do not otherwise use a hearing aid. The main reason for not
doing so is the expense, as radio hearing aids are very costly.
Figure 14.10. The child’s unit in each of the types of radio system.
Type 2 is a system in which the transmitted signal is fed directly from
the radio receiver into the child’s individual hearing aid; this is known as
‘direct input’. This is the type most widely used because the child
continues to use their own hearing aid and an unchanged frequency
response. The radio receiver is usually linked directly into the personal
hearing aid via a lead and shoe (although there are also some radio
receivers that are housed in a large ‘shoe’ attached to the postaural aid –
they do not have a lead or bodyworn unit). 
In some cases the type 2 system with the bodyworn receiver is used with a
neck loop (instead of the connection via shoe and lead), which permits the
whole receiving unit to be hidden under clothing. However, the performance
of the induction loop tends to be inferior to that of direct input due to a
reduced low frequency response and an increased tendency to interference,
mainly from fluorescent lights and other electrical sources.
14.4.3 Sound field radio systems
A sound field system is basically a miniature public address system for the
classroom. Loudspeakers are positioned at various points to provide an
equal sound level throughout the room. The teacher uses a radio micro-
phone and transmitter, exactly as in the case of individual radio hearing
aids but pupils do not have to wear any equipment as they receive the

310
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
signal via the loudspeakers. The improved sound level in the classroom
can help all children to hear more clearly by improving the signal-to-noise
ratio. 
14.4.3 Educational provision
Many hearing-impaired children will need educational support from the
time of diagnosis throughout their education. Most hearing-impaired
children are educated within the ordinary or ‘mainstream’ school system,
with varying degrees of support. Ordinary schools provide an environ-
ment in which the child can gain experience of normal language and
behaviour, benefit from a wide curriculum, make friends among local
children and, in general, learn to adjust to being part of the hearing world.
For children with a significant hearing loss, support is usually provided in
the form of personal hearing aids, a radio system and the services of a
peripatetic or visiting teacher of the deaf. However, ordinary schools tend
to be large, noisy and often intolerant places and some children are
unable to cope. Hearing-impaired children may be placed in:
• normal ‘mainstream’ school;
• special class, or ‘unit’, within the ordinary school;
• special school.
Children who need significant extra support may be provided with a
‘statement of special educational needs’, under the 1981 Education Act. A
statement formalizes the child’s special needs and ways of meeting these,
while reinforcing the parent’s right to be involved in the process.
A special class or ‘partially hearing unit’ is an attempt to provide ‘the
best of both worlds’, with children integrated into ordinary classes as far as
possible but having an individual programme tailored to their needs and
with access to a full-time teacher of the deaf.
Special school provision has decreased as children are increasingly
placed within the normal school environment. Most of the special schools
that do remain cater for the needs of particular groups of severely and
profoundly deaf children, such as those who are:
• in need of a high level of support;
• of a particular religion;
• academically very able;
• using an alternative method of communication;
• multiply handicapped.

Paediatric provision 
311
Children in special schools have less access to ‘normal’ patterns of speech
and of behaviour and may be less prepared for coping with the demands
of everyday life but special schools can provide a concentration of
specialist staff and facilities. Children are educated within a protected
environment and in very small classes, consisting of not more than 10
children. Classrooms can be sound treated and specialist equipment often
includes group hearing aids and speech training units. A group hearing aid
is a hard-wired system in which each child wears headphones linked to a
desk unit capable of providing high output over an extended frequency
range (Figure 14.11) and, since the ear is not blocked, advantage is also
taken of ear canal resonance. The teacher uses a microphone that is also
wired into the system. Speech training equipment includes individual
hard-wired hearing aid units, often with a visual display to help the child
monitor his or her speech.
Approaches to the education of very severely and profoundly deaf
children vary markedly, especially between an ‘oral’ or ‘manual’ approach.
All systems make use of hearing aids and strive to develop language and
learning. Unfortunately, deep divisions exist between the supporters of
the various approaches, which is often unhelpful to parents because they
may receive conflicting advice. Most hearing-impaired children can learn
to communicate by speech if their loss is diagnosed early and treated
Figure 14.11. A group hearing aid in use at a school for deaf children. (Photograph
courtesy of St John’s School, Boston Spa.) The child on the right is wearing the
headphones of the group aid. The child on the left is using the system with a cochlear
implant.

312
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
promptly with effective hearing aids and skilled guidance. In essence,
‘oral’ methods seek to develop speech in a natural manner, while manual
or ‘total’ communication provides support to the spoken pattern in one of
a number of ways, namely using:
• sign language – this is often said to be the natural language of the deaf
community but unfortunately few hearing people are able to sign,
except in a slow and clumsy manner;
• finger-spelling – this can be likened to the written pattern and is of
limited use until the child has achieved some proficiency in language;
• cued speech – this is a method of communication in which hand
positions are used to supplement the information available through
lip-reading.
Special consideration must be given to the education of hearing-impaired
children. Hearing loss provides a starting point but is not a sufficient basis
on which to make a decision. The child’s whole development and his or
her family’s wishes should be considered in selecting an appropriate
school placement.
14.5 SUMMARY
Hearing impairment in childhood hinders development of the ability to
communicate and to make normal progress in school. Early diagnosis and
appropriate management are among the factors that can reduce the handi-
capping effect of hearing loss. Evaluation of hearing in early childhood
necessitates the use of special techniques appropriate to a child’s age and
stage of development. Educational placement should take full account of
the child’s needs and the parents’ wishes. Great emphasis is placed on the
full use of residual hearing through amplification in all educational
environments and specialist teachers of the deaf provide support. Most
hearing-impaired children are able to receive their education with the
normally hearing in ‘mainstream’ school, with the necessary specialist
support.
FURTHER READING
Bess FH, Gravel JS, Tharpe AM (1996). Amplification for Children with Auditory
Deficits. Nashville TN: Bill Wilkerson Center Press.
British Society of Audiology (2000). Recommended Protocols for Neonatal Hearing
Screening and Assessment. Reading: BSA.
Davies H, Fallowfield L (1991) Counselling and Communication in Health Care.
Chichester: Wiley & Sons.

Paediatric provision 
313
Delta (2000) Deaf Children Talking. Deaf Education through Listening and Talking
(Delta). Delta:  Haverhill.
Gregory S et al. (eds) (1998) Issues in Deaf Education. London: David Fulton.
Maltby M, Knight P (2000) Audiology for Teachers and other Professionals. London:
David Fulton.
McCormick B (ed.) (1995) Paediatric Audiology 0–5 years. London: Whurr.
McCormick, Archbold S, Sheppard S (eds) (1994) Cochlear Implants for Young
Children. London: Whurr.
McCracken W, Laoide-Kemp S (eds) (1997) Audiology in Education. London: Whurr.
Murgatroyd S (1985) Counselling and Helping. London: Methuen.
National Deaf Children’s Society (2000/2001) NDCS Quality Standards in Paediatric
Audiology. London: The National Deaf Children’s Society. 
Northern JL, Downs MP (1991). Hearing in Children. 4 edn. Baltimore: Williams &
Wilkins.
Stokes J (ed.) (1999). Hearing Impaired Infants. Support in the First Eighteen Months.
London: Whurr.
Watson L, Gregory S, Powers S (1999) Deaf and Hearing Impaired Pupils in
Mainstream Schools. London: David Fulton Publishers.

314
Glossary
A-scale The weighting network used with a sound level meter for free-
field sound measurements. The A-scale approximates to the inverted
40 phon equal loudness curve.
Acoustic feedback The excitation of the microphone by sound gener-
ated from the receiver of the same system.
Acoustic neuroma Benign eighth nerve tumour.
Acoustic ohm Unit of acoustic impedance.
Acoustic reflex Contraction of middle ear muscles in response to loud
sound.
Acoustic trauma Noise damage due to sudden impulse noise of high
intensity.
Acoustics Study of science of sound.
Action potential Brief electrical discharge that occurs when a nerve cell
is activated.
Acute Short and severe, (of 21 days or less duration).
Adaptation (auditory) Reduction in hearing sensitivity within a brief
time of the sound onset.
Adhesion New and abnormal tissue growth due to inflammation.
Admittance The ease with which sound waves pass through.
Air–bone gap The difference in dB between the air conduction reading
on an audiogram and the bone conduction reading for the same ear. If
10 dB or greater indicates a conductive element.
Algorithm  A set of rules.
Alport’s syndrome Kidney disorder combined with hearing and sight
defects.
Ambient Surrounding or background.
Amplitude The maximum displacement of any wave from its equilibrium
position.
Analgesic Pain-killing drug, for example aspirin.
Anechoic With no echoes or significant sound reflection: ‘dead’.
ANSI American National Standards Institute.

Glossary 
315
Anoxia Lack of oxygen.
Aphasia Disorder of central nervous system causing difficulty with speech
and language.
Artificial ear
A 6 cc coupling device used in audiometer earphone
calibration.
Artificial mastoid Calibration device for bone vibrators, which simulates
the mechanical impedance of an average normal human mastoid.
Atresia Absence of an opening.
Atrophy  Wasting away due to cell degeneration.
Attenuation Reduction.
Audiogram A graph showing a person’s hearing thresholds for pure
tones.
Audiometry The measurement of hearing.
Auditory filters Overlapping band-pass filters representing filtering in
the cochlea.
Auditory training Teaching a hearing impaired person to make best use
of residual hearing.
Aural Of the ear.
Aural–oral approach A method of teaching hearing impaired children
using speech and hearing optimally.
Auricle Pinna.
Auropalpebral reflex (APR) Eyeblink in response to loud sound.
Automatic gain control (AGC) Automatic reduction in gain of a hearing
aid. Compression.
Azimuth Distance in degrees, for example 0° azimuth = straight ahead;
90° azimuth = to person’s right.
Barotrauma Fluid in the middle ear due to sudden pressure change.
Behavioural audiometry
Assessment of hearing by noting bodily
responses.
Békésy audiometry Automatic audiometry.
Benign Not cancerous.
Binaural summation Improvement in hearing threshold when hearing
via both ears. Usually at least 3 dB and may be much more.
Brief tone Tone of 500 ms or less.
BSI British Standards Institution.
Calibration
Checking, and adjusting if necessary, the output of a
measurement device, such as an audiometer.
Capillaries Small blood vessels.
Central In brain and/or spinal cord.
Cholesteatoma Cyst-like growth in the middle ear containing shed skin.

316
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Chronic Having lasted a long time (over 8 weeks).
Click A short impulse of sound, too short in duration for its characteris-
tics to be fully perceived.
CMV Cytomegalovirus disease.
Cochlear microphonic
Electrical output from cochlear hair cells,
following input signal.
Compliance Opposite of stiffness; ability to give.
Compression (1) Limiting of maximum output, using automatic gain
control to reduce the gain beyond a predetermined intensity level. (See
also compression limiting and dynamic range compression.) 
(2) Air at more than atmospheric pressure (as in the compressions of a
sound wave).
Compression limiting A method of limiting output with low distortion.
Compression limiting can be input or output compression but will have
a high kneepoint and a high compression ratio in order to avoid satura-
tion whilst maintaining linear amplification for as long as possible.
Conditioning Rewarding of required behaviour – used widely in assess-
ment of children.
Congenital Present at birth.
Contralateral On the opposite side.
Critical band The narrow band of noise required to mask a pure-tone
signal.
Cross-hearing Sound presented to one ear is perceived in the other by
vibration of the skull.
Curvilinear compression Compression with a compression ratio that
increases as the input increases.
Derecruitment Abnormally slow growth of loudness, usually due to
disorder of auditory nerve.
Dichotic Affecting each ear differently.
Difference limen (for example, of intensity or frequency)
The
smallest detectable difference between two signals.
Digital hearing aid
A hearing aid in which the electrical signal is
converted to digital values for modification before being converted
back to an electrical signal which is passed to the receiver.
Diotic Identical signal to each ear.
Diplacusis One pure tone appears to the listener as two or more tones.
Directional microphone One that is more responsive to sound from one
direction – normally the front.
Distortion Any unwanted sound present in the output that was not
present in the input.
Diuretic Drug to increase urination.

Glossary 
317
Down’s syndrome (also called Down syndrome) A congenital abnor-
mality, formerly known as mongolism. Features include mental retarda-
tion, mongoloid eyes, flattened facial features, short, broad hands and
feet, small  pinnae, narrow ear canals and a high incidence of conductive
and sensorineural hearing loss.
Dynamic range The difference in dB between the threshold of hearing
and the threshold of discomfort.
Dynamic range compression Compression that allows for the client’s
reduced dynamic range by amplifying low intensity input more than 
high intensity input and keeps output below uncomfortable loudness
level. 
Earhook That part of a postaural aid that fits over the ear – also called the
elbow.
Earphone A loudspeaker at the ear.
Ear simulator A coupler that simulates the acoustic characteristics of an
average adult ear.
Effective gain The difference between aided and unaided thresholds.
Effusion An abnormal outpouring of fluid.
Electro-acoustic device A device that converts electrical to acoustic
signals and vice versa.
Electrocochleography Recording electrical signals (action potentials)
from the eighth nerve.
Environmental microphone
A microphone that picks up airborne
sound – for example, an environmental microphone may be built into a
radio hearing aid so the pupils can hear themselves and their
colleagues as well as the teacher.
Fall time The time needed for a signal to decay by 60 dB from its steady
state.
Feedback (acoustic) The whistling that occurs from a hearing aid when
sound leaks from the receiver and is picked up and reamplified via the
microphone.
Feedback Information that is used to maintain or modify performance.
Filter (acoustic) Allows some sounds to pass but attenuates others.
Formant A special pattern of speech sounds, determined by the vocal
cords and the resonant cavities of the vocal tract, giving each vowel its
recognizable quality.
Fossa Groove.
Free-field Open space – or an area with boundaries that are negligible for
the test.
Frequency analyser A sound level meter with an octave band (or other)

318
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
filter. Displays amplitude versus frequency on graph of input.
Fulcrum Pivot.
Functional gain Real ear gain.
Functional hearing Non-organic or psychogenic loss.
Fundamental frequency The lowest frequency in a periodic waveform.
Harmonic A frequency that is a whole number multiple of the pure tone
to which it is related.
Haematoma Blood clot due to a break in a blood vessel.
Hertz A unit used in the measurement of frequency of sound, equivalent
to the number of cycles per second.
High compression ratio
One that is 5:1 or more – having greater
compression. 
High-pass filter Reduces low frequencies while allowing high frequen-
cies to pass unaffected.
Homeostasis Equilibrium – achieving a normal balance.
Horn A tapered sound tube.
Hyperacusis Abnormally sensitive hearing.
Idiopathic Cause unknown.
Immitance Impedance or admittance.
Impedance (acoustic) Resistance to the passage of sound.
Impedance match Making the resistance of two connecting parts equal.
Incidence The number of cases in a given population (for example, as a
number of live births).
Incident wave Any wave that has its path interrupted by an object; the
wave is then said to be incident on this object.
Induction coil Picks up electromagnetic signals from a loop amplifier;
activated in a hearing aid by the ‘T’ switch.
Inflammation Sore, swollen, red area. The body’s response to injury or
infection.
Insertion gain The difference between the gain of the open ear and the
gain of the ear wearing a hearing aid: aided – unaided real ear gain.
Insertion loss The difference between the gain of the open ear and that
of an occluded ear.
In situ In the natural position.
Intelligibility The degree to which speech can be understood.
Interaural attenuation The degree to which sound is reduced as it
crosses the head. Minimum interaural attenuation is 40 dB for air
conducted signals  and 0 dB for  bone conduction.
Intermodulation Frequencies in the output that are the sum and the
difference of two or more input frequencies and their harmonics.

Glossary 
319
Intonation Pitch variation.
Ipsilateral On the same side.
Isthmus A narrowed part of an organ or tissue.
Labyrinthitis Inflammation of the labyrinth.
Latency The time delay between a stimulus and the response to that
stimulus.
Lateralization When sound appears to be heard on one side although the
signal was placed on the other side or in the centre of the head (as in
certain tuning fork tests).
Lesion An injury.
Lexicon Vocabulary. 
Ligaments  Join bone to bone.
Linear A straight line, this applies when a change of input causes the same
change in output.
Localization Ability to pinpoint a sound source.
Loop (amplifier) An amplifying system which uses electromagnetic
induction. A loop of wire is placed around the room and a current is
induced in a coil within the hearing aid. Helps to overcome interfer-
ence from background noise.
Loudspeaker Apparatus that converts electrical impulses into sound.
Low-pass filter Allows low frequency sound to pass, but attenuates high
frequencies.
Mainstream Education within a normal school.
Malignant Cancerous, may cause death.
Mandibulofacial dysplasia Treacher Collin’s syndrome.
Manometer An instrument to measure pressure.
Manual audiometry As carried out by the hearing aid dispenser or
audiologist by the normal methods.
Masker An instrument used in the management of tinnitus; produces a
continuous masking noise.
Masking Raising of the threshold of hearing for one sound by the intro-
duction of another.
Maximum power
Saturation or output sound pressure level. The
greatest amount of sound pressure output or intensity that the hearing
aid can produce under any circumstances.
Ménière’s disorder
Idiopathic episodic endolymphatic hydrops. A
syndrome or disorder in which there is fluctuating sensorineural
hearing loss, vertigo and tinnitus, due to excessive fluid pressure in the
inner ear.

320
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Meningitis Inflammation of the brain lining.
Mixed loss
A hearing loss that is a combination of conductive and
sensorineural loss.
Monaural Of one ear.
Monitored Regulated – often of live voice using a sound level meter.
Morbidity Indicative of disease.
Most comfortable level (MCL)  There is an area, within the residual
hearing area, in which sounds are perceived as comfortable. Tests exist
to find the lower and upper limits of this area and the MCL is approxi-
mately half-way between these limits. No standardized procedure exists
to find the MCL and it is therefore rarely used.
Myringoplasty Surgery to repair a perforated tympanic membrane.
Myringotomy Surgical incision of tympanic membrane.
Narrow band A small range of frequencies.
Neckloop A small loop of wire worn around the user’s neck, rather than
having a loop placed around the room (see ‘Loop’).
Neoplasm A new tumour (benign or malignant).
Neuroma
A benign tumour growing from the fibrous covering of a
peripheral nerve.
Noise (1) Unwanted sound or unwanted electrical signal. (2) Aperiodic or
non-periodic sound.
Non-invasive Not involving surgery.
Non-organic Not of physical origin, as in psychological or fake.
Null Negative (as in a negative response) or void.
Nystagmus Involuntary beating movements of the eyes.
Objective Able to be observed or measured; not subjective.
Occluded Closed.
Occlusion effect An apparent improvement in hearing by bone conduc-
tion when the external auditory meatus is occluded.
Omnidirectional microphone Accepts sound equally from all direc-
tions.
On-effect The greatest response, which occurs at the onset of a signal.
Oscillator A sound source.
Osteogenesis imperfecta Brittle bones.
Otalgia Earache.
Otitis Inflammation of the ear.
Otitis media Inflammation of the middle ear.
Otolaryngology Ear, nose and throat (ENT) medical specialty.
Otology Ear medical specialty.

Glossary 
321
Otorrhoea Discharge from the ear.
Otosclerosis Bone growth disorder affecting stapes and causing conduc-
tive hearing loss.
Ototoxic Potentially poisonous to the ear.
Over-masking Too much masking, which may affect the test ear and
worsen its threshold.
Overshoot An initial level reached which is greater than the steady state
of a signal.
Paget’s disease Thickening and softening of bones, especially of skull.
Palsy Paralysis.
Paracusis Abnormal hearing (see Willis’ paracusis).
Parameter A variable or attribute.
Pascal Unit of pressure equivalent to 1 Nm2.
Perinatal Around the time of birth.
Peripheral Not within the central nervous system.
Phase Part of the period of a sound wave – can be expressed in degrees.
Phon A unit of equal loudness.
Phoneme The smallest individual speech sound.
Phonetic balance Having the same distribution of speech sounds as a
random sample of everyday conversational English.
Pip A pure tone with a rapid rise time and having a steady state that is no
more than one cycle in length.
Polarity Positive or negative (as in electricitv).
Pontine In that part of the brainstem known as the pons.
Postauricular Behind the ear.
Postlingual After the acquisition of speech.
Potentiometer Variable control in a hearing aid, adjusted using a screwdriver.
Prelingual Before the acquisition of speech.
Presbyacusis Loss of hearing with old age.
Probe (tube) microphone Used in real ear measurements to measure
sound from near the tympanic membrane.
Prosthesis An artificial replacement for an impaired body part.
Pseudohypacusis Non-organic or functional hearing loss.
Psychoacoustics Concerned with the relationship between measured
signals and their subjective attributes.
Quiescent current Current in a transistor in the absence of a driving or
input signal.
Receiver A term coined by the hearing aid industry to mean ‘loudspeaker’.

322
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Recruitment Abnormal loudness growth, usually found with cochlear
impairment.
Redundancy Part of the speech message that can be omitted without loss
of meaning.
Rehabilitation Therapy to help restore (normal) functioning.
Reliability Consistency – how repeatable is a test.
Residual hearing
That part of the normal dynamic range that the
impaired person is left with.
Resonance The reinforcement of sound by reflection.
Resonant frequency  The reinforcement of a particular frequency due to
natural synchronous vibration
Retrocochlear Beyond the cochlea.
Reverberation Continuation of sound by reflecting or echoing.
Rise time The time taken for a signal to reach its steady state.
Roll off Rate of attenuation in dB per octave.
Room acoustics How the design of a room affects the sound within it.
Rubella German measles.
Saturation
Maximum – any further increase in input will cause no
increase in output.
Sensation level Amount in dB above the individual’s threshold.
Sensorineural Impairment caused in or beyond the cochlea.
Sequelae After effects of disease.
Sibilant High frequency consonant of a hissing nature, for example ‘s’ as
in sue, ‘S’ (or ‘sh’) as in shoe.
Signal to noise ratio Signal level compared to the competing noise.
Usually expressed as signal minus noise, for example, a signal of
60 dBA with a competing noise level of 50 dBA gives S/N of + 10 dB.
Signs Signs of a disorder are whatever features are noted by the doctor,
for example swelling, discharge, redness.
Sintered mesh A filter made of partially fused metal.
Sound field Containing sound waves, for example in a room.
Sound level meter A device to measure sound pressure in dB.
Sound pressure level SPL – a scale in which 0 dB = 20 micro Pascals.
Spectrograph A three-dimensional display of the energy of speech.
Frequency and time are represented by the two axes of the graph.
Intensity is shown by the darkness of the trace.
Speculum  Examination tip used with an otoscope.
Speech spectrum The average level of the speech sounds.
Speech reception threshold The faintest level at which a person can
identify 50% in a speech test.
Speech reading Lip-reading – but includes use of all visual cues not just
those visible on the lips.

Glossary 
323
Spondee A two-syllable word with equal stress on each syllable, for
example football.
Stapedectomy Removal of the stapes and replacement with a prosthesis.
Stenosis Narrowing of the canal, as in stenosis of the external auditory
meatus.
Submucous Below the skin and surface tissue.
Supra-aural On (against) the ear.
Suprasegmental Features of speech that add to the phonemes, for
example time, intonation, pitch, loudness.
Suprathreshold Above threshold.
Sweep frequency A tone that gradually changes across a frequency
range.
Symptoms Features that are complained of by a patient, for example
pain, throbbing, heat, noises.
Syndrome A group of features that characterize a disorder.
Telecoil Induction coil in loop amplification system.
Temporal Concerned with time.
Tendons Join muscle to bone.
Tinnitus Noises in the ear or head with no external source.
Tone burst Tone with rapid rise time and short duration.
Tone decay Decrease in hearing sensitivity when a tone is held for a short
time, for example 1 min or 3 min. Auditory adaptation.
Transducer
A device to change one type of energy to another, for
example sound energy to electricity.
Transient tone A brief tone, of 500 ms or less.
Trauma Sudden injury.
Trimmer An adjustable element. Potentiometer.
Tympanometry Measurement of the ease or difficulty with which sound
passes through the eardrum.
Unilateral Of one side.
Unoccluded Open.
Upward spread of masking
Low frequency sounds mask higher
frequency sounds.
Validity The degree to which a test measures what it was intended to
measure.
Vent A hole drilled through an ear mould, usually to release unwanted
low frequency sounds.
Vertex  Crown or top of the head.
Vertigo Disturbance of balance.

324
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Vibrotactile Feeling vibration.
Viseme Phonemes that appear the same to a lip-reader, for example ‘p’,
‘b’ and ‘m’.
Warble tone A frequency modulated tone; the tone varies around a
central frequency. Used to avoid standing waves in free-field testing.
Wavelength The distance covered in one cycle of a sound.
White noise Broad band noise in which each frequency is presented at
equal intensity.
Willis’ paracusis An apparent ability to hear better in the presence of
background noise. Also called paracusis Willisi.
Zwislocki coupler One particular model of occluded ear simulator.
Simulates the acoustic impedance of the average adult ear.

325
References
Allen JB, Jeng PS (1990) Loudness growth in half octave bands (LGOB); a procedure
for the assessment of loudness. Journal of Acoustic Society of America 88: 745–53.
ANSI (1987) ANSI S322: Specification for hearing aid characteristics. American
Standards Institute.
Archbold S (2000) Personal communication.
Ashley J (1991) The silent house. In Taylor G, Bishop J (eds) Being Deaf: The experi-
ence of deafness. Milton Keynes: The Open University.
Bench J, Kowal A, Bamford JM (1979) The BKB (Bamford–Kowal–Bench) Sentence
lists for partially hearing children. British Journal of Audiology 13: 108–12.
Benyon G, Munro K (1993) A discussion of current field calibration procedures. British
Journal of Audiology 27: 427–35.
Berger KW (1988) A hearing aid fitting method. Audiology in Practice 5: 1.
Berger KW, Hagberg EN (1989) An examination of binaural selection criteria. Hearing
Instruments 40: 1(32), 44–6.
Berger KW, Hagberg EN, Rane RL (1980) A re-examination of the one-half gain rule.
Ear and Hearing 1: 223–5.
Berger K, Hagberg E, Rane R (1984) Prescription of Hearing Aids, Rationale,
Procedures and Results. Revised edition. Kent, Ohio: Herald Publishing House.
Bess FH, Tharpe AM (1986) An introduction to unilateral hearing loss in children. Ear
and Hearing 7(1): 3–13.
Boothroyd A (1968) The Arthur Boothroyd (AB) Word Lists. Manchester: Manchester
University.
British Association of Audiological Physicians (1990) Paediatric Audiological Medicine
– Into the 1990’s, policy document. The British Association of Audiological
Physicians.
British Society of Audiology (1981) Recommended procedure for pure-tone audiome-
try using a manually operated instrument. British Society of Audiology 15: 213–16.
British Society of Audiology (1986) Recommendations for masking in pure-tone
threshold audiometry. British Journal of Audiology 20: 307–14.
British Society of Audiology (1987) Recommended procedure for Rinne and Weber
tuning fork tests. British Journal of Audiology 21, 229–30.
British Society of Audiology (1987) Recommended procedure for uncomfortable loud-
ness level (ULL) British Journal of Audiology 21: 231.

326
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
British Society of Audiology (1989) Recommended format for audiogram forms. British
Journal of Audiology 23: 265–6.
British Society of Audiology (1991) Proposals for Recommendations for a Room for
Hearing Aid Fitting. Reading: British Society of Audiology.
British Society of Audiology (1998) Recommended Minimum Standard for Cleaning
Specula. Reading: British Society of Audiology.
British Standards Institution (1995) BS EN 60645-1. Audiometers – Part 1: Pure tone
audiometers. London: British Standards Institution.
British Standards Institution (1995) BS EN 60645-2. Specification for Audiometers.
London: British Standards Institution.
British Standards Institution (1998) BS EN 60118-4. Hearing Aids: Magnetic field
strength in audio-frequency induction loops for hearing aid purposes. London:
British Standards Institution.
British Standards Institution (1999) BS EN ISO 389-4. Specification for Reference
Levels for Narrow Band Masking Noise. London: British Standards Institution.
British Standards Institution (2000) BS EN ISO 389-1: 2000: Acoustics- Part 1: Standard
reference zero for the calibration of pure-tone air conduction audiometers.
London: British Standards Institution.
Brookes DN, Geoghegan PM (1992) Non-organic hearing loss in young persons: tran-
sient episode or indicator of deep-seated difficulty. British Journal of Audiology,
26(6): 347–50.
Byrne D, Dillon H (1986) The National Acoustic Laboratory (NAL) New procedure for
selecting the gain and frequency response of a hearing aid. Ear and Hearing 7: 4.
Byrne D, Parkinson A, Newall P (1991) Modified hearing aid selection for severe/pro-
found hearing losses. In Studebaker GA, Bess FH, Beck LB (eds) The Vanderbilt
Hearing Aid Report II. Parkton MD: York Press Inc. 
Carhart R (1957) Clinical determination of abnormal auditory adaptation. Archives of
Otolaryngology 65: 32–9.
Carhart R (1965) Monaural and binaural discrimination against competing sentences.
International Audiology 4: 5–10.
Conrad R (1977) The reading ability of deaf school leavers. Journal of British Society of
Educational Psychology 47: 138–48.
Cornelisse LE, Seewald RE, Jamieson DG (1994) Fitting wide dynamic range compres-
sion hearing aids: the DSL [i/o] approach. The Hearing Journal 47(10): 23–9.
Cox RM, Alexander GC (1995) The abbreviated profile of hearing aid benefit (APHAB)
Ear and Hearing 16: 176–86.
Csermak (2000) A primer on a dual microphone system. The Hearing Review, 7(1):
56–60.
Davis H, Silverman SR (1978) Hearing and Deafness. New York: Holt, Rinehart &
Winston.
Department of Health (1994) Building note 12, Supplement 3, ENT and Audiology
Clinics/Hearing Aid Centres. Leeds: NHS.
Department of Health and Social Security (1974) Hospital ENT Services. A design
guide. London: Department of Health and Social Security.
Department of Health (1994) Building note12, supplement 3, ENT and Audiology
Clinics/Hearing Aid Centres, NHS, Leeds.
Dermody P, Byrne D (1975) Loudness summation with binaural hearing aids. Hearing
Instruments 26: 22–3.

References 
327
Dillon H (1988) Compression in hearing aids. In Sandlin R (ed.) Handbook of Hearing
Aid Amplification. Volume 1. Boston: College-Hill.
Dillon H (1999) NAL-NL1: A new procedure for fitting non-linear hearing aids. Hearing
Journal 52(4): 10–16.
Duncan B (1988) Which Amplifier Technology? Studio Sound (December): 60–2.
Duracell (1990) Guide for Designers. Crawley: Duracell.
Fisch L (1983) Integrated development and maturation of the hearing system. British
Journal of Audiology 17: 137–54.
Fry D (1961) Word and sentence tests for use in speech audiometry. Lancet 2: 197–9.
Gatehouse S (1990) Acclimatisation and auditory deprivation as explanations for
changes in speech identification abilities in hearing aid users. Proceedings of the
Institute of Acoustics 12(10): 31–7. 
Giolas TG, Wark DJ (1968) Communication problems associated with unilateral hear-
ing loss. Speech and Hearing Disorders 41: 336–43.
Goldstein DP, Stevens SDG (1981) Audiological rehabilitation: management model I.
Audiology 20: 432–52.
Green R (1988) The relative accuracy of coupler and behavioural estimates of the real
ear gain of a hearing aid. British Journal of Audiology 23: 201–6. 
Green R, Day S, Bamford J (1989) A comparative evaluation of four Hearing aid selec-
tion procedures II – Quality judgements as measures of benefit. British Journal of
Audiology 23: 201–6.
Haggard MP, Gatehouse S, Davies AC (1981) The high prevalence of hearing disorders
and its implications for services in the UK. British Journal of Audiology, 15: 241–51.
Haggard MP, Pullan CR (1989) The staffing and structure for paediatric audiology
services in hospital and community units. British Journal of Audiology 23(2):
99–116.
Hallberg LRM, Carlsson SG (1991) Qualitative study of strategies for managing a hear-
ing impairment. British Journal of Audiology 25(3): 201–11.
Health and Safety Executive (1989) Noise at Work. London: HMSO.
Hearing Aid Council (1999) The Hearing Aid Council Code of Practice, Examinations
and Registration. Milton Keynes: Hearing Aid Council.
Hickson F (1986) The Manchester Picture Test. Manchester: Manchester University.
HMSO (1969) The Post Office Act: Guidelines. London: HMSO.
International Collegium of Rehabilitative Audiology (1997) ICRA Noise Signals Version
3. Hearing Aid Clinical Test Environment Standardization work Group.
Jastreboff PJ, Hazell JWP (1993) A neurophysiological approach to tinnitus: clinical
implications. British Journal of Audiology 27: 1–11.
Jerger J (1960) Hearing tests in otologic diagnosis. American Speech and Hearing
Association 4: 139–45.
Katz J (ed.) (1994) Handbook of Clinical Audiology. 4 edn. Baltimore: Williams &
Wilkins.
Kendall DC (1954) Audiometry for young children. Teacher of the Deaf, L1, 307.
Kettlety A (1987) The Manchester high pitch rattle. British Journal of Audiology 21:
73–4.
Kiessling J, Schubert M, Archut A. (1996) Adaptive fitting of hearing instruments by cat-
egory loudness scaling (ScalAdapt) Scandinavian Audiology 25(3): 31–6.
Killion MC (1994) Fig6 WQ1: Loudness-based fitting formulae. Elk Grove Village IL:
Etymotic Research.

328
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
Killion MC, Fikret-Pasa S (1993) The three types of sensorineural hearing loss:
Loudness and intelligibility considerations. Hearing Journal 46(11): 31–6.
King PF, Coles RRA, Lutman ME, Robinson DW (1992) Assessment of Hearing
Disability: Guidelines for medicolegal practice. London: Whurr.
Launer S (1995) Loudness Perception in Listeners with Sensorineural Hearing
Impairment. Unpublished doctoral thesis, University of Oldenburg.
Leavitt R, Flexer C (1999) Speech degradation as measured by the rapid speech trans-
mission index (RASTI) Ear and Hearing 12: 115–18.
Libby R (1986) The insertion gain hearing aid selection guide. Hearing Instruments
37(3): 27–8.
Ludvigsen C, Topholm J (1997) Fitting a wide range compression hearing instrument
using real ear threshold data: a new strategy. The Hearing Review 4(11): 37–39. 
Lutman ME, Brown EJ, Coles RRA (1987) Self-reported disability and handicap in the
population in relation to pure-tone threshold, age, sex and type of hearing loss.
British Journal of Audiology 21(1): 45–58.
Lybarger SF (1985) Earmoulds. In Katz J (ed.) Handbook of Clinical Audiology. 3 edn.
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
Lybarger SF (1963) Simplified fitting system for hearing aids. Cannonsburg PA:
Radioear Corp. Revised from 1953 publication.
Maltby M (1999) Acoustic Conditions in St Edward’s Secondary School. Unpublished
report.
Maltby M (2000) A new speech perception test for profoundly deaf children. Deafness
and Education International 2(2): 86–100.
Maltby MT, Knight P (2000) Audiology for Teachers and Other Professionals. London:
David Fulton Publishers.
Madison TK, Hawkins DB (1983) The signal-to-noise ratio advantage of directional
microphones. Hearing Instruments 34(18): 49.
Martin M, Summers I (1999) Dictionary of Hearing. London: Whurr.
McCandless G, Lyregaard P (1983) Prescription of gain and output (POGO) for hearing
aids. Hearing Instruments 34(1): 16–21.
Moore BCJ (1998) Cochlear Hearing Loss. London: Whurr.
Moore BCJ (2000) Development and evaluation of a test for identification of ‘dead
regions’. BSHAA News: The Newsletter of the British Society of Hearing Aid
Audiologists (February): 11.
Moore BCJ, Huss M, Vickers DA, Glasberg BR, Alcántara BR (2000) A test for the diag-
nosis of dead regions in the cochlea. British Journal of Audiology 34(4): 205–24.
Moore BCJ, Alcántara JI, Glasberg BR (1998) Development and evaluation of a proce-
dure for fitting multi-channel compression hearing aids. British Journal of
Audiology 32: 177–95.
Mueller HG, Ebinger KA (1997) Verification of the performance of CIC hearing aids. In
Chasin M (ed.) CIC Handbook. San Diego: Singular Publishing Group.
Mueller HG, Killion MC (1990) An easy method for calculating the articulation index.
The Hearing Journal 43(9): 14–17.
NDCS (1996) Quality Standards in Paediatric Audiology. Vol. II: The audiological man-
agement of the child with permanent hearing loss. London: National Deaf
Children’s Society.
Nolan M, Combe EC (1985) Silicone materials for ear impressions. Scandinavian
Audiology 14: 35–9.

References 
329
O’Donoghue GM (1993) Acoustic neuroma: triumph and disaster. British Journal of
Hospital Medicine 49(2): 86–7.
Pavlovic C, Studebaker G, Sherbecoe R (1986) An articulation index based procedure
for predicting the speech recognition performance of hearing-impaired individu-
als. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 80: 50–7.
Pollack M (1988) Amplification for the Hearing Impaired, 3 edn. Orlando FL: Grune &
Stratton.
Rosenberg PE (1969) Tone Decay. Maico Audiological Library Series, Report 6.
Ruggero MA, Rich NC (1991) Furosemide alters organ of Corti mechanics: evidence for
feedback of outer hair cells upon basilar membrane. Journal of Neuroscience 11:
1057–67.
Seewald RC (1988) The desired sensation level approach for children: selection and
verification. Hearing Instruments 39: 18–22.. 
Seewald RC (1992) The desired sensation level method for fitting children: version 3.0.
Hearing Journal 45(4): 36–41.
Seewald RC (1994) The Desired Sensation Level Method for Selecting and Fitting
Amplification in Children. Proceedings of the Hearing Aid Audiology Group
(HAAG) Spring Meeting. Hearing Aid Audiology Group, British Society of
Audiology, Reading.
Seewald RC (2000) The DSL Report 2000. National Centre for Audiology, London
Ontario.
Seewald RC, Ross M (1988) Hearing aid selection and evaluation with young children.
In Bess FH (ed.) Hearing Impairment in Children, Parkton MD, York Press.
Sheppard L, Hawkridge A (1987) Tinnitus – Learning to live with it. Bath: Ashgrove
Press.
Somerfield Q (1987) The Musician’s Guide to Acoustics. London: Dent.
Sullivan R (1989) Custom canal and concha instruments; a real ear comparison.
Hearing Instruments 40(4): 20–9.
Tate M (1990) The application of real ear probe tube measurements to hearing aid fit-
ting. Acoustic Letters 14(1): 1.
Tate M (ed.) (1994) The Earmould, Current Practice and Technology. Reading:
Hearing Aid Audiology Group, British Society of Audiology.
Taylor G, Bishop J (1991) Being Deaf, The Experience of Deafness. London: Pinter.
Tucker I, Nolan M (1984) Educational Audiology. London: Croom Helm.
Weatherall DJ, Ledingham JGG, Warrell DA (1983) Oxford Textbook of Medicine.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wernick JS (1985) Use of hearing aids. In Katz J (ed.) Handbook of Clinical Audiology,
3 edn. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.
Woolley M (1991) Acquired hearing loss: acquired oppression. In Taylor G, Bishop J
(eds) Being Deaf: The experience of deafness. Milton Keynes: Open University.
Wright A (2001) Personal communication. University College, London.
Wright D (1992) Signal Processing Hearing Aids: A review. Hearing Aid Audiology
Group (HAAG) Reading: British Society of Audiology.

This page intentionally left blank 

331
ABLB, see alternate binaural loudness
balance test
AB word list, 226
acoustic filters, 152, 216–7
acoustic impedance, 35, 268–70, 273–4
acoustic neuroma, 62
acoustic reflex,  35, 270, 273–6
acoustics, 1–19
acquired conditions of the ear, 47–50,
51–4, 57–62
adaptation, 276, 280–1, 287
addition cured silicone, 205–6
aditus, 27
afferent nerve fibres, 31–2
AGC, see Automatic Gain Control
aided thresholds, 222–3, 293
air-bone gap, 127, 136, 147–149
air conduction,
hearing aids, 155–9, 181, 186–7, 194
output transducer (hearing aid),
90–1, 104
threshold testing, 135–44, 150, 277
algorithms, prescriptive, 107, 112–3,
115–9, 195–9
aliasing, 108
alternate binaural loudness balance test,
276–9
American National Standards Institute,
171
amplifiers, 86–90, 97, 179
analogue hearing aids, see also hearing
aid(s); 102, 106–7, 242
anatomy, 21–32
ANSI, see American National Standards
Institute
antrum, 27–8
aperiodic, 9, 72–3
articulation index, 78
areal ratio, see Middle ear function
artificial mastoid, 177–8
A scale, 13–5, 294–6
ASP, see automatic signal processing
assistive devices, 239, 245–7
atresia, 46, 50
attack time, 97–8, 102, 114, 169–70
audiogram,
interpretation, 76–8, 146–51, 287
pure tone, 134–8, 146–7, 229–30
speech, 230–2
symbols, 143–4, 146–7, 196
audiological assessment,
audiogram interpretation, 146–51
case history, 125–8, 266
masking, 137–45, 146–7, 150, 229–30,
261, 264–7
otoscopy, 129–31
pure tone audiometry, 15, 134–7
referable conditions, 127–8
tuning fork tests, 132–4
audiological reference pressure, 11, 
13
audiometer,
calibration, 15
daily checks, 16–7
speech, 229–30
standards, 15–6
Index

332
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
audiometric,
symbols, 143–4, 146–7, 196
test frequencies, 135–7, 146, 301
tests, 15, 134–44, 276–82, 284–5,
286–9
audiometric room requirements, 151–2
audiometry,
automatic, 286–9
impedance, 268–75
masking, 137–44, 146, 150, 229–30,
261, 264–7
paediatric, 293–301
pure tone, 15, 134–7
speech, 224–32
auditory,
adaptation, 280–1
deprivation, 190–1
feedback, 78–9, 253, 284
training, 252–5
auditory pathways, see central connec-
tions of cochlear nerve
auditory tube, see Eustachian tube
aural rehabilitation, see rehabilitation
auricle, see pinna
automatic,
gain control, 97–102, 169, 200–1
signal processing, 103, 104, 113
volume control, see automatic gain
control
automatic audiometry, 286–9
auxiliary aids, see assistive devices
average speech spectrum, 76, 120, 150,
196, 223
background noise reduction, see also
bass cut; venting; 102–3, 113–4
bacterial conditions of the ear, see
infections
BAHA, see bone anchored hearing aid
balance, organ of, 29, 31
band, digital, 102, 113
basilar membrane, 29–31, 37–8, 260,
261, 281
bass cut, see also automatic signal
processing; venting; 94–5, 102–3,
216
batteries, hearing aid, 178–80, 242
battery, 
characteristics, 178–80
storage, 181
behind-the-ear hearing aid, 156–7, 181
Békésy audiometry, 287–9
Békésy’s travelling wave theory, 37–8
Bell’s palsy, 54
bi-CROS hearing aids, 193–4
binary numbers, 106, 110
binaural hearing, advantages over
monaural, 188–91
bit processing, 110–1
bodyworn hearing aid, 155–6, 157, 160,
181
bone anchored hearing aid, 187–8
bone conduction,
hearing aid, 159–60, 177, 186–8
output transducer, 91–2
threshold testing, 136–7, 139–42, 144,
149–50
bone vibrator, see bone conduction
output transducer
bone vibrator output measurement,
177–8
brain stem evoked response audiometry,
297–8
British Standards Institution, 171
BTE, see Behind-the-ear hearing aid
calibration, see audiometer
canal hearing aid, see in-the-canal
hearing aid
Carhart’s notch, 36, 54, 55, 137
case history, 125–8, 266
causes of hearing loss, see medical
aspects of hearing loss
central connections of cochlear nerve,
42–3
channel, digital, 102, 113–4
cholesteatoma, 52–3
chorda tympani, 26
chromosomes, 45
clicks, 297
cochlea,
anatomy of,  28–31
dead regions, 276, 281–2
cochlear,
echoes, see otoacoustic emissions
fluids, 28, 29, 30

Index 
333
hearing loss, see also sensorineural
hearing loss; 275, 276–7, 280
hearing loss, tests of, 276–82, 287–8 
implants, 201–2, 304–6
innervation, 31–2, 42–3
potentials, 41–2
code of practice,
Hearing Aid Council, 248–51
referable conditions, 127–8, 249
complex needs, children with, 304
complex sound, 8
compliance, 269, 271–2
compression, 97–102, 118, 201
condensation reaction silicone, 205, 
206
conductive hearing loss, 46–54, 136–7,
142, 269–70, 292–3
congenital conditions of the ear, 45–6,
50–1, 54–7
consonants, 68, 73–4, 76, 77
contralateral routeing of signals, 158,
192–4
corti, organ of, 30–1, 36–7, 260
Costen’s syndrome, 64
counselling, see rehabilitation
coupler, 2cc, 174–5
couplers, 173–8, 200
cranial nerves, 23, 25, 26, 27, 31, 273
CROS hearing aid, 158, 193–4
cross-hearing, 133–4, 137–41
Crouzon’s syndrome, 50
current, electrical, 93–4
cytomegalovirus, 54,57
daily checks, see audiometer
dBHL, see decibel, hearing level
dBSPL, see decibel, sound pressure level
dead regions in the cochlea, see Cochlea,
dead regions
decibel,
hearing level, 13–4
scales, 7, 11–3
sound pressure level, 11–3
delayed speech feedback test, 284–5
desired sensation level algorithm, 118
difference limen, 287, 287
digital, 
hearing aids, 106–7, 113, 119–20,
195–6
signal processing, 106–15
directional microphones, 81, 84–6, 114
disease, see pathology
discharge, ear, see also otitis externa;
otitis media; 53, 127, 130
distortion, 166–9
Doerfler-Stewart test, 284
Down’s syndrome, 50
drugs, see ototoxic drugs
DSL I/O, see desired sensation level
algorithm
DSP, see digital signal processing
dynamic range of hearing, 12, 154
ear,
anatomy, 21–32
canal, see external auditory meatus
canal resonance, 34, 220–1
examination, see also otoscopy; 207
physiology, 32–43
plugs, see ear protection
protection, 57–8
simulator, 173–4, 175, 176–7
earache, 63–4
earmould,
materials, 211
types, 211–3
earmoulds, 204–18
ear impression,
equipment, 206
open jaw, 209–10
technique, 207–9
echo, 10
eczema, 49
efferent nerve fibres, 31–2
electret microphone, 84, 104
electricity, elementary theory, 92–4
electro-acoustic impedance, see
impedance
endolymph, 28, 29, 30
endolymphatic, 
duct, 29
sac, 29, 62
equal loudness contours, 18
equivalent input noise level, 168
ERA, see evoked response audiometry
Eustachian tube, 27, 51–2, 292

334
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
evaluation of hearing aids, 119–20, 176,
219–24, 232–3
evoked response audiometry, 298
excessive wax, 48
external auditory meatus, see also
otoscopy; 22–3, 34
facial nerve, 22, 25, 26, 27
fall time, 16,17
feedback,
acoustic, 156, 187, 194, 199, 243
auditory, 78–9, 253
filters, acoustic, 217
fluctuating hearing loss, 61, 128, 292–3
formants, 72–3, 75, 77
free-field, 10, 13, 173, 294
frequency,
audible range, 6, 19
fundamental, 8–9
of sound, 5, 19
of speech, 71–2, 77
of vocal cords, 73
frequency response,
hearing aid, 100–1,102–3, 161–2, 165,
198–9, 213–7
modification, 94–5, 213–7 
fricatives, 73–4, 77
Fry speech test, 225
functional gain, 197, 222–3
fundamental frequency, see frequency
furunculosis, 49
gain
functional, 197, 222–3
insertion, 177, 197–8, 219–22
open ear, 197, 220–1
gain control (volume), 92
genetic conditions of the ear, 46, 50–1,
56
genetics, 45
german measles, 54, 57
glue ear, see also otitis media; 51–2, 292
grommet, 52, 63
HAC code of practice, see Hearing Aid
Council code of practice
HACTES test stimuli, 120
hair cells, 30–1, 37–42, 260, 296
HAIC standards, 171
half gain rule, 196, 197
half peak level (HPL), 230, 231
half peak level elevation (HPLE), 230,
231
hard acrylic earmould, 211
harmonic distortion, 16, 166–7
harmonics, 8–9
head shadow effect, 34, 189–90
hearing aid(s),
advantages of binaural, 188–91
care and cleaning, 243–4
components,
amplifier, 86–90
battery, 178–80, 242
microphone, 80–6, 104
output transducer, 90–2
transistor, 87, 88
digital, 106–7, 113, 119–20, 195–6
evaluation, 119–20, 176, 219–24,
232–3
fitting, 115–9, 185–6, 195–210, 302–3
fitting room requirements, 195
modification, 94–8, 213–7, 232–3
National health service, 181–3
performance,
frequency response, 100–1, 102–3,
165, 198–9, 213–7
gain, 163–4
maximum output, 95–6, 164–5,
199–200
specification sheets, 160–3
practical instruction to patients,
241–5
purpose, 185
selection and fitting, 185–201, 302–3
standards, 120, 169–71
test box, 173
types,
air conduction, 155–9, 181, 186–7,
194
behind-the-ear, 156–7, 181
bi-CROS, 193–4
bodyworn, 155–6, 157, 160, 181
bone conduction, 159–60, 186–8
CROS, 158, 193–4
in-the-canal, 158–9

Index 
335
in-the-ear, 158–9
spectacle, 157–8
Hearing Aid Council code of practice,
127–8, 248–51
hearing loss,
causes, see medical aspects of hearing
loss
in children, 46, 47, 51–2, 283–4,
290–301
classification, 150–1
conductive, 46–54, 136–7, 142,
269–70, 292–3
description, 150–1
fluctuating, 61, 128, 292–3
noise induced, 55, 57–8
sensorineural, 54–62, 133, 147–50,
231, 276
and speech perception, 70–1, 76–8
and speech production, 78, 253–4
unilateral, 128, 133, 192–4, 291
hearing range in humans, 6, 19
hearing screening, 39, 286, 297, 298–9
hearing tactics, 245–6
hearing therapist, 253, 254–5
herpes,
simplex, 49
zoster, 59, 64
hereditary conditions, 45, 46, 50–1
hertz, 5
high frequency emphasis, see also
venting; horns; 94–5, 100–1, 214,
233
hi-pro box, 112
horn, 214, 215
hydrops, see Ménière’s disorder
ICRA noise, 120
IEC, see International Electrotechnical
Commission
impedance,
acoustic, 268–70, 273–4
audiometry, 268–75
electrical, 94
middle ear, 35, 268–9, 273
impression,
of the ear, 204–5, 266, 303
equipment, 206
materials, 205–6
techniques, 207–10
incus, 24, 25, 26, 34
induction loop system, 243, 246–7
industrial hearing loss, see noise induced
hearing loss
industrial screening, 286–9
infection,
inner ear, 54, 57, 59–60
middle ear, 27, 51–3
outer ear, 48–9, 64
inner ear,
anatomy, 21, 28–32
congenital conditions, 54–7 
pathology, 54–62
physiology, 36–43
inner hair cells, 30–1, 260, 281–2
innervation of the cochlea, 31–2, 42–3
intermodulation distortion, 166, 167
internal noise, 168
International Electrotechnical
Commission, 169, 171
in-the-canal hearing aid, 158–9
in-the-ear hearing aid, 158–9
inverse square law, 3, 4, 10, 308 
ITE, see in-the-ear hearing aid
KEMAR (Knowles Electronic Manikin for
Acoustic Research), 176
Kendall toy test, 226–7
labyrinth, 28–9
labyrinthectomy, 63
laryngopharynx, 32
Libby horn, see horn
lip-reading, 70–1, 252–3
localization of sound, 33–4, 39, 192
logarithms, 11–2
Lombard test, 284
long-term average speech spectrum, 120,
150, 196, 223
loop system, 246–7, 309
loudness, see also intensity; 11, 18
loudness mapping, 117, 121
loudspeaker, see receiver
low frequency emphasis, 94–5, 100–1
LTASS, see long-term average speech
spectrum

336
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
MAF, see minimum audible field
malingering deafness, 283–5
malleus, 24, 25, 26, 34, 131, 273
Maltby speech perception test, 228–9
MAP, see minimum audible pressure
maskers, tinnitus, 261, 266–7
masking,
air conduction, 139, 140, 143
bone conduction, 139–40, 144
need for, 137–8
noise, 144–5, 229
procedure, 140–3
rules, 139–40
symbols, 143–4, 146
tinnitus evaluation, 264
mastoid, 23–4, 26, 27–8
mastoidectomy, 63, 207
mastoid simulator, 177–8
maximum output, 95–6, 98, 164–5,
199–200
maximum power output, see maximum
output
MCL, see most comfortable level
meatal projection of earmould, 213,
214–5
meatus, see external auditory meatus
medical aspects of hearing loss,
inner ear pathology, 54–62
middle ear pathology, 50–4
outer ear pathology, 46–50
medical referral, 127–8, 207, 249
mel, 19
Ménière’s disorder, 61–2, 63
microphone,
capacitor (condenser), 83–4, 104
carbon, 82
directional, 84–6
dynamic (moving coil), 82–3
electret, 84, 104
hearing aid, 80–6, 104
piezo-electric (crystal), 82
pressure, 81
middle ear,
anatomy, 23–8
function, 34–6
muscles, 25, 26, 35–6, 273–4
pathology, 50–4
physiology, 34–6
transformer action, 35, 268–9
minimum audible field (MAF), 13–4
minimum audible pressure(MAP), 13
modiolus, 28, 29, 30
Moore’s test of dead regions in the
cochlea, 281–2
most comfortable level, 196, 320
multi-channel hearing aids, 102, 104,
113–4, 201
myringotomy, 52, 62–3
NAL-NL1, see National Acoustics
Laboratory non-linear algorithm
nasopharynx , 32
National Acoustics Laboratory non-linear
algorithm, 115–6, 118–9
National Health Service hearing aids,
181–3
nerve supply, see cochlear innervation;
cranial nerves
NIHL, see noise induced hearing loss
NOAH, 112
noise induced hearing loss, 55, 57–8
noise reduction in hearing aids, see
automatic signal processing; bass
cut; venting
non-organic hearing loss, 283–5
Nyquist frequency, 108
occluded ear simulator, 173–4, 175,
176–7
occlusion effect, 36, 137, 216
octave, 9, 15
Ohm’s law, 93–4
on-effect, see auditory adaptation
open ear gain, 197, 220
open jaw impressions, 209–10
operations on the ear, see also cochlear
implants; 62–3
organ of Corti, 30–1, 36–7
oropharynx, 32
ossicles, 24–6
otalgia, see pain in the ear
otitis externa, 49
otitis media, 51–2, 53, 292–3
otoacoustic emissions, 39, 296–7
otorrhoea, see discharge of the ear
otosclerosis, 54, 55

Index 
337
otoscope, 129–30
otoscopy, 129–31
ototoxic drugs, 60
outer ear,
anatomy, 22–3 
excessive wax, 48
foreign bodies, 47–8
furunculosis, 49
infection, 48–9, 64
pathology, 46–50
physiology, 32–4
tumours, 50
outer hair cells, 30–1, 37–40, 42, 260,
296
output,
compression, 98–9
limiting, 95–9
transducer, 90–2, 104
output sound pressure level, see
maximum output 
paediatric hearing loss, 290–301
Paget’s disease, 51
pain in the ear, 63–4
pascals, 7, 12
pathology,
inner ear, 54–62
middle ear, 50–4
outer ear, 46–50
pathways to the auditory cortex, see
central nervous system
patient management, see rehabilitation
PB words, 225
PC, see peak clipping
perilymph, 28
period, 6
periodic sound, 8–9
pharynx, 32, 33, 70
phase,
distortion, 168
of sound, 8, 34
phon, 18
phonemes, 68, 225, 253
phonetically balanced (PB) words, 225
physiology of the ear, 
inner ear, 36–43
middle ear, 34–6
outer ear, 32–4
pink noise, 9, 144–5
pinna,
anatomy, 22
injury to, 47
physiology, 33–4
pitch,
matching, 263
of sound, 5, 9, 19
see also frequency
plosives, 74, 77
polar plot, 86
prelingual deafness, 290
presbyacusis, 55, 58–9
prescription formulae, 115–9, 195–200
pressure,
audiological reference, 11, 13
minimum audible, 13
sound, 7, 11–4
profound deafness, 150, 198, 201–2,
228–9, 291
pseudohypacusis, see non-organic
hearing loss
psychoacoustics, 18–9
psychogenic hearing loss, 283
pure tone,
audiogram, 147–50, 196
audiometry, 134–146
pure tones, 5, 8, 19
push-pull amplifier, 88, 90, 179
quantization, 110–2
radio hearing aid, 308–9
RASTI, 307–8
real ear measures, 220–2
receiver, 90–2, 159
recommended equivalent threshold
sound pressure levels, 13–4
recovery time, 169, 170
recruitment, see also cochlear hearing
loss, tests of, 18, 38, 196
reference coupler, 174–5, 176
reference test,
frequency, 164
gain, 163–4, 167
referable conditions, 127–8, 207, 249
reflex arc, 274
rehabilitation,

338
Principles of Hearing Aid Audiology
attitude types, 236–7
practical aspects of, 240–6
process, 235–6
tinnitus, 264–7
see also hearing aid fitting; subjective
evaluation of hearing aids
release time, 97–8, 102, 169
residual hearing, 154
retention rings for hearing aids, 303
retrocochlear disorders, 230–1, 275–6,
277, 280–1, 289
RETSPL, see recommended equivalent
threshold sound pressure levels
reverberation, 10, 307
reverberation time, 
for audiometric rooms, 152
for classrooms, 306
Rinne test, 133–4
rise time, 17–8
room requirements, 
for audiometry, 151–2, 294
classrooms, 306–7
for hearing aid fitting, 195
rubella, 57
sampling, digital signals, 107–9
saturation sound pressure level, see
maximum output
semicircular canals, 28–9, 31
sensorineural hearing loss, 54–62, 133,
147–50, 231, 276
shadow curve, 138–9
short increment sensitivity test, 280
signal processing, 94, 102–3, 106,
107–15
signal to noise ratio, 230, 306
sine waves, see pure tones
SISI test, see short increment sensitivity
test
social worker, 254
soft acrylic, 211
sone, 18
sound,
aperiodic, 9
complex, 8
field, 293, 294
field radio system, 293, 306, 309
frequency, 4, 5, 8–9
generation, 3
intensity, 7, 10, 11, 18, 19
localisation, 33–4, 39, 168, 194, 292
measurement, 14, 19, 294
perception, see also speech percep-
tion; 18, 19, 36, 115
periodic, 5, 8–9
pressure, 7, 11–4
psychological properties of, 18–9, 185
speed of, 3, 6
transduction, 40–2
transmission, 37–40
wave, 3, 5–10
wavelength of, 6
sound level meter, 14–6, 18, 294–5
specification sheets, hearing aid, 160–3
spectacle hearing aid, 157–8, 159, 187
specula sterilisation, 129–30
speech,
audiogram, 230–1
audiometry, 224, 229–32
‘banana’, see long-term average
speech spectogram
frequency, 73, 77
intelligibility, 67–9, 70–1, 76–8
intensity, 76, 196
perception, 67–8, 76–8
production, 67, 69–70, 78–9
reading, 70–1
sounds, 71–9
tests, 191, 224–9, 300
therapy, 253
time factors, 75–6
speed of sound, 3, 6
spondees, 225
standing waves, 10, 152, 293
standards, see ANSI; British Standards;
HAIC 
stapedectomy, 54, 56, 63
stapedial reflex, see acoustic reflex
stapedius muscle, 26, 273–4
stapes, 25–6, 34, 35, 268
startle reflex, 36, 273
Stenger test, 285–6
sterilisation of specula,129–30
subjective evaluation of hearing aids,
219, 232–4

Index 
339
surgical treatment, see operations on the
ear
syndromes, 45, 50–1, 56
syphilis, 57
tactics for new hearing aid users, 245–6
teacher of the deaf, 255, 301, 310
telecoil system, 246–7, 309
temporal integration, 19
temporary threshold shift, 57
tensor tympani muscle, 25–6, 35–6, 273
test box, hearing aid, 171–3
test frequencies,  audiometric, 135–6
tinnitus,
assessment, 261–4, 266
and associated hearing problems, 259
in children, 291
conditions involving, 47, 48, 58, 60,
61, 64–5
maskers, 261, 266–7
rehabilitation, 238, 264, 267
relief, 63, 190, 192, 261
tone controls, hearing aid, 94–5
tone decay, see auditory adaptation
transient distortion, 167
transistor, 87
transposition hearing aids, 194
travelling wave theory, 37–8
Treacher Collins’ syndrome, 46, 50
treble cut, 95, 232
trigeminal nerve, 25, 273
‘T’ switch, 92, 243, 302
TTS, see temporary threshold shift
tubing modification, 213–4
tuning curves, 38–9, 40
tuning fork, 4, 8, 132
tuning fork tests, 132–4
Turner’s syndrome, 56
twin channel hearing aids, 102, 201
tympanic cavity, 23–7
tympanic membrane,
anatomy, 24, 25
injury to, 47, 127, 207
physiology, 35
see also otoscopy
tympanometry, 270–3
tympanoplasty, 63
ULL, see uncomfortable loudness level
uncomfortable loudness level, 145–7,
196, 264, 275
unilateral hearing loss, 128, 192–3, 291
upward spread of masking, 77, 197
Usher’s syndrome, 56
venting, 215–7
vertigo, 61–2, 128
vestibular system, see semicircular canals
vestibule, 28, 29
vestibulo-cochlear nerve, 31, 32, 281
vibrotactile levels, 147, 149
viruses, 49, 54, 57, 59, 62
vocal,
cords, 69–73
folds, see Vocal cords
tract, 69–70, 71–3
voltage, 93
volume, see gain; intensity; loudness
volume control, 92, 97, 198, 242
vowels, 68, 71–3, 75–6, 77, 150
Waardenburg’s syndrome, 56
warble tone, 10–1
wavelength of sound, 6
wave motion, 10
waves,
sound, 5, 6, 8, 9
standing, 10, 152
wax, excessive, 48, 207
Weber test, 132–3
white noise, 9, 229
zinc air batteries, 180, 242

