
Probing the Meaning of
Superpositions, Dynamics, Semantics and Identity
Quantum Mechanics

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

Probing the Meaning of
Superpositions, Dynamics, Semantics and Identity
Quantum Mechanics
Editors
Diederik Aerts
Brussels Free University (VUB), Belgium
Christian de Ronde
University of Buenos Aires, Argentina &  
Brussels Free University (VUB), Belgium
Hector Freytes
Università di Firenze, Italy
Sven Aerts
Università degli studi di Cagliari, Italy
Quantum Mechanics and Quantum Information: Physical, 
Philosophical and Logical Approaches
Cagliari, Italy             23 – 25 July 2014
NEW JERSEY  •  LONDON  •  SINGAPORE  •  BEIJING  •  SHANGHAI  •  HONG KONG  •  TAIPEI  •  CHENNAI •  TOKYO
World Scientific

Published by
World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd.
5 Toh Tuck Link, Singapore 596224
USA office:  27 Warren Street, Suite 401-402, Hackensack, NJ 07601
UK office:  57 Shelton Street, Covent Garden, London WC2H 9HE
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
PROBING  THE  MEANING  OF  QUANTUM  MECHANICS
Superpositions, Dynamics, Semantics and Identity
Copyright © 2016 by World Scientific Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd. 
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not be reproduced in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or any information storage and retrieval 
system now known or to be invented, without written permission from the publisher.
For photocopying of material in this volume, please pay a copying fee through the Copyright Clearance 
Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA. In this case permission to photocopy 
is not required from the publisher.
ISBN	 978-981-3146-27-3	
Desk Editor: Ng Kah Fee
Typeset by Stallion Press
Email: enquiries@stallionpress.com
Printed in Singapore

v
EDITORIAL PREFACE
Quantum mechanics is recognized today as one of the most successful phys-
ical theories ever. However, its interpretation is still problematic, or more
speciﬁcally, an understanding of what quantum mechanics talks about does
not exist yet. Although the features that are considered at the origin of these
problems — Schr¨odinger’s cat situation, entanglement, non-separability
and contextuality — are well identiﬁed and nowadays resources of well-
established technical applications, we continue to lack a semantic and a
conceptual representation explaining the relation of quantum theory to
physical reality.
Independently of the many developments in the 20th Century, dur-
ing the last decades quantum mechanics has given rise to a new techno-
logical era, a revolution taking place today especially within the ﬁeld of
quantum information processing, reaching from quantum teleportation and
cryptography to quantum computation. This development is related to the
philosophy of quantum mechanics which addresses epistemic and ontic in-
terpretations, the meaning of individuality and identity, of quantum pos-
sibility, objective probability and chance, free will and causality. Next to
the philosophical foundations also the logical and mathematical structure
of the theory is considered in the present book. The underlying mathemat-
ical structure related to quantum mechanics is based on a vectorial Hilbert
space, which was employed in 1932 by John von Neumann in his famous
book Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Few years later,
in 1936, John von Neumann and Garret Birkhoﬀpublished a seminal pa-
per titled “The logic of quantum mechanics”. The subject of that paper
was an investigation of the logical structure underlying the language of
quantum mechanics, establishing a link between logic, language and quan-
tum mechanics. From this standpoint several schools in the foundations of
quantum mechanics and quantum logic with diﬀerent approaches followed.

vi
The diﬀerences in approach have still grown over time, up to the present
day. The quantum logical approaches consider many diﬀerent aspects of
quantum mechanics such as: truth notions, the logic related to superpo-
sitions and entanglement, modal approaches, logical systems associated to
quantum computational gates and categorical approaches.
These topics
deﬁne a new extensive area of investigation in modern quantum logic and,
at the same time, provide a deep contribution to the understanding of the
theory of quanta. All these diﬀerent subjects related to quantum mechanics
are discussed and analyzed in the present book.
This book attempts to address foundational questions in an interdisci-
plinary manner considering the physical, philosophical, mathematical and
logical aspects of quantum mechanics. Going from philosophy of quan-
tum mechanics to quantum logic, from categorical approaches to quantum
information processing, the originality of this book resides in the multiplic-
ity of approaches which focus on the common aim, to grasp the meaning
of the theory of quanta. We believe that the advancement of such under-
standing will be possible, not through the strict separation of smaller and
smaller subjects of research, but on the very contrary, through the common
sharing and discussion of multiple perspectives that come from diﬀerent
ﬁelds.
The novelty of the book comes from the multiple perspectives put for-
ward by top researchers in quantum mechanics, from Europe as well as
North and South America, discussing the meaning and structure of the
theory of quanta. The book comprises in a balanced manner physical,
philosophical, logical and mathematical approaches to quantum mechanics
and quantum information. From quantum superpositions and entanglement
to dynamics and the problem of identity, from quantum logic, computa-
tion and quasi-set theory to the category approach and teleportation, from
realism and empiricism to operationalism and instrumentalism, the book
touches from diﬀerent perspectives some of the most intriguing questions
related to one of the most important physical theories of our time. From
Buenos Aires to Brussels and Cagliari, from Florence to Florian´opolis, the
interaction between diﬀerent groups is reﬂected in the many diﬀerent ar-
ticles. This book is interesting not only to the specialists but also to the
general public attempting to get a grasp on some of the most fundamental
questions of present quantum physics.
D. Aerts, C. de Ronde, H. Freytes & R. Giuntini.

vii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The present book was inspired by the ﬁrst edition of the international meet-
ing “Quantum Mechanics and Quantum Information: Physical, Philosoph-
ical and Logical approaches” that took place at the University of Cagliari
(Italy) in July 2014.
We are particularly grateful to the Regione Sardegna that has par-
tially supported this international meeting within the Regional project:
“Modeling the uncertainty: Quantum Theory and Imaging Processing”,
(Legge Regionale 7 Agosto 2007, n.7, Promozione della ricerca scientiﬁca e
dell’innovazione tecnologica in Sardegna).
A
special thanks
to
the
National Research Council
CONICET
(Argentina) and the Centre Leo Apostel CLEA (Bruxelles) that also spon-
sored this conference.
Last but not least, thanks to the Scientiﬁc Committee, composed of
Diederik Aerts, Maria Luisa Dalla Chiara, Desio Crause and Newton da
Costa, and to the Organizing Committee, composed of Christian de Ronde,
Hector Freytes, Giuseppe Sergioli and Antonio Ledda.
Cagliari, May 13th, 2016
Roberto Giuntini

This page intentionally left blank
This page intentionally left blank

ix
CONTENTS
1.
On the Notion of Truth in Quantum Mechanics:
A Category-Theoretic Standpoint
1
V. Karakostas and E. Zaﬁris
2.
A Logical Account of Quantum Superpositions
44
D. Krause and J. R. B. Arenhart
3.
Mixing Categories and Modal Logics in the Quantum Setting
60
G. Cin`a
4.
Binary Gates in Three Valued Quantum Computational
Logics
76
G. Sergioli, A. Ledda and R. Giuntini
5.
The GTR-Model: A Universal Framework for
Quantum-Like Measurements
91
D. Aerts and M. S. de Bianchi
6.
‘Probabilistic Knowledge’ as ‘Objective Knowledge’ in
Quantum Mechanics: Potential Immanent Powers Instead
of Actual Properties
141
C. de Ronde
7.
On When a Semantics is not a Good Semantics:
The Algebraisation of Orthomodular Logic
179
T. Kowalski, F. Paoli and R. Giuntini

x
8.
Von Neumann, Empiricism and the Foundations of
Quantum Mechanics
192
O. Bueno
9.
The Born Rule and Free Will: Why Libertarian
Agent-Causal Free Will is Not “Antiscientiﬁc”
231
R. E. Kastner
10. Fuzzy Approach for CNOT Gate in Quantum Computation
with Mixed States
244
G. Sergioli and H. Freytes
11. A Modal Logic of Indiscernibility
259
D. Krause, J. R. B. Arenhart and P. Merlussi
12. The Possibility of a New Metaphysics for Quantum
Mechanics from Meinong’s Theory of Objects
280
M. Graﬃgna
13. Entanglement of Formation for Werner States and
Isotropic States via Logical Gates
308
C. Bertini, M. L. D. Chiara and R. Leporini
14. Time, Chance and Quantum Theory
324
A. Sudbery
15. A Topos Theoretic Framework for Paraconsistent
Quantum Theory
340
B. Eva
16. A Possible Solution to the Second Entanglement Paradox
351
D. Aerts and M. S. de Bianchi

1
ON THE NOTION OF TRUTH IN QUANTUM MECHANICS:
A CATEGORY-THEORETIC STANDPOINT
Vassilios Karakostas
Department of Philosophy and History of Science, Faculty of Sciences
University of Athens, Athens 157 71, Greece.
E-mail: karakost@ phs. uoa. gr
Elias Zafiris
Department of Logic, E¨otv¨os University, Budapest, Hungary.
E-mail: ezafiris@ math. uoa. gr
The category-theoretic representation of quantum event structures provides
a canonical setting for confronting the fundamental problem of truth valua-
tion in quantum mechanics as exempliﬁed, in particular, by Kochen-Specker’s
theorem. In the present study, this is realized on the basis of the existence
of a categorical adjunction between the category of sheaves of variable local
Boolean frames, constituting a topos, and the category of quantum event al-
gebras. We show explicitly that the latter category is equipped with an object
of truth values, or classifying object, which constitutes the appropriate tool
for assigning truth values to propositions describing the behavior of quantum
systems. Eﬀectively, this category-theoretic representation scheme circumvents
consistently the semantic ambiguity with respect to truth valuation that is in-
herent in conventional quantum mechanics by inducing an objective contextual
account of truth in the quantum domain of discourse. The philosophical im-
plications of the resulting account are analyzed. We argue that it subscribes
neither to a pragmatic instrumental nor to a relative notion of truth. Such an
account essentially denies that there can be a universal context of reference
or an Archimedean standpoint from which to evaluate logically the totality of
facts of nature. In this light, the transcendence condition of the usual concep-
tion of correspondence truth is superseded by a reﬂective-like transcendental
reasoning of the proposed account of truth that is suitable to the quantum
domain of discourse.
Keywords: Quantum mechanics, Kochen-Specker theorem, category theory,
categorical adjunction, topos theory, subobject classiﬁer, correspondence truth,
contextual semantics.

2
1. On the Traditional Framework of Correspondence Truth
in Physical Science
The logic of a physical theory reﬂects the structure of elementary propo-
sitions referring to the behavior of a physical system in the domain of the
corresponding theory. Elementary propositions concern the values of phys-
ical quantities pertaining to a system and are of the form “the value of the
physical quantity A lies in a measurable subset of the real numbers”, for
which we use the shorthand notation “A ∈∆”. Propositions of the type
“A ∈∆” refer to the world in the most direct conceivable sense. They can
only be ascertained as true or false by corresponding, or not corresponding,
to “facts” or, more generally, to “actual states of aﬀairs” or, in contempo-
rary physical terms, to “events” conceived in the physicist’s understanding
as actual measurement outcomes, as concrete elements of empirical real-
ity [1]. In this respect, elementary propositions are posits in the process
of probing the natural world. They can be used to indicate properties of
physical systems in the following sense: a system S is characterized by a
property a, namely a particular value of the physical quantity A, if and
only if the corresponding proposition PA is true, i.e., if and only if “A = a”
or “A ∈∆”. For instance, “qx = 5” is true of the system S if and only if
the x component of S’s position is 5 according to a proper system of coor-
dinates. To say, therefore, that the elementary proposition “A ∈∆” is true
of the system S is equivalent to say that in S, A has a value in ∆. Physics
is fundamentally concerned about the truth values of such propositions of
the form “A ∈∆”, where ∆varies over the Borel subsets of the real line
and A varies over the physical quantities of system S, when S is in a given
state. Of course, the state may change in time, and hence the truth values
also will change in time.
In addition to the syntactic aspect, dealing with the logico-mathematical
operations and relations among the propositions pertaining to a system, the
logic of a physical theory incorporates the task of providing a semantics,
focusing particularly on the task of establishing a criterion of truth or,
in a more complete sense, deﬁning propositional truth. In relation to the
latter, the correspondence theory of truth has frequently been regarded
within physical science as the most eminent. Although the correspondence
theory admits various diﬀerent formulations, the core of any correspondence
theory is the idea that a proposition is true if and only if it corresponds
to or matches reality. The classical version of the theory describes this
relationship as a correspondence to the facts about the world [2, pp. 70-72].

3
If so, then adopting a correspondence theory of truth amounts to endorsing
instances of the following scheme:
[CF] The proposition that P is true if and only if P corresponds
to a fact.
Alternatively, if one construes the notion of a “fact” in terms of the
weaker notion of an obtaining “state of aﬀairs”, as in an Austin-type theory
[3, pp. 149-162], then, [CF] is re-expressed as follows:
[CS] The proposition that P is true if and only if there is a state
of aﬀairs X such that P corresponds to X and X obtains.
The useful feature of states of aﬀairs, especially in the philosophical dis-
course, is that they refer to something that can be said to obtain or fail
to obtain, to be the case or not to be the case, to be a fact or fail to be
a fact, that is, they exist even when they are not concretely manifested or
realized.
It is worthy to note in this connection that the traditional theory of
truth as correspondence, regardless of its exact formulation, has frequently
been associated with the view that truth is radically non-epistemic [4, p.
606]. This means that the truth (or falsity) of a proposition is entirely
independent of anyone’s cognitive capacities, beliefs, theories, conceptual
schemes, and so on. According to this non-epistemic conception, the truth-
makers of propositions — namely, facts or actual states of aﬀairs, forming
the object-end of the truthmaking relation — are totally independent of
human conceptualization and thus can be conceived of as being completely
autonomous in themselves, or as residing in the world purely extensionally,
that is, in a manner independent of our worldviews and particular discursive
practices and contexts. In this sense, the view of a radically non-epistemic
conception of truth incorporates the following transcendence condition:
Transcendence condition: The truth of a proposition transcends
our possible knowledge of it, or its evidential basis; it is empirically
unconstrained.
As a consequence of the preceding condition, even if it is impossible to pro-
duce a framework on which we may ascertain the truth value of a propo-
sition this does not imply that the proposition does not possess any such
value. It always has one. It is either determinately true or determinately
false independently of any empirical evidence or cognitive means by which

4
we may establish which value it is. The possession of truth values is there-
fore entirely independent of our means of warranting their assignment.
The transcendence condition, no doubt, attempts to capture the realist
intuition that a proposition cannot be claimed true or false in virtue of its
knowability or justiﬁability. For, a proposition may be true without being
justiﬁed, and vice versa. Agreed! But what does the transcendence thesis,
in its totality, really presuppose, especially when viewed within the tradi-
tional framework of correspondence truth? It presupposes the existence of
a ‘platonic’ universe of true propositions, entirely independent of our abil-
ity in having access to it, and, henceforth, elements of this ideal world, in
this case, propositions, possess determinate truth values entirely indepen-
dent of our capability in forming justiﬁed convictions about them. In other
words, it is important to realize that this thesis does not simply aim to
establish an objective basis or attribute a non-epistemic character to the
notion of truth — that, for instance, the content of declarative proposi-
tions is rendered true (or false) on the basis of worldly conditions and not
on some relevant beliefs of ours — but this particular conception tends to
be so radically non-epistemic that at the end leads to a notion of truth with
absolutely no epistemic features.
Be that as it may, it is particularly interesting that the semantics under-
lying the propositional structure of classical mechanics allows truth-value
assignment in conformity with the usual traditional conception of a corre-
spondence account of truth. In classical physics, the algebra of propositions
of a classical system is isomorphic to the lattice of subsets of phase space, a
Boolean lattice, LB, that can be interpreted semantically by a two-valued
truth-function. This means that to every proposition P ∈LB one of the two
possible truth values 1 (true) and 0 (false) can be assigned; accordingly, any
proposition is either true or false (tertium non datur) [5, p. 21]. Speciﬁcally,
each point in phase space, representing a classical state of a given system
S, deﬁnes a truth-value assignment to the subsets representing the proposi-
tions. Each subset to which the point belongs represents a true proposition
or a property that is instantiated by the system. Likewise, each subset to
which the point does not belong represents a false proposition or a property
that is not instantiated by the system. Thus, every possible property of S is
selected as either occurring or not; equivalently, every corresponding propo-
sition pertaining to S is either true or false. Henceforth, all propositions of
a classical system are semantically decidable.
From a physical point of view, this is immediately linked to the fact that
classical physics views objects-systems as bearers of determinate properties.

5
That is, properties of classical systems are considered as being intrinsic to
the system; they are independent of whether or not any measurement is at-
tempted on them and their deﬁnite values are independent of one another
as far as measurement is concerned. All properties pertaining to a classical
system are simultaneously determinate and potentially available to the sys-
tem, independently of any perceptual evidence or cognitive means by which
we may verify or falsify them. Accordingly, the propositions of a classical
system are considered as possessing determinate truth values — they are
either determinately true or determinately false — prior to and independent
of any actual investigation of the states of aﬀairs the propositions denote;
that is, classical mechanical propositions possess investigation-independent
truth values, thus capturing the radically non-epistemic character of a tradi-
tional correspondence account of truth [6]. Consequently, since in a classical
universe of discourse all propositions are meant to have determinate truth-
conditions, there is supposed to exist implicitly an Archimedean standpoint
from which the totality of facts may be logically evaluated.
2. Propositional Truth in Standard Quantum Mechanics
In contradistinction to the Boolean propositional structure of classical me-
chanics, the logical structure of a quantum system is neither Boolean nor
possible to be embedded into a Boolean lattice. On the standard (Dirac-
von Neumann) codiﬁcation of quantum theory, the elementary propositions
pertaining to a system form a non-Boolean lattice, LH, isomorphic to the
lattice of closed linear subspaces or corresponding projection operators of
a Hilbert space. Thus, a proposition pertaining to a quantum system is
represented by a projection operator P on the system’s Hilbert space H, or
equivalently, it is represented by the linear subspace HP of H upon which
the projection operator P projects [7, Sect. 4.2]. Since each projection op-
erator P on H acquires two eigenvalues 1 and 0, where the value 1 can be
read as “true” and 0 as “false”, the proposition asserting that “the value
of the physical quantity A of system S lies in a certain range of values ∆”,
or equivalently, that “system S in state |ψ⟩acquires the property P(A)”,
is said to be true if and only if the corresponding projection operator PA
obtains the value 1, that is, if and only if PA|ψ⟩= |ψ⟩. Accordingly, the
state |ψ⟩of the system lies in the associated subspace HA which is the
range of the operator PA, i.e., |ψ⟩∈HA. In such a circumstance, the prop-
erty P(A) pertains to the quantum system S. Otherwise, if PA|ψ⟩= 0 and,
hence, |ψ⟩∈⊥HA (subspace completely orthogonal to HA), the counter
property ¬P(A) pertains to S, and the proposition is said to be false. It

6
might appear, therefore, that propositions of this kind have a well-deﬁned
truth value in a sense analogous to the truth-value assignment in classical
mechanics.
There is, however, a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the two situations.
Unlike the case in classical mechanics, for a given quantum system, the
propositions represented by projection operators or Hilbert space subspaces
are not partitioned into two mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive
sets representing either true or false propositions. As already pointed out,
only propositions represented by subspaces that contain the system’s state
are assigned the value “true” (propositions assigned probability 1 by |ψ⟩),
and only propositions represented by spaces orthogonal to the state are
assigned the value “false” (propositions assigned probability 0 by |ψ⟩) ([8,
pp. 46-47], [9, pp. 213-217]). Hence, propositions represented by subspaces
that are at some non-zero or non-orthogonal angle to the unit vector |ψ⟩
or, more appropriately, to the ray representing the quantum state are not
assigned any truth value in |ψ⟩. These propositions are neither true nor
false; they are assigned by |ψ⟩a probability value diﬀerent from 1 and 0;
thus, they are undecidable or indeterminate for the system in state |ψ⟩and
the corresponding properties are taken as indeﬁnite.
This kind of semantic indeterminacy imposes an inherent ambiguity
with respect to the classical binary true/false value assignments rigorously
expressed, for the ﬁrst time, by Kochen-Specker’s theorem [10]. According
to this, for any quantum system associated to a Hilbert space of dimen-
sion higher than two, there does not exist a two-valued, truth-functional
assignment h : LH →{0, 1} on the set of closed linear subspaces, LH,
interpretable as quantum mechanical propositions, preserving the lattice
operations and the orthocomplement. In other words, the gist of the the-
orem, when interpreted semantically, asserts the impossibility of assigning
deﬁnite truth values to all propositions pertaining to a physical system at
any one time, for any of its quantum states, without generating a contra-
diction.
3. Motivating the Application of the Categorical Framework
to Quantum Semantics
It should be underlined, however, that although the preceding Kochen-
Specker result forbids a global, absolute assignment of truth values to quan-
tum mechanical propositions, it does not exclude ones that are contextual
[11]. Here, “contextual” means that the truth value given to a proposi-
tion depends on which subset of mutually commuting projection operators

7
(meaning “simultaneously measurable”) one may consider it to be a mem-
ber, i.e., it depends on which other compatible propositions are given truth
values at the same time. To explicate this by means of a generalized ex-
ample, let A, B and E denote observables of the same quantum system S,
so that the corresponding projection operator A commutes with operators
B and E ([A, B] = 0 = [A, E]), not however the operators B and E with
each other ([B, E] ̸= 0). Then, due to the incompatibility of the last pair
of observables, the result of a measurement of A depends on whether the
system had previously been subjected to a measurement of the observable
B or a measurement of the observable E or in none of them. Thus, the
value of the observable A depends upon the set of mutually commuting ob-
servables one may consider it with, that is, the value of A depends upon the
selected set of measurements. In other words, the value of the observable A
cannot be thought of as pre-ﬁxed, as being independent of the experimen-
tal context actually chosen, as speciﬁed, in our example, by the {A, B} or
{A, E} frame of mutually compatible observables. Accordingly, the truth
value assigned to the associated proposition “A ∈∆” — i.e., “the value of
the observable A of system S lies in a certain range of values ∆” — should
be contextual as it depends on whether A is thought of in the context of
simultaneously ascribing a truth value to propositions about B, or to propo-
sitions about E. Of course, the formalism of quantum theory does not imply
how such a contextual valuation might be obtained, or what properties it
should possess. To this end, we resort to the powerful methods of cate-
gorical topos theory, which directly captures the idea of structures varying
over contexts, thus providing a natural setting for studying contextuality
phenomena ([12],[13],[14]), providing consistently context-dependent oper-
ations in logic ([15], [16]) and representing physical processes ([17], [18]).
In this work, the research path we propose implements the intuitively
clear idea of probing the global structure of a quantum algebra of events (or
propositions) in terms of structured multitudes of interlocking local Boolean
frames. It is probably one of the deepest insights of modern quantum the-
ory that whereas the totality of all experimental/empirical facts can only
be represented in a globally non-Boolean logical structure, the acquisition
of every single fact depends on a locally Boolean context. Indeed, we view
each preparatory Boolean environment of measurement as a context that
oﬀers a ‘classical perspective’ on a quantum system. A classical perspective
or context is nothing but a set of commuting physical quantities, as in the
preceding example, or, more precisely, a complete Boolean algebra of com-
muting projection operators generated by such a set. Physical quantities

8
in any such algebra can be given consistent values, as in classical physics.
Thus, each context functions as a Boolean frame providing a local ‘classical’
viewpoint on reality. No single context or perspective can deliver a com-
plete picture of the quantum system, but, by applying category-theoretic
reasoning, it is possible to use the collection of all of them in an overall
structure that will capture the entire system. It is also of great importance
how the various contexts relate to each other. Categorically speaking, this
consideration is naturally incorporated into our scheme, since the category-
theoretic representation of quantum event structures in terms of Boolean
localization contexts can be described by means of a topos, which stands for
a category of sheaves of variable local Boolean frames encoding the global
logical information of these localization contexts.
In a well deﬁned sense, topos theory provides us with the ﬁrst natural
examples of global multi-valued functional truth structures. By deﬁnition,
a topos, conceived as a category of sheaves for a categorical topology, is
equipped with an internal object of truth values, called a subobject classi-
ﬁer, which generalizes the classical binary object of truth values used for
valuations of propositions [19, pp. 338-343]. As explained below, this gen-
eralized object of truth values in a topos is not ad hoc, but reﬂects genuine
constraints of the surrounding universe of discourse. We will show, in par-
ticular, that the topos-theoretic representation scheme of quantum event
algebras by means of variable local Boolean frames induces an object of
truth values, or classifying object, which constitutes the appropriate tool
for the deﬁnition of quantum truth-value assignments, corresponding to val-
uations of propositions describing the behavior of quantum systems. This,
in eﬀect, characterizes the novelty of our approach and its fruitfulness for
a consistent contextual account of truth in the quantum domain in com-
parison to a multiplicity of various other approaches on the foundations of
quantum physics.
4. Category-Theoretic Representation of Quantum Event
Algebras
As indicated in the preceding section, the global semantic ambiguity of the
non-Boolean logical structure of quantum mechanics, expressed formally
by Kochen-Specker’s theorem, does not exclude local two-valued truth-
functional assignments with respect to complete Boolean algebras of projec-
tion operators on the Hilbert space of a quantum system. More precisely,
each self-adjoint operator representing an observable has associated with
it a Boolean subalgebra which is identiﬁed with the Boolean algebra of

9
projection operators belonging to its spectral decomposition. Hence, given
a set of observables of a quantum system, there always exists a complete
Boolean algebra of projection operators, namely, a local Boolean subalgebra
of the global non-Boolean event algebra of a quantum system with respect
to which a local two-valued truth-functional assignment is meaningful, if
and only if the given observables are simultaneously measurable. Conse-
quently, the possibility of local two-valued truth-functional assignments of
the global non-Boolean event algebra of a quantum system points to the
assumption that complete Boolean algebras play the role of local Boolean
logical frames for contextual true/false value assignments. The modeling
scheme we propose in order to implement this idea in a universal way, so
that the global structure of a quantum system to be modeled categorically
in terms of a topos of sheaves of local Boolean frames, uses the technical
apparatus of categorical sheaf theory (MacLane and Moerdijk [20], Awodey
[21]). The basic conceptual steps involved in the realization of the suggested
approach may be summarized as follows.
4.1. Conceptual considerations
Firstly, we introduce the notion of a topological covering scheme of a quan-
tum event algebra [22] consisting of epimorphic families of local Boolean
logical frames. From the physical point of view, this attempt amounts to
analyze or ‘co-ordinatize’ the information contained in a quantum event
algebra L by means of structure preserving morphisms B →L, having as
their domains locally deﬁned Boolean event algebras B. Any single map
from a Boolean domain to a quantum event algebra does not suﬃce for a
complete determination of the latter’s information content, and thus, it con-
tains only a limited amount of information about it. Speciﬁcally, it includes
only the amount of information related to a Boolean reference context and
inevitably is constrained to represent exclusively the abstractions associ-
ated with it. This problem is confronted by employing a suﬃcient amount
of maps, organized in terms of covering sieves, from the coordinatizing
Boolean domains to a quantum event algebra so as to cover it completely.
These maps play exactly the role of local Boolean covers for the ﬁltra-
tion of the information associated with a quantum structure of events, in
that, their domains B provide Boolean coeﬃcients associated with typical
measurement situations of quantum observables. The local Boolean cov-
ers capture individually complementary features of a quantum algebra of
events and provide collectively its categorical local decomposition in the
descriptive terms of Boolean reference frames. Technically, this is described

10
by an action of a category of local Boolean frames on a global quantum
event algebra, forming a presheaf.
Secondly, we deﬁne appropriate compatibility conditions between over-
lapping local Boolean covers. This is necessary since it enforces an eﬃcient,
uniquely deﬁned pasting code between diﬀerent local covers of a quantum
algebra of events. Technically, this is described by the notion of a Boolean
localization functor, or equivalently, by a structure sheaf of Boolean coef-
ﬁcients of a quantum event algebra. Category-theoretically, one may think
of a Boolean localization functor as consisting of epimorphic families or
diagrams of Boolean covers interconnected together targeting a quantum
event algebra.
Thirdly, we establish the necessary and suﬃcient conditions for the iso-
morphic representation of quantum event algebras in terms of Boolean lo-
calization functors. The crucial technical and semantical method used in
order to establish these conditions is based on the existence of a categorical
adjunction, consisting of a pair of adjoint functors, between the category of
(pre)sheaves of variable local Boolean frames and the category of quantum
event algebras. In essence, this Boolean frames-quantum adjunction pro-
vides a bidirectional and functorial translational mechanism of encoding
and decoding information between the Boolean and quantum kind of struc-
tures respecting their distinctive form. It is precisely the existence of this
categorical adjunction that allows the isomorphic representation of quan-
tum event algebras in terms of sheaves of variable local Boolean frames.
The notion of a sheaf incorporates the requirements of consistency under
extension from the local Boolean to the global quantum level, and inversely,
under restriction of the global quantum to the local Boolean level. The func-
tional dependence implicated by a categorical sheaf relativizes the presup-
posed rigid relations between quantum events with respect to variable local
Boolean frames conditioning the actualization of events (cf. [23]). The cate-
gory of sheaves of variable local Boolean frames, encoding the global logical
information of Boolean localization functors, constitutes a topos providing
the possibility of applying the powerful logical classiﬁcation methodology
of topos theory with reference to the quantum universe of discourse.
Topos theoretical approaches to the logical foundations of quantum me-
chanics have also been considered, from a diﬀerent viewpoint, by Isham
and Butterﬁeld [24], D¨oring and Isham ([13], [25]), Heunen, Landsmann
and Spitters ([14], [26]), Abramsky and Brandenburger [12], van den Berg
and Heunen [27]. In Zaﬁris and Karakostas [28] we compare each one of
the preceding approaches with our topos-theoretic representation scheme

11
of quantum event algebras. It should be noted in this connection that of
particular relevance to the present work, regarding the speciﬁcation of an
object of truth values or classifying object, although not based on categor-
ical methods, appears to be the approach to the foundations of quantum
logic by Davis [29] and Takeuti [30], according to whom, ‘quantization’ of a
proposition of classical physics is equivalent to interpreting it in a Boolean
extension of a set theoretical universe, where B is a complete Boolean al-
gebra of projection operators on a Hilbert space.
It is not possible to provide here a concise account of category theory.
For a general introduction to this well-developed mathematical framework,
topos theory and categorial logic, the reader may consult ([19], [31], [32]).
For the convenience of the reader, we deﬁne in the following subsection the
basic categorical structures involved in the functorial representation of a
quantum event algebra as a topos of (pre)sheaves over the base category of
Boolean event algebras ([33], [28]).
4.2. Functorial modeling of quantum event algebras
A Boolean categorical event structure is a small category, denoted by B,
which is called the category of Boolean event algebras. The objects of B are
σ-Boolean algebras of events and the arrows are the corresponding Boolean
algebraic homomorphisms.
A quantum categorical event structure is a locally small co-complete
category, denoted by L, which is called the category of quantum event
algebras. The objects of L are quantum event algebras and the arrows are
quantum algebraic homomorphisms. A quantum event algebra L in L is
deﬁned as an orthomodular σ-orthoposet [5], that is, as a partially ordered
set of quantum events, endowed with a maximal element 1, and with an
operation of orthocomplementation [−]∗: L →L, which satisfy, for all
l ∈L, the following conditions: [i] l ≤1, [ii] l∗∗= l, [iii] l ∨l∗= 1, [iv]
l ≤´l ⇒´l∗≤l∗, [v] l⊥´l ⇒l ∨´l ∈L, [vi] for l, ´l ∈L, l ≤´l implies that l and
´l are compatible, where 0 := 1∗, l⊥´l := l ≤´l∗, and the operations of meet ∧
and join ∨are deﬁned as usually. The σ-completeness condition, meaning
that the join of countable families of pairwise orthogonal events exists, is
required in order to have a well deﬁned theory of quantum observables
over L.
A quantum observable O is deﬁned to be an algebraic morphism from
the Borel algebra of the real line Bor(R) to the quantum event algebra
L, O : Bor(R) →L, such that: [i] O(∅) = 0, O(R) = 1, [ii] E  F =
∅⇒O(E) ⊥O(F), for E, F ∈Bor(R), [iii] O(
nEn) = 
nO(En), where

12
E1, E2, . . . denotes a sequence of mutually disjoint Borel sets of the real
line. Addition and multiplication over R induce on the set of quantum
observables the structure of a partial commutative algebra over R.
If L is isomorphic with the orthocomplemented lattice of orthogo-
nal projections on a complex Hilbert space, then from von Neumann’s
spectral theorem the quantum observables are in bijective correspon-
dence with the Hermitian operators on the Hilbert space. As noted in
Section 2, the original quantum logical formulation of quantum theory
depends in an essential way on the identiﬁcation of propositions with
projection operators on a complex Hilbert space. In the sequel, the
measure-theoretic σ-completeness condition is not going to play any par-
ticular role in the exposition of the arguments, so one may drop it and
consider complete Boolean algebras and complete orthomodular lattices
instead.
The crucial observation pointing to the signiﬁcance of the proposed func-
torial modeling approach to quantum event algebras is that despite the fact
that each object L in L is not Boolean, there always exists an underlying
categorical diagram of Boolean subalgebras of L, where each one of them
is generated by the following well-known compatibility condition: any arbi-
trary pair of elements l, ´l ∈L are compatible if the sublattice generated by
{l, l∗, ´l, ´l∗} is a Boolean algebra, namely, if it is a Boolean sublattice. Thus,
if these Boolean sublattices of events can be appropriately identiﬁed in
terms of local Boolean logical frames of a quantum event algebra, then the
global information of the latter can be recovered in a structure-preserving
way by a suitable sheaf-theoretic construction gluing together categorical
diagrams of local Boolean subobjects.
A topological gluing construction of this form can only take place in an
extension of B enunciating the free completion of B under colimits. Techni-
cally, this process requires initially the construction of the functor category
of presheaves of sets on Boolean event algebras, denoted by SetsBop, where
Bop is the opposite category of B. The objects of SetsBop are all func-
tors P : Bop →Sets, and morphisms all natural transformations between
such functors. Each object P in the category of presheaves SetsBop is a
contravariant set-valued functor on B, called a presheaf on B. The functor
category of presheaves on Boolean event algebras, SetsBop, provides the in-
stantiation of a structure known as topos. A topos exempliﬁes a well-deﬁned
notion of a universe of variable sets. It can be conceived as a local math-
ematical framework corresponding to a generalized model of set theory or
as a generalized topological space.

13
For each Boolean algebra B of B, a presheaf P on B, denoted by P(B),
is a set, and for each Boolean homomorphism f : C →B, P(f) : P(B) →
P(C) is a set-theoretic function such that, if p ∈P(B), the value P(f)(p) for
an arrow f : C →B in B is called the restriction of p along f and is denoted
by P(f)(p) = p · f. From a physical viewpoint, the purpose of introducing
the notion of a presheaf P on B, in the environment of the functor category
SetsBop, is to identify an element of P(B), that is, p ∈P(B), with an event
observed by means of a physical procedure over a Boolean domain cover
for a quantum event algebra. This identiﬁcation forces the interrelation of
observed events, over all Boolean reference frames of the base category B,
to fulﬁl the requirements of a uniform and homologous ﬁbred structure,
further considered in Section 5.
We notice now that each Boolean algebra B of B gives naturally rise to
a contravariant Hom-functor y[B] := HomB(−, B). This functor deﬁnes a
presheaf on B for each B in B. Concomitantly, the functor y is a full and
faithful functor from B to the contravariant functors on B, i.e.,
y : B
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq SetsBop,
deﬁning an embedding B →SetsBop, which is called the Yoneda embedding
([20, p. 26], [21, pp. 187-189]). According to the Yoneda Lemma, there
exists an injective correspondence between elements of the set P(B) and
natural transformations in SetsBop from y[B] to P and this correspondence
is natural in both P and B, for every presheaf of sets P in SetsBop and
Boolean algebra B in B. The functor category of presheaves of sets on
Boolean event algebras SetsBop is a complete and co-complete category.
Thus, the Yoneda embedding y : B
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq SetsBop constitutes the sought free
completion of B under colimits of diagrams of Boolean event algebras.
Then, the Boolean realization functor of a quantum categorical event
structure L in SetsBop, namely, the functor of generalized elements of L in
the environment of the category of presheaves on Boolean event algebras,
is deﬁned as
R : L →SetsBop,
where the action on a Boolean algebra B in B is given by
R(L)(B) := RL(B) = HomL(M(B), L).
The functor R(L)(−) := RL(−) = HomL(M(−), L) is called the functor
of Boolean frames of L, where M : B →L is a Boolean modeling functor
of L, i.e., a forgetful functor assigning to each Boolean event algebra the
underlying quantum event algebra and to each Boolean homomorphism the

14
underlying quantum algebraic homomorphism. In this manner, a Boolean
event algebra B, instantiated by the measurement of a quantum observable
via the spectral decomposition of the corresponding self-adjoint operator,
acts as a partial coordinatizing logical frame of a quantum event algebra L
in terms of Boolean coeﬃcients. Notice that the Boolean logical frames of
L, denoted by
ψB : M(B) →L,
being instantiated by the evaluation of the functor R(L)(−) at each B in
B, are not ad hoc but they are interrelated by the operation of presheaf
restriction. Explicitly, this means that for each Boolean homomorphism
f : C →B, R(L)(f) : R(L)(B) →R(L)(C) is a function between sets of
Boolean frames in the opposite direction such that, if ψB ∈R(L)(B) is a
Boolean frame, the value of R(L)(f)(ψB), or equivalently, the correspond-
ing Boolean frame ψC : M(C) →L is given by the restriction or pullback
of ψB along f, denoted by R(L)(f)(ψB) = ψB · f = ψC.
In this setting, the problem of establishing a functorial representation of
quantum event algebras is solved exactly by ﬁnding the left adjoint functor
L : SetsBop →L to the Boolean realization functor R : L →SetsBop. In
other words, the existence of the left adjoint functor L paves the way for
an explicit reconstruction of quantum event algebras by means of appropri-
ate diagrams of Boolean logical frames in a structure-preserving manner.
Additionally, as will be shown in the sequel, it can be used for address-
ing eﬃciently the problem of truth valuation in the quantum domain by
circumventing the Kochen-Specker types of prohibition. This becomes pos-
sible by exploiting the topos logical structure of the category of diagrams
of Boolean frames, and then using the left adjoint functor for the classiﬁ-
cation of quantum event algebras in terms of contextual truth valuations
with respect to interconnected covering families of local Boolean frames.
In this context of reasoning, we can show that there exists a categorical
adjunction between the categories SetsBop and L. More precisely, there
exists a pair of adjoint functors L ⊣R as follows [33]:
L : SetsBop
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
L : R.
The Boolean frames-quantum adjunction consists of the functors L and R,
called left and right adjoints, as well as the natural bijection:
Nat(P, R(L)) ∼= HomL(LP, L).
The established bijective correspondence, interpreted functorially, assures
that the Boolean realization functor of L, realized for each L in L by its

15
functor of Boolean frames,
R(L) : B →HomL(M(B), L),
has a left adjoint functor L : SetsBop →L, which is deﬁned for each presheaf
P of Boolean algebras in SetsBop as the colimit L(P), explicitly constructed
for the case of interest P = R(L) in the next section. Thus, the following
diagram, where the Yoneda embedding is denoted by y, commutes:
B
y
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
@
@
@
@
@
@qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
M
SetsBop
L
p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p p qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq pppppppppppppppp
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
R
L
The pair of adjoint functors L ⊣R formalizes categorically the process of
encoding and decoding information between diagrams of Boolean frames
and quantum event algebras respecting their distinctive structural form. In
general, the existence of an adjunction between two categories always gives
rise to a family of universal morphisms, called unit and counit of the ad-
junction, one for each object in the ﬁrst category and one for each object in
the second. In this way, each object in the ﬁrst category induces a certain
property in the second category and the universal morphism carries the
object to the universal for that property. Most importantly, every adjunc-
tion extends to an adjoint equivalence of certain subcategories of the initial
functorially correlated categories. It is precisely this category-theoretic fact
which determines the necessary and suﬃcient conditions for the isomorphic
representation of quantum event algebras by means of suitably restricted
functors of Boolean frames.
Every categorical adjunction is completely characterized by the unit and
counit natural transformations, acquiring the status of universal mapping
properties [21, pp. 208-215]. In relation to the Boolean frames-quantum
adjunction, for any presheaf P of Boolean event algebras in the functor
category SetsBop, the unit of the adjunction is deﬁned as
δP : P
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq RLP.

16
On the other side, for each quantum event algebra L in L, the counit is
deﬁned as
ϵL : LR(L)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq L.
The representation of a quantum event algebra L in L, in terms of
the functor of Boolean frames R(L) of L, is full and faithful if and
only if the counit of the Boolean frames-quantum adjunction is a quan-
tum algebraic isomorphism, that is structure-preserving, injective and
surjective. In turn, the counit of the Boolean frames-quantum adjunc-
tion is a quantum algebraic isomorphism if and only if the right ad-
joint functor is full and faithful. In the latter case we characterize the
Boolean modeling functor M : B →L as a proper or dense modeling
functor.
5. Equivalence Classes of Pointed Boolean Frames
The functorial representation of a quantum event algebra L in L through
the category of presheaves of Boolean event algebras SetsBop requires an
explicit calculation of the colimit, L(P) = LR(L), when the functor on
which it acts is the presheaf functor of Boolean frames of L. This task
is simpliﬁed by the observation that there exists an underlying colimit-
preserving faithful functor from the category L to the category Sets. Thus,
we can calculate the colimit in Sets by means of equivalence classes and,
then, show how the obtained set of equivalence classes carries the structure
of a quantum event algebra.
In order to calculate, in general, the colimit L(P) for any P in SetsBop, it
is necessary to specify the index or parameterizing category corresponding
to the functor P, which is deﬁned over the base category of Boolean event
algebras B. This index category is called the category of elements of a
presheaf P, denoted by

(P, B), and deﬁned as follows: it has objects all
pairs (B, p) and morphisms ( ´B, ´p)→(B, p) are those morphisms u : ´B→B
of B for which p · u = ´p, that is the restriction or pullback of p along
u is ´p. Projection on the second coordinate of

(P, B) deﬁnes a functor

P :

(P, B)→B called the split discrete ﬁbration induced by P, where B is
the base category of the ﬁbration, as in the diagram below. Notice that the
ﬁbers of this ﬁbration are categories in which the only arrows are identity
arrows, i.e., they are actually sets. Then, if B is an object of B, the inverse
image under

P of B is simply the set P(B), although its elements are
written as pairs so as to form a disjoint union.

17

(P, B)

P
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
B
P
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq Sets
Consequently, the index category corresponding to the functor P is the
category of its elements I ≡

(P, B), whence the functor [M ◦

P] deﬁnes
the diagram X : I →L over which the colimit should be calculated. Hence,
we obtain:
L(P) = LM(P) = Colim{

(P, B)

P
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq B
M
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq L  Sets}.
Now we consider the case of our interest where P = R(L), i.e., the
presheaf functor P represents the functor of Boolean frames of a quantum
event algebra L. In this case, the category of elements

(R(L), B) has
objects all pairs (B, ψB), where B is a Boolean event algebra and ψB :
M(B) →L is a Boolean frame of L deﬁned over B. The morphisms of

(R(L), B), denoted by ( ´B, ψ ´
B)→(B, ψB), are those Boolean event algebra
homorphisms u : ´B→B of the base category B for which ψB · u = ψ ´
B, that
is the restriction or pullback of the Boolean frame ψB along u is ψ ´
B.
Next, we deﬁne the set of pointed Boolean frames of a quantum event
algebra L as
Y(RL) = {(ψB, q)/(ψB : M(B) →L), q ∈M(B)}.
Note that a pointed Boolean frame ζ := (ψB, q) of L over B consists of
a Boolean frame ψB : M(B) →L together with a projection operator
q ∈M(B). The crucial observation is that the composition law in the
category  (R(L), B) induces a transitive and reﬂexive relation ℜon the set
Y(RL), deﬁned as follows,
(ψB · u, ´q) ℜ(ψB, u(´q)),
for any Boolean homomorphism u : ´B →B in the base category B. The
next step is to make this relation also symmetric by postulating that for
pointed Boolean frames ζ, η in Y(RL), where ζ, η denote pairs in the above
set, we have
ζ ∼η,

18
if and only if ζ ℜη or η ℜζ. Finally, by considering a sequence ξ1, ξ2, . . . ,
ξk of pointed Boolean frames in the set Y(RL) and also ζ, η such that
ζ ∼ξ1 ∼ξ2 ∼. . . ∼ξk−1 ∼ξk ∼η,
we deﬁne an equivalence relation on the set Y(RL) as follows,
ζ ▷◁η := ζ ∼ξ1 ∼ξ2 ∼. . . ∼ξk−1 ∼ξk ∼η,
if and only if there exists a path of Boolean transition homomorphisms in B
inducing the above equivalence. Then, for each pair ζ = (ψB, q) ∈Y(RL),
we deﬁne the equivalence class at pointed Boolean frame ζ:
Qζ = {ι ∈Y(RL) : ζ ▷◁ι}.
We ﬁnally deﬁne the quotient set of equivalence classes of pointed Boolean
frames as follows,
Y(RL)/ ▷◁:= {Qζ : ζ = (ψB, q) ∈Y(RL)},
and use the notation Qζ = ∥(ψB, q)∥= ψB ⊗q to denote the equiva-
lence class at a single pointed Boolean frame ζ = (ψB, q). The quotient set
Y(RL)/ ▷◁completes the calculation of the colimit LR(L) in Sets. The
tensor notation is justiﬁed by the fact that the equivalence classes of the
form ψB ⊗q are canonically identiﬁed as elements of the tensor product of
the functors R(L) and M over the base category B. Thus, we ﬁnally obtain:
LR(L) ∼= {Y(RL)/ ▷◁} ≡R(L)⊗BM.
Importantly, the quotient set R(L)⊗BM is naturally endowed with a
quantum event algebraic structure as follows. First, the orthocomplemen-
tation is deﬁned by the assignment:
Q∗
ζ = (ψB ⊗q)∗:= ψB ⊗q∗.
Second, the unit element is deﬁned by:
1 := ψB ⊗1.
Third, two equivalence classes in the quotient set R(L)⊗BM can be ordered
if and only if they have a common reﬁnement. Consequently, the partial
order structure is deﬁned by the assignment,
(ψB ⊗q) ⪯(ψC ⊗r),
if and only if,
d1 ⪯d2,

19
where we have made the following identiﬁcations,
(ψB ⊗q) = (ψD ⊗d1)
(ψC ⊗r) = (ψD ⊗d2),
with d1, d2 ∈M(D), according to the pullback diagram,
M(D)
β
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq M(B)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
γ
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
α
M(C)
λ
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
L
such that β(d1) = q, γ(d2) = r, and β : M(D) →M(B), γ : M(D) →
M(C) denote the pullback of α : M(B) →L along λ : M(C) →L in the
category of quantum event algebras.
We conclude that the ordering relation between any two equivalence
classes of pointed Boolean frames in the set R(L)⊗BM requires the ex-
istence of pullback compatibility conditions between the corresponding
Boolean frames, established in the next section. This is a consideration
of central signiﬁcance for an isomorphic representation of quantum event
algebras in terms of pullback compatible Boolean frames.
6. Boolean Localization Functors
In confronting this issue, let us recall that for each quantum event algebra
L in L the counit of the Boolean frames-quantum adjunction is deﬁned as
ϵL : LR(L)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq L.
If we express the calculation of the colimit in terms of equivalence classes
of pointed Boolean frames, viz. LR(L) ∼= R(L)⊗BM, we obtain:
ϵL : R(L)⊗BM
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq L.
Thus, the counit ϵL ﬁts into the following diagram:

20
R(L)⊗BM
ψB⊗(−)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq @
@
@
@
@
@qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
ϵL
M(B)
ψB
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
L
Accordingly, for every Boolean frame ψB : M(B) →L the projection oper-
ator q ∈M(B) is mapped to an event in L only through its factorization
via the equivalence class ψB ⊗q of pointed Boolean frames, or equivalently,
ϵL([ψB⊗q]) = ψB(q),
q ∈M(B).
We note that if the counit natural transformation ϵL at L can be appro-
priately restricted to an isomorphism R(L)⊗BM ∼= L, then the structural
information of L can be completely encoded and classiﬁed logically through
equivalence classes of pointed Boolean frames. For this purpose, we need to
impose suitable conditions on families of Boolean frames in R(L), which are
going to play the role of local Boolean covers of L. Intuitively, we require
that local Boolean covers of L should constitute a minimal generating class
of Boolean frames which jointly should form an epimorphic family covering
L entirely on their overlaps, and moreover they should be compatible under
reﬁnement operations. We formulate these notions as follows.
A functor of Boolean coverings for a quantum event algebra L in L is
deﬁned as a subfunctor T of the functor of Boolean frames R(L) of L,
T →R(L).
For each Boolean algebra B in B, a subfunctor T →R(L) is equivalent
to an algebraic right ideal or sieve of quantum homomorphisms T ▷R(L),
deﬁned by the requirement that, for each B in B, the set of elements of
T(B) ⊆[R(L)](B) is a set of Boolean frames ψB : M(B) →L of R(L)(B),
called Boolean covers of L, satisfying the following property:
{If [ψB : M(B) →L] ∈T(B), viz. it is a Boolean cover of L, and
M(v) : M( ´B) →M(B) in L for v : ´B →B in B, then [ψB ◦M(v) :
M( ´B) →L] ∈T(B), viz. it is also a Boolean cover of L}.
A family of Boolean covers ψB : M(B)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq L, B in B, is the generator
of an ideal of Boolean coverings T, if and only if, this ideal is the smallest
among all containing that family. The ideals of Boolean coverings for an L
in L constitute a partially ordered set under inclusion of subobjects. The

21
minimal ideal is the empty one, namely T(B) = ∅for all B in B, whereas
the maximal ideal is the set of all Boolean frames of L for all B in B.
We remind that the ordering relation between any two equivalence
classes of pointed Boolean frames in the set R(L)⊗BM requires the exis-
tence of pullback compatibility between the corresponding Boolean frames.
Thus, if we consider a functor of Boolean coverings T for a quantum
event algebra L, we require that the generating family of Boolean cov-
ers they belong to is compatible under pullbacks. Then, the pairwise glu-
ing isomorphism of the Boolean covers ψB : M(B)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq L, B in B, and
ψ ´
B : M( ´B)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq L, ´B in B, is deﬁned as
ΩB, ´
B : ψ ´
BB(M(B)×LM( ´B))
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq ψB ´
B(M(B)×LM( ´B))
ΩB, ´
B = ψB ´
B ◦ψ ´
BB
−1 ,
where M(B)×LM( ´B), together with the two projections ψB ´
B and ψ ´
BB, is
the pullback or categorical overlap of the Boolean covers ψB : M(B)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq L,
B in B, and ψ ´
B : M( ´B)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq L, ´B in B, with common codomain a quantum
event algebra L, as shown in the diagram:
M(B)×LM( ´B)
ψB, ´
B
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq M(B)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
ψ ´
B,B
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
ψB
M( ´B)
ψ ´
B
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
L
An immediate consequence of the previous deﬁnition is the satisfaction of
the following Boolean coordinate cocycle conditions for injective Boolean
covers:
ΩB,B = 1B
1B: identity of B
ΩB, ´
B ◦Ω´
B, ´´
B = ΩB, ´´
B
if M(B) ∩M( ´B) ∩M( ´´B) ̸= 0
ΩB, ´
B = Ω−1 ´
B,B
if M(B) ∩M( ´B) ̸= 0.
Thus, the gluing isomorphism assures that the Boolean covers ψ ´
BB :
(M(B)×LM( ´B)) →L and ψB ´
B : (M(B)×LM( ´B)) →L cover the same
part of L compatibly.
Now, given a functor of Boolean coverings T for a quantum event al-
gebra L, we call it a functor of Boolean localizations of L, or a structure

22
sheaf of Boolean coeﬃcients of L, if and only if the Boolean coordinate
cocycle conditions are satisﬁed. Then, we can show that for a dense gen-
erating family of Boolean covers in a Boolean localization functor T of L,
meaning that they generate an epimorphic ideal of Boolean coverings of
L, the counit of the Boolean frames-quantum adjunction is restricted to a
quantum algebraic isomorphism, that is structure-preserving, injective and
surjective [33]. In turn, the right adjoint functor of the adjunction restricted
to a Boolean localization functor is full and faithful. This argument can be
formalized more precisely in topos theoretic terminology using the techni-
cal means of a subcanonical Grothendieck topology (called the topology of
epimorphic families) on the base category of Boolean algebras. For details
the interested reader should consult [34]. Consequently, L is a reﬂection
of the topos of variable local Boolean frames SetsBop, and the structure
of a quantum event algebra L in L is preserved by the action of a family
of Boolean frames if and only if this family forms a Boolean localization
functor of L. The next step is to show that the category of quantum event
algebras L is equipped with a subobject classiﬁer or classifying object act-
ing as an object of truth values for the valuation of propositions describing
the behavior of quantum systems.
7. Existence of the Subobject Classiﬁer in L
A proper understanding of the meaning of the existence of a subobject
classiﬁer in the category of quantum event algebras presupposes the clari-
ﬁcation of the notion of subobjects in any categorical environment, since it
is going to be the main conceptual tool in our argumentation. A subobject
of an object X in any category X with pullbacks is an equivalence class
of monic arrows targeting X, denoted by µ : M →X. The set of all sub-
objects of X in the category X, denoted by ΘX (X), is a partially ordered
set under inclusion of subobjects. Now, ΘX can be construed as a presheaf
functor in SetsX op by the operation of pulling back as follows. Given an ar-
row g : Y →X in X, the pullback of any monic arrow µ : M →X along the
arrow g is a new monic arrow ´µ : ´
M →Y , that is a subobject of Y , and obvi-
ously the assignment µ →´µ deﬁnes a function ΘX (g) : ΘX (X) →ΘX (Y ).
An immediate question that arises in this setting is related with the
possibility of representing the subobject functor ΘX in SetsX op internally
by an object Ωin the category X such that, for each X in X, there exists
a natural isomorphism:
ιX : ΘX (X) ∼= HomX (X, Ω).

23
If the subobject functor becomes representable with representing object
Ωin X, then we say that the category X is equipped with a subobject
classiﬁer. By this term we mean a universal monic arrow
T := True : 1 →Ω
such that, to every monic arrow µ : M →X in X, there is a unique
characteristic arrow φµ, which, with the given monic arrow µ, forms a
pullback diagram in X:
M
!
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
1
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
µ
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
T
X
φµ
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
Ω
This is equivalent to saying that every subobject of X in X is uniquely a
pullback of the universal monic T. Conversely, satisfaction of this property
amounts to saying that the subobject functor ΘX is representable by the
object Ω, or equivalently, that it is isomorphic to HomX (−, Ω). Notice that
the bijection ιX sends each subobject µ : M →X of X to its unique
characteristic arrow φµ : X →Ω, and conversely.
A particularly important example, where the subobject classiﬁer of
a category always exists, is the case when the category X is a topos.
The paradigmatic instance of the function of the subobject classiﬁer in
a topos is provided by the classifying function of the two-valued object
2 := {false, true} = {0, 1} in the topos Sets of normal sets. The terminal
object in Sets is given by 1 = {∗}, i.e., by the one-point set. A subobject
µ : M →X of a set X is just a subset M ⊂X, which is classiﬁed by
the characteristic function φµ : X →2 on the set X, deﬁned as follows: for
every x ∈X, φµ(x) = 1 = true if x ∈M, and φµ(x) = 0 = false otherwise.
Then, by using the injective map T rue : 1 = {∗} →{false, true} = {0, 1}
deﬁned by {∗} →1, we indeed obtain the subobject classiﬁer in Sets, where
Ω= 2 classiﬁes subsets of X in Sets according to the pullback diagram:

24
M
!
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
1
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
µ
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
T
X
φµ
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
2
Thus,
in
the
topos
Sets
the
two-valued
Boolean
algebra
2
=
{false, true} = {0, 1} is the classifying object or object of truth values,
which means that the internal logic of the category Sets is the usual inter-
pretation of classical logic. Equivalently, we may say that the category of
Boolean event algebras B is classiﬁed internally by the two-valued Boolean
event algebra 2.
In contradistinction with the preceding case, as already noted in Section
2, Kochen-Specker’s theorem prohibits the existence of a global classifying
two-valued homomorphism on a quantum event algebra, and thus, the latter
cannot be embedded into a Boolean event algebra. Due to this, a pertinent
issue regarding the logic of quantum events is to ﬁnd out if there exists
another classifying object Ωin L acting as an object of truth values in
analogy with the classical case. The representation of quantum event al-
gebras in terms of Boolean localization functors is particularly suited to
address this issue. It is useful to recapitulate the role of Boolean localiza-
tion functors by means of the following diagram displaying the function of
the counit of the Boolean frames-quantum adjunction:
R(L)⊗BM
ψB⊗(−)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq @
@
@
@
@
@qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
ϵL
M(B)
ψB
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
L
If the functor of Boolean frames R(L) of L is restricted to a Boolean
localization functor T, then the counit of the adjunction localized to T
becomes an isomorphism, and thus quantum events are represented iso-
morphically in terms of equivalence classes ψB ⊗q, q ∈M(B), of pointed
Boolean covers, namely pointed Boolean frames qualiﬁed as local covers of

25
L. Thus, the action of Boolean localization functors on quantum event alge-
bras L makes the category L a reﬂection of SetsBop. Technically speaking,
this means that L is a complete category and monic arrows are preserved
by the right adjoint Boolean realization functor of quantum event algebras.
In particular, there exist a terminal object and pullbacks of monic arrows
[20]. Thus, there exists a subobject functor for a quantum categorical event
structure L equipped with Boolean localization functors.
The subobject functor of L is deﬁned as follows:
Sub : Lop →Sets.
The functor Sub is a contravariant functor by pulling back. Composition
with a proper or dense Boolean modeling functor deﬁnes a presheaf in
SetsBop, called the Boolean frames modeled subobject functor of L, as fol-
lows:
Sub ◦M : Bop →Lop →Sets.
In a compact notation we obtain,
ΥM := Υ(M(−)) := Sub ◦M : Bop →Sets,
such that,
Bop ∋B →{[Dom(m)→M(B)]} ∈Sets,
where the range denotes the set of subobjects of M(B), i.e., the set of
equivalence classes of monic quantum homomorphisms m from Dom(m) to
M(B).
The set ΥM(B) = Υ(M(B)) is deﬁned as the set of all subobjects of
M(B), for every B in B, in the category L. Notice that the set Υ(M(B)),
for every B in B, is a partially ordered set under inclusion of subobjects of
M(B).
We emphasize that ΥM is an object in SetsBop, so the pertinent question
is if it can be represented internally in L by means of a concrete quantum
event algebra Ω, which would play in this manner the role of a truth-values
object, or equivalently, a subobject classiﬁer in L, deﬁned as follows.
The subobject classiﬁer of the category of quantum event algebras is a
universal monic quantum homomorphism
T := True : 1 →Ω
such that, for every subobject K of L in L, represented by the monic arrow
m : K →L, there is a unique characteristic arrow φm, which, with the
given monic arrow m, forms a pullback diagram:

26
K
!
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
1
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
m
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
T
L
φm
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
Ω
This is equivalent to saying that every subobject of L in L is uniquely a
pullback of the universal monic T.
The signiﬁcance of the internal representation of ΥM in L boils down to
the fact that if this is the case, we could legitimately interpret the concrete
classifying object Ωas a truth-values object in L, and consequently use
it to classify quantum propositions circumventing in this way the Kochen-
Specker prohibition. Thus, in this case, subobjects of a quantum event
algebra should be characterized in terms of characteristic functions, which
take values not in 2, but precisely in the truth-values object Ωin L. Most
important, in that case the category of quantum event algebras L would be
endowed with a subobject classiﬁer.
7.1. The quantum object of truth values
The issue of the existence of a classifying or truth-values object Ωin L can
be fruitfully examined from the perspective of the Boolean-frames quantum
adjunction. We have seen previously that the counit of the adjunction,
ϵL : LR(L)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq L, evaluated at any quantum event algebra L in L, when
restricted to a Boolean localization functor of L becomes an isomorphism.
In particular, if Ωexists in L, there must be a Boolean localization functor
T of Ωsuch that,
ϵΩ: R(Ω)⊗BM ∼= Ω,
where R(Ω) is localized to T →R(Ω).
Henceforth, it is easily deduced that the subobject functor ΥM is rep-
resentable internally in L by a classifying or truth-values object Ωif and
only if there exists a natural isomorphism:
Υ(M(−)) ∼= R(Ω) := HomL(M(−), Ω).
The naturality condition means that the isomorphism holds at each Boolean
algebra B in B.

27
At the other side of the bidirectional adjunction, we have seen that for
any presheaf P ∈SetsBop, the unit is deﬁned as δP : P
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq RLP. Thus,
if we consider as P ∈SetsBop the subobject functor Υ(M(−)), we obtain
the following natural transformation
δΥ(M(−)) : Υ(M(−))
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq RLΥ(M(−)),
or equivalently,
δΥ(M(−)) : Υ(M(−))
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq HomL(M(−), LΥ(M(−)).
Hence, by inspecting the unit δΥ(M(−)) evaluated at Υ(M(−)) with respect
to a Boolean localization functor of L, we arrive at the following conclusion.
If the unit δΥ(M(−)), restricted to a Boolean localization functor T of L for
every L in L, is an isomorphism, then the subobject functor Υ(M(−))
becomes representable in L by the quantum truth-values object Ω, deﬁned
as follows,
Ω:= LΥ(M(−)),
and thus the category of quantum event algebras is endowed with a subob-
ject classiﬁer.
It is remarkable that the unit of the Boolean fames-quantum adjunc-
tion δΥ(M(−)), localized at T, depicts exactly the object of truth values Ω
in L, which is represented, in virtue of the counit isomorphism, as the col-
imit Ω:= LΥ(M(−)) in the category of elements of the subobject functor
Υ(M(−)). It is straightforward to verify the latter remark, in case the unit
δΥ(M(−)) is an isomorphism, by noticing that
Ω:= LΥ(M(−)) ∼= L[RLΥ(M(−))] ∼= LRΩ
is precisely an expression of the counit isomorphism for the quantum event
algebra Ωrestricted to T.
We emphasize that the above unit isomorphism δΥ(M(−)), evaluated at
each Boolean algebra B serving as the domain of a local Boolean cover of
Ω, means that there exists a bijection δΥ(M(B)) := ∆sending each sub-
object λ : Dom(λ) →M(B) of M(B) to its unique characteristic arrow
∆λB : M(B) →Ω, and conversely. This is equivalent to saying that every
subobject of M(B) in L is uniquely a pullback of the universal monic T.
Thus, the following diagram is a classifying pullback diagram in L for each
quantum algebraic homomorphism or classifying arrow
∆λ
B : M(B) →Ω
from the domain of a Boolean cover M(B), such that λ is a subobject of
M(B):

28
Dom(λ)
!
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
1
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
λ
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
T
M(B)
∆λB
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
LΥ(M(−)) := Ω
Furthermore, the characteristic arrow ∆λB is identiﬁed with a local Boolean
cover of Ωwith respect to the Boolean localization functor T for which the
counit ϵΩis an isomorphism. In other words, at each Boolean algebra B
local subobjects of M(B) correspond bijectively with local Boolean covers
of Ω.
8. Quantum Logical Structure of Truth Values and
Criterion of Truth
It is now important to provide an explicit representation of the elements of
the quantum truth-values object Ωby calculating the colimit LΥ(M(−)).
In order to calculate the latter, it is necessary to specify the index or pa-
rameterizing category corresponding to the subobject functor Υ(M(−)),
which is deﬁned over the base category of Boolean event algebras B. Fol-
lowing the reasoning presented in Section 5, this index category, denoted by

(Υ(M(−)), B), is called the category of elements of the functor Υ(M(−)).
Its objects are all pairs (B, λ), where λ is a subobject of M(B), that is a
monic quantum homomorphism in M(B). Its morphisms are given by the
arrows ( ´B, ´λ)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq (B, λ), namely, they are those morphisms v : ´B
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq B
of B for which λ ∗v = ´λ, where λ ∗v denotes the pullback of the subobject
λ of M(B) along v and ´λ is a subobject of M( ´B).
Consequently, the index category corresponding to the subobject func-
tor Υ(M(−)) is the category of its elements

(Υ(M(−)), B), whence the
functor [M ◦

Υ(M(−))] deﬁnes the diagram X : I →L over which the
colimit should be calculated. Hence, we obtain:
L(Υ(M(−))) = LM(Υ(M(−)))
= Colim{

(Υ(M(−)), B)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq B
M
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq L  Sets}.
Next, we consider the set of all pairs of the form,
Σ = {(λ, q)/( λ : Dom(λ) →M(B)), q ∈M(B)},

29
for all Boolean algebras B in B, where λ : Dom(λ) →M(B) is a sub-
object of M(B) and q is a projection operator in M(B). Then, from the
composition law in the category of elements

(Υ(M(−)), B), we obtain the
relation ⊤,
(λ ∗u, ´q)⊤(λ, u(´q)),
for any Boolean homomorphism u : ´B →B in the base category B. On the
basis of considerations in Section 5, it can be easily seen that the above
relation induces an equivalence relation deﬁned by the identiﬁcation equa-
tions:
[λ ∗v] ⊗´q = λ ⊗v(´q),
λ ∈Υ(M(B)), ´q ∈M( ´B), v : ´B
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq B.
Furthermore, if we deﬁne λ ∗v = ´λ, v(´q) = q, where ´λ is a subobject of
M( ´B) and q ∈M(B), we obtain the equations:
´λ ⊗´q = λ ⊗q.
Thus, the set Υ(M(−))⊗BM is identiﬁed as the quotient of the set Σ by
the equivalence relation generated by the above equations.
We conclude that the quotient set of equivalence classes of Σ, identiﬁed
with Υ(M(−))⊗BM, provides the calculation of the colimit LΥ(M(−))
in Sets. The tensor notation indicates that the equivalence classes of the
form λ⊗q are canonically identiﬁed as elements of the tensor product of the
functors Υ(M(−)) and M over the base category of Boolean event algebras
B.
It remains to show that the quotient set Υ(M(−))⊗BM has actually
the structure of a quantum event algebra Ωrestricted to the Boolean local-
ization functor T, characterized by the property that all arrows of the form
∆λB serve as local Boolean covers of Υ(M(−))⊗BM ≡Ωwith respect to
T, for which the counit ϵΩis an isomorphism.
For this purpose, since the property of pullback compatibility with re-
spect to T exists in L, we may consider the arrows h : M(D) →M(B) and
´h : M(D) →M( ´B) and the following pullback diagram in L
M(D)
h
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq M(B)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
´h
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
∆λB
M( ´B)
∆λ ´
B
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
Ω

30
such that the relations, h(d) = q, ´h(d) = ´q and λ ∗h = ´λ ∗´h, are satis-
ﬁed. Then, from the identiﬁcation equations of the equivalence relation, we
obtain:
λ ⊗q = λ ⊗h(d) = [λ ∗h] ⊗d = [´λ ∗´h] ⊗d = ´λ ⊗´h(d) = ´λ ⊗´q.
We may further deﬁne,
λ ∗h = ´λ ∗´h = τ,
where τ is a subobject of M(D). Then, apparently, it holds that:
λ ⊗q = τ ⊗d
´λ ⊗´q = τ ⊗d.
Now, it can be easily deduced that the set Υ(M(−))⊗BM ≡Ωis endowed
with a partial order relation with respect to T, as follows,
λ ⊗b ≤ρ ⊗c,
if and only if there exist quantum algebraic homomorphisms β : M(D) →
M(B) and γ : M(D) →M(C), and some d1, d2 in M(D), such that,
β(d1) = b, γ(d2) = c, and λ ∗β = ρ ∗γ = τ. Thus, we obtain:
λ ⊗b = τ ⊗d1
ρ ⊗c = τ ⊗d2.
We conclude that
λ ⊗b ≤ρ ⊗c,
if and only if,
τ ⊗d1 ≤τ ⊗d2 ⇐⇒d1 ≤d2.
The set Υ(M(−))⊗BM ≡Ωmay be further endowed with a maximal
element which admits the following presentations:
1 = τ ⊗1 := true
∀τ ∈Υ(M(D))
1 = idM(B) ⊗b := true
∀b ∈M(B),
and an orthocomplementation operator,
[τ ⊗d]⋆= τ ⊗d⋆.
Then, it is easy to verify that the set Υ(M(−))⊗BM ≡Ωendowed with
the prescribed operations is actually a quantum event algebra. Thus, Ω

31
constitutes the classifying or truth-values quantum event algebra, where the
characteristic arrows ∆λB serve as local Boolean covers of Ωwith respect
to the corresponding Boolean localization functor T. We form, therefore,
the following conclusions.
Quantum Truth-Values Algebra: The elements of the quantum truth-
values algebra Ω≡Υ(M(−))⊗BM are equivalence classes represented in
tensor product form as follows:
[δΥ(M(B))]λ(b) := ∆λB(b) = λ ⊗b,
where,
[λ ∗v] ⊗´b = λ ⊗v(´b),
λ ∈Υ(M(B)), ´b ∈M( ´B), v : ´B →B, v(´b) = b,
and [δΥ(M(B))]λ := ∆λB denotes a local Boolean cover of Ωin the Boolean
localization functor [δΥ(M(−))](−) := T of Ωusing the unit isomorphism.
Thus, truth-value assignment in quantum mechanics is localized with re-
spect to equivalence classes of compatible Boolean frames belonging to a
Boolean localization functor of a quantum event algebra.
Criterion of Truth : The criterion of truth for the category of quantum
event algebras L with respect to a Boolean localization functor of a quantum
event algebra L in L, given the preceding speciﬁcation of the quantum
truth-values object Ω, is the following:
∆λB(b) = λ ⊗b = true
iﬀ
b ∈Image(λ),
∀λ ∈Υ(M(B)),
where b is the projection operator that identiﬁes a corresponding quantum
event or proposition p = ψB(b) ≡ψB ⊗b with respect to the local Boolean
cover ψB : M(B) →L, i.e., with respect to the context of M(B).
9. Semantical Aspects of Quantum Truth Valuation
The conceptual essence of the existence of a quantum truth-values object Ω
in the category of quantum event algebras, as speciﬁed concretely in the pre-
vious section, is associated with the fact that Ωconstitutes the appropriate
quantum algebra for valuations of propositions describing the behavior of a
quantum system, in analogy with the classical case, where the two-valued
Boolean algebra 2 is properly used. Thus, in the quantum case, subobjects
of a quantum event algebra L admit classifying truth-values assignments in
terms of characteristic morphisms, which take values not in 2, but in the
truth-values object Ωwith respect to a Boolean localization functor of L.

32
Intuitively, within the proposed category-theoretic scheme, the fundamen-
tal operation of the classifying object Ωis based on the following functorial
aspect: a Boolean localization functor acting on a quantum event algebra L
induces a corresponding Boolean localization functor in the subobject clas-
siﬁer Ω, such that the characteristic arrows of the subobjects of the Boolean
domain covers in the former play the role of local Boolean covers in the lat-
ter. Due to the signiﬁcance of this remark, let us explain the functionality
of the quantum truth-values object Ωin more detail by considering the
following pullback diagram
Dom(l ∗ψB)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
K
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
l ∗ψB
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
l
M(B)
ψB
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
L
where the monic quantum homomorphism l : K →L denotes a subobject
of a quantum event algebra L, ψB : M(B)
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq
qqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqqq L signiﬁes a local Boolean
cover belonging to a Boolean localization functor of L, and l ∗ψB ≡λ
expresses the pullback of the quantum subobject l along ψB, thus, denot-
ing the subobject λ of M(B). According to the function of the subobject
classiﬁer Ω, the characteristic arrow of the subobject l : K →L of L is
speciﬁed as an equivalence class of pullbacks of the subobject l along its
restrictions on all Boolean covers in a Boolean localization functor of L.
Thus, for each projection operator b in M(B), coordinatizing a quantum
event or proposition p = ψB(b) of L, with respect to a local Boolean cover
ψB : M(B) →L, we obtain:
l ⊗ψB(b) = (l ∗ψB) ⊗b = λ ⊗b.
Consequently, by using the criterion of truth of Section 8, it is valid that
λ ⊗b = true if and only if b belongs to the Image(λ). We stress that this
criterion holds for all λ in the set of subobjects Υ(M(B)). Then, when can
we say that a particular proposition p in L is in the Image(l)? Clearly, since
each λ is the restriction of l with respect to a corresponding subobject of
M(B), this will be the case if and only if λ⊗b = true for all and only those
λ for which this restriction is non-empty. Thus, for each Boolean cover
M(B) of L, the value 1 = true in Ωis assigned to all those b in M(B)
belonging to the restriction of the subobject l : K →L of L with respect

33
to the subobject λ of M(B), for all these λ. In particular, if the Boolean
covers are monic morphisms, each pullback of this form is expressed as the
intersection of the subobject l with the corresponding cover in the Boolean
localization functor.
Conceptually, every quantum event or proposition of a quantum event
algebra L is localized with respect to all Boolean frames M(B) belonging
to a Boolean localization functor of L by means of pulling back or restrict-
ing. Accordingly, truth-value assignment in quantum mechanics is contex-
tualized with respect to ideals of local Boolean covers, which are pullback
compatible and cover completely a quantum event algebra. With respect
to each such contextualization we obtain a contextual truth valuation of
the restricted proposition associated with the corresponding frame M(B)
speciﬁed by the truth rule λ ⊗b = true if and only if b belongs to the
Image(λ), holding for every subobject λ of M(B), where b represents the
restricted quantum proposition with respect to the Boolean frame M(B).
In this sense, elementary propositions associated with the description of
the behavior of a quantum system in various contexts of observation, iden-
tiﬁed by local frames in Boolean localization functors of a quantum event
algebra, are naturally assigned truth values in Ωaccording to the preceding
criterion of truth.
We emphasize in this respect that the quantum truth-values object Ω
enables not only a determinate truth valuation in each ﬁxed frame M(B),
but in addition, it amalgamates internally all compatible truth valuations
with respect to all Boolean frames belonging to a Boolean localization func-
tor of L. This, in eﬀect, is established by the formation of equivalence
classes, which are represented in tensor product form, via the truth-value
true in Ω. The maximally compatible equivalence class identiﬁed with the
maximal element true in Ωspeciﬁes a complete description of states of af-
fairs with respect to the considered Boolean localization functor. In this
way, truth-value assignment in quantum mechanics is localized and conse-
quently contextualized with respect to tensor product equivalence classes
formed among compatible Boolean frames belonging to a Boolean localiza-
tion functor of a quantum event algebra.
Importantly, the attribution of truth values to quantum mechanical
propositions arising out of the preceding category-theoretic scheme circum-
vents consistently the semantic ambiguity with respect to binary truth-
value assignments to propositions that is inherent in conventional quantum
mechanics, in the following sense. All propositions that are certainly true or
certainly false (assigned probability value 1 or 0) according to conventional

34
quantum mechanics are also certainly true or certainly false according to the
category-theoretic approach. The remaining propositions (assigned proba-
bility value diﬀerent from 1 and 0) are semantically undecidable according
to the former interpretation, they are neither true nor false, while they have
determinate (albeit unknown) truth values, they are either true or false, ac-
cording to the latter. These values, however, depend not only on the state
of the physical system that is considered but also on the context through
which the system is investigated, thus capturing the endemic feature of
quantum contextuality. Indeed, as already explained, the existence of the
subobject classiﬁer Ωleads naturally to contextual truth-value assignments
to quantum mechanical propositions, where each proposition pertaining to
a physical system under investigation acquires a determinate truth value
with respect to the context deﬁned by the corresponding observable to be
measured.
A particularly interesting application of the proposed scheme refers to
the following case involving partially overlapping, incompatible Boolean
frames, physically realized as experimental contexts for the measurement
of quantum observables pertaining to a system. Thus, let A and E be two
incompatible observables of a quantum system in a given state sharing one
or more projection operators in their corresponding spectral decomposi-
tions. Let M(BA) and M(BE) be the corresponding Boolean subalgebras
in the system’s Hilbert space quantum event structure associated to the
observables A and E, respectively. From a physical perspective, the quan-
tum truth-values object Ωtakes into account the whole set of possible ways
of assigning truth values to the propositions associated with the projectors
of the spectral decomposition of a given observable. Then, the subobject
classiﬁer Ωmakes it possible to refer, at least partially, to the truth valu-
ation of propositions represented by projectors pertaining to incompatible
observables with respect to the initially chosen, without facing a Kochen-
Specker contradiction, in the following sense: once an observable is selected
to be measured, say A, and thus the associated context of measurement is
ﬁxed, we may consistently refer to Boolean truth valuations of observable
E, as far as its common projectors with A are concerned, by taking into
account the Boolean information that M(BA)∩M(BE) has about M(BE).
It is important to realize that in this framework no Kochen-Specker con-
tradiction arises, since these truth valuations are considered from a ﬁxed
context. Furthermore, the sheaf theoretical representation of a quantum
algebra of events, in terms of Boolean localization functors, takes precisely
into account the compatibility conditions of these Boolean subalgebras with

35
respect to their intersection in such a way as to leave invariant the amount
of information contained in a quantum system. As indicated in Section 6,
this underlying invariance property is satisﬁed if and only if the counit of the
adjunction, restricted to those Boolean localization functors, is an isomor-
phism, that is, structure-preserving, 1−1 and onto. Inevitably, this state of
aﬀairs allows one to formalize the extent to which we can consider as objec-
tive properties of a physical system, and hence, attribute well-deﬁned truth
values to their corresponding propositions, those properties represented by
projectors pertaining to the overlaps of diﬀerent Boolean covers without
facing no-go theorems.
It is instructive to note at this point that considering a preparatory
Boolean environment for a system to interact with a measuring arrange-
ment does not determine which event will take place, but it does determine
the kind of event that will take place. It forces the outcome, whatever it is,
to belong to a certain deﬁnite Boolean subalgebra of events for which the
standard measurement conditions are invariant. Such a set of standard con-
ditions for a deﬁnite kind of measurement constitutes a set of necessary and
suﬃcient constraints for the occurrence of an event of the selected kind. As
already explained in Section 4, this equivalently means in the light of our
approach that a Boolean algebra in the lattice of quantum events picked by
an observable to be measured instantiates locally a physical context, which
may serve as a logical Boolean reference frame relative to which results
of measurement are being coordinatized. In this respect, Boolean frames
or instances of concrete experimental arrangements in quantum mechanics
play a role analogous to the reference frames of rods and clocks in relativity
theory in establishing a perspectival aspect to reality. We may further ob-
serve that the variation of the base Boolean event algebras in the proposed
category-theoretic scheme is actually arising from any experimental praxis
aiming to ﬁx or prepare the state of a quantum system and corresponds,
in this sense, to the variation of all possible Boolean preparatory contexts
pertaining to a quantum system for extracting information about it. The
key philosophical meaning of this approach implies, therefore, the view that
the quantum world is comprehended through overlapping Boolean frames,
which interlock, in a category-theoretical environment, to form a coherent
picture of the whole in a nontrivial way. Most importantly, this viewpoint
is formalized categorically as an instance of the concept of the adjunction
of our interpretative scheme between the category of presheaves of variable
local Boolean frames and the category of quantum event algebras. In this
way, the global structural information of a quantum event algebra can be

36
captured homomorphically or, by restriction to a Boolean localization func-
tor, can be completely constituted (up to isomorphism) by means of glu-
ing together the information collected in all compatible Boolean frames in
the form of appropriate equivalence classes. Moreover, the Boolean frames-
quantum adjunction provides the conceptual and technical means to show
that the category of quantum event algebras is equipped with a quantum
truth-values object Ω, a classifying object, which generalizes the classical
binary object by classifying information in terms of contextual truth val-
uations with respect to these distinct Boolean frames. We claim that this
development is fundamental philosophically for a novel realist understand-
ing of truth-semantics suited to the quantum domain.
10. Contextual Conception of Truth in Quantum Mechanics
In view of the preceding considerations, therefore, and in relation to philo-
sophical matters, we propose a contextual account of truth that is compat-
ible with the propositional structure of quantum theory by conforming to
the following instance of the correspondence scheme:
[CC] The proposition that P-in-C is true if and only if there is a
state of aﬀairs X such that (1) P expresses X in C and (2) X obtains,
where C denotes, in general, the context of discourse, and speciﬁcally, in
relation to the aforementioned quantum mechanical considerations, the ex-
perimental context CA(M), linked to the proposition P under investigation,
that is associated with a particular Boolean frame M(B) belonging to a
Boolean localization functor of L, and A indicating the physical magnitude
under investigation.
Let us initially note that the proposed contextual account of truth sat-
isﬁes Tarski’s [35, p. 188] criterion of material adequacy, known as “con-
vention T” or “schema T”, for a theory of truth:
(T) The proposition that “P” is true if, and only if, P
where the symbol “P” in (T) represents the name of the proposition which
P stands for. To this purpose, let us consider a particular proposition P:
“system S has the property P(A)”. Assume context-dependence with regard
to P(A), i.e., the latter property of S holds within context C. Then, propo-
sition P is concisely translated as: “system S has the property P(A)-in-C”.

37
Suppose now, harmlessly, that this proposition is true. If so, the following
instance of the T-schema must be true a priori:
The proposition that “system S has the property P(A)-in-C” is true
if, and only if, system S has the property P(A)-in-C.
If, however, the property P(A) of S is context-dependent upon C, then the
proposition that system S has the property P(A) must also be context-
dependent upon C. Thus, in conformity with the propositional status en-
tering into the scheme [CC], the preceding instance of the T-schema can be
written equivalently in succinct form as:
The proposition that “P-in-C” is true if, and only if, P-in-C.
Clearly, the logical operation of the bi-conditional in the preceding T-
sentence is governed again by the T-schema, or the truism, that the content
of a proposition determines the necessary and suﬃcient conditions under
which it is true. Thus for any given true proposition which is context-
dependent upon C, the fact that makes it true is the context-dependent fact
(or state of aﬀairs) upon C that the proposition expresses. Truth contex-
tuality follows naturally from the contextuality of makers of propositional
truths. If the latter are context-dependent, then whatever truths may be
expressed about them must also be contextual.
The proposed account of truth, as encapsulated by the scheme [CC]
of contextual correspondence, incorporates explicitly a context-dependence
texture of the “world-word” relation, if the world, in its microphysical di-
mension, is to be correctly describable. The truth-making relationship is
now established, not in terms of a raw un-conceptualized reality, as en-
visaged by the traditional scheme of correspondence truth, but between
a well-deﬁned portion of reality as carved out by the experimental con-
text and the propositional content that refers to the selected context. Such
interdependence of propositional content and referential context is not by
virtue of some meta-scientiﬁc principle or philosophical predilection, but by
virtue of the microphysical nature of physical reality displaying a context-
dependence of facts. Truthmakers of quantum mechanical propositions,
namely facts or actual states of aﬀairs, are not in general pre-determined,
pre-ﬁxed; they are not ‘out there’ wholly unrestrictedly, regardless of the
consideration of a well-deﬁned context of discourse. On the other hand, the
traditional conception of correspondence truth, as exempliﬁed either by the
alethic scheme [CF] or [CS], alluded to in the introduction, and involving a
direct context-independent relation between singular terms of propositions

38
and deﬁnite autonomous facts of an external reality, may be viewed as a
species or as a limit case of the more generic alethic scheme of contextual
correspondence [CC], when the latter is applied in straightforward unprob-
lematic circumstances where the non-explicit speciﬁcation of a context of
discourse poses no further consequences.
If, however, ascriptions of truth values to propositions are context-
dependent in some way as the scheme [CC] implies, it would appear, ac-
cording to traditional thinking, that one is committed to antirealism about
truth. In our opinion, this assumption is mistaken. The contextual account
of truth suggested here conforms to a realist conception of truth, which,
moreover, is compatible with contemporary physics; it subscribes neither
to an epistemic nor to a relative notion of truth. Such an account essentially
denies that there can be a “God’s-eye view” or an absolute Archimedean
standpoint from which to state the totality of facts of nature. For, in virtue
of the Kochen-Specker theorem, there simply does not exist, within a quan-
tum mechanical discourse, a consistent binary assignment of determinately
true or determinately false propositions independent of the appeal to a con-
text. Propositional content seems to be linked to a context. This connection
between referential context and propositional content means that a descrip-
tive elementary proposition in the domain of quantum mechanics is, in a
sense, incomplete unless it is accompanied by the speciﬁed conditions of
an experimental context under which the proposition becomes eﬀectively
truth-valued [36]. In view of our approach, the latter observation under-
lines the fact that the conceptual signiﬁcance of a logic of propositions
referring to the description of a quantum system lies, not at the level of
non-contextual propositions forming the original axiomatized poset struc-
ture of quantum logic, but on the level of propositions holding in distinct
Boolean frames. The proposed categorical framework reveals precisely that
the logic of a quantum event structure is to be sought not in its internal
constitution as a set-theoretical entity endowed with unrestricted primary
qualities, but rather, in the form of its relationship with the Boolean kind
of structure through the established network of adjoint functors between
the topos of variable overlapping Boolean frames and the category of quan-
tum event algebras. This conception enlightens yet further the connection
between a quantum algebra of events and its underlying building blocks of
Boolean algebras by clarifying the contextual character of quantum theory.
We note in this respect that the proposed account of truth of contex-
tual correspondence [CC] ought to be disassociated from a pragmatic in-
strumental notion of truth. From the category theoretical perspective of the

39
present paper, the reference to a Boolean preparatory experimental context
should not be viewed primarily as oﬀering the evidential or veriﬁcationist
basis for the truth of a proposition; it does not aim to equate truth to
veriﬁcation. Nor should it be associated with practices of instrumentalism,
operationalism and the like; it does not aim to reduce theoretical terms to
products of operational procedures. It rather provides the appropriate con-
ditions under which it is possible for a proposition to receive consistently
a truth value. Whereas in classical mechanics the conditions under which
elementary propositions are claimed to be true or false are determinate inde-
pendently of the context in which they are expressed, in contradistinction,
the truth-conditions of quantum mechanical propositions are determinate
within a context. In other words, the speciﬁcation of the context is part
and parcel of the truth-conditions that should obtain for a proposition in
order the latter to be invested with a determinate (albeit unknown) truth
value. Otherwise, the proposition is, in general, semantically undecidable.
In the quantum description, therefore, the introduction of the experimental
context is to select at any time t a speciﬁc complete Boolean subalgebra
M(BA) in the global non-Boolean algebra of propositions of a quantum sys-
tem as co-deﬁnite; that is, each proposition in M(BA) is assigned at time t
a deﬁnite truth value, “true” or “false”, or equivalently, each corresponding
property of the system either obtains or does not obtain [37]. Signiﬁcantly,
due to the functioning of the quantum classifying object Ω, as speciﬁed by
the explicit criterion of Section 8, the truth of a proposition in a Boolean
frame remains invariant with respect to truth valuations of all other com-
patible propositions in all Boolean frames M(B) belonging to a Boolean
localization functor of a quantum event algebra. Thus, in our approach,
the speciﬁcation of a particular Boolean frame, or a concrete experimental
context, provides in a consistent manner the necessary conditions whereby
bivalent assignment of truth values to quantum mechanical propositions
is in principle applicable. This marks the fundamental diﬀerence between
conditions for well-deﬁned attribution of truth values to propositions and
mere veriﬁcation conditions.
This element also signiﬁes the transition from the transcendence con-
dition of the conventional correspondence theory of truth of Section 1 to
a reﬂective-like transcendental reasoning of the proposed account of truth.
That is, it signiﬁes the transition from the uncritical qualiﬁcation of truth
values to propositions beyond the limits of experience and acknowledging
them as being true or false simpliciter, to the demarcation of the limits of
possible experience or to the establishment of pre-conditions which make

40
possible the attribution of truth values to propositions. In the quantum
description, therefore, the speciﬁcation of the experimental context forms
a pre-condition of quantum physical experience, which is necessary if quan-
tum mechanics is to grasp empirical reality at all. Any microphysical fact
or event that ‘happens’ is raised at the empirical level only in conjunction
with the speciﬁcation of an experimental context that conforms to a set of
observables co-measurable by that context. The introduction of the experi-
mental context furnishes thus the status of a material presupposition of any
empirical access to the quantum level of reality, of any possible empirical
inquiry on the microscopic scale, and hence of any possible cognizance of
microphysical objects as scientiﬁc objects of experience. In this respect, the
speciﬁcation of the context constitutes a methodological act preceding any
empirical truth in the quantum domain and making it possible.
Nor the proposed contextual conception of truth is a relative notion
itself; the propositions to which it applies are relative. They are relative
to a speciﬁc Boolean subalgebra of propositions which are determinately
true or false of a system at any particular time. For, as already argued,
a quantum mechanical proposition is not true or false simpliciter, but ac-
quires a determinate truth value with respect to a well-deﬁned context of
discourse as speciﬁed by the state of the quantum system concerned and
a particular observable to be measured. Thus, the conditions under which
a proposition is true are jointly determined by the context in which the
proposition is expressed and the actual microphysical state of aﬀairs as
projected into the speciﬁed context. What makes a proposition true, there-
fore, is not that is relative to the context (as an alethic relativist must
hold, see, for instance, [38]) but whether or not the conditions in question
obtain. The obtainment of the conditions implies that it is possible for us
to make, in an overall consistent manner, meaningful statements that the
properties attributed to quantum objects are part of physical reality. In
our approach, therefore, the reason that a proposition is true is because
it designates an objectively existing state of aﬀairs, albeit of a contextual
nature. In relation to the latter, we wish to emphasize the fact that, in
contrast to a panoptical “view from nowhere” of the classical paradigm,
the general epistemological implication of quantum theory acknowledges in
an essential way a contextual character of knowledge. The classical idea
that one can reasonably talk about “all entities”, as if the terms “entity”
or “object” had a unique, ﬁxed meaning, independently of the appeal to
a particular context of reference, is inadequate in the microphysical level
of discourse. Whereas in the old classical paradigm, reality was conceived

41
as an absolute concept totally independent of the process of knowledge, in
the new quantum paradigm, epistemology — namely, the understanding of
the process of knowing — has to be explicitly included in the description of
natural phenomena. Epistemology necessarily becomes now an integral part
of the theory, an issue pointing at the same time at the meta-theoretical,
philosophical level towards an interconnection among epistemological and
ontological considerations.
Acknowledgments
One of us (V.K.) acknowledges support from the research program “Thalis”
co-ﬁnanced by the European Union (ESF) and the Hellenic Research Coun-
cil (project 70-3-11604).
References
1. K. Svozil, Quantum Logic (Springer, Singapore, 1998).
2. A. Burgess, J.P. Burges, Truth, Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Phi-
losophy (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2011).
3. S. Blackburn, K. Simmons, Truth, Oxford Readings in Philosophy (Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 1999).
4. M. Devitt, The Metaphysics of Truth, in M. Lynch (ed.), The Nature of
Truth: Classic and Contemporary Perspectives (MIT Press, Cambridge MA,
pp. 579-611, 2001).
5. M. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini, R. Greechie, Reasoning in Quantum Theory
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2004).
6. V. Karakostas, “Realism and Objectivism in Quantum Mechanics”, Journal
for General Philosophy of Science 43, 45-65, 2012.
7. M. R´edei, Quantum Logic in Algebraic Approach (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1998).
8. P.A.M. Dirac, Quantum Mechanics, 4th edition (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1958).
9. J. von Neumann, Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics (Prince-
ton: Princeton University Press, 1955).
10. S. Kochen, E.P. Specker, “The Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum
Mechanics”, Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics 17, 59-87, 1967.
11. V. Karakostas, “Nonseparability, Potentiality, and the Context-Dependence
of Quantum Objects”, Journal for General Philosophy of Science 38, 279-
297, 2007.
12. S. Abramsky, A. Brandenburger, “The Sheaf-Theoretic Structure of Non-
Locality and Contextuality”, New Journal of Physics 13, 113036, 2011.
13. A. D¨oring, C.J. Isham, “A Topos Foundation for Theories of Physics”, Jour-
nal of Mathematical Physics 49, 053515, 2008.
14. C. Heunen, N.P. Landsman, B. Spitters, “A Topos for Algebraic Quantum
Theory”, Communications in Mathematical Physics 29 (1), 63-110, 2009.

42
15. B. Coecke, C. Heunen, A. Kissinger, “Compositional Quantum Logic”, Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 7860, 21-36, 2013.
16. G. Domenech, H. Freytes, “Contextual Logic for Quantum Systems”, Journal
of Mathematical Physics 46, 012102, 2005.
17. M. Adelman, J.V. Cordett “A Sheaf Model for Intuitionistic Quantum Me-
chanics”, Applied Categorical Structures 3, 79-104, 1995.
18. B. Coecke, “Quantum Picturalism”, Contemporary Physics 51 (1), 59-83,
2010.
19. W. Lawvere, S. Schanuel, Conceptual Mathematics, 2nd edition (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2009).
20. S. MacLane, I. Moerdijk, Sheaves in Geometry and Logic (New York:
Springer, 1992).
21. S. Awodey, Category Theory, 2nd edition (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2010).
22. E. Zaﬁris, “Generalized Topological Covering Systems on Quantum Events
Structures”, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and General 39, 1485-1505,
2006.
23. H. Freytes, G. Domenech, C. de Ronde, “Physical Properties as Modal Opera-
tors in the Topos Approach to Quantum Mechanics”, Foundations of Physics
44, 1357-1368, 2014.
24. C.J. Isham, J. Butterﬁeld, “A Topos Perspective on the Kochen-Specker The-
orem: I. Quantum States as Generalised Valuations”, International Journal
of Theoretical Physics 37, 2669-2733, 1998.
25. A. D¨oring, C.J. Isham, “What is a Thing?”: Topos Theory in the Foundations
of Physics, in B. Coecke (ed.), New Structures for Physics (Lecture Notes in
Physics, vol. 813, Berlin: Springer, pp. 753-937, 2011).
26. C. Heunen, N.P. Landsman, B. Spitters, Bohriﬁcation, in H. Halvorson (ed.),
Deep Beauty (New York: Cambridge University Press, pp. 271-313, 2011).
27. B. Berg, C. Heunen, “Noncommutativity as a Colimit”, Applied Categorical
Structures 20 (4), 393-414, 2012.
28. E. Zaﬁris, V. Karakostas, “A Categorial Semantic Representation of Quan-
tum Event Structures”, Foundations of Physics 43, 1090-1123, 2013.
29. M. Davis, “A Relativity Principle in Quantum Mechanics”, International
Journal of Theoretical Physics 16, 867-874, 1977.
30. G. Takeuti, Two Applications of Logic to Mathematics. Part I: Boolean Val-
ued Analysis, Publications of Mathematical Society of Japan 13 (Tokyo and
Princeton: Iwanami and Princeton University Press, 1978).
31. J.L. Bell, Toposes and Local Set Theories (New York: Dover, 1988/2008).
32. R. Goldblatt, Topoi: The Categorial Analysis of Logic, rev. 2nd edition (New
York: Dover, 1984/2006).
33. E. Zaﬁris, “Boolean Coverings of Quantum Observable Structure: A Setting
for an Abstract Diﬀerential Geometric Mechanism”, Journal of Geometry
and Physics 50, 99-114, 2004.
34. E. Zaﬁris, “Sheaf-Theoretic Representation of Quantum Measure Algebras”,
Journal of Mathematical Physics 47, 092103, 2006.
35. A. Tarski, The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages, in A. Tarski,

43
Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics: Papers from 1923 to 1938 (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, pp. 152-278, 1935/1956).
36. V. Karakostas, “Correspondence Truth and Quantum Mechanics”, Ax-
iomathes 24, 343-358, 2014.
37. V. Karakostas, “Truth as Contextual Correspondence in Quantum Mechan-
ics”, Philosophia Scientiae 19 (1), 199-212, 2015.
38. J. MacFarlane, “Making Sense of Relative Truth”, Proceedings of the Aris-
totelian Society, 105, 321-339, 2005.

44
A LOGICAL ACCOUNT OF QUANTUM SUPERPOSITIONS
D´ecio Krause
Department of Philosophy, Federal University of Santa Catarina,
Florian´opolis, Santa Catarina, Brazil
E-mail: deciokrause@ gmail. com
Jonas R. Becker Arenhart
Department of Philosophy, Federal University of Santa Catarina,
Florian´opolis, Santa Catarina, Brazil
E-mail: jonas. becker2@ gmail. com
In this paper we consider the phenomenon of superpositions in quantum me-
chanics and suggest a way to deal with the idea in a logical setting from a
syntactical point of view, that is, as subsumed in the language of the formal-
ism, and not semantically. We restrict the discussion to the propositional level
only. Then, after presenting the motivations and a possible world semantics, the
formalism is outlined and we also consider within this scheme the claim that
superpositions may involve contradictions, as in the case of the Schr¨odinger’s
cat, which (it is usually said) is both alive and dead. We argue that this claim
is a misreading of the quantum case. Finally, we sketch a new form of quan-
tum logic that involves three kinds of negations and present the relationships
among them. The paper is a ﬁrst approach to the subject, introducing some
main guidelines to be developed by a ‘syntactical’ logical approach to quantum
superpositions.
Keywords: Superpositions; quantum logic; modal logic; Schr¨odinger’s cat; con-
tradictions; collapse; quantum deduction.
1. Introduction
Superposition is one of the most strange and diﬃcult concepts of quantum
mechanics. It is used in the most impressive applications of the theory, being
essential, for instance, in quantum information theory.a But it is rather
diﬃcult to understand precisely what a state of superposition stands for,
although this understanding is important for any attempt at meeting the
challenge of providing a coherent interpretation of quantum theory. Surely
aSuﬃce to have a look at the SEP entry ‘Quantum Entanglement and Information’.

45
superposition is one of the keys to the multiplicity of quantum mysteries,
and must be dealt with in any attempt to understand quantum mechanics.
The traditional Copenhagen interpretation, so as other ‘collapse inter-
pretations’ of quantum mechanics, assumes that a quantum superposition
disappears when a measurement is made, and then only one of the involved
states takes place as the state of the system after the measurement (with
one of the eigenstates of the measured operator emerging as the state of the
system). Common to all these theories is the fact that, if we think that each
superposed state stands for a certain ‘property’ of the system, we never at-
tribute to the superposed system all of the particular properties involved in
the superposition: superposition means a diﬀerent thing than ‘having all the
involving properties at once’, and some no-go theorems grant that under
plausible conditions, these ‘properties’ cannot have actual values at once.
The diﬀerences reside in the interpretation about what (or who) causes the
collapse or the change of state.
In this paper we shall be dealing with interpretations that assume some
form of collapse, and in section 2 we provide a particular way to introduce
syntactically the idea of superpositions in the vocabulary of a formal quan-
tum language. To begin with, we advance a Kripke-style semantics for the
system. We will not revise here all the history related to the phenomenon,
so we assume that the reader is comfortable with the concepts to be intro-
duced below, including those involving modal logic.
In particular, in section 3 we shall employ our formalism to discuss
the claim that entanglement and superpositions should be understood as
involving or representing contradictions (even if only potential contradic-
tions; see [7] and [9] for a defense and development of such claims). We shall
argue that this is not the most interesting understanding of what is going
on in the formalism of quantum theory, and suggest that it involves presup-
positions which are diﬃcult to swallow. To advance a claim we had already
defended before (see [1], [2], [3]), we argue that quantum superpositions
are better understood not as involving contradictions, but rather a diﬀer-
ent kind of opposition, traditionally known (from the square of opposition)
as contrariety.b As we hope to make clear, this opposition is in tune with
bWe must also acknowledge that we are not the ﬁrst to ﬁnd such a claim; later we
realized that it is present also in other authors, yet in a diﬀerent perspective; see for
instance [5, pp.220-1], [11], [13]. Indeed, it seems to be a well-known fact among quantum
logicians that a ‘quantum negation’ would have these characteristics, so that some of
them call it choice negation in contradistinction to exclusion negation (see [13, p.582])
which has the characteristics of ‘classical’ negation. We shall be back to this point later.

46
traditional approaches to the proper understanding of negation in quantum
logics. We develop this in section 4 discussing aspects of negation involved
in quantum mechanics. The ﬁnal section with a conclusion then follows.
2. A modal logic of superpositions
In this section we present a modal logic in which we introduce the notions of
superposition and measurement at the syntactical level. It is just an attempt
to do it, for we are still very tentatively for instance about which should
be the right modal system that would underly our system. Furthermore, it
seems also that a kind of temporal logic could be proﬁtably used in this
context. But these are works to be done. In saying that, we hope the reader
takes this paper as a ﬁrst work in the subject, approaching it from the
scratch.
2.1. Syntax
Let us assume that our basic logic is the standard propositional modal
system S4 with ¬, ∧, ∨and 3 as primitive, being →and ↔deﬁned as
below. Perhaps a weaker system will be enough, say T, but we wish that the
Euclidean property does not hold,c so we shall not assume S5 to begin with.
We enlarge the language of our system with two new connectives, a binary
connective ‘⋆’, representing ‘superposition’ and a unary one, ‘M’, which
will stand for ‘a measurement is made on’. Furthermore, to facilitate the
physical interpretation, we will denote the propositional variables by ‘|ψ⟩’,
‘|ψ1⟩’, ‘|φ⟩’, ‘|φ1⟩’, etc.d Intuitively, propositional variables will denote only
pure states that are not superposed. Formulas are deﬁned as usual, except
that ⋆and M apply only to both propositional variables and formulas of
the type |ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩, but not to formulas in general. Intuitively speaking,
|ψ⟩⋆|φ⟩is read as indicating the superposition of |ψ⟩and |φ⟩, while Mα is
read as ‘a measurement is made on the state α’.
We deﬁne formulas explicitly to avoid confusion. We begin with a simple
class B of formulas called basic formulas:
i) |ψ⟩, |φ⟩, |ω⟩, . . . are basic formulas.
cA frame for the system is Euclidean if wRw′ and wRw′′ entails that w′Rw′′, being R
the accessibility relation and w and w′ standing for worlds. Soon we will make it clear
why the Euclidean property is not desired in our system.
dFrom now on we shall not make more distinctions betwen use and mention, leaving the
details for the context.

47
ii) If α and β are basic formulas, so that α and β share no proper
subformula, then (α ⋆β) is a basic formula.
iii) These are the only basic formulas.
Notice that basic formulas are of the form |ψ⟩, or things like (|ψ⟩⋆
|φ⟩) and longer iterations of ⋆, such as (|ψ⟩⋆|φ⟩) ⋆|ω⟩(already using the
standard parentheses convention). We have a proviso in the second clause
in order to avoid things like |ψ⟩⋆|ψ⟩) from being formulas. So one may
formally write the superposition of many diverse states, but we shall not
allow superposition of a state with itself.
The molecular formulas are now deﬁned as follow:
i) If α and β are any formulas, then ¬α, (α ∧β), (α ∨β) and 3α are
molecular formulas.
ii) If α is a basic formula, then Mα is a molecular formula.
iii) These are the only molecular formulas.
Notice that it does not make sense to put an operator like M in front
of molecular formulas in general, but only in front of basic formulas. As
we shall make clear in the next table, the idea is that M formalizes that
a measurement in a system in a given state is being made, so it would be
strange or even senseless to measure a conjunction of states or negation of
a statement that the system is in a given state, for instance.
In Table 1 below we exemplify the intuitive understanding of a super-
posed state |ψ⟩⋆|φ⟩with a particular case of the entanglement of two
states, typical of the Schr¨odinger’s cat case, to be considered below. More
explanations are given after the presentation of the axiomatics.
Table 1.
Logic
Informal interpretation (with examples)
|ψ⟩
state vector, wave function |ψ⟩
M|ψ⟩
a measurement is made on the system in the state |ψ⟩
|ψ⟩⋆|φ⟩
Example: 1/
√
2(|ψ1
A⟩⊗|ψ2
B⟩)



|ψ⟩
± 1/
√
2(|ψ2
A⟩⊗|ψ1
B)



|φ⟩
3|ψ⟩
|ψ⟩is a possible state the system may evolve to
or |ψ⟩is a state in potentia of the system.
¬|ψ⟩
not the state |ψ⟩
|ψ⟩∧|φ⟩
state |ψ⟩and state |φ⟩
etc.
etc.

48
The bi-conditional ↔is deﬁned as usual, being the implication deﬁned
as follows (Sasaki hook). The reason for using this implication is that within
the formalism of classical modal logic, it acts as the standard implication
(¬|ψ⟩∨|φ⟩), but we can also associate our system to some axiomatization
of an orthomodular quantum logic, and then the chosen implication would
be adequate, as is well known [8, p.166].
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Implication).
|ψ1⟩→|ψ2⟩:= ¬|ψ1⟩∨(|ψ1⟩∧|ψ2⟩)
Now, we advance a modal logic semantics to cope with the above intu-
itions about the workings of our apparatus.
2.2. Semantics
Here we sketch a way to introduce a Kripke-style semantics for our logic
based on a possible world semantics for S4. We give here just a sketch of
this formal semantics because we are more worried with the ‘concrete’ part
of the logic, to employ the words of Hardegree [11, p.50], that is, in its
connections with the quantum realm.
A frame F is a pair ⟨W, R⟩, being W a non-empty set of worlds and
R being a binary relation on W, the accessibility relation. A valuation for
basic formulas can be introduced as follow:.
Deﬁnition 2.2 (Valuation). A valuation is a mapping µ : B × W →
{0, 1}, where B is the set of basic formulas.
Now, obviously, we are not willing to take every valuation into account.
One of our claims is that a superposition is a sui generis state a system may
be in, which is not reducible to anything else except by a measurement. So,
we shall discard valuations that could conduce to µ(|ψ1⟩, w) = µ(|ψ2⟩, w) =
µ(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩, w) = 1. That is, when a system is in a superposition (µ(|ψ1⟩⋆
|ψ2⟩, w) = 1 obtains), the individual superposed states should not obtain
(so, we must have µ(|ψ1⟩, w) = µ(|ψ2⟩, w) = 0 when µ(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩, w) = 1).
In order to preserve this fundamental idea, as a further condition for our
semantics we shall ﬁlter the valuations, dividing them between acceptable
and unacceptable ones. The valuations which shall have “physical content”
in our interpretation are those accepting the following consistency require-
ment:

49
Acceptability We shall only take into account valuations µ such that, for
any world w, whenever µ(α ⋆β, w) = 1, then for any subformula γ
of α or β, µ(γ, w) = 0.
That is, if a superposition (α⋆β) is the case in w, then α is not the case
in w, β is not the case in w, and also none of their proper subformulas are
the case in w.
Having selected those valuations, we now extend µ to more complex
formulas as follows:
Deﬁnition 2.3.
i) The usual deﬁnitions for propositional connectives and modal op-
erators;
ii) µ(M|ψ1⟩, w) = 1 iﬀµ(|ψ1⟩, w) = 1 and ∃w′ ̸= w, wRw′, such that
µ(|ψ1⟩, w′) = 1.
iii) µ(M(α ⋆β), w) = 1 iﬀ(i) there is w′ ̸= w such that wRw′ and
µ(α, w′) ̸= µ(β, w′), and (ii) ∀w′ ̸= w, if wRw′, µ(α, w′) ̸= µ(β, w′).
This condition says that the valuation attributes distinct values to α
and β to all accessible words distinct from the actual world and that there
exists at least one of such worlds (to which the superposed system evolves
after the measurement).
Given those conditions, it is easy to show that some interesting formulas
are valid.
To begin with, one may easily check that as a result of our acceptability
constraint, |ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩→(¬|ψ1⟩∧¬|ψ2⟩) is valid. In fact, in any valuation
µ satisfying the antecedent (µ(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩, w) = 1 for some w), by our
acceptability condition we must also have µ(|ψ1⟩, w) = µ(|ψ2⟩, w) = 0, so
that µ(¬|ψ1⟩, w) = 1 and µ(¬|ψ2⟩, w) = 1.
Consider now the formula M|ψ1⟩→|ψ1⟩. Suppose that there exist
w and µ such that µ(M|ψ1⟩, w) = 1 but µ(|ψ1⟩, w) = 0. However, since
µ(M|ψ1⟩, w) = 1 we have by deﬁnition that µ(|ψ1⟩, w) = 1, contradiction.
So, M|ψ1⟩→|ψ1⟩is also valid.
Still taking into account a simple case, consider M(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩) →
¬3(|ψ1⟩∧|ψ2⟩). Suppose again that there exist w and µ such that
µ(M(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩) →¬3(|ψ1⟩∧|ψ2⟩), w) = 0. Then, we have
µ(M(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩), w) = 1
and
µ(¬3(|ψ1⟩∧|ψ2⟩), w) = 0.

50
From this last line we have that there exists w′ accessible to w such that
both µ|ψ1⟩, w′) = 1 and µ(|ψ2⟩), w′) = 1. From the truth of the antecedent,
however, we must have among other things that µ(|ψ1⟩, w′) ̸= µ(|ψ2⟩), w′).
Anyway one chooses such values, we get a contradiction.
For a more sophisticated case, consider |ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩∧M(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩) →
(3|ψ1⟩∨3|ψ2⟩). Suppose, again for a proof by reductio, that there exist w
and µ such that
µ(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩∧M(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩), w) = 1
and
µ((3|ψ1⟩∨3|ψ2⟩), w) = 0.
By the fact that µ(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩, w) = 1 we know (by the acceptability con-
straint) that µ(|ψ1⟩, w) = µ(|ψ2⟩, w) = 0. From µ(M(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩), w) = 1,
we know that there exists w′ accessible to w such that µ(|ψ1⟩, w′) ̸=
µ(|ψ2⟩, w′). Now, given that µ((3|ψ1⟩∨3|ψ2⟩), w) = 0, we know that both
µ(3|ψ1⟩, w) = 0 and µ(3|ψ2⟩, w) = 0, so that µ(|ψ1⟩, w′) = µ(|ψ2⟩, w′) = 0,
contradicting the fact that those formulas must have opposite truth values.
So, the formula is valid. Notice that not even the system T was used here.
2.3. Postulates
The previous discussion helps us in providing some interesting formulas that
are valid in our system, according to the semantics sketched above. Let us
now take those formulas as a minimal axiomatic basis for our treatment of
quantum superpositions and measurement.
The postulates of our system are those of S4 plus the following ones.
We also add an intuitive explanation of the meaning of each postulate,
following the informal suggestions given at Table 1:
(1) |ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩→¬(|ψ1⟩∨|ψ2⟩) — When a system is in a quantum superpo-
sition, it is not in both the superposed states. This will be relevant for
the discussion on contradictions. In fact, using the standard ‘quantum
semantics’ and taking the orthogonal complementation of a state for its
negation, then if we suppose that the superposed states are orthogonal,
that is, that something like |ψ1⟩⋆|ψ1⟩⊥happens, then this axiom will
avoid that the system has both properties associated with the states
(to the extent that we can speak of the system and of its properties of
course).e
eThat is, we are purposely avoiding a purely instrumentalistic view. See below.

51
(2) M|ψ⟩→|ψ⟩— Being in a state that is not superposed, the system, if
measured, evolves to the same state.
(3) M(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩)∧(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩) →(3|ψ1⟩∨3|ψ2⟩) — After a measurement
of a system in a quantum superposition, the system evolves to only one
of the component states.
(4) M(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩) →¬3(|ψ1⟩∧|ψ2⟩) — After a measurement, a system
represented by a quantum superposition does not evolve to both super-
posed states at once (in a same world).
Of course the above schemata can be extended to involve more than
two states. We think that the axioms capture the basic ideas concerning
superpositions and measurements under the general view that collapse in
quantum theory can be assumed. Furthermore, we shall depart from some
views, in particular the standard Copenhague interpretation, in assuming
that we can speak of quantum systems even before measurement. This is,
we think, the main novelty of quantum mechanics on what concerns the
interpretation of quantum states. Thus, we agree with Sunny Auyang in
that “physical theories are about things” [4, p.152], so we shall assume a
realistic point of view in saying that there are quantum systems which may
be in certain states and that these states may be described by a superposi-
tion. Furthermore, we can measure the relevant observables for the systems
in certain states. The observables are subsumed in the above axiomatics,
for we are assuming that, in measuring a certain state, in reality we are
measuring a certain observable in that state, and the axiomatics does not
depend on the particular observable being measured, so that they need not
be considered in our logical framework.
Furthermore, we also do not make reference to the speciﬁc mechanism of
collapse, neither the observer (as in von Neumann’s original proposal) nor
anything else. This detail does not matter to our schema, so that entering
into these controversies would not be productive to our present study.
3. Schr¨odinger’s cat and contradictions
Schr¨odinger’s cat is a paradigmatic example of a quantum superposition.
We think it is not necessary to revise the details of the description of the
experimental situation here, for it is quite well known in the discussions on
the philosophy of quantum mechanics. Here, as said before, we shall assume
that we can speak of the cat even before a measurement of the entangled
state between the cat and the radioactive material inside the cage. That
is, the cat is an element of reality even when in a superposed state. Hence,

52
there are three possible situations for the cat: no measurement is made and
(1) she is in a superposed state; or else a measurement is made and (2) she is
alive or (3) she is dead. But, of course, she cannot be alive and dead at once,
for situation (1) does not say that. Recall that such a situation was ascribed
by Schr¨odinger as being the characteristic trait of quantum mechanics [12].
In fact, the superposed state vector can be written as follows, if we consider
the system composed by the cat plus the radioactive material that activates
the deadly poison:
|cat⟩+|material⟩=
1
√
2(|cat alive⟩⊗|no decay⟩+|cat dead⟩⊗|decay⟩) (1)
or, in a simpler way,
|cat⟩=
1
√
2(|cat alive⟩+ |cat dead⟩)
(2)
The superposed state is a vector expressing a situation where the cat
is neither deﬁnitively alive nor deﬁnitively dead, but in a limbo, expressed
by the superposition. According to us, and following Schr¨odinger, this is
the great novelty of quantum mechanics. As was already much discussed in
the literature, superpositions cannot be understood or explained in terms
of classical concepts; it is a sui generis idea.f
There is also a widely quoted passage by Schr¨odinger which deserves
attention, for it is not usually mentioned and which enters quite well in the
discussion. Just after the well known (and highly quoted!) passage where
he presents his description of the situation of the cat, we can read that the
situation
“[i]n itself it would not embody anything unclear or contradictory.
There is a diﬀerence between a shaky or out-of-focus photograph
and a snapshot of clouds and fog banks.” (our emphasis) [12]
It seems that he is suggesting that the superposed state acts as a snap-
shot of clouds, really a situation involving vagueness of some sort. It is not
that the cat, when in the superposed state, is blurred by the cloud, but she
is the cloud. And, as we see (and agree with Schr¨odinger), there is no con-
tradiction here, if by a contradiction we understand, as in standard logic, a
fThe following passage by Dirac is also usually quoted: “[t]he nature of the relationships
which the superposition principle [that one which enables the formation of superposed
states] requires to exist between the states of any system is of a kind that cannot be
explained in terms of familiar physical concepts.” [10, p.11]

53
conjunction (not a vector sum) of two propositions, one of them being the
classical negation of the other.
This aﬃrmative can be seen from a more ‘technical’ point of view. In the
formalism of quantum mechanics, the situations ‘cat alive’ and ‘cat dead’
are represented by arrays in orthogonal subspaces, say S and S⊥so that
S⊕S⊥= H (the whole Hilbert space, being ⊕the direct sum of subspaces).
Thus we should agree with Gary Hardegree when he says that
“Since a given vector x may fail to be an element of either S or
S⊥, the quantum negation diﬀers from classical exclusion negation,
being instead a species of choice negation. A choice negation is
characterized by the fact that a sentence A and its choice negation
A⊥may both fail to be true at the same time. Common examples
of choice negation include intuitionistic negation and the standard
(diametrical) negation of three-valued logic.” [11]
This ‘choice negation’ will be brieﬂy discussed in the next section, where
we will identify it with the operation that gives us the contrary of a cer-
tain proposition, in the sense of the square of opposition. Let us read by
a moment |ψ⟩and ¬|ψ⟩as vectors in S and in S⊥respectively. Even if
S ⊕S⊥= H, there may be vectors of H which are neither in S nor in
S⊥, so |ψ⟩and ¬|ψ⟩do not exhaust all possible situations. Thus, being
not in state |ψ⟩, this does not mean that the system is in state |ψ⟩⊥, for
it can be in the superposed state (a sum of two non null vectors, one in
S, another in S⊥). This motivates the discussion about the meaning of the
negation in the quantum context. Our claim is that it is not ‘classical’ nega-
tion, where α is true iﬀ¬α is false (‘exclusion negation’ to use Hardegree’s
and van Fraassen’s term). According to us, the quantum negation is (in
van Fraassen’s terms, to whom Hardegree attributes the name),g a ‘choice
negation’ or, as we prefer to say, contrary negation. In the next section we
shall discuss this point in the context of an alternative interpretation of the
above logic.
Taking into account our system, some results can be easily obtained,
and their intuitive meaning are clear enough:
Theorem 3.1. ⊢(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩) →(¬|ψ1⟩∧¬|ψ2⟩)
Proof: Immediate from our ﬁrst axiom.
gvan Fraassen introduces this terminology in [13]. However, in this paper van Fraassen
attributes the terminology to other origins.

54
A similar result is the following one:
Theorem 3.2. ⊢(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩) →¬(|ψ1⟩∧|ψ2⟩)
Corollary 3.1. Here and below sometimes we shall use the quantum me-
chanics notation for emphasis. The ⊥operator may be understood as em-
phasizing the choice negation. A stronger situation than that one shown
before (without the need of a measurement): |ψ⟩⋆|ψ⟩⊥→¬(|ψ⟩∧|ψ⟩⊥)
Theorem 3.3. ⊢M(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩) →¬(|ψ1⟩∧|ψ2⟩)
Proof:
1. (|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩) (hypothesis)
2. M(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩) →¬3(|ψ1⟩∧|ψ2⟩) (Axiom 4)
3. ¬3(|ψ1⟩∧|ψ2⟩) (1, 2 Modus Ponens)
4. □¬(|ψ1⟩∧|ψ2⟩) (basic modal logic)
5. ¬(|ψ1⟩∧|ψ2⟩) (T principle)
That is, a measurement on a system in superposition never has both
the superposed states as a result. Notice that here we have employed only
the resources of T .
We could continue exploring our system here, mainly in trying to link it
with quantum mechanics. But since our aim is just to introduce the logical
system with a minimum of discussion, we leave this job for future works.
Anyway, two further theorems follow, whose proofs are immediate:
Theorem 3.4. |ψ1⟩⊢¬(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩)
Theorem 3.5. |ψ1⟩∧|ψ2⟩⊢¬(|ψ1⟩⋆|ψ2⟩)
Finally, the promised explanation about the preference for not using S5.
If in the world ω0 the system (say, the cat) is in a superposed state and in
ω1 she is alive and in ω2 (both accessible from ω0) she is dead, of course we
don’t want that these two last worlds are both accessible to each other, so
the accessibility relation should not be Euclidean.
4. Many worlds and a new quantum logic
Another way of interpreting our system is by considering many worlds. In
this case, we do not speak of collapse, but of bifurcation. Thus, in making
a measurement we get two actual worlds and the considered system may
be in both, but since the ‘parallel’ worlds do not access one another, we
shall not have a contradiction here either; that is, the conjunction of two

55
contradictory propositions. Indeed, let us consider once again the case of
the cat. In one world, say w1, the cat is alive, while in w2 it is dead. Now if
we read one of the states as the negation of the other, it seems that in this
case we may have subcontrary situations, for the cat can be in both states
in diﬀerent worlds, that is, the propositions can be both true, although not
both false. But even here there is no strict contradiction (one of them is
true if and only if the other one is false; in particular, we don’t have the
conjunction of the two situations).
There is a logic that can express this situation, a non-adjunctive logic.
In such logics, we can have propositions like |ψ⟩and ¬|ψ⟩, but not their
conjunction, that is, they can both be true, but not in the same world. But
the involved negation must be treated with care. So, let us just discuss this
concept a little.
-




@
@
@
@
R
|cat alive⟩⋆|cat dead⟩
ω0 (actual world)
|cat alive⟩= ¬2|cat dead⟩
ω1
|cat dead⟩= ¬2|cat alive⟩
ω2
A measurement is made
Figure 1.
A measurement is made in a superposed entangled system and the world
splits in two. Both states of the cat, alive and dead become actual, but not in the same
world.
Inspired in the square of opposition (and in [6]), we can consider three
kinds of negation, which we term standard negation, ¬1 (characterized by
‘exclusion negation’ and delivering contradictories — the diagonals of the
square), contrary-negation, ¬2 (or ‘choice-negation’ in the sense of Hard-
egree’s quotation of the previous section), given by the upper side of the
square, and sub-contrary-negation, ¬3, given by the bottom side of the
square. Our previous discussion about the cat has suggested that |cat dead⟩
should be read as ¬2|cat alive⟩and vice-versa. A typical ¬3 is paraconsis-

56
tent negation, while classical logic formalizes ¬1 and intuitionistic logic (for
instance) also deals with ¬2. Thus, in the case of many worlds, we can read
‘cat in world 1’ as ‘¬2(cat in world 2)’ and vice-versa, so that they can be
both false but not both true. In this case, they can be both true but neither
in this case do we have a ‘true’ contradiction (involving ¬1).
We sketch here a minimum of such a quantum logic. We can take our
system from above and just change the notion of deduction as follows (we
use the symbol ⊪for this new deduction):
Deﬁnition 4.1 (Quantum Deduction). Let Γ be a set of formulas of
the language of our system and let α be a formula. We say that α is quantum
deduced from Γ, and write Γ ⊪α, if one of the following clauses hold:
(1) α ∈Γ, or
(2) α is a thesis of the logical system, or
(3) There exists a subset ∆⊆Γ such that ∆∪{α} is non-trivial (accord-
ing to classical logic), and ∆⊢α, where ⊢is the standard (classical)
deduction symbol.
A set of formulas ∆is ⊢−non-trivial (according to classical logic) if
there is a formula β such that ∆̸⊢β. Analogously, we can deﬁne ⊪−
non triviality. The most typical situation is to require that ∆be consistent
according to classical logic, that is, there is no formula β such that ∆⊢β
and ∆⊢¬1β. A consistent set of formulas is of course non-trivial. But the
most interesting case is that ∆∪{|ψ⟩∧¬3|ψ⟩} is non-trivial. That is, our
system enables Γ ⊪|ψ⟩∧¬3|ψ⟩without trivializing the system. In doing
so, our system, which is standard logic plus the above notion of deduction
plus ¬3, is paraconsistent. Anyway, we have neither Γ ⊪|ψ⟩∧¬2|ψ⟩nor
Γ ⊪|ψ⟩∧¬1|ψ⟩, as it is easy to see, and that is what matters.
Of course you could say that once we have admitted the possibility of
a paraconsistent quantum logic, then some form of contradiction is possi-
ble in the case of superpositions. Really, perhaps you can force the things
this way, once you provide a reasonable interpretation about what does a
paraconsistent negation mean, that is, what is the intuition behind ¬3|ψ⟩
(and not only a formal setting). Anyway, in this case, we should agree that
we can speak of the cat having properties (contradictory separated prop-
erties) before measurement and that these properties do have true values,
something questionable in the usual interpretations of the quantum realm.
An interesting theorem can be obtained in considering the above nega-
tions, at least if we consider the modal logic S5 as the underlying logic (the
case of S4 involving ¬3 must be further investigated).

57
Theorem 4.1. We cannot derive a contradiction from a superposition even
by using a paraconsistent negation ¬3: that is, superposition does not entail
‘contradictions’!
Proof:
1. ¬(|ψ⟩∧|ψ⟩⊥) →3¬(|ψ⟩∧|ψ⟩⊥) (modal logic −T system)
2. 3¬(|ψ⟩∧|ψ⟩⊥) →¬□(|ψ⟩∧|ψ⟩⊥) (in S5, ¬□stands for a paraconsistent
negation “¬3”, that is, p, ¬3p ̸⊢q and p, ¬3p ̸⊢¬1q [6]).
3. |ψ⟩⋆|ψ⟩⊥→∼(|ψ⟩∧|ψ⟩⊥) (Our axiom plus propositional calculus) — be-
ing superposed, the system is not in both states even with the paraconsistent
negation ¬3.
Other arguments contrary to the reading that superpositions may in-
volve contradictions can be seen in the papers by Arenhart and Krause men-
tioned in our references. The ﬁgure below shows the interrelations among
the three negations we have considered.
@
@
@
@
@
@
@
@@








|ψ⟩
cat alive
|ψ⟩⊥= ¬2|ψ⟩
cat dead
¬1|ψ⟩⊥= ¬1¬2|ψ⟩
cat not dead
¬1|ψ⟩= ¬3¬1|ψ⟩⊥
cat not alive
Figure 2.
The interplay among the negations, inspired by the square.
5. Conclusion
In this paper we provided a ﬁrst approach to a logical understanding of
superpositions and their measurement. Obviously, superpositions will not
be fully understood from a purely logical approach, but we feel that it
is fair to put some things clearly by introducing an explicit talk about
superposition and measurement in the object language. Perhaps this can

58
help us in spotting the most thorny issues involved with superpositions so
as in helping us to achieve a better understanding of the subject. We have
approached the problem by ﬁrst trying to set some intuitive properties of
quantum superpositions and the result of measuring a physical system in a
superposition, and only then sought to provide for some formal counterparts
to those ideas.
Certainly much more is still required in order to achieve a better logical
(and physical) understanding of quantum superpositions but, as it happens
to almost every inquire into a great mystery, one must proceed with great
care and a disposition to revise what was already settled. In particular,
we hope to have convinced the reader that, given some fairly uncontrover-
sial assumptions about superpositions and their measurements, there is no
sensible sense to be made of the claim that superpositions involve contra-
dictions, a very common claim in popular accounts to quantum mechanics.
So, we agree that quantum mechanics produces oddities, but a dead and
alive cat is not one of them.
We guess our approach hits correctly at some of the core features of
superpositions and their measurements, at least for those willing to accept
some form of collapse. We grant that this is a very big ‘if’, but one has
to make a choice. Furthermore, still talking about choices, the modal logic
underlying our approach is still very much open to further discussion. We
have used most of the time the resources of T , but perhaps distinct systems
of modal logic and even distinct fragments of a tense reading of the modal
operators could be even better suited (given that ‘measure’ has a dynamical
understanding in collapse interpretations). These are some paths we intend
to investigate as a sequence to this ﬁrst step.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank Pedro Merlussi for discussions when this
paper was in its beginnings and to Christian de Ronde for many conversa-
tions, corrections and suggestions.
Bibliography
1. J. R. B. Arenhart, D. Krause, “Oppositions and quantum mechanics: super-
position and identity”. Forthcoming in: J. Y. B´eziau, K. Gan-Krzywoszynska
(eds.), New Dimensions of the Square of Opposition, pp.337–356. (M¨unchen,
Philosophia Verlag (Series Analytica), 2016).
2. J. R. B. Arenhart, D. Krause, “Contradiction, Quantum Mechanics, and the
Square of Opposition”, Forthcoming in Logique et Analyse, 2016.

59
3. J. R. B. Arenhart, D. Krause, “Potentiality and contradiction in quantum
mechanics”. In: Arnold Koslow, Arthur Buchsbaum (eds.) The Road to Uni-
versal Logic. Festschrift for the 50th Birthday of Jean-Yves B´eziau Volume
II, pp.201–211. (Basel, Birkh¨auser, 2015).
4. S. Y. Auyang, How is Quantum Field Theory Possible?, (New York, Oxford
Un. Press, 1995).
5. E. G. Beltrametti, G. Cassinelli, The Logic of Quantum Mechanics. (Reading,
Addison-Wesley, 1981).
6. J. Y. B´eziau, “Paraconsistent logic from a modal viewpoint”. Journal of
Applied Logic 3, 7–14, 2005.
7. N. C. A. da Costa, C. de Ronde, C. “The Paraconsistent Logic of Superpo-
sitions”. Foundations of Physics 43, 854–858, 2013.
8. M. L. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini, R. Greechie, Reasoning in Quantum Theory:
Sharp and Unsharp Quantum Logics. (Kluwer Ac. Press, 2004).
9. C. de Ronde, “A Defense of the Paraconsistent Approach to Quan-
tum Superpositions (Answer to Arenhart and Krause)”. Available at
http://arxiv.org/abs/1404.5186, 2014.
10. P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. 4th. ed. (Oxford,
Oxford Un. Press, 2011).
11. G. M. Hardegree, “The conditional in abstract an concrete quantum logics”.
in: C. A. Hooker (ed.), The Logico Algebraic Approach to Quantum Mechan-
ics. Vol. II −Contemporary Consolidation, pp.49–108. (D. Reidel, 1979).
12. E. Schr¨odinger, “The present situation in quantum mechanics”. (Translation
by J. D. Trimmer of the “Cat Paradox” paper). In: J. A. Wheeler, W.H. Zurek
(eds.) Quantum Theory and Measurement, 152–167. (Princeton, Princeton
University Press, 1983).
13. B. van Fraassen, “The labyrinth of quantum logics”. In: C. A. Hooker (ed.)
The Logico Algebraic Approach to Quantum Mechanics. Vol. I −Historical
Evolution, pp.577–607. (D. Reidel, 1975).

60
MIXING CATEGORIES AND MODAL LOGICS
IN THE QUANTUM SETTING
Giovanni Cin`a
Institute for Logic, Language and Computation; University of Amsterdam
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
E-mail: giovanni. cina@ gmail. com
The study of the foundations of Quantum Mechanics, especially after the ad-
vent of Quantum Computation and Information, has beneﬁted from the appli-
cation of category-theoretic tools and modal logics to the analysis of Quantum
processes: we witness a wealth of theoretical frameworks casted in either of the
two languages. This paper explores the interplay of the two formalisms in the
peculiar context of Quantum Theory.
After a review of some inﬂuential abstract frameworks, we show how diﬀer-
ent modal logic frames can be extracted from the category of ﬁnite dimensional
Hilbert spaces, connecting the Categorical Quantum Mechanics approach to
some modal logics that have been proposed for Quantum Computing. We then
apply a general version of the same technique to two other categorical frame-
works, the ‘topos approach’ of Doering and Isham and the sheaf-theoretic work
on contextuality by Abramsky and Brandenburger, suggesting how some key
features can be expressed with modal languages.
Keywords: Quantum mechanics, category theory, modal logic.
1. Introduction
The development of Quantum Computation and Information has caused
a new wave of studies in Quantum Mechanics: the possibility of deﬁning
quantum algorithms, and the fact that some of them outperform their clas-
sical counterparts, has elicited novel theoretical issues and challenges. They
range from the abstract study of general features of quantum phenomena,
such as non-locality, to the design of logical languages to encode quantum
protocols, to diagrammatic calculi for quantum-ﬂavoured categories. Two
sets of tools seem to be especially useful in these explorations, the frame-
work of Category Theory and formal languages from Modal Logic. The aim
of this paper is to suggest possible ways to connect these tools in a way
that is meaningful for the quantum setting.

61
We will start with an overview of some categorical approaches. This
is in no way a review of all the categorically-informed outlooks on the
quantum world; we will merely cherry-pick those that are more amenable
for our investigation, in the hope that the chosen examples will still carry
enough importance in the eyes of the reader. The ﬁrst research program we
describe was pioneered by Abramsky and Coecke. Their work started from
the analysis of the categorical structure of the category of ﬁnite-dimensional
Hilbert spaces and linear maps [1,3] In the last decade this research project
has produced many results and a renewed interest in symmetric monoidal
categories, the categories used to model compound systems. We then turn
our attention to the category of set-valued contravariant functors over the
poset of abelian sub-algebras of B(H), the algebra of bounded operators
of a given Hilbert space H. This topos and its associated logic are studied
in a line of research carried on by Doering and Isham [9]. Last but not
least, we will brieﬂy describe a sheaf-theoretic analysis of non-locality and
contextuality initiated by Abramsky and Brandenburger [2].
The second section of the paper will focus on modal languages that
have been used to encode quantum phenomena and processes. Again, there
are a wealth of modal logic proposed in this context; the main approach
we will cover, proposed by Baltag and Smets, exploits the formalism of
PDL to represent quantum algorithms and to design a proof system able
to prove their correctness. This research group has proposed diﬀerent logics
for this task; here we focus on LQP, the Logic of Quantum Programs, and
its compound version LQP n. This approach is connected with both the
traditional logical studies of the foundations of Quantum Mechanics, the
so-called standard Quantum Logic, and the “Dynamic Turn” in Logic, that
is, the use of modal logics to reason about processes and information. The
semantics of these logics are relational structures called Dynamic Quantum
Frames, namely relational versions of Hilbert spaces.a
Our ﬁrst step in merging categorical frameworks and modal languages is
to describe a procedure to extract modal languages and transition systems
from certain functors, ﬁrst proposed in a seminal paper by Joyal Winskel
and Nielsen [11]. We then show how the frames of LQP and LQP n are
related to the categories studied by Abramsky and Coecke. The bridge be-
tween the category of ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces and the semantics
of these is given by the choice of a speciﬁc functor from such category
into Setpart, the category of sets and partial functions. This construction
aThis line of research is developed in multiple papers, we refer to the main ones [5,6].

62
suggests how to obtain a richer semantics, containing probabilistic infor-
mation, with the choice of a diﬀerent functor. The intended use for such
semantics is the formalization of protocols where probabilities play an es-
sential part.
A more general version of the same construction can be exploited to
extract modal languages from the other categorical frameworks. In the case
of the topos approach the modal language can be used to describe the rela-
tionships between partial states seen as elements of the image of the spectral
presheaf. Moreover, we link the Kochen-Specker Theorem to the existence
of transition-preserving functions between the transition systems arising
from the terminal presheaf and the spectral presheaf, respectively. In the
sheaf setting put forward by Abramsky and Brandenburger the modal logic
obtained is shown to capture the important notion of strong contextuality.
We refer to the more detailed work [8] for a detailed explanation of the
results in subsections 4.1 and 4.2, further discussion and examples. In what
follows we employ concepts and notation from Category Theory, Modal
Logic and Quantum Computing; we direct the reader to the textbooks in
the references [7,13,15] for the necessary background in these areas.
2. Categorical frameworks
We begin by ﬂeshing out the categorical approaches that we listed.
2.1. Categorical quantum mechanics
In their paper [3] Abramsky and Coecke outline a study of the foundations
of Quantum Mechanics from a category-theoretic perspective. The target
of this study is FdHilC, the category having as objects ﬁnite-dimensional
Hilbert spaces over the ﬁeld of complex numbers and as morphisms linear
maps.b This category can be thought of as the formal environment where
Quantum Computing takes place.c
The key observation is the following:
Theorem 2.1 (3). The category FdHil is a dagger compact closed cate-
gory with biproducts.
This in particular means that FdHil is:
(1) a symmetric monoidal category
bWe will drop the subscript in what follows.
cThe limitation to ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert spaces is a rather standard one in Quantum
Computation [15].

63
(2) a compact closed category
(3) a dagger category
(4) a category with biproducts
and furthermore that all these layers of structure coexist together, namely
that the category satisﬁes some coherence conditions (in [13, pp. 158-9]).
Intuitively, a symmetric monoidal category is a category equipped with
an operation to mold objects into compound objects. In FdHil this role is
fulﬁlled by the tensor product. Monoidal categories have a special object
I which is the unit of the operation, in FdHil this is the one-dimensional
Hilbert space C. This unit object can be used to characterize scalars in
general as morphisms I →I; this deﬁnition specializes well, since the linear
maps of type C →C correspond indeed to the scalars in C.
A compact closed category is a category having, for each object, a dual
object with particular properties. In FdHil these are the conjugate spaces,
that is, the spaces in which scalars and inner product are the complex
conjugate with respect to the original space. Dagger categories have a con-
travariant, identity-on-objects and involutive endofunctor, namely an oper-
ation † that modiﬁes only morphisms and switches domains and codomains.
This corresponds to the conjugate-transpose of a linear map in FdHil. Via
this additional structure we can characterize unitary maps as isomorphisms
such that f −1 = f † and self-adjoints maps as morphisms such that f = f †.
This also suggests the abstract characterization of projectors as self-adjoint
morphisms such that f ◦f = f.
Finally, a category with biproducts is a category with a distinguished
object, called zero object, and an operation to merge objects together. Con-
trarily to the monoidal operation, biproducts stand for objects that are
completely determined by their components. The zero object in FdHil is
the 0-dimensional vector space, while the biproduct is the direct sum of
Hilbert spaces.
The central ingredients of Quantum Mechanics can be recovered in this
categorical framework, and we can give an abstract representation of quan-
tum protocols. Furthermore, we can prove the correctness of a protocol via
the commutation of the appropriate diagram.
2.2. A topos for quantum mechanics
The second research program that we sketch is part of a general enterprise
aimed at reconstructing physical theories within the language of suitable

64
topoi.d In the eyes of the authors Doering and Isham, a suitable topos for
a given physical theory will have an object Σ, playing the role of the state
space, and an object R, representing the possible values of physical quan-
tities. The latter are represented as arrows Σ →R, while propositions are
encoded as sub-objects of Σ. We limit ourselves to this superﬁcial descrip-
tion of the general picture and zoom in the case of quantum mechanics.
Given a Hilbert space H, consider the algebra of bounded operators
B(H). In quantum mechanics, a physical quantity is usually represented by
a self-adjoint operator in such algebra. Call V(H) the poset of all abelian
sub-algebras of B(H), ordered by inclusion. We can think of each abelian
sub-algebra V as a “classical snapshot” over the quantum system H, where
classicality is given by the fact that all the physical quantities represented
by operators in V commute. According to the authors the right topos for
quantum mechanics is SetV(H).
In this setting the presheaf acting as the state space is the spectral
presheaf Σ, the functor assigning to each V ∈V(H) the set of multiplica-
tive linear functionals λV →C and deﬁned on morphisms as restriction.
We can think of these functionals as partial states, assigning a value to each
bounded operator in V . Proposition are thus sub-objects of Σ. Being func-
tors from V(H), propositions will now have a diﬀerent extension depending
on the ‘context’ at which they are evaluated. While in the topos Set the
set of truth values for proposition is the set {0, 1}, in the presheaf category
SetV(H) the sub-object classiﬁer is the presheaf of sieves, hence the truth
value of a proposition is also contextual.
2.3. Sheaf-theoretic analysis of contextuality
As third and ﬁnal case study, we turn to the sheaf-theoretic analysis of
non-locality and contextuality proposed by Abramsky and Brandenburger
[2]. This work shares some similarities with the topos approach, indeed they
both deal with presheaves over categories of ‘contexts’, but nevertheless it
is casted at a higher level of generality. We are concerned with the gen-
eral architecture of the approach and will therefore only depict it in broad
strokes.
The primitives of their setting are a set of measurements X and a set of
outcomes O, both assumed to be ﬁnite. Given a collection of measurements
dFor a comprehensive survey of the approach we point the reader to the reference [9].
A closely related line of work, that could be amenable for a similar analysis, stems from
the reference [10]. For the standard reference in Topos Theory see the classic book [14].

65
U ⊆X, a section is a function s : U →O associating an outcome to each
measurements. We can thus deﬁne a presheaf E : ℘(X)op →Set, where the
powerset is seen as a poset category, assigning E(U) = OU and deﬁned on
morphisms by restriction: if i : U ⊆U ′ then E(i)(s) = s|U. Therefore such
presheaf encodes all the possible events: for each collection of measurements
it returns all the possible scenarios in the form of functions matching the
measurements to a corresponding outcome. The condition on morphisms
ensures that functions restrict coherently to the subsets of their domain.
This deﬁnition makes E into a presheaf; the ﬁniteness of X and O ensures
that partial functions can always be glued together by taking the union
of their graphs, hence E is actually a sheaf. This mathematical object is
called the sheaf of events for the given pair X and O. It is then possible to
compose this functor with the endofunctor given by the distributions over
a commutative semiring.
3. Dynamic quantum logic
The Logic of Quantum Programs LQP and it compound version LQP n
were designed by Baltag and Smets to express quantum algorithms and
prove their correctness [5,6]. The core ideas behind this logics are two.
First, we can see the states of a physical system as states of a Modal Logic
frame. Second, the dynamics of the system can be captured by means of a
PDL-style formalism, i.e., a modal logic formalism containing constructors
for modalities. In particular, the intuition is that measurements can be seen
as tests and the evolutions of the system as programs.
How do we prove the correctness of an algorithm in this setting? Es-
sentially, by proving that it is a validity of the logic. More precisely, if we
are able to represent the systems we want to study as Modal Logic frames,
we can express the correctness of an algorithm by proving that the formula
encoding the algorithm is true at all states in all systems, i.e., is a validity
of the corresponding class of Modal Logic frames. The key result that we
need to apply the above line of reasoning is Soundness: we need to show
that if a formula is provable in the logic (from some premises) then it is
true in all states in all Modal Logic frames (satisfying the premises).
3.1. The logic LQP
The logic LQP is an implementation of these ideas. Given a set of atomic
propositions At and a set of atomic actions AtAct, the set of formulas FLQP

66
is built by mutual recursion as follows:
ψ ::= p | ¬ψ | ψ ∧φ | [π]ψ
where p ∈At and the action π is deﬁned as
π ::= U | π† | π ∪π′ | π; π′ | ψ?
where U ∈AtAct. The basic actions are meant to represent unitary trans-
formations, while the tests ψ? capture the measurement of a certain prop-
erty. The composition of actions stands for the sequential composition of
quantum gates or measurements, the dagger is the conjugate transpose
and the nondeterministic union of actions is exploited to render the non-
deterministic behaviour caused by the measurements. Denote with Act the
collection of all actions.
The semantics of such a language is the following:
Deﬁnition 3.1. Given a Hilbert space H, call LH its lattice of linear
subspaces. A concrete quantum dynamic frame is a tuple ⟨ΣH, {
Pa?
−−→}a∈LH,
{
U−→}U∈U⟩such that
(1) ΣH is the set of all one-dimensional linear subspaces of H
(2) {
Pa?
−−→}a∈LH is a family of quantum tests, partial maps from ΣH into ΣH
associated to the projectors of the Hilbert space H. Given v ∈ΣH, the
partial map
Pa?
−−→is deﬁned as
Pa?
−−→(v) = Pa(v). The map is undeﬁned
if Pa(v) is the zero vector.
(3) {
U−→}U∈U is a collection of partial maps from ΣH into ΣH associated
to the unitary maps from H into H. As for projectors, the map
U−→is
deﬁned as
U−→(v) = U(v).
Call ΓCQDF the class of all concrete quantum dynamic frames.
Deﬁnition 3.2. Given a concrete quantum dynamic frame, a set T ⊆ΣH
and a relation R ⊆ΣH × ΣH, deﬁne the following operations
• T ⊥= {s|∀t ∈T s ⊥t}
• [R]T = {s|∀t ∈T (s, t) ∈R ⇒t ∈T }
• R† = {(s, t)|t ∈([R]{s}⊥)⊥}
where s ⊥t is the orthogonality relation between one-dimensional linear
subspaces in ΣH.

67
Deﬁnition 3.3. An LQP-model M consists of a concrete quantum dy-
namic frame ⟨ΣH, {
Pa?
−−→}a∈LH, {
U−→}U∈U⟩and a valuation function V
:
At →℘(ΣH).
Given an LQP-model, we deﬁne an interpretation of the actions and
the satisfaction relation by mutual recursion.
Deﬁnition 3.4. Call Cl({Ri}i∈I) the closure of a set of relations with
respect to the operations of relational composition, union and the dagger
operation described in Deﬁnition [3.2]. An interpretation of the actions in
an LQP-model is a function i : Act →Cl({
Pa?
−−→}a∈LH ∪{
U−→}U∈U) such
that
• i(U) ∈{
U−→}U∈U
• i(π ∪π′) = i(π) ∪i(π′)
• i(π†) = i(π)†
• i(π; π′) = i(π); i(π′)
• i(ψ?) =
Pa?
−−→where a is the span of the set {s ∈ΣH|M, s ⊨LQP ψ}
Where ; on the right-hand side is the composition of relations (partial func-
tions in this case), ∪is the union of relations and † is the previously deﬁned
operation on relations.
Deﬁnition 3.5. Given a model M, a state s in the model and a formula
ψ ∈FLQP , the satisfaction relation ⊨LQP is deﬁned as
• M, s ⊨LQP p
iﬀ
s ∈V (p)
• M, s ⊨LQP ¬ψ
iﬀ
M, s ̸⊨LQP ψ
• M, s ⊨LQP ψ ∧φ
iﬀ
M, s ⊨LQP ψ and M, s ⊨LQP φ
• M, s ⊨LQP [π]ψ
iﬀ
for all (s, s′) ∈i(π) we have M, s′ ⊨LQP ψ
Theorem 3.1 (6 p. 21). There exist a proof system of LQP which is
sound with respect to the class ΓCQDF .
We refer to the literature [6] for the details of the proof system.
3.2. The logic LQP n
Nevertheless, the formalism of LQP is not enough to express quantum
protocols. We need to express locality, that is, we need to express the fact
that some quantum gates or measurements are performed locally, on certain
subsystems. For this reason an enhanced version of LQP, called LQP n, was
developed to capture locality in systems of n qubits.

68
Suppose given a natural number n. Set N = {1, . . . , n} and I ⊆N.
The syntax of LQP n is the same as that of LQP plus the propositional
constants
⊤I | 1 | +
and the constant actions trivI. The new propositional constants are used
to characterize local properties, while trivI is used to deﬁne local actions.
Deﬁnition 3.6. Let H′ be a Hilbert space of dimension 2 with basis
{|1⟩, |0⟩}. Consider the Hilbert space H := ⊗i=n
i=1 H′ consisting of n copies
of H′ and call n-partite quantum dynamic frame the concrete quantum
dynamic frame associated to H.
Set N = {1, . . . , n}. We write HI to indicate the tensor product of the
Hilbert spaces indexed by the indices in I ⊆N. Thus in particular HN = H.
Call ΓCQDF n the class of n-partite quantum dynamic frames.
Deﬁnition 3.7. The satisfaction relation ⊨LQP n contains that of LQP and
is deﬁned on the new formulas as
• M, s ⊨LQP n 1
iﬀ
s = ⊗i=n
i=1 |1⟩i
• M, s ⊨LQP n +
iﬀ
s = ⊗i=n
i=1 |+⟩i
• M, s ⊨LQP n ⊤I
iﬀ
s ∈⊤Σ
I
Hence 1 and + are used to denote speciﬁc states, while the last condition
means that ⊤I is true at a state iﬀthat state is I-separated.
Theorem 3.2 (6 p.28). There is a proof system of LQP n which extends
that of LQP and is sound with respect to the class ΓCQDF n.
The correctness of a protocol can then be proved by encoding it in a
formula of the logic and then showing that such formula is a validity.
Theorem 3.3 (4,6). In the logic LQP n we can give a formal correctness
proof of the following algorithms: Teleportation, Quantum Secret Sharing,
Superdense Coding, Entanglement Swapping and Logic Gate Teleportation.
Unfortunately, with this logic we can only encode quantum protocols
that succeed with probability 1.
4. Drawing the connection
We now address the question: is there a systematic way to relate these two
formalisms that can bear meaningful fruits in the quantum setting?

69
Deﬁnition 4.1. A small category is a category such that the collection of
objects and the collection of maps are both sets. For a small category C we
indicate with C0 the set of objects and with C1 the set of morphisms.
Deﬁnition 4.2. Given a small category C and a functor U : C →Rel, a
(C, U)-frame is a pair ⟨W, {Rf}f∈C1⟩such that:
• W := {(x, C)|x ∈U(C), C ∈C0}
• Rf := {((x, C)(U(f)(x), C′))|f : C →C′ ∈C1}
Notice that if C is small then W is the union of set-many sets, and thus is
a set. Similarly, as there are set-many morphisms in C, the collection of all
relations Rf will be a set.
This is essentially the construction known as ‘category of elements’, repack-
aged into a labelled transition system. An analogous procedure was studied
in Theoretical Computer Science in connection with presheaves [16]. In that
context, because of contravariance, the relations are deﬁned as follows:
Rf := {((x, C)(y, C′))|U(f)(y) = x, f : C →C′ ∈C1}
This construction can be turned into a full functor embedding
presheaves into the category of transition systems and transition-preserving
functions.e As a consequence we obtain the following Proposition.
Proposition 4.1. Suppose U, U ′ : Cop →Set. There exists a natu-
ral transformation θ : U →U ′ iﬀthere is a transition-preserving func-
tion θ from the (C, U)-frame to the (C, U ′)-frame deﬁned as θ((x, C)) =
(θC(x), C).
The obvious modal language to describe these transition systems is the
one provided by the base category C:
φ ::=
p | ¬φ | ψ ∧φ | ⟨α⟩φ
where α ∈C1 and p ∈At, a set of atomic propositions. Notice that this is
a fragment of the so-called path logic introduced in the presheaf approach’
to concurrency [11].f Suppose given a model M = ⟨W, {Ri}i∈C1, V ⟩, where
eIf the transitions on transition system given from a presheaf are deﬁned following the
functions, instead of be deﬁned as the inverses of such functions, then there is such a
natural transformation if and only if there is a functional bisimulation between the two
corresponding transition systems.
fIn the original formulation path logic was conceived with inﬁnitary conjunctions and
disjunctions.

70
⟨W, {Ri}i∈C1⟩is one of the aforementioned transition systems and V is
a valuation. The satisfaction of the formulas is deﬁned as usual for the
propositional case, while for the modalities put:
M, w ⊨⟨α⟩φ
iﬀ
∃(w, w′) ∈Rα ∧M, w′ ⊨φ
The additional structure of the base category C is then reﬂected in
the modal language within the modalities, and can be interpreted provided
that the functor giving the semantics matches this structure with a corre-
sponding structure on the target category. More precisely, suppose there is
an endofunctor T : C →C; this will be reﬂected in the syntax with the
existence of modalities of shape ⟨T α⟩. Given a functor U : C →Rel, if
there is a functor T ′ : Rel →Set such that the diagram
C
C
Rel
Rel
T
U
T ′
U
commutes then we can concretely deﬁne the satisfaction relation as g
M, w ⊨⟨T α⟩φ
iﬀ
∃(w, w′) ∈T ′(Rα) ∧M, w′ ⊨φ
This intuition will be exploited, for example, when dealing with the dagger
operator in the next section.
4.1. Recovering the semantics of LQP
The procedure outlined in the previous section cannot be applied to non
small categories, if we want to have a set-sized carrier and set-many rela-
tions. However, we can give up the idea of obtaining a single Modal Logic
frame from a category and have instead a frame from every small subcat-
egory. Note that this entails having class-many frames. Hence from a big
category we can still recover a class of frames, and study such class with
modal logics.
We want to apply this construction to FdHil to recover the semantics
of LQP and LQP n. In this particular case, we are interested in having one
gWe choose Rel here just to remain general, but the same concept applies to subcate-
gories such as Set. Also the same idea can be generalized to functors of type Cn →C.

71
frame for each physical system, since this was the original idea underlying
LQP, thus we will consider the frames generated by the subcategories of
FdHil with only one object. Notice that the procedure depends on the
choice of a functor FdHil →Rel; each functor produces a diﬀerent class
of frames, and therefore a diﬀerent modal logic.
Consider the functor S : FdHil →Setpart deﬁned as:
H →ΣH
L : H →V →S(L) : ΣH →ΣV
where ΣH is the set of one-dimensional linear subspaces of H and the
functions S(L) are the partial functions deﬁned as S(L)(v) = L(v). We
now deﬁne a (H, S)-frame, for H the full subcategory of FdHil containing
only a single Hilbert space H.
Deﬁnition 4.3. An (H, S)-frame is a pair ⟨W, {RL}L∈H1⟩such that
• W := ΣH
• {RL}L∈H1 := {S(L)|L ∈H1}
Hence in this case the carrier of the Modal Logic frame is the set of all
one-dimensional subspaces of H. Alternatively, since such subspaces are in
bijection with the unitary vectors that represent the states of a quantum
systems, W is the set of all pure states of H.
Notice that the concrete quantum dynamic frame given by a Hilbert
space H is a substructure of the corresponding (H, S)-frame: the latter has
all the partial functions corresponding to linear maps of type H →H, the
former only those “constructed from” unitary maps and projectors. So if
we interpret the programs in the syntax of LQP in the right way, that
is, we send tests to the partial functions corresponding to projections and
basic actions to the functions corresponding to unitary transformations, we
get the same validities of the class ΓCQDF in the language of LQP. This
happens simply because all the additional relations that are in the (H, S)-
frame but not in the concrete quantum dynamic frame are not expressible
in the language.
Theorem 4.1 (8). The logic of the class of (H, S)-frames in the language
FLQP contains all the theorems of LQP. Similarly for LQP n, when the
class of frames is suitably restricted.

72
4.2. Capturing probabilistic information
We hint now at how to use the same technique to obtain richer relational
structures containing probabilistic information. Consider F : FdHil →
Setpart deﬁned as:
H →AH
L : H →V →F(L) : AH →AV
The set AH is the set of functions sρ : LH →[0, 1], where LH is the lattice
of closed linear subspaces of H, deﬁned as
sρ(a) = tr(Paρ)
where Pa is the projector associated to the subspace a and ρ is a density
operator on H.
A linear map L : H →V is sent to the partial function F(L) : AH →
AV , where
F(L)(sρ) = s
LρL†
tr(LρL†)
F(L)(sρ) is not deﬁned if tr(LρL†) = 0. Recall that the density operators
are exactly the positive linear maps of trace 1. The operator LρL† is still
positive, and the denominator tr(LρL†) ensures that it is an operator of
trace 1. Therefore
LρL†
tr(LρL†) is again a density operator, so the function F(L)
is well deﬁned.
Deﬁnition 4.4. A (H, F)-frame is a pair ⟨W, {RL}L∈H1⟩deﬁned as
• W := AH
• {RL}L∈H1 := {F(L)|L : H →H}
Hence in this case the carrier of the Modal Logic frame is the set of functions
sρ : LH →[0, 1] deﬁned above. Such functions are associated to density
operators on H, which represent both pure and strictly mixed states of the
quantum system H. The set {RL}L∈H1 is the collection of maps generated
by all linear maps of type H →H.
We can design a language to express the features of these richer frames
and show that, upon translation, all the theorems of LQP (LQP n) are
validities of the class of (H, F)-frames (given by compound systems) in this
enriched language [8].

73
4.3. Path logic for the quantum topos
The logic that is naturally associated to topoi is intuitionistic. The quan-
tum topos SetV(H) is no exception, and the authors argue about how a
higher-order typed language interpreted in SetV(H) can be useful in ren-
dering the properties of a quantum system H. Here we want to remark that
each presheaf in SetV(H) is amenable for the treatment described at the
beginning of this section.
We have seen how from each presheaf we can obtain a transition system;
in this environment the most interesting choice is the spectral presheaf Σ:
since the elements in Σ(V ) are partial states λ : V →C, the elements of
the transition system generated by Σ will be all pairs (λ, V ). Because of
the deﬁnition of Σ on morphisms, two such partial states are related if one
is the restriction of the other. The path logic given by V(H) can thus be
used to describe how these partial states are connected. More generally, it
remains to be seen how the path logic for such a presheaf category interacts
with the internal logic of the topos.
We can however oﬀer a remark on the purely structural level. One of the
insight of the topos-theoretic point of view on quantum mechanics is the
observation that the Kochen-Specker Theorem [12] is equivalent to the fact
that, for a Hilbert space H of dimension greater than 2, there is no global
element for the spectral presheaf of SetV(H), that is to say, no natural
transformation θ : 1 →Σ. Because of proposition 4.1 we know that the
latter is the case if and only if there is a transition-preserving function
from the transition system given by 1 to the transition system arising from
Σ.
4.4. A language for sections in the sheaf of events
Suppose given the sheaf of events E : ℘(X)op →Set for given sets of
measurements X and of outcomes O. Notice that because of the ﬁniteness
of X the category ℘(X)op will be ﬁnite and therefore small. Moreover,
observe that the elements of the transition system obtained from E are
the sections themselves, paired with their domain, that is, they are pairs
(s : U →O, U) for U ⊆X.h
The path logic resulting from this base category is a modal logic whose
modalities are indexed by the inclusion of sets of measurements. In the
hIf we consider the functor E composed with a distribution functor DR for a given
commutative semiring R then the objects of the transition systems will be pairs (d, U),
where d is an R-distribution over the sections over U.

74
case of E this concretely means that (s : U →O, U) ⊨⟨U ⊆U ′⟩φ iﬀ
there is a section s′ : U ′ →O whose retraction is s, or in other words, a
section extending s, and such that (s′, U ′) ⊨φ. We can therefore use this
modal logic to describe how sections over diﬀerent sets are related to each
other, similarly to what we sketched for the topos approach. An important
property of the systems considered in this approach is the existence of
the so-called global sections, namely sections over the whole set X. This
property can be expressed with the path logic formula ⟨∅⊆X⟩⊤: the
unique section r : ∅→O satisﬁes this formula if it can be extended to a
section over the whole X, i.e., if there exists a global section. We refer to the
literature [2] and in particular to Theorem 8.1 in loc. cit. for a discussion
on the existence of global sections.
5. Conclusions
We have seen how we can associate modal logic to some inﬂuential cate-
gorical frameworks employed in the study of quantum phenomena. In our
ﬁrst case study we showed how from the category FdHil and the functor
S we can obtain the class of Modal Logic frames for the dynamics quan-
tum logics LQP and LQP n. This constitutes the link between these two
research programs. Along the same lines we have sketched how, with the
choice of the functor F, it is possible to obtain a richer semantics containing
probabilistic information.
The same approach was used to associate a modal logic to the topos-
theoretic analysis of Doering and Isham. In that case the path logic could be
used to describe the relationships between partial states seen as elements of
the image of the spectral presheaf. Moreover, via the topos representation of
quantum mechanics we linked the Kochen-Specker Theorem to the existence
of transition-preserving functions between the transition systems arising
from the terminal presheaf and the spectral presheaf, respectively.
Finally, we addressed the work on contextuality by Abramsky and Bran-
denburger, casted in the language of Sheaf Theory. The modal logic ob-
tained in that setting was shown to capture the important notion of strong
contextuality.
References
1. S. Abramsky and B. Coecke. A categorical semantics for quantum protocols.
In In: Proceedings of the 19th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer
Science (LiCS04), IEEE Computer Science. Press. Arxiv:quant-ph/0402130,
2004.

75
2. S. Abramsky and A. Brandenburger. The sheaf-theoretic structure of non-
locality and contextuality. New Journal of Physics, 13(11):113036, 2011.
3. S. Abramsky and B. Coecke. Categorical quantum mechanics. In Handbook of
quantum logic and quantum structures: quantum logic, pages 261–324, 2008.
4. D. Akatov. The Logic of Quantum Program Veriﬁcation. Master thesis, Ox-
ford University Computing Laboratory, 2005.
5. A. Baltag and S. Smets. Complete Axiomatizations for Quantum Actions.
International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 44(12):2267–2282, 2005.
6. A. Baltag and S. Smets. LQP, The Dynamic Logic of Quantum Information.
Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 16(3):491–525, 2005.
7. P. Blackburn, M. de Rijke, and Y. Venema. Modal Logic. Cambridge Tracts
in Theoretical Computer Science. Cambridge University Press, 2002.
8. G. Cin`a. On the connection between the categorical and the modal logic ap-
proaches to Quantum Mechanics. Master thesis, ILLC, 2013.
9. A. D¨oring and C. Isham. “What is a Thing?”: Topos Theory in the Foun-
dations of Physics. In New structures for physics, pages 753–937. Springer,
2011.
10. C. Heunen, N. P Landsman, and B. Spitters. A topos for algebraic quantum
theory. Communications in mathematical physics, 291(1):63–110, 2009.
11. A. Joyal, M. Nielsen, and G. Winskel. Bisimulation from open maps. Infor-
mation and Computation, 127(2):164–185, 1996.
12. S. Kochen and E.P. Specker. The problem of hidden variables in quantum
mechanics. Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics, 17:5987, 1967.
13. S. Mac Lane. Categories for the Working Mathematician. 2nd edition.
Springer, 1998.
14. S. Mac Lane and I. Moerdijk. Sheaves in geometry and logic: A ﬁrst intro-
duction to topos theory. Springer, 1992.
15. M.A. Nielsen and I.L. Chuang. Quantum Computation and Quantum Infor-
mation. Cambridge University Press, 2010.
16. G. Winskel and M. Nielsen. Presheaves as transition systems. DIMACS Se-
ries in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science, 29:129–140,
1997.

76
BINARY GATES IN THREE VALUED
QUANTUM COMPUTATIONAL LOGICS
Giuseppe Sergioli, Antonio Ledda and Roberto Giuntini
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa - Universit`a di Cagliari
Via Is Mirrionis 1, 09123, Cagliari-Italia
E-mail: giuseppe. sergioli@ gmail. com
antonio. ledda@ unica. it
giuntini@ unica. it
The standard theory of quantum computation relies on the idea that the
qubit — the basic information quantity — is represented by a superposition
of elements of the standard quantum computational basis B(2) = {|0⟩, |1⟩}. In
the present paper we focus on the case of qutrits where the standard quan-
tum computational bases is replaced by a three-valued computational basis
B(3) = {|0⟩, | 1
2⟩, |1⟩}. Recently in [13], unary gates on the Hilbert space C3
were considered. In this work we propose an extensive method that allows to
extend binary gates to the framework of qutrits.
1. Introduction
The theory of quantum computation has suggested new forms of quantum
logic — the so called quantum computational logics — that turn out to have
some typical unsharp features [4]. The main diﬀerence between the quan-
tum logic introduced by Birkhoﬀand von Neumann [3] and the quantum
computational logics, could be summarized as follows: in the Birkhoﬀand
von Neumann approach, the meaning of a sentence is interpreted as a closed
subspace of the Hilbert space associated with a physical system [5]; on the
other hand, in quantum computational logics the meaning of a sentence is
identiﬁed with a quantum information quantity: a qubit, a quregister (that
is a system of qubits) or, more generally, a mixture of quregisters (the so
called qumix) [6–8,11,14].
In [2,13] authors proposed an extension of the standard quantum com-
putational logic where the basic information quantity is a qutrit (a unit
vector of the Hilbert space C3) instead of the usual qubit. Following this
approach, the standard quantum computational basis is replaced by the

77
three-valued quantum computational basis B(3) = {|0⟩, | 1
2⟩, |1⟩}, and in
this context several unary quantum gates were discussed. In this paper we
introduce an extensive method that allows to extend binary gates to the
framework of qutrits.
The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we provide all the basic
notions necessary to render the article self-contained; in Section 3 we sum-
marize the behaviour of some unary quantum gate in the framework of the
standard and the three-valued quantum computational logic, respectively;
in Section 4 we introduce an extensive method to deﬁne some binary gate
in three-valued quantum computational logics. Finally, we close the paper
with a few comments on possible further developments.
2. Basic Notions
In this section we introduce all the notions necessary for a consistent reading
of this paper.
Consider the n-fold tensor product Hilbert space ⊗nCd, with n ≥1 and
d ≥2.
The canonical orthonormal basis B(dn) of ⊗nCd is deﬁned as follows:
B(dn) = {|x1, ..., xn⟩: xi ∈{0,
1
d −1,
2
d −1, ..., 1}, ∀i ∈{1, ..., n}}
where
• |x1, ..., xn⟩is an abbreviation of the tensor product |x1⟩⊗...⊗|xn⟩;
• the vector |
i
d−1⟩∈Cd (with 0 ≤i ≤d −1) is a d-dimensional
column vector with 1 in the (i + 1)th-entry and 0 in all the other
d −1 entries.
In the special case where n = 1 and d = 3, we obtain the basis B(3) =
{|0⟩, | 1
2⟩, |1⟩}.
Deﬁnition 2.1. Qudit
A unit vector in the Hilbert space Cd (with d ≥2) is called qudit.
As a special case of the Deﬁnition above, if d = 3 the unit vector is
the qutrit, whose extensive expression is |ψ⟩= a|0⟩+ b| 1
2⟩+ c|1⟩(with
|a|2 + |b|2 + |c|2 = 1).
Deﬁnition 2.2. Quregister and Qumix
A quregister is a unit vector in ⊗nCd and a qumix (or mixed state) is a
density operator in ⊗nCd.

78
So, a vector in ⊗nCd is a n-fold tensor product of d-dimensional vectors.
Trivially, qudits are special cases of quregisters.
Deﬁnition 2.3. Truth-values of a quregister
We say that the truth-value of a quregister |x1, ..., xn−1,
i
d−1⟩∈⊗nCd is
i
d−1, with 0 ≤i ≤d −1.
Indeed, the truth-value of a quregister depends on its last component
only. In particular, if i = 0 we say that the register is false and if i = d −1
we say that the register is true.
Let us remark that the number of diﬀerent truth-values over the Hilbert
space ⊗nCd is d, for any value of n. Hence, in the Hilbert space ⊗nC3, three
possible truth-values only are available.
Deﬁnition 2.4. The truth-value projectors
A truth-value projection on ⊗nCd is a projector P (dn)
i
d−1 whose range is the
closed subspace spanned by the set of all quregisters whose n-th component
is |
i
d−1⟩, where P (dn)
i
d−1 = I(n−1) ⊗P (d)
i
d−1 and 0 ≤i ≤d −1.
In particular, the truth-projection on ⊗nCd is the projection operator
P (dn)
1
whose range is the closed subspace spanned by the set of all true
quregisters of ⊗nCd.
According to the Born rule, for any qumix ρ ∈⊗nCd, a notion of prob-
ability can be introduced as follows:
Deﬁnition 2.5.
i
d−1-probability
Let ρ be a qumix in ⊗nCd. The probability that ρ has the truth-value
i
d−1
(with 0 ≤i ≤d −1) is deﬁned by:
p(d)
i
d−1 = tr(P (dn)
i
d−1 ρ),
where tr is the trace functional.
From an intuitive point of view, p(d)
i
d−1 represents the probability that
the information stored by the qumix ρ is the truth-value
i
d−1.
The unitary evolution of quregisters and qumixes is dictated by quantum
logical gates and the quantum operations they naturally induce: unitary
transformations mapping quregisters and qumixes in ⊗nCd into quregisters
and qumixes in ⊗nCd, respectively. We may distinguish between:
- semiclassical quantum gates: unitary operators that transform basis
elements into basis elements;

79
- genuinely quantum gates: unitary operators that transform basis
elements into a superposition of basis states;
- genuinely entangled gates: unitary operators that transform basis
elements into entangled states.
In this paper, we will be mostly interested in the Hilbert space C3. We
say that a density operator (qumix) in C3 is a qutrit-density operator and
a quantum logical gate on C3 is a qutrit-gate.a
3. Extending Unary Quantum Gates
In this section we discuss extensions of two known quantum gates to the
case of qutrits. These constructions exploit the fact that in C3 — as well as
in ⊗n3 — the new truth value widens the usual behavior of gates in C2 —
as well as in ⊗n2 — along distinct degrees of freedom. In fact, we will see
that single gates in C2 may admit several extensions in the case of qutrits.
3.1. The negation
Qubit case: For any n ≥1, the negation on
n C2 is the unitary operator
Not(2n) such that, for every element |x1, ..., xn⟩of the computational basis
B(2n),
Not(2n)(|x1, ..., xn⟩) = |x1, ..., xn−1⟩⊗|1 −xn⟩.
We have that:
Not(2n) =

σx
if n = 1;
I(n−1) ⊗σx,
otherwise,
where σx :=
0 1
1 0

is the “ﬁrst” Pauli matrix.
The negation is an example of semiclassical gate: its application to
the vectors of the standard quantum computational basis reproduces the
behavior of the classical negation: Not|0⟩= |1⟩, Not|1⟩= |0⟩.
Qutrit case: Given the usual logical basis B(3) = {|0⟩, | 1
2⟩, |1⟩} on C3,
we can deﬁne a negation Not(3)
| 1
2 ⟩as expected by
Not(3)
| 1
2 ⟩|x⟩= |1 −x⟩,
aWhen a qutrit gate A is applied to a density operator ρ on C3, the evolution of ρ is
given by: AρA†. Since no danger of confusion will be impending, for the sake of notational
simplicity, from now on we write A(ρ).

80
where x ∈{0, 1
2, 1}. We use the subscript | 1
2⟩to emphasize the fact that | 1
2⟩
is a ﬁxpoint of Not(3)
| 1
2 ⟩, i.e. Not(3)
| 1
2 ⟩| 1
2⟩= | 1
2⟩. We can immediately obtain a
matrix form Not(3)
| 1
2 ⟩=


0 0 1
0 1 0
1 0 0

such that:
Not(3)
| 1
2 ⟩


a
b
c

=


c
b
a

.
This idea can be easily applied to the other basis states as follows:
Not(3)
|0⟩=


1 0 0
0 0 1
0 1 0

and Not(3)
|1⟩=


0 1 0
1 0 0
0 0 1

.
Let us remark that, for any i ∈{0, 1
2, 1}, Not(3)
|i⟩· Not(3)
|i⟩= I(3).
3.2. The Hadamard gate
Qubit case: For any n ≥1, the Hadamard gate on
n
 C2 is the linear
operator H(2n) such that for every element |x1, ..., xn⟩of the computational
basis B(2n):
H(2n)(|x1, ..., xn⟩) = |x1, ..., xn−1⟩⊗1
√
2 ((−1)xn |xn⟩+ |1 −xn⟩) .
We have that
H(2n) =

H
if n = 1;
In−1 ⊗H,
otherwise,
where H is the Hadamard matrix:
H =
1
√
2
1 1
1 −1

.
The basic property of H(2n) is that, for any |ψ⟩∈
n
 C2,
H(2n) 	
H(2n)(|ψ⟩)

= |ψ⟩.
Hadamard gate is an example of genuinely quantum gate: its application
to the vectors of the standard quantum computational basis produces as
output a superposition. Clearly, this behavior has no classical counterpart.
Qutrit case: In [1], the following extension of the Hadamard gate to
the case of qutrits is considered

81
H(3) =
1
√
3


1
1
1
1 1
6(−1 + i
√
3) −1
6(1 + i
√
3)
1 −1
6(1 + i
√
3) 1
6(−1 + i
√
3)


as a tool in the framework of distillation protocols for fault tolerant quan-
tum computation — precisely Magic State Distillation.
We state without proof the main properties of H(3):
Lemma 3.1.
(1) For any |ψ⟩∈B(3), H(3)|ψ⟩= a|0⟩+b| 1
2⟩+c|1⟩s.t |a|2 = |b|2 = |c|2 = 1
3;
(2) H(3) is a genuinely quantum gate;
(3) H(3) · H(3) = Not(3)
|0⟩̸= I.
Along diﬀerent lines, other possible extensions of the Hadamard gate
are the square root of the identity gates
√
I
(3)
|i⟩[10].
√
I
(3)
|0⟩= 1 ⊕H(C2) =
√
2
2


√
2 0 0
0 1 1
0 1 −1

;
√
I
(3)
| 1
2 ⟩=
√
2
2


1 0
1
0
√
2 0
1 0 −1

;
√
I
(3)
|1⟩= H(C2) ⊕1 =
√
2
2


1 1
0
1 −1 0
0 0
√
2


where ⊕indicates the matrix direct sum. The name “square root of the
identity” derives from the fact that a double application of
√
I
(3)
|i⟩is indeed
the identity operator.
Some properties of the gates above follow:
Lemma 3.2. For any i ∈{0, 1
2, 1}:
(1)
√
I
(3)
|i⟩is a genuinely quantum qutrit-gate;
(2)
√
I
(3)
|i⟩·
√
I
(3)
|i⟩= I;

82
(3)
√
I
(3)
|0⟩


a
b
c

=



a
1
√
2(b + c)
1
√
2(b −c)


;
√
I
(3)
| 1
2 ⟩


a
b
c

=



1
√
2(a + c)
b
1
√
2(a −c)


;
√
I
(3)
|1⟩


a
b
c

=



1
√
2(a + b)
1
√
2(a −b)
c


.
Let us notice that, in the Hilbert space C3, the Hadamard gate H(3) does
not behave as a square root of the identity, since in general
√
I
(3)
|i⟩
√
I
(3)
|i⟩|ψ⟩̸=
ψ. The operator
√
I
(3)
|i⟩, instead, is a square root of identity for any i ∈
{0, 1
2, 1}.
4. Extending Binary Quantum Gates
In this section we discuss extensions of several well known binary quantum
gates to the case of qutrits. These constructions exploit the fact that in
C3 — as well as in ⊗n3 — the new truth value widens the usual behavior
of gates in C2 — as well as in ⊗n2 — along distinct degrees of freedom.
In fact, we will see that single gates in C2 may admit several extensions in
the case of qutrits.
4.1. Reversible binary gates
4.1.1. The Swap gate
The Swap gate is the semiclassical unitary operator such that, for any
ρ, σ ∈C2, Swap(ρ ⊗σ) = σ ⊗ρ. This gate is extremely useful since it
allows to “move” — to swap, in fact — the qubits during a computational
protocol.
Qubit case: The explicit formulation of the Swap(2) gate is the following:
Swap(2) =




1 0 0 0
0 0 1 0
0 1 0 0
0 0 0 1



.
Qutrit case:
It can be seen that the Swap(2) gate can be generalized as follows to the
case of qutrit-density operators [9]:

83
Swap(3) =















1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0
0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1















.
4.1.2. The √Swap gate
The √Swap is an example of genuinely quantum gate.
Qubit case: For any n ≥1, the √Swap
(2) gate on ⊗nC2 can be deﬁned
by: √Swap
(2)(|x1, ..., xn⟩) =

1
2((1 + i)|xn−1xn⟩+ (1 −i)|xnxn−1⟩),
if n = 2;
|x1, ..., xn−2 ⊗1
2⟩((1 + i)|xn−1xn⟩+ (1 −i)|xnxn−1⟩),
if n < 2.
The matrix formulation of √Swap
(2) gate in C2 is:

Swap
(2) =




1
0
0
0
0 1+i
2
1−i
2
0
0 1−i
2
1+i
2
0
0
0
0
1



.
Qutrit case
According with [15], a matrix expression of √Swap gate in C3 is:

Swap
(3) = 1
2















2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 1 + i
0
1 −i 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1 + i
0
0
0
1 −i
0
0
0 1 −i
0
1 + i 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 1 + i
0
1 −i 0
0
0
1 −i
0
0
0
1 + i
0
0
0
0
0
0
0 1 −i
0
1 + i 0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
















84
4.2. Irreversible binary gates
One may immediately note that, in the case of Swap and √Swap gates, the
dimensions of the input and the output coincide. Actually, these gates are
unitary: represent a reversible transformation. It can be seen that this is
not the case in general. For instance, consider the functions And and Xor
from {0, 1}2 to {0, 1}. In these cases diﬀerent inputs may correspond to a
single output; these functions are no longer reversible and therefore are not
representable by unitary operators. In quantum computation, a standard
method for addressing this issue involves the introduction of an auxiliary
ancilla.
In this section we propose an application of this method to the frame-
work of qutrits. First, it can be easily seen that, given an irreversible func-
tion, ϕ : {0, 1
2, 1}2 →{0, 1
2, 1}, the extension fϕ : {0, 1
2, 1}3 →{0, 1
2, 1}3,
deﬁned by
fϕ(x, y, z) = (x, y, ϕ(x, y) ⊕3
2 z)
(1)
where x, y are the control outputs, ϕ(x, y) ⊕3
2 z is the target output, and
⊕3
2 is the sum modulo
3
2, allows to represent ϕ in terms of a reversible
transformation. The price to pay for this reversible extension is that the
introduction of an extra-ancilla z increases the dimension of the original
space.
Let us now discuss the And and Xor quantum gates.
4.3. The Conjunction
Qubit case
In C2 the conjunction is usually deﬁned by:
And(2)(ρ, σ) = T (ρ ⊗σ ⊗P (2)
0
)T,
where the Toﬀoli gate T is T (|x⟩|y⟩|z⟩) = |x⟩|y⟩|xy ⊕z⟩, ⊕is the sum
modulo 2 and P (2)
0
plays the role of an extra ancilla. As usual, in clas-
sical logic, for any x, y ∈{0, 1} is And(x, y) = x · y. In the quan-
tum computational case it can be easily seen that, for any ρ, σ ∈C2,
p1(And(2)(ρ, σ)) = p(2)
1 (ρ) · p(2)
1 (σ).

85
Qutrit case
In the case of three-valued logic, G¨odel conjunction (i.e. min(x, y)) has the
following irreversible truth-table:
And
0
1/2
1
0
0
0
0
1/2
0
1/2
1/2
1
0
1/2
1
Obviously, since And(x, y) is irreversible, this function can’t be repre-
sented by a unitary operator. However, Equation (1) yields: fAnd(x, y, z) =
(x, y, min(x, y) ⊕3
2 z) and, setting z = 0, we have:
fAnd(x, y, 0) = (x, y, min(x, y)).
The fAnd(x, y, z) function induces the following table:
In
fAnd
Out
(0, 0, 0)
(0, 0, 0)
(0, 0, 1/2)
(0, 0, 1/2)
(0, 0, 1)
(0, 0, 1)
(0, 1/2, 0)
(0, 1/2, 0)
(0, 1/2, 1/2)
(0, 1/2, 1/2)
(0, 1/2, 1)
(0, 1/2, 1)
(0, 1, 0)
(0, 1, 0)
(0, 1, 1/2)
(0, 1, 1/2)
(0, 1, 1)
(0, 1, 1)
(1/2, 0, 0)
(1/2, 0, 0)
(1/2, 0, 1/2)
(1/2, 0, 1/2)
(1/2, 0, 1)
(1/2, 0, 1)
(1/2, 1/2, 0)
(1/2, 1/2, 1/2)
(1/2, 1/2, 1/2)
(1/2, 1/2, 1)
(1/2, 1/2, 1)
(1/2, 1/2, 0)
(1/2, 1, 0)
(1/2, 1, 1/2)
(1/2, 1, 1/2)
(1/2, 1, 1)
(1/2, 1, 1)
(1/2, 1, 0)
(1, 0, 0)
(1, 0, 0)
(1, 0, 1/2)
(1, 0, 1/2)
(1, 0, 1)
(1, 0, 1)
(1, 1/2, 0)
(1, 1/2, 1/2)
(1, 1/2, 1/2)
(1, 1/2, 1)
(1, 1/2, 1)
(1, 1/2, 0)
(1, 1, 0)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 1, 1/2)
(1, 1, 0)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 1, 1/2)
Thanks to the ancilla z, the function fAnd(x, y, z) is reversible and the
target bit of the output of fAnd(x, y, 0) correctly represents the outputs
of the three-valued G¨odel conjunction. It can be seen that the truth table
above is representable by the following FAnd matrix:
FAnd =















Q1
Q1
Q1
Q1
Q2
Q2
Q1
Q2
Q3
















86
where Q1 =


1 0 0
0 1 0
0 0 1

, Q2 =


0 1 0
0 0 1
1 0 0

and Q3 =


0 0 1
1 0 0
0 1 0

.
Consequently, we can deﬁne, for any qutrit-density operators ρ, σ ∈C3,
the qutrit G¨odel conjunction by:
And(ρ, σ) = (FAnd(ρ ⊗σ ⊗P (3)
0
)),
where P (3)
0
plays the role of a 0-ancilla (similarly to z = 0 in fAnd(x, y, z)).
We list without proof some easy observations on the qutrit G¨odel conjunc-
tion:
• p(3)
1 (And(ρ, σ)) = p(3)
1
2 (ρ)p(3)
1 (σ) + p(3)
1 (ρ)p(3)
1
2 (σ) + p(3)
1
2 (ρ)p(3)
1
2 (σ);
• p(3)
1
2 (And(ρ, σ)) = 1
2p(3)
1 (ρ)p(3)
1 (σ).
4.4. The Xor gate
Qubit case: The standard quantum Xor gate is the unitary operator such
that, for any basis vectors |ψ⟩,|φ⟩of a Hilbert space, Xor(2)(|ψ⟩|φ⟩) =
|ψ⟩|ψ ⊕φ⟩. The matrix form of the Xor(2) gate in C2 is the following:
Xor(2) = CNot =




1 0 0 0
0 1 0 0
0 0 0 1
0 0 1 0



.
Qutrit case: In the case of {0, 1
2, 1}, let us note that diﬀerent versions of
the Xor function have been considered in the literature. For instance,
|x −y| or fXor(x, y) =
 (x, x ⊕2 y), if x, y ∈{0, 1}
(x, y), if x = 1
2 or y = 1
2
(2)

87
where ⊕2 is the sum modulus 2. In this last case, the matrix presentation
is the following:















1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0















.
It seems reasonable that we may require that an extension Xor(3) would
satisfy the following natural properties:
(1) Xor(3)(1, 1) = 0 (boundary condition);
(2) Xor(3)(0, x) = x (neuter element);
(3) Xor(3)(x, y) = Xor(3)(y, x) (commutativity);
(4) Xor(3)(x, Xor(3)(y, z)) = Xor(3)(Xor(3)(x, y), z) (associativity);
since in the case of C2 it does. It can be seen that both functions in Display
2 fail associativity.
What’s the most suitable 3-valued extension of the Xor(2) gate in
qutrits’ framework? We devote the remain of this section to propose a ten-
tative answer. A ﬁrst step towards this goal can be found in the following:
Lemma 4.1. There exists only one 3-valued Xor: x + y −2xy.
Proof. It is easy to check that x + y −2xy satisﬁes the requirements
(1)-(4) above. As regards uniqueness, one can see that 1
2 = Xor( 1
2, 0) =
Xor( 1
2, Xor(1, 1))
=
Xor( 1
2, 1). Moreover, if Xor( 1
2, 1
2)
=
1, then
Xor(1, Xor( 1
2, 1
2)) = 0 ̸= Xor(Xor(1, 1
2), 1
2)) = 1
2; if Xor( 1
2, 1
2) = 0, then
Xor(1, Xor( 1
2, 1
2)) = 1 ̸= Xor(Xor(1, 1
2), 1
2)) = 0.
Let us remark that, according with [12, p. 2], this 3-valued Xor is the least
sensitive (most robust) exclusive or, in the sense that if we slightly change
the inputs, then “the result of the fuzzy operation does not change much”
(see [12, Def. 3]).
One may readily realise that the function in Lemma 4.1 is not reversible
if it takes values in {0, 1
2, 1}. Call a function Xorf : [0, 1]2 →[0, 1]2 a
minimal Xor without ancilla iﬀ∀x, y ∈{0, 1}, Xorf(x, y) = (x, x ⊕2 y).

88
Consider a minimal Xor without ancilla Xorf restricted to {0, 1
2, 1}, and
let g : {0, 1
2, 1}2 →{0, 1
2, 1} be g(x, y) = π2(Xorf(x, y)), where π2 is the
second coordinate projection. We have the following:
Lemma 4.2. Let Xorf be a minimal Xor without ancilla in {0, 1
2, 1}. If
Xorf is reversible, then g is neither commutative nor associative.
Proof. Suppose Xorf is reversible. Then, if a ∈{0, 1}, g(a, 1
2) /∈{0, 1},
since otherwise Xorf wouldn’t be reversible. Therefore, for a ∈{0, 1},
g(a, 1
2) = 1
2. If g is commutative, then g(0, 1
2) = g( 1
2, 0) = g( 1
2, 1) = g(1, 1
2).
Therefore, Xorf( 1
2, 0) = Xorf( 1
2, 1), against the hypothesis. As regards
associativity, note that for, a ̸= b, g( 1
2, a) ̸= g( 1
2, b). By direct inspection, it
can be seen that g is not associative.
We have seen in Lemma 4.1 that there exists a unique, irreversible, three-
valued Xor satisfying Conditions (1)–(4). Since Lemma 4.2, any minimal
Xor would induce a failure of commutativity and associativity. Therefore,
any reversible gate preserving Conditions (1)–(4) will be in ⊗3C3.
Resorting again to Equation (1), we obtain the reversible extension:
fXor(x, y, z) = (x, y, (x+y−2xy)⊕3
2 z). Obviously, fXor(x, y, 0) = (x, y, x+
y −2xy). The truth table induced by the 3-valued Xor is:
In
fXor
Out
(0, 0, 0)
(0, 0, 0)
(0, 0, 1/2)
(0, 0, 1/2)
(0, 0, 1)
(0, 0, 1)
(0, 1/2, 0)
(0, 1/2, 1/2)
(0, 1/2, 1/2)
(0, 1/2, 1)
(0, 1/2, 1)
(0, 1/2, 0)
(0, 1, 0)
(0, 1, 1)
(0, 1, 1/2)
(0, 1, 0)
(0, 1, 1)
(0, 1, 1/2)
(1/2, 0, 0)
(1/2, 0, 1/2)
(1/2, 0, 1/2)
(1/2, 0, 1)
(1/2, 0, 1)
(1/2, 0, 0)
(1/2, 1/2, 0)
(1/2, 1/2, 1/2)
(1/2, 1/2, 1/2)
(1/2, 1/2, 1)
(1/2, 1, 1)
(1/2, 1/2, 0)
(1/2, 1, 0)
(1/2, 1, 1/2)
(1/2, 1, 1/2)
(1/2, 1, 1)
(1/2, 1, 1)
(1/2, 1, 0)
(1, 0, 0)
(1, 0, 1)
(1, 0, 1/2)
(1, 0, 0)
(1, 0, 1)
(1, 0, 1/2)
(1, 1/2, 0)
(1, 1/2, 1/2)
(1, 1/2, 1/2)
(1, 1/2, 1)
(1, 1/2, 1)
(1, 1/2, 0)
(1, 1, 0)
(1, 1, 0)
(1, 1, 1/2)
(1, 1, 1/2)
(1, 1, 1)
(1, 1, 1)

89
It can be seen that the truth table above is implemented by the following
FXor matrix:
FXor =















Q1
Q2
Q3
Q2
Q2
Q2
Q3
Q2
Q1















.
Finally, we can reasonably deﬁne, for any ρ, σ ∈C3, the qutrit Xor(3)
gate by: Xor(3)(ρ, σ) = FXor(ρ ⊗σ ⊗P0). Some easy properties of this
gate follows:
• p(3)
1 (Xor(ρ, σ)) = p(3)
1
2 (ρ) + p(3)
1
2 (σ)
	
p(3)
0 (ρ) + p(3)
1 (σ)

;
• p(3)
1
2 (Xor(ρ, σ)) = 1
2
	
p(3)
0 (ρ)p(3)
1 (σ) + p(3)
1 (ρ) + p(3)
0 (σ)

.
5. Conclusions
Further possible developments of this note will be:
- enquiring into the logical properties of 3-valued quantum computational
logics through the notion of eﬀect probability [13];
- investigating the algebraic structures naturally associated to 3-valued
quantum computational logics;
- extending the present results to a n-valued quantum computational
logics.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the Italian Ministry of Scientiﬁc Re-
search within the FIRB project Structures and dynamics of knowledge and
cognition, Cagliari unit F21J12000140001 and by RAS within the project:
Modeling the uncertainty: Quantum Theory and Imaging Processing.

90
References
1. H. Anwar, E. T. Campbell, D. E. Browne, arXiv:1202.2326v2, 2012.
2. C. Bertini, R. Leporini, International Journal of Quantum Information, 5,
641 (2007).
3. G. Birkhoﬀ, J. von Neumann, Ann. Math. 37, 823 (1936).
4. G. Cattaneo, M. L. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini, R. Leporini, International
Journal of Theoretical Physics, 43, 1803 (2004).
5. M. L. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini, “Quantum logics, in Handbook of Philo-
sophical Logic”, in Gabbay G. and Guenth F. Eds. (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 4
129, 2002).
6. M. L. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini, H. Freytes, A. Ledda, G. Sergioli, Founda-
tions of Physics, 39, 559 (2009).
7. M. L. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini, A. Ledda, G. Sergioli, Journal of Philosoph-
ical Logic, 42, 467 (2013).
8. H. Freytes, A. Ledda, G. Sergioli, R. Giuntini, New Challenges to the Phi-
losophy of Science, Andersen et al. (Eds.), 49, 2013.
9. G. C. Garcia-Escartin, P. Chamorro-Posada P., Quantum Information Pro-
cessing, 12, 3625 (2013).
10. R. Giuntini, A. Ledda, G. Sergioli, F. Paoli, International Journal of General
Systems, 40, 61 (2011).
11. S. Gudder, International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 42, 39 (2003).
12. J. E. Hernandez, J. Nava, Fuzzy Information Processing Society (NAFIPS)
Annual Meeting of the North American, 2011.
13. G. Sergioli, A. Ledda, Soft Computing in press (DOI: 10.1007/s00500-015-
1790-6) (2016).
14. V. E. Tarasov, arXiv:quant-ph/0201033 (2002).
15. C. M. Wilmott, arXiv:quant-ph/1101.4159v1 (2011).

91
THE GTR-MODEL: A UNIVERSAL FRAMEWORK FOR
QUANTUM-LIKE MEASUREMENTS
Diederik Aerts
Center Leo Apostel for Interdisciplinary Studies,
Brussels Free University, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
E-mail: diraerts@ vub. ac. be
Massimiliano Sassoli de Bianchi
Laboratorio di Autoricerca di Base,
6914 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: autoricerca@ gmail. com
We present a very general geometrico-dynamical description of physical or more
abstract entities, called the general tension-reduction (GTR) model, where not
only states, but also measurement-interactions can be represented, and the as-
sociated outcome probabilities calculated. Underlying the model is the hypoth-
esis that indeterminism manifests as a consequence of unavoidable ﬂuctuations
in the experimental context, in accordance with the hidden-measurements in-
terpretation of quantum mechanics. When the structure of the state space is
Hilbertian, and measurements are of the universal kind, i.e., are the result
of an average over all possible ways of selecting an outcome, the GTR-model
provides the same predictions of the Born rule, and therefore provides a natu-
ral completed version of quantum mechanics. However, when the structure of
the state space is non-Hilbertian and/or not all possible ways of selecting an
outcome are available to be actualized, the predictions of the model generally
diﬀer from the quantum ones, especially when sequential measurements are
considered. Some paradigmatic examples will be discussed, taken from physics
and human cognition. Particular attention will be given to some known psy-
chological eﬀects, like question order eﬀects and response replicability, which
we show are able to generate non-Hilbertian statistics. We also suggest a real-
istic interpretation of the GTR-model, when applied to human cognition and
decision, which we think could become the generally adopted interpretative
framework in quantum cognition research.
Keywords:
Probability;
hidden-measurements;
degenerate
measurements;
hidden-variables; Born rule; Bloch sphere; order eﬀects; response replicability;
quantum cognition.

92
1. Introduction
Probability is the key notion used by scientists of diﬀerent disciplines to
quantify, in a meaningful and optimal way, their lack of knowledge regard-
ing certain properties of the systems under study. Before the advent of
quantum mechanics, only classical probabilities were taken into considera-
tion, based on the structure of Boolean algebra and obeying the classical
Kolmogorovian axioms [1]. On the other hand, quantum probabilities, which
are based on a diﬀerent structure of the experimental propositions, cannot
be represented in a ﬁxed probability space (if multiple measurements are
considered), and therefore generally disobey the Kolmogorovian axioms.
However, the diﬀerence between classical and quantum probabilities is
not in a simple correspondence with the diﬀerence between macroscopic
and microscopic physical entities. Indeed, also macroscopic entities can be-
have in a quantum-like way, depending on the nature of the experimental
actions that an experimenter is considering in relation to them. In other
terms, quantum and classical probabilities can always emerge from our ex-
perimental investigations, depending on the structure of possibilities that
are taken into consideration.
This means that classic and quantum probabilities should be considered
as special cases of more general probability structures, which can simply be
called (depending on the context) non-classical, non-quantum, or quantum-
like. These more general structures are non-classical in the sense that they
do not obey the Kolmogorovian axioms, and they are quantum-like in the
sense that, similarly to quantum probabilities, they are based on logical
connectives that are dynamical, i.e., describing the possible outcomes of
actions (measurements) that can be performed on the diﬀerent entities.
However, they are also non-quantum, in the sense that they are not neces-
sarily purely quantum, as the structure of the associated state space is not
necessarily Hilbertian and the probability values are not necessarily those
predicted by the Born rule.
From the viewpoint of physics, the interest of investigating more gen-
eral probability models lies for instance in the possibility of shedding new
light onto the problem of the semiclassical limit, i.e., in the understanding
of the transition from pure quantum to pure classical regimes. Indeed, if
it is true that classical and quantum probabilities are based on diﬀerent,
not commensurable structures, obtained as diﬀerent limits of more general
quantum-like situations, then it is also clear that we need more general
models, of a “mixed” quantum-classical kind, if we want to describe the
mesoscopic regions of our reality, which cannot be incorporated within the
pure quantum or pure classical limit models.

93
A preliminary analysis of these intermediary regions of reality, described
by non-classic and non-quantum probabilities, was carried out in some de-
tail by one of us and his collaborators in the past decades, using a paradig-
matic model called the ϵ-model [2,3]: a generalization of a two-level (qubit)
system where an additional real parameter ϵ can be continuously varied,
from 0 to 1, so as to produce a non-singular classic-to-quantum transi-
tion. Even though the initial motivation in studying these more general
probability models came from physics, it became clear early on that their
signiﬁcance went beyond the ﬁeld of physics, and was of great interest also
in the description of human cognitive processes, as today studied in the new
emerging ﬁeld of theoretical and experimental investigation called quantum
cognition [4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11].
Quantum cognition resulted, among other things, from the observa-
tion that human concepts, understood as abstract entities interacting with
human minds that are sensitive to their meanings, can produce highly con-
textual dynamics, impossible to explain by only using traditional modeliza-
tions in terms of logico-rational thinking processes, and therefore classical
probabilities. Similarly, quantum mechanics was historically created, as a
mathematical theory, to oﬀer a consistent description of entities whose be-
havior appeared also to be highly contextual. Therefore, it was quite natural
at some point to assume that the quantum formalism could also play a role
in the modelization of human cognition and decision-making.
This intuition was followed by an increasing number of successful appli-
cations of the quantum formalism, and today it is a well-established hypoth-
esis that, in addition to our classical logical layer, describable by classical
probability theory, there is an additional quantum conceptual layer, de-
scribable by standard quantum mechanics [12]. This quantum description
of the human cognitive behavior, however, has nothing to do with the fact
that our human brains would be quantum machines. Quantum cognition is
not concerned with the modeling of human brains as quantum computers,
but with the possibility of using quantum probabilities, and the structure
of Hilbert spaces, to elucidate the working of our mental processes, partic-
ularly those mistakenly understood as irrational.
Clearly, the contextuality of human concepts mirrors that of elementary
quantum entities. Consider for instance the problem of concept combina-
tion, i.e., the problem that not all concept combinations will have an in-
tersective semantics, so that the meaning of a combination of concepts will
not always be reducible to the meaning of the individual concepts form-
ing the combination, as new meanings are constantly able to emerge. This

94
emergence eﬀect can be naturally described within the quantum formalism
by means of the superposition principle and the related constructive and
destructive interference eﬀects, which can explain the observed overexten-
sion and underextension of the probabilities (with respect to the classical
predictions). The superposition principle is in turn a key ingredient in the
creation of entangled states that can be used to describe the situation of
concepts connected through meaning, which are able to violate Bell’s in-
equalities in a way similar to quantum microscopic entities [13,14]. Other
fundamental aspects of the quantum formalism, like for instance quantum
ﬁeld many particles dynamics, can be also be exploited to describe typical
situations where human judgments and decisions are at play [15].
This “unreasonable” success of quantum mathematics in the modeliza-
tion of human cognitive and decision situations requires of course to be
widely explained. At the same time, one needs to investigate what are its
limits, i.e., to what extent the standard quantum formalism can be used
to model all sorts of cognitive situations. These two issues are intimately
related. Indeed, there are no a priori reasons for the contextuality built-in
in the standard Hilbertian formalism to be exactly the same (in terms of
structure) as that incorporated in our human mental processes, also because
the latters describe a (non-physical, mental) layer of our reality which, evo-
lutionarily speaking, is much younger than the layer of the fundamental
physical processes. This means that, starting from a more general model,
containing both the quantum and classical regimes as special situations, one
should be able to explain why certain aspects of the quantum formalism,
in particular the Born rule, are so eﬀective in describing many empirical
data, and at the same time insuﬃcient to model many others, considering
that a Hilbert space, equipped with the Born rule, necessarily imposes some
speciﬁc constraints (like the QQ-equality introduced by [16]), that can be
violated by our complex cognitive and decisional processes.
To provide a convincing explanation of both the success of quantum
probabilities, and their lack of universality, the present article is orga-
nized as follows. In Sec. 2, we use the simple example of a coin ﬂipping
experiment to motivate a general description of an entity that gives rise to
a general measurement model, called the general tension-reduction model
(GTR-model). The model was recently derived in the ambit of quantum
cognition studies [17,18], but is of great interest also for physics, as it of-
fers a non-circular derivation of the Born rule and therefore constitutes a
possible solution to the measurement problem [19,20].

95
Our strategy here is not that of repeating our previous more formal
derivations of the model, but to motivate its construction starting from
more qualitative and general considerations. More precisely, inspired by
our analysis of the coin ﬂipping measurement of Sec. 2, the GTR-model
will be introduced in Sec. 3. In Sec. 4, it will be shown to allow for the
description of experiments where some of the outcomes can be degenerate
and, in Sec. 5, we show that it can naturally handle also the situation of
composite entities. In Sec. 6, we explain how the Born rule can be deduced,
when a huge (universal) average is performed over all possible kinds of
measurements, showing that the Born rule can be interpreted as a ﬁrst order
approximation of a more general theory, thus explaining its great success
also in the description of cognitive experiments. In Sec. 7, we explicitly
show that the GTR-model can describe more general structures than the
Kolmogorovian and Hilbertian ones and, in Sec. 8, we apply the model
to human cognition, showing that one needs its full structural richness to
described some of the experimental data, like question order eﬀects and
response replicability. Finally, in Sec. 9, we oﬀer a few concluding remarks.
2. Measuring a coin
Consider the process that consists in ﬂipping a coin onto the ﬂoor. If we
are interested in knowing the ﬁnal upper face of the coin, three possible
outcomes have to be distinguished: “head,” “tail” and “edge,” and to these
three outcomes three diﬀerent probabilities can be associated: P(h), P(t)
and P(e). In the case of an American nickel, their typical experimental
values are [21]:
P(h) = 2999.5
6000 ,
P(t) = 2999.5
6000 ,
P(e) =
1
6000.
(1)
Flipping a coin onto the ﬂoor is a simple action producing a non-
predeterminable outcome, and the same is true when we toss a die, draw a
ball from a urn, etc. All these simple experiments, called chance games, have
been largely used in the past to study the logic of probabilities, and culmi-
nated in modern classical probability theory, axiomatized by Kolmogoroﬀ
[1]. However, the actions associated with chance games are of a very special
kind, and one should expect a probability model derived from their analy-
sis to also be a very special model, not necessarily able to describe all the
probability structures that can emerge from our experiments.
To explain in which sense the random processes traditionally studied
by classical probability theory are special, take the coin ﬂipping example.

96
The associated probabilities will depend in part on how the coin is man-
ufactured. For instance, if we have exactly three possible outcomes, this
is because there are three distinct faces (two ﬂat faces and a curved one),
and the values of the probabilities certainly also depend, in part, on their
relative surfaces, on the exact location of the center of mass of the coin,
and so on. These are the so-called intrinsic properties of the coin, i.e., the
attributes it always possesses, in a stable and permanent way (at least for
as long as the coin exists).
But a coin, as a physical entity, is not only described by its intrinsic (al-
ways actual) properties: its condition is also determined by those properties
that can contextually change over time, like its position and orientation in
space, its linear and angular momentum, its temperature, etc. Now, a pro-
cess like that of ﬂipping a coin is special because it is usually so conceived
that we cannot learn anything about its non-intrinsic properties from the
obtained probabilities. In other terms, ﬂipping a coin is an experiment which
tells us nothing about the state of the coin prior to its execution: there is
no discovery aspect involved, but only a creation aspect.
In [17,18], we have named these special — creation only — processes,
solipsistic measurements, with the term “solipsistic” used in a metaphorical
sense, to express the idea that the measurement tells us nothing about the
pre-measurement state of the entity, but only about the measurement pro-
cess itself. Note that in the following we shall use the terms “measurement”
and “experiment” almost interchangeably, being clear that a measurement
is an experiment aimed at the observation of a given quantity, and that also
the ﬂipping of a coin can be interpreted as a measurement process, whose
outcomes are the values taken by a quantity called the “upper face” of the
coin.
It is worth observing that solipsistic measurements have a truly remark-
able property: being totally insensitive to the initial state of the entity,a
they are necessarily all mutually compatible experiments. Not in the sense
that they can be performed at the same time (almost no experiments have
this remarkable property), but in the sense that the order with which they
are carried out is irrelevant. This because the ﬁnal state obtained by the
ﬁrst measurement cannot inﬂuence the outcome of the second one, and vice
versa. It is then clear why the Kolmogorovian probability model, which is
founded on the paradigm of the solipsistic measurements, is unable to ac-
aIt is because solipsistic measurements are processes that are extremely sensitive to small
ﬂuctuations that, statistically speaking, they are totally insensitive to variations in the
initial state of the entity.

97
count for the quantum probabilities: quantum measurements, from which
quantum probabilities result, are non-solipsistic indeterministic processes,
producing statistics of outcomes which strongly depend on the initial pre-
measurement states, and therefore cannot in general be mutually compati-
ble measurements.
Let us exploit a bit further the evocative example of the coin to see how
we can go from solipsistic measurements to a more general class of measure-
ments, to model more general (non-Kolmogorovian) probability situations.
Clearly, an experimenter is free to conceive diﬀerent measurements, by sim-
ply deﬁning diﬀerent observational protocols. In the case of the coin, one
can for instance consider diﬀerent ways to produce its ﬂipping. Solipsistic
measurements, as is known, correspond to a situation where the experi-
menter has to ﬂip the coin with a vigorous momentum, on a suﬃciently
hard ﬂoor. On the other hand, if the experimenter decides to ﬂip the coin
in a less vigorous way, or onto a softer surface, or even a sticky one, it
is easy to imagine that the statistics of outcomes will start depending on
how the coin is initially positioned before the ﬂipping, for instance on the
bottom of the dice cup that is used to produce the shot.
To model this possibility, we need to ﬁnd a representation that allows us
to express a dependency of the probabilities on the pre-measurement state.
A very simple idea would be to represent the state of the coin directly in
terms of the associated outcome probabilities. Of course, by doing so we
will not be able anymore to describe solipsistic measurements (as is clear
that for them the diﬀerent initial states are all associated with the same
outcome probabilities), but let us explore anyway this idea, as it will show
us the path for its natural generalization.
So, let us assume that we have chosen a given ﬂipping protocol (i.e.,
a given measurement), and that by repeating the experiment many times,
with the coin always in the same initial state inside the cup, we have ob-
tained the three outcome probabilities P(h), P(t) and P(e). The idea is to
describe the initial state of the coin as an abstract point-particle in R3, with
position x = (P(h), P(t), P(e)), i.e., as a point-particle whose coordinates
are precisely the outcome probabilities. Since P(h) + P(t) + P(e) = 1, it
follows that x belongs to a two-dimensional regular simplex △2, i.e., to an
equilateral triangle of side
√
2.
We obtain in this way a simple and natural geometric representation of
the probabilities characterizing the measurement under investigation. How-
ever, as we said, this representation cannot be used to describe solipsistic
measurements, as two states x and x′, if diﬀerent, will necessarily be as-

98
sociated with diﬀerent outcome probabilities. In fact, this representation
doesn’t allow, neither, to describe deterministic measurements, such that
for a given initial state the outcome would be predetermined. These are
experiments such that the protocol allow the experimenter to ﬂip the coin
in a perfectly controlled (ﬂuctuation free) way, so as to know in advance
what will be the ﬁnal state, given the initial one.
If we want to obtain a representation that can be used to also represent
solipsistic and deterministic measurements, we thus need to ﬁnd a way to
describe the state of the entity independently from the outcome probabili-
ties. For this, we need to introduce in our model some additional elements
of reality, describing the interactions between the measured entity and the
measuring system, i.e., between the coin and the cup-ﬂoor system, in our
example. To do so, we start by observing that the point x exactly deﬁnes
three disjoint triangular sub-regions in △2, which we will call Ah, At and
Ae (see the ﬁrst drawing of Fig. 1). A simple geometric calculation then
shows that [17–19,22]:
P(h) = µ(Ah)
µ(△2),
P(t) = µ(At)
µ(△2),
P(e) = µ(Ae)
µ(△2),
(2)
where µ denotes the Lebesgue measure. In other terms, the relative areas of
the three sub-regions deﬁned by the state-vector x are exactly the outcome
probabilities. To exploit this remarkable geometric property of simplexes,
we are now going to describe a tension-reduction process that will allow us
to represent, in an abstract way, the (possibly) indeterministic part of a
measurement process.
Assume that △2 is an elastic and disintegrable membrane, stretched
between its three vertex points — let us call them xh, xt and xe, respec-
tively — and that the state of the entity is represented by a point-particle
ﬁrmly attached to the membrane, at some point x. Assume also that the
line segments separating the three regions Ah, At and Ae are like “ten-
sion lines,” along which the membrane can less easily disintegrate. Then,
consider the following process: the membrane disintegrates, at some unpre-
dictable point λ. If λ ∈Ah, the disintegrative process propagates inside
the entire sub-region Ah, but not in the other two sub-regions At and Ae,
because of the tension lines. This will cause the two anchor points of Ah,
xt and xe, to tear away, and being the membrane elastic, it will conse-
quently collapse toward the remaining anchor point xh, drawing in this
way the point particle (which is attached to it) to the same ﬁnal position,
representative of the outcome “head.”

99
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
Fig. 1.
A 2-dimensional triangular membrane stretched between the three vertex points
xh, xt and xe, with the point particle attached to it at point x, giving rise to three disjoint
convex regions Ah, At, and Ae. The vector λ, here assumed to belong to region At,
indicates the initial point of disintegration of the membrane, which by collapsing brings
the point particle to point xt, corresponding to the ﬁnal outcome of the measurement.
Similarly, if the initial disintegration point happens in At, the ﬁnal out-
come will be “tail,” represented by the vector xt (see Fig. 1), and if the
initial disintegration point happens in Ae, the ﬁnal outcome will be “edge,”
represented by the vector xe. If the membrane is uniform, it is clear that
the probability to obtain outcome xh is just given by the relative area of
sub-region Ah, which according to (2) corresponds to the ﬁrst component
of state vector x, and similarly for the other two outcomes.
Of course, a uniformly disintegrable membrane is a very special situa-
tion, and a priori an (uncountable) inﬁnity of diﬀerent membranes, char-
acterized by diﬀerent ways of disintegrating, can be considered, like for
instance those giving rise to solipsistic measurements, whose outcome prob-
abilities are independent of the initial state x. These can be understood as
the limit of membranes that become less and less disintegrable in their in-
terior points and more and more disintegrable in the points belonging only
to their three edges, so that the position of the point particle on △2, repre-

100
sentative of the initial state, becomes irrelevant in the determination of the
outcome probabilities, which will only depend on the probabilities that the
initial disintegration happens in one of the three edges of △2. More pre-
cisely, if the disintegration probability of the edge opposite to xh is P(h),
then this will also be the probability for outcome xt, for (almost) all initial
states, and similarly for the other two edges.
The membranes describing deterministic measurements, on the other
hand, can be understood as the limit of membranes becoming more and
more disintegrable in a sub-region that becomes increasingly small and less
and less disintegrable everywhere else. Indeed, in this limit we obtain a
structure which almost surely will start disintegrating in a single prede-
termined point λ. Then, for almost all initial states one can predict the
outcome in advance, with certainty. Indeed, if the initial state x is such
that λ ∈Ah, the outcome will be xh, with probability P(h) = 1, and simi-
larly for the other two outcomes. Note that if we have said that outcomes
are predetermined for almost all, and not all initial states, this is because
we cannot exclude the special situation x = λ, of classical unstable equi-
librium, which remains clearly indeterminate (but do not contribute to the
probability calculus, being this possibility of zero Lebesgue measure).
To describe the most general typology of disintegrable membrane, we
only need to introduce a probability density ρ : △2 →[0, ∞[,
R
△2 ρ(y)dy =
1, characterizing the propensity of the membrane (which will be called ρ-
membrane) to disintegrate in its diﬀerent possible sub-regions. This means
that if the initial state produces the three sub-regions Ah, At and Ae, the
probabilities for obtaining the three outcomes xh, xt and xe, will be given
by the integrals:
P(x →xi|ρ) =
Z
Ai
ρ(y)dy,
i ∈{h, t, e},
(3)
and of course, in the special case of a uniform membrane, we simply have
ρ(y) =
1
µ(△2) =
2
√
3, for all y, and we recover (2).
Before continuing in the construction of our model, a remark is in order.
It is clear that the ‘tension-reduction’ mechanism associated with the dis-
integrable elastic membranes can only describe idealized measurements of
the ﬁrst kind, i.e., measurements such that, if repeated a second time, will
produce exactly the same outcome, with probability 1. This is so because
if x corresponds to one of the three vertices of △2, then, being already
located in one of the end points of the elastic structure, its position cannot
be altered by a new membrane’s collapse, when the measurement process
is repeated.

101
Of course, not all measurements are of the ﬁrst kind, but certainly most
of them can be made, at least ideally, of the ﬁrst kind. For instance, to
make the coin ﬂipping a measurement of the ﬁrst kind it is suﬃcient to
specify in the protocol that if the coin is already located on the ﬂoor, i.e.,
if the initial state of the coin is an on-ﬂoor state, and not an on-cup state,
then what the experimenter has to do is to simply observe if the upper face
is “head,” “tail” or “edge,” and take the result of such observation as the
outcome of the measurement.
Clearly, the ﬂipping of the coin producing the three on-ﬂoor outcomes
“head,” “tail” and “edge,” is not the only coin-measurement that we can
perform. Imagine for a moment the following coin shaking measurement,
operationally deﬁned by the following protocol: If the coin is on the ﬂoor,
then put it at the center of the bottom of the cup, with exactly the same
upper face, then shake the cup, following a predetermined procedure (that
we don’t need to specify here), and ﬁnally look at the bottom of the cup, to
see what is the obtained upper face. On the other hand, if the coin is already
in the cup, just observe its upper face, which will then be the outcome of
the measurement.
We now have two diﬀerent measurements, the coin-ﬂipping measure-
ment, which can produce the outcome states “ﬂoor-head,” “ﬂoor-tail” and
“ﬂoor-edge,” and the coin-shaking measurement, which can produce the
outcome states “cup-head,” “cup-tail” and “cup-edge,” and of course we
cannot associate the same membrane (i.e., the same measurement simplex)
to both measurements. This not only because their outcome states are dif-
ferent, but also because the associated ﬂipping and shaking procedures are
diﬀerent.
If diﬀerent membranes can represent diﬀerent measurements, belonging
to a same state space, then in addition to the tension-reduction process
describing the membrane’s collapse we have to introduce a mechanism al-
lowing the states belonging to one membrane to be measured with respect
to another membrane. In other terms, we need to describe a process that
can transform an oﬀ-membrane state into an on-membrane state, in order
to be subjected to its (possibly) indeterministic collapse. A process of this
kind has to be able, in particular, to bring the state “cup-head” in contact
with the ‘potentiality region’ of the ﬂipping-membrane, or the state “ﬂoor-
head” in contact with the ‘potentiality region’ of the shaking-membrane.
Since we are here interested in obtaining a geometrical representation,
and that we want the description to be as simple as possible, a very natural
choice is to use a (deterministic) orthogonal projection process. In other
terms, if x is an oﬀ-membrane state, with respect to the considered mea-

102
surement, we can describe the latter as a two-stage process. The ﬁrst stage,
purely deterministic, would correspond to the point particle orthogonally
“falling” onto the membrane, along a rectilinear path, until it reaches its
on-membrane position; the second stage, which can either be deterministic
or indeterministic (depending on the nature of the membrane), is then the
tension-reduction process produced by the disintegration and subsequent
contraction of the membrane that we have previously described.
3. The general tension-reduction (GTR) model
In the previous section, we have considered some measurements possibly
performed on a coin, generalizing the solipsistic ones usually considered in
the classical games of chance. Of course, it was not our intention to describe
in a complete and self-consistent way all possible states and measurements
that can be described in relation to a coin entity. Our example was just
meant to ﬁx ideas and allow introducing some of the basic concepts of a
general geometrical description of an entity, which includes not only its
states, but also its measurements, and this by means of an interaction
mechanism, based on the disintegration of a membrane, which is able to
produce the diﬀerent outcomes and associated probabilities. Based on the
intuition we have gained, we are now in a position to reason in more general
and abstract terms to identify the fundamental ingredients of what we have
called the general tension-reduction (GTR) model [17,18].
We begin by summarizing what we have obtained so far, using now a
more formal language. Let Σ be the set of all states of a given entity S.
By “all states” we don’t necessarily mean all conceivable states, but more
speciﬁcally the set of those states that are relevant for the description of
the entity in the diﬀerent measurement contexts it can be meaningfully
associated with. If the entity is ﬁnite-dimensional, or can be conveniently
approximated as such (this is generally the case in all practical experimental
situations), which we will assume to be so in the following, then Σ can be
taken to be a subset of the M-dimensional Euclidean space RM, for some
given ﬁnite integer 2 ≤M < ∞.
A measurement on S, producing N diﬀerent outcomes, with N ≤M, is
then described as a (N−1)-dimensional simplex △N−1, whose N vertices xi,
i = 1, . . . , N, are representative of the N possible outcomes. A measurement
of the non-degenerate kind (degenerate measurements will be discussed in
Sec. 4) is then a two-stage process, bringing the initial state x ∈Σ to
one of the outcome states xi, i = 1, . . . , N. The ﬁrst stage of the process
corresponds to the point particle associated with the state x orthogonally

103
“falling” onto the (N −1)-dimensional ρ-membrane, associated with △N−1,
and ﬁrmly attaching to it. If we write x = x∥+x⊥, with x∥and x⊥the two
components of x parallel and orthogonal to △N−1, respectively, then this
ﬁrst deterministic stage of the measurement corresponds to the transition:
x →x∥.
The second stage is a process that can either be deterministic or inde-
terministic, depending on the nature of the ρ-membrane. Its description is
a straightforward generalization of what we have explained already in the
N = 3 coin example (see Fig. 1). The presence of the point particle on the
ρ-membrane, at point x∥, creates N disjoint sub-regions Ai, i = 1, . . . N
(Ai is the convex closure of {x1, . . . , xi−1, x∥, xi+1, . . . , xN}), such that
△N−1 = ∪N
i=1Ai. These sub-regions are separated by (N −2)-dimensional
“tension-surfaces,” along which the elastic substance can less easily disin-
tegrate. Then, as soon as the ρ-membrane starts disintegrating, at some
point λ, if λ ∈Ai, the disintegrative process will cause the N −1 anchor
points xj, j ̸= i, of Ai, to tear away, and consequently the ρ-membrane will
contract toward the remaining anchor point xi, drawing the abstract point
particle to that position. Thus, we have a two-stage process producing the
possible transitions x →x∥→xi, with associated probabilities:
P(x →xi|ρ) =
Z
Ai
ρ(y)dy,
i ∈{1, . . . , N}.
(4)
Let us explore a little further the general structure of Σ. All points
belonging to a measurement simplex △N−1 are also possible states of the
entity under investigation, as is clear that they are all measurable with
respect to a ρ-membrane associated with △N−1. But it is also clear that
within the (N −1)-dimensional sub-space generated by △N−1, there cannot
be other points representative of states in addition to those belonging to
△N−1 itself. Indeed, bona ﬁde states are those that, at least in principle,
can participate in all well-deﬁned measurements, but the points in that sub-
space lying outside of the simplex cannot be orthogonally projected onto the
latter, and therefore cannot be measured with respect to its ρ-membrane.
Of course, this doesn’t mean that the points outside of a simplex, in each
simplex sub-space, cannot also be used to describe some kind of states, i.e.,
some real conditions characterizing the entity under study. However, since
these states would describe situations where the entity would not be avail-
able in producing any outcome (i.e., in providing an answer when subjected
to a measurement’s interrogative process), they have to be considered states
of a non-ordinary kind. Let us call them conﬁned states, to express the idea
that they describe situations where the entity is conﬁned in a “place of
reality” which is out of reach for ordinary measurement contexts.

104
In the example of the coin, we can imagine a situation where the coin
has been glued to the wall, with a very strong glue, so that it cannot be
subjected anymore to the coin-ﬂipping measurement, or the coin-shaking
one. In a cognitive psychology experiment, we can consider the situation
of a person who is asked to choose one among a set of predetermined re-
sponses to a given question, but with the question and responses expressed
in a language that the person cannot understand, so that no meaningful
answer can be obtained from her. In physics we can also mention the ex-
ample of color conﬁnement, the well-known diﬃculty in directly observing
single color-charged entities, like quarks, in our Euclidean spatial theater.
Having said that, in the following we will limit our discussion to ordinary
(non-conﬁned) states, participating to all possible measurements, which
means that by the term “state” we will mean (if not mentioned otherwise)
a condition in which the entity is available to take part in all well-deﬁned
measurements. Consequently, the (N −1)-dimensional section of the state
space Σ that contains the measurement simplex △N−1, will be taken to be
precisely △N−1.
As we said, diﬀerent measurements are associated with diﬀerent sim-
plexes, i.e., with simplexes having diﬀerent relative orientations. This means
that the dimension M of the state space Σ needs to be large enough to
accommodate all these diﬀerent orientations, in a way that the points be-
longing to the diﬀerent simplexes are all mutually orthogonally projectable,
so that they can all participate to the diﬀerent possible measurements. For
this to be the case, it is easy to imagine that the dimension M of Σ will
generally have to be considerably larger than N, taking into account the
fact that in each subspace generated by a simplex no other simplexes can
be present.
Another issue to be addressed is the center of the simplexes. Of course,
they all have to be centered at the same point, say the origin of the sys-
tem of coordinates considered, otherwise it would not be possible to ensure
the overall functioning of the orthogonal projection mechanism. But there
is another reason why all measurement simplexes need to share the same
origin. The point at the origin corresponds to a state which has quite a
remarkable property: it is the state which manifests the same availability
in producing whatever outcome, in whatever measurement, and if measure-
ments are described by uniform eﬀective membranes (see Sec. 6, for the
central role played by uniform probability distributions ρu), it is also the
state producing the same probabilities
1
N , for all outcomes in all measure-
ments. In a sense, it is the most neutral state among all possible ones, and

105
if we assume that such condition of maximum neutrality should exist, at
least in principle, then the diﬀerent simplexes will have to share the same
origin.
What about the shape of the state space Σ in RM? First of all, what
we know is that no states can be at a distance from the origin that is
greater than that of the apex points of the diﬀerent (N −1)-dimensional
measurement simplexes. Since these points are by deﬁnition at distance 1
from the center of the simplex to which they belong, and that all simplexes
share the same center, we have that all the M-dimensional vectors of Σ
are necessarily contained in a M-dimensional ball of radius 1, although
of course they will not generally ﬁll such ball. We can also remark that
each (N −1)-simplex contains an inscribed (N −1)-ball of radius
1
N−1,
and since all simplexes have the same origin, within Σ there is a M-ball
of radius
1
N−1 possessing a maximum density of states, as it contains all
the inscribed (N −1)-balls associated with the diﬀerent measurements.
Thus, in case the entity under consideration would be associated with a
continuity of measurement simplexes, we can expected such M-ball to be
completely ﬁlled with states. Also, considering that for N = 2 the inscribed
1-sphere (a line segment) has radius 1, if we have a continuity of two-
outcome measurement simplexes △1, oriented along all possible directions
in RM, the state space will be precisely a M-dimensional ball of radius 1,
i.e., Σ = B1(RM).
Of course, apart being contained in a unit ball, and containing a smaller
ball having a maximum density of states, nothing can be said a priori about
the shape of Σ, i.e., about the envelope containing the extremal points of
Σ. These extremal points can be of two kinds: either they are at a distance
1 from the origin, and thus correspond to one of the vertices of a measure-
ment simplex, or they belong to one of the sub-simplexes of a measurement
simplex, and then their distance from the origin will be smaller than 1.
This means that, apart the above mentioned two-dimensional case, Σ will
generally not have a spherical symmetry.
Strictly speaking, the question of the shape of Σ is meaningful only if we
have a continuity of states, i.e., if Σ is a region of RM completely ﬁlled with
states. In this case, for consistency reasons, it is reasonable to assume that
it will be a convex region. Indeed, by deﬁnition, a convex region is a set of
points such that, given any two points, the line joining them lies entirely
within it. This means that the region is connected, in the sense that it is
possible to go from one point to another without leaving the region. If we

106
assume, as we did, that a measurement is a process during which the state
of the entity changes in a continuous way within Σ, and that both during
the ﬁrst deterministic stage and the second possibly indeterministic stage
the abstract point particle representative of the state follows rectilinear
trajectories, then the only way to guarantee that in all circumstances these
trajectories are made of states, i.e., that they belong to Σ, is to require Σ
to be a convex set.
4. Degenerate measurements in the GTR-model
To complete our description of the GTR-model, we need to consider the
possibility of measurements such that diﬀerent ﬁnal states can be associ-
ated with a same outcome. These are called degenerate measurements in
quantum mechanics and we will adopt here the same terminology. How-
ever, since our approach is more general, we will have to distinguish be-
tween two diﬀerent possibilities, that we will call submeasurements of the
ﬁrst type and submeasurements of the second type (not to be confused with
von Neumann’s designation of measurements of the ﬁrst and second kind).
Submeasurements of the ﬁrst type are degenerate measurements in which
the experimenter can in principle distinguish between all the possible out-
comes, but decides (for whatever reason) not to do so, thus identifying some
of them.
For instance, in the example of the coin, we can imagine the situation
where the “edge” outcome is conventionally identiﬁed with the “head” out-
come, so that one obtains an eﬀective “head” or “tail” two-outcome mea-
surement, where “head” is now re-interpreted as either point xh or point xe.
But apart from this identiﬁcation, the measurement protocol, and therefore
the associated membrane’s collapse mechanism, remains exactly the same.
In other terms, a submeasurement of the ﬁrst type, by only identifying some
of the outcomes, produces a change of state of the entity that is identical to
that produced by an experiment where such identiﬁcation is not considered.
Submeasurements of the second type, on the other hand, correspond to
experimental situations where the distinction between certain outcomes be-
comes impossible to realize in practice, even in principle. This means that
the outcome states are diﬀerent than those associated with the correspond-
ing non-degenerate situations, as if they were not, the distinction between
the diﬀerent outcomes would always be possible. In other terms, a submea-
surement of the second type is characterized by a diﬀerent experimental
context, and therefore the membrane’s mechanism describing its unfolding
will also be diﬀerent.

107
In the example of the coin, we can consider the following modiﬁed ﬂip-
ping protocol. Once the coin has reached the ﬂoor, before taking knowledge
of the value of the upper face, a colleague performs the following additional
operations: if she ﬁnds that the upper face is “tail,” she does nothing. If
instead she ﬁnds that the upper face is “edge,” or “head,” she takes the
coin and places it on a table, tail up, and then without saying a word leaves
the room. Clearly, if the ﬁnal location of the coin is on the ﬂoor, the out-
come is “tail,” and more precisely “ﬂoor-tail”. On the other hand, if the
ﬁnal location of the coin is on the table, then the outcome is “table-tail,”
and evidently such new state contains no information that would allow
the experimenter to associate it either with the “ﬂoor-head” state or the
“ﬂoor-edge” state, of the associated non-degenerate measurement.
If we denote Pdeg(t) the probability of obtaining “ﬂoor-tail,” and Pdeg(¯t)
the probability of obtaining “table-tail,” in the degenerate measurement,
we clearly have:
Pdeg(t) = P(t),
Pdeg(¯t) = P(h) + P(e).
(5)
Degenerate measurements of the second type which obey equalities of the
above kind will be said to be quantum-like, as is clear that quantum mea-
surements always obey them.
Let us now show how we can modify the membrane’s mechanism to
describe submeasurements of the second type. Starting from the non-
degenerate situation, we must alter the functioning of the membrane in
such a way that not only (5) will be satisﬁed, but also the collapse will have
to produce the two states “ﬂoor-tail” (xt) and “table-tail” (x¯t), instead of
the three states “ﬂoor-tail” (xt), “ﬂoor-head” (xh) and “ﬂoor-edge” (xe).
In the following, we only analyze the N = 3 situation, the generalization
to more general measurements being straightforward.
The ﬁrst deterministic stage of the measurement is exactly the same
as for the corresponding non-degenerate situation, with the point particle
initially in state x orthogonally “falling” onto the membrane and ﬁrmly
attaching to it. Instead, the second indeterministic stage is diﬀerent, being
that the two sub-regions Ah and Ae will now be fused together, so as to
form a single larger subregion A¯t = Ah ∪Ae. To ﬁx ideas, we can think that
a special reactive substance has been applied along the common boundary
between Ah and Ae, the eﬀect of this special substance being twofold: ﬁrstly,
it produces the eﬀective fusion of the two subregions into a single one, so
that if the membrane breaks in a point belonging to, say, Ah, the tearing will
now propagate also across the boundary with Ae (because of the presence

108
of the reactive substance), causing the collapse of the entire subregion A¯t.
Secondly, it produces the early detachment of the common anchor point
xt, with the consequent contraction of the elastic membrane, drawing the
point particle attached to it to a given position on the line segment (the
1-simplex) subtended by xh and xe. Finally, also the last two anchor points
xh and xe will detach, causing the membrane to shrink toward the particle,
but without aﬀecting its acquired position (see Fig. 2).
 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
   
    
  
Fig. 2.
The breaking of the elastic membrane (in grey color), when the two regions Ah
and Ae have been fused into a single larger region A¯t. The process is here represented in
the case where the initial breaking point is in Ah. At ﬁrst, the membrane disintegrates
inside Ah ⊂A¯t, causing the anchor point xt to detach and the particle to be drawn to a
position somewhere on the line segment between xe and xh. Then, also the two anchor
points xe and xh simultaneously detach, causing the membrane to shrink toward the
particle, without aﬀecting its acquired position. Note that the on-membrane state has
been denoted x, instead of x∥, for notational consistency with Fig. 1.
On the other hand, if the membrane breaks in At, then only At will
collapse, producing the ﬁnal outcome xt, exactly as in the non-degenerate
situation. So, when performing the degenerate measurement, only two tran-
sitions are now possibly produced by the membrane mechanism. If the

109
membrane disintegrates in At, the outcome is xt, which means that the
abstract point particle representative of the ﬁnal state will be at a maximal
(unit) distance from the origin of the system of coordinates, that is, from
the center of the M-dimensional sphere in which Σ is inscribed. On the
other hand, if the membrane disintegrates in the composite subregion A¯t,
the membrane’s collapse will not necessarily produce a vector of maximal
length within Σ. Therefore, it is natural to assume in this case that a third
deterministic process can possibly occur, to complete the measurement,
bringing the point particle to a ﬁnal position x¯t of maximal distance from
the origin, at the surface of Σ, representative of the ﬁnal outcome-state of
the measurement.
In view of (4), it is clear that the degenerate membrane’s mechanism
we have just described obeys (5), considering that the ﬁrst and third stages
of the measurement are purely deterministic. There is however another as-
pect of interest that needs to be discussed, in relation to this possible third
stage of a degenerate measurement of the second type. More precisely, we
need to distinguish the following two possibilities. Considering the outcome
x¯t, either (1) its orthogonal projection onto the membrane falls onto some
point of the line segment between xe and xh, or (2) it falls onto whatever
other point of the membrane, not lying on that line segment. Condition (1)
corresponds to the situation where the corresponding non-degenerate mea-
surement having x¯t as the initial state, can only produce the two outcomes
xe and xh, and therefore cannot produce the outcome xt. On the other
hand, condition (2) corresponds to the situation where the probability of
obtaining xt will be generally non-zero.
We shall say that a submeasurement of the second type, obeying con-
dition (1) above, is a projection-like submeasurement, as we know that de-
generate quantum measurements do obey this condition as a result of the
projection formula. A simple way to automatically implement (1) in our
model is to ask the third deterministic stage to be structurally similar to
the ﬁrst one, in the sense that the point particle, when reemerging from
the membrane, it will always do so following a rectilinear path, orthogo-
nal to the membrane’s plane. Such ﬁnal state, when projected back onto
the membrane, in a repetition of the measurement, will then land onto the
same edge of the triangular membrane, in accordance with condition (1).
It is worth observing, however, that a degenerate measurement of the sec-
ond type will generally not be projection-like, in the above sense. This is
immediately clear in our coin example. Indeed, when ﬂipping the coin in
a “table state” onto the ﬂoor, if we don’t use a very special experimental

110
protocol, all three states “ﬂoor-head,” “ﬂoor-tail” and “ﬂoor-edge” will be
easily obtained.
5. Composite entities in the GTR-model
Another important class of measurements we want to describe in our GTR-
model is that of measurements performed on composite entities (also called
join entities). To remain within the ambit of our example, consider the sit-
uation where instead of a single coin we now have two coins (not necessarily
identical). Then, we can perform a ﬁrst coin-ﬂipping measurement with the
ﬁrst coin, observe the outcome, and do the same with the second coin, ob-
serving again the outcome. As each one-entity measurement can produce
3 diﬀerent outcomes: “head,” “tail” and “edge,” the combination of the
two measurements can produce 9 = 3 × 3 diﬀerent outcomes: “head-head,”
“head-tail,” “head-edge,” “tail-head,” “tail-tail,” “tail-edge,” “edge-head,”
“edge-tail” and “edge-edge.”
It is important to observe that, to be able to perform separately the two
measurements, it has to be possible to act separately on the two coins and
obtain in a separate way the outcomes of the two experimental actions. We
are not saying by this that the two coins must be experimentally separated,
in the sense that their measurements cannot produce correlations, but that
the measurements themselves have to be separable. In physics for instance,
when considering measurements on composite entities, these are usually
separable, but in more general situations this may not necessarily be the
case [23,24].
An important characteristic of separable measurements is that they can
be performed either sequentially or simultaneously, and that when they are
performed in a sequential way the order of the sequence is irrelevant. This is
evidently the case in the coin-ﬂipping measurements. Indeed, we can either
ﬂip the two coins simultaneously, or one after the other, in whatever order,
and we will always obtain the same statistics of outcomes. However, a sepa-
rable measurement can either produce or not produce correlated outcomes,
depending on the nature of the state of the join entity. If such state de-
scribes a condition of (experimental) separation of the sub-entities forming
the join entity, then no correlations will be observed in the statistics of out-
comes. We shall call states of this kind product states. The term “product”
is here to be understood in the speciﬁc sense of a state that when subjected
to a separable measurement, the obtained set of outcomes can be described
as the Cartesian product of the set of outcomes obtained when individ-
ual measurements are performed separately, on the diﬀerent sub-entities,
in whatever order.

111
In the GTR-model, the situation of separable measurements performed
on product states can be described by simply considering distinct mem-
branes, one for each sub-entity forming the join entity, working indepen-
dently from one another. In the case of the two-coin entity, its initial state
is then described by a couple of initial states, one for each individual coin,
and its measurement is described by a couple of membranes, acting sep-
arately on these two one-coin initial states. Of course, it is also possible
to represent this double-membrane process as a single higher-dimensional
membrane process. For this, instead of two three-dimensional triangular
membranes, we will have a 8-dimensional hypermembrane (a 8-simplex),
with 9 vertices. The initial state of the two coins will then be described
by a vector whose ﬁrst three components deﬁne the state of the ﬁrst coin,
the successive three components deﬁne the state of the second coin, and
the remaining components (the number of which depends on the dimension
M ≥8 of the state space) are fully determined by them (as the join entity
state, being a product state, it has to be fully determined by the state of
its components). This means that the higher-dimensional single-membrane
measurement process, when projected onto its ﬁrst 3 + 3 components, will
describe two independent processes, in accordance with the fact that, for
a separable measurement performed on a product state, “the whole has to
be equivalent to the sum of its parts.”
The situation is however diﬀerent if either the state is a non-product
state, or the measurement itself is a non-separable measurement, or both.
For instance, we may decide to change the operational deﬁnition of the
ﬂipping measurement by introducing a small rigid rod whose two ends are
glued to the two coins (in a way that we don’t need to specify here), before
ﬂipping them. The presence of the connecting rod means that the two-coin
measurement cannot anymore be conceived as two separate one-coin mea-
surements, as by ﬂipping one coin we will also, inevitably, ﬂip the other
one, and because of the connecting rod (which may break or not during
the experiment), correlated outcomes can be observed (which one can show
are able to violate Bell’s inequalities; see for instance [13,25,26]). In other
terms, the measurement becomes non-separable. The situation where the
state of the two coins is non-product is similar. For instance, one can con-
sider that the two coins are strongly magnetized, and therefore able to
attract each other. This means that the description of their state also has
to include a description of the magnetic ﬁeld connecting them, which simi-
larly to the above rigid rod example can produce correlations, under certain
conditions.

112
Diﬀerent from the situation of separable measurements performed on
product states, in the case of non-separable measurements and/or non-
product states, two separate membranes will clearly not be suﬃcient to
obtain a full description not only of the state of the two-coin entity, but
also of the statistics of (correlated) outcomes that the measurement is able
to produce. Only a genuinely higher dimensional structure will be able in
this case to account for all the experimental possibilities, and in particular
the 3 + 3 components describing the two initial individual coin states will
generally not allow to deduce the value of the remaining components, in
accordance with the fact that, for non-product (non-separable) entities,
“the whole will be more than just the sum of its parts.”
6. The quantum mechanical example
In the previous sections we have used the coin example as an heuristic to
explain the basic ingredients and structure of the GTR-model. In this sec-
tion, we consider an important implementation of the GTR-model: quantum
mechanics. Clearly, the GTR-model is much more general than quantum
mechanics, in the sense that it is able to account for a much wider class
of measurements and states than those usually considered in the standard
quantum formalism. Also, even when the model is reduced to quantum me-
chanics, by means of two assumptions that we are now going to enunciate,
it still remains a more general framework than quantum mechanics, in the
sense that it describes a completed version of the latter where the Born rule
can be derived in a non-circular way. In that sense, the GTR-model also
oﬀers a possible solution to the longstanding measurement problem [19].
The two additional assumptions that are needed to derive the Born rule
of probabilistic assignment from the GTR-model are the following:
Hypothesis 1: Metaignorance. The experimenter does not control which
speciﬁc measurement is actualized at each run of the measurement, among
those that can actualize the given outcome-states. In other terms, the ex-
perimenter lacks knowledge not only about the (almost deterministic) mea-
surement interaction that each time is actualized, but also about the way it
is each time selected.
Hypothesis 2: Hilbertian structure. The state space Σ is a generalized
Bloch sphere.
Let us explain how the above two assumptions can be used to derive the
quantum mechanical Born rule. We start by analyzing the consequences of
the ﬁrst one: metaignorance (or metaindiﬀerence, to use the terminology

113
of [27]; see also [28]). This assumption is natural for the following rea-
son. In a typical quantum measurement (like, say, a Stern-Gerlach spin-
measurement), we are in a situation where the experimenter doesn’t want
to control in whatsoever way its development. This because a measurement
is generally understood as a process of observation, and an observation is
meant to alter in the least possible way the observed entity. Of course, if
the process creates the very property that is observed, then there will be
an “intrinsic invasiveness” to it, impossible to remove. This is precisely the
situation of quantum measurements, where the entity transitions from an
initial to a ﬁnal state, with the latter being generally diﬀerent from the
former (if the pre-measurement state is not an eigenstate).
In other terms, in a measurement context the only controlled aspect
is that relative to the deﬁnition of the possible outcome-states. But apart
from that, the experimenter will avoid as much as possible to interfere
with the natural process of actualization of these potential outcomes. Thus,
underlying the metaignorance assumption there is the idea that if nothing
limits the way the measuring system and the measured entity can interact,
they will naturally explore all possible (available) ways of interacting. This
means that the quantum statistics, and more generally the statistics of any
observational process where the experimenter doesn’t try to inﬂuence the
outcomes, corresponds to what has been called a universal average [17–
19,28], i.e., an average over all possible measurement processes associated
with a predetermined set of outcomes. Measurements subtending a universal
average are called universal measurements, and our point is that quantum
measurements are just a special example of universal measurements.
More speciﬁcally, to each experimental situation characterized by N
given outcomes, an uncountable inﬁnity of measurements can be deﬁned,
each one characterized by a diﬀerent ρ-membrane, i.e., by a (N −1)-simplex
associated with a diﬀerent probability density ρ. A universal measurement
then corresponds to a two-stage process, where ﬁrstly a ρ-membrane is
selected among the inﬁnity of possible ones, and secondly, from that speciﬁc
ρ-membrane, a λ-measurement-interaction is also selected, so producing the
(almost) deterministic collapse of the membrane.
So, to calculate the probabilities associated with a universal measure-
ment one has to perform an average over the probabilities obtained from all
these diﬀerent possible measurements. Of course, if such a huge average is
addressed directly, one will be confronted with technical problems related
to the foundations of mathematics and probability theory. A good strategy,
similar to that used in the deﬁnition of the Wiener measure, is to proceed

114
as follows. First, one shows that any probability density ρ can be described
as the limit of a suitably chosen sequence of cellular probability densities
ρn, as the number of cells n tends to inﬁnity, in the sense that for every
initial state x and ﬁnal state y, one can always ﬁnd a sequence of cellular
ρn such that the transition probability P(x →y|ρn), associated with the
ρn-membrane, tends to the transition probability P(x →y|ρ), associated
with the ρ-membrane, as n →∞[18,19].
By a cellular probability density we mean here a probability density
describing a structure made of a ﬁnite number n of regular cells (of whatever
shape), tessellating the hypersurface of the (N −1)-simplex, which can only
be of two sorts: uniformly breakable, or uniformly unbreakable. Then, if one
excludes the totally unbreakable case (as it would produce no outcomes),
we have a total number 2n −1 of possible ρn-membranes. This means that
for each n, one can unambiguously deﬁne the average probability:
⟨P(x →y)⟩n ≡
1
2n −1
X
ρn
P(x →y|ρn),
(6)
where the sum runs over all the possible 2n −1 probability densities made
of n cells. Clearly, ⟨P(x →y)⟩n is the probability for the transition x →
y, when a probability density ρn (a cellular ρn-membrane) is chosen at
random, in a uniform way.
Then, to obtain the transition probabilities of the universal measure-
ment, i.e., of the average over all possible ρ-measurements, one has to cal-
culate the inﬁnite cell limit of the above average:
⟨P(x →y)⟩univ = lim
n→∞⟨P(x →y)⟩n,
(7)
and it is possible to demonstrate that [18,19]:
⟨P(x →y)⟩univ = P(x →y|ρu),
(8)
where ρu denotes the uniform probability density, i.e., the probability den-
sity associated with a uniform membrane, for which all points have the
same probability of disintegrating.
A model only contemplating uniform membranes has been called the
uniform tension-reduction (UTR) model [17,18]. The result (8) then tells
us that every time a statistics of outcomes is generated by a universal
average, an eﬀective UTR-model will naturally emerge. This is however not
suﬃcient to derive the quantum mechanical Born rule. For this, the second
assumption, about the structure of the state space, is also needed. Here
again we will not go into any technical details of the proof and just explain
in broad terms the gist of it, referring the interested reader to [17–19].

115
It is well known that the rays of a two-dimensional Hilbert space can be
represented as points at the surface of a 3-dimensional unit sphere, called
the Bloch sphere [29], with its internal points describing the so-called density
operators (also called density matrices). What is less known is that a similar
representation can be worked out for general N-dimensional Hilbert spaces
[19,30–35]. The standard 3-d Bloch sphere is then replaced by a generalized
(N 2 −1)-dimensional Bloch sphere, with the only diﬀerence that for N > 2
only a convex portion of it will be ﬁlled with states. In other terms, the
state space Σ is a M-dimensional convex set, with M = N 2 −1, inscribed
in a unit sphere of same dimension.
It is then possible to show that the set of eigenvectors associated with a
given observable, i.e., with a self-adjoint operator, are precisely described,
within Σ, by the N vertexes of a (N −1)-simplex inscribed in the gener-
alized Bloch sphere [19]. And when the point particle representative of the
initial ray-state, located at some point x at a unit distance from the origin,
plunges into the sphere to reach its on-membrane position x∥, following a
path orthogonal to the simplex, it can also be shown that this determin-
istic movement precisely causes the oﬀ-diagonal elements of the associated
density operator (in the measurement’s basis) to gradually vanish, which
means that the on-membrane state is precisely a decohered state, described
by a fully reduced density operator.
Diﬀerent from the usual description of decoherence theory [36], the de-
cohered on-membrane state x∥does not correspond to the ﬁnal state of
the measurement, but to the state prior to the indeterministic collapse of
the membrane. In probabilistic terms, the disintegrative/collapse process
is governed by the Born rule, as is clear that the coordinates of the on-
membrane (reduced density operator) state x∥are precisely the transition
probabilities and that, as we already remarked in Sec. 2, Eq. (2), the relative
Lebesgue measure of the diﬀerent subregions correspond to the values of
the corresponding coordinates of the on-membrane vector. Also, in the sit-
uation where the measurement is degenerate, a third purely deterministic
process can also happen, of the puriﬁcation kind, through which the en-
tity takes a maximal “distance” from the measurement context represented
by the membrane, in accordance with the predictions of the L¨uders-von
Neumann projection formula [19].
To complete our description of the quantum mechanical example, we
brieﬂy mention the situation with multipartite systems, formed by multi-
ple entities. For this, we recall that the existence of a generalized Bloch
representation is based on the observation that one can always ﬁnd a basis

116
for the density operators acting in CN, made of N 2 orthogonal (in the
Hilbert-Schmidt sense) operators. One of them is the identity matrix I, and
the other N 2−1 correspond to a determination of the generators of SU(N),
the special unitary group of degree N. These are traceless and orthogonal
self-adjoint matrices Λi, i = 1, . . . , N 2 −1, which can be chosen to be nor-
malized as follows: Tr ΛiΛj = 2δij. Then, any density operator state D can
be uniquely determined by a (N 2 −1)-dimensional real vector x, by writing
[19]:
D(x) = 1
N (I + cN x · Λ) = 1
N

I + cN
N 2−1
X
i=1
xiΛi

,
(9)
where we have deﬁned the constant: cN ≡
q
N(N−1)
2
.
If the entity in question is a joint entity formed by two sub-entities,
with Hibert spaces CNA and CNB, respectively, so that CN = CNA ⊗CNB
and N = NANB, it is possible to introduce a tensorial determination of
the generators, such that the generators of SU(N) are expressed as tensor
products of the generators of SU(NA) and SU(NB). In this way, one can
show that the vector x representative of the state of the joint entity can
always be written as a direct sum of three vectors [37]:
x = dNAxA ⊕dNBxB ⊕xcorr.
(10)
where dNA = ( NA−1
N−1 )
1
2 , dNB = ( NB−1
N−1 )
1
2 , xA belongs to the one-entity
Bloch sphere B1(RN 2
A−1) and describes the state of the A-entity, xB belongs
to the one-entity Bloch sphere B1(RN 2
B−1) and describes the state of the B-
entity, and rcorr is that component of the state describing the correlations
between the two sub-entities.
In accordance with our analysis of Sec. 5, it is then possible to show
that: (1) when the initial state x is representative of a product state, the
components of the two individual vectors xA and xB are independent of
one another, and the components of the correlation vector xcorr are en-
tirely determined by the components of the latter. This means that the
indeterministic process described by the (N −1)-dimensional two-entity
measurement’s membrane is equivalent to that obtained by two sequen-
tial measurements, in whatever order, performed by two (NA −1)- and
(NB −1)-dimensional membranes.
On the other hand, when the initial state is not of the product form
D = DA ⊗DB, the two vectors xA and xB are not anymore indepen-
dent and the components of the correlation vector xcorr cannot anymore

117
be deduced from the components of xA and xB. This means that in a non-
product situation the collapse mechanism of the full (N −1)-dimensional
membrane is needed to describe the statistics of outcomes of the quantum
measurement, which cannot be decomposed into two separate and indepen-
dent collapse mechanisms [37].
7. Beyond Kolmogorov & Hilbert
In the previous section we have shown that quantum mechanics provides
a speciﬁc realization of the GTR-model, when the membranes are uniform
(a situation we have called the UTR-model) and the state space is a gen-
eralized Bloch sphere, which can be seen as the natural completion of the
standard Hilbert space structure in which also density matrices are allowed
to play the role of pure states. In this section, we provide a few examples of
situations where both classical and quantum probabilities structures are vi-
olated, showing in this way that the GTR-model can describe more general
probability models than those associated with purely classical and purely
quantum experimental propositions.
7.1. Beyond classical
We start by considering the violation of the classical probability model.
More precisely, we will show that the joint probabilities of sequential mea-
surements cannot generally be ﬁtted into a classical probability model
equipped with a single sample space. For this, we consider the sim-
plest possible situation: that of an entity whose measurements only have
two possible outcomes. The ﬁrst measurement is characterized by a one-
dimensional ρA-membrane (an elastic band) stretched between the two op-
posite outcome-states a and −a (we will call it the A-measurement), and
a second measurement is characterized by a one-dimensional ρB-membrane
stretched between the two opposite outcome-states b and −b (we will call
it the B-measurement).
We assume that the entity is initially in eigenstate b of the B-
measurement. This means that the probability P(→b →a|b) of having
ﬁrst the transition to state b, then to state a, knowing that the initial state
is b, is: P(→b →a|b) = P(→b|b)P(→a|b) = P(b →a). Also, the
probability P(→a →b|b) of having ﬁrst the transition to state a, then
to state b, knowing that the initial state is b, is: P(→a →b|b) = P(→
a|b)P(→b|a) = P(b →a)P(a →b). We thus ﬁnd that:
P(→b →a|b) −P(→a →b|b) = P(b →a)[1 −P(a →b)].
(11)

118
This means that whenever P(b →a) ̸= 0 and P(a →b) ̸= 1, the right hand
side of (11) is diﬀerent from zero, i.e., P(→b →a|b) ̸= P(→a →b|b),
which is a violation of classical probability, as the (static) propositions of
classical probability theory, based on Boolean algebra, always commute.
More precisely, in classical theory the probability of the event “b then a”
has to coincide with the probability of the event “a then b,” i.e., Pc(→b →
a) = Pc(→a →b), for whatever initial state of the entity under study.
Thus, the GTR-model easily violates classical probability.
As a speciﬁc example, we can assume that ρA is uniform, whereas ρB
describes an elastic band uniformly breakable only inside an interval of
length 2ϵ, centered at the origin of the sphere, and such that ϵ < cos θ,
with θ the angle between the two elastic bands. Then, we have the transition
probabilities: P(a →b) = 1, and P(b →a) = 1
2(1+cos θ), which are clearly
diﬀerent if cos θ ̸= 1 (see Fig. 3).
 
   
  
  
  
   
     
Fig. 3.
Two measurements, characterized by diﬀerent one-dimensional breakable elastic
structures. The measurement having the two outcomes a and −a is characterized by a
uniform ρA-membrane, whereas the measurement having the two outcomes b and −b
is characterized by a ρB-membrane that can uniformly break only inside an interval
centered at the origin, whose length is strictly less than 2 cos θ. If the initial state is a,
all the breakable points of ρB will contribute to the transition a →b. On the other
hand, if the initial state is b, only the points belonging to the segment of length 1+cos θ
will contribute to the transition b →a.
7.2. Beyond quantum
To show that the GTR-model can also easily violate quantum probability,
we can still use the example of Fig. 3. Indeed, P(b →a) ̸= P(a →b)
is already a manifest violation of the Born rule, as is clear that according
to the latter we should always have the equality (sometimes called the
reciprocity law): P(b →a) = P(a →b). Indeed, ⟨ψ|φ⟩= ⟨φ|ψ⟩∗, implying:

119
P(|φ⟩→|ψ⟩) = |⟨ψ|φ⟩|2 = |⟨φ|ψ⟩|2 = P(|ψ⟩→|φ⟩). This tells us that
the transition probability between two states only depends on their relative
orientation in the Hilbert space, as measured by the modulus of their scalar
product, and not on the speciﬁc direction taken by the transition.
One should not conclude, however, that when the reciprocity law is
satisﬁed the probability model would be Hilbertian. Indeed, as soon as
ρA = ρB, we have P(b →a) = P(a →b), but this doesn’t mean that
the probabilities produced by the elastic bands are necessarily given by the
Born rule. For this, as we explained in Sec. 6, the probability densities have
to be uniform. In other terms, testing the reciprocity law is not the same
as testing the quantumness of the model, as the reciprocity law can also
be satisﬁed by more general probability models than the Hilbert one. To
make this point even more clear, let us introduce a quantity called the q-test
[6,16,38]:
q ≡[P(→a →−b|x) + P(→−a →b|x)]
−[P(→b →−a|x) + P(→−b →a|x)],
(12)
where x is some given initial state. It can be shown that if the probability
model is Hilbertian, then independently of the dimension of the Hilbert
space we must have q = 0, which is usually called the “QQ-equality” [6,16,
38,39].
We will give a simple proof of the “QQ-equality” in Sec. 8.2. Let us here
calculate explicitly the value of q using the GTR-model, to show that the
q = 0 condition can be easily violated. For this, we observe that: P(→a →
−b|x) = P(x →a)P(a →−b), and similarly for the other terms in (12).
Thus, we can write:
q = [P(x →a)P(a →−b) + P(x →−a)P(−a →b)]
−[P(x →b)P(b →−a) + P(x →−b)P(−b →a)].
(13)
Limiting our discussion to two-outcome situations, we can use P(x →
−b) = 1 −P(x →b) and P(x →−a) = 1 −P(x →a), so that (13)
becomes:
q = q1 + q2,
(14)
q1 ≡P(−a →b) −P(−b →a)
(15)
q2 ≡P(x →a)[P(a →−b) −P(−a →b)]
+P(x →b)[P(−b →a) −P(b →−a)].
(16)
The term q1 is called the relative indeterminism contribution, and the
term q2 is called the relative asymmetry contribution [39]. To simplify the

120
discussion, we assume that all measurements are described by symmetrical
probability densities: ρA(y) = ρA(−y) and ρB(y) = ρB(−y), as it is the
case in the example of Fig. 3. Then, we have: P(a →−b) = P(−a →b)
and P(−b →a) = P(b →−a), so that q2 = 0, but:
q1 =
Z 1
cos θ
[ρB(y) −ρA(y)]dy.
(17)
Clearly, if ρB ̸= ρA, then q1 ̸= 0, so that q ̸= 0, showing again that the
probability model described by the GTR-model can extend beyond quan-
tum.
It is interesting to also observe that being the quantum mechanical
situation characterized by uniform probability densities, i.e., ρB = ρA = ρu,
this means that in a pure quantum model both q1 (relative indeterminism)
and q2 (relative asymmetry) are zero. But this is not the only way to satisfy
the QQ-equality, as also the condition q1 = −q2 can guarantee that q = 0.
In other terms, the QQ-equality is a necessary but not suﬃcient condition
to test the quantumness of a probability model.
In fact, even when the stronger condition q1 = q2 = 0 is satisﬁed, the
model can still be non-Hilbertian. To see this, consider the situation where
ρB = ρA = ρ, with ρ a symmetrical (but non-uniform) probability distri-
bution. We then know that, similarly to quantum mechanics, the reciprocal
law is satisﬁed and that q1 = q2 = 0. As we are now going to show, this
doesn’t mean however that the probability model is structurally equivalent
to that described by the Born rule.
According to the general theorem we have stated in Sec. 6, only when
ρ is a uniform distribution we recover the exact formulae predicted by the
Born rule. For example, in the situation of a two-outcome measurement,
the Born rule gives:
PBorn(a →±b) = |⟨ψb|ψa⟩|2 = 1
2(1 ± cos θ),
(18)
which is very diﬀerent form the GTR-model expression:
P(a →±b) =
Z ± cos θ
−1
ρ(y)dy.
(19)
For instance, for the speciﬁc choice ρϵ(y) =
1
2ϵχ[−ϵ,ϵ](y), with χ[−ϵ,ϵ] the
characteristic function of the interval [−ϵ, ϵ], and ϵ ∈[0, 1] (the so-called
ϵ-model; see [2,3]), we can write the more explicit expression:
P(a →±b) = δ±,−1Θ(−cos θ −ϵ) + δ±,+1Θ(cos θ −ϵ)
+ 1
2

1 ± cos θ
ϵ

χ[−ϵ,ϵ](cos θ),
(20)

121
which clearly predicts diﬀerent values than the Born rule (here Θ denotes
the Heaviside step function, equal to 1 when the argument is positive and
equal to 0 otherwise, and δ denotes the Kronecker delta, equal to 1 when
the two indices are the same and equal to 0 otherwise).
We observe that in the limit ϵ →0, ρϵ(y) →δ(y), i.e., the elastic
becomes only breakable in its middle point, which corresponds to a mea-
surement with no ﬂuctuations. Then the third term of (20) vanishes and
one recovers an almost classical situation (almost because for cos θ = ±ϵ
we are in a situation of unstable equilibrium). On the other hand, in the
opposite uniform limit ϵ →1, ρϵ(y) →1
2, the ﬁrst two terms of (20) vanish
and the third term tends to the pure quantum expression (18).
Now, albeit the values of the probabilities predicted by the Born rule
(18) and by the GTR-model (19) (or more speciﬁcally the ϵ-model (20)) are
manifestly diﬀerent, one may nevertheless ask if the quantum model (i.e.,
the UTR-model in the Bloch sphere) would nevertheless describe the same
experimental situations than a symmetric GTR-model, when all the elastic
bands are the same, considering that both models satisfy (at least in the
two-outcome situation) the equalities q1 = q2 = 0. As we are now going to
show, the answer is negative. For this, we need to consider three distinct
measurements. If they are purely quantum we have, with obvious notation
[19]:
⟨ψa|ψ−b⟩= ⟨ψa| (|ψc⟩⟨ψc| + |ψ−c⟩⟨ψ−c|) |ψ−b⟩
= ⟨ψa|ψc⟩⟨ψc|ψ−b⟩+ ⟨ψa|ψ−c⟩⟨ψ−c|ψ−b⟩,
(21)
where for the ﬁrst equality we have used the resolution of the identity:
|ψc⟩⟨ψc| + |ψ−c⟩⟨ψ−c| = I. It immediately follows that if we can ﬁnd an
experimental situation in the GTR-model with identical and symmetrical
elastic bands such that, say, P(c →−b) = 0 (implying ⟨ψc|ψ−b⟩= 0)
and P(a →−c) = 0 (implying ⟨ψa|ψ−c⟩= 0), but also P(a →−b) ̸= 0
(implying ⟨ψa|ψ−b⟩̸= 0), then such situation would clearly be incompatible
with the quantum identity (21), and therefore would be modelizable by the
symmetric GTR-model, but not by the Born rule of quantum mechanics.
A simple situation of this kind is described in Figure 4.
8. The human cognition example
In Sec. 6 we have shown that the quantum mechanical (Hilbertian) model
is a special case of the GTR-model, obtained by considering only uniform
membranes and a Blochean state space. In this section we want to provide
another important implementation of the GTR-model: human cognition. In

122
 
 
   
  
  
  
   
   
Fig. 4.
Three diﬀerent measurements represented by three identical symmetric ρϵ-
elastic bands oriented along the directions a, b and c, respectively. The angle between a
and b is π
2 , and the angle between a and c, and between c and b, is π
4 . The unbreakable
segments of the elastics are in black color, the uniformly breakable segments in gray
color, and the picture corresponds to the choice ϵ =
1
√
2 (the breakable segments are
therefore of length
√
2).
that respect, we recall that as from the beginning of the present century the
quantum formalism has been applied with success to model a large number
of cognitive phenomena, like information processing, human judgment and
decision making, perception and memory, as well as concept combinations
and conceptual reasoning; see for instance: [4–11,17,18] and the references
cited therein.
However, diﬀerent from the situation of the elementary microscopic en-
tities interacting with macroscopic measuring apparatuses, described by
standard quantum mechanics, the general structure and the possible sym-
metries characterizing the human cognitive activity, when human minds
interact with diﬀerent conceptual entities, remain to be identiﬁed. Indeed,
even though the quantum formalism has proven to work pretty well as a
model, to ﬁt many of the existing experimental data, it also fails to do so
for many others (some examples will be given in the following). This means
that the general probabilistic structures of the data generated by the hu-
man minds, in the diﬀerent cognitive contexts, goes beyond that described
by pure classical and pure quantum models. Therefore, to study these more
general structures one needs an ampler theoretical framework than just
classical or quantum mechanics, able to embrace from the beginning the
full complexity of these non-physical (mental) processes. The GTR-model
provides this more general framework, both in the Chatton and Occam
sense: it is not more complex than necessary (Occam’s razor), but also it
is not less complex than necessary (Chatton’s anti-razor).

123
Before explaining why the GTR-model provides a natural, coherent and
unitary description of human cognition, at a quite fundamental level, it is
useful to brieﬂy address a possible objection, which consists in saying that
the GTR-model would contain too many free parameters, allowing it to
easily ﬁt all sorts of empirical data, but because of this it would not make
it of great interest in providing an explanation for the observed phenomena.
In fact, considering that an inﬁnity of diﬀerent probability densities ρ can
be used to describe each measurement (in addition to the choice of the
orientations of the measurement simplexes), the model clearly allows for an
uncountable inﬁnity of free parameters!
To answer this objection (which by the way is usually also addressed in
relation to pure Hilbertian models, obeying the Born rule; see for instance
the recent discussion in [40]), one has to distinguish between phenomeno-
logical models, where the diﬀerent parameters are just introduced ad hoc,
to obtain a good (or exact) data ﬁt, but only for a reduced set of isolated
experimental situations, from more fundamental models, designed with the
precise intent of describing all possible situations in a given domain of ex-
perimentation, possibly also deriving the observed phenomena from ﬁrst
principles, so providing for them convincing explanations (and whenever
possible, predictions).
To give an example taken from physics, no one would ever have objected
to Einstein that his general relativity theory was a bad explanation because
it contained too many free parameters, as for instance the stress-energy
tensor appearing in Einstein’s ﬁeld equations could take any functional
dependence on the space-time coordinates. Of course, this was not a weak
trait of Einstein’s model, but its intrinsic richness, considering that his
equations had to be applicable to all possible densities and ﬂuxes of energy-
momentum in spacetime. And this is precisely what made his theory a
universal one. What was important in Einstein’s equations is that the free
parameters associated with the stress-energy tensor always remained in a
clear and logical relation with respect to the other fundamental quantities
of the theory, like Einstein’s and Ricci’s tensors and the metric. And as we
are now going to explain, the same holds true, mutatis mutandis, for the
GTR-model.
When the GTR-model is applied to interrogative contexts involving
human minds (a measurement can always be understood as an interrog-
ative context, with the diﬀerent outcomes being the available answers),
diﬀerent from the standard quantum formalism it allows for a clear dis-
tinction not only between ‘a question and its possible answers,’ but also

124
between ‘the diﬀerent ways an answer can be selected.’ Indeed, diﬀerent
human subjects, when subjected to a same interrogation (or situation elic-
iting a decision), will have each, in general, a diﬀerent ‘way of choosing
an answer.’ Diﬀerent ‘ways of choosing’ can be described within the GTR-
model by means of diﬀerent probability densities ρ (in the same way as
diﬀerent energy-momentum distributions can be described by means of dif-
ferent stress-energy tensors in general relativity). On the other hand, in
standard quantum mechanics all measurements are described by the same
uniform probability densities ρu, which means that a pure quantum model
can only describe situations where all subjects participating in the experi-
ment act as perfect “Bornian clones,” all selecting an answer exactly in the
same way (which is “the way of a uniform membrane”).
Also, the disintegration-collapse of a membrane expresses in a very in-
tuitive way what we humans typically perceive when facing a decisional
context [17,18]. Indeed, when we are subjected to an interrogation, or a
situation requiring a decision, we know that at the mental level a (neural)
state of equilibrium will be built, expressing a sort of balancing of the ten-
sions between the initial state of the conceptual entity we are subjected to,
and the available (mutually excluding and competing) answer-states. The
building of this equilibrium is described in the GTR-model by the abstract
point particle entering the sphere and reaching an on-membrane position,
so producing “tension lines” going from its position to the end points repre-
sentative of the diﬀerent outcomes. At some moment, always in accordance
with what we can subjectively feel, some ﬂuctuations will disturb this men-
tal equilibrium, in a way that we cannot predict in advance, and trigger an
irreversible and almost instantaneous process, drawing the abstract point
particle to one of the vertices of the mental simplex, reducing in this way the
previous tensional equilibrium (hence the “tension-reduction” name given
to the model, which was suggested to us by Jerome Busemeyer).
So, the diﬀerent membranes in the GTR-model are representative of as-
pects of the minds of the diﬀerent subjects, understood as dynamic memory
structures sensitive to meaning. On the other hand, and consequently, the
abstract point particle interacting with a membrane is not to be interpreted
(as is usually done) as a description of the subject’s beliefs, but as an objec-
tive (intersubjective) element of a conceptual reality that is independent of
the minds of the individuals that can possibly interact with it. This means
that the diﬀerent locations of the abstract point particle within the gener-
alized Bloch sphere describe the diﬀerent states a conceptual entity can be

125
in, and that all these states have the same objective status for the diﬀer-
ent subjects participating in an experiment [41,42]; but diﬀerent subjects,
because of their diﬀerent forma mentis (their diﬀerent ρ), will extract a
diﬀerent meaning from them, in a given cognitive context, i.e., each subject
will choose in a diﬀerent way an outcome, i.e., an answer to the addressed
question (and therefore each subject will be generally associated with a
diﬀerent statistics of outcomes).
To give an example, consider the concept Food. When it is not under
the inﬂuence of a speciﬁc context, we can say that it is in its “ground”
state, which can be understood as a sort of basic prototype of the concept.
But as soon as Food is contextualized, for instance in the ambit of the
phrase This food is very juicy, its state will change. This means that its
previous ground state will stop playing the role of a prototype, which will
be played then by its new state, in a sort of new ‘contextualized prototype’.
Now, the diﬀerence between the concept Food in a ground state and in an
“excited” state, like the one associated with the above “juicy context,” can
be evaluated by subjecting the concept to an additional context: that of a
human mind that is asked to select a good representative of the concept,
among a number of possible predetermined choices. The diﬀerence between
the ground state Food and the excited state This food is very juicy will then
manifest in the fact that, assuming for example that Fruit and Vegetable
are among the possible choices of representatives, the former will be chosen
much more frequently (i.e., with a higher probability) than the latter, when
the concept is in its “juicy” excited state, rather than in its ground state.
8.1. Replicable measurements
As we said, a ρ-membrane describes in the GTR-model an aspect of a
participant’s mind subjected to a given interrogative (or decisional) con-
text. It is then natural to consider variations of the probability density ρ,
when measurements are repeated, to account for the replicability eﬀects
that are easy to observe in experimental situations. In quantum mechanics,
the replicability of an outcome is only predicted by the theory in relation
to the repetition of the same measurement, according to von Neumann ﬁrst
kind condition. As we have seen in Sec. 2, the ‘tension-reduction’ mecha-
nism associated with a disintegrable elastic membrane does automatically
guarantee that if a measurement is repeated a second time, it will produce
exactly the same result, with probability 1. This because the membrane’s
collapse cannot alter the position of the point particle when already located
in one of the vertices of the measurement simplex.

126
However, if, following a measurement A, a second diﬀerent measurement
B is performed, and then, following the B-measurement, measurement A
is performed once again, one will not generally obtain the same outcome
obtained in the ﬁrst A-measurement with probability 1. Indeed, the inter-
mediary B-measurement will generally produce an outcome that is not an
eigenstate of the A-measurement, so that when A is performed a second
time the outcome will not be certain in advance and could be diﬀerent
from the ﬁrst A-outcome (unless the two measurements are compatible, a
situation described in quantum mechanics by two commuting self-adjoint
operators).
When the A and B measurements are interrogative processes, and the
measuring apparatus is a human mind, we know however that the situation
is diﬀerent. Indeed, it is to expected in this case that, in most situations, if
we have given a certain answer to question A, then we will give the same
answer to that same question if we are asked it a second time, even if in
the meantime we have also answered to question B. This can happen for
many reasons, like desire of coherence, learning, fear of being judged when
we change opinion, etc.
In quantum mechanics replicability is easy to model if one assumes that
the two measurements A and B are associated with compatible (commut-
ing) observables. The problem is that response replicability is expected to
be observed also when the observables A and B are non-compatibles, i.e.,
when they describe interrogative contexts that, for instance, can give rise
to question order eﬀects, as commonly observed in social and behavioral re-
search [43–45]. In other terms, as [46] recently emphasized, an experimental
situation where both question order eﬀects and response replicability are
present cannot be modelized by the standard quantum formalism.
What about the GTR-model? Is it able to jointly describe (i.e., jointly
model) question order eﬀects and response replicability? The answer is
clearly aﬃrmative, as for this it is suﬃcient to allow the probability den-
sity ρ, describing the mind aspect of a respondent in relation to a given
interrogation, to change in such a way that if the measurement is repeated,
following an intermediary measurement, the same answer will be obtained
with certainty. In Fig. 5 we give an example of how the probability densities
ρA and ρB characterizing two two-outcome measurements A and B have to
change, to guarantee response replicability.
Note that the elastic bands represented in Fig. 5 are locally uniformly
breakable, i.e., uniformly breakable on an interior segment (represented in
grey color in the ﬁgure) and unbreakable everywhere else (black color in

127
the ﬁgure). Note also that the speciﬁc structure of these elastics is pre-
cisely that required to model in an exact way the data obtained in ex-
periments where subjects were asked to answer the following two incom-
patible “yes-no” questions, producing some typical question order eﬀects
[6,16,47]: “Do you generally think Bill Clinton is honest and trustworthy?”
(A-measurement) and “Do you generally think Al Gore is honest and trust-
worthy?” (B-measurement). We shall not give here the details of this exact
modelization, for which we refer the interested reader to [39].
8.2. Non-Hilbertian order eﬀects
Another example of the insuﬃciency of the quantum formalism in the mod-
eling of psychological experiments is question order eﬀects. This statement
may appear a bit surprising, as these eﬀects are considered by many au-
thors to be among the most successful quantitative predictions of quantum
theory in social and behavioral sciences. But this depends on the perspec-
tive that is taken on the whole issue. To explain what we mean, we start by
considering an equality originally derived by [48] and rediscovered by [16],
which we have discussed already in Sec. 7.2. It is very simple to derive:
for this, we denote Pa and Pb two orthogonal projection operators acting
on some Hilbert space H, representing two properties a and b of the en-
tity under study. We also consider the complementary projection operators
P¯a = I−Pa and P¯b = I−Pb, describing the orthocomplementary properties
¯a and ¯b, and deﬁne the following self-adjoint operator:
Q ≡PbPaPb −PaPbPa + P¯bP¯aP¯b −P¯aP¯bP¯a.
(22)
Taking its average q ≡Tr QD, over an arbitrary state D (which can also be a
density matrix), and considering that the probability P(ba|D) of observing,
in a sequence, ﬁrst property b then property a, is described in quantum
physics by the average [6]: P(ba|D) = Tr PbPaPbD, and similarly for the
other sequential (i.e., conditional) probabilities, then using the additivity
of the trace, we can write:
q = [P(ba|D) −P(ab|D)] + [P(¯b¯a|D) −P(¯a¯b|D)],
(23)
which apart from the diﬀerent notation is precisely (12). The so-called QQ-
equality consists in observing that, for whatever initial state D, q = 0 [6,16].
This can be easily proven by replacing P¯a = I −Pa and P¯b = I −Pb into
(22), then developing the various terms and see that most of them simplify,
so that one is left with the equality Q = (P 2
b −Pb) −(P 2
a −Pa). Using the

128
Fig. 5.
A sequence of three two-outcome measurements, A, B and then again A, in the
GTR-model. Figure (a) represents the situation before measurement A. The represen-
tative point particle is located somewhere at the surface of the sphere, outside of the
plane of the two elastic bands describing the two (incompatible) measurements A and
B, characterized by the non-uniform probability distributions ρA and ρB, respectively.
The black parts of the elastics are unbreakable, whereas their grey parts are uniformly
breakable. Following the ﬁrst A-measurement, it is here assumed that the indetermin-
istic breaking of the elastic has produced outcome a, as indicated in Figure (b). Then,
in the second B-measurement, it is assumed that the transition a →b has occurred,
as well as the corresponding membrane’s change ρA →ρ′
A, as illustrated in Figure (c).
The outcome a of the third A-measurement, described in Figure (d), is then certain in
advance, in accordance with the hypothesis of replicability, and the b →a deterministic
transition is also associated with the change ρB →ρ′
B of the B-elastic. Subsequent B-
measurements and/or A-measurements will then not change anymore the nature of the
elastic bands, and state transitions will become perfectly deterministic.
idempotency of the orthogonal projection operators, we thus have Q = 0,
and therefore also q = 0, for whatever state D.

129
The condition q = 0 is generally considered to be a good test of the
Hilbertian character of the probabilities involved in an experiment. How-
ever, as emphasized in Sec. 7.2, it can also be obeyed by non-Hilbertian
models. This because what we have called the relative indeterminism con-
tribution and the relative asymmetry contribution to q, can also mutually
compensate, whereas these contributions need to be both zero in a Hilber-
tian model. But as we have seen, even when these contributions are both
zero, the model can still be non-Hilbertian.
This departure from the Hilbertian model can be better appreciated by
performing a detailed analysis of data like the Clinton/Gore ones we have
mentioned in the previous section. Indeed, although the associated proba-
bilities appear to almost obey the q = 0 condition, not only there are no
reasons to expect that such condition would be exactly obeyed in the ideal
limit of an inﬁnite number of participants, but also, and more important,
when these probabilities are described using the GTR-model, one immedi-
ately sees that their structure is highly non-Hilbertian. This because the
breakable elastic bands that are needed to exactly model the data are very
diﬀerent from the globally uniformly breakable structures that are typical
of quantum measurements. For example, the elastics depicted in Fig. 5 (a)
are precisely those required to generate the Clinton/Gore probabilities, and
they are manifestly non-uniform and non-symmetric, i.e., non-Bornian (see
also the general discussion in [39], where additional quantum identities are
derived and shown to be strongly violated by the Clinton/Gore data, and
similar ones).
8.3. Individual and collective minds
To provide another argument as to why the standard quantum formalism
cannot be considered to be suﬃcient to describe typical psychological mea-
surements, let us come back for a moment to the results of Sec. 6. We have
shown that when diﬀerent measurements, all having the same outcomes,
are averaged out, in what we have called a universal average, one recov-
ers the Born rule, provided the state space is Hilbertian. A physicists may
rightly ask to what exactly these diﬀerent measurements do correspond.
Indeed, when a same measurement is performed a number of times in a
physics laboratory, in order to obtain a suﬃciently rich statistics of data,
and deduce some robust experimental probabilities, the quantum entity is
simply prepared every time in the same state, measured by means of the
same instrument, in a large number of equivalent runs of the experiment.
If the interpretation of a quantum measurement as a universal measure-
ments is correct also for physics, this would mean that even though at each

130
run of the measurement the same apparatus is used, the latter would nev-
ertheless each time select an outcome in a diﬀerent way, i.e., according to
a diﬀerent ρ-membrane, but since the experimenter would not know which
ρ is each time actualized by the apparatus, all these outcomes generated
by the diﬀerent membranes would be averaged out in the ﬁnal statistics,
yielding an eﬀective description in terms of a uniform membrane, which is
the Born rule.
The existence of the hidden-membranes and the hidden-interactions as-
sociated with their possible breaking points remains of course hypothetical
for the time being in physics, considering that we don’t have any direct
access to such non-spatial (or pre-spatial) layer of our physical reality, from
our limited Euclidean theater [19]. This of course does not mean that clev-
erly designed experiments wouldn’t be able in future to reveal these hidden
and multidimensional dynamical structures, but for the time being they
only remain a compelling theoretical explanation about how the quantum
mechanical Born rule can emerge, as a ﬁrst order approximation, from a
substratum of more general probabilistic theories.
What is the situation in psychological measurements? The main dif-
ference is that in that ambit there is an aspect of the measurements that,
contrary to quantum measurements in physics laboratories, is not at all hid-
den. Indeed, in a typical psychological measurement the data are obtained
from a number of diﬀerent participants, for instance about a thousand in
the previously mentioned Clinton/Gore experiment. And since these par-
ticipants are all subjected to the same questions, in relation to a conceptual
entity presented to them in the same intersubjective initial state, each par-
ticipant in the measurement is the manifestation of a diﬀerent ρ-membrane,
corresponding to that speciﬁc mind aspect characterizing the way each of
them, diﬀerent from all the others, will select one of the available answers.
In other terms, if the process of actualization of potential ρ remains
totally hidden (and also hypothetical for the time being) in physics labora-
tories, it is instead a perfectly manifest element of reality in psychological
measurements. Considering however that the number n of participants is
necessarily ﬁnite, and in many measurements not necessarily large, it can
be expected that in some situations the obtained average will not be well
approximated by a universal one, and therefore the ﬁnal probability model
will not be Hilbertian. To put it in a diﬀerent way, the abstract “collective
mind” of the participants may not be representative of a “pure quantum
mind,” if some “ways of choosing an outcome” are not actualizable, because
the statistical sample of the available ρ-membranes is too small.

131
It is however important to emphasize that when we limit our considera-
tions to a single measurement situation, then a Hilbert space probabilistic
model, or a Kolmogorovian model, will always be suﬃcient to ﬁt the exper-
imental data, as these two models are “universal probabilistic machines,”
capable of representing all possible probabilities appearing in nature, in a
single measurement context [17,49]. But when we look for a consistent rep-
resentation for diﬀerent non-compatible measurements, this is where clas-
sical probabilities become totally inadequate, and pure quantum (Bornian)
probabilities become too speciﬁc to describe all possible experimental situ-
ations.
The situation becomes even more problematic when we try not only
to devise a consistent model for the description of a collection of diﬀer-
ent measurements (diﬀerent questions) associated with diﬀerent outcomes
(diﬀerent answers), but when we also consider the possibility of combin-
ing these diﬀerent measurements and their outcomes in a sequential way.
This introduces an additional diﬃculty, which is precisely the problem of
distinguishing the individual level from the collective one. Indeed, when
psychologists consider sequential measurements, to highlight possible ques-
tion order eﬀects, it is not the abstract collective mind that is subjected
to the sequence of measurements, in diﬀerent orders, but each one of the
individual minds of the participants. In other terms, the sequence of mea-
surements is ﬁrst performed at the individual level (each participant is
asked to answer two questions in a given succession), then an average of
their obtained answer is considered.
Of course, the reason why an overall question order eﬀect is observed is
because the eﬀect manifests at the individual level, and is then transferred
from the individual to the collective level, in the ﬁnal statistics of outcomes.
If we ask the ﬁrst question to an individual, then the second question to
another individual, no order eﬀects would be observed (and the same holds
true for response replicability eﬀects). It is of course essential that a same
individual in the sample of respondents replies to the two questions in a
given order, for the eﬀect to manifest, being it generated at the level of the
individual mind and not of the collective one.
All we are saying is of course perfectly evident, but it is important not to
mix these two diﬀerent levels: the individual and the collective. Let us con-
sider the previously mentioned Clinton/Gore example to further clarify our
point. Imagine for a moment that we have found a way to perfectly clone
the i-th individual participating in the opinion pool. If we repeat many
times the “A then B” and the “B then A” sequential measurements, using

132
these i-clones (we can only use each clone once, because of response replica-
bility), then calculate the relative frequencies of the observed outcomes and
use the GTR-model to ﬁt the data, we would ﬁnd two elastic bands with
a speciﬁc orientation in the Bloch sphere, characterized by some generally
non-uniform probability densities ρ(i)
A and ρ(i)
B . This is the description at
the individual level.
When we consider the responses obtained from all the n diﬀerent indi-
viduals participating in the pool, the probabilities we end up calculating
are equivalent to a uniform average over the diﬀerent sequential probabili-
ties that would have been generated by these i-clones, for i = 1, . . . , n, i.e.,
the probabilities we can deduce from the associated ρ(i)
A - and ρ(i)
B -elastics.
These overall probabilities can in turn be modeled by using also two ef-
fective elastic bands, characterized by some probability densities ρA and
ρB and a speciﬁc orientation. So, at the formal level, the abstract collec-
tive mind is described as if it was an individual mind, also performing the
sequential measurements, according to its speciﬁc “forma mentis.”
However, and this is the subtle point we want to clarify with the present
discussion, the collective mind does not really perform a sequential mea-
surement. To see this, consider the following sequential measurement per-
formed “at the collective level.” We ﬁrst ask question A (“Do you generally
think Bill Clinton is honest and trustworthy?”), and to obtain an answer
we randomly select one of the participants, ask the question and collect the
answer. Then, we ask question B (“Do you generally think Al Gore is hon-
est and trustworthy?”) and to obtain the answer we again randomly select
one of the participants, ask the question and collect the answer. Similarly,
we can perform the same sequential process in reversed order, by asking
ﬁrst B and then A. Now, apart the very special circumstance where the
same participant would be selected in one or both of the above sequences
(a possibility whose probability tends to zero as the number of participants
increases), no order eﬀects will be observed in this way. In other terms, at
the collective level, if the participants are randomly chosen at each mea-
surement, no order eﬀects will be observed, and of course the same remains
true for the response replicability eﬀects.
This is because if we randomly chose a new participant every time that
we ask a question, all memory eﬀects will be destroyed, and all measure-
ments will become compatible. At the individual level, measurements are
generally incompatible because the answer given to a ﬁrst measurement
remains in the ﬁeld of consciousness of the respondent, changing in this
way the state of the conceptual entity when a second question is asked. For

133
example, in the Clinton/Gore experiment, the entity which is measured by
each individual mind is the conceptual entity Honesty and trustworthiness
(which for brevity, we shall simply denote Honesty).
Prior to a measurement, we can consider that such entity is in its
“ground” (most neutral) state, this being true for all the respondents. At
the individual level, when performing measurement A, a subject is asked
if s/he thinks Clinton is honest. Considering this as a measurement of the
conceptual entity Honesty, the interrogation can be rephrased as follows:
“What best represents Honesty, between the two possibilities: Clinton is
honest and Clinton is not honest?” It is also worth observing that the out-
comes Clinton is honest and Clinton is not honest are here to be considered
as “excited states” of the conceptual entity Honesty.
Now, when a subject is submitted to the A-measurement, the outcome
(i.e., the answer) will generally remain in her/his ﬁeld of consciousness when
the same subject is submitted to the subsequent B-measurement, corre-
sponding to the question “Do you generally think Al Gore is honest?” This
means that when the B-measurement is performed immediately after A, the
measured conceptual entity will not anymore be in its ground state, but in
the excited state corresponding to the outcome of the A-measurement. If,
say, the answer to the A-interrogation is “yes,” that is, “Clinton is honest,”
the eﬀective subsequent B-measurement will be: “What best represents
Clinton is honest between the two possibilities: ‘Gore is honest and Gore
is not honest?”
In other terms, the short term memory of a participant is what al-
lows her/him to keep track of the change of the state of the conceptual
entity under consideration, in a sequence of diﬀerent measurements, and
this memory eﬀect, manifesting at the individual level, is what in the end
produces the order (and replicability) eﬀects. This memory eﬀect would of
course be lost at the collective level, if respondents are selected in a random
way at each measurement in a sequence. It could however be restored if the
experimental protocol would be so designed to keep track of the obtained
answer, and use them as a new input state when a successive measurement
is performed, on a new randomly chosen subject.
Having elucidated this diﬀerence between the individual and collective
levels, we want now explain how the averaging procedure, when performed
on sequential measurements operated at the individual level, can generate
a symmetry breaking process that can also be held in part responsible for
the departure of the experimental probabilities from Hilbertian-like sym-
metries, like for instance that expressed by the QQ-equality. For this, we

134
consider the simple situation of a collective mind formed by only two indi-
viduals and we assume that each of them, when subjected to a sequence of
two two-outcome measurements A and B, will use the same locally uniform
and symmetric probability density, in both measurements. In other terms,
we assume that ρ(i)
A = ρ(i)
B =
1
2ϵi χ[−ϵi,ϵi], where the index i = 1, 2, denotes
the individual subject. Thus, we are here in a situation where both the
relative indeterminism contribution and the relative asymmetry contribu-
tion are zero and the symmetry expressed by the QQ-equality is obeyed. In
other terms, even though the measurements are not purely quantum, they
still obey the QQ-equality that is also obeyed by pure quantum systems,
and in that sense (but only in that sense) the situation can be considered
to be, at the individual level, close to a pure quantum situation.
What happens then when we consider a uniform average over these
two participants? To see this, we denote a and −a the two outcomes of
measurement A, and b and −b those of measurement B, as represented in
the Bloch sphere. According to (20), if we assume that the angle θ between
the two elastic bands (cos θ = a · b) is such that cos θ < ϵi, i = 1, 2, and
that the angle θA between the unit vector x describing the initial state and
outcome a (cos θA = x · a) is such that cos θA < ϵi, i = 1, 2, then for the
sequence of outcomes “a then b” we have the i-individual probability:
P (i)(→a →−b|x) = P (i)(x →a)P (i)(a →b)
= 1
2(1 + 1
ϵi
cos θA)1
2(1 + 1
ϵi
cos θ)
= 1
4[1 + 1
ϵi
(cos θ + cos θA) + 1
ϵ2
i
cos θ cos θA]. (24)
If now we consider the uniform average: P(→a →−b|x) ≡1
2[P (1)(→a →
−b|x) + P (2)(→a →−b|x)], we obtain:
P(→a →−b|x) = 1
4

1 + ϵ1 + ϵ2
2ϵ1ϵ2
(cos θ + cos θA) + ϵ2
1 + ϵ2
2
2ϵ2
1ϵ2
2
cos θ cos θA

.
(25)
We observe that (25) can be written in the form (24) only if (ϵ1 +ϵ2)2 =
2(ϵ2
1 + ϵ2
2), or (ϵ1 −ϵ2)2 = 0, i.e., if ϵ1 = ϵ2. But since by hypothesis
ϵ1 ̸= ϵ2, we immediately see that the eﬀective elastic bands describing
the two measurements from the viewpoint of the “collective mind” (here
just formed by two individuals), not only they are not anymore the same,
but also they are not anymore symmetric (for a speciﬁc calculation, see
[39]). Also, the obtained averaged probabilities will generally violate the
QQ-quality. In other terms, the averaging procedure induces a breaking

135
of possible symmetries in the structure of the probabilities, and a clear
departure from the Hilbertian model.
A remark is in order. In Sec. 6, we have explained that when all possible
membranes (i.e., all possible ways of choosing an outcome) are allowed to
be actualized in a single (non-sequential) measurement context (in what we
have called a universal average, or universal measurement), the averaged
probabilities are then described by an eﬀective uniform membrane, equiva-
lent to the Born rule, when the state space is considered to be Hilbertian.
As we have just seen, the process of averaging over diﬀerent membranes
becomes much more involved when we deal with sequential measurements.
Certainly, when considering a ﬁnite number of participants (the actual sit-
uation in real experiments), not all behaving as “Bornian clones,” the ﬁnal
statistics will be non-Hilbertian. However, it remains an open question to
determine what would be the probability model of a ‘universal sequential
measurement,’ i.e., of an average over sequential measurements when all
possible probability densities are included in the calculation. We plan to
come back to this interesting question in future works.
9. Concluding remarks
In the present work we have reviewed and further illustrated some of the
results we have recently obtained in [17–20,28,37,39,50], to emphasize the
interest and role played by the GTR-model (and the associated hidden-
measurement approach) in the description of very general measurement
situations, extending beyond the pure classical and pure quantum ones.
As we have explained, these more general situations, and the associated
probability models, are certainly relevant in the description of both physical
and psychological experimental situations.
Classical
(Kolmogorovian)
probabilities
generally
describe
“static
propositions,” i.e., our lack of knowledge about the actual elements of re-
ality that are present in the system under study. On the other hand, quan-
tum probabilities generally describe “dynamic propositions,” i.e., our lack
of knowledge about processes of actualization of potential properties (if we
exclude the special situations of measurements performed on eigenstates).
Somehow in between these two descriptions, we can consider mixed mea-
surements, where both static and dynamic logics, discovery and creation
processes, actuality and potentiality, determinism and indeterminism, play
an equivalent role. These more general, hybrid contexts, cannot be described
using the too limited Hilbertian or Kolmogorovian models, but require more
general structures.

136
In that respect, it is important to realize that our reality, because of its
extreme complexity, is able to manifest all sorts of mixtures of creation and
discovery processes, also at a fundamental level. Therefore, in our investi-
gations we need to be equipped with probabilistic models that are able to
cope with such complexity, beyond the very speciﬁc classical and quantum
structures. This of course does not mean that, in certain ambits, one will
not try to highlight some possible remarkable symmetries, but to correctly
describe them we certainly need a general enough theoretical approach, as
only in this way we can hope to understand the full logic behind them.
The example of the QQ-equality is in that sense paradigmatic: we know
that the equality is exactly obeyed by pure Hilbertian models, but we have
seen it can also be obeyed by a class of non-Hilbertian models, which are
precisely those describing the question order eﬀect in “opinion pool” psy-
chological measurements. This means that if we want to understand the
reasons behind these observed regularities, we cannot do so from the lim-
ited Hilbertian viewpoint, but need a more general approach. One of the
scope of the present article was to point out that the GTR-model precisely
provides such needed more general approach.
Actually, we think that the GTR-model does more than this. Indeed,
if it is correct to say that the Kolmogorovian model is a universal model
for the description of situations governed by “static information,” certainly
we cannot say that the Hilbertian model, equipped with the Born rule,
is a universal model for situations governed by (non-Boolean) “dynamic
information,” where also lack of knowledge about processes of actualization
of potential properties is considered. This not only because the state space
is Hilbertian, which may be a too severe constraint in certain situations, but
also because very speciﬁc collapsing membranes are considered in quantum
mechanics: the uniform ones. When all possible structures of membranes
and state spaces are allowed, one certainly obtains the most general possible
probabilistic description, i.e., a universal model for the description of both
static and dynamic situations, which we have called the GTR-model.
As our simple coin example illustrates, the necessity of using the more
general GTR-model already manifests when considering experimental situ-
ations involving macroscopic objects. This because classical properties, and
the associated classical probabilities, are insuﬃcient to describe all possible
observations. In fact, macroscopic objects possess more physical properties
than those usually accounted for by classical mechanics, like for instance
the “upper face” property of a coin, or of a die [25]. And when these non-
ordinary properties are considered, and tested in an operational way, not

137
only the classical Kolmogorovian probabilities become inadequate, but the
Hilbertian (Bornian) ones as well. On the other hand, the universality of the
GTR-model allows to properly handle these non-ordinary measurement sit-
uations, and we cannot exclude that its structural richness will not also be
instrumental in the description of anomalies manifesting in measurements
with elementary physical entities (see for instance [51] for an example of
possible anomalies in the ambit of coincidence measurements).
However, if the interest of the GTR-model for elementary (microscopic)
physical systems remains to be evaluated (apart of course its theoretical
interest in deriving and explaining the Born rule as a universal average),
it is already a necessary tool for properly modeling human cognition, as
we have illustrated in this work, considering that the data already in our
possession cannot be exactly ﬁtted by means of classical and Hilbertian
models. We therefore hope that more scientists will decide to adopt it with
advantage, both conceptually and as a mathematical instrument, to explore
the ubiquitous quantum-like (but not necessarily pure quantum) structures.
References
1. Kolmogoroﬀ, A. N. (1933). Grundbegriﬀe der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung.
Berlin: Springer.
2. Aerts, D. (1998). The entity and modern physics: the creation discovery view
of reality. In E. Castellani (Ed.), Interpreting Bodies: Classical and Quantum
Objects in Modern Physics (pp. 223–257). Princeton: Princeton Unversity
Press.
3. Sassoli de Bianchi, M. (2013a). Using simple elastic bands to explain quantum
mechanics: a conceptual review of two of Aerts’ machine-models. Central
European Journal of Physics 11, 147–161.
4. Kitto, K. (2008). Why Quantum Theory? In Bruza, P. and Lawless, W.
and van Rijsbergen, C. and Sofge, D. and Coecke, B. and Clark, S., Eds.
Proceedings Second Quantum Interaction Symposium, 11–18, Oxford.
5. Khrennikov, A. (2010). Ubiquitos Quantum Structure: From Psychology to
Finance. New York: Springer.
6. Busemeyer, J. R. & Bruza, P. D. (2012). Quantum Models of Cognition and
Decision. New York: Cambridge University Press.
7. Aerts, D., Broekaert, J., Gabora, L. and Sozzo, S. (2013a). Quantum struc-
ture and human thought. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 36, 274–276.
8. Aerts, D., Gabora, L. & Sozzo, S. (2013b). Concepts and Their Dynamics:
A Quantum-Theoretic Modeling of Human Thought. Topics in Cognitive
Sciences 5, 737–772.
9. Pothos, E. M. & Busemeyer, J. R. (2013). Can quantum probability provide
a new direction for cognitive modeling? Behavioral and Brain Sciences B 36,
255–274.
10. Wang, Z., Busemeyer, J. R., Atmanspacher, H. & Pothos, E. M. (2013). The

138
potential of using quantum theory to build models of cognition. Topics in
Cognitive Science 5(4), 672–688.
11. Blutner, R., beim Graben, P. (2014). Descriptive and Foundational Aspects
of Quantum Cognition. arXiv:1410.3961 [q-bio.NC].
12. Aerts, D., Sozzo, S. & Veloz T. (2015).A New Fundamental Evidence
of Non-Classical Structure in the Combination of Natural Concepts.
arXiv:1505.04981 [cs.AI].
13. Aerts, D., Aerts, S., Broekaert, J. & Gabora, L. (2000). The violation of Bell
inequalities in the macroworld. Foundations of Physics 30, 1387–1414.
14. Aerts, D. & Sozzo, S. (2011). Quantum structure in cognition. Why and how
concepts are entangled. Quantum Interaction. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 7052, 116–127.
15. Aerts, D. & Sozzo, S. (2015). Quantum Structure in Cognition, Origins, De-
velopments, Successes and Expectations. arXiv:1503.02994 [cs.AI].
16. Wang, Z., Busemeyer, J. R. (2013). A quantum question order model sup-
ported by empirical tests of an a priori and precise prediction. Top Cogn Sci
5(4), 689–710.
17. Aerts, D. & Sassoli de Bianchi M. (2015a). The unreasonable success of quan-
tum probability I. Quantum measurements as uniform ﬂuctuations. Journal
Mathematical Psychology 67, 51–75.
18. Aerts, D. & Sassoli de Bianchi M. (2015b). The unreasonable success of
quantum probability II. Journal Mathematical Psychology 67, 76–90.
19. Aerts, D. & Sassoli de Bianchi M. (2014a). The Extended Bloch Represen-
tation of Quantum Mechanics and the Hidden-Measurement Solution to the
Measurement Problem. Annals of Physics 351, 975–1025.
20. Aerts, D. & Sassoli de Bianchi M. (2015c). Many-Measurements or Many-
Worlds? A Dialogue. Foundations of Science 20, 399–427.
21. Murray, D. B. and Teare S. W. (1993). Probability of a tossed coin landing
on edge. Phys. Rev. E 48, 2547.
22. Aerts, D (1986). A possible explanation for the probabilities of quantum
mechanics. Journal of Mathematical Physics 27, 202–210.
23. Aerts, D. & Sozzo, S. (2014a). Entanglement zoo I: Foundational and struc-
tural aspects. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 8369, 84–96.
24. Aerts, D. and Sozzo, S. (2014b). Entanglement zoo II: Examples in physics
and cognition. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 8369, 97–109.
25. Sassoli de Bianchi, M. (2013b). Quantum dice. Annals of Physics 336, 56–75.
26. Sassoli de Bianchi, M. (2014). A remark on the role of indeterminism and
non-locality in the violation of Bell’s inequality. Annals of Physics 342, 133–
142.
27. Shackel, N. (2007). Bertrand’s Paradox and the Principle of Indiﬀerence.
Philosophy of Science 74, 150–175.
28. Aerts, D. & Sassoli de Bianchi M. (2014b). Solving the hard problem of
Bertrand’s paradox. J. Math. Phys. 55, 083503.
29. Bloch, F. (1956). Nuclear induction. Phys. Rev. 70, 460–474.
30. Arvind, Mallesh, K. S. & Mukunda, N. (1997). A generalized Pancharatnam
geometric phase formula for three-level quantum systems. J. Phys. A 30,
2417.

139
31. Kimura, G. (2003). The Bloch Vector for N-Level Systems. Phys. Lett. A
314, 339.
32. Byrd, M. S. & Khaneja, N. (2003). Characterization of the positivity of the
density matrix in terms of the coherence vector representation. Phys. Rev. A
68, 062322.
33. Kimura, G. & Kossakowski, A (2005). The Bloch-vector space for N-level
systems – the spherical-coordinate point of view. Open Sys. Information Dyn.
12, 207.
34. Bengtsson, I. & ˙Zyczkowski, K. (2006). Geometry of quantum states: An
introduction to quantum entanglement, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
35. Bengtsson, I. & ˙Zyczkowski, K. (2013). Geometry of the Set of Mixed Quan-
tum States: An Apophatic Approach. In: Geometric Methods in Physics,
XXX Workshop 2011, Trends in Mathematics, Springer, 175–197.
36. Schlosshauer, M. (2005). Decoherence, the measurement problem, and inter-
pretations of quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 76, 1267–1305.
37. Aerts, D. & Sassoli de Bianchi M. (2015d). The Extended Bloch Represen-
tation of Quantum Mechanics. Explaining Superposition, Interference and
Entanglement. arXiv:1504.04781 [quant-ph].
38. Wang, Z., Sollowaya, T., Shiﬀrinb, R. M. & Busemeyer, J. R. (2014). Con-
text eﬀects produced by question orders reveal quantum nature of human
judgments. PNAS 111, 9431–9436.
39. Aerts, D. & Sassoli de Bianchi M. (2015e). Beyond-quantum modeling of
question order eﬀects and response replicability in psychological measure-
ments. arXiv:1508.03686 [cs.AI].
40. Blutner, R., beim Graben, P. (2015). Quantum cognition and bounded ra-
tionality. Synthese, DOI: 10.1007/s11229-015-0928-5.
41. Aerts, D. & Gabora, L. (2005a). A theory of concepts and their combinations
I: The structure of the sets of contexts and properties. Kybernetes 34, 167–
191.
42. Aerts, D. & Gabora, L. (2005b). A theory of concepts and their combinations
II: A Hilbert space representation. Kybernetes 34, 192–221.
43. Sudman, S., & Bradburn, N. M. (1974). Response eﬀects in surveys. Chicago:
Aldine.
44. Schuman, H., & Presser, S. (1981). Questions and answers in attitude surveys:
Experiments on question form, wording, and content. New York: Academic
Press.
45. Tourangeau, R., Rips, L. J., & Rasinski, K. A. (2000). The psychology of
survey response. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
46. Khrennikov, A., Basieva, I., Dzhafarov, E. N., Busemeyer, J. R. (2014). Quan-
tum models for psychological measurements: an unsolved problem. PLoS
ONE 9(10), e110909.
47. Moore, D. W. (2002). Measuring new types of question-order eﬀects: additive
and subtractive. Public Opinion Quarterly 66, 80–91.
48. Niestegge, G. (2008). An approach to quantum mechanics via conditional
probabilities. Foundations of Physics 38, 241–256.

140
49. Aerts, D. & Sozzo, S. (2012a). Entanglement of conceptual entities in Quan-
tum Model Theory (QMod). Quantum Interaction. Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science 7620, 114–125.
50. Aerts, D. & Sassoli de Bianchi M. (2015f). Do spins have directions? Soft
Computing. DOI: 10.1007/s00500-015-1913-0.
51. Adenier, G. & Khrennikov, A. Y. Is the fair sampling assumption supported
by EPR experiments? J. Phys. A 40, 131–141.

141
‘PROBABILISTIC KNOWLEDGE’ AS ‘OBJECTIVE
KNOWLEDGE’ IN QUANTUM MECHANICS:
POTENTIAL IMMANENT POWERS
INSTEAD OF ACTUAL PROPERTIES
Christian de Ronde
CONICET, Buenos Aires University - Argentina
Center Leo Apostel and Foundations of the Exact Sciences
Brussels Free University - Belgium
E-mail: cderonde@ vub. ac. be
In classical physics, probabilistic or statistical knowledge has been always re-
lated to ignorance or inaccurate subjective knowledge about an actual state
of aﬀairs. This idea has been extended to quantum mechanics through a com-
pletely incoherent interpretation of the Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein statis-
tics in terms of “strange” quantum particles. This interpretation, naturalized
through a widespread “way of speaking” in the physics community, contradicts
Born’s physical account of Ψ as a “probability wave” which provides statistical
information about outcomes that, in fact, cannot be interpreted in terms of
‘ignorance about an actual state of aﬀairs’. In the present paper we discuss
how the metaphysics of actuality has played an essential role in limiting the
possibilities of understating things diﬀerently. We propose instead a metaphys-
ical scheme in terms of immanent powers with deﬁnite potentia which allows us
to consider quantum probability in a new light, namely, as providing objective
knowledge about a potential state of aﬀairs.
Keywords: Quantum probability, objectivity, immanent powers, potentia.
1. Reality, Metaphysics and Knowledge
The term “metaphysics” comprises a series of many diﬀerent deﬁnitions.
The most known is the one proposed by Aristotle who deﬁned it as a theory
of “being qua being” [Met. 1003a20], a theory about what it means or im-
plies to “be” in its diﬀerent senses. Ever since, metaphysics and its problems
have remained at the center of debates in western philosophical thought.
But while for some, it is considered as a supreme form of knowledge, for
others, it remains an occupation constituted by unfruitful discussions and
pseudoproblems. One of the very ﬁrst problems discussed in metaphysical

142
terms is the famous problem of motion, which goes back to pre-socratic phi-
losophy and the tension between the Heraclitean and Parmenidean schools
of thought. In fact, it was Plato and Aristotle who created an opposition
between Heraclitus, who embraced the doctrine of permanent motion and
becoming in the world; and Parmenides, who taught the non-existence of
motion and change in reality, reality being absolutely one and determined.
As remarked by Verelst and Coecke:
The contradicting conclusions deriving from pre-Socratic philoso-
phy were of a major concern to Plato and Aristotle, because they
challenged the existence of truth and certainty about the world and
therefore about the actions of human beings in it. This uncertainty
had given rise to a philosophical discipline, Sophism, that simply
denied any relation between reality and what we say about it ([45],
Theaetetus, 42, 152(d,e)). Its subjectivism stems from a radical em-
piricism, which holds that things are for me as I perceive them. But
since reality as we perceive it is always in a process of permanent
change this implies, as Plato points out in the Theaetetus, also the
non-existence of stable, individual things in the world. [46, p. 44]
Metaphysics introduced a fundamental idea according to which it was
possible to acquire knowledge of reality and existence through a system of
principles, a theory. One of the ﬁrst such metaphysical systems, which still
today plays a major role in our understanding of the world around us is
that proposed by Aristotle through his logical and ontological principles:
the Principle of Existence (PE), the Principle of Non-Contradiction (PNC)
and the of Principle Identity (PI). As Verelst and Coecke make the point:
The three fundamental principles of classical (Aristotelian) logic:
the existence of objects of knowledge, the principle of contradiction
and the principle of identity, all correspond to a fundamental as-
pect of his ontology. This is exempliﬁed in the three possible usages
of the verb ‘to be’: existential, predicative, and identical. The Aris-
totelian syllogism always starts with the aﬃrmation of existence:
something is. The principle of contradiction then concerns the way
one can speak (predicate) validly about this existing object, i.e.
about the true and falsehood of its having properties, not about its
being in existence. The principle of identity states that the entity is
identical to itself at any moment (a=a), thus granting the stability
necessary to name (identify) it. [46, p. 44]

143
Here we see the fundamental relation between logic and metaphysics. Aris-
totle had developed a metaphysical scheme in which, through the notions
of actuality and potentiality, he was able to articulate both the Heraclitean
and the Eleatic metaphysical schools of thought. On the one hand, po-
tentiality constrained the undetermined, contradictory and non-individual
realm of existence, on the other, the mode of being of actuality was de-
termined through PE, PNC and PI. Through these principles the notion
of entity was capable of unifying, of totalizing in terms of a “sameness”,
creating certain stability for knowledge to be possible. But even though
Aristotle claimed that Being is said in many ways presenting at ﬁrst both
actual and potential realms as ontologically equivalent, from chapter 6 of
book Θ of Metaphysics, he seems to place actuality in the central axis of
his architectonic, relegating potentiality to a mere supplementary role.a
Both actuality and potentiality were part of a metaphysical represen-
tation and understood as characterizing modes of existence independent of
observation. This is the way through which metaphysical thought was able
to go beyond the hic et nunc, creating a world beyond the world, a world
of concepts and representations. Such representation or transcendent de-
scription of the world is considered by many as the origin of metaphysical
thought itself.b And this is the reason why, as noticed by Edwin Burtt [7,
p. 224]: “[...] there is no escape from metaphysics, that is, from the ﬁnal im-
plications of any proposition or set of propositions. The only way to avoid
becoming a metaphysician is to say nothing.”
2. Classical Physics: Actual Properties and States of Aﬀairs
The importance of potentiality, which was ﬁrst placed by Aristotle in equal
footing to actuality as a mode of existence, was soon diminished in the
history of western thought. As we have seen above, it could be argued that
the seed of this move was already present in the Aristotelian architectonic,
whose focus was clearly placed in the actual realm. The realm of potential-
ity, as a diﬀerent (ontological) mode of the being was neglected becoming
aAristotle argues: “We have distinguished the various senses of ‘prior’, and it is clear
that actuality is prior to potentiality. [...] For the action is the end, and the actuality
is the action. Therefore even the word ‘actuality’ is derived from ‘action’, and points to
the fulﬁllment.” [1050a17-1050a23] Aristotle then continues to provide arguments in this
line which show “[t]hat the good actuality is better and more valuable than the good
potentiality.” [1051a4-1051a17]
bThe need of metaphysical principles in order to account for physical experience has
been beautifully exposed by Borges in a story called Funes the Memorious.

144
not more than mere (logical) possibility, a teleological process of fulﬁllment.
In relation to the development of physics, the focus and preeminence was
also given to actuality. The 17th century division between res cogitans and
res extensa played in this respect an important role separating very clearly
the realms of actuality and potentiality. The philosophy which was devel-
oped after Descartes kept res cogitans (thought) and res extensa (entities as
acquired by the senses) as separated realms.c As remarked by Heisenberg
[29, p. 73]: “Descartes knew the undisputable necessity of the connection,
but philosophy and natural science in the following period developed on the
basis of the polarity between the ‘res cogitans’ and the ‘res extensa’, and
natural science concentrated its interest on the ‘res extensa’.” This mate-
rialistic conception of science based itself on the main idea that extended
things exist as being deﬁnite, that is, in the actual realm of existence. With
modern science the actualist Megarian path was recovered and potentiality
dismissed as a problematic and unwanted guest. The transformation from
medieval to modern science coincides with the abolition of Aristotelian hile-
morphic metaphysical scheme —in terms of potentiality and actuality— as
the foundation of knowledge. However, the metaphysical scheme grounded
on his logic still remained the basis for correct reasoning. As Verelst and
Coecke remark:
Dropping Aristotelian metaphysics, while at the same time contin-
uing to use Aristotelian logic as an empty ‘reasoning apparatus’
implies therefore loosing the possibility to account for change and
motion in whatever description of the world that is based on it.
The fact that Aristotelian logic transformed during the twentieth
century into diﬀerent formal, axiomatic logical systems used in to-
day’s philosophy and science doesn’t really matter, because the
fundamental principle, and therefore the fundamental ontology, re-
mained the same ([40], p. xix). This ‘emptied’ logic actually con-
tains an Eleatic ontology, that allows only for static descriptions of
the world. [46, p. 44]
It was Isaac Newton who was able to translate into a closed mathemat-
ical formalism both, the ontological presuppositions present in Aristotelian
(Eleatic) logic and the materialistic ideal of res extensa —with actuality
as its mode of existence. In classical mechanics the representation of the
cWhile res cogitans, the soul, was related to the indeﬁnite realm of potentiality, res
extensa, i.e. the entities as characterized by the principles of logic, related to the actual.

145
state of the physical system is given by a point in phase space Γ and the
physical magnitudes are represented by real functions over Γ. These func-
tions commute between each other and can be interpreted as possessing
deﬁnite values independently of measurement, i.e. each function can be
interpreted as being actual. The term ‘actual’ refers here to preexistence
(within the transcendent representation) and not to hic et nunc observa-
tion. Every physical system may be described exclusively by means of its
actual properties. The change of the system may be described by the change
of its actual properties. Potential or possible properties are considered as
the points to which the system might arrive in a future instant of time. As
also noted by Dieks:
In classical physics the most fundamental description of a physi-
cal system (a point in phase space) reﬂects only the actual, and
nothing that is merely possible. It is true that sometimes states
involving probabilities occur in classical physics: think of the prob-
ability distributions ρ in statistical mechanics. But the occurrence
of possibilities in such cases merely reﬂects our ignorance about
what is actual. The statistical states do not correspond to features
of the actual system (unlike the case of the quantum mechanical
superpositions), but quantify our lack of knowledge of those actual
features. [24, p. 124]
Classical mechanics tells us via the equation of motion how the state of
the system moves along the curve determined by the initial conditions in
Γ and thus, as any mechanical property may be expressed in terms of Γ’s
variables, how all of them evolve. Moreover, the structure in which actual
properties may be organized is the (Boolean) algebra of classical logic.
3. Physical Probability and Subjective Ignorance
We believe that a realist coherent interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
(QM) should be capable of providing an understanding of its own physical
concepts. Since Born’s 1926 interpretation of the quantum wave function
Ψ, probability has become one of the key notions in the description of
quantum phenomena. But the diﬃculties to interpret quantum probability
were already explicit in Born’s original paper.
Schr¨odinger’s quantum mechanics [therefore] gives quite a deﬁnite
answer to the question of the eﬀect of the collision; but there is
no question of any causal description. One gets no answer to the

146
question, ‘what is the state after the collision’ but only to the
question, ‘how probable is a speciﬁed outcome of the collision’.
Here the whole problem of determinism comes up. From the stand-
point of our quantum mechanics there is no quantity which in any
individual case causally ﬁxes the consequence of the collision; but
also experimentally we have so far no reason to believe that there
are some inner properties of the atom which condition a deﬁnite
outcome for the collision. [...] I myself am inclined to give up de-
terminism in the world of the atoms. But that is a philosophi-
cal question for which physical arguments alone are not decisive.
[47, p. 57]
In his paper Born formulated the now-standard interpretation of ψ(x) as
encoding a probability density function for a certain particle to be found
at a given region. The wave function is a complex-valued function of a
continuous variable. For a state ψ, the associated probability function is
ψ∗ψ, which is equal to |ψ(x)|2. If |ψ(x)|2 has a ﬁnite integral over the
whole of three-dimensional space, then it is possible to choose a normalizing
constant. The probability that a particle is within a particular region V is
the integral over V of |ψ(x)|2. However, even though this interpretation
worked fairly well, it soon became evident that the concept of probability
in the new theory departed from the physical notion considered in classical
statistical mechanics as lack of knowledge about a preexistent (actual) state
of aﬀairs described in terms of deﬁnite valued properties.
In the history of physics the development of probability took place
through a concrete physical problem and has a long history which goes
back to the 18th century. The physical problem with which probability
dealt was the problem of characterizing a state of aﬀairs even though the
possessed knowledge of it was incomplete. Or in other words, “gambling”.
This physical problem was connected later on to a mathematical theory
developed by Laplace and others. But it was only after Kolmogorov that
this mathematical theory found a closed set of axioms [36]. Although there
are still today many interpretational problems regarding the physical un-
derstanding of classical probability, when a realist physicist talks about
probability in statistical mechanics he is discussing about the (average val-
ues of) properties of an uncertain —but existent— state of aﬀairs.d This is
dIn this respect it is important to remark that the orthodox interpretation of probability
in terms of relative frequencies, although provides a conceptual framework to relate to
measurement outcomes, refers to ‘events’ and to ‘properties of a system’; in this sense

147
why the problem to determine a deﬁnite state of aﬀairs in QM —the sets of
deﬁnite valued properties which characterize the quantum system— poses
also problems to the interpretation of probability and possibility within the
theory itself. As noticed by Schr¨odinger in a letter to Einstein:
It seems to me that the concept of probability [related to quantum
theory] is terribly mishandled these days. Probability surely has
as its substance a statement as to whether something is or is not
the case —an uncertain statement, to be sure. But nevertheless it
has meaning only if one is indeed convinced that the something
in question quite deﬁnitely is or is not the case. A probabilistic
assertion presupposes the full reality of its subject. [6, p. 115]
Schr¨odinger [43, p. 156] knew very well that in QM it is not possible to
asigne a deﬁnite value to all properties of a quantum state. As he remarked:
“[...] if I wish to ascribe to the [quantum mechanical] model at each mo-
ment a deﬁnite (merely not exactly known to me) state, or (which is the
same) to all determining parts deﬁnite (merely not exactly known to me)
numerical values, then there is no supposition as to these numerical values
to be imagined that would not conﬂict with some portion of quantum theo-
retical assertions.” This impossibility would be exposed three decades after
in formal terms by Kochen and Specker [35].
We
understand
mathematics,
contrary
to
physics,
as
a
non-
representational discipline which respects no metaphysical nor empirical
limits whatsoever. The mathematician does not need to constrain himself
to any set of metaphysical principles but only to the internal structure and
coherency of the mathematical theory he is dealing with. ‘Probability’ is
regarded by the mathematician as a ‘theory of mathematics’ and in this
sense departs from any conceptual physical understanding which relates
the formal structure to the world around us. A mathematician thinks of
a probability model as the set of axioms which ﬁt a mathematical struc-
ture and wonders about the internal consistency rather than about how
this structure relates and can be interpreted in relation to experience and
physical reality. As noticed by Hans Primas:
Mathematical probability theory is just a branch of pure math-
ematics, based on some axioms devoid of any interpretation. In
this framework, the concepts ‘probability’, ‘independence’, etc. are
it is not necessarily linked to a realistic physical representation but rather supports an
empiricist account of the observed measurement results.

148
conceptually unexplained notions, they have a purely mathemat-
ical meaning. While there is a widespread agreement concerning
the essential features of the calculus of probability, there are widely
diverging opinions what the referent of mathematical probability
theory is. [41, p. 582]
The important point is that when a mathematician and a physicist talk
about ‘probability’ they need not refer to the same concept. While for the
mathematician the question of the relation between the mathematical struc-
ture of probability and experience plays no signiﬁcant role, for the physicist
who assumes a realist stance the question of probability is necessarily re-
lated to experience and physical reality.
Luigi Accardi proved in 1981 that there is a direct relation between Bell
inequalities and probability models [1]. The theorem of Accardi states that
any theory which violates Boole-Bell inequalitiese has a non-Kolmogorovian
probability model. Since only Kolmogorovian models can be interpreted as
referring to a degree of ignorance of a presupposed state of aﬀairs described
by a set of deﬁnite valued preexistent properties, this means that QM pos-
sesses a probability model which cannot be interpreted in terms of ignorance
of such preexistent reality.
The fact that QM possesses a non-Kolmogorovian probability model is
not such a big issue from a mathematical perspective: many mathemati-
cians work with these probability structures and do not get astonished in
any way by them. But from a representational realist perspective which
understands that a physical theory must be capable of providing a con-
ceptual representation of physical reality, the question which arises is very
deep, namely, what is the meaning of a concept of probability which does
not talk about the degree of knowledge of a deﬁnite state of aﬀairs? From
our perspective, if such a question is not properly acknowledged, the state-
ment “QM is a theory about probabilities” looses all physical content. It
might be regarded as either an obvious mathematical statement with no
interest —it only states the well known fact that in QM there is a (non-
Kolmogrovian) probability measure assigned via Gleason’s theorem— or
a meaningless physical statement, since we do not know what quantum
probability is in terms of a physical concept. According to our stance, if
eAs remarked by Itamar Pitowsky [40, p. 95]: “In the mid-nineteenth century George
Boole formulated his ‘conditions of possible experience’. These are equations and in-
equalities that the relative frequencies of (logically connected) events must satisfy. Some
of Boole’s conditions have been rediscovered in more recent years by physicists, including
Bell inequalities, Clauser Horne inequalities, and many others.”

149
we are to understand QM as a physical theory, and not merely as an algo-
rithmic structure which predicts measurement outcomes, it is clear that we
still need to provide a link between the mathematical structure and a set
of physical concepts which are capable of providing a coherent account of
quantum phenomena.
4. Empirical Terms vs Physical Concepts
In the ﬁrst decades of the 20th century logical positivists fought strongly
against dogmatic metaphysical thought, imposing a reconsideration of ob-
servability beyond the a priori categories of Kantian metaphysics. In their
famous Manifesto [8] they argued that: “Everything is accessible to man;
and man is the measure of all things. Here is an aﬃnity with the Sophists,
not with the Platonists; with the Epicureans, not with the Pythagoreans;
with all those who stand for earthly being and the here and now.” Their
main attack to metaphysics was designed through the idea that one should
focus in “statements as they are made by empirical science; their meaning
can be determined by logical analysis or, more precisely, through reduction
to the simplest statements about the empirically given.” Their architectonic
stood on the distinction between empirical terms, the empirically “given” in
physical theories, and theoretical terms, their translation into simple state-
ments. This separation and correspondence between theoretical statements
and empirical observation would have deep consequences not only regarding
the problems addressed in philosophy of science but also with respect to
the limits of development of many diﬀerent lines of research. The important
point is that even though within the philosophy of science community this
distinction has been strongly criticized and even characterized as “naive”;
many of the problems discussed in the literature still presuppose it implic-
itly. Indeed, as remarked by Curd and Cover:
Logical positivism is dead and logical empiricism is no longer an
avowed school of philosophical thought. But despite our historical
and philosophical distance from logical positivism and empiricism,
their inﬂuence can be felt. An important part of their legacy is
observational-theoretical distinction itself, which continues to play
a central role in debates about scientiﬁc realism. [9, p. 1228]
One of the major consequences of this “naive” perspective towards observa-
tion is that physical concepts become supplementary elements in the analy-
sis of physical theories. Indeed, when a physical phenomenon is understood
as independent of physical concepts and metaphysical presuppositions,

150
empirical terms conﬁgure an objective set of data which can be directly
related —without any metaphysical constrain— to a formal scheme. Actual
empirical observations become then the very fundament of physical theories
which, following Mach, should be understood as providing an “economical”
account of such observational data. As a consequence, metaphysics and
physical concepts are completely out of the main picture.
Empirical Data ————— Theoretical Terms
(Supplementary Interpretation)
According to this scheme, physical concepts are not essentially needed
since the analysis of a theory can be done by addressing the logical struc-
ture which accounts for the empirical data. The role of concepts becomes
then accessory: adding metaphysics might help us to picture what is go-
ing on according to a theory. Like van Fraassen argues [45], it might be
interesting to know what the world is like according to an interpretation
of a formalism. However, one can perfectly do without interpretation when
the question addressed is only related to empirical ﬁndings. Many realists
within philosophy of physics while stress the need of an interpretation, ac-
cept the (empiricist) idea that the formalism already provides direct access
to empirical data. Like a Troyan horse, these supposedly realist schemes
hide within the main (metaphysical) presupposition of the enemy (empiri-
cism). Indeed, within philosophy of physics, many who claim to be realists,
agree with empiricists that metaphysical schemes are only necessary when
attempting to “understand” —a term which remains dependent on the
philosophical stance— a physical theory. The distance between realism and
empiricism seems to be the strength with which they argue for or against
the need of interpretation. This is the main reason why the “interpreta-
tion” of a theory has been understood in philosophy of physics as something
“added” to an already formalized empirical theory. Thus, physical concepts
are not directly related to the metaphysical foundation of phenomena and
experience.f
Against these empiricist based perspectives —extensively widespread
within philosophy of physics even in the context of supposedly realist
approaches— we understand that each physical theory is a triad composed
fA clear expression of this situation is the so called “underdetermination problem” which
implicitly assumes that a theory can account for phenomena independently of a meta-
physical scheme.

151
by a mathematical formalism, a conceptual network and a limited speciﬁc
ﬁeld of phenomena. In this scheme physical notions play a fundamental role.
Physical concepts are deﬁned through metaphysical principles which conﬁg-
ure and determine physical experience itself. Physical observation cannot be
considered in terms of “common sense” realism for that would presuppose
that the world is constrained by our “common sense” understanding of it.
This idea breaks with the basic humble attitude of science, which accepts
that we do not know how the world really is.
Physical observation is always both metaphysically and theory laden. We
are always within a particular physical (and metaphysical) representation.
A realist analysis which believes in the possibility of representing reality in
terms of a formal and metaphysical theory must always begin, not by col-
lecting a set of “naked” empirical data —as it is the case of empiricists—,
but by considering and making explicit the metaphysical presuppositions
related to the theory and its phenomena. Our philosophical post-Kantian
realist position stresses the need to consider physical notions as fundamen-
tal elements of a theory, without which physical observation of phenomena
cannot be deﬁned. As obvious as it is, a ‘ﬁeld’ cannot be observed without
the notion of ‘ﬁeld’, we simply cannot observe a ‘particle’ or a ‘wave’ with-
out presupposing such physical concepts. These concepts are undoubtedly
part of a metaphysical architectonic developed through centuries. Natural-
izing such concepts in terms of “common sense” givens is turning a speciﬁc
metaphysical scheme into dogma. As Einstein makes the point:
Concepts that have proven useful in ordering things easily achieve
such an authority over us that we forget their earthly origins and
accept them as unalterable givens. Thus they come to be stamped
as ‘necessities of thought,’ ‘a priori givens,’ etc. The path of scien-
tiﬁc advance is often made impossible for a long time through such
errors. [25, p. 102]
In particular, it is important to remark that all classical physical enti-
ties —as we discussed above— presuppose PE, PNC and PI. These are not
principles that are found or observed in the world, but the very conditions
that allow us to determine physical experience itself [16]. As remarked by
Einstein in his famous recommendation, which led Heisenberg to the prin-
ciple of indetermination: “It is only the theory which can tell you what
can be observed.” Einstein’s philosophical position has been many times

152
charichaturized in the literature as a scientiﬁc realist.g The fact that “he
was not the friend of any simple realism” [32, p. 206] can be witnessed
from the very interesting remark, recalled by Heisenberg, in which Einstein
explained:
I have no wish to appear as an advocate of a naive form of realism;
I know that these are very diﬃcult questions, but then I consider
Mach’s concept of observation also much too naive. He pretends
that we know perfectly well what the word ‘observe’ means, and
thinks this exempts him from having to discriminate between ‘ob-
jective’ and ‘subjective’ phenomena. No wonder his principle has
so suspiciously commercial a name: ‘thought economy.’ His idea of
simplicity is much too subjective for me. In reality, the simplicity of
natural laws is an objective fact as well, and the correct conceptual
scheme must balance the subjective side of this simplicity with the
objective. But that is a very diﬃcult task. [30, p. 66]
Einstein’s position was orthodoxy at the time. Most of the founding fathers
of QM —exception made of Dirac— were also part of this same neo-Kantian
tradition which understood that the observation of physical phenomena
was metaphysically constrained. This idea goes back to Hume himself who
argued that the notion of causation is not something grounded empirically,
it is never found in the observable world. Rather, as Kant would later on
clearly expose, it is a metaphysical presupposition which allows us to make
sense of physical phenomena. Following Einstein’s dictum, Heisenberg went
also against the positivist interpretation of empirical science as disconnected
from metaphysical presuppositions:
The history of physics is not only a sequence of experimental dis-
coveries and observations, followed by their mathematical descrip-
tion; it is also a history of concepts. For an understanding of the
phenomena the ﬁrst condition is the introduction of adequate con-
cepts. Only with the help of correct concepts can we really know
what has been observed. [31, p. 264]
gAs remarked by Howard [33, p. 73], Einstein was certainly part of the neo-Kantian
tradition: “Einstein was dismayed by the Vienna Circle’s ever more stridently anti-
metaphysical doctrine. The group dismissed as metaphysical any element of theory whose
connection to experience could not be demonstrated clearly enough. But Einstein’s dis-
agreement with the Vienna Circle went deeper. It involved fundamental questions about
the empirical interpretation and testing of theories.”

153
Going back to our scheme, the three elements that compose a physical
theory form a perfect circle with no preeminence of one over the other.
All three elements are interrelated in such a way that only through their
mutual inter-deﬁnition we can access physical experience.
Conceptual Network
Mathematical Formalism
Field of Representable Phenomena
In order to be clear about our perspective of analysis we would like to
make explicit our philosophical stance which considers, not only the radi-
cal importance of conceptual representation, but also the metaphysical and
theory ladenness of physical observation:
Representational Realism: A representational realist account of a phys-
ical theory must be capable of providing a physical (and metaphysical) rep-
resentation of reality in terms of a network of concepts which coherently
relates to the mathematical formalism of the theory and allows us to make
predictions of a deﬁnite ﬁeld of phenomena. Observability in physics is al-
ways both metaphysically and theory laden, and thus, must be regarded as
dependent of each particular physical representation.
According to our stance, physical statements about phenomena must be
necessarily related to the physical (and metaphysical) representation pro-
vided by the theory in terms of deﬁnite physical concepts. Crudely put,
there is no “common sense” experience in physics. Every experience in
physics is a restricted experience, constrained by physical concepts and
metaphysical presuppositions. Physics is in essence a metaphysical enter-
prise. As Einstein remarked: “The problem is that physics is a kind of
metaphysics; physics describes ‘reality’. But we do not know what ‘reality’
is. We know it only through physical description...” From this perspective,
the problem with the orthodox formalism of QM is that it provides predic-
tions which have not yet been coherently related to a network of adequate
physical concepts. To say it shortly, we do not know what QM is talking
about. But if we do not know how to account for the ‘clicks’ in detectors in
a typical quantum experiment, we simply do not understand either what
a quantum phenomenon really is. Still today, the ‘quantum clicks’ that we

154
ﬁnd in the lab have no conceptual explanation. Boole-Bell type inequal-
ities have proven that ‘quantum clicks’ lie outside the scope of classical
local-realistic theories.
5. The EPR-Battle: Counterfactual Statements and
(Actual) Elements of Physical Reality
The power of physics comes from its amazing predictive capacity; some-
thing that is exposed through the empirical conﬁrmation of (operational)
counterfactual statements. If a theory is empirically adequate then coun-
terfactual statements of the type: “if we measure physical quantity A, the
result will be x; but if we measure instead physical quantity B the result
will be y” are always considered to be what the theory is really talking
about. As clearly expressed by Griﬃths [28, p. 361]: “If a theory makes a
certain amount of sense and gives predictions which agree reasonably well
with experimental or observational results, scientists are inclined to believe
that its logical and mathematical structure reﬂects the structure of the real
world in some way, even if philosophers will remain permanently skepti-
cal.” Indeed, operational counterfactual statements conform the core of the
objective physical reality the theory talks about.
Counterfactual reasoning is a necessary condition not only for construct-
ing a representation that provides an objective account of physical reality
independent of the choices and actions of subjects but also for physical dis-
cursivity itself. We should remark, due to the ongoing debate about coun-
terfactuals in QM, that these kind of physical statements need not be nec-
essarily related to “possible worlds” or to “the reiﬁcation of modalities” —a
particular way of analyzing these subjects by logicians and analytic meta-
physics which has also penetrated deeply philosophy of physics. In physics,
operational counterfactual reasoning does not imply that every statement
is actually real. Obviously, the fact that I can imagine an experience in the
future does not imply its reality. Operational counterfactual reasoning has
been assumed in every physical theory that we know and allows a theory
to make predictions in terms of meaningful operational statements. Their
main structure is very simple: “if I do this then that will happen.”
Meaningful Operational Statements (MOS): If given a speciﬁc situ-
ation a theory is capable of predicting in terms of deﬁnite physical state-
ments the outcomes of possible measurements, then such physical statements
are meaningful relative to the theory and must be considered as constitu-
tive parts of the particular representation of physical reality that the theory

155
provides. Measurement outcomes must be understood only as exposing the
empirical adequacy (or not) of the theory.
MOS are not necessarily statements about future events, such as for ex-
ample “if I measure the spin in the x-direction, I will obtain spin-up with
probability 0.4 and spin-down with probability 0.6.” MOS can be also state-
ments about the past or the present. For example, according to some physi-
cal theories I can claim that “the earth was formed about 4.54 billion years
ago” (long before even physics was imagined!), or that if someone would
perform a free fall experiment in the moon at this very moment, due to its
gravity, “the object would be falling accelerated at 1.6 m
s2 .” That is indeed
the magic of both physics (and metaphysics), the possibility to represent,
think and imagine beyond the here and now.
Physical statements that allow us to predict speciﬁc phenomena have
been always intuitively related to physical reality. According to physicists,
if we possess an empirically adequate physical description of a state of
aﬀairs we can predict what will happen in any particular experiment.h
For instance, we also know what might have happened if I had performed
an experiment in the past or in the present, in a diﬀerent place to the
one I am now. Experiments in classical physics allow us to learn about
the preexistent properties of a system. The strong realist presupposition
is that once we have an empirically adequate theory we don’t even need
to perform an experiment in order to know the result! Take for example a
physical object as a small ball, one can imagine all the possible experiments
that one could perform inside a lab with it. We know the acceleration of
this ball in a free fall experiment on earth will be 9.8 m
s2 and we can also
predict the motion of the ball if we through it inside the room. There are
indeed many experiments we could perform of which we know the answer
beforehand by simply calculating their results using classical mechanics.
There is no single physicist that would dare go against the predictions of
Newtonian mechanics. And that is the whole beauty of physics, at least from
a realist perspective: physical representations talk about physical reality
independently of the here and now.
hIt is interesting to notice that in such kind of statements we see the two main under-
standings of actuality coming together: the actuality hic et nunc of observations is an
expression of the actual preexistent mode of existence of properties. Unfortunately, it is
very frequent to ﬁnd in the literature a mixture between these two diﬀerent meanings of
actuality.

156
The importance of counterfactual statements as related to physical re-
ality was stressed, in the context of QM, by Einstein himself in 1935, in
what would become on of the most famous articles in the foundational lit-
erature: the “EPR paper” [26]. In this paper, Einstein together with his
students Podolsky and Rosen, used his famous deﬁnition of what was to be
considered an element of physical reality in order to show that QM seemed
not to be a complete theory. As remarked by them: “Whatever the meaning
assigned to the term complete, the following requirement for a complete the-
ory seems to be a necessary one: every element of physical reality must have
a counterpart in the physical theory.” [Op. cit., p. 777] Indeed, this seems to
be a necessary condition for a theory which attempts to provide an account
of physical reality. However, Einstein’s deﬁnition stressed only a limited set
of the MOS predicted by quantum theory. His deﬁnition focused only on
those MOS which could be related to an actualist metaphysical account of
physical reality —leaving aside the more general probabilistic statements.
Einstein’s (Actual) Element of Physical Reality: If, without in any
way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty (i.e., with probability
equal to unity) the value of a physical quantity, then there exists an element
of reality corresponding to that quantity.
As remarked by Aerts and Sassoli [2, p. 20]: “the notion of ‘element of
reality’ is exactly what was meant by Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen, in their
famous 1935 article. An element of reality is a state of prediction: a property
of an entity that we know is actual, in the sense that, should we decide to
observe it (i.e., to test its actuality), the outcome of the observation would
be certainly successful.” Indeed, certainty and actuality were the restrictive
constraints of what could be considered in terms of physical reality.
But Bohr, contrary to Einstein, had a very diﬀerent standpoint regard-
ing the meaning of physics in general, and of QM in particular. In his 1935
reply paper to EPR [4] which appeared in the following volume of Physical
Review, he argued that in QM things were completely diﬀerent to any other
physical theory. Bohr wanted to presuppose classical discourse in terms of
classical notions (e. g., ‘waves’ and ‘particles’) even at the price of restrict-
ing the multiple contexts of analysis provided by the formalism itself. Even
though each basis was directly related to the correct predictions of statis-
tical outcomes of observables, it was argued that in order to discuss about
quantum properties the very precondition was the choice of a single con-
text (interpreted in terms of an experimental arrangement). In this way,
quantum physics had been restricted to the here and now experimental

157
set-up. At the same time, Bohr [47, p. 7] had strongly argued about the
impossibility of providing a physical representation of QM beyond classical
notions, claiming that: “[...] the unambiguous interpretation of any mea-
surement must be essentially framed in terms of classical physical theories,
and we may say that in this sense the language of Newton and Maxwell
will remain the language of physicists for all time.” According to him [Op.
cit., p. 7], “it would be a misconception to believe that the diﬃculties of
the atomic theory may be evaded by eventually replacing the concepts of
classical physics by new conceptual forms.” The choice of Bohr was to stick
to classical discourse and give up counterfactual reasoning of MOS in QM
—which was explicitly used within the EPR argument. Bohr was willing
to develop a new complementarity scheme even at the price of abandoning
the physical representation of quantum reality.
Bohr took as a standpoint the idea that observed measurement out-
comes were perfectly deﬁned in QM and added the necessity of choosing
a particular context between the many possible onesi in order to recover a
classical “as-if discourse” in terms of ‘waves’ and ‘particles’.
[...] the choice between the experimental procedures suited for the
prediction of the position or the momentum of a single particle
which has passed through a slit in a diaphragm, we are, in the
‘freedom of choice’ oﬀered by the last arrangement, just concerned
with the discrimination between diﬀerent experimental procedures
which allow of the unambiguous use of complementarity classical
concepts. [4, p. 699] (emphasis added)
But this complementarity scheme designed by the Danish physicist pre-
cluded —since it denied operational counterfactual reasoning itself— the
very possibility of relating MOS to an objective physical description of
reality —independent of subjective choices. After Bohr’s reply [4], unlike
a classical object which preexists (in terms of deﬁnite valued properties)
independently of the choice of any experiment, it was accepted that quan-
tum systems and properties were explicitly dependent on the choice of an
experimental arrangement or context.
Once and again it was repeated that Bohr had been “the true winner
of the EPR battle” —as well as of the Solvay confrontation some years
before. However, no one could really explain why. Bohr had designed a
iA problem known today in the literature as the infamous basis problem. One that has
found no true solution until the present.

158
contradictory algorithmic language based on his complementarity principle
according to which, it only made sense to talk about “waves” and “par-
ticles” once the choice of an experimental set up had been performed by
the physicist in the lab. Subjectivity had been introduced for the ﬁrst time
within physical description, creating what is known today as “the quantum
omelette” (see for discussion [19]). As most clearly stated by Jaynes:
[O]ur present [quantum mechanical] formalism is not purely epis-
temological; it is a peculiar mixture describing in part realities of
Nature, in part incomplete human information about Nature —all
scrambled up by Heisenberg and Bohr into an omelette that nobody
has seen how to unscramble. Yet we think that the unscrambling is
a prerequisite for any further advance in basic physical theory. For,
if we cannot separate the subjective and objective aspects of the
formalism, we cannot know what we are talking about; it is just
that simple. [34, p. 381]
But to be fare, it was not true that Bohr wanted to discuss about reality.
His scheme was totally consistent and very diﬃcult to tackle. It rested on an
understanding of physics in highly pragmatic terms, as a “tool” to approach
intersubjective agreement between experimentalists. In this respect, Bohr
was indeed much closer to logical positivism than he himself would have
admitted.
Physics is to be regarded not so much as the study of something
a priori given, but rather as the development of methods of or-
dering and surveying human experience. In this respect our task
must be to account for such experience in a manner independent of
individual subjective judgement and therefor objective in the sense
that it can be unambiguously communicated in ordinary human
language. [5]
Even though Bohr was a neo-Kantian and understood phenomena as re-
lated to categories and metaphysical principles, against metaphysical ques-
tions and problems, he was in line with the positivist appeal to Sophists
and their epistemological perspective which placed the subject —and his
here and now experience— as the fundament of knowledge itself. Bohr, con-
trary to the logical positivists who presupposed a “common sense” here and
now observation, had placed his a priori in classical language —which had
the purpose of constraining phenomena as classical space-time phenomena.
Bohr had reintroduced Protagoras dictum within physics, adding to it the

159
importance of classical language and connecting physics to the main philo-
sophical debate of the 20th century: the linguistic turn. His new precept
could be read in the following terms: the subject and his (classical) lan-
guage are the measure of all things. Bohr was not interested in the problem
of reality. Instead of getting into the riddle of an ontological analysis Bohr
focused on epistemological concerns. Indeed, as remarked by A. Petersen,
his long time assistant:
Traditional philosophy has accustomed us to regard language as
something secondary and reality as something primary. Bohr con-
sidered this attitude toward the relation between language and re-
ality inappropriate. When one said to him that it cannot be lan-
guage which is fundamental, but that it must be reality which, so
to speak, lies beneath language, and of which language is a pic-
ture, he would reply, “We are suspended in language in such a way
that we cannot say what is up and what is down. The word ‘real-
ity’ is also a word, a word which we must learn to use correctly.”
Bohr was not puzzled by ontological problems or by questions as
to how concepts are related to reality. Such questions seemed ster-
ile to him. He saw the problem of knowledge in a diﬀerent light.
[39, p. 11]
Bohr wanted to develop a language that would allow us to account for
phenomena in terms of classical physical concepts, even at the price of dis-
solving the relation between such concepts and physical reality. His com-
plementarity approach was designed in order to support the inconsistencies
of such incompatible relations. This had very important consequences for
the development of physics. As Arthur Fine makes the point:
[The] instrumentalist moves, away from a realist construal of the
emerging quantum theory, were given particular force by Bohr’s so-
called ‘philosophy of complementarity’; and this nonrealist position
was consolidated at the time of the famous Solvay conference, in
October of 1927, and is ﬁrmly in place today. Such quantum nonre-
alism is part of what every graduate physicist learns and practices.
It is the conceptual backdrop to all the brilliant success in atomic,
nuclear, and particle physics over the past ﬁfty years. Physicists
have learned to think about their theory in a highly nonrealist
way, and doing just that has brought about the most marvelous
predictive success in the history of science. [9, p. 1195]

160
Contrary to Fine we do not understand this as “the most marvelous” epoch
of science but rather as a quite obscure period in which we have not ad-
vanced much in really understanding one of the main theories of the 20th
Century. After more than one century after its creation we still don’t know
what QM is talking about.
Our representational realist stance attempts to bring back metaphysi-
cal considerations within the analysis of QM by taking into account three
main desiderata: the ﬁrst is that physical observation is both metaphysically
and theory laden; the second is that operational counterfactual reasoning
about MOS is the kernel of physical discourse and, in consequence, can-
not be abandoned if we seek to ﬁnd an objective representation of physical
reality; the third and ﬁnal desideratum is that predictions must be nec-
essarily related to the physical representation of reality provided by the
theory in terms of adequate physical concepts. Against Bohr, (actual) ex-
periments and measurements cannot be regarded as the point of departure,
since it is only the theory which can tell you what can be observed. We
need to do exactly the opposite, we need to read out an objective physical
description from the formalism escaping at the same time dogmatic clas-
sical metaphysics —which is today still grounded in the (classical) meta-
physics of actuality through PE, PNC and PI. Just like Einstein taught
us to do in Relativity, we need to concentrate on what the theory predicts
in operational terms, and be ready to come up with new physical concepts
that match the formalism and explain phenomena. From our perspective —
contrary to Bohr’s dogmatism with respect to classical language and physi-
cal experience—, every new physical theory determines a radically new ﬁeld
of experience which is necessarily related to a language constituted by new
physical concepts.
6. Actual Properties and Observation in QM
The general metaphysical principle implied by the understanding of Newto-
nian mechanics, that ‘Actuality = Reality’, has become an unquestionable
dogma within physics. As a silent fundament all of physics has been devel-
oped following the metaphysics of actuality. And even though QM was born
from a deep positivist deconstruction of the a priori classical Newtonian no-
tions —and in this sense the philosophy of Mach can be understood as the
very precondition for the creation of both QM and relativity theory— it
was very soon reestablished within the limits of classical metaphysics itself.
The constrains of actuality have been unquestionably accepted by philoso-
phers of physics either in terms of hic et nunc observation (empiricism and

161
its variants) or as the mode of preexistence of properties (realism). Both
positions have remained captive of actualism; trapped in the metaphysical
net designed —through PE, PNC and PI— by Aristotle around the 5th cen-
tury before Christ and imposed by Newton in the 18th Century of our time.
Actual (preexistent) properties and actual (here and now) observations are
two sides of the same (metaphysical) coin.
Today, both realists and anti-realists support an anti-metaphysical un-
derstanding of observation within philosophy of physics. It is accepted by
both parties that QM is an empirically adequate theory and, consequently,
that the problem is not related to the understanding of quantum phe-
nomena. This can be directly linked not only to the positivist “common
sense” or “naive” understanding of observation, but also —maybe more
importantly— to Bohr’s analysis of QM based on the idea that any phys-
ical phenomena is a classical phenomena, or in his own words, to the idea
that “[...] the unambiguous interpretation of any measurement must be
essentially framed in terms of classical physical theories”.
Bas van Fraassen [44, pp. 202-203] has followed the Bohrian path in
terms of his constructive empiricism. According to him: “To develop an em-
piricist account of science is to depict it as involving a search for truth only
about the empirical world, about what is actual and observable.” Making
explicit the fact that observation should be understood in terms of “common
sense” observation. The problem, according to van Fraassen, only appears
with respect to the “non-observable” entities —such as e.g, an atom or an
electron. Instrumentalists assume exactly the same ground (as empiricist)
considering actual observation in terms of “common sense” observation of
measurement outcomes. As made explicit by Fuchs and Peres: “[...] quan-
tum theory does not describe physical reality. What it does is provide an
algorithm for computing probabilities for the macroscopic events (‘detector
clicks’) that are the consequences of experimental interventions.”
Realists approaches to QM have focused on Einstein’s implicit use of
the elements of physical reality in terms of actuality and his recommenda-
tion to extend QM —which should be considered as “incomplete”— to a
more general framework, one that goes back to a description in terms of
actual properties restoring a classical way of thinking about what there is.
This idea, presupposed by the Hidden Variable Program (HVP), has also
permeated strongly most realist interpretations of QM, which in one way
or the other have ended up always discussing in terms of actual properties,
grounded as well on “common sense” observation. Such is the case of the
modal interpretation of Dieks, Griﬃths’ consistent histories approach, and

162
the many worlds interpretation. Even those interpretations that have ar-
gued in favor of considering a diﬀerent realm to that of actuality —such as
the ones proposed by Heisenberg, Popper, Margenau and Piron— were not
able to advance in an ontological deﬁnition of such non-actual realm. Po-
tentialities, propensities and dispositions have been repeatedly deﬁned only
in terms of a process of becoming actual (see for discussion [12]). These tele-
ological schemes have betrayed, because of their standpoint and focus on
the measurement problem, any true possibility of progress and development
beyond the realm of actuality.
Actuality imposes a mode of existence (of both properties and observa-
tions) determined by PE, PNC and PI. Everything is reduced then either
to: yes-no properties (realism) or yes-no experimental observations (em-
piricism). But what if QM cannot be subsumed under the metaphysical
equation imposed by Newtonian physics according to which: Actuality =
Reality?
7. Revisiting Quantum Physical Reality
We believe it would be no exaggeration to claim that the EPR paper to-
gether with Bohr’s reply, have determined the fate of QM up to the present.
The EPR paper ended with a recommendation to extend QM in order to
recover a classical actualist understanding about what there is:
While we thus have shown that the wave function does not pro-
vide a complete description of the [actual] physical reality, we left
open the question of whether or not such a description [of actual
properties] exists. We believe, however, that such theory is possible.
[26, p. 780]
Bohr argued instead that:
While [...] in classical physics the distinction between object and
measuring agencies does not entail any diﬀerence in the character
of the description of the phenomena concerned, it fundamental im-
portance in quantum theory [...] has its root in the indispensable
use of classical concepts in the interpretation of all proper measure-
ments, even tough the classical theories do not suﬃce in accounting
for the new types of regularities with which we are concerned in
atomic physics. [4, p. 701]
EPR was the ﬁnal battle of the two main ﬁgures in the physics of the
20th century, and even though Bohr was declared the only triumphant

163
survivor, both lines of research were developed under the constraints and
limits of the logical positivist “naive” or “common sense” understanding of
observation. As a consequence of this development within philosophy of QM
one of the main discussions of the founding fathers regarding the meaning of
quantum phenomena and experience was completely abandoned. The mea-
surement problem which accepted quantum observations as perfectly well
deﬁned givens of experience begun very soon to concentrate the attention
of everyone.
After the clash of the two titans, physicists were confronted with a choice
between two diﬀerent paths. Either they could follow Bohr and be satis-
ﬁed with an inconsistent intersubjective language ruled by complementarity
with no direct reference to physical reality, or they could follow Einstein
and try to ﬁnd a new formalism that would allow them to recover a classical
actualist type-description of physical (quantum) reality. But this crossroad,
imposed by Einstein, Bohr and logical positivism, hides a “road sign” called
Wolfgang Pauli which exposed the lines of a more radical resolution to the
quantum riddle. Indeed, between the founding fathers, we regard Wolfgang
Pauli as the most radical and revolutionary thinker of them all. Against
Bohr, he stood always close to metaphysics and the problem of reality;
beyond Einstein, he was ready to seriously reconsider the meaning and def-
inition of physical reality itself.j
When the layman says ‘reality’ he usually thinks that he is speak-
ing about something which is self-evidently known; while to me it
appears to be speciﬁcally the most important and extremely diﬃ-
cult task of our time to work on the elaboration of a new idea of
reality. [37, p. 193]
What do we mean when we say that “particles are physically real ac-
cording to classical mechanics”? Following Heisenberg and his closed theory
approach, this question has a deﬁnite answer according to our representa-
tional realist stance. It means that classical mechanics is capable of express-
ing through the relation between the formalism of mathematical calculus
and a network of concepts —such as, for example, space, time, particle,
mass, position, velocity— a speciﬁc ﬁeld of phenomena. It is in this sense
that the notion of particle is a metaphysical machinery which allows us to
express reality.
jWhich for Einstein was determined through space-time separability.

164
In QM we have a sound formalism, with features such as contextuality,
superposition and indetermination, which defy a realist classical scheme
in terms of an ASA. However, all approaches until today have stood close
to physical reality understood in an actualist fashion. Because of this, the
features of the quantum formalism have been regarded as obstacles which
we need to bypass or escape in order to restore our classical way of thinking
about what there is. Our proposed line of research, following Pauli, is to turn
this problem upside-down. We need to develop a representation of physical
reality according to the quantum formalism, not the other way around.
Heisenberg’s closed theory approach is the key to abandon another pre-
supposed dogma —also imposed by Bohr— according to which QM must
be related to classical physics in terms of a reductionistic limit. Once we
accept the possibility of considering an independent metaphysical scheme
to account for QM, the “problems” addressed in the literature become in-
stead essential features of the metaphysical system we need to construct
in order to coherently relate the formalism with physical reality and ex-
perience. We need to develop a new way of understanding reality beyond
the ruling of actuality. To escape the ruling of actuality —both in terms of
hic et nunc observation and preexistent properties— means to abandon, on
the one hand, the idea that we have a clear deﬁnition of what is observed
according to QM, and on the other hand, the idea that actuality is the only
possible way to conceive and understand physical reality. Our strategy is
the same strategy followed by Einstein in order to make sense of the Lorentz
transformations in relativity theory. That is, to take as a standpoint the
formalism and the predictive power of the theory in order to develop new
physical concepts which relate coherently to the formalism and can allow
us to represent and explain the phenomena in question.
8. Generalized Elements of Physical Reality
The quantum wave function Ψ provides deﬁnite physical statements regard-
ing observables through the Born rule. The MOS provided by QM which
have been used in order to develop outstanding experimental technological
developments are of the following type:
Deﬁnition 8.1. MOS in QM: Given a vector in Hilbert space, Ψ, the
Born rule allows us to predict the average value of (any) observable O.
⟨Ψ|O|Ψ⟩= ⟨O⟩
This prediction is independent of the choice of any particular basis.

165
To take seriously the orthodox quantum formalism means for us to take
into account all the predictions provided by the theory; i.e., both certain
predictions (probability equal to unity) and statistical predictions (proba-
bility between zero and unity). This means we need to create a new un-
derstanding of probability in terms of objective knowledge and abandon its
classical understanding of probability in terms of ignorance about an actual
state of aﬀairs. But how to do so in relation to physical reality? We believe
that a good standpoint is the generalization of Einstein’s famous deﬁnition
of an element of physical reality. This redeﬁnition must keep the relation
imposed between operational predictive statements and reality, but leave
aside both the actualist constraint imposed by certainty (probability equal
to unity) and the intromission of the notion of measurement.
Generalized Element of Physical Reality: If we can predict in any way
(i.e., both probabilistically or with certainty) the value of a physical quan-
tity, then there exists an element of reality corresponding to that quantity.
By extending the limits of what can be considered as physically real, we
have also opened the door to a new understanding of QM beyond classical
physics. The problem is now set: we now need to ﬁnd a physical concept that
is capable of being statistically deﬁned in objective terms. That means to
ﬁnd a notion that is not deﬁned in terms of yes-no experiments (as it is the
case of classical properties), but is deﬁned instead in terms of a probabilistic
measure. Of course, this ﬁrst step must be accompanied by developing a
network of physical notions that accounts for what QM is talking about,
beyond measurement outcomes. In the end, our new non-classical physical
scheme will also have to be capable of taking into account the main features
brought in by the orthodox formalism.
i. Our network of physical concepts must provide a deeper understanding
of the principle of indetermination, the principle of superposition, the
quantum postulate and quantum phenomena in general.
ii. Our network of physical concepts must also explain the physical meaning
of non-locality, non-separability and quantum contextuality.
iii. Our metaphysical scheme must be capable of recovering an objective
notion of measurement (one that exposes a preexistent state of aﬀairs).
iv. The physical representation must account for all MOS in QM respecting
(operational) counterfactual reasoning.

166
We believe it is possible to come up with a physical network of concepts
that takes into account these features. The price we are willing to pay
is the abandonment of the metaphysics of actuality. Only then it will be
possible to construct a new non-classical metaphysical scheme with physical
concepts speciﬁcally designed in order to account for the formalism of QM.
9. Immanent Powers in QM
Our research has analyzed the idea of considering a mode of existence truly
independent of actuality, namely, ontological potentiality. Elsewhere, we
have introduced ontological potentiality as the realm of which QM talks
about. This realm is deﬁned by the principles of indetermination, super-
position and diﬀerence. In order to advance we also need to introduce the
notions of Potential State of Aﬀairs (PSA), potential eﬀectuation and im-
manent cause [13,17]. Indeed, by developing these new concepts, we expect
that our formal analysis regarding quantum possibility [22] can ﬁnd a co-
herent physical interpretation. But now the question arises: what are the
“things” which exist and interact within this potential realm? Our answer
is: immanent powers with deﬁnite potentia.k Indeed, while entities are com-
posed by properties which exist in the actual mode of being, we have argued
that an interesting candidate to consider what exists according to QM is
the notion of immanent power. Elsewhere [12,13], we have put forward such
an ontological interpretation of powers. In the following we summarize such
ideas and provide an axiomatic characterization of QM in line with these
concepts.
We should remark that our proposal diﬀers substantially with respect
to the hilemorphic schemes which deﬁne causal powers, propensities and
dispositions always in terms of the actual realm —attempting to solve the
infamous measurement problem. Such schemes still discuss in terms of prop-
erties and systems attempting to bridge the gap between “classical reality”
and QM. The physical representation we propose, grounded on the closed
theory scheme, escapes classical representation imposing an independent
ontology for QM right from the start. The measurement and basis problems
become, within our scheme, epistemic problems. These orthodox problems
do not address what QM really talks about but rather, make reference to
the way in which we humans acquire knowledge from the MOS implied by
the theory.
kIt will become clear in the following the radical distance of our approach with respect
to many power ontologies developed within philosophy of QM.

167
The mode of being of a power is potentiality, not thought in terms of
classical possibility (which relies on actuality) but rather as a mode of
existence —i.e., in terms of ontological potentiality. To possess the power
of raising my hand, does not mean that in the future ‘I will raise my hand’
or that in the future ‘I will not raise my hand’; what it means is that, here
and now, I possess a power which exists in the mode of being of potentiality,
independently of what happens or will happen in actuality. Powers do not
exist in the mode of being of actuality, they are not actual existents, they are
undetermined potential existents. Powers, like classical properties, preexist
to observation; unlike them preexistence is not deﬁned in the actual mode
of existence in terms of an Actual State of Aﬀairs (ASA), instead we have
a potential preexistence of powers which determines a Potential State of
Aﬀairs (PSA). While an ASA can be deﬁned in terms of a set of actual
properties, a PSA is deﬁned as a set of powers with deﬁnite potentia.
Immanent powers are indetermined. The concept of ‘immanent power’
allow us to compress experience into a picture of the (quantum) world, just
like entities such as ‘particles’, ‘waves’ and ‘ﬁelds’, allow us to do so in
classical physics. We cannot “see” powers in the same way we see objects.l
Powers are experienced in actuality through elementary processes. A power
is sustained by a logic of actions which do not necessarily take place in
the actual realm. Immanent powers interact in the potential realm through
potential eﬀectuations. While the actual realm reﬂects only an epistemic
aspect of immanent powers, one that regards a speciﬁc type of knowledge
we can acquire from them; the potential realm exposes the truly ontological
relations between powers.
According to our representational realist stance, one of the most im-
portant problems regards the ontological meaning of a quantum superpo-
sition [20]. What does it mean to have a mathematical expression such
as: α| ↑⟩+ β| ↓⟩, which allows us, through the Born rule, to predict (even
though probabilistically) experimental outcomes? We believe that quantum
superpositions are the central elements of QM. But what is the physical
representation of these quantum superpositions? Our theory of powers has
been explicitly developed in order to try to ﬁnd an answer to this particular
question.
Given a superposition in a particular basis, Σ ci|αi⟩, the powers are rep-
resented by the elements of the basis, |αi⟩, while the coordinates in square
lIt is important to notice there is no diﬀerence in this point with the case of entities: we
cannot “see” entities —not in the sense of having a complete access to them. We only
see perspectives which are uniﬁed through the notion of object.

168
modulus, |ci|2, are interpreted as the potentia of each respective power.
Powers can be superposed to diﬀerent —even contradictory— powers [17].
We understand a quantum superposition as encoding a set of powers each
of which possesses a deﬁnite potentia. This we call a Quantum Situation
(QS). For example, the quantum situation represented by the superposi-
tion α| ↑⟩+ β| ↓⟩, combines the contradictory powers, | ↑⟩and | ↓⟩, with
their respective potentia, |α|2 and |β|2. Contrary to the orthodox interpre-
tation of the quantum state, we do not assume the metaphysical identity
of the multiple mathematical representations given by diﬀerent bases [20].
Each superposition is basis dependent and must be considered as a distinct
quantum situation. For example, the superpositions cx1| ↑x⟩+ cx2| ↓x⟩and
cy1| ↑y⟩+ cy2| ↓y⟩, which are representations of the same Ψ and can be
derived from one another via a change in basis, are interpreted as two dif-
ferent quantum situations, QSΨ,Bx and QSΨ,By. Each one of them describes
a particular quantum state of aﬀairs. Notice that this interpretation departs
radically from the orthodox understanding of superposed states as making
reference to a quantum system. While orthodoxy relates superpositions to
the state of a quantum system (e.g., photon, electron, etc.) our proposal
relates quantum superpositions to quantum situations.
The logical structure of a superposition is such that a power and its
opposite can exist at one and the same time, violating PNC [10]. Within
a situation in which I can raise my hand, both powers (i.e., the power ‘I
am able to raise my hand’ and the power ‘I am able not to raise my hand’)
co-exist. A QS is compressed activity, something which is and is not the
case, hic et nunc. Its expression cannot be thought in terms of identity
but is expressed as a diﬀerence, as a quantum of action. This diﬀerence is
expressed in the actual realm through actual eﬀectuations.
Our understanding of QM can be condensed in the following eight pos-
tulates which contain the relation between our proposed concepts and the
orthodox formalism of the theory.
I. Hilbert Space: QM is mathematically represented in a vector Hilbert
space.
II. Potential State of Aﬀairs (PSA): A speciﬁc vector Ψ with no given
mathematical representation (basis) in Hilbert space represents a PSA;
i.e., the deﬁnite existence of a multiplicity of immanent powers, each
one of them with a speciﬁc potentia.
III. Actual State of Aﬀairs (ASA): Given a PSA and the choice of
a deﬁnite basis B, B′, B′′, ..., etc. —or equivalently a Complete Set of

169
Commuting Observables (C.S.C.O.)—, a context is deﬁned in which a
set of immanent powers, each one of them with a deﬁnite potentia, are
univocally determined as related to a speciﬁc experimental arrangement
(which in turn corresponds to a deﬁnite ASA). The context builds a
bridge between the potential and the actual realms, between quantum
powers and classical objects. The experimental arrangement (in the
ASA) allows the powers (in the PSA) to express themselves in actuality
through elementary processes which produce actual eﬀectuations.
IV. Quantum Situations, Immanent Powers and Potentia: Given
a PSA, Ψ, and the context or basis, we call a quantum situation to
any superposition of one or more than one power. In general given the
basis B = {|αi⟩} the quantum situation QSΨ,B is represented by the
following superposition of immanent powers:
c1|α1⟩+ c2|α2⟩+ ... + cn|αn⟩
(1)
We write the quantum situation of the PSA, Ψ, in the context B in
terms of the order pair given by the elements of the basis and the
coordinates in square modulus of the PSA in that basis:
QSΨ,B = (|αi⟩, |ci|2)
(2)
The elements of the basis, |αi⟩, are interpreted in terms of powers.
The coordinates of the elements of the basis in square modulus, |ci|2,
are interpreted as the potentia of the power |αi⟩, respectively. Given
the PSA and the context, the quantum situation, QSΨ,B, is univocally
determined in terms of a set of powers and their respective potentia.
(Notice that in contradistinction with the notion of quantum state the
deﬁnition of a quantum situation is basis dependent and thus intrinsi-
cally contextual.)
V. Elementary Process: In QM we only observe discrete shifts of energy
(quantum postulate). These discrete shifts are interpreted in terms of
elementary processes which produce actual eﬀectuations. An elemen-
tary process is the path which undertakes a power from the potential
realm to its actual eﬀectuation. This path is governed by the immanent
causem which allows the power to remain potentially preexistent within
mThe immanent cause allows us to connect the power with its actual eﬀectuation with-
out destroying nor deteriorating the power itself. The immanent cause allows for the
expression of eﬀects remaining both in the eﬀects and its cause. It does not only remain
in itself in order to produce, but also, that which it produces stays within. Thus, in
its production of eﬀects the potential does not deteriorate by becoming actual —as in

170
the potential realm independently of its actual eﬀectuation. Each power
|αi⟩is univocally related to an elementary process represented by the
projection operator Pαi = |αi⟩⟨αi|.
VI. Actual Eﬀectuation of an Immanent Power (Measurement):
Immanent powers exist in the mode of being of ontological potential-
ity. An actual eﬀectuation is the expression of a speciﬁc power within
actuality. Diﬀerent actual eﬀectuations expose the diﬀerent powers of a
given QS. In order to learn about a speciﬁc PSA (constituted by a set
of powers and their potentia) we must measure repeatedly the actual
eﬀectuations of each power exposed in the laboratory. (Notice that we
consider a laboratory as constituted by the set of all possible exper-
imental arrangements that can be related to the same Ψ.) An actual
eﬀectuation does not change in any way the PSA.
VII. Potentia (Born Rule): A potentia is the strength of an immanent
power to exist in the potential realm and to express itself in the actual
realm. Given a PSA, the potentia is represented via the Born rule. The
potentia pi of the immanent power |αi⟩in the speciﬁc PSA, Ψ, is given
by:
Potentia (|αi⟩, Ψ) = ⟨Ψ|Pαi|Ψ⟩= T r[PΨPαi]
(3)
In order to learn about a QS we must observe not only its powers
(which are exposed in actuality through actual eﬀectuations) but we
must also measure the potentia of each respective power. In order to
measure the potentia of each power we need to expose the QS statis-
tically through a repeated series of observations. The potentia, given
by the Born rule, coincides with the probability frequency of repeated
measurements when the number of observations goes to inﬁnity.
VIII. Potential Eﬀectuations of Immanent Powers (Schr¨odinger
Evolution): Given a PSA, Ψ, powers and potentia evolve determinis-
tically, independently of actual eﬀectuations, producing potential eﬀec-
tuations according to the following unitary transformation:
iℏd
dt|Ψ(t)⟩= H|Ψ(t)⟩
(4)
the case of the hylomorphic scheme. Actual results are single eﬀectuations, singularities
which expose the superposition in the actual mode of existence, while superpositions
remain evolving deterministically according to the Schr¨odinger equation in the poten-
tial mode of existence, even interacting with other superpositions and producing new
potential eﬀectuations.

171
While potential eﬀectuations evolve according to the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion, actual eﬀectuations are particular expressions of each power (that
constitutes the PSA, Ψ) in the actual realm. The ratio of such expres-
sions in actuality is determined by the potentia of each power.
According to our physical representation, just like classical physics talks
about entities constituted by properties that preexist in the actual realm,
QM talks about powers with deﬁnite potentia that preexist in an ontologi-
cal potential realm, independently of the speciﬁc actual context of inquiry
(QS) or the particular set of actualizations. QM talks about potential ef-
fectuations: the ontological evolution and interaction of immanent powers
with deﬁnite potentia. Actual eﬀectuations are only epistemic expressions
of the immanent powers and their potentia. Our representation allows us
to deﬁne powers objectively, independently of the epistemic context of in-
quiry. Through the immanent cause we are able to argue that a ‘click’ in a
detector is the partial expression of an immanent power in the actual realm
—instead of the complete actualization of a system (e.g. photon, electron,
etc.). Only through the repetition of measurements we can ﬁnd out (at
the epistemic level) what is the speciﬁc potentia of this or that immanent
power (in the ontic level). Both the basis and measurement problems are
dissolved when acknowledging that the process of observation is restored as
an epistemic display of an ontic level. Our representation allows us to regain
an objective picture of physical reality independent of measurements and
subjective choices. The price we are willing to pay is the abandonment of
the Newtonian metaphysical equation presupposed in the analysis of QM,
exposing the fact that: Quantum Reality ̸= Actuality.
The notion of immanent power is completely diﬀerent from the notions
of causal power, dispositions and propensities put forward by Heisenberg,
Margenau, Popper and Piron —notions that have been redeveloped in the
last years by Suarez, Dorato and Esfeld. Causal powers, propensities and
dispositions are deﬁned as non-actualized properties (see for a detailed dis-
cussion [12]). While these notions were developed in order to keep talking
about systems and properties within QM, our notion of immanent power is
designed to escape “classical reality”. While our notion of immanent power
exists and is deﬁned in a manner completely independent of actuality; the
notions of causal powers, dispositions and propensities are exclusively de-
ﬁned —going back to the Aristotelian hylemorphic scheme— in terms of
their actualization. Propensity-type interpretations have focused in trying
to solve the infamous measurement problem. Instead, rather than analyzing
the quantum to classical limit, our scheme is the only one that proposes

172
to discuss and focus on the interaction and evolution of that which exists
according to QM in a manner completely independent of the representation
provided by classical physics.
According to our physical representation QM is talking about potential
eﬀectuations of immanent powers and their potentia. In the mathematical
level this is described by entangled quantum superpositions which evolve
according to the Schr¨odinger equation of motion. Thus, the distance we
take from the hylemorphic proposals is very radical. Firstly, our approach
breaks with the presupposed existence of a reductionistic quantum to clas-
sical limit. Secondly, within our scheme the measurement and the basis
problems are regarded only as epistemic problems. We have solved them
by showing how they can be related to the objective measure —in the
actual realm— of immanent powers and their potentia. Thirdly, the imma-
nent power interpretation of QM that we put forward does not attempt to
solve the “no-problems” discussed in the literature. These are considered
as pseudoproblems which require the strong presupposition that QM is in
fact talking about “classical reality”. Our physical representation has been
designed in order to solve two ontic problems: the contextuality problem
and the superposition problem presented in [19,20]. Indeed, our (metaphys-
ical) interpretation explains not only the physical meaning of the contextual
character of QM in a natural manner through the introduction of the con-
textual notion of quantum situation, but also the physical meaning of quan-
tum superpositions and more speciﬁcally, the objective nature of quantum
probability.
10. Quantum Probability as an Objective Measure of the
Potentia of Powers
An analogy can be useful in order to picture the physical representation we
attempt to put forward for QM in terms of powers and potentia. Imagine
two baseball players called Matthias and John. If we talk about baseball,
everyone can understand that both Matthias and John possess a deﬁnite
set of potentia withy respect to the powers of batting, running and pitch-
ing. What does it mean, for example, that Matthias possesses the power
of batting with 0.9 potentia? It means obviously that he is a very good
batter. That if I through 100 balls to him, he will be capable to batt ap-
proximately 90 balls. If I would like to learn (at the epistemic level) about
the (ontic) power of Matthias to batt I obviously need to do statistics. The
more statistics I perform the better I will learn about the potentia of his
power to batt. Of course, exactly the same applies to John, if we would

173
like to learn about his powers of batting, running and pitching, we would
also need to perform a statistical measure. The statistics we could obtain
from the performance of each player in many baseball games become in
our scheme an (epistemic) measure of the (ontic) potentia of the powers in
question. QM talks about the powers that exist in Nature, how they evolve
and interact —it does not talk about subjects.
The analogy we are making with baseball is very important to under-
stand the importance of considering immanent powers as notions which
exist in quantum physical reality. In the movie Moneyball,n an American
biographical sports drama ﬁlm we ﬁnd an account of the Oakland Athletics
baseball team’s 2002 season and their general manager Billy Beane’s at-
tempts to assemble a competitive team. In the ﬁlm, Beane (Brad Pitt) and
assistant GM Peter Brand (Jonah Hill), faced with the franchise’s limited
budget for players, build a team of undervalued talent by scouting and an-
alyzing players only in terms of the statistical exposure of the potentia of
each one of their powers (batting, running and pitching). The movie tells
us how during a visit to the Cleveland Indians, Beane meets Peter Brand
(Jonah Hill), a young Yale economics graduate with radical ideas about
how to assess players’ value. Rather than relying on the scouts’ experience
and intuition, Brand selects players based exclusively on their on-base per-
centage (OBP); i.e. the actual eﬀectuation of the potentia of each player’s
powers. The movie tells us how, using these ideas, the Oakland Athletics
2002’ campaign ranks among the most famous in franchise history winning
20 consecutive games between August 13 and September 4, 2002. Two years
later the Red Sox won the 2004 World Series using the model pioneered by
the Athletics. This model, which simply measures the potentia of the powers
of each player has changed radically the way baseball is understood today.
My strong claim is that the ontological understanding of what is going on
in this model is related to the physical understanding of QM itself.
Our notion of immanent power recovers in a natural way the contextual
character of QM. Indeed, in order to measure the potentia of a speciﬁc
power (of John or Matthias), I will need to prepare a speciﬁc context. For
example, if I want to measure the power of batting of John, then I will need
to provide John with a batt, I will also need to have someone who throws
balls to him in order to be able to do statistics. Notice that this is in no way
diﬀerent to a Stern-Gerlach situation. Obviously, if I through only one ball
nThis movie is an adaptation of Michael Lewis’ book Moneyball: The Art of Winning
an Unfair Game [38].

174
I might not get enough information. If John misses this ﬁrst throw I might
not even learn if John can batt at all. It should become clear by now that
the knowledge we might gain (or not) of a speciﬁc power changes in no way
its ontological existence. It also becomes clear that the context of batting
is epistemically incompatible to those of running or pitching. Exactly the
same contextual aspect is found in Stern-Gerlach experiments. As we can
see, immanent powers are contextual existents. However, it also beocmes
clear that even though powers are epistemically incompatible, they are not
ontologically incompatible. It is this aspect which is required in order to
make sense of QM in objective terms and solve the contextuality problem
prsented in [19].
Our notion of immanent power also provides a natural explanation to
the measurement problem. In our terms, this amounts to the relation be-
tween the potentia of a power and its actual eﬀectuation as described in
terms of the immanent cause (see for a detailed discussion [14]). The fact
that Matthias can batt 0.9 of the times does not imply in any way that if I
throw a ball to Matthias he will batt the ball. This possibility is completely
indetermined since the notion of immanent power is intrinsically statistical.
That is the quantifying fuzzy nature of powers. Powers are notions which
—unlike properties which are either true or false, 0 or 1— are quantiﬁed in
a continuous manner; they posses an objective measure, namely, a potentia
between 0 and 1. A power is either potentially true or false [21], but its
potentia will range between 0 and 1.
We would like to remark the fact that our notion of immanent power is
maybe the ﬁrst physical notion to be characterized ontologically in terms
of an objective probability measure. This concept escapes the ruling of
actuality since it is founded on a diﬀerent set of metaphysical principles to
that of classical entities. Indeed, powers are indetermined, paraconsistent
and contextual existents. Powers can be superposed and entangled with
diﬀerent —even contradictory— powers. A power, contrary to a property
which can be only true or false possesses an intrinsic probabilistic measure,
namely, its potentia. A potentia is intrinsically statistical, but this statistical
aspect has nothing to do with ignorance. It is instead an objective feature
of quantum physical reality itself.
Objective knowledge of properties is determined through yes-no exper-
iments; one experiment is enough to completely characterize a property.
Boolean classical logic and truth tables are suitable structures that allow
us to deﬁne the elements of physical reality present in classical physics
—namely, actual properties. Contrary to classical properties, objective

175
knowledge of powers with deﬁnite potentia can be only approached by per-
forming statistical experiments. One experiment is simply not enough in
order to determine the potentia of a power. Boolean classical logic and
correspondence truth tables are not suitable structures and notions that
would allow us to characterize the physical elements of reality present in
QM which are, as we have discussed above, intrinsically statistical. Indeed,
we must remark that our scheme implies the need of developing a new
potential notion of truth, one that is not understood as a one-to-one corre-
spondence relation of propositions with an actual state of aﬀairs. We leave
this problem for a future work.
11. Conclusion
Our conceptual physical scheme allows us to provide a metaphysical ground
to Pauli’s intuition —also shared by Heisenberg, Popper, Margenau, Piron
and many others— that quantum statistics and quantum probability expose
objective features of a quantum situation, instead of “ignorance” or “inac-
curate” knowledge of an ASA. Quantum probabilities of physical quantities
calculated though the Born rule become in our scheme the objective gnoseo-
logical counterpart of an ontological potentia, an element of physical reality
that provides an objective measure of ontologically existent quantum pow-
ers. We believe that the key to disentangle the quantum riddle and create
a coherent representation of quantum physical reality is to abandon the
metaphysical dogma, presupposed in classical physics, that Reality = Ac-
tuality. We should acknowledge in this respect that “common sense” is just
a name for the naturalization of dogmatic metaphysics. Indeed, our time
calls to work on the elaboration of a new idea of reality, but in order not to
engage ourselves in pseudoproblems we should also acknowledge right from
the start that this project is in itself a metaphysical enterprise.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the following grants: FWO project
G.0405.08 and FWO-research community W0.030.06. CONICET RES.
4541-12 and the Project PIO-CONICET-UNAJ (15520150100008CO)
“Quantum Superpositions in Quantum Information Processing”. I would
like to thank G. Domenech and M. Graﬃgna for a careful reading of pre-
vious versions of this manuscript. Their many insightful comments and
suggestions have been valuable for revising and improving our manuscript.

176
References
1. Accardi, L., 1982, “Foundations of quantum probability”, Rend. Sem. Mat.
Univ. Politecnico di Torino, 249-270.
2. Aerts, D. and Sassoli di Bianchi, M., 2015, “Do Spins Have Directions?”,
quant-ph/arXiv:1501.00693.
3. Bacciagaluppi, G., 1996, Topics in the Modal Interpretation of Quantum Me-
chanics, Doctoral dissertation, University of Cambridge, Cambridge.
4. Bohr, N., 1935, “Can Quantum Mechanical Description of Physical Reality
be Considered Complete?”, Physical Review, 48, 696-702.
5. Bohr, N., 1960, “The Unity of Human Knowledge”, In Philosophical writings
of Neils Bohr, vol. 3., Ox Bow Press, Woodbridge.
6. Bub, J., 1997, Interpreting the Quantum World, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
7. Burtt, E. A., 2003, The Metaphysical Foundations of Modern Science, Dover,
New York.
8. Carnap, H., Hahn, H. and Neurath, O., 1929, “The Scientiﬁc Conception of
the World: The Vienna Circle”, Wissendchaftliche Weltausﬀassung.
9. Curd, M. and Cover, J. A., 1998, Philosophy of Science. The central issues,
Norton and Company (Eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
10. da Costa, N. and de Ronde, C., 2013, “The Paraconsistent Logic of Quantum
Superpositions”, Foundations of Physics, 43, 845-858.
11. da Costa, N. and de Ronde, C., 2015, “The Paraconsistent Approach to
Quantum Superpositions Reloaded: Formalizing Contradictory Powers in the
Potential Realm”, Preprint. (quant-ph/arXiv:1507.02706)
12. de Ronde, C., 2011, The Contextual and Modal Character of Quantum Me-
chanics: A Formal and Philosophical Analysis in the Foundations of Physics,
PhD dissertation, Utrecht University, Utrecht.
13. de Ronde, C., 2013, “Representing Quantum Superpositions: Powers, Poten-
tia and Potential Eﬀectuations”, Preprint. (quant-ph/arXiv:1312.7322)
14. de Ronde, C., 2013, “Quantum Superpositions and Causality: On the Multi-
ple Paths to the Measurement Result”, Preprint. (quant-ph/arXiv:1310.4534)
15. de Ronde, C., 2014, “The Problem of Representation and Experience in
Quantum Mechanics”, in Probing the Meaning of Quantum Mechanics: Phys-
ical, Philosophical and Logical Perspectives, pp. 91-111, D. Aerts, S. Aerts and
C. de Ronde (Eds.), World Scientiﬁc, Singapore.
16. de Ronde, C., 2014, “A Defense of the Paraconsistent Approach to Quantum
Superpositions (Answer to Arenhart and Krause)”, Logique et Analyse, sent.
(quant-ph/arXiv:1404.5186)
17. de Ronde, C., 2015, “Modality, Potentiality and Contradiction in Quan-
tum Mechanics”, New Directions in Paraconsistent Logic, pp. 249-265, J.-Y.
Beziau, M. Chakraborty and S. Dutta (Eds.), Springer, Berlin.
18. de Ronde, C., 2015, “Epistemological and Ontological Paraconsistency in
Quantum Mechanics: For and Against Bohrian Philosophy”, in The Road
to Universal Logic (Volume II), pp. 589-604, A. Koslow and A. Buchsbaum
(Eds.), Springer.
19. de Ronde, C., 2015, “Hilbert space quantum mechanics is contextual. (Reply
to R. B. Griﬃths)”, Preprint. (quant-ph/arXiv:1502.05396)
20. de Ronde, C., 2016, “Quantum Superpositions and the Representation of

177
Physical Reality Beyond Measurement Outcomes and Mathematical Struc-
tures”, Preprint. (quant-ph/arXiv:1603.06112)
21. de Ronde, C., 2016, “Potential Truth in Quantum Mechanics”, Preprint.
22. de Ronde, C., Freytes, H. and Domenech, G., 2014, “Interpreting the Modal
Kochen-Specker Theorem: Possibility and Many Worlds in Quantum Me-
chanics”, Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 45, 11-18.
23. DeWitt, B. and Graham, N., 1973, The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quan-
tum Mechanics, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
24. Dieks, D., 2010, “Quantum Mechanics, Chance and Modality”, Philosophica,
83, 117-137.
25. Einstein, A., 1916, “Ernst Mach.”, Physikalische Zeitschrift, 17, 101-102.
Translated by D. Howard, 2005, “Albert Einstein as a Philosopher of Sci-
ence”, Physics Today, 58, 34-40.
26. Einstein, A., Podolsky, B. and Rosen, N., 1935, “Can Quantum-Mechanical
Description be Considered Complete?”, Physical Review, 47, 777-780.
27. Fuchs, C. A. and Peres, A., 2000, “Quantum theory needs no ‘interpretation’
”, Physics Today, 53, 70.
28. Griﬃths, R. B., 2002, Consistent quantum theory, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
29. Heisenberg, W., 1958, Physics and Philosophy, World perspectives, George
Allen and Unwin Ltd., London.
30. Heisenberg, W., 1971, Physics and Beyond, Harper & Row.
31. Heisenberg, W., 1973, “Development of Concepts in the History of Quantum
Theory”, in The Physicist’s Conception of Nature, 264-275, J. Mehra (Ed.),
Reidel, Dordrecht.
32. Howard, D., 1993, “Was Einstein Really a Realist?”, Perspectives on Science,
1, 204-251.
33. Howard, D., 2005, “Albert Einstein as a Philosopher of Science”, Physics
Today, 58, 34-40.
34. Jaynes, E. T., 1990, Complexity, Entropy, and the Physics of Information,
W. H. Zurek (Ed.), Addison-Wesley.
35. Kochen, S. and Specker, E., 1967, “On the problem of Hidden Variables in
Quantum Mechanics”, Journal of Mathematics and Mechanics, 17, 59-87.
Reprinted in Hooker, 1975, 293-328.
36. Kolmogorov, A. N., 1933, Grundbegriﬀe der Wahrscheinlichkeitrechnung,
Ergebnisse Der Mathematik; translated as Foundations of Probability,
Chelsea Publishing Company, 1950.
37. Laurikainen, K. V., 1998, The Message of the Atoms, Essays on Wolfgang
Pauli and the Unspeakable, Springer Verlag, Berlin.
38. Lewis, M., 2003, Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game, Norton,
New York.
39. Petersen, A., 1963, “The Philosophy of Niels Bohr”, Bulletin of the Atomic
Scientists, Sep 1963, 8-14.
40. Pitowsky, I., 1994, “George Boole’s ‘Conditions of Possible Experience’ and
the Quantum Puzzle”, The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 45,
95-125.
41. Primas, H., 1999, “Basic elements and problems of probability theory”, Jour-
nal of Scientiﬁc Exploration, 13, 579-613.
42. R´edei, M., 2012, “Some Historical and Philosophical Aspects of Quantum

178
Probability Theory and its Interpretation”, in Probabilities, Laws, and Struc-
tures, pp. 497-506, D. Dieks et al. (Eds.), Springer.
43. Schr¨odinger, E., 1935, “The Present Situation in Quantum Mechanics”,
Naturwiss, 23, 807. Translated to english in Quantum Theory and Measure-
ment, J. A. Wheeler and W. H. Zurek (Eds.), 1983, Princeton University
Press, Princeton.
44. Van Fraassen, B. C., 1980, The Scientiﬁc Image, Clarendon, Oxford.
45. Van Fraassen, B. C., 2010, “Rovelli’s World”, Foundations of Physics, 40,
390-417.
46. Verelst, K. and Coecke, B., 1999, “Early Greek Thought and perspectives for
the Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics: Preliminaries to an Ontological
Approach”, in The Blue Book of Einstein Meets Magritte, 163-196, D. Aerts
(Ed.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.
47. Wheeler, J. A. and Zurek, W. H. (Eds.) 1983, Theory and Measurement,
Princeton University Press, Princeton.

179
ON WHEN A SEMANTICS IS NOT A GOOD SEMANTICS:
THE ALGEBRAISATION OF ORTHOMODULAR LOGIC
Tomasz Kowalski
Dept. of Mathematics and Statistics, La Trobe University
Melbourne (Victoria), Australia
Francesco Paoli and Roberto Giuntini
Dept. of Pedagogy, Psychology, Philosophy
University of Cagliari, Italy.
E-mail: giuntini@unica.it
It has been taken for granted for a long time that orthomodular lattices are
the “algebraic counterpart” of orthomodular quantum logic. Paviˇcic and Megill
have questioned this claim by pointing out that orthomodular quantum logic
is sound and complete with respect to a proper supervariety of the variety
OML of orthomodular lattices (the so-called weakly orthomodular lattices).
The same authors conclude that “in the syntactical structure of quantum logic
there is nothing orthomodular”. After reviewing in a certain detail some con-
cepts from Abstract Algebraic Logic, especially Blok and Pigozzi’s theory of
algebraisable logics, we argue that the weakly orthomodular semantics intro-
duced by Paviˇcic and Megill is not a good semantics, and that the role of OML
as an algebraic counterpart of quantum logic is unaﬀected by their allegations.
1. Introduction
This paper contains no new results; indeed, it scarcely contains anything
that goes beyond folklore. However, diﬀerent folks have diﬀerent lore, and
since quantum logic is an area to which mathematicians, physicists, and
philosophers — let alone logicians — claim some rights, clashes are in-
evitable. Under some circumstances, then, it may not be out of place to
review a few facts that could be far from obvious to a signiﬁcant portion of
this composite community, lest some claims you encounter in the literature
lead more people than one would expect to believe that well-established re-
sults in the area are actually false. This is what we try to do in the present
article.

180
2. A paradox to begin with
From a logic L one expects two things: syntax and semantics. Syntax is
some way of manipulating strings of symbols, in order to separate the grain
from the chaﬀ. What counts as the grain could vary, depending on what we
are interested in, but typically it will be theorems, i.e., provable formulae.
Semantics is a way of associating meanings with strings of symbols, typically
by specifying some class C of models of L, i.e., structures in which suitably
interpreted formulae of L are either true of false. Now, it is sometimes said
that a class C is a good semantics for L if L is at least weakly sound and
complete with respect to C, that is, if all theorems of L are true in C and
all non-theorems are false.
This seems trivial. Let us see where it can lead, if taken literally. Take
the lattice N5 with the universe {1, a, b, c, 0} ordered as in Figure 1. Endow
N5 with a unary operation ′ deﬁned by
′
1
0
a
c
b
a
c
a
0
1
Fig. 1.
The algebra N
′
5.

181
Just like you would do with Boolean algebras, deﬁne a formula α to be
true in N′
5 if the equation α ≈1 holds in N′
5 in the usual algebraic sense
expressed by N′
5 |= α ≈1. It is not diﬃcult to verify that N′
5 is a model
of classical logic, the key fact being that if p →q ≈1 and p ≈1 hold,
then q ≈1 holds as well, where p →q stands for p′ ∨q. So classical logic
is sound with respect to N′
5. Conversely, observing that the two-element
Boolean algebra 2 is a subalgebra of N′
5, we get that any non-theorem β
can be falsiﬁed on N′
5, by any valuation falsifying β on 2. Thus, we have
proved:
Prop 2.1. Classical logic is (weakly) sound and complete with respect to
a non-modular lattice with a non-involutive complementation.
Strong soundness and completeness can also be established along simi-
lar, albeit slightly more convoluted, lines. Certainly, the theorem above does
not show that classical logic is non-distributive, non-modular, and fails the
double negation law. There would be no need to point this out, were it not
for the fact that similar theorems have appeared in peer-reviewed outlets,
making precisely such bizarre claims. Deferring references and a more de-
tailed discussion thereof until Section 4, let us dwell for the time being on
Proposition 2.1: what it does show is that classical logic has models that
viewed from the outside are non-modular and do not satisfy double negation.
But seen with the eyes of classical logic the model N′
5 is distributive and
satisﬁes double negation, that is N′
5 |= (p∧(q ∨r)) ↔((p∧q)∨(p∧r)) ≈1
and N′
5 |= p ↔p′′ ≈1 both hold, with ↔being the classical equivalence
connective. This is so because in N′
5 we have that b ↔c = 1, and since clas-
sical logic can only distinguish things up to classical equivalence, it cannot
tell the diﬀerence between b and c in N′
5.
To rule out such models, a Leibnizian principle of identifying indis-
cernibles may be employed, restricting the class of models of a given logic
L to what we expect. And since what we expect (in the vast majority of
cases) is the result of the algebraisation process, the next section will review
it in some detail.
3. Algebraisability
This section is a concise primer of abstract algebraic logic, tailored for the
dialectical purposes of the present paper. More detailed information on the
subject can be found in the standard references for the area: [2,7,8]. The
universal algebraic drudgery is the usual one, for which the reader can
consult classical sources like [5].

182
3.1. Logics and equational consequence
Let ν be a similarity type, presented as a sequence of connectives, and let
X be a set of variables. Furthermore, let FmlL(X) = ⟨FmlL(X), ν⟩be
the absolutely free algebra of type ν, freely generated by X. We disregard
whatever diﬀerences there may be between logical and algebraic types, so
that FmlL(X) can be alternatively viewed as a set of terms or as a set
of well-formed formulae over a set of variables X, typically assumed to be
countably inﬁnite. The symbols p, q, x, y... will be used as metavariables
for members of X. Equations on ν, in this perspective, are nothing but
ordered pairs of formulas, i.e. members of (FmlL(X))2. The traditional
notation α ≈β will be used in place of the ordered pair notation ⟨α, β⟩.
We will identify a logic L with a deductive system, i.e., a pair
⟨FmlL(X), ⊢L⟩, where ⊢L⊆℘(FmlL(X)) × FmlL(X) is a consequence re-
lation satisfying the following conditions:
(1) if α ∈Γ, then Γ ⊢α
(2) if Γ ⊢α and Γ ⊆∆, then ∆⊢α
(3) if Γ ⊢α and ∆⊢γ for every γ ∈Γ, then ∆⊢α
(4) if Γ ⊢α, then ∆⊢α for some ﬁnite ∆⊆Γ
(5) if Γ ⊢α, then σ(Γ) ⊢σ(α) for any endomorphism σ of FmlL.
Notice that we dropped the subscript L from ⊢L in the process, and
also the indication of the set of variables X from FmlL(X). Whenever the
logic L or the set X of variables are unimportant or clear from context,
we will do it systematically. Since FmlL is free, there is a natural bijection
between its endomorphisms σ and maps σ0 : X →FmlL(X), namely, each
σ is an extension of a σ0 to a homomorphism, via
σ(⋄(p1, ..., pn)) = ⋄(σ (p1) , ..., σ (pn)) ,
for any connective ⋄in ν. With no danger of confusion, both σ0 and σ will
be sometimes called substitutions. If Γ, ∆are sets of formulas, Γ ⊢L ∆is
short for: Γ ⊢L α for all α ∈∆.
Sometimes, the term consequence relation is used in a wider sense: it is
only required that the conditions (1)–(3) hold. Then, consequence relations
satisfying (4) are called ﬁnitary, and those satisfying (5) structural. Every
ﬁnitary and structural consequence relation is a consequence relation of
some deductive system deﬁned in a traditional way (cf. [12]), by axioms
and inference rules. To see that it must be so, take as axioms all formulae
α such that ⊢α (i.e., ∅⊢α) holds; then adopt as inference rules all pairs
(∆, α) such that ∆is ﬁnite and ∆⊢α holds.

183
A subset T of FmlL that is closed under ⊢, i.e., T ⊢α implies α ∈T for
any α ∈FmlL, is called a theory over L. From the structurality of ⊢it fol-
lows that the set of theories is closed under inverse substitutions, that is, if
T is a theory and σ a substitution, then σ−1(T) is also a theory. The small-
est theory over L is the set Th(L) = {α ∈FmlL : ⊢α}, whose members
are called theorems of L. Observe that Th(L) = T{T : T is a theory of L}.
Now, let A be an algebra of the same type as FmlL, let α (p1, ..., pn)
be a formula of the same type containing at most the indicated variables,
and let −→a = a1, ..., an be elements of A. By the freeness of FmlL, any
homomorphism h : FmlL →A is uniquely determined by its action on
variables. This justiﬁes the notation αA(−→a ) to denote the element h (α),
whenever h is such that h (pi) = ai, for all i ≤n. With this notation at
hand, when K is a class of algebras, all of the same type as FmlL, we
deﬁne the equational consequence relation of K as the relation ⊢Eq(K)⊆
℘((FmlL)2) × (FmlL)2 such that, for all sets of equations E ⊆(FmlL)2
and for all equations α ≈β ∈(FmlL)2,
E ⊢Eq(K) α ≈β iﬀfor every A ∈K and every −→a ∈An,
if γA(−→a ) = δA(−→a ) for all γ ≈δ ∈E, then αA(−→a )=βA(−→a ).
In the same vein, given E ⊆(FmlL)2, A an algebra of the same type
as FmlL, and −→a = a1, ..., an elements of A, we will write EA(−→a ) to mean
that for all γ ≈δ ∈E, γA(−→a ) = δA(−→a ), omitting parentheses if E is
a singletona. Again, if E, E′ are sets of equations, E ⊢Eq(K) E′ means
E ⊢Eq(K) ϵ for all ϵ ∈E′.
3.2. Algebraic semantics
Let L = ⟨FmlL(X), ⊢L⟩be a logic in the type ν, and let τ = {γi(p) ≈
δi(p)}i∈I be a set of equations in a single variable of ν. We may also view
τ as a function which maps formulas in FmlL to sets of equations of the
same type. Thus, we let τ(α) stand for the set
{γi(p/α) ≈δi(p/α)}i∈I,
where γi(p/α) refers to the result of uniformly replacing any occurrences of
p in γi by α, and similarly for δi(p/α). For Γ ⊆FmlL, τ(Γ) is deﬁned as
S {τ(γ) : γ ∈Γ}.
aConsequence relations of deductive systems and equational consequence relations are
both instances of a more general concept, devised by Blok and J´onsson [1], according to
which the base set need not be a set of formulas or equations, but can be any old set.
We will not enter into that.

184
Now, let K be a class of algebras also of the same type. We say that K
is an algebraic semantics for L if, for some such τ, the following condition
holds for all Γ ∪{α} ⊆FmlL:
Γ ⊢L α
iﬀ
τ(Γ) ⊢Eq(K) τ(α).
If K is an algebraic semantics for L via the mapping τ, we also say that
L is the τ-assertional logic of K [3].
Here’s the intuitive idea behind all this. Given an algebra A ∈K, val-
uations on A — namely, homomorphisms h : FmlL→A, where A ∈K —
are interpreted as “assignments of meanings” to elements of FmlL, while
elements of A can be seen as “meanings of propositions” or “truth values”.
The translation map τ equationally deﬁnes, for every A ∈K, a “truth set”
T ⊆A in the following sense: A satisﬁes τ(α) just in case every valuation
of α on A maps it to a member of T. Under such circumstances, intuitively
speaking, the meaning of α in A belongs to the set of “true values” and
hence is true. What is at stake here is an algebra-based concept of valid
argument: α follows from the set of premises Γ just in case, whenever we
assign a “true” value to all the premises in some algebra in K, the conclu-
sion α is also assigned a “true” value. In particular, if ν contains a nullary
connective 1, it is possible to choose τ to be the singleton {p ≈1}, which
forces, for any A ∈K, the truth set T to be the singleton

1A	
. For ex-
ample, the variety BA of Boolean algebras is an algebraic semantics for
classical logic CL via τ = {p ≈1}; we also say (in this and in similar cases)
that CL is the 1-assertional logic of BA.
As natural as it may seem, the notion of algebraic semantics — which
is, essentially, the brainchild of Lindenbaum and Tarski in the pioneer-
ing era of algebraic logic — has several shortcomings, hereafter reviewed.
Metaphorically speaking, there are logics that cannot ﬁnd an algebraic part-
ner; moreover, the m´enage between a logic and its algebraic semantics is
an open couple relationship, and its partners do not enjoy equal rights.
• There are logics with no algebraic semantics [4]. An example is the
deductive system ⟨FmlL, ⊢HI⟩, where ⊢HI is the derivability relation
of the Hilbert-style calculus whose sole axiom is α →α and whose sole
inference rule is modus ponens.
• The same logic can have more than one algebraic semantics [4]. The
concept of algebraic semantics depends on the chosen translation map,
and diﬀerent translations may lead to diﬀerent places. By Glivenko’s
Theorem, for example, CL admits not only BA as an algebraic se-
mantics, but also the variety HA of Heyting algebras, by choosing the
nonstandard map τ = {¬¬p ≈1}.

185
• There can be diﬀerent logics with the same algebraic semantics. Since
Heyting algebras are an algebraic semantics for intuitionistic logic IL,
the previous example shows that both CL and IL have HA as an
algebraic semantics.
• The relationship between a logic and its algebraic semantics can be
asymmetric. The property of belonging to the set of “true values” of
an algebra A ∈K must be deﬁnable by means of the set of equations
τ, whence the class K has the expressive resources to indicate when a
given formula is valid in L. On the other hand, the logic L need not
have the expressive resources to indicate when a given equation holds
in K.
The observation that such unwelcome states of aﬀairs are all but in-
frequent spurred logicians to make the transition to a stronger concept, to
be credited to Blok and Pigozzi [2]. This notion is the heart of the next
subsection.
3.3. Equivalent algebraic semantics
Given an equation α ≈β and a set of formulas in two variables ρ =
{αj (p, q)}j∈J, we use the abbreviation
ρ (α, β) = {αj (p/α, q/β)}j∈J .
ρ, in the same guise as τ, will be also regarded as a function, mapping
this time equations to sets of formulas. Again, for E ⊆(FmlL)2, ρ (E) is
deﬁned as S {ρ (α, β) : α ≈β ∈E}.
A logic L = ⟨FmlL(X), ⊢L⟩is said to be algebraisable with equivalent
algebraic semantics K (where K is a class of algebras of the same type as
FmlL(X)) iﬀthere exist a map τ from formulas to sets of equations, and a
map ρ from equations to sets of formulas such that the following conditions
hold for any Γ ∪{α, β} ⊆FmlL and for all E ⊆(FmlL)2:
AL1: Γ ⊢L α iﬀτ(Γ) ⊢Eq(K) τ(α);
AL2: E ⊢Eq(K) α ≈β iﬀρ (E) ⊢L ρ (α, β);
AL3: α ⊣⊢L ρ (τ(α));
AL4: α ≈β ⊣⊢Eq(K) τ(ρ (α, β)).
This deﬁnition can be drastically simpliﬁed:
Lemma 3.1. A logic L is algebraisable with equivalent algebraic semantics
K iﬀit satisﬁes either AL1 and AL4, or else AL2 and AL3.

186
Clearly, the Blok-Pigozzi notion of equivalent algebraic semantics sub-
sumes the Lindenbaum-Tarski notion of algebraic semantics. Every equiv-
alent algebraic semantics for L is, in particular, an algebraic semantics for
L in virtue of AL1. But the converse need not hold. Actually, the previous
deﬁnition goes a long way towards meeting the criticisms of the previous
subsection. First of all, it bans logical chauvinism: by AL2, logics must
have the expressive resources to indicate which equations hold in the corre-
sponding class of algebras. Second, it curbs (although it does not completely
prohibit) promiscuity. If L is algebraisable with equivalent algebraic seman-
tics K, then K might still not be the unique equivalent algebraic semantics
for L. A trivial example demonstrates this situation: both the variety BA of
Boolean algebras and the singleton {2}, where 2 is the 2-element Boolean
algebra, are equivalent algebraic semantics for CL. However, we have the
following:
Theorem 3.1. [2, Thm. 2.15] In case L is ﬁnitary, any two equivalent
algebraic semantics for L generate the same quasivariety.
This quasivariety is in turn an equivalent algebraic semantics for the
same logic, and so has every right to be called the equivalent quasivariety
semantics for L.
On the other hand, it is possible to have diﬀerent algebraisable logics
with the same equivalent algebraic semantics (see e.g. [16] for an example
of two diﬀerent algebraisable logics whose equivalent variety semantics is
the variety of Abelian ℓ-groups). None the less, if L and L′ are algebraisable
with equivalent quasivariety semantics K and with the same set of deﬁning
equations τ(p), then L and L′ must coincide.
4. Algebraisability and quantum logic
Let us now focus on the issue alluded to in the very title of the present
paper: the semantics of quantum logics, and in particular of the oldest and
noblest member of this class: orthomodular quantum logic (OML). Before
coming to the point, let us recall some relevant deﬁnitions.
An ortholattice is an algebra A = ⟨A, ∧, ∨,′ , 0, 1⟩of type ⟨2, 2, 1, 0, 0⟩
s.t. the reduct ⟨A, ∧, ∨, 0, 1⟩is a bounded lattice and the equations x′′ ≈x,
x∧x′ ≈0 and x∨x′ ≈1 are satisﬁed. An ortholattice satisfying the identity
(x′ ∧(x ∨y)) ∨y′ ∨(x ∧y) ≈1

187
is called a weakly orthomodular lattice, while an ortholattice satisfying the
identity
x ∨y ≈((x ∨y) ∧y′) ∨y
is an orthomodular lattice. As the names themselves suggest, every ortho-
modular lattice is weakly orthomodular, but the converse fails to hold — a
counterexample is the lattice O6 depicted below:
We make a note of a particular formula of type ⟨2, 2, 1, 0, 0⟩, of primary
importance for the following considerations: the Sasaki hook, deﬁned as
x →y = x′ ∨(x ∧y) .
Let us now revert to OML. Here, the association between logic and
algebra is somewhat obvious: actually, as it happened for many other non-
classical logics, in this case semantics predated syntax. Upon noting that
the mathematical representatives of quantum events, viz. closed subspaces
in a complex separable Hilbert space, formed a possibly nondistributive
orthomodular lattice, Birkhoﬀand von Neumann deﬁned OML in such a
way as to obtain a match with the variety of orthomodular lattices (see
e.g. [6]). Using terminology that was not available to them but that was
brieﬂy recalled above, Birkhoﬀand von Neumann introduced OML as the
1-assertional logic of the variety OML of orthomodular lattices, i.e. as the
logic whose consequence relation is given by:
Γ ⊢OML α iﬀ{γ ≈1 : γ ∈Γ} ⊢Eq(OML) α ≈1,
which, as we know, ipso facto implies that OML is an algebraic semantics
for OML with set of deﬁning equations τ (p) = {p ≈1}. The subsequent
Hilbert-style, or Gentzen-style, axiomatisations of OML (see e.g. [10] or
[13]) provided traditional, syntactically deﬁned deductive systems that were
sound and complete with respect to orthomodular lattices.

188
Actually, more than that is true: OML is an equivalent algebraic se-
mantics for OML, as the next theorem shows.
Theorem 4.1. OML is algebraisable, with set of equivalence formulae
ρ (α, β) = {(α →β) ∧(β →α)} ,
and set of deﬁning equations τ (p) = {p ≈1}. Its equivalent quasivariety
semantics is the variety OML.
Proof. We already observed that OML is strongly sound and complete
w.r.t. OML. This settles Condition (AL1) in Lemma 3.1. To round oﬀour
proof, it is suﬃcient to show that Condition (AL4) is also met, namely, that
for an arbitrary equation α ≈β
α ≈β ⊣|=OML (α →β) ∧(β →α) ≈1.
However, it is known that the quasiequation (α →β) ∧(β →α) ≈1 ⇒
α ≈β holds in OML, while the converse implication is obvious.
In the light of Theorem 3.1, no other class of algebras which is at least a
quasivariety can claim to play the same rˆole: the unique position of OML
as the algebraic match of orthomodular quantum logic is secure. Although
the adequacy of OML for quantum mechanics can be, and has been, dis-
puted — for one, the class of all lattices of closed subspaces of Hilbert spaces
validates identities that are not universally satisﬁed throughout OML [9]
— the least we can say is that, whether or not OML adequately represent
a proper formalisation of the intrinsic logic of quantum mechanics, its alge-
braic counterpart can’t be anything else than the variety of orthomodular
lattices.
Surprisingly enough, however, this claim has been questioned by Paviˇcic
and Megill in a series of papers [14,15]. They consider a Hilbert-style sys-
tem for OML, taken from [11], and observe that this system is sound and
complete w.r.t. a supervariety of OML, the variety WOML of weakly or-
thomodular lattices. Furthermore, they observe a few additional facts:
• orthomodular lattices are exactly those members of WOML which
satisfy the quasiequation (α →β) ∧(β →α) ≈1 ⇒α ≈β;
• WOML and OML have the same quasiequational theory, if we re-
strict ourselves to equations of the form α ≈1;
• The soundness and completeness proof also works if we replace
WOML with the single algebra O6.

189
Having remarked the above, they venture on such bold claims as:
Deductive quantum logic is not orthomodular [15, p. 26].
The proofs of completeness [of orthomodular quantum logic and classical
logic] introduce hidden axioms of orthomodularity and distributivity in
the respective Lindenbaum algebras of the logic [15, p. 27].
In the syntactical structure of quantum logic there is nothing
orthomodular. The orthomodularity appears through the deﬁnition of the
equivalence relation [14, p. 14 of the preprint version].
If we grant this, a puzzling conclusion follows: orthomodularity does
not lie in the structure of quantum logic, as all of us were taught, but
“in the eye of the beholder”. Appealing to the framework we presented in
the previous sections, however, it is now comparatively easy to detect the
ﬂaws in the argument by Paviˇcic and Megill. What they manage to show,
indeed, is that deductive quantum logic (as they call it) has the variety
of weakly orthomodular lattices as an algebraic semantics, period. They
do not show that this variety is an equivalent algebraic semantics for the
same logic — and of course they cannot do so, because there is a unique
quasivariety with this property, and such a slot is already ﬁlled (as we have
seen) by OML. But there is a further instructive lesson to be drawn from
Paviˇcic’s and Megill’s proof. WOML falls short of the requirements needed
for an equivalent algebraic semantics for OML precisely because it includes
algebras (like O6) containing as members distinct but OML-indiscernible
elements. And this, in turns, happens because WOML does not universally
satisfy the quasiequation
(α →β) ∧(β →α) ≈1 ⇒α ≈β,
which, true to form, characterises orthomodular lattices within the class
of all ortholattices (as Paviˇcic and Megill correctly observe). Therefore it
is not true that Σ ⊣|=WOML τ(ρ(Σ)), for an arbitrary set of equations Σ:
Paviˇcic’s and Megill’s semantics is not a good semantics in the sense we
speciﬁed above.
Two additional remarks are in order, lest the issue be clouded by ir-
relevant details that could trigger unfounded counter-objections. First, let
us assess more thoroughly the claim by Paviˇcic and Megill to the eﬀect
that ”in the syntactical structure of quantum logic there is nothing ortho-
modular” and ”the orthomodularity appears through the deﬁnition of the
equivalence relation”. These authors maintain that orthomodularity is kind
of smuggled into the standard completeness proof for orthomodular logic

190
by deﬁning the Lindenbaum congruence as
(α, β) ∈Ωiﬀ⊢OML (α →β) ∧(β →α).
According to them, if we modify this deﬁnition as follows:
(α, β) ∈Ωiﬀ⊢OML(α →β) ∧(β →α)
and v (α) = v (β) for all homomorphisms of Fml to O6,
we get a soundness and completeness proof w.r.t. WOML and our models
need no longer be orthomodular. That ﬁgures. The suggested reﬁnement of
the Lindenbaum congruence, in fact, has a twofold eﬀect. First, it allows
OML-indiscernible but distinct elements to sneak into the models for our
logic. Second, it renders the new congruence undeﬁnable by means of the
symmetrisation of the Sasaki hook — or, indeed, by any other set of equiv-
alence connectives, on pain of contradicting Theorems 3.1 and 4.1. The
results surveyed above explain away all the doubts that have been cast on
the correspondence between orthomodular quantum logic and orthomodu-
lar lattices.
In the second place, one should not be misled by our semantic deﬁnition
of OML. Although this semantic approach was historically prior to any
syntactic axiomatisation, if we proceeded as Paviˇcic and Megill do and
considered, say, their Hilbert-style system H for OML deﬁning
Γ ⊢
∗
OML α
iﬀthere is a ﬁnite sequence of formulas ending with α,
each of which is either an axiom of H or is obtained
from its predecessors by a rule of H,
it would have been an easy exercise to prove that Γ ⊢OML α iﬀΓ ⊢
∗
OML
α. This is, indeed, what these authors refer to when they mention the
soundness and completeness theorem of OML.
To conclude, the allegations to be found in [14,15] rest on confusions that
can be conveniently cleared up with the help of some tools from contempo-
rary abstract algebraic logic. Although these misunderstandings may seem
evident to a practicioner of the ﬁeld, we thought it important to point them
out in some detail for the beneﬁt of the wider quantum structures commu-
nity, whose members may not be wholly familiar with these concepts and
methods. We hope that, by so doing, we will prevent once and for all such
incorrect claims from spreading any furtherb.
bWe thank Matthew Spinks for helpful discussions on the themes of this paper.

191
References
1. Blok W.J. and J´onsson B., “Equivalence of consequence operations”, Studia
Logica, 83, 1-3, 2006, pp. 91–110.
2. Blok W.J. and Pigozzi D., Algebraizable Logics, Memoirs AMS, 77, N 396,
1989.
3. Blok W.J. and Raftery J.G., “Assertionally equivalent quasivarieties”, Inter-
national Journal of Algebra and Computation, 18, 4, 2008, pp. 589-681.
4. Blok W.J. and Rebagliato J., “Algebraic semantics for deductive systems”,
Studia Logica, 74, 1-2, 2003, pp. 153-180.
5. Burris S. and Sankappanavar H.P., A Course in Universal Algebra, Springer,
Berlin, 1981.
6. Dalla Chiara M.L., Giuntini R. and R´edei M., “The history of quantum
logic”, in D. Gabbay, J. Woods (Eds.), Handbook of the History of Logic,
Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2007.
7. Font J.M., Abstract Algebraic Logic: An Introductory Textbook, 2013, College
Publications, London, forthcoming.
8. Font J.M., Jansana R. and Pigozzi D., “A survey of Abstract Algebraic
Logic”, Studia Logica, 74, 1-2, 2003, pp. 13-97.
9. Greechie R. J., “A non-standard quantum logic with a strong set of states”,
in E. Beltrametti and B. van Fraassen (Eds.), Current Issues in Quantum
Logic, Plenum, New York, 1981, pp. 375–380.
10. Hardegree G.M., “An axiom system for orthomodular quantum logic”, Studia
Logica, 40, 1981, pp. 1-12.
11. Kalmbach G., Orthomodular Lattices, Academic Press, London,1983.
12.  Los J. and Suszko R., “Remarks on sentential logic”, Indagationes Mathe-
maticae, 20, 1958, pp. 177-183.
13. Nishimura H., “Sequential method in quantum logic”, Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 45, 1980, pp. 339-352.
14. Paviˇcic M. and Megill M.D., “Is quantum logic a logic?”, in K. Engeresser et
al., Handbook of Quantum Logic and Quantum Structures. Vol. 2, Quantum
Logic, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2009, pp. 23-47.
15. Paviˇcic M. and Megill M.D., “Non-Orthomodular models for both standard
quantum logic and standard classical logic: Repercussions for quantum com-
puters”, Helv. Phys. Acta, 72, 1999, pp. 189-210.
16. Paoli F., Spinks M., VeroﬀR., “Abelian logic and the logics of pointed lattice-
ordered varieties”, Logica Universalis, 2, 2, 2008, pp. 209-233.

192
VON NEUMANN, EMPIRICISM AND
THE FOUNDATIONS OF QUANTUM MECHANICS
Ot´avio Bueno
Department of Philosophy, University of Miami,
Coral Gables, FL 33124, USA
E-mail: otaviobueno@ mac. com
The system of logics which one
uses should be derived from ag-
gregate experiences relative to
the main application which one
wishes to make — logics should
be inspired by experience.
John von Neumann
1. Introduction
The issue of the application of mathematics to natural science has received
a great deal of consideration in the last few years (see, for instance, Field
[1980] and [1989], Hellman [1989], Steiner [1989] and [1998], and Shapiro
[1997]). In this paper, I am concerned with two tasks: (1) to provide a
formal framework to accommodate one important aspect of this issue —
the heuristic use of mathematics in theory construction — and (2) to il-
lustrate how this framework works by focusing on a particular case-study:
von Neumann’s use of logic and set theory in his work in the foundations of
quantum mechanics. The reason to consider von Neumann’s work derives
from the interplay of mathematical, logical and heuristic considerations
that he wove together in the process of providing an axiomatization for
quantum mechanics and exploring some of its consequences. Moreover, his
work provides important insights into the nature of theory construction in
physics.
As we shall see below, we cannot separate von Neumann’s attitude to-
wards mathematics from his attitude towards logic. He was searching for

193
a uniﬁed approach to physics, where logic, mathematics and probability
nicely hang together. This approach naturally raises the issue of the cogni-
tive status of logic and mathematics in von Neumann’s view. In addressing
this issue, what I want to establish is that there are three major empiri-
cist trends in von Neumann’s work: (i) von Neumann was an empiricist in
his view of mathematics (in the sense that mathematical theories are often
created from empirical demands); (ii) von Neumann was also an empiri-
cist with regard to logic (in the sense that logic should be inspired and
modiﬁed by experience; moreover, in his view, there are as many logics as
physical phenomena demand). Finally, (iii) in developing his approach to
the foundations of quantum mechanics, von Neumann countenanced an em-
piricist version of the semantic approach (stressing the empirical adequacy
of scientiﬁc theories, rather than their truth). In this way, we have a new
understanding of von Neumann’s accomplishments, and we can determine
the cognitive status he assigned to them.
But to represent the moves made by von Neumann in the articulation of
his approach, we need a particular formal framework. One of the contentions
of the present work is that the framework developed by da Costa and French
— the partial structures approach — is helpful here. This framework has two
major components: an open-ended notion of structure (partial structure)
and a weak concept of truth (quasi-truth). Both notions received a formal
characterization in a number of interesting papers by da Costa (see da
Costa [1986], and Mikenberg, da Costa and Chuaqui [1986]), and in later
works, da Costa and French have provided extensive applications of them
to various problems in the philosophy of science (see da Costa and French
[1989], [1990], [1993a], [1993b], and [2003]). In my view, this framework
helps us to understand von Neumann’s work in the foundations of physics;
so let me ﬁrst say a few things about it.a
aThe formal framework presented below is part of a broader program whose main task
is to articulate a constructive empiricist philosophy of mathematics (see Bueno [2009]),
thus extending van Fraassen’s proposal to this domain (see van Fraassen [1980], [1985],
[1989], and [1991]). Although I have no plans to elaborate on this program here, let me
just make one point. As is well known, the aim of science for the constructive empiricist
is not truth, but something weaker — empirical adequacy (van Fraassen [1980], p.12).
Similarly, the aim of mathematics in the present proposal is accordingly weaker. It is not
truth, but quasi-truth (roughly speaking, truth with regard to a limited domain).

194
2. Partial Structures and Quasi-Truth
The partial structures approach (see Mikenberg et al. [1986], and da Costa
and French [1989], [1990], and [2003]) relies on three main notions: partial
relation, partial structure and quasi-truth. One of the main motivations
for introducing this proposal comes from the need for supplying a formal
framework in which the “openness” and “incompleteness” of information
dealt with in scientiﬁc practice can be accommodated. This is accomplished
ﬁrstly by extending the usual notion of structure, in order to model the
partialness of information we have about a certain domain (introducing then
the notion of a partial structure). Secondly, the Tarskian characterization
of the concept of truth is generalized for such “partial” contexts, advancing
the corresponding concept of quasi-truth.
The ﬁrst step, that paves the way to introduce partial structures, is to
formulate an appropriate notion of partial relation. When investigating a
certain domain of knowledge ∆(say, the physics of particles), we formulate
a conceptual framework which helps us in systematizing the information we
obtain about ∆. This domain is represented by a set D of objects (which in-
cludes real objects, such as conﬁgurations in a Wilson chamber and spectral
lines, and ideal objects, such as quarks). D is studied by the examination of
the relations holding among its elements. However, it often happens that,
given a relation R deﬁned over D, we do not know whether all the objects
of D (or n-tuples thereof) are related by R. This is part and parcel of the
“incompleteness” of our information about, and is formally accommodated
by the concept of partial relation. The latter can be characterized as fol-
lows. Let D be a non-empty set. An n-place partial relation R over D is a
triple ⟨R1, R2, R3⟩, where R1, R2, and R3 are mutually disjoint sets, with
R1 ∪R2 ∪R3 = Dn, and such that: R1 is the set of n-tuples that (we know
that) belong to R, R2 is the set of n-tuples that (we know that) do not
belong to R, and R3 is the set of n-tuples for which it is not known whether
they belong or not to R. (Note that if R3 is empty, R is a usual n-place
relation which can be identiﬁed with R1.)
However, in order to represent appropriately the information about the
domain under consideration, we need a notion of structure. The following
characterization, spelled out in terms of partial relations and based on the
standard concept of structure, is meant to supply a notion which is broad
enough to accommodate the partiality usually found in scientiﬁc practice.

195
A partial structure A is an ordered pair ⟨D, Ri⟩i∈I, where D is a non-empty
set, and (Ri)i∈I is a family of partial relations deﬁned over D.b
We have now deﬁned two of the three basic notions of the partial struc-
tures approach. In order to spell out the last one (quasi-truth), we will
need an auxiliary notion. The idea is to use the resources supplied by
Tarski’s deﬁnition of truth. But since the latter is only deﬁned for full
structures, we have to introduce an intermediary notion of structure to
link it to the partial ones. This is the ﬁrst role of those structures which
extend a partial structure A into a full, total structure (which are called
A-normal structures). Their second role is model-theoretic, namely to put
forward an interpretation of a given language and to characterize semantic
notions. Let A = ⟨D, Ri⟩i∈I be a partial structure. We say that the struc-
ture B = ⟨D′, R′
i⟩i∈I is an A-normal structure if (i) D = D′, (ii) every
constant of the language in question is interpreted by the same object both
in A and in B, and (iii) R′
i extends the corresponding relation Ri (in the
sense that, each R′
i, supposed to be an n-place relation, is not necessarily
deﬁned for all n-tuples of elements of D′). Note that, although each Ri is de-
ﬁned for all n-tuples over D′, it holds for some of them (the R′
i1-component
of R′
i), and it doesn’t hold for others (the R′
i2-component).
As a result, given a partial structure A, there are several A-normal struc-
tures. Suppose that, for a given n-place partial relation Ri, we don’t know
whether Ria1 . . . an holds or not. One way of extending Ri into a full R′
i
relation is to look for information to establish that it does hold, another way
is to look for the contrary information. Both are prima facie possible ways
of extending the partiality of Ri. But the same indeterminacy may be found
with other objects of the domain, distinct from a1, . . . , an (for instance, does
Rib1 . . . bn hold?), and with other relations distinct from Ri (for example, is
Rjb1 . . . bn the case, with j ̸= i?). In this sense, there are too many possible
extensions of the partial relations that constitute A. Therefore, we need to
provide constraints to restrict the acceptable extensions of A.
In order to do that, we need ﬁrst to formulate a further auxiliary notion
(see Mikenberg, da Costa and Chuaqui [1986]). A pragmatic structure is
a partial structure to which a third component has been added: a set of
accepted sentences P, which represents the accepted information about the
structure’s domain. (Depending on the interpretation of science which is
bThe partiality of partial relations and structures is due to the “incompleteness” of our
knowledge about the domain under investigation — with further information, a partial
relation may become total. Thus, the partialness modeled here is not “ontological”, but
“epistemic”.

196
adopted, diﬀerent kinds of sentences are to be introduced in P: realists will
typically include laws and theories, whereas empiricists will add mainly
certain laws and observational statements about the domain in question.)
A pragmatic structure is then a triple A = ⟨D, Ri, P⟩i∈I, where D is a
non-empty set, (Ri)i∈I is a family of partial relations deﬁned over D, and
P is a set of accepted sentences. The idea is that P introduces constraints
on the ways that a partial structure can be extended (the sentences of P
hold in the A-normal extensions of the partial structure A).
Our problem is, given a pragmatic structure A, what are the necessary
and suﬃcient conditions for the existence of A-normal structures? Here is
one of these conditions (Mikenberg et al. [1986]). Let A = ⟨D, Ri, P⟩i∈I
be a pragmatic structure. For each partial relation Ri, we construct a set
Mi of atomic sentences and negations of atomic sentences, such that the
former correspond to the n-tuples which satisfy Ri, and the latter to those
n-tuples which do not satisfy Ri. Let M be 
i∈I Mi. Therefore, a pragmatic
structure A admits an A-normal structure if and only if the set M ∪P is
consistent.
Assuming that such conditions are met, we can now formulate the con-
cept of quasi-truth. A sentence α is quasi-true in a pragmatic structure
A = ⟨D, Ri, P⟩i∈I if there is an A-normal structure B = ⟨D′, R′
i⟩i∈I such
that α is true in B (in the Tarskian sense). If α is not quasi-true in A, we say
that α is quasi-false in A. Moreover, we say that a sentence α is quasi-true
if there is a pragmatic structure A and a corresponding A-normal structure
B such that α is true in B (according to Tarski’s account). Otherwise, α is
quasi-false.
The idea, intuitively speaking, is that a quasi-true sentence α does not
necessarily describe, in an appropriate way, the whole domain to which it
refers, but only an aspect of it — the one modeled by the relevant partial
structure A. For there are several diﬀerent ways in which A can be extended
to a full structure, and in some of these extensions α may not be true. Thus,
the notion of quasi-truth is strictly weaker than truth: although every true
sentence is (trivially) quasi-true, a quasi-true sentence is not necessarily
true (since it may be false in certain extensions of A).c
It may be argued that because quasi-truth has been deﬁned in terms
of full structures and the standard notion of truth, there is no gain with
cThe notions of full structure, partial structure and quasi-truth can all be characterized
in second-order logic. Hence, using Boolos’s [1985] plural interpretation of second-order
quantiﬁers, they are nominalistically acceptable, assuming their ﬁrst-order components
also are. For alternative nominalization strategies, see Bueno [2009] and [2013].

197
its introduction. In my view, there are several reasons why this is not the
case. Firstly, as we have just seen, despite the use of full structures, quasi-
truth is weaker than truth: a sentence which is quasi-true in a particular
domain — that is, with respect to a given partial structure A — may
not be true if considered in an extended domain. Thus, we have here a
sort of “underdetermination” — involving distinct ways of extending the
same partial structure — that makes the notion of quasi-truth especially
appropriate for the empiricist. Secondly, one of the points of introducing
the notion of quasi-truth, as da Costa and French ([1989] and [1990]) have
argued in detail, is that in terms of this notion, a formal framework can
be advanced to accommodate the “openness” and “partialness” typically
found in science. Bluntly put, the actual information at our disposal about
a certain domain is modeled by a partial (but not full) structure A. Full,
A-normal structures represent ways of extending the actual information
which are possible according to A. In this respect, the use of full structures
is a semantic expedient of the framework (in order to provide a deﬁnition
of quasi-truth), but no epistemic import is assigned to them. Thirdly, it
is possible to dispense with full structures in the formulation of quasi-
truth, since the latter can be characterized in a diﬀerent way, but still
preserving all its features, independently of the standard Tarskian type
account of truth (Bueno and de Souza [1996]). This provides, of course, the
strongest argument for the dispensability of full structures (as well as of the
Tarskian account) vis--vis quasi-truth. Therefore, full, A-normal structures
are entirely inessential; their use here is only a convenient device.
To illustrate the use of quasi-truth, let us consider an example. As is
well known, Newtonian mechanics is appropriate to explain the behavior of
bodies under certain conditions (say, bodies which, roughly speaking, have
“low” velocity, are not subject to strong gravitational ﬁelds, etc.). But with
the formulation of special relativity, we know that if these conditions are
not satisﬁed, Newtonian mechanics is false. In this sense, these conditions
specify a family of partial relations, which delimit the context in which
the theory holds. Although Newtonian mechanics is not true (and we know
under what conditions it is false), it is quasi-true; that is, it is true in a
given context, determined by a pragmatic structure and a corresponding
A-normal one (see da Costa and French [1993a]).d
dCan the partial structures approach help the constructive empiricist to develop a phi-
losophy of mathematics? I think it can. As I mentioned above, the main idea is that
mathematics doesn’t have to be true to be good, but only quasi-true; that is, true with
regard to a possible domain — the one delimited by certain mathematical structures. It

198
3. Partial Isomorphism and Partial Homomorphism
In empirical research, we often lack complete information about the do-
main of inquiry. We know that certain relations deﬁnitely hold for objects
in the domain, and others clearly don’t; but for a number of relations we
simply don’t know (given our current information) whether they hold or
not. Typically, we have at best partial structures to represent our infor-
mation about the domain under investigation (and this includes not only
empirical structures, but also theoretical ones). As a result, partial struc-
tures help us to accommodate the partiality of our information (see French
[1997]).
But what is the relationship between the various partial structures artic-
ulated in a particular domain? Since we are dealing with partial structures,
a second-level of partiality emerges: we can only establish partial relation-
ships between the (partial) structures at our disposal. This means that
the usual requirement of introducing an isomorphism between theoretical
and empirical structures can hardly be met. Relationships weaker than full
isomorphisms, full homomorphisms etc. have to be introduced, otherwise
scientiﬁc practice — where partiality of information appears to be ubiqui-
tous — cannot be properly accommodated (for details, see French [1997],
French and Ladyman [1997], and Bueno [1997]).
Following a related move made elsewhere (see French and Ladyman
[1999], Bueno [1997], French and Ladyman [1997], and Bueno, French and
Ladyman [2002]), it is possible to characterize, in terms of the partial struc-
tures approach, appropriate notions of partial isomorphism and partial ho-
momorphism. And because these notions are more open-ended than the
standard ones, they accommodate better the partiality of structures found
in science. Here they are:
Let S = ⟨D, Ri⟩i∈I and S = ⟨D′, R′
i⟩i∈I be partial structures. So, each
Ri is of the form ⟨R1, R2, R3⟩, and each R′i of the form ⟨R′
1, R′
2, R′
3⟩.
We say that a partial function f : D →D′ is a partial isomorphism
between S and S′ if (i) f is bijective, and (ii) for every x and y ∈D,
R1xy ↔R′
1f(x)f(y) and R2xy ↔R′
2f(x)f(y). So, when R3 and R′
3 are
empty (that is, when we are considering total structures), we have the
standard notion of isomorphism.
turns out that quasi-truth also extends van Fraassen’s own account of empirical adequacy,
which is ultimately truth with regard to a limited domain — that of the observable (for
details, see Bueno [1997]). Thus, a uniﬁed empiricist view (encompassing mathematics
and empirical science) can be articulated using the partial structures approach.

199
Moreover, we say that a partial function f : D →D′ is a partial homo-
morphism from S to S′ if for every x and every y in D, R1xy →R′
1f(x)f(y)
and R2xy →R′
2f(x)f(y). Again, if R3 and R′
3 are empty, we obtain the
standard notion of homomorphism as a particular case.e
Using these notions, we can provide a framework for accommodating
the application of mathematics to theory construction in science. The main
idea, roughly speaking, is to bring structure from mathematics to an empir-
ical domain. In other words, mathematics is applied by “bringing structure”
from a mathematical domain (say, functional analysis) into a physical, but
mathematized, domain (such as quantum mechanics). What we have, thus,
is a structural perspective, which involves the establishment of relations
between structures in diﬀerent domains. (Note that, at the level we are
considering here, the physics is already mathematized.) But, as Redhead
[1975] has nicely spelled out, there is typically “surplus” structure at the
mathematical level (see also French [1999]). And given this “surplus”, only
some structure is brought from mathematics to physics; in particular those
relations which help us to ﬁnd counterparts, at the empirical domain, of
relations that hold at the mathematical domain. In this way, by “trans-
ferring structures” from a mathematical to a physical domain, empirical
problems can be better represented and examined. This assumes, of course,
that we have information about the relations between the two domains, al-
though it may well not be complete. Only the information we know to hold
is used; but there are other relations at the mathematical level that may
not have any counterpart at the empirical level. (This will become clear in
the discussion of von Neumann’s work below.)
It is straightforward to accommodate this situation using partial struc-
tures. The partial homomorphism represents the situation in which only
some structure is brought from mathematics to physics (via the R1- and
R2-components, which represent our current information about the relevant
domain), although “more structure” could be found at the mathematical
domain (via the R3-component, which is left “open”). Moreover, given the
partiality of information, just part of the mathematical structures is pre-
served, namely that part about which we have enough information to match
the empirical domain.
By bringing structure from one domain into another, the application of
mathematics has a heuristic role in theory construction: it suggests a way
eNote that the notions of partial isomorphism and partial homomorphism can also be
formulated in second-order logic. Hence, given Boolos’s [1985] plural quantiﬁer, they are
acceptable by the nominalist.

200
of searching for relations at the empirical domain, given their counterparts
at the mathematical level. However, since mathematical theories don’t have
to be true to be applicable, but only quasi-true, the empiricist is allowed
to use these theories without incurring into unacceptable ontological com-
mitments.f
Of course, far more could be said about these issues. But here I am
only concerned with presenting the overall formal framework assumed by
the present proposal (in terms of partial structures, quasi-truth, and par-
tial isomorphisms and homomorphisms). However, I hope enough has been
said to indicate that this framework can be taken by the empiricist to pro-
vide an account of the role of structure in the application of mathematics
(see Bueno [2009] and [2013]). To illustrate these points, we shall see now
how this framework can be used to consider von Neumann’s application of
mathematics to physics.
4. Von Neumann, Logic and the Application of
Mathematics
4.1. The 1925-1926 mess
Von Neumann’s work in the foundations of quantum mechanics emerged in
a context where there was a demand for a proper mathematical formulation
of the theory. The demand arouse out of what can be called the “1925-
1926 mess”. In these years, two entirely distinct formulations of quantum
mechanics were devised: on the one hand, Heisenberg, Born, and Jordan
formulated, in a series of papers in 1925, the so-called matrix mechanics; on
the other hand, in 1926, also in a series of works, Schr¨odinger articulated
wave mechanics.g The two formulations couldn’t be more diﬀerent. Matrix
mechanics is expressed in terms of a system of matrices deﬁned by algebraic
equations, and the underlying space is discrete. Wave mechanics is articu-
lated in a continuous space, which is used to describe a ﬁeld-like process in
a conﬁguration space governed by a single diﬀerential equation. However,
despite these diﬀerences, the two theories seemed to have the same empir-
ical consequences. For example, they gave coinciding energy values for the
hydrogen atom.
fOf course, in order to support this claim, the empiricist needs a nominalization strategy
for mathematics. This can be done using the partial structures approach and adapting
Hellman’s modal-structural interpretation, or by invoking ontologically neutral quanti-
ﬁers (see Hellman [1989], Azzouni [2004], Bueno [2009] and [2013]).
gFor a detailed critical discussion, and references, see Muller [1997].

201
Schr¨odinger’s explanation for this was to claim that the two theories
were equivalent, and this was the main point of one of his papers of 1926.
In the opening paragraph of this work (Schr¨odinger [1926]), in which he
tried to establish the equivalence, Schr¨odinger notes:
Considering the extraordinary diﬀerences between the starting-
points and the concepts of Heisenberg’s quantum mechanics
[matrix mechanics] and of the theory which has been designated
“ondulatory” or “physical” mechanics [wave mechanics] [. . . ] it is
very strange that these two new theories agree with one another
with regard to the known facts where they diﬀer from the old
quantum theory. That is really very remarkable because starting-
points, presentations, methods and in fact the whole mathematical
apparatus, seem fundamentally diﬀerent. Above all, however, the
departure from classical mechanics in the two theories seems to oc-
cur in diametrically opposed directions. In Heisenberg’s work the
classical continuous variables are replaced by systems of discrete
numerical quantities (matrices), which depend on a pair of integral
indices, and are deﬁned by algebraic equations. The authors them-
selves describe the theory as a “true theory of a discontinuum”. On
the other hand, wave mechanics shows just the reverse tendency;
it is a step from classical point mechanics towards a continuum-
theory. In place of a process described in terms of a ﬁnite number
of dependent variables occurring in a ﬁnite number of diﬀerential
equations, we have a continuous ﬁeld-like process in conﬁguration
space, which is governed by a single partial diﬀerential equation,
derived from a Principle of [Least] Action. (Schr¨odinger [1926], pp.
45-46; for a discussion, see Muller [1997], pp. 49-58)
According to Schr¨odinger, despite the conceptual and methodological
diﬀerences, the two theories yielded the same results because they were
equivalent. His strategy to prove the equivalence was clear enough: to es-
tablish an isomorphism between the canonical matrix- and wave-operator
algebras. This was, of course, a straightforward strategy.
The problem, as Muller indicates ([1997], pp. 52-53), is that Schr¨odinger
only established a mapping that assigns one matrix to each wave-operator,
but he didn’t establish the converse. More surprisingly, Schr¨odinger himself
acknowledges this point. In a footnote to his paper, he remarks:
In passing it may be noted that the converse of this theorem is
also true, at least in the sense that certainly not more than one

202
linear diﬀerential operator [wave-operator] can belong to a given
matrix. [. . . ] [However] we have not proved that a linear opera-
tor [wave-operator], corresponding to an arbitrary matrix, always
exists. (Schr¨odinger [1926], p. 52)
In other words, the equivalence between matrix and wave mechanics hasn’t
been proved after all. The claim that Schr¨odinger established the result in
1926 is therefore a “myth” (Muller [1997]).
Given the importance of the two theories, and since they were thought of
as having the same empirical consequences, it comes as no surprise that to
establish the equivalence between them was taken as a substantial achieve-
ment. There were several attempts to do so. Dirac, for instance, provided
a distinctive approach (see Dirac [1930]). As is well known, his main idea
was to put each self-adjoint operator in diagonal form. And this approach
in fact succeeds in putting matrix and wave mechanics in a uniform setting.
But it faces an unexpected problem: it is inconsistent! In the case of those
operators that cannot be put in diagonal form, Dirac’s method requires
the introduction of “improper” functions with self-contradictory properties
(the so-called δ−functions). However, from the viewpoint of classical math-
ematics, there are no such functions, since they require that a diﬀerential
operator is also an integral operator; but this condition cannot be met.
4.2. Von Neumann’s equivalence proof
Given the failure of these two attempts to establish the equivalence be-
tween matrix and wave mechanics, an entirely new approach was required
to settle the issue. This was one of von Neumann’s achievements in his
[1932] book on the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics. But
von Neumann’s involvement with foundational issues in quantum mechan-
ics started earlier. In a paper written in 1927 with Hilbert and Nordheim,
the problem of ﬁnding an appropriate way of introducing probability into
quantum mechanics had been explicitly addressed (see Hilbert, Nordheim
and von Neumann [1927]). The approach was articulated in terms of the
notion of the amplitude of the density for relative probability (for a dis-
cussion, see R´edei [1997]). But it faced a serious technical diﬃculty (which
was acknowledged by the authors): the assumption was made that every
operator is an integral operator, and therefore Dirac’s problematic function
had to be assumed. As a result, an entirely distinct account was required
to adequately introduce probability in quantum mechanics. And this led to
von Neumann’s 1932 work, using Hilbert spaces.

203
Von Neumann’s book is the development of three papers that he wrote
in 1927 (for a discussion and references, see R´edei [1997] and [1998]). It
is distinctive not only for its clarity, but also for the fact that there is
no use of Dirac’s δ-function. Probabilities are introduced via convenient
trace functions, and relevant operators (projection operators) are deﬁned on
Hilbert spaces. So, von Neumann is able to claim that there is indeed a way
of introducing probabilities in quantum mechanics without inconsistency
(see von Neumann [1932]).
What about the equivalence between matrix and wave mechanics? In
von Neumann’s hand, the problem becomes an issue of structural similarity.
Bluntly put, von Neumann realized that there was a similarity of structure
between the theory of Hilbert spaces and quantum mechanics, and that we
could adequately represent claims about quantum systems by exploring the
geometry of Hilbert spaces. But how can we accommodate this intuition?
That is, how can we accommodate the structure similarity that von Neu-
mann found between quantum mechanics and part of functional analysis?h
In a nutshell, structure similarity can be accommodated via an appro-
priate morphism between the structures under consideration; that is, by a
transformation which preserves the relevant (features of those) structures.
Of course, the strongest form of morphism is isomorphism — the full preser-
vation of structure. However, the use of this notion would be inappropriate
in this case, for the following reason. By 1927, quantum mechanics could be
seen as a semi-coherent assemblage of principles and rules for applications.
Weyl’s 1931 book was an attempt to impose a degree of coherence via the
introduction of group-theoretic techniques (the uncertainty principle, for
example, could be obtained via group theory). Dirac’s 1930 work repre-
sents a further attempt to lay out a coherent basis for the theory. However,
as von Neumann perceived, neither of these oﬀered a mathematical frame-
work congenial for the introduction of probability at the most fundamental
level, and this was one of the major motivations for the introduction of
Hilbert spaces. (There is, of course, a great deal more to be said about
this, but here is not the place to do so.) Given this, there is no way of
spelling out the similarity of structure between quantum mechanics (as it
was at the end of 1920’s and the beginning of 1930’s) and Hilbert spaces in
terms of the existence of full isomorphisms. Moreover, since there is more
structure in functional analysis than was actually used by von Neumann
hIn fact, it was due to this structure similarity that claims about quantum systems could
be represented in terms of Hilbert spaces.

204
in his axiomatization of quantum mechanics, we can say that the relation-
ship between those “quantum” and mathematical structures is captured
by appropriate partial homomorphisms. The partiality involved in the for-
mulation of quantum mechanics is then captured by the partial nature of
the homomorphism — only those components of quantum mechanics about
which we have enough information are “preserved”.
An important feature of von Neumann’s axiomatization was his sys-
tematic search for analogies between mathematical structures and between
the latter and “physical” structures (that is, structures employed in the
description of physical phenomena). These analogies played an important
role in von Neumann’s equivalence proof of matrix and wave mechanics.
What von Neumann established is a mathematical relation between two
systems of functions. And, in this case, the relation is a full isomorphism.
On the one hand, we have functions — deﬁned on the “discrete” space of
index values Z = (1, 2, . . . ) — which are sequences x1, x2, . . . , and are used
in the formulation of matrix mechanics; on the other hand, we have func-
tions deﬁned on the continuous state-space Ωof a mechanical system (Ωis
a k-dimensional space, with k being the number of classical mechanical de-
grees of freedom), and Ω’s functions are wave functions ϕ(q1, . . . , qk). Von
Neumann explicitly points out that the spaces Z and Ωare quite diﬀerent
([1932], p. 28). It is not surprising then that Dirac’s method of uniﬁcation
faced so many mathematical diﬃculties, since this method assumed a direct
analogy between Z and Ω(see von Neumann [1932], pp. 17-27).
The method [. . . ] resulted in an analogy between the “discrete”
space of index values Z [. . . ] and the continuous state space Ω
[. . . ]. That this cannot be achieved without some violence to the
formalism and to mathematics is not surprising. The spaces Z and
Ωare in reality very diﬀerent, and every attempt to relate the two
must run into great diﬃculties. (von Neumann [1932], p. 28)
However, the correct analogy is not between the spaces Z and Ω, but
between the functions deﬁned on them. Von Neumann calls the totality
of functions on Z, satisfying certain conditions, FZ, and the totality of
function on Ω, also satisfying certain conditions, FΩ([1932], pp. 28-29).
Once this point is clearly seen, von Neumann presents his equivalence proof.
But note that what he proved is that FZ and FΩare isomorphic, and
therefore his theorem is restricted to the mathematical structures employed

205
in matrix and in wave mechanics. Their physical content, as it were, is left
untouched.
And it was here that ﬁnding the right analogy paid oﬀ. For it was the
existence of the mathematical equivalence (between FZ and FΩ) that led
von Neumann to search for a more basic mathematical formulation for
quantum mechanics. However, since FZ was nothing but a Hilbert space, it
was natural to adopt a slightly more abstract formulation of it — not tied
to the particular features of FZ — as the basis for shaping the structure of
quantum mechanics. In von Neumann’s own words:
Since the systems FZ and FΩare isomorphic, and since the theo-
ries of quantum mechanics constructed on them are mathematically
equivalent, it is to be expected that a uniﬁed theory, independent
of the accidents of the formal framework selected at the time, and
exhibiting only the really essential elements of quantum mechan-
ics, will then be achieved, if we do this: Investigate the intrinsic
properties (common to FZ and FΩ) of these systems of functions,
and choose these properties as a starting point.
The system FZ is generally known as “Hilbert space”. There-
fore, our ﬁrst problem is to investigate the fundamental proper-
ties of Hilbert space, independent of the special form of FZ or FΩ.
The mathematical structure which is described by these properties
(which in any speciﬁc special case are equivalently represented by
calculations within FZ or FΩ, but for general purposes are easier
to handle directly than by such calculations), is called “abstract
Hilbert space”. (von Neumann [1932], pp. 32-33; the italics are
mine)
In other words, once the right analogy is found — that is, once the appro-
priate structural relationship is uncovered — the crucial step is taken. The
rest is to explore the consequences.
4.3. Quasi-truth, empiricism and quantum mechanics
Let us reﬂect on what von Neumann is doing here. He is bringing some
structure from functional analysis, by using the theory of abstract Hilbert
spaces, and he is using this structure to provide the basis for quantum
mechanics. Does this require that the theory of Hilbert spaces is true? By
no means: the only requirement is that it has the adequate structure; that is,
that it provides a system of functions which generalizes the mathematical
properties satisﬁed by FZ and FΩ. We can think of the latter as partial

206
structures A (in the sense that they would provide partial information about
a given physical system). What von Neumann is doing is to overcome that
partiality by ﬁnding a convenient “A-normal structure”, which extends and
generalizes the relations in A — and this is the abstract Hilbert space. In
this sense, the only requirement is the quasi-truth (and not the truth) of
Hilbert space theory. In other words, we need only the possibility that there
is a structure that extends the partial information contained in A.i
These features the idea that a mathematical theory doesn’t have to be
true to be applicable and the role of analogies in theory construction in
mathematics — suggest that von Neumann’s mathematical practice might
be captured by the framework developed here. As is well known, according
to van Fraassen, a scientiﬁc theory doesn’t have to be true to be good, but
only empirically adequate (van Fraassen [1980], p. 12). Similarly, in this
account of von Neumann’s approach, a mathematical theory doesn’t have
to be true to be applicable, but only consistent with a particular physical
description (in the present case, consistent with quantum mechanics). In
this way, a mathematical theory has only to be quasi-true to be applicable
(where the body of accepted sentences P provides the relevant accepted
information from physics). Moreover, just as analogies are explored in the
construction of physical theories (see French [1997], and French and Lady-
man [1997]), the same goes in the case of mathematics, as the discussion of
the equivalence between matrix and wave mechanics clearly indicates.
But there is a third feature worth considering in von Neumann’s appli-
cation of mathematics. It concerns the role of logic in this process — and as
we shall see, von Neumann has a pluralist and empiricist view about logic.
According to him, there is a plurality of logics, depending on the particular
context we study, and such logics should be constrained by experience. As
we shall also see, pluralism and empiricism about logic support the em-
piricist framework advanced here. They entail that logic is motivated by
experience, and they strengthen the role of analogies between mathemat-
ics and physics as part of the development of physics and mathematics. In
this sense, experience has a double role of generating logics and demanding
further mathematical structures. In what follows, I shall elaborate on these
points.
iA noted above, since we are dealing here with mathematical objects, the empiricist
will have to adopt a nominalization strategy in order to avoid ontological commitments
to them. This can be articulated by the introduction of convenient modal operators,
deﬁned in terms of quasi-truth, and adapting the modal-structural interpretation of
mathematics, due to Hellman [1989]. Alternatively, ontologically neutral quantiﬁers can
be invoked (see Azzouni [2004], Bueno [2009], and [2013]).

207
4.4. Logic and empiricism
As I have indicated, with the introduction of Hilbert spaces in quantum me-
chanics, von Neumann made a top-down move from mathematical to physi-
cal theories. Now what I intend to delineate is the corresponding bottom-up
move in von Neumann’s thought as one goes from experience through logic
to highly abstract mathematical structures.
One of the outcomes of von Neumann’s approach to quantum mechanics
was the creation of quantum logic. He showed that we can formulate a family
of propositions that describe the state of a physical system, in such a way
that the geometrical structure underlying this family gives us information
about the physical system. The idea is found in von Neumann’s 1932 book,
and is developed further in the celebrated 1936 paper by Birkhoﬀand von
Neumann, where “quantum logic” as such was ﬁrst introduced.
The study of the geometry associated with the relevant family of propo-
sitions give us its “logic”. In the case of classical mechanics, the family of
propositions generate a Boolean algebra, but in the context of quantum
mechanics, we have “a sort of” projective geometry. The reason for the
proviso is that in the 1936 paper, Birkhoﬀand von Neumann only consider
physical systems with a ﬁnite number of degrees of freedom (that is, whose
states can be characterized by ﬁnitely many parameters, in a state-space
with a ﬁnite dimension). Now, with this ﬁniteness assumption, the result-
ing “logic” (which is isomorphic to the projective geometry of all subspaces
of a ﬁnite-dimensional Hilbert space) is indeed a projective geometry. But
the question arises as to the logic of a physical system that has inﬁnitely
many degrees of freedom. Von Neumann explicitly addressed this problem
in the work he produced after the 1936 paper with Birkhoﬀ. And his so-
lution was to provide a generalization of projective geometry, which led
to the formulation of continuous geometry and to what is now called von
Neumann algebras of Hilbert space operators (see von Neumann [1960] and
[1981], Murray and von Neumann [1936], and for a discussion, Bub [1981a]
and [1981b], and R´edei [1997], [1998], and [2000], and R´edei and St¨oltzner
(eds.) [2000]).
In other words, it was because of von Neumann’s pluralism that he was
concerned with determining the logics adequate to each particular domain
— moving from ﬁnite physical systems (represented by projective geom-
etry) to inﬁnite ones (represented by continuous geometry). Moreover, it
was because of his empiricism that he undertook the search for distinct
logics based on experience, that is the various types of physical systems
we have to accommodate. In other words, the case of the generalization of

208
projective geometry (continuous geometry) is a clear example of a mathe-
matical theory that is created from physical, empirical demands. I shall call
this von Neumann’s ﬁrst empiricist feature. Let us consider some others.
4.5. The 1937 manuscript: logics and experience
In an unpublished manuscript, written about 1937, von Neumann discusses
his view about the status of logic and alternative logical systems (see von
Neumann [1937a]). This work was written shortly after the publication of
Birkhoﬀand von Neumann [1936], and von Neumann’s chief task is to
explore some consequences of the approach to logic left unnoticed in the
1936 paper.
The manuscript begins with a remark making it clear that it was not
part of what was then considered work in the “foundations” of mathematics:
We propose to analyze in this note logics from a point of view
which is fundamentally diﬀerent from the one current in present-
day “foundations” investigations. While we are not questioning at
all the great importance and value of those investigations, we do
believe that our present system of logics is open to criticism on
other counts also. And it seems to us that these other “counts”
are at least as fundamental and essential as those which form the
subject-matter of the current “foundations” analysis. (von Neu-
mann [1937a], p. 1)
Von Neumann had several reasons for not being satisﬁed with the then dom-
inant foundational research. The most important of them was the entirely
a prioristic way in which that research was typically conducted. Logic was
essentially taken as classical logic, and there was hardly any room for the
development of logics that were speciﬁc and appropriate to the particular
domain of science under consideration. As opposed to this, the approach
favored by von Neumann was
much more directly connected with and inspired by the connection
of logics with the physical world, and particularly also with prob-
ability. For this reason we even see some point in the proposition
that [the problems this approach generates] deserve precedence over
the generally considered problems of “foundations”. (von Neumann
[1937a], p. 1; the italics are mine)

209
According to von Neumann, it is crucial to have room for the articulation
of logics that are faithful to the domain in question. In fact, he goes still
further claiming that logics should be inspired by experience.
The basic idea [of this approach to logic] is that the system of logics
which one uses should be derived from aggregate experiences relative
to the main application which one wishes to make — logics should
be inspired by experience. (von Neumann [1937a], p. 2; the italics
are mine)
In other words, not only the construction of mathematical theories, but
also the construction of logical systems is heuristically motivated by expe-
rience — in order for the resulting logic to be adequate to the domain in
question — and a logic should also reﬂect the main traits of the empiri-
cal domain. Logic should be inspired by experience (this is von Neumann’s
second empiricist feature).
However, as well as being heuristically inspired by experience, a logic
can also play a critical role, being open to revision on empirical grounds:
If any accepted physical theory which has a reasonable claim to
“universality” permits to draw inferences concerning the structure
of logics, these inferences should be used to reform logics, and not
to criticize the theory. (von Neumann [1937a], pp. 2-3; the italics
are mine)
In other words, a logic can be revised on empirical grounds (third empiricist
feature). As a result, a logic is relative to a particular domain of inquiry.
And relying on this revisability principle, von Neumann provides a further
argument against the traditional approach to logic:
We hope to show on the pages which follow that an absolutely con-
sequent application of this principle leads to very plausible results,
and particularly to more natural ones than the usual, rigidly dog-
matic, attitude in logic. (von Neumann [1937a], p. 3)
All these considerations (especially the domain-dependence of logic) be-
come completely clear with quantum logic, which as is well known, due to
the demands of quantum phenomena, lacks the distributivity of classical
logic. In von Neumann’s own words:
Quantum mechanics is a particularly striking example of how a
physical theory may be used to modify logics — and for this reason

210
it was ﬁrst investigated in [Birkhoﬀand von Neumann [1936]]. (von
Neumann [1937a], p. 3; the italics are mine)
However, von Neumann has something still more radical to advance:
We propose to show in this note that even classical mechanics is
incompatible with the usual system of “inﬁnite” (or “transcenden-
tal”) logics [that is, logics which are not related to experience].
We will determine the system of logics to which classical mechan-
ics lead. We will see that this system lends itself much better to
an extension to “probability logics” — which is an absolutely in-
dispensable one if we bear in mind the modern developments of
physical theory. (von Neumann [1937a], p. 3)
But once this is achieved, something more will be established:
We will also see that this “classical mechanical” system of logics,
when combined with the “ﬁnite” “quantum mechanical” system of
logics given in [Birkhoﬀand von Neumann [1936]], leads to a sat-
isfactory, general “inﬁnite” system of “quantum mechanical” log-
ics, which contains also probability theory. (von Neumann [1937a],
pp. 3-4)
And these are the “plausible results” that von Neumann referred to
above in his criticism of the “dogmatic” approach to logic.
Therefore, the picture that emerges from this paper involves, ﬁrstly,
pluralism (there are as many logics as physical phenomena demand); sec-
ondly, anti-apriorism (the demand for new logics arises from experience);
and thirdly, empirically driven change (logic is open to change via empiri-
cal considerations). These are, of course, three features that are cherished
by the empiricist. In this sense, there is more to logic than the a priori
exploration of the logical consequence relation, and the main features of a
logic should be obtained from, and modiﬁed by, experience (the domain of
application).
Given the empiricist features of von Neumann’s account of logic (in
particular, given the idea that logic is open to change via empirical con-
siderations), it is interesting to note that von Neumann thought that his
account was comparable to the criticism of classical logic made by intu-
itionist and relevant logicians. As he points out in his paper with Birkhoﬀ
on the logic of quantum mechanics:

211
The models for propositional calculi which have been considered in
the preceding sections are also interesting from the standpoint of
pure logic. Their nature is determined by quasi-physical and tech-
nical reasoning, diﬀerent from the introspective and philosophical
considerations which have had to guide logicians hitherto. Hence
it is interesting to compare the modiﬁcations which they introduce
into Boolean algebra, with those which logicians on “intuitionist”
and related grounds have tried introducing. (Birkhoﬀand von Neu-
mann [1936], p. 119; the italics are mine.)
However, as Birkhoﬀand von Neumann point out, there is a crucial distinc-
tion between the criticisms of classical logic as articulated by the quantum
and the intuitionist logicians:
The main diﬀerence seems to be that whereas logicians have usually
assumed that properties L71-L73 of negation [namely, (A′)′ = A;
A∧A′ = f; A∨A′ = t; A →B implies B′ →A′] were the ones least
able to withstand a critical analysis, the study of mechanics points
to the distributive identities L6 [A ∨(B ∧C) = (A ∨B) ∧(A ∨C)
and A ∧(B ∨C) = (A ∧B) ∨(A ∧C)] as the weakest link in the
algebra of logic. (Birkhoﬀand von Neumann [1936], p. 119)
In their view, their own approach was closer to that of the relevant logician:
Our conclusion agrees perhaps more with those critiques of logic,
which ﬁnd most objectionable the assumption that A′ ∨B = t
implies A →B. (Birkhoﬀand von Neumann [1936], p. 119)
All these principles (pluralism, anti-apriorism, and empiricism) are
forcefully articulated in von Neumann’s work on quantum logic, since he
thinks this logic is fully adequate for the quantum domain, and it is impor-
tantly diﬀerent from classical logic (even if one is a fragment of the other).
In my view, not only has von Neumann adopted these methodological and
epistemological principles but also he has fruitfully explored them to de-
velop several of his most lasting contributions. In other words, these prin-
ciples have informed von Neumann’s research, providing him with heuristic
guidelines for theory construction. Of course, all this can be clearly seen
with the development of quantum logic.
Now, we have here a sophisticated interaction between mathematics,
logic and physics. As von Neumann articulated them, logics (such as quan-
tum logic) are inspired by experience, but once articulated they generate
new mathematical structures (such as the continuous geometry demanded

212
by physical systems with inﬁnitely many degrees of freedom). Such struc-
tures are in turn applied to model physical phenomena. Of course, once
mathematical structures are formulated, they can also be studied in purely
mathematical terms, independently of any concern with physics — as von
Neumann’s own mathematical work with continuous geometry beautifully
illustrates (see, for instance, von Neumann [1981]).
So we have here a movement from the bottom up, from experience
through logic to highly abstract mathematical structures (from quantum
logic to continuous geometry), in addition to the movement from the top
down, from mathematical structures down to experience. The latter move
was described earlier with von Neumann’s use of the theory of Hilbert
spaces in the formulation of quantum mechanics.
Returning now to von Neumann’s 1937 manuscript, we can see another
aspect of his pluralism. According to von Neumann, in order to have a
proper understanding of classical mechanics we need an appropriate logic,
and even in this case, we need logics that are non-classical (“probabil-
ity logics”), in the sense that weaker, probabilistic “implication” relations
among statements are invoked. The idea is not that the Kolmogorovian
notion of probability is non-classical, but rather that there are probabilistic
“implication” relations. This proposal is explored further in another unpub-
lished manuscript, whose subject is quantum logic (von Neumann [1937b];
I present the details of the approach in the discussion of this manuscript in
Section 4.7 below). In this article, von Neumann outlined four possibilities
concerning the interplay between the “dimension” of a physical system and
its logic, each alternative leading to an appropriate logical system. The four
cases are: (i) a system “which behaves in the sense of classical physics (in
particular mechanics) and which posses only a ﬁnite number of possible dif-
ferent states” (von Neumann [1937b], p. 11); (ii) a system similar to (i) but
in which the number of states is discretely inﬁnite; (iii) a system similar to
(i) but in which the number of states is continuously inﬁnite; and ﬁnally (iv)
a system where the “ﬁniteness of [the number of states] remains essentially
untouched, but the ‘classical’ way of looking at things (as practiced in [(i)-
(iii)]) is replaced by a ‘quantum mechanical’ one” (von Neumann [1937b],
p. 16). Moreover, von Neumann also advanced a ﬁnal synthesis, combining
“these two kinds of extensions”, namely from the ﬁnite to the inﬁnite, and
from the “classical” to the “quantum” approach (ibid.). Unfortunately, this
is an unﬁnished work, and von Neumann only discussed case (i) (see von
Neumann [1937b], pp. 11-15).

213
But note that the three methodological and epistemological principles
mentioned above play a heuristic role at this point. What led von Neu-
mann to consider these four possibilities concerning a physical system was:
(a) his logical pluralism (since he was searching for logics appropriate to
the domain under study, whether it is classical or quantum physics); (b) his
anti-apriorism (by refusing to adopt a logic which was not properly moti-
vated by experience), and (c) his empiricism with regard to logic (which
required an empirical investigation to determine the adequacy of a logic
to the physical domain in question). In this sense, these principles have
informed and supported von Neumann’s research.
4.6. The status of mathematics
It is important to note that I am not saying that von Neumann was an
empiricist about logic and mathematics in the naive, and untenable, sense
that these disciplines are empirical. Once motivated by empirical consider-
ations, logic and mathematics are developed and articulated as deductive
disciplines in the standard way. And the adoption of this standard practice
is absolutely clear in von Neumann’s own mathematical writings.
For instance, von Neumann criticized Dirac for his introduction of the
δ-function on mathematical grounds, along the lines I have previously in-
dicated (see von Neumann [1932], pp. 23-27). According to von Neumann,
since this function lies “beyond the scope of mathematical methods gener-
ally used”, and he desires to “describe quantum mechanics with the help
of these latter methods” (ibid., p. 27), he moves on to his own formulation
of quantum mechanics in terms of Hilbert spaces. This surely illustrates
the importance von Neumann saw in subscribing to standard methods of
mathematical research. As he insists:
The method of Dirac, mentioned above (and this is overlooked to-
day in a great part of quantum mechanical literature, because of
the clarity and elegance of the theory), in no way satisﬁes the re-
quirements of mathematical rigor — not even if these are reduced
in a natural and proper fashion to the extent common elsewhere
in theoretical physics. For example, the method adheres to the ﬁc-
tion that each self-adjoint operator can be put in diagonal form.
In the case of those operators for which this is not actually the
case, this requires the introduction of “improper” functions with
self-contradictory properties. The insertion of such a mathematical
“ﬁction” is frequently necessary in Dirac’s approach, even though
the problem at hand is merely one of calculating numerically

214
the result of a clearly deﬁned experiment. (von Neumann [1932],
pp. viii-ix)
However, von Neumann points out:
There would be no objection here if these concepts [Dirac’s “im-
proper” functions], which cannot be incorporated into the present
day framework of analysis, were intrinsically necessary for the phys-
ical theory. Thus, as Newtonian mechanics ﬁrst brought about the
development of the inﬁnitesimal calculus, which, in its original
form, was undoubtedly not self-consistent, so quantum mechan-
ics might suggest a new structure for our “analysis of inﬁnitely
many variables” — i.e., the mathematical technique would have
to be changed, and not the physical theory. (von Neumann [1932],
p. ix)
This passage illustrates the extension of von Neumann’s empiricism:
he would be prepared to change the standard mathematical techniques, if
this were required by our physical theories. And the precedent for this in
the case of Newtonian mechanics is surely well taken. Nevertheless, von
Neumann continues:
But this is by no means the same case. It should rather be pointed
out that the quantum mechanical “Transformation theory” can be
established in a manner which is just as clear and uniﬁed, but which
is also without mathematical objections. It should be emphasized
that the correct structure need not consist in a mathematical re-
ﬁnement and explanation of the Dirac method, but rather that it
requires a procedure diﬀering from the very beginning, namely, the
reliance on the Hilbert theory of operators. (von Neumann [1932],
p. ix)
That is, once we have the appropriate mathematical framework, there is no
need for introducing deviant techniques in mathematics in order for us to
formulate quantum mechanics.
4.7. The 1954 manuscript: a uniﬁed approach
One of the striking features of von Neumann’s work is his search for an ap-
proach in which logic and the mathematical and physical theories we employ
to explain the phenomena hang nicely together. This means that we should
search for an account that admits diﬀerent kinds of generalization, such

215
as the following: Suppose we are considering a given type of physical sys-
tem. The approach von Neumann tried to provide was such that the same
framework that is used to describe a physical system with a ﬁnite number
of degrees of freedom could be extended to accommodate a system with an
inﬁnite number of degrees. Moreover, the geometric structures associated
with such descriptions should be such that they are also preserved and gen-
eralized when the extension to the inﬁnite case is performed. Furthermore,
the logic derived from the geometric structure should also be amenable to
generalization. Finally, given the crucial role played by probability theory in
physics (especially in quantum mechanics), and given the close connection
that von Neumann saw between probability and logic, he searched for an
approach that allowed probability to be adequately introduced in quantum
mechanics, and which also made clear the relationship between logic and
probability. These are broad constraints and von Neumann adopted them
as heuristic devices in theory construction. As we shall see, they played a
crucial role in his program.
These points are clearly formulated in an unpublished paper that von
Neumann presented in 1954 in the Congress of the Mathematicians in Am-
sterdam. Half a century after Hilbert’s celebrated 1900 paper on mathe-
matical problems, von Neumann was asked to consider further unsolved
problems in mathematics. And he emphasized the importance of providing
a uniﬁed approach to logic, probability and physics. Once again, he was
keen on exploring analogies and structural similarities between diﬀerent
domains of mathematics and physics. He ﬁrst considered classical physics,
its underlying logic and probability, in a ﬁnite context:
If you take a classical mechanism of logics, and [. . . ] limit yourself
to logics referred to a ﬁnite set, it is perfectly clear that logics in
that range are equivalent to the theory of all subsets of that ﬁnite
set, and that probability means that you have attributed weights
to single points, that you can attribute a probability to each event,
which means essentially that the logical treatment corresponds to
set theory in that domain and that a probabilistic treatment cor-
responds to introducing measures. (von Neumann [1954], p. 21)
However, given the importance that von Neumann attached to generaliza-
tions, it would be important to extend these considerations to the inﬁnite
case. But this can be done without diﬃculties:
But it is quite possible to extend this to the usual inﬁnite sets.
And one also has this parallelism that logics corresponds to set

216
theory and probability theory corresponds to measure theory and
that given a system of logics, so given a system of sets, if all is
right, you can introduce measures, you can introduce probability
[. . . ]. (von Neumann [1954], p. 21)
Note, in particular, the structural analogies von Neumann introduces be-
tween logic and set theory, on the one hand, and between probability and
measure theory, on the other. The idea is that there are structural relations
between these domains, and he explores them in order to ﬁnd a uniﬁed
approach.
Things become more delicate when we try to extend this uniﬁed picture
to quantum mechanics:
In the quantum mechanical machinery the situation is quite diﬀer-
ent. Namely instead of the sets use the linear subsets of a suitable
space, say of a Hilbert space. The set-theoretical situation of logics
is replaced by the machinery of projective geometry, which in itself
is quite simple. (von Neumann [1954], p. 21)
As it could be expected, the delicate part consists in the introduction of
probability:
However, all quantum mechanical probabilities are deﬁned as inner
products of vectors. Essentially if a state of a system is given by
one vector, the transition probability in another state is the inner
product of the two which is the square of cosine of the angle be-
tween them. In other words, probability corresponds precisely to
introducing the angles geometrically. Furthermore, there is only one
way to introduce it. The more so because in the quantum mechani-
cal machinery the negation of a statement, which is represented by
a linear set of vectors, corresponds to the orthogonal complement
of this linear space. And therefore, as soon as you have introduced
into the projective geometry the ordinary machinery of logics, you
must have introduced the concept of orthogonality. [. . . ] So in order
to have logics you need in this sense a projective geometry with a
concept of orthogonality in it. (von Neumann [1954], pp. 21-22)
In this way, logic and probability go hand to hand. As von Neumann
stresses:
In order to have probability all you need is a concept of all angles, I
mean angles other than 90o. Now it is perfectly quite true that in a

217
geometry, as soon as you can deﬁne the right angle, you can deﬁne
all angles. Another way to put it is that, if you take the case of an
orthogonal space, those mappings of this space on itself, which leave
orthogonality intact, leave all angles intact; in other words, in those
systems which can be used as models of the logical background for
quantum theory, it is true that as soon as all the ordinary concepts
of logics are ﬁxed under some isomorphic transformation, all of
probability theory is already ﬁxed. (von Neumann [1954], p. 22)
In conclusion, the uniﬁed approach could be achieved, in the sense that
logics and probability theory arise simultaneously and are derived
simultaneously. (von Neumann [1954], p. 22)
The importance of these considerations is that, by putting forward a
uniﬁed approach, von Neumann could provide a better understanding of
logic, probability and physics. The search for such understanding is some-
thing that can be traced back to von Neumann’s work in the 1930’s, and he
has explicitly discussed these topics in the unpublished manuscript of 1937
that I mentioned earlier (see von Neumann [1937b]). As well as examining
the relationship between the “dimension” of a physical system and its logic,
which we considered above, in this work von Neumann also indicates how
classical (“strict-”) logic can be obtained as a particular case of probabil-
ity logic. The main idea is again to provide an approach in which logic,
probability and physics are closely tied together.
Let S be the physical system, or rather the mathematical model of
a physical system, to which we wish to apply logics. The system L
of logics is then the set of all statements a, b, c, . . . which can be
made concerning S. Such a statement is always one concerning the
outcome of a certain measurement, which is to be performed on S.
[. . . ] The fundamental relations and operations for elements of L
are these:
(I) The relation of “implication”: a ≤b.
a ≤b means this: If a measurement of a on S has shown a
to be true, then an immediately subsequent measurement of
b on S will certainly show b to be true.
(II) The operation of “negation”: ¬a.
¬a obtains as follows: The same measurement which is used to
decide about the validity of a is also used to decide about the
validity of ¬a, but when the result concerning the validity of

218
a is “yes”, then the one concerning ¬a is “no”, and conversely.
(von Neumann [1937b], pp. 3-4)
The operations of conjunction and disjunction can also be deﬁned (von
Neumann [1937b], p. 5), which leads von Neumann to call L the system of
“strict logics” (ibid., p. 6).
However, as he notes, when we apply L to “physical reality”, a further
structure emerges, which can only be expressed in terms of probability
(ibid.).
For any well deﬁned state of our knowledge concerning the math-
ematical description of physical reality, that is for any reasonable
model S, a probability function exists. So we have in L:
(VI) The (real number-valued) function called “probability func-
tion”: P(a, b). P(a, b) = θ (θ a real number) means this: If
a measurement of a on S has shown a to be true, then the
probability of an immediately subsequent measurement of b
on S showing b to be true, is equal to θ.
If we consider the structure which L aquires by making use of the
function P(a, b) — that is, of all relations P(a, b) = θ (of course
necessarily 0 ≤θ ≤1) — then L appears as a new system, which we
will call the system of “probability logics”. (von Neumann [1937b],
pp. 6-7)
But what is the relation between strict- and probability-logics? It is
clear enough: the former is a particular case of the latter.
It is easy to see that the system of strict logics is part of the system
of probability logics, since a ≤b, ¬a can be deﬁned in terms of
P(a, b) = θ(0 ≤θ ≤1). Indeed (VI) makes the following statements
obvious:
(F) P(a, b) = 1 is equivalent to a ≤b.
(G) P(a, b) = 0 is equivalent to a ≤¬b.
Hence a ≤b is directly deﬁned by (F), that is by P(a, b) = 1; and
¬a is indirectly deﬁned by (G), as the (unique) c, for which d ≤c
is equivalent to d ≤¬a, that is, for which P(d, c) = 1 is equivalent
to P(d, a) = 0. (von Neumann [1937b], p. 7)
However, there is no “reduction” of probability-logic to strict-logic.
And in this sense, since probability-logic naturally arises in the context of

219
physical theories, it cannot be dismissed as irrelevant, and to some extent
it is even irreducible.
For a θ with 0 ≤θ ≤1, however, no such “reduction” of P(a, b) = θ
to strict logics seems possible. (von Neumann [1937b], p. 8)
In other words:
Probability logics cannot be reduced to strict logics, but constitutes
an essentially wider system than the latter, and statements of the
form P(a, b) = θ(0 ≤θ ≤1) are perfectly new and sui generis
aspects of physical reality. (von Neumann [1937b], pp. 9-10)
The point of these remarks is to indicate the importance that von Neu-
mann assigned to the development of an integrated approach to physics,
logic and probability, and how he used this as a heuristic constraint in the-
ory construction. More importantly, he was clear in not claiming that a
uniﬁed theory is more likely to be true than a less uniﬁed one (von Neu-
mann [1947], p. 7), and in this sense, such uniﬁcation was only a pragmatic
feature, not an epistemic one.j This is again an empiricist (and anti-realist)
component in his work.
But von Neumann’s work in the foundations of probability and quan-
tum theory led him to articulate elements of what we now recognize as an
empiricist version of the semantic approach. Together with his empiricism
with regard to logic and mathematics, this constitutes the third empiricist
trend in von Neumann’s thought. To this issue we shall turn now.
jAs von Neumann reminds us: “The attitude that theoretical physics does not explain
the phenomena, but only classiﬁes and correlates, is today accepted by most theoretical
physicists. [This attitude is of course clearly spelled out by Duhem [1906], when he
distinguished the explanation of the phenomena (i.e. the search for their underlying
causes) from their classiﬁcation (i.e. to provide structural representations for them). Von
Neumann is clearly siding with Duhem’s anti-realism about unobservable entities here.]
This means that the criterion of success for such a theory is simply whether it can, by
a simple and elegant classifying and correlating scheme, cover very many phenomena,
which without this scheme would seem complicated and heterogeneous, and whether the
scheme even covers phenomena which were not considered or even not known at the
time when the scheme was evolved. (These two latter statements express, of course,
the unifying and predicting power of a theory.) Now this criterion, as set forth here, is
clearly to a great extent of an aesthetical nature. For this reason it is very closely akin
to the mathematical criteria of success, which [. . . ] are almost entirely aesthetical” (von
Neumann [1947], p. 7; the italics are mine). This passage forcefully indicates that, for von
Neumann (as for any good empiricist!), uniﬁcation is a pragmatic, aesthetic feature of a
theory, not an epistemic one (see also von Neumann [1935-36/2000] and [1954/2000]).

220
4.8. Von Neumann and the semantic approach
As is well known, the semantic approach to science supplies a new perspec-
tive to the issue of the structure of scientiﬁc theories. The main components
of this approach, in the formulation provided by van Fraassen, are: the use
of models of data to represent empirical information; the employment of
state-spaces to represent theoretical information; the adoption of laws of
succession to represent the evolution of a physical system; and the require-
ment of empirical adequacy as a major criterion of theory choice (see van
Fraassen [1980], [1989] and [1991]). As we shall see now, each of these four
components were clearly formulated by von Neumann — in a strictly em-
piricist way (see also Suppe [1989] and [1977]).
With regard to models of data (observation space), von Neumann and
Birkhoﬀare explicit:
It is clear that an “observation” of a physical system M can be
described generally as a writing down of the readings from various
compatible measurements. Thus if the measurements are denoted
by the symbols µ1, . . . , µn, then an observation of M amounts to
specifying numbers x1, . . . , xn corresponding to the diﬀerent µk.
It follows that the most general form of a prediction concerning
M is that the point (x1, . . . , xn) determined by actually measuring
µ1, . . . , µn, will lie in a subset S of (x1, . . . , xn)-space. Hence if we
call the (x1, . . . , xn)-spaces associated with M, its “observation-
spaces”, we may call the subsets of the observation-spaces associ-
ated with any physical system M, the “experimental propositions”
concerning M. (Birkhoﬀand von Neumann [1936], p. 106)
Furthermore, von Neumann also formulates the notion of a state-space
(phase-space), which is crucial for the representation of theoretical infor-
mation:
According to this concept [phase-space], any physical system M is
at each instant hypothetically associated with a “point” p in a ﬁxed
phase-space Σ; this point is supposed to represent mathematically
the “state” of M, and the “state” of M is supposed to be ascer-
tainable by “maximal” observations. (Birkhoﬀand von Neumann
[1936], p. 106)k
kOf course, there is a history to be told about the evolution of the notion of phase-space
in physics. I shall not embark on this here.

221
The third component of the semantic approach, the introduction of laws
of succession (law of propagation), is then explicitly considered:
Furthermore, the point p0 associated with M at a time t0, together
with a prescribed mathematical “law of propagation”, ﬁx the point
pt associated with M at any later time t. (Birkhoﬀand von Neu-
mann [1936], p. 106)
As examples to illustrate these concepts, von Neumann mentions a few
cases (note the reference to function spaces, which are subsequently artic-
ulated by Redhead [1975]):
Thus in classical mechanics, each point of Σ corresponds to a choice
of n position and n conjugate momentum coordinates — and the
law of propagation may be Newton’s inverse-square law of attrac-
tion. Hence in this case Σ is a region of ordinary 2n-dimensional
space. In electrodynamics, the points of Σ can only be speciﬁed
after certain functions — such as the electromagnetic and electro-
static potential — are known; hence Σ is a function-space of in-
ﬁnitely many dimensions. Similarly, in quantum theory the points
of Σ correspond to so-called “wave-functions”, and hence Σ is again
a function-space — usually assumed to be Hilbert space. (Birkhoﬀ
and von Neumann [1936], p. 106)
As further examples, Birkhoﬀand von Neumann consider:
In electrodynamics, the law of propagation is contained in
Maxwell’s equations, and in quantum theory, in equations due to
Schr¨odinger. In any case, the law of propagation may be imagined
as inducing a steady ﬂuid motion in the phase-space. (Birkhoﬀand
von Neumann [1936], p. 106)
The last component of the semantic approach, which is particularly
important in the context of an empiricist view, is the formulation of a con-
venient notion of empirical adequacy. After spelling out the mathematical
content of models of data and state-spaces, von Neumann indicates the im-
portance of assigning empirical content to the models considered; otherwise,
we would be considering only mathematical structures.
Now before a phase-space can become imbued with reality [empir-
ical content], its elements and subsets must be correlated in some
way with “experimental propositions” (which are subsets of dif-
ferent observation-spaces). Moreover, this must be so done that

222
set-theoretical inclusion (which is the analogue of logical implica-
tion) is preserved. (Birkhoﬀand von Neumann [1936], p. 107)
In other words, a physical theory is empirically adequate if there is a
transformation between certain components of the state-space and the
data models that preserves the relevant relations; that is, which assigns to
the observable components of the state-space a counterpart in the models
of data.
Note that, in this passage, when von Neumann talks about imbuing the
state-space with “reality”, he is not adding a realist gloss to the resulting
formalism. He is actually talking about the empirical content of the theory
under consideration. This is clear for the following reasons: Firstly, von Neu-
mann was careful in not adding a realist gloss to his claims. He insisted that
the uniﬁcatory and predictive components of a theory are only aesthetic,
pragmatic features, and not epistemic (see von Neumann [1947], p. 7), and
the fact that a theory is uniﬁed and empirically successful doesn’t increase
the probability that it is true. Of course, this move meshes nicely with an
empiricist approach. Secondly, in a remark made immediately after the pas-
sage I’ve just quoted, von Neumann explicitly considers the empirical sub-
structures of the state-spaces (the components which refer only to the ob-
servables of a physical system, and which are crucial for an empiricist view):
There is an obvious way to do this in dynamical systems of the clas-
sical type. One can measure position and its ﬁrst time-derivative
velocity — and hence momentum — explicitly, and so establish a
one-one correspondence which preserves inclusion between subsets
of phase-space and subsets of a suitable observation space. (Birkhoﬀ
and von Neumann [1936], p. 107)
This passage clearly indicates that von Neumann is concerned with the
observables of a physical theory (this is the focus of the empirical substruc-
tures) and the existence of a “one-one” correspondence that preserves the
relevant structure between the state-space and the models of data. And
this is, of course, the main feature of van Fraassen’s notion of empirical
adequacy (see van Fraassen [1980], p. 64, and Bueno [1997]).
However, Birkhoﬀand von Neumann are concerned not only with the
empirical adequacy of deterministic theories, but also of statistical ones (a
point which is discussed at length in van Fraassen [1989]):
In quantum theory [. . . ] the possibility of predicting in general
the readings from measurements on a physical system M from a

223
knowledge of its “state” is denied; only statistical predictions are
always possible. (Birkhoﬀand von Neumann [1936], p. 107)
In this way, it becomes clear that all the main components of the se-
mantic approach (especially in the empiricist gloss given by van Fraassen)
can be found in von Neumann’s work.
Von Neumann was also clear in his emphasis on the role of mathematical
structures to accommodate physical phenomena, and also when talking
about “physical reality”, he always made it clear that he was considering
the models we use to represent information about reality. In this sense,
given the emphasis on structural considerations, and since von Neumann
didn’t add a realist gloss to them, his overall approach meshes nicely with
an empiricist account (see von Neumann [1947]).l
But is this account of von Neumann’s epistemic attitude towards science
adequate? For given that von Neumann developed a quantum-logical ap-
proach to quantum mechanics, and since quantum logic is often used to sup-
port a realist interpretation of quantum mechanics, wasn’t von Neumann
a realist after all? The problem with this suggestion lies in the assumption
that quantum logic supports realism. Surely there are quantum-logical in-
terpretations that are meant to enhance the realist position; this is the case
of Putnam’s view (see Putnam [1968] and [1976], and for a discussion Bub
[1981b], and da Costa [1997]). However, quantum logic, as such, is not nec-
essarily tied to realism. When Putnam articulated his version of quantum
logic, he added to the quantum-logical approach a realist gloss. But this is
not necessary. It is interesting to note that van Fraassen himself, while not
sharing the realist additions to quantum logic, has formulated his modal
interpretation of quantum mechanics quantum-logically (see van Fraassen
[1991]). In other words, quantum logic provides a broad conceptual frame-
work in which both realists and anti-realists can work. The distinctions
between these two kinds of interpretations (realist and anti-realist) arise
from the diﬀerent assumptions they add. The importance of this is that we
can understand why von Neumann’s formulation of quantum logic wasn’t
articulated as part of a realist enterprise. Given his concerns with structures
and the lack of a realist gloss over them, it meshes more smoothly with an
empiricist outlook.
lIt is worth mentioning that Birkhoﬀand von Neumann also consider Hankel’s principle
of the “perseverance of formal laws” as one of the requirements to be met by their
approach (Birkhoﬀand von Neumann [1936], p. 118). This perseverance is introduced
as a heuristic component in the formulation of quantum logic.

224
4.9. Logic and constructive empiricism
But it is not only in the formulation of the semantic approach, and in the
role assigned to quantum logic that von Neumann’s and van Fraassen’s
approaches are related; they also share a similar kind of logical pluralism.
And of course this pluralism makes a lot of sense in an empiricist setting.
According to van Fraassen, the correctness of a logical system is always
relative, and in this sense, the question about the determination of the
right logic cannot be addressed in absolute terms:
A logical system is considered correct for a language if it provides a
catalogue of the valid inferences in that language. So the question
“Which is the right logic?” may perhaps be rephrased as: Assuming
that natural language is adequately represented by a certain formal
language L, what logic is correct for L from a semantic point of
view? (van Fraassen [1971], p. 3)
As a result, we cannot talk about the correct logic in absolute terms, but we
have to consider the particular context (the particular domain or language)
we are concerned with.
From the semantic point of view, the correct logic is always deriva-
tive: It is found by examining semantic relations (deﬁned in terms
of truth, reference, and so on) among statements. Thus, if what the
intuitionist means by his statements is understood, it can then be
seen that intuitionistic logic is the correct logic for his language.
(van Fraassen [1971], p. 4)
So, just as von Neumann stressed the context-dependence of logic (we
have diﬀerent logics depending on the empirical domain we are examining),
van Fraassen emphasizes the language-dependence of logic. In both cases
the outcome is clear enough:
Since we have now denied that there is a unique logic we must
face the charge of a self-defeating relativism. For what logical sys-
tem shall govern the appraisal of our own reasoning in semantic
inquiry? Our answer to this is fairly straightforward: In Metalogic
we use a part of natural language commonly known as “mathemat-
ical English”, in which we describe and discuss only mathematical

225
(that is, set-theoretic) objects. (van Fraassen [1971], p. 4; the italics
are mine)m
However, van Fraassen adds, despite his talk of set-theoretic objects, he is
by no means a platonist:
We are deliberately speaking of mathematical objects in the idiom
of naive platonism; the reader is asked not to infer that this is our
position in philosophy of mathematics. After all, any philosophy of
mathematics must eventually make sense of the common language
of mathematical mankind. (van Fraassen [1971], p. 5, note 6)
The idea is to make sense of the mathematical language without inﬂating
the ontology, that is, without assuming platonism, and advocating a logical
pluralism.
Given van Fraassen’s rejection of the existence of a unique (correct)
logic, he claims that a logic is correct only relative to a given domain.
According to him, “we accept classical logic as correct within a certain
(perhaps rather limited) domain” (van Fraassen [1971], p. 5; the italics are
mine). This is, of course, the natural position for the empiricist, since it
avoids the essentialism typical of a topic neutral account of logic. It is
this domain dependence of logic that von Neumann explored so fruitfully
in his work in the foundations of quantum mechanics. The logic he was
then exploring was the logic of elementary statements, and for the reasons
discussed in Birkhoﬀand von Neumann [1936], this logic is correct for the
language of these statements.
The point of these considerations is simple. If we adopt a broad notion of
empiricism (namely, constructive empiricism), we can understand how one
can be an empiricist in mathematics. It doesn’t require any form of reduc-
tionism of mathematics to the observable (just as van Fraassen’s approach
doesn’t require any such reduction in science), but it allows mathematics
and logic to be motivated and changed on empirical grounds. This form of
empiricism is by no means foreign to mathematical practice, but it has in-
formed, as I indicated here, von Neumann’s own approach to mathematics.
mAnd van Fraassen notes: “When this language [mathematical English] is understood it
can be seen that classical logic [. . . ] is the correct logic for that language. To understand
this language may involve understanding our beliefs concerning what sets are like and
what sets exist — and some of these beliefs are rather audacious” (van Fraassen [1971],
p. 4).

226
5. Conclusion
Von Neumann adopted a clear empiricist and pluralist view about logic,
which played an important role in the development of his research both in
the foundations of quantum mechanics (with the formulation of quantum
logic) and in mathematics itself (with the creation of continuous geome-
try). However, these two features are by no means incompatible with the
adoption of a classical attitude with regard to the practice of mathematics;
in particular, with regard to the rejection of inconsistencies (such as those
found in Dirac’s use of the δ-function).
The answer to the question Was von Neumann an empiricist? should
now be clear. As we saw above, a number of factors support a positive
answer, since according to von Neumann: (1) mathematical theories are
often created from physical, empirical demands (ﬁrst empiricist feature); (2)
logic should be inspired by experience (second empiricist feature); (3) logic
can be revised on empirical grounds (third empiricist feature); (4) there are
as many logics as physical phenomena demand (logical pluralism); (5) the
demand for new logics arises from experience (logical anti-apriorism); and
ﬁnally (6) von Neumann clearly formulated the semantic approach, with
special emphasis on the empirical adequacy of the resulting theories, rather
than their truth.
If these considerations are still not enough, I shall leave the last word
to von Neumann himself, quoting a passage which leaves room for no
doubt:
As a mathematical discipline travels far from its empirical source,
or still more, if it is a second and third generation only indirectly
inspired by ideas coming from “reality”, it is beset with very grave
dangers. It becomes more and more purely aestheticizing, more and
more purely l’art pour l’art. This need not be bad, if the ﬁeld is
surrounded by correlated subjects, which still have closer empiri-
cal connections [. . . ]. But there is a grave danger that the subject
will develop along the line of least resistance, that the stream, so
far from its source, will separate into a multitude of insigniﬁcant
complexities. In other words, at a great distance from its empirical
source, or after much “abstract” inbreeding, a mathematical sub-
ject is in danger of degeneration. (von Neumann [1947]; the italics
are mine)

227
Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Philip Catton, John Christie, Newton da Costa, Christian
de Ronde, Steven French, Graeme Gooday, and Jon Hodge for helpful dis-
cussions. Special thanks go to Steven French for comments and suggestions
on earlier versions of this work. This paper was written after I spent some
time consulting the von Neumann Archives (Library of Congress, Washing-
ton, D.C.). I think a new picture of von Neumann’s work in logic and the
foundations of quantum mechanics emerges once we consider the material
kept there.
Bibliography
1. Azzouni, J., Deﬂating Existential Consequence (Oxford University Press,
New York, 2004).
2. Beltrametti, E., and van Fraassen, B., (eds.) Current Issues in Quantum
Logic. (Plenum Press, New York, 1981).
3. Birkhoﬀ, G., and von Neumann, J., The Logic of Quantum Mechanics. Annals
of Mathematics 37, pp. 823-843, 1936. (Reprinted in von Neumann [1962],
pp. 105-125.)
4. Boolos, G., Nominalist Platonism, Philosophical Review 94, pp. 327-344,
1985.
5. Bub, J., What Does Quantum Logic Explain?, In: Beltrametti and van
Fraassen (eds.) [1981], pp. 89-100, 1981.
6. Bub, J., Hidden Variables and Quantum Logic — A Sceptical Review, Erken-
ntnis 16, pp. 275-293, 1981b.
7. Bueno, O., Empirical Adequacy: A Partial Structures Approach, Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science 28, pp. 585-610, 1997.
8. Bueno, O., Mathematical Fictionalism. In: Bueno and Linnebo (eds.) [2009],
pp. 59-79, 2009.
9. Bueno, O., Nominalism in the Philosophy of Mathematics. In: Edward N.
Zalta (ed.), Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2013 edition). URL
= http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2013/entries/nominalism-mathema
tics/.
10. Bueno, O., and de Souza, E., The Concept of Quasi-Truth, Logique et Analyse
153-154, pp. 183-199, 1996.
11. Bueno, O., French, S., and Ladyman, J., On Representing the Relationship
between the Mathematical and the Empirical, Philosophy of Science 69,
pp. 497-518, 2002.
12. Bueno, O., and Linnebo, Ø. (eds.) New Waves in Philosophy of Mathematics.
(Palgrave MacMillan, Hampshire, 2009).
13. Butterﬁeld, J., and Pagonis, C., (eds.) From Physics to Philosophy. (Cam-
bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999).
14. Churchland, P.M., and Hooker, C.A. (eds.) Images of Science: Essays on Re-
alism and Empiricism, with a Reply by Bas C. van Fraassen. (The University
of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1985).

228
15. Cohen, R.S., and Wartofsky, M. (eds.) Boston Studies in the Philosophy of
Science, vol. 5. (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1968).
16. da Costa, N.C.A., Pragmatic Probability, Erkenntnis 25, pp. 141-162, 1986.
17. da Costa, N.C.A., Logiques classiques et non classiques. (Expanded and re-
vised French translation by Jean-Yves Bziau; the original edition in Por-
tuguese was published in 1980.) (Masson, Paris, 1997).
18. da Costa, N.C.A., and French, S., Pragmatic Truth and the Logic of Induc-
tion, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 40, pp. 333-356, 1989.
19. da Costa, N.C.A., and French, S., The Model-Theoretic Approach in the
Philosophy of Science, Philosophy of Science 57, pp. 248-265, 1990.
20. da Costa, N.C.A., and French, S., Towards an Acceptable Theory of Ac-
ceptance: Partial Structures and the General Correspondence Principle. In:
French and Kamminga (eds.) [1993], pp. 137-158, 1993a.
21. da Costa, N.C.A., and French, S., A Model Theoretic Approach to “Natural
Reasoning”, International Studies in Philosophy of Science 7, pp. 177-190,
1993b.
22. da Costa, N.C.A., and French, S., Science and Partial Truth. (Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford, 2003).
23. Dalla Chiara, M.L., Doets, K., Mundici, D., and van Bentham, J. (eds.),
Structures and Norms in Science. (Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht,
1997).
24. Dirac, P.A.M., The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. (Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1930).
25. Duhem, P., The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory. (An English trans-
lation, by P.P. Wiener, was published in 1954.) (Princeton University Press,
Princeton, 1906).
26. Field, H., Science without Numbers: A Defense of Nominalism. (Princeton
University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1980).
27. Field, H., Realism, Mathematics and Modality. (Basil Blackwell, Oxford,
1989).
28. French, S., Partiality, Pursuit and Practice. In: Dalla Chiara et al. (eds.)
[1997], pp. 35-52, 1997.
29. French, S., Models and Mathematics in Physics: The Role of Group Theory.
In: Butterﬁeld and Pagonis (eds.) [1999], pp. 187-207, 1999.
30. French, S., and Ladyman, J., Superconductivity and Structures: Revisiting
the London Account, Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics
28, pp. 363-393, 1997.
31. French, S., and Ladyman, J., Reinﬂating the Semantic Approach, Interna-
tional Studies in the Philosophy of Science 13, pp. 103-121, 1999.
32. French, S., and Kamminga, H. (eds.) Correspondence, Invariance and Heuris-
tics: Essays in Honour of Heinz Post. (Reidel, Dordrecht, 1993).
33. Hellman, G., Mathematics without Numbers: Towards a Modal-Structural In-
terpretation. (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1989).
34. Heywood, R.B. (ed.) The Works of the Mind. (Chicago University Press,
Chicago, 1947).

229
35. Hilbert, D., Nordheim, L., and von Neumann, J., ¨Uber die Grundlagen der
Quantenmechanik, Mathematische Annalen 98, pp. 1-30, 1927. (Reprinted
in von Neumann [1961a].)
36. Mikenberg, I., da Costa, N.C.A., and Chuaqui, R., Pragmatic Truth and
Approximation to Truth, Journal of Symbolic Logic 51, pp. 201-221, 1986.
37. Muller, F.A., The Equivalence Myth of Quantum Mechanics, Studies in His-
tory and Philosophy of Modern Physics 28, pp. 35-61; 219-247, 1997.
38. Murray, F.J., and von Neumann, J., On Rings of Operators, Annals of Mathe-
matics 37, pp. 116-229, 1936. (Reprinted in von Neumann [1961b], pp. 6-119.)
39. Putnam, H., Is Logic Empirical?, In: Cohen and Wartofsky (eds.) [1968].
(Reprinted as “The Logic of Quantum Mechanics” in Putnam [1979],
pp. 174-197.)
40. Putnam, H., How to Think Quantum Logically, In: Suppes (ed.) [1976].
41. Putnam, H., Mathematics, Matter and Method. Philosophical Papers, volume
1. (Second edition.) (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1979).
42. R´edei, M., Why John von Neumann did not Like the Hilbert Space Formalism
of Quantum Mechanics (and What He Liked Instead), Studies in History and
Philosophy of Modern Physics 28, pp. 493-510, 1997.
43. R´edei, M., Quantum Logic in Algebraic Approach. (Kluwer Academic Pub-
lishers, Dordrecht, 1998).
44. R´edei, M., Von Neumann’s Concept of Quantum Logic and Quantum Prob-
ability, In: R´edei and St¨oltzner (eds.) [2000], pp. 153-172, 2000.
45. R´edei, M., and St¨oltzner, M. (eds.) John von Neumann and the Foundations
of Quantum Physics. (Springer, Dordrecht, 2000).
46. Redhead, M., Symmetry in Intertheory Relations, Synthese 32, pp. 77-112,
1975.
47. Schr¨odinger, E.,
¨Uber das Verh¨altnis der Heisenberg-Born-Jordanschen
Quantenmechanik zu der meinen, In: Schr¨odinger [1927], pp. 45-61, 1926.
48. Schr¨odinger, E., Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics. (Translated by J.F.
Shearer.) (Chelsea, New York, 1927).
49. Shapiro, S., Philosophy of Mathematics: Structure and Ontology. (Oxford
University Press, New York, 1997).
50. Steiner, M., The Application of Mathematics to Natural Science, Journal of
Philosophy 86, pp. 449-480, 1989.
51. Steiner, M., The Applicability of Mathematics as a Philosophical Problem.
(Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass., 1998).
52. Suppe, F., The Search for Philosophic Understanding of Scientiﬁc Theories,
In: Suppe (ed.) [1977], pp. 1-232, 1977.
53. Suppe, F. (ed.) The Structure of Scientiﬁc Theories. (Second edition.) (Uni-
versity of Illinois Press, Urbana, 1977a).
54. Suppe, F., The Semantic Conception of Theories and Scientiﬁc Realism.
(University of Illinois Press, Urbana, 1989).
55. Suppes, P. (ed.) Logic and Probability in Quantum Mechanics. (Reidel, Dor-
drecht, 1976).
56. van Fraassen, B.C., Formal Semantics and Logic. (Macmillan, New York,
1971).

230
57. van Fraassen, B.C., The Scientiﬁc Image. (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1980).
58. van Fraassen, B.C., Empiricism in the Philosophy of Science, In: Churchland
and Hooker (eds.) [1985], pp. 245-308, 1985.
59. van Fraassen, B.C., Laws and Symmetry. (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1989).
60. van Fraassen, B.C., Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View. (Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1991).
61. von Neumann, J., Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. (The
English translation, by Robert T. Beyer, of the original German edition was
ﬁrst published in 1955.) (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1932).
62. von Neumann, J., Quantum Mechanics of Inﬁnite Systems, In: R´edei and
St¨oltzner (eds.) [2000], pp. 249-266, 1935-36/2000.
63. von Neumann, J., On Alternative Systems of Logics, unpublished manuscript,
von Neumann Archives, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C, 1937a.
64. von Neumann, J., Quantum Logics. (Strict- and Probability- Logics), unpub-
lished manuscript, von Neumann Archives, Library of Congress, Washington,
D.C. (A brief summary, written by A.H. Taub, can be found in von Neumann
[1962], pp. 195-197.), 1937b.
65. von Neumann, J., The Mathematician, In: Heywood (ed.) [1947], pp. 180-196.
(Reprinted in von Neumann [1961a], pp. 1-9.), 1947.
66. von Neumann, J., Unsolved Problems in Mathematics, typescript, von Neu-
mann Archives, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. (Published in R´edei
and St¨oltzner (eds.) [2000], pp. 231-246.), 1954.
67. von Neumann, J., Amsterdam Talk about ‘Problems in Mathematics’, In:
R´edei and St¨oltzner (eds.) [2000], pp. 247-248, [1954/2000].
68. von Neumann, J., Continuous Geometry. (Princeton University Press, Prince-
ton, 1960).
69. von Neumann, J., Collected Works, vol. I. Logic, Theory of Sets and Quantum
Mechanics. (Edited by A.H. Taub.) (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1961a).
70. von Neumann, J., Collected Works, vol. III. Rings of Operators. (Edited by
A.H. Taub.) (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1961b).
71. von Neumann, J., Collected Works, vol. IV. Continuous Geometry and Other
Topics. (Edited by A.H. Taub.) (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1962).
72. von Neumann, J., Continuous Geometries with a Transition Probability,
Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society 34, No. 252, pp. 1-210, 1981.

231
THE BORN RULE AND FREE WILL:
WHY LIBERTARIAN AGENT-CAUSAL
FREE WILL IS NOT “ANTISCIENTIFIC”
Ruth E. Kastner
Department of Philosophy, University of Maryland
College Park, USA.
E-mail: rkastner@ umd. edu
In the libertarian “agent causation” view of free will, free choices are at-
tributable only to the choosing agent, as opposed to a speciﬁc cause or causes
outside the agent. An often-repeated claim in the philosophical literature on
free will is that agent causation necessarily implies lawlessness, and is therefore
“antiscientiﬁc.” That claim is critiqued and it is argued, on the contrary, that
the volitional powers of a free agent need not be viewed as anomic, speciﬁ-
cally with regard to the quantum statistical law (the Born Rule). Assumptions
about the role and nature of causation, taken as bearing on volitional agency,
are examined and found inadequate to the task. Finally, it is suggested that
quantum theory may constitute precisely the sort of theory required for a nomic
grounding of libertarian free will.
Keywords: Born Rule; free will; anomic action.
1. The Born Rule and free choices
The agent causation (AC) theory of free will holds that truly free human
choices are attributable not to speciﬁc events or causes external to a choos-
ing agent, nor to desires or other internal psychological inﬂuences, but only
to the volitional power of the choosing agent. In eﬀect, that is what “voli-
tion” means according to AC. But the latter is currently a minority view.
The more “mainstream,” conservative approach to the problem of free will
is to assert that “free will” simply means acting in accordance with our
desires in a way that is free of external constraints. This view is called
compatibilism, because it was developed speciﬁcally to be compatible with
deterministic laws. In eﬀect, it deﬁnes the term “free will’ in such a way
that we can say we are making free choices as to how to behave even when
all of our behaviors are fully determined by past causes and inexorable

232
deterministic laws (or even fated in the sense of being elements of a “block
world” in which the future exists in the same way as the past and present).
In contrast, AC is a form of incompatibilism, which denies that free will
is compatible with determinism. It holds that in order for us to have free
will, the world must be fundamentally indeterministic. AC is the libertarian
form of incompatibilism; it asserts that the world is in fact indeterministic,
and that we do have free will. Our own volitional power is taken as the
primary cause of our choices. The complementary form of incompatibilism
is to assert that the world is deterministic and therefore to deny that we
have free will.
It is often asserted that the agent causation view requires lawlessness,
and is necessarily ”antiscientiﬁc.” For example, the entry on incompatibil-
ism in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy states: “Libertarians who
hold this view [agent causation] are committed, it seems, to the claim that
free will is possible only at worlds that are at least partly lawless, and that
our world is such a world.” [1]
Sider [2] argues that this alleged incompatibility of agent causation with
scientiﬁc laws extends beyond ordinary deterministic laws to the indeter-
ministic probability law (i.e. the Born Rule) of quantum theory. He brieﬂy
entertains the idea that agent causation could ‘peacefully coexist’ with an
indeterministic law such as the Born Rule, concluding in the negative, as
follows:
“In the previous sections I was ignoring quantum mechanics. For instance, I
was assuming that if a cause occurs, its eﬀect must occur, even though quan-
tum mechanics merely says that causes make their eﬀects probable. Why did I
ignore quantum mechanics? Because randomness is not freedom... A libertarian
might concede that randomness is not suﬃcient for freedom, but nevertheless
claim that quantum randomness makes room for freedom, because it makes
room for agent causation. Imagine that it is 1939, and Hitler has not yet de-
cided to invade Poland. He is trying to decide what to do among the following
three options:
Invade Poland
Invade France
Stop being such an evil guy and become a ballet dancer
Quantum mechanics assigns probabilities to each of these possible decisions;
it does not say which one Hitler will choose. Suppose, for the sake of argument,
that the probabilities are as follows:

233
95% Invade Poland
4.9% Invade France
0.1% become a ballet dancer
If this picture [of quantum theory leaving room for free will] were correct,
then my criticism of libertarianism as being anti-scientiﬁc would be rebutted:
agent causation could peacefully coexist with quantum mechanics. In fact,
though, the coexistence picture makes agent causation a slave to quantum-
mechanical probabilities.” (p. 124)
In other words, Sider assumes that Hitler, as modeled above, must
‘mindlessly follow the probabilities’ and therefore is not really free to choose.
On the next page, he concludes:
“Quantum mechanics does not help the agent-causation theorist. I will now
go back to ignoring quantum mechanics.” (p. 125)
However, Sider’s formulation depends on the highly nontrivial but un-
supported claim that a human agent can be represented as a quantum
system with a well-deﬁned state over the relevant time period, and that the
agent’s choices can be characterized by eigenvalues of an operator repre-
sented the set of options available to the agent. So, for example, if the agent
(Hitler) is presented with a choice of actions, the measured operator is as-
sumed to be one whose possible outcomes (eigenvalues) are “Invade Poland,
Invade France, or Become Ballet Dancer.” Then the Born probabilities for
measurement outcomes are assumed to apply to those possible actions, con-
sidered as eigenstates, conditioned on the presumed stable-over-time initial
quantum state of the choosing agent. It then follows, so the argument goes,
that an agent would be a “slave” to those quantum statistics in order to
be in compliance with the Born Rule. If not a slave, then the agent would
presumably be able to violate the rule willy-nilly, and thus be in engaging
in anti-scientiﬁc, “anomic action.”a
aTechnically, to say a set of events is ‘anomic’ is not a statement about law violation,
but about the fact the events are not covered by any law. But clearly, if a set of events
is not covered by any law whatsoever, than any given extant law must be violated by
them; that is, the set of events must fail to conform to that law. Thus it follows that the
claim that actions of free will are anomic is equivalent to the claim that events resulting
from such actions would have to violate any extant law. For otherwise they would be
consistent with that law, and would therefore fail to be anomic.

234
The main purpose of this paper is to argue that this argument fails
because a human agent cannot be assumed to be modeled in this way.b
First, however, I will note some objections of Clarke [4] to the claim that
libertarian free will must be inconsistent not only with deterministic laws
but also with statistical laws such as the Born Rule. Clarke argues against
this claim by noting that:
“probabilistic laws of nature also do not require, for any ﬁnite number of
trials, any precise distribution of outcomes. The probabilities involved in di-
achronic laws...are the chances that events of one type will cause, or will be
followed by, events of another type. ... These probabilities, we may assume, de-
termine single-case, objective probabilities, or propensities. Actual distributions
can diverge from proportions matching these probabilities. As trials of some
process governed by such a law increase, it becomes increasingly likely that the
distribution of outcomes will match the probabilities given by the laws. But for
any ﬁnite number of repetitions, any distribution at all is possible for outcomes
neither determined to occur nor determined not to occur.” (pp. 390-391)
Thus, a statistical law is not violated unless very large numbers of pre-
cisely repeated experimental runs yield statistically signiﬁcant deviations
from expected mean values, where even “statistically signiﬁcant” can be
a matter of context and degree. Highly unlikely strings of outcomes may
occur, and yet a statistical law may still not be violated. The point here
is that the demonstration of a violation of a statistical law requires a high
hurdle of empirical evidence.
Clarke presents an example in which an agent may “freely choose to
obey the laws” by choosing to obtain a distribution of choice outcomes that
comport with a prescribed probabilistic law in a psychology experiment. He
notes that each of the agent’s individual choices are free, even in the face
of such a law. This author concurs that the situation envisioned in this
example bears against the idea that an agent with libertarian free will
must necessarily violate statistical laws. However, one might still wonder
whether an agent governed not by an arbitrary statistical law but by the
laws of quantum mechanics might somehow be constrained by them in a
bPereboom similarly claims that “... although our being undetermined agent-causes has
not been ruled out as a coherent possibility, it is not credible given our best physical
theories.” [3, 422] By this, he presumably endorses Sider’s argument.

235
way that would either void his causal agency or necessarily violate the laws
of quantum mechanics; i.e., by resulting in observable deviations from the
Born Rule. It is this situation that is considered herein.
Concerning the Born Rule, the ﬁrst thing to note is that in order to
predict physically relevant probabilities of outcomes with the Rule, one
must have a clearly deﬁned system and a clearly deﬁned observable being
measured on that system. A system deﬁnition must be able to state how
many degrees of freedom (usually considered as ‘particles’) are in play, and
exactly what the initial state of that system is. An observable deﬁnition
must be able to state exactly what forces are acting on the system and
what sort of detection process constitutes the outcome of the observable
being measured. These requirements may be straightforwardly met for mi-
croscopic systems in the laboratory, but it is a highly nontrivial matter as
to whether they may be met under conditions obtaining in the context of
human behavior.
Now, consider Sider’s apparent assumption that a human agent, if truly
free, should be able to make choices that would deviate from the Born Rule
(for otherwise he would be a ‘slave’ to the rule and thus not be making free
choices). Such a claim assumes that one could set up repeatable experiments
in which the agent could be precisely deﬁned as a quantum system in an
unambiguous quantum state, whose applicable observable was also tightly
enough deﬁned so as to be able to detect such deviations. It is only if such
deviations were in principle detectable that there could be a violation from
the statistical laws of quantum mechanics, as observed in Clarke’s remark
quoted above. However, there are very good reasons to think that this is
not the case.
For one thing, as noted above, one has to be able to perform precisely
repeatable experiments. Does exposing a given human agent to repeated
opportunities to make a choice constitute a precisely repeatable experiment
of this type? Almost certainly not. The human agent is an open system,
continually exposed to variable inﬂuences from his or her environment: air
currents, radiant energy, etc; as well to internal ﬂuctuations (number of
blood cells in the brain, number of activated neurons, etc.). Assuming the
brain is the most relevant bodily system concerning the choice, the state(s)
and the number of relevant degrees of freedom in the brain are in continual
ﬂux. There is no justiﬁcation for assuming that the agent would be in the
same quantum state over any extended period of time, in particular the
time interval in which repeated choices would be presented. No matter how
tightly one might attempt to control the agent’s environment, one is dealing

236
with an enormously complex and under-deﬁned system, from a quantum-
mechanical perspective.
It we want to be more careful in the application of physical law,
the example of Hitler facing diﬀerent choices of action is better mod-
eled as a macroscopic system with several possible macrostates, where the
macrostates correspond to the choices. Each such macrostate is instanti-
ated by an enormous number of microstates (we will see just how enormous
in what follows). It is only at the level of the microstates that quantum
laws would become relevant, not at the level of the macroscopic system of
“Hitler’s body and brain.” So the choice discussed by Sider would more
accurately be described by probabilities dictated by the Gibbs ensembles of
statistical mechanics, not the Born Rule. However, quantum eﬀects could
be relevant at the level of individual microstates, such that quantum inde-
terminism might enter at that point.
Thus, there is indeed an entry for fundamental indeterminism allowing
in principle for free will, but not in such a way that it would lead to observ-
able Born Rule or other law violations. One can see this by noting that the
number of microstates corresponding to a sample of ice in a macrostate de-
ﬁned by a temperature of 273K and normal atmospheric pressure is roughly
101,299,000,000,000,000,000,000,000. (This is calculated using S = klogW, where
S is the system’s entropy, k is Boltzmann’s thermodynamic constant, and
W is the number of microstates corresponding to a given macrostate; and
the experimentally determined value of S for the given ice macrostate is
input.c) This is the number of microscopic (quantum-level) diﬀerent pos-
sible conﬁgurations of the atoms in the ice that give rise to exactly the
same outward, classically observable properties for the sample. (Just for
comparison, the number of atoms in the entire universe is estimated to be
“only” about 1080.) Given that the body and brain are largely composed of
water, the number of microstates involved in describing macroscopic human
behaviorial states is of the same astonishing order.
Now suppose a human being could exercise free will by volitionally alter-
ing some of the microstates in his brain, exploiting quantum indeterminacy.
Granted, this would require that the brain’s neural wiring be delicately bal-
anced so as to be able to manifest such alterations as changes in the rele-
vant macrostates. But as a human brain is a far-from equilibrium biological
cDetails are given by Lambert [5] at http://entropysite.oxy.edu/microstate/, where it is
noted concerning this enormous number of microstates that “Writing 5,000 zeroes per
page, it would take not just reams of paper, not just reams piled miles high, but light
years high of reams of paper to list all those microstates!”

237
system, this is certainly a conceivable brain function. Could one detect
any Born Rule violation as a result of this process? In order to do so, one
would have to have exactly repeatable input/measurement/output data;
that is, one would have to have data demonstrating that speciﬁc neural
atoms or molecules underwent state transitions at rates not in conformity
with the rule. Even if this were in principle possible, the number of mi-
crostates that would have to be taken into account would, as above, be
hyper-astronomical. At the rate of recording even one microstate’s atomic
transitions per second (way too optimistic to be realistic), this would take
hugely longer than the age of the universe. Clearly, the model of Hitler and
his putative quantum choice-eigenstates is grossly oversimpliﬁed.
The example of mental activity inﬂuencing a choice raises another im-
portant consideration: if we are going to discuss the relevance of quantum
indeterminism for free will, we must take into account whether it should
be understood as describing only physical/material systems, or whether in
some way it also pertains to mental activity. Now, a physicalist would deny
that the mind is anything diﬀerent from the physical brain, and an idealist
would assert that quantum mechanics describes mental substance in various
guises, among them apparently solid matter. Meanwhile, a dualist would
presumably say that physical theory describes only material substance and
therefore mind is not addressed by quantum theory. The very fact that
there are very diﬀerent metaphysical views concerning the nature of matter
and mind, and the role of either substance in explaining and understanding
human behavior, dictates that we must tread with extreme caution when
invoking physical theories (whether presumed deterministic or not) as a
basis to argue either for or against the existence of free will.
Against this backdrop, it would seem reasonable to point out, with pru-
dence, at least the possibility that quantum indeterminism might provide
an opening for free will–if only as an avenue of possible escape from the
alleged ‘fatedeness’ of future actions. To rule out that possibility based
on a demonstrably oversimpliﬁed application of quantum laws to choices
modeled as quantum observables and human beings ostensibly labeled by
stable-over-time quantum states would seem to be precipitous.
Even assuming that one could model human choices directly by quan-
tum states corresponding one-to-one with speciﬁc choices (as opposed to
taking into account the macrostate/microstate relationship), the crucial
point is that at the level of individual instances the Born Rule gives only

238
propensities for outcomes.d A human agent described as a huge quantum
system might instantaneously be subject to those propensities yet, given
quantum indeterminism, still have room to make a free choice (in the sense
that the choice is made by the agent as a volitional, primary substance).
If another instance outwardly presenting the same choice came before the
agent, it is in fact overwhelmingly unlikely that the agent is in exactly the
same state that she was just prior to the previous choice, so that the Born
Rule propensities are likely not the same as in the previous instance. Even if
the experiment is repeated many times, a resulting set of outcomes in which
so many parameters are ill-deﬁned and subject to change has no bearing
on whether any particular statistical law is being violated.
Thus, it is a highly nontrivial matter to try to apply the Born Rule to
macroscopic biological systems and their macroscopically deﬁned choices;
yet Sider’s argument for the failure of free choice presumes without argu-
ment that one can straightforwardly do so.e This may not be possible due
to the quickly changing and therefore ill-deﬁned nature of the physical sys-
tems constituting the choosing agent during any relevant time interval, and
the similarly ill-deﬁned-over-time status of the “choice observable.” (And
that is to disregard the distinction between microstates and macrostates,
where it is probably the latter that correspond to human choices.) Thus it is
far from established that there would be any necessary statistical violation
of the Born Rule resulting from free choices even if such choices are made
possible by fundamental quantum indeterminacy.
Finally, the claim that free will must be anomic and “anti-scientiﬁc”
also encompasses psychological laws. But the latter are either empirically
observed statistical regularities or fallible theoretical models. In either case,
no large-scale, apparently deterministic regularity is necessarily inconsistent
with fundamental indeterminacy and the attendant possible opening for
free will. For example, the Ideal Gas Law, PV = nRT , is a large-scale,
apparently deterministic statistical eﬀect of microscopic processes and yet
does not conﬂict with fundamental quantum indeterminacy.
dHere we also need to correct an inaccuracy in the quoted argument by Sider: “quantum
mechanics merely says that causes make their eﬀects probable.” No, a ‘cause’ (considered
as a quantum state subject to measurement) can give rise to equally possible measure-
ment outcomes. Thus a quantum mechanical ‘cause’ can set up a number of equally
possible eﬀects, none of which is any more probable than the others.
eIndeed the idea that macroscopic objects like humans are describable by quantum states,
while routinely assumed, is also debatable. In particular this is not the case in the
Transactional Interpretation; [6, pp. 112-115].

239
Concerning the fallibility of theoretical models of human behavior, and
generalizations made from empirical observation: to every rule formulated
to ‘cover’ human behavior, there is an exception. For example, this author
recalls the following introductory statement in a college sociology textbook:
“Everybody loves a parade.” But on the contrary, certainly there are people
do not love parades. Does that make their behavior anti-scientiﬁc? Perhaps
more to the point, is an arbitrary volitional choice–one in which the choos-
ing agent provides no reason or cause for their choose– ‘antiscientiﬁc’? An
aﬃrmative answer to this question seems to be an underlying assumption
of the arguments against agent causation. Yet if quantum theory indicates
that genuine indeterminism is a feature of the world, then one can point
to no reason or cause for an electron to ‘choose’ spin up over spin down
when both are equally likely and equally possible. Yet one such outcome
always occurs.f And quantum theory is a (set of) well-corroborated scien-
tiﬁc law(s). Moreover, since one such outcome does in fact occur, quantum
theory might even be seen as demanding some sort of primitively volitional
capacity on the part of quantum systems. In fact, this is not a new idea:
physicist Freeman Dyson famously opined that
“... I think our consciousness is not just a passive epiphenomenon carried
along by the chemical events in our brains, but is an active agent forcing the
molecular complexes to make choices between one quantum state and another.
In other words, mind is already inherent in every electron, and the processes of
human consciousness diﬀer only in degree but not in kind from the processes
of choice between quantum states which we call “chance” when they are made
by electrons.” [9, p. 249]
2. Critique of causal notions invoked in support of the
alleged lawlessness of free choice
Let us now turn to Sider’s claim that we must be somehow “detached” from
our choices if they are not considered as caused by our beliefs and/or desires
[2, p. 121]. The idea that choices must be attributable to beliefs or desires
is questionable in itself, since it does not take into account situations, as
alluded to just above, in which we are called upon to make a completely
arbitrary choice that does not involve any necessary belief or desire. For
fHere I disregard “many worlds theories” which hold that all outcomes occur, because
(as I have argued elsewhere) I think they face serious problems; cf. [7]. I also disregard
the “Bohmian” theory because of weaknesses in accounting for the putative corpuscles
in the relativistic domain and because of a cogent argument by Brown and Wallace [8]
that it amounts to a many-worlds picture.

240
example, an experimenter needs to generate some statistics for an exper-
iment on an entangled EPR pair. He stands at one measuring device (a
Stern-Gerlach apparatus) and his colleague stands at another. In each run,
they must choose an orientation for the S-G magnet, say ‘z’ or ‘x’. They
have no belief or desire relevant to making each choice; it is completely
arbitrary. Yet there is no logical incompatibility with each of their choices
being free, and also connected to themselves as choosing agents.
Thus, there is no necessary ‘detachment’ in making a completely ar-
bitrary choice. The experimenters make an arbitrary choice because they
need to do so in order to conduct the experiment. At most, one might say
that they have a ‘belief’ or ‘desire’ that they should have roughly the same
number of x’s and z’s, but that does not constitute any belief or desire
applying to any individual choice. This is similar to the scenario considered
by Clarke in which an agent is given a target distribution and he freely
chooses how to approximate that distribution in each individual case.
More generally, a claim such as Sider’s concerning the causal relationship
between an agent and his or her choice must be based both on speciﬁc
theories of (i) causation and (ii) the ‘Self’ that is, on some notion of who or
what it is that is to be considered as characterized by beliefs and desires,
in what aspect of the Self those beliefs and desires consist, and in what
sense the choosing Self is ‘detached’ from them if they are not subject
to the notion of causality invoked in (i). These kinds of details are not
provided in support of the claim, and it is far from clear that (apart from
the consideration of arbitrary choices as above) it would hold across the
board, in the context of all possible theories of causation and its relation
to the Self.
Let us ﬁrst consider (i): causation. I will not attempt to present and
defend any particular theory of causation for purposes of this paper, which
has a narrow focus on the “anomic” claim. What must be remembered,
however, is that causation (as Hume pointed out) is not something that
can be grounded empirically. It is never found in the observable world.
Rather, causation is a vexed theoretical construct invoked in an attempt to
explain the regularities that we see in the world. In particular, it is invoked
as a kind of ‘missing link’ whenever we see that a particular type of input
seems always to be followed by a unique type of output.
Since causation is not externally observed, it is certainly possible that
it could be an aspect of volition, which (if it exists) is a wholly internal
sort of inﬂuence. (Does viewing causation as an aspect of volition seem to
conﬂict with the concept of causation as explaining apparently deterministic

241
regularities? Not if it is kept in mind that the apparent determinism of the
classical realm arises from a fundamental quantum indeterminacy, in the
limit of large quantum numbers and/or large numbers of interacting degrees
of freedom.) In this case, it would be entirely conceivable to regard the agent
as the primary cause of his or her free choice, through an irreducible act of
volition. As above, that volition need not be ‘caused by’ desires or beliefs;
it could be invoked to fulﬁll an arbitrary criterion. This brings us to an
appropriately non-detached view of the Self, point (ii): that is, the action
can be considered as causally connected to the Self through that primary
volitional act.
In this picture, the volitional power is the essence of the external in-
tervention whose causal eﬃcacy is crucial to libertarian free will. As in-
compatibilists correctly note, under strict determinism there is no external
intervention in the ﬂow of events. However, quantum theory predicts only
a set of outcomes without specifying which of the set will occur; yet one
always does. Consider this puzzling fact in light of Curie’s Principle, a
version of the Principle of Suﬃcient Reason which says that a speciﬁc out-
come must always be attributable to a speciﬁc cause which actualizes that
outcome as opposed to all others. This principle (which may or may not
apply to Nature) speciﬁes that the speciﬁc cause is a necessary condition
for something to happen; absent that speciﬁc cause, nothing will actually
happen.
If Curie’s Principle does in fact apply to Nature, it would appear that
some external intervention is actually necessary in order for any of that
set of possible events to occur. Were this the case, it would directly rebut
the presumption of ‘randomness’ attributed by Sider to an agent subject at
some level to the Born Rule: on the contrary, the choosing agent would use
his or her freedom of choice to provide the asymmetric cause demanded by
Curie’s Principle. (But even if Curie’s Principle does not strictly apply to
Nature at the quantum level, there is certainly room, in-principle, for the
agent to ‘tip the scales’ for one outcome as opposed to the others.)
3. Conclusion
This paper has focused on two speciﬁc critiques of libertarian, agent-causal
free will: (i) the claim that it must be anomic or “antiscientiﬁc”; and (ii)
that it must be causally detached from the choosing agent. The present
author is aware that the topic of volitional agent causation is a deep and
vexed issue with a very lengthy literature. This paper does not address the
broader concerns; its primary intent is to point out that the grounds often

242
adduced for claiming that agent causation is inconsistent with ‘our best sci-
entiﬁc theories’ [10] are weak, based as they are on misunderstandings (or
at best, unsupported assumptions) concerning the nature and applicability
of the quantum probability law to human choices. For example, O’Connor
[11] discusses Pereboom’s criticism that agent causation is (in O’Connor’s
terms) “inconsistent with seeing human beings as part of the natural world
of cause and eﬀect.” But this statement and its attendant critiques of agent-
causal free will presuppose a particular metaphysical view of the ‘natural
world’ that excludes quantum indeterminism. Or, if quantum processes are
(however cursorily) considered as part of the natural world, the quantum
probability law is presumed (without argument and likely erroneously, as
argued herein) to apply to human beings and their choices as being de-
scribable by well-deﬁned, stable-over-time quantum states and eigenvalues
of observables, respectively. Thus, the treatment of quantum theory in con-
nection with free will has been considerably less careful than would warrant
sweeping negative conclusions about its compatibility with processes in the
natural world.
Moreover, the puzzle of indeterministic, seemingly uncaused ‘collapse’
to one outcome from a set of eligible outcomes seems to beg for an external
intervention of some sort, in order to satisfy Curie’s Principle. It might
seem farfetched to think of quantum objects such as electrons or photons
as having volition, yet it is certainly conceivable that some very primitive
and elementary form of volition might obtain at this level. While volition is
a conscious mental function, some of the quantum pioneers thought of the
quantum domain as mental, or at least idea-like, in nature (for example,
Heisenberg’s non-actual ‘potentiae’ [12, pp. 154-155]. Pauli remarked that
the quantum process of actualization of events ”acausally weaves meaning
into the fabric of nature.” [13]. Clearly, ’meaning’ is something that arises
from the mental realm, not from inanimate material systems.
Considering the elementary constituents of matter as imbued with even
the minutest propensity for volition would, at least in principle, allow the
possibility of a natural emergence of increasingly eﬃcacious agent volition
as the organisms composed by them became more complex, culminating
in a human being. And allowing for volitional causal agency to enter, in
principle, at the quantum level would resolve a very puzzling aspect of
the indeterminacy of the quantum laws–the seeming violation of Curie’s
Principle in which an outcome occurs for no reason at all. This suggests
that, rather than bearing against free will, the quantum laws could be the
ideal nomic setting for agent-causal free will.

243
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank Christian de Ronde for valuable comments.
Bibliography
1. Kadri, V. “Arguments for Incompatibilism”, The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy (Fall 2015 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), forthcoming.
URL: http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2015/entries/incompatibilism-
arguments/.
2. T. Sider, “Free Will and Determinism”, in E. Conee and T. Sider, eds.,
Riddles of Existence. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2005, 112-133.
3. D. Pereboom, “Optimistic Skepticism About Free Will”, in P. Russell and O.
Deery, eds., The Philosophy of Free Will: Selected Contemporary Readings.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2013, 421-49.
4. R. Clarke, “Are We Free to Obey the Laws?”, American Philosophical Quar-
terly 47, 389-401, 2010.
5. F. Lambert, “What is a microstate?”, http://entropysite.oxy.edu, accessed
Jan. 12, 2016.
6. R. E. Kastner, Understanding Our Unseen Reality: Solving Quantum Riddles.
London: Imperial College Press, 2015.
7. R. E. Kastner, “ ‘Einselection’ of Pointer Observables: The New H-
Theorem?”, Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics 48, 56-58,
2014.
8. H. Brown, D. Wallace, “Solving the Measurement Problem: deBroglie-Bohm
loses out to Everett”, Foundations of Physics 35, 517-540, 2005.
9. F. Dyson, Disturbing the Universe. Basic Books, 1979.
10. D. Pereboom, Living without Free Will. Cambridge Studies in Philosophy,
2002.
11. T. O’Connor, “Free Will”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Fall
2014 Edition, Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL: http://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/fall2014/entries/freewill/.
12. W. Heisenberg, IPhysics and Philosophy. Harper Perennial Modern Classics,
2007.
13. W. Pauli, Letter to Marcus Fierz, 1948. Quoted in H. Stapp, Mind, Matter,
and Quantum Mechanics. Berlin: Springer, 2009.

244
FUZZY APPROACH FOR CNOT GATE
IN QUANTUM COMPUTATION
WITH MIXED STATES
Giuseppe Sergioli
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa Universit´a di Cagliari
Via Is Mirrionis 1, 09123, Cagliari-Italia
E-mail: giuseppe. sergioli@ gmail. com
Hector Freytes
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa Universit´a di Cagliari
Via Is Mirrionis 1, 09123, Cagliari-Italia
Departmento de Matem´atica (FCEIA), Universidad Nacional de Rosario-CONICET,
Av. Pellegrini 250, C.P.2000 Rosario, Argentina
E-mail: hfreytes@ gmail. com
In the framework of quantum computation with mixed states, a fuzzy repre-
sentation of CNOT gate is introduced. In this representation, the incidence of
non-factorizability is specially investigated.
Keywords: CNOT quantum gate, quantum operations, non-factorizability.
0. Introduction
The concept of quantum computing, introduced at the beginning of 1980s
by Richard Feynman, is animated by the fact that quantum systems make
possible new interesting forms of computational and communication pro-
cesses. In fact, quantum computation can be seen as an extension of classical
computation where new primitive information resources are introduced. Es-
pecially, the concept of quantum bit (qubit for short) which is the quantum
counterpart of the classical bit. Thus, new forms of computational processes
are developed in order to operate with these new information resources. In
classical computation, information is encoded by a series of bits represented
by the binary values 0 and 1. Bits are manipulated via ensemble of logical
gates such as NOT, OR, AND etc, that form a circuit giving out the result
of a calculation.

245
Standard quantum computing is based on quantum systems described
by ﬁnite dimensional Hilbert spaces, such as C2, that is the two-dimensional
Hilbert space where a generic qubit lives. Hence, a qubit is represented by
a unit vector in C2 and, generalizing to a positive integer n, n-qubits are
represented by unit vectors in C2n = ⊗nC2 = C2 ⊗C2 ⊗. . .⊗C2 (n- times).
Similarly to the classical case, we can introduce and study the behavior of a
number of quantum logical gates (hereafter quantum gates for short) operat-
ing on qubits. As in the classical case, a quantum circuit is identiﬁed with an
appropriate composition of quantum gates. They are mathematically rep-
resented by unitary operators acting on pure states. In this framework only
reversible processes are considered. But for many reasons this restriction
is unduly. On the one hand, it does not encompass realistic physical states
described by mixtures. In fact, a quantum system rarely is in a pure state.
This may be caused, for example, by the incomplete eﬃciency in the prepa-
ration procedure and also by manipulations on the system as measurements
over pure states, both of which produce statistical mixtures. It motivated
the study of a more general model of quantum computational processes,
where pure states and unitary operators are replaced by density operators
and quantum operations, respectively. This more general approach, where
not only reversible transformations are considered, is called quantum com-
putation with mixed states [1,6,7,9,10]. In this powerful model, fuzzy logic
can play an important role to describe certain aspects of the combinational
structures of quantum circuits.
Our work is motivated on a fuzzy behavior of the CNOT quantum gate
that arises when the model of quantum computation with mixed states is
considered.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 1 contains generalities about
tensor product structures to describe bipartite quantum systems. In Section
2 we recall some basic notions about the model of quantum computation
with mixed states. In Section 3 we study fuzzy aspects of the CNOT when
factorized inputs are considered. Section 4 generalizes the precedent sec-
tion by considering non-factorized states. Finally in Section 5 we establish
necessary and suﬃcient condition on the input of CNOT for which the
factorizability of density operators in ⊗2C2 is preserved by CNOT.
1. Bipartite systems
The notion of state of a physical system is familiar from its use in classical
mechanics, where it is linked to the initial conditions (the initial values of
position and momenta) which determine the solutions of the equations of

246
motion for the system. For any value of time, the state is represented by
a point in the phase space. In classical physics, compound systems can be
decomposed into their subsystems. Conversely, individual systems can be
combined to give overall composite systems. In this way, a classical global
system is completely described in terms of the states of its subsystems and
their mutual dynamic interactions. This property about classical systems
is known as separability principle. From a mathematical point of view, the
separability condition of classical systems comes from the fact that states
of compound systems are represented as direct sum of the states of their
subsystems.
In quantum mechanics the description of the state becomes substantially
modiﬁed. A quantum state can be either pure or mixed. A pure state is
described by a unit vector in a Hilbert space and it is denoted by |ϕ⟩
in Dirac notation. When a quantum system is not in a pure state, it is
represented by a probability distibution of pure states, the so called mixed
state. Mixed states are mathematically modelled by density operators on
a Hilbert space, i.e. positive self-adjoint, trace class operators. In terms
of density operators, a pure state |ψ⟩can be represented as the projector
ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|. Thus, in quantum theory, the most general description of a
quantum states is encoded by density operators.
In quantum mechanics a system consisting of many parts is represented
by the tensor product of the Hilbert spaces associated with the individ-
ual parts. We restrict our investigation to compound systems living in the
bipartite Hilbert space of the form H1 ⊗H2, where H1 and H2 are ﬁnite
dimensional. But not all density operators on H1 ⊗H2 are expressible as
ρ = ρ1 ⊗ρ2, where ρi is a density operator living in Hi, for i ∈{1, 2}. Thus,
there exist properties of quantum systems that characterize the whole sys-
tem but that are not reducible to the local properties of its parts. Unlike
classical physics, compound quantum systems can violate the separability
principle.
From a mathematical point of view, the origin of this diﬀerence between
classical and quantum systems arises from the tensor product structure re-
lated to the Hilbert spaces. More precisely, the non-factorizability property
of quantum states is related to the fact that the direct sum of H1 and H2
is a proper subset of H1 ⊗H2.
In what follows we provide a formal description of this instance of non-
factorizability of quantum states in compound systems of the form H1⊗H2.

247
Due to the fact that the Pauli matrices
σ1 =
0 1
1 0

,
σ2 =
0 −i
i 0

,
σ3 =
1 0
0 −1

and I are a basis for the set of operators over C2, an arbitrary density
operator ρ over C2 may be represented as
ρ = 1
2(I + s1σ1 + s2σ2 + s3σ3)
where s1, s2 and s3 are three real numbers such s2
1 + s2
2 + s2
3 ≤1. The
triple (s1, s2, s3) represents the point of the Bloch sphere that is uniquely
associated to ρ. A similar canonical representation can be obtained for
any n-dimensional Hilbert space by using the notion of generalized Pauli-
matrices.
Deﬁnition
1.1. Let
H
be
a
n-dimensional
Hilbert
space
and
{|ψ1⟩, . . . , |ψn⟩} be the canonical othonormal basis of H. Let k and j be
two natural numbers such that: 1 ≤k < j ≤n. Then, the generalized
Pauli-matrices are deﬁned as follows:
(n)σ[k,j]
1
= |ψj⟩⟨ψk| + |ψk⟩⟨ψj|
(n)σ[k,j]
2
= i(|ψj⟩⟨ψk| −|ψk⟩⟨ψj|)
and for 1 ≤k ≤n −1
(n)σ[k]
3
=
s
2
k(k + 1)(|ψ1⟩⟨ψ1| + · · · + |ψk⟩⟨ψk| −k|ψk+1⟩⟨ψk+1|).
If H = C2 one immediately obtains: (2)σ[1,2]
1
= σ1, (2)σ[1,2]
2
= σ2 and
(2)σ[1]
3
= σ3.
Let ρ be a density operator of the n-dimensional Hilbert space H. For
any j, where 1 ≤j ≤n2 −1, let
sj(ρ) = tr(ρσj).
The sequence ⟨s1(ρ) . . . sn2−1(ρ)⟩is called the generalized Bloch vector
associated to ρ, in view of the following well known result:
Theorem 1.1. 15 Let ρ be a density operator of the n-dimensional Hilbert
space H and let σj ∈Pn. Then ρ can be canonically represented as follows:
ρ = 1
nI(n) + 1
2
n2−1
X
j=1
sj(ρ)σj
where I(n) is the n × n identity matrix.

248
A kind of converse of Theorem 1.1 reads: a matrix ρ having the form
ρ = 1
nI(n)+ 1
2
Pn2−1
j=1 sj(ρ)σj is a density operator if an only if its eigenvalues
are non-negative.
Let us consider the Hilbert space H = Ha⊗Hb. For any density operator
ρ on H, we denote by ρa the partial trace of ρ with respect to the system
Hb (i.e. ρa = trHb(ρ)) and by ρb the partial trace of ρ with respect to the
system Ha (i.e. ρb = trHa(ρ)). For the next developments it is useful to
recall the following technical result:
Lemma 1.1. Let ρ be a density operator in a n-dimensional Hilbert space
H = Ha ⊗Hb where dim(Ha) = m and dim(Hb) = k. If we divide ρ in
m × m blocks Bi,j, each of them is a k-square matrix, then:
ρa = trHb(ρ) =


trB1,1 trB1,2 . . . trB1,m
trB2,1 trB2,2 . . . trB2,m
...
...
...
...
trBm,1 trBm,2 . . . trBm,m


ρb = trHa(ρ) =
m
X
i=1
Bi,i.
Deﬁnition 1.2. Let ρ be a density operator in a Hilbert space Hm ⊗Hk
such that dim(Hm) = m and dim(Hk) = k. Then ρ is said to be (m, k)-
factorizable iﬀρ = ρm ⊗ρk where ρm is a density operator in Hm and ρk
is a density operator in Hk.
It is well known that, if ρ is (m, k)-factorizable as ρ = ρm ⊗ρk, this
factorization is unique and ρm and ρk correspond to the reduced states of
ρ on Hm and Hk, respectively.
Suppose that H = Ha ⊗Hb, where dim(Ha) = m and dim(Hb) = k. Let
us consider the generalized Pauli matrices σa
1, . . . , σa
m2−1 and σb
1, . . . , σb
k2−1
arising from Ha and Hb, respectively.
If we deﬁne the following coeﬃcients:
Mj,l(ρ) = tr(ρ[σa
j ⊗σb
l ]) −tr(ρ[σa
j ⊗I(k)])tr(ρ[I(m) ⊗σb
l ])

249
and if we consider the matrix M(ρ) deﬁned as
M(ρ) = 1
4
m2−1
X
j=1
k2−1
X
l=1
Mj,l(ρ)(σa
j ⊗σb
l )
then M(ρ) represents the “additional component” of ρ when ρ is not a
factorized state. More precisely, we can establish the following proposition:
Proposition 1.1. 15 Let ρ be a density operator in H = Ha ⊗Hb. Then,
ρ = ρa ⊗ρb + M(ρ).
The above proposition gives a formal representation of the instance of
holism mentioned at the beginning of the section. In fact, a state ρ in
Ha ⊗Hb does not only depend on its reduced states ρa and ρb, but also
the summand M(ρ) is involved. Let us notice that M(ρ) is not a density
operator and then it does not represent a physical state.
2. Quantum computation with mixed states
As already mentioned, a qubit is a pure state in the Hilbert space C2. The
standard orthonormal basis {|0⟩, |1⟩} of C2, where |0⟩= (1, 0)† and |1⟩=
(0, 1)†, is generally called logical basis. This name refers to the fact that the
logical truth is related to |1⟩and the falsity to |0⟩. Thus, pure states |ψ⟩in
C2 are superpositions of the basis vectors |ψ⟩= c0|0⟩+c1|1⟩, where c0 and c1
are complex numbers such that |c0|2+|c1|2 = 1. Recalling the Born rule, any
qubit |ψ⟩= c0|0⟩+ c1|1⟩may be regarded as a piece of information, where
the numbers |c0|2 and |c1|2 correspond to the probability-values associated
to the information described by the basic states |0⟩and |1⟩, respectively.
Hence, we conﬁne our interesting to the probability value p(|ψ⟩) = |c1|2,
that is related to the basis vector associated with the logical truth.
Arbitrary quantum computational states live in ⊗nC2. A special basis,
called the 2n-computational basis, is chosen for ⊗nC2. More precisely, it
consists of the 2n orthogonal states |ι⟩, 0 ≤ι ≤2n where ι is in binary
representation and |ι⟩can be seen as tensor product of states (Kronecker
product) |ι⟩= |ι1⟩⊗|ι2⟩⊗. . . ⊗|ιn⟩, with ιj ∈{0, 1}. Then, a pure state
|ψ⟩∈⊗nC2 is a superposition of the basis vectors |ψ⟩= P2n
ι=1 cι|ι⟩, with
P2n
ι=1 |cι|2 = 1.
As already mentioned, in the usual representation of quantum com-
putational processes, a quantum circuit is identiﬁed with an appropriate

250
composition of quantum gates, mathematically represented by unitary op-
erators acting on pure states of a convenient (n-fold tensor product) Hilbert
space ⊗nC2 [14].
In what follows we give a short description of the model of quantum
computers with mixed states.
We associate to each vector of the logical basis of C2 two density op-
erators P0 = |0⟩⟨0| and P1 = |1⟩⟨1| that represent, in this framework, the
falsity-property and the truth-property, respectively. Let us consider the
operator P (n)
1
= ⊗n−1I ⊗P1 on ⊗nC2. By applying the Born rule, we
consider the probability of a density operator ρ as follows:
p(ρ) = Tr(P (n)
1
ρ).
(1)
Note that, in the particular case in which ρ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|, where |ψ⟩=
c0|0⟩+ c1|1⟩, we obtain that p(ρ) = |c1|2. Thus, this probability value
associated to ρ is the generalization of the probability value considered for
qubits. In the model of quantum computation with mixed states, the role
of quantum gates is replaced by quantum operations. A quantum operation
[11] is a linear operator E : L(H1) →L(H2) - where L(Hi) is the space of
linear operators in the complex Hilbert space Hi (i = 1, 2) - representable
(following the ﬁrst Kraus representation theorem) as E(ρ) = P
i AiρA†
i,
where Ai are operators satisfying P
i A†
iAi = I. It can be seen that a
quantum operation maps density operators into density operators. Each
unitary operator U has a natural correspondent quantum operation OU
such that, for each density operator ρ, OU(ρ) = UρU †. In this way, quantum
operations are generalizations of unitary operators. It provides a powerful
mathematical model where also irreversible processes can be considered.
3. CNOT quantum operation as fuzzy connective
As in classical case, also in quantum computation it is useful to implement
some kind of “if-then-else”operations. More precisely, it means that we have
to consider the evolution of a set of qubits depending upon the values of
some other set of qubits. The gates that implement these kind of operations
are called “controlled gates”. The controlled gates we are interested on, is
the controlled-NOT gate (CNOT, for short). An usual application of the
CNOT gate is to generate entangle states, starting from factorizable ones.
This is a crucial step for quantum teleportation protocol and quantum
cryptography.
The CNOT gate, takes two qbits as input, a control qbit and a target
qbit, and performs the following operation:

251
• if the control qbit is |0⟩, then CNOT behaves as the identity
• if the control bit is |1⟩, then the target bit is ﬂipped.
Thus, CNOT is given by the unitary transformation
|i⟩|j⟩7→|i⟩|ib+j⟩
where i, j ∈{0, 1} and b+ is the sum modulo 2. Note that, conﬁning in
the computational basis only, the behaviour of CNOT replaces the classical
XOR connective. The matrix representation of CNOT is given by:
CNOT =


1 0 0 0
0 1 0 0
0 0 0 1
0 0 1 0

.
(2)
Since CNOT is a unitary matrix, it naturally admits an extension as
quantum operation. Noting that CNOT† = CNOT, its extension as quan-
tum operation is given by:
CNOT(ρ ⊗σ) = CNOT (ρ ⊗σ) CNOT.
(3)
Theorem 3.1. Let ρ, σ be two density operators in C2. Then:
p(CNOT(ρ ⊗σ)) = (1 −p(ρ))p(σ) + (1 −p(σ))p(ρ).
Proof. Let
ρ =
1 −a r
r∗
a

and
σ =
1 −b t
t∗
b

be density operators in C2. It is easy to check that the diagonal elements of
ρ ⊗σ are d11 = (1 −a)(1 −b), d22 = (1 −a)b, d33 = a(1 −b) and d44 = ab.
Similarly, the diagonal elements of CNOT(ρ ⊗σ) are: d′
11 = d11, d′
22 = d22
and d′
33 = d′
44 and d′
44 = d33. Thus
p(CNOT(ρ ⊗σ)) = d′
22 + d′
44
= (1 −a)b + b(1 −a)
= (1 −p(ρ))p(σ) + (1 −p(σ))p(ρ).
The above theorem allows us to consider CNOT as a fuzzy connective
in accord to the probability value p(CNOT(−⊗−)).
In fact: let x, y ∈[0, 1]; the usual product operation x · y in the uni-
tary real interval deﬁnes the conjunction in the fuzzy logical system called

252
Product Logic [3]. The operations ¬ Lx = 1 −x and x ⊕y = min{x + y, 1}
deﬁne the negation and the disjunction of the inﬁnite value  Lukasiewicz
calculus respectively [4]. The operations ⟨·, ⊕, ¬ L⟩endow the interval [0, 1]
of an algebraic structure known as Product MV -algebra (PMV -algebra, for
short) [5,13]. In this case the PMV -algebra ⟨[0, 1]·, ⊕, ¬ L⟩is the standard
model of the a fuzzy logic system, called Product Many Valued Logic.
If ρ, σ are two density operators in C2, then (1 −p(ρ))p(σ) + p(ρ)(1 −
p(σ)) ≤1. Thus, p(CNOT(ρ ⊗σ)) can be expressed in terms of PMV -
operations. More precisely:
p(CNOT(ρ ⊗σ)) = (1 −p(ρ))p(σ) + (1 −p(σ))p(ρ)
= (¬ Lp(ρ) · p(σ)) ⊕(¬ Lp(σ) · p(ρ)).
In this way CNOT can be relate to the fuzzy connective given by the
PMV -polynomial term (¬ Lx · y) ⊕(¬ Ly · x), establishing a link between
CNOT and a fuzzy logic system. Let us notice that there are other quantum
gates admitting a similar fuzzy representation [8,9].
In Figure 1 we show the behavior of p(CNOT(−⊗−) as a fuzzy con-
nective.
Fig. 1.
p(CNOT(ρ ⊗σ))
4. CNOT on general density operators
In the precedent section we have introduced the behaviour of the CNOT
gate on factorized states of the form ρ ⊗σ. For a more general approach,

253
we now assume that the input state can be any arbitrary mixed state ρ
in ⊗2C2. We remark how this kind of studies suggests a holistic form of
quantum logics [2,17]. Let ρ be a density operator in ⊗2C2 and ρ1, ρ2 the
reduced states of ρ. Since CNOT is linear, by Proposition 1.1, we have that
CNOT(ρ) = CNOT(ρ1 ⊗ρ2) + CNOT(M(ρ))CNOT.
(4)
The summand CNOT(ρ1 ⊗ρ2) will be called the fuzzy component of
CNOT(ρ) and we denote by C(ρ) the quantity CNOT(M(ρ))CNOT.
Theorem 4.1. Let ρ be a density operator in C4 such that
ρ = (rij)1≤i,j≤22 =


r11 r12 r13 r14
r21 r22 r23 r24
r31 r32 r33 r34
r41 r42 r43 r44

.
Then:
(1) p(CNOT(ρ)) = r22 + r33,
(2) p(CNOT(ρ1 ⊗ρ2)) = (r11 + r22)(r22 + r44) + (r11 + r33)(r33 + r44),
(3) −1 ≤Tr(P1C(ρ)) = 2(r22r33 −r11r44) ≤1,
(4) Tr(P1C(ρ)) = 1
2 iﬀ, r11 = r44 = 0 and r22 = r33 = 1
2,
(5) Tr(P1C(ρ)) = −1
2 iﬀ, r11 = r44 = 1
2 and r22 = r33 = 0.
Proof. 1) It is immediate to see that diag(CNOT(ρ)) = (r11, r22, r44, r33).
Then p(CNOT(ρ)) = tr(P1CNOT(ρ)) = r22 + r33.
2) By Lemma 1.1 we have that
ρ1 =
r11 + r22 r13 + r24
r31 + r42 r33 + r44

and ρ2 =
r11 + r33 r12 + r34
r21 + r43 r22 + r44

.
By Theorem 3.1 we have that
p(CNOT(ρ1 ⊗ρ2)) = (1 −p(ρ1))p(ρ2) + (1 −p(ρ2))p(ρ1)
= (1 −(r33 + r44)(r22 + r44) + (1 −r22 + r44)(r33 + r44)
= (r11 + r22)(r22 + r44) + (r11 + r33)(r33 + r44).
3,4,5) By Proposition 1.1,
Tr(P1C(ρ)) = p(CNOT(ρ)) −p(CNOT(ρ1 ⊗ρ2))
= r22 + r33 −(r11 + r22)(r22 + r44) −(r11 + r33)(r33 + r44)
= 2(r22r33 −r11r44).

254
Note that Tr(P1C(ρ)) assumes the maximum value when r11r44 = 0. If
r11 = 0 then 1 = r2,2 +r3,3 +r4,4 and the maximum of r2,2r3,3 occurs when
r44 = 0. It implies that r2,2 + r3,3 = 1. Thus max{r2,2r3,3} occurs when
r2,2 = r3,3 = 1
2. In this way, max{Tr(P1C(ρ))} occurs when r11 = r44 = 0
and r22 = r33 = 1
2 and max{Tr(P1C(ρ))} = 1
2. With a similar argument we
prove that min{Tr(P1C(ρ))} = −1
2 and it occurs when r11 = r44 = 1
2 and
r22 = r33 = 0.
Example 4.1. Werner states provide an interesting example to show the
behavior of CNOT on a non-factorized states. Werner states, originally in-
troduced in [18] for two particles to distinguish between classical correlation
and the Bell inequality satisfaction, have many interests for their applica-
tions in quantum information theory. Examples of this, are entanglement
teleportation via Werner states [12], the study of deterministic puriﬁcation
[16], etc. Werner states in ⊗2C2 are generally represented by the following
expression:
ρw(α) = 1
4


1 −α
0
0
0
0
1 + α −2α
0
0
−2α 1 + α
0
0
0
0
1 −α

.
where α ∈[0, 1]. By Theorem 4.1 we have that:
p(CNOT(ρw(α))) = 1+α
2 ,
p(CNOT(ρw(α)1 ⊗ρw(α)2)) = 1
2,
Tr(P1C(ρw(α)))) = α
2 .
Note that, for each α ∈[0, 1] the probability value of the fuzzy com-
ponent p(CNOT(ρw(α)1 ⊗ρw(α)2)) does not change. Thus, the varia-
tion of probability value p(CNOT(ρw(α))) is ruled by the variation of
Tr(P1C(ρw(α)))). The Figure 2 shows the incidence of Tr(P1C(ρw(α))))
in the probability value p(CNOT(ρw(α))) when the parameter w varies.
5. Preservation of factorizability by CNOT
As we noted at the beginning of Section 3, CNOT allows us to entangled
factorized states. As an example, if the control qbit is in a superposition
state |ψ⟩= α|0⟩+β|1⟩(α, β ̸= 0) and the target is |0⟩, then CNOT generates
the entangled state
(α|0⟩+ β|1⟩) ⊗|0⟩7→α(|0⟩⊗|0⟩) + β(|1⟩⊗|1⟩).

255
Fig. 2.
Incidence of Tr(P1C(ρw(α))))
In this section we shall study a generalization of this situation. More
precisely, we characterize the input ρ ⊗σ for which CNOT generates a
non-factorizable state.
Theorem 5.1. Let ρ and σ be two density operators in C2. Then
CNOT(ρ ⊗σ) is factorizable iﬀone of the following two conditions holds:
(1) ρ =
a1
0
0 1 −a1

and σ =
 1
2 b
b 1
2

,
(2) ρ = Pi where i ∈{0, 1},
(3) σ = 1
2
 1 ±1
±1 1

.
Proof. Consider the following two generic density operators in C2
ρ =
 a1
a
a∗1 −a1

and
σ =
 b1
b
b∗1 −b1

.
By Proposition 1.1, CNOT(ρ ⊗σ) has the following form:
CNOT(ρ ⊗σ) = CNOT(ρ ⊗σ)1 ⊗CNOT(ρ ⊗σ)2 + M(CNOT(ρ ⊗σ)).
Thus we have to establish conditions on ρ, σ such that M(CNOT(ρ⊗σ)) =
0. Since M(CNOT(ρ⊗σ)) = CNOT(ρ⊗σ)−CNOT(ρ⊗σ)1⊗CNOT(ρ⊗σ)2,

256
is straightforward to see that
M(CNOT(ρ ⊗σ)) = (xi,j)1≤i,j≤4
where
11) x11 = a1(1 −a1)(1 −2b1) = −x22 = −x33 = x44,
12) x12 = −2ia1(a1 −1)Im(b),
13) x13 = −a(b∗+ 2Re(b)(a1(2b1 −1) −b1)),
14) x14 = a(b1 −2Re(b)(b∗+ 2ia1Im(b))).
23) x23 = −a(b1 −1 + 2Re(b)(b −2ia1Im(b))),
24) x24 = a(b∗−2Re(b)(a1 + b1 −2a1b1)).
34) x34 = 2ia1Im(b)(a1 −1).
The other entries of M(CNOT(ρ ⊗σ)) are obtained by the conjugation
of the above entries. Let us consider the system of equations
(xi,j = 0)1≤i,j≤4.
(5)
Note that x11 = 0 iﬀb1 = 1
2, a1 = 0 or a1 = 1. We shall study these
cases
1 Case b1 = 1
2
By x13 = 0 we have that −a(b∗−Re(b)) = 0. Thus we have to consider
two subcases, a = 0 or b∗= Re(b) i.e. b ∈R.
1.1 Note that the conditions b1 = 1
2, a = Im(b) = 0 is a solution of the
system (5) that characterize the input
ρ =
a1
0
0 1 −a1

and
σ =
 1
2 b
b 1
2

.
In this way CNOT(ρ ⊗σ) =


a1
2
a1b
0
0
a1b
a1
2
0
0
0
0
1−a1
2
(1 −a1)b
0
0 (1 −a1)b
1−a1
2

which is
factorizable as ρ ⊗σ.
1.2 b ∈R. By x23 = 0 we have that −a(−1
2 + b2) = 0, giving the following
three possible cases:
– a = 0 which is the case 1.1.

257
– b = ± 1
2. It provides solutions to the system (5) that respectively
characterizes the input
σ = 1
2
 1 ±1
±1 1

for an arbitrary ρ.
In this way CNOT(ρ ⊗σ) = 1
2


a1 ±a1
±a
a
±a1 a1
a
±a
±a∗a∗
1 −a1
±(1 −a1)
a∗±a∗±(1 −a1)
1 −a1


which is factorizable as
1
2
 a1
±a
±a∗1 −a1

⊗
 1 ±1
±1 1

.
2 Case a1 = 0
By x13 = 0 −a(b∗−Re(b)b1) = 0. Thus we have to consider two subcases,
a = 0 or b∗= 2Re(b)b1
2.1 Note that a = a1 = 0 is a solution of the system 5 that characterizes
the input: ρ = P1 and arbitrary σ.
In this case CNOT(P1⊗σ) = P1⊗(σ1σσ1), where σ1 is the Pauli matrix
introduced above.
2.2 b∗= 2Re(b)b1. Since b1 ∈R, b ∈R and b(1 −2b1) = 0. It provides two
possibles subcases b = 0 or b1 = 1
2.
– b = 0. By x14 = 0 we have that a = 0 or b1 = 0. The case a = 0
is an instance of the case 2.1. If b1 = 0 then, the equation x23 = 0
forces a = 0 which is also an instance of the case 2.1.
– b1 = 1
2. It is an instance of the case 1.
3 Case a1 = 1
By x13 = 0 we have that −a(b∗+ 2Re(b)(b1 −1)) = 0. It provides two
possibles subcases: a = 0 or b(2b1 −1) = 0 where b ∈R.
3.1 a = 0, a1 = 1 is a solution of the system 5 that characterize the input:
ρ = P0 and arbitrary σ.
In this way CNOT(P0 ⊗σ) = P0 ⊗σ.
3.2 b(2b1 −1) gives two possibilities: b = 1
2 or b = 0
– b = 1
2 is an instance of the case 1.1.

258
– b = 0. By x14 = 0 we have that ab1 = 0. The case a = 0 is an
instance of the case 3.1. If b1 = 0, by x23 = 0 follows that a = 0
which is also an instance of the case 3.1.
Thus we have analyzed all possible solution of the system 5 character-
izing the preservation of factorizability for CNOT.
References
1. D. Aharanov, A. Kitaev, N. Nisan in Proc. 13th Annual ACM Symp. on
Theory of Computation, STOC, 20 (1997).
2. E. Beltrametti, M.L. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini, R. Leporini, G. Sergioli,
International journal of theoretical physics, 53, 3279 (2014).
3. R. Cignoli, A. Torrens, Multi-Valued Logic, 5, 45 (2000).
4. R. Cignoli, M. I. D’Ottaviano, D. Mundici: Algebraic foundations of many-
valued reasoning, (Kluwer, Dordrecht-Boston-London, 2000).
5. A. Di Nola, A. Dvureˇcenskij, Multi-Valued Logic, 6, 193 (2001).
6. G. Domenech, H. Freytes, International journal of theoretical physics 34, 228
(2006).
7. H. Freytes, G. Domenech, Mathematical Logic Quarterly, 59, 27 (2013).
8. H. Freytes, G. Sergioli, Reports on Mathematical Physics, 74, 159 (2014).
9. H. Freytes, G. Sergioli, A. Arico´o, Journal of Physics A, 43 46, (2010).
10. S. Gudder, International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 42, 39 (2003).
11. K. Kraus: States, eﬀects and operations, (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1983).
12. J. Lee, M.S. Kim, Physical Review Letters, 84, 4236 (2000).
13. F. Montagna, J. of Algebra 238, 99 (2001).
14. M.A. Nielsen, I.L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Informa-
tion, (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2000).
15. J. Schlienz, G. Mahler, Physical Review A, 52, 4396 (1995).
16. A. Short, Physical Review Letters, 102, 180502 (2009).
17. G. Sergioli, M.L. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini, A. Ledda, R Leporini, Foundation
of Physics, 40, 1494 (2010).
18. R.F. Werner, Physical Review A, 40, 4277 (1989).

259
A MODAL LOGIC OF INDISCERNIBILITY
D´ecio Krause
Department of Philosophy, Federal University of Santa Catarina,
Florianpolis, Santa Catarina, Brazil
E-mail: deciokrause@ gmail. com
Jonas R. Becker Arenhart
Department of Philosophy, Federal University of Santa Catarina,
Florianpolis, Santa Catarina, Brazil
E-mail: jonas. becker2@ gmail. com
Pedro Merlussi
Department of Philosophy, University of Durham
Durham, England
E-mail: p. merlussi@ gmail. com
This paper is a continuation of the authors’ attempts to deal with the notion
of indistinguishability (or indiscernibility) from a logical point of view. Now
we introduce a two-sorted ﬁrst-order modal logic to enable us to deal with
objects of two diﬀerent species. The intended interpretation is that objects of
one of the species obey the rules of standard S5, while the objects of the other
species obey only the rules of a weaker notion of indiscernibility. Quantum
mechanics motivates the development. The basic idea is that in the ‘actual’
world things may be indiscernible but in another accessible world they may
be distinguished in some way. That is, indistinguishability needs not be seen
as a necessary relation. Contrariwise, things might be distinguished in the
‘actual’ world, but they may be indiscernible in another world. So, while two
quantum systems may be entangled in the actual world, in some accessible
world, due to a measurement, they can be discerned, and on the other hand,
two initially separated quantum systems may enter in a state of superposition,
losing their individualities. Two semantics are sketched for our system. The
ﬁrst is constructed within a standard set theory (the ZFC system is assumed
at the metamathematics). The second one is constructed within the theory
of quasi-sets, which we believe suits better the purposes of our logic and the
mathematical treatment of certain situations in quantum mechanics. Some
further philosophically related topics are considered.
Keywords: Indiscernibility; non identity; modal logic; quasi-set theory; non-
standard semantics.

260
1. Introduction
“[P]hotons (. . . ) are individuals without identity.”
(Herman Weyl [23, p.246])
Classical logic and standard mathematics (say, the mathematics that
can be developed within a standard set theory such as ZFC, the Zermelo-
Fraenkel set theory with the Axiom of Choice, with our without Urelemente
—or simply atoms) are ‘Leibnizian’ in the sense that indiscernible things
—sets having the same elements or atoms belonging to the same sets—
turn out to be the very same thing. The standard approach to deal with
indiscernible things within such frameworks is to consider some congruence
relation other than identity to represent indiscernibility. In this case the
elements belonging to the same equivalence class are taken as ‘indiscernible’.
So good for physics (for this may work), so bad for philosophy, because even
if equivalent, the objects are in fact either distinct or identical, and in this
last case they are the very same object. Leibniz reigns in classical logic.
So, we address the following question: suppose we admit a metaphysics
comprising truly indiscernible objects, objects that may form aggregates
with more than one element but so that these elements are in no way
discernible from one another. As Frank Ramsey and Ludwig Wittgenstein
have noted when they criticized the (Leibnizian) deﬁnition of identity in
Principia Mathematica (PM), this is a logical possibility [20, p.28], [24,
5.5302].a Nowadays, quantum physics seems to provide reasons to suppose
that this may in fact be the case: bosons may share the same quantum state
and in some cases nothing in the universe can distinguish them, and this
of course would include logic. Fermions, on the contrary, must obey Pauli’s
exclusion principle, so they cannot partake all their quantum numbers.
Thus, in principle, they always present a distinction. But the problem is
that in certain situations (say in an entangled state), again, nothing in the
universe can tell us which is which. So, their (alleged) individuality is lost.
In both cases, it is doubtful whether they can be regarded as individuals in
the standard (and informal) sense of the word: an individual, by deﬁnition,
is something that has an identity, something that retains its identity even
when mixed among others of similar kind. But quantum objects seem to
be entities of another category: their indiscernibility and non-individuality
seem to come from an ontological source!
aThe fact that the deﬁnition of PM involves a hierarchy of types and not set theoretical
notions does not matter here, for the very idea continues to be the same: indistinguishable
objects are identical.

261
We have already introduced a ﬁrst-order logic to cope with indiscernible
but non-identical objects in [3]. Here we extend the discussion by arguing
that indiscernibility, read as a binary relation, needs not be necessary (in the
alethic modal sense), that is, two objectsb may be indistinguishable in this
world but may be discernible in another accessible world. A typical example
is given by an entangled state. In this state (suppose involving two quantum
objects for simplicity) they cannot be discerned, but after a measurement,
they can (at least this is what we tend to agree with). Conversely, two
discernible objects (note that we don’t need to use the words ‘identical’ and
‘distinct’, for ‘indiscernible’ and ‘discernible’ suﬃce; see [17]) may enter in
a superposed state, and in this case something completely new arises: their
‘separate’ wave functions don’t exist anymore, but a new one has arisen,
one for the composed system, which have no more ‘parts’ in the usual sense.
The system we shall present is a simple one, but perhaps its most strik-
ing features and novel facts concern semantics. We provide two distinct
semantics to it, a move that shows that the consideration of the metamath-
ematics used in discussing semantics may have important consequences.
The ﬁrst semantics is developed within a standard framework (which can
be taken to be ZFC). We argue that this semantics has some shortcomings
in the sense that it rules out the metaphysical assumption of indiscernible
but non-identical things (in its strong sense that these objects are really in-
discernible and not just ‘epistemologically indiscernible’). Then we develop
a semantics based on quasi-set theory and discuss it from the logical and
philosophical points of view.
An important point to be mentioned concerns the content of the last
footnote. We can certainly speak of two objects as being indiscernible and
this does not entail that they are diﬀerent. Let us explain this a little
further. In order to say that they are diﬀerent, we need to grant that there
is a property (characteristics, attribute, whatever you wish) satisﬁed by
just one of them. Of course (within classical mathematics) we don’t need
to explicitly present this property, but just show that it exists. For quantum
objects, as it is well known (if the reader is skeptic with this, take a collection
of bosons in the same quantum state) there may be not such a property,
and even so they are not taken to be the same entity. But if we use the
resources of standard mathematics, we can grant the existence of such a
property, for standard mathematics is committed with Leibniz’s laws. So,
we beg the question at the start, for we are showing that two entities are
bNotice that our talk of two objects does not entail that they have an identity. See below.

262
distinct because this hypothesis is consonant with our metaphysics (and our
mathematics), which already involves this idea in its core.
Let us go now to our logic and then to further discussions.
2. An elementary modal logic of indiscernibility
In this section we present a minimal nucleus of an elementary modal logic
comprising a notion of indiscernibility which does not collapse into identity.
Let L be a ﬁrst-order two sorted language deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 2.1. The language L encompasses the following list of primi-
tive symbols:
1. [Propositional connectives]: ¬ (negation) and →(material implica-
tion);
2. [Universal quantiﬁer]: the universal quantiﬁer ∀;
3. [Modal operator]: the unary operator 2 (necessity),
4. [Relations]: two binary predicate symbols, ≈(identity) and ∼= (indis-
tinguishability, or indiscernibility);
5. [Variables]: two species of them: (i) variables of the ﬁrst species
x1, x2, . . . (which we represent by x, y, z) and (ii) variables of the second
species X1, X2, . . ., represented by X, Y, Z;
6. [Predicates]: for every n ∈ω, a denumerable collection of non-logical
predicates of arity n.
7. [Auxiliary symbols]: parentheses and comma.
In this formulation, we shall make use of neither individual constants
nor function symbols. We use t with eventual subscripts for terms in general
(that is, variables) of any of the two species.
Before we deﬁne formulas, we deﬁne the type of a predicate. We call ι
the type of terms for the ﬁrst species, which intuitively represent entities
without identity conditions, and we call η the type of terms of the second
species, representing everyday objects, (supposedly) having identity condi-
tions. Every predicate will have a type, in the sense that it relates entities
of a certain type in a given order. For instance (see the deﬁnitions below),
a predicate of type ⟨η, ι, η⟩is a relation of weight 3 and relates objects of
types η, ι, η respectively.
Deﬁnition 2.2. A type τ is any ﬁnite sequence composed of η and ι.
For instance, ⟨ι, ι⟩, ⟨η, ι, η⟩are also types.

263
Deﬁnition 2.3. The type τ P of a n-ary predicate symbol P is a type of
length n.
There are three possible cases for the type of a predicate symbol. On
the extremes, the type of a predicate may be composed only of η or only
of ι; in those cases we call the predicate classical (intuitively, it relates
only classical objects) and non-classical (it relates only entities without
identity conditions), respectively. On the other hand, some types are mixed.
For instance, the type ⟨η, ι⟩is the type of a binary relation that relates a
classical object to a non-classical object. The same holds for other possible
combinations. In principle, nothing should prevent a predicate from having
more than one type. One instance could be the relation ‘is a part of’. One
could reasonably claim that some electrons are part of Angelina, and also
that her lips are part of her. The former are non-classical objects according
to our classiﬁcation, the latter are classical, while Angelina is a classical
object too. So a relation like this would have two types, ⟨η, η⟩and ⟨ι, η⟩.
To simplify matters here, the only relation allowed to have more than one
type will be ∼=, which has two types, a classical and a non-classical, that is,
it has types ⟨η, η⟩and ⟨ι, ι⟩. In that sense, it relates both kinds of things,
but never mixes them. The type of ≈is τ ≈= ⟨η, η⟩, because as we shall
require, identity holds only between classical things.
The atomic formulas are deﬁned as comprising the expressions of the
form x ∼= y, X ∼= Y , X ≈Y , and for predicate symbols P of type τP ,
Pt1, . . . , tn is a formula provided that each ti is of the appropriate type as
required by τ P . The usual clauses for connectives, quantiﬁers and modal
operators are also assumed. It follows from our deﬁnition that the binary
predicate of identity does not apply to the objects denoted by the variables
of the ﬁrst species (objects of the ﬁrst species). All the standard deﬁnitions
of the other sentential connectives, the operator for possibility 3 and the
existential quantiﬁer are deﬁned as usual.
The postulates of our logic are the following ones (see also [3]). First, a
standard complete axiom system for modal ﬁrst-order classical logic with
identity with respect to the objects of the second species. As for the objects
of the ﬁrst species, the corresponding axioms of the same logic, except those
of identity. Furthermore, we add the following axioms:
(i) The relation of indiscernibility is reﬂexive, symmetric and transitive
with respect to objects of the ﬁrst species.
(ii) ∀X∀Y (X ∼= Y →X ≈Y )
(iii) The axioms for the modal elementary system S5. We use S5 here

264
for convenience, but perhaps other systems could be used instead. For
what we shall state below, the modal system K seems to be enough.
We remark that the substitution law (sometimes called Leibniz Law) is
valid only with respect to identical objects of the second species. That is,
we have that
∀X∀Y (X ≈Y →(α(X) →α(Y ))
with the standard restrictions, but it is NOT the case that
∀x∀y(x ∼= y →(α(x) →α(y)).
Thus, identity and indistinguishability are distinct relations. The reciprocal
of the above axiom (ii) is a theorem, as we shall see below. So, our system
requires of objects of second species that whenever indiscernibility holds,
identity holds too (indiscernibility implies identity and vice-versa); objects
of ﬁrst species, on the other hand, may at best be indiscernible. As we
remarked before, in our intended interpretation, we think of the objects of
second species as those physical objects described by classical physics, that
is, roughly speaking, the objects of our surroundings (in our scale). The
objects of the ﬁrst species will be thought of as representing elementary
quantum objects. Here we follow Schr¨odinger in that the notion of identity
lacks sense with respect to them [21, pp.17-8] (see [10, chap.3] for details).
Theorem 2.1 (The reciprocal of axiom (ii)). For all X and Y , X ≈
Y →X ∼= Y . In words, identical objects of the second species are indis-
cernible.
Proof:
1. X ≈Y
(premise)
2. X ≈Y →(X ∼= X →X ∼= Y )
(instance of the substitutivity
axiom for objects of the second species)
3. X ∼= X →X ∼= Y
(1,2, Modus Ponens)
4. ∀X(X ∼= X)
(axiom)
5. ∀X(X ∼= X) →X ∼= X
(axiom)
6. X ∼= X
(4, 5, Modus Ponens)
7. X ∼= Y
(3, 6, Modus Ponens)
8. X ≈Y →X ∼= Y
(1-7, Deduction Theorem)
The theorem and the axioms show that identity and indiscernibility
coincide for objects of the second species (denoted by the variables of the
second species). As for the Deduction Theorem, it can clearly be applied in

265
this case. Having that result, other important theorems are easy to prove,
such as that indiscernibility is reﬂexive, symmetric and transitive also for
objects of the second species, and also that a version of the substitution of
indiscernibles holds for objects of the second species too.
The assumption of classical logic for the underlying logic of our system is
only a choice of ours. The idea of having a system to deal with indiscernible
but non identical objects is a very general one, and it would surely be
interesting to study it associated with other systems as well, such as some
paraconsistent logics (see [6]).
3. Classical semantics
We now introduce a ‘classical’ Kripke-style semantics for our system; we
call it classical in the sense that the underlying framework in which it
is developed is ZFC. After presenting it, we shall be able to discuss the
inadequacy of this semantics for encompassing the underlying motivations
for the logic presented above, given that the semantics is formulated within
a standard framework such as ZFC, which involves the notion of identity
for all objects, while our system suggests that for the objects of the ﬁrst
species the concept of identity should not be applied.
The Kripke semantics we have in mind makes use of a domain of objects
D composed of two disjoint sets D1 and D2 such that the variables of the
ﬁrst species have as their range the set D1 and the variables of the second
species range over the elements of D2. Now, one of the guiding intuitions
behind the modal behavior of our indiscernibility relation concerns the fact
that some entities (e.g. a pair os electrons) may be indiscernible in our
world, but could be discerned in some other world (for instance, as a result
of a measurement). To grant that indiscernible objects in one world may
be discernible in other world, and to preserve indiscernibility by properties
in cases where the relation ∼= holds between two entities in one world, we
begin by endowing worlds w ∈W with the structure of a Weyl aggregate,
deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 3.1. A Weyl aggregate over a non-empty set D is an ordered
pair ⟨D, ∼⟩, where ∼is an equivalence relation over D.
Intuitively, a Weyl aggregate determines a partition of D into classes of
‘indiscernible’ elements, in the sense that the elements of the same equiva-
lence classes are thought of as the indiscernible objects of the set D [23, App.
B]. Our next step is to consider each world w as a Weyl aggregate over D1;
each world will therefore provide for a particular partition of D1. To avoid

266
ambiguities, we shall denote by ∼i the equivalence relation which interprets
the indistinguishability relation in wi. The relation of identity is interpreted
in the diagonal of D2, that is, the set ∆D2 = {⟨xi, xi⟩: xi ∈D2}. The in-
distinguishability relation ∼= stands just for the equivalence relation ∼i in
each world wi when dealing with objects of the ﬁrst type, and it stands
for the identity relation when dealing with objects of the second type. The
identity sign means the identity relation over the domain D2.
More formally, a frame F = ⟨W, R⟩is comprised by a set W of worlds
and an accessibility relation R between worlds which is an equivalence re-
lation between worlds (since we are working within S5). Given a domain
D = D1 ∪D2, each wi ∈W is endowed with the structure of a Weyl aggre-
gate wi = ⟨D1, ∼i⟩, as deﬁned above. For ease in reading the next deﬁnition,
we associate with each type τ a function f from types τ of predicates to
the domains of interpretation as follows, deﬁned by induction:
(i) f(η) = P(D2).
(ii) f(ι) = P(D1)
(iii) for τ = ⟨p1, . . . , pn⟩, then f(τ) = P(f(p1) × . . . × f(pn)).
Notice that f(η) is the set of all properties of objects of the second type,
f(ι) is the set of all properties of objects of the ﬁrst kind, and for eah type
τ there is a set of all the relations of type τ. For instance, for τ = ⟨ι, η⟩,
f(τ) is the set of all relations between objects of the ﬁrst kind (elements of
D1) with objects of the second kind (that is, elements of D2).
Now we generalize the indistinguishability relation ∼i of each world wi
to every object of the domain and to properties and relations of every type
deﬁned in the domain. Notice that the generalization is always relative to
a world wi.
Deﬁnition 3.2. Extending ∼i. Given wi, we deﬁne:
(i) for a, b ∈D2, a ∼i b if and only if a = b (that is, indiscernibility for
classical objects in the metalanguage is identity)
(ii) for two n-tuples ⟨a1, . . . an⟩and ⟨bn . . . bn⟩of elements of D1 and D2
(that is, each element of the n-tuple has a type), we deﬁne ⟨a1, . . . an⟩∼i
⟨bn . . . bn⟩iﬀa1 ∼i b1 and . . . and an ∼i bn.
(iii) given τ and X and Y elements of f(τ), we say that X ∼i Y iﬀfor
each a ∈X there is a b ∈Y and a ∼i b and, for each b ∈Y there is an
a ∈X such that b ∼i a and card(X) = card(Y ).
So, we have an indiscernibility relation ∼i for every element of the range
of the function f. That is, we can have a partition of f(τ) for each τ

267
relative to ∼i. For instance, for ι, two subsets of D1 may be indiscernible
without being identical: it is enough that they have the same cardinal and
indiscernible elements of the appropriate kind.
A Kripke model is a 4-tuple K = ⟨W, R, D, V ⟩(in the sense of [13,
p.243]), where D is as above and V is an interpretation mapping such that:
(i) V (≈, wi) = ∆D2, for every wi ∈W
(ii) V (∼=, wi) = ∼i ∪∆D2; that is, the indiscernibility relation provided
by the Weyl aggregate and the identity in D2;
(iii) V (P, wi) ∈f(τ P ).
Remark: The reader should pay attention to the symbology: = is the
metatheoretical identity (that is, the identity in ZFC), while ≈is the symbol
of identity of our language. As usual, we leave to the context the distinction
between use and mention.
For instance, we may have D = D1 ∪D2 = {a, b, c} ∪{1, 2}, so that ∼1
may be the following relation, which extends the identity relation:
∼1 = {⟨a, a⟩, ⟨b, b⟩, ⟨c, c⟩, ⟨1, 1⟩, ⟨2, 2⟩



identity
, ⟨b, c⟩, ⟨c, b⟩}.
Now, an assignment µ of the variables of L to elements of the domain
so that µ(x) ∈D1 and µ(X) ∈D2. Each formula has a truth value Vµ
which may be 1 (truth) or 0 (false) relative to an assignment, deﬁned as
follows:
(i) Vµ(x ∼= y, wi) = 1 iﬀ⟨µ(x), µ(y)⟩∈∼i, and 0 otherwise.
(ii) Vµ(X ≈Y, wi) = 1 iﬀµ(X) = µ(Y ).
(iii) Vµ(Pt1 . . . tn, wi) = 1 iﬀthere is an X in f(τ P ) such that X ∼i
V (P, wi) and ⟨µ(t1) . . . µ(tn)⟩∈X
(iv) Vµ(¬α, wi) = 1 iﬀVµ(α, wi) = 0, and 0 otherwise.
(v) Vµ(α →β, wi) = 1 iﬀVµ(α, wi) = 0 or Vµ(β, wi) = 1.
(vi) Vµ(2α, wi) = 1 iﬀVµ(α, w′) = 1, for every w′ ∈W such that wiRw′,
and 0 otherwise.
(vii) Vµ(∀sα, wi) = 1 (where s is a variable of either the ﬁrst or of the
second species) iﬀVρ(α, wi) = 1 for every assignment ρ which is a s-
alternative of µ, that is, such that for every variable t except possibly
s, (being t of the same species as s), ρ(t) = µ(t).
We emphasize that we can in fact assert the last aﬃrmation, namely,
that ρ(t) = µ(t) even in the case of t being a variable of the ﬁrst species, for

268
both ρ(t) and µ(t) are elements of a ‘standard’ set, that is, a set in ZFC,
so that the identity relation makes sense for them.
Now, as usual, α is valid in a model K iﬀVµ(α, w) = 1 for every w and
µ. Perhaps the most important thing is to discuss the nature of such a ‘se-
mantics’ for our logical system. We believe that logic comprises semantics,
at least an informal one (see also [5]). If this was not so, we wouldn’t have
contact, for instance, with the ‘meaning’ of intuitionistic logic. Indeed, as is
well known, but sometimes misunderstood, from the formal point of view
we can get intuitionistic logic (better, the so called Brouwer-Heyting sys-
tem) by dropping the excluded middle law from classical logic (in Kleene’s
axiomatization, for instance; see [14]). But this is only from a formal point
of view, for the meanings of these two logics are completely diﬀerent. In the
same vein, in order to keep our logic consonant with indiscernible objects
but so that indiscernibility does not collapse into identity, we need to speak
of a ‘philosophically well-grounded’ semantics for our system. To do so, we
turn to a non-classical set theory to be used in the metamathematics (see
also [1]). Before that, let us insist a little about the reason of this move.
The problem concerning the above semantics is that the relation of
identity makes sense (in the metamathematics) also for the elements of D1,
because D1 is a standard set (in our chosen metatheory, ZFC). But we have
interpreted the indiscernibility relation ∼= as an equivalence relation ∼only,
due to the chosen axioms, and not necessarily in the identity of D1. But such
a semantics is not in agreement with the real spirit of our logic, for identity
continues to hold (in the metamathematics) for the objects interpreted by
the variables of the ﬁrst species. Thus, we should require a semantics for
our logic where the notion of identity would not apply to the elements in
the domain of the variables of the ﬁrst species. Of course this cannot be
done within a standard set theory such as ZFC. For this reason, we sketch
below a semantics for our logic constructed within quasi-set theory. But
before that, let us comment on some peculiarities of our system.
4. Peculiarities of our system
Certain standard results that hold in the modal predicate system S5 don’t
have analogue when the considered relation is indistinguishability and not
identity. In this section we shall present some of these results and try to
interpret them within a context, namely, by supposing that the objects of
the ﬁrst species play the role of quantum objects according to a standard
interpretation of quantum mechanics (that is, in most cases, we shall be
thinking in some version of quantum mechanics that enables us to suppose

269
indiscernible but not identical objects, thus we leave versions like Bohm’s
out of this discussion).c
The ﬁrst result is that x ∼= y does not entail 2(x ∼= y), that is, the non-
necessity of indistinguishability. To show that, as usual, we need to consider
a conter-example to the formula x ∼= y →2(x ∼= y), that is, a model of
x ∼= y that is not a model of 2(x ∼= y). For that, consider a set of worlds
W = {w1, w2}, D1 = {a, b}, D2 is any non-empty set whatever. Now, given
that each world is a Weyl aggregate, we put w1 = ⟨D1 ∼1⟩, with ∼1=
{⟨a, a⟩, ⟨b, b⟩, ⟨a, b⟩, ⟨b, a⟩}, while w2 = ⟨D1, ∼2⟩, with ∼2= {⟨a, a⟩, ⟨b, b⟩}.
That is, a and b are indiscernible in w1, but are not indiscernible w2. Also,
R is such that w1 accesses w2 and vice versa. Consider an assignment µ
such that µ(x) = a and µ(y) = b. It is simple to see that Vµ(x ∼= y, w1) = 1,
Vµ(x ∼= y, w2) = 0, so that Vµ(2(x ∼= y), w1) = 1.
Thus, while indiscernibility is not necessary, the same doesn’t happen
with identity, as the next theorem shows. Really, we can easily show that
X ≈Y →2(X ≈Y ) (the necessity of identity) as follows:
1. X ≈X
(logical thesis)
2. X ≈Y →(α(X) →α(Y ))
(axiom — the substitutivity of
identity)
3. X ≈Y →(2(X ≈X) →2(X ≈Y ))
(instance of the axiom,
by taking α(X) as 2(X ≈X).
4. 2(X ≈X)
(from 1, by G¨odel’s rule of necessitation)
5. X ≈Y →2(X ≈Y )
(from 3 and 4, by the standard logical
rules)
But, if indiscernibility doesn’t entail necessary indiscernibility, what
does this result mean?
We can interpret this result by saying that objects that are indiscernible
in the actual world (termed w0) may be not indiscernible in another accessi-
ble world (call it w1). That is, there may be a world, accessible to us, where
indiscernible objects from our point of view may not be indiscernible. In
particular, suppose that a and b are indiscernible individuals in w0, and
R is the accessibility relation, so that w0Rw1, and in w1 it is not the case
that a and b are indiscernible. This fact could be taken to imply either that
there are properties in w1 which do not exist in w0, which would intro-
duce a kind of possibilia concerning properties, or the individuals a and b
cIn fact, Bohm’s metaphysics coincides with classical mechanics in that all its objects
are individuals.

270
are simply discernible in ω1. Leaving aside the discussion of possibilia in
regarding properties (we haven’t found in the literature any discussion on
this topic), we prefer the other alternative. A possible situation may be as
follows.
Suppose that in ω0 we have two particles of the same species (two pho-
tons, say) correlated as in an EPR-like experiment. Before they have inter-
acted, each of them may be described by its own wave function, which gives
us their quantum states. After interaction, the quantum state is described
by either a symmetric (for bosons) or by an anti-symmetric (for fermions)
wave-function, so that their individual characteristics become blurred; if we
accept to speak of quantum objects behind the formalism, they are now in-
discernible by all means provided by quantum mechanics (or even by God,
if God is not a logician —see below): they are in a state of superposition,
and cannot be described in isolation. But now we perform the experiment,
sending the particles to opposite directions to detectors A and B where we
measure, say, the spin of particle 1 which arrived in A in the z–direction,
getting an ‘UP’ result.d Thus, says quantum mechanics, we know by what
Einstein called ‘a spooky action at a distance’ that the spin of particle 2
in B is down, even without measuring it. We shall not pursue the details
here, which can be found in standard books on quantum mechanics. The
important thing is that the particles (perhaps it would be better to say,
their correspondents in the world w1), become discernible! But, it is quite
important to say, if the two particles were of the same species, we cannot
identify which one (of the pair of particles) had its state measured at A.
This is a typical quantum result that will be important for what follows.
Thus, we have a situation where two objects (the involved particles)
are indiscernible in a “world” but discernible in another accessible “world”.
But, what matters here, indiscernibility needs not be necessary, as our logic
shows. That is, it may be that in some other world w2, no measurement
was made, so that the particles continue indiscernible.
Another interesting fact, typical from modal logics, can be re-discussed
here. For instance, can we name (label) the particles, say be calling ‘John’
and ‘Peter’ the two entangled particles mentioned above? If we can do it, do
these names act as rigid designators? The quantum situation is a fantastic
realm for questioning standard logical and semantical notions. If we accept
that quantum objects do not have precise identity conditions (remember
that this is just one of the possible metaphysics that can be associated to
dAs is well known, the label ‘1’ does not indicate individuation.

271
quantum entities), then names and labels in general will not work as usual,
for there is no precise and unambiguous sense in naming ‘John’ a certain
atom or particle. Of course sometimes the quantum object (an atom, say)
can be isolated and in this situation the name ‘John’ seems to make sense.
But the atom can be put together with others of similar species, and then
the alleged identity of John is lost forever. We can never determine again,
without ambiguity, that a particular atom is John.e In a certain in imprecise
sense, all of them may be John, and (in a more precise talk) the measured
results will do the same results. John has no identity. Some time ago, Dalla
Chiara and Toraldo di Francia, have called our attention to the fact that
the quantum realm is a land of anonymity (see [7]), so, no proper names
make sense at all, and then neither rigid designators too!
5. Quasi-sets
Since this theory is still not in the reader’s mind, we need to recall here its
main ideas. Intuitively speaking, a quasi-set (qset for short) is a collection
of objects such that some of them may be indistinguishable without turning
out to be identical.f Of course this is not a strict “deﬁnition” of a quasi-set,
but act more or less as Cantor’s ‘deﬁnition’ of a set as “any collection into a
whole M of deﬁnite and separate, that is, distinguishable objects m of our
intuition or our thought”, serving just to provide an intuitive account of
the concept.g By ‘indistinguishable’ we mean agreement with respect to all
properties, and in saying that a and b are ‘identical’ we mean intuitively that
they are the very same entity. The deﬁnitions of these concepts depend on
the employed language and logic, but here we consider only their informal
meanings.
eThere is an interesting ﬁlm made by the IBM research team (available at the YouTube),
termed “The boy and his atom”. The scientists have magniﬁed atoms over 100 million
times and made a ﬁgure of a boy with them. In a certain moment, one atom is isolated
from a group of similar atoms and the boy “plays” with it. But later the atom merges
the atoms of the boy’s hand, and after a few moment, it becomes isolated again. Can
we say that the atom now isolated is “the same one” as before? The reader should be
convinced that there is no sense in saying that. The atoms are exactly similar. ‘Identity’
(in the standard sense) seems in fact do not work here at all.
fImportant to say that we have discussed some objections addressed to this theory for
some people think that once we have ‘more than one’ object, they must be diﬀerent,
so identity applies to them. The reader who thinks this way needs to read again about
the IBM ﬁlm mentioned above, and a counter-argument in [16]. Really, quasi-set theory
shows in particular that such a claim does not hold in general, for quasi-set comprising
indiscernible objects may have a cardinal grater than 1.
gA more detailed discussion about this theory can be found in [10] and [11].

272
The quasi-set theory Q has in its main motivations some considera-
tions taken from quantum physics, mainly from Schr¨odinger’s idea that the
concept of identity does not make sense when applied to elementary par-
ticles in orthodox quantum mechanics (see [10]). Another motivation, in
our opinion, is the need, stemming from philosophical diﬃculties of deal-
ing with collections of absolutely indistinguishable items that would be not
‘the same’ entity.h Of course, from a formal point of view, Q can also be
formally developed independently of any intended interpretation, but here
we shall always keep in mind this ‘quantum’ motivation since, after all, it
is the intended interpretation that has motivated the development of the
theory.
The ﬁrst point is to guarantee that identity and indistinguishability (or
indiscernibility) will not collapse into one another when the theory is for-
mally developed. We of course could just take an equivalence relation within
a standard set theory such as ZFC to mimic indiscernibility, but this is just
what we don’t want to do; instead, we wish to deal with ‘legitimate’ (in a
sense of the word to be explicated below) indistinguishable objects. Thus,
we assume that identity, that will be symbolized by ‘=’, is not a primitive
relation, but that the theory has a weaker concept of indistinguishability,
symbolized by ‘≡’ as primitive. This is just an equivalence relation and holds
among all objects of the considered domain. The ur-elements of the domain
are divided up into two classes of objects, the m-objects, that stand for
‘micro-objects’, and M-objects, for ‘macro-objects’.i Quasi-sets are those
objects of the domain which are not ur-elements. Identity is deﬁned for M-
objects and ‘sets’ (entities that obey the primitive predicate Z) only. Thus,
if we take just the part of theory obtained by ruling out the m-objects and
collections (quasi-sets) that have m-objects in their transitive closure, we
obtain a copy of ZFU (ZFC with ur-elements); if we further eliminate the
M-objects, we get just a copy of the ‘pure’ ZFC.
Indiscernible m-objects are termed non-individuals by historical rea-
sons (see [10] for a wide discussion). From the axioms of the theory Q we
can form collections of m-objects which may have a cardinal, termed its
hThis is of course a way of speech. Despite the fact that some interpretations (such
as Bohm’s) presuppose an ontology similar to that of classical physics, in the sense of
dealing with individuals, we shall keep here with the mainstream account of assuming
that quantum objects may be ‘absolutely indiscernible’ in certain situations.
iWithin Q, there are no explicit relations among m and M atoms, but we guess that
the theory could be supplemented by mereological axioms enabling us to say that the
M objects can be ‘formed’ by m objects in some sense. A ﬁrst attempt to consider such
a ‘quantum mereology’ was done in [15].

273
quasi-cardinal, but not an associated ordinal. Thus, the concepts of ordi-
nal and cardinal are independent, as in some formulations of ZFC proper,
so, there are quasi-sets that cannot be ordered. Informally speaking, there
may be quasi-sets of m-objects such that its elements cannot be identiﬁed
by names, counted, ordered, although there is a sense in saying that these
collections have a cardinal which cannot be deﬁned in terms of ordinals. It
is just by using quasi-cardinals that we can say (within Q) that a quasi-set
has ‘more than one’ element. This discourse is of course dubious if we notice
that the notion of identity does not hold in certain situations, but here the
number (the quasi-cardinal) is what matters, and this resembles the Fock
space quantum formalism (see [22]).
It is important to remark that, when Q is used in connection with quan-
tum physics, the m-objects are thought of as representing quantum entities
(henceforth q-objects), but they are not necessarily “particles” in the stan-
dard sense. Generally speaking, whatever ‘objects’ sharing the property of
being indistinguishable can also be values of the variables of Q. For a survey
of the various diﬀerent meanings that the word ‘particle’ has acquired in
connection with quantum physics see [9, Chap.6].
Another important feature of Q is that standard mathematics can be
developed using its resources, because the theory is conceived in such a way
that ZFU (and hence also ZFC) is a subtheory of Q. In other words, the
theory is constructed so that it extends standard Zermelo-Fraenkel with ur-
relements (ZFU); thus standard sets of ZFU must be viewed as particular
qsets, that is, there are qsets that have all the properties of the sets of
ZFU, and the objects of Q that correspond to the ur-elements of ZFU are
identiﬁed with the M-atoms of Q. To make the distinction, the language of
Q encompasses a unary predicate Z such that Z(x) says that x is (a copy
of) a set of ZFU.
It is also possible to show that there is a translation from the language
of ZFU into the language of Q, so that the translations of the postulates of
ZFU become theorems of Q; thus, there is a ‘copy’ of ZFU in Q, and we refer
to it as the ‘classical’ part of Q. In this copy, all the standard mathematical
concepts can be stated, as for instance, the concept of ordinal (for Z-sets).
This ‘classical part’ of Q plays an important role in the formal developments
of the next sections.
Furthermore, it should be recalled that the theory is constructed so that
the relation of indiscernibility, when applied to M-atoms or Z-sets, collapses
into standard identity of ZFU. The Z-sets are qsets whose transitive closure,
as usually deﬁned, does not contain m-atoms or, in other words, they are

274
constructed in the classical part of the theory.
In order to distinguish between Z-sets and qsets that may have m-atoms
in their transitive closure, we write (in the metalanguage) {x : ϕ(x)} for
the former and [x : ϕ(x)] for the latter. In Q, we term ‘pure’ those qsets
that have only m-objects as elements (although these elements may be not
always indistinguishable from one another, that is, the theory is consistent
with the assumption of the existence of diﬀerent kinds of m-atoms, i.e., not
all of them must be indiscernible from one each other).
The concept of extensional identity, as said above, is a deﬁned notion,
and it has the properties of standard identity of ZFU. More precisely, we
write x = y (read ‘x and y are extensionally identical’) iﬀthey are both
qsets having the same elements (that is, ∀z(z ∈x ↔z ∈y)) or they are
both M-atoms and belong to the same qsets (that is, ∀z(x ∈z ↔y ∈z)).
Since m-atoms may be indiscernible, in general is not possible to at-
tribute an ordinal to collections of m-atoms. As a consequence, for these
collections it is not possible to deﬁne the notion of cardinal number in the
usual way, that is, through ordinals.j In the theory, to remedy this situa-
tion, we admit also a primitive concept of quasi-cardinal which intuitively
stands for the ‘quantity’ of objects in a collection. The axioms for this no-
tion grant that certain quasi-sets x, in particular, those whose elements are
m-objects, may have a quasi-cardinal, written qc(x), even when it is not
possible to attribute an ordinal to them.
To link the relation of indistinguishability with qsets, the theory also
encompasses an ‘axiom of weak extensionality’, which states, informally
speaking, that those quasi-sets that have the same quantity of elements
of the same kind, expressed by the quasi-cardinals (in the sense that they
belong to the same equivalence class of indistinguishable objects) are them-
selves indistinguishable. One of the interesting consequences of this axiom
is related to the quasi-set version of the non observability of permutations
in quantum physics, which is one of the most basic facts regarding indistin-
guishable quanta (see [12]). In brief, remember that in standard set theories,
if w ∈x, then
(x −{w} ) ∪{z} = x iﬀz = w.
We can ‘exchange’ (without modifying the original arrangement) two
elements iﬀthey are the same elements, by force of the axiom of exten-
sionality. In contrast, in Q we can prove the following theorem, where z,
jWe just recall that an ordinal is a transitive set which is well-ordered by the membership
relation, and that a cardinal is an ordinal α such that for no β < α there exists a bijection
from β to α.

275
and similarly w, stand for a quasi-set with quasi-cardinal 1 whose only
element is indistinguishable from z and, respectively, from w (the reader
should not think that this element is identical to either z or w, because
the relation of equality does not apply to these items; the set theoretical
operations can be understood according to their usual deﬁnitions):
Theorem 5.1 (Unobservability of Permutations). Let x be a ﬁnite
quasi-set such that x does not contain all indistinguishable from z, where z
is an m-atom such that z ∈x. If w ≡z and w /∈x, then there exists w
such that:
(x −z) ∪w ≡x.
The theorem works to the eﬀect that, supposing that x has n ele-
ments, then if we ‘exchange’ their elements z by corresponding indistin-
guishable elements w (set theoretically, this means performing the operation
(x−z)∪w), then the resulting quasi-set remains indistinguishable from
the one we started with. In a certain sense, it does not matter whether we
are dealing with x or with (x−z)∪w. So, within Q, we can express that
‘permutations are not observable’, without necessarily introducing symme-
try postulates, and in particular we derive ‘in a natural way’ the quantum
statistics [10, Chap.7].
6. Quasi-set semantics for the logic of indiscernibility
In this section we shall be working within Q. Informally, we say that two
objects are of the same species when they are indiscernible.
To deﬁne a quasi-set semantics for our language L , we repeat almost all
the previous deﬁnition with obvious adaptations, as follows. Let ⟨W, R⟩be a
frame where W is a set of worlds (that is, W is a qset satisfying the predicate
Z), and R is an equivalence relation on W, the accessibility relation. A
Kripke quasi-model for L is a 4-tuple K
= ⟨W, R, D, V ⟩, where D =
D1 ∪D2 ̸= ∅, D1 being a qset whose elements are m-objects (occasionally
indiscernible), and D2 is a set.
As before, there is a quasi-function f from types to the adequate qsets
comprising the domain. We now deﬁne an interpretation V of the predicate
symbols in each world wi as follows:
(i) V (≈, wi) = ∆D2, for every wi ∈W
(ii) V (∼=, wi) = ≡∪∆D2; that is, the indiscernibility relation is provided
by the indiscernibility relation of Q between the elements of D1 and the
identity in D2;

276
(iii) V (P, wi) ∈f(τ P ).
Now, as before, we deﬁne a valuation related to an assignment µ, Vµ.
This is a quasi-function from {formulas}×W onto {0, 1}, deﬁned as below,
for each assignment µ of the variables of L to the domain, so that µ(x) ∈D1
and µ(X) ∈D2, for x and X variables of the ﬁrst and of the second species
respectively.
(i) Vµ(x ∼= y, w) = 1 iﬀµ(x) ≡µ(y), and 0 otherwise.
(ii) Vµ(X ≈Y, w) = 1 iﬀµ(X) = µ(Y ), and 0 otherwise.
(iii) Vµ(Pt1 . . . tn, wi) = 1 iﬀthere is an X in f(τ P ) such that X ≡
V (P, wi) and ⟨µ(t1) . . . µ(tn)⟩∈X
(iv) Vµ(¬α, w) = 1 iﬀVµ(α, w) = 0, and 0 otherwise.
(v) Vµ(α →β, w) = 1 iﬀVµ(α, w) = 0, or Vµ(β, w) = 1.
(vi) Vµ(2α, w) = 1 iﬀVµ(α, w′) = 1, for every w′ ∈W such that wRw′,
and 0 otherwise.
(vii) Vµ(∀sα, w) = 1 (where s is a variable of either the ﬁrst or of the
second species) iﬀVρ(α, w) = 1 for every assignment ρ which is a s-
alternative of µ, that is, such that for every variable t except possibly
s, (being t of the same species as s), ρ(t) ≡µ(t).
&%
'$
·
·
a
b
∗
∗∗
D1
D2
D = D1 ∪D2
Figure 1.
A typical qset taken as
the domain of the individuals in
our semantics, composed of indi-
viduals of both species. The ele-
ments of D1 are indiscernible.
The main items that deserve special at-
tention are (i), (ii), and (iii). Firstly, we
remark that according to (i), indiscernible
objects in the language are taken as indis-
cernible m-atoms in the domain D. This
makes our semantics in agreement with the
ideas encoded in the logic. As for (ii), the
deﬁnition gives the usual modal conditions:
identical objects (from the point of view of
L ) are the very same object in D, for we
are here considering objects of the second
species, to which the notion of identity makes sense.
Concerning (iii), a main diﬀerence emerges from the classical semantics.
Recall that in classical semantics each world is a Weyl aggregate, with an
indiscernibility relation. Each world has its own indiscernibility relation,
so that objects indiscernible in one world could be discernible in another
world. However, in quasi-set theoretical semantics, in every world the in-
discernibility relation is interpreted as ≡in Q. However, that relation is
the same for every world. So, in this case the indiscernibility is indeed nec-

277
essary. This means that classical semantics generates a distinct system of
logic than quasi-set theoretical semantics. Of course, both systems may gen-
erate the same system if in the classical case we impose the restriction that
the indiscernibility relation be the same in every world.
Another point also deserves explanation for the reader. This concerns
item (vii), for quantiﬁers. Quantiﬁcation over objects that don’t have well
deﬁned identity conditions is thought by many not to make sense (see for
instance [4]). Some may say that there is no way to quantify over them,
but we can circumvent this criticism by showing that we can proceed in Q
exactly as we do in (say) ZFC (see [8]), as shown in [2]. In this paper, it
is shown that quantiﬁcation over non-individuals is perfectly well deﬁned,
but here is not the place to discuss such issues.
7. Conclusion
In conclusion, we consider again the suggestion that a logic of indiscerni-
bility is something that should be investigated from several points of view.
The ﬁrst account, as we have said, is to work within a standard set the-
ory such as ZFC. But in this approach, the best we can do is to consider
indiscernible objects by means of an equivalence relation (or by a congru-
ence), but by the inevitable fact that all objects represented within ZFC
are individuals, this “mock” indiscernibility can be shown to be false by
extending the considered structures (we are always working within a cer-
tain mathematical structure) can be extended to a rigid one. The “right
way”, so to say, is to work within a non-standard set theory such as Q. The
modal account to indiscernibility serves to enlighten some other aspects not
pursued till now. We hope that our paper has provided some such insights.
But the discussion goes on.
There are in fact many distinct lines of investigation that deserve to be
pursued. Our axiomatization, presented earlier, is certainly not complete
with respect to both of our semantics. As we mentioned, in the classical
semantics we could establish that x ∼= y →2(x ∼= y) is not a theorem.
However, as a consequence of our quasi-set theoretical semantics, this for-
mula is logically valid in this second semantics. So, the systems are in-
deed diﬀerent, and distinct sets of axioms will be required. Furthermore, in
classical semantics systems distinct from S5 could be proﬁtably used. One
could thing, for instance, of systems in which the accessibility relation R
is such that a world wi accesses only worlds wj such that ∼j⊆∼i, that is,
where the indiscernibility relations are more ‘ﬁne grained’. In this sense, a
world would access another world only if more things get discerned in the

278
accessed world. On the other hand, alternative systems could operate the
other way: wi accesses wj only if ∼i⊆∼j. In this case, the indiscernibility
relation involves more elements, items that previously were discernible now
get indiscernible. These are interesting ways to further develop our system,
and we hope to pursue such issues in a future paper.
Bibliography
1. J. R. B. Arenhart, “Semantic analysis of non-reﬂexive logics”, The Logic
Journal of the IGPL, 22, 565–584, 2014.
2. J. R. B. Arenhart, D. Krause, “Quantiﬁers and the foundations of quasi-set
theory”, Principia 13(3), 251–268, 2009.
3. J. R. B. Arenhart, D. Krause, “Uma l´ogica da indistinguibilidade”, Dispu-
tatio 4(34), 555–573, 2012.
4. O. Bueno, “Why identity is fundamental”, American Philosophical Quar-
terly 51, 325–332, 2014.
5. N. C. A. da Costa, J. Y. Bziau, O. Bueno, “What is semantics? A brief
note on a huge question”, Sorites – Electronic Quarterly of Analytical Phi-
losophy 3, 43–47, 1995.
6. N. C. A. da Costa, D. Krause, O. Bueno, “Paraconsistent logic and para-
consistency”. In: Dale Jacquette (ed.) Handbook of the Philosophy of Sci-
ence. Volume 5: Philosophy of Logic, pp.655–775. Amsterdam: Elsevier,
2006.
7. M. L. Dalla Chiara, G. Toraldo di Francia, “Individuals, kinds and names
in physics”. In: G. Corsi, M. L. Dalla Chiara, G. Ghirardi (eds.) Bridging
the Gap: Philosophy, Mathematics, and Physics, pp.261–284. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Ac. Pu. (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 140), 1993.
8. H. D. Ebbinghaus, J. Flum, W. Thomas, Mathematical Logic. (Springer-
Verlag, New York, 1994).
9. B. Falkenburg, Particle Metaphysics: A Critical Account of Subatomic Re-
ality. (Springer, New York, 2007).
10. S. French, D. Krause, Identity in Physics. A historical, philosophical, and
formal analysis. (Oxford Un. Press, Oxford, 2006).
11. S. French, D. Krause, D., “Remarks on the theory of quasi-sets”, Studia
Logica 95(1-2), 101–124, 2010.
12. S. French, D. Rickles, “Understanding permutation symmetry”. In: K.
Brading, E. Castellani (eds.) Symmetries in Physics: New Reﬂections,
pp.212–238. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003.
13. G. E. Hughes, M. J. Cresswell, A New Introduction to Modal Logic. London:
Routledge, 1996.
14. S. C. Kleene, Introduction to Metamathematics. (van Nostrand, 1952).
15. D. Krause, “On a calculus of non-individuals: ideas for a quantum mere-
ology”. In: L. H. Dutra, A. M. Luz (eds.) Linguagem, Ontologia e Ao,
pp.92–106. Florianpolis: NEL/UFSC, v. 10, Coleo Rumos da Epistemolo-
gia, 2012.
16. D. Krause, J. R. B. Arenhart, “Individuality, quantum physics and a meta-

279
physics of nonindividuals: the role of the formal”. In: A. Guay, T. Pradeau
(eds.) Individuals Across the Sciences, pp.61–80. New York: Oxford Un.
Press, 2015.
17. D. Krause, J. R. B. Arenhart, “Is identity really so fundamental?” Forth-
coming, 2016.
18. D. Krause, J. R. B. Arenhart, “A logical account of quantum superposi-
tions”. Forthcoming, this volume, 2016.
19. W. V. Quine, Philosophy of Logic. 2nd.ed. (Harvard Un. Press, Cambridge,
1986).
20. F. P. Ramsey, Los fundamentos de la matemtica y otros ensayos sobre lgica.
Collected by R. B. Braithwaite. Trans. Emilio del Solar Petit y Wilfred
Reyes Scantlebury. Santiago: Universidad de Chile, 1968.
21. E. Schr¨odinger, Science and Humanism. (Cambridge Un. Press, Cam-
bridge, 1952).
22. P. Teller, An interpretive Introduction to Quantum Field Theory. (Prince-
ton Un. Press, Princeton, 1995).
23. H. Weyl, Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science. Princeton:
Princeton Un. Press, 1949.
24. L. Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. 2a. ed., Trad. Luiz Hen-
rique Lopes dos Santos. (EdUSP, So Paulo, 1994).

280
THE POSSIBILITY OF A NEW METAPHYSICS
FOR QUANTUM MECHANICS FROM
MEINONG’S THEORY OF OBJECTS
Mat´ıas Graffigna
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina
E-mail: matiasgraffigna@ gmail. com
According to de Ronde it was Bohr’s interpretation of Quantum Mechanics
(QM) which closed the possibility of understanding physical reality beyond
the realm of the actual, so establishing the Orthodox Line of Research. In this
sense, it is not the task of any physical theory to look beyond the language and
metaphysics supposed by classical physics, in order to account for what QM de-
scribes. If one wishes to maintain a realist position (though not nave) regarding
physical theories, one seems then to be trapped by an array of concepts that
do not allow to understand the main principles involved in the most successful
physical theory thus far, mainly: the quantum postulate, the principle of inde-
termination and the superposition principle. If de Ronde is right in proposing
QM can only be completed as a physical theory by the introduction of ‘new
concepts’ that admit as real a domain beyond actuality, then a new ontology
that goes beyond Aristotelian and Newtonian actualism is needed. It was al-
ready in the early 20th century that misunderstood philosopher Alexius von
Meinong proposed a Theory of Objects that admits a domain of being beyond
existence-actuality. Member of the so called ‘School of Brentano’, Meinong’s
concerns were oriented to provide an ontology of everything that can be thought
of, and at the same time an intentionality theory of how objects are thought
of. I wish to argue that in Meinong’s theory of objects we ﬁnd the rudiments of
the ontology and the intentionality theory we need to account for QM’s basic
principles: mainly the possibility of predicating properties of non-entities, or in
other words, the possibility of objectively describing a domain of what is, that
is diﬀerent from the domain of actual existence.
0. Introduction
The wonder of Newtonian physics has many facets. It is not only a ‘useful’
theory we can apply to calculate velocities, accelerations, falls; it is not only
a theory that allows us to perform experiments or to pose questions about
how things are, given some conditions, or how things would be, given some
others. It is also, and maybe mainly, a theory that allows us to understand

281
the world in which we live in. Of course, not all physicists or philosophers are
realists, who commit themselves to the thesis that holds that the terms of
the theory actually refer to independent entities in the world. But, beyond
the realism debate, I believe it to be without doubt that classical mechanics
is a complete theory that allows us to understand reality, by oﬀering certain
concepts that seem to describe the macroscopic world we inhabit. Even
if there is no independent reality where Newtonian particles collide and
interact, that picture of the world seems to hold true when we inquire into
certain domains of nature. So strong is said picture of the world, that it
seems impossible to think beyond the concepts of Newtonian physics.
It is in this sense, I believe, that Quantum Mechanics (QM) is said to
lack a consensus regarding its interpretation. What does it mean, for a the-
ory that possesses a successful mathematical formalism, and unprecedented
levels of empirical adequacy, to be without a unanimous interpretation?
This means, basically, that “if we are to understand QM as a physical the-
ory, and not merely as a mathematical or algorithmic structure, it is clear
that we still need to provide a link between the mathematical structure and
a set of physical concepts which are capable of providing a coherent account
of quantum phenomena” (de Ronde, 2015A:8). In other words, we do not
know what the theory is about. QM has a rigorous formalism, empirical ad-
equacy, and outstanding technological applications, but it lacks still those
concepts that allow us to form a picture of the world, to think about the
‘reality’ described by the theory, to do physics in the most complete sense.
There is agreement in the literature, regarding the fact that QM possesses
indeed a successful formalism and adequate experimental arrangements,
even though we do not have the appropriate concepts to account for all of
this:
“(1) The only consensual part of the theory is a formal skeleton
enabling one to calculate the probability of various experimental
outcomes at any time, given the initial preparation (Peres, 1995;
Schwinger, 2001). (2) This formal skeleton is often complemented
with bits and pieces of former pictures of the world borrowed from
classical physics, but connected to one another in an unfamiliar
and unruly way. A recurring complaint is that, as long as we are
left without any truly coherent representation of the world and of
its ‘ontological furniture’ compatible with the quantum formalism,
we cannot claim that we truly ‘understand’ quantum mechanics”
(Bitbol, 2010:54-55)

282
“Quantum mechanics brilliantly succeeds as a mathematical for-
malism: the numbers it provides are always successfully compared
with experimental results. But it is often said to fail as an explana-
tory theory allowing us to understand the laws of atomic processes”
(Lurat, 2007:230).
“Scientiﬁc advances can signiﬁcantly change our view of what the
world is like, and one of the tasks of the philosophy of science is
to take successful theories and tease out of them their broader im-
plications for the nature of reality. Quantum mechanics, one of the
most signiﬁcant advances of twentieth century physics, is an obvi-
ous candidate for this task, but up till now eﬀorts to understand its
broader implications have been less successful than might have been
hoped. The interpretation of quantum theory found in textbooks,
which comes as close as anything to deﬁning “standard” quan-
tum mechanics, is widely regarded as quite unsatisfactory. Among
philosophers of science this opinion is almost universal, and among
practicing physicists it is widespread. It is but a slight exaggera-
tion to say that the only physicists who are content with quantum
theory as found in current textbooks are those who have never
given the matter much thought, or at least have never had to teach
the introductory course to questioning students who have not yet
learned to ‘shut up and calculate!’ ” (Griﬃths, 2011:2).
“Regarding its formal structure we could say that quantum
mechanics seems to be a ‘ﬁnished theory’. In terms of empirical
adequacy, it provides outstanding results, its mathematical struc-
ture —developed in the ﬁrst three decades of the 20th century by
people like Werner Heisenberg, Pascual Jordan, Max Born, Erwin
Schr¨odinger and Paul Dirac— seems able to provide until now the
adequate modeling to any experiment we can think of. However,
apart from its fantastic accuracy, even today its physical inter-
pretation remains an open problem. In the standard formulation,
quantum mechanics assigns a quantum mechanical state to a sys-
tem, but ‘the state’ has a meaning only in terms of the outcomes
of the measurements performed and not in terms of ‘something’
which one can coherently relate to physical reality. It is not at all
clear, apart from measurement outcomes, what is the referent of
this quantum state, in particular, and of the formal structure, in
general. If we are to ask too many questions, problems start to pop

283
up and simple answers seem doomed to inconsistency” (de Ronde,
2011:9)
Regardless of this agreement concerning the lack of a proper conceptual
scheme that would allow a comprehensive understanding of QM in terms
of a ‘physical reality’ of some sort, one could very well argue that this is
indeed a futile enterprise, one that should be abandoned in favor of a more
pragmatic or instrumentalist approach. Of this opinion are, for instance,
Fuchs & Peres (2000:1): “Contrary to those desires, quantum theory does
not describe physical reality. What it does is provide an algorithm for com-
puting probabilities for the macroscopic events (‘detector clicks’) that are
the consequences of our experimental interventions. This strict deﬁnition of
the scope of quantum theory is the only interpretation ever needed, whether
by experimenters or theorists”. So, we could ask ourselves, why bother with
ﬁnding concepts or an interpretation for a theory that is already providing
everything it should?
It is inevitable, in order to answer such a question, to make explicit
what one believes should be a physical or even a scientiﬁc theory. The in-
strumentalist approach simply decides to ignore the fact that the theory
—might— ‘lacks’ something, and wishes to pursue and insist in the al-
ready achieved successes of the theory. The interpretative ‘problems’ of the
theory, such as the measurement problem, the basis problem, non-locality,
non-separability. . . and the list goes on, are only set aside, swept under the
rug, to allow for the wonderful computations to carry on. To argue with a
position that does not acknowledge the existence of a theoretical problem
is a hard enterprise, given how the desiderata concerning a physical theory
are so diﬀerent from one another. To them, I can only ask: is that all? Are
we to satisfy ourselves by claiming that the most successful scientiﬁc the-
ory produced by mankind is nothing more than an algorithm to compute
probabilities, with no reference whatsoever to physical reality? Can we re-
ally settle with a theory that has no comprehensive concepts, but opens
questions regarding nature and being we would choose never to answer?
To all of those who believe ‘no’ is the best answer for the posed questions,
and believe physics is more than an algorithm that computes the results of
the experiments we ourselves have designed, to all of those who yet believe
in some kind of physical reality to be known by human scientiﬁc endeavor,
a long road of problems lies ahead. I believe QM lacks concepts that would
allow us to comprehend the reality which its formalism already describes,
in the strong sense that implies that we need to ﬁnd these concepts. For the
unconvinced instrumentalist who remains happy computing, the remainder

284
of this article will seem pointless. To the one who shares the desideratum
of comprehending reality through physics, we need now to inquire into how
this could be approached.
I will begin by presenting a map of possible interpretations for QM and
I will argue in favor of the line of interpretations that states the need to
ﬁnd new concepts for QM. In section 3, I will oﬀer a brief presentation of
Meinong’s theory of objects, which I will apply, in section 4, to some of the
problematic issues of QM.
1. The interpretation of QM
The quest of conceptually comprehending QM until today can be presented,
following de Ronde (2011), in two main lines of inquiry: ﬁrst, the tradition
that beginning with Bohr has tried to comprehend QM based on classi-
cal concepts and has tried to make the formalism compatible with basic
classical metaphysical principles; and second, another line of inquiry which
attempts to take the successful formalism as a starting point and so, tries
to ﬁnd the appropriate metaphysical principles that would account for it:
“We believe that an interesting distinction that can help us to
understand the huge interpretational map of quantum mechanics
relates to the position one takes with respect to metaphysics. This
controversial relation between physics and metaphysics displaces
the problem of truth to a secondary stage and concentrates its
analysis in the conditions of possibility to access and distinguish
physical phenomena. Metaphysical schemes provide the coordinates
through which the representational map of realistic stances can be
developed. Among those who attempt to provide a metaphysical ac-
count of quantum mechanics there is a ﬁrst group that tries, in dif-
ferent ways, to ‘restore a classical way of thinking about what there
is’. Staying close to at least some of the classical notions of physics
(space-time, causality, objects, etc.) these approaches have no prob-
lem to give up the orthodox formulation of quantum mechanics. A
second group also interested in the metaphysical question regard-
ing quantum mechanics attempts to begin ‘right from the start’
with the successful mathematical formalism in its orthodox form,
trying to learn about its structure and internal features in order
to ﬁnd a metaphysical scheme which is able to ﬁt the formalism.
We might consider the ﬁrst group as going from metaphysics into
the formal structure while the second group goes from the formal
structure into the metaphysical scheme” (de Ronde, 2011:54).

285
The ﬁrst path can be characterized, then, as that which attempts to
comprehend the new theory, QM, with the old concepts, the classical
Aristotelian-Newtonian ones. Bohr himself stated that “the unambiguous
interpretation of any measurement must be essentially framed in terms of
classical physical theories, and we may say that in this sense the language
of Newton and Maxwell will remain the language of physicists for all time”
(Bohr, quoted in de Ronde, 2011: 7). Probably one of the most famous
examples in this line of inquiry is Bohm’s hidden variable program, which
according to de Ronde, “is forced to change the formalism with seemingly
ad hoc moves; moves which can be only justiﬁed in relation to the prior
metaphysical commitments” (de Ronde, 2011:54-5).
The Bohr-inspired program that seeks to ﬁnd an interpretation for QM
in the concepts and language of classical mechanics ﬁnds, among other
approaches, its philosophical grounds in an interpretation of Kantian tran-
scendental philosophy. Following Pringe’s interpretation, the general idea
is that the limits of possible experience require that a phenomenon be
constituted both through sensibility and understanding, that is, through
empirical intuitions and a priori concepts. Anything that falls out of these
limits is considered by Kant to be metaphysical and not subject to scientiﬁc
inquiry, inasmuch as it is beyond possible experience. According to Kant,
certain a priori conditions must be met in order for something to be an ob-
ject of possible experience: sensibility must provide the necessary empirical
intuitions which are synthesized by the faculty of understanding according
to the categories table. One of the most important elements in this table
is the concept of causality. So, according to Pringe’s Kantian reading of
Bohr’s interpretation of QM:
“If the quantum postulate is assumed, all pretension of reaching a
spatial-temporal representation, which is at the same time causal,
of an object subject to the postulate, must be abandoned. That
is, if an object is within the domain of validity of the postulate, it
won’t be possible —as it is in classical physics— to synthesize the
set of contingent data of a measurement, according to the concept
of cause, as the eﬀect of said object, representing this in space and
time, in such a way that its states modify each other causally”
(Pringe, 2012:183).
This means that the quantum postulate forbids ‘quantum objects’ to be
objects of possible experience, inasmuch as it is not possible to synthesize

286
the multiplicity of empirical data following the concept of causality. The
main problem of this conclusion lies in the fact that objectivity is then lost
for the quantum domain. So, how does QM remain a scientiﬁc theory, given
that it violates Kantian transcendental conditions of validity?
The Bohrian answer to this question, as it is known, is contextual-
ity. Within each experimental arrangement or measurement process, Bohr
argues, we can synthesize the given objects, meeting thus the necessary
conditions. The problem is, we cannot give a coherent account of the re-
sults of multiple experiments, since these immediately become incompatible
in terms of the Kantian categories. Pringe goes on to argue that quantum
phenomena must be described in classical terms, thus guaranteeing Kantian
transcendental conditions.
“In eﬀect, quantum phenomena are contextual, given that their
validity is restricted to a determined type of experimental arrange-
ment, and they are complementary, inasmuch as they mutually
exclude one another; but at the same time, they are all necessary
to account for experimental evidence. We face, then, a multiplicity
of phenomena, whose objective character is established, but they
do not yet acquire systematic unity” (Pringe, 2012:188-9).
This systematic unity is, of course, a necessary condition for scientiﬁc
knowledge. So, quantum phenomena are given in terms of classical concepts
which are referred to speciﬁc and distinct experimental arrangements. Now,
each quantum phenomenon, from each arrangement, is incompatible, in
classical terms, with each other (in most of the cases). Though incompatible,
these results are mutually complementary, in the sense that they are all
necessary to account for the empirical data that the theory produces. So,
how can all these mutually incompatible and complementary results be
brought to systematic unity in order to guarantee the objective validity of
scientiﬁc knowledge?
“[. . . ] Bohr distinguishes quantum objects from quantum phenom-
ena, which are nothing more, than classical descriptions, whose to-
tality exhausts the available information regarding the ﬁrsts. The
systematic unity of quantum phenomena will only be reached when
they are subsumed under the concept of quantum object. [. . . ] The
concept of a certain quantum object or system contains the rep-
resentation of its state, and with it, the information about the
diﬀerent probabilities of the diﬀerent results of the possible mea-
surements that can be realized on the system. In this way, the

287
multiple quantum phenomena are uniﬁed by a probabilistic law.
Given a certain quantum phenomenon, the representation of the
state of the quantum object establishes the probability of each and
every phenomena of the object. So, the multiplicity of phenomena
is synthesized through the concept of the object and subsumed un-
der it. This synthesis allows, then, to carry out predictions such
that, given a certain phenomenon, the probabilities of the diﬀer-
ent results of possible measurements are calculated based on the so
called ‘wave function’ of the system” (Pringe, 2012:189).
The wave function then plays the role of the quantum object, which
can never be directly given into intuition neither can it be synthesized
according to the categories, but operates as the regulative systematic unity
of the diﬀerent quantum phenomena which are in fact, given to intuition
and synthesized. The objective validity of QM is then grounded on the
objective validity of classical physics, the reason for this being that classical
concepts are the only ones that can attain objective validity. I shall quote
Pringe in extenso one last time to appreciate the conclusion of such an
analysis:
“In the ﬁrst place, the objective validity of a classical object con-
sists in its synthetic function of an empirical multiple, thanks to
which, the intuitive representation of an object is constituted. On
the contrary, the objective validity of the concept of a quantum
object is based rather in its regulative task to provide systematic
unity to the complementary phenomena (whose objectivity is guar-
anteed by the use of classical concepts to interpret the experimental
results).
In second place, the concept of a classical object acquires objective
reality when a given empirical multiplicity is subsumed under the
concept thanks to the mediation of a scheme. So, the concept is ex-
hibited directly in intuition. On the contrary, as we have seen, as a
consequence of the quantum postulate, the conditions under which
an empirical multiplicity is given, which should be synthesized by
the concept of a quantum object, are incompatible with those con-
ditions under which the concept can be applied. Therefore, a direct
exhibition of such a concept in intuition is not possible. The con-
cept of a quantum object acquires objective reality, rather, through
an indirect exhibition in intuition, carried out through symbolic
analogies” (Pringe, 2012:192-3)

288
We can now appreciate what it means, in philosophical terms, that quan-
tum mechanics can only be interpreted in terms of classical physics. These
Bohrian declarations can be grounded in Kantian transcendental philoso-
phy. What it means to be able to constitute an object is incompatible with
quantum theory. Thus, all that is left for QM is to settle with classical rep-
resentations, mutually incompatible, but mutually complementary. There
is no quantum object we can constitute, but this concept operates not in
a constitutive manner, but a regulative one, providing systematic unity
to the multiple phenomena, presented in classical terms, through symbolic
analogies.
In other words, we could say that the Bohrian interpretation of QM that
seeks to understand QM in terms of classical concepts is right, if Kantian
transcendental philosophy is also right. That is, it makes no sense to pursue
new constitutive concepts for QM if the limits established in Kant’s Critique
of Pure Reason are indeed the a priori limits of what can be constituted
by human thinking. All that is left is the possibility of ﬁnding metaphysical
concepts, which would perform a regulative role, but not a constitutive
one. This is, clearly, one possibility: but it implies that we must always ﬁnd
objective validity for these concepts, as Pringe says, ‘indirectly’. Now, of
course, we must ask ourselves, why should we trust Kant? The most direct
way to ‘refute’ Kant’s limits to human experience would be to ﬁnd new
limits to experience that are compatible with the quantum principles. But,
again, why seek them if one thinks Kant is right about them? It would seem
we need further motivation to enter such an enterprise.
It can be argued that we ﬁnd in Kant the philosophical grounding for
classical mechanicsa. The space, which is the empty form of sensibility ac-
cording to Kant, is the space of Euclidean geometry, which is, at the same
time, the absolute space of Newtonian physics. The pure concept of causal-
ity, under which we synthesize phenomena and constitute objects of ex-
perience according to Kant, is the concept of causality that is needed for
classical mechanics’ descriptions of macroscopic interactions between bod-
ies. These could be the transcendental limits of human experience. But
they could also very well be the transcendental limits of classical experi-
ence. Why should these be the limits of all human experience? One may
aRegardless of whether or not Kant took Newtonian mechanics and Euclidean geome-
try as starting points for his theory, and regardless of whether or not these principles
are needed for Kantian philosophy, the truth is that they seem highly compatible and
that history, specially neo-kantism, has taken Kantian philosophy as a transcendental
fundament for physics.

289
argue that both the appearance of Relativity Theory and QM are suﬃcient
reason to believe that we need new limits for human experienceb. We need
a new ontology that is not grounded on classical metaphysical principles.
Another approach to a Kantian interpretation of QM is found in Michael
Bitbol’s work. The French author wishes not to accept the ﬁxed given limits
of experience developed by Kant, but to embrace his ‘reﬂective metaphysical
program’ in order to analyze the diﬀerent problems that arise from quantum
theory. In this sense, the task is not to limit experience to Kant’s words,
but to inquire once again into the limits of human experience, based on the
new developments brought about by QM:
“Kant’s motto is that, despite its stemming from the “extravagant
claims of speculative reason” (Kant, 1997, Introduction), meta-
physics should not be rejected but disciplined. It should be given
an epistemological rather than ontological status, so much so that
ontology itself is seen as an epistemological tool. At the very end of
Kant’s work of reconstruction, metaphysical statements are then
no longer seen as representations of something “out there”, but
as rules in a grammatical pre-ordering of experience. [. . . ] Hence,
metaphysics becomes nothing else than a reﬂective analysis of the
powers and credence of reason” (Bitbol, 2010:59).
In this way, metaphysics is not seen as an objective description of an
independently existing reality, but as a way to determine the possibility of
knowledge. Given QM’s ‘new knowledge’, one might argue, we need meta-
physics to establish its conditions of possibility:
“One can thus adopt a pragmatic deﬁnition of the a priori instead
of a purely intellectual one (Pihlstrm, 2003). According to this deﬁ-
nition, an a priori form is no longer a universally necessary intellec-
tual condition for objective knowledge, but a pragmatic condition
locally and provisionally necessary for the determination of some
intersubjectively shared domain of experimental or technological
intervention” (Bitbol, 2010:62).
So Kant’s all-limiting a priori becomes, under this new perspective, a
contextual limitation to speciﬁc cases of knowledge. The task of a reﬂec-
tive metaphysics is not any more, then, to establish the limits of possible
bOf course, no a posteriori theory or evidence could refute a priori arguments. The point
is that now, there seems to be reason enough to believe that those limits set by Kant
are indeed to narrow.

290
knowledge for all human cognitive activity, but rather, to describe the a
priori elements that are at stake in each context.
“This being granted, a solution (or rather dissolution) of the mea-
surement problem boils down to ﬁnding a way to articulate the
indeﬁnite chain of relational statements of the quantum theory to
the absolute statements that are used in experimental work. An
articulation of this kind can easily be found, provided one realizes
that the latter absolute statements are in fact indexical; provided
one realizes that these statements are only ‘absolute’ relative to us,
to our scale, to the open community of experimenters to which we
belong (Rovelli, 1996 ; Bitbol, 2008). At this point, one is bound to
realize the ineliminability of situatedness from the apparently neu-
tral descriptions of quantum mechanics, and to accomplish thereby
the reﬂective move typical of Kant’s renewed deﬁnition of meta-
physics” (Bitbol, 2010:75).
So the measurement problem is ‘dissolved’ because we come to the un-
derstanding that the ‘absolute statements’ of QM are in fact relative state-
ments, the term of the relation being the community of scientists. The
‘pragmatic a priori’ means nothing else than the explicitation of the meta-
physical principles that underlie each experimental arrangement. Since each
of these is in fact produced by the community itself, all that remains is to
acknowledge this fact and consider QM as interpreted in our own terms:
“But in quantum physics, no event should be ascribed autonomy.
In this case, every event is tantamount to an observable value as-
cription, and an observable is only deﬁned relative to an eﬀective
instrumental possibility of assessing it. In quantum physics, the in-
strumental context is not only a way of getting access to an event;
it is a way of generating it” (Bitbol, 2010:78).
So, according to this pragmatic a priori, we are to settle ourselves with
no more than the conditions of possibility of a given situation, which coin-
cides with the fact that we determine ourselves the conditions for a given
experimental arrangement. There is nothing beyond that situation and the
so called ‘paradoxes’ of QM are dissolved inasmuch as they no longer con-
stitute a problem, if we accept that each measurement is situated:
“This represents a major diﬀerence with classical physics. In clas-
sical physics, the simple truth that we act as situated subjects
of knowledge could be bracketed, and a naturalized description of

291
the world including ourselves taken as objects could pretend to be
universal. Instead, quantum physics manifests the bounds of this
attitude of all-pervasive naturalization. It makes one realize that
the irreducible fact of situatedness is a necessary presupposition
of objective knowledge and cannot thus be objectiﬁed itself. This,
of course, was pointed out by many generations of transcenden-
tal philosophers, from Kant to Husserl and beyond; but quantum
physics leaves little room for those who want to ignore their lesson”
(Bitbol, 2008:212).
In my opinion, Bitbol’s so called transcendental interpretation of QM
boils down to a sophisticated defense of an instrumentalist position. To as-
cribe Husserl or Kant such a conception is as fair as believing we have come
any closer to an understanding of the problems involved in QM, because
we call “pragmatic a priori” the renounce of a realist program for QM.
Kant believed that the a priori concepts of pure understanding referred to
actual, existing, independent reality, by way of the empirical intuitions that
are synthesized under such concepts. Husserl believed that the constitution
of phenomena in natural attitude is guided by the world itself, and that in
ultimate stance, the question about how phenomena are constituted is the
question as to why the subjective constitution of phenomena is valid, in the
sense that it corresponds with the reality ‘out there’. The whole point of
the transcendental question into the conditions of possible experience is to
determine in a universal manner how it is that we know the world. There is
nothing transcendental, in any relevant sense, in the claim that we generate
an instrumental context each time we perform an experiment.
Pringe’s reading of Bohr’s interpretation is based on a solid understand-
ing of Kantian philosophy. My only criticism to it is that, while Kant’s
philosophy successfully grounds in transcendental conditions classical me-
chanics, it fails to bring us any closer to an understanding of QM and closes
the door for any project that seeks to really empower QM by acknowledg-
ing that the success of the theory should be taken seriously. We cannot
understand QM, know what the theory is talking about, if we try to force
it into old schemes, and settle with ‘symbolic analogies’. The question of
what does QM talk about, needs to be taken seriously, instead of trying to
explain why the question cannot be answered.
On the other hand, Bitbol’s position falls short of being transcendental
or realist in any relevant sense. If anything, it is an elaborate account of the
claim that QM needs no interpretation: because we are situated, we cannot
escape our situation, and therefore must settle with a contextual reading

292
of the results of QM, that denies them any kind of autonomy, validity and
even reality.
Let us now move into the second group of interpretations of QM, that
which wishes to ﬁnd the proper metaphysical principles for QM taking as
a starting point the successful formalism, and which wishes to do so not in
instrumentalist terms, neither in nave realist terms, but in the sort of real-
ism that takes into consideration the fact that scientiﬁc theories represent
reality, a reality that exists out there, but that we can only access through
a certain array of concepts. De Ronde calls this a “Representational Realist
Stance”, and deﬁnes it as follows:
“A representational realist account of a physical theory must be
capable of providing a physical (and metaphysical) representation
of reality in terms of a network of concepts which coherently relates
to the mathematical formalism of the theory and allows to make
predictions of a deﬁnite ﬁeld of phenomena (expressed through such
concepts)” (de Ronde, 2015:12-3).
We can take, then, the realist stance and the search for a new ontology
of QM as two fundamental desiderata in the quest of interpreting QM. If
we do so, we can better see what the problem is with interpretations that
still seek to keep the classical concepts for QM. The argument is simple: it
is the theory which tells us how to understand reality and what is and is
not out there. Physical theories are based on metaphysical principles which
are adopted without question and, of course, without possible scientiﬁc
justiﬁcation, since they are the basic principles upon which the concepts of
the scientiﬁc theory are developed. In the case of physical theory, de Ronde
argues, we are still trapped by Aristotle’s basic metaphysical principles:
the Principle of Existence, which determines that an entity, that which
exists, can only do so only in spatio-temporal way; the Principle of Non-
Contradiction, which forbids the attribution of contradictory properties to
anything that exists, since it assumes that reality is in itself of a non-
contradictory nature; and the Principle of Identity, which asserts that an
entity is identical to itself, and that its essential properties are maintained
through time. The basic assumption in Aristotelian metaphysics and later
in Newtonian, taken to the extreme, is that everything that is, all that
exists, can only do so for real, in actuality. In other words, there is only one
real existent mode of being: the mode of actuality:
“The general metaphysical principle implied by the understanding
of Newtonian mechanics, that ‘Actuality = Reality’, has become an

293
unquestionable dogma within physics. As a silent fundament all of
physics has been developed following the metaphysics of actuality.
And even though QM was born from a deep positivist deconstruc-
tion of the a priori classical Newtonian notions -and in this sense
the philosophy of Mach can be understood as the very precondi-
tion for the creation of both QM and relativity theory- it was very
soon reestablished within the limits of classical metaphysics itself.
The constrains of actuality have been unquestionably accepted by
philosophers of physics either in terms of hic et nunc observation
(empiricism and its variants) or as the mode of preexistence of
properties (realism). Both positions have remained captive of actu-
alism; trapped in the metaphysical net designed (through the PE,
PNC and PI) by Aristotle around the 5th century before Christ
and imposed by Newton in the 18th Century of our time. Actual
(preexistent) properties and actual (here and now) observations are
two sides of the same (metaphysical) coin” (de Ronde, 2015:20)
All attempts to understand QM have been precluded to do so, due to
the limitations imposed by such a metaphysic, “But what if QM cannot be
subsumed under the metaphysical equation imposed by Newtonian physics:
Actuality = Reality?” (de Ronde, 2015:21-2). If that is the case, and it is
the unquestioned presupposition that reality can only be in the mode of
actuality which has prevented a successful interpretation of QM, then a
new path is clear ahead:
“We need to develop a new way of understanding reality beyond
the ruling of actuality. To escape the ruling of actuality —both
in terms of hic et nunc observation and pre-existent properties—
means to abandon, on the one hand, the idea that we have a clear
deﬁnition of what is observed according to QM, and on the other
hand, the idea that actuality is the only possible way to conceive
and understand physical reality. Our strategy is to take as a stand-
point the formalism and its predictive power in order to develop
new physical concepts which relate coherently to the formalism
and can allow us to think about the physical meaning of quantum
phenomena.” (de Ronde, 2015:23-4).
The project then comes to light. To search for new concepts for QM
means to develop a new ontology. A new ontology is not the same as new
ontic categories. The task is not to expand the list of what there is, but to
rethink the principles under which we claim that something is or can be.

294
The principle that underlies all previous metaphysical endeavors and, there-
fore, all attempts to ﬁnd a proper conceptualization of QM, seems to be the
principle that equates reality to actuality. Two things are then needed to
carry on forward: a new ontology that does not reduce reality to what is ac-
tual, and a new theory of experience that allows us to understand how such
a domain of reality, which is not actual, could be thought of, experienced.
In other words, we need a new ontology and ‘a new’ phenomenology.
2. Meinong’s Theory of Objects
In this section I wish to oﬀer a schematic presentation of philosopher Alexius
von Meinong’s Gegestandtheorie or theory of objects. Based on the conclu-
sion of the previous section regarding the need for a “new ontology” that
would allow to fully grasp the principles of QM, I believe Meinong’s ontol-
ogy is a good place to start. Meinong is a disciple of Austrian philosopher
Franz Brentano, who can be considered to have founded a philosophical
school, the so called “School of Brentano”, of which I wish to recover one
main principle that appears clearly in Meinong’s philosophy and is relevant
for the present purposesc. The key point of Brentano, or at least of the
‘Brentanian philosophers’, is the correlation between the psychological and
the ontological.
Brentano’s reading of Aristotelian realism leads him to consider that
there is a parallelism between mental acts and their objects, one the one
hand, with objects ‘in themselves’, on the other. The crucial thesis is that
those objects as they are, unlike Kant’s nomena, are given to the mind and
can be fully known. Thus, philosophy is the inquiry both into the mental
acts and its correlates (psychology), and into objects and their nature as
such (ontology). In the words of Barry Smith:
“Descriptive psychology, as Brentano here understands it, seems to
consist precisely in a psychology that will issue in an ontologically
sophisticated theory of the diﬀerent types of parts, of such a sort
that the speciﬁcation of parts will be at the same time a speci-
ﬁcation of the ways in which these parts are ﬁtted together into
wholes” (Smith, 1994:47)
cFor a comprehensive reading on the philosophy of Brentano and its disciples, see: Smith,
Barry (1994), Austrian Philosophy. The Legacy of Franz Brentano, Open Court Pub-
lishing Company, Chicago and LaSalle, Illinois.

295
A psychological investigation, thus, would yield as results not only in-
formation regarding mental acts themselves and consciousness as such, but,
inasmuch as investigating the mental correlates of mental acts is investigat-
ing objects, it would also yield the ontological information of the objects
as they are.
Historically speaking, this parallelism found in Brentano’s theory, was
inherited by most (if not all) of his disciples, who later focused in diﬀerent
domains of inquiry. In the case of Meinong, the disciple who interests us
here, this was translated into a theory of objects which is, as we will see in
a moment, both a theory of objects as they can be thought of, as well as a
theory of objects as they are or can be:
“For where Brentano applied his descriptive realist method almost
exclusively in the area of psychology, his students extended it in
systematic ways to other domains of inquiry. We can in fact dis-
tinguish in their work three branches of what might be called ‘de-
scriptive ontology’: the ontology of things (or objects in the narrow
sense), the ontology of states of aﬀairs, and the ontology of values,
a tripartite division which ﬂows in an obvious way from Brentano’s
tripartite division of acts.
The ontology of things or objects arises when one turns from
the psychology of presentation to an investigation of the non-
psychological correlates of presenting acts. ‘Object’ is then under-
stood as: ‘possible correlate of presentation’ ” (Smith, 1994:52).
In order to make clear how this tripartite division follows obviously, let
me very brieﬂy present Brentano’s tripartite division of acts: all acts of
consciousness are of one of the following type: an act of presentation, in
which the object is simply present to the mind; an act of judging in which
the object’s existence is either aﬃrmed or negated; and an act of interest,
in which the object (both presented and usually judged to exist) is loved or
hatedd. It is in the ﬁrst simple sense in which Meinong’s theory of objects
can be ﬁrst understood: an object is that which can be thought of. As such,
it must have some sort of being. Which ‘type’ or mode of being it has, must
be ‘decided’ once we know more about that object we are thinking of.
This common principle of the School of Brentano is of crucial impor-
tance in the task to ‘ﬁnd new concepts’ for QM. As it has been shown in the
previous section, especially considering Pringe’s Kantian interpretation of
Bohr, an ontology that does not allow us to comprehend how the ontological
dCf. Smith (1994:42-4)

296
domain to which ‘quantum objects’ belong, can be experienced, would
not be a very fruitful enterprise. In this sense, the typical psychological-
ontological parallelism of the School of Brentano should prove interesting:
it is not only a theory about what there is (ontology) what we seek, but also
a theory about how what is can be thought of (psychology). The problem
with the Kantian approach is that it limits experience only to the domain of
what can be empirically intuited, thus closing both ontology and psychol-
ogy to very limited possibilities, and leaving everything else outside of the
‘scientiﬁc’ knowable world and relegated to mere metaphysical speculation.
It is important to make a distinction between an object of possible
experience and an object that plays a role in experience. From the Kantian
perspective, we only have experience of spatio-temporal objects, yet, there
are other objects, such as regulative objects or metaphysical objects, which
cannot be experienced, but perform a function in guiding or regulating
experience. Such objects are, for instance, God, the Soul or even Truth,
understood as a regulative idea. The problem arises with the idea that
certain objects that we claim, belong to nature, such as QM-objects would
be, are not objects of possible experience, and all they can do is regulate
or guide our experience of classical objects, which, in its turn, would tell us
something about the domain of QM. The accusation against Kant-Bohr-
Pringe is not that they ﬁnd no role for these objects which cannot be
experienced, the problem is the claim that there are, in physicial nature,
objects which cannot be experienced and should perform a function similar
to that which performs, for instance, the idea of God.
Let us now move into Meinong’s theory. A good starting point for the
present discussions is Meinong’s ‘prejudice in favor of the actual’. The idea
is that the interest of inquiry has always been so focused on what exists
in the sense in which spatio-temporal objects exists, that a whole domain
of objects of knowledge has been left aside, objects which are in their own
sense. A theory of objects, then, should focus not only in those objects that
exist in such a manner, but in all objects that have some sort of being:
“If we remember how metaphysics has always been conceived as
including in its subject matter the farthest and the nearest, the
greatest and the smallest alike, we may be surprised to be told
that metaphysics cannot take on such a task. It may sound strange
to hear that metaphysics is not universal enough for a science of
Objects, and hence cannot take on the task just formulated. For the
intentions of metaphysics have been universal (a fact which has so
often been disastrous to its success). Without doubt, metaphysics

297
has to do with everything that exists. However, the totality of what
exists, including what has existed and will exist, is inﬁnitely small
in comparison with the totality of the Objects of knowledge. This
fact easily goes unnoticed, probably because the lively interest in
reality which is part of our nature tends to favor that exaggera-
tion which ﬁnds the non-real a mere nothing — or, more precisely,
which ﬁnds the non-real to be something for which science has no
application at all or at least no application of any worth” (Meinong,
1981:77)
Meinong’s concern, then, can be said to exceed the preoccupation for
what is ‘real’ or what exists, or that which metaphysics encompasses.
Meinong is concerned with providing a theory that can account for all ob-
jects, i.e., everything that can be thought of. In this sense, there are more
objects than ‘things’. We can think of more things than those that actually
exist. And in a very relevant sense, we can have experience of more objects
than those that exist only in the form of spatio-temporal entitites.
We can approach Meinong’s theory of objects by comparing it with
Russell’s theory of deﬁnite descriptions. Historically speaking, Russell can
be considered the victor in a dispute between the two authors, regarding
how to consider the attribution of properties to non-entities:
“Meinong was concerned with the problem of explaining the appar-
ently correct attributions of properties to non-entities, especially in
intensional contexts, and the closely related problem of intension-
ality. It is often said that Russell’s theory of descriptions simply
solved the problem of ascriptions of properties to non-entities; and
this is usually supported by pointing to the Russellian analysis of
non-existence claims as claims about entities” (Routley & Routley,
1973:225).
Let us take the example of Pegasus and the corresponding statement
“Pegasus does not exist”. According to Russell, since logic and hence all
predication is always extensional, no statement can correctly be predicated
of a logical subject that does not exist. So, the statement about Pegasus
should be correctly paraphrased into “The class of existing items does not
include Pegasus”. We can see here how the second statement does not have
Pegasus as its logical subject, but the set of existing things. Given that Pe-
gasus does not exist, I cannot correctly attribute it with any property at all,
not even non-existence. Now, the consequence of the Russellian approach
is that I cannot predicate anything at all of a non-existing entity. Thus,

298
the statement “Pegasus is a winged horse”, given how there is no Pegasus,
must be considered false, the same as the statement “Pegasus is identical
to Pegasus”. This ‘solution’ oﬀered by Russell and accepted by the analytic
tradition of philosophy of language has as a consequence the impossibility
of predicating of anything that does not exist. Now, this logical maneuver
carried out by Russell can, of course, be considered legitimate and suiting
very speciﬁc purposes. It goes along great, for example, with a positivist
ontology as the one assumed nowadays, but it falls short for pretty much
any other purpose:
“While such a ’solution’ to the problem of the attribution of prop-
erties to non-entities might be satisfactory for a few limited pur-
poses, for many purposes it is not. Russell’s theory does not even
begin to provide a solution to the main problems which concerned
Meinong, viz. that of obtaining a satisfactory account and expla-
nation of truth (or factuality) in intensional discourse, and of the
logical behaviour of subjects, descriptions and quantiﬁed expres-
sions in intensional discourse, of explaining the apparent truth of
some statements about non-entities and the peculiarity or falsity
of others, and of obtaining a non-Platonistic account of mathemat-
ics.” (Routley & Routley, 1973:226)
Meinong’s solution to this problem runs in a very diﬀerent line. Rather
than denying the possibility of attributing properties to non-entities,
Meinong proposes quite a diﬀerent principle to start from, the so called
“principle of independence of being-so (Sosein) from being (Sein)” and it
states as follows: “The Object is by nature indiﬀerent to being, although
at least one of its two Objectives of being, the Object’s being or non-being,
subsist” (Meinong, 1960: 82 and 86 respectively). We can know an object,
we can think about it, predicate of it, without yet knowing whether or not
the object exists. Things are said to exist when they do so in space-time.
In this sense, all of mathematics is able to predicate from objects that do
not exist.
An object is a simple unit; it can be a part of an objective, which is
Meinong’s term for what is usually known as a state of aﬀairs, a complex
‘situation’. For example, the golden mountain is an object, “the golden
mountain is made of gold” is an objective. The golden mountain does not
exist, yet the just stated objective subsists. “Why doesn’t the golden moun-
tain exist?”, one might ask. And Meinong’s answer would be “because it’s
made of gold and there are no such things as golden mountains”. Yet we only

299
know that golden mountains do not exist, because we understand what a
golden mountain is, we can grasp the object ‘golden mountain’: “If I should
be able to judge that a certain Object is not, then I appear to have had to
grasp the Object in some way beforehand, in order to say anything about
its not-being, or more precisely, in order to aﬃrm or deny the ascription of
non being to the Object” (Meinong, 1960:84).
Now, regarding certain other objects, such as the round square, we can-
not attribute them with any kind of being. They are, in fact, Aussersein
or outside being. Yet, for Meinong, unlike for Russell, round squares are
indeed round and square, hence we know they are impossible objects. The
objective “round squares are impossible ﬁgures” subsists. This objective has
a being so, inasmuch as it subsists, even if the object, the round square,
must be attributed with not-being. Compare this with Russell, for whom
round squares are neither round nor square, since the class of existing items
does not comprise such entities, nothing can be predicated of them with
truth.
We can see the elements of Meinong’s ontology in the following chart:
The most important consequence of Meinong’s theory of objects, at
least for our present purposes, is that it allows to know and describe ob-
jects without a prior commitment to its existence. The domain of being
is expanded beyond existence, allowing for science to inquire into objects
that do not exist in the way of spatio-temporal things, but rather have a
diﬀerent kind of being, they subsist:
“The ﬁrst distinctive thesis of Meinong’s theory is that very many
objects do not exist in any way at all. Nevertheless we can make

300
true statements in which such objects occur as proper subjects.
Since the term ’object’ carries no existential commitment, the stan-
dard attempt to represent Meinong’s theory as a Platonistic theory
or as a levels-of-existence theory is, on the face of it, seriously mis-
taken in the case of ground-ﬂoor objects at least. Thus one very
important feature which Meinong’s theory shares with any thor-
oughgoing and genuinely non-existential logic is the rejection of the
Ontological Assumption (OA), the view embodied in all standard
modern logical theories and most empiricist theories (e.g. Hume),
that one cannot make true statements about what does not exist.
Alternatively, the OA is the thesis that a non-entity cannot be the
proper subject of a true statement (where the proper subject con-
trasts with the apparent subject which is eliminated under analysis
into canonical form). The OA was explicitly rejected in Meinong’s
Independence Thesis (IT) stating the independence of Sosein from
Sein: according to the thesis an item’s having properties does not
imply its existence” (Routley & Routley, 1973:227).
I’d like to oﬀer a brief presentation of two more concepts that are central
to Meinong’s theory of object and could prove useful in the following sec-
tion. The ﬁrst one is the concept of incomplete object. A complete object is,
paradigmatically, a thing, a spatio-temporal entity. They are complete both
in the ontological and gnoseological senses. An object is complete when it is
completely determined in all its properties regarding all its relations with
all other objects. In other words, a complete object is the one that has
a determined answered for all questions posed in terms of the law of the
excluded middle. From the gnoseological side, a complete object is that of
which I can know all is properties, all its determinations. This glass of water
next to me, for instance, is a complete object. When I ask “is it transpar-
ent?” I answer “yes”, “is it 10cm tall?”, yes. . . and so on. The object is
determined in every sense, even if I do not know all of its properties, in
principle I could, or if I don’t it is due to empirical reasons and not due to
a natural impediment of the object.
An incomplete object, on the other hand, is that which is not determined
regarding all of its properties. This means, not only that one does not know
these attributes, but that indeed the object is, in an ontological sense,
undetermined. Excluded middle does not apply to it. For example, the
abstract circle described by an Euclidean geometry is not determined as to
its size, its color, its texture, its location, etc. It is not that these properties
are unknown, they are simply not in the object. I could not know, for

301
example, that the circle’s area is π.r2, yet the object is determined in
this respect, whereas the color of the circle is not something unknown, but
undetermined. It is just a property that the abstract geometrical circle does
not possess.
An object that is either determined or undetermined will also be
(un)determined in its mode of being:
“An object which is completely determined in its Being-So (So-
sein), is also completely determined in its mode of Being (Sein).
Correspondingly that object which is incompletely determined in
its Being-So, is also incompletely determined in its Being. Of the
incomplete object A, which is not determined as to its Being, it
cannot be stated ‘A is’ or ‘A is not’. It is still possible that it
is and that it is not. Here again, possibility is a third alternative
to the two contradictory factuality determinations and, moreover,
something deﬁnitely positive. The indeterminateness of incomplete
objects with respect to factuality of Being and Being-So is wholly
compatible with their determinateness as to the possibility of Be-
ing and Being-So. Thus, though factuality cannot be attributed to
incomplete objects, possibility may. The freedom of the incomplete
objects from the law of the excluded middle enables them to be the
‘carriers’ (Trger) of ‘pure possibilities”’ (Michaelis, 1942:401).
Which brings us to the second and last concept I wish to introduce,
that is, the concept of possibility. “Possibility is a quantitative property
which can be intensiﬁed up to the limit of factuality” (Michaelis, 1942:397),
meaning that possibility can be thought of as a line that goes from impos-
sibility to factuality/actuality. Possibility is predicated not upon objects
themselves, but upon objectives; one should not say “A is (not) possible”,
but “it is (not) possible that A”. Then, in one extreme of the possibility
line, we would ﬁnd all the objectives that have as components completely
undetermined objects, contradictory objects such as the round square. In
‘the middle’ of the line, we would ﬁnd incomplete objects, such as mathe-
matical entities or objects that are probabilistic in their own nature; until
the other extreme of the line, where determined, complete objects, that is,
spatio-temporal things, are found.
To conclude this section, the aim of which was no other than to oﬀer
a schematic presentation of some of the rudiments of Meinong’s ontology
in the hope they can be applied to some of the issues of QM in the fol-
lowing section, we can state that Meinong’s theory of objects takes as a

302
starting point the concept of object, that what can be thought of, and frees
objects from the restraint of existence in the task of knowledge; meaning
that there is a realm of being that goes beyond existence/actuality that can
be scientiﬁcally known. Objectives can be composed both by real existing
objects or inexistent objects. In both cases we say of objectives that they
subsist. Finally, objects can be either complete or incomplete in the strong
ontological sense, and depending on this, we will ﬁnd them in one place or
another of the possibility line, which again, is an ontological possibility and
not an epistemic one.
3. A Meinongian ontology for QM
In this section I would like to apply some of the Meinongian concepts pre-
sented in the previous section, to some of the main interpretative problems
in QM. In particular, I will address quantum superpositions.
Quantum superpositions, also known in the literature as “Schr¨odinger’s
cats” raise a series of diﬃculties that concern not only the discussions in
foundations of QM, but also the theory itself. The problem regarding su-
perpositions, according to (da Costa & de Ronde, 2013), is that they seem
to violate the principle of non-contradiction when establishing mutually ex-
clusive terms as in for example α| ↑⟩+ β| ↓⟩. Moreover, a further problem
appears at the time of determining what objective physical process is re-
sponsible for the measurement outcome of only one of the terms; this is
known as the “measurement problem”. These problems are yet without an
accepted solution and, according to de Ronde, the way to solve them lies
not within the insistence on the ‘measurement problem’, on trying to ﬁnd
a way to classically justify the measurement outcomes, which are always
taken as a starting, legitimizing point, but rather, by looking into the su-
perpositions themselves. All attempts are guided by the will to understand
QM in classical terms, by ignoring that there are, in fact, superpositions
as described by the quantum formalism, but also being used for the most
diverse technological applicationse.
This misguided approach rests, among others, in one metaphysical sup-
position that is operating in every attempt to interpret QM, that is, that
reality equals actuality. In other words, that something can only be consid-
ered as real, as ‘truly existent’, with ontological density, if and only if that
something is in the mode of the actual. Actual here must be understood as
eSee de Ronde 2015B, specially 25-6.

303
a metaphysical mode of being, that in which the object in question is com-
pletely determined in every respect, as it is the case of physical bodies in
classical Newtonian physics. But, “if we are willing to discuss the possibility
that ‘Quantum Physical Reality Actuality’, then there is plenty of space
to interpret and represent quantum superpositions in terms of (non-actual)
physical reality” (de Ronde, 2015B:3). What would it mean for ‘quantum
physical reality’ to be diﬀerent from actuality?
An answer can be sought in Meinong’s ontology, as I have presented
it in the previous section. To begin with, we can consider any deﬁnition
of a quantum superposition, as the one quoted above, to be a subsisting
objective in the Meinongian sense. We mean by this two things. First, that
the state of superposition as such should not be thought of as an object,
but as an objective. Remember that objectives are, for Meinong, states of
aﬀairs, complex objects, made of objects. Hence, in α| ↑⟩+β| ↓⟩we ﬁnd the
terms | ↑⟩and | ↓⟩as being the objects that conform the whole objective.
Second, by saying that the entire objective subsists, we are saying that it
has a speciﬁc mode of being, that is not the mode of being of existent actual
things, and we are also saying, that we need not worry (yet) about whether
or not the objects that compose this objective, the terms in the equation,
exist or not; because, as explained in the previous section, judgments about
existence are independent of other judgments we can make about objectives.
Superpositions are contradictory only when thought from the perspec-
tive of what is actual. But we could understand the wave function, a
complex objective which has several bases, some of which are states of
superpositions, as being an incomplete object. Now, incomplete objects are
undetermined not only in a subjective sense, in the sense that we don’t
know certain properties it has, but also in an ontological sense, that is, in-
complete objects are indeed undetermined regarding many of its properties.
This indetermination is only a problem, again, if we want the wave func-
tion to be a complete object and more precisely a spatio-temporal thing
that exists in the same sense as Newtonian particles do. But are we not, in
this way, calling for unnecessary problems? Why insist in a metaphysical
principle, which as such cannot be demonstrated, if it turns out to make
any coherent interpretation impossible?
According to Meinong possibility is a line that goes from impossibility
to actuality. What if the domain that QM describes does not belong to the
realm of actuality, but to that of pure possibility?:

304
A ﬁrst consequence of this way of interpreting the problem would be
that: the superpositions problems should be investigated separately from
the measurement problem. By this I mean, one issue is understanding mea-
surement in the sense of ‘actualization’ of quantum states, that is, one issue
is the relation there is between the domain of reality described by QM and
how that domain becomes actual in a measurement. But the wave func-
tion, as described by QM, should constitute an independent and legitimate
problem for quantum theory, one that should be understood in terms of
possibility, rather than actuality. Thinking of as an incomplete object al-
lows to understand that there is nothing contradictory in the expression
of a superposition state. At the same time, if ‘real’, in the sense of strong
being, in the sense of ‘what really is’, is separated from what is actual, al-
lowing to enlarge the domain of relevant being beyond actuality, then, the
wave function, understood as an incomplete object, can be said to be in its
own right, even if it doesn’t exist in the sense of the actual. This being of
the wave function, now in the mode of possibility rather than actuality, is
from a Meinongian perspective a legitimate domain of being, in the relevant
sense that it is a domain susceptible of scientiﬁc inquiry.
Following this line of thought, the primordial question should no longer
be “how does nature decide the result of a measurement given a superpo-
sition?”, but, rather, “what is a superposition and what can it do besides

305
being actualized in a measurement?” It is not that the process of actualiza-
tion through measurement were irrelevant or unimportant for QM, but it
seems that some previous knowledge is necessary in order to tackle it. We
do not yet fully understand what a superposition is, but we do have the
formalism, and also the possibility of grounding this understanding in a dif-
ferent ontology from the one of classical Newtonian mechanics. By taking
the realm of possibility seriously, and the independence of being-so from
being, I believe, we can start seeking for new physical concepts that allow
the proper comprehension.
We can seek for these concepts now, not in terms of complete deter-
mined actual classical objects, but with a diﬀerent ontology. We can think
of superpositions as incomplete objects. This change allows superpositions
to bear “mutually contradictory properties” without collapsing understand-
ing. The relevant question would be now, not how one term of the equation
appears instead of the other in a measurement outcome, but, for instance,
how do diﬀerent superposition states, none of them actualized, become ‘en-
tangled’ and interact with one another? If this occurs independently of a
measurement process, as it seems to be the case, then we need to begin
to understand that these curious states have objective physical properties
that are entirely independent of actuality.
Superpositions and the wave function must be understood in their own
right. This means we need to ﬁnd the metaphysical principles that allow for
their comprehension regardless of the domain of actuality. In this sense, de
Ronde proposes to replace the classical Aristotelian metaphysical principles
upon which classical physics are based, for the principles that spring from
the quantum theory: instead of the Aristotelian principles of Existence (that
being is being is the mode of the Aristotelian entity, as a space-time unity,
a complete object in the Meinongian sense); of non-contradiction, and of
identity (that is, the identity of an entity through time); instead of said
principles, “This realm [the realm of QM] is deﬁned by the principles of
indetermination, superposition and diﬀerence” (de Ronde, 2015:26). This
means that to understand what constitutes a quantum object; we need to
deﬁne it according to the principles proper to the domain it belongs, the
domain of QM, the domain of possibility; and not in terms of actuality.
4. Conclusions
I have argued in favor of a realist approach to the problem of the interpre-
tation of QM and, following that line, I have oﬀered some arguments as to
why such problem should be sought to be solved from a perspective that

306
prioritizes the quantum formalism and the elements proper of the theory
that have led to so much experimental and technological success, over those
orthodox interpretations that seek to maintain all physical understanding
within the limits of classical physics. Having accepted then the need for new
ontological concepts that could allow for such an interpretation, I have of-
fered a brief presentation of Meinong’s theory of objects. In particular, the
concepts of subsistence, possibility and incomplete objects, open, I believe,
the opportunity to consider that the wave function, as a sort of ‘quantum
object’, belongs to a diﬀerent mode of being than that of actuality. I do not
claim to have found here any revolutionary results, but only to have oﬀered
some basic ontological considerations in order to guide the discussion in the
foundations of QM. In this sense, I believe that Meinong’s ontology allows
for a scientiﬁc comprehension of objects that do not exist in the mode of the
actual, and that these objects could be the objects of QM. If this is true,
the only result I have to oﬀer is an indication as to how to proceed in the
quest to comprehend quantum reality: that is, not in its constant reference
to measurements and actuality, but as a legitimate domain in itself.
Acknowledgements
I’d like to thank Christian de Ronde and Hernan Pringe for their careful
reading of the manuscript and the valuable comments and insights they
oﬀered.
References
1. Bitbol, M. (2008), Consciousness, Situations, and the Measurement Problem
of Quantum Mechanics, NeuroQuantology, Vol. 6, Issue 3, pp. 203-213.
2. Bitbol, M. (2010), Reﬂective Metaphysics: Understanding Quantum Mechan-
ics from a Kantian Standpoint, Philosophica N83, pp 53-83.
3. De Ronde, C. (2011), The Contextual and Modal Character of Quantum Me-
chanics: A Formal and Philosophical Analysis in the Foundations of Physics,
Print Partners Ipskamp, Enschede.
4. De Ronde, C. (2015A), Probabilistic Knowledge as Objective Knowledge in
Quantum Mechanics: Potential Powers Instead of Actual Properties.
5. De Ronde, C. (2015B), Quantum Superpositions Do Exist! But ‘Quantum
Physical Reality Actuality’ (Reply to Dieks and Griﬃths).
6. Fuchs, C. and Peres, A. (2000), Quantum theory needs no ‘interpretation’,
Physics Today, 53, 70.
7. Griﬃths, R. (2011), A Consistent Quantum Ontology.
8. Lurat, F. (2007), Understanding Quantum Mechanics, en Rediscovering Phe-
nomenology, Boi, L., Kerszberg, P. & Patras, F. (eds), Springer, Dodrecht.

307
9. Meinong, A. (1960), Theory of Objects, in Realism and the Background of
Phenomenology, ed. Chisholm, R., Free Press.
10. Michaelis, A. (1942), The Conception of Possibility in Meinong’s ”Gegen-
standstheorie”, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, Vol. 2, No. 3,
pp. 394-403.
11. Pringe, H. (2012), La ﬁlosofa trascendental y la interpretacin de Bohr de la
teora cuntica, scienti zudia, So Paulo, v. 10, n. 1, p. 179-94.
12. Routley, R. & Routley V. (1972), Rehabilitating Meinong’s Theory of Objects,
Revue Internationale de Philosophie, Vol. 27, No. 104/105 (2/3), MEINONG
(1973), pp. 224-254.
13. Russell, B. (1905), On Denoting, Mind, New Series, Vol. 14, No. 56,
pp. 479-493.
14. Smith, Barry (1994), Austrian philosophy. The legacy of Franz Brentano,
Open Court Publishing Company, Chicago and LaSalle, Illinois.

308
ENTANGLEMENT OF FORMATION
FOR WERNER STATES AND ISOTROPIC STATES
VIA LOGICAL GATES
Cesarino Bertini
Dipartimento di Scienze aziendali, economiche e metodi quantitativi
Universit`a di Bergamo, Via dei Caniana 2, I-24127 Bergamo, Italy.
E-mail: cesarino. bertini@ unibg. it
Maria Luisa Dalla Chiara
Dipartimento di Lettere e Filosoﬁa, Universit`a di Firenze
Via Bolognese 52, I-50139 Firenze, Italy.
E-mail: dallachiara@ unifi. it
Roberto Leporini
Dipartimento di Ingegneria Gestionale, dell’Informazione e della Produzione,
Universit`a di Bergamo, viale Marconi 5, I-24044 Dalmine (BG), Italy.
E-mail: roberto. leporini@ unibg. it
To what extent is a logical characterization of entanglement possible? We in-
vestigate some correlations that hold between the concept of entanglement
of formation for Werner states and for isotropic states and the probabilistic
behavior of some quantum logical gates.
Keywords: Entanglement; quantum logics.
1. Introduction
Entanglement represents a characteristic feature of quantum theory, of-
ten described as “puzzling and mysterious”. The ﬁrst explicit analysis of
this concept is due to Schr¨odinger, who proposed the German term “Ver-
sch¨arfung”, later translated into English as “entanglement”.
How can we describe “entangled quantum objects” from an intuitive
point of view? Let us refer to a simple paradigmatic case. We are concerned
with a composite physical system S consisting of two subsystems S1 and
S2 (say, a two-electron system). The observer has a maximal information
about S: a pure state, which is identiﬁed with a unit vector |ψ⟩of a Hilbert

309
space HS (representing the “mathematical environment” for S). What can
be said about the states of the two subsystems? Due to the form of |ψ⟩and
to the quantum-theoretic rules that concern the mathematical description
of composite systems, such states cannot be pure: they are represented by
two identical mixed states (or mixtures), which codify a “maximal degree
of uncertainty”. A typical possible form of |ψ⟩is the following Bell-state:
|ψ⟩=
1
√
2
(|0, 0⟩+ |1, 1⟩),
which lives in the space HS = C2 ⊗C2 (the tensor product of the
space C2 with itself), whose canonical basis consists of the four vectors
|0, 0⟩, |0, 1⟩, |1, 0⟩, |1, 1⟩.
This gives rise to the following physical interpretation: the global system
S might satisfy the properties that are certain either for the state |0, 0⟩or for
the state |1, 1⟩with probability-value 1
2. At the same time, |ψ⟩determines
that the state of both subsystems (S1 and S2) is the mixed state 1
2I (where
I is the identity operator of C2.) Although it is not determined whether the
state of the global system S is |0, 0⟩or |1, 1⟩, the two subsystems S1 and
S2 can be described as “entangled”, because in both possible cases they
would satisfy the same properties, turning out to be “indistinguishable”.
As a consequence, any measurement performed by an observer either on
system S1 or on system S2 would instantaneously transform the potential
properties of both subsystems into actual properties (by the collapse of the
wave function-principle.)
The celebrated “Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox”(EPR) is based on
a similar physical situation. As is well known, what mainly worried Ein-
stein was the possibility of “non-local eﬀects”: the subjective decision of an
observer (who may choose among diﬀerent incompatible observables to be
measured on the system S1) seems to determine the instantaneous emer-
gence of an actual property for the system S2, which might be very “far”
from S1 (possibly inaccessible by means of a light-signal).
Strangely enough, the critical concept of entanglement did not play a
relevant role in the foundational debate inspired by the “quantum logical
approaches to quantum theory” (after the pioneering work of Birkhoﬀand
von Neumann). The interest for abstract investigations about entanglement
emerged again during the last three decades in the framework of the new
quantum-computation theories, where the theoretic analysis has often in-
teracted with the experimental research about quantum non-locality. In this
context, the characteristic EPR-situations (no longer described as myste-
rious and potentially paradoxical) have been used as a powerful resource,

310
even from a technological point of view (for instance, in the applications to
teleportation-phenomena and to quantum cryptography).
The question “to what extent is a logical characterization of entangle-
ment possible?” can be naturally discussed in the framework of new forms
of quantum logic that have been suggested by the theory of quantum com-
putation ([1], [2]). The basic semantic idea of these logics (called quantum
computational logics) can be sketched as follows. Linguistic formulas are
supposed to describe pieces of quantum information, mathematically rep-
resented as possible states of quantum objects that can store a given in-
formation; while the logical connectives are interpreted as quantum-logical
gates that process quantum information. Accordingly, any formula of the
quantum computational language can be regarded as a synthetic logical
description of a quantum circuit.
In [4] we have shown how a logical characterization of entanglement
(for bipartite systems) is possible by using a somewhat sophisticated lan-
guage that is an extension of the standard quantum computational language
(whose logical connectives are interpreted as special examples of unitary
operators). The use of unitary gates is, instead, suﬃcient for a logical char-
acterization of entanglement in the case of some special classes of quantum
states (in particular, the Werner states and the isotropic states). In this
article we will generalize some results proved in [3].
2. States, entanglement and entanglement-measures
Let us ﬁrst recall some basic deﬁnitions. The general mathematical envi-
ronment for quantum computation is the Hilbert space
H(n) := C2 ⊗. . . ⊗C2



n−times
(the n-fold tensor product of the space C2). Any piece of quantum informa-
tion is represented by a density operator ρ of a space H(n). A quregister (or
quregister-state) is represented by a unit-vector |ψ⟩(which is a pure state)
of a space H(n) or, equivalently, by the corresponding density operator P|ψ⟩
(the projection-operator that projects over the closed subspace determined
by |ψ⟩). A register (which represents a certain piece of information) is an
element |x1, . . . , xn⟩of the canonical orthonormal basis of a space H(n)
(where xi ∈{0, 1}). The registers |0⟩and |1⟩represent the two classical
bits.

311
Any density operator ρ can be represented as a mixture of pure states
ρ =

i
wiP|ψ⟩i (with

i
wi = 1).
Generally such representation is not unique. A density operator ρ that
cannot be represented as a projection P|ψ⟩is called a proper mixture.
Following a standard convention, we assume that the bit |1⟩represents
the truth-value Truth, while bit |0⟩represents the truth-value Falsity. On
this basis, we can identify, in each space H(n), two special projection-
operators P(n)
1
and P(n)
0
that represent, respectively, the truth-property
and the falsity-property. The truth-property P(n)
1
is the projection-operator
that projects over the closed subspace spanned by the set of all registers
|x1, . . . , xn−1, 1⟩; while the falsity-property P(n)
0
is the projection-operator
that projects over the closed subspace spanned by the set of all registers
|x1, . . . , xn−1, 0⟩. In this way, truth and falsity are dealt with as mathemati-
cal representatives of possible physical properties. Accordingly, by applying
the Born-rule, one can naturally deﬁne the probability-value p(ρ) of any
density operator ρ of H(n) as follows:
p(ρ) := tr(P(n)
1 ρ), where tr is the trace-functional.
Hence, p(ρ) represents the probability that the information ρ is true.
The concept of entanglement can be deﬁned both for pure and for mixed
states. Consider the product-space
H(m+n) = H(m) ⊗H(n).
Any density operator ρ of H(m+n) represents a possible state for a compos-
ite physical system S = S1 + S2 (consisting of two subsystems). According
to the quantum formalism, ρ determines the two reduced states Red(1)
[m,n](ρ)
and Red(2)
[m,n](ρ) that represent the states of S1 and of S2 (in the context
ρ). In such a case, we say that ρ is a bipartite state with respect to the de-
composition (m, n). It may happen that ρ is a pure state, while Red(1)
[m,n](ρ)
and Red(2)
[m,n](ρ) are proper mixtures. In this case the information about
the whole system is more precise than the pieces of information about its
parts. As an example, consider the following density operator:
ρ = P
1
√
2 (|0,0⟩+|1,1⟩)
(the projection that projects over the closed subspace spanned by the vector
1
√
2(|0, 0⟩+ |1, 1⟩)).

312
We have:
Red(1)
[1,1](ρ) = Red(2)
[1,1](ρ) = 1
2I.
Deﬁnition 2.1. (Factorizability, separability and entanglement)
Let ρ be a bipartite state of H(m+n) (with respect to the decomposition
(m, n)).
1) ρ is called a (bipartite) factorized state of H(m+n) iﬀρ = ρ1 ⊗ρ2, where
ρ1 and ρ2 are density operators of H(m) and H(n), respectively;
2) ρ is called a (bipartite) separable state of H(m+n) iﬀρ = 
i wiρi,
where each ρi is a bipartite factorized state of H(m+n), wi ∈[0, 1] and

i wi = 1;
3) ρ is called a (bipartite) entangled state of H(m+n) iﬀρ is not separable.
Accordingly, a pure state is entangled iﬀit is non-factorizable. Proper
mixtures, instead, may be non-factorizable, separable (and, hence, non-
entangled). An example is represented by the following proper mixture:
ρ = 1
2P|0,0⟩+ 1
2P|1,1⟩
Deﬁnition 2.2. (Maximally entangled states and maximally mixed states)
1) A pure bipartite state ρ of H(m+n) is called maximally entangled iﬀ
Red(1)
[m,n] =
1
2m I(m) or Red(2)
[m,n] =
1
2n I(n), where I(m) and I(n) are the
identity operators of the spaces H(m) and H(n), respectively.
2) A state ρ of H(m+n) is called a maximally mixed state of H(m+n) iﬀ
ρ =
1
2(m+n) I(m+n).
How to measure the “entanglement-degree” of a given state? Diﬀerent
deﬁnitions for the concept of entanglement-measure, which quantify diﬀer-
ent aspects of entanglement, have been proposed in the literature ([5,6]).
Generally it is required that any notion of normalized entanglement-measure
(EM) satisﬁes the following minimal conditions for any density operator ρ:
(1) EM(ρ) ∈[0, 1];
(2) EM(ρ) = 0, if ρ is separable;
(3) EM(ρ) = 1, if ρ is a maximally entangled pure state;
(4) EM(ρ) is invariant under locally unitary maps. This means that:
EM(ρ) = EM((U (m)
1
⊗U (n)
2
)ρ(U (m)
1
⊗U (n)
2
)†), for any unitary op-
erators U (m)
1
of H(m) and U (n)
2
of H(n) (where (U (m)
1
⊗U (n)
2
)† is the
adjoint of U (m)
1
⊗U (n)
2
).

313
One of the most interesting notions of entanglement-measure is the con-
cept of entanglement of formation, which is deﬁned in terms of the notion
of von Neumann-entropy.
Deﬁnition 2.3. (The von Neumann-entropy)
Let ρ be a density operator of the space H(n). The von Neumann-entropy
of ρ is deﬁned as follows:
ES(ρ) = −

i
λi ln λi,
where λi are the eigenvalues of ρ.
Deﬁnition 2.4. (The entanglement of formation)
Let ρ be a bipartite state of the space H(m+n)). The entanglement of for-
mation of ρ is deﬁned as follows:
EF (ρ) = inf

i
wiES(Red(j)
[m,n](P|ψi⟩)) : ρ =

i
wiP|ψi⟩

,
where j ∈{1, 2}.
Apparently, the number EF (ρ) is determined by the set of all values of the
von Neumann-entropy of the two pure reduced states that correspond to
all possible representations of ρ as a mixture of pure states.
One can easily show that EF (ρ) satisﬁes the minimal conditions that
are required for all concepts of normalized entanglement-measure.
3. Quantum logical gates and entanglement-measures
The question “to what extent is a logical characterization of entanglement
possible?” is deeply connected with the probabilistic behavior of quantum
logical gates (brieﬂy, gates), the quantum operations that process quantum
information. It seems reasonable to assume that any logical characteriza-
tion of entanglement should provide a deﬁnition for an accepted notion of
entanglement-measure (say, the concept of entanglement of formation) in
terms of the probabilistic behavior of some gates.
In this perspective, we will ﬁrst recall the deﬁnition of some basic gates
that play an important role both from the computational and from the log-
ical point of view. One is dealing with special examples of unitary operators
that transform quregisters into quregisters (in a reversible way).

314
Deﬁnition 3.1. (The negation)
For any n ≥1, the negation (deﬁned on H(n)) is the linear operator NOT(n)
such that, for every element |x1, . . . , xn⟩of the canonical basis,
NOT(n)|x1, . . . , xn⟩= |x1, . . . , xn−1⟩⊗|1 −xn⟩.
In particular, we obtain:
NOT(1)|0⟩= |1⟩;
NOT(1)|1⟩= |0⟩,
according to the classical truth-table of negation.
Deﬁnition 3.2. (The Toﬀoli-gate)
For any m, n, p ≥1, the Toﬀoli-gate (deﬁned on H(m+n+p)) is the linear
operator T(m,n,p) such that, for every element |x1, . . . , xm⟩⊗|y1, . . . , yn⟩⊗
|z1, . . . , zp⟩of the canonical basis,
T(m,n,p)|x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yn, z1, . . . , zp⟩
= |x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yn, z1, . . . , zp−1⟩⊗|xmyn 	+zp⟩,
where 	+ represents the addition modulo 2.
Deﬁnition 3.3. (The XOR-gate)
For any m, n ≥1, the XOR-gate (deﬁned on H(m+n)) is the linear opera-
tor XOR(m,n) such that, for every element |x1, . . . , xm⟩⊗|y1, . . . , yn⟩of the
canonical basis,
XOR(m,n)|x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yn⟩= |x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yn−1⟩⊗|xm 	+yn⟩.
Deﬁnition 3.4. (The Hadamard-gate)
For any n ≥1, the Hadamard-gate (deﬁned on H(n)) is the linear operator
√
I
(n) such that for every element |x1, . . . , xn⟩of the canonical basis:
√
I
(n)|x1, . . . , xn⟩= |x1, . . . , xn−1⟩⊗1
√
2 ((−1)xn|xn⟩+ |1 −xn⟩) .
In particular we obtain:
√
I
(1)|0⟩=
1
√
2(|0⟩+ |1⟩);
√
I
(1)|1⟩=
1
√
2(|0⟩−|1⟩).
Hence,
√
I
(1) transforms bits into genuine qubits.

315
Deﬁnition 3.5. (The square root of NOT)
For any n ≥1, the square root of NOT (deﬁned on H(n)) is the linear operator
√
NOT
(n) such that for every element |x1, . . . , xn⟩of the canonical basis:
√
NOT
(n)|x1, . . . , xn⟩= |x1, . . . , xn−1⟩⊗

1 −i
2
|xn⟩+ 1 + i
2
|1 −xn⟩

,
where i = √−1.
Deﬁnition 3.6. (The swap-gate)
For any m, n ≥1, the swap-gate (deﬁned on H(m,n)) is the linear opera-
tor SW(m,n) such that, for every element |x1, . . . , xm⟩⊗|y1, . . . , yn⟩of the
canonical basis,
SW(m,n)|x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yn⟩= |y1, . . . , yn, x1, . . . , xm⟩.
All gates can be canonically extended to the set of all density operators.
Let G be any gate deﬁned on H(n). The corresponding density-operator gate
(also called unitary quantum operation) DG is deﬁned as follows for any
density operator ρ of H(n):
DGρ = G ρ G† (where G† is the adjoint of G).
For the sake of simplicity, also the operations DG will be brieﬂy called gates.
The Toﬀoli-gate has a special logical interest, since it allows us to deﬁne
a conjunction that behaves according to classical logic, whenever it is ap-
plied to certain pieces of information (bits and registers). At the same time
this conjunction may have some deeply anti-classical features when the in-
puts are uncertain pieces of quantum information. The most peculiar prop-
erty is represented by a holistic behavior: generally the conjunction deﬁned
on a global piece of quantum information (represented by a given density
operator) cannot be described as a function of its separate parts. This is the
reason why the quantum computational conjunction is called “holistic”.
Deﬁnition 3.7. (The holistic conjunction)
For any m, n ≥1 and for any density operator ρ of H(m+n)), the holistic
conjunction AND(m,n) is deﬁned as follows:
AND(m,n)(ρ) =
DT(m,n,1)(ρ ⊗P (1)
0
).
Clearly, the falsity-property P (1)
0
plays, in this deﬁnition, the role of an
ancilla. Generally we have:
AND(m,n)(ρ) ̸= AND(m,n)(Red(1)
[m,n](ρ) ⊗Red(2)
[m,n](ρ)).

316
Hence, the holistic conjunction deﬁned on a global information consisting of
two parts does not generally coincide with the conjunction of the two sep-
arate parts. As an example, consider the following density operator (which
corresponds to a maximally entangled pure state):
ρ = P 1
√
2 (|0,0⟩+|1,1⟩).
We have:
AND(1,1)(ρ) = P 1
√
2 (|0,0,0⟩+|1,1,1⟩) ,
which also represents a maximally entangled pure state. At the same time
we have:
AND(1,1)(Red(1)
[1,1](ρ) ⊗Red(2)
[1,1](ρ)) = AND(1,1)

1
2I(1) ⊗1
2I(1)

,
which is a proper mixture.
Now we introduce a highly representative class of gates, called
connective-gates.
Deﬁnition 3.8. (Connective-gate)
Consider a Hilbert space H(m+n+p) with m, n ≥0 and p ≥1.
A connective-gate of H(m+n+p) is a unitary operator G(m,n,p) that can be
represented in the following form:
G(m,n,p) = [P (m)
0
⊗P (n)
0
⊗I(p−1) ⊗U00] + [P (m)
0
⊗P (n)
1
⊗I(p−1) ⊗U01] +
[P (m)
1
⊗P (n)
0
⊗I(p−1) ⊗U10] + [P (m)
1
⊗P (n)
1
⊗I(p−1) ⊗U11],
where Uij are unitary operators of H(1), I(0) = 1, P (0)
0
= P (0)
1
= 1
2.
Apparently, any connective-gate G(n) applied to a register |x1, . . . , xn⟩
transforms the target-bit |xn⟩into a qubit that determines the probability-
value of G(n)(|x1, . . . , xn⟩).
One can easily check that the negation NOT(1) (of H(1)) and the Toﬀoli-
gate T(1,1,1) (of H(1+1+1)) are connective-gates, since they can be repre-
sented in the following form:
NOT(1) = (1
2 · 1
2 ·1)NOT(1)+(1
2 · 1
2 ·1)NOT(1) +( 1
2 · 1
2 ·1)NOT(1)+( 1
2 · 1
2 ·1)NOT(1);
T(1,1,1) = [P (1)
0
⊗P (1)
0
⊗1 · I(1)] + [P (1)
0
⊗P (1)
1
⊗1 · I(1)]
+ [P (1)
1
⊗P (1)
0
⊗1 · I(1)] + [P (1)
1
⊗P (1)
1
⊗1 · NOT(1)].
Similar representations can be given for the gates NOT(p), T(m,n,p), XOR(n,p),
√
NOT
(p),
√
I
(p). An example of gate that is not a connective-gate is the
swap-gate .
The following theorem shows that entanglement cannot be generally
characterized by the probabilistic behavior of connective-gates ([4]).

317
Theorem 3.1.
There is no connective-gate G(m,n,1) that satisﬁes the following condition:
there exists a function µ : [0, 1] →[0, 1] such that for any density operator
ρ of H(m) ⊗H(n), µ(p( DG(m,n,1)(ρ ⊗P (1)
0
))) is an entanglement-measure
for ρ.
4. Werner states and isotropic states
Although (by Theorem 3.1) entanglement-measures cannot be generally
characterized in terms of the probabilistic behavior of connective-gates,
the situation changes if we restrict our attention to some special classes
of states. An interesting example is represented by the class of all Werner
states, introduced in [9] in order to show that entangled bipartite states do
not necessarily exhibit non-local correlations.
Deﬁnition 4.1. (Werner state)
A Werner state is a bipartite state ρ of a space H(2n) that satisﬁes the
following condition for any unitary operator U of H(n):
D(U ⊗U) ρ = ρ.
Hence, any Werner state is invariant under local unitary transformations.
One can prove that the class of all Werner states of H(2n) can be repre-
sented as a one-parameter manifold of states.
Lemma 4.1. Any Werner state of the space H(2n) can be represented as
follows:
ρ(2n)
w
=
1
22n −1
 
1 −w
2n

I(2n) +

w −1
2n

SW(n,n)
,
where −1 ≤w ≤1 (while I(2n) and SW(n,n) are the identity operator and
the swap-gate of the space H(2n)).
Notice that the number w represents the expectation value of SW(n,n) for
the state ρ(2n)
w
(i.e. w = tr(SW(n,n)ρ(2n)
w
)).
A simple correlation connects the entanglement of formation for a
Werner state ρ(2n)
w
with the parameter w ([8]).
Lemma 4.2. The entanglement of formation of any Werner space ρ(2n)
w
is
EF (ρ(2n)
w
) =



s

1−
√
1−w2
2

if w ∈[−1, 0];
0, otherwise.
(where s(x) = −x log2 x −(1 −x) log2(1 −x)).

318
On this basis one can prove that the entanglement of formation of
Werner states can be represented in terms of the probabilistic behavior
of the holistic conjunction.
Lemma 4.3. [3]
Let ρ(2n)
w
be a Werner state of H(2n).
1) p(ρ(2n)
w
) = 1
2;
2) p(AND(n,n)(ρ(2n)
w
)) = 22n−1+2n−1w−1
2(22n−1)
;
3) p(Red(1)
[n,n](ρ(2n)
w
)) = p(Red(2)
[n,n](ρ(2n)
w
)) = 1
2.
Theorem 4.1. Let ρ(2n)
w
be a Werner state of H(2n).
EF (ρ(2n)
w
) =















s



1−

1−

2(22n−1)p(AND(n,n)(ρ(2n)
w
))−22n−1+1
2n−1
2
2


,
if 1
4 +
1
4(1−2n) ≤p(AND(n,n)(ρ(2n)
w
)) < 1
4 +
1
4(1−22n);
0, otherwise.
Proof. By Lemma 4.2 and Lemma 4.3.
Similar results can be found for another interesting class of states that
contains all isotropic states.
Deﬁnition 4.2. (Isotropic state)
An isotropic state is a bipartite state ρ of a space H(2n) that satisﬁes the
following condition for any unitary operator U of H(n):
D(U ⊗U ∗)ρ = ρ.
Hence, any isotropic state ρ of H(2n)) is invariant under the whole U ⊗U ∗-
group of transformations (where U is any unitary operator of H(n) and U ∗
is the complex conjugate of U).
As happens in the case of Werner states, one can prove that also the
class of all isotropic states of H(2n)) can be represented as a one-parameter
manifold of states.
Lemma 4.4.
Any isotropic state of trhe space H(2n)) can be represented as follows:
ρ(2n)
ι
=
1
22n −1
 
1 −ι
2n

I(2n) +

ι −1
2n

P(n,n)
,

319
where 0 ≤ι ≤2n and
P(n,n) = 1
x1,...,xn,y1,...,yn=0 |x1, . . . , xn, x1, . . . , xn⟩⟨y1, . . . , yn, y1, . . . , yn|.
Notice that the number ι represents the expectation value of P(n,n) for the
state ρ(2n)
ι
(i.e. ι = tr(P (n,n)ρ(2n)
ι
)).
Lemma 4.5. ([7])
Let ρ(2n)
ι
be an isotropic state of H(2n).
EF (ρ(2n)
ι
) =

h(s(γ(ι)) + (1 −γ(ι)) log2(2n −1)) if ι ∈(1, 2n]
0 otherwise
,
where γ(ι) =
1
22n (√ι+

(2n −1)(2n −ι))2, s is the binary Shannon entropy
(i.e. s(x) = −x log2 x −(1 −x) log2(1 −x)) and h is the convex-hull of the
inner expression (i.e. the largest convex curve nowhere larger than the given
one).
On this basis one can prove that the entanglement of formation of
isotropic states also can be represented in terms of the probabilistic be-
havior of the holistic conjunction.
Lemma 4.6. Let ρ(2n)
ι
be an isotropic state of H(2n)).
1) p(ρ(2n)
ι
) = 1
2
2) p(AND(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
)) = 22n−1+2n−1ι−1
2(22n−1)
Proof. 1) p(ρι) = tr(P (2n)ρι) =
1
2
 22n−1
i=1

1 −
ι
2n

+ 2n−1
i=1

ι −
1
2n
 
= 1
2.
2) p(AND(n,n)(ρι)) = tr(P (2n+1) DT(n,n,1)(ρι⊗P (1)
0
)) = tr((P (n)
1
⊗P (n)
1
)ρι) =
1
22n−1
 22(n−1)
i=1

1 −w
2n

+ 2n−1
i=1

ι −
1
2n
 
= 22n−1+2n−1ι−1
2(22n−1)
. In particu-
lar, for any entangled state ρ(2n)
ι
(i.e. ι ∈(1, 2n]), we have: 1
4 +
1
4(1+2n) <
p(AND(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
)) ≤
1
2. For any separable state ρ(2n)
ι
(i.e. ι ∈[0, 1]), we
have: 1
4 +
1
4(1−22n) ≤p(AND(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
)) ≤1
4 +
1
4(1+2n). For the factorized
state ρ(2n)
ι
=
1
2n I(n) ⊗1
2n I(n) (i.e. ι =
1
2n ), we have: p(AND(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
)) = 1
4.

320
Theorem 4.2. Let ρ(2n)
ι
be an isotropic state of H(2n)).
EF (ρ(2n)
ι
) =













h

s(γ

2(22n−1)p(AND(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
))−22n−1+1
2n−1

)
+(1 −γ

2(22n−1)p(AND(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
))−22n−1+1
2n−1

) log2(2n −1)

,
if 1
4 +
1
4(1+2n) < p(AND(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
)) ≤1
2;
0, otherwise.
Proof. By Lemma 4.5 and Lemma 4.6.
On this basis one can conclude that (unlike the general case) the prob-
abilistic behavior of the holistic conjunction allows us to characterize en-
tanglement both for Werner states and for isotropic states.
One might wonder whether the capacity of characterizing entanglement
may depend on the speciﬁc features of the holistic conjunction. The answer
to this question is negative. In fact, similar results can be obtained by
using (instead of AND(m,n)) the gate XOR(m,n) or other gates that represent
a binary Boolean function (in the Hilbert-space environment).
Theorem 4.3. Let ρ(2n)
w
be a Werner state H(2n).
1) p( XOR(n,n)(ρ(2n)
w
)) = 22n−1
22n−1

1 −w
2n

2) EF (ρ(2n)
w
) =















s



1−

1−

22n−1−(22n−1)p( XOR(n,n)(ρ(2n)
w
))
2n−1
2
2


,
if
22n−1
22n−1 < p( XOR(n,n)(ρ(2n)
w
)) ≤2n−1
2n−1;
0, otherwise.
Proof. Similar to Theorem 4.1. In particular, for any entangled state ρ(2n)
w
(i.e. w ∈[−1, 0)), we have:
22n−1
22n−1 < p( XOR(n,n)(ρ(2n)
w
)) ≤
2n−1
2n−1. For any
separable state ρ(2n)
w
(i.e. w ∈[0, 1]), we have: 2n−1
2n+1 ≤p( XOR(n,n)(ρ(2n)
w
)) ≤
22n−1
22n−1. For the factorized state ρ(2n)
w
=
1
2n I(n) ⊗
1
2n I(n) (i.e. w =
1
2n ), we
have: p( XOR(n,n)(ρ(2n)
w
)) = 1
2.
Theorem 4.4. Let ρ(2n)
ι
be an isotropic state of H(2n).
1) p( XOR(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
)) = 22n−1
22n−1

1 −
ι
2n


321
2) EF (ρ(2n)
ι
) =













h

s(γ

22n−1−(22n−1)p( XOR(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
))
2n−1

)
+(1 −γ

22n−1−(22n−1)p( DXOR(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
))
2n−1

) log2(2n −1)

,
if p( XOR(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
)) < 2n−1
2n+1;
0, otherwise.
Proof. Similar to Theorem 4.2. In particular, for any entangled state
ρ(2n)
ι
(i.e. ι ∈(1, 2n]), we have: p( XOR(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
)) < 2n−1
2n+1. For any separa-
ble state ρ(2n)
ι
(i.e. ι ∈[0, 1]), we have: 2n−1
2n+1 ≤p( XOR(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
)) ≤22n−1
22n−1.
For the factorized state ρ(2n)
ι
=
1
2n I(n) ⊗
1
2n I(n) (i.e. ι =
1
2n ), we have:
p( XOR(n,n)(ρ(2n)
ι
)) = 1
2.
□
Both AND(m,n) and XOR(m,n) belong to a special class of gates that we
call binary Boolean gates.
Deﬁnition 4.3. (Binary Boolean gate)
Consider the 16 binary Boolean functions gj (with 1 ≤j ≤16) de-
ﬁned on the set {0, 1}. A unitary operator G(m,n,p)
j
is called a bi-
nary Boolean gate representing the Boolean function gj in the space
H(m+n+p) iﬀG(m,n,p)
j
satisﬁes the following condition, for any element
|x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yn, z1, . . . , zp⟩of the canonical basis of H(m+n+p):
Gj(m,n,p)|x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yn, z1, . . . , zp⟩
= |x1, . . . , xm, y1, . . . , yn, z1, . . . , zp−1, gj(xm, yn)	+zp⟩),
where 	+ is the addition modulo 2.
One can easily show that all binary Boolean gates are connective-gates,
but generally not the other way around. For instance, the Hadamard-gate
deﬁned on the space H(3) is a connective-gate that is not a binary Boolean
gate.
Consider now the following proper subset of the set BBF of all binary
Boolean functions:
BBF∗= BBF −{g1, g2, g3} ,
where: g1(x, y) = 0, g2(x, y) = 1 −x(1 −y), g3(x, y) = 1 −y(1 −x).

322
Theorem 4.5.
Let ρ be either a Werner state or an isotropic state. For any choice of
a binary Boolean function gj ∈BBF∗, there is a corresponding binary
Boolean gate Gj(m,n,p) such that the entanglement of formation of ρ can be
determined as a function of the probabilistic behavior of Gj(m,n,p).
Proof. Similar to Theorem 4.1 and 4.2.
In conclusion, the question “to what extent is a logical characterization
of entanglement possible?” gives rise to diﬀerent answers that depend on the
class of gates and on the class of states that is taken into consideration. In [4]
we have proved that a logical characterization of entanglement for bipartite
states is possible by using some elements of a “non-standard” class of gates
that contains both unitary and anti-unitary operators. An interesting open
question is the following: is it possible to characterize entanglement by using
only unitary gates that are not necessarily connective-gates?
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Roberto Giuntini and Giuseppe Sergioli who have
discussed this paper with us, proposing some useful suggestions. Leporini’s
work has been supported by the Italian Ministry of Scientiﬁc Research
within the PRIN project “Automata and Formal Languages: Mathematical
Aspects and Applications”.
References
1. M. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini, R. Leporini, “Logics from quantum computa-
tion”, International Journal of Quantum Information 3, 293–337, 2005.
2. M. Dalla Chiara, R. Giuntini, A. Ledda, R. Leporini, G. Sergioli, “Entangle-
ment as a semantic resource”, Foundations of Physics 40, 1494–1518, 2009.
3. H. Freytes, R. Giuntini, R. Leporini, G. Sergioli, “Entanglement and quantum
logical gates. Part I.”, International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 2015.
DOI 10.1007/s10773-015-2668-1.
4. M.L. Dalla Chiara, R. Leporini, G. Sergioli, “Entanglement and quantum
logical gates. Part II.”, International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 2015.
DOI 10.1007/s10773-015-2667-2.
5. R. Horodecki, P. Horodecki, M. Horodecki, K. Horodecki, “Quantum entan-
glement”, Reviews of Modern Physics 81, 865–942, 2009.
6. M.B. Plenio, S. Virmani, “An introduction to entanglement measures”,
Quant. Inf. Comput. 7, 1–51, 2007.
7. B.M. Terhal, K.G.H. Vollbrecht, “The Entanglement of Formation for
Isotropic States”, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 2625–2628, 2000. Also available as
arXiv:quant-ph/0005062.

323
8. K.G.H. Vollbrecht, R.F. Werner, “Entanglement Measures under Symme-
try”, Physical Review A 64, 062307, 2001. Also available as arXiv:quant-
ph/0010095.
9. R. F. Werner, “Quantum states with Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen correlations
admitting a hidden-variable model”, Physical Review A 40, 4277–4281, 1989.

324
TIME, CHANCE AND QUANTUM THEORY
Anthony Sudbery
Department of Mathematics, University of York,
Heslington, York YO10 5DD, U.K.
E-mail: tony. sudbery@ york. ac. uk
I propose an understanding of Everett and Wheeler’s relative-state interpreta-
tion of quantum mechanics, which restores the feature of indeterminism to the
theory. This incorporates a theory of probability as truth values in a many-
valued logic for future statements, and a contextual theory of truth which gives
objective and subjective perspectives equal validity.
Keywords: Relative-state interpretation; probability; many-valued logic.
1. Introduction
When quantum mechanics emerged in the 1920s as the basic format in
which all subsequent theories of physics would be couched, it exhibited two
distinct features which represented its radical conceptual departure from
classical physics. These two features have been given [21] the confusingly
similar labelsa of indeterminacy and indeterminism.
Indeterminacy is the more startling and harder to grasp of these two
new concepts, yet it has the clearer mathematical formulation in the the-
ory. Physically, it is the idea that physical quantities need not have deﬁnite
values. Mathematically, this is expressed by the representation of such quan-
tities by hermitian operators instead of real numbers, and the mathemtical
fact that not every vector is an eigenvector of such an operator. This yields
the physical notion of superposition, well known as a stumbling block in
understanding the theory.
Indeterminism, on the other hand, is simply the opposite of determin-
ism, as canonically expressed by Laplace [12]. It is the denial of the idea
aThe confusing similarity of these words reﬂects the confusion of the two concepts in the
conceptual fog from which the theory was slowly clarifying. It is still tempting to think
of the two ideas as related; but it is well to distinguish them.

325
that the future of the universe is rigidly determined by its present state. It
can be seen as not so much a rejection, more a reluctant abandonment: if
Laplace’s determinism is seen, not as a statement of faith, but as a declara-
tion of intent — “We will look for an exact cause in the past of everything
that happens in the physical world” — then quantum theory is an admis-
sion of failure: “We will not try to ﬁnd the reason why a radioactive nucleus
decays at one time rather than another; we do not believe that there is any
physical reason for its decay at a particular time.”
Indeterminism, unlike indeterminacy, does not present any conceptual
diﬃculty. In the history of human thought, the determinism of classical
physics is a fairly recent and, to many, a rather troubling idea. To the
pre-scientiﬁc mind, whether in historical times or in our own childhood,
the apparent fact of experience is surely that there are things which might
happen but they might not: you can never be sure of the future. As it is
put in the Bible, “time and chance happeneth to them all”.
On simply being told that the new theory of physics is to be indeter-
ministic, one might think one could see the general form that theory would
take: given a mathematical description of the state of a physical system at
time t0, there would be a mathematical procedure which, instead of yielding
a single state at each subsequent time t > t0, would yield a set of possible
states and a probability distribution over this set. This would give a precise
expression of the intuition that some things are more likely to happen than
others; the probabilities would be objective facts about the world.
But this is not how indeterminism is manifested in quantum mechanics.
As it was conceived by Bohr and formalised by Dirac [6] and von Neumann
[22] and most textbooks ever since (the “Copenhagen interpretation”), the
indeterminism does not enter into the way the world develops by itself, but
only in the action of human beings doing experiments. In the basic laws
governing physical evolution, probabilities occur only in the projection pos-
tulate, which refers to the results of experiments. The idea that experiments
should play a basic part in the theory has been trenchantly criticised by
John Bell [4]. This unsatisfactory, poorly deﬁned and, frankly, ugly aspect
of the theory consititutes the measurement problem of quantum mechanics.
It could be argued that the indeterminism of quantum theory is played
down in the Copenhagen interpretation, in the sense that the role of time in
physical probability is minimised. This is not a formal feature of the theory,
but an aspect of its presentation. Experiments are presented as if they took
no time to be completed; probabilities are properties of the instantaneous
state. Heisenberg referred to the contents of the state vector as representing

326
potentiality, and this aspect of the state vector has been emphasised by de
Ronde [5], but it seems to me that the idea of something being potential
looks to the future for its actualisation.
The theory remained in this state (and some say it still does) until the
papers of Everett and Wheeler in 1957. Everett, as endorsed by Wheeler,
argued that there was no need for the projection postulate and no need
for experiments to play a special role in the theory. But this did not give a
satisfactory place for indeterminism in the theory: on the contrary, quantum
mechanics according to Everett is essentially deterministic and probability
is generally regarded as a problem for the Everett-Wheeler interpretation.
There are at least four diﬀerent concepts that go under the name of
“probability” (or, if you think that it is a single concept, four theories of
probability) [10]. Probability can be a strength of logical entailment, a fre-
quency, a degree of belief, or a propensity. Physicists tend to favour what
they see as a no-nonsense deﬁnition of probability in terms of frequencies,
but in the context of physics this is ultimately incoherent. Classical de-
terministic physics has a place for probability in situations of incomplete
knowledge; this is how Laplace considers probability. The concept being
used here is degree of belief. Some quantum physicists [8] would like to re-
tain this concept in the indeterministic realm. Many, however, would reject
this subjectivist approach as abandoning the ideal of an objective theory.
The most appropriate concept for an indeterministic theory, as outlined
above, would seem to be that of propensity; if there is a set of possible
future states for a system, the system has various propensities to fall into
these states. This gives an objective meaning of “probability”. This concept
is also appropriate to the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechan-
ics: an experimental setup has propensities to give the diﬀerent possible
results of the experiment. The Everett-Wheeler picture, however, seems to
have no place for propensities.
Everett liked to describe the universal state vector, which occupies cen-
tre stage in his theory, as giving a picture of many worlds; Wheeler, I think
rightly, rejected this language. Both views, however, attribute simultaneous
existence to the diﬀerent components of the universal state vector which
are the seat of probabilities in the Copenhagen interpretation. It is hard
to see how propensities can attach to them. Everett, consequently, pur-
sued the idea of probabilities as frequencies, and even claimed to derive the
quantum-mechanical formula for probability (the Born rule) rather than
simply postulating it. It is generally agreed, however, that his argument
was circular (see Wallace in [23, p. 127]).

327
In this article I will explore the Everett-Wheeler formulation of quantum
mechanics from the point of view of a sentient physical system inside the
world, such as each of us. I argue that it is necessary to recognise the
validity of two contexts for physical propositions: an external context, in
which the universal state vector provides the truth about the world and its
development is deterministic; and an internal context in which the world is
seen from a component of the universal state vector. In the latter context the
development in time is indeterministic; probabilities apply, in a particular
component at a particular time, to statements referring to the future. This
leads to a ﬁfth concept of probability: the probability of a statement in
the future tense is the degree of truth of that statement. I conclude with
a formulation of the predictions of quantum mechanics from the internal
perspective which ﬁts the template for an indeterministic theory described
earlier in this section: for each state at time t0, the universal state vector
provides a set of possible states at subsequent times t > t0 and a probabiilty
distribution over this set.
I start by arguing for the relative-state interpretation of Everett and
Wheeler as the best approach to the problem of understanding quantum
theory.
2. The relative-state understanding of quantum mechanics
How can we approach the problem of understanding quantum mechanics?
First, some principles: what understanding a scientiﬁc theory means to
me. I want to take our best science seriously; whatever a successful theory
supposes, I am disposed to believe that that is the truth about the world.
But secondly, I want to take my own experience seriously. Too often, ex-
positors of science tell us that what we experience is an illusion. Of course,
illusions do exist: when I see a stick bending as it is put into water at less
than a right angle to the surface of the water, that is an illusion, and it
can be demonstrated to be an illusion by immediate appeal to other expe-
riences.b But there are other experiences that are too basic to be illusory.
Such fundamental aspects of our experience as time, and consciousness, and
free will, and the solidity of solids [18], cannot be illusions. It may be that
bSuch illusions are less common than is often thought. We are told that Copernicus
discovered that it was an illusion that the sun goes round the earth. Not so: it is true
that the sun goes round the earth. Einstein taught us that any such statement is relative
to a frame of reference, and in my rest frame the sun does indeed go round me once
a day. This reﬂection is relevant to the understanding of quantum mechanics suggested
here, with “frame of reference” replaced by “perspective”.

328
we have a false theory of these phenomena — for example, that free will
consists of an interruption to the laws of nature, or that the solid state con-
sists of a mathematical continuum — it may, indeed, be diﬃcult to deﬁne
them precisely — but that does not mean that the phenomena themselves
are not real.
Now here’s the problem. It seems to be impossible to apply both of
these principles in understanding quantum mechanics. One of the basic facts
of our experience which I cannot disbelieve is that (properly conducted)
experiments have well-deﬁned, unique results. But there are no such unique
results of experiment in pure quantum theory.
What do I mean by “pure quantum theory”? The mathematical ma-
chinery is not in question: Hilbert spaces to describe the possible states of
systems, tensor products to combine them, Hamiltonians to describe inter-
actions, the Schr¨odinger equation to govern evolution. That is clear-cut.
But if the theory is to include our unique experience, it seems that further,
more vague, elements have to be added to this clear theory. What is tra-
ditionally taught as quantum mechanics therefore includes, in addition to
the Schr¨odinger equation, the “collapse postulate”: a stochastic evolution
which delivers a state vector incorporating the uniqueness that we experi-
ence. For some reason, this only happens after a “measurement”, though
nobody has ever made precise what exactly a measurement is; so it does
not describe our experience when we are not making measurements [19].
I therefore follow Everett and Wheeler in not including this part of the
text-book account in what I mean by “quantum theory”.
The preceding criticisms do not apply to theories of spontaneous collapse
like the GRW theory [9], which was designed to overcome these objections,
but such theories go beyond orthodox quantum theory and, in principle,
are empirically distinguishable from it. This response to the challenge of
understanding quantum theory essentially consists of saying “It’s hopeless
— quantum mechanics can’t be understood; we need to replace it with a
diﬀerent theory”. That may be correct, but in this article I want to persevere
in the attempt to understand the pure theory of quantum mechanics.
It then seems that my two basic principles are incompatible. If the sci-
ence of quantum theory is true, then experiments have no unique results
and our experience of such uniquenesss cannot be trusted. We cannot take
quantum mechanics seriously and at the same time take our basic experi-
ence seriously.
This dilemma has the same form as some perennial philosophical prob-
lems. For example,

329
(1) The existence of space-time vs the passage of time;
(2) Determinism vs free will (or, indeed, indeterminism vs free will);
(3) The physical description of brain states vs conscious experience;
(4) Duty vs self-interest
This general class of philosophical problems has been discussed by Thomas
Nagel in his book The View from Nowhere [15]. Each of the above exam-
ples is, or seems to be, a contradiction between two statements or principles,
both of which we seem to have good reason to believe. In each case one of
the statements is a general universal statement — what Nagel calls “a view
from nowhere” — to which assent seems to be compelled by scientiﬁc inves-
tigation or moral reﬂection; the other is a matter of immediate experience,
seen from inside the universe (a view from “now here”).
Nagel suggests that we can resolve these contradictions by recognising
that the apparently opposed statements can both be true, but in diﬀer-
ent contexts (or from diﬀerent perspectives). Statements in the view from
nowhere do not contradict statements in the view from now here, they just
do not engage with them; the two types of statement are incommensurable.
But, provided we are careful to specify the context of each statement, we
will see that in each pair, the apparently opposed statements are compatible.
In order to see how these ideas apply to quantum mechanics, let us look
at the famous example of Schr¨odinger’s cat.
Schr¨odinger’s sad story [17] is often presented as a challenge to quantum
mechanics. When the unfortunate cat has been in Schr¨odinger’s diabolical
device for a time t, the crude argument (not Schr¨odinger’s!) goes, its state
is
|ψcat(t)⟩= e−γt|alive⟩+

1 −e−2γt|dead⟩
So why don’t we see such superpositions of live and dead cats?
The answer is simple. If we are watching the cat, hoping to see a super-
position like the above, the interaction by which we see it actually produces
the entangled state
|Ψ(t)⟩= e−γt|alive⟩cat|  
⌣⟩observer +

1 −e−2γt|dead⟩cat|  
⌢⟩observer
in which |  
⌣⟩is the observer state of seeing a live cat and |  
⌢⟩is the state
of seeing a dead cat. Nowhere in this total state is there an observer seeing
a superposition of a live and a dead cat.
But that doesn’t tell us what there actually is in the state |Ψ(t)⟩. In
order to understand the meaning of this superposition, let us look at it
more carefully.

330
If the observer is watching the cat continuously over the period from
time 0 to time t, they will be able to note the time, if any, at which they see
the cat die. Then the joint state of the cat and the observer is something
like
|Ψ(t)⟩= e−γt|alive⟩cat|“The cat is alive”⟩observer
+

2γ
 t′
0
e−γt′|dead⟩cat|“I saw the cat die at time t′”⟩observerdt′
(1)
in which the observer states contain propositions which are physically en-
coded in the brain of the observer. But what is their status as propositions;
are they true or false? Each is believed by a brain which has observed the
fact it describes, and that fact belongs to reality. As a human belief, each
statement could not be more true. Yet they cannot all be true, for they
contradict each other.
This conﬂict shows the necessity of considering the perspective from
which a statement is made when discussing its truth value. When this is
done, it becomes possible for contradictory statements to be simultaneously
true, each in its own context.
In general, the state of the universe can be expanded in terms of the
states of any observer inside the universe as
|Ψ(t)⟩=

n
|ηn⟩|Φn(t)⟩
where the |ηn⟩form an orthonormal basis of observer states, which we can
take to be eigenstates of deﬁnite experience; the |Φn(t)⟩are the correspond-
ing states of the rest of the universe at time t. The latter are not normalised;
indeed, most of them will be zero. It is only possible for the observer to
experience being in one of the states |ηn⟩, and in this state it is true for the
observer that the only experience they have is ηn; the observer is justiﬁed,
at time t, in deducing that the rest of the universe is in the unique state
|Φn(t)⟩. This is the internal truth relative to the experience state |ηn⟩.
But there is also the external truth that the state of the whole universe is
|Ψ(t)⟩. From this standpoint all the experiences ηn truly occur. In Everett’s
terms, |Φn(t)⟩is the relative state of the rest of the universe relative to the
observer’s state |ηn⟩.
Thus there are the following two types of truth involved.
External truth: The truth about the universe is given by a state vec-
tor |Ψ(t)⟩in a Hilbert space HU, evolving according to the Schr¨odinger

331
equation. If the Hilbert space can be factorised as
HU = HS ⊗HE
where HS contains states of an experiencing observer, then
|Ψ(t)⟩=

n
|ηn⟩|Φn(t)⟩
and all the states |ηn⟩for which |Φn(t)⟩̸= 0 describe experiences which
actually occur at time t.
Internal truth from the perspective |ηn⟩: I actually have experience ηn,
which tells me that the rest of the universe is in the state |Φn(t)⟩. This is
an objective fact; everybody I have talked to agrees with me.
This distinction between internal and external truth is an example of
Nagel’s distinction between the view from nowhere and the view from “now
here”. Scientists might be tempted to exalt the external statement as the
objective truth, downgrading internal statements as merely subjective. In-
deed, Nagel himself uses the terminology of “objective” and “subjective”
[14]. But he does not use a dismissive qualiﬁer like “merely” to denigrate
the subjective: he is at pains to emphasise that the truth of an internal
statement has a vividness and immediacy, resulting from the fact that it is
actually experienced, compared to which external truth is “bleached-out”.
This applies most obviously in contexts like ethics and aesthetics, but we
would do well to remember it in our scientiﬁc context; as I have pointed
out above, it is the internal statement which has the scientiﬁc justiﬁcation
of being supported by evidence, and is objective in the usual sense that it
is empirical and is agreed by all observers who can communicate with each
other.
But the situation is more complicated than this might suggest. It is not
that there is a God-like being who can survey the whole universe and make
statements about the universal state vector, distinct from us physical beings
who are trapped in one component of |Ψ⟩. We physical beings are the ones
who make statements about |Ψ⟩, for good theoretical reasons, from our
situation in which we experience just the one component |ηn⟩|Φn⟩. From
that perspective, what are we to make of the other components |ηm⟩|Φm⟩?
Consider a measurement process, in which an initial state |Ψ(0)⟩=
|η0⟩|Φ0(0)⟩, containing only one experience η0, develops in time t to an
entangled state |Ψ(t)⟩=  |ηn⟩|Φn(t)⟩. The external statement is:
|Ψ(t)⟩represents a true statement about the universe, and all its
components are real.

332
The observer who experiences only |ηn⟩must say:
I know that only |ηn⟩is real (because I experience only that),
and therefore |Φn(t)⟩represents a true statement about the rest
of the universe. But I also know that |Ψ(t)⟩is true (because I’ve
calculated it). The other |ηm⟩|Φm⟩represent things that might
have happened but didn’t.
These statements are font-coded, using bold type for internal (vivid, expe-
rienced) judgements, and italic for external (pale, theoretical) ones, even
though these are made by an internal observer.
It is a constant temptation in physics, on ﬁnding a quantum system in
a superposition |φ⟩+ |ψ⟩, to think that it is either in the state |φ⟩or in
the state |ψ⟩. This, after all, is the upshot when we look at the result of
an experiment. Despite the stern warnings of our lecturers when we are
learning the subject, and the proof from the two-slit experiment that “+”
cannot mean “or” [21, pp. 188-189], we all probably slip into this way of
thinking at times; and the common-sense view of Schr¨odinger’s cat seems to
justify it. On the other hand, the many-worlds view insists that both terms
in the superposition are real, and therefore “+” means “and”. What I am
suggesting here is that both “and” and “or” are valid interpretations of “+”
in diﬀerent contexts: “and” in the external view, “or” in the internal view.
How Many Worlds? The foregoing needs some reﬁnement. Quantum
superposition is not just a single binary operation “+” on states, but is
modiﬁed by coeﬃcients: a|φ⟩+ b|ψ⟩is a weighted superposition of the
(normalised) states |φ⟩and |ψ⟩. In interpreting “+” as “or”, it is easy
to incorporate this weighting of the disjuncts by interpreting it in terms of
probability. But if we interpret “+” as “and”, as in the many-worlds inter-
pretation, what can it mean to weight the conjuncts? Let us look back to the
paradigmatic geometrical meaning of vector addition. “Going north-east”
is the vector sum of “going north” and “going east”, and does indeed mean
going north and going east at the same time. But “going NNE” also means
going north and going east at the same time; only there is more going north
than going east. So if a superposition a|φ⟩+ b|ψ⟩of macroscopic states |φ⟩
and |ψ⟩means that both |φ⟩and ψ⟩are real in diﬀerent worlds, we must
accept that they are not “equally real”, as is often carelessly stated by Ev-
erettians (including Everett himself [7] — in a footnote — but not Wheeler
[24]), but that they are real to diﬀerent extents |a|2 and |b|2. Adding up
these degrees of reality, we then ﬁnd that there are not many worlds but
(|a|2 + |b|2 =) one.

333
Another argument for this conclusion uses the physical observable of
particle number. The many-worlds view regards the state vector |Ψ(t)⟩=

n |ηn⟩|Φn(t)⟩as describing many (say N) worlds, with N diﬀerent copies
of the observer having the diﬀerent experiences |ηn⟩. Suppose the observer’s
name is Alice. There is an observable called Alice number, of which each
of the states |ηn⟩|Φn(t)⟩is an eigenstate with eigenvalue 1. Then |Ψ(t)⟩is
also an eigenstate of Alice number with eigenvalue 1 (not N). There is only
one Alice.
3. Probability and the future
3.1. Probability
The observer in this measurement process might go on to say:
I saw a transition from |η1⟩to |ηn⟩at some time t′ < t. But
I know that |Ψ(t′)⟩didn’t collapse. The other |ηm⟩|Φm⟩might
come back and interfere with me in the future; but this has very
low probability.
This shows how the conﬂicting statements about time development in the
Everett-Wheeler and Copenhagen interpretations can after all be com-
patible. The continuous Schr¨odinger-equation evolution postulated by the
Everett-Wheeler interpretation refers to the external view; the collapses
postulated by the Copenhagen interpretation refer to the internal view, i.e.
to what we actually see. The occurrence of collapse, in the form of perceived
quantum jumps in the memory of an observer, becomes a theorem rather
than a postulate (see [19] for some indications, but work remains to be done
on this). We also see that it is only the internal statement that mentions
probability. But what does it mean?
The meaning of probability is a long-standing philosophical problem
(see, for example, [10]). There are in fact several distinct concepts which go
by the name of probability, sharing only the fact that they obey the same
mathematical axioms. The clearest of these, perhaps, is degree of belief,
which has the advantage that it can be deﬁned operationally: someone’s
degree of belief in a proposition is equal to the odds that they are prepared
to oﬀer in a bet that the proposition is true. The subjective nature of this
concept seems to chime with the fact that it belongs in internal statements,
as we have just seen, and indeed similar views of probability are often
adopted by Everettians even though their general stance is objectivist.

334
However, we have also seen that “internal” should not be equated with
“subjective”, and our experience in a quantum-mechanical world seems to
require a description in terms of objective chance. Things happen randomly,
but with deﬁnite probabilities that cannot be reduced to our beliefs. The
value of the half-life of uranium 238 is a fact about the world, not a mere
consequence of someone’s belief.
Such objective probability (or “chances”) can only refer to future events.
3.2. The future
What kinds of statements can be made at time t0 about some future time
t > t0, if the universal state vector is known to be |Ψ(t0)⟩and its de-
composition with respect to experience states of a particular observer is

n |ηn⟩|Φn(t0)⟩? From the external perspective, the future state |Ψ(t)⟩is
determined by the Schr¨odinger equation and there is no question of any
probability. From the internal perspective relative to an experience state
|ηn⟩, there is a range of possible future states |ηm⟩, and probabilities must
enter into the statement of what the future state will be. But here is a fun-
damental problem: there is no such thing as what the future state will be.
As Bell pointed out [3], quantum mechanics gives no connection between a
component of |Ψ⟩at one time and any component at another time; so what
is it that we can assign probabilities to? How can “the probability that my
state will be |ηm⟩tomorrow” mean anything when “my state will be |ηm⟩
tomorrow” has no meaning?
This puzzle takes us back to ways of thinking that are much older than
quantum mechanics, indeed older than all of modern science. The success of
Newtonian deterministic physics has led us to assume that there always is
a deﬁnite future, and even when we drop determinism we tend to continue
in the same assumption. There is a future, even if we do not and cannot
know what it will be. But this was not what Aristotle believed, and maybe
it is not what we believed when we were children.
Aristotle, in a famous passage [1], considered the proposition “There will
be a sea-battle tomorrow”. He argued that this proposition is neither true
nor false (otherwise we are forced into fatalism). Thus he rejected the law
of excluded middle for future-tense statements, implying that they obey a
many-valued logic. Modern logicians [16] have considered the possibility of
a third truth-value in addition to “true” or “false”, namely u for “undeter-
mined”, for future-tense statements. But, interestingly, Aristotle admitted
that the sea-battle might be more or less likely to take place. This suggests
that the additional truth values needed for future-tense statements are not

335
limited to one, u, but can be any real number between 0 and 1 and should
be identiﬁed with the probability that the statement will come true.c Turn-
ing this round gives us an objective form of probability which applies to
future events, or to propositions in the future tense; in a slogan,
Probability = degree of future truth.
A form of temporal logic incorporating this idea is developed in [20].
It contains a lattice of propositions in the context of a particular observer
and a particular time t0 (“now”). The lattice is generated by propositions
corresponding to the observer’s experience eigenstates, labelled by time t.
The observer is assumed to have a memory of experiences occurring before
t0: thus propositions in the present tense (t = t0) and in the past tense
(t < t0) have truth values 0 or 1, as in classical logic, but those in the
future tense (t > t0) can take any truth value in the real interval [0, 1].
General propositions are formed from these dated experience propositions
by means of conjunction, disjunction and negation (“and”, “or” and “not”).
A conjunction of experience propositions is a history in the sense of the
consistent-histories formulation of quantum mechanics; then a conjunction
of histories is another history, but the general proposition is a disjunction of
histories — something which is not usually considered in this formulation.
It is shown in [20] that, given a weak form of the assumption that the
histories are consistent, the usual formula for the probability of a history
can be extended to truth values for all propositions, with logical properties
that are to be expected from identifying truth values with probabilities.
The Open Future. We ﬁnd it hard, in a scientiﬁc theory, to accom-
modate the idea that there is no deﬁnite future. To be sure, we have inde-
terministic theories in which the future is not uniquely determined by the
past, but such stochastic theories deal with complete histories encompass-
ing past, present and future; probabilities refer to which of these histories
is actual. Indeterminism, in the usual stochastic formulation, consists of
the fact that there are many such histories containing a given past up to
a certain time, so the future extension is not unique; but the underlying
assumption is that only one of these future histories is real, so that the fu-
ture is ﬁxed even though it is not determined. In contrast, the formulation
of quantum mechanics outlined here — or what Bell [3] called the “Everett
(?) theory” — is, I think, the only form of scientiﬁc theory in which the
future is genuinely open. Unlike Bell, I do not regard this as a problem for
cThis idea motivated Lukasiewicz [13] in formulating modern many-valued logic, and has
been applied to quantum mechanics by Pykacz [2].

336
the theory; it tells a truth which we should be happy to acknowledge. The
function of the theory is to provide a catalogue of possibilities and spec-
ify how these change (deterministically) with time; it does not and cannot
say which of the possibilities is actualised at any time. The “measurement
problem” of quantum theory is no more than the diﬃculty of accepting this
format for a scientiﬁc theory; with a change of gestalt, we can see it as a
natural way to formulate indeterminism.
However, I must emphasise the roles that entanglement and the concept
of internal truth play in this resolution of the measurement problem. With-
out these, there would be a “preferred basis” problem: if the universal wave
function is a catalogue of possibilities, what basis deﬁnes the components
which are to be regarded as possibilities? But there is no preferred-basis
problem in the relative-state interpretation, as understood here. The pos-
sibilities are given by experience states, which only exist if the universal
Hilbert state has a tensor product structure in which one of the factors
describes a system capable of experience, i.e. which has a basis of states
exhibiting the structure of propositions describing experience. It is not re-
quired that this structure should be unique; in principle, it is possible that
the universal Hilbert space has more than one tensor product structure with
the required properties. If this should be so, statements about these diﬀer-
ent experiences would also be (internally) true, relative to these diﬀerent
structures; this would not detract from the truth of the original experience
propositions. Both kinds of internal proposition would be compatible with
the external truth of the same universal state vector.
This potential ambiguity is not peculiar to quantum mechanics: a the-
ory of conscious observers in classical physics would also admit the logical
possibility that a single physical structure could admit two diﬀerent in-
terpretations in terms of conscious beings. It is hard to imagine that this
could actually occur with systems complex enough to record experiences;
nevertheless, it has been shown that in simpler systems such ambiguous
factorisation can arise in quantum mechanics, and that decoherence can be
exhibited in both factorisations [11]. This does not show that an under-
standing based on such factorisation, like that outlined here, is untenable.
4. Summary
Here is how I understand nonrelativistic quantum mechanics.
1. From the external perspective there is, at each time t, a true descrip-
tion of the physical world given by a state vector |Ψ(t)⟩in a Hilbert space
HU.

337
2. The sequence of states |Ψ(t)⟩satisﬁes the Schr¨odinger equation with
a universal Hamiltonian HU.
3. In general, a description of the physical world from the external
perspective is given by a closed subspace of the Hilbert space HU. Such a
description has, at time t, the degree of truth ⟨Ψ(t)|Π|Ψ(t)⟩where Π is the
orthogonal projection onto the relevant closed subspace.
4. Suppose the universe has a subsystem S which has suﬃcient structure
to experience and record propositions about the physical world. Then HU =
HS ⊗H′ where HS is the state space of the experiencing subsystem S. Let
{|ηn⟩} be an orthonormal basis of HS which includes all possible experiences
of S. Then the true state of the universe (from the external perspective)
can be expanded as
|Ψ(t)⟩=

n
|ηn⟩|Φn(t)⟩
with |Φn(t)⟩∈H′. From the external perspective, an experience |ηn⟩is real
at time t if |Φn(t)⟩̸= 0, and the component |ηn⟩|Φn(t)⟩describes a world
which has a degree of reality ⟨Φ(t)|Φ(t)⟩at time t.
5. From the internal perspective of the experiencing system S in the
state |ηN⟩at time t0, there is, for each time t ≤t0, one true experience
(recorded in memory) described by a basis vector |ηn(t)⟩with n(t0) = N.
6. From the perspective of the experiencing system S in state |ηN⟩at
time t0, the statement that its experience state at a future time t > t0 will
be |ηm⟩has truth value
⟨Ψ(t)| (Πm ⊗I) e−iH(t−t0)/ℏ(ΠN ⊗I) |Ψ(t0)⟩
2
⟨Ψ(t)| (Πm ⊗I) |Ψ(t)⟩⟨Ψ(t0)| (ΠN ⊗I) |Ψ(t0)⟩
where Πm is the orthogonal projector onto |ηm⟩in HS. The experiencing
subject S refers to this as the probability that they will experience ηm at
time t.
7. From the perspective of the experiencing system S in state |ηN⟩at
time t0, the signiﬁcance of the universal state vector |Ψ(t)⟩is as follows.
For t ≤t0, |Ψ(t)⟩describes what might have happened but didn’t, as
well as what actually did happen.
For t > t0, |Ψ(t)⟩describes what might be going to happen at time t.

338
Thus, from the internal perspective, the universal state vector |Ψ(t)⟩is
not a description of reality but an inﬂuence governing changes in reality.
Things that didn’t actually happen still, in principle, have an eﬀect on what
is going to happen.
References
1. Aristotle. De Interpretatione. Chap. 9.
2. J. Pykacz. Can many-valued logic help to comprehend quantum phenomena?
arXiv:1408.2697.
3. J. S. Bell. Quantum mechanics for cosmologists. In C. Isham, R. Penrose,
and D. Sciama, editors, Quantum Gravity 2, pages 611–637. Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1981.
4. J. S. Bell. Against “measurement”. Physics World, 3(8):33–40, August 1990.
5. C. de Ronde. Probabilistic knowledge as objective knowledge in quan-
tum mechanics: Potential powers instead of actual properties. This volume.
arXiv:1506.07378.
6. P. A. M. Dirac. The Principles of Quantum Mechanics. Oxford University
Press, 1930.
7. H. Everett. “Relative state” formulation of quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod.
Phys., 29:141–153, 1957.
8. C. A. Fuchs, N. D. Mermin, and R. Schack. An introduction to QBism with
an application to the locality of quantum mechanics. Am. J. Phys., 82:749–
754, 2014. arXiv:1311.5253.
9. G. Ghirardi, A. Rimini, and T. Weber. Uniﬁed dynamics for micro and macro
systems. Phys. Rev. D, 34:470–491, 1986.
10. D. Gillies. Philosophical Theories of Probability. Routledge, London, 2000.
11. J. Jeknic-Dugic, M. Dugic, and A. Francom. Quantum structures of a model-
universe: an inconsistency with Everett interpretation of quantum mechanics.
Int. J. Theor. Phys., 53:169, 2014. arXiv:1109.6424.
12. P.-S. Laplace. Philosophical Essay on Probabilities. Springer-Verlag, 1994.
English translation by Andrew I. Dale of the ﬁfth French edition (1825).
13. J. Lukasiewicz. Philosophical remarks on many-valued systems of proposi-
tional logic. In L. Borkowski, editor, Selected Works, pages 153–178. North-
Holland, Amsterdam, 1970. First published in 1930.
14. T. Nagel. Subjective and objective. In Mortal Questions, pages 196–214.
Cambridge University Press, 1979.
15. T. Nagel. The View from Nowhere. Oxford University Press, 1986.
16. A. N. Prior. Formal Logic. Oxford University Press, second edition, 1962.
17. E. Schr¨odinger. Die gegenw¨artige situation in der quantenmechanik. Natur-
wissenschaften, 23:807, 1935. English translation by J. D. Trimmer in 25.
18. S. Stebbing. Philosophy and the Physicists. Penguin, 1937.
19. A. Sudbery. Diese verdammte Quantenspringerei. Stud. Hist. Phil. Mod.
Phys., 33B:387–411, 2002. arXiv:quant-ph/0011082.
20. A. Sudbery. The logic of the future in the Everett-Wheeler understanding of
quantum mechanics. arXiv:1409.0755.

339
21. A. Sudbery. Quantum Mechanics and the Particles of Nature. Cambridge
University Press, 1986.
22. J. von Neumann. Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics. Prince-
ton University Press, 1955. translated by Robert T. Beyer. Originally pub-
lished 1932.
23. D. Wallace. The Emergent Multiverse. Oxford Unviersity Press, 2012.
24. J. A. Wheeler. Assessment of Everett’s “relative state” formulation of quan-
tum theory. Rev. Mod. Phys., 29:463–465, 1957.
25. J. A. Wheeler and W. H. Zurek, editors. Quantum Theory and Measurement.
Princeton University Press, 1983.

340
A TOPOS THEORETIC FRAMEWORK FOR
PARACONSISTENT QUANTUM THEORY
Benjamin Eva
Department of Philosophy, University of Bristol, United Kingdom
E-mail: be0367@ bristol. ac. uk
In this paper, we show how a particular form of paraconsistent logic arises
naturally from a topos-theoretic formulation of quantum theory. We argue
that paraconsistent approaches have the potential to shed new light on some
conceptual problems in the interpretation of quantum theory, and suggest some
potential directions for related mathematical research.
1. Introduction
Over the last century, a vast variety of diﬀerent forms of non-classical logic
have been brought to bear on the conceptual problems of quantum theory.
Apart from the canonical orthomodular quantum logic of Birkhoﬀand Von
Neumann [1], approaches from fuzzy logic [2], supervaluationism [3], linear
logic [4] and topos theoretic intuitionistic logic [5], to name but a few, have
all been used to provide new perspectives on the quantum world. However,
the idea of applying paraconsistent logic to quantum mechanics (henceforth
QM) has, thus far, only be tentatively courted (the most comprehensive
treatment so far seems to be in [6]. In this paper, we attempt to contribute
to this exciting new project by showing how the topos theoretic formulation
of QM provides a natural semantics for a popular and well known form
of paraconsistent logic in the same way that the orthodox Hilbert space
formalism provides a natural semantics for non-distributive quantum logic.
In section 2, we will provide a quick overview of the relevant aspects
of the topos theoretic approach to quantum logic. We will then go on to
show how paraconsistency naturally arises out of this formalism. Section 3
concludes by making some general remarks concerning the application of
paraconsistent logic to QM and sketching some arguments concerning the
advantages of the approach developed in section 2.

341
2. Paraconsistent Topos Quantum Logic
The primary formal setting for this paper will be the topos theoretic formu-
lation of QM (henceforth TQT), as developed by Isham, Butterﬁeld, D¨oring
and others (e.g [7–9]). Of course, this is an extremely rich subject, and we
can only give the most superﬁcial of introductions here. Speciﬁcally, we will
focus exclusively on one aspect of the logical structure of the formalism.
The starting point for TQT’s approach to the logic of QM is the infa-
mous Kochen Specker theorem (KST). Speciﬁcally, TQT is concerned with
overcoming the following immediate corollary of KST,
VAL: There is no non-contextual valuation assignment on the lattice of
projections on a Hilbert space with dimension greater than 2 which takes
values in a Boolean algebra and respects the functional relationships be-
tween the projections.
In one sense, VAL can be seen as a consequence of the non-Boolean (or,
more pertinently, non-distributive) structure of projections lattices. Thus,
we read:
while a classical property state is selected by a two-valued homo-
morphism on the Boolean lattice of classical properties, a quantum
property state ... is not selected by a two-valued homomorphism on
the non-Boolean lattice of subspaces representing the properties of
a quantum mechanical system. There are no such two-valued ho-
momorphisms. [10]
Given the usual interpretational assumption that we should represent
the physical propositions that can be made about a quantum system Q
with associated Hilbert space H by elements of the orthomodular lattice
P(H) of projections onto H, VAL immediately licenses the conclusion that
is is impossible to simultaneously assign classical truth values to all of the
physical propositions associated with Q. There will always be some physical
propositions about Q that have no determinate classical truth value. So Q,
as a quantum system, is somehow underdetermined in a fundamental way.
Philosophically, we can take this as the starting point of TQT, which
attempts to strip VAL of its conceptually problematic implications by
rejecting many of the basic interpretational assumptions of the Hilbert
space formalism of QM. In particular, TQT rejects the formalisation of
physical propositions as projection operators, and provides a new formal
representation of physical propositions.

342
2.1. The Spectral Presheaf
As we noted above, VAL guarantees that it is generally impossible to assign
classical truth values to all of the projection operators onto a ﬁxed Hilbert
space H in a non-contextual way that preserves functional relationships.
However, if we take any given Boolean subalgebra B of the lattice P(H)
of projections onto H, it will generally be possible to assign classical truth
values to all of the projections in B in a straightforward and unproblem-
atic way. From an algebraic perspective, this is a consequence of the fact
that there always exist Boolean algebra homomorphisms from any Boolean
algebra B into the two element Boolean algebra 2 = {0, 1}. We call the
set of all such homomorphisms the ‘Stone space of B’, denoted ΩB, i.e.
ΩB = {λ : B →2|λ is a Boolean algebra homomorphism}. Now, we can
turn ΩB into a topological space if we take the basis sets to be all those
sets of the form Ub = {λ ∈ΩB|λ(b) = 1} (where b ∈B). This topology
turns ΩB into a compact totally disconnected Hausdorﬀspace. By Stone’s
theorem, we know that any Boolean algebra B is isomorphic to the set
cl(ΩB) of all clopen subsets of ΩB. So we can represent B by the clopen
subsets of its Stone space. Now, one of the main ideas behind TQT is to
ﬁnd a way to ‘paste together’ the Stone spaces of the individual Boolean
subalgebras of P(H) into a single uniﬁed space that acts like a Stone space
for the whole projection lattice. Of course, VAL tells us that we can’t just
take the set of homomorphisms from P(H) into 2, since there are no such
homomorphisms. This is where topos theory becomes an important tool.
Given an arbitrary complete orthomodular lattice L (for our purposes,
we can generally think of this as the projection lattice of some given Hilbert
space), let B(L) denote the set of complete Boolean subalgebras of L, par-
tially ordered by inclusion. Then, following D¨oring and Cannon [11], we can
deﬁne the spectral presheaf of L in the following way,
Def 2.1.1: The ‘spectral presheaf’, Ωof a complete orthomodular lat-
tice L is the presheaf over B(L) deﬁned by
Objects: Given B ∈B(L), ΩB = ΩB
Arrows: Given B′ ⊆B, ΩB,B′ : ΩB →ΩB′
λ →λ|B′

343
So the component of Ωat an element B ∈B(L) is just the Stone space
of B, and the component of Ωat an inclusion morphism λ : B′ →B is just
the restriction morphism that takes λ ∈B and returns its restriction to
B′, λ|B′. It was shown by D¨oring and Cannon [11] that two orthomodular
lattices are isomorphic (as orthomodular lattices) if and only if their spectral
presheaves, as deﬁned above, are isomorphic as presheaves. This tells us that
the spectral presheaf Ωis a complete invariant of the orthomodular lattice
L.
Intuitively, the idea is that Ωacts like a generalised Stone space for
the corresponding orthomodular lattice L (which we know is unique). This
interpretation is justiﬁed by the fact that Ωis ‘composed’ of the individual
Stone spaces of L’s Boolean subalgebras. Intuitively, we would like to con-
sider the ‘elements’ of Ω, since, given the interpretation of Ωas the Stone
space of L, its elements should act as truth value assignments on the ele-
ments of L. But, in the case where L = P(H) for some H with dim(h) > 2,
we know that such valuation functions don’t exist. Indeed, it was actually
shown [12] that the non-existence of global elements of Ωin the case where
L = P(H), dim(H) > 2, is equivalent to KST. So the interpretation of Ωas
the generalised Stone space for P(H) is justiﬁed, since its global elements, if
they existed, would correspond to non-contextual truth value assignments
on P(H).
Now, in light of this interpretation, together with Stone’s theorem, it
makes sense to consider the ‘clopen subsets’ of Ω. However, since Ωis a
presheaf, not a set, it does not have subsets. However, it does have sub-
objects (sub prehseaves). The following map (one of the central formal
constructions of TQT) allows us to generate an interesting class of such
subobjects.
Def 2.1.2: Given a ∈L, and B ∈B(L), we deﬁne the daseinisation of
a at B to be δ(a)B = {b ∈B|b ≥a}. We then deﬁne the ‘outer daseini-
sation presheaf’ δ(a) over B(L) by
Objects: Given B ∈B(L), δ(a)B = {λ ∈ΩB|λ(δ(a)) = 1}
Arrows: Given B′ ⊆B, δ(a)B,B′ : δ(a)B →δ(a)B′
λ →λ|B′

344
So, given a ∈L, and B ∈B(L), the component of the outer daseinisation
presheaf, δ(a), of a at B is the part of B’s Stone space that makes δ(a)B true
(assigns it the value 1). We can think of δ(a)B as B’s ‘best approximation’
to a. In the case where L = P(H), it might be that a is some projection that
is incompatible with some projections in B. So, in the measurement context
represented by B, we won’t be able to meaningfully assert the proposition
a. Then δ(a)B is the closest thing we can say to a that can be meaningfully
asserted from the classical context B.
By Stone duality, δ(a)B ∈cl(ΩB), i.e. δ(a)B is a clopen subset of ΩB.
Since this holds for all B ∈B(L), we call δ(a) a ‘clopen subobject’ of Ω. It is
a basic theorem of TQT that the lattice Subcl(Ω) of clopen subobjects of the
spectral presheaf is a complete Heyting algebra (under natural component
wise lattice operations).
So, 2.1.2 deﬁnes a map δ from L into Subcl(Ω). It is well known [see 11]
that this map satisﬁes the following properties,
Theorem 2.1.3:
(i) δ is injective.
(ii) δ preserves all joins, i.e. 
i∈I δ(ai) = δ(
i∈I ai), for any family
{ai|i ∈I} ⊆L.
(iii) δ(a) is order preserving (monotone), i.e. a ≤b in L implies
δ(a) ≤δ(b) in Subcl(Ω).
(iv) δ(0) = ⊥, δ(1) = ⊤, where 0, 1 are the minimal and maximal
elements of L, respectively, and ⊥and ⊤are the minimal and maximal
elements of Subcl(Ω) (⊥is the presheaf that takes each B ∈B(L) to the
empty set and ⊤is just Ω).
(v) δ(a ∧b) ≤δ(a) ∧δ(b).
So we can think of δ as an order preserving injection of L into the com-
plete Heyting algebra of clopen subobjects of the spectral presheaf of L.
Since this map is monotone and join preserving, it has a monotone meet
preserving upper adjoint, deﬁned as follows,
Def 2.1.4: Given S ∈Subcl(Ω), deﬁne ε(S) = {a ∈L|δ(a) ≤S}.

345
D¨oring and Cannon showed that ε has the following properties,
Theorem 2.1.5:
(i) ε preserves all meets.
(ii) ε is order preserving (monotone).
(iii) ε(δ(a)) = a, for any a ∈L.
(iv) δ(ε(S)) ≤S, for any S ∈Subcl(Ω).
(v) ε(S ∨T) ≥ε(S) ∨ε(T).
ε can be used to deﬁne an equivalence relation on Subcl(Ω), deﬁned by
S ∼T iﬀε(S) = ε(T). We let E denote the set of all equivalence classes of
Subcl(Ω) under this equivalence relation. E can be turned into a complete
lattice by deﬁning 
i∈I[Si] = [
i∈I Si], [S] ≤[T] iﬀ[S] ∧[T] = [S] and

i∈I[Si] = {[T]|[Si] ≤[T ] ∀i ∈I}. D¨oring and Cannon also showed the
following important result.
Theorem 2.1.6: E and L are isomorphic as complete lattices. In par-
ticular, the maps g : E →L and f : L →E deﬁned by g([S]) = ε(S) and
f(a) = [δ(a)] are an inverse pair of complete lattice isomorphisms.
Now, the Heyting algebraic structure of Subcl(Ω) makes the clopen sub-
objects a natural model for ﬁrst order intuitionistic logic. This is the logical
structure that is usually considered in the context of TQT. However, the ε
map deﬁned above allows for the deﬁnition of a new type of logical struc-
ture on Subcl(Ω). For the remainder of the paper, we will assume that L is
the projection lattice of a ﬁxed Hilbert space H.
Def 2.1.7: Given S ∈Subcl(Ω), deﬁne S∗= δ(ε(S)⊥), i.e. S∗is the
daseinisation of the orthocomplement of ε(S) (⊥denotes the orthocomple-
ment of P(H). Recall that ⊥satisﬁes (a) a ∨a⊥= 1, (b) a ∧a⊥= 0,
(c) a ≤b implies a⊥≥b⊥, (d) a⊥⊥= a, (e) (a ∧b)⊥= a⊥∨b⊥, (f)
(a ∨b)⊥= a⊥∧b⊥).

346
The ∗operation can be thought of as the ‘translation’ of the ortho-
complement operation into TQT. It represents a new form of negation on
Subcl(Ω), the properties of which are outlined below.
Theorem 2.1.8: The ∗operation has the following properties,
(i) S ∨S∗= ⊤,
(ii) S∗∗≤S,
(iii) S∗∗∗= S∗,
(iv) S ∧S∗≥⊥,
(v) (S ∧T)∗= S∗∨T ∗,
(vi) (S ∨T)∗≤S∗∧T ∗,
(vii) ε(S) ∨ε(S∗) = 1,
(viii) ε(S) ∧ε(S∗) = 0,
(ix) S ≤T implies S∗≥T ∗.
Proof: (i) Since S ≥δ(ε(S)), we have
S ∨S∗= S ∨δ(ε(S)⊥) ≥δ(ε(S)) ∨δ(ε(S)⊥) = δ(ε(S) ∨ε(S)⊥) = δ(1)
= ⊤.
(ii) S∗∗= δ(ε(S)⊥)
∗= δ(ε(δ(ε(S)⊥))⊥) = δ(ε(S)⊥⊥) = δ(ε(S)) ≤S.
(iii) S∗∗∗= δ(ε(S))∗= δ(ε(δ(ε(S)))⊥) = δ(ε(S)⊥) = S∗.
(iv) This is obvious, but the reason that we don’t have equality can be
seen below,
S ∧S∗= S ∧δ(ε(S)⊥) ≥δ(ε(S)) ∧δ(ε(S)⊥) ≥δ(ε(S) ∧ε(S)⊥) = δ(0)
= ⊥.

347
(v) (S ∧T)∗= (S ∧T)∗= δ(ε(S ∧T )⊥) = δ((ε(S) ∧ε(T ))⊥) =
δ(ε(S)⊥∨ε(T )⊥) = δ(ε(S)⊥) ∨δ(ε(T )⊥) = S∗∨T ∗.
(vi) (S ∨T)∗= (S ∨T)∗= δ(ε(S ∨T )⊥) ≤δ((ε(S) ∨ε(T ))⊥) =
δ(ε(S)⊥∧ε(T )⊥) ≤δ(ε(S)⊥) ∧δ(ε(T )⊥) = S∗∧T ∗.
(vii) ε(S) ∨ε(S∗) = ε(S) ∨ε(δ(ε(S)⊥)) = ε(S) ∨ε(S)⊥= 1.
(viii) ε(S) ∧ε(S∗) = ε(S) ∧ε(δ(ε(S)⊥)) = ε(S) ∧ε(S)⊥= 0.
(ix) Let S ≤T. Then ε(S) ≤ε(T). So ε(S)⊥≥ε(T)⊥. So δ(ε(S)⊥) ≥
δ(ε(T )⊥), i.e. S∗≥T ∗.
Crucially, property (iv) is only an inequality. ∗is a paraconsistent nega-
tion that violates the law of ‘explosion’ (whereby a contradiction implies
every other proposition). Indeed, this theorem guarantees that ∗models a
very particular type of paraconsistent negation.
Corollary 2.1.9: Equipped with ∗and the implication operation ⇒
deﬁned by S ⇒T = S∗∨T, Subcl(Ω) is a model of ‘dialectical logic with
quantiﬁers’ (DLQ), a well known form of paraconsistent logic [13].
So, we have seen that, by translating the orthocomplement of traditional
orthomodular quantum logic into TQT, a well known form of paraconsistent
logic arises in a natural and straightforward way.
3. Paraconsistency and Quantum Theory
The results of the preceding section demonstrate a natural and straight-
forward connection between quantum theory (speciﬁcally, TQT) and para-
consistent logic. The author is inclined to argue that this is probably the
strongest and most natural connection between the two subjects that has
been observed so far. In [8], another form of paraconsistent logic was de-
rived from the algebraic structure of Subcl(Ω), but it only arose as a dual
form of the already well known intuitionistic structure. DLQ is a well known
and important form of paraconsistent logic that has a number of important
applications. For example, DLQ appears to have an important role to play
as the underlying logic of paraconsistent set theory (see [14] and [15] for
details). Indeed, in [15], ∗is used to make initial steps in the project of
unifying TQT with quantum set theory, as developed in [16,17].

348
In [6], some general arguments were made in support of the idea that
paraconsistent logic could have an important role to play in aiding our
understanding of quantum superpositions. Although this is not the setting
for a detailed analysis of this argument, there is a straightforward sense
in which the conclusion can be seen as very intuitive. If we consider a
spin 1/2 particle in the superposition 1/
√
2 |↑⟩+ 1
√
2 |↓⟩(for some ﬁxed
direction), it seems very natural to say that the proposition ‘the spin of the
particle is up and it is not the case that the spin of the particle is up’ is at
least partially true. Paraconsistent logic allows us to respect this intuition
without trivialising our whole logical system. It should be noted that this
is directly analogous to some of the arguments that have been made to
justify the adoption of intuitionistic logic for quantum theory. In that case,
the argument rests on the intuition that the proposition ‘the spin of the
particle is up or the spin of the particle is not up’ is at least partially false.
It seems clear that the intuition supporting the argument for the adoption
of paraconsistent logic is at least as strong as the argument for the adoption
of intuitionistic logic in this case.
In [6], the authors suggest a particular form of paraconsistent logic that
might be useful for thinking about quantum superpositions. Again, there
is no space to discuss their proposals in any detail, but it should be noted
that the present approach has the advantage that the paraconsistent logical
structure arises naturally, as part of the formalism of the theory. The fact
that this form of paraconsistent logic arises naturally from the formalism
is both conceptually encouraging and technically convenient. Indeed, the
paraconsistent structure of Subcl(Ω) has already been used to extend the
TQT formalism [15].
Another recently discovered connection between paraconsistency and
quantum theory was explored in [20], where the authors showed that para-
consistent logic can play an important role in deriving quantum probability
rules in the context of Bayesian probability theory. The underlying logic
used in this approach is closely related to that used in [6], so this could
provide an independent justiﬁcation for that approach, that strengthens its
links with the operational and formal structure of quantum theory.
At any rate, the author hopes that this paper can serve as a humble
invitation to the study of the application of paraconsistent logic to quantum
theory. It seems clear that a number of closely related ideas, both conceptual
and mathematical, are emerging in this area, and the stage is set for an
exciting new wave of research.

349
References
1. Birkhoﬀ, G. and Von Neumann, J., ‘The Logic of Quantum Mechanics’,
Annals of Mathematics, 37(4), 823-844, 1936.
2. Pykacz, J., ‘Fuzzy quantum logics and inﬁnite-valued Lukasiewicz logic’,
International Journal of Theoretical Physics, 33(7), 1403-1416, 1994.
3. Bigaj, T., ‘Three-valued Logic, Indeterminacy and Quantum Mechanics’,
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 30(2), 97-119, 2001.
4. Coecke, B., ‘The Logic of Quantum Mechanics: Take 2’, http://arxiv.org/
abs/1204.3458, 2012.
5. D¨oring, A., ‘Topos Quantum Logic and Mixed States’, in B. Coecke,
P. Panangaden, P. Selinger: Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop
on Quantum Physics and Logic (QPL 2009), Electronic Proceedings in The-
oretical Computer Science, 2, 59-77, 2010.
6. De Ronde, C. and Da Costa N., ‘The Paraconsistent Logic of Quantum Su-
perpositions’, Foundations of Physics, 43(7), 845-858, 2013.
7. D¨oring, A. and Isham, C., ‘A Topos Foundation for Theories of Physics 1:
Formal languages for Physics’, Journal of Mathematical Physics, 49, 053515,
2008.
8. D¨oring, A., ‘Topos-Based Logic for Quantum Systems and Bi-Heyting Alge-
bras’, arxiv.org/abs/1202.2750, 2012.
9. D¨oring, A. and Isham C., ‘ ‘What is a Thing?’: Topos Theory in the Foun-
dations of Physics’ In New Structures for Physics, B Coecke (ed), Springer,
Springer Lecture Notes in Physics, 813, 753-940, 2011.
10. Bub, J., Interpreting the Quantum World, Cambridge University Press, Re-
vised Edition, 1999.
11. D¨oring, A. and Cannon, S., The Spectral Presheaf of an Orthomodular Lattice,
unpublished Msc thesis, Oxford University, 2013.
12. Isham, C. and Butterﬁeld, J., ‘A topos perspective on the Kochen-Specker
theorem 1: Quantum States as Generalized Valuations’, arxiv.org/abs/quant-
ph/9803055, 1998.
13. Routley, R., and Meyer, R., ‘Dialectical Logic, Classical Logic and the Con-
sistency of the World’, Studies in Soviet Thought, 16(1), 1-25, 1976.
14. Weber, Z., ‘Transﬁnite Numbers in Paraconsistent Set Theory’, Review of
Symbolic Logic, 3(1): 71-92, 2010.
15. Eva, B., ‘Towards a Paraconsistent Quantum Set Theory’, In C. Heunen, P.
Selinger and J. Vicary: Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop on
Quantum Physics and Logic (QPL 2015), Electronic Proceedings in Theoret-
ical Computer Science, 195, 158-169, 2015.
16. Ozawa, M., ‘Orthomodular Valued Models for Quantum Set Theory’,
http://arxiv.org/abs/0908.0367, 2009.
17. Ozawa, M., ‘Quantum set theory extending standard probabilistic interpre-
tation of quantum theory’. In B. Coecke, I. Hasuo and P. Panangaden: Pro-
ceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Quantum Physics and Logic
(QPL 2014), Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science, 172,
15-26, 2014.

350
18. D¨oring, A., ‘The Physical Interpretation of Daseinisation’, in H Halvorson
(ed), Deep Beauty, Cambridge University Press, 207-239, 2011.
19. D¨oring, A. and Isham, C., ‘Classical and Quantum Probabilities as Truth
Values’, Journal of Mathematical Physics, 53, 032101, 2012.
20. Salazar, R., Jara-Figueroa, C. and Delgado, A., ‘Analogue of the quan-
tum total probability rule from paraconsistent Bayesian probability theory’,
http://arxiv.org/abs/1408.5308, 2014.

351
A POSSIBLE SOLUTION TO THE SECOND
ENTANGLEMENT PARADOX
Diederik Aerts
Center Leo Apostel for Interdisciplinary Studies,
Brussels Free University, 1050 Brussels, Belgium
E-mail: diraerts@ vub. ac. be
Massimiliano Sassoli de Bianchi
Laboratorio di Autoricerca di Base,
6914 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: autoricerca@ gmail. com
Entangled states are in conﬂict with a general physical principle which ex-
presses that a composite entity exists if and only if its components also exist,
and the hypothesis that pure states represent the actuality of a physical entity,
i.e., its ‘existence’. A possible way to solve this paradox consists in completing
the standard formulation of quantum mechanics, by adding more pure states.
We show that this can be done, in a consistent way, by using the extended Bloch
representation of quantum mechanics, recently introduced to provide a possi-
ble solution to the measurement problem. Hence, with the solution proposed
by the extended Bloch representation of quantum mechanics, the situation of
entangled states regains full intelligibility.
Keywords: Entanglement; density operators; SU(N); extended Bloch represen-
tation.
Since their discovery, entangled states were considered to describe enigmatic
situations. More precisely, we can distinguish two entanglement paradoxes.
The ﬁrst one is well-known, as it attracted most of the attention of physi-
cists throughout the years: it is related to the experimental fact that two
entangled entities are able to produce perfect correlations, even when sep-
arated by large spatial distances. In other terms, the ﬁrst entanglement
paradox is about the existence of non-local eﬀects, allowing entities to be-
come spatially separated, by arbitrarily large distances, without becoming
experimentally separated.

352
The second entanglement paradox is in our opinion even more puzzling,
although lesser known. Schrœdinger, the discoverer of entanglement, was
perfectly aware of this diﬃculty, for instance when he emphasized that for
two quantum entities in an entangled state only the properties of the pair
appeared to be deﬁned, whereas the individual properties of each one of
the two entities forming the pair remained totally undeﬁned [1] (see also
[2], Sec. 7.3, and the references therein).
Let us explain why this observation is able to generate a paradox. For
this, we start by enouncing two very general physical principles (GPP) [3]:
GPP1 A physical entity S is said to exists at a given moment, if and only
if it is in a pure state at that moment.
GPP2 A composite physical entity S, formed by two sub-entities SA and
SB, is said to exist at a given moment if and only if SA and SB exist at
that moment.
On the other hand, according to standard quantum mechanics (SQM), the
following two principles are also assumed to hold:
SQMP1 If S is a physical entity with Hilbert space H, each ray-state of H
is a pure state of S, and all the pure states of S are of this kind.
SQMP2 The pure states of a composite entity S, formed by two sub-entities
SA and SB, with Hilbert spaces HA and HB, are the rays of H = HA⊗HB.
SA and SB are in the ray-states |ψA⟩and |φB⟩if and only if S is in the
product ray-state |ψA⟩⊗|φB⟩.
The paradox results from the observation that the above four principles
are not compatible with each other, precisely because of the existence of
entangled states. Indeed, if the composite entity S is in the entangled state:
|ψ⟩= a1 eiα1|ψA⟩⊗|φB⟩+ a2 eiα2|φA⟩⊗|ψB⟩,
(1)
with a1, a2, α1, α2 ∈R, 0 ≤a1, a2 ≤1, a2
1 + a2
2 = 1, |ψA⟩, |φA⟩∈HA,
|ψB⟩, |φB⟩∈HB, ⟨ψA|φA⟩= ⟨ψB|φB⟩= 0, considering that |ψ⟩is a ray-
state, by the SQMP1 it describes a pure state of S. By the GPP1, we know
that S exists, and by the GPP2, the two sub-entities SA and SB also exist.
But then, by the SQMP1, SA and SB are in ray-states, and by the SQMP2,
S is in a product state, which is a contradiction.
Facing this conﬂict between the above four principles, a possible strategy
is that of considering that the GPP2 does not have general validity, in the
sense that when a composite entity is in an entangled state, its sub-entities
would simply cease to exist, in the same way that two water droplets cease

353
to exist when fused into a single larger droplet. However, this strategy is
not fully consistent, as two quantum entities do not completely disappear
when entangled, considering that there are properties associated with the
pair that remain always actual.
For instance, we are still in the presence of two masses, which can be
separated by a large spatial distance. So, entanglement is neither a situation
where two masses are completely fused together, nor a situation where a
spatial connection would bond them together, making it diﬃcult to spatially
separate them (as in chemical bonds). Also, entangled entities can remain
perfectly correlated, and the property of “being perfectly correlated” is
clearly a property which is meaningful only when we are in the presence of
two existing entities.
In other terms, we cannot aﬃrm that in an entangled state the com-
posing entities cease to exist, and it is very diﬃcult to even conceive a
situation where the GPP2 would cease to apply. Even the above example
of two droplets of water fused together cannot be considered as a coun-
terexample, as in this case we are not really allowed to describe the larger
droplet, once formed, to be the combination of two actual sub-droplets.
So, it doesn’t seem reasonable to abandon the GPP2, and of course it is
neither reasonable to abandon the GPP1, which is almost tautological if we
consider that a pure state, by deﬁnition, describes the objective condition
in which an entity is in a given moment, precisely because of its actual
existence.
Regarding the GPP1, it could be objected that also an entity which is
not in a pure state can exist. This is correct, but we have here to understand
that the term ‘pure state’ is a sort of pleonasm, as if we consider the notion
of state at its most fundamental level, i.e., as a description of the reality of
an entity, in a given moment, then all states are by deﬁnition pure states.
Indeed, the non-pure states (i.e., the statistical mixtures of states), only
describe our subjective lack of knowledge regarding the actual condition of
the physical entity under consideration. Even when we are ignorant about
the objective condition of an entity, i.e., its pure state, we can of course still
say that the entity exists. However, and this is how the GPP1 should be
understood, if the entity exists, in a given moment, then it must be possible
(at least in principle, and independently of our subjective ‘state of knowl-
edge’) to characterize its potential behavior under all possible interactions,
and such characterization is precisely what a pure state is all about.
So, the only way to resolve the paradox seems to be that of revisiting the
SQM1. To do so, we start by observing that there is a well-deﬁned procedure

354
in SQM that allows to associate individual states to entangled sub-entities.
If, say, we are only interested in the description of SA, irrespective of its
correlations with SB, all we have to do is to take a partial trace. For this, one
has to rewrite the ray-state (1) in operatorial form. Deﬁning: Dψ = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|,
DA
ψ = |ψA⟩⟨ψA|, DA
φ = |φA⟩⟨φA|, DB
ψ = |ψB⟩⟨ψB| and DB
φ = |φB⟩⟨φB|, we
have:
Dψ = a2
1 DA
ψ ⊗DB
φ + a2
2 DA
φ ⊗DB
ψ + Iint,
(2)
where the interference contribution is given by:
Iint = a1a2 e−iα|ψA⟩⟨φA| ⊗|φB⟩⟨ψB| + c.c.,
(3)
with α = α2 −α1. The state of SA, irrespective of its correlations with SB,
can then be naturally deﬁned by taking the partial trace: DA = TrB Dψ,
and similarly for SB: DB = TrA Dψ. A simple calculation yields:
DA = a2
1 DA
ψ + a2
2 DA
φ ,
DB = a2
1 DB
φ + a2
2 DB
ψ .
(4)
However, (4) cannot be considered to solve the second entanglement
paradox, as is clear that the reduced one-entity states DA and DB will not
in general be ray-states, but density operators, and by the SQM1 we cannot
interpret them as pure states. Therefore, we cannot use the GPP1 to decree
the existence of SA and SB.
The following questions then arise: To save the intelligibility of the en-
tangled states, shouldn’t we complete the SQM by also allowing density
operators to describe pure states? And more importantly: Do we have suﬃ-
cient physical arguments to consider such a completed quantum mechanics
(CQM), and can it be formulated in a suﬃciently general and consistent
way? It is the purpose of this article to provide positive answers the above
questions, showing that the second entanglement paradox can be solved.
For this, we start by observing that the ﬁrst reason to consider that
density operators should also describe pure states is precisely the existence
of the above mentioned partial trace procedure. Indeed, there is no logical
reason why by focusing on a component of a system in a well-deﬁned pure
state, taking a partial trace, we would suddenly become ignorant about the
condition of such component.
Another important reason is that a same density operator admits in-
ﬁnitely many representations as a mixture of one-dimensional projection
operators [4]. This immediately suggests that the mixture interpretation is
generally inappropriate, not only because it remains ambiguous, but also,
and especially, because it fails to capture the dimension of potentiality that
a density operator is able to describe.

355
Another relevant observation is that composite entities in ray-states can
undergo unitary evolutions such that the evolution inherited by their sub-
entities will make them continuously go from ray-states to density operator
states, and return; a situation hardly compatible with the statistical igno-
rance interpretation of the density operators (see [5], sect. 7.5).
But we think there is an even more important reason to consider that
the density operators can also describe pure states: if we do so, it becomes
possible to derive the Born rule and provide a solution to the measurement
problem, as recently demonstrated in what we have called the extended
Bloch representation of quantum mechanics [6].
Let us brieﬂy explain how this works. As is known, the ray-states of
two-dimensional systems (like spin- 1
2 entities) can be represented as points
at the surface of a 3-dimensional unit sphere, called the Bloch sphere [7],
with the density operators being located inside of it. What is less known is
that a similar representation can be worked out for general N-dimensional
systems [8]. The 3-d Bloch sphere is then replaced by a (N 2−1)-dimensional
unit sphere, with the diﬀerence that, for N > 2, only a convex portion of
it is ﬁlled with states.
When this generalized Bloch sphere representation is adopted, as an al-
ternative way to represent the quantum states, it can be further extended
by also including the measurements. These are geometrically described as
(N −1)-simplexes inscribed in the sphere, whose vertices are the eigenvec-
tors of the measured observables. These measurement simplexes, in turn,
can be viewed as abstract structures made of an unstable and elastic sub-
stance, and it can be shown that an ideal quantum measurement is a process
where the abstract point particle representative of the state ﬁrst plunges
into the sphere, in a deterministic way, along a path orthogonal to the sim-
plex, then attaches to it, and following its indeterministic disintegration,
and consequent collapse, is brought to one of its vertices, thus producing
the outcome of the measurement, in a way that is perfectly consistent with
the Born rule and the projection postulate [6].
We will not describe here the details of this ‘hidden-measurement mech-
anism’, as this is not the scope of this article. We only emphasize that its
functioning requires the point particle representative of the state to move
from the surface to the interior of the sphere, then back to the surface, thus
implicitly ascribing the status of pure states also to the density operators.
In other terms, if we take seriously the extended Bloch representation,
we can say in retrospect that a key obstacle in our understanding of quan-
tum measurements is that SQM was not considering all the possible pure

356
states that can describe the condition of a physical entity, and that the
missing ones were precisely those located inside of the generalized Bloch
sphere, i.e., the density operators.
Our ﬁnal and in a sense most important argument in favour of the ‘den-
sity operators are pure states’ interpretation is about showing that within
the extended Bloch formalism a composite entity in an entangled state is
naturally described as a system formed by two components that always
remain in well deﬁned states, precisely corresponding to the reduced states
(4), plus a third ‘element of reality’ describing their non-local correlation.
For this, we start by observing that (2) can be written as [6]:
Dψ = 1
N (I + cN r · Λ) ,
(5)
where the real unit vector r is the representative of the ray-state Dψ within
the generalized Bloch sphere B1(RN 2−1), cN = ( N(N−1)
2
)
1
2 , and the com-
ponents of the operator-vector Λ are (a determination of) the generators
of SU(N), the special unitary group of degree N, which are self-adjoint,
traceless matrices obeying Tr ΛiΛj = 2δij, i, j ∈{1, . . ., N 2 −1}, forming a
basis, together with the identity operator I, for all the linear operators on
H = CN.
In the same way, with HA = CNA, HB = CNB, N = NANB, we can
deﬁne the Bloch vectors: rA, sA, rA ∈B1(RN 2
A−1), rB, sB, rB ∈B1(RN 2
B−1),
representative of the states DA
ψ , DA
φ , DA, DB
ψ , DB
φ , DB, respectively, by:
DA
ψ =
1
NA (IA + cNA rA · ΛA), DA
φ =
1
NA (IA + cNA sA · ΛA), DA =
1
NA (IA +
cNA rA · ΛA), DB
ψ =
1
NB (IB + cNB rB · ΛB), DB
φ =
1
NB (IB + cNB sB · ΛB),
DB =
1
NB (IB + cNB rB · ΛB), where the ΛA
i are the N 2
A −1 generators of
SU(NA), the ΛB
j are the N 2
B −1 generators of SU(NB), and IA and IB are
the identity operators on HA and HB, respectively. Note that for N = 2,
the components Λi in (5) are simply the Pauli matrices, and r is a vector
in the usual three-dimensional Bloch sphere.
At this point, we observe that it is possible to use the remarkable prop-
erty that the trace of a tensor product is the product of the traces, to con-
struct a determination of the SU(N) generators in terms of tensor products
of the generators of SU(NA) and SU(NB). More precisely, deﬁning the N 2
self-adjoint N × N matrices:
Λ(i,j) =
1
√
2
ΛA
i ⊗ΛB
j ,
where i = 0, . . . , N 2
A −1, j = 0, . . . , N 2
B −1, and we have deﬁned ΛA
0 =
( 2
NA )
1
2 IA and ΛB
0 = ( 2
NB )
1
2 IB, it is easy to check that, apart Λ(0,0) = ( 2
N )
1
2 I,

357
the remaining N 2 −1 matrices are all traceless, mutually orthogonal and
properly normalized, and therefore constitute a bona ﬁde determination of
the generators of SU(N) that can be used in (5), to express the components
of the vector r, representative of the composite entity’s state.
Using the orthogonality of the generators, the components of r are given
by: ri = eNTr DψΛi,
i = 1, . . . , N 2 −1, with eN =
N
2cN , and similarly for
the components of the Bloch vectors representing the sub-entities’ states.
With a direct calculation, one can then show that the entangled state r is
of the tripartite direct sum form:
r = dNArA ⊕dNBrB ⊕rcorr.
(6)
where we have deﬁned dNA = ( NA−1
N−1 )
1
2 and dNB = ( NB−1
N−1 )
1
2 . In (6), the
vector rA = a2
1rA+a2
2sA belongs to the one-entity Bloch sphere B1(RN 2
A−1),
and describes the state of SA, whereas the vector rB = a2
1sB +a2
2rB belongs
to the one-entity Bloch sphere B1(RN 2
B−1), and describes the state of SB.
On the other hand, rcorr is the component of the state which describes the
correlation between the two sub-entities, and is of the form:
rcorr = dNA,NBrAB + rint,
(7)
where rAB = a2
1rAB
1
+ a2
2rAB
2
∈B1(R(N 2
A−1)(N 2
B−1)) is a vector with com-
ponents [rAB](i,j) = a2
1[rAB
1
](i,j) + a2
2[rAB
2
](i,j), with [rAB
1
](i,j) = rA
i sB
j ,
[rAB
2
](i,j) = sA
i rB
j , i = 1, . . . N 2
A −1, j = 1, . . . N 2
B −1, dNA,NB
=
( (NA−1)(NB−1)
N−1
)
1
2 , and the vector rint ∈R(N 2
A−1)(N 2
B−1) describes the in-
terference contribution (3).
If the ﬁrst two one-entity generators are chosen to be: ΛA
1 = |ψA⟩⟨φA|+
|φA⟩⟨ψA|, ΛA
2 = −i(|ψA⟩⟨φA| −|φA⟩⟨ψA|), ΛB
1 = |ψB⟩⟨φB| + |φB⟩⟨ψB|,
ΛB
2 = −i(|ψB⟩⟨φB| −|φB⟩⟨ψB|), rint only has four non-zero components,
which for a suitably chosen order for the joint-entity generators are:
rint = eN
√
2a1a2(cos α, cos α, −sin α, sin α, 0, . . . , 0).
(8)
According to (6), and diﬀerent from the SQM formalism, we see that
the extended Bloch representation allows to describe an entangled state as
a “less tangled” condition in which the two sub-entities are always in the
well-deﬁned states rA and rB, belonging to their respective one-entity Bloch
spheres, which are clearly distinguished from their correlation, described by
the vector (7), which cannot be deduced from the states of the two sub-
entities, in accordance with the general principle that the whole is greater
than the sum of its parts (so that the states of the parts cannot generally
determine the state of the whole).

358
We can observe that the interference contribution rint is what dis-
tinguishes the entangled state (1)-(2) from the separable state: Dsep
ψ
=
a2
1 DA
ψ ⊗DB
φ + a2
2 DA
φ ⊗DB
ψ . However, even when the interference contribu-
tion is zero, the separable (but non-product) state Dsep
ψ
does not describe a
situation of two experimentally separated entities, as is clear that the state
vector rA is not independent from the state vector rB, since their compo-
nents both contain the parameters a2
1 and a2
2. Also, the components of rAB
cannot be deduced from the knowledge of the components of rA and rB,
which means that a separable state is not a separated state, but a state
that still describes a situation where the whole is greater than the sum of
its parts.
Of course, when a2 = 0 (or a1 = 0), we are back to the situation of a so-
called product state. This manifests at the level of the Bloch representation
in the fact that r = dNArA ⊕dNBsB ⊕dNA,NBrAB
1
, with the two sub-
entity states rA and sB now totally independent from one another, and
able to fully determine the joint-entity contribution rAB
1
, so that there are
no genuine emergent properties in this case.
Therefore, considering the general description (6), and the previously
mentioned arguments in favor of the ‘density operators are pure states’
interpretation, we are now in a position to formulate a completed quantum
mechanical principle, in replacement of the SQMP1, which can restore the
full intelligibility of entangled states:
CQMP1 If S is a physical entity with Hilbert space H, then each density
operator of H is a pure state of S and all the pure states of S are of this
kind.
Of course, the CQMP1 does not imply that a density operator cannot be
used to also describe a situation of subjective ignorance of the experimenter,
regarding the pure state of an entity. It simply means that within the quan-
tum formalism a same mathematical object can be used to model diﬀerent
situations, which are not easy to experimentally distinguish, because of the
linearity of the trace used to calculate the transition probabilities.
However, a distinction between ‘pure state-density operators’ and
‘mixed state-density operators’ is in principle possible, for instance if one
can set up an experimental context producing a non-linear evolution of the
states, as in this case mixtures and pure states will evolve in a diﬀerent way,
and their ontological diﬀerence can become observable (see [6] for some ad-
ditional considerations regarding the distinguishability of pure and mixed
states in a measurement context).

359
It is worth mentioning that a completed quantum mechanics retaining
all the principles of SQM, apart the SQM1 which is to be replaced by
the CQMP1, was already proposed by one of us many years ago [3]. At
the time the proposal was motivated by the existence of a mechanistic
classical laboratory situations able to violate Bell’s inequalities exactly as
quantum entities in EPR-experiments can do [9]. Today, considering that
the ‘density operators are pure states’ interpretation is an integral part
of the extended Bloch representation, which provides a possible solution
to the measurement problem [6] and, as we have shown in this article, also
allows to obtain a partitioning of the entangled states where their correlative
aspects remain clearly and naturally “disentangled” from the description of
the sub-entities’ states, we believe that the proposal has reached the status
of a ﬁrmly founded scientiﬁc hypothesis, only waiting for an experimental
conﬁrmation.
A last remark is in order. Even in the simplest case of two entangled
qubits (NA = NB = 2), where the two one-entity states rA and rB can
be represented within our 3-dimensional Euclidean space (for instance as
directions, in the case of spins), the correlation vector rcorr is already 9-
dimensional, and therefore is no longer describable within our Euclidean
theatre. This is in accordance with the observed non-local eﬀects that are
produced by entangled entities, which are insensitive to spatial separation,
and which therefore should be understood as eﬀects resulting from the
existence of genuinely non-spatial correlations.
In other terms, the solution we have proposed to the second entangle-
ment paradox, via the extended Bloch representation, also suggests that
non-locality should be understood as a manifestation of the non-spatial
nature of quantum entities. This means that our approach also oﬀers a pos-
sible solution to the ﬁrst entanglement paradox, as is clear that if quantum
entities are non-spatial entities, then their interconnections, when in entan-
gled states, need not to happen through space, and therefore can remain
perfectly insensitive to spatial separation.
References
1. Schrœdinger, E. (1935). Naturwissenschaftern 23, 807.
2. Van Fraassen, B. C. (1991). Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View (Ox-
ford University Press Oxford 1991).
3. Aerts, D. (2000). Int. J. Theor. Phys. 39, 485.
4. Hughston, L. P., Jozsa, R. & Wootters, W. K. (1993). Phys. Lett. A 183, 14.

360
5. Beltrametti, E. & Cassinelli, G. (1981). The Logic of Quantum Mechanics
(Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley 1981).
6. Aerts, D. & Sassoli de Bianchi, M. (2014). Ann. Phys. 351, 975.
7. Bloch, F. (1946). Phys. Rev. 70, 460.
8. Kimura, G. (2003). Phys. Lett. A 314, 339.
9. Aerts, D. (1991). Helv. Phys. Acta 64, 1.

