Relations and Truthmaking
Peter Simons and Fraser MacBride
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
II—FRASER MACBRIDE
RELATIONS AND TRUTHMAKING
Can Bradley’s Regress be solved by positing relational tropes as truth-
makers? No, no more than Russell’s paradox can be solved by positing
Fregean extensions. To call a trope relational is to pack into its essence the
relating function it is supposed to perform but without explaining what
Bradley’s Regress calls into question, viz. the capacity of relations to re-
late. This problem has been masked from view by the (questionable) as-
sumption that the only genuine ontological problems that can be
intelligibly raised are those that can be answered by providing a schedule
of truthmakers.
I
Introduction. Russell held that there are relations amongst the ulti-
mate constituents of reality. Only by admitting them, he argued, is it
possible to comprehend the great continua of space, time and
number. Russell forged his conception of relations in debate with
Bradley and an extended engagement with the works of Leibniz,
philosophers who, for different reasons, and in different ways, de-
nied the existence of relations. He also held to the view that truth is
not a property of propositions but itself a matter of relations: prop-
ositions are not true simpliciter but made true by existing things.
Russell’s views about relations and truth were destined to acquire
the status of analytic orthodoxy, at least amongst philosophers of a
realist persuasion. Without their guiding influence, the history of
analytic ontology would likely have taken a quite different course.
Lately Russell’s views about relations and truth have been cast
into doubt. It has been questioned whether Russell’s arguments
against Bradley’s monism in favour of pluralism were as effective as
it has become orthodox to suppose. Espied from this lofty historical
perspective, Peter Simons’s contribution to the present symposium
may be seen to cast into doubt the effectiveness of Russell’s argu-

FRASER MACBRIDE
162
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
ments against Leibniz’s monadism. What has made it seem possible,
or even desirable, to think about turning the intellectual clock back
in this way? An important part of the answer to this question: a tec-
tonic shift in the underlying conception of ontological commitment
to which many philosophers adhere. No longer is to be simply to be
the value of a variable. To be is to perform a role in making a prop-
osition true or false. Once granted, this conception conspires with
what, if Simons is right, the world is actually like, to bring Russell’s
views about relations and truth into significant, if not irreconcilable,
tension. Since very few of the relations Russell posited are required
amongst the class of things that perform a role in actually making
propositions true, there is no necessity to admit them amongst the
ultimate constituents of reality.
Of course, Russell would not have been moved by this concern,
because he did not hold that to be is to play a role in making a prop-
osition true or false. In this paper I will argue that we should be
wary too of adopting this conception of ontological commitment.
Its employment masks rather than resolves metaphysical problems
that are genuine and deep. There are other theoretical roles, besides
truthmaking, for relations to perform.1
I will explore these general themes by examining some of the spe-
cific ways in which Simons employs the truthmaking conception of
ontological commitment in his paper. Simons does not define what
it means to be a truthmaker, or to perform a role in making a prop-
osition true. Instead he treats truthmaking as a primitive notion, re-
lying primarily upon examples of truthmakers and their
corresponding truths to enable us to catch on to what he means. For
present purposes it suffices to follow Simons and proceed at this rel-
atively intuitive level. But it is important to note that Simons rejects
truthmaker maximalism—the doctrine that every true proposition
has a truthmaker—on the grounds that when a negative existential
is true this is so not because it has a truthmaker, but because its pos-
itive contradictory lacks one. Moreover, he is inclined towards ac-
cepting the necessitation principle (nec) that if a makes it true that
p then the proposition that a exists logically necessitates that p
(Simons 2008).
1 In fact I am sceptical of whether truthmaking does mark a genuine role in our thinking or
whether truth merely supervenes upon being. For reasons of space I will not press that con-
cern here. See MacBride (2005) for further discussion.
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RELATIONS AND TRUTHMAKING
163
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
II
(Leibniz v. Russell) v. Simons. I have suggested that, seen from far
above, Simons’s contribution casts into doubt a long prevailing as-
sessment of the Leibniz–Russell dispute about relations, the assess-
ment that Russell won whereas Leibniz lost. Let me spell out what I
mean by this.
Leibniz advanced two arguments against relations. First, that for
an attribute to have ‘one leg in one term and another leg in another
term’ is ‘contrary to the nature of attributes’ (Letter to Clarke, Leib-
niz 1969, p. 704). Since a relation would be an attribute of this
kind, Leibniz concludes that there are no relations. Second, that a
relation between two terms is reducible (in some sense) to the prop-
erties of the terms taken separately. If Leibniz is right, a proposition
of the form aRb may be perspicuously resolved into a proposition of
the form Fa∧Gb. Leibniz concluded that ‘the relation common to
both terms is a mental thing, of which the modification of singulars
are the foundation’ (Letter to De Bosses, Leibniz 1969, p. 609).
Russell came to the defence of relations. He dismissed the first ar-
gument as no more than a picturesque way of insisting that no at-
tributes are relations. He dismissed the second argument on the
grounds that any purported reduction of an asymmetric relational
proposition to a conjunction of monadic ones will give rise to a vi-
cious regress: ‘The proposition “A is greater than B” is to be analyz-
able into two propositions, one giving an adjective to A, the other
giving one to B. … But then [Leibniz] will have to admit a relation
between the magnitudes, which will be as asymmetrical as the rela-
tion which the magnitudes were to explain. Hence the magnitude
will need new adjectives, and so on ad infinitum’ (Russell 1903,
§214). Let us contemplate the fact that Barack Obama is taller than
David Cameron. By Leibniz’s reckoning this is not because Obama
bears a relation (being taller than) to Cameron that Cameron does
not bear to Obama. It is because Obama and Cameron have differ-
ent heights. Whereas the former is (purportedly) 1.87 metres tall,
the latter is only 1.83 metres. But, Russell reflects, it only follows
from Obama and Cameron having these different heights that the
former is taller than the latter if we also assume that the height of
Obama (1.87 metres) is greater than the height of Cameron (1.83
metres), that is, if we presuppose the obtaining of another asymmet-
ric relation between these heights. Russell concluded that asymmet-
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FRASER MACBRIDE
164
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
ric relations are incapable of being reduced to the properties of the
things they relate.
Where does Simons stand with respect to this dispute between
Leibniz and Russell? On the one hand, Simons agrees with Leibniz
that there is a sense in which a great many relations are reducible.
This is because many relational predications are ‘internally true’,
made true solely by virtue of the existence of the things whose rela-
tionships they describe. Take Simons’s example, the proposition that
this proton is more massive than this electron. According to Simons
we have no need to acknowledge the existence of an asymmetric re-
lation, being more massive than, when specifying the truthmakers
for this prediction. Since ‘their masses are essential to them’, the
joint existence of the electron and the proton suffice.2 And there are
other relational predications that, whilst they fail to be internally
true, are made true by the existence of some other plurality of indi-
vidual things. Take another of Simons’s examples, the proposition
that this sweater is darker than this shirt. The sweater and the shirt
might both have existed and been of different hues, so their existence
does not suffice for the truth of the proposition in question. Never-
theless, the existence of their trope hues does suffice for its truth.
Why? Because it is essential to these tropes that they belong to their
respective garments—they are ‘non-transferable’, to use the meta-
physical jargon—and so they, the tropes, jointly make it internally
true that the hue of the sweater is darker than the hue of the shirt.
On the other hand, Simons agrees with Russell that Leibniz’s first
argument is a petitio principii (Simons 2002/3, p. 3). Simons also
agrees with Russell that some relations may be irreducible. This is
because some relational predications may fail to be made true by
any plurality of individual things. Simons conjectures that spatio-
temporal relations, including comparative geometrical relations,
amongst the occupants of loci are irreducible in this way, that is,
properly external relations. The proposition that Obama is taller
than Cameron may provide a case in point, a proposition that re-
quires a truly external relation amongst its truthmakers.
This still leaves us in the dark about how Simons stands with
respect to Russell’s regress argument. Simons doesn’t say anything
about this aspect of Russell’s thinking about relations, and this is a
2 Of course, one might question the assumption that tropes and electrons have their masses
essentially. But I will leave that concern to one side for the time being.
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RELATIONS AND TRUTHMAKING
165
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
significant omission in the presentation of his case for relational
tropes. But the following response dovetails with many things
Simons does say and goes some way towards remedying this lack.
Russell is absolutely right that an internally true proposition aRb
about how a and b are related cannot be formally deduced from a
conjunction of two other propositions, one entirely about a, the
other entirely about b. But this does not compromise the capacity of
a and b to make the proposition that a and b are so related true. If a
and b are truthmakers for the proposition that aRb then it is abso-
lutely impossible for them to exist and yet the proposition in ques-
tion be false. Once these truthmakers are recognized there is no
need to admit further relations to account for the truth of the prop-
osition in question. The parochial fact that we cannot pass by the
formal rules of a particular language from statements of a monadic
form to statements of a relational form does not belie this fact. The
recognition of the methodological point that we should admit only
those items into our ontology that ‘appear indispensable to account
for the truth’ of true propositions thus appears to enable Simons to
take a middle way between the views of Leibniz and Russell.
Does the appeal to truthmaking here really provide for a cogent
response to Russell’s argument that relations cannot be reduced?3 I
remain sceptical. It is important to recognize that this response to
Russell fails to get the measure of his position. Russell was clearly
not demanding that Leibniz provide per impossible a formal reduc-
tion of relational to monadic forms to vindicate reductionism about
relations. Otherwise Russell would not have been able, by his own
lights, to avoid the vicious regress he identified by appealing to a
higher-order asymmetric relation. Russell thought that (1) the ob-
taining of a higher-order relation R* between the magnitudes F and
G, and (2) a is F and b is G, does explain (3) the obtaining of a low-
er-order relation R (being greater than) between a and b. But clearly
a statement of the form aRb cannot be formally deduced (that is,
syntactically) from statements of the form R*(F, G) and Fa∧Gb.
This reflects that fact that the general project in which Russell
was engaged was one of providing a substantive explanatory ac-
count of what makes necessary truths true. He was not willing to
3 Some Leibniz commentators have certainly thought so. See, for example, Mates (1986,
pp. 214–18), Cover (1989, pp. 197–8), and Cover and O’Leary-Hawthorne (1999, p. 92).
But for the reasons sketched in this and the succeeding paragraph I think they are unfair to
Russell.
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FRASER MACBRIDE
166
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
rest content with acknowledging brute modal regularities. Instead
he sought to achieve insight into them by appealing to his realism:
‘All a priori knowledge’, he declared—remember he didn’t distin-
guish necessity from apriority—‘deals exclusively with relations be-
tween universals’ (Russell 1912, p. 59). There is something very
intuitive about Russell’s strategy for explaining necessities. Why (for
example) should a’s having one quantity and b’s another entail that
(for example) a is twice is massive as b? Answer: because the prop-
erty of having this mass stands in a certain relation of proportion to
the property of having that mass!
Would Russell have been impressed by the reflection that rela-
tions were not required to serve as truthmakers for internally true
propositions? No. He would have been suspicious of the purported
capacity of the terms described to make these propositions true
without implicating relations in their explanatory wake, even if it is
granted that they don’t serve as truthmakers for these internally true
propositions.4 Investigating more closely what Simons has to say on
behalf of relational tropes will help us get clearer about whether
there is any real substance to this suspicion.
III
The Case for Relational Tropes. Our thinking about relations has
been beset by two puzzles that have obdurately refused to go away.
The first concerns the capacity of any relation whatsoever to hold
between its terms. The second concerns the capacity of some rela-
tions, viz. non-symmetric ones, to hold between their terms in a
plethora of different ways. In the form in which these puzzles are
usually stated it is assumed that relations, if there are any, are uni-
versals, genuine ‘one-over-many’s that are capable of existing inde-
pendently of whatever particulars they in fact relate. Simons makes
the intriguing claim that these puzzles will go away if only we recog-
4 Another source of doubt about the Leibniz-Simons metaphysics comes from a quite different
direction, namely that there are few, if any, actual monadic truthmakers for relational truths.
It is often assumed that physics describes fundamental quantities that are defined as the
intrinsic (monadic) properties of points or point particles. If this assumption were granted,
then (confirmed) physics would indeed supply a rich source of monadic truthmakers. How-
ever, it is arguable that even in classical physics, quantities are endemically conceived as rela-
tional. For further details see Butterfield (2006). I am grateful to Jeremy Butterfield for
discussion of this issue.
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RELATIONS AND TRUTHMAKING
167
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
nize that relations are tropes, i.e. items that are unique to their bear-
ers and unable to exist without them. And this is crucially because
relational tropes, by contrast to relational universals, are capable,
all by themselves, of making relational propositions true. If Simons
is right about this, then he will have identified a critical respect in
which theories committed to tropes are to be preferred to theories
that are committed to universals. So Simons raises the prospect here
of breaking the deadlock that has so long endured between the
champions of tropes and their rivals who favour universals.
3.1. Bradley’s Regress. Let us consider what Simons has to say about
the first puzzle. This is Bradley’s notorious regress argument de-
signed to show that the very idea of a relation is unintelligible.
Simons elaborates upon ‘Bradley’s problem’ only briefly: ‘If a rela-
tion such as being upon is to link this book and this table it would ap-
pear that it needs to be related to the book and the table. But this
threatens an infinite regress’ (Simons 2010, p 202). Simons suggests
that whilst the prospects are bleak for blocking this regress if rela-
tions are universals, Bradley’s problem cannot arise if relations are
tropes. Simons characterizes a relational trope as being ‘multiply de-
pendent’ upon its bearers, so that it could not have existed without
them. In particular, a binary dependent trope ‘must be such that it de-
pends on two individuals … and the two individuals are related in a
certain way in virtue of there being such a trope depending on them’
(Simons 2002/3, p. 6). It follows that if a relational trope exists then
the things upon which it depends must be related in the relevant way.
Because they are so dependent upon the individuals they relate, rela-
tional tropes make it true that the things they relate are related.
Simons’s paradigm example of a relational trope is a particular
clap of two hands. If this clap exists then the two hands upon which
it depends must exist too and they must be related together in virtue
of its depending upon them. It follows that if this particular clap ex-
ists it makes true the proposition that these two hands clap together.
Since the clap makes this relational proposition true all by itself,
Simons concludes that there can be no further Bradley-style problem
about how the clap is related to the hands upon which it depends.
What Simons says here stands in need of further elaboration. In
the form that he actually states it, Bradley’s Regress appears to ap-
ply just as well to relational tropes as to universals: if a particular
relation is to link this book and this table, it would appear it needs
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FRASER MACBRIDE
168
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
to be related to this book and this table; but this threatens an infi-
nite regress. So it remains unclear what it is about relational tropes
that enables them to steal an advance on their universal brethren.
However, it is plausible that Simons is talking in shorthand here,
and what he has in mind is a different version of Bradley’s argu-
ment.5
Here is a thumbnail sketch. A relational universal R is supposed
to be a genuine ‘one-over-many’. In other words, it is supposed to
be something that is capable of existing independently of the partic-
ular terms it relates; a relational universal is something that could
have failed to relate its actual terms and related different terms in-
stead. A relation R of this kind cannot account for the fact (for ex-
ample) that a and b are related thus and so. This is because the mere
existence of R alongside a and b cannot suffice for a’s bearing R to
b. R, being a universal, may perfectly well exist, but instead of being
borne by a to b, may be engaged elsewhere, relating together entire-
ly different things, but not a and b. So to account for the fact that a
is related thus and so to b it must be established not only that R ex-
ists but that R is itself related to a and b. But this further fact, if it is
one, is a fact of the very same relational kind that we set out to ex-
plain. This makes it evident that relational universals lack the ex-
planatory power to advance our understanding of relatedness. The
positing of a universal like R simply results in the multiplication of
the number of items that we must recognize to be related, items
whose relatedness is still left unexplained.
By contrast to their universal brethren, it is clear that relational
tropes are not liable to this version of Bradley’s Regress. A relational
trope r1 is incapable of existing independently of its terms. It is
borne essentially by the things it relates, say a and b. So, necessarily,
if r1 exists then a and b exist too and they’re r1-related. Because of
the way in which a relational trope depends upon its terms, the mere
existence of a relational trope can, where a relational universal can-
not, account for its terms being related.
3.2. Order. What does Simons have to say about the second puzzle?
Simons invites us to consider whether non-symmetric relations have
5 See van Inwagen (1993, pp. 35–6) for a regress argument of this kind. It is also plausible
that Bradley had something like this in mind when he debated with Russell in Mind in 1911.
However, as we will see, it is the original 1893 version of Bradley’s Regress in Appearance
and Reality that creates the most trouble for Simons.
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RELATIONS AND TRUTHMAKING
169
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
distinct converses. Prima facie, there are a number of metaphysical
hypotheses between which we will need to decide to settle this issue.
Is it necessary to admit both being larger than and being smaller than
into our ontology, or only one of them? Or is it possible that, as Fine
has suggested, there is only one underlying relation that is neutral be-
tween the two different orders in which its terms may be mentioned?
Simons’s view is that these are pseudo-questions ‘occasioned by
adopting the view that the metaphysically ultimate nature of rela-
tions is universal’ (Simons 2010, p. 207). But, Simons declares, we
can avoid the impossible task of answering them by conceiving of re-
lations as tropes. This is because ‘Where a relational trope exists to
link two or more individuals, in itself it is neutral. It depends equally
on its various terms, though they need not depend on it’ (p. 207).
What Simons says here needs some polishing up before we can
clear about its import. He says that questions about whether relations
are distinct from their converses, or whether there is only one under-
lying neutral relation, are pseudo-questions. But Simons himself ap-
pears to recommend a position that provides negative answers to
both these questions. According to Simons, relations are not distinct
from their converses because relations do not apply to their terms in
any significant order. Nor, if Simons is right, is there only one under-
lying neutral relation corresponding to the forms ‘x is larger than y’
and ‘x is shorter than y’; in fact there are many neutral trope relations
that do so. But if it is intelligible to think that there are many neutral
relations corresponding to these forms, it is difficult to see how it can
be unintelligible to think that there is only one. So this leaves us in the
dark about why Simons thinks with respect to the problem of order
that his own trope theoretic position is to be preferred to Fine’s,
which holds that there are neutral relational universals.
I would like to sketch another way in which Simons might have
pressed his case against universals and which may indeed better re-
flect his underlying thinking about these matters, one that highlights
the role of tropes as truthmakers. Certainly it reflects a tendency
prevalent amongst proponents of truthmaking theory to think in a
certain way about the problems of ontology.
The puzzle about converse relations that we owe to Russell, Hoch-
berg and most recently to Fine arises out of trying to understand the
phenomenon of differential application, the fact that a binary non-
symmetric relation can apply in two different ways, aRb and bRa.6
We can try to explain this by saying that R applies in one direction in
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FRASER MACBRIDE
170
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
the first case, in another direction in the second. But now, equipped
with the notion of a direction, it is difficult to avoid conceding the
possibility of a converse relation. If R applies to a and b (in that or-
der), then a converse relation R* may be defined as the relation that
applies to b and a (in the reverse order). Do both of these relations
exist or only one of them? It seems arbitrary to privilege one over the
other. Neither being taller than nor being shorter than appear to
have the better claim to exist. But it also seems unacceptable to ad-
mit both relations, to admit that there is not only the circumstance
that Obama is taller than Cameron but also another chunk of reality,
the circumstance that Cameron is shorter than Obama.
Now, prima facie, tropes do allow us a way out of this uncom-
fortable situation. This is because relational tropes, by contrast to
universals, are not capable of differential application. There are not
two ways in which a given relational trope r1 can apply to a and b;
if it exists at all, it holds between them in just one way. Hence, r1, if
it exists, makes true that aRb rather than bRa. Similarly, let us sup-
pose that r2, if it exists, makes it true that bRa rather than aRb. And
this appears to provide us with an account of what makes the differ-
ence between its being true that aRb rather than bRa, the fact that
r1 exists rather than r2.
3.3. The ‘Virtus Relativa’ Problem. I am sceptical of whether
Simons has succeeded in showing that relational tropes avoid the
aforementioned puzzles. I find his arguments unconvincing in a way
that should make us wary of the more general employment of the
truthmaker methodology in metaphysics. We are often told that the
failure to supply a schedule of truthmakers for a given theory is a
form of ‘cheating’. Recognizing the kinds of truthmakers that are
required to make our favoured theories true keeps us honest, keeps
us on our guard against ‘brute’, ungrounded truths: brute counter-
factuals, brute truths about the past and future, and so on. But un-
less it is cautiously handled the truthmaker methodology itself
makes us liable to cheat.
The basic strategy employed by Simons and other truthmaker
theorists is to pack enough information into the essence of a thing
that its mere existence suffices for the truth of a target set of other-
6 See Russell (1903), Hochberg (1987) and Fine (2000). I discuss the problem of order in
greater detail in MacBride (2007).
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RELATIONS AND TRUTHMAKING
171
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
wise puzzling propositions. But this does mot mean that positing the
existence of a thing bestowed with such an essence will result in the
dissolution of our original puzzlement. We may simply transfer our
sense of intellectual unease about how it is possible for the target set
of propositions to be true to how it is possible for a thing with such
an essence to exist. It will not do to be simply told that no further
explanation is required because a schedule of truthmakers for these
propositions has already been provided. This just masks the under-
lying problem that originally emerged from reflection upon the tar-
get propositions by, in effect, insisting, without having earned the
privilege, that the only genuine ontological problems that can intel-
ligibly be raised are those that can be answered by providing a
schedule of truthmakers.
Let’s investigate whether anything of this kind is going on when
Simons attempts to resolve Bradley’s Regress by positing relational
tropes. To begin, let us grant the following conditional upon which
Simons relies:
(rt) If a relational trope r exists, then r relates its terms.
This is plausibly established by Simons’s basic characterization of
what a relational trope is. One might even think of it as a stipula-
tion that provides a partial explanation of the concept of a relation-
al trope. However, it doesn’t follow from (rt) that a relational
trope’s relating of its terms is unproblematic. It doesn’t follow either
that we can take for granted the possibility of r’s existing. Compare:
Frege’s fundamental characterization of an extension establishes
that if Fregean extensions exist then they satisfy Axiom (v). But
Russell showed that Axiom (v) gives rise to a contradiction. We
won’t get around this contradiction by simply positing the existence
of Fregean extensions. In fact Russell’s reasoning also demonstrates
that it isn’t possible for Fregean extensions to exist. Similarly, if Bra-
dley did succeed in showing by his regress argument that ‘a relation-
al way of thought—any one that moves by the machinery of terms
and relations—must give appearance and not truth’ (Bradley 1893,
p. 33), then Bradley’s reasoning also establishes it isn’t possible for
relational tropes to exist either. We cannot assume then that just be-
cause relational tropes, if they existed, would make relational prop-
ositions true, we are entitled to posit such entities. Why not?
Because until we have solved, or resolved, Bradley’s Regress directly
we are not entitled to presuppose that relational tropes are capable
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FRASER MACBRIDE
172
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
of existence.
This is not only a special problem for someone who only believes in
relational tropes, but applies more generally. Facts are often posited,
for example by Armstrong (1997, pp. 115–16) and Hochberg (1978,
pp. 338–40), as theoretical entities to solve Bradley’s Regress. The
idea is that whereas the mere existence of its constituents does not
suffice for a’s bearing R to b, the fact that aRb does. But ask yourself
the question, what is a fact? What distinguishes it from the mere plu-
rality of its constituents? The best answer seems to be that the con-
stituents of the fact are related. This means that unless we already
have an account of how the constituents of a fact are capable of being
so related we have no understanding of how a fact is possible. But
Bradley’s Regress is precisely designed to show that we don’t under-
stand how it is possible for things to be related. So we can’t appeal to
the existence of facts—any more than relational tropes—in advance
of independently solving, or dissolving, Bradley’s regress argument.
Before he can legitimately appeal to the existence of relational
tropes Simons must therefore face squarely up to Bradley’s Regress
itself. Has he done so? We have already seen that there is a case to
be made for saying that because relational tropes are necessarily re-
lated to their terms they are immune to one version of Bradley’s Re-
gress that besets relational universals. However, I wish to maintain
that Bradley’s original argument raises a genuine difficulty for rela-
tions regardless of whether they are necessarily or contingently
borne by their terms.
Bradley presented his original argument as a dilemma: either (a) if
a relation ‘is nothing to the [relata], then they are not related at all’
or (b) ‘it is something to them [and] then clearly we now shall re-
quire a new connecting relation … being something itself, if it does
not itself bear a relation to the terms in what intelligible way will it
succeed in being anything to them? But here we are hurried off into
the eddy of a hopeless process since we are forced to go on finding
new relations without end’ (Bradley 1893, pp. 32–3). The problem
for relations here is generated by reflection upon the fact that if a re-
lation isn’t related to its terms, then it can hardly hold between
them; but if a relation is related to its terms, then we require a fur-
ther relation to relate it to its terms, and then we fall into a regress
because the same reasoning applies to the relation newly intro-
duced. This shows that if we attempt to explain what it takes for
one thing to bear a relation to another in terms of a further relation
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RELATIONS AND TRUTHMAKING
173
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
then we will never achieve explanatory closure.
Now, do relational tropes evade this regress? It doesn’t seem so.
Bradley’s reasoning appears to apply just as smoothly to the case of
relational tropes as universals. For even a relational trope r must be
something to a and b, otherwise R can hardly hold between them.
Hence it must be related to them. But this means there must be a
further relational trope r* to so relate r, a and b, and then things just
keep falling apart after that concession. So it appears that relational
tropes succumb to the regress if universals do.
One might seek to resist this line of reasoning by arguing that re-
lational tropes are not related to their terms and therefore immune
to Bradley’s Regress. Because a relational trope r holds necessarily
between the terms it relates, this may make it appear questionable
whether r requires to be related to its terms in the way that relation-
al universals do. After all, r is incapable of floating free from the
terms upon which it depends to hold amongst alternative relata as
universals do. But necessary coexistence of a relation and its terms is
not enough to ensure that the relation holds between its terms. It’s
not enough that they exist in all and only the same worlds. What
more, then, is required of them? Obviously that they are related! So
even a relation that necessarily relates its terms must be something
to its terms and therefore liable to Bradley’s Regress.
More radically, one might argue that there is no need to posit a
further relation in order to explain how a bears the relational trope
r to b because there is nothing further about the possibility of rela-
tions relating that stands in need of explanation. It is the very nature
of r to be borne (if it exists) by a to b. So the mere existence of r ne-
cessitates its holding between a and b without need of further rela-
tions. However, it is difficult to avoid the suspicion that to endorse
this line of reasoning would be to license a form of cheating.7 For
how can positing the existence of a relational trope like r explain
anything about its capacity to relate when it has been stipulated to
be the very essence of R that it relates a to b? It is as though the ca-
pacity of relational tropes to relate is explained by mentioning the
fact that they have a ‘virtus relativa’.8 But this no more explains r’s
7 See MacBride (2002) for an argument that similar difficulties beset the use of truthmakers
to resolve the problem of universals.
8 I am grateful to David Sedley for suggesting this Latin form. Alternatives include ‘virtus
relationalis’ and ‘virtus relativis’.
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FRASER MACBRIDE
174
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
capacity to relate than the doctor in Molière’s Le Malade imaginaire
assigning to opium a ‘virtus dormitiva’ explains its capacity to put
people to sleep.
Similar difficulties afflict Simons’s claim that positing relational
tropes and eschewing universals enables us to resolve the second
puzzle. Here it also appears that Simons has simply packed into the
essence of a non-symmetric relational trope the ordering function it
is supposed to perform, but without giving us any insight into how
this is possible. What made it appear plausible that preferring rela-
tional tropes to universals enables us to avoid the second puzzle was
the fact that we can’t ask the question about a binary relational
trope that we can ask about a corresponding universal, namely, how
is it possible for it to apply in two different ways? But we can ask:
what is it about r1 that distinguishes it from r2 in such a way that if
r1 exists then aRb, whereas if r2 exists then bRa? r1 and r2 depend
upon just the same terms, viz. a and b. So there’s no distinguishing
between them via their terms. Therefore it appears that Simons is
left with an uncomfortable choice. He can distinguish r1 and r2 by
virtue of the different directions that they depend upon their terms.
But this enables us to define the notion of a converse relational
trope, and then we are embroiled once more in the cluster of diffi-
culties from which the admission of tropes was supposed to free us.
Or, alternatively, he can assign relations an innate capacity to order.
But then it is difficult to see how positing relational tropes can pro-
vide any explanatory insight into the fact that our world is one of
order and series.
This impression is compounded when we reflect that if relational
tropes are entirely neutral, as Simons supposes, then it is difficult to
see how order can ever arise in the world. Some relational tropes are
symmetric whereas others are asymmetric. But if Simons is right
that relational tropes are neutral then there is no underlying differ-
ence between these relations in the way they depend upon their
terms. So this saddles us with a mystery that the appeal to relational
tropes as truthmakers cannot resolve: just how the existence of one
relational trope can suffice for the truth of a symmetric construction
whereas the existence of another suffices for the truth of a non-sym-
metric construction.
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RELATIONS AND TRUTHMAKING
175
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
IV
Is Entailment a Relation? It is difficult to avoid the suspicion that if
we try to push the relational carpet down in one place it will simply
bulge up in another. And the more abstract and general our thinking
about the world becomes, the harder it becomes to find plausible
candidates for truthmakers that don’t involve a commitment to rela-
tions. It is conspicuous in this regard that Simons nowhere includes
entailment on his list of putative relations, especially since this
notion appears in the principle (nec) that provides a partial elucida-
tion of the notion of truthmaking itself: if a makes it true that p then
the proposition that a exists logically necessitates that p. But prima
facie truths about entailment are relational in form, encoding a non-
symmetric relation between premiss or premisses and a conclusion.
This raises the question of whether the relation of entailment is ex-
ternal, internal or neither.
Certainly it is difficult to see how entailment could be an external
relation. The obtaining of an external relation is not implied by the
existence or the attributes of the terms it relates, whereas the fact
that p entails q plausibly flows from the nature of the premiss and
the conclusion. It is not a matter of arbitrary fortune that they are
linked together in this way. But it is also difficult to see how entail-
ment could be an internal relation either.
On what could the obtaining of this relation possibly depend?
There appear to be three options worth considering. According to
the first option, the proposition that p entails q is made true by the
inconsistency of the premiss and the negation of the conclusion. But
consistency appears itself to be a relation between propositions and
so the carpet has just bulged up again.
According to the second option, validity is conceived as a primi-
tive feature of whole arguments. This option has some plausibility
in the light of the fact that logicians plausibly treat arguments as sin-
gle items (for example, they count, compare and contrast them). In
effect this approach corresponds to the monistic reduction of rela-
tions (aRb=R(a+b)) that Russell also criticized (1903, §215). And
it appears liable to something like Russell’s earlier criticism of mon-
ism. Simply treating validity as a monadic feature of an argument
gives us no insight into the fact that the argument is valid because
the premisses and conclusion are related one way rather than anoth-
er (that p entails q even though q doesn’t entail p).
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FRASER MACBRIDE
176
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
According to the third option, it is the premisses and conclusions
of a valid argument that are themselves responsible for the truth of
the proposition that p entails q. But this option provides no solace to
an advocate of nominalism such as Simons. Interpreted sentence to-
kens may be nominalistically acceptable, but there are insufficiently
many of them to make all the truths of entailment true. Propositions
and possible worlds are sufficiently numerous to perform the truth-
making role for all these truths about entailment. But neither propo-
sitions nor possible worlds can plausibly serve as truthmakers for
truths about entailment so far as Simons is concerned; they appear to
be abstract objects, like universals, that Simons wishes to eschew.
This suggests the more radically possibility that truths about en-
tailment lack truthmakers altogether. So they can be classified nei-
ther as internally nor externally true, and no corresponding distinc-
tion can be drawn between the relations they purportedly implicate.
However, this option is uncomfortable for the truthmaker theorist
in a different way. The application of the truthmaker methodology
was supposed to keep us honest, to keep us cognizant of the fact
that there’s no truth without something taking worldly responsibili-
ty for it’s being so. But now, if we take this route out, it turns out
that some truths, viz. those about entailment, must be taken as
brute. But if it is conceded that some propositions enjoy the privi-
lege of truth this threatens to undermine the motivation for the de-
mand for truthmakers in the first place. If some propositions can be
true without benefit of truthmakers then why not others? It is some-
times suggested that necessary truths can be exempted from the de-
mand for truthmakers in a principled way because they are true
come what may. But it doesn’t follow from the fact that something
never comes down that nothing is keeping it up. Similarly, it doesn’t
follow that from the fact something is necessarily true that nothing
is responsible for its being so.
The temptation to think otherwise is no doubt due to the fact that
we lie intellectually downstream from the Tractatus, the work that
told us ‘logic must take care of itself’ (Wittgenstein 1922, 5.473).
Wittgenstein there conceived logical truths, by contrast to contingent
truths which make substantive demands upon the world, to be mere-
ly structural: ‘When the truth of one proposition follows from the
truth of others, we can see this from the structure of the proposi-
tions’ (Wittgenstein 1922, 5.13). Wittgenstein tried to substantiate
this view by arguing that inference is grounded in structure of the
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RELATIONS AND TRUTHMAKING
177
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
sentences themselves. Inference expresses a relationship between
truth-grounds of propositions: ‘In particular, the truth of a proposi-
tion p follows from the truth of another proposition q if all the truth-
grounds of the latter are truth-grounds of the former’ (Witgenstein
1922, 5.12). And the truth-grounds of a proposition are determined
by the representational powers of the elementary propositions set-
tling what has to be the case for them to be true. This fundamental
thought is expressed in the Notes on Logic: ‘Molecular propositions
contain nothing beyond what is contained in their atoms’ (Wittgen-
stein 1961, p. 98). So once the picturing capacities of the atomic
propositions are fixed, their inferential liaisons are fixed too.
However, Wittgenstein’s ‘structural’ conception of entailment
cannot be applied to the class of entailments especially germane to
our present discussion. These are entailments that take conjunctions
of monadic propositions to deliver relational ones. According to
Wittgenstein, inference is a form of stuttering: it is reaffirming in the
conclusion some of the pictures that were already affirmed by the
premisses. But since relational forms are irreducible to monadic
forms, relational propositions cannot be reduced to a collection of
pictures that are implicitly isomorphic to the same states of affairs
that monadic propositions picture.
Since Wittgenstein’s structural conception of logic cannot help,
Simons must make out (1) an alternative conception of the distinc-
tion between merely structural truths that come for free and sub-
stantial truths that demand an ontology of truthmakers. He must
then show (2) that the relevant entailment truths lie upon the struc-
tural side of this distinction. Until and unless these tasks are effec-
tively executed, it remains to be settled what if any truths, relational
or otherwise, are possessed of truthmakers; and, as we have also
seen, it remains to be established whether an appeal to relational
tropes facilitates any kind of advance in addressing Bradley’s Re-
gress or the problem of order.9
9 I am grateful to audiences in Cambridge and Leeds. I am also indebted to Ken Gemes, Jane
Heal, Nick Jones, Mike Martin, Hugh Mellor, Mark Migotti, Steven Methven, Kevin Mul-
ligan and Alex Oliver for further discussion of the issues raised here.
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

FRASER MACBRIDE
178
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
Faculty of Philosophy
University of Cambridge
Sidgwick Avenue
Cambridge cb3 9da
uk
References
Armstrong, D. M. 1997: A World of States of Affairs. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Bradley, F. H. 1893: Appearance and Reality. London: Swan Sonnenschein.
——1911: ‘Reply to Mr Russell’s Explanation’. Mind, 19, pp. 74–6.
Butterfield, Jeremy 2006: ‘Against Pointillisme in Mechanics’. British Jour-
nal for the Philosophy of Science, 57, pp. 709–54.
Cover, J. A. 1989: ‘Relations and Reduction in Leibniz’. Pacific Philosophi-
cal Quarterly, 70, pp. 185–211.
——and John O’Leary-Hawthorne 1999: Substance and Individuation in
Leibniz: An Essay in Metaphysics. Cambridge University Press: Cam-
bridge.
Fine, Kit 2000: ‘Neutral Relations’. Philosophical Review, 109, pp. 1–33.
Hochberg, Herbert 1978: Thought, Fact and Reference: The Origins and
Ontology of Logical Atomism. Minneapolis, mn: University of Minneso-
ta Press.
——1987: ‘Russell’s Early Analysis of Relational Predication and the
Asymmetry of the Predication Relation’. Philosophia, 17, pp. 439–59.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 1969: Philosophical Papers and Letters, 2nd
edn., ed. and trans. Leroy E. Loemker. Dordrecht and Boston, ma: Reidel.
MacBride, Fraser 2002: ‘The Problem of Universals and the Limits of
Truth-making’. Philosophical Papers, 31, pp. 27–37.
——2005: ‘Lewis’s Animadversions on the Truthmaker Principle. In Helen
Beebee and Julian Dodds (eds.), Truthmakers: The Contemporary De-
bate, pp. 117–40. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——2007: ‘Neutral Relations Revisited’. Dialectica, 61:1, pp. 25–56.
Mates, Benson 1986: The Philosophy of Leibniz: Metaphysics and Lan-
guage. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Russell, Bertrand 1903: The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
——1912: The Problems of Philosophy. London: Williams and Norgate.
Simons, Peter 2002/3: ‘Tropes, Relational’. Conceptus, 35, pp. 53–73.
——2008: ‘Why the Negations of False Atomic Sentences are True’. In Tim
De Mey and Markku Keinänen (eds.), Problems from Armstrong: Acta
Philosophica Fennica, 84, pp. 15–36.
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

RELATIONS AND TRUTHMAKING
179
©2011 The Aristotelian Society
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Vol. cxi, Part 1
doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x
——2010: ‘Relations and Truthmaking’. Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society Supplementary Volume 84, pp. 199–213.
Van Inwagen, Peter 1993: Metaphysics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wittgenstein Ludwig 1922: Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, trans. C. K.
Ogden. London: Routledge.
——1961: Notebooks 1914–16, ed. G. H. von Wright, trans. G. E. M.
Anscombe. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
 14679264, 2011, 1pt1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1467-9264.2011.00304.x by The Wikipedia Library, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2023]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

