VI
PROGRESS IN THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO
PLATO'S TIME
IN tracing the further progress in the Elements which took
place down to the time of Plato, we do not get much assistance
from the summary of Proclus. The passage in which he
states the succession of geometers from Pythagoras to Plato
and his contemporaries runs as follows:
'After him [Pythagoras] Anaxagoras of Clazomenae dealt
with many questions in geometry, and so did Oenopides of
Chios, who was a little younger than Anaxagoras; Plato
himself alludes, in the Rivals, to both of them as having
acquired a reputation for mathematics. After them came
Hippocrates of Chios, the discoverer of the quadrature of
the lune, and Theodorus of Cyrene, both of whom became
distinguished geometers; Hippocrates indeed was the first
of whom it is recorded that he actually compiled Elements.
Plato, who came next to them, caused mathematics in general
and geometry in particular to make a very great advance;
owing to his own zeal for these studies; for every one knows
that he even filled his writings with mathematical discourses
and strove on every occasion to arouse enthusiasm for mathe-
matics in those who took up philosophy. At this time too
lived Leodamas of Thasos, Archytas of Taras, and Theaetetus
of Athens, by whom the number of theorems was increased
and a further advance was made towards a more scientific
grouping of them'1
It will be seen that we have here little more than a list of
names of persons who advanced, or were distinguished in,
geometry. There is no mention of specific discoveries made
by particular geometers, except that the work of Hippocrates
on the squaring of certain' lunes is incidentally alluded to,
rather as a means of identifying Hippocrates than as a de-
tail relevant to the subject in hand. It would appear that
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 65. 21-66. 18.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME 
171
the whole summary was directed to the one object of trac-
ing progress in the Elements, particularly with reference
to improvements of method in the direction of greater
generality and more scientific order and treatment; hence
only those writers are here mentioned who contributed to this
development. Hippocrates comes into the list, not because
of his lunes, but because he was a distinguished geometer
and was the first to write Elements. Hippias of Elis, on the
other hand, though he belongs to the period covered by the
extract, is omitted, presumably because his great discovery,
that of the curve known as the quadratrix, does not belong
to elementary geometry; Hippias is, however, mentioned in
two other places by Proclus in connexion with the quadratrix,1
and once more as authority for the geometrical achievements
of Ameristus (or Mamercus or Mamertius).2 Less justice is
done to Democritus, who is neither mentioned here nor else-
where in the commentary; the omission here of the name
of Democritus is one of the arguments for the view that
this part of the summary is not quoted from the History
of Geometry by Eudemus (who would not have been likely to
omit so accomplished a mathematician as Democritus), but
is the work either of an intermediary or of Proclus himself,
based indeed upon data from Eudemus's history, but limited to
particulars relevant to the object of the commentary, that
is to say, the elucidation of Euclid and the story of the growth
of the Elements.
There are, it is true, elsewhere in Proclus3 s commentary
a very few cases in which particular propositions in Euclid,
Book I, are attributed to individual geometers, e.g. those
which Thales is said to have discovered. Two propositions
presently to be mentioned are in like manner put to the
account of Oenopides; but except for these details about
Oenopides we have to look elsewhere for evidence of the
growth of the Elements in the period now under notice.
Fortunately we possess a document of capital importance,
from this point of view, in the fragment of Eudemus on
Hippocrates's quadrature of lunes preserved in Simplicius's
commentary on the Physics of Aristotle.3 This fragment will
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 272. 7, p. 356. 11. 
2 Ib., p. 65. 14.
3 Sinipl. m ArtsL Phys. pp. 54-69 Diels.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

172 
THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
be described below. Meantime we will take the names men-
tioned by Proclus in their order.
ANAXAGORAS (about 500-428 B.O.) was born at Clazomenae
in the neighbourhood of Smyrna. He neglected his posses-
sions, which were considerable, in order to devote himself
to science. Some one once asked him what was the object
of being born, to which he replied, c The investigation of sun,
moon and heaven/ He was apparently the first philosopher
to take up his abode at Athens, where he enjoyed the friend-
ship of Pericles. When Pericles became unpopular shortly
before the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War, he was attacked
through his friends, and Anaxagoras was accused of impiety
for holding that the sun was a red-hot stone and the moon
earth. According to one account he was fined five talents
and banished; another account says that he was kept in
prison and that it was intended to put him to death, but
that Pericles obtained his release, he went and lived at
Lampsacus till his death.
Little or nothing is known of Anaxagoras's achievements
in mathematics proper, though it is credible enough that
he was a good mathematician. But in astronomy he made
one epoch-making discovery, besides putting forward some
remarkably original theories about the evolution of the
universe. We owe to him the first clear recognition of the
fact that the moon does not shine by its own light but
receives its light from the sun; this discovery enabled him
to give the true explanation of lunar and solar eclipses,
though as regards the former (perhaps in order to explain
their greater frequency) he erroneously supposed that there
were other opaque and invisible bodies 'below the moon'
which, as well as the earth, sometimes by their interposition
caused eclipses of the moon. A word should be added about
his cosmology on account of the fruitful ideas which it con-
tained. According to him the formation of the world began
with a vortex set up, in a portion of the mixed mass in which
'all things were together', by Mind (vov$). This rotatgry
movement began in the centre and then gradually spread,
taking in wider and wider circles. The first effect was to
separate two great masses, one consisting of the rare, hot,
light, dry, called the 'aether', the other of the opposite
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANAXAGORAS 
173
categories and called 'air' 
The aether took the outer, the
air the inner place. From the air were next separated clouds,
water, earth and stones. The dense, the moist, the dark and
cold, and all the heaviest things, collected in the centre as the
result of the circular motion, and it was from these elements
when consolidated that the earth was formed; but after this,
in consequence of the violence of the whirling motion, the
surrounding fiery aether tore stones away from the earth and
kindled them into stars. 
Taking this in conjunction with
the remark that stones 'rush outwards more than water',*
we see that Anaxagoras conceived the idea of a centrifugal
force as well as that of concentration brought about by the
motion of the vortex, and that he assumed a series of pro-
jections or c whirlings-off' of precisely the same kind as the
theory of Kant and Laplace assumed for the formation of
the solar system. At the same time he held that one of the
heavenly bodies might break away and fall (this may account
for the story that he prophesied the fall of the meteoric stone
at Aegospotami in 468/7 B.C.), a centripetal tendency being
here recognized.
In mathematics we are told that Anaxagoras 'while in
prison wrote (or drew, eypatpe) the squaring of the circle'.1
But we have no means of judging what this amounted 'to.
Rudio translates eypafe as f zeichnete', ' drew', observing that
he probably knew the Egyptian rule for squaring, and simply
drew on the sand a square as nearly as he could equal to the
area of a circle.2 It is clear to me that this cannot be right,
but that the word means (wrote upon' in the sense that he
tried to work out theoretically the problem in question. For
the same word occurs (in the passive) in the extract from
Eudemus about Hippocrates: ' The squarings of the lunes . . .
were first written (or proved) by Hippocrates and were found
to be correctly expounded*,3 where the context shows that
kypd<pr](Tav cannot merely mean 'were drawn'. 
Besides,
T€Tpay(ovL<rfji6$, squaring, is a process or operation, and you
cannot, properly speaking, ' draw' a process, though you can
' describe' it or prove its correctness.
1 Plutarch, De exih 17, 607 F.
2 Rudio, Der Bericht des Simplicius uber die Quadraturen des Antiphon
und Hippohrates, 1907, p. 92, 93.
3 Simpl. in Phys., p. 61. 1-3 Diels ; Rudio, op. cit, pp. 46. 22-48. 4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

174 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
Vitruvius tells us that one Agatharchus was the first to paint
stage-scenes at Athens, at the time when Aeschylus was
having his tragedies performed, and that he left a treatise on
the subject which was afterwards a guide to Democritus and
Anaxagoras, who discussed the same problem, namely that of
painting objects on a plane surface in such a way as to make
some of the things depicted appear to be in the background
while others appeared to stand out in the foreground, so that
you seemed, e.g., to have real buildings before you; in other
words, Anaxagoras and Democritus both wrote treatises on
perspective.1
There is not much to be gathered from the passage in
the Rivals to which Proclus refers. 
Socrates, on entering the
school of Dionysius, finds two lads disputing a certain point,
something about Anaxagoras or Oenopides, he was not certain
which; but they appeared to be drawing circles, and to be
imitating certain inclinations by placing their hands at an
angle.2 Now this description suggests that what the lads
were trying to represent was the circles of the equator and
the zodiac or ecliptic; and we know that in fact Eudemus
in his History of Astronomy attributed to Oenopides the dis-
covery of ' the cincture of the zodiac circle ',3 which must mean
the discovery of the obliquity of the ecliptic. It ^would prob-
ably be unsafe to conclude that Anaxagoras was also credited
with the same discovery, but it certainly seems to be suggested
that Anaxagoras had to some extent touched the mathematics
of astronomy.
OENOPIDES OF CHIOS was primarily an astronomer. This
is shown not only by the reference of Eudemus just cited, but
by a remark of Proclus in connexion with one of two proposi-
tions in elementary geometry attributed to him.4 Eudemus
is quoted as saying that he not only discovered the obliquity
of the ecliptic, but also the period of a Great Year. Accord-
ing to Diodorus the Egyptian priests claimed that it was from
them that Oenopides learned that the sun moves in an inclined
orbit and in a sense opposite to the motion of the fixed stars.
It does not appear that Oenopides made any measurement of
1 Vitruvius, Be architectural vii. praef. 11.
2 Plato, Erastae 132 A, B. 
8 Theon of Smyrna, p. 198. 14.
* Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 283. 7-8.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

OENOPIDES OF CHIOS 
175
the obliquity of the ecliptic. The duration of the Great Year
he is said to have put at 59 years, while he made the length
of the year itself to be 365§| days. His Great Year clearly
had reference to the sun and moon only; he merely sought to
find the least integral number of complete years which would
contain an exact number of lunar months. Starting, probably,
with 365 days as the length of a year and 29^ days as the
length of a lunar month, approximate values known before
his time, he would see that twice 29|, or 59, years would con-
tain twice 365, or 730, lunar months. He may then, from his
knowledge of the calendar, have obtained 21,557 as the num-
ber of days in 730 months; for 21,557 when divided by 59 gives
365f| as the number of days in the year.
Of Oenopides's geometry we have no details, except that
Proclus attributes to him two propositions in Eucl. Bk. I. Of
I. 12 (' to draw a perpendicular to a given straight line from
a point outside it') Proclus says:
'This problem was first investigated by Oenopides, who
thought it useful for astronomy. He, however, calls the per-
pendicular in the archaic manner (a straight line drawn)
gnomon-wise (Kara yvtofMova), because the gnomon is also at
right angles to the horizon/ *•
On I.*23 ('on a given straight line and at a given point on
it to construct a rectilineal angle equal to a given rectilineal
angle') Proclus remarks that this problem is ' rather the dis-
covery of Oenopides, as Eudemus says \2 It is clear that the
geometrical reputation of Oenopides could not have rested on
the mere solution of such simple problems as these. Nor, of
course, could he have been the first to draw a perpendicular in
practice; the point may be that he was the first to solve the
problem by means of the ruler and compasses only, whereas
presumably, in earlier days, perpendiculars would be drawn
by means of a set square or a right-angled triangle originally
constructed, say, with sides proportional to 3, 4, 5. Similarly
Oenopides may have been the first to give the theoretical,
rather than the practical, construction for the problem of I. 23
which we find in Euclid. It may therefore be that Oenopides's
significance lay in improvements of method from the point of
view of theory; he may, for example, have been the first to
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 283. 7-8. 
2 Proclus on Eucl I, p. 333. 5.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

176 
THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
lay down the restriction of the means permissible in construc-
tions to the ruler and compasses which became a canon of
Greek geometry for all 'plane' constructions, i.e. for all
problems involving the equivalent of the solution of algebraical
equations of degree not higher than the second.
DEMOCRITUS, as mathematician, may be said to have at last
come into his own. In the Method of Archimedes, happily
discovered in 190fr, we are told that Democritus was the first
to state the important propositions that the volume of a cone
is one third of that of a cylinder having the same base and
equal height, and that the volume of a pyramid is one third of
that of a prism having the same base and equal height; that is
to say, Democritus enunciated these propositions some fifty
years or more before they were first scientifically proved by
Eudoxus.
Democritus came from Abdera, and, according to his own
account, was young when Anaxagoras was old. Apollodorus
placed his birth in 01. 80 (= 460-457 B.C.), while according
to Thrasyllus he was born in 01. 77. 3 ( = 470/69 B.C.), being
one year older than Socrates. He lived to a great age, 90
according to Diodorus, 104, 108, 109 according to other
authorities. 
He was indeed, as Thrasyllus called him,
nevraOXos in philosophy1; there was no subject to which he
did not notably contribute, from mathematics and physics on
the one hand to ethics and poetics ori the other; he even went
by the name of l Wisdom' (Sofyia).2 Plato, of course, ignores
him throughout his dialogues, and is said to have wished to
burn all his works; Aristotle, on the other hand, pays
handsome tribute to his genius, observing, e.g., that on the
subject of change and growth no one save Democritus had
observed anything except superficially; whereas Democritus
seemed to have thought of everything.3 
He could say
of himself (the fragment is, it is true, considered by Diels
to be spurious, while Gomperz held it to be genuine), 'Of
all my contemporaries I have covered the most ground in
my travels, making the most exhaustive inquiries the while ;
I have seen the most climates and countries and listened to
1 Diog. L. ix. 37 {Vors. ii3, p. 11. 24-30).
2 Clem. Strom, vi. 32 {Vors. ii3, p. 16. 28).
3 Arist. De $en. et corr. i. 2, 315 a 35.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DEMOCRITUS 
177
the greatest number of learned men'} 
His travels lasted for
live years, and he is said to have visited Egypt, Persia and
Babylon, where he consorted with the priests and magi; some
say that he went to India and Aethiopia also. Well might
he undertake the compilation of a geographical survey of
the earth as, after Anaximander, Hecataeus of Miletus and
Damastes of Sigeum had done. In his lifetime his fame was
far from world-wide: ' I came to Athens', he says, ' and no
one knew me/2
A long li^t of his writings is preserved in Diogenes Laertius,
the authority being Thrasyllus. In astronomy he wrote,
among other works, a book On the Planets, and another On
the Great Year or Astronomy including a parapegma3 (or
calendar). Democritus made the order of the heavenly bodies,
reckoning outwards from the earth, the following: Moon,
Venus, Sun, the other planets, the fixed stars. Lucretius 4 has
preserved an interesting explanation which he gave of the
reason why the sun takes a year to describe the full circle of
the zodiac, while the moon completes its circle in a month.
The nearer any body is to the earth (and therefore the farther
from the sphere of the fixed stars) the less swiftly can it be
carried round by the revolution of the heaven. Now the
moon is nearer than the sun, and the sun than the signs of
the zodiac ; therefore the moon seems to get round faster than
the sun because, while the sun, being lower and therefore
slower than the signs, is left behind by them, the moon,
being still lower and therefore slower still, is still more left
behind. Democritus's Great Year is described by Censorinus5
as 82 (LXXXII) years including 28 intercalary months, the
latter number being the same as that included by Callippus in
his cycle of 76 years; it is therefore probable that LXXXII
is an incorrect reading for LXXVII (77).
As regards his mathematics we have first the statement in
1 Clement, Strom, i. 15, 69 (Vors. ii3, p. 123. 3).
2 Diog. L. ix. 36 (Vors. ii3, p. 11. 22).
3 The parapegma was a posted record, a kind of almanac, giving, for
a series of years, the movements of the sun, the dates of the phases of
the moon, the risings and settings of certain stars, besides inKrrjfiacriat
or weather indications ; many details from Democritus's parapegma
are preserved in the Calendar at the end of Geminus's Isagoge and in
Ptolemy.
4 Lucretius, v. 621 sqq. 
5 Be die natali, 18. 8.
1623 
N
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

178 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
the continuation of the fragment of doubtful authenticity
already quoted that
' in the putting together of lines, with the necessary proof, no
one has yet surpassed me, not even the so-called harpedon-
aptae (rope-stretchers) of Egypt \
This does not tell us much, except that it indicates that
the 'rope-stretchers', whose original function was land-
measuring or practical geometry, had by Democritus's time
advanced some way in theoretical geometry (a fact which the
surviving documents, such as the book of Ahmes, with their
merely practical rules, would not have enabled us to infer).
However, there is no reasonable doubt that in geometry
Democritus was fully abreast of the knowledge of his day;
this is fully confirmed by the titles of treatises by him and
from other sources. The titles of the works classed as mathe-
matical are (besides the.astronomical works above mentioned):
1. On a difference of opinion (yi/w/jLrjs: v. I. yva/jiovos, gno-
mon), or on the contact of a circle and a sphere;
2. On Geometry;
3. Geometricorum (?I, 11)/
4. Numbers;
5. On irrational lines and solids (j/aara>i/} atoms ?);
6.
As regards the first of these works I think that the
attempts to extract a sense out of Cobet's reading
(on a difference of a gnomon) have failed, and that
(Diels) is better. 
But ' On a difference of opinion' seems
scarcely determinative enough, if this was really an alternative
title to the book. We know that there were controversies in
ancient times about the nature of the l angle of contact' (the
'angle' formed, at the point of contact, between an arc of
a circle and the tangent to it, which angle was called by the
special name hornlike, KepaToeiSrjs), and the 'angle' comple-
mentary to it (the 'angle of a semicircle').x The question was
whether the ' hornlike angle' was a magnitude comparable
with the rectilineal angle, i.e. whether by being multiplied
a sufficient number of times it could be made to exceed a
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 121. 24-122. 6.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DEMOCRITUS 
179
given rectilineal angle. Euclid proved (in III. 16) that the
c angle of contact' is less than any rectilineal angle, thereby
setting the question at rest. This is the only reference in
Euclid to this angle and the ' angle of a semicircle ', although
he defines the 'angle of a segment' in III, Def. 7, and has
statements about the angles of segments in III. 31. But we
know from a passage of Aristotle that before his time ' angles
of segments' came into geometrical text-books as elements in
figures which could be used in the proofs of propositions1;
thus e.g. the equality of the two angles of a segment
(assumed as known) was used to prove the theorem of
Eucl. I. 5. Euclid abandoned the use of all such angles in
proofs, and the references to them above mentioned are only
survivals. The controversies doubtless arose long before his
time, and such a question as the nature of the contact of
a circle with its tangent would probably have a fascination
for Democritus, who, as we shall see, broached other questions
involving infinitesimals. 
As, therefore, the questions of the
nature of the contact of a circle with its tangent and of the
character of the ' hornlike' angle are obviously connected,
I prefer to read ycoi/irjs (' of an angle') instead of yj/co/nj^ ; this
would give the perfectly comprehensible title, ' On a difference
in an angle, or on the contact of a circle and a sphere'. We
know from Aristotle that Protagoras, who wrote a book on
mathematics, nepl TCOI/ /ladrjfiaTcoi', used against the geometers
the argument that no such straight lines and circles as
they assume exist in nature, and that (e. g.) a material circle
does not in actual fact touch a ruler at one point only2; and
it seems probable that Democritus's work was directed against
this sort of attack on geometry.
We know nothing of the contents of Democritus's book
On Geometry or of his Geometrica. One or other of these
works may possibly have contained the famous dilemma about
sections of a cone parallel to the base and very close together,
which Plutarch gives on the authority of Chrysippus.3
f If, said Democritus, ' a cone were cut by a plane parallel
to the base [by which is clearly meant a plane indefinitely
1 Arist. Anal. Pr. i. 24, 41 b 13-22.
2 Arist. Metaph. B. 2, 998 a 2.
3 Plutarch, De comm. not. adv. Stoicos, xxxix. 3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

180 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
near to the base], what must we think of the surfaces forming
the sections 1 Are they equal or unequal ? For, if they are
unequal, they will make the cone irregular as having many
indentations, like steps, and unevennesses; but, if they are
equal, the sections will be equal, and the cone will appear to
have the property of the cylinder and to be made up of equal,
not unequal, circles, which is very absurd/
The phrase ' made up of equal . . . circles' shows that
Democritus already had the idea of a solid being the sum of
an infinite number of parallel planes, or indefinitely thin
laminae, indefinitely near together: a most important an-
ticipation of the same thought which led to such fruitful
results in Archimedes. This idea may be at the root of the
argument by which Democritus satisfied himself of the truth
of the two propositions attributed to him by Archimedes,
namely that a cone is one third part of the cylinder, and
a pyramid one third of the prism, which has the same base
and equal height. For it seems probable that Democritus
would notice that, if two pyramids having the same height
and equal triangular bases are respectively cut by planes
parallel to the base and dividing the heights in the same
ratio, the corresponding sections of the two pyramids are
equal, whence he would infer that the pyramids are equal as
being the sum of the same infinite number of equal plane
sections or indefinitely thin laminae. (This would be a par-
ticular anticipation of Cavalieri's proposition that the areal or
solid content of two figures is equal if two sections of them
taken at the same height, whatever the height may be, always
give equal straight lines or equal surfaces respectively.) And
Democritus would of course see that the three pyramids into
which a prism on the same base and of equal height with the
original pyramid is divided (as in Eucl. XII. 7) satisfy this
test of equality, so that the pyramid would be one third part
of the prism. The extension to a pyramid with a polygonal
base would be easy. And Democritus may have stated the
proposition for the cone (of course without an absolute proof)
as a natural inference from the result of increasing indefinitely
the number of sides in a regular polygon forming the base of
a pyramid.
Tannery notes the interesting fact that the order in the list
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DEMOCRITUS 
181
of Democritus's works of the treatises 0 a Geometry, Geometrica.
Numbers, and On irrational lines and solids corresponds to
the order of the separate sections of Euclid's Elements, Books
I-VI (plane geometry), Books VII-IX (on numbers), and
Book X (on irrationals). With regard to the work On irra-
tional lines and solids it is to be observed that, inasmuch as
his investigation of the cone had brought Democritus con-
sciously face to face with infinitesimals, there is nothing
surprising in his having written on irrationals; on the con-
trary, the subject is one in which he would be likely to take
special interest. It is useless to speculate on what the treatise
actually contained; but of one thing we may be sure, namely
that the dXoyoi ypa/xfxac, 'irrational lines', were not arofioi
ypaiijjLai, 'indivisible lines'.1 
Democritus was too good a
mathematician to have anything to do with such a theory.
We do not know what answer he gave to his puzzle about the
cone; but his statement of the dilemma shows that he was
fully alive to the difficulties connected with the conception of
the continuous as illustrated by the particular case, and he
cannot have solved it, in a sense analogous to his physical
theory of atoms, by assuming indivisible lines, for this would
have involved the inference that the consecutive parallel
sections of the cone are unequal, in which case the surface
would (as he said) be discontinuous, forming steps, as it were*
Besides, we are told by Simplicius that, according to Demo-
critus himself, his atoms were, in a mathematical sense
divisible further and in fact ad infinitum? while the scholia
to Aristotle's Be caelo implicitly deny to Democritus any
theory of indivisible lines: 'of those who have maintained
the existence of indivisibles, some, as for example Leucippus
and Democritus, believe in indivisible bodies, others, like
Xenocrates, in indivisible lines \3
With reference to the JjE/c7rera<r/zara it is to be noted that
this word is explained in Ptolemy's Geography as the projec-
tion of the armillary sphere upon a plane.4 This work and
that On irrational lines would hardly belong to elementary
geometry.
1 On this cf. 0. Apelt, Beitrdge zur Geschichte der griechischen Philo-
sophie, 1891, p. 265 sq.
2 Simpl. in Phys., p. 83. 5. 
3 Scholia in Arist., p. 469 b 14, Brandis.
4 Ptolemy, Geogr. vii. 7.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

182 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
HIPPIAS OF ELIS, the famous sophist already mentioned (pp. 2,
23-4), was nearly contemporary with Socrates and Prodicus,
and was probably born about 460 B.C. Chronologically, there-
fore, his place would be here, but the only particular discovery
attributed to him is that of the curve afterwards known as
the quadratrix, and the quadratrix does not come within the
scope of the Elements. It was used first for trisecting any
rectilineal angle or, more generally, for dividing it in any
ratio whatever, and secondly for squaring the circle, or rather
for finding the length of any arc of a circle; and these prob-
lems are not what the Greeks called ' plane' problems, i. e.
they cannot be solved by means of the ruler and compasses.
It is true that some have denied that the Hippias who
invented the quadratrix can have been Hippias of Elis;
Blassx and Apelt2 were of this opinion, Apelt arguing that at
the time of Hippias geometry had not got far beyond the
theorem of Pythagoras. To show how wide of the mark this
last statement is we have only to think of the achievements
of Democritus. 
We know, too, that Hippias the sophist
specialized in mathematics, and I agree with Cantor and
Tannery that there is no reason to doubt that it was he who
discovered the quadratrix. 
This curve will be best described
when we come to deal with the problem of squaring the circle
(Chapter VII); here we need only remark that it implies the
proposition that the lengths of arcs in a circle are proportional
to the angles subtended by them at the centre (Eucl. VI. 33).
The most important name from the point of view of this
chapter is HIPPOCRATES OF CHIOS. He is indeed the first
person of whom it is recorded that he compiled a book of
Elements. This is lost, but Simplicius has preserved in his
commentary on the Physics of Aristotle a fragment from
Eudemus's History of Geometry giving an account of Hippo-
crates's quadratures oi certain ' lunules' or lunes.3 This is one
of the most precious sources for the history of Greek geometry
before Euclid; and, as the methods, with one slight apparent
exception, are those of the straight line and circle, we can
form a good idea of the progress which had been made in the
Elements up to Hippocrates's time.
1 Fleckeisen's Jahrbuch, cv, p. 28.
2 Beitrage zur Gesch, d. gr. Philosophies p. 379.
3 Sirapl. in Phys., pp. 60. 22-68. 32, Diels.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HIPPOCRATES OF CHIOS 
183
It would appear that Hippocrates was in Athens during
a considerable portion of the second half of the fifth century,
perhaps from 450 to 430 B.C. We have quoted the story that
what brought him there was a suit to recover a large sum
which he had lost, in the course of his trading operations,
through falling in with pirates; he is said to have remained
in Athens on this account a long time, during which he con-
sorted with the philosophers and reached such a degree of
proficiency in geometry that he tried to discover a method of
squaring the circle.1 This is of course an allusion to the
quadratures of lunes.
Another important discovery is attributed to Hippocrates.
He was the first to observe that the problem of doubling the
cube is reducible to that of finding two mean proportionals in
continued proportion between two straight lines.2 The effect
of this was, as Proclus says, that thenceforward people
addressed themselves (exclusively) to the equivalent problem
of finding two mean proportionals between two straight lines.3
(a) Hippocrates's quadrature of lunes.
I will now give the details of the extract from Eudemus on
the subject of Hippocrates's quadrature of lunes, which (as
I have indicated) I place in this chapter because it belongs
to elementary fplane' geometry. 
Simplicius says he will
quote Eudemus ' word for word' (Kara \££LV) except for a few
additions taken from Euclid's Elements, which he will insert
for clearness* sake, and which are indeed necessitated by the
summary (memorandum-like) style of Eudemus, whose form
of statement is condensed, ' in accordance with ancient prac-
tice'. We have therefore in the first place to distinguish
between what is textually quoted from Eudemus and what
Simplicius has added. To Bretschneider 4 belongs the credit of
having called attention to the importance of the passage of
Simplicius to the historian of mathematics ; Allman5 was the
first to attempt the task of distinguishing between the actual
1 Philop. in Phys.s p. 31. 3, Vitelli.
2 Pseudo-Eratosthenes to King Ptolemy in Eutoc. on Archimedes (vol.
iii, p 88, Heib.).
8 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 213. 5.
4 Bretschneider, Die Geometrie und die Geometer vpr Enklides, 1870,
pp. 100-21.
5 Hermathena, iv, pp. 180-228; Greek Geometry from Thales to Euclid,
pp. 64-75.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

184 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
extracts from Eudemus and Simplicius's amplifications; then
came the critical text of Simplieius's commentary on the
Physics edited by Diels (1882), who, with the help of Usener,
separated out, and marked by spacing, the portions which they
regarded as Eudemus's own. Tannery,1 who had contributed
to the preface of Diels some critical observations, edited
(in 1883), with a translation and notes, what he judged tojbe
Eudemian (omitting the rest). Heiberg2 reviewed the whole
question in 1884; and finally Rudio,3 after giving in the
Blbliotheca Mathematica of 1902 a translation of the whole
passage of Simplicius with elaborate notes, which again he
followed up by other articles in the same journal and elsewhere
in 1903 and 1905, has edited the Greek text, with a transla-
tion, introduction, notes, and appendices, and summed up the
whole controversy.
The occasion of the whole disquisition in Simplicius's com-
mentary is a remark by Aristotle that there is no obligation
on the part of the exponent of a particular subject to refute
a fallacy connected with it unless the author of the fallacy
has based his argument on the admitted principles lying at
the root of the subject in question. ' Thus \ he says, ' it is for
the geometer to refute the (supposed) quadrature of a circle by
means of segments (77x77/* ara)j/), but it is not the business of the
geometer to refute the argument of Antiphon/4 
Alexander
took the remark to refer to Hippocrates's attempted quadra-
ture by means of lunes (although in that case TjJLrjfia is used
by Aristotle, not in the technical sense of a segment, but with
the non-technical meaning of any portion cut out of a figure).
This, probable enough in itself (for in another pkice Aristotle
uses the same word rfirjfia to denote a sector of a circle5), is
made practically certain by two other allusions in Aristotle,
one to a proof that a circle together with certain lunes is
equal to a rectilineal figure,6 and the other to ' the (fallacy) of
Hippocrates or the quadrature by means of the lunes \7 The
1 Tannery, Memoires scientifiques, vol. i, 1912, pp. 339-70, esp. pp.
347-66.
2 Philologus, 43, pp. 336-44.
3 Rudio, Der Bencht des Stmphcius ilber die Quadraturen des Antiphon
und Hippokrates (Teubner, 1907).
4 Arist. Phys. i. 2, 185 a 14-17. 
5 Arist. De caelo, li 8, 290 a 4.
6 Anal. Pr. ii. 25, 69 a 32. 
7 Soph. El. 11, 171 b 15.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HIPPOCRATES'S QUADRATURE OF LUNES 
185
two expressions separated by' or' may no doubt refer not to
one but to two different fallacies. But if ' the quadrature by
means of lunes' is different from Hippocrates's quadratures of
lunes, it must apparently be some quadrature like the second
quoted by Alexander (not by Eudemus), and the fallacy attri-
buted to Hippocrates must be the quadrature of a certain lune
plus a circle (which in itself contains no fallacy at all). It seems
more likely that the two expressions refer to one thing, and that
this is the argument of Hippocrates's tract taken as a whole.
The passage of Alexander which Simplicius reproduces
before passing to the extract from Eudemus contains two
simple cases of quadrature, of a lune, and of lunes plus a semi-
circle respectively, with an erroneous inference from these
cases that a circle is thereby squared. It is evident that this
account does not represent Hippocrates's own argument, for he
would not have been capable of committing so obvious an
error; Alexander must have drawn his information, not from
Eudemus, but from some other source. Simplicius recognizes
this, for, after giving the alternative account extracted from
Eudemus, he says that we must trust Eudemus's account rather
than the other, since Eudemus was 'nearer the times' (of
Hippocrates).
The two quadratures given by Alexander are as follows.
1. Suppose that AB is the diameter of a circle, D its centre,
and AC, GB sides of a square
inscribed in it.
On AC as diameter describe
the semicircle AEG. 
Join CD.
Now, since
AB2=2AC2,
A 
0 
B
and circles (and therefore semi-
circles) are to one another as the squares on their diameters,
(semicircle AGB) = 2(semicircle AEG).
But 
(semicircle AGB) = 2 (quadrant A DC);
therefore 
(semicircle AEC)= (quadrant ADC).
If now we subtract the common part, the segment AFC,
we have 
(lune AECF) = A ADC,
and the lune is ' squared'.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

186 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
2. Next take three consecutive sides GE, EF} FD of a regular
hexagon inscribed in a circle of diameter CD. Also take AB
equal to the radius of the circle and therefore equal to each of
the sides.
On AB, GE, EF, FD as diameters describe semicircles (in
the last three cases outwards with reference to the circle).
Then, since
GD2 =
and circles are to one another as the squares on their
diameters,
semicircle GEFD)^= 4 (semicircle ALB)
= (sum of semicircles ALB, CGE, ERF, FKJD).
H
Subtracting from each side the sum of the small segments
on GE, EF, FD, we have
(trapezium GEFD) — (sum of three lunes) + (semicircle ALB).
The author goes on to say that, subtracting the rectilineal
figure equal to the three lunes (' for a rectilineal figure was
proved equal to a lune'), we get a rectilineal figure equal
to the semicircle ALB, ' and so the circle will have been
squared \
This conclusion is obviously false, and, as Alexander says,
the fallacy is in taking what was proved only of the lune on
the side of the inscribed square, namely that it can be squared,
to be true of the lunes on the sides of an inscribed regular
hexagon. It is impossible that Hippocrates (one of the ablest
of geometers) could have made such a blunder. We turn there-
fore to Eudemus's account, which has every appearance of
beginning at the beginning of Hippoerates's work and pro-
ceeding in his order.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HIPPOCRATES'S QUADRATURE OF LUNES 
187
It is important from the point of view of this chapter to
preserve the phraseology of Eudemus, which throws light
on the question how far the technical terms of Euclidean
geometry were already used by Eudemus (if not by Hippo-
crates) in their technical sense. I shall therefore translate
literally so much as can safely be attributed to Eudemus
himself, except in purely geometrical work, where I shall use
modern symbols.
' The quadratures of lunes, which were considered to belong
to an uncommon class of propositions on account of the
close relation (of lunes) to the circle, were first investigated
by Hippocrates, and his exposition was thought to be in
correct form1; we will therefore deal with them at length
and describe them. He started with, and laid down as the
first of the theorems useful for his purpose, *the proposition
that similar segments of circles have the same ratio to one
another as the squares on their bases have [lit. as their bases
in square, Swd/iei]. And this he proved by first showing
that the squares on the diameters have the same ratio as the
circles. 
For, as the circles are to one another, so also are
similar segments of them. For similar segments are those
which are the same part of the circles respectively, as for
instance a semicircle is similar to a semicircle, and a third
part of a circle to a third part [here, Rudio argues, the word
segments, r\ir\\xaTat would seem to be used in the sense of
sectors']. It is for this reason also (Sib KOU) that similar
segments contain equal angles [here ' segmentsJ are certainly
segments in the usual sense]. The angles of all semicircles
are right, those of segments greater than a semicircle are less
than right angles and are less in proportion as the segments
are greater than semicircles, while those of segments less than
a semicircle are greater than right angles and are greater in
proportion as the segments are less than semicircles/
I have put the last sentences of this quotation in dotted
brackets because it is matter of controversy whether they
belong to the original extract from Eudemus or were added by
Simplicius.
I think I shall bring out the issues arising out of this
passage into the clearest relief if I take as my starting-point
the interpretation of it by Rudio, the editor of the latest
1 Kara rponov (' werthvolle Abhandlung \ Heib.).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

188 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
edition of the whole extract. Whereas Diels, Usener, Tannery,
and Heiberg had all seen in the sentences ' For, as the circles
are to one another . . . less than semicircles' an addition by
Simplicius, like the phrase just preceding (not quoted above),
' a proposition which Euclid placed second in his twelfth book
with the enunciation " Circles are to one another as the squares
on their diameters "', Rudio maintains that the sentences are
wholly Eudemian, because 'For, as the circles are to one
another, so are the similar segments' is obviously connected
with the proposition that similar segments are as the squares
on their bases a few lines back. Assuming, then, that the
sentences are Eudemian, Rudio bases his next argument on
the sentence defining similar segments, ' For similar segments
are those which are the same part of the circles: thus a semi-
circle is similar to a semicircle, and a third part (of one circle)
to a third part (of another circle) \ He argues that a' segment'
in the proper sense which is one third, one fourth, &c, of the
circle is not a .conception likely to have been introduced into
Hippocrates's discussion, because it cannot be visualized by
actual construction, and so would not have conveyed any clear
idea. On the other hand, if we divide the four right angles
about the centre of a circle into 3, 4, or n equal parts by
means of 3, 4, or n radii, we have an obvious division of the
circle into equal parts which would occur to any one; that is,
any one would understand the expression one third or one
fourth part of a circle if the parts were sectors and not
segments. (The use of the word T/Mrjjia in the sense of sector
is not impossible in itself at a date when mathematical
terminology was not finally fixed; indeed it means 'sector'
in one passage of Aristotle.1) 
Hence Rudio will have it that
'similar segments' in the second and third places in our passage
are ' similar sectors \ 
But the ' similar segments' in the funda-
mental proposition of Hippocrates enunciated just before are
certainly segments in the proper sense; so are those in the
next sentence which says that similar segments contain equal
angles. There is, therefore, the very great difficulty that,
under Rudio's interpretation, the word Tfi^jxara used in
successive sentences means, first segments, then sectors, and
then segments again. However, assuming this to be so, Rudio
1 Arist. De caelo, ii. 8, 290 a 4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HIPPOCRATES'S QUADRATURE OF LUNES 189
is able to make the argument hang together, in the following
way. The next sentence says, ' For this reason also (SLO KCU)
similar segments contain equal angles'; therefore this must be
inferred from the fact that similar sectors are the same part
of the respective circles. The intermediate steps are not given
in the text; but, since the similar sectors are the saine part
of the circles, they contain equal angles, and it follows that the
angles in the segments which form part of the sectors are
equal, since they are the supplements of the halves of the
angles of the sectors respectively (this inference presupposes
that Hippocrates knew the theorems of Eucl. III. 20-22, which
is indeed clear from other passages in the Eudemus extract).
Assuming this to be the line of argument, Rudio infers that in
Hippocrates's time similar segments were not defined as in
Euclid (namely as segments containing equal angles) but were
regarded as the segments belonging to c similar sectors \ which
would thus be the prior conception. Similar sectors would
be sectors having their angles equal. The sequence of ideas,
then, leading up to Hippocrates's proposition would be this.
Circles are to one another as the squares on their diameters or
radii. Similar sectors, having their angles equal, are to one
another as the whole circles to which they belong. (Euclid has
not this proposition, but it is included in Theon's addition to
VI. 33, and would be known long before Euclid's time.)
Hence similar sectors are as the squares on the radii. But
so are the triangles formed by joining the extremities of the
bounding radii in each sector. Therefore (cf. Eucl. V. 19)
the differences between the sectors and the corresponding
triangles respectively, i.e. the corresponding segments, are in
the same ratio as (1) the similar sectors, or (2) the similar
triangles, and therefore are as the squares on the radii.
We could no doubt accept this version subject to three ifs,
(1) if the passage is Eudemian, (2) if we could suppose
TfirjjjLctTa to be used in different senses in consecutive sentences
without a word of explanation, (3) if the omission of the step
between the definition of similar ' segments' and the inference
that the angles in similar segments are equal could be put
down to Eudemus's ' summary' style. The second of these
if8 is the crucial one; and, after full reflection, I feel bound
to agree with the great scholars who have held that this
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

190 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
hypothesis is impossible; indeed the canons of literary criti-
cism seem to exclude it altogether. If this is so, the whole
of Rudio's elaborate structure falls to the ground.
We can now consider the whole question ab initio. 
First,
are the sentences in question the words of Eudemus or of
Simplicius? On the one hand, I think the whole paragraph
would be much more like the ' summary' manner of Eudemus
if it stopped atf have the same ratio as the circles', i.e. if the
sentences were not there at all. Taken together, they are
long and yet obscurely argued, while the last sentence is
really otiose, and, I should have said, quite unworthy of
Eudemus. On the other hand, I do not see that Simplicius
had any sufficient motive for interpolating such an explana-
tion : he might have added the words ' for, as the circles are
to one another, so also are similar segments of them', but
there was no need for him to define similar segments, he
must have been familiar enough with the term and its
meaning to take it for granted that his readers would know
them too. I think, therefore, that the sentences, down to ' the
same part of the circles respectively' at any rate, may be
from Eudemus. In these sentences, then, can ' segments' mean
segments in the proper sense (and not sectors) after all?
The argument that it cannot rests on the assumption that the
Greeks of Hippocrates's day would not be likely to speak of
a segment which was one third of the whole circle if they
did not see their way to visualize it by actual construction.
But, though the idea would be of no use to us, it does not
follow that their point of view would be the same as ours.
On the contrary, I agree with Zeuthen that Hippocrates may
well have said, of segments of circles which are in the same
ratio as the circles, that they are ' the same part' of the circles
respectively, for this is (in an incomplete form, it is true) the
language of the definition of proportion in the only theory of
proportion (the numerical) then known (cf. Eucl. VII. Def. 20,
' Numbers are proportional when the first is the same multiple,
or the same part, or the same parts, of the second that the
third is of the fourth', i e. the two equal ratios are of one
1 
07?
of the following forms m, - or — where m, n are integers);
the illustrations, namely the semicircles and the segments
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HIPPOCRATES'S QUADRATURE OF LUNES 
191
which are one third of the circles respectively, are from this
point of view quite harmless.
Only the transition to the view of similar segments as
segments 'containing equal angles' remains to be explained.
And here we are in the dark, because we do not know how, for
instance, Hippocrates would have drawn a segment in one
given circle which should be 'the same part' of that circle
that a given segment of another given circle is of that circle.
(If e.g. he had used the proportionality of the parts into which
the bases of the two similar segments divide the diameters
of the circles which bisect them perpendicularly, he could,
by means of the sectors to which the segments belong, have
proved that the segments, like the sectors, are in the ratio
of the circles, just as Rudio supposes him to have done; and
the equality of the angles in the segments would have followed
as in Rudio's proof.)
As it is, I cannot feel certain that the sentence Sib KOLI KT\.
' this is the reason why similar segments contain equal angles'
is not an addition by Simpiicius. Although Hippocrates was
fully aware of the fact, he need not have stated it in this
place, and Simpiicius may have inserted the sentence in order
to bring Hippocrates's view of similar segments into relation
with Euclid's definition. 
The sentence which follows about
'angles of' semicircles and 'angles of segments, greater or
less than semicircles, is out of place, to say the least, and can
hardly come from Eudemus.
We resume Eudemus's account.
' After proving this, he proceeded to show in what way it
was possible to square a lune the outer circumference of which
is that of a semicircle. This he effected by circumscribing
a semicircle about an isosceles right-angled triangle and
(circumscribing) about the base [ = describing on the base]
a segment of a circle similar to those cut off by the sides/
[This is the problem of Eucl. III. 33,
and involves the knowledge that similar
segments contain equal angles.]
'Then, since the segment about the
base is equal to the sum of those about
the sides, it follows that, when the part
of the triangle above the segment about the base is added
to both alike, the lune will be equal to the triangle.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

192 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
1 Therefore the lune, having been proved equal to the triangle,
can be squared.
'In this way, assuming that the outer circumference of
the lune is that of a semicircle, Hippocrates easily squared
the lune.
' Next after this he assumes (an outer circumference) greater
than a semicircle (obtained) by constructing a trapezium in
which three sides are equal to one another, while one, the
greater of the parallel sides, is such that the square on it is
triple of the square on each one of the other sides, and then
comprehending the trapezium in a circle and circumscribing
about (= describing on) its greatest side a segment similar
to those cut off from the circle by
the three equal sides/
[Simplicius here inserts an easy
proof that a circle can be circum-
scribed about the trapezium.1]
' That the said segment [bounded
by the outer circumference BAGD
in the figure] is greater than a
semicircle is clear, if a diagonal
be drawn in the trapezium.
1 For this diagonal [say BC],
subtending two sides [BA, AC] of
the trapezium, is such that the
square on it is greater than double
B 
D the square on one of the remain-
ing sides/
[This follows from the fact that, AC being parallel to
BD but less than it, BA and DC will meet, if produced, in
a point F. 
Then, in the isosceles triangle FAC, the angle
FAC is less than a right angle, so that the angle BAC is
obtuse.]
' Therefore the square on [BD] the greatest side of the trape-
zium [ = 3 CD2 by hypothesis] is less than the sum of the
squares on the diagonal [BC] and that one of the other sides
1 Heiberg (Philologus, 43, p. 340) thinks that the words KCX OTL ph
7T€pL\7](j>0rjaeTaL KVK.\G> TO Tpaire£iov dfif-eis [ovrcos] dixoTOfirja-as TCIS rov Tpaire^iov
yavias (' Now, that the trapezium can be comprehended in a circle you
can prove by bisecting the angles of the trapezium') may (without oura>s—
F omits it) be Eudemus's own. For on pkv . .. forms a natural contrast
to on 8i fjLtiCov . . . in the next paragraph. Also cf. p. 65. 9 Diels, TOVTQV
w TO TpaTr^iov (j)r)pj, €(f) ov EKBH 7i€pi\r]^Tai KVKXOS.
f
oZv OVTODS
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HIPPOCRATES'S QUADRATURE OF LUNES 193
\CD~\ which is subtended1 by the said (greatest) side [BD]
together with the diagonal [BO]' [i.e. BD2 < BC2 + CD*].
1 Therefore the angle standing on the greater side of the
trapezium [Z BCD] is acute.
' Therefore the segment in which the said angle is is greater
than a semicircle. And this (segment) is the outer circum-
ference of the lune/
[Simplicius observes that Eudemus has omitted the actual
squaring of the lune, presumably as being obvious. We have
only to supply the following.
Since 
BD2 = 3BA*,
(segment on BD) = 3 (segment on BA)
= (sum of segments on BA, AC, CD).
Add to each side the area between BA, AC, CD, and the
circumference of the segment on BD, and we have
(trapezium ABDC) — (lune bounded by the two circumferences).]
<A case too where the outer circumference is less than
a semicircle was solved by Hippocrates,2 who gave the follow-
ing preliminary construction.
1 Let there be a circle with diameter AB, and let its centre
be K.
6Let CD bisect BK at right angles; and let the stra%ght
line EF be so placed between CD and the circumference that it
verges towards B [i.e. will, if produced, pass through B], while
its length is also such that the square on it is 1 \ times the square
on (one of) the radii.
1 Observe the curious use of viroTciveiv, stretch under, subtend. 
The
third side of a triangle is said to be 'subtended' by the other two
* Literally ' If (the outer circumference) were less than a semicircle,
Hippocrates solved (Karea-Kevao-ev, constructed) this (case).'
1523 
O
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

194 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
'Let EG be drawn parallel to AB, and let (straight lines)
be drawn joining K to E and F.
e Let the straight line [KF~\ joined to F and produced meet
EG in G, and again let (straight lines) be drawn joining
B to F, G.
(It is then manifest that BF produced will pass through
[" fall on "] E [for by hypothesis EF verges towards B], and
BG will be equal to EK!
[Simplicius proves this at length. The proof is easy. The
triangles FKC, FBC are equah in all respects [Eucl. I. 4].
Therefore, EG being parallel to KB, the triangles EOF, GDF
are equal in all respects [Eucl. I. 15, 29, 26]. Hence the
trapezium is isosceles, and BG = EK.
'This being so, I say that the trapezium EKBG can be
comprehended in a circle!
[Let the segment EKBG circumscribe it.]
' Next let a segment of a circle be circumscribed about the
triangle EFG also;
then manifestly each of the segments [on] EF, FG will be
similar to each of the segments [on] EK, KB, BG!
[This is because all the segments contain equal angles,
namely an angle equal to the supplement of EGK!\
' This being so, the lune so formed, of which EKBG is the
outer circumference, will be equal to the rectilineal figure made
up of the three triangles BFG, BFK, EKF
1 For the segments cut off from the rectilineal figure, on the
inner side of the lune, by the straight lines EF, FG, are
(together) equal to the segments outside the rectilineal figure
cut off by the straight lines EK, KB, BG, since each of the
inner segments is 1^ times each of the outer, because, by
hypothesis, 
EF* ^ _. FQ2^ _ a
[i.e. 
2EF*=3EK2,
'If then
(lune) = (the three segmts.) + {(rect. fig.) — (the two segmts.)},
the trapezium including the two segments but not the three,
while the (sum of the) two segments is equal to the (sum
of the) three, it follows that
(lune) = (rectilineal figure).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HIPPOCRATES^ QUADRATURE OF LUNES 195
' The fact that this lune (is one which) has its outer circum-
ference less than a semicircle he proves by means of the fact
that the angle [EKG] in the outer segment is obtuse.
' And the fact that the angle EKQ is obtuse he proves as
follows/
[This proof is supposed to have been given by Eudemus in
Hippocrates's own words, but unfortunately the text is con-
fused. The argument seems to have been substantially as
follows.
By hypothesis, 
EF2 =
Also 
BK2 > 2BF2 (this is assumed: we shall
consider the ground later);
or 
EK2 > 2KF2.
Therefore 
EF2 =
so that the angle EKF is obtuse, and the segment is less than
a semicircle.
How did Hippocrates prove that BK2 > 2 BF2 ? The manu-
scripts have the phrase' because the angle at ^is greater' (where
presumably we should supply opdrjs, 'than a right angle').
But, if Hippocrates proved this, he must evidently have proved
it by means of his hypothesis EF2 = %EK2, and this hypo-
thesis leads more directly to the consequence that BK2 >2KF2
than to the fact that the angle at F is greater than a right
angle.
We may supply the proof thus.
By hypothesis, 
EF2 = f KB2.
Also, since A, E, F, C are coneyclic,
EB.BF=AB.BC
or 
EF
It follows from the last relations that EF > FB, and that
KB2>2BF2.
The most remarkable feature in the above proof is the
assumption of the solution of the problem ' to place a straight
02
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

196 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
line [EF] of length such that the square on it is 1^ times the
square on AK hetween the circumference of the semicircle and
GD in such a way that it will verge (veveiv) towards B' [i.e. if
produced, will pass through B\ 
This is a problem of a type
which the Greeks called vevo-eis, inclinationes or vergings.
Theoretically it may be regarded as the problem of finding
a length (x) such that, if F be so taken on GD that'Ui^ x,
BF produced will intercept between GD and the circumference
of the semicircle a length EF equal to \/§ . AK.
If we suppose it done, we have
EB.BF=AB.BC=AK2,
or 
x (x + v7|. a) = a2 (where AK = a).
That is, the problem is equivalent to the solution of the
quadratic equation
x2 + A / | . ax = a2.
This again is the problem of l applying to a straight line
of length </§. a a rectangle exceeding by a square figure and
equal in area to a2 \ and would theoretically be solved by the
Pythagorean method based on the theorem of Eucl. II. 6.
Undoubtedly Hippocrates could have solved the problem by
this theoretical method; but he may, on this occasion, have
used the purely mechanical method of marking on a ruler
or straight edge a length equal to \ / § . AK, and then moving
it till the points marked lay on the circumference and on GD
respectively, while the straight edge also passed through B.
This method is perhaps indicated by the fact that he first
places EF (without producing it to B) and afterwards
joins BF.
We come now to the last of Hippocrates's quadratures.
Eudemus proceeds:]
'Thus Hippocrates squared every1 (sort of) lune, seeing
thatx (he squared) not only (1) the lune which has for its outer
1 Tannery brackets iravm and unep KaL Heiberg thinks (1. c, p. 343)
the wording is that of Simplicius reproducing the content of Eudemus.
The wording of the sentence is important with reference to the question^
(1) What was the paialogism with which Aristotle actually charged
Hippocrates ? and (2) What, if any, was the justification for the charge ?
Now the four quadiatures as given by Eudemus are clever, and contain in
themselves no fallacy at all. The supposed fallacy, then, can only have
consisted m an assumption on the part of Hippocrates that, because he
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HIPPOCRATES'S QUADRATURE OF LUNES 19?
circumference the arc of a semicircle, but also (2) the lune
in which the outer circumference is greater, and (3) the lune in
which it is less, than a semicircle.
' But he also squared the sum of a lune and a circle in the
following manner.
' Let there be two circles about K as centre, such that the
square on the diameter of the outer is 6 times the square on
that of the inner.
'Let a {regular) hexagon ABCDEF be inscribed in the
inner circle, and let KA9 KB, KG be joined from the centre
and produced as far as the circumference of the outer circle.
Let GH, HI, GI be joined!
[Then clearly GH, HI are sides of a hexagon inscribed in
the outer circle.]
'About GI [i e. on GI] let a segment be circumscribed
similar to the segment cut off by GH.
'Then 
GI2 = 3GH2,
for GI2 + (side of outer hexagon)2 = (diam. of outer circle)2
[The original states this in words without the help of the
letters of the figure.]
'Also 
GH2 = 6AB2.
had squared one particular lune of each of three types, namely those
which have, for their outer circumferences respectively (1) a semicircle,
(2) an arc greater than a semicircle, (3) an arc less than a semicircle, he
had squared all possible lunes, and therefore also the lune included in his
last quadrature, the squaring of which (had it been possible) would
actually have enabled him to square the circle. The question is, did
Hippocrates so delude himself? Heiberg thinks that, in the then
state of logic, he may have done so. But it seems impossible to believe
this of so good a mathematician; moreover, if Hippocrates had really
thought that he had squared the circle, it is inconceivable that he
would not have said so in express terms at the end of his fourth
quadiature.
Another recent view is that of Bjornbo (in Pauly-Wissowa, Ueal-Ency-
clopddie, xvi, pp. 1787-99), who holds that Hippocrates realized periectly
the limits of what he had been able to do and knew that he had not
squared the circle, but that he deliberately used language which, without
being actually untrue, was calculated to mislead any one who read him
into the belief that he had really solved the problem. This, too, seems
incredible; for surely Hippocrates must have known that the first expert
who read his tract would detect the fallacy at once, and that he was
risking his reputation as a mathematician for no purpose. I prefer to
think that he was merely trying to put what he had discovered in the
most favourable light; but it must be admitted that the effect of his
language was only to bring upon himself a charge which he might easily
have avoided.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

L98 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
' Therefore
segment on (?/[= 2(segmt. on GH) + 6 (segmt. on AB)]
= (segmts. on GH, HI) + (all segmts? in
inner circle).
['Add to each side the area bounded by GH, HI and the
arc GI;]
therefore (A GHI) = (lune GHI) + (all segints. in inner circle).
Adding to both sides the hexagon in the inner circle, we have
(A GHI) + (inner hexagon) = (lune GHI) + (inner circle).
1 Since, then, the sum of the two rectilineal figures can be
squared, so can the sum of the circle and the lune in question.'
Simplicius adds the following observations:
'Now, so far as Hippocrates is concerned, we must allow
that Eudemus was in a better position to know the facts, since
he was nearer the times, being a pupil of Aristotle 
But, as
regards the "squaring of the circle by means of segments"
which Aristotle reflected on as containing a fallacy, there are
three possibilities, (1) that it indicates the squaring by means
of lunes (Alexander was quite right in expressing the doubt
implied by his words, " if it is the same as the squaring by
means of lunes"), (2) that it refers, not to the proofs of
Hippocrates, but some others, one of which Alexander actually
reproduced, or (3) that it is intended to reflect on the squaring
by Hippocrates of the circle plus the lune, which Hippocrates
did in fact prove " by means of segments ", namely the three
(in the greater circle) and those in the lesser circle. . . . On
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

HIPPOCRATES'S QUADRATURE OF LUNES 199
this third hypothesis the fallacy would lie in the fact that
the sum of the circle and the lune is squared, and not the
cirele alone/
If, however, the reference of Aristotle was really to Hip-
pocrates's last quadrature alone, Hippocrates was obviously
misjudged; there is no fallacy in it, nor is Hippocrates likely
to have deceived himself as to what his proof actually
amounted to.
In the above reproduction of the extract from Eudemus
I have marked by italics the passages where the writer follows
the ancient fashion of describing points, lines, angles, &c, with
reference to the letters in the figure: the ancient practice was
to write TO o-rjfieiov k(j> 3> (or £<p' ov) K, the (point) on which (is)
the letter K, instead of the shorter form TO K arjfieToi/, the
point K, used by Euclid and later geometers; fj k(f> y AB
(€v0e?a), the straight line on which (are the letters AB, for
17 AB (ev0eia), the straight line AB; TO Tpiycovov TO €$' OV
EZH, the triangle on which (are the letters) EFG, instead of
TO EZH Tplycovov, the triangle EFG; and so on. Some have
assumed that, where the longer archaic form, instead of the
shorter Euclidean, is used, Eudemus must be quoting Hippocrates
verbatim; but this is not a safe criterion, because, e.g., Aristotle
himself uses both forms of expression, and there are, on the
other hand, some relics of the archaic form even in Archimedes.
Trigonometry enables us readily to find all the types of
Hippocratean lunes that can
be squared by means of the
straight line and circle. 
Let
AGB be the external circum-
ference, ABB the internal cir-
cumference of such a lune,
r, r' the radii, and 0, 0' the
centres of the two arcs, 0, 0'
the halves of the angles sub-
tended by the arcs at the centres
respectively.
Now (area of lune)
= (difference of segments AGB, ABB)
= (sector OAGB- AAOB)- (sector 
O'ABB-AAO'B)
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

200 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
We also have
rsin<9 = %AB = r'sind' 
(1)
In order that the lune may be squareable, we must have, in
the first place, 
r20 = r'20'.
Suppose that 6 — m&', and it follows that
r' = Vm. r.
Accordingly the area becomes
|r2(msin 20'-sin2m0');
and it remains only to solve the equation (1) above, which
becomes 
sinm0'= v'm.sinfl'.
This reduces to a quadratic equation only when m has one
of the values 
2, 3, §, 5, 
f.
The solutions of Hippocrates correspond to the first three
values of m. But the lune is squareable by ' plane' methods
in the other two cases also. Clausen (1840) gave the last four
cases of the problem as new1 (it was not then known that
Hippocrates had solved more than the first); but, according
to M. Simon2, all five cases were given much earlier in
a dissertation by Martin Johan Wallenius of Abo (Abveae,
1766). As early as 1687 Tschirnhausen noted the existence
of an infinite number of squareable portions of the first of
Hippocrates's lunes. Vieta 3 discussed the case in which m = 4,
which of course leads to a cubic equation.
(/?) Reduction of the problem of doubling the cube to
the finding of two "mean proportionals.
We have already alluded to Hippocrates's discovery of the
reduction of the problem of duplicating the cube to that of
finding two mean proportionals in continued proportion. That
is, he discovered that, if
a:x = x:y — y.b,
then a3: x* = a: b. This shows that he could work with
compound ratios, although for him the theory of proportion
must still have been the incomplete, numerical, theory
developed by the Pythagoreans. It has been suggested that
1 Crelle, xxi, 1840, pp. 375-6.
2 Geschichte der Math, im Altertum, p. 174.
o> Vieta, Variorum de rebus mathematicis responsorum lib. vhi, 1593.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ELEMENTS AS KNOWN TO HIPPOCRATES 201
the idea of the reduction of the problem of duplication may
have occurred to him through analogy. The problem of
doubling a square is included in that of finding one mean
proportional between two lines; he might therefore have
thought of what would be the effect of finding two mean
proportionals. Alternatively he may have got the idea from
the theory of numbers. Plato in the Timaeus has the pro-
positions that between two square numbers there is one mean
proportional number, but that two cube numbers are connected,
not by one, but by two mean numbers in continued proportion.1
These are the theorems of Eucl. VIII 11, 12, the latter of
which is thus enunciated: ' Between two cube numbers there
are two mean proportional numbers, and the cube has to the
cube the ratio triplicate of that which the side has to the side/
If this proposition was really Pythagorean, as seems prob-
able enough, Hippocrates had only to give the geometrical
adaptation of it.
(y) The Elements as known to Hippocrates.
We can now take stock of the advances made in the
Elements up to the time when Hippocrates compiled a work
under that title. We have seen that the Pythagorean geometry
already contained the substance of Euclid's Books I and II,
part of Book IV, and theorems corresponding to a great part
of Book VI; but there is no evidence that the Pythagoreans
paid much attention to the geometry of the circle as we find
it, e.g., in Eucl., Book III. But, by the time of Hippocrates,
the main propositions of Book III were also known and used,
as we see from Eudemus's account of the quadratures of
lunes. Thus it is assumed that ' similar' segments contain
equal angles, and, as Hippocrates assumes that two segments
of circles are similar when the obvious thing about the figure
is that the angles at the circumferences which are the supple-
ments of the angles in the segments are one and the same,
we may clearly infer, as above stated, that Hippocrates knew
the theorems of Eucl. III. 20-2. Further, he assumes the
construction on a given straight line of a segment similar to
another given segment (cf. Eucl. III. 33). The theorems of
Eucl. III. 26-9 would obviously be known to Hippocrates
1 Plato, Timaeus. 32 A, B.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

202 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
as was that of III. 31 (that the angle in a semicircle is
a right angle, and that, according as a segment is less or
greater than a semicircle, the angle in it is obtuse or acute).
He assumes the solution of the problem of circumscribing
a circle about a triangle (Eucl. IV. 5), and the theorem that
the side of a regular hexagon inscribed in a circle is equal
to the radius (Eucl. IV. 15).
But the most remarkable fact of all is that, according to
Eudemus, Hippocrates actually proved the theorem of Eucl.
XII. 2, that circles are to one another as the squares on their
diameters, afterwards using this proposition to prove that
similar segments are to one another as the squares on their
bases. Euclid of course proves XII. 2 by the method of
exhaustion, the invention of which is attributed to Eudoxus
on the ground of notices in Archimedes.1 
This method
depends on the use of a certain lemma known as the Axiom
of Archimedes, or, alternatively, a lemma similar to it. The
lemma used by Euclid is his proposition X. 1, which is closely
related to Archimedes's lemma in that the latter is practically
used in the proof of it. Unfortunately we have no infor-
mation as to the nature of Hippocrates's proof; if, however,
it amounted to a genuine proof, as Eudemus seems to imply,
it is difficult to see how it could have been effected other-
wise than by some anticipation in essence of the method of
exhaustion.
THEODORUS OF CYRENE, who is mentioned by Proclus along
with Hippocrates as a celebrated geometer and is claimed by
Iamblichus as a Pythagorean,2 is only known to us from
Plato's Theaetetus. He is said to have been Plato's teacher
in mathematics,3 and it is likely enough that Plato, while on
his way to or from Egypt, spent some time with Theodorus at
Cyrene,4 though, as we gather from the Theaetetus, Theodorus
had also been in Athens in the time of Socrates. We learn
from the same dialogue that he was a pupil of Protagoras, and
was distinguished not only in geometry but in astronomy,
arithmetic, music, and all educational subjects.5 The one notice
1 Prefaces to On the Sphere and Cylinder, i, and Quadrature of the
Parabola.
2 Iambi. Vit. Pyth. c. 86. 
3 Diog. L. ii. 103.
4 Cf. Diog. L. iii. 6.
5 Plato, Theaetetus, 161 B, 162 A ; ib. 145 A, c, D.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEODORUS OF CYRENE 
203
which we have of a particular achievement of his suggests that
it was he who first carried the theory of irrationals beyond
the first step, namely the discovery by the Pythagoreans
of the irrationality of y/2. 
According to the Theaetetus,1
Theodoras
'was proving2 to us a certain thing about square roots
(SVPduets), I mean (the square roots, i.e. sides) of three square
feet and of five square feet, namely that these roots are not
commensurable in length with the foot-length, and he went on
in this way, taking all the separate cases up to the root of
17 square feet, at which point, for some reason, he stopped \
That is, he proved the irrationality of \/3, </5 ... up to
V17. 
It does not appear, however, that he had reached any
definition of a surd in general or proved any general proposi-
tion about all surds, for Theaetetus goes on to say:
'The idea occurred to the two of us (Theaetetus and the
younger Socrates), seeing that these square roots appeared
1 Theaetetus, 147 D sq.
2 liepi 
Bvpafj.€0i>v rt rjfxlu Qe68a>pos o8e eypafa, 
TTJS re rptVoSoj ire pi KCL\
7T€PT€nodos [drrocpaivcov] on jjLrjKci ov a-v(Xfji€Tpoi rfj 7roStn/a. 
Certain writers
(H. Vogt in particular) persist in taking Zypafa in this sentence to mean
drew or constructed. The idea is that Theodorus's exposition must have
included two things, first the construction of straight lines representing
<v/3, *Jh ... (of course by means of the Pythagorean theorem, Eucl. 1.47),
in order to show that these straight lines exist, and secondly the proof
that each of them is incommensurable with 1; therefore, it is argued,
€ypa4>€ must indicate the construction and dnocpalvcov the proof. But in
the first place it is impossible that eypacpe n nepi, 'he wrote something
about * (roots), should mean constructed each of the roots \ 
Moreover, if
dTroclxiivcov is bracketed (as it is by Burnet), the supposed contrast between
eypa(j>€ and d7ro(f)aiva>v disappears, and eypafc must mean * proved', in
accordance with the natural meaning of eypafa TI, because there is
nothing else to govern on H^KCL, KT\. ('that they are not commensurable
in length ...'), which phrase is of course a closer description of n. There
are plenty of instances of ypdfaiv in the sense of ' prove \ 
Aristotle says
(Topics, 0. 3, 158 b 29) 'It would appear that in mathematics too some
things aie difficult to prove (ov paS'ias ypafeaOai) owing to the want of
a definition, e. g. that a straight line parallel to the side and cutting a plane
figure (parallelogram) divides the straight line (side) and the area simi-
larly \ Cf. Archimedes, On the Sphere and Cylinder, ii, Pref.,' It happens
that most of them are proved (ypdfeo-dai) by means of the theorems . . . ' ;
' Such of the theorems and problems as are proved (ypdcperai) by means of
these theorems I have proved (or written out, ypd\j/as) and send you
in this book '; Quadrature of a Parabola, Pref., * I have proved (eypa<j>ov)
that every cone is one third of the cylinder with the same base and equal
height by assuming a lemma similar to that aforesaid.*
I do not deny that Theodorus constructed his 4 roots *; I have no doubt
that he did ; but this is not what eypacf)* n means.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

204 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
to be unlimited in multitude, to try to arrive at one collective
term by which we could designate all these roots . . . We
divided number in general into two classes. The number
which can be expressed as equal multiplied by equal (foov
io-dicis) we likened to a square in form, and we called it
square and equilateral (ia-oirXevpov) . . . The intermediate
number, such as three, five, and any number which cannot
be expressed as equal multiplied by equal, but is either less
times more or more times less, so that it is always contained
by a greater and a less side, we likened to an oblong figure
(npoftrJKei <ryr\iiaTi) and called an oblong number. . . . Such
straight lines then as square the equilateral and plane number
we defined as length (fjLfjKos), and such as square the oblong
(we called) square roots (Suvd/xecs) as not being commensurable
with the others in length but only in the plane areas to which
their squares are equal. And there is another distinction of
the same sort with regard to solids/
Plato gives no hint as to how Theodorus proved the proposi-
tions attributed to him, namely that Vs, \/5 ... V17 are
all incommensurable with 1; there is therefore a wide field
open for speculation, and several conjectures have been put
forward.
(1) Hultsch, in a paper on Archimedes's approximations to
square roots, suggested that Theodorus took the line of seeking
successive approximations. Just as f, the first approximation
to \/2, was obtained by putting 2 — -§-|, Theodorus might
have started from 3 = f|, and found \ or \^\ 
as a first
approximation, and then, seeing that \\\> 
\/3>l^, might
(by successive trials, probably) have found that
1 1 1 
1 
1 
1 
-^ 
A/q 
^ 
i 1 1 
1 
1 
1
]2 
8 T6 
12 
64 
^ 
V 
6 
> 
L2 
8 T6 
^2 
1T28 *
But the method of finding closer and closer approximations,
although it might afford a presumption that the true value
cannot be exactly expressed in fractions, would leave Theodorus
as far as ever from proving that V 3 is incommensurable.
(2) There is no mention of V 2 in our passage, and Theodorus
probably omitted this case because the incommensurability
of \/2 and the traditional method of proving it were already
known. The traditional proof was, as we have seen, a reductio
ad absurdum showing that, if \/2 is commensurable with 1,
it will follow that the same number is both even and odd,
i.e. both divisible and not divisible by 2. The same method
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEODORUS OF CYRENE 
205
of proof can be adapted to the cases of >/3, V5, &c^ if 3, 5 ...
are substituted for 2 in the proof; e.g. we can prove that,
if V 3 is commensurable with 1, then the same number will
be both divisible and not divisible by 3. One suggestion,
therefore, is that Theodorus may have applied this method
to all the cases from </3 to VI7. We can put the proof
quite generally thus. Suppose that N is a non-square number
such as 3,5..., and, if possible, let VN = m/n, where m, n
are integers prime to one another.
Therefore 
m2 = N. n2;
therefore m2 is divisible by JV", so that m also is a multiple
of K
Let 
m = ix.N, 
(1)
and consequently 
n2 = N.fi2.
Then in the same way we can prove that n is a multiple
of N.
Let 
n = v.N 
(2)
It follows from (1) and (2) that m/n = /i/v, where ji < m
and v < n; therefore m/n is not in its lowest terms, which
is contrary to the hypothesis.
The objection to this conjecture as to the nature of
Theodorus's proof is that it is so easy an adaptation of the
traditional proof regarding V2 that it would hardly be
important enough to mention as a new discovery. Also it
would be quite unnecessary "to repeat the proof for every
case up to V17; for it would be clear, long before V17 was
reached, that it is generally applicable. The latter objection
seems to me to have force. The former objection may or may
not; for I do not feel sure that Plato is necessarily attributing
any important new discovery to Theodorus. The object of
the whole context is to show that a definition by mere
enumeration is no definition; e.g. it is no definition of eTri-
o-Trj/irj to enumerate particular kirKTrrjuai (as shoemaking,
carpentering, and the like); this is to put the cart before the
horse, the general definition of iTncrTrjfir] being logically prior.
Hence it was probably Theaetetus's generalization of the
procedure of Theodorus which impressed Plato as being
original and important rather than Theodorus's proofs them-
selves.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

206 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
(3) The third hypothesis is that of Zeuthen.1 He starts
with the assumptions (a) that the method of proof used by
Theodorus must have been original enough to call for special
notice from Plato, and (6) that it must have been of such
a kind that the application of it to each surd required to be
set out separately in consequence of the variations in the
numbers entering into the proofs. 
Neither of these con-
ditions is satisfied by the hypothesis of a mere adaptation to
</3, \/5 ... of the traditional proof with regard to V2.
Zeuthen therefore suggests another hypothesis as satisfying
both conditions, namely that Theodorus used -the criterion
furnished by the process of finding the greatest common
measure as stated in the theorem of Eucl. X. 2. 'If, when
the lesser of two unequal magnitudes is continually subtracted
in turn from the greater [this includes the subtraction
from any term of the highest multiple of another that it
contains], that which is left never measures the one before
it, the magnitudes will be incommensurableJ; that is, if two
magnitudes are such that the process of finding their G. C. M.
never comes to an end, the two magnitudes are incommensur-
able. True, the proposition Eucl. X. 2 depends on the famous
X. 1 (Given two unequal magnitudes, if from the greater
there be subtracted more than the half (or the half), from the
remainder more than the half (or the half), and so on, there
will be left, ultimately, some magnitude less than the lesser
of the original magnitudes), which is based on the famous
postulate of Eudoxus (= Eucl. V, Def. 4), and therefore belongs
to a later date. Zeuthen gets over this objection by pointing
out that the necessity of X. 1 for a rigorous demonstration
of X. 2 may not have been noticed at the time; Theodorus
may have proceeded by intuition, or he may even have
postulated the truth proved in X. 1.
The most obvious case in which incommensurability can be
proved by using the process of finding the greatest common
measure is that of the two segments of a straight line divided
in extreme and mean ratio. For, if AB is divided in this way
at G, we have only to mark off along GA (the greater segment)
1 Zeuthen,' Sur la constitution des livres arithmetiques des filaments
d'Euclide et leur rapport a la question de 1'irrationaKte' in Oversigt over
det kgl, Danske videnskabernes Selskabs Forhandlinger, 1915, pp. 422 sq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEODORUS OF CYRENE 
207
a length CD equal to GB (the lesser segment), and CA is then
divided at D in extreme and mean ratio, CD being the
greater segment. 
(Eucl. XIII. 5 is the equivalent of this
A 
D 
E 
C 
B
i 
1 
i 
1 
1
proposition.) 
Similarly, DC is so divided if we set oft* DE
along it equal to DA; and so on. This is precisely the
process of finding the greatest common measure of AC, GB,
the quotient being always unity; and the process never comes
to an end. Therefore AC, GB are incommensurable. What
is proved in this case is the irrationality of |(>/5 —1). This
of course shows incidentally that V5 is incommensurable
with 1. It has been suggested, in view of the easiness of the
above proof, that the irrational may first have been discovered
with reference to the segments of a straight line cut in extreme
and mean ratio, rather than with reference to the diagonal
of a square in relation to its side. But this seems, on the
whole, improbable.
Theodorus would, of course, give a geometrical form to the
process of finding the G. C. M., after he had represented in
a figure the particular surd which he was investigating.
Zeuthen illustrates by two cases, >/5 and \/3.
We will take the former, which is the easier. The process
of finding the G. C. M. (if any) of • 5 and 1 is as follows:
• 5-2)1 
(4
4 ( • 5 - 2 )
(v/5-2)2
[The explanation of the second division is this:
1 = ( ^ 5 - 2 ) ( ^ 5 + 2) = 4 ( ^ 5 - 2 ) + (•5-2) 2.]
Since, then, the ratio of the last term (^5 —2)2 to the pre-
ceding one, • 5 — 2, is the same as the ratio of V5— 2 to 1,
the process will never end.
Zeuthen has a geometrical proof which is not difficult; but
I think the following proof is neater and easier.
Let ABC be a triangle right-angled at J5, such that AB = 1,
BC = 2, and therefore AC = • s .
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

208 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
Cut off CB from CA equal to OB, and draw BE at right
angles to CA. Then BE = EB.
Now AB = V5 —2, and by similar triangles
BE=2AB= 
2(^5-2).
Cut off from i£4 the portion EF equal to
), and draw FG at right angles to AE.
Then AF = AB-BF = AB-2BE
A F
= (•6-2)".
Therefore -4.BGy, ABE, AFG are diminishing
similar triangles such that
^4i?: AD: AF = 1: (\/5 - 2): (-/5 - 2)2,
and so on.
Also AB > FB, i.e. 2BE or 4 J.D.
Therefore the sidve of each triangle in the series is less than
^ of the corresponding side of the preceding triangle.
In the case of V 3 the process of finding the G. C. M. of
\/3 and 1 gives
1) v/3
1
( 1
(1
5 - 1 ( 2
the ratio of \(V3 — I)2 to J(>/3 —I)3 being the same as that
of 1 to (V3-1).
This case is more difficult to show in geometrical form
because we have to make one more
division before recurrence takes place.
The cases VlO and VI7 are exactly
similar to that of -/5.
The irrationality of V 2 can, of course,
be proved by the same method. If ABCD
is a square, we mark off along the diagonal
AC a length AE equal to AB and draw
EF at right angles to AC. The same
thing is then done with the triangle CEF
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEODORUS OF CYRENE 
209
as with the triangle ABC, and so on. This could not have
escaped Theodoras if his proof in the cases of V3, \/5...
took the form suggested by Zeuthen; but he was presumably
content to accept the traditional proof with regard to V2.
The conjecture of Zeuthen is very ingenious, but, as he
admits, it necessarily remains a hypothesis.
THEAETETUS1 (about 415-369 B.C.) made important contribu-
tions to the body of the Elements. These related to two
subjects in particular, (a) the theory of irrationals, and (6) the
five regular solids.
That Theaetetus actually succeeded in generalizing the
theory of irrationals on the lines indicated in the second part
of the passage from Plato's dialogue is confirmed by other
evidence. The commentary on Eucl. X, which has survived
in Arabic and is attributed to Pappus, says (in the passage
partly quoted above, p. 155) that the theory of irrationals
'had its origin in the school of Pythagoras. It was con-
siderably developed by Theaetetus the Athenian, who gave
proof in this part of mathematics, as in others, of ability
which has been justly admired. . . . As for the exact dis-
tinctions of the above-named magnitudes and the rigorous
demonstrations of the propositions to which this theory gives
rise, I believe that they were chiefly established by this
mathematician. 
For Theaetetus had distinguished square
roots 2 commensurable in length from those which are incom-
mensurable, and had divided the well-known species of
irrational lines after the different means, assigning the medial
to geometry, the binomial to arithmetic, and the apotome to
harmony, as is stated by Eudemus the Peripatetic/3
1 On Theaetetus the reader may consult a recent dissertation, De Theae-
teto Atheniensi mathe?naticot by Eva Sachs (Berlin, 1914).
2 * Square roots '. The word in Woepcke's translation is ' puissances ',
which indicates that the original word was dwd^is. This word is always
ambiguous; it might mean 4 squares', but I have translated it ' square
roots' because the 8vvafus of Theaetetus's definition is undoubtedly the
square root of a non-square number, a surd. The distinction in that case
would appear to be between ' square roots' commensurable in length and
square roots commensurable in square only; thus >/B and -/12 are
commensurable in length, while A/3 and >/7 aie commensurable in
square only. I do not see how dwdfiets could here mean squares; for
' squares commensurable in length' is not an intelligible phrase, and it
does not seem legitimate to expand it into * squares (on straight lines)
commensurable in length \
8 For an explanation of this see The Thirteen Books of Euclid's Elements
vol. iii, p. 4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

210 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
The irrationals called by the names here italicized are
described in Eucl. X. 21, 36 and 73 respectively.
Again, a scholiast1 on Eucl. X. 9 (containing the general
theorem that squares which have not to one another the ratio
of a square number to a square number have their sides
incommensurable in length) definitely attributes the discovery
of this theorem to Theaetetus. But, in accordance with the
traditional practice in Greek geometry, it was necessary to
prove the existence of such incommensurable ratios, and this
is done in the porism to Eucl. X. 6 by a geometrical con-
struction ; the porism first states that, given a straight line a
and any two numbers m, n, we can find a straight line x such
that a: x = m: n; next it is shown that, if y be taken a mean
proportional between a and x, then
a2: y2 = a: x = m: n;
if, therefore, the ratio m:n 
is not a ratio of a square to
a square, we have constructed an irrational straight line
a V(n/m) 
and therefore shown that such a straight line
exists.
The proof of Eucl. X. 9 formally depends on VIII. 11 alone
(to the effect that between two square numbers there is one
mean proportional number, and the square has to the square
the duplicate ratio of that which the side has to the side);
and VIII. 11 again depends on*VII. 17 and 18 (to the effect
that ab:ac = b:c, and a:b = aeibc, propositions which are
not identical). But Zeuthen points out that these propositions
are an inseparable part of a whole theory established in
Book VII and the early part of Book VIII, and that the
real demonstration of X. 9 is rather contained in propositions
of these Books which give a rigorous proof of the necessary
and sufficient conditions for the rationality of the square
roots of numerical fractions and integral numbers, notably
VII. 27 and the propositions leading up to it, as well as
VIII. 2. He therefore suggests that the theory established
in the early part of Book VII was not due to the Pytha-
goreans, but was an innovation made by Theaetetus with the
direct object of laying down a scientific basis for his theory
of irrationals, and that this, rather than the mere formulation
1 X, No. 62 (Heiberg's Euclid, vol. v; p. 450).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THEAETETUS 
211
of the theorem of Eucl. X. 9, was the achievement which Plato
intended to hold up to admiration.
This conjecture is of great interest, but it is, so far as
I know, without any positive confirmation. 
On the other
hand, there are circumstances which suggest doubts. For
example, Zeuthen himself admits that Hippocrates, who re-
duced the duplication of the cube to the finding of two mean
proportionals, must have had a proposition corresponding to
the very proposition VIII. 11 on which X. 9 formally depends.
Secondly, in the extract from Simplicius about the squaring
of lunes by Hippocrates, we have seen that the proportionality
of similar segments of circles to the circles of which they form
part is explained by the statement that ' similar segments are
those which are the same part of the circles'; and if we may
take this to be a quotation by Eudemus from Hippocrates's
own argument, the inference is that Hippocrates had a defini-
tion of numerical proportion which was at all events near
to that of Eucl. VII, Def. 20. Thirdly, there is the proof
(presently to be given) by Archytas of the proposition that
there can be no number which is a (geometric) mean between
two consecutive integral numbers, in which proof it will
be seen that several propositions of Eucl., Book VII, are
pre-supposed; but Archytas lived (say) 430-S65 B.C., and
Theaetetus was some years younger. I am not, therefore,
prepared to give up the view, which has hitherto found
general acceptance, that the Pythagoreans already had a
theory of proportion of a numerical kind on the lines, though
not necessarily or even probably with anything like tlie
fullness and elaboration, of Eucl., Book VII.
While Pappus, in the commentary quoted, says that Theae-
tetus distinguished the well-known species of irrationals, and
in particular the medial, the binomial, and the apotome, he
proceeds thus :
' As for Euclid, he set himself to give rigorous rules, which
he established, relative to commensurability and incommen-
surability in general; he made precise the definitions and
distinctions between rational and irrational magnitudes, he
set out a great number of orders of irrational magnitudes,
and finally he made clear their whole extent.'
As Euclid proves that there are thirteen irrational straight
p 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

212 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
lines in all, we may perhaps assume that the subdivision of
the three species of irrationals distinguished by Theaetetus
into thirteen was due to Euclid himself, while the last words
of the quotation seem to refer to Eucl. X. 115, where it is
proved that from the medial straight line an unlimited number
of other irrationals can be derived which are all diflFerent from
it and from one another.
It will be remembered that, at the end of the passage of the
Theaetetus containing the definition of ' square roots' or surds,
Theaetetus says that ' there is a similar distinction in the case
of solids'. We know nothing of any further development
of a theory of irrationals arising from solids; but Theaetetus
doubtless had in mind a distinction related to VIII. 12 (the
theorem that between two cube numbers there are two mean
proportional numbers) in the same way as the definition of
a l square root' or surd is related to VIII. 11; that is to say,
he referred to the incommensurable cube root of a non-cube
number which is the product of three factors.
Besides laying the foundation of the theory of irrationals
as we find it in Eucl., Book X, Theaetetus contributed no less
substantially to another portion of the Elements, namely
Book XIII, which is devoted (after twelve introductory
propositions) to constructing the five regular solids, circum-
scribing spheres about them, and finding the relation between
the dimensions of the respective solids and the circumscribing
spheres. We have already mentioned (pp. 159, 162) the tradi-
tions that Theaetetus was the first to' construct' or 'write upon'
the five regular solids,1 and that his name was specially
associated with the octahedron and the icosahedron.2 There
can be little doubt that Theaetetus's 'construction' of, or
treatise upon, the regular solids gave the theoretical con-
structions much as we find them in Euclid.
Of the mathematicians of Plato's time, two others are
mentioned with Theaetetus as having increased the number
of theorems in geometry and made a further advance towards
a scientific grouping of them, LEODAMAS OF THASOS and
ARCHYTAS OF TARAS. With regard to the former we are
1 Suidas, 8. V. GealrrjTos.
2 Schol. 1 to Eucl XIII (Euclid, ed. Heiberg, vol. v, p. 654).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

AECHYTAS 
213
told that Plato ' explained (da^yrja'aTo) to Leodamas of Thasos
the method of inquiry by analysis'1; Proclus's account is
fuller, stating that the finest method for discovering lemmas
in geometry is that * which by means of analysis carries the
thing sought up to an acknowledged principle, a method
which Plato, as they say, communicated to Leodamas, and
by which the latter too is said to have discovered many
things in geometry'.2 Nothing more than this is known of
Leodamas, but the passages are noteworthy as having given
rise to the idea that Plato invented the method of mathe-
matical analysis, an idea which, as we shall see later on, seems
nevertheless to be based on a misapprehension.
ARCHYTAS OF TARAS, a Pythagorean, the friend of Plato,
flourished in the first half of the fourth century, say 400 to
365 B.C. Plato made his acquaintance when staying in Magna
Graecia, and he is said, by means of a letter, to have saved
Plato from death at the hands of Dionysius. Statesman and
philosopher, he was famed for every sort of accomplishment.
He was general of the forces of his city-state for seven years,
though ordinarily the law forbade any one to hold the post
for more than a year; and he was never beaten. 
He is
said to have been the first to write a systematic treatise on
mechanics based on mathematical principles.3 Vitruvius men-
tions that, like Archimedes, Ctesibius, Nymphodorus, and
Philo of Byzantium, Archytas wrote on machines4; two
mechanical devices in particular are attributed to him, one
a mechanical dove made of wood which would fly,5 the
other a rattle which, according to Aristotle, was found useful
to ' give to children to occupy them, and so prevent them
from breaking things about the house (for the young are
incapable of keeping still) \6
We have already seen Archytas distinguishing the four
mathematical sciences, geometry, arithmetic, sphaeric (or
astronomy), and music, comparing the art of calculation with
geometry in respect of its relative efficiency and conclusive-
ness, and defining the three means in music, the arithmetic,
1 Diog. L. iii. 24. 
2 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 211. 19-23.
8 Diog. L. viii. 79-83.
4 Vitruvius, Be architectural Praef. vii. 14.
5 Gelhus, x. 12 8, after Favorinus (Vors. i3, p. 325. 21-9).
6 Aristotle, Politics, E (0). 6, 1340 b 26.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

214 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
the geometric, and the harmonic (a name substituted by
Archytas and Hippasus for the older name 'sub-contrary').
From his mention of sphaeric in connexion with his state-
ment that' the mathematicians have given us clear knowledge
about the speed of the heavenly bodies and their risings and
settings' we gather that in Archytas's time astronomy was
already treated mathematically, the properties of the sphere
being studied so far as necessary to explain the movements
in the celestial sphere. He discussed too the question whether
the universe is unlimited in extent, using the following
argument.
'If I were at the outside, say at the heaven of the fixed
stars, could I stretch my hand or my stick outwards or not ?
To suppose that I could not is absurd; and if I can stretch
it out, that which is outside must be either body or space Cit
makes no difference which it is, as we shall see). We may
then in the same way get to the outside of that again, and
so on, asking on arrival at each new limit the same question,
and if there is always a new place to which the stick may be
held out, this clearly involves extension without limit. If
now what so extends is body, the proposition is proved; but
even if it is space, then, since space is that in which body
is or can be, and in the case of eternal things we must treat
that which potentially is as being, it follows equally that there
must be body and space (extending) without limit.'x
In geometry, while Archytas doubtless increased the number
of theorems (as Proclus says), only one fragment of his has
survived, namely the solution of the problem of finding two
mean proportionals (equivalent to the duplication of the cube)
by a remarkable theoretical construction in three dimensions.
As this, however, belongs to higher geometry and not to the
Elements, the description of it will come more appropriately
in another place (pp. 246-9).
In music he gave the numerical ratios representing the
intervals of the tetrachord on three scales, the anharmonic,
the chromatic, and the diatonic.2 He held that sound is due
to impact, and that higher tones correspond to quicker motion
communicated to the air, and lower tones to slower motion.3
1 Sirnplicius in Phijs., p. 467. 26. 
2 Ptol. harm. i. 13, p. 31 Wall.
3 Porph. in Ptol. harm., p. 236 (Vors. i3, p. 232-3); Theon of Smyrna,
p. 61. 11-17.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ARCHYTAS 
215
Of the fragments of Archytas handed down to us the most
interesting from the point of view of this chapter is a proof
of the proposition that there can be no number which is
a (geometric) mean between two numbers in the ratio known
as kiniiopios or super particular is, that is, (n+l):n. 
This
proof is preserved by Boetius1, and the noteworthy fact about
it is that it is substantially identical with the proof of the
same theorem in Prop. 3 of Euclid's tract on the Sectio
canonis.2 
I will quote Archytas's proof in full, in order to
show the slight differences from the Euclidean form and
notation.
Let A, B be the given ' superparticularis proportio' (km-
ixopiov Sida-TTj/jia in Euclid). 
[Archytas writes the smaller
number first (instead of second, as Euclid does); we are then
to suppose that A, B are integral numbers in the ratio of
n to (n+l).'\
Take C, DE the smallest numbers which are in the ratio
of A to B. 
[Here DE means D + E] in this respect the
notation differs from that of Euclid, who, as usual, takes
a straight line DF divided into two parts at G, the parts
DG} GF corresponding to the D and E respectively in
Archytas's proof. The step of finding C, DE the smallest
numbers in the same ratio as that of A to B presupposes
Eucl. VII. 33 applied to two numbers.]
Then DE exceeds G by an aliquot part of itself and of G
[cf. the definition of emfxopio? dpiO/xos in Nicomachus, i. 19. l].
Let D be the excess [i.e. we suppose E equal to G].
I say that D is not a number, but a unit.
For, if D is a number and an aliquot part of DE, it measures
DE; therefore it measures E, that is, G.
Thus D measures both G and DE: which is impossible,
since the smallest numbers which are in the same ratio as
any numbers are prime to one another. 
[This presupposes
Eucl. VII. 22.]
Therefore D is a unit; that is, DE exceeds G by a unit.
Hence no number can be found which is a mean between
the two numbers C, DE [for there is no integer intervening].
1 Boetius, De inst. mus. iii. 11, pp. 285-6 Friedlein.
2 Musici scriptores Graeci, ed. Jan, p. 14; Heiberg and Menge's Euclid,
vol. viii, p. 162.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

216 THE ELEMENTS DOWN TO PLATO'S TIME
Therefore neither can any number be a mean between the
original numbers A, B, which are in the same ratio as C, DE
[cf. the more general proposition, Eucl. VIII. 8 ; the particular
inference is a consequence of Eucl. VII. 20, to the effect that
the least numbers of those which have the same ratio with
them measure the latter the same number of times, the greater
the greater and the less the less].
Since this proof cites as known several propositions corre-
sponding to propositions in Euclid, Book VII, it affords a strong
presumption that there already existed, at least as early as
the time of Archytas, a treatise of some sort on the Elements
of Arithmetic in a form similar to the Euclidean, and con-
taining many of the propositions afterwards embodied by
Euclid in his arithmetical books.
Summary.
We are now in a position to form an idea of the scope of
the Elements at the stage which they had reached in Plato's
time. The substance of Eucl. I-IV was practically complete.
Book V was of course missing, because the theory of proportion
elaborated in that book was the creation of Eudoxus. The
Pythagoreans had a theory of proportion applicable to com-
mensurable magnitudes only; this was probably a numerical
theory on lines similar to those of Eucl., Book VII. But the
theorems of Eucl., Book VI, in general, albeit insufficiently
established in so far as they depended on the numerical theory
of proportion, were known and used by the Pythagoreans.
We have seen reason to suppose that there existed Elements
of Arithmetic partly (at all events) on the lines of Eucl.,
Book VII, while some propositions of Book VIII (e.g. Props.
11 and 12) were also common property. The Pythagoreans,
too, conceived the idea of perfect numbers (numbers equal to
the sum of all their divisors) if they had not actually shown
(as Euclid does in IX. 36) how they are evolved. There can
also be little doubt that many of the properties of plane and
solid numbers and of similar numbers of both classes proved in
Euclid, Books VIII and IX, were known before Plato's time.
We come next to Book X, and it is plain that the foundation
of the whole had been well and truly laid by Theaetetus, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

SUMMARY 
217
the main varieties of irrationals distinguished, though their
classification was not carried so far as in Euclid.
The substance of Book XI. 1-19 must already have been in-
cluded in the Elements (e.g. Eucl. XI. 19 is assumed in Archytas's
construction for the two mean proportionals), and the whole
theory of the section of Book XI in question would be required
for Theaetetus's work on the five regular solids: XI. 21 must
have been known to the Pythagoreans: while there is nothing
in the latter portion of the book about parallelepipedal solids
which (subject to the want of a rigorous theory of proportion)
was not within the powers of those who were familiar with
the theory of plane and solid numbers.
Book XII employs throughout the method of exhaustion,
the orthodox form of which is attributed to Eudoxus, who
grounded it upon a lemma known as Archimedes's Axiom or
its equivalent (Eucl. X. 1). Yet even XII. 2, to the effect that
circles are to one another as the square of their diameters, had
already been anticipated by Hippocrates of Chios, while
Democritus had discovered the truth of the theorems of
XII. 7, Por., about the volume of a pyramid, and XII. 10,
about the volume of a cone.
As in the case of Book X, it would appear that Euclid was
indebted to Theaetetus for much of the substance of Book XIII,
the latter part of which (Props. 12-18) is devoted to the
construction of the five regular solids, and the inscribing of
them in spheres.
There is therefore probably little in the whole compass of
the Elements of Euclid, except the new theory of proportion due
to Eudoxus and its consequences, which was not in substance
included in the recognized content of geometry and arithmetic
by Plato's time, although the form and arrangement of the
subject-matter and the methods employed in particular cases
were different from what we find in Euclid.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

