

PROJECT
MANAGEMENT
TOOLBOX
Second Edition
Russ J. Martinelli
Dragan Z. Milosevic

Cover image: Wiley
Cover design: abstract background © yewkeo/iStockphoto
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
Copyright © 2016 by Russ J. Martinelli and Dragan Z. Milosevic
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior
written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee
to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978)
646-8600, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission should be
addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030,
(201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best eﬀorts in
preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with the respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither the
publisher nor the author shall be liable for damages arising here from.
For general information about our other products and services, please contact our Customer Care
Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or
fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some material
included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or in
print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the version
you purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For more
information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
ISBN 978-1-118-97312-7 (hard back), 978-1-118-97321-9 (ePDF), 978-1-118-97320-2 (ePUB)
and 978-1-119-17482-0 (oBook)

CONTENTS
Preface
xv
Acknowledgments
xvii
PART I:
THE PM TOOLBOX
1
1 INTRODUCTION TO THE PM TOOLBOX
3
Enabling Business and Project Strategy 5
Project Management Methodologies and Processes 7
Constructing and Adapting a PM Toolbox 9
Secure Strategic Alignment 10
Customize the PM Toolbox 12
Continuously Improve the PM Toolbox 20
References 21
PART II:
PROJECT INITIATION TOOLS
23
2 PROJECT SELECTION
25
The Benefits Map 25
Enabling Beneﬁts Management 26
Developing a Beneﬁts Map 28
Using a Beneﬁts Map 29
Variations 30
Beneﬁts 31
Economic Methods 31
Payback Time 31
Net Present Value 31
Internal Rate of Return 33
Using Economic Methods 33
Beneﬁts of Economic Methods 34
iii

iv
CONTENTS
Scoring Models 34
Developing a Scoring Model 34
Using a Scoring Model 39
Beneﬁts 40
Voting Models 40
Developing a Voting Model 41
Using the Voting Model 42
Beneﬁts 45
Pairwise Ranking 46
Developing a Pairwise Ranking Tool 47
Using the Pairwise Ranking Matrix 48
Beneﬁts 49
The Alignment Matrix 49
Developing the Alignment Matrix 50
Variations 51
Beneﬁts 52
References 52
3 PROJECT INITIATION
55
Checklist Questions for Project Initiation 55
Developing Checklist Questions for Project
Initiation 56
Using the Checklist Questions 57
The Goals Grid 57
Developing a Goals Grid 58
Using the Goals Grid 59
Beneﬁts 60
Responsibility Matrix 60
Developing a Responsibility Matrix 61
Using the Responsibility Matrix 63
Beneﬁts 64
Complexity Assessment 64
Developing the Complexity Assessment 65
Using the Complexity Assessment 67
Beneﬁts 67

CONTENTS
v
The Project Business Case 68
Developing the Project Business Case 68
Using the Project Business Case 70
Beneﬁts 71
The Project Charter 71
Developing a Project Charter 71
Using a Project Charter 76
Variations 77
Beneﬁts 77
References 78
PART III:
PROJECT PLANNING TOOLS
81
4 PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
83
The Elicitation Plan 84
Developing an Elicitation Plan 86
Using the Elicitation Plan 89
Beneﬁts 90
Requirements Specification 91
Specifying a Requirement Using Planguage 91
Using the Requirements Speciﬁciation 93
Beneﬁts 96
The Product Requirements Document 96
Developing a Product Requirements
Document 97
Using the PRD 101
Beneﬁts 102
Requirements Ambiguity Checklist 102
Using the Requirements Ambiguity
Checklist 104
Beneﬁts 106
Requirements Baseline 106
Establishing a Requirements Baseline 107
Establish a Requirements Change Board 107
Beneﬁts 108
References 109

vi
CONTENTS
5 SCOPE PLANNING
111
Project SWOT Analysis 111
Performing a Project SWOT Analysis 112
Using a Project SWOT Analysis 116
Beneﬁts 117
The Scope Statement 118
Developing a Scope Statement 118
Using a Scope Statement 124
Variations 124
Beneﬁts 125
The Work Breakdown Structure 126
Constructing a Project WBS: A Top-Down
Approach 128
Establish the WBS Level of Detail 130
Constructing a Project WBS: A Bottom-Up
Approach 134
Using the WBS 135
Beneﬁts 136
The Product Breakdown Structure 137
Constructing a Product Breakdown
Structure 137
Using the PBS 141
Beneﬁts 141
References 142
6 SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
145
The Gantt Chart 146
Developing a Gantt Chart 146
Using the Gantt Chart 149
Beneﬁts 149
The Milestone Chart 150
Developing a Milestone Chart 151
Using the Milestone Chart 153
Beneﬁts 154

CONTENTS
vii
The Critical Path Method Diagram 154
Constructing a CPM Diagram 155
Using the CPM Diagram 160
Beneﬁts 161
Variations 161
The Time-Scaled Arrow Diagram 162
Developing a TAD 162
Using a TAD 167
Beneﬁts 168
The Critical Chain Schedule 168
Developing a Critical Chain Schedule 169
Using the Critical Chain Schedule 172
Beneﬁts 173
The Hierarchical Schedule 173
Constructing a Hierarchical Schedule 174
Using a Hierarchical Schedule 176
Beneﬁts 177
Line of Balance 177
Developing a Line-of-Balance Schedule 178
Using the LOB 180
Beneﬁts 181
Choosing Your Scheduling Tools 181
References 183
7 COST PLANNING
185
The Cost-Planning Map 185
Developing a Cost-Planning Map 186
Using the Cost-Planning Map 191
Beneﬁts 191
Analogous Estimate 191
Developing an Analogous Estimate 192
Using an Analogous Estimate 193
Beneﬁts 193

viii
CONTENTS
Parametric Estimate 194
Developing Parametric Estimates 194
Using Parametric Estimates 198
Beneﬁts 198
Bottom-up Estimate 199
Developing Bottom-Up Estimates 200
Using Bottom-Up Estimates 202
Beneﬁts 202
The Cost Baseline 203
Developing a Cost Baseline 203
Using the Cost Baseline 207
Beneﬁts 208
Choosing a Cost-Planning Tool 211
References 211
PART IV:
PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION TOOLS
213
8 SCOPE MANAGEMENT
215
Project Scope Control System 217
Establishing a Project Scope Control
System 217
Using the Project Scope Control System 220
Beneﬁts 223
Project Change Request 223
Developing a Project Change Request 224
Using the Project Change Request 228
Beneﬁts 229
The Project Change Log 229
Developing a Project Change Log 230
Using the Project Change Log 232
Beneﬁts 233
The Scope Control Decision Checklist 233
Developing a Scope Control Decision
Checklist 233

CONTENTS
ix
Using the Scope Control Decision
Checklist 234
Beneﬁts 235
References 235
9 SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
237
The Burn Down Chart 239
Developing the Burn Down Chart 239
Using the Burn Down Chart 240
Beneﬁts 242
The Slip Chart 243
Developing the Slip Chart 244
Using the Slip Chart 246
Beneﬁts 246
The Buffer Chart 247
Developing the Buﬀer Chart 248
Using the Buﬀer Chart 249
Beneﬁts 250
The Jogging Line 251
Constructing a Jogging Line 252
Using the Jogging Line 255
Variations 256
Beneﬁts 256
The Milestone Prediction Chart 257
Constructing the Milestone Prediction
Chart 258
Using the Milestone Prediction Chart 260
Beneﬁts 260
B-C-F Analysis 261
Performing the B-C-F Analysis 262
Using the B-C-F Analysis 264
Beneﬁts 265
Schedule Crashing 265
Performing Schedule Crashing 265
Using Schedule Crashing 269
Beneﬁts 269

x
CONTENTS
Choosing Your Schedule Management Tools 269
References 270
10 COST MANAGEMENT
273
Cost Management Plan 275
Developing the Cost Management Plan 275
Using the Cost Management Plan 276
The Budget Consumption Chart 276
Developing the Budget Consumption
Chart 277
Using the Budget Consumption Chart 278
Variations 279
Beneﬁts 279
Earned Value Analysis 280
Performing Earned Value Analysis 281
Using Earned Value Analysis 292
Variations 293
Beneﬁts 293
Milestone Analysis 294
Performing a Milestone Analysis 295
Using the Milestone Analysis 297
Beneﬁts 297
Choosing Your Cost Management Tools 297
References 298
11 AGILE PROJECT EXECUTION
301
Contributed by
Peerasit Patanakul
James Henry
Jeﬀrey A. Leach
Scrum Basics 302
Product Backlog and Sprint Backlog 304
Information on the Backlogs 304
Populating Backlogs 304
Beneﬁts 306

CONTENTS
xi
Release Planning 307
The Release-Planning Event 308
Initial Draft Release Plan 309
Final Release Plans 309
HIP Sprint 310
Release Planning versus Sprint Planning 310
Beneﬁts 311
The Daily Scrum Meeting 311
Organizing a Daily Scrum Meeting 312
Beneﬁts 312
Sprint Task Board 313
Using the Sprint Task Board 313
Beneﬁts 314
The Sprint Burn Down Chart 315
Developing a Sprint Burn Down Chart 315
Using a Sprint Burn Down Chart 316
Beneﬁts 317
The Sprint Retrospective Meeting 317
Organizing a Sprint Retrospective
Meeting 318
Using a Sprint Retrospective Meeting 318
Beneﬁts 320
Concluding Remarks 320
References 321
PART V:
PROJECT REPORTING AND
CLOSURE TOOLS
323
12 PERFORMANCE REPORTING
325
Project Reporting Checklist 325
Developing the Project Reporting
Checklist 326
Using the Project Reporting Checklist 326
Beneﬁts 326

xii
CONTENTS
The Project Strike Zone 328
Developing the Project Strike Zone 328
Using the Project Strike Zone 330
Beneﬁts 332
The Project Dashboard 332
Designing a Project Dashboard 334
Using the Project Dashboard 335
Beneﬁts 336
The Summary Status Report 337
Developing a Summary Status Report 337
Using the Summary Status Report 342
Beneﬁts 343
The Project Indicator 343
Developing the Project Indicator 345
Using the Project Indicator 346
Variations 346
Beneﬁts 348
Choosing Your Reporting Tools 349
References 349
13 PROJECT CLOSURE
351
Contributed by Tim Rahschulte, PhD
Understanding Project Closure 351
Project Closing Activities 353
Project Closure Plan and Checklist 356
Developing the Plan and Checklist 358
Using the Closure Plan and Checklist 362
Beneﬁts 362
The Project Closure Report 363
Developing the Project Closure Report 363
Using the Project Closure Report 365
Beneﬁts 365
Postmortem Review 366
Conducting the Postmortem Review 366
Using the Postmortem Review 369

CONTENTS
xiii
Variations 371
Beneﬁts 372
Concluding Remarks 373
References 373
PART VI: RISK AND STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT
TOOLS
375
14 MANAGING PROJECT RISK
377
Risk Management Plan 378
Developing a Risk Management Plan 378
Using the Risk Management Plan 385
Beneﬁts 386
The Risk Identification Checklist 387
Developing a Risk Identiﬁcation Checklist 387
Using a Risk Identiﬁcation Checklist 389
Beneﬁts 389
The Risk Register 390
Creating a Risk Register 390
Using the Risk Register 393
Beneﬁts 394
The Risk Assessment Matrix 394
Developing a Risk Assessment Matrix 395
Using the Risk Assessment Matrix 397
Variations 398
Beneﬁts 398
Monte Carlo Analysis 399
Performing a Monte Carlo Analysis 400
Using the Monte Carlo Analysis 408
Beneﬁts 409
The Decision Tree 409
Analyzing the Decision Tree 410
Using Decision Trees 413
Beneﬁts 414

xiv
CONTENTS
The Risk Dashboard 414
Developing the Risk Dashboard 414
Using the Risk Dashboard 418
Beneﬁts 418
Choosing Your Risk Management Tools 420
References 420
15 INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
423
The Stakeholder Management Plan 423
Developing a Stakeholder Management
Plan 424
Using the Stakeholder Management Plan 427
Beneﬁts 427
The Stakeholder Map 428
Developing a Stakeholder Map 428
Using the Stakeholder Map 431
Beneﬁts 431
The Stakeholder Analysis Table 431
Developing a Stakeholder Analysis Table 433
Using the Stakeholder Analysis Table 434
Beneﬁts 435
The Stakeholder Evaluation Matrix 436
Developing a Stakeholder Evaluation
Matrix 438
Using the Stakeholder Evaluation Matrix 439
Variations 441
Beneﬁts 443
The Stakeholder Strategy Matrix 444
Developing a Stakeholder Strategy Matrix 444
Using the Stakeholder Strategy Matrix 446
Beneﬁts 447
Choosing Your Stakeholder Management Tools 447
References 449
Final Thoughts on The PM Toolbox 449
Index
451

PREFACE
M
uch has changed since the publication of the ﬁrst edition of this book, as the
ﬁeld of project management (PM) is continually evolving. Part of that evolution
has involved a new approach for selecting project management tools from an
ad-hoc “choose as you use” approach to a more systematic approach of creating a PM
Toolbox that can be applied to many project situations. From this perspective, we feel
fortunate to have been part of the recent project management evolution.
We also feel fortunate to have had the opportunity to work ﬁrsthand with many
project managers and project oﬃce directors as they set about the task of creating their
initial PM Toolboxes based on the teachings of this text. Our personal understanding of
how project management is evolving and how it aﬀects the needs for PM tools has been
greatly enhanced. This new understanding became the basis for the changes introduced
in this second edition.
The most signiﬁcant changes in this edition are in four areas. First, we have focused
the content of the book on the fundamental project management practice areas to
create more depth in content. Next, we have maintained the traditional view of project
management tools but have also provided a contemporary set of tools that reﬂect the
changes in PM practices. Then, to strengthen an area that has created some of the most
positive reader feedback, we have enhanced the various tips, tricks, and examples found
throughout the book. Finally, we worked to create a stronger message concerning the
importance of creating a PM Toolbox that enables stronger alignment between busi-
ness strategy and project execution, between strategic goals and project deliverables,
and between the work of senior leaders and project managers.
This book has established itself as both educational lecture material and an industry
practice reference, which we hope to maintain with this second edition. Our heartfelt
thanks to the existing and future readers of this book; we hope you ﬁnd it both enjoyable
and useful to read.
Of course, we would like to hear from you directly and get your feedback at
www.programmanagement-academy.com. Supplemental materials and templates can
be found on our web site as well.
xv


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
W
e would like to thank the many people who have helped in making this book
a reality.
To our contributing authors, whose subject matter expertise is appreciated:
Debra Lavell, Jim Waddell, Tim Rahschulte, Peerasit Patanakul, James Henrey, and Jeﬀrey
Leach.
To the team at John Wiley & Sons, who continue to provide outstanding support and
guidance. In particular, we want to thank our executive editor, Margaret Cummins, and
our assistant editor, Amanda Shettleton. Your continued partnership and collaboration
is greatly valued.
To our many colleagues and coworkers who have contributed to the concepts pre-
sented in this work in many ways.
To our families who provide the support and encouragement necessary to complete
the writing process.
We are truly blessed to be associated with such a wonderful and supportive com-
munity of people!
xvii


P A R T
I
The PM
Toolbox


1
INTRODUCTION
TO THE PM TOOLBOX
C
onventional wisdom holds that project management (PM) tools are enabling
devices that assist a project manager in reaching an objective or, more speciﬁ-
cally, a project deliverable or outcome. While this traditional role of PM tools is
more than meaningful, we believe that there is greater opportunity to provide value to
an organization and its project managers. In particular, each PM tool can be part of a set
of tools that makes up a project manager’s PM Toolbox.
The PM Toolbox, then, serves a higher purpose: (1) to increase eﬃciency of the
project players, (2) to provide the right information to support problem-solving and
decision-making processes, and (3) to help establish and maintain alignment among
business strategy, project strategy, and project execution outcomes.
Project management tools support the practices, methods, and various processes
used to eﬀectively manage a project.1 They are enabling devices for the primary players
on a project: the project manager, the specialists who make up the project team, the
executive leadership team, and the governance body.
PM tools include procedures, techniques, and job aids by which a project deliverable
is produced or project information is created. Similarly, A Guide to the Project Manage-
mentBodyofKnowledgeandothersourcesusethephrase“toolsandtechniques”inplace
of what we deﬁne as PM tools.2
PM tools may be either qualitative or quantative in nature. To illustrate, consider
two examples: the team charter and Monte Carlo analysis. They diﬀer in the type of
information they process. The team charter provides a systematic procedure to process
qualitative information about authorizing a team to implement a project. Monte Carlo
analysis is a risk-planning tool that uses an algorithm to quantify risks. The heart of both
the qualitative and quantitative groups of tools—and all PM tools belong to one of these
groups—is in their systematic procedure.
Note that we don’t talk about software tools here. True, many PM tools that we dis-
cuss in this book exist in a software format. However, our focus is not on tool formats.
Rather, we concentrate on the substance of PM tools: the use of tools to manage projects
more eﬀectively and eﬃciently.
The design of a PM Toolbox should mirror the approach an organization takes for
establishing standardized project management methodologies and processes. A highly
3

4
INTRODUCTION TO THE PM TOOLBOX
standardized set of methods and processes will in turn require an equally high level of
standardization of the PM Toolbox. Less standardization introduces more variability in
PM Toolbox design and use, and therefore more possibility for inconsistent results.
In practice, as organizations strive to grow and mature, project execution eﬃciency
and repeatability become increasingly important as the leaders of the organization look
for consistency in achieving business results. This means that project managers must be
armed with the right tools—those that support the business strategy, project strategy,
and project management methodologies and processes. It also means that the same
tools should be used across the gamut of projects with limited exceptions.
Standardization of a ﬁrm’s PM Toolbox does not happen overnight. Rather, it is
an evolutionary process. In a practical sense, PM Toolboxes will look quite ad hoc at
ﬁrst. The tendency is to begin building the PM Toolbox with existing tools due to a
project manager’s familiarity with them. So the early-stage PM Toolbox has more to do
with familiarity of use than with standardization. As a ﬁrm begins to mature its project
management practices, standardization of methodologies and processes begins to
take hold. This is when the PM Toolbox also begins to become more standardized, as
well as more aligned with the project strategy and the business strategy of the ﬁrm.
Construction of a PM Toolbox should be systematically driven, meaning that PM
tools are a vital part of an organization’s overall project execution mechanism. How-
ever, project execution must ﬁrst be aligned to company strategy to be most eﬀective.
When this is the case, the PM Toolbox becomes strategically aligned as well, as illustrated
in Figure 1.1.
As illustrated by the downward arrow, business strategy drives the project strategy,
which in turn drives methods and processes, which inﬂuences the PM Toolbox design.
For this downward ﬂow to work, the PM Toolbox supports the project management
methodology and processes implemented by an organization. The methodology and
process in turn helps to implement the project strategy, which supports and is aligned
to the business strategy of a company in its quest for growth (upward arrow).
Business
Strategy
Project
Strategy
Project Management
Methodologies and Processes
PM ToolBox
Strategically Driven
Strategic Alignment
Figure 1.1: Strategically Aligned PM Toolbox

ENABLING BUSINESS AND PROJECT STRATEGY
5
ENABLING BUSINESS AND PROJECT STRATEGY
Looking at how projects and the management of those projects support the business
strategy of an organization is critical to understanding the strategic importance of the
PM Toolbox. Since alignment between the PM Toolbox and business strategy is driven
from the top of the pyramid (Figure 1.1), we start from there.
Historically, the strategic management and project management functions and pro-
cesses of a company have been deﬁned and performed as independent entities, each
with its own purpose and set of activities.3 Companies have come to realize, however,
that the time, money, and human eﬀort invested in reﬁning and improving each of these
independent functions and processes have not brought them closer to turning their
ideas into positive business results. Increasingly, this fact is leading business leaders to
the realization that strategy and project execution can no longer remain independent
if they wish to repeatedly achieve their desired business beneﬁts and business value.
Rather, they must be integrated so that the formation of strategy and the execution of
strategy are tightly aligned.
Use of the Porter model is a simple approach to demonstrate at a high level the align-
ment among business strategy, project strategy, and PM Toolbox design (Figure 1.2).4
The essence of business strategy lies in devising ways to create both short-term and
long-term growth and sustainability for an enterprise. To equip themselves with the
opportunity, companies rely on their organizational resources.5 Visualize, for example,
project management as an organizational resource. Useful for this visualization can be
the framework of generic strategies, shown in Figure 1.2.6
DIFFERENTATION
COST
Low
High
Low
High
Business Strategy:
Differentiation
Project Strategy:
Fast Cycle Time
Business Strategy:
Schedule Planning
Schedule Management
Risk Management
Business Strategy:
Best - Cost
Project Strategy:
Cost and Quality
Business Strategy:
Cost Planning
Cost Management
Performance
Business Strategy:
Low-Cost
Project Strategy:
Cost Containment
Business Strategy:
Cost Planning
Cost Management
Figure 1.2: Aligning Business Strategy, Project Strategy, and PM Toolbox

6
INTRODUCTION TO THE PM TOOLBOX
To understand the eﬀect of business strategy, let’s use Porter’s model as an example
to evaluate the strategies for three companies producing liquid crystal display (LCD)
projectors.
The core of diﬀerentiation strategies (high diﬀerentiation/high cost quadrant
in Figure 1.2) is an ability to oﬀer customers something diﬀerent from a company’s
competitors. This may include fast time to market (which we used as an example in
Figure 1.2), high quality, innovative technology, special features, superior service, and
so on. When striving for product superiority, LCD projector companies pursuing these
strategies provide cutting-edge features that customers are willing to pay a premium
price for.
Companies focusing on low-cost strategies aim at establishing a sustainable cost
advantage over rivals (low-cost/low-diﬀerentiation quadrant). The intent is to use the
low-cost advantage as a strategy to underprice rivals and take market share away from
them. Another strategic option is to earn a higher proﬁt by selling at the going market
price. This is pursued with a good basic product that has few frills and continuous quest
for cost reduction without giving up quality and essential features.
Best-cost companies combine upscale features with low cost (low-cost/high-
diﬀerentiation quadrant). This should lead to superior value by meeting or exceeding
customer expectations on product features and surpassing their expectations on
price. At the same time, the aim is to become the low-cost provider of a product that
has good-to-excellent features and use that cost advantage to underprice rivals with
comparable features. Because such a company has the lowest cost compared with
similarly positioned rivals, the strategy is called a best-cost strategy.
In Figure 1.2, the blank quadrant of high cost/low diﬀerentiation is not a viable
option in the quest for short- or long-term business growth.
Now, let us use the model to see how the business strategy shapes project strategies.
Examples of three companies—Sirius, Park, and Prima—will help us illustrate the point.
Sirius’s business strategy is one of diﬀerentiation. The strategy uses innovation and
time-to-market speed as competitive advantages. The business strategy is executed
through product development projects, whose job it is to roll out new advanced LCD
projector chips faster and faster. This is where the project strategy comes into play,
focusing on overlap across project phase activities to shorten the project cycle time
and the management of risk due to a number of new technologies. The project strategy
emphasizes time and risk management.
Park’s business strategy is quite diﬀerent from that of Sirius. Instead of the diﬀeren-
tiation and time-to-market emphasis that Sirius relentlessly pursues, Park has set out
to become the low-cost leader in the industry. To develop the ability and become the
leader in the industry, Park has had to employ a project strategy to continuously lower
project and product cost goals. Part of that eﬀort has been perfecting project cost
planning and management methods for managing cost cutting within the projects.
Nurturing these competencies supports Park’s low-cost advantages.
The strategies of Sirius and Park exploit their schedule- and cost-focused project
strategies, respectively. In contrast, Prima relies on a best-cost strategy. The goal is to
have the best cost relative to competitors whose LCD projectors are of comparable qual-
ity. Accordingly, their project strategies emphasize high quality and low development

PROJECT MANAGEMENT METHODOLOGIES AND PROCESSES
7
cost. Project management methodologies and practices aim to accomplish cost and
quality goals through excellent cost and performance management.
These examples provide a context from which we can construct a common base
of understanding. First, companies select business strategies as a means of operating
within the markets that they serve. Although each type of strategy has the same
goal—to create and sustain business growth, ways to accomplish the goal diﬀer. One
company builds a strategy on the basis of diﬀerentiation, another on low cost, and still
another on a best-cost approach.
Second, companies align their project strategies with their business strategy.
Consequently, in the case of Sirius, Park, and Prima, each company’s project strat-
egy is focused diﬀerently: schedule focus (Sirius), cost focus (Park), and cost/quality
focus (Prima).
Any of these approaches is, of course, acceptable. What is critically important, how-
ever, is that care should be taken to ensure that the projects and their associated project
strategies align to and support the business strategies of the enterprise.
PROJECT MANAGEMENT METHODOLOGIES
AND PROCESSES
As an organization grows and becomes more mature in its practices, the need for stan-
dardization of methodologies and processes invariably arises. This is due to increased
need for repeatability and consistency of project outcomes.
But what does standardization really mean? If we seek a standardized sequence of
project activities (that culminate in project deliverables and outcomes), then standard-
ized means the degree of absence of variation in implementing such activities.7 Let’s use
Figure 1.3 to explain this.
At one extreme, there may be a complete variation in the project management
methods and processes. Literally, every time a process is performed, it is performed in
a diﬀerent way. Obviously, 100 percent variation means that standardization is equal
to zero. This is often referred to as an ad-hoc approach. At the other extreme, methods
and processes may be 100 percent standardized, meaning a process is performed
in the same way every time. In this case, variation is zero percent. Between the two
extremes lies a continuum of methodologies and processes with diﬀerent ratios of
standardization and variation.
Take, for example, process S on the x-axis of Figure 1.3, one of the many possible
PM methods (e.g., the critical chain scheduling methodology). The degree of standard-
ization and the degree of variation add up to 100 percent. If we go down the diago-
nal line to other methods, the degree of standardization will increase, and the degree
of variation will decrease; but their sum will remain constant at 100 percent. Moving
up the diagonal line will lead to a higher variation and lower standardization, still with
the sum of 100 percent. Using plain language, the lower the variation, the higher the
standardization; and the more varied the implementation of project activities, the less
standardized they are.

8
INTRODUCTION TO THE PM TOOLBOX
Degree of Standardization
Degree of Variation
100%
0%
100%
0%
Degree of
Standardization
Degree of Variation
Figure 1.3: Continuum of PM Methods and Processes
This means that organizations have a host of options when developing their
methodologies and processes—they can be more standardized or less standardized.
The rationale behind standardization is to create a predictable process that prevents
activities from diﬀering completely from project to project, and from project manager
to project manager. Put simply, standardization saves project players the trouble of
reinventing a new method and process for each individual project.8 As a result, the
process is repeatable despite changes in customer expectations or management
turnover. The higher the standardization, the higher the repeatability.
When establishing standardized methodologies and processes, organizations have
a host of options to choose from. Some companies adopt one of the well-known
project management methodologies such as the PMBoK, PRINCE2, or Agile Scrum.
Many establish their own methodologies and processes based on how they normally
perform their project work. Still others combine approaches by utilizing elements of the
standard methodologies and then augmenting and customizing based on the culture
of their organization.
The decision about how much to standardize project management methodologies
and processes is a decision about the ratio of standardization and variation (popularly
called ﬂexibility). It is driven by business strategy and by the types of projects needed to
realize the business strategy. Generally, projects of higher certainty will strive for higher
levels of standardization and lower levels of ﬂexibility. According to experts, the majority
of projects in organizations belong to this group.9 Projects that face high uncertainty
require lower standardization and higher ﬂexibility.
Selecting PM tools one at a time demands a substantial amount of resources and
expertise. It is not reasonable to presume that each project manager—especially if he
or she is less than experienced, as is the case with many—would have the resources
and expertise to quickly, smoothly, and consistently select his or her own set of tools.
Rather, such managers end up struggling to ﬁnd the right PM tools and how to use them,
introducing variability in results. In contrast, having a standardized PM Toolbox capable
of supporting the methods and processes results in minimum variation (see Table 1.1).
Often, project managers assume that the PM Toolbox is of a one-size-ﬁts-all nature.
This, of course, is incorrect. The PM Toolbox can come in many sizes, shapes, and ﬂavors.
Logically, this is an issue related to the project management methodology and types of
projects the methodology serves. Since the PM Toolbox is aligned with the PM method-
ology used, it is understandable that the level of standardization of the methodology

CONSTRUCTING AND ADAPTING A PM TOOLBOX
9
Table 1.1: One-Tool-at-a-Time versus the
PM Toolbox Approach
Impact on SPM Process
Requirement
One-Tool-at-a-Time PM Toolbox
Speed
Lower
Higher
Repeatability
Less repeatable
More repeatable
Concurrency
Less likely
More likely
impacts the standardization level of the PM Toolbox. For example, a methodology that
is highly standardized will probably be supported by a highly standardized PM Toolbox.
Regardless of whether an organization’s project management methods and pro-
cesses are standardized, ﬂexible, or semiﬂexible, a PM Toolbox needs to be designed so
that it aligns with both the PM methods and processes employed as well as the strategy
of the project and the business strategies driving the need for the project. To accomplish
this, a process for selecting and adapting the PM Toolbox is needed.
CONSTRUCTING AND ADAPTING A PM TOOLBOX
PM tools serve two roles. First, in their conventional role, the tools are enabling devices
for reaching a project deliverable. Second, in their new role, they serve as basic building
blocks to construct the PM toolbox.
There are three major steps, each including several substeps, in constructing and
adapting a PM Toolbox for speciﬁc projects or a project organization (Figure 1.4):
1.
Secure strategic alignment
2.
Customize the PM Toolbox
3.
Improve continuously
As detailed in the previous sections, aligning the PM Toolbox with the organization’s
business strategy tells us in broad terms what categories of project management tools
to select. This alignment drives the next step—customization of the PM Toolbox—by
Secure Strategic
Alignment
•    Understand business
     strategy
•    Visualize Toolbox
     alignment
•    Align Toolbox with
     strategy 
Customize PM
Toolbox 
•    Customize by project
     size, or
•    Customize by project
     family, or
•    Customize by project
     type 
Continuously
Improve Toolbox 
•    Form an
     improvement team
•    Identify mechanisms
     to collect ideas
•    Follow improvement
     process 
Figure 1.4: Steps for Constructing and Adapting a PM Toolbox

10
INTRODUCTION TO THE PM TOOLBOX
selecting speciﬁc tools to use on the projects. The deployment of the PM Toolbox in
real-world projects will reveal its glitches and generate new learning, which leads to the
third step—continuous improvement of the toolbox. Details about each step follow.
Secure Strategic Alignment
One of the primary purposes of the PM Toolbox is to enable the implementation of
projects that aﬀect the organization’s strategic business goals. To make this purpose
happen, the PM Toolbox needs to be in alignment with both the business and project
strategies, as we discussed earlier in this chapter. To be successful in designing the Tool-
box, therefore, project managers must have an understanding of the business strategy,
at least knowing if their company follows a fundamental strategy of being a market
leader, a market follower, a cost leader, or a customer service leader. However, many of
them do not have this level of understanding. Why? Among many reasons for this is the
fact that in many organizations, strategy formulation and implementation is viewed as
theexecutive’sdomain.Theyaretaskedwithchartingthebusinessstrategyfortheenter-
prise. Project managers often are not in a position to access this knowledge or show little
interest in gaining it. Project managers need to be tenacious by probing and digging to
comprehend the strategic reasons for executing the projects they are in charge of, even
if the strategy is not communicated to them.
This lack of strategic knowledge can create substantial obstacles for project man-
agers and will limit the strategic alignment of their PM Toolbox. To remove the obstacles,
project managers need to have conversations with top managers and convince them
that business strategy is key to planning and implementing projects and that project
managers need this knowledge in order to secure expected returns on their projects.
Our mandate is simple: Gain an understanding of your organization’s business strategy,
or designing the toolbox will be like shooting an arrow into the fog—we don’t know
where the target is or whether we hit it.
Visualizing Alignment
Part of understanding how a toolbox should align to business strategy is the ability to
clearly visualize the relationship. Earlier in the chapter, we laid the foundation for the
alignment by using examples of three companies—Sirius, Park, and Prima—to illustrate
how the PM Toolbox can be focused to support business strategies.
To visualize this alignment, in Figure 1.5 we show what we conveniently call
investment curves—a more precise term is the net present value curves—for three
comparable projects performed in alignment with their base business strategies.
Each curve shows four important points: (1) project start, (2) time to deployment,
(3) time to breakeven, and (4) salvage point. Project start is the time when the project
is initiated and begins to consume resource hours and budget; therefore, the cash
ﬂow begins to turn negative. Investment and negative cash ﬂow continue to increase
until the project is completed. At that time, the project outcome (a product, service,
or other capability) can be deployed, which constitutes time to deployment. Instead
of time to deployment, some project managers prefer the term project cycle time or,
simply, project completion. Note that negative cash ﬂow usually reaches its peak at the

CONSTRUCTING AND ADAPTING A PM TOOLBOX
11
Salvage
Point
Time-to-breakeven
Time-to-deployment
Cash Flow ($)
Positive
Project
Start
Cash Flow ($)
Negative
Schedule-driven
Project & Toolbox
Cost/Performance -driven
Project & Toolbox
Cost-driven
Project & Toolbox
Time
Key:
Sirius
Prima
Park
Figure 1.5: Visualizing a Strategy-Driven Toolbox
time-to-deployment point. After that, the use of the project output begins to generate
returns (revenue, cost savings, eﬃciency gains), and the curve begins to turn upward.
Hopefully, the upward trend will continue until at least the time-to-breakeven point
is reached. This is the point where all investments in the project are equal to returns gen-
erated by the use of the project output. Beyond that point, the cash ﬂow turns positive
and typically continues to do so until the project output is salvaged.
We use the curves to explain the nature of the PM Toolbox’s alignment with the
business strategy for each of the three companies discussed earlier. Consider, for
example, Sirius. A primary element of Sirius’s diﬀerention strategy is project cycle time
speed. Figure 1.5 illustrates that point: Time-to-deployment and time-to-breakeven
points are reached much sooner than for the other two companies. For this to be possi-
ble, Sirius needs a timeline-driven toolbox in which the central role and priority belong
to tools that can help enable fast cycle times. These may include tools such as the
Gantt chart, time-scaled arrow diagram, critical path diagrams, milestone charts, and so
on (Chapter 6). This does not mean that other components of the typical PM Toolbox
such as cost, risk, and stakeholder tools are ignored. Quite to the contrary—they
are important and have their role in the toolbox as well, but they are subjugated to
timeline-driven tools.
The case is diﬀerent for the toolbox for Park, a company that concentrates on cost
leadership. Logically, then, most projects within Park are cost driven, searching to mini-
mize project cost whenever possible. This logic is apparent in Figure 1.5. The Park curve
shows less negative cash ﬂow than those of Sirius and Prima. It is the intended goal and
realized outcome of project actions. To accomplish the project strategy, Park is willing to
take the longest time to reach time to deployment and time to breakeven. Crucial in this

12
INTRODUCTION TO THE PM TOOLBOX
eﬀort is a cost-driven toolbox that emphasizes cost, cost, and cost. Correspondingly, cost
estimates and cost baselines are carefully prepared, as is the assessment of return on
investment, even for small cost-cutting projects (Chapter 5).
The intent to align the PM Toolbox with the business strategy is aggressively pursued
in Prima as well. The driving force is the best-cost strategy that is also translated to the
project level. As can be seen from Figure 1.5, time to deployment and time to breakeven
are shorter than Park’s, but longer than Sirius’s. This means that cost focus is lower than
Park’s but higher than Sirius’s. Such cost philosophy is closely intertwined with the need
for the project to emphasize performance goals more than the other two companies.
Given this situation, how does one shape a cost-performance-driven PM Toolbox?
A combination of well-balanced performance and cost tools has the priority. Formal
and informal voice of the customer tools and feature requirement tools are crucial for
hitting customers’ expectations, as are cost estimates and cost baselines. To Prima and
its customers, delivering on schedule is important, as keeping customers satisﬁed is not
possible without delivering when promised. Nevertheless, schedule goals are subju-
gated to performance and cost. Other tools, such as a risk management plan, are mod-
iﬁed to support the combination of cost and performance focus. For example, the risk
management plan may be focused on lowering cost rather than schedule (Chapter 14).
As can be gleaned from our discussion, the nature of alignment of the toolbox is
reﬂected in the balance of two issues. First, many of the tools show up in all three tool-
boxes. The second issue concerns the situational approach: adapting tools to account
for the characteristics of the three toolboxes (see Table 1.2)
Customize the PM Toolbox
There are multiple options for customizing a strategically aligned PM Toolbox. Three
options are perhaps the most viable:
1.
Customization by project size
2.
Customization by project family
3.
Customization by project type
The options are three diﬀerent ways to select and adapt the toolbox. Each option has
thepurposeofshowingwhichspeciﬁcprojectmanagementtoolstoselectandadaptfor
the PM Toolbox. For this to be possible, each option is based on the particular method-
ology used, which has a large inﬂuence on the choice of tools.
An in-depth knowledge of individual tools is a prerequisite to each of the options
because you need to understand how each tool can support a project deliverable. We
will describe the customization options in turn and oﬀer guidelines for selecting one of
them for implementation.
Customization by Project Size
Some organizations use project size as the key variable when customizing a PM Toolbox.
Their logic is that larger projects are more complex than smaller ones, or that size drives
diﬀerences in project management methodology complexity. The reasoning here is
that as the project size increases, so does the number of activities and resulting project
deliverables associated with a project, as well as the number of interactions among

CONSTRUCTING AND ADAPTING A PM TOOLBOX
13
Table 1.2: Characteristics of Strategically Aligned Toolboxes
Company’s Core Business Strategy
Differentiation Low-Cost
Best-Cost
Nature of PM Toolbox
Characteristics of the PM Toolbox
Schedule
Driven
Cost Driven
Performance-
Cost Driven
Central role and priority belong to schedule
tools
✓
Management attention is on schedule
performance
✓
PM spends majority of time managing to
schedule
✓
Schedule tools are primary basis for decisions
✓
Other tools adapted to support schedule
tools
✓
Central role and priority belong to cost tools
✓
Management attention is on cost performance
✓
Project manager spends majority of time
managing cost
✓
Cost tools are primary basis for decisions
✓
Other tools adapted to support cost tools
✓
Central role and priority belongs to
cost-performance tools
✓
Management attention on performance and
cost
✓
PM spends majority of time managing
performance requirements and cost
✓
Performance and tools are primary basis for
decisions
✓
Other tools adapted to support performance
tools
✓
them. Worst of all, this number of interactions grows by compounding, rather than
linearly.10 Such increased complexity, then, has its penalty—larger projects require
more work to coordinate the increased number of interactions.
Since diﬀerent project sizes require diﬀerent processes and tools, we ﬁrst need a way
to classify projects by size and then customize their toolboxes. For size classiﬁcation we
draw on the experience of some companies. In Table 1.3, we present three examples.
All companies use three classes of project size: small, medium, and large. The units used
to measure project size are dollars or person-hour budgets. On the basis of the size, the
companies determined the managerial complexity of its project classes and processes.
The complexity further dictated the PM Toolbox makeup, a simpliﬁed example of which
is illustrated in Table 1.4. For the sake of simplicity, only the toolbox is shown, leaving
out the project deliverables.

14
INTRODUCTION TO THE PM TOOLBOX
Table 1.3: Examples of Project Classification per Size in Three Companies
Project Size
Project and Company Type
Small
Medium
Large
Product development projects in a $1 billion/
year high-technology manufacturer
$1–2m
$2–10m
> $10m
Infrastructure technology projects in a
$300 million/year food processing company
< $50k
$50–150k
> $150k
Software development projects in a $40 million/
year customer relationship management software
company
300–400
person-hours
1,000–3,000
person-hours
>3,000
person-hours
Table 1.4: Examples of PM Toolbox Customization by Project Size
Project Phases
Project Size
Initiation
Planning
Execution
Closure
Small
Project charter
Scope statement
Progress report
Final report
WBS
Responsibility
matrix
Milestone chart
Medium
Project charter
Scope statement
Progress report
Final report
Skill inventory
WBS or PWBS
Change process
Change log
Responsibility
matrix
Change log
Postmortem
report
Cost estimate
Gantt chart
Gantt chart
Cost burn down
Risk plan
Risk register
Large
Project charter
Scope statement
Progress report
Final report
Stakeholder matrix WBS and PWBS
Project indicators
Postmortem
report
Stakeholder
strategy
Responsibility
matrix
Change process
and log
Closure checklist
Cost estimate
Time-scaled arrow
diagram
Time-scaled arrow
diagram
Slip chart
P-I matrix
EVM
Risk register
EVM = earned value management; P-I = probability-impact; PWBS = program work breakdown structure;
WBS = work breakdown structure.

CONSTRUCTING AND ADAPTING A PM TOOLBOX
15
As Table 1.4 indicates, some of the tools in the toolboxes for projects of diﬀerent size
are the same, while others are diﬀerent. For example, all use the summary status report
(Chapter 12) because all projects need to report on their performance. Since managerial
complexity of the three project classes and their processes call for diﬀerent tools, some
of the tools diﬀer. A P-I matrix (Chapter 14), for example, is needed only in large projects.
To be successful, the process team designing the toolbox should carefully balance the
standard tools with those that account for the speciﬁc size of the project.
Experience of these companies oﬀers several guidelines for customizing the PM
Toolbox by project size:
■
Identify a small number of project classes and their methodologies.
■
Deﬁne each class by the size parameter.
■
Match the project size with the proper toolbox, each tool supporting a speciﬁc
project deliverable.
Note that while customization by project size oﬀers advantages of simplicity, it also
carries a risk of being generic, disregarding other situational variables. To some, these
other variables may be of vital importance, as will be pointed out in the next section on
customization by project family.
Customization by Project Family
When the PM Toolbox is strategically aligned, you can opt to customize it by family types
within an industry. Many companies choose such options in a belief that project fami-
lies in their industry are suﬃciently unique to merit an industry-speciﬁc project family
methodology and toolbox.11
As a group of organizations that compete directly with each other, an industry is
characterized by the nature of its environment and business risk. For example, com-
panies in the high-technology industry face an environment of dynamic technology
change. Because of this, their portfolio abounds with fast time-to-market projects driven
by the desire of their customers to continuously buy the latest and greatest technolog-
ical products and services. Combined, the business environment and risk proﬁle create
similar challenges in families of projects. For example, a family of new product devel-
opment projects in high-tech industries face similar challenges. So do facilities manage-
ment projects, manufacturing projects, marketing projects, and information technology
projects within the same industry.
Often, project families are deﬁned by the novelty of the capabilities the projects
produce. Generally, the more novel the capability, the more complex the projects.12
This is because increasing novelty (newness or uniqueness) in projects leads to more
uncertainty, elevating the need for more ﬂexibility in the processes and the supporting
toolbox. For example, as novelty grows:
■
The more evolving the scope statement and WBS become.
■
The project time line becomes more ﬂuid.
■
The cost estimates follow the ﬂuidity of the schedules and scope.
■
More risks need to be identiﬁed and managed.

16
INTRODUCTION TO THE PM TOOLBOX
Table 1.5: Customizing the Toolbox by Project Family
Project Phases
Project Family
(Novelty)
Initiation
Planning
Execution
Closure
Derivative
projects
Project charter
Milestone chart
Progress report
Final report
Financial scoring
model
Requirements
baseline
WBS
Incremental
projects
Project charter
Scope statement
Progress report
Final report
Financial scoring
model
WBS or PWBS
Change log
Change log
Stakeholder map
Requirements
baseline
Gantt chart
Retrospective
Cost estimate
Cost burn down
Gantt chart
Risk register
Risk plan
Breakthrough
projects
Project charter
Scope statement
Progress report
Final report
Voting Models
WBS or PWBS
Project indicators
Postmortem
report
Stakeholder map
Requirements
baseline
Change process
and log
Closure checklist
Stakeholder
strategy matrix
Responsibility
matrix
Milestone chart
Cost estimate
Slip chart
Milestone chart
EVM
P-I matrix
Risk register
EVM = earned value management; P-I = probability-impact; PWBS = program work breakdown structure;
WBS = work breakdown structure.
A simple example reﬂecting these trends in adapting the toolbox for the three
classes of project families is illustrated in Table 1.5.
As the table shows, the toolboxes of the three classes of projects are similar in some
and diﬀerent in other aspects. For example, all use schedules and progress reports. Still,
the schedules diﬀer in that simple projects rely on a simple milestone chart, while com-
plex projects use a rolling wave type of the time-scaled arrow diagram. Obviously, the
variation in the novelty of the project is the source of the diﬀerences.
Customization by Project Type
While the previous two approaches to PM Toolbox customization rely on one dimen-
sion each—project complexity and project family as deﬁned by novelty, respectively—
customization by project type uses both dimensions.13

CONSTRUCTING AND ADAPTING A PM TOOLBOX
17
To make it more pragmatic, we will simplify the model, while maintaining its com-
prehensive nature. Each of the two dimensions includes two levels: (1) novelty of the
capability under development (low, high) and (2) project complexity (low, high). This
helps to create a two-by-two matrix that features four types of projects: routine, admin-
istrative, technical, and unique (see Figure 1.6).
A routine project is one having a low level of capability novelty (less than half of
the features are new) and low complexity (few cross-project interdependencies). Due
to the low levels of novelty and complexity, the project scope can normally be frozen
before project execution begins or early in the execution stage. Scope also remains fairly
stable, with few scope changes. With scope remaining stable, project scheduling, cost
management, and performance management are also quite static.
Typically, routine projects are performed within a single organization or organiza-
tional function (e.g., infrastructure technology). Examples include the following:
■
Continuous improvement project in a department.
■
Upgrading an existing software application or existing product.
■
Adding a swimming pool to an existing hotel.
■
Developing a derivative model in a washing machine product line.
■
Expanding an established manufacturing line.
Administrative projects are similar to routine projects in terms of novelty. Business
goals and scope are normally well deﬁned, stable, and detailed. The added complexity
requires the coordination of multiple organizational functions and the mapping of the
many functional interdependencies, but the lack of capability novelty allows for stan-
dard scheduling techniques. The same added complexity generally means larger project
size, with higher ﬁnancial exposure, justifying the need for detailed bottom-up cost esti-
mates reconciled with ﬁnancial targets contained in the project business case. Risk is
primarily related to the increased number of interactions between the function’s project
teams; therefore, additional risk planning and analysis is required.
Administrative
Projects
Unique
Projects
Routine
Projects
Technical
Projects
Capability Novelty
High
Low
High
Low
Project Complexity
Figure 1.6: Four Project Types

18
INTRODUCTION TO THE PM TOOLBOX
Some examples of administrative projects are as follows:
■
Corporate-wide organizational restructuring.
■
Deploying a standard information system for a geographically dispersed organiza-
tion.
■
Building a traditional manufacturing plant.
■
Developing a new automobile model.
■
Upgrading an enterprise computer system.
Technical projects consist of more than 50 percent of new technologies or features
at the time of project initiation. This creates a higher degree of uncertainty that requires
project ﬂexibility. The goals, scope, and work breakdown structure (WBS) are simple due
to the low level of complexity, but they may take longer to fully deﬁne. The rolling wave
or similar approach can be used, meaning that only the schedule for the following 60 to
90 days can be planned in detail, while the remainder of the project schedule is rep-
resented only by milestones. Similarly, cost estimates are ﬂuid as well. A detailed cost
estimate for the next 60 to 90 days can be detailed, while cost estimates for the remain-
der of the project are at the summary or rough order of magnitude level. The increased
technical novelty results in increased technical risk and the need for a more rigorous risk
management implementation and tools. Here are some examples:
■
Reengineering a new product development process in an organization.
■
Developing a new software program.
■
Adding a line with the latest manufacturing technology to a semiconductor fab.
■
Developing a new model of a computer game.
For unique projects, business goals, detailed scope deﬁnition, and WBS develop-
ment takes time to evolve as a result of many new features and cross-project interde-
pendencies. The evolving nature of scope leads to the need for ﬂuid schedules. Project
mapping and rolling-wave scheduling processes can be used to contend with the ﬂuid-
ity. Similarly, cost estimates for milestones are more detailed in the near term and more
summary level for the longer term. A high level of project complexity exists due to mul-
tiple organizational functions required to execute unique projects, requiring integra-
tion tools such as the project map. Combined capability novelty and project complexity
push risks to the extreme, making it the single most challenging element to manage.
In response, a rigorous risk management plan is needed, as well as a combination of
tools such as the probability-impact (P-I) matrix and Monte Carlo analysis (Chapter 14).
Example technology projects include:
■
Building a new light rail train system for a city.
■
Developing a new-generation integrated circuit.
■
Developing a new software suite.
■
Constructing that latest semiconductor fab.
■
Developing a platform product in an internally dispersed corporation.
Now that we have deﬁned the four project types, we can move on to the next
step: Describe how the two dimensions impact the construction of the PM Toolbox.
Taken overall, the growing technical novelty in a project generates more uncertainty,
which consequently requires more ﬂexibility in the tools chosen. In Figure 1.7 we show

CONSTRUCTING AND ADAPTING A PM TOOLBOX
19
1.  Precise project goals
2.  Detailed, precise scope, large WBS
3.  Complex critical path charts
4.  Complex cost estimate and
     baseline
5.  Qualitative risk response
6.  Stakeholder mapping & analysis
1.  Simple, stable project goals
2.  Simple, precise scope statement,
     stable WBS
3.  Simple Gantt chart, milestones
4.  Simple cost estimating
5.  Informal risk response
6.  Stakeholder mapping
Key:      MCA = Monte Carlo Analysis
RWA = rolling Wave Approach
1.      Project goals
2.      Scope
3.      Schedule
4.      Cost
5.      Risk
6.      Stakeholders
Administrative
Projects
Routine
Projects
Unique
Projects
Technical
Projects
WBS = Work Breakdown Structure
1.  Simple, evolving project goals
2.  Simple, evolving scope statement
     and WBS
3.  Fluid milestone charts
4.  Fluid milestone cost estimates
5.  Fluid P-I matrix, at times MCA
6.  Stakeholder mapping
1.  Evolving project goals
2.  Evolving scope statement and
     WBS, PWBS
3.  Fluid, hierarchical scheduling (RW
     Gantt or milestone)
4.  Fluid milestone cost estimates
5.  Fluid risk response, MCA
6.  Power & Influence analysis
Figure 1.7: Customizing the PM Toolbox by Project Type
examples of several tools that have to be adapted to account for diﬀerent processes
driven by diﬀerent project types.
A summary comparison of the tools for the four project types reveals that they use
very similar types of tools. For example, all use the WBS. Still, when the same type of
tool is used, there are diﬀerences in their structure and how they are used. Consider, for
instance, Gantt and milestone charts. Both are used in the routine and unique projects,
but terms of use are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent. This is the situational approach—as the
nature of the PM processes changes, so does the PM Toolbox.
Which Customization Option to Choose?
We oﬀer three options for the customization of the PM Toolbox. Each has its advan-
tages, disadvantages, and risks, and ﬁts some situations better than others. To assist
with the selection, refer to Table 1.6. Customization by project size is a good option
when an organization has projects of varying size and needs a simple start toward more
mature forms of customization. In addition, projects of varying size characterized by
mature processes lend themselves well to this customization option. In an organiza-
tion that has a stream of projects that feature both mature and novel capabilities but
project size is not an issue, customization by project family may be the best option. This
is also a good option to go for when projects are dominated by a strong industry or
professional culture.

20
INTRODUCTION TO THE PM TOOLBOX
Table 1.6: Project Situations and PM Toolbox Customization
Situation
Customization
by Project
Size
Customization
by Project
Family
Customization
by Project
Type
Simplest start to PM Toolbox
customization
✓
Projects of varying size with mature
capabilities
✓
Projects with both mature and novel
capabilities, size not an issue
✓
Projects with strong industry or
professional culture
✓
Projects of varying size with both mature
and novel capabilities
✓
Need for a unifying framework for all
organizational projects
✓
Customization of the PM Toolbox by project type is also a good option in situa-
tions where an organization has a lot of projects that signiﬁcantly vary in size but also
in novelty of the solutions, such as a portfolio of government research and procure-
ment projects. Organizations searching for a unifying framework that can provide the
customization for all types of projects—from facilities to product development to man-
ufacturingprocesstocustomerservicetoinformationsystems—mayﬁndcustomization
by project type an appropriate choice.
Continuously Improve the PM Toolbox
Once the Toolbox has been customized, it will be more eﬀective if it is continuously
improved. Without such improvement, the Toolbox will gradually lose its eﬀectiveness
and its ability to support the project management methods and tools employed and
the business strategy of the organization.14 Avoiding such a predicament and instead
sustaining an eﬀective toolbox can be achieved through the following steps:
1.
Form a PM Toolbox improvement team.
2.
Identify mechanisms for collecting improvement ideas.
3.
Follow an improvement process.
Form an Improvement Team
The toolbox improvement team is usually part of the process team responsible for
designing and managing project processes. This team has the total responsibility for
simplifying, improving, and managing the implementation of the PM Toolbox. Each
team member owns a piece of the toolbox, and, overall, the responsibility should be
distributed as evenly as possible across the team. When forming a team, it is important
to understand that management enforces, while the team operates and owns the

REFERENCES
21
toolbox. Since it is mostly project managers that must use the toolbox, we recommend
that the majority of the toolbox improvement team come from the PM ranks.
Identify Mechanisms for Collecting Improvement Ideas
Ideally, there should be a continuous stream of suggestions and ideas to improve the
customized toolbox. To secure such a stream, you can require that project teams address
PM Toolbox improvement suggestions as part of the retrospective or postmortem
reviews (Chapter 13). If the reviews ﬁnd a need to change the toolbox, the team should
submit a change request. Change requests may come at any time from anyone involved
in projects. Note that requests are not the only way to collect the toolbox improvement
ideas. A survey, brown bag information-gathering sessions, or focus groups may also
be viable options to collect improvement ideas.
Follow an Improvement Process
A toolbox improvement process should deﬁne steps for acting on change requests,
including an escalation process for brokering requests that are turned down. Quickly
collecting and responding to PM Toolbox change requests is of vital importance. Also
signiﬁcant are requests to deviate from various tools that are included in a toolbox,
usually the standardized tools. Deviations from standardized tools help to ensure that a
toolbox remains ﬂexible. Since most deviation requests are submitted while a project is
in progress, it is important to respond as soon as possible. At a later time, the requests
can be evaluated to determine if the toolbox should be permanently modiﬁed to
include the requests.
Eﬀectively constructing and adapting a PM Toolbox is predicated on the user’s
knowledge of individual PM tools. To help increase our readers’ knowledge, the chapters
that follow will detail a multitude of useful tools that can be chosen for inclusion in your
own PM Toolbox.
References
1.
Martinelli, Russ, James Waddell, and Tim Rahschulte. Program Management for
Improved Business Results, 2nd ed (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014).
2.
Project Management Institute. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowl-
edge, 5th ed (Drexell Hill, PA: Project Management Institute).
3.
Martinelli, Waddell, and Rahschulte, 2014.
4.
Spencer, J. C. Business Strategy: Managing Uncertainty, Opportunity, & Enterprise
(London, England: Oxford Press, 2014).
5.
Pearce, John A. II, and Richard B. Robinson Jr. Strategic Management: Formulation,
Implementation, and Control, 12th ed (New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2010).
6.
Porter, Michael E., W. Chan Kim, and Renee Mauborgne. HBR’s 10 Must Reads on
Strategy (Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2011).
7.
Stevenson, W. J. Production and Operations Management (Boston, MA: Irwin, 1993).
8.
Kerzner, H. Applied Project Management (New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2000).

22
INTRODUCTION TO THE PM TOOLBOX
9.
Hammer, M., and J. Champy. Reengineering the Corporation (New York, NY: Harper
Business, 1993).
10.
Kahn, Kenneth B. The PDMA Handbook of New Product Development (Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, 2012).
11.
Pinto, Jeﬀrey K., and Jeﬀrey G. Covin. “Critical Factors in Project Implementa-
tion: A Comparison of Construction and R&D Projects.” ScienceDirect website:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0166497289900400.
Accessed
April 2014.
12.
Tatikonda, M. V., and R. S. Rosenthal. “Technology Novelty, Project Complexity, and
Product Development Project Execution Success: A Deeper Look at Uncertainty
in Product Innovation.” IEEE Transitions on Engineering Management 47 (1): 74–87,
2009.
13.
Shenhar, A. J. “One Size Does Not Fit All Projects: Exploring Classical Contingency
Domains.” Management Science 47 (3): 394–414, 2001.
14.
Boutros, Tristan, and Tim Purdie. The Process Improvement Handbook: A Blueprint
for Managing Change and Increasing Organizational Performance (New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill, 2013).

P A R T
II
Project
Initiation Tools


2
PROJECT SELECTION
W
e have yet to witness an organization that had an overabundance of resources
to execute on their full list of ideas and projects. Quite the opposite, in fact.
Commonly, resources become overcommitted, and an organization needs to
make choices among possible projects.
As is usually the case, organizations have many more product, service, and infras-
tructure solutions or transformational change ideas than available resources to execute
them. As a result, an organization must ﬁnd a way to broker competing demands for
its limited resources. Project selection techniques are used to identify and prioritize
projects that best support attainment of the business goals of an enterprise. Projects
are ranked and prioritized based on a set of criteria that represents business value
to the organization. Senior management can then allocate available resources to the
highest-value and most strategically signiﬁcant projects. This is sometimes referred to
as resource capacity planning.
Additionally, the mix of projects within a portfolio is in a state of constant ﬂux, as an
organization reevaluates its selections on an ongoing basis to respond to changes in the
business environment and other needs. Project selection tools allow an organization to
select projects for initiation and termination as conditions change.
This chapter is intended to help with the selection of projects based on the highest
value of the project’s return to an organization. We describe a number of tools that can
be added to a PM Toolbox that help to better evaluate the value a project oﬀers, the
beneﬁts it can deliver, and how well it aligns to business strategy. There are, of course,
many tools for selecting projects. In this chapter, we present the tools that we ﬁnd most
ubiquitously used across a variety of industries and organizations, beginning with the
beneﬁts map.
THE BENEFITS MAP
Eﬀective project selection is about evaluating the potential value a project idea can
return to an organization, and then making deterministic choices about which of the
project ideas will be funded and resourced. We talked about the importance of taking a
strategy-driven approach to managing a project and to constructing a PM toolbox. This
25

26
PROJECT SELECTION
is because organizations are in business or mission for the long haul. The outcome of
their projects must contribute to the long-term viability of the enterprise by delivering
both short-term and long-term value. Projects that contribute to the achievement of the
long-term goals of the organization provide the greatest value.1
But what is value? The British European Standard (BSI) describes value as the
relationship between the satisfaction of need and the resources used to achieve that
satisfaction.2 They use the diagram shown in Figure 2.1 to demonstrate this deﬁnition
of value.3
In the United States as well as other parts of the world, value with respect to business
and project management has come to be associated with the generation and deliv-
ery of anticipated business beneﬁts. In turn, value management is often described in
terms of beneﬁts management. The value diagram can therefore be updated as shown
in Figure 2.2 to demonstrate this more speciﬁc view of value.
So what is all this leading to? First, project managers must be able to describe the
valuepropositionoftheirprojectsintermsofthebusinessbeneﬁtstheprojectwillcreate
for the organization. Second, the management team of the organization must also sift
through the value promise of each of its project opportunities in order to prevent an
over commitment of its limited resources.
Projects should be viewed as investments that a management team makes in hopes
of gaining an acceptable return. For many organizations, the objective measure of
value is in ﬁnancial terms. Other organizations make a qualitative measure of value by
assessing the business beneﬁts delivered in correlation to the strategic goals. In either
approach, business beneﬁts are the outcomes of a project that provide value to the
organization in return for the investments made in the project. We begin by looking at
the qualitative assessment of business beneﬁts value.
Enabling Beneﬁts Management
Beneﬁts management is about realizing the business results desired from the invest-
ment in a project. It is about management of the business goals that are driving the need
for a project and the achievement of the business results intended. A critical part of ben-
eﬁts management is the development of a beneﬁts management strategy. Creating a
Value = Satisfaction of Need
Use of Resources
Figure 2.1: BSI Description of Value
Business Benefits Achieved
Value = 
Resources Expended
Figure 2.2: Business Benefits as a Measure of Value

THE BENEFITS MAP
27
beneﬁts management strategy involves identifying the speciﬁc business results that a
project must deliver to directly support the strategic goals of the enterprise.
It is the beneﬁts management strategy that forms the foundation of the project busi-
ness case (Chapter 3). The beneﬁts map is an eﬀective tool that documents the expected
beneﬁts that are to be realized from the investment. It speciﬁcally charts the path from
the organization’s business strategy to the distinct beneﬁts that are to be derived from
the output of a project.4 The information provided by the beneﬁts map supports the
cost/beneﬁt analysis for a project and should become part of the project business case.
Thebeneﬁtsmapcanbedepictedinvisualformtoprovideausefulmeanstodemon-
strate alignment of project deliverables to the business success factors for a project, and
to the expected business goals as displayed in Figure 2.3.
As demonstrated in the ﬁgure, the beneﬁts map provides traceability between
project outcomes and deliverables to the beneﬁts intended. It is essential to ﬁrst
establish the overall vision and scope for a project, then communicate how the project
contributes to the objectives, and ﬁnally track the execution of the project to ﬁnal
delivery of strategic business goals.
This tool is used to assist in the characterization of how speciﬁc project objectives
are met. However, beneﬁts maps can become complex and confusing due to the
one-to-many relationships between project deliverables and outcomes to the objec-
tives. The critical component in building an eﬀective beneﬁts map is to ensure each
project deliverable or outcome is mapped to an objective, and every objective to the
business success factors.
Project Deliverables
Business Goal
Be first to market with new web-based financial service
Business Success Factors
Financial
Market
User Experience
Product Integration
- New Revenue ($5M
in Year 1)
- Profit Margin (47
percent) 
- Product Usage (500K
users by Year 3, 1M users
by Year 5)
- User Base (Users in >5
countries)   
Time
- Launch Date
(July ‘17 intro date)
- Repeat Use
(80 percent)
- Ease of Use
(<30 second sign up)
- Integration with existing  tech
platform (50% reuse)
- Same base software technology
Software
Marketing
Market Oppty Report
SW Requirements
Production SW
Project Objectives
Figure 2.3: Example Project Benefits Map

28
PROJECT SELECTION
Developing a Beneﬁts Map
The development of a beneﬁts map is not a simple exercise because it requires knowl-
edge of both business strategy and detailed project execution. Because of this, however,
it is an extremely eﬀective tool for aligning the setting of strategy and the implementa-
tion of strategy. These two sides of strategy were discussed in Chapter 1. The major steps
in creating a beneﬁts map are described next.
Identify the Strategic Business Goals
The ﬁrst activity involved in developing a beneﬁts map is to deﬁne the strategic business
goals that are underwriting the need for the project. Strategic business goals deﬁne
what the company wants to achieve within a speciﬁc period of time, and are normally
deﬁned at two levels of an organization: corporate strategic goals and business or
operating unit strategic goals.5
The purpose of corporate-level strategic goals is to align the various business units
toward a common purpose and direction, while business unit strategic goals serve to
focus the functional departments and work eﬀorts of the people within a business unit.6
Every enterprise is unique, and therefore every enterprise will have its own set of strate-
gic goals. It is common, however, to ﬁnd strategic goals centered in a number of areas,
including:7
■
Proﬁtability
■
Competitive position
■
Employee relations
■
Product or solution leadership
■
Productivity
■
Employee development
■
Public responsibility
It should be pointed out that a business normally does not strive to identify strategic
goals in all areas presented in the list, but rather only in those areas that align with and
fully support attainment of the corporate mission.
When developing a beneﬁts map, it is important that the designer do his or her
homework on identifying the correct strategic goal or goals that the project is intended
to help achieve. This can be accomplished only through knowledge of the business
aspects of an enterprise and through a series of discussions with the senior leaders of
the organization.
Deﬁne the Business Success Factors
With the strategic goal or goals identiﬁed, it is time to deﬁne how the achievement of
the strategic goals will be measured. The metrics used to deﬁne successful achievement
of the strategic goals become the business success factors for the project.
The business success factors transform the business results derived from strategic
goals into a speciﬁc statement of success that guides the organization as to how to
plan and execute their work. We deﬁne business success factors as the set of quantiﬁable
measures that describe the successful achievement of a project’s business results. It is the

THE BENEFITS MAP
29
business success factors that bind the activities of strategy setting to those of strategy
implementation.
It is important to minimize the number of business success factors to the critical
few—three to six is an ideal number. During the early stages of a project, the factors
are used to align the project sponsor, executive stakeholders, and the project team on
what project success will likely mean. They form the foundation of the project business
case, and for the broader project team they establish the end state they will be working
to achieve.
Identify Project Outcomes
Through the use of the project work breakdown structure (Chapter 5) the primary out-
comes for the project are identiﬁed. These are normally deﬁned at Level 2 or Level 3 of
the breakdown structure, before the detailed tasks associated with the creation of the
outcomes are documented.
Once project outcomes are identiﬁed, it normally works well to categorize the out-
comes by ownership. In other words, group all outcomes by each project sub team that
will be responsible for creating and delivering the outcome.
As shown in Figure 2.3, it works well to document the outcomes in what we refer to
as a series of team swim lanes. Even though the swim lanes look linear in nature, there is
not a time element to the beneﬁts map, so the outcomes for each team do not have to
be documented in time sequence order. In fact, it is normally best not to, but rather to
try to align them with the business success factors that they support.
Perform the Mapping
This step simply involves graphically demonstrating, through the use of interconnecting
lines, the relationship between project outcomes and project objectives, and between
the project objectives and the business success factors. The use of color-coding of lines
associated with the particular project outcomes is especially helpful for larger projects.
Validating the Results
The ﬁnal step in creating a beneﬁts map is to validate that each project outcome directly
supports the achievement of a project objective, and that the project objective (through
the delivery of the project outcome) directly supports the achievement of the business
success factor it is associated with.
When completed, a project manager has a visual mapping of how a project outcome
supports the strategic goals of the ﬁrm via a direct link between project objectives and
business success factors.
Using a Beneﬁts Map
Along with the project work breakdown structure, the beneﬁts map is a useful tool for
establishingtheoverallscopeofaprojectandfordemonstratingthealignmentbetween
project outcomes and deliverables to the business success factors. The beneﬁts map
can also be used to communicate to top management, the project team, and other

30
PROJECT SELECTION
stakeholders how the strategy of the organization and project are melded together, and
how each business beneﬁt will be realized.
The beneﬁts map is intended to be used throughout the life of the project to ana-
lyze consequences caused by adjustments and changes as they occur to the original
project strategy and scope. The ﬁrst use of the beneﬁts map normally occurs as part
of the business case development process, where a high-level mapping of beneﬁts to
project objectives to strategic intent is established. Further detail is then added dur-
ing detailed planning when the full comprehension of scope and traceability of project
outcomes to business beneﬁts is necessary.
In organizations with established governance policies and a set of related processes,
the beneﬁts map is often used as one of their key business-level monitoring and tracking
devices for the project.
Variations
At times, business beneﬁts are described in terms of solutions to problems that have
been identiﬁed. If this is the case, a variation of the beneﬁts map, often called the objec-
tives tree, is better suited to assess project value. The goals deﬁned in the objectives tree
can be used to reﬁne the project objectives.8
An objectives tree provides a visual representation that allows you to quickly and
completely articulate the scope of the problem you are attacking. It is used primarily in
the earliest stages of project deﬁnition.
As illustrated in Figure 2.4, the objectives—which are the means to solving a
problem—are decomposed into lower levels of detail and speciﬁcity.
When using the objectives tree to solve a problem, the core problem is reworded
into an objective that describes a desired end state. For example, suppose we are the
new product development team in charge of deﬁning, designing, and producing our
15 hour battery
Specify the next
generation tablet
product
Design
Objectives
User
Objectives
Functional
Objectives
Cost
Objectives
Modular
Open source
Open architecture
Touch control
Drop resistant
Touch screen
Portable (backpack)
Read in sunlight
Zero turning radius
Secure login
2 clicks to website
10% price reduction
$150 BOM
Figure 2.4: Example Objectives Tree

ECONOMIC METHODS
31
company’s tablet products. A primary object we would likely have at some point would
be to specifythenexttabletthatwillbedesignedandmanufactured. Thisprimaryobjective
would then be decomposed into sub objectives that deﬁne solutions to the primary.
Decompose to at least three levels and then work your way back up the tree to validate
that the sub objectives are suﬃcient to achieve the objectives at the next-highest level.
The resulting objectives tree can be used as the basis for deﬁning the core
requirements for the project, as discussed in Chapter 4.
Beneﬁts
There are several advantages to be gained by both top management of an organization
and the project manager through the use of the beneﬁts map. It helps to create better
clariﬁcation and understanding of the project strategy and scope, and establishes direct
alignment between objectives, outcomes, and the business beneﬁts to be realized.
The beneﬁts map also provides a systematic process to assess business beneﬁts as
part of the project’s cost-beneﬁt analysis, which is a critical element of the business case
of a project and in project selection.
Finally, it enables focused tracking and monitoring of progress toward realization of
the beneﬁts as part of the project reporting process and establishes an eﬀective means
for evaluating success of a project from a beneﬁts realization perspective.
ECONOMIC METHODS
When quantitative methods are used to deﬁne project value to guide the project selec-
tion process, they are normally economically focused. We discuss the three most com-
mon economic methods for describing project value: payback time, net present value
(NPV), and internal rate of return (IRR).
Payback Time
Payback time is simply the length of time from when the project is oﬃcially initiated
until the cumulative cash ﬂow (or cost savings) becomes positive. At that point all the
funds invested in the project have been recovered. As can be seen from the three project
cash ﬂow scenarios in Table 2.1, the cash ﬂow for Project 1 turns positive in six years, for
Project 2 in ﬁve years, and for Project 3 in eight years.
Payback time is a very conservative criterion and provides more protection against
future uncertainties than do either of the other economic methods (NPV and IRR).
However, it is insensitive to project size, since a project with massive investment
requirements may still have short payback time. Moreover, it takes no account of future
economic potential once payback is reached.
Net Present Value
Net present value takes into account the time value of money, in that a dollar a year from
now is worth less than a dollar today due to inﬂation. NPV discounts both future costs

32
PROJECT SELECTION
Table 2.1: Project Payback Time Examples
Project 1
Project 2
Project 3
Year Cost Revenue Cum Cash Cost Revenue Cum Cash Cost Revenue Cum Cash
1
20
−20
30
−30
20
−20
2
50
−70
80
−110
50
−70
3
80
−150
105
147
−68
78
−148
4
120
−270
110
154
−24
80
−228
5
200
200
−170
125
175
26
150
−378
6
450
630
10
150
210
86
375
525
−228
7
500
775
260
160
220
146
525
735
−18
8
500
775
535
170
223
199
600
840
222
9
450
700
785
175
230
254
800
1,120
542
10
450
650
985
170
228
312
750
1,200
992
and revenues by the interest rate, according to the formula:
NPV(i, N) =
N
∑
t=0
Rt
(1 + i)t
In this formula, Rt represents the net cash ﬂows (cash inﬂow – cash outﬂow, at
time t), i is the discount rate or the rate the company pays for borrowed money,
expressed as a decimal fraction, and N is the total number of periods (years, months, etc).
Spreadsheet programs can be used to calculate NPV directly. You only need to enter
the discount rate and the values (or a vector of cells) into the NPV function. The result
is computed and displayed in the cell holding the function. Using the NPV function,
the NPV for three projects at a discount rate of 5, 10 and 15 percent are shown in
Table 2.2.
It can be seen that the more the future is discounted (i.e., higher the discount rate),
the less the NPV of the project. When comparing the three projects for project selection,
Project 3 delivers greater value than either Project 1 or Project 2 at all discount rates.
That is, the higher the NPV, the greater the economic value of a project.
Table 2.2: Project Net Present Value Examples
Project 1
Project 2
Project 3
NPV at
NPV at
NPV at
5% discount rate = $5,283
5% discount rate = $2,320
5% discount rate = $6,400
10% discount rate = $2,841 10% discount rate = $1,254 10% discount rate = $3,275
15% discount rate = $1,563 15% discount rate = $688
15% discount rate = $1,679

ECONOMIC METHODS
33
NPV takes into account the magnitude of the project and the discount rate. It is
not a particularly conservative measure, however, since it incorporates estimated future
revenues that may not actually materialize.
Internal Rate of Return
Internal rate of return is simply the discount rate at which NPV for the cash ﬂow is zero.
There is no closed-form formula for it. IRR must be computed iteratively by “honing in”
on the exact discount rate that produces an NPV of zero. Most spreadsheets have an IRR
function that allows the user to obtain an IRR. You need to only enter the list of values
(or a vector of cells) and a guess value of IRR. The function then carries out the iterative
calculation. For the projects shown in Table 2.2, the IRR values are as follows:
Project 1 IRR = 42 percent
Project 2 IRR = 40 percent
Project 3 IRR = 36 percent
By the IRR criterion, Project 1 is superior in economic value to the other two projects.
While IRR discounts future values, it takes no account of the size of the project. Project 3
promises a signiﬁcantly greater total return than Project 1, but those returns are farther
in the future and follow a longer course of investment before cash ﬂow turns positive.
Hence, the IRR for Project 2 is lower than for Project 1.
Using Economic Methods
Financially driven quantitative measures of value require data about revenues (or cost
savings) and costs expected to result from a project. They are thus appropriate primar-
ily for capital projects and projects intended to improve existing capabilities (products,
services, or infrastructure). In such cases, they allow a direct comparison of such projects
with alternative capital investments.
Care should be taken to ensure that the same economic method is used for all
project valuation calculations to provide a direct “apples-to-apples” comparison of
projects. Also ensure that you know your organization’s standard discount rate before
performing the calculations. For a comparison of the three economic methods, see the
example titled “Choosing an Economic Method.”
Choosing an Economic Method
As we have demonstrated, the three methods can give differing results on the
same set of projects. Which method should be chosen depends on the consid-
erations important to the decision maker. NPV is best used for projects with
(continued)

34
PROJECT SELECTION
large payoffs but gives little protection against future uncertainties. IRR like-
wise gives little protection against future uncertainties and may tend to give
preference to a project with modest total payoff but high return on a modest
investment. Payback time is a very conservative method, giving more protec-
tion than the other two methods against future uncertainty, but it does not
factor in the size of project payoff nor of the discounted value of future costs
and revenues. The consideration that is most important will govern the choice
of methods. Moreover, since these methods treat projects as capital invest-
ments, it would be appropriate to use whichever method the company uses
for evaluating its other capital investments, thus allowing a direct comparison
between project investments and other investments.
Beneﬁts of Economic Methods
Quantitative measures are readily understandable. They enable the decision maker
and project managers to communicate more readily about ﬁnancial considerations of
projects. They also make it easier to compare projects with other opportunities that are
vying for capital investment.
Also, once the necessary data are obtained, they are easy to compute. They also
make sensitivity testing easy by adjusting discount rates, time, and other input data.
Alternate scenarios about future costs and returns can be compared to test various
assumptions being made about project value against future uncertainty.
SCORING MODELS
A scoring model is little more than a list of criteria the decision maker wishes to take into
account when selecting projects from the list of candidate projects. Projects are then
rated by decision makers on each criterion, typically on a numerical scale with anchor
phrases. Finally, multiplying these scores by weightings and aggregating them across
all criteria will produce a score that represents the merit of the project. Higher scores
designate projects of higher value.
Developing a Scoring Model
Like other methods, scoring models follow the basic steps of the project selection
process: 1) Create the menu or list of candidate projects, 2) Develop the relevant
project selection criteria, 3) Rate projects against the selection criteria, and 4) Choose
the projects to invest funds and resources. To be fully functional and meaningful, the
models need the following inputs: (1) a menu of candidate projects, (2) strategic goals,
(3) project proposal or business case, and (4) historical information.
Since the purpose of the models is to help maximize the value of the selected
projects for the company, understanding which of the company’s strategic goals a
project supports is a key point. While these goals are described in the strategic and

SCORING MODELS
35
tactical plans of the organization, project proposals oﬀer speciﬁcs on projects. To make
better decisions, decision makers should also rely on the historical information about
both the results of past project selection decisions and past project performance. When
these inputs are available, you can move to choose relevant project selection criteria.
Identify Relevant Scoring Criteria
A key factor in developing a successful scoring model is identifying an appropriate set
of scoring criteria that will reﬂect the strategic, ﬁnancial, technical, and behavioral situa-
tion of the company. The challenge often seems to be in overcoming the temptation to
develop a detailed and, therefore, cumbersome list of criteria that becomes unmanage-
able. Narrowing down to the critical few criteria that really matter is rather diﬃcult, but
necessary. Consider, for example, the criteria listed in the example titled “Criteria to Be
Considered in Project Selection.” To be used eﬀectively, most of the criteria need to be
described in more speciﬁc terms. This further elevates the challenge of sticking with the
critical few. An eﬀective approach used by some companies is in conceiving the list and
reﬁning over time with the intent to reduce the number of scoring criteria to ﬁve or less.
Criteria to Be Considered in Project Selection
Scoring criteria that are relevant in project selection depend on the types of
projects and their situation. For example, the following criteria are typically
considered in choosing research and development projects. This list is intended
to be suggestive rather than comprehensive:
Cost to develop
Total expected revenue
Probability of technical success
Probability of market success
Market size
Market share
Alignment to strategic goals
Strength of competition
Availability of required staff
Degree of organizational commitment
Regulatory alignment
Alignment to company policy
Although many of these criteria may be used in selecting different types of
projects, the important thing is to include in the analysis whatever criteria are
relevant to your project situation.
Constructing the Model
To construct a scoring model, you must understand and resolve several issues:
1.
The form of model you want to use.
2.
Categories of scoring criteria you want to use.
3.
Value and importance of the criteria.
4.
Measurement of the criteria.

36
PROJECT SELECTION
First, we will deal with formation of the model. A generic scoring model would have
the following form:
Score = A(bB + cC + dD)(1 + eE)
fF(1 + gG)
The symbols A, B, C, D, E, F, and G represent the criteria to be included in the score for
the project. The value of each criterion for a given project is substituted in the formula.
The symbols b, c, d, e, f, and g represent the weights assigned to each criterion. In the
model,thecriteriainthenumeratorare beneﬁts,whilethecriteriainthedenominatorare
costs or other disbeneﬁts. The values of the criteria are project speciﬁc and are normally
provided by the project team.
This model uses three categories of criteria:
1.
Overriding criteria (e.g., A). These are factors of such great importance that if they
go to zero, the entire score should be zero. For instance, factors to be included in
the model might be measures of performance such as eﬃciency or total output.
A performance measure of zero should disqualify a project completely, regardless
of any other merit.
2.
Tradablecriteria(B,C,D,F). These are factorsthat can be traded against one another;
a decrease in one is acceptable if accompanied by a suﬃcient increase in another.
For instance, a designer may be willing to trade between reliability and maintain-
ability, so long as “cost of ownership” remains constant. In this case, the weights
would reﬂect the relative costs of increasing reliability and making maintenance
easier. Cost F is shown as a single criterion that is relevant to all projects. Typically,
this would include monetary costs of the project. This might be disaggregated into
cost categories such as wages, materials, facilities, and shipping, if there is the pos-
sibility of a trade-oﬀamong these cost categories. If no such trade-oﬀexists, the
costs should simply be summed and treated as a single factor.
3.
Optional criteria. These are factors that may not be relevant to all projects: If they
are present, they should aﬀect the score; but if they are absent, they should not
aﬀect the score. Note that either costs or beneﬁts may involve optional factors.
For instance, E in the formula represents a beneﬁt that may not be a consideration
with all projects. It should be counted in the score only if it is relevant to a project.
For example, this might be a rating of ease of consumer use, which would not be
relevant to a project aimed at an industrial purpose. G in the formula represents an
“optional” cost that might not be relevant to all projects. Typically, this type of cost
is one in which the availability of some resource is a more important consideration
than its monetary costs. For instance, there may be limits on the availability of a
testing device, specialized computers, or a scarce skill such as a programmer. In
such a case, the hours or other measure of use should be included separately from
monetary cost and should apply only to those projects requiring that resource.
The second issue focuses on value and importance of criteria. Once the form of the
model is selected, the designers of the model need to distinguish between the value of
a criterion and the weight or importance of that criterion. In the preceding formula, B,
C, and D are the values of their respective factors for a speciﬁc project, while b, c, and d

SCORING MODELS
37
are the weights assigned to those factors, reﬂecting the importance assigned to them
by the decision maker. In the case of the tradable factors, the ratio b/c represents the
trade-oﬀrelationship between factors B and C. If B is decreased by one unit, C must
be increased by at least the amount b/c for the sum of the tradable factors to remain
constant or increase. That is, the decision maker is willing to trade one factor for another
according to the ratios of their weights, so long as the total sum remains constant
or increases.
Finally, the third issue to resolve is one of measurement of criteria. Some criteria
are objectively measurable, such as costs and revenues. Others, such as probability of
success or strategic importance, must be obtained judgmentally. Scoring models can
readily include both objective and judgmental criteria. It is helpful if the judgmental
criteria are estimated with a scale and descriptor phrases to obtain consistency in
estimating the magnitude of the factor for each project. The estimates should be
made on some convenient scale, such as 1 to 10. (see “An Example of Subjective
Measure of Criteria.”) A similar scale should be devised to aid in making estimates
of each of the criteria to be obtained judgmentally, as was done in the example
in Table 2.3.
An Example of Subjective Measure of Criteria
10
All skills are in ample supply.
9
All skills are available with no excess.
8
All technical skills are available.
7
Most professional skills are available.
6
Some technical skill retraining is required.
5
Some professional skill retraining is required.
4
Extensive technical skill retraining is required.
3
Extensive professional skill retraining is required.
2
Most technical skills must be hired.
1
Most technical and professional skills must be hired.
0
All technical and professional skills must be hired.
Most scoring models are more complex than a simple sum of criteria. Suppose
the factors we wish to include in the score are probability of success, payoﬀ, and cost.
Suppose further that we are willing to trade payoﬀand probability of success (e.g., we
are willing to accept a project with higher risk if the payoﬀis high enough), and we
think payoﬀis twice as important as either probability of success or cost. Probability of
success and payoﬀare beneﬁts, where cost is a disbeneﬁt. Then the scoring model will
be as follows:
Score = PSuccess + 2 ∗Payoﬀ
Cost
The designer of the scoring model is free to include whatever factors are considered
important and to assign weights to reﬂects relative importance.

38
PROJECT SELECTION
Table 2.3: Rating a New Product Development Project with a Scoring
Model
Criteria/Factors (Scored 0–10)
Criteria/Factor
Item
Score Out
of 10 (Points)
Average
Criterion/Factor
Score (Points)
Strategic positioning
Degree of project’s alignment
with business unit strategy
(strategic significance)
8
8.0
Product/Competitive
advantage
Unique product functionalities
8
8.0
Provides better customer
benefits
9
Meets customer value measures
better
7
Market appeal
Market size
8
7.0
Market share
8
Market growth
6
Degree of competition
6
Alignment with core
competencies
Market alignment
8
7.0
Technological alignment
7
Manufacturing alignment
6
Technical merit
Technical gap
9
8.0
Technical complexity
6
Technical probability of success
9
Financial merit
Expected net present value
9
8.0
Expected internal rate of return
9
Payback time
7
Total Project
Score
130 out of a possible
170 points (77%)
Scoring Projects
When the criteria for the model have been selected, the form of the scoring model cho-
sen, weights established, and measurement scales deﬁned, you are ready to rank the
candidate projects. Note that while the decision maker(s) must obtain the criteria and
their weights from management, this is a one-time activity. The project-speciﬁc data
for individual projects will in most cases come from those proposing the project. They
will provide either objective data (e.g., costs, staﬀhours, machine use) or ratings based
on the scales the decision maker has established. In some cases, project-speciﬁc data
may be obtained from sources other than the project originators. For instance, data on
probability of market success or payoﬀmight be obtained from marketing rather than
fromresearchanddevelopment(R&D).Whilethisdatamustbeobtainedforeachproject

SCORING MODELS
39
being ranked, the criteria and their weights will remain ﬁxed until management decides
they must be revised.
In most cases, the project data will be in units that vary in magnitude: probabili-
ties to the right of the decimal, monetary costs to the left of the decimal, scale rank-
ings in integers, and so forth. It is necessary to convert all the factors to a common
range of values. Assuming that the project-speciﬁc values are approximately normally
distributed, the result should be standardized values ranging from about –3 to about
+3. These must now be restored to positive values. If any of the original values in a col-
umn was zero, the standardized value for that factor should also be zero. Add to every
value the absolute value of the most negative number in the column resulting from the
subtraction and division process. This will result in standardized values ranging from
zero to approximately 6. If none of the original values was zero, add to every number
1 plus the absolute value of the most negative number. This will give values ranging
from 1 to approximately 7. These standardized values should then be substituted in the
model. Each project then receives a score based on weights supplied by management
and project data supplied by the project originators.
Using a Scoring Model
Table 2.4 shows the results of the model applied to standardized scores. The rows have
been reordered in decreasing magnitude of the score. If the standardized values are
available in a spreadsheet, the process of computing project scores is trivial. Likewise,
sorting the projects in order of scores is readily accomplished using a spreadsheet. In this
Table 2.4: Ranking of Projects Using the Scoring Model
Project
Cost ($k)
P (Sxs)
Payoff ($m)
Score
4
1.89
2.67
3.35
4.96
6
2.12
3.38
2.78
4.22
3
1.00
2.13
1.00
4.13
5
2.17
3.33
2.78
4.10
8
2.51
3.88
2.37
3.43
1
1.45
2.13
1.42
3.42
12
3.58
3.56
4.22
3.35
11
3.70
3.61
3.34
2.78
2
1.62
1.00
1.58
2.57
7
2.49
3.67
1.34
2.56
14
4.44
3.78
3.54
2.45
16
6.39
3.88
5.74
2.4
9
3.11
3.56
1.91
2.38
10
4.13
3.65
1.91
2.38
13
4.11
3.98
2.53
2.20
15
5.43
3.86
2.88
1.77

40
PROJECT SELECTION
example, Project 4 is the highest-ranked project. The other projects fall in order of their
score. The next step would be to approve projects starting from the top of the list and
working down, until the budget and/or resources are exhausted. Note that the diﬀer-
ence between Projects 8 and 1 comes only in the third signiﬁcant ﬁgure. Since most of
the original data were good only to one or two signiﬁcant ﬁgures, this diﬀerence should
not be taken seriously.
While scoring models can be used for any type of project, they are especially useful
in the earlier phases of a project life cycle, when major project selection decisions are
made. Take, for example, new product development projects. In earlier project phases,
market payoﬀis distant or even inappropriate as a measure of merit. In such projects,
considerations such as technical merit—a frequent criterion in scoring models—may
be of greater signiﬁcance than economic payoﬀ. Selection of other types of projects,
large and small, widely relies on scoring models as well. The ﬁnal score is typically used
for two purposes:
1.
Go/kill decisions. These are located at certain points within the project manage-
ment process, often at the ends of project phases. Their purpose is to decide which
new projects to initiate and which of the existing ones to continue or terminate.
2.
Project prioritization. This is where resources are allocated to the new projects with
a “go” decision, and the total list of new and existing projects, which already have
resources assigned, are prioritized.
Although the principles behind the scoring models are relatively simple, developing
an eﬀective scoring model can be an arduous endeavor.
Beneﬁts
The value of the scoring model is that it can be tailored to ﬁt the decision situation, tak-
ing into account multiple goals and criteria, both objective and judgmental, which are
deemed important for the decision.9 This prevents putting a heavy emphasis on ﬁnan-
cial criteria that tend not to be reliable early in the project life. With such an approach,
decision makers are forced to scrutinize each project on the same set of criteria, focusing
rigorously on critical issues but recognizing that some criteria are more important than
others (by means of weights).
Scoring models are also conceptually simple. They trim down the complex selection
decision to a handy number of speciﬁc questions and yield a single score, a helpful input
into a project selection eﬀort. This is perhaps a major reason for scoring models’ wide
popularity.
Finally, scoring models produce results. Several studies showed that they yield good
decisions. For example, Procter & Gamble claims that their scoring models provide an 85
percent predictive ability.10
VOTING MODELS
For some organizations, numeric scoring models can become complex and cumber-
some. We have found that when scoring models fail within an organization, they do so

VOTING MODELS
41
for a couple of primary reasons. First, teams get embroiled in trying to design the per-
fect scoring model. An enormous amount of time and energy can be lost in debating
the right scoring criteria, the deﬁnition of numeric value for each criterion (e.g., how
to describe a scoring value of 1 versus 2 versus 3, etc.), and which criteria are more
important than the others so weights can be assigned.
Second, numeric scoring models quite often fail to provide good scoring separation
between projects. One executive from a ﬁnancial services organization describes this
outcome as “the scores tend to munge to the middle” to form a bell curve eﬀect. When
this happens, it gets very diﬃcult to evaluate which projects are the best investment
choices.
For these reasons, some organizations adopt an approach that provides the
necessary structure and information to make project investment choices but relies
on the experience and judgment of a cross-section of informed stakeholders. Voting
models are eﬀective in facilitating this judgmental approach by providing a technique
to tap the collective knowledge of a group of experts with diverse perspectives. Voting
models take advantage of these diverse perspectives to create a clear understanding
of the highest-priority projects, increasing the organizational knowledge about the
value proposition of each project, creating broad buy-in of project priorities across the
organization, and clearly separating the wheat from the chaﬀ.
Developing a Voting Model
The process for developing a voting model is very similar in nature to developing a
numeric scoring model, but simpliﬁed. The primary diﬀerence is in how project value
is evaluated and scored. Simpliﬁcation is achieved through the limitations imposed on
the scoring structure. Project value for any one criterion is limited to three values (1-2-3,
H-M-L, etc.), and no weighting of criteria is needed. The major steps in developing a
voting model are described next.
Identify the Stakeholders
Critical to a successful outcome in using voting models is the assembly of the right set
of stakeholders who will have a vote on project value and prioritization. The intent is to
assemble a set of stakeholders who have a vested interest in the prioritization outcome
and represent a good cross-section of functional perspectives. It is advisable that no
more than 12 to 15 stakeholders participate in a voting event.
Develop Value Propositions for Each Project
For each of the candidate projects, a brief value proposition should be prepared for use
in the voting event. Limit the amount of content to that which can be presented to
the stakeholders within a maximum of three to ﬁve minutes. If the potential value of
a project cannot be adequately communicated within a three- to ﬁve-minute time limit,
additional vetting of the project is needed and should be held until a later date so it
won’t be mistakenly viewed as being of lesser value than other candidate projects that
have a mature value proposition prepared.

42
PROJECT SELECTION
Create the Prioritization Criteria and Value Anchors
For voting models, the prioritization criteria have to be limited to the critical few criteria.
The number of criteria must be limited to a maximum of three to ﬁve. For each criterion,
a description of the criterion and the value anchors must be prepared prior to the voting
event. Table 2.5 shows an example of criteria and value descriptions.
Create a Voting Template
Voting models are best used in a facilitated work session where all critical stakehold-
ers can be assembled and provided the opportunity to discuss and debate the value of
each of the candidate projects. To facilitate the collection of discussion outcomes and
information, it is best to create a work template for use in the voting event. Figure 2.5
illustrates an example voting model template that can be used in either physical or elec-
tronic format. Some of the most productive prioritization sessions we have witnessed
have been those that use a physical voting template that is large enough to hang on a
conference room wall.
Using the Voting Model
Since voting models rely on the expert judgment of a cross-section of stakeholders,
it is best if a face-to-face work session is used to ensure that proper collaboration
and communication takes place. It is within this context that the following steps are
recommended for using a voting model.
Step 1: Validate the voting criteria. The initial set of criteria and voting anchor descrip-
tions developed prior to the work session are presented to the stakeholders in this initial
step. The intent is to level set the stakeholders on the criteria and how the criteria will
be evaluated, and gain buy-in from the cross-section of stakeholders. If necessary, the
criteria and voting descriptions can be modiﬁed during this step.
Table 2.5: Example Criteria Description and Value Anchors
Criteria
A
B
C
Monetary
value
Clear path to money,
high ROI
Clear path to money,
low ROI
No clear path to money
> $100m ROI (3 yr)
$50–100m ROI (3 yr)
<$50m ROI
Strategic value
Severe competitive
threat
Moderate competitive
threat
Low competitive threat
Must do for leadership
or time-critical
neutralizer
Moderate for
neutralization activities
No direct map to
strategy
Market pull
Capability requested by
customers
Valid interest by
customers
No pull or interest from
customers
Complexity
and risk
Low complexity, low
risk
Moderate complexity
and risk
High complexity, high
risk
Effort and cost
Low effort, cost < $3m
Low effort, cost $3–9m
Large effort, cost > $9m
ROI = return on investment.

VOTING MODELS
43
Prioritization Criteria
Candidate Projects
Project Priority
Wisdom of Crowds Votes
Criterion 1
Criterion 2
Criterion 3
Criterion 4
Criterion 5
Voting Model Work Template
Figure 2.5: Example Voting Model Template
Step 2: Review the list of candidate projects. This step involves reviewing all candi-
date projects that the stakeholders will be evaluating during the prioritization process.
To expedite time, the projects can be prepopulated in the voting template, as shown
in Figure 2.6. The intent is to ensure that all projects are listed and also make an initial
determination if any of the projects should be eliminated from consideration or if others
should be added to the list.
Prioritization Criteria
Candidate Projects
Project Priority
Wisdom of Crowds Votes
Criterion 1
Criterion 2
Criterion 3
Criterion 4
Criterion 5
Voting Model Work Template
Project 1
Project 2
Project 3
Project 4
Project 5
Project 6
Project 7
Figure 2.6: Candidate Projects Prepopulated in Work Template

44
PROJECT SELECTION
Step3:Projectvaluepropositionandinitialvoting.Takingeachcandidateprojectinthe
list in order, the project representative describes the project value proposition in three
to ﬁve minutes. Stakeholders will then have an opportunity to ask clarifying questions
and debate the value proposition. It is in this step that an expert facilitator is needed to
gauge the discussion and debate for focus, value, and time constraints.
At the end of each discussion, the stakeholders are asked to vote on the project
for each criterion by a show of hands (or electronic vote if blind voting is desired). The
project receives a vote of H, M, L (or 1, 2, 3) for each criterion, as shown in Figure 2.7.
This process is repeated for each candidate project on the list.
Through this step in the process, two signiﬁcant things are accomplished. First, an
initial assessment of candidate project value is debated and scored. Second, the stake-
holder’s knowledge about the intent and potential value of each candidate project is
increased. It is common at this point to want to make a ﬁnal judgment about project
priority. However, doing so creates a fatal ﬂaw that many numeric scoring models fall
into. Little separation will still exist between the highest-value projects and lowest-value
projects. To create more separation, one ﬁnal step is needed.
Step 4: The “wisdom of crowds” vote. Tapping into a technique that James Surowiecki
termed the wisdom of crowds provides the opportunity to let your new wise set of cross-
organizational stakeholders determine the highest-value projects.11 In this step, each
stakeholder is given a set number of votes (e.g., ten) that he or she can place against
the candidate projects. However, each stakeholder has a maximum limit on the number
of votes (e.g., three) that he or she can place against any one project. This constraint
prevents a stakeholder from placing all votes on one particular project. Once again, this
voting can take place in the open using the voting model template or electronically if
blind voting is preferred.
Prioritization Criteria
Candidate Projects
Project Priority
Wisdom of Crowds Votes
Criterion 1
Criterion 2
Criterion 3
Criterion 4
Criterion 5
Voting Model Work Template
Project 1
Project 2
Project 3
Project 4
Project 5
Project 6
Project 7
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
Figure 2.7: Initial Value Voting Assessment Results

VOTING MODELS
45
Prioritization Criteria
Candidate Projects
Project Priority
Wisdom of Crowds Votes
Criterion 1
Criterion 2
Criterion 3
Criterion 4
Criterion 5
Voting Model Work Template
Project 1
Project 2
Project 3
Project 4
Project 5
Project 6
Project 7
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
M
L
M
H
H
M
L
L
H
H
L
H
L
M
M
H
H
H
H
H
M
M
M
L
L
Project 8
Project 9
Project 10
25
19
17
12
11
9
8
8
5
3
Figure 2.8: Ranking of Projects into High, Medium, and Low Priority
A ﬁnal tally of votes is conducted, and the top candidate projects are identiﬁed.
Figure 2.8 shows an example of a fully populated voting model with three bands of pri-
oritized projects based on the results of the voting. The top band (projects 1-5) contains
the highest-value projects, which need to be funded and initiated. The bottom band
(projects 9-10) contains the lowest-value projects, which need to be eliminated or recast
to provide more value. The middle band of projects needs additional scrutiny but can
be funded and initiated if resources are available after all top-level projects are initiated.
Beneﬁts
Voting models provide an alternative project selection approach for organizations that
get themselves bogged down in the minutia of numeric scoring models. They often pro-
vide an accelerated path from project opportunity identiﬁcation to full project ranking,
especially if a large number of candidate projects are involved.
As shown in Figure 2.8, voting models can provide clear separation between
projects that the selected group of stakeholders deem of highest value and those that
are deemed of low value. With those of highest and lowest value identiﬁed, the decision
maker has fewer candidate projects requiring further scrutiny and debate.
Finally, since a cross-section of organizational stakeholders are involved in the deter-
mination of project ranking via the voting model technique, a greater level of buy-in of
the ﬁnal project ranking decision tends to occur (see “A Rock Star Votes”).

46
PROJECT SELECTION
A Rock Star Votes
Prioritizing a set of technology development projects can be a challenging task.
This is especially true in an organization like Intel, where a signiﬁcant number of
projects are vying for funding and resources, and each project has an inﬂuential
and respected technologist championing its value proposition for the company.
Being the person responsible for the ﬁnal decision about which new tech-
nology development projects will be funded and which won’t requires a track
record of success, such as the track record of a gentleman named Ajay. Ajay
was a co-inventor of the universal serial bus (USB) and was featured in one of
the company’s “Intel Rock Stars” television commercials.
However, as Ajay learned, being an expert in your ﬁeld and possessing a
track record of success does not give you a decision-making mandate. Making
project ranking and selection decisions is relatively easy; the hard part comes
in gaining organizational buy-in for the decisions you have made. In Ajay’s case,
two problems consistently emerged once a mandate decision was made:
1.
People continued to work on technology projects that were not ofﬁcially
selected and funded.
2.
The product planners who made the decisions on which technologies to
include in a project sometimes didn’t agree with Ajay’s decision, making
it difﬁcult for the project to transition from technology development to
project development.
Ajay turned to the voting model as a potential solution to the problems. He
began by inviting both technology experts and product planners to the project
prioritization discussions. Through the voting model technique, the product
planners have an equal say in which technology projects were most valuable,
but from a product and user perspectives (everyone has the same number
of votes).
Two other behaviors were also critical. First, Ajay remained quiet during
the questioning and debate on project value; second, he made sure he voted
last in order to not inﬂuence the voting of the other members in the session.
At the end of the session, he had a prioritized project list that was not too far
from how he would have personally ranked the projects. But most importantly,
he gained alignment with the product planners on which project technologies
would eventually make their way into Intel products. Some of them we are now
using with our personal computers.
PAIRWISE RANKING
When a small number of candidate projects are involved in the selection process, the
pairwise ranking technique is an eﬀective tool for identifying priority order of the
projects. A number of decisions have to be made when comparing candidate projects,
so it is necessary that the decision method be identiﬁed up front (i.e., consensus,
autocratic, consultative). Additionally, it must be determined whether a numeric or
judgmental approach to comparing one project against another will be used.

PAIRWISE RANKING
47
Developing a Pairwise Ranking Tool
Development of a pairwise ranking tool is a very simple exercise consisting to two pri-
mary steps. First, a comparison matrix must be constructed that represents the number
of candidate projects to be compared.12 Second, a set of criteria must be identiﬁed and
documented.
Construct a Comparison Matrix
The construction of the comparison matrix is a simple exercise that is dependent on the
number of candidate projects that will be ranked. Figure 2.9 shows a pairwise compari-
son matrix for six candidate projects.
Care should be taken to ensure that the numbering schema is accomplished cor-
rectly. The numbers representing each of the six projects should be laid out in ascending
order from top to bottom in both the vertical and diagonal axis.
Document the Comparison Criteria
A set of criteria from which each project pair will be compared must be identiﬁed
and documented to ensure consistency in comparison. These criteria will serve as the
basis for comparing each of the candidate projects against one another. Try to limit
the criteria to three items, ﬁve as an absolute maximum. Anything greater than ﬁve
criteria adds unnecessary complexity and makes the tool and comparison exercise
more complicated than it needs to be. Pairwise ranking criteria may include some of the
following:
■
Net present value
■
Return on investment
■
Payback period
■
Level of strategic alignment
■
Cost savings
■
Market share increase
■
Aﬀordability
■
Usability
1
2
3
4
5
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 2.9: Pairwise Ranking Comparison Matrix

48
PROJECT SELECTION
Using the Pairwise Ranking Matrix
With a comparison matrix constructed, the comparison criteria identiﬁed, the decision
method agreed upon, and the right set of stakeholders assembled to compare the
candidate projects, the following steps are recommended for using pairwise ranking.
Step 1: Rank each project pair. Sytematically work through the candidate projects,
comparing one against another, but following the structure created by the compari-
son matrix. For each pair of projects, the stakeholders will determine which of the two
candidate projects is preferred based on the criteria identiﬁed. The number of the pre-
ferred project is then inserted into the comparison matrix. This project-to-project com-
parison is repeated until the comparison matrix is completely ﬁlled, as demonstrated
in Figure 2.10.
Step 2: Tally comparison results. Using a simple scorecard (Table 2.6), tally the
number of times each candidate project was preferred during the project-to-project
comparison exercise. This is accomplished by viewing the inputs in the fully populated
comparison matrix.
Step3:Rankthecandidateprojects. Using the tally information from the previousstep,
rank the candidate projects based on the number of times they are preferred. Table 2.7
illustrates the priority ranking of the six projects used in this example.
1
1
2
3
4
5
2
3
4
5
6
1
3
1
2
3
4
5
2
3
4
5
6
1
3
3
3
2
1
5
5
3
5
6
6
6
2
6
1
2
3
4
5
2
3
4
5
6
1 and 2 compared
Project 1 preferred
1 and 3 compared
Project 3 preferred
5 and 6 compared
Project 6 preferred
Figure 2.10: Project-to-Project Comparison
Table 2.6: Project Preference Tally
Candidate projects
1
2
3
4
5
6
Times preferred
2
2
4
0
3
4
Table 2.7: Candidate Project Ranking
Candidate projects
1
2
3
4
5
6
Times preferred
2
2
4
0
3
4
Project ranking
4
5
2
6
3
1

THE ALIGNMENT MATRIX
49
In cases where there is a tie between two candidate projects, refer to the compar-
ison matrix created in Step 1 and ﬁnd the box where the two projects were compared
against one another. The project that was preferred between the two receives the higher
ranking. In the preceding example, Project 3 and Project 6 were each preferred four
times. By referring back to Figure 2.10, one can see that when the two projects were
compared against one another, Project 6 was preferred. Therefore, Project 6 receives the
higher ranking.
Beneﬁts
Pairwise ranking helps to make a complicated process (prioritizing a set of candidate
projects) much more simple by eliminating the tendency to try to sort through a list
of projects holistically. Through the project-to-project comparison methodology, only
two projects at a time have to be evaluated.
The tool itself forces a structured process and makes the project comparison results
immediately visible to the stakeholders and decision makers. The tablature nature of
the ﬁnal ranking results is also more visually eﬀective than other project scoring and
ranking tools.
THE ALIGNMENT MATRIX
The project alignment matrix is used to establish the degree to which a project is
aligned with the organization’s business strategy (see Figure 2.11). This is, of course, also
Example Business
Strategies 
Project
1
Project
2
Project
...
Project
n
P
F
F
Provide clearly
differentiated products
from our competitors 
Consistently deliver
performance increase in
high-speed devices 
Be the first to market
with new products 
Supports the common
platform architecture 
F
Continuously reduce
manufacturing cost 
N
F
P
P
F
F
P
N
F
F
F
Legend:  F = Fully Supports    P = Partially Supports    N = Does Not Support
Figure 2.11: Example Alignment Matrix

50
PROJECT SELECTION
balanced against the speciﬁc customer needs that the ﬁrm is attempting to meet. The
alignment assessment aids the project manager and top managers in understanding
howwellaprojectsupportsthestrategicgoalsoftheﬁrm.Withthisinplace,eachproject
concept can be evaluated on the basis of cost, beneﬁt, risk, and strategic importance.
Developing the Alignment Matrix
The ﬁrst column of the matrix contains the list of the organization’s strategic business
goals that serve as criteria to align projects with the organization’s strategy. Then, in each
of the remaining columns, the degree of alignment of individual projects with each goal
is assessed using a qualitative scale. As an outcome, a qualitative goal-by-goal align-
ment evaluation for each project is generated that may be used for diﬀerent strategic
purposes.
The assessment of a project’s alignment with an organization’s business strategy
calls for information that typically comes from three inputs:
1.
Approved business strategy.
2.
The portfolio of projects.
3.
Project business case (or preliminary business case information).
The approved business strategy provides a list of the organization’s business goals
thatthestrategyisstrivingtoaccomplish.Toassessthedegreeofalignmentofindividual
projects to the strategic goals, a list of current and future projects is needed. This infor-
mation is typically found in project portfolio documents. Finally, to understand how well
each project is aligned with the strategic goals, the preliminary project business case is
needed.
Identify the Organization’s Strategic Goals
Strategic goals are deﬁned by the organization’s senior management, sometimes for-
mally in strategic plans, at other times informally. In either case, the goals should be
used for the alignment matrix assessment. Since each organization is a unique entity,
the list of strategic goals found in the alignment matrix will be unique as well. Addition-
ally, as the strategic goals of an organization are updated and modiﬁed, the list of goals
in the alignment matrix needs to be updated accordingly.
Identify the Projects
There are two steps to this action. First, the names of the new and existing projects
are entered into the columns of the alignment matrix. As stated earlier, the list of the
projects is normally part of the portfolio of projects documentation. If a formal portfolio
of projects does not exist, an active project roster will suﬃce. Second, the project strat-
egy and goals should be developed and documented to secure the information needed
to assess alignment of projects to strategy.
Deﬁne the Alignment Scale
Scales vary, of course, and the choice of scale to use is organization speciﬁc. We
believe that a simple, qualitative scale is completely adequate and provides the value

THE ALIGNMENT MATRIX
51
we want from this matrix. An example of a simple qualitative scale is the three-level
scale shown in Figure 2.11. The scale includes Fully Supports for the highest degree of
alignment, Partially Supports for the medium-level alignment, and Does Not Support for
no alignment of the project with a speciﬁc goal.
Assess the Degree of Alignment
Now it is time to assess each project’s alignment with each organizational business
goal using the adopted scale of assessment. Typically, decision makers who do
the assessment should use a collaborative work session format, where information
from multiple perspectives is exchanged, and the assessment decisions are shared
and consensual.
Variations
An information technology (IT) organization for a major ﬁnancial institution uses a vari-
ation of the alignment matrix, which they call the strategy alignment map (Figure 2.12)
to gain alignment between the IT strategy and business strategy. The map is used to
ensure that their IT projects complement the needs of the business. Their IT Project
Management Oﬃce director, Melida Ramos, explains
The alignment chart provides a strategic mapping of the business goals, the business
values, and the IT projects. As part of the strategic changes which occurred last year,
we were tasked by the company to design the alignment process, part of which was
accomplished by the alignment map which helped us visualize the alignment between
business goals, business value, and the projects.
AbubbleontheintersectionofStrategicBusinessGoal4andBusinessValue3means
that they are aligned. Further, a bubble indicates that Business Value 3 intersects with
Project 3, meaning they are aligned. In summary, Project 3 delivers Business Value 3,
Strategic Business Goals
Business Value &
Activity
IT Projects
Goal
1
Goal
2
Goal
3
Goal
4
Project
1
Project
2
Project
4
Business value/
activity 1
Business value/
activity 2
Business value/
activity 3
Business value/
activity 4
Project
3
Figure 2.12: Strategy Alignment Map

52
PROJECT SELECTION
which helps to achieve Strategic Business Goal 4. The alignment is about IT projects
contributing to business beneﬁts by helping to achieve the strategic business goals.
Beneﬁts
Typically, the alignment matrix is prepared for project portfolio management reviews
when projects are assessed with respect to alignment with the strategies, goals, and
objectives of an organization. Based on the alignment information obtained by means
of the alignment matrix, the preliminary selection and risk balancing of projects may
be changed and the ﬁnal project portfolio adopted, providing improved alignment of
projects with the strategic goals of the organization.
The alignment matrix enables an organization to reﬁne the selection and risk balanc-
ing of the preliminary portfolio of projects by pointing to projects that are best aligned
with the organization’s business goals.13 Based on that, one can eliminate some prelim-
inary selected projects that are not strategically aligned; one can also add new projects
that are better aligned. That is the matrix’s value, which is strategically precious given
how diﬃcult it is to select the most valuable projects that are risk balanced and are also
aligned with the strategic goals of the organization.
Additionally, it requires that senior managers of an organization develop and docu-
ment the organization’s strategic goals. The alignment matrix aids the project manager
in understanding how well his or her project supports the strategic objectives of the
ﬁrm, therefore helping him or her in creating the project strategy.
References
1.
Venkataraman, Ray R., and Jeﬀrey K. Pinto. Cost and Value Management in Projects
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2008).
2.
Thiry, Michael. A Framework for Value Management Practice (Newton Square, PA:
Project Management Institute, 2013).
3.
British Standard Institute (BSI). BS EN 12973:2000: Value Management (London,
England: BSI, 2000).
4.
Martinelli, Russ, James Waddell, and Tim Rahschulte. Program Management for
Improved Business Results, 2nd ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014).
5.
De Wit, B., and Ron Meyer. Strategy: Process, Content, Context, 4th ed. (London,
England: Cengage Learnings, 2010).
6.
Pearce, John A. II, and Richard B. Robinson Jr. Strategic Management: Formulation,
Implementation, and Control (New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2000).
7.
Martinelli, Russ, and Jim Waddell. “Aligning Program Management to Business
Strategy.” Project Management World Today, January–February 2009.
8.
Andler, Nicolai. Tools for Project Management, Workshops and Consulting: A Must-
Have Compendium of Essential Tools and Techniques (Erlangen, Germany: Publicis
Publishing, 2011).

REFERENCES
53
9.
Morris, P. W. G., and A. Jamieson. “Moving from Corporate Strategy to Project
Strategy.” Project Management Journal 36 (4): 5–18, 2005.
10.
American Productivity and Quality Center. NewProductDevelopment:Embracingan
Adaptable Process, Final Report, APQC, 2010.
11.
Surowiecki, James. TheWisdomofCrowds (Harpswell, ME: Anchor Publishing, 2005).
12.
Andler, 2011.
13.
Pearce, John A. II, and Richard B. Robinson Jr. Strategic Management: Planning for
Domestic and Global Competition (New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2014).


3
PROJECT INITIATION
T
he primary outcome of the project selection process is, of course, an approval
decision to initiate a project. We must remember that while going through the
selection process, projects are normally little more than a set of ideas, goals, and
assumptions. If the ideas and goals stand up to the scrutiny of the project selection cri-
teria and process, then a set of actions must take place to reformulate the ideas into
a project construct in which the ability to execute upon the ideas can be evaluated.
Project initiation is aimed at establishing a ﬁrm foundation to validate that the busi-
ness case underwriting a project is achievable and that a successful project outcome
is possible.1
Due diligence is needed during the project initiation process to ensure that ﬁnan-
cial, capital, and human resources are committed to a project that has its objectives
adequately deﬁned, level of complexity understood, roles and responsibilities deﬁned,
and the business case validated. All parties involved must be clear on what a project is
intended to achieve, why it is needed, and how the outcome will be accomplished.2
Anumberoftoolsthatwedescribeinthischapterareavailabletoassistintheproject
initiation process. Consider adding the following tools to your PM Toolbox. We begin
with the checklist questions for project initiation.
CHECKLIST QUESTIONS FOR PROJECT INITIATION
Management teams in successful and innovative companies fully understand that some
of the greatest opportunities reside in the fuzzy front end of a project.3 The ability to
accurately forecast future customer, user, and market needs and then integrate those
needs with leading-edge capabilities is critical for companies to survive in their respec-
tive industries.4 This work is never simple, and high levels of ambiguity have served as a
test in frustration and a lesson in patience for many.5
However, the presence of ambiguity is a characteristic of many projects, particularly
in the early stages of project initiation and initial planning. The ability to eﬃciently
and eﬀectively converge on the business need, the value proposition, the roles and
responsibilities, and a clear set of business objectives during project initiation is crucial.
A set of checklist questions for project initiation is a very good tool for establishing
an approach for managing the project initiation process and for ensuring that the
necessary information is collected.
55

56
PROJECT INITIATION
Developing Checklist Questions for Project Initiation
Taking the time to develop a standard set of questions for an organization is good prac-
tice, as it drives consistency in project initiation content and outcomes. The questions
contained within the checklist can be developed by ﬁrst understanding the various work
activities and project artifacts that result from the activities (such as the project business
case). Questions will center on what work has to be completed and what outcomes have
to be created.
Then, additional questions can be developed by understanding what information
the project sponsor and primary stakeholders require in order to make the critical deci-
sions involved during project initiation. The checklist questions for project initiation will
be diﬀerent for every organization because every organization requires its own unique
set of information and outcomes to support its project initiation activities.
Table 3.1 illustrates a sample set of questions that can be used as a reference for
developing your own checklist questions for your PM Toolbox.6
Table 3.1: Sample Checklist Questions for Project Initiation
Status Checklist Questions
Do we understand the primary goal of the project?
What are the business benefits derived from the project?
What strategic goals does this project support and enable?
What do we want to achieve and avoid?
What are the project objectives: business, financial, organizational, social, etc.?
Is there agreement and alignment on the objectives (in particular with the project
sponsor)?
Do we understand the problem(s) we intend to solve?
Is the problem clearly defined, differentiated, and documented?
Do we understand the solution requirements?
Do we understand the priorities of the solution requirements?
Is the solution concept convincing and realistic?
Are we ready to make a decision about the proposed solution concept?
What are our base assumptions?
Have we verified all our assumptions with our stakeholders?
What are our project constraints?
What are the boundaries and limitations?
Do we have primary roles and responsibilities documented?
Do we understand the project risks?
Do we have mitigation plans for the high-impact, high-likelihood risks?
What will serve as evidence of project success or failure?
Are we ready to make a decision to transition to project planning?
Can we justify the decision internally and externally?

THE GOALS GRID
57
The status column can be used to indicate whether suﬃcient information has
been discovered to answer the question. Some project managers add a third column
to the checklist labeled “artifact” or “documentation” to indicate where the answers
to the checklist questions are documented. For example, they may be documented
in the project charter, responsibility matrix, or project business case.
Using the Checklist Questions
Once a project has been selected and a project manager is assigned ownership of it, he
or she becomes immersed in a series of activities focused on learning as much as possi-
ble about the intent of the project as well as the environment in which the project will
exist. The more ambiguous a project, the more there is to learn. The old saying, “We don’t
know what we don’t know,” applies when beginning the project initiation process.
Use of the checklist questions for project initiation can be a means of breaking
through the ambiguity of a project and beginning to achieve clarity. It should therefore
be developed very early in the project initiation process.
Obviously, not all answers to the questions contained within the checklist will come
quickly. Depending on the complexity associated with the project, it may take a number
of weeks or, in some cases, months to discover the right information needed to satisfy
therequirementsofprojectinitiation.Usethechecklistthroughouttheinitiationprocess
as a guide and focusing mechanism to peel away the layers of ambiguity to discover the
core information needed to successfully initiate a project and prepare the project team
to move into planning activities.
THE GOALS GRID
We have all read or heard about the reports that describe the staggering rate of project
failures. It is true that most of the reports are now written by consultants who want to
sell us services to improve our success rate. However, there is merit in the ﬁndings even
though the situation may not be as dire as reported. One of the factors that is consis-
tently identiﬁed as a contributing factor is the failure to deﬁne or document the criteria
for project success.
Establishing project goals is a task that is many times delegated to the project man-
ager. Saying that a project manager must deﬁne what success looks like for his or her
project is easy to say but hard to do in many instances, because project success is usu-
ally outside of the project manager’s purview. This is really a task for the senior sponsor
and leadership team of an organization. The project manager may participate in the
documentation of the project goals, but the senior leaders need to deﬁne what con-
stitutes project success; because, ultimately, they will be the ones judging ﬁnal success
or failure.
For a project manager to document the project success factors, therefore, he or she
must engage the project sponsor and primary stakeholders in conversations about what
theybelieveconstitutesprojectsuccess.Theoutcomeoftheseconversationsthenneeds
to be documented as a set of project goals, and then veriﬁed.

58
PROJECT INITIATION
The goals grid is an eﬀective tool for helping the project manager facilitate the
discussions with the project sponsor and stakeholders, and then documenting the
project goals. It was originally developed to help senior managers establish a set of
strategic goals but can be eﬀectively repurposed to help a project manager establish
project-level goals.
The goals grid is a simple 2 × 2 matrix constructed to help answer two basic ques-
tions: (1) Do you want something?, and (2) Do you have it? By applying Yes and No
answers to each of these questions, four categories of project goals emerge that are
centered on the following questions:
1.
What do we want to achieve?
2.
What do we want to preserve?
3.
What do we want to avoid?
4.
What do we want to eliminate?
These four key questions help us to derive our project goals and achieve goal clarity
by prompting us to think about our goals in a structured manner and from four diﬀerent
perspectives.
Developing a Goals Grid
Creating a goals grid is a very simple exercise. As illustrated in Figure 3.1, the goals grid
is a 2 × 2 matrix.7 Along the vertical axis is the ﬁrst primary question to be answered,
“Do you want it?”; along the horizontal axis lies the second primary question to be
answered, “Do you have it?”
The upper left quadrant is then set up to explore the goals you want to achieve.
Goals in this quadrant are identiﬁed from the perspective of yes, I want something, and
no, I don’t have it.
The upper right quadrant of the grid is set up to explore the goals that you want
to preserve. Goals in this quadrant are identiﬁed from the perspective of yes, I want
something, and yes, I already have it.
Achieve
Preserve
Avoid
Eliminate
Do You Have It?
Do You Want It?
No
Yes
No
Yes
Figure 3.1: The Goals Grid Structure

THE GOALS GRID
59
The lower left quadrant is set up to explore things that should be avoided. Things
that should be avoided are identiﬁed from the perspective of no, I don’t want something,
and no, I don’t already have it.
Finally, the lower right quadrant of the grid is set up to explore project goals associ-
ated with eliminating things that you feel you should shed going forward. Goals in this
quadrant are identiﬁed from the perspective of yes, I have it, and no, I don’t want it.
With the basic structure of the goals grid in place, a project manager is now ready to
use the tool to facilitate the necessary conversations with his or her sponsor and primary
stakeholders in an eﬀort to identify and document the goals of the project.
Using the Goals Grid
There are four primary steps in the use of the goals grid: (1) collecting input from stake-
holders on what they believe are the goals for the project; (2) synthesizing the goals into
the critical few; (3) validating that the goals align to the organization’s values, priorities,
and strategies; and (4) using the goals grid as the project compass.
■
Step1:Collectinput. This step begins with the identiﬁcation of the people from whom
you will solicit feedback concerning the project goals. The project sponsor should
always be involved, as well as those individuals who have a direct stake in the suc-
cess or failure of the project. This group of individuals are your primary stakeholders
(Chapter 15).
Solicitation of feedback on project goals can be conducted in either a work
session where the project manager facilitates the discussion around the questions
associated with each quadrant of the goals grid, or a series of one-on-one discus-
sions with each of the stakeholders. Either approach will result in the desired result,
but it is normally a matter of personal preference on the part of the project manager
as well as the cultural norms of the organization.
■
Step 2: Synthesize the goals identiﬁed. It is normal that after the collection of project
goals is complete, more goals are documented than could ever be realized. When
this happens, the goals have to be synthesized to the critical few.
Begin by identifying the duplicate goals within each quadrant and eliminate
all but one that captures the essence of success the best. Next, identify goals that
are in direct conﬂict with one another and work directly with the senior sponsor to
broker the conﬂicting goals appropriately. Finally, within each quadrant, combine
the goals into groups of related themes and work to create a single, common goal
that encompasses the deﬁnition of success for each grouping.
■
Step 3: Validate the results. With the goals pared down and synthesized into a man-
ageable and meaningful set, validate with your sponsor and primary stakeholders
that the set of goals contained within the goals grid adequately deﬁnes success for
the project undergoing the initiation process.
The goals grid is very eﬀective in helping the project stakeholders and project
manager think about goals in terms of the categories making up the grid, but it does
not by itself ensure that the goals are consistent with the organization’s values, prior-
ities, and strategic objectives. Therefore, validation of the goals contained within the

60
PROJECT INITIATION
goals grid should also focus on alignment of the goals, and ultimately the project, to
three factors: organizational values, priorities, and strategic objectives.
■
Step 4: Use the goals grid as your compass. Throughout the course of a project,
a project manager is faced with hundreds of decisions that have to be made.
The goals grid should be used throughout project planning and execution as a
guide to ensure that decisions remain in alignment with the goals of the project.
This will help prevent the series of decision outcomes from gradually steering a
project oﬀcourse and away from project success.
Beneﬁts
From a usage perspective, the greatest beneﬁt is that the goals grid is simple to cre-
ate, easy to use, and ﬂexible, and guides the right conversations needed to adequately
identify project goals.
From a functional perspective, the goals grid oﬀers beneﬁts to the project manager
as well. Because of its structure, it guides those using it though a logical progression
of thought for goal identiﬁcation. Instead of only thinking about what it is you’d like to
achieve, it also guides discussion about goals focused on what you would like to pre-
serve, avoid, and eliminate. This gives the project manager a richer set of goals for the
project.
Through the validation step described previously, the goals grid provides a check
and balance of the alignment of the goals to the values, priorities, and strategic objec-
tives of the organization. This provides veriﬁcation that the project is on track to the
intent of the investment decision that was made during the project selection process
(Chapter 2).
Finally, use of the goals grid provides an eﬀective means for developing group con-
sensus among the project stakeholders on how project success is deﬁned. It is better
to establish consensus at the early stages of a project than to witness a debate about
whether a project is successful at the end of the project cycle. This consensus building
also creates broad buy-in that the project is of value to the organization.
THE RESPONSIBILITY MATRIX
By nature, project initiation is fraught with ambiguity caused by the sheer fact that
the amount of information that is unknown is normally signiﬁcantly greater than the
amount of information that is known. Therefore, establishing clarity is a primary focus
for the project manager during initiation of a project.
An important aspect of establishing early clarity is ﬁguring out who needs to be
involved with the project, what they will be responsible for, and how they will partici-
pate. A responsibility matrix is an eﬀective tool for establishing this who, what, and how
relationship between the project elements and project players.
Completing a high-level responsibility matrix during project initiation will give the
project manager insight into how responsibility will be shared across the various aspects
of the project without having to go into task-level detail, which is yet to be established.
Doing so removes at least one element of project ambiguity.

THE RESPONSIBILITY MATRIX
61
Developing a Responsibility Matrix
Using a high-level responsibility matrix during the early stages of a project requires one
to take a top-down approach to formulating the project. Much like the design of a resi-
dential or commercial building, top-down project formulation begins with creating the
project architecture.
Create the Project Architecture
The term architecture refers to the conceptual structure and logical organization of a
system. It includes the elements of the system and the relationships among them.8
A project architecture is therefore the conceptual structure and logical organization of
a project.9
By way of example, Figure 3.2 illustrates a project architecture for an information
technology (IT) project focused on transitioning a ﬁrm’s workforce work platforms from
desktop systems to laptop systems. It is a high-level conceptual design showing the
major components that comprise the project.
The initial responsibility matrix will include the people who are responsible for the
successful development of each component contained in the project architecture. While
thisisagoodbeginning,itisnotentirelysuﬃcient.Toderivemoreutilityfromaresponsi-
bility matrix, an initial step of identifying the primary outcomes and deliverables for each
of the project components should also be completed. Figure 3.3 illustrates a possible
initial responsibility matrix for the workforce mobilization project described previously.
Identify Project Players
With the project architecture deﬁned and the primary outcomes for each of the project
components identiﬁed, the next step involves determining who within the organiza-
tion (or partner organizations) are responsible for the various outcomes. It is common
during this early stage of a project that some project players are not yet identiﬁed by
Hardware
Software
Applications
Security
Infrastructure
Support
Workforce 
Mobilization
Program
Figure 3.2: Workforce Mobilization Project Architecture

62
PROJECT INITIATION
HW Solution
HW Definition
HW Requirements
SW Platform
SW Architicture
SW Requirements
Applications
System Security
Infrastructure Definition
David P.
System Designer
Marianne V.
Aaron M.
Bridget B.
Victor P.
Gina C.
Siva G.
Figure 3.3: Initial Responsibility Matrix Structure
name. When this is the case, use a role designation, such as “scrum master,” instead of a
person’s name.
Atthispoint,thebasicstructureoftheresponsibilitymatrixiscreated(seeFigure3.3).
As shown, each project element and nested outcomes are listed in the left-hand column
of the matrix. The project players identiﬁed (or roles) are in turn listed along the top row.
Select Responsibility Designations
In order for the matrix to be eﬀective, it must accurately reﬂect people’s expectations
and responsibilities. This is accomplished by using diﬀerent participation types that
designate the appropriate level of responsibility for project outcomes.
Many variations of participation designators exist; we particularly like the “A-R-C”
method because of its simplicity, something that is important during the early stages of
a project. Our philosophy remains that things get complicated in a hurry on a project;
the more you can do to simplify, the better.
The responsibility designators for the A-R-C method are deﬁned as follows:
■
“A” means that the person approves the project outcome.
■
“R” means that the person reviews the outcome.
■
“C” means that the person creates the outcome.
Many people may be involved in creating a project outcome, but usually there is only
one person who is responsible for approving the creation of the outcome, such as a team
leader or scrum master.
Assign Responsibilities
The ﬁnal step in developing a responsibility matrix involves assigning the appropriate
responsibility designators to the project players identiﬁed for each project outcome.
Figure 3.4 illustrates a completed responsibility matrix for the project deﬁned earlier.

THE RESPONSIBILITY MATRIX
63
HW Solution
HW Definition
HW Requirements
SW Platform
SW Architicture
SW Requirements
Applications
System Security
Infrastructure Definition
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
A
C
C
C
C
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
David P.
System Designer
Marianne V.
Aaron M.
Bridget B.
Victor P.
Gina C.
Siva G.
Figure 3.4: Completed Project Responsibility Matrix
It is common during this exercise to realize that some project players have been mis-
takenly forgotten. When this happens, add the person’s name or role on the project and
assign them the appropriate level of responsibility.
Using the Responsibility Matrix
As stated previously, the responsibility matrix is used during the early stages of a project
to document and communicate the types of involvement associated with the various
key players on the project. It should be completed before a commitment to resources,
budget, and timeline has been established. This means that it is best used to establish
high-level responsibility and ownership of the project components and key project out-
comes. Care should be taken to avoid going into the task-level detail at this juncture of
the project even though it is a natural tendency for many project managers.
Ultimately, the project manager is responsible for the various outcomes and outputs
associated with a project, as well as the successful achievement of the success factors.
However, along the way, responsibility for the satisfactory completion of work is a shared
responsibility. Use the responsibility matrix to explicitly demonstrate how responsibility
will be delegated and shared on a project.
Once the responsibility matrix is developed as described in the previous section, it
must be validated with the project sponsor, those listed as having responsibility, and
other key stakeholders. This step is important in order to reach broad buy-in across
the organization. Equally important, if multiple organizations are involved in a project,
validation is necessary between partner organizations to avoid confusion and misun-
derstanding about who is responsible for what.
It is important to treat the responsibility matrix as a living project artifact. Project
players and responsibilities will change during the course of a project; so, too, must
the responsibility matrix. Update the matrix whenever major responsibilities for project

64
PROJECT INITIATION
outcomes shift, and then publish the changes to the key stakeholders to communicate
the change.
It is good practice to incorporate the responsibility matrix into the materials used
to present project status. If no changes in responsibility have occurred since the last
status review, the matrix can be part of the informational backup material. If changes
have occurred, the responsibility matrix should be included in the main project status
review materials.
Beneﬁts
Using a responsibility matrix during project initiation serves to accelerate the pace
at which clarity about who is responsible for what becomes established. It brings
together two critical activities that are part of the project initiation process: deﬁnition
of the project architecture and formation of the core project team. Left unmanaged,
ambiguity at the front end of the project cycle can be the greatest contributor to lost
cycle time on a project. The responsibility matrix gives the project manager a tool for
managing and reducing this inherent ambiguity.
As stated earlier, a project manager has to delegate responsibility of tasks and
outcomes to other players associated with the project. Along with the delegation of
responsibility must come empowerment to make the decisions necessary to ensure
that the project outcomes are created successfully. By documenting delegated respon-
sibility through the responsibility matrix, the necessary delegation and empowerment
is established and communicated to primary stakeholders of the project and top
management within an organization.
By documenting project responsibility, it removes possible implied assumption on
the part of both the project players charged with sharing in the project responsibilities
and the stakeholders and replaces it with explicit responsibility direction, again remov-
ing a factor that causes ambiguity in the early stages of projects—implicit assumptions.
This paves the way to gain broad buy-in across an organization for responsibility and
decision authority and ﬁnal accountability for project outcomes. This is also the case
between organizations when multiple companies are involved in a collaborative project
agreement.
THE COMPLEXITY ASSESSMENT
Complexity is a characteristic of many projects. Contributing factors include the
following: Designs have become more complex as features and integrated capabilities
increase; the processtodevelopand manufacture solutionsrequiresmore partners, sup-
pliers, and others throughout the value chain; the ability to integrate multiple technolo-
gies with end-user wants requires not only accuracy regarding requirements delivery,
but also speed and agility to change; and the current global, highly distributed business
environment requires work to occur in multiple sites across multiple time zones. There-
fore, the ability to characterize and proﬁle the degree of complexity associated with a
project has become essential for both executive leaders and their project managers.

THE COMPLEXITY ASSESSMENT
65
If the complexity assessment tool is part of a PM Toolbox, the information gained
from its use helps to balance the portfolio of projects from a complexity perspective.
For a project manager, it aids in the determination of the skill set and experience level
required of the project team; guides the implementation of key project processes such
as change management, risk management, and contingency reserve determination;
and helps the project manager adapt his or her management style relative to the level
of complexity of the project.
Developing the Complexity Assessment
The structure of the project complexity assessment features several parts. The tool
includes various dimensions (ﬁrst part) as deﬁned by a business. Each dimension of
complexity is assessed on an anchor scale (second part), and when the complexity
scores of each dimension are connected, a line called the complexity proﬁle (third
part) is obtained. The complexity proﬁle is a graphical representation of a project’s
multifaceted complexity. An example of a project complexity assessment is illustrated
in Figure 3.5.
Low
Complexity
High
Complexity
Complexity
Dimension
Business Climate
Market Novelty
Financial Risk
Project Objectives
Requirements
Organization
Technology
Speed to Market
Geography
Team Members
Stable
Derivative
Low
Clear
Clear
Hierarchical
Low-Tech
Normal
Local
Experienced
Uncertain
Breakthrough
High
Vague
Vague
Matrix
Very Hi-Tech
Blitz
Global
Inexperienced
1
2
3
4
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Figure 3.5: Example Project Complexity Assessment

66
PROJECT INITIATION
Determining the Complexity Dimensions
Every industry has unique characteristics, every business within an industry is unique,
andeveryprojectwithinabusinessisunique.Thismeansthataﬁrmhastocustomizethe
complexity assessment tool for its use.10 Project managers often start this work by deter-
mining the complexity dimensions that are speciﬁc to the organization. For example,
technical complexity may be directly related to the technical aspect of the product, ser-
vice, or other capability under development, or from the knowledge and capability of
the existing resources of the ﬁrm. Structural complexity also has a number of subfac-
tors that involve the organizational elements of a ﬁrm. Business complexity involves the
business environment in which the ﬁrm operates.
Examples of variations in dimensions with respect to technical, structural, and
business complexity are shown in Table 3.2.
Deﬁne the Complexity Scale
Withthedimensionsofcomplexityidentiﬁedthatareappropriateforaparticularorgani-
zation and project, the next step in developing a complexity assessment tool is to deﬁne
how each dimension of complexity will be measured. We do this by choosing a scale for
each dimension.
Table 3.2: Example Technical, Structural, and Business Complexity
Dimensions
Technical Complexity
Low Complexity
High Complexity
Feature upgrade to an existing product
Development of a single module of a system
Use of existing and developed technologies
New product architecture and platform design
Development of a full system
Use of new and undeveloped technologies
Structural Complexity
Low Complexity
High Complexity
Team is co-located
Mature processes and practices
High performing team
Single-site development
Single-geography development
Single-cultural team
Single-company development
Team is a geographically distributed
Ad hoc processes and practices
Low level of team cohesion
Multisite development
Multigeography development
Multicultural team
Multicompany development
Business Complexity
Low Complexity
High Complexity
Selling into traditional and mature markets
Receptive customers and/or stakeholders
Flexible time-to-money requirements
Existing end-user usage models
Selling into new and emerging markets
Unreceptive customers and/or stakeholders
Aggressive time-to-money requirements
New end-user usage models

THE COMPLEXITY ASSESSMENT
67
Alternatives for the scales abound; we chose a scale in the preceding example where
the complexity for each dimension is measured on a simple four-level scale (1 being
the lowest complexity, 4 being the highest complexity). The important thing to estab-
lish is not so much the scale, but rather the anchor statements for each level of the
scale. Anchor statements help build consistency when assessing the complexity for each
dimension. Without anchor statements, each assessor may evaluate the levels diﬀer-
ently, leading to inconsistent complexity evaluations. Well-deﬁned anchor statements
help to ensure that all assessors approach the scale for each complexity dimension from
a consistent frame of reference.
Using the Complexity Assessment
As stated earlier, each organization should create a customized version of the assess-
ment tool that is speciﬁc to the complexity dimensions they are dealing with. Once
the complexity dimensions are identiﬁed, each dimension is then assessed based
on the scale established. For example, in Figure 3.5, speed to market is assessed as a
Level 2 complexity (fast and competitive). Once all complexity dimensions are assessed,
connect the obtained scores for each dimension to produce the complexity proﬁle,
which helps to visually depict the overall project complexity. The proﬁle in Figure 3.5,
for instance, indicates that the program is of medium complexity, with all dimensions
at Levels 2 and 3, except team members who are experienced (the least complex) and a
globally distributed team (the most complex).
Typically, the project complexity assessment tool is prepared very early in the
project cycle. However, this tool should be utilized dynamically and updated period-
ically in high-velocity environments where the project scope and business climate
may frequently change. It is advantageous if the senior management team of an
organization who manages the portfolio of projects uses this tool to inform them of the
overall level of complexity for each project.
By using this tool, the senior management team and project manager can quickly
get a feel for the level of complexity of each project. However, care should be taken to
prevent the inclusion of too many complexity dimensions. In this case, the simpler the
tool structure, the more eﬀective its use will be.
Beneﬁts
The project complexity assessment tool’s value is multifold. First, knowing the project
complexity helps balance the portfolio of projects with an appropriate mix of low-,
medium-, and high-complexity projects. Further, the complexity assessment aids in
the planning process, indicating how to adapt one’s management style to the level of
complexity of the project.
The project complexity assessment tool also helps the top management team
determine the level of skill and experience needed, and thus aids in the selection of
the project manager and the key leadership positions on the team to successfully
deﬁne and execute the project. Additionally, the tool may inﬂuence how much con-
tingency buﬀer to build into the project budget and schedule—the more complex

68
PROJECT INITIATION
the project, the higher the risk, and the bigger the buﬀer. Finally, the tool can help
identify the categories of risk and the level of robustness you will need in your risk
management plan.
THE PROJECT BUSINESS CASE
The project business case, sometimes called the project proposal, is a start-up docu-
ment used by the project manager and top management to assess the feasibility of
a project from multiple business perspectives. It demonstrates how the project will
contribute to business results and how the project aligns with the strategy of the
organization.11
The project business case establishes the project vision by describing a business
opportunity in terms of alignment to strategy, market or customer needs, technology
capability, and economic feasibility. It also provides a balanced view of business oppor-
tunity versus business risk. The project business case is used for the following purposes:
■
To gain agreement on project scope and business success criteria.
■
To obtain approval of funding and resource allocation for project planning and
implementation.
■
To evaluate a project against others in the portfolio of projects.
■
To obtain approval to proceed from the initiation stage to the planning stage of the
project cycle.
The project business case is a must-have tool for every project manager’s PM
Toolbox.
Developing the Project Business Case
The business case for a project must be correctly based on the knowledge available at
the time it is created, and also be unbiased and clear. This requires quality information
about the following:
■
The business environment
■
Customer requirements
■
The business strategy
■
Business success criteria
The business environment and customer requirements information are necessary
to build the foundation of the business case. Understanding the needs of the customer
as well as the state of the environment within which the business operates is needed
to position and diﬀerentiate the project outcome being proposed. The business strat-
egy speciﬁes the strategic goals that the organization is striving to achieve and that
the project is charged with enabling. The business success criteria consist of high-level
directives from senior management to gauge initial feasibility of a project to meet the
business needs. Table 3.3 can be used as a guide for developing a project business case.
It suggests a minimum set of information to include in the business case.

THE PROJECT BUSINESS CASE
69
Table 3.3: Minimum Elements of a Project Business Case
Business Case Element Description
Project purpose
A succinct statement of the anticipated business benefits driving the
need for the investment in the project
Value proposition
A succinct statement characterizing the value to be delivered
(quantified when possible)
Business success factors
The set of quantifiable measures that describe business success for
the project
Detailed cost analysis
The investment cost of the project
Critical assumptions
The events and circumstances that are expected to occur for
successful realization of the project objectives
Project timeline
Critical project milestones and timing expectations on the part of key
stakeholders
Risk analysis
A thorough analysis of the risks that may prevent realization of the
business benefits of the project
Describe the Business Opportunity
There are two steps to this action: ﬁrst, a description of the beneﬁts that the project
will fulﬁll is provided, with a focus on the business beneﬁts; second, a description of
value that the project brings to the organization from a business perspective should be
described.
The business beneﬁt is a statement that summarizes what the company should
expect to gain from its investment in the project. It provides answers to the following
questions: What business beneﬁts will be gained from investment in this project? What
organizational strategies does this project help to achieve? What opportunity in the
market is this project going to capitalize on?12
The purpose of projects is to serve as basic building blocks for the execution of an
organization’s strategy. This should be the basis of the value proposition statement for
all projects. The premise is that if projects are aligned with the ﬁrm’s strategy, they will
better support the goals of that strategy. Since one tangible way to express the strategy
is to deﬁne its speciﬁc, measurable, attainable, relevant, and time-based goals, one can
use the stated goals to assess how well an individual project supports them. A descrip-
tion of how the project aligns to and supports achievement of one or more strategic
goals of the organization should be included in the value proposition statement of the
project business case.
Additionally,adescriptionofhowtheprojectoutcomefulﬁllsdocumentedcustomer
and market needs is included. Finally, a description of any new technologies that will be
included in the project outcome being developed is provided in this step.
Deﬁne the Business Success Criteria
Identiﬁcation of the business success criteria for a project should be accomplished dur-
ing project initiation and documented in the project business case. The business success
criteria ensure that the product, service, or infrastructure capability under development

70
PROJECT INITIATION
supports key business goals such as proﬁtability, time to beneﬁt, productivity gains, and
technology advancement.13
Perform the Cost-Beneﬁt Analysis
The heart of the project business case is the feasibility assessment that results from the
cost versus beneﬁt analysis of the project. The cost-beneﬁt analysis should identify both
tangible and intangible beneﬁts, with the beneﬁts expressed in quantiﬁable terms such
as dollars gained or saved, hours saved, and gross margin increase. The cost-beneﬁt
analysis should answer the following questions:
■
How much will this project cost to implement?
■
How much will this project contribute to the company bottom line?
■
Is the project outcome, in terms of achievement of speciﬁc business objectives,
worth investing in?
List Critical Assumptions
Much of the work performed during project initiation is focused on trying to predict
what will happen in the future. In order to do this, a series of assumptions about the
future have to be made, where assumptions are events and circumstances that are
expected to occur for successful realization of the project objectives.
Each project player and each project stakeholder has a set of assumptions in
his or her mind that they use to guide their vision and perspective of the future
relative to the project being initiated. By explicitly stating the primary assumptions on
which the project business case is built, the project manager establishes a common
vision of how it is assumed that the future will unfold. Discussing and debating this
critical set of assumptions is as important as analyzing the cost-beneﬁt portion of the
business case.
Analyze Project Risk
In this ﬁnal step, all potential risk events that may aﬀect the business success of the
project are identiﬁed. At this stage of the project, it is a high-level look at the known
risks. The risk events are then analyzed, and a plan to minimize the impact and proba-
bility of occurrence for the high-level risks is developed. The risk analysis should answer
the following questions:
■
What is the probability of success for this project?
■
What will be done to maximize the probability of success?
■
How will the known risks be avoided or mitigated?
■
Does the level of risk prevent continued investment in the project?
Using the Project Business Case
Presentation of the business case to top management stakeholders is normally used to
drive the ﬁnal investment and funding decision near the end of the initation stage of the
project cycle and provides primary content for the project charter.

THE PROJECT CHARTER
71
Although the project business case is ﬁrst developed during project initiation,
it should be viewed and used as a living document throughout the project cycle and as
a primary guide for project tracking and governance. The project business case, along
with the market or customer requirements document, forms the foundation on which
the project plan is developed. The business case is updated as needed and reviewed as
part of the implementation plan approval.
Duringprojectexecution,thebusinesscaseneedstoonceagainbereviewedpriorto
releasing funds for large expenditures such as factory tooling. Finally, the business case
information is used during the project retrospective to evaluate whether the project was
successful in achieving the business goals intended.
Beneﬁts
The beneﬁts of creating a good business case for a project are many. The primary ben-
eﬁts are fourfold. First, the business case answers the critical question, “How will this
project help our company meet its business and strategic goals?” In this sense, it helps
top managers of a ﬁrm make sound decisions when considering investment options.
Second, the project business case establishes alignment between strategic goals
and project execution outcomes based on multiple business perspectives.
Third, consistent use of the business case for all projects helps to make the portfolio
management process more eﬀective by enabling the evaluation of projects within the
portfolio on a consistent set of criteria.
Finally, it establishes the vision, or future state, to eﬀectively plan, execute, and
deliver the output of the project.
THE PROJECT CHARTER
With every project, a project manager needs an eﬀective way to deﬁne what work has to
be accomplished and communicate how the project is going to achieve its objectives.14
The project charter is a tool that formally authorizes a project and serves as the contract
between the project manager and the organization (see Table 3.4).15
Typically ratiﬁed by a manager external to the project, it equips the project man-
ager with the authority to deploy organizational resources on the project. This is espe-
cially important in environments where project managers have no direct authority over
project team members and other resources but bear the responsibility for delivery of the
project outcome. In such a situation, for the charter to be eﬀective, the issuing manager
has to be on a level that has control over the resources.
Developing a Project Charter
When comparing the type of information described in the charter and scope statement,
you will note a lot of similarities. Both contain the same elements—project purpose,
goals, and milestones, for example. Where these elements diﬀer is their level of detail.
More precisely, because it is an authorization tool, not a planning tool, the project

72
PROJECT INITIATION
Table 3.4: Example Project Charter
Project Name:
ISU Alumni Website
Project Manager:
Jen Cosgrove
Project Sponsor:
Dan Seales
Project Mission
This project will provide the local chapter of the ISU Alumni Association a web site that will be
used as a resource to enable continued social networking, information exchange, and information
repository for alumni association members.
Project Goals
The university is looking for new ways to help alumni stay connected to the university post-
graduation. The web site to be developed will (1) create the means to establish a strong alumni
social network; (2) provide a portal for the university to communicate activities, information, and
needs; and (3) establish a repository of academic research information for the alumni to access and
contribute to. The project will be completed prior to the Fall 2017 academic semester, and cost
no more than $60,000 to implement.
Project Scope
The scope of the project will include the design, development, test, and go-live activities
necessary to create an operational web site. The web site will include four major capabilities:
(1) HOME page for alumni information and navigation, (2) SOCIAL NETWORKING page,
(3) ACADEMIC RESEARCH repository, and (4) ALUMNI ACTIVITIES page.
Dependencies, Risks, and Assumptions
Dependencies
Risks
Assumptions
■Budget approval
■Availability of IT
resources
■First use of open
source software
■Schedule is aggressive
■Additional security software is not
needed
■Open source software can be leveraged
Major Milestones:
Usage study completion
Web site design completion
Prototype development completion
Development completion
Operational test completion
Go-live launch completion
30-day retrospective completion
Sponsor and Project Team
Project Sponsor:
Project Manager:
User Exp. Designer:
Web Site Developer:
Web Site Developer:
Quality Assurance:
Dan Seales
Jen Cosgrove
Lynda Carmody
Ajit Chattergee
Fariba Rezzanie
Will Torday
Budget and Completion Date
Budget:
Completion Date:
$60,000
August 1, 2017
Approvals
Project Sponsor: _______________________________________________
Project Manager: _______________________________________________
Finance Manager: _______________________________________________

THE PROJECT CHARTER
73
charter tends to include fewer details, giving a mandate to the project team to proceed
with a detailed planning cycle, part of which includes developing a detailed scope
statement. Naturally, then, the scope statement has more details about these elements
than the charter.
Collect Information Inputs
Issuing a project charter is a major decision because it commits resources to support
organizationalgoals.Forthatreason,organizationstendtoinvestingeneratinginforma-
tion that will help make educated charter decisions. Crucial pieces of such information
include the following:
■
Project goals
■
Project requirements
■
Project business case
■
Project selection information
Projects are vehicles for the delivery of organizational needs; therefore, the project
goals cannot be overstated. Understanding which of the goals a project supports is
therefore of crucial importance. As discussed earlier in this chapter, the information con-
tained in the goals grid is suﬃcient to adequately provide content for the project charter.
Additionally, for a project to be successful, the project requirements need to be docu-
mented, understood, and responded to. Also, to properly assess the viability of a project,
you need to develop a feasibility study that should be completed during the project
selection process.
Deﬁne the Project Mission
Precision and clarity are two key words in the charter’s deﬁnition of what the project
should accomplish.16 Whether the charter is for a small process improvement or a
multibillion-dollar semiconductor fab, a few words can usually do the trick. The state-
ment may identify major tasks such as design, prototyping, and programming, or it can
be as simple and directive as “develop a new product platform.”
To express the accomplishment expected of the project, we use the term projectmis-
sion. Project mission has an aura of signiﬁcance, which may be why it is often used.
Alternative terms, such as project purpose or assignment, have less gravitas, but may
nonetheless be appropriate. The selection of the term is often dictated by organizational
jargon.
Contained within the project mission is an understanding of what drives the imple-
mentation of the project. Is its purpose to increase customer satisfaction? Or is it to enter
anewmarket,increasemarketshare,developnewcompetencies,andsoon?Onastrate-
gic level, there may be several diﬀerent reasonsfor the existence of the project. The point
is that we should know it and spell it out.
Once we are out of the strategic territory and in the tactical world of small projects,
many project teams struggle with what exactly is their project’s purpose. They assume
it is simply to create the project output. However, it is not. Like any other project, your
small project exists to accomplish some tactical gains supporting your organization’s

74
PROJECT INITIATION
strategic business goals. For example, when you are buying and installing a piece of new
factory equipment, the business purpose is not to buy and install the new equipment.
Rather, the purpose may be to increase the eﬃciency of your operation and lower your
manufacturing costs. Similarly, a project developing a standardized PM process is prob-
ably aiming at improving consistency and repeatability of performance. Certainly, its
business purpose is not to have the process itself.
Deﬁne the Project Goals
By their nature, “project mission” and “business purpose” are broadly deﬁned. To pro-
vide more speciﬁc guidelines to the project team, the charter needs to identify spe-
ciﬁc project goals (see the example titled “Stretch Goals or Not?”). At a minimum, these
usually include schedule, cost, and quality targets. Your schedule target is your desired
project completion date. Remember to focus not only on what you want to achieve, but
also on what you want to preserve, avoid, and eliminate, as described in the goals grid.
You may have important project goals associated with each perspective.
Stretch Goals or Not?
How attainable should the project goals in the charter be? Is it okay to write
charters using a stretch goal? Empirical evidence suggests that those who
set stretch goals—that is, outline goals that are typically quite difﬁcult to
attain—outperform those with routine goals, which are typically easy to
attain. If you are purely driven by performance, the choice is clear: go for
stretch goals.
At Google, many project managers deliberately use stretch goals in their
project charters because corporate culture drives this behavior. What happens
when they do not attain their stretch goals? According to one project manager,
“No project sponsors use this practice to call people out. The idea is to always
strive for more and do your best. If you do so, you won’t be penalized if a stretch
goal is missed.”
Is this the case in all companies? According to a project manager for a
business-to-business software company, “If you try stretch goals and miss, it is
likely to be held against you in your next performance evaluation. That’s why
everybody goes for routine goals in our company.” The point, then, is that the
use of project stretch goals is dependent on company culture and likely related
to the level of desire for industry leadership.
State the Scope
The project charter should include a summary-level scope statement in order to
establish an agreement between the project team and the project sponsor by clarifying,
identifying, and relating the work of the project to the sponsor’s business goals.
A well-written scope statement is crucial to guide a project manager’s decisions dur-
ing the course of the project cycle. The more information you can document in the

THE PROJECT CHARTER
75
initiation stage of a project, the more adaptable you will be when having to deal with
critical decisions that appear during the project.
List Dependencies, Risks, and Assumptions
Begin this section of the project charter by listing the major dependencies that will need
to be in place for the project to proceed to planning and implementation activities.
Examples may be the approval of the project budget by the selection committee or the
availability of resources. It is of high importance that these types of dependencies be
documented, as normal organizational behavior is to approve a project charter with the
expectation that work will begin immediately.
If there are major dependencies that have to occur before project activities begin,
it is best to include them in the charter to increase understanding and probability of a
successful project start.
Likewise, it is advisable to list any known high-impact or high-probability risks that
may aﬀect the success of the project. At this stage in a project, there is a lot of excitement
aboutthepossibilitiesandopportunitiesassociatedwiththeproject.Buttakesometime
to think negatively about the project in order to identify what may go wrong. This will be
theprojectmanager’sﬁrstopportunitytoaskforprojectsponsorassistancetoovercome
or eliminate high-level risk events.
Finally, list the critical assumptions associated with the project. During project initia-
tion, all activities and planned outcomes are predicated on a set of assumptions of how
the future will play out. Since the future rarely goes as predicted, some of the assump-
tions made at this early stage will be incorrect. This means that all activities and out-
comes associated with the incorrect assumptions may need to be adjusted in the future.
By listing the major assumptions in the charter, they become visible and can be tracked
and validated as the project progresses.
Specify Major Project Milestones
Major milestones include completion of certain tasks or deliverables by a speciﬁed date
and are typically requested by those issuing the charter. The key word here is major; you
shouldlimitthenumberofmajormilestonestothosethatareabsolutelyvital.Specifying
three to ﬁve is a dominant practice. In other words, given the charter’s purpose and the
related level of detail, developing a long list of milestones is unnecessary, especially at
this early stage of project initiation.
Identify Project Sponsor and Team
One of the purposes of issuing a charter is to formally announce the names of the pri-
mary stakeholders associated with the project, including the team members. However, it
is not important that all team members be immediately identiﬁed. The expectation here
is that functional managers will nominate those members after the charter is issued.
In some organizations, the use of project sponsors is a regular practice for major
projects. Sponsors provide guidance for the project team, making sure that the
functional managers fulﬁll their resource commitments to projects and serve as a
communication link with customers.17 Typically, the sponsor is a senior manager who
has authority over budget and resources. In the case of less strategy-driven projects,

76
PROJECT INITIATION
the role of a sponsor may go to a middle-level manager. Whatever the level of the
project sponsor, issuing the charter is a convenient way to visibly announce the name
of the sponsor.
Include Project Budget and Completion Date
Explicitly document the project budget allocated, as well as the expected completion
date for the project. Cost and schedule are normally the two primary project con-
straints, and as such, need to be elevated to the signature and approval level of the
project charter.
Project Approvals
As an authorization document to oﬃcially start expending organizational resources,
the project charter must include the names, titles, and signatures of the individuals
who will sign oﬀon the project. At a minimum, signatures should be required for the
project sponsor, the project manager, and a manager from the ﬁnance or accounting
department of the organization.
Refer to the Supporting Detail
What is immediately evident in a project charter is the decision about bringing a project
to life, stated in a laconic manner. What is not evident is the process that led to the
decision. The decision was a result of the process of project selection that was based
on information developed in strategic and tactical plans, the high-level project require-
ments, the project proposal, and project selection methods. To make this visible and
give credibility to the charter, refer to these documents in the charter.
Using a Project Charter
The project charter has been used in large projects since the beginning of formal project
management. Because large projects engage substantial organizational resources orig-
inating in diﬀerent functional groups, this approach is quite logical. For the same
reason—resources that derive from various functional groups—the charter is popular
with small, cross-functional projects as well. However, for other small projects that
are not cross-functional, issuing a project charter is an infrequent practice—unless
functional department members are not collocated, a growing phenomenon in our
virtual world. For an example of the use of the project charter in diﬀerent corporate
situations, see “The Need for the Charter” on page 77.
Even though a large majority of organizations now make use of the project char-
ter, not all companies create the charter at the same point in the project cycle.18 Some
charters are created as part of the project selection process, immediately after the feasi-
bility study is complete. When used at this point in the project cycle, the project charter
contains the results of the feasibility study as well as the underlying assumptions and
constraints.
Most organizations create the charter after the project has been selected and a
project manager has been assigned. In this case, the project charter contains some or
all of the information described previously.

THE PROJECT CHARTER
77
Still other organizations create the project charter after detailed planning is com-
plete and the project plan is approved. When used at this point in the project cycle, the
charter contains a summarized description of the detailed project plan.
Even though the project charter is an agreement between the project manager and
executive sponsor, all functional groups or departments in the organization that will be
supporting the project need to be informed correctly and promptly about the start of
the project.19 For that reason, they need to put them on the distribution of the charter.
Variations
The practice of project chartering exhibits many variations and nuances, including its
name, content, pattern of use, and formality. For instance, some organizations call it
the “project authorization notice,” others the “project birth certiﬁcate.” In all cases, the
charter is meant to bring a project into existence.
As for the content, some organizations use charters that include speciﬁcs about
budget and schedule for major milestones, as shown in the project charter example
in Table 3.4. Others, especially for smaller projects, ﬁnd it suﬃcient to announce the
purpose of the project, the start of the project, the team composition, and the executive
sponsor.
Beneﬁts
Projects often require organizational arrangements that span functional boundaries. In
such cross-functional designs, functional managers “own” resources, and the project
charter is a practical way of communicating the need for the project and for making
a request for resources. This practically deﬁnes speciﬁc resources, the amount and time
of their use in the project, and who is responsible for providing them. Aside from this act
of organizational legitimacy, the charter also helps a project get visibility by announcing
its start and purpose, leaving the ball in the project manager’s court.
The primary beneﬁt of the project charter, however, is that it serves as the agree-
ment or contract between the project manager and the executive sponsor to work as a
team to execute the project to the intent of the project business case and to utilize the
organization’s resources to maximum business beneﬁt.
The Need for the Charter
Do you need a charter for all projects? Consider that it normally takes a lead-
ing truck manufacturer located in the United States months of work to issue a
charter for a new truck development project. With millions of dollars involved,
the company develops multiple scenarios of scope, cost, and timeline, and
evaluates them carefully before launching the effort. The launch begins with
(continued)

78
PROJECT INITIATION
the issuance of a detailed charter, where the sponsor typically is a corporate
vice president.
In contrast, a major information technology upgrade project within the
same company typically starts with a sentence-long charter, e-mailed to the
functional managers providing resources. No sponsor is identiﬁed, and not
much of the charter is completed prior to project planning. The rule for these
projects is that any major project consuming resources (over $10k) must issue
a charter. Charters are not used for projects below $10k, usually performed
within a functional group. The reason? It is considered an unnecessary step.
This is a good example to review when deciding whether you need a char-
ter for all projects. The need for the charter should be matched with the size,
complexity, and degree of cross-functional involvement on the project.
References
1.
TSO. Managing Successful Projects with PRINCE2 (London, England: TSO, 2012).
2.
Cleland, David I., and Lewis R. Ireland. Project Management: Strategic Design and
Implementation (New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2002).
3.
Koen, P. A., G. M. Ajamian, et al. “Fuzzy Front End: Eﬀective Methods, Tools, and Tech-
niques.” In P. Belliveau, A. Griﬃn, and S. Somermeyer, eds., The PDMA ToolBook for
New Product Development (New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, 2002): 5–35.
4.
Smith, Preston G., and Donald G. Rinertsen. Developing Products in Half the Time:
New Rules, New Tools (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 1998).
5.
Cooper, Robert G. Winning at New Products: Accelerating the Process from Idea to
Launch, 3rd ed. (Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books, 2001).
6.
Andler, N. Tools for Project Management, Workshops, and Consulting (Erlangen,
Germany: Publicis Publishing, 2011).
7.
Nichols, F. “The Goals Grid: A Tool for Setting and Clarifying Goals and Objectives;”
2012. http://www.nickols.us/goals_grid.htm
8.
New Oxford American Dictionary, 3rd ed. (New York, NY: Oxford University Press
Publishing, 2010).
9.
Martinelli, Russ, James Waddell, and Tim Rahschulte. Program Management for
Improved Business Results, 2nd ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014).
10.
Edmonds B. “What Is Complexity?” In F. Heylighen & D. Aerts, eds., The Evolution of
Complexity (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer, 2006).
11.
Cohen, Dennis J., and Robert J. Graham. TheProjectManager’sMBA:HowtoTranslate
Project Decisions into Business Success (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2001).
12.
Ibid.
13.
Wysocki, Robert K. Eﬀective Project Management: Traditional, Agile, Extreme
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013).

REFERENCES
79
14.
Kerzner, Harold K. Project Management: Best Practice: Achieving Global Excellence,
2nd ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2010).
15.
Project Management Institute. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowl-
edge, 5th ed. (Drexell Hill, PA: Project Management Institute, 2013).
16.
Katzenbach, J. R., and D. K. Smith. The Wisdom of Teams (reprint) (New York, NY:
HarperCollins, 2006).
17.
Kerzner, Harold K. ProjectManagement:ASystemsApproachtoPlanning,Scheduling,
and Controlling (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2009).
18.
Kerzner, 2010.
19.
Pyzdek, Thomas. The Six Sigma Project Planner: A Step-by-Step Guide to Leading a Six
Sigma Project through DMAIC (New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2003).


P A R T
III
Project
Planning Tools


4
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
Contributed by
Debra S. Lavell
James M. Waddell
O
ne of the most important aspects of good project planning and execution is a
comprehensive, clear, and valid set of requirements. When it comes to require-
ments, it is well documented that many of the contributing factors to failed
projects are such things as lack of stakeholder input or involvement, inadequate under-
standing of the voice of the customer, and improper documentation and validation of
the requirements for the intended solution.
The Project Management Institute (PMI) deﬁnes requirements management as:
The discipline of planning, monitoring, analyzing, communicating and controlling
requirements. It is a continuous process throughout a project. It involves communica-
tion among project team members and stakeholders and adjustments to requirements
changes throughout the course of the project.1
A broader term, requirements engineering, focuses on using a systematic and repeat-
able process to ensure that solution requirements are discovered, documented, and
maintained throughout the project cycle. For this chapter, we will focus on four major
activities within requirements engineering within the context of project planning and
the tools used to support those activities. They are:
1.
Requirements elicitation: Gathering requirements from stakeholders and ensuring
the voice of the customer is captured.
2.
Requirements analysis: Assessing, negotiating, and ensuring requirements are cor-
rect.
3.
Requirements speciﬁcation: Documenting requirements.
4.
Requirements veriﬁcation: Assessing requirements for quality.
The purpose of requirements engineering is to ensure that projects fully meet the
requirements intended by the external or internal customers who are the users of the
solution. Most of us have experienced a situation where a key customer’s needs and
wants were improperly addressed, leading to a failure or, at the very least, project
outcomes adversely impacted.
83

84
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
To begin, we must ﬁrst ask what is a requirement? A requirement states what a
solution must do (functional requirement) and how well it must do what it does (quality
or nonfunctional requirement). In its most simplistic form, a requirement is anything
that drives design choices. Done well, requirements establish a clear, common, and
coherent understanding of what a solution must accomplish in order to meet customer
expectations. The bottom line is that requirements are the foundation on which projects
are built.
In an in-depth study conducted in 2014 by PMI, in which they elicited responses
from 2,066 project managers, program managers, and business analysts, it was deter-
mined that 47 percent of unsuccessful projects failed to meet their original goals and
business objectives due to poor requirements management.2 These failures were iden-
tiﬁed as being caused by inadequate resources, insuﬃcient skills development, informal
processes and practices, and lack of understanding and support for the importance of
requirements management by top management. By contrast, enterprises performing
successful projects recognize the importance of the requirements engineering disci-
pline and are much more likely to adopt formal processes for requirements gathering,
writing, and management for their projects.
The major ﬁnding was that the more time spent on requirements deﬁnition and
understanding up front, the more predictable project costs become, the higher the
probability for achieving successful solutions from the customer’s and user’s perspec-
tives, and the greater the chance for achieving the ﬁnancial and business objectives for
the project. Requirements are the foundation on which systems are built.3
Developing and managing requirements is hard work! There are no simple shortcuts
or magic solutions.4 This chapter is intended to assist the reader in understanding the
process of project requirements engineering and to identify speciﬁc tools that are used
in support of these processes. There are many requirements tools available through var-
ious sources. In this chapter, we have identiﬁed the tools and techniques that provide
the most utility to the project manager.
The tools presented are designed to work holistically together, as a set of require-
ments tools that will guide you through planning the very ﬁrst interaction with a
stakeholder; assist you with the art of writing clear, concise, coherent, and measurable
requirements; and provide you with a template to eﬀectively verify that you have the
requirements developed to the highest quality. These tools should be a part of every
project manager’s PM Toolbox.
THE ELICITATION PLAN
When in the initial stages of a project, there are several ways to approach collecting
requirements from stakeholders. Many teams, unfortunately, spend an insuﬃcient
amount of time collecting requirements and jump directly into writing requirements.
This behavior leads to key requirements being missed, incomplete information needed
to make decisions, and multiple scope changes later in the project cycle.
The most important tool for gathering project requirements is an elicitation plan.
This plan ensures that the best methods are used to gather requirements from the
stakeholders and allows the team to document the methods they will use to ensure

THE ELICITATION PLAN
85
that they cover all possible sources.5 The plan need not be long and complicated, but
the detail level must be consistent with the risk and complexity of the project. This can
be determined by the type of project, number of stakeholder groups, experience of the
team, and so forth.
Why spend time to document a plan to gather requirements? Many teams make
the mistake of diving into requirements discussions with a small set of stakeholders
who they think have the information they need, and with whom they have an estab-
lished relationship. Jumping in without a comprehensive and holistic view of who has a
material interest in the project can lead to missing stakeholders and therefore missing
requirements. The opposite is also true. It is impossible to interview everyone, so iden-
tifying key contributors and then narrowing down the list to the “right” stakeholders
who can provide a well-rounded understanding of the requirements can save the team
precious time. Interviews, focus groups, and surveys are better conducted if the right
stakeholders are thoughtfully identiﬁed and approached.
Figure 4.1 provides a template for a simpliﬁed elicitation plan. If appropriate, based
on the size of the project, or if the team has experience with a similar project, feel
PROJECT ELICITATION PLAN
Project Name: ______________
Rev #: _______
Date: ___________
Highlands
1.0
22 April 2016
Primary Authors: ___________________________________________
Key Contributors: ___________________________________________
REQUIREMENTS AUTHORS & KEY CONTRIBUTORS
Simon B., Phillip C., Christine H.
Carry M., Nesli S., Carl W.
Problem Statement:
INTRODUCTION
ELICITATION STRATEGY & PROCESS
Strategy and Process: Group interviews with three key customers, followed by
series of prototype reviews, and a direct observation of end users at five sites 
LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS
Stakeholder’s Name
Current Role
Elicitation
Technique
Desired Outcome
Jim Johnson
Medical
Provider
Group
Interview
Feedback on 
key features
SCHEDULE & RESOURCES
Item
Estimated
Schedule
Resources
Range of Uncertainty
Group 
Interviews
5 weeks
Jim, Sury, Pat
+2 weeks
ASSUMPTIONS & RISKS
Risk
Magnitude of Risk
Likelihood
Mitigation Plan
Stakeholder
Schedules
High
High
Add 2 week
buffer
Figure 4.1: Simple Elicitation Plan Template

86
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
free to add or delete topics that are pertinent to your project. Again, the elicitation
plan can be as simple or as broad as you like based on the needs of the team and the
value from a deeper discussion. Be mindful that you are focused only on gathering
project requirements. This is not an overall project plan; this is a speciﬁc plan to elicit
requirements.
Developing an Elicitation Plan
The elicitation plan can be created using simple word processing or spreadsheet
software. Begin by documenting the project name, version number, and date; list the
primary requirements authors(s) and the key contributors to the elicitation plan. Next,
spend adequate time documenting the following ﬁve key items.
What Is the Problem to Be Solved?
Document a clear understanding of the problem or opportunity the project will be
addressing. This is generally high level because an elicitation plan is normally developed
early in the project cycle, when the scope and assumptions are still ambiguous. This is
usually translated into the project’s scope and charter when combined with information
about the user environment and business context.
What Are the Strategies for Gathering Requirements?
Identify the high-level objectives of the eﬀort and the key strategies the team will use
to gather requirements. Most requirements eﬀorts center on interviews. Yes, interviews
are very helpful for gathering requirements, but there are so many more eﬀective tech-
niques to elicit requirements from stakeholders than just interviews alone (see “Tech-
niques to Elicit Requirements”).
Techniques to Elicit Requirements
Interviews. Usually one-on-one or in small groups (three to four people) where
key stakeholders are invited to attend a requirements elicitation meeting
and asked questions to uncover needs, wants, and desires. The key ques-
tions should be determined prior to meeting with them based on the type of
requirements you are looking for. There are a lot of ways to ask questions;
generally, you want to ask open-ended questions to get them started and
then follow up with probing questions to uncover requirements.
Facilitated discussions. Larger groups (ﬁve to ten people) come together with
a facilitator trained on how to elicit requirements. The goal is to gather
requirements faster than if you spent time interviewing each stakeholder
independently.
Surveys or questionnaires. Used best when you want to gather requirements
from a lot of stakeholders who are geographically dispersed. It is best if an

THE ELICITATION PLAN
87
expert in surveys or questionnaires develops the questions so you get the
information needed.
Prototyping. Build an initial version of the solution; demonstrate it in the spirit
of learning more about what features the users like and don’t like. Use the
feedback to make changes to the prototype, and show it to the users again.
This repetitive process allows real-time feedback and a better understand-
ing of the requirements.
Use cases. Think of use cases as stories that are easier for users to describe
and understand. These are best used for the functionality (what the sys-
tem must do) rather than how it will behave. Remember, use cases are not
requirements; however, they are very helpful to get to detailed functional
requirements.
Change requests. Ask to see the log showing what customers and end users
are asking to be ﬁxed on current solutions. System enhancements and bug
reports are all good sources for possible requirements.
Observation. Watching users perform their jobs can be very helpful in under-
standing the current process from start to ﬁnish. Asking questions to better
understand where they get frustrated or wish the solution did something
different are excellent areas to ﬁnd requirements.
Brainstorming session. Use a brainstorming session to help discover require-
ments for solutions that have not been developed before. Invite domain
and subject matter experts into a session and let them brainstorm what
they think the solution might look like. Allow enough time for the “good
stuff” to come out, then ask them to prioritize those ideas they think are
the best to go forward with. Use the highest-priority ideas as a basis for the
initial set of the requirements.
Another very eﬀective technique for gathering project requirements is the voice
of the customer (VOC) technique. This term describes the process of capturing critical
details regarding the desires, needs, and requirements of a given prospect, customer,
or target group.6
There is no one homogenous VOC. Customer voices are diverse and reﬂect a vari-
ety of diﬀerent needs. There are multiple customer voices within a single organization.
For example, a product being considered for purchase within an organization may have
the voice of the procurement department, the voice of the product end users, and the
voice of the support and maintenance of the product. All of these diverse voices must be
listened to, considered, and balanced to form the appropriate requirements for a truly
successful solution.
VOCshouldbecapturedfrombothexternalandinternalsources.Externalcustomers
are those that purchase the output of a design and development eﬀort such as new
products and services. Internal customers are normally the receivers of newly developed
systems, services, and other capabilities designed and developed by project teams for
individuals within the same organization or company. Generally, internal and external
customers exhibit the same traits. It therefore becomes imperative that the members
of the team treat their search for identifying, understanding, and characterizing project
requirements the same for both audiences.

88
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
Things to Avoid When Uncovering the
Voice of the Customer
Engineering knows best. Don’t let the technical implementation drive the
requirements. What an engineer may ﬁnd interesting may not be what the
customers and end users ﬁnd interesting.
Sales can be a proxy for the customers. What the sales team hears from
customers can help guide the requirements elicitation process and discussion.
Spend time validating what the sales force is hearing against what is known
about the broader market and competition.
CEO said so. It can be very difﬁcult to discount a pet feature, especially if
it comes from the person at the top. Key executives may try to inﬂuence the
requirements based on their own opinions. Gather facts to support why their
requirements are good ones or not.
Who Are the Stakeholders We Need to Talk To?
Taking time to brainstorm a list of stakeholders the team wants to engage with is one
of the most important aspects of planning the elicitation eﬀort. A simple table with
a column for the stakeholder’s name, their role, possible techniques used during the
elicitation eﬀort, and what will be the output or result is eﬀective for planning your
requirements elicitation stakeholders (see Table 4.1).
Identify the Schedule and Resources
It is important to estimate the schedule and resources needed for the elicitation eﬀort.
Just like any other project task, requirements elicitation requires resources, time, and
budget to complete. Include a measure of uncertainty for each key stakeholder.
Document the Assumptions and Risks
Take time to document all the assumptions made when determining the plan to
gather requirements. Since assumptions by nature tend to be “big deal” items that
many times are outside the inﬂuence or control of the project team, they can easily be
converted into a risk mitigation table. Additionally, they should have a well-thought-out
mitigation and management strategy. Focus on risks such as compressed schedule,
resource constraints, and funding needed to travel to conduct focus groups or other
Table 4.1: Example List of Stakeholders
Stakeholder’s Name
Current Role
Technique to Elicit
Requirements
Desired Outcome
Jim Johnson
Business Analyst
Group Interview
Feedback on key features
Suzy Smith
Lead Engineer
Prototype
Validate usage is correct
Pat Pink
Marketing Lead
Observation
Gain “insider” viewpoint

THE ELICITATION PLAN
89
costs associated with prototypes or participant observation (see “Tips for Mitigating
Requirements Gathering Risks”).
Tips for Mitigating Requirements
Gathering Risks
Brainstorm as many assumptions as you can think of (e.g., will all the key stake-
holders be available and willing to discuss the project?).
Share the list with key stakeholders to uncover new assumptions and vali-
date any hidden costs associated with the brainstormed list.
When you believe you have a solid list, convert each assumption into a risk
and document it as such in the elicitation plan.
Focus ﬁrst on the highest risks associated with schedule, resources, and
quality of the elicitation process.
Identify the possible impacts should the risk become a reality.
Document the likelihood (high, medium, low) of the risk happening.
If the risk becomes a reality, what is the magnitude of the impact to the
project (high, medium, low).
What is the mitigation and management strategy should you need to
employ it?
Using the Elicitation Plan
Taking time early in the project to fully understand and document an elicitation plan will
save precious time. Investing time to discuss the process and strategy to elicit require-
ments, separate from the project plan, will give a next layer of detail to the overall time
needed for the project. If youwant tosave time, thisisone of the best waystoensure that
the time allocated for gathering requirements is used eﬀectively. Often, teams spend too
much time talking to the wrong people, gathering duplicate requirements from stake-
holders from the same organization or group, or realizing late in the project they must
allocate more time to talk to “new” stakeholders they forgot about because they began
without a plan.
It is never too early to begin developing an elicitation plan. As soon as a project is
assigned to a project manager, he or she should begin the process. Start by pulling two
or three key contributors into a 90-minute to two-hour requirements elicitation kickoﬀ
meeting to discuss each of the sections of the elicitation plan. Write down what you hear.
You will use this time to ensure that you and the team really understand what it will take
to gather the project requirements.
Don’t be constrained by the content areas shown in Figure 4.1 and described ear-
lier. Customize your elicitation plan to meet your speciﬁc needs. Other information to
consider in your plan might include:
■
Market and business context. A high-level description of the market and how it
interacts with the business goals for the project.

90
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
■
System domain. Document the environment and conditions the solution will oper-
ate within. For example, if you wish to build a mobile communications device, you
must understand the environments and conditions in which it will be used. To build
a driverless car, you must understand the car industry, the manufacturing process,
and how cars are used.
■
Outputs. State the expected deliverables of the eﬀort. For example, draft use cases,
completed customer surveys, interview notes, and so forth.
■
Open issues. Mark sections in the elicitation plan where the information is unclear
or unknown. Or better, create a table at the end of the elicitation plan titled “Open
Issues.” Document all items under open issues so they are in one place that will make
them easy to ﬁnd, track, and resolve.
Once the sections are documented, have the project sponsor review the elicitation
plan to approve the scope and validate any assumptions made by the team. Better
to get the assumptions out on the table early so they can be addressed and the
full scope of what it will take to successfully gather the requirements known and
agreed to.
Beneﬁts
Spending adequate time to get a complete understanding of what it is going to take to
gather requirements for a project can be of signiﬁcant value.
Following are four beneﬁts gained by taking the time to develop an elicitation plan,
even if it is only a few pages and at a high level:
■
Guarantee you will spend time with the “right” stakeholders. Without a well-thought-
out plan, you may begin gathering requirements, only to ﬁnd out later that you
have missed important stakeholders or gathered information from stakeholders
who were not able to provide the right feedback.
■
Use the right technique to gather requirements. Spending time to identify the correct
elicitation technique (interview, focus group, prototype, etc.) will help ensure that
you deliver the best possible set of requirements. Many requirements teams start
with interviews with the existing users.7 However, many unique solutions do not
have current users, so there is a visualization leap required. When users are asked
to help design a solution they have never seen or used, an interview may prove to
be an ineﬀective way to gather a list of requirements. A prototype would produce
better insight, but time to create, test, and then deliver a prototype requires plan-
ning to do it right. Without a solid elicitation plan, what was thought to take a few
days could turn into several weeks.
■
Assign the right resources, armed with the right amount of time to gather requirements.
Often, gathering requirements is seen as a “second job” that has to be completed
in conjunction with other responsibilities. Taking time to create a plan helps to
ensure that the right people will be involved in gathering requirements, that their
time will be used wisely, and that adequate up-front requirements gathering will be
performed.

REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION
91
■
Gain agreement from top managers on the requirements elicitation eﬀort (time,
resources, and cost). By documenting what resources and time it is going to take
to gather requirements, senior leaders can guide the project manager on what
compromises and decisions will need to be made. For example, if an elicitation plan
shows ﬁve focus groups are planned at a cost of $50k, senior leaders can approve
this cost before the focus groups are formed and scheduled, rather than be surprised
at the end.
An elicitation plan can be as simple as one page. Or it can be quite lengthy (eight
to ten pages) depending on how comprehensive and complex the project is. The main
thing to remember is that it is a speciﬁc plan to gather requirements, not an overall
project plan. Use this plan to augment the overall project plan with more details on
the resources, time, and eﬀort needed to eﬀectively and eﬃciently gather project
requirements.
REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION
Now that you have an understanding of the eﬀort to gather requirements, it is time to
talk to stakeholders. Before conducting the ﬁrst interviews, it is good practice to develop
a requirements speciﬁcation and a consistent syntax to document the information from
the stakeholders. A requirements speciﬁcation is the process you will use to collect and
document the project requirements. One of the primary purposes for developing a
requirements speciﬁcation is to achieve team consensus on how project requirements
will be documented before making the more time-consuming eﬀort of performing
the work.
There are, of course, many requirements speciﬁcation techniques to use. One of the
best techniques was developed by Tom Gilb, who developed a simple, yet powerful
end-to-end process for writing high-quality requirements. He calls this technique
Planguage.8
The name Planguage is a combination of the words planning and language.
Planguage is an informal, but structured, keyword-driven planning language. It aids in
communicating complex ideas in terms any stakeholder can understand.
Planguage provides a standard format and vocabulary for each requirement. This
helps reduce ambiguity, increase readability, and promote requirements reuse.
The keyword-driven syntax is a very eﬀective way to document both functional
(what the solution must do) and nonfunctional (how the solution will behave)
requirements.
Specifying a Requirement Using Planguage
When specifying (writing) a requirement, it is much easier if you use a framework.
As we have been discussing, Planguage is a keyword-driven syntax that provides an
easy and eﬀective way to ensure that you gather all the needed information from the

92
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
stakeholder and can validate with other stakeholders a requirement has been written
concisely, correctly, and completely.
Structuring Functional Requirements
The best way to use Planguage is to start with functional requirements. Table 4.2 lists
a few basic Planguage keywords and deﬁnitions for writing functional requirements.
Choose the Planguage keywords that will be most beneﬁcial to your project.
Structuring Nonfunctional or Quality Requirements
The more challenging requirements to write are the nonfunctional or quality require-
ments. These requirements ensure that a solution behaves as expected. A few examples
of nonfunctional requirements are level of reliability of the solution, scalability of the
solution as it evolves and grows, and performance (how fast the system must be).
Table 4.2: Planguage Keywords for Functional Requirements
Basic Functional Keywords
Keyword
Definition
Tag
Unique, persistent identifier for traceability purposes
Gist
One-line description of the requirement or area being addressed
Source
Who provided the requirement
Functional requirement The text detailing the requirement (The system shall …)
Rationale
The reasoning that justifies the requirement, quantified if possible
Priority
Statement of priority and claim on resources
Author
The person who wrote the requirement
Additional Functional Keywords
Keyword
Definition
Stakeholders
List of parties materially affected by the requirement
Revision
A version number for the requirement (each requirement can have a
revision history, not just an entire specification)
Date
The date of the most recent revision
Assumptions
All assumptions or assertions that could cause problems if untrue
now or later
Risks
Anything that could cause malfunction, delay, or other negative
impacts on the expected results
Subject matter expert
The person who is most knowledgeable (considered the expert)
about the requirement
Dependencies
Anything that this requirement is dependent on (can’t be
implemented without)
Notes
Key information to assist in design, development, or delivery of the
requirement
Defined
The definition of a term (better to use a glossary)

REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION
93
Table 4.3: Nonfunctional Planguage Keywords
Keyword
Definition
Ambition
A description of the goal of the nonfunctional requirement
Scale
The unit of measure used to quantify the nonfunctional requirement
Meter
The process or device used to establish the scale
Minimum
The minimum level required to avoid failure
Target
The level at which good success can be claimed
Outstanding
Stretch goal if everything goes as planned
Past
Previous results for comparison
When we state a nonfunctional requirement (or any qualitative statement), it is vital
that we specify a few unique items not found in a functional requirement (see Table 4.3).
Don’t forget, these Planguage keywords are used only when specifying nonfunc-
tional requirements. Why? Functional requirements specify what a solution must do and
are measured in “yes/no” terms. Most people capture these pretty well. Nonfunctional
requirements are everything else associated with being measured on a scale other than
as a simple “yes/no.” The following section demonstrates how to use the Planguage
technique to create high-quality functional and nonfunctional project requirements.
Using the Requirements Speciﬁciation
The information captured in the requirements speciﬁcation enables many things.
Primarily, it helps with understanding requirements prioritization in a meaningful
way. Rather than just calling something a high-priority requirement, the requirements
speciﬁcation also describes the impact of not implementing a requirement, as well
as the rationale behind it. This enables sound decision making and prioritization
throughout the project.
Functional requirements are usually easy to convert into a Planguage template,
especially if the requirement is well known and has been successfully implemented
before. The real value comes when the requirement is new, and asking a few more
questions and documenting the answers signiﬁcantly reduces the time to write a good
requirement. Following is an example in order to illustrate how easy and eﬀective it
is to use this technique. While in a focus group discussion, an important stakeholder
shared one of the key requirements as follows: After every enrollment is completed, a
conﬁrmation has to be sent to the user.
Is this a good requirement? As written, unfortunately, no, because critical informa-
tion is missing. We don’t know enough to be able to build and test this as stated. We
would need to understand a lot more, such as:
■
What does the system need to do? (Functional requirement)
■
When does the system need to do this? (Functional requirement)
■
Is there a time when the system won’t do this? (Functional requirement)
■
What is meant by completed? (Functional requirement)

94
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
■
Why is this important for the system to do? (Rationale)
■
How important is this in relation to other requirements? (Priority)
■
If this is a high priority, what will happen if we don’t implement? (Claim on resources)
■
Who needs to know if this requirement is dropped? (Stakeholders)
Spending time to gain an understanding of the true requirement will help ensure
that a complete requirement has been documented. Table 4.4 is an example of a
complete functional requirement using Planguage.
Let’s look closely at the functional requirement “conﬁrmation” written previously
usingPlanguage.Arethereanyobviousnonfunctionalrequirementsassociatedwiththe
functionality of the solution? To uncover a nonfunctional requirement, ask:
■
Is there a degree in which the requirement can be measured? (Binary—yes or no;
if yes, it is a nonfunctional requirement)
■
How do you expect the system to behave? (Nonfunctional requirement)
■
What is the goal? (Ambition)
■
What will need to be measured? (Scale)
■
What process or device can we use to measure? (Meter)
■
What is the minimum level we need to establish? (Minimum)
■
What is success? (Target)
■
If everything goes as planned, what is a good stretch goal? (Outstanding)
Take the nonfunctional requirement information gathered and enter it into a table,
database, or a spreadsheet (see Table 4.5).
A lot of information is now available in a very small space. Where most require-
ments speciﬁcations go wrong is in the description of how the nonfunctional
requirements will be measured. Take time to talk to experts who do the testing and
Table 4.4: Example Functional Requirement Using Planguage
Keyword
Definition
Tag
Confirmation
Gist
Confirmation notification is key to enrollment process
Source
Chris Smith, during focus group discussions on July 2, 2015
Functional Requirement
After the user fills in all fields on the enrollment page and selects
the enroll activation tab, the system shall send a confirmation to
the user unless the health care provider is missing
Rationale
Task automation decreases error rate, reduces effort per
enrollment, meets corporate business rule to confirm enrollment
successfully
Priority
High; if not implemented, will cause business process
reengineering and reduce program return on investment by $40m
per year
Stakeholders
Intake analyst, marketing, health care provider
Author
Pat Jones
Date
July 5, 2015

REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATION
95
Table 4.5: Example Nonfunctional Requirement Using Planguage
Keyword
Definition
Tag
Performance
Ambition
Ensure that enrollment into health care system is quick and efficient so users
are not frustrated
Source
Chris Smith, during focus group discussions on July 2, 2015
Scale
Average time required for a novice to complete enrollment using only the online
help system for assistance
Minimum
No more than 7 minutes
Target
No more than 9 minutes
Outstanding
No more than 5 minutes
Past
Recent site statistics show 11 minutes
Defined
Novice: A person with less than 6 months’ experience with web applications
and no prior exposure to our web site
Stakeholders
Intake analyst, marketing, health care provider
Author
Pat Jones
Date
July 5, 2015
validation of the solution to better understand how the requirement will be tested
and validated. Many times, those who do the testing and validation know the most
obvious, natural measurement because they are experienced in measuring quality and
performance levels.
A project team should create its own set of keywords to meet the needs of the
project. Some of the most creative keywords can be found in a concept glossary on
Tom Gilb’s web site.9
Simple Dos and Don’ts When Using Planguage
Do:
■
Only use Planguage keywords that add value.
■
Keep the Planguage list of keywords handy to help guide conversations with
stakeholders.
■
Spend time to understand how the nonfunctional requirements will be vali-
dated to ensure that minimum, target, and outstanding measurements are
captured and discussed early in the requirements speciﬁcation phase.
■
Talk to a variety of stakeholders—especially the domain experts, sub-
ject matter experts, and testing team members—to understand how
requirements are best validated.
(continued)

96
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
■
Start with the scale ﬁrst—ﬁgure out what you want to measure, and then
associate the meter used to measure the scale.
■
Use known, accepted scales of measure whenever possible.
■
Begin with the standard Planguage keywords and create new keywords as
needed
Don’t:
■
Guess; talk to testing and validation experts for their experience with similar
measurements.
■
Forget the meter must be employed before completion of the deliverable.
■
Be fearful of Planguage; try it out on a small set of critical requirements
that are new (never been done before) or are key to the success of the
project.
Beneﬁts
Most requirements speciﬁcation tools focus on functional requirements and by nature
mix in a variety of design and implementation solutions within the functionality of a
solution. The keyword-driven syntax used by the Planguage technique is key to writing
better requirements by pulling out a more detailed speciﬁcation for both functional and
nonfunctional requirements. This enables the project manager to provide improved
prioritization of requirements, reduce design constraints, improve quality, and more
eﬀectively manage risk.
This in turn provides signiﬁcant beneﬁt to the consumers of the requirements spec-
iﬁed such as a software developer who now knows what to design and develop, a tester
who now knows what tests to run, and stakeholders who now know what they will be
receiving.
THE PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT
As requirements are written, it is very helpful to start to organize them into a document
by logical groupings. Requirements documents can go by many names depending on
your needs, such as a business requirements document, functional speciﬁcation, system
speciﬁcation, or just the requirements document. For our purposes, we will use the term
product requirements document (PRD). The PRD is used to document all requirements
necessary to fully describe the features, functions, and capabilities required in the deliv-
erables of a project. Even though it has product contained within its title, the PRD is used
to deﬁne the requirements for any solution to be developed (see Figure 4.2).
The PRD is normally created in response to a marketing requirements document and
should generally deﬁne the problems a solution is intended to solve. The PRD should
not describe the solutions to the problems.10 Solution development comes after the
requirements are deﬁned and documented.

THE PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT
97
PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT
_____________
Highlands
Market Drivers:  
________________________________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
________________________
Key Customers:  
MARKET REQUIREMENTS
Time to Market, Technical Leadership
Big Data LLC
PERSONAS AND USAGES
JOE:
REQUIREMENTS
RISK
Technology 
not available 
for launch
Monitor 
monthly with 
technologist
Competition:
ACME
Long-time user
Daily use
Traditionalist
Subject Expert
PAT:
Geek
Loves Technology
Mobile Functions
Extended Use
HALEY:
Power User
Customization
24x7
Millennial
After the user fills in all fields on the enrollment page and selects the enroll
activation button, the system shall send  a confirmation to the user unless the
healthcare provider information is missing
System shall support 150  users simultaneously
User shall be able to get to any screen within three (3) “clicks”
Novice user shall be able to complete the enrollment form in 30 minutes
maximum
…….
Project Name:
Rev#:
1.0
11 Sept 2016
Date:
______
___________
Risk
Magnitude of Risk
Likelihood
Mitigation Plan
High
High
Figure 4.2: Example Product Requirements Document
There are many PRD templates available. Feel free to tailor your PRD to suit the needs
of your project. Rather than duplicating information that is already captured and still
valid, reference it by the name of the document or by the tag.
Developing a Product Requirements Document
The purpose of the PRD is to clearly describe a solution’s purpose, its features and
functionality, how it is intended to be used, and what risks may be encountered.11
The following guidelines are valuable when developing a PRD.
1.
Understand the product’s reason for being. In order to do this, you must spend time
to understand the market requirements. This includes the product’s objectives,
your customers, and your competition. Every good project starts with an unﬁlled
need that sparks the desire to develop a solution that addresses that need. It is
critical to the success of the project that the project manager establishes a clear,
concise value proposition for the creation of the product.

98
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
Few project managers stop long enough to create an “elevator pitch,”
which is three or four sentences (spoken in 10 to 15 seconds) that adequately
describe the point of your product, why it is important, and how it would beneﬁt
the company.
2.
Classifythetypesofusersandcustomers.Onceyouhaveaclearunderstandingofthe
problem or unfulﬁlled need you want to solve, the next step is to gain an in-depth
understanding of the target users and customers. These are many times called per-
sonas: ﬁctional users who are realistic archetypes. They serve as a representation
of the actual users and their expected experiences when using the product.12
3.
Deﬁne usages that will help users accomplish their goals. Deﬁning key usages per
persona is important when discussing the user’s main goals or objectives when
using the product. This is the center of the product speciﬁcations process, and this
is where creativity and innovation comes in. Again, avoid jumping to solutions, but
rather focus on the user’s problems and needs. Note that we have talked about
goals and tasks but not features. Features will be linked to required tasks that map
to speciﬁc user and customer’s goals and objectives. If a feature cannot map to a
goal, we have to ask if it is necessary.
4.
Use a format all stakeholders can understand. Most requirements are written
in a standard word processing application. The media and format are not as
important as the content and the ability to ﬁnd what the team needs and can be
updated throughout the life of the project. Clearly articulate each requirement
in a simple syntax, such as Planguage, which was discussed in the previous
section.
5.
Brainstorm assumptions and risks to ensure success. Once you think you under-
stand their problem you are trying to solve, the users of the system, the usages,
and the requirements, it is time to brainstorm all the assumptions made regarding
the product planning, development, and launch. Spend time to question each
assumption and comprehend the risks associated with the assumptions. What
really matters is that the right product gets delivered, so don’t let a wrong
assumption derail your success.
The key to developing a useful PRD is to be very clear what success looks like,
and provide guidance to the project team so it is easy for them to make trade-oﬀ
decisions when needed.
Identify the PRD Content
The next step is to determine what content you need in the PRD to ensure success.
The PRD must be tailored to meet the needs of the project team. Following is a set of
recommended content items to use as a reference for creating a customized PRD for
your project.
1.
Project identiﬁers and purpose. Project identiﬁers include the project name, the
project manager, project sponsor, version number of the document, and the date
the version was released.

THE PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT
99
The purpose statement describes why the document was created and what
its intended use involves. An example purpose statement is:
The primary purpose of this PRD is for the requirements team to ensure
all aspects of the project requirements are easy to ﬁnd in one place and
provide the project team with the information necessary to understand and
design the solution. It also provides the baseline for requirements change
management.
2.
Market overview. It is recommended that a brief description of the market be
included early in the PRD. If a marketing requirements document has been gen-
erated, the market overview can usually be pulled directly from the document.
The market overview provides a short description of the market, whether the
market is new or an existing market, how the market is segmented, a description
of the competing solutions, and a summary of the key market risks.
3.
Personas and usages. This section of the document focuses on the customers,
users, and how the product will likely be used. Customers are described through
the use of customer proﬁles. Customer proﬁles identify the types of customers
who are expected to purchase the product, any purchase decision information
about the customers, and an overview of the customer’s business model if it is a
business-to-business-type purchase.
Personas, also known as user proﬁles, describe the diﬀerent types of users
who will use the product. Users are many times a diﬀerent set of people than
those who will purchase the product. For example, parents (adults) normally
purchase children’s toys where the children are the users.
Use cases describe how the product will be used. The best use cases describe
how the user will interact with the various features of the product.
4.
Key features. Provide a list of the key features that will satisfy the market objec-
tives and meet the customer and user needs. Steer clear of too much detail when
describing the features as the detail will be contained in the functional and non-
functional requirements. The intent of this section is only to give the reader an
overview of the key features being considered for the product.
5.
Functional requirements. Organize the functional requirements in a way that sup-
ports their development. This usually means grouping them by functional area
using subsections as required to present a logical breakdown of the functionality.
The functional requirements should be entered in a table or a spreadsheet
using keyword-driven syntax (Planguage) to ensure that clear, concise, and
testable requirements are documented. Refer to Table 4.4 for an example of how
to write a functional requirement using Planguage.
6.
Nonfunctional requirements. Nonfunctional requirements should be organized
by topics or requirement types. Example nonfunctional requirement types
include performance, reliability, usability, security, maintainability, compatibility,
interoperability, and customization requirements.
The nonfunctional requirements should be entered in a table or a spread-
sheet using keyword-driven syntax (Planguage) to ensure that clear, concise, and

100
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
testable requirements are documented. Refer to Table 4.5 for an example of how
to write a nonfunctional requirement using Planguage.
7.
Documentation. Often overlooked are the documentation requirements asso-
ciated with a solution and project. It is not uncommon for project teams to
complete the design, development, and test of a solution and then come
to realize that they had forgotten to create the documentation required by the
customer and end users of the solution. Usually, this situation is caused by a
missed documentation requirement.
Examples of documentation that may be required include the following:
■
User documentation
■
Online help scripts
■
Labels and packaging
■
Technical documentation
■
Marketing collateral and sales tools
8.
Internationalization and location. It is common for products and other solutions
to be deployed on a worldwide scale, which many times require a number of cus-
tomizations to meet market, customer, and user needs. All requirements that are
speciﬁctointernationaluseshouldbedocumentedinthePRD.Thesemayinclude
requirementsfor unique user interfaces, customer or user documentation, special
export requirements, and what languages must be supported.
9.
Legal requirements. Although not commonly included in a PRD, legal require-
ments are included in this suggested list of content items to encourage project
managers to at least investigate whether there are any special legal requirements
that need to be documented and acted upon by the downstream recipients of
the PRD.
Legal requirements may include such things as trademarks and copyrights
(do any components need to be registered or approved?), licenses that may
be required, requirements for certiﬁcate of origin, and export and import
requirements if the solution is going to be sold or used internationally.
Document the Requirements
Creating a useful PRD is much more diﬃcult than just identifying the contents of
the document. The hard work is deﬁning and writing the requirements in terms
that your project team can comprehend and take action upon. Before sitting down
to write, start by taking the time to describe or draw your ideas out with a pencil
and paper. This will help formulate your ideas, especially after talking to your stake-
holders to understand their needs and desires (see “Golden Rules for Developing a
Useful PRD”).
Next, review the PRD template and eliminate sections that don’t apply to your
project. Begin ﬁlling in the template with the information that comes easy to you.
Get past writer’s block by ignoring the quality of your writing. Just write. You can ﬁx
the grammar, punctuation, and spelling later. It is very easy to unintentionally dive into
documenting the actual solution rather than staying at the level of “what” versus “how.”

THE PRODUCT REQUIREMENTS DOCUMENT
101
Golden Rules for Developing a Useful PRD
1.
Before writing a PRD, make sure you understand the user needs and
problems you are trying to solve.
2.
Use a PRD template to guide you through the process and prevent you
from missing key elements.
3.
Include the market requirements in the PRD so you stay focused and
avoid scope creep.
4.
“A picture is worth a thousand words”—complex ideas can be best con-
veyed with a picture, which makes it possible to absorb large amounts of
data quickly.
5.
Use
Planguage
to
document
the
functional
and
nonfunctional
requirements.
6.
Focus on “what” the product must do, versus “how” to solve the
problems.
Using the PRD
The best PRD is one that provides enough information so the downstream consumers
(designers, engineers, validation team) can do their jobs, but not so much information
that the important details get lost in the noise of long, rambling sentences and
paragraphs.
Keep the PRD as simple and uncluttered as possible. Only have in the document
what the design, developers, and testers really need. Customize the content items to
meet the needs of your project to ensure that it will actually be read and used.
The key to ensuring usage of the PRD is for the author to ensure it is easy for the
recipients to ﬁnd what they need and understand what they need to do. Go talk to your
team, ask them what they want, and give it to them. If your PRD isn’t getting across the
information they need, the most important thing is to be ﬂexible and modify it to meet
the needs of your audience.
Tips for PRD Use
Make sure the PRD is up to date, accessible, and easy to search so the con-
sumers of the PRD can ﬁnd what they need.
What is the right level of detail? It depends. Ask your audience what level
of detail they need, and then provide it to them.
Spend time to educate your audience on Planguage so they understand the
keywords and the information provided.
Whenever possible, include information on the market requirements so
those using the PRD understand the market and strategy.

102
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
Think of the PRD as a compass for the team to ensure they are going in the right
direction and not going down a dead-end road. It will be the document that ties all the
downstream activities such as design, development, and testing eﬀorts together. If no
one uses the PRD, the team is setting oﬀon a long, uphill hike without a map and no
idea of which direction they are going.
Beneﬁts
Will anyone really read the PRD? You must hope so! The PRD will be a lifesaver when
the size and complexity of a project is fairly large. If the complexity is low, the PRD may
only be two to four pages. If the complexity is high, the documentation may be several
hundred pages (including Planguage keyword tables).
Documenting the product requirements is very helpful in getting the team focused.
It ensures that everyone has a clear understanding of the product being developed and
where they ﬁt into the process. It is very common for a requirements team to become
distracted by an exciting feature they like (not necessarily a feature a customer or user
asked for), rather than staying focused on the problem they are trying to solve.
One of the biggest beneﬁts of a PRD is that it gets the entire project team involved.
Avoid at all costs writing a PRD alone without any input from stakeholders. Include key
partners such as designers, developers, and testers to write and review as you go. This
will spark new questions and discussions about risk and assumptions, as well as encour-
age the team to talk about the right level of detail and inspire new thoughts and new
ideas, which will only make the product better.
The bottom line is that a PRD helps reduce ambiguity and provides the team with
the details to actually build and test a product.
REQUIREMENTS AMBIGUITY CHECKLIST
After several requirements have been documented, and before development of
the requirements begins, set up a series of requirements review sessions for key
stakeholders to check for clarity, completeness, and quality.
The goal of a requirements review is to ensure that the team has developed the
requirements to their highest level of quality and gain agreement among the stakehold-
ers that the requirements are correct, complete, and unambiguous.
To help this process go faster, use a requirements ambiguity checklist to expose the
most common mistakes requirements authors make.13 Once the stakeholders agree and
sign oﬀon the requirements, development or design can begin. See Table 4.6 for an
example checklist.
Review Each Requirement for a Single Interpretation
Take time to meet with the requirements team to conﬁrm that each requirement is clear,
concise, and coherent for the intended audience, and that each requirement possesses a
single interpretation. There are three areas the team should discuss to ensure that there
is only one interpretation of the requirement:

REQUIREMENTS AMBIGUITY CHECKLIST
103
Table 4.6: Example Requirements Ambiguity Checklist
Status Checklist Items
Requirements are clear to the intended audience, with only one interpretation.
Terms are defined in a glossary and used consistently.
Poor grammar that causes unintended meaning (or no meaning at all) has been removed.
All “dangling else” statements have been removed.
Terms relying on personal opinion, such as fast, easy, state-of-the-art, obvious, simple,
relatively, as appropriate, and excellent, have been removed.
Words without precise meaning, such as soon, virtually, more, most, some, similar, eventually,
and recent, have been removed
Unbounded lists, such as TBD, etc., at least, including, such as, and at a minimum, have been
eliminated.
Optionality words, such as should, could, possibly, if possible, or may, have been eliminated.
1.
Completeness. Are there any placeholders (“TBD,” question marks, use of etc., or
notes) to add information that has not been addressed? Are there any unbounded
lists? Look for statements such as at least, including, such as, or at a minimum, to
name a few.
2.
Optionality. Are the correct imperatives used? Remove any use of the words
should, could, would, can, may, might, possibly, or if possible. Preface functional
requirements with the imperative shall (or will), and nonfunctional requirements
with must.
3.
Vagueness. Are there any words without a precise meaning, such as friendly, sim-
ilar, some, few, eventually, recent, more, or most? Time references, such as before,
after, current, or simultaneous, can be tricky. Personal opinion, such as excellent,
fast, easy, state-of-the-art, hardly ever, by and large, more or less, obvious, and sim-
ple, are ambiguous. Double check to make sure there aren’t any double-negative
statements and that proper grammar, punctuation, and spelling is used.
Ensure that All Terms Are Deﬁned and Used Consistently
Therequirementsteamshouldhaveallacronymsandspeciﬁctermsdeﬁnedinaglossary
and available to refer to when there is a question on how a speciﬁc term is being used.
Tips to Ensure that Terms Are Defined
Take time to deﬁne terms that are not universally known by the target audience.
Highlight all instances of deﬁned terms with some visual trait (e.g., color,
font, capitalization, or boldface) so they stand out from the other text.
Use a glossary to deﬁne words used in the document to safeguard consis-
tent usage and understanding.

104
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
Review Each Requirement for Weak Words
Weak words are notorious for being vague or ambiguous. Replace any term that is qual-
itative rather than quantitative, as it is most likely weak. There are too many weak words
to list them all. Richard Bender has a comprehensive list of words in his whitepaper titled
“The Ambiguity Review Process” that helps point out potential ambiguities when writ-
ing a PRD.14 He describes a trap he calls the “dangling else,” where words such as must
be, will be, is one of, should be, could be, and can be are ambigous. Also review the words
listed above under completeness, optionality, and vagueness. Replace or remove them
to improve the quality of your requirements.
Include Alternative Methods to Describe Requirements
If possible, include a diﬀerent way to describe a requirement, especially if a diagram,
algorithm, table, use case, user stories, or a link to a prototype would increase under-
standing. To reduce ambiguity and increase comprehension, show process and data
ﬂows with a diagram or algorithm. Any complicated logical ﬂows, dependencies, and
time indicators are good candidates.
When there are many categories or attributes within a requirement, use a table. State
tables are very eﬀective when several conditions or complex logical structures govern
the responses of the system under speciﬁc deﬁnitions.
Use cases describe the user experience of the end solution, which is an excellent
way to document system usage and provide context to the requirements. User stories
are typically very short—one to two sentences to enable quick updates to the project
based on user speciﬁcations as they are known.
Using the Requirements Ambiguity Checklist
As stated previously, the requirements ambiguity checklist is best used as a guide when
requirements authors, contributors, and stakeholders are reviewing requirements to
ensure that all statements are unambiguous to the intended audience. The burden of
clarity is on the author, not the reader.
The ambiguity review process is best used as a two-step process:15
Step 1: The initial ambiguity review. This initial review is conducted by someone
who knows little to nothing about the domain. The intent of this review is to ensure
that the logic and structure are clear and understandable by a layperson. Since they are
not a domain expert, they can’t read into the requirement facts that aren’t explicitly writ-
ten. Identify three to ﬁve key requirements you want reviewed and encourage them to
identify generic ambiguities such as unclear references.
Step 2: After the issues raised in the initial ambiguity review are resolved, the next
step is to have a domain expert use the ambiguity checklist to review for content. Focus
on ensuring that the requirements are complete and correct; terms are deﬁned and
used consistently; there are no “weak words”; and that diagrams, tables, use cases, or
prototypes are present to improve clarity.
If the requirements are in a word processing application, then the ambiguities are
documented in either a copy of the requirements or in a separate document.

REQUIREMENTS AMBIGUITY CHECKLIST
105
Depending on the accessibility of the requirements and logistics of making the
requirements available to the reviewers and if the comments made by one reviewer
can be seen by the others, keep the timing of providing feedback relatively short. For
instance, if you hold a review session on Tuesday, ask for feedback to be sent back by
Thursday. That way, you can follow up on Friday to ensure that all review comments are
collected and can be addressed in a timely manner.
It is common on the ﬁrst review to ﬁnd about 10 to 15 ambiguities per page of
detailed requirements. The cost associated with ﬁxing the error after release of a solution
can be over four to ﬁve times as much as one found during design, and some numbers
show up to 100 times more expensive to correct than an error found during the main-
tenance phase. This is best illustrated in a chart. See Figure 4.3 to better see the cost
comparison.16
After a series of reviews with both domain experts and those who are not domain
experts, ambiguities per page drop by a factor of 10×. We ﬁnd that once a requirements
author realizes that the reviewers are looking for dangling else terms such as must be
and willbe and vague terms such as friendly,similar, and more, the next requirement they
write will be void of the same error. The author gets better at writing, and the reviewers
will ﬁnd substantially fewer errors.
Tips for Using the Ambiguity Checklist
Use the checklist to help remind you of weak words to avoid.
Do a search to remove any instances of “dangling else” before stakeholders
provide feedback.
Remember, ﬁxing requirements defects during the planning phase costs
substantially less than waiting until your customer ﬁnds the error in the
released solution.
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cost to Fix Multiplier
Project Phase Where Requirement Error Discovered
Design
Develop
Test
Operations
1x
6.5x
15x
100x
Figure 4.3: Relative Costs to Fix Requirements Errors

106
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
Beneﬁts
The requirements ambiguity checklist will improve the readability and provide clarity
to individual requirements as well as the entire requirements document. Use it while
writing requirements and every time stakeholders, especially domain experts, conduct
reviews to provide a framework to help ensure the team is spending time to discuss the
right things and ﬁx common problems that occur in writing requirements.
The key beneﬁts are:
■
Domain experts provide feedback and insight early in the documentation of the
requirements, which results in higher-quality requirements.
■
Errors are ﬁxed earlier so the cost is less.
■
Breaking the requirements into smaller pieces provides focus and timely feedback.
■
One clear, concise, and measurable set of requirements reduces rework and
unnecessary features creeping into the product.
REQUIREMENTS BASELINE
After the ambiguity reviews are complete and all requirements have been formally
approved (usually via an inspection process), the stage is set for moving into the
requirements management process.
It is estimated that few initial requirements documents capture more than half of
the eventual requirements. So change will happen! Unmanaged and poorly managed
changes to requirements lead to mistakes, unnecessary features, and expensive rework.
Managing changes is a very important part of a successful project. Equally so, is the
establishment of a requirements baseline. A requirements baseline is a snapshot in
time that represents the agreed-upon, reviewed, and approved set of requirements for
a project.17
Once approved by all the stakeholders, the baseline becomes the foundation of the
requirements management process. Any changes needed after the baseline is set are
subject to stringent change control. This is because the baseline is a ﬁnite agreement
between the project team and their sponsor and stakeholders. Any changes required
will be subject to agreement by both sides.
When is the right time to establish a requirements baseline and to start managing
the changes to requirements? While in the midst of gathering and writing requirements,
it is normal to have many changes. Actually, it is encouraged to make modiﬁcations
to requirements as new information becomes known. Once customer needs are
adequately documented, reviews and inspections are completed, and requirements
are approved in the PRD, it is time to establish a requirements baseline and control the
changes throughout the remainder of the project cycle.
The purpose of establishing a baseline is to ensure that the requirements are
clear, common, and coherent to the downstream consumers of a requirements doc-
ument. Spending adequate time with internal business partners, customers, and

REQUIREMENTS BASELINE
107
other stakeholders to determine if the requirements are complete, necessary, correct,
unambiguous, consistent, modiﬁable, traceable, and testable will pay larger dividends
as changes to the requirements begin to occur.
Establishing a Requirements Baseline
You may have heard the phrase “freeze the requirements.” This really means it is time
to “establish a requirements baseline.”18 The Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE) Standard Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology deﬁnes a
baseline as:
A speciﬁcation or product that has been formally reviewed and agreed on, that there-
after serves as the basis for further development, and that can be changed only through
formal change control procedures.
As we have been discussing, the requirements are the foundation to a project and
the lack of a requirements baseline can give free rein to constant change in requirements
and therefore project scope. A baseline is about spending time to come to a common
agreement between stakeholders. It essentially involves setting the right expectations,
including responsibilities, risks, assumptions, and approaches. Once an agreement is
reached, the requirements document is under change control to manage the baseline
going forward.
Typically, a requirements change will aﬀect the scope of a project (commonly called
scope creep). Scope creep is generally not a good thing. It can drive costs, resources,
and schedules beyond their thresholds, and when features are implemented without
complete understanding of how they impact other aspects of the project, it can cause
confusion throughout the project.
Once the requirements have become stable, it is time to establish the baseline and
implement a formal requirements change control process (see Chapter 8). Controlling
the project requirements baseline is essential to project success.
Establish a Requirements Change Board
Karl Wiegers deﬁnes the requirements change control process as “all the activities that
maintain the integrity and accuracy of the requirements as the project progresses.”19
In order for the requirements to be managed eﬀectively, a change control board (CCB)
is formed. This team is usually a small cross-functional team that can represent view-
points of all project stakeholders and is given the authority to manage the new require-
ments baseline using a well-deﬁned, well-documented (and communicated) change
management process.
The CCB owns the implementation of a formal change management process that
begins as soon as the baseline is established and continues throughout the project life
cycle.Normally,theCCBisasmallteamwhomeetsregularlytoensurestandardmethods
and procedures are used to eﬃciently handle any changes to the requirements. This is
best described as a formal, repeatable process to reduce the risk of introducing change
into the project scope without assessing and controlling the requested change. A simple
but robust change management process is presented in Chapter 8.

108
PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
Will there be changes on every project? The answer is yes. Do we want a change after
the baseline has been established to be as painless as possible? The answer is, again,
yes. Early in the deﬁnition of the project we want changes to be easy to implement
because the elicitation eﬀorts will continue to uncover new requirements. However,
once we have an agreed-upon scope, an approved budget, and a schedule established,
new requirements and modiﬁcations to requirements can be very disruptive and cause
the project to derail. Changes to requirements will happen; you just have to be ready for
them when they do.
Beneﬁts
Setting a requirements baseline and establishing a change control board to manage
requirements changes is a good practice. The beneﬁts of establishing a baseline and
then managing changes to that baseline are many; following are a few of the crucial
beneﬁts:
■
Establishing a requirements baseline helps to ensure all requests for change are eval-
uated and managed by the right stakeholders at the right time.
■
Changes are planned, managed, and communicated so that resources, budget, and
schedule can be aligned to support the change.
■
An eﬀective CCB will assess the overall impact and risk associated with the
change and have the authority to approve, defer, or deny based on criteria set for
the project.
■
An updated and maintained requirements baseline ensures that the project team
is designing, developing, and testing the approved set of requirements, which will
reduce rework, errors, and unnecessary features.
Final Thoughts
Requirements are a primary factor in project success or failure. We know and understand
that one size does not ﬁt all, so feel free to tailor the ﬁve requirements tools outlined in
this chapter to meet the needs of your organization and project.
Spend time at the very onset of a project to outline an eﬀective elicitation plan
so you can ensure that you have a clear understanding of the voice of the customer
by gathering requirements from many stakeholders—and a comprehensive plan
to do so.
Every business situation is diﬀerent; some are more complex than others, and
your stakeholders will all have diﬀerent perspectives. Use Planguage to help simplify
by breaking down each requirement into keywords that any stakeholder, from the
technology geek to a ﬁnance wizard, can understand.
Organize your requirements into a document such as the product requirements doc-
ument so the downstream consumers of the document can easily ﬁnd what they need
and understand what they need to do. Pick and choose what your project needs—at a
minimum the functional and nonfunctional requirements.
Use an ambiguity checklist when stakeholders review requirements to ensure that
they are replacing weak requirements with clear, concise, and measurable ones. The
common mistakes can be avoided by providing guidance to your reviewers.

REFERENCES
109
Establish a requirements baseline after the reviews are done so the team members
know what requirements have been approved. When changes occur, use the baseline
as the basis for requirements change management.
References
1.
Project Management Institute. Pulse of the Profession: Requirements Management—
A Core Competency for Project and Program Success. The Pulse of the Profession,
In-Depth Report (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2014).
2.
Ibid.
3.
Rierson, Leanna. Developing Safety-Critical Software: A Practical Guide for Aviation
Software and DO-178C Compliance (Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2013): 99–100.
4.
Wiegers, Karl, and Joy Beatty. Software Requirements, 3rd ed. (Developer Best
Practices) (Redmond, WA: Microsoft Press, 2013): 4.
5.
Hass, Kathleen, and Rosemary Hossenlopp. Unearthing Business Requirements:
Elicitation Tools and Techniques (Vienna, VA: Management Concepts, 2008): 76–77.
6.
Roman, Ernan. Voice-of-the-CustomerMarketing:ARevolutionaryFive-StepProcessto
Create Customers Who Care, Spend and Stay (New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2011): 3.
7.
Robertson, Suzanne, and James Robertson. Mastering the Requirements Process:
Getting Requirements Right, 3rd ed. (New York, NY: Pearson Education, 2013):
102–108.
8.
Gilb, Tom. Competitive Engineering: A Handbook for Systems Engineering, Require-
ments Engineering, and Software Engineering Using Planguage. (Burlington, MA:
Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann, 2005).
9.
Web site: www.gilb.com. Under Resources for Requirements, see concept glossary.
Accessed October 30, 2014.
10.
Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Product_requirements_document.
Accessed February 2015.
11.
Cagan, Martin. How to Write a Good PRD (white paper) (Silicon Valley, CA: Silicon
Valley Product Group, 2005). http://www.svpg.com/assets/Files/goodprd.pdf
12.
Wiegers and Beatty, 2013.
13.
Ibid.
14.
Bender,Richard.TheAmbiguityReviewProcess(whitepaper).http://www.benderrbt
.com/Ambiguityprocess.pdf
15.
Robertson and Robertson, 2013, 388.
16.
Soni, Mukesh. “Six Sigma. Defect Prevention: Reducing Costs and Enhanc-
ing Quality.” http://www.isixsigma.com/industries/software-it/defect-prevention-
reducing-costs-and-enhancing-quality/. Accessed December 18, 2014
17.
Wiegers and Beatty, 2013.
18.
Ibid.
19.
Ibid.


5
SCOPE PLANNING
P
roject planning begins with identifying what work needs to be completed for a
project to be successfully implemented. Regardless of the project management
methodology used, it will require you to ﬁrst and foremost deﬁne the scope of the
project. Thus, it will require the project manager to engage in scope planning activities.
Scope planning is a collaborative process between the project manager, the project
sponsor, and other key stakeholders who can help shape the work that must be
completed in order to achieve the business goals driving the need for a project.
The purpose of scope planning is to ensure that all the required work and only the
required work is clearly identiﬁed, that the deliverables and outcomes are documented,
and that the boundary conditions are adequately deﬁned to complete the project
successfully.
Scope planning involves identifying your goals, objectives, tasks, resources, budget,
and timeline. This chapter includes a number of high-impact tools that can be added to
a project manager’s PM Toolbox to assist with the process of scope planning.
Used in conjunction with tools for schedule, budget, resource, and risk planning,
project scope planning tools eventually lead to project plan development. Later, dur-
ing project implementation, the scope baseline will be a vital foundation for disciplined
scope control and change management, creating a barrier to unnecessary scope creep.
THE PROJECT SWOT ANALYSIS
The project SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats) analysis is a technique
used by project managers to develop project execution positioning. By positioning a
project to take advantage of its particular strengths and opportunities while minimizing
weaknesses and threats, the project SWOT analysis helps identify a sound strategy for
project execution. The analysis is performed to gain an understanding of and act upon
the project’s capabilities and environment.1
Projectcapabilities—expressedastheproject’sinternalstrengthsandweaknesses—
tell us what our project can and cannot do well. At the same time, our assessment of
the project environment indicates what opportunities and threats are presented by the
environment within which the project operates. Information about the environment,
combined with the knowledge of the project’s capabilities, enables project teams to
identify factors needed to meet the business and project requirements (see Figure 5.1).
111

112
SCOPE PLANNING
PROJECT SWOT ANALYSIS
_____________________________________
_____________________________________
IDENTIFY PROJECT GOALS
MEASURE GAPS
DEFINE ACTIONS TO RESPOND TO GAPS
Act 1: Implement a new schedule system
Act 2: Deploy concurrent process
Act 3: Deploy collaboration software
Act 4: Provide team leadership training
Act 5: Hire specialist or consultant
Key:  
SWOT – Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats
CSF – Critical Success Factor
Act - Action
_____________________________________
4
1
High 10
Low
CSF 1: Rapid project cycle time
CSF n
X
CFS 1 Gap
Project Name:
Date: _____________
_____________
_____________
Goal 1:
Goal 2:
Goal n:
______________
______________
______________
Leave
Reduce
Eliminate
_____
_____
_____
Figure 5.1: Project SWOT Analysis Template
Measurement of where the project stands regarding these factors provides clues
about execution gaps, prompting the team to consider strategies and actions to address
the gaps. Awareness of the gaps and a clearly deﬁned response allow the team to for-
mulate a realistic project scope and related strategies for attaining the project goals. In
short, the project SWOT analysis is an eﬀective tool to include in a project manager’s
PM Toolbox because it identiﬁes areas of strengths to leverage and execution gaps to
resolve in developing an eﬀective project plan.
Performing a Project SWOT Analysis
Much of the information needed to perform a SWOT analysis at the project level can be
collected through tools described previously. For a good start in performing the project
SWOT analysis, three information inputs are of vital importance:
1.
The project charter with its supporting detail.
2.
The project business case.
3.
The project requirements.
While the project charter provides knowledge about the fundamental boundaries
and constraints of the project, the supporting detail (strategic and tactical plans,
project selection criteria, and project mission) helps determine the context in which

THE PROJECT SWOT ANALYSIS
113
the boundaries were drawn. The project business case describes the business environ-
ment in which the project will exist, thus providing vital information about capabilities
needed internally and external to an organization. Exactly why the project requirements
are so relevant for the analysis will become clear in the ﬁrst step in performing a project
SWOT analysis.
Identify Project Goals
Projects are implemented to create value for a ﬁrm. Consequently, the project goals
deﬁne what constitutes value when the project is completed. When it comes to the
project SWOT analysis, focus only on the critical goals, those that can make or break
the project. For example, if a ﬁrm is heavily involved in a time-to-market race with their
competition, they may have a requirement that a project shave oﬀ30 percent of what is
considered a typical delivery time for a project of that type. This is a signiﬁcant challenge
for the implementing company and its project team, who may have little experience
in fast-track projects. Because the company’s management may view this project as an
opportunity to enter into a new market, the project needs to be successful. But what
doesit take tobe successful? The answer isin identiﬁcation of the project successfactors.
Select the Project Success Factors
Fundamentally, project success factors (commonly called critical success factors) are
areas in which a company must do well in order to be successful.2 So what are these
areas? The areas come from two major domains. The ﬁrst domain is the business success
factors that are identiﬁed in the project business case. The second domain is the goals
of the project, which support the business success factors but are execution focused.
The project success factors are those that are necessary to meet the goals of the
project. Begin, then, by asking what you need to do well within the project in order
to meet or exceed the project goals. In the example stated earlier, rapid project cycle
time is identiﬁed as a primary project success factor that supports the business goal of
early entry into a new market in order to capture market share. That is a very complex
project success factor, requiring the synchronization of several components, including
concurrent engineering, the use of collaboration software, cross-functional teams with
interpersonal skills, and integrated scheduling. Of course, more may be necessary for
rapid project cycle time, but these four components are good examples.
Concurrent engineering is about overlapping project activities to speed up the
project pace.3 Its crux is reciprocal dependencies between the activities that exchange
incomplete information, making it more diﬃcult but faster to work.4 In the product
development context, that exchange is signiﬁcantly more eﬃcient if performed in a col-
laborative manner supported by collaboration software, which commands signiﬁcant
resources and skills. Rapid product development also demands ﬂexible cross-functional
teams, fully equipped with soft, interpersonal skills to handle conﬂicts and negotiations
germane to fast-track projects.5 On top of all of this, scheduling this project calls for
the ability to juggle multiple critical paths, perhaps including 30 to 40 percent of all
activities, with a constant need to use schedule crashing or fast-tracking techniques.
When you are ﬁnished analyzing the project capabilities domain, look again at the
project requirements, particularly the requirements focused on customer needs and

114
SCOPE PLANNING
desires. In which areas in the project environment must you do well to meet or exceed
the requirements? You may need to include a ﬁrst-tier vendor involved in the project
execution, as this has been shown to be a proven technique to speed up projects.6
Certainly, possibilities of external critical success factors (CSFs) abound, but the checklist
shown in the example titled “Screening Your Environment for Possible Critical Success
Factors and Gaps” oﬀers a few ideas of where to look.
Screening Your Environment for Possible
Critical Success Factors and Gaps
Here is a short, general checklist of areas where you can ﬁnd possible CSFs
and related strategic gaps:
■
Stockholders
■
Customers
■
Governments
■
Competitors
■
The general public
■
Creditors
■
Suppliers/Vendors
■
Unions
■
Local communities
Again, possibilities are limitless, but note that these environment-related CSFs are
more challenging to deal with because, unlike internal project capabilities, they are
external to the project and less controllable. Brainstorm with the team to identify ten
or so for each domain, internal and external. Rank them and focus on the critical few.
Keep in mind that identifying CSFs without understanding their measurement criteria,
dynamics, and interactions is fruitless.
Measure the Gaps
After you have selected project execution CSFs, the next step is measuring the gaps.
A gap is the diﬀerence between the ideal and actual level of a CSF. If the CSF in our
example from Figure 5.1—rapid project cycle time—were ideal, it would draw a per-
fect scoring on all of its four components, including concurrent engineering, collabo-
ration software, interpersonal skills, and integrated scheduling. That would mean that
the entire CSF and its four components are at a level ideal for meeting the project goals.
The actual level, however, is where you believe you currently stand with regard to that
CSF and its components.
A measurement scale is necessary to identify the magnitude of the gaps. Depending
on the degree of desired rigor and the time available for the project SWOT analysis, you
can choose from among several alternatives. For example, smaller and simpler projects
may do just ﬁne by having a straightforward scale of small, medium, and large gaps.

THE PROJECT SWOT ANALYSIS
115
Other organizations categorize gaps by urgency, perhaps using colors—for instance,
green for “no gap,” yellow for “caution,” and red for “danger.” This allows them to send
an immediate visual message that describes the gap.
In contrast, a perceptual scale spanning from 10 (the ideal level in example SWOT
Analysis) to 1 (the widest gap) more precisely measures a gap. How do you identify a
gap with this scale? One way is to assign a narrative description of the state of a CSF’s
component to each level in the scale (1 through 10). Then, after a team discussion, each
team member assesses the actual level of a component. Further, the actual level of each
component can be averaged for the whole team. For example, the actual level of rapid
project cycle time for Figure 5.1 would be 4. Comparing the actual level with the ideal
one will yield the gap—in our case, a large gap of six units. Whatever gap measuring
method you choose, keep in mind that measuring a gap is a subjective judgment, not
an exact science.
Having a large gap on internal capabilities is an apparent weakness, while a small
gap is a strength. Similarly, where we ﬁnd a small gap in assessing the project envi-
ronment, we can view it as an opportunity. Along the same line, a sizable external gap
poses a threat. Expressing gaps as potential threats can help you relate the problem to
the project sponsor, top managers, and other stakeholders who may be instrumental in
getting the resources you need to address the gaps.
Decide How to Respond to the Gaps
Identifying a gap brings you to another decision: what to do about it. Generally, you have
three options: leave it as is, reduce the gap, or eliminate the gap.7
As Figure 5.2 indicates, when your project has few or no gaps in internal capabili-
ties and project environment (upper left-hand corner), your best option may be to leave
things as is.
Leave as Is
Leave as Is
or Reduce
Significantly
Reduce
Little/No Gaps
(Ample Opportunities)
Significant Gaps
(Critical Threats)
Status of Project Environment
Little/No Gaps
(Critical Strength)
Significant Gaps
(Critical Weaknesses)
Status of Internal Project Capabilities
Figure 5.2: Project SWOT Analysis and Strategies to Act on Gaps

116
SCOPE PLANNING
Why would anyone select this option? A lack of time or an insigniﬁcant impact of
eliminating gaps may be reasons for opting to leave small gaps alone. However, those
who decide to eliminate small gaps may ﬁnd the motivation for doing so in the ease of
closing them or in their drive for perfection. With larger gaps in internal capabilities or
project environment (the shaded area in Figure 5.2), the case may be more complex.
First, acting on gaps usually requires resources, typically controlled by management.
If your knowledge of the style of management and resource availability tells you that
your action may not be fruitful, and therefore not worth the eﬀort, leaving the gap as is
may be understandable. However, it is often worth the case to management, especially
if you use a language that management reveres: impact to business results.
Take, for example, our case of the six-unit gap in CSF 1 in Figure 5.1. Not acting
on this gap may prohibit the company’s management goal of entering a new market
of time-to-market focused competitors, resulting in loss of expected sales and proﬁts.
Given the strategic and proﬁt signiﬁcance of our case, management sees that our gap
deserves an action of eliminating the gap. However, if the project was resource or
funding constrained, we might choose the leave as is option.
Receiving an infusion of resources, though, is not an easy scenario in today’s orga-
nization, where various projects often brutally compete for their share of the resource
supply. Rather, it may take preparing well, presenting the case for the scarce resources,
and ﬁghting for them with a passion based on facts. Once the resources have been
obtained, developing a plan to reduce the gap is important.
Figure 5.2 also shows that in a situation burdened with large gaps in internal and
external capabilities (lower right-hand corner), perhaps the most viable option is to act
to signiﬁcantly reduce gaps; eliminating them may be too challenging.
Deﬁne Speciﬁc Actions to Respond to Gaps
Reducing or eliminating project execution gaps is a good decision, requiring speciﬁc
actions to deploy resources. Going back to the structure of a CSF, its components,
and the actual state is helpful in identifying actions needed. In our project SWOT
analysis example, we list several actions, attacking gaps in all four components: con-
current engineering, using collaboration software, interpersonal skills, and integrated
scheduling. Some gap reduction eﬀorts can start right away, for example, training
on interpersonal skills and integrating the scheduling system. Others, like installing
collaboration software, will take a slower path. When the actions are identiﬁed and
understood, they should be built into the scope statement and, possibly, into the work
breakdown structure (WBS).
Using a Project SWOT Analysis
Identifying a sound strategy for project execution is not likely without a critical evalua-
tion of the project’s internal capabilities and surroundings, whether the project is large
or small. Typically blessed with more resources than small projects, large projects should
strive for a more comprehensive, systematic, and formal project SWOT analysis, pre-
ceding a detailed scope statement. Applying the project SWOT analysis in an informal
manner is a common approach for smaller projects. Faced with little time or resources

THE PROJECT SWOT ANALYSIS
117
to do a detailed analysis, project managers for small projects should make the analysis
part of their mental process, constantly questioning their project capabilities and sur-
roundings. They should not be concerned that the analysis must be written; it does not
have to be (see the example titled “Ten Minutes Can Do It”).
Ten Minutes Can Do It
Jeffrey D’Esposito, project manager for Procter & Gamble, had this to say about
using the project SWOT analysis:
When I ﬁrst ran into the project SWOT analysis tool, I was very pleasantly
surprised and, frankly, very proud of myself. For a long time I was doing a
SWOT analysis on my projects without knowing there was actually a formal
tool. As a manager of multiple small projects, I never had time to do a
formal, written analysis. Rather, I was doing it informally, verbally in ten or
so minutes with my team members. We simply called it risk assessment.
But it worked, and it worked very well.
Jeffrey’s story is not a solitary case. Many project managers do the same
thing. Know your gaps before you venture into the project. Make them visible.
Ask your manager to help reduce or close the gaps. And if it only takes ten
minutes, you can ﬁnd the time in your busy schedule.
Beneﬁts
The most successful ventures are built on the ability to utilize one’s strengths, mod-
erate weaknesses, seize the opportunities, and neutralize threats.8 Pressured for time
on many concurrent fronts, project managers all too often do not build their projects
on this premise. Rather, they dive into detailed project planning without taking stock
of their project’s strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats, and related gaps. This
is where the project SWOT analysis comes in; it takes stock and oﬀers a clear picture
of project gaps. The value of the analysis, therefore, is in enabling the project to do
the following:
■
Position itself in the best possible way to take advantage of its particular strengths
and opportunities within an organization, while minimizing the weaknesses and
threats.
■
Uncover strengths that have not yet been fully leveraged and identify weaknesses
that can be corrected.
■
Bringtotheattentionoftheseniormanagementteamsigniﬁcantgapsthatcanjeop-
ardize the project and get their support to close the gaps and reduce the risk of
failure.
■
Continually focus actions on business success factors and project requirements to
ensure alignment of project capabilities.
The proactive nature involved in the use of the project SWOT analysis helps build
the mentality that it is never too early to bring a defensive shield up. Facing project

118
SCOPE PLANNING
execution gaps early helps to deﬁne alternative project scenarios and prepare for major
project danger zones.
THE SCOPE STATEMENT
The scope statement is a written narrative of the goals, work, and outcomes of a project.
Itdeﬁnestheprojectandbecomesthebasisformakingdecisionsanddecisiontrade-oﬀs
during project planning and execution. A good scope statement is necessary to guide a
project to successful completion.
Scope statements take many forms, depending on the project type as well as the
nature of an organization. They should be viewed as a dynamic tool that contains the
best information available during early project planning, and as the project progresses,
it should be modiﬁed to reﬂect signiﬁcant changes incurred.
The scope statement is eﬀective in establishing the project baseline and boundary
conditions, which cannot be compromised without consent of the approving managers.
It also means that within the project boundaries, the project manager and his or her
team are empowered to operate and make appropriate decisions.
Developing a Scope Statement
The fundamental premise in developing a scope statement is that the statement must
be as change resistant as possible (see the example titled “Innovative Ways to Develop
a Change-Resistant Scope Statement”). Note that this premise does not have to do with
successful control of changes through change management systems such as a change
control plan and scope control. Rather, the premise here is very diﬀerent and rooted
in a set of principles that help minimize the impact of changes from the environment
surrounding the project.
Innovative Ways to Develop a
Change-Resistant Scope Statement
The application of the following principles in scoping projects can help deﬁne
projects with increased resistance to change later in the implementation:
Principle 1: Reduce project complexity. Adding work elements to a project
means that you create more interactions between the elements. Each
new element adds complexity by increasing the number of interactions,
so when a change hits, more elements need to be changed or redone. In
contrast, scoping projects with fewer work elements reduces the number
of interactions and increases the project’s resistance to change.9
Principle 2: Design robust project outcomes. Some project outcomes are
designed to perform within a narrow range of conditions. Others, however,

THE SCOPE STATEMENT
119
are designed for a wider range of conditions and are said to have a robust
design. When a change in the range of conditions occurs, a project scoped
with a wider range of project outcomes becomes more resistant to change.
In contrast, even a slight change in the conditions can cause ripple-effect
changes in projects with narrowly designed outcomes.
Principle 3: Freeze the scope early. When you freeze the project scope early,
you establish an early baseline, which helps to manage change more effec-
tively. Late changes typically impact a large portion of the project, impeding
the progress and imposing delays and cost overruns. Therefore, an early
freeze may force earlier decision making and enable a faster completion
of the project. This circular reaction, early freeze–faster completion–fewer
changes, offers you advantages in deﬁning a change-resistant project
scope.
The quality of a scope statement hinges in many ways on the quality of the input
information. Speciﬁcally, the following inputs carry great weight in developing a scope
statement that has value:
■
Business success factors
■
Project requirements
■
Project charter
■
Project SWOT analysis
Truly, a project’s reason for existing is in helping an organization meet its business
goals. Recognizing this, we reviewed earlier in the book several tools for capturing the
business goals and project requirements with the purpose of internalizing the goals and
requirements to incorporate them in the project. If you prepared any of the tools, the
time is now to put them to use in developing the scope statement, such as the example
shown in Table 5.1.
Identify Business Purpose
Long gone are times when projects were viewed only as technical ventures whose major
purpose was to provide a certain capability. Today, in addition to producing a capability,
a project must support the delivery of business goals: desired proﬁts, market share, com-
petency building, customer satisfaction, productivity gains, and so forth.10 Therefore,
we begin the development of the scope statement with the project’s rationale—what
is its business purpose? What business goals will the project accomplish? What busi-
ness plans will it support? For a traditional project manager, this thinking of projects
in business terms is not easy; rather, it is both challenging and demanding. But so are
today’s projects. The demand is for them to be faster, cheaper, and better than those
of the previous year. This is so much the case that some experts believe the project
businesspurposeshouldbecalledthe“projectpassionstatement”andanswertheques-
tion: What unique and distinct value will your project create for the customer and the
company’s business?

120
SCOPE PLANNING
Table 5.1: A Simple Scope Statement
Scope Statement
Project: Jumpin Jive
Revision #: 1
Date: 17 December 2017
Business Purpose:
Improve our customer service satisfaction rating by 5% through the development and deployment
of a new customer relationship management software solution
Project Goals:
■Completion Date: July 22, 2019
■Estimated Budget: $166,000
■First-Year Customer Adoption: 1,200 users
■Minimum Satisfaction Score: 87%
■Maximum System Downtime: 4 hours per month
Project Work Statement:
Work to be completed on this project includes an analysis of the customer relationship work-
flow, design the software solution, develop a prototype solution, perform customer usage tests,
develop a final solution, conduct quality and acceptance tests, and release the software to the
production platform.
Primary Deliverables:
■Workflow analysis diagram
■Workflow gap report
■Prototype SW design files
■Customer usage test plans
■Customer usage test report
■Production SW design files
■Quality and acceptance test plan
■Quality and acceptance test report
■Release plan
■Production SW build
Key Milestones:
■Workflow analysis complete: 9/30/18
■Prototype SW complete: 12/15/18
■Usage tests complete: 1/31/19
■Production SW design complete:
6/15/19
■Quality and acceptance tests complete:
7/10/19
■Production SW available: 7/15/19
■SW solution visible to market: 7/22/19
Constraints:
Our key developers will not be available in June because of travel to our European division.
Project Work Exclusions:
This project excludes work associated with customer- or customer segment–specific customiza-
tions, field testing, next revision needs analysis, and user training.
Deﬁne Project Goals
As compelling and inspirational as the business purpose may be, it is still no more than
a broad direction, lacking details about speciﬁc targets for the project. Those targets
are deﬁned by project goals for time, cost, quality, and business success. By specify-
ing when you will ﬁnish the project—for example, by July 22, 2019—you set your time
or schedule goal. To attain the schedule, you must determine what cost budget you
need—for instance, “the budget for this fab upgrade is $400m.” Projects in industries

THE SCOPE STATEMENT
121
notusingcostbudgetsmayindicatethedesirednumberofresourcehours,suchas1,200
resource hours. Unlike the schedule and cost/resources goals, expressing quality goals
in a speciﬁc and measurable fashion may be a challenge. Since quality is about meeting
or exceeding customer requirements, usually expressed by certain standards, a sound
strategy is to deﬁne the project quality goal by referring to a certain standard agreed
uponwiththecustomer.Forexample,“ThisprojectmanualwillbeinlinewiththeProject
Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK Guide).”
Describe the Project Work Statement
What work will you do in this project to deliver the project outcome and support the
business goals? Can you express that very succinctly in a sentence or two? For example,
the work statement for the erection of an optics plant may read: “Design an optics plant,
procure it, erect it, and commission it.” Or, for a software project, “Deﬁne workﬂow, con-
ﬁgure software, develop training plan, develop prototype, train personnel, and release
software.”
The idea here, again, is to identify major elements of project work, which will be
described in greater detail in the supporting speciﬁcations, project WBS, and other
documentation. Also, as you read the example statement, you might have noticed
the way the work statements are structured: the verb (deﬁne) followed by the noun
(workﬂow), the verb (conﬁgure) followed by the noun (software). This method of writing
has a very speciﬁc purpose of reducing the activity orientation of the work statement
and highlighting its goal orientation. Of course, you may choose to write work
statements diﬀerently.
Identify Deliverables
Performing the work described in the work statement must result in major deliverables
or outcomes. Take the preceding example of the work statement for the software
project. Its major deliverables are workﬂow gaps report, software design ﬁles, test plans,
test reports, and production software. A closer look at this set of deliverables reveals
several guidelines for identifying the deliverables. First, there is almost one-for-one
correspondence between elements of work statement and deliverables. “Customer
relationship workﬂow” (element of the statement) produces a “workﬂow gap report”
(deliverable). Also, major elements of work lead to major deliverables. Focus your
identiﬁcation of deliverables in the scope statement on deliverables that you can
make Level 1 or 2 elements in your project WBS. It is in the WBS that you will identify
minor deliverables—or subdeliverables—(Levels 2, 3, and so on), not here. Another
guideline evident from the example set is that your deliverables may include interim
deliverables—for example, products of early project stages (workﬂow report)—as well
as end deliverables (software release). Finally, deliverables may be of the product (e.g.,
machine, facility, report, study) and service (e.g., training). Identifying deliverables
should be followed by an additional step: Deﬁne each one in terms of how much,
how complete, and in what condition they will be delivered. This is typically done in
the supporting speciﬁcations and other documentation. Should a WBS dictionary be
available, it can take on this role.

122
SCOPE PLANNING
Select Key Milestones
Milestones are major events and points in time, indicating the progress in implement-
ing your work statement and producing deliverables. As a crucial part of the scope
statement, you need to identify major milestones in your project. Consider again
the example of the preceding software project. The project team identiﬁed these
key milestones:
■
Workﬂow analysis complete: 9/30/18
■
Prototype SW complete: 12/15/18
■
Usage tests complete: 1/31/19
■
Production SW design complete: 6/15/19
■
Quality and acceptance tests complete: 7/10/19
■
Production SW available: 7/15/19
■
SW solution visible to market: 7/22/19
Note the correlation between deliverables and milestones. This is a personal choice
designed to provide full consistency from work statement to deliverables to milestones.
This correlation becomes even more critical if payments from a customer are tied to
deliverables and milestone events. Although there are many other ways of identifying
major milestones, they share some common ground. They focus on several major mile-
stones deﬁned and understood by project stakeholders, with a clear date and consistent
with the list of deliverables.
Deﬁne Major Constraints
All projects face constraints that may change the way project work is deﬁned, deliv-
erables produced, and milestones met. These constraints may be physical, technical,
resource, or any other limitation. Think of climbing Mount Everest as a project. The phys-
ical constraint here is the climate, which limits the time the project can be executed to
certain months. In another example, management ordered a project manager to deliver
a software package per a fast-track schedule. Because of the lack of resources for fast
software quality testing, the project milestones had to be changed and pushed out by
several months. These examples provide a crisp message: Identify major constraints and
build your scope and project plan around them, or face the derailment of your project
during execution.
To manage constraints means to clearly identify them, size them up, and formulate
the scope statement around them. As the project unfolds, you will need to revisit them
and verify whether they still exist. Considering that they are a foundational element of
the scope, you need to rescope the project if the constraints change.
Determine Exclusions
Habits die hard, as the following anecdote vividly points out. In the early 2000s, a
contractor involved in the transfer of some technology to Africa scoped its projects
to include computer centers with oﬃce furniture. It took the owners several years
to realize that they would be better oﬀbuying the furniture locally than having the
contractor import it from Europe. Consequently, the owners asked the contractor to

THE SCOPE STATEMENT
123
leave the furniture out of the scope. The contractor’s oﬃce was properly notiﬁed but to
no avail; the furniture arrived at the oﬃces of the African owners. Why? The furniture
used to be a habitual part of the scope, and the exclusion notiﬁcation was neither
strong nor visible enough.
To avoid a situation like this, you need to speciﬁcally identify project work elements
that will be explicitly excluded from the project scope. State speciﬁcally what is not part
of the scope. In the previous example scope statement, the project speciﬁcally excluded
work associated with customer-requested customizations, ﬁeld testing, next revision
needs analysis, and user training.
Include Supporting Detail
To be clearly directive and crisp, the scope statement should be succinct, possibly
written in the imperative mood (see the example titled “Simple Dos and Don’ts in
Preparing the Scope Statement”). Technical and other details usually have no place in
the statement; rather, they should be attached in the supporting documentation.
Simple Dos and Don’ts in Preparing the Scope
Statement
Do:
■
If the statement is longer than a page, split it into two tiers: a one-page
summary (as in example scope statement) and the supporting detail.
■
Avoid repeating in one tier what is mentioned in the other tier.
■
Use active rather than passive language, and spell out acronyms.
■
Include functional groups providing resources in writing the statement.
■
Have the statement approved by managers.
Don’t:
■
Write a scope statement without having a system to structure it.
■
Write it as a purely technical statement of the project.
■
Use ambiguous language (e.g., “nearly”).
■
Mix major and minor goals, deliverables, and milestones.
■
Proceed without having an independent party review the scope statement.
■
Forget to include constraints and exclusions.
Evaluate and Fine-Tune the Scope Statement
There are at least two levels of evaluation that deserve your attention. First, check the
statement for completeness, comparing it against the information inputs and the infor-
mation requirements that we have discussed here. Did you include all primary project
requirements? Did you deﬁne the project goals? Did you identify major constraints? Has
any speciﬁcally excluded element of scope been identiﬁed?

124
SCOPE PLANNING
Second, you should assess the quality of certain information, for example, schedule
and cost aspects of the project goals. The scope statement is used again for detailed
schedule and cost planning. However, the detailed numbers are integrated and may be
diﬀerent from your schedule and cost numbers in the scope statement. What should
you do? You can replace the numbers in the scope statement with those integrated
numbers from detailed planning, or you can reduce the scope and cut the integrated
numbers to comply with the original numbers from the scope statement. Whatever you
choose, it is obvious that the scope statement is only the ﬁrst step in this iterative cycle
of project planning, and for that reason, you have to ﬁne-tune it as you go through the
planning cycle.
Using a Scope Statement
Not only is the scope statement a must-have tool to include in any PM Toolbox, but it is
one of the most indispensable tools available. Every industry and every project family
can use it. Except for highly repetitive projects that can utilize the same informal scope
statement, every project regardless of the size and complexity would greatly beneﬁt
from having a formal written scope statement. History has seen successful projects with-
out formal scope statements, but researchers have found that having a well-deﬁned idea
of what you want to do in a project (the scope) is a critical factor in project success.11
Therefore, if you strive for the heights of success, make sure you deﬁne the project scope
and control its implementation properly.
Variations
The scope statement that we have described is designed to be a cross-industry tool to
serve as many project audiences as possible. Still, almost any industry or project family
may ﬁnd it useful to have a variation of the tool. Take, for example, product developers.
Having a product statement included in the scope statement (after the project goals
section) is a regular practice. Such a statement typically spells out the following:12
■
Speciﬁcation of the target market: exactly who the intended users are.
■
Description of the product concept and the beneﬁts to be delivered.
■
Delineation of the positioning strategy.
■
A list of the product’s features, attributes, requirements, and speciﬁcations (priori-
tized: “must have” versus “would like to have”).
Others, such as those involved in government contract projects or contrac-
tor/subcontractor arrangements prefer the use of a statement of work (SOW). A project
scope statement and SOW serve related and often overlapping functions. Both set
expectations and parameters for the project. The SOW, however, provides a detailed
breakdown of the project and deals with the nuts-and-bolts details of how the project
team will accomplish the project goals.
There are three basic types of SOWs:13
1.
Design/Detail SOW. This SOW type tells a supplier or vendor how to do the
work. The statement of work deﬁnes buyer or client requirements that control

THE SCOPE STATEMENT
125
the processes of the supplier—such as measurement, tolerances, and qual-
ity requirements. In this type of SOW, the buyer or client bears the risk of
performance.
2.
Level of eﬀort or time and materials SOW. This SOW type can be used for nearly any
type of service. The real deliverable under this type of SOW is an hour of work and
the material required to perform the work.
3.
Performance-based SOW. This SOW deﬁnes work agreements based on what has to
be accomplished. Desired outcomes from the work are described in clear, speciﬁc,
and objective terms that can be reasonably measured.
A statement of work typically includes the following information about a project:
■
Project purpose: Describes why the organization is investing in the project.
■
Objectives: Describes what the project aims to achieve once it is complete.
■
Location of work: Describes where the work will be performed.
■
Period of performance: Speciﬁes the allowable time for projects. This can be repre-
sented in start and ﬁnish dates, number of hours that can be billed, or anything else
that describes scheduling constraints.
■
Deliverables: Describes the tangible outcomes from the project.
■
Deliverables schedule: Describes when each of the deliverables is due.
■
Value of work performed: Describes the estimated total cost of the project.
■
Speciﬁcations and standards: Describes any speciﬁcations or industry standards that
need to be adhered to in fulﬁlling the work obligation.
■
Method of measurement of acceptance: Describes how the buyer or receiver of the
project outcomes will determine if the project outcomes are acceptable.
Whether a project manager chooses to use a scope statement, an SOW, or some
other variation, every project will beneﬁt from the use of one of these tools. They provide
the foundation for project planning as well as the overall vision of what the project end
state will look like.
Beneﬁts
Project managers value the scope statement for what it is—a ﬁrst-step tool for plan-
ning for a project that directs all subsequent tools in the planning and control eﬀort. It
captures the fundamentals of a project, bonds them, and displays them for everyone to
see. Setting the scope baseline helps project teams stay focused, allowing them to be
guided by the project vision it creates. Once this baseline is available, the project team
should consider establishing a change control plan (see “Change Control Plan Helps Set
the Direction for Controlling Scope”).
The scope statement is also comprehensive, simple in format, and easily adaptable.
It includes a look at all major project dimensions, providing the project manager with
a comprehensive vision of what encompasses a project, but also simple enough that it
enables an easy grasp of versatile dimensions of project assignment. With little eﬀort
it can be adapted to speciﬁc industry or company needs, taking out or adding new
elements as needed.

126
SCOPE PLANNING
Change Control Plan Helps Set the Direction
for Controlling Scope
Working on a signiﬁcantly large project will almost inevitably call for some
sort of change control plan, typically part of the project plan. Although smaller
projects usually cannot afford such a level of documentation, they still need
to set a clear direction for controlling changes. Therefore, both smaller
projects informally and larger projects formally need to address the following
issues:
■
Who has the change approval authority? If the authority is to rest with
the change review board, then chairman and board members need to
be appointed for the project. Clearly deﬁne their responsibilities. In some
cases, especially in smaller projects, project managers may have full
authority to make changes and will not use a board.
■
How is the scope of the change authority deﬁned? For example, a board
may be authorized to deal with major changes substantially affecting the
scope. For the sake of responsiveness, the board chairman may have the
approval authority, with other members reviewing (not approving!) their
areas of expertise. Changes with small or no impact on scope may be in
the purview of the project manager.
■
What is the change request procedure? The change control plan needs to
describe the change request procedure and any forms or documentation
to be used for submittal to the change authority.
■
How do we ensure the implementation of the approved changes? For
example, nominating an administrator for this role is a possible solution.
■
When in the project life cycle do we begin using and stop using the change
request procedure? The change control plan should address this issue.
THE WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
A project work breakdown structure is an outcome-oriented grouping of project ele-
ments that organizes and deﬁnes the total scope of the project—work not in the WBS
is outside the scope of the project.14 When presented in a graphical format, it becomes
obvious why the WBS is often described as a project tree diagram, hierarchically dis-
playing project outcomes, which are further broken down into more detailed tasks (see
Figure 5.3). This same project tree analogy helps to visualize project outcomes at one
level as parents to those from the next-lower level, who then become parents to the
next-lower level outcomes, and so on.
The project WBS provides the project manager the means to divide a project into
manageable increments, helping to ensure the completeness of all work that is required
for successful completion of a project. Projects are planned, organized, and controlled
around the lowest level of the WBS or work packages that are assigned to a project team
member for responsibility for completion.15

THE WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
127
1000
2000
2000
1100
1200
2100
2200
3100
3200
3300
Hardware Development Project
Concept Stage
Design Stage
Manufacturing Stage
Design
Review
Prototype
Approval
Process
Develop
1stArticle
Production
Release
1110
1120
Project
Kickoff
1210
1220
Project
Plan
2110
2120
2130
Design
Concept
Design
Review
DFMEA
2210
2220
2230
UX Design
Review
Component
1st Article
Quality
Test
3110
3120
3130
3210
3310
3320
Level 0
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Figure 5.3: An Example Hardware Development Project WBS
Don’t confuse the project WBS with an array of intimidating acronyms such as
CWBS, BOM, or OBS. These tools are as logical and conceptually simple as the WBS,
but they have diﬀerent purposes. For example, CWBS (contractual WBS), which is less
detailed than a WBS, is used to deﬁne the level of reporting that the project contractor
will provide to the owner in larger, contractual projects. Widely applied in manufac-
turing industries, BOM (bill of materials) is a hierarchical representation of the physical
assemblies, subassemblies, components, parts, and so forth that are necessary to pro-
duce a product. Finally, an OBS (organizational breakdown structure) indicates which
organizational units are responsible for which work elements from a WBS (for basic
terminology, see “WBS Language”).
WBS Language
Work elements. Any project outcome in the WBS is called a work element,
consisting of an item of hardware, software, service, or data. While some
elements are the direct outcome of work, others are the aggregation of
several logically grouped deliverables.
WBS level. This is the hierarchical location of a work element in the WBS. Work
elements at the same stage of structuring are on the same level. There is
no universal system for numbering levels. We number the overall project
level as 0 and subsequent levels as Level 1, Level 2, and so forth. Using
(continued)

128
SCOPE PLANNING
level numbers enables you to uniquely code each work element, providing
a basis for cost control, for example.
Work package. These are work elements at the lowest level of the WBS. We
assign each of them to individuals (often called work package managers),
who are responsible for managing tasks such as planning, scheduling,
resource planning, budgeting, risk response, and quality assurance.
Cost account. This is a summary work element that is one level higher than the
work package. A cost account includes one or several work packages and is
often described as a management control point where actual performance
data may be accumulated and reported.
Branch. All work elements underneath a Level 1 deliverable constitute a branch.
Branches may vary in length.
WBS dictionary. At a minimum, a WBS may include brief descriptions of work
packages, along with entry conditions (what inputs to a work package are
necessary) and exit conditions (what outputs of a work package are required
to call it complete). Adding more to it—for example, schedule dates, cost
budgets, staff assignments for work packages, and descriptions of other
work elements—may make sense in large projects.
Constructing a Project WBS: A Top-Down Approach
There are two basic ways of developing a project WBS: top-down and bottom-up. In this
section we detail the top-down approach, which is a very convenient approach for
project managers and teams with experience in project work, have knowledge of the
project deliverables, and are comfortable with a systems approach to organizing the
work to be performed on a project.
The development of a WBS is likely to be an easier and more meaningful exercise if
you are equipped with information about the following:
■
Project scope
■
Project workﬂow
■
Project requirements
■
Project situation
The project scope statement provides an understanding of what the project will pro-
duce. You ﬁrst need to know “what you will produce” (scope) before you decide “how
you will produce it” and depict it in the WBS. Note the practice of some experienced
project teams who prefer to develop the scope statement and WBS in parallel rather
than sequentially or actually include the WBS as part of the scope statement.
In constructing a WBS, the knowledge of the project workﬂow is crucial. For instance,
to develop a meaningful WBS for a software development project, you need to under-
stand the process of software development. Knowledge of the process will indicate
which activities are necessary to produce the required project deliverables.
Finally, speciﬁcs of your project situation are known to inﬂuence the anatomy of a
WBS. Take, for example, the case of an enterprise software development company where
each department had its own WBS when working on a project until it was acquired.

THE WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
129
The new owner immediately ordered all projects to develop an integrated WBS for each
project, mandating that a large project’s WBS include a project management branch.
Select WBS Type
After acquiring all necessary information about WBS shaping factors, you have more
choices to make before being able to construct a WBS. Which method will you use to
structure your WBS? Consider the three major ones: WBS by project life cycle, WBS by
system, and WBS by geographic area (see Table 5.2).
The underlying principle of the WBS by project life cycle method is self-explanatory:
You break the overall project into phases of its life cycle on Level 1 of the WBS. This
principle of conveniently following the natural sequence of work over time is widely
popular in some industries. A good example is a software development project con-
sisting of phases such as requirements deﬁnition, high-level design, low-level design,
coding, testing, and release.
In contrast, users of a WBS structure by geographic area segment the project work
by major geographic sites or regions such as in building construction. It is not unusual
that literal geographic regions—for example, northwest site, southwest site, southeast
site, and northeast site—are used as the element for Level 1 of the WBS.
You have probably noticed that our discussion about the three structuring meth-
ods was limited to Level 1 of the WBS. What about Level 2 and other lower levels? Each
of the three can continue with the underlying principle of further dividing the work
into the lower levels. For instance, WBS by geographic area can have work elements on
Levels 2 and 3 that could be composed of work elements that will be performed in a
speciﬁc geography identiﬁed at Level 1. Many practitioners, however, ﬁnd hybrids more
practical,combiningtwoorthreemethodsinthesameWBS.Forexample,theymayhave
a WBS by project life cycle on Level 1, systems on Level 3, and a geographic breakout of
work at a lower level.
Which method of WBS structuring is right for you? Before answering this question,
you should know that structuring a WBS is not an act of science. It is rather an act heavily
inﬂuenced by a company’s culture, shaped by top managers with the purpose of deter-
mining “how we get things done around here.” If there is no previous history of using
a WBS in your company, you should probably follow your industry norm. This does not
rule out the use of a diﬀerent type of WBS structuring, but the bar of resistance to a new
WBS structure will be lower if you go with the standard approach. Should you decide
to go against the grain, be prepared to engage in some organization transformation
discussions with others in the organization.16
Table 5.2: Methods for Structuring the WBS
Method of WBS Structuring
WBS Level
Life Cycle
System
Geographic Area
0
Project
Project
Project
1
Phase
System Component
Area or region

130
SCOPE PLANNING
Establish the WBS Level of Detail
How many levels should a project manager use to structure a WBS (see “Too Many Levels
Can Create Turmoil”)? The answer to this question will determine the total number of
work packages. Considering that the number of work packages inﬂuences the necessary
time and cost you need to manage a project, you need this number to align with what
your available time and budget can tolerate.
Too Many Levels Can Create Turmoil
“How many WBS levels do we want our projects to have?” This was a question
that designers of the PM process in a power distribution organization asked
themselves. To prepare a good answer, they ﬁrst looked at the projects they
manage: 10 to 15 projects per year, ranging from $100k to $5m, mostly
involving the design and construction of electrical substations. After some
benchmarking, the designers made their decision: Each project shall have a
ﬁve-level WBS.
Soon after the deployment of the PM process began, a silent rebellion
in smaller projects began, followed by outright refusal of their project man-
agers to use the process. The justiﬁcation was simple. The amount of work
on scheduling, budgeting, and control of 250 work packages in a ﬁve-level
WBS drove smaller projects to a halt. As a result, project managers went to
the old, ad-hoc way of management. The moral of the story: Match the size
and structure of WBS with the size and structure of the project. The smaller
projects likely could have been adequately organized and managed with three
WBS levels.
As explained earlier, the work package is the central point for managing to the WBS,
as illustrated in Figure 5.4. Simply said, work packages are discrete tasks, or combination
oftasks,thathavedeﬁnableendresults—outcomes—thatassignedorganizationalunits
“own” and need to create. When using them for the integration of project planning and
control in a very detailed WBS, for each work package, you will assign responsibility,
develop the schedule, estimate the resource and cost, develop plans for risk response
and other planning functions, and measure performance. Obviously, as the number of
work packages grows, so does the necessary time (and cost) to perform project planning
and execution. Reaching a point when there may be too many work packages renders
their management impractical and cost prohibitive. Closely related to the number of
work packages is their average size. Clearly, work packages need to be small enough
that they are manageable.
In summary, establishing the level of detail of the WBS includes determining the
number of levels in the WBS, the number of work packages, and the average size of the
work package that are compatible with your tolerance level and the industry practice.
Table 5.3 shows WBS data from some actual projects.

THE WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
131
Manufacturing
Engineering
Marketing
Company
Work
Package
Work Breakdown Structure
Level 0
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Figure 5.4: Work Package, a Critical Link in Managing the WBS
Table 5.3: Examples of the Level of Detail of the WBS
(1)
Project
(2)
Project
Duration
(days)
(3)
Project
Budget
(person-
hours)
(4)
# of
Levels
in WBS
(5)
# of
Work
Packages
(6)
Mean #
of Hours/
Work
Package
(3) / (5)
(7)
Mean #
of Days/
Work
Package∗
(2) / (5)
(8)
Mean %
of Budget/
Work
Package
[(6) / (3)]
× 100
IT
infrastructure
90
500
3
15
33
6
6.6
Selecting a
billing
platform
180
1200
4
36
33
5
2.7
S/W
development
270
1200
3
25
48
11
4
Hardware
development
365
500
4
29
17
13
3.4
∗Assuming all work packages are sequential without any overlapping.

132
SCOPE PLANNING
From the table, you can derive the following guidelines for the majority of small
and medium projects in the ﬁeld of information technology, software development, and
product development:
■
Three to four levels of WBS.
■
Fifteen to 40 work packages.
■
Twenty to 50 hours per average work package.
■
One to two weeks’ duration of the average work package.
■
Three to 7 percent of the total hours budget per average work package.
For larger projects, however, the level of detail often quoted in literature indicates17:
■
Five and more levels of WBS.
■
Eighty to 200 hours per average work package.
■
Less than two to four weeks per average work package.
■
From 0.5 percent to 2.5 percent of the total project budget per average work
package.
Whether you manage a small or large project, these numbers should be adapted for
yourpersonalandpossiblyculturalpreferences.Forexample,someindividualsandcom-
pany cultures favor more detailed planning and control, and accordingly, more detailed
WBS, while others have the opposite tendency.18
Structure the WBS
Once you are equipped with necessary information, along with the type of WBS and its
level of detail, you are ready to construct a WBS for your project (see “Golden Rules of
WBS Structuring”). The steps are outlined as follows:
Step 1: Start by identifying the major construct of structure of the WBS. Depending on
the type of WBS you selected, these may be phases, systems, geographic areas, or
a combination. One useful approach here is called the scope connection. In partic-
ular, when developing the scope statement, you identify major deliverables, which
could be borrowed to serve as the major elements of the WBS. This helps integrate
the scope statement with the WBS, linking business and project goals—via major
deliverables—with lower-level deliverables and work packages.
Step 2: Divide the major WBS elements into smaller, more manageable outcomes, level
by level, until a point is reached where the outcomes are tangible, veriﬁable, and
deﬁned to the level of detail that enables them to be used for the integration of
project planning and control activities.
Step 3: How will you represent your WBS? In the case of smaller projects, drawing a
WBS as a tree diagram is a very visual and preferential way (see the upper part of
Figure 5.4). As your number of WBS levels grows, so does the complexity, making it
more diﬃcult to stick with the tree format.
An alternative may be in the TOC (table of contents) format. For example,
Figure 5.5 shows the TOC format for the WBS from Figure 5.4. To some extent this
WBS construction process looks like a random process. Bringing more order to
it is possible by following several guidelines (a shortened version appears in the
“Golden Rules” example).19

THE WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
133
Hardware Development Project
Concept Stage
1000
2000
Design Stage
1100
1200
Project Kick-off
1110
1120
1220
1210
Materials Preparation
Project Plan Approval
Integrated Plan Preparation
Kick-off Meeting
Project Plan
2100
Design Review
2110
Design Concept
2120
Design Review Meeting
2130
DFMEA
2200
Prototype Approval
2210
UX Design Review
2220
Component 1st Article
2230
Quality Test
Figure 5.5: Table of Contents WBS Structure
Step 4: Make sure the WBS is outcome oriented. Since the WBS is about outcomes,
activities and tasks should be relegated to the lowest levels of the WBS.
Step 5: Be sure that the WBS includes all project work. What is left out will not be
resourced and scheduled, which is a risky proposition.
Step 6: Make each work element relatively independent of others on the same level.
Step7: Keep breaking the work down into work elements until you reach a level at which
there is a method in your organization capable of producing the element. Stop there.
It is an acceptable practice to have WBS branches of unequal length.
Step 8: Produce a WBS that integrates work elements or separate levels to the point that
their aggregate is an equivalent of the project completion.
Golden Rules of WBS Structuring
■
Focus on documenting the project outcomes.
■
Show all project work.
■
Make objectives relatively independent.
■
Use symmetrical branches when justiﬁed.
■
Build the WBS as an integrated effort.
Evaluate the WBS Structure
Since the WBS development lacks the rigor and discipline of the scientiﬁc approach,
there is no single correct WBS structure. Rather, there can be many diﬀerent but equally
good WBS structures. To make sure that your WBS is suﬃcient, you should evaluate it

134
SCOPE PLANNING
against the preceding guidelines. If there is a need for some revisions, making them will
ensure that you have created a WBS capable of acting as a framework for integration of
project planning and control.
Increase Productivity through WBS Templates
Having each project team develop a WBS from scratch can create several problems. First,
WBS development consumes resources. Also, when each project uses a diﬀerent WBS
type, the beneﬁt of comparing various projects and drawing synergies is lost. These
problems have been successfully cured by the use of WBS templates.
Speciﬁcally, this means adopting templates for certain project families. Highway
construction projects are an example of a project family. Other families may include
software development projects, manufacturing process projects, and hardware devel-
opment projects. Generally, a family of projects is a group of projects that share identical
or suﬃciently similar project assignments. When the templates are developed and
adopted, the development of a WBS for a new project is reduced to adapting the tem-
plate. This saves time, produces a quality WBS, and enables interproject comparability.
In a nutshell, templates increase productivity.
Constructing a Project WBS: A Bottom-up Approach
Brainstorming all project work that needs to be performed and then organizing it into
a WBS hierarchy is at the heart of the bottom-up approach. This approach, essentially
an application of the aﬃnity diagramming method, is beneﬁcial to those without
much project experience or those who do not prefer to take a systems approach.
Projects developing or deploying novel technologies, typically fraught with high
uncertainty and lacking precedents, can beneﬁt from this approach as well, even if the
project team is experienced. Despite its brainstorming nature, the bottom-up approach
may be preceded by collecting necessary information for the WBS development,
selecting the type of WBS, and establishing the level of its detail—in other words,
some of the steps taken in the top-down approach. Other steps in the bottom-up
approach follow.
Generate a Detailed List of Outcomes
This step includes having each project team member brainstorm what is going to be
created and delivered in the project. Each outcome may be recorded on a sticky note
and posted in a visible place, with the number of generated outcomes ranging from
40 to 60—a good number for a small or medium-size project. Higher numbers may be
required for large projects. In the process, adhering to the brainstorming principle of not
critiquing the ideas is crucial.
Sort Deliverables in Related Groupings
The result of this step is the grouping of related outcomes. The aim may be to create
groupings of ﬁve or so outcomes. Screen them carefully for relationships and group

THE WORK BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
135
them into new groupings, striving to have three or four levels of groupings for small
and medium projects, possibly more for larger projects.
Create Duplicates and Consolidate Outcomes
Project team members may have diﬀerent and conﬂicting ideas about grouping out-
comes. If that occurs, create duplicates of the outcomes and post them in the groupings
suggestedbytheteammembers.Developthediscussiontounderstandtherationalefor
the conﬂicting groupings, and try to reach a consensus. If this is not possible, use a pre-
ferred type of voting to decide on the ﬁnal grouping. Also, consolidate similar outcomes
and eliminate redundancies. This should give you the preliminary WBS hierarchy.
Create Names for the Groupings
The hierarchy needs names for groupings/outcomes on diﬀerent levels. As much as pos-
sible, the idea here is one of garnering consensus among team members. Spending
enough time on naming the groupings/outcomes is useful for a good understanding
of what is going to be delivered on the project, as well as for creating buy-in.
Evaluate WBS Structure
Similar to the top-down approach, bottom-up WBS development lacks the rigor and dis-
cipline of the scientiﬁc approach, leaving room for mistakes. Therefore, this is the time to
evaluate the WBS developed against the guidelines for structuring a WBS. Again, useful
revisions and corrections are welcome, aiming at the improvement of the WBS to the
level it needs to perform as a framework for integration of project planning and control.
The bottom-up approach is a good method for novice project managers and for use
on unfamiliar projects. For full evaluation of its potential, we should recognize that it pro-
vides an easy start, encourages strong involvement, and downplays vocabulary issues.
Its ease of use may give it an edge over the top-down approach, which requires more
time to start and a shared vocabulary, and also limits team participation.
Using the WBS
The WBS was initially used to bring order to the integration of management work faced
with large and complex projects in the government domain. Logically, then, most of the
“science” of the WBS was conceived in governmental agencies and is very well reﬂected
and covered in the works of prominent PM books.20 What is not well covered is how
to adapt the science for what is the dominant stream of projects in today’s business
world—dynamic small and medium projects. For these, the WBS is a must-have tool.
Whether you are in software or hardware development, marketing or accounting, man-
ufacturing, infrastructure technology, or construction, practically any area and industry,
small and medium projects beneﬁt from a WBS to structure the project work. It is possi-
ble to run a successful project without using a WBS, but the point is that probability of
success is higher when a good WBS is used, as opposed to having an inappropriate WBS
or not having one at all (see “Tips for WBS Use”).

136
SCOPE PLANNING
Tips for WBS Use
■
Adopt a template WBS for each project family.
■
When developing the template, begin with few levels. Add more if project
team members ask for it.
■
Build “blank” work elements in the template to be used by unusual projects.
■
Develop a WBS in each project, small or large, starting from a template WBS.
■
Allow smaller projects to use a fewer number of levels in the template.
For each work element, assign an individual responsible for producing the outcomes
listed under that work element. If, for example, you identify 20 elements in the WBS, each
work element would have an “owner” responsible for the element: its schedule, cost, risk
response, performance measurement, and project control. A convenient tool for assign-
ing responsibilities in this manner is the responsibility matrix (Chapter 3). Listed on its
vertical axis are work elements, while across the top are persons involved in the project.
In the cell at the intersection of a work element row and a person column, diﬀerent
responsibilities are assigned for the accomplishment of the work element.
The second planning action made possible by the WBS is scheduling the project
work. Here, the development of a project schedule begins at the work package level.
In particular, once the schedule for each work package is developed, the schedule for a
work element on the next level is no more than a summarization of schedules of its work
packages with resource constraints resolved. Similarly, the schedule for any higher-level
work element is the summary of schedules of its constituent work elements.
In a way similar to schedule integration, the WBS provides a formal structure for
resource estimating. Again, resources are estimated for work packages, and their aggre-
gation up the WBS leads to total resource requirements. When resources for a work
element are spread over the element’s schedule, you will obtain a time-phased resource
plan, a great baseline against which to compare the actual performance and strategize
corrective actions, if a variance occurs. The reason we emphasize resources is that the
majority of small and medium projects prefer the use of resource-based estimates to
the cost-based estimates. Should you prefer the latter, multiply resources by their hourly
labor rate to obtain cost estimates.
Planning for other management functions, such as risk, quality, and change man-
agement, should also be performed around the skeleton provided by the WBS. Take, for
example, risk response. The basic place for a risk plan including risk identiﬁcation, anal-
ysis, and response is the work package. Summing up risk plans for work packages that
belong to the next-higher-level work element will yield a risk proﬁle for the element.
Continuing with this summation up the WBS hierarchy will produce a risk proﬁle for the
total project.
Beneﬁts
There are two reasons why the value of the WBS cannot be overstated: It helps organize
theprojectwork,anditcreatesaframeworkfromwhichmanagementofaprojectcanbe

THE PRODUCT BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
137
fully integrated. In particular, the WBS enables a project team to organize the work into
small outcomes that are manageable, making the assignment of responsibility for each
of them easy. Because the outcomes are relatively independent, their interfacing with
and dependence on other outcomesisreduced toa minimum. Still, theyare integratable
as you move up the WBS so the team can get a view of the total solution. This extraordi-
nary capability of the WBS to help organize the project work is an enabler of what is an
even higher value of the well-constructed WBS; it serves as the framework for integra-
tion of project planning and control functions. Some call it the single most important
element in project management.21
At the heart of the signiﬁcance of the WBS is its ability to serve as a project planning
and control framework, enabling the achievement of the following fundamental project
management actions:
■
Assign the responsibility for the project work.
■
Schedule the project work.
■
Estimate the cost or resources to complete the project work.
■
Develop the response to risks associated with the project work, and perform other
planning functions such as quality planning.
■
Manage changes to project scope.
■
Control the project work eﬀort to accomplish project goals.
Finally, the WBS provides a strong visual impact. As a practicing project manager
recently commented, “the WBS brings order to disorder in a visual way.” At a glance, the
WBS turns the disorder of the verbal and obscure scope statements into the order of a
clearly structured hierarchy of work.
THE PRODUCT BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
For those project managers involved in product development, planning activities
involve the combination of product-based planning and project-based planning.22
This type of planning is based on the premise that the product solution is developed
ﬁrst, and then the project activities, tasks, deliverables, and resources required to create
and deliver the product are planned.
The product breakdown structure (PBS) is a critical tool for product-based planning
and should be an essential part of any product development project manager’s PM Tool-
box. Essentially, the PBS disaggregates a ﬁnal product into its constituent components.
Like the project WBS, the PBS is a visual aid that represents the relationship between
a product and its components. However, the project WBS and the PBS are used for dif-
ferent purposes. The main diﬀerence between the two is that the PBS focuses on the
product, whereas the WBS focuses on the work required to create the product.
Constructing a Product Breakdown Structure
When creating a PBS, it is common to utilize the knowledge of the team that will be
designing and developing the product. This usually involves a group of cross-functional

138
SCOPE PLANNING
product specialists. A structured brainstorming session, complete with a whiteboard,
sticky notes, pens, and brainpower, is all you need to construct a PBS.
Start with the End in Mind
It is helpful to begin the PBS construction process by ﬁrst diagramming the product
that will eventually be created and developed. We recommend doing this by diagram-
ming the whole solution that fulﬁlls the customer’s expectations.23 For example, if we
purchase a laptop computer, we wouldn’t consider it acceptable if we received a box
of circuit boards, a second box that contained the enclosure, another box containing
the peripheral devices such as memory and network adapters, and ﬁnally an envelope
containing a CD with the computer software applications and operating system. Rather,
unless we’re a computer hobbyist or a system integrator, we expect to receive an inte-
grated laptop that we can unpack, plug in, and begin using immediately. The point we’re
making is that the whole solution may include not only the core product, but also a num-
ber of enabling elements of the product that are needed in order to fulﬁll the customer’s
expectation.
It is helpful to think of the whole solution consisting of two parts: (1) the core compo-
nents of a product and (2) the enabling components of a product. The core components
are the tangible elements that when integrated, constitute the physical product devel-
oped. In systems language, these are the subsystems of the integrated product. The
enabling components are the additional elements needed to ensure the product meets
customers’ expectations. Both the core and enabling components of a product need to
be included in the planning of a project.
Let’s look at an example to illustrate. Imagine that you are in charge of leading the
project commissioned to create the next-generation smartphone for a phone manufac-
turer. Your whole product solution diagram may look something like the one illustrated
in Figure 5.6.
The product solution begins with the core components that consist of the physical
elements that make up the phone such as the digital circuitry, the embedded software,
the radio device, and the enclosure packaging (keep in mind this is a simplistic view for
discussion sake).
The product solution also includes other important elements needed such as a soft-
ware application development platform, interface to the wireless communication infras-
tructure, manufacturing of the product, quality assurance, and customer support for the
users of the product. These are the enabling components of the product that are needed
to ensure complete customer and user satisfaction when the phone is delivered.
By diagramming the product and its components you are beginning to structure
your project. In eﬀect, you are creating the project architecture, where the term archi-
tecture refers to the conceptual structure and organization of a system.24 The process of
creating a PBS now has an excellent starting point.
Choose the PBS Structure
Once you understand the core components of the product you intend to develop, you
are ready to construct your PBS. The ﬁrst step in this process is to select the type of struc-
ture you wish to use.

THE PRODUCT BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
139
Whole Solution
Core Components
Circuitry
Software
Radio
Enclosure
Manufacturing
Customer Support
Infrastructure
Enabling Components
App Platform
Quality
Power Supply
Figure 5.6: Example Whole Product Solution Diagram
Like the project WBS, multiple structure types are available for the PBS: the hierarchi-
cal tree design, the table of contents design, and the mind-map design to name three.
The hierarchical tree and table of contents designs are identical to those described for
the project WBS. If you create a diagram of the whole product solution as recommended
in the previous section, the mind-map design is a good complementary PBS design to
choose. Figure 5.7 illustrates an example of the mind map PBS structure for the cell
phone product discussed previously.
Decompose the Product
With the PBS structure decided upon, the next step is to begin decomposing the prod-
uct into its components and subcomponents. At the top level (or in the middle of the
mind-map structure) is the integrated product that will emerge from the product devel-
opment process. In the example used earlier, the cell phone is the top-level product in
the PBS.
Next, decompose the top level, or integrated product, into its primary components.
As illustrated in Figure 5.6, you may have a combination of core components and
enabling components if you take a whole solution approach. You will want to include
both component types in your PBS. Continue decomposing each component into its
subcomponents until a logical point of decomposition is reached (Figure 5.7). This is
normally the level where the subcomponents can be described as a set of project
deliverables.
Validate the PBS
Working your way up from the lowest level of the PBS, validate that the subcomponents
at each level will integrate to create the subcomponent or component at the

140
Cell
Phone
10.1 Motherboard
10.2 Memory
10.3 Wireless Charger
10 Circuitry
9 Software
9.1 BIOS
9.2 GUI
9.3 OS
8 Radio
8.1 IC
8.2 Antenna
8.3 ADAC
7 Pwr Supply
7.1 Volt. Reg.
7.2 Transformer
7.3 Rectifier
6 Enclosure
6.1 Casing
6.2 LCD
6.3 Adapters
5 Quality
5.1 Test Planning
5.2 QualityReqt’s
5.3 Line Inspection
4 Customer
Support
4.1 Support Planning
4.2 Hiring
4.3 Procedures
3 Manufacturing
3.1 Assembly
3.2 Test
3.3 Process Dev.
2 Infrastructure
2.1 Packet Core
2.2 Regulations
2.3 Gateways
1 App Platform
1.1 API’s
1.2 Arch Framework
1.3 Database
Figure 5.7:
Mind-Map PBS Design Example

THE PRODUCT BREAKDOWN STRUCTURE
141
next-highest level. Continue this process until the top-level product is validated. If gaps
are discovered during the validation process, go back to the decomposition step to
correct for the gap.
Using the PBS
As stated previously, the PBS is primarily used for product development projects where
product planning and project planning are often occurring in a concurrent manner. The
PBS is used to bring these two planning eﬀorts together by providing a visual repre-
sentation of the product and its components, as well as the relationship between the
components, in order to facilitate the project planning process.
The PBS is used to describe what the project work eﬀort is meant to create. This
should be established before full-scale project planning begins, where project planning
focusesonhowtheproductwillbedeveloped.Obviously,whatshouldcomebeforehow.
We found it interesting to witness a recent debate on a professional networking site
concerning the value of using a WBS versus a PBS.25 We had no idea this was the basis
of such a hotly contested philosophical war between factions. Not only did we ﬁnd the
debate interesting, we found it a bit disturbing. As is usually the case in such mental
exercises, the key point of interest was lost. The discussion should not have been about
the virtues of using one tool versus the other, but rather about how the two tools can
be eﬀectively used in tandem.
Since planning on a product development project includes both product-based
planning and project-based planning, once a PBS is created that decomposes a product
into its components to the level of deliverables, the components can then become the
elements contained within the WBS. Decomposition of the work necessary to create
each product component can now take place using the WBS. Used in this manner,
the PBS and WBS become a set of integrated tools, which demonstrates both the
decomposition of the product as well as the decomposition of the work necessary to
create the product.
Beneﬁts
Since the planning process on a product development project involves concurrent plan-
ning of product and project, the opportunity is great for these two eﬀorts to become
disconnected and even in conﬂict with one another. This of course can be a disastrous
situation for the project manager as well as the project sponsor. If used, the PBS is an
eﬀective tool that can help to keep this from occurring. It focuses the planning eﬀort on
both what will be developed as well as how it will be developed. Especially if used in
conjunction with the project WBS.
The PBS is a very visual tool that helps the project manager visualize the various
components of the product and project. This visual representation aids in establish-
ing structure and order to very complex projects. By engaging the sense of sight in
the project structuring process, we are gaining another tool to establish order out of
complexity.

142
SCOPE PLANNING
An intangible, but important beneﬁt gained from the use of the PBS is an increase in
teamcohesion.Howisthis?ThePBSisnormallycreatedearlyintheprojectplanningpro-
cess, a time when a project team is beginning to form. Since development of the PBS is
a collaborative eﬀort between the cross-functional product specialists, much is learned
aboutthevariousspecialties,andarealizationthattheproductdevelopmentprojectwill
only be successful through a collaborative eﬀort normally sets in. Nothing drives team
cohesion faster than having to collectively solve problems and create a solution—in this
case, the PBS.
References
1.
Stroh, P. J. Business Strategy: Plan, Execute, Win! (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
2014).
2.
Alleman, G. B. Performance-Based Project Management: Increasing the Probability
of Project Success. New York, NY: AMACOM, 2014).
3.
Handiﬁeld, R. B. “Eﬀects of Concurrent Engineering on Make-to-Order Products.”
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 41 (4): 384–393, 2004.
4.
Reinertsen, D. G. ThePrinciplesofProductDevelopmentFlow:SecondGenerationLean
Product Development (Redondo Beach, CA: Celeritas, 2009).
5.
McDounough, E. F. I., and G. Barczak. “Speeding Up New Product Development: The
Eﬀects of Leadership Style and Source of Technology.” JournalofProductInnovation
Management 8 (3): 203–211, 1991.
6.
Handﬁeld, R. B., Gary L. Ragatz, Kenneth J. Petersen, and Robert M. Monczka. 2009.
“Involving Suppliers in New Product Development.” California Management Review
42 (1): 59–82.
7.
Cleland, D. I. Project Management: Strategic Design and Implementation (New York,
NY: McGraw-Hill, 2006).
8.
Thompson, A. T., and A. J. Strickland. Crafting and Implementing Strategy, 19th ed.
(New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2013).
9.
Reinertsen, 2009.
10.
Berkun, Scott. Making Things Happen: Mastering Project Management (Sebastopol,
CA: O’Reilly Media, 2008).
11.
Kahn, K. B. The PDMA Handbook of New Product Development, 3rd ed. (Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, 2012).
12.
Cooper, R. G. Winning at New Products: Creating Value Through Innovation, 4th ed.
(New York, NY: Basic Books, 2011).
13.
Web site: www.purchasing-procurement center.com. Accessed October 15, 2014.
14.
Project Management Institute. AGuidetoProgramManagementBodyofKnowledge,
5th ed. (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2014).
15.
Ibid.
16.
Hammer, M., and J. Champy. Reengineering the Corporation (New York, NY: Harper
Business, 2006).

REFERENCES
143
17.
Kerzner, H. R. Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling, and
Controlling (Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013).
18.
Schneider, A. “Project Management in International Teams: Instruments for
Improving Cooperation.” International Journal of Project Management 13 (4):
247–251, 2005.
19.
Department of Defense. MIL HDBK-881A; Department of Defense-Work Breakdown
Structure (Washington, DC: Department of Defense, 2005).
20.
DepartmentofEnergy. DOEG120.1-5,PerformanceMeasurementSystemsGuidelines
(Washington, DC: Department of Energy, 1996).
21.
Kerzner, 2013.
22.
TSO. Managing Successful Projects with PRINCE2 (London, England: TSO, 2012).
23.
Martinelli, Russ, James Waddell, and Tim Rahschulte. Program Management for
Improved Business Results, 2nd ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014).
24.
Ibid.
25.
Website:
https://www.linkedin.com/groups/What-is-Work-Breakdown-Structure-
35313.S.5879948537357152257?trk=groups_search_item_list-0-b-ttl&goback=
%2Egmr_35313%2Egna_35313. Viewed on October 8, 2014


6
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
P
roject scheduling involves the planning of timelines for completing the work
identiﬁed and establishing dates during which project resources will be needed
to perform the work.
The project schedule is the cornerstone of project work and, as such, serves as the
working tool for project planning, execution, monitoring, and control. By developing
a project schedule, a project manager is planning the time element of the project. By
authorizing work according to the tasks contained within the schedule, the project man-
ager triggerstheexecutionof the project. Bycomparing the actual execution datesof the
tasks with the scheduled dates, a project manager monitors the project and when actual
performance deviates from the scheduled dates to an extent that corrective action must
take place, a project manager is using the schedule to exercise control measures.
The process of schedule development involves the integration of multiple aspects
concerning a project, including the estimated duration of tasks, the constraints imposed
by the availability of resources and budget, and expected due dates. The goal of sched-
ule development is to be able to answer the following questions:
1.
If performed to plan, when will the project be completed?
2.
At what dates should each task begin and end?
3.
Which tasks are more critical to ensure timely completion of the project?
4.
Which tasks can be delayed, if necessary without delaying the project completion
date?
5.
When are project resources needed and when will they be released?
6.
Which resources are most constrained according to their task load?
The project schedule can be presented in various ways, as demonstrated in this
chapter. The schedule type is often driven by the preferences and needs of the various
project players. A functional manager, for example, may be interested in a schedule type
that show the resource allocation requirements; the senior sponsor may be interested
in a schedule that shows only major project events and milestones; and a project
manager may need a detailed schedule showing each work breakdown structure
(WBS) element.
Since project managers have a set of stakeholders with varying scheduling needs,
they need to have various schedule types in their PM Toolbox. We will start by describing
the most widely used project schedule type—the Gantt chart.
145

146
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
THE GANTT CHART
Using bars to represent project activities, the Gantt chart is a scheduling tool that shows
when the project and each activity within the project start and end against a horizontal
time scale. Even though the Gantt was developed around 1917 and is the oldest formal
scheduling tool, it is still the most widely used tool.
Having a Gantt chart helps ensure that project participants have the necessary time
allocated on their calendars and are available to perform their activities. Figure 6.1 illus-
trates a simple example of the Gantt chart.
Developing a Gantt Chart
Developing a Gantt chart takes several steps. Though the ﬁrst step—determine level of
detail and identify activities—is normally part of scope planning, we include it here in
order to provide an integrated procedure.
The quality of the Gantt chart is ﬁrmly rooted in quality inputs about the following:
■
Project scope
■
Project WBS
■
Responsibilities
■
Available resources
■
Schedule management system
Information about the project scope and the breakdown of project outcomes
and activities from the WBS helps schedulers analyze and understand the project
1.01 Select Concept
1.02  Design Beta PC
1.03  Produce Beta PC
1.04  Develop Test Plan
1.05  Test Beta PC
2.01  Design Production PC
2.02  Outsource Mold Design
2.03  Design Tooling
2.04  Purchase Tool Machines
2.05  Manufacture Molds
2.06  Test Molds
2.07  Certify PC
3.01  Ramp Production
Timeline
Work Packages/Tasks
Jan
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Figure 6.1: An Example Gantt Chart

THE GANTT CHART
147
activities that are being scheduled. Naturally, those responsible for the execution of the
activities should be in the best position to schedule them because they are the best
source of knowledge about the activities. Part of their knowledge relates to priorities,
activity sequencing, and duration estimating. Another part of their knowledge relates
to what resources are available and in which time periods. Still another part of their
knowledge is the schedule management system, a method leading companies deploy
to ensure their schedules are systematically developed and used (see “Schedule
Management System”).
Determine Level of Detail and Identify Activities
How many line items should there be in the Gantt chart? Twenty-ﬁve? Fifty? Seventy-
ﬁve? The answer will be determined by the level of detail used in the WBS and the
number of activities required to create each project outcome. Consider, for example,
a practice used by an information technology (IT) organization in a ﬁnancial services
company. For a certain type of project proﬁle, the team’s decision is that a typical Gantt
chart will have around 25 activities, with no activity longer than three weeks and shorter
than one week. This provides guidance for the next step and ensures that the chart is
sized appropriately, neither too cumbersome and time consuming nor too high level
and lacking necessary information to manage. Speciﬁcally, the amount of detail should
be enough for the intended user to monitor progress and for coordination.
Brainstorming and breaking the project down into constituent outcomes and activi-
ties that need to be performed in order to complete the project is next. You can enlist the
help of the WBS (Chapter 5) for this purpose, identifying activities necessary to achieve
work packages in the WBS. At this time, you don’t need to worry about how big the activ-
ities are; rather, the emphasis is on making sure that all necessary activities are identiﬁed.
Once that point is reached, refer to the level of detail established in the previous step. If
it is determined that there are too few activities, breaking down some of them to hit the
desired level of detail is a natural choice. Or, if there are too many activities, it is helpful
to combine activities to arrive at the desired level.
Schedule Management System
Scheduling a project is rarely a matter of sitting down and developing a sin-
gle schedule before the project starts. The process of developing and using
schedules needs to be planned and organized.1 To ensure such an approach,
some companies tend to resort to a schedule management system that helps
to determine the following:
What schedules are needed? Depending on the size of the projects, you can use
a hierarchy of schedules for larger projects (see the Hierarchical Schedule
section later in this chapter) or a single schedule for small projects, as well
as preliminary and ﬁnal schedules.
(continued)

148
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
How will the schedules be used? Some schedules, such as a summary schedule,
can be used for management oversight, while a detailed schedule can be
used for organizing and controlling all work.
How much detail is needed? Limiting the number of activities in a schedule,
such as up to ten in a milestone schedule, is an attempt to preempt unnec-
essary detail and eliminate wasted time.
What tools will be appropriate? Any of the tools in this chapter are appropriate,
if used for their designed purpose.
When will the schedules be prepared? Before the project starts. For projects
with a high level of uncertainty, a rolling-wave concept may be applied: Pre-
pare a front-end schedule for the ﬁrst 60 days of a project, then develop a
more detailed schedule as the project unfolds.
How will the schedules be monitored and updated? Frequency and schedule
control tools need to be deﬁned in tune with needs of a company.
Scheduling can be overwhelming unless approached in a systematic way.
Developing a schedule that is more detailed than necessary is as useless as the
schedule that the management team cannot follow or understand. Inappro-
priate scheduling emphasis like this may easily turn people against the use of
formal scheduling techniques. It is the job of the schedule management system
to prevent this.
Sequence Activities
Sequencing activities involves arranging them in a logical order of execution. This
requires a good knowledge of the work ﬂow and priorities of the project and ensures
that we ﬁrst perform activities that need to produce outputs necessary for work on the
subsequent activities. Illogical sequence of activities is destined to cause rework and
additional cycle time.
Estimate Activity Durations
Resources, human and material, drive the process of estimating activity durations. Begin
the process by asking, “What resources do I need to successfully complete this activity?”
The answer should provide the names of resources and work time for each one of them
to complete the activity: for example, 100 hours of work from a software programmer.
Next, knowing the availability of a resource and using the company’s work calendar (e.g.,
no work on Sundays), convert the work time into calendar time. For instance, because
she is involved in multiple projects, the programmer’s 100-work time hours will have to
be spread over 12 weeks to get her job done. This should be repeated for each activity.
Draft and Reﬁne the Gantt Chart
Drawing a Gantt chart requires a sheet or form with a horizontal time scale and the list
of activities across the vertical axis (Figure 6.1). Adding up calendar times for project
activities gives a rough idea of the total time the time scale needs to show. This is a good
approach for projects in which all activities are sequential. Should there be overlapping
activities, you can reduce the duration of the time scale accordingly.

THE GANTT CHART
149
Next is listing all activities on the vertical axis per determined sequence, followed by
these steps:
Step 1: Draw a bar representing each activity, with its length proportional to its duration
on the time scale.
Step2: For multiple activities that form a phase of work, add a summary bar, called a ham-
mock activity or simply a hammock, just above the ﬁrst activity. A hammock begins
when the ﬁrst of the activities begins and ends when the last of the activities ends.
A reasonable measure is to have a hammock activity for every four to ten detailed
activities that relate to each other. Because management needs a big-picture view
of the project, the hammocks’ summary level of detail makes them very convenient
for that purpose.
Step 3: Look again at the whole chart. Are all necessary activities there? Logically
sequenced? With appropriate timescale and reasonable durations? Make any
changes necessary to ﬁnish reﬁning the chart and get ready to use it.
Using the Gantt Chart
The Gantt chart is an eﬀective tool for smaller and simpler projects, where there is
less need to show dependencies between activities, since they are well known to
all involved.2 As the project size and complexity increase, the Gantt chart becomes
less applicable. Simply, the chart gradually loses the ability to handle the increasing
number of activities, data, and dependencies between activities involved. In large
and cross-functional projects, using the Gantt chart as the primary scheduling tool is
impractical and ineﬀective (see “Tips for Gantt Charts”).
In contrast, in large and complex projects, the complementary use of the Gantt chart
and critical path schedule may be a very smart strategy. The latter eﬀectively copes
with number of activities, data, and dependencies between activities. It, however, does
a poor job of showing in a simple and visual manner what activities to work on, in what
order, and for how long. That is where the Gantt chart may add value. Extracting from
the sizable critical path schedule activities due in the next week or two and then pre-
senting them in the Gantt chart format provides clear and practical short-term schedule
focus. The project manager is still responsible for coordinating the interfaces between
the owners of the project activities and outcomes.
Depending on one’s knowledge and experience, a 20-activity Gantt chart can be
developed in anywhere from 10 to 40 minutes. Some experienced project managers
use the rule “activity per minute,” meaning it should take one minute for each activity
in the Gantt chart. Note that the more people involved in the Gantt chart development,
the more time may be needed.
Beneﬁts
Having a Gantt chart helps ensure that everyone understands the timeline for project
activities. Then, project participants will have the necessary time allocated on their cal-
endars and be available to perform their activities.

150
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
The Gantt chart brings value to the project manager through its visual and simple
design that has lasted for decades. It creates a pictorial model of the project that makes
it both an excellent management and communication tool. Its simple design enables a
user with little or no instruction the ability to create and read a project schedule.
Finally, the Gantt chart is a very useful tool for resource planning and allocation.
By deﬁning the number of resources needed for each project activity, and then adding
them up for each time period, the total resource requirements over a deﬁned period of
time for each activity as well as for the project as a whole can be established.
Tips for Gantt Charts
■
Rely on the Gantt chart as long as it has fewer than 100 activities.
■
Use a single Gantt chart as a primary scheduling tool in small, simple
projects.
■
Don’t use a single Gantt chart as a primary scheduling tool in large, complex,
cross-functional projects. Rather, utilize multiple, integrated Gantt charts.
■
Team-developed Gantt charts lead to higher quality, better buy-in, and
stronger commitment of team members.
THE MILESTONE CHART
This scheduling tool shows milestones against a time scale in order to signify key
project events and to draw stakeholder attention to them (Figure 6.2). A milestone is
deﬁned as a point in time or event whose importance lies in it being the climax point
for many converging activities. For instance, “Requirements Document Complete” is a
distinctive milestone for software development projects, and “Market Requirements
Document Complete” is a characteristic milestone for product development projects.
While these milestones relate to the completion of key deliverables, other types may
include the start and ﬁnish of major project phases, major reviews, events external to
the project (e.g., trade show date), and so forth.
Requirements Documented
Conceptual Design Complete
Development Complete
Production Review Complete
First Ship to Customer
1st Half - 2018
2nd Half - 2018
Milestones
1/31
3/31
7/15
10/16
11/18
Jan Feb Mar
Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Oct Nov
Dec
Figure 6.2: Example Milestone Chart

THE MILESTONE CHART
151
Developing a Milestone Chart
Traditionally, the milestone chart has been used to focus senior managers on highly
important project events, whether the project is large or small. It can also help
strengthen the emphasis on goal orientation while reducing focus on activity orienta-
tion. Its value can be additionally improved if the chart is customized to speciﬁc project
needs.
A relatively simple procedure for developing a milestone chart includes several steps
that build heavily on a schedule with activity dependencies that is constructed in a sepa-
rate procedure. We nevertheless include it here in order to present an integrated picture
of milestone chart development.
A milestone chart is as good as its inputs. Having a solid deﬁnition of the project
scope provides those who schedule a good understanding of the milestones being
scheduled. The quality of the chart is certainly expected to be higher when the owners
of milestones are responsible for their scheduling (see “Who Is Involved in Scheduling?”)
and follow guidelines established in the schedule management system. If scheduling
of milestones is based on a previously developed detailed schedule, the quality of the
chart is bound to further improve.
Who Is Involved in Scheduling?
The involvement of project participants in developing schedules hinges to a
great extent on the organizational strategies for project management. In the
matrix environment, for example, many players are involved—team members,
project managers, functional managers, the project ofﬁce, and executives.
Team members typically own work packages and tasks, reporting their
completion and estimating how much time is necessary to complete each
unﬁnished work package or task. While they have to know some scheduling
terms, such as start date, ﬁnish date, data (reporting) date, resource availability,
and so on, there is no need for extensive knowledge of scheduling theory.
As providers of resources to a project, functional managers care about the
accuracy of the estimates and availability of resources when projects need
them.3 Like team members, their knowledge of scheduling theory is basic.
Project managers are the ultimate users and owners of the project sched-
ule. They facilitate schedule development and monitor the data furnished by
team members for completeness and feasibility. They then use the schedule to
monitor and control progress to plan, working with the functional managers to
make schedule modiﬁcations when needed. Project managers need a decent
amount of knowledge about scheduling theory.
The project ofﬁce (or the scheduling group) should have scheduling experts
who are capable of designing and maintaining a project scheduling system that
all other players utilize. Also, their knowledge in running scheduling software
and checking time, cost, and resource estimates in order to support the system
and individual projects is essential.
(continued)

152
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
The job of executives in project scheduling is not about scheduling
theory, tools, or software. Rather, their focus is on asking questions, reading
reports, directing project-related personnel, and providing overall support.
Like a well-conducted orchestra of master musicians, these players need to
synchronize their actions to produce a meaningful scheduling concert.
Select Milestone Chart Type
You may choose to develop a high-level milestone chart with only a few high-proﬁle
milestones intended to inform managers or other stakeholders. Another option may
be a milestone chart designed to help manage the work necessary to accomplish a
project deliverable or complete a project phase. Which one is better? It depends on the
situation. As an example, for a certain type of project, a company can use high-level mile-
stone charts with ﬁve standard milestones identiﬁed as decision points between project
phases. At these milestones, top management reviews the project status and decides
to either continue or terminate the project. In addition, the company may also use a
more detailed chart with 10 to 15 milestones, which the project team uses to review
major project deliverables. Selecting the type of chart based on its purpose and use is
an important step in building the milestone chart.
Identify Key Milestones
In this step, we let the type of the chart chosen guide the selection of the desired mile-
stones. Consider all types of milestones—key deliverables, start and ﬁnish of the project
and its major phases, major reviews, important events external to the project, and so
forth. Which ones are key to monitoring the project progress? If a company uses stan-
dard milestones, the answer is simple: those same standard milestones. If this is not the
case, focus on the major synchronization points and key decision points in the project.
Sequence the Milestones
Sequencingmilestonesisaboutstudyingdependenciesbetweenactivitiesandcompre-
hendinghowtheiroutputswillconvergetoaculminationorsynchronizationpoint—the
selected milestone. Marking their position in the detailed schedule will provide their
sequence, indicating which activities have to be started or completed to proclaim that
a milestone is accomplished.
Draft and Reﬁne the Milestone Chart
Once milestones are marked on the detailed schedule with activity dependencies, the
milestone chart is essentially drafted. This is the time to ask the following questions. Are
all necessary milestones there? Are they logically sequenced? In appropriate positions
on the schedule? It is important to ensure that a suﬃcient number of milestones have
been chosen so as not to have a prolonged period between milestones. It is easy to
select all milestones at the project beginning and end, where many activities start and
complete. However, that would leave the middle void of milestones, reducing the ability

THE MILESTONE CHART
153
to control project progress. As these questions get answered, the information will be
created to make any changes and distill the chart.
With milestones marked on the schedule, two points should be discernible. The ﬁrst
is the laborious work that must be done. Second, the selected milestones that signify
keys to the project progress must stand out so as to avoid getting lost in the details of
the laborious work. In short, not only should the trees (details) be evident, but the forest
(milestones) as well.
Finalize the Chart
Quite understandably, managers don’t necessarily like to bother with detailed sched-
ules. Rather, they will ask for a chart showing only milestones so they can glance and
discern key data on project progress. You should use information from the detailed
schedule with milestones—time scale, milestone names, and time positions of
milestones—in order to prepare the milestone chart. To do so, list milestones on the
vertical axis of a sheet, draw the time scale across the horizontal axis, select symbols for
milestones (e.g., diamond), and place the symbols across the time scale (see “Tips for
Milestone Charts”).
Tips for Milestone Charts
■
Provide adequate time spacing between milestones.
■
Use the chart for both key events and detailed milestones.
■
Use the charts in both large and small projects to demonstrate actual
progress against plan.
■
Use the chart in conjunction with another schedule that show activity
dependencies.
■
Team-developed milestone charts lead to higher-quality schedules, broader
buy-in, and stronger commitment of team members.
Using the Milestone Chart
Traditionally, the milestone chart has been used to focus management on highly impor-
tant events whether projects are large or small.4 As a result, when used for this purpose,
the chart typically shows a few key milestones. In other words, use the chart to pro-
vide key data pertaining to planned and actual project progress. When the WBS is used
intheproject,thesehighlyimportanteventsandkeydataareusuallyrelatedtoLevel1in
the WBS.
Recent developments have seen the increased use of multiple milestone charts at
one time, where each chart corresponds to a certain level of WBS. Consequently, a chart
on Level 4 of a ﬁve-level WBS, for example, may easily have a couple hundred milestones,
each one tied to a work package. The chart is then used in conjunction with a detailed
network diagram chart so that the eﬀect of dependencies on milestones is discernible.
This practice is well accepted in technology organizations that compete on fast project
cycle times (see the “Hierarchical Schedule” section later in this chapter).

154
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
Beneﬁts
A chart with a few key milestones—related to Level 1 of a WBS, for example—is in a solid
position to capture and enjoy management attention and time with high-proﬁle project
events (see “The Lack of Milestones May Kill Thousands”).5 Not so with charts including
many milestones linked to work packages. The gain from such charts is the ability to
increase the emphasis on goal orientation (“milestone accomplished” or “milestone not
accomplished”), while reducing focus on activity orientation (“I am working on it”).
The visual nature of the milestone chart also provides value to both the project man-
ager and his or her stakeholders. It creates a pictorial model of the project ideal for
eﬀective communication between project team and stakeholders as well as within the
project team. In this manner, the milestone chart serves as an eﬀective project tracking
tool as well as an eﬀective planning tool.
The Lack of Milestones May Kill Thousands
Napoleon, a master of warfare, never made more than the sketchiest plans
even for his great projects.6 Those sketchiest plans probably resembled mile-
stones to signify key events in a campaign. When he invaded Egypt, he did
so making his expectations clear to each of his generals. In contrast, when
Napoleon invaded Russia with his 400,000+ troops in June 1812, he chose
not to communicate the plans. Despite his generals’ desire to have the plans
communicated because of the harsh Russian winter, Napoleon never shared
them. In December of 1812, Napoleon’s defeated army left Russian soil, this
time numbering only 20,000+ troops. The lack of a clear milestone schedule
might have contributed to the ﬁnale of Napoleon’s Russian campaign—from
the zenith of glory to ashes.
THE CRITICAL PATH METHOD DIAGRAM
The critical path method (CPM) tool is a network diagram technique for analyzing, plan-
ning, and scheduling projects. It provides a means of representing project activities as
nodes (see Figure 6.3) or arrows, determining which of them are “critical” in their impact
on project completion time, and scheduling them in order to meet a target date at a
minimum cost.7
Originally developed for use in large, complex, and cross-functional projects, the
CPM tool is now employed in smaller projects as well. Having a CPM schedule helps the
project manager to see the total completion time, understand the sequencing of activ-
ities, ensure that resources are available when needed, monitor those that are critical,
and measure progress.

THE CRITICAL PATH METHOD DIAGRAM
155
a
d
b
f
e
c
g
h
Activity
Description
Duration
(days)
Immediate
Predecessor
Project Kick‐ off
Get materials for a
Get materials for b
Manufacture a
Manufacture b
Customize a
Release
Assemble a & b
b,c
b,c
d,f
a
a
e
g
0
10
20
30
20
40
20
0
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
Start
Finish
Figure 6.3: Example Critical Path Method Diagram
Constructing a CPM Diagram
Constructing a CPM diagram is an exercise in patience and discipline that involves pro-
ceeding through several major steps. In it, as with all schedule development tools, a
crucial step is to determine the level of detail and to identify activities. Although this
step usually belongs to the scope planning process, we include it here because it helps
explain the tool development in an integrated way.
The process of building a CPM schedule is destined to produce a better product
if quality information about scope, responsibilities, resources, and the overall schedule
management system is available.
Project scope provides schedulers with the knowledge of the project activities
that need to be scheduled. Clear deﬁnition of responsibilities—who does what in the
project—points to who has the best information about the individual activities and
should therefore schedule them. To develop realistic schedules, these “owners” of
the activities also need to know which resources are available and when. Finally, the
schedule management system will direct schedulers in developing and using
the CPM.
Determine the Level of Detail and Identify Activities
HowcanlargeorsmallindividualactivitiesinﬂuencethenumberofactivitiesintheCPM?
A rule at one company may help clarify this point. Large-fab construction projects run
at around 2,000 activities, lasting from two to four weeks. This helps everyone realize
what level of detail is acceptable and what is unacceptable. The goal for scheduling
is to account for the complexity and size of the project in a way that gives the team

156
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
enough information—not too little and not too much—to direct the daily work, identify
interfaces between workgroups, and monitor progress at an eﬀective level (see “Why a
Team Approach to CPM Development?”).
When the level of detail is set, you are ready to perform the following activities:
1.
Brainstorm and identify activities that are necessary to complete in order to ﬁnish
the project. This can be done by means of the WBS, perhaps the most systematic
and integrated way of activity identiﬁcation (see the Work Breakdown Structure
section in Chapter 5).
2.
Refocus the attention on the established level of detail. If the number of activities
is lower than the intended number, continue breaking down larger activities. If the
number of activities is over the target number, combine related activities to reach
the desired detail.
Why a Team Approach to CPM Development?
Using a project team to build a CPM diagram is perhaps the most effective way
of doing it. Here is why:
■
Team members are usually the best source of knowledge about their piece
of the schedule.
■
Each team member can see where and why he or she is critical to the suc-
cess of the project.
■
The team can ﬁnd creative ways to best sequence and shorten the duration
of activities and the total project.
■
As a unit, the team can focus its energy and mind on mission-critical
activities.
■
Involvement of team members enhances commitment and a sense of
ownership of the project.
Sequence Activities
Sequencing is about identifying dependencies between activities by determining an
activity’s immediate prerequisite activities, called predecessors. A portion of the depen-
dencies will be arranged in pure “technological order.” These are termed hard or logi-
cal dependencies, meaning that the technology of work mandates such sequence. An
example is that one must write the code before testing it; the other way around is not
possible. Disregarding hard dependencies may lead to rework and project delay. But
not all of the dependencies are hard; some of them are soft or preferential. They are not
required by the work logic but set by choice, reﬂecting one’s experience and preferences
in scheduling. For example, we may decide to write a piece of software code, test it, write
another piece, test it, and so forth. Dependencies may also be dictated by availability of
key resources. If two activities require the same resources, one will have to follow the

THE CRITICAL PATH METHOD DIAGRAM
157
other. Once the dependencies are established, they can be recorded, as we have done
in Figure 6.3.
Assign Resources and Estimate Activity Duration
The age-old rule of scheduling is that people and material resources get the work
done. As a result, it is logical to estimate an activity’s duration by identifying resources
necessary to successfully complete it. Consider, for example, 100 hours of work
from a business analyst. This is the work (eﬀort) time, which in the case of mature
work technologies is calculated by dividing the amount of work by the production
norms.8 With the information that the analyst splits her work time between this and
three more projects, and knowing the company’s work calendar (50 hours per week
only; no work on Saturdays and Sundays), she may need eight weeks to get it done.
This is the calendar time. Write the calendar time in the fourth column of the table
in Figure 6.3.
Draft a CPM Diagram
Each activity is drawn on the network diagram as a circle or rectangle, with identifying
symbols and duration within the circle or per convention chosen. This format is called
AON (activity-on-node). Later in this chapter, we discuss another format of drawing net-
work diagrams, AOA (activity-on-arrow). To pursue the AON format, indicate sequence
dependencies by arrows connecting each circle (activity) with its immediate successors,
with arrows pointing to the latter. For convenience, connect all circles without predeces-
sors into a circle denoted “Start.” Similarly, connect all circles without successors into a
circle marked “Finish.”
Identify the Critical Path
Normally, the diagram shows a number of diﬀerent paths from Start to Finish, deﬁned
as sequences of dependent activities. To calculate the time to pass through a path, add
up the times for all activities in the path. The critical path is the longest path (in time)
from Start to Finish. It indicates the minimum time necessary to complete the entire
project. Essentially, the critical path is the bottleneck route, and the highest priority set
of activities to manage.
There is another way to calculate the critical path: using the forward/backward
pass procedure.9 While adding up activity times is simpler for smaller projects, it is
too cumbersome and diﬃcult for larger projects. Rather, the large projects use the
pass procedure. Say, for example, you have the start date for a project. Then, for each
activity there exists an earliest start time (ES). Assuming that the time to ﬁnish the
activity is t, then its earliest ﬁnish time (EF) is ES + t. Figure 6.4 shows how to go through
the forward pass to calculate ES and EF for each activity. The process, from left to right, is
as follows:
■
ES is the largest (or latest) EF of any immediate predecessors.
■
EF is ES + time to complete the activity (t).

158
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
c, 10
b, 5
e, 10
f, 20
g, 10
h, 0
d, 15
a, 0
10
0
10
0
20
10
20
10
40
20
40
20
50
40
50
40
50
50
50
50
25
10
40
25
5
0
10
5
10
0
10
0
Key
Activity
Name
a, 0
Activity
Duration
Critical
Path
40
20
40
20
Early Start (ES)
Late Start (LS)
Early Finish (EF)
Late Finish (LF)
Backward Pass: Right to Left
Determine Late Finish & Late Start
Forward Pass: Left to Right
Determine Early Start & Early Finish
Figure 6.4: Forward and Backward Pass
Suppose now that you want to ﬁnish the project by the time that is equal to the EF for
the project. If so, you can deﬁne the concept of late ﬁnish (LF), or the latest time that the
project can be ﬁnished, without delaying the total project beyond EF. Thus, LF is equal
to EF.
Similarly, you can deﬁne late start (LS) as LF −t, where t is the activity time. Building
on these concepts, we can go through the backward pass, from right to left, to calculate
for each activity (see Figure 6.4):
■
LF is the smallest (or earliest) LS of any of immediate successors.
■
LS is LF – Time to complete the activity (t).
Now that the forward/backward pass is ﬁnished, note that Figure 6.4 indicates that
in some activities, early start is equal to late start, while in some it is not. The diﬀerence
between an activity’s early and late start (or between early and late ﬁnish) is called total
ﬂoat. Total ﬂoat is the maximum amount of time you can delay an activity beyond its
early start without delaying the project completion time. Free ﬂoat is another kind of
ﬂoat equal to the amount of time you can delay an activity without delaying the early
start of any activity immediately following it. While an activity with the positive total
ﬂoat may or may not have free ﬂoat, the latter never exceeds the former. The formula to
calculate free ﬂoat is the diﬀerence between the activity’s EF and the earliest of the ES
of all of its immediate successors.

THE CRITICAL PATH METHOD DIAGRAM
159
In our example in Figure 6.4, activities b and d have free ﬂoat of 5 days and 15, respec-
tively,whileallotheractivitieshavezerofreeﬂoat.Activitiesonthecriticalpathhavezero
total ﬂoat and are called critical activities. They are shown in Figure 6.4, with thick arrows
connecting critical activities on the only critical path. It is, however, legitimate to have
multiple critical paths, a common situation in fast-tracking projects.
Anactivitywithzerototalﬂoathasaﬁxedscheduledstarttime,meaningthatES=LS.
Consequently, to delay the start time is to delay the whole project, which is why such
activities are called critical.
In contrast, activities with positive total ﬂoat oﬀer some ﬂexibility. For example,
we can relieve peak loads in a project by shifting activities on the peak days to their
late starts. That won’t impact project completion time. But this ﬂexibility may vanish
quickly. Consider a path with a very small total ﬂoat, which we call near-critical path, the
second-highest priority to pay attention to. If we let an activity on the near-critical path
slip, its small total ﬂoat may be gone and it becomes critical path. In case of the free
ﬂoat, we can delay the activity start by an amount equal to (or less than) the free ﬂoat
without aﬀecting the start times or ﬂoat of succeeding activities.
Review and Reﬁne
Look closely at the drafted diagram and ask the following questions:
■
Has any important activity been left out of the schedule?
■
Is the activity sequencing logical?
■
Are durations of activities reasonable?
■
Is the project schedule time-constrained or resource-constrained? (See “Time- or
Resource-Constrained? Or Both?”)
Time- or Resource-Constrained? Or Both?
Although Intel is in a constant time-to-market race with its competition, project
managers in one of its divisions understand the relationship between time and
resources when developing their schedules. The problem is that no matter how
fast they want to complete their projects, the availability of resources is limited.
This helps classify schedules into two categories:10
1.
Schedules under a time-constrained situation. The project must be ﬁn-
ished by a certain time (called the drop-dead date in Intel language), with
as few resources as possible. Here, it is time, not resources, that is critical.
These are typically the highest priority projects.
2.
Schedules under a resource-constrained situation. The project must be
ﬁnished as fast as possible without exceeding a certain resource limit.
Here, it is resources, not time, that is critical. Projects like these are usu-
ally of lower priority.
(continued)

160
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
Between these two extremes are resource-leveling projects with their
medium priority. With these, once a schedule is developed, project tasks are
shifted within their ﬂoat allowances to provide smoother period-by-period
resource utilization. As long as management clearly communicates in which
category each project is, project managers face no problem—most commer-
cially available software they use already have algorithms to develop schedules
for any of the three situations. The trouble arrives when project managers
are told their projects are time-constrained but with limited and insufﬁcient
resources. Faced with such systems constraints, they know they have to ﬁnd
resources on their own. So what do project managers do? They make do.
They utilize overtime, work long hours, convince team members to do the
same, and navigate their way through. Most of the time they succeed. After
all, Intel’s culture is all about performance.
This is the time to answer the questions and, if the answers require, to make neces-
sary corrections.
If a company competes on time, a project manager must check if it is possible
to reduce the project duration. The only avenue to do that is to ﬁnd ways to shorten
activities along the critical path. This is possible by fast tracking, or schedule crash-
ing, or a combination of the two approaches.11 Note that fast-tracking or crashing
noncritical activities is irrelevant, because it does not reduce the duration of the
critical path. Fast-tracking means changing the hard and soft dependencies—in
other words, changing the logic of the diagram by obliterating previously established
dependencies and creating new ones by attempting to overlap certain activities on
the critical path. In the process, neither activity durations nor resource allocations will
be changed.
“Crashing” means shortening the duration of activities along the critical path with-
out changing dependencies. The way to do this is by assigning more people to the
activities, working overtime, using diﬀerent equipment, and so on. The crucial question
is whether the gains from the reduction of project duration exceed the costs of acceler-
ation. For the majority of time-to-market projects the answer to the question is yes. For
more details, see the Schedule Crashing section in Chapter 12.
Using the CPM Diagram
The CPM tool was originally developed for large, complex, and cross-functional projects.
This is still the primary use of CPM diagrams because it can easily deal with a large
number of activities and their dependencies, directing our attention to the most criti-
cal activities. However, with the dissemination of CPM knowledge, it is not unusual to
also see CPM used for smaller projects.
A ﬁne application of CPM can be found in conjunction with the Gantt chart. In short,
extractingfromthesizableCPMdiagramactivitiesdueinthenextoneortwoweeks,pre-
senting them in the Gantt chart format, provides clear and practical partial short-term
outlook schedules.

THE CRITICAL PATH METHOD DIAGRAM
161
Beneﬁts
Having a CPM diagram helps the project manager to see the total completion time,
understand the sequencing of activities, ensure resources when necessary, monitor
those that are critical, and measure progress (or lack of it). This is easier to accomplish
if certain rules are followed (see Tips for CPM Diagrams under “Three Don’ts for CPM
Diagrams”).
The CPM diagram also oﬀers the project manager value through its graphical struc-
ture. The CPM diagram is easily explainable by means of the project network diagram
that clearly charts the technological order of work. Data calculations are not diﬃcult
and can be handled readily and quickly by personal computers.
The greatest beneﬁt to the project manager is arguably the focus on priority that
the CPM diagram provides. It pinpoints attention on the small group of activities that
are critical to successful project schedule completion. This focus greatly adds to higher
accuracy and, later, precision of schedule control.
Three Don’ts for CPM Diagrams
1.
Don’t let the CPM chart control you. It is just a schedule and won’t make
a decision for you. You will.
2.
Don’t consider it gospel. If there is a better way to schedule, go for it!
3.
Don’t throw it aside when your project starts slipping. Review it, update,
and improve, then use it again!
Tips for CPM Diagrams
■
If you need to accelerate the schedule, do it by fast-tracking and crashing.
■
Watch out! Accelerating the schedule may increase the number of critical
activities. While in earlier times 10 percent of all activities were critical, in
today’s fast schedules, you often see 40 percent to 50 percent of activities
being critical.
■
Sprinkle major milestones over your CPM diagram. It helps you see the for-
est (milestones) and the trees (activities).
■
Color-code activities performed by various resource providers in order to
identify their interfaces and provide their coordination.
Variations
The CPM diagram discussed here is of the AON format. Other formats include CPM with
AOA, Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT), and precedence diagrams. In
AOA,activitiesareshownasarrows,andthearrowsareconnectedbycircles(ordots)that
indicate sequence dependencies. In that way, all immediate predecessors of an activity
lead to a circle at the beginning point of the activity arrow, while all immediate succes-
sors stem from the circle at the arrowhead. Thus, a circle becomes an event, where all
activities leading to the circle are completed.

162
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
The CPM diagram is very similar to the PERT diagram, but while CPM’s activity dura-
tion estimate is deterministic, PERT uses a weighted average to calculate expected time
of activity duration as follows:12
TE = (a + 4m + b)∕6
where
a = optimistic time estimate
b = pessimistic time estimate
m = most likely time estimate
The PERT diagram has been used primarily in research and development projects,
while CPM, which was originally developed for construction projects, has spread across
other industries.
The precedence diagram is an AON network that allows for leads and lags between
two activities (see the Time-Scaled Diagram section in this chapter for more details
on leads and lags). This makes it easier to portray rich and complex dependencies
for real-world projects, giving the precedence diagram a wider application across
industries and an edge over the CPM and the PERT. These two methods allow for leads
and lags only by splitting activities into subactivities, leading eventually to a signiﬁcant
increase in the number of activities in the network, and making it more complex and
diﬃcult to manage.
THE TIME-SCALED ARROW DIAGRAM
The time-scaled arrow diagram (TAD) is used to analyze, plan, and schedule projects in
order to meet a target date at a minimum cost. In the process, the TAD helps to deter-
mine which project activities are “critical” in their impact on project completion time
to provide focus for the project team. As its nominal deﬁnition states, TAD is an activity
on arrow tool, and is the only critical path method that is displayed against a time scale
(Figure 6.5).
Like other schedule development tools, the TAD helps you identify the total comple-
tion time, understand the sequencing of activities, identify when resources are needed,
monitor activities that are critical, and assist the project manager in measuring progress.
Developing a TAD
Building a TAD is an exercise that requires endurance and discipline, unfolding through
several major steps. As with all schedule development tools, the ﬁrst thing to do is to
determine the level of detail required and identify the project activities. Typically, this is
part of scope planning. We include it here in order to provide an integrated view of this
tool’s development.
The TAD’s quality is heavily dependent on solid information about project scope,
team member responsibilities, availability of resources, and the higher-level schedule
management system.

THE TIME-SCALED ARROW DIAGRAM
163
1.01 Select Concept
1.02  Design Beta PC
1.03  Produce Beta PC
1.04  Develop Test Plan
1.05  Test Beta PC
2.01  Design Production PC
2.02  Outsource Mold Design
2.03  Design Tooling
2.04  Purchase Tool Machines
2.05  Manufacture Molds
2.06  Test Molds
2.07  Certify PC
3.01  Ramp Production
Work Packages/Tasks
Jan
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug Sep
Oct
Nov Dec
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
2.01
2.02
2.03
2.04
2.05
2.06
2.07
3.01
1.01
1.02
1.03
1.04
1.05
2.01
2.02
2.03
2.04
2.05
2.06
2.07
3.01
Figure 6.5: Example of a Time-Scaled Arrow Diagram
Clearly, you need to understand the project scope in order to schedule the project
activities. The purpose of knowing who is responsible for certain activities is to indi-
cate who will schedule and then manage the activities. For this to be possible, project
schedulers need information on resource availability. Guidelines for how to develop and
maintain a TAD will come from an organization’s scheduling management system.
Determine the Level of Detail and Identify Activities
How large or small a project is inﬂuences the number of activities in a TAD. An example
may shed more light on this issue. Large new product introduction projects typically
include 300 to 500 activities, with durations between three and ﬁve weeks. The intention
is to provide just enough information—neither more, nor less—than what one needs
to direct and monitor project work of a certain size and complexity. Providing more or
less information than necessary may either overload the team or deprive it of essential
information, respectively.
Once the level of detail is chosen, identify activities that have to be performed to
complete the project. As is the case with all types of scheduling tools, an excellent way to
do this is to employ the WBS, perhaps the most systematic and integrated way of activity
identiﬁcation. Activities necessary for developing a TAD are those needed to produce
work packages, the lowest-level elements of the WBS.
When the activities are identiﬁed, concentrate on the level of detail that was selected
earlier. If the actual number of activities is smaller than the targeted number, resume
breaking down larger activities. Should the actual number exceed the target number,
some similar activities can be merged to reach the desired level of detail.
Sequence Activities
Sequencing involves determining the logical ﬂow of project activities and establishing
the dependencies between the activities. This means putting activities into a speciﬁc

164
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
order by determining an activity’s immediate prerequisite activities, called predecessors,
and leaving no loose ends (see “Loose Ends May Mislead the Team”). As explained in the
section on the CPM diagram, some dependencies will be hard or logical; others will be
soft or preferential. Both types can be used to create overlapping activities, of course,
for the purpose of fast-tracking a TAD.
The TAD makes available a number of ways to represent dependencies: ﬁnish-to-
start (FS), start-to-start (SS), ﬁnish-to-ﬁnish (FF), and start-to-ﬁnish (SF).13 To each of
those we may specify a lead/lag factor in order to accurately deﬁne the dependency.
(See the examples in Figure 6.6.)
How much are these dependencies really used in practice? How much do we need
them? Traditionally, FS has been used extensively. The FF and SF dependencies, how-
ever, historically have seen little use. Generally, the SS dependency has gained huge
popularity in businesses competing on faster project cycle times. In short-cycle-time
project environments, the SS dependency is what is needed to fast-track a project.14
Its major beneﬁt is in allowing parallel work. Consider, for example, developing a new
computer, where software development has an SS with lag dependency with hardware
FS – Activity B can start only when activity A is finished. When you add a two-day lead/lag,
         activity B can start only two days (lead/lag) after activity A is finished.  
B
8
A
5
B
8
A
5
FS
FS with lead/lag factor
(2)
SS – Activity B must not start before activity A starts. Adding a lead/lag, activity B must not
         start before activity A has been in progress for at least two days. 
B
8
A
5
B
8
A
5
SS with lead/lag factor
SS
(2)
FF – Activity B must be finished at the same time as activity A.  With a lead/lag, activity A
         must be completed at least two days before activity B can be finished.
B
8
A
5
FF
FF
A
5
(2)
SF – Activity B cannot be completed before activity A starts. Inserting a lead/lag, activity B
         cannot be completed before seven days from the start of activity A. 
B
8
A
5
B
8
SF
SF with lead/lag factor
A
5
with lead/lag factor
Figure 6.6: Types of Dependencies between Activities

THE TIME-SCALED ARROW DIAGRAM
165
development. To start its work, the software team needs at least a hardware design,
and once they get it, they can carry on with their work in parallel with the hardware
development.
Loose Ends May Mislead the Team
We frequently see TADs with loose ends, including arrow tails and arrowheads
that are not connected to other activities. When we ask project managers why,
we often get an answer like, “I only want to show the critical path and depen-
dencies on it. Other paths and their dependencies are not important to me.”
This is a risky practice. To determine the critical path, the team has to eval-
uate all paths with properly connected activities. If there are loose ends, the
team may not see the real critical path. Then the whole purpose of having a
TAD—focus on really critical activities—is defeated.
Assign Resources and Estimate Activity Duration
The heart of schedule development is resource allocation and scheduling. Although it
was touched on in the CPM section, we repeat it here. The ﬁrst rule of resource allocation
is to identify resources necessary to successfully complete activities. For example, you
may need a cost estimator and precisely 80 hours of his work (eﬀort) time. Assume now
that the estimator is shared by this and two other projects. Look at the company’s work
calendar as well (50 hours per week maximum; no work on Saturdays and Sundays). All
this information tells that the estimator will need to spread his 80 hours’ worth of work
over 10 calendar weeks (calendar time). Reiterate steps of identify resources, determine
work time, and convert it to calendar time for all remaining activities. Estimating activity
durations can be tricky, especially in multiproject environments (see “Switchover Time
Adds to the Schedule Inaccuracy”).
Switchover Time Adds to the Schedule
Inaccuracy
Some 90 percent of projects are implemented in a multiproject management
environment. This means that a practice of having project managers run
multiple projects at a time, anywhere from two to ten, is widely accepted.15
While such an approach provides outstanding beneﬁts in terms of better
management, it also generates a unique problem that calls for very meticulous
scheduling of the projects. In particular, the problem here is the switchover
time. When the project manager switches from one project to another, she
needs switchover time to align her thinking and get into the new project,
physically and mentally.16
(continued)

166
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
Since team members also operate as members of multiple project teams,
they suffer from the same problem. As the projects grow in complexity, so
does the switchover time.17 Clearly, this time is a loss in a busy day of a project
manager and team member. For example, some experts indicate that this loss
may be up to 20 percent of the project manager’s or team member’s time,
when involved in four projects at a time. The real problem then is that this
switchover time loss typically is not taken into account in scheduling multiple
projects. As a consequence, project schedules are notoriously optimistic and
inaccurate.
There are at least two strategies to deal with the problem. One is to reduce
the available monthly work hours of a multiproject person used for scheduling
purposes by the corresponding switchover time loss. Another is to increase
the estimate of a multiproject person’s work hours for a speciﬁc project by the
corresponding switchover time loss. These strategies are not attractive, but
they are necessary for the realistic development of any project schedule or
dependency diagram.
Draft the TAD
Draw activities as arrows, connecting them to one another—arrowhead to arrow tail to
indicate the sequence of dependencies (see Figure 6.6). In that manner, all immediate
predecessors of an activity lead to the beginning point of the arrow tail, while all imme-
diate successors stem from the arrowhead. Thus, the beginning point of the arrow tail
becomes an event, where all activities leading to the point are completed. Obviously, a
TAD can be drawn in two diﬀerent formats (see Figure 6.6 and the example that follows,
“Cascade- versus Spine-Formatted TAD”).
Cascade- versus Spine-Formatted TAD
Cascade
One zone, one activity. A zone is a horizontal swath or strip across a TAD print-
out. The cascade format allows only one activity per zone.
Why called cascade? A well-arranged succession of activities, one per zone,
appears like a cascade of events.
Less complex. The cascade resembles a Gantt chart, a simple-looking tool,
which creates a sense of lower complexity that is easier to apply.
Less practical. Because of one activity per zone, a larger TAD may require many
sheets to print it and large wall space to post it.
Spine
One zone, multiple activities. The TAD printout allows multiple activities per
zone.
Why called spine? Activities are symmetrically arranged around a central path,
usually the critical path, resembling a spine of the network.

THE TIME-SCALED ARROW DIAGRAM
167
More complex. The appearance of the spine is much like any other network,
something that looks scarily complex to some project managers.
More practical. Because of multiple activities per zone, you can print a larger
TAD on a single sheet of paper and post on it on a small wall space.
Identify the Critical Path
Normally, a TAD shows a number of diﬀerent paths—that is, sequences of dependent
activities. The paths can be used in two ways to ﬁnd the critical path. First, you can
visually ﬁnd a path composed of activities without ﬂoat—no complex calculations nec-
essary. Among all network users, this convenience is available only to those who practice
TAD. Adding up the times for all activities in a path (as we did with CPM) will tell how long
it is. As a reminder, the critical path is the longest path in a TAD, which indicates the min-
imum time necessary to complete the entire project. Second, you can ﬁnd the critical
path with the forward/backward pass procedure and calculate total and free ﬂoat, as
explained in the CPM section featured earlier in this chapter.
Using a TAD
Like any network diagram, the TAD’s original targets were large, complex, and cross-
functional projects. The TAD is well suited to such projects because of the ease with
which it handles a large number of activities and their intricate dependencies, directing
our attention to the most critical activities. While it is still applied for this purpose, a large
number of project managers have used the TAD for medium-size and small projects (see
“Tips for TAD”). In this case, a TAD is typically drawn in a cascade and often called a “Gantt
chart with links.” Perhaps more than anything else, this format facilitated the growing
popularity of the TAD.
A sizeable TAD can be used along with a Gantt chart to provide focus on the
day-to-day project work. In particular, we can take out from TAD those activities due in
the next week or two, show them in the Gantt chart format, and have their “owners”
use them as short-term outlook schedules. This provides a balance in focusing on both
the big picture of the project with TAD and daily work details with Gantt charts.
Tips for TAD
■
If you need to fast-track your schedule, use SS with or without lags. Be
prepared to see and manage 40 to 50 percent critical activities in the
schedule.
■
Building on the similarity between a cascade-formatted TAD to a Gantt
chart, spread the use of the TAD in all smaller projects. This will signiﬁcantly
enhance the quality of scheduling.
■
Add major milestones to a TAD to help vital events serve as beacons in the
sea of activities.
■
Insist on the use of template TADs to boost quality and productivity of
scheduling.

168
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
Beneﬁts
The TADoﬀersa unique beneﬁt not available toany other network diagram: the abilityto
read directly oﬀthe schedule’s time scale when the project and each activity starts and
ends, as well as the total ﬂoat. Like other network diagrams, the TAD helps identify the
total completion time, understand the sequencing of activities, ensure resources when
necessary, monitor those that are critical, and measure progress (or lack of it).
The TAD’s graphical appeal and intuitive logic provide additional utility to a project
manager. The TAD’s unambiguous sequence of work, supported by the timescale, is eas-
ier to clarify than any other network diagram. Data calculations are not diﬃcult and can
be handled readily and quickly by personal computers. Additionally, the TAD exhibits
the dependencies between constituent activities of a project simply and directly. This
helps fathom the order of activity execution.
Perhaps the highest value comes from the TAD’s focus on priorities; TAD directs our
mind on the vital few activities of critical importance to the project completion date. The
outcome is higher accuracy and, later, precision of schedule control.
THE CRITICAL CHAIN SCHEDULE
Introduced in 1997, the critical chain schedule (CCS) is a relatively new tool to the world
of project managers.18 A CCS is a network diagram that strives for accomplishment of
drastically faster and more reliable schedules (see Figure 6.7). It uses several unique
A:16d
Activities
B:16d
D:8d
G:16d
H:16d
C:8d
I:8d
F:16d
J:8d
D:8d
E:16d
Critical Chain (CC) Activity
Non-CC Activity
CC Feeding Buffer (CCFB)
Project Buffer (PB)
Key:
A
B
C
D
E
F
CCFB1
G
H
I
J
CCFB2
K
PB
Days (d)16
112
96
80
64
48
32
128
Figure 6.7: Example Critical Chain Schedule

THE CRITICAL CHAIN SCHEDULE
169
approaches. First, the CCS focuses on the critical chain, the longest path of dependent
events that prevents the project from completing in a shorter time. Unlike the critical
path, the critical chain never changes. Second, its activity durations are estimates
with 50 percent probability. For this reason, they are signiﬁcantly shorter than those
used in other scheduling tools, which are often with 95 percent probability. Third, in
contrast to the critical path, the critical chain is deﬁned by the resource dependencies.
Fourth, buﬀers are built to protect the critical chain during the course of project
implementation.
Developing a Critical Chain Schedule
Because of the inherent challenge of faster schedules that it seeks to make possible, a
CCS’s quality is even more dependent on the depth and degree of deﬁnition of inputs
than other schedule development tools.
While the scope, responsibilities, and schedule management system will provide
information about the what, and the who elements, as well as how to schedule project
activities faster, the real emphasis is on the CCS’s requirement for dedicated team
resources, meaning that team members work full-time on one project only. Because of
this, the logic goes that members of the dedicated project teams are more productive
than members who are shared by multiple project teams. A reason for this is that the
switching time cost created by one’s work in multiple projects is eliminated as discussed
in the previous section. Although this is generally true, there are some exceptions. A
study found that when a team member who is focused on a single project is assigned a
second one, productivity often increases a bit because the team member no longer has
to wait for the activities of other members working on the initial project (see Figure 6.8).
Rather, the team member can shift his or her attention to the second project.19 When
a third, fourth, and ﬁfth project is added, however, the productivity plummets rapidly,
and the team member becomes a bottleneck of all projects he or she is involved in. This
is why the CCS approach insists on using dedicated teams.
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
1
2
3
4
5
Efficiency
Number of projects working on
Figure 6.8: Productivity of Multiproject Team Members

170
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
Determine the Level of Detail and Identify Activities
The number of activities in a CCS is closely related with the size of activities. Therefore,
choosing to have approximately 100 or 300 or 500 activities will help determine how
large individual activities will be. To illustrate this point, consider one company’s golden
rule: Large projects, including between 5,000 and 10,000 person-hours, will have around
500 project activities that range in duration from two to four calendar weeks. Not only
does this clearly tell everyone that neither 180-activity schedule nor 15-week activities
are tolerated, but it also spells out the company’s belief about the right level of detail.
Given the complexity and size of the project, such level of detail provides suﬃcient
information to manage the project without making it unnecessarily burdensome and
time demanding.
Once the decision has been made about the level of detail, these actions should
be taken:
■
Brainstorm and identify activities that are necessary to complete in order to ﬁnish the
project. As with other scheduling tools, resort to the WBS for the activity identiﬁ-
cation. In this process, disregard how large the activities are; rather, ensure that all
necessary activities are on the list.
■
Go back to the chosen level of detail. If the list of activities is below the intended num-
ber of activities, continue breaking down larger activities; if it is over the target
number, combine similar activities to reach the desired goal.
Sequence Activities
Sequencing means arranging the activities in a logical workﬂow and identifying the
dependencies between the various activities. Deep knowledge of workﬂow is a prereq-
uisite here. The principle of sequencing is to know that a preceding activity produces
outputs that become inputs to an activity that follows. If the obtained diagram fails to
observe the principle, it is likely that we are missing the logic of the project work, result-
ing in rework and delays in project execution.
Assign Resources and Estimate Activity Durations
Since people and material resources are needed to complete project activities, they dic-
tate activity durations. Therefore, a natural starting point for estimating the durations
is: “What resources do I need to successfully complete this activity?” The answer should
provide the names of resources and work time for each to complete the activity—for
example, 100 hours of work from a programmer. The key point here is that CCS uses a
unique technique of activity duration estimating that does not allow for contingencies
(see “When Estimating Durations, No Contingency Safety Allowed”). Considering that
the critical chain approach requires dedicated teams, and knowing the company’s work
calendar—5 days a week, 10 hours a day—those 100 hours turn into 10 workdays or
14 calendar days. Naturally, the estimation of each activity should undergo this process.

THE CRITICAL CHAIN SCHEDULE
171
Identify the Critical Chain
The critical chain is the longest path in the network diagram, considering activity and
resource dependencies. Stated a diﬀerent way, it is the sequence of dependent events
that keeps the project from completing in a shorter time.
Add the Resource Buﬀers
Critical chain schedules always consider the resource constraints and include the
resource dependencies that deﬁne the overall longest path. Practically, this is handled
by adding resource buﬀers to protect the critical chain from unavailability of resources.
Resource buﬀers are added to the critical chain only, do not take any time in the critical
chain, and are termed resource ﬂags. For example, any time a new resource will be
used in a critical chain activity, we will add a resource buﬀer. This signals to the project
manager and resource provider when to make the resource available to work on a
critical chain activity. Since timely resource availability is critical to the rapid execution
that CCS advocates, some companies use incentives to reward behavior of early delivery
of activity outputs and standby time of resources.20
Create a Project Buﬀer
Unlike other schedule development tools, the CCS uses a novel concept of the project
buﬀer. Its purpose is to protect the project completion date by aggregating risk contin-
gency time in the form of the project buﬀer at the end of the critical chain (for manage-
ment of the buﬀer, see the Buﬀer Chart section in Chapter 12). There are several methods
to determine the buﬀer duration. One of them is to divide the duration of the critical
chain by two (called the “50 percent buﬀer sizing rule”). The buﬀer is used to absorb
uncertainty or disruptions that may occur on the critical chain and has no work assigned
to it (see Figure 6.7).
Create Feeding Buﬀers
Protecting the critical chain with the project buﬀer is not enough. There is a signiﬁ-
cant risk that activities that are not on the critical chain but feed into it may slip to the
point of pushing out the critical chain. To protect the critical chain from the risk, we can
aggregate contingency time at all points where noncritical activities feed into the critical
chain (see Figure 6.7). These contingency times are termed critical chain feeding buﬀers.
During the project implementation, these buﬀers will be used to absorb uncertainty or
disruptions that may occur in noncritical chain activities. To determine these buﬀers,
use one-half of the sum of the activity durations in the chain of activities preceding the
buﬀer. No work is assigned to the buﬀers.

172
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
When Estimating Durations, No Contingency
Safety Allowed
Most project managers tend to include contingency time into each activity esti-
mate without specifying it. The reason is simple: add the safety time. The CCS
strives to eliminate the safety. Here is what it means. Figure 6.9 shows a typical
distribution of activity time performance. The solid line (the left ordinate) tells
us the incremental probability of a given activity duration time on the x-axis.
The dotted line indicates the cumulative probability (the right ordinate) that the
activity will be ﬁnished in a time less than or equal to the activity duration time
on the x-axis.21
Incremental Probability
0.000
0.004
0.008
0.012
0.016
0
0.020
0.2
0.1
0.0
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.00
Contingency
Activity Duration (Days)
Cumulative Probability
Inc Prob
Cum Prob
100
80
60
40
20
Figure 6.9: A Typical Distribution of Activity Time Performance
When project managers include contingency time within an activity, they
really go for 95 percent probable estimate (cumulative probability). As the
cumulative curve shows in the ﬁgure, it is duration equal to or less than 50
days. Without the contingency time, the duration is less or equal to 20 days.
That is a 50 percent probable estimate. The difference between the 95 percent
probable estimate and the 50 percent probable estimate is contingency time,
30 days in this example. To avoid excessive activity duration, and speed up
the schedule, the CCS eliminates the contingency time, using only 50 percent
probable estimates.
Using the Critical Chain Schedule
The most appropriate application of the CCS is for a dedicated project team seeking
a signiﬁcant reduction of the project cycle time in a company with an outstanding
performance culture. The only job of this team is their project. Equipped with all

THE HIERARCHICAL SCHEDULE
173
necessary resources, the team operates in a company whose performance culture
focuses on exceeding its customer expectations, creating maximum value for its
shareholders, and providing strong growth opportunities to its employees (see “Tips
for Critical Chain Scheduling”).
Tips for Critical Chain Scheduling
■
Use CCS in important projects that can afford a dedicated team.
■
Apply CCS in companies that are in a time-to-market race, always striving
to shave off their cycle times.
■
Support CCS with performance measurements that promote behavior of
transferring an activity’s output to the succeeding activities as early as
possible.
■
Deploy CCS where there exists a strong performance culture willing to take
on 50 percent probable estimates.
Beneﬁts
Beyond every schedule’s purpose of having the project team understand the timetable
for project activities and their personal time commitments, the CCS intends to improve
the results of the project team. Hence, as experiences with the CCS indicate, the project
should see considerable improvements in schedule and cost performance because
the CCS:
■
Is an important eye-opener. Simply, the CCS recognizes that the interaction between
activity durations, dependencies, resource requirements, and resource availabilities
has a major impact on project duration.22
■
Protects a deterministic baseline schedule. This protection helps ﬁght uncertainties
by using feeding, resource, and project buﬀers to set a realistic project deadline.
As a result, the CCS oﬀers signiﬁcant potential for radical acceleration of project
completion times. Project managers at 3M and Lucent reported up to a 25 percent
reduction in project cycle times when using the CCS approach.23 For those in a
rapid-project-cycle-time business, this may be a tool worth trying.
■
Makes a case for truth in activity duration estimation.24 In contrast to other tools
without a mechanism to prevent project managers from building contingency
safety into activities, CCS’s “no contingency allowed” mechanism eradicates such
tendencies.
THE HIERARCHICAL SCHEDULE
The hierarchical schedule is a multilevel schedule with varying amounts of detail at each
level (see Figure 6.10). It is an eﬀective tool to have in a project manager’s PM Toolbox,
particularly when the project manager is applying a rolling-wave scheduling technique

174
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
Level 1 Schedule,
Master Project Schedule
Level 2 Schedules,
Functional Schedules
Level 3 Schedules,
Work Package Schedules
Figure 6.10: An Example Hierarchical Schedule
because it helps integrate the schedules of earlier and later phases. The hierarchical
schedule also works well in multitiered scheduling techniques used on larger projects.
A hieararchy is created when activities on a higher-level schedule are disaggregated
into several activities and sometimes entire schedules at a lower level. Typically, the
schedules from various levels are connected at major milestones or events.
Constructing a Hierarchical Schedule
Developing hierarchical schedules hinges on the size of a project. A very large project
can easily use three levels, while a medium-sized project cannot warrant more than
two levels. To oﬀer a sense of a more diﬃcult situation, we will use a three-level hier-
archy here. In developing the schedules, the rules for building a particular schedule
type—whether a Gantt chart, network diagram, or milestone chart—should be applied.
As with all other project schedules and network diagrams, project scope provides
information necessary for a good understanding of the project activities to be sched-
uled. Such scope information will be furnished to or developed by those who are respon-
sible for certain work packages of the project. When scheduling the work packages, they
will rely on the information about availability of resources and seek guidance from the
particulars from the schedule management system.
Construct the Level 1 (Master Project) Schedule
Level 1 is a summary schedule of the project, which is usually a Gantt or milestone
chart format. It is an outline that will be used throughout the project as a tool to

THE HIERARCHICAL SCHEDULE
175
report progress to top management. Since it is developed during project planning,
it is considered to be an initial plan as well. Included in the schedule are only prin-
cipal activities and key milestones from Level 1 or 2 of a WBS (the project is level 0).
Everything in the schedule is roughly estimated. For example, overall timing of phases,
required resources, major dependencies, and major events in the schedule are all
roughly estimated. It is important to highlight events that need critical attention, such
as material requirements, vital tests, and completion dates. Linking the development
of the schedule with the deﬁnition of project objectives is a good strategy because
this is the time when the purpose and implementation methods for the project are
shaped. In this linking, you should be able to easily chart, rechart, and evaluate multiple
alternatives of the schedule in order to select the most viable alternative. Because the
schedule is rough in its nature, it should not be used for the total integration of all
project phases. That is why you need a Level 2 schedule.
Figure 6.10 shows the master schedule for a project named OCI, consisting of eight
work elements from Level 1 of the WBS, each with a milestone at its end. It is in a Gantt
chart format and is used for progress reporting to the project governance board, an
executive group responsible for the project performance.
For example, the ﬁrst-level schedule (master project schedule) can be built of
work elements from Level 1 of the WBS. Work packages from Level 2 of the WBS can
be included into the second-level schedules (functional schedules because they are
typically owned by functional units). Finally, constituent activities or task of the work
packages (Level 3) would be used to develop the third-level schedules (work package
schedules).
Construct the Level 2 (Intermediate) Schedule
TheLevel2schedulewillexplodeactivitiesfromthemasterprojectschedule,scheduling
theminmoredetail.Forthis,acommonchoiceisaGanttornetworkchart,sprinkledwith
milestones. This schedule is a middle management planning and control tool, generally
to assign responsibilities for work packages (Level 3 of the WBS, for example). Clearly,
activities in the schedule are not meant to provide daily or even weekly scheduling and
directing of project work, except for the most critical activities. Still, it should be sched-
uled in suﬃcient detail to include major and minor milestones, crucial human resources,
and sequencing and constraints in the project work. This enables you to scrutinize the
structure of the project, dissect dependencies between various phases and milestones,
and set boundaries within which shifting activities won’t impact project completion.
Project OCI had several Level 2 schedules, each drawn as a time-scaled arrow dia-
gram in the cascade format. The largest of them had nearly ten work packages from
Level 2 of the WBS. Essentially, each Level 2 schedule was the functional schedule for a
certain discipline—marketing, electrical group, optoelectronic group, software group,
and so on.
Construct the Level 3 (Detailed) Schedule
This set of detailed schedules is intended to help execution level managers—work pack-
age managers, for example—in directing daily and weekly project work. Although it can

176
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
be in the network format, a more frequent approach is to use a Gantt or milestone chart.
Before getting to scheduling, you should size up available information, assess the size
and complexity of the project, and weigh in experience and inclination of the involved
project members. Then you should decide which of the following approaches to pursue
for Level 3 schedules:
■
Create a fully integrated schedule for the entire project.
■
Build a complete schedule for each activity from the Level 2 schedule.
■
Construct a separate detailed schedule for each phase as the project unfolds, and
connect them via the Level 2 schedule.
■
Ask each project participant to develop detailed schedules for activities in the Level
2 schedule that he or she is responsible for.
Whatever the choice, the schedule must lay down the day-to-day, week-to-week
work that an organization needs to successfully execute and control. It goes beyond
saying that the schedule needs to be rooted in available resources, established depen-
dencies, and time targets approved by management.
The choice of the OCI project was to use the Gantt chart format to schedule in detail
constituent activities of the individual work packages, keeping the number of activities
per chart to less than ten (work package schedules). The total number of all activities
in Level 3 schedules was slightly below 500. While the OCI project oﬀers one example
of how to structure the hierarchical schedule, many other approaches are possible (see
“Milestone/CPM-Milestone Schedule Gets the Job Done”).
Milestone/CPM-Milestone Schedule Gets the
Job Done
In a six-month, $70m project, a semiconductor company identiﬁed a few major
milestones to be presented to the executive governance board (Level 1 sched-
ule). To direct the work and review progress weekly, the project management
team relied on a CPM diagram with carefully weaved 200+ minor milestones
(Level 2 schedule). Minor milestones from the diagram were grouped into sepa-
rate working milestone charts and handed to the teams responsible for certain
technical disciplines (Level 3 schedules). Including 40 to 50 milestones, each
milestone chart was the key tool for doing work and reporting progress to the
project manager. Rid of complex dependencies typical of the CPM diagram, the
minor milestone chart provided clear and simple goals to go after.
Using a Hierarchical Schedule
Hierarchical schedules are used to confront challenges in two major project situations:
■
Rolling-wave scheduling. When starting some projects, we only have information
about an early phase, while details about later phases emerge as the project
progresses. In response, at the start of the project, we can develop a high-level

LINE OF BALANCE
177
schedule encompassing the whole project and then build detailed schedules of
the project’s major phases as details become available. This approach is termed
rolling-wave scheduling and is implemented via the hierarchical schedule method.
■
Multitiered schedule information for larger projects. Since diﬀerent levels of manage-
ment have diﬀerent jobs in a project, each level needs a diﬀerent detail of schedule
information. Diﬀerent levels in hierarchical schedules provide those diﬀerent details
of schedule information.
Beneﬁts
The use of hierarchical schedules equips project managers with the capability to inte-
grate the scheduling of the earlier and later phases. Without the schedules, our schedul-
ing and our attention would be focused on a piece of the project for which we have
information, ignoring the whole project. This would be tantamount to a runner who
sees terrain just in front of her, having no idea how long the run is (a mile or 26 miles)
or, what major milestones lie ahead (e.g., a steep hill). Such a runner would have little
chance to pace herself and successfully reach the ﬁnish line.
By using a hierarchical schedule, a project team is not forced to develop a schedule
for activities for which they have little or no information at the current moment. Rather,
they can build a ﬂexible big-picture schedule, focusing on near-term activities ﬁrst, and
then add longer-term detail as the project progresses through the project cycle. How-
ever, the hierarchical schedule also has some pitfalls to be aware of, as described in the
example titled “Challenges of Hierarchical Schedules.”
Challenges of Hierarchical Schedules
Hierachical schedules are complex. Multiple-level scheduling techniques
require well-established process, skills, and involvement and coordination of
many project participants. This may make hierarchical schedules a bit bafﬂing
and cumbersome for participants, raising the resistance level to its use.
Constructing hierarchical schedules is also a time-consuming endeavor.
Detailed scheduling of this type demands time, a resource lacking in too many
organizations. For this reason, some project participants may resist the use of
multilevel scheduling.
LINE OF BALANCE
Line of balance (LOB) is a tool for the scheduling and tracking of project progress
designed for projects of a highly repetitive nature (see Figure 6.11). The LOB schedule
displays the cumulative number or percentage of components or units that must be
completed by a certain point in time for a schedule to be accomplished.

178
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
Start Work
on Subassemblies
10
Number of Units
20
30
40
50
Subassemblies
Complete
Units
Assembled
Units
Tested
Units
Delivered
Actual
Plan
Figure 6.11: An Example LOB Schedule
By presenting the planned completion status at each phase versus actual comple-
tion status, LOB illustrates in a very visual manner whether the project is ahead or behind
the plan. For executive use, it highlights the potential showstoppers and bottlenecks,
urging action to remove the problem areas.
Developing a Line-of-Balance Schedule
As with other scheduling tools, quality information about the scope, responsibilities,
available resources, and schedule management system will help users of the LOB to
understand the what and who issues, along with resources and scheduling require-
ments. What makes the LOB schedule diﬀerent from other scheduling tools is the
need for a bill of materials (for production projects see “A Poor Bill of Materials Can
Hurt”), lead times for procurement, and production norms. This information is used to
determine the project detail and then the time line for production or construction, as
shown in the upcoming discussion on developing an S chart for a multiunit project.
A Poor Bill of Materials (BOM) Can Hurt
Snap-All Corporation, a leader in mechanical fasteners, received a request
for special delivery of its Lockmight Hinge System, with conditions that they
meet a very aggressive delivery schedule. One of Snap-All’s senior executives
promised the customer a proposal the same day, asked for an LOB schedule
to highlight bottlenecks and assess the likelihood of meeting the delivery
date. The ﬁrst step in preparing the LOB calculation was getting a BOM from
someone who understood the parts buildup. Immediately, a manufacturing
representative discerned that the BOM was obsolete and did not including
all necessary parts. Updating the BOM and checking lead times to acquire
the various components took several days. As a result, the executive could
not keep his commitment to prepare a fast turnaround on the proposal, and
Snap-All lost this business to a more agile competitor.

LINE OF BALANCE
179
Set the Objective
The overall objective of the project must be understood in order to begin the LOB
development eﬀort. For example, consider a production or construction project
aiming at producing a certain quantity of the end deliverables. A production example
might include a series of special orders for 50 connection cables per agreed delivery
commitments. To make the project more complex, the cables cannot be completed in
one batch because of insuﬃcient production capacity. Another project requirement
is that the installation of the cable has to occur in 15 houses within the ﬁrst month. In
order to start developing a LOB schedule, the project manager must decide if the main
objective of the project is the required production and delivery of the 50 cables, or the
installation of the cables in the 15 houses. Understanding the primary objective informs
how the project is deﬁned.
Deﬁne the Project
The preceding example is a production or construction plan that may be formatted as a
network diagram, Gantt chart, or milestone chart (see Figure 6.12). In the plan, we set the
control points, which are key points in the production or construction process. Depend-
ing on the chosen format, these points are events in the network diagram, or the end of
bars in the Gantt chart, or milestones in a milestone chart. They are used to measure the
progress of the project.
The example that follows shows such a project for one unit only. Having a project
with multiple units to produce or construct requires a project plan for all units. There are
two possible scenarios for this. In the ﬁrst scenario, you can produce all multiple units in
one batch, assuming suﬃcient production capacity. Here, all quantities for one unit are
multiplied by the number of units to arrive at a project plan that includes all units. The
lead time for every unit would remain unaltered.
The fundamental premise of the second scenario is that the multiple units can be
produced in several batches to accommodate for the insuﬃcient production capacity.
Considering that the lead time for each batch is equal to the duration of the one unit
program, these batches can be ﬁt into the production schedule. As a result, we obtain
the plan for producing multiple units.
2
1
3
4
5
Complete
Subassemblies
Events in L.O.B.:
1. Start work on subassemblies
2. Subassemblies completed
3. Units assembled
4. Units tested
5. Units delivered
Deliver
Test
Assemble
Figure 6.12: Project Plan for a Single Unit in a Multiunit Project

180
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
10
Number of Units
20
30
40
50
LOB @ end of day 30
Days
Start Work on Subassemblies
Units Assembled
Units Tested
Units Delivered
Subassemblies Complete
10
20
30
50
40
Figure 6.13: S Chart for a Multiunit Project
Develop an S Chart for the Project
In a further step, draw the project plan for multiple units on a graph called an S chart,
showing cumulative deliveries against time scale (Figure 6.13) and also cumulative com-
pletion schedule for control points. Because of the linear production rate, S curves are
straight lines in our example. Essentially, this signiﬁes the planned completion of ﬁnal
units and their intermediate parts or phases. This is for the second scenario—several
batches to accommodate for the insuﬃcient production capacity.
Draft and Reﬁne the Line of Balance
Draw a vertical line through the S chart. This is the LOB, a snapshot at a certain point
in time (e.g., day 30) that indicates the cumulative number of components or units that
are planned to be complete by that date in order to comply with the schedule. To track
the progress against the plan, you can draw another line that depicts the cumulative
number of actually completed components or units (the dashed line in Figure 6.13).
For instance, in the example shown, the ﬁrst two events are ﬁve units behind the plan,
the third event is two units behind the plan, the fourth event is two units ahead of the
plan, the ﬁfth event is six units ahead of plan, and there is no real bottleneck. All of this
is ﬁne and helpful, but most of the time, the ﬁrst draft may need reﬁnement, including
changes necessary to clean up the LOB.
Using the LOB
Although diﬀerent versions have been developed since LOBs were introduced in the
1950s, more than anything else, the LOB is a tool for low-volume, new-production situ-
ations requiring coordination of the design and small-scale manufacturing or construc-
tion. Its main areas of application are as follows:
■
Projects including the design and then the manufacturing of a limited number of
units per that design (e.g., a pilot run for integrated circuits).
■
Projects consisting of a number of identical units manufactured or constructed in
sequence (e.g., construction of a multiunit housing project).
■
Projects of one-oﬀnature (e.g., shipbuilding).

CHOOSING YOUR SCHEDULING TOOLS
181
Beneﬁts
By presenting the planned completion status at each phase versus actual completion
status at these phases, the LOB shows to the project team in a very visual manner
whether the project is ahead or behind the plan.25 For executive use, it highlights the
potential showstoppers and bottlenecks, urging action to remove the problem areas
(see Tips for LOB under “Focus on Critical Components”).
The LOB also oﬀers value to the project manager in its visual, focused, and concise
nature. It provides a visual display of both the planned and actual progress of repetitive
activities and provides focus on the project elements that require critical attention. For
project stakeholders, the LOB provides the ability to assess project progress at a glance,
a quality every reporting tool strives to provide.
Iftheprerequisiteslistedpreviouslyarepreparedandanadequatesoftwareprogram
is available, building an LOB diagram with 20+ components can be completed between
one and two hours. This time will increase when more people are involved because more
time is necessary for their communication.
Focus on Critical Components
In many companies, the prevailing view is that not all components are created
equal. From previous experience, some components are known as potential
showstoppers in the delivery schedule, while others are not. This is because
some components bring with them inherent constraints—for instance, very
precise manufacturing tolerances. To respond to different levels of risk related
to the constraints, a project manager can use the LOB for monitoring the
high-risk components known to cause delay. The point here is this: Keep your
eye on the critical few; don’t bother with the trivial many.
Tips for LOB
■
Focus on critical components or units.
■
Use LOB to detect bottlenecks.
■
If you have a material requirements planning (MRP) system, use its power
to deﬁne the project and develop an S chart and LOB.
■
Show the LOB to executives when you need their support to solve a
problem.
CHOOSING YOUR SCHEDULING TOOLS
Multiple scheduling tools are presented in this chapter that lead to the question, which
one or ones are the most appropriate to select and use? Such a decision, of course,
depends on your project situation. To help narrow the options, in Table 6.1 we list a
set of project situations and indicate how each situation favors the use of the various

182
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
Table 6.1: A Summary Comparison of Schedule Development Tools
Situation
Gantt
Chart
Mile-
stone
Chart
Critical
Path
Method
(CPM)
Time-
Scaled
Arrow
Diagram
Critical
Chain
Schedule
Hierar-
chical
Schedule
Line of
Balance
Small and simple
projects
✓
✓
Short training time
✓
✓
Focus on highly
important events
✓
✓
Increase goal
orientation
✓
✓
Large, complex,
and
cross-functional
projects
✓
✓
✓
Focus on
top-priority
activities
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Strong interface
coordination
needed
✓
✓
✓
Need time scale in
complex projects
✓
✓
Very fast schedule
✓
✓
✓
Multitiered
schedule for large
projects
✓
Rolling-wave
scheduling needed
✓
Short-term
outlook schedule
in large projects
✓
✓
Schedule to
support resource
planning
✓
✓
✓
Scheduling,
tracking of
repetitive projects
✓
Use of templates
desired
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
scheduling tools. Identifying the situations that correspond to your own project is the
ﬁrst step. If the situations described do not describe your particular project situation,
brainstorm more situations in addition to those listed, marking how each favors the
tools. The tool that has the highest number of marks for identiﬁed situations becomes

REFERENCES
183
the tool of choice. Note, however, that more than one tool can be used to support any
particular project, since some of them complement each other rather than exclude each
other. A careful study of the material covered in this chapter will help you determine
when this is practical.
References
1.
Powers, J. R. “A Structured Approach to Schedule Development and Use.” Project
Management Journal 19 (5): 39–46, 1988.
2.
Berkun, Scott. Making Things Happen: Mastering Project Management (Sebastopol,
CA: O’Reilly Media, 2008).
3.
Sipos, A. “Multiproject Scheduling.” Cost Engineering, 2010. 13–17.
4.
Gould, F., and Nancy Joyce. Construction Project Management (Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall, 2013).
5.
Lewis, J. Mastering Project Management: Applying Advanced Concepts to Systems
Thinking, Control & Evaluation, Resource Allocation (New York, NY: McGraw-Hill,
2007).
6.
Segur, P. Napolean’s Russian Campaign (Alexandria, VA: Time-Life, 1958).
7.
Bowen, H. K. Project Management Manual (Boston: Harvard Business School Press,
2007).
8.
Project Management Institute. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowl-
edge, 5th ed. (Drexell Hill, PA: Project Management Institute, 2013).
9.
Handﬁeld, R. B., Gary L. Ragatz, Kenneth J. Petersen, and Robert M. Monczka.
“Involving Suppliers in New Product Development.” California Management Review
42 (1): 59–82, 2009.
10.
Milosevic, D. “Case Study: Integrating the Owner’s and the Contractor’s Project
Organization.” Project Management Journal 21 (4): 23–32, 2000.
11.
Crawford, M. “The Hidden Costs of Accelerated Product Development.” Journal of
Product Innovation Management 9 (3): 188–199, 2002.
12.
Miller, R. W. “How to Plan and Control with PERT.” Harvard Business Review 40 (2):
92–102, 1982.
13.
Pinto, Jeﬀrey K. Project Management, 2nd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
2013).
14.
Bowen, 2007.
15.
Adler, P. S., Avi Mandelbaum, Vien Nguyen, and Elizabeth Schwerer. “Getting the
Most out of Your Product Development Process.” Harvard Business Review 74 (2):
134–152, 1996.
16.
Tobis, M. Managing Multiple Projects (New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2002).
17.
Rubenstein, A. M. “Factors Inﬂuencing Success at the Project Level.” Resource Man-
agement 16: 15–20, 1979.
18.
Goldratt, E. Critical Chain (Croton-on-Hudson, NY: North River Press, 1997).

184
SCHEDULE DEVELOPMENT
19.
Wheelwright, Steven C., and Kim B. Clark. Revolutionizing Product Development:
Quantum Leaps in Speed, Eﬃciency, and Quality (New York, NY: Free Press).
20.
Leach, L. P. Critical Chain Project Management (Norwood, MA: Artech House, 2014).
21.
Sipos, 2010.
22.
Herroelen, W., and R. Leus. “On the Merits and Pitfalls of Critical Chain Scheduling.”
Journal of Operations Management 19(5): 559–577, 2010.
23.
Leach, 2014.
24.
Steyn, H. “An Investigation into the Fundamentals of Critical Chain Project Schedul-
ing.” International Journal of Project Management 19(6): 363–369, 2009.
25.
Pinto, Jeﬀrey K. Project Management, 2nd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
2013).

7
COST PLANNING
F
oremost on the list of questions in the mind of a project sponsor is the ques-
tion, “How much will this project cost the organization?” The project sponsor and
other senior management stakeholders look to the project manager to answer
this question. Furthermore, they look to the project manager to establish a cost baseline
to enable the monitoring and control of cost throughout the project life cycle.
Cost planning is the process by which organizational goals are translated into a plan
that speciﬁes the allocated resources, the selected estimation methods, and the desired
schedule for achieving the goals of the project. The cost-planning process culminates
in the establishment of a project budget that represents the organization’s (or a client’s)
investment in the project.
Although we focus attention in this chapter on cost planning at the project level,
all levels of the organization are involved in the cost-planning process, as described in
Table 7.1. As one can see from the table, creating the detailed cost estimates for the
projects is at the center of the organizational cost planning process.
Project cost estimating can be accomplished in various ways as dictated by the
needs and policies of an organization, as well as by a particular project situation. Since
project managers need to be able to respond to and address varying organizational and
project situations, they need to have various cost planning tools in their PM Toolbox.
This chapter describes some widely used project cost planning tools.
THE COST-PLANNING MAP
The cost-planning map is a tool for establishing a systematic approach to cost plan-
ning in projects (see Figure 7.1). The cost-planning map spells out steps and substeps
a project team needs to go through in order to make choices necessary to develop
basic deﬁnitions, terminology, estimate types, estimating tools, and the process for cost
planning. When such choices are seamlessly integrated, the cost-planning map can help
establish a culture of cost consciousness within a project.
While any project can ﬁnd value in using a cost-planning map, organizations with
large projects and those with a constant stream of small and medium projects may ben-
eﬁt most. The value of a cost-planning map is in the careful scripting and orchestration
of cost-planning tasks that leaves no ambiguity as to what a certain cost estimate type
185

186
COST PLANNING
Table 7.1: Organizational Cost Planning
Sequence
Organization Level
Responsibility
1
Senior Management
Set organizational goals, establish organizational investment
budget
2
Functional Management Establish budget for a functional unit
3
Project Management
Create detailed cost estimate for projects
4
Functional Management Select projects for functional unit, manage project
investment versus functional budget
5
Senior Management
Ratify project selection, balance overall project investment
to organizational budget and goals
1. Understand
 
Perspective
2. What is a Cost
 
Plan?
1. Assess Capital
 
Cost
2. Establish
 
Baseline
3. Assess Risks
1. Identify Types
 
of Estimates
2. Planning
 
Definitions
1. Plan for Cost
 
Planning
2. Item
 
Description
3. Costing
4. Check
5. Review and
 
Improve
Define Cost
Planning
Select Cost
Plan Uses
Identify Cost
Plan Scope
Design
Planning
Process
Figure 7.1: An Example Cost-Planning Map
is and how to develop it. This signiﬁcantly reduces risk of poor cost planning and misuse
of a company’s resources.
Developing a Cost-Planning Map
Project cost planning is an eﬀort fraught with risks that, if not addressed, may result in
seriousconsequences.Toaddresstherisksandavoidtheconsequences,thedeployment
of a cost-planning map will establish a well-synchronized and integrated sequence of
steps and substeps that are described in continuation.
Prior to deploying a cost-planning map, a project manager should have knowledge
about his or her organization’s ﬁnancial policies, ﬁnancial rate structure, and project
staﬃng policies.
Financial policies dictate the design of the primary elements of the cost-planning
model. For example, answers to questions such as which types of cost estimates will
be used and with what purpose in the project process depend on the ﬁnancial poli-
cies of the organization. Another example is knowledge of current labor and overhead
rates. Similarly, when performing resource planning, you must consider organizational
policies regarding staﬃng and outsourcing, a key element of the costing substep in the
cost-planning model.1

THE COST-PLANNING MAP
187
Deﬁne Cost Planning
When conﬁguring a cost-planning model, you should start with two simple questions:
“Who is the cost planner?” and “What is a cost plan?” The former really asks about the
perspective of the planner, for example, whether the planner is the owner of the project,
orperhapsacontractor,andalsowhethertheplannerisexperiencedorjustanovice.The
approach to developing a cost-planning model will greatly depend on the perspective,
experience, and organizational culture in which the planner plans. Think, for example, of
a company developing a new product. In developing a manufacturing cost estimate for
the product, the company will have to consider its manufacturing process, plant, mate-
rials procurement strategy, design for manufacturability approach, and so forth. Each of
these will contribute to cost. If manufacturing were outsourced, the contractor is likely
to have a diﬀerent manufacturing process, plant, and materials procurement strategy,
all resulting in a diﬀerent cost planning approach.
Regarding the second question, the project cost plan typically includes a cost esti-
mate and a cost baseline. Take, for example, the estimate. It is an assessment, based on
speciﬁc facts and assumptions, of the ﬁnal cost of a project.2 This assessment and its
results will heavily hinge on factors such as accuracy of scope, quality of available esti-
mating data, stage of the project, time allowed for the estimate, estimator’s perspective
and experience, desired accuracy, available estimating tools, and so on. Consequently,
by deﬁning these factors, you will deﬁne the makeup of your cost-planning map. The rel-
evance of asking these two primary questions is in getting answers that will help shape
the cost-planning map for speciﬁc situations.
Select Cost Plan Uses
Once cost planning is deﬁned, determination on how the cost plan will be used must be
established (Step 2 in Figure 7.1). Three primary uses are common: to assess the capital
cost, to establish a baseline, and to evaluate risks and productivity. As an assessment
tool, a cost plan may serve multiple purposes—for instance, substantiating a request
for capital appropriations or borrowing funds. In other situations, a cost plan can act as
a basis for a proposal, bid, or contract document. Still in other situations, a cost estimate,
an element of the cost plan, is compared with other cost plans to validate their accuracy
and increase the conﬁdence level. Typically, this type of estimate is called an independent
cost estimate, or in some companies’ parlance, a shadow estimate.3
The second capability of a cost plan, and also the second substep in this step, is
to help establish two baselines—a schedule and a cost baseline. As discussed later
in this section, part of developing a cost estimate is identifying necessary resources
such as hours of eﬀort that are necessary to complete project activities. This is typically
performed hand in hand with scheduling, so that the resource hours of eﬀort may
be turned into activity durations, thus setting a schedule baseline. By combining the
scheduled activities with their costs, you can develop a cost baseline, also known as a
time-phased budget.
The third substep, evaluating risks, aims at establishing a reasonable amount of cost
estimate to allow for changes that are likely to occur and drive additional unplanned
cost. This amount, called contingency, practically reﬂects project risks in the cost plan.

188
COST PLANNING
The motivation for careful analysis of risks and subsequent identiﬁcation of the contin-
gency amount is usually driven by attempts to lower costs as much as possible. Risks, as
we discuss in Chapter 14, may be related to any performance, schedule, and cost uncer-
tainties in work packages. Once cost planning has been deﬁned and the purpose of the
costplanselected,thestageissetforthenextsteptodecidewhatwillbeinthecostplan.
Identify the Cost Plan Scope
Vital to this step is the determination of the cost estimate type you want to use in your
practice of project cost planning, as well as what exactly the estimates will include. There
are many types available, but the three most often used are: (1) order-of-magnitude,
(2) budget, and (3) deﬁnitive estimates.4 As Table 7.2 indicates, they diﬀer in many
attributes: their purpose, accuracy, cost of preparation, information they require, and
type of estimating tool they employ.5 Each of the estimates can be used as a basis to
develop the second element of a cost plan—cost baseline or time-phased budget.
Cost estimates are typically expressed in currency units, such as dollars, enabling
an easy comparison across and within projects.6 In contrast, projects in some industries
favor estimates in labor hours, lumping together labor hours of diﬀerent types of exper-
tise. This is an acceptable practice as long as it doesn’t prevent comparison across and
within projects. Also, the practice of providing estimates in multiple units of measure
when management control requires so is acceptable.
Understanding what exactly an estimate and cost baseline mean calls for concrete
deﬁnitions of their components and other cost-planning terms. This is why it is advised
that the second substep be developing cost-planning deﬁnitions, such as those in
the “Examples of Cost Estimating Deﬁnitions” that follows. They will provide a shared
language for all participants to communicate in the cost-planning process that will be
designed in the next step.
Table 7.2: Types of Cost Estimates
Order of Magnitude
Budget Estimates
Definitive Estimates
Use
Feasibility study, project
screening, budgeting and
forecasting
Budgeting and forecasting,
authorization (partial or
full funds)
Authorization (full funds),
bids and proposals,
change orders
Accuracy
–30%, +50% before
contingency
–15%, +30% before
contingency
–15%, +15% before
contingency
Cost of
Preparation
0.04% to 0.15% of total
project cost
0.15% to 0.60% of total
project cost
0.45% to 2% of total
project cost
Information
Required
Size, capacity, location,
completion date, similar
projects
Partial design, vendor
quotes
Specifications, drawings,
execution plan
Estimating
Tool
Analogous, parametric
Parametric, bottom-up
Bottom-up, minor
parametric
Also Called
Global, conceptual,
ballpark, guesstimate,
judgment
Scope, sanction,
authorization, preliminary,
semidetailed
Detailed, control, final

THE COST-PLANNING MAP
189
Examples of Cost-Estimating Definitions
Direct cost. An item of cost, or the aggregate of items, that is identiﬁed specif-
ically with the project. These costs, such as labor, materials, and travel are
charged directly to the project.
Indirect cost. The cost of items such as building usage, utilities, management
support labor, services, and general supplies is not easily or readily allocable
directly to a project. Indirect costs are accrued and charged to overhead
accounts, the sum of which is applied as burden.
Fixed cost. A cost that does not vary with usage. An example may be a database
server used for testing on a project.
Variable cost. Expenses that vary according to use, such as the number of hours
worked by a person assigned to do tasks on a project.
Most probable cost. This is the cost most likely to occur, which is made up of all
the itemized known items and a contingency estimate that together invoke
a 50 percent degree of conﬁdence.
Range of accuracy. This is a prediction of the least expected and highest
expected cost relative to the most probable cost. Higher quality of esti-
mate, better scope deﬁnition, lower project risks, fewer unknowns, and
more accurate estimate pricing will lead to a better range of accuracy.
Contingency. An allowance added to an estimate to cover future changes that
are likely to occur for unknown causes or unforeseen conditions. Contin-
gency can be determined through statistical analysis of past project costs
or from experience in similar projects.
Design the Cost-Planning Process
Thisistheprocessthatyouwillusetodevelopanyoftheestimatesandrelatedcostbase-
lines discussed later in this chapter—analogous, parametric, and bottom-up. Of course,
the process for each one of them will diﬀer in terms of level of detail, but the princi-
ple steps will be the same. To enable this, you need to design a proper cost-planning
process, consisting of several substeps (Figure 7.1). To begin, preplan how you intend to
perform cost planning. Although this may sound like an excessive dose of paperwork, in
reality it can reduce the total eﬀort for cost planning while minimizing rework. Several
speciﬁc items are the focus of preplanning. First, thinking through who the end users
of estimates are, and with what purpose, may help you select appropriate estimating
format and forms. Knowledge of the due date for the estimate and details of the esti-
mate review are crucial to scheduling cost planning work and submitting an estimate of
the desired quality. Also, as part of preplanning, you may have to determine the cost of
preparing the cost plan and inform the end users.
Developing item descriptions is the second substep, one that may have more impact
on the estimate quality than any other factor (other than the contingency estimate). But
what exactly are item descriptions? These are descriptions of work task that we want to
develop an estimate for. Typically, a complete item description should include several
elements. Begin with a quantity and applicable measurement unit, followed by a physi-
cal description of the item in as much detail as possible. Continue by stating item scope

190
COST PLANNING
boundaries that clarify any ambiguities or assumptions, and document any diversions
from conventions and standards. Add sources of estimating data (e.g., standard labor
rates for each job category).
Computing an estimate for an item is the third subcategory. Within the core of
costing is an estimating algorithm or formula that processes project information—for
example, item description and a source of cost data for both direct and indirect
cost—into costs. Typically, these formulas or algorithms are called cost-estimating rela-
tionships. Each cost-estimating tool relies on a diﬀerent cost-estimating relationship. For
instance, when number of quantities to produce, unit production rates, and an hourly
rate of labor are available, a bottom-up estimate may use the following cost-estimating
relationship to calculate labor cost:
Labor cost = Quantity × (hrs∕unit) × ($∕hr)
Labor cost = 200articles × (5hrs∕article) × ($80∕hr)
Labor cost = $80,000
Again, which cost-estimating relationship for labor cost calculation is used will
depend on the type of estimate being prepared.
Labor, materials, and equipment can be estimated by cost estimation relationships
using ratios, parameters, cost chunks, or multiplication methods, as illustrated later in
this chapter. When costing for individual items is complete, direct costs for all items
are often totaled separately from indirect costs, and possibly by categories of work. If
requested, this is the time to translate the estimate into a cost baseline.
Costing needs to be checked, which is the fourth substep. This involves validation
of calculations, veriﬁcation of estimating data sources, and peer reviews. With checking
done, you can move to the ﬁfth substep—review and improve. Management needs to
review the estimate because they are responsible for supervision of the estimate prepa-
ration and typically can spot major problems. Then, the estimate can be issued following
the principles of sound document management. The cost-planning process does not
end here. Rather, it ends when the project is complete. At that time, all actual costs are
collected, analyzed, and compared with the cost plan, and historical data is updated.
The essence of the cost-planning process is summarized in the example titled “Tips for
Cost Planning.”
Tips for Cost Planning
Know your user. Ask questions to clarify their needs, item descriptions, and
project scope.
Follow the cost planning process. Don’t skip process steps. If the process
doesn’t work, change it.
Go beyond a “number-cruncher” mentality. Understand the big picture and phi-
losophy of the project and its customer.
Document everything. Include assumptions, references, sources, scope exclu-
sions, and so on.

ANALOGOUS ESTIMATE
191
Leave an audit trail. Audits enhance quality of the estimate and demonstrate a
process was followed.
Document changes. The estimate you have originally planned for is almost cer-
tain to change. Record the change and maintain document revision control.
Create involvement and buy-in. Make experts from each performing functional
department part of estimate preparation; after all, they have to live with it
during project execution.
Using the Cost-Planning Map
While any project can ﬁnd value in using it, organizations with large projects and organi-
zations with a constant stream of small and medium projects may beneﬁt most from the
cost-planning map. Consistency and discipline in cost planning that the cost-planning
map can generate is of vital importance to these users.
Building a cost-planning map is a signiﬁcant time commitment. In organizations
with large projects that are also complex and resource-intensive, heavy involvement
of experts from various functions—technical, ﬁnancial, accounting, for example—is
typical, often resulting in hundreds of resource hours required to construct a quality
cost-planning map. Developing a cost-planning map in organizations with a constant
stream of small and medium projects is less time consuming for lower-complexity
projects, although it may still take tens of resource hours.
Beneﬁts
The value of a cost-planning map is in the clarity of the direction that it provides to
project teams. Through a careful scripting and orchestration of cost-planning tasks, a
cost-planning map leaves no ambiguity as to what a certain cost estimate type and
cost baseline are and how to develop them. This signiﬁcantly increases the consistency
of project cost planning and reduces risks of poor cost planning and misuse of com-
pany resources.
The cost-planning map also provides structure that increases repeatability from
project to project, as well as the quality of each project estimate.
ANALOGOUS ESTIMATE
An analogous estimate is the derivation of a project cost estimate based on the actual
cost of a previous project or projects (analogous or source project) of similar size, com-
plexity, and scope.7 The estimators may use historical data, or rules of thumb that are
modiﬁed to account for any diﬀerences between the estimated project and analogous
project(s). An example of the analogous estimate is illustrated in Table 7.3, while basic
features of the estimates are shown in Figure 7.2.
An analogous estimate is generally applied when there is a lack of detailed informa-
tion about the project. Typically, this is the case early in the project life cycle.

192
COST PLANNING
Table 7.3: An Example Analogous Estimate for a Software Project
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Item
Analogous
Size
(KLOC)
Analogous
Productivity
Factor
(LOC/Person-
Month)
Analogous
Effort
(Person-
Month)
2/3
Target
Size
(KLOC)
Target
Productivity
Factor
(LOC/Person-
Month)
Target
Effort
(Person-
Month)
5/6
1
1
100
10
0.8
80
10.0
2
2
50
40
2.5
40
62.5
3
2
200
10
2.5
160
15.6
4
1
100
10
1.0
80
12.5
5
1
50
20
1.0
40
25.0
Totals
7
90
7.8
125.6
KLOC = thousand lines of code; LOC = lines of code.
End Use
Accuracy
Cost of
Preparation
Information
Required
Also Called
Feasibility Study,
Project Screening,
Budgeting &
Forecasting
Typically:
0.04% - 0.15%
of
Total Project Cost
Similar Projects,
Basic Project
Scope, Size &
Complexity
Top - Down
Estimate
+50% / –30%
Before
Contingency
Figure 7.2: Basic Features of Analogous Estimates
Developing an Analogous Estimate
In general, the process of developing an analogous estimate follows the steps previ-
ously deﬁned in the cost-planning map. Speciﬁcs will vary to reﬂect the nature of the
analogous estimation.
The quality of an analogous estimate is highly dependent on suﬃcient informa-
tion about the project scope, historical information about previous projects, resource
requirements, and resource rates.
Identifying the target project and analyzing its scope ensures that the project being
estimated is understood. For the estimate to develop, however, we need an analogous
project, which will be extracted from a historical database of previous projects with sim-
ilar features. Resource requirements and rates are necessary to express the estimate in
appropriate units.
Prepare the Estimate
The starting step involves working through the preplanning speciﬁcs such as who are
the end users of the estimate, the purpose of the estimate, estimating format, list of
contributors and their roles, and available resources for creating the estimate. What fol-
lows is a ﬁrm understanding of a project’s scope, size, and complexity features. In our

ANALOGOUS ESTIMATE
193
example in Table 7.2, the scope of the target project is broken down into ﬁve major
items (column 1), each with the targeted size (column 5). Each item may be a key feature
of the software product. Now we can go to the database of previous projects with simi-
lar features to search for projects with similar size (scope). The most appropriate project
(or projects) is selected as the analog. The mapping of analogous features to the target
project is fairly straightforward because the two projects share a common set of items.8
Our example has chosen one analogous project with the same ﬁve items. Analyzing
actual data about the analogous project indicates size and productivity (columns 2 and
3, respectively), as well as the eﬀort for the completion of each of its items in column 4,
essentially an analogous cost estimating relationship. Then we transfer the information
from the analogous project to the target, adjusting it for analogical elements that are
not in correspondence with the target project. Speciﬁcally, for item 1 in our example,
the project team is less experienced and their productivity (column 6) is judged to be
0.8 (judgmental factor) of that for the analogous project team (column 3). Applying a
cost estimation relationship that divides an item size value (column 5) by the productiv-
ity factor (column 6) yields an item estimate (column 7) expressed in resource hours. To
convert to monetary terms, we can multiple the hours by the resource rates.
A sum of all the estimated items is equal to the total project estimate. Crucial in this
eﬀortistheabilityoftheestimatorstoidentifysubtlediﬀerencesinthesourceandtarget
items and estimate the cost of a target item based on the source item that is analogous.9
Checking, reviewing, and improving the estimate are the ﬁnal steps in developing an
analogous estimate.
Using an Analogous Estimate
An analogous estimate is a tool of choice when there is a lack of detailed information
aboutaproject.Typically,thisisthecaseearlyintheprojectcycle.Becauseotherestimat-
ing tools have disadvantages of their own as well, an analogous estimate can be used in
combination with the bottom-up and parametric estimates described in the following
sections.
An analogous estimate operates on the assumption of a limited amount of infor-
mation about the target project and a very summary type of information about the
analogous project. Put together, these two facts mean that just a few hours may be
enough for almost any project’s analogous estimate.
In analogous estimating, an estimator may choose to estimate only the total target
project without breaking it down into items as we have done. He or she may judge, for
example, that the target project may take twice the resource hours as the analogous
one. This judgmental factor of 2 would then be multiplied by the resources deployed in
the analogous project to obtain the estimate for the new target project. Essential for this
type of estimation is adequate justiﬁcation for all judgmental assumptions made.
Beneﬁts
The value an analogous estimate brings to a user is in the little time it takes to develop,
while operating with limited available information about the project being estimated.

194
COST PLANNING
Also, because the analogous estimate is based on representative past data,
the developed estimate can be substantiated and easily justiﬁed unless signiﬁcant
judgments in comparison to past projects have been made.
PARAMETRIC ESTIMATE
A parametric estimate uses mathematical models to relate cost to one or more physical
or performance characteristics (parameters) of a project that is being estimated.10
Typically, the models provide a cost estimation relationship that relates cost of the
project to its physical or performance parameters (also called cost drivers), such as
production capacity, size, volume, weight, power requirements, and so forth. Deter-
mining the estimate for a new power plant may be as simple as multiplying two
parameters—the number of kilowatts of a new power plant, for example, by the
anticipated dollars per kilowatt. Or it may be very complex, such as estimating the cost
of a new software development project that requires 32 parameters be comprehended
in a cost estimate algorithm. Values of the parameters can be entered into the cost
estimate relationship, and the results can be plotted in tablature format or on a graph
(see Figure 7.3).
Developing Parametric Estimates
Figure 7.4 shows the basic features of parametric estimates for reference when
considering the use of such a method. Prior to developing a parametric estimate, a
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
160
180
170
190
200
210
y = 90(x)
Area (in thousands of sq. ft.)
Cost (in thousands of dollars)
Figure 7.3: Example Cost Estimate Relationship for Parametric Estimates

PARAMETRIC ESTIMATE
195
End Use
Accuracy
Cost of
Preparation
Information
Required
Also Called
Budget Planning,
Project Screening,
Feasibility Study
Typically:
0.04% - 0.45%
of
Total Project Cost
Basic Project Scope
with Selected
Parameters
Identified
Statistical
Estimate
+50% / –30%
Before
Contingency
Figure 7.4: Basic Features of Parametric Estimates
project manager should have knowledge about the project scope, the key project
parameters (cost drivers) to use for analogous comparison, and historical information
from like projects.
Basic project scope description provides understanding of what is being estimated.
Its parameters are identiﬁed on the basis of the nature of the cost estimation relation-
ship model that will be used to collect and organize historical information, which will be
related to the project being estimated.
Prepare the Estimate
As explained in the cost planning map tool, the general process of developing any type
of estimate is relatively similar. Per such process the parametric estimating starts with
preplanning and continues with developing item descriptions and costing. The last
step is unique to parametric estimating. Speciﬁcally, it includes database development,
model building, and model application.
The purpose of database development is to collect and organize cost data from
past projects in such a manner that the data can be used to build a model, which
will be employed to estimate the cost of a new project. The ﬁrst step is to select the
framework to organize costs of past projects methodically. That framework is called the
basic work element structure form and corresponds to that of the desired cost estimate
relationship. For example, the structure may include project management cost (e.g.,
planning, controls), nonrecurring costs (e.g., design and engineering, software, facility),
and recurring costs (e.g., production, operations). The necessary cost data from outside
and within an organization are collected against the structure and normalized to
established ground rules and assumptions. Typically, these databases are maintained
in some constant-year price levels and are updated periodically to provide consistency
in estimating from project to project.
Building a model aims at determining which equation type would best ﬁt a data
sample organized in the database and deriving a mathematical model for the cost
estimate relationship that describes the project undergoing estimation.11 While many
mathematical models in the form of equations can be used for the cost estimate rela-
tionship, in practice, a lot of cost data can be ﬁt empirically using one of the following
forms—linear, power, exponential, or logarithmic curves. When graphed, all of them
will resemble either straight lines or well-behaved curves. As shown in Figure 7.3,
the simplest cost estimate relationships are as simple as a dollars per square foot
relationship, a linear relationship of the form y = ax, where y is the estimated project

196
COST PLANNING
cost (dependent variable) that is a function of x, the area in square feet (parameter
or cost driver), and a is the parameter based on historical cost data relating to the
cost driver. For example, this type of cost estimate relationship can be used for rough
order of magnitude cost estimating for a new home. Assuming that a number of
homes between 1,800 and 2,300 square feet had costs of $90 per square foot, then the
corresponding cost estimate relationship can be expressed as:
y = 90(x)
This simple linear model assumes that there is such a relationship between the
independent variable (cost driver) and project cost so that as the independent variable
changes by one unit, the cost changes by some relatively constant number. Often,
life is not that linear and simple, which leads to the use of nonlinear cost estimate
relationships (see the example that follows titled “Parametric Software Estimating”), as
well as cost-estimating relationships with multiple independent variables and multiple
regression analysis.
How do we determine which equation type would best ﬁt a data sample organized
in a database? If we enter all data points from the past projects into a graph, gener-
ally the best ﬁt would be the equation type that can be drawn through the data points
such that the sum of vertical distances from the cost-estimating relationship curve to
the data points above the line are about equal to the sum of vertical distances from the
cost-estimatingrelationshipcurvetothedatapointsbelowtheline.Ormoresophisticat-
edly, the best mathematical ﬁt is the equation type that minimizes the absolute value of
total cost deviation between the data points and the cost estimating relationship curve.
Once the best-ﬁt equation type is determined, model building continues by deriving
a mathematical model for the cost estimation relationship. Among many statistical tech-
niques available for this, the method of least squares appears to be the most frequently
used curve-ﬁtting method. Although linear in nature, the method can be applied to
bothlinearandnonlinearcostestimationrelationshipequationtypes—tothelatteronly
when they are transformed into linear forms.
Parametric Software Estimating
Many parametric software effort models are based on key software parame-
ters as cost drivers. They are usually based on the statistical analysis of the
results of previous software development projects.12 These analyses included
key parameters such as system size (e.g., lines of code), complexity (e.g., num-
ber of interdependencies), type of application (e.g., real-time operating sys-
tem), and development productivity (e.g., lines of code developed per hour).
One expert suggested 59 parameters (factors) that can impact the outcomes
of these cost models.13 A simple model can take the form of:
Z = CYL

PARAMETRIC ESTIMATE
197
where:
Z = estimated project effort (person-months)
Y = Estimated project size (KLOC—thousands of lines of code)
C = Regression coefﬁcient
L = Regression exponent
You can apply this model to estimate the effort for a new software devel-
opment project by assuming the following values: C = 3.8, L = 1.4, Y = 2.
■
Z = CYL = 3.8 (2)1.4 = 10.03 person-months
When database development and model building are complete, you can proceed
with the next step—model application, using the cost-estimating relationship derived
from past cost experience to estimate the cost of a new project. Clearly, the assumption
in applying a cost-estimating relationship is that future projects will be performed as
past projects. What if, as is often the case, the future project that is being estimated
diﬀers from the past projects in some details? This can be resolved by cost-estimating
relationship stratiﬁcation and cost adjustments. Through stratiﬁcation our historic
database is divided into layers, each layer representing a “family” of data points similar
to each other in some respect. Then, a separate curve for each family is ﬁtted. For
example, six data points in Figure 7.5 have higher costs than the other nine. A close
look reveals that these six data points are for luxurious homes with features such
as central vacuum cleaner, surround-sound audio system, stainless steel appliances,
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.2
2.3
160
180
170
190
200
210
Area (in thousands of sq. ft.)
Cost (in thousands of dollars)
173
186
Cost Family 2
Cost Family 1
Figure 7.5: Stratified Cost-Estimating Relationships

198
COST PLANNING
marble countertops, hardwood ﬂoors, stucco work, and so forth, while the remaining
nine were ordinary homes with much simpler and less expensive features. Logically, we
could stratify our database into two families of homes and ﬁt curves through each of
the two subsets of the database, thus obtaining two cost-estimating relationships, as
illustrated in Figure 7.5. If we have a square footage of the home being estimated (e.g.,
2,000 square feet), we can easily determine that the parametrically estimated cost of
either the luxurious ($186 k) or the ordinary ($173 k) home.
Cost adjustments or complexity factors are also used in parametric estimating
to adjust the cost-estimating relationship estimated cost to account for diﬀerences
between the project being estimated and the historical projects used as the basis of
estimate. For example, let’s assume product development projects from a database
typically include an average number of ﬁve prototypes. If a project being estimated
includes ten prototypes, two methods can help resolve the diﬀerence. One is to stratify
the database and develop separate cost-estimating relationships for diﬀerent numbers
of prototypes. The other is to separately compute the cost of the prototypes. Whatever
the case, when cost adjustment is done, the parametric estimate needs to be checked,
reviewed, and improved as discussed in the section on the cost-planning map.
Using Parametric Estimates
Parametric estimates are most often used in the project deﬁnition stage as well as
in the early design stages when insuﬃcient information is available to develop a
bottom-up estimate. Considering that cost estimation relationships typically relate
project cost to high-level measurement of capacity or performance, it is exactly
this information that is available early in the project cycle. Naturally, such summary
information makes parametric estimates very appropriate for calculating comparative
cost assessments of alternate project approaches and providing a cross-check to other
estimating tools, but not for developing a detailed competitive cost proposal.14 To be
used for such purposes, the parametric estimate must be based on accurate historic
information, quantiﬁable parameters, and a scalable model (applicable in both small
and large projects).
The most diﬃcult and time-consuming part of parametric estimating is the method-
ology development, including database development and formulation of the cost
estimating relationship. Depending on the complexity of the database, it may take
anywhere from tens of hours to hundreds of hours to develop the database and cost-
estimatingrelationship.Oncethat’sdone,actualprojectestimationcanbeaccomplished
in minutes or hours.
Beneﬁts
Parametric cost estimating tends to be faster and less resource consuming than
bottom-up estimating. Focused on the need to establish good cost estimation rela-
tionships that properly relate project cost and cost-driving parameters, parametric
estimates put a focus on cost-driving parameters, disregarding what is less important.
This concentration on cost-driving parameters—coupled with greater speed and lower

BOTTOM-UP ESTIMATE
199
resource consumption—enables parametric estimates to be applied in estimating
situations in which detailed, bottom-up estimates are neither practical nor possible.
Think, for example, about a cost estimate for a new house. To develop a bottom-up
estimate of the house, you need detailed house blueprints, bill of materials, labor rate
information, and so forth. A lot of eﬀort and cost is needed to prepare all of this. For
estimating the cost of the same house using the dollars-per-square-feet parameter, you
only need knowledge of the house size, making it much faster and easier to estimate.
Parametric estimates can be produced even though little is known about the project
except its physical parameters.
Parameteric estimates are also easy to use and repeatable. The reason for this is that
the estimates are based on mathematical formulas, which correlate the present estimate
with the past history of resource utilization on similar project types. Still, to enjoy these
beneﬁts, you must rely on judgment and experience.
BOTTOM-UP ESTIMATE
A bottom-up estimate relies on estimating the cost of individual work items and then
aggregating them to obtain a total project cost.15 Typically, an in-depth analysis of all
project tasks, components, and processes is performed to estimate requirements for the
items. The application of labor rates, material prices, and overhead to the requirements
turns the estimate into monetary units.16 Figure 7.6 is a generic version of the bottom-up
estimate for simpler projects, but it can be used to estimate both simple and complex
projects.
Typically, a bottom-up estimate is developed just before project execution, or even
in earlier phases if the required information inputs are available. They are valued for
their capacity to produce estimates of good accuracy, which is higher than that of
any other estimating tools. Basic features of the bottom-up estimates are summarized
in Figure 7.7.
PROJECT BUDGET ESTIMATE
Project Name: Longfellow
Estimator: Williams
Date: Aug. 5, 2017
1
Code
2
Item
3
Quan
4
Labor
Unit
Hours
Total
Hours
Rate
$/Hour
5
6
7
8
Materials
Unit
Price
Amnt
9
10
11
3210
10
0.5
5
60
300
75
45
$450
$825
010
1
291.5
291.5
65
18947.5
4737
$900
$24,584
Over-
Head
(25%)
Total $
7+8+10
First
Article
Project
Total
Amount
(5) X (6)
Figure 7.6: An Example of a Bottom-Up Estimate

200
COST PLANNING
End Use
Accuracy
Cost of
Preparation
Information
Required
Also Called
Bids & Proposals,
Cost Control
Budgets,
Change Order,
Estimates
Typically:
0.045% - 2%
of
Total Project Cost
Design >50%
complete,
Specifications
>60% complete,
Tasks >85%
identified
Detailed, Control,
Grass roots
Estimate
+15% / –10%
to
+5% / –5%
Before Contingency
Figure 7.7: Basic Features of Bottom-up Estimates
Developing Bottom-Up Estimates
To develop a bottom-up estimate, a project manager needs to have knowledge about
the project scope, resources needed and their associated labor rates, material cost
required, and the project schedule.
Project scope in the form of a work breakdown structure (WBS) provides a frame-
worktoorganizeanestimateandensurethatallworkidentiﬁedintheprojectisincluded
and estimated.17 For this to happen, resource requirements that deﬁne types and quan-
tities of resources necessary to complete the work are multiplied by resource rates to
obtain a cost estimate. Typically, the rates come from historic records of previous project
results, commercial databases, or personal knowledge about team members. Consid-
ering that some estimates contain an allowance for cost of ﬁnancing such as interest
charges, which are time dependent, the durations of activities as deﬁned in the project
schedule are an important input.
Establish the Estimate Format
Once all information inputs are available, work on a bottom-up estimate begins. Nor-
mally, the format of the estimate is established in the cost-planning map. A sound prac-
tice is to adopt a format that is based on a code of accounts, where a cost code is allo-
cated to each work item. In our bottom-up estimate example, the code in column 1 uses
the WBS structure coding. This simpliﬁes the analysis of the project while serving as the
basis for cost reporting, cost control, and even information retrieval.18
Prepare the Estimate
Once the estimate format is set, there are several steps necessary to prepare the esti-
mate. Since these steps are discussed in general in the section on the cost-planning
map, we will shed light on implementation speciﬁcs related to bottom-up estimates.
First, you need to identify a work item that is being estimated, then determine its quan-
tity, along with the cost of labor (human resources), overhead, and materials. One good
way to accomplish this is to proceed area by area or category by category in the project,
before adding them up to arrive at the total project estimate. We take that approach
in our example cost estimate, where a WBS work package is selected as an item. In our
example, the work package is called ﬁrst article approval (column 2). By repeating this
process work package by work package, and then aggregating or totaling the individual
costs, we obtain the total project cost.

BOTTOM-UP ESTIMATE
201
The ﬁrst-article-approval item requires that the quantity (column 3) of ten proto-
types of a high-tech cable be produced with equipment, tooling, ﬁxtures, and materials
thatwillbeusedlaterinthecourseoftheregularproduction.Shouldtheestimatedlabor
cost for a single unit be shown, or a whole project batch of ten items? When project tasks
are single and nonrepetitive, the question of quantity is irrelevant. When there are multi-
pleidenticalitems,asinourexample,thecostforthewholebatchneedstobeestimated.
Accordingly, our cost estimation relationship will multiply half an hour per unit (column
4) by the ten prototypes (column 3), which is a total of ﬁve resource hours (column 5), by
a rate of $60 per resource hour (column 6) to obtain the cost of $300 (column 7) per item.
Columns 4 to 7 indicate the labor times and cost for each estimated work package
item. While we use monetary units to record cost in columns 6 and 7, we do recognize
that project managers will not do so, but instead will only record labor or resource hours
in columns 4 and 5. This is an acceptable practice in many industries, where project man-
agers are not expected to manage dollars but resource hours only. Actually, when labor
time estimates are used for estimating future projects, the category of resource hours is
much more relevant than cost. With the passage of time, the accuracy of cost is eroded
by inﬂation and other factors, while the resource (labor) estimates should remain valid.
Once the direct labor cost is calculated, you can move to the labor overhead (col-
umn 8). There are no hard-and-fast rules here, since company policies vary widely. While
some companies zealously include labor overhead into the estimate, other companies
do not factor overhead labor into the estimate at all. Those who do often have diﬀerent
overhead rates in diﬀerent parts of the company, and even from one project to another.
Very frequently, this rate is based on a cost estimation relationship, calculating it as a
percentage of the direct labor cost in column 7. In our example cost estimate, the rate
is 25 percent. Typically, the overhead rate relates to the wages and salaries of employ-
ees who are not directly connected with the project, such as supervisors, administrators,
and support personnel.
So far, the estimate includes direct and overhead labor cost for an item, in our case a
work package. Now, we will estimate a net cost of materials required for the item com-
pletion (column 10), using a cost estimate relationship that multiplies the cost per unit
(column 9) by the number of units (column 3). Material cost typically is comprised of
costs of components, raw materials, or services for each item. It can include the cost of
largercapitalequipmentaswell,whichisleftouthereforthesakeofsimpliﬁcation.While
our example for unit prices is based on catalog prices of materials, it is also possible to
base it on vendor quotations or standard unit costs for stock items.19
With direct and overhead labor cost already available, the materials cost is the last
cost piece necessary to ﬁgure out the total estimated cost for the item. By adding the
costs of all columns, the total cost per item is estimated. Repeating this exercise for
each item (i.e., work package) and summing up estimates for all items will lead to a total
project cost estimate. If this were a project for an external customer, this would be the
time to add proﬁt margin cost to the estimate. The work on a bottom-up estimate ends
with checking, reviewing, and improving it.
During the review process, care must be taken to ensure all cost items are included.
For an example of the implications of incomplete estimates, see “The Courthouse
Disaster.”

202
COST PLANNING
The Courthouse Disaster
Halfway through its construction, the courthouse project looked like a sure
winner for the contractor. The project was on schedule, contract payments
were made in a timely manner, and the owner was happy with project perfor-
mance. Then Greg, the contractor’s project manager who also developed the
bottom-up project cost estimate that was the basis for the project contract,
left the company. A month later, Pete, the new project manager, determined
that the entire project budget had been spent, although a lot of work remained.
A quick audit commissioned by management revealed the following:
■
Greg’s project cost estimate was never reviewed by peers or managers.
■
A signiﬁcant monetary loss was to be expected at the end of the project.
When completed a few months later, the courthouse became one of the
biggest losers in the company’s history, ending $500 k over the estimated cost,
almost one-third over the original budget. In the postmortem session, the fol-
lowing improvements were adopted for future cost estimating:
■
All major estimates will be reviewed by peers and management
■
All major estimates developed under time pressure will be compared to a
shadow cost estimate (a cost estimate developed by an independent ﬁrm).
Using Bottom-Up Estimates
Both small and large projects, whether simple or complex, are good candidates to apply
bottom-up estimates. Typically, the application occurs just before project execution,
or even in earlier phases if the required information inputs are available. This gener-
ally means that a substantial amount of design work is completed, often exceeding
60 percent.
For their detailed nature, bottom-up estimates are primarily used for cost control
budgets, bids/proposals, and change order estimates (see “No Bottom-Up Estimate,
No Job!”).
The time to develop a bottom-up estimate varies with the size and complexity of
a project that is being estimated. A 500-resource hour project without materials and
equipment may take an hour or two to bottom-up estimate. In contrast, a team of esti-
mators may spend thousands of resource hours preparing a bottom-up estimate for a
$400 m project.
Beneﬁts
The value of the bottom-up estimate lies in their capacity to produce estimates of good
accuracy, which is higher than that of any other estimating tools. Subsequently, they are
the best basis for cost control.20
An added beneﬁt is that a high degree of buy-in can be achieved with this type of
estimate because people involved in estimating the project are the people who will be
doing the work once the project moves to execution.

THE COST BASELINE
203
No Bottom-Up Estimate, No Job!
“We develop perfect quality software” was an informal motto of the SP Group,
a unit of a privately held company. Its clients, divisions of the same company,
agreed: The SP Group was doing a great job of developing software applications
that had almost no bugs. Happy with the quality, the clients didn’t care much
about the actual costs of the projects. For a project to be approved and paid
for by the client, the SP Group would simply submit an order-of-magnitude
estimate ranging from 1,000 to 10,000 resource hours.
Then, the company went public and a focus on proﬁt and demonstrated
cost efﬁciency took over. Unable to respond to the operating principles, all
division managers were forced out and new, proﬁt-oriented division executives
were brought in.
Project cost estimation also changed. “Sharks,” as project managers called
the new division managers, ﬂatly refused to look at the order-of-magnitude
estimates. Having proﬁt-and-loss responsibility, the sharks wanted to manage
their cost and required bottom-up estimates to approve a project. Since the
project managers were lacking the expertise to develop such estimates,
the large majority of them were eventually forced out. The learning from
this real example is that project managers have a responsibility to keep
their skills honed not just for current responsibilities, but also for future
responsibilities.
THE COST BASELINE
The cost baseline is a time-phased budget used to measure and monitor cost perfor-
mance on a project.21 Developed by segmenting estimated costs by time period, the
baseline reﬂects estimated costs and when they are supposed to occur, if executed in
a speciﬁc way (see Table 7.4). Many projects, mostly large ones, may have multiple cost
baselines expressing diﬀerent facets of cost performance. For example, the baseline
may measure expenditures (cash outﬂows), received payments (cash inﬂows), or com-
mitted costs. In contrast, other projects may have only one cost baseline—an S curve
that illustrates how labor hours and material are to be expended over the life cycle of
a project.
Typically, the baseline is developed in larger projects as part of initial project
planning to forecast its cash ﬂow. The cost baseline oﬀers beneﬁts as a performance
measurement baseline, where the project team can gauge eﬃciency and progress and
identify any deviations from planned progress and estimated costs.
Developing a Cost Baseline
To develop a cost baseline, a project manager needs to have knowledge about the
project WBS, the project schedule, and the cost estimate for the project.

Table 7.4: An Example Cost Baseline
Timeline (in thousands of dollars)
Work Packages/Tasks
Item Totals $k
FEB
MAR
APR
MAY
JUN
JUL
AUG
SEP
OCT
NOV
DEC
JAN
1.01 Select Concept
12
8
4
1.02 Design Beta PC
8
1
3
3
1
1.03 Produce Beta PC
8
1
3
3
1
1.04 Develop Test Plans
2
1
1
1.05 Test Beta PC
6
3
3
2.01 Design Production PC
18
3
6
6
3
2.02 Outsource Mold Design
16
1
7
7
1
2.03 Design Tooling
3
5
10
10
5
2.04 Purchase Tool Machines
16
20
140
2.05 Manufacture Molds
80
10
10
60
2.06 Test Molds
8
8
2.07 Certify PC
18
18
3.01 Ramp Up
30
30
TOTALS
396
8
7
7
6
5
12
23
23
47
150
78
30
204

THE COST BASELINE
205
A simple deﬁnition of cost baselining as the spreading of the cost estimate items
over time hints that having a documented cost estimate that includes all cost items is
a mandatory starting point. Hopefully, these items can be arranged in alignment with
the project WBS. If done so, the knowledge of the project schedule—indicating planned
start and expected ﬁnish dates for work elements—enables the assignment of the cost
to the time period when the cost will be incurred.
Identify Cost Baseline Type and Cost Items
Which types of cost are typically included in a cost baseline? That, of course, depends on
the type of baseline being developed. As mentioned earlier, several are available, but the
size and nature of the project are major determinants of the baseline type. If the target is
to prepare a baseline focused on project expenditures (also called project spending plan
or cash outﬂows or project budget), which is our focus here, consider including a broad
menu of cost items, some of which are as follows:
■
Salaries and wages of project personnel (in simplest cases this is the only item to
include in in-company projects).
■
Overhead expenses.
■
Payments to contractors.
■
Payments of vendors’ invoices for purchases of equipment, materials, and services.
■
Interest payable on loans, loan repayments, tax payments, shipping fees, duties, and
so on.
■
Travel expenses.
In case you are establishing a baseline to measure cash inﬂows, examples of some
cost items that may be included are as follows:
■
Payments from customers for delivered equipment, materials, and services.
■
Loans from ﬁnancial institutions.
■
Tax refunds, grants, and so on.
If the intent is to manage cash ﬂow, you will need items for both cash outﬂows and
cash inﬂows. Once the cost items to include are identiﬁed, it is time to set criteria for cost
baselining.
Set Cost Baseline Criteria
The preparation of a cost baseline is essentially an act of establishing the relationship
between the cost estimate and time. For this to be possible, there must be clear crite-
ria that determine which project events trigger payments of cost items included in the
baseline, and the time intervals between the trigger events and the related payments
(see Table 7.5). For payments to vendors, for instance, the trigger events are usually mile-
stonesdeﬁnedinthecontractualtermsthatstipulatehowandwhenthepaymentsareto
be made. At other times, such as paying salaries of project team members, labor sched-
ule of their engagement is what triggers their payment at the end of each month. The
intervals, whether for payments within or outside the organization, are dictated by the
time needed for internal and external communications, approvals and administrative
procedures, and company policies bent to take advantage of the time value of money.22

206
COST PLANNING
Table 7.5: Example Criteria for Cost Baselining in a Product Development
Project
Cost Baseline (Time-Phased Budget) Criteria
Cost or Payment
Item
Schedule Trigger
Event or
Information
Interval between
Trigger Event
and Payment
Comments
Management and design
team
Per labor schedule
1 month
Vendor subcontracts
Schedule milestones
45 days
This is company policy
Vendor’s invoices for
equipment and
materials purchases
On-site delivery
milestones
2 weeks
This is set by the design
team to motivate
vendors
Performing an appropriate analysis of the criteria and deﬁning them in a written form is
highly advisable, for it becomes a crucial foundation for tabulating costs by periods in
the process of cost baselining.
Allocate Cost Items to Time Periods
Once the baseline type is chosen, cost items to be included in the baseline are identiﬁed,
and criteria for baselining are deﬁned, the foundations for allocating cost to time peri-
ods are established. Next, one should address coding and arrangement of cost items.
Preferably, the project would have its own cost codes (column 1 in Table 7.4) that are
consistent with the company’s cost coding system or industry standards. If the project is
externally funded, the customer may mandate the use of its own cost codes. Items from
column 2 may be arranged in diﬀerent ways. If a cost baseline is being developed on the
basis of the bottom-up estimate, the items can be arranged in line with the WBS, as we
have done in Table 7.4, using work packages from the WBS for a project. When an anal-
ogous or parametric estimate is being used to construct a cost baseline, other methods
to arrange the items can be deployed, such as project phases.
Column 3 provides cost estimates for the items, which will now be allocated to cer-
tain time periods in a 12-month project. Since reporting is on a monthly basis, time
periods are months represented in columns 4 to 15. Item 1.01, Select Concept, will be
carried out in months 1 and 2, so part of the estimated $12 k will be expended in month
1 and the remaining part in month 2. How much will be allocated to each month hinges
on the following factors:23
■
The project schedule, indicating the planned start and end dates of the item, along
with resource histograms specifying resource requirements by time period.
■
The contractual terms.
■
Intervals between trigger events and payments.
Similarly, estimates for the remaining items are spread over their months of execu-
tion and entered in the appropriate months. The schedule is rarely drawn on the cost
baseline, but we included it in Table 7.4 to make the baseline easier to comprehend.

THE COST BASELINE
207
Incremental >
0
100
50
150
200
250
Monthly Budget (in thousands of dollars)
Budget (in thousands of dollars)
300
350
400
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
8
7
7
6
5
12
23
23
47
150
78
30
8
15
22
28
33
45
68
91
138
288
366
396
Cumulative >
Figure 7.8: A Cost Baseline Displayed as an S Curve
Sum Estimated Cost by Period
Once all item cost estimates are allocated to speciﬁc time periods, the next action is to
sum estimated cost by periods. This provides information about incremental expendi-
tures by time periods—that is, expenditures for each month—which will be used in the
next step to display the cost baseline graphically.
Display the Cost Baseline
The S curve is a popular way of displaying a cost baseline formatted as cumulative
expenditures (see Figure 7.8). To calculate cumulative expenditures, add the incre-
mental expenditures for the ﬁrst period to those of the second period. These are the
cumulative expenditures for the ﬁrst two periods. Add this number to the third period’s
incremental expenditures to obtain the cumulative expenditures for the ﬁrst three
periods, and continue with this procedure for the remaining periods. When ﬁnished,
graph the cumulative expenditures (y-axis) over time (x-axis) to develop a cost baseline
in the form of an S curve. As in any type of the cost estimate, this is the time to check
and review the cost baseline.
Once the project is completed, there is a lot of value in studying how the initial
baseline played out over the life of the project, learning the lessons, and using them
to improve future cost baselines.
Using the Cost Baseline
Many experts believe that cost baselining is an unnecessary activity for small projects,
because the cost of its preparation may easily outweigh the beneﬁts.24 In contrast, other
projects do have a need for the cost baseline. Typically, the baseline is developed as part

208
COST PLANNING
of initial project planning to forecast its cash ﬂow. Considering that the cost baseline
may be based on an analogous, parametric, or bottom-up cost estimate, sometimes as
the estimates evolve and become more accurate, so do the cost baselines. They are reis-
sued at regular or irregular intervals and may even constitute part of project reports
submitted to senior management or external customers.25 For details about updating
and changing the baseline, see “When Should You Update or Change the Budget?”
As a function of the size and complexity of the project and its schedule, resource
requirementsandcostestimate,thetimetodevelopacostbaselinemaywidelyvary.The
development of a cost baseline based on a low-detail analogous estimate and summary
schedule may consume an hour or two of a skilled project manager’s time. However,
an experienced project manager may spend tens of hours constructing a cost baseline
based on a detailed bottom-up estimate, with hundreds of activities in the schedule.
When Should You Update or Change
the Budget?
Dogmatically sticking with the initial cost baseline or time-phased budget when
there is a need to alter it serves no purpose and is risky. The need for alteration
is triggered by several factors, leading to minor (updates) or major revisions
(changes) of the baseline. Updates may occur because of factors such as:26
Cost estimate evolvement. As a project progresses, more information becomes
available, helping to develop more accurate estimates. Such changes in esti-
mates should lead to the update of the baseline.
Project changes. Management of project changes may require new expen-
ditures, which should be added to the baseline. Changes may be due to
unforeseen conditions or from customer-generated changes.
Schedule changes. Changes of time-phasing of project activities during the
execution stage are frequent and result in inevitable modiﬁcation of the
baseline.
In addition to these updates (minor revisions), there may be times when
a major revision of the baseline is necessary. During project implementation,
major unplanned schedule, cost, or technical problems may occur. Or there
may be a need to change the project strategy. These typically prompt major
revision of the project plan, including a major revision of the cost baseline. Such
changes to the cost baseline may happen very rarely, once or twice in the life
of a project, if at all. When dealing with updates or changes to the baseline,
the key is to manage all modiﬁcations and related factors in a proactive rather
than a reactive manner when possible to maintain control of the project.
Beneﬁts
The lack of an eﬀective cost baseline, even if a cost estimate and labor requirements
are available, poses a major risk to a project—organizing measurement of performance
and cash ﬂow is diﬃcult, if not impossible. Therefore, constructing the baseline oﬀers
beneﬁtsofusingitasaperformancemeasurementbaseline.Inthiscapacity,thebaseline
isabasisforcomparingactualcosts(whentheyoccurred)withplannedcosts(whenthey

THE COST BASELINE
209
were supposed to occur). This, then, is a way to gauge eﬃciency and progress, attracting
management’s attention to any deviations from planned progress and estimated costs.
Cashﬂowforecastingisanotherbeneﬁtthataneﬀectivebaselineprovides.Itinforms
management or the customer in advance of the funds that must be made available in
order to procure resources and use them to sustain project progress. When properly
performingthisroleinthecourseofprojectimplementation,thecostbaselineshouldbe
modiﬁed to reﬂect performance and progress to date. Some risky consequences of not
managing cash ﬂow in a project, and how to avoid them, are described in the example
titled “The Museum Design Company.”
The visual power of displaying a cost baseline as an S-curve format is impressive, fur-
ther strengthening the case of its simplicity and visual nature as a beneﬁt to the project
manager and stakeholders.
The Museum Design Company
The Museum Design Company (MDC) found itself in what appeared to be a
paradoxical situation: It had multiple contracts, but no positive cash ﬂow. How
was this possible? Loaded with top design talent and known for a strong track
record of superb technical quality, MDC had no difﬁculty landing project con-
tracts to design military museum exhibits. But John Riddle Jr., CEO of MDC and
an accomplished designer, had to borrow from his bank on a regular basis to
make the payroll. Puzzled by this, Riddle asked for professional help.
He was advised to study the cash inﬂow and outﬂow S curves for each
project within their portfolio. Since S curves were not available, project man-
agers were tasked to develop them for each project. Once developed, the
majority of the curves looked like the one illustrated in Figure 7.9a. The S curves
clearly showed that the difference between the funds obtained from the cus-
tomer (cash in) and payments paid for designers’ salaries, overhead, and loan
interests (cash out) was negative throughout the project. The exception being
at the end when it was zero.
Cash In
Cash In
Cash Out
Cash Out
Project Time
Project Time
Negative
Cash
Flow
Positive
Cash
Flow
Cash
Cash
(b) Positive Cash Flow
(a) Negative Cash Flow
Figure 7.9: Two Possibilities: Negative and Positive Cash flow
(continued)

210
COST PLANNING
This was the source of the paradox. MDC was burning through its proﬁts,
forcing it to continually borrow from the bank. Continuation of the practice
would certainly force MDC out of business. Riddle concluded that the negative
cash ﬂow situation had to be avoided at all costs on future projects. The cost
baseline for each future project was set up so the difference between cash in
and cash out was positive (Figure 7.9b), enabling MDC to eliminate the need
for costly loans.
Table 7.6: A Summary Comparison of Cost-Planning Tools
Situation
Cost-Planning
Map
Analogous
Estimate
Parametric
Estimate
Bottom-up
Estimate
Cost
Baseline
Provide cost-planning
methodology
✓
Show the amount of
estimated funds
✓
✓
✓
✓
Show time-phasing of
estimated funds
✓
Organizations with
stream of small projects
✓
✓
✓
✓
Organizations with large
projects
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Based on past
experience
✓
✓
Higher accuracy
required
✓
✓
Lower accuracy
required
✓
✓
A few hours to prepare
✓
Medium time to prepare
✓
Longer time to prepare
✓
✓
✓
✓
Need estimate for
project screening,
forecasting
✓
✓
Need estimate for
budget authorization
✓
Need estimate for cost
proposal/change orders
✓
✓
Make decisions very
early in project life cycle
✓
Estimate in project
definition/early design
✓
Before execution,
design substantially
complete
✓

REFERENCES
211
CHOOSING A COST-PLANNING TOOL
This chapter features ﬁve tools with clearly designed purposes. For two tools, the
cost-planning map and cost baseline, the purposes are so distinct that they do not
compete with other tools for use in cost planning. While the cost-planning map strives
to establish a systematic methodology for cost planning, the cost baseline aims at
providing a time-phased budget.
The remaining three tools may be used in combination or a single tool can be chosen
foraparticularapplication.Thatcallsformatchingtheprojectsituationwiththetoolthat
favors the situation. Table 7.6 can provide a project manager guidance on tool selection.
References
1.
Project Management Institute. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowl-
edge, 5th ed. (Drexell Hill, PA: Project Management Institute, 2013).
2.
Humphreys, K. K. Project and Cost Engineers’ Handbook, 4th ed. (Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press, 2014).
3.
Ibid.
4.
Chemuturi, M. K., and Thomas M. Cagley. Mastering Software Project Management:
Best Practices, Tools, and Techniques (Plantation, FL: J. Ross Publishing, 2010).
5.
Ostwald, P. F., and Timothy S. McLaren. Cost Analysis and Estimating For Engineering
and Management (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2003).
6.
Project Management Institute, 2013.
7.
Meredith, J. R. Project Management: A Managerial Approach, 8th ed. (Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, 2011).
8.
Chemuturi and Cagley, 2010.
9.
Stewart, R. D. Cost Estimating, 2nd ed. (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2001).
10.
Humphreys, 2014.
11.
Venkataraman, R. R., and Jeﬀrey K. Pinto. Cost and Value Management in Projects
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2008).
12.
Kile, R. L., and USAFCA Agency. REVIC Software Cost Estimating Model User’s Manual,
Version 9.0 (Arlington, VA: Revic Users Group, 2001).
13.
Ostwald and McLaren, 2003.
14.
Chemuturi and Cagley, 2010.
15.
Project Management Institute, 2013.
16.
Stewart, 2001.
17.
Project Management Institute, 2013.
18.
Humphreys, 2014.
19.
Chatﬁeld, C., and Timothy Johnson. Microsoft Project 2010 Step by Step (Redmond,
WA: Microsoft Press, 2010).

212
COST PLANNING
20.
Ostwald and McLaren, 2003.
21.
Project Management Institute, 2013.
22.
Verzuh, Eric. TheFast Forward MBA in Project Management (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons, 2012).
23.
Chatﬁeld and Johnson, 2010.
24.
Meredith, 2011.
25.
Project Management Institute, 2013.
26.
Project Management Institute, 2013.

P A R T
IV
Project Imple-
mentation
Tools


8
SCOPE MANAGEMENT
W
hen it comes to managing a project, the one constant that can be counted
upon is change. Changes happen, or attempt to happen, at a constant pace
on projects. Each change has the potential to modify the scope of the project,
having an impact on the work performed. Scope management is therefore necessary to
determine if each change is necessary, how it will impact the work performed, and then
ensure that each necessary change is implemented properly.
Without scope management we get uncontrolled scope change, commonly referred
to as scope creep. We are all guilty of it. Just recently I took on what I estimated to be a
two-hour, one-person project to clean out the closet in the master bedroom. I eﬃciently
collected all the items that I determined I no longer needed on a daily basis, boxed them
up, and tagged them as either donatable items or keepers for later use and to be stored.
The donated items were packed in the car for delivery, while the storable items were
brought to the garage.
However,noroomwasavailabletostoretheitemsinthegarage,sotheprojectscope
changed to include cleaning out the storage portion of the garage, which in turn led to
additional project scope creep to rearrange the storage space in the attic to make more
room for items moving from the garage. The two-hour project had expanded uncontrol-
lably to a full two-weekend, two-person job. Sound familiar?
This simple example shows that project management requires focus to get the
required work completed, which in turn requires project scope management.
The Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) Guide deﬁnes project scope
management as “the process to ensure that the project includes all of the work required,
and only the work required, to complete the project successfully.”1
When a project is in the implementation phase, a project manager must be diligent
about maintaining control of project performance, especially in comparing actual
performance against what has previously been planned. Project control involves
establishing checks and balance techniques that compare planned activities (project
baseline) against what has actually occurred.
Arguably, the most critical control involves managing changes to the project scope.
Changes in scope will aﬀect the tasks that are performed on a project, which has a direct
eﬀect on project resources, which in turn directly aﬀect the project cost and schedule.
Changes in project scope therefore create a cascading eﬀect as depicted in Figure 8.1.
215

216
SCOPE MANAGEMENT
Affects
Affects
Affects
Changes in Scope
Changes in Tasking
Resource Usage
Project Cost
Project Schedule
Figure 8.1: The Cascading Effect of Project Scope Change
When one understands the cascading eﬀect of project scope change, it becomes
very apparent why this is so. It is a well-documented fact that unmanaged scope change
is a leading cause of project failure (see “Scope Change: If You Have to Do It, Do It Early”).2
Scope Change: If You Have to Do It, Do It Early
Uncontolled project scope changes are known as project killers, because they:
■
Cause delay.
■
Increase the cost.
■
Damage morale and productivity.
■
Spoil relationships among project participants.
Why such a far reaching impact? First, more often than not, changes cause
work to have to be repeated in the impacted activities. Second, any activities
related to those directly impacted by an uncontrolled change will likely need
to change as well. This means that the earlier you make the change, the less
rework and less damage you inﬂict on the project. Early in the project, very
few activities have been worked on and completed, so therefore there is less
rework that will have to take place. In contrast, if a scope change comes in late
in the project life cycle, signiﬁcant and costly change may need to occur, and
any work that has to be redone becomes wasted effort and cost.
Consider, for example, if a change comes in late on a product development
project. The change may cause redesign and associated redevelopment, the
repurchasing of factory tooling, ﬁxtures, and materials, the remaking of proto-
type systems, and so forth. All this work has signiﬁcant impact on the project.
Even a seemingly insigniﬁcant change of a team member during project imple-
mentation may set a team back by a number of weeks or months. The lesson
to learn here is to think hard and make changes early in the project cycle, and
put a very critical assessment eye on changes that come late in the project.

PROJECT SCOPE CONTROL SYSTEM
217
We have made the case for diligent scope management on a project. The remainder
of the chapter provides high-value tools that should be a part of every project manager’s
PM Toolbox for establishing and performing project scope management activities as
part of their project management practices.
PROJECT SCOPE CONTROL SYSTEM
Controlling scope on a project cannot be handled in an ad hoc manner, regardless of
the size or complexity of the project. Scope management requires the establishment
and use of an eﬀective project scope control system.
The project scope control system is the most prominent tool applied to project
scope management. Because scope changes are certain to happen on any project, there
must be order to process, document, approve, and manage the changes. The project
scope control system establishes the scope control protocols, or rules, for a project that
deﬁnes how changes to project scope will be managed once a project baseline has
been established.3 Scope control protocols will normally include the following:
■
Scope change requests must be made in writing.
■
The beneﬁts gained from a proposed scope change must be clearly articulated and
documented.
■
Scope control roles and responsibilities must be established.
■
An approval process must be documented.
■
A decision maker has to be appointed and anointed.
■
Approved scope changes must be incorporated into the project plan.
■
Scope changes must be adequately communicated.
■
A set of standardized tools must be used.
Many project managers ﬁnd it useful to create a visual representation of the project
scope control system, an example of which is illustrated in Figure 8.2. By incorporating
other scope control tools such as the project change request and project change log
into the scope control system, organization change control policy can be translated into
a practical project work ﬂow for managing and controlling changes to project scope.
Establishing a Project Scope Control System
Establishing a scope control system that harmonizes a process, actions, tools, owners,
and their interactions in controlling project scope calls for a thoughtful system that will
likely need to be tailored for each organization.
The eﬀectiveness of the project scope control system is dependent on suﬃcient
information about the project scope (scope statement or statement of work), an estab-
lished project work breakdown structure (WBS), and the appointment of a scope control
coordinator.
Identify Scope Control Roles
The ﬁrst step in establishing a project scope control system is to identify the various
roles and responsibilities to be performed by the project actors. Every project manager

218
SCOPE MANAGEMENT
Originator
Coordinator
Assessment
Body
Decision
Maker
Implementer
Tools
Prepare &
submit change
proposal 
Record
change
proposal in log
Review
change
proposal 
Impact
Assessment
Approval
Record change
rejection in log
Perform
impact 
assessment
Provide 
assessment 
input
Present
impact
assessment
Customer
impacted?
Level 1
change
approval
Level 2
change
approval
Success 
factors 
affected?
Level 3
change
approval
Record 
Level 1 
change 
approval
Record 
Level 2 
change 
approval
Record 
Level 3 
change 
approval
Communicate 
change 
decision
Implement 
change
Read
change
decision
Roles
Change Management Process
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
Project
Change
Request
Decision
Checklist
Yes
Yes
No
No
Decision
Policy
R & R
Matrix
Project
Change
Log
Figure 8.2: Example Scope Control System
(or project oﬃce if one exists) is charged with identifying and customizing the scope
control roles that are appropriate for the particular organizational and project situation.
The following roles are generic in nature and can be used as a starting point for a cus-
tomized project scope control system:
■
Change originator. The change originator is the person introducing a scope
change proposal to the project. He or she is responsible for clearly articulating

PROJECT SCOPE CONTROL SYSTEM
219
and documenting the scope change proposed, the need for the change, and the
quantiﬁable beneﬁt of the change if approved.
■
Scope control coordinator. The scope control coordinator is the person who shep-
herds a proposed scope change through the scope control process. The coordinator
is the person who is responsible for ensuring that a scope change proposal moves
through the evaluation process eﬃciently, that the decisions are being made eﬀec-
tively, and if approved, that the change in scope is communicated and implemented.
The scope control coordinator is also responsible for creating and maintaining the
project change log.
■
Change authority. The scope control change authority is the set of cross-functional
subject matter experts on a project who evaluate information associated with
a proposed change in scope. The change authority will assess the need for the
scope change, the beneﬁt gained, and the impact of each proposed change, and
then provide feedback and recommendations to the decision maker based on
its assessement.
■
Decision maker. The scope change decision maker is the person or persons who
makes a determination to proceed, or not to proceed, with each proposed scope
change. More than one decision maker may be required depending upon the level
of impact a proposed scope change will have on a project. This is discussed in more
detail in the following sections.
■
Implementers. Implementers are the various project actors who are responsible for
implementing the approved scope changes. Prior to implementation activities, the
implementers are also likely responsible for providing input to project baseline plan
changes resulting from a proposed scope change.
Itshouldbepointedoutthatpeoplemayservevariousroleswithintheprojectscope
control system. For example, a project manager may serve as the scope control coordi-
nator, a member of the change authority, and a scope change decision maker. Likewise,
a project specialist may serve as a scope change originator, a member of the change
authority, and an implementer.
Because of the multiple role possibility, it is good to include a responsibility matrix
(Chapter 3) as part of the project scope control system.
Document the Scope Control Process
The heart of the project scope control system is a documented and approved project
scope management process. This process is commonly referred to as the change control
process. Figure 8.2 contains a generic scope control process that can be used as the basis
of a customized process for your organization.
The scope control process should clearly identify the primary activities associated
with project scope control and the decisions that need to be made in order to eﬀectively
control project scope.
Itshouldbenotedthattheprocessshowncaneitherbemademorerobust,orleaned
out, to ﬁt a particular organizational or project need.

220
SCOPE MANAGEMENT
Establish the Scope Control Decision Policy
The project scope control system and its associated scope control process can break
down quickly if a project decision policy is not documented to guide the practices
associated with the key scope control decisions that need to be made. The decision
policy should describe the decision method that will be employed—consensus,
consultative, or authoritive. The decision boundary conditions associated with each
decision as well as the various decision levels—project level, executive level, customer
or client level—must also be established. Finally, the decision maker for each decision
and decision level must be documented.
Gain Senior Management Approval and Commitment
A project scope control system will fail to be eﬀective (or even used) if it is not supported
by the members of an organization’s senior management team. It is recommended that
a senior management sponsor be identiﬁed for the newly established project scope con-
trol system, and verbal support be clearly evident to the entire organization to establish
implementation empowerment.
Beyond senior management sponsorship and approval, a commitment on the part
ofseniormanagerstoensurethattheorganizationusestheprojectscopecontrolsystem
as designed must be established. This involves two primary things. First, senior man-
agers must play their role in the system, most often as a scope control decision maker.
Second, they must set expectations and ensure that other project actors play their part
and don’t try to circumvent the system. For instance, it is not uncommon for a disgrun-
tled scope change originator, who has been told his or her change proposal has been
denied, to escalate to a senior manager and get an override to the decision. It is also not
uncommon for a senior manager to attempt to mandate a scope change. Both examples
demonstrate a lack of commitment on the part of senior management and also destroy
the empowerment of the scope control system by changing authority body and the
project manager.
Using the Project Scope Control System
A project scope control system should be used on each project that is subject to change,
and put into use when the project requirements are locked in.4 With this, the project
scope control system is in place when the ﬁrst change to project requirements emerges,
setting the tone of scope control throughout the project. This is especially vital in larger
projects where there is a stronger need for scope control. Because of their lesser scope
and complexity, smaller projects can utilize a simpliﬁed scope control process—the
project manager often may be the only person available to handle scope changes. In
circumstances like this, an informal, but well-understood scope control system would
be more logical than having a formal system. Project management maturity of an
organization is also a factor that aﬀects the formal or informal use of a scope control
system (see “Can We Handle the Change?”).

PROJECT SCOPE CONTROL SYSTEM
221
Can We Handle the Change?
Project-oriented organizations with a well-established change management
process typically have change control policies in place, often accompanied by a
template change management plan. Such a plan, then, gets adapted for a spe-
ciﬁc project by its team, which already may have a change coordinator aboard.
In such cases, change coordinators tend to be well versed in change manage-
ment, spending all or much of their time on coordinating changes.
Other organizations which are less mature in project management offer an
example of the opposite experience. Not having change management policies
or template plans in place, they may expect a project manager to take on a
part-time role of the coordinator, developing a change management plan and
coordinating all changes through the change management process.
Using a formal project scope control system involves a number of activities. First,
the various roles have to be assigned to individuals involved in managing scope for the
project, and the individuals have to begin acting in the capacity deﬁned by the roles.
Next, the change authority has to be formed. For many projects, the change authority is
referred to the change control board (CCB) and is made up of a cross-section of project
stakeholders. Within a short period of time, the various tools that will be used to man-
age project scope have to be identiﬁed and developed. Finally, the change management
process needs to be implemented with the emergence of the ﬁrst scope change request.
The following steps (or a customized set of steps) are performed to appropriately man-
age proposed changes to project scope.
Submit a Scope Change Request
Naturally, anyone involved in a project, inside or outside the team, is welcome to
submit a scope change request, assuming the project scope is not frozen. All proposed
scope changes have to be submitted in writing using the project change request
(detailed later in the chapter). A description of the proposed change, the reasoning
for the change, and a beneﬁts justiﬁcation have to be included with the scope change
request.
Record the Change and Distribute the Request
After receiving a scope change request, the coordinator records it in a project change
log (detailed later in the chapter) and distributes copies of the project change request.
Typically, copies go to the change authority and any specialists whose subject matter
expertise is needed to assist in assessment of the request.

222
SCOPE MANAGEMENT
Review the Change Request
The originator prepares a brieﬁng and is responsible for presenting the proposed scope
change to the change authority. The presenter should be prepared to answer more
in-depth questions regarding the proposed change, potential impacts, beneﬁts, and
implementation options.
Recognizing that proceeding with a more in-depth evaluation of the change
impact and implementation options may divert critical project resources from their
normal project work, the change authority acts on behalf of the project to decide if the
proposed scope change is approved for further evaluation. One of three decisions can
be expected at this stage: (1) the proposed change is rejected; (2) the proposed change
is denied but with a request for additional information; or (3) the proposed change is
approved for further impact assessment and a formal approval decision.
Assess Impact
When an impact assessment is approved, an owner is assigned to shepherd the
proposed change through the evaluation of implementation options and associated
impact estimations. Depending on the nature of the proposed change, both a technical
assessment and programmatic assessment may be required. It is good practice to have
likely implementers involved with the impact assessment.
Make the Scope Change Decision
The change authority’s responsibility is to make an approval or rejection decision, which
is then recorded in the project control log. When a scope change is rejected, a copy is
stored in a master ﬁle and a copy is returned to the originator, explaining the decision
and the grounds for rejection.
When a scope change is approved, the coordinator makes the change oﬃcial and
sends it to those impacted by the change to carry it out. Also, the coordinator informs
the originator and other project stakeholders. Finally, it is not unusual that the change
authority ﬁnds an impact assessment incomplete, prompting the coordinator to request
more information from the originator and assessment team.
It is common that multiple levels of decision authority be required, as deﬁned by the
decision policy and the level of authority granted to various decision makers. Level 1
changes include those that do not negatively aﬀect the project success factors, and
approval decision resets with the project change authority. Level 2 changes are those
that do have an impact on the project success factors, and as such, require an addi-
tional level of decision approval by the project sponsor or another member of top man-
agement. Level 3 changes are those that impact the customer or client directly. These
changes require yet another decision approval by the customer or client.
Update the Change Log
The coordinator is responsible for recording the change decision, any actions required,
and supporting information in the project change log. The decision is then communi-
cated to the appropriate project stakeholders.

PROJECT CHANGE REQUEST
223
Modify the Project Plan
When a scope change is approved, it normally creates a change in the work that has
to be performed on a project, which in turn drives a change in tasks by one or more
project team members. Some scope changes are small and relatively insigniﬁcant and
therefore do not require a change to the project baseline. Other scope changes are
moderate and require the project manager to modify the project baseline. Still other
scope changes are large and aﬀect multiple aspects of the project WBS causing a reset
to the project baseline.
The signiﬁcance of the scope change is contained in the impact analysis performed.
When changes in tasking and deliverables are required, the change ﬁrst of all has to be
captured in the project WBS. From there, changes to the project budget and schedule
have to be performed in order to keep the project in alignment. The project team will
then be working under a new project baseline.
Implement the Change
The approved change now has to be broadly communicated to all stakeholders aﬀected.
A standard and consistent change communication plan should be developed and man-
aged by the change authority and utilized by the project manager.
Once communicated, the ﬁnal step in the scope change process is for the various
project specialists to implement the change as part of their project execution duties.
The ﬁnal entry in the project control log for all approved changes is an indication that
the scope change has been fully implemented.
Beneﬁts
The scope control system’s value is in bringing order to the project scope change
process. Through a methodical prescription of the sequence and arrangement of
roles, responsibilities, tasks, and tools involved in the system, this order signiﬁcantly
diminishes the possibility of problems, including scope creep, budget overruns, and
schedule slippage.5 Making the scope change process known in advance also helps
direct behaviors of project participants, eliminating notorious perplexity of people
involved in project changes.
When fully documented, the pictorial appearance of a scope control system makes it
user friendly and easy to follow, building on a natural ability of humans to better process
graphical rather than narrative information. The visual impact is further strengthened
by presenting the scope control system as a sequence of steps, a format that adds more
transparency and user utility to the process.
PROJECT CHANGE REQUEST
Some project managers despise change requests and have a tendency to say
“no” to every request. However, these project managers should broaden their
viewpoint to realize that many changes create additional value for a project, and

224
SCOPE MANAGEMENT
therefore have positive consequence. Most change requests are a result of several
factors:
■
Value enhancements: Changes that will increase the value proposition of the project.
■
External events: Changes caused by the environment in which a project operates
such as new laws and regulations put into place.
■
Errors or omissions: Changes that result due to forgotten or unrealized features or
work during project planning. Hey, we are human!
■
Risk response: Changes identiﬁed as a result of necessary risk mitigation or elimina-
tion responses.
However, the impact of changes on a project’s schedule, cost, quality, and other mat-
ters may easily surpass the awareness or expertise of a single change originator.6 As a
consequence, the project may severely suﬀer and in certain cases even collapse (see
“Scope Creep by Design”). For this reason, it is very important to ensure that the beneﬁt
and value of each change is understood, and the impact then evaluated in a disciplined
and professional manner before performing a change.
The project change request is a must-have tool to help a project manager and his
or her change authority perform a multiperspective evaluation of proposed changes.
The process, structure, and content of the project change request help businesses make
decisions of a higher quality, keeping project scope, cost, and schedule in check and in
alignment with one another.
Scope Creep by Design
Scope creep, or uncontrolled change of scope, is often perceived as a major
threat to projects.7 But one company faced with highly uncertain semicon-
ductor fab projects controls the creep one change at a time. At the time of
deﬁning the scope historically prone to many changes, the company identiﬁes
a bucket of money equal to 10 percent of the project budget that is called AFC
(allowance for change). Its purpose is to pay for the scope items that can’t be
predicted. To bring control to the process, every time such an item emerges, it
is treated as a scope change and the project manager has to formally approve
it. This very successful practice has helped the company to proactively manage
scope creep from a budget perspective.
Developing a Project Change Request
While the project change request appears as a simple form (Figure 8.3), it does require
some thought, which begins with preparing solid information inputs.
Major inputs to the application of the project change request are the scope baseline
with the project WBS, the scope statement, and the scope control system.
Project change request forms come in many diﬀerent styles and formats. When
developing a custom project change request for your project or organization, use

PROJECT CHANGE REQUEST
225
Change Title:
Change Number:
Originator:
Submittal Date:
Description:
Business Benefit:
Implications of
No Change:
Priority:
1 – critical:
“project cannot move forward unless this change is made”
2 – high:
“project success criteria impacted without this change”
3 – normal:
“project value proposition enhanced with this change”
4 – low:
“improvement in ease of use or performance gained by this change”
Impact Assessment
Assessment Owner:
Cost:
Schedule:
Resources:
Deliverables:
Impact Summary:
Alternatives
Alternative Approach:
Recommendation:
Decision:
Approved
Rejected
Deferred
Change Request Identification
Change Request Detail
Recommendation and Approvals
Figure 8.3: Project Change Request Template
the change management process contained in the scope control system to guide the
design and content to be included in the request form. Generally, there are ﬁve content
sections that we recommend including in the project change request:
1.
Change request identiﬁcation information
2.
Change request detail
3.
Impact assessment
4.
Alternative solutions
5.
Recommendations and approval decision

226
SCOPE MANAGEMENT
Change Request Identiﬁcation
This ﬁrst section of the project change request focuses on the quick identiﬁers for each
requested scope change. Included in this section should be a concise change request
title, a unique identiﬁcation number, the name of the person originating the change
request, and the date on which the change request is ﬁrst submitted to the project
change authority for consideration.
Change Request Detail
This section is intended to provide suﬃcient detail about a requested change so the
project change authority can decide if there is suﬃcient cause for an impact assessment
to be performed. The description of the change request must be suﬃciently precise
to provide clear understanding of which feature, deliverable, or work package will be
changed and in what manner.
Additionally, this section must contain the justiﬁcation for expending resource time
and potentially changing the project baseline in order to incorporate the change. Jus-
tiﬁcation should be articulated by describing the business beneﬁts that will result from
the change, if it is implemented. From the opposite perspective, we recommend that
a well-formed justiﬁcation also include a statement of the impact if the change is not
approved and implemented.
Finally, the change request originator should be required to make a determination
of the criticality of a requested change. As shown in Figure 8.3, we typically use a 4-point
scale of criticality that ranges from low priority to critical priority. One of the major
problems with regular, formalities-oriented treatment of project change requests is that
they are unnecessarily slow. To overcome this problem, you need a feature in the system
that ensures fast responses to urgent change requests, which is marked in the project
change request form as “critical.” The intent is to inform the change authority that the
requested change needs urgent consideration and approval. This may mean that the
authority will have to act promptly. Depending on the policy rules, if a critical change is
being requested, they may choose to interact in a face-to-face meeting, on the phone,
or via an intranet-based program (see “Fast-Tracking the Change Process”). It is of
utmost importance that critical changes should not be an excuse to circumvent evalu-
ation of matters related to quality, performance, reliability, safety, or any other aspect.
Building safeguards that enforce appropriate consideration of the change may be a
useful aid.
Fast-Tracking the Change Process
ODI Incorporated’s primary customer made it very clear that they had become
frustrated with slow change request responses when their design chief made
the following comment: “We are not willing to put up with your long turnaround
time of our major change requests!”

PROJECT CHANGE REQUEST
227
Keen to retain customers, ODI redesigned its change management proce-
dure, adding three vital changes. First, a rule was made that turnaround time for
major customer requests will be 48 hours. These changes required a signiﬁcant
evaluation effort, including involvement of design, tooling, and manufacturing
engineers, as well as marketing and purchasing experts. In addition, these peo-
ple and their representatives were not collocated, so communication among
them was time consuming and slow. Second, in response, ODI built an intranet
site that signiﬁcantly sped up the communication. Third, instead of using con-
sensus decision making on the change board, typically a slow method, one of
the board members was nominated the approver while others were considered
reviewers and inputters only. The system redesign led to a drastic improve-
ment, helping ODI to reestablish good relationship with this very important
customer.
With the appropriate justiﬁcation information in hand, and a sense of change
request urgency, the project change authority now has what it needs to decide if an
impact assessment is warranted, and if a change request needs to be fast-tracked. If so,
an assessment owner is assigned and he or she becomes responsible for ﬁlling out the
next section.
Impact Assessment
Some organizations have a habit of approving major changes to the scope without ever
referring back to the original (often called baseline) scope. This practice results in an
ever-changing scope, making it a moving target. The risk is that ever-increasing scope
may inﬂate to the point of representing a signiﬁcantly changed project that needs plan-
ning and implementation diﬀerent from the current baseline. To prevent this, screen all
proposed changes by identifying how they will impact the scope.
Should the change have minor, if any, impact, it may be treated as a minor correc-
tive action, not impacting baseline scope, cost, schedule, and resources. In contrast,
we may identify a major change to scope of work, funding, or schedule requirements
that may warrant a replanning (or rebaselining) eﬀort, including changes to the scope
statement, WBS, schedules, budget, and resource allocation. To make all involved fully
aware of such consequences, spend adequate eﬀort to assess the impact of the change
on scope, quality, cost, and schedule and document it in the project change log.
It is diﬃcult to evaluate the impact of changes on schedules without a good network
diagram, simply because a network diagram is where dependencies between activities
are shown that help us analyze how a change to one deliverable and its activities will
aﬀect dependent activities. Still, more often than not, that is what occurs—a sched-
ule impact assessment is made on the basis of a gut feeling. To safeguard against risks
related to such assessments, rely on network schedules to produce reliable estimates,
even if you are dealing with a small project.
Requiring a cost estimate for the proposed change is a well-meaning strategy to
prevent cost surprises. That humans have a tendency to underestimate the cost is well
documentedinmanybooksandpapers.Severaldecadesagoaswellastoday,missingan

228
SCOPE MANAGEMENT
estimate by 20+ percent is not unusual. What is unusual is the failure on management’s
part to take this tendency into account when evaluating a change request. Asking for a
detailed estimate when the change request is proposed is a sound management safe-
guardagainstthistendency.Ifthechangeismajor,itispossibletogofurtherandrequest
an estimate from an independent source to compare with the estimate of the change
originator.
With schedule and cost impacts identiﬁed, the underlying assumptions about
resource impact used to derive the schedule and cost impact should be explic-
itly stated. Even though a project manager may have budget and schedule contingency
to utilize to implement a scope change, availability of resources to do the work may
be a constraining factor. For full evaluation of impact, a discussion concerning which
resources are needed and for how long is necessary.
Finally, a thorough impact analysis should also include information about changes
to project deliverables and the ﬁnal project outcome. Will any project deliverable be
impacted by the change? If so, how? Will the quality of the project outcome be aﬀected
and how? These are just a few of the critical questions that need to be asked and
answered to complete the analysis.
Alternatives
Some project change request forms include a section requiring the originator and the
specialists evaluating the change request to include a statement on alternative solutions
to the stated need. We feel this is a best practice and, as such, we have included this ﬁeld
in our example project change request.
This requires the team to spend time in the possibility space, thinking about alterna-
tive ways to implement the change. In practice, it is sometimes the case where a simpler
and lower-impact solution is found than the original path that was being pursued. This
is where engaging the project specialists in the evaluation process pays oﬀ.
Recommendation and Approval
Armed with an impact analysis and alternative solutions, the ﬁnal pieces of information
needed in a well-designed project change request are the recommended direction and
documentation of the ﬁnal decision. We include three decision alternatives to consider:
(1) reject the change; (2) approve the change; and (3) defer the change to a later date or
event (such as a software release following delivery of the ﬁnal project outcome).
Using the Project Change Request
As conventional wisdom goes, a change should be proposed as soon as it is needed. We
would like to add a little bit more precision here. The early conceptual stage of scop-
ing a project is the time when there is limited if any use for a project change request
as a change management tool. With the scope still conceptual in nature, it is imprac-
tical to attempt to control changes. In the later stages of scope deﬁnition, however,
it is practical to start using the project change request. For example, a new product
development project that has not experienced the beginning of design work or has not

THE PROJECT CHANGE LOG
229
completed any product speciﬁcations would not need to apply formal management of
change requests. Rather, it would start using a project change request for changes when
they either constitute a departure from the agreed design speciﬁcation, or aﬀect the
work to be performed for product design.8 The project change request would continue
to be used from that point forward.
When do you stop applying the project change request? Although the question may
seem less than meaningful, there will come a time when any change may impede the
project, potentially leading to costly waste and rework. An eﬀective action in such situa-
tions would be to impose a scope freeze, a mandate that no changes will be considered
unless an overriding reason exists. An example may be a customer-funded requirement
to add a new safety feature to a product once it is in ﬁnal testing and validation. The
scope should be frozen before a project enters ﬁnal test and veriﬁcation activities.
The project control log is quite eﬃcient to use; only a few minutes is needed to
enter information into the log. But that is only the mechanics, which will likely be
preceded by a substantial analysis that is a function of the size and complexity of the
proposed change. In a small-scale change, determining its scope, cost, and schedule
consequences may take 15 to 30 minutes. At the other end of the spectrum are major
changes to projects, where a group of experts may spend a week or two to fully assess
the requested change’s impact on the project’s business purpose and goals.
Beneﬁts
As a result of its process, structure, and content, the project control log brings to the
project manager the value of making conscious decisions instead of letting change hap-
pen in an ad hoc manner. Naturally, the scope change decisions tend to be of a higher
quality. When the decisions are based on or coordinated with other tools necessary to
assess the change impact, project scope, cost, and schedule are kept in check and in
alignment with one another. Also, the documentation of changes reduces project par-
ticipants’ confusion, and results in better-controlled scope change, lower total cost, and
fewer delays.
THE PROJECT CHANGE LOG
Project changes may not come in small numbers; rather, they may proliferate. This cre-
ates a need for a tool with the purpose of recording, numbering, and coordinating the
ﬂow of project changes (see example project change log in Figure 8.4). Administered
by a coordinator, a project change log records each change request and assigns it a
unique identiﬁer, making sure the decision about it—whether it has been approved or
rejected by the change authority—is recorded as well. When a request is approved and
the change implemented, that information also becomes part of a project change log.
The project change log provides good oversight of all requested, rejected, approved,
ongoing, and completed changes. Such clarity is bound to decrease the confusion about
what changes have or have not occurred that is often present when a project change log
does not exist.

230
SCOPE MANAGEMENT
Project Change Log
Project Name: Rattlesnake
Project Manager: Unger
Change Summary
Assessment
Approvals
Status
Id
Submit
Date
Originator
Description
Cost
Schedule
Other
Assessment
Approval
Change
Approval
1
4/22/17
Allenbach
Westheim
Printer upgrade
Upgrade GUI Software
$6000
1 week
1 person
1 person
Approved
Approved (L1)
In Implementation
Completed
2
5/9/17
$12000
3 weeks
2 people
Approved
Approved (L2)
87
12/7/17
Reed
Add test probes
$15400
11 days
Approved
In Assessment
n
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Figure 8.4: Example Change Control Log
Developing a Project Change Log
Forms such as project change logs have a major advantage in that they look simple to
develop. Their appearance as a simple spreadsheet, however, fails to inform us that it
takes some information and energy spent in an orderly sequence of steps to produce a
meaningful log.
Development of a project change log begins with gathering information previously
developed. The scope control system provides full understanding of the project scope
changerulesthatarenecessaryforensuringtherightinformationiscontainedinthelog.
The project change request form provides the necessary information for the summary
section of the project change log, as well as additional information about the impact
assessment. Finally, a change coordinator should be appointed to administer the use of
the change log.
If one were to perform a web search for example project change logs, many diﬀerent
formats would emerge—some complicated and overdesigned and some too simpliﬁed
to provide meaningful information. We believe that a well-designed project change log
should provide information in four important areas:
1.
A high-level summary of each change requested,
2.
The outcome of the impact assessment,
3.
The approval decision outcomes, and
4.
The current status of the requested change.
Developing a project change log centers on creating a format that, when ﬁlled out,
provides the necessary information in these four areas.
Change Summary
The ﬁrst section of the project change log should give the reader a quick overview of
eachscopechangethathasbeenrequested.Summaryinformationbeginswithaunique
identiﬁer for each requested change (usually as simple as a chronological numbering
system) and a brief description of the change. Also included in the summary should be
the name of the person who originated the request and the date that it was submitted

THE PROJECT CHANGE LOG
231
to the project change authority. All the summary information should be documented
on the project change request form and can be directly transferred to the change log.
Assessment Information
The project change log should provide the reader a concise understanding of the impact
to the project if the change is implemented. The assessment ﬁelds should be tailored
to match the way in which an organization typically measures project impact. In the
example shown in Figure 8.4, we chose to show project budget impact, time impact,
and resource impact. These ﬁelds should be customized to match an organization’s par-
ticular approach to impact assessment.
Decision Outcomes
Moving a scope change from the point of request to implementation requires at least
one, and usually multiple, decisions. All change control logs must serve as the docu-
mented reference for all decisions associated with changing the scope of a project in
order to create a historical record of approved project scope change. A decision out-
come entry must be included in the project change log for each decision point identiﬁed
in the change management process.
Scope Change Status
Finally, it is good practice to provide a ﬁeld in the project change log that communicates
the current status of each requested change. Current status may include a number of
states that a change request may be in. Some example status states include “In Assess-
ment,” “In Approval,” “In Implementation,” “Completed,” and “Rejected.”
Attempt to keep the project change log focused on the four essential pieces of
information described previously, and try to avoid overdesigning the log format. As
described in “It Only Takes a Spreadsheet,” exotic or enterprise-level tools are not
required to develop a highly eﬀective project change log.
It Only Takes a Spreadsheet
Final accounting is a painful part of any contractual project, especially if there
were a lot of approved project changes. It is even more painful when there is
no project change log, as was the case in a project that approved several hun-
dred changes over a two-year project execution. Because of a lack of scope
change policy and several changes in the project manager position, the log
was never established. Then, at the end of the project, it took the project
team several months and thousands of dollars of their time to track down all
requested, approved, and rejected changes to include in a ﬁnal change control
log requested by the client. Eventually, the team learned a very simple lesson
the hard way: it only takes a spreadsheet to create a useful change log.

232
SCOPE MANAGEMENT
Using the Project Change Log
A project change log should be developed and in use as soon as the project scope goes
under change control and the ﬁrst requested scope change emerges. The change coor-
dinator is responsible for keeping the project change log current with the latest project
information.
As soon as a project change request is submitted to the project change authority,
the requested change should be entered in the project change log. In turn, as each
requested change moves through the assessment, decision, and implementation
steps of the change management process, the project change log should be consis-
tently updated to capture the necessary information as required by the change log
design.
Special diligence needs to be performed to ensure that each decision is documented
in the log. If various levels of decision approval are required by the change management
process, each change level must be logged along with the decision date and decision
maker’s name.
Use of the project change log does not end with the logging of the change decision,
unlessachangeisrejected.Forthechangesthatareapproved,thelogmustremainopen
and in use until it can be veriﬁed that a change has been fully implemented. Although
it sounds paradoxical, sloppy change coordination may fail to catch a change that was
never requested but implemented nonetheless (see “What Do You Do with an Unre-
quested Change?”) Should this happen, the change coordinator must ensure that the
change is entered into the log and fully documented to at least provide a historical
record of the change.
What Do You Do with an Unrequested Change?
Alan DeFazio was a computer engineer with no prior experience in contractual
project work. When he learned that the project’s computer vendor went out
of business, he simply ordered better and more expensive equipment from
another, more reputable vendor. After all, that’s what he had done many times
for his own company’s internal needs.
Four months later when the equipment was delivered, the project man-
ager was more than upset at DeFazio. The project manager asked the very
pointed question, “Why did you change computer specs without going through
the change request procedure?” Even worse, the project manager refused to
pay the price differential between the original and new equipment, saying “I
have no money in the budget and to get it I have to go beg my chief ﬁnancial
ofﬁcer.”
The epilogue? After several months of frustration, the project client
approved the change. The moral of the story: Having a change procedure in
place means nothing unless you train people to use it.

THE SCOPE CONTROL DECISION CHECKLIST
233
Beneﬁts
For projects that are fraught with changes, the project change log serves as a repository
of change that provides good oversight of all requested, rejected, approved, ongoing,
and complete changes. The value of this information is in its potential to prevent both
cost losses and project delays, by indicating to the decision makers the impact of major
changes on the project. Such clarity is bound to reduce the confusion often seen in sit-
uations when a project change log is absent.
The project change log fosters an environment of transparency, oﬀering fundamen-
tal but brief information on all changes associated with a project. If a simple design is
used, all project stakeholders will be able to gain insight on any and all scope changes
in a short amount of time, therefore serving as a communication booster.
The project change log also provides a complete historical record of all changes to
project scope, therefore providing documented evidence on why changes to project
cost and schedule were required. Additionally, it provides a record of who approved
each change and when. This information is many times a required deliverable in
contractual-based projects.
THE SCOPE CONTROL DECISION CHECKLIST
Throughout a project’s life cycle, the need and desire for change will come from project
team members, the project sponsor, senior leaders, customers and clients, and other
project stakeholders. All requests for change will require a series of decisions to be made
to determine if a change is worth considering, if resources should be directed to assess
the impact of a change, if the change should be implemented, and who needs to provide
the appropriate resources and approvals.
Decision-making consistency therefore is necessary to ensure that project scope
management practices are eﬀective.9 Decision consistency is crucial for establishing and
maintaining buy-in for the scope management process, and to prevent various project
players from attempting to circumvent the decision process. A standard set of decision
questions, formulated into a scope control decision checklist, is a valuable tool for a
project manager to establish the level of decision consistency required on his or her
project.
Developing a Scope Control Decision Checklist
A scope control decision checklist will be diﬀerent for every organization because every
organization will likely have a slightly unique scope control system and process, com-
plete with decision-making nuances.
Developing a standard set of decision questions for an organization is a good prac-
tice as it drives consistency across the projects being executed within the organization.
The questions contained within the checklist can be developed by ﬁrst understanding
the change management process. Questions will center on what decisions have to be

234
SCOPE MANAGEMENT
Table 8.1: Sample Scope Control Decision Checklist
Status
Checklist Questions
Does the change strengthen the project objectives?
Does the change negatively affect the project objectives?
Does the change modify any of the original project objectives?
Can the change be implemented within the current budget?
Can the change be implemented within the current schedule?
Do we need additional resources to implement the change?
Does the change affect any project deliverables?
Does the change affect the customer?
Have we considered alternative solutions?
Does the change require senior management approval?
What is the impact of not implementing the change?
What base assumptions have been made concerning the change?
What risks does the change introduce?
What risks does the change reduce or eliminate?
Do we need a contingency approach?
How do we verify correct and complete implementation?
Who is the final decision maker?
made as part of the process, what information is needed to make the various decisions,
and what decision outcomes are desired.
Table 8.1 illustrates a sample set of questions that can be used as a reference for
developing your own decision checklist, which should then become part of your PM
Toolbox.
We have included a status column in the sample checklist that, if adopted, can be
used to indicate whether the question has been asked and if so, if appropriate action
has been taken. Some project managers add a third column to the checklist labeled
“documented” to indicate if the answer to the question has been documented.
Using the Scope Control Decision Checklist
Once the initial scope of a project has been established, change will certainly begin to
occur. Before this occurs, the scope control system must be put in place and a docu-
mented decision checklist established as a core tool within the system.
The decision checklist can be used to eliminate decision process and decision out-
come ambiguity from the very beginning of the scope management process. All project
stakeholders will observe and experience consistency in the way decisions are being
made on a project.

REFERENCES
235
Obviously, not all answers to the questions contained within the checklist will
come quickly and easily. Depending on the complexity associated with a requested
change, it may take a number of days, or in some cases, weeks to discover the right
information needed to make a decision. Use the checklist throughout project planning
and execution as a guide and focusing mechanism to ensure that eﬀective, consistent,
and expedient decisions are being made.
Beneﬁts
The primary value that the scope control decision checklist provides a project manager
is found in two key areas: decision quality and decision consistency.10
High-quality decisions are those that are informed, reasoned, and thorough. Improv-
ing the quality of a decision begins with understanding the four primary steps in making
a project scope change decision:
1.
Description of the proposed change and beneﬁts
2.
Identiﬁcation of the cost of change
3.
Identiﬁcation of solution options
4.
Understanding the risks involved with the decision
The questions contained in the scope control decision checklist are designed to
improve the information used for decisions in each of the steps listed before.
Equally important to decision quality is decision consistency, which involves mak-
ing high-quality decision on a regular basis. Consistency in decision making comes with
approaching decisions in the same manner over time. The scope control decision check-
list provides consistency by documenting a standard set of questions to be asked and
explored for each project scope change decision facing the project manager and his or
her change authority.
References
1.
Project Management Institute. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowl-
edge, 5th ed. (Drexel Hill, PA: Project Management Institute, 2013).
2.
Robertson, S., and James Robertson. Mastering the Requirements Process: Getting
Requirements Right, 3rd ed. London, England: Addison-Wesley Professional, 2012).
3.
Heagney, Joseph. FundamentalsofProjectManagement(Worksmart) (New York, NY:
AMACOM, 2011).
4.
Kerzner, H. R. Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling, and
Controlling (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. 2013).
5.
Lock, Dennis. Project Management (Farnham, Surrey, England: Gower, 2013).
6.
Verzuh, Eric. TheFast Forward MBA in Project Management (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley
& Sons, 2012).

236
SCOPE MANAGEMENT
7.
Robertson and Robertson, 2012
8.
Pinto, Jeﬀrey K. Project Management, 2nd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
2013).
9.
Andler, Nicolai. Tools for Project Management, Workshops and Consulting: A Must-
Have Compendium of Essential Tools and Techniques (Erlangen, Germany: Publicis
Publishing, 2011).
10.
Heath, C., and Dan Heath. Decisive: How to Make Better Choices in Life and Work
(New York, NY: Crown, 2013).

9
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
S
chedule management consists of assuring that project work is accomplished
according to the planned timeline, assessing changes in the timeline based
upon changes to the project scope, and establishing a new baseline schedule
when necessary. Generally, there is minimal concern if work is completed earlier
than planned, so primary attention is focused on preventing schedule slippage—the
primary exception being if early work completion creates a cash ﬂow problem later in
the project.
Schedule slippage is common and needs to be a primary focus of project managers
during the execution stage of a project. Schedule slips caused by scope changes or
major resource adjustment are fairly easy to detect. However, humans are inherently
poor at managing their time—both personal and professional (see “Tips for Better Time
Management”)—and as a result, most slippage occurs one day at a time and is more
diﬃcult to detect. Project managers need to be vigilant about preventing slippage from
accumulating to a conspicuous and unacceptable level. To do so, they need to have tools
that provide early warning of potential and realized schedule slips.
The tools presented in this chapter provide a variety of options for early warning
detection of schedule slippage. Some tools are more suited for smaller projects, some
for larger projects, others for complex projects, and still others for simple projects. Since
the type of project a project manager will be called upon to manage will likely vary over
the course of his or her career, it is recommended that each tool become a part of all
project managers’ PM Toolbox.
Tips for Better Time Management
Better management of our time can help to improve our efﬁciency in both our
personal lives and in our professional lives. The following ten tips for better time
management are shared by Shirley McDowell, a seasoned project manager for
a large ﬁnancial institution.
1.
Prioritize. Since it is impossible to do everything, learn to prioritize the
important tasks and let go of the rest. This is done to avoid unwanted
(continued)
237

238
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
delay in the important tasks and at the same time avoid any chaos
resulting from the delays.
2.
Know your deadlines. When do you need to ﬁnish your tasks? Mark the
deadlines clearly so you know when the work needs to be completed.
3.
Target to complete early. With the deadlines identiﬁed for your tasks
in the previous steps, plan your activities in a manner that will result
in early completion if all goes as intended. This will leave room for the
unexpected things that will inevitably occur.
4.
Know the results intended. Make sure you understand exactly what it
is you are trying to accomplish at the end of each task. This will help
you know what success looks like before you start. It will also assist in
knowing when to stop working a task.
5.
Create a daily plan. Plan your day before it unfolds. The plan gives you a
good overview of how the day will play out and helps focus the mind.
6.
Focus. We are all guilty of excessive multitasking. Focus on one task at
a time until it is completed or at the intended state you planned for the
day. Focus solely on what needs to be done according to your plan in
order to increase your efﬁciency.
7.
Plan for interruptions. Plan to be pulled away from what you are
doing—it’s inevitable. This means not creating a daily plan that won’t
accommodate unexpected interruptions in your day. Allow for the
interruptions instead by making them part of your daily plan.
8.
Learn to say no. Don’t take on more than you can handle. For additional
tasks and activities that come your way when you are focusing on your
high-priority tasks, give a ﬁrm “no” or defer them to a later time.
9.
Block out distractions. It is important that you avoid any forms of dis-
tractions while working on the tasks that you have identiﬁed as high pri-
ority. When focusing on high-priority tasks turn off the phone, close your
browser, close instant messaging, close your e-mail. Don’t give people
your attention unless it’s absolutely crucial in your business to offer an
immediate human response. This will improve your concentration.
10.
Don’t procrastinate. There is no beneﬁt of putting off tasks that you ﬁnd
uninteresting, difﬁcult, or undesirable if they are important to accom-
plishing the work you have been assigned. Instead, try taking on these
tasks early in the day when you are fresh and have the energy to focus
on completing the tasks as quickly as possible.
Although schedule slips are common, they are not inevitable. Given early detection,
there is much a project manager can do to eliminate or limit them. For example, they
can subdivide tasks into smaller chunks of work; they can reassign resource respon-
sibilities; they can add additional resources, diﬀerent skill sets, or diﬀerent skill levels;
they can take advantage of schedule slack by adjusting task start/stop dates; and so
on. If schedule slippage is detected early enough to enact control actions, project man-
agers stand an excellent chance of managing to their baseline schedule and meeting
their timeline commitments. Beginning with the burn down chart, the following tools
are designed to assist project managers perform their schedule management duties
eﬀectively.

THE BURN DOWN CHART
239
THE BURN DOWN CHART
The burn down chart is a graphical representation of the amount of work completed
over a deﬁned period of time as compared to the amount of work initially planned for
completion.Thechartisaveryeﬀectivewayfortheprojectteamtocommunicatesched-
ule performance on a periodic basis, particularly in reporting schedule performance to
the project manager. One of the most powerful attractions of the burn down chart is that
it involves psychology by emotionally tying a metric to schedule completion through a
visual representation of a path counting down to zero.
As illustrated in Figure 9.1, burn down charts are represented as standard x-y charts,
with the x-axis representing time and the y-axis representing units of work completed.
Project managers should keep in mind that burn down charts are not designed as
a precise report on overall project schedule performance. We advocate using the chart
to measure schedule performance at the deliverable, milestone, work package, or task
level in preparation for discussions aimed at determining status at the lowest levels of
the project hierarchy. With this recommended usage, the burn down chart will work in
tandem with the other schedule management tools presented in this chapter to deter-
mine and communicate project-level schedule performance.
Developing the Burn Down Chart
Developing a burn down chart requires a detailed understanding of the work to be
completed by each functional or subproject team working on the project. The work
breakdown structure (WBS), or product breakdown structure, and the project baseline
schedule provide the information needed to create the chart structure which is repre-
sented as work completed over a designated period of time. Additionally, any approved
scope changes that have not been incorporated into the baseline schedule will need to
be evaluated for impact to the chart.
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
2
Behind
Schedule
Project Timeline
Deliverables Completed
Oct
Nov
Dec
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Actual Line
Ahead of
Schedule
Ideal Line
Figure 9.1: An Example Burn Down Chart

240
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
Create the Burn Down Template
An eﬀective burn down chart needs to reﬂect the amount of eﬀort required to complete
the work deﬁned over time in a quantiﬁable manner. Therefore, thought must be put
into the most eﬀective way to represent the work eﬀort when creating the template.
As stated earlier, the x-axis of the chart represents the project timeline, or a portion
of the timeline if a rolling-wave or iterative project execution methodology is employed.
Time zero on the x-axis represents the point in time when project execution begins, or
the point in time when a particular iteration begins.
The y-axis represents work completed. In Figure 9.1, we chose to use the number of
deliverables completed as the unit for measuring the amount of work completed. The
deliverables were derived from the project Gantt chart, segmented for the appropriate
owner, and displayed on the y-axis of the chart template.
The other measure of work completed we considered using for the y-axis was num-
ber of hour consumed. Although this is a valid measure of work completed, it is a very
weak measure because it does not represent work output. As we know, it is possible to
consume hours of work and generate no output.
A common measure of work completed used by some project managers is a percent-
age, as in percent of work completed. We strongly recommend avoiding this measure
for burn down charts. The problem with using percentage is that is practically impos-
sible to equate work completed with a percentage. How do you distinguish between
30 percent or 40 percent complete without quantiﬁable units of output to gauge the
percentage amounts? If you do have quantiﬁable units to gauge the percentages, use
the quantiﬁable units instead.
Keep in mind that the ﬁner the unit of measure for work completed, the shorter the
delay between updates on schedule performance.1 This is illustrated in Figure 9.2.
The chart on the left shows that three deliverables will be tracked for schedule perfor-
mance over a 30-day period, the chart on the right shows ten deliverables to be tracked.
One can plainly see that a delay in schedule performance would not be reported in
the scenario on the left until day 10 (one-third of the performance period expired).
Meanwhile, the delay in schedule performance on the right would be reported on day 5
(one-sixth of the performance period expired). Obviously, this scenario provides the
greatest opportunity to enact control actions in a timely manner and with the greatest
probability of recovering project progress.
The ﬁnal element of the burn down chart template is the ideal completion line, or
ideal line. The ideal line represents the planned completion of work over time and is
derived from the baseline project schedule. Many project managers represent this as
a line with constant slope. We used a slight iteration of this approach in Figure 9.1 by
directly mapping the line to the completion dates of the deliverables as represented in
the baseline schedule.
Using the Burn Down Chart
There are two primary uses of the burn down chart: schedule planning and schedule
monitoring.2 First, the chart represent the work that is intended to be completed
over a speciﬁed period of time with an agreed upon scope of work. During project

241
Deliverables Completed
1
2
3
Day 10
Day 20
Day 30
Day 10
Day 20
Day 30
1
Tasks Completed
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
X
X
Schedule delay
discovered on
day 10
X
Progress
Review
Progress
Reviews
Schedule delay
discovered on
day 5
Figure 9.2:
Work Completed Cadence versus Information Delay

242
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
planning, as the scope is being determined, the burn down chart can be used as an
early and low-percentage indication of when the project completion date would likely
occur under various scope and resource scenarios. Second, the chart provides a visual
representation of the actual work completed during project execution and provides a
comparison of planned versus actual schedule performance.
Requiring each functional team involved on a project to create and maintain a burn
down chart is an excellent practice to ensure focus is maintained on schedule perfor-
mance in addition to the performance within their specialty. Periodic and regular review
of schedule performance with the team leaders is highly encouraged.
At a glance, the chart can indicate whether you are ahead or behind schedule as
planned. Ideally, you would like the actual line to lie extremely close to the ideal line,
which would indicate actual schedule performance is progressing as planned. However,
this is seldom the case as we do not live in an ideal world—stuﬀhappens and plans are
always ﬂawed. Referring to Figure 9.1, we see a more realistic project scenario. When
the actual line moves above the ideal line, it is an indication that the team is behind
schedule. Conversely, when it is below the ideal line, the team is ahead of schedule.
When the burn down chart shows that schedule performance is behind the base-
line plan, the tool can be used as a real-time indicator that corrective action is needed.
Using the chart in this manner requires boundary conditions be established to deter-
mine exactly when a corrective action should be initiated.
The normal workﬂow and resource ﬂuctuation (vacations, holidays, multiple project
assignments) inherent on a project will show up on the burn down chart as ﬂuctuations
in schedule performance above and below the ideal burn down line. So how do you
know when a corrective action is needed? Many project managers establish corrective
action triggers, in terms of percent behind schedule, to signal the need to initiate a cor-
rectiveaction.Forinstance,ifa10percenttriggerisestablished,correctiveactionswould
not be needed for normal schedule performance ﬂuctuations as long as the schedule is
less than 10 percent behind the baseline schedule. If at some point the project becomes
greater than 10 percent behind schedule, it would indicate that the project manager
needs to initiate a corrective action such as increasing resources or resource utilization,
decreasing scope, or crashing the schedule.
The project scenario represented by Figure 9.1 contains a major assumption; do you
know what it is? It assumes no scope changes from beginning to end. This really is an
ideal scenario, as we all know that project scope is dynamic. Figure 9.3 illustrates how
the burn down chart is modiﬁed to include both increase and decrease in scope.
When an increase in scope occurs, it is represented as an increase in work to be
completed, and the ideal line is increased vertically by the additional amount of work
required (such as additional tasks). In contrast, when scope is decreased, the ideal line is
decreased vertically by the amount of work no longer required (fewer tasks). Once the
scope is reset, normal use of the burn down chart again commences.
Beneﬁts
Burn down charts provide value in their simplicity of structure while demonstrating
the power of visual project planning and control techniques. They reveal the execution

THE SLIP CHART
243
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
2
Scope
Change 1
Project Timeline
Deliverables Completed
Oct
Nov
Dec
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Original
Baseline
Scope
Change 2
Figure 9.3: Burn Down Chart with Scope Changes
strategy being used, show progress made against the baseline plan, and open the door
to discussions about how to best proceed when performance is not occurring as initially
predicted.
Although the burn down chart is not designed as a precise indicator of overall
project schedule performance, it provides great value for determining schedule per-
formance at the subteam or task owner level. As will be discussed in the tools which
follow, in order to determine schedule performance at the project level, it ﬁrst has to
be tracked and understood at the working level where tasks are being completed and
deliverables are being created.
THE SLIP CHART
The slip chart tracks progress of the overall project schedule by showing an estimate
of how much time the project is ahead of or behind the baseline schedule at the time
of reporting (see Figure 9.4). When updated on a regular, periodic basis, the slip chart
provides a project manager and project stakeholders a good, overall view of schedule
performance in relation to the plan. When consecutive estimates are linked, a trend line
is formed. Even though it provides a near-term view of schedule performance and is
only moderately valuable as a predictive tool, this has not prevented many project man-
agers from using it in this manner, however. As a result of more practitioners subscribing
to proactive project control, the slip chart has taken on the role of helping predict the
project completion date and signal the need for corrective actions to ﬁght potential
completion date slips. While this does not alter the basic design of this tool, it does
require an innovative frame of mind to use it as a predictive tool.

244
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
5
10
15
20
25
30
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
1
2
3
4
Time (weeks)
Weeks Early
X
X X
X
X
X
X X
X
X
X X
X X X X X
X X X X X
X X
X X
5
–5
Weeks Late
Project
Complete
Figure 9.4: An Example Slip Chart
Developing the Slip Chart
Developing a slip chart needs to be precipitated by the gathering of critical information
associated with the project. The baseline schedule, preferably a critical path diagram or
network diagram, is needed to anchor the status of work completed against the original
plan. Current schedule performance status is also needed to compare actual progress to
planned progress for each project task. Finally, all approved scope change requests that
have not already been incorporated into the current baseline schedule are a necessary
input for developing a quality slip chart.
Monitor Project Schedule Performance
Best schedule management practices begin with the regular monitoring of actual exe-
cution progress to the planned timeline. For smaller projects, schedule performance
can be monitored in periodic team meetings, assuming they are occurring on a regular
cadence. For larger, more complex projects, critical path monitoring may have to occur
as a separate exercise, outside of the regular team status meetings. In either case, the
cadence of the reviews is driven by the length and pace of the project. For example, a
waterfall-style project with a two-year timeline would only require weekly or biweekly
schedule monitoring. By contrast, a six-month agile-style project may require schedule
monitoring every day or every few days.

THE SLIP CHART
245
Review Activity Progress as a Team
With the current status of schedule progress in hand, now is the time to evaluate over-
all schedule impact with respect to the current progress. The eyes of the project team
are primarily on those who own critical activities, and secondarily on near-critical activ-
ity owners. With a vivid portrayal of activities’ actual progress and any variance from
the baseline, one after another, the owners deconstruct activity dependencies to assess
their impact on the progress of subsequent activities. Other owners join the impact anal-
ysis, receiving and giving more information with the purpose of calculating how slips of
individual activities on the critical path combine to establish how much slip exists in the
overall schedule.
Review Project Progress
For the ﬁrst slip chart review meeting, create a template by laying the project time-
line along the horizontal axis, “time zero” in the middle of the vertical axis, and early
and late increments above and below the “time zero” point. Figure 9.4 illustrates the
format of the horizontal and vertical axis, with the unit of time a variable that can be
set to days, weeks, months, or quarters depending on the overall length of a particular
project.
For subsequent slip chart review meetings, indicate the amount of slip associated
with the critical path or critical chain, based on current schedule performance. If it is
determined that the schedule end date will be later than planned, go up the vertical axis
by the appropriate time and mark an “x” along the current date. If the schedule end date
is pulled in and will be earlier than planned, go down the vertical axis by the amount the
project will complete early. Repeat on a regular basis and connect the periodic updates
via a line that reveals an overall schedule performance trend.
Predicting Schedule Completion
As stated earlier, the primary utility of the slip chart is in the demonstration of historic
and current schedule performance against the baseline plan. However, it can and is used
by some project managers to predict the changes to the project end date. Since the slip
chart focuses on the project critical path, positive or negative slips indicated on the slip
chart can be carried forward to adjust the project completion date.
For example, in Figure 9.4, the slip chart indicates that the project is four weeks
behind schedule when the project status is reviewed during week ﬁve. If a critical path
schedule is the information source, the project manager can then use this information
to push the project end date out by four weeks. However, caution must be exercised
with this practice. As one can see, the schedule performance on this example project is
quite dynamic. The slip is changing consistently and there is an overall wide variation in
performance ranging from four weeks behind schedule to four weeks ahead of sched-
ule. If the project manager uses the practice of changing the project end date each time
a change in schedule slip is indicated on the slip chart, he or she risks causing frustra-
tion and losing credibility on the part of the project sponsor, stakeholders, and partners
(see “The Window May Be Closing”). This retrospective view of the project illustrates that
using a second schedule management tool with better predictive capabilities in tandem
with the slip chart is normally better practice.

246
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
The Window May Be Closed
Soon after the start of a website development project, the project slip chart
showed a three-week slip. The team added the slip to the project completion
date, predicting the project would be three weeks late. Here is an example of
how this extrapolation may be a risky practice. One of the project’s later critical
activities, a one-week-long rapid prototyping, was to be subcontracted to a
vendor, who accepted the activity’s start date with the comment, “If you come
to us a week later, that’s ﬁne. If you come later than that, our window will be
closed. At that time, add seven extra weeks to the planned delivery date for the
prototype. We have already committed to starting another project at that time.”
Apparently, the extrapolation is misleading. The predicted completion date
is not three but at least seven weeks late. The learning here is to be careful
with extrapolations and ensure schedule risk is fully comprehended.
Using the Slip Chart
Small and simple projects can beneﬁt from the slip chart, as can large and complex
projects. When applied to track progress in these projects, the chart can work oﬀboth
the Gantt chart and network diagrams (except the critical chain schedule). Working oﬀ
the latter is easier and more accurate because the amount of time each activity is behind
or ahead of the baseline schedule can be translated into the amount of time the criti-
cal path is ahead of or behind the baseline schedule. As we know, the amount of time
the critical path is ahead of or behind the schedule is equal to the overall project’s time
ahead of or behind the baseline. In contrast, with the absence of dependencies between
activities, the Gantt chart may pose a challenge when you are converting each activity’s
amount of time behind or ahead of the baseline schedule into an overall project’s time
behind or ahead of the schedule. It is this same reason that makes the prediction of the
project completion date oﬀthe slip chart based on network diagrams easier than based
on the Gantt chart.
A smaller, knowledgeable team may be able to develop a slip chart for a 25-activity
schedule in about 30 minutes. More project activities will likely increase the time to
develop.
The slip chart is best used to monitor project schedule performance, providing
a backward-looking view of historic project schedule performance. The information
gleaned from the slip chart can be used as input to other schedule management tools
with superior predictive capability if a project manager is in need of estimating future
schedule performance based on historical and current information. Misusing the chart
is bound to reduce its value (see “Three Errors”).
Beneﬁts
The slip chart’s value is primarily in its ability to record the history of project progress
and thus reveal the historic trend.3 For this value to be further enhanced, an extra step

THE BUFFER CHART
247
needs to be taken—use the historic trend to forecast future schedule trend and organize
actions to deliver the project as planned.
Thevisualandsimplenatureoftheslipchartaddsvaluetoboththeprojectteamand
executives viewing the chart, making it easy and quick to create and easy to understand
the information it conveys.
The slip chart is also very informative. Since the chart focuses on performance rel-
ative to the critical path, it immediately indicates when corrective action is needed to
attempt to pull the schedule performance back in line with the baseline plan.
Three Errors
The executives of a leading food processing company love slip charts. Con-
sequently, all major projects they oversee are required to submit the chart
on a monthly basis. According to Seth Accordino, a senior project manager
with the company, “My team gets together on a regular basis and the major
emphasis of the meetings is for the activity owners to report their schedule
status. I then sit down by myself and prepare the slip chart, and send it to
the execs when I’m done. They review it and tell us what corrective actions to
take.”
There are at least three errors here related to the use of the chart. First,
the project manager does not include his team in the preparation of the slip
chart. Second, the team is not involved in identifying the corrective actions.
Finally, the executives identify the actions without having full understand-
ing of the issues involved, robbing the team of ownership to resolve the
issues.
THE BUFFER CHART
The buﬀer chart plays a very similar role for project managers using the critical chain
scheduling as the slip chart does for critical path scheduling (Chapter 6). It measures the
status and consumption of buﬀers established by the critical chain schedule method-
ology to provide an early warning system to protect the project’s end date. First, the
buﬀer chart takes an instantaneous snapshot of buﬀers’ percent consumed relative to
the percentage of the work completed on the critical chain (see Figure 9.5). Consecu-
tive snapshots taken at regular periodic intervals are then linked on the chart to obtain
a line indicating the trend. For example, in Figure 9.5 the line suggests that the buﬀer
is being consumed at a faster pace than the pace of progress in completing the critical
chainactivities.Inotherwords,thelineanswersthequestion“Howarewedoingtoday?,”
providing information to make a proactive decision to impact the schedule buﬀer. For
the project shown in Figure 9.5, that decision might be to initiate actions to recover the
project buﬀer.

248
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
0%
100%
% Critical Path Completed
% Buffer Consumed
100%
0%
Take Corrective Action
Develop Action Plan
No Action
Figure 9.5: An Example Buffer Chart
Developing the Buﬀer Chart
Developing a buﬀer chart begins by gathering important information associated with
the project that will aﬀect the timeline. The baseline schedule, in the critical chain for-
mat only, is needed to anchor the status of work completed against the original plan.
Additionally, current schedule performance status is needed to compare actual progress
to planned progress for each project task. Finally, all approved scope change requests
that have not already been incorporated into the current baseline schedule are a neces-
sary input for developing a quality buﬀer chart.
Monitor Schedule Performance
As explained earlier, best schedule management practices begin with the regular
monitoring of actual execution progress to the planned timeline. For smaller projects,
schedule performance can be monitored in periodic team meetings, assuming they
are occurring on a regular cadence. For larger, more complex projects, critical chain
monitoring may have to occur as a separate exercise, outside of the regular team status
meetings. In either case, the cadence of the reviews is driven by the length and pace of
the project.
Review Critical Chain Schedule Progress
Developing a buﬀer chart is most eﬀectively accomplished through involvement of the
critical leaders on a project. This normally involves the people responsible for the pri-
mary tasks and associated deliverables. The critical chain schedule review meeting is
focused on updates from those owning activities being executed on the critical chain,
and secondarily on the subordinate merging paths.

THE BUFFER CHART
249
With their activity status information prepared in the previous step, the activity
owners answer the crucial question, “How many days are remaining on this project
activity?” While measuring the project health in this fashion is beneﬁcial for overall
good control of the project, it also helps with the next step—monitoring the buﬀers.
Knowing how many days remain on activities underway indicates the completion
datefortheactivity.Thedate,then,providesbackgroundinformationtoanswerthenext
question, “What percentage of each buﬀer is consumed?” The emphasis is on the con-
sumption of all buﬀers, including the project buﬀer and all critical chain feeding buﬀers
on the merging paths. Typically, the monitoring occurs in a climate without pressure or
focus on the estimated activity completion.4 Rather, there is a realistic expectation that
the estimates may vary on a daily basis and may even go beyond their baseline duration
estimates. As long as the activity owners continue sticking with critical chain scheduling
principles of work and behavior, actual durations of their activities are of no concern.
Monitor the Completion of the Critical Chain
While the consumption of a buﬀer is of utmost signiﬁcance, its consequences can only
be understood in the context of the performance on the activity chain associated with
the buﬀer. In the progress review meeting the team needs to estimate the percentage of
work that is completed on the critical chain and other activity chains. When this informa-
tion is available, the team can compare the percentage of each buﬀer consumed with
the percent complete of the activity chain associated with the buﬀer, and be able to
establish the project’s status or health at any given time. This comparison is conveniently
illustrated on the buﬀer chart (Figure 9.5).
Create and Update the Buﬀer Chart
Prior to the ﬁrst review meeting, the buﬀer chart template must be created. The horizon-
tal axis represents the percent complete of the critical chain, from zero to one hundred
percent. The vertical axis represents the amount of schedule buﬀer consumed, again
from zero to 100 percent.
The chart is then sectioned into three parts, representing the action needed rel-
ative to the combination of critical chain completed and buﬀer consumed. Following
the guidelines established by Eliyahu Goldratt who pioneered the chart, we divided the
buﬀer chart illustrated in Figure 9.5 into thirds.
Once the buﬀer chart is created, the progress review meetings focus on periodically
updating the chart. To update, begin by marking the critical chain (or activity chain) per-
cent completed on the horizontal axis at the time of the progress meeting. Go vertically
upward until reaching a point equal to the percent of buﬀer consumed, and connect this
status point with point zero on the horizontal axis. Repeat drawing status points in each
progress meeting, creating a line consisting of connected consecutive status points.
Using the Buﬀer Chart
Being an integral part of the critical chain schedule methodology, the buﬀer chart’s use
is closely linked to how the critical chain schedule is used. The purpose of the chart is

250
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
to provide an anticipatory tool with clear decision criteria. Buﬀers, expressed in time
units, are used to measure activity chain performance. The crucial point is to establish
explicitactionlevelsfordecisionsexpressedintermsofthebuﬀersize,measuredindays.
Goldratt, the developer of the critical chain scheduling method, proposes the following
decision criteria.5 If a buﬀer is negative—for example, the latest activity on the chain is
late compared to its original completion date—and you penetrated the ﬁrst third of the
buﬀer, take “No Action” (see the graph). Should you start consuming the middle third,
it is time to assess the problem and develop a “Plan” of action. Once you are within the
ﬁnal third, you need to “Act.” Note that these hold true for both the project buﬀer and
critical chain feeding buﬀers.
For the buﬀer chart to be beneﬁcial, it should be updated as frequently as one-third
of the total buﬀer time. The reason is simple—the decision criteria are based on
thirds of the buﬀer length. For example, whether a buﬀer is less or more than a third
of the total buﬀer late (less or more than 5 days for a 15-day buﬀer) determines
the type of action we take. In contrast, the chart in Figure 9.5 uses slightly diﬀer-
ent decision boundaries. See the example titled “You Need to Experiment” for an
explanation.
You Need to Experiment
The buffer chart is based on the distinct philosophy of critical chain scheduling.
To really comprehend its potential and put it to best possible use, you need
to experiment with it and ﬁnd the decision trigger comfort zone. For example,
some companies modiﬁed the original criteria for using the buffers. Rather than
relying on buffer consumption thirds as decision triggers given by the originator
of the tool, they chose decision triggers that change as the consumption of
the critical path changes. Decision triggers are borderlines between zones of
“No Action,” “Plan,” and “Act,” mandating which action type to use. Look at
the chart in Figure 9.5 and notice the subtlety of the slope of the decision
trigger lines. The higher the percent of critical chain completed, the higher
the decision trigger boundaries as a percentage of buffer consumed. This, of
course,makessenseingeneral—themoreworktheprojectteamcompletes,the
more buffer consumption the project team can tolerate. But an exact amount
of “More” should be picked by the company to ﬁt its business purpose and
nature of projects.6 Experiment to ﬁnd the decision levels that best ﬁt your
company’s projects.
Beneﬁts
The value of the buﬀer chart is in the forward-looking view of current schedule perfor-
mance it provides. With decision criteria built into the tool, it also forces the necessary
conversations between project managers and their sponsors when critical performance
trigger points have been reached.

THE JOGGING LINE
251
The visual nature of the tool also aids in the presentation of schedule performance
status to senior executives and other stakeholders who may not have an intimate under-
standing of the project details.
Additionally, the buﬀer chart is partially predictive in nature. The chart is designed
to act as an early warning system, prompting the project team to take diﬀerent actions
in situations with diﬀerent levels of buﬀer consumption. The fact that the real actions
are taken only after a signiﬁcant portion of the buﬀer is consumed makes the approach
only partially proactive.
THE JOGGING LINE
The jogging line is an excellent tool for showing the project schedule performance
in aggregate form. It shows the amount of time each project task is ahead or behind
the baseline schedule by drawing a line representing schedule performance in
relation to the current date. In that manner, the line provides a snapshot in time
indicating the fraction of work completed, and what remains to be completed (see
Figure 9.6).
The information gained by assessing the amount of time each task is ahead of or
behind the baseline schedule is used to predict the project completion date and cre-
ate corrective actions necessary to eradicate any potential delay. Since the jogging line
focuses on all project tasks and is created as a project team activity, it is best suited for
use on smaller and less complex projects.
Jan
Feb Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
1.01 Select Concept
1.02 Design Beta PC
1.03 Produce Beta PC
1.04 Develop Test Plan
1.05 Test Beta PC
2.01 Design Production PC
2.02 Outsource Mold Design
2.03 Design Tooling
2.04 Purchase Tool Machines
2.05 Manufacture Molds
2.06 Test Molds
2.07 Certify PC
3.01 Ramp Production
Timeline
Work Packages/Tasks
Figure 9.6: An Example Jogging Line

252
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
Constructing a Jogging Line
Construction of a jogging line begins with gathering critical information associated
with the project timetable. The baseline schedule (either in Gantt or time-scaled arrow
diagram [TAD] format) is needed to anchor the status of work completed against
the original plan. Current schedule performance status is needed to compare actual
progress to planned progress for each project task. Finally, all approved scope change
requests that have not already been incorporated into the current baseline schedule
are a necessary input for jogging line construction.
The jogging line is most eﬀectively and eﬃciently constructed as a project team
exercise, but before gathering the project team members, it is best to get a sense of
the current status of each of the primary work elements of the project.
Review Progress with Tasks’ Owners
In spirit of the days when managing-by-walking-around was common, we suggest
the project manager have a conversation with each activity (or work package) owner,
one-on-one, to gain a good understanding of the current status of the project work
scheduled to be taking place at that point in time. As illustrated in Figure 9.6, not all
project tasks will be of interest, as some will have already been completed and some are
not scheduled to begin yet. For the tasks that are currently being worked, the project
manager should inquire about the progress of each task that the person is responsible
for completing, whether the current progress diﬀers from the plan, and if so, what
issues led to it, and when they anticipate ﬁnishing the tasks. If a variance to completion
exists, each task owner should be able to explain what can be done to ﬁnish the tasks
as originally planned.
Thesequestionsfocusoneachoftheconstituenttasks(workpackage)oftheproject.
Now is the time to ask how the answers to the task questions will translate into the
activity progress—ahead or behind the plan, predicted completion date, and major cor-
rective actions.
Essentially, this initial conversation is a rehearsal for the project progress meeting
that will focus on construction of the jogging line for the project. This may look like a
time-consuming activity for the project manager, but it is necessary to prepare the task
owners for the progress meeting.
Call the Project Progress Meeting
Periodic progress meetings instill the discipline and regularity in reviewing strides
that are being made on the execution of a project. They should be called on a regular
basis—once a month for a long project or once a week for a short project, for example.
Each of the project task or work package owners are required to attend the meeting, as
well as other critical project team representatives such as quality assurance or a product
manager.
The meetings may be formal, sit-down sessions with an oﬃcial scribe, in which
case, a clear and timed agenda should be communicated beforehand to the attendees.

THE JOGGING LINE
253
Or for fast-paced projects that are long on workload and short on time, it is perfectly
appropriate to stage short, on-the-go, stand-up meetings. Again, the key is regularity
and meeting discipline.
Review Project Progress
With the task owners assembled in the meeting and the information gathered from the
initial conversations with the task owners, focus on asking the following ﬁve questions
to gain a sense of overall project progress:
1.
What is the variance between the baseline schedule and actual performance of
each task?
2.
What are the issues causing the variance?
3.
What is the current trend and current prediction of the completion date given the
current performance?
4.
What new risks have been discovered that may aﬀect the predicted completion
date?
5.
What actions should be taken to bring performance back in line with the baseline
(if a variance exists)?
For those familiar with the work of Deming, one will recognize that the ﬁve questions
above are an integral part of the “Plan-Do-Study-Act” cycle (see “Project Assessment
Questions and Deming’s PDSA Cycle”).
Where there are interfaces and dependencies between task owners, focusing on
them is crucial, since that is where the potential seams may appear on the project.
Depending on the culture of the organization, task owners can bring written reports or
just verbal information to the meeting.
Project Assessment Questions and Deming’s
PDSA Cycle
The ﬁve questions of project assessment are in harmony with Deming’s
Plan-Do-Study-Act cycle, a circular approach to project performance improve-
ment. Once the schedule baseline is established in the Plan step and project
work is being carried out in the Do step, project assessment questions one,
two, three, and four come into play in the STUDY step (see Figure 9.7). Here, the
schedule variance is established, its cause determined, and trend forecasted
based on current issues and future risks. Then, in the ACT step, question
ﬁve leads to the identiﬁcation of connective actions, which will be planned
for and implemented in the plan-do steps of the next project performance
assessment cycle.
(continued)

254
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
Question 1
Question 2
Question 3
Question 4
Question 5
Act
Plan
Study
Do
Set Baseline
Perform Work
Figure 9.7: Project Assessment as Part of the Plan-Do-Study-Act Cycle
Draw the Jogging Line
Now is the time to assess the current progress of the project by drawing the jogging
line based on performance status information from each of the task owners. If the task
owners use a burn down chart to track schedule performance, the current performance
information can be carried over to the jogging line. Begin the exercise by showing a
useful-sized plot of the baseline schedule (preferably one that shows the critical path).
Next, mark on the schedule the date of the progress meeting, whether it’s called
the data date or, more informally and also more traditionally, the reporting date.7 From
that date, draw a line vertically down until reaching the ﬁrst task or work package that
is currently being worked on. The task owner will tell how many days the work is ahead
or behind the baseline. It is of vital importance that their information is reliable. If that’s
not the case, see what may happen in the example titled “Are You Getting Accurate
Information?”
Draw a horizontal line to the left of the data date for as many days the actual
schedule is behind. Or, if you are ahead of the baseline schedule, draw the horizontal
line to the right of the data date for as many days. At that point, draw a vertical line
crossing the ﬁrst activity. Repeat this exercise for all other tasks being worked on at that
time. When vertically crossing the last activity, draw the line horizontally back to the
data date and then turn vertically downward. In this way, the jogging line begins from
and ends at the data date.
Are You Getting Accurate Information?
Pamela Rice, project manager for a major appliance manufacturer, is struggling
with inconsistent progress reporting information from one of her team leaders.
According to Pamela, “In a progress meeting, Jim told me his deliverable was

THE JOGGING LINE
255
three weeks behind schedule. A week later, he reported that he caught up
with the deliverable and was right on schedule. Knowing that only one per-
son was working on the activity, I polled several experts and asked how many
hours it would take to catch up on the work. The answer was about 140 hours.
That means his engineer would have to have worked about 180 hours in the
past week.”
Pamela is clearly receiving inaccurate status information, which is delivered
verbally on a weekly basis. This is a scenario where another tool such as the
burn down chart should be used to force more accurate status reporting from
within the project team.
Predict Project Completion Date
Asshown in Figure 9.6, work package 2.01isahead of schedule byapproximatelya week,
while work package 2.02 is behind schedule by about the same amount. If either of these
tasks are on the project critical path, an adjustment to the project completion date, as
well as the timing of downstream dependent tasks, will have to be made.
Knowinghowmucheachactivityisaheadoforbehindtheschedulepreparesyoufor
making an educated forecast of the project completion date. If changes to the baseline
schedule result, the next discussion in the progress meeting has to be about actions that
canbeputintoeﬀecttoﬁnishasoriginallyplanned.Itisbesttohavetheinitialdiscussion
about corrective actionswith the task or work package owners(instead of doing it alone)
in order to gain multiple perspectives of options and constraints. The project manager
can then assess that information to make a decision on actions to put into play.
Using the Jogging Line
Small and less complex projects are best suited for the jogging line’s use. In such situa-
tions, when it comes to tracking progress only, the line works well with both the Gantt
chart and TAD. If you decide to use the jogging line for larger or more complex projects,
it is easier to apply it with a TAD instead of a Gantt chart since the TAD includes depen-
dencies between tasks. This makes it easier and more reliable to translate the amount
of time each project task is ahead or behind the baseline schedule into the projected
completion date for the project. This is not the case when working on small and sim-
ple projects. Here, having the dependencies is not an issue, and the Gantt chart will
suﬃce.
When constructing a jogging line, the following guidelines should be used:
■
The line should be drawn on an appropriate baseline schedule in the form of a TAD
or Gantt chart.
■
The line should be continuous.
■
It should start at the data date.
■
It should cross each task to indicate its time variance.
■
It should end at the data date.
Keep in mind that the jogging line only provides a snapshot in time of project per-
formance, and must be periodically updated. A reasonably skilled and prepared project

256
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
team can prepare a jogging line for a 25-task Gantt chart or TAD in 15 to 30 minutes. As
the number of tasks or work packages grows, so does the necessary time to construct
and update the tool.
Variations
There are several Gantt chart–based tools for schedule management that project teams
usually consider before discovering the value of the jogging line (see Figure 9.8):
1.
Shaded Bar Method
2.
Plan vs. Actual Bar Method
3.
Percent (%) Complete with Plan vs. Actual Bar Method
The Shaded Bar Method uses shading to indicate the portion of the activity that has
been completed. While very visual, the shaded portion cannot show when the imple-
mentation of the activity started, how much of the activity scope was really completed,
and how much the actual implementation is behind or ahead of schedule.
Only one of these shortcomings is resolved by the Plan vs. Actual Bar Method, which
visually compares the plan bar with the actual bar—we see when the implementation
of the activity started.
Percent (%) Complete with Plan vs. Actual Bar Method also relies on the plan and
actual bar but adds percent complete for each bar. The strongest of these three meth-
ods, % Complete with Plan vs. Actual Bar Method, suﬀers from an inability to reveal how
much the actual implementation of an activity is behind or ahead of the schedule. By
adding actual bars, it also increases the number of bars on the Gantt chart, making it
more complex. Faced with this increased complexity, many would see the jogging line
as more eﬀective.
Beneﬁts
The value of the jogging line is in both its historic and forecasting power. The former
means that it accurately tells a task owner and the project team the history of work
progress. Using the history, then, of course, they can forecast future schedule trend and
strategize actions to deliver the project as planned if a variance is determined.
Data Date
Plan and Actual
Plan
Actual
Plan
Actual
60%
50%
Shaded Bar
Method
Plan vs. Actual
Bar Method
Plan vs. Actual
Bar Method
With % Complete
Key: Task =
Figure 9.8: Less Effective Alternatives to the Jogging Line

THE MILESTONE PREDICTION CHART
257
The jogging line provides additional value due to its visual and simplistic structure
and presentation. It visually indicates the work done, supplying the project team with
an invaluable means of communication. Additionally, in a matter of minutes, almost any
project participant can read and draw the jogging line, and then use it to predict sched-
ule performance trends. When used for predicting trends, the jogging line helps build an
anticipatory mind-set, equipping the project team to act in advance to combat expected
diﬃculties.
THE MILESTONE PREDICTION CHART
Like other schedule management tools, the milestone prediction chart anticipates the
expectedrateoffutureprojectprogressbyfocusingonmajorprojectevents:milestones,
major deliverables, and project completion. Figure 9.9 illustrates an example of a mile-
stonepredictionchart.Notethattheverticalaxisshowstheteam’spredictedcompletion
date for a speciﬁc milestone or deliverable, while the horizontal axis shows the date the
prediction was made.
Obviously, the beginning point on the horizontal axis is the time when the schedule
baseline is prepared, and its milestone dates are marked on the vertical axis. Once the
project work is kicked oﬀ, the team reviews progress regularly and makes milestone pre-
dictions.Byconnectingallpredictionsforaparticularmilestoneintoaline,wecanobtain
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Milestone 3
(on-time completion)
Milestone 2
(late completion)
Milestone 1
(early completion)
Completion Line
Trend Line
Project Timeline
Predicted Milestone Completion
Figure 9.9: Example Milestone Prediction Chart

258
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
the milestone trend line. If the line approaches the completion line moving upward, the
trend would indicate a slip in the milestone or deliverable completion date. Deliver-
ing the milestone right on time would produce a line approaching the completion line
horizontally. If we estimate an early milestone completion, the completion line would
be approached with a downward trend. Although it is eﬀective in predicting milestone
progress,thechartisevenmoreeﬀectiveifusedtodevelopactionsrequiredtoeliminate
any potential deviation from the baseline milestone schedule.
Constructing the Milestone Prediction Chart
Construction of a milestone prediction chart begins with gathering critical information
associated with the project schedule and meeting the major milestones or deliverables.
The baseline schedule, preferably in the form of a milestone chart (see Chapter 6), is
needed to anchor the status of work completed against the original plan. Current sched-
ule performance status is needed to compare actual progress to planned progress for
each milestone. Finally, all approved scope change requests that have not already been
incorporated into the current baseline schedule are a necessary input for milestone pre-
diction chart construction. This background information is needed to create the intent
of the chart and to predict future milestone completion dates (see “Forgetting Trend
Analysis: Déjà Vu?”).
The chart is most eﬀectively and eﬃciently constructed as a project team exercise,
but before gathering the project team members, it is best to get a sense of the current
status of each of the primary milestones and deliverables of the project.
Forgetting Trend Analysis: Déjà Vu?
Experience shows that the majority of projects place an emphasis on the eval-
uation of historical data to determine current schedule status as the core of
their schedule management practices, leaving out the trend forecast to help
predict future performance. As experts have been writing for decades, the pri-
mary purpose of project control is to prevent any sudden shocks to the project
team, project sponsor, and key project stakeholders. Predictive analysis allows
for corrective action before issues mount and recovery options evaporate.8 In
other words, we predict via trends because it is much better if we can predict
ahead of time what is going to happen, “rather than just watch it happen.” This
makes trend analysis the single most important piece of information in project
control.
Managers, especially those in industries where time to market is a com-
petitive advantage, hate to suddenly hear that the schedule is going to slip. To
them, it is much more meaningful to learn that ahead of time. Having a trend
projection provides the managers with early warning signals so they can act
while it is still possible to reverse unfavorable trends.9
Does this mean that the historic information is of little value? Not really.
What we are saying is that history, of course, can’t be inﬂuenced and the future

THE MILESTONE PREDICTION CHART
259
can, so it is more important for the project team to use the historic information
to forecast a future schedule trend and strategize actions to deliver the project
as planned. It is for this reason that trend analysis should be the central piece
of schedule management.
Gather Milestone Information
Good preparation for progress meetings that are chartered with developing the mile-
stone prediction charts has a tremendous impact on how well you control a project. We
suggest the project manager have a conversation with each milestone or deliverable
owner, one-on-one, to gain a good understanding of the current status at that point in
time. As illustrated in Figure 9.9, not all milestones will be of immediate interest, as some
will have already been achieved and some are too far in the future that gathering sta-
tus is really meaningless. For the milestones in play, the project manager should inquire
about the progress of each milestone or deliverable that the person is responsible for
completing, whether the current progress diﬀers from the plan, and if so, what causes
and issues led to it, and when they anticipate ﬁnishing the milestone or deliverable. If
a variance to completion exists, inquire as to what the milestone owner thinks can be
done to ﬁnish the milestones as planned.
Essentially, this initial conversation is a rehearsal for the project progress meeting
that will focus on constructing or updating the milestone prediction chart. This may look
like a time-consuming activity for the project manager, but it is necessary to prepare the
milestone owners for the progress meeting.
Review Project Progress
Periodic progress meetings instill the discipline and regularity in reviewing strides that
are being made on the execution of a project. They should be called on a regular basis—
once a month for a long project or once a week for a short project, for example. Each of
the project milestone owners are required to attend the meeting, as well as other critical
project team representatives such as quality assurance or a product manager.
Formally or informally, based on verbal or written information, milestone owners
need to provide information on the status toward achieving the milestones that are
of interest in the review. Since cracks in the project usually appear during interfaces
between milestones or their constituent activities, the project team has the beneﬁt of
scanning and dissecting the interfaces and their related dependencies. In this process,
the understanding of the interfaces and the impact they may have on milestone
progress that the team wants to predict will be enhanced. Face-to-face, enriched
exchange of information between milestone owners and others involved has no par.
Develop the Milestone Prediction Updates
During the initial milestone review meeting, the prediction chart has to be created.
It can then be used in future review meetings. To begin, mark milestones from the
baseline milestone schedule on the vertical axis of the chart; these are the “as-planned”

260
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
milestones. Next, draw the completion line. Because the vertical and horizontal scales
use the same project schedule as the basis, the line has a 45-degree angle relative to
both scales.
With the initial predictive chart created, the milestone review can commence; the
owner of the ﬁrst milestone crisply describes its actual progress and, potential variance
from the baseline and current issues causing the variance, and gives a preliminary pre-
diction of the milestone completion. Relying on a schedule indicating the dependencies
between milestones and activities, the owner opines how the actual status of the mile-
stone can impact the progress of other dependent milestones. A pointed discourse will
normally unfold.
Owners of dependent milestones ask for more information and share their opinion
about their actual progress, variance, and current issues. They also give a preliminary
prediction of their milestone completion, analyze their actual impact on dependent
milestones, and review possible future risks that may further aﬀect the milestones.
At this point, preliminary predictions of milestone completions are made; however,
the job is not yet complete. Measures must be taken to prevent possible slips. Everybody
goes back to the drawing board and analyzes the dependencies between milestones.
Corrective actions are formulated if needed and ﬁnal predicted milestone completion
dates are established. Those are marked on the milestone prediction chart at the date
of the prediction. A ﬁnal analysis should be performed to determine if the project end
date is aﬀected by any slips in the milestone completion dates.
This exercise should be repeated every time schedule progress is reviewed. Once
a milestone is completed, mark it on the project completion line. It should be noted
that the milestone prediction chart provides the project team a near-term view of mile-
stone progress and is most eﬀective when analyzing project progress within a one- to
three-month window. Progress can only be gauged on milestones which are currently
being worked on, or have dependencies on the milestones being worked on.
Using the Milestone Prediction Chart
The milestone prediction chart is primarily designed to predict the completion date for
major milestones.10 It was originally designed to focus on six to seven milestones at the
highest level of the project, small or large. Despite this, many project managers apply it
with minor milestones numbering in the tens.
The chart is best used in a rolling wave manner where detailed milestone progress is
analyzed within a one- to three-month window, which repeatedly moves through time
with the progression of the project.
To move beyond the near-term window, an analysis of the dependencies between
the milestones has to be performed. Geared with such understanding, the project man-
ager can use the chart to formulate control strategies and report project progress to his
or her stakeholders.
Beneﬁts
The base value of the milestone prediction chart is in its ability to create a sense of
predictability in achieving major project events, or milestones. Through an environment

B-C-F ANALYSIS
261
of disciplined progress reviews, the chart helps predict completion dates for major
milestones on a regular basis, helping identify trends and leading to actions to correct
possible negative trends.
Additionally, the graphical nature of the chart accomplished through the direction-
ality of the line connecting milestone predictions is unmatched and is likely a major
reason for the aﬃnity that both top-level managers and project managers have for this
tool (see “The Tool of Choice”). As one expert commented, “These graphic representa-
tions are nearly infallible in improving schedule predictions over trying to use Program
Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) or Gantt charts alone.”11
The Tool of Choice
When a group of senior project managers from a leading sportswear man-
ufacturer engaged in a presentation titled “A Few Good Schedule Manage-
ment Tools,” it took them all of about ten minutes to unanimously choose the
tool they would prefer to use on their next project to manage their project
timeline.
The overview presentation included details on the slip chart, jogging line,
baseline-current-future (B-C-F) analysis, earned value analysis, milestone anal-
ysis, and milestone prediction chart. When the presentation ended, the project
managers were asked to pick one tool that they believed provided the great-
est utility for providing a summary level view of project schedule progress. The
milestone prediction chart was chosen as the tool of choice.
B-C-F ANALYSIS
The baseline-current-future (B-C-F) analysis compares the baseline project sched-
ule with two predictive schedules—the ﬁrst one based on the current schedule
performance and the second one derived from the worst-case future scenario (see
Figure 9.10). As a result, schedule performance trend is detected, or in other words,
where we predict the schedule performance is headed. Most importantly, if the trend
is unfavorable, it forces a project team to design actions to prevent it, which is the
ultimate purpose of all proactive schedule management tools.
The B-C-F analysis enables the project team to visualize the future of their project
schedule and devise actions necessary to get there. The analysis is more applicable in
smaller and medium-size projects than in large and complex projects.
The three schedules can be either in the format of the Gantt chart or a time-scaled
activity diagram. Whichever the format, the B-C-F schedule is no more than an appli-
cation of well established scheduling tools with a new twist of anticipatory prediction.
Simply, this tool is much more about a novel mind set and approach to schedule man-
agement than about a novel tool design.

262
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
Jan
Feb Mar
Apr May Jun
Jul
Aug Sep Oct
Nov Dec Jan
1.01 Select Concept
1.02 Design Beta PC
1.03 Produce Beta PC
1.04 Develop Test Plan
1.05 Test Beta PC
2.01 Design Production PC
2.02 Outsource Mold Design
Timeline
Work Packages/Tasks
1.01 Select Concept
1.02 Design Beta PC
1.03 Produce Beta PC
1.04 Develop Test Plan
1.05 Test Beta PC
2.01 Design Production PC
2.02 Outsource Mold Design
1.01 Select Concept
1.02 Design Beta PC
1.03 Produce Beta PC
1.04 Develop Test Plan
1.05 Test Beta PC
2.01 Design Production PC
2.02 Outsource Mold Design
Future Schedule
Current Schedule
Baseline Schedule
Figure 9.10: Example B-C-F Analysis
Performing the B-C-F Analysis
Performing a B-C-F Analysis begins with gathering critical information associated with
the project timeline. The baseline schedule is needed to anchor the status of work
completed against the original plan. Current schedule performance status is needed to
compare actual progress to planned progress for each project task. Finally, all approved
scope change requests that have not already been incorporated into the current
baseline schedule are a necessary input for performing a B-C-F analysis.
Prepare the Current Schedule
With a jogging line added to the baseline schedule (see previous section) the project
manager is armed with the knowledge of how much each project task is ahead of or
behind the baseline schedule, what the current issues are, and what remains to be com-
pleted. The project manager and task owners can now forecast the amount of change
to the baseline schedule (if any). This will produce a new duration for each task, when it
was started, and when it will be ﬁnished. Using this information, a new baseline sched-
ule will be drawn. This is the current schedule, reﬂecting how the project is expected to
unfold in the future given the task performance to date.
Develop a Future Schedule
To develop the future schedule, the project manager should ask each work package
owner the following question: “What is the worst thing that can realistically happen

B-C-F ANALYSIS
263
based upon where we are now?” This is a worst-case scenario planning exercise.
Visualizing threats, dangers, and risks that the project may encounter helps in devel-
oping the future schedule. If the doomsday approach doesn’t work, asking seasoned
project managers about their worst experiences with the same type of project is
another alternative. For example, one may respond that her primary vendor went out
of business during her project and set her back by six months. Brainstorming with team
members to identify such risks is helpful as well, especially if the organization has an
issue risk (see “Issue Database: A Checklist for Future Schedules”).12
Once the worst-case scenarios have been identiﬁed, the next step is to ﬁgure out
how they can impact the baseline schedule. For this, the project team needs to look
closely at the dependencies between tasks in the current schedule. Will the risks impact
tasks on the critical path? If the impacted tasks are on a noncritical path, will the total
ﬂoat be consumed? How much could it push out the completion of impacted tasks?
If the critical path is impacted, how much will the project completion be pushed out?
When the team develops answers to these questions, take the current schedule and
extend task durations accordingly to obtain the future schedule.
Issue Database: A Repository
for Future Schedules
When developing the future schedule in the B-C-F analysis, a project team can
go to its issue database as a repository of issues encountered on previous
projects. It is possible that issues which occurred in the past may again
affect current projects. Therefore, they are potential risks to the current
project.
For each issue in the database, the project team asks: “Could this issue
become a risk on our project? Would its impact on our project be different
from the impact it had on the past projects? Would actions taken on the past
projects work on our project, or would we have to use different actions to
defend against such risks?”
The database is built over time to include crucial lessons learned about
major issues and their impact in past projects. So, it is both experiential and
realistic. Using this tactic helps build future schedules of better quality and uses
past experience in mitigating risks.
Take Action
The primary purpose of the preceding steps is to equip the project manager with an
early warning signal—a signal that says, “Take action to resolve the issues causing the
current schedule variance and mitigate risks to the future schedule.” If the issues can-
not be eliminated, there is a need to rechart the future schedule and ﬁnd alternatives
that would lead the project team to deliver as expected per the baseline schedule. One
option is to try to fast-track the project.

264
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
To fast-track a project, perform the following activities and evaluate their aﬀects on
the overall project schedule:
1.
Go back to the future schedule and focus on hard and soft dependencies between
activities.
2.
Turn any of the sequential activities with hard dependencies into overlapping
activities as much as possible, while still observing the hard dependencies.
3.
Reexamine all soft dependencies in order to overlap as many activities as much as
possible.
4.
Also, given the soft dependencies, pick activities that can be performed out of the
sequence established in the schedule.
Fast-tracking however, may substantially increase the number of critical activities
and paths, putting more pressure on project time management.
Using the B-C-F Analysis
The B-C-F analysis is very beneﬁcial to those using Gantt charts or time-scaled activity
diagrams. In projects with Gantt charts, applying a B-C-F analysis requires that the
dependencies between tasks be well known, even if they are not shown on the Gantt.
When dependencies are formally identiﬁed via time-scaled activity diagram, the stage
is well set for the B-C-F analysis.
In both applications, the bottom line is to be proactive and insist on applying the
B-C-F analysis consistently in progress reviews, both formal and informal.
The analysis is more applicable to smaller and medium-size projects than to large
and complex projects. For larger projects with many dependencies, the application of
the B-C-F analysis may be too cumbersome and time consuming.
A reasonably skilled and prepared project team of smaller size can prepare a B-C-F
analysis for a 25-activity Gantt chart or TAD in 45 to 60 minutes. The necessary time will
expand as the project size increases.
When using a B-C-F Analysis, the following guidelines should be used to ensure max-
imum eﬀectiveness:
■
Work with the work package owners to help them give accurate project schedule
performance information.
■
Strive to develop good enough, not perfect, current and future schedules.
■
Insist on maximum interaction among task owners in progress meetings to help
them understand how they impact each other and the project.
■
Observe which task owners tend to be too optimistic or pessimistic when forecast-
ing their completion times. They may need personal coaching to overcome these
tendencies.
Keep in mind that like the jogging line, the B-C-F analysis provides a snapshot in time
of project performance and must be performed on a periodic basis.

SCHEDULE CRASHING
265
Beneﬁts
The B-C-F analysis provides project managers a deeper level of schedule forecasting
capability, namely the ability to foresee the estimated worst case scenario when
schedule slippage occurs and risks begin to mount. Even though there is a perception
of “overkill” when a project is running smoothly, one will fully come to appreciate the
power of the B-C-F analysis if a project gets in trouble.
For project managers who have been assigned the responsibility of turning a failing
project around, there is no better schedule management tool available to help analyze
the current situation and forecast future scenarios.
The visual nature and basic structure of the B-C-F analysis provides additional value
to a project manager and his or her stakeholders. It vividly indicates current schedule
performance on a project, directly overlaid with forecasted future performance.
SCHEDULE CRASHING
Schedule crashing is a method of shortening the total project duration without chang-
ing the project logic, which means that the sequence of dependencies between project
activities remains the same.13 To compress the duration, the project usually deploys
more resources in performing activities. As a consequence, the total project cost grows
as the duration decreases.
Performing Schedule Crashing
Schedule crashing requires a process of disciplined and patient steps outlined here,
which we will follow to demonstrate how a schedule is crashed from seven to four days.
A number of inputs are needed in order to eﬀectively crash a schedule. First,
the baseline schedule is needed. A network diagram provides the task logic and
baseline timeline, which is called the normal schedule. Second, the current schedule
performance as compared to the baseline is needed to identify the schedule gap that
needs to be eliminated by the crashing exercise. Third, any scope changes that have
not already been incorporated into the baseline need to be identiﬁed and factored
into the performance gap. Finally, resource loading and availability, along with the
associated labor rates and cost information will be needed to develop the cost impact
of the crashed schedule when completed.
Develop a Normal, Cost-Loaded Schedule
This is the baseline schedule developed during project planning. Here resources are
assigned to project activities, and their costs are calculated. Without this resource
and cost information, schedule crashing the way we deﬁne it here is not possible. In
Figure 9.11, we give an example of a normal schedule (starting position) with duration
and cost for each activity in the table.

266
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
Days
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Days
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Days
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Days
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
A
B
C
D
E
F
A
B
C
D
E
F
A
B
C
D
E
F
A
B
C
D
E
F
Starting Position:
 • Critical Path A-D-F
 • Total (normal) duration: 7 days
 • Total (normal) cost: $200
Step 1:
 • Cut D by 1 day
 • Total duration: 6 days
 • Total cost: $200 + $10 = $210
 • Critical Path A-D-F and A-B-E
Step 2:
 • Cut A by 1 day
 • Total duration: 5 days
 • Total cost: $210 + $20 = $230
 • Critical Path A-D-F and A-B-E
Step 3:
 • Cut D and B by 1 day
 • Total duration: 4 days
 • Total cost: $230 + $30 = $260
 • Critical Path A-D-F, A-B-E, and A-C
Figure 9.11: Schedule Crashing Example
Develop a Crashed, Cost-Loaded Schedule
While preserving the sequence of dependencies between project activities, perform the
following steps:
1.
Estimate for each activity the shortest possible time to complete it (unconstrained
estimate).
2.
Ask the activity owners and team the following questions: “What resources do
you need to complete each activity in this amount of time?” and “How much does
it cost?” This is sometimes a painstaking exercise, requiring a lot of quick and
good information. Also, it may take multiple iterations to develop these estimates,
called crash durations. In the process, various challenges will be encountered.
For example, some activities cannot be completed in shorter time than the
normal schedule shows, or some activities will require additional human and
nonhuman resources. Not surprisingly, some resources that the project needs
may not be available even though there is budget for them. Generally, these
estimates will be developed following the rules of time and cost estimating, which
are heavily dependent on the knowledge of project technology and productivity
of resources.

SCHEDULE CRASHING
267
3.
Reestimate the cost of resources and adjust the baseline project budget to reﬂect
the crashed timeline. Adjustments may then be needed to match the timeline to
available project budget. This may require multiple iterations of schedule crashing
and budget alignment.
Once crash durations and costs are prepared and aligned, the crashed schedule is
ready. Table 9.1 shows the duration and cost for each activity in the crashed schedule
for our example.
Compute the Cost/Time Slope
All activities are not created equal. Some of them are more costly to shorten than the
others. Calculating the cost/time slope will show the cost of reducing duration of each
activity by one day. Use the following formula to compute the slope for each activity (see
Table 9.1):
Cost∕time slope = (crash cost −normal cost)∕(normal time −crash time)
This creates the basis to identify the most cost eﬀective activities to crash. But don’t
start crashing yet. First, the sequence of crashing activities needs to be determined.
Focus on the Critical Path Only
The critical path is the longest path in the network schedule, composed of activities
whose ﬂoat is zero. The duration of the critical path is the minimum time to complete all
project activities. Therefore, the duration of the critical path is equal to the total project
duration. The only way to shorten the project duration, then, is to shorten duration of
activities on the critical path (see the example titled “Wasting Money by Crashing Non-
criticalActivities”).Simply,crashingthecriticalpathdurationbyacertainnumberofdays
will translate into reducing the total project duration by the same number of days. Now
look at the network diagram and identify the critical path (in Figure 9.11 we show the
Table 9.1: Crashed Schedule Duration and Cost Amounts
Duration (Days)
Cost ($)
Activity
Normal
Crash
Normal
Crash
Cost/Time Slope∗
A
3
2
30
50
20
B
2
1
40
60
20
C
2
1
20
80
60
D
3
1
30
50
10
E
1
1
40
40
0
F
1
1
40
40
0
Total: 7 days
Total: $200
∗Cost/Time Slope = (Crash cost −Normal cost) / (Normal duration −Crash
duration).

268
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
critical path for each schedule as a bold line). Working oﬀa time-scaled diagram is the
easiest way to crash the schedule because it shows activities with and without ﬂoat visu-
ally, which is why we use it in our example.
Wasting Money by Crashing
Noncritical Activities
How often does a project schedule slip? In our experience, project delays are
widespread and many of those projects take actions to accelerate and catch
up with the baseline schedule. A frequent action of this type is to throw in
additional resources indiscriminately to shorten duration of project activities.
Since all too often the schedule does not show dependencies, and accord-
ingly the critical path, both critical and noncritical activities are many times
crashed. Crashing noncritical activities increases the total project cost without
compressing the schedule. This is an unnecessary waste of project budget. The
only way to reduce a project’s duration without changing the project logic is to
crash critical activities.
Crash the Most Cost-Eﬀective Activities
When crashing, we want to do it with the minimum cost increase. For this reason, we
don’t choose to crash just any activity on the critical path. Rather, we focus on the most
cost-eﬀective one to shorten ﬁrst, by selecting a critical activity with the least cost/time
slope. In our example in Table 9.1 activity D has the least cost/time slope on the critical
path, $10/day (activity F cannot be shortened). Cut it by one day. Now the schedule is
one day shorter, or six days long, and its cost equals the normal cost of the schedule
plus the cost/time slope of the activity that was cut, which makes $210 (see Step 1 in
Figure 9.11). Continue with cutting critical activities one day at a time, ﬁrst those with the
least cost/time slope—see Steps 2 and 3—until reaching the desired schedule duration
of four days and its cost ($260).
Crash Multiple Critical Paths
It is a rare privilege to have a single critical path. More often than not, as we crash activ-
ities on the original critical path (activities A-D-F in Table 9.1), new critical paths appear.
After cutting D in the ﬁrst step, there are two critical paths—A-D-F and A-B-E. When this
happens, to shorten the total project duration, shorten duration of all, in our case both,
critical paths at the same time. This is why in Step 2, we cut activity A, which is on both
critical paths, and in Step 3, we cut D on one critical path and B on another critical path.
Failing to shorten one of them will leave the total project duration unchanged;
simply, the longest path(s) determines the total duration. As multiple critical paths are
crashed simultaneously, follow the rule of ﬁrst crashing the least slope activity on each
of the paths. Having multiple paths is why we enforce the rule of “crash one day at
a time.”

CHOOSING YOUR SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT TOOLS
269
Using Schedule Crashing
Schedule crashing is primarily a method involving two project scenarios. In the ﬁrst, the
project is in the planning stage, the execution has not started yet, and the project team
proposes a schedule for management approval. Management ﬁnds the schedule too
slow and demands it be shortened. To accomplish this, the team goes back to the draw-
ing board, employing schedule crashing.
The second scenario occurs when the project is under way and the schedule slips.14
To catch up, the team may use the schedule crashing method. While for both scenarios
the team can apply schedule crashing alone, many teams combine it with fast-tracking.
Remember, fast-tracking changes the project logic, altering the dependencies between
project activities.
Crashing a 250-activity network diagram in a half-day to one-day time is realistic for
a skilled project manager. Expect this time to increase with the increase of the team size,
since larger teams need more time for internal communications.
Beneﬁts
The value of schedule crashing lies in its capability to provide a way to correct for
negative schedule performance variances. Step by step, it shows which activities to
crash, what resources it takes, and how much it costs. To all organizations cherishing
time-to-market speed, or more generally, fast cycle times, this capability is a signiﬁcant
beneﬁt (see “Five Golden Rules of Schedule Crashing”).
Five Golden Rules of Schedule Crashing
1.
Crash only activities on the critical path.
2.
Crash by one time unit of the schedule at a time (one day at a time for
example).
3.
When there are multiple critical paths, crash all of them simultaneously.
4.
First crash critical activities that are the least costly to crash (the least
cost/time slope).
5.
Don’t crash noncritical activities.
CHOOSING YOUR SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT TOOLS
The seven tools presented in this chapter are designed for diﬀerent project situations.
Most project managers ﬁnd it useful to employ one to three schedule management
tools, and face the problem of eliminating the other tool options. To help in this eﬀort,
Table 9.2 lists various project situations and identiﬁes which tools are geared for each
situation. Consider this table as a starting point, and create your own custom project
situation analysis and tools of choice to ﬁt your particular project management style.

270
SCHEDULE MANAGEMENT
Table 9.2: A Summary Comparison of Schedule Control Tools
Situation
Jogging
Line
B-C-F
Method
Milestone
Prediction
Chart
Burn
Down
Chart
Slip
Chart
Buffer
Chart
Schedule
Crashing
Small and simple
projects
✓
✓
✓
✓
Task-level progress
reviews
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Low-level detail
needed
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Short time to train
how to use the tool
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Focus on highly
important events
✓
✓
Large, complex, and
cross-functional
projects
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Fast projects
✓
✓
✓
Projects of strategic
importance
✓
✓
✓
Focus on top-priority
activities
✓
✓
✓
✓
Summary detail
needed
✓
✓
✓
✓
Display trend
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Provide predictive
analysis
✓
✓
✓
Little time available
for schedule
management
✓
✓
Analyze failing
project
✓
✓
✓
✓
Correct project
delays
✓
References
1.
Cockburn, Alistair. Crystal Clear (Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2004).
2.
Taylor, James. ProjectSchedulingandCostControl:Planning,MonitoringandControl-
ling the Baseline (Plantation, FL: J. Ross Publishing, 2007).
3.
Kahn, K. B., ed. The PDMA Handbook of New Product Development (Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons, 2012).
4.
Leach, L. P. 1999. “Critical Chain Project Management Improves Project Perfor-
mance.” Project Management Journal 30 (2): 39–51.

REFERENCES
271
5.
Goldratt, E. M. Critical Chain (Great Barrington, MA: North River Press, 1997).
6.
Kania, E. “Measurements for Product Development Organizations: A Perspective
from Theory of Constraints.” Visions 24 (2): 17–20, 2010.
7.
Project Management Institute. AGuidetoProgramManagementBodyofKnowledge,
5th ed. (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2013).
8.
Meredith, J. R., Samuel J. Mantel Jr., and Scott M. Shafer. Project Management in
Practice. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013).
9.
Kharbanda, O. P., E. A. Stalworthy, and L. F. Williams. Project Cost Control in Action
(Farnborough, England: Gower, 1981).
10.
Pinto, Jeﬀrey K. Project Management, 2nd ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall,
2013).
11.
Silverberg, E. C. “Predicting Project Completion.” Research-TechnologyManagement
34 (3): 46–47, 2011.
12.
Lientz, B. P., and K. P. Rea. Breakthrough Technology Project Management, 2nd ed.
(San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2011).
13.
Kerzner, H. Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling, and
Controlling, 11th ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013).
14.
Meredith, J. R., and S. J. Mantel. Project Management: A Managerial Approach, 8th
ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011).


10
COST MANAGEMENT
P
roject cost management involves management of the processes required to
ensure that project work is accomplished within an approved budget, assessing
changes to the budget based upon changes to the project scope, and estab-
lishing a new budget baseline when necessary. Generally, there is minimal concern if
work is completed under budget, so primary attention is focused on preventing budget
overruns. The primary exception being if a budget underrun indicates work is not being
performed as planned.
Budget variances are common and need to be a primary focus of project managers
during the execution stage of a project (see “Common Reasons for Cost Overruns”).
Cost variances caused by scope changes or major resource adjustments are fairly easy
to detect. However, humans are inherently poor at managing their work and as a result,
mostbudgetunderandoverrunsoccuronedayatatimeandaremorediﬃculttodetect.
Project managers need to be vigilant about preventing budget variances from accumu-
lating to a conspicuous and unacceptable level. To do so, they need to have tools that
provide early warning of potential and realized budget slips.
The tools presented in this chapter provide a variety of options for early warning
detection of budget variances. Some tools are more suited for smaller projects, some
for larger projects, others for complex projects, and still others for simple projects. Since
the type of project a project manager will be called on to manage will likely vary over
the course of his or her career, it is recommended that each tool become a part of each
project manager’s PM Toolbox.
Common Reasons for Cost Overruns
It is a well-known fact that a large number of projects complete later than
scheduled and exceed cost estimates. No single reason explains all of the cost
overruns on projects. However, there are a number of reasons that show up
consistently in project cost management studies.
1.
Insufﬁcient funds. One of the main reasons for project budget overrun is
underfunding. This refers to the act of not allocating an adequate amount
(continued)
273

274
COST MANAGEMENT
of budget to a project to begin with. Without adequate funding, project
success becomes a matter of wishful thinking.
2.
Inaccurate cost estimates. Accurate cost estimation is crucial to effective
cost management. If the cost of the project is underestimated during the
planning stage, a budget overrun will eventually occur unless the scope
of the project is reduced to match the estimated cost. This is especially
true in environments where top managers of a ﬁrm set cost targets or
not-to-exceed thresholds that artiﬁcially limit the amount of budget that
is estimated. Likewise, if the cost of a project is overestimated, a budget
underrun will occur.
3.
Scope increases. Increases in scope on projects frequently cause cost
overruns. These changes map directly to project requirements. Normally,
scope increases are a result of missed requirements during project
deﬁnition and planning or new requirements that are introduced during
project execution. New requirements demand additional work and
additional work demands additional project cost.
4.
Extended project schedules. If project activities take longer to complete
than originally planned, the project schedule usually has to be extended
to reﬂect the correct amount of time required. Schedule extensions
mean additional costs caused by additional unplanned resource hours.
This is especially true as the complexity of a project increases. The
higher the project complexity, the higher the number of interdependen-
cies between team members and activities; therefore the higher the
probability that interconnected tasks and activities will take longer than
planned.
5.
Lack of risk management contingency. Failure to establish risk manage-
ment contingency budget for events likely to occur or with severe impact
on project completion accounts for many cost overruns. Failure to plan
risk management budget contingency creates the base assumption that
the best-case execution outcome will occur, and no unexpected impacts
to the project will occur.
6.
Poor cost management. Failure to effectively manage the cost aspects of
a project have resulted in many project cost overruns. They can include
the failure to clearly identify who is responsible for managing project
cost, who has the authority to approve changes to the project budget,
how cost performance will be measured and reported, and the identi-
ﬁcation of triggers to signal the need for cost management corrective
actions.
Even though changes to the project budget are common, they are not a foregone
conclusion if eﬀective project cost management practices are followed. Cost manage-
ment practices involve cost performance measurement, forecasted budget at project
completion, change impact analysis, recommended corrective actions, and making
updates to the project management plan and budget baseline.
Beginning with the cost management plan, the following tools are designed to assist
project managers perform their project cost management practices eﬀectively.

THE COST MANAGEMENT PLAN
275
THE COST MANAGEMENT PLAN
The cost management plan is a tool that describes how the budget and costs will be
managed on a project. It sets the process for how project costs are measured, reported,
and controlled by the project manager and his or her team.
Developing the Cost Management Plan
The cost management plan identiﬁes who is responsible for managing a project’s costs,
who has the authority to approve changes to the project budget baseline, how project
cost will be measured and reported on, and how cost variances will be controlled or
corrected.
The following elements of a cost management plan can be used as a suggested tem-
plate that can be modiﬁed to formulate a customized plan that meets the needs of your
organization.
Purpose
The cost management plan should begin with a statement of purpose for diligent cost
management practices on the project, as well as a statement of purpose for the plan. It
is also good to include a statement of who is responsible for managing and reporting
the project’s cost throughout the duration of the project in this opening section of the
plan. In most cases, this is the project manager.
Cost Management Approach
This section of the cost management plan explains the approach that will be used to
manage the costs on the project. It identiﬁes the processes, procedures, and tools that
will be used to manage cost during project execution.
Begin by describing how the baseline budget was derived and where the budget
funding is coming from. Also included in this section is the identiﬁcation of who is
involved in managing costs on the project and their speciﬁc roles.
Tracking Budget Expenditures
In this section, focus is put on how the expenditures will be tracked on the project while
it is in the execution stage. Discuss how project expenditures are tracked, what tools will
be employed, where the expenditure data comes from, how often the expenditure data
should be refreshed, what expenditure reports should be received for the project and
by whom, and what should happen if discrepancies in the data are discovered.
Metrics and Reports
This section of the plan describes the standard metrics that will be used to track and
report project budget expenditures. Also covered is a description of expenditure report
format, required content, and cadence of delivery to the project manager.

276
COST MANAGEMENT
Analyzing Cost Variances
Describe how variances (either positive or negative) between actual performance
and the planned budget expenditure are derived and analyzed. Deﬁne the control
thresholds for the project (see Chapter 12), and what actions should be taken if project
performance triggers a control threshold.
Changes to the Project Budget
This section describes the process used to review and approve a change to the project
budget, the approvals required to make a budget change, and how a new budget
baseline is established.
Project Budget
This ﬁnal section details the project budget. It is best to present the budget in its various
categories:
■
Fixed costs
■
Material costs
■
Other direct costs
■
Burden and overhead
■
Total project budget
In addition, if there is any budget contingency or management reserve amounts that
are being held separately, it is good practice to explicitly state those amounts as part of
the budget breakout.
Using the Cost Management Plan
Project costs cannot be managed just by thinking about them on a regular basis.
Cost management must be handled and performed as a primary project management
process, one that requires forethought and planning. By developing a cost management
plan, a project manager establishes the expectations of how cost will be managed on
a project and by whom. This in turn establishes the necessary roles and responsibilities
for eﬀective cost management among the project team members.
The cost management plan is established during the project planning stage of a
project and then put into practice during the project execution and closure stages. It is
equally important for small projects and large projects, as well as simple or complex
projects.
THE BUDGET CONSUMPTION CHART
The budget consumption chart is a graphical representation of the project expendi-
tures as they occur over the project timeline. The chart is a very eﬀective tool for project
managers to communicate current budget consumption status. Like the schedule con-
sumptionchartpresentedinChapter9,oneofthemostpowerfulattractionsofthischart

THE BUDGET CONSUMPTION CHART
277
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
$200
More Spending
Than Planned
Project Timeline
Project Budget (thousands of $)
Oct
Nov
Dec
$400
$600
$800
$1000
$1200
$1400
$1600
$1800
Planned Budget
Less Spending
Than Planned
Actual Budget
Figure 10.1: Example Budget Consumption Chart
is the psychological beneﬁt of representing progress by a path that counts down to zero
project budget available.
As illustrated in Figure 10.1, budget consumption charts are represented as standard
x-y charts, with the x-axis representing the project timeline and the y-axis representing
the project budget.
Project managers should keep in mind that the budget consumption chart is not
designed as a comprehensive tool to measure overall project cost performance, espe-
cially as it directly relates to schedule performance. Rather, it is only focused on measure-
ment of project budget spending and serves as a good tool for preparing the project
manager for a broader analysis of project cost management status.
Developing the Budget Consumption Chart
Developing the budget consumption chart requires a detailed understanding of the
project scope, the resources needed to complete the work deﬁned by the scope, the
cost of the resources, and the overall budget for a project. This information is normally
integrated into a detailed project budget (see Chapter 7). Additionally, the incremental
cost of any approved scope changes that have not been incorporated into the base-
line project budget will need to be evaluated for impact to the project budget and
incorporated into the chart.
Create the Budget Consumption Template
The budget consumption chart simply represents the amount of project budget avail-
able to the project manager at any point in time. Begin by laying the project timeline
across the x-axis of the chart. If a rolling-wave or iterative project execution methodol-
ogy is being employed, show only the portion of the project timeline that is pertinent.
Time zero on the x-axis represents the point in time when project execution begins, or
the point in time when a particular execution iteration begins.

278
COST MANAGEMENT
The y-axis represents the project budget, and should be distributed across the axis in
equal amounts. The total project budget is represented at the highest point of the y-axis
with zero dollars represented at the intersection of the y-axis and the x-axis. The budget
should be represented in this manner in order to illustrate budget consumption over
time, with full budget available at project execution start, and zero budget available at
planned project closure.
Draw the Planned Budget Consumption Line
Using the information contained in a project-scheduling tool (the Gantt chart is recom-
mended), plot the planned budget expenditure over the project timeline. Next, connect
the periodic budget expenditure or value points with a contiguous line that represents
the planned amount of budget remaining at the normal project review intervals, or
major deliverable dates. At project closure, the planned budget should be zero. Note
that, as illustrated in Figure 10.1, this is normally not a completely linear representation
due to the variations of resources, materials, and other direct costs; the exception being
projects that have constant level of eﬀort resource loading. The chart will normally look
like an inverted S chart.
Using the Budget Consumption Chart
The budget consumption chart is used for both the planning and execution stages of a
project.1 First, the chart represents the amount of project budget available over a speci-
ﬁed period of time. During project planning, the chart can be used as an early indication
of project spending under various scope, resource, and timeline scenarios. This is espe-
cially useful in situations where budget is constrained, or available at various points in
time—such as projects that rely on government funding from multiple sources or mul-
tiple ﬁscal years. Second, the chart provides a visual representation of the amount of
budget spent and amount of budget still available at any point on the project timeline.
At a glance, the chart can indicate whether a project manager is spending more or
less budget than planned. Ideally, you would like the actual line to lie extremely close to
the planned line. However, we do not live in an ideal world and project spending seldom
occurs as planned. Referring to Figure 10.1, we see a more realistic scenario. When the
actual line moves above the planned line, it is an indication that the team is spending
less than was planned, and therefore more budget is available than planned. Conversely,
when it is below the ideal line, more project budget is being consumed than planned.
Whenvariationsaboveandbelowtheplannedlineshowup,itmayindicatetheneed
for corrective actions. However, how do you know when a corrective action is needed?
Good cost management practices involve the use of corrective action triggers. One such
trigger might be percent above or below planned budget consumption. For example, if
current budget consumption is 10 percent more or 10 percent less than planned at any
point in which the project status is reviewed, it would indicate that a corrective action
analysis is needed.
Care should be taken to restrain yourself from reacting too quickly, however. Keep
in mind that you are only looking at the project from a single perspective (budget
consumption), and that you are missing the project schedule, resource, and risk

THE BUDGET CONSUMPTION CHART
279
perspectives. Recall that earlier we stated that the budget consumption chart is best
used to prepare the project manager for a broader discussion on project performance.
Here’s why, it only provides a single perspective of performance and taking correc-
tive action on a single perspective is a risky proposition. Instead, we recommend
that the budget consumption chart be used in tandem with other cost manage-
ment tools presented in this chapter that provide a more integrated view of project
performance.
Variations
The project scenario represented in Figure 10.1 contains a major assumption. It assumes
that the entire project budget is available when project execution begins. Many times
this is not the case, such as in the world of government procurement projects as men-
tionedearlier.Figure10.2illustrateshowthebudgetconsumptionchartcanbemodiﬁed
to include changes in project funding.
When an increase in project funding occurs, the project budget increases and the
planned budget line on the chart is increased vertically by the amount of incremental
budget received. In contrast, when project funding is lost, perhaps due to descope of
work, the planned budget line is decreased vertically by the amount of budget no longer
available to the project manager. Once the budget baseline is reset, normal use of the
budget consumption chart resumes.
Beneﬁts
Since the budget is often a primary constraint on a project, a quick and easy method
to track its consumption and change over time is necessary for any project, large
or small. The budget consumption chart provides value to the project manager by
conveying project budget status in a simple and powerful manner through visual
graphical analysis.
Budget
Increase
Project Timeline
Original
Budget
Budget
Decrease
$200
$400
$600
$800
$1000
$1200
$1400
$1600
$1800
Project Budget (thousands of $)
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Figure 10.2: Budget Consumption Chart with Funding Changes

280
COST MANAGEMENT
Even though the chart is not designed as a precise indication of overall project
cost performance, it conveys progress made against the baseline and can be used to
provide necessary detail when there is a need to ascertain overall project performance
to plan.
Used in tandem with other project cost management tools, the budget consump-
tion chart is a good asset for determining how the project budget is being utilized and
helping to trigger corrective actions when variances exist.
EARNED VALUE ANALYSIS
The best method today for precisely determining the overall project performance status
generally, and cost status speciﬁcally, is earned value analysis (EVA). EVA is a project per-
formance measurement technique that integrates scope, time, and cost data. It periodi-
callyrecordsthepastperformanceofaprojectinordertoforecastitsfutureperformance
(see Figure 10.3).
During project progress evaluation, EVA measures a project’s schedule and cost per-
formance to determine whether the project is ahead or behind the plan (schedule and
cost variances) and why. Then, ﬁnal project costs (estimate at completion) and comple-
tion date (schedule at completion) are predicted based upon the current performance.
While the practical elegance of such an approach comes from EVA’s integration of
project scope, cost, and time, its special value is in the proactive, predictive approach it
enables. In particular, predictions warn us of possible problems, creating opportunities
to ﬁx them in a timely manner, and keep the project on its planned course. In summary,
EVA strives to establish the accurate measurement of physical performance against
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Project Timeline
Oct
Nov
$200
$400
$600
$800
$1000
$1200
$1400
$1600
$1800
Project Budget (thousands of $)
(EV)
(PV)
(AC)
(BAC)
(EAC)
Cost Variance
(Under Budget)
Schedule Variance
(Behind Schedule)
Time Behind Schedule
(1 month)
Projected Budget
Overrun
Figure 10.3: Example Earned Value Analysis Chart

EARNED VALUE ANALYSIS
281
Table 10.1: Fundamentals of Major Earned Value Measurement Methods
Term
Acronymn
Description
Planned value
PV
Also known as the budget, the PV is the total cost estimate
planned to be spent on an activity (or project in totality) during a
given period of time. PV was formally called budgeted cost of
work scheduled (BCWS).
Actual cost
AC
The cost actually incurred for the work completed by the report
date. AC was formally called actual cost of work performed
(ACWP).
Earned value
EV
The total of direct and indirect cost incurred in accomplishing
work on an activity by the report date. EV was formally called the
budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP).
Cost variance
CV
The difference between the amount budgeted and the amount
actually spent for the work performed.
Schedule
variance
SV
The difference between the amounts budgeted for the work
completed and the amount that was planned.
Cost
performance
index
CPI
The index reflects the relative value of work done compared to
the amount paid for it.
Schedule
performance
index
SPI
The index reflects the relative amount the project is ahead or
behind schedule.
Budget at
complete
BAC
The original estimate of the total cost to complete a task or to
complete the project in its entirety.
Estimate at
complete
EAC
The current estimate of the total cost to complete a task or the
project in its entirety.
Estimate to
complete
ETC
The current estimate of the amount of funds required to
complete the project from a particular point in time.
Report date
The data date or point in time at which the EVA is performed.
a plan to enable the reliable forecast of ﬁnal project costs and completion date.2
We describe the deliberate sequence of steps to explain the conceptual simplicity
of performing an EVA. To begin, refer to Table 10.1, which deﬁnes the basic EVA
terminology, and Table 10.2, which deﬁnes the key formulas.3
Performing Earned Value Analysis
First conceptualized by the industrial engineers of the late nineteenth century, EVA grew
to its comprehensive and dominant form under the auspices of government project
management practices.4 In the process of growth, the original simple terminology of the
engineers yielded to a confusing terminology. Although EVA has become an eﬀective
tool, primarily in large government projects, it has not been able to attract a large follow-
ing in the private sector—the exception being the construction industry. Private busi-
ness generally performs work through small and medium-size projects, often managed
by companies that have only recently adopted formal project management methods.5

282
COST MANAGEMENT
Table 10.2: Key Earned Value Analysis Formulas
Term
Formula
Cost variance
CV = EV −AV
Schedule variance
SV = EV −PV
Cost performance index
CPI = EV ∕AV
Schedule performance index
SPI = EV ∕PV
Estimate at complete
EAC = (BAC −EV) + AC
Estimate to complete
ETC = EAC −AC
These companies need EVA in a simpler form, built on a terminology as simple as that
of the industrial engineers and often based on resource hours as much as on dollars.
Stellar,althoughrare,examplesofprivateorganizationspursuingsuchEVAcanbefound
in industry.6 Fully valuing both approaches, for large government and smaller private
projects, we will ﬁrst focus on a comprehensive, but simpliﬁed approach using current
terminology.
Performing an EVA needs to be precipitated by the gathering of critical information
associated with the project. The baseline schedule is needed to anchor the status of
work completed against the original plan and to compare actual progress to planned
progress for each project task. A time-phase project budget is needed to evaluate the
value of work completed against that which was planned. Finally, the project scope has
to be fully deﬁned and documented.
Fully deﬁning the project scope is not an easy task, of course, especially when you
are dealing with a new project fraught with unknowns. Among the available tools for
scope deﬁnition, it is our belief that the logic of systematic decomposition of project
work into successive levels of manageable chunks of work, as in the work breakdown
structure (WBS), provides a suﬃcient degree of conﬁdence that the scope will be fully
deﬁned, including all work to do in the project (see Chapter 5). This is why one of the
golden rules of WBS structuring is to show all project work. That this is critical becomes
clear when we know that EVA may require an estimate of the percent of work completed.
If the estimate is 20 percent complete and the project scope is not fully deﬁned, the
estimate is inaccurate because it does not include the full scope of work. A disciplined
and appropriate application of the WBS can help create a reasonable representation of
a fully deﬁned project scope.
The WBS provides the basis for scheduling the project scope of work. Each task will
be carefully analyzed to determine when in the project time line will be executed. Details
about beginning and ending points of work tasks, as well as their durations, will be
determined in the schedule. Such information, along with the approved budgets for
tasks, essentially deﬁnes scheduled work or planned value. As the project implemen-
tation unfolds, physically completed work is evaluated and earned value determined.
Both the planned value and earned value are derived from the project schedule informa-
tion and are critical for successful EVA. For that reason, the project schedule is a critical
input to EVA.

EARNED VALUE ANALYSIS
283
A fully deﬁned project scope that is scheduled for implementation must be based on
careful resource estimates. Speciﬁcally, resources to complete each WBS element need
to be identiﬁed and allocated for certain time periods on the schedule. This creates a
time-phased budget of resources. These resource estimates along with the scheduled
work help generate the planned value. Also, these estimates combined with the com-
pleted work constitute the earned value. The time-phased budget is a critical input to
EVA. In summary, EVA requires a fully deﬁned project scope integrated with allocated
resources, all translated into a sound project schedule for performance. Often, these
three inputs are termed a bottom-up project baseline plan.7
Set Up a Performance Measurement Baseline
A performance measurement baseline (PMB) should ﬁrst be established in order to
determine how much of the planned work the project team has accomplished at
any point in time. Establishing a PMB involves three tasks: (1) determining points of
management control and who is responsible for them, (2) selecting a method for
measurement of earned value, and (3) setting up the baseline.
The foundation for the tasks is the project baseline plan, which fully deﬁnes project
scope, integrating it with allocated resources and translating them into a project
schedule for performance, all within the framework of the WBS. Given that the WBS
has elements on multiple levels, you have to decide which elements (on which level)
will be management control points. These points are called control account plans
(CAPs). Although at ﬁrst sight this might seem like a confusing term, in actuality its
concept is simple—a CAP is a point at which we measure and monitor performance.
The makeup of a CAP is shown in the example titled “Key Components of a Control
Account Plan.”
Key Components of a Control Account Plan
■
Narrative scope deﬁnition.
■
Location in WBS (e.g., Level 1 in a WBS with levels 0 for project, 1 for CAP,
and 2 for work packages).
■
Constituent work elements (e.g., Level 2 for work packages).
■
Timeline (e.g., begin/end dates of each work package).
■
Budget (resource hours, dollars, or units for each work package).
■
Owner; the person responsible for the CAP (e.g., software project manager).
■
Type of effort (e.g., nonrecurring or recurring).
■
Methods to measure EVA performance (e.g., weighted milestones).
CAPs may be located on a selected level of a WBS—at Level 1, 2, or 3 (the project is
level 0 of the WBS), or all the way down to whatever is chosen as a lowest level to exercise
management control. The essence is that a CAP is a homogeneous grouping of work ele-
ments that is manageable, which brings us to the issue of its size. How large or how small
should a CAP be? According to the current trends in private industry, the size of CAPs is

284
COST MANAGEMENT
on the increase.8 One reason is that project managers want to concentrate on CAPs that
include larger work elements, which are typically on higher levels of the WBS. Also, they
include into a CAP all organizational units responsible for its constituent work elements.
The desired result of these trends is to enable project managers to focus their attention
on fewer but more vital control points of their projects, making EVA signiﬁcantly easier
to use and much more time eﬃcient.
Such a CAP, then, has a clearly deﬁned narrative scope, location in the WBS, con-
stituentworkelements,timeline,andbudget.Althoughthebudgetsareoftenexpressed
in dollars, they can be expressed in other forms—from resource hours, to units, to stan-
dards. Because so many project managers manage only resource hour budgets, we will
use hours in our examples. To ensure accountability for the budgets, each CAP should
be assigned to a person responsible for its performance.
Figure 5.5 in Chapter 5 illustrates how a WBS culminates in a set of work packages
that represent tasks or groups of tasks that have deﬁnable outcomes. The work pack-
ages are then aligned to the various organizational functions that will be responsible for
execution of the work packages and delivery of the outcomes. Figure 10.4 extends this
view of work organization one step further by illustrating how a Level 1 WBS element
can be organized into a CAP.
Company
Marketing
Manufacturing
Work Breakdown Structure
Level 1
Level 2
Level 0
Cost Account
Plan
Engineering
Figure 10.4: Organizing a Control Account Plan

EARNED VALUE ANALYSIS
285
Measurement of a CAP’s performance, the cornerstone of an EVA, calls for
well-deﬁned methods of measurement. While we review several such methods (see
Table 10.3), hard-and-fast rules for selecting the appropriate one do not exist. Rather,
the choice you have to make is a personal one, often arbitrary, and may vary on a
project-by-project basis. In the selection process, the project team and CAP managers
should focus on the ease and accuracy of measurements that can be consistently
applied to appropriately support their speciﬁc project needs.
The percent complete method uses a periodic (monthly or weekly) estimate of the
percentage of completion of a work package, expressed as a cumulative value (e.g.,
65 percent) against the full 100 percent value of the work package. Hailed as a simple
and fast method, which perhaps explains its wide popularity, the method has also been
viewed as being overly subjective. Deﬁning work packages’ scope well and checking on
accuracy of the estimates helps make the subjectivity reasonable.
Fixed formula by work package includes various options: 25/75, 50/50, 75/25, and
so on. For example, a 25/75 formula means that when a work package is started, 25
percent of the package’s budget is earned, while the completion of the package earns
another 75 percent. Any combination that adds up to 100 percent is possible. This is a
quick way of estimating, applicable in situations where work packages are short-span
and performed in a cascade type of time frame.
Table 10.3: Fundamentals of Major Earned Value Measurement Methods
Type of Method
When to Use
Major Advantage
Major Disadvantage
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
% complete
Well-defined work
packages; management
reviews in place;
nonrecurring tasks
The easiest method to
administer
Made purely on a
subjective basis
Fixed formula
Work packages are
detailed and short-span;
nonrecurring tasks
Easy to understand
Rather subjective
Weighted
milestones
Work packages run two
or more performance
periods; nonrecurring
tasks
Perhaps the most
objective method
Difficult to plan and
administer
% complete with
milestone gates
Works in any industry, on
any type of project;
nonrecurring tasks
Both easy and objective Requires time and
energy to define
meaningful milestones
Earned standards
Preestablished standards
of performance;
nonrecurring or recurring
tasks
Perhaps most
sophisticated of all
methods
Requires the most
discipline
Equivalent units
Long performance
periods; nonrecurring or
recurring tasks
Simple and effective
Requires a detailed
bottom-up estimate

286
COST MANAGEMENT
Weighted milestones is a method of dividing a long-span work package into a sev-
eral milestones, each one assigned a speciﬁc budgeted value, which is earned when
the milestone is accomplished. As objective as it is, the method’s success hinges heavily
on the ability to deﬁne meaningful milestones that are clearly tangible, budgeted, and
scheduled.
Percentcompletewithmilestonegates strives to balance the ease of percent complete
estimates with the accuracy of tangible milestones. A work package of, say, 600 hours is
broken down into three sequential milestones, each budgeted at 200 hours and placed
as a performance gate. You are allowed to estimate the ﬁrst milestone’s earned value by
percent complete up to 200 hours. To go beyond the point of 200, you need to meet
predeﬁned completion criteria for the ﬁrst milestone. This procedure is repeated for
subsequent milestones.9
Earned standards is a method often applied by industrial engineers to establish
planned standards for performance of work packages, which are then used as the
basis for budgeting the packages and subsequently measuring their earned value.
For example, the planned standard for producing a cup of lemonade at $0.20/cup is
used to budget the work package including the production of 1,000 cups for $200.
When 500 cups are produced, regardless of the actual cost the earned value is 500 cups
× $0.20/cup = $100. Widely applied in repetitive types of project work, the method’s
foundations are the planned standards developed from historical cost data, time, and
motion studies.10
In equivalent completed units, a planned work package is earned when it is fully com-
pleted. Similarly, a planned portion of it is earned when completed. For example, a work
package to build ﬁve miles (ﬁve units) of freeway is estimated at $3m/mile for a total of
$15m. It is fully earned when all ﬁve miles are ﬁnished. Also, the completion of half a mile
will earn $1.5m. Based on detailed bottom-up estimates, the method is favored by the
construction industry without ever having been called its real name—the earned value.
After this short review of the six methods, two things need to be mentioned in clos-
ing comments about measuring EVA performance. First, note that the work package is
the place where the measurement is taken, while measurement for a CAP is a summa-
tion of work packages’ measurements. Second, there is no single best way to measure
earned value for any type of project task. This contingency rule means that diﬀerent
types of tasks will use diﬀerent methods, and perhaps the most appropriate method
is to combine multiple methods, relying on CAP managers to collectively estimate the
earned value of individual work packages. For an example of a project where multiple
methods are used, see Figure 10.5a. A design project consists of three CAPs, essentially
three phases on Level 1 of the WBS. Each of them applies a diﬀerent method of EVA
measurement—percent-complete, weighted milestones, and earned standards. Since
each CAP consists of multiple work packages, this means that all work packages within
the CAP are measured with the same method. As we remind you that the EVA measure-
ment method is the last on the list of components of a CAP (see the previous example
titled “Key Components of a Control Account Plan”), we move to establish the PMB.
The PMB is a time-phased sum of detailed and individually measurable CAPs. What is
included into CAPs depends on how companies deﬁne cost management responsibili-
ties of their project managers. Many companies allow their managers of internal projects

287
CAP
EV Method Measure
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Conceptual
Design
%
Complete
Estimate
Planned
45
55
Earned
20
30
50
Actual
35
45
50
Detailed
Design
Weighted
Milestones
Planned
100
100
50
Earned
100
Actual
115
Prototype
Earned
Standards
Planned
100
50
Earned
25
Actual
25
Total
Project
Planned
Inc.
Cum
45
155
100
150
50
45
200
300
450
500
Earned
Inc.
Cum
20
130
75
20
150
225
Actual
Inc.
Cum
35
160
75
35
195
270
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
100
200
300
400
500
Hours
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
100
200
300
400
500
Hours
x
Report Date
 
PV
AV
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
100
200
300
400
500
Hours
x
Spending Variance
Cost Variance
 
Schedule Variance
PV
EV
AC
Report Date
 
a) Data on multiple methods of earned
value measurement for a project
b) Cumulative performance curve for the
    planned value
c)  Cumulative performance curves for the
     planned value and actual cost
d)  Cumulative performance curves for the
      planned value, actual cost, and earned value
Figure 10.5:
Performing Earned Value Analysis

288
COST MANAGEMENT
to manage only direct labor hours, which is our focus here. In that case, their CAPs and
PMB will include only direct labor hours. On the other end of the spectrum are project
managers, whose job is to manage all project costs, as well as management reserves
and proﬁt. Accordingly, their PMB will reﬂect this situation. Still other companies may
select that their PMB and related cost responsibilities of project managers is somewhere
between the two ends of the spectrum.
In projects with lower uncertainty, a ﬁrm PMB with detailed CAPs can be established
before project execution begins. What if you have to start executing an uncertain project
in which front-end CAPs are detailed out while the later ones cannot be planned for the
lackofinformation?WhatifaCAP’sscopestartschanging?Theanswerfortheﬁrstissueis
the rolling wave approach; as you progress in executing the available detailed CAPs, you
will generate more information that enables you to plan other CAPs.11 As for the second
issue of scope changes, you should establish a PMB change control process. By carefully
handling all changes to the scope, you will be able to update and maintain the approved
PMB, a prerequisite to successful EVA.
ForpracticalpurposesofEVA,thetime-phasedPMBcanbedisplayedasacumulative
performance curve representing the planned value over the project schedule. That is the
curve shown in Figure 10.5b, developed for a design project whose performance data is
giveninFigure10.5a.Insummary,aproject’sPMBisnowinplacethatconsistsofmultiple
detailed CAPs.
Evaluate Project Results
This step compares the actual results of performing the project with its plan (PMB). While
the very measurement of performance occurs within individual CAPs, you may monitor
and periodically (e.g., weekly or monthly) evaluate performance results at three lev-
els: within individual CAPs, at some intermediary summary level (either a WBS element
beyond the CAP or a PBS), and at the project level. This step includes the following:
■
Focusonschedule:Evaluateschedulevariance(SV)andscheduleperformanceindex
(SPI).
■
Focus on cost: Evaluate cost variance (CV) and cost performance index (CPI).
■
Identify the cause of the variances, if any.
Our example in Figure 10.5c shows the comparison, the cumulative performance
curve for actual values against the performance curve for planned values. The majority
of project managers favor this traditional cost management approach despite its poten-
tially deceptive results. At the end of March in our example, the diﬀerence between the
two curves, called the spending variance, only reﬂects whether the project stays within
the approved budgeted hours. It does not in any way determine the project’s true cost
performance status. If used for establishing the project’s true cost performance status
in Figure 10.5c, the comparison would mislead us by indicating that the actual perfor-
mance is under budget (300 hours −270 hours = 30 hours), a positive development. This
couldn’t be further from the truth; the project is in cost trouble, as we will soon see, and
that can’t be discerned using this planned-versus-actual approach. The reason for this
false ﬁnding is in comparing points on the planned and actual curves that include diﬀer-
ent scopes of work. In short, apples are compared with oranges. Another issue with this

EARNED VALUE ANALYSIS
289
two-dimensional traditional approach from Figure 10.5c is in that it relates to cost only.
To get an insight into the project schedule performance, we need a separate planned
versus actual schedule chart, and that one would not match the cost chart. The remedy
for these problems is a chart that integrates true cost and schedule performance. This is
where the earned value performance curve comes in, as illustrated in Figure 10.5d.
A comparison of the earned and planned value at the end of March indicates the
following:
Schedule Variance (SV) = EV −PV
(SV) = 225 hours −300 hours
(SV) = −75 hours
This negative SV means that the project has fallen behind its planned work. A look back
at Figure 10.5d reveals two manifestations of the same SVs—one drawn vertically is
expressed in budget units, the other horizontal in time units. Not surprisingly, you may
prefer the one expressed in time units (days, weeks, months). It is generally easier to
identify time units of delay by means of the schedule performance index. Before we
get there, it is worth mentioning that any time SV is negative, the project is behind the
planned work, and any time SV is positive, the project is ahead of the planned work.
Another task in evaluating the schedule position is calculating SPI. SPI quantiﬁes
how much actual earned value was accomplished against the originally planned value.
In other words, it represents how much of the originally scheduled work has been
accomplished at a certain point of time. An SPI equal to 1 means perfect schedule
performance to its plan. Any SPI greater than 1 implies an ahead-of-schedule position
to the original plan of work. SPI running below 1 reﬂects a behind-schedule position to
the originally scheduled work.
At the end of March in Figure 10.5d, the situation is as follows:
SPI = EV∕PV
SPI = 225∕300
SPI = 0.75
The SPI of 0.75 indicates that 75 percent of the originally planned work is accom-
plished. This means our project is behind, more precisely, 25 percent (1 −0.75 = 0.25)
behind the baseline plan of work. Since our reporting date at the end of March is the
90th day of the project, we can tell that our project is 22.5 days (25 percent of 90 days)
behind the original work planned.
Schedule analysis in EVA deserves a word of caution. Speciﬁcally, anytime you ﬁnd
a schedule delay condition that includes negative SV and SPI that is less than 1, you
should know that EVA schedule variance is not based on the critical path information
and may be deceptive. Poor schedule performance of some work packages or tasks may
be balanced by schedule performance of other work packages or tasks. Therefore, use
your critical path schedule and risk analysis in conjunction with EVA schedule analysis.12
If the late work packages/tasks are on the critical path or are highly risky to the project,
complete the work packages/tasks at the earliest possible date.13

290
COST MANAGEMENT
Now we can move to our second area of interest in this step, calculate CV and CPI.
At the end of March in Figure 10.5d, CV is as follows:
Cost Variance (CV) = EV −AC
CV = 225 hours −275 hours
CV = −45 hours
and
CPI = EV∕AC
CPI = 225∕270
CPI = 0.83
The purpose of CV is to indicate the diﬀerential between the earned value for the
physically accomplished work and the actual cost to accomplish the work. Therefore,
the positive CV means that the project is running under budget, while negative CV sig-
nals the project is spending more than planned, overrunning the budget. In essence,
we are experiencing the latter, consuming 45 more hours than we have allocated for the
amount of accomplished work.
CPI is a cost eﬃciency factor. By relating the physically accomplished work to the
actual cost to accomplish the work, CPI establishes the cumulative cost performance
position. When CPI is equal to 1, it indicates perfect cost performance to the original
budget. Values of CPI exceeding 1 indicate under original budget position, while those
less than 1 indicate over original budget position. In our example, the CPI reading of 0.83
tells us that the earned value for the physically accomplished work is only 83 percent of
the actual cost to accomplish the work. Putting it diﬀerently, for the amount of budget
spent, we accomplished only 83 percent of the work that was planned for that amount
of allocated budget.
Both CPI and SPI cumulative curves enable a very eﬀective tracking of a project, as
illustrated in Figure 10.6. Note that both rate and trend of the indices are crucial here.
Key to it is using the cumulative data, rather than incremental data (weekly or monthly).
Unlike the incremental data, which is prone to ﬂuctuations, the cumulative data tends to
smooth out the ﬂuctuations and is very eﬀective in forecasting the ﬁnal project results,
the focus of our next step.
A quick forecast of the completion date for our example in Figure 10.5d at the end
of March is as follows:
Schedule at Completion (SAC) = original schedule∕SPI
SAC = 150 days∕0.75
SAC = 200 days
This quick method may be risky. As mentioned earlier, an EVA schedule delay con-
dition as in Figure 10.5d has a negative schedule variance, and SPI that is less than 1
is not based on the critical path information and may be deceptive. Therefore, a better

EARNED VALUE ANALYSIS
291
CPI
Conceptual
Design
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
Detailed
Design
Prototype
SPI
CPI = 1  Right on Budget
CPI > 1  Under Budget
CPI < 1  Over Budget
SPI = 1  Right on Schedule
SPI > 1  Ahead of Schedule
SPI < 1  Behind Schedule
Key: CPI: Cost Performance Index
 
SPI: Schedule Performance Index
Figure 10.6: Tracking Cumulative Schedule Performance Index (SPI) and Cost Performance
Index (CPI)
solution is to predict the completion date based on results of the critical path analysis in
combination with EVA schedule variance.
Out of 20+ available formulas to estimate a project’s cost at completion of the
project, we will only look at two that are frequently used.14 Here is the low-end formula
and forecast:
Estimate at Completion (EAC) = budget at complete∕CPI
EAC = 500 hours∕0.83
EAC = 600 hours
This means that at the end of the project we would need 600 hours to get this project
done, a whole 100 hours variance at completion (VAC) over the original budget. Clearly,
this method—called constant cost eﬃciency rate—relies on to-date cost overrun and
projects it to the end of the project. Figure 10.3 includes the prediction of the ﬁnal results
developed by means of the quick forecast for SAC and low-end formula for estimate at
completion (EAC).
A more rigorous method, based on our forecast on both the cost overrun and sched-
ule slippage to date, is called constant cost and schedule eﬃciency rate:
Estimate at Completion (EAC) = (budget at complete)∕(SPI × CPI)
EAC = 500 hours∕0.625
EAC = 800 hours
With this method, we get variance at completion of 800 hours. Some researchers
found that the low-end forecast is a reliable measure of the “minimum” hours, while the
high-end method produces a forecast of the “maximum” hours we may need.15 Their

292
COST MANAGEMENT
claim that the high-end method is the most appropriate forecasting method should be
contrasted with a recent study’s ﬁnding that the low-end method is the most accurate.16
With such diﬀering views using both methods to develop a range of ﬁnal cost projec-
tions, in our case between 600 and 800 hours, makes sense. This is the absolute essence
of prediction—produce a sanity check of the trend and ﬁnal direction of the project (for
major factors impacting the ﬁnal results, see “Three Factors Inﬂuencing the Final Project
Results”). In our example, the prediction is not good; actually, it is very bad, but its ulti-
mate value purely depends on the willingness of management to act or not to act. If the
option is to not act, the EVA is meaningless—it has no value whatsoever. Choosing to
act by developing corrective actions focused on the root causes of the problems is what
EVA is designed for.
Using Earned Value Analysis
If there is one single, most compelling reason to use EVA, it is for its predictive ability, the
ability to reasonably forecast the ﬁnal project results during project execution, most of
the time. We say most of the time because it is only somewhere at the 15 percent com-
pletion point and beyond that a sound, statistically reliable forecast becomes feasible
by completing the following tasks:
■
Forecast the project’s completion date.
■
Forecast the project’s cost at completion of the project.
■
Take corrective actions, if necessary.
EVA is an option for any project, regardless of the industry and size. With the amount
of resources at stake in large projects, a full-scale EVA can be easily justiﬁed. Simpliﬁed
versions of EVA such as cost and achievement analysis (see the Variations section)
are a good ﬁt for smaller projects. In either case, a good measure of customization is
recommended.
Three Factors Influencing the Final
Project Results
1.
Sound project baseline. Only when the scope is well deﬁned, the schedule
is realistic, and the budget is accurate can we expect a realistic forecast
of the ﬁnal project results.
2.
Actual status of the project. The actual status of the project, as quantiﬁed
by SPI and CPI, will be a vital factor in determining what ﬁnal results the
project will end up. Better SPI and CPI rates and trends indicate better
ﬁnal results.
3.
Corrective actions. What will management do if the forecast is poor? Not
believe it and do nothing? Or believe it and aggressively pursue corrective
actions to alter the forecast? This is the moment of truth for management
that will critically inﬂuence the ﬁnal results.

EARNED VALUE ANALYSIS
293
Variations
There are several cost control tools that are conceptually founded on earned value,
although they are not, at least explicitly, referred to as what they really are—a sim-
pliﬁcation of EVA. Two such tools that enjoy a high level of popularity are milestone
analysis and cost and achievement analysis.17 Overall, their appeal is in that they use
simple terminology and straightforward process, which is perhaps why they are so time
eﬃcient. Because of a perception in the PM community that the milestone analysis is
a tool of its own, it is described as a separate tool in the next section in this chapter.
The cost and achievement analysis is brieﬂy covered in the following example and is
illustrated in Figure 10.7.
Based on the scope and schedule for a task, its budget (same as the planned value in
EVA) of resource hours is deﬁned. Multiplying the budget by the percent complete will
produce the achieved value (equivalent to the earned value in EVA). Actual consumed
hours (equivalent to actual cost in EVA) to complete the scope deﬁned by the achieved
value are recorded as well. Values for the budget, achieved, and actual cost are then used
to predict the ﬁnal cost for a task. Doing this on a regular basis for each task, in cumula-
tive terms, allows you to sum them to produce budget, achieved, and actual values for
the whole project and predict the project’s ﬁnal cost. The approach oﬀers a great way to
be proactive in smaller projects.
Beneﬁts
A disciplined use of EVA that is based on a clear understanding of what a company wants
to accomplish with it oﬀers multiple beneﬁts. We begin with how EVA can help handle a
COST AND ACHIEVEMENT ANALYSIS
Project Name:
Estimate Date:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Task
No.
Task Description
Budget
(hours)
Percent
Complete
to Date
Achieved
to Date
(3) X (4)
Actual Cost
to Date
Predicted
Final Cost
(hours)
(6) + (3) – (5)
(5) + (6)
12
Prepare Bill of Materials
and Routing
8.0
40%
3.2
5.0
12.5
Total
312.0
36.4%
113.6
118.0
206.1
Figure 10.7: Example Cost and Achievement Analysis

294
COST MANAGEMENT
fundamental question in today’s project business: Is the project on schedule, behind, or
ahead of schedule? Using the schedule variance and SPI in conjunction with the critical
path method can reliably answer this question. In a similar manner, the CV and CPI play
the crucial role in establishing the true cost position of the project by ﬁnding whether it
is on, over, or under budget.
Each true schedule and cost position may be viewed as a signiﬁcant step, telling
what happened in the project at a speciﬁc point of time of its history. Knowing that they
cannot change the history, proactive project managers use the position to look into the
future and impact it. In particular, research of the past use of EVA indicates that cumu-
lative CPI for larger projects becomes very stable at the 15 percent completion point in
the project.18 Simply, this means that early in the project the CPI exhibits a consistent
pattern, enabling reliable forecasts of the project cost at completion. Similarly, the
schedule performance index combined with the critical path method can be used for
predicting the ﬁnal completion date. Hence, you can periodically ask, “Given my current
performance, what will be my ﬁnal costs and completion date?” The answer oﬀers
trend performance and, if the trend diﬀers from the baseline plan, an early-warning
signal. This may be the greatest beneﬁt of EVA, providing project managers with
the early-warning signal about possible problems in the future and giving them an
opportunity to devise and take needed corrective actions while there is still time to ﬁx
the problems.
The true credibility and, eventually, the value of EVA is rooted in its integration of
project scope, schedule, and cost. The WBS provides the vehicle for the integration of all
project work through its hierarchical tree of deliverables called work elements. For each
element with its scope of work, resources are allocated, schedule determined, and cost
estimated. By measuring current and predicting future performance for each work
element, and aggregating them up the WBS hierarchy, we can arrive at a determination
of the current project performance and prediction of the future performance for the
total project. This integrated and consistent manner of performance measurement
and prediction is a vital improvement compared to the traditional separate schedule
performance and cost performance charts, a fairly typical approach in the industry.19
MILESTONE ANALYSIS
Milestone analysis compares the planned and actual cost performance for milestones
to establish cost and schedule variances as measures of the project’s progress (see
Figure 10.8). A milestone’s cost is planned and tracked on the y-axis, and its schedule
on the x-axis. The gap between the milestone’s planned and actual cost provides the
cost variance. Similarly, the schedule variance is obtained through the diﬀerential
between the planned and actual schedule for the milestone. Both the planned and
actual values are portrayed by cumulative curves. These two curves—as opposed to
EVA’s three curves of plan, actual, and earned values—are made possible by using
milestones as a platform for the integration of scope, schedule, and budget. Although
eﬀective in tracking project progress, milestone analysis is far more eﬀective when used
predictively to estimate the ﬁnal project cost and completion date.

MILESTONE ANALYSIS
295
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
300
600
900
1200
Hours
Budget
Predicted
Schedule
Delay
Projected
Budget
Overrun
1500
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Schedule
Variance
Cost
Variance
Prediction
M5
M5
M4
M3
M2
M1
M1
M2
Report Date
Planned
Actual
Project Timeline
Figure 10.8: Example Milestone Analysis
Performing a Milestone Analysis
The milestone analysis technique integrates project scope, schedule, and cost to
determine overall project performance. The quality of the analysis output is completely
dependent on the quality of the input. Therefore, a fully deﬁned project scope, detailed
project schedule, and a time-phased project budget are all necessary inputs for forming
a solid foundation for eﬀective milestone analysis. Additionally, any changes in the
project scope that have not been fully comprehended in the baseline plan have to
be included before an analysis is performed to create an accurate cost performance
determination.
Set Up and Track Milestones
Using the cost baseline (time-phased budget), draw a planned cost performance curve
that will be the baseline, annotating the milestones (Figure 10.8). This is a cumulative
curve, typically expressed in resource hours or monetary units. A certain number of
hours are budgeted for each milestone, and because of the cumulative nature of the
curve, when a milestone is reached, the cumulative number of hours for the milestone
and all preceding milestones should be consumed.
As the project unfolds, actual cost data are collected and used to draw a cumula-
tive actual cost curve, but what really matters is when a milestone is accomplished and
marked on the actual curve. Hence, all performance is measured on the milestone level,
following a ﬁxed formula of 0/100 EVA measurement method. When the work on a mile-
stone is started, 0 percent of the milestone’s budget is earned, while the completion of
the milestone earns a full 100 percent. Because of the cumulative nature of curves, the
milestone acts as the culmination point of all previous project work, making its perfor-
mance equate with project performance at that point.

296
COST MANAGEMENT
Evaluate Project Results
This step involves comparing actual results of performing the project against its plan.
The goal is to establish the SV and CV, and to identify the cause of the variances, if any.
A good way to prepare is to do a rehearsal with milestone owners, and then to imple-
ment the evaluation in a progress meeting.
Periodic progress meetings instill the discipline and regularity in reviewing strides
that are being made on the execution of a project. They should be called on a regular
basis—once a month for a long project or once a week for a short project, for example.
Each of the milestone owners are required to attend the meeting and report milestone
cost management progress. The project manager should focus on asking the following
ﬁve questions to gain a sense of cost management status:
1.
What is the variance between cost performance baseline and the actual project
cost?
2.
What are the issues causing the variance?
3.
What is the current trend and current prediction of cost completion if we continue
with our current performance?
4.
What new risks have been discovered and may aﬀect the predicted cost at
completion?
5.
What actions should be taken to bring cost performance back in line with the
baseline?
In our example from Figure 10.8 the variances are as follows:
Schedule Variance = Planned −Actual
SV = 2 months −3 months
SV = −1 month
and
Cost Variance = Planned −Actual
CV = 600 hours −900 hours
CV = −300 hours
While the negative variance indicates that the project has fallen behind its plan, a
positive variance means the project is ahead of its plan. No variance implies the per-
formance is right on plan. Therefore, in our example, the project is one month late and
300 hours over the budget.
Predict Final Results
Certainly, the most important and also the toughest step is the prediction of the ﬁnal
results. It is important because it enables a predictive look at the direction and trend of
theproject—whereareourﬁnalcostandcompletiondategoingtoendup?Theabsence
of formulas for prediction such as those used in EVA makes the prediction an intuitive,
challenging assignment, typically performed in the progress meeting. Such an exercise

CHOOSING YOUR COST MANAGEMENT TOOLS
297
is very similar to one described in detail in the Milestone Prediction Chart section in
Chapter 9. In particular, as the owner of the milestone describes its actual progress,
potential variance from the baseline, and issues causing the variance, owners of depen-
dent milestones evaluate the ripple eﬀect of the milestone on subsequent milestones.
The ripple eﬀect is analyzed in the context of the critical path schedule, indicating the
dependencies between milestones and related tasks. As a result of the analysis, predic-
tions of milestones’ cost and completion dates are made, all the way to the end of the
project. If the ﬁnal results are not favorable, corrective actions are developed to alter the
trend and set the project back on track.
Using the Milestone Analysis
Milestone analysisisa good candidate for both smaller and larger projects. With itsvisual
power and little time to develop, the analysis serves well the needs of projects with
smaller budgets. In larger projects, its primary rationale for use is its ability to supply
a summary view of the project status to high-level managers, focusing on major project
milestones.
With a bottom-up project plan already in place, a well-versed project team should
take no longer than 30 to 45 minutes to perform a milestone analysis that includes ﬁve
or six milestones. As the number of milestones increases, so will the necessary time for
the analysis.
Beneﬁts
Crucial to the beneﬁts of the milestone analysis is an understanding that it is a sim-
pliﬁcation of EVA. Using a milestone as a precisely deﬁned scope of work, the analy-
sis integrates cost and schedule with the scope, eliminating the need for the earned
value curve. As a result, the milestone analysis includes only two curves, as opposed to
EVA’s three. This makes it more attractive and easier to use than EVA, while providing
some of the values oﬀered by EVA. In particular, milestone analysis establishes cost and
schedule position, indicates performance trend and detects early-warning signals; inte-
grates scope, cost, and schedule; and facilitates management by exception. Most often,
these beneﬁts are conﬁned to smaller projects and larger projects that use the milestone
analysis for schedule performance analysis.
Additionally, the graphical appeal and simplicity of the tool makes it easy to visu-
ally discern the schedule and cost variances, along with the predicted line of future
milestone performance. This is especially appealing to top-level managers, who do not
havethetimetounderstandthepotentiallyoverwhelmingamountofcostmanagement
details that can exist on a project.
CHOOSING YOUR COST MANAGEMENT TOOLS
The tools presented in this chapter are designed for diﬀerent project situations. Most
project managers ﬁnd it useful to employ one to three cost management tools, and face

298
COST MANAGEMENT
Table 10.4: A Summary Comparison of Cost Control Tools
Situation
Cost
Management
Plan
Budget
Consumption
Chart
Earned
Value
Analysis
Milestone
Analysis
Small and simple projects
✓
✓
✓
Large and complex projects
✓
✓
✓
✓
Formal progress reviews
✓
✓
Informal progress reviews
✓
✓(simplified
version)
✓
Short time to train how to use the
tool
✓
✓
✓
Focuses on exceptions
✓
Provides early-warning indication
✓
✓
Integrates scope, cost, and
schedule
✓
✓
Provides a single control system
for all management levels in all
projects
✓
✓
Takes little time to apply
✓
✓
✓(simplified
version)
✓
Uses dollars or hours
✓
✓
✓
Summary detail needed
✓
✓
✓
✓
Uses two curves
✓
✓
Uses three curves
✓
Displays trend
✓
✓
Provides built-in predictive
approach
✓
Little time available for cost
management
✓
✓
✓
the problem of eliminating the other tool options. Project managers living under time
pressures often ask, “Given my project situation, which are more appropriate to use?”
To decide, refer to Table 10.4, which lists various project situations and identiﬁes which
tools are geared for each situation. Consider this table as a starting point, and create your
own custom project situation analysis and tools of choice to ﬁt your particular project
management style.
References
1.
Layer, Alexander, Erik Ten Brinke, Fred Van Houten, Hubert Kals, and Siegmar Haa-
sis. “Recent and future trends in cost estimation”. International Journal of Computer
Integrated Manufacturing, 15 (6): 499–510, 2002.

REFERENCES
299
2.
Fleming, Q. W., and J. M. Koppelman. Earned Value Project Management, 4th ed.
(Newton Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2010).
3.
Portney, Stanley E. ProjectManagementForDummies, 3rd ed. (Indianapolis, IN: John
Wiley & Sons, 2010).
4.
Fleming, Q. W., and J. M. Koppelman. “Earned Value for the Masses.” PM Network
16 (7): 29–32, 2001.
5.
Hatﬁeld, M. A. “The Case for Earned Value.” PM Network 10 (12): 25–27, 2006.
6.
Ten Brinke, Erik Lutters, Tom Streppel, and Hubert Kals. “Cost Estimation
Architecture of Integrated Cost Control Based on Information Management.”
International Journal of Computer Integrated Manufacturing 17 (6): 534–545, 2004.
7.
Hayes, B., and Jim Miller. “Using Earned Value Analysis for Better Project Manage-
ment.” Construction Management & Economics 16 (1): 2002.
8.
Fleming and Koppelman, 2010.
9.
Zwikael, O., S. Globerson, and T. Raz. “Evaluation of Models for Forecasting the Final
Cost of a Project.” Project Management Journal 31 (1): 53–57, 2000.
10.
Hatﬁeld, 2006.
11.
Kerzner, H. R. Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling, and
Controlling, 11th ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013).
12.
Singletary, N. “What’s the Value of Earned Value?” PM Network 10 (12), 28–30, 1996.
13.
Fleming and Koppelman, 2010.
14.
Portney, 2010.
15.
Hatﬁeld, 2006.
16.
Zwikael, Globerson, and Raz, 2000.
17.
Lock, D. Project Planner (Hunts, England: Gower Publishing, 1990).
18.
Johnson, Cheryl. “Implementing an ANSI/EIA-748-Compliant Earned Value
Management System.” Contract Management 46 (4): 29–34, 2006.
19.
Christensen, D. S., and S. R. Heise. “Cost Performance Index Stability.” National
Contract Management Association Journal. 25:17–22, 2011.


11
AGILE PROJECT EXECUTION
Contributed by
Peerasit Patanakul
James Henry
Jeﬀrey A. Leach
A
gile is a form of adaptive project execution, heavily used in software develop-
ment as an alternative to traditional approaches that emphasize the sequen-
tial or linear process starting from requirements gathering, planning, design-
ing, software code writing, testing, and implementation. Alternative to a sequential pro-
cess, agile methodologies emphasize an iterative workﬂow and incremental delivery of
project outcomes in short iterations (see “Value Proposition of Agile Methodologies”).
Several popular agile methodologies include extreme programming (XP), Dynamic Sys-
tems Development Method (DSDM), feature-driven development (FDD), crystal, lean
software development, agile uniﬁed process (AUP), and scrum.
Extreme programming, for example, was created to eﬀectively address projects that
involve requirement changes. Instead of assembling large, separately developed mod-
ules, XP relies on continual integration. XP projects are divided into iterations, approxi-
mately one to three weeks long to produce a project outcome (usually in the form of a
software release) that is fully tested. These iterations represent the development, inte-
gration, and thorough testing of a small amount of new capability. A planning meeting
is held at the beginning of each iteration to determine the content of the iteration and
to facilitate the incorporation of the changing requirements.
Four values guiding XP are communication, simplicity, feedback, and courage.
These four values drive 12 practices that dictate how programmers should carry out
their daily jobs. For instance, some of the practices are using user stories in the planning
process, working on small releases, implementing test-driven development, focusing
on design simplicity, using pair programming, having collective code ownership, and
ensuring continuous integration.1
301

302
AGILE PROJECT EXECUTION
Similar to XP, the main features of DSDM include user involvement, iterative and
incremental development, increased delivery frequency, integrated delivery frequency,
integrated test at each phase, and fulﬁlling requirements.
FDD is also an iterative and incremental software development process focusing on
feature (client-valued functionality).
Scrum is another agile methodology that has been widely used to manage project
execution activities. This chapter focuses on tools and techniques used in scrum
framework.
Value Proposition of Agile Methodologies
Many practitioners have false expectations of agile methodologies and this can
lead to tension between stakeholders. It is incorrect to equate agile method-
ologies with simply being “faster and cheaper,” as it leads to misconceptions.
Many customers think that because an agile methodology is used, they can ask
for anything and the project team can deliver it in two to four weeks—this is
not particularly true. Customers also seem to believe that their projects should
be completed faster and sooner than they would have been completed under
a waterfall methodology—this is not particularly true either.
Being “faster” is not the value of agile methodologies. The true value is the
delivery of customer-usable features earlier in the project life cycle. The focus
of any agile methodology is on shorter iterations of work effort to produce
project outcomes that:
■
Deliver the realization of business value earlier in the project cycle than
waterfall approaches may. This could give the customers the opportunity
to monetize projects earlier.
■
Give the customers the opportunity to prioritize work. There are many cases
where an agile project is 80 or 90 percent complete, and the customers
decide that the product is good enough as is and drop the last 10 percent of
the requirements. Sometimes, the customers still want the last 10 percent
of the requirements but decide to wait to complete the original scope of
work at a later date as there are other higher priority projects.
■
In some cases, allow customers to modify requirements with less impact
on cost and schedule.
■
Reduce project risks by allowing the customers to see the tangible progress
of the project. This enables the customers to fully understand what is being
delivered and conﬁrm that what is being built is the same as what is needed.
SCRUM BASICS
The scrum framework provides a structure of roles, meetings, rules, and artifacts that
project teams utilize during software development.2 Within this framework, a project
is broken down into self-organizing teams (scrums) of about six to nine members.

SCRUM BASICS
303
Product backlog
Prioritized product features,
according to the needs and
wants of the customers
Sprint backlog
Assigned features that
a scrum team decide
to work on
Backlog items
Expanded by the team
2 - 4 weeks sprint
New functionality
Demonstrated at
the end of sprint
Daily scrum
meeting
Figure 11.1: The Scrum Workflow
Source: Adapted from Eric J. Braude and Michael E. Bernstein. Software Engineering, 2nd ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, 2011): 72.
Each team focuses on a self-contained area of work.3 To develop software, a list of
customer wants and needs is created, referred to as a product backlog (see Figure 11.1).
Scrum uses ﬁxed-length iterations, called sprints, which are typically two to four weeks
long.4 While in a sprint, scrum teams are responsible for taking on a set of features
from the backlog and developing a deployable set of features that is properly tested.5
The team is given full authority to successfully complete the sprint. Every day, an
approximately 15-minute daily scrum meeting is organized to assess the status of the
sprint, report on problems, and identify future tasks. At the end of a sprint, a customer
demonstration is conducted. The leftover features and new tasks are gathered, a new
backlog is created, and a new sprint begins.
Alternative to traditional project approaches, scrum is an iterative approach that
allows the teams to develop a subset of high-value features as early as possible to incor-
porate early feedback from the customers. In essence, the scrum framework emphasizes
empirical feedback, team self-management, and striving to build properly tested prod-
uct increments within short iterations.6 Within the scrum management framework, par-
ticipants hold several key roles. They are, for example, product owner, scrum team, and
scrum master.
■
The product owner represents the customer of the project. Based on the product
requirements, the product owner provides customer-centric items (user stories) to
the team, prioritizes the items, and adds additional items to the product backlog.
The product owner is accountable for ensuring the value of the project output to
the business. New products will be promoted into production, only after the product
owner accepts the output from the scrum teams after the sprint demonstration.
■
The scrum team typically consists of six to nine members across disciplines.
These members are responsible for analyzing, designing, developing, testing,

304
AGILE PROJECT EXECUTION
communicating, and documenting product increments at the end of each sprint.
The team is generally self-organized but has some interaction with the project
management oﬃce to provide project reporting.
■
A scrum master is responsible for removing obstacles for the team to be able to
deliver the project outcome. He or she is not the team manager. A scrum master
helps enforce the rules to ensure that the scrum process is used as intended.
The following sections introduce six tools and techniques for use in a PM Toolbox
that are frequently utilized in a scrum management framework. They are the product
backlog and sprint backlog, release planning, daily scrum meeting, sprint task board,
sprint burn down chart, and sprint retrospective meeting.
PRODUCT BACKLOG AND SPRINT BACKLOG
Therearetwocommontypesofbacklogsthatareusedinthescrummanagementframe-
work: the product backlog and the sprint backlog. The product backlog is a prioritized
listing of all items that may be developed at some point in the future. These items rep-
resent the customers’ requirements. There is no commitment for when these items will
be assigned to a team to be worked on. There is also no guarantee that these items will
ever be assigned to a team.
A sprint backlog represents a list of items that a scrum team has taken from the
product backlog and has committed to developing during the next sprint.
Information on the Backlogs
The product backlog is visible to any stakeholder and is composed of customer-centric
features—descriptions of the desired product from the point of view of the customer or
user. These could be in the form of user stories or use cases.7 These features also have a
level of priority assigned to them to create a forced-ranked list of desired functionalities.
However, the priority of the items can be changed over time. There are no tasks listed
on the product backlog. See Figure 11.2 for an example of a product backlog for a team
that is developing a travel booking web site (the product).
Asprintbacklogcontainsspeciﬁctasksthatwillbeperformedduringasprintinaddi-
tion to the customer-centric features, from the product backlog, that are associated with
those tasks. Items on the sprint backlog do not need to be prioritized because they have
been committed to for a particular sprint release.
The sprint backlog is visible to the project team such that they can use it as a refer-
ence during daily scrum meetings. Figure 11.3 illustrates an example of a sprint backlog
iftheteamdecidedtoworkontheﬁrstandthirdstoriesfromtheproductbacklogshown
in Figure 11.2.
Populating Backlogs
Any team member, regardless of their role, can add items to the product backlog.
However, the product backlog is owned by the product owner, who can assign priority

PRODUCT BACKLOG AND SPRINT BACKLOG
305
Product Backlog
Stories that may be worked
Priority
As a user, I’d like to sort flights by price
so I can see the cheapest ones first.
As a user, I’d like to sort flights by
number of stops & see non-stops first.
As a user, I’d like to sort flights by airline
so I can see the carriers in alphabetical
order.
1
2
3
Figure 11.2: Example Product Backlog
Sprint Backlog
Stories to be worked on during sprint
Associated task list
As a user, I’d like to sort flights by price so I 
can see the cheapest ones first.
As a user, I’d like to sort flights by airline so I
can see the carriers in alphabetical order.
Query the flight in formation from the
temporary table, sorted by price
Display the flights on the screen in order
from cheapest to most expensive
Query the flight information from the
temporary table, sorted by carrier name
Display the flights on the screen in
alphabetical order
Figure 11.3: Example Spring Backlog

306
AGILE PROJECT EXECUTION
to the items or remove the items from the backlog.8 As already discussed, the prod-
uct backlog item (PBI) is often written in a user story form with more emphasis on the
“what” than on the “how” of a customer-centric feature. For example, a story that may
be written for a team that is developing a travel booking web site, could be: “As a user,
I’d like to sort ﬂights by price so that I can see the cheapest ones ﬁrst.” Prioritization of
the items in the product backlog is done by the product owner. Well-written user stories
will usually conform to the following common format: As a <who>, I want to <what>,
so that <why>.
The example given provides the ‘who’, ‘what’, and why of the story: As a user, I want
to sort ﬂights by price so that I can see the cheapest ones ﬁrst.
It is important that PBIs go through a reﬁnement process as it can be found that
some PBIs are too large and not clearly deﬁned.9 To do so, the team organizes a back-
log reﬁnement meeting that they can use as a session for dividing and clarifying large
PBIs, estimating the amount of eﬀort that they would spend to complete the PBIs and
providing necessary technical information to help the product owner prioritize PBIs.10
It is important that every item in the backlog must be assigned a priority, and the prior-
ity of each item must be diﬀerent. No two items are allowed to have the same level of
priority assigned. Estimated by the team, the level of eﬀort to complete the item can be
associated with each PBI.
Sprint backlogs, on the other hand, must be populated by each individual
scrum team during the sprint planning meeting, discussed later. When populating a
sprint backlog, teams look to the product backlog to ﬁnd items to be worked on.11
The highest-priority items on the product backlog are considered ﬁrst for addition
to the sprint backlog. There are instances wherein there are constraints that prevent
a high priority product backlog item from being added to the sprint backlog. Those
constraints could include, for example, some dependencies that need to be satis-
ﬁed before the work can be taken on. It is for this reason that the highest priority
items are not always added to the next sprint backlog. However, it is important to
note that the sprint backlog usually contains the highest-priority items from the
product backlog.
The sprint backlog is created during sprint planning sessions.12 All team members,
including the product owner and the scrum master, work together to agree to what
will be worked on during the next sprint. The team considers their capacity, the
constraints to development, and the priority of items when creating the backlog.
Figure 11.4 shows the relationship between the product backlog, sprint backlog, and
sprint planning meeting.
Beneﬁts
The product backlog allows for a close alignment between what the project teams are
working on and what the business sees as the most important items for delivering busi-
ness value. The ability to list everything that is desired, along with the ability to priori-
tize and reprioritize the work as necessary, enables the business to have more strategic
agility to meet the challenges that they face.

RELEASE PLANNING
307
Sprint Life Cycle
Product Backlog
Sprint Backlog
Input
Output
Sprint Planning
Meeting
Daily Scrum
Sprint Review
Meeting
Sprint Retrospective
Meeting
Figure 11.4: Product Backlog and Spring Backlog in Sprint Life Cycle
The creation of the sprint backlog necessitates engagement and collaboration
between the business and project teams. It results in a common understanding
between all parties on what the team has committed to delivering.
Both backlogs are simple to create and easy to read and understand by all stake-
holders involved, but the use of the backlogs may come with some initial challenges
(see “Overcoming Initial Challenges”). When used eﬀectively, however, the backlogs
provide a road map for how the team should execute their overall project objectives.
Overcoming Initial Challenges
Challenge 1: The knowledge gap. Product owners may struggle to fully deﬁne
work and may require the expertise of team members to help address items
like deﬁning technical requirements.
Challenge 2: Initial difﬁculty with prioritization. Product owners may ﬁnd it hard
to prioritize the product backlog items at ﬁrst; but once the product backlog
is established, they will ﬁnd it easier to add new stories and adjust priorities
as appropriate.
RELEASE PLANNING
A release is a group of sprints. In developing complex and large (enterprise) systems,
multiple scrum teams are needed. The teams often group sprints into releases to
allow for planning. The number of sprints in a release is determined by the project
organization, but is typically six to eight sprints in duration.
Release planning becomes a valuable technique when systems with interdepen-
dencies are being developed by multiple teams. In developing large systems, release

308
AGILE PROJECT EXECUTION
planning enables project managers and other stakeholders to have greater visibility into
the expected completion of future milestones. In addition, the release planning exercise
is an opportunity for collaboration between project teams, application teams, and other
stakeholders within the organization to occur.
The Release-Planning Event
The release-planning event involves various stakeholders as it is typical for develop-
ing large systems.13 Often, project management and business leaders, as well as all the
members of the impacted sprint teams are in attendance. The event is typically sched-
uled for two full days. For the ﬁrst release, the release-planning event takes place at the
beginning of the release. For subsequent releases, the event takes place at the end of
each release. Figure 11.5 shows the life cycle of a four-week release.
Release Life Cycle
Release
Planning
Event
The Release
Planning Event
for the next
release takes
place during
the HIP sprint.
It is one of the
items on the
Sprint Backlog
Sprint 4 (HIP Sprint) Life Cycle
Sprint Planning
Meeting
Daily Scrum
Sprint Review
Meeting
Sprint Retrospective
Meeting
Sprint 3 Life Cycle
Sprint Planning
Meeting
Daily Scrum
Sprint Review
Meeting
Sprint Retrospective
Meeting
Sprint 2 Life Cycle
Sprint Planning
Meeting
Daily Scrum
Sprint Review
Meeting
Sprint Retrospective
Meeting
Sprint 1 Life Cycle
Sprint Planning
Meeting
Daily Scrum
Sprint Review
Meeting
Sprint Retrospective
Meeting
Figure 11.5: The Release-Planning Event

RELEASE PLANNING
309
Initial Draft Release Plan
Before the interteam collaboration can begin, each scrum team must work together to
create their own initial draft release plan. This involves assigning product backlog items
to the sprints included in the release. For example, if a team is involved in a ﬁve-sprint
release, they would consider dependencies and capacity when putting together a plan
for which product backlog items they will develop in each of the next four sprints.
The team would then display this plan for everyone to see (Figure 11.6). The last sprint
is reserved as a HIP (hardening, innovation, and planning) sprint. No product backlog
items are planned for this sprint during release planning. HIP sprints are discussed later
in this section.
There are some risks involved when attempting to plan multiple sprints in advance.
Prioritiescanchange,requirementscanchange,andtheeﬀortneededtocreatethesolu-
tions could turn out to be greater than anticipated. To mitigate these risks, contingency
time is built into the release plan. This is accomplished by progressively reducing the
amount of scope planned for each sprint in the release. A common method for this is as
follows. In a six-week sprint, the amount of product backlog items assigned to the ﬁrst
sprint represents 100 percent of the team capacity. The second sprint assigned prod-
uct backlog items that should use 80 percent of the team capacity. The third sprint is
ﬁlled to 60 percent capacity, and the fourth and ﬁfth sprints are ﬁlled to 40 percent
and 20 percent capacity, respectively. The result is that the team is able to commit to
deliveronsomelonger-termbusinessneeds,whilealsomaintainingtheagilitytohandle
changes in scope and direction.
Final Release Plans
After all the scrum teams have created their draft release plans, the plans are visibly
displayed either physically or electronically in a way that allows for each scrum team
Team 1
(Bulldogs)
Team 2
(Poodles)
Teams
Sprint 1
Sprint 2
Sprint 3
Sprint 4
HIP Sprint
Release Plan
Team 3
(Pugs)
Story
Dependency
Figure 11.6: Release Plans Developed by Several Scrum Teams

310
AGILE PROJECT EXECUTION
the opportunity to review the release plans of all the other teams. Time is set aside
for the teams to review each other’s plans. During this time, the teams interact and
are encouraged to ask questions to get a full understanding of what each team plans
to work on during the next release. Through these discussions, each team member
looks to ﬁnd any dependencies between the planned activities of the teams. Once
the dependencies between the teams have been identiﬁed, the teams discuss how to
coordinate their activities. The draft release plans are then updated to account for any
needed changes.
Time for another review of the release plans is given to the teams after they’ve
updated their draft release plans. The process of review and update will continue until
all the plans are believed to be coordinated properly. Before the release plans can be
ﬁnalized, every member of every scrum team is asked to commit to the plan. If anyone,
for any reason, is uncomfortable with any of the release plans, that person will explain
their concerns and the entire group will discuss what changes should or should not be
made. The release-planning event is not complete until everyone agrees to commit to
the plan.
HIP Sprint
The HIP sprint is the last sprint of each release. This sprint is an opportunity for the teams
to ensure that they are on solid footing for the next release. Hardening (H) refers to activ-
ities that reduce technical debt, such as system wide performance testing, infrastructure
upgrades, bringing code up to architectural guidelines, and updating necessary docu-
mentation. Innovation (I) is encouraged during the HIP sprint. The agile teams can use
this time to follow-up on any ideas they may have that would beneﬁt the system. The
HIP sprint is also the time to begin planning (P) the next release. The release planning
event, for the next release, takes place during this sprint.
Release Planning versus Sprint Planning
It is important to note that the release planning does not replace the sprint planning.
At the beginning of each sprint, the product owner and team hold a sprint planning
meeting to discuss and select the product backlog items the team will develop to
create a working capability during the sprint.14 Traditionally, there are two artifacts
that result from a sprint planning meeting. The ﬁrst artifacts are the sprint goals that
are written by the team and describe what the team expects to get accomplished
during the sprint. The second artifact is the sprint backlog, which is the result of the
sprint-planning meeting.
As discussed earlier, while the product owner is responsible for indicating which
items are the most important to the customers, the team is responsible for selecting
the amount of work that they can implement. Toward the end of the sprint-planning
meeting, the team decomposes the selected items into an initial list of sprint tasks and
makes the ﬁnal commitment to perform the work.
While the focus of sprint planning is on each sprint, the focus of release planning
is on the overall release consisting of multiple sprints.15 During some releases, the
team could decide to move product backlog items into earlier releases because they

THE DAILY SCRUM MEETING
311
have the capacity to do so. They may also decide to rearrange the order of items
or even reduce their priority and drop them. Having identiﬁed the dependencies
during release planning, the team can communicate these changes to the other teams
as appropriate.
Beneﬁts
Release planning gives the scrum teams the ability to plan some longer-range activi-
ties. The release-planning event increases the collaboration among teams and allows
for dependencies between teams to be identiﬁed early and accounted for in the plans.
A successful release-planning event can facilitate the alignment between the overall
organizational goals as they progress and the individual team goals.
Release planning is also eﬀective in identifying cross-team dependencies that could
block or delay execution progress. By identifying dependencies early and accounting
for them during release planning, it lessens the chances of unanticipated delays during
development.
THE DAILY SCRUM MEETING
A daily scrum meeting is a fast paced meeting that begins once the sprint planning
meeting has been ﬁnalized and agreed upon by the entire team (see Figure 11.7).
The primary purpose for a daily scrum meeting is to answer the following three
questions16:
1.
What was completed yesterday?
2.
What impediments were encountered that blocked me from being eﬀective?
3.
And, ﬁnally, what is planned for today or prior to the next scrum meeting?
By having each team member answer these questions, the team now has a com-
plete picture of what’s happening, the overall sprint progress toward its goals, and any
modiﬁcation that needs to be made to the upcoming day’s work.
Within the daily scrum meeting, the scrum team will leverage a type of task board as
a way of communicating sprint progress. A task board is a very eﬀective method of illus-
trating the current state of the sprint backlog over time, discussed later in this chapter.
Sprint 1 Life Cycle
Sprint Planning
Meeting
Daily Scrum
Sprint Review
Meeting
Sprint Retrospective
Meeting
Figure 11.7: The Daily Scrum in the Sprint Life Cycle

312
AGILE PROJECT EXECUTION
At a high level, a task board contains four main pillars representing user stories or prod-
uct backlog items, tasks to do, task in progress, and task completed; see the next section
for more detail.
Organizing a Daily Scrum Meeting
Adailyscrummeetingistypicallyheldinthesamelocationandtime,eachandeveryday.
The meeting is most eﬀective when conducted in the morning as it helps set the objec-
tives for the upcoming day. The meeting usually lasts 15 minutes or less, in which each
team member will update the team on what was completed yesterday, impediments
encountered, and, ﬁnally, what they plan to do for today. Typically, the scrum master
will begin the meeting by starting with the person to their left and working clockwise
around the room until all stakeholders have reported their status updates. Team mem-
bers should focus on answering the three questions above with brevity in mind and
avoid discussions not pertaining to the agenda. It is common that all team members
stand up during the meeting, as sitting down has a tendency to extend the duration of
the meeting.
Participants
A daily scrum meeting involves the entire scrum team as well as the scrum master.17
Theproductownerisconsideredoptionalandisn’trequiredtoattendeveryscrummeet-
ing. In order to have an eﬀective daily scrum meeting, it’s important that all “partici-
pating” scrum team members come well prepared to quickly discuss the work they are
responsible for completing.
It is important that the scrum master keeps the meeting on time as to avoid any
distractions from the meeting agenda. Meetings that stray from the agenda will more
than likely run over the allotted time, begin to distract team members from answering
their three questions, and even steer the meeting into sidebar discussions around ﬁxing
problems. When these types of distractions occur, it’s important that the scrum master
brings the meeting back to focus as quickly as possible (see “Requirements for Eﬀective
Daily Scrum Meetings”).
Beneﬁts
The primary beneﬁt of a daily scrum meeting is to provide each scrum team member an
opportunity to communicate the status of their sprint backlog items, while keeping the
team in sync on how things are going. In addition, by having a daily meeting it provides
the team an opportunity for small course correction within each sprint as needed.
A daily scrum is a proactive activity that helps self-organizing teams get better over
time by building trust among team members. Similar to a sprint retrospective meeting
(discussed later in the chapter), each meeting is based on the concepts of teamwork,
empowerment, and collaboration through the use of open dialog and transparency.
A daily scrum meeting is also a powerful technique for communicating information
across a team. Having insight into each team member’s area of focus allows each mem-
ber to see the big picture while mitigating down stream risk.

SPRINT TASK BOARD
313
Requirements for Effective Daily
Scrum Meetings
1.
Resources. A daily scrum meeting requires that the scrum team be ded-
icated to attending the meeting. Dedicating too many resources to a
daily meeting can negatively impact the overall velocity of a project if
not managed properly.
2.
Preparation and focus. A lack of preparation for the daily scrum meeting
can deﬁnitely impact the overall value of the meeting. Team members
should be prepared to answer the primary three questions below while
dedicating the necessary time after each meeting to address any gaps or
concerns:
■
What work was completed the previous day?
■
What work will be proposed for today?
■
Did the team face any problems or impediments?
3.
Time. A daily scrum meeting needs to adhere to the time allotted (15 min-
utes or less). If meetings are running late on a regular basis, the scrum
master should step in to ensure that each team member is sticking to the
deﬁned agenda. This can be done by holding discussions after the scrum
meeting to address any areas that may be pushing the meeting over the
allotted time.
SPRINT TASK BOARD
For a scrum team, a sprint task board is used to organize tasks into categories based
upon their stage of completion. Sticky notes, with tasks written on them, are typically
placed on the board to give an easy visual representation of the work being done and
the progress made towards completing those tasks. The task board is often referred to
as the “kanban board.”
A very simple example of a task board could have four columns labeled “User Story,”
“Tasks to Do,” “Tasks in Progress,” and “Tasks Completed” (see Figure 11.8). At the begin-
ning of a sprint, all of the tasks would be in the “Tasks to Do” column. As soon as a team
member begins to work on a task, the sticky note with that task would be moved to
the “Tasks in Progress” column. Upon completion of the task, the sticky note would be
moved to the “Tasks Completed” column. At the end of a sprint, all the tasks should be
in the “Tasks Completed” column.
Using the Sprint Task Board
Sprint task boards are not limited to only four columns as illustrated in Figure 11.8.
Adding more meaningful columns could give sprint teams a more precise visual status.
A task board may also contain columns such as “Tasks to Do,” “In Design,” “In Coding,”
and “In Testing,” or any other combination of columns that will show the tasks moving

314
AGILE PROJECT EXECUTION
Task Board
User Story
As a user, I’d like to...
Tasks  To Do
Display the flights...
As a user, I’d like to...
Tas  in Progressks
Query the flight...
Tasks  Completed
Create database...
Figure 11.8: Example Sprint Task Board
Task Board
Tasks To Do
Display the flights...
User Story
As a user, I’d like to...
As a user, I’d like to...
In Testing
Query the flight...
Tasks Completed
Create database...
In Design
In Coding
Figure 11.9: Variation of a Sprint Task Board
through the sprint life cycle. Figure 11.9 shows a sprint task board that was created to
use the columns mentioned previously.
It is also recommended that dependencies between tasks be noted on the sticky
notes and that the team member working on the task adds his or her name as the task
is moved to new columns. This will allow for easier communication and collaboration
when the need arises. As illustrated in Figure 11.10, the task “Display the ﬂights on the
screen in order from cheapest to most expensive” is a successor of “Query the ﬂight
information from the temporary table, sorted by price.” Once the task began, Jeﬀrey
Leach, who was responsible for design, added his name to the task. When the design
was completed, James Henry, who is responsible for coding, added his name to the task
and crossed out the name of the designer.
Beneﬁts
The use of task boards makes the progress of the team visible to everyone. It will also
facilitate team coordination that could occur when the team works on a series of tasks.

THE SPRINT BURN DOWN CHART
315
TASK
Display the flights on the screen in order
from cheapest to most expensive
Dependency: Task – Query the flight
information from the temporary table,
sorted by price
Team member responsible:
Design–Jeffrey–Leach
Coding–James–Henry
Figure 11.10: Sample Sticky Note for a Task
If the sprint task board is used properly, everyone should know who is assigned to each
task, dependencies between tasks are properly accounted for, and there should be no
duplication of eﬀort.
Additionally, a sprint task board is a simple and easy way to manage the ﬂow of
work and information throughout a sprint. It visually represents each team member’s
work and progress over the duration of a sprint. Having the task board available for team
members to consume it now allows team members to know what other team members
are working on.
THE SPRINT BURN DOWN CHART
A sprint burn down chart generally displays the total quantity of work or tasks need-
ing to be completed versus the time allotted to complete a sprint (or an entire release
consisting of several sprints). The chart is a simple and easy to use tool that provides
relatively accurate estimates of the overall progress of a sprint or release progress.18
Having tasks broken down into suﬃcient detail is a necessary prerequisite for
creating a burn down chart. This is normally completed during the sprint-planning
phase where each task has been forecasted based on the hours it will take to complete
the work. These estimates are normally determined by the entire team during the
planning meeting.
Developing a Sprint Burn Down Chart
An example of the sprint burn down chart is shown in Figure 11.11. While the chart is
rather simplistic, it is very beneﬁcial to the team when utilizing it on a daily basis.
On the chart, the x-axis represents the amount of time that the team has deﬁned
for the entire sprint (20 days in this example). The y-axis represents the total amount
of time (in hours or days) the team will take to complete all of the given tasks for that
sprint(120hoursinthisexample).Sincetheamountofworktobecompletewilldecrease

316
AGILE PROJECT EXECUTION
Start
118
100 100
96
96
96
80
61
60
60
60
53
40
35
26
26
26
7
0
End
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Sprint Timeline (Days)
Sum of Tasks (Hours or Days)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Trendline of tasks remaining
Actual tasks remaining
Figure 11.11: Example Sprint Burn Down Chart
over time, the general trend in the chart is to burn down to a point where zero work
remains. A trend line can be calculated and drawn to illustrate projected outcomes, in
other words, when work might be completed.
Using a Sprint Burn Down Chart
A sprint burn down chart is updated on a daily basis by each of the task owners.
Collecting and communicating this information can be done by using many diﬀerent
techniques. Table 11.1 is a simple table that associates tasks to a user story along with
a status, owner, projected hours, and remaining hours. In this scenario, after spending
an entire day working on Task B, the business analyst (BA) has determined that another
ﬁve hours of work will be required to complete the tasking. The BA then updates this
information using the “Remaining Hours” ﬁeld located in the table.
After each task has been updated, the data is then aggregated and plotted for
that day to determine whether or not the sprint was progressing as planned (see
Figure 11.12). If the “Actual Tasks Remaining” line was above the “Trend Line of Tasks
Remaining,” this means the sprint is progressing at a slower pace than expected and
may not complete the deﬁned scope of work. However, if the “Actual Tasks Remaining”
Table 11.1: Task Tracking Table
User Story
Task # Task Description
Status
Owner
Projected
Hrs.
Remaining
Hrs.
Story 1
A
Develop requirements
Closed
SME
8
0
B
Coordinate with
customers
In Work BA
6
5
C
Code module 1
Open
Developer 2
10
10

THE SPRINT RETROSPECTIVE MEETING
317
Start
118
100 100
96
96
96
80
61
60
60
60
0
End
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
Sprint Timeline (Days)
Sum of Tasks (Hours or Days)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Trend line of tasks remaining
Actual tasks remaining
Figure 11.12: Plotting Work in Progress
line was below the “Trend Line of Tasks Remaining,” this means the sprint is moving at
a faster rate than projected and may be able to ﬁnish ahead of schedule.
Beneﬁts
The sprint burn down chart provides each team member a visual representation of the
total estimated time for all tasks to be completed (hours or days) versus the time per-
mitted to complete a sprint or release. It allows team members to actively estimate the
time it takes to complete each of their tasks. From there, data is aggregated so that team
members can determine whether or not they are under- or over-executing across the
sprint or release.
The chart also creates value by providing a powerful way to communicate the overall
status of the sprint or release across the entire team. If the project starts to deviate in a
positive or negative fashion from the trend line, the team will have this information to
help mitigate potential risk in the future. Throughout this process, the chart facilitates
eﬀective communications across the team in a transparent fashion for all team members
to consume.
Finally, a sprint burn down chart allows team members to make decisions based on
accurate data resulting in informative decisions being made.
THE SPRINT RETROSPECTIVE MEETING
A sprint retrospective meeting follows the sprint review meeting and is typically the last
step in the sprint life cycle. Upon completion of the sprint retrospective meeting, a new
sprint is created beginning with a sprint-planning meeting, followed by daily scrums, a
sprint review meeting, and another sprint retrospective meeting (see Figure 11.13).

318
AGILE PROJECT EXECUTION
Sprint Life Cycle
Sprint Planning
Meeting
 
Daily Scrum
Sprint Review
Meeting
Sprint Retrospective
Meeting
Figure 11.13: Sprint Retrospective Meeting in Sprint Life Cycle
The primary reason for a sprint retrospective meeting is to create a dialog providing
the scrum team an opportunity to analyze and review the entire sprint life cycle with
the intent of improving the overall process.19 The meeting is based on the concepts of
continuous improvement. At the end of each sprint, a retrospective meeting is held to
analyze and review all the things that went well, as well as the things that didn’t.
Within the meeting, the scrum team may choose to analyze existing processes, tech-
nologies, collaboration, communication techniques, and so forth. Once the sprint ret-
rospective meeting concludes, the scrum team will then carefully select the process
improvement areas of interest and plan for them in the upcoming sprint.
Organizing a Sprint Retrospective Meeting
An eﬀective sprint retrospective meeting happens at the end of every sprint cycle and
takes the necessary time needed to thoroughly discuss and document the sprint ret-
rospective agenda. Typically, the duration of a sprint retrospective meeting is about
an hour and a half but, in many cases, can require more time depending on the dura-
tion of the sprint, complexity of the project, the size of the team, or the team’s overall
experience with scrum methodologies.
Participants
A sprint retrospective meeting normally involves every scrum team member including
the scrum master. In order to have an eﬀective meeting, it is critical that all contributing
team members feel comfortable and safe in their surroundings as they provide sugges-
tions and recommendations on ways to improve the process. In most cases, the product
owner is the only individual that may not be involved in the sprint retrospective meeting
due to his or her potential decision-making authority (or power) over other team mem-
bers, thus preventing the team from being honest and open in the process. The result of
not having an open and honest dialogue is allowing process ineﬃciencies to continue
to impact future sprints.
Using a Sprint Retrospective Meeting
As stated earlier, the goal of a sprint retrospective meeting is to determine what worked
well and what could be improved upon. This process of information gathering can be
done in many diﬀerent ways.

THE SPRINT RETROSPECTIVE MEETING
319
Retrospective Whiteboard
Good
Bad
New
Figure 11.14: Retrospective Whiteboard
Visual learning is a great technique that can help the scrum master facilitate com-
munications within the team. As an example, a simple whiteboard can be divided into
three areas: good, bad, and new (see Figure 11.14). Good items would identify areas that
worked well over the sprint and didn’t require any modiﬁcations. This would include
things like continuing to limit daily sprint stand-up meetings to 15 minutes or to con-
tinue using custom client side queries. Bad items, on the other hand would include areas
that did not work well resulting in process ineﬃciencies. Examples of this would include
such items as deﬁning the term completed or done more precisely for team members to
better understand, segmenting product backlog items into smaller components during
the backlog reﬁnement phase, or ﬁnally shifting the daily scrum meeting from 9:00 A.M.
to 8:30 A.M.
Finally, new items would focus on areas that hadn’t been deﬁned or were missing
from the overall process. This would include such items as building a knowledge man-
agement system to inventory agenda items that fell outside the daily scrum meeting, or
adding a video teleconferencing solution in the scrum room for external team members
to enhance collaboration and communication.
There are many diﬀerent techniques that a scrum team can utilize when gathering
and categorizing information. As an example, sticky notes can be provided to each team
member based on a color schema deﬁned (green = good, red = bad, and yellow = new).
Each team member would then ﬁll out as many sticky notes as needed in order to com-
municate their recommendations. Once completed, each team member would place
their sticky notes in a box for the scrum master to place on the whiteboard under the
appropriate columns. Using a box ensures that all recommendations are anonymous
and free from judgment, thus helping create a safe environment for team members to
provide recommendations.
Selecting Improvement Areas
Using a whiteboard such as the one illustrated in Figure 11.14, the team would now
need to identify and prioritize which improvement areas they’d like to include in the
upcoming sprint. One popular technique is to provide each team member a few stars (3
to 5), which they would place on the items they feel would make the most signiﬁcant
impact to the project. If a team member felt very strongly about a particular area they

320
AGILE PROJECT EXECUTION
could place all of their stars on it, or they may choose to distribute their stars across
several areas. Once all of the votes had been collected, the team would then tally the
resultstoseewhichitemsreceivedthemostvotes.Fromthere,theoutputofthemeeting
would then be queued up for the product backlog meeting where the scrum master,
scrum team, and product owner would determine what items were most important and
should be addressed in the next sprint.
Beneﬁts
The primary beneﬁt of a sprint retrospective meeting is to provide the scrum team a
dedicated point in time after each sprint for team members to provide feedback on
areas they feel improvements could be made. Continuous improvement is critical to
the overall integrity and foundation of a project as it moves throughout its project
cycle. Overlooking continuous process improvement results in projects repeating past
mistakes and exponentially impacting the overall eﬃciency of the project.
Additionally, a sprint retrospective meeting is based on the concepts of teamwork,
empowerment, and collaboration through the use of open dialogue and transparency.
This is a powerful way to get each team member committed to the project as their
feedback and recommendations are now being heard and applied across the project.
Things to Avoid
1.
Poor preparation. A lack of preparation for a sprint retrospective will most
deﬁnitely impact the overall value of the meeting. This would include
things like not having a structured agenda, missing supplies or materials
(Post-its, pens, whiteboard), and even technology hurdles not addressed
within the sprint retrospective room.
2.
Complexity. As mentioned earlier, a sprint retrospective can be very
simple at times but if certain dynamics become too complex, the value
of a sprint retrospective can quickly diminish. Examples of this would
include the number of participants involved in the meeting or having
to manage the priority of recommendations from past meetings (the
backlog). Selecting backlog items with the greatest beneﬁt to the project
and the team can sometimes be difﬁcult to determine due to the politics
of a project.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
This chapter introduces six tools and techniques used within the scrum management
framework used to execute agile projects. They are the product backlog and sprint back-
log, release planning, daily scrum meeting, sprint task board, sprint burn down chart,
and sprint retrospective meeting. As parts of agile project execution methodologies,

REFERENCES
321
these tools and techniques are introduced to facilitate the iterative workﬂow and incre-
mental delivery of project work that can be completed in short iterations.
Practitionersareencouragedtoadaptthesetoolsandtechniquescontingentlyupon
their needs. It is important to note also that there are other tools and techniques used
with other agile methodologies beyond what have been presented in this chapter that
practitioners may want to explore further.
References
1.
Braude E. J., and M. E. Bernstein. Software Engineering, 2nd ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, 2011).
2.
James, M. “Scrum Reference Card,” 2010. http://ScrumReferenceCard.com.
Accessed February 2015.
3.
Schwaber, K. Agile Project Management with Scrum (Redmond, WA: Microsoft
Publishing, 2004).
4.
James, 2010.
5.
Cohn, M. Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using Scrum (Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2010).
6.
Schwaber, 2004.
7.
Cohn, 2010.
8.
Schwaber, 2004.
9.
Cohn, 2010.
10.
James, 2010.
11.
Schwaber, 2004.
12.
Ibid.
13.
Rubin, K. S. Essential Scrum: A Practical Guide to the Most Popular Agile Process
(Ann Arbor, MI: Pearson Education, 2012).
14.
Schwaber, 2004.
15.
Rubin, 2012.
16.
Schwaber, 2004.
17.
Ibid.
18.
Ibid.
19.
Ibid.


P A R T
V
Project
Reporting and
Closure Tools


12
PERFORMANCE REPORTING
P
roject performance reporting involves collecting key data concerning the perfor-
mance statusof the project at a particular point in time, synthesizing the data into
meaningful information, and then communicating the performance information
to project stakeholders to familiarize them with the project’s progress toward its objec-
tives. Eﬀective project performance reporting supports two key components of suc-
cessful project management: open and strong lines of communication and transparent
communication of information.1
The intent of performance reporting is threefold: (1) to determine and communicate
how project resources are being used to achieve the objectives of the project, (2) to
provide information on current performance against the project plan and performance
baseline, and (3) to use the information to enable informed project decisions.
The tools presented in this chapter are intended to assist project managers in eﬀec-
tively fulﬁlling this threefold intent. Just as performance reporting is a required activity
of all project managers, the following performance reporting tools should be a part
of every project manager’s PM Toolbox. We begin by looking at the project reporting
checklist.
PROJECT REPORTING CHECKLIST
There are many types of project status reports and great variation in the type of infor-
mation contained in the status reports. This is due in large part to variations in reporting
needs and desires of project stakeholders, variation of industry reporting standards and
practices, and variations in the size and complexity of projects themselves. Project sta-
tus report form and content is therefore situational, but needs to be standardized and
consistent with the needs of the project stakeholders who are on the receiving end of
the report. How does one establish and maintain standard messaging?
A simple and eﬀective tool to consider is the project reporting checklist. The check-
list assists the project manager in determining the correct status information to include
in a report and to consistently provide the information over time.
325

326
PERFORMANCE REPORTING
Developing the Project Reporting Checklist
To be eﬀective, a project status report must be current, concise, accurate, and contain
only the information needed to keep stakeholders abreast of progress and the resources
used to accomplish the project’s objectives.
The project reporting checklist will be diﬀerent for every organization because
every organization has its own unique set of information required for project reporting.
Developing a standard set of checklist items is good practice, as it drives consistency in
project reporting format and content within an organization.
The items contained within the checklist are developed by ﬁrst understanding the
information required by the project sponsor and other key project stakeholders. Then,
additional items can be included that are unique to a particular project or to the project’s
second tier stakeholders.
Table 12.1 illustrates an example set of project reporting items to consider as a refer-
ence and starting point for developing your own customized project reporting checklist.
The checklist shown is somewhat extensive, so keep in mind that the best project status
report is concise and to the point. Developing your custom checklist will involve using
a subset of items shown in Table 12.1.
The “Status” column can be used to indicate that the information needed to develop
a project status report has been collected. Some project managers add an additional
column to the checklist labeled “Source” to indicate where the source of information
resides, or to provide a hyperlink to the source data itself.
Using the Project Reporting Checklist
Most organizations have a deﬁned point in time when reporting of project performance
is expected to begin. This can be as early as once formal project initiation is determined.
Whenever the point, the project manager should begin using the checklist to formulate
the content that will be included in his or her project reports.
In practice, the content included in a project report is fairly repetitive over time.
However, it is valuable to review the checklist periodically to serve as a memory jog-
ger to provide additional information in a report, which may not be repetitive in nature.
This is normally the type of information included in the “general” section of the checklist.
Additionally, diﬀerent information may be required by the project stakeholders as
a project progresses through the various stages of the project cycle. A review of the
project reporting checklist during these stage transitions will help the project manager
modify the reporting content accordingly.
Beneﬁts
The greatest value that project managers gain from the use of the project reporting
checklist is knowledge gained about the project reporting requirements of their project
stakeholders. It helps to ensure they are reporting the most important project perfor-
mance information, as determined by their stakeholders.
The checklist also helps to ensure that the information contained in a project report
is both concise in nature and accurate at the time it is reported.

PROJECT REPORTING CHECKLIST
327
Table 12.1: Example Project Reporting Checklist
Status
Checklist Items
Project Scope
Have the project objectives been changed?
Have the deliverables in the project plan changed?
Have there been any changes to the project scope?
Are there any scope changes awaiting approval?
Project Schedule
Has the schedule been updated?
Is the project progressing on the critical path or critical chain?
Does the time expended to date vary from the project plan?
Do we have adequate resources to maintain the schedule?
Are project subcontractors or partners on schedule?
What is the estimated completion date?
Project Budget
Has the budget been updated?
Is the available budget to date in alignment with the project plan?
What is the average monthly budget burn rate?
Project Performance
Have all deliverables been met to date?
Have all project milestones been met to date?
What is the earned value (EV)?
What is the schedule variance (SV)?
What is the schedule index (SI)?
What is the cost variance (CV)?
What is the cost index (CI)?
Issues
Are there any current issues that need to be reported?
What are the resolution plans for any open issues?
Do our subcontractors or partners have any current issues?
Do any issues require project sponsor or top management action?
Risks
What are the HIGH-level risks?
What are the risk response plans for all HIGH-level risks?
What is the overall risk profile of the project?
Do any risks require project sponsor or top management action?
(continued)

328
PERFORMANCE REPORTING
Table 12.1: (Continued)
Status
Checklist Items
General
Is the project being impacted by any external factors?
Are there any quality issues associated with the project outcomes?
Are we receiving payments as planned?
Are there any actions or decisions needed on the part of the project sponsor or top
management?
THE PROJECT STRIKE ZONE
The ﬁrst principle of project performance reporting, as stated previously, involves
understanding and communicating how well project performance is progressing
toward achievement of the project objectives. Many times, project managers become
overfocused on progress against their cost and schedule baselines, and forget that
the real intent of a project is to achieve the business objectives driving the need for
the project.
The project strike zone is an excellent tool for evaluating and communicating
progress toward achievement of the project objectives. It is used to identify the critical
objectives for a project, to help a project manager and his or her stakeholders track
progress toward achievement of the key business results anticipated, and to set the
boundaries within which a project manager and team can operate without direct top
management involvement.
As shown in Figure 12.1, elements of the project strike zone include the project
objectives, target and threshold values, an “actual” ﬁeld that provides indication of
where a project is operating with respect to the target and threshold limits, and a
high-level status indicator.2
Bill Shaley, a senior project manager for a leading telecom company, described the
culture within his company this way: “Managing a project in this company is like having
a rocket strapped to your back with roller skates on your feet—there’s no mechanism
for stopping when you’re in trouble.” Sound familiar? The project strike zone is such
a mechanism that is designed to stop a project, either temporarily or permanently, if
the negotiated threshold limits are breached, at which point the project is evaluated for
termination or replan and continuation.
Developing the Project Strike Zone
Developing an eﬀective project strike zone is a critical activity for ensuring that the
project manager, project team, top management, and other stakeholders all understand
and agree on the objectives of the project. It is also critical for establishing the boundary
conditions that will drive eﬀective decision making on the project.
Deﬁning a meaningful project strike zone requires quality information from a num-
ber of sources. The initial set of objectives is derived directly from the approved project

THE PROJECT STRIKE ZONE
329
Project Strike Zone
Value Proposition
• Increase market share in product segment
• Order growth within 6 months of launch
• Market share increase after 1 year
Time-Benefits Target
• Project Initiation approval
• Business case approval
• Integrated plan approval
• Validation release
• Release to customers
Resources
• Team staffing commitments complete
• Staffing gaps
Technology
• Technology identification complete
• Core technology development complete
Financials
• Program Budget
• Product Cost
• Profitability Index
Project Objectives
Status
Strike Zone
Target
Threshold
10%
5%
7% (est)
5%
0%
4% (est)
1/03/2018
6/01/2018
8/06/2018
4/15/2019
7/15/2019
1/15/2018
6/30/2018 
8/20/2018 
4/30/2019 
8/01/2019
1/04/2018
6/01/2018
8/17/2018
6/29/2019
TBD
6/30/2018
All project teams
Staffed as min level 
7/15/2018
No critical path
resource gaps
7/1/2018
Staffed
4/30/2018
Priority 1 & 2 tech’s
Delivered @ Alpha 
5/15/2018
Priority 1 tech’s
Delivered @ Alpha
4/28/2018
on track
100% of Plan
$8500
2.0
105% of Plan
$8900
1.8
101% est
$9100 est
1.9 est 
Red
Green
Green
Green
Yellow
Actual
Figure 12.1: Example Project Strike Zone
business case (Chapter 3). To be able to establish and later negotiate the control limits
for each objective with the project manager, the project sponsor also needs to know the
project team’s capabilities and experience and past track record, and balance thresholds
against the new project’s complexities and risks accordingly.
Identify Project Objectives
Identiﬁcation of the project objectives begins during the initiation stage of a project.
The factors represent a subset of the metrics normally tracked by a project team. The
project strike zone should include only the measures that represent the high-level
project objectives (often the business objectives). The project objectives will be
unique to every organization, and are derived directly from strategic management and
portfolio management processes (Chapter 2).
The strike zone is most eﬀective when the objectives identiﬁed are kept to a critical
few (usually ﬁve to six), as this focuses the project and top management’s attention
on the highest priority contributors to the success of the project. The factors deemed
as “must haves” often include market, ﬁnancial, and schedule targets, and value
proposition of the project output.
Set the Recommended Target and Threshold Values
The target and threshold control limits shown in Figure 12.1 form the strike zone of suc-
cess for each project objective. The target value for an objective is that which the project

330
PERFORMANCE REPORTING
business case and baseline plan is based on. The target values should be pulled directly
from the project business case.
The threshold values represent the upper or lower limit of success for the project
objectives.3 Some discussion and debate is normally required to get an understand-
ing of how far oﬀtarget an objective can range, and still constitute success for the
project. For example, the target project budget may be set to $500,000. But if addi-
tional spending of 5 percent is allowable, then the budget threshold can be set at
$525,000. This means that even though a project team misses the target budget of
$500,000, they are still successful from a project budget perspective if they spend
up to $525,000.
Negotiate the Final Target and Threshold Values
Once the project manager establishes the recommended target and threshold values
for each project objective, the project manager presents the information to the senior
executive sponsoring the project. Based on the complexity and risk level of the project,
and on the capability and track record of the project manager and team, the project
sponsor may adjust the values accordingly. For example, on a project that is low
complexity, low risk, and is being managed by an experienced project manager, the
range between target and threshold values may be opened up to allow for a higher
degree of decision-making empowerment for the project manager. Conversely, on a
project that is of higher complexity, risk, or is being managed by an inexperienced
project manager, the range between target and threshold values will be tighten up to
limit the decision-making empowerment of the project manager, at least initially.
Once the targets and boundaries are negotiated, the team should be empowered to
move rapidly as long as they do not violate one of the strike zone threshold values.
Using the Project Strike Zone
The project strike zone provides many uses to project managers, the executive sponsor
of a project, and to the project governance body. Project managers utilize it to formalize
the critical project objectives for the project, to negotiate and establish the team’s
empowerment boundaries with executive management, to communicate overall
project progress and success, and to facilitate various trade-oﬀdecisions throughout
the project cycle (see “When Things Go Bad”).
Executive managers utilize the project strike zone to ensure that a new project’s deﬁ-
nition supports the intended business objectives, and to establish control limits in order
to ensure that the project team’s capabilities are in balance with the complexity of the
project. When used properly, it provides top managers a forward-looking view of project
alignment to the business objectives. When problems are encountered, the tool’s struc-
ture is intended to provide an early warning of trending problems, followed by a clear
identiﬁcation of “showstopper” conditions based on the level of achievement of the
project objectives. If a project is halted, senior executives can either reset the project
objective targets or thresholds, modify the scope of the project to bring it within the
current targets, or, in the extreme case, cancel the project to prevent further investment
of resources.

THE PROJECT STRIKE ZONE
331
Executive managers and the project governance body set the boundary conditions
(targets and thresholds) of the project strike zone between which the project manager
can operate, thereby empowering the project manager to make decisions and man-
age the project without direct top management involvement. As long as the project
progresses within the strike zone of each project objective, the project is considered
on target and the project manager remains fully empowered to manage the project
through its life cycle. However, if the project does not progress within the strike zone
of each project objective, the project is not considered on target and the top managers
must directly intervene.
When Things Go Bad
Santiam was the code name for a multimillion-dollar new product development
project within a leading consumer electronics company. One of the primary
strategic goals of the company was to move into a market outside of their
traditional business. The product to be produced by the Santiam project team
was the ﬁrst introduction into the new market. To be successful, introducing
the product into the market at the correct time, capturing a portion of the
market share, and selling the product at a better price than their competitors
were all critical project objectives needed to achieve the strategic business
goal of entering the new market.
As most project managers know, however, the best developed plans are
not immune to risks and alternative realities associated with doing business
in a dynamic environment—the Santiam project was no exception. Six months
into execution, word came from a supplier of a key component that technolog-
ical difﬁculties had been encountered. One of the intermediate schedule dates
identiﬁed in the project strike zone was in jeopardy.
During the next project review with her executive leadership team, Mellissa
Bingham, the Santiam project manager, presented the updated project strike
zone with status on the product introduction date criteria presented as YELLOW
(caution to management). Details of the current issue were discussed and risks
associated with achieving the success criteria were reviewed. A mitigation rec-
ommendation to place a representative from the quality organization at the
supplier’s location to continuously monitor the situation and assist with solu-
tions was approved by the executive team. The Santiam project team was given
the go-ahead to continue development of the product but under a heightened
state of risk awareness.
After an additional three weeks’ time, it became clear that the problem
had become a critical issue for the project when the supplier announced a
six-week slip in delivery schedule. This six-week delay would cause a signif-
icant delay of the product into the market, turning the product introduction
project objective in the project strike zone from “YELLOW” to “RED”—meaning
the project needed immediate top management intervention. An analysis of
the other project objectives showed that a delayed launch would jeopardize
(continued)

332
PERFORMANCE REPORTING
the desired market share capture and drive the proﬁtability index below the
acceptable threshold value of 1.8 (see Figure 12.1).
In effect, the business case for the project was in the red zone. Bingham
had the information she needed to make a recommendation to her project
sponsor. Her recommendation would be to cancel the Santiam project to pre-
vent signiﬁcant future losses to the business. Project discontinuance decisions
are never easy, especially when thousands, or in this case, millions of dollars
have already been spent. In the end, Bingham’s executive leadership team uti-
lized the information in the project strike zone as the basis for their decision
to cancel the project.
Beneﬁts
In practice, the value of the project strike zone is achieved through the direct commu-
nication and interaction between the project manager and the sponsor of the project
in setting the vision and key success parameters. These parameters are then recorded in
the strike zone and become the management and tracking focus for keeping the project
aligned to its business and project objectives.
Use of the tool fosters a “no surprises to senior management” behavior by increas-
ing the ﬂow of relevant information between the project team and top management.
This results in an eﬃcient means of elevating critical issues and barriers to success for
rapid decision making and resolution.
When used appropriately, it enables empowerment of the project manager and
team by establishing the boundaries for authority, responsibility, and accountability.
Too often, we hear project managers tell us that they have all the responsibility for
driving project success but lack the authority. The project strike zone is the best tool we
are familiar with to balance both sides of this equation.
THE PROJECT DASHBOARD
In today’s frenzied pace of many projects, project managers need to understand how
the project they are responsible for is performing with respect to the key performance
indicators, but they rarely have suﬃcient time to read through a number of detailed
status reports from their functional teams. From this time-versus-information dilemma
grew the concept of the project dashboard.4
Much like the dashboard of an automobile provides the driver a quick snapshot of
the current performance of the vehicle, the project dashboard provides the project man-
ager an up-to-date view of the current status of his or her project. Unlike the project
strike zone, which focuses on performance against the higher-level project objectives
and business goals, the project dashboard focuses on the current state of the lower-level
key performance indicators (KPIs).
The dashboard should be designed as an easy to read and concise (often a single
page) representation of all KPIs as illustrated in Figure 12.2.

333
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
$200
Project Timeline
Burn Down
Resource Allocation
Summary
Earned Value Indicators
Tasks
Late
(9%)
Early
(5%)
On time
(86%)
Status
Completed
Outstanding Issues
24%
6
4
SV = –75 hours
CV = –45 hours
EAC = 600 hours
22%
69%
9%
Over allocated
Normal
Under allocated
Project Budget (thousands of $)
Oct
Nov
Dec
$400
$600
$800
$1000
$1200
$1400
$1600
$1800
7/06/18
Actual
Plan
Plan
Approval
Initial
Design
First
Proto
Second
Proto
Ship
Approval
Project
Close
3/28/18
12/18/17
9/09/17
6/01/17
2/22/17
(Yellow)
SPI = 0.75
CPI = 0.83
Figure 12.2:
Example Project Dashboard

334
PERFORMANCE REPORTING
There are many types of project dashboards in use and available as reference for
designing your own customized dashboard that represents the information most rele-
vantandcriticaltoyourproject.WelikethedesignofthedashboardshowninFigure12.2
because of its graphical nature, it provides a variety of project status measures, and it
is concise.
Designing a Project Dashboard
The project dashboard is one of the most ﬂexible and customizable tools in a
project manager’s PM Toolbox. As stated earlier, it needs to be designed around the
particular KPIs of a project. Since each project is unique, each project will have some-
what unique performance indicators and therefore will likely have a unique project
dashboard design.
Identify the Key Performance Indicators
Design of the project dashboard begins with the identiﬁcation of the KPIs for the project.
These typically can be found in other tools such as the project business case or project
charter (Chapter 3).
The project objectives, identiﬁed and quantiﬁed in the project strike zone, deﬁne
the end state of the project in terms of what value the project brings to the sponsoring
organization. The KPIs quantiﬁably measure how well the project is performing toward
accomplishment of the project objectives.
The project KPIs are part of a measurement hierarchy that must be understood. Busi-
ness outcomes support an organization’s strategic goals, project objectives support the
business outcomes, and KPIs support the project objectives. If, for instance, a strategic
goal for an enterprise is to be the leader in a particular market segment, a business out-
comeinsupportofthatstrategicgoalwouldbeﬁrst-to-marketadvantagewiththeirnew
products or oﬀerings. A project objective would in turn have to quantiﬁably deﬁne the
project completion date that ensures ﬁrst-to-market position for the project outcome.
Two important project KPIs would likely complete the measurement hierarchy: (1) per-
formance to schedule, and (2) resource allocation percentage (if resources are not close
to 100 percent allocated to plan, schedule will likely suﬀer).
The KPIs identiﬁed in the project dashboard should directly measure performance
toward achieving the project objectives documented in the project strike zone. The KPIs
represented in the project dashboard in Figure 12.2 include performance to schedule,
performance to budget, performance to cost, and resource utilization.
Outline the Dashboard Layout
Based on the KPIs selected in the previous step, you have an idea of what information
should be shown on your dashboard. Now you need to determine how you want to
present that information on the project dashboard.
To accomplish this, take a few minutes to sketch the structure of the dashboard as
shown in Figure 12.3. Nothing fancy here, just sketch out the location of the information

THE PROJECT DASHBOARD
335
Figure 12.3: Example Dashboard Structure Layout
on the page. The goal is to design the dashboard so it is both comprehensive in content
and is appealing to the eye of the recipient.
Populate the Dashboard
The ﬁnal step in designing the project dashboard involves locating the pertinent per-
formance data and representing it on the dashboard. Whenever possible, use graphical
representations as they facilitate a speedier analysis of the current performance on the
part of the recipient than a text-based representation.
Some project managers embed hyperlinks within the top-level performance graph-
ics that link to detailed data about the KPI of interest. For instance, if additional detail is
needed for the performance to schedule KPI, a link can be provided to a detailed Gantt
chart, milestone analysis chart, or even the schedule section of the current detailed
status report for the project.
Using the Project Dashboard
The project dashboard can be used as both a communication tool and decision support
tool by project managers. By using the project dashboard to synthesize lower-level per-
formance data into higher-level information, a project manager becomes armed with
the right information he or she needs to communicate the current status of the project
with respect to the KPIs. Additionally, many decisions have to be made during the course

336
PERFORMANCE REPORTING
of a project, some large and some small, and the project dashboard serves as the basis
of past and current information from which decisions can be driven (see “Tips for Using
Project Dashboards”).
The project dashboard is also used to consolidate and display performance infor-
mation that resides in various project data sources. For example, schedule performance
data may reside in a Gantt chart, budget performance data in burn down chart, and cost
performance data in the earned value management system. The dashboard becomes a
single source of key performance information for a project.
The project dashboard also serves as a data source for the development of an overall
project status report. The project manager can use the dashboard as the data source for
the performance against the KPIs information that is normally included as part of the
summary project report.
Tips for Using Project Dashboards
With the overall simplicity of a project dashboard, project managers need to
remember that dashboards are not, in and of themselves, a panacea. The dash-
board is only as effective as the design of its structure, the value of the mea-
sures and metrics chosen, the accuracy of the data represented, and how
effectively the dashboard is used to drive communication and decisions.
Project managers must avoid descending into a quantitative and analytical
quagmire when using dashboards. There is a real return on investment that
must be maintained in that the value gained from the use of the project dash-
board must be greater than the cost of obtaining and analyzing the information
contained within it.
Beware of false and conﬂicting information that may show up in a dash-
board. Take the time to ensure that the information is current, accurate, and
that it conveys an accurate message about the performance of the project
against the KPIs. If not, the dashboard may do you more harm than good.
Beneﬁts
The project dashboard provides many beneﬁts for project managers; we discuss a
few of the most signiﬁcant. First, the dashboard helps the project manager focus
on the key performance indicators and how the project is operating relative to the
indicators. To gauge exactly how well a project team is performing, the dashboard
allows the project manager to capture and report speciﬁc data points relative to
the KPIs.
The visual nature of the project dashboard provides a concise snapshot in time of
project performance that enables quick analysis of progress, as well as easy identiﬁca-
tion of data outliers and correlations (e.g., correlation between resource utilization and
schedule performance).
If trend information is included in the dashboard, the project manager has the ability
to make informed decisions based on both past performance and future prediction of

THE SUMMARY STATUS REPORT
337
performance. Used in this manner, the dashboard becomes a valuable decision support
tool that is based on business intelligence.
THE SUMMARY STATUS REPORT
A project manager spends much of his or her time communicating the status of the
project to various stakeholders. This reporting takes the form of both formal and
informal communications, from hallway conversations to formal project reviews and
decision checkpoint meetings with top management and other key stakeholders.
Regardless of whether the status is formal or informal in nature, the message should
remain consistent.
Consistent communication of project progress is a critical element of cross-project
collaboration. Any signiﬁcant deviations or changes to the project must be communi-
cated by the project manager. In like fashion, any changes that have occurred on any of
the functional teams must be communicated to the project manager. Late or ineﬀective
communication can quickly result in rework, delays, and added cost to a project.
The summary status report is a document that highlights and brieﬂy describes the
status of the project, reporting on the scope, cost, and time variance, showing signiﬁcant
accomplishments, identifying issues, predicting trends, and stating actions required to
overcome issues, risks, and reverse negative trends. Contrary to the beliefs of many that
the report is about the history of the project, the report should be about the future of
the project that is based on its past. An example of a summary status report is illustrated
in Figure 12.4.
Developing a Summary Status Report
Producing a meaningful summary status report starts oﬀwith quality information
inputs. A solid project baseline plan is the foundation for a good progress report.
When the project baseline plan with various baselines—scope, cost, and schedule, for
example—is available, then they are compared to the actual state of the project to
assess its performance. The actual state is derived from work results and other project
records. Through work results, for example, we report which tasks or deliverables
are completed and resources expended, presenting them by means of schedule and
cost control tools such as the jogging line and earned value analysis.5 Other infor-
mation describing the project execution may be included in project records such as
correspondence, minutes of meetings, and progress statements.
Design the Reporting System
Deﬁning the purpose, hierarchy, frequency, responsibilities, and distribution of the
summary status report is what we call the reporting system. This provides consistency
in style and format, enabling comparison with previous and future reports for the
particular project and other projects. The purpose statement normally centers on
whether the report is for internal or external stakeholders. In most cases, the detail
and amount of information for internal reports will be diﬀerent from external reports.

338
SUMMARY STATUS REPORT
Project Name: 
Date: 
Project Manager: 
Purpose: 
Baseline vs Actual
Accomplishments:
Issues:
Risks:
Trend:
Actions Planned:
Decisions Needed:
July 2016
Lance Martin
Silverbow
Design, develop, test and launch a new PC/Tablet convertible device
Design complete, Tooling 40% complete, Purchasing 20% complete
Additional project funding delayed two months
Test resources have not rolled off of previous project
Power supply manufactureris our only supplier
Schedule is overly optimistic
Requirements not received from customers
Project is currently estimated to be completed 2 weeks later than the baseline plan
Budget spending is on par with the anticipated burn rate, expected to be within 3% of baseline
Explore the use of temporary personnel to perform
system test activities until permanent staff is 
released from the Berkley project
Approval to work at risk until additional funding is
available
Approval to use temporary test staff
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
$200
Oct
Nov
Dec
$400
$600
$800
$1000
$1200
$1400
$1600
$1800
Tasks
Design Production PC
Outsource Mold Design
Design Tooling
Purchase Tool Machines
May
Oct
Sep
Aug
Jul
Jun
Timeline
Figure 12.4:
Example Summary Status Report

THE SUMMARY STATUS REPORT
339
For example, external reports generally focus on helping the customer determine the
status of work being funded and need to be structured accordingly. Each of the two
types of reports may need a hierarchical structure, including the summary status report,
the detailed progress report, and backup data.
The summary status report provides the crucial points of the overall report while
enabling management to review performance progress and trends at a glance.
The detailed report contains the general status of the project, major developments,
signiﬁcant variances, major problems, predictions of ﬁnal schedule and cost, and speciﬁ-
cations of corrective actions. Essentially, both the summary and detailed report address
the same types of information but in a very diﬀerent level of detail (see “The Case of
Over Reporting”). Because of these similarities, we focus only on the methodology of
the summary status report.
The purpose and hierarchy set the stage for the frequency of the report. The report
cadence is often deﬁned by the primary recipient, but we also see commonalities based
on size and length of projects. For example:
■
Weekly reporting for small projects that are 6 months in duration.
■
Biweekly reporting for medium projects that are 12 months in duration.
■
Monthly reporting for large projects that are 24 months in duration.
These experientially developed benchmarks are based on the belief that each of
the projects should have a similar number of summary reports—26 for small, 26 for
medium, and 24 for large projects. The point is not the sheer number of status reports,
but rather a consistent number of control cycles. Added to these should be the so-called
unscheduled reports, prepared in response to unexpected events of a critical nature
that F. L. Harrison calls “Red Bandits” to aptly describe their potential to act as project
showstoppers.6 Finally, deﬁning responsibilities in preparing the report and who needs
to see it completes the design of the reporting system.
Determine the Variances
With the reporting system in place, it is time to turn the project data being collected
into useful information about the performance of the project. Begin by determining the
variance between the baseline and the actual project status. A comparison of the project
baseline plan and the actual work results should easily yield the variance—that is, the
diﬀerence between the two. Take, for example, the example progress report.
How the variance is collected is situational, and involves a number of other tools.
If for example the project is a small departmental project, it might use the Jogging Line
to indicate the schedule variance. Such a non-project-driven department might easily
opt to show only this type of variance. In a diﬀerent situation, where this would be a
large project to design and deploy performance metrics throughout a project-driven
ﬁrm, the milestone analysis might be used to identify the schedule and cost variance,
or even the full-scale earned value system might be employed and supported by verbal
descriptions about the quality and scope variances.
Ensure that you are reporting progress at the project level. A good strategy is to use
the WBS as a framework, as described in the WBS section in Chapter 5. The process of
reporting starts at the work package level, identifying the variances and aggregating

340
PERFORMANCE REPORTING
them up the WBS hierarchy to establish the variances for the whole project. Subsequent
steps of identifying issues, predicting trends, and specifying corrective actions should
follow the same approach of using the WBS as the framework. One way to do that is to
use the system of rehearsals and progress meetings described in Chapter 9.
The Case of Overreporting
This is a progress reporting story of a project manager in an enterprise informa-
tion technology (IT) department that, unfortunately, is all too common. Accord-
ing to the project manager, “project managers in our group write a project
status report every month for every project they manage. I am expected to
show how much time I spend on each project, including all administrative work.
Frankly, every project manager just reports 100 percent of their regular work
hours, even though we may be working 120 percent or 130 percent of our
regular work hours, just to minimize the amount of work we have to report on.
These are really very long reports, almost always 6 to 7 pages. I usually
manage four to ﬁve projects at a time and do a report for each of them. It takes
a lot of time to write them and frankly, it is time I should be using to manage
my projects. I have a hard time believing that our managers really spend time
reading 20 to 25 detailed reports each month.”
This is a case of overreporting in which value is lost for both the project
managers and their leaders. A better approach would be to provide a summary
progress report that would add more value to everyone involved.
Identify Issues and Risks
If there is a variance, especially an unfavorable one, report the issues causing the vari-
ance. Also, identify the risks that may occur in the future, and report the impact they may
have on the project. The ﬁrst area (issues) probes to learn what present problems are at
the root of the variance and what their impact on the project is. The second area (risks)
looks into the future to predict possible troubles and assess their future impact (see the
section on issues and risks in Figure 12.4 for an example). The point, of course, is to ﬁgure
out how the project can deal with them now. For instance, consider a project where the
project manager just learned that one of their major materials suppliers might be on the
verge of bankruptcy. This possible event would be identiﬁed as a high-level risk, worthy
of reporting on the summary status report. The team would immediately develop a con-
tingency strategy instead of waiting to hear a few months later about the bankruptcy,
at which point they might be helpless to correct the impact of the issue on the project.
Generally, issues impacting the project progress may come from any area of work.
It may be useful to use an issues tracker to track all project issues (see “Keeping an
Issues Database”). Issue logs are an eﬀective way of tracking problems on the project.
The issues that are impacting the project, or those that need top management involve-
ment to resolve, are carried forward to the summary status report. Figure 12.5 shows an
example issues log.

THE SUMMARY STATUS REPORT
341
Project Issue Log
1
Second round of funding not
approved 
1
2
Research data not available until
January
3
2
4
5
6
Issue Description
Status
Priority
Owner
Date Raised
Issue #
Quick set-up feature broken
Open
Open
Powers
10/25/2018
1
1
Closed
Gupta
11/23/2018
10/26/2018
Vendor missed 1st delivery
…..
…..
10/8/2018
Williams
Closed
Owens
Figure 12.5: An Example Issues Tracker
Keeping an Issues Database
Learning from past experience is a way for many organizations to continuously
improve. A technique that helps classify such learning and offers improve-
ment strategies to future generations of projects is use of an issues database.
Simply, it records three types of information: (1) issues of signiﬁcant impact
that occurred in past projects, (2) the nature of the impact that happened or
was prevented from happening, and (3) what actions were or could be used to
successfully resolve such issues.
How is the database developed? Searching through risk logs of past or cur-
rent projects and post-project reviews helps identify the preceding types of
information. Issues of a similar nature are then grouped. For example, groups
may include team issues, process issues, vendor issues, scheduling issues, risk
management issues, and so on. Computerized databases of this sort that are
searchable are of special value.
What can the database do for a project? It can serve as a checklist for plan-
ning future projects. Also, it can serve as a predictive tool by identifying issues
and risks in monitoring schedule, cost, and scope. Additionally, the database
offers “premade” impact assessment and actions to mitigate impacts.
Predict Trends
This section of the report shows the predicted future performance based upon the cur-
rent status of the project. Although forecasts of this type are not easy and are noto-
riously vulnerable, their essence is less in their accuracy and more in their creation of
early-warning signals. For example, in the summary status report in Figure 12.4, “project
is currently estimated to be completed 2 weeks later than the baseline plan” is a clear
warning,onethatmandatesactiontoattempttoreversethetrend.Theabilitytoforecast
the trend, week after week, or whatever the report frequency, is paramount in building
an anticipatory climate where project teams are alert about the project’s past progress
but even more about what the future bears.

342
PERFORMANCE REPORTING
Specify Actions
If trends are unfavorable, this section identiﬁes actions that should be taken to prevent
them and deliver to the baseline plan. With a look into the future, which is our trend,
we need to specify corrective actions, assess their impact, and assign an owner in the
report. Along with the trend, the speciﬁcation of corrective actions is perhaps the most
valuable part of the report because it enables project teams to be proactive. While the
performance progress is important in telling where we are, it is no more than the project
history—there is really nothing that we can do to correct or change it. Our only oppor-
tunity to change the project is in the future, and that is what the trend and corrective
actions oﬀer: an opportunity to anticipate and shape the future by acting—now.
Using the Summary Status Report
Whether small or large, projects need the summary status report. Pressed for resources,
small projects—especially in a multiproject environment—will likely issue the summary
report as their only report, doing away with a detailed report.
Although many will prepare the report in a formal, written format per predeter-
minedfrequency,itisnotunusualformanagersofsmallprojectstoreportstatusverbally
(see “The Case of Underreporting”).
The Case of Underreporting
We heard this story during a ten-minute lunch with a project manager for a
technology ﬁrm, Eric Biesot. According to Biesot, “we develop components for
our internal customers who build them into their new products for external
customers. With seven projects that I am managing right now, I don’t really
have time to write progress reports. This is really the case for all the project
managers. All of us run multiple projects at a time, too many we believe, and
no one has time for reporting since we typically work 70 hours a week.
My boss would like to have the reports, but knowing how busy we are, he
doesn’t require them. He was in our shoes before he was promoted to this
position, so I guess he understands what kind of situation we are in. He does
ask us in our weekly staff meetings if we have any problems he can help with.
But he can’t really help much because he has no resources to help out. I usually
develop a Gantt chart for each project, but with this pace of work, I just don’t
have time to keep them updated.”
This is a case of severe underreporting and a dangerous situation to be
in. This project manager, his manager, and their organization will be in a con-
tinuously reactive or “ﬁre-ﬁghting” situation without the use of a streamlined
summary status report for each project.
An hour may be suﬃcient to prepare a typical summary status report for a small or
mediumsizedproject.Evenastimerequirementsgohigherwiththesizeandcomplexity
of projects, it is clear that a few hours of a large project team’s time should suﬃce for the

THE PROJECT INDICATOR
343
summary report production. This assumes that extra time—perhaps running in tens of
hours—was spent to generate the performance data that feeds into the report.
Beneﬁts
If we view time spent on developing the report as an investment, then return on this
investment can be very lucrative in multiple ways. First, the process that results in the
report ensures a proactive cycle of project control, communicating information about
project problems and status to all concerned, including top management, and taking
actions to put the project back on track.
Second, the summary status report is a vehicle to secure stakeholders’ involvement
in the project. By feeding them with information about the past and future of the
project, we help them see the big picture and understand the impact of their contribu-
tion. This, in turn, helps maintain their motivation and coordination with others, further
strengthening the team cohesion.7
Third, the cycle of reporting instills discipline. Busy managers often get carried away
by daily pressures, the regularity of reports is a forcing function that makes them sit
down, collect data on project health, look into the project future, and form opinions
dictating actions. Such work, unlike their daily ﬁreﬁghting of project problems, is the
clear essence of project management—think, predict, act.
If a project manager functions in an inﬂuence without authority environment, the
report oﬀers a fourth beneﬁt. The progress report gives the project manager a voice to
top management. Having higher management’s ear and demonstrating that he or she
can clearly communicate the current progress of their project helps the project manager
increase his or her inﬂuence.
THE PROJECT INDICATOR
In most organizations, the project manager is required to provide verbal status to top
management on a regular basis, both in informal or more formal project reviews. The
project indicator is used by the project manager to summarize the overall status of a
project based upon the input and discussion with the project team. There is a direct
correlation between the summary status report in the previous section and the project
indicator. The project indicator is a presentation device to communicate the information
contained in the summary report. The tool gives the project manager a high-level view
of the total project and helps him or her to determine if the project remains successfully
on track or if there are potential barriers and issues that must be addressed.
It is eﬀective to have a common project indicator format in use on all projects for
consistency and comparability of information. The reporting format should include
all critical project elements that are important to top management so that they can
quickly evaluate progress on projects and determine which need more of their focus
and attention. An example project indicator is displayed in Figure 12.6.
The project indicator is brief and limited to one or two pages. It is meant to give a
concise,butcomprehensivedescriptionofcurrentprojectstatus,keyissuesandchanges

344
Performance to Budget
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Q308
Q408
Q109
Q209
Q309
Q409
$ Millions
Actual
Planned
2/22/08
6/1/08
9/9/08
12/18/08
3/28/09
7/6/09
IPA
Pwr On
Alpha
Beta
Silver
Pilot
Ship
Program Milestones
Performance to Schedule
Project Performance Indicator 
Project Changes
Project Status
Current Issues
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
High
Medium
Low
Total
Risk Severity
Project Risk Totals
This Month
Last Month
•
Additional test cycle approved
•
Second materials vendor approved
Work accomplished last month:
• Strategic customers identified and committed
• Circuit board power on complete
• SW build 42 delivered
Work planned for coming month:
•
Validation team staffed and fully tasked
•
Marketing plans completed
•
Enclosure CAD files delivered to vendor
• Validation platform stability
• Four weeks behind schedule on evaluation
• Critical part shortage for next circuit board builds
• Currently a five week gap in engineering resources
Project Overview
•
Circuit board power on complete
•
Currently 4 weeks behind schedule
•
Currently $1.2 million under budget
Actual
Planned
Figure 12.6:
Example Project Indicator

THE PROJECT INDICATOR
345
that have been encountered, performance against project performance metrics, and the
management of critical risk events.
Developing the Project Indicator
Creating a project indicator begins with understanding the information that should be
included and communicated in the informal or formal project review with top man-
agement. As stated previously, it is useful to top managers if all project indicators are
consistent in form and content. This is probably another application of the 80/20 rule;
80percentoftheinformationcontainedintheprojectindicatorshouldbecommontoall
projects being evaluated by the organization’s top management, and 20 percent of the
information should be unique to each project. In general, the project indicator should
include the following information:
■
Signiﬁcant changes to the project.
■
Work completed since the last review.
■
Work planned during the next reporting period.
■
Performance against plan.
■
Issues encountered.
■
Risks identiﬁed.
Changes to the Project
A brief description of the signiﬁcant changes to the project that may have an impact on
performance should always be included in a project indicator. Example changes include
signiﬁcant scope increases or decreases, changes in project budget or funding, changes
in project resources, and changes to the project objectives.
Work Completed
This section of the project indicator provides an overview of the key elements of work
completed since the last project report. This would include the achievement of project
milestones, completion of project deliverables, the resolution of major blocking issues,
removal of risk events, and the completion of key project events such as a customer
review or signing of a partnership agreement.
Work Planned
A high-level description of the work that is planned between the current reporting cycle
and the next should be included in the project indicator. This allows for a discussion on
not just what has occurred in the past, but also what will occur in the near future, and
what you as the project manager are anticipating in the next work cycle.
Performance Information
The project indicator should provide a concise description of how the project is perform-
ing against the key performance indicators. This can be accomplished either graphically
(which is always preferred when communicating to senior managers), or in text. If the
projectisusingearnedvaluemanagement(Chapter10),theearnedvalueanalysisvalues
should be included in this section.

346
PERFORMANCE REPORTING
Issues
This section of the indicator should concisely describe the major issues that the project
team is working to resolve. Be short and concise on your descriptions. Remember that
the project indicator is meant as a verbal communication tool, so issues are brieﬂy
described on the indicator and then explained to whatever detail is needed during the
ensuing conversation with top managers. For every issue communicated on the project
indicator, there must be an action plan employed.
Risks
Much like the project issues, a concise description of the critical risk events should be
included in the project indicator. Try to limit the risks to the critical three to ﬁve events
that the project team is working to eliminate or mitigate. Even better, a summarization
of progress against risks may be a better representation of project risks, such as is shown
in Figure 12.6.
Other Items
Since each project is unique, include a section in the indicator that addresses informa-
tion that pertains strictly to the project at hand. For reference on what to include in this
section, the “General” section in the project reporting checklist covered at the beginning
of this chapter is a good source.
Using the Project Indicator
As stated earlier, the project indicator is a verbal communication tool. It is used to com-
municate overall project status to the top management of an organization. In the pro-
cess it also facilitates the necessary discussion between the project manager and his or
her senior leaders. For each item included in the indicator, ensure you have the backing
details to engage in a conversation, or include the right member of your project team
who can speak to the details.
The indicator can become the means to engage top management in the critical
aspects of the project, and facilitate a request for assistance if and when needed.
The project indicator can also be used for eﬀective communication of project status
to the project team. Often, project team members are not privy to the overall status of
the project they are a part of. To be most eﬀective when used in this manner, the project
team should be briefed after top management so pertinent aspects of the conversations
with management can also be communicated to the team members.
To provide a complete overview of project status, many project managers present
the project indicator along with the project strike zone. This provides a more holistic
message that incudes operational status as well as a review of the project objectives
and current performance against those objectives.
Variations
Some project managers use indicators within their project teams to facilitate intrateam
progress reporting. In this use case, the functional project team leaders prepare and
present a more detailed and focused functional indicator that reﬂects the work of each
functional team (see Figure 12.7 for an example).

347
Software Development Project Indicator 
 Work accomplished last week:
Work planned for this week:
 Next deliverables: 
Critical Bugs 
1. Operating system is crashing
Risk: Linux developer not rolling off Icon program
when expected  
Mitigation:
Borrow developer from the technical marketing
team for short-term relief 
Software Development Status
Updated latest software build with User Guide 
Debug critical bugs
Complete Linux support plan
Linux support plan — due 10/14 
Software build 42 — due 11/01 
2. New firmware release causes system interrupts 
Risks
Software Bug Trend
Performance to Schedule 
Severity Level 
High
Med
Low
Done
12/18/16
10/29/16
9/09/16
7/21/16
6/01/16
4/12/16
2/22/16
1/05/16
20
15
10
5
Deliverables 
Impact
Schedule will be delayed two weeks.
A1
A2
A3
B1
B2
B3
C1 C2
Figure 12.7:
Example Functional Indicator

348
PERFORMANCE REPORTING
The project manager must work with each functional team leader to determine the
best format and content to present in the functional indicator. By requiring (or encour-
aging depending on a project manager’s style) the functional leaders to keep their func-
tional indicators current, the project manager will receive a comprehensive yet concise
report on fuctional team status on a regular basis (recommended weekly). Additionally,
the information in the functional indicators can be used as a data source for building the
project indicator.
Beneﬁts
The project indicator provides project managers a consistent format and data model
for determining the current status of their project, for understanding the most critical
challenges their project team is facing, and a gross-level indication of how their project
is trending against the baseline plan.
The project indicator also serves as a key communication vehicle between the
project manager and the top managers that highlights key cross-project issues that
need to be elevated to senior leadership for resolution. It eﬀectively facilitates focused
discussion between the project manager and their managers. For project managers
that are uncomfortable having these discussions with their senior leaders, or those that
are new to the opportunity, the project indicator also provides a mental prop and cue
card for discussion topics to cover.
Table 12.2: Project Reporting Tools
Situation
Reporting
Checklist
Project
Strike
Zone
Project
Dashboard
Project
Indicator
Summary
Project
Report
Prepare information to report
✓
✓
Tailor reporting information based
on project life cycle
✓
Communicate performance against
project objectives
✓
✓
✓
Facilitates project-level decision
making
✓
✓
✓
Communicate performance against
operational KPIs
✓
✓
Communicate functional status to
project manager
✓
✓
Communicate overall project status
to top managers
✓
✓
✓
Describe current issues
✓
✓
✓
Communicate project trends and
risks
✓
✓
✓
✓
Best for written status reporting
✓
Best for verbal status reporting
✓
✓
✓

REFERENCES
349
CHOOSING YOUR REPORTING TOOLS
The tools presented in this chapter are designed for various project performance report-
ing situations. Matching the tools to their most appropriate usage is sometimes a bit
confusing. To help in this eﬀort, Table 12.2 lists various performance reporting situations
and identiﬁes which tools are geared for each situation. Consider this table as a starting
point, and create your own custom project situation analysis and tools of choice to ﬁt
your particular project management style.
References
1.
Project Management Institute. AGuidetotheProjectManagementBodyofKnowledge,
5th ed. (Drexell Hill, PA: Project Management Institute, 2013).
2.
Martinelli, Russ, James Waddell, and Tim Rahschulte. Program Management for
Improved Business Results, 2nd ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014).
3.
Martinelli, Russ, and Jim Waddell. “The Program Strike Zone: Beyond the Bounding
Box.” Project Management World Today, March–April 2010.
4.
Kerzner, Harold. Project Management Metrics, KPIs, and Dashboards: A Guide to Mea-
suring and Monitoring Project Performance, 2nd ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
2013).
5.
Lientz, B. P., and P. R. Kathryn. Breakthrough Project Management (San Diego, CA: Aca-
demic Press, 1999).
6.
Harrison, F. L. Advanced Project Management: A Structured Approach, 3rd ed.
(New York, NY: Halsted Press, 1992).
7.
Project Management Institute, 2013.


13
PROJECT CLOSURE
Contributed by
Tim Rahschulte
T
he value of continuous improvement that occurs from continuous learning is
not ambiguous, nor is the concept for continuous learning new or novel. Rather,
it has been known for years that team and organizational learning can create a
competitive advantage. The concept, as well as tools and techniques, gained immense
popularity in the 1990s, due in part to Peter Senge’s book The Fifth Discipline. Since this
seminal text, countless other authors oﬀered publications and thought leadership on
the topic of learning.
Learning is indeed an important variable that separates the best from the rest.
Organizations that can obtain, codify, and make easily available data and information
from individuals and teams in the form of knowledge and lessons learned have a
competitive advantage. Often, such knowledge comes from project managers and their
teams—those individuals working to create new products, oﬀer new services, and help
their organization innovate from where they are now to where they aim to be in the
future. Those who do it well continually get better and those who struggle fall behind.
This chapter focuses on best practice project closure tools, techniques, and the func-
tions that the project manager needs to facilitate to ensure project closure leads to
continuous improvement from lessons and experiences learned. Three speciﬁc tools will
be detailed in this chapter: project closure plan and checklist, project closure report, and
project postmortem. Additionally, a section on project retrospectives is detailed. Prior
to the tools, however, an overview of project closure is oﬀered to ensure understanding
with regard to closing a project.
UNDERSTANDING PROJECT CLOSURE
Projects vary in size, scope, and complexity. Regardless of such diﬀerences, however, all
projects follow a rather similar, albeit generic, life cycle from start to ﬁnish. In general,
a project cycle progresses from starting or initiating to planning and organizing to
351

352
PROJECT CLOSURE
Initiating
Planning
Executing
Closing
Figure 13.1: Generalization of a Project Life Cycle
executing and then to closing. Harold Kerzner and others have spent a signiﬁcant
amount of time writing books and articles detailing life cycles used by project teams
in industries including engineering, manufacturing, software development and
construction.1 Because of Kerzner’s ﬁne research and contribution, there is no need
to replicate it here in detail. The general process, which is outlined in Figure 13.1, is
suﬃcient and enables the focus here to be on best practice tools and techniques that
project managers can use to ensure eﬀectiveness in their work.
It is important to note that a project life cycle is not synonymous with project
process groups that many project managers and teams use to organize their work.
This is expressly noted as such in the Project Management Book of Knowledge (PMBOK)
Guide in which it states, a project life cycle “should not be confused with the Project
Management Process Groups.”2 It is understandable that confusion occurs. The ﬁve
process groups are initiating, planning, executing, monitoring and controlling, and
closing. The nomenclature is nearly exact to that of Kerzner and others relative to
project life cycles. Further, they are both referred to as a cycle or process, and the work
eﬀort (deliverables, decisions, and otherwise) varies in accordance to the stage of work
under way.
Figure 13.2 illustrates each process group relative to the project’s life cycle over time
and the interaction of one group with the others. The diﬀerences between a project life
cycle and project process groups becomes evident with the visualization of Figure 13.2.
Whereas a life cycle is naturally explained and illustrated linearly, with deﬁnitive starts
and ﬁnishes, the process groups overlap with one another. As can be visualized, there
TIME
Level of Effort Relative to Life Cycle
START
FINISH
Initiating
Process Group
Planning
Process Group
Executing
Process Group
Monitoring
Process Group
Closing
Process Group
Figure 13.2: Process Groups Interact in a Phase or a Project

UNDERSTANDING PROJECT CLOSURE
353
is simultaneous work associated with most process groups over the period of the
entire project life cycle. Although this is illustrated, the simultaneous work is not always
comprehended and applied. For example, although project closure activities are to
be occurring in nearly every phase of the project’s life cycle, often project managers
and their teams conduct such activities only during the closing phase of the project.
Focusing project closure activities only at the end of a project limits the learning that
can occur and therefore increases project and enterprise risk. This will be explained in
further detail throughout this chapter.
Focusing here on project closure, the closing process group consists of the work
eﬀort necessary to end, or close out, any pertinent project activities across the phases
of work and process groups. Such work here is often associated with contractual obliga-
tions, procurement paperwork, handoﬀagreement(s) between the project and opera-
tions teams, and reallocation of resources, just to mention a few.
Project Closing Activities
When engaged in closing activities, the project manager’s responsibility is to review
the work of the prior phase (or phases if the project is beyond the ﬁrst phase in the
project’s life cycle) to ensure all necessary and planned work is complete and objec-
tives are met. The importance of the closing process group is twofold. First, is to ensure
that the work planned was actually completed. During project planning work eﬀorts,
all pertinent expectations associated with resourcing, timing, scope, quality, costs, and
other activities are detailed and sequenced along a timeline or schedule. Proper clos-
ing activities ensure that what was deemed necessary during the planning was carried
in accordance to expectations. If there is any variance between what was planned and
what was completed, the project manager must determine why and then determine if
any adjustments need to be made for the remainder of the project based on why the
variance occurred. Variances here could be either positive or negative to the successful
completion of the project.
While the ﬁrst point of the twofold importance to proper project closing is project-
centric, the second part of the importance for proper closing goes beyond the value
of the project team to being enterprise-centric. The most eﬀective learning organi-
zations have processes, systems, and a culture in place to foster knowledge sharing.
It is incumbent on the project manager to broadcast lessons learned, best practices,
and issue resolution tactics to peer project managers and project teams across the
enterprise. Doing so shares knowledge, which in turn can enable project teams to more
eﬃciently and eﬀectively plan and execute their projects. The more eﬃciently and
eﬀectively projects are delivered, the more business value project teams generate for
the enterprise.
The key takeaway here is that the work eﬀort associated with project closing is to
ensure that all pertinent activities are complete. However, importantly, closing is about
learning. This requires the project manager to engage a number of team members and
other stakeholders. This point also addresses a major oversight by most project man-
agers and their teams. As noted earlier, far too many project managers focus closing on
end of project work instead of throughout each process group.

354
PROJECT CLOSURE
Project management closing is not a work effort reserved for the end
of the project, but rather closing is about reviewing and learning throughout
the project’s life cycle.
It is common knowledge that there is a lot of work involved with managing a project.
It does not matter if the project is small or large, rather straightforward or complex. All
projects require numerous resources, many deliverables, and even more decisions dur-
ing the life cycle. Often project managers and their teams look to the deliverable as the
ﬁnish line, the point of completion. More seasoned project managers and mature learn-
ing organizations know diﬀerently. A milestone, deliverable, or even a handoﬀis not an
ending point. Rather, it is the process of closure that marks an ending point. Figure 13.3
isolates the closing work eﬀort relative to a project life cycle.
As can be discerned from the graphic in Figure 13.3, project closing is not a work
eﬀort reserved for the end of the project, but rather closing is about reviewing progress,
completing work, and learning throughout the project’s life cycle. This is being empha-
sized here because when discussing project closing with many (dare we say, most)
project managers, the conversation is often most concerned with the end of the project.
How Do You Learn from Your Projects?
A recent Project Management Ofﬁce audit at a company in the Paciﬁc North-
west uncovered a common theme when it came to project closeout work.
Ashley, a seasoned project manager within this rather immature project orga-
nization, shared this comment:
When it comes to learning from our project work, we do conduct post
mortem exercises after the project ends with members of the project
Closing
Process
Group  
Initiating
Planning
Executing
TIME
Level of Effort Relative to
Life Cycle 
Figure 13.3: Project Closing Work Effort During the Life Cycle

UNDERSTANDING PROJECT CLOSURE
355
team who are available [those not deployed on another project]. Unfor-
tunately, we do not invest enough time, in my opinion, during the project
to conduct learning initiatives necessary to capture new knowledge from
lessons learned and adjust our work effort accordingly. We make a lot
of the same mistakes, time and again, across projects. We are wasting
resources by not learning.
Ashley’s experience is a common one. With her company’s approach to con-
duct lessons learned efforts at the end of the project, often a lot of time has
passed since the start of the project and many lessons that may have been
learned have since been forgotten due to the passing of time and not having
codiﬁed, saved, and distributed the lessons experienced earlier and through-
out the project. Additionally, lost was any opportunity to make the next phase
in the project’s life cycle more efﬁcient and effective. When aggregated across
multiple projects in an enterprise, this lack of learning becomes increasingly
expensive and risky.
Waiting until the closing phase of the life cycle to reﬂect and learn becomes a prob-
lem not only for the project, but also for the entire company. Any project team that waits
until the end of the project’s life cycle loses out on opportunities to learn and improve.
Highly experienced project managers and organizations with mature project manage-
ment organizations know the value of intentionally engaging stakeholders in closing
work throughout the life cycle of any project.
The remaining pages in this chapter detail how project managers can (and
should) incorporate closing activities throughout their projects. The tools and tech-
niques outlined hereto should help seasoned and aspiring project managers do just
that—incorporate project closing activities and deliver greater levels of business value.
Summarizing Project Management Process
Groups
As a quick reminder, here is an outline of the major project process groups.3
■
Initiating process group. Those processes performed to deﬁne a new project
or a new phase of an existing project by obtaining authorization to start the
project or phase.
■
Planning process group. Those processes required to establish the scope of
the project, reﬁne the objectives, and deﬁne the course of action required
to attain the objectives that the project was undertaken to achieve.
■
Executing process group. Those processes performed to complete the work
deﬁned in the project management plan to satisfy the project speciﬁcations.
■
Monitoring and controlling process group. Those processes required to
track, review, and regulate the progress and performance of the project;
(continued)

356
PROJECT CLOSURE
identify any areas in which changes to the plan are required; and initiate
the corresponding changes.
■
Closing process group. Those processes performed to ﬁnalize all activities
across all process groups to formally close the project or phase.
PROJECT CLOSURE PLAN AND CHECKLIST
Proper project closure starts with proper planning. Planning is especially important
when it comes to project closure because this phase in the project’s life cycle and the
work associated with it is often neglected. To ensure project closure is not neglected,
best practices suggest starting the project’s closure work during the planning phase of
the project. Doing so ensures allocation of resources and clearly sets expectations
of how project closure activities will be conducted throughout the project. This leads
to the following two important questions.
1.
What activities are associated with the project closure work eﬀort?
2.
When should the project closure work be conducted?
There are three major tasks for project managers to oversee during closeout work.
These three tasks are the same (at a generalized level) regardless when in the life cycle
they are administered. First, the project manager must evaluate if the outcomes, deci-
sions, and deliverables of the project (at that point in the life cycle) met the expectations
of all stakeholders. This work can be summarized by the following questions:
■
Were all planned and scheduled deliverables and key milestones complete?
■
Based on the work to date, is the overall health of the project and the team high and
functional?
■
Basedontheworktodate,arethestakeholderssatisﬁedwithprogressandoptimistic
about the eﬀectiveness of work relative to the next phase (or operationalization) of
the project?
■
Is all contract and procurement work ﬁnalized and up-to-date?
■
Is the team adequately prepared, resourced, and optimistic about the eﬀectiveness
of work relative to the next phase of the project?
Essentially, these questions serve as a framework for project managers to begin
project closure activities. Ideally, all questions would be answered “yes.” If there is a “no”
answer, the project manager needs to further investigate, determine what is needed
to change the “no” to a “yes” in the next phase of work. In some cases, doing so will
require support, guidance, and direction from senior leadership, the governing body,
or sponsor of the project.
As project closure activities begin, a multitude of work lies ahead. The use of the
project closure checklist is helpful for guiding the closure work and ensuring all areas
are addressed. Table 13.1 oﬀers a generic project closure checklist that can be modiﬁed
to meet the needs of your particular organization and project.4

PROJECT CLOSURE PLAN AND CHECKLIST
357
Table 13.1: Generic Project Closure Checklist
Status
Checklist Items
Verify all project deliverables completed
Conduct project closure meetings
Develop a resource reassignment plan
Close out all work orders, contracts, and subcontracts
Prepare final reports (project, financial, quality, and so on)
Submit final reports to customer and top management as required
Finalize the project file
Close out all financial documents
Ensure all costs are charged to the project
Submit final invoices to customer and pay final invoices from suppliers
Document final change management log and final project scope
Document actual delivery dates of all deliverables
Conduct the final postproject review meeting
Submit final customer or client acceptance documentation
Officially notify the customer or client of project completion
Officially notify vendors, suppliers, and partners of project completion
Compile and store all required documentation for long-term data management
Dispose of all equipment and materials
Recognize the work of project team members
Collect and document all project lessons learned
Celebrate success
If the ﬁrst part of the project manager’s work in closing is to determine what worked
and what didn’t, the second critical aspect of closing is documenting your ﬁndings.
Documentation here means updating project artifacts, planning documents related
to upcoming phases of work, and templates and best practice documents for other
project teams. This leads us to the third and ﬁnal work eﬀort for project managers in
closing project work eﬀorts—socialize lessons learned and key takeaways.
The socialization of lessons learned and knowledge goes beyond the updating of
artifacts and templates. Here, socialization means broadcasting and distributing knowl-
edge. This means that the project manager and their team serve as a subject matter
expert by sharing knowledge: a researcher and a teacher, if you will, of key ﬁndings from
experience. This requires project managers to communicate eﬀectively and do so in a
way that focuses on applying lessons from one project on to others. The more often this
occurs, teams and organizations can become smarter, faster. The faster you can learn,
the better oﬀyou will be. This work is where teams, and organizations at large, can
build a competitive advantage. When knowledge sharing becomes a cultural expecta-
tion among project managers and their teams, intellectual capacity increases vicariously

358
PROJECT CLOSURE
from one team to another and best practices, tools, processes, and know-how become
expectations for continuous improvement.
Developing the Plan and Checklist
Proper planning is perhaps one of the most important aspects to ensuring project suc-
cess.Projectmanagersdeveloptheirclosureplaninaccordancewiththeoverallproject’s
scope and schedule. This enables the project manager to align the frequency of closure
work with minor and major activities of the project. The project management plan typ-
ically addresses the following items in relation to a business problem or opportunity:
■
Scope
■
Time and schedule
■
Costs
■
Quality
■
Communication
■
Risk
■
Procurement
During the planning phase of the project, closure activities can often be an over-
sight. This is unfortunate because closing a project has direct correlation and implication
on each of the seven bulleted items just noted. Proper planning should include closing
activitiesaspartoftheproject’sscope,time,andcost.Doingsocertainlyhasimplications
relative to the project’s quality, communication, risk management, and procurement ini-
tiatives. Therefore, the ﬁrst step to ensure proper project closure is to develop the project
closure plan during the project’s planning phase.
Ensuring proper project closure is the process of identifying the requirements for
closing out the most critical aspects of the project. These aspects could include deci-
sions, deliverables, milestones, and (deﬁnitely) each major life cycle phase of the project.
Figure 13.4 highlights the plan for project closure relative to inputs and outputs.
Essentially, the inputs necessary to clearly and completely plan for project closure
include the core project management plans. These plans should be detailed during the
planning phase of any project and from them, a project closure plan and its associated
processes, practices, expectations, and checklists can be created.
Since every project is diﬀerent, the detail (breadth and depth) of the project closure
plan will likely be diﬀerent for each project. The challenge faced by most project man-
agers is to ensure project closure occurs (make sure the project is completing work as
planned, document lessons learned, and share that knowledge to project teams) with-
out being overprescribed in the process or overburdened by the tools used in the pro-
cess. It is easy for project managers to simply say that project closure activities will occur
at every milestone or deliverable in the project schedule. In reality, however, that is not
needed. The project manager must discern at which critical points in the project should
an investment of time, personnel, and perhaps other resources be made to reﬂect, learn,
update documents and plans, and share ﬁndings. This is a balancing act for all project
managers (see “Balancing the Art and Science of Project Management”).

PROJECT CLOSURE PLAN AND CHECKLIST
359
Project Closure
Plan and Process 
Project Closure
Checklist 
Scope
Inputs
Outputs
Work Breakdown
Structure
Project Schedule
Human Resource
Plan
Stakeholder
Register 
Project Budget
Procurement
Management Plan 
Communication
Plan
Risk Management
Plan 
Organizational
Processes
Figure 13.4: Project Closure Inputs and Outputs
Balancing the Art and Science
of Project Management
There is a long-standing debate as to whether project management is a science.
Indeed, over the years, there have been scientiﬁc protocols added to the work
of project management. Consider the use of time estimating techniques, mea-
suring project performance with earned value management calculations, and
planning resource allocation needs relative to work effort. All of that is science.
However, the sum of all of that does not make project management. There is
also the importance for project managers to enable teams, navigate organi-
zational politics, motivate and encourage people to thrive, and communicate
effectively across diverse stakeholders and groups. That is all leadership and
that is all art.
The reality is, project management is not an “either-or” equation, but rather
a “both-and” need when it comes to art and science. The best project managers
balance the science of management with the art of leadership. These managers
know when to push for absolute use of project tools and when to lighten up
to ﬁt readiness of the team and organization’s culture. That’s balancing art and
science.
Any project closing plan should include the following sections or categories of
content:
■
Executive Summary
■
Project Scope and Business Objectives

360
PROJECT CLOSURE
■
Start and End Dates of Project Phases of Work
■
Project Completion Criteria and Metrics
■
Project Closure Deliverables
■
Project Closure Documentation
■
Project Closure Resources
■
Project Closure Communication Plan
■
Final Approval
It is important to note here that the closure plan will (at the completion of
the project) turn into the basis of the project closure report. So, in essence, using
this outline enables the project manager to plan (or start) with the end in mind.
The following describes each of the sections.
Executive Summary
It details the project closure work eﬀort, the timing of such work, and the business value
of its use. Additionally, this summary outlines key ﬁndings, issues, best practices, recom-
mendations, and lessons learned.
Project Scope and Business Objectives
It summarizes the scope of the project and the key business objectives aiming to be
met. This detail explains stakeholders and groups (inside and outside the organization)
impacted by the project and aims to align deliverables and project work outcomes to
business goals. It is important that any objective detailed in this section be plainly writ-
ten, unambiguous, and speciﬁc to the point of being measurable with tools such as
the project charter (Chapter 3), project business case (Chapter 3), and work breakdown
structure (WBS) or program work breakdown structure (PWBS) (Chapter 5) contain the
necessary information for this section.
Start and End Dates of Project Phases of Work
It summarizes the estimated start and end dates of the project. Some project managers
may also choose to illustrate a milestone view of the project schedule in this section.
Doing so helps to highlight the critical timing of the project work and at which points
closure activities will be used. Being clear in this section about project closure events
helps to ensure that project resources (especially personnel) are available for such work
prior to being reallocated to other initiatives.
Project Completion Criteria and Metrics
This section details both project and business measures and metrics that will be used to
evaluate project completion. A simple table (see Table 3.2) is most often used to denote
the activity or deliverable being reviewed, the criteria used to determine completion,
and any metrics used in the completion determination. Having this level of detail creates
unambiguous means by which a project can be deemed successful.
Project Closure Deliverables
This section outlines two major closure needs. First, this section serves as a checklist for
review of all project deliverables and whether or not each has been completed. Second,

PROJECT CLOSURE PLAN AND CHECKLIST
361
Table 13.2: Project Completion Template
Activity/Deliverable
Completion Criteria
Completion Metrics
it identiﬁes the handoﬀnecessary to release project deliverables to operational owners.
A simple table, such as the template shown in Table 13.3, is most commonly used to cap-
ture such detail. Highlighted will be any outstanding items such as those not complete
or not yet ready for handoﬀ. Such items will be accompanied with recommendations
and actions for resolution.
Project Closure Documentation
Any project document should be reviewed for completeness, updated, and archived.
To do so, a document or artifact register should be detailed at the planning phase of
the project and updated throughout the project cycle. This section of the plan should
include that register, clearly noting the owner(s) during the project and post project, the
location of the artifact, and keep track of the updates or versions of the artifacts as the
project matriculates its life cycle.
Project Closure Resources
This section outlines the resources needed for closure activities. Planning for the use
of resources early in the project helps to ensure their availability at the time of closing
activities. Again, a simple table (see Table 13.4) will suﬃce for planning purposes.
Project Closure Communication Plan
This section details the communication necessary to broadcast all lessons learned, key
takeaways from the project work, new best practices, and any updated tools, templates,
or other artifacts. A simple table (see Table 13.5) outlining key aspects of the communi-
cation plan can help serve as a summary view of all messaging (see Table 3.5).
Final Approval
This section is a placeholder for ﬁnal sign-oﬀof project closure. It is a formality that is
often signed singularly by the project sponsor or jointly by the sponsor and operational
Table 13.3: Project Closure Deliverables Template
Deliverable
Operational Owner
Complete
Handoff Plan

362
PROJECT CLOSURE
Table 13.4: Project Closure Resource Template
Resource Name
Closure Activity
Responsibility
Allocation
Approved
Duration of
Work Effort
Table 13.5: Project Closure Communication Template
Owner
Message
Audience
Distribution
Method
Timing
leader assuming responsibility of the project deliverables. A name, signature, and date
are the items most often captured and, once obtained, signal the formal closure of the
project and release of all resources.
Using the Closure Plan and Checklist
It is incumbent on the project manager to use the closure plan and checklists as tools:
tools to help negotiate the need for resource allocation for such work and tools to
support the monitoring function of the project and expedite the review of work com-
pletion. As noted earlier, detailing the tool and using the tool is a balancing act between
art (leadership) and science (management). The intent is to validate completion of work
and readiness for handoﬀwhile simultaneously codifying lessons learned and sharing
them for enterprise value. Use just enough rigidity necessary to capture this work, while
maximizing latitude to project personnel necessary to complete the work.
Beneﬁts
Handoﬀs, handovers, decisions, deliverables, and a myriad of other important activities
occur throughout the project. Using the closure plan and checklist can mean the dif-
ference between project success and failure. Importantly, beyond the project itself, fol-
lowing a proper plan and checklist can create a distinctive advantage for a company by
means of learning faster than competitors. Learning faster can translate into faster time
to markets with products, higher quality of services oﬀered to customers, and increased
margins due to lower project expense ratios.

THE PROJECT CLOSURE REPORT
363
THE PROJECT CLOSURE REPORT
Most project sponsors expect a ﬁnal project report. When completed properly, the
project closure plan (discussed previously) manifests into the project closure report
(see Figure 13.5). This tool is important in that it is the ﬁnal report of the project that
formalizes the closure of the project. It conﬁrms not only the completion of the project,
but also the acceptance of the project handoﬀfrom the project team to the operational
owner or client.
Developing the Project Closure Report
The project closure report is a documented review of the entire project. It highlights
the completion of project work. It should also highlight any variance between what
was planned and what was actually accomplished. Such variances may be in the form
of schedule, cost, resource utilization, and other pertinent measures and metrics. It
should also highlight the likelihood of application of the project outcome(s) achieving
the initially noted business case problem or opportunity. Noting all of this can follow
the same outline and format as the project closure plan, which is outlined again here
for convenience:
■
Executive Summary
■
Project Scope and Business Objectives
■
Start and End Dates of Project Phases of Work
Project Closure
Plan and Process
Project Closure
Checklist 
Scope
Inputs
Outputs
Final
Work Breakdown
Structure
Project Schedule
Human Resource
Plan
Stakeholder
Register 
Project Budget
Procurement
Management Plan
Communication
Plan 
Risk Management
Plan
Organizational
Processes
Project Closure
Report
Figure 13.5: Manifestation of the Project Closure Report

364
PROJECT CLOSURE
■
Project Completion Criteria and Metrics
■
Project Closure Deliverables
■
Project Closure Documentation
■
Project Closure Resources
■
Proejct Closure Communication Plan
■
Final Approval
In addition to the tables and checklists outlined in the prior section, you may choose
to summarize major closure activities into an executive level checklist. This executive
level view of the project would summarize the milestones, deliverables, key decisions,
handoﬀs and signoﬀs, and other pertinent aspects of the project. This level could aggre-
gate such accomplishments as all deliverables or it may be necessary (depending on
the project, the project manager’s preference, and the sponsor’s request) to detail each
milestone and deliverable individually, rather than in aggregate.
Table 13.6 illustrates a sample executive level checklist used in a project closure
report. As noted, the content and level of detail will likely vary from project to project,
but this illustration provides a general view of the checklist.
In addition to the checklist and other aspects of the report already noted, project
managers should also detail any business or stakeholder implications because of the
project. There may be known positive or adverse eﬀects to other projects, products,
teams, or resources because of the outcome of your project. Conducting a thorough
investigation and deriving a resolution to such implications may be outside of the scope
of the project being closed out; however, detailing such implications to make them
knowniscertainlywithinthescopeoftheprojectteamandexpectationsofprojectwork.
Table 13.6: Project Completion Template
Item
Complete
(yes/no)
Notes or Actions
All deliverables complete
All milestones complete
All contracts closed out
All issues resolved
All handoffs signed off
All payments made
All invoices submitted
All accounts closed
All artifacts updated
All lessons learned gathered,
documented, and shared
All personnel reassigned
All excess materials disposed of or
stored
. . . .

THE PROJECT CLOSURE REPORT
365
Further, in developing this report, the sponsor or stakeholders may request a
presentation to accompany the ﬁnal report. Therefore, as the report is being planned
and detailed, be mindful about how the report may be converted into a presentation
format for use.
Using the Project Closure Report
A project closure report starts in the planning phase of the project’s cycle. If nothing
else, project managers use the planning phase to understand what the project sponsor
and other stakeholders need at the closing of the project. This insight guides the project
manager in knowing what to deliver in the project closing report. The primary use of the
report is for sponsor signoﬀfor project completion and for permanent documentation
of project results.
Although the report can be planned at the beginning of the project, it is not until
the end that it is fully documented to completion. In between planning and closing, the
project manager must use discretion to periodically update the report. Doing so may
expedite some time at the end. However, even if a decision is made to wait until the end,
the project closing plan and checklists (outlined earlier) should be used throughout the
project. At the end of the project, these checklists can be used to complete all necessary
components of the closing report.
Seasoned project managers know that closing out a project can heighten emotions.
The longer the project in duration, the more personnel have the opportunity to galva-
nize a culture, build relationships, and grow attached to “my” project. The closure of the
project signiﬁes a transition. What was once assumed as “my” project is now going to
be closed. There may also be a sense of uncertainty in terms of resource allocation. The
ﬁnish of one project usually means the start of something new and anything new can
be emotionally challenging.
To address such concerns, project managers should work hard to meet with team
members individually as well as in groups and the entire team. Spend time listening to
each team member and help them celebrate the successes of the project, learn from the
shortcomings of the project, and motivate them to embrace what is next. Remember
that closing a project is more than just handing oﬀownership to an operational team
or customer. As a project manager, it is also about helping your team move on to their
next project assignment.
Beneﬁts
One of the most frustrating aspects of managing projects is leaving work undone. The
project closure report ﬁnalizes all work. There are beneﬁts of the report for the project
team and its stakeholders. From a sponsor perspective, the beneﬁt of the report is hav-
ing a summarized document of the entire project. For the end user or operational team,
it is an oﬃcial handoﬀof ownership. For the project manager and team, it outlines a clear
point of transition to work on other projects. For other project teams, there is value in
gaining lessons learned and best practices as well as identifying any implications from
the closure of the project. Finally, as was noted in the project closure planning section,
using the closure report can create a distinct advantage for a company by means of
learning faster than competitors.

366
PROJECT CLOSURE
THE POSTMORTEM REVIEW
Sometimes called the post project review or post-implementation review, the project
postmortem goes by many names. Regardless of what you call it, the project post-
mortem is a review of a project after the project closure acceptance, after all project
closure activities are complete, and after the project has been in operational mode for
a period of time. The purpose of such a review is to determine the following:
1.
Was the project successful?
2.
Were all closure activities handled properly, especially any ﬁnal handoﬀs from the
project team to the operations team or customer?
3.
Were lessons learned captured and transferred to project teams across the enter-
prise properly?
4.
Has the project achieved planned operational outcomes—the business goals and
objectives outlined in the project’s business case?
As can likely be imagined, a postmortem review can be rather stressful, especially
if the project was not deemed successful. In such events, individuals could engage in
ﬁnger-pointing, placing blame, dodging responsibility, skirting accountability, and miss
all opportunity for learning, growth, and improvement. Because of the probability of
such a negative event, it is the responsibility of the project manager to work with the
project sponsor and operational team leadership to ensure that an honest postmortem
review occurs without negativity.
To establish an honest and positive postmortem review, the project manager, spon-
sor, and team must work from the very beginning of the project to cultivate a positive
culture: a culture of team, a culture of we are in this together as compared to “us” versus
“them,” a culture of how can we win together rather than how can I make sure I win and
you lose. With this in mind, we can add one more element to our inputs-outputs illustra-
tion to capture how the postmortem work will leverage earlier project work. Figure 13.6
illustrates how early planning documents can be used for postmortem review work.
Conducting the Postmortem Review
The three steps most associated with the postmortem review are: (1) gather feedback
from project and operational teams, (2) organize and facilitate a meeting among the
teams and key stakeholders, and (3) capture the meeting outcomes in the form of a
postmortem report.
Gathering Feedback
Feedback is important in general, but it is especially important for a postmortem review.
Thoughts and opinions from team members are also important, but more so are facts
about the project and operations. In order to get the facts, the project sponsor and
operations leadership should identify a well-respected and nonbiased person to gather
information among the project team members and stakeholders. This same person may

THE POSTMORTEM REVIEW
367
Project Closure
Plan and Process
Project Closure
Checklist 
Scope
Inputs
Outputs
Final
Postmortem
Work Breakdown
Structure
Project Schedule
Human Resource
Plan
Stakeholder
Register
Project Budget
Procurement
Management Plan
Communication
Plan
Risk Management
Plan 
Organizational
Processes
Project Closure
Report
Postmortem
Report
Figure 13.6: The Cycle of Closure Work
be used to facilitate the postmortem meeting. We do not recommend that the project
manager be the postmortem review facilitator.
Gathering feedback ahead of the meeting will help to expedite the meeting and
provide the facilitator with a sense as to how the meeting will go—will it be emotionally
charged and negative or will it be productive, future focused, and positive? The three
standard questions used when gathering feedback in preparation for the meeting are:
1.
What went right that should be considered best practice and used during every
project?
2.
What went wrong and should be used as a leading indicator metric of project
problems?
3.
What should be done diﬀerently on the next project?
There are a number of diﬀerent ways in which these questions can be worded and
facilitated, but in general, these are the three primary questions used in postmortem
reviews. This information can be gathered from face-to-face interviews, e-mail or
web-based surveys, and from the review of prior lessons learned documentation if
gathered throughout the project’s life cycle.
Conducting the Meeting
The postmortem meeting can either feel like a celebration or a poor performance
review. It will be a celebration if things have gone well. Due to poor execution however,
missing business goals while in operations, personality conﬂicts, organizational politics,
or a number of other variables, the postmortem meeting could be negative. It is for this
reason a neutral and expert facilitator is recommended to oversee such meetings.
This individual can summarize feedback gathered ahead of the meeting and dive
into the details necessary to obtain real meaning and insight on what to do better

368
PROJECT CLOSURE
during future projects. The aim of the meeting is to uncover ways to make project work
better and strengthen the culture of the individuals involved. Expert facilitators can
navigate the challenging conversations of an otherwise negative postmortem review
and have participants leave the meeting feeling good about improvements for future
projects.
Documenting the Postmortem Report
The postmortem report is an important artifact. It needs to strike a balance between
pithy-level documentation and an overly burdensome article. Best practices suggest the
document not be summarized in bullet points, but rather written in a narrative form
of what to do and what not to do. Bullet points run the risk of being too ambiguous,
whereas a narrative that is properly categorized can provide a richer context of lessons
learned, thus making them easier to read, easier to contextualize, and easier to apply.
Further, this report should be provided to project and operational teams beyond those
represented in the postmortem meeting. The idea of the report is to beneﬁt all teams as
an enterprise asset, not just those involved in the postmortem.
The Top-Ten Best Practices for Postmortem
Success
1.
Start early. Make sure the postmortem work effort is part of the project’s
resource plan and schedule.
2.
Establish your team culture. Establish ground rules and expectations of
one another as you onboard project team members and stakeholders.
3.
Know your measures of success. Work with your team and customer to
identiﬁy the questions that will be raised during the postmortem so that
there are no surprises.
4.
Use experts. Since it is often difﬁcult to facilitate a meeting and doc-
ument the meeting and do so without bias, use an expert facilitator,
scribe, and others during the postmortem review.
5.
Ensure representation. Make sure the key members from the project
team and operational team are present and comfortable in sharing their
thoughts, ideas, and opinions openly and productively.
6.
Everyone contributes. Conduct the postmortem in a way that everyone
participates without peer pressure or senior leader persuasion.
7.
Work from facts. Make sure facts are known and have any comments
facilitated to the point of it being fact-based rather than subjective
opinion.
8.
Focus on the future. While the postmortem is a reﬂection of past events,
the primary focus is on how to make future projects better and therefore
the majority of time should be spent on what should be done differently
next time.
9.
Detail the conversation in narrative form. Rather than high-level
bullet-point summaries of the conversation, have the meeting detailed

THE POSTMORTEM REVIEW
369
in a narrative report because stories make for easier learning than
bullet points.
10.
Broadcast your results. Be sure to share the postmortem report with
other project teams and archive in an easily accessible database for
other project managers to use.
Many facilitators of postmortem reviews ﬁnd that using a checklist can be helpful
throughout the postmortem process—from gathering feedback to conducting the
meeting to documenting the ﬁnal report. The sample checklist in Table 13.7 oﬀers
questions that go beyond the three (high-level) standard questions noted earlier in this
section.
Depending on the response to each question in the postmortem checklist question-
naire, follow up or probing questions can (and should) be asked. For example, if any
question is answered “no” the facilitator should ask, what should be done diﬀerently on
the next project to ensure this occurs? The facilitator could also ask if there were any
leading indicators of a problem.
Using the Postmortem Review
Like the project closure report, the best postmortem review meetings and ﬁnal reports
start in the planning phase of the project. Experienced project managers know to plan
properly at the beginning phases of the project’s cycle to help ensure that resources
(time and personnel) are allocated for work after the project becomes part of operations
(or customer) use. The actual postmortem work eﬀort is conducted three to six months
after the ﬁnal handoﬀfrom the project team to the operations team or customer. The
timing between the project handoﬀand postmortem work is necessary in order to allow
the operations team enough time to realize the value and beneﬁt from the project.
It is important to note that while the tools and templates outlined for postmortem
work facilitate a reﬂection of the past, the focus during this work is on the future. The
reﬂection of the past can mostly be gleaned from the project closure report and a short
conversation with key project team membersand stakeholders. Therefore, the eﬀort and
workload associated with postmortem activities should be minimal. While the workload
isoften minimal, the resultsfrom the work can be verydramatic. The tools, and especially
the postmortem review meeting, should focus on leveraging experiential knowledge
to make future projects better (more eﬃcient and eﬀective), create higher-performing
project teams, and increase business value.
Most postmortem meetings have a duration of anywhere from one to four hours.
The larger and more complex the project, the longer the postmortem meeting may
take. Although it may be assumed at these meetings, it is important for the facilita-
tor (or the project sponsor) to emphasize the need for an honest, candid, and objec-
tive discussion and to focus on process and not people. These behavioral ground rules
serve as guidelines for participants and the facilitator. Such ground rules establish a

370
PROJECT CLOSURE
Table 13.7: Project Postmortem Checklist Questionnaire
Category
Question
Notes
Project planning
1.
Did the business case clearly detail the problem or
opportunity?
2.
Were business goals and project objectives clear and
measureable?
3.
Was the project scope, schedule, budget, and quality
clearly detailed?
4.
Were project plans detailed, accurate, and usable?
Customer focus
5.
Was the voice of the customer evident in all phases of
the project?
6.
Did deliverables and milestones meet customer (and
stakeholder) target expectations?
7.
Was communication with customers effective?
Deliverables
8.
Did the outcome (all outputs) of the project meet your
expectations?
9.
What gap or variance (if any) exists between your
expectations and the final deliverable?
10.
Were project monitoring and controlling efforts effec-
tive?
Scheduling
11.
Was planning and scheduling resources for the project
effective?
12.
Was there a visible schedule available to “see” mile-
stones and critical project work?
Resourcing
13.
Was the project resourced properly?
14.
Was the team effective? Would you describe the team
as “high performing”?
15.
Was there a skills assessment conducted to determine
resource need?
16.
Was there clarity in roles, functions, responsibilities,
and proper awareness of interdependencies?
17.
Was there active (proper) senior management sup-
port?
Managing risk
18.
Was there a deliberate risk management plan and pro-
cess in use?
19.
How effective was the planning and management of
risks?
20.
Were contingency plans in place and effective for all
risks?
Communication
21.
Was there an effective communication plan for the
project?
22.
Was there proper stakeholder management (analysis
and monitoring)?
23.
Was communication (to the team, to sponsors, to all
stakeholders) effective?
Decisions
24.
Was there a clear decision making process (including
an escalation process) in place and used?
25.
Were decisions made fast enough?
Other
26.
What are your most critical lessons learned from this
project?
27.
…
28.
…

THE POSTMORTEM REVIEW
371
constructive atmosphere for discussion and learning. These ground rules also help to
prevent personal attacks that disengage participants and disable learning.
In addition to the information gathering ahead of the meeting and ground rules
for use during the meeting, a prerequisite for an eﬀective postmortem review is
a well-crafted agenda. The agenda will certainly vary based on ﬁndings from the
information gathering work eﬀort. The following bullet points, however, oﬀer a sample
agenda for a postmortem review:
■
Welcome and introduction of everyone.
■
Review of the ground rules by the facilitator.
■
Summary of information gathering ﬁndings from the facilitator (this information
should be sent to participants in advance of the meeting if at all possible).
■
Review and rank issues and critical success factors.
■
Create a “what went wrong” list.
■
Create a “what went right” list.
■
Detail opportunities for improvement with speciﬁc (actionable) recommendations.
■
Outline speciﬁc points of communications and next steps.
The facilitator can manage this agenda in a number of ways. For example, all items
can be addressed in an open, round-table conversation. As an alternative, the facilitator
could conduct this meeting as a workshop in which case participants are much more
active. However the postmortem review is conducted, it should ﬁt the organizational
culture and conversational tone necessary to achieve the end results, which is individual,
team, and organizational learning.
Variations
It has been noted that project managers often address project closure work at the end
of projects rather than throughout the life cycle of projects. One of the best practices for
periodically evaluating a project’s progress toward meeting business goals is the use of
a retrospective process.
Retrospectives are a series of events where team members who have a perspective
to share meet at critical points during the project cycle to discuss what is working and
what needs to be improved. The intent is to capture key lessons while a project is in
ﬂight, and apply improvements during the remainder of the life cycle.5
Retrospectives diﬀer from the more traditional postmortem activities. In many
companies, a project postmortem is held following the conclusion or cancellation of a
project. Because this meeting occurs at the end of the project, it is too late to implement
corrections on that project. At best, learnings can be applied to the next project. In our
experience, the postmortem is many times held as an afterthought without a deﬁned,
objective process and does not lead to actionable change to project team practices.
There are signiﬁcant advantages of using the retrospective process. First, consider
that many times teams focus only on the negative aspects of their performance and
forget the positive. Retrospectives also explore what is working well on a project, and
ensures the practices are reinforced and repeated. Second, retrospectives allow an orga-
nization to make positive changes to projects that are currently in ﬂight; therefore, they

372
PROJECT CLOSURE
don’t have to wait several months or more to realize the beneﬁts of their learnings.
Third, teams learn best when they solve immediate problems. As part of the retrospec-
tive method, teams focus on the few but critical opportunities to improve, and develop
speciﬁc action plans to drive changes in their practices. These action plans are owned
by various members of the project team who drive them to implementation.
One of the reasons retrospectives are quite eﬀective is the use of a trained facilitator
who is an expert in extracting the key issues and learnings from a diverse and distributed
workforce. When applied most eﬀectively, a trained, objective facilitator—someone
other than the team leader—guides the team through an analysis of what is working
well and what is not, and then helps the project team generate ideas for improvement
and what they want to do diﬀerently moving forward.
The project retrospective is an organizational learning activity. Whether an organi-
zation uses the retrospective method or another method to capture its organizational
learnings is not the most critically important factor in creating a learning organization.
What is important is that the organization consistently invests the time and eﬀort to
stop, reﬂect, learn, and improve continuously over time.
Establishing a consistent practice of holding retrospective reviews will lead
to the identiﬁcation of many improvements needed for project success. Execution of
the improvements should be approved by the project governance body, and then
implemented within the organization and on targeted projects in a methodical manner.
Improvements should be implemented as quickly as possible to reap beneﬁts, but care
must be taken to prevent more change than the organization is able to absorb at any
one time.
Beneﬁts
Projectsarediﬃculttoinitiate,plan,execute,andclosewithoutissue.Mistakes,missteps,
and errors will happen. When such issues arise, it is important to stop, reﬂect, and learn
how to prevent it from happening again. Many great things happen on a project as well
and should not be lost, but instead repeated on future projects. Without learning, we
are doomed to repeat mistakes and forget success. Learning is a core function of project
closing. Transferring learning from one project to the next will continuously increase the
probability of success.
With the lessons learned from past projects helping to increase the probability of
future project success, we can see the postmortem work serving as a linchpin in an
organizational knowledge management process. With this understanding, the project
life cycle can be reconﬁgured from a linear view to a process view, as illustrated in
Figure 13.7.
The opportunity for learning from the postmortem review process is signiﬁcant. It is
because of the learning aspect of postmortems that most organizations associate these
processes as being part of knowledge management.6
As noted, learning is a core function—and beneﬁt—of postmortem work. This can
be viewed as a long-term beneﬁt. The short-term beneﬁt is making sure the ﬁnal project
handoﬀto the operations team (or customer) was done so eﬀectively. The relatively
low work eﬀort associated with postmortem activities is shadowed by the value added
from the eﬀort. Postmortem work can establish greater levels of team performance,

REFERENCES
373
Planning
Closing
Executing
Initiating
Figure 13.7: The Life Cycle of Project Learning
strengthen core principles and values of an organization, and foster a continuous learn-
ing and improvement mindset from project work.
CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this chapter, we presented three tools—the project closure plan and checklist, project
closurereport,andprojectpostmortem.Additionally,asectiononprojectretrospectives
was detailed.
Each of the tools is designed with a distinct purpose. Collectively, as part of project
closing work, they all serve to ensure that proper completion of work and handoﬀs
occurred and importantly that lessons learned were captured and shared as an enter-
prise asset—a competitive distinction. As a set of complementary tools, they enable
monitoring, reporting, and controlling of project risk. They also help us study the imple-
mentation and learn lessons for continuous improvements.
References
1.
Kerzner, H. R. Jr., Project Management: A Systems Approach to Planning, Scheduling,
and Controlling, 11th ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013).
2.
Project Management Institute. AGuidetotheProjectManagementBodyofKnowledge,
5th ed. (Newtown Square, PA: Project Management Institute, 2013).
3.
Ibid.
4.
Archibald, R. D. ManagingHighTechnologyProgramsandProjects (Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons, 1976).
5.
Lavell, D., and Russ Martinelli. Program and Project Retrospectives: An Introduction. PM
World Today, 10 (1), 2008.
6.
Lientz, B. P., and P. R. Kathryn. Breakthrough Project Management (San Diego, CA: Aca-
demic Press, 1999).


P A R T
VI
Risk and
Stakeholder
Management
Tools


14
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
F
or many companies, establishing industry leadership means assuming a higher
level of risk due to the uncertainties associated with navigating unchartered
territories. Developing new capabilities in today’s environment is risky business
by nature, especially if a company wants to establish or maintain a leadership position.
However, risk taking does not mean taking chances. It involves understanding the
risk-reward ratio, then managing the risks associated with a project.1
Project risk is the potential failure to deliver the beneﬁts promised when a project is
initiated.2 By understanding and containing the risk on a project, the project manager
is able to manage in a proactive manner. Without good risk management practices
and tools, the project manager will be forced into crisis management activities as
problem after problem presents itself, forcing a team to constantly react to the problem
of the day (or hour). As one well-known author stated, “If you don’t actively attack
the risks, the risks will actively attack you.”3 Risk management is a preventive practice
that allows the project manager to identify potential problems before they occur and
put corrective action in place to avoid or lessen the impact of the risk. Ultimately, this
behavior allows the project team to accelerate through the project cycle at a much
faster pace.
Understanding the level of risk associated with a project is crucial to the project
manager for several reasons. First, by knowing the level of risk associated with a project,
a project manager will have an understanding of the amount of schedule and budget
reserve (risk reserve) needed to protect the project from uncertainty. Second, risk
management is a focusing mechanism that provides guidance as to where critical
project resources are needed—the highest risk events require adequate resources
to avoid or mitigate them. Finally, good risk management practices enable informed
risk-based decision making. Having knowledge of the potential downside or risk of
a particular decision, as well as the facts driving the decision, improves the decision
process by allowing the project manager and team to weigh potential alternatives, or
trade-oﬀs, to optimize the reward-risk ratio.4
Thetoolspresentedinthischapterareinstrumentalinidentifyingriskstotheproject,
assessing their potential impact, developing actions to mitigate them, and monitoring
risk dynamics. Although there is certainly no shortage of project risk management tools
to include in a PM Toolbox, we have included the tools that we see most widely used
and that provide the broadest application to project types and sizes. We begin with the
risk management plan.
377

378
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN
The risk management plan serves to establish the framework and methodology in which
the project team will identify, monitor, and manage the risk associated with a project.
Developing a risk management plan at the onset of a project can help to eliminate
potential issues from emerging, or at least minimize the impact that they have on the
project if they do occur. Having a well-thought-out plan will help project managers deal
with project uncertainties when they arise and in the best case head them oﬀbefore
they impact their project.
Developing a Risk Management Plan
Making decisions is perhaps one of the toughest jobs that project managers have to
take on. Decision making wouldn’t be very challenging in a situation of total certainty,
where all information that is needed for decision making is already available and the
outcomes of decisions are predictable. Project managers’ lives, however, are much more
complex, and most of their decisions are made with incomplete information and uncer-
tain outcomes. This is the realm of project risk management. Beyond it lies the region
of total uncertainty, with complete absence of information, where nothing is known
about outcomes. This total certainty (knowns)—risk (known unknowns)—total uncer-
tainty (unknown unknowns) continuum is illustrated in Figure 14.1.
Risk Management Approach
The risk management plan is a document developed in the beginning of the project
that provides a framework for dealing with risk throughout the project’s life. Included in
the plan is a general description of the approach used to identify, assess, manage, and
monitor project risk events.5 It should include information such as the:
■
Risk management methodology. Identify and describe approaches, tools, and data
sources that may be used to handle risks.
Total
Uncertainty
Unknown
Unknowns
No
Information
Known
Unknowns
Complete
Information
Knowns
Scope of Project Risk Management
Uncertainty
Total
Certainty
Figure 14.1: The Project Risk Management Continuum

RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN
379
■
Roles and responsibilities. Deﬁne who does what in risk management on the project,
from project team members to members of the company’s risk management teams.
■
Budgetingandtiming. Specify the budget for risk management for the project, as well
as the frequency of the risk management processes.
■
Tools. Describe which speciﬁc tools for qualitative and quantitative risk analysis to
use and when to use them.
■
Reporting and monitoring. Deﬁne how risk will be reported and communicated to
the project stakeholders, how risk events and triggers will be monitored throughout
the project cycle, and how the information will be preserved for purposes of lessons
learned.
The risk management approach is fairly well documented and used across most
industries, and focuses on the simple cycle of risk identiﬁcation, assessment, response
planning, and monitoring. Basic risk management terminology is deﬁned in “Basic
Risk-Related Deﬁnitions.”
Basic Risk-Related Definitions
Project risk. The cumulative effect of the chances of uncertain occurrences
adversely affecting project objectives.6
Risk event. The description of what might happen to the detriment of the
project.
Risk probability. The likelihood that a risk will occur.
Risk impact. Severity of its effect on the project objective. Also called risk
consequences or amount at stake.
Risk event status. A measure of importance of a risk event. Also called its
ranking.
Contingency reserve. Also called risk reserve, this is the amount of money
or time normally included into the project cost or schedule baseline to
reduce the risk of overruns of project objectives to a level acceptable to
the organization.7
Risk Identiﬁcation
This section of the plan describes the process for identifying all the potential risks that
may inﬂuence the success of the project. It should describe the methods for how the
risks are identiﬁed and the format in which the risks are recorded.
Multiple ways for accomplishing this step are available, ranging from engaging the
project team in a brainstorming session, to consulting experienced team members,
and to requesting opinions of experts not associated with the project. Typical methods
of identifying risk are expert interviews, reviewing historical information from similar
projects, conducting a risk brainstorming meeting, and using more formal techniques
such as the Delphi method (see “The Basics of Delphi”).

380
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
The Basics of Delphi
The Delphi technique is useful in situations where outcomes or trends are
uncertain. This is particularly true in situations that have not been encountered
previously.
The technique involves soliciting the opinions of a group of experts related
to the future situation. It is best if forethought and preparation are exercised to
identify speciﬁc knowledge gaps relating to the future situation under scrutiny.
The knowledge gaps will guide the selection of the right panel of experts, and
will focus the discussion topics on the right areas.
The technique can be applied informally, where the panel of experts is
gathered together to discuss and debate the topics associated with the future
scenario, focusing on the knowledge gap areas. Group opinions and ideas are
then gathered and summarized. A second or third round of discussion ensues
until convergence of opinion begins to occur.
Applied formally, questionnaires are given to each panel expert in two or
more rounds. After each round, expert opinions are collected and summarized,
and then sent out to each panelist to consider in his or her next response. The
process can continue until convergence or a solution arises.8
Be acutely aware that complete consensus is highly unlikely and not very
useful. Judgment must be applied on the part of the facilitator to gauge when
convergence (not consensus) has occurred. Used to identify potential risk
events, the value of Delphi comes from the emergence of ideas, not in the
convergence of opinion.
When identifying risks, several things have to be taken into account. First, risks
vary across the project life cycle. Typically, risk levels tend to be relatively high early
in the project because so much is unknown. Similarly, later in the project many of the
unknowns are turned into knowns and risk levels are relatively lower. Also, some risks
occur only in certain project stages; for example, risks related to project acceptance tests
are typically encountered near the end of the project. Sometimes, even assumptions
may become a source of risk (see the example titled “Is an Assumption a Risk?”).
The dynamic nature of risk makes the identiﬁcation process iterative, requiring that
once risks are identiﬁed early in the project, they need to be continuously reviewed, with
appropriate adjustments.9
Is an Assumption a Risk?
“Is an assumption a risk?” This was a question that a project manager asked
in a risk identiﬁcation meeting. Assumptions are factors that are not entirely
known or are uncertain but for planning purposes are considered to be true
or certain. For example, consider a ﬁrm that launched a project to develop

RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN
381
and market a product in a Paciﬁc Rim country. A major assumption was that
the country’s annual market growth rate would continue to be around 10 per-
cent. Per its assumption management practice, the ﬁrm ﬁrst documented the
assumption by deﬁning it, nominating its owner, and identifying a monitoring
metric.10 Next, the project manager instructed the owner to periodically test
the metric in order to ensure that no change of assumption occurred. Seeking
to be proactive, the owner deﬁned at which time the assumption becomes a
risk (trigger point) and potential risk response actions may be needed.
A few months later, the country was hit by a recession and the growth rate
declined signiﬁcantly. The project team revisited the assumption and, since the
recession was expected to last for some time, decided that the assumption
changed into a risk, immediately invoking the risk response plan. So “is an
assumption a risk?” It is not; rather, it is a source of potential risk.
Second, risk events rarely strike independently. Rather, they tend to interact with
other risk events, combining into larger risks. Looking for such interactive possibilities is
important in risk identiﬁcation. Finally, since risks come in all types of packages, planners
should conduct risk identiﬁcation in a systematic way so that no stone is left unturned
internally in the project and externally in the environment, including management of
stakeholders. A huge help in this respect may be received from risk categorization.
Risk Categorization
Project planning outputs—scope, cost, time, and quality baselines—are what is at risk.
Having full knowledge of them is crucial in developing response plans to counter risks
to which the outputs will be exposed. These risks can be organized into diﬀerent cat-
egories. For example, risks can be classiﬁed according to their eﬀect on the project—
scope, quality, schedule, and cost risks (in other words, failure to complete the project
tasks within planned scope, quality, schedule, and cost performance). Another way is
to categorize risks per their primary source into external (but unpredictable), external
predictable (but uncertain), internal nontechnical, technical, and legal.11 This perspec-
tive looks for the balance between the internal and environmental impacts. The point
is that the ﬁrm and its projects need a consistent risk categorization schema, suiting its
business and culture, which can serve as a framework for a systematic identiﬁcation and
treatment of risks.
Assess Risk Qualitatively and Prioritize
Once risks have been identiﬁed, it is important to determine both the probability that
each of the risks will occur, and the impact to the project if they occur. In order to
determine the severity of the risks identiﬁed, a probability and impact factor has to be
assigned to each risk. This process allows the project manager to prioritize risks based
on the eﬀect they may have on a project.
A usual problem that arises is that a large number of risks might be identiﬁed
when the initial risk identiﬁcation is performed. However, which risks deserve the most

382
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
attention? To answer that question a project team needs to analyze impact, probability,
and severity (criticality) of each risk.
In the qualitative assessment, we tend to use a nonnumeric probability scale—for
example, a ﬁve-level scale, where 1 = very unlikely, 2 = low likelihood, 3 = likely,
4 = highly likely, and 5 = near certain.12 If you don’t have much experience or
data to reliably assess quantitative probabilities—addressed later in the quantita-
tive assessment—qualitative scales are suﬃciently good. Consequently, you will
qualitatively assess each risk’s probability on this nonnumeric scale.
The next step is to assess the impact of each risk, again on a discrete scale. One
example is a scale such as 1 = very low impact, 2 = low impact, 3 = medium impact,
4 = high impact, and 5 = very high impact. To illustrate its use, let’s assume that a risk
to be assessed has three impacts: Project costs can increase, schedule can slip, and per-
formance of the capability can be reduced. For each one of them, the scale can deﬁne
the levels of impact (see Table 14.3 for an example). After each of the three impacts are
rated, the overall impact rating of the risk is the largest of the three impacts.13
When all risks are assessed in this manner, it is time to use a formula to combine
their risk probability and impact to establish a measure of severity. Although nonlinear
formulas can be employed, linear formulas such as Severity = Probability + N × Impact
are easier to apply.
For example, N can be equal to 2, meaning that impact is twice as important as prob-
ability in establishing risk severity. In this case, the assessed probability and impact for
each risk would be entered in the formula Severity = Probability + 2 × Impact. The out-
come of the calculation will determine the priority of the risks.
The question still remains: How many of the highest-ranking risks should we deal
with? Some larger projects commonly focus on the top ten highest-ranked risks. In con-
trast, some smaller projects decide to manage the top three risks, arguing the lack of
resources to take on a larger number of risks. Both may be dangerous. If these projects
have more than ten and more than three risks, respectively, they are bound to disregard
some critical risks. However, if only one risk is truly a high-probability, high-impact risk,
they are wasting resources looking at the top ten and three risks.
So, what is a reasonable way out? Tools such as the risk register and risk assessment
matrix discussed later in this chapter provide a visual representation of risk prioritization
and are helpful in determining which risks need action and resources applied.
If you don’t have much data to reliably assess quantitative probabilities, qualitative
assessment of risks based on nonnumeric scales is suﬃcient to develop your risk
responses for the most critical risks. For projects where suﬃciently reliable data is
present, the next action is quantitative risk assessment.
Assess Risk Quantitatively
Quantitative risk assessment numerically analyzes the probability of each risk, its con-
sequences on project objectives, and the extent of overall project risk.14 It can be used
separately or together with qualitative assessment.
The process begins from the results of the earlier risk identiﬁcation step. For each
of the identiﬁed risks, you need to quantify the probability of occurrence by asking,
“What is the probability that this risk will happen?” “Ninety percent,” the team decides.

RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN
383
This means that there is a 10 percent probability that the risk will not occur. Clearly, the
probability that the risk will occur plus the probability that it will not occur equals 1.
Assessing the probability is no more than an estimate based on solid historical informa-
tion from similar experiences in past projects or considerate opinion of experts.
The next step is to determine the risk impact. “What will happen if this risk occurs?”
is the question that should be asked. While the impact may be expressed in almost any
units, from percentage of lost market share to loss of revenue, the real emphasis here
is to estimate schedule or cost severity of the risk. For example, if the highest priority
project objective is schedule, then the risk event status would be calculated in terms
of time.15
Risk Event Status = Risk Probability × Impact
= 90% × 60days
= 54days
In this example, the potential schedule impact for a particular risk event has been
determined to be 60 days, with a 90% probability of occurring at this point in time.
The current risk event status is therefore 54 days, which is the current risk exposure for
this event.
When the status is calculated for all risk events, the natural question is: Which risks
are really vital and deserve attention and which are trivial? To answer this question, we
will use principles similar to those on the issue of severity in qualitative assessment. First,
establish numerical intervals of severity that determine whether a risk event status is
critical (potential showstoppers), near-critical (soon to be potential showstoppers), or
noncritical (minor risks). For example, in a smaller project, the risk event status exceeding
15 days was critical, between 7 and 14 days near-critical, and below 7 days noncritical.
Second, respond to the highest-ranked risks, down to an agreed level.
Determine Risk Response
Once risks have been qualitatively or quantitatively assessed, the project ream must
determine how to address the risks that have the greatest potential for impacting the
project. This section of the risk management plan explains the response options and
actions that are available to the project team in managing the risks.
Any suitable risk response action essentially falls into one of the four broad cat-
egories of response strategies: avoidance, transference, mitigation, and acceptance
of risk.16 Changing the project plan or condition to eliminate the selected risk event
is risk avoidance. For instance, if faced with the risk of not having an available expert
to perform a quality business process analysis, the risk can avoided by hiring such an
expert.
Risk transfer simply involves shifting consequences of a risk event to a third party,
along with the ownership of the response. If, for example, projects within a ﬁrm have
historically been exposed to a risk of slow quality testing from their internal capabili-
ties, the risk can be transferred to a third party by hiring a professional ﬁrm to do the
testing.

384
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
The intent of risk mitigation is to lower the probability or impact (or both) of an unfa-
vorable risk event to an acceptable threshold. A fairly common risk for many projects
is the potential decision delays caused by the busy schedules of the executive sponsor.
This risk can be mitigated a number of ways, such as reducing the number of major mile-
stone decision points or the delegation of decision authority to one of the executive’s
direct reports.
The three response strategies—avoidance, transference, and mitigation—are
deployed when risks they are responding to are among the highest-ranked risks.
Obviously, these responses will be incorporated in the project plan.
For those risks that are not among the highest-ranked risks, or for risks that have
no other viable response strategy, a risk acceptance strategy is used. This implies that
projectmanagershavedecidedtonotchangetheprojectplanorareunabletoarticulate
a feasible response action to deal with a risk.17 A typical example of the risk acceptance is
the establishment of contingency allowances. For an explanation of how the allowances
are formed, see “How Much Reserves and Allowances to Plan For?”
How Much Reserves and Allowances
to Plan For?
Let’s think back about total certainty (knowns)—risk (known unknowns)—total
uncertainty (unknown unknowns) continuum. What kind of reserves do we
need in order to respond when any of these categories hit?
First, because of their totally certain nature, the knowns do not require any
reserves. How do you allow for risk consequences of the known unknowns?
Many ﬁrms add them to the baseline estimate as a separate fund for schedule
and cost contingency allowances. Others incorporate them into the individual
activities. While we favor the former, the latter approach—which, by the way,
is too risky to use because of activity owners’ tendency to use up allowances
liberally—appears to have wider presence.
How is the fund formed? Popular methods include applying standard
allowances and percentages based on past experience.18 We argue that the
use of the risk response plan may be a very appropriate way to compute
the fund. Take a risk from the plan that is not among the highest-ranked
risks—let’s call it a lower-ranked risk. Multiplying its risk probability by risk
impact provides the risk event status, which may be expressed in cost or
schedule terms. These numbers are essentially cost and schedule reserves or
allowances for the risk event. Adding up allowances for all of the lower-ranked
risk events in the plan creates a project contingency allowances fund.
Finally, what about reserves for the unknown unknowns? Although they are
absolutely not possible to foresee, such things may happen. Therefore, some
ﬁrms develop management reserves involving cost, schedule, or both to allow
for such future situations when cost or schedule objectives may be missed.
Once the reserves are used, the cost baseline gets changed. Managing man-
agement reserves is in the domain of top management, typically the project
sponsor.

RISK MANAGEMENT PLAN
385
An integral part of the response development is the identiﬁcation and assignment of
risk owners—individuals or parties responsible for each preventive action, trigger point,
and contingent action. In so doing, one should recognize that while some risks are inde-
pendent, leaving their owners fully responsible for their management, some risks might
be interdependent. If so, their preventive actions, trigger points, and contingent actions
should be developed and owned interdependently.
Risk Monitoring
Most of a project managers attention with respect to risk management tends to focus on
the activities associated with risk identiﬁcation, risk assessment, and risk response plan-
ning. Where project managers historically spend less time and focus are the activities
associated with risk monitoring. Not uncommon, project managers therefore continue
to be surprise when a risk event they had identiﬁed earlier, but were not monitoring,
suddenly turns into an issue. To protect against this, diligent risk monitoring must be
a part of every project manager’s activities and he or she must have tools in their PM
Toolbox to eﬀectively perform this function.
There are four primary elements involved with risk monitoring activities: (1) system-
atically track the status of risks previously identiﬁed; (2) identify, document, and assess
anynewrisksthatemerge;(3)eﬀectivelymanagetheriskreserve;and(4)capturelessons
learned for future risk identiﬁcation and assessment eﬀorts.
This section of the risk management plan should discuss how the project risks will
be monitored on an ongoing basis. The key to risk monitoring is to ensure that it is used
throughout the project cycle and includes the identiﬁcation and use of trigger condi-
tions that will accurately indicate if the probability of a risk occurring is increasing or has
passed.
As stated previously, it is advantageous to the project manager to assign risk owners
to the highest-level risks. A primary role of the risk owner is to continuously monitor the
status of the risks he or she are responsible for, and periodically report that status to the
project manager and team.
Since there is a time element to when risk events may aﬀect a project, not all risks
should be reported upon in each status meeting. Rather, as risk event triggers approach
on the project schedule, the project manager should ensure that the appropriate risk
owner provides the status updates at the appropriate time.
Using the Risk Management Plan
There is no project that cannot beneﬁt from developing and using a risk management
plan because all projects contain an element of uncertainty about the future. Small
projects typically rely more on the qualitative assessment of risk, often deciding to
handle only a few highest-ranked risk events. Not surprisingly, the dominant mode
of risk management planning is informal, as is the periodic reevaluation of the plan
throughout the project.
Although at times it may be overly simplistic for large and complex projects, the
risk management plan is nevertheless widely used, with more formality and stronger
orientation on quantitative risk assessment and prioritization. Focused on the larger

386
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
number of highest-ranked risk events, larger projects also tend to do more formal,
periodic reassessments of the plan.
Although the use of the risk management plan should become institutionalized on a
project, development of the plan can vary greatly. For smaller projects, only a few hours
may be required to conduct a planning session and develop a plan. This time propor-
tionately rises as projects get bigger and more complex. Tens of hours may be necessary
to devise a quality risk management plan for a team in charge of a large and complex
project.
Beneﬁts
The beneﬁts gained from the development and use of a risk management plan are
many. The plan helps sift through the myriad of uncertainties, pinpoint and highlight
the project areas of highest risk, both before work has begun and throughout the
project. This oﬀers a project manager an opportunity to identify eﬀective ways of
reducing those risks in a proactive manner, rather than being confronted by them when
they turn into issues (see “Issues and Risks”).
The risk management plan provides a systematic response. By developing a risk
management framework and methodology, a project manager is able to respond to
risks calmly and systematically. This decreases the necessity for making unplanned
decisions and actions on the ﬂy.
Projects normally involve a number of stakeholders that span across an organization
or between multiple organizations. When a project manager has developed a risk man-
agement plan and is performing to that plan, they build conﬁdence among all stake-
holders that their interests are properly guarded against risk. This will serve to protect
the project against unwanted and unneeded interference by stakeholders or persons
who are not part of the project team. Proper risk management allows the project man-
ager to maintain better control of the project and the project decisions.
Finally, a well-documented risk management plan provides a great opportunity to
capture key learnings for future projects. Many risks are associated with the particular
environment an organization does business within as well as the common policies and
practices associated with the ﬁrm itself. These risks tend to aﬀect every project within
an organization and can be addressed and dealt with directly in a project’s risk manage-
ment plan.
Issues and Risks
What is the difference between issues and risks? Without a pretense to deal
with the semantics of the difference, let’s take a look at their use in industry.
First of all, the terms are commonly used interchangeably. For example,
according to the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) Guide,
“Reports commonly used to monitor and control risks include Issues

THE RISK IDENTIFICATION CHECKLIST
387
Logs. . . . ”19 Some project managers believe that risks and issues deﬁne
different concerns and should, therefore, be deﬁned into different categories
that need different managerial responses. We agree with this belief.
An issue is an event that has already happened. Its time horizon includes
the past and the present. For example, a loss of a team member is an issue
that led to a month delay. In contrast, risk can be characterized as what could
happen to the detriment of the project. For example, “a possibility of losing
the project manager could cause a late completion of the project.” Risks are in
the future. Consequently, while we strive to resolve an issue, our managerial
response is to prevent a risk or its impact.
For questions such as “What are the issues causing the variance?,” the aim
is to identify what has happened that caused the schedule variance. On the
other hand, answers to a question such as “What new risks may pop up in
the future and how could they change the preliminary predicted completion
date?” seek to ﬁnd future candidate events that need to be acted on in order
to mitigate their impact on the project.
THE RISK IDENTIFICATION CHECKLIST
The ﬁrst step in the risk management process is to identify all of the events that could
possibly aﬀect the success of the project. Although risk identiﬁcation is the ﬁrst step in
the risk management process, it is not a one-time event. Risk identiﬁcation is an iterative
process that occurs throughout the project cycle. Some project teams begin by identify-
ing the categories of risk, such as technology risk, market risk, business risk, and human
risk, and then use brainstorming and other problem identifying techniques to identify
all potential risk events within each category.
The key element of this step is to attempt to identify all potential risks. Do not make
judgment at this step on whether a risk is of real concern or not, that is the next step
in the process. When risk identiﬁcation is done well, it can be overwhelming, especially
early in a project when the number of uncertainties is at the highest. Remember that
the goal of risk identiﬁcation is to ﬂush out as many potential risks as possible in order
to get them on the table for discussion.20
The risk identiﬁcation checklist is a good tool to use as a guide and framework for
identifying diﬀerent categories of risk as well as a number of common risks that plague
many projects.
Developing a Risk Identiﬁcation Checklist
Theriskidentiﬁcationchecklistwillbeuniqueforeveryorganizationbecauseeveryorga-
nization has a unique set of uncertainties associated with the business environment it
operates within, the policies and practices which guide it operation, its constraints that
aﬀect its project teams, and its ability to access and use information needed to inform
the team about future events. Table 14.1 contains a sample risk identiﬁcation checklist
that can be used as a starting point and reference for developing your own checklist.

388
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
Table 14.1: Sample Risk Identification Checklist
Project Management Risks
Schedule activities are overly optimistic
Timeline assumes the use of specific
resources who may not be available
Effort is greater than estimated
Target end date has moved up with no
adjustment to scope, time, or cost
Requirements have not been baselined
and continue to change
Budget is not based on structured
estimates
Functional requirements lack user
involvement and input
Risk response plans have not been
developed
Lack of performance measures and/or
performance reporting process
Project scope, vision, and objectives are
not clearly defined
Project does not have senior
management or customer buy-in
Other similar projects have been delayed
or canceled
Person-hours (hours per month) are not
reasonable for the work estimated
All dependencies between functional
groups have not been identified
Resource Risks
Hiring is taking longer than expected
The personnel most qualified to work
the project are not available
There is tension between the project
team and the client
Unexpected training is needed to build
required skill
Estimated staffing profile does not seem
reasonable given project scope and/or
complexity
No resource ramp time was included in
the project schedule
Stakeholder Risks
End user rejects project outcome,
resulting in rework
End user input is not solicited
End user or client will not participate in
review cycles
Communication time between project
team and end users or client is slower
than expected
Technical Risks
Necessary functionality cannot be
implemented using selected technologies
Components developed separately
cannot be easily integrated
Quality assurance activities are being
ignored or minimized
Inaccurate quality checking may result in
quality problems
The programming languages or other
technologies are unfamiliar
Development tools are not in place or
not working as expected
There is a dependency on a technology
that is still under development
The technology being used or developed
is new to the organization
Environmental Risks
The project depends on government
regulations
Project depends on industry standards
which may change
Project deliverables are developed by
third parties (subcontractors)
Project interdependencies with external
parties exist

THE RISK IDENTIFICATION CHECKLIST
389
Developing a standard set of risk identiﬁcation categories and items is a good
practice as it drives consistency in identifying various risks which can aﬀect project
outcomes. The questions contained in the checklist can be developed by ﬁrst under-
standing the various work activities contained in the project work breakdown structure
(WBS), the constraints within which the project will have to operate, and information
contained in other guiding project artifacts such as the project business case and
project charter (Chapter 3). Additional questions can then be developed by tapping
into historical learnings through the review of risk events and issues that aﬀected
previous projects.
Using a Risk Identiﬁcation Checklist
Eﬀective risk management begins with thorough risk identiﬁcation. Many argue that
risk identiﬁcation is in fact the keystone to good project planning and execution.21 They
base their argument on the idea that all projects face any number of uncertainties that
will turn into issues and roadblocks if ignored or left unmanaged in a predictive and
proactive manner. The ability to deal with uncertainties ahead of time is contingent on
a project team’s ability to predict their potential occurrence. That ability is rooted in risk
identiﬁcation.
The risk identiﬁcation checklist should be developed during the initiation stage of
the project or, better yet, as a standard job aid created by members of the project oﬃce.
Regardless of how it is developed, it needs to be implemented in the earliest stages of a
project.
The checklist is used as a guide for all project participants who will be involved in
tryingtopredictpossibleriskevents.Itismeanttoassisttheprojectmanagerinensuring
that various perspectives of risk are considered such as risks associated with managing
the project, environmental risks, resource and collaboration risks, risks associated with
stakeholders, and certain technological risks when applicable.
The checklist should be distributed to all members of the project team, as well as
key stakeholders, who are charged with identifying potential risks for the project. Best
practice usage involves continued use of the checklist as a project progresses through
its natural project cycle as new uncertainties arise.
To become institutionalized within an organization, the risk identiﬁcation checklist
should be periodically updated to reﬂect common risk events encountered across an
organization’s projects. An opportunistic time to update the checklist is during the post-
mortem review process for each project (Chapter 13). As the issues and risks encoun-
tered for a project are reviewed, those issues and risks that have a systemic propensity
to aﬀect future projects can be added to the risk identiﬁcation checklist for future
reference and use.
Beneﬁts
As stated earlier, good risk management practice is rooted upon good risk identiﬁcation:
Risks have to be identiﬁed before they can be actively managed. The risk identiﬁcation
checklist provides value by assisting a project team in their risk identiﬁcation activities

390
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
by ensuring risk is viewed from multiple perspectives. Left unprompted, many project
teams focus almost exclusively on project risk. The checklist helps to broaden their view
by prompting a team to also consider areas of risk coming from the business environ-
ment, resource and collaboration activities, and stakeholders to name a few.
If periodically updated, the risk identiﬁcation checklist can also add value by serving
as a risk knowledge database for the organization. Many risks and issues are systemic in
nature for every organization. By documenting the sources of these systemic risks and
issues in the checklist, each project will beneﬁt from knowledge gained on past projects.
THE RISK REGISTER
The risk register provides a record of identiﬁed risks relating to a project and serves
as the central repository for all open and closed risk events.22 The risk register typi-
cally includes a description of each risk event, a risk event identiﬁer, risk assessment
outcome, a description of the planned response, and summary of actions taken and cur-
rent status. Many times, the risk events are prioritized in the risk register based on the
risk assessment score or qualitative analysis. Table 14.2 demonstrates an example risk
register.
Creating a Risk Register
The risk register is arguably the most crucial tool for managing project risk. A good
register contains all the necessary information about the project risks, provides a com-
prehensive catalog of the risks, provides a severity determination, and describes the
possible responses to the risk events.
The information in the risk register can be represented in a number of ways, such
as a database, a paragraph-style document, or a spreadsheet. The spreadsheet style is
far and away the most commonly used format because it presents all the information
pertaining to project risks without the user having to scroll through several pages.
There are no standard information components to include in a register. We suggest
you search a number of risk register examples, then adopt and adapt the content for
your particular need. We encourage you to keep your register simple, however. The more
complicated a register becomes, the more time you will have to spend managing your
document, therefore leaving less time to manage your project. The following elements
should be included in a risk register.
Risk Identiﬁer
Each risk event must have a unique identiﬁer for cataloging and monitoring purposes.
The most common approach is to assign each risk that is identiﬁed a chronological num-
ber. Another approach is to map risk events to the WBS element for which they are
associated. For instance, risks associated with a Level 3 WBS element might have identi-
ﬁcation numbers of 3.0.1.1, 3.0.1.2, 3.0.1.3, and so on.

Table 14.2: Example Project Risk Register
Risk
Risk Description
Dates
Analysis
Response &
Owner Status
Ref
If
Then
Opened Trigger Closed Likelihood Impact Severity
Action
1
User
experience
designers are
not released
from their
current
project in two
weeks . . .
The project
kickoff will
be delayed
two weeks
3/12/17
3/28/17
3/22/17
5
2
10 (HIGH)
Avoid:
Request
release of
resources at
next portfolio
approval
meeting
Ranger
Closed:
Portfolio
decision body
approved the
hiring of three
additional
people
2
Insufficient
digital data
storage
capacity is
available for
weekend
customer
transac-
tions . . .
The system
will
experience
unscheduled
down time
of up to 60
hours
2/28/17
4/22/17
3
4
12 (HIGH)
Mitigate:
Enable system
transaction
limits over
each weekend
until
additional
storage is
available
Jordan
Active:
Transaction
limit feature in
development.
Request for
quotes for
additional
storage have
been released
3
Primary
stakeholders
do not agree
on proposed
product
price . . .
Features will
need to be
removed
from the
design
1/29/17
5/1/17
2
2
4 (LOW)
Accept:
Harkin
Inactive: Risk
deemed as low
risk. Will
continue to
monitor on a
monthly basis
391

392
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
Risk Description
The main component of the risk register is the risk description, at least as it related to
the identiﬁcation of risk events. We recommend using an “IF/THEN” format for your risk
descriptions (see Figure 14.2). The format not only describes the risk, but also describes
the potential consequences: “IF” this occurs (risk event), “THEN” that will be the outcome
(consequences).
Dates
For risk timing, aging, and tracking purposes, the risk register must have a date compo-
nent. The most common and useful dates are the date that the risk was identiﬁed, the
risk trigger date (when the risk is likely to occur), and the closure date.
Severity
In order to prioritize the risk events (remember, you can’t address every risk event
identiﬁed), a severity component needs to be included in the risk register. Either
quantitative (1, 2, 3) or qualitative (high, medium, low) representation of risk severity
is an acceptable approach. Speciﬁc deﬁnitions for the numerical values or qualitative
values must be documented.
Remember to evaluate the severity of risk from two perspectives: (1) the probability
a risk event will occur, and (2) the severity of the impact if it does indeed occur. Total risk
severity must factor in both probability and impact perspectives.
Response
For each risk event a project team decides to manage, a response approach must be
decided upon and documented in the register for reference and tracking purposes. For
low-priority risks and others that the team decides not to manage, the default response
is acceptance. The risk register must contain a ﬁeld to identify the chosen response for
each risk event.
Owner
Every risk event, regardless of priority, must have an owner assigned. The risk regis-
ter therefore must provide an owner component. The risk owner is the person who is
responsible for monitoring the risk event and initiating the risk response action if and
when it is necessary.
Status
Riskeventsaredynamicbynature,meaningtheycanchangestateovertime.Tofacilitate
communication, a risk register should include a risk status ﬁeld. The most common risk
statuses include open, monitoring trigger event, response initiated, and closed.
The risk register is a very ﬂexible tool in that it can be constructed with any number
of components as stated previously. Upon initiation of a project, take time to design the
risk register format and components that support the risk management methodology
described in the risk management plan.

THE RISK REGISTER
393
Using the Risk Register
As the central tool for managing risk on a project, the risk register has many valuable
usages. First, the register serves as the central repository for all risk events. Since it cata-
logs all project risks, its use must be initiated in the earliest stage of a project and used
throughout the project cycle. Identifying new risks and updating the risk register should
be part of an ongoing risk management process.
Since all risk events for a project are contained within the register, the opportunity
exists to use the tool to prioritize the risk events. Since most projects contain more risk
than a project has resources to manage, trade-oﬀdecisions have to be made concerning
which risk events to manage and which to either accept or simply monitor. The risk reg-
ister provides the necessary data and structure to represent risk event priority. Normal
practice is to put focus on the top three to ten risks at any one time.
The risk register also fosters risk-related communication with project stakeholders.
This can either be accomplished by using the register itself as a communication device,
or by using select information within the register to feed other project communication
tools. Used in its entirety, the risk register can be used to communicate the overall risk
proﬁle for a project. This is not our recommended approach however, as too much risk
information tends to scare the hell out of project stakeholders. Rather, we recommend
selecting information pertaining to the highest priority risk events that are active during
a particular reporting period, and record that information in the risk register and current
summary status report (see Chapter 12).
Sincemostriskeventshaveconsequences,theriskregisterisalsoaneﬀectivetoolfor
assisting project managers in developing budget and schedule risk reserve, and driving
the reserve into the project plan. By eﬀectively using the IF/THEN approach discussed
earliertodescriberiskevents,evaluationofthepotentialexposureofthehighestpriority
risks provides a minimum, most likely, and maximum range for exposure for the project.
Lastly, the risk register is used to periodically monitor the status of risk events that
have been identiﬁed. Project team members are balancing many tasks at any given time,
so they need an ongoing process and tool to remind them of their risk management
duties. With eﬀective use of dates within the register, the project manager is able to
track the overall risk trend of a project (Figure 14.2).
Project Stage
Severity Level
Initiation
Low
High
Medium
Close
Execution
Planning
Figure 14.2: Risk Trend Chart

394
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
Risk trend charts track the overall project risk proﬁle over time. If risk is being
managed eﬀectively, the project risk severity should decrease over time as illustrated in
the ﬁgure. If not, additional resources may be needed to speciﬁcally resolve risk events,
or an evaluation concerning project termination should be considered.
Beneﬁts
The beneﬁts gained from the use of the risk register are signiﬁcant. The register provides
a project manager and the organization as a whole a central risk knowledge repository.
Not only can the knowledge about project uncertainty contained in the risk register be
used to manage risks on a particular project, it can also be used to mitigate systemic
risks which plague many projects within an organization.
The register also provides value to project managers by assisting them in resource
allocation activities. Since it is not generally possible to manage all risk events, the pri-
oritization information contained in the register provides valuable insight on where to
apply resources to prevent the greatest risks to the projects.
By using the risk register to estimate risk reserve, the tool provides value by helping
to create more realistic project plans.
The greatest beneﬁt however, is the risk register’s contribution to helping project
managers protect their project objectives and business goals from being negatively
impacted by the myriad of uncertainties that surround a project.
THE RISK ASSESSMENT MATRIX
When you have identiﬁed risks that could aﬀect your project outcomes, you need to
determine which ones you will spend project budget, time, and resource eﬀort manag-
ing as not all risk events require action. The risk assessment step is needed to sift through
all of the risk events identiﬁed and determine those that pose the most serious threat to
the success of the project. The result is a prioritized “short” list of project risks that the
team can then manage.
Scenario analysis is one of the most common methods for assessing risk events.23
Scenario analysis involves analyzing each risk event in terms of the outcome of a risk
event’s occurrence, the severity of the impact of the outcome, the probability that a risk
event will happen, and understanding when the risk event may occur.
We recommend that a project team begin with a qualitative approach to risk assess-
ment, at least for the ﬁrst iteration of analysis. By this we mean assessing whether the
severity of impact and the probability of occurrence is high, medium, or low for each of
the risks identiﬁed. This gross analysis will accomplish two important things. First, it will
quickly prioritize the risks, so the highest risk can be identiﬁed for immediate action. Sec-
ond, it gives the project manager and team an understanding of the overall risk level of
the project. The risk assessment matrix is an excellent tool for this type of risk assessment
(see Figure 14.3).
If additional analysis is needed, more quantitative methods of risk assessment can
be utilized on the next iteration. For the more sophisticated project, we recommend

THE RISK ASSESSMENT MATRIX
395
IMPACT (I)
PROBABILITY (P)
Severity =  P + (2 x I)
NC = 5
HL = 4
L = 3
LL = 2
VU = 1
15
14
13
12
12
13
11
10
9
11
10
9
11
9
7
6
5
4
3
8
7
6
5
7
8
High Severity
Medium Severity
Low Severity
VL = 1
L = 2
M = 3
H = 4
VH = 5
Figure 14.3: Example Risk Assessment Matrix
the Monte Carlo analysis technique for quantitative analysis. The Monte Carlo analysis
technique is the next tool described in this chapter.
Developing a Risk Assessment Matrix
Good project management decision-making practices involve full understanding of the
data representing the state of a project at the given time a decision is made. Better
project management decision making involves also understanding the critical uncer-
tainties or risks that can aﬀect the decision outcome. Trying to factor all project risks
into a decision is an impossible undertaking, however. Rather, a project manager must
have a way to ﬁlter the critical risks from the noncritical risks. By focusing on risk severity,
the risk assessment matrix provides such a ﬁltering service.
The ﬁrst step in this process is designing a risk assessment matrix that ﬁts the needs
of the project manager.
Design the Matrix Format
Risk assessment matrices come in several diﬀerent formats that project managers can
search and adopt for their use. The format shown in Figure 14.3 is by and large the most
common.
The matrix is simply a 5 × 5 (sometimes 4 × 4) matrix, with risk probability repre-
sented along one axis (in this case the vertical axis) and risk impact along the other axis.
Foreachofthecellsrepresentingtheprobabilitythatariskeventwilloccur,theprob-
ability levels (or scale) must be represented. In like manner, the impact that a risk event
may have on one or more of the project objectives must be represented in each of the
risk impact cells.
When ﬁrst constructing the matrix, the cells that intersect the various levels of prob-
ability and impact will remain blank; population of the remaining cells occurs in a fol-
lowing step.

396
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
Deﬁne the Rating Scales
The next step is to deﬁne the scales for which risk probability and risk impact will be
assessed. Remember that risk assessment at this stage is qualitative, not quantitative,
even though numerical values are used to represent qualitative scales. For that reason,
the rating scales must be simple and explicit to enable consistency in qualitative
assessment for all risk events. In the example in Figure 14.3, we use a ﬁve-level scale for
probability of occurrence: Nearly Certain (NC), Highly Likely (HL), Likely (L), Low Likeli-
hood (LL), and Very Unlikely (VU). These qualitative values are not suﬃcient, however.
A description of each value has to be deﬁned by the project team as shown in Table 14.3.
In the same fashion, a discrete scale has to be determined for the impact of project
risk. This scale has to be based on speciﬁc details of the project. We suggest referring to
a tool described in Chapter 12 called the project strike zone, which deﬁnes the project
goals from various perspectives. Using the highest-priority objective, for example,
project completion date, develop the risk impact scale in relation to that objective.
Table 14.4 illustrates how a risk impact scale might be constructed based on the project
timeline.
The ﬁnal scale to be deﬁned is the risk severity scale. This is commonly accomplished
through the use of a formula and calculation that incorporates the values of risk prob-
ability and risk impact. Although nonlinear formulas can be employed, linear formulas
such as severity = [ probability + (N × impact)] are easier to apply. For example, N can
be equal to two, meaning that impact is twice as important as probability in establish-
ing risk severity. In this case, the assessed probability and impact for each risk would be
entered in the formula, severity = [ probability + (2 × impact )], and the obtained value
would be entered into the probability-impact (P-I) matrix. This is the formula utilized for
the risk severity calculations in Figure 14.3.
Populate the Risk Assessment Matrix
Using the risk severity formula developed in the previous step, calculate the risk
severity values for each cell in the matrix. Next, segment the matrix into three severity
levels—high, medium, low—based on the organization’s threshold for risk severity. The
higher the value in a matrix cell, the higher its rank and severity of its potential impact
to the project. For instance, a risk that has a risk severity score of 15 is more critical than
a risk that has a score of 8, and should therefore be prioritized higher.
The severity levels will be unique to how the severity score is calculated and how the
project manager decides to segment the numerical values in the matrix. For the example
shown in Figure 14.3, the project manager determined that high-priority risks are those
Table 14.3: Example Five-Level Scale of Risk Probability
1
2
3
4
5
Scale
Nearly Certain Highly Likely Likely
Low Likelihood Very Unlikely
Probability
descrip-
tion
81–100%
Probable
occurrence
61–80%
Probable
occurrence
41–60%
Probable
occurrence
21–40%
Probable
occurrence
1–20%
Probable
occurrence

THE RISK ASSESSMENT MATRIX
397
Table 14.4: Example Five-Level Scale of Risk Impact on Schedule
1
2
3
4
5
Scale
Very low
Low
Medium
High
Very high
Risk
impact on
schedule
Slight schedule
delay
Overall
project
delay <5%
Overall
project
delay 5–14%
Overall project
delay 15–25%
Overall
project delay
>25%
with a severity score of 12 or above. Medium-priority risks score between 9 and 11, while
low-priority risks are those scoring 8 or below.
With the risk assessment matrix developed and populated with data, it is now ready
to be put to use on a project.
Using the Risk Assessment Matrix
The most challenging aspect of performing a qualitative risk assessment is adequately
deﬁning the rating scales. Once that has been accomplished, however, the rating can be
used for the duration of the project to eﬀectively manage project risk.
If risk identiﬁcation is adequately performed, it is common for a large number of
risks to be identiﬁed, depending upon the type of project. The challenge in front of the
project manager is to identify those that have both the highest impact on the project
and those that are most likely to occur. This is where the risk assessment matrix provides
its utility.
With limited resources, the project manager has to use the matrix to determine
which risk events warrant the application of project resources the most. Some larger
projects commonly focus on the top 10 highest-ranked risks. In contrast, some
smaller projects decide to manage the top three risks, arguing the lack of resources to
take on a larger number of risks. Both approaches may be ad hoc in nature. So, what is a
reasonable approach? The answer is in the matrix. Respond to the highest-ranked risks
in the matrix, down to an agreed level.24 For example, focus on handling risks down to
a risk score of 11 (Figure 14.3), and treat other risks as noncritical. With this approach,
one neither squanders resources nor disregards signiﬁcant risks. It should be noted
that noncritical does not mean not important. Rather, it means that scarce project
resources are not immediately needed to address the risk event, but may be needed in
the future.
With the project risks adequately prioritized and the risk events targeted for action
chosen, the project team can now develop risk response strategies and actions. Refer
to the risk management plan for guidance on the preferred risk response approach to
take given the particular stage the project is in, and the current project situation. Keep
in mind that the project manager’s ability to put actions in place to mitigate or avoid
a risk event may be constrained by where a project is in relation to the project cycle.
Speciﬁcally, if a project is nearing the end of project execution, it may be too late to
aﬀectively mitigate or avoid a risk that emerges. In this case the response option may
only be to accept the risk or terminate the project.

398
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
Variations
The outcome of the risk analysis process is a shortened list of critical risk events that can
be actively monitored, managed, and communicated to stakeholders. A variation of the
risk assessment matrix, called the risk map, is slightly more eﬀective for monitoring and
communicating risk.
Shown in Figure 14.4, the map displays the most critical risks from the two dimen-
sions of likelihood of occurrence and risk impact. The scales displayed on the x- and
y-axes are those used to evaluate each risk event. We show numbered scales, but others
may prefer to choose more qualitative values such as high, medium, and low.
Normally, a threshold line is drawn to visually indicate the separation of the critical
risks events from those at a lower severity level. The line is determined from the descrip-
tion of the scale levels discussed earlier. It is important to include risk events that are
below but near the threshold, as these are the risks that are most likely to move to a
critical state.
The ﬁnal piece of project intelligence that can be included on a risk map is change
in likelihood of occurrence or impact.25 This is indicated by arrows on Figure 14.4. We
encourage project managers to include this piece of information because it reinforces
the behavior of ongoing risk monitoring and analysis.
Beneﬁts
The risk assessment matrix helps sift through the myriad of uncertainties to pinpoint and
highlight the project areas of highest risk—both before work has begun and through-
out the life of a project.26 This oﬀers an opportunity to focus project resources and to
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
Risk 1
Risk 4
Risk 11
Risk 17
Risk 3
Risk 14
Risk 10
Consequence of risk
Likelihood of Risk Occurring
Figure 14.4: Example Risk Map

MONTE CARLO ANALYSIS
399
identify eﬀective ways of reducing risk events in a proactive manner, rather than being
confronted by them if they turn into issues later in the project.
Inaddition,thematrixgeneratesinformationformorereasonablecontingencyplan-
ning and eﬀective project decision making. It is impossible to predict all possible risk
events. Therefore, best practice organizations include the use of schedule and budget
contingency based on a risk analysis. The amount of contingency can be derived from
risk impact information contained in the risk assessment matrix.
Much of the tool’s utility comes from its visual representation of risk severity and
simple design, making it more than adequate for situations where detailed quantitative
risk assessment is not required. This is particularly the case in the early stages of the
project cycle.
Finally, the risk assessment matrix is useful for increasing visibility and awareness on
the part of top managers within an organization of the critical risks associated with a
project. This enables sound decisions pertaining to the risk to be made in the appropri-
ate context.
With the risk register and risk assessment matrix in a project manager’s toolbox, he
or she is equipped with the means to identify, document, assess, prioritize, and monitor
any future event which may prevent a project team from fully realizing the project objec-
tives. However, none of these activities meet the real intent of risk management. The
real intent of project risk management is to use the information obtained to proactively
make adjustments to the project plan to account for the uncertainties that surround
every project, and to make better risk-informed decisions. The next two tools are eﬀec-
tive in assisting project managers in these two endeavors. We begin with the Monte
Carlo analysis.
MONTE CARLO ANALYSIS
Thepresenceofuncertaintiesconvertedtorisksdecreasestheprobabilityofsuccessfully
completing a project as deﬁned by the documented success criteria. If uncertainty did
not exist, it would be easy to repeatedly meet the schedule, cost, and performance goals
of the projects within our portfolios. However, with uncertainty being a part of every
project, project managers have to ﬁnd ways to handle the uncertainties that pose the
greatest risk to their projects.
While managing a project, a project manager will face a situation where they have a
long list of risk events, and little clue of the impact they may have on the project goals.
Once the risk events have been prioritized, a Monte Carlo analysis can be performed to
quantiﬁably evaluate the potential impact of the critical risks.
Monte Carlo analysis is eﬀective in determining the impact of identiﬁed risks by run-
ning mathematical simulations to identify a range of outcomes associated with various
conﬁdence levels relating to probability of success. The simulation furnishes the project
manager a range of possible outcomes and the probability they will occur for any choice
of action. This process provides a valuable tool to compensate for the impact of critical
risk events by determining the amount of risk reserve needed to increase the probability
of success given the known uncertainties facing a project.

400
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
5/16
6/1
5/28
5/26
5/24
5/22
5/20
5/18
0
Project Finish Date
Cumulative Probability
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Key:  
Ascending Cumulative
Descending Cumulative
Expected Value
Figure 14.5: Cumulative Distribution of Project Duration Produced in Monte Carlo Analysis
Source: David Vose, Risk Analysis: A Quantitative Guide. Copyright © 2000 by John Wiley & Sons Limited. Reprinted
with permission of John Wiley & Sons.
Monte Carlo analysis randomly samples a probability distribution of the critical
project risks to simulate project scenarios in response to the risk impacts hundreds
or even thousands of times.27 This provides statistical distribution of the calculated
project durations and approximates the expected value of the duration, as illustrated
in Figure 14.5. With these distributions, you can quantify the risk of various schedule
scenarios, alternative implementation strategies, activity paths, or even individual
activities. For example, as Figure 14.5 indicates, there is a 40 percent probability that
the project will be ﬁnished before or on May 20.
Performing a Monte Carlo Analysis
Typically, Monte Carlo analysis deals with schedule, cost, and cash ﬂow risks, although
other facets such as the quality of the ﬁnal project output can at times be analyzed.
Taken overall, performing a schedule risk analysis is more complex than a cost analysis,
simply because dependencies between project activities need to be established in order
to identify the critical path. For this reason, our focus is on looking at the Monte Carlo
analysis process in schedule risk analysis (see Figure 14.6).
A number of important inputs are needed to perform a successful Monte Carlo
analysis. First, the risk management plan should provide guidance on when and
how to apply Monte Carlo on a project. The critical project risks and their estimated
impact to the project provide the risk impact from which the simulations are built
upon. Finally, the project schedule or budget for the project is needed to establish
the baseline from which probability impact scenarios will be added. When analyzing
impact to project timeline, the time-scaled arrow schedule format is the most useful
(Figure 14.7).
This information will be fed into the Monte Carlo analysis to generate a range of
possible project durations (see “Basic Terminology of Monte Carlo Analysis”).

401
Task 1 duration
Probability
Task n duration
Task 2 duration
Probability
Risk Response Plan
INPUTS
Process n
Trials Results
Analyze and
Interpret Results
End
Start
Select a Random
Value from Each
Distribution
Run a Trial to
Generate Project
Duration and Store it
# of Trials <N?
No
Yes
Tornado Chart
Task 1 duration
0
1
Cumulative Distribution
with Expected Value
Frequency Distribution
Figure 14.6:
Monte Carlo Analysis Process for Schedule Risk

402
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Task 5
Task 6
Task 7
Task 8
y
a
M
lir
p
A
h
c
r
a
M
Figure 14.7: Example of the Time-Scaled Arrow Diagram for Risk Analysis with Monte Carlo
Basic Terminology of Monte Carlo Analysis
Chance event is a process or measurement for which we do not know the
outcome in advance.
Continuous distribution is used to represent any value within a deﬁned range
of values (domain).
Discrete distribution may take one of a set of identiﬁable values, each of which
has a calculable probability of occurrence.
Deterministic model is where all parameters are ﬁxed, having single-valued
estimates.
Expected value (EV) is the probability weighted average of all possible out-
comes. Synonyms: mean, average.
Mode is the particular outcome that is most likely; the highest point on a prob-
ability distribution curve.
Model is a simpliﬁed representation of a system of interest such as project
critical path chart. It projects project outcome (e.g., project duration) and
outcome value (e.g., 18 months).
Probability is the likelihood of an event occurring, expressed as a number from
0 to 1 (or equivalent percentages). Synonyms: likelihood, chance, odds.
Probability distribution represents mathematically or graphically the range of
values (e.g., from 2 to 14 days) the variable (e.g., activity duration) can take,
together with the likelihood that the variable will take any speciﬁc value.
Synonyms: probability density function, probability function.
Project scenario is a future state of the project. Synonyms: iteration, trial.

MONTE CARLO ANALYSIS
403
Random sampling is a process generating a random number between 0 and 1,
which determines the value of the input variable from the probability
distribution.
Random variable is a measure of a chance event. Synonyms: chance variable,
stochastic variable.
Single-valued estimate has one value only. Synonym: point estimate.
Standard deviation is the square root of the variance.
Stochastic model is a model that includes random variables. Synonym: proba-
bilistic model.
Variance is the expected value of the sum of squared deviations from the mean.
Generating a range of possible project durations and their probabilities is not
possible without preparing probability distributions for project activity durations. This
preparation process may begin with the question “How long does it take to complete
a project activity?” Let’s assume that you performed an activity many times, and each
time it took ten days to complete. If asked to estimate the duration of that same activity
in a future project, you would likely put it at ten days. If each project activity would
have such a single point estimate (also called single value estimate) as an input to
calculate project schedule duration, the duration would also have only one value. There
is not much uncertainty in project activity durations in this single-valued deterministic
model—they are all ﬁxed. In the majority of today’s projects, such a scenario is not
realistic. More realistic is the following probabilistic (stochastic) model.
Imagine that you repeated an activity (call it Activity 1) an extremely large number of
times (trials, iterations, scenarios), and its duration ran from 5 to 39 days (range of out-
comes) due to various issues that arose. You recorded the fraction of times that each
duration value (outcome) occurred. The fraction for a particular outcome is approxi-
mately equal to its probability (p) of occurrence for Activity 1. When we have these
approximate probabilities (the more trials you do, the closer the fraction becomes to the
trueprobability)forallpossibleoutcomes,wecanchartthemasprobabilitydistributions
(see the Task 1 duration curve in Figure 14.6). Assume that experience-based probability
distributions are also available for some other activities in the project as well (see Task
2 duration in Figure 14.6). If we really had such probability distributions, they would be
close to objective probabilities, which are deﬁned as being determined from complete
knowledge of the system and are not aﬀected by personal beliefs (see “Frequently Used
Probability Distributions”).
Frequently Used Probability Distributions
Three values are used to describe a very simple and popular triangular distribu-
tion (see Figure 14.8a): Triangular (5, 10, 20); minimum (L = 5); most likely (M =
10); and maximum (H = 20). Numbers in parentheses are project task durations
in days. The mean is calculated by (L + M + H) / 3.
(continued)

404
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
Task Duration (Days)
20
15
10
5
20
15
10
5
20
15
10
5
20
15
10
5
Probability
Triangle (5, 10, 20)
Task Duration (Days)
Probability
Beta (5, 10, 20)
Task Duration (Days)
Probability
Lognormal (10, 2)
Task Duration (Days)
Probability
General (5, 20, {7, 10, 15}, {2, 3, 1})
a) Triangular distribution
c) Lognormal distribution
d) General distribution
b) Beta distribution
Figure 14.8: Frequently Used Distribution
The Beta Distribution (see Figure 14.8b), which has been used for a long
time to estimate task durations in the Program Evaluation and Review Tech-
nique (PERT), requires the same three parameters as triangular distribution:
minimum (5), most likely (10), and maximum (20). The mean is calculated by
(L + 4M + H) / 6.
Two parameters describe a lognormal distribution (see Figure 14.8c)—mean
(10) and standard deviation (2).
Known for its ﬂexibility, the general distribution (see Figure 14.8d) allows
shaping the distribution to reﬂect the opinion of experts. It is described by an
array of values (7, 10, 15) with probabilities (2, 3, 1) that fall between the mini-
mum (5) and maximum (20).
Although some companies do have experience-based databases with the approxi-
mate distributions of their project activities, that is the exception rather than the rule.
What, then, do we do to prepare probability distributions for activity durations? We will
do what is a dominant practice in real-world projects—prepare and rely on subjective
probabilities derived from someone’s belief whether an outcome (activity duration) will
occur.
The most adequate way for this is to enlist the help of experts or experienced project
participants. Brainstorming with activity owners, studying durations of similar activities

MONTE CARLO ANALYSIS
405
in past projects, and consulting other specialists in the company who are not involved in
the project all help determine the probability distributions or single values for the activ-
ity durations.28 The single-value estimates are incorporated into the baseline project
schedule.
Now it is time to apply risk impact. The baseline schedule that was generated from
single-value estimates represents the best-case scenario. Monte Carlo Analysis provides
a best-case to worst-case distribution of potential outcomes based on a probability
distribution; therefore, we must also deﬁne the worst case. This is where the high-level
risk events come into play. Referring to the risk assessment matrix, locate all the
high-severity risks. The combined schedule impact of the high-severity risks represents
the worst-case scenario.
Randomly Select a Value from Each Distribution
When the probability distributions are available for the project tasks (variables), the
stage is set for the next step. Within the speciﬁc range of duration values bound by
the best- and worst-case values, select one duration value randomly. The key word
here is randomly. Using a random sampling technique, Monte Carlo analysis generates
a random number between 0 and 1, which is fed into a mathematical equation that
determines the task duration value to be generated for the distribution.29 All selected
values constitute a random sample of values that will be used to generate project
durations. Sampling can also be done with other eﬃcient methods such as Latin
hypercube sampling. Whatever the method used, random sampling from probability
distribution is performed in a manner that reproduces the distribution’s shape.
Run a Trial to Generate Project Duration
Having a random sample of task duration values means that for each activity in the
project schedule there is one value only. Plugging this combination of activity duration
values in the project network diagram will produce a scenario for project duration. In
essence, this is a deterministic schedule with a single value for project duration, built on
single-value durations for each activity. At this time, we will store this project duration
until the time comes to use it again.
Repeating this sequence of random sampling many times and running a trial will
produce as many scenarios for project duration, each one plausible. This prompts
the question, “How many trials do we need?” Typically, trials (iterations) go until the
predetermined number is reached (number N in the decision box in Figure 14.6).
That number depends on the number of variables (activities) and the degree of
conﬁdence required but typically lies between 100 and 1,000.30 The idea here is that
a suﬃcient number of trials preserves the characteristics of the original probability
distributions for activities and approximates the solution distributions for project
duration.31
Process Results
When the trials are complete, our “storage” will contain N project durations. Each one
is a possible case for the behavior of the project schedule. Processing them by means

406
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
of a software program can produce many forms of results, whereas our focus is on the
following (see the right-hand side of Figure 14.6):
■
Expected value of the project duration. Averaging trial values for project durations
approximates the expected value, the probability weighted average of all possible
outcomes. However, the higher the number of trials, the higher the precision of the
expected value and the approximations of probability distribution shape for project
durations.
■
Frequency distribution. This is a histogram plot showing relative frequency obtained
by grouping the data generated for project durations into a number of bars or
classes. Frequency is the number of values in any class. Dividing the frequency by
the total number of values will produce an approximate probability that the project
duration (output variable) will lie in that class’s range (see Figure 14.9).
■
Cumulative frequency. Cumulative frequency can be expressed in either an ascend-
ing or descending format. It has two formats (refer again to Figure 14.6). The former
indicates the probability of the project duration being less or equal to the value on
the x-axis. Conversely, the latter shows the probability of the project duration being
greater than or equal to the value on the x-axis. Expected value is marked on the plot
with a black dot.
■
Tornado chart. This chart shows the extent to which the uncertainty of the individ-
ual activities’ duration impacts the uncertainty of project schedule duration (see
Figure 14.10). Speciﬁcally, the bar represents the degree of impact the activity (input
variable) has on the project schedule (model’s output). Therefore, the longer the bar,
the greater the impact that a project activity has on the project duration. Per stan-
dard practice, bars are plotted from top down in decreasing degree of impact. When
5/16
6/1
5/28
5/26
5/24
5/22
5/20
5/18
0.000
Project Finish Date
Probability
0.056
0.112
0.168
0.224
0.280
Figure 14.9: Frequency Distribution Histogram of Project Duration

MONTE CARLO ANALYSIS
407
– .04
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
– .01
– .02
– .03
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Task 5
Task 6
Task 7
Task 8
Task 9
Task 10
Task 11
Task 12
Task 13
Figure 14.10: An Example Tornado Chart
Source: David Vose. Risk Analysis: A Quantitative Guide. Copyright © 2000 by John Wiley & Sons Limited. Reprinted
with permission of John Wiley & Sons.
there are both the positive and negative impact, the chart is a bit reminiscent of a
tornado, hence the name. To avoid the chart looking overly busy, Vose suggests lim-
iting the plot to those activities (variables) that have an impact of at least a quarter
of the maximum observed impact.
Analyze and Interpret Results
The results of the schedule risk analysis must be interpreted in a way that clearly pro-
vides answers to the questions the analysis was initiated to answer. For that reason, it is
beneﬁcial to follow four principles for schedule risk analysis:
1.
Focus on the problem.
2.
Keep statistics to a minimum.
3.
Use graphs whenever appropriate.
4.
Understand the model’s (e.g., time-scaled arrow diagram chart) assumptions.
To demonstrate these principles, let’s assume that the project team sets out to per-
form a schedule risk analysis to answer these questions:
■
How likely is it that the team will achieve the project deadline (May 20) imposed by
management?
■
If the probability is lower than 90 percent (the team’s preferred probability), what do
we do to negotiate the deadline with management?

408
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
■
If we successfully negotiate the deadline issue, which are the top three activities that
most impact the project duration?
First, the team goes to the cumulative distribution graph (Figure 14.5). To obtain the
answer to the ﬁrst question, they will:
■
Enter the x-axis at the deadline date imposed by management (May 20).
■
Move upward to the cumulative curve.
■
Move left to the corresponding value on the y-axis. This y-axis value is the probability
of completing their project on the imposed deadline date (40 percent).
Clearly, the probability is very low, way lower than the preferred 90 percent. To
answer the second question, the team decided to ask management for an option of
adding six days of schedule contingency to the imposed deadline, in which case the
project would be ﬁnished by May 26 and would be 90 percent probable. To build a
better case for negotiations with management, the team developed a strong and clear
justiﬁcation for the contingency by describing the top three risk events that contributed
the most potential schedule impact, the probability of success assessment without the
contingency (40%), mitigation and avoidance plans to manage the risks, and a call for
management action to help the team succeed by increasing the probability of success
to 90%.
Finally, the team created a tornado chart (see Figure 14.10) that reveals the three key
tasks with the highest impact on the deadline—these are the top priorities to monitor
during implementation, an answer to their question three.
Using the Monte Carlo Analysis
Traditionally, it has been the large and complex projects that have most often enjoyed
the beneﬁts of Monte Carlo analysis. The belief was that, unlike smaller projects,
larger projects had more important goals and could also aﬀord necessary resources
for performing Monte Carlo analysis. It took some signiﬁcant events for this view to
start changing. First, the trend toward “management by projects” led to a proliferation
of smaller but important projects. Also, very powerful desktop computer programs
for Monte Carlo analysis have become aﬀordable. Finally, project oﬃces capable of
supporting many projects with Monte Carlo analysis have become a frequent organi-
zational unit. All of these events helped put Monte Carlo within the reach of smaller
projects, changing the application pattern of Monte Carlo analysis in corporations.
Today, Monte Carlo analysis is used in both larger and smaller projects to respond to
certain situations. For example, if a project is sensitive to a completion deadline, Monte
Carlo analysis is a preferred option. Similarly, if there are many project scenarios and
what-if analyses to explore, Monte Carlo is favored over other analysis techniques.32
Roles in Monte Carlo analysis crucially inﬂuence how much time it takes to perform
an analysis. A typical approach is to task the project oﬃce specialists to perform Monte
Carlo analysis using the data provided by the project team. For a smaller project of 50
activities, for example, data entry and running Monte Carlo may take 10 to 30 minutes.
Assuming that a project logic diagram exists, preparing activity probability distributions
through team brainstorming and formatting them into a table to be fed to the project
oﬃce may take an hour or two. A growing size and complexity of the project is bound
to increase the time it takes to perform a Monte Carlo analysis.

THE DECISION TREE
409
Beneﬁts
Original project schedules and budgets are often unrealistic or, more precisely, inade-
quate. A major reason for this inadequacy is the uncertainty surrounding the project
activities. In response to this uncertainty, many project teams assign an arbitrary dura-
tion or cost to the activities and hope for the best.33 Contrast this approach with Monte
Carlo analysis, which allows richer, more detailed representation of the risk problem
by using risk-factored scenarios based upon probability of success distributions. There-
fore, arbitrary risk contingency is replaced by a quantitative analysis for determining the
amount of contingency needed based on probability projections.
The Monte Carlo approach also generates graphical representation of multiple
outcomes, especially if a commercially available software application is used. Graphical
analysis enhances evaluation and communication of decision choices.
By taking into account variable factors (such as schedule tasks or cost elements),
Monte Carlo makes it possible to spot which variables have the greatest impact on
project results. In like manner, the technique makes it possible to analyze the eﬀect of
combining multiple variables. For instance, performing project tasks concurrently if
additional staﬀis added versus performing them in sequence.
In summary, Monte Carlo analysis’s value is in its ability to examine each project sce-
nario, including the extreme scenarios, to see what conditions give rise to their results.
That helps not only to validate the project realism but also to diﬀerentiate between what
is possible and what is not possible, and most importantly, how to change what is not
possible into what is possible.
THE DECISION TREE
Adecisiontreeisagraphicaltoolforanalyzingprojectsituationsthatinvolveuncertainty
or risk. Reﬂecting the decision process, the tree displays sequential decisions in the form
of branches of a tree, from left to right, originating from an initial decision point and
extending to the end outcomes (see Figure 14.11).34 The path through the branches
represents the sequence of separate decisions and chance events that occur. Decisions
are evaluated by calculating the expected value and probabilities of each path.35 For a
description of a typical decision tree’s components, see “Five Components of a Typical
Decision Tree.”
Five Components of a Typical Decision Tree
Decision nodes. Also called decision points, these are points in time when deci-
sions are made or alternatives chosen. Shown as square boxes, they are
controlled by the decision maker. The starting node is called the root.
Chance nodes. These represent times when the result of a probabilistic event
occurs. Decision makers have no control over them. Chance nodes are also
called probabilistic nodes or points, and are represented by a circle.
(continued)

410
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
Green
Red
Yellow
1
2
3
4
56
52
55
Expected
Value
52
Decision
Point
Decision
Alternative
Chance
Node
Vendor 1 (0.6)
Vendor 2 (0.4)
Vendor 1 (0.6)
Vendor 2 (0.4)
Vendor 1 (0.6)
Vendor 2 (0.4)
Outcome of
Probabilistic
Events
Probability
Days
60
50
50
55
55
55
Payoff
Figure 14.11: Decision Tree for a Project Situation under Risk
Branches. Lines connecting the decision and chance nodes in a sequential
manner. The branches leading out of a decision node represent possible
decisions, while those stemming from chance nodes represent possible
outcomes of probabilistic events.
Probabilities. The probabilities of the probabilistic events shown on the
branches representing those events. Mostly they are conditional and for
any particular chance node must sum to 1.
Outcome values. Also called the payoff, outcome values of each alternative
are placed at the end of the branch. They may represent present values
discounted to the date of the root decision or cost.
Analyzing the Decision Tree
Literature on decision trees often looks at minimizing the risk by selecting decision alter-
natives that oﬀer maximum net present value or minimum cost. The abundance of such
examples prompted us to take a diﬀerent approach. In particular, we look at the gen-
eral process of analyzing decision trees on an example related to minimizing schedule
duration. This is in response to risks faced by a large group of today’s projects that must
execute to the fastest possible schedule as an unconditional priority.

THE DECISION TREE
411
Using the decision tree technique requires input from a number of sources. The risk
management plan speciﬁes how to use the decision tree to support decisions involv-
ing risk. Information contained in the risk assessment matrix about individual risks and
their response strategies is also crucial. In our example from Figure 14.11, this informa-
tion will be funneled into calculating durations for each of the outcomes in the decision
tree. Since this involves the project timeline, we also need schedule information for the
decision alternatives.
Describe the Decision under Risk
Common sense dictates that in order to make the best decision, we ﬁrst need to under-
stand the decision context and related risks a project is facing. A convenient way for this
is to describe the decision. Here is an example.
Consider a company that competes on time-to-market capabilities. As they are
entering the design phase for its new product development project, their goal is to
ﬁnish it as soon as possible and hit the market before their competitors. While literally
each project day is considered to be of extreme priority, the development cost is given
lower importance. In such a situation, the project team is attempting to decide on the
appropriate design approach to use for this product. A major uncertainty involves the
amount of time it will take to design the central module in the product. Three major
alternatives are being considered, each one identiﬁed with a single word:
■
Green (G). Incorporate the routing rules early in the central module design.
■
Yellow (Y). Predict the routing rules early and modify them at the end of the central
module design.
■
Red (R). Incorporate the routing rules at the end of the central module design.
A second uncertainty is related to an oﬀ-the-shelf part that goes into the central
module, whichever the alternative. Two diﬀerent vendors produce the part. It is well
known that both companies are in a race to release the newest upgrade of the part, and
they have announced the same release date. To represent this decision description and
enable its analysis, the team must ﬁrst structure the model.
Structure the Model
The model is drawn from left to right (for a better understanding refer again to the “Five
Components of a Typical Decision Tree”). Therefore, draw a decision node (the square
marked 1), then add to its right-hand side three branches, for three available design
alternatives—the green, yellow, and red (Figure 14.11). Put a chance node (the circles
marked 2, 3, and 4) at the end of each branch, followed by two branches, each one for
outcomes of probabilistic events—vendor 1 hitting the market ﬁrst and vendor 2 hit-
ting the market ﬁrst. As monotonous as structuring the model appears, it is precious in
sharpening our understanding. Complex decisions require a level of structure to help
simplify the decision options.
Assess the Probability of the Possible Outcomes
The company’s new product development project team cannot wait for the actual
release of the ﬁrst-to-market part by vendor 1 or vendor 2 before beginning their

412
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
own design process. That would signiﬁcantly extend the module design schedule,
jeopardizing the project end date. Therefore, the project team decides to assess the
probability of who—vendor 1 or vendor 2—will release the product ﬁrst. Their research
and past performance of the vendors led them to assess that there is 60 percent
probability that vendor 1’s part will ﬁrst reach the market. The probability for the part
from vendor 2 is 40 percent. Everybody on the team is clear that these are subjective
probabilities inﬂuenced by their perceptions, beliefs, and historical events.
Determine the Possible Outcomes
The project team has developed initial network schedules for each of the design
options—green, yellow, and red—as if the vendor part is already available. The
sequence of design activities involved in each option is diﬀerent, as well as some other
activities. Also, although both vendors’ parts can be used for the central module, the
process of their incorporation into the design is diﬀerent, causing the duration of each
outcome to diﬀer. Because the team’s expectation is that the ﬁrst-to-market vendor part
will be released sometime midway through the module design, they need to evaluate
how such a release is going to change the initial network schedules. The product of
their evaluation is a set of possible outcomes values, also called payoﬀs. These schedule
durations of the outcomes expressed in days are added at the end of each branch
(Figure 14.11).
There are two conceptually diﬀerent parts to a decision tree analysis. Included in the
ﬁrst part are structuring the model, assessing the probabilities of possible outcomes,
and their payoﬀs. This is a particularly unstructured task, requiring a signiﬁcantly greater
proportion of eﬀort. The second part—evaluate alternatives and select the strategy—is
the easy part of the model and the heart of the decision analysis under risk. We address
it next.
Evaluate the Alternatives
Our objective is to evaluate possible outcomes and select one with the shortest possi-
ble schedule. To accomplish this, we need to solve the tree (see “Two Simple Steps for
Solving a Tree”). When these steps are applied:
Step 1.
Chance Node 2 Expected Value: (0.60 × 60 days) + (0.40 × 50 days) = 56 days
Chance Node 3 Expected Value: (0.60 × 50 days) + (0.40 × 55 days) = 52 days
Chance Node 4 Expected Value: (0.60 × 55 days) + (0.40 × 55 days) = 55 days
Step 2.
The best alternative is the alternative with lowest expected value, the shortest
schedule—52 days. That means the team goes with the yellow option.
Decision tree analysis enables more than just identifying the best alternatives. Sen-
sitivity analysis, as well as a tornado chart, can also be developed to better understand
the decision under risk.36

THE DECISION TREE
413
Two Simple Steps for Solving a Tree
The procedure for solving a tree is called “rolling back” or “folding back” the
tree. Simply, by starting at the far right of the tree and working back to the left,
we solve for the value of each node, annotating it with its expected value. The
expected value can be represented as cost (measured in currency) or schedule
(measured in time units). Two simple steps for solving a tree are as follows:
1.
At each chance node, calculate the expected as the sum of each branch’s
outcome value (payoff) multiplied by probability. This is the value of the
node and the branch leading to it.
2.
At each decision node, we ﬁnd the best expected value alternative. This is
the alternative with the highest value (when dealing with present values)
and the lowest alternative for expected value (schedule or cost).
When the folding process is completed, the alternative with the best out-
come value for the leftmost decision nodes becomes the best alternative.
Using Decision Trees
Theoretically, we can use a decision tree to evaluate any decision under risk, regard-
less of its complexity, as long as the decision and probabilities of the possible outcomes
are speciﬁed.37 Practically, this is not the case. Rather, practicing project managers see
the tree as a method to address daily problems, requiring a straightforward and quick
selection of the best alternative. Why is this? The issue here is that complex decision sit-
uations lead to a “combinatorial explosion” and the time associated with it. As we add
decision and chance nodes, the trees tend to grow exponentially.38 For example, multi-
ple alternatives with multiple uncertainties can explode decision trees into hundreds of
paths, which is where Monte Carlo is a better analysis approach. Constructing and solv-
ing for such trees may take hundreds of hours. This situation normally creates a major
constraint. Practicing project managers go to decision trees primarily when they need
to swiftly evaluate simple alternatives, pick the best alternative, and go on with their
daily routine. Still, the majority of such situations occur in larger projects, although we
have seen project managers using two-alternative models with four to six paths very
informally with minimum time consumption.
Two extremes can help fathom the time requirements of decision trees. Spending 10
to 15 minutes to construct and evaluate a two-alternative decision tree with four paths
seems realistic to many project managers. On the other hand, tens of hours may go into
the construction of a decision tree with hundreds of paths. The assumption here is that
information necessary to estimate probabilities and outcome values is already available.
The analysis of large trees may be a matter of minutes, given the power of professional
software necessary to use large trees.

414
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
Beneﬁts
Two major beneﬁts seem to motivate project managers to use decision trees. First,
decision trees reduce an evaluation and a comparison of all decision alternatives under
risk to a single value metric. Simply, this metric indicates the degree of support of
project goals. In our example, that metric was time, gauging progress toward the quest
for time-to-market speed. In other cases, an additional convenience stems from the
fact that most of the time this single value metric is expressed in monetary terms, a
universal language of business and projects. Then, this single monetary value combines
cost, schedule, and performance criteria.
The second beneﬁt lies in the belief of many project managers that the real value of
decision trees is not in the numerical results but rather in their ability to help us gain
insights into decision problems. With or without the numerical results, users should
understand that decision trees do not provide an entirely objective analysis. In the
absence of suﬃcient empirical data necessary for a complete analysis, many facets of
the analysis are rooted in personal judgment—structuring the model and assessing
probabilities or payoﬀs, for example.
Beneﬁt also comes in the knowledge gained about the uncertainty being analyzed
through the evaluation and conversation between project team members and subject
matter experts. Many times a decision can be made without a decision tree being fully
developed or analyzed as a result of having the right conversations between the right
people.
THE RISK DASHBOARD
Due to the dynamic nature of project risks, risk monitoring must continue through the
life of a project. New risks will be identiﬁed, many anticipated risks will disappear, some
risks will be mitigated, and some will change in severity due to a change in probability
of occurring or a change in potential impact to a project.
Regularly held risk reviews force consistent risk monitoring and enable repeated
risk identiﬁcation, assessment, analysis, and response planning as a project progresses
through the life cycle. To facilitate the risk reviews, a number of tools are needed to help
project managers eﬃciently move through the monitoring process. Eﬃciency comes in
the ability maintain discussions at a high enough level that the team does not get mired
in risk detail. The best tools to use are the risk identiﬁcation matrix, the risk assessment
matrix, the risk map (all covered in previous sections), and the risk dashboard.
Developing the Risk Dashboard
The risk dashboard is a business intelligence tool that provides the important risk statis-
tics pertaining to a project. The dashboard helps the project manager and his or her top
management assess the health of a project as well as possible issues facing the project.
An example risk dashboard is presented in Figure 14.12.

415
October 2017
25
20
15
10
5
0
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
25
20
15
10
5
0
1/1
2/1
3/1
4/1
5/1
6/1
7/1
8/1
9/1
10/1
11/1
12/1
1/1
2/1
3/1
4/1
5/1
6/1
7/1
8/1
9/1
10/1
11/1
12/1
1/1
2/1
3/1
4/1
5/1
6/1
7/1
8/1
9/1
10/1
11/1
12/1
1/1
2/1
3/1
4/1
5/1
6/1
7/1
8/1
9/1
10/1
11/1
12/1
Risk Status Trend
Risk Dashboard: Silverbow Project
Active
Closed
Date
Risks Identified per Month
Number of Risks
Number of Risks
Date
Maximum Possible Exposure
Date
Exposure (Days)
Risk Reserve Remaining
Reserve (Days)
Date
Figure 14.12
Example Risk Dashboard

416
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
The risk dashboard needs to be carefully designed. Since it is a project and business
intelligence tool, you want to ensure that the most important intelligence is being col-
lected, that it is being represented eﬀectively, and that it can be easily and correctly
interpreted. All eﬀective dashboards begin with choosing the right set of metrics.
Choosing Risk Metrics
An organization, such as a program or project oﬃce, has to develop a risk metric system
to eﬀectively measure and monitor the state of risk on each of its projects. This is not an
easy exercise, however.
Chosen and used well, risk metrics have power to improve project and business
performance over time.39 However, if they are managed poorly, they can be counterpro-
ductive by reinforcing the wrong behavior. To ensure this does not happen, take time
before choosing your metrics to develop your risk management philosophy. This will
focus on what information needs to be tracked and why, what decisions will depend on
the information, and what behaviors you want to reinforce and what behaviors you want
to change.
The philosophy developed will lead to realization of what metrics are needed for a
risk dashboard. As each organization is unique, so too will be the risk metrics it chooses
to display. The example risk dashboard shown in Figure 14.12 focuses on four primary
metrics:
1.
Risk status trend
2.
Risks identiﬁed per month
3.
Maximum possible exposure
4.
Risk reserve status
Risk status provides a view of the overall number of risk events open and closed over
the life of the project to date. Risks identiﬁed per month tells the story of the amount of
uncertainty facing the project team over time. The maximum possible exposure indi-
cates the potential impact to the project and business based on the currently identiﬁed
risk events. Risk reserve status provides information on the amount of risk reserve that
has been consumed and what remains at the project manager’s disposal.
Outline the Dashboard Layout
With the metrics that are going to be represented in the risk dashboard deﬁned, you
know what information should be shown in the dashboard. Now you need to determine
how you want to present that information.
To accomplish this, take a few minutes to sketch the structure of the dashboard as
shown in Figure 14.13. This need not be an eloquent sketch, the intent is to logically
structure the information and how it will be presented.
We have chosen to represent the summary and trend information about the project
risk events on the left side of the dashboard. Summary information about the impact of
the risk events is represented on the right side of the dashboard. We chose this layout
to represent cause and eﬀect moving from left to right on the risk dashboard.

THE RISK DASHBOARD
417
Figure 14.13: Example Risk Dashboard Layout Sketch
The goal is to design the dashboard so that it is comprehensive in content, appealing
to the eye of the recipient, and meaningful in its presentation of the information and
messages it conveys.
Create the Dashboard Graphics
The job of a dashboard is to display a large amount of critical information about a project
in a very concise manner, and in a way that decisions can be made. The risk dashboard
should therefore be simple and quick to interpret, with only a few key indicators much
like the dashboard in an automobile. The best way to accomplish this is through graph-
ical representation of the data.
Once the key measures and metrics have been chosen, you now have to think about
how those measures will be graphically displayed. Trend information is best represented
in a line graph, while comparison of information (such as number of risks that are active,
inactive, or closed) is best represented in either bar charts or pie charts.
We recommend using common graph styles and keeping them simple. Remember,
the primary consumer of the risk dashboard will be your top management team. You
will want to spend your time with them talking about the status of risk on your project,
not helping them interpret your graphs.
Populate the Dashboard
This ﬁnal step in development of the dashboard involves collecting, synthesizing, and
graphically representing current risk information about your project. While all previous
steps are normally performed on a one-time occurrence at the beginning of a project,
this step is continuous throughout the life of the project.
It is well known that the best risk management practice is that which is performed
on a continuous, or at least periodic, basis due to the dynamic nature of project risk.

418
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
Keeping the information within the risk dashboard current is a great forcing function for
ensuring risk is being actively monitored and managed.
Using the Risk Dashboard
The risk dashboard is a tool that eﬀectively provides project and business intelligence.
As such, its key usages involve the monitoring of the health of a project, communication
of the current risk status and trends, and supporting various risk-based decisions.
How well a project team is managing the uncertainties associated with a project is
generally referred to in terms of project health. A healthy project is one that is on track
to meeting its objectives and business goals. That means the project is actively being
protected from the potential negative exposure caused by the risk that uncertainties
present. The risk dashboard is a project manager’s best indicator of project health. It
supports eﬀective risk monitoring by collecting the critical information about risk status
and presenting it in a fashion that conveys project health.
Since the dashboard contains critical information about the project health, it also
becomes an important communication device. All project stakeholders have a vested
interest in the outcome of a project for various reasons, so the stakeholders also have
a vested interest in knowing the health of the project. The risk dashboard presents risk
status and trend information to project stakeholders in a synthesized and summarized
manner. If designed correctly, project stakeholders will be able to determine the health
of a project within a few minutes.
The risk dashboard is also a good decision support tool. Good project decisions are
those made from information concerning the current status of a project. Better deci-
sions are those that also include information about the current and future risk associated
withaproject.Thedashboardcontainsthecriticalinformationneededtosupportcritical
risk-based decisions.
During project planning, the risk dashboard can be used to establish the amount
of risk reserve to include for a project. Risk reserve is the amount of time and funding
needed above the estimate to reduce the risk of overruns. Risk events will occur and not
all risk events will be predicted. Additionally, not all identiﬁed risks can be avoided or
mitigated; therefore, risk reserve is a necessary aspect of every project plan.
As a project progresses through its life cycle, the dashboard is used to determine
when risk reserve is needed to complete an aspect of a project (such as completing a
milestone) and to track the amount of reserve remaining.
Beneﬁts
All projects (small or large, simple or complex) will beneﬁt from the use of the risk dash-
board. The dashboard is an eﬀective tool for the execution of the project that focuses
on the state of project health. As such, it provides the rationale for risk-based project
decisions that have to be made by the project manager as well as the organization’s top
managers.
The risk dashboard also provides value by serving as a forward-viewing and predic-
tive project and business intelligence tool. This is especially true if information about

Table 14.5: Situational Use of Risk Management Tools
Situation
Risk Mgmt
Plan
Risk ID
Checklist
Risk
Register
Risk Assess
Matrix
Monte
Carlo
Decision
Tree
Risk
Dashboard
Establishes risk management methodology for
a project
✓
Establishes risk response options
✓
✓
Supports the identification of project risks
✓
✓
Establishes risk categories
✓
Establishes a project risk repository
✓
Used to determine risk severity and
prioritization
✓
✓
Provides focus on the most critical risks
✓
✓
✓
✓
Explores many project scenarios and what-if
analysis
✓
Used to help determine if action and
resources are required
✓
✓
✓
✓
Used to determine risk reserve
✓
✓
Provides information on risk timing
✓
✓
Monitors risk status
✓
✓
Supports qualitative risk analysis
✓
Supports quantitative risk analysis
✓
419

420
MANAGING PROJECT RISK
potential risk exposure, risk severity trend, and risk reserve consumption is included in
the dashboard.
Finally, the risk dashboard facilitates ongoing risk monitoring and management. It
is an unfortunate and too common practice that project risk managagement begins
and ends with risk identiﬁcation and assessment activities. The real value comes from
the ongoing monitoring and continuous management of risk as new uncertainties arise
during the course of a project.
CHOOSING YOUR RISK MANAGEMENT TOOLS
The tools presented in this chapter are designed for various project risk management
situations. Matching the tools to their most appropriate usage is sometimes a bit con-
fusing. To help in this eﬀort, the following table lists various risk management situations
and identiﬁes which tools are geared for each situation. Consider Table 14.5 as a starting
point, and create your own custom risk management tools of choice to ﬁt your particular
project management style.
References
1.
Martinelli, Russ, and Jim Waddell. “Managing Program Risk.” Project Management
World Today, September–October 2004.
2.
Bostrom, A., Steven P. French, and Sara J. Gotlieb. Risk Assessment Modeling and
Decision Support (Berlin, Germany: Springer Publishing, 2008).
3.
Gilb, T. Competitive Engineering: A Handbook for Systems Engineering, Requirements
Engineering and Software Engineering (Oxford, England: Butterworth-Heinmann,
2005).
4.
Martinelli, Russ, James Waddell, and Tim Rahschulte. Program Management for
Improved Business Results, 2nd ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2014).
5.
Project Management Institute. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowl-
edge, 5th ed. (Drexell Hill, PA: Project Management Institute, 2013).
6.
Wideman, M. Project and Program Risk Management (Newton Square, PA: Project
Management Institute, 1992).
7.
Couillard, J. “The Role of Project Risk in Determining Project Management
Approach.” Project Management Journal 26 (4): 3–15, 1995.
8.
Sunstein, C. R., and Reid Mastie. Wiser: Getting Beyond Group Think to Make Groups
Smarter (Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2014).
9.
Couillard, 1995.
10.
Duckert, G. H. Practicing Enterprise Risk Management: A Business Process Approach
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2010).
11.
Wideman, 1992.

REFERENCES
421
12.
Graves, R. “Open and Closed: The Monte Carlo Model.” PM Network 15 (2): 48–52,
2001.
13.
Graves, R. “Qualitative Risk Assessment.” PM Network 14 (10): 61–66, 2000.
14.
Project Management Institute, 2013.
15.
Person, Ron. Balanced Scorecards and Operational Dashboards with Microsoft Excel
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2009).
16.
Project Management Institute, 2013.
17.
Ibid.
18.
Wideman, 1992.
19.
Project Management Institute, 2013.
20.
Smith, P. G., and G. M. Merritt. Proactive Risk Management (New York, NY: Productiv-
ity Press, 2002).
21.
Project Management Institute. PracticeStandardforProjectRiskManagement (Drex-
ell Hill, PA: Project Management Institute, 2009).
22.
TSO. Managing Successful Projects with PRINCE2. (London, England: TSO, 2012).
23.
Martinelli and Waddell, 2004.
24.
Milosevic, Dragan Z., and P. Patanakul. “Standardization May Help Development
Projects,” International Journal of Project Management 23 (2), 2005, 62–66.
25.
Smith and Merritt, 2002.
26.
Meredith, Jack R., and Samuel J. Mantel Jr. Project Management: A Managerial
Approach, 8th ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011).
27.
Project Management Institute, 2013.
28.
Vose, D. Risk Analysis: A Quantitative Guide, 2nd ed. (New York, NY: John Wiley &
Sons, 2000).
29.
Ibid.
30.
Ibid.
31.
Schuyler, J. Risk and Decision Analysis in Projects, 2nd ed. (Newton Square, PA:
Project Management Institute, 2001).
32.
Ibid.
33.
Crouhy, M., Dan Galai, and Robert Mark. The Essentials of Risk Management, 2nd ed.
(New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2014).
34.
Cleland, D., and Lewis Ireland, . ProjectManagement:StrategicDesignandImplemen-
tation, 5th ed. (New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, 2006).
35.
Eppen, G. D., C. P. Schmidt, Jeﬀrey H. Moore, et al. IntroductoryManagementScience,
5th ed. (Upper Saddle, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1998).
36.
Winston, W. L., and S. Christian Albright. Practical Management Science, 5th ed.
(Independence, KY: Cengage Learning, 2011).
37.
Eppen et al., 1998.
38.
Schuyler, 2001.
39.
Smith and Merritt, 2002.


15
INFLUENCING PROJECT
STAKEHOLDERS
A
stakeholder is commonly deﬁned as anyone who has a vested interest in the
outcome of a project. More importantly, for a project manager, a stakeholder is
anyone who can inﬂuence, either positively or negatively, the outcome of their
project. This includes people and groups of people both inside and outside the organi-
zation. Stakeholder management isa processwith which a project manager can increase
his or her acumen in managing the political, communication, and conﬂict resolution
aspects of his or her project to ensure a positive outcome.1
Quite often, the accountability for success relies more and more on the abilities of
the project manager—a person who has limited positional power within the organiza-
tion, yet still owns the responsibility for project success. Empowerment must come from
the building of strong relationships and successfully inﬂuencing key stakeholders.2
Stakeholders are many and varied on a project, and come to the table with a vari-
ety of expectations, opinions, perceptions, priorities, fears, and personal agendas that
many times are in conﬂict with one another.3 The challenge, therefore, is to ﬁnd a way to
eﬃciently manage this cast of characters in a way that does not become all consuming.
Fundamental to eﬃciency is being able to identify and separate the highly inﬂuential
stakeholders and then create and execute a stakeholder strategy that can strike a bal-
ance between their expectations and the realities of the project.4
The tools presented in this chapter are designed to help project managers develop
an eﬀective stakeholder strategy to positively inﬂuence the attitudes and behaviors of
the stakeholders associated with their project. These tools are commonly found in the
PM Toolboxes of practicing project managers, and in our view provide the broadest
application to project types and sizes. To begin, successful stakeholder inﬂuence should
always begin with a stakeholder management plan.
THE STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT PLAN
The stakeholder management plan is used to establish the framework and methodology
the project team will use to identify, categorize, and analyze key project stakeholders in
order to develop and implement an eﬀective stakeholder strategy.
423

424
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
Developing a stakeholder management plan in the early stages of a project can help
to align your key stakeholders to the goals of the project and to turn key stakeholders
into advocates for project success. Having a stakeholder plan in one’s PM Toolbox gives
project managers an opportunity to proactively inﬂuence their stakeholders so when
issues arise, the most inﬂuential stakeholders are positioned to assist instead of hinder.
Developing a Stakeholder Management Plan
Project managers spend a signiﬁcant amount of time interfacing and working with the
various stakeholders of their project. A stakeholder management plan helps to ensure
that this signiﬁcant eﬀort is not happening in a haphazard manner. Rather, that their
eﬀorts are focused on the right set of stakeholders and that they are working toward
achieving the desired outcomes.
A good stakeholder management plan is an eﬀective tool to assist a project manager
in creation of a focused stakeholder strategy by identifying the correct set of stakehold-
ers, aligning the stakeholders to the goals of the project, and building good personal
and professional relationships with key stakeholders.
Stakeholder Management Approach
The stakeholder management plan is a document that is developed as part of the
broader project plan and establishes the framework for how a project manager will
perform his or her stakeholder management duties. Included in this plan is a gen-
eral description of the approach used to identify, analyze, and inﬂuence the project
stakeholders.5 It should include information about the following:
■
Stakeholder management process. The plan should identify and describe how man-
agement of stakeholders will be performed on the project, including a description
of the overall process.
■
Roles and responsibilities. The overall responsibility for stakeholder management
lies with the project manager, but he or she must leverage members of the project
team and assign responsibility to them as appropriate. The plan should identify
members of the team who have responsibility for managing stakeholders as well
as which stakeholders they are responsible for establishing and maintaining a
relationship with.
■
Tools. The plan should describe the various tools that will be used to identify stake-
holders and to analyze the stakeholders’ interest, attitudes, power, and inﬂuence in
order to develop and implement the stakeholder strategy.
Identifying Stakeholders
Eﬀective stakeholder management begins with identiﬁcation of all stakeholders associ-
ated with a project. The stakeholder management plan should discuss how the project
stakeholderswillbeidentiﬁed.Itisimportantthatthelistofstakeholdersshouldbecom-
prehensive in order to cast a wide net over all players who may have a vested interest in
the outcome of the project (see “Even a Salad Vendor May Be a Stakeholder”).

THE STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT PLAN
425
Even a Salad Vendor May Be a Stakeholder
This is a bizarre example of what can happen if a comprehensive stakeholder
analysis is not conducted on a project. The project involved a fast-track trans-
fer of manufacturing technology from Europe to a Middle East country. Just
after the beginning of the project, the project manager got a call from a vendor
claiming that all roads leading to his ofﬁce were blocked by groups of violent
people. As a result, some important computer equipment couldn’t be deliv-
ered. A quick check proved this call correct. The people were local butterhead
salad farmers who were unhappy that the foreign contractor was not buying
salad from them, rather, importing it from Europe.
The siege went on for days and the delivery delays were impacting the
project schedule. Finally, the project manager ﬁgured out his mistake—one
cannot ignore the relationship with local communities that have a big stake in
the project. The salad farmers, in this case, were part of the local community
and, therefore, a stakeholder in the project. Once the oversight was discov-
ered, the contractor began buying local salad, and project deliveries proceeded
without delays.
Tools such as a stakeholder map are common, and can be eﬀective in helping a
project manager identify the various stakeholders. The stakeholder list should include
internal stakeholders such as top managers, project governance board members,
department or functional managers, support personnel (accounting, quality, human
resources), and the project team. External stakeholders should also be listed and
may include contractors, vendors, regulatory bodies, service providers, and others.
The objective of stakeholder identiﬁcation is to include anyone who might have an
inﬂuence on the outcome of the project.
Stakeholder idenﬁcation also involves the categorization of stakeholders into the
logical groups that they belong to. Such categories may include senior sponsors, execu-
tive decision makers, team members, and resource providers to name a few. It is impor-
tant to realize that some stakeholders may belong to multiple groups. The intent of
stakeholder categorization is to bring structure to the stakeholder list based on common
interests in the project.
Analyzing Stakeholders
Thestakeholdermanagementplanshoulddescribehowtheprojectteamwillanalyzeits
list of identiﬁed stakeholders. Stakeholder analysis activities involve determining what
type of inﬂuence each stakeholder has on the project, such as decision power, control of
resources, or possession of critical knowledge, and their level of allegiance to the project.
In other words, would the stakeholder prefer the project to succeed, not to succeed, or
is he or she indiﬀerent about the outcome of the project?
The stakeholder analysis process is geared toward identifying the subset of stake-
holders who should be deemed as primary stakeholders along with the reasoning for

426
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
why they are deemed as key to project success. Primary stakeholders are often those
who have the most inﬂuence over the outcome of a project (positive or negative) or
those who may be the most aﬀected by the project.
Being able to determine the primary stakeholders is critical to the project manager
as he or she will not have time to engage with all stakeholders. To eﬀectively build
relationships with the right stakeholders, the project manager must ﬂush out who the
primary stakeholders are, understand what level and type of inﬂuence they have, and
determine how they feel about the project. These stakeholders will therefore require
more communication and engagement to solicit and maintain their support.
Creating a Stakeholder Strategy
Stakeholder analysis is about sense making. This means understanding the signiﬁcance
of the information gained about the various project stakeholders. Signiﬁcance of the
information is then used to develop a strategy for engaging and managing the right set
of stakeholders. The right stakeholders are those who have power and inﬂuence to aﬀect
the outcome of the project.
Most of the literature on stakeholder management immediately classiﬁes the pri-
mary stakeholders as those with both high power and strong allegiance to the project.
This is signiﬁcantly inaccurate because it leaves out the most potentially dangerous
stakeholders—those with high power and negative allegiance to the project. These
people also need to be considered primary stakeholders. Figure 15.1 helps to illustrate
Power
Allegiance
Low
High
Medium
Significant
Engagement
Little to No
Engagement
Limited
Engagement
Positive
Neutral
Negative
Figure 15.1: The Power/Allegiance Grid

THE STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT PLAN
427
why. Stakeholders with high power and negative allegiance fall in the category of
signiﬁcant engagement required.
If a project manager uses the power/allegiance grid to map their stakeholders, a core
stakeholder strategy will begin to emerge. The strategy should consist of a communica-
tion and action plan for each of the primary stakeholders. It should also keep the project
advocates engaged, describe how they can be used to inﬂuence others, and plan how
to win over or neutralize the stakeholders who are not current advocates.
Using the Stakeholder Management Plan
Every project manager, whether they are managing a small, simple project or a large and
complex project, will beneﬁt from using a stakeholder management plan. All projects
involve stakeholders who rarely come to the table completely aligned and fully support-
ive of a project.
Because of this, a stakeholder strategy needs to be developed and followed to
ensure that the right stakeholders are engaged and eﬀectively managed in a manner
that helps to set the project up for success. The stakeholder management plan is a
project manager’s most critical tool for developing an eﬀective stakeholder strategy.
The stakeholder management plan is normally created during the earliest stages
of a project, either during project initiation or project planning. Many times, it is
incorporated into a larger project plan that covers all aspects of planning a project
eﬀectively.
Although the use of the stakeholder management plan should become institution-
alized on a project, development of the plan can vary greatly. For smaller projects, only a
few hours may be required to conduct a planning session and develop a plan. This time
proportionately rises as projects get bigger and more stakeholders become involved.
Tens of hours may be necessary to devise a quality stakeholder management plan for a
team in charge of a large and complex project.
Even though it is created early, the plan should be viewed and treated as a dynamic
tool. This is due to the fact that project stakeholders are often transient, entering and
exiting throughout the project cycle. As turnover in stakeholders occurs, it is likely that
the stakeholder strategy will need to be modiﬁed. Therefore, the stakeholder manage-
ment plan will need to be modiﬁed.
Beneﬁts
Even though every project manager can beneﬁt from using a stakeholder management
plan, it brings the most value to project situations that have a larger number of stake-
holders and where their opinions and viewpoints about the project are not completely
aligned. In these project situations, the plan is a wonderful tool to assist project man-
agers in the creation of structure out chaos.
The greatest beneﬁt derived from the use of a stakeholder management plan is abil-
ity to align the various stakeholders to the goals of the project and bring competing
agendas and opinions to the surface for debate and discussion.

428
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
THE STAKEHOLDER MAP
The stakeholder map is a powerful tool that visually displays all stakeholders who either
inﬂuence a project or are aﬀected by the project. It takes the outcome of the stakeholder
identiﬁcation brainstorming activities and begins to create order and structure around
the individuals and groups associated with a project.
Developing a Stakeholder Map
Stakeholdermappingbeginswithidentiﬁcationofallpossiblestakeholders.Theempha-
sishereisonallpossiblestakeholders.Theintentisnottocreateamagiclistofstakehold-
ers, but to ensure that a stakeholder who may be later deemed inﬂuencially important is
not forgotten. Stakeholder identiﬁcation should be performed without screening, iden-
tifying everyone who may have an interest in your project today and in the future. The
screening of stakeholders takes place in a following step. Table 15.1 identiﬁes a number
of stakeholder sources to consider.
Choose a Stakeholder Map Format
Stakeholder maps come in many diﬀerent formats. An Internet search will yield many
map formats for you to choose from or use as a reference design. However, some
forethought is needed ahead of time to ensure you choose the right format for your
needs. The key to choosing or designing a format which is right for you comes from
Table 15.1: Sample Stakeholder Sources
Internal Stakeholder Sources
Project team
Project sponsor
Organizational top managers
Functional (department) managers
Business strategists
Governance bodies
Program or portfolio managers
Information technology group
Internal clients
Customer service group
Human resources group
Finance group
Legal group
Manufacturing group
Procurement group
Quality assurance group
Sales and marketing group
Operations group
External Stakeholder Sources
Clients or customers
Competitors
Community organizations
Vendors
Regulators
Trade unions
Media
Lobbyists
Users
Venture capitalists

THE STAKEHOLDER MAP
429
Sue Williams
(Sponsor)
Ajit Verjami
(Dept Mgr)
Al Thompson
(Proj Mgr)
Lynda Donovan
(Network Admin)
Tai Chen
(SW Developer)
Andy Mulchao
(SW Vendor)
Steve Cross
(Client)
Stakeholder Relationship
Collaborative Relationship
Figure 15.2: Example Stakeholder Map for Simple Projects
understanding how you want to structure your stakeholders, and what information you
want to include in your map.
For small and simple projects, try not to over design or complicate what is needed.
Figure 15.2 illustrates a simple stakeholder map format that is suﬃcient for these types
of projects.
Here, a relatively small number of stakeholders are involved due to the simplicity of
the project. Therefore, not a lot of structure is needed.
For projects that are larger and more complex, additional structure is needed to cat-
egorize the various stakeholders. Figure 15.3 shows an example of a stakeholder map
that is quite useful for this level of stakeholder organization and structure.
For projects that involve a larger number of stakeholders, particularly external stake-
holders, an even more structured stakeholder map is required. Using a table format
(Figure 15.4) is eﬀective for this type of project.
This format allows for a great deal of structure, as well as additional information that
may be valuable to a project manager during stakeholder analysis activities. This might
include information on who the project sponsor is, who the champions and supporters
are, and who might be a disrupter.
Populating the Stakeholder Map
Once a map format has been chosen based upon the project type and information
needs, the stakeholder map can now be populated with the details extracted from
the stakeholder identiﬁcation activities. If categories or groupings are used, begin
by placing the stakeholder names into the map under the appropriate category. We
suggest using names (for instance, Lynda Bratz) instead of titles (Director of Data
Management). Stakeholder management is about building relationships with people,
not titles or job responsibilities.

430
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
Al Thompson
Management
Ajit Verjami – SW Manager
Mark Williamson – Cust. Support 
Brian Vegassa - Strategy 
Professional Services
Chris Heiler - Procurement 
Anna Tamara - Legal
Fern Wilde - Finance
Project Team
Tai Chen – SW Developer 
Lynda Donovan - Networking 
Todd Cox - Testing
Vik Temzara – HW Developer
Brenda Cummins - Manuf’g
Client
Steven Cross - Director
Software Vendor
Andy Mulchao – R&D Manager 
Subcontractor
Matty Knowles - Manager
Eric Innis – Contract Mgmt
Tuan Ngyen – Test Engineer
Sue Williams
Project Manager
Internal Stakeholders
Sponsor
External Stakeholders
Figure 15.3: Example Stakeholder Map for Complex Projects
Category
Name
Function
Role
Management
Ajit Verjami
Software Dept Mgr
Resource provider
Mark Williamson 
Subject matter expert
Brian Vigassa
Strategist
Champion / Consultant
Sue Williams
Product Line Manager
Sponsor
Professional
Services 
Chris Heidler
Procurement
Subject matter expert
Anna Tamara
Legal
Subject matter expert
Fern Wilde
Contracting
Subject matter expert
Client
Steven Cross
Director
Client
Andy Mulchao
Software Vendor
R&D Manager
Ian Langly
Management Consultant
Subject matter expert
Vendors
Subcontractor
Eric Innis 
Tuan Ngyen
Test Contractor
Manager
Test Contractor
Contract Manager
Test Contractor
Test Engineer
Customer Support Mgr 
Matty Knowles
Figure 15.4: Example Stakeholder Map in a Table Format

THE STAKEHOLDER ANALYSIS TABLE
431
Once the stakeholder map is populated, it is a good idea to have someone else
review the contents for missing stakeholders. Better to ﬁnd the missing stakeholders
earlyintheprojectthantohaveaseniormanagerremindyoutowardtheendofaproject
that you have forgotten to consult a key stakeholder.
Using the Stakeholder Map
The stakeholder map should be created at the earliest stages of a project: ideally, during
project initiation when the ﬁrst stakeholders become aware of an idea that is intended
to be converted to an executable project. Waiting too long to create, populate, and use
the stakeholder map can have negative aﬀects on a project, particularly if detractors are
not identiﬁed and champions are not engaged.
The primary use of the stakeholder map is to help the project manager structure
the various stakeholders into some form of logical order. This is particularly useful for
projects with a large number of stakeholders. Earlier, we described the need to take a
systematic approach to stakeholder engagement instead of an ad-hoc approach. The
stakeholder map is used to create a systematic view of the various stakeholders.
The map can also be used to perform ﬁrst level stakeholder analysis if information
about stakeholder expectations or how they may be impacted by the project is included.
The stakeholder map can be used to describe why a particular individual or group has a
stake in a project.
The stakeholder map is a very dynamic tool, constantly changing, and for that rea-
son it must be reviewed and updated on a periodic basis. Project stakeholders transition
in and out, as do some of their viewpoints and opinions about the project. The stake-
holder map is a project manager’s best intelligence gathering tool for understanding
the changes associated with the stakeholders surrounding their project.
Beneﬁts
Even though every project manager can beneﬁt from using a stakeholder map, it is most
valuable in project situations that have a larger number of stakeholders and where their
opinions and viewpoints about the project are not well aligned. In these project situa-
tions, the map is a wonderful tool to assist project managers in the creation of structure
out of chaos.
The stakeholder map brings beneﬁt when used as an intelligence gathering tool as
well; particularly when it is used as a transition device from stakeholder identiﬁcation
to stakeholder analysis by documenting why each stakeholder has an interest in the
outcome of a project. This ﬁrst order of intelligence gathering helps a project manager
determine if each of his or her stakeholders is in support of the project, is in opposition,
or is indiﬀerent about the outcome.
THE STAKEHOLDER ANALYSIS TABLE
Project stakeholders can be many, dispersed, and varied in their viewpoints and
characteristics. It is important to do a good job in identifying your stakeholders, but
stakeholder identiﬁcation by itself has limited value for project managers. Developing a

432
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
deeper understanding of the project stakeholder’s interests, opinions, and viewpoints is
the necessary next step in the stakeholder management process. This step is commonly
referred to as stakeholder analysis.
The purpose of stakeholder analysis is to enable the project manager to identify
the individuals and groups that must be interacted with in order to accomplish the
project goals. Eﬀective stakeholder interaction is supported by thorough stakeholder
analysis activities that allow a project manager to develop a strategy to accomplish the
following:
■
Identify strategic interests that the various stakeholders have in the project to nego-
tiate a common interest.
■
Develop plans and tactics to eﬀectively negotiate competing goals and interests
between stakeholders.
■
Secure active support from project champions (see “What Is a Project Champion?”).
■
Devise activities to either neutralize or prevent the negative actions of non-
supporters.
■
Allocate personal and expanded resources to engage with the key stakeholders.
What Is a Project Champion?
A project champion is an informal but important role on a project. Also called
the project advocate, a champion is a key stakeholder who is a strong sup-
porter of the project and continuously communicates the beneﬁts and value of
the project to the other stakeholders. The project champion often serves as a
liaison to top management and is effective in communicating at all levels of the
organization. He or she also helps the project manager navigate the political
landscape and serves to remove obstacles that are or may prevent progress.6
Due to the champion’s position and inﬂuence within an organization, he or
she normally understands the concerns, goals, viewpoints, and opinions of the
other stakeholders. For this reason, they are an important individual for project
managers to work with during stakeholder analysis activities.
When looking for a project champion, search for individuals who have the
following characteristics:
1.
Respected. A project champion should be someone who is trusted and
whose viewpoints and opinions are sought out and considered.
2.
Inﬂuential. A project champion is someone who can prompt action on the
part of other stakeholders without relying on his or her positional power.
3.
Strong communicator. In order to effectively promote the value of the
project and inﬂuence action, a project stakeholder has to be a strong
communicator.
4.
Politically savvy. A project champion should be knowledgeable about the
formal and informal political landscape and effective at using their politi-
cal capital to realign personal agendas to the goals of the project.

THE STAKEHOLDER ANALYSIS TABLE
433
Many of the stakeholder analysis activities are about prioritizing the project stake-
holders. A small subset of your stakeholders, commonly called your key or primary stake-
holders, possess a signiﬁcant amount of organizational inﬂuence to either advance your
projectorblockitsprogress.Eitherway,thesestakeholdershavetobeidentiﬁedthrough
a ﬁltering and prioritization process.
Eﬀective stakeholder analysis also helps a project manager identify key stakeholder
relationships such as power and interest or inﬂuence and level of engagement.
There are a number of very eﬀective tools that project managers use to analyze their
stakeholders. Some of these tools are detailed in the sections that follow, beginning with
the stakeholder analysis table.
Developing a Stakeholder Analysis Table
The stakeholder analysis table is a tool that is used for a number of stakeholder analysis
purposes,theﬁrstofwhichiscapturinginformationaboutstakeholderexpectationsand
reservations. The table documents and communicates this information in a concise and
simple manner as demonstrated in the example stakeholder analysis table (Table 15.2).
As stated previously, a primary outcome of stakeholder analysis is gaining alignment
of common stakeholder interests and negotiating competing interests. Introductory
meetings should be used to understand each stakeholder’s understanding, interpreta-
tion, and opinion of the project for which they are a stakeholder (see “Key Questions to
Ask Your Stakeholders”). Additionally, the meeting can be used to collect information
on what each stakeholder believes their role is on the project, what decisions they
Table 15.2: Example Stakeholder Analysis Table
Name
Assumed
Role
Expectations
Reservations
Provides
to Project
Decision
Control
Sue
Williams
Sponsor
Project meets
all business
and execution
goals
Firm’s abiility
to develop the
new capability
Direction and
decisions
Gate
approvals
Ajit
Verjami
Department
manager
No
expectations
for this
project
Believe
another
project
provides a
better
solution
Resources
Resource
allocation
decisions
Steven
Cross
Client
Project
completed
under budget
Timeline is
very
aggressive
Funding
Gate
approvals
Danielle
Car-
valho
Subject
expert
Project will
stay on
schedule and
complete on
time
Already
committed to
two other
projects
Time and
expertise
None
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .
. . . .

434
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
believe they are charged with making, and what they are investing in the project
(e.g., resources, budget, or time). This information should then be entered into the
stakeholder analysis table for future reference and use.
Key Questions to Ask Your Stakeholders
Understanding the needs, expectations, and potential issues of project stake-
holders is crucial to the success of any project. The work you do to familiarize
yourself with your stakeholders and learn as much as possible about them may
make or break the outcome of your project.
The following questions can serve as a starting point for collecting the
necessary information you will need to fully understand and analyze your stake-
holders:
1.
Who will receive the output of your project?
2.
What direct beneﬁt will the recipient gain from your project output?
3.
Who will be working with you to execute your project?
4.
Who are the subject matter experts that you should consult?
5.
Who is the client or customer?
6.
What resources can I use for the project?
7.
Who are the primary detractors of the project?
8.
Who controls the project budget?
9.
How does the stakeholder deﬁne project success?
10.
What are the business goals driving the need for the project?
11.
How does the stakeholder see their role in the project?
12.
What worries the stakeholder about the project?
13.
Do any stakeholders have conﬂicts of interest?
14.
What information does the stakeholder need about the project?
15.
Is there an alternative project that would be a better investment?
Using the Stakeholder Analysis Table
The stakeholder analysis table, like all stakeholder management tools, should ﬁrst be
created and implemented during the earliest stage of a project, normally project ini-
tiation. First, information about who the project stakeholders are is directly transferred
from the stakeholder map to the stakeholder analysis table prior to conducting your ﬁrst
introductory discovery meetings with identiﬁed stakeholders.
The table then becomes the single source of information about the project stake-
holders from which further stakeholder analysis activities are performed. To begin the
analysis, you should use the information within the stakeholder analysis table to focus
on four key pieces of information:
1.
Determination of who the key stakeholders of the project are.
2.
Assessment of stakeholder alignment to the project goals, scope of work, and
project outcomes.

THE STAKEHOLDER ANALYSIS TABLE
435
3.
Identiﬁcation of potential conﬂicts of opinion between stakeholders.
4.
Identiﬁcation of the project advocates and nonsupporters.
It is far better to understand if your stakeholders agree with the project goals that
you have identiﬁed and documented early in the project cycle instead of waiting until
it is too late to make adjustments to the goals or to work with stakeholders to get
alignment. The project goals in turn aﬀect the scope of work to be performed and the
outcomes of that work. Stakeholder redirection is a primary cause of scope changes, so
the earlier the changes are executed, the less impact there will be to the project (see
Chapter 8).
Unless you have a very small number of project stakeholders, it is unrealistic to
believe that there will not be conﬂicting opinions and interests between the stakehold-
ers. This is common, and for this reason it needs to be uncovered and understood in
order to develop a strategy and tactics to broker this conﬂict of interest. Left unchecked,
conﬂicting interests and opinions are a leading cause for project failures.7
The stakeholder analysis table is also used to provide additional structure to your list
of stakeholders and to pinpoint the most important stakeholders who you will need to
work with to insure project success. To do this, critical information has to be collected
and analyzed to understand which stakeholders will be most involved, what their roles
will be, and how they will contribute to the project.
Project managers cannot aﬀord to be naïve in thinking that all stakeholders want
their project to succeed. Unfortunately, this is not always the case. Because of this, the
stakeholder analysis table can be used to begin determining who your supporters and
nonsupporters are. Speciﬁcally, pay close attention to the information that is contained
in the “reservations” portion of the table. Typically, nonsupporters will bring their reser-
vations to light during the discovery conversations with the project manager. Normally,
an additional level of analysis is needed to determine if stakeholders who are not advo-
cates may in fact become blockers to project success. However, at this stage project
managers should be able to separate their advocates from the nonsupporters.
Beneﬁts
In order to develop a strategy to inﬂuence and manage the stakeholders on a project,
you must ﬁrst develop an understanding of the individuals and groups you consider
your stakeholders. The stakeholder analysis table creates value by providing a means to
get beyond stakeholder identiﬁcation and helps project managers learn about stake-
holder expectations, concerns, issues, and ideas.
In the process, the table can also help to verify whether alignment among stake-
holders exists concerning the project goals. If not, it enables early adjustment of the
goals and associated scope of work necessary to accomplish the goals.
It is not uncommon for conﬂicting expectations and viewpoints to emerge between
stakeholders. By using the stakeholder analysis table to document the expectations,
reservations, and desired outcomes from the project for each stakeholder, the conﬂict-
ing opinions rise to the surface where they can be addressed and compromises bro-
kered. Also through this process of listening to the project stakeholders, potential issues
and risks will emerge. Again, bringing them to the surface so they can be managed.

436
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
The stakeholder analysis table helps project managers pinpoint the key project
stakeholders and helps them focus their stakeholder engagement strategy and tactics
on the individuals and groups that have the most inﬂuence on a project. This is bene-
ﬁcial because without a focused strategy, a project manager can spend an inordinate
amount to time and energy managing project stakeholders to the detriment of the
other aspects of their project management duties.
Finally, one of the greatest beneﬁts of the stakeholder analysis table is an intangible
beneﬁt. The use of the table becomes a means for establishing and building a rela-
tionship with the project stakeholders. To populate the table with suﬃciently adequate
information requires the project manager to interface with and listen to the individuals
involved. The act of listening is a powerful tool for building relationships.
THE STAKEHOLDER EVALUATION MATRIX
The stakeholder evaluation matrix, also commonly called the stakeholder grid, is used
to perform a deeper level of stakeholder analysis by assessing important relationships
between stakeholder characteristics, the most common relationship being a stake-
holder’s organizational inﬂuence and his or her allegiance to a project. This relationship
is demonstrated in Figure 15.5.
The primary purpose of the stakeholder evaluation matrix is to assess the political
landscape surrounding the project which iscommonlycreated bythe variousstakehold-
ers involved (see “I Never Wanted to Be a Politician”). The matrix helps to create political
awareness. This awareness is critically important as a project manager goes about cre-
ating a stakeholder strategy. Speciﬁcally, it allows he or she to assess whether they have
the political clout to inﬂuence the power players, or if they have to enlist the help of
other stakeholders.
Influence
Allegiance
Sue
Williams
Ajit
Verjami 
Steven
Cross
Danielle
Carvalho
Anna
Tamara
Neutral
Supportive
Low
High
Medium
Non-supportive
Figure 15.5: Example Stakeholder Evaluation Matrix

THE STAKEHOLDER EVALUATION MATRIX
437
I Never Wanted to Be a Politician
Joseph Algere is a bit perplexed and more than a little frustrated. Having just
returned to his ofﬁce from a meeting with the senior manager of his divi-
sion, he wonders why several key project team decisions concerning the fea-
tures of the new patient scheduling system have been overturned by senior
management—especially since the decisions were approved just two weeks
ago during the project plan approval meeting. Additionally, Joseph found out
that his senior system architect had been reassigned to a research project last
week by the functional manager of the architecture group. Now that the new
system has fewer advanced features, the schedule has been extended, and the
development cost has increased, he has to revise the project business case to
determine if the project is still viable from a business perspective.
What Joseph is not aware of is that the senior leaders of the ﬁrm have not
fully empowered their project managers, a situation that is not uncommon.
This leaves the project managers in a tenuous position—fully responsible for
the business success of the project, but limited authority over the resources
and decisions to make it happen. As a consequence, project managers can
become immersed in the organization’s political posturing, where personal and
functional agendas and priorities take precedence over a project’s business
results. Due to the nature of organizational behavior, a project manager must
accept that they are at times in the political hot seat, and learn the nuances of
managing their stakeholders accordingly.
Organizational politics originate when individuals drive their personal agen-
das and priorities at the expense of a cohesive corporate agenda. The basis
of organizational politics is really twofold: one’s desire to advance within the
ﬁrm, and one’s quest for power (usually in the form of controlling decisions
and resources). In a silo-structured organization, politics originate when the
functional managers develop objectives that support the speciﬁc long-term
goals of their department. But what happens if these functional objectives do
not support, or worse yet, are in direct conﬂict with the strategic goals of the
company?
Unfortunately, no organization structure or business model will eliminate
political behavior within a ﬁrm, as it’s a natural part of the dynamics involved
when people work together. Therefore, both senior managers and project man-
agers must take action to prevent an organization’s projects from becoming
negatively impacted by corporate politics.
As Patrick Lencioni states in this book titled Silos, Politics, and Turf Wars, “If
there is a place where the blame for silos and politics belongs, it is at the top
of the organization. Every departmental silo can ultimately be traced back to
the leaders of those departments who have failed to understand the interde-
pendencies that exist among [the departments]”.8 For project management to
be effective, senior leaders must make the tough decision to shift the balance
of power within the organization from the functional managers to the project
managers, and continue to ensure that the functional organizations are fully
supporting the projects.
The project manager must also actively manage the politics surrounding
his or her project. It is important that the project manager possess both a
(continued)

438
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
keen understanding of the organization, and the political savvy to build strong
relationships to effectively leverage and inﬂuence the power base of the com-
pany. Company politics are a natural part of any organization, and the project
manager should understand that politics is a behavioral aspect of project man-
agement that he or she must contend with in order to succeed. The most
effective method for playing the political game is to leverage the project stake-
holders and powerful members of one’s network who can help achieve the
project objectives.
Developing a Stakeholder Evaluation Matrix
An eﬀective evaluation matrix can only be created once the stakeholders have been
identiﬁedandthekeystakeholderspinpointed.Thisrequirescriticalinputfromtheinfor-
mation contained in the stakeholder map and the stakeholder analysis table.
Document the Primary Stakeholders
At this stage of stakeholder analysis, project managers should be focused on those
stakeholders who have the most impact on a project, particularly those who can impact
critical decisions or resource assignments: a reminder again to also include stakeholders
who have the ability to negatively impact the project.
The number of primary stakeholders will typically relate to the size of a project.
Larger projects normally require broader organizational and partnership involvement;
and, subsequently, more stakeholders will be involved.
The primary stakeholders should be documented in the stakeholder analysis table
and carried over to the stakeholder evaluation matrix.
Evaluate the Level of Stakeholder Inﬂuence
For each primary stakeholder, evaluate the level of inﬂuence you believe they have on
the outcome of the project. Focus on those individuals who can aﬀect critical project
decisions (such as phase gate approvals), those who are providing resources to the
project, those who control all or portions of the project budget, and those who have
expressed reservations about the project.
Plot the stakeholders with repect to their level of inﬂuence on the stakeholder eval-
uation matrix by assessing whether you believe a stakeholder has a high, medium, or
low level of inﬂuence on the project. Do this by asking the question, “To what degree
can the stakeholder exert inﬂuence to change the course of the project?”
Evaluate the Level of Allegiance
The second vector of evaluation focuses on each stakeholder’s attitude toward a project,
and how their attitude will aﬀect their level of support. Your evaluation is concentrated
on trying to determine if a stakeholder is supportive, nonsupportive, or essentially indif-
ferent toward your project, and then developing a further determination on the level of
support or nonsupport.

THE STAKEHOLDER EVALUATION MATRIX
439
Plot the Stakeholders on the Matrix
Each stakeholder can now be given a location on the matrix based upon your assessed
level of inﬂuence and allegiance to the project. When completed, project managers have
a graphical representation of their stakeholders from which they can then analyze the
political landscape of the project.
Using the Stakeholder Evaluation Matrix
The primary use of the evaluation matrix is to analyze the current landscape of primary
stakeholder’s inﬂuence and attitude toward a project, and to begin formulating a strat-
egy for how you can move the stakeholders to a more favorable position on the matrix
if needed.
Begin the evaluation process by adding a grid to the matrix as shown in Figure 15.6.
We recommend beginning with a simple 2 × 2 grid that will divide the matrix into four
quadrants. If additional resolution is needed, a 3 × 3 matrix can be used.
The stakeholders in quadrant A possess high inﬂuence and low, or indiﬀerent, alle-
giance to the project. These stakeholders constitute the highest risk to the project, and
will require signiﬁcant focus and attention.
The stakeholders in quadrant B possess high inﬂuence and positive allegiance to
the project. These individuals or groups are potential project champions. Work will be
required to ensure the continued support of these stakeholders. These individuals or
groups may be instrumental in helping to move other stakeholders, especially those in
quadrant A, to more favorable positions on the matrix.
The stakeholders in quadrant C are generally nonsupportive of a project but possess
little inﬂuence within the organization to aﬀect the project outcome. These stakeholders
Influence
Allegiance
Sue
Williams
Ajit
Verjami
Steven
Cross
Danielle
Carvalho
Anna
Tamara
D
C
A
B
Low
High
Medium
Non-supportive
Neutral
Supportive
Figure 15.6: Example Stakeholder Evaluation Matrix with Grid

440
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
cannot be ignored, however, as organizational and political landscapes are dynamic. It
is not uncommon for a stakeholder originally placed in quadrant C to gain inﬂuence
(e.g., through a promotion to a position of power) throughout the course of a project.
If they remain nonsupportive, once they gain additional inﬂuence, an additional risk to
the project is introduced.
The stakeholders in quadrant D are supportive of the project but again possess lit-
tle inﬂuence over the project outcomes at the current time. Use these stakeholders as
part of your project coalition of support by keeping them informed and engaged. Often,
these stakeholders possess speciﬁc knowledge and viewpoints that can be leveraged to
support speciﬁc decisions or actions you are trying to inﬂuence.
Plot Stakeholder Engagement Movement
Using the information gained by segmenting the evaluation matrix into a grid, physi-
cally draw the various stakeholder movements that will be necessary to secure positive
support for the project (Figure 15.7). This provides a visual representation of the future
state of the political landscape. This future state provides clarity and focus for the devel-
opment of your stakeholder strategy and engagement actions.
Be realistic when plotting your planned stakeholder movement. For instance, it isnot
realistic to believe you can move a highly inﬂuential stakeholder with strong aversion to
your project to a position of strong support. In reality, the best scenario may be that you
will be able to move this stakeholder to a neutral position. This in itself is a wonderful
risk mitigation strategy.
Power
Low
High
Influence
Keep Satisfied
Monitor
Keep Informed
Manage Closely
Sue
Ajit
Steven
Danielle
Anna
Matty
Andy
High
Low
Figure 15.7: Example Power-Influence Diagram

THE STAKEHOLDER EVALUATION MATRIX
441
Variations
The power-inﬂuence diagram is a variation of the stakeholder evaluation matrix that
focuses directly on each key stakeholder’s power within the organization and the
level of inﬂuence they have on a project’s outcome (see “The Diﬀerence between
Power and Inﬂuence”). Figure 15.7 illustrates an example of a typical power-inﬂuence
diagram.
Like the stakeholder evaluation matrix, the power-inﬂuence diagram is divided
into a 2 × 2 matrix, which creates four distinct quadrants that represent stakeholder
engagement strategies. Determining a stakeholder’s level of power and inﬂuence is a
subjective exercise, so trying to determine exactly where stakeholders are located on the
matrix is not a value-add activity. Making a determination of which quadrant they reside
in does add value, however, as each quadrant deﬁnes the type of engagement action
to pursue.
The quadrant deﬁned as high power (positional and decision authority) and high
inﬂuence (ability to change the project outcome) requires the project manager to man-
age these stakeholders closely (the engagement action).
Thequadrantdeﬁnedashighpowerandlowinﬂuencerequiresengagementactions
that focus on keeping these stakeholders informed of the project progress.
The quadrant deﬁned as low power and high inﬂuence includes stakeholders who
do not necessarily possess a high degree of organizational power, but can inﬂuence
a project’s outcome. This requires stakeholder actions that ensure these stakeholders
remain satisﬁed that their interests are being served by the project.
Finally, the quadrant deﬁned by low power and low inﬂuence requires little to no
stakeholder engagement action. Good risk management practices require that these
stakeholders should periodically be monitored, however. Power and inﬂuence within an
organization can change over the course of a project which may require more in-depth
engagement if a stakeholder gains additional organizational power or inﬂuence during
the life of a project.
The Difference between Power and Influence
If you are aiming to plan and execute a successful project, you will need to
be successful at stakeholder management. Beyond stakeholder identiﬁcation
and ranking, successful project managers know that they must discern the
power and inﬂuence each stakeholder has among others interested in the out-
come of the project. Often, however, even among some of the most seasoned
managers, power and inﬂuence gets confused. The following characterizes and
distinguishes the two.
(continued)

442
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
Power
Influence
Positional
Personal
Formal
Informal
Assumed
Earned
Control
Consent
Management
Leadership
Command
Request
Dictate
Dialogue
Stakeholder management is needed because the fact is, some people have
more power than others and some have more inﬂuence than others, and the
project manager must understand and then be able to leverage each stake-
holder’s power and inﬂuence for project success. A stakeholder can be an
enabler or constrainer to any project’s success.
It is important to realize that neither power nor inﬂuence is bad, although
either can certainly be abused. Power is an ability someone has to direct the
behaviors and actions of others. Similar but different is inﬂuence, which is a
personal capacity that one has to affect the behavior of someone.
To manage both stakeholder power and inﬂuence to increase the probabil-
ity of project success, project managers must connect people, share informa-
tion, build commitment, and make decisions. To do so, determine the power or
inﬂuence each stakeholder has with others and match the power or inﬂuence
as a lever to those engaged and impacted by the project.
Another variation of both the stakeholder evaluation matrix and the power-
inﬂuence diagram is a tool called the powergram (see Figure 15.8). The powergram
focuses exclusively on the power dynamics between project stakeholders.9 It is espe-
cially useful in project situations where achieving alignment between stakeholders is
a challenge caused primarily by diﬀerences in opinion or historical tensions between
individuals.
The powergram displays the power structure between your key stakeholders, which
can provide insights into where stakeholder tension exists and how other stakeholders
can be used to positively inﬂuence and change the power dynamics.
Developing a set of power relationship rules is necessary to construct an eﬀective
powergram. We suggest the use of the following rules:
1.
The size of a circle denotes the amount of organizational power a stakeholder
possesses. The larger the circle, the more power they possess.
2.
A double line represents a positive relationship between two stakeholders.
3.
A single line with a strike through it represents a negative relationship between
two stakeholders.
4.
The shorter the line connecting two stakeholders, the stronger the relationship
between them.

THE STAKEHOLDER EVALUATION MATRIX
443
Sue
Williams
Steve
Cross
Ajit
Verjami
Lynda
Donovan
Tai
Chen
Andy
Mulchado
Figure 15.8: Example Powergram
If you have created a graphical stakeholder map (such as the one shown in
Figure 15.2), the map can be used as the basis of the powergram relationship structure.
This is the approach we used to create the powergram in Figure 15.8.
The following power dynamics can be derived from the powergram. Sue Williams
(project sponsor) and Steven Cross (client) are the most powerful stakeholders, with Ajit
Verjami (department manager) relatively powerful as well. The powergram also shows
that there is a strained relationship between Williams and Verjami, but the positive rela-
tionship between Williams and Cross, and between Cross and Verjami, can be leveraged
if needed. Finally, Lynda Donovan (network administrator) has negative relationships
with both Chen and Mulchao. As a result, the positive relationships between Williams
and both Mulchao and Donovan may be needed to gain alignment between these three
project stakeholders.
The powergram is a very simple tool to create and does not require a high degree of
precision and accuracy to be useful in helping project managers to make sense of the
power dynamics surrounding their project.
Beneﬁts
The value the stakeholder evaluation matrix and its variations provide to a project
manager ﬁrst and foremost is in the enablement of a deeper understanding of the
project’s key stakeholders: speciﬁcally, an understanding of the stakeholder’s attitudes
toward the project evaluated against their organizational power and ability to inﬂuence
critical decisions and project outcomes. This creates important knowledge concerning
which stakeholders create risk to the project and which stakeholders can be leveraged
to advance the project. This knowledge is of course crucial for formulating an eﬀective
stakeholder strategy.
The simple and graphical format of the tool also oﬀers beneﬁts by providing a
visual representation of the stakeholder evaluation results. This visual representa-
tion makes it immediately clear which stakeholders will require the most focus and
attention. When stakeholder future state annotations are included in the graphs, the

444
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
project manager gains a quick understanding of a number of engagement actions
needed.
If used to evaluate positional power and inﬂuence, the matrix also serves to increase
a project manager’s political acumen. It is now understood that political acumen is a
necessary competency that all project managers need to acquire and hone over time.
THE STAKEHOLDER STRATEGY MATRIX
The primary goal of stakeholder engagement activities is to establish stakeholder
alignment to the strategic goals, intended business beneﬁts, project objectives, and
success criteria of a project. It involves putting action to the stakeholder strategy
through the building of professional relationships to inﬂuence for project advocacy
and to monitor stakeholder actions, words, and decisions. The project manager should
maintain focus on the primary stakeholders to prevent the job of stakeholder engage-
ment from being all-consuming at the detriment of other critical aspects of managing
a project.
Stakeholder engagement activities will test the courage of project managers who
need to be brave and bold when faced with building relationships with stakeholders
who are not a fan of the project, or may be professionally threatened by the outcome
of the project. Do not follow the human tendency to avoid these stakeholders. Rather,
seek them out and, most importantly, listen to what they have to say. Only by listen-
ing can a project manager begin to ﬁnd middle ground to use as a means to positively
inﬂuence.
The stakeholder strategy matrix is a valuable tool to ensure that you are focused on
the right stakeholders and that you thoughtfully develop a stakeholder strategy to gain
maximum stakeholder alignment and to eﬀectively maneuver the political landscape
surrounding your project.
Developing a Stakeholder Strategy Matrix
All the tools in this chapter to this point have been focused on identifying the project
stakeholders and analyzing their interests from multiple perspectives. This has all been
focused on collecting information and developing knowledge about the stakeholders
in order to create an eﬀective strategy for engagement and communication. The
stakeholder strategy matrix (shown in Figure 15.9) is used as a repository that explicitly
illustrates the information and knowledge gained from a project manager’s stakeholder
identiﬁcation and analysis activities. The information contained in the tool will become
a strong basis for development of a stakeholder strategy.
Construct the Matrix
The ﬁrst step in developing the stakeholder strategy matrix is creating a structure that
demonstratestheinformationyouchoosetoevaluateinthecreationofyourstakeholder
strategy.

THE STAKEHOLDER STRATEGY MATRIX
445
Stakeholder
Name
People
Money
Material
Facilities
Knowledge
Decisions
Level of
Influence
Allegiance to
Project
Relationship to
Project
Resources
Sue Williams
Sponsor
Ajit Verjami
Functional Manager
Steven Cross
Software Vendor
Lynda Donovan
Core Team Member
Influence Key:
L=Little or no influence
M =Some influence
H=Considerable influence
Allegiance Key:
Positive allegiance
Neutral allegiance
Negative allegiance
H
H
L
M
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Figure 15.9: Example Stakeholder Strategy Matrix
UsingthematrixinFigure15.9asanexample,wehavechosentostructurethematrix
around the following key information we chose to develop our stakeholder strategy:
■
Names of the primary stakeholders.
■
Stakeholder’s relationship to the project.
■
Stakeholder’s level of inﬂuence or organizational power.
■
Our perception of their allegiance to the project.
■
What project resources they control.
Keep in mind that this is only an example. It is up to each project manager to deter-
mine what information they need in order to develop the stakeholder strategy for their
project, and structure their stakeholder strategy matrix accordingly.
Populate the Matrix
Now is the time when a project manager gets to use the information and knowledge
they have gained from the stakeholder analysis activities by populating the matrix with
the information desired. In our example, this information includes the names of each pri-
mary stakeholder, a description of their relationship to the project, a determination of
whether they possess a high, medium, or low level of organizational inﬂuence, and if we
believe they are an advocate for our project, a potential detractor, or are basically indif-
ferent. The last piece of information needed in our example is an evaluation of whether
each stakeholder has control over project budget, people, decisions, and so on.
When the stakeholder strategy matrix is fully populated, a project manager is in
possession of highly valuable information about their set of primary stakeholders with
which they can use to create a stakeholder strategy.

446
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
Using the Stakeholder Strategy Matrix
Now, let’s be honest. Widely sharing the information shown in Figure 15.9 may be a
career-limiting move. Detailed stakeholder analysis information should be considered
conﬁdential and tightly controlled by the project manager. Why do we say this? Because
true and honest stakeholder analysis brings to the surface the realities of corporate pol-
itics and unique biases that have to be managed properly; usually that means actively,
but delicately.
Many project managers have told us that they do the analysis in their head, which
is good. However, when they hold the information in their heads, it tends not to be
used consistently or correctly, which is to sort the primary stakeholders from the remain-
der of the stakeholders and to develop a concise stakeholder strategy. Performing the
additional step of documenting the stakeholder analysis information, either physically
or electronically, helps to maintain history and clarity in developing the stakeholder
strategy.
As stated earlier, the strategy should focus on keeping the project’s advocates
engaged, describe how they can be used to inﬂuence others, and plan how to win over
or neutralize the stakeholders who are not current advocates.
The stakeholder strategy should consider the following aspects:
■
What is wanted or needed from each stakeholder?
■
What is the message that needs to be delivered to each stakeholder?
■
What is the best method and frequency of engagement and communication with
each stakeholder?
■
Does the strategy reﬂect the interests and concerns of each stakeholder?
See “Being a PM Would Be Easy if It Weren’t for People” for an opportunity to prac-
tice developing a stakeholder strategy. Keep in mind, there is no right right strategy to
employ. However, some will be more eﬀective than others.
Being a PM Would Be Easy if It Weren’t
for People
The Department of Social Services for a large government agency has initiated
a project to improve community response to its “Illnesses Awareness Services”
campaign. As the project manager who was recently hired to lead the project,
and who is new to the agency, Soo Lee has decided to complete a stakeholder
analysis and strategy for the project.
From personal discussions with her manager, the department manager, and
others within the department, this is what she currently knows about some of
the key people associated with her project:
■
The sponsor, Sue Williams, is a strong advocate for the project and seems
to be quite inﬂuential within the agency.

CHOOSING YOUR STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT TOOLS
447
■
The functional managers, Steve Sainz, Diane Best, and Ajit Verjami, all
supply resources to the project. They are also on the project’s management
review committee. All but Ajit Verjami are aligned to your project; Ajit
believes an alternative solution and project should have been selected and
funded.
■
Lee’s project core team consists of three members: Tai Chen, Jose Her-
nandez, and Lynda Donovan. She knows little about her core team at this
point, but she has some concern about Lynda Donovan. She has learned
that Lynda had applied for the project manager position for this project but
was the alternate choice at the end of the selection process.
■
The agency has hired an outside software development company to create
a new web site and discussion portal for the Department of Social Services.
Initial development and go-live of the web site will be managed as part of the
project. Multiple attempts have been made to contact the project manager
for the software vendor, but he has not responded to Lee’s messages.
Using the information above as well as the stakeholder analysis information
contained in Figure 15.10, can you develop a four-point stakeholder engage-
ment strategy?
Beneﬁts
The stakeholder strategy matrix provides a number of important beneﬁts for a project
manager. First, the tool helps a project manager pinpoint the right stakeholders to
engage—those that can have the greatest aﬀect (either positive or negative) on the
project outcome.
The matrix also helps a project manager focus on the right actions that will provide
themostresults:forexample,usingaprojectchampiontoinﬂuenceanotherstakeholder
who may feel negatively or indiﬀerent toward the project.
By using the tool to make sense of the organization’s inﬂuence and power structure,
a project manager can develop strategies to leverage that structure to the beneﬁts of
the project.
Finally, the stakeholder strategy matrix can help project managers establish a strong
coalition of support that can be called on when their projects run into diﬃculties and
challenges.
CHOOSING YOUR STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT TOOLS
The tools presented in this chapter are designed for various project stakeholder man-
agement activities and situations. Matching the tools to their most appropriate usage
is sometimes a bit confusing. To help in this eﬀort, Table 15.3 lists various stakeholder
management situations and identiﬁes which tools are geared for each situation. Con-
sider this table as a starting point, and create your own custom project situation analysis
and tools of choice to ﬁt your particular project management style.

448
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
Table 15.3: Situational Use of Stakeholder Influencing Tools
Situation
Stakeholder
Mgmt Plan
Stakeholder
Map
Stakeholder
Analysis
Table
Stakeholder
Evaluation
Matrix
Stakeholder
Strategy
Matrix
Establishes
stakeholder
management
methodology
for a project
✓
Identify project
stakeholders
✓
Creates
stakeholder
structure
✓
Tracking
stakeholder
changes
✓
Determine
stakeholders
interest in the
project
✓
Determine how
stakeholders
will be impacted
by the project
✓
Identify primary
stakeholders
✓
✓
✓
Identify
advocates and
detractors
✓
✓
✓
Assess
stakeholder
alignment to
project goals
✓
✓
Determine
opposing
stakeholder
opinion
✓
Used to devise
activities to
prevent negative
action of
nonsupporters
✓
✓
Assess
stakeholder
characteristics
✓
✓
Used to develop
a stakeholder
management
strategy
✓
✓
✓

FINAL THOUGHTS ON THE PM TOOLBOX
449
References
1.
Pinto, Jeﬀrey K. Power and Politics in Project Management (Newtown Square, PA:
Project Management Institute, 1998).
2.
Roeder, Tres. Managing Project Stakeholders: Building a Foundation to Achieve Project
Goals (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2013).
3.
Bourne, Lynda. Stakeholder Relationship Management (Burlington, VT: Gower, 2009).
4.
Pinto, 1998.
5.
Singh, Harjit. Mastering Project Human Resource Management: Eﬀectively Organize
and Communicate with All Project Stakeholders (New York, NY: Pearson FT Press,
2014).
6.
Eskerod, Pernille. Project Stakeholder Management: Fundamentals of Project Manage-
ment (Burlington, VT: Gower, 2013).
7.
IBM Systems Magazine. www.ibmsystemsmag.com/power/Systems-Management/
Workload-Management/project_pitfalls/?page=2. Accessed April 2015.
8.
Lencioni, Patrick. Silos, Politics and Turf Wars, a Leadership Fable about Destroying the
Barriers that Turn Colleagues into Competitors. (San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 2006).
9.
Andler, Nicolai.ToolsforProjectManagement,WorkshopsandConsulting:AMust-Have
Compendium of Essential Tools and Techniques (Erlangen, Germany: Publicis Publish-
ing, 2011).
FINAL THOUGHTS ON THE PM TOOLBOX
Like all tools, project management tools are not meant to be a panacea that will auto-
matically make someone a better project manager. Becoming a better project manager
is accomplished through experience and continuous building of skills and competen-
cies. Rather, tools are designed to help a project manager become more eﬀective and
eﬃcient in performing the key project management practices and in creating the vari-
ous project outcomes and deliverables required of project-based work.
For example, if we need to deﬁne the project scope, we can use the scope statement,
statement of work, and work breakdown structure (WBS) or program work breakdown
structure (PWBS) for this purpose. Similarly, if we are faced with having to accelerate our
project schedule, we can enlist the help of the schedule crashing technique or perhaps
thecriticalchainscheduletool.Therearetoolsavailablefornearlyeveryprojectsituation
known.
The primary point we have put forward in this book is that there are two main
approaches to choosing and using your project management tools: (1) select your tools
one at a time when a situation and need arise, or (2) create a PM Toolbox systematically
that provides a higher level of utility.
Creating a PM Toolbox requires a higher level of thinking and design. The toolbox
approach, if implemented to its full value, aims to establish and maintain alignment
between business strategy and project execution, between strategic goals and project

450
INFLUENCING PROJECT STAKEHOLDERS
deliverables, and between the work of the top managers and the project managers of
the company.
The demands of the modern business world have changed and are continuing
to change as companies manage more and more projects for all aspects of their
business. Such changes necessitate a new best practice, which this book was created to
enable—creating and using a PM Toolbox approach to enable a higher level of project
management practice and performance.

INDEX
A
Activity-on-arrow, 157, 175, 179, 180
Activity-on-node, 175, 179, 180
Adaptive project execution, 301
Agile methodologies, 301, 302, 321
Agile uniﬁed process, 301
Alignment Matrix, 49–52
Alignment scale, 50
Analogous Estimate, 191–194, 208,
210
A-R-C Method, 62
Assumptions, 69–72, 75, 85–86,
88–92, 98, 102, 107, 187, 190,
193, 228, 234, 380, 407
B
Backward pass, 157–158, 167
Bar
Actual bar method, 256
Bar charts, 417
Shaded bar method, 256
Baseline-Current-Future (B-C-F)
Analysis, 261–265, 270
Beneﬁts Map, 25–31,
Best-cost, 6–7, 12–13
Bottom-up Estimate, 199–203, 206,
208, 210, 285
Brainstorming, 87, 134, 138, 147, 263,
379, 387, 404, 408, 428
Branches
Decision Tree, 409–411
WBS, 128, 133,
Budget estimates, 188
Budget Consumption Chart, 276–280
Buﬀer Chart, 171, 247–251, 270
Business success factors, 27, 28, 29,
69, 113, 116, 119
Business Case, 17, 27, 29, 50, 56, 57,
68–71, 73, 77, 112, 113, 330,
334, 389, 437
C
Capability
And Business Goals, 119
Novelty, 15, 17
Technical, 68
Under development, 17, 66, 70, 433
Cascade format, 166, 175
Cash ﬂow, 10, 11, 31–33, 203, 205,
208–210, 237, 400
Chance Event, 402–403
Chance nodes, of Decision Tree,
409–410, 414
Change
Change log, 14, 16, 217–222, 227,
229–233
Change management, 65, 99,
107–109, 118, 136, 218, 221,
225–228, 231–233
Change process, 14, 16, 223, 226
Change request, 21, 126, 218,
221–232
Chart
Bar charts, 417
Buﬀer chart, 247–251
Burndown chart, 239–243
451

452
INDEX
Chart (Continued)
Gantt chart, 146–150
Milestone chart, 150–154
Slip chart, 243–247
Complexity, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 38,
42, 47, 55, 57, 64, 65, 66, 67, 85,
102, 118, 124, 132, 149, 156,
163, 166, 170, 176, 191, 192,
196, 198, 202, 208, 217, 220,
229, 235, 218, 318, 320, 325,
330, 351, 408, 414
Complexity Assessment, 64–68
Constraints, 44, 56, 76, 88, 96, 112,
120–123, 125, 136, 160, 171,
181, 306, 367, 389
Contingency
Buﬀers, 171
Budget, 67, 187–189, 195, 228, 274,
276
Risk, 171, 274, 309, 340, 399, 408,
409
Reserve, 65, 279, 384
Resource, 170
Schedule, 67, 172–173, 228, 408
Continuous distribution, in Monte
Carlo, 402
Control
Change, 106–108, 118, 125–126,
220, 232, 288
Cost, 128, 200–202, 293, 298
Project, 136, 215, 222, 229, 258, 343
Schedule, 148, 161, 168, 270
Scope, 111, 118, 217–221, 223, 230,
233–235
Strategies, 260
Cost-beneﬁt analysis, 31, 70
Cost and Achievement Analysis,
292–293
Cost Baseline, 185, 187–188,
190–191, 203–211, 295, 384
Cost estimating, 19, 185, 188–190,
193, 196–198, 266
Cost leadership, strategy, 11
Cost planning
Deﬁne, 186–187
Deﬁnitions, 188
Map, 185–186, 191–192, 198, 200,
210–211
Model, 186–187
Organizational, 185–186
Process, 185, 188–190
Project, 185–186, 188, 191
Cost planning tools, 210
Criteria
Optional, 36
Overriding, 36
Tradable, 36
Critical path, 19, 149, 157, 158, 159,
160, 165, 167, 244, 245, 246,
247, 248, 250, 254, 263, 266,
267, 268, 289, 291, 294, 297,
327, 400, 402
Critical chain, 168, 169, 170, 171, 247,
248, 249, 250, 327
Critical Chain Schedule, 7, 168–173,
182, 245–247, 249–250, 449
Customers, 12, 15, 42, 66, 83, 85,
87–88, 97–99, 138, 208, 227,
342
Customization
By project family, 12, 15, 16, 20
By project size, 12–15, 20
By project type, 12, 16–20
Of the PM Toolbox, 9, 19
D
Decision Tree, 409–415, 419
Deﬁnitive estimates, 188
Degree of variation, 7–8
Deliverables
Alignment, 27, 29, 360
And project outcomes, 7, 27, 111,
228, 449

INDEX
453
And milestones, 75, 150, 152, 257,
258
And product breakdown structure,
137, 139, 141
And project reporting, 327, 337
And requirements, 96
And WBS, 128, 132, 134, 223
In scope statement, 120, 121–125
Work completed, 240, 241, 243,
345, 354–357, 370
Closure, 360–362, 364
Delphi, 380
Dependencies
And requirements, 92, 104
And risks and assumptions, 72, 75
Between activities, 149, 151–153,
156, 157, 162, 168, 170, 227,
246, 255, 260, 265, 269, 297,
315, 400
In Agile, 306, 309–311, 314
Resource, 170–173
Scheduling, 163–167, 176, 263
Soft, 160, 164, 264
Deterministic model, in Monte Carlo,
402, 403
Dictionary, Work Breakdown
Structure, 123, 128
Diﬀerentiation strategy, 5–7, 13
Direct cost, 189
Discrete distribution, in Monte Carlo,
402
Dynamic systems development
model, 301, 302
E
Earned Value Analysis (EVA)
Control account plans, 283–284
Cost performance index, 281–282,
288, 290–292
Cost variance, 280–282, 287–290,
296
Estimate at complete, 281–282,
291
50/50 formula, 285
Fixed formula, 285, 295
Percent complete method, 285
Performing, 287, 292
Project results, 280
Purpose of, 280
Schedule at complete, 290–291
Schedule performance index,
281–282, 289–291
Terms, 282
Variances, 280, 288
Economic methods
Internal rate of return, 31, 33, 38
Net present value, 31, 32, 38
Payback time, 31, 32, 34, 38
Equivalent completed units, 286
Expected value, 11, 400–403, 406,
409, 410, 413, 414
Extreme programming, 301
F
Fast tracking, 113, 159, 160, 161, 164,
226, 264, 269
Feeding buﬀers, critical chain
schedule, 168
Float, 158, 159, 160, 167, 168, 263,
267, 268
Folding back procedure, 414
Frequency distribution, in Monte
Carlo Analysis, 401, 406
G
Gantt Chart, 11, 14, 16, 19, 146–150,
160, 167, 174, 182, 240, 246,
255–256, 278, 336, 342
Gap
In project SWOT analysis, 115–116
Knowledge, 380
Schedule, 265
Variance, 344, 370

454
INDEX
Geographic, Work Breakdown
Structure, 129
Go/Kill decision, 40
Goals
Business, 10, 17, 18, 25–28, 50–52,
70, 71, 74, 89, 111, 119, 121,
332, 360, 366, 367, 370, 394,
418, 434
Project, 19, 57–60, 72–74,
112–114, 120, 123, 124, 132,
137, 396, 399, 415, 432–435,
448
Goals Grid, 57–60, 73, 74
Governance, 3, 30, 71, 175, 176, 330,
331, 372, 425, 428
H
Hierarchical Schedule, 147, 153,
175–177, 182
Histograms, resource, 206
I
Indirect cost, 189, 190, 281
Internal Rate of Return, see Economic
Methods
Issues
And risk, 340, 346, 386, 389, 399
Database, 263, 340–341
Log, 341
Open, 90, 327
Reporting, 297, 327, 328, 340, 343,
344, 415
Stakeholder, 434, 435
J
Jogging Line, 251–257, 261, 262, 264,
270, 337
K
Key performance indicators, 332, 334,
335, 336, 345,
L
Labor cost, 190, 201,
Lean, 301
Line of Balance, 177–181, 182
M
Management reserve, 276
Mapping
Beneﬁts, 29, 30
Project, 18
Stakeholder, 19, 428
Strategic, 51
Market risk, 387
Milestone Analysis, 261, 293,
294–297, 298, 335, 339
Milestone Chart, 14, 16, 150–154,
174, 176, 179, 182, 258
Milestone Prediction Chart, 257–261,
270, 297
Milestones
Major, 72, 75, 77, 120, 122, 153, 161,
167, 174, 177, 258, 261
Minor, 176, 260
Project, 69, 122, 297, 327, 345
Sequencing, 152
Weighted, 283, 285, 286, 287
Work Packages, 175, 239
Mission, project, 72–74, 112
Mode, in Monte Carlo, 402
Monte Carlo Analysis, 3, 18, 19, 395,
399–409,
Most probably cost, 189,
Multitiered scheduling, 174
N
Near critical path, Critical Path
Method, 159
Net Present Value (NPV), see
Economic Methods
O
Options
Decision, 411
Fixed formula, 285

INDEX
455
Investment, 71
PM Toolbox customization, 19
SWOT analysis, 115
Order-of-magnitude estimates, 188,
203,
P
Pairwise Ranking, 46–49
Parametric Estimate, 194–199, 206,
210
Payback time, 31, 32, 34, 38
Payoﬀ,
of Decision Tree, 410, 414
of Scoring Model, 35, 37, 38, 39, 40
Percent Complete
Burn down, 240
Buﬀer chart, 249
Cost management, 282, 286
Earned value, 285, 293
Schedule management, 256
Performance measurement, 136, 203,
280, 283, 294
PERT (Project Evaluation and Review
Technique), 161, 162, 261,
404
P-I Matrix, 14, 16, 18, 396
Plan-Do-Study-Act cycle, 253, 254
Plan vs Actual, 256
PMBOK, 8, 121, 215, 352, 386
Portfolio, 20, 25, 50, 52, 65, 67, 68, 71,
209, 329
Postmortem Review, 366–373, 389
Precedence diagram, 161, 162
Predecessors, 156, 157, 161, 164, 166
PRINCE2, 8
Probabilities, 39, 382, 403, 404, 409,
410, 413, 414, 415
Probability distribution, 400, 402, 403,
405, 406
Product Breakdown Structure (PBS),
137–142, 239, 288
Product owner, 303, 304, 306, 310,
318
Progress reporting, 175, 254, 340, 345
Project authorization, 77
Project birth certiﬁcate, 77
Project buﬀer, 168, 171, 247, 249, 250
Project champion, 432, 447
Project charter, 14, 16, 57, 70, 71–77,
112, 119, 334, 360, 389
Project Closure Checklist, 356–357,
359,
Project Closure Plan, 356–362
Project Closure Report, 351, 360,
361–365, 369, 373
Project Dashboard, 332–337, 348
Project environment, 111, 115, 116
Project Indicator, 343, 348
Project life cycle, 129, 185, 210, 216,
348, 352, 353, 354, 372, 380
Project management process groups,
352, 353, 355, 356
Project management toolbox
And strategy, 4, 5, 10–12
Customization of, 9, 12–20
Purpose, 3
Improvement of, 9, 20–21
Standardization of, 4, 8, 9
Project mission, 72, 73, 74, 112
Project outcomes, 7, 27, 29, 30, 62, 63,
64, 83, 118, 119, 125, 126, 133,
146, 301, 302, 328, 389, 394,
434, 440, 443, 449
Project reporting, 31, 304, 325, 326,
327, 337, 346
Project scenario, 242, 279, 402, 409
Project scope (see Scope)
Project selection, 25, 31, 32, 34, 35, 40,
45, 55, 60, 73, 76, 112, 186

456
INDEX
Project sponsor, 29, 56, 57, 58, 59, 63,
72, 74, 75, 76, 90, 98, 111, 115,
141, 185, 222, 233, 245, 259,
326, 330, 361, 365, 366, 369,
384, 428, 429, 443
Project Strike Zone, 328–332, 334,
346, 348, 396
Project success factors, 57, 113, 222
Project SWOT analysis, 111–117, 119
Project value proposition, 44, 46, 225
Q
Qualitative assessment, 19, 26, 50,
379, 382, 383, 385, 390, 392,
394, 396, 397, 419
Quality
Assurance, 72, 128, 138, 428
Decisions, 229, 235, 252, 259
Goals and requirements, 74, 83, 84,
89, 91, 92, 100, 102, 104, 106,
120, 121, 125
Measuring, 95, 120, 383, 388
Strategy, 5–7
Quantitative assessment, 31, 33, 34,
104, 379, 382, 385, 392, 394,
395, 396, 409, 419
R
Random sampling, 403, 405
Random variable, in Monte Carlo,
403
Range of accuracy, 189
Release planning, 304, 307–311, 320
Repeatability, 4, 7, 8, 9, 74, 191
Requirements
Ambiguity checklist, 102–106
Baseline, 16, 106–109
Change, 87, 99, 107–109, 220, 301,
309
Customer requirements, 68, 71, 83,
108, 121
Document, 71, 96–102, 106, 107,
108, 150
Elicitation and gathering, 83, 84,
86, 88, 89, 90, 91, 108, 301
Engineering, 83, 84
Functional requirements, 87, 92, 93,
96, 99, 103, 388
Management, 83, 84, 106
Nonfunctional requirements, 84,
91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 99, 100,
101, 103, 108
Project requirements, 73, 76, 84, 86,
87, 89, 91, 93, 99, 107, 110, 112,
113, 117, 119, 123, 128, 220,
274
Quality requirements, 92
Resource requirements, 136, 150,
173, 192, 200, 206, 208
Schedule requirements, 227, 342,
414
Solution requirements, 56, 83
Speciﬁcation and writing, 83, 84,
91–96, 100, 101, 104, 106
Technical requirements, 307
Veriﬁcation, 83
Resource buﬀer, 171
Resource-constrained, 159
Responsibility Matrix, 14, 16, 57,
60–64, 136, 219
Return on investment (ROI), 12, 42,
47, 94, 336
Risk
and Assumptions, 72, 75, 85, 88, 89,
98, 102, 107, 380
and Contingency reserve, 171, 309,
377, 379, 385, 393, 394, 399,
408, 409, 412, 416, 418, 419,
420
Event, 379, 383, 384, 385, 390, 392,
393, 394, 395, 397, 398
Impact, 379, 383, 384, 395, 396,
397, 398, 399, 400, 405

INDEX
457
Owners, 385
Probability, 379, 382, 383, 384, 395,
396,
Risk Assessment Matrix, 394–399
Risk Dashboard, 415–420
Risk Identiﬁcation Checklist,
387–390
Risk management, 5, 18, 65, 341, 358,
377, 378, 379, 385, 386, 387,
392, 393, 399, 416, 417, 419,
420
Risk management plan, 378–387
Risk metrics, 416
Risk monitoring, 385, 398, 415, 420
Risk Register, 390–394
Risk Response Plan, 381, 384, 401
Rolling back procedure, 414
Rolling wave, 16, 18, 19, 148, 173, 176,
177, 182, 240, 260, 277, 288
S
S Chart, 178, 180, 181, 278
Schedule control, 148, 161, 168, 270
Schedule Crashing, 113, 160,
265–269, 270, 449
Schedule management system, 146,
147, 151, 155, 162, 169, 174,
178
Schedule performance index (SPI),
281, 282, 288, 289, 290, 291,
292, 294
Scope
Change or creep, 215–218,
220–224, 226, 228, 229, 230,
231, 232, 235, 243, 244, 248,
252, 258, 262
Project scope control system,
217–223
Planning, 111, 146, 155, 162
Scope Control Decision Checklist,
233–235
Scope Statement, 14, 15, 16, 19, 71,
73, 74, 116, 118–126, 128, 132,
217, 224, 227, 449
Scoring Model, 16, 34, 35–41
Scrum,
Framework, 302, 303
Master, 62, 303, 304, 306, 312, 319,
320
Meeting, 303, 304, 311, 312, 313,
319, 320
Team, 303, 304, 306, 309, 312, 313,
318, 319, 320,
Workﬂow, 303
S-curve, 209
Sequencing, 147, 148, 152, 154, 156,
159, 161, 162, 163, 168, 170,
175
Shaded Bar Method, 256
Slip Chart, 14, 16, 243–247, 261, 270
Spine format, Time-Scaled Arrow
Diagram, 166, 167
Sprint
Backlog, 304–307, 308, 310, 311,
320
Burn Down Chart, 304, 315–317,
320
HIP, 308, 309, 310
Planning, 306, 307, 308, 310, 311,
315, 317, 318
Review Meeting, 307, 308, 311, 317,
318
Retrospective, 304, 307, 308, 311,
312, 317–320
Task Board, 304, 313–315, 320
Stakeholder
Alignment, 434, 444, 448
Categorization, 425
Engagement, 431, 436, 441, 444,
447
Primary, 56, 57, 59, 64, 75, 391, 425,
426, 427, 433, 438, 444, 445,
446, 448

458
INDEX
Stakeholder (Continued)
List, 425
Management, 370, 423, 424, 425,
426, 429, 432, 434, 441, 447,
448, 449
Mapping, 19
Strategy, 423, 424, 426, 427, 436,
440, 443, 444, 445, 446, 447,
448
Stakeholder Analysis Table, 431–436,
438, 448
Stakeholder Evaluation Matrix,
436–444, 448
Stakeholder Management Plan,
423–427
Stakeholder Map, 16, 428–431, 438,
443, 448
Stakeholder Strategy Matrix, 16,
444–447, 448
Standard deviation, 403, 444
Standardized project management, 3,
4, 7, 8, 9, 21, 74, 217
Stochastic model, in Monte Carlo,
403
Strategic alignment, 4, 9, 10, 47
Summary Status Report, 15, 337–343,
340, 393
Switchover time, 165, 166,
Systems
Approach, 138, 134
Development method, 301
Information system, 18
Language, 138
Large systems, 307, 308
T
Template, 42–45, 84, 85, 93, 100, 112,
134, 136, 221, 225, 245, 275,
277, 361–364
Time-Phased Budget, 187, 188, 203,
206, 208, 211, 283, 295
Time-Scaled Arrow Diagram (TAD),
162–168, 252, 255, 256, 264
Time-to-breakeven, 10, 11, 12
Time-to-market, 6, 15, 97, 113, 116,
159, 160, 173, 258, 269, 411,
415
Time-to-deployment, 10, 11, 12
Top-down, 61, 128, 134, 135, 406
Tornado Chart, 401, 406, 407, 408, 413
Total ﬂoat, 158, 159, 168, 263
Trend analysis, 258
V
Variance
VAC, 291
Cost, 280, 281, 282, 287, 288, 290,
294, 295, 296, 327, 339
Performance, 136, 245, 253, 327,
339, 353, 363, 370, 403
Schedule, 253, 256, 259, 260, 263,
280, 282, 287, 288, 289, 291,
294, 295, 296, 327, 339
Voice-of-the customer, 12, 83, 87, 88,
108, 370
W
Weighted Milestone, 283, 285, 286,
287
Whole solution, 138–139
Wisdom of Crowds, 43, 44, 45
Work Breakdown Structure (WBS)
Bottom-up approach, 134, 135
Branch in, 128, 129
Construction of, 132
Cost accounts in, 128, 284
Dictionary, 121, 128
Geographic area method, 129, 132

INDEX
459
Golden rules, 132, 133, 282
Naming groups, 135
And performance measurement,
136, 283, 284
Project life cycle method, 129
Purpose, 126
Scope, 126,
Structure selection, 129
Table of contents format, 132, 133
Top-down approach, 128, 134
Work elements in, 127, 128, 129,
136, 175, 283, 284, 294
Work packages in, 128, 130, 131,
136, 147, 163, 175, 206,
Workﬂow, 120, 121, 122, 128, 242,
301, 303, 321

WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.

