PAET I. 
PROLEGOMENA TO ARITHMETIC.
CHAPTER I.
THE DECIMAL SCALE.
1, IN the book of Problemata, attributed to Aristotle, the
following question is asked (xv. 3): " Why do all men, both
barbarians and Hellenes, count up to 10 and not to some other
number?" It is suggested, among several answers of great
absurdity, that the true reason may be that all men have ten
fingers *: " using these, then, as symbols of their proper number
(viz. 10), they count everything else by this scale." The writer
then adds "Alone among men, a certain tribe of Thracians
count up to 4, because, like children, they cannot remember
a long sum neither have they any need for a great quantity of
anything."
It is natural to regret that an author who at so early a date
was capable of writing this passage, was not induced to ask
himself more questions and to collect more facts on the same
and similar subjects. Had he done so, he might have anti-
cipated, by some two thousand years, the modern method of
research into prehistoric times and might have attempted, with
every chance of success, a hundred problems which cannot now
be satisfactorily treated2. In the fourth century B. c. and for
long after, half the Aryan peoples were still barbarous and there
must still have survived, even among Greeks and Italians,
countless relics of primitive manners, forming a sure tradi-
1 Cf. Ovid, Fasti in. v. 121 sqq. 
lines as would be taken by a modern
8 It seems probable tliat Aristotle 
evolutionist. See Sir H. Maine, Early
himself was inclined to reconstruct 
Law and Custom, pp. 196, 197.
primitive history on much the same
G. G. M. 
1
Published online by Cambridge University Press

2 
THE DECIMAL SCALE.
tion of the past. Nearly all these materials, so abundant in
Aristotle's day, are irretrievably lost to us and the primeval
history of Aryan culture depends now chiefly on the evidence
supplied by comparative philology. It is so with the art of
calculation. We may assume evolution and, by careful com-
parison of the habits of the existing lower races, we may form
ah extra a theoretical history of arithmetic among our fore-
fathers; but almost the whole (so to say) internal evidence
is concealed in a few numeral words. To the etymology of
these a few pages may here be fitly devoted, not only because it
is habitual with our generation to commence every inquiry
from the beginning of things, but also because Greek arithmetic
offers no other prehistoric inquiry but this, because, in fact,
ordinary Greek calculation remained to the last so clumsy and
primitive, that if any progress in the art is to be ascribed to
the Greeks, it can be exhibited only by going back to the
beginning.
2. The words for 1000, and every higher power of 10,
are different in all the great branches of the Aryan family
of languages, and the cardinal numerals up to that limit are
manifestly derived, by mere addition or composition, from the
first ten. These last, therefore, are of by far the greatest
interest and importance and the present inquiry may be
confined to them. Before examining the individual words,
however, it will be well to consider the whole group. The
first three are adjectives, agreeing with only casual and partial
exceptions {e.g. Bvo) in gender and case with the substantives
which they qualify. The same might be said of the fourth, but
that in Latin quattuor is wholly indeclinable. The rest, from
five to ten, are generally uninflected and have or had originally
the form of a neuter singular1. In Sanskrit, indeed, these six
numerals are declined as adjectives but they do not take the
gender signs and in older writers are often employed without
any inflexions at all2. In old Slavonic they are extended by
a suffix (as in Semitic tongues) into abstract nouns of the
1 The final sibilant of 'six,' 'sex,' 
primeval. Schleieher, Vergl. Gram. §
etc. is part of the root, and the ap- 
237. 6 and 8.
parently dual ending of octo is not 
2 Whitney, Sanskrit Gram. § 486c.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE DECIMAL SCALE. 
3
feminine singular and are so declined1 (cf. Gr. wefnrd? etc.),
but this usage is also obviously late and may be ignored in
a general discussion of the origin of the words. For the present
purpose, it may be stated broadly that the first three are
adjectives, the fourth is generally an adjective but sometimes
an uninflected noun, the remaining six are uninflected nouns
only. All of them, in all Aryan tongues, are constructed of
the same materials, which, moreover, seem familiar enough
in different connexions. The difficulty is how to adapt the
apparent meanings of the roots to a numerical signification.
Some metaphor probably underlies each word, but though
metaphor, as we shall see, is competent to make numerals, it is
not able to extend their application. Things are not eight or
ten by a metaphor. They are so as a pure matter of fact, and
we are thus debarred from inferring the original meanings of the
numerals from any subsequent usage of them by transference!
The propriety of each numeral to its signification must be
explained a priori or not at all. And this, apart from any
linguistic difficulties, constitutes the chief objection to the
etymologies hitherto proposed by Bopp, Lepsius, Pott and
others2. Sometimes they do not explain the choice of the
particular name, sometimes they involve patent anachronisms.
When for instance they say that pankan and saptan,' five' and
' seven/ mean ' following,' because they follow ' four' and ' six'
1 Bopp, Comp. Gram. § 313. Stade, 
and 3: or else ha, qua — I.
Lehrb. der Hebr. Spr. p. 216. 
Five= 'that which comes after' (four).
2 Bopp, § 308 sqq. Pott, Die qui- 
Sk. pashch&t=after.
nare etc. Zdhlmethode, pp. 130 sqq. 
Six, Sk. shash is probably a compound
On p. 142 Pott, discussing Lepsius' de- 
of two and four.
rivations, points out that he ascribes 
Seven = ' that which follows' (six).
to 1 (besides its original eka) the forms 
Eight, Sk. ashtan = 1 + and + 3.
k, tsh, p and c in the composition of 
Nine=new—that which comes after 8
the other' numerals. 
The common 
and begins a new quartette.
derivations, taken chiefly from Bopp, 
Ten = two and eight.
are set out in Morris, Hist. Outlines Pott, in Etym. Forschungen, 2nd ed.,
of Eng. Accidence, p. 110 n. 
The 
1859, I. p. 61 n., declares his opinion
following only need be cited: 
that the numerals are derived from
27wee='what goes beyond' (root tri, 
names of concrete objects, but suggests
tar, to go beyond). 
no particular etymologies.
Four (quattuor) =' and three,' i.e. 1
1—2
Published online by Cambridge University Press

4 
THE DECIMAL SCALE.
respectively, they suggest no reason why any other numeral
above 1 should not have been called by either or both of these
names: so when they say that navan, 'nine,' means 'new'
(z/e'o? etc.) because it begins a new quartette, they assume a
primeval quaternary notation and do not explain why ' five'
was not called navan: so again when they say that navan
means 'last' (vearo<; etc.) because it is the last of the units,
they evidently speak from the point of view of an arithmetician
who has learnt to use written symbols. What one really wants,
in this as in so many other problems of philology, is to get at
the point of view of the primitive language-maker and to see
from what sources he was likely to get his numerals. And
this can only be done by a careful examination of the habits
and languages of modern savages.
3. It is probably familiar enough to most readers that
many savage tribes are really unable to count, or at least have
no numerals, above 2 or 3 or 4, and express all higher numbers
by a word meaning ' heap' or ' plenty,' and that every nation,
which can count further than this, uses a quinary or decimal or
vigesimal notation or a combination of these1, which is generally
founded on, and expressly referred to, the number of the fingers
and toes. These facts, which are beyond dispute2, suggest two
initial questions, first, what is the real difficulty which a savage
finds in separating the units which go to make a multitude ? and
1 No' nation has a purely quinary or 
Zeitschr. respectively. 
Also Tylor,
vigesimal notation at all. The Mayaa 
Primitive Culture, i. ch. 7 : Lubbock,
of Yucatan, however, and the Aztecs 
Orig. of Civilisation, ch. 8, and Prehist.
have special words and signs for 20, 
Times (4th ed.), p. 588. Another col-
400 and 8000. Pott, Zahlmethode supr. 
lection of similar facts will be found
cit. pp. 93, 97, 98. Wilson, Prehistoric 
in Dean Peacock's article 'Arithmetic'
Man, II. p. 61. 
in the Ency. Metropolitans. It may be
2 See, for instance, Pott, Die quin. 
added here that the Maoris are said to
Zahlmethode, etc., with an appendix 
use an undenary scale (Pott, Zahlm.
on Finger-names, supra cit. : Pott, 
pp. 75 and 76) in which rests are taken
Die Sprachverschiedenheit in Europa 
at 11, 121, 1331, etc., but this is
etc., on the same subject, being a 
doubted. The Bolans or Buramans of
Festgabe zur xxv. Philologenversamm- 
W. Africa are also said to use a senary
lung: and an article by the same 
scale (Pott, Festgabe, p. 30). These
writer in Zeitschr. fur Volkerpsycho- 
cases, if correctly reported, seem to be
logie, Vol. xn. 
These will be cited 
the only complete exceptions to the
hereafter as Pott, Zahlm., Festgabe and 
rule stated in the text.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE DECIMAL SCALE. 
5
secondly, why are the fingers—which, one would say a priori,
are as hard to count as any other collection of five or ten
things—always adopted as the means and basis of calculation ?
The answer seems to be, at least in part, as follows. A savage
knows large and familiar things by special distinguishing marks
and these special peculiarities prevent him from forming, in the
case of such things, the generalizations which are essential to
arithmetic. A black cow and a dun cow, a tall child and a short
one, a wood-chopper and a battle-axe, his own hat and his
neighbour's, are not, to him, essentially similar, but essentially
different from one another and from everything else, to be
spoken of by proper and not by generic names, not forming part
of a class and therefore not requiring to be counted. In respect
of these things, he does not count, he enumerates: as if a man,
when asked how many children he has, should say, not that he
has 3 or any other number, but that he has Tom and Susan
and Harry and so on, naming each individual1. With small or
unfamiliar things, on the other hand, with beans or fruits, for
instance, or strangers from another tribe, the savage, though he
is compelled to generalize, is not necessarily compelled to
count, for there are many ways of roughly indicating a quantity,
without knowing its component parts. Everybody has tried the
difficulty of counting quickly a number of spots irregularly
disposed, and what we are unable to do quickly, a savage may
well be unable to do at all. In order to count a heap correctly,
it is essential that the same thing be not counted twice, and
1 Compare Lubbock, Orig. of Civil. 
in order of seniority and which might
pp. 292—294, and the quotations from 
well serve for numerals, yet they can-
Galton and Liohtenstein, as to the 
not actually count above 2. So also,
special knowledge of individual animals 
according to Dr Eae (cit. Lubbock,
by which a savage, unable to count a 
Prehist. Times, p. 525), many Eskimos,
high number, keeps his herds together 
who are said by Parry (also loc. cit.)
and conducts his barter. Tylor (Prim. 
to have numerals up to 10 at least,
Cult. i. p. 303 and passim) gives 
cannot count their children correctly
abundant examples of proper names 
even when they have only four or five,
applied by savages to inanimate objects. 
But quaere, whether a man, who could
The same writer (i. p. 254) relates that 
not count his own children, would find
some Australians, as well as other 
the same difficulty in counting a num-
tribes, have a series of nine proper 
ber of strangers,
names which they give to their children
Published online by Cambridge University Press

6 
THE DECIMAL SCALE.
this, to the unpractised calculator, can be secured only by
arranging the things in such a form that the counting may
follow a definite direction from a fixed beginning to a fixed end.
Given such an arrangement, it is further necessary that the
calculator should have words or other symbols to serve as a
memoria technica of each successive total, otherwise he will be
as ignorant at the end of the counting as he was at the
beginning. But a savage, who ex hypoihesi is making his first
essay in counting, can hardly be expected both to arrange his
units and to invent his symbols immediately. 
Time and
practice and some hard thinking are obviously necessary before
he can master both operations.
4. These difficulties, however, are soonest surmounted
with very small numbers, of which any arrangement is bound
to be more or less symmetrical and of which so definite an
image may be retained in the memory that names or symbols
are unnecessary for the mere operation of counting. But some
means of communicating a total, and, with a higher number,
some memoria technica of the arrangement adopted are still
wanting. For both these purposes, the fingers and toes are
especially well adapted. 
They are a moderate number of
similar things, easily generalized, symmetrically disposed and
arranged in four groups of small contents. They can be so
moved, shown, concealed or divided, that they will exhibit any
number under 21 : they are so familiar that the eye is
constantly practised in counting them, and they are so uni-
versally supplied to human beings that they can be used to
communicate arithmetical results.
But men did not arrive at this use of the fingers till they had
already made some little progress in calculation without them.
That this is the true history of the art of counting is evident
if we consider the following facts in order. 
First, there is
hardly any language in the world in which the first three or
four numerals bear, on the face of them, any reference to the
fingers. Secondly, there are many savage languages in which
these numerals are obviously taken (not from the fingers but)
from small symmetrical groups of common objects. 
Thus,
' two' is, among the Chinese, ny and ceul, which also mean
Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE DECIMAL SCALE. 
7
' ears:' in Thibet paksha ' wing:' in Hottentot t'Koam ' hand:'
and so also among the1 Javanese, Samoyeds, Sioux and other
peoples. So again, with the Abipones, 'four' is geyenknate,
'ostrich-toes:' 'five' is neenhalbk, 'a hide spotted with five
colours :' with the Marquesans ' four' is pona, ' a bunch of four
fruits,' etc.1 
Thirdly, there are also many savages who, having
only a very few low numerals, count to much higher numbers
dumbly by means of the fingers2.
5. But just as, in the examples quoted above, the name
of the pattern group (e.g. ears or hands) becomes the name of
the number which that group contains, so with finger-counting
the savage, advancing in intelligence, begins to name the
gesture with or without performing it, and this name becomes
the symbol of the number which the gesture is meant to
indicate. Hence all the world over, in nearly every language
under the sun where names for the higher units exist and show
a clear etymology, the word for ' five' means ' hand,' and the
other numbers, up to 10 or 20, as the case may be, are merely
descriptive of finger-and-toe-counting. In Greenland, on the
Orinoco, and in Australia alike, ' six' is' one on the other hand,'
' ten' is ' two hands,' ' eleven' is ' two hands and a toe' and
'twenty' is 'one man8.' In some cases, we find even greater
definiteness. 
Among the Eskimos of Hudson's Bay the names
of the numerals ' eight,'' nine' and ' ten' mean respectively the
' middle,' ' fourth' and ' little finger,' and the same use of actual
finger-names is observed also among the Algonquin Indians of
North America, the Abipones and Guarani of the South,
the Zulus of Africa and the Malays of the Asiatic islands4.
6. Enough has now been said, or at least references
enough have been given, to show that wherever a quinary,
decimal or vigesimal notation is adopted in counting, there
1 For other examples, and especially 
low numbers (e.g. couple). See also
for a curious set of Indian poetic 
Farrar, Chaps, on Lang. pp. 198—201.
numerals, in which e.g. 'moon' stands 
2 Tylor, Prim. Cult. i. p. 244.
for 1 and 'teeth' for 32, see Tylor, 
3 Tylor, Prim. Cult. i. pp. 247—
Prim. Cult. i. pp. 252, 253, 256, 259, 
251.
and reff. 
Civilised peoples (ib. p. 257) 
4 Pott, Zahlm. pp. 190 and 301,
sometimes employ a similar nomen- 
Zeitschr. pp. 182,183, Festg. pp. 47,48,
clature, though not often with very 
83.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

"8 
THE DECIMAL SCALE.
is the strongest possible presumption that the notation is
founded on the number of the fingers and toes: and secondly,
that wherever these scales are used and the etymology of the
numerals is obscure, the most likely explanation will connect the
higher units with the gestures used in finger-and-toe-counting.
If we turn, then, to the languages of the Aryan peoples, we
shall find many signs that they acquired the art of calculation
slowly and by precisely the same modes as we see in practice
among modem savages. There is no word for 'counting'
common to all the Aryan tongues, but the special words
generally mean 'to arrange' or 'to group' (dpiB/ieiv1, numerare,
rechnen) and a similar notion must underlie the double uses of tell,
putare, Xeyeiv. Again, three numbers only are distinguished in
the inflexions of nouns and verbs, viz. the singular, dual and plural.
This, like the three strokes which mark plurality in Egyptian
hieroglyphics, seems to point to a time when 3 was the limit of
possible counting. It is noticeable also, in this regard, that
' three' always retained a notion of great multitude2: that
Sanskrit employs, for this numeral, two distinct roots, tri- and
tisar-3; and that, after 'three,' the first divergence appears
in the grammar of the Aryan numerals. The common use of a
duodecimal notation in measurements of length and capacity
and the sudden variation in the grammatical position of
' four' may be taken as evidence that ' four' was a separate
addition to the numerals and that 3 and 4 were for some
time used together as limits of the groups used in count-
ing4. The use of %elp and manus to signify 'a number,'
1 Cf. Odyssey x. 204. 
St%a apiBpuv 
(cf.n.2). In hieroglyphic numeral-signs,
must originally have meant'to arrange 
though the system is denary, units,
in two groups.' 
tens, etc. are grouped by threes and
2 Cf. Tpura8\ios, ter felix, && rpiav 
f o u r s a n d n o t b y fives, (e.g. 7 i s w r i t t e n ,
i n E u r . O r . 4 3 4 . 
T h e s u g g e s t i o n w a s 
I
I
. 
• u l 
•, . ., , 
.
„ . 
TT 
,,•,,, 
m, I i. i. it. 
i n invariably, and similarly for 70,
W. von Humboldt's. That about the 
| | | | 
•" 
J 
'
dual and plural was Dr Wilson's. See 
700, etc.). Observe also that Egyptian,
Tylor, Prim. Cult. i. p. 265. 
like Aryan, had a dual. The occasional
3 Cf. Irish tri, masc.: teoir, teoira, 
use of more than one group-limit in
fern.: Welsh tri, masc.: teir, fern. 
counting is common enough. Thus,
4 Hence also Pindar's rpls rerpaKi re, 
beside the examples given a little later
Horace's terque quaterque beati, etc. 
in the text, the Bas-Bretons use trio-
Published online by Cambridge University Press

PAET I. 
PROLEGOMENA TO ARITHMETIC.
CHAPTER I.
THE DECIMAL SCALE.
1, IN the book of Problemata, attributed to Aristotle, the
following question is asked (xv. 3): " Why do all men, both
barbarians and Hellenes, count up to 10 and not to some other
number?" It is suggested, among several answers of great
absurdity, that the true reason may be that all men have ten
fingers *: " using these, then, as symbols of their proper number
(viz. 10), they count everything else by this scale." The writer
then adds "Alone among men, a certain tribe of Thracians
count up to 4, because, like children, they cannot remember
a long sum neither have they any need for a great quantity of
anything."
It is natural to regret that an author who at so early a date
was capable of writing this passage, was not induced to ask
himself more questions and to collect more facts on the same
and similar subjects. Had he done so, he might have anti-
cipated, by some two thousand years, the modern method of
research into prehistoric times and might have attempted, with
every chance of success, a hundred problems which cannot now
be satisfactorily treated2. In the fourth century B. c. and for
long after, half the Aryan peoples were still barbarous and there
must still have survived, even among Greeks and Italians,
countless relics of primitive manners, forming a sure tradi-
1 Cf. Ovid, Fasti in. v. 121 sqq. 
lines as would be taken by a modern
8 It seems probable tliat Aristotle 
evolutionist. See Sir H. Maine, Early
himself was inclined to reconstruct 
Law and Custom, pp. 196, 197.
primitive history on much the same
G. G. M. 
1
Published online by Cambridge University Press

10 
THE DECIMAL SCALE.
was immediately made. The higher unit-numerals would then
be the names of the gestures made in finger-counting or, as
among the Algonquins etc., the actual names of the fingers in
the order in which they were exhibited in counting.
8. The evidence that 3 or 4 was once the limit of Aryan
reckoning has been already adduced. If the fact is so, then the
numerals up to that limit probably bear no reference to the
fingers, but they are so ancient that it is useless now to
inquire into their origin. But the following numerals are
neither so ancient nor so curt in form. Their original names
appear to have been pankan or Icankan (5), ksvaks or ksvaksva
(6), saptan (7), aktan (8), navan (9) and dakan or dvakan (10).
Some allusion to finger-counting may well underlie these words.
Ever since A. von Humboldt first pointed out the resemblance
between the Sanskrit pank'an and the Persian penjeh, 'the
outspread hand/ some connexion between the two has always
been admitted. It is possible, indeed, that penjeh is derived
from pank'an and not vice versa, but if we return to the
primeval form, pankan, as Curtius points out1, is probably
connected with TTV%, pugnus and fist or kankan with the
Germanic hand. So also dvakan seems to be for dvakankan,
meaning ' twice five' or ' two hands V dakan points to 8e!ji6<;,
dexter3, Be-^o/Mai etc. or else to SIZKTVXO?, digitus, zehe, toe.
Thus whatever original forms we assume for these two numerals,
their roots appear again in some name or other for the hand
or fingers. It is intrinsically probable, therefore, that pankan
means ' hand' and that dakan means ' two hands' or ' right
hand.' It may be suggested, here, that the intervening numerals
are the names of the little, third, middle and fore-fingers of the
right hand. Thus the little finger was called by the Greeks
4, by the Latins auricularis. This name is apparently
1 Griech. Etym., Nos. 629 and 384. 
decent, etc. 
The two hands may pos-
2 The Gothic numerals from 70 to 
sibly have been called the ' one-er'
90 are compounded not with the 
and the 'ten-er.' The ordinary etymo-
ordinary -taihun, but with -tehund, 
logy takes dexter and sinister to mean
which has been thought (wrongly no 
the 'taker'and'leaver'respectively,
doubt) to mean 'two hands' simply. 
4 The finger-names which follow are
3 Sinister, sem-el, singuli are curi- 
taken from the appendix to Pott's
ously analogous to dexter (dec-ister), 
Zahlmethode. Comp. also his article
Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE DECIMAL SCALE. 
11
explained by the Germans who call this finger the 'ear-cleaner'
(e.g. Dutch pin, pink ('poker') oorvinger). Now ksvaks or
ksvaksva seems to be a reduplicated form, containing the same
root as geco, gaivw, fjvpia> etc., and meaning ' scraper.' The name
saptan seems to mean ' follower' (eir-ofiai etc.), and the third
finger might very well be so called because it follows and
moves with the second, in the manner familiar to all musicians1.
The name aktan seems to contain the common root AK and
to mean, therefore, ' projecting,' a good enough name for the
middle finger. Lastly, the first finger is known as aairaariKO';,
index, salutatorius, demonstratorius (='beckoner,' 'pointer') and
this meaning probably underlies navan, which will thus be
connected with the root of novus, j/eo?, 'new' etc. or that of
vevco, nuo,' nod' etc. or both. Whatever be thought of these
suggested etymologies, it must be admitted that there is no
evidence whatever that our forefathers counted the fingers of
the right hand in the order here assumed. They may have
adopted the reverse order, from thumb to little finger, as many
savages do and as in fact the Greeks and Romans did with that
later and more complicated system of finger-counting which we
find in use in the first century of our era and which will be
described hereafter in these pages. If this reverse order be
in Zeitschr. pp. 164—166. 
It is 
' nameless:' in Greek also
curious that this writer should not 
iwifiaKos, which may mean 'rider' (
have attempted to make any use, by 
/3a-n;s). The first finger is also called
comparison, of the facts which he had 
'licker' (Xixavis, Platt D. pott-licker).
so industriously collected. 
Similarly 
Mr J. 0. Halliwell (Nursery Rhymes
in his article on 'Gender' (Geschlecht) and Tales, p. 206) gives as English
in Ersch and Gruber's Encyclopaedia, 
finger-names 
toucher, longman, leche-
Vol. LXII., he gives the facts about 
man, littleman, and explains that the
gender in every language under the 
third finger is called lecheman because
sun, but draws no conclusion from 
people taste with it as doctors try
them. It is to be observed, however, 
physic. He cites also such names as
that both essays were written before 
Tom Thumbkln, Bess Bumpkin, etc.
the evolution-theory was distinctly 
with Norse parallels,
formulated. 
Some other 
finger-names 
1 So in Odschi or Ashantee the
may be here added. The third finger middle finger is called ensatia MnnS,
is generally known either as the 'ring- 
'king of the fingers,' and the third is
finger' (SIJKTUXIWT?/!, annularis, golding- 
ensatiasafo-hinnS,'field-marshal.' (Pott
er), or as 'leech-finger' (medicinalis, 
in Ersch and Gr. sup. eit.).
arzt.): in Sanskrit also, anaman or
Published online by Cambridge University Press

12 
THE DECIMAL SCALE.
assumed, the numerals may still be explained in accordance
with other finger-names in. common usel, beside those which
have been cited. But after all, the main support of such
etymologies is their great a priori probability. The theory,
on which they are based, brings the history of Aryan counting
into accord with the history of counting everywhere else: it
explains the Aryan numerals in a way which is certainly correct
for nearly all other languages; it explains also the singular
discrepancy in the forms of those numerals and some peculiar
and very ancient limitations of Aryan counting. It is hardly to
be expected that such a theory should be strictly provable at
all points.
9. Scanty as is the evidence for the first steps of Aryan
calculation, there is none at all for those which follow. It will
be conceded, however, that so soon as the fingers were used as
regular symbols or a numeral nomenclature was adopted, further
progress could not have been difficult. 
Doubtless at first, as in
S. Africa at the present day2, the numbers from 10 to 100
required two, and those from 100 to 1000, three calculators.
But the assistance of coadjutors could be dispensed with, in
mere counting, so soon as the memory was trained to remember,
without embarrassment, the multiples of 10 or the habit was
adopted of making a mark or setting aside a symbol at the
completion of each group of 10 s. Addition scan be performed
with the fingers, but, in the case of high numbers, the process
1 On this 
plan, ksvaks is the 
mere compounds, neuter plurals in
thumb, saptan the forefinger, navan, 
form, up to 100. This last is supposed
the third 
finger. 
Of these navan, 
to have been named 
dakan-dakanta,
'nodder,' is as good a name for the 
of which the last two syllables only
third finger as saptan, for the same 
survive. But the later word was a
reason. 
Saptan may mean 'sucker,' 
neuter singular, uninflected (thus the
(6ir6s, sapio, saft, sap) pointing to 
£ of iKarbv is said to be a relic of &<).
the finger-names Xix<w<5s pott-licker, 
Multiples of 100 are again compounds
mentioned in the previous note. For 
and plurals, but in Latin and Greek,
this, compare the Zulu names for 7, 
curiously enough, they are plural ad-
which are kombile 'point,' or kota 
jectives, with inflexions of gender,
'lick.' 
(Pott, Festg. p. 48.) 
The words for 1000 are different in all
2 Schrumpf in Zeitschr. der Deutsch. 
the great branches of Aryan speech
3/orgenl. Gesellsch. xvi. 463. 
and are all of very obscure origin.
3 Multiples of 10 were expressed by
Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE DECIMAL SCALE. 
13
involves a severe tax on the memory. This tax is the more
severe with subtraction, because here, to take even the most
favourable conditions, the numerals have to be remembered
backwards. It is probable therefore that both these operations
were very early performed by means of other symbols, such
as pebbles (-v/r^ot, calculi). The multiplication-table is merely
a summarised statement of additions and a division-table would
be merely a summarised statement of subtractions. Continual
practice, leading to well-remembered inductions, was alone
necessary to give considerable facility in the four rules of
arithmetic.
10. But division, when it came to be conducted with nicety,
introduced a new difficulty. The divisor was not always a
whole factor of the dividend and there was then a remainder.
What was to be done with this? The question, no doubt, first
arose with concrete units, in a case, for instance, where 23
apples were left to be divided among 24 men. Here obviously
each man will get a fraction of an apple but there are two ways
of ascertaining the fraction. 
One is to divide each apple into
24 equal parts, and to give to each man 23 such parts. The
other is to subdivide 23 into groups, say 12, 8 and 3, and so to
give each man first |, then -Jrd, then ^th of an apple. This
latter method of treating a remainder (by taking parts of it at a
time) is clearly, analogous, to the way in which the whole
dividend has previously been treated, and no doubt it re-
commended itself, on this account, to the calculators of anti-
quity. But it had also an especial advantage in this, that the
fractions which it produces are more readily represented with
primitive symbols. Given only the fingers or pebbles, it would
puzzle any man to represent directly that fraction of an apple
which we call ffths, but it would not be so difficult to indicate
i + i + i1- -A-11 advantage of the same kind would attend the
practice of dividing the unit always into the same fractions (say
12ths or lOths) and expressing every other fraction, as nearly as
1 It should be mentioned here, also, 
used at all, so that there would be a
that fractions with low denominators 
tendency to express the latter in terms
would naturally be familiar long before 
of the former,
those with high denominators were
Published online by Cambridge University Press

14 
THE DECIMAL SCALE.
possible, in terms of these. As with the former plan the
numerator, so with the latter the denominator might be taken
for granted and so both the symbols of fractions and calculations
with them would be nearly the same as those for whole numbers.
And as a matter of fact, the ancient treatment of fractions
always did avoid the necessity of handling numerators and
denominators together. On the one hand, the astronomical
reckoning, introduced into Greece from Babylonia, used only
the sexagesimal fractions of the degree, and the Eomans used
for all purposes the duodecimal fractions of the as1; thus on
these systems the denominators were implied. On the other
hand, and much more commonly, every fraction was reduced to
a series of ' submultiples' or fractions with unity for numerator,
and thus the consideration of numerators was avoided. This
practice was retained in Greek arithmetic to the very last. The
Greeks had long since abandoned the old symbolism of.numbers
but they had adopted another, which, though less clumsy to
look at, was even more unmanageable in use. 
They could
state fractions as easily as whole numbers, but calculation
of any kind was still so difficult to them that they preferred to
get rid of numerators and to reduce denominators to a series of
numbers, some of which were so low that they could be handled
mechanically and the rest so high that they could often be dis-
carded without materially affecting .the result2.
1 Each of the Roman fractions had 
tors less than 9 (or compounded of
a special name. 
So we might use 
any units), and these had special
shilling for ^th, ounce for TVth, inch 
names: the latter (e.g. -fg) had no
for ^th, etc. of any unit whatever. 
names. Cantor, Vorl. iiber Gesch. der
The Aryans, however, do not seem to 
Math. i. p. 615.
have had a special name for any merely 
2 Thus Eutocius, in the 6th century
numerical fraction, except a half. The 
after Christ, reduces if to | + ^, which
Arabs used to distinguish expressible is - ^ too small. Nesselmann, Alg.
from inexpressible fractions. 
The 
der Griechen, p. 113.
former are all such as have denomina-
Published online by Cambridge University Press

