V
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
The special service rendered by PYTHAGORAS to geometry is
thus described in the Proclus summary :
' After these (Thales and Ameristus or Mamercus) Pythagoras
transformed the study of geometry into a liberal education,
examining the principles of the science from the beginning
and probing the theorems in an immaterial and intellectual
manner: he it was who discovered the theory of irrationals'
(or ' proportionsJ)' and the construction of the cosmic figures\1
These supposed discoveries will claim our attention pre-
sently; the rest of the description agrees with another
passage about the Pythagoreans:
'Herein', says Proclus, 'I emulate the Pythagoreans who
even had a conventional phrase to express what I mean,
"a figure and a platform, not a figure and sixpence", by
which they implied that the geometry which is deserving of
study is that which, at each new theorem, sets up a platform to
ascend by, and lifts the soul on high instead of allowing it
to go down among sensible objects and so become subser-
vient to the common needs of this mortal life '.2
In like manner we are told that ' Pythagoras used defini-
tions on account of the mathematical nature of the subject ',3
which again implies that he took the first steps towards the
systematization of geometry as a subject in itself.
A comparatively early authority, Callimachus (about 250 B.C.),
is quoted by Diodorus as having said that Pythagoras dis-
covered some geometrical problems himself and was the first
to introduce others from Egypt into Greece.4 Diodorus gives
what appear to be five verses of Callimachus minus a few words;
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 65. 15-21. 
2 lb., p. 84. 15-22.
3 Favormus in Diog. L. viii. 25
4 Diodorus x. 6. 4 (Vors. i\ p. 346. 23).
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

142 
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
a longer fragment including the same passage is now available
(though the text is still deficient) in the Oxyrhynchus Papyri.1
The story is that one Bathycles, an Arcadian, bequeathed a
cup to be given to the best of the Seven Wise Men. The cup
first went to Thales, and then, after going the round of the
others, was given to him a second time. We are told that
Bathycles's son brought the cup to Thales, and that (presum-
ably on the occasion of the first presentation)
' by a happy chance he found . . the old man scraping the
ground and drawing the figure discovered by the Phrygian
Euphorbus (= Pythagoras), who was the first of men to draw
even scalene triangles and a circle . . ., and who prescribed
abstinence from animal food \
Notwithstanding the anachronism, the ' figure discovered by
Euphorbus' is presumably the famous proposition about the
squares on the sides of a right-angled triangle. In Diodorus's
quotation the words after '.scalene triangles' are KVK\OV inra-
firJKr)(i7rTafjirJK€y Hunt), which seems unintelligible unless the
' seven-lengthed circle' can be taken as meaning the ' lengths of
seven circles' (in the sense of the seven independent orbits-
of the sun, moon, and planets) or the circle (the zodiac) com-
prehending them all.2
But it is time to pass on to the propositions in geometry
which are definitely attributed to the Pythagoreans.
1 Oxyrhynchus Papyri, Pt. vii, p. 33 (Hunt).
2 The papyrus has an accent over the e and to the right of the
accent, above the uncertain 7r, the appearance of a \ in dark ink,
A
thus KaiKVKkoveTr, a reading which is not yet satisfactorily explained.
Diels (Vorsokratiker, is, p. 7) considers that the accent over the € is fatal
to the reading fTrra/^Kj/, and conjectures KCU KVKXOV e\(tKa) Krjdldage
vrjo-reveiv instead Of Hunt's Kai KUKXOV iTr^afxrjKe9j r)8e vrjVTtveiv] 
and
Diodorus's KCU KVKKOV eVra/oijJKf? btda^e vrjorrevetv. 
B u t KVK\OV eXiKa, ; twisted
(or curved) circle', is very indefinite. 
It may have been suggested to
Diels by Hermesianax's lines (Athenaeus xiii. 599 A) attributing to
Pythagoras the Refinements of the geometry of spirals' (iXUtov KOfi^a
yeafieTpirjs). One naturally thinks of Plato's dictum (Timaeus 39 A, B)
about the circles of the sun, moon, and planets being twisted into spirals
by the combination of their own motion with that of the daily rotation ;
but this can hardly be the meaning here. A more satisfactory sense
would be secured if we could imagine the circle to be the circle described
about the ' scalene' (right-angled) triangle, I. e. if we could take the
reference to be to the discovery of the fact that the angle in a semi-
circle is a right angle, a discovery which, as we have seen, was alterna-
tively ascribed to Thales and Pythagoras.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY 
143
Discoveries attributed to the Pythagoreans.
(a) Equality of the sum of the three angles of a triangle
to two right angles.
We have seen that Thales, if he really discovered that the
angle in a semicircle is a right angle, was in a position, first,
to show that in any right-angled triangle the sum of the three
angles is equal to two right angles, and then, by drawing the
perpendicular from a vertex of any triangle to the opposite
side and so dividing the triangle into two right-angled
triangles, to prove that the sum of the three angles of any
triangle whatever is equal to two right angles. If this method
of passing from the particular case of a right-angled triangle to
that of any triangle did not occur to Thales, it is at any rate
hardly likely to have escaped Pythagoras. But all that we know
for certain is that Eudemus referred to the Pythagoreans
the discovery of the general theorem that in any triangle
the sum of the interior angles is equal to two right angles.1
Eudemus goes on to tell us how they proved it. The method
differs slightly from that of Euclid, but depends, equally with
Euclid's proof, on the properties of parallels; it can therefore
only have been evolved at a time when those properties were
already known.
Let ABG be any triangle; through A draw BE parallel
to BG. 
D
A
E
Then, since BG, DE are parallel, the
alternate angles DAB, ABG are equal.
Similarly the alternate angles EAG,
AGB are equal.
Therefore the sum of the angles ABG, 
B 
c
AGB is equal to the sum of the angles DAB, EAG.
Add to each sum the angle BAG\ therefore the sum of the
three angles ABC, AGB, BAG, i.e. the three angles of the
triangle, is equal to the sum of the angles BAB, BAG, CAE<,
i.e. to two right angles.
We need not hesitate to credit the Pythagoreans with the
more general propositions about the angles of any polygon,
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 397. 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

144 
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
namely (1) that, if n be the number of the sides or angles, the
interior angles of the polygon are together equal to 2w —4
right angles, and (2) that the exterior angles of the polygon
(being the supplements of the interior angles respectively)
are together equal to four right angles. The propositions are
interdependent, and Aristotle twice quotes the latter.1 The
Pythagoreans also discovered that the only three regular
polygons the angles of which, if placed together round a com-
mon point as vertex, just fill up the space (four right angles)
round the point are the equilateral triangle, the square, and
the regular hexagon.
(/?) The 'Theorem of Pythagoras' ( = Eucl. I. 47).
Though this is the proposition universally associated by
tradition with the name of Pythagoras, no really trustworthy
evidence exists that it was actually discovered by him. The
comparatively late writers who attribute it to him add the
story that he sacrificed an ox to celebrate his discovery.
Plutarch2 (born about A.D. 46), Athenaeus3 (about A.D. 200),
and Diogenes Laertius4 (A.D. 200 or later) all quote the verses
of Apollodorus the 'calculator' already referred to (p. 133).
But Apollodorus speaks of the ' famous theorem', or perhaps
' figure' (ypctfifxa), ,the discovery of which was the occa-
sion of the sacrifice, without saying what the theorem was.
Apollodorus is otherwise unknown; he may have been earlier
than Cicero, for Cicero5 tells the story in the same form
without specifying what geometrical discovery was meant,
and merely adds that he does not believe in the sacrifice,
because the Pythagorean ritual forbade sacrifices in which
blood was shed. Vitruvius6 (first century B.C.) connects the
sacrifice with the discovery of the property of the particular
triangle 3, 4, 5. Plutarch, in quoting Apollodorus, questions
whether the theorem about the square of the hypotenuse was
meant, or the problem of the application of an area, while in
another place7 he says that the occasion of the sacrifice was
1 An. Post. i. 24, 85 b 38 ; ib. ii. 17, 99 a 19.
2 Plutarch, Non posse suavitervivi secundum Epicurum, c. 11, p. 1094 B.
3 Athenaeus x. 418 F. 
* Diog. L. viri. 12, i. 25.
5 Cicero, De nat. deor. ni. 36, 88.
6 Vitruvius, De architecture/,, ix. pref.
7 Plutarch, Quaest. convw. viii. 2, 4, p. 720 A.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE <THEOREM OF PYTHAGORAS3 
145
the solution of the problem, ' given two figures, to apply
a third which shall be equal to the one and similar to
the other', and he adds that this problem is unquestionably
finer than the theorem about the square on the hypotenuse.
But Athenaeus and Porphyry1 (A.D. 233-304) connect the
sacrifice with the latter proposition ; so does Diogenes Laertius
in one place. We come lastly to Proclus, who is very cautious,
mentioning the story but declining to commit himself to
the view that it was Pythagoras or even any single person
who made the discovery:
' If we listen to those who wish to recount ancient history,
we may find some of them referring this theorem to Pytha-
goras, and saying that he sacrificed an ox in honour of his
discovery. But for my part, while I admire those who first
observed the truth of this theorem, I marvel more at the
writer of the Elements, not only because he made it fast by a
most lucid demonstration, but because he compelled assent to
the still more general theorem by the irrefutable arguments of
science in the sixth book.'
It is possible that all these authorities may have built upon
the verses of Apollodorus; but it is remarkable that, although
in the verses themselves the particular theorem is not speci-
fied, there is practical unanimity in attributing to Pythagoras
the theorem of Eucl. I 47. Even in Plutarch's observations
expressing, doubt about the particular occasion of the sacrifice
there is nothing to suggest that he had any hesitation in
accepting as discoveries of Pythagoras both the theorem of. the
square on the hypotenuse and the problem of the application
of an area. Like Hankel,2 therefore, I would not go so far as
to deny to Pythagoras the credit of the discovery of our pro-
position ; nay, I like to believe that tradition is right, and that
it was really his.
True, the discovery is also claimed for India.3 The work
relied on is the Apastamba-$ulba-Sutra, the date of which is
put at least as early as the fifth or fourth century B.C., while
it is remarked that the matter of it must have been much
1 Porphyry, Vit. Pyth. 36.
2 Hankel, Zur Geschichte der Math, in Alterthum und Mittelalter, p. 97.
8 Buik in the Zeitschrift der morgenldnd. 
Gesellschaft, lv, 1901,
pp. 543-91 ; lvi, 1902, pp. 327-91.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

146 
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
older than the book itself; thus one of the constructions for
right angles, using cords of lengths 15, 36, 39 (=5,12,13), was
known at the time of the Tdittirtya Samhitd and the Sata-
patha Brahmana, still older works belonging to the eighth
century B. c. at latest. A feature of the Apastamba-Sulba-
Sutra is the construction of right angles in this way by means
of cords of lengths equal to the three sides of certain rational
right-angled triangles (or, as Apastamba calls them, rational
rectangles, i.e. those in which the diagonals as well as the
sides are rational). The rational right-angled triangles actually
used are (3, 4, 5), (5, 12, 13), (8, 15, 17), (12, 35, 37). There is
a proposition stating the theorem of Eucl I. 47 as a fact in
general terms, but without proof, and there are rules based
upon it for constructing a square equal to (1) the sum of two
given squares and (2) the difference of two squares. But
certain considerations suggest doubts as to whether the
proposition had been established by any proof applicable to
all cases. 
Thus Apastamba mentions only seven rational
right-angled triangles, really reducible to the above-mentioned
four (one other, 7, 24, 25, appears, it is true, in the Baudha-
yana S. S, supposed to be older than Apastamba); he had no
general rule such as that attributed to Pythagoras for forming
any number of rational right-angled triangles; he refers to
his seven in the words c so many recognizable constructions
are there \ implying that he knew of no other such triangles.
On the other hand, the truth of the theorem was recognized in
the case of the isosceles right-angled triangle; there is even
a construction for \/2, or the length of the diagonal of a square
with side unity, which is constructed as (1 H 1 
)
V 
3 3.4 3.4.34/
of the side, and is then used with the side for the purpose of
drawing the square on the side: the length taken is of course
an approximation to \/2 derived from the consideration that
2.122 = 288 = 172 —1 ; but the author does not say anything
which suggests any knowledge on his part that the approxi-
mate value is not exact. Having drawn by means of the
approximate value of the diagonal an inaccurate square, he
proceeds to use it to construct a square with area equal to
three times the original square, or, in other words, to con-
struct \/3, which is therefore only approximately found.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE 'THEOREM OF PYTHAGORAS' 
147
Thus the theorem is enunciated and used as if it were of
general application; there is, however, no sign of any general
proof ; there is nothing in fact to show that the assumption of
its universal truth was founded on anything better than an
imperfect induction from a certain number of cases, discovered
empirically, of triangles with sides in the ratios of whole
numbers in which the property (1) that the square on the
longest side is equal to the sum of the squares on the other
two was found to be always accompanied by the property
(2) that the latter two sides include a right angle. But, even
if the Indians had actually attained to a scientific proof of
the general theorem, there is no evidence or probability that
the Greeks obtained it from India; the subject was doubtless
developed quite independently in the two countries.
The next question is, how was the theorem proved by
Pythagoras or the Pythagoreans? 
Vitruvius says that
Pythagoras first discovered the triangle (3, 4, 5), and doubtless
the theorem was first suggested by the discovery that this
triangle is right-angled; but this discovery probably came
to Greece from Egypt. 
Then a very simple construction
would show that the theorem is true of an isosceles right-
angled triangle. Two possible lines are suggested on which
the general proof may have been developed. One is that of
decomposing square and rectangular areas into squares, rect-
angles and triangles, and piecing them together again after
the manner of Eucl., Book II; the isosceles right-angled
triangle gives the most obvious case of this method. The
other line is one depending upon proportions; and we have
good reason for supposing that Pythagoras developed a theory
of proportion. That theory was applicable to commensurable
magnitudes only; but this would not be any obstacle to the
use of the method so long as the existence of the incom-
mensurable or irrational remained undiscovered. 
From
Profclus's remark that, while he admired those who first
noticed the truth of the theorem, he admired Euclid still
more for his most clear proof of it and for the irrefutable
demonstration of the extension of the theorem in Book VI,
it is natural to conclude that Euclid's proof in I. 47 was new,
though this is not quite certain. Now VI. 31 could be proved
at once by using I. 47 along with VI. 22; but Euclid proves
L 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

148 
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
it independently of I. 47 by means of proportions. 
This
seems to suggest that he proved I. 47 by the methods of
Book I instead of by proportions in order to get the proposi-
tion into Book I instead of Book VI, to which it must have
been relegated if the proof by proportions had been used.
If, on the other hand, Pythagoras had proved it by means
of the methods of Books I and II, it would hardly have been
necessary for Euclid to devise a new proof of I. 47. Hence
it would appear most probable that Pythagoras would prove
the proposition by means of his (imperfect) theory of pro-
portions. The proof may have taken one of three different
shapes.
(1) If ABG is a triangle right-
angled at A, and AD is perpen-
dicular to BG, the triangles DBA,
DAG are both similar to the tri-
angle ABG.
It follows from the theorems of
Eucl. VI. 4 and 17 that
BA* = BD.BG,
whence, by addition, BA2 + AC2 = BG2,
It will be observed that this proof is in substance identical
with that of Eucl. I. 47, the difference being that the latter
uses the relations between parallelograms and triangles on
the same base and between the same parallels instead of
proportions. The probability is that it was this particular
proof by proportions which suggested to Euclid the method
of I. 47 ; but the transformation of the proof depending on
proportions into one based on Book I only (which was abso-
lutely required under Euclid's arrangement of the Elements)
was a stroke of genius.
(2) It would be observed that, in the similar triangles
DBA, DAG, ABG, the corresponding sides opposite to the
right angle in each case are BA, AC, BG.
The triangles therefore are in the duplicate ratios of these
sides, and so are the squares on the latter.
But of the triangles two, namely DBA, DAG, make up the
third, ABG.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE 'THEOREM OF PYTHAGORAS' 
149
The same must therefore be the case with the squares, or
(3) The method of VI. 31 might have been followed
exactly, with squares taking the place of any similar recti-
lineal figures. Since the triangles DBA. ABG are similar,
BD:AB = AB:BC,
or BD, AB, BC are three proportionals, whence
AB2: BC2 = BD2: AB2 = BD: BC.
Similarly, 
AC2: BC2 = CD: BC.
Therefore 
(BA2 + AC2): BC2 = {BD + DC): BC. 
[V. 24]
= 1.
If, on the other hand, the proposition was originally proved
by the methods of Euclid, Books I, II alone (which, as I have
said, seems the less probable supposition), the suggestion of
a
/
i
/
/
/
/
/
Bre,tschneider and Hankel seems to be the best. According
to this we are to suppose, first, a figure like that of Eucli
II. 4, representing a larger square, of side (a-f 6), divided
into two smaller squares of sides a, b respectively, and
two complements, being two equal rectangles with a, b as
Then, dividing each complementary rectangle into two
equal triangles, we dispose the four triangles round another
square of side a + b in the manner shown in the second figure.
Deducting the four triangles from the original square in
each case we get, in the first figure, two squares a2 and b2
and, in the second figure, one square on c, the diagonal of the
rectangle (a, b) or the hypotenuse of the right-angled triangle
in which a, b are the sides about the right angle. It follows
that a2 + b2 = c2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

150 
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
(y) Application of areas and geometrical algebra.
We have seen that, in connexion with the story of the
sacrifice of an ox, Plutarch attributes to Pythagoras himself
the discovery of the problem of the application of an area
or, as he says in another place, the problem 'Given two
figures, to " apply " a third figure which shall be equal to .the
one, and similar to the other (of the given figures).' The
latter problem (= Eucl. VI. 25) is, strictly speaking, not so
much a case of applying an area as of constructing a figure,
because the base is not given in length; but it depends
directly upon the simplest case of 'application of areas',
namely the problem, solved in Eucl. I. 44, 45, of applying
to a given straight line as base a parallelogram containing
a given angle and equal in area to a given triangle or
rectilineal figure. The method of application of areas is
fundamental in Greek geometry and requires detailed notice.
We shall see that in its general form it is equivalent to the
geometrical solution of a mixed quadratic equation, and it is
therefore an essential part of what has been appropriately
called geometrical algebra.
It is certain that the theory of application of areas
originated with the Pythagoreans, if not with Pythagoras
himself. We have this on the authority of Eudemus, quoted
in the following passage of Proclus:
8 TVs(. Uiings, says Eudemus, are ancient, being discoveries
of 
ie Muse of the Pythagoreans, I mean the application of
art us (irapafioXri 7w xapLCov), their eccceeding (v7r€p/3o\rj) and
their falling short (iWei'tyis). It was from the Pythagoreans
that later geometers [i.e. Apollonius of Perga] took the
names, which they then transferred to the so-called conic
lines (curves), calling one of these a parabola (application),
another a hyperbola (exceeding), and the third an ellipse
(falling short), whereas those god-like men of old saw the
things signified by these names in the construction, in a plane,
of areas upon a given finite straight line. For, when you
have a straight line set out, and lay the given area exactly
alongside the whole of the straight line, they say that you
apply the said area; when, however, you make the length of
the area greater than the straight line, it is said to exceed,
and, when you make it less, in which case after the area has
been drawn there is some part of the straight line extending
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

APPLICATION OF AREAS 
151
beyond it, it is said to fall short. Euclid, too, in the sixth
book speaks in this way both of exceeding and falling short;
but in this place (I. 44) he needed the application simply, as
he sought to apply to a given straight line an area equal
to a given triangle, in order that we might have in our
power, not only the construction (o-vo-Tacns) of a parallelogram
equal to a given triangle, but also the application of it to
a limited straight line/x
The general form of the problem involving application
with exceeding or falling short is the following:
'To apply to a given straight line a rectangle (or, more
generally, a parallelogram) equal to a given rectilineal figure,
and (1) exceeding or (2) falling short by a square figure (or,
in the more general case, by a parallelogram similar to a given
parallelogram)/
The most general form, shown by the words in brackets,
is found in Eucl. VI. 28, 29, which are equivalent to the
geometrical solution of the quadratic equations
b 
a 
G
ax + - xl — — s
— c 
on
and VI. 27 gives the condition of possibility of a solution
when the sign is negative and the parallelogram falls short.
This general case of course requires the use of proportions;
but the simpler case where the area applied is a rectangle,
and the form of the portion which overlaps or falls short
is a square, can be solved by means of Book II only. The
proposition II. 11 is the geometrical solution of the particular
quadratic equation 
a (a - a) = x\
or 
x2 + ax = a2.
The propositions II. 5 and 6 are in the form of theorems.
Taking, e.g., the figure of the former proposition, and sup-
posing AB = a, BD = x, we have
ax — x2 = rectangle AH
= gnomon NOP.
If, then, the area of the gnomon is given (= b2, say, for any
area can be transformed into the equivalent square by means
of the problems of Eucl. I. 45 and II. 14), the solution of the
equation 
ax-x2 = b2
1 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 419. 15-420. 12.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

152
PYTHAGOKEAN GEOMETRY
would be, in the language of application of areas, ' To a given
straight line (a) to apply a rectangle which shall be equal
to a given square (b2) and shall fall short by a square figure/
A
K 
L
a
R 
^ \ D 
B
, ' /
N/ H
P
G 
F
As the Pythagoreans solved the somewhat similar equation
in II. 11, they cannot have failed to solve this one, as well as
the equations corresponding to II. 6. For in the present case
it is only necessary to draw GQ at right angles to AB from
its middle point C, to make CQ equal to b, and then, with
centre Q and radius equal to CB, or -|a, to draw a circle
cutting QC produced in R and CB in D (b2 must be not
greater than \a2 ; otherwise a solution is impossible).
Then the determination of the point D constitutes the
solution of the quadratic.
For, by the proposition II. 5,
therefore
or 
ax — x
2 — b2.
Similarly II. 6 enables us to solve the equations
ax + x2 = 62,
and 
x2—ax = b2:
the first equation corresponding to AB = a, BD = x and the
second to AB = a, AD = x, in the figure of the proposition.
The application of the theory to conies by Apollonius will
be described when we come to deal with his treatise.
One great feature of Book II of Euclid's Elements is the
use of the gnomon (Props. 5 to 8), which is undoubtedly
Pythagorean and is connected, as we have seen, with the
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

APPLICATION OF AREAS 
153
application of areas. The whole of Book II, with the latter
section of Book I from Prop. 42 onwards, may be said to deal
with the transformation of areas into equivalent areas of
different shape or composition by means of ' application'
and the use of the theorem of I. 47. Eucl. II. 9 and 10 are
special cases which are very useful in geometry generally, but
were also employed by the Pythagoreans for the specific purpose
of proving the property of 'side-' and 'diameter-' numbers,
the object of which was clearly to develop a series of closer
and closer approximations to the value of V2 (see p. 93 ante).
The geometrical algebra, therefore, as we find it in Euclid,
Books I and II, was Pythagorean. It was of course confirted
to problems not involving expressions above the second degree.
Subject to this, it was an effective substitute for modern
algebra. 
The- product of two linear factors was a rect-
angle, and Book II of Euclid made it possible to multiply
two factors with any number of linear terms in each; the
compression of the result into a single product (rectangle)
followed by means of the a2Jplication-theorem (Eucl. I. 44).
That theorem itself corresponds to dividing the product of
any two linear factors by a third linear expression. To trans-
form any area into a square, we have only to turn the area
into a rectangle (as in Eucl. I. 45), and then find a square
equal to that rectangle by the method of Eucl. II. 14; the
latter problem then is equivalent to the extraction of the square
root. And we have seen that the theorems of Eucl. II. 5, 6
enable mixed quadratic equations of certain types to be solved
so far as their roots are real. In cases where a quadratic
equation has one or both roots negative, the Greeks would
transform it into one having a positive root or roots (by the
equivalent of substituting — x for x); thus, where one root is
positive and one negative, they would solve the problem in
two parts by taking two cases.
The other great engine of the Greek geometrical algebra,
namely the method of proportions, was not in its full extent
available to the Pythagoreans because their theory of pro-
portion was only applicable to commensurable magnitudes
(Eudoxus was the first to establish the general theory, applic-
able to commensurables and incommensurables alike, which
we find in Eucl. V, VI). Yet it cannot be doubted that they
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

154 
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
used the method quite freely before the discovery of the irra-
tional showed them that they were building on an insecure
and inadequate foundation.
(8) The irrational.
To return to the sentence about Pythagoras in the summary
of Proclus already quoted more than once (pp. 84, 90, 141).
Even if the reading dXoycop were right and Proclus really
meant to attribute to Pythagoras the discovery of ' the theory,
or study, of irrationals', it would be necessary to consider the
authority for this statement, and how far it is supported by
other evidence. We note that it occurs in a relative sentence
oy Srj..., which has the appearance of being inserted in paren-
thesis by the compiler of the summary rather than copied from
his original source; and the shortened form of the first part
of the same summary published in the Variae collectiones of
Hultsch's Heron, and now included by Heiberg in Heron's
Definitions,1 contains no such parenthesis. Other authorities
attribute the discovery of the theory of the irrational not to
Pythagoras but to the Pythagoreans. A scholium to Euclid,
Book X, says that
* the Pythagoreans were the first to address themselves to the
investigation of commensurability, having discovered it as the
result of their observation of numbers; for, while the unit is
a common measure of all numbers, they were unable to find
a common measure of all magnitudes, . . . because all magni-
tudes are divisible ad infinitum and never leave a magnitude
which is too small to admit of further division, but that
remainder is equally divisible ad infinitum,'
and so on. The scholiast adds the legend that
' the first of the Pythagoreans who made public the investiga-
tion of these matters perished in a shipwreck \2
Another commentary on Eucl. X discovered by Woepcke in
an Arabic^ translation and believed, with good reason, to be
part of the commentary of Pappus, says that the theory of
irrational magnitudes ' had its origin in the school of Pytha-
goras \ Again, it is impossible that Pythagoras himself should
have discovered a 'theory' or 'study' of irrationals in any
1 Heron, vol. IV, ed. Heib., p. 108.
2 Euclid, ed. Heib., vol. v, pp. 415, 417.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE IRRATIONAL 
155
proper sense. We are told in the Theaetetus1 that Theodoras
of Cyrene (a pupil of Protagoras and the teacher of Plato)
proved the irrationality of A/3, V&, &C, up to \/l7, and this
must have been at a date not much, if anything, earlier than
400 B. c.; while it was Theaetetus who, inspired by Theodoras's
investigation of these particular 'roots' (or surds), was the
first to generalize the theory, seeking terms to cover all such
incoaimensurables; this is confirmed by the continuation of
the passage from Pappus's commentary, which says that the
theory was
'considerably developed by Theaetetus the Athenian, who
gave proof, in this part of mathematics as in others, of ability
which has been justly admired . . . 
As for the exact dis-
tinctions of the above-named magnitudes and the rigorous
demonstrations of the propositions to which this theory gives
rise, I believe that they were chiefly established by this
mathematician \
It follows from all this that, if Pythagoras discovered any-
thing about irrationals, it was not any ' theory' of irrationals
but, at the most, some particular case of incommensurability.
Now the passage which states that Theodorus proved that
A/ 3, \/5, &c. are incommensurable says nothing of </2. The
reason is, no doubt, that the incommensurability of V% had
been proved earlier, and everything points to the probability
that this was the first case to be discovered. But, if Pytha-
goras discovered even this, it is difficult to see how the theory
that number is the essence of all existing things, or that all
things are made of number, could have held its ground for
any length of time. The evidence suggests the conclusion
that geometry developed itself for some time on the basis of
the numerical theory of proportion which was inapplicable to
any but commensurable magnitudes, and that it received an
unexpected blow later by reason of the discovery of the irra-
tional. 
The inconvenience of this state of things, which
involved the restriction or abandonment of the use of propor-
tions as a method pending the discovery of the generalized
theory by Eudoxus, may account for the idea of the existence
of the irrational having been kept secret, and of punishment
having overtaken the first person who divulged it.
1 Plato, Theaetetus, 147 D sq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

156 
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
If then it was not Pythagoras but some Pythagorean who
discovered the irrationality of V 2, at what date are we to
suppose the discovery to have been made ? A recent writer1
on the subject holds that it was the later Pythagoreans who
made the discovery, not much before 410 B.C. It is impos-
sible, he argues, that fifty or a hundred years would elapse
between the discovery of the irrationality of \/2 and the like
discovery by Theodorus (about 410 or 400 B.C.) about the other
surds A/3, V5, &C. It is difficult to meet this argument
except by the supposition that, in the interval, the thoughts
of geometers had been taken up by other famous problems,
such as the quadrature of the circle and the duplication of the
cube (itself equivalent to finding ^/2). Another argument is
based on the passage in the Laws where the Athenian stranger
speaks of the shameful ignorance of the generality of Greeks,
who are not aware that it is not all geometrical magnitudes
that are commensurable with one another; the speaker adds
that it was only ' Jate' (6\jr£ irore) that he himself learnt the
truth.2 Even if we knew for certain whether ' late' means
' late in the day' or * late in life \ the expression would not
help much towards determining the date of the first discovery
of the irrationality of V2; for the language of the passage is
that of rhetorical exaggeration (Plato speaks of men who are
unacquainted with the existence of the irrational as more
comparable to swine than to human beings). Moreover, the
irrational appears in the Republic as something well known,
and precisely with reference to \/2; for the expressions 'the
rational diameter of (the square the side of which is) 5'
[= the approximation 
A/(4?) or l\ and the 'irrational
(dpprjTos) diameter of 5 ' [= A/(50)] are used without any word
of explanation.3
Further, we have a well-authenticated title of a work by
Democritus (born 470 or 460 B.C.), nepl dXoyoov ypa/ificoi/ KOL
vacTTcov aj8, ' two books on irrational lines and solids' (vaorrov
is wXrjpes, ' full', as opposed to KZVOV. l void', and Democritus
called his 'first bodies7 i/ao-rd). Of the contents of this work
we are not informed, the recent writer already mentioned
1 H. Vogt in Biblioiheca mathematical x3, 1910, pp. 97-155 (cf. ix3,
p. 190 sq.).
2 Plato, Laws, 819D-820 c. 
3 Plato, Bepublic, vii. 546 D.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE IRRATIONAL 
157
suggests that dXoyo? does not here mean irrational or incom-
mensurable at all. but that the book was an attempt to con-
nect the atomic theory with continuous magnitudes (lines)
through ' indivisible lines ' (cf. the Aristotelian treatise On
indivisible lines), and that Democritus meant to say that,
since any two lines are alike made up of an infinite number
of the (indivisible) elements, they cannot be said to have any
expressible ratio to one another, that is, he would regard them
as ' having no ratio'! It is, however, impossible to suppose
that a mathematician of the calibre of Democritus could have
denied that any two lines can have a ratio to one another;
moreover, on this view, since no two straight lines would have
a ratio to one another, dXoyoi ypafj.jj.ai would not be a class of
lines, but oil lines, and the title would lose all point. But
indeed, as we shall see, it is also on other grounds inconceiv-
able that Democritus should have been an upholder of f indi-
visible lines' at all. I do not attach any importance to the
further argument used in support of the interpretation in
question, namely that dXoyos in the sense of ' irrational' is
not found in any other writer before Aristotle, and that
Plato uses the words dpprjTos and do-v/ifierpos only. The
latter statement is not even strictly true, for Plato does in
fact use the word dXoyoi specifically of ypafifiac in the passage
of the Republic where he speaks of youths not being dXoyot
axnrep ypajjfiai, ' irrational like lines '-1 Poor as the joke is,
it proves that dXoyoi ypaiifiai was a recognized technical
term, and the remark looks like a sly reference to the very
treatise of Democritus of which we are speaking. I think
there is no reason to doubt that the book was on ' irrationals'
in the technical sense. We know from other sources that
Democritus was already on the track of infinitesimals in
geometry; and nothing is more likely than that he would
write on the kindred subject of irrationals.
I see therefore no reason to doubt that the irrationality
of A/2 was discovered by some Pythagorean at a date appre-
ciably earlier than that of Democritus; and indeed the simple
proof of it indicated by Aristotle and set out in the propo-
sition interpolated at the end of Euclid's Book X seems
appropriate to an early stage in the development of geometry.
1 Plato, Republic, 534 D.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

158 
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
(e) The jive regular solids.
The same parenthetical sentence in Proclus which attributes
to Pythagoras the discovery of the theory of irrationals
(or proportions) also states that he discovered the 'putting
together (o-vo-Taai?) of the cosmic figures' (the five regular
solids). As usual, there has been controversy as to the sense
in which this phrase is to be taken, and as to the possibility
of Pythagoras having done what is attributed to him, in any
sense of the words. I do not attach importance to the
argument that, whereas Plato, presumably ' Pythagorizing',
assigns the first four solids to the four elements, earth, fire,
air, and water, Empedocles and not Pythagoras was the
first to declare these four elements to be the material princi-
ples from which the universe was evolved ; nor do I think
it follows that, because the elements are four, only the first
four solids had been discovered at the time when the four
elements came to be recognized, and that the dodecahedron
must therefore have been discovered later. I see no reason
why all five should not have been discovered by the early
Pythagoreans before any question of identifying them with
the elements arose. The fragment of Philolaus, indeed, says
that
' there are five bodies in the sphere, the fire, water, earth,
and air in the sphere, and the vessel of the sphere itself
making the fifth',1
but as this is only to be understood of the elements in the
sphere of the universe, not of the solid figures, in accordance
with Diels's translation, it would appear that Plato in the
Timaeus2 is the earliest authority for the allocation, and
it may very well be due to Plato himself (were not the solids
called the ' Platonic figures' ?), although put into the mouth
of a Pythagorean. 
At the same time, the fact that the
Tiwueus is fundamentally Pythagorean may have induced
Aetius's authority (probably Theophrastus) to conclude too
1 Stobaeus, Eel. I, proem. 3 (p. 18. 5 Wachsmuth); Diels, Vors. is,
p. 314. The Greek of the last phrase is KO.\ 6 ras o-<paipas SXicds, TT^\XTTTOV^
but okicds is scarcely an appropriate word, and von Wilamowitz (Platon,
vol. ii, 1919, pp. 91-2) proposes 6 ras o-c^a/pa? 6\K6S, taking SXKOS (which
implies ' winding') as volumen. We might then translate by 'the spherical
envelope'.
2 Timaeus, 53 c-55 c.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE FIVE REGULAR SOLIDS 
159
hastily that ' here, too, Plato Pythagorizes', and to say dog-
matically on the faith of this that
' Pythagoras, seeing that there are five solid figures, which
are also called the mathematical figures, says that the earth
arose from the cube, fire from the pyramid, air from the
octahedron, water from the icosahedron, and the sphere of
the universe from the dodecahedron/1
It may, I think, be conceded that Pythagoras or the early
Pythagoreans would hardly be able to 'construct' the five
regular solids in the sense of a complete theoretical construc-
tion such as we find in Eucl. XIII; and it is possible that
Theaetetus was the first to give these constructions, whether
eypwyfre in Suidas's notice means that ' he was the first to
construct' or ' to write upon the five solids so called \ 
But
there is no reason why the Pythagoreans should not have
' put together' the five figures in the manner in which Plato
puts them together in the Timaeus, namely, by bringing
a certain number of angles of equilateral triangles, squares,
or pentagons severally together at one point so as to make
a solid angle, and then completing all the solid angles in that
way. That the early Pythagoreans should have discovered
the five regular solids in this elementary way agrees well
with what we know of their having put angles of certain
regular figures round a point and shown that only three
kinds of such angles would fill up the space in one plane
round the point.2 How elementary the construction still was
in Plato's hands may be inferred from the fact that he argues
that only three of the elements are transformable into one
another because only three of the solids are made from
equilateral triangles; these triangles, when present in suffi-
cient numbers in given regular solids, can be separated again
and redistributed so as to form regular solids of a different
number of faces, as if the solids were really hollow shells
bounded by the triangular faces as planes or laminae (Aris-
totle criticizes this in De caelo, iii. 1)! We may indeed treat
Plato's elementary method # a§ an indication that this was
actually the method employed by the earliest Pythagoreans.
1 Aet. h. 6. 5 (Vors. i3, p. 306. 3-7).
2 Proclus on Eucl. I, pp. 304. 11-305. 3.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

160 
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
Putting together squares three by three, forming eight
solid angles, and equilateral triangles three by three, four by
four, or five by five, forming four, six, or twelve solid angles
respectively, we readily form a cube, a tetrahedron, an octa-
hedron, or an icosahedron, but the fifth regular solid, the
dodecahedron, requires a new element, the regular pentagon.
True, if we form the angle of an icosahedron by putting
together five equilateral triangles, the bases of those triangles
when put together form a regular pentagon; but Pythagoras
or the Pythagoreans would require a theoretical construction.
What is the evidence that the early Pythagoreans could have
constructed and did construct pentagons? That they did
construct them seems established by the story of Hippasus,
'who was a Pythagorean but, owing to his being the first
to publish and write down the (construction of the) sphere
with (e/c, from) the twelve pentagons, perished by shipwreck
for his impiety, but received credit for the discovery, whereas
it really belonged to HIM (ktctlvov rod avSpos), for it is thus
that they refer to Pythagoras, and they do not call him by
his name' *
The connexion of Hippasus's name with the subject can
hardly be an invention, and the story probably points to
a positive achievement by him, while of course the Pytha-
goreans' jealousy for the Master accounts for the reflection
upon Hippasus and the moral. Besides, there is evidence for
the very early existence of dodecahedra in actual fact. In
1885 there was discovered on Monte Loffa (Colli Euganei,
near Padua) a regular dodecahedron of Etruscan origin, which
is held to date from the first half of the first millennium B. c.2
Again, it appears that there are extant no less than twenty-six
objects of dodecahedral form which are of Celtic origin.3 It
may therefore be that Pythagoras or the Pythagoreans had
seen dodecahedra of this kind, and that their merit was to
have treated them as mathematical objects and brought
them into their theoretical geometry. Could they then have
1 Iambi. Vit. Pyth. 88, de c. math, scient. c. 25, p 77. 18-24.
2 F. Lmdernann, 'Zur Geschichte der Polyeder und der Zahlzeichen'
(Sitzungsber. derK. Bay. AJcad. der Wiss. xxvi. 1897, pp. 625-768).
3 L. Hugo in Comptes rendus of the Paris Acad. of Sciences, lxiii, 1873,
pp. 420-1; lxvii, 1875, pp. 433, 472 ; lxxxi, 1879, p. 332.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

THE FIVE REGULAR SOLIDS 
161
constructed the regular pentagon ? The answer must, I think,
be yes. If ABCDE be a regular pentagon, and AG, AD, GE
be joined, it is easy to prove, from the (Pythagorean) proposi-
tions about the bum of the internal angles of a polygon and
the sum of the angles of a triangle, that each of the angles
BAG, DAE, EGD is fths of a right* angle, whence, in the
triangle AGD, the angle CAD is fths of a right angle, and
each of the base angles AGD, ADG is fths of a right angle
or double of the vertical angle GAD; and from these facts
it easily follows that, if CE and AD meet in F, GDF is an
isosceles triangle equiangular, and therefore similar, to AGD,
and also that AF = FG = CD. Now, since the triangles
AGD, GDF are similar,
or 
AD:AF = AF:FD;
that is, if AD is given, the length of AF, or GD, is found by
dividing AD at jPin ' extreme and mean ratio' by Eucl. II. 11.
This last problem is a particular case of the problem of
' application of areas', and therefore was obviously within
the power of the Pythagoreans. This method of constructing
a pentagon is, of course, that taught in Eucl. IV. 10,11. If
further evidence is wanted of the interest of the early Pytha-
goreans in the regular pentagon, it is furnished by the fact,
attested by Lucian and the scholiast to the Clouds of Aristo-
phanes, that the 'triple interwoven triangle, the pentagon',
i.e. the star-pentagon, was used by the Pythagoreans as a
symbol of recognition between the members of the same school,
and was called by them Health.1 Now it will be seen from the
separate diagram of the star-pentagon above that it actually
1 Lucian, Pro lapsu m saint. § 5 (vol. i, pp. 447-8, Jacobitz) ; schol. on
Clouds 609.
1528 
M
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

162 
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
shows the equal sides of the five isosceles triangles of the type
referred to and also the points at which they are divided in
extreme and mean ratio. (I should perhaps add that the
pentagram is said to be found on the vase of Aristonophus
found at Caere and supposed to belong to the seventh
century B.C., while the finds at Mycenae include ornaments of
pentagonal form.)
It would be easy to conclude that the dodecahedron is in-
scribable in a sphere, and to find the centre of it, without
constructing both in the elaborate manner of Eucl. XIII. 17
and working out the relation between an edge of the dodeca-
hedron and the radius of the sphere, as is there done: an
investigation probably due to Theaetetus. 
It is right to
mention here the remark in scholium No. 1 to Eucl. XIII
that the book is about
'the five so-called Platonic figures, which, however, do not
belong to Plato, three of the five being due to the Pytha-
goreans, namely the cube, the pyramid, and the dodeca-
hedron, while the octahedron and icosahedron are due to
Theaetetus'.1
This statement (taken probably from Geminus) may per-
haps rest on the fact that Theaetetus was the first to write
at any length about the two last-mentioned solids, as he was
probably the first to construct all five theoretically and in-
vestigate fully their relations to one another and the circum-
scribing spheres.
(£) Pythagorean astronomy.
Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans occupy an important place
in the history of astronomy. (1) Pythagoras was one of the first
to maintain that the universe and the earth are spherical
in form. It is uncertain what led Pythagoras to conclude
that the earth is a sphere. One suggestion is that he inferred
it from the roundness of the shadow cast by the earth in
eclipses of the moon. But it is certain that Anaxagoras was
the first to suggest this, the true, explanation of eclipses.
The most likely supposition is that Pythagoras's ground was
purely mathematical, or mathematico-aesthetical; that is, he
1 Heiberg's Euclid, vol. v, p. 654.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PYTHAGOREAN ASTRONOMY 
163
attributed spherical shape to the earth (as to the universe)
for the simple reason that the sphere is the most beautiful
of solid figures. For the same reason Pythagoras would
surely hold that the sun, the moon, and the other heavenly
bodies are also spherical in shape. (2) Pythagoras is credited
with having observed the identity of the Morning and the
Evening Stars. (3) It is probable that he was the first to
state the view (attributed to Alcmaeon and 'some of the
mathematicians5) that the planets as well as the sun and
moon have a motion of their own from west to east opposite
to and independent of the daily rotation of the sphere of the
fixed stars from east to west.1 Hermesianax, one of the older
generation of Alexandrine poets (about 300 B.C.), is quoted as
saying:
'What inspiration laid forceful hold on Pythagoras when
he discovered the subtle geometry of (the heavenly) spirals
and compressed in a small sphere the whole of the circle which
the aether embraces.'2
This would seem to imply the construction of a sphere
on which were represented the circles described by the sun,
moon and planets together with the daily revolution of the
heavenly sphere; but of course Hermesianax is not altogether
a trustworthy authority.-
It is improbable that Pythagoras himself was responsible
for the astronomical system known as the Pythagorean, in
which the earth was deposed from its place at rest in the
centre of the universe, and became a ' planet', like the sun,
the moon and the other planets, revolving about the central
fire. For Pythagoras the earth was still at the centre, while
about it there moved (a) the sphere of the fixed stars revolv-
ing daily from east to west, the axis of rotation being a
straight line through the centre of the earth, (b) the sun,
moon and planets moving in independent circular orbits in
a sense opposite to that of the daily rotation, i. e. from west
to east.
The later Pythagorean system is attributed by Aetius
(probably on the authority of Theophrastus) to Philolaus, and
1 Aet. ii. 16. 2, 3 (Vors. i3, p. 132. 15).
2 See Athenaeus, xiii. 599 A.
M 2
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

164 
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
may be described thus. The universe is spherical in shape
and finite in size. Outside it is infinite void which enables
the universe to breathe, as it were. At the centre is the
central fire, the Hearth of the Universe, called by various
names, the Tower or Watch-tower of Zeus, the Throne of
Zeus, the House of Zeus, the Mother of the Gods, the Altar,
Bond and Measure of Nature. In this central fire is located
the governing principle, the force which directs the movement
and activity of the universe. In the universe there revolve
in circles about the central fire the following bodies. Nearest
to the central fire revolves the counter-earth, which always
accompanies the earth, the orbit of the earth coming next to
that of the counter-earth; next to the earth, reckoning in
order from the centre outwards, comes the moon, next to the
moon the sun, next to the sun the five planets, and last of
all, outside the orbits of the five planets, the sphere of the
fixed stars. The counter-earth, which accompanies the earth
and revolves in a smaller orbit, is not seen by us because
the hemisphere of the earth on which we live is turned away
from the counter-earth (the analogy of the moon which
always turns one side towards us may have suggested this);
this involves, incidentally, a rotation of the earth about its
axis completed in the same time as it takes the earth to
complete a revolution about the central fire. As the latter
revolution of the earth was held to produce day and night,
it is a natural inference that the earth was supposed to
complete one revolution round the central fire in a day and
a night, or in twenty-four hours. This motion on the part of
the earth with our hemisphere always turned outwards would,
of course, be equivalent, as an explanation of phenomena,
to a rotation of the earth about a fixed axis, but for the
parallax consequent on the earth describing a circle in space
with radius greater than its own radius; this parallax, if we
may trust Aristotle,1 the Pythagoreans boldly asserted to be
negligible. 
The superfluous thing in this system is the
introduction of the counter-earth. 
Aristotle says in one
place that its object was to bring up the number of the
moving bodies to ten, the perfect number according to
1 Arist, Be caelo, ii. 13, 293 b 25-30.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PYTHAGOREAN ASTRONOMY 
165
the Pythagoreansa; but he hints at the truer explanation in
another passage where he says that eclipses of the moon
were considered to be due sometimes to the interposition
of the earth, sometimes to the interposition of the counter-
earth (to say nothing of other bodies of the same sort
assumed by ' some' in order to explain why there appear
to be more lunar eclipses than solar)2; we may therefore
take it that the counter-earth was invented for the purpose
of explaining eclipses of the moon and their frequency.
Eecapitulation.
The astronomical systems of Pythagoras and the Pytha-
goreans illustrate the purely mathematical character of their
physical speculations; the heavenly bodies are all spheres,
the most perfect of solid figures, and they move in circles;
there is no question raised of forces causing the respective
movements; astronomy is pure mathematics, it is geometry,
combined with arithmetic and harmony. 
The capital dis-
covery by Pythagoras of the dependence of musical intervals
on numerical proportions led, with his successors, to the
doctrine of the 'harmony of the spheres'. As the ratio
2 : 1 between the lengths of strings of the same substance
and at the same tension corresponds to the octave, the
ratio 3 :2 to the fifth, and the ratio 4 : 3 to the fourth, it
was held that bodies moving in space produce sounds, that
those which move more quickly give a higher note than those
which move more slowly, while those move most quickly which
move at the greatest distance; the sounds therefore pro-
duced by the heavenly bodies, depending on their distances
(i.e. the size of their orbits), combine to produce a harmony;
' the whole heaven is number and harmony \3
We have seen too how, with the Pythagoreans, the theory
of numbers, or ' arithmetic ', goes hand in hand with geometry;
numbers are represented by dots or lines forming geometrical
figures ; the species of numbers often take their names from
their geometrical analogues, while their properties are proved
by geometry. The Pythagorean mathematics, therefore, is all
one science, and their science is all mathematics.
1 Arist. Metaph. A. 5, 986 a 8-12.
2 Arist. Be caelo, ii. 13, 293 b 21-5. 
s Arist. Metaph. A. 5, 986 a 2.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

166 
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
It is this identification of mathematics (and of geometry
in particular) with science in general, and their pursuit of it
for its own sake, which led to the extraordinary advance of
the subject in the Pythagorean school. It was the great merit
of Pythagoras himself (apart from any particular geometrical
oi* arithmetical theorems which he discovered) that he was the
first to take this view of mathematics; it is characteristic of
him that, as we are told, (geometry was called by Pythagoras
inquiry 
or science' (eKaXeiro Se rj yeco/AeTpia Tr/ooy HvQayopov
io-Topia).1 Not only did he make geometry a liberal educa-
tion ; he was the first to attempt to explore it down- to its
first principles; as part of the scientific basis which he sought
to lay down he ' used definitions \ 
A point was, according to
the Pythagoreans, a ' unit having position'2; and, if their
method of regarding a line, a surface, a solid, and an angle
does not amount to a definition, it at least shows that they
had reached a clear idea of the differentiae^ as when they said
that 1 was a point, 2 a line, 3 a triangle, and 4 a pyramid.
A surface they called yjpoia, (colour'; this was their way of
describing the superficial appearance, the idea being, as
Aristotle says, that the colour is either in the limiting surface
(iripas) or is the irepas,3 so that the meaning intended to be
conveyed is precisely that intended by Euclid's definition
(XI. Def. 2) that' the limit of a solid is a surface \ 
An angle
they called yAo>x&, a ' point' (as of an arrow) made by a line
broken or bent back at one point.4
The positive achievements of the Pythagorean school in
geometry, and the immense advance made by them, will be
seen from the following summary.
1. They were acquainted with the properties of parallel
lines, which they used for the purpose of establishing by
a general proof the proposition that the sum of the three
angles of any triangle is equal to two right angles. This
latter proposition they again used to establish the well-known
theorems about the sums of the exterior and interior angles,
respectively, of any polygon.
2. They originated the subject of equivalent areas, the
transformation of an area of one form into another of different
1 Iambi. Vit. Pyth. 89. 
2 Proclus on Eucl. I, p. 95. 21.
3 Arist. Be sensu, 3. 439 a 31. 
4 Heron, Def. 15.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

RECAPITULATION 
167
form and, in particular, the whole method of application of
areas, constituting a geometrical algebra, whereby they effected
the equivalent of the algebraical processes of addition, sub-
traction, multiplication, division, squaring, extraction of the
square root, and finally the complete solution of the mixed
quadratic equation x2±px±q 
= 0, so far as its roots are real.
Expressed in terms of Euclid, this means the whole content of
Book I. 35-48 and Book II. The method of application of
areas is one of the most fundamental in the whole of later
Greek geometry; it takes its place by the side of the powerful
method of proportions; moreover, it is the starting point of
Apollonius's theory of conies, and the three fundamental
terms, parabole, ellipsis, and hyperbole used to describe the
three separate problems in 'application' were actually em-
ployed by Apollonius to denote the three conies, names
which, of course, are those which we use to-day. Nor was
the use of the geometrical algebra for solving numerical
problems unknown to the Pythagoreans; this is proved by
the fact that the theorems of Eucl. II. 9, 10 were invented
for the purpose of finding successive integral solutions of the
indeterminate equations
2-y2- 
±1.
3. They had a theory of proportion pretty fully developed.
We know nothing of the form in which it was expounded;
all we know is that it took no account of incommensurable
magmtudes. Hence we conclude that it was a numerical
theory, a theory on the same lines as that contained in
Book VII of Euclid's Elements.
They were aware of the properties of similar figures.
This is clear from the fact that they must be assumed
to have solved the problem, which was, according to
Plutarch, attributed to Pythagoras himself, of describing a
figure which shall be similar to one given figure and equal in
area to another given figure This implies a knowledge of
the proposition that similar figures (triangles or polygons) are
to one another in the duplicate ratio of corresponding sides
(Eucl. VI. 19, 20). As the problem is solved in Eucl. VI. 25,
we assume that, subject to the qualification that their
theorems about similarity, &c, were only established of figures
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

168 
PYTHAGOREAN GEOMETRY
in which corresponding elements are commensurable, they had
theorems corresponding to a great part of Eucl., Book VI.
Again, they knew how to cut a straight line in extreme and
mean ratio (Eucl. VI. 30); this problem was presumably
solved by the method used in Eucl. II. 11, rather than by that
of Eucl. VI. 30, which depends on the solution of a problem
in the application of areas more general than the methods of
Book II enable us to solve, the problem namely of Eucl.
VI. 29.
4 They had discovered, or were aware of the existence of,
the five regular solids. These they may have constructed
empirically by putting together squares, equilateral triangles,
and pentagons. This implies that they could construct a
regular pentagon and, as this construction depends upon the
construction of an isosceles triangle in which each of the base
angles is double of the vertical angle, and this again on the
cutting of a line in extreme and mean ratio, we may fairly
assume that this was the way in which the construction of
the regular pentagon was actually evolved. It would follow
that the solution of problems by analysis was already prac-
tised by the Pythagoreans, notwithstanding that the discovery
of the analytical method is attributed by Proclus to Plato.
As the particular construction is practically given in Eucl IV.
10, 11, we may assume that the content of Eucl. IV was also
partly Pythagorean.
5. They discovered the existence of the irrational in the
sense that they proved the incommensurability of the diagonal
of a square with reference to its side; in other words, they
proved the irrationality of A/2. 
AS a proof of this is referred
to by Aristotle in terms which correspond to the method
used in a proposition interpolated in Euclid, Book X, we
may conclude that this proof is ancient, and therefore that it
was probably the proof used by the discoverers of the proposi-
tion. The method is to prove that, if the diagonal of a square
is commensurable with the side, then the same number must
be both odd and even; here then we probably have an early
Pythagorean use of the method of reductio ad absurdum.
Not only did the Pythagoreans discover the irrationality
of V2 ; they showed, as we have seen, how to approximate
as closely as we please to its numerical value.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

RECAPITULATION 
169
After the discovery of this one case of irrationality, it
would be obvious that propositions theretofore proved by
means of the numerical theory of proportion, which was
inapplicable to incommensurable magnitudes, were only par-
tially proved. Accordingly, pending the discovery of a theory
of proportion applicable to incommensurable as well as com-
niensurable magnitudes, there would be an inducement to
substitute, where possible, for proofs employing the theory of
proportions other proofs independent of that theory. This
substitution is carried rather far in Euclid, Books I-IV; it
does not follow that the Pythagoreans remodelled their proofs
to the same extent as Euclid felt bound to do.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139600576.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

