A “thoughtful” Local Friendliness no-go theorem: a
prospective experiment with new assumptions to suit
Howard M. Wiseman1, Eric G. Cavalcanti2, and Eleanor G. Rieffel3
1Centre for Quantum Computation and Communication Technology (Australian Research Council),
Centre for Quantum Dynamics, Griffith University, Yuggera Country, Brisbane, Queensland 4111, Australia
2Centre for Quantum Dynamics, Griffith University, Yugambeh Country, Gold Coast, Queensland 4222, Australia
3QuAIL (Quantum Artifical Intelligence Laboratory), NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035,
United States of America
A recent paper by two of us and co-workers [1], based on an extended
Wigner’s friend scenario, demonstrated that certain empirical correlations pre-
dicted by quantum theory (QT) violate inequalities derived from a set of meta-
physical assumptions we called “Local Friendliness” (LF). These assumptions
are strictly weaker than those used for deriving Bell inequalities. Crucial to the
theorem was the premise that a quantum system with reversible evolution could
be an observer (colloquially, a “friend”). However, that paper was noncommittal
on what would constitute an observer for the purpose of an experiment. Here,
we present a new LF no-go theorem which takes seriously the idea that a sys-
tem’s having thoughts is a sufficient condition for it to be an observer. Our new
derivation of the LF inequalities uses four metaphysical assumptions, three of
which are thought-related, including one that is explicitly called “Friendliness”.
These four assumptions, in conjunction, allow one to derive LF inequalities for
experiments involving the type of system that “Friendliness” refers to. In addi-
tion to these four metaphysical assumptions, this new no-go theorem requires
two assumptions about what is technologically feasible: Human-Level Artificial
Intelligence, and Universal Quantum Computing which is fast and large scale.
The latter is often motivated by the belief that QT is universal, but this is not
an assumption of the theorem. The intent of the new theorem is to give a clear
goal for future experimentalists, and a clear motivation for trying to achieve
that goal, by using assumptions that are (i) logically independent, (ii) widely
held, (iii) not reliant on the exact correctness of QT, and (iv) relevant to how
different interpretations or modifications of QT respond to the no-go theorem.
The popular stance that “quantum theory needs no interpretation” does not
question any of our assumptions and so is ruled out by the theorem. Finally,
we quantitatively discuss how difficult the experiment we envisage would be,
and briefly discuss milestones on the paths towards it.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
1
arXiv:2209.08491v4  [quant-ph]  8 Sep 2023

Contents
1
Introduction
3
1.1
The goals of this paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
1.2
The new theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
1.3
The structure of the paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2
The original LF no-go theorem
6
2.1
Derivation of LF inequalities in an extended Wigner’s friend scenario . . . .
7
2.2
Local Friendliness assumptions are weaker than Bell’s assumptions . . . . .
10
2.3
Quantum violations of LF inequalities
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
3
Metaphysical Assumptions for the Thoughtful LF no-go Theorem
13
3.1
The four metaphysical assumptions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
3.2
LFϑ from the conjunction of the metaphysical assumptions . . . . . . . . . .
16
4
Technological Assumptions and Basic Experimental Considerations for the Thought-
ful LF no-go Theorem
18
4.1
Human-Level Artificial Intelligence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
4.2
Universal Quantum Computing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
4.3
Minor technological assumptions (not enumerated) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
4.4
Methodological assumptions, and Deutsch’s contributions
. . . . . . . . . .
24
5
Six Approaches to Quantum Theory
25
5.1
Hidden Variables interpretations
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.2
Single-Mind View of a Many Worlds Interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.3
Relativist interpretations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
5.4
Spontaneous Collapse theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.5
Penrose’s approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
5.6
Thinking causes collapse . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27
6
Resource Estimates for the Full Experiment
27
6.1
Resource estimates for a classical HLAI algorithm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
28
6.2
Estimating reversibility overhead . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
29
6.3
A model of a partially reversible HLAI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.4
Logical quantum resources for Quall-E . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
6.5
Overhead due to error correction and fault tolerant gate times . . . . . . . .
31
6.6
Potential ways forward . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
33
7
Conclusion
36
A Deutsch’s contributions and |“I knew 0 or 1”⟩
37
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
2

1
Introduction
Wigner introduced his now famous “friend” scenario in 1961 [2] to present what he saw
as an incompatibility between quantum theory (QT) and what one might call, in a loose
sense, friendliness:
It is natural to ask about the situation if one does not make [an] observation
oneself but lets someone else carry it out. What is the wave function if my
friend looked [at the quantum object]? The answer is that . . . one could [only]
attribute a wave function to the joint system [of] friend plus object, α(ψ1 ×
χ1) + β(ψ2 × χ2) [which] follows from the linearity of the equations. [This]
appears absurd because it implies that my friend was in a state of suspended
animation before he answered my question [about what he saw].
It follows that the being with a consciousness must have a different role in
quantum mechanics than the inanimate measuring device. In particular, the
quantum mechanical equations of motion cannot be linear if [it] is accepted . . .
that “my friend” has the same types of impressions and sensations as I. . . . To
deny the existence of the consciousness of a friend . . . is surely an unnatural
attitude, approaching solipsism, and few people, in their hearts, will go along
with it.
Wigner’s argument was not a theorem with the same sort of rigour as, for example,
Bell’s soon-to-appear theorem [3]. Recently, however, there has been a surge of renewed
interest in the Wigner’s friend scenario, due to the recognition that it is possible to ob-
tain theorems by combining it with the setup (separated entangled systems and mea-
surement choices) and formalism of Bell’s theorem [1, 4–10]. In particular, inspired by
Brukner [4, 5], two of us and co-workers [1] introduced the concept Local Friendliness
(LF). This was defined in Ref. [1] as the conjunction of three metaphysical assumptions1:
No Superdeterminism (permitting free choices), Locality (also known as “parameter inde-
pendence”), and Absoluteness of Observed Events (as opposed to such events being relative
to an observer or “world”). From this conjunction, certain inequalities, which we called
LF inequalities, were derived, which would be violated under the technological assumption
that arbitrary quantum operations could be performed on quantum systems considered to
be observers. Thus, if this technological assumption holds, then LF must be false, a result
which may be called a LF no-go theorem2 [1].
As well as proving the LF no-go theorem, Bong et al. [1] presented a “proof-of-principle”
experiment, in which various LF inequalities were violated. In this experiment, the role of
a friend — an observer to whom one of the “observed events” in the theorem pertains —
was played by a binary degree-of-freedom of a single photon (its path). The paper readily
admitted that such a friend “would not typically be considered a macroscopic, sentient
observer as originally envisioned by Wigner.” However, the paper was intentionally non-
committal about what could be considered an adequate “friend” or “observer”. That is, the
“observer” in the theorem of Ref. [1] should be interpreted as a placeholder to be defined by
a candidate theory or ideology. For example, if every physical system can be considered as
an observer, as claimed by Refs. [7] and [11], then the Wigner+Bell experiments performed
1By “metaphysical assumptions” we mean fundamental assumptions that may be satisfied or violated
by a physical theory, or by an “interpretation” of a physical theory, broadly construed.
2The theorem was obtained by three of the authors: Aníbal Utreras-Alarcón, Eric Cavalcanti, and
Howard Wiseman. The fact that LF inequalities are, in general, strictly weaker (i.e., harder to violate)
than Bell inequalities was proven together with the fourth theory author, Yeong-Cherng Liang.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
3

with single-qubit friends [1, 7] already rule out LF3. But the majority of physicists and
philosophers would surely not be convinced that these experiments disprove LF.
The fact that current experiments have only a proof-of-principle status is the essential
motivation for the current paper. But addressing it requires not only thinking about a new
type of experiment. It also requires formulating a new (though closely related) theorem
to suit, and to motivate, that type of experiment. We lay out, and then unfold, these two
goals in the next subsection.
1.1
The goals of this paper
The first goal of this paper is to come up with a feasible, though ambitious, proposal for an
experiment that would be broadly convincing as a test of LF. The second goal is to modify
the assumptions of the LF no-go theorem of Ref. [1] so as to obtain a new theorem of ex-
perimental metaphysics. The new assumptions are carefully chosen to attempt to motivate
our experimental colleagues (or, more realistically, future generations of experimentalists)
to perform the associated experiment. Specifically, the two goals are:
1. To make the proposed experiment satisfy the following three desiderata:
(a) That the experiment be plausibly achievable, if present technological trends
continue, in a matter of decades rather than centuries.
(b) That, according to standard QT, the experiment should yield correlations vio-
lating a LF inequality.
(c) That such a violation (if occurring) convince the largest possible part of the
interested community that LF is false.
2. To use assumptions in the associated theorem that are natural in the following senses:
(a) They are logically independent of one another and of the assumption of the
universal validity of QT;
(b) They are relevant to many approaches to QT;
(c) They are widely held amongst physicists and other scientists;
(d) They include a general principle of friendliness, in the same spirit to which
Wigner originally appealed, so as to leave no freedom to the skeptic to avoid
the conclusion of the theorem by excluding certain types of “friends” by fiat.
In goal (1c) we say “the largest possible part” of the interested community, rather than
“all”, because we expect that there would be some physicists or philosophers who would
believe that LF (as defined in Ref. [1]) must be true. Such scholars would presumably say
that any experiment purporting to violate it must involve a “friend” which does not deserve
observer status. This will be discussed more in Sec. 1.2, and a particular approach to QT
(Spontaneous Collapse) that harmonizes with this attitude is reviewed in Sec. 5.4. At this
stage, we remind the reader that we have already stated our goal (2d) of how to deal with
skeptics with this sort of attitude— they would have to reject a principle of friendliness
that is general, precise, and explicitly stated (which was not the case in Ref. [1]).
We should also clarify that in goal (2b) we use the word “approaches” to QT to include
two types of theories. Interpretations in the strict sense may add (e.g. hidden variables) to,
3The first of these experiments, Ref. [7], was published prior to the LF no-go theorem of Ref. [1], and
so it is only a demonstration of the violation of LF inequalities in hindsight.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
4

or subtract (e.g. a special role for measurement) from, the standard quantum formalism,
but do not (or at least claim not to) alter its usual empirical predictions. Modifications
are, in principle, empirically distinguishable from QT, in some regime not yet probed by
experiment. Representative examples of both types will be given in Sec. 5.
The enumeration of the goals above is not meant to imply that the theorem we will
present is the only fruitful way of formulating new theorems based upon that of Ref. [1].
Moreover, the experiment we propose would, we envisage, be the culmination of a long
research program involving increasingly sophisticated “friends”.
But, now, in the early
stages of scholarly discourse about LF no-go theorems, it seems useful to present the
strongest theorem (i.e. using the metaphysically weakest assumptions that are still intuitive
and relevant) that we can currently devise, compatible with the goals stated above.
Our new formulation is, in fact, significantly closer to what Wigner originally discussed
than is that in Ref. [1]. Specifically, our theorem (soon to be stated, in Sec. 1.2) considers
a friend who appears to be able to communicate thoughts comparable to our own. We
intentionally use the word “thoughts”, rather than, as Wigner used, “consciousness”, because
the former seems easier to identify and less controversial — we wish to avoid debates about
what constitutes consciousness or even whether it exists. The connotations of the word
“consciousness” may also make humans unwilling to ascribe it to a non-human intelligence.
Similarly, we wish to avoid having to speculate as to whether a given intelligence has the
“same types of impressions and sensations” [2] as our own.
1.2
The new theorem
To distinguish from the LF no-go theorem of Ref. [1], we will call the no-go theorem of this
paper the LFϑ no-go theorem, where the ϑ superscript indicates it is a variation in which
thoughts play a central role. This can be seen in the formal statement of our new theorem:
Theorem 1 (LFϑ no-go).
There is a contradiction between the conjunction of four metaphysical assumptions:
1. Local Agency
2. Physical Supervenience
3. Ego Absolutism
4. Friendliness
(which together constitute LFϑ); and these two technological assumptions:
5. Human-Level Artificial Intelligence (HLAI)
6. Universal Quantum Computing (UQC).
We detail each of these assumptions in the body of the paper.
Note that the universal validity of QT is not part of the theorem here, unlike the
theorems of Refs. [5, 6]. Of course the second technological assumption is often motivated
by a belief in the universal validity of QT (UVQT). The reader, recalling our goal (2a) in
Sec. 1 to use assumptions that are logically independent of the assumption of UVQT, may
thus wonder whether we have missed the mark in assumption 6. However, when we say
that the UQC assumption is independent of UVQT, we mean that it is logically possible,
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
5

at present, to reject UQC and accept UVQT or to reject UVQT and accept UQC (or reject
both or accept both). See Sec. 4.2 for further discussion on this point.
It is hopefully obvious that QT, whether universally valid or not, plays no role in the
metaphysical assumptions (1.)–(4.). The Wigner’s friend paradox (in a broad sense) is often
presented, as Wigner did in the opening quote, as a clash between Wigner’s description of
his friend using QT, and the friend’s own beliefs. But our theorem does not require Alice
(playing the role of Wigner) to assign a quantum state to her friend, and in fact does not
presume that Alice would have sufficient knowledge to assign a pure quantum state to her
friend even if she wanted to and it was valid to do so.
The experimentally testable inequalities which can be derived from LFϑ (the conjunc-
tion of the four metaphysical assumptions of our new theorem) are of identical form to the
inequalities derived in Ref. [1]. This is because, for a suitable experiment, LFϑ gives the
same constraints on correlations as does the assumptions of LF, but where the application
of LF requires the acceptance of the “friend” system as an observer. The interest in the
new theorem lies in the assumptions behind it and the nature of the associated experiment.
The new assumptions are complete; they remove the need (as discussed in the preceding
subsection) for an additional implicit assumption that such-and-such a system in a partic-
ular experiment is an observer. Thus, because the proposed experiment is designed to fit
the new assumptions, if the experiment violates a LF inequality, then it must be accepted
that LFϑ is false. This is so even though, as discussed above, a skeptic may maintain that
LF in the original sense of Ref. [1] remains inviolate, by denying that the friend in the
experiment we design is a system capable of making an observation.
1.3
The structure of the paper
We begin by recapitulating the LF no-go theorem of Ref. [1] in Sec. 2. We present the
proof explicitly in a way that makes it easy to compare with the LFϑ no-go theorem, and
expand upon some issues of relevance for both theorems. Even readers who are familiar
with Ref. [1] are advised to read this section, especially Sec. 2.3, for its discussion of the
disjoint roles of the metaphysical (theory-independent) assumptions and the technological
(and quantum-theory-related) assumption in the LF no-go theorem. This discussion also
applies, with some alterations, to our new theorem. The four metaphysical assumptions of
the new theorem, whose conjunction is LFϑ, are defined and discussed in Sec. 3. The two
technological assumptions, along with the nature of the experiment that would be required
to demonstrate the falsity of LFϑ, are presented in Sec. 4. That section also discusses
minor technological assumptions, plus ethical and other methodological requirements for
the experiment. In Sec. 5 we demonstrate the relevance of all six assumptions by briefly
presenting six different approaches (or classes of approaches) to QT, each one violating
one — and arguably only one — of the assumptions. In Sec. 6 we estimate the quantum
computing resources required to carry out the proposed experiment. We conclude in Sec. 7
with a discussion of future work, and of the most important current implication for our
theorem: the stance that “quantum theory needs no interpretation”, popularized by Fuchs
and Peres [12], does not deny any of our assumptions and so is ruled out.
2
The original LF no-go theorem
The LF no-go theorem of Ref. [1] can be considered a theorem of experimental metaphysics.
The phrase here in italics was introduced by Shimony [13] to refer to the field initiated by
Bell’s theorem. The theorem is, like Bell’s, a strict theorem of experimental metaphysics in
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
6

the following sense. It is a proof that, given certain scientific and technological assumptions,
it would be possible to do a well defined experiment that would plausibly give a result that
rules out the conjunction of certain well defined metaphysical assumptions.
The theorem builds upon a thought experiment introduced by Brukner [4, 5], involving
a combination of a standard Bell-type scenario with a Wigner’s friend scenario, called an
Extended Wigner’s Friend Scenario (EWFS). Brukner’s EWFS considered two observers in
spatially separated labs, Charlie and Debbie, who initially share a pair of entangled quan-
tum systems. They are the “friends” of two “superobserververs”, Alice and Bob respectively,
who are capable of performing arbitrary quantum operations on the entire contents of their
respective friends’ lab. As shown in Ref. [1], a more parsimonious scenario, involving only
one friend (Charlie), already allows for violation of LF inequalities. We will focus on this
simpler scenario here.
2.1
Derivation of LF inequalities in an extended Wigner’s friend scenario
Before proceeding, it is important to make a distinction between the LF no-go theorem,
on one hand, and the derivation of LF inequalities on the other.
The LF inequalities
are derived in a theory-independent manner, without making any assumption specifically
about QT. The LF no-go theorem is a proof that, under certain technological assumptions,
QT allows for the violation of LF inequalities. To make the distinction clear, we will first
summarise the derivation of LF inequalities, without any allusion to quantum systems or
operations. We note that all of this is completely analogous to the distinction between Bell’s
theorem and the derivation of Bell inequalities. In particular, we use the term “theory-
independent” in exactly the same way as it is used in the literature on Bell inequalities.
That is, the metaphysical assumptions only apply for a theoretical framework which take
as a priori notions such as space-time, physical events, interventions, and observations.
But we stress that such a framework does not assume the absolute reality of observations,
or other physical events, that may appear in the theorem.
The minimal scenario involves three observers, Charlie, Alice and Bob, as illustrated
in Fig. 1. In each run of the experiment, a bipartite system is prepared and distributed
to Charlie and Bob in separate laboratories. Charlie performs a fixed measurement upon
his subsystem, observing an outcome labelled by c ∈{±1}. Alice has a choice between
two measurements labelled by x ∈{1, 2}, with outcomes labelled by a ∈{±1}. Bob has a
choice between two measurements labelled by y ∈{1, 2}, with outcomes b ∈{±1}. Alice’s
measurement x is chosen in an appropriately random fashion, within a space-time region
not in the past light-cone of c or b. Bob’s measurement y is also chosen in an appropriately
random fashion, within a space-time region not in the past light-cone of c or a.
The
experimental protocol says that, if Alice’s measurement is x = 1, she will ask Charlie for
his observed outcome, and assign her outcome to be equal to that of Charlie4, i.e. a = c.
Otherwise, she will perform a different measurement upon the contents of Charlie’s lab
(including Charlie). Repeating this experiment produces empirical probabilities ℘(a, b|x, y)
for the observations performed by Alice and Bob. Charlie’s outcome c is not included in
these empirical probabilities, as it may be erased in the course of Alice’s measurement
when x ̸= 1, as we will see when discussing the quantum realisation.
This is a complete description of the minimal scenario needed to derive an LF inequality.
Note that we have not mentioned entangled quantum systems, nor did we specify that Alice
is a superobserverver to Charlie. Of course, those things will be needed to show that the
4There is, of course, an implicit assumption that Charlie accurately reports his observed outcome. We
will discuss the status of this assumption in Section 2.2.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
7

Alice
Charlie
Bob
x
a
c
y
b
Figure 1: Space-time diagram of the events involved in the original LF no-go theorem. The solid vertical
lines are the world-lines of the three parties (time increases upwards). Future-directed light-like lines
(dotted) emanate from Alice’s (x) and Bob’s (y) freely chosen settings for their measurements, yielding
outcomes a and b respectively. Past-directed light-like lines (dotted) converge on Alice’s outcome a,
showing that Charlie’s outcome, c (the result of a fixed measurement) is in the past light cone of a.
The application of Local Agency relies on the fact that, of the outcomes a, b and c, only a is in the
future light-cone of x, and only b is in the future light-cone of y. In the case x = 1, Alice simply asks
Charlie his outcome, and copies it so that a = c. In the case x ̸= 1 she follows a far more complicated
experimental procedure, involving Charlie and his lab, to obtain her outcome.
LF inequalities can be violated by QT, but they are not needed for the derivation of the
inequalities. With this scenario in mind, let us consider the constraints imposed by the
LF assumption on ℘(a, b|x, y). The first metaphysical assumption that went into the LF
assumption in Ref. [1] is the following:
Absoluteness of Observed Events (AOE): An observed event is an absolute single
event, and not relative to anything or anyone.
This assumption implies that in each run of the experiment described above, the vari-
ables a, b, c, x, y — all of which are observed by some observer in every run — take well
defined, absolute, single values. The relative frequencies of these events define a probability
distribution P(a, b, c|x, y)5. The empirical probabilities ℘(a, b|x, y) are related to the above
by marginalisation. That is, ℘(a, b|x, y) = P
c P(a, b, c|x, y), for all a, b, x, y. We also have,
from the scenario as constructed above, that P(a|c, x = 1, y) = δa,c, for all a, c, y.
Note that AOE is not challenging Peres’ dictum that “unperformed experiments have
no results” [15]. It is rather only an assumption that observed events (and in particular,
observed measurement outcomes) have absolute values.
The LF no-go theorem of Ref. [1] used two more metaphysical assumptions, Locality
and No-Superdeterminism. This was a legacy from Brukner’s theorem [5], which inspired
it; as noted in Ref. [1], the assumption of Local Agency (introduced in Ref. [16]), implies
both of those other assumptions. Here, we word it as follows:
Local Agency (LA). Any intervention, made in a manner appropriate for randomized
experimental trials of a given phenomenon, is uncorrelated with any set of physical events
that are relevant to that phenomenon and outside the future light-cone of that intervention.
In our scenario, the interventions assign values to the variables x and y for Alice’s
and Bob’s choices of measurement. We borrow the term “intervention” from the literature
on causal models [17], instead of the standard term “free choice” typically used in the
5Strictly, this requires that the system preparations in different runs of the experiment be interchange-
able, which is standard experimental assumption. A version of the LF no-go theorem without probabilistic
assumptions was recently derived in [14].
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
8

context of Bell’s theorem, to avoid the connotation that that these choices require a direct
application of human “free will”. In a given experimental situation, an intervention should
be designed to make it as plausible as possible (within reason) that those choices are made
via “external variables”, i.e. variables that do not have causes among, or share common
causes with, the other experimentally relevant variables. There is thus also a background
assumption that for the purposes of any well defined experiment, it is possible to make
interventions in a manner appropriate for randomized trials. But that is not an additional
metaphysical assumption; it is a statement about the norms of scientific practice.
As argued in Ref. [16], LA is more naturally formulated than both Locality and No-
Superdeterminism. For this reason, we use LA in the formulation of our new LFϑ no-go
theorem (see Sec. 1.2).
For ease of comparison, we will thus review the proof of the
original LF no-go theorem using this assumption. For simplicity, we will still refer to the
conjunction of AOE and LA as “Local Friendliness”, which was the name used in Ref. [1]
for the conjunction of AOE, Locality, and No-Superdeterminism.
Notwithstanding the above, it is certainly possible to split Local Agency into a natural
assumption that concerns agency, and an independent natural assumption that concerns
locality sensu lato. For example, in the most recent systematization by two of us [18], the
two assumptions would be, respectively, Interventionist Causation and Relativistic Causal
Arrow (and each of these can, in turn, be split into two further independent assump-
tions [18]). This brings out the essential role for relativity, and a forward-in-time causal
arrow in Local Agency. Thus, while we acknowledge Colbeck and Renner for coming up
with the essential concept of LA in 2011 [19], our reasons for not adopting their term for
it, free choice, are hopefully clear.
In the formulation of both AOE and LA, there is a background assumption that we
can apply concepts such as “light-cones”, “future”, etc., at least at the scale at, and in
the theoretical context in which, humans perceive and interact with the world. It is also
implicit in the definition of LA that a physical event takes place in some space-time volume
bounded in all dimensions in some reference frame.
Given the existence of P(a, b, c|x, y) implied by AOE, and the space-time relations
between the variables in the scenario, as shown in Fig. 1, LA implies (as does No-Super-
determinism) that c is independent of x and y, i.e., P(c|x, y) = P(c), for all c, x, y. It also
implies (as does the assumption of Locality), that P(a|c, x, y) = P(a|c, x) and P(b|c, x, y) =
P(b|c, y), for all values of the variables involved.
Following the method of proof of [1], it can be shown that these constraints imply the
existence of a model with probabilities P(abc|xy) satisfying
℘(ab|xy) =
(P
c δa,cP(b|cy)P(c)
if x = 1
P
c P(ab|cxy)P(c)
if x ̸= 1 ,
(1)
where the only constraint on P(ab|cxy) is that it satisfies Local Agency. This is equivalent
to the constraint that, for each possible value of c, the distribution P(ab|cxy) does not
allow faster-than-light signalling between Alice and Bob.
The results in [1] imply that any Alice-Bob correlations ℘(ab|xy) that have a model of
the form of Eq. (1) must satisfy inequalities of the same form as the CHSH inequalities for
this scenario, where Alice and Bob each have two settings with two outcomes6. In other
6This can be seen as follows. In [1], all of the tight LF inequalities for the scenario involving 3 dichotomic
measurements for each of Alice and Bob, and with a “friend” for each party (Charlie and Debbie) are
derived.
Among these facet inequalities are the “semi-Brukner” inequalities—CHSH-type inequalities
involving only one friend. If we ignore Debbie (i.e. ignore Bob’s measurement y = 1 in that scenario), and
ignore Alice’s measurement x = 3, we recover the scenario considered here.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
9

words, all Alice-Bob Bell inequalities are mathematically equivalent to the LF inequali-
ties, in this particular scenario (though not in scenarios including more than two settings
for Alice [1]). Therefore, violation of these inequalities in an Extended Wigner’s Friend
Scenario of the form described above implies the failure of Local Friendliness.
Again we stress that the conclusion above has been reached without any reference
to quantum theory. This is similar to how the observation of the violation of a Bell in-
equality in a standard Bell scenario implies the failure of any conjunction of assumptions
that are sufficient to derive a Bell inequality, in a theory-independent manner. At this
point, and still before any discussion of QT, we can see that the violation of Local Friend-
liness inequalities (in an EWFS) would have stronger implications than the violation of
Bell inequalities7. This is because the derivation of LF inequalities uses strictly weaker
metaphysical assumptions than the derivation of Bell inequalities, as we now discuss.
2.2
Local Friendliness assumptions are weaker than Bell’s assumptions
To understand that the LF assumptions are strictly weaker, three points are key.
First, Local Agency does not imply the notion of Local Causality which Bell used
in the 1976 version of his theorem [20]. Local Causality says that, if space-like events
are correlated, there must exist common causes, in their common past light-cone, that
render those correlated events conditionally uncorrelated — the “hidden variables” in Bell’s
theorem. By contrast, no events or variables are postulated to exist in Local Agency; it
merely says that correlations cannot exist between a certain type of event (an intervention
x in an experiment) and certain other types of events (physical events relevant to that
experiment and not in x’s future light-cone).
Second, while Local Agency does imply the notion of Locality which Bell used in the
original (1964) version of his theorem [3], Bell also required another assumption there,
Predetermination. The LF no-go theorem does not make use of the assumption of Prede-
termination, or anything akin to it. As an aside, we remind the reader that Local Agency
takes care of an assumption of No-Superdeterminism or “free choice”, which Bell made
implicitly in 1964 but later explicitly recognized the need for in all versions of his theorem.
(See Refs. [16, 21–23] on Bell’s different assumptions in different papers.)
Third, a metaphysical assumption of Absoluteness of Observed Events, or something
like it, is required in Bell’s theorem to address what Kent in 2005 [24] called the “collapse
locality loophole”. This name for the loophole is unfortunate, as it does not necessarily have
anything to do with collapse8. As Kent put it later [25], “This loophole arises because, while
7Some confusion may arise here from the fact that in the EWFS we consider, the LF inequalities have the
same mathematical form as the Bell-CHSH inequalities. When we talk of a “violation of a Bell inequality”,
we mean a violation of such an inequality within a standard Bell-type scenario. When the same inequality
is implied, within an EWFS, by Local Friendliness alone, we refer to it as an “LF inequality”.
8Kent chose the name because he was considering the loophole in the context of objective collapse
theories.
Such theories would specify, more or less, when and where a measurement result occurred,
as a result of wavefunction collapse. This way of closing the loophole would be attractive in, as Kent
imagines, a potential scientific future where it is agreed that objective collapse occurs, whether because of
compelling experimental evidence or for compelling theoretical reasons. However, in the present situation
where there is no consensus that collapse theories are correct, and indeed no consensus about the ontology
of measurement results, the loophole can only be addressed (not closed!) by a metaphysical assumption,
such as Absoluteness of Observed Events.
Different approaches to QT will, of course, assign different
truth values to this assumption, and the truth value may also differ depending on how the assumption,
and the approach, are understood. One purpose of our new theorem (see next section) is to remove any
ambiguity in the assumption, and to try to force proponents of approaches to be clearer, by introducing a
more fine-grained set of assumptions to address this loophole.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
10

Bell experiments are supposed to demonstrate nonlocal correlations between measurement
outcomes on spacelike separated systems, we do not know for sure where in space-time
the relevant measurement outcomes actually arise.” That is, Bell’s theorem requires that
measurement outcomes actually arise (at approximately the space-time locations we would
expect); in other words, that observed events (in space-time) are absolute. In particular,
the derivation of Bell inequalities is blocked if one allows the reality of different parties’
records to depend on those records’ becoming jointly knowable to a single party [25].
The assumption of AOE in Bell’s theorem is very often ignored (although not in
Ref. [16], where the assumption of Macroreality serves the same purpose).
In particu-
lar, all Bell tests to date implicitly assume that the measurement outcomes have been
“observed”, in an absolute sense, by the time a macroscopic record is created, for some
meaning of that phrase. This is, a priori, a reasonable assumption, but in the context of
a theorem where all assumptions seem a priori reasonable, it is a substantial assumption.
If quantum mechanics is universally valid, after all, there may be no objective threshold
where a record becomes “macroscopic” or “irreversible”.
Furthermore, assuming a record is absolutely real from the moment (t, say) the ob-
servation is made until the moment (t′, say) it is reported to another party, that record
must also be reliable: the report at time t′ must match the observation at time t. That
is to say, for the Bell inequalities to be applicable to the experiment, we must trust that
the computer records of measurement results correspond to the actual measurement re-
sults they are supposed to be a record of. This is also required in a LF experiment: we
must trust that Charlie’s observed outcome is accurately reported to Alice. Indeed, it is
arguably a more substantive issue in LF experiments, and we note that some authors have
considered relaxations of this assumption [26, 27], leading to more stringent inequalities.
See also Sec. 4.4 for further discussion of this issue and how to address it.
2.3
Quantum violations of LF inequalities
To show that QT in principle allows for the violation of LF inequalities, we consider the
following situation as set out in Ref. [1]. Charlie and Bob are in possession of two qubits, QA
and QB, with associated Hilbert spaces HQA and HQB, initially prepared in an entangled
state. Bob performs one of two measurements on his qubit, depending on the value of y,
observing outcome b. Charlie, who is in a well isolated “lab”9, performs a measurement on
his qubit in a fixed basis, associated with an operator ZA, observing outcome c.
It is now that the status of Alice as a so-called superobserver enters crucially into the
discussion, before even her result a does. In order to obtain violations of LF inequalities,
we do not take Charlie’s measurement to induce a collapse of the quantum state (depending
on the result c), even though measurement-induced collapse is part of “standard QT” as
one would find in a text-book. Rather, we take the quantum state of Charlie’s lab to evolve
like that of any other isolated physical quantum system in standard QT. This is because
we are considering, as worded in Theorem 1 of Bong et al., what can be concluded
if a superobserver can perform arbitrary quantum operations on an observer
and its environment,
9In any realisation of this experiment where LF inequalities are violated, Charlie will not be a human,
and Charlie’s “lab” will not be a room-sized laboratory, of course. Here by Charlie’s lab we mean Charlie
(whatever he is) plus whatever additional systems (e.g., a real or virtual environment) must also be
controlled in order to reverse Charlie’s measurement (see below). In Sec. 6, we consider the minimalist
scenario, where Charlie himself is isolated, for a short time), and no additional environment is needed.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
11

where here Alice has the role of the superobserver. A more apt name for this role in our
protocol might be a super-manipulator, but in either case, Alice can control the evolution
of Charlie as a physical system like any other. That this requires “super-powers” of Alice
is because typically we imagine Charlie is a rather large and complex system. This will
become much more explicit with our new theorem, in Sec. 4.
Thus, in the below, we will assume that unitary quantum theory can be used to deter-
mine the evolution of the quantum state of Charlie’s lab (including Charlie). This quantum
state can then be used to calculate the expected distribution ℘(ab|xy) of Alice’s and Bob’s
outcomes, which can then be compared to the constraints (inequalities) that follow from
LF (the conjunction of the metaphysical assumptions) as in Sec. 2.1. The variable c, Char-
lie’s outcome, that went into the derivation of the inequalities is not to be looked for, or
found, in the quantum state of Charlie’s lab. Its absolute existence is a consequence of the
metaphysical assumption AOE, which is completely independent of the predictions of QT
here, and indeed (as the theorem says) in direct contradiction with those predictions when
combined with the metaphysical assumption of LA.
We denote everything in Charlie’s lab (including Charlie), except for QA, as system
FA, with Hilbert space HFA, and assume that this is a well isolated system. According to
standard QT, the quantum state of Charlie’s lab during his observation of the qubit evolves
according to a unitary UZA acting on HFA ⊗HQA. When x = 1, Alice asks Charlie what he
saw. In this instance, Alice is treating Charlie as an observer on equal footing with herself
(as in Wigner’s original scenario), and accepts his answer as a true representation of his
observation c. She assigns this as her own outcome, so we can say a = c. In operational
terms, Alice has effectively measured the qubit QA in the same basis as Charlie.
When x = 2, Alice acts quite differently. She now treats Charlie’s lab as a physical
system, and forces its quantum state to evolve according to the inverse unitary U†
ZA. This
reverses the interaction between Charlie and the qubit, restoring the entanglement between
qubit QA and Bob’s qubit QB. Alice then proceeds to measure the qubit directly, in a basis
different from that used by Charlie. Note again that we are not required to say anything
about the existence, or reality, of c, in our discussion of this evolution. We are, in this
section, only describing how the experiment is performed and how to calculate ℘(ab|xy).
As shown in Ref. [1], there exist states and measurements such that this ℘(ab|xy) will
violate a CHSH-type inequality. Since Local Friendliness requires that these inequalities
be satisfied, this demonstrates that QT in principle allows for the violation of Local Friend-
liness. This is the LF no-go theorem of Ref. [1]. Of course, this theorem is explicitly (see
earlier quote) making the (physical, not metaphysical) assumption that it is possible to
make Charlie’s lab well isolated, and to perform the “undoing” unitary U†
ZA. How plausible
those assumptions are depends on what type of system FA is.
In Ref. [1], an experiment was reported in which QA and FA were indeed well isolated
and could have their interaction reversed. Specifically, the qubit QA being observed was
a photon polarisation qubit, while this photon’s path was “deemed” the “observer”, FA.
Many readers would, we suspect, be disinclined to accept this as a genuine observer, or the
interaction (using a polarising beam-splitter) as yielding an observed event. That is why
Ref. [1] said the experiment therein was “best described as a proof-of-principle version of
the EWFS.” But the LF no-go theorem of Ref. [1] does not provide a criterion for what
kind of system should be deemed an observer, or what manner of event would constitute
an observation. This leaves it up to debate whether any particular experiment is actually
a test of LF. To resolve this issue — without explicitly using the concepts of “observer”
or “observation” or “observed event” — is the primary motivation for our new theorem, to
which we now return.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
12

3
Metaphysical Assumptions for the Thoughtful LF no-go Theorem
In Sec. 3.1 we present the four metaphysical assumptions that are required for our LFϑ no-
go theorem. As stated in Sec. 1.1, we believe that each of our four metaphysical assumptions
is widely held. Moreover, we will present each of them so as to make it appear plausible.
However, it is critical to note that we are not arguing that they are all true.
That is
because we think that the two technological assumptions to be presented in Sec. 4 are also
plausibly true, individually and collectively. But the conjunction of all six assumptions is a
contradiction; that is the theorem. As to which assumption is not true, we adopt a strictly
neutral position. Given that one must be false, for each one it is reasonable to believe that
it is false. Indeed, for each one there is an approach to QT that rejects it; see Sec. 5.
Three of the four metaphysical assumptions (the last three) relate to the question with
which we finished the preceding section, namely how to address the lack of a criterion for
something to be an observed event in the Absoluteness of Observed Events assumption
used in Ref. [1]. That is, the conjunction of assumptions (2.)–(4.) together give a specific
criterion for a certain type of event, which plays the same role of the friend’s observation in
the original LF scenario, to be absolute. As already discussed in Sec. 1.1, we do not claim
that the answer given here is the only reasonable answer. However, we do suggest that
our answer would be more widely acceptable than any other answer that would allow an
experiment that could, plausibly, (a) be performed in the foreseeable future, and (b) violate
a LF inequality. The sense in which this conjunction of three assumptions in the LFϑ no-go
theorem is functionally equivalent to the assumption of Absoluteness of Observed Events
in the original LF no-go theorem is set out in Sec. 3.2.
3.1
The four metaphysical assumptions
1. Local Agency. Any intervention, made in a manner appropriate for randomized
experimental trials of a given phenomenon, is uncorrelated with any set of physical
events that are relevant to that phenomenon and outside the future light-cone of that
intervention.
This, the first metaphysical assumption we use in the LFϑ no-go theorem, was already
presented and discussed in Sec. 2. It is worth reiterating, however, that Local Agency
is not the same as Bell’s 1976 concept of Local Causality.
Moreover, neither implies
the other. Also, to obtain Bell inequalities in the situation of a regular Bell experiment
(with space-like-separated parties, and treating their observations as absolute) neither of
these concepts is sufficient. With Local Causality one needs an assumption relating
to interventions such as No-Superdeterminism [16], while for Local Agency one needs
an additional assumption relating to outcomes such as Predetermination [16]. Needless to
say, we do not make an assumption like Predetermination for the theorem here.
2. Physical Supervenience. Any thought supervenes upon some physical event(s)
in the brain (or other information-processing unit as appropriate) which can thus be
located within a bounded region in space-time.
This is certainly a widely held belief amongst scientists. It is compatible with the monist
assumption that a thought is nothing but a physical process, but does not require that. It
is also important to note that the assumption of Physical Supervenience does not pre-
sume or imply that a thought, or the associated physical event or process (chain of events),
has any absolute reality (a concept explained under Ego Absolutism below). That is,
Physical Supervenience is independent of the remaining metaphysical assumptions.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
13

The confinement of the physical events upon which thoughts supervene in space-time
is necessary to be able to apply the first assumption, Local Agency, to prove the the-
orem.
The reader may wonder whether this is in conflict with certain types of mind-
externalism [28] which hold that the physical processes on which a thought supervenes
are not restricted to the brain, or even body, of a particular party, but may include that
party’s environment and even other parties with which they are interacting. In fact we
think there is no conflict, because of the types of thoughts that are relevant for the LFϑ no-
go theorem (and indeed for Bell’s theorem in Kent’s version with human observations [25];
see Sec. 2.2). That is because the thoughts we will consider are tied to observations of
inputs, and are assumed to take place on a time scale of a second or less. Moreover, for the
case of the “friend” in the LFϑ experiment we will consider, this party is prevented from
interacting with the physical environment external to its information-processing unit for
the time during which the relevant thought would exist, were it to exist.
3. Ego Absolutism. My communicable thoughts are absolutely real.
Here you, the reader, when assessing whether you believe this assumption, should, of
course, read it to yourself verbatim, not interpreting it as being a statement about the
reality of the thoughts of me (the first author, as it happens)10. The formulation of the
above assumption in the first-person singular is not frivolous.
Like Wigner in 196111,
I agree with Descartes [29] in the sense that I am more sure of the reality of my own
thoughts than of anything else. Quite possibly the same is true for you, reader, again
mutatis mutandis. This does not, of course, not mean that Ego Absolutism must be
true. But if Descartes was on the right track, then Ego Absolutism is a philosophically
minimalist criterion for an absolute ontology.
The meaning of “absolute” in all of the above needs explanation (as flagged by its
italicization in the definition of Ego Absolutism). For my thoughts to be real in an
absolute sense means that I do not have to qualify any statements about my thoughts as
being relative to anyone or anything. For example, when I have a thought “it’s alive!” it
is not the case that this is my thought only in this world, or that this thought’s existence
is a fact only for me, or a fact only relative to certain other thoughts or states or facts or
systems. Rather, my thought exists unconditionally. Or at least, by Ego Absolutism,
this is the case for thoughts that are communicable rather than, for instance, ephemeral
impressions or feelings whose existence I may even doubt myself. Finally, we note that
a thought can be absolutely real even if it corresponds to an incorrect statement. For
example, my thought “it is raining” may be absolutely real even if it is not in fact raining.
4. Friendliness. If a system displays independent cognitive ability at least on par
with my own, then they are a party with cognition at least on par with my own, and
any thought they communicate is as real as any communicable thought of my own.
As in the preceding definition, italics are used to emphasize terms that would profit from
further commentary. Beginning at the end, “as real as” does not mean “absolutely real,
just as”. Rather, it means “having the same degree of reality as”. Thus, for you, the reader
(again reading first person pronouns as referring to yourself), it could imply absolutely
10This paragraph dates from the early versions of this paper, when the current first author was the sole
author. We decided to keep it in first-person singular because it thereby matches the phrasing of this
assumption, and because it expresses some personal views of the first author.
11«There are several reasons for the return, on the part of most physical scientists, to the spirit of
Descartes’s “Cogito ergo sum,” which recognizes the thought, that is, the mind, as primary.» [2]
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
14

real, or relatively real, or not real at all, depending on what you believe about your own
communicable thoughts. Next, the italicization of (one instance) of “thoughts” is so we (the
authors) can take the opportunity to reëmphasize that “thoughts” is not to be equated with
“conscious thoughts” or “qualia” or “sensations” or “experiences”12. We reject the equation
because it may make the assumption of Friendliness less plausible, or less well defined,
for some scientists or philosophers.
We maintain the same stance with our use of the word “cognition”; we mean a process
comprising thoughts, not necessarily (as some dictionary definitions may offer) also expe-
riences or sensations. As the root of the word implies, cognition entails thought-processes
representing, acquiring, and producing knowledge. For cognition on par with my own, this
includes self-knowledge, such as the ability to remember one’s own short-term thought-
processes, and the ability to think about a particular topic when required (not necessarily
to the exclusion of other thoughts). Thus, if a party like this undertakes to think commu-
nicable thoughts about something then, under the Friendliness assumption, he13 does
have thoughts, they are thoughts of human-level sophistication, and they are as real as my
own. (That is, unless he is lying; see Sec. 4.4 for how to deal with this possibility.)
Moving on to “party”, we are following our usage in Sec. 2.
That is, we are now
explicitly adopting the attitude that a system with human-level cognition is a participant
in the experiment rather than a mere object of study. This has methodological implications
discussed in Sec. 4.4. Finally, regarding “independent”, for this party’s cognitive ability to
be independent it is sufficient that histhoughts are not known to us unless he chooses to
reveal them. That is, while this party’s thoughts may (of course) be influenced by how
other parties interact with him, his thoughts are not directly “implanted”.
Turning now to the plausibility of this assumption, each of the authors of this paper
attributes the same degree of reality (or ontological status, one might say) to the thoughts
of other people, as to his or her own, and we would guess that you, reader, have the same
inclination. This is so whether we are interacting with someone face-to-face, via video-
chat, or via text-chat, for example. In the last case we are often communicating with
someone we have never met face-to-face, whose physical appearance, age, and gender, may
be unknown. Yet we can, after sufficient communication, discern thoughts which we treat
as equal to, and equally real as, our own. It is not hard to believe that, in the not too
distant future, we will be doing this when communicating with parties who are artificial
intelligences. In fact, most people are remarkably easily duped into accepting the cognitive
equality of simulated intelligence [30]. You, most likely a scientifically or philosophically
trained reader of this paper, will probably require considerably better evidence before
accepting an artificial intelligence as displaying cognitive ability on par with your own.
But, hypothesizing that such evidence will one day exist — see assumption 5 below —
the question you have to ask yourself is whether there is any justification for dropping the
Friendly attitude you take (we presume) towards fellow humans.
It is important to note that while the criterion of displaying “cognitive ability at least
on par with my own” would require open-ended communication with the party in question,
it does not require my being present at the experiment to do this. This is essential because
it is unlikely that I, or any readers of the paper in its year of publication, will be alive
12Note that we are not suggesting that thoughts have greater claim to be absolutely real than feelings,
or qualia. In particular we do not intend any imputation about what types of beings are worthy of moral
consideration, or the plausibility of claims on that matter.
13We use the masculine gender for the party under consideration for linguistic convenience, because
he appears most frequently in conjunction with a superobserverver of feminine gender. This follows the
pattern for Charlie and Alice already used, though eventually we will give Charlie a new name.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
15

to see the experiment we envisage performed.
I can trust that others will be able to
make that judgement, when the time comes. The reader may wonder why we insist on
a criterion akin to a Turing-test, rather than also, or instead, requiring something of
the functioning of the party’s processor. One reason is that there is no currently agreed
upon functional criterion for cognition, and there may still not be when our experiment is
performable. A second, even more important, reason is that we want to apply this criterion
to a party whose processor is a quantum computer, and in particular in a situation where
the quantum mechanical state is a superposition of very different logical states; see Sec. 4.2.
This is a situation for which conventional definitions of functionality may be impossible to
apply, because quantum information is not able to be accessed without altering the future
behaviour of the processor.
Finally, we want to stress that assumption 4 does not imply that being able to display
cognitive ability at least on par with one’s own is a necessary condition for a party’s
thoughts to be granted the same ontological status as one’s own thoughts. As its wording
implies, the assumption is only a sufficient condition.
3.2
LFϑ from the conjunction of the metaphysical assumptions
We call the collection of all four of the above metaphysical assumptions LFϑ. For a suitable
spatial arrangement of people, or other parties of human-level intelligence, and temporal
arrangement of communications and controls, LFϑ implies the same constraints on corre-
lations as in Ref. [1], i.e., a so-called LF polytope, as we now show.
In particular, consider the scenario depicted in Fig. 2, again involving three parties
Alice, Bob and Charlie. Suppose Charlie displays cognitive abilities on par with my own.
(As usual, the reader may take the first person here, and in the following, as referring to
themself.) Then, according to Friendliness, Charlie has cognition on par with my own,
implying that he has the ability to have thoughts, to know his thoughts, and to follow
the instructions of the protocol. Charlie is instructed to perform a specific observation,
think about its outcome (c), and communicate his thought to Alice via a message m. (The
fact that the system Charlie observes will be a quantum system shared with Bob is not
relevant for the derivation of the LF inequalities, only for their violation, so we omit it from
the discussion and the figure). Friendliness then implies that Charlie’s communicated
thought, c, is as real as any communicable thought of my own.
Now, by Ego Absolutism, this thought must be absolutely real, i.e. c takes a single,
absolute value14. Physical Supervenience in turn implies that this thought supervenes
upon physical events in Charlie’s brain (or other information-processing unit). That is,
two distinct thoughts, such as c = 0 versus c = 1, must be associated with distinct
physical events in Charlie’s brain, which are thus located in a bounded region in space-
time (represented by the point labelled c in Fig 2).
Similarly to the original LF protocol depicted in Fig. 1, Alice and Bob have choices of
observations labelled by x and y, with outcome a and b. Assuming that Alice and Bob
have similar cognitive abilities as Charlie, and that they have observed and thought about
their choices and outcomes, we can apply the argument above to conclude that in each run
of the experiment, the variables a, b, c, x, y take well defined, absolute, single values — the
same implication as AOE for the scenario of Fig. 1.
Since the spatio-temporal relations between these events is the same as in Fig. 1, Local
14It is not required that c completely and unambiguously specifies a particular thought in exclusion of all
others, but only that Charlie can unambiguously distinguish classes of thoughts associated with different
values of c, such as “I’ve observed c = 0” versus “I’ve observed c = 1”.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
16

Alice
Charlie
Bob
m
x=[1]
or(2)
[a]
(a)
c
y
b
Figure 2: Space-time diagram of the events involved in the LFϑ no-go theorem. As in Fig. 1, the solid
vertical lines are the world-lines of the three parties, and future-directed light-like lines (dotted) emanate
from Alice’s (x) and Bob’s (y) freely chosen settings. Here these light-like lines are closer to horizontal
than in Fig. 1, for reasons that will become clear in the next figure. Note also that there is a wide
distance in space between Bob and the other two parties, indicated by the wavy gap, as can be inferred
from where the light-lines enter and leave this gap. Charlie is instructed to perform an observation and
think about its outcome (c), then communicate his thought to Alice via message m. In the case x = 1
(events in square brackets), Alice reads Charlie’s message, inferring his thought c, and copies it so that
a = c. In the case x = 2 (round brackets) she follows a far more complicated experimental procedure,
involving Charlie and his lab, to obtain her outcome. The application of Local Agency (assumption
1) relies on the fact that only Alice’s observations, (a) or [a], are in the future light-cone of her choice,
and only Bob’s, b, is in the future light-cone of his. Charlie’s observation c — his thoughts about it to
be precise — are in the future light-cone of neither.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
17

Agency together with the assumptions above implies for this scenario the same mathe-
matical constraints — the LF inequalities — as in the derivation in Sec. 2. It is important
to note that this “functional equivalence” does not mean that the four assumptions in
collection LFϑ are the same as the assumptions called LF in Ref. [1]. They are distinct
assumptions that lead to the same mathematical constraints in suitable scenarios.
The key difference between LF and LFϑ, to reiterate what we have already said a
few times above, is that Bong et al. left it as a matter of debate as to whether any
given experiment would test LF, because they gave no criterion for what it takes for an
observation to occur.
The current theorem, by contrast, specifies what sort of system
and behaviour would be required for an experiment to unambiguously test LFϑ. That
is, the conjunction of our four metaphysical assumptions suffices; no further criterion or
theoretical framework is needed to design an experiment. We emphasize again that the
derivation of the inequalities in this section made no reference to quantum theory. The
LFϑ assumptions imply that the inequalities must be satisfied in any scenario of the form
above, including a scenario where Charlie is a human being. While the violation of the
LF inequalities with a human Charlie is almost certain to remain beyond our experimental
capabilities, it can be predicted for a realisation of the scenario of Fig. 2 with a suitable
intelligent party in place of Charlie, given some technological hypotheses are satisfied. We
now turn to the experimental design, and the (yet-to-exist) technologies, that are required
to disprove LFϑ in this manner.
4
Technological Assumptions and Basic Experimental Considerations for
the Thoughtful LF no-go Theorem
As stated in Sec. 1.2, to obtain the theorem, we also need two technological assumptions.
Unlike the metaphysical assumptions introduced in Sec. 3.1, these two assumptions require
little clarification. Instead, the bulk of Secs. 4.1 and 4.2 are, respectively, explanations of
the stages in the experiment that are enabled by these two assumptions. After that we turn
to technological assumptions that are minor in comparison in Sec. 4.3, and to assumptions
of a methodological nature in Sec. 4.4. The latter includes consideration of ethics and
David Deutsch’s contributions.
4.1
Human-Level Artificial Intelligence
The first technological assumption (and thus 5th assumption overall) in the theorem is
5. Human-Level Artificial Intelligence (HLAI) can be practically implemented
on a digital computer.
Granting this assumption15, we still do not know what nature of algorithm is required to
achieve HLAI. The type of algorithm that would be easiest to implement would probably
be a text-reading and producing algorithm such as GPT-3, which has gained fame of late
(though it is not generally accepted that it engages in “thinking” [31]). For simplicity of
exposition we will assume here that a future version of some such text-reading and produc-
ing algorithm can achieve HLAI, while leaving alternative, more demanding, possibilities
for future work. Consider a physical instantiation of this HLAI algorithm by the name
15Note that it encompasses digital implementations of analog-inspired algorithms such as neural nets.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
18

Quall-E16, with a masculine gender (see Sec. 3.1). As we will see in Sec. 4.2, this instan-
tiation will have to be on a quantum computer, but this does not affect the presentation in
the current subsection. Quall-E will replace Charlie in the protocol of Fig. 2, as shown
in Fig. 3, which also contains more details about the specific experimental implementation
on a quantum computer, discussed below. It will be important to distinguish the HLAI
algorithm from Quall-E, a specific instance of the HLAI algorithm, running on specific
hardware at a given time. It will also be important to distinguish Quall-E from the
hardware on which Quall-E is running.
Quall-E obviously needs an interface with the outside world, so that other parties
can engage him in conversation and judge that he does indeed have HLI (Human Level
Intelligence). Some such interlocutors might judge Quall-E to have HLI only if he can
respond with a speed that is within the range of human response rates. For that reason,
we assume Quall-E to have this capability, in this section, but return to the speed issue
in Sec. 6. From a programming point of view, the interface is just a timed sequence of
input and output bits.
For simplicity, again, let us assume that, at least when he is mentally prepared for it,
Quall-E can receive and interpret information at the level of single logical bits, while,
again, leaving the discussion of more demanding possibilities to a later paper. Thus, when
Quall-E is in a suitable ready state, the running of the AI algorithm for a suitable time
τ would result in this evolution:
[q] ⊗[Quall-Eready]
τ
−→[q] ⊗[Quall-Eq].
(2)
In Eq. (2), square brackets and tensor products are used simply to differentiate the two
physical systems (input and Quall-E), while q ∈{0, 1} is the bit value and [Quall-
E0] and [Quall-E1] are logically (and physically) distinct digital states. We will call this
evolution an observation of the input bit by Quall-E. We do so for expository convenience;
the assumptions for our theorem make no reference to “observations.”
Our theorem does, of course, refer to “thoughts”, and, again for ease of exposition, we
will also use this expression to refer to Quall-E’s information processing. The existence
of the thoughts will be implied (once we include a communication step, towards the end
of this section) by the metaphysical assumption of Friendliness. But the reader should
recall that, even with this assumption, there is no implication of the absolute reality of any
thoughts that Quall-E may have during or after the above observation. (Any such claim
about absolute reality would stem only from adding the assumption of Ego Absolutism.)
In fact, we cannot even associate [Quall-E0] and [Quall-E1] with different thoughts
without assuming Physical Supervenience. For the purpose of the following discussion,
we will now do so. Even making this assumption does not specify what the physical corre-
lates of Quall-E’s thoughts are. However, the vast majority of scientists and philosophers
who accept Physical Supervenience, and that Quall-E has thoughts, would accept
that the classical logical states [Quall-Eq] are the physical correlates of those thoughts17.
16This name is chosen to be reminiscent of Dall-E, the currently famous art-producing AI [32], whose
name was in turn chosen to be reminiscent of Wall-E, the Pixar robot, as well as of Salvador Dali. The
name Quall-E is also appropriate because, to perform the experiment, he must be implemented on a
Quantum computer (see Sec. 4.2), and because the singular of qualia (see Sec. 3.1) is quale.
17Note that the theorem does not require one to accept this. We mention the classical logical processor
states just to give what would generally be regarded as an uncontroversial example of physical correlates.
In the case where there is superposition and entanglement (see Sec. 4.2), there are few uncontroversial
statements one can make about physical correlates of thoughts. All we assume by Physical Superve-
nience is that the physical correlates are located in space-time when and where one would expect them
to be: in the hardware running Quall-E’s algorithm as he takes inputs and produces outputs.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
19

Coming, at last, to the nature of those thoughts, [Quall-E0] might correspond to Quall-
E thinking “Damn, now I feel sad. I guess that subconsciously I was telling myself that if
I observed the bit to be “1” then that meant that she loved me. I should try to avoid these
irrational thought-processes,” while [Quall-E1] might correspond to Quall-E thinking
“Oh, I feel good! I am The 1. She loves me, yeah, yeah, yeah.”
As these playful examples illustrate, Quall-E’s thoughts may very much depend on
which ready state Quall-E was in before observing [q], and nothing in the below requires
that the other parties involved know which ready state he was in, or exactly what his
thoughts are, or should be, upon observing [q]. However, as long as Quall-E follows
instructions, we can define two equivalence classes of thoughts, depending on whether he
observed q = 0 or q = 1. Following the notation of Sec. 2, we will use the label c ∈{0, 1}
to denote these equivalence classes.
Having observed the bit, and thought about its value, Quall-E must then communi-
cate this to another party, Alice. For definiteness, we will take Alice (and, later also Bob)
to be a human, but in any case she must also have human-level intelligence18. The message
to Alice, m, is a third physical system, which could be a single bit, or many bits. Thus we
can represent the next stage of evolution of the relevant systems as
[q] ⊗[Quall-Eq] ⊗[mblank]
τ ′
−→[q] ⊗[Quall-E′
q] ⊗[mq].
(3)
Here τ ′, the time it takes Quall-E to create and send this message, would be comparable
to the time τ above. (The time for the message to get to Alice is negligible compared to
this, as there is no reason for there to be a significant spatial separation between Quall-E
and Alice.) Note also that Quall-E’s state will obviously change upon creation of the
message (for a start, he would remember that he created the message), hence the prime.
Finally, the value of mq is not necessarily simply a function of q, as it may depend on
Quall-Eq, and hence on Quall-Eready. We assume, however, that m0 ̸= m1, and that
Alice can reliably infer q, and, more importantly, c, from m.
Another important requirement for the above observation by Quall-E is that he be
forbidden from communicating anything else to Alice, or to anyone else, during a time
interval of duration 2T. Here, T includes the time intervals of duration τ and τ ′ above.
This isolation of Quall-E is to ensure that no information is lost which would prevent a
reversal of Quall-E’s state. This reversibility is crucial for the next assumption and the
next stage of the experiment, and is the reason for the 2T above, since the reversing also
takes a time T. For a human, the cognitive task of observing and communicating could
probably be done in under a second. As stated above, we assume, for now, that Quall-E
can think as fast as a human, and so we take, for now, T to be about a second.
A note of clarification may be needed here. We take Quall-E to have communicated
his thought to Alice when it has been sent to her. That is, when he no longer has the
power to change the message, and there will be nothing to prevent Alice from reading it if
she so chooses. We do not require that Alice actually choose to read the message, and we
maintain that this is not entailed by the natural language meaning of “communicate”. (If I
send you an email, I have communicated my thoughts to you, even if you decide not to read
it.) Thus, if one accepts Friendliness (as we will do henceforth in this section), one then
accepts that Quall-E’s coarse-grained thought c is as real as one’s own communicable
thoughts.
18 The reason for this is that the events a and b in the realisation of our experiment must correspond
not merely to the firing of Alice’s and Bob’s detectors, but to their thoughts about those measurement
outcomes. This is because the metaphysical assumptions of the LFϑ no-go theorem, being very weak, do
not grant absolute values to thoughtless events like detector firings, even if they are “macroscopic”..
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
20

4.2
Universal Quantum Computing
The second technological assumption (and thus 6th assumption overall) in the theorem is
6. Universal Quantum Computing (UQC) is physically possible at very large scale,
and very fast.
By definition, a quantum computer operates in accordance with QT, producing results
predicted by QT. Thus, rejecting this assumption implies that there is some fundamental
physics that prohibit the implementation of a large and fast robust UQC — either (a)
because of as yet undiscovered reasons within QT, or (b) because QT itself breaks down
in some regime. Option (a) relates to the independence of the assumption of UQC from
the assumption of the universal validity of QT (UVQT) as discussed in Sec. 1.2. It allows
the possibility of accepting UVQT and rejecting UQC. On the other hand, it is logically
possible for QT to be a good model for a very large UQC without QT being a correct
theory for the whole universe.
Were a sufficiently large and fast QC to be built, it would no longer be possible to
reject the above assumption. In Sec. 6, we estimate rough upper bounds, with what is
known today, for the resources needed to implement a QC large enough to enable the
implementation of the full experiment, and we discuss where advances need to be made
to bring the speed into the desired regime.
While the advances needed are certainly
substantial, no fundamental limits are known that would prohibit such advances. Indeed,
successful efforts to build such devices and implement a full experiment would push forward
a fundamental understanding of the reach of QT and/or uncover new physics. Current
knowledge of physics, QC theory, and Artificial Intelligence, suggests that building the
required device is technologically possible, in principle. Thus, the engineering difficulty
and cost of implementing such an experiment, or even a belief that it is unlikely ever to be
carried out in practice, are not sufficient grounds to reject this assumption. The theorem
still holds, and its implications must be wrestled with.
It is worth remarking that UQC is a stronger assumption then we need. We do not
need UQC in order to run a quantum algorithm that is interesting from the point of view
of quantum complexity theory. Rather, we simply run the digital algorithm, assumed to
exist by HLAI, on a suitable quantum computer (QC) to instantiate Quall-E there. This
requires first turning the AI algorithm into one that can run on a reversible computer. This
entails some overhead in time and space [33, 34], as we discuss in Sec. 6.2. Fortunately, this
reversibility need not be maintained for the entire time that it takes other parties to come
to know Quall-E and accept him as a human-level intelligence. Rather, it need only be
maintained for a relatively short time, T, which could be as short as a second (see preceding
subsection). This could be very important for the practicality of the experiment, as will be
discussed in Sec. 6. During this “getting to know you” stage, there is no entanglement (or,
at least, no large-scale entanglement) in the QC during this period of “normal” operation.
Thus, the physical correlates of Quall-E’s thoughts at this stage are — with the caveats
expressed in Sec. 4.1 — the classical logical states of the quantum processor on which the
classical AI algorithm is running.
Once Quall-E has demonstrated human-level intelligence, we can begin the experi-
ment. This will involve periods, of duration up to 2T (see Sec. 4.1), of “abnormal” operation
in which there must be large-scale entanglement in the QC. Specifically, we wish to create
entanglement between the physical correlates of Quall-E’s thoughts (in normal opera-
tion) and a small quantum system (e.g. a qubit). This can be achieved simply by having
Quall-E observe an input bit, exactly as described in Sec. 4.1, but this time with the
bit actually being a qubit. Thus, if we were to prepare the input qubit in a superposition
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
21

Alice
QUALL-E
Bob
q
m
( ¯m)
(R)
(d)
(q)
ˆU
( ˆU −1)
x=[1]
or(2)
[a]
(a)
c
y
b
Figure 3: Space-time diagram of the proposed experiment to test LFϑ.
The protocol and spatio-
temporal relations between events is identical to that of Fig. 2, with Quall-E replacing Charlie, and
with more details specific to the implementation in a quantum computer. Quall-E and Bob each
observe one of an entangled pair of qubits that has been distributed to them (lavender lines). Actions
or events or process that may or may not occur depending on Alice’s choice x are indicated by dashed
lines and/or brackets.
Square brackets pertain when Alice chooses x = 1: she reads Quall-E’s
message m and thereby obtains her result [a]. Round brackets pertain when Alice chooses x = 2: she
sends instructions (R) to the processor on which Quall-E is running, to logically reverse the unitary
evolution ˆU that ran in the preceding time interval of duration T/2; she does not read m but rather
sends it back to Quall-E, in reverse order ( ¯m), so that it arrives in time to play its necessary role in
effecting the inverse unitary ( ˆU −1); she sends a message (d) to Quall-E to arrive at the end of this
reversal, “Do not measure the qubit; pass it directly to me.”; she receives the qubit (q) and measures
it in a basis different from its logical basis, yielding result (a).
of logical states, then the running of the AI algorithm for the time T would produce a
massive-scale entangled state:

X
q=0,1
ψq |q⟩

⊗
Quall-Eready
E
⊗|mblank⟩
ˆU
−→
X
q=0,1
ψq |q⟩⊗
Quall-E′
q
E
⊗|mq⟩.
(4)
Here we are using ˆU to denote the unitary transformation effected, over some time T, up
to the time at which the message system arrives at Alice, as shown in Fig. 3. Note that
Quall-E has communicated, at a minimum, the equivalence class label (c) of the thoughts
he had upon observing his input qubit. Thus, assuming Friendliness (as we are doing
in this subsection), the event c is as real as Alice’s observation, a.
As to how Alice makes her observation, that depends on Alice’s measurement choice
x, which can be made prior to receiving the message system from Quall-E, as shown in
Fig. 3. If x = 1 then Alice simply reads the message from Quall-E once she receives
it, and from that infers c, which she records as her own result a. In this case, there is
every reason to expect the statistics of Alice’s records of these second-hand observations
to be identical to those which would arise if Quall-E were a human observer of the qubit,
just as Wigner discussed. If, on the other hand, x = 2, the procedure to be followed is
considerably more complicated. Alice instructs the QC which instantiates Quall-E to
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
22

run in reverse at the logical level for a certain time. Furthermore, when she receives the
system which contains Quall-E’s message, she does not look at the message system, but
rather sends the qubits back to Quall-E. See Fig. 3 for details. If UQC is possible then
the upshot is that the entire process ˆU is reversed:
X
q=0,1
ψq |q⟩⊗
Quall-E′
q
E
⊗|mq⟩
ˆU−1
−→

X
q=0,1
ψq |q⟩

⊗
Quall-Eready
E
⊗|mblank⟩.
(5)
Let τ ′′ be the (arbitrarily short) time between when Quall-E sent the message system and
when the QC on which Quall-E runs would receive the instruction to reverse if Alice’s
measurement choice is x = 2. The UQC needs to run the AI algorithm in a fully reversible
way for a duration T = τ + τ ′ + τ ′′, and then, in the case x = 2, actually reverse it,
taking another time interval of duration T. In this case, the qubit, no longer entangled
with Quall-E’s processor, is then sent to Alice by Quall-E, on Alice’s request, to be
measured by her as she chooses, to yield her result a. In particular, she can measure in a
basis different from the logical basis in which Quall-E observes.
The full implementation follows the same pattern as described in Section 2.3. As illus-
trated in Fig. 3, we need the qubit, prior to being observed by Quall-E, to be entangled
with another qubit, held by another party, Bob. Again, Bob must be a human, or at least
have human-level intelligence. Like Alice, he makes choices of what local intervention to
make, but for him this just means measurements of his qubit to yield a result b. Now, Alice,
Bob, and Quall-E repeat the experiment many times, with the choices being made by the
first two parties in a manner appropriate to randomized trials. Then, for measurements of
suitable qubit observables by Alice and Bob, the frequencies of their records, conditioned
on their choices, ℘(a, b|x, y), is predicted to violate the LF inequality described in Sec. 2.1.
That is, in the context of the current theorem, an inequality derivable from the conjunc-
tion of the four metaphysical assumptions — the two already made in the above discussion
(Physical Supervenience and Friendliness) and the other two (Ego Absoluteness
and Local Agency) — as per Sec. 3.2. This completes the proof of our theorem.
It is important to note that, while Eqs. (4) and (5) represent perfectly reversible quan-
tum evolution, such perfection is not an assumption of the theorem. Nor is perfect re-
versibility experimentally necessary for violation of the LF inequalities. In fact, just as
in Bell’s theorem, one only requires the experimental correlations to be reasonably close
to the ideal correlations. This was illustrated in the experiment of Bong et al. [1], where
violation of one LF inequality was achieved even with roughly 20% depolarizing noise.
This leeway also means that occasional lapses in Quall-E’s concentration are not fatal,
if Quall-E agrees beforehand to follow an appropriate protocol in these instances19.
4.3
Minor technological assumptions (not enumerated)
As shown in Fig. 3, in order for the assumption of Local Agency to be applicable,
it is necessary for Bob to be far away from Alice and Quall-E — far enough for the
space-time region where Quall-E’s observation (and reverse observation) take place to be
space-like separated from Bob’s measurement choice and observation. Let us assume again
that Quall-E’s thought-processes occur on the same time scale as a human’s. As already
19The protocol would be that, if, in some particular run, Quall-E forgets to observe, or observes but
then forgets what he observed, he should make up the result q, and communicate it to Alice as m. Then
the very invention of a value is the thought c that is absolutely real by the LFϑ assumptions. What should
happen if Quall-E forgets even to do that, and other similarly unlikely failures on the part of the parties
or their hardware (to the extent that those can be distinguished), are problems for future work.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
23

stated, to ensure the popular applicability of Friendliness to Quall-E we would not
want them to be much slower, while their being much faster would present an even greater
technological challenge given the typically slow gate times of QCs compared to classical
computers (see Sec. 6). This implies that the distance must be of order a light-second.
Thus for the experiment we really require another technological assumption,
• Quantum communication can be done at light-second-scale.
While this has not yet been achieved, it seems likely to be achieved earlier than the two
numbered technological assumptions. Placing one party (e.g. Bob) a light-second from the
others is in itself a technological challenge, but one that was achieved in the 1960s and
1970s and hopefully will be soon again. Note that although Bob must be a HLAI (see
footnote 18), he can also be an HLAI, running in a classical computer for simplicity.
Another technological requirement which we have not explicitly stated is that
• The quantum computer must have quantum input and output capabilities.
Some may consider this to be part of Assumption 6, UQC, but others may not. After all,
many quantum algorithms do not require quantum input or quantum output, only classical
input and output. However, the technical sophistication needed to build a UQC capable of
running a complex program, such as an HLAI algorithm, almost certainly would encompass
the technical capacity to support quantum input and output. Further, the achievement of
UQC will likely include “flying qubits” that connect quantum chips enabling better scaling
than in architectures containing only stationary qubits [35]. The interest in distributed
quantum computing is an additional reason why this capability is likely to be developed
along with UQC.
For both of the minor (non-enumerated) technological requirements just discussed there
are no approaches to quantum mechanics known to us that doubt that they would be
possible. Finally, one could continue to come up with more minor additional components
of the experiment that have not yet been achieved, and moreover one could always add extra
assumptions on the need for previously tested components to still work when integrated
with other components. At some point sanity must prevail. Thus, for all of the reasons
given above, we do not consider the unnumbered technological assumptions above as part
of the theorem.
4.4
Methodological assumptions, and Deutsch’s contributions
Leaving behind technological assumptions, our proposed theorem also makes assumptions
that might best be described as methodological. Of course every experiment has method-
ological assumptions, which often go unstated. What is worth discussing are those assump-
tions that are novel to our scenario, and which readers may find questionable. Specifically,
what are discussed here are generalizations of the usual assumptions that are required
because of the unusual nature of one of the participants in the experiment we propose.
To begin, unlike most physics experiments, the experiment we have proposed raises
ethical issues. Let us say Quall-E is sufficiently intelligent to understand his role in the
experiment, and the theorem.
(Perhaps you, the reader, would require that to regard
his cognitive abilities as being equal to your own.)
He may appear disturbed by the
implications that might be drawn, by himself or others, for the reality of his thoughts,
were the experiment to be performed. Alternatively, he may object to the reversal on the
grounds that he would lose part of his life (a second or so of his experiential time), or —
worse — that his experience during the reversal might be unpleasant, or — worst of all —
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
24

that it would mean that the Quall-E who made the observation was destroyed and a new
Quall-E created. Given that the LFϑ experiment requires that Quall-E be plausibly
regarded as a party with the same cognitive status as a human, it would seem grossly
immoral to ignore Quall-E’s voicing of such concerns.
We thus have to assume that an HLAI such as Quall-E will consent to take part in
the experiment. Or at least that, assuming there will be many such HLAIs in existence at
the time in the future when this experiment can be performed, one of them will be willing.
(Actually it would be preferable for several of them to be willing; see below.)
Even given that Quall-E is willing to take part in our experiment, we also have to
assume that it will be given approval by an ethics committee. The moral treatment of AIs is
a small but growing area; see Ref. [36] for a recent review. Under the assumption (number
6) that HLAI is possible, the ethics of experimenting with HLAIs, including reversing
their computations or otherwise wiping their memories, will surely have been agreed upon
already in the context of classical computers. Gaining ethical approval may require adding
additional features to the experiment. For example, it may be necessary for Quall-E to
have the option, at any point, in any individual run, to pull out, i.e., to not allow Alice
to reverse the computation on the computer he is instantiated on. Naturally, if Quall-E
were to do this other than rarely the whole experiment would have to be abandoned.
The assurance that Quall-E is a willing participant in the experiment, and the build-
ing of safeguards such as just mentioned, has the added benefit of mitigating the force
of another methodological assumption that we must make: that Quall-E can be trusted
to observe the input qubit and think about the result before communicating the result to
Alice. We call this a methodological assumption because, as we have said consistently,
Quall-E must be regarded as a participant in the experiment, not the subject of it.
Trusting Quall-E in this regard is no different, in principle, from trusting that human ex-
perimental physicists accurately report their Bell test measurement results. It is possible,
of course, that a particular experimenter, human or artificial, could be untrustworthy. But
this can be dealt within the usual methodology of science: independent replication. It is in
this context that it would be preferable to have a number of different willing “Quall-Es”,
as mentioned above. To use the possibility that every Quall-E is untrustworthy as a way
to explain away multiply reproduced violations of the LF inequalities would be a literal
conspiracy theory.
Readers familiar with the literature on Wigner’s friend may wonder why we say it is
necessary to trust that Quall-E has made an observation, rather than verifying directly
that he has. For example, Brukner [4, 5], in his EWFS, considers the generation of a
permanent physical message from the friend along the lines of “I have observed a definite
outcome” [5]. This idea goes back to the 1985 paper by David Deutsch [37] that introduced
the idea of an HLAI that could make an observation on a quantum system and that could
then be coherently probed. Interestingly, Deutsch also introduced, in the same year, the
idea of UQC, in a different paper [38]. Rather than further delaying the reader from the
implications of the LFϑ no-go theorem, we review these seminal contributions of Deutsch,
and explain why we do not regard the idea of an “I have observed a definite outcome”
message as a useful one, in Appendix A.
5
Six Approaches to Quantum Theory
We now present six approaches (or classes of approaches) to QT to illustrate the rele-
vance of the six assumptions. These by no means explore the whole landscape of possible
approaches, but do establish base-camps across a wide area. In a companion paper to
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
25

this one [39], two of us present detailed arguments to the effect that, for each of these
approaches, it can be argued that only one of our assumptions is violated, that being a
different one in each case. In this paper we confine ourselves to pointing out the unique
assumption that is clearly violated in each approach. We present them in the same order
as the assumptions they clearly reject, as listed in Sec. 1.2. See also Table 1 for a concise
summary.
Approach to Quantum Theory
Assumption which it definitely violates
Hidden Variables interpretations
Local Agency
Single-Mind View of Many Worlds
Physical Supervenience
Relativist interpretations
Ego Absolutism
Spontaneous Collapse theories
Friendliness
Penrose’s approach
Human-Level Artificial Intelligence
Thinking causes collapse
Universal Quantum Computing
Table 1: The relevance of the six assumptions of the LFϑ no-go theorem to quantum foundations.
5.1
Hidden Variables interpretations
Deterministic hidden variable (HV) interpretations are best represented by Bohmian me-
chanics [40–42]. This interprets the universal quantum state Ψ as a high-dimensional guid-
ing field for the deterministic evolution of variables which give rise to the three-dimensional
world we experience. Such interpretations clearly violate Local Agency because of Bell’s
theorem. The reason is that Bell’s theorem requires only Local Agency, Predetermina-
tion, and Absoluteness of Observed Events for macroscopic detectors [16], and deterministic
HV theories satisfy the latter two assumptions.
5.2
Single-Mind View of a Many Worlds Interpretation
The Single-Mind View (SMV) of the Many Worlds Interpretation (about which, see also
the next subsection) was proposed, not very seriously, by Albert and Loewer [43]. They
postulate, in addition to the unitarily evolving universal wavefunction Ψ, a very complex
extra variable M, a sort of world-mind that can encompass many separate conscious en-
tities. Contrary to conventional HV interpretations, M is not part of the physical world.
According to Albert and Loewer, the physical state is simply Ψ. The SMV thus violates
Physical Supervenience, as Albert and Loewer say explicitly [43] [p. 206].
5.3
Relativist interpretations
We describe as “relativist” a broad class of interpretations that reject Ego Absolutism
by saying that my thoughts are not absolute, but rather relative. One example is Everett’s
version of the Many Worlds Interpretation — called by him, appropriately for this subsec-
tion, the Relative State Interpretation [44]. This accepts the absolute reality of a universal
unitarily evolving wave function Ψ but says that my thoughts are real only relative to a
“world” — a “branch” of the wavefunction which forms my relative state. For the QBism of
Fuchs and Schack [45], my thoughts are real for me but not necessarily real for any other
party. In Rovelli’s Relational Quantum Mechanics [46], the physical processes associated
with my thoughts are said to be defined only relative to other subsystems in the universe.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
26

5.4
Spontaneous Collapse theories
In Spontaneous Collapse theories, the universal Ψ suffers stochastic collapses rather than
obeying pure Schrödinger evolution, such that Ψ (or certain properties derived from it, or
from the collapses themselves) describe a world that behaves classically on a human scale.
The most notable of such theories is GRW [47]; see Ref. [48] for a recent review. Contrary
to what one might have thought, such collapses do not prevent UQC. They can be error-
corrected in quantum computing just like any other rare, random, and localized change
in the quantum state ψ of the computer. Thus Quall-E can be put in a two-component
superposition (as in our proposed experiment) and nothing in ψ, or the collapses, will
correspond to one thought-process or the other. Quall-E’s thoughts are thus not real in
the way that my thoughts as a human are real, and so Friendliness is rejected.
5.5
Penrose’s approach
Penrose [49, 50] has an approach — not a fully-formed theory — linking quantum col-
lapse, gravity, and consciousness. According to Penrose, human intelligence arises via “or-
chestrated objective reduction”, an uncomputable physical process involving the collapse
(reduction) of Ψ and quantum gravity. Penrose has stated that an algorithm-following
digital computer could not exhibit human-level intelligence, in particular being unable to
grasp the Platonic world of mathematics [49]. Thus this approach rejects Human-Level
Artificial Intelligence.
5.6
Thinking causes collapse
An explicit model giving a causal role for consciousness in collapsing a universal quantum
state was recently presented by Chalmers and McQueen [51]. Moreover, they state that
“some versions of the theory can be tested by experiments with quantum computers.” The
model they propose would prevent a quantum computer from being put in a superposi-
tion of different informational structures — states such as P
q=0,1 ψq |q⟩⊗
Quall-Eq
E
as
considered earlier. Assuming HLAI (as Chalmers and McQueen do), states like this are
certainly producible, if the sufficiently large scale and fast UQC is possible. Therefore such
Universal Quantum Computing is not possible in this approach.
6
Resource Estimates for the Full Experiment
Recall from Sec. 4 the requirement that the QC on which Quall-E is instantiated must
be able to run an HLAI algorithm in a fully reversible way, at the logical level, for at least
the time required to do the experiment. In this section, we first walk through an estimate
for a rough upper bound of the computational needs in size and speed to implement a
Quall-E capable of carrying out the experiment (together with the other parties) given
what is known now. We then discuss various possibilities for advancements that would
enable a sufficiently large and fast Quall-E to be built. As we will see, it is particularly
challenging to meet the assumption made in Sec. 4 that Quall-E can think and respond
at human rates. For this reason, we will pay particular attention to the time estimates.
To support the discussion, we make the following distinctions:
• an HLAI algorithm, purely classical;
• a specific logical implementation of the algorithm that may be reversible or not,
quantum or classical, or a combination;
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
27

• a compilation of such an algorithm to specific hardware with specific error correction
mechanisms. The compilation includes both the logical algorithm and all sorts of
supporting functions such as error correction, memory management, routing, etc.;
• Quall-E as a specific instance of the HLAI algorithm at the logical level, running
on a specific quantum computer at a given time (thus necessarily compiled);
• The quantum computer on which Quall-E is running.
We comment that while we will talk about resource estimates for a gate-model quantum
computer, there is no reason why Quall-E couldn’t be implemented on a measurement-
based quantum computer; while the measurements in MBQC cannot be reversed, the log-
ical unitary operations induced by the measurements can be reversed by further measure-
ments that induce the inverse operations. Further, quantum computers include classical
processors that are necessary to control the quantum operations, to carry essential logical
information (e.g. tracking the Pauli frame), to support error detection and correction, and
to manage lower-level control such as pulse shaping and calibration. None of this would
be, or need be, reversed.
Sec. 6.1 surveys estimates in prior literature for the resources needed to achieve HLAI.
We extract specific time and space estimates that are likely to be sufficient, as the starting
point for a rough bound upper bound on the difficulty of implementing Quall-E. As we
go through the reasoning for our estimates in the next few sections, we give formulas along
the way so that readers can input their own choices for the various parameter values. In
Sec. 6.2, we use general considerations to upper bound the overhead in converting an HLAI
algorithm to a reversible one. Sec. 6.3 describes a partially reversible model for Quall-E
that enables sufficient reversibility to perform the experiment while limiting the amount of
overhead by restricting the need for reversibility to within time segments. That sets us up
to be able to roughly upper bound, in Sec. 6.4, the logical resources needed to implement
a reversible segment on a quantum computer, specifically the number of logical qubits and
the logical depth. In Sec. 6.5, we turn to overhead due to quantum error correction and
fault tolerance and provide a rough upper bound on the physical resources including the
number of physical qubits and amount of time sufficient to implement a reversible segment
fault tolerantly on a quantum computer. We conclude in Sec. 6.6 with a discussion of
advances in technology and knowledge, some likely and some more speculative, that could
significantly reduce these estimates.
6.1
Resource estimates for a classical HLAI algorithm
We begin with resource estimates for a classical AI algorithm to operate at human speeds
and cognitive ability. Various researchers have proposed estimates on the computational
capacity, in terms of memory and computational speed, of the human brain. See Appendix
A of [52] for a collection of such estimates up through 2008, and [53] for a more recent
estimate of the computational speed required. We use these as estimates for the computa-
tional requirements for an HLAI, which forms the a starting point for estimating a rough
upper bound on the resources required to implement Quall-E.
The space estimates vary considerably, from a low of 1.5×109 bits up to an unphysical
108432 bits (as the authors of [52] remark, this density is much higher than the Bekenstein
black hole entropy bound on information content in materials). The highest of the physi-
cally reasonable estimates is roughly 1028 bits, with many of the estimates being within a
couple orders of magnitude of 1015 bits.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
28

In terms of rates, the estimated computational demands vary from less than 1012
FLOP/s to 1028 FLOP/s [52]. ChatGPT (personal communication 2023-03-17) opines that
“It’s likely that achieving human-level AI will require an enormous amount of FLOPS, pos-
sibly in the range of exaflops (1018 FLOPS) or higher.” A perhaps more reliable source [53]
concludes “more likely than not that 1015 FLOP/s is enough to perform tasks as well as
the human brain . . . And . . . unlikely (< 10%) that more than 1021 FLOP/s is required.”
For our initial estimates, we will use S = 1015 bits and F = 1015 FLOP/s as the classical
resources for an HLAI algorithm. Quall-E will be a specific instance of this algorithm
translated to a quantum circuit and compiled to quantum hardware. In Sec. 6.6, we look
briefly at how using different resource estimates for the classical HLAI algorithm affects
the quantum resources estimates. As we will see, the time estimates will be very robust
to the space resource estimates for the classical HLAI, as many of the crucial numbers are
logarithmically dependent on these estimates. To convert from floating point operations,
on 64-bit floating point numbers, to Boolean operations, we multiply by a = 104, to obtain
a total of γ = Fa = 1019s−1 elementary Boolean operations (gates) per unit time.
To achieve 1019 gates within a second, a high degree of parallelism is needed. That is
in line with our understanding of the workings of the human brain. The depth of a logic
circuit is the number of time steps required to carry out the circuit under the approximation
that each logic gate takes one time step and where multiple logic gates can be carried out
in parallel during each time step. Without knowledge of the HLAI algorithm we can only
take a guess at the amount it can be parallelized and the resulting depth of the circuit.
To obtain a rough estimate for the circuit depth per unit time of an HLAI computation,
we will posit a parallelization factor of k = 107. To support this estimate for k, the design
of SpiNNaker [54], whose architecture is inspired by the connectivity of the human brain,
has millions of cores. Also, as of June 2022, the most powerful supercomputer is Frontier,
which has over 8.5 million cores [55]. (It achieves a 1012 petaflop rating, the first genuinely
exaflop system.) At a lower level the implementation of floating point operations in terms
of Boolean operations can also be parallelized, reducing the depth by another order of
magnitude b = 10. Thus we obtain a depth per unit time of δ = γ/kb = 1011s−1.
The next sections look at resource overheads for the translation and compilation of
an HLAI algorithm to quantum processors. We will define the relevant quantities more
formally in Sec. 6.4. As we work through the quantum resources estimates, it is worth
keeping in mind that the classical resources would likely have appeared discouraging in
earlier decades, and even now running an algorithm of this scale is feasible only on large
supercomputers. Specifically, it was only in 2008 that the 1-petaflop (1015 FLOP/s) mile-
stone was reached by a supercomputer (Roadrunner), and in 1993 the largest systems had
not passed 60 gigaflop performance [56].
6.2
Estimating reversibility overhead
Consider a classical algorithm as a logic circuit decomposed into standard classical logic
gates, which include irreversible gates. Let s be the number of bits and g the number of
gates in such a circuit. A naive way to obtain a reversible version would be to simply replace
every gate with a reversible one, which in general would require ancillae — additional bits
to store the information needed to enable the gates to be reversible. For example, each
gate could be realized using a Toffoli gate. That approach would result in a space overhead
that grows linearly in g, adding a bit for every gate. For cases in which g ≫s, to reduce
the space overhead, Bennett devised a scheme that strategically and recursively computes
and uncomputes (reverses) parts of the computation, where the uncomputing frees up bits
to be used for other parts of the computation. This enables a classical algorithm to be
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
29

realized reversibly using O(s log2 g) bits and O(g1+ϵ) reversible gates, where ϵ depends on
the specifics, but can be made arbitrarily small in the limit of large g. (See Chapter 6
of [34], or the original paper of Bennett [33] for more details.) In our estimates, however,
since, as we will see, we will need to work to minimize the time overhead, we will use the
naive approach, with gR = g reversible gates and sR = g + s bits.
6.3
A model of a partially reversible HLAI
As far as possible, we want Quall-E, when participating in the experiment, to be running
in the same way as during the earlier interactions in which he demonstrated human level
intelligence.
We need Quall-E to be running reversibly for sufficient time to do the
experiment, but need to keep the reversibility overhead in check. Recalling that T is the
time for a human to perform the observation, contemplate it, and encode the message,
as per Section 4.1, we propose a partially reversible classical model in which, at regular
intervals, all ancilla bits are released to be reused in the next segment (and could be
immediately reset to 0 if desired). In keeping with with our estimates in Section 4.1 of a
second for a human to perform an observation, contemplate it, and compose a message,
we will consider a model in which these segments have depth t = δT, where T = 1s and
δ is the depth per unit time of HLAI computation defined in Sec. 6.1. It is also useful to
consider g = tkb, the number of Boolean gates in a segment, and s, the number of bits
required. Following the initial estimates from Sec. 6.1, our estimates for these quantities
are g = 1019, s = 1015, and t = 1011. Using Sec. 6.2, we estimate that the related quantities
for a reversible computation are gR = 1019, sR = g + s ≈1019, and tR = 1011.
We now turn to estimating a rough upper bound for the time and space overheads
for Quall-E, an instantiation of the partially reversible HLAI with each fully reversible
segment run in a quantum coherent manner. We will estimate various quantities including
TQ, the time to implement a segment on a quantum computer. We will be particularly in-
terested in the ratio TQ/T, representing the speed of Quall-E’s thought-processes relative
to a human’s.
6.4
Logical quantum resources for Quall-E
The above estimates on the number of reversible operations gR, the logical circuit depth
tR, and the number of bits sR would, on an ideal quantum computer, translate directly
to the number of logical quantum gates gI, the logical quantum circuit depth tI, and
the number of logical qubits sI, with the releasing of ancilla bits becoming measurement
and resetting of ancilla qubits. On an actual device, however, there will be compilation
overhead, both from routing and gate synthesis. Physical constraints limit the connectivity
achievable between logical qubits, i.e., on the locations of logical qubits in the quantum
processor on which multi-qubit logical gates can be performed. Routing moves information
around in the processor to enable the logical gates to be performed. The precise amount
of connectivity differs from one quantum computing architecture to another. Large-scale
quantum computers will integrate quantum and classical processors and have a modular
structure with connections at various different scales [57].
Alon et al. [58] show that any circuit on sI qubits can be implemented on any connected
architecture with gate routing overhead at most a multiplicative factor of 3sI, taking the
total logical gate count to no more than 3sIgI. On some architectures one can do much
better. Let’s consider an architecture in which each chip contains only a small number of
logical qubits [59]. or simplicity of analysis, we will consider architectures made up of sI
chips, each with 1 logical data qubit and a couple of logical ancillae that can temporarily
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
30

hold logical data qubits, routed from other chips, so that a Toffoli gate can be applied
on chip to a triple of logical qubits.
This overhead could clearly be reduced, but this
factor of 3 is small compared to other considerations in this analysis. Thus, we consider
an architecture in which each of the sI chips can hold u = 3 logical qubits, resulting in a
total hardware requirement, in terms of logical qubits, of
sL = usI = u(g + s).
(6)
These chips would be connected via photonic networks that are not required to be planar,
but with limitations on the connectivity, particularly the degree of the connectivity graph.
There are a number of reasonable connectivity architectures. For a graph with the
topology of an D-dimensional hypercube, in the case in which the number of nodes (chips
in our case) is n = 2D, Beals et al. [60] show that any quantum circuit with g gates
on n qubits can be implemented in depth increased by at most a multiplicative factor of
D(D + 1)/2. In our case, with sI = 1019 chips, each containing one logical data qubit,
D = log2 sI ≈64, the depth would increase by a factor of ∼2000.
A better choice
would be the cyclic butterfly graph, which shares many properties of a hypercube (it is a
“hypercubic” graph), but has constant degree and reduced routing overhead; Brierley [61]
shows that for the cyclic butterfly graph the depth increases by at most a factor of 6 log2 n,
which in our case would be a factor of ∼384. Herbert [62] conjectures that, for almost all
3-regular graph architectures, the factor would be 4 log2 n, reducing the estimate to ∼256.
We also need to include overhead from gate synthesis. Which logical gates are native to
an architecture varies, and Toffoli gates are not usually native to the hardware. Thus there
will be a small constant c in overhead due to synthesis. The exact value of the gate synthesis
overhead depends on the gate set available. Altogether, using Herbert’s conjecture, we
estimate the overhead due to gate synthesis and routing to be q = (40/3) c log10(sI) (using
log10(2) ≈3/10). For sI = 1019, we have q = 760c/3. For our estimates, we’ll use q = 103,
so the logical depth increases from tI = 1011 to tL = 1014. In terms of the input parameters,
this is
tL = qt = 4ct log2(g).
(7)
To summarise, we will use the rough upper bounds of tL = 1014 for the logical depth, and
sL = 3 × 1019 for the number of logical qubits, in our next set of estimates.
6.5
Overhead due to error correction and fault tolerant gate times
We now turn to providing a rough upper bound on the actual time TQ this computation
would require, given that fault tolerant quantum gates are slow compared to classical gates.
Babbush et al. [63] estimate the time for a fault tolerant Toffoli gate as τLTof = 170µs,
using a distance 30 surface code on a superconducting qubit device. This is about 7 orders
of magnitude slower than doing a Toffoli gate on a standard classical processor. (Babbush
et al. give 330ps, the typical speed of a 3-GHz CPU, as their estimate for the time of a
classical Toffoli gate, but mention that this is being generous to the quantum computer
since generally thousands of Toffoli gates would be involved in a single operation on a
classical computer, which would make it consistent with our estimate.) This is discouraging
since, together with our depth estimate of tL = 1014, we have TQ = tLτLTof = 1.7 × 1010s.
That is, Quall-E would take over 500 years to have thoughts that would take only 1s if
he were a human.
Our context, however, is quite different from the one Babbush et al. consider, so we
will carry out our own estimates for τLTof. Their estimate is for a small, fault tolerant
device early in the fault tolerant era. It is reasonable for us to posit lower error rates and
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
31

higher parallelism than they did, which will reduce the resources required. On the other
hand, the computations they used for their estimates involve 102 to 109 logical qubits and
a similar number of logical gates, which are substantially smaller than ours. The required
code distance is key to the resource estimates, and ultimately the time taken. There are
tradeoffs here: because we require many more qubits and gates, we may need to encode in
a higher-distance code, but on the other hand, a lower error rate would allow us to use a
smaller-distance code.
To begin our estimate for a rough upper bound on the required code distance, which
will help determine the physical resources in time and space required, we estimate the
probability of an error-free run for a circuit of depth 2tL, the depth of a segment of
the HLAI run forward and in reverse.
We consider the simple and common model of
independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) errors, in which there is a probability pL of
a logical Pauli error at each error location, i.e. at each logical qubit after each time step of
the algorithm. The number of error locations ℓ= 2tLsL is the product of the logical depth
and number of logical qubits. Under this model, the probability of at least one error in
the run is 1 −(1 −pL)ℓ. Our estimates of depth of 2tL = 2 × 1014 and number of qubits
sL = 1019 yield ℓ≈1033. We’ll take as our acceptable probability of any logical errors
occurring in a run to be ϵ = 10−2. Thus, to first order, we would need the logical error
rate pL to be no more than on the order of pL = ϵ/ℓ= 10−35.
Fowler et al. [64] estimate that for the surface code pL ≈0.03(p/pth)r, where pth is the
fault tolerance threshold for the code, p is the physical error rate for a simple error model
at the physical level, and r = d+1
2 , where d is the code distance. Taking pL = (2tLsL)−1,
we require distance d = ⌈2r −1⌉where
r = logp/pth
 100ϵ
6tLsL

.
(8)
If we took the physical error rate p to be approximately 0.1pth, as Babbush et al. do, we
would need distance d ≈66 to obtain pL < 10−35, more than double their code distance of
30. Our experiment would require us to be further into the fault tolerant era, so it seems
reasonable to hope for a physical error rate an order of magnitude smaller, p = 0.01pth.
For that, we would need a d ≈34 surface code. Thus, the effects from the improved error
rate and the much larger number of logical qubits roughly cancel each other out. The
physical resources corresponding to this estimate is in line with a common rule-of-thumb
estimate of 1000 physical qubits per logical qubit.
Babbush et al. estimate τQEC = 1µs, where τQEC is the time taken for one round
of surface code error correction including gate operations, measurement, and decoding.
Their estimate of 170µs for a logical Toffoli comes from multiplying by 5.5d, the number of
surface code cycles they estimate are needed per logical Toffoli gate, using a code distance
of d = 30. They give a detailed analysis of an approach using Toffoli factories to distill
Toffoli gates, concluding with the 5.5d estimate. Altogether, we have as our estimate
τLTof = 5.5dτQEC.
(9)
Keeping their estimate for τQEC and since we are using the slightly larger code distance of
34, our time would go up to 189µs. Babbush et al. estimate a single Toffoli factory needs
144d2 physical qubits, or ∼1.6 × 105 in our case.
To support our 10 million concurrent processes as discussed in Sec. 6.3, we would need
10 million such factories. Altogether that gives a total of roughly 1.6×1012 physical qubits
needed to implement the Toffoli factories, a tiny fraction of the total number of physical
qubits used to implement the 1019 logical qubits. Babbush et al. are able to ignore routing
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
32

time because their model has only a single gate happening at each time step, which can
be routed with a small constant overhead [65].
We need to include the output of the
10 million Toffoli state factories in our routing, but since again that is a small fraction
compared to the total number of logical qubits, our previous estimate suffices, leaving us
with an estimate of 189µs per logical Toffoli gate. Together with our depth estimate of
tL = 1014, this yields an estimate of TQ of 1.89 × 1010s (which is almost 600 years).
One way to reduce the fault tolerant overhead would be to take a different approach
to implementing fault tolerant Toffoli gates. Purely 2D approaches do not support fault
tolerant Toffoli gates, or more generally a universal set of fault tolerant gates, and magic
state factories of one sort or another are a common approach to handling this deficiency.
On the other hand, in 3D, there are sets of transversal gates that are universal. Bombin [66]
recognised that one can relax the 2D approach, so that it mimics a 3D code playing out
over time, with decoding happening across time steps as sufficient information comes in.
Brown [67] builds on Bombin’s approach to exhibit a transversal Toffoli gate for the surface
code that requires 3d surface code cycles, where d is the distance of the code, reducing the
logical Toffoli gate time to 99µs for distance-33 codes. Clearly we will need more radical
advances to bring TQ down to human conversational scales.
6.6
Potential ways forward
Many advances are expected in quantum computing in the coming decades, and much
remains unknown about the structure and resource requirements for an HLAI. Here, we
discuss the potential impact advances would have in bringing down our rough upper bound
estimates to enable Quall-E to interact at human speeds. Altogether, from equations (6)
and (7) in Sec. 6.4 and equations (8) and (9) in 6.5, we have, as our upper bound estimation
for the Quall-E to human ratio of times required for a given thought-process,
TQ
T = tLτLTof
= 22caF
kb
log2(aFT)dτQEC,
(10)
where
d =

2 logp/pth

25ϵ
6uctT(aFT + S) log2(aFT)

−1

.
(11)
Here we are using input (as opposed to derived) parameters; as a reminder, F and S are
the input estimates of FLOP/s and bits for an HLAI, T is the input estimate for a human
to make an observation, contemplate it, and compose a message, a is the conversion factor
between floating point operations and Boolean operations, b is the Boolean parallelization
factor, c is the gate synthesis overhead factor, ϵ is the acceptable probability of a segment
having one or more errors, k is the amount of parallelism, p/pth is the ratio of the physical
error to the threshold error. The equation assumes surface code encoding and the archi-
tecture described above. Looking at this equation, we see that the quantities that have
the most impact are τQEC and the circuit depth per unit time, δ = aF/kb, of a classical
HLAI (from Section 6.1).
We first turn to advances that could bring down τQEC, the time for one round of
error correction. It depends on the physical two-qubit gate time, measurement time, gate
synthesis time, and decoding time.
Bringing down these times are a high priority for
realising quantum computers generally, and are active areas of research.
In terms of hardware improvements, many groups around the world are working on a
variety of different hardware approaches to achieve lower error rates, faster measurements,
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
33

and faster gate speeds. It seems reasonable to expect that physical gate speeds and mea-
surement speeds will improve. Advances in control within the last couple of decades have
been impressive, and there are many possible physical systems that could be used as qubits
once they can be sufficiently controlled. As an example, a high-fidelity 0.8ns two-qubit gate
was demonstrated in phosphorous-donors in silicon [68], though the short-range nature of
the interaction means it will be challenging to scale up to a large-scale device [69]. We
can take inspiration from classical computer clock speeds, which improved three orders of
magnitude in less than three decades (from 1 MHz in the early 1970s to 1 GHz in the
late 1990s [70]), and from a 2022 demonstration of a femtosecond (10−15s) classical logic
gate [71]. Back on the quantum side, breakthroughs in optical frequency comb control now
enable atomic clocks to operate at optical frequencies [72, 73] (beyond 1015Hz). Further on
the quantum side, 2022 also saw the demonstration of a Rabi cycle (that is, a single-qubit
gate) taking only 52fs, using extreme-ultraviolet pulses acting on Helium atoms [74].
Our estimates already postulated an order of magnitude decrease in error rates. Further
lowering the error rate would help, but because TQ depends only logarithmically on the
error rate, the improvements would have to be by multiple orders of magnitude to have a
significant impact on the time (though smaller improvement would have a more significant
impact on space requirements).
For example, an additional order of magnitude (p =
0.001pth) would reduce the required code distance to d = 22, having only a small effect on
τLTof, but more than halving the number of physical qubits per logical qubits.
In addition to hardware improvements, we can expect that improvements can be made
in decoding, in error correction more generally, and in fault tolerant implementations.
These are again active areas of research in which significant advances continue to be
made at a rapid pace. Just within the time that this paper was being finalised, there
were advances in decoding, including a pre-decoding for surface codes that brings down
the overhead by multiple orders of magnitude [75] and a logarithmic parallel decoder for
asymptotically good LDPC codes [76], quantum Tanner codes which themselves are a re-
cent innovation [77, 78]. Some LDPC codes support single-shot error correction, which
reduces the error correction cycles from O(d) to O(1), immediately improving the depth
by more than an order of magnitude in our case. Powerful generalisations of error correc-
tion approaches have also been developed within the last year or so, including dynamical
logical qubits [79].
It seems plausible that a combination of advances in error correction and fault tolerance,
including decoding, and improved speeds for 2-qubit gates and measurements, could bring
our estimates down by 4 to 6 orders of magnitude, possibly more.
Advances need to
happen on multiple fronts to achieve this. For example, without improvements in gate
and measurement speeds, more efficient error correction would be limited to 2 to 3 orders
of magnitude because the logical Toffoli gate speed is lower bounded by the physical gate
speed. On the other hand, if the physical gates got a lot faster, the decoding time would
become a bottleneck if it could not be improved.
Another reason we would expect TQ/T to come down is that once a specific HLAI
algorithm is discovered, it is likely that we can make use of its structure to reduce both
the reversibility overhead and the routing overhead. While Bennett’s reversibility con-
struction works for any possible algorithm, in practice there are usually better ways to
obtain a reversible, and therefore a quantum, version of a classical algorithm (e.g. [80–83]).
Furthermore, our estimates for routing likely substantially overestimate the time needed.
The estimates support routing of qubits furthest away from each other at each step. Not
only is it generally unlikely that the maximum routing distance is needed at each step, but
given the suspected highly parallel nature of an HLAI algorithm, with separate subrou-
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
34

tines running and only loosely interacting, it is likely that an architecture well matched
to the structure could keep most of the routing within sets of qubits participating in a
single subroutine, with only occasional need for larger scale routing. It seems likely that
taking advantage of the structure could bring down the routing overhead by an order of
magnitude and the reversibility overhead by another 2 to 3 orders of magnitude, and plau-
sible that clever use of the structure could get us to beyond these 4 orders of magnitude
of improvement.
There are other speculative possibilities that could help to approach human speeds.
Once the structure of an HLAI algorithm is known, we may be able to take advantage
of that structure in other ways. It seems likely that much of Quall-E’s thinking during
the experiment would not be influenced by the observation given that the number of
floating-point operations is the same order of magnitude as the number of bits and the
hypothesised extremely parallel nature of the HLAI algorithm. Or, somewhat along similar
lines, Quall-E’s intense concentration on the observation could mean that some of the AI
processes would not be happening at all during the experiment. Either of these possibilities
could significantly reduce the amount of computation that needs to be implemented in a
way that can be reversed, thus reducing quantum computational resource requirements.
Another possibility would be that the HLAI algorithm has inherent robustness and thus
requires less overhead in terms of error correction and fault tolerance. Another approach
to reducing the time and resources in a quantum implementation would be to use quantum
algorithms to speed up subprocesses, with the expectation that square-root speed ups may
be reasonable (e.g. [84–86]). This use of quantum algorithms would be unusual in that
it would not be using them for quantum advantage, but rather to make up for the large
constant and logarithmic factors that mean that classical algorithms when implemented
on a quantum computer run significantly slower than on classical computers. A related
speculative possibility is the development of efficient “native-quantum” HLAIs for which
there isn’t a classical analogue, in which case there is of course no overhead due to a
conversion from classical to quantum. Such possibilities are left for future investigation.
Given the large variation in estimates for the resources needed to implement a HLAI,
it seems worthwhile to walk through a few possible scenarios.
If the higher estimates
of hardware and error correction advances are realised, improving τLTof by 6 orders of
magnitude and taking advantage of structure provides another 4 orders of magnitude, those
alone remove the 1010 overhead from our original estimates, bringing Quall-E to human
speed. If instead only the lower projections of 4 orders of magnitude for error correction
and 3 for taking advantage of structure were realised, human speeds would be attainable
if, for example, either an HLAI could be implemented with 3 orders of magnitude fewer
operations than the estimate we used, or if less of the HLAI computation would need to
be reversed.
Regarding the possibility that 3 orders of magnitude fewer operations are needed for
HLAI than 1015 FLOP/s we used as input for our estimates, it is notable that while
Carlsmith thought this would likely be sufficient, (as we quoted earlier), he also finds 1013
or even 1012 plausible [53]. Moreover, ChatGPT3, which displays aspects of human-level
intelligence, would require on order 1012 FLOP/s to generate output at human speed (as
opposed to the faster-than-human speed at which it normally generates answers). We base
this claim on the following [87] “GPT-3 [has] about 2×1011 parameters and uses about 4
flops per parameter per token [generated], so about ×1012 flops per token. If a human
writes at 1 token per second, then you should be comparing [that to] 1012 flops . . . per
second.” Here a “token” is a word generated by a Large Language Model. For the figure
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
35

of roughly 4 flops per parameter per token, see Table D.1 of [88]20. Changing the initial
estimate to 1012 FLOP/s would bring down the depth (and hence time) directly by a factor
of 103, but not much more. That is because the smaller computation size (roughly 1016
Toffoli gates) would only have a small effect on τLTof: using τQEC = 1µs as previously
would yield τLTof = 126µs.
On the other hand, 1015 FLOP/s could turn out to be too low.
While Carlsmith
estimates that it is unlikely (< 10%) that more than 1021 FLOP/s would be needed, this
statement suggests to us that it would be unwise to rule out such a high figure. Note
that a rate of 1021 FLOP/s is 3 orders of magnitude beyond the capabilities of today’s
fastest supercomputer. Even if that rate is required, it is still possible that a combination
of technical advances, taking advantage of structure to decrease not only the routing and
reversibility, but also the amount that needs to be reversed in the first place, and the
possibility of using quantum subroutines, could enable a Quall-E able to perform the
experiment and interact at human speeds. However, this eventuality would likely push the
experiment considerably further into the future.
7
Conclusion
Building on the Local Friendliness no-go theorem of Bong et al. [1], we have presented a
new theorem establishing a contradiction between four metaphysical assumptions (one now
actually called Friendliness) and two technological assumptions. None of the metaphys-
ical assumptions mentions quantum theory. While “quantum” obviously appears in the
technological assumption of Universal Quantum Computing, it still does not assume
the universal validity of QT. It is merely an assumption about what is technologically pos-
sible, guided by the best operational theory we have, QT. Thus the theorem is of precisely
the same sort as Bell’s theorem. It is a strict theorem of experimental metaphysics. If the
technology can be realised and performs as expected (and this is, just as it once was in
Bell’s case, a scientific as well as an engineering question) then one of the four metaphysical
assumptions must be wrong.
For each of the six assumptions, there is, amongst the plethora of approaches (interpre-
tations and modifications) of QT, at least one that rejects that assumption, and arguably
only that one [39]. This shows the independence and relevance of all the assumptions.
But what about QT itself? What if one were to believe the claim that «Quantum Theory
Needs No “Interpretation”» [12], and to follow Fuchs (pre-QBism) and Peres in neither
modifying nor interpreting QT? The answer, by our new Theorem, is that one would be
mistaken and misled. One has to give up at least one of the six widely held assumptions.
It is only by carefully interpreting, or modifying, QT, that it can be made compatible with
the theorem while remaining consistent with existing experiments and experiences.
The final undertaking of this paper was to estimate the level of technology required
to perform an experiment of the type relevant for our theorem. We found that this level
is far in advance of current technology, both in scale and rate of quantum information
processing. It is thus of interest to identify meaningful experimental milestones that could
be achieved between now and when an HLAI could be implemented on a UQC, along the
lines of Ref. [1] but with ever more sophisticated information processors in the role of the
“friend”. This is a problem for future work, one that could be helped by software such as
Quanundrum [90].
20There is a published version with the same title [89], but, unconscionably, it is significantly shorter
and does not contain the relevant table.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
36

As one example of a nearer-term milestone, the single physical qubit of Ref. [1] could
be replaced by a logical qubit encoded in an error-detecting or error-correcting code, using
a small number of physical qubits. Alternatively, it may also be possible to implement
some minimal degree of agent-like behaviour with a relatively small number of physical
qubits. In the decades before the full experiment proposed here can be realised, there is
also much theoretical work to be done, in formulating suitable metaphysical assumptions
for such intermediate experiments to have new and non-trivial metaphysical implications.
Acknowledgments
The paper has benefited from astute feedback by Nora Tischler.
EGR thanks Forrest
Bennett and Steve Omohundro for pointers to estimates for AI memory and processing
speed requirements.
We thank Yìlè Y¯ıng for help in preparing the paper, and George
Musser Jr for probing questions.
HMW and EGC acknowledge the traditional owners
of the land at Griffith University on which this work was undertaken, the Yuggera and
Yugambeh peoples.
Following the appearance of version 1 of this article on the arxiv, the authors are
grateful for comments made, at workshops on this topic which we co-organised, by Mo-
han Sarovar, Marissa Giustina, Lidia del Rio, and, most especially, Richard Healey, who
provided a very detailed critique. We also thank Paul Christiano for information on the
processing requirements of running ChatGPT. We thank Yìlè Y¯ıng for further help in
preparation and for insightful comments.
This research was supported by grant number FQXi-RFP-CPW-2019 from the Foun-
dational Questions Institute and Fetzer Franklin Fund, a donor advised fund of Silicon
Valley Community Foundation (HMW and EGC), by the Australian Research Council
Centre of Excellence Program CE170100012, the Centre for Quantum Computation and
Communication Technology (CQC2T) (HMW), and by the Australian Research Council
(ARC) Future Fellowship FT180100317 (EGC).
EGR is grateful for support from the NASA Ames Research Center, from the NASA
SCaN program, and from DARPA under IAA 8839, Annex 130, and for the collaborative
agreement between NASA and CQC2T.
Summary of contributions: The paper was conceived by HMW, who wrote a first draft.
All three authors contributed substantially to the first four sections.
HMW and EGC
were the primary contributors to Section 5. EGR was the lead contributor to Section 6.
A
Deutsch’s contributions and |“I knew 0 or 1”⟩
The first general and fully quantum model of computation was famously introduced by
Deutsch in 1985 in Ref. [38], whose very title introduced the term “Universal Quantum
Computing”.
But it was a somewhat less famous paper by him [37], published in the
same year but submitted some months earlier, which had already suggested the idea of
applying such a quantum computer (albeit not by that name) to the Wigner’s friend
scenario. Deutsch begins by asserting that our assumption 5, Human-Level Artificial
Intelligence is true:
Sooner or later (Turing, 1950) there will be machines capable of independent
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
37

thought comparable in every way to that of human beings. One of them could
no doubt be persuaded to take part in this experiment.
As this quote shows, he even touches upon the ethical issue of consent, which we considered
in Sec. 4.4. Next, he discusses the physical construction of a computer suitable for exactly
the task we have discussed above:
Presumably its internal workings will be electronic, rather than biological, and
its . . . Hamiltonian . . . will be known to the designers.
Extra apparatuses
would have to be installed to give it the requisite sense organ [to measure the
qubit], and to allow the total Hamiltonian to be temporarily altered when nec-
essary. Sufficient coherence for the interference effects to be preserved will be
possible if, for example, the information in the sense organ, the memory, and
all other affected parts of the observer are stored in sufficiently microscopic
finite-state components, thermally isolated from the outside world. Another
possibility might be to replace all the components by logically equivalent sys-
tems of currents in superconductors.
It is amusing to note that superconducting qubits are the current state of the art for
quantum computers, but few could have predicted that in 1985.
Now in this paper Deutsch also considers adding another subsystem, with which the
HLAI (whom we are calling Quall-E and whom Deutsch calls simply “the observer” or
“Professor X”) can interact, so that21
After the completion of the measurement, the observer records (in his memory,
or in his notebook if necessary) — not the value “0” or “1” of the bit, but
only whether or not he knows this value. He may write “I, Professor X, F.R.S.,
hereby certify that at time t′′′, I have determined whether the value of the qubit
in the logical basis is 0 or 1. At this moment I am contemplating in my own
mind one, and only one of those two values. In order to facilitate the second
part of this experiment, I shall not reveal which one.” This constitutes a record
of the completion of the measurement, a record which, we shall see, need not
be destroyed by a subsequent interference experiment.
That is, Deutsch is saying that the measurement reversal, Eq. (5), can leave the state of
this subsystem (be it some part of Quall-E’s internal memory or an external notepad)
unchanged. In our notation, the final state would be
X
b=0,1
cb |b⟩⊗
Quall-Eready
E
⊗|“knew 0 or 1”⟩,
(12)
still leaving the qubit in its initial state to allow Alice to measure it. The point of this is,
for Deutsch, that (his emphasis)
[T]he record that the 0/1 value of the bit was known to the observer at time t′′′
is preserved. . . . The interference phenomenon seen by our observer at the end
of the experiment requires the presence of both bit values, though he accurately
remembers having known at a previous time that only one of them was present.
He must infer that there was more than one copy of himself (and the qubit) in
existence at that time, and that these copies merged to form his present self.
21Here and below we have made minor changes in the notation and terminology (remember that this
was ten years before the word “qubit” was introduced [91]) to accord to that of the current paper.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
38

That is, the experiment would establish, as far as Deutsch is concerned, Quantum Theory
as a Universal Physical Theory (the title of his paper), and that the Everett interpretation
is the only viable one.
We discuss Everett’s interpretation and several other approaches to quantum theory
in Sec. 5.3.
Here, we wish to comment on the idea of the preservation of Quall-E’s
memory, or his record, of having seen some definite result. This idea was very influential
on Brukner, whose work [5] inspired the LF no-go theorem. In that work, Brukner sees
this as the key point of Ref. [37] (with the friend here being feminine): “The novelty of
Deutsch’s proposal lies in the possibility for Wigner to acquire direct knowledge on whether
the friend has observed a definite outcome upon her measurement or not without revealing
what outcome she has observed.” As we have seen, Deutsch actually emphasized the ability
of the “observer” (i.e. the “friend” in Brukner’s parlance) to “remember” himself that he
had made an observation, but the distinction is not so important.
Deutsch’s proof that this is mathematically possible is certainly correct. Indeed, it
is trivially so, since all that is required is an independent unitary evolution for the final
subsystem over the course of the experiment:
|blank⟩→|“knew 0 or 1”⟩,
(13)
Of course such a manner of producing this output would be silly, because it would under-
mine the motivation for this being a convincing record of Quall-E having known, and
thought about, the bit value. It would be a meaningless, mechanically produced, sequence
of ink stains on a notepad, unrelated to anything Quall-E actually thought. But, we
claim, this is the best Quall-E can do: to “press a button” which automatically produces
one particular message regardless of what he actually experiences.
To see why this is the case, recall Deutsch’s colourful description above. If Professor
X F.R.S. truly was “contemplating in [his] own mind one, and only one” of the values 0
and 1, would those different contemplative experiences be consistent with his two different
states (e.g. on the right-hand-side of Eq. (5)) making exactly the same ink stains on his
notepad, down to the atomic level and beyond? We think obviously no; they would preclude
it. Even if the record were a far more constrained system, such as a finite string of bits,
different “contemplations” would surely affect any genuine record of thoughts. For example,
if Quall-E were contemplating 0, he might, as he extemporizes this record for posterity,
omit his postnomial, or perhaps put a comma after “and only one”. Either would be more
than enough to make the entire experiment fail, because the reversal operation, acting only
on the qubit and Quall-E subsystems, would not return these to their initial factorized
state. The reversal would only work if Quall-E committed, before the experiment starts,
to creating a particular message at a particular time as in Eq. (13), which is thus no witness
to Quall-E’s real thoughts.
Now, it may be possible to construct a device (another enormous quantum computer)
that could perform a measurement on Quall-E’s logical qubits that would distinguish
that he was contemplating 0 or 1 (without distinguishing between these two), and raise
a flag if he was. That would arguably be more convincing than an automatically pro-
duced flag. However, in order to trust such a flag, one would need to assume that the
quantum description of the experiment is correct.
But if one makes that assumption
then the flag does not really serve much purpose. It is for these reasons that we did not
(in Ref. [1]), and do not here, consider such a record in our Wigner’s friend scenario.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
39

References
[1] Kok-Wei Bong, Aníbal Utreras-Alarcón, Farzad Ghafari, Yeong-Cherng Liang, Nora
Tischler, Eric G. Cavalcanti, Geoff J. Pryde, and Howard M. Wiseman. “A strong no-
go theorem on the Wigner’s friend paradox”. Nature Physics 16, 1199–1205 (2020).
[2] E. P. Wigner. “Remarks on the mind-body question”. In I. J. Good, editor, The
Scientist Speculates. Heinemann, London (1961).
[3] J. S. Bell. “On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen paradox”. Physics Physique Fizika 1,
195–200 (1964).
[4] ˘C. Brukner.
“On the quantum measurement problem”.
In R. Bertlmann and
A. Zeilinger, editors, Quantum [un]speakables II: half a century of Bell’s theorem.
Pages 95–117. The Frontiers Collection. Springer, Switzerland (2017).
[5] ˘C. Brukner.
“A no-go theorem for observer-independent facts”.
Entropy 20,
350 (2018).
[6] D. Frauchiger and R. Renner. “Quantum theory cannot consistently describe the use
of itself”. Nature Communications 9, 3711 (2018).
[7] M. Proietti, A. Pickston, F. Graffitti, P. Barrow, D. Kundys, C. Branciard, M. Ring-
bauer, and A. Fedrizzi. “Experimental test of local observer independence”. Science
Advances 5, eaaw9832 (2019).
[8] Veronika Baumann and Stefan Wolf. “On formalisms and interpretations”. Quantum
2, 99 (2018).
[9] Richard Healey.
“Quantum theory and the limits of objectivity”.
Foundations of
Physics 48, 1568–1589 (2018).
[10] V. Baumann, F. Del Santo, and ˘C. Brukner. “Comment on Healey’s ‘Quantum theory
and the limits of objectivity’”. Foundations of Physics 49, 741–749 (2019).
[11] Andrea Di Biagio and Carlo Rovelli. “Stable facts, relative facts”. Foundations of
Physics 51, 1–13 (2021).
[12] Christopher A. Fuchs and Asher Peres. “Quantum theory needs no ‘interpretation’”.
Physics Today 53, 70 (2000).
[13] A. Shimony. “Controllable and uncontrollable non-locality”. In Susumu Kamefuchi,
editor, Foundations of Quantum Mechanics in the Light of New Technology. Pages
225–230. Tokyo (1984). Physical Society of Japan.
[14] Marwan Haddara and Eric G. Cavalcanti.
“A possibilistic no-go theorem on the
Wigner’s friend paradox” (2022) arXiv:2205.12223.
[15] A. Peres. “Unperformed experiments have no results”. American Journal of Physics
46, 745–747 (1978).
[16] Howard M. Wiseman and Eric G. Cavalcanti. “Causarum investigatio and the two
Bell’s theorems of John Bell”.
Pages 119–142.
Springer International Publishing.
Cham (2017).
[17] Judea Pearl. “Causality: models, reasoning and inference”. Cambridge University
Press. (2000).
[18] Eric G. Cavalcanti and Howard M. Wiseman.
“Implications of Local Friendliness
violation for quantum causality”. Entropy 23, 925 (2021).
[19] Roger Colbeck and Renato Renner. “No extension of quantum theory can have im-
proved predictive power”. Nature Communications 2, 411 (2011).
[20] J. S. Bell. “The theory of local beables”. Epistemological Lett. 9, 11–24 (1976).
[21] H. M. Wiseman. “The two Bell’s theorems of John Bell”. J. Phys. A 47, 424001 (2014).
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
40

[22] Howard M. Wiseman and Eleanor G. Rieffel. “Reply to Norsen’s paper ‘are there
really two different Bell’s theorems?”’. International Journal of Quantum Foundations
1, 85–99 (2015).
[23] Howard M. Wiseman, Eleanor G. Rieffel, and Eric G. Cavalcanti. “Reply to Gillis’s ‘on
the analysis of Bell’s 1964 paper by Wiseman, Cavalcanti, and Rieffel”’. International
Journal of Quantum Foundations 2, 143–154 (2016).
[24] Adrian Kent. “Causal quantum theory and the collapse locality loophole”. Phys. Rev.
A 72, 012107 (2005).
[25] Adrian Kent. “Stronger tests of the collapse-locality loophole in Bell experiments”.
Phys. Rev. A 101, 012102 (2020).
[26] Zhen-Peng Xu, Jonathan Steinberg, H. Chau Nguyen, and Otfried Gühne.
“No-
go theorem based on incomplete information of Wigner about his friend” (2021)
arXiv:2111.15010.
[27] George Moreno, Ranieri Nery, Cristhiano Duarte, and Rafael Chaves.
“Events in
quantum mechanics are maximally non-absolute”. Quantum 6, 785 (2022).
[28] Mark Rowlands, Joe Lau, and Max Deutsch.
“Externalism About the Mind”.
In
Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.
Metaphysics
Research Lab, Stanford University (2020). Winter 2020 edition.
[29] Rene Descartes. “Discourse on the method”. SMK Books. (2018).
[30] Gary
Marcus.
“What
comes
after
the
Turing
test”.
The
New
Yorker,
14 June 2014, https://www.newyorker.com/tech/annals-of-technology/what-
comes-after-the-turing-test (2014).
[31] Guillaume Thierry. “GPT-3: new AI can write like a human but don’t mistake that
for thinking – neuroscientist”. https://theconversation.com/gpt-3-new-ai-can-
write-like-a-human-but-dont-mistake-that-for-thinking-neuroscientist-
146082 (2020).
[32] “DALL·E: creating Images from Text”. https://openai.com/blog/dall-e/ (accessed
2022).
[33] Charles H Bennett. “Logical reversibility of computation”. IBM journal of Research
and Development 17, 525–532 (1973).
[34] E. G. Rieffel and W. Polak. “Quantum computing: A gentle introduction”. MIT Press.
Cambridge, MA (2011).
[35] Thaddeus D Ladd, Fedor Jelezko, Raymond Laflamme, Yasunobu Nakamura, Christo-
pher Monroe, and Jeremy Lloyd O’Brien. “Quantum computers”. Nature 464, 45–
53 (2010).
[36] Jamie Harris and Jacy Reese Anthis. “The moral consideration of artificial entities: a
literature review”. Science and Engineering Ethics 27, 53 (2021).
[37] David Deutsch. “Quantum theory as a universal physical theory”. International Jour-
nal of Theoretical Physics 24, 1–24 (1985).
[38] David Deutsch.
“Quantum theory, the Church-Turing principle and the universal
quantum computer”. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. A. Mathematical
and Physical Sciences 400, 97–117 (1985).
[39] H. M. Wiseman and E. G. Cavalcanti. “How different approaches to quantum theory
relate to the “thoughtful” Local Friendliness no-go theorem”. (in preparation) (2022).
[40] David Bohm. “A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of “hidden”
variables. I”. Phys. Rev. 85, 166–179 (1952).
[41] David Bohm. “A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of “hidden”
variables. II”. Phys. Rev. 85, 180–193 (1952).
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
41

[42] D. Dürr, S. Goldstein, and N. Zanghì. “Quantum physics without quantum philoso-
phy”. Springer. Heidelberg (2013).
[43] David Albert and Barry Loewer. “Interpreting the many-worlds interpretation”. Syn-
these 77, 195–213 (1988).
[44] Hugh Everett. “‘Relative state’ formulation of quantum mechanics”. Rev. Mod. Phys.
29, 454–462 (1957).
[45] Christopher A. Fuchs and Rüdiger Schack. “Quantum-bayesian coherence”. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 85, 1693–1715 (2013).
[46] C. Rovelli.
“Relational quantum mechanics”.
International Journal of Theoretical
Physics 35, 1637–1678 (1996).
[47] G. C. Ghirardi, A. Rimini, and T. Weber. “Unified dynamics for microscopic and
macroscopic systems”. Phys. Rev. D 34, 470–491 (1986).
[48] Valia Allori, Angelo Bassi, Detlef Dürr, and Nino Zanghi, editors. “Do wave functions
jump?”. Fundamental Theories of Physics. Springer. Switzerland (2021).
[49] Roger Penrose. “The emperor’s new mind: concerning computers, minds, and the laws
of physics”. Oxford University Press, Inc. USA (1989).
[50] Roger Penrose. “Shadows of the mind: a search for the missing science of conscious-
ness”. Oxford University Press, Inc. USA (1994). 1st edition.
[51] David J. Chalmers and Kelvin J. McQueen. “Consciousness and the collapse of the
wave function”. In Shan Gao, editor, Consciousness and quantum mechanics. Oxford
University Press (forthcoming). arXiv:2105.02314.
[52] Anders Sandberg and Nick Bostrom. “Whole brain emulation: a roadmap”. http:
//www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/Reports/2008-3.pdf (2008).
[53] Joseph Carlsmith. “How much computational power does it take to match the human
brain?”. https://www.openphilanthropy.org/brain-computation-report (2020).
[54] Steve B Furber, Francesco Galluppi, Steve Temple, and Luis A Plana. “The spinnaker
project”. Proceedings of the IEEE 102, 652–665 (2014).
[55] TOP500 The List. “Top June 2022”. https://www.top500.org/lists/top500/2022/
06/ (accessed 2022).
[56] TOP500 The List. “Top #1 systems”. https://www.top500.org/resources/top-
systems/ (accessed 2022).
[57] Sergey Bravyi, Oliver Dial, Jay M. Gambetta, Dario Gil, and Zaira Nazario. “The
future of quantum computing with superconducting qubits” (2022). arXiv:2209.06841.
[58] Noga Alon, F. R. K. Chung, and R. L. Graham. “Routing permutations on graphs
via matchings”. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics 7, 513–530 (1994).
[59] Naomi H. Nickerson, Joseph F. Fitzsimons, and Simon C. Benjamin. “Freely scalable
quantum technologies using cells of 5-to-50 qubits with very lossy and noisy photonic
links”. Phys. Rev. X 4, 041041 (2014).
[60] Robert Beals, Stephen Brierley, Oliver Gray, Aram W. Harrow, Samuel Kutin, Noah
Linden, Dan Shepherd, and Mark Stather. “Efficient distributed quantum computing”.
Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
469, 20120686 (2013).
[61] Stephen Brierley. “Efficient implementation of quantum circuits with limited qubit
interactions” (2015) arXiv:1507.04263.
[62] Steven Herbert.
“On the depth overhead incurred when running quantum algo-
rithms on near-term quantum computers with limited qubit connectivity” (2018)
arXiv:1805.12570.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
42

[63] Ryan Babbush, Jarrod R. McClean, Michael Newman, Craig Gidney, Sergio Boixo,
and Hartmut Neven. “Focus beyond quadratic speedups for error-corrected quantum
advantage”. PRX Quantum 2, 010103 (2021).
[64] Austin G. Fowler, Matteo Mariantoni, John M. Martinis, and Andrew N. Cleland.
“Surface codes: Towards practical large-scale quantum computation”. Phys. Rev. A
86, 032324 (2012).
[65] Michael Beverland, Vadym Kliuchnikov, and Eddie Schoute. “Surface code compilation
via edge-disjoint paths” (2021) arXiv:2110.11493.
[66] Hector Bombin.
“2D quantum computation with 3D topological codes” (2018)
arXiv:1810.09571.
[67] Benjamin J. Brown. “A fault-tolerant non-clifford gate for the surface code in two
dimensions”. Science Advances 6, eaay4929 (2020).
[68] Yu He, SK Gorman, Daniel Keith, Ludwik Kranz, JG Keizer, and MY Simmons.
“A two-qubit gate between phosphorus donor electrons in silicon”. Nature 571, 371–
375 (2019).
[69] Anasua Chatterjee,
Paul Stevenson,
Silvano De Franceschi,
Andrea Morello,
Nathalie P de Leon, and Ferdinand Kuemmeth. “Semiconductor qubits in practice”.
Nature Reviews Physics 3, 157–177 (2021).
[70] “Microprocessor
chronology”.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Microprocessor_chronology (accessed 2022).
[71] Isabelle Dume.
“Logic gate breaks speed record”.
https://physicsworld.com/a/
logic-gate-breaks-speed-record/ (accessed 2022).
[72] “Optical frequency combs”.
https://www.nist.gov/topics/physics/optical-
frequency-combs (accessed 2022).
[73] Steven T. Cundiff and Jun Ye. “Colloquium: Femtosecond optical frequency combs”.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 325–342 (2003).
[74] S. Nandi et al. “Observation of Rabi dynamics with a short-wavelength free-electron
laser”. Nature 608, 488–493 (2022).
[75] Samuel C Smith, Benjamin J Brown, and Stephen D Bartlett.
“A local pre-
decoder to reduce the bandwidth and latency of quantum error correction” (2022).
arXiv:2208.04660.
[76] Anthony Leverrier and Gilles Zémor.
“A parallel decoder for good quantum ldpc
codes” (2022). arXiv:2208.05537.
[77] Pavel Panteleev and Gleb Kalachev.
“Asymptotically good quantum and locally
testable classical LDPC codes”. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual ACM SIGACT
Symposium on Theory of Computing. Pages 375–388. (2022).
[78] Anthony
Leverrier
and
Gilles
Zémor.
“Quantum
Tanner
codes”
(2022).
arXiv:2202.13641.
[79] Matthew B. Hastings and Jeongwan Haah. “Dynamically Generated Logical Qubits”.
Quantum 5, 564 (2021).
[80] Mihir K Bhaskar, Stuart Hadfield, Anargyros Papageorgiou, and Iasonas Petras.
“Quantum algorithms and circuits for scientific computing” (2015). arXiv:1511.08253.
[81] Stuart Andrew Hadfield. “Quantum algorithms for scientific computing and approxi-
mate optimization” (2018) arXiv:1805.03265.
[82] Alex Parent, Martin Roetteler, and Krysta M Svore. “Reversible circuit compilation
with space constraints” (2015). arXiv:1510.00377.
[83] Thomas Häner, Martin Roetteler, and Krysta M Svore. “Optimizing quantum circuits
for arithmetic” (2018). arXiv:1805.12445.
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
43

[84] Andris Ambainis and Martins Kokainis. “Quantum algorithm for tree size estimation,
with applications to backtracking and 2-player games”. In Proceedings of the 49th
Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing. Page 989–1002. STOC
2017New York, NY, USA (2017). Association for Computing Machinery.
[85] Ashley Montanaro. “Quantum speedup of branch-and-bound algorithms”. Phys. Rev.
Research 2, 013056 (2020).
[86] Kyle E. C. Booth, Bryan O’Gorman, Jeffrey Marshall, Stuart Hadfield, and Eleanor
Rieffel. “Quantum-accelerated constraint programming”. Quantum 5, 550 (2021).
[87] Paul
Christiano.
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/TAbQHFwGD4E3jCMnt/
is-it-a-coincidence-that-gpt-3-requires-roughly-the-same#:~:text=
Feb%2010%2C%202023&text=GPT%2D3%20is%20about%202e11,about%201e12%
20flops%20per%20token. (2023).
Comment on blog post “Is it a coincidence
that GPT-3 requires roughly the same amount of compute as is necessary to emulate
the human brain?” on Less Wrong blog, accessed 2023-03-20.
[88] Tom B Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla
Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al.
“Language models are few-shot learners” (2020). arXiv:2005.14165.
[89] Tom Brown,
Benjamin Mann,
Nick Ryder,
Melanie Subbiah,
Jared D Ka-
plan,
Prafulla
Dhariwal,
Arvind
Neelakantan,
Pranav
Shyam,
Girish
Sas-
try, Amanda Askell, et al.
“Language models are few-shot learners”.
Ad-
vances
in
Neural
Information
Processing
Systems
33,
1877–1901
(2020).
url:
proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-
Abstract.html.
[90] Nuriya Nurgalieva, Simon Mathis, Lídia del Rio, and Renato Renner. “Thought ex-
periments in a quantum computer” (2022). arXiv:2209.06236.
[91] B. Schumacher. “Quantum coding”. Phys. Rev. A 51, 2738 (1995).
Accepted in Quantum 2023-07-18, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0.
44

