Acknowledgements We acknowledge a generous allotment (of about 3,000 c.p.u. days) of
computer time at the supercomputing centre at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory through funding
from the NASA Ofﬁces of Mission to Planet Earth. Aeronautics and Space Science. Comments
from M. Geller improved our paper. The NASA Astrophysics Theory Program supported part of
this project.
Competing interests statement The authors declare that they have no competing ﬁnancial
interests.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to S.J.K.
(skenyon@cfa.harvard.edu).
..............................................................
Realization of quantum error
correction
J. Chiaverini1, D. Leibfried1, T. Schaetz1*, M. D. Barrett1*,
R. B. Blakestad1, J. Britton1, W. M. Itano1, J. D. Jost1, E. Knill2, C. Langer1,
R. Ozeri1 & D. J. Wineland1
1Time and Frequency Division, 2Mathematical and Computational Sciences
Division, NIST, Boulder, Colorado 80305, USA
* Present addresses: Max Planck Institut fu¨r Quantenoptik, Garching, Germany (T.S.); Physics
Department, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand (M.D.B.)
.............................................................................................................................................................................
Scalable quantum computation1 and communication require
error control to protect quantum information against unavoid-
able noise. Quantum error correction2,3 protects information
stored in two-level quantum systems (qubits) by rectifying errors
with operations conditioned on the measurement outcomes.
Error-correction protocols have been implemented in nuclear
magnetic resonance experiments4–6, but the inherent limitations
of this technique7 prevent its application to quantum infor-
mation processing. Here we experimentally demonstrate quan-
tum error correction using three beryllium atomic-ion qubits
conﬁned to a linear, multi-zone trap. An encoded one-qubit state
is protected against spin-ﬂip errors by means of a three-qubit
quantum error-correcting code. A primary ion qubit is prepared
in an initial state, which is then encoded into an entangled state
of three physical qubits (the primary and two ancilla qubits).
Errors are induced simultaneously in all qubits at various rates.
The encoded state is decoded back to the primary ion one-qubit
state, making error information available on the ancilla ions,
which are separated from the primary ion and measured. Finally,
the primary qubit state is corrected on the basis of the ancillae
measurement outcome. We verify error correction by comparing
the corrected ﬁnal state to the uncorrected state and to the initial
state. In principle, the approach enables a quantum state to be
maintained by means of repeated error correction, an important
step towards scalable fault-tolerant quantum computation using
trapped ions.
Error-correcting codes that utilize entanglement to rectify
unknown errors in qubits are an important ingredient for large-
scale quantum information processing1–3 (QIP). Owing to the
fragility of quantum states, the presence of noise during both
storage and entangling operations diminishes any gain achieved
through the use of QIP without error correction. For example, the
realization of long-distance quantum cryptography requires protec-
tion from the effects of noise on communication channels8. In
addition, quantum error correction will be necessary for appli-
cations of quantum computing such as efﬁcient factorization of
large numbers1,9. It is notable that any of an inﬁnite set of qubit
errors can be corrected through quantum error correction by means
of a ﬁnite set of unitary operations conditioned on measurement.
Although there has been extensive theoretical research in the area
of quantum error correction, experimental work has been limited to
protocol process veriﬁcations by means of liquid-state nuclear
magnetic resonance. These experiments4–6 showed an increase in
state ﬁdelity after performing the unitary operations of an error-
correction protocol, but using techniques known not to scale
efﬁciently with the number of qubits7. Furthermore, the ancillae
cannot be reset in these experiments, whereas the experiment we
describe provides this capability. In principle, the protocol demon-
strated here can be repeated with the same qubits as many times as
required by a particular quantum algorithm.
We describe the implementation of a quantum error-correcting
code (QECC) using three physical qubits, here denoted as the
primary qubit and ancillae 1 and 2, to encode and protect one
logical qubit from spin-ﬂip errors (a p rotation around the x axis, in
this case). Each qubit comprises two hyperﬁne states of a 9Beþ ion
and can be coherently manipulated by means of laser pulses10,11. We
implement the QECC by (1) preparing the state the primary qubit,
(2) encoding this state into the logical state of all three qubits
through use of an entangling operation, (3) applying an error
rotation (that induces spin-ﬂips upon measurement) to all three
qubits, (4) decoding the logical state to the primary qubit, (5)
measuring the state of the ancillae, and ﬁnally (6) applying correc-
tion operations to the primary qubit dependent upon the ancillae
measurement outcome. The error correction is performed determi-
nistically in every experiment. The results indicate that such
methods, coupled with other recent experimental advances11–14,
may lead to scalable QIP in a system of trapped ions.
In contrast to the standard repetition code2,3,15, the QECC
described and implemented here (see Fig. 1) can not be obtained
by application of the superposition principle to a classical error-
correction code. It is a stabilizer code15 with stabilizer group
generators {ZZX, ZXZ}. These generators are tensor products of
Pauli operators (X ¼ jx, Z ¼ jz) operating on the qubits 1, 2 and 3.
By calculation of the commutation relations of the generators with
various error sets, it can be seen that as an error-detecting code, the
QECC presented here detects not only spin-ﬂips on any qubit but
also a spin-ﬂip or phase-ﬂip on qubits 2 and 3. As an error-
correction code, it will correct a spin-ﬂip on any of the three qubits
(the case for this work), but it can instead be used to correct a spin-
ﬂip on qubit 1 and a spin-ﬂip or phase-ﬂip on qubit 2 or qubit 3, for
example. Another possible implementation can correct a spin-ﬂip
on qubit 1 and a phase-ﬂip on either of the other two qubits.
In the experiment, we use 9Beþ ions conﬁned to the axis of a
multi-zone linear radio frequency Paul trap11 similar to that
described in ref. 16. The qubits comprise the electronic ground-
state hyperﬁne levels jF ¼ 1;mF ¼ 21l and jF ¼ 2;mF ¼ 22l
(denoted as j " l and j # l respectively, by analogy to the states of a
spin-1
2 particle). Here F is the total angular momentum and mF is its
projection along the quantization axis. The qubits are entangled
with a three-qubit phase gate utilizing the ions’ quantized axial
vibrational modes17 (see Methods section and Fig. 2b). Rotations
Rðv;fÞ ¼ cos v
2I 2 isin v
2 cosfjx 2 isin v
2 sinfjy
ð1Þ
are realized with two-photon stimulated-Raman transitions10,18
implemented by two laser beams having a relative frequency
detuning equal to the qubit transition frequency. Here jx and jy
are the usual Pauli operators, I is the identity operator, v is the
rotation angle, and f is the angle of the rotation axis in the x–y
plane. Rotations around an axis A by an angle v will be denoted Av,
for example, Xp/2 ¼ R(p/2, 0), although for rotations around an
axis by p we will omit the angle subscript, for example, X ¼ R(p, 0).
Measurement is accomplished through projection of the state of
each qubit using state-dependent resonance ﬂuorescence (an ion in
the j # l state ﬂuoresces, whereas an ion in the j " l state does not).
The ions can be transported from one zone of the trap to another
letters to nature
NATURE | VOL 432 | 2 DECEMBER 2004 | www.nature.com/nature
602
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group

through concerted variation of the potentials on segmented control
electrodes of the trap, and individual ion detections can be per-
formed separately11,19.
Ion preparation before each implementation of the QECC
protocol consists of Doppler cooling, Raman sideband cooling of
all three axial modes of vibration to the ground state, and optical
pumping of the ions to the j # # # l state10,20. Each experiment also
requires the initialization of the primary physical qubit to a state
jw0lP ¼ aj " lP þ bj # lP with the ancillae initialized to the state
j # # lA. This is accomplished by momentarily increasing the spa-
cings between the three ions and then applying a rotation that
affects the ions differently owing to their respective positions in the
laser beam intensity proﬁle (see Fig. 2a). This operation requires
only one laser pulse10. The state of the primary qubit is then encoded
in the state of all three qubits (see Methods section). In the following
discussion we assume perfect entangling operations.
After encoding, we apply an ‘error’ ve, a rotation Xve; to all qubits
by means of a stimulated-Raman transition with all ions illumi-
nated equally (see equation (1) and top part of Fig. 2a). With respect
to later measurement, this error induces a spin-ﬂip on each physical
qubit with probability pðveÞ ¼ sin2ðve=2Þ: The state is then decoded
using the inverse of the operation used for encoding. The decoding
effects a transformation such that afterwards, the four possible
states of the ancillae in the measurement basis (the error syn-
dromes) depend on the type of error that has occurred: the state
j " " lA corresponds to no error having occurred, the state j " # lA
corresponds to the ﬁrst ancilla having ﬂipped, the state j # " lA
corresponds to the second ancilla having ﬂipped, and the state
j # # lA corresponds to the primary qubit having ﬂipped. For at
most one qubit ﬂipped, the state of the primary qubit before a
correction operation is applied is shown in Table 1.
After the decoding operation, the ions are spatially separated (see
Fig. 2c), and a measurement of the state of the ancillae is performed.
The ions are then moved so that only the primary qubit ion is
addressed. Depending on the ancillae measurement outcome, a
correction operation (X, Yor I, see Table 1) is applied to the primary
qubit. This qubit is then analysed to determine the effectiveness of
the protocol. After initial cooling and preparation of the state
j # # # l, each experiment requires approximately 4 ms to perform.
In principle, this QECC works perfectly only when at most one of
the three qubits undergoes a spin-ﬂip error. The probability of more
than one qubit ﬂipping is given by:
P2or3ðveÞ ¼ p3ðveÞ þ 3p2ðveÞ½1 2 pðveÞ
ð2Þ
Because of this, most input states cannot be corrected to all orders in
the error ve, though they can be corrected such that an improve-
ment in the ﬁdelity over the uncorrected case is attainable for small
errors. The ﬁdelity of the corrected ﬁnal state (as derivable from the
action of the code in Fig. 1) as a function of the error will be:
FðveÞ ¼1 2 jaj2jbj2ð2 2 3cosve þ cos3 veÞ
<1 2 3
4jaj2jbj2v4
e þ O v6
e


ð3Þ
The inﬁdelity in this case is quadratic in v2
e; whereas it is linear in v2
e
for the uncorrected state. The ﬁdelity reaches a maximum value of 1
for the cases where jaj2jbj2 ¼ 0: The input states j # lP (where
a ¼ 0;jbj ¼ 1) and j " lP (where jaj ¼ 1, b ¼ 0) can therefore be
Figure 1 Quantum circuit for the quantum error-correction protocol described and
implemented in this work as one would compose it of single-bit rotations, Hadamard
gates, and controlled-not gates15. Double lines denote classical information. The
entangling operation G(¼G 21) is diagonal in the measurement basis and is deﬁned in the
Methods section. The operation of G requires only one collective pulse on all three ions as
implemented in this work. The spin echo refocusing operations and ancilla mapping are
discussed in the Methods section. For rotations around an axis by p we omit the angle
subscript, for example, X ¼ R(p, 0) (see equation 1). The Hadamard and controlled-not
operations that make up the entangling operation G are equivalent to three controlled-
phase rotations between permuted pairs of qubits; these operations could be substituted
for the ones shown, depending on the system-dependent entangling gates selected.
Figure 2 Schematic representation of experimental techniques. a, State preparation
method. The upper panel depicts ion locations in the laser beam proﬁle for global
rotations. In the lower panel, the ions’ spacings are increased such that their relative Rabi
frequencies for rotations are different (the spacings between the ions relative to the laser
beam width are exaggerated in this diagram). By moving the ions such that the primary
qubit (labelled P) is at a location of lower radiation intensity, and hence has a lower Rabi
frequency than the ancillae A1 and A2 (which are illuminated with equal intensity), a
rotation of 2np (n an integer; for this experiment n ¼ 2) can be performed on the ancillae
while any chosen rotation dependent upon the relative Rabi frequencies can be performed
on the primary qubit10. b, Optical-dipole forces (directions indicate relative phase) on ions
during the entangling operation G for different internal states. The state-dependent
force18 (F # ¼ 22F ") on each ion leads to accumulation of phase if the centre-of-mass
vibrational mode is excited, that is, when the internal states of the ions are different, as in
the two diagrams on the right. c, Transportation of ions during the error-correction
protocol. The three ions’ positions are shown as a function of time. Qubit operations are
performed on ions in trapping regions 3 and 4, and ion separations are performed in
region 3.
letters to nature
NATURE | VOL 432 | 2 DECEMBER 2004 | www.nature.com/nature
603
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group

corrected to all orders in ve for any error Xv e with this protocol.
To isolate the basic behaviour of the protocol from the technical
errors present in the coherent operations required for its implemen-
tation, we apply the complete protocol (Fig. 1) with and without
application of the error-correction operations and compare the ﬁnal
state ﬁdelities. Figure 3a shows the results for the input state j # lP.
The data are consistent with the theoretical prediction that the state
should be corrected for any error Xv e by this QECC. The curves have
non-zero inﬁdelity for zero error angle ve owing to inﬁdelity present
in the operations of the protocol.
Figure 3b and c shows similar data for the initial states
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
0:10
p
j " lP2i
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
0:90
p
j # lP and
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
0:22
p
j " lP 2 i
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
0:78
p
j # lP respectively.
From equation (3), it can be seen that as the input state gets closer to
the equator of the Bloch sphere (jaj < jbj), the QECC is expected to
perform worse for larger errors. However, the inﬁdelity of the
corrected state should grow only quadratically in v2
e for small errors,
as opposed to a linear growth for the uncorrected state. This
behaviour can be observed in the data, which in all cases show an
improvement over the uncorrected state. Data for a full range of
input states are not presented, as input states with larger values of
jaj required larger ion spacings and lower axial conﬁning potentials
than were practical during preparation of the primary qubit
state; these conﬁgurations were temporally unstable in the
current apparatus. It should be noted, however, that these exper-
imental limitations to state preparation do not affect the QECC
protocol.
We also plot the observed rate of the ancillary syndromes
for a particular input state in Fig. 3d to verify that our QECC
protocol is correctly detecting errors. The rate G(j " " lA) of
the syndrome corresponding to no error and the sum of the
rates Gðj "# lAÞ þ Gðj #" lAÞ þ Gðj ## lAÞ of the syndromes corre-
sponding to one error are plotted separately. The rates of the
syndromes vary in the predicted manner for increasing error,
up to an offset due to imperfections in the operations that
make up the protocol.
Although an improvement in ﬁdelity over an uncorrected
encoded qubit was observed, the QECC protocol as implemented
here induced more inﬁdelity for small errors thanwould be acquired
if an unencoded qubit had been initialized and then been subject
only to the applied error. It should be noted, however, that for errors
Figure 3 Results of quantum error correction protocol. Recovered state inﬁdelity plotted
versus the square of the applied error for corrected and uncorrected cases for three initial
states (a–c) and rate of syndrome measurements of ancillae (d). One-standard-deviation
errors are approximately the size of the symbols. a, The initial state is jw0lP ¼ j # lP:
b, The initial state is jw0lP ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
0:10
p
j " lP 2 i
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
0:90
p
j # lP: c, The initial state is jw0lP ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
0:22
p
j " lP 2 i
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
0:78
p
j # lP: d, Rate of syndrome measurements of ancillae versus
square of error angle. The rate G(m) is the measured probability of obtaining the
measurement outcome m. The data are off-set from the theoretical curves because of
imperfect gate operations. The initial state is jw0lP ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
0:10
p
j " lP 2 i
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
0:90
p
j # lP for
these data.
Table 1 Syndromes and corrections for the quantum error-correcting code
Primary qubit
before correction
Error
Ancillary
syndrome
Correction
operation
.............................................................................................................................................................................
bj " lP þ aj # lP
No error
j " " lA
X
aj " lP þ bj # lP
Ancilla 1 ﬂipped
j " # lA
I
aj " lP þ bj # lP
Ancilla 2 ﬂipped
j # " lA
I
bj " lP 2 aj # lP
Primary qubit ﬂipped
j # # lA
Y
.............................................................................................................................................................................
The ﬁrst column shows the state of the primary qubit before a correction is applied. The fourth
column
shows
the
correction
required
to
recover
the
primary
qubit
initial
state
jw0lP ¼ aj " lPþbj # lP:
letters to nature
NATURE | VOL 432 | 2 DECEMBER 2004 | www.nature.com/nature
604
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group

larger than ve < 1 radian, the corrected state had higher ﬁdelity
than an unencoded qubit undergoing only an applied error for all
states investigated, and the logical state was genuinely protected
with this protocol. The degradation observed during the execution
of the QECC is due in large part to the ﬁdelity of the encoding and
decoding gates (,90%), and all operations must be improved to
achieve fault-tolerance. In spite of these technical difﬁculties, the
current experiment shows the viability of the error-correction
protocol and demonstrates the feasibility of quantum error correc-
tion in a scalable system in which the ancillae can be reset. With
improvements in ﬁdelity, the execution of the QECC can be made a
useful part of more complex quantum algorithms.
A
Methods
Encoding and decoding
To encode the logical state with the QECC, we implement a three-ion entangling
operation, an extension of those described previously12,17:
Gðs1;s2;s3Þ ¼ G21ðs1;s2;s3Þ ¼
1
if
s1 ¼ s2 ¼ s3
21
otherwise
(
ð4Þ
Here si [ { " , # } is the spin state of the ith ion. This operation is diagonal in the
measurement basis and is equivalent to that depicted by G in Fig. 1, as can be veriﬁed by
explicit calculation. A ‘walking wave’ polarization interference pattern is set up at the ions’
location using two perpendicular beams of radiation whose wavevector difference is
parallel to the trap axis and whose difference frequency is detuned by a small amount d
(<2p £ 70 kHz) from the frequency qCOM ( ¼ 2p £ 3.7 MHz) of the centre-of-mass
(COM) axial vibrational mode in the trap17,18. The inter-ion spacing is adjusted relative to
the beams’ interference pattern so that if the phase of the resulting oscillating optical-
dipole force at frequency qCOM 2 d at the primary ion is fP, the phases at the ancillae ions
are fA1 ¼ fP þ 2p
3 and fA2 ¼ fP þ 4p
3 : The axial COM mode will be (off-resonantly)
excited only if there is a net force on the ions, which is the case if the ions are in different
internal states, that is, for all states except j " " " l and j # # # l (see Fig. 2b). As the
vibrational mode is excited, the ions move along a closed path in phase space (if the
radiation is applied for a time equal to 2p/d), and the states acquire a phase proportional to
the phase-space area enclosed by this path. All states except those for which s1 ¼ s2 ¼ s3
acquire the same phase (adjusted to be p), as the magnitude of the net force on the ions is
equal and non-zero. The application of a global rotation Yp/2 followed by this entangling
gate implements the ‘Encoding’section of Fig. 1. The application of an error is followed by
a re-application of the three-ion entangling gate G and a ﬁnal global rotation Yp/2; this
implements the ‘Decoding’ section of Fig. 1.
Refocusing and auxiliary operations
To simplify the syndrome determination when the ancillae are measured together, the
protocol is designed such that an X operation is required to return the protected qubit to
its initial state if no error has occurred, while no operation (the identity) is required if
either one of the ancillae is ﬂipped, and a Y operation is required if the primary bit is
ﬂipped. The protocol was implemented in this fashion through the tailoring of the phases
of two spin echo refocusing pulses11,16,17 that are required between encoding and decoding
(spin echoes 2 and 3 in Fig. 1) to counteract qubit dephasing caused by ﬂuctuations in the
local magnetic ﬁeld from experiment to experiment. The time required for ion
transportation in the trap necessitates additional spin-echo operations after decoding and
before correction (spin echoes 4 and 5). To reduce experimental measurement uncertainty,
an ancilla mapping step is performed to associate the outcome that is expected most often
(no error) with the ancillae state j " " lA, the state most easily distinguishable from the
others when the ancillae are measured together.
After the correction operation is applied to the primary qubit, we apply a rotation XvF
to this qubit before measurement to characterize the effectiveness of the protocol. The
angle vF is varied over many experiments such that we produce a sinusoidal trace of the
probability of measuring the primary qubit to be in the state j # lP as it is rotated around
the Bloch-sphere axis around which the error was applied. This allows a ﬁt to a sinusoidal
curve and hence precise measurement of the ﬁnal state ﬁdelity of the primary qubit.
Received 30 August; accepted 1 October 2004; doi:10.1038/nature03074.
1. Preskill, J. Reliable quantum computers. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 454, 385–410 (1998).
2. Calderbank, A. R. & Shor, P. W. Good quantum error-correcting codes exist. Phys. Rev. A 54,
1098–1105 (1996).
3. Steane, A. Multiple particle interference and quantum error correction. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 452,
2551–2577 (1996).
4. Cory, D. G. et al. Experimental quantum error correction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 2152–2155 (1998).
5. Leung, D. et al. Experimental realization of a two-bit phase damping quantum code. Phys. Rev. A 60,
1924–1943 (1999).
6. Knill, E., Laﬂamme, R., Martinez, R. & Negrevergne, C. Benchmarking quantum computers: The ﬁve-
qubit error correcting code. Phys. Rev. Lett. 86, 5811–5814 (2001).
7. Cory, D. G. et al. NMR based quantum information processing: Achievements and prospects. Fortschr.
Phys. 48, 875–907 (2000).
8. Lo, H.-K. & Chau, H. F. Unconditional security of quantum key distribution over arbitrarily long
distances. Science 283, 2050–2056 (1999).
9. Shor, P. W. Proc. 35th Annual Symp. on Foundations of Computer Science (ed. Goldwasser, S.) 124 (IEEE
Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, California, 1994).
10. Wineland, D. J. et al. Experimental issues in coherent quantum-state manipulation of trapped atomic
ions. J. Res. Natl Inst. Stand. Technol. 103 (3), 259–328 (1998).
11. Barrett, M. D. et al. Deterministic quantum teleportation of atomic qubits. Nature 429, 737–739
(2004).
12. Leibfried, D. et al. Toward Heisenberg-limited spectroscopy with multiparticle entangled states.
Science 304, 1476–1478 (2004).
13. Riebe, M. et al. Deterministic quantum teleportation with atoms. Nature 429, 734–737 (2004).
14. Blinov, B. B., Moehring, D. L., Duan, L.-M. & Monroe, C. Observation of entanglement between a
single trapped atom and a single photon. Nature 428, 153–157 (2004).
15. Nielsen, M. A. & Chuang, I. L. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information (Cambridge Univ.
Press, Cambridge, UK, 2000).
16. Rowe, M. A. et al. Transport of quantum states and separation of ions in a dual rf ion trap. Quant. Inf.
Comput. 2, 257–271 (2002).
17. Leibfried, D. et al. Experimental demonstration of a robust, high-ﬁdelity geometric two ion-qubit
phase gate. Nature 422, 412–415 (2003).
18. Wineland, D. J. et al. Quantum information processing with trapped ions. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A
361, 1349–1361 (2003).
19. Schaetz, T. et al. Quantum dense coding with atomic qubits. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 040505 (2004).
20. King, B. E. et al. Cooling the collective motion of trapped ions to initialize a quantum register. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 81, 1525–1528 (1998).
Acknowledgements We thank T. Rosenband and D. Rosenberg for comments on the manuscript.
This work was supported by the US National Security Agency (NSA) and the Advanced Research
and Development Activity (ARDA). This manuscript is a publication of NIST.
Competing interests statement The authors declare that they have no competing ﬁnancial
interests.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.C.
(john.chiaverini@boulder.nist.gov).
..............................................................
Nonlinear optics in the extreme
ultraviolet
Taro Sekikawa, Atsushi Kosuge, Teruto Kanai & Shuntaro Watanabe
Institute for Solid State Physics, University of Tokyo, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa
277-8581, Japan
.............................................................................................................................................................................
Nonlinear responses to an optical ﬁeld are universal in nature but
have been difﬁcult to observe in the extreme ultraviolet (XUV)
and soft X-ray regions owing to a lack of coherent intense light
sources. High harmonic generation is a well-known nonlinear
optical phenomenon1,2 and is now drawing much attention in
attosecond pulse generation3–6. For the application of high
harmonics to nonlinear optics in the XUV and soft X-ray
regime, optical pulses should have both large pulse energy
and short pulse duration to achieve a high optical electric
ﬁeld. Here we show the generation of intense isolated pulses
from a single harmonic (photon energy 27.9 eV) by using a
sub-10-femtosecond blue laser pulse, producing a large
dipole moment at the relatively low (ninth) harmonic
order nonadiabatically7,8. The XUV pulses with pulse dur-
ations of 950 attoseconds and 1.3 femtoseconds were charac-
terized by an autocorrelation technique, based on two-
photon
above-threshold
ionization9
of
helium
atoms.
Because of the small cross-section for above-threshold ion-
ization10, such an autocorrelation measurement of XUV
pulses with photon energy larger than the ionization energy
of helium has not hitherto been demonstrated6,11–13. The
technique can be extended to the characterization of higher
harmonics at shorter wavelengths.
The two-photon above-threshold ionization (ATI) of helium
atoms is a successive absorption of an additional photon beyond
the one required for ionization of helium atoms. The cross-section
of two-photon ATI is an order of magnitude smaller than conven-
letters to nature
NATURE | VOL 432 | 2 DECEMBER 2004 | www.nature.com/nature
605
© 2004 Nature Publishing Group

