UC Santa Barbara
UC Santa Barbara Previously Published Works
Title
Agency Structure and the Distribution of Federal Spending
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/75g234mq
Journal
Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory, 26(3)
ISSN
1053-1858
Authors
Anderson, Sarah E
Potoski, Matthew
Publication Date
2016-07-01
DOI
10.1093/jopart/muw002
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Agency Structure and the Distribution of Federal Spending
Sarah E. Anderson
Bren School of Environmental Science & Management
University of California, Santa Barbara
2400 Bren Hall
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
sanderson@bren.ucsb.edu
Matthew Potoski
Bren School of Environmental Science & Management
University of California, Santa Barbara
2400 Bren Hall
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
mpotoski@bren.ucsb.edu
,

Abstract
Agency structure can shape agency independence in two ways. First, it can
insulate agencies from policy demands from political overseers in Congress
and the executive branch. Second, agency structure can shape the range of
available options from which agencies can select policy. In this paper, we
present a novel empirical approach that evaluates both types of effects by
modeling the mean and variance of agencies’ policy decisions. Analyses of
United States distributive program spending across ten congresses and 68
federal agencies shows that agencies structured for independence enjoy a
broader range of options from which to implement policy but are no less
responsive  to  spending  demands  from  members  of  Congress  and  the
president. 
,

Agency structure is the institutional rules and authority under which government agencies
administer the policy responsibilities delegated to them from their political authorities. Agency
structure helps govern the relationship among elected officials, agencies, and the public that is
key to electoral and democratic accountability. Like statutory limits on discretion (Huber and
Shipan 2002), congressional oversight (Aberbach 1990), limitation riders (MacDonald 2010), and
administrative procedures (McCubbins, Noll, and Weingast 1987), agency structure can be a
powerful tool that provides  presidents  and Congress  with the  opportunity to  steer agency
implementation to serve their electoral purposes (Howell and Lewis 2002; Moe 1989; Wood and
Bohte 2004) and shape the range of options from which agencies can select policy to implement
(Bawn 1995, 1997; Epstein and O’Halloran 1994, 1999; Hammond and Knott 1996; McCubbins,
Noll, and Weingast 1989; Bendor, Glazer and Hammond, 2001). 
Consider an example of how agency structure might play out in an agency administering
federal grants. Enabling legislation that creates a national public health agency to administer
grants for disease research might design the agency to be quite responsive to elected politicians.
As prior research has shown (e.g., Bickers and Stein 1996), such an agency might display a bias
by  directing  more  funding  to  districts  represented  by  powerful  or  electorally  demanding
politicians, perhaps because because politicians directly influence spending or because strategic
agency officials anticipate what their overseers would want. But suppose the agency officials are
more likely than the politicians to know which grant proposals have stronger scientific merit and
which diseases are more promising targets for research. Politicians could then structure the
agency for more independence, giving it a broader range of options for administering policy in an
attempt to exploit the public health officials’ expertise about how best to improve human health
through disease research. Under the cloak of independence, however, the agency administrators
,

could channel grants towards their favored research labs or their own pet disease causes, drifting
implementation from what politicians would want if they were as well informed as the agency
officials. Without knowing the agencies’ preferences and their evaluation of the technical merits
of funding options, it is difficult to specify the location where funding is more likely to occur
within the broader range of options available to them. What can instead be specified, however, is
that independent agencies can use the broader range of options to implement policy with what
appears from the outside to be a higher degree of variability. Agency structure can thus have two
consequences for how funding programs are administered. Agencies structured for political
control will be more likely to make awards in the districts of politically powerful and demanding
politicians, while also having a smaller range of options from which to select policies to
implement. 
In this paper, we present an empirical strategy for identifying both of these effects of agency
structure on the implementation of federal distributive policy. The data are a panel of US
distributive program awards made by federal agencies from 1983 to 2002, measures of agency
structure (Lewis 2003; 2008), and other controls. We first examine whether distributive program
spending in agencies structured for political influence is more sensitive to elected politicians’
political circumstances than spending in agencies structured for more independence, such as
whether politically pliable agencies channel more distributive program awards to the districts
represented by politicians facing close elections. We then examine whether more independent
agencies show wider variance in their distributive spending, conditional on the modeled mean
from the first analysis. Independent agencies may probabilistically choose policies across the
broader range of options available to them, whether these choices are motivated by the agency’s
own policy preferences or by its technical policy assessments. The emphasis on variability in
distributive spending means that we need not empirically distinguish between these motivations.
,

Across  several  model  specifications,  agency  structure  consistently  has  imperceptible
influence on agencies’ responsiveness to elected politicians, but it significantly increases the
range of options from which agencies implement distributive spending policy. The correlations
between  measures  of  politicians’ political  circumstances  and  agencies’ distributive  policy
spending in their congressional districts are no stronger for agencies structured for political
influence than for agencies structured for independence. However, the variance of distributive
policy spending is greater for agencies structured for independence than for those structured for
control. Together, these results suggest that agency structure is a way of adjusting agency
independence by structuring the range of options from which agencies can choose to administer
policy rather than by making agencies responsive to individual elected politicians. 
Our paper offers important contributions to public administration research. First, the paper
shows that agency independence can have two implications for how agencies implement policy:
agencies’ ability to resist demands from political overseers and their ability to select policies to
implement from a broad range of politically acceptable options. Second, the paper offers an
analytic strategy for identifying both of these discretionary effects in a broad range of research
settings. An advantage of this approach is that it identifies the consequences of discretion without
needing  to  sort  out  whether  decisions  were  based  on  administering  agencies’ technical
assessments or policy preferences, which is a vexing challenge in just about any empirical
setting.  Third,  the  paper’s  findings  suggest  that,  aside  from  responsiveness  to  politicians’
demands, agencies use discretion to pursue policies of their own choice, whether based on their
own policy preferences or technical expertise. The next section offers a more detailed theoretical
rationale in the context of the literature on agency structure and distributive spending. The paper
then presents the data and analytic techniques, results, and conclusion. 
,

1  Theoretical Rationale: The Consequences of Agency Structure
Agency structure is constrained by a tradeoff between the benefits of agency independence and
those of political responsiveness (e.g., Bawn 1995; Bendor and Meirowtiz 2004; Gailmard 2002;
Gailmard and Patty 2007; Hammond and Knott 1996; Huber 2007; Morgan and Campbell 2011;
Whitford 2005). Because agency administrators may have policy relevant expertise, independent
agencies may implement policy in more technically sound ways, leading to better policies than
the less informed politicians could have achieved on their own. But, administrators’ views on
what  constitutes  technically  sound  policy  may  be  different  from  politicians’ views,  and
administrators may have their own personal policy preferences that differ from politicians’
preferences. Agencies’ expertise and information advantage over their elected political overseers
may allow agencies to pursue objectives that are at odds with what elected politicians would want
(Banks  and  Weingast  1992).  Because  they  lack  administrators’ information  and  expertise,
politicians have a hard time discerning whether a particular administrative action is in line with
what they would have wanted or is some form of administrative drift (Calvert, McCubbins, and
Weingast 1989; Macey 1992; Shepsle 1992).1 
Theoretical and empirical research has shown that politicians design agencies through a
political  process  where  Congress  and the  president  are  often  at  odds  (e.g.,  Lewis  2003).
Politicians delegate increased discretion when agencies’ expertise is more valuable, such as when
a policy problem is more complex (Ringquist, Wrosham, and Eisner 2003) and reduce discretion
1 Beyond agency structure, other factors influence the level of agency autonomy, including 
reputation (Carpenter 2001), policy issue salience and the political environment (Lavertu 
2012; Carpenter and Krause 2015), and conflict among political overseers (Epstein and 
O’Halloran, 1999). We limit our discussion to agency structure since we do not address these 
other sources empirically; our analyses control for these effects using agency fixed effects 
and other empirical approaches.
,

when their political costs of agency drift are greater, such when a policy is more politically
salient or conflictual (Lavertu 2012; Whitford 2005). 
The consequences of agency structure for how agencies implement policy has received less
empirical scrutiny (but see e.g., Wood and Waterman 1991, 1993; Whitford 2014, Woods 2015),
most likely because of the challenges of measuring the degree of independence delegated across
different  agencies  and,  perhaps  more  importantly,  of  deploying  an  empirical  strategy  for
identifying the effects of agency structure on how agencies implement policy.2 This paper takes
up these challenges. First, we develop a theoretical rationale for how agency structure shapes the
degree of independence with which agencies implement policies. Second, we offer an empirical
analysis that identifies the effect of agency structure on political responsiveness directly and on
the range of policy options available to the agency.
1.1  Agency Structure and Policy Outcomes
There is a rich literature on the conditions under which politicians design agencies for more or
less political responsiveness (e.g., Howell and Lewis 2002; Lewis 2003; Wood and Bohte 2004).
Here  we  do  not  consider  the  causes  of  administrative  design  but  instead  emphasize  the
implications of agency design.3 Agency structure can have two important consequences for how
agencies implement policy. First, agencies structured for political responsiveness may implement
policy more in accordance with the demands of elected politicians. Both the president and
members of Congress have been shown to exercise influence over agencies (e.g., Clinton, Lewis,
2 See Carpenter and Krause (2015) for a contrasting perspective.  Krause and Douglas 2005 
find that the reputational incentives of agencies outweigh differences in structure.
3 Considerable research shows that politicians use agency structure to influence future agency 
behavior and to manage the tradeoff between agency expertise and responsiveness (e.g., Moe
1989, Bawn 1995, Bendor, Glazer, and Hammond, 2001; Gailmard and Patty 2012).
,

and Selin 2014; Berry, Burden, and Howell 2010). Politicians may exert more influence when
agencies’ decisions are more valuable to them, such as when facing a challenging election
(Bickers and Stein 1996, 2000). Politicians may likewise exert more influence over agencies
when they have more political authority. For example, a legislative committee chair may have
more influence over agencies under her jurisdiction. 
Second, agencies structured for independence may have a broader range of options from
which to choose policies. Of course, an agency might use its discretion to choose policies from a
narrow band of the broader range available to it, resulting in a more homogeneous set of policies.
However, across a large number of agencies making many policy choices, the broader range of
policy  options  available  to  more  independent  agencies  should  on  average  show  more
heterogeneous policies. Agency structure can affect an agency’s range of policy options by
heading it with a board or commission or by placing limitations on the type of person who can
serve as its leader. 
Theories of agency structure suggest two dimensions of agency independence: the degree to
which agencies respond to external political influence and the range of options from which they
can select policy to implement (see Bawn 1995; Gailmard and Patty 2012). From this we derive
two propositions that inform our empirical analyses. The first is that agencies’ policy output
varies based on the signals it receives from politicians, conditional on the degree to which the
agency  has  been  structured  for  political  responsiveness.  The  second  empirical  proposition
addresses the fact that agency structure can affect the range of policy options from which the
agency can select a policy to implement. From politicians’ perspectives, agency drift occurs when
agencies’ policy outputs differ from what is targeted by the combined effects of the legislative
mandate and political demands, with larger differences indicating that the agency had a larger
,

discretionary range from which to choose policy. The size of the range is a function of agency
structure for political responsiveness. 
1.2  Agency Structure and Distributive Policy
Federal distributive program spending in the United States is an ideal setting for studying the
effects of agency structure on policy implementation. There are thousands of grant programs
across  the  US  federal  government,  covering diverse  policy  areas  such as  health  research,
transportation infrastructure, education, and the environment. The demands of public office leave
politicians without the time and expertise to identify which levees need repair, which businesses
need loans, and so on. Instead, elected politicians establish via statute the broad aims for
distributive programs and then delegate authority for making specific awards to agencies with
expertise to better identify the most suitable recipients. At the same time, elected politicians can
sometimes have stronger incentives to influence how specific agencies spend distributive funds
(Stein 1981, Levitt and Snyder 1997), as demonstrated by empirical research on how elected
politicians influence distributive spending in the United States.4 Members of Congress demand
more spending in their districts when facing harder reelection battles (Bickers and Stein 1996;
Sellers 1997). Members of Congress also channel more distributive program spending to their
district when they hold favorable committee assignments (Adler 2002; Arnold 1979; Carsey and
Rundquist 1999; Hird 1991; Rich 1989) and when their party controls Congress (Levitt and
Snyder 1995; Bickers and Stein 2000; Balla et al. 2002). Members of Congress can use federal
spending to reward strong political supporters from the previous election (Anderson and Tollison
4 There is also considerable research on agency budget requests, suggesting that the political 
overseers seek ways to overcome the informational disadvantage that they face (e.g., Bendor 
and Moe 1985, Ryu, et al. 2007). If anything, this informational disadvantage is likely greater
with distributive awards, given their geographic and topical specificity.
,

1991; Chen 2010; Couch and Shugart 1998; Larcinese, Rizzo, and Testa 2006) but also to target
swing voters in upcoming elections (Garrett and Sobel 2003).5 The US president may also
influence spending (Hudak 2014) to target swing voters (Dixit and Londregan 1996), reward their
supporters from the previous election (Cox and McCubbins 1986), and reward copartisans (Berry,
Burden, and Howell 2010, Dynes and Huber 2015).
Comparing  how  independent  and  politically  controlled  agencies  respond  to  legislators’
political circumstances provides insights into how agency structure conditions responsiveness.
Distributive  spending  by  agencies  structured  for  such  influence  should  be  more  strongly
correlated with politicians’ political circumstances than spending by independent agencies.6 For
example, if a formerly safe incumbent faces a daunting election, her district would receive more
funding from agencies structured for political influence, while politically insulated agencies
would not change their spending in response to the legislator’s electoral circumstances. Likewise,
a politician gaining a new position of authority such as a legislative committee chair would have
more ability to shift to his district the spending of agencies structured for political influence,
while the spending of politically insulated agencies would remain unchanged. 
Figure 1 offers a conceptual illustration of the two ways that agency structure can shape
distributive program spending, using politicians’ electoral circumstances as an example of the
types of varying political circumstances agencies can face. The x-axis aligns agencies from low
to high by their level of independence. The y-axis is the number of awards received by districts,
with the solid lines distinguishing between competitive districts where incumbents have strong
5 Higher distributive program spending is also correlated with citizens’ needs and demands, as
reflected by district demographics (Arnold 1979; Bickers and Stein 1996, 2000; Carsey and 
Rundquist 1999; Hird 1991; Lee and Oppenheimer 1999; Levitt and Snyder 1995; Potoski 
and Talbert 2000; Rich 1989) and strength of organized interests (Lowry and Potoski 2004).
6 Here we do not consider the ideology of the member of Congress or agency, but congruence 
between these has also been shown to increase grants (Bertelli and Grose 2009).
,

demand for more distributive spending and safe districts where the incumbents’ demand for
distributive spending is lower. First, Figure 1 shows how agency structure influences agencies’
responsiveness to political demands. Insulated agencies do not change their level of spending
according  to  politicians’ electoral  circumstances;  when  agencies  are  the  most  insulated,
competitive districts receive the same amount of spending as safe districts. Less insulated
agencies  are  responsive  to  politicians’  electoral  circumstances,  increasing  spending  in
competitive districts relative to safe districts. Second, Figure 1 shows that agency structure
shapes the range of options available to an agency. The grey shaded area represents the range of
policies from which agencies can choose. More insulated agencies enjoy a broader range of
options from which to select policy to implement. 
Figure 1 about here 
Evaluating in practice whether agency structure shapes the range of policy choices available
to an agency has proven to be quite challenging, largely because of the difficulty of measuring
concepts like agency preferences and the technical merits of policy options. Below we describe
an analytic approach to evaluating distributive program spending that evaluates the effects of
agency structure on the range of policy options available for agencies to implement without
resorting to measuring agency preferences or the technical merits of policy options. We argue that
the variance in distributive program awards by US agencies, conditional on the mean predicted
by politically relevant observable factors, provides a measure of the range of policy options
available to the agency. A broader range of options means that agencies enjoying discretion are
more likely to choose policies that are larger deviations from what the observed factors would
have predicted. 
,

2  Methods and Data
Our analyses first model the mean of agencies’ distributive program implementation across
congressional districts as a function of agency structure, politicians’ political circumstances, and
other controls. We next examine interaction terms between politicians’ political circumstances
and agency structure to see if distributive program spending is less responsive to politicians’
demands when procedures grant agency independence. Our analyses then model the variance of
agencies’ spending choices, conditional on the estimated mean, as a function of agency structure.
The key tests of the effect of agency structure on the range of policy available to agencies are
coefficients measuring whether the variance of distributive policy spending across districts
increases  with  agencies’ discretion.  For  this  test,  the  analyses  use  panel  techniques  with
multiplicative heteroskedasticity (Harvey 1976). Note that this empirical approach implies a
definition of agency discretion as the range of policy options that are practically feasible for the
agency to implement. By practically feasible  we mean permissible  by statute and judicial
oversight and beyond the direct influence of political demand from Congress and the President.
We also report several specification checks, including fixed and random effects and different
measures of agency independence. All in all, our analytic approach offers several important
advantages over previous agency design and distributive policy research: a large sample of panel
data, variation in agency structure and political circumstances, and an analytic approach that uses
interaction  terms  and  conditional  variance  coefficients  to  assess  two  outcomes  of  agency
independence. 
,

2.1  Estimation Methods
The analyses are based on linear regression with multiplicative conditional heteroskedasticity
estimated via full information maximum likelihood (Harvey 1976). This procedure estimates both
the mean and variance of a dependent variable conditional on independent variables. Such
techniques are useful for uncovering circumstances where the variance of a dependent variable
depends on exogenous factors. For example, the variability of citizens’ attitudes on contentious
issues may depend on how well they are informed (Alvarez and Brehm 2002). Our empirical
model regresses the number of distributive program awards from an agency to a district on the
independent variables and interaction terms in order to assess whether the effect of political
variables is conditional on the agency structure, shown as equation 1.
awardsijt=α+B1∗Xit+B2∗P j+B3( Xit∗P j)+B4∗W it+τijt  (1)
where subscript  i indexes congressional districts, subscript  j indexes agencies, and subscript  t
indexes congresses.  represents a matrix of political characteristics measuring conditions where
the district’s representative would have more ability or effective demand to steer distributive
program  awards  to  her  district,  such  as  her  seniority,  committee  assignment,  or  political
vulnerability.  is a measure of agency independence. While we do not see any obvious theoretical
reason to believe that the number of awards is a direct function of agency structure, we include it
in the empirical model as a main effect in order to estimate the interaction terms, which are of
interest.  is a vector of controls composed of district characteristics. The coefficients α and in , ,
and  represent respectively the constant and direct effects of political characteristics, agency
independence,  and  controls  on  distributive  program  awards.  The  control  variables  include
measures of districts’ demand and ability to procure distributive program awards, including
wealth, education and other demographics. , the vector of coefficients on the interaction terms,
,

indicate whether the structure chosen affects the degree to which the agency is responsive to
political factors. The intuition behind this modeling approach is that the coefficients α and in , ,
and  together capture how politicians direct agencies to implement policy, whether through
legislative mandate or through the amount they respond to political signals net of the insulating
effects of agency structure, which are captured via .  is the error term which takes the form of
equation 2. 
Var(τijt )=e
ϑ+ γ∗P j+ϵ ijt
(2)
with notations the same as equation 1.  is once again a measure of agency independence. The
coefficients ϑ and γ represent the constant and the coefficient for agency independence. The
intuition behind this modeling approach is that a larger variance means that agencies are choosing
policies with more independence from the political influences captured in equation 1. This
specification allows us to assess whether the variance in agency policies is greater when the
agency is more insulated, with a positive coefficient indicating greater variance among more
independent agencies (e.g., Huber and Shipan 2002). After performing the Wooldridge test for
autocorrelation in panel data (Wooldridge 2002), we can reject the null hypothesis of no first-
order autocorrelation, which is not surprising given the nature of distributive spending data. The
results include models with and without a lagged dependent variable. Equations 1 and 2 were
estimated in Stata using the regh command.
We  also  conducted alternative  analyses  to  see  if  the  results  are  sensitive  to  modeling
assumptions. Since the control variables may not account for all observable factors influencing
distributive program spending, such as actors’ capacity to work collaboratively to procure grants,
we estimated models using fixed and random effects to account for unmeasured characteristics of
the agency-district pair within a redistricting period that might otherwise lead to omitted variable
,

bias.7 This identification strategy accounts for factors such as interest group strength and the
presence of major research universities that might influence distributive program grants as well
as unobservable factors in the relationship between an agency and a district. This means, of
course, that we cannot estimate a coefficient for independence in the first stage because it does
not vary within the district-decade-agency groupings and is captured via the fixed effects, but we
can still estimate the interaction term coefficients to see if the effects of political circumstances
vary with agency structure, which is our primary interest. We also estimated random effects
analyses, which can include both the interaction terms and their components. A disadvantage of
both fixed and random effects approaches is that software procedures have not been developed
for jointly estimating equations 1 and 2 with fixed and random effects. For both these models, we
adopt the less efficient but asymptotically equivalent approach of first estimating equation 1 and
then using its squared residuals to estimate equation 3. 
τijt
2 =ϑ +γ∗P j+ ρ∗Gt+ϵ ijt
(3)
Since the Wooldridge (2002) test for serial autocorrelation again suggests that there is serial
autocorrelation, we use fixed and random effects GLS models with AR(1) disturbances. We note
the important findings and where the results differ substantially from the estimates in the
multiplicative heteroskedasticity estimation. The overall pattern of results persists across different
estimation approaches.
7 We include decade in the panel variable of district-decade-agency to account for redistricting
that occurs each decade. As a result, a district may not be comparable from decade to decade.
,

2.2  Data
Our policy data are a panel of distributive awards in U.S. congressional districts from 68 agencies
over 10 Congresses (1983-2002), as reported in the Federal Assistance Awards Data System
(FAADS), maintained by the Bureau of the Census and the Department of Commerce. The
dependent variable is the number of new distributive program awards within each congressional
district by each distributive program in each Congress from the 98th to the 107th.8 Following
Bickers and Stein (1996, 2000) and others, we choose the number of new awards rather than
dollar value of the awards as a better indicator of political salience than dollars (Grimmer,
Messing, and Westwood 2012).9 This is largely because the marginal credit claiming value of
additional dollars declines, holding number of awards constant. As a check of this assumption,
we also test an alternative specification using the dollar value of awards from agencies to
districts, excluding contingent liability programs. The results are similar to our main results and
reported in the Appendix.
The distributive programs were matched to David Lewis’ data on agency structure and
political appointments in US federal agencies created between 1946 and 1997 (Lewis 2003,
8 The dependent variable is quite skewed, with many zeros and some very large values. 
Normally, we would use a log transform under these circumstances. However, a log 
transform can create a spurious relationship between variance and independence if more 
independent agencies give more awards (which they do). Therefore, we present results with a
logged dependent variable only as a robustness check in the appendix. Results are 
substantially the same when the dependent variable is logged and are discussed below.
9 Counting the number of awards also allows us to include contingent liability programs such 
as loan guarantees and insurance, which are favored by Republicans (Bickers and Stein 
2000). These awards have monetary value to recipients, but their dollar value recorded in the 
FAADS system is not directly comparable to cash awards. For a more complete discussion, 
see Bickers and Stein (1996), Lowry and Potoski (2004). Also, following Stein and Bickers 
(1996) and others, we exclude programs distributed by formula and those whose eligible 
recipients are restricted only to governments or individuals, as reported in the Catalog of 
Federal Domestic Assistance.
,

2008). Sixty-eight agencies administering over 600 distributive programs appeared in both the
FAADS data and Lewis agency data. Among districts that receive awards, the average number of
new awards from an agency is 36. However, many districts receive no awards from a program.
Out of approximately 274,000 district-agency-congress groups, about 47,000 receive at least one
award and the mean number of awards is six.
Lewis’s (2003, 2008) data is designed to measure independence from the president; it
inevitably also captures independence of agencies from the legislative branch as well. For
example, an agency headed by a board or commission is more likely to be insulated from
Congress,  as  well  as  the  president.10 Lewis  offers  two  approaches  to  measuring  agency
independence. The first assesses each agency on six major aspects of independence: whether the
agency is headed by a board or commission, whether the new agency is independent (created
outside of existing bureaucratic structure), whether the administrator serves for a fixed term, how
long that term is, whether there are limitations on the type of persons who can be appointed to
head the agency, and the agency’s proximity to the president. Further details on the coding
scheme  can  be  found in  Lewis’s  codebook,  posted at  https://my.vanderbilt.edu/davidlewis/.
Second, Lewis (2008) offers data on the percentage of political appointees in an agency, which
may affect responsiveness (Krause, Lewis, and Douglas 2006). This is measured by the number
of presidential appointees over the number of career-level SES managers within an agency
(Lewis 2008). To keep the analyses more tractable, we use principal factor analysis to collapse
these variables into a summary measure of agencies’ degree of independence. This summary
variable captures 89% of the variance in the underlying descriptions of agency independence.11
One factor captures 90% of the variance in the structural variables, when the political appointees
10 Selin (2015) expands on these measures of independence, but we believe these capture 
enough variation to allow testing of the relationship between agency structure and policy 
outcomes.
,

variable is kept separate. Since including both ordinal and continuous data in factor analysis can
be problematic, we also estimate the latent insulation using Bayesian factor analysis for mixed
ordinal and continuous data following Quinn (2004). The resulting factor is correlated at 0.91
with  the  factor  estimated  via  principal  components,  so  we  maintain  the  simpler  principal
components version and offer robustness checks that separate out the structural variables (the
ordinal variables) from the political appointees (the continuous variable) and also include each
component  of  the  factor  separately.  The  results  are  largely  similar.  Agencies  such  as  the
Agricultural Marketing Service and the Centers for Disease Control are the least insulated from
political control, while agencies such as the National Science Foundation and the Corporation for
National and Community Service are the most insulated. Appendix Table 1 shows some of the
agencies and their independence scores. 
The  remaining  important  independent  variables  fall  into  two  categories:  variables  that
describe the political conditions of the district and variables that describe the characteristics of
the districts’ representatives in Congress. The key variables describing district political conditions
are  the  legislator  and  presidential  vote  margins  in  the  district.  We  include  the  winning
congressional candidate’s vote share in the prior election as a measure of the safety of the
congressional district and the safety of the seat for the incumbent president using the absolute
value of the difference between 0.5 and the share of the vote going to the Democratic candidate
in the prior election. To measure the political power of the member of Congress representing the
district, we include seniority in Congress, majority party membership, whether she is a Democrat,
whether she is a freshman, whether she serves on the Appropriations or Ways and Means
Committees, whether she is a committee chair or ranking member, and whether she is a party
11 The first factor has an eigenvalue of 4.57, after which all subsequent eigenvalues are below 
one. This suggests that one factor is sufficient.
,

leader. To assess the effects of agency structure, the analyses include interaction terms between
the agency independence measures and the district and representative characteristics.12 If agency
structure  conditions legislators’ influence over agencies’ distributive  program  spending, the
correlation  between  spending  and legislator  characteristics  will  be  lower  in  agencies  with
procedures granting independence than in agencies designed for political control. 
The remaining variables serve as controls. First is a suite of standard district demographic
variables drawn from US census data. Following Bickers and Stein (2004) and others, we include
controls for district demand characteristics. These include the proportion of the population with
no diploma, under 18 years of age, over 65 years of age, of Hispanic origin, black, living in urban
areas, and employed in blue collar occupations. These are only available every 10 years from the
Census Bureau so we include the district’s unemployment rate and per capita income, which are
available on a yearly basis from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The analyses include House
delegation size (the number of districts in the state) because theoretical literature suggests that
larger delegations get more distributive benefits because of spillover from the other districts
(Levitt and Snyder 1995). 
Divisions among agencies’ political overseers can influence the variability with which they
administer policy (e.g., Huber and Shipan 2002). We measure the size of the gridlock interval per
Krehbiel (1998) as the difference between the Common Space Nominate scores (Carroll et al.
2009) of the leftmost and rightmost members of Congress whose votes are necessary to pass
legislation following Chiou and Rothenberg (2003) with no role for party. Appendix Table 2
provides descriptive statistics of the variables in the model. 
12  We do not include an interaction between party and independence, since we have no 
reason to expect that agencies would be more responsive to one party that the other. We do 
include the main effect of party, since Democrats may be more likely to receive more awards.
,

3  Results
Table 1 presents the results of multiplicative conditional heteroskedasticity full information
maximum  likelihood  analyses  of  the  effects  of  agency  structure  on  agency  discretion  in
administering distributive program awards (the demographic controls from these analyses are
reported in Table 2 to conserve space). The analysis reported in Column 1 does not include a
lagged dependent variable, while the analysis in Column 3 does. 
Tables 1 & 2 about here 
In Table 1, the effects of the political variables on the mean level of distributive program
awards in districts are generally in line with theoretical expectations and previous research. In
both specifications, districts that are safer for the president receive fewer awards, while the
specifications differ as to whether safer congressional seats receive fewer awards (perhaps
because the measures of independence better capture independence from the president). And in
both, Democrats receive more awards and districts with larger state delegations receive fewer
awards. Results for the rest of the political variables are generally in the expected direction, even
when they do not reach statistical significance at the 95% level. More independent agencies give,
on  average,  more  awards.  These  results  suggest  that  our  empirical  model  is  a  plausible
representation of the distribution of awards, as they are consistent with prior findings. 
To test the theoretical expectations about how agency structure affects responsiveness to
political principals, we first examine the interaction terms, which estimate whether independent
agencies are less responsive to political signals. Significant interaction terms with the opposite
sign of the main effects would indicate that agencies with more independent structures are less
responsive to political signals. ‡ indicates that the null hypothesis that the linear combination of
the interaction and main effect is equal to zero can be rejected with a p-value of less than 0.05.
,

The  coefficients  on  the  interaction  terms  generally  do  not  reach  conventional  levels  of
significance.  None  of  the  interaction  term  coefficients  are  statistically  significant  in  the
hypothesized direction consistently across the models. The linear combination is significant in
both specifications for safety of the president, suggesting that independent agencies are even less
likely to give awards to districts that are safe for the president. In contrast to some prior research
(e.g., Hudak 2014), the fact that few of the interaction terms are significant in the expected
direction suggests that being structured for independence does not make agencies less responsive
to political demands for allocating distributive program awards to congressional districts. We
hesitate to make a strong claim that insulated agencies do not respond at all differently to
politicians, particularly presidents (e.g., in election years per Kriner and Reeves 2015), but we
emphasize that the variability remaining after this estimation captures the available range of
choices left to the agency.
The second way that agency structure can affect policy implementation is by constraining the
range of policy options available to the agency, which in our analyses would be associated with
lower variance in distributive program spending across districts. The variance results at the
bottom of Table 1 show that independent agencies have a wider range of options from which to
choose in administering policy. Across both specifications, agency independence is positively
associated with the variance in distributive spending awards. A one standard deviation increase in
agency independence increases the standard deviation around the predicted mean number of
awards given to a district from 69 to 103, holding the effects of other variables in the model
constant at their means. Figure 2 plots these relationships. The dark lines represent the predicted
number of awards and the lines for safe (equivalent to the mean district where the winning
candidates receive approximately 68% of the vote) and competitive districts (where the winning
candidate receives only 50% of the vote). These lines are nearly parallel, with competitive
,

districts getting slightly more awards on average. The dotted lines represent the predicted range
of policies from which an agency can choose (illustrated here for the safe district). As agency
independence increases, the number of awards does not change much, but the variability in the
number of awards increases. 
Figure 2 about here 
Table 2 shows that the control variables measuring district demographics generally conform
to expectations. Districts with lower per capita income, more education, more minorities, more
rural populations, and more white collar jobs receive more awards.13
3.1  Alternate Specifications
We conducted three groups of alternative specifications. The first uses fixed and random effects
because the main models may be misspecified by failing to account for heterogeneity across
congressional districts and agencies. Table 3 replicates Equation 1 while replacing the district and
agency variables with random (Column 1) and fixed (Column 3) effects for district-agency-
decade. Both models have AR(1) error terms. We then took the squared residuals from these
models and used them with Equation 3 to estimate the effect of agency structure on the variance
of distributive program awards. These variance results are presented in Table 4. The results from
the random and fixed effects analyses are similar to the main model results. The interaction terms
do not display a consistent pattern of results that would indicate that more insulated agencies are
more immune to political demands; their coefficients are generally not statistically significant and
the significant coefficients are often counter to the hypothesized sign. In the random effects
13 When these demographics are included in the variance portion of the estimation, the results
are substantially the same. The significant positive relationship between independence and 
the variability in awards remains. Three of the nine demographics (proportion black, 
proportion rural, and proportion white collar) are significantly related to variability.
,

model, two of the 11 interaction terms have p-values less than 0.05, but only one of these has a p-
value of less than 0.05 in the fixed effects model (and then the sign is opposite). None of the
linear combinations are significantly different from zero across both specifications. Agency
structure does not appear to change agencies’ responsiveness to political demands. Once again
agency independence is significantly associated with increased variance in the awards in Table 4.
Instead of making agencies less responsive to their political principals, independence appears to
give them more latitude in distributing awards across districts once political considerations are
taken into account.
Tables 3 & 4 about here 
The second group of specification checks investigates whether the main model results are
sensitive to different approaches to measuring agency structure. We repeated the analyses in
Tables  1  and  2  using  different  measures  of  independence.  The  different  multiplicative
heteroskedasticity specifications are 1) independence without the inclusion of appointments from
Lewis (2003), 2) the average percentage of political appointees in the agency (a measure of lack
of independence) alone from Lewis (2008), 3) these two measures together in one specification,
and 4) each component of the factor separately.14 The structural factor and the percentage of
political appointees are significantly associated with variability (or reduced variability in the case
of the percentage of political appointees, which measures lack of independence), both when they
are entered together and when they are entered separately. To briefly summarize the results from
the components of the factor separately, in four of the seven specifications, the individual
measure of agency structure had a statistically significant effect in the expected direction in the
variance equation. The coefficients are reported in Table 5. Being created independent of existing
14 We do not include party balancing because it does not have enough variability to be entered
separately.
,

bureaucratic structure, having limitations on the type of administrator, being further from the
president, and having fewer political appointees are all associated with greater variability in the
distribution of awards. Commissions, agencies with fixed terms, and with longer term lengths are
associated with lower variability, perhaps because there is more continuity among agency heads
in these cases. In the mean equations, the individual agency structure variables had only a few
interaction term coefficients that were both statistically significant and in the expected direction.
Across all of these models (full results in Appendix Tables A3, A4, and A5), the overall pattern of
results persists; agency structure does not consistently condition agencies’ responsiveness to
external political signals. Instead, agencies designed to be more independent generally exhibit
more variance in distributive spending and agencies with fewer political appointees exhibit more
variance. In the model with political appointees only, there is more evidence less independent
agencies are more responsive to their political principals, as the interaction terms are more often
significant and in the hypothesized direction.
Table 5 about here 
The third group of specification checks investigates whether the main model results change
when using the logged number of awards or distributive program district expenditures as the
dependent variable in place of the number of awards (Appendix Tables 4 and 5).15 Again, the
results,  particularly  the  variance  results,  are  substantially  the  same  as  the  main  models.
Independence results in more policy variability, both in terms of the number of awards that they
give to each district and the amount of those awards. These robustness checks give confidence
that the results are not a function of the measure of independence that we use or something
peculiar about the number of awards as the dependent variable.
15 Recall that the dependent variable is quite skewed.
,

4  Conclusion
Agency structure can influence how agencies implement distributive spending programs. In this
paper, we examine the effects of agency structure on distributive program implementation
through analyses of 68 government agencies implementing distributive programs. Our analyses
show that agencies designed to be insulated, such as those with fewer political appointees and
more independence from elected politicians, have more variability in their distributive program
spending across congressional districts, suggesting that these agencies enjoy a broader range of
options from which to select policy to implement. At the same time, our analyses uncover little
evidence that agencies’ structure influences their responsiveness to demands for distributive
spending expressed from individual politicians. Agencies designed for independence allocate
distributive program spending in the same way as agencies designed for political control. To be
clear,  we  do  find  that,  consistent  with  previous  research,  politicians  influence  agencies’
distributive program spending, such as by increasing awards to competitive districts. Yet we do
not find that this influence varies across agencies based on their structure. Independent agencies,
in other words, are just as responsive to external political demands, such as politicians’ electoral
circumstances and committee assignments, perhaps because strategic actors within the agency
find it useful to keep political overseers satisfied and to exert their independence via the wider
range of policy options available to them. 
Our paper contributes to the study of relations between government agencies and their elected
political overseers. Agency structure can be an effective tool for shaping agency independence
and managing the tradeoffs between agency and political control. Although there is evidence that
agency structure affects responsiveness to elected politicians, very little research has investigated
whether agency structure shapes the range of policy options available to the agency. This paper
,

presents an analytic approach for examining both effects within the same research setting,
allowing a better understanding of the extent of electoral accountability that is governed by the
relationship between agencies and elected officials. 
The findings in this paper raise directions for future research. The analytic approach outlined
in this paper is sufficiently flexible to be applied in different political and policy contexts and
does not require measuring difficult concepts like information asymmetry between politicians and
agencies, the complexity of the policy problem, or agencies’ political preferences. The approach
can be applied in a variety of empirical settings, such as in state governments and cross
nationally, and in different policy areas including regulatory policy. Future research might also
use this approach to look at different dimensions of agency discretion beyond the number of
distributive program awards, such as shifting the type of award recipients or changing the
activities and causes the awards support. 
  
,

5   References
Aberbach, Joel D. 1991. Keeping a Watchful Eye: The Politics of Congressional Oversight. 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Adler, E. Scott. 2002. Why Congressional Reforms Fail: Reelection and the House Committee 
System. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Alvarez, R. Michael and John Brehm. 2002. Hard Choices, Easy Answers. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Arnold, R. Douglas. 1979. Congress and the Bureaucracy: A Theory of Influence. New Haven: 
Yale University Press.
Balla, Steven J. 1998. “Administrative Procedures and Political Control of the Bureaucracy.” 
American Political Science Review. 92(3): 663-673.
Banks, Jeffrey S., and Barry R. Weingast. 1992. “The Political Control of Bureaucracies under 
Asymmetric Information.” American Journal of Political Science 36(2): 509–24.
Bawn, Kathleen. 1995. “Political Control versus Expertise: Congressional Choices about 
Administrative Procedures.” American Political Science Review 89(1): 62-73.
Bawn, Kathleen. 1997. Choosing Strategies to Control the Bureaucracy: Statutory Constraints, 
Oversight, and the Committee System.” Journal of Law Economics and Organization 
13(1): 101-126. 
Bendor. J, A. Glazer, and T. Hammond. 2001. “Theories of Delegation.” Annual Review of 
Political Science 4:235-269.
Bendor, Jonathan, and Adam Meirowitz. 2004. “Spatial Models of Delegation.” American 
Political Science Review 98(2): 293--310.
Bendor, Jonathan, and Terry M. Moe. 1985. “An Adaptive Model of Bureaucratic Politics.” 
American Political Science Review 79(03): 755–74.
Berry, Christopher R., Barry C. Burden, and William G. Howell. 2010. “The President and the 
Distribution of Federal Spending.” American Political Science Review 104(04): 783-99.
Bickers, Kenneth N. and Robert M. Stein. 1996. “The Electoral Dynamics of the Federal Pork 
Barrel.” American Journal of Political Science 40(4): 1300-1326.
Bickers, Kenneth N. and Robert M. Stein. 2000. “The Congressional Pork Barrel in a Republican 
Era.” Journal of Politics 62(04): 1070-1086.
,

Calvert, Randall L., Mathew D. McCubbins, and Barry R. Weingast. 1989. “A Theory of Political
Control and Agency Discretion.” American Journal of Political Science 33(3): 588.
Carpenter, Daniel P. 2001. The Forging of Bureaucratic Autonomy: Reputations, Networks, and 
Policy Innovation in Executive Agencies, 1862-1928. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press. 
Carpenter, Daniel P. and George A. Krause. 2015 “Transactional Authority and Bureaucratic 
Politics” Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory (1): 5-25.
Carroll, Royce, Jeff Lewis, James Lo, Nolan McCarty, Keith Poole, and Howard Rosenthal. 
2009. “Common Space DW-NOMINATE Scores with Bootstrapped Standard Errors. 
(Joint House and Senate Scaling).” Computer file, retrieved April 23, 2009.
Carsey, M. Thomas and Barry Rundquist. 1999. “Party and Committee in Distributive Politics: 
Evidence from Defense Spending.” Journal of Politics 61: 156--69.
Chen, Jowei. 2010. “The Effect of Electoral Geography on Pork Barreling in Bicameral 
Legislatures.” American Journal of Political Science 54(2): 301--22.
Chiou, Fang-Yi and Lawrence S. Rothenberg. 2003. ``When Pivotal Politics Meets Partisan 
Politics.” American Journal of Political Science 47(3): 503-22.
Clinton, Joshua D., David E. Lewis, and Jennifer L. Selin. 2014. “Influencing the Bureaucracy: 
The Irony of Congressional Oversight.” American Journal of Political Science 58(2): 
387-401.
Cox, Gary W. and Mathew D. McCubbins. 1986. “Electoral Politics as a Redistributive Game." 
Journal of Politics 48: 370-89.
Dixit, Avinash and John Londregan. 1996. “The Determinants of Success of Special Interests in 
Redistributive Politics." Journal of Politics 58: 1132-55.
Dynes, Adam M., and Gregory A. Huber. 2015. “Partisanship and the Allocation of Federal 
Spending: Do Same-Party Legislators or Voters Benefit from Shared Party Affiliation 
with the President and House Majority?” American Political Science Review 109(01): 
172-86.
Epstein, David and Sharyn O'Halloran. 1994. “Administrative Procedures, Information, and 
Agency Discretion.” American Journal of Political Science 38(3): 697--722.
Epstein, David and Sharyn O'Halloran. 1999. Delegating Powers: A Transaction Cost Politics 
Approach to Policy Making Under Separate Powers. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Gailmard, Sean. 2002. “Expertise, Subversion, and Bureaucratic Discretion.” Journal of Law, 
Economics, and Organization 18: 536--555. 
,

Gailmard, Sean and John W. Patty. 2007. “Slackers and Zealots: Civil Service, Policy Discretion, 
and Bureaucratic Expertise.” American Journal of Political Science 51(4): 873-889.
Gailmard, Sean and Jown W. Patty. 2012. “Formal Models of Bureaucracy.” Annual Review of 
Political Science 15:353-377
Grimmer, Justin, Solomon Messing, and Sean J. Westwood. 2012. “How Words and Money 
Cultivate a Personal Vote: The Effect of Legislator Credit Claiming on Constituent Credit 
Allocation.” American Political Science Review 106(04): 703--19.
Hammond, Thomas H. and Jack H. Knott. 1996. “Who Controls the Bureaucracy?: Presidential 
Power, Congressional Dominance, Legal Constraints, and Bureaucratic Autonomy in a 
Model of Multi-Institutional Policy-Making.” Journal of Law, Economics, and 
Organization 12(1): 119--66.
Harvey, A. C. 1976. “Estimating Regression Models with Multiplicative Heteroscedasticity.” 
Econometrica 44(3): 461.
Hird, A. John. 1991. “The Political Economy of Pork: Project Selection at the US Army Corps of 
Engineers.” American Political Science Review 85(2): 429--56.
Howell, William G., and David E. Lewis. 2002. `”Agencies by Presidential Design.” Journal of 
Politics 64(4): 1095-1114.
Huber, Gregory A. 2007. The Craft of Bureaucratic Neutrality: Interests and Influence in 
Governmental Regulation of Occupational Safety. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Huber, John D. and Charles R. Shipan. 2000. “The Costs of Control: Legislators, Agencies, and 
Transaction Costs.” Legislative Studies Quarterly 25(1): 25--52.
Huber, John D. and Charles R. Shipan, 2002. Deliberate Discretion? The Institutional 
Foundation of Bureaucratic Autonomy. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hudak, John. 2014. Presidential Pork: White House Influence over the Distribution of Federal 
Grants. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Krause, George A. and James W. Douglas. 2005. “Institutional Design versus Reputational 
Effects on Bureaucratic Performance: Evidence from U.S. Government Macroeconomic 
and Fiscal Projections.” Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 15(2): 
281--306.
Krause, George A., David E. Lewis, and James W. Douglas. 2006. “Political Appointments, Civil 
Service Systems, and Bureaucratic Competence: Organizational Balancing and Executive 
Branch Revenue Forecasts in the American States.” American Journal of Political 
Science 50(3): 770--87.
,

Krehbiel, Keith. 1998. Pivotal Politics: A Theory of U.S. Lawmaking. Chicago: University Of 
Chicago Press.
Kriner, Douglas L., and Andrew Reeves. 2015. “Presidential Particularism and Divide-the-Dollar 
Politics.” American Political Science Review 109(01): 155-71.
Larcinese, Valentino, Leonizo Rizzo, and Cecilia Testa. 2006. “Allocating the U.S. Federal 
Budget to the States: The Impact of the President." Journal of Politics 68: 447-456.
Lavertu, Stephane. 2013. “Issue-Specific Political Uncertainty and Policy Insulation in U.S. 
Federal Agencies.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 29(1): 145-177.
Lee, E. Frances and I. Bruce Oppenheimer. 1999. Sizing Up the Senate: The Unequal 
Consequences of Equal Representation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Levitt, Steven D. and James M. Snyder. 1995. “Political Parties and the Distribution of Federal 
Outlays.” American Journal of Political Science 39(4): 958-980. 
Levitt, Steven D. and James M. Snyder, Jr. 1997. “The Impact of Federal Spending on House 
Election Outcomes.” Journal of Political Economy 105(1): 30-53.
Lewis, David E. 2003. Presidents and the Politics of Agency Design. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Lewis, David. 2008. The Politics of Presidential Appointments: Political Control and 
Bureaucratic Performance. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lowry, Robert C. and Matthew Potoski. 2004. “Interest Groups, Citizens and Legislators: 
Organized Demand and the Politics of Federal Grants.” Journal of Politics 66(2): 513-
533.
Macey, Jonathan R. 1992. “Organizational Design and Political Control of Administrative 
Agencies.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 8(1): 93--110.
Macdonald, Jason A. 2010. “Limitation Riders and Congressional Influence over Bureaucratic 
Policy Decisions.” American Political Science Review 104(04): 766-782.
May, Peter J., Samuel Workman, and Bryan D. Jones. 2008. “Organizing Attention: Responses of
the Bureaucracy to Agenda Disruption.” Journal of Public Administration Research and 
Theory 18(4): 517--41.
McCubbins, D Matthew, Roger G. Noll, and Barry R.Weingast. 1987. “Administrative 
Procedures as Instruments of Political Control.” Journal of Law, Economics, and 
Organization 3(2): 243-277.
,

McCubbins, Matthew D., Roger G. Noll, and Barry R. Weingast. 1989. “Structure and Process, 
Politics and Policy: Administrative Arrangements and the Political Control of Agencies.” 
Virginia Law Review 75(2): 431-82.
Moe, Terry. 1989. ``The Politics of Bureaucratic Structure.” In Can the Government Govern? eds.
John Chubb and Paul Peterson. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Morgan, Kimberly J. and Andrea Louise Campbell. 2011. The Delegated Welfare State: 
Medicare, Markets, and the Governance of Social Policy. Oxford University Press.
Potoski, Matthew, and Jeffery Talbert. 2000. “The Dimensional Structure of Policy Outputs: 
Distributive Policy and Roll Call Voting.” Political Research Quarterly 53: 695-710.
Quinn, Kevin M. 2004. “Bayesian Factor Analysis for Mixed Ordinal and Continuous 
Responses.” Political Analysis 12(4): 338–53.
Rich, Michael. 1989. “Distributive Politics and the Allocation of Federal Grants.” American 
Political Science Review 83(1): 193-213.
Ringquist, Evan J., Jeff Worsham, and Marc Allen Eisner. 2003. “Salience, Complexity, and the 
Legislative Direction of Regulatory Bureaucracies.” Journal of Public Administration 
Research and Theory 13(2): 141-164.
Ryu, Jay Eungha, Cynthia J. Bowling, Chung-Lae Cho, and Deil S. Wright. 2007. “Effects of 
Administrators' Aspirations, Political Principals' Priorities, and Interest Groups' Influence 
on State Agency Budget Requests.” Public Budgeting & Finance 27(2): 22–49.
Selin, Jennifer L. 2015. “What Makes an Agency Independent?” American Journal of Political 
Science 59(4): 971–987.
Sellers, Patrick J. 1997. “Fiscal Consistency and Federal District Spending in Congressional 
Elections.” American Journal of Political Science 41(3): 1024-41.
Shepsle, Kenneth A. 1992. “Bureaucratic Drift, Coalitional Drift, and Time Consistency: A 
Comment on Macey.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 8(1): 111-118.
Stein, Robert M. 1981. “The Allocation of Federal Aid Monies: The Synthesis of Demand Side 
and Supply Side Explanations.” American Political Science Review 75:334-343.
Stein, Robert M. and Kenneth N. Bickers. 1994. “Congressional Elections and the Pork Barrel.” 
Journal of Politics 56(02): 377-399.
Whitford, Andrew B. 2005. “The Pursuit of Political Control by Multiple Principals.” Journal of 
Politics 67(1): 28-49.
,

Whitford, Andrew B. 2015. “Information and Uncertainty in Policy Implementation: Evidence 
from the Implementation of EPA Waivers” Journal of Public Administration Research 
and Theory 24 (2): 267-288
Wooldridge, J. M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Wood, B. Dan, and John Bohte. 2004. “Political Transaction Costs and the Politics of 
Administrative Design.” Journal of Politics 66(1): 176-202.
Wood, B. Dan, and Richard W. Waterman. 1991. “The Dynamics of Political Control of the 
Bureaucracy.” American Political Science Review 85(3): 801-828.
Wood, B. Dan, and Richard W. Waterman. 1993. “The Dynamics of Political-Bureaucratic 
Adaptation.” American Journal of Political Science 37(2): 497-528.
Woods, Neal D. 2015. “Regulatory Democracy Reconsidered: The Policy Impact of Public 
Participation Requirements.” Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 
25(2): 571-596
,

Figure 1: Agency independence is predicted to decrease political responsiveness and increase the 
range of options available to agencies
 
,

Figure 2: Independence does not change responsiveness to competitiveness of district but 
increases variability in awards. (Variability for safe districts is illustrated here.)
,

Table 1: Independence as a Predictor of the Number of and Variance in Awards
Multiplicative
Heteroskedasticity
Multiplicative
Heteroskedasticity with LDV
Coefficient
Std. Error
Coefficient
Std. Error
MEAN COEFFICIENTS
Independence Factor 
18.95* 
4.062
9.542
6.147
Winning Candidate's Vote Share 
-6.223* 
2.725
0.67
2.914
Safety of District for President 
-9.098* 
3.564
-15.40* 
4.676
Member of the President's Party 
0.853
0.76
1.193
0.963
Seniority 
-0.147
0.103
-0.135
0.109
Member of the Majority Party 
1.138
0.808
1.067
1.082
Democrat 
1.631* 
0.432
0.673* 
0.197
Freshman 
1.086
0.816
2.153
1.188
Appropriations Cmtee Member 
0.0925
0.928
0.475
0.984
Ways and Means Cmtee Member 
0.801
1.614
-2.205
1.232
Cmtee Chair 
2.801
1.512
-3.037
4.071
Ranking Member of a Cmtee 
3.656
2.606
7.028
4.084
Member of the Leadership 
-0.553
2.377
-1.054
1.857
House Delegation Size 
-0.0795* 
0.0154
-0.0492* 
0.00844
Vote Share X Independence 
-8.723‡ 
4.772
2.145
5.59
Safety for President X 
Independence 
-12.17*‡ 
5.942
-26.02*‡ 
8.744
President's Party X Independence 
0.449
1.276
1.412
1.865
Seniority X Independence 
-0.297
0.179
-0.23
0.213
Majority Party X Independence 
0.171
1.401
0.746
2.089
Freshman X Independence 
1.03
1.411
4.034
2.307
Appropriations X Independence 
0.408
1.607
1.156
1.903
Ways and Means X Independence 
-0.275
2.797
-4.813* 
2.446
Cmtee Chair X Independence 
4.945
2.644
-5.837
7.738
Ranking X Independence 
6.991
4.503
13.57
7.79
Leader X Independence 
0.188
4.321
-3.288
4.773
Lagged Log of # of Awards 
 
 
0.572* 
0.0712
Constant 
51.63* 
5.147
20.68* 
5.841
VARIANCE COEFFICIENTS 
Independence Factor 
0.996* 
0.0904
1.972* 
0.129
Distance Between Veto Pivots 
-3.993
2.285
-4.017* 
1.754
Constant 
10.33* 
1.165
10.13* 
1.004
Observations 
274,429
245,333
VWLS R-squared 
0.0069
0.411
Dependent Variable: Number of Awards. Specification includes demographics reported in Table 2. Robust 
standard errors. * p<0.05. ‡ indicates that a test of whether linear combination of the interaction and main 
effect is equal to zero hasa a p-value of less than 0.05.
,

,

Table 2: Demographics from Multiplicative Heteroskedasticity Models in Table 1
Multiplicative
Heteroskedasticity
Multiplicative
Heteroskedasticity with
LDV
Coefficient
Std. Error
Coefficient
Std. Error
Unemployment Rate 
0.083
0.101
0.240* 
0.056
Per Capita Income 
-5.40e-4* 
6.74e-5
2.25e-4* 
4.21e-5
Prop. No Diploma 
-15.85* 
3.297
-9.388* 
1.576
Prop. Younger than18 
-18.020
9.455
-7.310
4.073
Prop. Older than 65 
-11.580
7.353
0.532
3.230
Prop. Hispanic 
9.652* 
1.656
5.513* 
0.909
Prop. Black 
2.500* 
1.195
1.601* 
0.553
Prop. Urban 
-13.36* 
1.225
-6.321* 
0.830
Prop. Blue Collar 
-38.76* 
4.983
-12.52* 
3.210
,

Table 3: Random and Fixed Effects Robustness Checks: Effect of Independence on Distribution of Awards
Random Effects
Fixed Effects
Coefficient
Std. Error
Coefficient
Std. Error
Independence Factor 
2.124* 
0.999
 
 
Winning Candidate's Vote Share 
-1.281
1.043
0.102
0.885
Safety of District for President 
5.682* 
1.893
1.696
2.225
Member of the President's Party 
0.0704
0.286
0.204
0.267
Seniority 
0.0287
0.0493
0.0215
0.053
Member of the Majority Party 
0.794* 
0.308
-0.346
0.457
Democrat 
0.996* 
0.369
-0.117
0.465
Freshman 
0.634
0.329
0.0695
0.290
Appropriations Cmtee Member 
0.38
0.504
-0.523
0.581
Ways and Means Cmtee Member 
0.679
0.603
-1.110
0.740
Cmtee Chair 
-1.271
0.668
-0.665
0.645
Ranking Member of a Cmtee 
2.515* 
0.674
1.100
0.664
Member of the Leadership 
1.339
1.946
7.328* 
2.314
Vote Share X Independence 
-1.161
1.296
-0.714
1.115
Safety for President X Independence 
5.143*‡ 
2.193
-7.626* 
2.801
President's Party X Independence 
-0.200
0.357
-0.0439
0.335
Seniority X Independence 
0.0563
0.061
0.0247
0.0665
Majority Party X Independence 
0.555‡ 
0.384
0.563
0.569
Freshman X Independence 
0.903*‡ 
0.413
0.282
0.365
Appropriations X Independence 
0.412
0.632
-0.00604
0.732
Ways and Means X Independence 
-0.37
0.756
-0.196
0.929
Cmtee Chair X Independence 
-0.227
0.840
-0.436
0.812
Ranking X Independence 
1.602‡ 
0.846
0.21
0.836
Leader X Independence 
-1.956
2.448
-5.682
2.915
House Delegation Size 
-0.0846* 
0.0185
 
 
Unemployment Rate 
0.554* 
0.0814
 
 
Per Capita Income 
-0.000496* 
8.15e-05
 
 
Proportion No Diploma 
-19.46* 
4.73
 
 
Proportion Younger than18 
-15.41
11.03
 
 
Proportion Older than 65 
-11.94
9.41
 
 
Proportion Hispanic 
11.18* 
2.739
 
 
Proportion Black 
1.972
1.912
 
 
Proportion Urban 
-13.50* 
1.428
 
 
Proportion Blue Collar 
-41.68* 
5.594
 
 
Constant 
41.85* 
4.954
5.307* 
0.505
Observations 
274,429
217,943
R-squared 
0.0032
0.0005
District-Decade-Agency Groups
56,486
56,420
Dependent Variable: Number of Awards. Robust standard errors. * p<0.05. ‡ indicates that a test of 
whether linear combination of the interaction and main effect is equal to zero has a p-value of less than 
0.05.
,

Table 4: Variance of Awards for Robustness Checks
Random Effects
Fixed Effects
Coefficient
Std. Error
Coefficient
Std. Error
Independence Factor 
1,221* 
602.1
1,223* 
603
Distance Between Veto Pivots 
-24,217
16,290
-24,259
16,299
Constant 
16,160
8,842
16,199
8,846
Observations 
274,429
245,433
R-squared 
0.0001
0.0001
Dependent Variable: Squared residuals from specifications in Table 3. * p<0.05.
Table 5: Coefficients for Each Component of Independence Separately
Components of Insulation
Coefficien
t
Standard Error
Predicted Sign
Commission Structure 
-1.802*
0.237
+
Independent of Existing Bureaucractic Structures
1.948*
0.324
+
Fixed Term for Administrator 
-1.716*
0.275
+
Term Length 
-0.246*
0.058
+
Limitations on Type of Adminstrator 
2.240*
0.326
+
Distance of Agency from the President 
1.654*
0.185
+
* p<0.05. Dependent Variable: Number of Awards. Coefficients from linear regression with multiplicative 
heteroskedasticity following specification in Table 1, standard errors clustered by district-decade-agency. 
Full results in Appendix Tables A4 and A5, except % Political Appointees in Appendix Table A3.
,

Appendix Tables
Table A1: For 107th Congress, Agencies Ordered by Their Insulation Values
Insulatio
n 
 Agency 
 
Insulatio
n 
 Agency 
 Insulation 
 Agency
-0.537
 Ag Marketing Svc 
-0.537
 Indian Health Svc 
-0.524
 Intl Trade Admin 
-0.537
 APHIS 
-0.537
 Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality 
-0.514
 Economic Dev 
Admin 
-0.537
 Natl Resources Cons 
Agency 
-0.537
 NIH 
-0.506
 Office of Justice 
Programs 
-0.537
 Farm Service Agency
-0.537
 Family Support Admin 
-0.294
 DOE 
-0.537
 Rural Business-
Cooperative Extention
-0.537
 Admin on Aging 
-0.292
 HUD 
-0.537
 Food and Consumer 
Svc 
-0.537
 Natl Geospatial 
Intelligence Agency 
-0.195
 Dept of Education
-0.537
 Food Safety and 
Inspection Svc 
-0.537
 Defense Logistics Agency 
-0.168
 Fed Mediation 
and Conciliation 
Svc 
-0.537
 Ag Research Svc 
-0.537
 Air Force 
-0.168
 NASA 
-0.537
 Coop State research, 
Edu, and Extension 
-0.537
 Fed Highway Admin 
-0.168
 General Services 
Admin 
-0.537
 Econ Research Svc 
-0.536
 NHTSA 
-0.167
 EPA 
-0.537
 Natl Ag Stats Svc 
-0.536
 Bur Land Management 
-0.166
 DHS 
-0.537
 Minory Business 
Devt Agency 
-0.535
 Employment and Training 
Admin 
-0.118
 Vets Medicine and
Surgery 
-0.537
 US Travel Svc 
-0.535
 US Fish and Wildlife Svc 
0.121
 FAA 
-0.537
 Minerals Mgmt Svc 
-0.535
 OSHO 
0.122
 Small Business 
Admin 
-0.537
 Surfact Mining and 
Reclamation 
-0.535
 Fed Railroad Admin 
0.476
 NLRB 
-0.537
 National Bio Survey 
-0.534
 Natl Telecommunications 
and Info Admin 
1.261
 Bur of 
Tranportation Stats
-0.537
 Mine Safety and 
Health 
-0.533
 Employment Standards 
Admin 
1.835
 Surface 
Transportation 
Board 
-0.537
 Maritime Admin 
-0.533
 Urban Mass Transit Admin
2.219
 Nuclear Reg 
Commission 
-0.537
 DOT Research and 
Special Programs 
-0.533
 Rural Housing Service 
2.332
 EEOC 
-0.537
 Alcohol, Drug Abuse,
and Mental Health 
Admin 
-0.533
 Admin for Children and 
Families 
2.341
 NSF 
-0.537
 CDC 
-0.529
 Ofc of Human Devt 
Services 
2.466
 Corp for Natl and 
Community 
Service 
-0.537
 Health Resources 
Admin 
-0.527
 USAID 
 
 
Note: This is not exhaustive of all the agencies in the data, only those used in the random effects 
regression for which there was data for the 107th Congress. It is included to illustrate the range of 
agencies and their insulation.
,

Table A2: Summary Statistics
Variable
Mean
Std. Dev.
Min.
Max.
N
Number of Awards 
6.205
65.794
0
16277
274429
Independence Factor 
-0.211
0.765
-0.537
2.466
274429
Winning Candidate's Vote Share 
0.676
0.132
0
1.003
274429
Safety of District for President 
0.095
0.088
0
0.461
274429
Member of the President's Party 
0.455
0.498
0
1
274429
Seniority 
5.268
4.005
1
24
274429
Member of the Majority Party 
0.565
0.496
0
1
274429
Freshman 
0.15
0.357
0
1
274429
Democrat 
0.555
0.497
0
1
274429
Appropriations Cmtee Member 
0.133
0.34
0
1
274429
Ways and Means Cmtee Member 
0.085
0.279
0
1
274429
Cmtee Chair 
0.051
0.22
0
1
274429
Ranking Member of a Cmtee 
0.051
0.219
0
1
274429
Member of the Leadership 
0.007
0.081
0
1
274429
House Delegation Size 
18.511
14.038
1
52
274429
Unemployment Rate 
6.069
1.821
2.4
16.05
274429
Per Capita Income 
10843.6
1
4784.32
3567
41151
274429
Proportion No Diploma 
0.292
0.104
0.078
0.664
274429
Proportion Younger than18 
0.269
0.036
0.111
0.399
274429
Proportion Older than 65 
0.118
0.032
0.028
0.311
274429
Proportion Hispanic 
0.055
0.109
0
0.832
274429
Proportion Black 
0.114
0.152
0.001
0.921
274429
Proportion Urban 
0.745
0.222
0.129
1
274429
Proportion Blue Collar 
0.291
0.075
0.085
0.519
274429
,

Table A3: Robustness Checks with Different Measures of Independence
Independence Factor
without Appointees
Political Appointees 
Only
Independence Factor &
Political Appointees Sep'ly
Coeff
Std Error
Coeff
Std Error
Coeff
Std Error
MEAN COEFFICIENTS
Independence Factor 
1.748
0.917
 
 
16.02* 
3.873
% Appointees 
 
-1.221* 
0.157
-2.527* 
0.376
Winning Candidate's Vote Share 
1.815
1.299
-3.346* 
0.958
-6.435* 
2.657
Safety of District for President 
-8.733* 
2.743
-13.07* 
1.334
-10.68* 
3.31
Member of the President's Party 
1.449* 
0.585
1.253* 
0.27
0.997
0.759
Seniority 
-0.0488
0.0745
-0.0618
0.0397
-0.175
0.102
Member of the Majority Party 
1.527* 
0.565
0.956* 
0.27
0.761
0.792
Democrat 
1.328* 
0.348
0.302* 
0.103
0.310* 
0.0891
Freshman 
1.913* 
0.525
1.026* 
0.267
1.25
0.783
Appropriations Cmtee Member 
0.0653
0.685
0.493
0.422
0.42
0.896
Ways and Means Cmtee Member 
0.717
1.208
0.627
0.603
1.086
1.645
Cmtee Chair 
1.57
1.107
0.774
0.621
2.283
1.469
Ranking Member of a Cmtee 
2.657
1.94
1.592* 
0.765
4.064
2.669
Member of the Leadership 
-0.553
1.792
-0.967
1.21
-0.0888
2.425
House Delegation Size 
-0.0661* 
0.0125
-0.0181* 
0.00431
-0.0338* 
0.00512
Vote Share X Independence 
8.149*‡
1.943
 
 
-7.121
4.525
Safety for President X Independence 
-12.45*‡
4.78
 
 
-8.198‡
5.612
President's Party X Independence 
2.014‡
1.047
 
 
0.0532
1.296
Seniority X Independence 
-0.102
0.134
 
 
-0.214
0.174
Majority Party X Independence 
1.44
1.003
 
 
-0.251
1.377
Freshman X Independence
3.156*‡
0.925
 
 
1.651
1.333
Appropriations X Independence 
0.287
1.238
 
 
-0.0854
1.529
Ways and Means X Independence 
-0.145
2.194
 
 
0.512
2.773
Cmtee Chair X Independence 
2.686
2.018
 
 
3.747
2.563
Ranking X Independence 
5.338
3.512
 
 
6.589
4.575
Leader X Independence 
-0.0851
3.371
 
 
1.011
3.825
Vote Share X Appointees 
 
 
0.331‡
0.201
1.177*‡
0.447
Safety for President X Appointees 
 
 
2.465*‡
0.284
1.708*‡
0.565
President's Party X Appointees 
 
 
-0.237*‡
0.0556
-0.152
0.132
Seniority X Appointees 
 
 
0.0155
0.00891
0.0361* 
0.0176
Majority Party X Appointees 
 
 
-0.119*‡
0.0552
-0.119
0.137
Freshman X Appointees 
 
 
-0.154*‡
0.0574
-0.218
0.135
Appropriations X Appointees 
 
 
-0.0641
0.0898
-0.179
0.153
Ways and Means X Appointees 
 
 
-0.13
0.12
-0.219
0.281
Cmtee Chair X Appointees 
 
 
-0.0461
0.154
-0.298
0.26
Ranking X Appointees 
 
 
-0.340*‡
0.151
-0.705
0.429
Leader X Appointees 
 
 
0.201
0.254
0.107
0.486
Unemployment Rate 
0.0668
0.0796
0.00472
0.0255
0.122* 
0.0299
Per Capita Income 
-0.000448* 
5.57E-05
-0.000226* 
2.92E-05
-0.000148* 
1.91E-05
Proportion No Diploma 
-12.77* 
2.673
-3.810* 
1.059
-3.591* 
0.932
Proportion Younger than18 
-17.86* 
7.615
-21.89* 
3.994
-3.856
2.29
Proportion Older than 65 
-11.02
6.014
-14.30* 
2.551
-4.029
2.324
Proportion Hispanic 
8.016* 
1.325
2.220* 
0.494
2.690* 
0.603
Proportion Black 
2.370* 
0.964
1.217* 
0.451
0.272
0.349
Proportion Urban 
-10.85* 
0.988
-3.871* 
0.361
-3.171* 
0.36
Proportion Blue Collar 
-31.45* 
3.898
-8.571* 
1.217
-10.49* 
1.295
Constant 
36.69* 
3.911
24.92* 
2.076
23.63* 
2.455
,

VARIANCE COEFFICIENTS
Independence Factor 
1.003* 
0.109
 
 
1.144* 
0.0994
% Appointees 
 
 
-1.366* 
0.0476
-1.566*
0.104
Distance Between Veto Pivots 
-3.886
2.074
-2.145
1.801
-3.507
1.988
Constant 
9.989* 
1.058
9.542* 
0.945
10.13* 
1.03
Observations
333,538
443,308
274,429
VWLS R-squared
0.0056
0.0104
0.0127
Dependent Variable: Number of Awards. Robust standard errors. * p<0.05.
,

Table A5: Robustness Checks with Components of Independence Factor, continued
Commission Structure
Independent of Existing
Bureaucracy
Fixed Administrator
Term
Coeff
Std 
Error
Coeff
Std 
Error
Coeff
Std 
Error
MEAN COEFFICIENTS
Independence Measure 
-6.415* 
1.453
16.59* 
3.305
-4.711* 
1.471
Winning Candidate's Vote Share 
-4.162* 
1.016
-1.085
0.807
-3.610* 
1.183
Safety of District for President 
-9.126* 
1.582
-3.140* 
1.4
-3.579* 
1.747
Member of the President's Party 
0.777* 
0.288
0.507* 
0.205
0.683* 
0.305
Seniority 
-0.0155
0.0412
0.0182
0.0381
-0.0495
0.046
Member of the Majority Party 
1.019* 
0.27
0.787* 
0.201
0.912* 
0.322
Democrat 
0.997* 
0.315
1.066* 
0.304
1.218* 
0.342
Freshman 
1.122* 
0.275
0.379
0.256
0.584
0.36
Appropriations Cmtee Member 
0.235
0.454
-0.0317
0.349
-0.0607
0.425
Ways and Means Cmtee Member 
0.768
0.648
0.741
0.613
0.611
0.73
Cmtee Chair 
0.926
0.597
0.0153
0.408
1.203
0.628
Ranking Member of a Cmtee 
1.145
0.803
-0.204
0.473
0.95
0.914
Member of the Leadership 
-1.376
1.251
-0.39
1.709
-0.882
1.546
House Delegation Size 
-0.0701* 
0.0129
-0.0574* 
0.0112
-0.0532* 
0.0133
Cand. Vote Share X Independence 
2.764
1.837
-7.770* 
3.886
2.094
1.839
Pres. Safety X Independence 
18.57* 
3.376
-8.256
4.92
11.41* 
3.076
Memb. Pres. Party X Independence 
-1.604* 
0.463
0.312
1.112
-1.274* 
0.428
Seniority X Independence 
0.124
0.0887
-0.224
0.151
0.142
0.0813
Memb. Maj. Party X Independence 
0.203
0.511
0.427
1.159
0.418
0.521
Freshman X Independence 
-0.13
0.517
1.342
1.143
0.377
0.532
Approps. X Independence 
1.147
1.043
0.776
1.346
1.165
0.897
Ways and Means X Independence 
-0.972
1.021
-0.168
2.41
-1.225
0.994
Committee Chair X Independence 
-0.0133
1.686
4.099
2.216
-0.463
1.473
Ranking Member X Independence 
-1.584
1.302
6.014
3.908
-1.469
1.27
Party Leader X Independence 
4.017
4.822
0.868
3.974
2.268
4.048
Unemployment Rate 
0.0576
0.0691
0.0384
0.0664
0.0744
0.0822
Per Capita Income 
-
0.000550*
7.40E-
05
-0.000402*
5.16E-
05
-
0.000722*
8.50E-
05
Proportion No Diploma 
-13.07* 
2.703
-10.19* 
2.359
-13.58* 
2.858
Proportion Younger than18 
-39.89* 
11.33
-25.00* 
6.672
-43.36* 
12.41
Proportion Older than 65 
-16.46* 
7.166
-14.50* 
5.418
-29.38* 
7.357
Proportion Hispanic 
9.560* 
1.588
6.926* 
1.131
6.219* 
1.404
Proportion Black 
3.730* 
1.159
2.969* 
0.847
0.336
1.096
Proportion Urban 
-13.65* 
0.97
-8.708* 
0.863
-10.04* 
1.001
Proportion Blue Collar 
-27.44*
3.917
-25.76* 
3.175
-34.44* 
4.327
Constant 
49.14* 
5.09
32.15* 
3.626
51.29* 
5.804
VARIANCE COEFFICIENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
Independence Measure 
-1.802* 
0.237
 1.948* 
0.324
-1.716* 
0.275
Distance Between Veto Pivots 
-2.275
1.677
 -3.444* 
1.334
-4.563
2.585
Constant 
9.428* 
0.878
 8.883* 
0.649
10.35* 
1.301
Observations
515,083
341,981
333,538
VWLS R-squared
0.0037
0.0052
0.0042
Dependent Variable: Number of Awards. Robust standard errors. * p<0.05.
,

Table A5: Robustness Checks with Components of Independence Factor, continued
Length of Term
Limitations on Type of
Administrator
Distance of Agency
from President
Coeff
Std Error
Coeff
Std Error
Coeff
Std Error
MEAN COEFFICIENTS
Independence Measure 
-0.568
0.433
21.30* 
4.266
18.74* 
3.762
Winning Candidate's Vote Share 
-3.392* 
1.182
-1.177
0.784
16.34
8.964
Safety of District for President 
-3.23
1.811
-3.245* 
1.366
21.48
11.19
Member of the President's Party 
0.675* 
0.311
0.524* 
0.200
-0.688
2.536
Seniority 
-0.0453
0.0462
0.0202
0.0372
0.577
0.346
Member of the Majority Party 
0.838* 
0.319
0.818* 
0.196
0.348
2.662
Democrat 
1.383* 
0.38
1.080* 
0.299
1.097* 
0.304
Freshman 
0.457
0.359
0.419
0.249
-2.048
2.645
Appropriations Cmtee Member 
-0.276
0.431
0.0311
0.342
-0.735
3.036
Ways and Means Cmtee Member 
0.669
0.731
0.708
0.598
0.485
5.547
Cmtee Chair 
1.128
0.634
0.0552
0.398
-9.035
4.959
Ranking Member of a Cmtee 
0.854
0.914
-0.205
0.460
-14.01
8.927
Member of the Leadership 
-1.100
1.605
-0.399
1.676
-0.728
8.491
House Delegation Size 
-0.0608* 
0.0143
-0.0596* 
0.0111
-0.0585* 
0.0112
Cand. Vote Share X Independence 
0.321
0.541
-9.945* 
4.998
-8.708* 
4.402
Pres. Safety X Independence 
2.779* 
0.981
-11.02
6.324
-12.20* 
5.454
Memb. Pres. Party X Independence 
-0.317* 
0.126
0.406
1.458
0.597
1.255
Seniority X Independence 
0.0349
0.0251
-0.304
0.196
-0.280
0.169
Memb. Maj. Party X Independence 
0.233
0.157
0.493
1.504
0.223
1.317
Freshman X Independence 
0.244
0.154
1.556
1.469
1.218
1.297
Approps. X Independence 
0.475
0.289
0.709
1.725
0.349
1.477
Ways and Means X Independence 
-0.318
0.278
0.171
3.127
0.123
2.702
Committee Chair X Independence 
-0.035
0.484
5.017
2.853
4.531
2.443
Ranking Member X Independence 
-0.284
0.357
8.010
5.148
6.905
4.442
Party Leader X Independence 
0.767
1.358
1.203
4.980
0.158
3.854
Unemployment Rate 
0.0892
0.0923
0.0312
0.0648
0.0456
0.0667
Per Capita Income 
-
0.000750* 
8.44E-05
-
0.000420* 
5.09E-05
-
0.000397* 
5.10E-05
Proportion No Diploma 
-15.12* 
3.085
-10.20* 
2.316
-10.45* 
2.349
Proportion Younger than18 
-41.10* 
12.47
-28.04* 
6.564
-22.76* 
6.634
Proportion Older than 65 
-28.11* 
7.64
-16.95* 
5.339
-13.42* 
5.378
Proportion Hispanic 
7.178* 
1.544
7.036* 
1.109
7.021* 
1.132
Proportion Black 
0.483
1.174
2.975* 
0.832
2.779* 
0.843
Proportion Urban 
-11.45* 
1.104
-8.668* 
0.846
-8.927* 
0.861
Proportion Blue Collar 
-38.12* 
4.839
-25.99* 
3.098
-26.27* 
3.194
Constant 
52.81* 
5.770
33.71* 
3.574
-5.72
8.423
VARIANCE COEFFICIENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
Independence Measure 
-0.246* 
0.0584
2.240* 
0.326
1.654* 
0.185
Distance Between Veto Pivots 
-4.491
2.651
-3.332* 
1.234
-3.541* 
1.484
Constant 
10.29* 
1.337
8.802* 
0.604
5.684* 
0.696
Observations
333,538
333,538
341,981
VWLS R-squared
0.004
0.0055
0.0059
Dependent Variable: Numbers of Awards. Robust standard errors. * p<0.05.
,

Table A6: Logged Number of Awards as the Dependent Variable
Multiplicative
Heteroskedasticity
Multiplicative
Heteroskedasticity with
LDV
Coefficient
Std. Error
Coefficient
Std. Error
MEAN COEFFICIENTS
Independence Factor 
0.0799*
0.013
-0.00859*
0.00377
Winning Candidate's Vote Share 
-0.0373*
0.0124
0.00675
0.00366
Safety of District for President 
-0.131*
0.0199
-0.0552*
0.00638
Member of the President's Party 
0.0102*
0.00292
0.000868
0.00114
Seniority 
0.000339
0.000552
5.51E-06
0.000154
Member of the Majority Party 
0.0304*
0.00325
0.00845*
0.00127
Democrat 
0.00792*
0.00324
-0.00027
0.000994
Freshman 
0.00831*
0.0032
0.00358*
0.0016
Appropriations Cmtee Member 
0.0103
0.00592
0.00146
0.0014
Ways and Means Cmtee Member 
-0.00776
0.00634
-0.00203
0.00163
Cmtee Chair 
0.0136
0.00809
0.00249
0.00228
Ranking Member of a Cmtee 
0.00811
0.00804
0.00173
0.00245
Member of the Leadership 
-0.0334
0.0207
-0.00764
0.00471
House Delegation Size 
-0.00210*
0.000133
-0.000455*
3.46E-05
Vote Share X Independence 
0.00402
0.0178
0.0148* ‡
0.00476
Safety for President X Independence 
-0.0541* ‡
0.0262
0.0111 ‡
0.00828
President's Party X Independence 
0.00399‡
0.00411
-0.0013
0.00157
Seniority X Independence 
0.000403
0.000792
0.000362
0.000215
Majority Party X Independence 
0.00428 ‡
0.00452
0.00188 ‡
0.00169
Freshman X Independence 
0.0129* ‡
0.00452
0.00281 ‡
0.00207
Appropriations X Independence 
0.00571
0.00857
-0.00099
0.0019
Ways and Means X Independence 
-0.013
0.00882
-0.00396
0.00233
Cmtee Chair X Independence 
0.000316
0.0118
-0.00508
0.00313
Ranking X Independence 
0.00466
0.0115
-0.0023
0.00344
Leader X Independence 
0.000896
0.0298
-0.00447
0.00605
Lagged Log of # of Awards 
0.381*
0.00107
Constant 
0.904*
0.0379
0.156*
0.00977
VARIANCE COEFFICIENTS 
Independence Factor 
0.488*
0.0123
0.0873*
0.0134
Distance Between Veto Pivots 
0.119
0.121
1.026*
0.129
Constant 
-1.733*
0.0605
-3.633*
0.0613
Observations 
274,429
245,333
VWLS R-squared 
0.0321
0.764
Dependent Variable: Logged Number of Awards + 1. *: p<0.05. Specification includes demographics 
reported in Table 2, but omitted here for space. Robust standard errors. ‡ indicates that a test of whether 
linear combination fo the interaction and main effect is equal to zero has p-value of less than 0.05.
,

Table A7: Expenditures ($) as the Dependent Variable
Multiplicative Heteroskedasticity
Coefficient
Standard Error
MEAN COEFFICIENTS
Independence Factor 
-616,043
2,992,000
Winning Candidate's Vote Share 
-1,834,000
1,242,000
Safety of District for President 
943,537
1,565,000
Member of the President's Party 
139,145
284,060
Seniority 
11,421
45,785
Member of the Majority Party 
560,782
319,375
Democrat 
1,588,000* 
552,040
Freshman 
-315,962
345,152
Appropriations Cmtee Member 
42,870
359,576
Ways and Means Cmtee Member 
-961,170
811,120
Cmtee Chair 
1,474,000* 
690,889
Ranking Member of a Cmtee 
86,305
646,529
Member of the Leadership 
-1,115,000
719,767
House Delegation Size 
-32,049
20,776
Vote Share X Independence 
-4,894,000
4,381,000
Safety for President X Independence 
15,250,000*‡ 
5,666,000
President's Party X Independence 
-897,680
1,061,000
Seniority X Independence 
-130,995
194,049
Majority Party X Independence 
473,327
1,049,000
Freshman X Independence 
-2,457,000
1,346,000
Appropriations X Independence 
496,164
1,589,000
Ways and Means X Independence 
-5,942,000
3,974,000
Cmtee Chair X Independence 
3,933,000
2,138,000
Ranking X Independence 
1,022,000
2,672,000
Leader X Independence 
1,525,000
3,299,000
Unemployment Rate 
172,405
102,747
Per Capita Income 
-483.5* 
92.19
Proportion No Diploma 
-3,314,000
3,571,000
Proportion Younger than18 
-43,680,000* 
10,070,000
Proportion Older than 65 
-35,830,000* 
9,020,000
Proportion Hispanic 
2,306,000
1,821,000
Proportion Black 
1,581,000
1,291,000
Proportion Urban 
-6,489,000* 
1,427,000
Proportion Blue Collar 
-33,910,000* 
5,765,000
Constant 
36,700,000* 
6,382,000
VARIANCE COEFFICIENTS 
 
 
Independence Factor 
3.916* 
0.0961
Distance Between Veto Pivots 
-4.119* 
1.390
Constant 
39.57* 
0.692
Observations
274,429
VWLS R-squared
0.0021
Dependent Variable: $ value of awards. Robust standard errors. ‡ indicates that a test of whether linear 
combination of the interaction and main effect is equal to zero has p-value of less than 0.05. * p<0.05.
 
,

