San Diego Linguistic Papers 6 (2016) 66-121 
 
66 
 
 
 
 
 
Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
Richard Kroeger 
University of California, San Diego 
 
1 
Introduction 
 
Ideophones are a class of sound symbolic words that have been defined cross-linguistically as 
“marked words that depict sensory imagery” (Dingemanse 2012: 655). While various languages 
have greater or lesser use and variety of these words, as a phenomenon they are ubiquitous.  
This paper makes two main contributions. First, it investigates the descriptive semantics and 
semantic typology of Korean ideophones, an understudied aspect of Korean ideophones. Second, 
it makes an empirical contribution by examining primary data obtained through a novel 
methodology, Folk Definitions, recently employed in Dingemanse (2015).  The thesis examines 
data from a corpus of multimodal data on ideophones collected by the author with native speakers 
of the Seoul dialect of Korean. 
Research in ideophones cross-linguistically has been devoted to their unique phonological and 
phonotactic properties, and to the structural aspects of these words that render them depictively 
iconic. Research has also been done classifying the broad types of sensory imagery attested cross-
linguistically, and ordering them by prevalence in the interest of creating a semantic typology. In 
recent years a new methodology has been used for the investigation of ideophones. This 
methodology, called Folk Definitions, is designed to record multi-modal data in informal settings 
to give the language consultant a greater degree of freedom and an environment that lends itself 
to eliciting more natural expression. The researchers are able to make use not only of written and 
transcribed data or audio recordings, but video footage, which contributes an additional 
dimension of articulation by means of gesture, reference to nearby objects, props, etc. that help 
illuminate the meanings of these often tricky words. The full semantic space of each word and the 
correlations of the semantics to iconic structural components are best captured by a method of 
exhaustively detailed and contextualized data of a multi-modal nature.  
Previous studies have largely ignored gestural information, which is an essential definitional 
component as will be demonstrated in the scope of this paper. Rather, most researchers have 
focused solely on the verbal content of their language consultants’ definitions. They have also on 
occasion found themselves frustratingly constrained by the artificiality of their task to interact 
with ideophones without allowing speakers free range to articulate through other available modes 
(Dingemanse 2015: 227) With the technique of Folk Definitions, this study aims to explore the 
question of descriptive semantics of Korean ideophones, an area which, until recently, has not 
received much attention in the literature. In the case of Korean this has largely been because the 
existing scholarly inquiries have been done with the purpose of describing the phonological and 
morphophonological properties of the words and the structurally iconic functions of particular 
properties and sub-syllabic constituents. The results of the study may help to understand the 
limits of variation of semantic classes and their interrelationships in the interest of creating cross-
linguistic typologies or generating predictive theories about what is possible for the semantic 
spaces of these words. 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
67 
 
Additionally I look at the phenomenon of ideophonic forms that depict more than one sensory 
modality simultaneously. I discuss asymmetry in semantic nuances between minimal pair and 
triplet forms of a single ideophonic base word in this thesis that differ by single structurally iconic 
properties. I show there is evidence to support one variant that is basic (unmarked) rather than a 
series of equally marked forms of the same ideophone. 
 
2 
Background 
 
2.1 
Cross-linguistic study of ideophones 
 
It was mentioned above that ideophones are “marked words depictive of sensory imagery” 
(Dingemanse 2012: 655). This description encompasses issues in the cross-linguistic study of 
ideophones concerning the nature of markedness, depiction, and the kinds of sensory imagery 
encoded in ideophones. 
Ideophones are widely acknowledged to be idiosyncratic in their phonology, phonotactics, and 
morphosyntax. That is, compared to the “prosaic” items of the lexicon which function according 
to the “basic” or “unmarked” schema of phonological rules etc., ideophones reserve to themselves 
distinctive operations and functions that make them structurally marked. (Dingemanse 2012: 656) 
The markedness of ideophones has been explained in the literature in different ways. In one 
proposal, the phonological markedness of ideophones  (as well as proper names and swear words) 
results from a relationship between semantically complex meanings of ideophones and structural 
complexity; specifically, complexity is located in the meaning, giving rise to complex 
phonological form  (Klamer 1999, 2001, 2002; cited in Dingemanse 2012: 657). In a second 
proposal, the iconic nature of the expression gives rise causally to iconic structural features; that 
is, iconicity, as a property, selects for structural features that function iconically. Thus, the surface 
features of ideophones must all have iconic status. This means that to test the theory one would 
have to see whether every structural feature found in ideophones can be justifiably said to be 
iconic (Diffloth 1980; cited in Dingemanse 2012:657). 
There is no disagreement in the literature about the fact that there is iconicity to at least some 
extent in ideophones. As “depictive” words, ideophones rely on “iconic mappings of form and 
meaning” (Dingemanse 2012: 658) in which structural features may communicate iteration by 
repetition of form, augmentative meanings by way of sonority, etc. The precise means may be 
closer to or farther from definite resemblance. As Dingemanse states, “depictions…may vary in 
the degree to which they are lifelike, but that does not stop them from being depictions. Compare 
Van Gogh’s Almond Blossom, Marchel Duchamp’s Nu descendant un escalier, and Mondrian’s 
Victory Boogie Woogie. These paintings show different degrees of perceived resemblance to 
reality, but they are all presented and interpreted as depictions” (2012: 658) 
Dingemanse also notes that “gradient perceptual experiences” have been related generally to 
“gradient linguistic forms” (2012: 659). This may be realized in each different language by 
different phonological featural schemas. Some minimal change in the form must correspond to 
some minimal change in the degree of perceptual experience communicated by the ideophone. 
For instance, change from one phonological segment to another and then to another within an 
ideophonic word may correspond to a progressive increase or decrease in the intensity 
communicated. Korean does this through reduplication, ablauting, and consonant mutation, and 
other languages also exhibit similar processes. 
The sensory imagery in ideophones falls under a variety of categories such as visual, auditory, 
tactile, and includes more abstract extensions such as inner states and feelings. From a large body 
of data of many typologically diverse languages, there is reserach that attempts to establish an 

Richard Kroeger 
68 
 
implicational hierarchy between the categories, where a language that has ideophones belonging 
to any given category is predicted to also have ideophones encoding the categories to the left of 
the attested category on the hierarchy. This implicational hierarchy is illustrated in (1): 
 
(1)  SOUND < MOVEMENT < VISUAL PATTERNS < OTHER SENSORY PERCEPTIONS < 
INNER FEELINGS AND COGNITIVE STATES 
 
(Akita 2009a and Kilian-Hatz 1999; cited in 
Dingemanse 2012: 663) 
 
The hypothesis set forth by Dingemanse (2012: 663), discussing and interpreting this work by 
Akita (2009) and Kilian-Hatz (1999) is that sound is naturally best described by auditory iconic 
resemblances in spoken speech.1 Thus, auditory iconic forms comprise the most basic category, 
while forms further up in the hierarchy are predicted to be increasingly less frequently attested, a 
generalization borne out in a survey of ideophone-employing languages from Navaho, which 
attests only sound-depicting forms, to Siwu, which includes “visual patterns, shapes, tastes, 
textures, inner feelings, and so on.” (Dingemanse 2012: 662-663). 
However, much work remains to be done to develop a comprehensive semantic typology of 
ideophones; there has not been enough work dedicated to this aspect (Dingemanse 2012: 662). In 
order to accomplish this typology then, it is necessary to gather more data on the variation of 
meanings and phenomena pertaining to the descriptive semantics of ideophones in many 
typologically diverse languages. In order to achieve this goal, one of the things that needs to be 
addressed is identifying the class of systematic inter-relationships between semantic categories 
and how these function language-internally as well as cross-linguistically. Since ideophones 
depict sensory imagery and the human sensory apparatus is universal to speakers of different 
spoken languages, one would expect certain consistencies in the co-occurrence and linking of 
categories. 
One crucial concern within this line of research is methodological: in many cases, the analysis 
of ideophones relies on data obtained through field research or other methodologies that rely on 
non-speakers eliciting data from native speakers. This brings along the risk that in these cases the 
semantic spaces and salient categories of a meta-language or different culture may lead to 
interference in a description of a language under study (see Dingemanse 2012: 662). Thus, 
methods must be used to eliminate impositions onto the semantic spaces encoded in another 
language. Based on his field-based study of Siwu ideophones, Dingemanse implements object-
language definition and multimodal explanation (such as those involving gestures), 
methodologies that have been important tools of ethnoscience but disregarded in recent research. 
Based on the Siwu case study, Dingemanse argues for the need to re-introduce speakers’ folk 
definitions and documentation of multimodal information as methodologies in the study of 
ideophones (Dingemanse 2015: 216). Having introduced the state of the cross-linguistic study, 
the next section focuses on the language-specific status of the research into Korean ideophones. 
 
2.2 
The linguistic study of Korean ideophones 
 
Korean ideophones have been extensively studied. Most of these studies have explored the 
phonological and morphological properties that are used for Korean-specific encodings of iconic 
                                                        
1 This raises implications about gesture and iconic resemblances to motion and visual patterns; this is addressed below 
in this paper (section 5). 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
69 
 
resemblance (Martin 1992, Lee 1992, Sien 1997, Sohn 1994). The main phonological features 
which serve to “mark” Korean ideophonic words as opposed to prosaic lexical items fall into two 
main strategies: vowel ablaut and consonant mutation. The main morphological features that 
mark this word class are types of reduplication, either full or partial. Work on the descriptive 
semantics of Korean ideophones, on the other hand, is less well developed: meaning patterns are 
not studied in themselves, but mainly for the purposes of illuminating the structural features that 
are iconic. In this section, I will delve into each one of these features and what various authors 
have said about them.  
 
2.2.1 
Vowel ablaut 
The full (monophthong) vowel inventory of Korean is: [i], [e], [ɛ], [a], [ɨ], [u], [o], and [ə].2 Some 
authors (including Cho 1967) recognize a [∅] phoneme, however I have not observed a rounded 
front phoneme in any of the Seoul Korean spoken currently. In Korean, nucleic vowels of 
ideophones may take on one of two values (sometimes referred to as isotopes). These are known 
as “light” and “dark”, a featural distinction partially based on the distinction between low and 
non-low vowels. “Light” and “dark” isotopes tend to have diminutive and augmentative meanings 
respectively. The light isotope may have to do with lightweight, delicate things, while the dark 
isotope has to do with the heavy, ponderous, and often negative aspects such as coarseness or 
excess. In the literature, the semantic effects of vowel ablaut light isotopes of ideophones are 
associated with “brightness, lightness, sharpness, thinness, slowness, smallness etc., as opposed 
to dark vowels which tend to give the feeling of darkness, heaviness, dullness, thickness, 
quickness, bigness, etc.” (Sohn 1994: 500). Lee quotes Martin 1962, noting that these words can 
carry “pejorative” connotations, such as “unsubstantial” or “silly” in the case of light isotopes, 
and “gloomy” or “clumsy” for the heavy isotope. (Lee 1992: 105-106) If these were represented 
as features, they could be classified [+light] or [+ dark] according to their vowel quality. This is 
not to say that the identity of any single vowel is ambiguous as to whether it has a light or dark 
value, but that there is not a perfect correspondence between low and non-low phonological 
featural values, on the one hand, and “light” and “dark” categorizations, on the other. That is, the 
light-dark distinction is an abstract, system-internal categorization that does not completely match 
any phonological natural class. Lee (1992) reports that the vowels [e], [ə], and [u] are dark, 
whereas [ɛ], [a], and [o] are light (1992: 103). The low-non-low distinction works here defining 
“light” vowels as low and “dark” vowels as non-low, except in the case of [o], which is non-low 
but light. This is illustrated in Table 1: 
 
 
Front 
Central 
Back 
High 
i (neutral) 
ɨ (neutral) 
u (dark) 
High Mid 
e (dark) 
ə (dark) 
o (light) 
Low Mid 
ɛ (light) 
 
 
Low 
 
a (light) 
 
 
Table 1: An illustration of the light and dark featural contrast and how this correlates to the 
vowel space in Korean, based off the assigned values in Lee 1992: 103. 
                                                        
2 Lee (1993: 60) notes that [ɛ] is a more accurate transcription than [æ] which many authors adopt. Cho (1967: 
79) notes: “the proponents of the ‘articulatory view’ tend to compare the vowel to the Russian [ɨ] …the tongue 
position for it is is higher and slightly more backward than the position for the other central vowels.” Given that 
the vowel is still classified as central and the retractedness is only “slight” I have chosen to retain [ɨ] in 
transcription 

Richard Kroeger 
70 
 
There are some disagreements in the literature as to whether a third, neutral vocalic category 
exists in Korean. Specifically, Lee proposes that high front and high central vowels have a neutral 
status with respect to light/ dark semantics (1992: 103), while, Sien (1997), citing McCarthy 
(1983), proposes that light and dark values correspond to [+low] and [-low] featural values, 
respectively (1997:131). Martin (1992), on the other hand, postulates that: “the vowels u and i are 
either heavy [dark] or neutral. The isotopic difference of meaning is not always strongly present, 
and sometimes one isotope is felt to be ‘neutral’ or ‘basic’ (i.e. connotationally unmarked) – 
frequently the one with the heavy vowel…” (Martin 1992: 343). Lee (1993: 215) notes: “Neutral 
vowels can co-occur either with dark or light vowels. However an ideophonic expression may not 
have both light and dark vowels.” In short, there are phonological reasons for considering these 
neutral, as they can co-occur with either category. However, the semantics of the ideophonic 
isotope is determined by the “light” or “dark” vowels with which they co-occur.”  
The description of Korean ideophones often implies that light and dark isotopes are two halves 
of a symmetry in which neither is really more marked than the other. Lee, discussing Martin 
1992, notes that pejorative meanings can be attached to dark isotopes, yet: “[Martin says] the 
pejorative connotation invoked from light vowels is a secondary one developed from the primary 
connotation ‘smallness’. Although Martin’s remark is true to some extent it is interesting to note 
this secondary connotation is almost never imposed on the primary source of ideophones…” (Lee 
1992: 106). Thus, she seems to recognize an asymmetry qualitatively, but does not develop this 
idea in her thesis. 
 
2.2.2 
Consonant mutation 
Korean stops have a three-way phonemic contrast between fortis, lenis, and aspirated. In terms of 
their production, these categories are distinguished by both F0 and VOT without overlapping 
(Kim, Midam 2004: 1). A minimal triplet will serve to illustrate this three-way distinction (fortis 
stops are marked with a length diacritic hereafter in this paper): 
 
(2) t:aɭ   “daughter” (fortis) 
 
taɭ  “moon” (lenis) 
tʰaɭ  “mask” (aspirated) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Kim& Duanmu 2004: 59) 
 
This contrast between stops can be used in ideophonic words to create a graded scale of 
semantic degrees. Lee notes that fortis consonants (which she calls “tense”) have to do with the 
idea of “something dense, compact, solid, tough, heavy, slow etc.” (Lee 1992: 99). Aspirated 
consonants, on the other hand, have to do with things that are “airy, crisp, sparse, light, swift” 
(Lee 1992: 99). The lenis stops are basic. This three-way contrast, which seems to compliment 
the vowel ablaut as a mechanism of communicating intensity and degree (Lee 1992: 98) is 
exemplified in (2): 
 
(3)   taltal < t:alt:al ~ tʰaltʰal rattling 
 
 
 
 
(Lee 1992: 98) 
 
According to Lee, the sense of intensity increases depending on which onset it used. She does 
not give the exact gloss for each individual word, but it seems that she is implying a rattle with 
increasing loudness with each degree of emphasis: “the forms with plain [lenis] stops represent 
the unmarked simple connotation, whereas the tense [fortis] stops and aspirated stops represent 
more intensive connotations.” (1992: 98) Therefore “taltal” is “rattling” and “t:alt:al” or “tʰaltʰal” 
is “rattling hard.” 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
71 
 
Sien (1997) proposes a full theory of a gradient range of phonological segmental modifications 
corresponding to slight semantic differences in Korean ideophones. Taking any ideophonic form, 
slightly different senses of intensity, degree, etc. can be achieved through consonant or vowel 
mutations, partial and full reduplications, etc. He provides distinctions of meaning that are 
extremely fine and precise. For example, consider this passage from Sien on infixes (he analyzes 
occurrence of non-initial syllable onset infixes): 
 
“Relative connotational differences among them [infixes] can be generally stated as follows: 
 
-t-: intensity, hard sound, abruptness 
-c-: strong resonance, sharp sound 
-s-: resonance, fragility, low-tone sound 
-l-: diminution, continuity, light-tone sound” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Sien 1997: 112) 
 
As an example, he gives the following: 
 
(4)  a. /əlk-/ [əlk] ‘to be pockmarked’      /əl+t+k/ [əlt’uk] ‘with many big mottles’       
      /əl+t+t+k/ [əlt’utuk] ‘with many big clear mottles’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Sien 1997: 113) 
 
Infixes are phenomena of onset clusters, while the below mentioned suffix changes are located 
in syllable codas. Each part of the syllable structure has thus been variously linked to iconic 
resemblances 
These relationships between phonological features and semantic differences can be quite 
specific and detailed. Here is an example found in the hierarchies developed in Sien’s (1997) 
analysis of diminutive meaning in obstruent suffixes: 
 
(5)  Intensity in Suffixes 
       a. Dorsal Suffixes  
 
 
b. Alveolar Suffixes 
      -k >-ŋ  >-l  
 
 
 
  -s > -n > -l 
      -<---- intensity 
 
 
 
-<----- intensity 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Sien 1997: 104) 
 
As examples of the alveolar suffixes, Sien includes: 
 
[nok] ‘to melt’  [nogɨt] ‘slightly soft’  [nogɨn] ‘very soft’  [nogɨl] ‘extremely soft’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Sien 1997: 107) 
Note: [nogɨt] is underlyingly /nok +s/ in Sien’s paper. 
 
 
While Sien provides a detailed proposal of the relationship between phonological form and 
meaning of ideophones, a standing question is whether speakers are in fact aware of the level of 
the sound symbolism of consonant features on single segments. How salient is this really to 

Richard Kroeger 
72 
 
speakers? Is it part of speaker knowledge in a concrete sense? That is, we need to understand its 
cognitive reality. Also one must consider how extensively this used: is this productive? Do 
speakers know this form and extend its use productively? 
 
2.2.3 
Reduplication 
 
2.2.3.1 Full reduplication 
In addition to abalut and consonant mutation, ideophonic words in Korean also exhibit different 
kinds of reduplicative patterns. The most common one involves full reduplication. One can think 
of there as being a single “base form” which is a single phonological word that can be 
reduplicated completely. The reduplicated sequence forms a single syntactic word (generally 
adverbial or adjectival). As an example, the ideophone pʰodoŋ pʰodoŋ shows full reduplication as 
all segments are repeated from the two-syllable base. The word is used as an adjective and can be 
placed in the periphrastic expression “pʰodoŋ pʰodoŋ hada” or “to be chubby in a cute way.” 
Meanwhile an example of an adverbial form would be kotʃʰi kotʃʰi, a word describing persistent, 
unstopping action usually used with the verb “kemutda” to communicate ceaseless asking of 
questions. For instance: 
 
(6) gjesək            iɾəke         mutda    dwe-s:ə                  kotʃʰi kotʃʰi      kemutda iɾəmjən 
      constantly  like that     to ask    turn out-PAST    [IDEOPHONE]        to ask        like that 
      ‘To constantly ask, like that,  kotʃʰi hotʃʰi kemutda like that’ <KR 26:25> 
 
Full reduplication is the most frequent and general strategy for ideophones. While most 
ideophones have an unreduplicated base form, there are some “frozen reduplicated forms” that 
are “inherently reduplicated” as a pair of identical forms (Lee 1992: 123). An example of the 
latter is the word “tʃoɭtʃoɭ”, meaning “in a continuous flow” (Lee 1992: 123), which does not 
have a base form that occurs alone: *tʃoɭ. As Lee states, this word “does not have independent 
morphemic status” (1992: 124). 
According to Sien, “[t]otally reduplicated forms carry the meaning of continuity of repetition 
rather than intensity” (Sien 1997: 204). The aspectual concept of iteration is part of the semantics 
of this particular type of reduplication. It is possible to reduplicate more than once, bearing in 
mind that since these are performative words more appropriate to certain speech genres, they can 
be extended for dramatic effect. 
 
2.2.3.2 Non-identical reduplication 
Sometimes, the two halves of fully reduplicated forms are not identical. One base form may have 
a different nucleic vowel, or onset consonant from the other, as seen in (7).3  
 
(7) 
a.   aki-caki    “lovely in this way and that way” 
b.   hoNiya-haNiya   “debating with all different options” 
c.   twicuk-pakcuk   “total chaos” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Lee 1992: 127) 
 
 
                                                        
3 Lee uses “N” as notation for [ŋ] 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
73 
 
Many kinds of different variations can occur between the base and reduplicant. They may have 
different consonantal onsets, nucleic vowels, or even an entirely different initial syllable, as we 
see in (7c). In this case, reduplication carries different semantic nuances. According to Lee, for 
instance, “[t]he semantic aspect of non-identical reduplication in Korean appears to be 
‘directionlessness’ or ‘aimlessness’” (Lee 1992: 127). 
 
2.2.3.3 Prefixal reduplication 
There is also a case of prefixal reduplication, which Lee identifies as characterizing “a longer 
duration of the event described” (1992: 116). The ideophone uses material from the base as a 
template to construct a prefixed partial element. Sien, following the analysis in McCarthy and 
Prince (1986) for Ponopaean, notes that moraic units are responsible for the conditioning of the 
selection of form of the prefixed material. According to Sien, “[i]n Korean, the choice of prefixes 
for bisyllabic bases also depends upon the quantity of the base-initial syllable. A base whose 
initial syllable is monomoraic takes the bimoraic prefix, while a base whose initial syllable is 
bimoraic takes the monomoraic one” (1997: 198). He sums this up concisely in a principle of 
“moraic complementarity”, which he describes as involving “prefixation [that] shows a moraic 
opposition between the prefix and the base-initial syllable” (1997: 200). As an example of this 
process: 
 
(8)  a. Sien first notes there is a “choice of prefix templates by moraic complementarity” (200) 
 
     σ           σ   σ  
 
 
 
σ           σ   σ 
 
  μ   μ   +      μ      μ 
 
 
             μ  +   μ   μ  μ μ 
 
 
 
      k o l u 
 
 
 
      t  u  ŋ s i  l 
 
b. Sien next says there is a “copying and mapping of segmental string onto the template in 
the left-to-right fashion” (200) 
 
     σ           σ   σ  
 
 
 
σ               σ   σ 
 
  μ   μ   +      μ      μ 
 
 
 
μ   +        μ μ    μ μ 
 
 
k o    l u     k o   l u 
 
 
         t u ŋ s i l t u ŋ s  i   l 
 
c. Following this there is a “erasure of unassociated material by Stray Erasure Convention 
(41)” (201) 
 
   σ               σ   σ 
 
 
           σ           σ         σ 
 
  μ   μ   +      μ      μ 
 
 
 
μ   +    μ  μ    μ   μ 
 
 
k o    l      k o  l   u 
 
 
         t   u      t  u  ŋ   s  i    l 
 

Richard Kroeger 
74 
 
 
d. Lastly the resultant structure is (201): 
 
      σ           σ   σ 
 
 
 
          σ           σ      σ 
 
     μ    μ   +   μ      μ 
 
 
 
            μ   +    μ  μ     μ  μ 
 
 
   k o   l      k o l  u 
 
 
 
      t     u      t u  ŋ  s  i   l 
 
The reduplication process takes as much material from the base as it needs to make a prefix of 
complimentary moraic weight to the first syllable. In this case, the prefix will be a heavy syllable, 
so it takes the onset of the second syllable to make the coda of the pre-fixed syllable [kol], which 
is in moraic complementarity to [ko]. Meanwhile the base [tuŋʃil] begins with a heavy syllable 
[tuŋ], so based on the principle just mentioned, the prefixed material must be a light syllable, 
taken from the segments of the base: [tu]. Thus the resultant form is [tutuŋʃil] (Sien 1997: 200-
201). 
As can be seen from the above, a number of analyses have been developed to account for the 
structure of ideophonic words, the possible variations of form, and the general meaning 
correspondence to these changes of form. 
 
2.3 
Summary 
 
I have reviewed the work that has been done in ideophones cross-linguistically and in Korean and 
shown that  extensive analysis has been done on the analysis of the form of these words. I have 
summarized the research carried out so far addressing the iconicity of structural components in 
Korean ideophones and have remarked that the description of the iconicity of structural 
components is a basic part of the investigation of the unique properties of these words. In the next 
section I discuss the methodology I employed and the particular advantages that this methodology 
confers to the researcher of ideophones. 
 
3 
Methodology 
 
3.1 
Folk definitions 
 
For this project, I elicited ideophonic data with native Korean speakers using a methodology 
developed by Dingemanse (2015) called “folk definition”. Folk definitions involve a descriptive, 
explanatory discourse by a native speaker in the object language about the nature of the 
ideophone, its use in context, and examples such as enacted direct quotations if the speaker 
decides to use them. The folk definition is “multi-modal” in that it is recorded in a manner that 
preserves not only the speaker’s words, intonation, etc. but also documents associated gestures, 
facial expressions and other pieces of descriptive performance that the speaker may deploy when 
defining ideophones. This may involve enactments with their whole bodies or sometimes even 
props or objects in the environment. It is a holistic methodology, suited especially to ideophones 
because of their nature as sensory experiences, and often as multi-modal experiences involving 
sight, hearing, touch, and emotions. For this reason, it is argued to be the best way in which to 
capture the full expression of ideophones. (Dingemanse 2015: 215) The additional advantage of 
this methodology is that there is no interference by meta-language interpretation as the folk 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
75 
 
definition is preserved in the object language. Data obtained this way can then be used to build a 
corpus that can be accessible to speakers who may be able to present their critiques of the meta-
language interpretation, the annotation, and the gestural notation. It has therefore a greater 
amount of accountability as a research methodology. 
Since ideophones are iconic words, they resemble the things that they index by their structural 
properties. Gesture is thus a crucial definitional tool, especially in cases of visual modality and 
movement where gestural iconicity can be used as an economical tool. I show how capturing 
gesture is a major advantage in the study of ideophones below in my results section devoted to 
gesture. 
 
3.2.1 
Speakers 
All speakers were fluent, native speakers of the Seoul dialect of Korean, were college-educated, 
and spoke English well. My subjects were two female and two male speakers. The two females 
were ages 21 and 34, and the two males were ages 25 and 24.  
 
3.3 
Pilot game methodology 
 
For my first subject (F, 21),. I created a slide show, incorporating images that had particular 
visual salience (for instance fireworks, vivid fall leaves, etc.) with the Korean equivalent of the 
depicted noun written beneath each slide. The speaker played a game with a consultant I enlisted 
in which the subject had to communicate the identity of the object or event to the consultant 
without using the word written beneath each slide. It is similar to the board game known as 
“Taboo” in which the word giving a precise denotation of the signified object or event cannot be 
spoken aloud, and members of one’s team must guess its identity through clues given by 
descriptions, actions, etc. The effect of the game was that the subject was very involved and used 
a variety of gestures. However very few tokens of ideophones were elicited. I prepared the 
speaker beforehand with a short written description of the procedure, asking them to use as many 
descriptive words referencing shape, color, etc. as they could. In this way I was hoping to prime 
the speaker to pay attention more closely to the visual modality. Given that this method was 
unsuccessful, I revised my procedure to elicit ideophones more directly. Ideophones belong to 
narrative speech genres most often, and it may be difficult to reproduce the right context and 
environment for these very specialized words to be used in a natural way.  
 
3.4 
Elicited form methodology 
 
The methodology that was successful in eliciting ideophones and their definitions involved 
elicitation from a list of ideophones with selections of data cited in Lee (1992), supplemented by 
some words from Sien (1997) and a few I had encountered on my own previously. I selected all 
these words on the criteria of whether or not their glosses seemed to be classifiable as primarily 
visual modality. I focused on a subset of words: a series of ideophones that were glossed in my 
sources (Lee 1992 and Sien 1997) as having visual modality as a way to both limit my scope in 
the research and to investigate the particular properties of a given modality “domain” to see what 
kinds of domain-internal phenomena and sub-categorizations were present. 
 This of course introduces a measure of artificiality, as the forms in the list were selected using 
an English gloss, and so the precise nuances of their meanings were obscured. Specifically, the 
gloss decontextualizes the ideophones, as it is only needed to the extent that contrastive meanings 
are shown to pattern together with minimal iconic featural changes. So I could not build a list 
with a precise foreknowledge of their meanings, but attempted to pull together a number of 

Richard Kroeger 
76 
 
similar words, and worked to clarify and expand my knowledge of these words through my 
speaker sessions. As I show in the results section, the contextualization of usage and gesture both 
helped with the retrieval of these nuances in the meanings of ideophones. 
Referring to the definition of ideophones provided in the introduction of this paper, I identified 
these forms as ideophonic because they all had sensory depictive meanings, most of them 
manifested alternations in the vowels corresponding to the form-meaning correspondences of 
light/ dark vowels in Korean. All these forms (with the exception of three) showed reduplication 
patterning typical of ideophones. 
I submitted this list to a Korean teacher at the Korean Language Institute (for foreign students) 
at Yonsei University, who helped me by taking out a few forms that were either North Korean 
dialectal variants or unproductive forms.  
There were 53 individual ideophones presented. Of these, 16 were pairs differing by a vowel 
contrast, representing 32 individual ideophones. There was one triplet, which also exhibited a 
light/ dark vowel contrast in a graded manner. Thus only 18 were individual ideophones, 
occurring without an alternate variant also presented in the list. The list is included in Appendix 
A of this paper. 
The speakers were presented with the ideophones orally in obvious pairs based on the light/ 
dark vowel contrast, with the exception of 47 and 494. Numbers 36-38 form the only triple of the 
data set. These ideophones were written in native Korean orthography, and were typed out on a 
sheet, which the speakers were able to look at and consult during the session for clarification 
purposes. With this list, I interviewed the speakers, asking them to explain each word one at a 
time in Korean. If they didn’t know the word, they skipped it. I attempted to converse only to a 
small extent (mainly to ask for appropriate contexts) in Korean, so as not to introduce my own 
interpretation and analysis into the speaker’s intuitions. The speakers talked about the meanings 
and inevitably gave examples as well as spontaneous sample sentences expressed as direct 
quotations, etc. They used a significant amount of explanatory gesture. I recorded these gestures 
and facial expressions using the camcorder (Canon Vixia HF R400) (the Marantz Professional 
Solid State Recorder PMD 660 and Audio-Technica Condensor Microphone Lo-Z that I brought 
were inoperable, so the sound was recorded by the camcorder internal microphone) that I held 
and moved depending on whether they were using their hands at any given time or indicating off-
screen objects. 
For the first and second interviews, a research assistant who is a fluent heritage speaker of 
Korean engaged with the consultants on camera. For the last two interviews, I read the forms 
myself (with second-language skills in Korean) and engaged the speaker in dialogue (my own 
questions being very short).  
 
4 
Results and analysis 
 
The elicitation by the folk definition methodology has yielded a video corpus of valuable data 
(which can be found in Appendix B with IPA transcriptions and semantic classifications). In this 
section I discuss the main findings of this study, give analyses of prominent phenomena in the 
data and outline the implications for the study of Korean ideophones.  My results from this study 
are summarized as follows: 
 
                                                        
4 These numbers correlate to the numbered ideophones in Appendix B. Please see the appendix for these forms and the 
contrastive triple. 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
77 
 
1. There is a significant amount of simultaneous encoding of different modalities onto 
single ideophonic forms. 
2. Visual Modality should be subdivided into four sub-categories in the description of 
Korean ideophones. 
3. Tactile Modality is a robust category in Korean ideophones. 
4. Modalities are not always sensory 
5. The light ideophonic istope has a wider semantic valence in terms of evaluative negative/ 
positive polarity, and is therefore more basic, while the dark isotope is marked for 
distinctly negative polarity. 
 
4.1 
Multiple modalities encoded on one form 
 
There are references across the literature on ideophones that point to the fact that any given 
ideophone cannot always be assigned to one modality category or another on the implicational 
hierarchy described in Dingemanse 2012, but rather that each ideophonic form is either 
ambiguous or it conveys meanings that can be simultaneously placed within different categories 
on the hierarchy. For instance, for Korean ideophones Lee notes that: “words such as pʰalakpʰalak 
‘the way a flag is flapping in the wind’ and tʰapaktʰapak ‘the way a tired person walks slowly and 
heavily’ depict sound and manner at the same time” (Lee 1992: 90). Dingemanse also notes that 
the reason motion follows sound immediately in the hierarchy is that “MOVEMENT comes 
frequently packaged with sound in sensory input” (Dingemanse 2012: 663 [capitals in original]). 
However, to the best of my knowedge, not much attention has been devoted in the literature to 
identifying what kinds of interactions are attested between modality categories in ideophones, 
how many meanings can be encoded on a single form, and how extensive this phenomenon of 
simultaneous meanings is in the ideophonic lexicon. I address this gap in my study and show that 
a significant percentage of these cases have multiple encodings (as many as 20% for two speakers 
in this paper). 
All three speakers produced ideophones with simultaneous encoding of modalities. If the 
speaker evidenced either by verbal definition or by gesture that the word was connected to a 
given modality (often by describing the word in an example), the categorization was noted in the 
data. If more than one modality was indicated within the same definition (a single form and 
definition, not two homophonous forms with separable definitions), the ideophone was 
considered to encode multiple modalities. The justifications for each classification can be found 
in Appendix B. Two speakers each had the same proportions of multiply encoded forms to the 
total number of forms they knew. For speaker F34: out of 45 forms the speaker knew (the total 
number of forms speakers were asked about was 53), 9 encoded more than a single modality 
simultaneously (that is, without having separable meanings as a consequence of being 
homophonous) representing 20% of the total forms. It is also important to note that 3 of these 
forms had a meaning of internal state. It makes sense that the more abstract experiences are 
partially dependent on linked sensory perceptions and thus would group together with other 
modalities. Dingemanse 2012:656, alluding to the class of internal states calls them “kinaesthetic 
sensations…and other feelings and sensations.” For speaker M25: out of 44 forms the speaker 
knew there were again 9 tokens in which more than a single modality was simultaneously 
encoded, that is 20% approximately. It is worth noting that 4 of these forms, were tactile and 
shape joint classifications. Shape was represented in six multiply encoding forms. The third 
speaker M24, however, was noticeably different both in the proportion of multiply encoded forms 
and number of forms overall that he knew. The speaker seemed generally to give a very concise 
definition of the words, perhaps leaving out some nuances. Out of the 36 forms he knew, 4 forms, 

Richard Kroeger 
78 
 
or 11% encoded more than one modality. This speaker had a less expressive and verbose 
character, so perhaps he had a less rich vocabulary of words used for narrative and illustrational 
purposes. 
As an example of multiple encoding in which the speaker indicated all modalities verbally F34 
gives: 
 
(9)  botoŋ    giok           dʒuŋ-esə-do           ke              ʃigakdʒogi-n      giok 
       usually  memory  middle-LOC-also like that     visual-ADJ      memory 
  ‘Usually in the middle of remembering as well, like that, a visual memory.’  <KR 17:23> 
 
Here a memory, an internal state, is explicitly verbally connected with the visual modality. As 
an example of two modalities given as part of the same definition, this would be considered a 
multiply-encoded form. In some cases however, one of the encoded modalities is given gesturally 
rather than verbally (see section 5 for a discussion of gesture and how gesture is used to indicate 
modality). 
 
4.2 
Subdivision of visual modality 
 
I propose that a single modality “Visual” can, and should be subdivided for descriptive 
purposes into different categories. Four categories seem to best fit the data: Shape, Surface 
Pattern, Spatial Orientation, and Light/ Color. Shape has to do with the overall distribution of 
volume, boundaries, outlines etc. delimiting an object. A surface pattern has to do with an 
appearance connected to the exterior, but not necessarily the whole volume of an object. Spatial 
orientation has to do with how something is situated in space with regards to some axis such as up 
and down. Light/ Color is a category dealing with spectral properties such as luminosity, 
vibrance, dimness, hue, etc. These have potential to each be differently linked to other modalities. 
As an example of Shape, the speaker gives the definition: 
 
 (10)  toŋguɭ     hada     muɭgən-i          toŋguɭ                 ha-mjən           toŋguɭ toŋguɭ hada 
          circular  AUX    object-SUBJ   circular              AUX-TEMP      [IDEOPHONE] 
         ‘It is circular, when it is circular it is toŋguɭ toŋguɭ.’ <KR 4:58> 
 
A few seconds later she defines it explicitly as a “shape” in reply to my question asking if it 
could be characterized as a shape (<KR 5:08>). Surface Patterns are also quite common: 
 
 
(11)  uduɭ tuduɭ          mə        iɾən    padak            gat-ɨn 
       [IDEOPHONE]  what      this       floor     seems like-COMP 
    ‘uduɭ tuduɭ, something like this floor…’ 
    (Makes undulating gestures with hand up and down over table top)  <KR 8:54> 
 
In this instance, modality had to be inferred from the gesture of the speaker making an 
imitative motion of the bumps on an uneven floor. Spatial Orientation has to do with what axis of 
alignment an object is on: 
 
 
 
 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
79 
 
(12)  bitɨɭ bitɨɾɨn         iɾəke        saɾam-i            kəɾəga-ɭte                  kɨ       mojaŋ-i 
      [IDEOPHONE]  like that   person-SUBJ  go walking-TEMP  DEM  shape-SUBJ 
      ‘bitɨɭ bitɨɭ is like this when a person goes walking… that shape.’ 
       (Makes rocking movements with torso back and forth)    <KR 6:46> 
 
This is classified as Spatial Orientation rather than Shape, even though the Korean word the 
speaker used is often translated “shape”. This word does not have the same semantic space, and 
rather than a static shape, what is emphasized is the leaning of the walking person’s body relative 
to an axis perpendicular to the ground. The precariousness of the orientation is emphasized. 
Lastly, there are some words that can only be described as Color/ Light: 
 
(13)    san-e                      tanpʰuŋ-i             iɾəke        tʃa       noɾansek   tʃuwaŋsek     baɭgansek 
         mountain-LOC  fall foliage-SUBJ  like this  DEM      yellow       orange             red 
        ‘On the mountain, the fall leaves there are like this: yellow, orange, red.’  <T-R 25:52> 
 
In trying to describe the ideophone ulgɨt puɭgɨt, the speaker here uses words for color, 
indicating vibrance. These four subcategories are sufficient for classifying the data on Visual 
Modality. 
 
4.3 
Tactile modality 
 
It is clear that Tactile modality is a recognizable modality in Korean ideophones (this would 
fall under the “Other Sensory Perceptions” in the implicational hierarchy). This categorization 
occurs 20 times in the data for all speakers. The speaker F34 makes clear references to how 
texture is integral in the perceived positive or negative definition of the ideophone (<KR 
10:35>)5: 
 
(14)  botoŋ     saɾam-dɨɾ-i          mekɨɾəu-n     gə-ɭ  
       Usually people-PL-SUBJ  smooth-ADJ  thing-DO 
    ‘Usually people like smooth things,’ (speaker strokes table surface) 
 
     tʃoaha-nənde     k:əkɨɭ k:əkɨɭ        kɨɾəmjə-nən  
     like-CONJ        [IDEOPHONE]   like that-TOP 
‘In the case of something being k:əkɨɭ k:əkɨɭ [the dark isotope of the previously discussed word]’ 
 
     jakan      tʃiɭ-do                tʃom     an     tʃə-g:o               iɾəke 
    slightly  quality-also        a bit     not    good-CONJ     like that 
‘the quality is also slightly not good, like that.’ (Speaker rubs fingers together in one hand). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<KR: 10:29> 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
5 Please refer to Appendix C for a key to abbreviations used in these glosses. 

Richard Kroeger 
80 
 
Speakers stroked items, used props, and made gestures to indicate tactile modality. For 
instance, M25: 
 
 
(15)  iɾən   gə      aka           pjəmjən-i         kətʃiɭdʒi   an-ko 
        this  thing  like this  surface-SUBJ     rough     NEG-CONJ 
       ‘This thing, like this, the surface is not rough’ 
     (Grabs metal water bottle and strokes the side)   <T-R 26:49> 
 
As is evident, the speaker wanted to enact the touching of a surface for illustrative purposes, 
highlighting the tactile experience. 
 
 
4.4 
Non-sensory modality classification 
 
Some words present difficulty in classification and do not appear to encode sensory information 
or clear inner feelings. For example, there was some trouble in the analysis of the word kotʃʰi 
kotʃʰi. I noted in the data from speaker F34 that the word seemed to be evaluative of a behavior. 
In this context no emotion, thought, or cognitive state may be portrayed, no explicit modality 
evoked, but a person’s behavior is evaluated from the speaker’s perspective. kotʃʰi kotʃʰi, to “ask 
repeatedly” is not explicitly sound, visual, or tactile based. Neither is it really an emotion or 
cognitive state. It is an externally evaluated social behavior. It shares the aspectual feature of 
iterativity with many ideophones, and may be abstractly linked with some concepts of space (my 
consultant gestured to show the repetitive nature of the asking) and can therefore still be 
depictive, but there is no explicit sensory encoding. The question is: how explicit does the 
sensory encoding need to be for something to be considered ideophonic, not just sound symbolic? 
There may be a clue that it is linked to motion metaphorically. The speaker said that it was like 
“digging” for an answer, accompanying this explanation with an action of digging:  
 
(16) ke                pʰadɨʃi            iɾəke       kemutda   hana    muɾəbo-nən     ge                ani-ja 
       like that    digging-ADV  like that    to ask       one    asking-COMP thing.SUBJ    NEG-
COPULA 
  Digging like that, to ask like that (with hands curled downward towards self, makes kneading, 
digging gestures). 
 
joɾo                 ge                  mankɨm     ne    gə-nde           kɨnde        kotʃʰi kotʃʰi  
all kinds of   thing.SUBJ  that much  my   thing-CONJ   but         [IDEOPHONE] 
‘It isn’t asking once, but lots of times like that, but kotʃʰi kotʃʰI’  
 
 
kɨɾəmjən-en      gə-ɾ-e                   hana hana  
that way-TOP  thing-DO-LOC   one by one 
‘like that, it is one by one.’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<KR: 26:16> 
 
If it is linked to a motion in some way, then it could be argued to be an ideophone since it is 
depictive of an image evocative of this modality. The same descriptive problem for this word 
occurred for M24. This may be due to simplification on the part of the speaker and there is in fact 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
81 
 
some kind of sound or other modality implicit here, but it also may reflect the synchronic usage 
of the word. Perhaps the word originally had an identification with some sensory input, but it 
seems that based on this subject’s description, and that of F34, who defines the word as a 
behavior of repetitive questioning devoid of explicit sensory character (there may be implicit 
encoding as mentioned), perhaps abstracted patterns, aspectual features such as semelfactive 
aspect, etc. are the only synchronic feature encoded sound symbolically. In that case they are not 
be ideophones proper, since ideophones have been cross-linguistically defined as having to do 
with “sensory” depiction (Dingemanse 2012: 654). 
The speaker F34’s classification of wagɨɭ wagɨɭ, the last word in the list I presented, is a bit 
ambiguous. In agreement with the other speakers she first classifies it as a sound, particularly the 
kind of noise of many voices that arises from an environment filled with too many people <KR2 
0:08>. This concurs with what other speakers said. However, she afterward contradicted herself 
by saying it wasn’t a sound, the word simply referred to the gathering of people <KR2 0:35>: 
 
(17)   ke            soɾi-ga           wawawa    iɾəke           maɾ-əɭ            makʰhan  
         like this  sound-SUBJ  [noises]   like that  speech-DO              a lot 
         ‘The sound is like this “wawawa…” (makes gestures with wiggling fingers in front of 
mouth imitating indistinct noise), like that, a lot of talking.’ 
 
      saɾam-dɨɾ-i             mani      mojə-sə              mani iɾəke        soɾi     hesə               wagɨɭ wagɨɭ 
   person-PL-SUBJ    many   gathered-CONJ  a lot  like this  sound make-CONJ   [IDEOPHONE] 
   ‘There are many people gathered together, so they make a lot of sound like this wagɨɭ wagɨɭ.’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<KR2: 0:19> 
 
 (18)  a kɨnde ne-ga     tʃaɭmot [inaudible] katgi-ne               ke            soɾi-ga           aniɾa  
        oh  but  I-SUBJ  mistake   [made]       it seems-EXCL  like this  sound-SUBJ  NEG 
      ‘Oh, it seems I made a mistake. It’s not a sound,’ 
          
         kɨnjaŋ… saɾam-i            manɨ-n             gə-ja 
          just          person-SUBJ  many-ADJ  thing-COPULA 
        ‘just something with many people.’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<KR2: 0:35> 
 
Cross-comparing this with the other subjects, it seems likely that the word generally is 
regarded as a sound, but this represents the state of the individual speaker’s knowledge.  
The next section discusses the argument for a basic light isotope. 
 
4.5 
Basic forms and evaluative functions of isotopes 
 
I now address the fact that ideophones seem to be fundamentally evaluative in nature. Many of 
the examples have negative or positive connotations based on the aesthetics, usefulness, or 
appropriateness of something described by the ideophones. It is useful to examine to what degree 
these connotations are part of the meaning of each ideophone. It seems that they are not merely 
“possible” in the valence of available meanings, but it is typical to find some kind of negative or 
positive evaluative nature on ideophones. Furthermore, the negative connotations are almost 
exclusively for dark isotopes while the positive connotations, when they occur, are more in the 
domain of light isotopes. Light isotopes seem to be more basic (or unmarked) in the sense that 

Richard Kroeger 
82 
 
they can have more neutral meanings. I examine the exact number of attestations for each 
category below. However, even though light isotopes are often more neutral, there are many 
positive tokens. Dark isotopes seemed to be more marked as decidedly pejorative. As a contrast 
of light and dark connotations (in that order), speaker M25 notes along with F34 about the 
meaning of tʰoʃiɭ tʰoʃiɭ/ tʰuʃiɭ tʰuʃiɭ: 
 
(19) 
a. iɾəke          kwiəp-ge   saɭ      dʒjə-s-ɨɭte 
like this  cute-ADV  flesh     gain-PAST-TEMP 
          ‘Like this, when one is chubby in a cute way.’  <T-R 24:24> 
 
b. tʰuʃiɭ tʰuʃiɭ              s:ɨ-mjən … saɾam-i           an      tʃoa-ɭ       gə-n 
[IDEOPHONE]  use-TEMP  person-SUBJ  not  like-FUT  thing-COMP 
          ‘tʰuʃiɭ tʰuʃiɭ is used when you don’t like a person.’   <KR 28:33> 
 
The chart in Appendix C examines the data for positive/ negative connotations and the tokens 
of explicit labeling by the speakers (when the item was known). I have also included the number 
of gaps of speaker knowledge for the form of the given isotope. 
Let us now analyze the correspondences between forms that are of a given isotope and their 
positive/ negative connotation. For each number on Table 2, I am not counting each speaker 
response separately as different tokens for the positive/ negative meanings unless there is a case 
of contradiction or other notable feature. The gaps are counted as a token if two speakers or more 
fail to recognize the same word. The word is then considered a less well registered/ used form. 
 
Positive 
Meanings 
with Light 
Isotope 
Negative 
Meanings 
with Light 
Isotope 
Positive 
Meanings 
with Dark 
Isotope 
Negative 
Meanings 
with Dark 
Isotope 
Number of 
Speaker 
Knowledge 
Gaps for 
Light Isotope 
Number of 
Speaker 
Knowledge 
Gaps for Dark 
Isotope 
5 
1 
0 
11 
5 
2 
 
 
 
Table 2: The table details the negative and positive polar connotations speakers identified and to 
which isotopic variants they correspond giving the token number of identifications in the data set 
for all speakers. 
 
From this data there is clearly an association of negative meanings with the dark isotope. 
There is never a dark isotope with a positive meaning.  Light isotopes seem to be more neutral, or 
even a bit bivalent, as we see one token of a negative meaning and five positive tokens connected 
with the light form. The number of speaker knowledge gaps compared with attested forms may be 
such that it is difficult to really advance a hypothesis about whether or not the other form is basic 
on this basis alone, but it appears that the light isotope is basic on the strength of its wider 
valence. One can better predict the sense of the dark isotope. Overall, out of 45 known forms, 22 
are evaluated as having positive or negative meanings. This is a representation of 49%, almost 
half. The fact that positive and negative meanings can be identified and contrasted for half the 
data justifies the proposal that Korean ideophones carry a heavily evaluative function. 
With a larger set of data, it might be possible to test whether there are more gaps of knowledge 
for “marked” forms (dark forms with a general negative evaluative function) and “unmarked” 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
83 
 
forms (the evaluative nature of the light forms may be neutral or go either way). This would 
reveal how speaker knowledge relates to markedness of this semantic polarity. 
 
5 
On the importance of gesture 
 
I turn now to the role of gesture as a centrally important part in the investigation of ideophones. 
As I have already described, the recording of the video footage of the native speaker gestures as 
part of their overall definitions of ideophonic words is integral to the folk definition methodology. 
The way that gesture is used together with verbal definition often falls into distinctive patterns. In 
this section, I focus on these speaker definitional strategies and how they incorporate gesture as a 
central feature. 
Firstly, speakers sometimes employed a strategy of using negative and positive definitions 
together. They would verbally say “not X, but this…” then visually demonstrate with a gesture. 
The salience of the gesture made it the locus of the positive, selective definition, while verbal 
input was used as the locus of the negative, contrastive definition. In (4) I provide an example 
from speaker F34: 
 
(20)    əsɨt əsɨsɨn          iɾəke    ke dokbaɾo tʃaɾə-nən                      ge              ani-go            
        [IDEOPHONE] like this      straight    cut-COMP        thing.SUBJ     NEG-CONJ 
         ‘əsɨt əsɨt is like this… not a thing cut directly…’ (Vertical motions with hand blade)       
 
          jakan     iɾəke       pisɨtɨm   ha-ge         tʃatəndago hetna 
          slightly like this  slanted  AUX-ADV   it is cut 
          ‘slightly like this, it is cut slanted.’ (Slanted cutting movements with hand blade) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<KR  12:36> 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Speaker performing slanted cutting motions for əsɨt əsɨt 
 
In this segment, the speaker verbally gives an explicit negative direction: “not a thing cut 
directly”, then shows what precisely the word means by repeating a gesture of up and down hand 
movements with one contrastive difference: she makes the motion along a slanted path. This is a 
minimal pair in gestural form as the speaker has only changed the orientation of the path along 
which the motion is done. The gesture decomposes the action into discrete elements and shows at 

Richard Kroeger 
84 
 
what point the action qualifies as being described by the ideophone, which constitutes the crucial 
difference. For this reason gesture can be a descriptive tool with both precision and economy, 
especially for ideophones dealing with visual modality in which space, boundaries, and surfaces 
are definitionally very important. In almost every definition, speakers relied heavily on gestures, 
accompanied by a verbal “like this” or “like that”. It is a show-and-tell process. 
As another example of using gesture for greater specificity and verbal definitions merely as 
auxiliaries, consider this segment from the same speaker: 
 
(21)   kiɾi     iɾəke         dokbaɾo na                it:-nən         ge                   aniɾa          
          road   like this  straight   come out  EX-COMP thing.SUBJ   it is not 
        ‘The road doesn’t go straight.’ (Makes long straight gesture with arm)      
 
         iɾəke        toɾasə   na               is:ɨ-ɭte          k:ubuɭ k:ubuɭ hada 
          like this  turns    come out  EX-TEMP     [IDEOPHONE] 
       ‘when it comes out, it is like this k:ubuɭ k:ubuɭ.’   (Uses two hands to indicate winding 
motion of bounded path) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<KR 3:32> 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Speaker performs winding movement for k:ubuɭ k:ubuɭ 
 
The Korean gloss references “turning”, but the periodic gesture, the curving trail, and the 
bounded space of the road are all captured in one movement. 
When gesture is not acting as the primary locus of definition, it is also reinforcing nuances of 
definition. For example, the same speaker as the above example also says: 
 
(22)   kɨ       daɨm-e      giok-do            do   kɨɾəke       s:ɨ-go           
       DET  next-LOC memory-also  also  like that  use-CONJ 
     ‘Next, one also uses it about a memory’ (Points to head) 
 
         ga botoŋ     giok        dʒuŋ-esɔ-do 
         usually  memory middle-LOC-also 
         ‘usually in the middle of thinking’ (Points to head) 
 
 
 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
85 
 
        ke ʃigakdʒogi-n giok 
        visual-ADJ     memory 
         ‘a visual memory’ (Points to eye then to head) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<KR 17:21> 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Speaker indicate visual modality by means of gesture 
 
In this example, the speaker links both verbally and gesturally the two modalities: visual and 
internal state. By pointing to the head, the eye, by touching and stroking surfaces, speakers 
constantly reinforce the explanation of the experiential locus. In this case there is a link between 
what one sees and remembers, as the speaker shows by spatially linking head to eye and back 
again. 
Sometimes there is a piece of information present in the gesture that is unclear in the verbal 
definition. From M25 I have this example: 
 
(23)    tʃəndʒaŋ-e     iɾɔke          ʃiɭ          gat-ən      gos-e…  
          ceiling-LOC  like this   thread   like-ADJ  thing-LOC 
         ‘On the ceiling this thread… yeah…’ (Traces line in air)    (Holds fist curled below other 
hand)    
 
          ə… kɨɾəke    medaɭi-n         gə…   teɾəŋ teɾəŋ         medaɭjueda 
            like that  cling-COMP thing  [IDEOPHONE]  to cling 
         ‘something clinging like that… it clings on teɾəŋ teɾəŋ’ (Swings fist back and forth) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<T-R 0:34> 
 

Richard Kroeger 
86 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Speaker makes “swinging” motion, although no explicit reference to motion was made 
in the verbal definition 
 
The word that he used is translated as “cling” in my Korean dictionary. However, the 
metalanguage definition, or possibly the word itself obscures the fact that rather than the 
fixedness/ tethering of the object to the ceiling, what is being emphasized is its free motion, the 
dangling aspect, the fact that the object is capable of swinging. Using a gesture that imitates 
swinging shows that this word can be linked to motion as well, to a concept of free movement 
back and forth of a suspended object. It happens that the visual data can be a check against errors 
introduced by a meta-data interpretation. 
Ideas such as spatial distribution are better communicated in gesture than in speech. Speaker 
F34 relies on gesture to show the distribution of “pieces of paper” stuck all over a wall surface in 
the definition for tədək tədək: 
 
(24)   kɨ            ge                      hana    man    butʰə       it:-nən     ge                    ani-go  
        DET  thing.SUBJ              one     only   stuck on   EX-COMP  thing.SUBJ  NEG-CONJ 
        ‘It’s not just one stuck on’ (Makes single gesture as is slapping palm against surface) 
 
         jəɾə          ge-ga                           iɾəke iɾəke iɾəke 
        all kinds  thing.SUBJ-SUBJ         like that (X3) 
        ‘but many like that, and that, and that’ (Gestures repeatedly with palms striking each other as 
if spatially overlapping) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<KR 3:10> 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
87 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Speaker demonstrates the pattern of a surface 
 
Without the demonstration, there would not be any information that the pieces of paper can be 
overlapping or layered, or just generally how dense they are, but the density is well captured 
through the gesture. In short: gesture is good at preserving information, especially in ideophonic 
words where experience is so nuanced and the impressions of the words is so strongly evoked on 
the senses. 
Some things are virtually impossible to describe more succinctly by means of verbal definition 
because gesture best articulates movement (being the same modality). For example: 
(25)   ne   sonkaɾak     ogɨɭ ogɨɭ                ha-n           i         gə-nən  
         my  finger         [IDEOPHONE]  AUX-ADJ  DET  thing-TOP 
        ‘My fingers go ogɨɭ ogɨɭ’ (With fingers curled upward for display, makes wiggling, twitching 
gestures) 
 
        jodʒɨm       tʃoɭmɨn      saɾam-i       s:ɨ-nən        maɾ-ija 
         nowadays young   people-SUBJ  use-COMP  word-COPULA 
        ‘this is an expression used nowadays by young people’ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<KR 24:07> 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Speaker demonstrates the movement for ogɨɭ ogɨɭ 
 

Richard Kroeger 
88 
 
It would be impossible for the hearer to understand what this motion involves without seeing 
it. Even the long glosses I make to describe the gestures are very poor at capturing them, as they 
are single integrated events with many aspects. 
Descriptively how would one do justice to an iconic descriptor of motion without enacting that 
motion themselves? For the definition of bitɨɭ bitɨɭ, F34 describes a drunken walk and sways her 
torso back and forth to capture the motion.  
 
 
 
Figure 7: Speaker demonstrates a swaying, drunken walk as an illustration of an ideophone. 
 
Similarly for this word speaker M25 says: 
 
(26)   məngəga    iɾəke         iɭtʃik       səni    ani-go          iɾəke        bitɨɭ bitɨɭ 
         something like this  regular  line    NEG-CONJ   like this  [IDEOPHONE] 
        ‘Like this: it’s not a regular line, but like this bitɨɭ bitɨɭ’ 
        (Uses two hands to delineate long, straight path)     (With two hands shifts back and forth in 
an undulating track) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
<T-R 0:20> 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Speaker shows the contours of a path by means of a gesture 
 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
89 
 
Since gesture is an iconic descriptor it makes sense that it would be used together with iconic 
words. The word class as a whole defines a word by resemblance and is an enactment by way of 
speech, so it is naturally accompanied by gesture that defines by way of resemblance. Gesture 
might in fact go as far as to enact the motion itself that is being described by the ideophone. 
However in the history of elicitation researchers have aimed to inhibit rather than encourage 
accompanying gesture. Dingemanse (2015) quotes William Samarin in making this point: “[i]t 
turned out that some of the meanings I isolated were based almost exclusively on gestures. On the 
assumption that the informants were leaning too heavily on their gestures to convey the 
meanings, I have tried, unsuccessfully, to get them to verbalize without gestures.” (Dingemanse 
2015:227) 
 
6 
Conclusion 
 
I have shown in this paper that the study of Korean ideophone semantics can profit greatly by a 
multi-modal methodology such as folk definitions. Those considering research into ideophone 
semantics in other languages should adopt such approaches as these techniques are illuminating 
of aspects of the semantic space that may go unnoted if only limited and selective data recording 
is taken. I have given evidence that there is a prevalent phenomenon of multiple encodings of 
modalities onto single ideophonic forms. As a further direction of research a more extensive 
study should be devoted to this question alone to see if this encoding varies by type of modality, 
to test the number of modalities that can be indexed by a single form, and to compare this 
phenomenon across ideophone-rich languages. I have given reason for considering that the light 
isotopic form of Korean ideophonic vowel ablaut is basic. Further I have shown that there is 
descriptive and typological reason to divide Visual Modality into subcategories. Research should 
be done to determine whether greater specificity in sub-categorization can be extended to cross-
linguistic typologies. 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
I would like to thank Taehum Cho for his help as a participant in these interviews, to Tim for 
facilitation of two of my interviews, to KL and the other speakers who contributed to this project. 
A special thanks to Dayoung Kim who provided me with translation of documents for this 
experiment and for discussions on ideophones at the start of this project. 
 
References 
 
Akita, Kimi. 2009a. A grammar of sound-symbolic words in Japanese:theoretical approaches to iconic and lexical 
properties of Japanese mimetics. PhD dissertation, Kobe University. [Online]. Retrieved on 10 June 2012 from: 
http://www.lib.kobe-u.ac.jp/handle_gakui/D1004724.  
Cho, Seung-bog. A Phonological Study of Korean with a historical analysis. Uppsala: Almqvist & Wiksells 1967. 
Print. 
Dingemanse, Mark. 2012. Advances in the Cross-Linguistic Study of Ideophones. Language and Linguistics Compass 
6/10 (2012): 654-672. 
Dingemanse, Mark. Folk Definitions in Linguistic Fieldwork.  In J. Essegbey, B. Henderson, & F. Mc Laughlin (Eds.), 
Language Documentation and endangerment in Africa (pp. 215-238). Amsterdam: Benjamins. 2015. Print. 
Kilian-Hatz, Christa. 1999. Ideophone: Eine typologische Untersuchung unter besonderer Berücksichtigung  
afrikanischer Sprachen. Cologne: Habilitationsschrift, Universität zu Köln.   
Kim, Midam. Correlation Between VOT and F0 in the Perception of Korean Stops and Affricates. Interspeech 2004-
ICSLP (8th International Conference on Spoken Language Processing), Jeju Island, Korea, October 4-8, 2004. Web. 
Kim, Mi-Ryoung and San Duanmu. “Tense” and “Lax” Stops in Korean. Journal of East Asian Linguistics, 13 (2004): 
(59-104) Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 

Richard Kroeger 
90 
 
Kim-Renaud, Young-Key. Korean: An Essential Grammar. New York: Routledge. 2009. Print. 
Klamer, Marian. 1999. Austronesian expressives and the Lexicon. Toronto Working Papers in Linguistics 16(2). 201–
19.   
Klamer, Marian. 2001. Expressives and iconicity in the Lexicon. Ideophones, ed. by F. K. Erhard Voeltz and Christa 
Kilian-Hatz, 165–81. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Klamer, Marian. 2002. Semantically motivated lexical patterns: a study of Dutch and Kambera expressives. Language 
78(2). 258–86.   
Lee, Jin-Seon. 1992. Phonology and Sound Symbolism of Korean Ideophones. PhD Dissertation, Indiana University. 
1992. 
Lee, Yongsung. Topics in the Vowel Phonology of Korean. PhD Dissertation, Indiana University. 1993. Web. Accessed 
6/9/16 at: cms.bufs.ac.kr/yslee/research/diss/diss_all.pdf 
Martin, Samuel E. A Reference Grammar of Korean. Tokyo: Charles E. Tuttle Company Inc. 1992. Print. 
Sien, Nam Cheol. An Autosegmental Analysis of Ideophones in Korean. PhD Dissertation, University of Washington. 
1997. 
Sohn, Ho-Min. Korean. London: Routledge. 1994. Print. 
 
 
Richard Kroeger 
University of California, San Diego 
rkroeger@ucsd.edu 
rikroeger@hotmail.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
91 
 
Appendix A 
 
Below I show the particular ideophones I used and the sources they came from. The transcription 
is not the original from the dissertations, but is my own into IPA. I represented fortis by a 
lengthened diacritic, although this is inaccurate. Fortis is in fact mostly perceived based on a high 
tone that comes on the following vowel. Fortis contrasts in Korean have a longer closure time due 
to a stronger build-up of pressure in the glottis (it is somewhat egressive), but this is not 
significant for the perception of the contrast. Because of this closure time I have chosen to use a 
lengthening diacritic. However, the IPA gives no way to represent the Korean fortis yet. The rest 
of the segments were in standard IPA. I list the forms as found in the sources. Many were un-
reduplicated in the sources, but I presented them in reduplicated form (except for the triple) by 
the recommendation of the Korean Language teacher I consulted6. Here is the list: 
 
 
From my own previous conversational notes 
 
1. pit:uɭ pit:uɭ   squiggly 
2. teɾoŋ teɾoŋ  hanging, dangling 
3. tɨmsəŋ tɨmsəŋ   sparse like backyard grass, spread out 
4. p:ak p:ak tightly compacted 
5. tətək tətək like stickers plastered all over 
6. kubuɭ kubuɭ  winding 
7. hikɨt hikɨt   salt-and-pepper hair 
 
From Lee 1992 
 
1. toŋgɨɭ   round (99) 
2. pʰodoŋ/ pʰudɨŋ   chubby   (107) 
3. pitʃ:ək/ petʃ:ak   bony   pitʃ:ək-pitʃ:ək    very bony   (113) 
4. pitʰɨl/ pɛtʰɨl  twisted  (127) 
5. odoɭ todoɭ/ uduɭ tuduɭ   having different sizes of bumps  (133) 
6. k:ampak-k:ampak   flickering  (134) 
7. k:ak:ɨɭ/ k:ək:ɨɭ   of rough surface  (147) 
8. sobok/ subuk   in a mound  (147) 
9. pupʰuɭ-pupʰuɭ   in a protruding surface  (148) 
10. kiɭtʃ:uk   narrow and long  (149) 
                                                        
6 I was told by this instructor that number 24 from Lee (the ugɨl variant) had a different meaning than what 
Lee glossed it as. Some candidates that did not make it into the list were rejected because they were not 
recognized and could not be found by dictionary search (presumably Naver, the most popular search engine 
in South Korea, equivalent to Google, offering many of the same services). For instance “jatɨm jətɨm” 
which Lee glosses as “more or less colorless” on page 356 of his dissertation, caused great consternation. A 
few others, such as “c:on c:on” or “tightly woven” (Lee, 100) could not appear apart from adverbial 
morphology (and are pronounced somewhat differently) “c:om c:omhi” (in a tightly woven manner, adv.) 
and in periphrastic expression of adjective constructions (or verbs; the copular construction with adjectives 
as it appears in English is identical with the periphrastic expression for verbs in Korean) “c:om c:om hada” 
(to be tightly woven). These differences may be due to the fact of language change over the course of a few 
decades, and also perhaps some over-simplification of ideophones (not presented in the context of a 
sentence) in Lee’s thesis for demonstrative purposes of some of their phonological properties. 

Richard Kroeger 
92 
 
11. əsɨt-əsɨt   nearly similar, tilted  (160) 
12. moŋge/ muŋge   forming an indefinite shape (cloud, smoke)   (170) 
13. taboɾok/ təbuɾuk   moderately piled   (172) 
14. uɭtʰuŋ-pultʰuŋ   uneven surface   (318) 
15. kamuɭ   flickering   (272) 
16. aɾɨn/ əɾɨn  flickering   (350) 
17. kamut/ kəmut speckled with black   (352) 
18. naptʃak/ nəptʃək/ nəptʃuk   (353) 
19. ogɨt/ ugɨt   dented   (353) 
20. k:otʃʰi k:otʃʰi   very thin   (358) 
21. taboɾok/ təbuɾuk  bulky   (358) (repeat of form above) 
22. həbun   sparse texture; juicy   (351) 
23. tʰoʃiɭ/ tʰuʃiɭ   plump, chubby   (355) 
24. ogɨɭ/ ugɨɭ  shrunken  (353) 
 
 
From Sien 1997 
 
1. aɭ:ok   spotted  (214) 
2. uɭgɨt-puɭgɨt in colorful dots  (220) 
3. əɭ:ɨk   big spots of one or two colors  (141) 
4. mɛk:ɨn/ mik:ɨn   smooth over an area   (141) 
5. wagɨl  in dense swarms   (156) 
6. kiɭtʃ:uk   separately very longish  (164) 
7. pəndɨl  a very smooth state   (141) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
93 
 
Appendix B 
 
The following are data tables listing the relevant data for categorization of the ideophones by 
their modality. The first chart is for speaker F34 followed by M25 and M24 in that order. F34 is 
the first speaker discussed in section 4.1. 
 
Ideophone (Korean 
Orthography) 
Ideophone (IPA) 
Attested Semantic 
Type 
Evidence for 
Classification 
1. 비뚤비뚤 
 
pit:uɭ pi:t:uɭ    
Movement 
 
Shape 
“You walk 
or…”<KR 00:29> 
“When you make a 
line…it doesn’t turn 
out straight.” 
<KR 00:35> 
2. 대롱대롱 
 
teɾoŋ teɾoŋ   
Spatial Orientation 
 
Movement 
“[An object] is 
dangling like this” 
<KR 1:11> 
Pivots lower hand to 
show free swinging 
motion <KR 1:11> 
3. 듬성듬성 
 
tɨmsəŋ tɨmsəŋ    
Surface Pattern 
“You pluck out 
[corn kernels from 
cob], when you see 
that” <KR 1:41> 
4. 빡빡 
 
p:ak p:ak 
Internal State 
“Tight” <KR 2:32> 
“When something 
turns out very 
difficult it is p:ak 
p:ak” <KR 2:48> 
5. 더덕더덕 
 
tədək tədək 
Surface Pattern 
“On the wall there 
are many bits of 
paper stuck on. It’s 
not just one but 
many like that and 
that and that 
(accompanied by 
gesture: open palms 
make continual 
movement of 
slapping surface, 
often overlapping 
each other) <KR 
3:04> 
6. 구불구불 
 
kubuɭ kubuɭ   
Shape 
“The road doesn’t go 
straight when it turns 
like this: kubuɭ 
kubuɭ” <KR 3:32> 
“It seems usually 

Richard Kroeger 
94 
 
kubuɭ kubuɭ is used 
for a road. bituɭ bituɭ 
for people and 
handwriting.” <KR 
3:50> 
7. 꼬불꼬불 
 
k:obuɭ k:obuɭ 
Shape 
“When there are 
many curls. For 
example, ramen 
noodles” <KR 4:11> 
“Or for hair, when 
you do a perm it is 
also k:obuɭ k:obuɭ” 
<KR 4:20> 
8. 희끗희끗 
 
hik:ɨt hik:ɨt    
Light/ Color 
“Just a little like it’s 
been mixed with 
white, the most usual 
thing is hair.” <KR 
4:33> 
9. 동글동글 
 
toŋgɨɭ toŋgɨɭ 
Shape 
“When an object is 
circular, it is toŋgɨɭ 
toŋgɨɭ.” <KR 4:59> 
“A shape” <KR 
5:08> 
10. 포동포동 
 
pʰodoŋ pʰodoŋ 
Shape 
 
“Chubby” <KR 
5:49> 
“pʰodoŋ pʰodoŋ has 
a more cute meaning 
[than fat]” <KR 5:46 
11. 푸등푸등 
 
pʰudɨŋ   pʰudɨŋ  
 
No Data 
12. 비쩍비쩍 
 
pitʃ:ək pitʃ:ək 
Shape 
“It’s not the normal 
kind of thin, but too 
thin, when you don’t 
look good.” <KR 
6:17> 
13. 배짝배짝 
 
pɛtʃ:ak pɛtʃ:ak   
 
No Data 
14. 비틀비틀 
 
pitʰɨɭ pitʰɨɭ 
Spatial Orientation 
 
 
 
Motion 
“When people go 
walking (rocks torso 
back and forth) that 
shape.” <KR 6:46> 
“Walking like this, 
this, this (leans torso 
side to side in abrupt 
movements) when 
they walk it seems 
like they will fall.” 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
95 
 
<KR 6:54> 
15. 배틀배틀 
 
pɛtʰɨl pɛtʰɨɭ   
 
No Data 
16. 오돌 토돌 
 
odoɭ todoɭ 
Surface Pattern 
“If something breaks 
out on the face, it 
comes out odoɭ todoɭ 
(points to spot on 
face and taps it 
repeatedly).” <KR 
8:41> 
17. 우둘투둘 
 
uduɭ tuduɭ    
Surface Pattern 
“uduɭ tuduɭ is like 
this floor (indicates 
flat surface and 
undulates hand up 
and down over table 
top)” <KR 8:54> 
18. 깜박깜박 
 
k:ampak-k:ampak    
Light/ Color (First 
Meaning, speaker 
explicitly 
disconnects two) 
 
Internal State 
(Second Meaning) 
“A light turns on and 
off, on and off.” 
<KR 9:18> 
 
 
“People’s heads as 
well, heads 
remember and 
forget, remember 
and forget.” <KR 
9:26> 
19. 까끌까끌 
 
k:ak:ɨɭ k:ak:ɨɭ 
Surface Pattern 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tactile 
“It’s not a smooth 
thing, but a bit like 
this (makes small 
tapping motions on 
table with index 
finger indicating 
small bumps)” <KR 
9:55> 
“Laundry detergent 
like things (rubs 
thumb and fingers 
together to 
emphasize grainy 
texture)” <KR 
10:18> 
20. 꺼끌꺼끌 
 
k:ək:ɨɭ k:ək:ɨɭ    
Tactile 
“The quality is a bit 
not good…like that 
(rubs fingers 
together on one hand 
in a lose way.” <KR 

Richard Kroeger 
96 
 
10:35> 
“Normally people 
like smooth things.” 
<KR 10:29> 
21. 소복소복 
22. 수북수북 
 
sobok sobok 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subuk subuk 
Shape 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shape 
“It’s a stacking up 
(of something) 
sobok 
sobok…stacked up 
to here (indicates 
level height after 
some iterations of 
higher and higher 
levels).” <KR 
11:15> 
“For subuk subuk, 
something stacks up 
this much (spreads 
out hands to indicate 
larger height)” <KR 
11:21> 
23. 부풀부풀 
 
pupʰul-pupʰul    
Shape 
Makes 
hemispherical 
gesture <KR 11:50> 
24. 길쭉길쭉 
 
kiɭtʃ:uk kiɭtʃ:uk    
Spatial Orientation 
“When one wants to 
highlight this 
(gestures to show 
length), when people 
want to say ‘Oh, 
that’s far!’ It is 
kiɭtʃ:uk kiɭtʃ:uk,” 
<KR 12:08> 
“It has the meaning 
of being long.” <KR 
12:24> 
25. 어슷어슷 
 
əsɨt-əsɨt    
Shape 
“Like this, not cut 
directly, slightly like 
this (makes 
imagined cuts with 
blade of hand along 
slanted path)” <KR 
12:37> 
26. 몽개몽개 
 
moŋge moŋge 
Shape 
“It’s a thing lumped 
together (brings two 
hands clasped in a 
ball). It is one thing, 
like a block, lumped 
together like this 
(uses index fingers 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
97 
 
to show small, 
contained, circular 
volume).” <KR 
13:25> 
27. 뭉게뭉개 
 
muŋge muŋge 
Shape 
“When you use 
muŋge muŋge it is 
an especially large 
thing (emphasizes 
large spherical 
volume with 
hands).” <KR 
13:35> 
28. 다보록다보록 
 
taboɾok taboɾok 
 
No Data 
29. 더부룩더부룩 
 
təbuɾuk təbuɾuk 
Tactile (pain and 
discomfort) 
Internal State 
(discomfort) 
“When one has 
constipation and it is 
uncomfortable it is 
tobuɾuk.” <KR 
14:14> 
30. 울퉁불퉁 
 
uɭtʰuŋ-puɭtʰuŋ    
Surface Pattern 
“It isn’t the same 
like this (makes 
undulating gesture), 
something like a 
surface, like this.” 
<KR 15:15> 
31. 가물가물 
 
kamuɭ kamuɭ 
Internal State 
“A memory is kamuɭ 
kamuɭ, so you 
should remember 
something, but the 
memory doesn’t 
come.” <KR 16:03> 
32. 아른아른 
 
aɾɨn aɾɨn 
Light/ Color (First 
Meaning) 
 
 
 
Internal State 
Visual 
(Second Meaning) 
“Visible then 
obscured, like that, a 
bit hard to see.” 
<KR 16:54> 
 
“It isn’t something 
you literally see, the 
word aɾɨn aɾɨn before 
my eyes, when you 
miss something the 
thought comes up. 
While you are 
missing it the 
thought comes but it 
isn’t all visible.” 
<KR 17:47> 

Richard Kroeger 
98 
 
33. 어른어른 
 
əɾɨn əɾɨn 
Visual (First 
Meaning, speaker 
explicitly refers to 
two meanings) 
 
Internal State 
Visual 
“It is used about 
something visible to 
the eyes (points to 
eyes, then outward.” 
<KR 17:16> 
 
“One also uses it 
about a memory, 
usually in the middle 
of remembering, a 
visual memory” 
<KR 17:21> 
34. 가뭇가뭇 
 
kamut kamut 
Light/ Color 
(Speaker doubtful 
about meaning) 
“A bit dark.” <KR 
18:16> 
35. 거뭇거뭇 
 
kəmut kəmut 
 
No Data 
36. 납작(납작) 
 
naptʃak 
Shape 
“The meaning of 
naptʃak and nəptʃək 
when it is used is 
flat” <KR 19:37> 
37. 넙적(넙적) 
 
nəptʃək 
Shape 
“The meaning of 
naptʃak and nəptʃək 
when it is used is 
flat” <KR 19:37> 
38. 넙죽(넙죽) 
 
nəptʃuk 
Behavior 
 
 
Shape 
Motion 
“Nəptʃuk behavior” 
<KR 20:29> 
“A naptʃak shape 
results when one 
gets down nəptʃuk 
(makes bowing 
gesture with hands 
and torso forward), 
usually one says 
nəptʃuk.” <KR 
20:37> 
“nəptʃuk…that flat 
shape results, it is 
talking about 
behavior.” <KR 
20:46> 
39. 오긋오긋 
 
ogɨt ogɨt 
 
No Data 
40. 우긋우긋 
 
ugɨt ugɨt 
 
No Data 
41. 오글오글 
 
ogɨɭ ogɨɭ 
Shape (1st Meaning) 
 
“Ogɨɭ ogɨɭ is a bit of 
a small shape and 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
99 
 
 
 
 
Motion (2nd 
Meaning) 
 
 
 
 
 
Internal State (3rd 
Meaning) 
ugɨɭ ugɨɭ has a bit 
bigger shape.” <KR 
23:50> 
“My fingers go ogɨɭ 
ogɨɭ, like that (curls 
fingers, wiggling, 
with palms 
upward).” <KR 
24:07> 
“If you see it, it is an 
especially bad 
thing…shy and too 
childish, like that, 
‘Ah [that person is] 
ogɨɭ ogɨɭ’ like that.” 
<KR 24:21> 
42. 우글우글 
 
ugɨɭ ugɨɭ 
Motion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shape 
“Bugs go ugɨɭ ugɨɭ 
when there are many 
of them (makes a 
downward-oriented 
wiggling gesture 
with fingers).” <KR 
22:51> 
“Originally it was 
about a formation/ 
shape of insects.” 
<KR 23:27> 
“Ugɨɭ ugɨɭ like that, 
when you put 
something in the fire 
and it is wrinkled 
strangely.” <KR 
25:15> 
“The shape of hands, 
insects, like 
that…that meaning 
is ugɨɭ ugɨɭ.” <KR 
24:35> 
43. 꼬치꼬치 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
k:otʃʰi k:otʃʰi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Behavior 
 
See comments 
section in 4.1 
“It isn’t just asking 
(questions) once, it 
is asking a lot, so 
much, so k:otʃʰi 
k:otʃʰi like that, one 
by one. To 
constantly ask, like 
that.” <KR 26:19> 
“Digging, like that 
(makes digging 

Richard Kroeger 
100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44. 허분허분 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
həbun həbun 
motions), asking like 
that.” <KR 26:16> 
 
No Data 
45. 토실토실 
 
tʰoʃiɭ tʰoʃiɭ 
Shape 
“It is similar to 
pʰodoŋ pʰodoŋ.” 
<KR 26:42> 
“tʰoʃiɭ tʰoʃiɭ, it 
seems, is used for 
people. A person is 
tʰoʃiɭ tʰoʃiɭ. A baby 
is especially tʰoʃiɭ 
tʰoʃiɭ (makes cupped 
motion with both 
hands).” <KR 
28:19> 
46. 투실투실 
 
tʰuʃiɭ tʰuʃiɭ 
Shape 
“tʰuʃiɭ tʰuʃiɭ has a bit 
strong meaning 
compared to tʰoʃiɭ 
tʰoʃiɭ… if you use 
tʰuʃiɭ tʰuʃiɭ you don’t 
like them.” <KR 
28:27> 
47. 알록알록 
 
aɭ:ok (t)aɭ:ok 
Light/ Color 
“It’s something with 
all kinds of colors.” 
<KR 29:09> 
48. 울긋불긋 
 
uɭgɨt puɭgɨt 
Light/ Color 
“puɭgɨt means dark 
red color.” <KR 
29:48> 
49. 얼룩얼룩 
 
əɭ:uk əɭ:uk 
Light/ Color 
“əɭ:uk təɭ:uk is used 
like aɭ:ok taɭ:ok but 
the meaning… isn’t 
really good, not 
clean, but a dirty 
thing.” <KR 31:19> 
“The original color 
is lost and a different 
color is stuck on.” 
<KR 31:39> 
50. 매끈매끈 
 
mek:ɨn mek:ɨn 
Tactile 
“Something isn’t 
odoɭ todoɭ, it isn’t 
uduɭ tuduɭ (rubs 
back of hand with 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
101 
 
 
The second speaker described in section 4.1 is speaker M25. Here is the data for M25: 
 
index finger of other 
hand).” <KR 32:13> 
51. 미끈미끈 
 
mik:ɨn mik:ɨn 
Tactile 
“Mikɨn mikɨn is 
smooth… you are 
walking and, woah 
(pretends to slip) 
like that, slippery.” 
<KR 32:28> 
52. 번들번들 
 
pəndɨɭ pəndɨɭ 
Visual 
“One’s face…[has] 
too much facial oil.” 
<KR 33:38> 
53. 와글와글 
 
wagɨɭ wagɨɭ 
See comments in 
4.1 
 
Ideophone (Korean 
Orthography) 
Ideophone (IPA) 
Attested Semantic 
Type 
Evidence for 
Classification 
1. 비뚤비뚤 
 
pit:uɭ pi:t:uɭ    
Shape 
“It’s not a regular line, 
but like this (shifts two 
hands back and forth to 
delineate shifting 
direction of path).” <T-
R 0:20> 
2. 대롱대롱 
 
teɾoŋ teɾoŋ   
Spatial 
Orientation 
 
 
Motion 
“On the ceiling, this 
kind of 
thread…clinging like 
that (holds a hand in a 
loose curl below 
another hand 
representing a ceiling 
and swings it back and 
forth).” <T-R 00:34> 
3. 듬성듬성 
 
tɨmsəŋ tɨmsəŋ    
Surface Pattern 
“When you lose hair, 
when you lose a lot, 
there’s [a patch of] hair 
here and there (touches 
head with fingertips in 
different places).” <T-R 
00:49> 
4. 빡빡 
 
p:ak p:ak 
Motion 
“An eraser-like thing 
scrubs b:ak b:ak (places 
palm downward and 
pinches fingers together 
then makes a scrubbing 
motion).” <T-R 1:06> 
5. 더덕더덕 
tədək tədək 
Surface Pattern 
“A ‘postage’ [English, 

Richard Kroeger 
102 
 
 
trying to say ‘postage 
note’] is stuck all over.” 
<T-R 1:36> 
“Something that is not 
neatly stuck on (makes 
circular tapping gestures 
on the wall to show 
distribution of attached 
sticky notes).” <T-R 
1:47> 
6. 구불구불 
 
kubuɭ kubuɭ   
Shape 
“The mountain road 
goes like this: kubuɭ 
kubuɭ (delineates 
shifting path with both 
hands).” <T-R 2:07> 
7. 꼬불꼬불 
 
k:obuɭ k:obuɭ 
Shape 
“Ramen (twisting then 
curling motion with 
thumb and 
forefinger)…and…curly 
hair.” <T-R 2:25> 
8. 희끗희끗 
 
hik:ɨt hik:ɨt    
Light/ Color 
“It’s not purely white, 
but now it’s a little 
between black and 
white.” <T-R 2:58> 
9. 동글동글 
 
toŋgɨɭ toŋgɨɭ 
Shape 
“Like it says [in Korean 
this is the word for 
“circle” repeated twice] 
(traces a circle with 
index finger.” <T-R 
3:09> 
“When you use it about 
people, you’d say their 
face is toŋgɨɭ toŋgɨɭ.” 
<T-R 3:13> 
10. 포동포동 
 
pʰodoŋ pʰodoŋ 
Shape 
“When one is a bit 
chubby (cups hands 
next to cheeks).” <T-R 
3:37> 
“When it is a bit 
cute…” <T-R 3:46> 
11. 푸등푸등 
 
pʰudɨŋ   pʰudɨŋ  
Shape 
“Plump without the 
sense of being cute.” 
<T-R 4:21> 
12. 비쩍비쩍 
 
pitʃ:ək pitʃ:ək 
Shape 
“When you are really 
emaciated.” <T-R 4:52> 
13. 배짝배짝 
 
pɛtʃ:ak pɛtʃ:ak   
 
No Data 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
103 
 
14. 비틀비틀 
 
pitʰɨɭ pitʰɨɭ 
Motion 
“When one drinks 
alcohol and is drunk 
when they go on the 
road, they do like this 
pitʰɨɭ pitʰɨɭ while they 
walk.” <T-R 5:22> 
15. 배틀배틀 
 
pɛtʰɨl pɛtʰɨɭ   
 
No Data 
16. 오돌 토돌 
 
odoɭ todoɭ 
Surface Pattern 
“When you look at a 
tongue () like this, these 
circular things odoɭ 
todoɭ are protruding.” 
<T-R 5:47> 
17. 우둘투둘 
 
uduɭ tuduɭ    
Tactile 
“A thing that is really 
big and it is not smooth 
and has a rough sense to 
it…it is uduɭ tuduɭ 
(imitates stroking a 
surface).” <T-R 6:33> 
18. 깜박깜박 
 
k:ampak-k:ampak    Light/ Color (First 
Meaning) 
 
Internal State 
(Second Meaning) 
“A light or stoplight 
goes k:ampak 
k:ampak.” <T-R 7:05> 
“Second, my 
memory…when you 
forget something.” <T-
R 7:13> 
19. 까끌까끌 
 
k:ak:ɨɭ k:ak:ɨɭ 
Tactile 
“When you haven’t 
been shaving (rubs chin 
with index finger, 
continues to rub jaw 
with hand).” <T-R 
7:34> 
“[A] rough sense.” <T-
R 7:43> 
20. 꺼끌꺼끌 
 
k:ək:ɨɭ k:ək:ɨɭ    
Tactile 
“A rougher feeling, if 
you haven’t shaved in 
an even longer time and 
your mustache/ beard is 
longer.” <T-R 7:59> 
21. 소복소복 
22. 수북수북 
 
sobok sobok 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shape 
 
 
 
 
Tactile 
 
 
“It snows once, when 
snow falls that piles up 
a lot, there is this word 
sobok sobok piling up.” 
<T-R 8:28> 
“Sobok sobok is a bit 
small, smooth, a bit 
cute?” <T-R 8:49> 

Richard Kroeger 
104 
 
 
subuk subuk 
 
 
 
 
 
Sound, Tactile, 
Shape 
 
“Subuk subuk also you 
can use in the same 
way, but this sense…” 
<T-R 8:43> 
“There is a very slow 
and small sound, this 
sense is subuk subuk, it 
is a little rougher and 
bigger.” <T-R 8:59> 
23. 부풀부풀 
 
pupʰul-pupʰul    
 
No Data 
24. 길쭉길쭉 
 
kiɭtʃ:uk kiɭtʃ:uk    
Spatial 
Orientation 
 
Shape 
“When something is 
very long.” <T-R 9:37> 
“While one is thin, one 
is also tall.” <T-R 
10:12> 
25. 어슷어슷 
 
əsɨt-əsɨt    
 
No Data 
26. 몽개몽개 
 
moŋge moŋge 
 
No Data 
27. 뭉게뭉개 
 
muŋge muŋge 
Shape 
“A cloud or smoke… 
smoke billows out 
(pulls hand apart to 
show increasing 
volume).” <T-R 11:07> 
28. 다보록다보록 
 
taboɾok taboɾok 
 
No Data 
29. 더부룩더부룩 
 
təbuɾuk təbuɾuk 
Shape (1st 
Meaning) 
 
 
 
 
Tactile (2nd 
Meaning) 
“I slept and when I got 
up, my hair was təbuɾuk 
təbuɾuk.” <T-R 11:47> 
“Not cleanly trimmed.” 
<T-R 11:40> 
“One’s digestion is 
tobuɾuk (lays hand on 
abdomen).” <T-R 
12:04> 
30. 울퉁불퉁 
 
uɭtʰuŋ-puɭtʰuŋ    
Shape 
“You would say uɭtʰuŋ 
puɭtʰuŋ about a bent 
thing.” <T-R 12:41> 
“If you see the street 
cars drive on, an uɭtʰuŋ 
puɭtʰuŋ street is hard to 
ride on.” <T-R 12:50> 
31. 가물가물 
 
kamuɭ kamuɭ 
Light/ Color (1st 
Meaning) 
 
“At night when you 
look at the stars…the 
star’s light…when you 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
105 
 
 
 
Internal State (2nd 
Meaning) 
don’t see it well.” <T-R 
13:21> 
“A memory is kamuɭ 
kamuɭ, a very old 
memory, it is very far in 
the past and being 
recalled, the thought 
doesn’t come well. That 
is kamuɭ kamuɭ.” <T-R 
13:45> 
32. 아른아른 
 
aɾɨn aɾɨn 
Internal State 
“When a memory 
doesn’t come. This is 
also an old one, it is a 
very old memory.” <T-
R 14:32> 
“The memory doesn’t 
come, it doesn’t return 
but it is something you 
want to remember 
like…my first love I 
met ten years ago.” <T-
R 14:40> 
33. 어른어른 
 
əɾɨn əɾɨn 
Internal State (1st 
Meaning) 
 
 
 
 
 
Visual (2nd 
Meaning) 
“You can use it about a 
memory you recall.” 
<T-R 15:06> 
“But əɾɨn əɾɨn is a 
memory that is not 
good.” <T-R 15:15> 
“You can also use it 
when you don’t see 
well, when your eyes 
don’t see well. That far 
away thing, I don’t see 
it well, my eyes aren’t 
good.” <T-R 15:40> 
34. 가뭇가뭇 
 
kamut kamut 
Light/ Color 
 
 Surface Pattern 
“Black like this dɨmsəŋ 
dɨmsəŋ (patchy) sense, 
it isn’t purely black.” 
<T-R 16:20> 
35. 거뭇거뭇 
 
kəmut kəmut 
Light/ Color 
“Skin, you would say 
skin is kəmut kəmut… 
among my Korean 
friends my skin is a bit 
black.” <T-R 16:51> 
36. 납작(납작) 
 
naptʃak 
Surface Pattern 
“The sense is level 
(spreads hands out and 
in over the same 
plane).” <T-R 18:42> 

Richard Kroeger 
106 
 
37. 넙적(넙적) 
 
nəptʃək 
Tactile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shape 
“The sense is smooth 
(with both hands 
extended makes slow 
outwards and inwards 
motions on the same 
plane in space).” <T-R 
18:41> 
“You can also use it 
about people’s faces.” 
<T-R 18:54> 
“When the face is wide 
like this.” <T-R 19:33> 
38. 넙죽(넙죽) 
 
nəptʃuk 
Behavior 
“You receive 
[something] nəptʃuk 
nəptʃuk.” <T-R 20:03> 
“Directly, just nəptʃuk 
nəptʃuk directly, given 
directly to me and 
directly received.” 
<20:34> 
39. 오긋오긋 
 
ogɨt ogɨt 
 
No Data 
40. 우긋우긋 
 
ugɨt ugɨt 
 
No Data 
41. 오글오글 
 
ogɨɭ ogɨɭ 
Internal State 
“When you can’t deal 
with something…for 
example, people 
compliment me a lot…it 
is hard to stand.” <T-R 
21:55> 
42. 우글우글 
 
ugɨɭ ugɨɭ 
Motion 
 
 
 
Shape 
“When there are lots of 
ants running all over the 
place.” <T-R 23:09> 
“This swarm of ants is 
ugɨɭ ugɨɭ.” <T-R 23:17> 
“The shape of many 
[ants] together.” <T-R 
23:20> 
43. 꼬치꼬치 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
k:otʃʰi k:otʃʰi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Behavior 
“When one asks a lot of 
questions about you.” 
<T-R 23:48> 
“They keep asking and 
can’t take a break <T-R 
24:01> 
“They continually ask 
questions.” <T-R 
24:08> 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
107 
 
 
44. 허분허분 
 
 
həbun həbun 
 
No Data 
45. 토실토실 
 
tʰoʃiɭ tʰoʃiɭ 
Shape 
“Chubby in a cute 
way.” <T-R 24:23> 
“It’s a word used about 
babies or cute animals.” 
<T-R 24:38> 
46. 투실투실 
 
tʰuʃiɭ tʰuʃiɭ 
Shape 
“It is less cute, it is not 
cute, but a bit plump.” 
<T-R 24:53> 
47. 알록알록 
 
aɭ:ok (t)aɭ:ok 
Light/ Color 
“aɭ:ok taɭ:ok is when 
you have many different 
colors.” <T-R 25:16> 
“Red, yellow, green, 
blue, they are all 
together.” <T-R 25:29> 
48. 울긋불긋 
 
uɭgɨt puɭgɨt 
Light/ Color 
“Fall leaves, in the fall 
here in Korea on the 
mountain, the leaves are 
yellow, orange, red.” 
<T-R 25:46> 
49. 얼룩얼룩 
 
əɭ:uk əɭ:uk 
Light/ Color 
“It is similar to aɭ:ok 
taɭ:ok but has a slightly 
dirty sense.” <T-R 
26:09> 
“When the colors are 
dirty ().” <T-R 26:17> 
50. 매끈매끈 
 
mek:ɨn mek:ɨn 
Tactile 
 
 
 
 
Visual 
“This thing (grabs metal 
water bottle and strokes 
surface) the surface is 
not rough.” <T-R 
26:49> 
“One uses this about 
cars, the car’s ‘design’ 
[English] is like this.” 
<T-R 27:10> 
51. 미끈미끈 
 
mik:ɨn mik:ɨn 
Tactile 
 
 
 
Shape 
“It seems that mikɨn 
mikɨn has the same 
meaning as mekɨn 
mekɨn.” <T-R 27:41> 
“Also…they use it 
about a body, a person’s 
body, like that…when 
speaking, especially a 
woman’s body. As for 
women’s bodies, from 

Richard Kroeger 
108 
 
 
The last speaker discussed is M24. The data for M24 is presented here: 
 
the waist to the legs that 
‘line’ [English] is 
mik:ɨnhada…long, not 
plump….thin and…not 
too emaciated.” <T-R 
28:25> 
52. 번들번들 
 
pəndɨɭ pəndɨɭ 
Visual 
“There is oil on your 
face…that sense.” <T-R 
29:24> 
53. 와글와글 
 
wagɨɭ wagɨɭ 
Sound 
“Loud and noisy…for 
example our ‘lounge’ 
[English], when you go 
to…our lounge there are 
many people, it’s 
noisy.” <T-R 29:53> 
Ideophone (Korean 
Orthography) 
Ideophone (IPA) 
Attested Semantic 
Type 
Evidence for 
Classification 
1. 비뚤비뚤 
 
pit:uɭ pi:t:uɭ    
Shape 
“This thing…is [about] 
handwriting…that hand 
drawn line can’t go 
straight, but comes out a 
bit slanted.” <MR 0:36> 
2. 대롱대롱 
 
teɾoŋ teɾoŋ   
Spatial 
Orientation 
 
 
 
 
Motion 
“When an object is 
hanging…swinging for 
a while (clenches one 
hand in a fist below 
another one that 
delineates a flat plane, 
then oscillates the 
bottom hand back and 
forth).” <MR 0:59> 
3. 듬성듬성 
 
tɨmsəŋ tɨmsəŋ    
Surface Pattern 
“Something should be 
taken out 
individually…hair…hair 
strands…when they are 
a bit plucked out are 
tɨmsəŋ tɨmsəŋ.” <MR 
1:24> 
4. 빡빡 
 
p:ak p:ak 
Visual 
“When one’s hair is b:ak 
b:ak, there is absolutely 
no strands of hair left.” 
<MR 1:45> 
5. 더덕더덕 
 
tədək tədək 
 
No Data 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
109 
 
6. 구불구불 
 
kubuɭ kubuɭ   
Motion 
“One cannot go straight, 
kubuɭ kubuɭ.” <MR 
2:16> 
“For example a river 
doesn’t go pit:uɭ pit:uɭ, 
but it flows kubuɭ kubuɭ, 
handwriting is not 
written kubuɭ kubuɭ, but 
it is written pit:uɭ 
pit:uɭ.” <MR 2:24> 
7. 꼬불꼬불 
 
k:obuɭ k:obuɭ 
Motion 
“It just feels like the 
same thing [as kubuɭ 
kubuɭ].” <MR 2:58> 
8. 희끗희끗 
 
hik:ɨt hik:ɨt    
Motion 
“When you look like 
this, this is to look hikɨt 
hikɨt (makes sideways 
glances). You don’t 
gaze directly, but for a 
very brief time, a very 
brief time, like this 
“glance, have a glance” 
[English] like that.” 
<MR 3:06> 
9. 동글동글 
 
toŋgɨɭ toŋgɨɭ 
Shape 
“It has the meaning of a 
circle, but toŋguɭ toŋguɭ 
has a cute sense to it.” 
<MR 3:27> 
“When you say ‘The 
spider is toŋguɭ’ it is just 
round it’s ‘just 
explanation’ [English] 
but when you say toŋguɭ 
toŋguɭ, it is especially 
‘emotional’ [English], 
you dislike it, so ‘It’s 
toŋguɭ toŋguɭ’, that 
feeling.” <MR 3:37> 
10. 포동포동 
 
pʰodoŋ pʰodoŋ 
Shape 
“This is fat, but when 
something is [just] fat, 
there is a lot of weight, 
but this one carries a 
cute meaning.” <MR 
3:56> 
“A cute fatness? Like 
that.” <MR 4:10> 
11. 푸등푸등 
 
pʰudɨŋ   pʰudɨŋ  
 
No Data 

Richard Kroeger 
110 
 
12. 비쩍비쩍 
 
pitʃ:ək pitʃ:ək 
Shape 
“pitʃɔk thin, really thin 
(places hands parallel to 
each other and drops 
them down). It is a word 
meaning extremely thin 
when it is used.” <MR 
4:28> 
13. 배짝배짝 
 
pɛtʃ:ak pɛtʃ:ak   
 
No Data 
14. 비틀비틀 
 
pitʰɨɭ pitʰɨɭ 
Visual 
 
Motion 
“One has the appearance 
of being about to 
fall…drunk people walk 
pitʰɨɭ pitʰɨɭ.” <MR 5:10> 
15. 배틀배틀 
 
pɛtʰɨl pɛtʰɨɭ   
 
No Data 
16. 오돌 토돌 
 
odoɭ todoɭ 
Tactile 
“This ‘surface’ 
[English] isn’t smooth 
but just a bit, slightly, it 
has a rough feeling 
almost. Because it isn’t 
smooth when you feel it, 
the ‘texture’ [English] 
you feel is a bit odoɭ 
todoɭ.” <MR 5:31> 
17. 우둘투둘 
 
uduɭ tuduɭ    
 
No Data 
18. 깜박깜박 
 
k:ampak-k:ampak    Light/ Color 
“Turn on, turn off, turn 
on, turn off. A stoplight 
goes k:ampak k:ampak, 
this (points up at light) 
goes k:ampak k:ampak.” 
<MR 6:04> 
19. 까끌까끌 
 
k:ak:ɨɭ k:ak:ɨɭ 
Tactile 
“Sandpaper.” <MR 
6:19> 
“An especially rough 
surface, this rough 
condition.” <MR 6:40> 
20. 꺼끌꺼끌 
 
k:ək:ɨɭ k:ək:ɨɭ    
Tactile 
“k:ək:ɨɭ k:ək:ɨɭ is a bit 
less k:ak:ɨɭ k:ak:ɨɭ than 
k:ak:ɨɭ k:ak:ɨɭ…a less 
‘rough’ [English] 
thing.” <MR 6:53> 
21. 소복소복 
22. 수북수북 
 
sobok sobok 
 
 
 
 
Sound 
 
 
 
 
“This one is really 
sobok sobok when snow 
comes down. It is used 
extremely often with 
snow…extremely often 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
subuk subuk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shape 
[used with] snow, like 
this () when you walk, 
the sound is like sobok 
sobok as you walk.” 
<MR 7:36> 
 
“Subuk…it is used 
often, cut hair, trash 
subuk (uses two hands 
to show a hemispherical 
volume, brings them 
together and spreads 
them apart).” <MR 
8:01> 
23. 부풀부풀 
 
pupʰul-pupʰul    
 
No Data 
24. 길쭉길쭉 
 
kiɭtʃ:uk kiɭtʃ:uk    
Shape 
“It emphasizes people’s 
height.” <MR 8:32> 
25. 어슷어슷 
 
əsɨt-əsɨt    
Shape 
“Slanted (places two 
hands next to each other 
in motions delineating 
segments of identical 
length).” <MR 8:55> 
26. 몽개몽개 
 
moŋge moŋge 
 
No Data 
27. 뭉게뭉개 
 
muŋge muŋge 
Shape 
“A muŋge cloud, muŋge 
cloud…like this (pulls 
hands out and down in 
‘stepped’ motions 
showing a shape) a 
cloud formed like that. 
<MR 9:20> 
28. 다보록다보록 
 
taboɾok taboɾok 
 
No Data 
29. 더부룩더부룩 
 
təbuɾuk təbuɾuk 
Shape 
“You use it for when 
one’s stomach is 
təbuɾuk, they ate and 
they ate too much, so 
they are constipated and 
it looks like they have 
something here.” <MR 
10:19> 
30. 울퉁불퉁 
 
uɭtʰuŋ-puɭtʰuŋ    
Tactile 
“This thing, like this 
surface (undulating 
gesture with one hand) 
it’s not flat, but ‘Rough’ 
[English] like this 

Richard Kroeger 
112 
 
(repeats undulating 
gesture).” <MR 10:46> 
31. 가물가물 
 
kamuɭ kamuɭ 
Internal State 
“A memory goes kamuɭ 
kamuɭ, it is used like 
that often, you can’t 
remember clearly.” 
<MR 11:36> 
32. 아른아른 
 
aɾɨn aɾɨn 
Visual 
“This is not a memory, 
it is visual. When 
something is not 
visible.” <MR 11:58> 
“When you don’t see 
something clearly.” 
<MR 12:06> 
33. 어른어른 
 
əɾɨn əɾɨn 
 
No Data 
34. 가뭇가뭇 
 
kamut kamut 
 
No Data 
35. 거뭇거뭇 
 
kəmut kəmut 
 
No Data 
36. 납작(납작) 
 
naptʃak 
Shape 
“It seems like it 
emphasizes the flatness 
of the thing (places 
palms together, one on 
top of the other).” <MR 
12:41> 
37. 넙적(넙적) 
 
nəptʃək 
Shape 
 
Spatial 
Orientation 
“naptʃak is only flat 
(places one palm down 
on top), this thing is 
wide ‘plus’ [English] 
flat, together (delineates 
wide, round, bounded 
area).” <MR 13:01> 
38. 넙죽(넙죽) 
 
nəptʃuk 
Behavior (1st 
Meaning) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Motion 
Spatial 
Orientation (2nd 
Meaning) 
“One receives a greeting 
nəptʃuk, I receive 
[something] nəptʃuk, 
there is that [usage].” 
<MR 13:17> 
“Just simply receiving 
something (scoops in 
toward self with both 
hands).” <MR 13:26> 
“When you bow as a 
greeting (traditional), 
you don’t do this, but 
suddenly….” (lays one 
palm down, the brings 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
113 
 
other hand down as if it 
is falling on top of the 
other hand) <MR 
13:29> 
 
39. 오긋오긋 
 
ogɨt ogɨt 
 
No Data 
40. 우긋우긋 
 
ugɨt ugɨt 
 
No Data 
41. 오글오글 
 
ogɨɭ ogɨɭ 
Internal State 
“It’s a feeling, 
feeling…for example a 
man and a 
woman…can’t see each 
other.” <MR 14:16> 
42. 우글우글 
 
ugɨɭ ugɨɭ 
 
No Data 
43. 꼬치꼬치 
 
 
 
44. 허분허분 
 
k:otʃʰi k:otʃʰi 
 
 
 
həbun həbun 
See Discussion in 
4.1 
“One by one, seems like 
the same meaning.” 
<MR 14:47> 
 
No Data 
45. 토실토실 
 
tʰoʃiɭ tʰoʃiɭ 
Shape 
“A baby or a pig, a 
person…a bit fat, but on 
the cute side, a word 
that gives that 
meaning.” <MR 15:04> 
46. 투실투실 
 
tʰuʃiɭ tʰuʃiɭ 
Shape 
“This one is also the 
same [as above].” <MR 
15:19> 
47. 알록알록 
 
aɭ:ok (t)aɭ:ok 
Light/ Color 
“It isn’t just one color, 
but when every color is 
together it is aɭ:ok 
taɭ:ok, a rainbow is aɭ:ok 
taɭ:ok.” <MR 15:29> 
48. 울긋불긋 
 
uɭgɨt puɭgɨt 
Light/ Color 
“Fall leaves [the Korean 
word specifically is 
about bright autumnal 
foliage, no direct 
translation] are uɭgɨt 
puɭgɨt.” <MR 15:47> 
49. 얼룩얼룩 
 
əɭ:uk əɭ:uk 
 
No Data 
50. 매끈매끈 
 
mek:ɨn mek:ɨn 
Tactile 
“A surface isn’t rough 
but very smooth (makes 
stroking motions).” 
<MR 16:20> 

Richard Kroeger 
114 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
51. 미끈미끈 
 
mik:ɨn mik:ɨn 
Tactile 
“It seems like the word 
is used when something 
is too smooth.” <MR 
16:49> 
“In winter there is ice, 
so when it is mikɨn 
mikɨn, it seems a bit like 
it is not used in a good 
context.” <MR 17:15> 
52. 번들번들 
 
pəndɨɭ pəndɨɭ 
 
No Data 
53. 와글와글 
 
wagɨɭ wagɨɭ 
Sound 
“There are many people 
and a lot of sounds, so 
you can’t think. That 
wʰagɨɭwagɨɭwagɨɭwagɨɭ 
sound…” <MR 17:42> 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
115 
 
Appendix C 
 
The data for section 4.2 on the evaluative nature of ideophones and the basic identity of 
the light isotope is presented here in table form: 
 
Ideophone (Korean 
Orthography) 
IPA and Isotope 
Positive (+), 
Negaitve (-) 
Meaning or Form 
Unknown To 
Speaker (?) 
Evidence for 
Assignment of 
Category 
1. 비뚤비뚤 
 
pit:uɭ pit:uɭ 
 
 
2. 대롱대롱 
 
teɾoŋ teɾoŋ 
 
 
3. 듬성듬성 
 
tɨmsəŋ tɨmsəŋ 
 
 
4.   빡빡 
 
p:ak p:ak 
(-) 
“When it turns out 
difficult it is p:ak 
p:ak, too p:ak p:ak.” 
<KR 2:48> 
5. 더덕더덕 
 
tədək tədək 
(?) 
 
6. 구불구불 
 
kubuɭ kubuɭ 
(dark) 
 
 
7. 꼬불꼬불 
 
k:obuɭ k:obuɭ 
(light) 
 
 
8. 희끗희끗 
 
hikɨt hikɨt 
 
 
9. 동글동글 
 
toŋguɭ toŋguɭ 
(+) (+) 
“When their face is 
cute it is toŋguɭ 
toŋguɭ.” <T-R 3:21> 
“It has the meaning 
of a circle, but 
toŋguɭ toŋguɭ has a 
cute sense to it.” 
<MR 3:28> 
10.  포동포동 
 
pʰodoŋ pʰodoŋ 
(light) 
(+) (+) (+) 
“pʰodoŋ pʰodoŋ has 
a more cute 
meaning.” <KR 
5:45> 
“When they are a bit 
cute.” <T-R 3:45> 
“This is fat…but this 
one carries a cute 
meaning.” <MR 
3:57> 

Richard Kroeger 
116 
 
11. 푸등푸등 
 
pʰudɨŋ pʰudɨŋ 
(dark) 
(?) (-) (?) 
“Plump without the 
sense of being cute.” 
<T-R 4:21> 
12. 비쩍비쩍 
 
pitʃ:ək pitʃ:ək 
(dark) 
(-) 
“It is not the normal 
kind of thin, but too 
thin, when you don’t 
look good.” <KR 
6:16> 
13. 배짝배짝 
 
pɛtʃ:ak pɛtʃ:ak 
(light) 
(?) (?) (?) 
 
14. 비틀비틀 
 
pitʰɨɭ pitʰɨɭ 
(dark) 
 
 
15. 배틀배틀 
 
pɛtʰɨɭ pɛtʰɨɭ 
(light) 
(?) (?) (?) 
 
16. 오돌 토돌 
 
odoɭ tʰodoɭ 
(light) 
 
 
17. 우둘투둘 
 
uduɭ tʰuduɭ 
(dark) 
(-) 
“ɔdoɔl tʰɔdoɔɭ is 
small…it has an ok 
sense in an example, 
uduɭ tʰuduɭ is a bit 
noisy/ loud…” <T-R 
6:17> 
18. 깜박깜박 
 
k:ampak k:ampak 
 
 
19. 까끌까끌 
 
k:ak:ɨɭ k:ak:ɨɭ 
(light) 
 
 
20. 꺼끌꺼끌 
 
k:ək:ɨɭ k:ək:ɨɭ 
(dark) 
(-) 
“…but when you say 
k:ək:ɨɭ k:ək:ɨɭ, it’s 
not really a good 
meaning…normally 
people like smooth 
things…so the 
quality is a bit…not 
good, like that.” 
<KR 10:23> 
21. 소복소복 
 
sobok sobok 
(light) 
(+) 
“sobok sobok is a 
bit…small, smooth, 
a bit cute?” <T-R 
8:49> 
22. 수북수북 
 
subuk subuk 
(dark) 
(-) 
“You say rice is 
subuk, one also uses 
this expression, rice 
is subuk (when) too 
much has been 
given.” <KR 11:27> 
23. 부풀부풀 
pupʰuɭ pupʰuɭ 
(?) (?) 
 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
117 
 
 
24. 길쭉길쭉 
 
kiɭtʃ:uk kiɭtʃ:uk 
 
 
25. 어슷어슷 
 
əsɨt əsɨt 
(?) 
 
26. 몽개몽개 
 
moŋge moŋge 
(light) 
(?) (?) 
 
27. 뭉게뭉개 
 
muŋge muŋge 
(dark) 
 
 
28. 다보록다보록 
 
taboɾok taboɾok 
(light) 
(?) (?) (?) (? My 
Korean Helper for 
the MR recording 
also found this form 
novel) 
 
      29. 더부룩더부룩 
təbuɾuk təbuɾuk 
(dark) 
(-) (-) (-) 
“When one has 
indigestion/ is 
constipated and it is 
uncomfortable, it is 
təbuɾuk.” <KR 
14:14> 
“When your 
digestion isn’t 
working.” <T-R 
12:12> 
“They ate, and they 
ate too much, so they 
are constipated.” 
<MR 10:27> 
30. 울퉁불퉁 
31. 가물가물 
 
uɭtʰuŋ puɭtʰuŋ 
 
kamuɭ kamuɭ 
 
 
32. 아른아른 
 
aɾɨn aɾɨn (light) 
(+) 
“A good 
memory…it doesn’t 
return but it is 
something you want 
to remember…my 
first love.” <T-R 
14:27> 
33. 어른어른 
 
əɾɨn əɾɨn (dark) 
(-) (-) 
“əɾɨn əɾɨn is a 
memory that is not 
good…[I interject: ‘a 
bad memory?’] you 
could say a bad 
memory too.” <T-R 
15:15> 
34. 가뭇가뭇 
kamut kamut 
(light) 
(?) 
 

Richard Kroeger 
118 
 
 
35. 거뭇거뭇 
 
kəmut kəmut 
(dark) 
(-) (-) 
“Also when you 
aren’t well, when 
one is ill…the 
skin…turns a bit 
dark.” <T-R 17:22> 
36. 납작(납작) 
 
naptʃak 
(light) 
(?) 
 
37. 넙적(넙적) 
 
nəptʃək 
(dark) 
(-) 
“My meaning is that 
the leg is a bit big, it 
isn’t small and 
doesn’t sound like a 
cute meaning.” <KR 
20:10> 
38. 넙죽(넙죽) 
 
nəptʃuk 
(dark) 
 
 
39. 오긋오긋 
 
ogɨt ogɨt 
(light) 
(?) (?) 
 
40. 우긋우긋 
 
ugɨt ugɨt 
(dark) 
(?) (?) 
 
41. 오글오글 
 
ogɨɭ ogɨɭ 
(light) 
(-) (-) 
“So the hand was 
originally like this, 
and it became like 
this ogɨɭ ogɨɭ, so if 
you see it, it is an 
especially not good 
thing...especially. 
Shy and childish, 
like that.” <KR 
24:11> 
“That won’t do 
[describing a 
behavior].” <T-R 
22:21> 
42. 우글우글 
 
ugɨɭ ugɨɭ 
(dark) 
(?) 
 
43. 꼬치꼬치 
 
k:otʃʰi k:otʃʰi 
 
 
44. 허분허분 
 
həbun həbun 
(?) (?) 
 
45. 토실토실 
 
tʰoʃiɭ tʰoʃiɭ 
(light) 
(+) (+) (+) 
“pʰodoŋ pʰodoŋ and 
tʰoʃiɭ tʰoʃiɭ have a 
cute meaning, so…” 
<KR 26:53> 
“Chubby in a cute 
way, like that.” <T-

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
119 
 
R 24:23> 
“A bit fat, but on the 
cute side.” <MR 
15:12> 
46. 투실투실 
 
tʰuʃiɭ tʰuʃiɭ 
(dark) 
(-) (-) 
“But if you use tʰuʃiɭ 
tʰuʃiɭ, you don’t like 
them.” <KR 28:33> 
“It is less cute, it is 
not cute, but a bit 
plump.” <T-R 
24:29> 
47. 알록알록 
 
aɭ:ok (t)aɭ:ok 
(light) 
 
 
48. 울긋불긋 
 
uɭgɨt puɭgɨt 
 
 
49. 얼룩얼룩 
 
əɭ:uk (t)əɭ:uk 
(dark) 
(-) (-) (?) 
“But the meaning of 
əɭ:uk təɭ:uk, the 
meaning of əɭ:uk 
isn’t really good, not 
clean, but a dirty 
thing.” <KR 31:23> 
“It is similar to aɭ:ok 
taɭ:ok, but has a 
slightly dirty sense, 
when the colors are 
dirty.” <T-R 26:09> 
50. 매끈매끈 
 
mek:ɨn mek:ɨn 
(light) 
(+) (+) (+) 
“It seems usually 
mekɨn mekɨn has a 
bit of a good 
meaning.” <KR 
32:07> 
“The car’s design is 
like this [I interject: 
‘you can heard this 
in an 
advertisement?’]. 
Yeah, in an ad.” <T-
R 27:12> 
“mekɨn mekɨn has an 
especially () 
‘positive’ [English] 
meaning.” <MR 
16:44> 
51. 미끈미끈 
 
mik:ɨn mik:ɨn 
(dark) 
(-) 
“It is like that. When 
there is also a good 
meaning...? It seems 
like it has the 

Richard Kroeger 
120 
 
meaning of 
slippery.” <KR 
32:28> 
“It seems like a word 
used when 
something is too 
smooth.. mikɨn 
mikɨn has a bit of a 
not good 
[meaning?].” <MR 
16:50> 
52. 번들번들 
 
pəndɨɭ pəndɨɭ 
(-) (?) 
“There is too much 
oil, so the face is 
pəndɨɭ pəndɨɭ, so the 
meaning of pəndɨɭ 
pəndɨɭ isn’t really 
good.” <KR 33:43> 
53. 와글와글 
 
wagɨɭ wagɨɭ 
(-) (-) 
“Loud and noisy.” 
<T-R 29:53> 
“There are many 
people and a lot of 
sound, so you can’t 
think.” <MR 17:42> 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Folk Definitions of Korean Ideophones 
121 
 
Appendix D 
 
For the data examples in sections 4 and 5 I used a number of abbreviations for my glosses. Here 
is a key to the abbreviations: 
 
ADV- adverb 
AUX-auxiliary verb 
COMP-complementizer particle 
CONJ-conjunction 
COPULA-copula 
DET-determiner 
DO-direct object 
EX-existential 
EXCL-exclamatory marker 
FUT- future 
LOC-locative 
NEG-negative verb 
PAST-past tense 
SUBJ-subject 
TEMP- temporal marker 
TOP-topic 

