 
 
Lusus Naturae, Folklore, and Display in the Nineteenth Century in the United States 
 
By 
Lena Verderano Reynoso 
 
A dissertation submitted in partial satisfaction of the 
requirements for the degree of  
Doctor of Philosophy 
in 
Curiosities, Display, and Lore in the United States in the Nineteenth Century 
in the  
Graduate Division 
of the  
University of California, Berkeley 
 
Committee in charge: 
Professor John Lindow 
Professor Daniel Melia 
Professor Nelson Graburn  
Professor David Henkin 
Professor Sue Schweik 
 
 
Spring 2012 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Copyright by Lena Verderano Reynoso 2012 
All Rights Reserved 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Lusus Naturae, Lore, and Display in the Nineteenth Century in the United States 
by 
Lena Verderano Reynoso 
Doctor of Philosophy in Curiosities, Display, and Lore in the United States in the 
Nineteenth Century 
University of California, Berkeley 
Professor John Lindow, Chair 
 
 
Exhibitions of lusus naturae were at the height of popularity during the nineteenth 
century in the United States and reveal how popular culture reflects emerging themes in 
folklore. This study takes an interdisciplinary approach by examining these exhibitions as 
a process, where an interdependent relationship based on the knowledge of familiar folk 
narratives is formed between the latent performer (seller), the pitchman (lecturer), the 
performer (display), and the audience. The presentation, marketing, and reception of 
these entertaining and unusual exhibitions are analogous to various forms of folklore, and 
therefore function in the same manner as folklore.  
 
The interaction and experience with these living motifs are defined as motif ostension. 
Motif ostension evoked whole stories from fragments of information given to the 
audience directly or indirectly, allowing the audience to employ their own unique 
knowledge to add context to the narrative. The interest in these displays permeated 
through gender, age, and social classes in early America, allowing these displays to use 
folklore to negotiate a plethora of newly emerging issues under the guise of entertainment 
and education. The use of motif ostension was an integral form of social expression 
during the nineteenth century; it pushed the boundaries of folklore, and showed how 
folklore could be at the root of one of the most popular and influential forms of 
entertainment in the history of the United States.  
 
 

 
 
i 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for Alan Dundes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ii 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
 
 
This dissertation has led me on a journey through unexpected challenges, 
bereavement, and great joy.  I want to thank Alan Dundes for inspiring me, and 
reminding me to always follow my dreams. It is not often that one meets someone so 
passionate about his field of study, his research, and his life.  The knowledge that I 
learned from him has permeated all aspects of my life, and I thank him tremendously for 
that.  
 
My journey might not have begun without taking Stuart Blackburn’s methods 
seminar in 2004. He introduced me to both folklore and Alan Dundes, and for this I am 
very grateful. I cannot thank my advisor John Lindow enough for stepping in so 
graciously after the passing of my advisor, Alan Dundes.  I did not think that I would be 
able to finish writing this dissertation, but John supported me throughout my academic 
journey with kindness and understanding.  Our countless meetings, brainstorming 
sessions, and discussions helped me tremendously throughout the writing process, and 
even though he had some extremely large shoes to fill, he managed to admirably fill 
them.  
 
I also want to thank my interdisciplinary committee for believing in my project 
from the start, and for providing me with a great deal of comments, feedback, and advice.   
Thank you to David Henkin (Department of History), Daniel Melia (Department of 
Rhetoric), Nelson Graburn (Department of Anthropology), and Sue Schweik (Department 
of English).  
 
I cannot go without thanking my parents, Dale and Miho Verderano, for always 
cheering me on whenever I felt overwhelmed, and my wonderful in-laws Rita and Bob 
Denman, who showed me the sincerest love and support throughout my journey.  Also, 
the support of incredibly inspirational people, like Dr. Laurie Ross, Jean Chu, and Jacob 
and Moriah Van Vleet, helped keep me focused on my goal. The enthusiasm of many 
carny folk, sideshow performers, and impresarios I have met along the way kept me 
excited about my topic—among them, Johnny Fox, Charon Henning, and James Taylor.  
 
With all of my heartfelt gratitude, I want to thank my husband Matt Reynoso for 
his continued love and encouragement.  He never once questioned my path, and he 
unconditionally supported me through all the hurdles along my academic journey. Words 
cannot describe my great admiration for him.  I thank him for being my best friend and 
greatest champion.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
iii 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT  
1 
DEDICATION  
i 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
ii 
  LIST OF FIGURES  
v 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION  
1 
Outline and Method  
1 
Assumptions and Limitations  
1 
Historical Background of Venues  
3 
         Traditional Approaches  
15 
                 The Monster and The Wonder  
15 
                  Disability and Normality  
17 
                  Freakery, The Exotic, and The Cultural “Other”  
20 
                 As Ethnographic Object  
22 
American Folkloristics in the Nineteenth Century  
23 
Historical Perspective  
26 
Summary  
27 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2. FOLK MOTIFS AND EXHIBITION: DATA  
28 
The Use of Folklore  
28 
The Tale-Type  
29 
The Motif  
30 
Display as Instantiations of Folk Motifs  
34 
     Conjoined Twins  
34 
Wild Hairy People  
35 
Giants  
39 
Little People  
41 
Remarkable Hair  
43 
Extremely Old Person  
44 
Spotted People   
44 
Maternal Impression 
44 
Wax People, Living Statues  
46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
iv
CHAPTER  3. FOLKLORE AS EXHIBITION: MARKETING  
 
Motif Ostension   
49 
       Impresario as Active Bearer  
52 
       Tradition & Authenticity 
53 
Folklorism & Nostalgia  
55 
Tourism  
57 
        Semiotics  
61 
        Souvenirs  
63 
Narratology & Display  
66 
Pitches  
68 
Epic Laws  
69 
Literature & Folklore  
70 
Pseudo-Events and Heroes  
73 
 
 
 
 
 CHAPTER 4. FOLKLORE AND EXPERIENCE: RECEPTION  
75 
 Patrons as Active and Passive Bearers  
77 
          Presentation & Reception 
77 
Scientific Presentation  
79 
Liminality  
81 
         The Performer  
82 
The Patron  
84 
         The Location  
85 
Reception: Irish Motifs  
86 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSION  
90 
Retrospect  
90 
Interpretation  
91 
Functions of Folklore  
92 
Bodies and Performance  
94 
Limitations and Suggestions  
97 
 
 
APPENDIX  
101 
BIBLIOGRAPHY  
109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
v 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
 
 
Figure 
Page 
 
1. Prominent places where lusus naturae where exhibited  
15 
 
2. 
 
The use of semiotics in the marketing and reception of exhibitions 
of nineteenth century lusus naturae  
 
62 
 
3. 
 
Frontispiece of Edward Bulwer Lytton’s The Siamese Twins: A 
Satirical Tale of the Times with Other Poems (1831) 
 
73 
 
4. 
 
Liminality and motif ostension  
 
82 
 
5. 
 
Mass culture and folklore patterns of nineteenth century human 
exhibitions in the United States  
 
100 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
1 
LUSUS NATURAE, FOLKLORE, AND DISPLAY 
IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY IN THE UNITED STATES 
 
CHAPTER 1 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 
OUTLINE & METHOD 
 
 
This study employs a diachronic and synchronic approach, using interdisciplinary 
methods to better understand how and why folklore manifests into popular entertainment 
in the United States in the nineteenth century.  The strategy for addressing a rather large 
subject matter will begin by forming a perimeter around a general time period between 
the 1840s and the 1880s, defining “exhibit” as an unusual display primarily used as a 
form of entertainment, although possibly didactic in nature, which features lusus naturae 
(living bodies, wax replicas, or automata).  
 
Traditional studies of lusus naturae in early American exhibitions often approach 
the subject of “freakery” by exploring the construction of these displays from only one 
perspective (performer, seller, or patron). This study takes an interdisciplinary approach 
by examining these exhibitions as a process, where an interdependent relationship based 
on the knowledge of familiar folk narratives is formed between the latent performer 
(seller), the pitchman (lecturer), the performer (display), and the audience (patron), and 
demonstrates that the presentation, marketing, and reception of these entertaining and 
unusual exhibitions are analogous to various forms of folklore, and therefore function in 
the same manner as folklore. The use of primary source material including, but not 
limited to, newspapers, broadsides, diaries, advertisements, pamphlets, and pitchcards 
will be used to contextualize and describe these exhibitions, while theories from varying 
disciplines will be drawn upon in the analysis. 
 
By recognizing the prevalent use of folklore in nineteenth century America, 
particularly concerning amusements and leisure, we can begin to understand why the 
American public found such intrigue in images of simultaneous wonder and aberrance, 
and how the interaction with these displays allowed the public to negotiate a plethora of 
newly emerging issues under the guise of entertainment and education.  
 
 
ASSUMPTIONS & LIMITATIONS  
 
 
The study of folklore as a discipline has spawned the debate of definitions, 
methods, and techniques.  Scholars debate what American folklore is (or isn’t), what 
methods to apply, if and what the theories are, what discipline it is under (literature vs. 
anthropology vs. its own), what content should be printed, and what parts are considered 
valid.  It is no wonder that the general public is confused about what folklore it, and why 
folklore has always been under scrutiny as a discipline of its own. The American Folklore 
Society defines folklore as “the traditional art, literature, knowledge, and practice that is 
disseminated largely through oral communication and behavioral example,” and I will 
use this definition of folklore.  

 
 
2 
 
 I have also chosen to use the term lusus naturae rather than “freak” for the 
following reasons.  I find that the use of this term derived from wonder and the term was 
used to describe natural phenomena in a non-derogatory manner. The term can be used 
for any natural object including vegetables and all living beings.1 Lusus naturae were also 
seen as fascinating rather than demonic, for example, The Naturalist’s Library [1850’s], 
notes, “A still more wonderful lusus naturae lately existed in the person of a bicephalous 
girl...”2  
 
The use of the term “freak” as a was first used in the mid-nineteenth century and 
derives from the term “freak of nature.” The first use of the term freak as a colloquial 
moniker for lusus naturae on display is often dated to the late nineteenth century. 
Showman Edward Hingston, for example, facetiously suggested he advertise his ruined 
half melted wax Circassian woman as a “freak of nature,” in his book “The Genial 
Showman” (1870), and the San Francisco Chronicle (1884) featured an article titled 
“Funny Freaks.”3 The author suggests that tattooed people, phony Circassian girls who 
wear wigs, and “African fellows they advertise as Ashante chiefs freaks, [sic]” are simply 
curiosities, whereas the “spotted boy,” and “two-headed, four-legged girl” are freaks.4 
During this era, the difference between a “curiosity” and “freak” was often based on two 
factors:  truthful representations and real physical abnormalities. Freaks were usually 
considered to have congenital abnormalities and were usually not man-made, whereas 
curiosities could be invented. Rosemary Garland-Thompson believes the “word freak 
meant whimsical more than monstrous.”5  These distinctions, however, were flexible and 
certainly not fixed. Performers with disabilities preferred to be called prodigies, and 
Barnum circumvented this phrase by using terms such as ‘Parliament of Peculiar 
Puzzling Physical Phenomena and Prodigies, Colossal Continental Congress of Curious 
Creatures, Weird and Winsome Wonders of the Wide, Wide World, and Peerless 
Prodigies of Physical Phenomena and Great Presentation of Marvelous Living Human 
Curiosities.”6 
                                                
1 John Adams Tarbell, The sources of health and the prevention of disease: or, Mental 
and physical hygiene, (Boston: Otis Clapp, 1850), 148.  
2 Augustus A. Gould, ed., The naturalist's library; containing scientific and popular 
descriptions of man, quadrupeds, birds, fishes, reptiles and insects; comp. from the works 
of Cuvier, Griffith, Richardson ... and other writers on natural history. Arranged 
according to the classification of Stark, (New York: E. Kearny, 185-?), 66. 
3 Full title “Funny Freaks.  What Can Be Found in Dime Museums.  Curiosities Vs. 
Freaks.  The Hairy Woman, the Fat Girl, the German Dwarfs and the Two-Headed 
Girl…” 
4 The article continues with the headline “What Freaks Are” and asks “Why do you use 
the term ‘freak’’? “Because we are ‘freaks,’ ain’t we?”  See San Francisco Chronicle 
December 1, 1884, 4.  
5 Rosemarie Garland-Thomson, “Seeing the Disabled: Visual Rhetorics of Disability in 
Popular Photography,” in The New Disability History, ed. Paul K. Longmore and Lauri 
Umansky, (New York: New York University Press, 2001), 349. 
6 Marc Hartzman, American Sideshow: An Encyclopedia of History’s Most Wondrous 
and Curiously Strange Performer, (New York: Penguin, 2005), 21.  

 
 
3 
 
I have used the term lusus nature, and occasionally freak, when referring to 
displays regardless of whether they were truly natural. In many cases, the proprietor was 
responsible for procuring and often fabricating lusus naturae using mendacious methods. 
I am using this term, because these exhibitions were presented to the public as real (and 
therefore legitimate) lusus nature, and the public believed these displays were truly lusus 
naturae.7  During the late nineteenth and early 20th centuries, the term freak did not carry 
the stigma it has today, and freaks were considered to be almost non-human. It was as if a 
visible anomaly, physical abnormality, or unusual malady, could transform someone into 
a liminal, uncategorizable state.  In a revealing statement, the last sentence of the 
aforementioned article reads, “There’s a great deal of human nature in freaks, after all.” 
 
In addition to the notorious term freak, numerous terms were used to describe 
unusual displays in the nineteenth century, including: oddity, human enigma, deviant 
member of society, monster, monstrosity, wonder, curiosity, freak, savage, exotic, human 
anomaly, mutant, abnormality, human oddity, prodigy, malformation, portent, primitive, 
very special people, phenomenes, grotesque body, etc.8 Some of these terms may also be 
used in this study on occasion as deemed appropriate.  
 
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND OF VENUES 
 
 
There were many opportunities for the general public to encounter an exhibition 
of lusus naturae. Most museums, traveling shows, cabinets of curiosities, expositions, 
world fairs, circuses, carnivals, midways, and sideshows showcased unusual human 
beings, or automata, for public amusement and profit in the nineteenth century in the 
United States.  Early anthropology museums in America inadvertently influenced the 
style, content, and approach to future venues showcasing curiosities.  In 1890, the 
Journal of American Folk-Lore published a proposal to create a “Folk-Lore Museum.”  
The proposed folklore museum would have incorporated objects, which were not 
ordinarily collected, yet illustrated customs, myths, and superstitions. The Journal of 
American Folk-lore also stated that the “increased public interest in collecting strange 
and rare and curious objects is one through which much of this same lore may be 
accounted for.” 9  A “folk-lore” museum was never actually created, but collections of 
objects considered to be in the domain of folklore were often showcased (e.g. games, 
playing cards, and ritual objects) in traditional anthropological museums, and nineteenth 
century anthropology museums and folklore collections (oral and material) both shared 
the same goal of preserving vanishing traditions. 
                                                
7 These displays were marketed to the public under a variety of terms including, lusus 
naturae, freak, curiosity, etc.  The public used and understood the term lusus naturae to 
refer to something unusual (such as a freak of nature). 
8 “Very Special People” refers to Frederick Drimmer’s book of the same title. See Very 
Special People,  (New York: Amjon Publishers, 1973). For a lengthier discussion on 
names see Leslie Fiedler, Freaks: Myths & Images of the Secret Self,  (New York: Simon 
and Schuster, 1978), 13-36. 
9 See “Folk-Lore Museums,” The Journal of American Folklore, Vol. 3, No. 11 (Oct. –
Dec., 1890): 312. 

 
 
4 
 
The sites of presentation, display, and reception of lusus naturae are extremely 
useful modes for understanding those who attended these exhibitions, why the public 
chose this particular form of amusement, why this form of entertainment flourished 
during the nineteenth century, and how the audience responded. The venues of the 
greatest influence often had five characteristics. First, they were sites of popular 
entertainment and amusement in the United States, particularly in urban areas in the 
nineteenth century. Second, they were sites of frequent exhibition and mass spectatorship.  
The presentation, exhibition, and display of lusus naturae and the anticipation and 
promotion of new lusus naturae were among the most successful exhibits for these 
venues. Third, these venues framed the lusus nature within a narrative. That is, a narrative 
was shaped by the visual presentation (clothes, scenery, performance) of the display, 
lectures, written word, advertisements (such as banners and posters) as well as purposeful 
distributed information about the display. Fourth, these venues touted a didactic 
experience, providing patrons with a form of amusement legitimated by a museum-like 
setting.  The experience was reinforced by historical and scientific evidence and veiled by 
a sense of legitimacy and truth.  The museum setting provided the opportunity to offer 
“lectures” and thus narratives about the object, or human, on display.  Edward Hingston 
wrote, “Mr. Barnum set the example, and all showmen in the States follow it, to have a 
lecture explanatory of whatever curiosity they may please to exhibit. A lecturer or two, 
able to describe an object of interest, and tell a few good stories about it, was always 
found to be of advantage in the Old Museum of New York.”10 The stories told by 
lecturers helped create a narrative surrounding the display, which is a vital aspect of this 
study. Unlike visits to national parks or strolls along the boulevard, dime museums and 
exhibition halls charged admission.  In order to increase profits, most venues began 
appealing to men, women, and children, which was a new strategy in Victorian-era 
amusements. The heterogeneous clientele created a neoteric environment, which 
challenged existing notions of amusement and morals.11 Venues that exhibited the five 
qualities stated above will be discussed in the following section. 
 
 
 
 
                                                
10 Edward Hingston, The Genial Showman, Being reminiscences of the life of Artemus 
Ward and pictures of a showman’s career in the western world,  (London: J.C. Hotten, 
1871), 47.  
11 See John Kasson, Rudeness & Civility: Manners in Nineteenth Century Urban 
America, (New York: Hill and Wang, 1990).  John F. Kasson also discusses early 
American amusements and social conditions in Amusing the Million: Coney Island at the 
Turn of the Century, (New York: Hill and Wang, 1978), 3-9.  Janet M. Davis, The Circus 
Age: Culture & Society Under the American Big Top, (North Carolina: The University of 
North Carolina Press, 2002), 34-35. See also Lawrence W. Levine, Highbrow Lowbrow: 
The Emergence of Cultural Hierarchy in America, (Harvard: Harvard University Press, 
1990) Edward P. Alexander, Museums in Motion: An Introduction to the History and 
Functions of Museums, (Nashville: American Association for State and Local History, 
1979), 12-14. 

 
 
5 
EARLY MUSEUMS 
 
 
 
Traveling shows, cabinets of curiosities, museums, and dime museums, were all 
similar venues that developed in America from the late 18th century and into the early 
20th century. In the West, curiosity museums have been dated as far back as 1550, 
although they peaked in the 16th-17th centuries.12  In America, the beginning of curiosity 
museum displays spurred from the merging of two prominent groups.  In 1769, the 
American Philosophical Society and the American Society for Promoting Useful 
Knowledge joined together to form The American Philosophical Society, held at 
Philadelphia, for promoting useful Knowledge (henceforth APS).13  This union was based 
on the premise of the “advancement of useful knowledge” and sought to improve 
American methods of industry and ingenuity.14  Much like the impetus for early folklore 
collectors, the APS focused on preservation. Curators, for example, were required to 
“take charge of, and preserve, all Specimens of natural Productions, whether of the 
ANIMAL, VEGETABLE or FOSSIL Kingdom; [and] all Models of Machines and 
Instruments…”15 Early collections of unique and “exotic” items began as early as 1772 
with a display of Native American Indian snowshoes and a blanket.16  During the early 
years of the APS, items were accumulated, not collected.  Members of the Society, or the 
general public, sent many of the unusual items in, to be examined by “learned men,” 
which eventually resulted in a significant accumulation of artifacts. The collection was 
severely neglected during the American Revolution and in 1789, when APS finally 
moved into a building of its own, there was an attempt to organize the acquisitions.17  By 
1793, the APS became known as a “national museum, library and scientific academy.”18 
 
The popularity of artificial curiosities was rivaled by nature, and by the end of the 
18th century, natural exhibitions such as the mammoth proved to be the most popular 
exhibits.  Soon, however, nationalism began to take its grip upon the people, and patriotic 
items, such as locks of George Washington’s hair or Scudder’s Naval Panorama, which 
was shown in conjunction with the anniversary of American Independence, gained in 
popularity.19  Charles W. Peale, for example, provided a host of amusements to satisfy 
both patriotic and scientific patrons, although his American Museum, formed in 1786, 
                                                
12 Edward P. Alexander, Museums In Motion: An Introduction to the History and 
Functions of Museums, (Tennessee, 1979), 41.  
13 Whitfield J. Bell, “The Cabinet of the American Philosophical Society” In Walter Muir 
Whitehill, Cabinet of curiosities: five episodes in the Revolution of American museums, 
(Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1967), 3. 
14 Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 1 (Jan.1, 1769-Jan.1, 1771): 
iii. 
15 Ibid.  Emphasis in original.  
16  Presented by James Dickinson.  See Whitfield J. Bell, The Cabinet of the American 
Philosophical Society (Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1967), 5. 
17 Until 1789, the Philosophical Society had no official meeting place and often met by 
renting various rooms and locations. Whitfield J. Bell, The Cabinet of the American 
Philosophical Society (Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1967), 7. 
18 Ibid, 8. 
19 Columbian, Vol. V, Issue 1424, June 21, 1814.   

 
 
6 
began with very few items: a war cap and cloak made of feathers, bark cloth, an East 
India Bow and Arrow, a Sea Feather, Porcupine Quill, among other relatively benign 
objects.20 Peale began the tradition that gave American museums a “distinctly eclectic 
character” and his “assemblage of curiosities at points strained his ideal of “rational 
amusement” and the orderly reflection of the great Book of Nature.”21  
 
 Five years later he moved and expanded his museum to a wing of the APS hall 
and acted as curator and resident caretaker for the APS museum, and by 1804, Peale 
moved his museum next door to the State House and continued expanding his museum 
well into the nineteenth century.22 Human displays of unique, abnormal, or medically 
intriguing qualities were gaining momentum in the wake of scientific discovery, and 
Peale, although fascinated by the natural sciences, realized the growing popularity of 
curious human objects and featured an albino, but was heavily criticized for the 
“frivolous attention” his exhibit brought.23 Peale’s Museum continued to focus on curious 
exhibits of nature, but with increasing rent, administrative problems, and the death of 
Peale, the museum began to take a more ostentatious turn and eventually went bankrupt.24 
Greenhalgh suggests that there was an intellectual shift due to the acceptance of 
anthropology as a discipline in the late nineteenth century, which permitted expositions to 
focus on human display.25  From 1861-1865, the Civil War appeared to have little effect 
on the types of leisure amusements Americans indulged in, particularly in the South.26 
The War did, however, affect theater ticket prices, which allowed for the popular support 
of secular amusements.27 
 
 
DIME MUSUEMS 
 
 
 
The days of renting small storefronts and buildings for exhibitions soon came to 
an end and curators were beginning to open permanent and more elaborate institutions.  
Sideshows were often considered bawdy and crude compared to the new impressive 
museums, and most Americans preferred to transform themselves into upper class 
                                                
20 Pennsylvania Packet and Daily Advertiser, Issue 3292, August 19, 1789, 3. 
21 John Kasson, Rudeness & Civility: Manners in Nineteenth Century Urban America. 
(New York: Hill and Wang, 1990), 217. 
22 Whitfield J. Bell  “The Cabinet of the American Philosophical Society” In Walter Muir 
Whitehill, Cabinet of curiosities: five episodes in the Revolution of American museums, 
(Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1967), 12. 
23 Robert Bogdan, Freak Show: Presenting Human Oddities for Amusement and Profit,  
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988), 29. 
24 See Charles Coleman Sellers, “Peale’s Museum,” Transactions of the American 
Philosophical Society 43 (1953) and “Peale’s Museum and “The New Museum Idea.” 
Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 124 (Feb. 29, 1980): 25-34.  
25 Paul Greenhalgh, Ephemeral Vistas: The Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions 
and World’s Fairs, 1851-1939,  (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1988), 86. 
26 Patricia C. Click, The Spirit of the Times: Amusements in Nineteenth Century 
Baltimore, Norfolk, and Richmond,  (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1989), 
2. 
27 Ibid, 6, 52. 

 
 
7 
patrons. These traveling shows were often very small in company and were comprised of 
individuals who were regularly exhibited in museums. Museums such as Peale’s were 
often referred to as Dime Museums because of the typical cost of admission.28 Lambert 
describes these museums as “generally three or four stories in height.29  The first floor 
was a regular Variety Theater, second floor a conglomeration of curios from all parts of 
the world and curiosities of natural history, freaks, etc., third floor performing freaks, 
novelties, stuffed birds, etc., fourth floor wild and tame stuffed animals and games of 
chance...” Lambert later writes, “The [curio] halls of the museums was a place for the 
publicity and exhibition of anything in the world that was curious, novel, scientific or 
entertaining.  There were freaks of human nature and of the animal kingdom, especially, 
monstrosities of all kinds.  The more blood curdling, barbarous and repulsive were the 
freaks the more eager they were to exhibit them.”30  However, not all museums chose to 
exhibit horrifying novelties. 
 
Some museums, such as William Clark’s Museum (1816-1838) focused heavily 
on archeological artifacts,31 but most focused on scientific display. In 1810, John Scudder 
opened a museum of curiosities that would later become Barnum’s American Museum in 
1841.  Even before the mainstream interest in science, Scudder’s Museum attempted to 
combine education and entertainment so that his museum appealed to a “liberal and 
enlightened public.” A newspaper advertisement from the Evening Post praises this 
approach and reads: “To blend instruction with entertainment should be the object of 
every place of public entertainment; and in no place can the young mind be more 
benefited than at the [Scudder’s] museum.”32  Scudder expanded his collection, 
concentrating mainly on zoological specimens and housed a variety of animals, as well as 
curiosities, such as the bed curtains of Mary Queen of Scots.33   
 
The Market Museum in Boston (1804-1822) was one of the earliest museums to 
feature humans, albeit in wax form. Human displays began to grow in popularity after 
Scudder’s death in 1821, when his son John Scudder Jr. took over the American Museum 
and “began to provide variety acts and freak shows” in order to encourage business, 
particularly away from Peale’s museum.34 Cabinets of curiosities transformed into dime 
                                                
28 Barnum is often credited as starting the first Dime Museum (The American Museum, 
1841), but Peale and Scudder laid the foundation for Barnum’s didactic approach to 
entertainment. 
29 William Lambert, Show Life in America, (Georgia: W. Delavoye, 1925), 159. 
30 Ibid. 
31 John C. Ewers, “William Clark’s Indian Museum in St. Louis 1816-1838” In Walter 
Muir Whitehill, Cabinet of curiosities: five episodes in the Revolution of American 
museums, (Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia, 1967), 49-72. 
32 Evening Post, October 16, 1810. 
33 See Andrea Stulman Dennett, Weird and Wonderful: The Dime Museum in America, 
(New York: New York University Press, 1997), 18. In John Scudder, A Companion to the 
American Museum, (New York: G.F. Hopkins, 1823).   
34 Ibid, 18-19. To avoid demonstrating an overwhelming amount of what George Yúdice 
calls “postmodern finger flexing”, I will no longer use quotes with the term freak, but 
will use it freely according to Robert Bogdan’s (1988) notion that freaks are made rather 
than born. Thompson notes, “[n]ot until 1847 did the word [freak] become synonymous 

 
 
8 
museums, and entertainment became the goal rather than purely education. Dime 
museums offered an “inexpensive and unrestricted admission policy [which] made them 
accessible to the masses, and their popularity grew explosively from 1860 to 1900.”35 In 
1841, Phineas T. Barnum emerged with his version of the American Museum—featuring 
anatomically correct wax figures, beasts, and freaks.  Museums and curio halls, most 
notably Barnum’s American Museum, often provided a place for various human 
attractions to work during the winter season.36  
 
Although Barnum considered his circus to be a traveling museum, there was 
always debate regarding the legitimacy of this title. 37  The Daily Cleveland Herald, for 
example, (1856) placed suspecting quotation marks around the word “museum” and 
“showman” when referring to Barnum’s endeavors.38 Barnum’s New American Museum 
was destroyed by fire in 1865, the same year President Lincoln was assassinated and the 
Civil War ended. Barnum quickly rebuilt a New American Museum—ironically it was 
also ravaged by fire in 1868.39  After the destruction of both American Museums, Barnum 
took his show on the road in 1871 and teamed up with James Baily, continuing his wildly 
successful collection of human acts (freaks) with the traveling circus.40   Dime Museums 
continued to grow in abundance until they peaked in the United States in the 1880s and 
1890s.  
 
LYCEUM 
 
 
 
Oratory was another form of popular entertainment in the United States 
throughout the nineteenth century.  Lyceums were lecture halls that were often used as a 
didactic entertainment venue, particularly in the mid nineteenth century.  Josiah Holbrook 
founded the Lyceum Movement in the United States in 1826 and “by the late 1840s, a 
public lecture was expected to entertain as well as instruct and inspire.”41 Putnam 
                                                                                                                                            
with human corporeal anomaly. See George Yúdice, The Expediency of Culture, (London 
2005), 42; Rosemarie Garland Thomson, Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the 
Extraordinary Body, (New York, 1996). 
35 Andrea Stulman Dennett, Weird and Wonderful: The Dime Museum in America, (New 
York: New York University Press, 1997), 8. 
36 Eventually, the decline in these museums limited many to work only the summer 
season. See William Lambert, Show Life in America,  (Georgia, 1925), 152.  
37 Robert Bogdan, Freak Show: Presenting Human Oddities for Amusement and Profit,  
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988), 41. 
38 “Mr. P.T. Barnum’s Troubles,” The Daily Cleveland Herald, Issue 20.  Col. A, 
Thursday, January 24, 1856.  
39 Edward P.  Alexander, Museums In Motion: An Introduction to the History and 
Functions of Museums, (Tennessee, 1979), 49-50. 
40 Rachel Adams, Sideshow U.S.A.: Freaks and the American Cultural Imagination,  
(Chicago, 2001), 11.  
41 Donald M. Scott, “The Popular Lecture and the Creation of a Public in Mid-Nineteenth 
Century America,” The Journal of American History, Vol. 66, No. 4 (Mar., 1980): 802. 

 
 
9 
Monthly even defined the lyceum as “the American Theatre.”42  Historian Donald M. 
Scott reminds us that the during this period, Americans had a “seemingly insatiable 
craving” for  “useful knowledge” and that between 1840 and 1860 there were more than 
3,000 advertised lectures.43  
 
Much like early museums and exhibition halls, lyceums were touted for their 
secular, inclusive, and non-partisan nature and “Josiah Holbrook himself had gloried in 
the non-partisan character of his lyceums...”44 People of all backgrounds were drawn to 
these lectures as curiosity played an integral role in the most popular lectures and “[f]irm 
interest remained in what might be called curious knowledge—the exotic, bizarre, and 
wondrous.” The audience was not interested in just hearing facts but wanted lecturers to 
“place their particular topic or kind of knowledge in a broad, interpretive context.”45 
 
Barnum evidently wanted to take advantage of the interest in the unusual and 
requested to have “a judicious man go ahead and arrange with Lyceums, so that I am paid 
as much as $50 to $100 per lecture, or have a share of receipts which will amount to 
that.”46  Museum proprietors like Barnum satiated public interest in science, nature, and 
curiosities, and “the lyceum circuit attracted lecturers on science, while independent 
entrepreneurs displayed live animals, mineral specimens, and rarities in small towns 
across the country, capitalizing on public curiosity about natural objects.”47  Although 
these venues did not normally display lusus naturae, the subject was discussed either 
directly or indirectly. Lyceum culture helped shape the public’s notion of nature and 
science, which ultimately involved their interaction with and observation of lusus naturae 
as a didactic form of amusement.  
 
EXPOSITIONS & WORLD’S FAIRS 
 
 
 
International expositions grew out of a European tradition that began in 1851 at 
the Crystal Palace in London.  Since this time, the term exposition and world’s fair are 
often used synonymously, the latter usually involving a more international perspective. 
Raymond Corbey describes world’s fairs or international expositions as “very large-scale 
                                                
42 This was in contrast to similar European forms of entertainment. See Donald M. Scott, 
“The Popular Lecture and the Creation of a Public in Mid-Nineteenth Century America” 
The Journal of American History, Vol. 66.  No. 4 (Mar., 1980): 791. 
43 Ibid.  
44 Vern Wagner,  “The Lecture Lyceum and the Problem of Controversy,” Journal of the 
History of Ideas, Vol. 15, No. 1 (Jan. 1954): 122.   Wagner also notes that “George 
William Curtis wrote that because the mixed audience at lyceum lectures were of all 
political and religious views, lecturers discussed Hamlet,” 125. 
45 Donald M. Scott, “The Popular Lecture and the Creation of a Public in Mid-Nineteenth 
Century America,” The Journal of American History, Vol. 66, No. 4 (Mar., 1980): 802. 
46 The Liberator, Issue 24: 96, Friday, June 15, 1855.  The idea that Barnum would give a 
lecture on “the science of humbug” was thought to be a newspaper joke, but it appears 
that Barnum was actually interested in pursuing this topic. See “Mr. Barnum,” Farmer’s 
Cabinet, Vol. 53, 1854, 3, 24.  
47 Sally Gregory Kohlstedt,  “Curiosities and Cabinets: Natural History Museums and 
Education on the Antebellum Campus,” Isis, Vol. 79: 3, (Sep., 1988): 407. 

 
 
10
happenings that combined features of trade and industrial fairs, carnival, music festivals, 
political manifestations, museums, and art galleries.”48 
 
The first large international exposition in the United States was the Exhibition of 
the Industry of All Nations held in New York in 1853.49 Like most early expositions, the 
showcase was on recent industrial achievements in categories such as: machines, 
philosophical instruments, paper and stationary, wearing apparel, glass, etc.50 The 
exposition was a financial failure and Don Wilmeth notes that “even P.T. Barnum, 
America’s most successful impresario, failed to save the venture.”  The 1876 Centennial 
Exposition in Philadelphia, is considered to be the first official World’s Fair in the United 
States, but it was not until the 1878 at the Exposition Universelle in Paris that humans 
from non-Western cultures were exhibited with great success.  The 1893 World’s 
Columbian Exposition in Chicago featured 400 natives from Senegal, Java, Tahiti, and 
Egypt. These living exhibits of exotic, unusual, and foreign people became an integral 
part of expositions. Both the architecture of the temporary buildings at these expositions 
and the familiar reoccurring folk motifs, further allowed the public to escape to lands of 
fantasy and legend.51 
 
MIDWAY 
 
 
 
The American midway began at the 1893 Columbian Exposition in Chicago, 
where “Midway” originated from the term Midway Plaisance, or the strip of land that ran 
the length of the fair outside the exposition halls at the Columbian Exposition, although 
the origins of the layout have been traced back to European traditions including the 
medieval carnival as well as the seventeenth-century pleasure garden of England and 
France.52 Rides, various forms of games and entertainment, as well as food booths, and 
displays of oddities lined the midway for all future world’s fairs, and the midway was 
                                                
48 Raymond Corbey,  “Ethnographic Showcases, 1870-1930,” Cultural Anthropology, 
Vol. 8, No. 3 (August 1993): 339. 
49 The earliest exposition was the annual (1829-1897) American Institute Fair in New 
York, but it was much smaller in scope. 
50 “Official Catalogue of the New-York Exhibition of the Industry of All Nations” New 
York: George P. Putnam & Co., 1853.  Also, Nelson Graburn has shown that both the 
Canadian pavilion of 1987 and the 1851 World’s Fair exhibited “native” artifacts and 
nature, such as canoes, moose, along with the latest technology (steam engines, the 
“Canada Arm” of the space shuttle. See Nelson Graburn, “Natives and High Tech: 
Canadian National Symbols at World’s Fairs, 1851-1986.” Paper presented at the Annual 
Meetings of the Kroeber Anthropological Society, Berkeley March 7, 1987.  
51 For more on the architecture of the Centennial Exhibition, see Jeffery Howe, “A 
‘Monster Edifice’: Ambivalence, Appropriation, and the Forging of Cultural Identity at 
the Centennial Exhibition,” The Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography, Vol. 
126, No. 4 (Oct., 2002): 635-650.  
52 Don B. Wilmeth, Variety Entertainment and Outdoor Amusements: A Reference Guide, 
(Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1982), 25. 

 
 
11
called the “grittiest and most commercial part of the Fair.”53 The World’s Columbian 
Exposition featured a plethora of living humans including “the Samoan, Javanese, 
Dahomeyan and other ‘native villages’...”54 Soon after the Exposition, the term midway 
was used liberally to define any outdoor area which included a variety of games, rides, 
and exhibits.  These later exhibits usually featured humans, who were not only foreign 
and exotic, but also had physical abnormalities.  
 
CARNIVAL  
 
 
 
Carnival historian Joe McKennon defines the carnival as “a collective amusement 
organization consisting of various shows, riding devices, free acts, exhibitions, and 
gaming and catering concessions.”55  McKennon also notes “There is no need to confuse 
a circus with a carnival under any circumstances.  A carnival can, and often does, have a 
complete circus as one of the shows on its midway.  By no alchemy worked by a master 
of circus logistics can a circus carry a carnival.  If it could be done, the organization 
would become a fast moving carnival.”56 McKennon uses the term midway to describe 
the activity that occurs within the perimeter of the carnival, and not just world’s fairs.  As 
McKennon previously mentioned, circuses can be an aspect of a carnival, and equally, a 
sideshow could be an aspect of either a carnival or circus.   
 
CIRCUS  
 
 
 
In 1793, seventeen years before the birth of the notorious circus proprietor P.T. 
Barnum, Americans in Philadelphia were treated to their first circus experience when 
John Bill Ricketts arrived on the scene from London with his “Equestrian Performance.”  
Ricketts’s circus took advantage of the current public interest in horsemanship and 
featured acrobats and skilled riders.57  Animals, particularly horses, played a crucial role 
in these first American circuses, and in 1795 in Philadelphia, Ricketts “built his famous 
“New Amphitheatre” containing both a riding ring and a stage …”58 Menageries, which 
featured a variety of animals such as elephants, camels, lions, and polar bears, originally 
developed in competition with circuses, but soon the differences became less distinct and 
by 1813 the first traveling menagerie traveled through New York.59  By 1825 canvas tents 
were used and soon became the standard circus structure for housing large audiences— a 
                                                
53 Rosemarie Bank,  “Representing History: Performing the Columbian Exposition,” 
Theatre Journal, Volume 54. No. 4. (December 2002): 589-606. 
54 Roslyn Poignant, Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle,  
(London: 2004), 219. 
55 Joe McKennon,  A Pictorial History of the American Carnival, Vol. 1 (Ohio: Popular 
Press, 1972), 19.  
56 Ibid. 
57 General Advertiser, Issue 663, November 10, 1792, 3. 
58 LaVahn G. Hoh and William H. Rough.  Step Right Up! The Adventures of Circus in 
America, (Virginia: Betterway Puglications, 1990), 55. 
59 Ibid, 57, and “The Circus in America Timeline,” Institute for Advanced Technology in 
the Humanities, 2004.  

 
 
12
design that allowed portability and convenience to traveling venues.  It kept circuses 
moving into new towns and ultimately shortened the time a venue remained to as little as 
one day.  Soon, even the smallest towns were visited by various circuses and entertainers 
and the public could choose between local and more distant amusements, but major cities 
like New York had circuses “since the days of Ricketts.”60       
 
In terms of content, Barnum’s early circus endeavors were much like sideshows.   
For example, his (1851-52) “Barnum’s Asiatic Caravan, Museum and Menagerie” and 
“P.T. Barnum’s Grand Colossal Museum and Menagerie” (1854-55), featured “Mr. 
Nellis, the man without arms” as well as “wild beasts, a Museum of wonders, Gen. Tom 
Thumb, &c., &c...”61 Although Barnum was briefly involved in circuses from 1851-1855, 
he did not become seriously involved until his retirement 1871 when he joined William 
C. Coup and Dan Castello in “a new enterprise with the profitable but unwieldy title, the 
P.T. Barnum Museum, Menagerie, and Circus, International Zoological Garden, 
Polytechnic Institute and Hippodrome”62  
 
In 1871, Barnum continued his lengthy descriptions and aptly titled his traveling 
circus, “Barnum's Great Traveling World's Fair, consisting of Museum, Menagerie, 
Caravan, Hippodrome, Gallery of Statuary and Fine Arts, Polytechnic Institute, 
Zoological Garden, and 100,000 Curiosities, Combined with Dan Castello's, Sig 
Sebastian's, and Mr. D'Atelie's Grand Triple Equestrian and Hippodromatic Exposition.” 
The importance of the circus to the American public cannot be emphasized enough.  
Roslyn Poignant writes, “Before the movies, the circus was probably the most influential 
instruments of mass culture in shaping public attitudes, through an extraordinary range of 
linked representational activities associated with publication and performance.”63  
 
SIDESHOW 
 
 
 
The American sideshow existed primarily as a supplement to circuses, world’s 
fairs, carnivals, and travelling fairs, and is typically defined as “an auxiliary or under-
canvas show attached to a midway (or at a circus)...” with frequent exhibitions of “freaks 
or human oddities...”64 The term is considered to have originated around 1850, although 
the exact origin remains a subject of speculation.65  The Online Etymology Dictionary 
                                                
60 LaVahn G. Hoh and William H. Rough.  Step Right Up! The Adventures of Circus in 
America, (Virginia: Betterway Puglications, 1990), 57. 
61 Weekly Eagle, Volume IV, Issue 101: 3, July 28, 1851 and “Barnum’s Asiatic 
Caravan” Farmer’s Cabinet, Vol. 49, Issue 46: 3, June 26, 1851. 
62 LaVahn G. Hoh  and William H. Rough.  Step Right Up! The Adventures of Circus in 
America, 60. 
63 Roslyn Poignant, Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle,  
(London: Yale University Press, 2004), 82. 
64 Don B. Wilmeth, Variety Entertainment and Outdoor Amusements: A Reference Guide, 
(Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1982), 23. See also See Stuart Thayer’s article in the 
March-April 1992 issue of Bandwagon, “Out-Side Shows.” 
65 Don B. Wilmeth, scholar of theater and English, dates the first sideshow at around 
1904, 50 years after Barnum’s traveling exhibitions.  

 
 
13
reads “sideshow—1855, apparently a coinage of P.T. Barnum’s, from side + show (n.).”66  
Perhaps this origin stems from P.T. Barnum’s 1855 biography, where Barnum refers to 
his “side shows” as temporary enterprises.67  
 
Barnum was regularly presenting human oddities as exhibits in his American 
Museum (from the time he opened in 1841) and brought many of his exhibits with him on 
his first brief circus enterprise (1851-1855).  As a result, the traveling shows that flanked 
the periphery of many circus tents, showcased human oddities, just like Barnum’s 
American Museum. The characteristics of the sideshow usually involve both lusus 
naturae of some manner as a supplement to a dominant show.  
  
FREAK SHOW 
 
 
The freak show was simply another term to describe a sideshow act, which 
specifically featured strange, unusual, and usually deformed individuals, both born and 
self made. The freak show was almost always connected to a larger venue (i.e. sideshow, 
circus, carnival) and existed well before the use the word “freak” or “freak show” came 
into existence.  Rosemary Garland Thompson writes, “The freak show is a spectacle, a 
cultural performance that gives primacy to visual apprehension in creating symbolic 
codes and institutionalizes the relationship between the spectacle and the spectators.”68 
The freak show, as an element of a circus, carnival, or fair was one of the primary places 
where humans with abnormalities were displayed for amusement during the nineteenth 
century in the United States.  
 
SUMMARY 
 
 
There are other venues that exhibited human lusus naturae, such as amusement 
and seaside parks.69  These later incarnations of carnivals, circuses, and sideshows, 
                                                
66 Dictionary.com. Online Etymology Dictionary. Douglas Harper, Historian. 
http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/sideshow (accessed September 09, 2011). 
67 Phineas T. Barnum, The Life of P.T. Barnum,  (New York: Redfield, 1855) Reprint, 
(Illinois: University of Illinois, 2000) 344. See also R.L. Parkison,  “A report of the 
Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Baily Circus Sideshow 1919-1956,” June 7, 1971, at 
Archives of Circus World Museum, Baraboo, WI documented in Farrah J. Mateen and 
Christopher J. Boes “Pinheads” The Exhibition of Neurologic Disorders at “The Greatest 
Show on Earth,” Neurology, 75, November 30, 2010. 
68 Rosemarie Garland Thomson, Extraordinary bodies: Figuring physical disability in 
America culture and literature, (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997), 60. 
69 The American amusement park began with Sea Lion Amusement Park (1895), 
Steeplechase Park (1897), Luna Park (1903), and Dreamland (1904), all were located in 
the Coney Island area. Similar to the Midway, these theme parks were extensions of 
entertainment at World’s Fairs and Expositions. For a detailed list of sources on 
American seaside resorts and amusement areas, see Don B. Wilmeth’s, Variety 
Entertainment and Outdoor Amusements: A Reference Guide, (Westport, Connecticut: 
Greenwood Press, 1982), 37-38. John Kasson, Amusing the Million, (New York: Hill and 
Wang, 1978). 

 
 
14
although important, existed outside the temporal framework of this study and will 
therefore not be included in this survey.  In summary, the distinctions between these 
terms are flexible and many of these venues are not mutually exclusive.  The size, 
location, and specifications (such as having a “ring,” under a “canvas tent,” or part of a 
larger venue) of these venues are the identifying factors rather than the actual content, 
and these venues existed independently of one another (See Figure 1).  
 
The study of human spectacle has been explored through numerous disciplines, 
particularly in the fields of anthropology, folklore, disability studies, performance studies, 
and tourism studies.  It is important to remember that the general public did not often 
come into contact with non-human forms of lusus naturae in their daily lives. Although it 
was possible for the average nineteenth century American to come across an anomalous 
human outside of an exhibition hall, it was still a very scarce occurrence.  Literary and 
disability scholar Sue Schweik points out that there were many laws and ordinances that 
kept the nineteenth century American public from viewing physical deformities or 
grotesque bodies.70  As a result, as the interest in anomalous objects, including human, 
grew, it became nearly impossible for the general public to view lusus naturae without 
evoking a freak show context.  
 
Most scholarly approaches to this subject focus on the object or display rather 
than the viewer, with little or no attention paid to the interdependent relationship with the 
seller (or proprietor, storyteller, and latent performer).  Traditional studies of the display 
of lusus naturae have been limited to a specific academic discipline, which limits the 
scope of the study as well as the capacity to fully understand the trend of exhibiting lusus 
naturae for profit from a multi directional perspective. This section examines some of the 
ways that scholars have studied human curiosities on display in the United States, and 
how this study differs from these traditional approaches.71   
                                                                                                                                            
 
70 See Susan M. Schweik, The Ugly Laws: Disability in Public, (New York: New York 
University Press, 2009).  
71 This is not intended to be a chronological or comprehensive account of all scholarly 
methods of studying humans on display.  Subsequent chapters will introduce methods, 
theories, and approaches from various scholars and disciplines as they relate to the 
discussion.  

 
 
15
 
TRADITIONAL APPROACHES 
 
THE MONSTER AND THE WONDER 
 
 
  
 
Most scholars of lusus naturae reference the border between human and non-
human form in their research.  Lorraine Daston and Katharine Park have produced a 
significant study on the history of wonder and the display and reception of marvels and 
monsters from the 12th century throughout Europe.72 For Daston and Park, the viewing of 
lusus naturae went through “three successive stages [of interpretations and emotions]–
horror, pleasure, and repugnance—which overlapped and coexisted during much of the 
early modern period, although each had its own rhythm and dynamic.”73  By the early 
nineteenth century, individuals familiar with the legends of monsters, were compelled by 
the notion of witnessing a living being that was essentially only partially human. The 
term monster was often used to describe a naturally occurring phenomenon, portent, or 
providence, rather than a ruse or self-made monster. Rosemary Garland-Thompson, for 
                                                
72 Lorraine Daston and Katharine Park’s study on wonder focuses on a period between 
1150-1750.  See Daston, Lorraine. Wonders and the Order of Nature. New York: Zone 
Books, 1998. 
73 Ibid, 176. 

 
 
16
example, states, “[a]uthentic monsters are born, never made.”74 The study of teratology, 
or monsters, existed in Greek and Roman times and into the early nineteenth century, and 
during this era, most explorations of the monstrous used science to explain these bodies 
in terms of medical conditions.75 
 
M.J.B Gardin Dumesnil’s 1825 edition of Latin synonyms designates portentum, 
ostentum, and monstrum, as synonyms and more specifically refers to them as 
“particular prodigies.”76  Dumesnil also writes “Monstrum, a monster, or anything that 
is against or besides the common course of nature.  An ox with a horse’s head would be 
monstrum.”77 The theme of the human/animal hybrid appears a great deal, and Leslie 
Fiedler asserts that whether the meaning of monster “derives from moneo, meaning to 
warn, or monstro, meaning to show forth, the implication is the same: human 
abnormalities are the products not of a whim of nature but of the design of Providence.”78 
Foucault suggests that humans, unless combined with animals, are not considered 
monstrum, but that the “expressions portentum and ostentum will designate a simple 
abnormality, and that of monstrum will be applied exclusively to any being which does 
not have human form.”79  
 
The displays of humans with abnormalities (whether mummified, waxed, or 
skeletonized) were extremely popular exhibitions, but humans who were considered to 
have animal characteristics (or to literally be part animal) proved exceedingly popular. 
For Foucault, the defining aspect of a monster is “the blending, the mixture of two 
species,” such as an animal with another animal’s head; the “mixture of two realms,” 
which could be the man with the head of an ox; the “mixture of two individuals,” such as 
a person with two heads and one body or two bodies and one head; or “the mixture of two 
sexes, as a hermaphrodite; or the “mixture of forms, the person with no arms nor legs is 
like a snake.”80  
 
The understanding of lusus naturae as wonder and monstrosity is rooted in 
tradition and folklore.  C.J.S. Thompson writes,  “Extraordinary creatures of human and 
animal form enter into many of the mythological fables, and monsters possessing two or 
more heads and beings of gigantic stature, figure in the stories and fairy-tales of nearly 
                                                
74 Rosemarie Garland-Thompson, Staring: How We Look,  (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2009), 178. 
75 See George M. Gould and Walter L. Pyle,  Anomalies and Curiosites of Medicine,  
(New York: Bell Publishing Company, 1896).  
76 M.J.B. Gardin Dumesnil, Latin Synonyms, with Their Different Significations: and 
Examples Taken From the Best Latin Authors, Translated into English with Additions 
and Corrections, by The Rev. J.M. Gosset,  Third Ed.,  (London: George B. Whittaker, 
Ave-Maria Lane; Baldwin, Cradock and Joy, and J. Duncan, Paternoster Row; J. Cuthell, 
Holborn; and J. Nunn, Great Queen Street, 1825), 466. 
77 Ibid. 
78 This has also been noted by Susan Stewart in On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, 
the Gigantic, the Souvenir, the Collection,  (Durham: Duke University Press, 1993), 108. 
79 Michel Foucault, Abnormal: Lectures at the College de France 1974-1975,  (UK: 
Verso, 2003), 76.  
80 Ibid. 

 
 
17
every country.”81  Interestingly, Thompson’s book The History and Lore of Freaks (1996) 
was originally published as The Mystery and Lore of Monsters in 1930.  The change from 
“mystery” to “history” appears to legitimize the contents by associating the anomaly with 
historical truth, and equally, the change from “monster” to “freak” indicates a cultural 
change in the social construction of these anomalous bodies.  
 
Rosemary Garland-Thompson recognizes the interactive aspect of display in 
relation to the viewer, the starer, and the monstrous body.82 Garland-Thomson describes 
the visual rhetoric involved when one gazes at a photograph of a disabled figure and 
suggests that the wondrous as a visual rhetoric is historically the oldest mode of 
representing disability, and that modernity secularized the wonder into stereotypes such 
as the “supercrip.” Ultimately, this visual rhetoric “directs the viewer to look up in awe of 
difference” by “positioning the disabled figure as the exception to human capability.”83   
 
DISABILITY AND NORMALITY 
 
 
 
Modern disability scholars have explored exhibitions featuring (human) lusus 
naturae from interesting perspectives.84  Rosemarie Thomson writes, “From folktales and 
classical myths to modern and postmodern ‘grotesques,’ the disabled body is almost 
always a freakish spectacle presented by the mediating narrative voice.”85  The disabled 
body is often associated with the marginalized, the defective, and the “other.” 
Medicalization often deflected the curiosity of the general public from the realm of 
wonder to that of error, and scholars such as Leonard Cassuto assert that through science, 
the freak is in essence “solved” with the doctor playing the role of the detective and 
disability as the “crime.”86 
                                                
81 C.J.S. Thompson, The History and Lore of Freaks,  (London: Williams & Norgate Ltd, 
1996), 17.  First published as The History and Lore of Monsters, 1931.  
82 Rosemarie Garland-Thompson, Staring: How We Look,  (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2009), 7. For a discussion on shaping and directing the gaze into a 
mutual look, see Oliver Sacks, Awakenings,  (Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, 1999).  
83 Thomson also presents the rhetoric of the realistic, which can be used as a way to 
“warn viewers against becoming disabled.” Rosemarie Garland-Thomson, “Seeing the 
Disabled: Visual Rhetorics of Disability in Popular Photography” in The New Disability 
History, Ed. Paul K. Longmore and Lauri Umansky, (New York: New York University 
Press, 2001), 341, 346. 
84 The Disability Rights Movement began in the 1970’s, encouraged by examples of the 
Civil rights movement and women’s rights movements.  The discourse on disability is too 
huge and encompassing to address at this point.  The scholarship that has been completed 
on this topic is integral to understanding both sides of the experience and could 
eventually be applied to further the premise of this study.   
85 Rosemarie Garland-Thompson, Extraordinary Bodies: Figuring Physical Disability in 
American Culture and Literature,  (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997), 10. 
86 Cassuto is referring here to Oliver Sacks. 

 
 
18
 
The display of the marginalized is a characteristic of American exhibitions.87  
Roslyn Poignant writes “The presentation of the exotic ‘other’ in association with the 
anomalous ‘other’ appears to have been much more marked in America than Europe.”88  
John Williams-Searle attributes this to the “uniquely American ideas of democracy” 
because “[t]he freak show helped establish boundaries of social inclusion, allowing 
spectators to quell their status anxieties by gazing at people whose actual bodies had been 
defined as essentially un-American.”89  Susan Stewart suggests that the “freak of nature” 
is actually a “freak of culture,” which implies that there was something distinctly 
American about viewing these types of exhibits as amusement, albeit didactic in form.90  
 
Disabled performers have been seen as reflecting current social and cultural 
climates in much the same way as circulating folklore is said to reflect the same.  Petra 
Küppers, for example, suggests that the disabled performer is “a sign of her times: a point 
in modernity when extraordinary bodies have a currency as lifestyle accessories, when 
any shock or alienation value is eroded by the ubiquity of difference that is consumed and 
repackaged.”91  This study sees the performer as an instantiation of a folk motif, and 
therefore a (usually) familiar subject that acts in much the same way as folklore. 
Circulating folklore, for example, is said to directly reflect current issues occurring in a 
particular society.  
 
Many scholars have noted the absence of pity “as a mode of presentation” in freak 
show type exhibitions, although Garland-Thompson believes that in regard to 
photographs of disabled people, “The rhetoric of sentiment diminishes that [disabled] 
figure to evoke pity, inspiration, and frequent contributions.”92  This absence of pity has 
been seen by some scholars as particularly contradictory.  For example, Tobin Siebers, a 
literary and cultural critic who specializes in disability theory writes: “It is easy to 
                                                
87 Roslyn Poignant cross references “freaks” with “marginalized people” in her index. 
Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle, (London: Yale University 
Press, 2004), 297.  
88 Ibid, 265. 
89 John Williams-Searle, “Cold Charity: Manhood, Brotherhood, and the Transformation 
of Disability, 1870-1900,” in The New Disability History: American Perspectives, ed. 
Paul K. Longmore and Lauri Umansky,  (New York: New York University Press, 2001), 
179. 
90 Susan Stewart, On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, 
the Collection,  (Durham: Duke University Press, 1993), 109. This has also been noted by 
Rosemary Garland Thompson in Extraordinary bodies: Figuring physical disability in 
America culture and literature, (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997). 
91 Petra Küppers, Disability and Contemporary Performance: Bodies on Edge, (New 
York: Routledge, 2003), 3. 
92 Robert Bogdan, Freak Show: Presenting Human Oddities for Amusement and Profit,  
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988), 277; Susan M. Schweik, The Ugly Laws: 
Disability in Public, (New York: New York University Press, 2009), 103; Rosemarie 
Garland-Thomson,  “Seeing the Disabled: Visual Rhetorics of Disability in Popular 
Photography” in The New Disability History, ed. Paul K. Longmore and Lauri Umansky,  
(New York: New York University Press, 2001), 341. 

 
 
19
mythologize disability as an advantage.  Disabled bodies are so unusual and bend the 
rules of representation to such extremes that they must mean something extraordinary.”93  
 
The relationship between freak shows and human abnormalities developed so 
strongly in the nineteenth century, that even people with disabilities who were not on 
display for entertainment or profit were often seen through the lens of the freak show.  
Scholars have commented that the American public, though heterogeneous in many 
ways, was normalized in relation to the abnormal bodies on display. 94   Susan Stewart 
suggests that displays like freak shows “normalize” the viewer as much as they mark the 
freak as an aberration.”95 
 
As Lennard J. Davis notes, the use of the concept “normal,” “normalcy,” 
“normality,” “norm,” “average,” “abnormal”—all entered the European languages rather 
late in human history, and that the “word ‘norm,’ in the modern sense, has only been in 
use since around 1855, and ‘normality’ and ‘normalcy’ appeared in 1849 and 1857 
respectively….[I]t is possible to date the coming into consciousness in English of an idea 
of ‘the norm’ over the period 1840-1860.”96  D.C. Baynton suggests that the modern 
concept of normality came about in the nineteenth century and that during this period 
“…the concept of natural was to a great extent displaced or subsumed by the concept of 
normality.”97  John Williams-Searle writes “Spectators—middle-class gawkers, self-
described rubes, anyone with the price of a ticket—used the sideshow to displace 
anxieties about their own identities, projecting their fears onto an exhibited person with a 
disability and thereby creating and policing the boundaries of normality.98 
 
 
 
 
                                                
93 Tobin Siebers, “Disability in Theory: From Social Constructionism to the New 
Realism of the Body,” American Literary History, Vol. 13: 4, (Winder, 2001). 
94 Foucault often refers to Roman law in his discussion of the monstrous and suggests 
that the law, either civil, canon, or legal, is the very thing that causes a “transgression of 
natural limits.” Foucault later suggests “the difference between disability and monstrosity 
is revealed at the meeting point, the point of friction…Disability may well be something 
that upsets the natural order, but disability is not monstrosity because it has a place in 
civil or canon law.” Michel Foucault, Abnormal: Lectures at the College de France 
1974-1975,  (UK: Verso, 2003), 63-64. 
95Susan Stewart, On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, the 
Collection,  (Durham: Duke University Press, 1993), 109. 
96 Lennard J. Davis,  “Constructing Normalcy: The Bell Curve, the Novel, and the 
Invention of the Disabled Body in the Nineteenth Century” in The Disability Studies 
Reader,  (New York: Routledge, 1997), 3-16. 
97 D.C. Baynton,  “Disability & the Justification of Enequality in American History” in 
New Disability History: American Perspectives, Ed. P. Longmore & L Umansky,  (New 
York: New York University Press, 2001), 35. 
98 John Williams-Searle,  “Cold Charity: Manhood, Brotherhood, and the Transformation 
of Disability, 1870-1900.” in in New Disability History: American Perspectives, ed. P. 
Longmore & L Umansky,  (New York: New York University Press, 2001), 178. 

 
 
20
FREAKERY, THE EXOTIC, AND THE CULTURAL “OTHER” 
 
 
The term freak as a noun stands as a highly charged term that describes, not only 
a disfigured body, but also inevitably one that is tied to display for profit and amusement. 
Leslie Fiedler’s seminal work, Freaks: Myths and Images of the Secret Self, opened the 
door to scholarship on this subject.  Fiedler’s work is particularly related to the premise 
of this study.  Fiedler extensively notes the relationship between freaks and mythology, 
but fails to use folklore scholarship to strengthen his argument.  This study, in a sense, 
takes aspects of Fiedler’s study much further by using an interdisciplinary discourse with 
folklore as the principal tool.  While Fiedler probes the archetypical aspects of the freak, 
this study explores the relationship between particular displays and the audience. 
 
Robert Bogdan’s work on the freak show is significant to this study because he 
explores the context of freakery from the perspective of “presenting human oddities for 
amusement and profit.”99 Bogdan argues that all freaks are an elaborate social 
construction and it was the aggrandized and exotic presentation that created the freak. In 
most cases, unusual individuals from distant lands proved to be the most successful 
exhibits.  Their act could be billed as both unique and exotic—doubling the curiosity 
factor. Poet and literary critic, Susan Stewart writes, “We may find the freak inextricably 
tied to the cultural other...”100  
 
In a move that evokes the biblical stories of Noah’s Ark, P.T. Barnum developed 
the Ethnological Congress of Barbarous and Savage Tribes (1894) and urged American 
consuls, and anthropological institutions, to bring back “a collection, in pairs or 
otherwise, of all the uncivilized races in existence...to astonish, interest and instruct [the 
American public].”101 The exotic spectacle was portrayed as a vestigial entity of a time 
past, and the entrance to this temporal space was often the payment of a coin. Once 
inside, the spectator fell prey to the images inside, and these exoticized individuals were 
often displayed among a group of people with various physical abnormalities.   
 
Barnum’s request for pairs of “uncivilized races” was accompanied by the request 
for “those who possess extraordinary peculiarities such as giants, dwarfs, singular 
disfigurements of the person, dexterity in the use of weapons, dancing, singing, juggling, 
unusual feats of strength or agility etc,”102 and he exhibited  “freaks,”103 “hideous 
tribes,”104 and “100 superstitious, Idolatrous, Pagan-Worshipping Heathens”105 alongside 
those with mental disabilities.  Exhibitions that juxtaposed exotic and disabled individual 
insinuated a forced relationship between mental disability and otherness. Poignant writes, 
“Barnum was not alone in propagating the idea that geographical marginality equated 
                                                
99 Robert Bogdan, Freak Show: Presenting Human Oddities for Amusement and Profit,  
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988). 
100 Susan Stewart, On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, 
the Collection,  (London, 1993), 109. 
101 Roslyn Poignant, Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle,  
(London: Yale University Press, 2004), 87. 
102 Ibid, 58. 
103 Philadelphia Inquirer. Vol. CX, April 2, 1884, 3.  
104 The Sun, Vol. XCIV, Issue 149, May 8, 1884, 1. 
105 The Philadelphia Inquirer, Vol. CX, April 8, 1884, 8. 

 
 
21
with the social marginality of the physically and mentally impaired...Not only were the 
congenitally impaired shown together with the exotic indigenous, the latter were 
described in the language of impairment—as ‘deformed’, with ‘distorted’ features, and 
lacking proper speech.”106 This study takes an alternative, yet parallel approach.  I suggest 
that the reason these exotic individuals were shown alongside those with disabilities was 
not necessarily merely to degrade the former, but because the subject matter resonated 
with the viewer, as folkloric in nature.   Foreigners such as the “Australian cannibals,” the 
“Ferocious Zulus,” the “Extraordinary Todars,” or the “Wild Men of Borneo” were 
advertised as having the “already well-established visual stereotype of cannibal 
savagery.”107 The topic of cannibalism is found throughout the Motif-Index, with over 
117 motifs relating to the topic of cannibals and cannibalism.  
 
Many of these displays correspond to specific motifs, which strengthen the 
premise that it was the familiarity of these motifs that helped to draw in the public. For 
example, The Wild Men of Borneo (Motif G11.1 Cannibal dwarfs), The Australian 
Cannibals (Motif G11.18  Cannibal tribe), or The Extraordinary Todars (Motif G11.14 
Jungle-man as cannibal) all have analogous motifs.108 With the understanding of the 
relationship between display and motif, comes an entirely different perspective to the 
study of humans with abnormalities outside traditional approaches.  
 
Rosemary Garland Thompson uses the exotic as one of her noted aspects of visual 
rhetoric, which  “presents disabled figures as alien, often sensationalized, eroticized, or 
entertaining in their difference.”109  Thompson suggests that self-made ‘freaks’ can 
invoke the exotic mode of representation.  That is, one does not have to be both disabled 
and exotic, but the mere labeling of exotic-ness is enough to deem someone disabled and 
therefore allow the person to be viewed as a disabled figure.110 For Thompson, 
individuals with a physical disability (real or self-made) were alienated (and therefore 
seen as exotic) via presentation, not the other way around.  This study views “freakery” 
as another, visual rhetoric, to use Thompson’s term.  That is, the “exotic other” can be 
presented and seen in the same manner as the disabled without actually having a physical 
abnormality.  This perspective merely places the focus on something other than the 
disability. The usual scholarly approaches to the freak show focuses on the disability of 
the performer first and foremost, and although the subject of disability is still a large and 
                                                
106 See Robert Bogdan, Freak Show: Presenting Human Oddities for Amusement and 
Profit, (Chicago, 1988); Roslyn Poignant, Professional Savages: Captive Lives and 
Western Spectacle,  (London: Yale University Press, 2004), 84. 
107 Roslyn Poignant, Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle,  
(London: Yale University Press, 2004), 265.  
108 Motifs taken from Stith Thompson, Motif-index of folk-literature : a classification of 
narrative elements in folktales, ballads, myths, fables, mediaeval romances, exempla, 
fabliaux, jest-books, and local legends, Revised and enlarged edition, (Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1955-1958). 
109 Rosemarie Garland-Thomson,  “Seeing the Disabled: Visual Rhetorics of Disability in 
Popular Photography” in The New Disability History, ed. Paul K. Longmore and Lauri 
Umansky, (New York: New York University Press, 2001), 341. 
110 Ibid, 358.  

 
 
22
important aspect, this study suggests that there is something else framing and shaping the 
criterion and popularity of the human display for amusement.   
 
AS ETHNOGRAPHIC OBJECT 
 
 
The American Exhibitions, like the Columbian Exposition in Chicago, claimed 
the purpose of the villages was strictly educational.  Animal trainer Carl Hagenbeck was 
considered the originator of exhibiting foreign peoples, and by 1890, one of the principal 
traditions of exhibiting foreign people involved claims of ethnographic authenticity.111 
The science of ethnology was gaining popularity in the mid nineteenth century, and by 
the early 20th century Franz Boas introduced cultural relativism, which consequently 
slowly began to erode these earlier notions of primitive cultures.112   
 
Museum researcher, Paul Greenhalgh, identifies an exact period, 1889-1914, 
when exhibitions all over the world showcased humans, and suggests that, in this era, 
“objects were seen to be less interesting than human beings, and through the medium of 
display, humans were transformed into objects.”113 These nineteenth century American 
displays of lusus naturae were often what Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimlett describes as in 
situ, a notion that “entails metonymy and mimesis: the object is a part that stands in a 
contiguous relation to an absent whole that mayor may not be re-created,” while 
simultaneously attempting to be in context.114  
  
In the same year that Barnum died, 1891, Boas and Putnam began organizing 
anthropological human displays for the upcoming Chicago Exposition.  The resulting 
exposition displayed Native Americans as a “primitive foreign race” while any person of 
color was denied any part in the Fair.115 Fair exhibitions also depicted extraordinary 
individuals as both mundane and sensational.  John Urry explains that the “visual gaze 
renders extraordinary activities that otherwise would be mundane.” For example, 
Kirshenblatt-Gimlett’s book Destination Culture showcases a cartoon from the Chicago 
                                                
111 Curtis M. Hinsley,  “The World as Marketplace: Commodification of the Exotic at the 
World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893,” In Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and 
Politics of Museum Display, (Washington: 1991), 246.  Hinsley notes that in 1878, 
Jacobson toured with the Lapps and in 1880, his tour of Labrador Eskimos all died of 
small pox 
112 Robert Bogdan, Freak Show: Presenting Human Oddities for Amusement and Profit, 
(Chicago, 1988), 177. 
113 Paul Greenhalgh, Ephemeral Vistas: The Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions 
and World’s Fairs, 1851-1939,  (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1988), 82. 
114 Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimlett, Destination Culture: Tourism, Museums, and Heritage,  
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998), 19-21. See also Dean MacCannell, The 
Tourist: A New Theory of the Leisure Class, (New York: Schocken, 1976).  
115 It was not until 1936 that the Texas Centennial built a Hall of Negro Life, but only to 
show that people of color could be a valuable economic resource. Paul Greenhalgh’s  
Ephemeral Vistas: The Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions and World’s Fairs, 
1851-1939, 98, 100 

 
 
23
Sunday Herald, 17 September 1893, which reads “Great Excitement—Indian Lady 
Throwing Out Bathwater.”116  
 
Many scholars who study human exhibitions have noted the public’s familiarity 
with strangeness.  Rosemarie Garland Thomson, for example, writes, “Using imagery and 
symbols managers and promoters knew the public would respond to, they created a 
public identity for the person that was being exhibited that would have the widest appeal, 
and thereby would collect the most dimes.”117 Scholars have yet to identify why the 
public responded to particular images and symbols, and this study addresses this 
question.  
 
AMERICAN FOLKLORISTICS IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY 
 
 
William K. McNeil’s lengthy dissertation entitled “A History of American 
Folklore Scholarship Before 1908” gives insight into some of the earliest examples of 
written folklore.118  McNeil begins with some of the more notable characters of the past, 
including John Josselyn (1638-1675), Increase (1639-1723) and Cotton Mather (1663-
1728), and Meriwether Lewis (1774-1809) and William Clark (1770-1838)—but he does 
so with caution.  McNeil suggests that folklore collections prior to the eighteenth century 
“can be placed in one of two categories: either they were intentional projects made 
haphazardly or systematic efforts that were unintentionally folkloristic,” but the real 
problem, he notes, is that “there was no real theoretical basis underlying the works that 
were produced.”119 The proclaimed lack of a theoretical foundation is not confined to a 
historical past, and has, in fact, been remarked upon well into the 20th century, which 
suggest that the problems noted by McNeil have never really diminished—even after 
nearly 300 years.120  
 
But even with this caveat, McNeil considers much of this early travel literature 
the foundation of current folklore studies.  His uncertainty towards early folklore 
collections wanes at times—asserting that James Adair’s History of American Indians 
                                                
116 Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimlett, Destination Culture: Tourism, Museums, and Heritage,  
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998), 48. 
117 Rosemarie Garland Thomson, ed.  Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary 
Body, 25. 
118 See Pane’s On the Antiquities of the Indians (1496), Josselyn’s New England Rarities 
(1672), and An Account of Two Voyages (1674), Increase Mather’s Essay for the 
Recording of Illustrious Providences (1684), and Cotton Mather’s Magnalia Christi 
Americana (1702). 
119 William K. McNeil, A History of American Folklore Scholarship Before 1908, Vol. 1, 
Dissertation, Indiana University, 1980, 19.  
120 In 1948, Stith Thomson remarks on the relative “amateurish” quality of previous 
collections, and more recently, Alan Dundes commented on the lack of theory and the 
inundation of amateurs into the field.  See Stith Thompson’s “The Future of Folklore 
Research in the United States,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 
93, No. 3, (Jun. 10, 1949) and Alan Dundes’s “Folkloristics in the Twenty-First Century 
(AFS Invited Presidential Plenary Address, 2004)” Journal of American Folklore 
118(470): 385-408. 

 
 
24
(1775) is one of the earliest examples of applied folklore. McNeil also suggests that 
Cotton Mather’s goals and methodology are parallel to those of modern studies of 
tradition, while also reminding us that Mather was no folklorist.121    
 
Because the techniques of early collectors were not necessarily analogous to 
modern methods, it is difficult for present day folklorists to use this material to gain 
insight into the context of the material.  Alan Dundes, for example, believed that early 
folklore was treated as “rare exotica, metaphorically speaking, to have a pin stuck 
through them and mounted in a display archival case such that is almost impossible to 
imagine the folklore items were ever alive.”122 
 
The concern for the vanishing nature of oral traditions in America has been noted 
by Scotsman Hugh Miller in 1835, and with this concern came considerable collections 
of ballads, tales, and folk beliefs.  Even though nineteenth century folklore collections 
contained virtually the same material (except labeled as “popular antiquities” or “popular 
literature”), much of the dialogue takes place after the founding of the American Folklore 
Society in 1888, and on occasion, the conversation begins in 1846 when William John 
Thoms coined the term folklore.  It is not as if American folklore did not exist before this 
term was used— the material simply had a different name.   
 
Scholarship techniques took center stage in the mid nineteenth century, and 
continue to hold the attention of folklore scholars today.  In America, the first Ph.D. in 
anthropology was given from Clark University in 1892, and the first Ph.D. in folklore 
was given in Indiana University in 1953.  With over 60 years in the lead, it is no wonder 
that folklore has paddled in the wake of anthropology for so long. Rosemary Levy 
Zumwalt’s American Folklore Scholarship gives a detailed and lengthy discussion of the 
“schism” between anthropological and literary folklorists.  Her study is rooted in the 
debates and methods of folklore in an academic context (mainly a divide between 
disciplinary approaches) with little commentary on folklore collections before the late 
nineteenth century.    
 
Zumwalt suggests that the divide between anthropological and literary folklorists 
became less apparent as professional folklore took root and argues that professionalism 
and scientism was the eminent cause of the divide (and eventually what closed the 
divide). The argument seems to lie on whether anthropology was considered a legitimate 
scientific discipline rather than whether folklore itself was scientific. As a result, the 
legitimacy of folklore was indirectly at stake merely because of the relationship between 
folklore and anthropology. Zumwalt does not attempt to define what American folklore 
is, but merely limits her discussion to those who studied and resided in the United States. 
By default, American folklore was defined by who was telling it, not necessarily by what 
was being told.123  
                                                
121 William K. McNeil, A History of American Folklore Scholarship Before 1908, Vol. 1, 
Dissertation, Indiana University, 1980, 12.  
122 Alan Dundes “Folkloristics in the Twenty-First Century” (AFS Invited Presidential 
Plenary Address, 2004). 
123 Dorson would argue that American folklore is not independent from European 
folklore, while other scholars might consider particular African-American and Native 
American influences as forming a particularly American folklore.   

 
 
25
 
At the turn of the century the classification of the “folk” was dominating the 
discussion and the American Indian, for example, was no longer considered a legitimate 
topic of study.   The question of who the folk were (marginal vs. inclusive), and whether 
folklore encompassed traditional lifeways or merely verbal art, reflected a time when 
there was a need to place folklore in an academic discipline.  The motives of early 
collectors are often criticized and the fruits of their labor deemed defective. Modern 
scholars frequently ask: Was the collector an “amateur”? Was he prejudiced against 
particular members of society? Did the collector bowdlerize the tales? Was he receiving 
earnings for the materials? The answers were almost invariably yes in regards to early 
American folklore, whereas current scholarship techniques advise that folklore should be 
collected by professional scholars who are trained in their field of study, the collector is 
expected to remain neutral and unprejudiced, the collector should not alter the material in 
any manner (including derogatory remarks), and whether or not to provide compensation, 
or to be compensated for, the collection of folklore is still an ongoing debate. 124 
 
Even by today’s standards, many approaches to analyzing folklore (including 
psychoanalytic and historic-geographic methods) did not come without their share of 
criticism.  In 1948, Stith Thompson suggested that the future of folklore should involve 
three steps; collection, organization, and analysis, although Thompson does not elaborate 
much on his third point regarding the interpretation of folklore.125  The interdisciplinary 
nature of this research employs methodologies and theories from folkoristics as well as 
other disciplines in order to elucidate and demonstrate the significance of folklore in 
society. 126  These displays of lusus naturae existed in much the same way as the oral 
narratives, which were collected during this era, and these “narratives” were “curated” 
and “created” by various impresarios of oddities.  Identifying particular displays as 
instances of active folk motifs, will add to the abundance of nineteenth century folklore 
data, allowing for new methods of interpretation and discovery. 
 
 
 
HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE  
 
 
 
This study is loosely set between 1840 and 1893.  This time frame begins when 
Barnum acquired the American Museum and ends with the World’s Columbian 
Exposition.  In 1830, the average American was sixteen years old, and as a result, popular 
                                                
124 Recent research attempts to set forth studies that are based on geographic boundaries, 
or methods for collection and analysis, and current trends lean towards specific folklore 
theory and independent folklore departments at Universities. For methods on collection, 
see Ruth Finnegan, Oral Tradition and The Verbal Arts: Guide to Research Practices, 
(London: Routledge, 1992). 
125Stith Thompson, “The Future of Folklore Research in the United States,” Proceedings 
of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 93, No. 3, (Jun. 10, 1949), 244. 
126 Dan Ben-Amos, for example, remarks that the use of other discipline’s theoretical 
frameworks is reflection of the low status of Folklore in the University. Dan Ben-Amos,  
“A History of Folklore Studies—Why Do We Need It?  Journal of Folklore Institute, 
Vol. 10, No. 1/2 Special Issue: American Folklore Historiography,  (Jun.-Aug., 1973): 
b117. 

 
 
26
forms of entertainment and amusement often corresponded with “youthful activities.”127 
During the greater part of the nineteenth century, Americans found entertainment in an 
array of amusements such as: theater, gaming, exhibitions, lectures, clubs, and horse 
racing.  Leonard Cassuto believes that “the racially divided American society of the 
1840’s nurtured the freak show which took root and thrived in troubled soil.”128  The 
nineteenth century is often considered to be “a period of significant mobilization against 
working-class profane and disorderly conduct.”129 We can see this in a number of 
instances, including the 1886 Haymarket Labor Riots and the 1894 Pullman Strike,130 
both in Chicago.  In order to show that Chicago had, literally, risen out of the ashes of the 
Great Fire of 1871, and less overtly to show a certain degree of normality had returned to 
the city, the 1893 Columbian Exposition was held in Chicago.131 Although small traveling 
venues held carnivals and sideshows in rural areas, the major metropolitan areas often 
housed the most extravagant and popular exhibition halls, museums, and theaters, which 
exhibited lusus naturae and therefore play a large part in this specific study.   
 
 
During this time, the interest in folklore was widespread and fear of losing oral 
traditions to modernity motivated scholars and others to collect folktales, ballads, and 
folk beliefs. In fact, the original intent of the American Museum, which exhibited 
countless displays of lusus naturae was to “Preserve and Collect,” the exact same impetus 
for the establishment of the American Folklore Society in 1888.132  The nineteenth 
century marked a time when curators, showmen, and scholars found interest in applying 
scientific discoveries to anthropological specimens. During the period of this study, 
exhibitions of lusus naturae grew intensely and reached an apogee in the late nineteenth 
century. It is no coincidence that the Pulitzer Prize winner Robert Bruce Lee’s The 
Launching of Modern American Science 1846-1876 concentrates on a subset of these 
years. During this period, the Smithsonian was founded in 1846, Barnum’s Museum was 
founded in 1841, the American Folklore Society was founded in 1888, the word folklore 
was first coined in 1846, and the use of the term “normality” was first used in the 
                                                
127 Jack Larkin, The Reshaping of Everyday Life: 1790-1840,  (New York: Harper & 
Row, 1988), 11. 
128 Leonard Cassuto, ““What an Object He Would Have Made of Me!”” In Freakery: 
Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary Body, (New York: 1996), 244. 
129 Tina Loo and Carolyn Strange,  “The Traveling Show Menace: Contested Regulation 
in Turn-of-the-Century Ontario,” Law and Society Review (1995), 640.  
130 See Almont Lindsey,  “Paternalism and the Pullman Strike” The American Historical 
Review, 44 (Jan. 1939): 272-289. 
131 But even the Exposition was not free from the turmoil of labor issues and political 
unrest as the mayor of Chicago, Carter Harrison, was murdered in the parlor of his home 
on the closing night of America’s second World’s Fair.  See Edward M Burke, “Lunatics 
and Anarchists: Political Homicide in Chicago,” The Journal of Criminal Law and 
Criminology 92 (Spring - Summer 2002): 792. 
132 Bill Brown asserts “Historians of the American press, though, explain the 
sensationalism of the 1890’s as a response to the craving for excitement that the Civil 
War had provoked…” Bill Brown (The Material Unconscious) takes this from Hazel 
Dicken-Garcia in Journalistic Standards in Nineteenth Century America,  (Madison: 
University of Wisconsin Press, 1989), 90. 

 
 
27
1850s.133 The reason for the popularity and persistence of this type of entertainment can 
be understood by exploring how and why all these factors came to be in approximately 
the same historical time frame, and how this affected the American public’s abundant 
interest in the subject of lusus naturae. 
 
SUMMARY  
 
 
Chapter 2 discusses the use of folklore and introduces the Motif-Index as a major 
source of supplemental evidence showing how particular exhibitions can be seen as 
physical instantiations of folk motifs.  Examples of human displays that correspond with 
various motifs are given at length. This chapter provides the data which is the foundation 
for this study. 
 
Chapter 3 introduces the concept of motif ostension in relation to exhibitions of 
lusus naturae for entertainment and examines the connection between folkloristics and 
the display, marketing, and reception of human exhibitions in nineteenth century 
America.  Showmen are introduced as bearers of tradition and motif ostension is 
discussed in relation to nostalgia and tradition.  The marketing of instantiations of folk 
motifs, including pamphlets and pitches, is shown to parallel folk narrative structure, and 
displays of lusus naturae are discussed in relationship with tourism and semiotics.   
The existence of circulating folklore in literature was a significant factor which 
influenced popular culture and showmen’s choices.  
 
Chapter 4 examines the audience’s position as an active or passive bearer of 
tradition and explores the presentation of lusus naturae from the observer’s perspective.  
The presentation of exhibitions of lusus nature are examined in scientific context, and 
both the audience and performer exist in a liminal space.  Irish lore is discussed as an 
example of intentional motif ostension found within a specific population.  
 
Chapter 5 summarizes why the nineteenth century American public responded to 
exhibitions of lusus naturae with intrigue, repulsion, and fascination.  As manifestations 
of living motifs, displays of lusus naturae function as folklore, and can be used as 
vehicles for expression in this era.  This chapter examines Bascom’s functions of 
folklore, and how the bodies on display existed in the liminal space between reality and 
lore. A discussion of limitations and future suggestions closes the study.  
 
 
                                                
133 Robert V. Bruce, The Launching of Modern American Science, 1846-1876,  (New 
York: Cornell University Press, 1988).  

 
 
28
CHAPTER 2 
 FOLK MOTIFS AND EXHIBITION: DATA 
 
 
THE USE OF FOLKLORE 
 
 
To some degree, promoters, patrons, and the performers themselves were aware 
of the connection between lore and display. Ward Hall, a modern day P.T. Barnum 
writes,  
 
 
People love giants, midgets, and fat people. Because this is the fairy tale.  Jack 
 
Sprat ate no fat, his wife would eat no lean, Jack and the Beanstalk, the little 
 
people of Gulliver’s Travels.  These are stories people have been told when they 
 
were small children.  It’s much easier to sell an attraction that you can paint the 
 
pretty picture about, rather than something gruesome….The world’s smallest 
 
married couple. Why, they’re so tiny, so cute, you’d want to hold them in the 
 
palm of your hand.  It’s much easier to sell the pretty picture.134  
 
Literary critic, Leslie Fiedler writes, “Tom Thumb, Barnum hoped, would evoke in his 
audience childhood memories of the old ballad.  In Arthur’s time, Tom Thumb did live, 
as well as fairy tales starring miniature Giant-killers like..Thumbkin.”135 Fiedler is the 
author of one of the earliest examinations of sideshow otherness.  He uses myths to 
explain parallels or “historical origins” of sideshow displays as if mythological origins, 
particularly Greek mythology, were a necessary precursor to these displays.136  In fact, 
Fiedler suggests Europeans found it especially easy to believe in creatures who had 
prototypes in pre-Christian European mythologies or who resembled monsters.137  
 
Most humans exhibitions did not stand idle on display but exhibited an unusual 
skill—similar to Motif F660 Remarkable Skill.  Dime Museums also used these 
terms……  Stanhope & Epstean’s New Dime Museum in Chicago referred to its four 
floors as “WONDERLAND” and advertised human exhibits such as “The Camel Child,” 
“The Turtle Boy,” and “The Mexican Wild Boy.”138 
                                                
134 Marc Hartzman, American Sideshow: An Encyclopedia of History’s Most Wondrous    
 and Curiously Strange Performers, (New York: Penguin, 2005), 127. 
135 See Leslie Fiedler, Freaks: Myths & Images of the Secret Self, (New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1978), 64. 
136 Even in his more recent works, Fiedler frequently uses the term “myth” when the term 
“legend” would be more appropriate. For example, see “Mythicizing the Unspeakable” 
The Journal of American Folklore, Vol. 103, No. 410 (Oct.-Dec., 1990): 390-39.  
Nonetheless, Freaks, is a valuable work which is rarely referenced by folklorists, even 
though at its core, it is one of the few contemporary examinations that link displays of 
monsters and myth.  
137 Fiedler goes so far to suggest that human malformations preceded and inspired the 
creation of mythic monsters. Leslie Fiedler, Freaks: Myths & Images of the Secret Self, 
(New York: Simon and Schuster, 1978), 238.  
138 Chicago Daily Tribune, May 3, 1885, 6. Original emphasis. 

 
 
29
 
THE TALE- TYPE  
 
 
In order to better understand the various functions and structure of folk narratives, 
scholars have developed various methods of categorizing small units of information.   
Folklorists, in particular, have developed various taxonomies for understanding 
folkloristic morphology.139  In 1910, Antti Aarne published the Tale-Type index 
(Verzeichnis der Märchentypen), a method of categorizing tales in categories such as: 
Animal Tales (1-299), Fairy Tales (300-749), Religious Tales (750-849), Realistic Tales 
(850-999), Tales of the Stupid Ogre, Giant, or Devil (1000-1199), Anecdotes and Jokes 
(1200-1999), and Anecdotes (2000-2399). Stith Thompson revised and translated Aarne’s 
Tale-Type Index into English in 1928, and Hans-Jörg Uther updated the Tale-Type Index 
in 2004.140  
 
Stith Thompson defined the tale-type as “a traditional tale that has an independent 
existence.  It may be told as a complete narrative, and it does not depend for its meaning 
on any other tale.”141  Hasan M. El-Shamy writes, “The term tale-type –a translation of 
the German Märchentypen [sic]—tends to be misleading; it may not be perceived as 
denoting a tale’s kind, sort, or genre.  A tale-type denoted a recurrent narrative typically 
told as a whole and is often found cross-culturally.142  Thompson’s tale types can 
simplistically be described as plots grouped by various topics.143  The obsession over 
finding the origin of a particular version of a tale allowed the tale-type index to be 
become an indispensable tool for comparative analysis, such as Julius Krohn’s historic-
geographic method.144 Because the type or tale-type is categorized by a central plot which 
                                                
139 D.P. Rotunda, Motif-Index of the Italian Novella in Prose, Publications Folklore 
Series, No. 2, (Bloomington: Indiana University, 1924); J. Childers, Motif-Index of the 
Cuentos of Juan de Timoneda, No. 5, (Bloomingon: Indiana University Publications 
Folklore Series, 1948); and J.E. Keller, Motif-Index of Mediaeval Spanish Exempla, 
(Knoxville: The University of Tennessee Press, 1949).  In John E. Keller, “The Motif-
Index,” South Atlantic Bulletin, Vol. 17, No. 2, (Nov., 1951), 1, 6, 7.  
140 The motifs in Stith Thompson’s revised index are referred to as AT motifs (or Aa-Th) 
and motifs in Uther’s current revision are referred to as ATU motifs. See The Types of 
International Folktales: A Classification and Bibliography. Based on the system of Antti 
Aarne and Stith Thompson, FF Communications no. 284–286, (Helsinki: Suomalainen 
Tiedeakatemia), 2004. Three volumes; Antti Aarne, The Types of the Folktale: A 
Classification and Bibliography, The Finnish Academy of Science and Letters, Helsinki, 
1961. 
141 Stith Thompson, The Folktale, (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1946), 415. 
142 El-Shamy, Hasan M.,  “Psychologically-Based Criteria for Classification by Motif and 
Tale Type,” Journal of Folklore Research, Vol. 34, No. 3 (Sept. – Dec., 1997): 234. 
143 The groups are now represented as: Animal tales; Fairy Tales; Religious Tales; 
Realistic Tales, or Novelles; Tales of the Stupid Ogre, Giant, or Devil; Anecdotes and 
Jokes; and Formula Tales.  Note that these groups are further subdivided.   
144 Also referred to as “the comparative method or, especially outside the United States, 
the historical-geographic method, the Finnish method, and the typological method.” from 
Thomas A. Green, Folklore: an Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, Tales, Music, and Art, 

 
 
30
may contain several key elements (such as protagonist, action, or object), it has been 
criticized for its vagueness.  Vladimir Propp, for example, “finds fault with ambiguities 
and overlaps in Aarne’s index, making classification by type arbitrary and subjective… 
Like Propp, Dundes points out the ambiguity and arbitrariness inherent in the Tale Type 
Index, stating that classifying tales according to types is based upon “the subjective 
evaluation stable.”145 Uther suggests the main criticisms of tale-types are: 1) imprecision 
in the definition of motif and type; 2) the introduction of too many oiko types with 
minimal variants; 3) a one-sided orientation toward Europe; 4) insufficient integration of 
the available indices; 5) an exclusive orientation toward traditional genres, with no 
consideration of minor forms. In connection with the last point it is often pointed out that 
classification into types and into groups like animal tales, ordinary folktales, jokes and 
anecdotes, and formula tales would be quite different if done with regard to function.146 
 
 
THE MOTIF 
 
 
In 1955, Stith Thompson, expanded Aarne’s Tale Type Index and created the 
Motif-Index, a collection of motifs from a variety of narratives, compiled into 6 separate 
volumes.147  The motif is defined by Thompson as “the smallest element in a tale having a 
power to persist in tradition,” and he differentiates three classes of motifs: actors, items, 
and incidents.148 Although the motif can be seen as a smaller more specific (and 
memorable) aspect of a tale-type, the differences in tale-types and motifs can sometimes 
be indistinguishable. Several motifs strung together can produce a familiar tale-type, but 
when a tale-type consists of only one motif, scholars have noted the problem of 
distinguishing one from another. For example, some animal tales, jokes, and anecdotes 
are tale-types which consist of one motif. Thompson devised his numbering system to be 
“remotely similar to that used by the Library of Congress, so that the Index can be 
indefinitely expanded at any point.”149  
                                                                                                                                            
(Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 1997), 443.  
145 Robert A. Georges, “The Centrality in Folkloristics of Motif and Tale Type,” Journal 
of Folklore Research, Vol. 34, No. 3 (Sept.-Dec., 1997): 204. 
146 Hans-Jörg Uther, “Type- and Motif-Indices 1980-1995: An Inventory,” Asian 
Folklore Studies, Vol. 55, No. 2 (1996): 299-317.  
147 Expanded by Hans-Jörg Uther in 2004, the classification now reads as ATU. Stith 
Thompson, The Folktale,  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977), 415. See also 
Maria Leach, Ed.  “Type.” in Standard Dictionary of Folklore Mythology and Legend.  
(New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1950), 1137. Before the inception of Thompson’s motifs, 
Richard Dorson first began comparing “folklore themes” in American legends such as 
Davy Crockett. See Dan Ben-Amos, “The Historical Folklore of Richard M. Dorson,” 
Journal of Folklore Research, Vol. 26. No. 1, Special Issue: Richard M. Dorson’s Views 
and Works: An Assessment (Jan.-Apr., 1989): 55. 
148 Stith Thompson, The Folktale,  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977), 415. 
149 Ibid, 425. 

 
 
31
 
Even Thompson, the creator the motif index “admits to the impressionistic nature 
of the construct motif and arbitrariness of identifying and classifying narrative motifs.”150  
Hasan El-Shamy suggests that the tale-type and motif are “like yard/inch or pound/ounce, 
inseparable units of measurement and data identification.  Although both are applied 
mainly to folk-narrative, the concept of motif has greater potential of application to a 
broader spectrum of culture and society.”151  Dundes states “one of the key differences 
between a motif and a tale type is that all versions of a tale type are assumed to be 
genetically related, that is, they are assumed to be cognate, whereas all narratives listed 
under a motif heading may or may not be related.” Dan Ben Amos suggests that the motif 
is a minimal narrative, and primarily a tool for managing the study of the Ur-form.152 
 
Thompson defines the Motif-index of folk-literature as “a classification of 
narrative elements in folktales, ballads, myths, fables, mediaeval romances, exempla, 
fabliaux, jest-books, and local legends.”153 Thompson explains that the  
 
 
ideal was to bring together narrative elements from as many different fields of 
 
traditional fiction as possible.  Tales and myths from primitive peoples 
 
everywhere, European and Oriental stories and ballads, local and explanatory 
 
legends, the well-known mythological cycles…The Motif-Index thus attempts to 
 
bring together material from everywhere and arrange it by a logical system.  It 
 
makes no assumption that items listed next to each other have any genetic 
 
relationship, but only that they belong in neighboring logical categories. The 
 
classification is for the practical purpose of arranging and assorting narrative 
 
material so that it can be easily found.154 
 
 
 
A motif must be something unusual or striking.  It is not enough to give a motif of 
“buttocks” “person” or “throne” But instead, speaking buttocks, extremely old person, or 
magic throne.  There must be something remarkable about a motif that allows it to 
persist. The motif is more valuable than a tale-type for organizing, classifying, and 
understanding the nature of early American displays as amusement because most motifs 
are categorized by the dramatis personae. 
                                                
150 Robert A. Georges,  “The Centrality in Folkloristics of Motif and Tale Type,” Journal 
of Folklore Research, Vol. 34, No. 3 (Sept.-Dec., 1997): 205. 
151 Hasan M. El-Shamy,  “Psychologically-Based Criteria for Classification by Motif and 
Tale Type,” Journal of Folklore Research,  Vol. 34, No. 3 (Sept. – Dec., 11997): 235. 
152Alan Dundes,  “The Motif-Index and the Tale Type Index: A Critique,” Journal of 
Folklore Research, Vol. 34, No. 3 (Sep. - Dec., 1997): 197. See Dan Ben-Amos, “The 
Concept of Motif in Folklore” in Folklore Studies in the  Twentieth Century: Proceedings 
of the Centenary Conference of the Folklore Society,  ed. Venetia J. Newall, (Great 
Britian: St. Edmundsbury Press, 1980). 
153 Full title of Stith Thompson, Motif-index of folk-literature : a classification of 
narrative elements in folktales, ballads, myths, fables, mediaeval romances, exempla, 
fabliaux, jest-books, and local legends. Revised and enlarged edition, (Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press, 1955-1958). 
154 Stith Thompson, The Folktale,  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977), 423-
424. 

 
 
32
  
The Motif-Index is also not without criticisms and concerns. Folklorist Alan 
Dundes points out the major arguments—the Eurocentrism of the data, the overlapping 
nature of the motifs, the focus on the protagonist rather than function, and censorship.155 
Structuralist Vladimir Propp criticized the motif index for ignoring the actions which 
often drive the tales.156 While these concerns are all valid, they do not hinder the 
usefulness of motifs in this study for the following reasons. Thompson’s entire collection 
is based primarily on European narrative, but the prevalence of similar motifs in 
American exhibitions simply reinforces the notion that patrons (such as European 
immigrants) were drawn to particularly European motifs.157 Also, the overlapping nature 
of motifs reinforces the importance of these topics (eg. cannibalism, savage tribes) to the 
American public.  The focus on the protagonist makes the Motif Index particularly useful 
for exposing visual snapshots of popular extraordinary beings on display in early 
America.  
 
Thompson does not deny the overlapping nature of motifs and tale-types, yet he 
does not see it as a problem. Robert A. Georges explains that “experiences and events are 
noteworthy when they contrast with the usual, expected, or predictable and stimulate 
creative conceptualization as a consequence,” and it is these noteworthy events that make 
people want to repeat and retell the “story.”158 The notion of the unusual, unexpected, and 
therefore, memorable event, makes the motif index an exceptional source for identifying 
elements of a folk narrative that the public finds worth remembering (or repeating).   
Also, the focus on the dramatis persona is particularly useful in this study, because it is 
not necessarily the action that is of importance, but rather the character.  In fact, motifs 
which correspond to lusus naturae on display do not usually include an action.  
 
Uther lists numerous contemporary international indices, which could compliment 
Thompson’s Motif Index, as Thompson’s motif-index remains at the crux to most 
contemporary indices.  Uther writes, “New type- and motif-indices that document 
European narrative material continue existing indices, provide amendments, or identify 
                                                
155 Dundes give extensive examples of the debates including criticisms by János Honti, 
Anna Birgitta Rooth, Bengt Holbek, Vladimir Propp, and Gerson Legman. See  Alan 
Dundes, Alan, “The Motif-Index and the Tale Type Index: A Critique,” Journal of 
Folklore Research, Vol. 34, No. 3 (Sep. - Dec., 1997): 196. Regardless of their concerns, 
Dundes, among other prominent folklorists, believed that the “the six-volume Motif-
Index of Folk Literature and the Aarne-Thompson tale type index constitute two of the 
most valuable tools in the professional folklorist’s arsenal of aids for analysis.” Hans-
Jörg Uther, Asian Folklore Studies, Vol. 55, No. 2 (1996): 299-317.  
156 Propp, in turn, analyzed tales based on his 31 functions, a much smaller group than the 
thousands of motifs, although, Propp was also criticized for ignoring the oral aspect of 
the tales (e.g. verbal cues, tone) Vladimir Propp, Morphology of the Folktale,  (Texas: 
University of Texas Press, 1968).  
157 Thompson focuses on Irish, Icelandic, Italian, French Spanish, British, African, West 
Indian and American folktales 
158 Robert A. Georges, “The Centrality in Folkloristics of Motif and Tale Type,” Journal 
of Folklore Research, Vol. 34, No. 3 (Sept.-Dec., 1997): 206.  See also Robert A. 
Georges, “The Universality of the Tale-Type as Concept and Construct,” Western 
Folklore, Vol. 42, No. 1 (Jan., 1983): 21-28.  

 
 
33
new genres.”159 Because it would be nearly impossible to compare motifs across these 
various indices, this study remains rooted in Thompson’s seminal work.  However, the 
examination of various international motif indices could prove quite interesting for 
exploring specific ethnic and cultural interest in particular exhibitions.  
 
This chapter examines the association between folk narratives and early American 
attractions by viewing exhibits as physical instantiations of folklore motifs as previously 
defined. The focus on motifs, rather than tale-types, is imperative because early 
American exhibits often closely resembled folk motifs, not merely by possessing qualities 
of a particular motif, but also in function.  Exhibitions that featured recognizable motifs 
were often the most successful. The connections between folklore and displays of lusus 
naturae are numerous to say the least.  Whenever a human was on display, the focus was 
placed on the narrative which surrounded the display (such as the pamphlets, 
descriptions, photographs, and information provided by the lecturer), but when there was 
a material object on display, the focus was on the object itself.  As a result, for living 
exhibitions, the narrative became a critical part of the display.  
 
My purpose is not to say that only those familiar with a particular motif may have 
found it interesting, but instead to present the possibility that the majority of the paying 
public had an affinity for motifs that featured remarkable beings, even if they were not 
familiar with a corresponding narrative. The objective is not to assert that all motifs are 
accounted for in Thompson’s motif-index, or that all American exhibitions have an 
analogous counterpart in the motif-index.  The real objective is to show that there is a 
connection between lore and display in nineteenth century American amusement.160  This 
study shows there are literally hundreds of corresponding human exhibits that parallel 
specific motifs (See Appendix). For example, Motif F511.1.3 Person with animal face 
and the exhibition of Julia Pastrana; Motif F516.1 Armless people and Charles Tripp, the 
“armless wonder”; Motif F521.1 Man covered with hair like animal- and Jo-Jo the Dog 
Faced Boy; Motif F535 Pygmy. Remarkably small man, and General Tom Thumb; Motif 
F551 Remarkable Feet and Fanny Mills the Ohio Big Foot Girl; Motif F517.1.5 Person 
with Knees Backwards and Ella Harper, the Camel Girl. 
 
The object/human on display could be alive or dead, but it exists in our reality, 
rather than in another time or place—a crucial element in drawing in the crowds. Barnum 
advertised his exhibitions as being “real” and “living” as if to tap into the public desire to 
experience fairytales and stories of wonder.  For example, an advertisement in the March 
9,,1864 issue of the New York Times promotes, “The Splendid New Drama—with its 
gorgeous scenery, brilliant costumes, illuminated fountains, with real water, living 
fairies….The Giants, Dwarfs and multitudes of other living novelties will also contribute 
to the amusement of the crowds.”161 The instantiations of various folk motifs allowed the 
viewer to experience folklore with the price of a ticket.  
                                                
159 Uther is critical of many of these new indices, but remarks that importance of these 
indices to further the study of narrative studies. Hans-Jörg Uther,  “Type- and Motif-
Indices 1980-1995: An Inventory,” Asian Folklore Studies, Vol. 55, No. 2 (1996): 307-
308.  
160 One could take this premise to another level by exploring contemporary lore and 
display to see if this phenomenon still occurs and why.  
161 My emphasis. 

 
 
34
 
The majority of this chapter is based in Appendix 1 as an extensive listing of 
various motifs and corresponding exhibits.  In order to give context to the notion of 
exhibits as instantiations of folk motifs, a few of the most popular exhibits will be 
elaborated on. Because the purpose is to show parallels between popular folk motifs and 
exhibitions of lusus naturae, the following section is organized and labeled by the 
exhibit’s specific characteristic, usually physical.  
 
DISPLAYS AS INSTANTIATIONS OF FOLK MOTIFS 
 
CONJOINED TWINS 
 
 
Perhaps one of the most infamous and successful display of lusus naturae would 
be Chang and Eng (May 11, 1811-January 17, 1874), the original ‘Siamese Twins.’ Born 
in Siam (now Thailand), King Rama II sentenced them to death out of fear that they were 
an omen of disaster.162  But after a lack of adversity, they were no longer deemed harmful 
and were allowed to live and eventually came to America (1829) to exhibit their bodies 
for money.  They were exhibited throughout the United States from about 1824-1839 and 
again, with their children, in 1860. It is important to note that the term “Siamese Twin” is 
documented in the motif index, which means that Chang and Eng were an obvious 
reference to Thompson when he labeled the material.  The exhibition of conjoined twins 
can be seen as a physical instantiation of Thompson’s Motif F523 Two persons with 
bodies joined Siamese twins.163 Conjoined twins were seen as lusus naturae, and therefore 
as an aspect of nature that was intriguing.  Many of these exhibits were prefaced by terms 
like “wonderful” and “amazing” in advertisements, heralding a similarity to wonder tales 
and folk narratives.  
 
For example, one of the earliest newspaper advertisements reads “Wonderful 
Production of Nature.  The Siamese Twins, for a Few Days Only.”164 The conjoined “St. 
Benoit Twins” were also billed as “wonderful,” and they were only seven months old 
when they were exhibited at the New York Aquarium in 1878.165  Another newspaper 
advertisement reads “the St. Benoit twins have proved such an attraction to the medical 
profession that they will be continued on exhibition until the interest abates.”166  The 
interest in the twins abated, but not in folklore, because 8 months later the New York 
Aquarium replaced the St. Benoit Twins with the “overwhelming success of Little Red 
Riding Hood.”167  
 
Conjoined twins, as well as most exhibits of humans with abnormalities, were 
billed as both flawed and perfect.  The infant St. Benoit twins were also said to be “both 
                                                
162 King Rama II’s full name is Phra Bat Somdet Phra Poramenthramaha Isarasundhorn 
Phra Buddha Loetla Nabhalai.  He ruled from 1809-1824.  
163 Motif F523 is listed in Thompson’s Motif-Index as an Irish Myth.  
164 My emphasis. Baltimore Patriot, Volume XXXVII April 26, 1831, 3.  
165 Amusements, New York Times, June 23, 1878, 7.  
166 Amusements, New York Times, July 21, 1878.  
167 The Benoit Twins were then exhibited at G.B. Bunnell’s American Museum of 
“Famous Curiosities.” Classified Ad-No title, New York Times, February 23, 1879, 11. 

 
 
35
pretty little babies, not the dwarfed and puny creatures that are usually exhibited.”168  
Another advertisement reads “The Siamese Twins Outdone…There are now on 
exhibition in New York, a couple of Virginia born twin mulatto children, perfectly 
formed and united together…forming a continuity of surface and flesh, one 
individual…Their limbs, backs, heads, eyes and features of each are prefect, and even 
beautiful.”169 Other conjoined twins were advertised in comparison to Chang and Eng 
with headlines such as “An Amazing Freak of Nature” in the New Orleans Bee, followed 
by a description of a “pair of twins…far more extraordinary and interesting than that of 
the Siamese Twins…They will no doubt be visited by thousands, and will be a special 
object of investigation to the medical faculty.”170  Sometimes conjoined twins were billed 
as a single entity, like Millie-Christine who was billed as “The Double-Headed Woman,” 
which parallels motifs T551.2 Child born with two heads, F511.0.2.1 Two-headed 
person, and F511.0.2 person with more than one head. 
 
Similar motifs were also successfully exhibited, such as Motif F516 Person 
unusual to his arms and F516.2 People with many arms when a child with two bodies and 
three arms was on exhibition in New York in 1858.171  By February 1879, the twins were 
displayed at G.B. Bunnell’s American Museum as “The Two-Headed Child” as 
“attractive novelties” and “rare wonders.”172 Conjoined twins were highly coveted by 
showmen who were eager to market these individuals as fascinating lusus naturae. 
 
WILD HAIRY PEOPLE 
 
 
 
Wild, hairy, and animal-like people are a staple in Thompson’s Motif-Index.  
Fiedler writes “Sometimes furry Freaks are called by such mythological names as the 
“Wild Man of Borneo” or the “Missing Link.”173 Although the interest in exotic living 
curiosities from overseas occurred in the early 1840s, it was the influential arrival of 
Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species (1859), which aroused a certain interest in the quest 
to find the “missing link.” By the 1870s, it was not unusual to find newspaper articles 
exclaiming headlines such as,  “The Lowest Type of Humanity,” and in this instance, the 
article resumes,  
 
 
On the island of Borneo has been found a certain race of wild creatures…They are 
dark, wrinkled, and hairy.  They construct no habitation, form no families, 
scarcely associate together, sleep in caves and trees, feed on snakes and vermin, 
on ants, eggs, and on each other…They turn up a human face to gaze at their 
                                                
168 “The Siamese Twins Outdone,” New York Times, June 23, 1878, 7.  Apparently this 
headline was quite popular as it was used in 1835, 1870, 1874, 1878, and 1882.  
169 “The Siamese Twins Outdone,” New Hampshire Sentinel, Vol. XXXVII, Issue 46, 
November 12, 1835, 4.  
170 “An Amazing Freak of Nature,” Barre Patriot, Vol X, Issue 37, March 24, 1854, 1.  
171 “News and other Items,” The Pittsfield Sun, Volume LIX, Issue 3036: 3, November 
25, 1858. 
172 New York Times, February 27, 1879, 7.   
173 Even with Fiedler’s misleading use of the term “mythological” he notices there is 
folklore involved. 

 
 
36
captors, and females show instincts of modesty; and, in fine these wretched beings 
are men.174  
 
 
The Motif F567 Wild man. Man lives alone in wood like beast resonates. The wild 
creature is not only wild, but “scarcely associates” with other creatures.  In every instance 
of monstrosity and display, the fact that the monster exhibits human features is the 
ultimate determining factor in distinguishing whether these beings are men. Not only 
were “Wild Men” exhibited as amusement, but they also made headlines such as “A late 
Haverhill paper gives the following wonderful account of a wild man of the woods, 
caught last week in that town.”175 
 
William Henry Johnson, who was also known as “Zip the What is it,” “Missing 
Link,” and “Man Monkey,” was also considered to be half human.  His medical 
condition, microcephaly, affected his appearance, resulting in a reduced head 
circumference. Johnson’s appearance was significantly altered so that he traversed into 
the animal world, “[Barnum] had his head shaved—except for a small tuft of hair on 
top—and dressed him in a furry suit to promote the Missing Link concept.”176  The 
Illustrated Catalogue and Guide Book to Barnum’s American Museum gives the 
following description: 
 
What is it?—A very singular creature, possessing alike the features and 
characteristics of both man and brute.  He was found in the interior of Africa in a 
perfectly natural state, roving about like a monkey or Orang Outang.  He was 
captured with great difficulty, and brought to this country, where he has been 
exhibited over a year without the least abatement in the public interest.  While his 
face, hands, and arms are distinctly human, his head, feet and legs are more like 
the Orang Outang, indicating his mixed ancestry.”177 
 
 
Because he was not covered in hair, or did not exhibit obvious animal-like 
features, his appearance was distorted just enough to make him an enigma, while at the 
same time suggesting a familiar narrative. As in most folk motifs, a human quality, 
usually physical, is often present in “monsters.”  The orangutan is also often billed as 
“The Wild Man of the Woods” as the origin of the word derives from the Malay words 
“orang” which means human and “hutan” which means forest, thus translating into man 
of the woods. This description is often taken literally when making compelling 
headlines.178 “[W]hen brought here at first [the What is it?] refused all food except raw 
                                                
174 Chicago Tribune, May 17, 1872, 3. 
175 “Haverhill Mr. Frink,” New Hampshire Gazette, Vol. LXXI, Issue 40: 4, August 22, 
1826.  
 
176 Marc Hartzman, American Sideshow: An Encyclopedia of History’s Most Wondrous 
and Curiously Strange Performers, (New York: Penguin, 2005), 49. James Cook, Arts of 
Deception, (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001). 
177 Phineas T. Barnum, An Illustrated Catalogue and Guide Book to Barnum’s American 
Museum, (New York: Wynkoop, Hallenbeck and Thomas, 1860). 
178 “Miscellany from the Table Book,” Salem Gazette, Vol. X, Issue 33: 1, April 24, 
1832.   

 
 
37
meat.  Now it will eat fruit, cakes and almost any article of food eaten by human beings 
but prefers flesh dressed very rare” and the New York Herald states that “it was captured 
by a party of adventurers” and it was “the only survivor [of three captured oddities].”179 
 
The profuse occurrence of cannibalism in the motif index is rivaled by the 
implication of cannibalism by “savage” humans on exhibit. The popularity of tales 
containing motifs of cannibals is evident as there are over 100 motifs relating to cannibals 
in the motif index (G10-G100). Equally, the “wild men” on display are often touted as 
being cannibals.  For example, The Wild Men of Borneo, The Australian, and The 
Extraordinary Todars were all marketed as cannibals, which are related to motifs such as 
G11.18 Cannibal tribe, and G11.14 Jungle-man as cannibal. Advertisements often 
sensationalized these exhibits with headlines such as “A Tribe of Male and Female 
Australian Cannibals…Gorge Themselves Upon Each other’s Flesh.” 
 
 
The Wild Men of Borneo, were sometimes billed as cannibals, Waino and 
Pelutano, or the “Little” Wild Men of Borneo and they were known as “one of the best 
side-shows in the country and reported to be valued by their owner, Mr. Warrer, of 
Weston, Mass., at $50,000.”180 These exhibitions also related to Motif G11.1 Cannibal 
dwarfs and F529.8 Monkey-like little people.181    “Little” wild people were also exhibited 
with much success, such as The “What Is It?” which was advertised as standing about 4 
feet high and weighing 50 pounds.182  The Illustrated Catalogue and Guide Book to 
Barnum’s American Museum advertises “The Two Living Aztec Children” with great 
detail.183 In 1852, “The Aztecs” were on display in New York, with an advertisement 
detailing “These curious little people from central America, scarce two feet in hight [sic], 
weighing only 37 pounds—one 10, the other 17 years of age—heretofore deemed 
fabulous or extinct—unseen by civilized nations, and unequaled as living curiosities of a 
pigmy race, for size, form, and character..” The Aztec Children were also questionably 
advertised as “Aztec Pigmies.”184  Evidence of the awareness between exhibitions of 
lusus naturae and familiar motifs is revealed when a writer in the (1852) New York Daily 
Times refers to the “Aztec Children” as “little elves” but notes that “they are human 
beings and they are not freaks of nature, but specimens of a dwindled, minnikin race, who 
almost realize in bodily form our idea of the ‘brownies,’ ‘bogles,’ and other fanciful 
creations of a more superstitious age.”185  The evidence exposing the public’s association 
with lore and display continues as one writer describes the Aztec Children, “To me these 
tiny fairies in human form seem as inexplicable as did the “weird Sisters” to Banquo and 
                                                
179 “What Is It?,” New York Tribune, March 1, 1860.   
180 Miscellaneous, Chicago Daily Tribune, December 16, 1873, 2.  
181 Also related, Motif B600 Marriage of person to animal, Percilla Lauther Bejano (also 
known as “The Hairy Girl” or “The Monkey Girl”) and husband Emmitt Bejano (“The 
Alligator-Skinned Man”) often billed themselves as “The World’s Strangest Married 
Couple.” See Francine Hornberger, Carny Folk, (New York: Citadel Press Books, 2005), 
196. 
182 “What Is It?,” New York Herald,  March 19, 1860.   
183 Phineas T. Barnum, An Illustrated Catalogue and Guide Book to Barnum’s American 
Museum, (New York: Wynkoop, Hallenbeck and Thomas, 1860). 
184 “The Aztec Children,” New York Daily Times, Jan 31, 1852, 4.  
185 My emphasis. 

 
 
38
Macbeth, and like the latter, I can only say, as I behold them,” Speak, if you can, what are 
you.”186 The Wild Men were also said to have “long, sharp teeth” (Motif G88 Cannibal 
has long tooth and long nail, Motif F544.3.5 Remarkably long teeth) 
 
One of the most popular sideshow acts involved the “geek,” who was usually a 
person without any physical or psychological disability (often a drunk) in desperate need 
of money, and who could subsequently be convinced to eat live chickens, dogs, or other 
small animals.187  The geek act was remarkably popular, and can be seen as a symbolic 
depiction of civilized man turned savage. This act played upon the spectator’s fear and 
fascination regarding the ability to cross the boundary of civilization and enter the world 
of savages. The spectator aspired to see the savage become assimilated, and the spectacle 
also allowed the viewer to feel mentally and physically superior to the “actor.” Geeks 
were also depicted as feral and animalistic, yet they were not usually dressed as animals.  
Instead, geeks were usually dressed in average, often tattered clothes and acted as wild 
animals. Geeks also were also similar to motifs and “sometimes [Geeks] reenact the roles 
attributed to those mythological beings, biting off the heads of living chickens or rats and 
bolting them down raw, like Singh’s Amala and Kamala.”188  
 
Pitchmen often used motifs and folk narrative patterns to shape their speeches.  
During a preconference session at the 1981 Georgetown University Round Table on 
Languages and Linguistics conference, Fred “Doc” Bloodgood, considered one of the last 
living medicine show pitchman, gave a presentation of one of his sideshow pitches 
originally recorded in 1928.  A transcript of his presentation recounts his description of 
Neola, a “strange and curious animal that lived in the center of a deep dark cave.”  Doc 
Bloodgood continues to describe her eyes that “glare just like two red-hot coals of fire” 
and that the shape of her head “tapers at the top just like that of a coconut….she doesn’t 
speak any language.  Doesn’t know any creed.  Neither walks nor talks, just creeps and 
crawls…”189 There are several motifs found in Bloodgood’s pitch, such as Motif F541.1.3 
Eyes of live coals,190 F512ff Person Unusual as to his eyes, T585.5.1 Child born with 
hairy mane, F521.1.1 Woman with animal hair, F511.1.3 Person with animal face, 521.1 
Man covered with hair like animal, and F511.1.3.1 Person with face of ape.191   
 
Because families were often brought to America to be displayed in groups, it was 
convenient to advertise them as cannibal tribes.192 The goal (for those like Barnum) was 
to show a recreation of a ‘typical’ cannibal (or billed likewise) village. Families and 
                                                
186 My emphasis.  “The Aztec Children,” New York Daily Times, 4, Jan 31, 1852.  
187 “The word is reputed to have originated with a man named Wagner of Charleston, 
Virginia, whose hideous snake-eating act made him famous.” (Maurer 1931:331) 
 
188 Leslie Fiedler, Freaks: Myths & Images of the Secret Self,  (New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1978), 162.  
189 Fred ‘Doc” Bloodgood,  “The Medicine and Sideshow Pitches,” In Analyzing 
Discourse: Text and Talk by Deborah Tannen,  (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown 
University Press, 1982), 381. 
190 R. Kleinere Schriften Köhler, ed. J. Bolte, 3 vols, (Weimar: E. Felber, 1898-1900), 
403. 
191 These motifs also parallel Lionel the Lion Faced Man and Jo Jo the Dog Faced boy. 
192 Roslyn Poignant, Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle,  
(London: Yale University Press, 2004), 10. 

 
 
39
villages averaging from 50-200 people would be transported to these exhibition villages, 
given food and clothes, and would live for six months on the site of the exposition.193 The 
display of the Dahomeyan Villagers in the Columbian Exposition (1893) was one of the 
largest groups to be transplanted to the United States and displayed as “savages.” The 
success of wild tribes of men became so popular, that many of the “savages” were 
simply, “[l]ocals dressed in outrageous costumes and portrayed as authentic 
representatives of exotic non-Western tribes.”194  
 
Beginning in 1882, Barnum began organizing what would become the 
Ethnological Congress of Savage and Barbarous Tribes. Barnum wrote to various 
American consulates around the world, “Dear Sir, I desire to carry out as far as possible 
an idea I have entertained, of forming a collection, in pairs or otherwise of all the 
uncivilized races in existance [sic] …My aim is to exhibit to the American public not 
only human beings of different races, but also, when practicable, those who possess 
extraordinary peculiarities, such as giants, dwarfs, singular disfigurements of the 
person…In any case a group of 3 to 6 or even 10 would be as novel….inanimate objects I 
do not desire.”195  Barnum’s Congress featured a plethora of “wild” and “savage” people 
such as the “Barbarians from the Woods of Papau,” “Cannibals from Australian Tribes,” 
and “Warlike Afghans from the Hindu Kush.”196  Individuals were transformed by 
showmen and marketed as savage, animal-like, cannibals, with the intention of enticing 
patrons with familiar lore.  
 
  
GIANTS 
 
 
Extremely tall people were often exhibited in ways that would evoke familiar 
narratives of giants into the minds of the paying public. Advertisements almost always 
treated these ‘giants’ as real manifestations of motif F531 Giant.  Also related, ogres are 
classified in the motif index comprising over 500 motifs (G10-G699) including G10-G99 
Cannibals and Cannibalism; G100-G199 Giant Ogres.  As if to reinforce the notion that 
giants, as in fairytales and legends, exist among us, they were usually marketed with a 
sobriquet related to a genuine geographical origin. There were “French Giants,”197 the 
“American Giantess,”198 Noah Orr, the Ohio Giant, Anna Swan the Nova Scotia Giantess, 
                                                
193 Paul Greenhalgh, Ephemeral Vistas: The Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions 
and World’s Fairs, 1851-1939,  (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1988), 83. 
194 Robert Bogdan, Freak Show: Presenting Human Oddities for Amusement and Profit, 
(Chicago, 1988), 176. 
195 Letter in Permanent Administrative Files, Smithsonian Institution Archives, In  
Roslyn Poignant, Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle,  (London 
2004), 58. 
196 Frank Leslie’s Illustrated Newspaper, Issue 1, 544, Saturday, April 25, 1885. The 
Congress was described as “The Zulus, Nubians, and New-Zealand cannibals are now 
travelling around the United States, and the Hottentot, Malay, and Bushmen 
representatives will soon arrive. The Island of Borneo will be represented by the famous 
wild man.” “Women with Wooden Lips,” New York Times, October 7, 1883, 3. 
197 “Amusements this evening,” New York Times, January 4, 1864, 4.  
198 Exhibited at Barnum’s Museum, New York Daily Times, March 19, 1855, 8.   

 
 
40
Andrew Harsen, the Norwegian giant,199 the “Maine Giantess,”200 and the “Arab Giant.”201  
Sometimes age became the emphasis and giants were marketed as “infant giants”202 or 
“giant boys and girls.”203  A newspaper advertisement titled “A Gigantic Marriage” 
illustrates the wedding of a giant and giantess and discusses these individuals as if they 
were truly manifestations of familiar lore, “Giants are known to be weak, especially in 
the knees; and from the days of Polyphemus they have always been very susceptible of the 
tender passion.  But poor Polyphemus could cast but a single sheep’s eye, and couldn’t 
find anybody taller than Galatea upon whom to cast it.  Our giant who was this morning 
married in our royal parish was more fortunate.  He and his giantess met—at a public 
exhibition—and loved.”204 
 
The public was continually reminded of the lore behind the displays of giants.  In 
1854, The New York Daily Times ran an article on the front page titled “The Ancient 
Giants of Finland” and declares “Before the French—so runs the Legend—there were the 
Giants; a good while before…and so we may form some near guess as to when the 
Finnish Giants went away.  For their legacy—so runs the legend—they left the 
immeasurable masses of ore which were their prodigiously hot ovens and stoves, but 
which are known to the tiny race of their successors as inexhaustible iron mines.” 205  
Promoters like Barnum intentionally publicized an association between exhibitions of 
giants via with giants in folklore, which allowed writers and advertisers the opportunity 
to take advantage of this connection.  Puck, one of the earliest American humor 
magazines, published an article titled “Mythology Made Easy: The Wanderings of 
Ulysses,” which reads “Barnum offered Polyphemus a handsome salary to travel with his 
greatest show, billed as the strongest man in the world: The giant refused the offer saying 
that he could not disgrace his family.”206 
 
 
Nineteenth century publications like The Albion often featured articles on giants 
and other lusus naturae.  F.T. Buckland reminds his readers of some of the biblical 
references to giants such as “There were giants in the earth;” “We saw giants, the sons of 
Anak;” “Og, King of Bashan, remained of the remnant of giants;” “Bashan, called the 
Land of Giants;” “The lot of Judah at the Valley of Giants,” &c.,&c”  The author also 
states that giants were seen as rarities and wonders of the age, “some commenters have 
gone so far as to say that these “Nephilim” or giants were not so much giants in physical 
statures as great atheists and monsters of impiety, rapine, and all wickedness.”207  This 
view is rarely seen in nineteenth century exhibitions of giants, because giants were 
                                                
199 New York Daily Times, December 14, 1865, 7.   
200 New York Daily Times, April 25, 1855, 5. 
201 Pittsfield Sun, Vol LIX, Issue 3051, March 10, 1859, 2.  
202 “The Giant Baby,” Vanity Fair, June 9, 1860, 382.  
203 New York Times, December 19, 1863, 10.  
204 My emphasis. “A Gigantic Marriage,” Chicago Tribune, July 5, 1871, 3.  
205 New York Daily Times, July 17, 1854, 1.  
206 “Mythology Made Easy,” Puck, March 24, 1880, 36. 
207 “Giants in General,” The Albion, A Journal of News, Politics and Literature, July 5, 
1862.  

 
 
41
associated with strength.208  Sometimes giants were described as ogres, who are also the 
subject of hundreds of motifs in the Motif-Index (G. OGRES G10-699).  Barnum even 
featured a performance showcasing a giant and the tiny Commodore Nutt billed as “Ogre 
and the Dwarf.”209 Giants and dwarfs were such a popular subject, many of Barnum’s 
advertisements were reduced to the phrase “Giants, dwarfs, 100,000 curiosities.”210 
 
LITTLE PEOPLE 
 
 
One of the most popular exhibitions in the United States during the nineteenth 
century involved little people. I would argue that this is because of the significance of this 
motif in popular folklore, particularly among European immigrants who comprised most 
of the audience at these exhibits. Thompson’s Motif F451 Dwarf  (Underground spirit),211 
Motif F535 Pygmy (Remarkably small man), Motif F530 Remarkably large or small men, 
and Motif F535 thumbling all come into play here. In exhibits, little people were often 
referred to as “dwarves,” which bring to mind images from fairy tales, notably Jacob and 
Wilhelm Grimm’s collection, or adaptations thereof.  Dwarves, fairies, and trolls in 
European fairy tale context are not considered to be human.  In traditional European folk 
narratives, it is not uncommon to find dwarves presented as remarkably old (See also 
Motif F571 Extremely old person). Bogdan noted that “young children who were 
presented as dwarfs were said to be older than they actually were,” and P.T. Barnum 
openly admitted to this deceit, announcing in his autobiography that he advertised 
Charles Stratton (General Tom Thumb) as 11 years of age when he was actually 5 years 
old.212 There are several motifs that are specific to age and little people such as: 
F451.2.5.1 Dwarfs have old face, 451.3.12 Dwarfs are intelligent, and F451.5.1.7 Dwarfs 
serve.213 Susan Stewart remarks that “by the Victorian Age, the domestication of the fairy 
is complete and the English fairy becomes inextricably linked to the enduring creation of 
the Victorian fantastic: the fairylike child.”214  
 
Little people remained among the most popular exhibits throughout the nineteenth 
century and continued to draw in crowds in the twentieth century.  In 1904, Dreamland, a 
theme park at Coney Island, opened an attraction called “Lilliputia” (also known as “The 
                                                
208 There were instances when they are marketed as ghoulish. “A Ghoulish Giant,” The 
Daily Inter Ocean, Issue 290, Thursday, February 16, 1882, 5.  
209 “There were Giants in Those Days,” Chicago Tribune, April 28, 1862, 2.  
210 Amusements this Evening, New York Times, January 18, 1866.  
211 The dwarf, especially in Northern Europe, is considered an underground spirit. He is 
to be distinguished from the other conception of dwarf, viz., a very small person, pigmy, 
or thumbling.  
 
212 Robert Bogdan, Freak Show: Presenting Human Oddities for Amusement and Profit,  
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988), 97. Phineas T. Barnum, The Life of P.T. 
Barnum,  (New York: Redfield, 1855; Illinois: University of Illinois, 2000), 243. 
213 Motif F451.2.5.1 Dwarfs have old face. Is noted as having a Finnish-Swedish and 
German existence and F451.3.12 Dwarfs are intelligent and F451.5.1.7 Dwarfs serve 
mortals are both Irish myths. 
214 Susan Stewart, On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, 
the Collection, (London: Duke University Press, 1993), 113.  

 
 
42
Midget City”), a scaled replica of Nuremberg, Germany, populated by 300 little people in 
a permanent municipality.215  Similarly, the 1933 Chicago World’s Fair, ironically titled 
A Century of Progress International Exposition” featured the “Midget City,” which 
housed about two hundred little people. (Related motifs F210 Fairyland, F219.1 Fairies 
dwell in the next country) Also, it was common for proprietors to employ giants to walk 
through these various “Midget Cities” in order to create a greater juxtaposition of small 
and large, an action that parallels motif F531.6.3.2 Giant lives in fairyland.216 “Lilliputia” 
and “Midget City” were both architecturally similar to traditional European castles, 
which parallels Motif F222 Fairy Castle.  
 
One critic writes, “Decidedly the most successful speculation which he ever 
undertook was the exhibition of Tom Thumb.”217  Profits from six weeks of exhibiting 
Tom Thumb were recorded at $14,000.  “The aggregate of profits made by him out of 
that unfortunate little monstrosity, is not far from a hundred thousand dollars.”218 The 
exhibition of Tom Thumb was so successful, it became common for proprietors to simply 
put “dwarf” on their exhibition roster in order to entice an audience.219  Besides Tom 
Thumb, there were many successful exhibitions of little people in the nineteenth century 
including: the Lilliputian King, Carrie Akers the fleshy midget, Che-Mah the Chinese 
Dwarf, Lucy Zarate, Hop o’ My Thumb, the Nova Scotia midget, Admiral Dot, Count 
Primo Magri, Count Rosebud, Baron Littlefinger, General Mite, Lucia Zarate the 
Mexican Lilliputian, Commodore Foote, Charles and Eliza Nestel, Nicholi the little 
Russian Prince, Commodore Nutt, Jennie Quigley the Scottish Queen, Lavinia Warren, 
and many more.220  
 
In addition to dwarves and pygmies, the Motif-Index has a category F200-F699 
Marvelous Creatures, in which F200-F399 Fairies and Elves are listed. Over two 
                                                
215 The 1933 Midget City was organized by Samuel Gumpertz, the “godfather of the 
freak” See Andrea Stulman Dennett, Weird and Wonderful: The Dime Museum in 
America, (New York: New York University Press, 1997), 128.  
216 It is important to note that this motif, as well as nearly all examples I have given, is 
documented as a popular Irish motif.  
217 “Speculations on Barnum, The Museum, &c.” An English Traveller [sic], The Literary 
World, Vol 210, February 8, 1851, 115. 
218 “Mr. Barnum; American Museum; Tom Thumb,” Morning News, Vol. 1, Issue 143, 
April 28, 1845, 2. 
219 New York Times, March 28, 1865, 7.  
220 See in order: New York Daily Times, February 9, 1854, 8; Chicago Daily Tribune, 
April 5, 1885, 6; for Che-Mah see “Dwarfs,” San Francisco Chronicle, March 2, 1884, 6 
and “Che-Mah, the Dwarf,” Chicago Daily Tribune, May 21, 1881, 7; For Lucy Zarate, 
and Hop o’ My Thumb see: “Dwarfs,” San Francisco Chronicle, 6, March 2, 1884; San 
Francisco Chronicle, June 4, 1870, 3; “A Marriage of Midgets,” Chicago Daily Tribune, 
2, April 7, 1885; for Baron Little Finger and Count Rosebud see New York Times, 
January 30, 1879, 7; for General Mite and Lucia Zarate see The Washington Post, 
January 2, 1879, 4; for Commodore Foot and Eliza Nestel see Chicago Daily Tribune, 
May 3, 1885, 6; “Eagles Plan Carnival,” The Washington Post, April 25, 1909, 16;  New 
York Times, February 3, 1862, 5; Chicago Daily Tribune, January 21, 1877, 16; New York 
Times, January 19, 1863, 7.  

 
 
43
hundred “fairy” motifs are categorized in the Motif index.  Numerous little people were 
marketed as “fairy like” and “child like” which parallel Motif F239.4.2 Fairies are the 
size of small children, and F239.4.3 Fairy is tiny.  Eliza Nestel, for example, the wife of 
the famous Commodore Foote, was billed as “The Fairy Queen.”221  An advertisement for 
Lavinia Warren, the wife of the late General Tom Thumb, read “Everybody rushing 
headlong to SEE THE FAIRY, MISS LAVINIA WARREN, MISS LAVINA 
WARREN.”222 
 
REMARKABLE HAIR 
 
 
Similar to Motif F555 Remarkable Hair and F555.3 Very Long Hair, Circassian 
women such as Zalumma Agra (the ‘Circassian Beauty’) were said to resemble “the 
embodiment of white racial purity, as a kind of counternarrative to the black exoticism 
represented by other show types,” and “[Zalumma’s] specially frizzed hair and 
provocative clothing signaled her own exotic sexuality.”223 Barnum often portrayed 
Circassian women as the ideal beauty, although highly sexualized. These women were 
sometimes called “moss haired” resulting in a stereotype that compelled many women 
who were exhibited as a Circassian to purchase wigs to complete their costume.224  
 
Other instances of exhibitions of remarkable hair, and Motif F521.1.1 Woman 
with animal hair, include Belle (or Bella) Carter, “The Dashing Kentucky Horse-
Woman—The Living Lady with a Horse’s Mane,” who had a patch of long hair which 
grew out of a mole on her back.225 The Seven Sutherland (or Southerland) Sisters 
charmed audiences with their extraordinary long hair in the late nineteenth century. The 
sisters were advertised as the “Long-Haired Wonders” and had a collective total of 36.5 
ft. between them.226 The Sisters soon began producing and marketing a successful “Hair 
Grower and Scalp Cleaner” to both men and women.227  Motif F521.1 Man covered with 
                                                
221 Hartzman, Marc.  American Sideshow: An Encyclopedia of History’s Most Wondrous 
and Curiously Strange Performers, (New York: Penguin, 2005), 75-76.  
222 New York Times January 19, 1863, 7. Original emphasis. 
223 Roslyn Poignant notes “that this racialist fantasy...claimed its ‘scientific’ authority 
from Professor Friedrich Blumenbach’s designation of the white races as Caucasian.” 
Poignant, Roslyn. Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle.  London: 
Yale University Press, 2004, 88. Circassian Families were also exhibited at Barnum’s 
Museum. New York Times August 21, 1865, 4. 
224 “The “Freaks” of the Circus” The Washington Post May 12, 1907, 2.  
225 She was exhibited at Epstean’s New Dime Museum.  See Chicago Daily Tribune 
December 30, 1890, 3 also, in 1932, Colon T. Updike was exhibited cabinet photos and 
in Ripley’s Believe it or Not with a similar condition.  
226 They were exhibited at Kohl & Middleton’s West Side Dime Museum. Chicago Daily 
Tribune January 28, 1884, 8.  
227 Headlines often read, “A Woman’s Crowning Glory is Her Hair” For Sale by the 
Seven Sutherland Sisters.  Chicago Daily Tribune April 12, 1888, 7 and New York Times 
March 27, 1887, 2.   Sometimes headlines read “A Man’s Crowning Glory is His Hair” as 
in Chicago Daily Tribune August 12, 1888, 6. The Sutherlands were believed to have 
“made millions over the course of several decades.” See Marc Hartzman, American 

 
 
44
hair like animal and T585.5.1 Child born with hairy mane resonates with Fedor Jeftichew 
(JoJo the Dog-Faced Boy) and Stephan Bibrowski (Lionel the Lion-Faced Man), who 
both suffered from hirsutism and were entirely covered in hair.  
 
EXTREMELY OLD PERSON 
 
 
Motif F571 Extremely old person—Six years before his legendary American 
Museum, Barnum began his career exhibiting the alleged 161 year old nursemaid to the 
infant George Washington.  Barnum took Heth on tour and she was also exhibited at 
Niblo’s Garden in New York beginning in 1835 and until her passing in 1836. Heth’s age 
intrigued audiences so much that after her death Barnum organized a public autopsy in 
front of 1,500 paying spectators to prove Heth’s age.228  
 
SPOTTED PEOPLE  
 
 
Motif T465.4 Children spotted like leopards after bestiality; Motif G303.4.8.9 
Devil spotted—The “Spotted Boys” featured “the dermatological condition that medical 
discourse termed vitiligo to fashion an engaging alien for the viewers’ amusement and 
amazement—and for the showman’s profit.”229 Also, in 1888, the “Spotted People of 
Peru” were exhibited at Kohl & Middleton’s South Side Dime Museum in Chicago.230 
 
MATERNAL IMPRESSION 
 
 
Motif T550.4 Monstrous Birth because mother sees horrible sight closely 
resembles Maternal Impression or Maternal Imprinting, which was believed to be a 
legitimate medical explanation for monstrous or malformed beings. It was believed that if 
a pregnant woman visually experienced something, usually frightful or unusual, the 
infant could possess traits which directly reflected the pregnant mother’s experience.  The 
results could be as trivial as a birthmark, or as serious as a mental or physical 
abnormality. British Medical Journal (1875) tells the story of a woman who gave birth to 
a child with three legs and a parasitic twin, and when the woman was told that her child 
was deformed, she replied: “I thought it would not be all right; for I was frightened, at 
                                                                                                                                            
Sideshow: An Encyclopedia of History’s Most Wondrous and Curiously Strange 
Performers, (New York: Penguin, 2005), 41.  
228 It was proven that Heth was only about 80 years old. Harriet Washington, Medical 
Apartheid: The Dark History of Medical Experimentation on Black Americans from 
Colonial Times to the Present,  (New York: Doubleday, 2007).  For more on Heth, see 
Cook, Arts of Deception and Adams, E Pluribus Barnum.  
229 Rosemarie Garland Thomson,  “Seeing the Disabled: Visual Rhetorics of Disability in 
Popular Photography,” in The New Disability History: American Perspectives, ed. Paul 
K. Longmore and Lauri Umansky,  (New York: New York University Press, 2001), 343-
344. Spotted children were noted in “Sleighing to the Circus,” New York Times, 2, March 
16, 1888.  
230 Chicago Daily Tribune, October 22, 1888, 3.  

 
 
45
Limpsfield fair, by two men outside a show, who kept hugging each other closely and 
posturing.  I was frightened by them, but could not keep my eyes off them.”  
 
E. Shepard writes on the topic, suggesting that an armless and legless child was 
the result of the mother who had watched the butchering of hogs.  Shepard also 
hypothesizes that “The mother of Napoleon engaged herself in military tactics and 
planted ante-natal desires and determinations in her offspring.” 231 Interestingly, the 
nineteenth century editions of the British Medical Journal give numerous accounts of this 
phenomenon, and only an English reference is given for Motif T550.4 Monstrous Birth 
because mother sees horrible sight in Thompson’s Motif-Index.232 The fear of maternal 
impression even affected the exhibits that featured monstrous beings. Chang and Eng, for 
example, were exhibited all over Europe, but were denied entrance into France because 
of the fear that their presence could cause deformities in the unborn and would “have a 
disastrous effect upon pregnant women.”233  Motif T554 Woman gives birth to animal is 
exemplified in the case of Mary Toft of England, who, in the early 18th century, claimed 
to have given birth to rabbits. Of course, her claim was eventually revealed as a hoax, but 
it had persisted under the well believed notion that she gave birth to parts of animals 
because she was fascinated by a rabbit she saw during her pregnancy.234 A contemporary 
example, Grady Stiles Jr, better known as Lobster Boy, was believed to be a result of 
when his pregnant mother’s fainting at the sight of her husband’s exceptionally large 
catch of the day.   
 
Maternal impression was cited as the cause of Che Mah, the Chinese Dwarf’s 
small size. A Newspaper article titled “Dwarfs: Some Information About Their 
Peculiarities” reads, “His mother while walking through the streets of Ningpo was greatly 
shocked and frightened by seeing a very small child crushed to death by the falling of a 
tree.  She was greatly affected and when Che Mah was born, shortly afterward, he bore a 
most striking resemblance in face and figure to the little one that was killed.  The child 
killed was but 2 years old and Che Mah has never grown larger than a child of that 
age.”235  
 
For folklorists, Maternal Impression sometimes exists under the umbrella of 
“pregnancy folklore,” and much study has revealed the importance of these beliefs and 
how they can act as an indicator of cultural and societal issues.  The nineteenth century 
woman shows us that Victorian England was not privy to homosexual behavior; the 20th 
                                                
 
231 E. Shepard, Fads, Fakes, Freaks, Frauds and Fools,  (Indiana: The Commercial 
Service Company, 1923), 119-120.  
 
232 Stith Thompson, Motif-index of folk-literature: a classification of narrative elements 
in folktales, ballads, myths, fables, mediaeval romances, exempla, fabliaux, jest-books, 
and local legends, Revised and enlarged edition, (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 
1955-1958.  
 
233 Kay Hunter, Duet for a Lifetime: The Story of the Original Siamese Twins, (New 
York: Coward-McCann, 1964), 60. 
234 Stith Thompson, Motif-index of folk-literature: a classification of narrative elements 
in folktales, ballads, myths, fables, mediaeval romances, exempla, fabliaux, jest-books, 
and local legends, Revised and enlarged edition, (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 
1955-1958).  See Type 441. 
235 “Dwarfs,” San Francisco Chronicle, March 2, 1884, 6.  

 
 
46
century woman who watched the butchering of hogs reveals the importance of gender 
expectations; and the comment regarding Napoleon’s military tactics attempts to blame 
his tyrannical behavior and ravages of war on the female.  Acts that defied expectations 
of appropriate moral behavior were demonstrated through exhibition pamphlets, and, 
lecturers.236  
 
WAX PEOPLE, LIVING STATUES 
 
 
Essentially, displays of lusus naturae, whether a human, a wax figure, or an 
automaton, were subjected to the same processes and audience reception as the living 
displays and there are those, like Susan Stewart who would argue that it does not matter 
whether the spectacle is dead or alive.237  
 
During the late 18th century, automata were introduced to American Exhibits.  
Interestingly, the first “foreigners” exhibited in America often had no pulse.  For 
example, an exhibition in 1790 advertises a “Speaking Figure…consisting of CHINESE 
and ITALIAN SHADES with the most elegant SCENES, Transparent SCENERY, and 
other Decorations adapted to different Pieces.”238  Americans did not begin 
manufacturing automata as frequently or as skilled as many of the French and German 
automata makers, and as a result, most of the traveling exhibits featured foreign 
machines. For example, the French automata acrobats of Mr. L’Aiftocrate were exhibited 
in Philadelphia in 1795 and the “Chinese Automaton Figure” performed “feats on the 
rope” in Rhode Island in 1796.239 Most often, the mechanical exhibitions fetched a higher 
price than natural curiosities, and soon became known as “artificial curiosities.”  These 
early automata featured moving parts and were remarkably detailed in construction, 
astonishing patrons and subsequently corresponding to Motif D1620 Magic Automata.  
Statues that act as if alive, and D1268 Magic Statue.240  By the early nineteenth century, 
mechanical living statues were commonplace, and many corresponded to Motif D435.1.1 
Transformation: statue comes to life, such as the work of Mr. Frimbey in 1831 which was 
described as “No semblance of life presented itself; all was motionless and still, until the 
spring, as it were, was touched, which set this wonderful machine in motion..”241 
 
Wax figures (as well as mummies) emerged again in the 1900s, and were also 
exhibited as freaks, such as “The Embalmed Bandit”, “The Stone Man”, “The Amazing 
Petrified Man,” Floyd Collins, John Wilkes Booth, Notorious Marie O’Day, and Mr. 
Dinsmoor to name a few.242 The early nineteenth century exhibits were soon complicated 
                                                
236 The corresponding motifs further explain the possible existence of such creatures, for 
example, Motif T465.4 Children are spotted like leopards as result of bestiality and 
Motif T465.5 Pig born with head like that of man as a result of bestiality, are, according 
to Thompson, both particular to the United States.  
237 See Susan Stewart, On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the 
Souvenir, the Collection, London, 1993. 
238 Emphasis in original.  New York Daily Gazette, January 4, 1790, 3.  
239 See Messrs L’Egalite, A New Entertainment, (Providence: Bennett Wheeler, 1796).   
240 “Ossified” men and women might also parallel these motifs.  
241 “Living Statue,” The Boston Medical and Surgical Journal, November 22, 1831, 5.  
242 Quigley, Christine,  “Mummy Dearest” in James Taylor and Kathleen Kotcher,  

 
 
47
by “innovation and novelty,”243 and new forms, such as waxworks, gained popularity, 
although not without criticism.244  Dorfeuille quickly took advantage, and at the peak of 
the wax craze, he established his “Chamber of Horrors”245 and said his acquisitions must 
“excite the emotions, not titillate the intellect.”246 Grotesque life sized wax figures were 
displayed in models of Dante’s Divine Comedy and Milton’s Paradise Lost, and the 
Museum of “The Regions” featured images of Dante’s Purgatory.247  Mythical images of 
heaven and hell were juxtaposed with displays of ‘Sleeping Beauty,’248 but perhaps 
because of the clergy’s interest in using the depictions of hell for religious justification, 
the more grotesque and frightening displays were most successful. A small exhibition 
hall in Haverhill, Massachusetts advertised “18 Wax Figures as large as Life,” including 
Siamese Twins and an American Dwarf.249 
 
The Boston Museum advertised the New Hall of Wax Statuary 1851, which 
featured wax figures that “are so natural and lifelike as to mock reality, and lead the 
beholder to doubt whether the figures do not actually live and breathe.” Some of the 
featured figures included Christ’s Last Supper, The Prodigal Son, The Crucifixion, the 
Siamese Twins, Massacre by Pirates, and the Horrors of Slavery.250  
 
 
 
 In many cases, wax figures, or mannequins, were preferred even when living 
people were available.  For example, in 1876 at the first official World’s Fair, in 
Philadelphia, wax Indians were preferred over living people, perhaps making it easier to 
show inanimate figures as “immoral savages.”251 Living statues, or living tableaux, was a 
common attraction in the United States during the mid nineteenth century.252  Even 
Charles Stratton (General Tom Thumb) was billed as GRECIAN STATUES and posed as 
                                                                                                                                            
“Shocked and Amazed” On & Off the Midway,  (Connecticut, 2002), 205-211. 
243 Whitfield J. Bell, “The Cabinet of the American Philosophical Society,” In Whitehill, 
Walter Muir, Cabinet of curiosities: five episodes in the Revolution of American museums. 
(Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1967), 84. 
244 Franz Boas, for example, hated them, and considered them to be “ghastly”.  See 
Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimlett, Destination Culture: Tourism, Museums, and Heritage.  
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998), 39. 
245 Whitfield J. Bell, “The Cabinet of the American Philosophical Society,” In Whitehill, 
Walter Muir, Cabinet of curiosities: five episodes in the Revolution of American museums. 
(Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1967), 85. 
246 Ibid, 88. 
247 For more details on Dorfeuille’s collection or the Western museums see M.H. Dunlop, 
“Curiosities Too Numerous to Mention: Early Regionalism and Cincinnati’s Western 
Museum,”  American Quarterly, 36: 4 (Autumn, 1984): 524-548.  
248 Whitfield J. Bell, “The Cabinet of the American Philosophical Society,” In Whitehill, 
Walter Muir, Cabinet of curiosities: five episodes in the Revolution of American museums. 
(Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1967), 86. 
249 Essex Gazette, Volume IX, Issue 18, October 25, 1834, 3. 
250 The Barre Patriot, Vol. 7, Issue 30, February 7, 1851, 4. 
251 Paul Greenhalgh,  Ephemeral Vistas: The Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions 
and World’s Fairs, 1851-1939,  (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1988), 100. 
252 “Living Statue,” The Boston Medical and Surgical Journal, (November 22, 1831): 5, 
15. Metta V. Fuller, “The Living Statue,” Home Journal, (Nov 11, 1848): 1. 

 
 
48
“The Discus Thrower, Ajax, Cincinnatus, Samson, Hercules, the Dying Gladiator, and 
other athletes whose size was an amusing contrast to his littleness.”253 Miss Anderson 
performed as a living statue in “Pygmalian and Galatea” at Booth’s Theatre in 1882.254  
Living Statues were commonly billed as such.  The Hippotheatron in New York (1865) 
and Wood’s Museum (1874) advertised “living statues.”255 Related Motifs: J1800 One 
thing mistaken for another-miscellaneous; J1809 Other things with mistaken identities; 
F990 Inanimate objects act as if living; J1794 Statue mistaken for living original.  
 
The evidence associating circulating folklore and popular exhibits in the 
nineteenth century in the United States is extensive, and accounts for the great degree of 
popularity of this form of amusement. Those who witnessed these events were able to 
experience these displays as instantiations of familiar folk motifs within a recognizable 
context.  
 
 
                                                
253 Alice Curtis Desmond,  Barnum Presents General Tom Thumb,  (New York: The 
Macmillian Company, 1954), 62.  
254 Puck, 331, January 25, 1882.  
255 New York Times, October 19, 1865, 7 and New York Times, September 19, 1874, 6.  

 
 
49
CHAPTER 3 
 FOLKLORE AS EXHIBITION: MARKETING 
 
 
MOTIF OSTENSION 
 
 
The term ostension was introduced by semiotician and philosopher Umberto Eco 
as the most “elementary act of active signification.” Eco cites, “Ostension occurs when a 
given object or event produced by nature or human action (intentionally or 
unintentionally and existing in a world of facts as a fact among facts) is ‘picked up’ by 
someone and shown as the expression of the class of which it is a member.” 256 Eco gives 
an example of two friends getting ready for a party: If one friend asked the other, “How 
should I dress for this event?” and the friend responded by showing his tie and jacket 
while saying “like this.” The latter would be signifying by ostension. For Eco, ostension 
is not simply recognizing a sign, but a performing it, typically in cases of metonymy and 
synecdoche.   
 
Instances of metonymy and synecdoche are also observed in theatrical ostension. 
For example, the presence of a single tombstone may suggest a cemetery, or a gurney 
may signify a hospital. Theatrical ostension often focuses on the mise-en-scène, but may 
also refer to verbal signs.257 Folklorists Linda Dégh and Andrew Vázsonyi appropriated 
the term ostension to describe real-life actions influenced by legends, or legends we 
live.258 Dégh and Vázsonyi believe that although “the showing of an action by showing 
the action itself or by another action” might be recognized as acting, ostensive action is 
not acting because “actors intend to create illusion, not delusion.259 Dégh suggests “An 
orally told story can also be acted out dramatically, using redundant signs, gestures, and 
mimics..”260 For Dégh, acted out simply means producing physical gestures in order to 
communicate the plot of a legend rather than acting to impersonate and deceive.   
 
At this point, I would like to introduce the concept of motif ostension, an idea that 
expands upon the definition of ostension often used by folklorists. Dégh touches upon 
this idea as she defines the process of ostension, “The recipients are the script writers, 
editors, directors, narrators, and actors in one person, who will convert the legend—or 
create the legend—on the basis of what their conduits have passed on to them.  The 
material may be a full-blown legend, a motif, a reference, a name, or any small 
provocative ingredient.”261 A motif, by Thompson’s definition, is a remarkable and 
                                                
256 Umberto Eco,  A Theory of Semiotics, (Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1976), 224-
225. See also Umberto Eco,  “Semiotics of Theatrical Performance,” The Drama Review, 
Vol. 21, No. 1,  (March, 1977): 110.  
257 For a discussion of ostension and theater, see Patricia Dorval, “Towards a Stylistics of 
the Modes of Ostension,” Theatre Research International, 18 (1993): 206-214. 
258 “Does the Word "Dog" Bite? Ostensive Action: A Means of Legend-Telling,” Journal 
of Folklore Research, Vol 20, No 1 (May, 1983): 5-34. 
259 Ibid, 7-8. 
260 Original emphasis. Linda Degh, Legend and Belief,  (Indiana: University of Indiana 
Press, 2001), 423. 
261 My emphasis. Ibid. 

 
 
50
memorable instance in a tale, and although Dégh recognizes that a motif alone may be 
reproduced by ostension, she does not elaborate on this idea, but rather focuses on the 
reenactment of entire legends. I define motif ostension as the real life occurrence of a 
particular folk motif. There are a few points to consider: 
 
1. One must have the information to recognize motif ostension. 
2. Motif ostension exists within varying contexts.  
 
 
The actor, lecturer, or latent performer (showman) may or may not be aware of 
the relationship between the existence of a motif and his or her performance.  
I would like to suggest that in the case of motif ostension, the writers (showmen), 
narrators (lecturers or pitchmen), and actors (lusus naturae) may be separate individuals 
involved in performing the same motif.  Impresarios, showmen, and remarkably, even the 
performers themselves may be latent performers.  Shrewd showman had the ability to 
recognize popular interest as well as create interest in new subject matters.  The most 
successful exhibits of lusus naturae captured the interest of the heterogeneous nineteenth 
century American public, and often featured folkloric elements. Public interest in best 
selling books and theater often influenced a curator’s choices.   Barnum, for example, 
was inspired by stories of Tom Thumb when he branded Charles Stratton with the 
sobriquet General Tom Thumb.262 Barnum knew the public would be interested in a 
witnessing a real-life manifestation of a familiar character, but he was not aware that he 
was marketing Thompson’s Motif F451 Dwarf  (Underground spirit), Motif F535 Pygmy 
(Remarkably small man), Motif F530 Remarkably large or small men, or Motif F535 
thumbling, since the motif-index first appeared in 1955.  
 
While the showman may have intentionally enticed the audience to draw parallels 
between familiar folklore and the exhibition on display, the performer may not have been 
aware of his/her place as an instantiation of a folk motif for varying reasons. The 
performer might not be familiar with the motif he or she is analogous to because of 
cultural differences, as many of the performers chosen by showmen were exotic others 
from distant lands.  Also, the performer would likely be focused on his or her act because 
these displays of lusus naturae did not stand idle as patrons gazed upon them.  Feats of 
daring and skill doubled the curiosity factor and helped legitimize acts for reasons other 
than inciting mere gawking.  
 
In order to recognize motif ostension, performers, showmen, lecturers, and 
patrons, must have some previous knowledge to recognize the sign(s) involved. This, 
however, does not mean one has to recognize motif ostension for it to exist. Philosopher 
Ludwig Wittgenstein criticized the idea of the semiotic mode of sign production, 
ostension, noting that one must already have some knowledge of the language to 
                                                
262 In 1827, Major Stevens, a little person, had already assumed the character of Tom 
Thumb at the Bowery Theatre in New York, but with much criticism and little success. 
The Daily National Intelligencer reviewed Major Steven’s performance referring to him 
as an “odd little personage” with a “peculiar babyish whining tone, ad added much to the 
ludicrousness of the performance.” Barnum followed in 1842 with his extraordinary 
success marketing General Tom Thumb.  See Daily National Intelligencer, 4539, 
Tuesday, August 14, 1827.   

 
 
51
recognize the information.263 Wittgenstein believed that “ostensive definition can be 
variously interpreted in every case.”264 
 
Motif ostension exists in much the same way. Because the manifestation of a 
motif does not involve an entire narrative, but only a remarkable element, each observer 
may interpret an instance of motif ostension in an entirely different way depending on the 
information he or she previously possessed. Thus, the meaning of an instantiation of a 
folk motif will vary for each person involved. The showman might intend to frame an 
exhibit in a particular context, but the audience might perceive it quite differently.  An 
exhibit of a little person like Tom Thumb might conjure images of fairies in one patron 
and trolls in another. Whether repulsed or attracted to an exhibit, the audience was often 
intrigued enough to purchase a ticket in order to satiate their own curiosity. Observers are 
most likely not consciously aware they are experiencing motif ostension.  In most cases, 
there was a feeling of familiarity and nostalgia, which attracted an observer to the 
occurrence. Motif ostension can also be a form of interactive communication between a 
showman, performer, and/or observer.265 
 
The idea of motif ostension, although similar to Dégh and Vázsonyi’s version of 
ostension, is quite different.  The difference here is the acting out of memorable elements 
of familiar tales (motifs) in varying context, rather than one full narrative or legend.  
Motif ostension allows the audience to experience and interpret a living motif in a way 
that makes sense to him or her.  A lecturer’s words, a banner, a story learned in youth, a 
photograph, pitchcard, or pamphlet may give context to a particular motif. Instances of 
synecdoche are also frequently present in the case of motif ostension, as each 
presentation of a motif is often a substitute for an entire story, or even a variety of motifs.  
An exhibition of a little person, for example, might suggest a reference to a general theme 
of fairies, which encompasses hundreds of motifs (F200-F399 Fairies and Elves).  The 
showman may attempt to suggest this and the observers may respond appropriately, or 
the observers may find this connection independently of the showman’s intentions.   
 
Ostension as defined by Dégh and Vázsonyi does not give room for interpretation 
because a legend is acted out in full. Unlike ostension as defined by Dégh, motif 
ostension is a phenomenon that does not appear to lessen through time.  Dégh and 
Vázsonyi believe that “the phenomenon of legend-telling by ostension has become more 
frequent in our time than ever before, and we attributed this mostly to the special effect of 
the mass media.” Motif ostension also collapses the categories of pseudo-ostension and 
proto-ostension. Bogdan has pointed out that “the few who have written about the 
sideshow, mainly popular historians, answer the question by concentrating on the 
physical characteristics of those exhibited.  They organize the chapters of their books like 
medical textbooks. Headings include such topics as: little people (dwarfs and midgets), 
                                                
263 See Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Philosophical Investigations, (New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 
1973).  
264 Stuart Shanker, Editor, Ludwig Wittgenstein: From Philosophical Investigations to On 
Certainty: Wittgenstein’s Later Philosophy, (New York: Taylor & Francis, 1997), 95. 
265 This is in contrast to Dégh and Vázsonyi’s notion of ostension.  They write “At this 
point there is little said of the role ostension plays In folklore communication.” Linda 
Dégh and Andrew Vázsonyi,  “Does the Word "Dog" Bite? Ostensive Action: A Means 
of Legend-Telling,” Journal of Folklore Research, Vol. 20, No. 1 (May, 1983): 7. 

 
 
52
giants, hairy people, human skeletons, armless and legless wonders, pinheads, fat people, 
albinos, Siamese twins, people with extra limbs, half men/half women, people with skin 
disorders, tattooed people, and anatomical wonders.266  Bogdan’s list seems 
indistinguishable from folk motifs, F535 Pygmy. Remarkably small man; F531 Giant; 
F521.1 Man covered with hair like animal; F516.1 Armless people; Motif F523 Two 
persons with bodies joined Siamese twins; F547.2 Hermaphrodite; T551 Child with 
extraordinary members (limbs), which is why I argue that these topics continue to 
resurface for a reason.  Subsequent chapters will address these motifs as instantiations of 
folk motifs and address the functions and reception of this phenomenon without the 
necessity to distinguish these headings as Bogdan has suggested so many others have 
approached the subject. 
 
THE IMPRESARIO AS ACTIVE BEARER 
 
 
Nineteenth century American exhibition halls and museums often featured a 
haphazard assortment of curiosities, paintings, historical objects, lecturers, and 
performers, organized and promoted by a notorious showman. Rented exhibition halls, 
museums, and other venues that featured lusus naturae advertised primarily in the 
amusement section of a local newspaper. Marketing was critical to the success of a 
venue, and these impresarios of curiosities vied for their readers’ attention, often 
advertising exclusivity by prefacing their attractions with adjectives like “the biggest” 
“the most” “the greatest” and “the only.”  
 
Carl Wilhelm von Sydow (1878-1952), comparative folklore scholar, is 
considered one of the great contributors to folkloristics, the study of folklore as an 
academic discipline.267 Von Sydow’s interest in the transmission of folklore, inspired him 
to coin the terms “active” and “passive bearers.” He defines active bearers as those “who 
keep tradition alive and transmit it,” whereas passive bearers “have indeed heard of what 
a certain tradition contains, and may perhaps, when questioned, recollect part of it, but do 
nothing themselves to spread it or keep it alive.”268  The showman and the lecturer (or 
seller) of lusus naturae may be the same person, as these titles are not mutually exclusive. 
However, the importance of this section rests on two factors, the ability to spread 
tradition(s), which includes hiring others to do so, and the possession of a particular 
repertoire (several narratives).269  Barnum, for example, employed numerous lecturers to 
                                                
266 Robert Bogdan,  “The Social Construction of Freaks” in Rosemarie Garland 
Thomson’s Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary Body.  
267 Alan Dundes, for example, writes, “perhaps no scholar was more creative and 
imaginative than Carl Wilhelm von Sydow (1878-1952) of Sweden.” Alan Dundes, 
International Folkloristics: Classic Contributions by the Founders of Folklore,  
(Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 1999), 137. 
268 C.W. von Sydow, “On the Spread of Tradition,” in Selected Papers on Folklore, ed. 
Laurits Bødker, (Copenhagen, 1948), 12-13. 
269 Equally, the person on display, may have also given speeches to the audience 
regarding his or her own personal narrative, which could theoretically place him or her in 
the active bearer category. While performers, or lusus naturae on display, may have 
various accounts they tell to patrons, the focus is on one principal narrative.  

 
 
53
captivate audiences by giving alluring narratives about a particular exhibition.  The 
notion of the impresario as an active bearer includes those who were employed by the 
showman as an instrument of his/her repertoire.  
 
According to von Sydow, an active bearer must actively spread tradition(s), a 
phrase that implies the process of transmitting folklore. The question regarding the nature 
of tradition and its meaning, particularly to folkloristics, has been discussed by some of 
the earliest folklore theorists. Folklorist Dan Ben Amos endeavored to demystify the 
concept of tradition into seven strands, and points out that folklorists have regularly used 
the terms lore and tradition synonymously with one another, and although definitions of 
tradition are diverse and often criticized, the term remains a “symbol of and for 
folklore.”270 Von Sydow’s definition of an active bearer of tradition can therefore be 
defined as an individual who [intentionally] perpetuate the spread of folklore. 271 
Showmen can also, at times, become passive bearers. Von Sydow writes, “An active 
bearer may become passive for various reasons…An active teller of tales will become a 
passive bearer of folk-tale tradition when nobody cares to listen to him any longer and 
this may happen for various reasons.”272 A showman’s repertoire is shaped by current 
interest in popular culture, the audience’s reception, and available performers.  Once a 
showman no longer provided the audience with exhibitions and consequent narratives, he 
became a passive bearer.  
 
TRADITION & AUTHENTICITY 
 
 
Because active bearers must propagate tradition, the theory that showmen can act 
as active bearers rests on the notion that motif ostension is analogous to a form of 
tradition. Edward Shils believes that a person is impelled to modify a tradition because it 
is not good enough for him.  He speaks of these changes as “enrichments of the stock” 
and as “improvements” to a particular tradition.  Shils refers to the “superior” human 
mind, and the need to change.  According to Shils, it is the inexhaustibility of the 
universe that allows the human mind to find a discrepancy, flaw, or defect in a tradition.  
It is when the universe, or some part of it, ceases to be interesting that tradition remains 
stagnant, and it is the infinite nature of the universe that facilitates the changes in a 
                                                
270 For a complete discussion on tradition from a folklorist’s perspective, see Dan Ben-
Amos, “The Seven Strands of Tradition: Varieties in Its Meaning in American Folklore 
Studies,” Journal of Folklore Research, Vol. 21, No. 2/3, Culture, Tradition, Identity 
Conference, March 26-28, 1984 (May-Dec., 1984): 97-131.  
271 Von Sydow does not mention the awareness of the active bearer’s intentions. The 
implication is suggested simply because those who actively transmit folklore, are usually 
aware that they are doing so. However, in the case of showmen, awareness is not only 
apparent, but necessary to the success of the exhibition.  Von Sydow believes that 
tradition “does not spread by itself but is moved and transferred by human bearers. Thus, 
his work calls for a shift in focus from the superorganic transmission of folk traditions to 
the transmitters of these items.”  See Thomas Green’s Encyclopedia of beliefs, customs, 
tales, music, and art, Volume 1.  
272 C.W. von Sydow, “On the Spread of Tradition,” in Selected Papers on Folklore, ed. 
Laurits Bødker (Copenhagen, 1948), 15. 

 
 
54
tradition.  In other words, tradition cannot change nor grow, when there is nothing left to 
experience.  Shils describes the “defect” as something that lies dormant inside a tradition 
from the time of its birth, waiting to be discovered by the “critical intelligence” or 
changed by a “charismatic figure.”273    
 
A charismatic impresario of oddities, like Barnum, acted as a storyteller who was 
aware of the current state of traditional culture. This traditional culture, or lore, reflected 
the interests of those attending these exhibits. In a sense, Barnum was shaping his 
narratives to include pre-existing and familiar versions of motifs known to his patrons, 
and he was simultaneously catering to and cultivating audience interest. As discussed in 
Chapter 2, motifs of Marvelous Creatures (F200-F1099) were the popular choice among 
impresarios. Exhibitions that paralleled these motifs, not only drew in crowds, but also 
helped stimulate stories of giants, dwarves, and other wondrous beings during this era. 
Von Sydow believed that “each tradition has its own bearers,” a notion that can 
undoubtedly reveal an impresario of lusus naturae as an active bearer of legends and 
folktales.274 The active staging, promoting, and advertising of displays that bear a strong 
resemblance to folk narratives (which include specific folk motifs) can be equated to 
spreading tradition. 
 
Impresarios of oddities had the power to revitalize and shape the public’s interest 
in folklore.  Because these showmen curated their exhibitions to simultaneously create 
innovative and unique displays and to cater to the tastes of his audience, the results 
reflected current concerns, as well as attempted to create new interests. Barnum was 
infamous for having his exhibits perform mythic roles, and Barnum himself was even 
perceived as a mythical figure.275 An English traveler commented on Barnum’s success 
and celebrity status, thus: “The rise of this illustrious person, like that of some of his 
fellows, would seem to be veiled in obscurity.  Whether he rose to fame on a fabulous 
griffin, or reached the wished-for goal on the back of an eight-legged horse, must remain 
matter of conjecture.”276 
 
The line between showmen and museum curators was often blurred. In fact, as the 
popularity of didactic museums grew, these two professions became nearly synonymous 
with one another, often to the dismay of serious curators.277 Both professions focused on 
disseminating knowledge (lore) and collecting and preserving material curiosities in 
public, although showmen often implied the latter.  Showmen like Barnum experienced 
pecuniary success, and their influence on the American public was substantial. In his 
1854 autobiography The Life of P.T. Barnum, Barnum bragged about the abundance of 
                                                
273 Edward Shils, Tradition,  (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006).  
274 C.W. von Sydow, “On the Spread of Tradition,” in Selected Papers on Folklore, ed. 
Laurits Bødker (Copenhagen, 1948), 12. 
275 Justin Wintle ed.  Makers of Nineteenth Century Culture 1800-1914, (London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul), 30.  
276 “Speculations on Barnum, The Museum, &c.” An English Traveller [sic].  The 
Literary World, Vol 210, 115, February 8, 1851.   
277 For example, The Nation published “A Word About Museums” (July 27, 1865), which 
heavily criticized Barnum’s museum, stating “Barnum’s Museum is gone at last…. Its 
memory is not pleasant. It pandered to the most foolish curiosity and to the most morbid 
appetite for the marvelous.”  

 
 
55
editorial notices that featured his first major successful exhibition, Joice Heth, the elderly 
woman he claimed was George Washington’s 161 year old nursemaid. The New York 
Spirit of the Times compared Heth to the legend of the Wandering Jew, and the 
impersonation of time in the primer. Nineteenth century showmen also had distinct 
repertoires, and just as active bearers of oral narratives would exchange stories, many 
showmen swapped exhibitions in order to keep their line up fresh and exciting. 
 
Letting critics independently speculate on the relationship between exhibitions 
with folklore allowed the exhibit to resonate mnemonically to the public, making 
Barnum, and other showmen, quasi-bearers of traditions. Dan Ben Amos writes in 
regards to von Sydow’s notion of active and passive bearers, “[M]ost studies of 
individual narrators and singers focus on their oral literary repertoire and social function, 
and not on their contribution to the dissemination of tales and songs.”278  By recognizing 
showmen as possible active bearers, future studies can focus not only on the repertoire 
and social function of an active bearer, but explore how these showmen contributed to the 
popularity of particular motifs in folklore trends.  
 
FOLKLORISM & NOSTALGIA 
 
 
Motif ostension involves the transmission of tradition, but the genuine or spurious 
nature of the tradition is not imperative, and in fact, the presence of fakelore, folklorism, 
or invented traditions indicates an active interest with particular motifs.279  Historian Eric 
Hobsbawm believes that the study of the invented tradition is interdisciplinary.280 By 
itself, motif ostension is with little meaning, as its significance is understood when it is 
examined from within the context in which it exists.  Folklorism has been defined as 
“visually and aurally striking or aesthetically pleasing folk materials, such as costume, 
festive performance, music, and art (but also foods) that lend themselves to being 
extracted from their initial contexts and put to new uses for different, often larger 
audiences.”281  
 
The existence of folklorism stems from a widespread interest in authenticity of the 
folk material involved.  That is, the more popular and intriguing, the more a particular 
piece of folk material is used for new uses such as advertising and propaganda, and the 
                                                
278 “The Seven Strands of Tradition: Varieties in Its Meaning in American Folklore 
Studies” Journal of Folklore Research, Vol. 21, No. 2/3, Culture, Tradition, Identity 
Conference, March 26-28, 1984 (May-Dec., 1984): 119. 
279 The question regarding whether certain traditions are geniuine or spurious has been 
discussed at length by Handler and Linnekin. Richard Handler and Jocelyn Linnekin,  
“Tradition, Genuine or Spurious,” The Journal of American Folklore, Vol. 97, No. 385 
(Jul.-Sep., 1984): 273-290.  
280 “It is a field of study which brings together historians, social anthropologists and a 
variety of other workers in the human sciences, and cannot adequately be pursued 
without such collaboration.” Eric Hobsbawm, ed. The Invention of Tradition, (London: 
Cambridge University Press, 1992), 14.  
281 Folklorism is also referred to as folklorismus (German) and fol’klorizm (Russian). 
Thomas A. Green, Folklore: an Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, Tales, Music, and Art, 
(Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 1997), 337. 

 
 
56
more the authenticity of the lore is questioned. The term folklorism was used in Russia 
from the 1930s, but contemporary folklore scholars give much of the credit to Hans 
Moser for bringing it to the forefront of folklore research in 1962.282 Moser defined 
folklorism as “second-hand mediation and presentation of folk culture,” and 
identified three forms of folklorism, “the performance of folk culture away from its 
original local context, the playful imitation of popular motifs by another social class, and 
the invention and creation of folklore from different purposes outside any known 
tradition.”283  According to Moser, folklorism implies imitation, copy, or repurposing of 
folklore by others, but this does not automatically deem the folk material unauthentic.   
 
Moser indicates that the imitation of popular motifs can be a form of folklorism, 
but he also implies that this imitation is conscious. Contemporary folklorist Guntis 
Šmidchens also believes that folklorism is “best defined functionally, denoting the 
conscious use of folklore as a symbol of ethnic, regional, or national culture.”284 The 
deliberate reproduction of folklore is often associated with sanctioned propaganda and/or 
commercialism.  Soviet folklorists like Viktor Gusev often tied folklorism to official 
ideologies such as government and state entities, whereas Western scholars like Moser 
and Bausinger associated folklorism with commercial contexts.285  The extent to which 
nineteenth century showmen who touted instances of familiar motifs featuring lusus 
naturae realized they were repurposing folklore may be a subject for speculation, but 
there is evidence that showman knew the popularity of “fairy stories” and lore in general 
and wanted entice customers using similar imagery.  
 
The term fakelore, coined by folklorist Richard Dorson, is sometimes used 
interchangeably with folklorism. Dorson himself uses the term folklorismus (folklorism) 
synonymously with fakelore and defines fakelore as “the presentation of spurious and 
synthetic writings under the claim that they are genuine folklore.”286 The question of 
intent in both folklorism and fakelore is obscured by the focus on authenticity and the 
reproduction of folklore, but most scholars agree that folklorism is not necessarily 
misleading, whereas fakelore is consciously manufactured and presented as genuine 
folklore. Both terms, however, refer to folklore outside of the normal context in which it 
would be found, and therefore both are applicable to the occurrence of motif ostension in 
nineteenth century exhibitions of lusus naturae.  
                                                
282 See Guntis Šmidchens, “Folklorism Revisited,” Journal of Folklore Research, Vol. 36, 
No. 1, (1999): 52. Hans Moser, “Vom Folklorismus in unserer Zeit” Zeitchrift für 
Volkskunde, 58: 177-209. Voigt suggests a modern form of folklorism which he calls new 
folklorism or neo-folklorism. Vilmos Voigt,  “Confines of Literature, Folklore, and 
Folklorism” Neohelicon, VII 2, (Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó, 1980): 131. 
283 My emphasis.  See Venetia J. Newall, “The Adaptation of Folklore and Tradition 
(Folklorismus), Folklore, Vol. 98, ii, (1987): 131 and Hans Moser, “Vom Folklorismus in 
unserer Zeit” Zeitchrift für Volkskunde, 58: 177-209 
284 Guntis Šmidchens, “Folklorism Revisited,” Journal of Folklore Research, Vol. 36, 
No. 1, (1999): 64. 
285 Ibid, 53. 
286 Richard Dorson, American Folklore and the Historian, (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1971), 9. Dorson first discussed this term in “Folklore and Fake Lore,” 
American Mercury, 70, (March, 1950): 335-343. 

 
 
57
 
In order for motif ostension to persist, either intentionally or unintentionally, there 
must be a desire to see the subject matter.  Folklorist Venetia J. Newall points out that the 
association between folklorism and nostalgia are “closely linked”287 Not only were motifs 
repurposed for amusement, but they enticed the audience by evoking a sense of nostalgia. 
Nineteenth century exhibitions of lusus naturae may have transported members of the 
audience into what anthropologist Kathleen Stewart calls “fantasy environments to roam 
around in.”288 Environments that encapsulate an ideological utopian reality are at the 
nexus of nostalgia, and the desire for nostalgia is often associated with a sense of 
discontent and longing.289 Nineteenth century instances of motif ostension created milieus 
charged by nostalgia, imbued with folklore in the guise of folklorism, and provided 
patrons with the opportunity to experience secular tourism as a form of amusement and 
education.  The appearance of motifs in early American exhibitions, whether authentic, 
reproduced, or recreated, attracted local urban crowds, as well as those living in rural 
areas. Folklorist Alan Dundes, for instance, believed that it might be impossible for 
folklorism to be discussed apart from tourism.290 
 
TOURISM 
 
 
Tourism had already gained popularity in Europe by the 1790s, and travel, 
particularly among the English, to the scenic countryside was extremely widespread 
among upper class Europeans. 291   America, on the other hand, suffered from poor roads, 
and a lack of convenient forms of transportation, and as a result, Americans did not 
                                                
287 Venetia J. Newall, “The Adaptation of Folklore and Tradition (Folklorismus)” 
Folklore, Vol. 98, ii, (1987): 140. 
288 Kathleen Stewart,  “Nostalgia: A Polemic,” Cultural Anthropology, Vol. 3, No. 3 
(Aug.,1988): 232. 
289 Poet and critic Susan Stewart, for example, describes nostalgia as “a sadness without 
an object, a sadness which creates a longing that of necessity is inauthentic because it 
does not take part in lived experience,” and Kathleen Stewart refers to nostalgia as  “a 
painful homesickness that generates desire…” Susan Stewart, On Longing: Narratives of 
the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, the Collection, (London: Duke University 
Press, 1993), 23 and Kathleen Stewart, “Nostalgia: A Polemic,” Cultural Anthropology, 
Vol.3, No.3 (Aug.,1988): 228. 
290 Journal of American Folklore, vol. 21, no 2/3, 207. 
291 John Sears, Sacred Places: American Tourist Attractions in the nineteenth Century,  
(Oxford, 1989), 3. Catherine Cocks reminds us that, in America, the term tourist was first 
noted in the 1800’s. See Catherine Cocks, Doing the Town: The Rise of Urban Tourism 
in the United States, 1850-1915,  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001), 5. I 
have found an occurrence of the term ‘tourist’ as early as 1801.  John Corry refers to the 
tourist in his book.  “The life of George Washington, late president and commander in 
chief of the armies of the United States of America interspersed with biographical 
anecdotes of the most eminent men who effected the American Revolution.” Corry uses 
the term and credits the word to “Vide Smyth’s Tour in the United States of America, vol, 
11, p. 148. 

 
 
58
embrace tourism until the early nineteenth century.292  The invention of the electric motor 
in 1821, the construction of turnpikes, steamboats, canals, and better roads allowed for 
the rapid growth of cities and eventually tourism on a larger scale.293 It was not until the 
1820s and 1830s that Americans began exploring natural wonders as tourist destinations.  
John Sears, for example, suggests that Americans turned to tourism and travel because it 
satiated the need to visit sacred, yet secular, places, and equally to establish a national 
culture (and identity) that was closely tied to nature.294 Those who visited these various 
attractions often referred to themselves as “pilgrims,” and visited tourist sites such as 
Niagara Falls, Mammoth Cave, The Connecticut and Hudson river valleys, the Willey 
House, and Yosemite, as well as cemeteries, asylums, and parks.295  
 
During the early years of the Republic, tourism existed as mostly endeavors to 
visit various museums and exhibitions in local towns or neighboring cities, but by the 
mid nineteenth century, the railroad became the standard choice of travel providing 
passengers with the option of long distance and overnight excursions, and later with the 
invention of the Pullman Sleeping Car, passengers could travel in further comfort. Major 
urban centers such as Boston, New York, and Philadelphia remained the epicenters for 
dime museums and exhibition halls, and although most of the patrons were from the city, 
tourists from rural areas also attended these exhibitions.  John Sears believes that 
Barnum’s miniature working model of Niagara Falls was presented to tourists in much 
the same way as natural tourist destinations such as Niagara Falls. That is, “The spectacle 
as a whole was supposed to awe the tourist, and its grandeur provided an ever-present 
context in which to examine its various parts.”296 
 
The study of tourism as an academic discipline in America is a fairly recent 
development, which was legitimized by the first edition of Hosts and Guests: The 
Anthropology of Tourism published in 1977.297  While it is true that both folklore and 
tourism studies are two seemingly distinct underdogs of anthropology, these two areas of 
study become inseparable once folklorism and/or fakelore is introduced, and there is a 
great similarity in the academic view of tourism and folklore.  Anthropologist Nelson 
Graburn writes, “Tourist behavior and aspirations are direct or indirect indicators of what 
                                                
292 Museums and exhibit halls, like Peale’s “Transparent Perspective Views,” seemed to 
offer a plentitude of opportunities for Americans to “travel” virtually to distant and 
unfamiliar lands.  These “moving pictures” allowed a spectator to view the countryside at 
night, see an elegant building in the rain, or watch water cascade in motion down a water-
wheel.  Dunlap’s American Daily Advertiser, 4, January 28, 1791. Other scenes exhibited 
in the American Museum included a “timid deer,” “a crawling badger,” “a grey American 
fox,” and “flexible snakes.” National Advocate, Vol. 1V.  Issue 1146, August 17, 1816. 
293 John Sears, Sacred Places: American Tourist Attractions in the Nineteenth Century, 
(Oxford, 1989), 3-4. 
294 Ibid, 3-6. 
295 Ibid, 5. 
296 Ibid, 29. 
297 Valene L. Smith, Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of Tourism, Second edition, 
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989), IX.  The first credited article on 
tourism is given to Theron Nunez, who in 1963, published the article “Tourism, 
Tradition, and Acculturation: Weekendismo in a Mexican Village” in Ethnology.  

 
 
59
is significant and meaningful in peoples’ lives, of their self-perceptions, their class or 
group identity, and their social aspirations,”298 and John Sears believes that “tourism 
played a powerful role in America’s invention of itself as a culture.” 299 Similarly, 
eminent folklorist Alan Dundes states, “Folklore furnishes a socially sanctioned outlet for 
cultural pressure points and individual anxieties.”300  Thompson defines a motif as an 
extraordinary element of a tale, and Robinson points out that there must be an 
extraordinary element involved with tourism.301 
 
Much like the impetus for transmitting folklore, there are social and cultural 
motivations for choosing a particular leisure tourist activity. Nineteenth century tourists 
were often able to “travel” to a different class, or socialize amongst men, women, and 
children during a time in American where gender, class, and age distinctions were 
prevalent. These motivations were particular to each individual tourist, much like interest 
in specific elements of folklore.  Current debates over tourist behavior and roles have 
spawned tourist typologies that categorize tourists into: organized mass tourist, individual 
tourist, the explorer, and the drifter.302  However, the most compelling reasons for tourism 
were often centered in folklore.   
 
Tourism studies in America often focused on travelers in Europe rather than 
North America. The closeness of international borders allowed visitors to traverse into 
foreign lands quite easily, whereas the vastness of the United States makes international 
travel less common.  Dime museums, exhibition halls, world’s fairs, and later circuses, 
were all popular tourist destinations for both local and rural visitors.  The Columbian 
Exposition attracted over 27 million visitors at a time when the population of the United 
States was only about 67 million.  Expositions became destinations or excursions for the 
American public, and “public curiosity about other peoples, mediated by the terms of the 
marketplace, produced an early form of touristic consumption.”303 
 
 
  Most of the larger expositions share the same basic elements that attracted viewers 
to dime museums during the mid to late nineteenth century.  That is, the patron sought 
authenticity as well as the exotic, and his/her expectations became embodied in the 
experience. Dean MacCannell, author of the quintessential book on tourism The Tourist, 
believes that all tourists seek authenticity.304 Cultural geographer Peter Jackson comments 
on the thorny question of authenticity while suggesting that, “tourists seek an ‘authentic’ 
                                                
298 Nelson Graburn,  “The Anthropology of Tourism,” Annals of Tourism Research, Vol 
10, (1983): 29.  
299 John Sears, Sacred Places: American Tourist Attractions in the nineteenth Century, 
(Oxford, 1989), 4. 
300 Alan Dundes, Interpreting Folklore, (Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1980), x.  
301 H. Robinson,  A Geography of Tourism, (Plymouth: Macdonald & Evans, 1976), 157. 
302 Valene L. Smith, Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of Tourism, Second edition, 
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989). Cohen, Erik.  Toward a 
Sociology of International Tourism.  Soc. Res. 39. 1. 164-82.  
303 Curtis M. Hinsley,  “The World as Marketplace: Commodification of the Exotic at the 
World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893,” In Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and 
Politics of Museum Display, (Washington 1991), 363. 
304 Dean MacCannell, The Tourist: A New Theory of the Leisure Class, (New York: 
Schocken, 1976).  

 
 
60
experience of other places, even when they know such authenticity to have been ‘staged’ 
specifically for their benefit,305 or where a new generation of ‘post-tourists’ may actually 
delight in inauthenticity, willingly suspending disbelief for the temporary enjoyment of 
the ‘exotic’.”306  
 
John Urry writes, “Places are chosen to be gazed upon because there is an 
anticipation, especially through daydreaming and fantasy, of intense pleasures, either on a 
different scale or involving different senses from those customarily encountered.”307 Urry 
goes on to suggest that this anticipation is constructed and sustained through a variety of 
non-tourist practices, such as film, TV, literature, etc.  This chapter demonstrates the 
connectedness between aspects of popular culture, such as literature, and the use of 
folklore.  I would propose that it is also manifestations of folklore (such as a familiar tale, 
or a motif) that provides the public with the “anticipation” Urry speaks of.  
 
In the form of folklore, stories and exhibitions of lusus naturae were able to mask 
or address larger issues, giving the American public the opportunity to negotiate through 
newly emerging concerns. The use of folklore allowed these exhibitions to be a specific 
form of entertainment in nineteenth century America where the public came together 
regardless of age, gender, or class. The audience, however, was not the only one to 
experience this form of liminality.  The performers themselves were often in a liminal 
state (e.g. half human/half monster, part fantasy, part reality, part man/woman, or part 
magical being), and often experienced a similar form of communitas.  
 
John Sears argues that tourist attractions “offered diverse attractions under 
umbrella of unifying spectacle.”308  Most sideshows featured the “Ten-in-One”, which 
consisted of at least ten performers with various deformities and skills in a constant cycle 
of acts. The Ten-in-One promised ten acts for the price of one, and more importantly 
boasted “no waiting.” The spectator could enter at any given point in the show and when 
the cycle of acts eventually rotated back to the act in which they entered, they would 
leave.  At first, the viewer appeared to be surrounded by a seemingly unrelated group of 
freaks, but soon found a connection between these acts—somehow they all appeared to 
fit together. Referring to American vacations, Gottlieb believes tourists desire the 
inversion of the everyday. “The middle-class tourist will seek to be a ‘peasant for a day’ 
while the lower middle-class tourist will seek to be ‘king/queen for a day’.”309  
                                                
305 Peter Jackson,  “Commodity Cultures: The Traffic in Things,” Transactions of the 
Institute of British Geographers, 24 (1999): 100. See also Dean MacCannell, The Tourist, 
(London, 1989). 
306 John Urry, The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies,  
(London: Sage Publications, Ltd., 1990). 
307 Ibid, 3. 
308 John Sears, Sacred Places: American Tourist Attractions in the nineteenth Century, 
(Oxford, 1989), 27. 
309 Those exhibited could perform complex dances, play instruments with great skill, 
speak multiple languages, and throw boomerangs with precision.  In fact, Americans 
were compelled to learn these feats, and a boomerang craze, for example, swept the 
nation with one toy company selling 11,000 boomerangs in 1888.  Roslyn Poignant,  
Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle,  (London: Yale University 
Press,  2004), 91, 138. Originally in the Daily Alta, February 26, 1888.  John Urry, The 

 
 
61
SEMIOTICS  
 
 
Semiotic studies exist at the intersection of folkloristics, folklorism, and tourism, 
and some scholars have suggested, “Folklore is semiosis.”310  The idea of motif ostension 
in and of itself necessitates a recognizable sign, but each observer interprets the signs 
uniquely.311  Sociologist John Urry writes, “The gaze is constructed through signs, and 
tourism involves the collection of signs.”312 Motif ostension, in a semiotic sense, is 
similar to the token.  Umberto Eco refers to tokens as replicas of the same type and “signs 
whose tokens, even though produced according to a type, possess a certain quality of 
material uniqueness.”313  Similarly, there may be multiple physical manifestations of a 
particular motif, such as the presentation of various little people (General Tom Thumb 
and Admiral Dot, for example) as Motif 451 Dwarf or Motif 530 Remarkably large or 
small men.  
 
More specifically, instances of motif ostension resemble the type-token. 314  
Philosopher Walter Benjamin pointed out that we often see countless reproductions of an 
original type before we see an original.315 Nineteenth century patrons, for example, were 
inundated with posters, broadsides, and repeated newspaper advertisements all literally 
and/or figuratively replicating a motif in print, through illustration, description, and 
printed matter. Russian linguist Roman Jakobson’s model of the functions of language 
can be used to show how the relationship between the seller and patron in nineteenth 
century American displays of lusus naturae is a form of communication (see Figure 2).316  
                                                                                                                                            
Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies,  (London: Sage 
Publications, Ltd., 1990), 11. A. Gottlieb, “Americans vacations,” Annals of Tourism 
Research, 9: 165-87.  
310 Janet L. Langlois,  “Folklore and Semiotics: An Introduction,” Journal of Folklore 
Research, Vol. 22. No. 2/3, Folklore and Semiotics, (May-Dec., 1985): 77. 
311 In her earlier work with Vázsonyi, Dégh believes that “It is common knowledge, 
however, that pure ostension exists more in theory than in reality as much as pure signs 
do not exist in reality.” In her more recent work, Dégh suggests that legend reenactments 
are performed by narrators by “pure ostension.” Linda Dégh, Legend and Belief,  
(Indiana: University of Indiana Press, 2001), 423 and “Does the Word "Dog" Bite? 
Ostensive Action: A Means of Legend-Telling,” Journal of Folklore Research, Vol. 20, 
No. 1, (May, 1983): 7. 
312 John Urry, The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies,  
(London: Sage Publications, Ltd., 1990), 3. 
313 Daniel Chandler, Semiotics: The Basics,  (New York: Routledge, 2002), 50.  See 
Umberto Eco, A Theory of Semiotics, (Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1976), 178. 
314 Charles Sanders Peirce, Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Volume I, 
paragraph 191, 1903 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1960). 
315 Walter Benjamin,  “The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction” 1935 
316 Roman Jakobson, "Linguistics and Poetics." Poetry of Grammar and Grammar of 
Poetry. Vol. 3 of Selected Writings. (The Hague: Mouton, 1981): 18-51. 

 
 
62
 
The tourist may first see a representation of the site— a marker.317 Images in 
pitchcards, broadsides, and pamphlets reinforced the notion that, indeed, these displays 
were something to see, and the large banners that hung outside the entrances of sideshow 
tents and exhibition acted as tourist site marker. The sensational slogans in daily 
newspapers, and later, the bright colored banners, act as markers, as well as the words of 
the barkers, pitchmen, and lecturers. Even the dimes, the entrance fee for dime museums, 
were signs indicating to the patron there is “something I need to see.” The 10 in 1 proved 
exceptionally useful because it offered a variety of visual displays. Dean MacCannell 
believes tourist attractions are signs and tourists can become disappointed when the sight 
involvement and marker are different.318 Barnum, for example, the father of the term 
humbug, often used misleading signs to entice the tourist, and sometimes, the site, 
although an instance of motif ostension, is not what was expected.  Also, particular signs 
indicated something extraordinary even when the attraction itself was mundane.319  
                                                
317 Claude F. Jacobs, “Folk for Whom? Tourist Guidebooks, Local Color, and the 
Spiritual Churches of New Orleans,” The Journal of American Folklore, Vol. 114, No. 
453 (Summer, 2001): 311. Dean MacCannell,  The Tourist: A New Theory of the Leisure 
Class, (New York: Schocken, 1976), 110.  
318 Dean MacCannell, The Tourist: A New Theory of the Leisure Class,  (New York: 
Schocken, 1976), 109. 
319 John Urry, The Tourist Gaze, (London 1990), 12. This happened quite frequently in 
World’s Fairs, and other venues that showcased exotic performers.  
Fig. 2. The use of semiotics in the marketing and reception of exhibitions of 
nineteenth century lusus naturae 

 
 
63
 
Jonathan Culler points out that without markers, a site “could not be experienced 
as authentic.”320 Most nineteenth century printed matter literally used words such as 
“authentic,” “real,” and “living” in conjunction with the exhibit of lusus naturae.  
MacCannell discusses the stages of site sacralization and suggests that sites go through a 
naming phase, framing and elevation phase, enshrinement, mechanical reproduction, and 
social reproduction.  According to MacCannell, a site cannot be a tourist attraction until it 
is named, and tourist attractions are “an empirical relationship between a tourist, a sight, 
and a marker.”321 Even photographs of performers were a form of signifying practice 
structured by planning, staging, and selecting the photographs to reproduce.322  
 
SOUVENIRS  
 
 
In the nineteenth century, the curtain may have been pulled off the once 
mysterious mythological explanations for these oddities, but it was just as quickly 
cloaked by the mysteries of medical terminology.  Pamphlets, posters and photographs of 
these individuals were accompanied with lengthy, detailed, and often bogus, descriptions 
of their medical ailments.  These scientific descriptions were often riddled with medical 
jargon and ridiculous explanations, but, nonetheless, managed once again to mystify the 
public. The science of physiognomy, or the act of judging human character from facial 
features, was popularized in the early nineteenth century with the invention of the 
Physiognotrace (invented in 1803) and was yet another way to propagate notions of racial 
(and bodily) superiority.323  
 
Souvenir pamphlets were offered to the public after the (side) show or exhibit, 
and with the payment of a coin, visitors were provided with a glimpse of esoteric 
knowledge regarding the human display.  Thompson notes that “an illustrated, printed 
narrative pamphlet almost always accompanied the actual exhibit, authenticating the 
freak with a ‘true life’ story and medical testimonies that served as both advertisement 
and souvenir, augmenting the pitchman’s oral spiel.”324  These pamphlets contained 
extravagant life stories of sideshow performers, provided scientific explanations for 
various maladies, and placed the spectator in an intellectually and physically superior 
light.  
 
 Poignant believes that these nineteenth century living exhibits and their show-
space “became a site where science and popular culture were entangled, and where a 
                                                
320 Jonathan Culler, Framing the Sign: Criticism and Its Institutions, (Oklahoma: 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1990), 8.  
321 MacCannell, Dean.  The Tourist: A New Theory of the Leisure Class.  New York:  
Schocken, 1976. p. 41.  
322 John Urry, The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies,  
(London: Sage Publications, Ltd., 1990), 138.  
323 Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimlett, Destination Culture: Tourism, Museums, and Heritage, 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998), 38. 
324 Rosemarie Garland Thomson, Extraordinary bodies: Figuring physical disability in 
America culture and literature, (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997), 61. 
 

 
 
64
potent mix of stereotypic ideas about race was brewed.”325 Science and anthropology 
were shaping the “the discourse about the differences between human types, ranking 
them on a ladder of cultural stages that placed the hunter-gather societies like the 
‘Patagonians, Eskimos, Bushmen, Veddas, Laplanders, Australians’ at the lowest level of 
human development.”326 Cassuto harks back to a time when American race relations were 
abounding and suggests, “It was this racially divided American society of the 1840s that 
nurtured the freak show, which quickly took root and thrived in its troubled soil.”327  
Once the seeds of unrest were laid, the success of promoting racially inferior peoples 
became undeniably related to the introduction of “scientific knowledge” to the people. 
The publication of Charles Darwin’s Origin of Species (1859) influenced the way human 
exhibitions were framed. Such an example was a young girl from the Australian Palm 
Islands who was billed as the “missing link” and went by the name “the Ape Girl”, 
“Princess Tagarah” and “Sussy.328  Julia Pastrana, a Mexican Indian woman whose body 
was covered with “thick black hair” was first exhibited in New York’s Gothic Hall in 
1854 and remained such an object of both wonder and curiosity, her embalmed body 
(along with her child) was displayed from 1860-1993.329 Rosemarie Garland-Thomson 
notes how her body “radically violated expectations of how human beings should appear” 
and visibly illustrated the “discursive shift from prodigy to pathology.” 330   
 
Teratology was also a growing trend, and with it came depictions of humans with 
abnormalities as creations of God rather than the monsters of early mythology.331  This of 
course further roused the curiosity of those seeking to understand nonstandard bodies on 
a more spiritual level.  When souvenirs were involved, and they usually were, it did not 
matter whether the tourist was a local, or someone who traveled a great distance.  
Americans wanted proof of their educational, grotesque, or fascinating experience.  After 
a show, there was often the opportunity to purchase a small inexpensive souvenir.   The 
old pamphlets were shortened to fit on a postcard-sized paper and with a photograph on 
one side and a “story” on the other.  These souvenirs became known as pitchcards.  
Pitchcards were often the main source of income for many of the performers, mostly 
benefiting from the fads of the times. During this period, it has been noted that 
Americans suffered from “a compulsion to collect photographs,” and freaks were among 
                                                
325 Roslyn Poignant, Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle,  
(London: Yale University Press, 2004), 124-125. 
326 Ibid, 119. 
327 Leonard Cassuto, “‘What an Object He Would Have Made of Me!’” In Freakery: 
Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary Body,  (New York, 1996), 244-245. 
328 Poignant, Roslyn. Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle.  
London: Yale University Press,  2004, 83. 
329 Rosemarie Garland-Thomson,  “Making Freaks: Visual Rhetorics and the Spectacle of 
Julia Pastrana” in Cohen and Weiss, Thinking the Limits of the Body,  (SUNY Press, 
2003), 129, 137. 
330 Ibid. 
331 For an brief and interesting account of the history of teratology, See Mark V. Barrow’s 
“A Brief History of Teratology to the Early 20th Century,” in Teratology 4 (May 2005): 
119-130.  

 
 
65
the favored subjects.332  One could almost always find a photo album on the coffee table 
of a Victorian home, and in its pages; one would most likely find a collection of various 
human prodigies.333   
  
 Those on display often autographed personal notes on these souvenirs which 
often attempted to show them as an “able body,” while the photograph itself almost 
always exaggerated and accentuated the individual’s abnormality (or disability) by either 
juxtaposing them with extreme opposites or by placing them in costume and scenery that 
exemplified their “stage character.”  In addition, the living exhibits were often shown as a 
nuclear family.   In one photograph, Tom Thumb and Lavinia Warren (both little people) 
were shown posing with a baby (without any abnormalities) in order to emulate the 
nuclear family.334  Hinsely tells us of a photograph featuring the newborn Arab boy (born 
at the Chicago exposition), which was exceptionally popular because of the 
representation of the nuclear family.335 The life stories of the performer did not always 
have, to use Charlotte Linde’s term, a high “reportability.” Linde suggests that one of the 
criteria for including a story one’s life story is that it contains an event that is unusual, but 
in the case of “commodified otherness,” the events described could be seen as “unusual” 
only in regards to their physical abnormality or talent.336  
 
By the 1880s even prestigious photography studios specialized in photographing 
human oddities.337 These photographs were often altered and exaggerated either directly 
on the photograph or by adding props.  Sometimes costumes were peculiarly fabricated as 
in the example of three Australian Aboriginals dressed in clothes that were “much finer 
than would have been worn customarily.”338 Lionel “The Lion Faced Boy” (sometimes 
the “dog faced boy”) was frequently shown wearing a “upper-class or even aristocratic 
clothing in stately and educated poses.”339 Even the “Wild Men of Borneo” were shown, 
at times, wearing strange costumes and standing in particularly rehearsed (Western) 
poses. The Rousseauian myth of the “noble savage” was shattered and pieced together as 
these individuals were simultaneously displayed as “headhunters” as well as family 
                                                
332 Robert Bogdan, Freak Show: Presenting Human Oddities for Amusement and Profit, 
(Chicago, 1988), 11. 
333 Ibid, 12. 
334 Rachel Adams, Sideshow U.S.A.: Freaks and the American Cultural Imagination,  
(Chicago 2001), 116. 
335 Curtis M. Hinsley,  “The World as Marketplace: Commodification of the Exotic at the 
World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893, in Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and 
Politics of Museum Display, (Washington 1991), 359-360. 
336 Charlotte Linde, Life Stories, (New York, 1993), 21-22. 
337 Bogdan mentions Mathew Brady, who was “famous for his Lincoln portraits and his 
striking visual chronicle of the Civil War.” See Robert Bogdan, Freak Show: Presenting 
Human Oddities for Amusement and Profit,  (Chicago, 1988), 12. 
338 Roslyn Poignant, Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle,  
(London: Yale University Press, 2004), 73. 
339 Nigel, Rothfels,  “Aztecs, Aborigines, and Ape-People” in Rosemarie Garland 
Thomson, Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary Body, (New York, 1996), 
170; Daniel P. Mannix, Freaks: We Who Are Not As Others, (San Francisco, 1990), 87. 

 
 
66
oriented individuals (who also were subjected to the daily grind of performing household 
chores, raising a family, or obtaining food).   
 
In 1893, the American Engraving Company of Chicago published Midway Types: 
A Book of Illustrated Lessons About the People of the Midway Plaisance World’s Fair 
1893.  This book attempted to categorize the different physiological and cultural types of 
exhibitions and these telling images, “served to alleviate anxieties about class differences 
and other frictions of society, to convince the Parisian that really these other types were 
merely ‘harmless oddballs.’”340 With a glimpse of humanity in these individuals, one 
could witness hope in “civilizing” them.  And with this hope came the possibility of 
continued public interest, more ticket sales, and the spectator’s own conjecture regarding 
when the spectacle would transform and for how long the spectacle would remain a 
“savage.”  Sometimes, this transformation would deliberately be made visible to the 
public.  For example, the “Missing Link”, or “Ape Girl” was photographed adorned in a 
“primitive” leather costume, leaning casually against a wooden prop imbedded with 
jungle foliage, standing before a painted backdrop of a Western countryside, and wearing 
Western boots.341  
 
  
NARRATOLOGY & DISPLAY 
 
 
The narrative structure of the presentation of lusus naturae can be critically 
examined using thematic and modal forms of narratology. Structuralist approaches are 
particularly useful from an interdisciplinary perspective. Critical Studies scholar, Ellen 
Seiter, demonstrates that semiotics and structuralism are ways of finding connections 
between various academic disciplines, and literary theorist Mieke Bal declares a profound 
interdisciplinary interaction between narratology and anthropology.342 Bal defines fabula 
as a series of events that are caused or experienced by actors, and uses the example of 
Tom Thumb to show how people may be familiar with different versions of stories (or 
different “texts”).343 Bal also suggests that the “notion of fabula can benefit from 
interdisciplinary work, but only if one leaves behind the question of how an image tells a 
predetermined story, in favor of asking what story the visual representation produces, 
thereby thoroughly modifying its pre-textual ‘source’.”344 Patrons experiencing motif 
ostension also relate their experience of a particular image to various versions of a story. 
The display becomes a narrative in which the viewer completes the story.  
                                                
340 Meg Armstrong,  “‘A Jumble of Foreignness:’ The Subline Musayums of Nineteenth 
Century Fairs and Expositions.” Cultural Critique, No. 23 (Winter, 1992-1993): 209.  
341 Roslyn Poignant, Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle,  
(London: Yale University Press, 2004), 122. 
342 Ellen Seiter,  “Semiotics, Structuralism, and Television,” Channels of Discourse, 
Reassembled: Television and Contemporary Criticism, (University of North Carolina 
Press, 1992). Mieke Bal,  “The Point of Narratology,” Poetics Today, Vol. 11.  No. 4, 
Narratology Revisited II (Winter, 1990): 731.   
343 Mieke Bal, Narratology: Introduction to the Theory of Narrative, (Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 2009), 5-6. 
344 Mieke Bal,  “The Point of Narratology,” Poetics Today, Vol. 11.  No. 4, Narratology 
Revisited II (Winter, 1990): 744.  

 
 
67
 
Gerald Prince and Arlene Noble remark that misleading facts told by a narrator 
may not be deemed spurious if established in the narrative universe. If the truth does not 
necessarily depend on the diegetic status of the narrator, cases of motif ostension allow 
the suspension of factual judgment by observers during the interaction or experience.345 
Upon interacting and experiencing a display of lusus naturae, patrons may find 
themselves entering a narrative, or fictional world shaped by preconceived stories 
containing motifs, and engaged by the words of the narrator (lecturer, pamphlet, or the 
performer him/herself). If a display of lusus naturae can become an instance of motif 
ostension, it would follow that each instance would occur within the frame of a folk 
narrative. A visual motif can be the basis for an entire tale-type, and like written and oral 
narratives, a visual narrative can also be made up of several motifs.  Prince also defines 
diegesis, in terms of narratology, as the telling of a story by a narrator.346 Nineteenth 
century showmen, lecturers, and performers also presented a story to the audience in 
conjunction with a visual motif by the use of a pitchman, pamphlet, or the 
actor/performer him or herself engaging with the audience.  
 
There are as many folklorists who find categorizing folk narratives into defined 
genres as complicating as those who find it useful, but the usefulness of such 
classification is divulged when narratives function and present themselves in similar 
ways.347 Instances of motif ostension in nineteenth century exhibitions exist at the axis of 
narrative and performance, and although showmen attempt to intentionally shape the 
viewer’s experience through planned context (and the creation of a narrative), factors 
such as idiosyncratic responses allow the viewer to alter the given narrative according to 
his or her previous knowledge. In this view, showmen often frame displays of lusus 
naturae within narratives of legends (fabulates), belief stories, and memorates in order to 
create a sense of historical importance and may also use fairy tales and folk tales to 
construct a place of fantasy.348 These genres are by no means mutually exclusive and 
sometimes a showman will create a story that might be considered uncategorizable by a 
folklorist.  Dégh has commented on the creative aspect of the creation of folklore by 
declaring that 
 
 The legend performer may select a whole set, a type, one or more unique pieces, 
a string of motifs, one motif, or may simply affirm the existence of magic without 
                                                
345 Gerald and Arlene Noble Prince,  “Narratology, Narrative, and Meaning,” Poetics 
Today, VOl. 12, No. 3 (Autumn, 1991): 548.  
346 Gerald Prince, A Dictionary of Narratology,  (Nebraska: University of Nebraska 
Press, 2003).  
347 Some of the major forms of narrative folklore include: myths, legends, folktales, and 
fairy tales. Alan Dundes gives an extensive list in The Study of Folklore,  (New Jersey: 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1965), 3. Elliot Oring Discusses Dundes’ choices in Folk Groups and 
Folklore Genres: An Introduction, (Utah: Utah University Press, 1986), 3-18. 
348 Linda Dégh has written a comprehensive book on the topic of legend.  See Legend 
and Belief,  (Indiana: University of Indiana Press, 2001). Donald Ward has written on the 
difference between belief story and belief legend in “Genre Morphology of Legendry: 
Belief Story versus Belief Legend,” Western Folklore, Vol. 50, No. 3 (July, 1991): 296-
303.  

 
 
68
conveying any specific content…Personal selection and combination of several 
motifs is not only a behavior, but is obviously a creative act. And because all 
motifs are traditional and well known, there is no other way of creation than to 
choose from what is available.349 
 
 
Showmen were quick to assemble narratives which contained popular motifs, 
whether fairytale, folktale, legend, or other genre of folk narrative.  To the showmen, 
these genres had no boundaries—giants from folktales could be found roaming the streets 
of popular legends and magic helpers or dwarves might interact with a modern day 
celebrity (e.g. General Tom Thumb and the Queen of England).  
 
The legend has been defined at great length by folklorist Timothy Tangherlini as 
“a short (mono) episodic, traditional, highly ecotypified historicized narrative performed 
in a conversational mode, reflecting on a psychological level a symbolic representation of 
folk belief and collective experiences and serving as a reaffirmation of commonly held 
values of the group to whose tradition it belongs." Folklorist Linda Dégh takes a 
straightforward approach and simply states that tales cannot be true, and the legend can 
be.350 One of the most important elements of legends is that they are believable and based 
in our reality. The fabulate was coined by C.W. von Sydow in 1934 and refers to a form 
of a migratory legend told principally for entertainment.  The fabulate is in contrast to the 
memorate, which is a narrative told from personal experience.351 Lusus naturae were part 
of a larger narrative that thrived on personal experience and belief. The legend, and more 
particularly the fabulate, allowed both the showman (lecturer or pitchman) and the viewer 
to engage in a narrative on a personal level. Almost every display of lusus naturae was 
marketed as “living” and “real,” and as a result, believability was invariably involved. 
 
The popularity of modern Fairy tales is often attributed to the Brothers Grimm 
and their publication of Kinder-und Hausmärchen (1812).  For folklorists, fairy tales are 
narratives that often contain magical helpers, complex tasks, and occur in a place outside 
our own temporal and physical spatiality, and when used for contextual purposes 
alongside motif ostension, the showman were able conjure images of dwarves (General 
Tom Thumb), giants (Chang the Chinese giant), and strange creatures (fejee mermaid), 
luring viewers into a fantasy world, yet based in our reality.  
 
PITCHES 
 
Throughout the mid nineteenth century in America, exhibits of lusus naturae were 
accompanied by additional information, usually in the form of a captivating narrative told 
by a pitchman, lecturer, printed pamphlet, or the performer him, or herself. Whether told 
orally or read by the viewer in a broadside, the words created an additional narrative, 
                                                
349 Dégh, Linda.  Legend and Belief.  Indiana: University of Indiana Press, 2001, 421. 
350 Tangherlini, "'It Happened Not Too Far from Here...': A Survey of Legend Theory and 
Characterization" Western Folklore 49.4 (October 1990:371-390): 85. Dégh, Linda.  
Legend and Belief.  Indiana: University of Indiana Press, 2001, 6.  
351 von Sydow, Carl Wilhelm.  Selected Papers on Folklore. (New York: Arno Press, 
[1948] 1978). Thomas A. Green, Folklore: An Encyclopedia on Beliefs, Customs, Tales, 
Music, and Art.  Vol. 1. A-H. (Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 1997), 274. 

 
 
69
which framed the exhibit and gave context to the display. Amanda Zeitlin describes the 
art of the sideshow carnival pitchman: 
 
The pitchman tells the audience how to look at what they are going to see.  The 
talkers’ language of expectation evokes pictures deeply rooted in the imagination, 
of half men/half animals, of half men/half women, mythological creatures, pictures 
which are far richer than anything the pitchman could possibly show the audience.  
It is the talkers who transforms a man with a skin disease into an Elephant Boy, 
with the “rough, tough, shaggy, baggy hide of an elephant”’ or a young man with 
buck teeth into Kokomo the Mule Face boy, having the “lower jaws, the protruding 
teeth that look and resemble that of a mule.352 
 
The pitchmen not only evoked a sense of folkloric familiarity, but the words were often 
structured like traditional sermons and recited per cola et commata.  The use of biblical 
cadence, as Daniel Melia remarks, “provide the authority of religion and oblique 
reference to the mystery (and wonders) of the Bible.”353 In an article on the infamous 
pitchman Fred “Doc” Bloodgood, Deborah Tannen proposes that the structure of the 
pitch “make[s] use of repeated rhythmic patterns, sound play, and specific details to 
create immediacy and vivid imagery—features found in poetry, both oral and written.”354 
Doc Bloodgood himself said, “[A] successful pitch always made use of repeated 
rhythmic patterns and word play.  People expected a certain sound, just as they did with 
an auctioneer.  And they also expected specific details to establish a sense of 
authenticity…I always tried to use alliteration and euphonious phrases.”355 The pitch is an 
integral part of exhibition, as it lures in the audience by giving a mental picture of the 
images to soon follow.  
 
EPIC LAWS 
 
 
Pitchmen are, in a sense, simultaneously selling the unknown and familiar, and 
because much of their material is based in folklore, the patterns in their oral spiels and 
written pamphlets also follow folk narrative patterns. Danish folklorist Axel Olrik found 
that traditional folktales followed patterns that he referred to as “epic laws.”356 Olrik 
noticed that regardless of narrative preference, “storytellers have a tendency to observe 
                                                
352 Amanda Dargan Zeitlin,  “American talkers: The art of the sideshow carnival 
pitchman and other itinerant showmen and vendors,” Ph.D. diss., University of 
Pennsylvania, In Dissertations & Theses: A&I [database on-line]; available from 
http://www.proquest.com (publication number AAT 9235221; accessed July 9, 2011), 5 
353 personal email correnspondence. 
354 Fred ‘Doc” Bloodgood,  “The Medicine and Sideshow Pitches,” In Deborah Tannen,  
Analyzing Discourse: Text and Talk, (Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press, 
1982), 371. 
355 Brooks McNamara, “Talking,” The Drama Review: TDR, Vol. 31.  No. 2,  (Summer 
1987): 49. 
356 Axel Olrik’s epic “laws” are particularly useful because they are not bound by folklore 
genre and are applicable to myth, folktale, legend, etc. 

 
 
70
certain practices in composition and style that are generally common to large areas and 
different categories of narratives, including most of the European narrative tradition.”357  
Some of Olrik’s epic laws are: The Law of Opening and the Law of Closing, the Law of 
Repetition, The Law of Two to a Scene, Unity of Plot, the Law of Concentration on a 
Leading Character, the Law of Contrast, the Law of Twins, the Law of the Single Strand, 
and the Use of Tableaux Scenes.  
 
Olrik’s laws can be applied to the narratives surrounding displays of lusus naturae 
and instances of motif ostension.  The Law of Twins, for example, can be found in 
exhibitions featuring conjoined twins like Chang and Eng. Olrik stated that if twins are 
present, they are usually subject to the Law of Contrast (one introverted, one extraverted, 
for example).  As with most siblings, conjoined twins often have distinct personalities, 
but following Olrik’s law of contrast, their characteristics were especially exaggerated in 
advertisements. The New York Daily Times (1852), for example, writes “It is also 
generally admitted that there is a marked difference in the systems and temperaments of 
the gentlemen…”358 and The Chicago Daily Tribune (1873) reported, “If Chang and Eng, 
the Siamese twins, should get intoxicated, what a picture it would make.  We should 
probably see Chang high and Eng raving.”359 Rosa and Josefa Blasek, two famous female 
conjoined twins, were advertised as “New Freaks in Twins, Bohemian Sisters Stranger 
Than the Siamese.  Distinct in Individuality.”  The advertisement gives lengthy 
elaborations of their “distinct individualities.”360  
 
In folklore, particularly mythology, twins were often portrayed as enemies and/or 
opposites (male/female, sun/moon). Leslie Fiedler gives the prototype of the enemy twin 
brother, and most likely referring to Chang and Eng, he notes that “Chroniclers of actual 
Siamese Twins have adapted this aspect of the myth, portraying male pairs in particular 
as opposite in temperament and taste.”361 Exhibitors, such as Barnum, often advertised 
the uncanny juxtaposition of weak vs. strong and little vs. big, much like Olrik’s law of 
contrast.  Showmen also used terms such as General or Admiral and dressed his tiny 
marvels as persons with great strength or military prowess. Waino and Plutano were 
advertised as “The Little Wild Men of Borneo” who possessed of marvelous strength and 
[were] mere Dwarfs.”362 
 
LITERATURE & FOLKLORE 
 
 
Stith Thompson believed that folklore “is a subject which comes in between 
literature and anthropology.”363  Folklore was originally thought to be traditional 
                                                
357 Axel Olrik, Principles for Oral Narrative Research, (Indiana: Indiana University 
Press, 1992), 41.  
358 The Siamese Twins, New York Daily Times, November 24, 1852, 7. 
359 Chicago Daily Tribune, September 7, 1873, 10.  
360 “New Freaks in Twins” Special Correspondence of the Washington Post, The 
Washington Post, December 9, 1904, 3.  
361 Leslie Fiedler, Freaks: Myths & Images of the Secret Self,  (New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1978), 204. 
362 Chicago Daily Tribune, January 25, 1885, 6.   
363 Stith Thompson, “Folklore at Midcentury,” Midwest Folklore 1, (1951): 12. 

 
 
71
information that was transmitted orally, but contemporary folklorists agree that this 
information can also be communicated through the written word.  The introduction of 
print dramatically changed the study, collection, and preservation of folklore. Eighteenth 
century collections of Western folklore focused on collecting and documenting the 
ethnographies of curious new cultures (travel literature), and/or explaining unusual 
occurrences in a religious light (providences) rather than to preserve a fading past, and 
many writers were frequently influenced by popular culture resulting in the manifestation 
of popular folk motifs into novels and ephemera. 
   
During the 1840s – 1880s, folklore data was often disseminated through print 
publications such as newspapers, broadsides, chapbooks, almanacs, and pamphlets with 
bowdlerized versions of legends, folktales, and fairytales often appearing in books.364  
Many works of fiction were structured similarly to folk narratives, and it was not unusual 
for popular fiction to be inspired by, or contain trace elements of folklore data.  
Washington Irving, for example, suggested that Henry Rowe Schoolcraft’s collection of 
American Indian oral narratives be used to “provide a distinctive flair to American 
literature.”365 Nathaniel Hawthorne rewrote Greek myths in his A Wonder-book for Girls 
and Boys (1852) and Hawthorne’s short story “The Great Carbuncle” was based on an 
Indian legend.  
 
Victorian print culture in America was heavily influenced by journalism, and 
more particularly sensationalism.366  Strange stories of “monsters” like Chang and Eng 
and other folk motifs were some of the most popular tales, and even Mark Twain was so 
enamored by conjoined twins, Chang and Eng, he wrote “Personal Habits of the Siamese 
Twins (1869).” Twain, however, was no stranger to folklore or sensationalism, as he was 
one of the charter members of the American Folklore Society (established in 1888) and a 
friend and fan of Barnum (who was 25 years his senior).367 During the peak of Chang and 
Eng’s first career wave,  Robert Graves and Hanna Gould published popular poems about 
Siamese twins, but the most popular publication on the topic was acclaimed English 
author Edward Bulwer-Lytton’s “The Siamese Twins.  A tale of the Times” written in 
1831.368 Although published in London, Bulwer’s tale circulated widely in the United 
                                                
364 Jim Cullen believes that popular fictional narratives “appeared in three formats 
between 1840’s and 1890’s: the story paper, the dime novel, and the cheap library.” Jim 
Cullen, ed. Popular Culture in American History, (Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishing 
Ltd., 2001), 82.  
365 William K. McNeil, A History of American Folklore Scholarship Before 1908.  Vol. 1 
Dissertation, (Indiana University, 1980), 111. During the early nineteenth century, 
Schoolcraft, with the help of his brothers-in-law William and George Johnston, collected 
narratives at meetings, through lectures and surveys.   
366 Matthew Rubery, “Victorian Print Culture, Journalism and the Novel,” Literature 
Compass, Volume 7, Issue 4, (April 2010): 290–300. 
367 It is even suspected that some of Twains stories were written around P.T. Barnum’s 
character.  Regarding Twain’s “A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court” see 
Hamlin Hill, “Barnum, Bridgeport ant The Connecticut Yankee,” American Quarterly 16 
(Winter): 615-616. 
368 Edward Bulwer Lytton, The Siamese Twins: A Satirical Tale of the Times with Other 
Poems, (New York: J & J Harper, 1831). Graves writes “Siamese twins: one, maddened 

 
 
72
States and refers to the protagonists as “monster boys,” who are conspicuously named 
Chang and Ching.369  
 
Bulwer’s poem mimics the real lives of Chang and Eng, with two major 
differences, the protagonists are named Chang and Ching and eventually become 
separated through surgery.  The poet was criticized for using the popularity of the twins 
to sell his book.  For example, a few months after publication one critic writes “The title 
of his poem seems to have been seized upon as one which at present would be likely to 
make the book sell; and it bears marks of haste in the composition. 370 Even Bulwer’s 
poem “narrates [Chang and Eng’s] dissimilarity of disposition.”371 
 
Most interesting, is the frontispiece from the book (see Figure 3). The illustration 
places the conjoined twins, who are obvious doppelgangers for Chang and Eng, inside the 
realm of a Greek myth alongside Ares the Olympian God of War.  The illustration depicts 
a bat, which is often perceived as an omen of evil.  Similarly, at birth, the real life Chang 
and Eng were also considered to be a portent of misfortune. The large serpent looming 
above the twins may be a representation of the mythical Greek serpent (Ismenian 
Dragon), which is said to have emerged from an extraordinary land, and is described in 
the story of Oedipus as a land producing strange monsters and prodigies.372 The 
illustration uses the familiar connection between Siamese Twins (Motif F523 Two 
persons with bodies joined. Siamese twins) and Greek myth to further attract the public, 
and presents the conjoined twins as a familiar motif in an appropriate context.  
Daston and Park comment on the narrative conventions from the 16th century, which 
often accompany accounts of monsters.  “Details of place and date and often names of 
parents and witnesses unfailingly appeared,” and Daston suggests this is to lend truth and 
authenticity “apparently anticipating skepticism on the part of readers.”373  The term lusus 
naturae usually referred to something that was not entirely human, but possessed human 
characteristics.  James Fenimore Cooper, for example, uses the term lusus naturae in his 
short story “The Water-witch” (1830) to describe a group of less desirable individuals 
who did not seem human in character.374  
 
                                                                                                                                            
by the other’s moral bigotry, Resolved at length to misbehave And drink them both into 
the grave.” Hanna Flagg Gould, “To the Siamese Twins.  Poems by Miss H.F. Gould,” 
(Boston: Hilliard, Gray & Co, 1839), 54 Literature Online (1996).  
369 “The Siamese Twins,” The Philadelphia Album and Ladies’ Literary Literary 
Portfolio, 117, Vol. 5, Issue 15, April 9, 1831. 
370 “Siamese Twins,” Atkinson’s Casket, No. 7, 326, (Jul 1831). 
371 “The Siamese Twins,” The Philadelphia Album and Ladies’ Literary Literary 
Portfolio, 117, Vol. 5, Issue 15, April 9, 1831. 
372 Seneca, Oedipus 725 ff (trans. Miller) (Roman tragedy C1st A.D.): "Our land [Thebes] 
has e’er produced strange monsters: either a serpent [the Ismenian Drakog], rising from 
the valley’s depths…. The wanderer [Kadmos] quaked at prodigies so strange, and 
fearfully awaited the assault of the new-born folk” 
373 Lorraine Daston, Wonders and the order of nature, (New York: Zone Books; 
Cambridge, Mass.: Distributed by MIT Press, 1998), 191. 
374 James Fenimore Cooper, The Works of J. Fenimore Cooper; The Water-witch; or, The 
Skimmer of the seas; a tale ... (New York: G. P. Putnam, 1852), 354. 

 
 
73
 
 
 
Inspired by the tale of Tom Thumb among other stories of miniature and giant 
people, Hans Christian Anderson’s Thumbelina (Tommelise) was published in Denmark 
in 1835 and translated into English in 1846 by Mary Howitt.  Howitt bowdlerized the 
texts and many other translations, versions, and adaptations started to surface in the mid 
to late nineteenth century in America. Admiral Dot, Commodore Nutt, and General Tom 
Thumb (Motif  F451 Dwarf ) were all exhibited by Barnum during this period with great 
success, and showmen often exhibited unusual people who represented familiar motifs 
found in novels and newspaper serials in print. 
 
 
PSEUDO-EVENTS & HEROES 
 
 
Many exhibitions, particularly of lusus naturae, were presented as folklore and 
allowed the public to experience folklore on an interactive level (motif ostension).  
Showmen used the most popular subject matters to entice the audience, and often 
Figure 3 

 
 
74
decorated and presented performers as doppelgangers of motifs found in printed folklore 
(novels, newspapers, chapbooks, and serials).  Just as folklore can allow the expression of 
deep-rooted anxieties about society, the attendance of these exhibitions allowed visitors 
to experience strange, curious, and inappropriate subject matters under the guise of 
rational amusements. Ultimately, exhibitions could be presented in a context that suited 
the showman’s narrative style.  
 
Marketing an exhibition of lusus naturae incorporated various strategies, and 
Barnum had one of the most creative and successful approaches.  Historian and writer 
Daniel Boorstin calls Barnum “the first modern master of pseudo-events.” Boorstin 
defines the pseudo-event as a planned happening that is created primarily for the purpose 
of being reported or reproduced, and suggests that heroes can become celebrities as a 
human pseudo-event.375  Boorstin proposes that the synthetic creation of “fame” can lead 
to celebrity status, but that celebrity-worship and hero-worship should not be confused—
a celebrity can be made, but we can’t make a celebrity a hero.376  Boorstin believes that in 
the United States there has been a decline of the “folk” and the rise of the “mass,” and he 
alludes to the decline of folklore production and the increase of mass media.  
 
While the folk created heroes, the mass can only look and listen for them.  It is 
waiting to be shown and told…the folk had a universe of its own creation, its own 
world of giants and dwarfs, magicians and witches.  The mass lives in the very 
different fantasy world of pseudo-events.377 
 
Boorstin does not consider that popular forms of entertainment, such as nineteenth 
century exhibitions of lusus nature, and the subsequent marketing of these exhibitions, 
can be marketed and presented as folklore and experienced as motif ostension.  Instances 
of motif ostension encompass both folk heroes and mass culture. The heroes turned 
celebrities are indeed the giants, dwarfs, magicians, and witches that Boorstin speaks of.  
 
Performers of the most successful exhibitions during this era were believed to be 
heroes in the eyes of the public. Motif A526.7 Culture hero performs remarkable feats of 
strength and skill can be seen to represent most of Barnum’s performers as they were 
considered to be “the most talented performers” and often received as heroes.378 
Commodore Nutt, for instance, was called “the diminutive hero of Barnum’s Museum,” 
and General Tom Thumb was also referred to as a “miniature hero.”379  
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
375 Daniel J. Boorstin, The Image: A Guide to Pseudo-Events in America, (New York: 
Harper and Row, 1961).  
376 Ibid, 48. 
377 Ibid.  
378 Hudson River Chronicle, Vol. 8, Issue 10, December 17, 1844, 3. 
379 Amusements, New York Times, March 10, 1862, 5  and “Departure of Tom Thumb for 
America,” Morning News, Vol. 3. Issue 95, March 1, 1847, 2.  

 
 
75
 
 
CHAPTER 4 
 FOLKLORE AND EXPERIENCE: RECEPTION 
 
 
PATRONS AS ACTIVE AND PASSIVE BEARERS  
  
 
As discussed in Chapter 3, showmen and curators of exhibitions of lusus naturae 
can be considered active bearers of tradition.  Each impresario was infamous for his 
carefully curated bevy of performers and narratives. Equally, as observers of folklore, 
visitors of these exhibitions can also be considered as active and passive bearers. As 
previously defined by von Sydow, active bearers keep tradition alive by transmitting it, 
and passive bearers do nothing to spread tradition or keep it alive.380  Kenneth Goldstein 
reminds us that the folk are not simply divided into active and passive bearers, and even 
Von Sydow believes that “[Among the peasantry] one person may be active as regards 
certain traditions, and passive in respect of others, indeed entirely without certain other 
traditions.  A carrier of tradition is thus active only as regards part of his stock, being 
passive in so far as perhaps the major part is concerned.”381   
 
After viewing an exhibition of lusus naturae, the patron may choose to spread the 
lore surrounding a display at an exhibition or let the experience die. Barnum’s exhibitions 
became synonymous with personal experience tales and motif ostension.  The men in 
Zenas T. Haines’s barracks acted out their own version of one of Barnum’s successful 
acts (Motif G11.11.1 Albino twins cannibals), as Haines writes, “The ‘Albino Family,’ 
with head-dresses of frayed ropes, was an exceedingly clever take-off of Barnum’s 
curious beings at the Aquarial Gardens.”382 The re-enacting of the Albino Family reveals 
the men involved as active bearers of tradition.  
 
Sightings of strange and unusual beings were also frequently published in 
newspapers, such as the “Wild Man, Monkey, Sea-Serpent, or Some Thing Else” seen by 
the citizen Patrick C. Flournoy in 1831.  Flournoy’s account describes an encounter with 
a creature whose tail was tied to the limb of a tree, and had long and flowing hair to his 
waist, one central eye in the center of his forehead (Motif J1494 wood spirit gigantic with 
one eye in center of forehead), a body covered with hair and feathers (Motif F521.2 
people with feathers, Motif F232.5  Fairies have hairy bodies, Motif F521.1 Man 
                                                
380 C.W. von Sydow, “On the Spread of Tradition,” in Selected Papers on Folklore, ed. 
Laurits Bødker, (Copenhagen, 1948), 12-13.  
381 Kenneth Goldstein,  “On the Application of the Concepts of Active and Inactive 
Traditions to the Study of Repertory,” The Journal of American Folklore, Vol. 84, No. 
331, Towards New Perspectives in Folklore (Jan.-Mar.,1971): 62-67.  See C.W. von 
Sydow, “On the Spread of Tradition,” in Selected Papers on Folklore, ed. Laurits Bødker, 
(Copenhagen, 1948), 15.  
382 Zenas T Haines, 1830-1900, Letter from Zenas T. Haines, March 4, 1863, in Letters 
from the Forty-fourth Regiment M.V.M.: A Record of the Experience of a Nine Month's 
Regiment in the Department of North Carolina in 1862-3, (Boston, MA: Herald Job 
Office, 1863), 121. 

 
 
76
covered with hair like animal), and feet that resembled a bear (Motif G365 Ogre 
monstrous as to feet, F517.1 person unusual as to his feet).383 A few examples of 
corresponding motifs have been annotated, showing the correlation between interaction 
with unusual beings, lore, and exhibitions that feature similar oddities.  
 
Patrons and showmen, like Barnum, often used motifs, or remarkable elements of 
tales, as the basis for new narratives.  Franz Boas remarked on the uniqueness of 
American folklore stating, “The analysis of American material, on the other hand, 
demonstrates that complex stories are new, that there is little cohesion between the 
component elements, and that the really old parts of tales are the incidents and a few 
simple plots.”384 Narratives were an integral part of the viewing experience, and the 
nineteenth century public became accustomed to reading narratives (in labels, pamphlets, 
broadsides, and photographs), which accompanied various attractions.  David L. Day, a 
visitor to Barnum’s museum in 1863, writes in his diary, “Strolling around up stairs we 
came to the mummy cabinet…I looked around to find some biographies of these people 
but could not…. I wanted to suggest to Mr. Barnum that if he would hang a biography on 
every one of these mummies it would be the most taking thing he ever had, not excepting 
the What-is-it.”385 
 
As mentioned above, visitors often purchased a souvenir photograph, pamphlet, 
or pitchcard (a photograph combined with a short descriptive text at the bottom) to keep 
in their photograph albums for sharing with visitors.  Most of the middle to upper class 
public in nineteenth century United States had a collection of photographs in their 
visiting room, many of which were not necessarily of family or friends, but photographs 
of unusual and exotic people viewed at various dime museums.386  Photographic 
collections of these types of displays were all the rage, and may have acted as evidence of 
the visitor’s repertoire.  
 
Pentikainen and Dégh suggest people should be considered as having multiple 
folklore repertoires not just one because  “repertoires must be conceptualized as emergent 
and dynamic rather than closed and static.”387 Showmen had a repertory of exhibits, and 
                                                
383 “Munchausen Revived,” Portsmouth Journal of Literature and Politics, Vol. XLII, 
Issue 6, February 5, 1831, 2. Motifs from Stith Thompson’s The Types of International 
Folktales: A Classification and Bibliography. Based on the system of Antti Aarne and 
Stith Thompson, FF Communications no. 284–286, (Helsinki: Suomalainen 
Tiedeakatemia, 2004). 
384 Franz Boas,  “The Development of Folk-Tales and Myths,” The Scientific Monthly, 
Vol. 3, No. 4, (October 1916): 340.  
385 David L. Day, “Diary of David L. Day,” December, 1863, in My Diary of Rambles 
with the 25th Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry, (Milford, MA: King & Billings Printers, 
1884), 106.  
386 John Urry comments on the nature of photography, “To have visual knowledge of an 
object is in part to have power, even if only momentarily, over it.  Photography tames the 
object of the gaze, the most striking examples being of exotic cultures.” in The Tourist 
Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies,  (London: Sage Publications, Ltd., 
1990): 138-139.  
387 Robert A. Georges,  “The Concept of “Repertoire” in Folkloristics,  Western Folklore, 
Vol. 53, No. 4, (Oct., 1994): 317.   

 
 
77
patrons had a repertory of narratives based on exhibits featuring lusus naturae—either 
based on personal experience, transmitted facts, or both.  Besides classifying people into 
categories such as active and passive bearers, Carl W. von Sydow also defined the 
memorate as someone’s “own, purely personal experiences.”388 Linda Dégh and Andrew 
Vázsonyi write extensively on this topic, referring to the memorate as a “banished 
genre.”389 Dégh and Vázsonyi believe that the memorate is not only difficult to classify, 
but “[f]or a long time, memorates were not even recorded because they did not fit into 
any recognized folklore category.”390 According to folklorist Lauri Honko, the memorate 
is the prelude to the legend, or fabulate.391   
 
The stories told after visiting P.T. Barnum’s museum or like establishment often 
followed patterns of the memorate such as “This happened to me,’ “I saw it with my own 
eyes,” “I heard it from my father, it happened to him,” or “A good friend of mine told it, 
he saw it himself.”392  Because the experience at a dime museum often involved motif 
ostension, and happened within a narrative context, it functioned, transmitted, and was 
received like folklore. Collected photographs of lusus naturae on display could be one 
gauge of the size of a visitor’s repertory, assuming each photograph was associated with 
a memory. However, many patrons who could not afford to purchase photographs or 
pamphlets may have actively discussed their experience with others.    
 
PRESENTATION & RECEPTION 
 
 
The obvious goal of impresarios of oddities was to profit from the entertainment 
business.  In order to be successful, it was imperative that showmen had their finger on 
the pulse of popular culture.  Moral values of the amusement industry were the backbone 
of didactic entertainment in the nineteenth century in America. Barnum developed a 
threefold plan for a successful museum, which involved creating a safe environment for 
women and children, consistently changing the exhibits, and promoting the museum as an 
educational experience.393  The welcoming of both women and children in a didactic 
museum setting allowed this form of entertainment to rapidly gain in popularity.394  
                                                
388 Linda Dégh and Andrew Vázsonyi. “The Memorate and Proto-Memorate,” The 
Journal of American Folklore, Vol. 87, No. 345 (Jul.-Sept., 1974): 225. Carl von Sydow 
“Kategotien der Prosa-Volksdichtung,” published in Volkskundliche Gaben John Meier 
zum siebzigsten Geburtstage dargebracht (Berlin and Leipzig, 1934): 253-268.  
389 Linda Dégh and Andrew Vázsonyi. “The Memorate and Proto-Memorate,” The 
Journal of American Folklore, Vol. 87, No. 345 (Jul.-Sept., 1974): 226. 
390 Ibid, 233. 
391 Lauri Honko, “Memorates and the Study of Folk Beliefs,” Journal of the Folklore 
Institute I  (1965), 18. Once a memorate is told to another, who repeats it, it becomes a 
memory legend, or Erinnerungssage.  
392 Linda and Andrew Vázsonyi Dégh,  “The Memorate and Proto-Memorate,” The 
Journal of American Folklore, Vol. 87. No. 345 (Jul.-Sept., 1974): 227. 
393 Andrea Stulman Dennett, Weird and Wonderful: The Dime Museum in America, (New 
York: New York University Press, 1997), 144.  
394 Barnum’s museum “offered multiple attractions that promised to educate and uplift, as 
well as entertain, its middle-and working-class clientele.” Rachel Adams, Sideshow 

 
 
78
 
In 1876, Edward P. Hingston published a book titled The Genial Showman: Being 
Reminiscences of the Life of Artemus Ward.  In his book, he discusses the museum in 
America, which he describes as “a place of amusement, where-in there shall be a theatre, 
some wax figures, a giant and a dwarf or two, a jumble of pictures, and a few live 
snakes…The mainstay of the “Museum” [in America] is the “live art,” that is, the 
theatrical performance, the precocious mannikins, or the intellectual dogs and 
monkeys.”395  Many museums were mimicking Barnum’s methods.  After both of 
Barnum’s museums were destroyed by fire, Brunnell’s museum became known “as the 
home to the dwarfs and giants.”396 
 
The line between visitor and performer is one of the most important, and obvious, 
aspects of the display of lusus naturae.  Susan Stewart writes, “The viewer of the 
spectacle is absolutely aware of the distance between self and spectacle.... there is no 
question that there is a gap between the object [freak] and the viewer.”397 Stewart later 
defines this gap as a separation, or even hesitation, between the chatter of the ‘talker’ and 
the appearance of the freak.398  Historian Curtis Hinsley suggests the line between the 
visitor and performer spaces is always evident, and sometimes quite simple, such as a 
fence, chain, rope, or bench row, and the placement of the spectator and spectacle is a 
physical and ideological construction.399  He further proposes that the camera is to the 
modern tourist as the fence is to the Victorian spectator—for self-definition and 
distancing.400   
 
The goal of display is to distance the viewer and place them in a socially 
constructed position of authority. In his acclaimed study of freaks, Leslie Fiedler writes,  
 
 
[There is nothing] novel about the mode of presentation, so that after a minute or 
 
two we do not know in what town we are, or at what point in our lives.  The 
 
human oddities on the show are never displayed on our level—the level of reality 
 
and the street outside.   Most often they stand against a curtain on a draped 
 
platform, to which we have to look up...sometimes they are placed in a railed 
 
“pit,” into which we have to look down...401  
 
                                                                                                                                            
U.S.A.: Freaks and the American Cultural Imagination, (Chicago, 2001), 11. 
395 Edward Hingston, The Genial Showman, Being reminiscences of the life of Artemus 
Ward and pictures of a showman’s career in the western world, (London: J.C. Hotten, 
1871), 18.  
396 Amusements, New York Times, August 21, 1881, 7.  
397 Susan Stewart, On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, 
the Collection, (London 1993), 108. 
398 Ibid, 109. 
399 Curtis M. Hinsley,  “The World as Marketplace: Commodification of the Exotic at the 
World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago,” 1893, In Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and 
Politics of Museum Display, (Washington, 1991), 357-358. 
400 Ibid, 358. 
401 Leslie Fiedler, Freaks: Myths & Images of the Secret Self, (New York, 1978), 282-283. 

 
 
79
The pit shows almost always featured a ‘geek’ show, a cannibal act, or a crazed savage, 
whereas the balcony shows regularly featured human oddities and acts of talent.402  These 
expose the space of performance as a result and reflection of socially constructed views 
of others. If these exhibits are seen as instances of motif ostension, there is more to be 
discovered. The audience was told narratives of the onerous capture of those on display 
while gazing down at cannibals (or wild men), and participants could literally imagine 
themselves within the narrative in a place of discovery and power. 
 
Expositions often touted an “experience” rather than a show.403  The Midway, a 
term taken from the 1893 Columbian Exposition, is often the home of the sideshow, the 
spectacle, and the commodification of culture.  Hinsley describes the Midway, “The eyes 
of the Midway are those of the flâneur, the stroller through the street arcade of human 
differences, whose experience is not the holistic, integrated ideal of the anthropologist but 
the segmented, seriatim fleetingness of the modern tourist ‘just passing through.’”404 
However, both on and off the midway, Fairs often “celebrated the ascension of civilized 
power over nature and primitives.”405 Hinsely points out that by 1890, two traditions of 
human display were established.  The first, the Hagenbeck type, usually made claims to 
ethnographic authenticity and the second, the Barnum type, often displayed human freaks 
and oddities.406  These two forms of show were not mutually exclusive and exhibits often 
contained both elements.  Of course, the more educational exhibits attempted to keep 
voyeuristic appeal in the shadow of their scientific objective, but nonetheless managed to 
attract the attention of plenty of tourists both near and far.   
 
SCIENTIFIC PRESENTATION 
 
  
Many Americans often felt a sense of inferiority towards Europe, particularly 
regarding museum formation. Art historian Paul Greenhalgh writes, “The obsession with 
the authenticity of the object and the rationale for its collection in science, not in plunder, 
would soon encourage and justify the acquiring of objects from all over the world by 
Western museums.”407  Bell notes that European guests often commented that American 
museums were frequently showing exhibits that were not only scientific but were also 
mere novelty and that the “museum appeared to many visitors to be only a meaningless 
                                                
402 Pit-show is defined as “An exhibition of freaks displayed in a “pit” built of boards or 
canvas, around the top of which is a walk for the customers,” D.W. Maurer, "Carnival 
Cant: A Glossary of Circus and Carnival Slang," American Speech, Vol. 6, No. 5, (June, 
1931): 334. 
403 See Catherine Cocks, Doing the Town: The Rise of Urban Tourism in the United 
States, 1850-1915,  (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001), 191-193.  
404 Curtis M. Hinsley,  “The World as Marketplace: Commodification of the Exotic at the 
World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893, In Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and 
Politics of Museum Display, (Washington 1991), 356. 
405 Ibid, 345. 
406 Ibid. 
407 Paul Greenhalgh, Ephemeral Vistas: The Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions 
and World’s Fairs, 1851-1939,  (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1988), 88. 

 
 
80
and useless clutter.”408 The Society attempted to include more “scientific” items, but a 
lack of space, curators, archiving techniques, and interest, resulted in a description of the 
American Philosophical Society Museum as “an old-fashioned eighteenth-century cabinet 
of undifferentiated curiosities.”409  
 
Organizing the displays remained a problem, as there was realistically no obvious 
way to arrange displays of human abnormalities and unknown curiosities.  As a result, 
both dead and living objects were arbitrarily organized by a vast range of methods 
(although some more subjective than others) such as: size, temporal, regional, cross-
cultural, or specific medical conditions. Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimlett writes, “Nineteenth 
century advocates of scientific approaches to museum exhibition complained repeatedly 
about collections of curiosities that were displayed without systematic arrangement.”410 
The Ohio Show-Stop attempted to correct previous conceptions regarding haphazard 
organization and announced a “greater variety of specimens, a neater and more classical 
arrangement of curiosities than any institution of its kind and age in the United States.”411   
 
Kirshenblatt-Gimlett warns us that “There is danger that theatrical spectacle will 
displace scientific seriousness, that the artifice of the installation will overwhelm 
ethnographic artifact and curatorial intention.”412 Yet, the “public apathy toward non-
dramatic scientific exhibits [at the Ohio Show-Stop]” was cured when Dorfeuille took 
over the museum in 1823, which became known as “the age of hokum.”  Expositions 
became “refined” extensions of the early traveling shows. Hinsely, for example, refers to 
expositions as “carnivals of the industrial age.”413  Sideshows remained concentrated on 
narratives of the fantastic, while expositions continued to focus on “progress.” In 
expositions, human oddities existed as the foundation of new knowledge both scientific 
and anthropological.  One such example can be seen in the live display of ceremonial 
Filipino Bontoc Igorot dancers at the 1909 Alaska-Yukon-Pacific Exposition in Seattle.  
Vaughan writes, “Promoters [of the Igorot dancers] ignored government warnings against 
emphasizing the savage spectacle, applying an academic veneer to the exhibit by offering 
college anthropology courses in “The Growth of Cultural Evolution Around the 
                                                
408 Whitfield J. Bell, “The Cabinet of the American Philosophical Society,” In Whitehill, 
Walter Muir, Cabinet of curiosities: five episodes in the Revolution of American museums, 
(Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1967), 21-22. 
409 Ibid, 23. 
410 Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimlett, Destination Culture: Tourism, Museums, and Heritage.  
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998), 26. 
411 Louis Leonard Tucker, “Ohio Show-Shop, The Western Museum of Cincinnati 1820-
1867.”  In Cabinet of curiosities: five episodes in the Revolution of American museums, 
(Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1967), 81 from Liberty Hall and Cincinnati 
Gazette, September 30, 1823. 
412 Ibid. 
413 Curtis M. Hinsley,  “The World as Marketplace: Commodification of the Exotic at the 
World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893, In Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and 
Politics of Museum Display, (Washington, 1991), 344. 

 
 
81
Pacific.”414 This new fascination with science and culture extended well into other 
Western countries, and it has been recorded that in Europe, youths were only admitted to 
a popular sideshow that featured anatomical waxworks if they claimed they were medical 
students.415  The infant conjoined “St. Benoit Twins” were successfully on display at the 
New York aquarium under the guise of science.  In fact, it was written that “The 
Aquarium is rapidly becoming a museum of natural history, the learned monkeys and 
dogs perform every afternoon.”416 
 
In the case of Al Tomaini “Giant Boy,” mythical origins about giants were 
replaced by a modern “Lesson in Glands.”  Science allowed a reimagining of the body—
that of sameness and homogeneity,417 and in the case of “Julee—Juliane” (the 
Hermaphrodite), science replaced myth by transforming him/her into an extraordinary 
being and transcending his/her origins beyond myths such as the one told by the Greek 
poet, Aristophanes—that man was originally created as both man and women in one 
body.  
 
During the late nineteenth century, the organization of villages on the midway in 
world’s fairs and expositions held in America were calculated attempts at demonstrating 
Darwinian theory.   Greenhalgh notes, “The first Fairs in the twentieth century became 
obsessed with evolutionary theory in an attempt to give scientific credence to the 
legalized racism present everywhere in American society.  The [Pan-American 
Exposition in Buffalo (1901)] was the extreme case, where the layout of the whole site 
was intended to show the visitor the shift from low levels of humanity to higher ones.  It 
was hoped the visitor would sense the evolutionary flow of mankind as he/she walked 
through the Fair.”418 
 
Visitors employed scientific claims with authority, and as a result science was 
accepted as authoritative.  This new knowledge transformed the meaning of ‘authenticity’ 
from that of traditional to that of scientific validity.  If an act could be “scientifically” 
proven to be true, then it was authentic, and subsequently, “scientific” and “authentic” 
were used interchangeably.  In this space, taboos could be transcended and psychological 
constructions of identity were based solely on the lack of normality.   
 
LIMINALITY 
 
 
Arnold van Gennep referred to liminality as one aspect (rites of transition) in what 
he defines as “the rites of passage.”419 For Gennep, rites of passage may include, but are 
not limited to births, initiations, marriage, ordinations and other significant life moments. 
                                                
414 Christopher A Vaughan,  “Ogling Igorots: The Politics and Commerce of Exhibiting 
Cultural Otherness, 1898-1913,” In Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary 
Body,  Ed. Rosemarie Garland Thomson,  (New York 1996), 231. 
415 Disher, M. Willson, Fairs, Circuses and Music Halls  (London 1942), 36. 
416 “Amusements,” New York Times, July 21, 1878.  
417 Rosemarie Garland Thomson, Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary 
Body, (New York, 1996), 12. 
418 Paul Greenhalgh, Ephemeral Vistas: The Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions 
and World’s Fairs, 1851-1939,  (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1988), 102. 
419 Arnold Van Gennep,  The Rites of Passage, (London: Routledge, [1909] 2004). 

 
 
82
Anthropologist Victor Turner expands on van Gennep’s model and states that “liminal 
entities are neither here nor there; they are betwixt and between the positions assigned 
and arrayed by law, custom, convention, and ceremonial.”420 According to Turner, during 
a liminal period, the structure of a society often goes through a period of communitas 
(community) where normal societal laws are temporarily suspended. Turner also used the 
term liminal to describe a phenomenon found in religious rituals, but preferred the term 
liminoid when referring to secular rituals, which he believed were found in complex 
societies.421 The widespread appeal of familiar motifs on display sanctioned the 
integration of the heterogeneous American audience, and essentially the patrons, 
regardless of age, class or gender, were the “folk.” Liminality and communitas occurs in 
the performers, the audience, and the space itself (see figure 4).  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Liminality and Motif Ostension 
 
THE PERFORMER 
 
 
The performer (object of display) often exists in a liminal state, whether half 
human/half monster, part fantasy, part reality, part man/woman, or part magical being.  
The radically diverse individuals on display as lusus naturae were citizens of their own 
(freak) culture, not only within the borders of the exhibition, but among citizens outside 
this territory as well.  Those on display had their own folk group that resulted in a form of 
cultural citizenship.  For those outside this sphere, the idea that freaks possess a form of 
                                                
420 Victor Turner,  “Liminality and Communitas” in The Ritual Process: Structure and 
Anti-Strucuture, (Chicago: Aldine Publishing, 1969), 95. 
421 Turner refers to the industrial world as complex societies. See Victor Turner, 
“Variations on a Theme of Liminality,” In Secular Ritual, S. Moore and B. Myerhoff, 
eds, (Amsterdam: Van Gorcum, 1977): 27-41.   

 
 
83
cultural citizenship only increased the need to group these individuals as others. 
Otherness, in this sense, was a combination of both physical abnormalities and non-
western ethnicities. As a result, freaks of all types were assimilated into a pan-freak 
culture. Andrew Apter’s critique of the Pan-African representation of Africa suggests a 
homogeneous and unified culture, 422 and freaks, too, are also susceptible to the ever-
popular blanket freak designation, and in essence, these individuals were fashioned 
together in a quasi-freak diaspora.  
 
Spectators could attend a sideshow or exhibit and view individuals from a variety 
of ethnicities.  For example, Lia Graf a little person from Germany, Lionel “the Lion-
Faced Boy” from Russia, Madame Clofullia “the Bearded Lady of Switzerland,” Frank 
Lentini “the Three Legged Man” from Siracusa, Sicily, Mortado “the Human Fountain” 
from Germany, Pip and Flip “Twins from Yucatan” (Although actually born in Georgia, 
USA), and countless others.423 It was not merely their physical abnormalities that 
constituted their otherness, but a combination of their individual ethnic backgrounds, 
abnormalities, talent, or ethnicity. 
 
The collectiveness of freaks allow for a certain degree of cultural citizenship.  
Most scholars, when describing the “commodification of otherness” refer to 
representations of race and gender, but for many freaks on display, it was the fabricated 
race (giants, monkey people or alligator people) or gender (the ‘half man/half woman’ or 
‘Zip the what is it?’) that brought them together.424 While many of these living 
exhibitions displayed individuals of foreign ethnicities, it was often the physical 
abnormality, “primitiveness,” or unusual talent that was presented—all of which were 
neither a race nor an ethnicity.  As living instantiations of folk motifs, every individual on 
display at venues that showcased lusus naturae indirectly became a member of a folk 
group, which existed in a liminal space.   
                                                
422 Andrew Apter,  “The Pan-African Nation: Oil-Money and the Spectacle of Culture in 
Nigeria,” Public Culture, 8 (1996): 441-466.  
423 Daniel P. Mannix, Freaks: We Who Are Not As Others,  (San Francisco, 1990), 28, 87; 
Rachel Adams,  Sideshow U.S.A.: Freaks and the American Cultural Imagination  
(Chicago, 2001), 30, 222; James Taylor, “Shocked and Amazed,” On and Off the Midway, 
6  (Baltimore 2001), 1; James Taylor and Kathleen Kotcher,  “Shocked and Amazed” On 
& Off the Midway, (Connecticut 2002), 49.  These individuals, although from different 
ethnic backgrounds, experienced their own cultural citizenship.  Toby Miller suggests 
that cultural citizenship should take into consideration political, economic, and cultural 
concerns, all of which these commodified individuals partake in. Toby Miller suggests 
that cultural citizenship should take into consideration political, economic, and cultural 
concerns, all of which these commodified individuals partake in. See James Taylor, 
“Shocked and Amazed,” On and Off the Midway, 6, (Baltimore, 2001). 
424 Sociologist Bell Hooks, for example, studied the exploitation of the black female body 
through the ‘commodification of otherness,’ and Joseba Gabilando also examines 
‘commodification of otherness’ in the construction of Basque identity and Spanish 
culture. See Bell Hooks, Black Looks: Race and Representation,  (Cambridge 1992); 
Joseba Gabilondo, Archaeology of Global Desire: New Hollywood, Spectacle Hegemony, 
and the Commodification of Otherness, Forthcoming; Joseba Gabilondo,   Empire and 
Terror: Nationalism/Postnationalism In the New Millennium, (Nevada 2005). 

 
 
84
 
THE PATRON 
 
 
The popularity of the educational museum did not remain tethered to the East 
coast, but grew as quickly as the Nation.  Western states, like Ohio, provided destinations 
that rivaled the East coast.  The “Ohio Show-Stop” (1820-1867) in Cincinnati became a 
must-see destination in the mid-West.  Perhaps some of the success of the Ohio Show-
Stop is due to a prolific amount of both wealthy and working class patrons. Andrea 
Dennett suggests that the Southern cities were “out of the museum loop” mainly because 
they were “part of a slave-oriented culture, [and] they did not have the thriving working-
class population needed to support the dime museum industry.”425  
 
Similar to a pilgrimage where upper and lower class citizens intermingle, working 
class and wealthy patrons viewed and enjoyed dime museums in the same space, and 
issues such as social class were de-emphasized and a social structure of communitas was 
formed. Sears suggests that the nineteenth century public museum, the exposition, and 
the popular resort  
 
 
offered diverse attractions under the umbrella of a unifying spectacle, functioned 
 
as instruments of the mass consumption of culture, and provided a democratic 
 
stage on which the obscure and famous could share the same experience and 
 
where, increasingly as the century progressed, members of all classes could 
 
mingle as they would also do at Coney Island.426  
 
Expositions, Dime Museums, and circuses provided a place for men, women, and 
children to frequent. Although small traveling venues and sideshows were still 
predominantly for men, mainly due to the “exotic” and “erotic” nature of many shows.427 
 
The earliest exhibitions in the United States were usually centered on 
industrialization and progress (of machinery), which ultimately focused on male-related 
occupations and focus.428  The line between entertainment and education continued to 
reveal issues of morality, gender, and class.  Until this point, educational establishments, 
                                                
425 Andrea Stulman Dennett, Weird and Wonderful: The Dime Museum in America, (New 
York: New York University Press, 1997), xii. 
426 John Sears, Sacred Places: American Tourist Attractions in the nineteenth Century,  
(Oxford, 1989), 18. 
427 Even in the most ‘scientific’ displays, females were depicted as highly sexualized.  
428 One of the first major Expositions to be held in the United States, the American 
Institute Fair, was held annually in New York from 1829-1897. The American Institute 
Fair featured new and innovative American manufactured items and machines, as well as 
unique, pricey, and high quality items, which often invoked curiosity in those who could 
not afford such luxuries.  Once again, the emphasis was placed on the attendance of men, 
and women were seen as an appendage.  An advertisement in the New York Courier 
(1829) reads, “[t]he public generally were not permitted to enter [the American Institute 
Fair] without [tickets].  These were put at a low rate, 25 cents each, including any number 
of ladies, so as to afford every rank in society an opportunity to gratify their laudable 
curiosity.” The Pittsfield Sun, Vol.XXX,  Issue 1519, October 29, 1829, 1. 

 
 
85
and societies, catered mainly to men, but with the coming of science and the fusion of 
entertainment, new approaches had to be made.  Peale, for example, “wanted his museum 
to appeal to all classes, the illiterate and the scholarly, adults as well as children, and both 
men and women.  The motto of the museum, inscribed above the building’s entrance, was 
“whoso would learn Wisdom, let him enter here!”429  Peale’s generous invitation to 
women and children may have been provoked by the period of reform (1830-1850) in the 
antebellum United States—a particular moment in history when women’s rights, activism 
on all levels, and the need to secularize and embrace morality permeated American 
society.   
 
 
Education often justified hokum and even the most virtuous Americans could find 
legitimacy to their curiosity.  John Sears suggests that natural tourist destinations were 
nondenominational and equally neither a male or female space, which contributed to the 
popularity of such destinations, but dime museums also transformed into nonsecular 
tourist destinations that catered to a wider audience.430 When referring to tourism, John 
Urry comments on the existence of communitas and states, ‘There is a license for 
permissive and playful ‘non-serious’ behavior and the encouragement of a relatively 
unconstrained ‘communitas’ or social togetherness.”431  The nineteenth century audience 
experienced a fantasy world filled with living motifs and wondrous narratives, which 
allowed them to enter into a liminal space with one another.  
 
THE LOCATION 
 
 
Dime museums and exhibitions run by showmen like Barnum often advertised the 
space as a place to “learn,” to “educate,” and to be “amused.”  These buildings functioned 
didactically and can be seen as a liminal place—outside of a university, theater, or 
performance hall. In her book, Victorian Science and The Architecture of Display, Carla 
Yanni remarks that “[Philosopher Krzysztof Pomian] theorizes that the Wunderkammer 
existed in a liminal realm between religion and science, where curiosities spoke to elite 
visitors about the secrets of nature.”432 Just like the European wunderkammer of 17th and 
18th centuries, the nineteenth century dime museums, exhibition halls, circuses, and 
World’s Fairs all existed in the nexus of entertainment and education. As didactic venues 
of amusement, they automatically transported visitors into a liminal space once inside.  
 
                                                
429 Andrea Stulman Dennett, Weird and Wonderful: The Dime Museum in America, (New 
York: New York University Press, 1997), 13. 
430 Jack Larkin gives the following description, “The earliest American circus audiences 
were not, as they became much later, gatherings of families with excited children in tow, 
but adult and primarily male.  The shows were clearly part of a masculine world whose 
boundaries were defined by liquor and the possibility of violence.” See Jack Larkin,  The 
Reshaping of Everyday Life 1790-1840,  (New York: Harper & Row, 1988). John Sears, 
Sacred Places: American Tourist Attractions in the nineteenth Century, (Oxford, 1989), 8. 
431 John Urry, The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies,  
(London: Sage Publications, Ltd., 1990). 
432 Carla Yanni, Nature’s Museums: Victorian Science and the Architecture of Display, 
(New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2005), 16.  

 
 
86
RECEPTION: IRISH MOTIFS 
 
 
The nineteenth century American public found great interest in exhibitions of 
lusus naturae.  Although many members of society were highly critical of such displays, 
most of the general population was intrigued enough to purchase a ticket. The lure of 
these exhibits, as argued earlier, is based on the existence of motif ostension.  There are 
perhaps innumerable perspectives to explore, each being correct from a particular vantage 
point, but one cannot deny the prolific connection with the presentation of European lore 
and the attendance of European immigrants. Cynthia Wu remarks, “The fact remains that 
nineteenth century freak shows were populated largely by immigrants and the working 
classes.”433 In 1877, during the peak of the Depression, the statute of California gave the 
commissioner of immigration the authority to refuse entry to any immigrant who appears 
to be  
 
 
lunatic, idiotic, deaf, dumb, blind, crippled, or infirm, and is not accompanied 
 
by relatives who are able and willing to support him, or is likely to become a 
 
public charge, or has been a pauper in any other country, or is, from sickness or 
 
disease, existing either at the time of sailing from the port of departure, or at the 
 
time of his arrival in the state, a public charge, or likely soon to become so, or is a 
 
convicted criminal, or a lewd or debauched woman…  
 
In addition, any person who was to pay a bond to allow entry to such a person had to take 
full responsibility for expenses “incurred for the relief, support, or care of such persons 
for two years thereafter.”434  These laws made it extremely difficult for those with 
disabilities, or diseases that caused physical abnormalities, to enter the United States.  
Immigrants from Asia or the Middle East were particularly targeted, and often operated 
with a different criterion than those from the West.  Because of the burden of 
responsibility and finances, it was often only those who would become human displays 
under the “care” of wealthy showmen like Barnum and Hagenbeck, who managed to 
make it ashore.  
                                                
433 Cynthia Wu,  “The Siamese Twins in Late-Nineteenth Century Narratives of Conflict 
and Reconciliation,” American Literature,  Volume 80, No. 1,  (Duke University Press, 
2008): 32. 
434 For example, Chy Lung, a Chinese citizen, arrived in San Francisco by vessel, and 
was subsequently charged and held for being a “lewd and debauched” woman.  U.S. 
Congress.  Joint Select Committee To Investigate Chinese Immigration U.S. Congress.  
Senate Report. Serial Set Vol., No. 1734, Session Vol. No. 3.  44th Congress, 2nd Session.  
S.Rpt. 689, February 27, 1877: 1164-1165.  In 1891 this statute was amended by adding: 
1. A person likely to become a public charge; 2.  A person suffering from a loathsome 
disease; 3. A polygamist; 4. Any person whose ticket or passage is paid for with the 
money of another… See the Report of the Select Committee on Immigration and 
Naturalization, and Testimony taken by the Committee on Immigration of the Senate and 
the Select Committee on Immigration and Naturalization of the House of Representatives 
under concurrent resolution of March 12, 1890. Reported to the House by Mr. Owen, of 
Indiana, January 15, 1891. 

 
 
87
 
Visitors reacted to displays of lusus naturae in a variety of ways. Because most 
human exhibitions interacted with the public and were on display for long periods of 
time, many were tired and exhausted.  Eventually, human curiosities were often 
stereotyped as possessing a certain disposition or appearance.  A published interview 
with a two-headed girl reads,” Expecting to find a melancholy Siamese twin monstrosity, 
the reporter was agreeably surprised to find two girls joined in one, cheerful, refined and 
cultivated.  The haggard, worn expression which, as a rule, the faces of the curiosities of 
humanity wear was entirely absent.”435  Those on display were often judged with a 
sweeping generalization, leading to further segregation among ethnic groups deemed 
exotic or abnormal.   
 
The presence of Irish in major U.S. cities during this period is evident. The Irish 
Famine resulted in heavy Irish immigration to the United States in the mid nineteenth 
century. In 1841, there were an estimated three million inhabitants of Irish birth or 
descent, and According to the U.S. Census of 1850, 26% of New York City’s total 
population were Irish born.436 Other major cities such as Chicago also had a large Irish 
population. In 1851, for example, The Irish National Fair held in Chicago promised to be 
“one of the largest conventions that have ever assembled in any State.”437 
 
The masses of Irish immigrants were not veiled from the vice of money-making 
as publications, theaters, and exhibitions were all catering to the Irish public.   Early 
American publications are riddled with commentary on Irish folklore, and popular books 
such as Handerahan, the Irish Fairy-man and Legends of Carrick were considered quite 
remarkable.438 Theatrical performances often overtly advertised towards the Irish public.  
Barnum, for example, featured  “The charming Irish Comedienne and Vocalist, Miss 
Kathleen O’neil, in Songs, Stories, of “Ould Ireland.”439 And numerous plays with Irish 
themes, such as:  “Our Irish Cousin—This best of all the race of Cousins,”440 “Irish 
Dragoon,”441 “The Irish Haymaker,”442 the “Irish Tiger,”443 “Irish Assurance.”444 
 
Many of the theaters openly advertised towards Irish patrons, partly because the 
shows were limited, rotated frequently, were confined to a restricted time span, and held 
a finite amount of people.  Museums, on the other hand, were open daily and needed to 
                                                
435 “The Two-Headed Girl,” A Reporter’s Talk With the Most Remarkable of Damsels, 
The Washington Post, June 26, 1881, 3.  
436 “The Irish Census,” The Eclectic Magazine of Foreign Literature, August 1851, 4,23; 
Ronald H. Bayor and Timothy J. Meagher, “The New York Irish,” (New York: John 
Hopkins University Press, 1996). 
437 Chicago Tribune, January 28, 1864, 4. 
438 See New York Daily Times, November 8, 1854, 4. Articles such as “The Ancient 
Giants of Finland” were also mentioned and received popularity in local newspapers.  For 
example, see New York Daily Times, July 17, 1854, 1. 
439 New York Daily Times, October 24, 1865, 7. 
440 New York Daily Times, April 2, 1859, 8. 
441 New York Daily Times, June 20, 1853, 5. 
442 New York Daily Times, November 13, 1857. 
443 At Wallack’s Theatre, New York Daily Times, April 26, 1853, 4 and still playing in 
1866.  See New York Times, April 30, 1866, 5.  
444 New York Times, May 7, 1858, 4. 

 
 
88
attract a large cross section of the population in order to stay open. Because Irish 
communities were akin to plebeians of the United States, and museums and exhibit halls 
were regarded as middle class arenas, blatant Irish themes would have been detrimental 
to business.  Therefore, it was not necessarily the display that was overtly Irish, but the 
folk motif it represented.  
 
A writer in the Chicago Tribune (1887) commenting on the lack of Irish fairy lore 
in the United States that affirmed that immigrants coming to America “did not bring any 
fairies or goblins, kobolds, trolls or brownies with them” and wrote, “whatever came over 
in the Mayflower, there were certainly no fairies there.”   The same author suggests the 
immigrants felt sorrow at “having left all their fairies behind them,” but there were some 
indications (fairy rings on the ground—later to be explained by science) there could be 
native fairies or that Irish fairies also sent colonists to America.445 Another writer, in 
1873, suggests that “Fairies will not flourish in the neighborhood of railway stations, 
national schools, or…union workhouses.”446 
 
This brings about the question of whether fairies can exist in America, and if they 
do, are they native or colonist beings? Panoramas were common in nineteenth century 
America, and patrons could “virtually” visit foreign lands, major cities, and different eras 
by placing themselves in a panoramic scene.  Among these, Irish landscapes were not 
uncommon.  It could be said that artificial Irish terrain was able to accommodate fairy 
folk and other wondrous beings.  I would like to suggest here that mermaids, giants, and 
other creatures from Irish folklore were manifested in museums, displays, and exhibits. 
One of Barnum’s dramas was billed as having gorgeous scenery, brilliant costumes, 
illuminated fountains, with real water, living fairies,”447 and another advertised as having 
“Fairy Scenes.”448 
 
According to the Irish, fairy men and women are occasionally visible to mortals, 
and phantoms or spirits would assume the shape of superhuman beauty or ugliness.449  
Displays of human oddities did precisely this, that is, display the two extreme ends of the 
spectrum—superhuman beauty or ugliness.  The “Grotesque” and “Strange” were 
exhibited alongside “The Prettiest Circassian Girls Ever Seen.”450 The dichotomy 
between magnificence and monstrous is a common theme in folk narrative and also 
conforms to Olrik’s Law of Contrast.451  
 
Mermen, merwomen, and mermaids were considered “among the graceful folk-
lore fauna of Ireland.”452 Themes of giants, dwarves and mermaids permeated early 
American exhibits.  The “fejee mermaid” was often featured alongside a “giantess” and a 
                                                
445 “Footfalls of Fairies: Folk-Lore of the Old World Transplanted in the New,” Chicago 
Daily Tribune, February 3, 1887, 9. 
446 Chicago Daily Tribune, June 16, 1873, 5.  
447 New York Times, March 9, 1964, 8. 
448 New York Times, March 23,1891, 7. 
449 Chicago Daily Tribune, June 16, 1873, 5. 
450 New York Times, September 12, 1865, 7. 
451 Axel Olrik, Principles for Oral Narrative Research. Indiana: Indiana University Press, 
1992.  
452 Chicago Daily Tribune, June 16, 1873, 5. 

 
 
89
“dwarf lady.”453 Giants were uniquely referred to, and their respective origins were 
almost always mentioned as if to discern from an anticipated type of giant (e.g. Irish).  
“Goshen, the Giant”454, “Noah Ore the Ohio Giant,” “Anna Swan the Nova Scotia 
Giantess,” “Andrew Harsen the Norwegian Giant,”455 “the American Giantess,”456 “The 
Great French Giant”457 and “The Giant Boy and Girl”458 were among the many advertised 
giants.  Liliputian cities inhabited by “little people” closely imitate the Motif F210 
“Fairyland,” a subject often found in Irish lore.  Susan Stewart writes, “The Irish tradition 
held that the fairies were shape-shifters, appearing at will as stately full-sized or giant 
figures or as small figures.”459 Audiences were enticed by plays with familiar folk motifs, 
but did not require exact replicas of their favorite narratives to be satisfied.  Barnum’s 
Museum, for example, exhibited Mr. Maeder’s version “Red Riding Hood” which is 
touted as being as “little like the nursery legend from which it derives its title as 
possible.”460  
 
Barnum also exhibited a pantomimic “representation of the interesting legend of 
Mother Goose and her Golden Egg. The Egg is found to be full of meat, and Mother 
Goose hatches a bright new one every evening.”461 Also, the Broadway Theatre and 
Barnum’s Museum, both in New York, simultaneously showed the “fairy spectacle” of 
Cinderella.462  I would like to posit that the presence of these “folk beings” in various 
exhibits satiated the Irish population’s desire to participate and relay supernatural and 
wonder tales. At the very least, it appears that these displays fascinated and lured the 
viewer who felt an affinity between the display and his/her personal repertoire of 
folklore.  
 
 
  
 
                                                
453 See New York Daily Times, April 25, 1855, 5; The New York Daily Times, May 16, 
1855, and New York Times, March 28, 1865, for example.  
454 See The Washington Post, September 20, 1879, 3.  
455 “At Barnum’s Museum,” New York Times, December 14, 1865, 7. 
456 “At Barnum’s Museum,” New York Daily Times, March 19, 1855, 8. 
457 “At Barnum’s Museum,” New York Times, January 4, 1864, 4. 
458 New York Times, December 19, 1863, 10.  
459 Susan Stewart, On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, 
the Collection, (London: Duke University Press, 1993), 185. 
460 New York Times, February 13, 1868, 4.  
461 New York Times, August 27, 1867, 4. 
462 New York Times, January 5, 1857, 4. 
 

 
 
90
CHAPTER 5 
CONCLUSION 
 
 
RETROSPECT 
 
 
The nineteenth century American public responded to exhibitions of lusus naturae 
with intrigue, repulsion, and fascination. On the surface, this form of didactic amusement 
appealed to all classes, ages, and genders. Marketed as a moral form of entertainment 
suitable for women and children, showmen, especially Barnum, took this form of 
entertainment to an entirely new level. Between 1840-1880, exhibitions of lusus naturae 
in dime museums reached the apogee of popularity in major urban cities. Visitors from 
rural areas began to travel to large cities to attend these exhibitions, and tourism began to 
shift from natural destinations to man made destinations. Anthropologist Nelson Graburn 
states, “Styles of tourism may be leading indicators of fundamental changes which are 
taking place in a class or national culture, changes which may be latent in the more 
restricting institutions of the everyday world, because tourism is that short section of life 
in which people believe they are free to exercise their fantasies, to challenge their 
physical and cultural selves, and to expand their horizons.”  
 
Showmen, to some degree, consciously implied connections to folk motifs. 
Barnum’s advertisements often invited the public into a world of folklore and fantasy. In 
one advertisement, Barnum featured the “Black Crook Transformations, Mythology in 
Miniature,” and “The Miniature Car of Crœsus, drawn by a Fairy Team of Twenty Pigmy 
Ponies”463 The narrative of mythology which Barnum propagated was further established 
by reproducing the myth of Crœsus in miniature.  Barnum’s miniaturization of 
mythology, including Crœsus’s carriage, is in an instance of motif ostension in a fantasy 
narrative formulated from known folklore and re-appropriated by drawing on already 
popular motifs (Such as general Tom Thumb, Admiral Dot, and Fairy Cities— Motif 
F210 Fairyland, F222 Fairy Castle, F239.4.2 Fairies are the size of small children, and 
F239.4.3 Fairy is tiny.)  
 
Tiny “tableaux” were commonly featured in dime museums. General Tom 
Thumb, for example performed as a statue of Cupid, in which “his size and form being so 
perfect for that representation, that he looks as if he had just been removed from an 
Italian image-board.” When he performs as Samson carrying off the gates of Gaza, “the 
spectator for the moment loses the idea of the diminutive size of the representation of the 
strong man, so perfect is the representation.”464  Susan Stewart calls upon Alex Olrik’s 
                                                
463 The Black Crook was a highly successful piece of musical theatre that featured 
extravagant scenes of fantasy and myth.  Norwich Aurora, Issue 21, Friday, May 19, 
1876.  
464 From Sketch of Life, Personal Appearance, Character, and Manners, of Charles S. 
Stratton, The Man in Miniature, Known as General Tom Thumb, Twenty-Eight Inches 
High, and Weighing Only Fifteen Pounds.  With Some Account of Remarkable Dwarfs, 
Giants, and Other Human Phenomena, of Ancient and Modern Times, (New York: John 
W. Amerman, 1856).  Also, General Tom Thumb’s Songs (New York: Van Norden and 

 
 
91
observation of the tableau, remarking on the “lingering actions—which also play a large 
role in sculpture—possess the singular power of being able to etch themselves in one’s 
memory,” and suggests the tableau “effectively speaks to the distance between the 
context at hand and the narrated context; it is possible only through representation, since 
it offers a complete closure of a text framed off from the ongoing reality that surrounds 
it.”465 Susan Stewart refers to these instances as “still shots” and suggests that the 
miniature, in particular, offers a world frozen and generalized in time.  Both Stewart and 
Olrik noticed the occurrence of “memorable images” that linger in the mind of the reader 
or observer, but they do not comment on the presence of instantiations of folk motifs into 
popular culture.  By recognizing motif ostension, we can see the layering or 
compounding of popular motifs, which explains how the success of miniature people, like 
General Tom Thumb, were marketed and they functioned in society in much the same 
manner as folklore.  
 
INTERPRETATION 
 
 
During the nineteenth century, traditional forms of folklore data were being 
collected and published, but instances of motif ostension went unnoticed.  In a statement 
which mirrors the words of folklorists, Nelson Graburn asserts that “tourist behavior and 
aspirations are direct or indirect indicators of what is significant and meaningful in 
peoples’ lives, of their self-perceptions, their class or group identity, and their social 
aspirations.”466 Dorson believed that it was imperative for scholars, particularly folklorists 
and historians, to study the folklore collected and published in early America as a way to 
further understand this historical period.  He writes, “the vital folklore and especially the 
legends of a given period in American history reflect the main concerns and values, 
tensions, and anxieties, goals and drives of the period.”467 Both tourism studies and 
folkloristics are tools to further understand cultural and social aspects within a society.  
By recognizing instantiations of folklore, or motif ostension, the gaps between 
performance and folk narrative diminish, and connections between tourism, amusement, 
and lore become evident. 
 
Because most displays of lusus naturae were presented as folklore, they were also 
believed to be analogous to folklore. Just as folklore was being collected throughout the 
nineteenth century, so were instantiations of folk motifs. In 1902, Sidney O. Addy 
commented on the state of collecting folklore,  “I cannot help expressing my surprise at 
the little attention which is paid to the collection of the folklore of our own country.  It 
                                                                                                                                            
Amerman, 1847) reprinted in James W. Cook, Ed.  The Colossal P.T. Barnum Reader, 
(Illinois: University of Illinois, 2005), 118.  
465 Axel Olrik, Principles for Oral Narrative Research, (Indiana: Indiana University 
Press, 1992). Susan Stewart, On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the 
Souvenir, the Collection, (London: Duke University Press, 1993), 48.  
466 Nelson Graburn,  “The Anthropology of Tourism,” Annals of Tourism Research, Vol 
10 (1983): 29. 
467 Richard Dorson,  America in Legend: Folklore from the Colonial Period to the 
Present,  (New York: Pantheon Books, 1973).  

 
 
92
appears to be assumed by everybody that there is nothing to collect.”468 Barnum’s 
Ethnological Congress of Barbarous and Savage Tribes (1894) was an attempt to collect 
in pairs “all the uncivilized races in existence,” in much the same manner as collections 
of folklore, and he too, focused on foreign, and exotic people for his collection.469  
 
Patrons associated an instance of motif ostension within both the context provided 
by the showman, performer, and space, as well as his or her own attributions to the 
particular motif, making every experience compelling and unique. The study of folklore 
data usually remains restricted to the field of folkloristics, while the study of the function 
of folklore within the context of a society often extends through various disciplines, 
sometimes without the acknowledgement that the material is actually folklore. Many 
scholars have suggested that interdisciplinary methods are the only way to fully 
understand the various functions of folklore. 
 
  
FUNCTIONS OF FOLKLORE 
 
 
When applied to these instantiations of folk motifs, folklore theories and studies 
such as Bascom’s classical four functions of folklore can illuminate the study of display 
from an entirely new perspective. Narratives surrounding a motif on display, not only 
follow forms of folklore, but they function in the same manner as folklore, and theories 
once reserved for oral narratives and literature can be applied to this form of 
entertainment to better understand the function of this form of didactic entertainment. 
Although published in 1954, Folklorist William Bascom’s publication on the four 
functions of folklore (escape, validation, education, social control) continues to be 
relevant and is generally accepted by contemporary folklorists as noteworthy 
observations on the role of folklore in society.470  
 
 
The recognition of motif ostension assumes the existence of folklore as 
memorable motifs, existing in varying context in the real world. By using Bascom’s 
functions to examine motif ostension, new insights into how American amusements 
functioned as a means of expression can be revealed. Early American amusements, 
particularly dime museums, showcased a variety of unusual objects and exotic people, all 
which resonated with familiar motifs and functioned in much the same way as traditional 
folklore.  Bascom believed folklore let people escape from repressions imposed on them 
by society. 471   
                                                
468 Sidney O. Addy, Charlotte S. Burne, William Crooke, Walter Skeat, C.G. Seligmann, 
and John Roscoe,  “The Collection of Folklore,” Folklore, Vol. 13.  No. 3 (Sept. 29, 
1902): 297-313. 
469 Roslyn Poignant, Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle, 
(London: Yale University Press, 2004), 87. 
470 William Bascom,  “Four Functions of Folklore,” The Journal of American Folklore,  
Vol. 67,  No. 266 (Oct.-Dec., 1954): 333-349.  
471 Bascom asserts that folklore “reveals man’s frustrations and attempts to escape in 
fantasy from repressions imposed upon him by society, whether these repressions be 
sexual or otherwise and whether they result from taboos on incest or polygamy, or from a 
taboo on laughing at a person afflicted by yaws.” Bascom’s second function suggests 
folklore is used to validate culture when “dissatisfaction with or skepticism of an 

 
 
93
 
Patrons were able to view and interact with human oddities that were exotic, curious, and 
otherwise inaccessible. For example, the relationship between conjoined twins, such as 
Chang and Eng and Millie and Christine (Motif F523 Two persons with bodies joined 
Siamese twins), challenged the Victorian public’s notion of privacy and space.472 In his 
article about Barnum’s marketing success of Joice Heth (Motif F571 Extremely old 
person), Benjamin Reiss suggests that there was a desire to “see one’s idols tainted by the 
grotesque.”473 
 
Folklorist Simon Bronner believes that, “Victorians prescribed healthy doses of 
fantasy and exoticism in folklore to balance the nervousness and monotony of public 
industrial life.”474  The outlet for creating a fantasy environment was manifested in 
sideshows and other venues that exhibited lusus naturae.  Maurice Willson Disher, an 
authority on the circus in the Victorian era believed that the sideshow is “the mirror of 
our inner selves.  Here are things ugly, curios, admirable and beautiful, each warranted to 
stir some primal emotion.”475 Once instances of motif ostension are recognized, exhibits 
featuring instantiations of folk motifs can be understood as channels of expression, which 
function in much the same way as folk narratives.   
 
Bascom believed folklore was used to validate culture when “dissatisfaction with 
or skepticism of an accepted pattern is expressed or doubts about it arise, whether it be 
sacred or secular…”476 Under the guise of science and education and in the form of 
familiar narratives, the general public engaged in knowledge and actions that would have 
otherwise been an inappropriate and unacceptable form of entertainment. Thomson 
writes, “Because [freak] bodies are rare, unique, material, and confounding of cultural 
categories, they function as magnets to which culture secures its anxieties, questions, and 
needs at any given moment.”477  Exhibited peoples in world’s fairs, and larger exhibition 
halls were confined “within a precisely circumscribed part of the exhibition space, which 
represented their world; the boundary between this world and that of the citizens visiting 
and inspecting them, between wildness and civility, nature and culture, had to be 
                                                                                                                                            
accepted pattern is expressed or doubts about it arise, whether it be sacred or secular…” 
Bascom’s third function states that folklore “plays a role in education, particularly, but 
not exclusively, in non-literate societies.” Bascom’s fourth function suggests that, 
“folklore fulfills the important but often overlooked function of maintaining conformity 
to the accepted patterns of behavior. William Bascom,  “Four Functions of Folklore,” The 
Journal of American Folklore, Vol. 67, No. 266 (Oct.-Dec., 1954): 333-349.  
472 Motif F523 is listed in Thompson’s Motif-Index as an Irish Myth.  
473 Benjamin Reiss, “P.T. Barnum, Joice Heth and Antebellum Spectacles of Race,” 
American Quarterly, Vol. 51, No. 1 (March 1999): 88.  
474 Simon J. Bronner, Following Tradition, (Utah: Utah State University Press, 1998), 97. 
475 Maurice Willson Disher, Fairs, Circuses and Music Halls,  (London, 1942). 
476 William Bascom,  “Four Functions of Folklore,” The Journal of American Folklore,  
Vol. 67,  No. 266 (Oct.-Dec., 1954): 333-349. 
477 Rosemarie Garland Thomson, Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary 
Body, (New York, 1996), 2. 

 
 
94
respected unconditionally.”478  Motifs such as F567.1 Wild Woman, F568 Naked Tribe, 
F567 Wild man lives alone in wood like a beast, and F535 Pygmies, often paralleled those 
on display and allowed the viewer to see the exhibit as a narrative, rather than an obvious 
mode for expressing social issues and concerns.  The boundaries between spectator and 
performer further reinforced the narrative allowing the viewer to separate the display 
from the present time and space. 
 
The third function regards folklore as a pedagogic device, which reinforces 
morals and values. Bascom notes “characters in folktales and myths may do things that 
are prohibited or regarded as shocking in daily life.” This allows the public to escape 
from conventional socially sanctioned behavior. The intimate relationship between 
conjoined twins and their wives, for example, challenged social expectations regarding 
moral behavior such as polygamy. Equally, hermaphrodites (Motif F547.2 
Hermaphrodite) and Circassian beauties (Motif F555 Remarkable Hair) often performed 
in risqué costumes and exposed themselves in ways that would otherwise be deemed 
improper. Spectators could witness otherwise forbidden acts and as a result, reinforce 
proper societal behavior—almost always the antithesis of these performances.  
 
Bascom’s fourth function of folklore, suggests folklore is an important means of 
applying social pressure and exercising social control. Narratives surrounding an 
instantiation of a folk motif could change and adapt to reflect current cultural situations, 
in much the same way as folk narratives.  For example, five months before the Civil War 
began, a newspaper article reported, “a dreadful quarrel took place between the Siamese 
Twins at the American Museum, on the 7th inst.  It seems that Chang, who is a North 
Carolinian and a Secessionist, had insisted upon painting the ligament black which binds 
them together.  To this Eng objected, preferring the natural color; whereupon Chang 
resolved to “sever the union” with Eng, which he declared to be “no longer worth 
preserving.” Eng, who is of a calmer temperament, finally persuaded him to wait…479 
The newspaper report concludes with a quote from a local doctor regarding the 
possibility of separation and says “the operation would be dangerous for both parties” 
and that “the union must and shall be preserved.” The motif of conjoined twins was used 
to question a congenital connection between the North and South, and because this story 
was only printed in the Chicago Tribune, it clearly reflects the pro Union sentiment of 
Chicago.  While some of the advertisements focused on the unity of conjoined twins, it 
was particularly, the Civil War era that frequently featured their opposite nature.480  
 
 
                                                
478 Raymond Corbey,  “Ethnographic Showcases, 1870-1930,” Cultural Anthropology, 
Vol. 8, No. 3 (August 1993): 344. 
479 Chicago Tribune, November 16, 1860, 2. 
480  A contemporary article by Allison Pingree claims that Chang and Eng were symbolic 
of the Union of the United States and that they were, in fact, always advertised as 
working together, similar in temperament, and presented as one entity. Pingree’s 
argument, however, should not be dismissed, as it only reinforces the manner in which 
these living narratives act as any other genre of folklore. That is, folklore changes and 
adapts to current cultural situations. Allison Pingree,   “America’s ‘United Siamese 
Brothers:’ Chang and Eng and Nineteenth Century Ideologies of Democracy and 
Domesticity,” in Monster Theory,  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1996).  

 
 
95
BODIES AND PERFORMANCE 
 
 
Many exhibitions of lusus naturae not only paralleled folk motifs visually, but 
also paralleled motifs of remarkable acts or skills. The combination of motifs doubled the 
interest and familiarity of the display and together formed the beginnings of a narrative. 
When describing the acts of the sideshow freaks, Fiedler was one of the few to notice a 
connection between bodies on display and folklore. He writes, “at the very least, [the 
freaks] move about, gimping, hopping, waddling, as they tell some half-legendary 
version of their origin and fate.”481  These grand allusions to mythical ancestry were often 
coupled with an unusual “talent” as the basis of the act.  The performers did not just stand 
idly by onstage, but engaged in various acts of skill, strength, and humor—all which 
added to the narrative. 
 
 Otis Jordan, for example, was born with ossified limbs and grew to be a mere 31 
inches in height. He propelled his body in a “hopping” motion by the use of his neck 
muscles, and was often dressed in costumes that concealed his limbs so that he could be 
billed as “Otis the Frog Boy”.482  His “act” was not just a display of his unique physique, 
(which could parallel: Motif D195 Transformation: man to frog, B177.2 Magic frog, 
B211.7.1 Speaking frog, B493 Helpful frog, B245.1 King of frogs, B645.1.2 Marriage to 
person in frog form) but involved a range of cigarette tricks including the difficult task of 
rolling, lighting, and smoking a cigarette using only his lips (Motif F660 Remarkable 
skill).483 
 
The physical performance was essential to shaping the narrative, and usually 
incorporated additional motifs.  The Wild Men of Borneo, for example, were described as 
having “mighty strength” and can “lift a stout man just as he were a shuttle-cock.”484 The 
“Wild Men,” or sometimes “Little Men of Borneo” were billed as both mighty and small, 
which not surprisingly coincide with Motif F610.1 Wild man of superhuman strength, 
Motif F610.2 Dwarf-hero of superhuman strength, and Motif F253.1.1 Fairies possess 
extraordinary strength. These human displays were often shown in close proximity to 
various animals in order to establish imaginary and wondrous notions of a new (or old) 
human species.485 As quickly as scientific explanations dominated the discussion of the 
human display, narratives of freaks shifted once again towards the marvelous.  The life 
stories that once permeated small packets of paper were often centered on the loose yet 
implied connection to mythical figures. The Wild Men of Borneo were advertised as 
                                                
481 Leslie Fiedler, Freaks: Myths & Images of the Secret Self,  (New York 1978), 283. 
482 Fred Siegel, TDR, 35 (Winter, 1991), 113; Taylor 2002: 244. 
483 Because of continued disputes from the community regarding the exploitation and 
demeaning portrayal of disabled people, Otis eventually ended up at Coney Island and 
performed the same act under the more politically correct billing, “The Human Cigarette 
Factory.” Robert Bogdan, Freak Show: Presenting Human Oddities for Amusement and 
Profit, (Chicago, 1988), 1, 280-281. Fred Siegel, TDR, 35 (Winter 1991), 114. 
484 “Exhibition of Wild Men,” New York Daily Times, August 7, 1854, 6.  
485 The beginnings of humans displayed alongside animals were rooted in 1878 when the 
Jardin d’ Accalimation in Paris brought six Eskimos to be shown among the animals. See 
Paul Greenhalgh, Ephemeral Vistas: The Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions and 
World’s Fairs, 1851-1939,  (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1988), 86. 

 
 
96
having a “heart on the back of the head—very beautiful, and only comes from mixing the 
blood of beast and man,” which correlates to Motif B20 Beast-men, Motif F510 
Monstrous persons, Motif B20.1 Army of half-animals, half-men.486  
 
References to “savage,” “primitive,” and/or “cannibal” in American advertising 
was also closely tied to the notion of disability, and the use of motifs allowed the further 
propagation of this notion by suggesting a further connection between the display and 
familiar motifs. These individuals were exhibited as deficient and incapable, and their 
inability to adapt to American culture was often a justification for their lack of ability.487 
The Wild Men of Borneo were described as having “no brain, but an empty skull, without 
an organ for memory, or a place to put a thimble full of sense.”488 
 
These bodies, whether disabled or marginalized in some manner, were the 
epitome of early American work ethics. Whether armless, legless, blind, or conjoined, 
these bodies would always manage to perform in a narrative, which combined motifs to 
entice the audience with the most fascinating exhibitions.  The legless would perform 
acrobatics, the armless would write calligraphy with their toes or shoot a bow and arrow, 
the blind would juggle knives, and the conjoined would play musical instruments.489  
Because motifs are categorized by both actors and actions, those on display could exist 
simultaneously as multiple motifs, including motifs F680 remarkable skill, F273 Fairy 
shows remarkable skill, F660 remarkable skill, F610 Hero performs remarkable feats of 
strength and skill, A526.7 Culture hero performs remarkable feats of strength and skill.  
 
In regard to the freak, the shift from deviant to normal is not fixed—They ebb and 
flows into one another.  It is the fluctuating space of uncertainty, or the anomalous 
boundary, between ordinary and peculiar, that allowed the public to become attracted to 
these human displays. And it is the ability to traverse these boundaries, combined with 
social constructions of society that resulted in the extraordinary depictions of the freaks.  
Thus, the successful marketing of those on display was achieved by placing a significant 
emphasis on this shifting border, and one’s place in relation to it.  Thompson suggests 
that the historical changes in “freak discourse genealogy” are framed within the cultural 
                                                
486 “Exhibition of Wild Men,” New York Daily Times, August 7, 1854, 6.  
487 Some of the largest and most revealing billings in this period are: the “Bestial 
Australian Cannibals”, the “Ferocious Zulus”, the “Wild Men of Borneo”, and the 
“Pigmy Earthmen.” See Roslyn Poignant, Professional Savages: Captive Lives and 
Western Spectacle, (London: Yale University Press, 2004). Saartjie Baartmann (the 
‘Hottentot Venus’) and Zalumma Agra (the ‘Circassian Beauty’) were often depicted as 
abnormally risqué for the Victorian period. 
488 “Exhibition of Wild Men,” New York Daily Times, August 7, 1854, 6.  
489 These bodies could also be compared to what Curtis Hinsley refers to as “raw 
materials.” Martin-Barbero in his critique of Marxism, suggests that actors that do not 
represent the popular, such as invalids, are often in conflict with hegemony. But, this is 
not the case with lusus naturae.  On the contrary, and quite ironically, what appeared to 
be the most ‘useless bodies’ were the exemplary models of American work ethics. Curtis 
M. Hinsley, “The World as Marketplace: Commodification of the Exotic at the World’s 
Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893,” in Exhibiting Cultures: The Poetics and Politics 
of Museum Display, (Washington, 1991), 345. Martin-Barbero, Communication, Culture, 
and Hegemony, (London, 1987), 19. 

 
 
97
imagination and reflect “a movement from a narrative of the marvelous to a narrative of 
the deviant.... In brief, wonder becomes error.”490   
 
 
LIMITATIONS & SUGGESTIONS 
 
 
It is no surprise that British historian Eric Hobswam found the period 1870-1914 
a prolific time for what he calls “invented tradition” and “symbolic ritual practices that 
function to inculcate values and behavior patterns with signifying continuity with the 
past.”491  During this era, folklore traversed oral narratives, printed matter, and theatrical 
performances, all under the guise of entertainment.  During periods of social change, 
notions of wonder were deeply embedded in public discourse. The tendency towards 
narratives of wonder during the early American period can be seen as both shaping and 
reflecting early American notions of the ideal and normal.  Very early (12th century) 
displays of the grotesque body were often attributed to a mythical origin, and even a 
limited number of nineteenth century American sideshows advertised (although 
frequently unsuccessfully) freaks as marvelous mythical beings.492  For example, 
Thompson suggests that it was “the wondrous monsters of antiquity who became the 
fascinating freaks of the nineteenth century.”493  
 
Sideshows became some of the most popular forms of entertainment while they 
seemed to push the boundaries of social acceptance. We could see the sideshow as, “a 
theater of guts; a viscerally titillating place where performers violate their bodies with 
spikes, swords, and fire and walk off the platform unharmed,” but it was much more.494  It 
was a space where two worlds managed to collide, and “the freak show expressed what 
Eric Lott calls “the racial unconscious,” implicating cross-cutting desires for difference 
and superiority—but it also expressed a desire for sameness by identifying freaks as 
fellow humans.”495 Similarly to folklore, American amusements, “provided important 
outlets for social intercourse; consequently, issues of democracy, social status, cultural 
control, class division, and respectability were inextricably intertwined with the ongoing 
arguments about the propriety of amusement.”496  Lawrence Levine describes nineteenth 
century high culture, and writes,  
 
                                                
490 Rosemarie Garland Thomson, Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary 
Body,  (New York, 1996), 2-3. 
491 Eric Hobsbawm, “Mass-Producing Traditions: Europe, 1870-1914,” in The Invention 
of Tradition, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983): 263-307.   
492 For a mythical approach to freaks, see Leslie Fiedler, Freaks: Myths & Images of the 
Secret Self,  (New York: Doubleday, 1978). 
493 Rosemarie Thomson, Extraordinary Bodies: Figuring Physical Disability in American 
Culture and Literature,  (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997), 58. 
494 Fred Siegel, TDR, 35 (Winter 1991): 108. 
495 Leonard Cassuto,  “‘What an Object He Would Have Made of Me!’” In Freakery: 
Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary Body, (New York, 1996),  245. 
496 Partricia Click,  The Spirit of the Times: Amusements in Nineteenth Century 
Balitimore, Norfolk, and Richmond, (Charlotesville: University Press of Virginia, 1989), 
15. 

 
 
98
 
As long as they remained shared culture, the manner of their presentation and 
 
reception was determined in part by the market, that is, by the demands of the 
 
heterogeneous and therefore from the mixed audience and from the presence of 
 
other cultural genres; they were removed from the pressures of everyday 
 
economic and social life, and placed, significantly, in concert halls, opera houses, 
 
and museums that often resembled temples, to be perused, enjoyed and protected 
 
by the initiated—those who had the inclination, the leisure, and the knowledge to 
 
appreciate them.497  
 
The use of folklore lured the audience, allowed the heterogeneous public to experience 
communitas, and allowed the most popular form of entertainment to exist as a vehicle for 
expression.  The heterogeneous nineteenth century American public was enticed by 
diverse motifs, but the combination of several motifs, from primarily European cultures, 
provided the audience with enough information to find familiarity in the performance. 
Roger Abrahams, writing on the rhetorical theory of folklore, believes the “controlling 
power of folklore, the carrying out of its rhetorical intent, resides in the ability of the item 
and the performer to establish a sense of identity between a ‘real’ situation and its 
artificial embodiment. This sense of identity is engineered through the exercise of 
control, allowing the audience to relax at the same time it identifies with the projected 
situation.”498  Abrahams explains that the viewer feels relief when a “psychic distance” is 
created, allowing the audience to feel sufficiently removed from the situation, by, for 
example, creating an imaginary world. 
 
The use of motifs in American amusements allowed commentary on real life 
issues under the pretext of folklore and entertainment.  Joice Heth’s advertisements 
surprisingly exhibited very little xenophobic commentary, but this does not, however, 
mean the public did not have issues with her exhibit.  The parallels with motif F571 
Extremely old person and dozens of motifs featuring old women as prophets and helpers, 
added to the narrative, which Barnum wove together.  The result was a patriotic 
exhibition and an instance of motif ostension that appealed to the general public by 
simultaneously luring them in and repelling them with grotesque descriptions of her 
physicality. Heth and her disfigured body allowed the public to stare and indirectly 
comment on her racial features, while maintaining her place as a tie to a nostalgic past.   
 
The future studies of motif ostension could certainly extend beyond the nineteenth 
century, and exhibitions of lusus naturae. Motif ostension could be studied as regional 
variants, or oicotypes.499  For instance, Moses Kimball’s Boston Museum and Barnum’s 
American Museum in New York may have appeared, on the surface, to market similar 
motifs, but upon closer examination, they may have had varying public interest due to 
                                                
497 Lawrence W. Levine, Highbrow Lowbrow: The Emergence of Cultural Hierarchy in 
America, (Harvard: Harvard University Press, 1990),  230. 
498 Roger D. Abrahams, “Remarks to a Rhetorical Theory of Folklore,” The Journal of 
American Folklore, Vol. 81, No. 320 (Apr. –Jun., 1968): 144.  
499 C.W. von Sydow,  “Geography and Folk-Tale Oicotypes,” in Selected Papers on 
Folklore,  (Copenhagen, 1948), 44-59.  

 
 
99
regional differences.500  Bascom believed that studies could further elaborate on the four 
functions of folklore and distinguish between “amusement, creative fantasy, and 
psychological escape.”501  Equally, motif ostension could be investigated in a specific 
situation to further understand how this phenomenon exists and changes with time.   
 
A nineteenth century writer remarked that the American knows “nothing of Dime 
Museums except the outside,” much like “the resident in Oxford never explores the 
interiors of the colleges.” 502  Even without setting foot into a dime museum, the 
nineteenth century American public knew a great deal about what was inside.  Folklore 
was used like a secret weapon, and spectators were shown what they wanted to see—
what they expected to see.   The spectators did not expect to confront notions of 
modernity, disability, or sexuality when they entered these spaces, nor did they realize 
they were always in dialog with these issues.  
  
By using folklore as a key tool in unraveling complex issues, it is possible to 
examine how popular culture reflects emerging themes in folklore, how the leisure of 
various ethnic groups may reflect social class issues, how manifestations of wonder have 
permeated through social and ethnic classes in early America, and how the manifestation 
of folk narratives are used as a tool for expression (See Figure 5).  Motif ostension 
evoked whole stories from snippets of information given to the audience directly or 
indirectly, and in turn, the audience supplemented with their own unique knowledge to 
complete the narrative. This phenomenon was an integral form of social expression 
during the nineteenth century; it pushed the boundaries of folklore, and showed how 
folklore was an integral part of one of the most popular and influential forms of 
entertainment in the history of the United States.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
500 Barnum and Kimball were known to exchange their exhibitions in order to keep the 
public’s interest. 
501 William Bascom,  “Four Functions of Folklore,” The Journal of American Folklore, 
Vol. 67.  No. 266 (Oct.-Dec., 1954): 348.  
502 J.G.  Wood,  “Dime Museums: From a Naturalist’s Point of View,” Atlantic Monthly, 
Vol. 55, (June 1885): 759. 

 
 
100 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Mass Culture and Folklore Patterns of nineteenth Century Human Exhibitions in the United       
 States 

 
 
101 
APPENDIX  
 
 
Motif 
 
 
Instantiation 
 
 
Year(s) 
 
 
A1301. Men at first as 
large as giants. 
 
Various Giants (see F232.6) 
 
 
B20 Beast-Men. 
Combinations of bestial 
and human form.  
 
Also, B29 Beast-Men  
 
1. Jo Jo the Dog Faced Boy 
2. Wild Men of Borneo 
3. Julia Pastrana 
 
1. 1884-1904 
2. 1850-1905 
3. 1854-1860 
(and after her 
death into 20th 
century) 
 
D1620 Magic 
Automata 
D1268 Magic Statue 
D435.1.1 
Transformation: statue 
comes to life 
 
Various Automata 
 
F123. Journey to land 
of little men (pygmies).  
 
1. Chicago World’s Fair “Midget City” 
2. Dreamland “Lilliputia” 
 
1. 1933 
2. 1904 
 
F167.2. Dwarfs in 
otherworld. (Cf. F451)  
 
See F167.2 
 
 
F167.3. Giants in 
otherworld. (Cf. F531)  
 
Various giants often employed to walk through 
“Midget City” at Chicago World’s Fair 
1933 
 
F232.4. Fairies have 
long hair.  
 
See F555 Remarkable Hair 
       F555.3 Very Long Hair 
 
 
 
F167.11. Monstrous 
creatures in 
otherworld.  
 
Various  
 
 
F232.5. Fairies have 
hairy bodies.  
 
Wild Men of Borneo 
1850-1905 

 
 
102 
†F232.6. Fairies as 
giants. Irish myth: 
*Cross. 
 
 
F530. Exceptionally large or small men.  
F531 Giant 
F531.0.4 Giant Woman 
F531.1.0.1.1 Beautiful Giants 
F531.1.0.2 Hideous Giant 
F531.1.11 Giants and giantesses dressed as human 
beings. 
F531.2.1 Extremely tall giant 
F533 Remarkably tall man (woman) 
 
 
 
 
F233.8. Fairies are 
brown and hairy. (Cf. 
F232.5) 
 
Wild Men of Borneo 
1850-1905 
 
F451.0.1. Luchrupáin 
(leprechauns) (as 
fairies) 
  
See  F451 Dwarfs 
F451.2.1.1. Dwarfs are small. (Cf. F239.4.3, 
F441.5.1.) 
 
F451 Dwarfs 
F451.2.1.1. Dwarfs are 
small. F239.4.3 Dwarfs 
are small 
F441.5.1 Wood-spirit 
tiny. 
F451.2.1.3 Dwarf with 
small body and large 
head. 
F451.3. Characteristics 
of dwarfs. 
F232.4.1. Fairy as a 
small pretty girl with 
blond hair.   
F233.5. Fairies have 
yellow (golden) hair 
(clothing). 
 
 
1. (Dwarf/309 pounds) Carrie Akers 
2. Che-Mah the Chinese Dwarf 
3. Admiral Dot 
4. Count Primo Magri 
5. Baron Ernesti Magri 
6. Count Rosebud 
7. Baron Littlefinger 
8. General Mite 
9. The Murray Midgets 
10. Pauline Musters 
11. Charles and Eliza Nestel 
12. Nicholi, the Little Russian Prince 
13. Commodore Nutt 
14. Jennie Quigley, the Scottish Queen 
15. General Tom Thumb 
16. Lavinia Warren 
17. Lucia Zarate, the Mexican Lilliputian 
18. The Doll Family 
19. Lilliputian King 
 
1.1860’s 
2. 1838-1926 
3. 1864-1918 
4-7. 1850’s 
8. 1864-? 
9.1860’s 
10. 1876-1895 
11.1840’s-1937 
12. 1870’s 
13. 1860’s 
14. 1851-1936 
15. 1838-1883 
16.1841-1919 
17.1863-1889 
18.1900’s 
19. 1850’s 
 
F511.0.2.1 Two 
Headed Person  
 
F511.0.2.  
Person with more than 
one head. 
(See also T551.1.2 
Child born with two 
heads) 
 
1. Millie-Christine, the Two-Headed Nightingale 
2. Chang and Eng 
3. Tocci Twins 
 
1. 1851-1912 
2. 1811-1874 
3. 1875-1912 

 
 
103 
 
F511.1.3. Person with 
animal face 
 
 
1. Jo Jo the Dog-Faced Boy (see F521.1) 
2. Lionel the Lion-Faced Man 
3. Grace McDaniels “The Mule-Faced Woman” 
4. Joseph Carey Merrick “The Elephant Man” 
1. 1868-1903 
2. 1890-1932 
3. 1935-1938 
4. 1880’s 
 
F511.1.3.1. Person 
with face of ape 
 
 
1. Julia Pastrana “The Ape Woman” 
1. 1834-1860; 
1918-2001 
 
F511.3. Person with 
horns.  
F545.2.2. Horns on 
forehead.  
 
1. M.Dimanche 
2. Miss Kizzie 
1. 1754-1846 
2. 1902 
 
F516. Person unusual 
as to his arms 
 
1. Charles Tripp 
2. Prince Randian 
1.  1870’s-
1910’s 
2.  1880’s-
1930’s 
 
F516.1. Armless people 
 
 
 
1. Ann E. Leak 
2. Sanders K.G. Nellis 
3. Mr. Nellis 
4. Charles Tripp 
 
1. 1839 
2. 1817-? 
3. 1851 
4. 1870’s-1910’s 
 
F517.1. Person 
Unusual as to his feet. 
F551. Remarkable Feet 
 
1. Fanny Mills, the Ohio Big Foot Girl 
2. Sylvia Porter the Elephant Foot Girl 
1. 1860-1899 
2. 1940’s-1970’s 
F517.1.5 Person with 
knees backwards 
Ella Harper, the Camel Girl  
 
1880’s 
 
F521.1 Man covered 
with hair like animal. 
 
 
 
1. William Henry Johnson (Zip, the What is it?) 
(See F567) 
2. Krao, Darwin’s Missing Link 
3. Jo Jo the Dog-Faced Boy (see F511.1.3) 
4. The Sacred Hairy Family of Burma, Mahphoon 
and Moung Phoset 
5. Lionel “The man with the Lion’s Mane”  
 
1. 1842-1926 
2. 1880’s-1900’s 
3. 1884-1904 
4. 1886 
5. 1900-1920’s 
 

 
 
104 
F521.1.1. Woman with 
animal hair 
 
F545.1.5.1. 
Enormously fat woman 
with beard. 
 
1. Madame Josephine Fortune Clofullia, The 
Bearded Lady of Geneva 
2. Madame Baroness Sidonia De Barcsy 
3. Madame Devere 
4. Grace Gilbert 
5. Annie Jones, the Esau Lady 
6.  Julia Pastrana, the Ugliest Woman in the World 
(See F511.1.3.1) 
7. Percilla Bejano “Monkey Girl”  
8. Burmese Hairy Family 
Lionette “The Lion Face Girl” 
9. Bella Carter “The Mare Woman” 
 
1. 1831-? 
2. 1866-1976 
3. 1842-? 
4. 1876-1924 
5. 1865-1902 
6. 1834-1860; 
1918-2001 
7. 1870’s-1880’s 
8. 1880’s 
9. 1891-1895 
Motif F222 Fairy 
Castle 
 
Dreamland “Lilliputia” 
 
1904 
 
F523. Two persons 
with 
bodies joined. 
Siamese twins. 
 
 
1. Rosa and Josefa Blazek 
2. Chang and Eng Bunker 
3.The Tocci Brothers, Giacomo and Giovanni 
4. Mary and Margaret Gibb, America’s Siamese 
Twins 
5. The Hilton Sisters, Daisy and Violet 
1. 1878-1922 
2. 1811-1874 
3. 1875-1912 
4. 1912-1967 
5. 1908-1969 
 
F525. Person with half 
a body. As if body has 
been split in two 
 
  
1. Johnny Eck the legless wonder 
2. Eli Bowen the Legless Acrobat  
3. Mademoiselle Gabrielle, the Living Half-Woman 
1. 1911-1991 
2. 1844-1924 
3. 1884-? 
 
F526. Person with 
Compound Body.   See 
also F523 Two persons 
with bodies joined.  
Lalu 
 1874-1905 
 
F527.3. Blue man. 
 
 
The “Blue Man” 
 
 
1897 
 
 
F529.5. Person with 
transparent body.  
 
 
1. Transparent Man 
2. Count Orloff 
 
1. 1892 
2. 1880’s 
 
F529.4. Person has 
small animal within his 
body. 
 
Lalu 
1874-1905 
 
F529.5 Person with 
transparent body. 
 
Count Orloff, the only living Transparent and 
Ossified Man 
 
1864-1904 

 
 
105 
 
F529.7 Boneless 
person 
 
 
M. Duverna 
1864 
F529.7.1 Person 
without joints 
1. Ella Harper, the Camel Girl  
2. Jonathan R. Bass (ossified) 
 
1. 1886 
2. 1830-1892 
 
 
F529.8. Monkey-like 
little people. 
 
Percilla Bejano “Monkey Girl” 
1930’s-1980 
 
F530. Exceptionally 
large or small men.  
F531 Giant 
F531.0.4 Giant Woman 
F531.1.0.1.1 Beautiful 
Giantess 
F531.1.0.2 Hideous 
Giant 
F531.1.11 Giants and 
giantesses dressed as 
human beings. 
F531.2.1 Extremely tall 
giant 
F533 Remarkably tall 
man (woman) 
 
 
1.The Taughannock Giant (Hoax) 
2. The Cardiff Giant (Hoax) 
3. Chang the Chinese Giant 
4. Willam Doss the Human Telescope 
5.Martin Van Buren Bates 
6. Anna Swan 
7. Ella Ewing the Missouri Giantess 
8. Colonel Ruth Goshen 
9. Noah Orr, the Union County Giant 
10. The Shields Brothers, The Texas Giants 
11.John Aasen 
12. Captain George Auger, the Cardiff Giant 
13. Eddie Carmel, the Jewish Giant 
14. Jack Earle, the Texas Giant 
15. The Great Mexican Indian Giant 
 
1. 1879 
2. 1869 
3. 1845-1893 
4. 1860-? 
5. 1845-1919 
6. 1846-1888 
7. 1872-1913 
8. 1824-1889 
9. 1836-1882 
10. 1850’s-
1860’s 
11. 1890-1938 
12. 1882-1922 
13. 1936-1972 
14. 1906-1952 
15. 1858 
F531.2.5 Extremely fat 
giant 
 
1. Hannah Battersby 
2. Blanche Gray 
3. Big Winnie Johnson 
4. Chauncey Morlan 
5. Dolly Dimples 
 
1. 1842-1889 
2. 1866-1883 
3. 1839-1888 
4. 1869-1912 
5. 1901-1982 

 
 
106 
F535 Pygmy. 
Remarkably small man. 
Also called “dwarf” 
 
See also, Motif 
F239.4.2 Fairies are 
the size of small 
children 
 
and F239.4.3 Fairy is 
tiny 
 
1. (Dwarf/309 pounds) Carrie Akers 
2. Che-Mah the Chinese Dwarf 
3. Admiral Dot 
4. Count Primo Magri 
5. Baron Ernesti Magri 
6. Count Rosebud 
7. Baron Littlefinger 
8. General Mite 
9. The Murray Midgets 
10. Pauline Musters 
11.Charles and Eliza Nestel 
12. Nicholi, the Little Russian Prince 
13. Commodore Nutt 
14. Jennie Quigley, the Scottish Queen 
15. General Tom Thumb 
16. Lavinia Warren 
17.Lucia Zarate, the Mexican Lilliputian 
18. The Doll Family 
19. Lilliputian King 
 
1. 1860’s 
2. 1838-1926 
3. 1864-1918 
4-7. 1850’s 
8. 1864-? 
9. 1860’s 
10. 1876-1895 
11. 1840’s-1937 
12. 1870’s 
13. 1860’s 
14. 1851-1936 
15. 1838-1883 
16. 1841-1919 
17. 1863-1889 
18. 1900’s 
19. 1850’s 
 
F545.2.2. Horns on 
forehead.  
F511.3. Person with 
horns.  
 
1. M.Dimanche 
2. Miss Kizzie 
1. 1754-1846 
2. 1902 
F547.2 Hermaphrodite 
 
1.Albert-Alberta 
2. Freda-Fred 
 
1. 1899-1963 
2. 1908? 
F555 Remarkable Hair 
 
F555.3 Very Long Hair 
 
 
 
 
1. Circassian Beauties 
2. Belle Carter (Hair in middle of her back like a 
ponytail) 
3. Colon T. Updike (Hairy thicket from lower back 
18” long) 
4. Jo Jo the “Russian Dog Faced Boy” 
5. Burmese Hairy Family 
6. Bella Carter “The Mare Woman” 
7. Seven Southerland (Sutherland) Sisters 
 
1. 1800’s 
2. 1800’s 
3. 1930’s 
4. 1884-1904 
5. 1880’s 
6. 1891-1895 
 
F610 Remarkably 
strong man (Strong 
John) 
 
Colonel Ruth Goshen (see F531 No.8)  
 
 
 
F610.2. Dwarf-hero of 
superhuman strength 
Wild Men of Borneo 
1820’s-1900’s 

 
 
107 
F567 Wild man.  Man 
lives alone in wood like 
a beast 
 
 
 
 
1. The Winsted Wild Man (Hoax) 
2. The Aztec Children (Maximo and Bartola) 
3. William Henry Johnson (Zip, the What is it?) 
(See F521.1) 
4. The Wild Men of Borneo, Waino and Plutano 
5. Clico, the Wild Dancing South African Bushman 
6. The Aztec Children, Maximo and Bartola 
 
1. 1895 
2. 1840-1910’s 
3. 1842-1926 
4. 1820’s-1900’s 
5. 1857-1940 
6. 1850’s-1901 
 
F571 Extremely old 
person 
F571.3.  Very old 
Woman 
 
Joice Heth 
1835 
F990 Inanimate objects 
act as if living 
 
See also J1800 One thing mistaken for another-
miscellaneous; J1809 Other things with mistaken 
identities; F990 Inanimate objects act as if living; 
J1794 Statue mistaken for living original.  
 
Various wax figures and living statues 
 
 
G100. Giant ogre. 
 
 
See F530. Exceptionally large or small men.  
F531 Giant 
F531.0.4 Giant Woman 
F531.1.0.1.1 Beautiful Giantes 
F531.1.0.2 Hideous Giant 
F531.1.11 Giants and giantesses dressed as human 
beings. 
F531.2.1 Extremely tall giant 
F533 Remarkably tall man (woman) 
 
 
 
G10. Cannibalism. 
G11.18 Cannibal tribe  
G11.14 Jungle-man as 
cannibal 
G11.2 Cannibal giant 
G11.18 Cannibal tribe. 
 
Various wild tribes: 
Barbarians from the Woods of Papau  
Cannibals from Australian Tribes  
Warlike Afghans from the Hindu Kush  
1880’s 
 
G11.1 Cannibal 
dwarfs. 
 
1. Wild Men of Borneo 
2. Mazimo and Bartola, the Aztec Children 
1. 1820’s-1900’s 
2. 1880’s 
 
G11.11.1 Albino twins 
with cannibal appetite. 
 
Wild Men of Borneo 
1820’s-1900’s 
 
J1794 “Statue mistaken 
for living original” 
 
General Tom Thumb 
1838-1883 

 
 
108 
 
 
 
 
T550.4. Monstrous 
birth because mother 
sees horrible sight.  
 
 Maternal Impression 
 
 
T551 Child with 
extraordinary members 
(limbs). 
 
1. Ella Harper, the Camel Girl 
2. May-Joe 
3. George Williams, the Turtle Boy 
1. 1873-? 
2. 1909 
3. 1859-? 
 
T551.1. Child born 
without limbs 
 
1. Prince Randian 
2. Charles Tripp 
1. 1889-1930’s 
2. 1870’s-1910’s 
 
T551.2 Child born with 
two heads.  
F511.0.2 person with 
more than one head  
F511.0.2.1 Two-
Headed person 
 
1. Millie-Christine 
2. Chang and Eng 
1. 1851-1912 
2. 1811-1874 
 
T572.2.5 Abortion 
caused by fear 
 
See also T550.4 Monstrous birth 
 
 
T554.8 Woman bears 
frog 
 
Child born in the form of a frog 
1. 1870 
 
T585.5.1 Child born 
with hairy mane 
 
1. Fedor Jeftichew (Jo Jo the Dog-Faced Boy)  
2. Stephan Bibrowski (Lionel the Lion-Faced Man 
1. 1884-1904 
2. 1900-1920’s 
 
 
 

 
 
109 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
 
Abrahams, Roger D.  “Remarks to a Rhetorical Theory of Folklore” The Journal of 
American Folklore 81, No. 320 (April-June, 1968).  
 
Adams, Bluford.  E Pluribus Barnum.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1997. 
 
Adams, Rachel.  Sideshow U.S.A.: Freaks and the American Cultural Imagination.  
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001.  
 
Alden, W.L.  Among the Freaks.  New York: Longmans, Green, and Co, 1896. 
 
Alexander, Edward P. The museum in America: innovators and pioneers. Walnut Creek: 
AltaMira Press, 1997. 
 
Alexander, Edward P. Museums in Motion: An Introduction to the History and Functions 
of Museums. Nashville: American Association for State and Local History, 1979. 
 
Altick, Richard.  Shows of London.  Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1978. 
 
“An Amazing Freak of Nature.” Barre Patriot, March 24, 1854. 
 
Appel, Toby A. The Cuvier-Geoffroy Debate: French biology in the decades before 
Darwin. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987. 
 
Armstrong, Meg. “‘A Jumble of Foreignness:’ The Subline Musayums of Nineteenth 
Century Fairs and Expositions.” Cultural Critique 23 (Winter, 1992-1993):199-250.  
 
Ashby, LeRoy.  With Amusement for All: A History of American Popular Culture Since 
1830. Kentucky: The University Press of Kentucky, 2006. 
 
Bakhtin, Mikhail Mikhailovich.  The Dialogic Imagination.  Texas: University of Texas 
Press Slavic Series No. 1, 1981.  
 
Bailly, Christian.  Automata: The Golden Age, 1848-1914.  Robert Hale Limited, 2003. 
 
Bal, Mieke.  “The Point of Narratology.” Poetics Today 11, No. 4 (Winter, 1990): 727-
753.  
  
——.  Narratology: Introduction to the Theory of Narrative.  Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press, 1997. 
  
Baltimore Patriot.  April 26, 1831, 3. 
  

 
 
110 
“Barnum’s Asiatic Caravan” Farmer’s Cabinet, June 26, 1851.  
 
Barnum, Phineas T.  The Life of P.T. Barnum.  New York: Redfield, 1855. Reprint, 
Illinois: University of Illinois, 2000. 
 
——. An Illustrated Catalogue and Guide Book to Barnum’s American Museum. New 
York: Wynkoop, Hallenbeck and Thomas, 1860. 
 
——. The life of Barnum: the world-renowed showman : his early life and struggles; 
bold ventures and brilliant successes; wonderful career in which he made and lost 
fortunes; captivated kings, queens, nobility and millions of people; his genius, wit, 
eloquence, public benefactor, life as a citizen, etc., etc. : a remarkable story, 
abounding in facinating incidents, thrilling episodes, and marvelous achievements / 
written by himself ; to which is added The art of money getting, or Golden rules for 
making money. London, Ontario, McDermid & Logan, [1891?] 
 
Bascom, William.  “Four Functions of Folklore.” The Journal of American Folklore 67, 
No. 266 (Oct.-Dec., 1954): 333-349.  
 
Bausinger, Hermann.  “Folklorismus.” Enzyklopädie des Märchens IV, 1984.  
 
Baynton, D.C.  “Disability & the Justification of Enequality in American History.” New 
Disability History, Edited by P. Longmore & L Umansky, 2001. 
 
Beckwith, Martha Warren.  Folklore in America, Its Scope and Method.  New York: 
Vassar College, The Folklore Foundation, 1931. 
 
Bedini, Silvio A.  “The Role of Automata in the History of Technology.”  Technology 
and Culture 5:1 (Winter 1964): 24-42 
 
Beeman, William O.  “The Anthropology of Theater and Spectacle.” Annual Review of 
Anthropology 22 (1993): 369-393. 
 
Bell, Whitfield J.  “The Cabinet of the American Philosophical Society.” Cabinet of 
curiosities: five episodes in the Revolution of American museums. Charlottesville, 
University Press of Virginia, 1967. 
 
Bell, Michael J.  “William Wells Newell and the Foundation of American Folklore 
Scholarship.” Journal of the Folklore Institute 10, No. 1/2, Special Issue: American 
Folklore Historiography.  (Jun.-Aug. 1973): 7-21.  
 
Ben-Amos, Dan.  “A History of Folklore Studies—Why Do We Need It?”  Journal of 
Folklore Institute, Vol. 10, No. 1/2 (Jun.-Aug., 1973): 113-124. 
 
 
 

 
 
111 
——. “The Concept of Motif in Folklore.” Folklore Studies in the Twentieth Century: 
Proceedings of the Centenary Conference of the Folklore Society.  Edited by Venetia 
J. Newall.  Great Britian, St. Edmundsbury Press, 1980. 
 
Ben-Amos, Dan.  “The Seven Strands of Tradition: Varieties in Its Meaning in American 
Folklore Studies” Journal of Folklore Research, Vol. 21, No. 2/3, Culture, Tradition, 
Identity Conference, March 26-28, 1984 (May-Dec., 1984): 97-131.  
 
——.  “The Historical Folklore of Richard M. Dorson.” Journal of Folklore Research 26, 
No. 1.  Special Issue: Richard M. Dorson’s Views and Works: An Assessment, (Jan.-
Apr., 1989): 51-60.   
 
Bendix, Regina.  “Folklorism: The Challenge of a Concept.” International Folklore 
Review 6 (1988): 5-15.     
 
——.  “Folklorismus/Folklorism.” In Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, 
Tales, Music, and Art, edited by Thomas A. Green, 337-39.  Vol. 1. Santa Barbara, 
California: ABC-CLIO, 1997. 
 
Benes, Peter. Ed.  Wonders of the Invisible World: 1600-1900.  Boston: Boston 
University, 1995. 
 
Bloodgood, Fred ‘Doc”.  “The Medicine and Sideshow Pitches.”  In Analyzing 
Discourse: Text and Talk by Deborah Tannen, 371-382.  Washington, D.C.: 
Georgetown University Press, 1982.  
 
Bluford, Adams.  E Pluribus Barnum: The Great Showman and the Making of U.S. 
Popular Culture. Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press, 1997.  
 
Blumin, Stuart M. The Emergence of the Middle Class: Social Experience in the 
American City, 1760-1900.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1980. 
 
Boas Franz.  “The Development of Folk-Tales and Myths.”  The Scientific Monthly 3, 
No. 4 (October 1916): 335-343.  
 
Bogdan, Robert.  Freak Show: Presenting Human Oddities for Amusement and Profit.  
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1988. 
 
Bombanci, Nancy.  Freaks in late modernist American culture: Nathanael West, Djuna 
Barnes, Tod Browning, and Carson McCullers.  New York: Peter Lang, 2006.  
  
Bondeson, Jan.  The Two-headed Boy, and Other Medical Marvels. New York: Cornell 
University Press, 2004.  
 
Boorstin, Daniel J.  The Image: A Guide to Pseudo-Events in America.  New York: 
Harper and Row. 1961.  

 
 
112 
 
Bottigheimer, B.  Fairy Tales and Society.  Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 1986.  
 
Brinton, Daniel Garrison. The Myths of the New World: A Treatise on the Symbolism and 
Mythology of the Red Race of America Language.  New York: Leypoldt & Holt, 
1868. 
 
Brinton, Daniel Garrison.  American Hero Myths.  Philadelphia: H.C. Watts & Co., 1882.  
 
Bronner, Simon J.  Following Tradition.  Utah: Utah State University Press, 1998.  
 
——.  Grasping Things: Folk Material Culture and Mass Society in America.  Kentucky: 
University Press of Kentucky, 2004. 
 
Brown, Bill. The Material Unconscious: American Amusement, Stephen Crane, and the  
economies of play.  Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press, 1996. 
 
Brown, Henry T.  Five Hundred and Seven Mechanical Movements: Embracing All 
Those Which Are Most Important in Dynamics, Hydraulics, Hydrostatics, 
Pseumatics, Steam en. Minnesota: Astragal Press, 1995. 
 
Brown, Richard D. Modernization: The Transformation of American Life 1600-1865.  
New York: Hill and Wang, 1976. 
 
Bruce, Robert V.  The Launching of Modern American Science, 1846-1876.  New York: 
Cornell University Press, 1988.  
 
Brunvand, Jan Harold.  The Study of American Folklore: An Introduction.  New York, 
Norton & Company, 1968. 
 
Cassuto, Leonard,  “‘What an Object He Would Have Made of Me!’” In Freakery: 
Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary Body. New York: NYU Press, 1996. 
 
——. The Inhuman Race: The Racial Grotesque in American Literature and Culture.  
New York: Columbia University Press, 1997. 
 
Castle, Terry.  The Female Thermometer: Eighteenth-Century Culture and the Invention 
of the Uncanny (Ideologies of Desire).  Oxford University Press, 1995. 
 
Chambers, Robert. The book of days, a miscellany of popular antiquities in connection 
with the calendar, including anecdote, biography, & history, curiosities of literature 
and oddities of human life and character. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott & Co. 1863. 
 
Chapuis, Alfred.  Automata: A Historical and Technological Study.  Neuchatel: Editions 
du Griffon, 1958. 

 
 
113 
 
Chemers, Michael M. Staging Stigma: A Critical Examination of the American Freak 
Show. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. 
 
Click, Partricia C.  The Spirit of the Times: Amusements in Nineteenth Century 
Balitimore, Norfolk, and Richmond.  Charlotesville: University Press of Virginia, 
1989. 
 
Cocks, Catherine.  Doing the Town: The Rise of Urban Tourism in the United States, 
1850-1915.  Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001. 
 
Cohen, Bernard.  The Eighteenth-Century Origins of the Concept of Scientific 
Revolution.   Journal of the History of Ideas 37, No. 2. (Apr. - Jun., 1976): 257-288.  
 
Cohen, Jeffrey Jerome ed.  Monster Theory. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1996. 
 
Cohen, Erik.  “Toward a Sociology of International Tourism.”  Soc. Research 39, 1. 
(1972): 164-82.  
 
Conn, Steven. Museums and American intellectual life, 1876-1926. Chicago: The 
University of Chicago Press, 1998. 
 
Cook, James W. Ed.  The Colossal P.T. Barnum Reader.  Illinois: University of Illinois, 
2005 
 
Cook, James.  “Mass Marketing and Cultural History: The Case of P.T. Barnum” 
American Quarterly 51.1 (1999) 175-186.  
 
——.  Arts of Deception. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001. 
 
Corbey, Raymond.  “Ethnographic Showcases, 1870-1930.” Cultural Anthropology 8, 
No. 3 (August 1993): 338-369.  
 
Crawford, Julie.  Marvelous Protestantism: Monstrous Births in Post-Reformation 
England.  The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2005. 
 
Cullen, Jim. Editor.  Popular Culture in American History.  Massachusetts: Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd., 2001.  
 
Culler, Jonathan. Framing the Sign: Criticism and Its Institutions. Oklahoma: University 
of Oklahoma Press, 1990.  
 
Darnell, Regna.  “American Anthropology and the Development of Folklore Scholarship: 
1890-1920.”  Journal of the Folklore Institute 10, No. ½, (Jun.-Aug., 1983): 23-39.  
 

 
 
114 
Daston, Lorraine. Wonders and the order of nature. Cambridge, Mass.: Distributed by 
MIT Press, 1998. 
 
 
Daston, Lorraine J. and Park, Katharine.  "Unnatural Conceptions: The Study of 
Monsters in Sixteenth- and Seventeenth-Century France and England." Past and 
Present, no. 92 (1981): 20-54. 
 
Daston, Lorraine and Fernando Vidal. The moral authority of nature. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 2004. 
 
Davis, Janet M.  The Circus Age: Culture & Society Under the American Big Top. North 
Carolina: The University of North Carolina Press, 2002.  
 
Davis, Lennard J. “Constructing Normalcy: The Bell Curve, the Novel, and the Invention 
of the Disabled Body in the Nineteenth Century” in The Disability Studies Reader.  
3-16. New York: Routledge, 1997.   
 
Dégh, Linda and Andrew Vázsonyi.  “Does the Word "Dog" Bite? Ostensive Action: A 
Means of Legend-Telling.” Journal of Folklore Research 20, No. 1 (May, 1983): 5-
34. 
 
——. “The Memorate and Proto-Memorate.” The Journal of American Folklore 87, No. 
345 (Jul.-Sept., 1974): 225-239. 
 
Dennett, Andrea Stulman. Weird and wonderful: the dime museum in America. New 
York: New York University Press, 1997. 
  
Desmond, Alice Curtis.  Barnum Presents General Tom Thumb.  New York: The 
Macmillian Company, 1954.  
 
Dorson, Richard.  “The Shaping of Folklore Traditions in the United States” Folklore 78, 
No. 3 (Autumn, 1967): 161-183.  
 
——. American Folklore and the Historian. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1971.   
 
——.  America in Legend: Folklore from the Colonial Period to the Present. New York: 
Pantheon Books, 1973. 
 
 
——.  Journal of the Folklore Institute 10, no. 1/2 (Jun.-Aug.,1973): 125-128. 
 
——. America Begins: Early American Writing. New York: Pantheon Books, 1950. 
 
——. “Folklore and Fake Lore.” American Mercury  70 (March, 1950): 335-343. 
 
Dorval, Patricia.  “Towards a Stylistics of the Modes of Ostension.”  Theatre Research 
International (1993): 206-214.  

 
 
115 
 
Drimmer, Frederick.  Very Special People.  New York: Amjon Publishers, 1973.  
 
Dumesnil, M.J.B. Gardin.  Latin Synonyms, with Their Different Significations: and 
Examples Taken From the Best Latin Authors.  Translated into English with 
Additions and Corrections, by The Rev. J.M. Gosset.  Third Ed.  London: George B. 
Whittaker, Ave-Maria Lane; Baldwin, Cradock and Joy, and J. Duncan, Paternoster 
Row; J. Cuthell, Holborn; and J. Nunn, Great Queen Street, 1825.  
 
Dundes, Alan.  “From Etic to Emic Units in the Structural Study of Folktales.” The 
Journal of American Folklore 75, No.296 (April-June, 1962): 95-105.  
 
——.  The Study of Folklore.  New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 1965. 
 
——.  “Seeing is Believing.” In The Nacirema: Readings on American Culture.  Edited 
by Japes Spradley and Michael A. Rynkiewich.  Boston: Little, Brown and 
Company, 1975. 
 
——.  Interpreting Folklore. Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1980.    
 
——.  “The Motif-Index and the Tale Type Index: A Critique.” Journal of Folklore 
Research 34, No. 3 (Sep. - Dec., 1997): 195-202. 
 
——.  International Folkloristics: Classic Contributions by the Founders of Folklore.  
Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc., 1999.  
 
Dunlap’s American Daily Advertiser, January 28, 1791.  
 
Evans, R. J. W. and Alexander Marr. Curiosity and wonder from the Renaissance to the 
Enlightenment. Ashgate Publishing Co., 2006.  
 
Dunlop, M.H.  “Curiosities Too Numerous to Mention: Early Regionalism and 
Cincinnati’s Western Museum.”  American Quarterly 36. No. 4. (Autumn, 1984): 
524-548.  
 
Eco, Umberto.  “Semiotics of Theatrical Performance.” The Drama Review 21, No. 1 
(March, 1977): 107-117.  
 
——.  A Theory of Semiotics. Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1976.  
 
El-Shamy, Hasan M.  “Psychologically-Based Criteria for Classification by Motif and 
Tale Type.”  Journal of Folklore Research 34, No. 3 (Sept. – Dec., 11997): 233-243. 
 
Ellis, Bill.  “Ostension, Contemporary Legend, and Murder.” Western Folklore 48, No. 3 
(Jul., 1989): 201-220. 
 

 
 
116 
Ewers, John C.  “William Clark’s Indian Museum in St. Louis 1816-1838.” In Whitehill, 
Walter Muir. Cabinet of curiosities: five episodes in the Revolution of American 
museums. 49-72.  Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1967. 
 
Fabian, Ann. The Unvarnished Truth. California: University of California Press, 1999.  
 
Fiedler, Leslie.  Freaks: Myths & Images of the Secret Self.  New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1978.  
 
——. “Mythicizing the Unspeakable.” The Journal of American Folklore 103, No. 410 
(Oct.-Dec., 1990): 390-39.  
 
Findlen, Paula. Possessing Nature: Museums, Collecting, and Scientific Culture in Early 
Modern Italy (Studies on the History of Society and Culture, No. 20).  University of 
California Press, 1996. 
 
Finnegan, Ruth.  Oral Tradition and The Verbal Arts: Guide to Research Practices.  
London: Routledge, 1992. 
 
Fiske, John. “The Origins of Folk-Lore.” The Atlantic Monthly 0027, Issue 160 (February 
1871): 145-161. 
 
——. Myths and Myth-Makers: Old Tales and Superstitions.  Boston: Houghton, Mifflin 
and Company, 1885.  
 
Fitzgerald, William. “Side-Shows” Strand Magazine 13 (1897): 320-328, 407-416, 521-
528, 696-700; 14 (1897): 91-96, 152-157. 
 
“Folk-Lore Museums.” The Journal of American Folklore 3, No. 11 (Oct. –Dec., 1890): 
312-313. 
 
Foster, Hall.  Recodings: Art, Spectacle, Cultural Politics. Washington: Bay Press, 1985. 
 
Foucault, Michel.  Abnormal: Lectures at the College de France 1974-1975.  UK: Verso, 
2003. 
  
 Freedberg, David.  The Eye of the Lynx: Galileo, His Friends, and Beginnings of 
Modern Natural History.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2003. 
 
Freud, Sigmund.  The Uncanny.  New York: Penguin Group, [1941] 2003. 
 
Freund, Hugo A. “Cultural Evolution, Survivals, and Immersion: The Implications For 
Nineteenth Century Folklore Studies.” In 100 Years of American Folklore Studies: A 
Conceptual History. Edited by William M. Clements.  Washington, D.C.: American 
Folklore Society, 1988.  
 

 
 
117 
Fryer, David M. and John C. Marshall.  “The Motives of Jacques Vaucansan.” 
Technology and Culture 20 (Jan, 1979): 257-69. 
 
Fuller, Metta V. “The Living Statue.” Home Journal.  Nov 11, 1848, 46, 144. 
 
Gaines, Jane M.  “Everyday Strangeness: Robert Ripley’s International Oddities as 
Documentary Attractions.”  New Literary History 33.4 (2002): 781-801. 
 
 
 
Garland, Robert. The eye of the beholder: Deformity and disability in the Graeco-Roman 
World. Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 1995. 
 
Garland-Thomson, Rosemarie. “Seeing the Disabled: Visual Rhetorics of Disability in 
Popular Photography” in The New Disability History.  Ed. Paul K. Longmore and 
Lauri Umansky.  New York: New York University Press, 2001.  
 
——.  “Making Freaks: Visual Rhetorics and the Spectacle of Julia Pastrana” in Cohen 
and Weiss.  Thinking the Limits of the Body.  SUNY Press, 2003. 
 
——.  Staring: How We Look.  New York: Oxford University Press, 2009. 
 
Gennep, Arnold Van.  The Rites of Passage. London: Routledge, [1909] 2004. 
 
Georges, Robert A.  “The Universality of the Tale-Type as Concept and Construct.” 
Western Folklore  42, No. 1 (Jan., 1983): 21-28.  
 
Georges, Robert A. “The Centrality in Folkloristics of Motif and Tale Type.” Journal of 
Folklore Research 34, No. 3 (Sept.-Dec., 1997): 203-208. 
 
Georges Robert A.  “The Concept of ‘Repertoire’ in Folkloristics.”  Western Folklore 53, 
No. 4 (Oct., 1994): 313-323.   
 
Gilmore, David D.  Monsters: Evil Beings, Mythical Beast.  Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, 2003.   
 
Green, Thomas A.  Folklore: an Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, Tales, Music, and Art. 
Santa Barbara: ABC-CLIO, 1997. 
 
Goldstein, Kenneth.  “On the Application of the Concepts of Active and Inactive 
Traditions to the Study of  Repertory.”  The Journal of American Folklore  84, No. 
331, Towards New Perspectives in Folklore (Jan.-Mar.,1971): 62-67.   
 
Goodman, Matthew.  The Sun and the Moon: The Remarkable True Account of Hoaxers, 
Dueling Journalists and Lunar Man-Bats in Nineteenth Century. New York: Basic 
Books, 2010. 
 
Gottlieb, A. “Americans’ vacations.” Annals of Tourism Research 9 (1982): 165-87.  

 
 
118 
 
Gould, Augustus A. ed. (Augustus Addison). The naturalist's library; containing 
scientific and popular descriptions of man, quadrupeds, birds, fishes, reptiles and 
insects; comp. from the works of Cuvier, Griffith, Richardson ... and other writers on 
natural history. Arranged according to the classification of Stark. Ed. by A. A. 
Gould, M. A. With 400 engravings. New York: E. Kearny,  185-?. 
 
Gould, George M. and Walter L. Pyle.  Anomalies and Curiosites of Medicine.  New 
York: Bell Publishing Company, 1896.  
 
Graburn, Nelson and Jafari, Jafar.  “Introduction: Tourism Social Science.” Annals of 
Tourism Research 18 (1991): 1-25.  
 
Graburn, Nelson.  “The Anthropology of Tourism” Annals of Tourism Research 10 
(1983): 9-33.  
 
——. “Tourism: The Sacred Journey.” In Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of 
Tourism. Edited by Valene L. Smith. 21-36.  Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press, 1989.  
 
Greenhalgh, Paul.  Ephemeral Vistas: The Expositions Universelles, Great Exhibitions 
and World’s Fairs, 1851-1939.  Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1988. 
 
Gregory, James.  “Eccentric Biography and the Victorians.”  Biography 30.3 (2007): 342-
376.  
 
Hankins, Thomas L.  Instruments and the Imagination.  Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press, 1995. 
 
Haraway, Donna.  Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature.  Free 
Association Books, 1996. 
 
Hartzman, Marc.  American Sideshow: An Encyclopedia of History’s Most Wondrous and 
Curiously Strange Performers. New York: Penguin, 2005. 
 
Harris, Neil.  Humbug.  Canada: Little, Brown & Company Limited, 1973. 
 
Hazel Dicken-Garcia.  Journalistic Standards in Nineteenth Century America.  Madison: 
University of Wisconsin Press, 1989. 
 
Heider, Fritz. The Psychology of Interpersonal Relations.  New York: John Wiley & 
Sons, 1958. 
 
Helman, Cecil. The Body of Frankenstein's monster: Essays in myth and medicine. New 
York: Norton, 1992. 
 

 
 
119 
 
Hingston, Edward.  The Genial Showman, Being reminiscences of the life of Artemus 
Ward and pictures of a showman’s career in the western world.  London: J.C. 
Hotten, 1871.  
 
Hinsley, Curtis M.,  “The World as Marketplace: Commodification of the Exotic at the 
World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893.    In Exhibiting Cultures: The 
Poetics and Politics of Museum Display. 344-365. Washington, 1991. 
 
Hobsbawm, Eric Ed.  The Invention of Tradition. London: Cambridge University Press, 
1992.  
 
——. The Age of Revolution: Europe 1789–1848. Peter Smith Pub. Inc., 1999. 
 
——. The Age of Capital: 1848-1875. New York: Scribners, 1975. 
 
Hoh, LaVahn G. and William H. Rough.  Step Right Up! The Adventures of Circus in 
America. Virginia: Betterway Puglications, 1990.  
 
Hoffman, Daniel G.  Folklore in Literature: A Symposium.  The Journal of American 
Folklore 70, No. 275 (Jan.-Mar., 1957): 1-24.  
 
Hoffmann, Kathryn A.  “Of Monkey Girls and a Hog-Faced Gentlewoman: Marvel in 
Fairy Tales, Fairgrounds, and Cabinets of Curiosities” Marvels & Tales 19 (2005): 
67-85. 
 
Hogarth, William.  Credulity, Superstition, and Fanaticism, A Medley.  1762. 
 
Holbek, Bengt. “Interpretation of Fairy Tales: Danish Folklore in a European 
Perspective.” FF Communications 239. Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, 1987.  
 
Honko, Lauri.  “Memorates and the Study of Folk Beliefs.” Journal of the Folklore 
Institute 1, no. ½ (1964): 5-19. 
 
——.  “Folkloristic Theories of Genre.” Studia Fennica 33 (1989): 13-28.  
 
Hornberger, Francine.   Carny Folk.   New York: Citadel Press Books, 2005.  
 
Howe, Jeffery.  “A ‘Monster Edifice’: Ambivalence, Appropriation, and the Forging of 
Cultural Identity at the Centennial Exhibition.” The Pennsylvania Magazine of 
History and Biography 126, No. 4 (Oct., 2002): 635-650.  
 
Hudson, Kenneth.  A Social History of Museums. Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities 
Press, 1975, 38-39.  
 
 

 
 
120 
 
Hufford, David.  The Terror that Comes in The Night: An Experience-Centered Study of 
Supernatural Assault Traditions.  Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 
1982.  
 
Hunter, Kay.  Duet for a Lifetime: The Story of the Original Siamese Twins.  New York: 
Coward-McCann, 1964.  
 
Impey, Oliver and Arthur MacGregor. The Origins of Museums: The Cabinet of 
Curiosities in Sixteenth and Seventeenth-Century Europe. Oxford [Oxfordshire]: 
Clarendon Press; New York: Oxford University, 1985. 
 
Jacobs, Claude F. “Folk for Whom? Tourist Guidebooks, Local Color, and the Spiritual 
Churches of New Orleans.” The Journal of American Folklore 114, No. 453 
(Summer, 2001): 309-330.   
 
Jardine Nicholas., J.A. Secord, and E.C. Spary, ed. Cultures of Natural History.  
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
 
Kaplan, Louis. The Strange Case of William Mumler, Spirit Photographer. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2008.     
 
Kasson, John.  Rudeness & Civility: Manners in Nineteenth Century Urban America. 
New York: Hill and Wang, 1990.  
 
——.  Amusing the Million: Coney Island at the Turn of the Century. New York: Hill and 
Wang, 1978. 
 
Keller, John E.  “The Motif-Index.” South Atlantic Bulletin 17, No. 2 (Nov., 1951): 1, 6, 
7.  
 
Kirby, R.S.   Kirby’s Wonderful and Eccentric Museum; or, Magazine of Remarkable 
Characters.  London: R.S. Kirby, 1820. 
 
Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, Barbara.  Destination Culture. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1998. 
 
Knoppers, Laura Lunger and Joan Landes, eds.  Monstrous Bodies/Political 
Monstrosities in Early Modern Europe. Cornell University Press, 2004. 
 
Kohlstedt, Sally Gregory.  “Curiosities and Cabinets: Natural History Museums and 
Education on the Antebellum Campus.”  Isis 79, No. 3. (Sep., 1988): 405-426. 
 
Küppers, Petra.  Disability and Contemporary Performance: Bodies on Edge.  New 
York: Routledge, 2003 
 

 
 
121 
 
Langlois, Janet L.  “Folklore and Semiotics: An Introduction.” Journal of Folklore 
Research  22, No. 2/3 (May-Dec., 1985): 77-83.  
 
Larkin, Jack.  The Reshaping of Everyday Life 1790-1840.  New York: Harper & Row, 
1988. 
 
Larson, Erik.  The Devil in the White City: Murder, Magic, and Madness at the Fair that 
Changed America. New York: Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, 2004.  
 
Leach, MacEdward.  “Folklore in American Regional Literature.”  Journal of the 
Folklore Institute 3, No. 3 (Dec., 1966): 376-397.  
 
Leach, Maria ed.  “Type.” in Standard Dictionary of Folklore Mythology and Legend.  
 
New York: Funk & Wagnalls, 1950. 
 
Lehuu, Isabelle.  Carnival on the Page: Popular Print Media in Antebellum America.  
North Carolina: The University of North Carolina Press, 2000. 
 
Leroi, Armand Marie.  Mutants: On Genetic Variety and the Human Body.  New York: 
Viking, 2003. 
 
Levine, Lawrence W. Highbrow Lowbrow: The Emergence of Cultural Hierarchy in 
America. Harvard: Harvard University Press, 1990.  
 
Lindfors, Bernth, ed. Africans on stage: studies in ethnological show business. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press; Cape Town: David Philip, 1999.  
 
Lindman, Janet Moore, ed.  A Centre of Wonders: The Body in Early America.  Cornell 
University Press, 2001.  
 
“Living Statue.” The Boston Medical and Surgical Journal. (November 22, 1831): 5,15.   
 
Livneh, Hanoch. “Disability and Monstrosity Further Comments.”  Rehabilitation 
Literature 41 (Nov-Dec, 1980): 280-283. 
 
Longmore, Paul and Lauri Umansky, ed.  The New Disability History.  New York: New 
York University Press, 2001.  
 
Lorraine Daston and Fernando Vidal. The Moral Authority of Nature. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2004. 
 
MacCannell, Dean.  The Tourist: A New Theory of the Leisure Class.  New York:  
Schocken, 1976.  
 
 

 
 
122 
McKennon, Joe.  A Pictorial History of the American Carnival. Vol. 1.  Bowling Ohio: 
Popular Press, 1972.   
 
Marvin, Dwight Edwards. Curiosities in proverbs. New York, London, G.P. Putman's 
sons, 1916. 
 
Mateen, Farrah J. and Boes, Christopher J.  “‘Pinheads’ The Exhibition of Neurologic 
Disorders at ‘The Greatest Show on Earth.’” Neurology 75 (November 30, 2010): 
2028-2032. 
 
Mauries, Patrick.  Cabinets of Curiosities. New York: Thames & Hudson, 2002.  
  
McConachie, Bruce A.  “Museum theatre and the problem of respectability for mid-
century urban Americans.” In The American Stage: Social and economic issues from 
the colonial period to the present.  Edited by Ron Engle and Tice L. Miller.  Great 
Britain: University Press, Cambridge, 1993.  
 
McNamara, Brooks.  “‘A Congress of Wonders’ The Rise and Fall of the Dime 
Museum.” Emerson Society Quarterly 20 (3rd  Quarter, 1974): 219.  
 
McNeil, William K.  A History of American Folklore Scholarship Before 1908.  Vol. 1 
and 2.  Dissertation, Indiana University, 1980.   
 
——. “History in American Folklore: An Historical Perspective.” Western Folklore 41 
(1982): 30–35. 
 
——. “Telling Facts: Some Thoughts on the Art of Writing a History of American 
Folklore Studies.” Folklore Historian 3 (1986): 16–25. 
 
——.  “Pre-Society American Folklorists” In 100 Years of American Folklore Studies: A 
Conceptual History. Edited by William M. Clements, 2–5. Washington, D.C.: 
American Folklore Society, 1988. 
 
——. “What Have Our Histories Taught Us?” Folklore Historian 6 (1989): 8–12. 
 
Moser, Hans.  “Vom Folklorismus in unserer Zeit.” Zeitschrift für Volkskunde 58 (1962): 
177-209. 
 
“Mr. Barnum” Farmer’s Cabinet, August 24, 1854.  
  
“Mr. P.T. Barnum’s Troubles.” The Daily Cleveland Herald.  Thursday, January 24, 
1856.  
 
“Museums and Their Purposes.” The Museum News 1: 8 (March 1906): 110. 
 
 

 
 
123 
Nasaw, David.  Going Out: The Rise and Fall of Public Amusements. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press, 1993. 
 
Nash, Dennison and Valene L. Smith.  “Anthropology and Tourism.” Annals of Tourism 
Research 18 (1991): 12-25.  
 
Newall, Venetia J.  “The Adaptation of Folklore and Tradition (Folklorismus)” Folklore 
98, (1987). 
 
“New Freaks in Twins” The Washington Post. December 9, 1904, 3. 
 
New York Daily Gazette. January 4, 1790, 3. 
 
Nickles, Thomas. “Philosophy of Science and History of Science.” Osiris 10 (1995): 138-
163.  
 
Nunez, Theron “Tourism, Tradition, and Acculturation: Weekendismo in a Mexican 
Village.” Ethnology 2, No. 3 (July 1963): 347-352. 
 
Orosz, Joel J. Curators and culture : the museum movement in America, 1740-1870.  
Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 1990.  
 
Oring, Elliott. “Three Functions of Folklore: Traditional Functionalism as Explanation in 
Folkloristics.” The Journal of American Folklore 89, No. 351 (Jan. - Mar., 1976): 
67-80. 
 
Oring, Elliott, ed.  Folk Groups and Folklore Genres: An Introduction. Utah: Utah 
University Press, 1986.  
 
Paré, Ambroise, 1510-1590. On Monsters and Marvels. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1983. 
 
Parkison, R.L.  A report of the Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Baily Circus Sideshow 
1919-1956. June 7, 1971.   
 
Pennsylvania Packet and Daily Advertiser.  August 19, 1789, 3. 
 
Pickover, Clifford A.  The Girl Who Gave Birth to Rabbits: A True Medical Mystery. 
New York: Prometheus Books, 2001. 
 
Pingree, Allison.  “America’s ‘United Siamese Brothers:’ Chang and Eng and Nineteenth 
Century Ideologies of Democracy and Domesticity.” In Monster Theory.  
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1996.  
 
Poignant, Roslyn.  Professional Savages: Captive Lives and Western Spectacle.  
Connecticut: Yale University Press, 2004. 

 
 
124 
Price, Derek J. De Solla.  “Automata and the Origins of Mechanism and Mechanistic 
Philosophy.”  Technology and Culture 5:1 (Winter 1964): 9-23. 
 
Prince, Gerald and Arlene Noble. “Narratology, Narrative, and Meaning.” Poetics Today 
12, No. 3 (Autumn, 1991): 543-552.  
 
Propp, Vladimir.  Theory and History of Folklore.  Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1984.  
 
——.  Morphology of the Folktale.  Texas: University of Texas Press, 1968.  
 
Purcell, Rosamond. Special cases: Natural Anomalies and Historical Monsters. San 
Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1997. 
 
Reiss, Benjamin.  “P.T. Barnum, Joice Heth and Antebellum Spectacles of Race.” 
American Quarterly  51, No. 1 (March 1999): 78-107.  
 
Reiss, Benjamin.  The Showman and the Slave: Race, Death, and Memory in 
 
Barnums  America. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2001. 
 
Riskin, Jessica.  “The Defecating Duck, Or, The Ambiguous Origins of Artificial Life.” 
Critical Inquiry 29: 4 (Summer 2003): 599-633. 
 
Riskin, Jessica.  Science in the age of sensibility: The sentimental empiricists of the 
French Enlightenment.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002. 
 
Robinson, H. A Geography of Tourism.  Plymouth: Macdonald & Evans, 1976.  
 
Rubery, Matthew.  “Victorian Print Culture, Journalism and the Novel.” Literature 
Compass 7, Issue 4 (April 2010): 290–300. 
 
Rudwick, Martin.  The Great Devonian Controversy: The Shaping of Scientific 
Knowledge Among Gentlemanly Specialists. Chicago: The University of Chicago 
Press, 1985. 
 
Rydell, Robert. All the World's a Fair: Visions of Empire at American International 
Expositions, 1876-1916.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984. 
 
Rydell, Robert. “‘Darkest Africa’: African Shows at America’s World’s Fairs, 1893-
1940.” In Africans on Stage.  Indiana: Indiana University Press, 1999. 
 
Sacks, Oliver.  Awakenings.  Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group, 1999. 
 
Sante, Luc.  Low Life.  New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2003. 
 
 

 
 
125 
Sappol, Michael.  “‘Morbid curiosity’: The Decline and Fall of the Popular Anatomical 
Museum.” Common-Place 4, No. 2 (January, 2004).  
 
Schilder, Paul.  The Image and Appearance of the Human Body.  London: Kegan Paul, 
Trench, Trubner, 1935. 
 
Schweik, Susan M.  The Ugly Laws: Disability in Public. New York: New York 
University Press, 2009.  
 
Scott, Donald M.  “The Popular Lecture and the Creation of a Public in Mid-Nineteenth 
Century America” The Journal of American History 66, No. 4 (Mar., 1980): 791-
809.  
 
Sears, John.  Sacred Places: American Tourist Attractions in the nineteenth Century.  
Oxford, 1989. 
 
Secord, James.  Victorian Sensation: The Extraordinary Publication, Reception, and 
Secret Authorship of Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation. Chicago, 
University of Chicago Press, 2000. 
 
Seiter, Ellen, “Semiotics, Structuralism, and Television” in Channels of Discourse, 
Reassembled: Television and Contemporary Criticism.  University of North Carolina 
Press, 1992. 
 
Sellers, Charles Coleman. Mr. Peale's Museum : Charles Wilson Peale and the first 
popular museum of natural science and art. New York: Norton, 1980. 
 
Seltzer, Mark.  Bodies and Machines. London: Routledge, 1992. 
 
Shanker, Stuar, ed.  Ludwig Wittgenstein: From Philosophical Investigations to On 
Certainty: Wittgenstein’s Later Philosophy. New York: Taylor & Francis, 1997. 
 
Shapin, Steven and Simon Schaffer. Leviathan and the Air-pump: Hobbes, Boyle, and the 
Experimental Life: Including a Translation of Thomas Hobbes, Dialogus Physicus 
de Natura Aeris. Translated by Simon Schaffer.  New Jersey: Princeton University 
Press, 1985.  
 
 
 
Shepard, W.E.  Fads, Fakes, Freaks, Frauds and Fools.  Indiana: The Commercial 
Service Company, 1923. 
 
Siebers, Tobin.  “Disability in Theory: From Social Constructionism to the New Realism 
of the Body.”  American Literary History 13, No. 4 (Winder, 2001): 737-754.  
 
Siller, Jerome; Chipman, Abram; Ferguson, Linda; and Vann, Donald H.  Attitudes of the 
Non-Disabled Toward the Physically Disabled.  New York: New York University, 
School of Education, 1967.  

 
 
126 
 
Siraisi, Nancy G. The Clock and the Mirror: Girolamo Cardano and Renaissance 
Medicine. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1997. 
 
Slotkin, Richard. Regeneration Through Violence: The Mythology of the American 
Frontier, 1600-1860.  Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press, 2000. 
 
Šmidchens, Guntis. “Folklorism Revisited.” Journal of Folklore Research 36, No. 1 (Jan. 
- Apr., 1999): 51-70. 
 
Smith, Henry Nash. Virgin Land, the West as Symbol and Myth. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1971.  
 
Smith, Valene L.  Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of Tourism. Second edition. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1989.  
 
“Speculations on Barnum, The Museum, &c.” An English Traveller [sic].  The Literary 
World. 115,  February 8, 1851.  
 
Standage, Tom. The Turk: The Life and Times of the Famous Eighteenth-Century Chess-
Playing Machine.  New York: Berkley Trade, 2003. 
 
Stern, Stephen and Simon J. Bronner.  “American Folklore vs. Folklore in America: A 
Fixed Fight?”  Journal of the Folklore Institute 17, No. 1 (Jan.-Apr., 1980): 76-84.  
 
Stewart, Kathleen.  “Nostalgia: A Polemic.”  Cultural Anthropology 3, No.3 (Aug.,1988): 
227-241.  
 
Stewart, Susan.  Nonsense: Aspects of Intertextuality in Folklore and Literature.  
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1979. 
 
——.  On Longing: Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, The 
Collection. London: Duke University Press, 1993.  
 
Stitt, Michael J. and Robert K. Dodge.  A Tale Type and Motif Index of Early U.S. 
Almanacs.  New York:  Greenwood Press, 1991. 
 
Sun. November 25, 1858, 3.  
 
Tannen, Deborah.  Analyzing Discourse: Text and Talk.  Washington, D.C.: Georgetown 
University Press, 1982.  
 
Tangherlini, Timothy.  Interpreting Legend: Danish Storytellers and Their Repertoires. 
New York: Garland Publishing, 1994.    
 
 

 
 
127 
Tarbell, John Adams. The sources of health and the prevention of disease: or, Mental and 
physical hygiene. Boston: Otis Clapp, 1850.  
 
“There were Giants in Those Days.” Chicago Tribune.  April 28, 1862, 2. 
 
The Siamese Twins.  New York Daily Times. Nov 24, 1852, 7. 
 
Thompson, C.J.S. The History and Lore of Freaks.  London: Williams & Norgate Ltd, 
1930.  First published as The History and Lore of Monsters. 
 
Thomson, Rosemarie Garland. Extraordinary bodies: Figuring physical disability in 
America culture and literature. New York: Columbia University Press, 1997. 
 
——.  ed. Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary Body.  New York: New 
York University Press, 1996. 
 
——.  “Seeing the Disabled: Visual Rhetorics of Disability in Popular Photography” in 
The New Disability History: American Perspectives.  Edited by Paul K. Longmore 
and Lauri Umansky.  335-374. New York: New York University Press, 2001.  
 
Thompson, Stith. “Folklore at Midcentury.” Midwest Folklore 1. (1951): 5-12. 
 
——.  “The Future of Folklore Research in the United States.”  Proceedings of the 
American Philosophical Society 93, No. 3. (Jun. 10, 1949): 244-247. 
 
  
——. Motif-index of folk-literature : a classification of narrative elements in folktales, 
ballads, myths, fables, mediaeval romances, exempla, fabliaux, jest-books, and local 
legends. Revised and enlarged edition. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 
1955-1958. 
 
——.  The Folktale.  Berkeley: University of California Press, 1977.  
 
Todd, Dennis. Imagining Monsters: Miscreations of the Self in Eighteenth-Century 
England. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995. 
 
Todorov, Tzvetan.  The Fantastic: A Structural Approach to a Literary Genre.  
Translated from the French by Richard Howard.  Cleveland: Press of Case Western 
Reserve University, 1973.   
 
Trodd, Colin, Paul Barlow, and David Amigoni, ed. Victorian Culture and the Idea of the 
Grotesque.  Aldershot and Brookfield, Vt: Ashgate, 1999.   
 
Thomson, Rosemarie Garland.  Extraordinary Bodies: Figuring Physical Disability in 
American Culture and Literature.  New York: Columbia University Press, 1997. 
 
 

 
 
128 
——.  Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the Extraordinary Body. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1997.  
 
Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 1 (Jan.1, 1769-Jan.1, 1771): v-xii. 
 
Tucker, Holly. Pregnant fictions: childbirth and the fairy tale in early-modern France. 
Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 2003. 
 
 
Tucker, Louis Leonard. “‘Ohio Show-Shop’ The Western Museum of Cincinnati 1820-
1867.”  In Cabinet of curiosities: five episodes in the Revolution of American 
museums. Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1967. 
 
Turner, Victor. “Liminality and Communitas” in The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-
Strucuture. Chicago: Aldine Publishing, 1969. 
 
Uebel, Michael.  Ecstatic Transformation: On the Uses of Alterity in the Middle Ages.  
United Kingdom: Palgrave MacMillan, 2005.  
 
Urry, John.  The Tourist Gaze: Leisure and Travel in Contemporary Societies.  London: 
Sage Publications, Ltd., 1990. 
 
Uther, Hans-Jörg.  “Type- and Motif-Indices 1980-1995: An Inventory.”  Asian Folklore  
Studies 55, No. 2 (1996): 299-317. 
 
Uther, Hans-Jörg.  “The Types of International Folktales: A Classification and 
Bibliography. Based on the system of Antti Aarne and Stith Thompson.” FF 
Communications 55, No. 2 (1996): 299-317.  
 
Voigt, Vilmos.  “Today’s Folklore: A Review.” In Contemporary Folklore and Culture 
Change, ed. Irma Riita Farvinen, 17-32.  Helsinki: Suomalaisen Kirjallisuuden 
Seura, 1986. 
 
——.  “Confines of Literature, Folklore, and Folklorism.” Neohelicon VII. (1980). 
 
von Sydow, Carl W.  “Kategotien der Prosa-Volksdichtung.” In Volkskundliche Gaben 
John Meier zum siebzigsten Geburtstage dargebracht (1934): 253-268.  
 
——.  Edited by Laurits Bødker.  Selected Papers on Folklore. Copenhagen: Rosenkilde 
and Bagger, 1948. 
 
Wagner, Vern.  “The Lecture Lyceum and the Problem of Controversy.” Journal of the 
History of Ideas 15, No. 1 (Jan. 1954): 119-135.  
 
Wallace, Irving. The fabulous showman; the life and times of P. T. Barnum. New York, 
Knopf, 1959. 
 
 

 
 
129 
Warner, Marina.  Fantastic Metamorphoses, Other Worlds: Ways of Telling the Self.  
United Kingdom: Oxford University Press, 2004.  
 
——.  Phantasmagoria: Spirit Visions, Metaphors, and Media.  United Kingdom: Oxford 
University Press, 2006. 
 
Weekly Eagle.  July 28, 1851, 3.  
 
Weschler, Lawrence.  Mr. Wilson's cabinet of wonder.  New York: Pantheon Books, 
1995. 
 
“What Is It?,” New York Tribune, March 1, 1860.   
 
Whitehill, Walter Muir. Cabinet of curiosities: five episodes in the Revolution of 
American museums. Charlottesville, University Press of Virginia, 1967. 
 
Williams-Searle, John.  “Cold Charity: Manhood, Brotherhood, and the Transformation 
of Disability, 1870-1900.” In The New Disability History: American Perspectives.  
Ed. Paul K. Longmore and Lauri Umansky. 157-186. New York: New York 
University Press, 2001.  
 
Wilmeth, Don B.  Variety Entertainment and Outdoor Amusements: A Reference Guide. 
Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1982.  
 
Wilson, Eric G. The Melancholy Android: On the Psychology of Sacred Machines. New 
York: State University of New York Press, 2006. 
 
Winkelman, Donald M.  “Three American Authors as Semi-Folk Artists.” The Journal of 
American Folklore 78, No. 308 (Apr. – Jun., 1965): 130-135.  
 
Wood, J.G.  “Dime Museums: From a Naturalist’s Point of View,” Atlantic Monthly 55, 
(1885).  
 
Wu, Cynthia.  “The Siamese Twins in Late-Nineteenth Century Narratives of Conflict 
and Reconciliation.”  American Literature 80, No. 1, (March, 2008).  
 
Yanni, Carla.  Nature’s Museums: Victorian Science and the Architecture of     
     Display.  New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2005. 
 
Zeitlin, Amanda Dargan.  American talkers: The Art of the Sideshow Carnival 
Pitchman and Other Itinerant Showmen and Vendors. Ph.D. diss., University 
of Pennsylvania, 1992. 
 
 
 
 

 
 
130 
Zumwalt, Rosemary Levy. “On the Founding of the American Folklore Society and the 
Journal of American Folklore” In 100 Years of American Folklore Studies: A 
Conceptual History, Edited by William M. Clements. 8-10. Washington, D.C.: 
American Folklore Society, 1988.  
 
 ——. American Folklore Scholarship.  Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1988.   
 
 
 
 
 
 

