UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA,
IRVINE
Representing Geometry: Perception, Concepts, and Knowledge
DISSERTATION
submitted in partial satisfaction of the requirements
for the degree of
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
in Philosophy
by
J. Ethan Galebach
Dissertation Committee:
Professor Jeremy Heis, Chair
Professor Penelope Maddy
Professor Sean Walsh
2018

c⃝2018 J. Ethan Galebach

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Acknowledgments
iv
Curriculum Vitae
vii
Abstract of the Dissertation
viii
Introduction
1
1
Does Visual Perception Have a Geometry?
5
1.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
1.2
VMS Proponents and Arguments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.1
What is Visual Perception?
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
1.2.2
Five Arguments for a VMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
1.2.3
Behavioral evidence against a VMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
26
1.3
Spatial Representation according to Vision Science
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
1.3.1
Marr’s visual perception: demarcation and primary function . . . . .
30
1.3.2
Current Views on Shape and Scene Perception . . . . . . . . . . . . .
36
1.4
Conclusion and Open Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
1.5
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
44
2
Are Euclidean Beliefs Grounded in Core Cognitive Systems?
57
2.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
2.2
The Core Cognitive Theory of Numerical Concept Acquisition . . . . . . . .
58
2.2.1
Two Core Systems of Number . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
59
2.2.2
Bootstrapping to Numerical Concepts and Arithmetical Beliefs . . . .
62
2.3
The Core Cognitive Theory of Geometric Concept Acquisition . . . . . . . .
65
2.3.1
Two Core Systems of Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
2.3.2
Bootstrapping to Geometric Concepts and Beliefs . . . . . . . . . . .
70
2.4
Problems for the Core Cognitive Theory of Geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
2.4.1
Critique of the Two Core Systems of Geometry
. . . . . . . . . . . .
71
2.4.2
Critique of the Proposed Geometric Concepts and Beliefs . . . . . . .
74
2.5
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
76
ii

3
Visual Imagination and Mathematical Entitlement
82
3.1
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
82
3.2
Imagery-based Mathematical Entitlement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
85
3.3
The Geometric Contents of Visual Imagination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
88
3.4
Geometric Knowledge through Visual Imagination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
3.5
Knowing the o-minimal IVT through Visual Imagination . . . . . . . . . . .
95
3.5.1
The Synthetic IVT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
96
3.5.2
The Analytic IVT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
97
3.5.3
The O-minimal IVT
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
3.6
O-minimality as a Visual-Epistemological Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108
3.6.1
Can o-minimal objects be visualized? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
108
3.6.2
Visual Virtues of O-minimality
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
112
3.7
Appendix: Modal Logic of O-minimal Structures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
118
3.8
Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
122
iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This project would not have been possible without the encouragement, guidance, and ex-
pertise of dozens of philosophers. I want to thank these people, and especially my advisor
Jeremy Heis, for developing my scholarship over many years and for treating my whole self
with compassion and respect at every turn. In addition, Pen Maddy and Sean Walsh have
dedicated the most time and eﬀort to my academic and personal development. I am deeply
grateful for the impact they have had on me. Below, I would like to describe my academic
development over the last decade in order to thank the many other charitable souls who have
contributed to the successful completion of this project.
In my undergraduate studies at the University of Pittsburgh, Mark Wilson was the ﬁrst pro-
fessor to show a sincere interest in my philosophical questions. Without Mark’s sustained
attention to my senior thesis over countless one-on-one sessions in his oﬃce, I doubt I would
have developed the conﬁdence and self-worth required to articulate and defend a PhD thesis.
I hold a similar appreciation for the advice and generosity of Bob Batterman and Tom Rick-
etts. In my ﬁrst two years of graduate school at UC Irvine, I was fortunate enough to take
multiple seminars with Jeremy, Pen, and Sean on a variety of topics within the philosophy of
mathematics. Although the subject matters of these seminars varied widely (e.g., Cassirer’s
philosophy of geometry, Heyting arithmetic, Dedekind’s conceptual analysis of continuity,
Freges notion of analyticity), each seminar was intensely concerned with documenting how
philosophical questions arise naturally out of mathematical practice.
I was absorbed by
their treatment of mathematics as a science (with its own anomalies, methodological com-
mitments, and historical development). These seminars led me to books like Kitcher’s The
Nature of Mathematical Knowledge, Lakatos’ Proofs and Refutations, Mancosu’s (ed.) Phi-
losophy of Mathematical Practice, Bos’ Redeﬁning Geometrical Exactness, and Giaquinto’s
Visual Thinking in Mathematics, all of which seemed to me to be asking and answering the
most interesting and important questions regarding the nature of geometric knowledge.
iv

In the summer of 2014, I became more conﬁdent in the legitimacy and durability of these ap-
proaches to the philosophy of mathematics when I participated in the month-long PhilMath
Intersem in Paris organized by Mic Detlefsen. While I was there I presented a paper on
Giaquinto’s theory of mathematical entitlement (which eventually became Chapter 3) and
I had dozens of invaluable meal-length conversations with philosophers and historians of
mathematics from a handful of countries. In particular, Andrew Arana, Karine Chemla,
Mic Detlefsen, Katherine Dunlop, Renaud Chorlay, Paolo Mancosu, David Rabouin, and
Vincenzo De Risi all displayed genuine interest in my research and they each oﬀered mean-
ingful advice and encouragement for my academic future. My exposure to this constellation
of ideas and well-rounded academics solidiﬁed my commitment to studying the history of
geometry and the nature of spatial representation. Three months later, I presented a logic-
focused variant of my paper on Giaquinto at another interdisciplinary conference called
Spatial Cognition in Riga, Latvia. This is where I met Nora Newcombe, Barbara Landau,
and many other psychologists and linguists of spatial representation. They introduced me
to an adjacent world of concepts, theorists, and debates that inform all of my chapters. The
Spatial Cognition conference made me aware of the close alignment between philosophical
and psychological questions about the nature of spatial representation. Giaquinto’s book
was merely the tip of an iceberg. When I returned, Pen Maddy introduced me to Stephen
Palmers Vision Science and David Marr’s Vision, both of which became my portals into the
debates and assumptions driving various traditions within cognitive science.
The most general question of my dissertation had taken shape: what are the prospects for
using experimental and theoretical psychology to answer common philosophical questions
about geometric representation? In terms of isolating questions within the philosophical dis-
course on spatial perception, Pen’s seminar on vision theory in the Winter of 2016 introduced
me to the work of Gary Hatﬁeld, and a reading group with Jeremy and Alysha Kassam in
Summer of 2016 introduced me to the work of Tyler Burge. The conversations about the
border of perception and whether its content had a metric relational structure arose out of
v

these two experiences. Chapter 1 was born. Regarding concept acquisition, a handful of
LPS colloquia on arithmetical knowledge (as well as the works of Newcombe, Landau, and
Maddy) pointed me toward to the theory of core number cognition as a useful framework for
asking metaphysical, semantic, and epistemological questions about mathematics. The more
recent literature on core cognitive theory of geometric concept acquisition seemed to oﬀer
parallel hopes for understanding geometric knowledge. In the Spring of 2016, Pen organized
a reading group that allowed me to explore and discuss the claims core geometric cognition.
The disanalogies I discovered during this reading group gave rise to Chapter 2.
The third and ﬁnal chapter on mathematical entitlement has a longer history. In my ﬁrst
year at UC Irvine, after reading Giaquinto’s book (mentioned above), I started discussing
the philosophical signiﬁcance of the nineteenth-century “ﬂight from intuition” with Sean
and Jeremy. Initially, I was searching for alternatives to set-theoretic reductionism in the
philosophy of geometry, but this metaphysical concern was eventually overshadowed by my
growing interest in the visual imagery content that Giaquinto appeals to in his theory of
geometric knowledge. While trying to make this content logically precise, Sean Walsh intro-
duced me to the model-theoretic ﬁeld of o-minimality. After reading some of the early texts
of this ﬁeld, it became clear that many of these logicians developed o-minimality with some
intention to make precise the spatial content of human mental representation. The content
and restrictions of o-minimal structures even seemed to complement the cognitive science
models of visual imagery that Giaquinto was using in his theory of mathematical entitle-
ment. These elements combined to form the main concern of my third chapter: delimiting
the scope of mathematical theorems that can be known through imagery-based mathematical
entitlement.
In addition to the philosophers mentioned above, I would not have been able to ﬁnish writing
this dissertation without the loving support of my family (Elliott, Harold, Jean, Karen,
Mark), my partner (Elaine), and my closest friends (Sam, Alysha, Valerie, and Tyler).
vi

CURRICULUM VITAE
J. Ethan Galebach
EDUCATION
Doctor of Philosophy in Philosophy
2018
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA
Masters of Arts in Philosophy
2015
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA
Bachelor of Science in Physics and Philosophy
2012
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA
TEACHING EXPERIENCE
Instructor (PHIL 110)
2018
Santa Ana College
Santa Ana, CA
Instructor (LPS 29, 60, 105, 205)
2015–2018
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA
Teaching Assistant
2012–2015
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA
vii

ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION
Representing Geometry: Perception, Concepts, and Knowledge
By
J. Ethan Galebach
Doctor of Philosophy in Philosophy
University of California, Irvine, 2018
Professor Jeremy Heis, Chair
In this dissertation, I investigate how humans represent space and other geometric enti-
ties. The topics of my three chapters are delimited by three kinds of spatial representation:
perception, conception, and propositional knowledge. In chapter 1, argue against the widely-
held philosophical view that the content of visual perception includes a “geometry,” or more
precisely, a metric space. I appeal to behavioral and neural evidence to argue that the spa-
tial contents of visual perception exhibit a disunity that most philosophers since Kant would
ﬁnd surprising. In chapter 2, I evaluate a theory of geometric concept acquisition known
as “core geometric cognition,” and I use behavioral and neural evidence to argue that the
most general assumptions of this approach are likely false. In chapter 3, I defend the view
that, despite the geometric disunity exhibited by perception, it is still plausible to believe
that some propositional knowledge of advanced mathematical theorems is grounded in visual
imagination.
viii

Introduction
In this dissertation, I investigate how humans represent space and other geometric enti-
ties. The topics of my three chapters are delimited by three kinds of spatial representation:
perception, conception, and propositional knowledge. In chapter 1, argue against the widely-
held philosophical view that the content of visual perception includes a geometry, or more
precisely, a metric space. I appeal to behavioral and neural evidence to argue that the spa-
tial contents of visual perception exhibit a disunity that most philosophers since Kant would
ﬁnd surprising. In chapter 2, I evaluate a theory of geometric concept acquisition known
as core geometric cognition, and I use behavioral and neural evidence to argue that the
most general assumptions of this approach are likely false. In chapter 3, I defend the view
that, despite the geometric disunity exhibited by perception, it is still plausible to believe
that some propositional knowledge of advanced mathematical theorems is grounded in visual
imagination.
My ﬁrst chapter begins with a demarcation of perception based on perceptual constancy
that can be found in David Marr, JJ Gibson, and Tyler Burge. If we assume that the notion
of perceptual constancy is capable of operationally deﬁning perceptual representation, is
there any reason to believe that the spatial content of visual perception includes a metric
space? Analytic philosophers since the publication of Peter Strawson’s Individuals (1959)
have either taken for granted that the answer is ‘Yes,’ or have provided faulty arguments for
the existence of a visuo-perceptual metric space (VMS). I use behavioral, fMRI, and EEG
1

studies by Nancy Kanwisher, Ruth Rosenholtz, and other vision scientists to argue against
the existence of a VMS. This evidence suggests that our attributions of shape to objects,
agents, faces, scenes, and surfaces, all fail to meet the deﬁnition of a metric space. Why
is this important? For one, it is often thought that Euclidean intuitions about parallelity,
angular addition, object rotation, size comparison, etc.
are embedded in the content of
visual perception. Once we give up on the notion of a VMS, what explains the origins of
these intuitions and what can be said of their epistemic status? Are there unlearned cognitive
structures that underlie our intersubjective agreement in elementary geometry? Empirically,
how intersubjective is this agreement? Such questions bring me to my second chapter.
My second chapter evaluation one theory of the development of Euclidean intuitions
and geometric concepts known as the core cognitive theory of geometry. Philosophers of
arithmetic have fruitfully drawn upon the cognitive theory of number to develop their meta-
physical, semantic, and epistemological claims. Might a similar strategy be useful for philoso-
phers of geometry? As the theory currently stands, this is not likely. There are a number of
problems that are unique core cognitive theory of geometry that will need to be worked out
before philosophers can rely on its theoretical claims. In particular, there is little evidence
that the two core systems of geometry have the representational content and neural basis
that the theory attributes to them. Moreover, the theory fails to precisely demarcate (at
both an experimental and theoretical level) the concepts and beliefs it wants to explain.
Finally, the theory oﬀers much fewer details about the stages of the acquisition process for
geometry than it does for arithmetic. In time, something like the core cognitive theory may
end up being correct. However, the current state of scientiﬁc knowledge does not provide a
ﬁrm foundation for developing claims in the philosophy of geometry.
In my third chapter, I propose an account of mathematical entitlement that is inspired
by Marcus Giaquinto’s book Visual Thinking in Mathematics. Over the past century, the
philosophical literature on the epistemology of mathematics has focused primarily on ax-
2

iomatic proof, sometimes even suggesting that beliefs formed outside of axiomatic deduction
cannot qualify as mathematical knowledge (e.g., the Intermediate Value Theorem). As an
antidote to this preoccupation with proof-based knowledge, Giaquinto’s book describes how
the contents of visual imagination can reliably give rise to warranted basic beliefs in the
domain of elementary geometry and elementary arithmetic. In my chapter, I update and
expand upon the representational contents that Giaquinto attributes to visual imagination.
Additionally, I introduce the notion of a valid connection between imagery contents and
the resulting belief as a novel means for evaluating the epistemic status of the resulting
belief. Finally, I use this epistemic framework to show that both elementary and advanced
formulations of the Intermediate Value Theorem are subject to imagery-based mathematical
entitlement. The advanced formulation comes from a relatively new mathematical discipline
known as o-minimality. It is of philosophical interest that the founders of this discipline are
attempting to give an alternative foundation for geometric topology. Following Grothendieck,
they insist that the objects of o-minimality are inherently visualizable and that its theorems
conform to the topological intuition of shape. These assertions give additional support to
my thesis that advanced mathematical beliefs can be epistemically grounded in visual imag-
ination. As our scientiﬁc understanding of visual imagination progresses, my account will
have to be updated with more accurate details about its representational contents and belief
ﬁxation processes. Despite this, I hope my epistemological account can contribute to our
understanding of the nature of mathematical knowledge outside of axiomatic proof.
The unifying topic of my dissertation – spatial representation – has given me the chance
to put a variety of disciplinary perspectives in conversation with one another. At times, it
seemed that translating concepts and claims between these disciplines was impossible. These
obstacles were temporary. I remain strongly committed to the view that any adequate un-
derstanding of how humans represent space requires us to articulate and synthesize robust
normative concepts, fruitful experimental paradigms, and a large body of neural and be-
havioral results. No academic discipline is currently ﬁt to do this work alone. Even if my
3

chapters are revealed to have signiﬁcant blind spots, I hope they can motivate more gifted
philosophers to engage in this interdisciplinary eﬀort to understand geometric representation.
4

Chapter 1
Does Visual Perception Have a
Geometry?
Abstract: Over the past century, philosophers have often assumed that the content of
visual perception exhibits some sort of geometric organization. During this time, there has
been broad consensus that the representational contents of ordinary visuo-perceptual states
include, at the very least, a metric space in which the distance relations between many
visible elements are explicitly represented. This geometrically-organized representation goes
by various names – “scenario content,” “visual space,” “reference frame,” “egocentric space,”
“depth map,” “2.5-D sketch,” “coordinate space,” etc. – but in this essay, I simply call it
a visuo-perceptual metric space (VMS). I argue that, despite this consensus, no compelling
reason has been given for believing that visuo-perceptual states contain a VMS. I also show
that many neural and behavioral anomalies exist for VMS proponents. Finally, I describe
our best current vision-scientiﬁc theories of the spatial contents of perception and show how
they explain shape and scene perception without positing a VMS.
5

1.1
Introduction
Philosophers since at least the publication of Peter Strawson’s Individuals (1959), but ar-
guably since Kant’s ﬁrst Critique (1781), have agreed that the representational contents of
visual perception are often perceptually organized in a geometric structure. For present-day
philosophers that write on the spatial contents of perception, this claim – that visual per-
ception contains a metric space – has gone largely unquestioned. When arguments for this
view are put forward, they are often short and end with an appeal to allegedly supportive
research in perceptual psychology.
One illustrative example of how philosophers talk about the idea that visual percep-
tion has a geometric structure comes from The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Perception
(2015). J´erˆome Dokic begins his essay, “Perception and Space,” by declaring that the con-
tents of perception typically have a geometric structure:
There is a minimal, formal sense in which the perceptual ﬁeld is a kind of space.
The perceptual ﬁeld imposes upon objects and positions a set of relations charac-
teristic of space, and this set of relations corresponds to a mathematical structure
that deﬁnes a perceptual space. ... I would like to relate these [facts] to the notion
of a frame of reference. (2015, p 441)
By the end of his essay, Dokic has concluded that every theory of perceptual representation
“should acknowledge that spatial perception ... necessarily involves frames of reference ...
with diﬀerent origins and coordinate systems” (p 456).1
Like many other philosophical
1My concern in this essay is with the broad notion of a metric space. By positing a coordinate system,
Dokic posits additional geometric structure over and above that needed for a metric space. Indeed, most
philosophical proponents posit some additional structure (e.g., axes, origin, angles). However, I will largely
ignore this additional structure in my argument here in order to be as expansive as possible. Still, it is
important to appreciate the fact that positing a coordinate space has given rise to a number of philosophical
debates about whether the geometry of perception is discrete or continuous, allocentric or egocentric, carte-
6

essays, Dokic largely assumes the existence of a visuo-perceptual metric space (henceforth,
a VMS) and believes that this has been established by psychological experimentation and
past philosophical argumentation.2
In this essay, I would like to seriously question this geometric view of perceptual rep-
resentation.
I believe that recent neural and behavioral evidence has revealed a deeply
counterintuitive disunity in the way we perceive spatial aspects of our environment. I think
philosophers should take this disunity of spatial perception seriously. Although I will not
explore them here, there are signiﬁcant consequences for a number of prominent debates
within the philosophy of perception, such as the pictorial vs. propositional content debate
and the cognitive penetrability debate.
I will argue against the existence of a VMS in three stages. First, I will show that, since
Strawson (1959), the central philosophical arguments for the existence of a VMS are faulty.3
Second, I will describe a number of experimental anomalies that prima facie conﬂict with
the claim that a VMS exists. Finally, I will describe the dominant understanding of spatial
representation in vision science today, taking note of which representational resources it
posits in place of a VMS. As we will see, the spatial contents of perception are not organized
geometrically in any robust sense.4
sian or polar, etc. These debates all assume the existence of a visuo-perceptual metric space, which reveals
how entrenched the philosophical commitment to the existence of this entity has become.
2Dokic appeals to philosophical argumentation by Gareth Evans, a student of Peter Strawson, in his
Varieties of Reference (1982).
3Although he limits his focus to egocentric coordinate spaces, David Bennett (2016; cf. 2012, p 25) is the
only philosopher that I am aware of who questions the existence of a VMS. He oﬀers a critique of some of
the more recent philosophical arguments for the egocentric VMS. The arguments that he rebuts – arguments
based on visual processing of surface curvature, structure-from-motion, etc. – do not overlap with the more
historically inﬂuential arguments that I consider here. I am in agreement with many of Bennett’s conclusions.
4Perceptual states may represent spatial properties – shape, size, order, containment, distance, direction,
angle, length, orientation, etc. – properties without thereby representing a metric space. Do our spatial
representations achieve a geometric unity in post-perceptual processing? This question is partially addressed
in chapters 2 and 3.
7

1.2
VMS Proponents and Arguments
Philosophers have used a wide variety of terms to refer to visuo-perceptual metric spaces.
The most common of these terms are: visual space, 2.5-D sketch, scenario content, egocentric
space, reference frame, coordinate system, visual ﬁeld, and depth map.5 Yet, each of these
spaces has two features in common that I will use to deﬁne the notion of a VMS. First,
they all contain a set of distance relations that hold between most, if not all, entities in the
space. These distance relations are symmetric (i.e., d(x, y) = d(y, x)) and obey the triangle
inequality (i.e., d(x, y) + d(y, z) < d(x, z)). Second, they are all part of the representational
content of a visuo-perceptual state. Before I consider the speciﬁc philosophical arguments
oﬀered for the existence of a VMS, a few caveats are in order regarding the meaning of
“visuo-perceptual state.”
1.2.1
What is Visual Perception?
As I will be using these terms, perception is importantly diﬀerent from sensation and cogni-
tion. I will start with the sensation/perception border. The main feature that distinguishes
sensory states from perceptual (and cognitive) states is the fact that they are not repre-
sentations. That is, sensory states lack accuracy conditions. Sensory states necessarily lack
representational content, while perceptual states necessarily have content.6 I follow philoso-
phers like Tyler Burge (2010, pp 92), and perceptual psychologists like J. J. Gibson (1966,
p 1), in maintaining that the most primitive type of representational content arises via con-
5For “visual space,” see Hatﬁeld (2009, p 5). For “2.5-D sketch,” see Hatﬁeld (2009, p 5), Green (2015,
p 5). For “scenario content,” see Peacocke (1992, pp 64ﬀ), Heck (2007, p 14), Schellenberg (2008, p 61).
For “egocentric space,” see Evans (1982, p 163). For “reference frame,” see Burge (2010, pp 199-201), Dokic
(2015, pp 443ﬀ); Campbell (1994, ch. 1). For “visual ﬁeld,” see Strawson (1959, p 65). For “coordinate
system,” see Wu (2013, p 652), Bermudez (1998, p 141). For “depth map,” see Bennett (2016, p 6).
6I will use “representational content” and “content” interchangeably. Some philosophers, like Gary Hat-
ﬁeld and Christopher Peacocke, describe the phenomenal character of an experience as part of its “content,”
but I will not do so here.
8

stancy in cortical visual areas. Constancy transformations issue mental states with accuracy
conditions involving perspective-invariant distal properties.7 These mental states represent,
e.g., the shape and color properties of distal entities. On this understanding of perception,
the retinal image – i.e., the sensory registration of luminance on the retina – does not con-
stitute a visuo-perceptual state. Hence, the retinal image is not a VMS despite the fact that
it can be usefully analyzed as a metric space. My thesis is not so bold as to claim that the
retinal image does not exist.
The perception/cognition border is more controversial among philosophers. There are
two schools of thought on how to draw this distinction.8 The ﬁrst school of philosophers
demarcates perception from cognition in terms of an allegedly distinct type of phenome-
nal character that perceptual states have. On this understanding, a perceptual state can
normally be introspectively individuated and classiﬁed as perceptual by the person in that
state.9 Philosophers in the second school ﬁnd this phenomenological demarcation of per-
ceptual states to be “deeply wrong-headed” (Burge 2014, p 11). This second school rejects
the claim that introspection can determine whether a given mental state is perceptual or
cognitive:
7This has been a common restriction since at least Gibson (1966, p 1) and Marr (1982, pp 29, 34, 36),
which call these perspective-invariant properties “constant,” “valid,” “invariant,” “objective,” “physical,”
and “permanent.” Marr distinguishes ‘primitive’ visual systems, like that of a ﬂy, from ‘advanced’ visual
systems, like that of a human, on the basis of the latters ability to attribute perspective-invariant properties
like 3D-shape (pp 32-36).
Similar appeals to perspective-invariance as constitutive of constancy can be
found at Palmer (1999, p 125), Nakayama and Shimojo (1992, p 1357), and Bennett (2016, p 4). Today,
determinations of perceptual constancy are most often operationalized in fMRI adaptation eﬀects because
“fMRI ... adaptation across two diﬀerent stimuli provides evidence for a common neural representation”
(Epstein, et al. 2017, p 1505; cf. Kanwisher and Dilks 2014, p. 733). Behavioral paradigms are also used
to determine constancies: aftereﬀects (Marr 1982, p 287), dishabituation eﬀects (Kayaert and Wagemans
2010), categorization, individuation, and reidentiﬁcation abilities (Potter 1975, 2014; Sekuler and Palmer
1992; Chen 1982, 1990, 2005; Rosenholtz 2016), tracking abilities (Zhou et al 2010), and illusions (Chen and
Zhou 1997, Zhou et al. 2003, Todd and Bressan 1990).
8Orlandi (2014) mentions a similar distinction between two schools of philosophy of perception: those who
reﬂect on “conscious perceptual experience” and those who reﬂect on the “current best models of perception
in the cognitive sciences” (p 13). See also Nanay (2017), pp 2-3.
9See Peacocke (1992, p 62), and Siegel (2010, pp 3-4). As Siegel (2017b) puts it, “We have an under-
standing of perceptual experiences that comes from our familiarity with them, and that understanding is
robust enough to identify the experiences, but not detailed enough to settle the [question of which properties
are perceptually represented in a given experience]” (p 74).
9

Can we be sure from introspection that [the contents and phenomenal character
of an experiential state] are really perceptual, as opposed to primarily the “cog-
nitive phenomenology” of a conceptual overlay on perception, that is, partly or
wholly a matter of a conscious episode of perceptual judgment rather than pure
perception? (Block 2014, p 7)
Philosophers like Block and Burge deny that perceivers have introspective access to their own
mental states in a way that allows them to individuate or classify these states as perceptual
or cognitive. Instead, they oﬀer a perception/cognition demarcation derived from vision
science. According to common usage in vision science, a visuo-perceptual state necessarily
(a) ﬁnds its neural correlate in the ventral or dorsal visual pathways,10 and (b) is the result of
processing information from a single ﬁxation.11 If a representational mental state deﬁnitively
does not meet one of these criteria, it is post-perceptual and hence cognitive.
These two perception/cognition demarcations, one phenomenal and one vision-
scientiﬁc, issue diﬀerent verdicts about whether perceptual states can represent, for instance,
a laptop, a punt return touchdown, your own neighborhood, or that two complex three-
10Most vision science focuses on the belief-guiding content of the ventral pathway, which goes from the
occipital to the temporal lobe and includes visual areas like LOC, PPA, OPA, EBA, FFA, and VWFA
(Kanwisher and Dilks 2014).
Less is known about the action-guiding content of the dorsal pathway(s),
which goes from the occipital to the parietal lobe (Kravitz et al. 2011; Konen et al. 2013; Bell et al. 2014).
11This restriction has been common since at least Julesz (1975), which distinguishes single-ﬁxation “pre-
attentive perceptions” of texture properties from transsaccadic “scrutiny” representations. A single ﬁxation
lasts for “300 msec on average” (Henderson and Hollingworth 2003, p 58). Psychologists who explicitly
endorse this single-ﬁxation view of perception include: O’Regan (1992), Rensink (2000, 2002), Henderson
and Hollingsworth (2003), and Fei-Fei et al. (2007). Some smaller (and largely independent) traditions of
research in psychology departments – namely, visual psychophysics and computer vision – do not clearly
distinguish perception from sensation or cognition, and hence I will not include their theoretical paradigms
within the category of vision science pace Palmer (1999).
10

dimensional shapes are identical.12 In this essay, I will follow the vision-scientiﬁc demarcation
in specifying the scope of the VMS-concept.13
Now that we have a better sense of the scope of the VMS-concept, I will lay out
and critique the views of ﬁve prominent philosophers who endorse a VMS: Peter Strawson,
Christopher Peacocke, Tyler Burge, Gary Hatﬁeld, Wayne Wu.14 These ﬁve ﬁgures are not
the only proponents of a VMS, but they are the only ones I have found that give arguments
for believing that a VMS exists.15
1.2.2
Five Arguments for a VMS
The idea of a visuo-perceptual metric space is not new. In the ﬁrst Critique, Kant posits a
sensation-involving nonconceptual representation of space, intuition, that at the very least
obeys the triangle inequality:
12In this footnote, I say why these four items cannot be represented perceptually if we accept (a) and (b).
Kind-attributions like this laptop will have neural correlates outside of early visual areas (Kim et al. 2009).
Event-attributions like this punt return touchdown will be based on information from dozens of saccades and
ﬁxations in various memory stores. Scene reidentiﬁcation like this is my neighborhood (from Siegel 2017, p
xiii) will likely involve activating cognitive maps from long-term memory, which seems to take place in RSC,
an area whose perceptual status is unclear (Epstein and Vass 2013). Finally, shape-identity judgments like
these two objects have the same shape (from Peacocke 1992, p 78) will result from mental rotations in visual
working memory. These four representations will all likely count as perceptual under the phenomenological
demarcation, but they are likely post-perceptual under the vision-scientiﬁc demarcation.
13I do this because I agree with Block and Burge that our introspective abilities are not strong enough
to make this distinction in many cases. Hence, what vision scientists ﬁnd theoretically fruitful will be a
preferable distinction to the phenomenal one. Moreover, I have sympathies with the ‘reductive’ approach
to phenomenal consciousness known under the label “higher-order theories of consciousness” (Carruthers
2016).
14Two philosophers that I will be discussing in detail, namely Peacocke and Hatﬁeld, do not make clear
eﬀorts to distinguish between these two demarcations of perception from cognition. As such, it is logically
possible that they would reject the existence of a VMS as I have narrowly deﬁned it. However, since both
philosophers substantively engage with vision-scientiﬁc literature, they may endorse it. I will proceed as if
Peacocke’s scenarios and Hatﬁeld’s visual spaces are both VMSs. Even if this is assumption is inaccurate,
their arguments for the existence of scenarios and visual spaces are unconvincing as I will show.
15Other twenty-ﬁrst century proponents include Richard Heck (2007, p 14), David Chalmers (2006, p 22),
Mohan Matthen (2005, p 300), Susanna Schellenberg (2008, p 61), Robert Briscoe and John Schwenkler
(2015, p 1458), and Brad Thompson (2010, p 140).
11

Space is not a discursive, or as one says, general concept of relations of things
in general, but a pure intuition ... [G]eometrical propositions, that, for instance,
in a triangle two sides together are greater than the third, can never be derived
from the general concepts of line and triangle, but only from intuition and indeed
a priori with apodictic certainty. (Kant 1781, A24-5/B39-40)
Throughout the twentieth century, dozens of philosophers have elaborated this metric-space
conception of perceptual content.16 I will focus on what I regard as the ﬁve most substantive
arguments for a VMS, namely, the arguments of Strawson, Peacocke, Hatﬁeld, Burge, and
Wu. I will address each of these ﬁgures in turn, ﬁrst demonstrating that they posit a VMS
and then laying out their argument. Each argument claims that humans would be unable to
complete a certain visual or cognitive task without a VMS. After laying out each argument,
I will show why it is ﬂawed.
Strawson
In his 1959 book Individuals, Peter Strawson endorses a VMS in the following passages.
He claims that “the visual ﬁeld is necessarily extended at any moment, and its parts must
exhibit spatial relations to each other” (p 65). The locations of these spatial parts (also
called visual elements) are perceptually speciﬁed in terms of “a common reference point
and common axes of spatial direction [and distance]” (p 22). According to Strawson, these
“visual elements can be seen all at once as at a certain visual distance from one another ...
Or, to put it in another way: the momentary states of the colour-patches of the visual scene
visibly exhibit spatial relations to each other at a moment” (80). From these passages, and
16The claim the visual perception has a geometry akin to a VMS can be found in the following twentieth-
century texts: Mach (1902), Carnap (1922), Cassirer (1944), Strawson (1959), Gr¨unbaum (1962, 1973),
Putnam (1963), Sellars (1968, pp 25-30), Suppes (1977, 1995), Taylor (1978), O’Shaughnessy (1980, p 176),
Evans (1982, ch 6), French (1987, p 115), Baldwin (1992, p 183), Peacocke (1992, ch 3).
12

many others like them, it is clear that Strawson conceives of visual perception as containing
a (coordinatized) metric space.
What is Strawson’s argument that such an entity exists? He claims that an adequate
conceptual analysis of our capacity for linguistic reference requires the existence of a VMS.
His argument rests on a few premises, the ﬁrst of which is the claim that every instance of
linguistic reference is also an instance of identifying reference (p 16). According to Strawson,
a speaker makes an identifying reference only if she knows an “individuating fact” about
the referent (p 23). So, an implication of Strawson’s ﬁrst premise is that linguistic reference
to object a, achieved by uttering an expression E, requires, for some concept P, that the
speaker knows: E refers to a & P(a) & ∀y(P(y) →a = y). The proposition, P(a), is the
individuating fact by which the expression E gains its “demonstrative force” (p 118).
Strawson’s second premise is that the concept P must individuate the referent by (i)
conceptually locating it within a region of a spatio-temporal coordinate space (pp 38, 56),
and (ii) providing a description that is true of the referent and false of the other particulars
in that region (p 25). Why does Strawson privilege the spatio-temporal coordinate space
as the means of all identifying reference? He does this because such a space is “uniquely
eﬃcient” at generating the individuating facts required for identifying reference (p 24).
The third premise of Strawson’s argument is that the “visual ﬁeld [must provide] the
materials for spatial concepts” (p 65).17
By this claim, Strawson means that the visual
perception must have the same geometric structure as the spatio-temporal coordinate space
underlying the individuating concept P. Hence, Strawson conceives of his “visual ﬁeld” as
necessarily a visuo-perceptual metric space (p 65).
Taken together, Strawson’s three premises entail that the cognitive task of linguistic
reference requires a VMS. But his argument is not sound. Strawson’s ﬁrst and third premises
17Strawson considers but rejects the view that auditory perception would also “suﬃce to generate spatial
concepts” (p 66).
13

are false. The ﬁrst premise is false because linguistic reference does not require knowledge
of an individuating fact. This is now orthodoxy in philosophy of language and is associated
with the general view known as “semantic externalism.” Most philosophers agree that certain
examples of everyday reference made famous by Kripke (1972) demonstrate that a speaker
need not know any individuating facts about a referent in order to refer to it. Strawson is
simply wrong when he claims that “one cannot signiﬁcantly use a name to refer to someone
or something unless one [is] prepared to substitute a description for the name” (p 181).
A neo-Strawsonian might try to salvage the argument from reference by granting that
semantic externalism holds for linguistic reference, but still claiming that perceptual reference
requires attribution of an individuating location to the referent. Indeed, this is precisely
the view of Gareth Evans. Evans embraces semantic externalism in his 1973 essay, “The
Causal Theory of Names,” but Evans later claims that perceptual reference, unlike reference
from memory or testimony, requires “a conception of it as the occupant of such-and-such a
position” in an egocentric frame of reference (1982, p 149).18 Evans argues that this latter
claim is a consequence of his Generality Constraint, which Evans states as: “If we hold
that the subject’s understanding of ‘Fa’ and his understanding of ‘Gb’ are structured, we
are committed to the view that the subject will also be able to understand the sentences
‘Fb’ and ‘Ga’ ” (p 102). This constraint allegedly entails that perceptual reference is only
possible when a perceiver is capable of reidentifying the object (p 149). And reidentiﬁcation
is allegedly accomplished on the basis of the object’s perceived location within an egocentric
frame of reference (p 149).
There are a number of problems with Evans’ argument. For one, it is not clear why
Evans requires locative facts to be the basis of reidentiﬁcation rather than, say, shape facts.
For another, it seems fairly clear that we are capable of individuating, tracking, reidentify-
18Cf. Evans (1985), p 392. More recently, Evans’ location-based view of perceptual reference has been
endorsed by Robert Briscoe: “To see a matchbox as over there, e.g., is perforce to see it as located somewhere
relative to here, somewhere, that is, more precisely speciﬁed using the axes right/left, front/behind, and
above/below” (2009, p 424).
14

ing, and thinking about objects that we unwittingly see in a mirror. Such objects are not
perceived in their true location and so Evans is committed to the unappealing view that
this is a case of reference failure.19 Finally, the Generality Constraint is primarily about
thoughts, not perceptual representations. Even if we extend it to perception, Evans does not
say how his reidentiﬁcation requirement could be derived from the Generality Constraint.20
Hence, a neo-Strawsonian view of reference is without any argumentative support. More-
over, many cogent philosophical arguments for semantic externalism regarding perception
have been developed, although I will not review them here.21
Strawson’s third premise is also false. It is not true that the geometric character of
perception must be the same as the geometric character of our conception of the world. Even
if we grant to Strawson the bold claim that humans conceive of all objects as located in a
single, uniﬁed coordinate space (p 31), why should we think such a metric space is present
in perception? I assume Strawson would say that we could not develop (or “ﬁll in”) our
conception of the world without a VMS. But this is simply inaccurate. It is logically possible
that each perceptual state represents a single distance relation between two objects, and only
later in a post-perceptual region (e.g., the hippocampus) do we integrate these relations into
a uniﬁed coordinate space.22 It is even possible that we develop (and “ﬁll in”) our conception
of the world without incorporating any perceived metric properties of our environment – we
19I draw this objection from Tyler Burge (2010, p 200) and E. J. Green (2017, p 14). Burge and Green each
provide some other cogent objections to Evans’ locative requirement on perceptual reference. For instance,
Burge says: “One can see and think about a star or comet through light that is refracted by the atmosphere.
One might have seriously mislocated the object with respect to ones own position and have no practical way
of locating it correctly” (p 200).
20It seems very likely that Evans is drawing his reidentiﬁcation requirement from Strawson (1959, ch. 2).
But Strawson’s reidentiﬁcation requirement is (a) a requirement for linguistic reference, (b) grounded in the
capacity for sortal predication, and (c) lacking any argument for why every sortal predication contains the
idea “of a continuous path traced through space and time” (p 207), let alone for Evans’ further implication
that the perception of path-continuity requires the perception of a coordinatized metric space.
21Most prominently, Burge’s defense of “anti-individualism regarding perception” (1991; 2010, ch. 3).
22This might be how the hippocampus constructs a cognitive map representation of one’s environment, but
it is still unknown which perceptual and cognitive contents are integrated during this construction process.
For an overview of the currently-available neural and behavioral evidence on this topic, see Epstein et al.
(2017).
15

might use saccadic corollary discharges, not perceptual contents, as our basis for adding new
objects and distance relations to our conception of the world cognitive map.23
In sum, Strawson’s argument from linguistic reference fails to provide any support
for the claim that a VMS exists because his ﬁrst and third premises are false. Although
Strawson’s argument is not often explicitly endorsed today, his inﬂuence is still felt through
Evans and one of Evans’ colleagues: Christopher Peacocke. Peacocke provides our second
argument for a VMS.
Peacocke
In his 1992 book A Study of Concepts, Christopher Peacocke posits a VMS he calls a “sce-
nario.”24 According to Peacocke, a scenario is a perceptual representation that speciﬁes the
coordinate locations and properties of all the surfaces in ones ﬁeld of vision.25 Peacocke
claims that scenarios are perceptually ascribed to the unique physical location “given by
the property of being the center of the chest of the human body, with three axes given by
the directions back/front, left/right, and up/down with respect to that center” (p 62). For
Peacocke, the representational content of a scenario speciﬁes,
for each [discernible] distance and direction from the origin..., whether there is a
surface there and, if so, what texture, hue, saturation, ...brightness, ...degree of
solidity, ...orientation, ...it has at that point. (p 63)
23Cf. Redish (1999), pp 84, 85, 277. Corollary discharges are visuo-motor neural signals that ‘predict’
future retinal stimulation after a saccade on the basis of a saccadic motor command.
24Peacocke’s postulation of scenarios was directly inspired by Gareth Evans’ above argument for a VMS.
See Peacocke (1992, p 71) where he endorses “Evans’ Thesis.”
25Other VMS proponents speak not of component surfaces but component points, textures, bars, blobs,
luminance gratings, contours, volumetric objects, enclosures, etc. I will gloss over these diﬀerences about
the elements that constitute the underlying set of the posited metric space.
16

These contents determine the accuracy conditions of a scenario representation. When the
environmental surfaces match the represented surfaces with respect to the features mentioned
in this quote, the perceptual state with the scenario content is considered to be accurate.26
Peacocke’s initial motivating example for believing in a VMS is phenomenological. He
claims that distinctions in the way visual experiences feel should be explained in terms of
their distinct perceptual content:
The appropriate set of labeled axes captures distinctions in the phenomenology of
experience itself. Looking straight ahead at Buckingham Palace is one experience.
It is another to look at the palace with ones body turned toward a point on the
right. In this second case the palace is experienced as being oﬀto to one side
from the direction straight ahead, even if the view remains exactly the same as
in the ﬁrst case. (p 62)
In other words, Peacocke claims the distinct feel of these two experiences of Buckingham
Palace supports the claim that a surface’s direction from the perceiver’s body is percep-
tually represented.27 In doing so, Peacocke is assuming that phenomenal diﬀerence always
supervenes on representational diﬀerence. This view is usually called representationalism.28
However, in his earlier book, Sense and Content, Peacocke himself seems to reject repre-
sentationalism when he claims that the two phenomenally distinct interpretations of the
Necker cube have the same perceptual content (1983, pp 16-17). Representationalism is also
26Do scenarios qualify as visuo-perceptual in my sense? It seems so. Peacocke says that scenarios are
“most primitive level of ... nonconceptual representational content” (90). This suggests that scenarios are a
part of the content of visuo-perceptual states as deﬁned by (a) and (b) above. Moreover, Peacocke discusses
and partially endorses the representational theories of early vision given by vision scientists like David Marr,
Stephen Palmer, Anne Treisman, and Roger Shepard. These vision scientists are explicitly concerned with
early visual areas, perceptual constancies, and visual representations derived from single eye ﬁxations. So,
although Peacocke accepts the phenomenal demarcation of perception from cognition, his scenarios seem to
be perceptual in my sense.
27Peacocke formalizes this directional relation as, “R is located in direction D” (p 70). Presumably, this
direction D is encoded as three numbers representing the degrees of each angle formed by the vector to the
surface and each of the body’s three axes.
28Cf. Lycan (2015).
17

fundamentally at odds with the vision-scientiﬁc deﬁnition of perceptual content in terms of
perspective-invariant constancies.29 Hence, this initial motivating example does not consti-
tute much of an argument.
Later on, Peacocke gives two additional reasons for believing in a VMS. First, he claims
that if “you are looking at a range of mountains, it may be correct to say that you see some
as rounded, some as jagged. But the content of your visual experience in respect of the shape
of the mountains is far more speciﬁc than that description indicates” (p 67). Peacocke is
claiming that when we perceive a scene like a range of mountains, the content is more pictorial
than conceptual, and that pictorial content should be articulated as a VMS. The problem
with this argument is that almost every current vision-scientiﬁc model of scene perception
understands “pictorial content” in terms of the global texture properties of the retinal image
rather than as a scenario representation. There is good experimental and neural evidence
for this view as we will see in section 3. One of the more revealing experimental results
from Mary Potter and colleagues demonstrates that, even though we can categorize a scene
as, e.g., ‘mountains’ or ‘ﬂowers,’ after only seeing it for a few dozen milliseconds, we are
unable to reidentify which ﬂower scene we saw even when the alternative choice has a vastly
diﬀerent metric layout (Potter 1993; Potter et al. 2014). Over longer viewing times, when
we can distinguish round from jagged mountains, it is likely that the underlying perceptual
content is given by texture properties rather than a VMS. Hence, Peacocke’s ﬁrst argument
is weak.
Peacocke’s second argument amounts to the claim that scenario content is the basis
of our capacity to “conﬁrm or refute” the accuracy of our perception of an object’s shape
29See footnote 7. This is not to say that perceptually representing body-centric direction is impossible
– such a representation might be invariant over eye or head motion – but Peacocke’s Buckingham Palace
example does nothing to make this possibility more likely.
Moreover, even if Peacocke is right that we
perceive the body-centric direction to Buckingham Palace, there are many ways to articulate this content
without positing a VMS. For instance, some visual neuroscientists and developmental psychologists have
claimed that we perceptually categorize an object as to the left or to the right independent of any metric
directional content (Scott et al. 2016; Gava et al. 2009).
18

(p 242n11). This raises the question: If I perceive that this cube is red, can I refute this
perception without perceptually locating the cube in a VMS? This seems eminently plausible.
In order to refute this perception, I will need to reidentify the cube, and this can be done in
a number of ways without a VMS. For example, I might reidentify the cube on the basis of
some rare markings or the object next to it. There are many ways to reidentify an object
without using a VMS. Hence, Peacocke’s arguments do not provide any support for believing
in a VMS.
Hatﬁeld
Gary Hatﬁeld is our third VMS proponent. He describes his VMS in his theory of “visual
space.” Hatﬁeld claims that visual space is “like David Marr’s 2.5-D sketch” (2009, p 5).30
David Marr’s 2.5-D sketch will be discussed more fully in section 3, but here I will simply
note that it contains a three-dimensional coordinate space centered on the ego. Presumably
Hatﬁeld’s visual space also has this property. Regarding its metric structure, Hatﬁeld claims
“that a ﬁnite Euclidean model captures the gross structure” of visual space (2003, p 172).
Visual space, like Marr’s 2.5-D sketch, is supposed to “guide action and ... support reasonably
accurate judgments of size, distance, and shape” (2009, p 205). So it seems that visual space
arises early in the visual cortex before processing splits into action-guiding dorsal content
and judgment-guiding ventral content.31
Nevertheless, there are two notable diﬀerences
between Hatﬁeld and our previous proponents.
First, Hatﬁeld thinks of visual space in
the ﬁrst instance as part of the phenomenal character of a perceptual state. Hence, we
determine the three-dimensional geometric structure of a visual space by asking perceivers
30The psychologist Rudolf Luneburg (1947) introduced the idea of a “visual space” with a hyperbolic
metric as a theory of the perceptual content underlying a particular visual task: judging the parallelity of
black cords or a series of lights. The “visual space” continues to be a topic of investigation in the (to my
my mind rather speculative) discipline of mathematical psychology (Indow 2004, Wagner 2005, Koenderink
and Van Doorn 2008), and in most of these cases visual space has an egocentric coordinate system
31See footnote 10.
19

how things appear to them.32 Nevertheless, Hatﬁeld thinks the geometric structure of visual
space determines the perceptual state’s geometric representational content via a Euclidean
transformation (2013, p 59).33 For example, even if two parallel railroad tracks converge
in (phenomenal) visual space, Hatﬁeld thinks we often perceptually represent the railroad
tracks as parallel.
As long as the phenomenal visual space successfully “serve[s] action
guiding, object cognition, and other purposes,” Hatﬁeld thinks our perceptual state can be
said to accurately represent the geometry of the visible environment (2013, p 59). So it
should be no surprise that Hatﬁeld’s primary argument for a VMS is based on psychological
experiments in which participants estimate various metric properties of their environment.
Hatﬁeld thinks that these experimental results – particularly the object size estimation
results of Granrud (2004, 2013) – support the view that children develop a veridical VMS
by the age of 10 (2013, p 49).
Hatﬁeld’s argument for a VMS has many shortcomings. Most signiﬁcantly, it assumes
that our perceptual attribution of an object’s size in embedded in a uniﬁed geometric repre-
sentation of the whole visual environment. It is of course true that we feel that an object’s
size is perceptually given to us in a geometrically organized environment. But this feeling
substitutes the phenomenal deﬁnition of perception for our preferred vision-scientiﬁc deﬁni-
tion. In visual neuroscience today, it is near orthodoxy that object size and spatial layout
32For Hatﬁeld, perceptual states have two aspects: a phenomenal aspect and an representational aspect
(2009, p 18). The phenomenal aspect of a perceptual state is a collection of subject-dependent entities,
properties, and relations.
The phenomenal aspect does not purport to represent anything in the visible
environment. For instance, when I look at the Kanisza triangle illusion and assert that there appears to be a
bright triangle there, Hatﬁeld would say that this assertion reports the phenomenal aspect of my perceptual
state rather than the representational aspect. Hatﬁeld claims that the phenomenal aspect of a perceptual
state has its own “spatial structure” (p 18). On the other hand, the representational aspect of a perceptual
state are the source of the states veridicality conditions and it is not reducible to biological function (p 25).
For Hatﬁeld, it is fundamentally a scientiﬁc task to specify what a perceptual state represents, and ones
evidence will come from behavioral, evolutionary, and neurophysiological evidence. Hatﬁeld’s two aspects
of perception allow him to claim that a single perceptual state may have phenomenally present a trapezoid
while representing a rectangle (p 19).
33Although this fact is not relevant to his argument, the Euclidean transformation is allegedly needed
to explain systematic underestimations of metric properties (2009, pp 171-175, 183). Outside of the visual
space framework, other theories could be developed to explain these underestimations (e.g., maybe Intraub’s
metric-free notion of “boundary extension” in scene representations could account for them (Intraub and
Richardson 1989; Intraub 2014)).
20

constancies are processed by two distinct neural pathways in the ventral stream. Object
size constancy is represented in the lateral occipital cortex (LOC), whereas spatial layout
constancies are represented in the parahippocampal place area (PPA).34 Hence, even if our
verbal estimation of an object’s size is drawn directly from a perceptual representation of
the object’s size (as Hatﬁeld supposes), there is substantial neural evidence to believe this
perceptual representationdoes not determine the geometry of the perceived spatial layout
(i.e., “visual space”).
A second, more narrow, objection to Hatﬁeld’s argument comes from the experiments
in Foley (1972). Foley’s experiments demonstrate that visual space, supposing it exists, does
not have a constant curvature geometry (p 328). In his second experiment, Foley asked
participants (standing at a location O with a ﬁxed luminous point A in front on them) to
ﬁrst place a luminous point B in the right side of their visual ﬁeld to create an isosceles
right triangle, OBA.35 Next, they were asked to place a luminous point C in the left side of
their visual ﬁeld to create an isosceles right triangle, BAC. Finally, participants were asked
whether OA and BC have the same length. If a participant answered “no,” they were also
asked to estimate the ratio of the lengths of OA and BC. On average, he found that BC was
perceived to be 20% longer than OA (p 327). The results of this study are often taken to
show that, at best, the metric structure of visual space violates the “axiom of the congruence
of triangles,” and thus cannot have “any constant curvature geometry, including Euclidean
geometry” (Masrour 2015, p 1823).36 At worst, these results suggest that attempting to
describe the uniﬁed geometric structure of visual perception is a red herring. Either way,
Foley’s experiments disconﬁrm Hatﬁeld’s claim that visual space is Euclidean.
In sum,
34For an illustrative example, see Park et al. (2011). To get a fuller picture, see the essay collection Scene
Vision edited by Kveraga and Bar (2014).
35More exactly, Foley asked participants to place point B so that (i) OB is perpendicular to BA, and (ii)
OB and BA have the same length (1972, p 326).
36Suppes (1995, p 39), Wagner (2006, p 29), and Masrour (2015, p 7) all use this result to justify their
rejection of a constant curvature geometry for visual space. A somewhat analogous result for object shape
perception is presented in Domini and Braunstein (1998).
21

Hatﬁeld’s argument from size estimation provides no support for believing that his visual
space exists.
Burge
Tyler Burge (2010, p 200) draws his conception of a VMS from Gareth Evans’ Varieties
of Reference. Burge rejects Evans’ referential argument for a VMS (outlined above in the
Strawson section), but he endorses a diﬀerent argument that he attributes to Evans.37 Ac-
cording to this argument, “egocentric spatial frameworks are necessary to spatial perceptual
representation [because they] ﬁgure centrally in agency” (p 201). Burge main evidence for
this claim is that, “empirically it is nearly certain that some animals have egocentric spatial
perceptual abilities” (2010, p 207).38 His only cited example from experimental psychology is
a 1998 article by Fred Dyer on bee navigation. Burge describes this article as defending the
view that “the perception and perceptual memory involved in this particular navigational
task use only egocentric spatial frameworks” (2010, p 202). However, Dyer describes the
bee’s navigation abilities as grounded in its encoding of a “retinally localized snapshots” (p
148). When this retinal image is presented again, Dyer claims it triggers the bee to ﬂy in
a speciﬁc direction. Clearly, Dyer’s conception of the bee’s egocentric framework does not
constitute a perceptual state in my (or Burge’s) sense.
Burge (2014) gestures at a second argument for a VMS based on object shape percep-
tion. He claims that perceptually representing an object as a cube requires plotting straight
lines in a three-dimensional coordinate system:
Visual perception occurs in an egocentrically anchored, spatial coordinate system.
... [The] edge of a cube must be speciﬁed not merely as an edge, but through
37Burge (2010), pp 200-201. See also footnote 19.
38Burge also states this claim in an older essay when he says: “attribution of egocentric indexes is ubiq-
uitous in perceptual and animal psychology” (2003, p 330).
22

speciﬁcations that plot the edge in the coordinate system – give its length, shape,
and orientation, using spatial speciﬁcations within the coordinate system. (p 492)
As before, it is not obvious that perceiving an objects shape requires perceiving its location.
Indeed, Burge (2010, p 202) makes this very point in arguing against Evans.39 On an em-
pirical level, the neural and behavioral evidence regarding object shape perception suggests
that shape attributed is size-invariant and orientation-invariant.40 Hence, it seems that a
perceptual attribution of shape does not necessitate a perceptual attribution of edge “length”
or “orientation” as Burge claims. Burge might respond that this representation is computed
on the basis of his proposed VMS shape representation. This is logically possible, but today
the most widely adopted computational model posits that a collection of 2D images, rather
than a VMS, is the basis of object shape attribution.41 There may be a compelling argument
for a VMS on the basis of object shape perception, but Burge does not provide it.
Wu
The ﬁnal argument for a VMS is given by Wayne Wu. Before we look at Wu’s argument, I
want to establish that Wu actually posits a VMS. Consider the following passage where he
describes the representational content of visual experience:
Since normal human visual experience is three-dimensional and the locations of
visible objects are represented relative to the egocenter, we can present egocen-
39Peacocke (1992, p 242n11) puts forward a compelling argument that shape perception does not require
location perception: “Visually disoriented subjects are able to identify and apparently perceive the shape of
objects in their environments without experiencing them as have any particular (egocentric) location. There
is a readable case study in Godwin-Austen 1965. ... I thus allow that something is perceived as square
without being localized.”
40Konen and Kastner (2008), Kourtzi et al. (2003), Grill-Spector et al. (1999), Biederman and Cooper
(1992).
41This is the HMAX model of Reisenhuber and Poggio (1999). For an overview of the current status of this
model, see Li et al. (2015). Opponents of the HMAX model, like Biederman, admit that it is the “default
framework” for 3D object shape perception in vision science (Hayworth et al. 2011, p 1).
23

tric spatial content in a Cartesian coordinate system, centered on part of the
perceiver, with the Cartesian axes setting egocentric directions (e.g. the z-axis
deﬁnes straight ahead). More appropriate would be a spherical [i.e., polar] coordi-
nate system that represents egocentric distance explicitly as a vector originating
at the egocentric origin and whose magnitude is the distance between visible
objects and the reference point. (2014, p 391)
In this passage, Wu technically claims that “visual experience,” not “visual perception,”
contains a three-dimensional coordinate space. Is there reason to think that visual perception
contains this coordinate space? I think so. For one, Wu claims that visual experience occurs
in a “visual system” that is distinct from a “cognitive” system (2013, p 648). For another, he
says that we locate objects in this space during a single ﬁxation (2014, p 394). Wu provides
further conﬁrmation that his coordinate space is visuo-perceptual when he cites Peacocke’s
writing on scenarios as a way of articulating his own view on the “egocentric spatial content”
of perception (2013, p 653n7). On this basis, I claim that Wu posits a VMS. Wu’s VMS is
unique in that it has polar coordinates pace Strawson, Peacocke, and Burge, each of whom
suggest that the VMS has Cartesian coordinates.
But Wu, like most philosophers since
Kant, accepts that visual perception has a geometry about which we may inquire, “How is
it coordinatized?”
Wu’s argument for a VMS is grounded in the claim that a VMS is required to explain
position constancy and motion constancy. Position constancy is the capacity to accurately
perceive objects as stationary after a saccadic eye movement (despite changes in the retinal
image before and after the saccade). Motion constancy is the parallel capacity to accurately
perceive objects as in motion after a saccadic eye movement. Wu claims that these capacities
exist and that the standard non-VMS explanation of these capacities, “the Transsaccadic
Memory Account” (TM), is inadequate. His alternative explanation posits a VMS. It will be
24

suﬃcient to refute Wu’s argument against the TM account of position constancy and motion
constancy.
According to the TM account, object motion attribution is computed purely on the
basis of comparing retinal images before and after a saccade.42 The ﬁrst retinal image merely
needs to be adjusted on the basis of the corollary discharge from the eye saccade. This
account of motion constancy makes no appeal to a VMS since retinal images are sensations,
not representations.43 Wu (2013, p 651, ﬁg 1) provides a helpful diagram of this allegedly
inadequate account. Wu claims that the TM account falsely assumes that, “where error is
high, the subject experiences visual spatial inconstancy [i.e., motion]; where error is low,
the subject experiences spatial constancy [i.e., no motion]” (p 651). According to Wu, this
assumption is false because
error signals are deployed in other areas in the brain that have nothing to do
with spatial constancy but where prediction is useful (e.g. in motor control, and
in explaining auditory verbal hallucination in schizophrenia). The Transaccadic
[sic] Memory account is explanatorily incomplete at a critical point. (2013, p
651; citations removed)44
In other words, Wu is claiming that low error signals in the above-cited diagram cannot be
necessary and suﬃcient for perceptual motion attribution. After all, error detection is used
in many non-perceptual systems. However, this is a straw man. I am not aware of any
TM proponent who has claimed that any low error signal in any brain area is suﬃcient for
perceptual constancy, let alone position constancy. Most proponents of the Transsaccadic
Memory Account merely claim that in the case of early vision this particular error signal is
42Cf. Wurtz et al. (2011), p 496.
43Wu (2014, p398) attributes this Transsaccadic Memory Account to the neuroscientists who wrote Wurtz
et al. (2011). This account is also endorsed by Henriques (1998), who defends it against various alternative
accounts that posit a VMS.
44A virtually identical passage (and argument) is presented at Wu (2014), p 398.
25

necessary for the constancy transformation underlying motion attribution.45 Until Wu states
more fully his objection to the TM Account, we have no to reject this non-VMS account
of position and motion constancy. That is, I do not think position or motion constancy
considerations provide any grounds for positing a VMS.46
In sum, all of the arguments for a VMS from our ﬁve proponents are seriously ﬂawed.
However, the idea of a VMS did have an explanatory purpose. The VMS was supposed to be
a single representation that explains human performance on a number of visual tasks such
as motion constancy, scene categorization, shape perception, linguistic reference, location
reports, and cognitive map construction.47 In some sense, the only remaining virtue of the
VMS is the unity it gives to our various explanations of these visual tasks. Hence, in section
3, I will show in some detail that current neural evidence supports a radically disuniﬁed
approach to the spatial contents underlying our most common visual tasks. Before we turn
to this, however, I would like to discuss two well-isolated behavioral anomalies that count
against the existence of a VMS: distance reports and visual crowding. In the next section, I
will show why these two visual tasks support my claim that a VMS does not exist.
1.2.3
Behavioral evidence against a VMS
Philosophical proponents of the VMS since Evans have distinguished themselves from older
philosophers (like Strawson and Kant) by appealing to behavioral evidence and computa-
tional models from perceptual psychology to develop their theories of perceptual content.
45See Stone (2011, p 105) for an account of how visual area V5 computes motion.
46Interestingly, Dokic (2015), section 9, argues that our capacity for position constancy suggests that we
should reject the existence of an egocentric coordinate space pace Wu.
47Many philosophical proponents of the VMS suggest that it should be used to explain human performance
on visuo-motor tasks (e.g., saccading, tracking, reaching, grasping, catching, rotating, etc.). For example,
see Wu (2014, p 399), Dokic (2015, p 454), Burge (2003, p 330), Hatﬁeld (2009, p 205), Peacocke (1992, p
94). However, none of these ﬁve philosophers present an argument for a VMS based on its alleged ability
to explain visuo-motor behavior. Nanay (2013, pp 39-42) oﬀers a more detailed analysis of visuo-motor
behavior, and notably he does not espouse a VMS in his theory of action-guiding representations (despite
positing representations of an object’s size, shape, location, etc.).
26

This cross-disciplinary approach makes them vulnerable to attacks on the basis of new be-
havioral evidence. In this section, I will discuss two sets of experimental results that I believe
undermine the existence of a VMS. These experiments test human performance on distance
report tasks and visual crowding tasks.
The ﬁrst set of experimental results suggest that, in many environments, humans per-
ceptually represent distance relations asymmetrically. That is, the perceived distance from
point A to point B is often systematically unequal to the perceived distance from point B to
point A. If this is right, the symmetry axiom of a metric space would be violated in spatial
perception. I am not familiar with any VMS proponents that have addressed this challenge
to their view. Two experiments revealing asymmetric distance estimations are presented in
Codol (1990). In the ﬁrst experiment, seventy-two participants were each placed in a rectan-
gular room with twelve letter-labeled wooden disks placed on the ﬂoor at variable distances
from one other (p 395). Each participant was asked to stand on one disk and answer (in
centimeters) questions of the form: (i) “How far are you from person P?,” and (ii) “How far
is person P from you?” (p 394). The results show that, on average, humans estimate the
distance in (i) to be signiﬁcantly greater – more than 14% greater – than the distance in (ii).
The second experiment conﬁrmed this asymmetry in perceived distance. In this experiment,
Codol gave participants a map of a public room containing letter-labeled points. One point
was labeled “ME,” and the participants were told the other points represented people. Par-
ticipants were asked to answer questions (i) and (ii) again (using a map legend showing that
one meter corresponds to a 3-cm line). Their answers conﬁrmed the original results. Codol
concludes that “individuals tend to consider others closer to themselves than they consider
themselves to others” (1989, p 15). Could a VMS proponent account for these results? It is
certainly possible, but to do so she would have to claim that these distance reports are not
27

based on the VMS.48 The simplest explanation, to my mind, is that these distance estimates
are based on perceptual attributions that do not constitute a metric space.49
The other set of experimental results comes from the literature on visual crowding.
Visual crowding can be characterized as any phenomenon in which humans are unable to
individuate, categorize, or order objects in peripheral vision when they are ﬂanked by other
objects. Vision scientists usually distinguish visual crowding phenomena from the limitations
associated with reduced peripheral acuity:
Visual crowding refers to the phenomenon in which a target may be easily recog-
nizable when viewed in isolation but becomes diﬃcult to identify when ﬂanked by
other items. The ease of recognizing the isolated target indicates that crowding
is not simply a by-product of reduced visual acuity in the periphery. Instead,
it seems that the visual system applies some as-yet-unspeciﬁed lossy transfor-
mation – perhaps some form of “feature integration,” pooling, or averaging – to
the stimulus, resulting in the subjective experience of mixed-up, jumbled visual
features. (Balas et al. 2009, p 1, citations removed)
One diagram from Rosenholtz (2016, ﬁg 4) provides a nice example visual crowding.
In the ﬁrst and third rows, observers ﬁxate on the cross and they are able to categorize the
‘V’ on the left as a V. By contrast, in the second row, “an observer might see these crowded
letters in the wrong order ... they might not see a V at all or might see strange letter-
like shapes made up of a mixture of parts from several letters” (pp 443-444). Similarly,
48Peacocke (1992) may be providing a response to this challenge when he distinguishes VMS perceptual
distance content and non-VMS perceptual distance content. He admits that one may perceive “that x is
above y, that y is above z, and that z is above x” (79), and I presume that he thinks similar paradoxical
perceptions occur when we represent quantitative distance. To account for this fact, he claims that these
judgments derive not from his VMS (“scenario content”) but from a diﬀerent type of perceptual content
that he calls “protopropositional content.” This is certainly a possible way out of the predicament, but this
raises the question of why we would need to posit is a VMS at all.
49Similar results have been established for spatial memory (rather than perception). See Newcombe et
al. (1999) for an overview. These results potentially constitute evidence against the existence of a cognitive
map, but they do not directly say anything about the contents of perception.
28

Rosenholtz (2015) notes that an “observer might see these crowded letters in the wrong
order, perhaps confusing the word [‘BOARD’] with ‘BORAD’ ” (p 11).
Many vision scientists have used these behavioral results to develop ‘bag-of-features’
models of visual perception (see Pelli et al. 2004 for a review). According to these models,
our visual ﬁeld is split up into “pooling regions” that can be used to index low-level features
such as contours and textures before we individuate, categorize and order visible objects.
These models provide clear explanations for many of the perceptual failures that humans
exhibit in visual crowding tasks. If these models are correct, we likely do not perceive most of
the spatial relations that hold between objects even when we have perceptually individuated
these objects. If the visual perception systematically fails to preserve even the order of visible
objects, then it is unlikely that the much stricter axioms of a metric space are satisﬁed by
the contents of visual perception. I believe visual crowding phenomena are much more easily
incorporated into a theory of perceptual content that forgoes a VMS in favor of piecemeal
spatial relations.
The above experimental results associated with distance report tasks and visual crowd-
ing tasks constitute anomalies for VMS theories of spatial perception. These results are not
decisive refutations of the VMS view, but I believe they should be taken seriously by any
philosopher who thinks visual perception has a uniﬁed geometry. In the second part of this
essay, I will oﬀer an overview of what I take to be the current dominant paradigm of spatial
perception in vision science. I see this paradigm as constituting a non-geometric alterna-
tive to the VMS framework for understanding spatial perception that currently dominates
philosophical theorizing.
29

1.3
Spatial Representation according to Vision Science
In the ﬁrst part, I attempted to show how the major philosophical arguments for a VMS
are ﬂawed. These arguments – from object shape categorization (Peacocke, Burge), scene
categorization (Peacocke), demonstrative reference (Strawson, Evans), navigation (Burge),
size estimation (Hatﬁeld), and motion and position constancy (Wu) – all fail to support the
belief in a VMS.50 In this part, I would like to address the argument from psychological
authority for a VMS. In particular, most philosophical proponents of the VMS assume that
the psychological research of David Marr provides scientiﬁc legitimacy to the VMS. Evans,
Peacocke, and Hatﬁeld all explicitly draw on Marrs 2.5-D sketch for inspiration in developing
their VMS variants. In section 3.1, I will show why Marr’s views and arguments provide no
support for the VMS. In section 3.2, I will show that any attempt to revise this argument from
authority by replacing Marr with the “best current vision science” provides no support for
positing a VMS. In section 3.3, I will conclude by discussing our prospects for understanding
spatial memory and the nature of its geometric content.
1.3.1
Marr’s visual perception: demarcation and primary function
Many philosophers see David Marr as a scientiﬁc authority on visual perception. However, in
the context of arguing for a VMS, Marr is not an ideal inspirational source for three reasons.
First, it is questionable whether Marr even posits a VMS. Second, Marr’s reasons for positing
the 2.5-D sketch are not conceptually valid. Third, the current best empirical theories of
the representational content underlying the visual tasks that Marr posits his 2.5-D sketch to
explain – namely, shape and scene categorization – do not appeal to a metric space. I will
develop these three points below, but it is necessary to ﬁrst outline which parts of Marr’s
50Additionally, I am unaware of any more recent experimental results that purport to show that humans
make use of a VMS in completing any of these six visual tasks.
30

approach to visual perception were innovative in the years around 1980 and remain dominant
in vision science today: (i) his isolation of the computational level, (ii) his demarcation of
perception from sensation, and (iii) his view of the primary function of the visual system.
Marr and Poggio (1977) introduced the notion of a “computational level” to vision
science as a way of highlighting the limitations of a ‘neurons-up’ approach to vision science.
The computational level of analysis uses goal-oriented and representational terms to describe
visual processes. According to Marr, this terminology is most often used by the plain man
and the computer vision engineer (1982, p 4). In contrast, brain scientists like Barlow (1972)
reject this terminology and focus exclusively on “how the nervous system is built and how
parts of it behave ...
how the cells are connected, [and] why they respond as they do”
(Marr 1982, p 4). The plain man and the computer vision engineer, however, understand
visual processes primarily as an attempt to solve certain representational problems, such as
stereopsis, color attribution, perceptual grouping, and shape attribution (1977, pp 476-481).
According to Marr, the neurons-up approach of Barlow is unable to distinguish hexagonal
after-images from the interpretations of the Necker cube (p 471). The latter, but not the
former, is intrinsically a representational and goal-oriented process. Like other representa-
tional problems, a scientiﬁc understanding of how we perceive the Necker cube will require
a computational level of analysis in addition to the neuron-based hardware level of analysis
(1982, p 25). Vision science today accepts the need for a computational level of analysis.
Many articles in perceptual psychology continue to frame their experiments and discussions
as an analysis of speciﬁc representational problems.
Marr’s second innovation was his general distinction between sensation and perception
that aligns with the distinction I oﬀered in section 1.1.
In particular, Marr appeals to
constancy transformations as a feature of perceptual states that demarcates them from
purely sensory states:
31

The important thing about the senses is that they are channels for perception
of the real world outside... [J. J. Gibson (1966)] asked the critically important
question, How does one obtain constant perceptions in everyday life on the basis
of continually changing sensations? This is exactly the right question, showing
that Gibson correctly regarded the problem of perception as that of recovering
from sensory information “valid” properties of the external world. (1982, p 29)
To illustrate this border between sensation and perception, Marr oﬀers a few examples
of visual processes that never “obtain constant perceptions”: the houseﬂy landing on the
ceiling (pp 32-34), and the human eye making a saccade in response to a sudden environmen-
tal change (p 105). Marr sees himself (and Gibson) as unlike most mid-century perceptual
psychologists who “have made no serious attempts at an overall understanding of what per-
ception is, concentrating instead on the analysis of properties and performance” (p 9). These
psychologists simply focus on, e.g., color receptors, shape judgments, or stereogram-based
judgments. Marr and Gibson want to give a synoptic account of perception. They both
adopt a framework in which perspective-invariant constancies demarcate perceptual states
from purely sensory states. This much is accepted by mainstream vision science today.51
Mar’s third lasting contribution to vision science is his claim that the primary function
of the human visual system is representing constancies of shape and spatial layout:
The quintessential fact of human vision [is] that it tells about shape and space
and spatial arrangement. Here lay a way to formulate its purpose – building a
description of the shape and positions of things from images. Of course, that
is by no means all that vision can do; it also tells about the illumination and
about the reﬂectances of the surfaces that make the shape – their brightnesses
and colors and visual textures – and about their motion. But these things seems
51Cf. footnote 7
32

secondary; they could be hung oﬀa theory in which the main job of vision was
to derive a representation of shape. (1982, p 36)
Marr says that he formed this view of the primary function of human vision on the basis of
Elizabeth Warrington’s experiments in clinical neurology, which show that objective object
shape categorization can occur without semantic categorization (Warrington and Taylor,
1973). More speciﬁcally, Marr goes on to claim that the primary function of the human
visual perception is attributing shape to various particulars: portable objects, agents, faces,
scenes, and surfaces.52 This shape-based view of the primary function of visual perception
informs the rest of 52 Marr’s book and continues to be the dominant framework in vision
science today (Kanwisher and Dilks, 2014). In sum, Marr’s lasting contribution to vision
science is the proposition that the primary function of visual perception is to represent
perspective-invariant shape properties via constancy transformations.
Other aspects of Marr’s work have not lasted. In particular, Marr proposes a set of
syntactic-computational stages for recovering objective shape representations, most of which
are no longer seriously endorsed by vision scientists. Marr’s stages are: the retinal image,
the zero-crossing, the raw primal sketch, the full primal sketch, the 2.5-D sketch, and the
3-D model. Computational theories today usually only endorse the ﬁrst two stages.53 Given
that philosophers continue to draw on Marr’s 2.5-D sketch for inspiration for their VMS
(Peacocke 1992, p 65; Hatﬁeld 2009, p 5), it is important to note that the 2.5-D sketch is no
52For objects, see pp 35, 312, 316. For agents, see p 319. For faces, see p 311. For scenes, see pp 217,
240, 249 (and arguably pp 229-232). For object surfaces, see pp 220-221, 224, 229. Note that most vision
scientists and philosophers use “shape perception” in a restricted sense to mean perceptual attribution of
shape to manipulable objects. For Marr, shape perception will also include aspects of what today is often
called “body perception,” “face perception,” “perceptual organization,” “spatial layout perception,” and
“scene perception.”
53Carandini et al. (2005), Freeman and Simoncelli (2011). Even in the Forward to the 2010 edition of
Marr’s Vision, Marr’s former student Shimon Ullman admits that the currently dominant approach to object
shape perception no longer posits a VMS such as Marr’s 2.5-D sketch or 3-D model: “Computational vision
has been dominated in the last decade by an alternative approach to [object 3D shape] recognition, based
on describing the possible image appearances of an object rather than its invariant 3-D structure” (xxi).
Ullman is here referring to the HMAX model of Reisenhuber and Poggio (1999) that I mentioned in footnote
40 above.
33

longer a staple of computational theories of visual perception.54 Another aspect of Marr’s
approach to vision that has not lasted is his attempt to integrate representational theories
from vision science and visual psychophysics.55 The latter tradition accepts the existence of
a VMS on phenomenological and introspective grounds.56 It posits a coordinatized geometry
for the VMS on the basis of experimental estimations of apparent size and distance. Marr
brieﬂy embraces this phenomenological methodology when he appeals to apparent distance
and orientation estimationresults in Ittelson (1960) and Stevens (1979) to justify the claim
54The 2.5-D sketch is deﬁned as an encoding of “properties of the visible surfaces in a viewer-centered coor-
dinate system, such as surface orientation, distance from the viewer, and discontinuities in these quantities”
(p 38).
Although my line of reasoning here does not depend on it, I think the case could be made that Marr
is committed to view that the 2.5-D sketch is not a representation at all, but is rather a merely syntactic
entity. This is because representations have to be “objective,” “physical,” and “permanent” (pp 29, 34, 36).
Hence,the fact that the 2.5-D sketch is “viewer-centered” seems to disqualify it from being a representation.
According to Marr, the houseﬂy has “no explicit representation” (35) of its landing surface because its visual
system makes only “subjective measurements” and does not describe “objective qualities” (36). These claims
seem to be true of the 2.5-D sketch as well, and hence it should not be understood as a representation. Against
his better judgment, Marr nevertheless claims that the 2.5-D sketch represents “objective physical reality”
(p. 269). Given Marr’s lack of clarity on this matter of whether subjective but perspectivally semi-invariant
properties (such as egocentric distance, direction, or slant) can be perceptually represented, I will bracket
the question of what Marr’s considered view is on whether his 2.5-D sketch is representational.
55In vision science, Marr draws on Hubel and Wiesel (1968). In visual psychophysics, Marr draws on
Ittelson (1960) and Stevens (1979). For the sake of clarity, I understand “vision science” to refer to any
ﬁxation-controlled experimental results (behavioral or neural), as well as the theoretical claims made by these
experimentalists in discussion sections, review articles, meta-analyses, and textbooks. More speciﬁcally, I
understand vision-scientiﬁc behavioral results to include data from ﬁxation-controlled experimental tasks
such as forced choice, categorization, estimation, serial reidentiﬁcation, serial discrimination, instantiation
identiﬁcation, navigation, reaching, etc.
(These results may or may not depend on neural atypicalities
as a TMS or an agnosia.) I have in mind experimentalists such as Mary Potter, Ruth Rosenholtz, and
Aude Oliva.
I understand vision-scientiﬁc neural results to include fMRI, EEG, and ECoG data about
adaptation, diﬀerential regional blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) activation across identical stimuli,
and intra-regional BOLD activation across diﬀering stimuli. I have in mind experimentalists such as Nancy
Kanwisher, Russell Epstein, and Daniel Dilks.
Visual psychophysics, however, is a collection of experimental results in which participants estimate the
apparent (rather than objective) metric size and distance features.
On this basis, visual psychophysics
articles infer that their postulated VMS exhibits various coordinatized geometries (Henderson 19999, Indow
2004, Wagner 2006, Koenderink and van Doorn 2008). This tradition and these psychologists are the ones
that Hatﬁeld (2003, 2009) draws on as his scientiﬁc authorities in his argument for a contracted Euclidean
geometry for visual space.
56Additionally, many theorists in the visual psychophysics tradition accept a sense-data framework for
perceptual content. For instance, Ittelson (1960, p 133) claiming that “apparent distance is a subjective
datum which cannot be observed or measured directly by the experimenter.” Wagner (2006, ch 1) makes
many similar claims. These theorists presuppose a veil of perception in which we attribute locations and
properties to phenomenal entities. As I mentioned in section 1 while discussing Hatﬁeld, I strongly suspect
that these phenomenological reports are based on higher cognitive processes (e.g., conversational maxims).
To suppose otherwise requires ascribing increasingly esoteric and context-dependent geometric structure to
the content of perception (cf. Wagner 2006).
34

that “there is at least one internal representation [i.e., the 2.5-D sketch] of the depth [i.e.,
egocentric distance], surface orientation, or both associated with each surface point in a
scene” (1982, pp 275, 283).57 Marr’s argument for a VMS on the basis of visual psychophysics
would not be accepted in vision science today because appearance estimation results are a
poor substitute for the adaptation results and ﬁxation-controlled behavioral results that are
currently used to determine perceptual contents.58 But even if one were to follow Marr in
embracing the validity of this phenomenological methodology, it is notable that Marr himself
admits that the psychophysical evidence for the existence of his 2.5-D sketch is weak:
Unfortunately, I cannot provide much more than a framework within which to
ask questions. ...There has not yet been any determined psychophysical assault
on the 2.5-D sketch, so we know very little about it or even whether it in fact
exists in the sense suggested by our approach to vision. (1982, p 279)59
Despite Marr’s cautionary claims about the existence of his 2.5-D sketch, philosophers and
psychologists have often assumed that its existence is empirically well-supported. This is
simply not the case. Hence, a legitimate argument from authority for a VMS should not be
appealing to Marr’s writings on the 2.5-D sketch.
57Marr oﬀers some other arguments for a VMS, but they are quite opaque. In one argument, Marr appeals
to Julesz’s results that there is a 2◦-of-disparity upper limit on random-dot stereoscopic fusion. He claims
that this result indicates that we are likely perceiving the egocentric distance of all the surfaces in the
perceived scene (Marr 1982, pp 279-282). I fail to see how this argument is supposed to work. This upper
limit be a direct consequence of the physiology of matching the two retinal images in the striate cortex. But
more importantly, I do not see how an upper limit on fusion could support a claim about the perception of
egocentric distance. (One might argue that fusion itself requires a representation of egocentric distance, but
this is not what Marr is claiming.) In another argument, Marr appeals to occlusion perception to justify the
claim that we perceive egocentric distance. But we may simply be perceiving a non-metric depth relations
(‘in front of’ and ‘behind’) between surfaces (cf. Bennett 2016, pp 28ﬀ.).
58This is simply an observation about the kinds of evidence that vision scientists currently use to infer
perceptual content. But I also believe there are good a priori reasons for being wary of such psychophysical
evidence: (i) these experiments are not ﬁxation-controlled and thus are unable to distinguish perceptual
content from cognitive content, and (ii) the metric estimates are usually for a single surface/object and thus
can reveal very little about any alleged global representation of the environmental geometry.
59For example, Marr claims that “we do very poorly” on judging which of two surfaces is farther away
when they “lie in diﬀerent parts of the visual ﬁeld” (p 282). This fact “casts doubt ... on the idea that depth
is ... stored accurately over a range of values” (1982, p 282). The estimation results of Norman et al. (1995)
gives rise to a parallel doubt for surface orientation.
35

As we have seen in this section, Marrs lasting contribution to vision science was the idea
that the primary function of the human visual system is to attribute perspective-invariant
shapes to portable objects, agents, faces, scenes, and surfaces via constancy transformations.
Marr’s other contributions, such as his posited stages of visual processing, have not lasted.
(And, at least in the case of the 2.5-D sketch, we have seen that this was for good reason.)
In the next section, I will elaborate the current vision-scientiﬁc understanding of the spatial
contents of perception. As we will see, the current explanations of our most well-understood
everyday visuo-spatial tasks make no appeal to a VMS.
1.3.2
Current Views on Shape and Scene Perception
For Marr, the primary function of visual perception was shape attribution to portable ob-
jects, agents, faces, scenes, and surfaces. In many ways, this is still the dominant paradigm of
visual perception. This view of visual perception has been repeatedly conﬁrmed since Kan-
wisher and colleagues introduced functional neuroimaging techniques into vision science in
the 1990s. They have isolated neural correlates and pathways in the ventral stream for per-
ceptual attribution of each of the following shape types that Marr discusses: object/surface
shape, face shape, body shape, and scene shape. Kanwisher and Dilks (2014) summarize the
“key results from the last 15 years of neuroimaging research on humans”:
The central ﬁnding from this now-substantial body of work is that the VVP
[ventral visual pathway] is not homogeneous but is instead a highly diﬀerenti-
ated structure containing a set of regions each with its own distinct functional
proﬁle. These regions include the fusiform face area (FFA), which responds selec-
tively to faces, the parahippocampal place area (PPA), which responds selectively
to [scenes], the extrastriate body area (EBA), which responds selectively to bod-
ies, the lateral occipital complex (LOC), which responds to object shape largely
36

independent of object category, and the visual word form area (VWFA), which re-
sponds selectively to both visually presented words and consonant strings. Each
of these regions is present in approximately the same location in virtually every
healthy subject. These regions and their cohorts (e.g., the occipital face area or
OFA) constitute the fundamental machinery of high-level visual recognition in
humans. (p 733, citations removed)
These neural correlates and pathways respond selectively to their associated shape types
within a few hundred milliseconds.60 Moreover, we know that these cortical areas represent
distal environmental constancies because they exhibit adaptation eﬀects. By recording these
adaptation eﬀects, Kanwisher and colleagues infer which properties are being represented
in these cortical areas.61 I will focus on the question of which spatial contents mediate our
visual achievement of object shape constancy and scene shape constancy given that (i) these
are the two most commonly investigated and well-understood representational processes from
the ﬁve listed above, and (ii) they are the two representational processes of the ﬁve that our
philosophers appealed to in arguing for a VMS.62
Scene Categorization
Since 2001, Aude Oliva and her colleagues have been the leading ﬁgures in vision science
attempting to answer the question: what are the spatial contents involved in perceiving an
environmental space (i.e., a scene)? They claim that a decade of fMRI adaptation results
have suggested that “an environmental space can be represented by two separable and com-
plementary descriptors (Oliva and Torralba, 2001): its spatial boundary (i.e., the shape and
60See Bastin et al. (2013), Greene and Oliva (2009a) for the temporal proﬁles of PPA and OPA.
61In addition to fMRI adaptation, visual neuroscientists infer representational content based on the neural
and behavioral results described in footnote 54.
62The totality of these philosophical arguments were based on: object shape categorization (Peacocke,
Burge), scene categorization (Peacocke), motion and position constancy (Wu), demonstrative reference
(Strawson, Evans), navigation (Burge), and size estimation (Hatﬁeld). I will address the last four at the end
of section 2.2.
37

size of the scene’s space) and its content (textures, surfaces, materials and objects)” (Park
et al. 2011, p 1333). The ‘spatial boundary descriptor’ attributes global features to the envi-
ronmental space, whereas the ‘content descriptor’ attributes local features to various items in
the environment. These two perceptual representations arise in two distinct visual pathways
that end in the “PPA and LOC,” respectively (p 1339). I will discuss the representational
contents of the latter pathway below. In the former pathway, these “scene-selective” visual
areas (e.g., OPA, PPA, RSC) exhibit adaptation eﬀects when we add or remove portable
objects to the scene over multiple ﬁxations, but these areas do not exhibit such adaptation
eﬀects when we alter the permanent boundaries and landmarks of the scene (Park and Chun
2009; Park et al. 2011).
What, then, is the content of Oliva’s proposed “spatial boundary” percept associ-
ated with the PPA? According to Oliva’s model, this content is given by a global feature
space.63 For example, the openness and depth of the visible environment – deﬁned in terms
of perspective-invariant large-scale texture patterns within the retinal image (see ﬁgure 3 of
Torralba and Oliva (2003), p 395) – are perceived attributes of this space.64 These features
may then subserve various visual tasks such as categorizing scenes as a “beach,” “street,” or
“forest.”
Although the exact number of global features that we represent in this pathway is not
yet known, the fMRI adaptation results are consistent with the ﬁve global features postulated
in Oliva’s model (the Spatial Envelope Model).65 Signiﬁcantly, neither Oliva’s model nor its
63Park et al. (2015), Oliva et al. (2011), Greene and Oliva (2006, 2009a,b), Oliva and Torralba (2001).
64For instance, Greene and Oliva (2009a), Torralba and Oliva (2003), and Oliva and Torralba (2001) use
various gabor ﬁlters (a type of fourier transformation) on an image to classify the visible environment along
feature dimensions such as naturalness, openness, roughness, expansion, and ruggedness. The neural location
of these spatial boundary attributions may be in visual areas adjacent to the PPA. For instance, the RSC
seems to exhibit greater perspective-invariance than the PPA along some dimensions: “We did not ﬁnd
any attenuation for panoramic repeats in the PPA, showing viewpoint-speciﬁcity. In contrast, RSC showed
signiﬁcant attenuation for the panoramic condition, showing viewpoint-integration.” (Park and Chun 2009,
p. 1747)
65 See Oliva (2014), pp 727ﬀ., for references to some of these adaptation experiments. For additional
studies on the constancies exhibited in the visual pathway to PPA, see Dilks et al. (2013), Kamps et al.
(2016), Dilks et al. (2011), Greene and Oliva (2009b), Park and Chun (2009), Ward et al. (2010), Morgan
38

competitors posit a VMS: the distance relations between visible objects are never represented
as such.66 Many vision science articles are explicit on this point, such as this illustrative
passage from Oliva in which she contrasts her “holistic-based approach” to scene perception
with Marr’s “part-based approach”:
In the attempt to explain how the brain represents
a scene, the part-based
approach (Marr, 1982; Biederman, 1987) depicts access to scene meaning as the
last step within a hierarchical organization of modules of visual processing with
increasing complexity (edges, surfaces, objects, scene). The “geon” theory put
forth by Irving Biederman (1987, 1995) suggests that fast scene understanding
could be achieved via a representation of the [geometric] arrangement of simple
volumetric forms from which the identity of the individual objects and scenes can
be inferred. Alternatively, a holistic-based approach (spatial envelope theory;
see Oliva and Torralba, 2001) constructs a meaningful representation of scene
gist directly from the low-level features pool, without binding contours to form
surfaces, and surfaces to form objects. (Oliva 2005, p 256)67
et al. (2011), Epstein et al. (2007). These studies suggest that spatial layout may be represented in terms of
spatial frequency textures as well as mean depth, center of mass, and mean element size. Although I cannot
explore these models here, it is notable that none of these features suggest the existence of a VMS.
66The competing models of scene representation in vision science are: (i) the Texture Tiling Model of
Rosenholtz (2009, 2012, 2016), (ii) the Parametric Texture Model of Gatys et al. (2015) and Portilla and
Simoncelli (2000), (iii) the Scene Schema Model of Renninger and Malik (2004), Kim and Biederman (2012),
and potentially Dillon et al. (2017), and (iv) the Regional Semantics Model of Vogel and Schiele (2007).
All four of these models are very similar to Oliva’s model in that they appeal to texture patterns (i.e.,
spatial frequencies) on the retinal image – rather than a metric space – to explain human performance on
visual tasks such as categorizing and reidentifying scenes in rapid serial visual presentations. Only the Scene
Schema Model posits anything like a geometric structure in representation content, but even here it is a
topological relational structure in which the relations are analogous to locative prepositions such as “under”
and “on.” These more abstract, topological relational structures were ﬁrst posited by Biederman as “scene
schemas” (1982, p 145) and “structural descriptions” (1987, p 128). I ﬁnd it somewhat plausible that these
structures exist, but there are few neural or behavioral results that support their existence in single-ﬁxation
perception.
67For similar passages, see Mullin and Steeves (2011), p 4174; Mullally and Maguire (2011), p 7441;
Kanwisher and Dilks (2014), pp 736-737; Rosenholtz (2016), p 449.
39

As we saw in section 2.1, Marr claims that the visual system ﬁrst encodes local surface
properties of egocentric distance and orientation in a 2.5-D sketch and only later do we end
up perceiving the spatial layout or semantic properties of a scene. For Oliva and most present-
day vision scientists, Marr’s approach is not only an incorrect account of the computational
stages preceding scene perception, but it is an incorrect account of the representational
contents of scene perception. Marr postulated that the shape we perceptually attribute to
a scene will necessarily be embedded in a coordinate system in which each visible point
of a surface receives its own local coordinate. Oliva rejects this “part-based approach” in
favor of an approach in which spatial layout contents are analyzed in terms of global spatial
frequencies, not coordinate systems. In other words, the dominant and empirically-supported
approach to scene perception today outright rejects the postulation of a 2.5-D sketch or
a VMS. The current models claim that the naturalness, openness, roughness, expansion,
ruggedness, etc. of the visible environment are each attributed to the global space without
ﬁrst locating multiple objects within a metric space.68
In sum, the best current models of scene perception do not posit a VMS, and many
articles explicitly reject the VMS as an artifact of a now-defunct tradition in vision science.
These current models are supported by a substantial body of neural and behavioral evidence,
almost all of which was not available to Marr in the 1980s. Today, a scientiﬁcally-informed
account of scene perception all but mandates that we reject a VMS in favor of a global
feature space representation. Such global features are stable over changes in perspective and
many studies show that various visual areas in the pathway to PPA adapt to these features.
68As might be guessed, Oliva considers her model to be Gibsonian in spirit: “By grounding our search in
the principles of environmental aﬀordance (Gibson, 1979; Rosch, 1978), we have been able to ﬁnd a collection
of properties that are necessary and suﬃcient to capture the essence of many landscape image categories”
(Greene and Oliva 2006, p 6).
40

Object Shape Categorization
Does the VMS-concept fare any better in the study of object shape perception? That is, do
any of the “object-selective regions” in the LOC contain a VMS? Neural evidence suggests
otherwise: these regions exhibit adaptation across changes in the object’s occlusion, size,
position, handedness, surface curvature, and internal angles.69 If object shape contents in
the LOC included a metric space (with metric relations been a set of vertices, for instance),
these adaptation eﬀects would not occur since the VMS itself would vary with each of these
changes in the object’s features.70
A VMS proponent may wonder whether these abstract and non-metric shape contents
in the LOC might be constructed from a VMS representation that arises in a pre-LOC visual
area such as V4. Indeed, vision scientists have shown that when “identical stimuli diﬀering
in size ... were presented, V4 showed a recovery from adaptation” (Konen and Kastner 2008,
p 227). On its own, this could be used to suggest that V4 represents a metrically-determined
shape of an object. However, this size-dependency of V4 taken in conjunction with the fact
that V4 also recovers from adaptation when the object’s orientation changes suggests that
“the previously observed adaptation eﬀects [in V4] were due to adaptation to low-level fea-
tures” of the retinal image (p 227). Hence, V4 may not exhibit any perceptual constancies,
“whereas higher-order lateral occipital complex (LOC) responds selectively to objects inde-
69For changes in occlusion, see Kourtzi and Kanwisher (2001). For changes in size and position, see Grill-
Spector et al. (1999). For changes in handedness, see Dilks et al. (2011). For changes in surface curvature
and internal angles, see Kourtzi et al. (2003) as well as the studies of the LOC-homologue in rhesus monkeys
in Kayaert et al. (2003), Kayaert et al. (2005). (The dishabituation results in Kayaert and Wagemans
(2010) provide behavioral corroboration that aﬃne rather than metric features are the primary contents of
shape perception.) Somewhat relatedly, the results of Kim and Biederman (2012) suggest that we perceive
spatial relations between multiple objects (e.g., attachment, alignment, occlusion) only if these relations are
non-metric.
70The parts and structure of these non-metric shape representations are still not well understood. There
are various programmatic frameworks, however, such as Biederman’s geon theory (Biederman 1987; Lescroart
and Biederman 2013). One might wonder whether we know that the LOC represents object shape at all rather
than, say, an object’s even more abstract semantic properties. But the latter view has been disconﬁrmed by
the adaptation results mentioned in footnote 68 as well as by a study that directly tested this view: “fMRI
adaptation is not found in LOC across objects that are similar in meaning but diﬀer in shape” (Kanwisher
and Dilks 2014, p 736).
41

pendent of image transformations, suggesting a more abstract visual representation that is
necessary for perceptual object constancy” (Konen et al. 2011, p 49).71
Perceptual Content Other Than Shape-Based Content
In sum, the evidence from vision science over the past twenty years suggests that there is
no VMS in the representational content underlying object shape and scene shape percep-
tion. Hence, it would seem that any philosophical attempt to update Peacocke’s or Burge’s
appeals to object shape or scene shape perception to argue for a VMS would be ﬁghting an
uphill battle against the current vision-scientiﬁc consensus. Of course, as we saw in Part
1, there are other kinds of perceptual content on the basis of which one might argue for a
VMS. Wayne Wu appeals to motion perception, Peter Strawson and Gareth Evans appeal to
perceptual reference, Burge appeals to perceptual content used in navigation, and Hatﬁeld
appeals to perceptual content used in size estimation judgments. As we saw in Part 1, the
particular arguments for a VMS that these authors provide are ﬂawed. Does current vision
science provide any experimental results about these topics that could be used to update and
strengthen their arguments? If so, I am unaware of such results. Although there have been
sustained vision-scientiﬁc investigations of perceptual reference (in the form of object track-
ing systems), object motion, and navigation, but little is known about the spatial contents
in these perceptual systems.That is, vision scientists currently lack experimentally-grounded
theories about which spatial features these perceptual processes actually represent.72 Hence,
it would seem that appealing to vision-scientiﬁc authority regarding any of these perceptual
contents, shape-based or not, will at best be unhelpful to a VMS proponent.
71For a similar claim that visual areas before LOC do not represent distal properties (i.e., invariances,
constancies), see Kanwisher and Dilks (2014, p 737). For fMRI adaptation results that suggest V4 may
exhibit constancy in representing the metric distance between two surfaces, see Neri et al. (2004), p 1881.
72For the little we do know about the spatial contents in these systems, see the following articles. Object
motion: Ashida et al. (2007), Warren and Rushton (2007), Fajen and Matthis (2013). Perceptual reference:
Xu (2009), Green (2018). Navigation: Raudies and Hasselmo (2011).
42

1.4
Conclusion and Open Questions
Many philosophers in the 20th and 21st centuries have claimed that humans represent a
metric space in visual perception. I have critiqued their central arguments for this claim in
section 2, and I have contrasted this claim with the most experimentally-grounded theories
of perceptual content in vision science today in section 3. Based on these considerations,
I see every reason to be skeptical about the existence of a VMS. At the same time, hu-
mans constantly rely on geometrically-organized cognitive representations of both physical
domains (e.g., cognitive maps) and ideal domains (e.g., Euclidean ﬁgures). If they do not
arise in perception, which cognitive systems contain such geometric representations, what is
their speciﬁc content, and on what basis are they constructed? Answers to these questions
lack the kind of robust empirical support that investigations of perceptual content could
oﬀer. Nevertheless, these questions are vital to any basic understanding of animal and hu-
man representation. For this reason, developmental psychologists like Elizabeth Spelke and
philosophers like Marcus Giaquinto have proposed representational theories to account for
various kinds of geometric cognition. In the next two chapters, I draw from and criticize their
theories in developing my own understanding of cognitive maps and elementary geometric
beliefs.
43

1.5
Bibliography
Arcaro, M. J., McMains, S. A., Singer, B. D., and Kastner, S. (2009). “Retinotopic organiza-
tion of human ventral visual cortex.” Journal of Neuroscience, 29 (34), pp 10638-10652.
Ashida, H., Lingnau, A., Wall, M. B., and Smith, A. T. (2007). “fMRI Adaptation Reveals
Separate Mechanisms for First-Order and Second-Order Motion.” Journal of Neuro-
physiology 97, pp 1319-1325.
Balas, B. J., Nakano, L., Rosenholtz, R. (2009). “A summary-statistic representation in
peripheral vision explains visual crowding.” Journal of Vision 9(12):13, pp 1-18.
Baldwin, T. (1992). “The projective theory of sensory content.” In: T. Crane (Ed.), The
Contents of Experience. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp 177-195.
Bar, M., and Aminoﬀ, E. M. (2003). “Cortical analysis of visual context.” Neuron 38, pp
347-358.
Barlow, H. B. (1972). “Single units and sensation: a neuron doctrine for perceptual psy-
chology?” Perception 1, pp 371-394.
Bayne, T. (2016). ”Gist!” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 2(116), pp 1-20.
Bell, A. H., Pasternak, T., and Ungerleider, L. G. (2014). “Ventral and Dorsal Cortical
Processing Streams.” In Werner and Chalupa (2014), pp 227-242.
Bennett, D. J. (2011). “Seeing Shape: Shape Appearances and Shape Constancy.” British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science 0, pp 1-32.
Biederman, I., Mezzanotte, R. J., Rabinowitz, J. C. (1982). “Scene Perception: Detecting
and Judging Objects Undergoing Relational Violations.” Cognitive Psychology 14, pp
143-177.
Biederman, I. (1987). “Recognition-by-components: A theory of human image interpreta-
tion.” Psychological Review 94, pp 115-148.
Block, N. (2012). “The Grain of Vision and the Grain of Attention.” Thought 1, pp 170-184.
Block, N. (2013). “Seeing and Windows of Integration.” Thought 1, pp 1-11.
Block, N. (2014a). “Seeing-as in the Light of Vision Science.” Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research 89(3), pp 560-572.
Block, N. (2014b). “Rich Conscious Perception Outside Focal Attention.” Trends in Cogni-
tive Sciences 18(9), pp 445-447.
44

Boghossian, P. A., and Velleman, D. J. (1989). “Color as a secondary quality.” Mind 98, pp
81-103.
Briscoe, R. E. (2009). “Egocentric Spatial Representation in Action and Perception.” Phi-
losophy and Phenomenological Research 79(2), pp 423-460.
Briscoe, R. E. (2011). “Mental Imagery and the Varieties of Amodal Perception.” Paciﬁc
Philosophical Quarterly 92, pp 153-173.
Burge, T. (2010). Origins of Objectivity. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Campbell, J. (1994). Past, Space, and Self. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Carandini, M., Demb, J. B., et al. (2005). “Do We Know What the Early Visual System
Does?” The Journal of Neuroscience 25(46), pp 10577-10597.
Carruthers, P. (2016). “Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness.” Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy.
Cavanagh, P. (2001). “Seeing the Forest But Not the Trees.” Nature Neuroscience 4(7), pp
673-74.
Cavanagh, P., He, S., and Intriligator, J. (1999). “Attentional Resolution: The Grain and
Locus of Visual Awareness.” In C. Taddei-Ferretti and C. Musio (Eds.), Neuronal Basis
and Psychological Aspects of Consciousness. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc, pp 41-52.
Chalmers, D. (2006). “Perception and the Fall from Eden.” The Character of Conscious-
ness. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. Originally published in: Gendler, T. and
Hawthorne, J. (eds.), Perceptual Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.
Clark, A. (2000). A Theory of Sentience. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Codol, J., Jarymowicz, M., Kaminska-Feldman, M., and Szuster-Zbrojewicz, A. (1989).
“Asymmetry in the estimation of interpersonal distance and identity aﬃrmation.” Eu-
ropean Journal of Social Psychology 19, pp 11-22.
Codol, J. (1990). “Studies on self-centered assimilation processes.” In: J.-P. Caverni, J.-M.
Fabre, and M. Gonzalez (Eds.), Cognitive Biases. Amsterdam North-Holland Press, pp
387-400.
Cohen, J. (2015). “Perceptual Constancy.” In M. Matthen (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
Philosophy of Perception. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Derrington, A. M., Krauskopf, J., Lennie, P. (1984).
“Chromatic mechanisms in lateral
geniculate nucleus of macaque.” Journal of Physiology 357(1), pp 241-265.
45

De Valois, R. L. and De Valois, K. K. (1988). Spatial Vision. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Dilks, D., Julian, J. B., Kubilius, J., Spelke, E. S., and Kanwisher, N. (2011). “Mirror-Image
Sensitivity and Invariance in Object and Scene Processing Pathways.” The Journal of
Neuroscience 31(31), pp 11305-11312
Dilks, D., Julian, J. B., Paunov, A. M., and Kanwisher, N. (2013). “The occipital place area
(OPA) is causally and selectively involved in scene perception.” Journal of Neuroscience
33(4), pp 1331-1336.
Dillon, M., Perischetti, A. S., Spelke, E. S., and Dilks, D. D. (2017). “Places in the Brain:
Bridging Layout and Object Geometry in Scene-Selective Cortex.”
Cerebral Cortex
28(7), pp 2365-2374
Dokic, J. (2015). “Perception and Space.”In: Matthen, M. (ed.) The Oxford Handbook of
Philosophy of Perception. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp 441-458.
Domini, F., and Braunstein, M. L. (1998).
“Recovery of 3-D Structure from motion is
neither euclidean nor aﬃne.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance 24(4), pp 1273-1295.
Dyer, F. C. (1998). “Spatial Cognition: Lessons from Central Place Foraging Insects.” In
R. Balda, I. Pepperberg, and A. Kamil (Eds.), Animal Cognition in Nature. San Diego:
Academic Press, 1998.
Epstein, R. A. and Kanwisher, N. (1998).
“A cortical representation of the local visual
environment.” Nature 392, pp 598-601.
Epstein, R. A. (2011). “Cognitive Neuroscience: Scene Layout from Vision and Touch.”
Current Biology 21(11), pp 437-438.
Epstein, R. A. (2014). “Neural Systems for Visual Scene Recognition.” In Kveraga and Bar
(2014), pp 105-134.
Epstein, R. A., Patai, E. P., Julian, J. B., and Spiers, H. J. (2017). “The cognitive map in
humans: spatial navigation and beyond.” Nature Neuroscience 20(11), pp 1504-1513.
Evans, G., and Altham, J. E. J. (1973). “The Causal Theory of Names.” Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes 47, pp 187-225.
Evans, G. (1982). The Varieties of Reference. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Evans, G. (1985). “Molyneuxs Question.” In A. Phillips (Ed.), Gareth Evans: Collected
Papers. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
46

Fajen, B. R., and Matthis, J. S. (2013).
“Visual and Non-Visual Contributions to the
Perception of Object Motion during Self-Motion.” PLoS ONE 8(2), e55446.
Ferrara, K. and Park, S. (2016). “Neural representation of scene boundaries.” Neuropsy-
chologia 89, pp 180-190.
Fleming, R. and Anderson, B. (2004). “The perceptual organization of depth.” In L. Chalupa
and J. Werner (Eds.), The Visual Neurosciences. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (1983). Modularity of Mind. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Foley, J. M. (1972). “The sizedistance relation and intrinsic geometry of visual space: Im-
plications for processing.” Vision Research 12, pp 323-332.
French, R. (1987). “The geometry of visual space.” Noˆus 21, pp 115-33
Freeman, J., and Simoncelli, E. P. (2011).
“Metamers of the ventral stream.”
Nature
Neuroscience 14(9), pp 1195-1201.
Gava, L., Valenza, E., and Turati, C. (2009). “Newborns’ Perception of Left-Right Spatial
Relations.” Child Development 80(6), pp 1797-1810.
Gibson, J. J. (1950). The Perception of the Visual World. Riverside Press.
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems. Boston: Houghton
Miﬄin.
Gibson, J. J. (1979).The Ecological Approach to Visual Perception. Boston: Houghton Miﬄin
Gillam, B. (1995). “The Perception of Spatial Layout from Static Optical Information.” In
Epstein and Rogers (Eds.), The Perception of Space and Motion. Academic Press, pp
23-67.
Gillam, B. (2011). “The Inﬂuence of monocular regions on the binocular perception of spatial
layout.” In Harris and Jenkin (2011), pp 46-69.
Goodale, M. A., Meenan, J. P., et al. (1994). “Separate neural pathways for the visual
analysis of object shape in perception and prehension.” Current Biology 4, pp 604-610.
Goodale, M. A., and Milner, A. D. (1992). “Separate visual pathways for perception and
action.” Trends in Neuroscience 15, pp 20-25.
Green, E. J. (2015). “A Layered View of Shape Perception.” British Journal for the Philos-
ophy of Science 0, pp 1-33.
Green, E. J. (2016).
“Representationalism and Perceptual Organization.”
Philosophical
Topics 44(2), pp 121-148.
47

Green, E. J. (2017). “Attentive Visual Reference.” Mind & Language 32(1), pp 3-38.
Green, E. J. (2018).
“What Do Object Files Pick Out?”
Philosophy of Science 85, pp
177-200.
Greene, M. R., and Oliva, A. (2006). “Natural Scene Categorization from Conjunctions
of Ecological Global Properties.”
Proceedings of the 28th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Vancouver, July 2006.
Greene, M. R., and Oliva, A. (2009a). “The briefest of glances: The time course of natural
scene understanding.” Psychological Science 20(4), pp 464-472 .
Greene, M. R., and Oliva, A. (2009b). “Recognition of natural scenes from global properties:
Seeing the forest without representing the trees.” Cognitive Psychology 58(2), pp 137-
176.
Grill-Spector, K., Kushnir, T., Edelman, S., Avidan, G., Itzchak, Y., and Malach, R. (1999).
“Diﬀerential Processing of Objects under Various Viewing Conditions in the Human
Lateral Occipital Complex.” Neuron 24, pp 187-203.
Gr¨unbaum, A. (1962).
“Geometry, chronometry, and empiricism.”
In H. Feigl and G.
Maxwell (Eds.), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science, Minneapolis, pp 405-
526.
Gr¨unbaum, A. (1973). “Empiricism and the Geometry of Visual Space.” In A. Gr¨unbaum
(Ed.), Philosophical Problems of Space and Time, Boston: D. Reidel Publishing, pp
152-157.
Harris, L. R. and Jenkins, M. R. M. (2011).
Vision in 3D Environments.
Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hasson, U., Yang, E., Vallines, I., Heeger, D. J., Rubin, N. (2008). “A hierarchy of temporal
receptive windows in human cortex.” Journal of Neuroscience 28, pp 2539-2550.
Hatﬁeld, G. (2002). “Perception as Unconscious Inference.” In D. Heyer, D. and R. Rainer
Mausfeld (Eds.), Perception and the Physical World: Psychological and Philosophical
Issues in Perception. John Wiley and Sons, pp 113-143.
Hatﬁeld, G. (2003). “Representation and Constraints: The Inverse Problem and the Struc-
ture of Visual Space.” In Hatﬁeld (2009a), pp 153-177.
Hatﬁeld, G. (2009a). Perception and Cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hatﬁeld, G. (2009b). “On Perceptual Constancy.” In Hatﬁeld (2009a), pp 178-211.
Hatﬁeld, G. (2011). “Philosophy of Perception and the Phenomenology of Visual Space.”
Philosophic Exchange 42(1), pp 33-66.
48

Hatﬁeld, G. (2012).
“Phenomenal and Cognitive Factors in Spatial Perception.”
In G.
Hatﬁeld and S. Allred (Eds.), Visual Experience: Sensation, Cognition, and Constancy.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heelan, P. A. (1983). Space Perception and the Philosophy of Science. Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Hershenson, M. (1999). Visual Space Perception: A Primer. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hubel, D. H., and Wiesel, T. N. (1968). “Receptive ﬁelds and functional architecture of
monkey striate cortex.” J. Physiol. (Lond.) 195, pp 215-243.
Indow, T. (2004). The Global Structure of Visual Space. World Scientiﬁc Publishing.
Intraub, H. (2014). “Visual Scene Representation.” In Kveraga and Bar (2014), pp 5-26.
Intraub, H., and Richardson, M. (1989). “Wide-angle memories of close-up scenes.” Journal
of Experimental Psychology, Learning, Memory, and Cognition 15(2), pp 179-187.
Kant, I. (1787).
Critique of Pure Reason.
P. Guyer and A. Wood (Eds.).
Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Kanwisher, N. (2004). “The ventral visual object pathway in humans: evidence from fMRI.”
In L. Chalupa and J. Werner (Eds.), The Visual Neurosciences. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kanwisher, N., and Dilks, D. D. (2014). “The Functional Organization of the Ventral Visual
Pathway in Humans.” In Chalupa and Werner (2014), pp 733-746.
Kayaert, G., Biederman, I. and Vogels, R. (2003).
“Shape Tuning in Macaque Inferior
Temporal Cortex.” The Journal of Neuroscience 23, pp 3016-3027.
Kayaert, G., Biederman, I. and Vogels, R. (2005). “Representation of Regular and Irregular
Shapes in Macaque Inferotemporal Cortex.” Cerebral Cortex 15, pp 1308-21.
Kayaert, G. and Wagemans, J. (2010). “Infants and Toddlers Show Enlarged Visual Sen-
sitivity to Nonaccidental Compared with Metric Shape Changes.” i-Perception 1, pp
149-158.
Konen, C. S., and Kastner, S. (2008). “Two hierarchically organized neural systems for
object information in human visual cortex.” Nature Neuroscience 11(2), pp 224-231.
Konen, C. S., Mruczek, R. E. B., Montoya, J. L., and Kastner, S. (2013).
“Functional
organization of human posterior parietal cortex: grasping- and reaching-related activa-
tions relative to topographically organized cortex.” Journal of Neurophysiology 109, pp
2897-2908.
49

Kornblith, S., Cheng, X., Ohayon, S., and Tsao, D. (2013). “A Network for Scene Processing
in the Macaque Temporal Lobe.” Neuron 79, pp 766-781.
Kravitz, D. J., Saleem, K. S., Baker, C. I., and Mishkin, M. (2011). “A new neural framework
for visuospatial processing.” Nature Reviews Neuroscience 12, pp 217-230.
Kubilius, J., Wagemans, J., and Op de Beeck, H. P. (2014). “A conceptual framework of
computations in mid-level vision.” Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 8(158), pp 1-19.
Kveraga, K. and Bar, M. Eds.
(2014).
Scene Vision: Making Sense of What We See.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Landy, M. S., Maloney, L. T., Johnston, E. B., Young, M. (1995) “Measurement and Mod-
eling of Depth Cue Combination: in Defense of Weak Fusion.” Vision Research 35(3),
pp 389-412.
Lu, Z., and Dosher, B. (2014). Visual Psychophysics: From Laboratory to Theory. Cam-
bridge: MIT Press.
Lycan, W. (2015). “Representational Theories of Consciousness.” Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy.
Mach, E. (1897). The Analysis of Sensations. New York: Dover, 1959.
Mach, E. (1902). “On the Psychology and Natural Development of Geometry.” The Monist
12(4), pp 481-515.
Malcolm, G. L. and Schyns, P. G. (2014). “More Than Meets the Eye.” In: Kveraga and
Bar (2014), pp 27-44.
Maloney, L. T., Gerhard, H. E., Boyaci, H., and Doerschner, K. (2011).
“Surface color
perception and light ﬁeld estimation in 3D scenes.” In: Harris and Jenkin (2011), pp
280-307.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2010.
Marr, D., and Hildreth, E. (1980). “Theory of Edge Detection.” Proceedings of the Royal
Society of London Series B, Biological Sciences 207(1167), pp 187-217.
Marr, D., and Poggio, T. (1977). “From Understanding Computation to Understanding
Neural Circuitry.” Neurosciences Res. Prog. Bull. 15(3), pp 470-488.
Marr, D., and Poggio, T. (1979).
“A Computational Theory of Human Stereo Vision.”
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B, Biological Sciences 204(1156), pp
301-328.
50

Marr, D. and Nishihara, K. (1978). “Representation and Recognition of the Spatial Orga-
nization of Three-Dimensional Shapes.” Proceedings of the Royal Society B 200(1140),
pp 269-294.
Masrour, F. (2015). “The geometry of visual space and the nature of visual experience.”
Philosophical Studies 172, pp 1813-1832.
Masrour, F. (2016). “Space Perception, Visual Dissonance and the Fate of Standard Repre-
sentationalism.” Noˆus 00(0), pp 1-29.
Matthen, M. (2005). Seeing, Doing, and Knowing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Matthen, M. (2010). “How things look (and what things look that way)”. In B. Nanay
(Ed.), Perceiving the World. New York: Oxford University Press.
Matthen, M. (2015). “Active Perception and the Representation of Space.” In D. Stokes,
M. Matthen, and S. Biggs. (2015). Perception and Its Modalities. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Millar, S. (2008). Space and Sense. New York: Psychology Press.
Milner, A. and Goodale, M. (1995 2006). The Visual Brain in Action, 2nd edition. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Moors, P., Boelens, D., van Overwalle, J., and Wagemans, J. (2016). “Scene Integration
Without Awareness: No Conclusive Evidence for Processing Scene Congruency During
Continuous Flash Suppression.” Psychological Science 27(7), pp 945-956.
Moors, P., Wagemans, J., van Ee, R., and de-Wit, L. (2015).
“No evidence for surface
organization in Kanizsa conﬁgurations during continuous ﬂash suppression.” Attention
Perception Psychophysics 79(3), pp 902-914.
Morgan, L. K., MacEvoy, S. P., Aguirre, G. K., and Epstein, R. A. (2011). “Distances
between real-world locations are represented in the human hippocampus.” Journal of
Neuroscience 31(4), pp 1238-1245.
Nanay, B. (2017). “Philosophy of Perception: A Road Map with Lots of Bypass Roads.”
In B. Nanay (Ed.), Current Controversies in Philosophy of Perception.
New York:
Routledge, pp 1-19.
Nasr, S., Liu, N., Devaney, K. J., Yue, X., Rajimehr, R., Ungerleider, L. G., et al. (2011).
“Scene-selective cortical regions in human and non-human primates.” Journal of Neu-
roscience 31(39), pp 13771-13785 .
Newcombe, N., Huttenlocher, J., Sandberg, E., Lie, E., and Johnson, S. (1999). “What
Do Misestimations and Asymmetries in Spatial Judgment Indicate About Spatial Rep-
51

resentation?” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition
25(4), pp 986-996.
Norman, J. F., Todd, J. T. and Phillips, F. (1995). “The Perception of Surface Orientation
from Multiple Sources of Optical Information.” Perception and Psychophysics 57, pp
629-636.
Oliva, A., and Torralba, A. (2001). “Modeling the Shape of the Scene: A Holistic Represen-
tation of the Spatial Envelope.” International Journal of Computer Vision 42(3), pp
145-175.
Oliva, A. (2005). “Gist of the Scene.” In L. Itti et al. (Eds.), Neurobiology of Attention.
New York: Academic Press, pp 251-257.
Oliva, A., Park, S., and Konkle, T. (2011). “Representing, perceiving, and remembering the
shape of visual space.” In Harris and Jenkin (2011), pp 308-336.
Oliva, A. (2014). “Scene Perception.” In Werner and Chalupa (2014), pp 725-732.
Ooi, T. L., Wu, B. He, Z. J. (2001). “Distance determined by the angular declination below
the horizon.” Nature 414, pp 197-200.
O’Regan, K. (1992). “Solving the ’real’ mysteries of visual perception: the world as an
outside memory.” Can J Psychol. 46(3), pp 461-488.
Orlandi, N. (2014). The Innocent Eye. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O’Shaughnessy, B. (1980). The Will: A Dual Aspect Theory, i. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Palmer, S. (1999). Vision Science: From Photons to Phenomenology. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Park, S., Brady, T. F., Greene, M., and Oliva, A. (2011). “Disentangling Scene Content from
Spatial Boundary: Complementary Roles for the Parahippocampal Place Area and Lat-
eral Occipital Complex in Representing Real-World Scenes.” Journal of Neuroscience
31(4), pp 13331340.
Park, S. and Chun, M. M. (2014). “The constructive nature of scene perception.” In Kveraga
and Bar (2014), pp 45-72.
Park, S., Konkle, T., Oliva, A. (2015). “Parametric coding of the size and clutter of natural
scenes in the human brain.” Cerebral Cortex 25 (7), pp 1792-1805.
Parkes, L., J. Lund, A. Angelucci, J. Solomon, and M. Morgan. “Compulsory Averaging of
Crowded Orientation Signals in Human Vision.” Nature Neuroscience 4(7), pp 739-44.
52

Peacocke, C. (1992). A Study of Concepts. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Pelli, D. G., Palomares, M., and Majaj, N. J. (2004). “Crowding is unlike ordinary masking:
Distinguishing feature integration from detection.” Journal of Vision 4, pp 1136-1169
Potter, M. C. (1975). “Meaning in Visual Search.” Science 187, pp 965-966.
Potter, M. C. (1993). “Very Short-Term Conceptual Memory.” Memory & Cognition 21(2),
pp 156-161.
Potter, M. C. (1999). “Understanding sentences and scenes: The role of Conceptual Short
Term Memory.” In V. Coltheart (Ed.), Fleeting memories: Cognition of brief stimuli.
Cambridge, MIT Press, pp 13-46
Potter, M. C., Wyble, B., Hagmann, C. E., McCourt, E. S. (2014). “Detecting Meaning
in RSVP in 13 ms per picture.” Attention, Perception, and Psychophysics 76(2), pp
270-279.
Putnam, H. (1963). “An Examination of Grnbaums Philosophy of Geometry.” In H. Putnam
(1975), Mathematics, Matter, and Method. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp
93-129.
Raudies, F., and Hasselmo, M. E. (2012). “Modeling Boundary Vector Cell Firing Given
Optic Flow as a Cue.” PLoS Computational Biology, 8(6): e1002553.
Redish, A. D. (1999). Beyond the Cognitive Map: From Place Cells to Episodic Memory.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Rensink, R. A. (2000). “The Dynamic Representation of Scenes.” Visual Cognition 7, pp
17-42.
Rensink, R. A. (2002). “Change Detection.” Annu. Rev. Psychol. 53, pp 245-77.
Rogers, B. J., and R. Cagenello. (1989). “Disparity Curvature and the Perception of Three-
Dimensional Curvature.” Nature 339, pp 135-37.
Rosenholtz, R., J. Huang, and K. Ehinger. (2012). “Rethinking the Role of Top-down At-
tention in Vision: Eﬀects Attributable to a Lossy Representation in Peripheral Vision.”
Frontiers in Psychology 3(1), pp 1-15.
Rosenholtz, R. (2015). “Texture Perception.” In J. Wagemans (Ed.), Oxford Handbook of
Perceptual Organization. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp 167-186.
Rosenholtz, R. (2016). “Capabilities and Limitations of Peripheral Vision.” Annual Review
of Vision Science 2, pp 437-57.
53

Schyns, P. and Oliva, A. (1994). “From Blobs to Boundary Edges.” Psychological Science
5(4), pp 194-200.
Scott, N. M., Leuthold, A., Sera, M. D., and Georgopoulos, A. P. (2016). “Diﬀerential neural
activity patterns for spatial relations in humans: a MEG study.” Exp Brain Research
234, pp 429-441.
Sellars, W. (1968).
Science and Metaphysics: Variations on Kantian Themes.
London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Shepard, R. and Cooper, L. (Eds.)
(1982).
Mental Images and Their Transformations.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Shepard, R. and Metzler, D. (1972).
“Mental Rotation of Three-dimensional Objects.”
Science 171, pp 701-703.
Siegel, S. (2006). “Direct Realism and Perceptual Consciousness.” Philosophy and Phe-
nomenological Research 73(2), pp 378-410.
Siegel, S. (2010). The Contents of Visual Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Siegel, S. (2017). The Rationality of Perception. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sperling, G. (1960). “The information available in brief visual presentations.” Psychological
Monographs: General and Applied 74, pp 1-29.
Stevens, Kent A. (1979). “Surface Perception from Local Analysis of Texture and Contour.”
MIT Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory. Technical Report 512
Stone, J. V. (2011). Vision and Brain: How We Perceive the World. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Strawson P. (1959). Individuals. Routledge.
Strawson, P. (1966). The Bounds of Sense: An Essay on Kants Critique of Pure Reason.
Routledge.
Suppes, P. (1977). “Is Visual Space Euclidean?” Synthese 35, pp 397-421.
Suppes, P. (1995). “Some Foundational Problems in the Theory of Visual Space.” In D.
Luce et al. (Eds.), Geometric Representations of Perceptual Phenomena: Papers in
Honor of Tarow Indow on his 70th Birthday. Erlbaum, pp 37-45.
Thompson, B. (2010). “The Spatial Content of Experience.” Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research 81(1), pp 146-184.
54

Ungerleider, L., and Mishkin, M. (1982). “Two cortical visual systems.” In M. Ingle, M.
Goodale, and R. Masﬁeld (Eds.), Analysis of Visual Behavior. Cambridge: MIT Press,
pp 549-586.
Vishwanath, D. (2011). “Visual information in surface and depth perception: Reconciling
pictures and reality.” In L. Albertazzi, G. van Tonder, and D. Vishwanath (Eds.), Per-
ception Beyond Inference: The Information Content of Visual Processes. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Vanmarcke, S., Mullin, C., Van der Hallen, R., Evers, K., Noens, I., Steyaert, J., and
Wagemans, J. (2016). “In the Eye of the Beholder: Rapid Visual Perception of Real-
Life Scenes by Young Adults with and Without ASD.” J Autism Dev Disord 46, pp
2635-2652.
Vanmarcke, S. and Wagemans, J. (2015).
“Rapid gist perception of meaningful real-life
scenes: Exploring individual and gender diﬀerences in multiple categorization tasks.”
i-Perception 6, pp 1937.
Vishwanath, D. (2014). “Toward a new theory of stereopsis.” Psychological Review 121, pp
151-178.
Wagemans, J., van Doorn, A. J., and Koenderink, J. J. (2011). “Measuring 3D point con-
ﬁgurations in pictorial space.” i-Perception 2, pp 77-111.
Wagner, M. (2006). Geometries of Visual Space. Erlbaum.
Walther, D. B., Caddigan, E., Fei-Fei, L., and Beck, D. M. (2009). “Natural scene categories
revealed in distributed patterns of activity in the human brain.” Journal of Neuroscience
29 (34), pp 10573-10581.
Ward, E. J., MacEvoy, S. P., Epstein, R. A. (2010). “Eye-centered encoding of visual space
in scene-selective regions.” Journal of Vision 10(14), pp 1-12.
Warren, P. A., & Rushton, S. K. (2007). “Perception of object trajectory: Parsing retinal
motion into self and object movement components.” Journal of Vision 7(11):2, pp 1-11.
Warrington, E., and Taylor, A. (1973). “The contribution of the right parietal lobe to object
recognition.” Cortex 9, pp 152-164.
Werner, J. S. and Chalupa, L. M. (2014). The New Visual Neurosciences. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Wolbers, T., Klatzky, R. L., Loomis, J. M., Wutte, M. G., and Giudice, N. A. (2011).
“Modality-independent coding of spatial layout in the human brain.” Current Biology
21(11), pp 984-989.
55

Wu, B., Ooi, T. L., and He, Z. J. (2004.) “Perceiving Distance Accurately by a Directional
Process of Integrating Ground Information.” Nature 428(4), pp 73-77.
Wu, W. (2013). “Visual spatial constancy and modularity: Does intention penetrate vision?”
Philosophical Studies 165, pp 647-669.
Wu, W. (2014). “Against Division: Consciousness, Information and the Visual Streams.”
Mind & Language 29(4), pp 383-406.
Wurtz, R. H., Joiner, W. M., and Berman, R. A. (2011). “Neuronal mechanisms for visual
stability: progress and problems.” Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B 366, pp 492-503.
56

Chapter 2
Are Euclidean Beliefs Grounded in
Core Cognitive Systems?
2.1
Introduction
Over the past decade, philosophers have drawn upon psychological theories of numerical
concept acquisition and arithmetical belief formation to defend claims about the meta-
physics,semantics, and epistemology of arithmetic.1
Most commonly, these philosophers
have focused on one theory from the psychological literature that has come to be known as
the “theory of core cognition.” The theory of core cognition oﬀers an account of concept
acquisition and belief formation in at least ﬁve domains: portable objects, intention action,
number, geometry, and social group (Spelke and Kinzler 2007). For each domain, a collec-
tion of unlearned core cognitive systems makes possible the acquisition of basic concepts and
the formation of basic beliefs about this domain. Until recently, the domains of object and
number have received the most attention from core cognitive theorists and philosophers of
arithmetic. However, over the past decade, Spelke and others have published a number of
articles developing the core cognitive theory of geometry. The primary purpose of this essay
1For example, Ball (2017), Beck (2015), Burge (2010, pp 471ﬀ), Giaquinto (2001a,b), Heck (2000), Jenkins
(2005, 2008), Maddy (2007, 2014), Margolis and Laurence (2008), Prinz (2002, pp 184ﬀ), and Shea (2011).
Other philosophers of arithmetic, such as Hale and Wright (2001), Parsons (2009), and Resnik (1997), defend
their metaphysical, semantic, and epistemological claims without engaging this experimental literature.
57

is to evaluate whether the theory of core cognition might be as useful for philosophers of
geometry as it has become for philosophers of arithmetic. My answer will be largely negative
given the current state of scientiﬁc knowledge.
In Part 1, I review the core cognitive theory of numerical concept acquisition in order
to isolate the essential claims of the core cognitive theory of number. In Part 2, I show how
core cognitive theorists have defended parallel claims in the domain of geometry. In Part 3,
I evaluate the strength of the core cognitive theory and reﬂect on its utility for philosophers
of geometry.
2.2
The Core Cognitive Theory of Numerical Concept Acquisition
In her Origin of Concepts, Susan Carey proposes a general theory of concept acquisition.
According to this theory, the content of a learned concept in one of the ﬁve domains (e.g.,
the numerical concept eight) is determined by its causal relations with objects in the en-
vironment.
These causal relations are sustained by a set of unlearned, domain-speciﬁc,
modular systems of representation: core cognitive systems. The representations in these
core cognitive systems are necessarily intermodal and sensory-derived (Carey 2009, pp 38-
40, 136). Additionally, core cognitive representations are non-conceptual in the sense that
they cannot contain logical constants (e.g., negation or disjunction), cannot be asserted,
and cannot be entertained without attributing the property it represents to a particular
in the environment.2 According to Carey, concepts cannot be acquired by combining the
representational contents of core cognitive systems.3 Rather, a set of interrelated concepts
(e.g., natural number concepts) is acquired when a corresponding set of lexical items (e.g.,
2Carey claims that core cognitive representations are “conceptual,” but by this she merely means that
they are post-perceptual (2009, p 34) and intermodal (2009, p 39). I believe Carey would agree that core
cognitive representations lack all three aspects of my more restricted deﬁnition of concept.
3To claim that concepts are acquired in this way is to fall prey to Fodors (1975, p 36ﬀ) reductio in favor
of radical concept nativism (Carey 2009, p 18).
58

numerals) are appropriately related to each other and to the underlying core cognitive sys-
tems. Carey draws this theory of concept acquisition from philosophical essays like Laurence
and Margolis (1999, 2002) and she attributes it to many psychological essays from the early
1990s.4 Nevertheless, her book is currently the most detailed and experimentally grounded
explication of the core cognitive theory of concept acquisition.
Carey applies the core cognitive theory of concept acquisition to the system of natural
number concepts (2009, ch 4). In particular, she wants to give an account of “how children
learn the meaning of verbal numerals such as ‘three’ and ‘seven’ ” (p 134). Possession of this
system of concepts entails that one can correctly answer questions about the cardinality of
sets of objects, such as whether two sets have equal cardinality or questions of how many
objects are in the union or diﬀerence of two sets. Carey claims that the causal relations
determining the contents and acquisition of numerical concepts are sustained by two core
cognitive systems: the analogue magnitude system (AM) and the parallel individuation
system (PI).5
2.2.1
Two Core Systems of Number
The AM system is responsible for representing the numerical size of a set of environmental
particular. Core theorists individuate the AM system by its conformity to Weber’s law.
4Carey (2009, pp 25, 306, 307, 511, 517) also cites MacNamara (1986), Block (1986), and Nersessian (1992)
as philosophical articulations of the bootstrapping process that is espoused in the theory of core cognition.
Carey maintains that the core cognitive theory of numerical concept acquisition was ﬁrst defended in ﬁve
studies from the early 1990s (p 25n2), and we might add to her list the publications of Fuson (1988), Wynn
(1990), and Dehaene and Changeux (1993). Despite some similarities, the core cognitive theory of concept
acquisition should not be attributed to Piaget. Piaget (1936) falsely claims that certain object and number
representations do not develop until around age 5, but these representations have since been isolated in
six-month-old infants (Carey 2009, pp 121, 136). Still, the core cognitive theory and Piagets theory both
posit discrete stages of cognitive growth and concept acquisition. This distinguishes their paradigms from
more ‘empiricist,’ ‘gradualist,’ or ‘non-modular architecturalist’ approaches, such as Bates et al. (1998),
Karmiloﬀ-Smith (1992), Spencer et al. (2009), and Thelen and Smith (1994).
5Carey (2009), pp 117, 137. The AM system is identical to what Dehaene (2011) calls the “analogue
number sense” (Carey 2009, p 118). The PI system tracks multiple individuals (e.g., objects, events, tone
bursts) in working memory and during periods of occlusion (p 117).
59

Weber’s law maintains that the discriminability of the (numerical) size of any two sets is a
function of the ratio of their cardinalities (2009, p 118). For example, according to Weber’s
law, it should be more diﬃcult for an animal to determine whether an 8-object set and
a 9-object set have the same size than it is to determine whether an 8-object set and a
16-object set have the same size. Many species, including humans, respond to cardinality
properties in accordance with Webers law. For example, Elizabeth Brannon and colleagues
have shown that Rhesus monkeys can learn to order a novel collection of images by the
number of closed regions in each image.6 The Rhesus monkeys were successful at ordering
the images by cardinality when every pair of images had a cardinality ratio greater than 3:2,
but they failed when the ratio was smaller than this. Their performance conforms to Webers
law. In a second study, Xu and Spelke (2000) have shown that six-month-old human infants
dishabituate to (i.e., look longer at) a new dot array if its cardinality ratio to the old dot
array is greater 3:2.7
The AM system is not limited to representing that the numerical size of one set is
not equal to (or greater than) the numerical size of another set. The AM system can also
represent and compute the addition of two numerical sizes. Flombaum et al. (2005) showed
that Rhesus monkeys dishabituate if two sets of n objects are put behind a screen and then
the screen is lifted to reveal n objects rather than 2n objects.8 Still, it would be inaccurate
to say the AM system contains arithmetical representations. There is no evidence that AM
representations contain singular reference to discrete natural numbers (e.g., “the number
of planets is eight”, “seven is the successor of six”).9 Rather, the Weber-fraction signature
suggests the AM system represents 9 numerical size as a continuous property similar to
6Brannon and Terrace (1998), Cantlon and Brannon (2006).
7Spelke replicated this result using tone sequence cardinalities (Lipton and Spelke 2003, 2004) and car-
dinalities of jumping event sequences (Wood and Spelke 2005).
8This experiment is replicated for nine-month-old infants in McCrink and Wynn (2004).
9As Carey notes, an outdated model of the AM system called the “accumulator model” did posit such
discrete representations that are computed via a subconscious counting routine (2009, p 293). But the results
of Barth et al. (2005) and Wood and Spelke (2005) show that the time it takes adults and infants to form
an AM representation is invariant across set size.
60

perceptible magnitudes like brightness, length, and temperature. Before we can explain the
acquisition of natural number concepts, we must consider the representational contents of
the PI system.
Core theorists individuate the PI system and their representations by their conformity
to a “set-size signature” (p 139). This signature arises in habituation studies where objects
are occluded one at a time behind a screen or in a jar. Starkey and Cooper (1980) found that,
although infants dishabituate when two objects are hidden and three are revealed, infants
do not dishabituate when four objects are hidden and six are revealed. These results violate
Weber’s law. Hence, the AM system is not responsible for the infant’s ability to discriminate
the sizes of these sets. Core cognitive theorists claims that the infants discrimination abilities
are grounded in an object-tracking system that is incapable of tracking more than three
objects. Their hypothesis is conﬁrmed by another experimental paradigm involving jars of
occluded food items. In this paradigm, each of two empty jars are visibly and sequentially
ﬁlled with a certain number of graham crackers (Feigenson and Carey 2005). Infants are then
allowed to grab the food out of one of the jars. Infants consistently choose the numerically
larger set if both jars contain fewer than three objects. However, if either jar contains four
or more objects, they choose at random between the two jars (even in the case of one versus
four!).
There is some controversy about how we should characterize the content of the PI
system. Some core theorists believe that the above experiments show that the PI system
contains applied arithmetical representations of, e.g., 2 + 2 = 4. Other core theorists believe
that the PI system merely opens and closes individual-ﬁles rather than attributing cardinality
to sets.10 Despite this controversy, it is universally accepted that the PI system is not capable
of representing arithmetical facts involving numbers greater than four. The core cognitive
theory of number maintains that applied representations of, e.g., 5 + 7 = 12, are only possible
10Carey (2009, pp 142-143) seems to hold a position between these two extremes according to which infants
can represent that two sets stand in a 1-1 correspondence.
61

through the childs construction of the verbal numeral list.11 As we will see below, the PI
and AM core systems play “a crucial role in the creation of the explicit verbal numeral list
representation of the positive integers” (Carey 2009, p 152).
2.2.2
Bootstrapping to Numerical Concepts and Arithmetical Beliefs
In any domain, the theory of core cognition desires to show how it is possible for language
learning to “build representational resources that transcend core cognition” (p 248).
In
any domain, this process requires acquiring a lexicon along with an associated network of
inference and action rules (p 306).
In the domain of number, core theorists agree that
children acquire numerical concepts by ﬁrst learning: (i) to rehearse the verbal numeral list
(one, two, three, etc.), (ii) to count a set of objects, and (iii) to answer ‘how-many’ questions
with the the last numeral uttered during the counting procedure.12 Tokens of these numerals
lack meaning until they can be used to correctly answer a variety of cardinality questions
about sets of environmental particulars.13
What allows a child to correctly answer cardinality questions? Core theorists believe
that the singular/plural distinction in English grammar is the primary catalyst for correctly
answering these questions. They claim that children learn the meaning of the word “some” as
appropriate in cases where a visible set has two or more elements. They also claim that many
experimental results show that when children start to correctly answer cardinality questions
for sets with one element, the are actually mapping the numeral one to the indeﬁnite article
11We may assume that core theorists would also accept that non-verbal numeral lists can also be used a
basis for the development of arithmetical representations.
12Carey calls these three skills, “the stable order principle,” “the 1-1 correspondence principle,” and “the
last word rule,” respectively (2009, pp 288-290, 300). As many experimental results show, these skills are
not suﬃcient for numerical concept possession since children with these skills are unsuccessful on the three
tasks described in the next footnote.
13These questions include: “Can you give me n?” (Give-a-Number task), “Can you point to the card
with n ﬁsh?” (Point-to-n task), and “What’s on this card?” (What’s-on-this-card task). When a child
is successful at all of these tasks for any set size, core theorists say they have acquired the “cardinality
principle.” Cf. Carey (2009), pp 297-302.
62

“a” and all numerals greater than one to the word “some” (p 326). The crucial step comes
when they learn to correctly answer cardinality questions for sets of two, three, and four
elements. In the case of “two,” children learn to apply this numeral just in case their PI
system contains two open individual ﬁles. In every such case, the numeral “two” functions
as a determiner and thus describes a property of a set of objects. This property is naturally
inferred to be the numerical size that is represented in the AM system whenever the PI
system has two open individual ﬁles. In this way, “two” comes to represent a numerical
size. The same process explains how the numerals “three” and “four” come to represent
numerical sizes. In all three cases, when a child has learned to utter the numeral n whenever
they have n open individual ﬁles, their utterance will have the same meaning as their AM
representation of that set.
The PI system is not capable of opening more than four individual ﬁles.
For this
reason, higher numerals only gain reference to a precise numerical size through a childs
ability to enumerate a set. The child’s disposition to answer ‘how-many’ questions using the
last word rule combines with singular/plural distinction to activate an AM representation
of the enumerated set.
Through this procedure, higher numerals gain their reference to
numerical size. These numerals still do not represent cardinal numbers because they “do not
yet embody the arithmetic successor function” (p 327). However, children can acquire the
successor function concept when, for any set of size n, the meaning of numeral n + 1 is simply
the size of the set resulting from adding a new individual” (p 327). Children then use “this
integrated representational system to invent addition and subtraction algorithms based on
the successor function (i.e., by counting up and counting down)” (p 344). To summarize, the
singular/plural distinction in English grammar makes possible the simultaneous activation
of the PI and AM systems, which in turn allows the network of inference rules (i)-(iii) to
associate numerals with discretized content.
63

When children are able to correctly answer cardinality questions, the system of nu-
merical concepts they now possess is constitutively related to core representations in the
AM and PI systems. That is, the representations in these two core systems are capable of
producing basic arithmetical beliefs. For example, if adults are shown two dot arrays where
the ﬁrst array has twice as many dots as the other array, the AM system will represent this
fact and give rise to a belief that the number of dots in the ﬁrst array is greater than the
number of dots in the second array (Barth et al. 2003). When the number of dots in the two
arrays is varied, Barth and colleagues have shown that the accuracy of adult verbal reports
about which array is larger conforms to Webers law.14 The mechanism underlying this sort
of basic arithmetical belief formation is sustained by “a mapping between analog magnitude
representations and the verbal integer list” (Carey 2009, p 128). Similarly, if the PI system
has three object ﬁles open, we are capable of forming a belief without counting that there
are three objects in the visible set.15 In this way, the theory of core cognition is just as much
a theory of belief formation as it is a theory of concept acquisition.
In order to evaluate the core cognitive theory of geometry, I want to isolate the essential
claims of the core cognitive theory of number. There are three such claims: (a) the AM and
PI systems exist, (b) numerical concept acquisition occurs when these two core systems allow
the numeral list to be appropriately applied to the environment, and (c) the representations
in the AM and PI system dispose us to form corresponding basic beliefs. Many philosophers
of arithmetic have adopted at least one of these claims in developing their own metaphysical,
semantic, and epistemological arguments.16 They have used this theory and its supporting
14Carey (2009), p 131. Barth et al. (2006) also showed human adults and four-year-old children a serial
display of a blue 45-dot array, a blue 60-dot array, and a red 75-dot array. They asked participants whether
they saw more blue dots or red dots. Their performance was again predicted by Weber’s law, which suggests
that the AM system generates arithmetical beliefs involving addition-like operations. (Carey 2009, pp 123,
127, 128)
15The exercise of this capacity is often called “subitizing” (Dehaene and Cohen 1994).
16Philosophers who support parts of the core cognitive theory of numerical concept acquisition include Ball
(2017), Beck (2015), Maddy (2007, 2014), Shea (2011), Burge (2010), Laurence and Margolis (2008), and
Giaquinto (2001). Some of these endorsements come with dissenting claims about some aspect of Carey’s
view of the representations in these two core cognitive systems: Ball (2017) argues they are not iconic, Beck
(2015) argues they are not conceptual, Burge (2010, p 480n82) argues they do not represent numerosity. I
64

experiments to reﬁne and extend their own theories of, e.g., arithmetical belief formation,
knowledge, analyticity, apriority, truth, and meaning. It is only natural to ask whether core
cognitive theory can bear philosophical fruitful in other domains. In particular, I will ask
whether the core cognitive theory of geometrical concept acquisition and belief formation
can stimulate theorizing in the philosophy of geometry.
2.3
The Core Cognitive Theory of Geometric Concept Acquisition
According to Spelke et al. (2010), core cognition of geometry parallels the structure of core
cognition of number. There are two core systems – the surface layout system and the object
shape system – that make the acquisition of familiar geometric concepts and Euclidean beliefs
possible:
What, then, is the nature of human knowledge of geometry, and how does this
knowledge arise and develop? Here, we oﬀer a hypothesis in the spirit of Carey
(2009) ...
Like natural number, natural geometry is founded on at least two
evolutionarily ancient, early developing, and cross-culturally universal cognitive
systems that capture abstract information about the shape of the surrounding
world: two core systems of geometry. Nevertheless, each system is limited: It
captures only a subset of the properties encompassed by Euclidean geometry, and
it applies only to a subset of the perceptible entities to which human adults give
shape descriptions. Children go beyond these limits, and construct a new system
of geometric representation that is more complete and general, by combining
productively the representations delivered by these two systems. (2010, p 865)
agree with these claims, but they should not be seen as challenging the essential claims of the core cognitive
theory of numerical concept acquisition.
65

The “new system of geometric representation” refers to a collection of propositions and lex-
ical concepts found in Euclid’s Elements. In the case of arithmetic, the verbal numeral list
and the singular/plural distinction made the acquisition of numerical concepts and arith-
metical beliefs possible. In the case of geometry, acquisition is made possible by a set of
“uniquely human, culturally variable artifacts: pictures, models and maps” (2010, p 865).17
These artifacts make possible the construction of a rich relational structure (exhibiting typ-
ical Euclidean relations between points, lines, and angles) that is responsible for producing
basic Euclidean beliefs.18 This rich relational structure is thought to augment the geometric
content of cognitive maps, working memory, and the spatial representations inferred from
drawn maps.19 In short, the core cognitive theory of geometry posits three levels of repre-
sentation: the two core systems, an artifact-based rich relational structure, and Euclidean
concepts and beliefs. Over the past decade, articles by Spelke and many other cognitive
psychologists have argued for the existence of these representational systems and various
causal dependencies between them on the basis of behavioral and neural evidence that I will
describe below.20
17Spelke et al. (2010) make this point explicitly: “Thus, like the system of number, the system of geometry
that feels most natural to educated adults is a hard-won cognitive achievement, constructed by children as
they engage with the symbol systems of their culture” (p 865).
18For example, Dillon and Spelke (2018, p 1) claim that “older childrens map reading undergoes changes
through development that predict the emergence of intuitions that align better with euclidean geometry.”
19Dehaene et al. (2006) make the same point: “Geometrical intuitions, in the ﬁnal analysis, may rest on
a spontaneous imposition of stable conceptual relations onto variable and imperfect sensory data” (p 383).
There is some disagreement about whether all three of these spatial representations take on this Euclidean
structure. For example, Lee et al. (2012, p 145) claim that certain experimental results demonstrate that
cognitive maps do not have a Euclidean structure. Rather, the geometric content of cognitive maps is closer
to what Chrastil and Warren (2014) refer to as “graph knowledge.”
20Calero et al. (2019), Dillon and Spelke (2015, 2018), Dillon et al. (2013), Lee et al. (2012), Spelke and
Lee (2012), Izard et al. (2011a), Spelke (2011), Spelke et al. (2010), Izard and Spelke (2009), Dehaene et al.
(2006). Within broadly the same tradition, some cognitive psychologists (e.g., Landau 2017, Shusterman and
Li 2016) have focused on the acquisition of non-metric concepts expressed by locative prepositional phrases
(e.g., ‘on’, ‘to left of’, ‘uphill from’). Still other articles in this tradition (e.g., Winkler-Rhoades et al. 2013,
Burgess 2006) have merely defended the view that the two core systems of geometry can explain the origins
of other cognitive, but pre-conceptual, skills such as the construction and application of cognitive maps.
66

2.3.1
Two Core Systems of Geometry
The core cognitive theory of geometric concept acquisition appeals to a variety of neural and
behavioral evidence to argue for the existence, neural basis, and content of the surface layout
system and the object shape system.21 I will give an overview of this evidence here. Let’s
begin with the surface layout system. This core system, also called the “geometric module,”
was ﬁrst proposed by Ken Cheng (1986) based on the results of three experiments about the
reorientation behavior by rats. In each experiment, rats were trained to ﬁnd hidden food at
up to nine locations in a rectangular box. In the test trials, after rats learned the location
of the food, they were removed and placed in an identical box where they had to reorient
to ﬁnd the food again. Cheng found that features such as the color, texture, and lighting
on the walls were not used to reorient. Based on these results, he posits a core system in
the working memory of rats that guides their navigation to a target object in a familiar
environment. In this core system, Cheng claims that rats attribute a “metric frame” to the
environment based on the “arrangement of surfaces,” and they location food via an “address
on the metric frame” (p 172).
A decade after Cheng’s experiments, neuroscientists recorded the activity of hippocam-
pal “place cells” while rats explored a rectangular environment (O’Keefe and Burgess 1996).
They found that the ﬁring rates of certain place cells varied with the rat’s distance from a
given boundary wall. Further studies compared the ﬁring rates of speciﬁc place cells across
variously-shaped environments, and they concluded that “the representation of space pro-
vided by place-cell ﬁring rates is like a single ﬂexible map, or more accurately a coordinate
system, which can be applied to any environment” (Hartley et al. 2000, p 378). By this, they
mean that place cell ﬁring rates are computed from a set of postulated “boundary vector
cells” that each represent the distance to a boundary wall (and thus can be thought of as one
coordinate in the metric frame). Boundary vector cells were isolated in the rats entorhinal
21Unlike the numerical case, these two systems have not been given widely-adopted proper names.
67

cortex by Solstad et al. (2008).22 In the case of humans, the fMRI studies of Doeller et
al. (2008) have found that when a human is being taught the location of a hidden object
(relative to a circular wall and the sun), the activity levels in the right posterior hippocam-
pus predict how well the subject is able to estimate that object’s location in a future trial.
Additionally, Hupbach and Nadel (2005) and Spelke and Lee (2008) found that two-year-old
children do not reorient on the basis of the distance between landmarks (e.g., a pole) or the
size of the angle between boundary walls.23
Core cognition theorists, who are primarily concerned with concept acquisition, regu-
larly cite the above studies to elaborate the contents and neural basis of the spatial layout
system. For example, Spelke et al. (2010, pp 867ﬀ) claim that these studies demonstrate
that the spatial layout system represents (i) the egocentric distance and direction to each
boundary wall, (ii) the proportion between the lengths of adjacent boundary walls,24 and
(iii) the left/right relations between pairs of adjacent boundary walls. In contrast, these
representations do not include contents such as the distance between landmarks, the color
22This study is often cited by core theorists like Spelke and Lee (2012, p 2786), Lee et al. (2012), p
157. In addition to these boundary vectors cells, other kinds of newly-isolated cells have been implicated in
navigation. For instance, Hafting et al. (2005) isolated “grid cells.” If we imagine the navigable environment
has been tiled by equilateral triangles, each of these grid cells ﬁres when the location of the animal has moved
over a vertex of a triangle. They propose that this ﬁring pattern is evidence of a metric space representation of
the environment (often called a cognitive map), in which the animal stores the location of objects, landmarks,
and boundaries.
23As recently as Lee et al. (2012, pp 153, 157), core theorists have appealed to boundary vector cells as
the neural basis of the spatial layout system. However, there have been more recent attempts (e.g., Dillon
et al.
2017) by core theorists to argue that the neural basis of the spatial layout system is in fact the
occipital place area (OPA) and the retrosplenial complex (RSC). The argument that these areas represent
distance and left/right relations is based on fMRI adaptation results showing that these two brain regions
release from adaptation when the distance to a pictured landmark changes or the image is mirror-reversed.
Unfortunately, these results about adaptation release can be explain by any number of proximal image
features or non-geometric distal properties. Moreover, the OPA (and, arguably, the RSC) is a part of the
visuo-perceptual system, and hence cannot be the neural basis of a core system. For these reasons, in the
rest of this essay I will assume that boundary vector cells are the intended neural basis of the spatial layout
system.
24Spelke et al. (2010), p 868. Core theorists seem to have rejected claim (ii) after Lee et al. (2012,
experiments 7 and 8) showed that when four disconnected walls of equal length were arranged in a rectangular
shape, children were able to reorient. However, when four disconnected walls of two diﬀerent lengths were
arranged in a square shape, children failed to reorient. This strikes me as a good reason to drop claim (ii).
If we do drop this claim, none of my critiques of the core cognitive theory of geometry would be aﬀected,
but the diagram below from Spelke et al. (2010) would need to be updated.
68

of, texture of, or angle between these boundary walls. The former set of properties, or so it is
maintained, innately and spontaneously guide human reorientation behavior in familiar en-
vironments, while the latter properties do not.25 Since this system does not represent certain
geometric features (e.g., angles and distance) it “fails as a system of Euclidean geometry”
(Spelke et al. 2010, p 867).
The object shape system also fails as a system of Euclidean geometry but for slightly
diﬀerent reasons. The object shape system represents the geometric relations between the
parts of 3D portable objects (rather than between navigational boundaries). Spelke et al.
(2010) claim that this system represents (i) the size of angles formed by two edges of the
object, and (ii) the proportion between the length of adjacent edges. Notably, this system
does not represent the left/right relations between edges. The main results that core cognitive
theorists use to support these claims come from oddity tasks. In an oddity task, participants
are shown six roughly-similar ﬁgures simultaneously and asked to select the ‘odd’ ﬁgure.
Dehaene et al. (2006) found that pre-adolescent children in the U.S. do well at selecting
the ﬁgure with distinct angles or distinct length proportions. They also found that in trials
where the odd ﬁgure is a mirror image of the other ﬁgures (at various rotations), children
only make the correct selection 23% of the time (p 382). According to Spelke et al. (2010),
the neural basis of this core system is identical to the neural basis of visual shape perception:
the lateral occipital cortex (LOC). Dilks et al. (2011) have shown that the LOC exhibits
adaptation across serial displays of mirror-reversed ﬁgures. This adaptation eﬀect suggests
that visual shape perception does not represent the left/right relations between the edges of
the perceived ﬁgure. Based on these ﬁndings, core cognitive theorists often claim that the
object shape system represents angles and length proportions, but not left/right (“sense”)
relations.
25The non-geometric properties are allegedly capable of guiding reorientation behavior, but only by means
of non-modular “associative learning” (Doeller and Burgess 2008; Spelke et al. 2012).
69

2.3.2
Bootstrapping to Geometric Concepts and Beliefs
According to the theory of core cognition, the two core systems of geometry make possible
the acquisition of geometric concepts and Euclidean beliefs.26
The two core systems of
geometry are intended to be structurally parallel to the two core systems of number. Spelke
et al. (2010, p 874) make this parallel explicit in their Figure 4. In the case of geometric
concept acquisition, the two core systems of geometry allegedly sustain the causal relations
that give meaning to the relevant lexicon (e.g., point, line, angle, circle, triangle, parallel).
When an adolescent human has acquired these geometric concepts, Spelke et al. (2010, p 878)
describe this achievement as the “construction of a more general, uniﬁed system of Euclidean
geometry.” Dillon and Spelke (2018) operationalize the unity of this Euclidean system by
means of (i) a triangle completion task, and (ii) an angle-based reorientation task.27 Both
tasks require the participant to infer the size of one angle in a triangle (or a rhombus) from
core representations of side lengths. Two-year-old children perform no better than chance on
these two tasks, but twelve year-olds are successful at both tasks. What allows an adolescent
to successfully complete these tasks? As in the case of number, certain cultural artifacts are
supposed to explain this bootstrapping process. In core number cognition, these artifacts
were the verbal numeral list and the singular/plural distinction. In core geometric cognition,
these artifacts are supposed to be pictures, models, and (primarily) maps. Similar to the
singular/plural distinction, maps can simultaneously activate both core systems. To take
one example, an overhead line map of a triangular space activates the object shape system
because it is itself a small portable object with a 2D shape and it activates the spatial layout
system because it represents a large, navigable space with boundary walls. As of yet, the core
26Carey (2009) labels concept acquisition processes, “bootstrapping,” when they constitutively rely on
core systems for their representational content.
27In this study, the triangle completion task required the participants to predict whether the (imagined)
third angle in a triangle would get smaller or larger based on seeing the base angles either (i) increase in size
or (ii) move farther apart (Dillon and Spelke 2018, p 8, ﬁg 3). The angle-based reorientation task provided
a map of either three disconnected sides or three disconnected angles that the participant had to complete
in mental imagery in order to reorient in a disconnected enclosure of the opposite kind (2018, p 5, ﬁg 1).
70

cognitive explanation for how this simultaneous activation is supposed to confer meaning on
geometric concepts like triangle, length, and parallel is not as detailed in the geometric case
as it is in the arithmetical case.
The core cognitive framework for geometric concept acquisition and Euclidean belief
formation is appealing. In time, something like it may prove to be correct. However, I want
to show here that the theory is inadequate as it currently stands. There are problems with the
claims about the two systems, the claims about the resulting concepts, and the claims about
the basic Euclidean beliefs that the core systems allegedly produce. These problems should
serve as a cautionary tale for any philosophers trying to building philosophical arguments
about truth, meaning, and knowledge in geometry while at the same time assuming the
accuracy of the core cognitive theory of geometric concept acquisition.
2.4
Problems for the Core Cognitive Theory of Geometry
The core cognitive theory of geometric concept acquisition faces three major obstacles. First,
the two core systems lack clear empirical support in the face of more recent neural and
behavioral evidence. Second, the geometric concepts that children allegedly acquire have
proven much more diﬃcult to isolate than the analogous numerical concepts. Third, the
Euclidean beliefs that these core systems are supposed to generate have not been directly
tested.
2.4.1
Critique of the Two Core Systems of Geometry
The theory of core cognition posits the existence of core systems. By deﬁnition, core sys-
tems are post-perceptual and intermodal. The object shape system that Spelke and other
core theorists posit, however, is a visuo-perceptual system. The neural basis of this system,
71

the lateral occipital cortex, is squarely within the vision-speciﬁc ventral stream that is re-
sponsible for visual perception (Kanwisher and Dilk 2014, p 733). Hence, it is clear that the
object shape system cannot be a core system. It is certainly possible there is an intermodal
core system with similar geometric contents to the object shape system (i.e., angles, length
proportions, but not left/right relations). But the neural and behavioral evidence that Spelke
and others have cited does not support this claim.
The spatial layout system fairs a bit better. This core system has a neural basis in
the boundary vector cells of the hippocampus.
As such, it is both post-perceptual and
intermodal. Nevertheless, there are independent reasons for doubting that this system can
play the bootstrapping role that core theorists want it to play.
The ﬁrst reason is that
these boundary vectors cells in the hippocampus are part of a “a wider network of spatially
modulated neurons, including grid, [place], and head direction cells, each with distinct roles
in the representation of space and spatial memory” (Moser et al. 2015, p 2). This wider
network of spatially modulated neurons is not limited in the same way that boundary cells are
limited. In particular, the ﬁring patterns of grid cells and place cells reveal that rats represent
their self-location on a metrically-speciﬁed grid of the navigable environment (Moser et al.
2015, p 3). Surprisingly, the ﬁring patterns of the grid cells form equilateral triangles that
tile the surrounding space (2015, p 3, ﬁg 1). The precise geometric contents of this wider
network of spatially modulated neurons is not obvious. However, it is clear that the failure of
boundary vector cells to represent angle sizes does not adequately account for the contents of
this wider network. Spelke and other core theorists have not provide any reason to think that
the spatial layout system should exclude the richer geometric contents of place, grid, and
head direction cells. Until such reasons are given, the neural evidence cited by core theorists
in favor of a spatial layout system does little to support their claim that this system cannot
represent the size of angles.
72

The second reason for doubting the existence of the spatial layout system comes from
more recent reorientation studies. As we saw above, the core theorists identify the spatial
layout system with Ken Chengs (1986) proposed “geometric module.” His experiments were
taken to show that wall color, brightness, and texture were not used by rats to reorient.
Later, core theorists used Cheng’s experimental set up to show that these claims apply to
two-year-old children as well. (Further results about the lack of angle-based reorientation
came from these later studies as well.) But, notably, Cheng (2008 p 355) now maintains
the behavioral evidence for the existence of his geometric module “crumbled” beginning
with two reorientation studies published around 2005.
These studies demonstrated that
rats and chickadees reorient in a rectangular enclosure based on the color of walls, which
overshadow the geometric properties of these walls.28 This evidence led Cheng to conclude
that the system underlying reorientation is associative and image-based, rather than modular
or geometric:
[New empirical] developments have led to an associative learning theory modeling
how featural cues [like color and texture] can sometimes help and sometimes
hinder the learning of geometric cues. And they have led to an approach of view-
based matching, in which geometric properties are not explicitly encoded. (2008,
p 355)
The behavioral evidence against the geometric module has only grown since 2008.29 Cheng
and his colleagues often explicitly note that these new studies undermine the core cognitive
theory of geometry (Twyman and Newcombe 2010, Sutton and Newcombe 2014). In fact,
Newcombe et al. (2009) use these newer studies of reorientation as evidence all modular
theories of mind. I do not mean to endorse these claims, but merely to note that the spatial
layout system lacks the clear behavioral support that undergirds the two core systems of
28These studies are Gray et al. (2005) and Pearce et al. (2006).
29Twyman et al. (2013) and Cheng et al. (2013) provide a nice overview of the many studies disconﬁrming
the existence of a geometric module.
73

arithmetic. More generally, the neural and behavioral results that initially seemed to support
the object shape system and the spatial layout system have proved diﬃcult to square with
more recent results.
2.4.2
Critique of the Proposed Geometric Concepts and Beliefs
The core cognitive theory of geometry is a theory of how we acquire geometric concepts
mentioned in Euclids Elements (e.g., point, line, equilateral triangle). This lexicon is notably
dissimilar to the lexicon of numerals that is studied by core numerical cognition. For one,
what set of concepts must be learned in order to have genuinely “Euclidean” beliefs? Are
concepts like left, right, rhombus, and cube necessarily in the set of geometric concepts whose
acquisition core theorists are trying to explain? In the case of number, there is a relatively
precise set of numerical concepts, function concepts, and relation concepts (e.g., greater than,
addition of, number of, successor of ) that delimit the constituents of arithmetical beliefs.
In the case of geometry, I am not aware of any similarly precise proposals for a set of basic
geometric concepts. The only statement of which I am aware that describes the intended
basic lexicon of geometry claims that it is composed of two syntactic kinds: shape names
and locative prepositions (Spelke et al. 2010, p 874). Without a more precise sense of these
set of basic geometric concepts are required, it will be diﬃcult to determine when children
typically acquire these concepts and to theorize which core systems may be involved in their
acquisition. In the meantime, Dillon and Spelke (2018) use the Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test (PPVT) to gauge mastery of geometry. They show that the PPVT score predicts success
on the triangle completion task and the angle-based reorientation task. However, given that
the PPVT is primarily a test of everyday sortal concepts, these results tell us little about how
basic geometric concepts are acquired. Hence, until a more precise lexicon is established, it
will be diﬃcult to develop an experimental paradigm that can provide support for the core
cognitive theory.
74

Perhaps the more fundamental problem is that no precise set of Euclidean beliefs has
been experimentally established. Although the propositions of Euclid’s Elements are often
cited as the set of Euclidean beliefs, the experimental procedures do not test for such be-
liefs. In discussions of both the triangle completion task and the angle-based reorientation
task, core theorists often claim that successful participants must thereby believe a Euclidean
proposition. In the triangle completion task, it is that the sum of the three angles in a
triangle is a constant. In the angle-based reorientation task, it is that length of the sides
determine the size of the angles in a triangle. However, this is questionable. It seems clear
that participants would be able to successfully complete either task on the basis of amodal
completion or visual image generation. These latter abilities are not tied to Euclidean belief
formation in any obvious way.30 The one task that core theorists have used in their experi-
ments that seems to have the potential to reveal the formation of Euclidean beliefs is the line
intuitions task of Izard et al. (2011b). In this task, participants are shown diagrams of, say,
three non-collinear points and asked questions like, “Can a straight line be drawn through
all three points?” Other questions in the line intuitions task are about intersection and par-
allelity. Unfortunately for core theorists, the sample size is small and the results suggest that
adults and children perform equally well on these questions. In sum, the core cognitive theory
of geometric concept acquisition has faced unique diﬃculties in delimiting its explanandum
and in providing evidence for the existence of its explanans. These problems should serve as
a cautionary tale for any philosophers trying to build philosophical arguments about truth,
meaning, and knowledge in geometry while at the same time assuming the accuracy of the
core cognitive theory of geometric concept acquisition.
30There are some suggestive remarks from core theorists that these visual imagery abilities are dependent
on the formation of Euclidean beliefs. However, I am not aware of any evidence for this counterintuitive
claim.
75

2.5
Bibliography
Ball, B. (2017).
“On representational content and format in core numerical cognition.”
Philosophical Psychology 30(1-2), pp 119-139.
Barth, H. C., Kanwisher, N., and Spelke, E. (2003). “The construction of large number
representation in adults.” Cognition 86, pp 201- 221.
Barth, H. C., La Mont, K., Lipton, J., Dehaene, S., Kanwisher, N., and Spelke, E. S. (2006).
“Non-symbolic arithmetic in adults and young children.” Cognition 98(3), pp 199-222.
Bates, E., Elman, J., Johnson, M. H., Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A., Parisi, D., and Plunkett, K.
(1998). Rethinking innateness: A connectionist perspective on development. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Beck, J. (2015). “Analogue Magnitude Representations: A Philosophical Introduction.” The
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 66, pp 829-855.
Block, N. J. (1986). “Advertisement for a semantics for psychology.” Midwest Studies in
Philosophy 10(1), pp 615-678.
Brannon, E. M., and Terrace, H. S. (1998). “Ordering of the numerosities 1 to 9 by monkeys.”
Science 282, pp 746-749.
Burge, T. (2010). Origins of Objectivity. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Burgess, N. (2006). “Spatial memory: how egocentric and allocentric combine.” Trends in
Cognitive Science 10(12), pp 551-557.
Calero, C., Shalom, D. E., Spelke, E. S., and Sigman, M. (2019).
“Language, gesture,
and judgment: Children’s paths to abstract geometry.” Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology 177, pp 70-85.
Cantlon, J., and Brannon, E. M. (2006).
“Shared system for ordering small and large
numbers in monkeys and humans.” Psychological Science 17(5), pp 401-406.
Carey, S. (2009). The Origin of Concepts. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carey, S. (2011). “Pr´ecis of The Origin of Concepts.” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 34, pp
113-124.
Cheng, K. (1986). “A purely geometric module in the rat’s spatial representation.” Cognition
23, pp 149-178.
76

Cheng, K. (2008).
“Whither geometry?
Troubles of the geometric module.”
Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 12(9), pp 355-361.
Cheng, K., Huttenlocher, J., and Newcombe, N. (2013). “25 years of research on the use of
geometry in spatial reorientation: a current theoretical perspective.” Psychon Bull Rev
20, pp 1033-1054.
Chrastil, E. R., and Warren, W. H. (2014). “From Cognitive Maps to Cognitive Graphs.”
PLoS ONE 9(11): e112544.
Dehaene, S. (2011). The Number Sense: How the Mind Creates Mathematics. New York:
Oxford University Press. First edition published in 1997.
Dehaene, S. and Changeux, J. (1993). “Development of Elementary Numerical Abilities: A
Neuronal Model.” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 5, pp 390-407.
Dehaene, S. and Cohen, L. (1994). “Dissociable mechanisms of Subitizing and Counting:
Neurophysiological Evidence from Simultanagnosic Patients.” Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 20(5), pp 958-975.
Dehaene, S., Izard, V., Pica, P., and Spelke, E.S. (2006). “Core knowledge of geometry in
an Amazonian indigene group.” Science 311, pp 381-384.
Dillon, M., Huang, Y., and Spelke, E. S. (2013). “Core Foundations of Abstract Geometry.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110(35), pp 14191-14195.
Dillon, M., Persichetti, A., Spelke, E. S., and Dilks, D. D. (2017). “Places in the Brain:
Bridging Layout and Object Geometry in Scene-Selective Cortex.”
Cerebral Cortex
2017, pp 1-10.
Dillon, M. and Spelke, E. S. (2015). “Core Geometry in Perspective.” Developmental Science
18(6), pp 1-14.
Dillon, M. and Spelke, E. S. (2018). “From Map Reading to Geometric Intuitions.” Devel-
opmental Psychology 54(7), pp 1304-1316.
Feigenson, L., and Carey, S. (2005). “On the limits of infants’ quantiﬁcation of small object
arrays.” Cognition 97(3), pp 295-313.
Flombaum, J. I., Junge, J., and Hauser, M. D. (2005). “Rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta)
spontaneously compute large number addition operations.” Cognition 97(3), pp 315-
325.
Fodor, J. (1975). The Language of Thought. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Fuson, K. (1988). Children’s Counting and Concepts of Number. New York: Springer.
77

Giaquinto, M. (2001a). “Knowing Numbers.” The Journal of Philosophy 98(1), pp 5-18.
Giaquinto, M. (2001b). “What Cognitive Systems Underlie Arithmetical Abilities?” Mind
& Language 16(1), pp 56-68.
Gray, E.R. et al. (2005). “Spatial encoding in mountain chickadees: features overshadow
geometry.” Biol. Lett. 1, pp 314-317.
Hale, B. and Wright, C. (2001). The Reason’s Proper Study. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Hafting, T., Fyhn, M., Molden, S., Moser, M., and Moser, E. (2005). “Microstructure of a
spatial map in the entorhinal cortex.” Nature 436(11), pp 801-806.
Hartley, T., Burgess, N., Lever, C., Cacucci, F., O’Keefe, J. (2000). “Modeling Place Fields
in Terms of the Cortical Inputs to the Hippocampus.” Hippocampus 10, pp 369-379.
Heck, R. (2000). “Cardinality, Counting, and Equinumerosity.” Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic 41(3), pp 187-209.
Hupbach, A., and Nadel, L. (2005). “Reorientation in a rhombic environment: No evidence
for an encapsulated geometric module.” Cognitive Development 20, pp 279-302.
Izard, V., Pica, P., Dehaene, S., Hinchey, D., and Spelke, E. S. (2011a). “Geometry as a
Universal Mental Construction.” In E. Brannon and S. Dehaene (Eds.), Space, Time
and Number in the Brain: Searching for the Foundations of Mathematical Thought,
Attention and Performance. Boston: Elsevier Academic Press, pp 319332.
Izard, V., Pica, P., Spelke, E. S., and Dehaene, S. (2011b). “Flexible intuitions of Euclidean
geometry in an Amazonian indigene group.” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 108(24), pp 97829787.
Izard, V., and Spelke, E. S. (2009). “Development of sensitivity to geometry in visual forms.”
Human Evolution 23, pp 213-248.
Jenkins, C. S. (2005). “Knowledge of Arithmetic.” The British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science 56, pp 727-747.
Jenkins, C. S. (2008). Grounding Concepts: An Empirical Basis for Arithmetical Knowledge.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kanwisher, N., and Dilks, D. D. (2014). “The Functional Organization of the Ventral Visual
Pathway in Humans.” In L. Chalupa and J. Werner (Eds.), The New Visual Neuro-
sciences. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Karmiloﬀ-Smith, A. (1992). Beyond Modularity: A Developmental Perspective on Cognitive
Science. Cambridge: MIT Press.
78

Landau, B. (2017). “Update on ‘What’ and ‘Where’ in Spatial Language: A New Division
of Labor for Spatial Terms.” Cognitive Science 41 (Supp 2), pp 321-350.
Laurence, S. and Margolis, E. (1999). “Concepts and cognitive science.” In E. Margolis and
S. Laurence (Eds.), Concepts: Core readings. Cambridge: MIT Press, pp 3-82.
Laurence, S. and Margolis, E. (2002). “Radical concept nativism.” Cognition 86, pp 25-55.
Lee, S. A., Sovrano, V. A., Spelke, E. S. (2012). “Navigation as a source of geometric knowl-
edge: Young children’s use of length, angle, distance, and direction in a reorientation
task.” Cognition 123, pp 144-161.
Lipton, J. S., and Spelke, E. S. (2003). “Origins of number sense: Large number discrimi-
nation in human infants.” Psychological Science 15(5), pp 396-401.
Lipton, J. S., and Spelke, E. (2004). “Discrimination of large and small numerosities by
human infants.” Infancy 5(3), pp 271-290.
MacNamara, J. (1986). Border dispute: The place of logic in psychology. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Maddy, P. (2007). Second Philosophy: A Naturalist Method. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Maddy, P. (2014). “A Second Philosophy of Arithmetic.” The Review of Symbolic Logic
7(2), pp 222-249.
Margolis, E. and Laurence, S. (2008). “How to learn the natural numbers: Inductive infer-
ence and the acquisition of number concepts.” Cognition 106, pp 924-939.
McCrink, K., and Wynn, K. (2004). “Large-number addition and subtraction by 9-month
old infants.” Psychological Science 15(11), pp 776-781.
Moser, M., Rowland, D., Moser, E. (2015). “Place Cells, Grid Cells, and Memory.” Cold
Spring Harb Perspect Biol 7:a021808.
Nersessian, N. (1992). “How do scientists think? Capturing the dynamics of conceptual
change in science.” In R. Giere (Ed.), Cognitive Models of Science. Minneapolis: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, pp 3-44.
Newcombe, N., Ratliﬀ, K., Shallcross, W., Twyman, A. (2009). “Young children’s use of
features to reorient is more than just associative: further evidence against a modular
view of spatial processing.” Developmental Science 13(1), pp 213-220.
O’Keefe, and Burgess, N. (1996). “Geometric determinants of the place ﬁelds of hippocampal
neurons.” Nature 381(6581), pp 425-428.
79

Parsons, C. (2009). Mathematical Thought and Its Objects. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Pearce, J.M. et al. (2006). “Potentiation, overshadowing, and blocking of spatial learning
based on the shape of the environment.” J. Exp. Psychol. Anim. Behav. Process. 32,
pp 201-214.
Piaget, J. (1936). The Construction of Reality in the Child. Abingdon: Routledge, 1954.
Prinz, J. J. (2002). Furnishing the Mind: Concepts and Their Perceptual Basis. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Resnik, M. (1997). Mathematics as a Science of Patterns. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Shea, N. (2011). “New concepts can be learned: Review of Susan Carey, The Origins of
Concepts.” Biology and Philosophy 26, pp 129-139.
Shusterman, A., and Li, P. (2016). “Frames of reference in spatial language acquisition.”
Cognitive Psychology 88, pp 115-161.
Solstad, T., Boccara, C., Kropﬀ, E., Moser, M., and Moser, E. (2008). “Representation of
Geometric Borders in the Entorhinal Cortex.” Science 322(19), pp 1865-1868.
Spelke, E. S. (2011). “Natural Number and Natural Geometry.” In E. Brannon and S.
Dehaene (Eds.), Space, Time and Number in the Brain: Searching for the Foundations of
Mathematical Thought, Attention and Performance. Boston: Elsevier Academic Press,
pp 287-317.
Spelke, E. S. and Kinzler, K. D. (2007). “Core Knowledge.” Developmental Science 10(1),
pp 89-96.
Spelke, E. S. and Lee, S. (2012). “Core Systems of Geometry in Animal Minds.” Philosoph-
ical Transactions of the Royal Society B 367, pp 2784-2793.
Spelke, E. S., Lee, S. A., and Izard, V. (2010). “Beyond Core Knowledge: Natural Geome-
try.” Cognitive Science 34, pp 863-884.
Spencer, J. P., Thomas, M., McClelland, J. (2009), Toward a New Grand Theory of Devel-
opment? Dynamic Systems Theory and Connectionism Reconsidered. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Starkey, P., and Cooper, R. (1980). “Perception of numbers by human infants.” Science
210, pp 1033-1035.
Sutton, J. E., and Newcombe, N. S. (2014). “The hippocampus is not a geometric module:
processing environment geometry during reorientation.” Frontiers in Human Neuro-
science 8(596), pp 1-6.
80

Thelen, E. and Smith, L. B. (1994). A Dynamic Systems Approach to the Development of
Cognition and Action. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Twyman, A. and Newcombe, N. (2010). “Five Reasons to Doubt the Existence of a Geo-
metric Module.” Cognitive Science 34, pp 1315-1356.
Twyman, A., Newcombe, N., and Gould, T. (2013). “Malleability in the Development of
Spatial Reorientation.” Developmental Psychology, pp 243-255.
Winkler-Rhoades, N., Carey, S. C., and Spelke, E. S. (2013). “Two-year-old children inter-
pret abstract, purely geometric maps.” Developmental Science 16(3), pp 365-376.
Wood, J. N., Spelke, E. (2005). “Infants’ enumeration of actions: Numerical discrimination
and its signature limits.” Developmental Science 8(2), pp 173-181.
Wynn, K. (1990). “Children’s Understanding of Counting.” Cognition 36, pp 155-93.
Xu, F., and Spelke, E. S. (2000). “Large number discrimination in 6-month old infants.”
Cognition 74, pp B1-B11.
81

Chapter 3
Visual Imagination and Mathematical
Entitlement
Abstract: Recent work by Marcus Giaquinto on visual thinking in mathematics has pro-
vided us with a new appreciation for the role of visual imagination in the formation and
warrant of basic beliefs in elementary arithmetic and geometry.
Yet, Giaquinto remains
skeptical about the epistemic role that visual imagination can play in elementary analysis.
He claims that our visual faculties are unreliable guides to the “limiting behavior” of certain
continuous functions. But a recent branch of mathematical logic, namely o-minimality, takes
as one of its primary objects deﬁnable continuous functions. I will argue that our visual fac-
ulties are dependable guides to the behavior of these objects. More speciﬁcally, I will argue
that the o-minimal Intermediate Value Theorem admits of imagery-based mathematical en-
titlement despite Giaquinto’s (sound) argument that the real-analytic IVT cannot be known
in this way.
3.1
Introduction
In his 2007 book, Visual Thinking in Mathematics, Marcus Giaquinto provides an answer
to a question raised by Plato: “how is pure geometrical knowledge possible?” (p 12). Gi-
82

aquinto argues that a proper understanding of visual imagination and geometrical concepts
can explain the formation of true warranted geometrical beliefs.
Can a parallel account
be given for mathematical knowledge outside of elementary geometry? Giaquinto maintains
that theorems in real analysis and other advanced mathematical disciplines cannot be known
through visual thinking.1 In this essay I will argue that Giaquinto underestimates the po-
tential explanatory power of his own epistemic framework. By focusing on the case of the
Intermediate Value Theorem, I will show that visual thinking can generate mathematical
knowledge in advanced disciplines like model theory and topology.
The primary reason Giaquinto develops his account of visual thinking is to refute
a long-standing position (held by some prominent mathematicians and philosophers) that
visual imagination and diagrammatic reasoning are too unreliable to produce warranted
mathematical beliefs. In Giaquinto’s own words:
A time-honoured view, still prevalent, is that the utility of visual thinking in
mathematics is only psychological, not epistemological.
...Visual representa-
tions...cannot be a resource for discovery, justiﬁcation, proof, or any other way of
adding epistemic value to our mathematical capital – or so it is held. The chief
aim of this book is to put that view to the test. I will try to show how, why, and
to what extent it is mistaken. (2007, p 1)
Giaquinto takes aim here at numerous claims by both mathematicians and philoso-
phers over the past 200 years, such as Russell’s assertion that arithmetic and geometric
“self-evidence is often a mere will-o’-the-wisp, which is sure to lead us astray” (1901, p 78).
Arguably, this skeptical tradition can be traced to 1817, when Bernardo Bolzano appealed
to the real-analytic Intermediate Value Theorem (IVT) to defend his view that our visual
faculties are not reliable guides to the behavior of ϵ-δ continuous functions. In the early
1When the representational contents of visual imagination give rise to mathematical beliefs in a chain of
reasoning, Giaquinto says that this reasoning constitutes “visual thinking” (2007, p 1).
83

20th century, Russell (1919) and Hahn (1933) put forward an historical narrative accord-
ing to which 19th-century mathematics is a story of a “ﬂight from intuition.” They claim
that these mathematicians continually uncovered cases where visual imagination leads us to
believe various mathematical falsehoods.2 According to Russell and Hahn, these demonstra-
tions eventually convinced the mathematical community that a search for the foundations
of mathematical knowledge was necessary. The ﬁrst major victory of this movement was the
discovery of a “rigorous” deﬁnition of the notion of a continuous function. According to this
narrative, once ϵ-δ deﬁnition of continuity was formulated, true mathematical knowledge of
the IVT became possible. It is this historical narrative that makes the IVT particularly
worthy of study for anyone concerned with visual thinking in mathematics, and it is why I
focus on the IVT in this essay.
In Part 2, I distinguish some basic epistemological notions. In Part 3, I describe a
plausible set of geometric contents for visual imagination according to the current dominant
theory of working memory. In Part 4, I consider a single proposition of elementary geometry
– for any square, the parts either side of its diagonal are congruent – and show how we can
acquire knowledge of this proposition through visual thinking. In Part 5, I will extend this
account of mathematical knowledge to the o-minimal Intermediate Value Theorem. Unlike
the real-analytic Intermediate Value Theorem, which Giaquinto has discussed extensively
(1994, 2007, 2011), I will argue that the o-minimal version can be known through visual
thinking. In Part 6, I step back from the IVT and show that the developers and practitioners
of o-minimality were engaged in a general epistemological project. These mathematicians
intended the primary objects of o-minimality to be inherently visualizable. I will consider
the extent to which they succeeded by asking if our visual faculties are reliable guides to the
behavior of these objects.
2One can ﬁnd discussions of the falsehoods that allegedly powered the ﬂight from intuition in the following
sources: Russell (1901), p 94; von Koch (1906); Forder (1927), p 46; Coﬀa (1982), p 686. Cf. Norman (2006),
Mancosu (2005). It should be noted, however, that the ‘ﬂight from intuition’ narrative has been refuted by
historians of mathematics (e.g., Gray 2008, Heis 2008, L¨utzen 2003). Nevertheless, it continues to hold
weight among some philosophers.
84

3.2
Imagery-based Mathematical Entitlement
Marcus Giaquinto’s mathematical epistemology focuses on a very speciﬁc type of knowledge
that requires what I will call imagery-based mathematical entitlement. In this section I will
ﬂesh out what I mean by this phrase and the more basic notion of epistemology. Epistemol-
ogy, in the broadest sense, concerns a person’s right to accept a proposition or theory as
true.3 Some rights to accept a proposition p are partially grounded in the believer’s ability to
produce a proposition q as a reason (i.e., justiﬁcation) for the belief. Other rights to accept
a proposition are not grounded in such an ability, and such rights are called entitlements.4
When a justiﬁed or entitled belief is true, I will refer to it as knowledge. The most familiar
type of entitlement is a perceptual entitlement. A perceptual entitlement is a right to believe
a proposition that is grounded in (a) the reliability of the believer’s perceptual systems in
generating perceptual states with accurate contents, and (b) a deductively valid connection
between the contents of the underlying perceptual states (e.g., this triangle is scarlet) and
the contents of the belief that the perceptual states generate (e.g., this ﬁgure is red).
Giaquinto maintains that for his target epistemological case studies, namely mathe-
matical beliefs generated from visual imagination (e.g., the angles of a triangle sum to 180◦),
our right to believe should not theorized in terms of perceptual entitlement.5 Mathematical
beliefs, unlike perceptual beliefs, are not about the believer’s visible environment and so
possession of a systematically accurate perceptual system does not add any epistemic force
to the belief. In other words, condition (a) above is not necessary for the mathematical
3According to this understanding, knowledge and justiﬁcation are merely subtopics within epistemology.
4The terminology of entitlements comes from Burge (1993, 1998, 2003), Dretske (2000), and Goldman
(2001).
5Giaquinto uses the word “discovery” instead of “entitlement,” which I assume he draws from Lakatos
(1976). The only diﬀerence is that discovery excludes entitlements from testimony and entitlements that
involve a “violation of epistemic rationality” (2007, p 2). I will be exclusively concerned with mathematical
entitlement in this essay, so the reader should assume these restrictions hold unless otherwise stated.
85

kind of entitlement that Giaquinto theorizes. For this reason, imagery-based mathematical
entitlements (as distinguished from perceptual entitlements) are apriori entitlements.6
That is, these beliefs do not derive their epistemic status from a reliably-produced
perceptual state. Additionally, since the mathematical belief is generated from visual imag-
ination rather than perception, condition (b) is not necessary either. However, a validity
condition similar to (b) is necessary for imagery-based mathematical entitlement: the ground
of one’s right to believe that, e.g., for any square the parts either side of its diagonal are
congruent, is a deductively valid connection between the underlying imagery contents and
the generated belief contents. In Part 4, I will ﬂesh out the imagery contents from which
this proposition about squares may be deduced. Before diving into this particular example,
I will use Part 3 to describe what we know about the geometric contents of visual imagery.
current cognitive-scientiﬁc understanding of mental imagery and its contents. For now, all
one needs to know is that when these geometric contents produce a mathematical belief, we
will say that the resulting belief is imagery-based.
The third and ﬁnal kind of entitlement that I will mention here is analytic entitlement.
This kind of entitlement accrues to mathematical beliefs such as two is a number and every
square has four sides, as well as non-mathematical beliefs such as every apple is a fruit
and my house lights are either on or oﬀ.7 In every such case, anyone who possesses the
component concepts of the proposition will necessarily ﬁnd the proposition self-evident.8 In
6Giaquinto (2007), pp 2, 8. Cf. Burge (1993), p 274. For discussion of non-imagery-based kinds of apriori
entitled beliefs (e.g., introspective, analytic, or logical beliefs), see the essays cited in footnote 4.
7For endorsements of the idea that our entitlement to certain set-theoretic axioms is analytic, see Kreisel
(1967, p 144), G¨odel (1964, p 260ﬀ), and Fraenkel (1927, p 61).
8I would like to note, somewhat tangentially, a minor diﬀerence between Giaquinto’s theory of analytic
entitlement and my own. Giaquinto elaborates the idea of analytic entitlement in terms of Christopher
Peacocke’s (1992) theory of concept possession, which is a theory to which I do not want to commit my-
self. According to Peacocke’s theory, possession of a concept is nothing more than acceptance of a set of
“primitively compelling” propositions and inference rules. I do not wish to commit myself to this theory of
concept possession, but I ﬁnd a weaker claim plausible: for some concepts, acceptance of certain propositions
is necessary (but not suﬃcient) for possession of the concept. For arithmetic and geometric concepts, this
claim seems exceptionally plausible. My rejection of Peacocke’s theory and acceptance of the weaker claim
aligns with Prinz (2002), who claims that Peacocke’s theory “seems to work well for certain taxonomic and
kinship terms,...mathematical and theoretical terms,...and artifact concepts” (p 32). Prinz goes on to argue
86

contrast to imagery-based mathematical entitlement, one’s right to believe these propositions
is not grounded in any facts about pre-belief representational systems (e.g., the existence of
a valid connection between visual imagery and the beliefs it generates). Analytic entitlement
will only become signiﬁcant in this essay when I elaborate the notion of a “valid connection,”
which is necessary for imagery-based mathematical entitlement in Part 4. In particular, when
we establish one example of a deductively valid connection between the contents of visual
imagery and the resulting belief, we will allow premises that are self-evident propositions in
addition to the premises that are imagery contents.
Before I move on to characterizing the geometric contents of visual imagination, I
will brieﬂy specify what ‘mathematical’ means in imagery-based mathematical entitlement.
My understanding of mathematics is broad. My use of this term not only rejects logicist
claims such as, “formal logic...is the same thing as mathematics” (Russell 1901, p 74),
but it also rejects more lenient uses of ‘mathematics’ where professional mathematicians
are the dominant concern (Paseau 2014). In contrast, my notion of mathematics is just
as much about the representational content and inferential activity associated with K-12
mathematics textbooks and exercises as it is about the proofs in mathematics journals.9
Giaquinto argues that elementary beliefs in number theory, algebra, and geometry admit
of imagery-based mathematical entitlement. But Giaquinto also argues that this kind of
entitlement cannot accrue to beliefs in analysis. Giaquinto’s argument leaves the reader
with the impression that imagery-based entitlement is impossible for mathematical beliefs
about more ‘advanced’ mathematical subject matters, such as algebraic topology, set theory,
complex analysis, geometric model theory, analytic number theory, and algebraic geometry.10
that Peacocke’s account is not be adequate for every kind of categorization capacity that we might want to
call conceptual, such as dot-pattern categorization (p 51), color categorization (p 52), bird categorization (p
53-55). A prototype theory of concept individuation (Rosch and Mervis 1975) may be preferable in these
cases. It is possible that Giaquinto also believes this since he appeals to Kosslyn’s notion of a category
pattern, which is a prototype (Kosslyn 1994, p 180).
9This seems to be how Giaquinto (2005b) understands the delineation of mathematics as well.
10Indeed, most philosophers of mathematics place similar epistemic limits on visual imagination and
diagrams in ‘advanced’ disciplines. One exception is Brown’s (2008) argument that the analytic Intermediate
Value Theorem can be diagrammatically known. However, I believe Giaquinto (2011) provides a convincing
87

In Part 5, I will show that this impression is misleading. Before I address the question of
which mathematical subdisciplines admit imagery-based mathematical entitlement, I will
ﬁrst need to describe the geometric contents of visual imagination that make imagery-based
mathematical entitlement possible.
3.3
The Geometric Contents of Visual Imagination
To articulate his view of the contents of visual imagery, Giaquinto appeals to the work of
cognitive psychologist Stephen Kosslyn. Kosslyn’s theory of visual imagery remains more or
less the dominant paradigm in cognitive psychology today.11 According to Kosslyn’s theory,
when a human generates a mental image of, e.g., a square, a tent, or a knife, their visual
imagination produces three kinds of representations: an environment-centered coordinate
system, a set of object-centered intrinsic axes, and a set of axis-dependent spatial relations.
I will describe each kind of representation in the following paragraphs.12
According to Kosslyn, when we imagine an object we attribute a coordinate system
to the space surrounding the object.13 Perhaps the most widely accepted argument for this
claim comes from the experimental results of Roger Shepard. Roger Shepard’s studies of
mental rotation (Shepard and Metzler 1971, Cooper and Shepard 1973) are widely regarded
refutation of his view. Another exception, one which I ﬁnd more promising, is De Toﬀoli and Giardino
(2014).
11Endorsements of Kosslyn’s theory of imagery contents can be found in Bettencourt and Xu (2016),
Christophel et al. (2015), Pearson et al. (2013), Hamam´e et al. (2012), and Logie and van der Meulen
(2009). In cognitive psychology and cognitive neuroscience today, discussion of visual imagination is often
couched within a larger discussion of working memory. For this reason, Baddeley’s episodic buﬀer is more
frequently cited than Kosslyn’s visual buﬀer. I maintain, along with Pearson (2001) and Logie and van der
Meulen (2009), that these two terms refer to the same buﬀer.
12For discussion of and evidence for this coordinate structure, see Kosslyn (1994, ch 7). All of my examples
of an imagined object – a square, a tent, and a knife – are taken from Kosslyn (1994).
13The origin and axes of this coordinate system (relative to the visualizer) are determined by factors such
as “the gravitational upright,...position on the retina, and the way the body is oriented” (Kosslyn 1994, p
132).
88

as revealing the existence of an environment-centered coordinate system in mental imagery.14
In the ﬁrst study, Shepard and Metzler asked participants whether two distinct 3D tetris
ﬁgures at various orientations have the same shape. They found that the decision times
of participants increased linearly with the angular distance of the necessary rotation. This
result has been conﬁrmed many times, and parallel results have been found for other spatial
conﬁgurations such as letters (Cooper and Shepard 1973) and 2D line ﬁgures (Hochberg and
Gellman 1977, Jordan et al. 2001).15 Kosslyn uses Shepard’s result to claim that we attribute
an environment-centered coordinate system to the space around an imagined object. If this
were not true,
mental rotation would not be necessary. In fact, one of the reasons Shepard and
Metzler’s (1971) original mental rotation experiment had such a large impact
was that the then-current approaches to visual representation emphasized object-
centered representations, and the rotation results were clearly not predicted by
such approaches. (Kosslyn 1994, p 149)
Kosslyn here rejects an object-centered approach to mental rotation, which holds that we
merely attribute intrinsic axes to an object. These intrinsic axes are primarily determined
by the symmetry properties of an object. So, for example, the intrinsic axes of a square will
be the lines that segment the square into four congruent square parts. Without an additional
set of environmental axes, the object-centered approach is unable to give an account of what
14For instance, Jeﬀrey Zacks begins his 2007 meta-analysis of mental rotation studies with these assertions:
“Mental rotation is a hypothetical psychological operation in which a mental image is rotated around some
axis in three-dimensional space. Mental rotation was ﬁrst revealed in behavioral experiments (Cooper and
Shepard 1973, Shepard and Metzler 1971) in virtue of a striking ﬁnding: The time to make a judgment
about a rotated object often increases in a near-linear fashion with the amount of rotation required to bring
the object into alignment with a comparison object or with a previously learned template.” (Zacks 2007, p
1)
15Additionally, fMRI studies have found that mental rotation tasks are accomplished by spatiotopic regions
of the posterior parietal cortex and the activation levels in these regions increases linearly with angular
distance (Harris and Miniussi 2003, Zacks 2007).
Together, these behavioral and neuroimaging results
“provide relatively good support for the hypothesis that mental rotation is a continuous transformation” of
an imagined object within a stable, environment-centered coordinate system (Zacks 2007, p 6).
89

it would mean to continuously transform a square by mentally rotating it 45◦.16 Hence,
Shepard’s result is often taken to suggest that we represent both an environment-centered
coordinate system and a set of intrinsic axes, the latter of which I will call a reference frame.
Beside Shepard’s result, the existence of an object-centered reference frame (in addition
to an environment-centered coordinate system) in visual imagination is further suggested by
the symmetry experiments such as Palmer and Hemenway (1978) and McMullen and Farah
(1991).17 Palmer and Hemenway found that decision times for whether a ﬁgure has a reﬂec-
tion symmetry (e.g., symbols ‘H’, ‘%’) across an intrinsic axis is substantially shorter than
the decision time for whether a ﬁgure has a rotational symmetry (e.g., the letter ‘Z’). Their
explanation for this result is that reﬂection symmetries, but not rotational symmetries, are
encoded into the very representation of the ﬁgure. Additionally, McMullen and Farah found
“that the eﬀects of orientation on naming time are eliminated with practice for symmetrical,
but not asymmetrical, pictures” (Kosslyn 1994, p 133). They also explained their result by
claiming that reﬂection symmetries are explicitly encoded in the representation of imagined
and perceived objects.18
The third kind of representation that Kosslyn posits in visual imagination is a set
of axis-dependent spatial relations.
The reﬂection symmetries mentioned above are just
one example of this kind of representation.
In addition, Kosslyn posits representations
of metric relations (e.g., distance, parallelity) and qualitative relations (e.g., collinearity,
co-termination, ‘on’, ‘left of’, ‘connected to’, ‘above’) within visual imagination.19
The
16An account of mental ‘rotation’ in terms of discrete changes, such as using intrinsic axes that segment
the square into four triangles rather than four squares, is ruled out by Shepard’s result.
17Kosslyn’s (1994, pp 133-136, 160) own endorsement of intrinsic axes draws on these experiments and the
related symmetry experiments of Corballis and Beale (1976, 1983), Bower and Glass (1976), Palmer (1977),
Jolicoeur and Kosslyn (1983), McMullen and Farah (1991).
18I believe symmetry results like these were a major reason that Kosslyn abandoned his early theory of
imagery contents (Kosslyn and Shwartz 1977, p 278), according to which shapes representations are encoded
by a two-dimensional grid of ﬁlled and unﬁlled cells. The symmetry theory does not require such a rich
grid structure to be represented (though, of course, even the symmetry theory acknowledges that the non-
representational retinal image will have a ‘grid structure’ in a sense). In philosophy, Michael Tye (1991, chs
5, 6) has incorporated Kosslyn’s older grid structure into his theory of imagery contents.
19Kosslyn (1994), pp 108-109, 227-228.
90

experimental support for the existence of these spatial relations has been even less conclusive
than the available evidence discussed above for the coordinate system and reference frame.
For this reason, I will not review these results here. Nevertheless, I ﬁnd Kosslyn’s theory
of imagery content plausible enough given the currently available behavioral and neural
evidence. Hence I will follow Giaquinto (2005a, 2007) in accepting these contents for the
rest of this essay while also noting that (i) this set of representations “is not the only one that
is consistent with the data” (2007, p 28), and (ii) our account of imagery-based mathematical
entitlement will not be signiﬁcantly altered if, say, collinearity is not represented in visual
imagination.
Finally, I should note that in addition to the three kinds of representations above,
Kosslyn (1994, ch 10) proposes the existence of a ﬁxed set of transformations – rotation,
translation, similarity (i.e., ‘zooming’), reﬂection, and stretching – that a visualizer has at
their disposal to voluntarily manipulate the representational contents of visual imagination.
Kosslyn describes some additional decision-time experiments in favor of the existence of these
mental transformations, but caveats (i) and (ii) also apply to the existence of these trans-
formations. Given the above notion of visual imagination, we will now turn our attention
to Giaquinto’s illustrative example of a geometric belief with imagery-based mathematical
entitlement.
3.4
Geometric Knowledge through Visual Imagination
With the above epistemological deﬁnitions and imagery contents ﬁxed, I will focus on one
example of imagery-based mathematical entitlement from Giaquinto (2007) that will serve
as a guide for later cases. Consider the following claim:
91

(S) For any square x and for any diagonal k of x, the parts of x either side of k
are congruent. (Giaquinto 2007, p 38)
After visualizing a square with a diagonal through it, a person may come to believe (S)
without being able to give a justiﬁcation for the belief.20
Nevertheless, the person may
be entitled to believe (S) if the belief was acquired through a valid connection with visual
imagination. What constitutes this valid connection? First, their concept square must have
the correct “category speciﬁcation.” That is, a certain set of imagery contents must cause
the application of the concept square to the imagined object. Giaquinto proposes a category
speciﬁcation for square that is empirically plausible:
Category Speciﬁcation for square
Let V and H be the vertical and horizontal axes of the reference frame. Then, to
categorize a ﬁgure as a square, it is necessary and suﬃcient that visual imagina-
tion represents the following features:
• Plane surface region, enclosed by straight edges: edges parallel to H, one
above and one below; edges parallel to V, one each side.
• Symmetrical about V.
• Symmetrical about H.
• Symmetrical about each axis bisecting angles of V and H.21
This category speciﬁcation must not only guide the application of the concept square. It
must also generate a visual image with these contents when one visualizes a square. A person
20Besides its intuitive support, the idea that working memory (and hence visual imagination) triggers the
formation of beliefs has some experimental support in the case of the phonological loop (Baddeley et al.
1987, Baddeley et al. 2009).
21Giaquinto (2007), p 23.
He draws these contents primarily from Stephen Palmer’s experiments on
perceptual judgments of shape, orientation, and symmetry (Palmer and Hemenway 1978, Palmer 1980, 1983,
1985). For Giaquinto, these contents are also supposed to arise in perception. But, as argued in Chapter 1,
I do not think that perceptual content includes a coordinate system. Nevertheless, it seems plausible that
these contents may be stored in a post-perceptual memory system, such as Logie’s visual cache (Logie 1995,
Logie and Cowan 2015). But as Palmer (1999) notes, “the nature of shape perception is so complex and
enigmatic that there is as yet no accepted theory of what shape is or how shape perception occurs” (p 327).
92

with imagery-based entitlement to (S) must have the correct category speciﬁcation for the
concept square. However, they must also have the correct category speciﬁcations for all other
visual concepts in (S), including diagonal, part, and congruence.22
The second requirement for imagery-based entitlement to (S) is ability to reﬂect the
square over its imagined diagonal.
This ability is constitutive of a properly functioning
imagery system. Reﬂecting the square over its diagonal should then cause the concept con-
gruence to be applied to the parts of the square either side of the diagonal.
The ﬁnal
requirement for imagery-based entitlement to (S) is the disposition to generalize over all
imaginable square ﬁgures through imagery transformations.23 us to believe exercise a dis-
position a If rotation, translation, and similarity are constitutive of visual imagination as
Kosslyn claims, then this requirement is also met by anyone with a properly functioning
imagery system.24
The above three requirements are suﬃcient for imagery-based entitlement to (S) be-
cause they establish a deductively valid connection between the imagery contents and the
generated belief (S). This valid connection can be written in argument form as follows:
Valid Connection for (S)
22More precisely, these concepts are diagonal of a quadrilateral, part of a ﬁgure, and congruence of two
ﬁgures.
23Giaquinto (2007, pp 40-42) maintains that this disposition to generalize over all squares is the very
same disposition that can causes us to believe other universal mathematical claims about other shapes and
conﬁgurations. If this psychological hypothesis turns out to be correct, Giaquinto is right to assert that this
disposition will only generate knowledge if it is reliable (i.e., consistently generates true beliefs except for
cases of malfunction).
24It is possible that this generalization over the set of all imaginable square ﬁgures is not the result of
mental transformations, but simply the results of recognizing that all square-with-diagonal conﬁgurations
“share all their intrinsic geometric properties” (Giaquinto 2007, pp 137, 154). Other types of generalization
that Giaquinto posits do explicitly draw on Kosslyn’s set of mental transformations. For instance, Giaquinto
claims that we generalize over all triangular conﬁgurations of dots irrespective of the number of dots in each
row. Giaquinto claims that the phenomenal experience of a dot pattern can be numerically indeterminate and
thus we are disposed to make a shape-based generalizations based on similarity and rotational transformations
(2007, pp 144, 156). This strikes me as prima facie plausible, but I will largely remain silent on arithmetical
knowledge in this essay. Moreover, it is not necessary for us to determine here which of these two accounts of
geometric generalization. Either way, the three requirements I have placed on imagery-based mathematical
entitlement will be very similar.
93

P1. Every square is symmetric about its diagonals. (Speciﬁcation for square)
P2.
Every quadrilateral that is symmetric about its diagonal has two parts
on either side of the diagonal that precisely overlap after a mental reﬂection.
(Structure of visual imagination)
P3. Every pair of ﬁgures that can be made to precisely overlap with another
through translation, reﬂection, and rotation are congruent.
(Speciﬁcation for
congruent)
C. Therefore, for any square with a diagonal, the parts either side of its diagonal
are congruent.
This deductively valid argument establishes a valid connection between (S) and visual imagi-
nation. It is important to note that this argument is not psychologically implemented by the
person with imagery-based entitlement to (S). In fact, it is conceivable that someone entitled
to (S) cannot even entertain any of the three premises in this argument. For instance, they
may not possess concepts like symmetry or reﬂection that are necessary to entertain these
premises. But even if they are able to think these premises and believe them, psychologically
implementing this argument would not produce imagery-based entitlement to (S). At best,
it would produce a justiﬁcation to believe (S). Unlike this argument, the psychological route
to an imagery-generated belief in (S) that I describe above involves: generating a particular
imagined object, manipulating that imagined object, applying the concept congruence to
the parts of that imagined object, and generalizing over all imaginable squares.25 The argu-
ment above is not a description of psychological reality. Nevertheless, it establishes a valid
connection between visual imagination and the generated belief. According to my theory of
entitlement, this is suﬃcient for imagery-based mathematical entitlement to (S).
25This sequence of psychological acts reveals a general fact about the mathematical productivity of visual
imagination. The heart of this productivity “lies in viewing a form in two ways at once” (Giaquinto 2007, p
158). In this case, we view a ﬁgure as both a square and as a composition of two triangles. Giaquinto also
notes that cognitive scientists have theorized seeing in “two ways” (e.g., a rotated ‘D’ on top of a ‘J’ will
be categorized as an umbrella) and often they explain these phenomena in terms of Kosslyn’s visual buﬀer
(Finke et al. 1989, p 76).
94

Which mathematical subject matters are most vulnerable to imagery-based mathemat-
ical entitlement? Clearly, claims about rectilinear ﬁgures are good candidates for this type
of knowledge. But other mathematical concepts have category speciﬁcations as well. Gi-
aquinto (2007) makes a number of compelling arguments that integers, algebraic structures,
curves, and functions all have category speciﬁcations. This makes mathematical beliefs about
these objects potentially subject to imagery-based entitlement. Below I will focus on planar
curves and continuous functions. I will argue that certain concepts about these objects have
category speciﬁcations. I will use the above square-and-diagonal example as a guide for
demonstrating that certain beliefs about these curves and functions admit of imagery-based
mathematical entitlement. In particular, my focus will be on the Intermediate Value The-
orem. After I have detailed Giaquinto’s argument for an invalid connection between visual
imagination and the real-analytic IVT, I will consider whether the parallel argument holds
in the case of the o-minimal IVT.
3.5
Knowing the o-minimal IVT through Visual Imagination
Bolzano and many mathematicians after him, used the Intermediate Value Theorem to cast
doubt on the reliability of using diagrams to form mathematical beliefs. In other words,
Bolzano questions the epistemic status of imagery-generated belief in the IVT. He argues
that using a diagram in this case gives rise to a false, intermediate belief. Is Bolzano right?
It depends on how we formulate the content of the IVT. I will try to answer this question for
three diﬀerent formulations of IVT: the synthetic formulation, the real-analytic formulation,
and the o-minimal formulation.
I will show that, in addition to the synthetic IVT, the
o-minimal IVT admits of imagery-based mathematical entitlement.
95

3.5.1
The Synthetic IVT
The simplest and most intuitive formulation of the Intermediate Value Theorem is called
the synthetic IVT. This formulation is a universal statement over the concept planar curve.
The category speciﬁcation for planar curve is as follows:
Let y and x be the vertical and horizontal axes of the reference frame. Then,
to categorize a ﬁgure as a planar curve, it is necessary that visual imagination
represents the following features:
• Bounded contour with no visible gaps26
• Piecewise monotonic (i.e. ﬁnitely oscillating)27
• Piecewise smooth (i.e. has a tangent at all but ﬁnitely many points)28
• Passes the vertical line test (i.e., no point is directly above another)
Under this category speciﬁcation, a planar curve will never have a segment that cannot
be visualized. In other words, a planar curve will never exhibit such “pathological behavior”
as ﬁlling a two-dimensional space (e.g., the “Hilbert curve”), having an inﬁnitely-oscillating
segment (e.g., the “topologist’s sine curve”), or having inﬁnitely many singular points (e.g.,
the “Weierstrass function”).29 With this in mind, we can state the synthetic IVT as follows:
(SI) Any planar curve that goes from below the x-axis to above it, intersects the
x-axis. (Giaquinto 2011, p 298)
Giaquinto maintains that, if a person possesses the concept planar curve and has the cor-
rect category speciﬁcation of it, visual imagery may disposed them to believe (SI). He does
26Giaquinto (2011), pp 297-298. Giaquinto also refers to the property of having no visible gaps as “graphical
continuity.”
27Giaquinto (2007), p 185, fn 12.
28Giaquinto (2011), p 299.
Additionally, Giaquinto speaks of “the ‘intuitive’ belief that a continuous
function must have a derivative everywhere except at isolated points” (Giaquinto 2007, p 3).
29I intended “planar curve” to be synonymous with Giaquinto’s (2007, 2011) term “pencil-continuous
curve.”
96

not discuss the psychological mechanism by which this generalization over all planar curves
would normally occurs. For our purposes, we may assume that the stretching and similarity
transformation of visual imagination is responsible for generating belief like (SI). More im-
portantly, this imagery-generated belief has a valid connection to visual imagination. Hence,
it has imagery-based mathematical entitlement. We can write this valid connection in argu-
ment form as follows:
Valid Connection for (SI)
P1. All planar curves are piecewise smooth and monotonic. (Speciﬁcation for
planar curve)
P2.
All piecewise smooth and monotonic contours from below the x-axis to
above have a segment that is smooth, monotonic and goes from below the x-axis
to above. (Structure of visual imagination)
P3. All smooth, monotonic curve segments that go from below the x-axis to
above it will intersect the x-axis at a point. (Structure of visual imagination)
C. Therefore, any planar curve that goes from below the x-axis to above it,
intersects the x-axis.
Similar to the case of (S) above, this valid connection between (SI) and visual imag-
ination is the ground of one’s imagery-based entitlement to believe (SI). Can additional
valid connections be established for other formulations of the Intermediate Value Theorem?
Giaquinto makes a convincing argument that no valid connection exists between visual imag-
ination and the analytic IVT. I want to review Giaquinto’s argument before attempting to
answer this question for the o-minimal formulation of the IVT.
3.5.2
The Analytic IVT
When Russell, Hahn, and Bolzano rejected visual imagination as a source of knowledge
in mathematics, they all cite the analytic formulation of the IVT as a major motivation.
97

Although Giaquinto disagrees with their conclusion, he does admit that the analytic IVT
cannot be known through visual thinking. I agree. The sheer symbolic complexity of the
analytic IVT, as compared to the synthetic IVT, suggests by itself that this theorem may
be about objects that cannot be visualized:
(AI) If f is an ϵ-δ continuous function on [a, b] ⊂R and f(a) < 0 < f(b), then
f(c) = 0 for some c ∈(a, b).30
Let us assume for now that visual imagination can generate a belief in (AI). If so, the
concept ϵ-δ continuous function must have a category speciﬁcation. Plausibly, it will be the
very similar to the category speciﬁcation of the concept planar curve. But this already poses
a problem for the analytic IVT case. As we saw above, planar curves do not exhibit certain
pathological behaviors like oscillating inﬁnitely many times or having an inﬁnite number of
singular points. Yet, some notable ϵ-δ continuous functions demonstrably do exhibit these
pathological behaviors. At this point, we may try to revise the category speciﬁcation of ϵ-δ
continuous function to include these functions. However, these pathological functions are
notable precisely because they cannot be speciﬁed in visual imagination. Hence, there is
no correct category speciﬁcation for the concept ϵ-δ continuous function.31 This fact makes
it impossible to form universal beliefs about ϵ-δ continuous functions with imagery-based
entitlement. If we were to attempt to write out a valid connection for (AI) as we did for
(SI) above, we would fail.
The parallel ﬁrst premise – “all ϵ-δ continuous functions are
30Cf. Rudin (1976), p 93; Giaquinto (2011), p 297, fn 28. This is, in fact, the Intermediate Zero Theorem.
For purposes of argumentation, I will assume, along with Giaquinto (1994, 2007, 2011) and Brown (2008),
that we can use the IZT without loss of generality. Also, note that the range of this function is the metric
space R.
31To be clear, I am not denying that we might associate a set of prototypical visual features with this
concept. In fact, Kosslyn (1994, p 178) calls this set of prototypical features an exemplar pattern. Ex-
emplar patterns may give rise to universal beliefs about the associated concept, but these beliefs will lack
a deductively valid connection to visual imagination. In other words, such beliefs will lack imagery-based
entitlement. Kosslyn gives the example of an exemplar pattern of the concept dog. This pattern is a set
of visible features of a particular dog, Rover. When one imagines Rover, one may disposed to form various
universal beliefs about dogs. But these beliefs would not have imagery-based entitlement because Rover’s
features are not had by all dogs. There is no valid connection. Of course, such universal beliefs may have
inductive justiﬁcations, but this is another matter entirely.
98

piecewise smooth and monotonic” – is nowhere to be found in the category speciﬁcation for
ϵ-δ continuous function. Without this premise, we cannot write a valid connection between
the analytic IVT and visual imagination.
Giaquinto expresses this same point when he
claims that the analytic IVT does not admit of imagery-based entitlement:
The problem is that there are some functions ϵ-δ continuous on a closed interval
... [that] do not have curves. Any continuous nowhere-diﬀerentiable function is
an example. So generalizing from the diagram here is not valid. (2011, p 300)
The analytic IVT is not the only mathematical theorem that eludes imagery-based
entitlement.32 Indeed, it may be tempting to think that for all but the most elementary
mathematical theorems, imagery-based entitlement will be untenable.
Giaquinto himself
expresses this view when he claims that the reason (AI) does not admit of imagery-based
entitlement is that it “depends on theoretical concepts from e.g. real (or complex) analysis, or
something similarly abstruse” (2007, p 29). But I see no reason why complex and ‘abstruse’
mathematical concepts and theorems should be excluded from imagery-based entitlement.
In the rest of this paper, I want to push back against this tidy epistemological partition of
mathematics by showing that the ‘abstruse’ o-minimal formulation of the IVT has a valid
connection to visual imagination.
32Giaquinto gives two other examples of mathematical beliefs that do not admit of imagery-based entitle-
ment. One example comes from Kenneth Manders’ discussion of the distinction between exact and co-exact
properties in Euclidean practice (Manders 1996, 2008a, 2008b). In this setting, a diagram of a triangle may
dispose one to believe a false universal statement because the diagram contains a co-exact property that
“depends on” exact properties (Giaquinto 2011, pp 291-293). The second example is a generalization over
paths in Cantor space (Giaquinto 2008b; 2007, ch 11).
Although Giaquinto does not discuss it, there is a fourth formulation of the Intermediate Value Theorem.
This topological IVT, formulated and proved by Munkres (2000, p 154) as Theorem 24.3, is not subject
to imagery-based entitlement. As was the case for ϵ-δ continuous functions, some topologically continuous
functions cannot be visualized. A complete study of epistemology of the IVT should include considerations
of all four of these theorems (and probably more). Recognizing the variety of IVTs is crucial for dissolving
the presumption that the IVT belongs exclusively to real analysis.
99

3.5.3
The O-minimal IVT
The o-minimal formulation of the IVT is able to overcome the two diﬃculties that plagued the
analytic IVT in the last section. First, the concept o-minimal continuous function is capable
of having a category speciﬁcation, unlike the concept ϵ-δ continuous function. Second, there
is a valid connection between the o-minimal IVT and visual imagination. Unlike the analytic
IVT, we can write this valid connection in a deductive argument in a way that parallels the
argument for (SI) above. This section is aimed at establishing both of these claims. We will
begin by stating what exactly o-minimality is before returning to these claims.
O-minimality is a branch of model theory. I will review some general model-theoretic
deﬁnitions introducing the concept o-minimal continuous function. This will help us to grasp
the content of the o-minimal formulation of the IVT. At the most basic level, model theory
begins with a collection of formal languages:
Deﬁnition 3.5.1. A model-theoretic language L is given by specifying the following data:
a) A set of function symbols F and non-negative integers nf for each f ∈F.
b) A set of relation symbols S and positive integers nS for each S ∈S.
c) A set of constant symbols C.33
For example, the language of groups is speciﬁed by two symbols: the identity element ‘e’
and the group operation ‘·’. Other language may contain, e.g., a function symbol for every
analytic function on R. A model theorist might consider one language in isolation or, as in
the case of o-minimality, many languages all at once. For each language, there is a collection
of structures on which the symbols of the language are given a meaning. More precisely:
33Marker (2002b), p 8.
100

Deﬁnition 3.5.2. A model-theoretic L-structure R = (R, (SR
i )i∈I), (f R
j )j∈J) consists of
a nonempty set R, the relations SR
i
each of which is the interpretation of Si ∈S, and the
functions f R
j each of which is the interpretation of fj ∈F.34
For example, the structures associated to the language of groups are just the groups them-
selves. In each group, the identity element symbol is interpreted as the identity element and
the group operation symbol is interpreted as the group operation.
In every structure, the language of that structure induces a collection of subsets on
that structure which we call the deﬁnable sets. Intuitively, these are the sets that we can
talk about in our language. A more precise deﬁnition is given here:
Deﬁnition 3.5.3. Let R = (R, ...) be an L-structure. We say that X ⊆Rn is deﬁnable
if there is an L-formula ϕ(x1, ..., xn, y1, ..., ym), and parameters p1, ..., pm such that X =
{(a1, ..., an) ∈Rn : R |= ϕ(a1, ..., an, p1, ..., pn)}. We say that ϕ deﬁnes X.35
For example, in the group of integers, the set of even integers is deﬁnable by the formula
ϕ(x) := ∃y(y + y = x). But many subsets of structures cannot be deﬁned in the language of
the structure. For example, the set of real numbers cannot be deﬁned in the ﬁeld of complex
numbers. It is usually not obvious which subsets of a given structure are deﬁnable.
The structures that we call o-minimal are deﬁned by the intuitive simplicity of their
deﬁnable sets. In all o-minimal structures, the deﬁnable subsets are ﬁnite unions of isolated
points and intervals. More precisely:
Deﬁnition 3.5.4. An L-structure R = (R, <R, ...), where <R is a dense linear order without
endpoints, is called o-minimal if and only if every set S ⊆R1 that is deﬁnable in R with
parameters is a union of ﬁnitely many intervals and points.36
The two simplest kinds of o-minimal structures are ordered vector spaces of the form,
(R, <R, +R, (λ·R )λ∈F, 0R), and real closed ﬁelds of the form, (R, <R, +R, ·R , 0R, 1R). The
34Dries (1998), p 21.
35Marker (2002b), p 19. We also say that L generates the sequence of deﬁnable sets δ = ({X ⊆Ri : X is
deﬁnable})i∈N. (Dries 1998, p 21)
36Dries (1998), p 23.
101

smallest o-minimal ordered vector space is (Q, <Q, +Q, (λ·Q )λ∈Z, 0), and the smallest real
closed ﬁeld is (A, <A, +A, ·A , 0, 1).37
But the above deﬁnition of o-minimal structures also rules out many structures. For
example, if we add the sine function symbol to our language, the resulting structures (over
dense linear orders) will not be o-minimal. This is because we can use the sine function
symbol to deﬁne the set of integers. (Simply let ϕ(x) be the formula, sin(x) = 0.) And since
the integers cannot be written as a ﬁnite union of points and intervals, this structure is not
o-minimal.
O-minimal structures have a number of nice logical and geometrical properties. In par-
ticular, we will see that the o-minimal continuous functions within every o-minimal struc-
ture are ‘visualizable’ in precisely the ways that the ϵ-δ functions were not. Intuitively, an
o-minimal continuous function is any topologically continuous function that the language
has resources to talk about. More precisely,
Deﬁnition 3.5.5. A function f : R →R in an o-minimal structure is o-minimal con-
tinuous if and only if the inverse image of every deﬁnable open set of R is deﬁnable and
open.38
For example, in the ﬁeld of real numbers, even though sin(x) is a continuous function, it is
not o-minimal continuous because the language of ﬁelds does not have the resources to talk
about this function.
In every language, we can collect together sentences of the language to form a theory.
If all of the sentences of a theory T are true on a structure M, we say that the structure
models that theory. We express this symbolically as: M |= T. If all the models of a given
theory are o-minimal, we say that the theory itself is o-minimal. That is:
37Here, ‘A’ refers to the ﬁeld of real algebraic numbers, whose underlying set is the set of real roots of the
non-zero polynomials in one variable with rational coeﬃcients.
38My term “o-minimal continuous” is synonymous with the Dries’ (1998) term “deﬁnable continuous.”
Also, the topology of an o-minimal structure is always the order topology.
102

Deﬁnition 3.5.6. An L-theory T is o-minimal iﬀfor all models M = (M, ...), such that
M |= T, the deﬁnable sets of M 1 are exactly the ﬁnite unions of points and intervals.
For example, the theory of real closed ﬁelds is an o-minimal theory. And so is the theory
of dense linear orders.
In each case, the axioms of the theory prohibit all their models
from having deﬁnable subsets that contain inﬁnitely many isolated points. That is, all their
models are o-minimal.
Let us close this overview of o-minimality with the deﬁnition of an o-minimal expansion.
Intuitively, this is an o-minimal structure that we attain by enriching the language of a
diﬀerent o-minimal structure. More precisely:
Deﬁnition 3.5.7. Let L+ ⊃L. If M+ is an L+-structure, then by ignoring the interpre-
tations of the symbols in L+ \ L we get an L-structure M. We call M a reduct of M+
and M+ an expansion of M. An o-minimal expansion of an o-minimal structure, is one
that preserves o-minimality (i.e. one in which the new function and relation symbols cannot
be used to deﬁne new subsets of R1).39
The notion of an o-minimal expansion allows us to state one of the ﬁrst impor-
tant results about the class of o-minimal structures.
Peterzil and Starchenko (1998)
have proven that all non-trivial o-minimal structures are expansions of these two basic
kinds of structures.40
That is, they are all either (1) order vector spaces of the form
(R, <R, +R, (λ·R )λ∈F, 0R, F), where F stands for the new functions of the expansion, or
(2) real closed ﬁelds of the form (R, <R, +R, ·R , 0R, 1R, F). The most well-known expansion
of a real closed ﬁeld is Wilkie’s real exponential ﬁeld (i.e. R = R and F = {ex}).41
The class of o-minimal structures has many other notable properties. From the per-
spective of pure model theory, the two most important are the following. First, all o-minimal
39Marker (2002b), p 31.
40“Trivial” is a technical term for Peterzil and Starchenko. Roughly, it means that the number of deﬁnable
subsets of the structure is ‘small’.
41Wilkie (1996). This result also seems to have led to a signiﬁcant increase in the number of mathematicians
working on o-minimality.
103

theories have the Non Independence Property.42 Second, that o-minimality is preserved un-
der elementary equivalence of structures.43 Results like these have suggested that the class
o-minimal structures is uniﬁed enough to be worthy of sustained mathematical inquiry.
We are now in a position to state the o-minimal IVT and turn back to the question of
whether it has a valid connection with visual imagination. Here is the o-minimal formulation
of the Intermediate Value Theorem, and its well-known proof:
(OI) Let R be an o-minimal structure with a constant symbol ‘0’.44 If the function
f : [a, b] ⊆R →R is o-minimal continuous and f(a) < 0 < f(b), then there is a
c such that f(c) = 0.45
Proof: Suppose not. Then there is no x such that f(x) = 0. In other words,
[a, b] = f −1((−∞, 0)) ∪f −1((0, ∞)).46
Since R is o-minimal, the deﬁnable subsets of R1 are exactly the ﬁnite unions
of points and intervals. Hence, the subsets (−∞, 0) and (0, ∞) are deﬁnable.
Furthermore, since R is o-minimal, it has the order topology, so (−∞, 0) and
(0, ∞) are open, too. Now, since f is deﬁnable continuous, the inverse images of
deﬁnable open sets are deﬁnable and open. Hence, f −1((−∞, 0)) and f −1((0, ∞))
are deﬁnable and open. Because they are both deﬁnable, they can each be written
as a ﬁnite disjoint union of open intervals in the subspace [a, b] of R. That is, we
can write:
f −1((−∞, 0)) = [a, c1) ∪(c2, c3) ∪... ∪(cm−1, cm), where a < ci < ci+1 < b for all
i < m.
f −1((0, ∞)) = (c′
1, c′
2)∪(c′
3, c′
4)∪...∪(c′
n, b], where a < c′
j < c′
j+1 < b for all j < n.
For contradiction, consider the endpoint, c1, of the ﬁrst interval of f −1((−∞, 0)).
Since [a, b] is the disjoint union of the above two sets, we know that c1 is in
42This notion was developed by Shelah in the 1960s and 1970s. The distinction between theories that have
the Independence Property and those that have NIP is widely considered to be “one of the most important
dividing lines between theories” (Peterzil 2007, p 13). For more on Stability Theory and its basic notions,
see Buechler (2017).
43Peterzil (2007), §3. This result is important because the related property of being ‘minimal’ (i.e. all
deﬁnable subsets are either ﬁnite or co-ﬁnite) is not preserved under elementary equivalence.
44The restriction to languages with a zero symbol is not strictly necessary.
45Dries (1998), p 19. For an additional statement of the proof, see Peterzil (2007).
46f −1((−∞, 0)) := {x | f(a) ≤f(x) < 0}, and f −1((0, ∞)) := {x | 0 < f(x) ≤f(b)}.
104

exactly one of these sets. By stipulation, it cannot be in f −1((−∞, 0)) because
its intervals are disjoint and open. So c1 ∈f −1((0, ∞)). This means that there
is some j such that c1 ∈(c′
j, c′
j+1). But, since (c′
j, c′
j+1) is open, there is a point
q < c1 such that q ∈(c′
j, c′
j+1). And since a < c′
j by deﬁnition, it must be the
case that q ∈[a, c1) as well. From this, it follows that q is a member of both
f −1((−∞, 0)) and f −1((0, ∞)). Hence, f(q) < 0 and f(q) > 0. →←
The above proof provides us with a certain kind of mathematical knowledge of the o-
minimal IVT, a form of knowledge based on justiﬁcation. This is not the kind of knowledge
that I am primarily concerned with in this paper. The kind of knowledge I am interested in
is imagery-based mathematical entitlement, which is not acquired through explicit proof. In
order to show that the o-minimal IVT also admits of imagery-based entitlement, we will take
note of three relevant theorems from o-minimality, namely the Monotonicity Theorem, the
Piecewise-Diﬀerentiability Theorem, and Dimension Invariance Theorem. These are stated
as follows:
Monotonicity Let R = (R, <, . . .) be an o-minimal structure, and let f :]a, b[] →
R be a deﬁnable function on some open interval ]a, b[⊆R.
Then there are
a0 = a < a1 < ... < an = b such that on each ]ai, ai+1[ the function f is either
constant or strictly monotone and continuous.47
Piecewise-Diﬀerentiability Let R = (R, <, . . .) be an o-minimal structure,
and let f :]a, b[→R be a deﬁnable function on some open interval ]a, b[⊆R.
Then for every n ∈N there exist a = a0 < a1 < ... < ar = b such that f is
n-diﬀerentiable on each ]ai, ai+1[.48
Dimension-Invariance If X ⊆Rm and Y ⊆Rn are deﬁnable subsets in an
o-minimal structure and there is a deﬁnable bijection between X and Y , then
dim X = dim Y .49
Together these three theorems tell us that o-minimal continuous functions lack the sort of
pathological behavior exhibited by ϵ-δ continuous functions. The topologist’s sine curve is
47Peterzil (2007), p 4.
48Peterzil (2007), p 19.
49Dries (1998), p 64. Proposition 1.3.
105

not an o-minimal continuous function because it violates Monotonicity. Similarly, the Weier-
strass function violates Piecewise-Diﬀerentiability and the Hilbert curve violates Dimension-
Invariance. These three theorems do more than rule out a few bad apples. They establish
that every o-minimal continuous function, when plotted in a Cartesian reference frame, con-
forms to the category speciﬁcation of the concept planar curve: (i) bounded contour with
no visible gaps, (ii) piecewise monotonic, (iii) piecewise smooth, and (iv) passes the vertical
line test. I would like to suggest that the concept o-minimal continuous function has, if
not the the same category speciﬁcation as the concept planar curve, something very similar
to it. Of course, these two concepts themselves remain very much distinct. Possessing the
concept o-minimal continuous function requires that one accepts a number of claims and
inferences about model-theoretic entities. The same cannot be said for the concept planar
curve. Nevertheless, every object falling under these two concepts can be represented using
the limited representational resources available in visual imagination. This was not true for
the concept ϵ-δ continuous function. Whatever these limited resources turn out to be, I think
the claim they can represent all planar curves but not all ϵ-δ continuous functions is fairly
secure. I believe this claim is all we need to establish that the concept o-minimal continuous
function is capable of having a category speciﬁcation.50
Supposing that the concept o-minimal continuous function has the above category
speciﬁcation, is there reason to think that the o-minimal IVT has a valid connection to
visual imagination? Yes, because we can write this valid connection in argument form just
as we did for (SI):
Valid Connection for (OI)
P1. All o-minimal continuous functions f(x) are piecewise smooth and mono-
tonic. (Speciﬁcation for o-minimal continuous function)
50In Part 6, I will argue for the stronger claim that the developers of o-minimality intended for these
o-minimal concepts to have category speciﬁcations.
106

P2.
All piecewise smooth and monotonic contours from below the x-axis to
above have a segment that is smooth, monotonic and goes from below the x-axis
to above. (Structure of visual imagination)
P3. All smooth, monotonic curve segments that go from below the x-axis to
above it will intersect the x-axis at a point. (Structure of visual imagination)
P4. For all curves that intersect the x-axis, there is a c ∈R such that f(c) = 0.
(Concept of o-minimal function51)
C. Therefore, for any o-minimal continuous function f(x) that goes from below
the x-axis to above it, there is a c ∈R such that f(c) = 0.
This argument establishes the existence of a valid connection between (OI) and visual
imagination. Recall that no such connection could be established for the case of (AI) because
the concept ϵ-δ continuous function did not have a category speciﬁcation. In the case of (OI),
by contrast, the premise P1 can be derived from the category speciﬁcation of the concept
o-minimal continuous function.
In this section, I have shown that the concept o-minimal continuous function is capable
of having a category speciﬁcation and that there is a valid connection between the o-minimal
IVT and visual imagination. In Part 6, I will establish the stronger claim that the o-minimal
IVT can be known through imagery-based entitlement. In order to establish the stronger
claim I will show that o-minimal concepts, such as o-minimal continuous function, do indeed
have category speciﬁcations.
51This claim should be primitively compelling to everyone who possesses the concept o-minimal function.
107

3.6
O-minimality as a Visual-Epistemological Project
3.6.1
Can o-minimal objects be visualized?
There is good reason to think that the concept o-minimal continuous function has a
category speciﬁcation.
This should not be obvious.
It could be that o-minimality, like
abstract algebra, is not really concerned about whether its concepts have category speciﬁca-
tions. (Consider, for example, the abstract-algebraic concept algebraically independent set.)
I will argue for this claim on the grounds that the developers of o-minimality intended its
subject matter to be inherently visualizable. Along the way I will suggest that these math-
ematicians are engaged in a mathematical project that is grounded in deep epistemological
commitments about the foundations of mathematics. Unfortunately, I will not be able to
evaluate the validity of these commitments here. Instead, I will simply make note of these
commitments when they bear on the imagistic nature of o-minimal objects.
The ﬁrst textbook on o-minimality, Tame Topology and O-minimal Structures, was
published in 1998 by Lou van den Dries. He glosses the subject matter of o-minimality
as “the realm of geometry and topology envisaged by Poincar´e” (Dries 1998, p 1). The
main work in which Henri Poincar´e put forward his views on topology and geometry was his
“Analysis Situs” papers.52 In the introduction to this work, Poincar´e tells us what he takes
to be the subject matter of geometry:
52This paper is widely considered to be a founding document of algebraic topology: “The systematic
study of algebraic topology was initiated by the French mathematician Henri Poincar´e (1854-1912) in a
series of papers during the years 1895-1901.
Algebraic topology, or analysis situs, did not develop as a
branch of point-set topology. Poincare’s original paper predated Frechet’s introduction of general metric
spaces by eleven years and Hausdorﬀ’s classic treatise on point-set topology, Grundz¨uge der Mengenlehre,
by seventeen years. Moreover, the motivations behind the two subjects were diﬀerent. Point-set topology
developed as a general, abstract theory to deal with continuous functions in a wide variety of settings.
Algebraic topology was motivated by speciﬁc geometric problems involving paths, surfaces, and geometry in
Euclidean spaces. Unlike point-set topology, algebraic topology was not an outgrowth of Cantor’s general
theory of sets. Indeed, in an address to the International Mathematical Congress of 1908, Poincar´e referred
to point-set theory as a “disease” from which future generations would recover.” (Croom 1978, p 2).
108

Geometry, in fact, has a unique raison d’ˆetre as the immediate description of the
structures which underlie our senses. (Poincar´e 1895, p 5)
From this characterization, it is clear that o-minimality, insofar as it shares its subject matter
with the geometry of Poincar´e, is a ﬁeld of study explicitly tailored to visual perception and
visual imagination.
Lou van den Dries also claims that o-minimality is “an excellent framework for devel-
oping tame topology, or topologie mod´er´ee, as outlined in Grothendieck’s prophetic ‘Equisse
d’un Programme’ of 1984” (Dries 1998, vii). A few other contemporary model theorists have
expressed the same view.53 Grothendieck characterizes his theory of ‘tame topology’ as an
alternative to general topology (i.e. the axioms of a topological space) as a foundation for
the mathematical ﬁeld of geometric topology.54 His “heuristic reﬂections” on the founda-
tions of topology reveal that he thinks the originators of the general-topological treatment
of geometric topology started on the wrong foot:
‘General topology’ was developed (during the thirties and forties) by analysts
and in order to meet the needs of analysis, not for topology per se, i.e.
the
study of the topological properties of the various geometrical shapes. That the
foundations of topology are inadequate is manifest from the very beginning, in
the form of “false problems” (at least from the point of view of the topological
intuition of shapes) such as the “invariance of domains” ... (Grothendieck 1984,
pp 28-29)
What is remarkable about this document is that Grothendieck is calling for a deep
revision in the foundations of general topology, not (primarily) because his proposed alter-
53For instance, see Marker (2002a), Wilkie (2007), and Yomdin and Comte (2004).
54Grothendieck (1984, note 6) suggests that he wants tame topology to provide a restatement and proof
of the Hauptvermutung (i.e. any two triangulations of a triangulable space have a common reﬁnement, a
single triangulation that is a subdivision of both of them), which is false in the received, general-topological
foundation of geometric topology.
109

native has greater problem-solving capabilities (which I take to be, historically, the rule in
shifts of mathematical norms), but because general topology is ‘unnatural’ given its task: to
provide a framework for the “topological [and] geometrical intuition of shapes”.55 Indeed, he
even thinks that his revisions of general topology go hand-in-hand with the need to “rewrite
a new version, in modern style, of Klein’s classic book on the icosahedron and the other
Pythagorean polyhedra”.56 The objects that would be studied in such a book, although
written in the notations of algebraic geometry, are presented to us visually:
I do not believe that a mathematical fact has ever struck me quite so strongly
as [a certain theorem of algebraic geometry about complex algebraic curves],
nor had a comparable psychological impact. This is surely because of the very
familiar, non-technical nature of the objects considered, of which any child’s
drawing scrawled on a bit of paper (at least if the drawing is made without
lifting the pencil) gives a perfectly explicit example. (Grothendieck 1984, p 247)
These facts suggest that o-minimality, insofar as it shares its subject matter with
Grothendieck’s tame topology and Poincar´e’s geometry, is explicitly concerned with the
visualizable realm.
A ﬁnal reason to think that o-minimality is inherently visualizable arises when we
consider the origins of o-minimality. It is well known that o-minimality grew out of work
by Alfred Tarski on the method of quantiﬁer elimination in geometry (Tarski 1948). Tarski
applied this method to his axiomatization of elementary geometry. His axiom system for
geometry attempted to capture as many of the results of Euclid’s Elements as he thought
feasible (Tarski 1959). And since the Elements is an essentially diagrammatic treatise, it
would seem that Tarski’s subject matter, at least in the 1959 paper, is inherently visualizable.
55Grothendieck (1984), pp 240, 258, 259.
56Grothendieck (1984), p 255.
The book that Grothendieck mentions is Felix Klein’s Lectures on the
Icosahedron (1884).
110

This hypothesis is conﬁrmed when Tarski says that in the formal language of elementary
geometry,
we are able to ... refer ... to various special classes of geometrical ﬁgures, such
as the straight lines, the circles, the segments, the triangles, the quadrangles,
and, more generally, the polygons with a ﬁxed number of vertices...
This is
primarily a consequence of the fact that, in each of the classes just mentioned,
every geometrical ﬁgure is determined by a ﬁxed ﬁnite number of points. (Tarski
1959, pp 16-17)
By Tarski’s own lights, his axiomatization of geometry has circles, polygons, lines, etc., as
its subject matter. These are paradigm cases of mathematical objects that can also form
the contents of visual imagination. We cannot overlook the fact that van den Dries (1984,
p 99) motivates the deﬁnition of an o-minimal structure by appealing to the “geometric
idea” in Tarski’s method of quantiﬁer elimination.57 Finally, the fact that Tarski’s geometric
structures are all real closed ﬁelds further conﬁrms the idea that o-minimality and Tarski’s
geometry share a substantial part of their subject matter. These considerations about Tarski,
support my claim that the primary objects of o-minimality can be represented in visual
imagination.
From the above discussion of Poincar´e, Grothendieck, and Tarski, it is clear that the
developers of o-minimality see its subject matter as inherently visual. Therefore, it is reason-
able to think that the concept o-minimal continuous function has a category speciﬁcation.
Furthermore, the category speciﬁcation of o-minimal continuous function given by the de-
scription set in §5.1 presents itself as an obvious candidate.
It is an obvious candidate
57The “geometric idea” of Tarski’s method of quantiﬁer elimination contrasts with the “decidability idea”
of Tarski, which is a purely computational idea. In fact, van den Dries (1984, p 98) says that the search for a
decision method is a “waste of time” in the case of the elementary of theory of the real exponential ﬁeld. The
main results of van den Dries’ 1984 paper are a collection of “ﬁniteness theorems” that one might take to be
essential to our pre-theoretic notion of geometricality (i.e. what Giaquinto calls our “visual expectations in
mathematics” (Giaquinto 2007, p 3). These results will be discussed below.
111

because o-minimal continuous functions demonstrably satisfy each of the descriptions in
§5.1: no gaps, piecewise monotonic, piecewise smooth, and satisﬁes the vertical line test.58
I take the above argument to support my claim that the o-minimal IVT admits of
imagery-based mathematical entitlement.59
In the ﬁnal section, I will discuss the extent
to which o-minimality has succeeded in developing a general theory for which our visual
faculties are reliable guides to the behavior of its primary objects.
I will focus on how
the visualizable objects of o-minimality behave diﬀerently from the real-analytic objects
that led to the so-called ‘ﬂight from intuition’ in the nineteenth century. I will argue that
o-minimality has succeed and the behavior of o-minimal visualizable objects, unlike the
behavior of visualizable objects in real analysis, “accords with our visual comprehension of
space and spatial objects” (Giaquinto 2007, p 5).
3.6.2
Visual Virtues of O-minimality
Some of the most important results in o-minimality are what one might call ‘tameness
results’ (Wilkie 2007, Marker 2002a).
These tameness results suggest that o-minimality
has succeed in isolating a subject matter that can be reliably investigated with one’s visual
faculties. The tameness results of o-minimality can, very roughly, be split into two kinds:
invariance results and ﬁniteness results.60 In the former category belong the propositions
that Dimension and Euler Characteristic are invariant across deﬁnable bijections. In the
latter category, there are a number of ‘ﬁniteness’ theorems.
We have already seen two
58Moreover, there is a “general procedure” for imagining the o-minimal continuous functions, since each
has a ﬁnite number of smooth pieces. According to Giaquinto’s (2011, pp 299-300) psychological hypothesis,
this disposes us to generalize over all o-minimal continuous functions.
59Although I cannot defend it here, I think parallel arguments can be made for the reality of imagery-based
entitlement in the case of other o-minimal theorems, such as Rolle’s Theorem and the Mean Value Theorem.
60There are a few theorems that do not ﬁt into either of these categories: the Curve Selection Theorem,
the Deﬁnable Choice Theorem, the Trivialization Theorem, and the theorem that states that all deﬁnable
groups are deﬁnably isomorphic to a Lie group. See Peterzil (2007) and Marker (2002a). I leave to future
investigation the question of to what extent these additional theorems suggest that o-minimal structures are
‘tame’.
112

of these theorems, the Monotonicity Theorem and the Piecewise-Diﬀerentiability Theorem,
which together state that all deﬁnable continuous functions can be decomposed into a ﬁnite
number of pieces, each of which is either monotonic and n-diﬀerentiable.
But there are
many other ﬁniteness theorems.
These ﬁniteness theorems show that the developers of
o-minimality succeeded in their attempt to delineate a whole collection of concepts with
category speciﬁcations. In other words, our visual faculties are reliable guides to the behavior
of many o-minimal objects, not merely o-minimal continuous functions.
I believe that these ﬁniteness theorems can be used to provide a clear distinction
between o-minimality and real analysis. According to Giaquinto, the main reason why real
analysis eludes visual imagination is the non-ﬁnite nature of its objects:
The reliability of visual thinking in mathematics, especially in analysis, came
under heavy suspicion in the nineteenth century.
The main reason was that
our visual expectations in mathematics, known collectively as geometrical or
spatial intuition, quite often turned out to be utterly misleading, particularly
about what happens “at the limit” of an inﬁnite process.
A prominent case is
the existence of ...continuous but nowhere-diﬀerentiable function[s] ... A related
example reinforced suspicion. In 1890 Peano showed that it is possible to deﬁne
a curve that completely ﬁlls a two-dimensional region ... (Giaquinto 2007, pp
3-4).
There is no question that our intuitions about the behavior of inﬁnite totalities and the
results of inﬁnite processes can be very misleading. But o-minimality, I claim, is speciﬁcally
suited to avoid these kinds of objects and processes. There are three reasons o-minimality
can avoid these misleading inﬁnite totalities and processes: the deﬁnition of an o-minimal
structure, the ﬁniteness theorems hinted at above, and the fact that dimension is a deﬁnable
invariant. I will discuss each of these below.
113

The deﬁnition of an o-minimal structure guarantees that we will never ﬁnd ourselves
talking about one-dimensional objects that do not have ﬁnitely many connected components.
In other words, we can only deﬁne subsets of R1 that are ﬁnite collections of points, line
segments, and lines. We can express the content of this claim in terms of the limiting behavior
of these deﬁnable sets. That is, the deﬁnition of an o-minimal structure guarantees that,
as we approach a point in R1, we will not ﬁnd any deﬁnable set D that inﬁnitely oscillates
between p ∈D and p ̸∈D. In fact, expression of inﬁnite oscillation are familiar from tense
logic and relation modal logic.61 It is therefore natural to ask, given the order topology on
all o-minimal structures, whether we can formalize the above intuitive condition on inﬁnite
oscillations in topological modal semantics.62
In the topological modal semantics, ‘□p’ says that there is an open neighborhood
around every point such that p is true on that neighborhood. Within this formal framework
we can express the claim that there are inﬁnite oscillations between p and ¬p around a
single point x by the following holding at x: ¬□(p →□p) ∧¬□(¬p →□¬p). But I have
shown that this can never happen on o-minimal expansions of the real numbers. Indeed
the negation of the above sentence is characterist of all such expansion. See Appendix for
details. This theorem provides us with a formal statement of the intuitive fact that the one-
dimensional deﬁnable subsets are ﬁnite unions of familiar, visualizable objects like points
and line segments.
Let us move on to our discussion of the ﬁniteness theorems. These theorems give us yet
another reason to think o-minimality can avoid the misleading inﬁnite totalities and processes
that aﬄicted 19th-century analysis.
Above, we said that the Piecewise-Diﬀerentiability
Theorem guarantees that all deﬁnable continuous functions will be n-diﬀerentiable at all
but ﬁnitely many points. Hence, we avoid continuous nowhere-diﬀerentiable functions. We
61For example, in tense logic, the formula ‘G(Fp∧F¬p)’ expresses the fact that at any future time there
will be a time in the future when p is true and a time in the future when p is false.
62Topological modal semantics originated with Tarski’s 1938 paper, “Sentential Calculus and Topology”.
More recently, the study of Spatial Logics has been focused on the topological modal semantics.
114

also said that the Monotonicity Theorem guarantees that all deﬁnable continuous functions
will only have ﬁnite oscillations. Hence, we avoid paradoxes of inﬁnitely oscillating curves
like the topologist’s sine curve. Other pathological and ’untame’ constructions are ruled out
by additional ﬁniteness theorems like the Finite Homeomorphism Type Theorem, the Cell
Decomposition Theorem, the Stratiﬁcation Proposition, and the Triangulation Theorem.
These ﬁniteness theorems provide the basis for additional suggestive results and conjectures
such as the following:
• The Borel subsets of Rn are not deﬁnable. (Marker 2002a, p 353)
• The solutions to deﬁnable diﬀerential equations have a ﬁnite number limit
cycles. (Dries and Speissegger 2003, p 2)
• O-minimal theories do not exhibit the “G¨odel Incompleteness Phenomena”.
(Steinhorn 2003, p 21; Haskell, et al. 2000, p 7)
It is diﬃcult to articulate what, if any, visual consequences these statements have. Never-
theless, they are concrete cases in which the objects of o-minimality exemplify a ﬁnite or
tame behavior that simply does not hold for objects in real analysis.
Finally, the invariance theorems of o-minimaility guarantee that visually detectable
properties like dimension and euler characteristic will be preserved under deﬁnable home-
omorphism. In contrast, the space-ﬁlling curves and other non-visual equivalences of real
analysis reveal that these objects do not align with our spatial expectations of the behav-
ior of a geometric ﬁgure when it is deformed. After all, it would seem quite puzzling if a
line segment could ﬁll a square simply by deformation. In fact, Wilkie describes dimension
invariance as a desideratum of o-minimality:
[Any framework for tame topology] should have built-in restrictions so that we are
a priori guaranteed that pathological phenomena can never arise. In particular,
115

there should be a meaningful notion of dimension for all sets under consideration
and any that can be constructed from these ... (Wilkie 2007, p 1)
Given the above discussion of the deﬁnition, ﬁniteness theorems, and invariants of o-
minimality, I believe there is strong support for the claim o-minimality has succeeded in
developing a theory for which our visual faculties are reliable guides to the behavior of its
primary objects.
Before leaving this topic of the visual virtues of o-minimality, I would like to mention
that o-minimality also allows us to reject a dichotomy that Giaquinto puts to us when he
says that we have to choose between the IVT on the one hand, and the PDT and Dimension-
invariance on the other:
[The] maintain[enance of] our cognitive predispositions about space motivates
the intermediate-value condition on continuous functions, as one of our strongest
cognitive predispositions is that space has no gaps, not even invisibly small gaps.
Of course some things had to give: our cognitive dispositions are violated in
classical analysis by the existence of continuous nowhere-diﬀerentiable functions
and space-ﬁlling curves. We can avoid these surprises by replacing classical anal-
ysis with smooth inﬁnitesimal analysis. But the IVT does not hold in smooth
inﬁnitesimal analysis. (Giaquinto 2011, p 303.)
We do not have to choose between the IVT on the one hand, and the PDT and dimension-
invariance on the other hand. In o-minimality, we can maintain all three of these expectations
(along with many others). Moreover, the o-minimal IVT does not require extending the
rationals to reals. We can get away with incomplete orders because the proof of the o-minimal
IVT never appeals to the existence of minima or suprema, which stands as a counterexample
to what Giaquinto says about the IVT here:
116

[I]f the IVT is a desideratum for an account of the real numbers, it has to
be proved for the given account, and that cannot be done without appeal to
Dedekind Completeness or something which implies it. (2011, p 303) 63
In sum, o-minimality seems tailored to our cognitive expectations about the spatial
contents of visual imagination. The deﬁnitions, ﬁniteness theorems, and invariance theorems
suggest that o-minimality is able to sidestep much of the misleading ‘limiting’ behavior that
plague the basic objects of real analysis.
In this essay, I have articulated a general account of imagery-based entitlement and ap-
plied it to the the case of the o-minimal Intermediate Value Theorem. More generally, I have
argued that we have good reason to think the subject matter of o-minimality is inherently
visual. Finally, I proposed that the diﬀerential epistemic status of theorems in real analysis
and and theorems in o-minimality can be explained by considering the deﬁnitions, ﬁniteness
theorems, and invariance results that hold in o-minimality but not in real analysis. I believe
my arguments in this essay undermine any attempt to restrict imagery-based mathemati-
cal entitlement to elementary geometry and arithmetic. If this is correct, a comprehensive
understanding of mathematical knowledge will have to go beyond the study of proof-based
justiﬁcation. I would like to think the most promising way to study non-inferential mathe-
matical knowledge, such as imagery-based entitlement, is by synthesizing results in cognitive
psychology with a detailed study of how mathematicians understand their subject matter.
Throughout this essay, I hope to have exempliﬁed this methodological commitment.
63For further discussion of the inessential nature of Dedekind Completeness for the IVT in real closed
ﬁelds, see Sinaceur (1994).
117

3.7
Appendix: Modal Logic of O-minimal Structures
I will show here that the class of o-minimal structures can be characterized in proposi-
tional modal logic with the deﬁnable topological semantics.64 First, I say what the deﬁnable
topological semantics is, and then I prove the theorem stated in the main text.
Deﬁnition 3.7.1. Let R = (R, <, +, ×, . . .) be an o-minimal expansion of the real ﬁeld. In
the deﬁnable topological semantics, we let a deﬁnable valuation V : SL →D, be a map
from atomic letters to the collection of deﬁnable-with-parameters subsets of R, such that for
all p and x65:
V, R, x |= p
⇐⇒
x ∈V (p)
(3.1)
V, R, x |= □ϕ
⇐⇒
There is open U ∋x such that U ⊆{y ∈Rk : V, R, y |= ϕ} (3.2)
The clauses for the propositional connectives are the usual ones, and here the topology is
the usual Euclidean topology on Rk. Further, as usual, one says that R, x |= p if and only
if for all deﬁnable valuations V , we have V, R, x |= p.
—
Theorem 1. For any expansion of the real ﬁeld R, R is o-minimal iﬀfor all x ∈R, and p,
R, x |= □(p →□p) ∨□(¬p →□¬p)
(3.3)
Proof. Note that □(p →□p) ∨□(¬p →□¬p) is logically equivalent to S := □(p ∨□¬p) ∨
□(¬p ∨□p). In this proof, we will be using the second formula, S.
‘⇒’: Let R be o-minimal. Let Di be an arbitrary deﬁnable subset of R. Then Di is a
ﬁnite union of isolated points and intervals. Let Vi be the valuation such that Vi(p) = Di.
We must show for an arbitrary x ∈R, that Vi, R, x |= □(p ∨□¬p) ∨□(¬p ∨□p). There are
two cases. Case (I): Vi, R, x |= p. Case (II): Vi, R, x |= ¬p.
64Of course there are many other kinds of “topological semantics” for propositional modal logic. Some
alternative topological interpretations of the Box operator that are worthy of consideration include: the
derivate operator, the deﬁnable closure operator, and the convex closure operator. All of these have been
studied in some capacity before, but (as far as I know) no one has studied them in the o-minimal setting.
65The following clauses are adapted from van Benthem and Bezhanishvili (2007), p 218.
118

In case (I), I claim that Vi, R, x |= □(p∨□¬p). That is, there is an open interval Ox ∋x
such that for all y ∈Ox, we have Vi, R, y |= p ∨□¬p. Since Di is a ﬁnite union of isolated
points and (open or closed) intervals, either (a) x is an isolated point in Di, or (b) x is in an
(open or closed) interval Ux ⊆Di. Consider (a). If x is an isolated point in Di, then there
is an open interval Jx around x such that Jx ∩Di = {x}. Let I := Jx. Then for all y ∈I, if
x = y, then Vi, R, y |= p, and if x ̸= y, then Vi, R, y |= □¬p. Hence, Vi, R, x |= □(p ∨□¬p).
Consider (b). Since there is an interval Ux containing x, either: (b1) x ∈Int(Ux), (b2) x
is an endpoint of Ux. Consider (b1) and let I := Int(Ux). Then for all y ∈I, we have
Vi, R, y |= p. Hence, Vi, R, x |= □p, entailing that Vi, R, x |= □(p ∨□¬p). Consider (b2).
Since x is an endpoint of Ux, there is a w ̸∈Di such that, for all points z between x and w
(without loss of generality we can assume x < w), Vi, R, z |= ¬p (and, thus also: for all z,
we have Vi, R, z |= □¬p). Let I := Int(Ux) ∪[x, w[. Then for all y ∈I, either y ∈Ux (and
so Vi, R, y |= p), or y ∈]x, w[ (and so Vi, R, y |= □¬p). Hence, Vi, R, x |= □(p ∨□¬p).
In case (II), I claim that Vi, R, x |= (¬p ∨□p). Here we follow the same argument as
in case (I), except we consider the complement of Di, R \ Di.
Since we began with an arbitrary Di and an arbitrary x, we can generalize over all
worlds x and deﬁnable valuations Vi. We thus conclude, for any x ∈R, that Vi, R, x |=
□(p ∨□¬p) ∨□(¬p ∨□p).
‘⇐’: Let R be any expansion of the real ﬁeld in which, for all x ∈R and all Di = Vi(p)
, Vi, R, x |= □(¬p ∨□p) ∨□(p ∨□¬p). We need to show that R is o-minimal. Appealing
to Schoutens (2014), Corollary 2.4, we have that if R is locally o-minimal, then R is o-
minimal.66 Hence, all we need to show is that R is locally o-minimal. By Toﬀalori and
Vozoris (2009), Proposition 2.4:
R is locally o-minimal iﬀfor every x ∈R and every Di ⊆R, there are c, d ∈R
such that c < x < d and either Di∩]c, d[ or ]c, d[\Di is equal to one of the
following: (i) {x}, (ii) ]c, x], (iii) [x, d[, or (iv) the whole interval ]c, d[.
We will show that if every x and Vi is such that Vi, M, x |= □(p ∨□¬p) ∨□(¬p ∨□p),
then for each x, there is an open interval I around x such that for all Di, either Di ∩I or
I \ Di is equal to any of (i)-(iv) above. We can then conclude that R is o-minimal. Fix x
and Di. In order to show that either I ∩Di or I \ Di is equal to (i)-(iv), we will start by
considering the consequences of our supposition under the valuation Vi. That is, we know
from our supposition that Vi, R, x |= S. We thus know that one of two cases holds. Case
(I), Vi, R, x |= □(p ∨□¬p). Case (II), Vi, R, x |= □(¬p ∨□p).
In case (I), there is an open interval Ox around x such that for all y ∈Ox, Vi, R, y |=
p ∨□¬p. The second disjunct tells us that Ox \ Di is open. By Folland (1999), Proposition
66Schoutens actually proves that if R is type-complete, then it is o-minimal. But, as Rennet (2014), p 55,
fn 1, points out this type-completeness is equivalent to local o-minimality in the case of ordered ﬁelds.
119

0.21, p 12, all open sets of R are equal to an arbitrary disjoint union of open intervals. That
is, Ox \ Di = F
k∈K Jk. (Note that K might be empty.) Now either (a) x is in some Jk or
(b) it is not. Consider subcase (a) and let I := Jk. Then we know that I \ Di = I, which is
(iv) above.
In subcase (b), we already have that Ox is an interval around x. But choosing an
appropriate I around x that satisﬁes any of (i)-(iv) is more diﬃcult than in subcase (a).
For, it seems possible that all subneighborhoods Ux of Ox, contain inﬁnitely many Jk’s.
For example, if x = 0 and Di = [1, 1/2] ∪[1/4, 1/8] ∪[1/16, 1/32] ∪... ∪{0}, then any
subneighborhood Ux will contain infnitely many Jk’s. But, in fact, such cases are not possible.
More precisely, I claim that Ox \ Di is a ﬁnite union K0 of open intervals, F
k∈K0 Jk. For,
suppose not. Then there are inﬁnitely many Jk’s in Ox. We show that if R contains such
a deﬁnable set Di, it must contain another deﬁnable set Dj such that R does not model S
under Vj at some point y. (This would show that any structure containing Di must violate
the basic assumption for the right-to-left direction that R models S under all deﬁnable
valuations at every point.) In particular, we let Dj := Di \ {x}. (We know that this set
is deﬁnable because we have parameters.) We let Vj be the deﬁnable valuation such that
Vj(p) = Dj. I claim that Vj, R, x ̸|= □(p ∨□¬p) ∨□(¬p ∨□p).
For contradiction, suppose ﬁrst that Vj, R, x |= □(p ∨□¬p). It follows that Vj, R, x |=
p∨□¬p. Since x ̸∈Dj, it follows that Vj, R, x |= □¬p. So there is an open Ox ∋x such that
Ox\Dj = Ox. But since Di = Dj⊔{x}, we then have that Ox∩Di = {x}. Hence, there are two
closest open intervals Ja, Jb, such that Ox = Ja⊔{x}⊔Jb67, which contradicts our assumption
that there are inﬁnitely many Jk’s in Ox. In this case there are only two: Ja and Jb. Hence,
by reductio, we have Vj, R, x ̸|= □(p∨□¬p). Now suppose that Vj, R, x |= □(¬p∨□p). Then
there is an Ox such that for all y ∈Ox, Vj, R, y |= ¬p∨□p. The second disjunct tells us that
Dj ∩Ox must be an arbitrary union of disjoint open intervals F
m∈M Lm. But we already have
that Ox \ Di is an inﬁnite union of disjoint open intervals F
t∈T Jt. Since Di = Dj ⊔{x}, we
then have that Ox\Dj = (F
t∈T Jt)⊔({x}). Hence Ox = (F
t∈T Jt)⊔(F
m∈M Lm)⊔({x}). And
since |T| ≥ω, this is impossible. (To see this, consider the set Ox \ {x}. It can be written
as two disjoint open intervals ]a, b[, ]b, c[. Since the ﬁrst interval is connected, it cannot be
the disjoint union of open sets, so it must be identical to either a Jt or an Lm. This means
the second, connected interval is equal to an inﬁnite disjoint union of open sets, which is a
contradiction.) Hence, Vj, R, x ̸|= □(p ∨□¬p) ∨□(¬p ∨□p). This violates our supposition
for the left-to-right direction. So we can conclude that Ox \ Di is a ﬁnite union K0 of open
intervals, F
k∈K0 Jk.
Recall from the set up of subcase (b), we have that x ∈Di, x ∈Ox, and x ̸∈Jk for all
k. Since there are ﬁnitely many Jk’s we can select a open interval Ux ⊆Ox that contains
at most one Jk on either side of x. There are four cases to consider: (1) Ux contains one
interval Ja above x and one interval Jb below x, (2) Ux contains one interval Ja above x and
is disjoint from all Jk’s below x, (3) Ux contains one interval Jb below x and is disjoint from
all Jk’s above x, and (4) Ux is disjoint from all Jk’s.
67So everyone is clear, I am using the square cup to mean “disjoint union”.
120

In (4), we can immediately conclude that Ux ∩Di = Ux, which means that Ux satiﬁes
(iv). In (3), either x ∈cl(Jb) or not. If it is in the closure, then Ux ∩Di = [x, d[ for some
d, which means Ux satisﬁes (iii). If not, then there is an open interval I around x that is
disjoint from all Jk’s, which means I satisﬁes (iv). In (2), we have the same as (3). In (1),
either x ∈cl(Ja ∪Jb) or not. If not, then there is an open I around x which satisﬁes (iv). If
so, then either x ∈cl(Ja) ∩cl(Jb) or not. If not, then we can ﬁnd an I that satisﬁes (ii) or
(iii). If so, then Ux satisﬁes (i).
In case (II), we follow a similar argument as in case (I). We assume that Vi, R, x |=
□(¬p ∨□p). Let Dk := R \ Di. Then we know that Vk, R, x |= □(p ∨□¬p). Since we let Vi
be arbitrary in case (I), we can substitute Vk for Vi in the above reasoning. Thus, we have
that at x, there is an I such that either I \ Dk of I ∩Dk is equal to one of (i)-(iv) above.
Since I \ Dk = I ∩Di and I ∩Dk = I \ Di, we can say the same of Di itself.
Using the above-mentioned results from Toﬀalori and Vozoris (2009) and Schoutens
(2014), we can conclude that R is o-minimal.
121

3.8
Bibliography
Baddeley, A. D., Hitch, G.J., and Allen, R.J. (2009). “Working memory and binding in
sentence recall.” Journal of Memory and Language 61, pp 438-456.
Baddeley, A. D., Vallar, G., and Wilson, B. A. (1987). “Sentence comprehension and phono-
logical memory: some neuropsychological evidence.” In M. Coltheart (Ed.), Attention
and Performance XII: The Psychology of Reading. London: Erlbaum, pp 509-529.
van Benthem, J. and Bezhanishvili, G. (2007). “Modal Logics of Space.” In M. Aiello et al
(Eds.), Handbook of Spatial Logics. Dordrecht: Springer, pp 217-298.
Bettencourt, K. C. and Xu, Y. (2016). “Decoding the content of visual short-term memory
under distraction in occipital and parietal areas.” Nature Neuroscience 19(1), pp 150-
157.
Bolzano, B. (1817). “Purely analytic proof of the theorem that between any two values which
give results of opposite sign there lies at least one real root of the equation.” In W.
Ewald (Ed.), From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics,
Vol 1. Oxford: Clarendon, 1996. pp 225-248.
Bower, G. H. and Glass, A. L. (1976). “Structural units and the reintegrative power of picture
fragments.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory 2, pp
456-466.
Brown, J. R. (2008). Philosophy of Mathematics. Second Edition. New York: Routledge.
Buechler, S. (2017). Essential Stability Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2002.
Burge, T. (1993). “Content Preservation.” The Philosophical Review 102(4). Reprinted in
Philosophical Issues, Vol 6, 1995. pp 271-300.
Burge, T. (1998). “Computer Proof, Apriori Knowledge, and Other Minds.” Philosophical
Perspectives, Vol. 12, pp 1-37.
Burge, T. (2003). “Perceptual Entitlement.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
67(3), pp 503-548.
Christophel, T. B., Cichy, R. M., Hebart, M. N., and Haynes, J. (2015).
“Parietal and
early visual cortices encode working memory content across mental transformations.”
NeuroImage 106, pp 198206.
122

Coﬀa, A. (1982). “Kant, Bolzano, and the Emergence of Logicism.” Journal of Philosophy
79(11): pp 679-689.
Cooper, L.A. and Shepard, R.N. (1973). “Chronometric Studies of the Rotation of Mental
Images.” In W.G. Chase (Ed.), Visual Information Processing. New York: Academic
Press.
Corballis, M. G. and Beale, I. L. (1976). The psychology of left and right. Hillsdale, N.J.:
Erlbaum.
Corballis, M. G. and Beale, I. L. (1983). The ambivalent mind: The neuropsychology of left
and right. Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
Croom, F. H. (1978). Basic Concepts of Algebraic Topology. New York: Springer-Verlag,
2002.
De Toﬀoli, S. and Giardino, V. (2014). “Forms and Roles of Diagrams in Knot Theory.”
Erkenntnis 79, pp 829-842.
Dretske, F. (2000). “Entitlement: Epistemic Rights without Epistemic Duties?” Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 60(3), pp 591-606.
van den Dries, L. (1984). “Remarks on Tarski’s problem concerning (R, +, *, exp).” In
Lolli, Longo, and Marcja (Eds.), Logic Colloquium ’82. North-Holland: Elsevier, 1984.
van den Dries, L. (1998). Tame Topology and O-minimal Structures. London Mathematical
Society Lecture Note Series 248. Cambridge: CUP, 1998.
van den Dries, L. and Speissegger, P. (2003). “O-minimal Preparation Theorems.” Proceed-
ings of the Euro-Conference in Model Theory and Applications, Ravello, Italy.
Finke, R. A., Pinker, S., and Farah, M. J. (1989). “Reinterpreting Visual Patterns in Mental
Imagery.” Cognitive Science 13, pp 51-78.
Folland, G. (1999). Real Analysis: Modern Techniques and Their Applications. New York:
Wiley & Sons, 1999.
Forder, H. (1927). The Foundations of Euclidean Geometry. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Fraenkel, A. (1927). Zehn Vorlesungen ber die Grundlegung der Mengenlehre. Leipzig: B.
G. Teubner.
Giaquinto, M. (1994). “Epistemology of Visual Thinking in Elementary Real Analysis.” The
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, Vol. 45, No. 3, pp 789-813.
123

Giaquinto, M. (2005a). “From Symmetry Perception to Basic Geometry.” In P. Mancosu
(Ed.), Visualization, Explanation, and Reasoning. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp
31-56.
Giaquinto, M. (2005b). “Mathematical Activity.” In P. Mancosu (Ed.), Visualization, Ex-
planation, and Reasoning Styles in Mathematics. Dordrecht: Springer, pp 75-89.
Giaquinto, M. (2007). Visual Thinking in Mathematics. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2007.
Giaquinto, M. (2008a). “Visualizing in Mathematics.” In P. Mancosu (Ed.), The Philosophy
of Mathematical Practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp 22-42.
Giaquinto, M. (2008b). “Cognition of Structure.” In P. Mancosu (Ed.), The Philosophy of
Mathematical Practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp 43-64.
Giaquinto, M. (2011).
“Crossing Curves: A Limit to the Use of Diagrams in Proofs.”
Philosophia Mathematica 19(3), pp 281-307.
G¨odel, K. (1964). “What is Cantor’s continuum problem?” In S. Feferman et al (Eds.),
Collected Works Vol II. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990. pp 254-270.
Goldman, A. (2001).
“Experts: Which Ones Should You Trust?”
Philosophy and Phe-
nomenological Research 63(1), pp 85-110.
Gray, J. J. (2009). “Nineteenth Century Analysis as Philosophy of Mathematics.” In B.
van Kerkhove (Ed.), New Perspectives on Mathematical Practice. Singapore: World
Scientiﬁc, pp 138-149.
Grothendieck, A. (1983). “Pursuing Stacks”. http://www.math.umn.edu/∼messing/docs/
Grothendieck%20–%20Pursuing%20stacks.pdf
Grothendieck, A. (1984). “A Sketch of a Programme.” In L. Schneps and P. Lochak (Eds.),
Geometric Galois Actions I: Around Grothendieck’s Esquisse D’un Programme, London
Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series 242, Cambridge University Press, 1997.
Hahn, H. (1933). “The Crisis in Intuition.” In J. R. Newman (Ed.), The World of Mathe-
matics, Vol 3. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1956. pp 1956-1976.
Hamam´e, C. M., Vidal, J. R., et al. (2012). “Reading the mind’s eye: Online detection
of visuo-spatial working memory and visual imagery in the inferior temporal lobe.”
NeuroImage 59, pp 872-879.
Harris, I. M. and Miniussi, C. (2003).
“Parietal Lobe Contribution to Mental Rotation
Demonstrated with rTMS.” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 15 (3), pp 315-323.
124

Haskell, D. and Pillay, A. and Steinhorn, C. (2000). “Overview.” In: Model Theory, Algebra,
and Geometry. Mathematics Sciences Research Institute. Cambridge: CUP, 2000.
Heis, J. (2008). The Fact of Modern Mathematics: Geometry, Logic, and Concept Formation
in Kant and Cassirer. Doctoral Dissertation, University of Pittsburgh.
Hochberg, J. and Gellman, L. (1977). “The eﬀect of landmark features on ‘mental rotation’
times.” Memory and Cognition 5: pp 23-26.
Jolicoeur, P. and Kosslyn, S. M. (1983). “Coordinate systems in the long-term memory
representation of three-dimensional shapes.” Cognitive Psychology 15, pp 301-345.
Jordan, K., Heinze, H.-J., Lutz, K., Kanowski, M., and J¨ancke, L. (2001). “Cortical Acti-
vations during the Mental Rotation of Diﬀerent Visual Objects.” NeuroImage 13, pp
143-152.
Klein, F. (1884). Lectures on the Icosahedron. New York: Dover, 2003.
von Koch, H. (1906).
“Une m´ethode g´eom´etrique ´el´ementaire pour l’´etude de certaines
questions de la th´eorie des courbes planes.” Acta Mathematica 30: pp 145-174.
Kosslyn, S. M. and Shwartz, S. P. (1977). “A Simulation of Visual Imagery.” Cognitive
Science 1, pp 265-295.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1994). Image and Brain: The Resolution of the Imagery Debate. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Kreisel, G. (1967). “Informal Rigour and Completeness Proofs.” In Lakatos (Ed.), Problems
in the Philosophy of Mathematics. Proceedings of the International Colloquium in the
Philosophy of Science, London, 1965. North-Holland Publishing, pp 138-171.
Lakatos, I. (1976). Proofs and Refutations: The Logic of Mathematical Discovery. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Logie, R. H. (1995). Visuo-spatial working memory. Hove, UK: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Logie, R. H. and Cowan, N. (2015).
“Perspectives on working memory.”
Memory and
Cognition 43, pp 315-324.
Logie, R. H. and van der Meulen, M. (2009). “Fragmenting and integrating visuospatial
working memory.” In Brockmole, J. R. (Ed.), The Visual World in Memory. Hove,
UK: Psychology Press, pp 1-32.
L¨utzen, J. (2003). “The Foundation of Analysis in the 19th Century.” In A History of Analy-
sis, volume 24 of History of Mathematics. American Mathematical Society, Providence,
RI, 2003. pp 155-195.
125

Mancosu, P. (2005).
“Visualization in Logic and Mathematics.”
In P. Mancosu (Ed.),
Visualization, Explanation, and Reasoning Styles in Mathematics. Dordrecht: Springer,
pp 13-30.
Manders, K. (1996). “Diagram Contents and Representational Granularity.” In J. Seligmann
and D. Westerstahl (Ed.), Logic, Language, and Computation. Stanford: CSLI, pp 389-
404.
Manders, K. (2008a). “The Euclidean Diagram.” In P. Mancosu (Ed.), The Philosophy of
Mathematical Practice. Oxford: OUP, pp 80-133.
Manders, K. (2008b). “Diagram-Based Geometric Practice.” In P. Mancosu (Ed.), The
Philosophy of Mathematical Practice. Oxford: OUP, pp 65-79.
Marker, D. (2002a). “Review of Tame Topology and O-minimal Structures”. Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society. Volume 27, Number 3, pp 351-357.
Marker, D. (2002b). Model Theory: An Introduction. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2002.
McMullen, P. A. and Farah, M. J. (1991). “Viewer-centered and object-centered represen-
tations in the recognition of naturalistic line drawings.” Psychological Science 2, pp
275-277.
Munkres, J. R. Topology. Second Edition. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall Inc., 2000.
Norman, J. (2006).
After Euclid: Visual Reasoning and the Epistemology of Diagrams.
Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Palmer, S. E. (1977).
“Hierarchical Structure in Perceptual Representation.”
Cognitive
Psychology 9, pp 441-474.
Palmer, S. E. (1980). “What Makes Triangles Point: Local and Global Eﬀects in Conﬁgu-
rations of Ambiguous Triangles.” Cognitive Psychology 12, pp 285-305.
Palmer, S. E. (1983).
“The psychology of perceptual organization: A transformational
approach.” In J. Beck et al (Ed.), Human and Machine Vision. New York: Academic
Press, 1983.
Palmer, S. E. (1985). “Palmer, S. (1985). The role of symmetry in shape perception.” Acta
Psychologica 59, pp 67-90.
Palmer, S. E. (1999). Vision Science: Photons to Phenomenology. Cambridge: MIT Press,
1999.
Palmer, S. E. and Hemenway, K. (1978). “Orientation and symmetry: Eﬀects of multiple,
rotational, and near symmetries.” J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 4(4), pp 691-
702.
126

Peacocke, C. (1992). A Study of Concepts. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1992.
Pearson, D. G. (2001). “Imagery and the visuo-spatial sketchpad.” In J. Andrade (Ed.),
Working memory in perspective. Hove, UK: Psychology Press, pp 33-59.
Pearson, D. G., Deeprose, C., Wallace-Hadrill, S., Burnett Heyes, S., Holmes, E. A. (2013).
“Assessing mental imagery in clinical psychology: A review of imagery measures and a
guiding framework.” Clinical Psychology Review 33, pp 1-23.
Peterzil, Y. and Starchenko, S. (1998). “A trichotomy theorem for o-minimal structure.”
Proc. London Math. Soc. 77(3), pp 481-523.
Peterzil, Y. (2007). “A Self-Guide to O-minimality.” Camerino Tutorial June 2007.
Plato. Meno. In J. Cooper (Ed.), Plato: Complete Works. Hackett, 1997.
Poincar´e, H. (1895). “Analysis Situs.” Papers on Topology: Analysis Situs and Its Five
Supplements. Translator: John Stillwell. USA: American Mathematical Society, 2010.
pp 5-74.
Prinz, J. J. (2002). Furnishing the Mind: Concepts and their Perceptual Basis. Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Rennett, A. (2014). “The non-axiomatizability of o-minimality.” The Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 79(1), pp 54-49.
Rosch, E. and Mervis, C. B. (1975). “Family Resemblances: Studies in the Internal Structure
of Categories.” Cognitive Psychology 7, pp 573-605.
Rudin, W. (1976). Principles of Mathematical Analysis. Third Edition. New York: McGraw
Hill.
Russell, B. (1901). “Mathematics and the Metaphysicians.” In: B. Russell, Mysticism and
Logic. London: George Allen and Unwin Ltd, 1910. pp 74-96.
Russell, B. (1919). Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. London: George Allen and
Unwin; New York: The Macmillan Company.
Schoutens, H. (2014). “O-minimalism.” Journal of Symbolic Logic 79(2), pp 355-409.
Shepard, R.N. and Metzler, J. (1971). “Mental Rotation of Three-Dimensional Objects.”
Science (171), pp 701-703.
Sinaceur, H. (1994). “Calculation, Order, and Continuity.” In P. Ehrlich (Ed.), Real Num-
bers, Generalizations of the Reals, and Theories of Continua. Netherlands: Kluwer, pp
191-206.
127

Steinhorn, C. (2003). “A Brief Introduction to O-minimality.” In Edmundo (ed). O-minimal
Structures, Lisbon 2003: Proceedings of a Summer School by the European Research and
Training Network RAAG. pp 11-31.
Tarski, A. (1938). “Sentential Calculus and Topology”. Printed in: Logic, Semantics, and
Metaphysics. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983.
Tarski, A. (1948). “A Decision Method for Elementary Algebra and Geometry.” The RAND
Corporation. Second Edition, 1957.
Tarski, A. (1959). “What is Elementary Geometry?” In L. Henkin et al (Eds.), The ax-
iomatic method. Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp 16-29.
Toﬀalori, C. and Vozoris, K. (2009). “Notes on local o-minimality.” Mathematical Logic
Quarterly 55(6), pp 617 - 632.
Tye, M. (1991). The Imagery Debate. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Wilkie, A. J. (1996). “Model Completeness Results for Expansions of the Ordered Field
of Real Numbers by Restricted Pfaﬃan Functions and the exponential function.” J
American Math Soc 9(4), pp 1051-1094.
Wilkie, A.J. (2007).
“O-minimal Structures.”
Seminarie BOURBAKI. pages 985-01 to
985-11.
Yomdin, Y. and Comte, Ge. (2004). Tame Geometry with Application in Smooth Analysis.
Lecture Notes in Mathematics (1834). New York: Springer.
Zacks, J. (2007). “Neuroimaging Studies of Mental Rotation: A Meta-analysis and Review.”
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 20(1), pp 1-19.
128

