61
Quadrilateral Patterns
for Rigid Folding
Structures
Milena Stavric and Albert Wiltsche
issue 1, volume 12
international journal of architectural computing

62
Quadrilateral Patterns for Rigid Folding
Structures
Milena Stavric and Albert Wiltsche
In this paper we will do investigations on spatial
quadrilateral meshes developed from folding patterns.
The simplicity of manual production in combination
with the geometrical complexity of paper folding shall
lead to an inspiration for designing architectural
structures.We propose geometrical methods for
designing these quadrilateral structures which follow in
their shape geometrical surfaces. Our methods use
folding patterns where only four folding lines meet in
one node and every quadrangular part stays flat.This
enables simpler solutions for architectural realization in
a big scale especially for join connections and
assembling of the whole spatial and structural system.
In order to understand and handle the complexity of
paper folding we use CAD tools to model the
structures where the entire folding element is
reconstructed and its geometric characteristics are
controlled.This kind of control reflects on scale
models. Models are then adjusted, examined and built
to reach certain further geometric conclusions that are
once more tested in CAD software.

1. INTRODUCTION
In the field of origami – the generic term for paper folding - people
investigate how to design different shapes only from one sheet of paper
using folding techniques. In the folding technique single planar material is
folded without stretching, tearing or cutting. For geometrical and
mathematical considerations and for CAD animations usually “folding”
elements of zero-thickness are used and calculated.The material paper
imitates this situation very well. But if we consider plane building elements
with a certain material thickness for large scale space structures derived
from paper folding models, two important factors appear.The first one is
the connection aspect. For instance if two wooden panels are joined, their
edges have to be mitered correctly.This cannot be imitated be paper
folding.The second factor is the stiffness of paper.Although paper folding
can be done very precisely and complex one cannot be sure that all parts
stay flat if wished.That is why we use paper folding in combination with
geometrical observations and CAD tools to describe the process of folding
precisely.
Our approach is not making classical kinetic foldable structures but to
use geometrical principles and static advantages of origami in order to
classify quadrilateral folding structures and develop interactive methods for
designing rigid structures with a load-bearing effect for different geometrical
structures with quadrilateral patterns.
The theoretical basis of our work is funded in various research fields
which cover 
•
geometrical and mathematical properties of classical origami
[1],[2],[3],[4],[5],
•
folding structures and principles from the mathematical point of
view [6],[7],[8],[9],
•
applied research of folding plate structures made out of cross-
laminated timber panels [10],[11] 
•
practical applications which analyse and the static and dynamic
characteristics of folding structures, taking into account the type
and thickness of materials of which they are made [12], [13].
In addition to literature there also exist some software packages offering
origami simulation, like [14] where the user can manipulate interactively a
sheet of paper or for interacting with origami forms while altering the
crease pattern of the model [15].
We can distinguish three different kinds of origami: classic, modular and
tessellated origami.
The classic origami deals with figurative representation of animals, plants
or humans.The figures are strongly simplified and almost always two
dimensional. For the folding only a squared sheet of paper is used without
any help of scissors or glue.
63
Quadrilateral Patterns for Rigid Folding Structures

Modular Origami deals exclusively with spatial geometric forms that are
composed by individual elements, which are stuck together.
Tessellated origami is, like modular origami, purely geometric.The
starting point is a two dimensional, geometric pattern or grid, known as
tiling or tessellation, which is drawn on the paper and folded using folding
techniques. Some tessellations remain two dimensional but others become
three dimensional and the folded form gets certain stiffness.Tessellated
origami produces a variety of shapes, which are particularly interesting in
their spatial structure and therefore worthwhile for architectural design.
2. PRACTICE AND APPLICATION
In architectural terminology, the term folding structure stands for structures
consisting of plane polygonal elements.Their main characteristic is that
individual polygonal elements are very small in size compared to the scale of
the entire structure’s bearing capacity.There already exist some very
interesting architectural examples which demonstrate the potential of
structures developed from folding structures like the Folded-Plate Hut in
Osaka by Ryuichi Ashizawa Architects,Yokohama International Port Terminal
in Tokyo by Foreign Office Architects, United States Air Force Academy –
Cadet Chapel by Leo A. Daly, Inc. and Henningson and the Chapele St. Loup
in Switzerland by Danilo Mondada.
Folding structures can also be found in many fields, such as industrial
design, fashion, interior design, architecture, textile industry and jewellery.
They can be made out of different types of material, such as paper, textiles,
cardboard, wood or metal.
From the point of material efficiency there are two main important facts:
•
Foldable material can be used to cover a whole construction in a
certain range with only one piece (Figure 1 left and middle).
•
A spatial structure developed by folding which is made of a non
foldable material (i.e. timber panel) leads to a “natural” optimal
nesting of the parts for their production (Figure 1 right).
 Figure 1: Left and Middle:An
arrangement of rods can easily be
covered by a single piece of foldable
material if designed as a folding
structure. Right:The same structure
built with material of a certain
thickness and the “natural” nesting of
the parts.
64
Milena Stavric and Albert Wiltsche

3. FOLDING TYPES
A linear folding structure is built by folding a plane material along (linear)
edges.The structure usually consists of triangles and quadrangles (Figure 2
left). Since some kinds of material are very flexible – for instance paper –
the triangles and quadrangles are sometimes further bended and stay not
flat and the border lines become curved.The term rigid folding is used to
describe folding where all single parts stay flat during the whole folding
procedure.
For architectural purposes it is very important and a matter of cost
efficiency to work with standard plane materials.Therefore it is inevitable
for us to investigate rigid folding.
A curved folding structure is built by folding a plane material along
curves so that the resulting structure consists of single curved elements
such as cylinders, cones and general developable surfaces (Figure 2 right).
 Figure 2: Linear and curved folding.
 Figure 3: Folding knots where four
quadrilaterals and six triangles are
meeting.
65
Quadrilateral Patterns for Rigid Folding Structures
In our approach we concentrate on linear folding structures – or better
folding patterns – which consists of quadrilaterals.The advantage of such a
structure is the fact that in every folding knot “only” four parts are meeting
(Figure 3 left). Folding structures with triangles have knots where even six
parts come together (Figure 3 right). From a practical viewpoint a knot with
four parts is much easier to fabricate for a big scale construction than a
knot with more parts.

4. STATICS
Folding structures can also be used to improve the static behavior of loads.
A large span can be covered by a thin surface but under its dead load the
surface will bend (Fig. 4a).A folding structure can cover the same span but
without bending. In this case each inclined face acts as a beam whereby the
adjoining face acts as a horizontal support (Fig. 4b). If the load is greater the
folding structure will open and bend (Fig. 4c).To avoid this bending the
folding structure must be reinforced by end plates, diaphragms, tie bars or
bracings (Fig. 4d). In order to increase the bearing capacity the form of the
folding shape must be changed (Fig. 4e).
 Figure 4: Static behavior of different
folding structures.
 Figure 5: Left:A cross section of a
paper folding. Middle and Right:The
folding and numerous shapes obtained
by bending and pulling the folding
structure.The single elements are no
more flat.
66
Milena Stavric and Albert Wiltsche
5. INTUITIVE FOLDING
Folding techniques are a field often explored with “learning by doing”
methods.The work on these structures begins with simple paper folding,
playing with paper and using the simplest drawing materials. Many different
forms are produced in a short time, intuitively and easily. If these structures
are made of paper, which allows further bending, the simplest folding
patterns can produce many different forms. Figure 5 left shows a cross-

section of a folding structure and Figure 5 right possible folding positions
within a flexible system of boundary curves. Since it is made of paper, its
extreme flexibility is more than obvious.
The physical characteristics of paper can lead to different conclusions in
terms of folding. For example, paper can easily be twisted out of its plane.
Thus changing the form of an entire three-dimensional folding structure
made of paper can be done very simply.The folding structure shown in
Figure 5 is bended several times after the initial folding and therefore some
of the single quadrilaterals are no more flat and border lines are curved.
Hence the whole structure cannot be called rigid folding as defined in
chapter 3.As the single quadrangles must stay developable after the bending
they consist of cylinders, cones or general developable surfaces.Working
with paper models can therefore lead to wrong conclusions in terms of
geometry.Therefore we use CAD tools in addition to scale models, where
the entire folding element is reconstructed and its geometric characteristics
are controlled.This kind of control reflects on the scale model. Models are
then adjusted, examined and built to reach certain conclusions that are
once more tested in CAD software.
One of the most useful methods is defining parametric models.The
biggest advantage of parametric models is that, depending on the form of
objects, they provide a direct connection to the folding pattern.Yet another
advantage is the possibility to simulate dynamic models by opening the
structure, starting from the open position (sheet of paper) to the complete
folding into a single strip.
To be able to model complex structures and generate patterns, one
needs to understand the theory of folding.This includes knowledge of basic
patterns, folding methods and understanding of spatial transformations in
the folding process.
6. BASIC TECHNIQUES
Fabrication of three-dimensional folding structures involves two dominant
techniques: parallel folds and reverse folds.
With parallel fold technique paper is folded along the pattern lines
generating alternating valley and mountain lines (for example Figure 4 b, d).
Reverse folding technique changes the direction of basic folding (Figure
6).After folding around the diagonal d, the mountain fold a turns into the
valley fold b. In this way two planes become four, meeting in point A.The
position of the diagonal d affects the change of folding direction. Figure 6b
shows the reverse folding as a geometric transformation of a 3D reflection
in a plane α.The plane α is defined by the diagonal d and it is perpendicular
to the vertical plane β which is symmetric to the parallel folding. Figure 6c
shows a part of the structure and Figure 6d the folding pattern.
67
Quadrilateral Patterns for Rigid Folding Structures

7. BASIC FOLDING PATTERNS
Folding patterns are based on lines (linear folding) or curves (curved
folding) and on a two-dimensional material which is folded to make a three-
dimensional structure. Folding produces lines or curves which alternate in
mountain and valley folds.The mountain and valley folds can exchange their
role so that there are two different folding structures for one folding
pattern.
Folding structures are based on the presented patterns.Their
significance is reflected in the following:
•
They give structural stability to three-dimensional forms;
•
Basic pattern can be modified, achieving remarkable variability;
•
Different patterns can be combined;
•
They are the basis for the development of curved folding patterns.
We will now investigate patterns which consist of quadrangles and in every
knot of the pattern four quadrangles are meeting. Such patterns have the
characteristic that the whole folding procedure can be described by one
parameter. For instance this parameter can be the opening angle between
two adjacent quadrangles. Rotating two quadrangles around its common
edge by the angle the position of all other quadrangles can be described
exactly and there is now more degree of freedom. In geometry this kind of
folding is called a one-parametric motion [16].This makes simulation and
understanding much easier.The simulation of triangle folding patters can
only be approximated to this day because of too many degrees of freedom.
We will start with a very famous folding pattern.
7.1 Miura-Ori Pattern
This pattern which is also called Herringbone Pattern or Parallelogram
Pattern was named after the Japanese scientist Miura who used this spatial
structure system to make kinetic solar systems in space.This pattern
consists of congruent parallelograms forming a zigzag configuration in two
directions (Figure 7).This configuration allows the opening of patterns in
two directions.
 Figure 6: Reverse folding with
reflection in the plane α.
68
Milena Stavric and Albert Wiltsche

The characteristic of this pattern is the fact that half of the knot points
of the pattern stay in one common plane during the whole folding
procedure. Figure 8 shows the two different knot groups situated in a lower
and the upper plane. From the designers point of view this folding pattern
can be seen as a linear or plane element.
 Figure 7: Miura-Ori
pattern.
 Figure 8: Miura-Ori pattern.All
patterns knot points are either in the
lower or upper plane.The whole
structure stays between two planes all
along the folding procedure.
 Figure 9:A pattern of congruent
and symmetric trapezoids generates a
folding structure which follows a
cylinder of revolution.
69
Quadrilateral Patterns for Rigid Folding Structures
7.2 Trapezoid Pattern
If we exchange the parallelograms of the Muira-Ori pattern by congruent
trapezoids we get folding structures which follow a cylinder of revolution.
Figure 9 shows a configuration with symmetric trapezoids.

But the trapezoids can also vary as long as two opposite edges are
parallel. By varying the shape of the trapezoids one can design different kind
of three dimensional cylindrical structures. In chapter “Grid Generation
Analysis” it can be seen how the trapezoids and its angels can be
determined.
If the form of the trapezoids is varied in the direction d of the parallel
lines of the pattern the basis curve of the cylindrical shape can follow an
arbitrary shape. Figure 10 shows a pattern which produces a spiral cylinder.
 Figure 10:The trapezoids vary in
the direction d so that the folding
structure follows a cylindrical form
with a spiral as base curve.
 Figure 11: Left:Trapezoid pattern
which varies in the direction d and e.
Right:The folding structure follows an
arbitrary shape similar to cylindrical
surfaces.
70
Milena Stavric and Albert Wiltsche
If the trapezoids also vary in the direction e an arbitrary form similar to
cylindrical shapes occurs (Figure 11).
7.3 Arbitrary quadrangles 
A very famous folding pattern (Figure 12) is named after A. Kokotsakis [17].
This pattern consists of arbitrary convex congruent quadrangles and
generates a three-dimensional folding structure which follows a helical
shape lying on a cylinder of revolution. Each quadrangle can be rotated

around the midpoint of one of its edges by 180° into the neighbouring
quadrangle.
7.4 Triangle Patterns
Triangle patterns are difficult to simulate because there too many degrees of
freedom for the motion parameters (more parametric motion).We want to
introduce two of them because they are often used in design.The following
patterns can be derived from the trapezoid patterns by shortening one of
the parallel edges.
The “Diamond Pattern” (Yoshimura Pattern) is a triangular pattern and
was named after the Japanese scientist Yoshimura who observed the
behaviour of thin cylinders folded under axial compression force [18]. He
found out that the surface folds of a folded cylinder follow a specific pattern
which is similar to a diamond (Figure 13).The base for this pattern is a
deltoid that is folded along a diagonal. Deltoid edges are folded as a valley
fold, while one diagonal is a mountain fold.
 Figure 12: Left: Kokotsakis pattern
which consists of arbitrary but
congruent quadrangles. Right: It
generates a folding structure which
follows a helical form.
 Figure 13:A diamond pattern
consisting of triangles and trapezoids.
71
Quadrilateral Patterns for Rigid Folding Structures
A variant of this pattern can be produced if the deltoid structure is
stretched following one diagonal, thus becoming a hexagonal form (Figure
14). In this case, instead of getting triangles we get two symmetrical
trapezoids which we already saw in paragraph 6.2.
The “Diagonal Pattern” is very similar to the “Diamond Pattern”.This
pattern is achieved when torsion [19] is applied to a folded cylinder of
revolution (Figure 14).The basis of this pattern is a parallelogram, folded
along its diagonal.All diagonals define the valley fold, while all parallels define

the mountain fold.With the Diagonal Pattern, in contrast to the Diamond
Pattern, diagonal lines define helical polygonal lines, used to define helical
folding structures.
In architectural terms, it is very important to continue with the
development of these patterns to produce new variations of the form.This
kind of research can be divided into two trends.The first one involves the
study of variations in relation to basic 2D patterns.The second trend starts
from an already known 3D shape, as a basis for the construction of the
folding structure.
8. GRID GENERATION ANALYSES
In our analysis we consider folding structures which follow certain
cylindrical shapes.As we have seen from basic patterns, a folding structure
pattern is composed of a series of quadrangular or triangular elements.
During the folding act, the single elements take specific positions in space in
which two adjacent elements rotate around their common edge, while
several elements also meet in a common point.We choose pattern
configurations consisting of trapezoids which represent a modified diamond
pattern. Figure 15 shows the whole process of the folding structure
generation, from the original cross-section to the final grid.The examples
show all the measures used to build the scale model in general.The starting
point for defining a folding structure is its cross-section. Here it is given in
the form of a spline curve.To approximate this curve, we used the curve’s
control polygon. For further calculation of the folding (Figure 15c) it is
necessary to measure the angles formed by each of the polygon segments
with the neighboring one (angle αi) and measure the length of it (ai). Based
on these angles, it is possible to calculate the folding angle at each point of
the polygon:
βi = (180- αi)/2
The distances ai represent the trapezoids centre lines. Parallel to these
centre lines are lines that define the thickness of the folding (Figure 15d).
The angles βi define the directions of the unparallel trapezoid edges.
In convex grids all unparallel trapezoid edges are valley folds.The
concave structure grid shows that in the concave part (vertex 4) the
 Figure 14: Diagonal Pattern as a
result of cylinder torsion.
72
Milena Stavric and Albert Wiltsche

trapezoid edge is a mountain fold and it is precisely this point where the
structure changes direction from the convex to concave position.
Simulation of paper folding can be done after the grid has been drawn.
The entire structure can be folded starting from the flat plane of paper to
the maximum folding position, in which the entire structure looks like a
 Figure 15. Left: Folding construction and calculation of the folding structure grid of a convex example. Right: Concave example.
73
Quadrilateral Patterns for Rigid Folding Structures

folded strip (Figure 15d).The structure goes through various stages of
folding in this process and enables the generation of many different forms.
Figure 16 shows three arbitrary positions of the folding structure.
 Figure 16: Different opening shapes
and folding structure forms.
74
Milena Stavric and Albert Wiltsche
9. OFFSET
One big problem occurs when a folding structure should be build by
material with a certain thickness, i.e. wooden panels (cross-laminated
timber, etc.). In general if four or more plane polygons meet in one point
the offset of the polygons do not meet in a common point (Figure 17 a and
b).This causes troubles in the accuracy of fit and makes is impossible to
construct a bigger shape out of plane panels. Only if the panels are tangent
 Figure 17: Four planes meeting in
one point (a). In general the four offset
planes to not meet in a common point
(b) which causes problems for
construction. If the initial four planes
are tangent to a common sphere (c),
the offset is guaranteed (e) because
the four associated symmetry planes
meet in a common line (d), where all
the centers of tangent spheres lie.

to a cone of revolution or a sphere the correct offset is guaranteed. Figure
17c shows one initial plane set tangent to a sphere. Figure 17d shows a
solid offset and a smaller half sphere which is tangent to it.Additionally the
four symmetry planes of adjacent parts are shown.They must intersect in
one line so that the offset is correct (Figure 17e). On the intersection line
lie the centers of the tangent spheres.The same considerations can be
performed with a cone of revolution instead of a sphere.That is why such a
configuration is called a conical knot. For a bigger mesh consisting of
quadrilateral planes it is difficult to find a useful offset solution. If every knot
in a quadrilateral mesh is a conical knot it is called a conical mesh [20].A
detailed proof and further treatment of the matter can be read in [21] and
[22].
An easier way to find conical knots and therefore conical meshes for
offsetting quadrilateral ones can be found in [21], namely if the sum of
opposite angles in a knot sum up the same result the knot can be used for
offsetting.This situation is schematically shown in Figure 18 middle. If the
angles a1 + a2 = b1 + b2 the knot is conical and can therefore be used for a
correct offset.
Our folding structures which consist of quadrilaterals usually do not
provide this fact. But in the case of a Kokotsakis folding pattern which
consists of congruent quadrilaterals we can fulfill this constraint very easily.
If the quadrilaterals have a circumcircle the sum of the angles a1+ a2 = b1+
b2 = 180° which is known from mathematical basics (Figure 18 left). Since in
every knot always all four angles a1, a2, b1, b2 are meeting (like in Figure 18
Middle) the criterion for a conical mesh is fulfilled.
The criterion of a conical mesh is also fulfilled in the cases of symmetric
folding patterns like the Miura-Ori pattern or trapezoid patterns with
symmetric knots.
 Figure 18. Left: If the quadrilaterals
of a Kokotsakis folding pattern have a
circumcircle the criterion for a conical
net is fulfilled (Middle) and therefore
the precise offset of the pattern is
guaranteed (Right).
75
Quadrilateral Patterns for Rigid Folding Structures

10. CURVED FOLDING
Reverse folding is a technique that can also be applied to generate curved
folding. If one selects a cylindrical surface and then applies reverse folding
technique, the result is going to be a curved folding structure (Figure 19).
These structures have initial patterns consisting of curves. Since curved
folding structures result from the folding of two-dimensional paper, the
resulting surfaces can only be single curved surfaces – cylinders, cones or
generalized developable surfaces.
 Figure 19:Application of reverse
folding on a cylindrical surface.
 Figure 20. Cylindrical and conical
structures – curved folding.
76
Milena Stavric and Albert Wiltsche
More complex forms of these structures can be achieved if we repeat
the primary folding several times. Figure 20 shows some complex cylindrical
and conical structures. Further information on the issue can be found in [7],
[23] and [24]. In terms of practical realization in a bigger scale Gregory
Epps uses robots for fabrication. He constructed a metal sheet tree
structure for Zaha Hadid for her contribution to the Venice Biennale 2012
(Figure 21).At the EPFL in Lausanne curved cross laminated timber are used
to design a reverse folded cylinder pavilion [25].
If 3D models of rigid linear and curved folding are generated with 3D
software, it is possible to develop a folding pattern of the entire structure
directly in software (for example Rhinoceros).This is possible because each
individual component is a developable surface. Naturally, it must be kept in
mind that automated software solutions sometimes contain errors that
need to be corrected.

11. CONCLUSION
In this paper we investigated geometrical properties of linear rigid folding
and gave precise geometric definition and explanation to this issue.With the
help of rules for parallel and reverse folding we established basic folding
properties which can be used for parametric modeling for computer aided
supported design in order to generate various steps from pattern
generation to folding simulation.The introduced folding patterns follow
special geometric shapes, in most cases various types of cylinders. For the
practical use in architecture we also discussed the problem of offsetting a
folding structure, which is a mesh consisting of plane elements.This leads to
conical meshes in which the shown Kokotsakis pattern can be a natural
representative.
The geometrical rules of linear rigid folding can also be extended to
curved folding which we showed on the examples of cylinders and cones.
Future work will be concentrated on parametrically supported folding
which follow various types of surfaces with the aim to generate big scale
architectural structures and dynamic architectural elements like shadowing
or interactive facade systems. One additional topic will also be the
investigation of the static of various folding structures fabricated by different
materials, which obviously leads to excellent structural behavior.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank the reviewers for their very helpful and detailed
comments which supported us to improve the final version of the paper.
 Figure 21: Curved folded tree
structure fabricated by Gregory Epps
for Zaha Hadid at the Biennale in
Venice 2012.
77
Quadrilateral Patterns for Rigid Folding Structures

REFERENCES
1.
Belcastro S.M, Hull T.C,A mathematical model for non-flat origami, in T. Hull
(ed.), Origami 3, Proceedings of the 3rd International Meeting of Origami
Mathematics, Science and Education, 2002, 39–51.
2.
Belcastro, S.M., Hull,T., Modelling the folding of paper into three dimensions
using affine transformations, Linear Algebra and its Application, 348, 2002, 273–282.
3.
Geretschlaeger, R., Geometric Origami,Arbelos, UK, 2008.
4.
Nojima,T., Modelling of folding patterns in flat membranes and cylinders by
origami, JSME International Journal Series C, 45(1), 2002, 364–370.
5.
Tachi,T., Generalization of Rigid-Foldable Quadrilateral-Mesh Origami, Journal of
the International Association for Shell and Spatial Structures, 50(3), 2009, 173–179.
6.
Kawasaki,T., On the relation between mountain-creases and valley creases of a
flat origami (abridged English translation), in H. Huzita (ed.), Proceedings of the
First International Meeting of Origami Science and Technology, Ferrara, 1998,
229–237.
7.
Mitani, J.,A Design method for 3d origami based on rotational sweep, Computer-
aided Design and Application, 6 (1), 2009, 69–79.
8.
Miyazaki, S.,Yasuda,T.Yokoi, S.,Toriwaki J.,An origami playing simulator in the
virtual space, The Journal of Visualization and Computer Animation, 7(1), 1996,
25–42.
9.
Zimmer, H., Campen, M.Bommes, D., Kobbelt, L., Rationalization of triangle-based
point-folding structures, Computer Graphics Forum, 31(2), 2012, 611–620.
10. Buri, H., Origami - Folded plate structures, PhD Thesis, EPFL, Lausanne, 2010.
11. Haasis, M,Weinand,Y., ORIGAMI - Folded Plate Structures, Engineering,10th World
Conference on Timber Engineering, Miyazaki, Japan, 2008, 2098–2104.
12. Tachi,T., Rigid-Foldable Thick Origami, in P.Wang-Iverson, R. J. Lang, M.Yim, (Eds.),
Origami 5: Fifth International Meeting of Origami Science Mathematics and Education,
Taylor & Francis, 2011, 253–264.
13. Balkcom, D., Robotic origami folding, PhD Thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, 2002.
14. Lang, R.,
http://www.langorigami.com/science/computational/origamisim/origamisim.php (7-
2-2014).
15. Tachi,T.,“Freeform origami”,Available from: Open Source Repository,
http://www.tsg.ne.jp/TT/software/#ffo, (10-2- 2014)
16. Bottema, O., Roth, B., Theoretical Kinematics. North Holland Pub.Co.,Amsterdam,
1979.
17. Stachel, H.,A Flexible Planar Tessellation with a Flexion Tiling a Cylinder of
Revolution, Journal of Geometry and Graphics, 16(2), 2012, 153–170.
18. Miura, K., Proposition of pseudo-cylindrical concave polyhedral shells, Institute of
Space and Aeronautical Report No. 442, University of Tokyo, 1969, 141–163.
19. Hunt,W.G.,Ario, I.,Twist buckling and the foldable cylinder: an exercise in
origami, International Journal of Non-Linear Mechanics, 40(6), 2005, 833–843.
20. Liu,Y., Pottmann, H.Wallner, J.,Yang,Y. and Wang,W., Geometric Modeling with
Conical Meshes and Developable Surfaces, Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH, 2006,
681-689.
21. Wang,W.,Wallner, J. and Liu,Y.,An Angle Criterion for Conical Mesh Vertices,
Journal of Geometry and Graphics, 2007, 11(2), 199 – 208.
78
Milena Stavric and Albert Wiltsche

22. Wiltsche,A., Schimek, H., Stavric, M., Geometric aspects in Producing Non-
Standard Architecture with Standard Tools, Journal of Geometry and Graphics,
2008, 12(2), 205-214.
23. Tachi,T., Epps, G., Designing One-DOF Mechanisms for Architecture by
Rationalizing Curved Folding, Proceedings of ALGODE TOKYO 2011,Tokyo, online.
24. Verma, S., Epps, G., Curved Folding: Design to Fabrication, Proceedings of 33th
ACADIA, Cambridge, 2013, 453 – 454.
25. EPFL IBOIS, http://www.detail.de/architektur/news/besondere-verbindung-
doppelt-gekruemmte-holzschale-der-epfl-lausanne-022346.html, (10-2-2014).
79
Quadrilateral Patterns for Rigid Folding Structures
Milena Stavric and Albert Wiltsche
Graz University of Technology
Institute of Architecture and Media
Austria
mstavric@tugraz.at, wiltsche@tugraz.at 


