Quantum Science and Technology
Dimitris G. Angelakis    Editor 
Quantum 
Simulations 
with Photons 
and Polaritons
Merging Quantum Optics with 
Condensed Matter Physics

Quantum Science and Technology
Series editors
Nicolas Gisin, Geneva, Switzerland
Raymond Laﬂamme, Waterloo, Canada
Gaby Lenhart, Sophia Antipolis, France
Daniel Lidar, Los Angeles, USA
Gerard J. Milburn, St. Lucia, Australia
Arno Rauschenbeutel, Vienna, Austria
Renato Renner, Zürich, Switzerland
Maximilian Schlosshauer, Portland, USA
Yaakov S. Weinstein, Princeton, USA
H.M. Wiseman, Brisbane, Australia

Aims and Scope
The book series Quantum Science and Technology is dedicated to one of today’s
most active and rapidly expanding ﬁelds of research and development. In
particular, the series will be a showcase for the growing number of experimental
implementations and practical applications of quantum systems. These will
include, but are not restricted to: quantum information processing, quantum
computing, and quantum simulation; quantum communication and quantum
cryptography; entanglement and other quantum resources; quantum interfaces and
hybrid quantum systems; quantum memories and quantum repeaters; measure-
ment-based quantum control and quantum feedback; quantum nanomechanics,
quantum optomechanics and quantum transducers; quantum sensing and quantum
metrology; as well as quantum effects in biology. Last but not least, the series will
include books on the theoretical and mathematical questions relevant to designing
and understanding these systems and devices, as well as foundational issues
concerning the quantum phenomena themselves. Written and edited by leading
experts, the treatments will be designed for graduate students and other researchers
already working in, or intending to enter the ﬁeld of quantum science and
technology.
More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/10039

Dimitris G. Angelakis
Editor
Quantum Simulations
with Photons and Polaritons
Merging Quantum Optics with Condensed
Matter Physics
123

Editor
Dimitris G. Angelakis
Centre for Quantum Technologies, National
University of Singapore
Singapore
Singapore
ISSN 2364-9054
ISSN 2364-9062
(electronic)
Quantum Science and Technology
ISBN 978-3-319-52023-0
ISBN 978-3-319-52025-4
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-52025-4
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017930283
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part
of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations,
recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission
or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar
methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this
publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from
the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this
book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the
authors or the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or
for any errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

To my family and all the families of the
contributing scientists for being patient
with them.

Preface
One of the most important problems in the interdisciplinary area spanned by Physics,
Computing, Engineering, and Nanotechnology is the efﬁcient simulation of the
dynamics of quantum many-body systems. Quantum simulators offer a new perspective
allowing also for the implementation of quantum computation and the design of new
materials with speciﬁc properties for technological applications. Initial approaches
focused in the use of cold atom in optical lattices and ions in ion traps for mimicking a
variety of models from condensed matter. More recent technological developments in
the ﬁelds of interfacing light and matter, and especially in quantum nonlinear optics,
have motivated complementary proposals for quantum simulators based on strongly
correlated photons and polaritons. The latter are generated in hybrid light-matter sys-
tems ranging from coupled QED resonator arrays in superconducting circuits to slow
light setups and semiconductor-based photonic chips. In this edited volume, several
world experts in the area review some of the most important works on emulations of
phenomena ranging from Mott transitions and Luttinger liquid physics to interacting
relativistic theories and gauge ﬁelds with photons and polaritons. The aim was to
review both the major theory proposals and the ongoing experimental efforts to realize
photonic simulators in the laboratory in circuit QED, semiconductor, and integrated
photonic lattice structures.
The book should be useful as an introduction to this area for graduate students
working in quantum physics, quantum optics, implementations of quantum simu-
lation, and strongly correlated physics. It can also serve as a reference material
of the major developments at the time of writing to experts in the ﬁeld.
We acknowledge the support of Technical University of Crete and the Centre for
Quantum Technologies (CQT) Singapore while preparing this volume. We also like to
thank CQT Ph.D. student Jirawat Tangpatinanon for his help in processing the latex
ﬁles and the staff in Springer for their patience while this volume was being prepared.
Crete
October 2016
Dimitris G. Angelakis
vii

Contents
1
Strongly Correlated Polaritons in Nonlinear Cavity Arrays . . . . . . .
1
Andrea Tomadin, Davide Rossini and Rosario Fazio
2
Phase Diagram and Excitations of the Jaynes-Cummings-Hubbard
Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
Sebastian Schmidt and Gianni Blatter
3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic
Resonator Arrays . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
Changsuk Noh, Stephen R. Clark, Dieter Jaksch
and Dimitris G. Angelakis
4
Topological Physics with Photons. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
71
Mohammad Hafezi and Jacob Taylor
5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
91
Na Young Kim and Yoshihisa Yamamoto
6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear
Nanophotonic Platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
D. Gerace, C. Ciuti and I. Carusotto
7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics . . . . .
153
Guillermo Romero, Enrique Solano and Lucas Lamata
8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung
to Photonic Topological Insulators. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
181
F. Dreisow, M.C. Rechtsman, J.M. Zeuner, Y. Plotnik, R. Keil,
S. Nolte, M. Segev and A. Szameit
ix

Introduction
Computer simulation has led to huge advances in technology, from the engineering
of smart materials to the design of drugs. Supercomputers are now a mainstream
tool of science. However, studying many-body effects in condensed matter physics
such as high-temperature superconductivity, topological states, and quantum
magnetism, or even phenomena predicted by quantum ﬁeld theories, which are
otherwise only accessible in high-energy accelerators still poses tremendous chal-
lenges. The main obstacle is usually the computational complexity of solving even
the most simpliﬁed models.
Quantum simulators present a powerful alternative, as originally suggested by
Feynman. The recent advances in manipulating quantum particles and their envi-
ronment have allowed demonstrations of quantum simulators of many-body and
exotic physics under tabletop laboratory conditions. The latter includes realizing
Mott-insulator–superﬂuid transitions, BEC-BCS crossovers, frustrated spin models,
and artiﬁcial gauge ﬁelds in disordered systems. The main experimental platforms
used so far consist of cold atoms in optical lattices and cold ions in electromagnetic
traps.
More recently, a new approach for quantum simulation based on hybrid
light-matter systems has been slowly emerging. Here, the main role is played by
photons and hybrid light-matter excitations, also known as polaritons. In these
ideas,
the
accessibility
to
local
observables,
and
the
ability
to
probe
out-of-equilibrium many-body phenomena in driven systems with efﬁcient optical
measurements, offers several advantages over other approaches based on purely
atomic or photonic setups.
The purpose of this book was to review the progress in this area in terms of both
physical platforms and phenomena. In the following chapter, experts in this
emerging area review some of the most important ideas so far. Among others, we
see how photons and polaritons generated in circuit QED, integrated linear, and
nonlinear quantum optics setups can be used to prepare and simulate novel
out-of-equilibrium phases of matter, to probe topological physics and to implement
phenomena from the realm of exotic physics.
xi

In more detail, in Chap. 1, the equilibrium phase diagram of the Jaynes–
Cummings–Hubbard (JCH) model is reviewed. The latter is done both within mean
ﬁeld theory and using sophisticated techniques such as DMRG. Aspects of the
non-equilibrium behavior of coupled resonator arrays (CRAs), especially in terms
of time-dependent quenches, are also presented.
Chapter 2 reviews some of the analytical as well as the numerical approaches to
treat the JCH model, including the Green function and slave boson methods to
calculate both elementary excitations and critical exponents of the equilibrium case.
The fate of these results in open dissipative systems is brieﬂy discussed, and an
outline of schemes for their experimental veriﬁability is presented.
Chapter 3 reviews some of the exotic phases predicted in driven dissipative
CRAs, including photon fermionization, crystallization, and photonic quantum Hall
states in out-of-equilibrium setting. Possible experimental candidates to realize
coupled resonator arrays along with the two theoretical models that capture their
physics, the Jaynes–Cummings–Hubbard and Bose–Hubbard Hamiltonians are also
discussed.1
Chapter 4 discusses the possibility to simulate synthetic gauge ﬁelds for photons
and reviews the early observation of topological features such as photonic edge
states in linear coupled resonator systems. After discussing the basics of the transfer
matrix and coupled mode approaches, the cases of interacting regimes are also
explored including proposal to simulate quantum hall parent Hamiltonians.
Chapter 5 reviews the basics of solid-state quantum simulator platforms based on
exciton-polaritons. After introducing the microcavity exciton-polaritons basics, a
review of the works on exciton-polariton condensation is discussed along with the
efforts for simulating lattice models.
In Chap. 6, many-body quantum photonics in semiconductor photonic crystal
structures is discussed. After an introduction to nanophotonics platforms and the
basics of light propagation and conﬁnement there, developments in achieving
strong light-matter coupling are reviewed. The chapter closes with a discussion
of the efforts to realize strongly correlated states of photons in nanophotonics chips
with a focus on driven dissipative approaches.
Chapter 7 deals with quantum simulation using strongly interacting microwave
excitations in superconducting circuits. The basic notions of circuit quantization are
introduced followed by a review of some of the theoretical and experimental works
for analog and digital quantum simulations with superconducting quantum circuits.
The last chapter deals with classical analogue simulations in integrated photonic
chips. The chapter starts with a review of the femtosecond laser writing of
1At the time of writing this introduction, after the completion of the main chapters, a preprint of an
experiment involving 72 coupled CCQED resonators interacting with artiﬁcial atoms in a super-
conducting circuit has been reported in arXiv:1607.06895. In this work, a realization of the
proposal for a one-dimensional Jaynes–Cummings lattice or Jaynes–Cummings–Hubbard
Hamiltonian as in 2007 by Angelakis et al. in Phys. Rev. A(R), 76, 031805 2007 is reported. The
experiment took place in the group of A Houck in Yale. Among other effects, signatures of a
dissipative phase transition taking place is reported.
xii
Introduction

waveguides in silica and proceeds with discussing the simulation of Dirac physics
in one-dimensional photonic lattices. Works in two-dimensional lattices are then
presented where topological physics including edge states, effective gauge ﬁelds,
and Floquet topological insulators states were implemented.
Dimitris G. Angelakis
Centre for Quantum Technologies,
National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore
and
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Technical University of Crete, Chania, Crete, Greece
Introduction
xiii

Chapter 1
Strongly Correlated Polaritons in Nonlinear
Cavity Arrays
Andrea Tomadin, Davide Rossini and Rosario Fazio
Abstract Arrays of coupled QED cavities have been proposed as promising
candidates to study hybrid many-body states of light and matter in a controlled
way. The rich scenario emerging in these systems stems from the interplay between
intra-cavity light-matter interaction and inter-cavity photon hopping. Coherent light-
matter interaction generates polaritonic excitations with physical properties resem-
bling those of bosonic particles in a lattice. We review the most salient features of the
zero-temperature equilibrium phase diagram of a polaritonic lattice model, focusing
on a quantitative analysis for the one-dimensional case. A judicious analysis of the
system, however, cannot neglect the effect of losses and decoherence of both light and
matter components of the polaritonic excitation. External driving is typically needed
to counteract such losses. In this case, the knowledge of the equilibrium phase dia-
gram is not sufﬁcient to describe the state of the system during its time-evolution,
and its possible approach to the steady state. For this reason, we also discuss the
nonequilibrium dynamics resulting from the interplay between losses and external
driving in some relevant cases.
1.1
Introduction
Collective behavior emerges in many-body systems as a result of the interaction
between their constituents. Strong interactions are believed to be at the root of still
not completely understood phenomena as high temperature superconductivity or
in the fractional quantum Hall effect. To the aim of understanding these features,
A. Tomadin · D. Rossini · R. Fazio
NEST Istituto Nanoscienze-CNR and Scuola Normale Superiore, 56126 Pisa, Italy
e-mail: andrea.tomadin@sns.it
D. Rossini (B)
Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Pisa and INFN, Largo Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy
e-mail: davide.rossini@unipi.it
R. Fazio
Abdus Salam ICTP, Strada Costiera 11, 34151 Trieste, Italy
e-mail: fazio@sns.it
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
D.G. Angelakis (ed.), Quantum Simulations with Photons and Polaritons,
Quantum Science and Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-52025-4_1
1

2
A. Tomadin et al.
artiﬁcial many-body systems started to be explored as quantum simulators, i.e. to
simulate other quantum systems. Together with more mature implementations as
cold atoms in optical lattices or trapped ions, interest is growing in using interacting
photonic systems. Remarkable progresses in tailoring light-matter interaction have
fuelled the interest towards the realization of many-body states of photons [1–5].
A paradigm to study these effects is an array of coupled QED-cavities, a periodic
arrangement of cavities mutually interacting through photon hopping and with strong
local photon nonlinearities.
In these few years signiﬁcant progress has been achieved on the theoretical side.
Recently some experiments started to appear (see for example in [4]). The aim of
this chapter is to brieﬂy review some of our activity on this ﬁeld. We will concentrate
in particular on the transition from the Mott to superﬂuid state. We will discuss the
properties of the phase diagram in the absence of damping, and we will analyze how
to detect this “equilibrium” quantum phase transition in the more realistic case of a
cavity array in the presence of leakage. We will ﬁnally describe an interesting possi-
bility in which cavity arrays can be exploited to implement models with engineered
dissipation.
The chapter is organized as follows. In the next section we will introduce cavity
arrays, the model Hamiltonian which is commonly used to describe their properties,
and the relevant mechanism of dissipation. We will then proceed by describing the
equilibrium phase diagram, i.e. the one obtained ignoring any coupling to the exter-
nal world. The latter is obviously an idealized situation, which is impossible to be
realized. We will therefore discuss how it would be possible to detect some features
of the nonequilibrium diagram through a quench experiment in which the array is
brought out of equilibrium by a laser pulse. We will ﬁnally conclude this chapter by
discussing how to engineer dissipation in cavity arrays. As already mentioned, this is
intended as a review of our work, where we provide some more details as compared
to what has been published already. The list of references is therefore not complete.
We refer to the existing reviews for an extensive account of the current literature.
1.2
Modelling of Nonlinear Cavity-Arrays
1.2.1
Effective Photon-Photon Interaction in Nonlinear
Cavities
Photons hardly interact in open space. Nonetheless, if a resonator is used to trap
photons and atoms, it is possible to substantially increase the interaction between
them. The simplest conceivable model of resonator takes into account only one mode
of the electromagnetic ﬁeld, with frequency ω, which can interact with one or more
identical atoms located in the cavity. We assume that only one atomic transition,
between two atomic levels {|g⟩, |e⟩}, with energy difference ωq (hereafter we are
using units such that ℏ= 1), is almost resonant with the cavity mode. The frequency

1
Strongly Correlated Polaritons in Nonlinear Cavity Arrays
3
difference Δ = ω −ωq between the cavity mode and the atomic transition is called
the cavity detuning. In the jargon of quantum information, the two atomic levels
coupled to the electromagnetic ﬁeld are called a qubit. In the dipole and rotating-wave
approximations,theHamiltonianofthesystemisgivenbytheJaynes-Cummings(JC)
model [6]:
ˆHJC = ωq ˆSz + ω ˆa† ˆa + g( ˆS+ ˆa + ˆS−ˆa†) ,
(1.1)
where g is the atom-ﬁeld coupling strength, and ˆa† (ˆa) is the creation (annihilation)
operator of the photonic mode. Here, ˆSα is a collective pseudospin operator for atoms
(with α = x, y, z; ˆS± = ˆSx ± i ˆSy), deﬁned by ˆSα = 1
2
N
j=1 ˆσα
j , with N being the
number of atoms inside the cavity and ˆσα
j the Pauli matrices for the j-th qubit.
The JC Hamiltonian (1.1) conserves the total number m of atomic and photonic
excitations, which are the eigenvalues of the polariton number operator
ˆm = ˆa† ˆa +
N

j=1
ˆσ+
j ˆσ−
j .
(1.2)
When restricted to the subspace of a ﬁxed number of excitations, ˆm can be written in
a tridiagonal form and easily diagonalized (see Sect.1.3.2 for a detailed discussion).
The spectrum of the Hamiltonian in Eq. (1.1) is anharmonic and thus the JC model
describes a nonlinear cavity [6]. Such anharmonicity is at the origin of an effective
repulsion between photons. To understand this fact, let us suppose that one photon is
injected into the cavity and, as a consequence, the system is in its ﬁrst excited state.
Adding a second excitation requires an energy larger than that of two photons in
the same system with vanishing light-matter coupling. The strength of this effective
interaction depends on the detuning Δ and on the number N of atoms in the cavity.
If the interaction is strong enough, the excitation of the atom-cavity system by a
ﬁrst photon may block the transmission of a second photon, thereby converting an
incident thermal stream of photons into an antibunched stream. This nonlinear effect
has been named photon blockade [7], after the Coulomb blockade effect, in which
charge transport through a device occurs on an electron-by-electron basis.
The Hamiltonian in Eq. (1.1) generates the unitary evolution of a simpliﬁed atom-
cavity system. However, even within a simple atom-cavity model, two major loss
and decoherence processes exist and are responsible for the energy transfer with the
surrounding environment: i) spontaneous emission with rate γa from the higher- to
the lower-energy atomic state; ii) photon propagation at a rate κ from the cavity mode
to the continuum of modes outside of the cavity. The rate κ is inversely proportional
to the quality factor of the cavity. The ratio between the interaction strength squared
g2 and the algebraic average √κγa of the two loss rates is called the cooperativity
factor η. For η ≫1, the typical time-scale of the coherent evolution generated by the
Hamiltonian is much shorter than the time-scale of the non-unitary processes that
cause loss and decoherence. In this parameter regime, the Hamiltonian model (1.1)
is sufﬁcient to describe the dynamics of the system. For longer times, or for smaller

4
A. Tomadin et al.
cooperativity factors, it is necessary to take into account the loss and decoherence
processes as well (see Sect.1.2.3).
1.2.2
Photon-Mediated Coupling Between Nonlinear Cavities
The coupling between different cavities may be due to photon propagation between
the cavity modes, due to the ﬁnite quality factor of the cavities. This process can
be understood in terms of photon hopping between neighboring cavities, as massive
particles do between neighboring wells due to quantum tunneling. Eventually, pho-
tons propagate through the whole cavity array and delocalized modes can be deﬁned
in the array, adopting the same formalism used to describe electrons traveling in a
solid-state crystal [8]. The Bloch theorem can be applied to the electromagnetic vec-
tor potential A(r), in the Coulomb gauge, so that a Wannier function [8] ξℓ(r) can be
deﬁned in the ℓ-th site of the lattice (i.e. the ℓ-th cavity of the array) and interpreted
as the wave function of the corresponding cavity mode. As Wannier functions are
not entirely localized within a lattice site (i.e. the cavity volume), the ﬁnite overlap
between the Wannier functions of different cavities is responsible for ﬁnite photon
hopping amplitude. In terms of Wannier functions, and annihilation operators for
the cavity modes, the non-relativistic second-quantized vector potential operator [9]
reads:
ˆA(r) =
L

ℓ=1
ξℓ(r)ˆaℓ.
(1.3)
Choosing a basis of maximally localized Wannier functions [10] allows to neglect
overlap between cavities which are not nearest neighbors in the array. In this nearest-
neighbor approximation, photon propagation through the cavity array contributes
through the following “kinetic” term to the cavity array Hamiltonian:
ˆHkin = −J

⟨ℓ,ℓ′⟩
ˆa†
ℓˆaℓ,
(1.4)
where the symbol ⟨. . .⟩restricts the summation over couples of indices ℓ, ℓ′ labelling
neighboring cavities. The hopping amplitude J is given by J =

dr ϵ(r)ξℓ(r)ξℓ′(r),
where ϵ(r) is the inhomogeneous dielectric constant in the cavity array.
Adding the kinetic term (1.4) to the Jaynes-Cummings Hamiltonian (1.1), one
obtains the so-called Jaynes-Cummings-Hubbard (JCH) Hamiltonian:
ˆHJCH =
L

ℓ=1
ˆH(ℓ)
JC −J

⟨ℓ,ℓ′⟩
ˆa†
ℓˆaℓ′ −μ
L

ℓ=1
ˆmℓ.
(1.5)

1
Strongly Correlated Polaritons in Nonlinear Cavity Arrays
5
Here, the Hamiltonian is written in its “gran canonical” form [11], which includes
a term proportional to the chemical potential μ of polaritons (neglecting losses, the
total number of polaritons is conserved). The JCH Hamiltonian describes a system of
L coupled identical cavities, each of them containing N atoms. Its structure closely
matches that of the Bose-Hubbard (BH) Hamiltonian
ˆHBH = U
2
L

ℓ=1
ˆnℓ(ˆnℓ−1) −J

⟨ℓ,ℓ′⟩
ˆb†
ℓˆbℓ′ −μ
L

ℓ=1
ˆnℓ,
(1.6)
which is the paradigmatic model to describe ultracold bosonic neutral atoms trapped
in periodic electromagnetic potentials created by counterpropagating laser beams,
called optical lattices [12]. In Eq. (1.6), ˆb†
ℓ(ˆbℓ) is the atomic creation (annihila-
tion) operator in the ℓ-th optical lattice site and ˆnℓ= ˆb†
ℓˆbℓ. The onsite JC Hamil-
tonian is substituted by a nonlinear term, proportional to the interaction strength U,
which originates from a zero-range repulsion potential between the neutral atoms.
It has been shown that the phase diagram and the low-energy excitations of the two
Hamiltonians (1.5) and (1.6) are qualitatively similar. However, at higher energies,
substantial differences arise between the spectra of the two models, due to the com-
posite nature of the polaritons. Although the BH Hamiltonian naturally arises in
the context of ultracold atoms in optical lattices, a nonlinear cavity array setup has
been devised [13–15] where a family of polaritons obeys the BH Hamiltonian in
a speciﬁc parameter regime. In Sects.1.3 and 1.4 we discuss the equilibrium and
nonequilibrium dynamics of a cavity array resorting both to the JCH and to the BH
Hamiltonian.
1.2.3
Photon-Induced Losses and Decoherence
Despite being described by similar Hamiltonians (1.5) and (1.6), polaritons in a non-
linear cavity array and ultracold atoms in an optical lattice are substantially different
systems for the following reason. Optical lattices are able to trap a number of ultra-
cold atoms on a time-scale which is very long compared to the typical time-scales of
the BH Hamiltonian [12]. This important feature guarantees that the number of atoms
is practically constant during the whole time-evolution and the BH Hamiltonian can
be solved both in the gran-canonical and in the canonical ensemble. On the contrary,
polaritons in the JCH Hamiltonian are composite excitations, which eventually dis-
appear from the cavity array due to coupling of the cavity modes to the continuum
of electromagnetic modes outside the cavity. State-of-the-art implementations of a
cavity array are such that the time-scale ∝κ−1 for photon propagation outside of the
array (often referred to as “photon leakage”) cannot be assumed to be much longer
than the time-scale g−1 for light-matter coherent energy exchange. In other words,
a cavity array is an inherently open quantum system [16]. Moreover, the detection
of leaked photons is the only way to probe the properties of the polaritons inside

6
A. Tomadin et al.
the cavity array. An external driving is thus necessary to measure a nonvanishing
output signal. While this measurement scheme is active, the number of polaritons is
not well-deﬁned and the effects of the driving and of the environment on the cavity
array must be taken into consideration.
The driving of a cavity array can be achieved by shining a coherent light source
(i.e. a laser beam) onto the cavities. On the ℓ-th cavity, it is represented by the
Hamiltonian term [9]
ˆH(ℓ)
pump(t) = Ω(t)∗ˆaℓ+ Ω(t) ˆa†
ℓ,
(1.7)
where Ω(t) is proportional to the amplitude of the electromagnetic ﬁeld of the coher-
ent light source. If the frequency of the driving ﬁeld is ωd and the rotating-wave
approximation [9] is used, we have Ω(t) = Ωe−iωdt.
The inclusion of photon leakage into the model cannot be done within the Hamil-
tonian formalism. The profound reason for this difﬁculty is that losses necessarily
induce decoherence (as a broad consequence of the ﬂuctuation-dissipation theo-
rem [17]) and thus require a more general dynamical framework than a coherent
unitary evolution. In general, the time-evolution of a mixed state described by the
density matrix ρ(t) obeys the master equation [6]
∂tρ(t) = −i[ ˆH(t), ρ(t)] + ˆL[ρ](t) .
(1.8)
For the JCH and BH models, in the presence of external driving by a coherent light
source, the time-dependent Hamiltonian reads:
ˆHJCH−pump(t) = ˆHJCH +
L

ℓ=1
ˆH(ℓ)
pump(t),
ˆHBH−pump(t) = ˆHBH +
L

ℓ=1
ˆH(ℓ)
pump(t) .
(1.9)
The Liouvillian superoperator ˆL[ρ](t) includes the contributions of losses and deco-
herence and, in general, depends on the state ρ(t′) at t′ < t. Under the assumption
that the external environment (i) is weakly coupled to the cavity array and (ii) has a
smooth continuous density of states at the frequency ω, the system dynamics can be
shown to be Markovian [18]. In this case, the Liouvillian superoperator is a linear
function ˆL[ρ(t)] of the state ρ(t) at time t only, which can be written in the Lindblad
form [18]:
ˆL[ρ(t)] = Γ
L

ℓ=1
(2 ˆKℓρ ˆK †
ℓ−ˆK †
ℓˆKℓρ −ρ ˆK †
ℓˆKℓ) ,
(1.10)
where ˆKℓis a so-called Kraus operator. Photon leakage corresponds to local Kraus
operators
ˆKℓ= ˆaℓwith coefﬁcient Γ = κ. For a cavity array operating in the
microwave spectral range at non-cryogenic temperatures, propagation of photons
from the environment to the cavity mode has also to be taken into account, and
corresponds to ˆKℓ= ˆa†
ℓ.

1
Strongly Correlated Polaritons in Nonlinear Cavity Arrays
7
The system is in a steady state ρss when the time-derivative of the density matrix
vanishes. The concept of steady state is the closest analogue of the ground state that
canbedevisedinanonequilibriumsystem.Thesteadystateofacavityarraydescribed
by the JCH Hamiltonian with photon leakage, in the absence of external driving, is
the vacuum state. It is also useful to deﬁne a dark state ρds such that ˆKℓρds = 0
for each ℓ. It is easy to see that if a dark state is an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian,
it is a steady state of the system. Otherwise a much more complicated dynamics
arises and the steady state results from the interplay between the Hamiltonian and
the Liouvillian. Nonlocal and nonlinear Kraus operators can be engineered to drive
the system towards a desired steady state (see Sect.1.4.2).
1.3
Equilibrium Phase Diagram of Cavity-Array Models
1.3.1
The Mott-Insulator—Superﬂuid Quantum Phase
Transition
The crucial property of both the JCH and the BH Hamiltonian is the competition
between the kinetic energy (i.e. the photon or atom hopping, respectively) and the
onsite interactions (i.e. the light-matter coherent interaction or the atomic repulsive
interaction, respectively). Consequently, the phase portrait of both models presents
substantial similarities. In the following discussion we focus on the JCH Hamil-
tonian. The competition between the kinetic and the interaction terms opens up the
possibility to stabilize two qualitatively different phases at zero temperature, where
the polaritonic excitations have opposite behaviors. If the kinetic term dominates,
the photonic component of the polaritons is delocalized across the cavity array and
the system demonstrates long-range spatial coherence. The property of long-range
spatial coherence is typical of superﬂuid (SF) liquids and gases, so this phase of
the polaritonic system is called superﬂuid phase. In the opposite limit where the
interaction term is much larger then the kinetic term, polaritons are localized in the
cavity volume. The system is incompressible and photon propagation through the
array is inhibited by onsite interactions, so that the polaritonic system realizes a Mott
insulating (MI) phase. The two phases are separated by a quantum phase transition,
which takes place at a well-deﬁned critical value of the ratio between the hopping
amplitude J and the atom-ﬁeld coupling strength g, for a given number of atoms N
in each cavity.
The phase diagram of the JCH Hamiltonian has been ﬁrst obtained by means
of a mean-ﬁeld approach, applied for one [14] as well as many [19] atoms in each
cavity, and later conﬁrmed with a strong-coupling theory [20]. Subsequently, accu-
rate numerical techniques, such as variational cluster approximations [21], quantum
Monte Carlo [22–24], and density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) algo-
rithms [25, 26], have yielded a more precise picture, which includes the role of
dimensionality and the information on the critical exponents at the quantum phase

8
A. Tomadin et al.
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
J/g
−1.2
−1.0
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
ρ = 1
ρ = 2
ρ = 3
(a)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
J/g
−1.6
−1.4
−1.2
−1.0
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
(μ −ω )/g
(μ −ω )/g
ρ = 1
ρ = 2
ρ = 3
(b)
Fig. 1.1 Phase diagram of the 1D JCH Hamiltonian at Δ = 0, obtained with DMRG calcula-
tions [25]. Dark shaded areas denote the MI lobes at ﬁxed integer density ρ, while in the surrounding
white region the system is in a SF phase. The left and right panel correspond to N = 1 and N = 2,
respectively
transition. In Fig.1.1 we show the phase diagram for a one-dimensional (1D) cavity
array. However, the following discussion applies to higher dimensionalities as well.
The phase diagram in the plane spanned by the hopping amplitude J and the chem-
ical potential μ is characterized by several lobes extending from the J = 0 axis. (The
energy ω of the cavity mode is subtracted from the chemical potential in the plot of
Fig.1.1.) The system is in the MI phase when the parameters μ, J correspond to a
point inside the lobes, and in the SF phase otherwise. Inside the ρ-th lobe, the ground
state of the system has ρ polaritons localized in each cavity and the ﬂuctuations of the
polariton number operator vanish. The excitation spectrum is gapped, thus the MI
phase is incompressible. In the SF phase, the global U(1) symmetry of the Hamil-
tonian, realized by the transformation ˆaℓ→ˆaℓeiφ, is broken. In other words, the
expectation value of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in the cavity array acquires a uniform,
constant phase. Such state of light is called “coherent” and its properties are markedly
differ from light emitted by a standard thermal source [9]. The number of polaritons
in each cavity is not well-deﬁned, since quantum ﬂuctuations ⟨( ˆmℓ−⟨ˆmℓ⟩)2⟩of
the photonic number operator are ﬁnite; moreover they considerably increase if one
considers a block of cavities with an enlarging dimension [26]. Local ﬂuctuations of
the particle number correspond to the property, mentioned above, that the photonic
component of the polaritons is delocalized over the whole lattice. The SF phase is
characterized by a ﬁnite stiffness and compressibility, and the energy gap closes.
In the BH model (1.6), the SF-MI transition has been studied theoretically in
great detail [27]. Most importantly, an experimental implementation of the BH model
using ultracold bosonic neutral atoms in optical lattices [28] has been achieved by
several groups around the world and has been the target of constant efforts for more
than a decade. On the contrary, complete experimental implementations of the JCH

1
Strongly Correlated Polaritons in Nonlinear Cavity Arrays
9
model have not been reported yet. Several implementation schemes have been put
forward [2, 5] and ﬁrst experiments started to appear recently [29].
In the rest of this section we discuss in detail the zero-temperature phase diagram
of the 1D JCH Hamiltonian. We consider ﬁrst the case of vanishing photon hopping
amplitude, J = 0, in Sect.1.3.2 and then the general case, J ̸= 0, in Sect.1.3.3. A
comparison with the BH Hamiltonian is discussed at a quantitative level.
1.3.2
Vanishing Photon Hopping Amplitude
When the photon hopping is completely suppressed, the cavities of the array are
decoupled and the problem is exactly solvable. Let us also suppose that the ground
state contains ρ polaritons in each cavity. The system is homogeneous, therefore
it contains a total number ρL of polaritons. To create (annihilate) a polariton in a
cavity requires a positive (negative) energy ΔE+ = E+ −E0 (ΔE−= E−−E0).
The minimum between +ΔE+ and −ΔE−is the energy gap of the spectrum of the
cavity array (“Mott gap”). The existence of an energy gap in each cavity implies that
the ground state is incompressible and insulating.
In the parameter space, the phase boundary between ground states with a different
number ρ of polaritons per cavity is determined by the condition that the Mott gap
vanishes: ΔE± = 0. To calculate the Mott gap it is sufﬁcient to diagonalize the JC
Hamiltonian matrix, reduced to the subspace with ρ polaritons:
ˆHJC
ρ=
⎛
⎜⎜⎜⎜⎝
ρω
g√Nρ
g√Nρ
ωq + (ρ−1)ω
g√2(N −1)(ρ−1)
g√2(N −1)(ρ−1)
2ωq + (ρ−2)ω
g√3(N −2)(ρ−2)
g√3(N −2)(ρ−2)
3ωq + (ρ−3)ω
. . .
. . .
. . .
⎞
⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠
.
(1.11)
The Hamiltonian matrix is written in the basis {|0, ρ⟩, |1, ρ −1⟩, · · · , |N, ρ −N⟩},
where the ﬁrst index gives the number of excited atoms, and the second index gives
the number of photons in the cavity mode. Note that, for ρ < N, the above matrix
has to be truncated to the ﬁrst (ρ + 1) × (ρ + 1) rows and columns.
In Fig.1.2 we plot the boundaries μ±
c (ρ, J = 0) between ground states with differ-
ent number of polaritons in each cavity, as a function of the detuning Δ, for different
number of atoms N in each cavity. In the grand canonical ensemble, the boundaries
correspond to the extra energies to create or annihilate a polariton,
μ±
c (ρ, 0) = ±ΔE±(ρ, 0) .
(1.12)
One can identify a critical value Δ⋆(N) of the detuning such that, for Δ > Δ⋆(N),
the Mott lobes (corresponding to segments at J = 0) tend to group into two sets,
with ρ > N and ρ < N, respectively. The width of the Mott lobe with ρ = N, sep-
arating the two sets, increases as the detuning increases past Δ⋆(N). We estimated

10
A. Tomadin et al.
−10
−5
0
5
10
Δ/g
−0.5
−0.4
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0.0
ρ = 0
ρ = 1
ρ
(a)
−10
−5
0
5
10
Δ/g
−3.0
−2.5
−2.0
−1.5
−1.0
−0.5
0.0
(μ −ω )/g
(μ −ω )/g
ρ = 0
ρ = 10
ρ
(b)
Fig. 1.2 Boundaries between MI phases with different polariton density ρ in each cavity, as a
function of the detuning Δ, for J = 0. The value of ρ increases along the arrow and is indicated
explicitly in some regions. The left and right panel correspond to N = 1 and N = 10, respectively.
Note that the absolute value of ω simply shifts the values of the critical chemical potentials
Δ⋆numerically, taking the value of the detuning at which the curve μ+
c (ρ = N, 0)
in Fig.1.2 has a minimum, and found a scaling Δ⋆(N) ∼
√
N.
At a ﬁxed polariton density ρ, one can give an estimate of the effective interaction
strength Ueff between polaritons by taking the second-order difference quotient of
the ground-state energy E0(ρ) with respect to the number of polaritons:
Ueff(ρ) = Δ2E0(m)
Δm2

m=ρ
= μ+
c (ρ, 0) −μ−
c (ρ, 0) .
(1.13)
An important difference with respect to the BH model is the fact that the effective
repulsion Ueff(ρ) for the JC model explicitly depends on the number of polaritons in a
cavity.Ataﬁxedρ,thisdependenceweakenswhenthenumber N ofatomsinsideeach
cavity increases (see Fig.1.3). We also notice that, for large ρ, the effective repulsion
drops as a power law Ueff ∼ρ−3/2, for each value of N and Δ. The ρ-independent
effective interaction, mimicking the BH situation, can be thus recovered in the limit
of many atoms N ≫ρ.
1.3.3
Finite Photon Hopping Amplitude
When a ﬁnite hopping amplitude is taken into account, J ̸= 0, all the cavities in
the array are coupled and it is not practical to straightforwardly diagonalize the
JCH Hamiltonian. Moreover, it can be shown that the JCH Hamiltonian is non-

1
Strongly Correlated Polaritons in Nonlinear Cavity Arrays
11
1
2
5
10 20
50 100
ρ
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
log10(Ueff/g)
N
(a)
1
2
5
10 20
50 100
ρ
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
log10(Ueff/g)
N
(b)
Fig. 1.3 Onsite effective interaction strength Ueff in the JCH model, as a function of the number ρ
of polaritons in each cavity, for J = 0. Different data sets correspond to N = 1, 2, 4, 10, 50, 100,
increasingasindicatedbythearrow.Onthehorizontalaxis,ρcanattainonlyintegervalues,however,
the data is shown using solid lines to make the graphics clearer. The dashed line corresponds to
Ueff ∼ρ−3/2. The left and the right panel correspond to Δ = 0 and Δ = 5, respectively. For our
convenience, here and in the next Figs.1.4 and 1.5 we set ω = 0
integrable, so that an analytical solution of the model in its whole complexity is not
possible. To overcome these difﬁculties in a 1D geometry, the DMRG algorithm has
been employed and accurate results on the phase diagram have been obtained. The
strategy of DMRG [30] is to build up a portion of the system (the system’s block)
and then recursively enlarge it, until the desired system size is reached. At every
step, the basis of the corresponding Hamiltonian is truncated, so that the size of the
Hilbert space is kept manageable as the physical system grows. The truncation of
the Hilbert space is performed by retaining only some eigenstates, corresponding to
the highest eigenvalues of the block’s reduced density matrix.
The phase boundaries between MI and SF phases have been obtained by calcu-
lating the Mott gap as function of the hopping amplitude and ﬁnding the values of
the chemical potential μ±
c at which the Mott gap vanishes [25, 26]. In the same way
as for the zero-hopping case, Eq. (1.12), along the μ axis and at ﬁxed J, the upper
and lower extreme of the ρ-th Mott lobe are given by
μ±
c (ρ, J) = ±ΔE±(ρ, J) .
(1.14)
More precisely, on a chain of ﬁnite length L, the Mott gap for a generic value of J can
be evaluated by performing three iterations of the DMRG procedure in the canonical
ensemble at integer density ρ, with projections on different polariton number sectors
ρL, ρL ± 1. The corresponding ground states give the desired energies E0, E± =
E0 + ΔE±, from which the chemical potential μ±
c is extrapolated through Eq. (1.14).

12
A. Tomadin et al.
The thermodynamic limit is recovered by means of a ﬁnite-size scaling with a linear
ﬁt in 1/L, as discussed in Refs. [31, 32].
The most signiﬁcant effect of a ﬁnite photon hopping amplitude is that the Mott
lobes shrink with increasing J and superﬂuid regions appear between neighboring
Mottlobes(seeFig.1.1).Atsomevalue J ⋆(ρ)thetwoboundariesoftheMIlobemeet,
μ+
c [ρ, J ⋆(ρ)] = μ−
c [ρ, J ⋆(ρ)] and the ρ-th Mott lobe features a sharp tip, as shown
in Fig.1.1. (In two- and three-dimensional geometry the tip is generally smoother.)
Photon hopping between neighboring cavities can also be interpreted in terms of
effective polariton hopping, with amplitude Jeff. To ﬁnd the relation between Jeff
and J, we consider the energy of a defect state, i.e. a state that is obtained from the
MI ground state by creating or annihilating a polariton. We also calculate the energy
of a defect state in an auxiliary BH model with hopping amplitude Jeff. By requiring
the two energies to be the same, we ﬁnd the desired relation. For deﬁniteness, we
focus here on the ﬁrst MI lobe, with ρ = 1, for both the JCH and the BH model. An
analogous calculation can be performed for any other lobe.
Let us start out with the calculation of the defect state energy in the BH model.
We follow the route of a perturbative expansion in Jeff, which can also be understood
as a strong-coupling expansion, valid in the limit Jeff ≪U [33]. The energy of the
defect state is then given by the average of the kinetic operator over the unperturbed
ground state. To zeroth order in Jeff/U, the MI ground state of the BH model, with
ρ = 1 boson per lattice site, is given by:
|ψ0⟩∝
L

ℓ=1
ˆb†
ℓ|vac⟩,
(1.15)
where |vac⟩is the vacuum state. Let us consider the two defect states
|ψ+⟩∝
L

ℓ=1
ˆb†
ℓ|ψ0⟩,
|ψ−⟩∝
L

ℓ=1
ˆbℓ|ψ0⟩,
(1.16)
where one boson is created (annihilated) with the same probability and phase on each
cavity of the array. The energy of the defect states (with respect to the ground state
energy), at ﬁrst order in Jeff, is given by E+ −E0 ∼−4Jeff and E−−E0 ∼−2Jeff,
respectively.
Following the same procedure for the JCH model, we can also explicitly calculate
the expectation value of the photon hopping term −J 
ℓˆa†
ℓˆaℓon the same one-defect
states (1.16), thus ﬁnding
E+ −E0 ∼−4J ×
[ˆaℓ, ˆb†
ℓ,1]
2,
E−−E0 ≃−2J ×
[ˆaℓ, ˆb†
ℓ,1]
2 .
(1.17)
Here, ˆb†
ℓ,1 is the operator that, applied to the ground state, gives the state with one
polariton in the ℓ-th site of the lattice, and reads

1
Strongly Correlated Polaritons in Nonlinear Cavity Arrays
13
ˆb†
ℓ,1 =
1
√
2
·

4Ng2 + Δ2 −Δ

ˆa†
ℓ−ˆS+
ℓ

4Ng2 + Δ2 −Δ

4Ng2 + Δ2
.
(1.18)
We remark that polaritons do not have a well-deﬁned statistics, hence they cannot
be associated to standard bosonic creation and annihilation operators. (It is easy to
check that [ˆbℓ,1, ˆb†
ℓ,1] ̸= 1, in general.)
Equating the energies of the defect states in the BH and JCH model, we ﬁnd
Jeff ∼J ×
[ˆaℓ, ˆb†
ℓ,1]
2 .
(1.19)
Using the expression (1.18), and the commutation relations [ˆaℓ, ˆa†
ℓ] = 1 and
[ˆaℓ, ˆS+
ℓ] = 0, we ﬁnally obtain:
Jeff ∼J × 1
2

1 −
Δ

4Ng2 + Δ2

.
(1.20)
The ratio Jeff/J is shown in Fig.1.4 (solid line) as a function of the detuning,
and compared to numerical results obtained with the DMRG algorithm (symbols).
In the following we elucidate the origin of the discrepancies, by working out more
explicitly the comparison with the BH model.
As a matter of fact, the effective interaction strength Ueff and the hopping ampli-
tude Jeff for the polaritons allow us to deﬁne a mapping from the JCH to the BH
−10
−5
0
5
10
Δ/g
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Jeff/J
(a)
−10
−5
0
5
10
Δ/g
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Jeff/J
(b)
Fig. 1.4 Ratio between the effective polaritonic hopping amplitude Jeff and the photonic hopping
amplitude J as a function of the detuning Δ. The solid line corresponds to the analytical estimate in
Eq.(1.20). The ﬁlled (empty) symbols correspond to numerical data obtained from the lower (upper)
slope of the MI lobes. The left and right panel correspond to N = 1 and N = 10, respectively

14
A. Tomadin et al.
model, where polaritons are approximately represented as bosonic particles and the
effective parameters are used in the Hamiltonian (1.6).
The robustness of this mapping can be checked by comparing the analytical
expressions for Jeff given above with results of DMRG calculations. The ﬁrst step in
this direction is to show that a relation exists between the slope of the boundaries of
the MI lobes for J ≳0 and the ratio Jeff/J. Specializing Eq. (1.14) to the ﬁrst lobe
and using Eqs. (1.17) and (1.19), we ﬁnd
dμ−
c
d J = 2 Jeff
J ,
dμ+
c
d J = −4 Jeff
J
.
(1.21)
Numerical results for both the lower and the upper boundary of the ρ = 1 MI lobe are
reported in Fig.1.4 and compared to the analytical expression (1.20). We point out
that the ratio Jeff/J is very different for the lower and the upper boundary in the case
N = 1 [panel (a)]. In particular, Eq. (1.20) agrees only with the numerical results
corresponding to the lower boundary. The discrepancy indicates that the polariton
hopping depends on the occupation of the cavity where this happens [the form of
polariton operators depend on the excitation subspace they live in; in particular, ˆb†
ℓ,2
is generally different from ˆb†
ℓ,1 in Eq. (1.18)]. We conclude that, in this limit, the
mapping to an effective BH model is less accurate, and cannot be used to extract
information about the phase transition. On the other hand, when N is increased,
the mapping becomes more accurate [panel (b)]. This trend is supported by the
observation that, only in this situation, one can unequivocally deﬁne a constant
effective interaction strength Ueff for the mapping to the BH model, while for N ≤ρ
the interaction strength depends strongly on the density (see Fig.1.3).
An accurate estimate of the critical hopping J ⋆, at which the Mott gap closes and
the system exhibits the MI-SF transition, can be given by analyzing the compressibil-
ity κ = ∂ρ/∂μ in the canonical ensemble at ﬁxed number of polaritons ρ per cavity.
In the thermodynamic limit, MI states are identiﬁed by the vanishing of the com-
pressibility, which is, on the other hand, ﬁnite in the SF phase. A ﬁnite-size scaling
of κ is thus able to detect the quantum phase transition with high accuracy1 [25]. The
results for ρ = 1, obtained with DMRG calculations, are plotted in Fig.1.5. When N
is large, it is possible to extrapolate such value with large precision by exploiting the
mapping with the BH model. Indeed, it is well known that the MI-SF transition in the
BH model with one boson per lattice site in the ground state occurs at J/U ≃0.3 [31,
32]. Given the effective onsite polariton repulsion Ueff, the transition is thus located
at the critical polariton hopping
J ⋆
eff ≃0.3Ueff .
(1.22)
1This procedure is formally equivalent to ﬁnding the critical hopping J ⋆at which, in the grand
canonical ensemble, the critical chemical potentials μ±
c (ρ, J) of Eq. (1.14) coincide.

1
Strongly Correlated Polaritons in Nonlinear Cavity Arrays
15
−10
−5
0
5
10
Δ/g
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
log10(J /g)
log10(J /g)
SF
MI
(a)
−10
−5
0
5
10
Δ/g
−4
−3
−2
−1
0
1
SF
MI
(b)
Fig. 1.5 Critical hopping in the ﬁrst MI lobe as a function of the detuning Δ. Symbols are obtained
by means of DMRG calculations. The gray shading is a guide to the eye connecting the symbols.
The left and right panel correspond to N = 1 and N = 10, respectively. In panel (b), the dashed
line is an analytical approximation discussed in the main text, following from J ⋆
eff ≃0.3Ueff
From this analytic estimate it is possible to draw the dashed line in the panel (b) of
Fig.1.5 (in the case of N = 10 atoms per cavity), which compares very well with
the numerical results.
Finally we observe that, for large positive detuning Δ = ω −ωq, the superﬂuid is
stabilized for increasing values of the photon hopping, thus meaning that it becomes
suppressed with respect to the MI state. (On the contrary, for large negative detuning
the opposite situation occurs.) This can be intuitively understood by the fact that,
when Δ ≫1, the single-photon cavity frequency ω is much larger than the excitation
frequency of the atomic transition, therefore the photonic (delocalized) part of the
polaritons is energetically suppressed. Note also that, in such circumstance, the onsite
repulsion energyUeff exhibits a marked peak around ρ = N [see panel (b) in Fig.1.3],
thus enhancing the stabilization of a polaritonic MI state at large detunings if the
number of atoms in each cavity matches the density ρ. In Fig.1.5 we observe indeed
that, at ﬁxed large Δ values, the ﬁrst MI lobe is more robust for N = 1.
1.4
Nonequilibrium Dynamics of Cavity-Array Models
1.4.1
Nonequilibrium Signatures of the Equilibrium Phase
Diagram
In Sect.1.3 we have discussed the equilibrium MI-SF quantum phase transition in
the JCH and BH models. A cavity array implementation of either model, however,

16
A. Tomadin et al.
is necessarily an open system and cannot be probed in equilibrium, as explained in
Sect.1.2.3. In this section, we address the following question: is it possible to identify
signatures of the equilibrium MI-SF quantum phase transition in the nonequilibrium
steady-state of the open JCH or BH model? For deﬁniteness, here we focus on the BH
model, exploiting the mapping discussed in Sect.1.3 in terms of effective hopping
amplitude and interaction strength.
We remark that our goal is not to investigate a novel set of quantum phases,
arising from the interplay of the Hamiltonian and Liouvillian dynamics. On the
contrary, we consider signatures proper of the well-known ground-state MI and
SF phases, and we devise a protocol by which these signatures can be accessed
when the system is coupled to the environment and driven by an external ﬁeld. The
dynamicsofthesystemisgeneratedbythemasterequation(1.8)withtheHamiltonian
ˆHBH−pump deﬁned in Eq. (1.6) (with the substitutions J →Jeff, U →Ueff) and
the Liouvillian (1.10). Here, the losses are deﬁned by local, linear Kraus operators
ˆKℓ= ˆbℓ,correspondingtobosonsleakingoutsideofthecavityarray,atarateΓ →κ.
The crucial observable to distinguish the MI from the SF phase is the “order
parameter” ⟨ˆbℓ(t)⟩[14, 34], where ⟨ˆO(t)⟩= Tr[ ˆOρ(t)] is the quantum average of
the operator ˆO at time t. The order parameter vanishes in the MI and is ﬁnite in
the SF phase, indicating the breaking of the U(1) symmetry associated to the latter
phase (see Sect.1.3.1) and, more tangibly, emission of coherent light [6, 9] from the
cavity array. To search for a signature of the MI-SF transition in the amplitude of
the emitted coherent light requires to carefully devise a driving scheme. Indeed, it is
easy to understand that a continuous and coherent driving of the cavity array washes
out signatures of the coherent light generated in the cavity array spontaneously due
to light-matter interactions. To overcome this difﬁculty, it has been proposed [35] to
drive the cavity array periodically, using a pulsed light source. The dynamics of the
light coherence between pulses is unaffected by the driving and is distinctly different
in the parameter regime corresponding to the MI and SF phases [35]. A convenient
observable is thus the time-average of the absolute value of the coherent amplitude,
|⟨ˆbℓ(t)⟩|.
The solution of the equations of motion for the cavity array in these nonequilib-
rium conditions, with many-body interactions between the bosonic particles, poses a
formidable task. In general, explicitly solvable models of master equations (1.8) are
very limited, and support from extensive numerical simulations is desirable. In the
Lindblad formalism, the most common approach relies on the quantum trajectories
technique, a method that is widely used in quantum optics [18]. This is based on a sto-
chastically evolving state vector which can occasionally jump to other states accord-
ing to the Lindblad operators. A more recent method is based on time-dependent
DMRG in the formalism of the matrix product operators (MPO): the density matrix
of the system is represented as a MPO, while the time evolution is performed by
employing a time-evolving block-decimation (TEBD) algorithm that integrates the
master equation (1.8) in time until a steady state is reached [36, 37].

1
Strongly Correlated Polaritons in Nonlinear Cavity Arrays
17
0.1
0.2
0.5
1.0
Jeff/Ueff
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.16
ˆb (t)
MI
SF
κ
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Ω/κ
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
ns, na
ns
na
Fig. 1.6 The leftmost panel shows the time-averaged absolute value of the order parameter of the
MI-SF quantum phase transition in the BH model as a function of the ratio between the effective
hopping amplitude and interaction strength. Data sets correspond to different values κ/Ueff =
5 × 10−3, 10−1, and 2 × 10−2, increasing as indicated by the arrow. The shaded area marks the
parameter range where the equilibrium Mott phase is expected for ρ = 1. The right panel shows
the steady-state value of the average photonic occupations ns, na in the two-cavities symmetric
and antisymmetric mode, respectively, for the model discussed in Sect.1.4.2. The dashed lines
correspond to the semiclassical solution of Eq. (1.26). The solid line has been obtained with the
exact diagonalization of the two-cavity system
In Ref. [35] a mean-ﬁeld scheme was used [14, 34], where the kinetic part of the
Hamiltonian is approximated as follows:
ˆHkin(t) = −J

⟨ℓ,ℓ′⟩
⟨ˆbℓ′(t)⟩ˆb†
ℓ+ H.c. .
(1.23)
This approximation corresponds to neglecting nonlocal correlation functions beyond
the connected term. In other words, quantum correlations between different sites are
lost, while onsite quantum correlations are considered. We point out that the “semi-
classical” approximation [9], often used in quantum optics, neglects local correlation
and can be recovered from the mean-ﬁeld scheme by substituting the creation and
annihilation operators with their time-dependent quantum averages.
Panel (a) of Fig.1.6 shows that the time-averaged coherent amplitude increases
as the ratio Jeff/Ueff increases, corresponding to a transition from a localized (MI)
to a delocalized (SF) dynamics. The increase is particularly sharp around a critical
value, which shifts towards the boundary of the equilibrium phase transition as the
decay rate becomes smaller. We conclude that the MI-SF quantum phase transition,
which characterizes the BH model in the absence of losses and decoherence, could
be demonstrated experimentally by detecting light from an open, driven cavity array.

18
A. Tomadin et al.
1.4.2
Liouvillian Engineering and Driven-Dissipative
Dynamics
In the previous section, we considered a dissipative mechanism (photon leakage)
which drives the cavity array towards the vacuum state and thus prevents the per-
sistence of the ground state of the Hamiltonian in time. This effect of the losses is
particularly detrimental when the Hamiltonian is engineered to have a certain ground
state, which may be of practical interest as a platform to perform, for example, quan-
tum computation algorithms, or to study correlated states of matter [2, 3]. A very
general approach to overcome this difﬁculty has been proposed in Ref [38] and con-
sists in the engineering of the Liouvillan itself to yield a desired steady state. A
practical route to Liouvillian engineering is to implement Kraus operators such that
the dark state, instead of the ground state, features the desired set of properties. The
Hamiltonian of the system has to be engineered as well to ensure that the dark state of
the Liouvillian is also the steady state of the whole system. Liouvillian engineering
generally requires some external driving applied to the system, which connects the
low-energy states of the lattice to a set of detuned higher-energy states, which can
be adiabatically eliminated. In this case, the driving is integral part of the dissipation
process, and it is instrumental to achieving a desired Liouvillian. For this reason,
these systems are called driven-dissipative.
The ﬁrst proposal of a many-body driven-dissipative system [38] considered a
cold-atom setup in an optical lattice, described by the BH model. In this case, the
effective dynamics is not unitary but there is no loss of particles from the system.
The same principle, however, has been applied to cavity arrays [39] where photon
losses and driving, as discussed in Sect.1.2.3, must be taken into account in addition
to the engineered Liouvillian.
We consider now a cavity array which is driven towards a state consisting of a
Bose-Einstein condensate (BEC) of photons. This state is interesting because photons
cannot condense in a black body, due to their vanishing chemical potential. Only
recently alternative routes to photon condensation have been realized [40]. To achieve
a BEC steady state, the Kraus operators are nonlocal and nonlinear, and read [39]:
ˆKℓ= 1
2(ˆb†
ℓ+ ˆb†
ℓ+1)(ˆbℓ−ˆbℓ+1) .
(1.24)
It is easy to see that a BEC state with M photons and zero wavevector
|BEC⟩∝

L

ℓ=1
ˆb†
ℓ
M
|vac⟩,
(1.25)
is a dark state of the Liouvillian.
The physical implementation of the system [39] consists of an array of stripline
resonators, coupled to each other by pairs of interacting superconducting qubits.
Photons in the stripline resonators are capacitively coupled to the qubits. One transi-

1
Strongly Correlated Polaritons in Nonlinear Cavity Arrays
19
tion in the four-levels spectrum of the interacting qubits is driven, two transitions are
quasi-resonant with the cavity modes, and a fourth transition includes a dominant
dissipative process. The cavity array is driven by a coherent source which creates
photons and photon leakage has to be considered as well.
For simplicity, let us ﬁrst consider an array with only two cavities, L = 2. It
is convenient to introduce annihilation operators for the symmetric and antisym-
metric superposition of the cavity modes, ˆbs = (ˆb1 + ˆb2)/
√
2, ˆba = (ˆb1 −ˆb2)/
√
2,
respectively. The equations of motion for the expectation values of the annihilation
operators reads
∂t⟨ˆbs⟩= [−i(δd −2J) −κ]⟨ˆbs⟩+ Γ ⟨ˆbs ˆb†
a ˆba⟩,
∂t⟨ˆba⟩= (−iδd −κ)⟨ˆba⟩−iΩ −Γ ⟨(ˆb†
s ˆbs + 1)ˆba⟩,
(1.26)
where the time-dependence of the expectation values has been dropped from the
notation, and δd is the detuning of the antisymmetric cavity mode with respect to
the frequency of the driving ﬁeld. Here, Γ is the strength of the Lindblad terms
in the engineered part of the Liouvillian and Ω is the amplitude of the driving
ﬁeld. The Liouvillian is engineered to generate a BEC in the symmetric mode. For
this reason, external driving pumps photons in the antisymmetric mode only: all the
photonic population in the symmetric mode is a direct consequence of the Liouvillian
dynamics.
The solution of Eqs. (1.26) in the steady state can be obtained numerically by
setting a limit to the maximum number of photons which can be present in the cavity
modes. The photon occupation ns,a = ⟨ˆb†
s,a ˆbs,a⟩in the steady state is shown in the
panel(b)ofFig.1.6.Ananalyticalsolutionisalsoeasytoobtainwithinasemiclassical
approximation, where each operator is substituted with its time-dependent quantum
average: ˆbs,a →bs,a(t). In this approximation, we ﬁnd that a critical value of the
driving strength Ω exists
Ωc = κ

δ2
d + (κ + Γ )2
κΓ
,
(1.27)
such that: (i) for Ω < Ωc the symmetric mode is empty and the population in the
antisymmetric mode increases quadratically with Ω; (ii) for Ω > Ωc the population
in the antisymmetric mode is independent of Ω, and the population in the symmetric
mode increases linearly with Ω. In other words, above thresholds the action of the
engineered Liouvillian is to scatter photons from the antisymmetric to the symmetric
mode. The numerical solution allows to compute the second-order, equal time corre-
lation function g(2) of photons in the symmetric mode and shows that increasing the
pumping strength produces a change in the light statistics from super-Poissonian to
Poissonian. Poissonian statistics is a feature expected for a coherent state of photons
in the same mode [6, 9], i.e. a BEC of photons. The numerical solution (which takes
into account quantum ﬂuctuations) and the semiclassical solution give comparable
results, as shown in Fig.1.6.

20
A. Tomadin et al.
The time-evolution of an extended array with L cavities can be understood in
terms of the two-cavities model. In this case, one introduces a family of modes with
annihilation operators ˆbq ∝L
ℓ=1 eiqℓˆbℓ, corresponding to Bloch waves [8] with
quasimomentum q in the Brillouin zone of the lattice [8]. The analogous of the sym-
metric (antisymmetric) mode is the q = 0 (q = π) Bloch wave. Condensation takes
place in the q = 0 mode, i.e. the mode obtained by the symmetric superposition of
all the cavity modes. The external driving couples to all Bloch modes with amplitude
Ωq. By tuning the spatial dependence of the phase of the external driving along the
lattice, one can change the proﬁle Ωq. Let us take Ωq = Ωδq,π for analogy with the
two-cavity case. (Here, δi, j is the Kronecker symbol.) It can be shown [39] that all
the Bloch modes with q ̸= 0 and q ̸= π are effectively decoupled from the dynam-
ics and can be neglected. The cavity array then maps precisely into the two-cavity
setup considered above. Exact diagonalization of a small array with L = 4 cavities
supports these conclusions [39].
Acknowledgements We acknowledge the EU (through IP-SIQS and STREP-TermiQ) and the Ital-
ian MIUR through FIRB (Project RBFR12NLNA) and PRIN (Project 2010LLKJBX), for ﬁnancial
support. We would also acknowledge a fruitful collaboration on the topics discussed in this chapter
with I. Carusotto, S. Diehl, D. Gerace, V. Giovannetti, A. Imamo˘glu, D. Marcos, P. Rabl, G. Santoro,
and H. Türeci.
References
1. C. Ciuti, I. Carusotto, Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 299 (2013)
2. M.J. Hartmann, F.G.S.L. Brandão, M.B. Plenio, Laser Photon. Rev. 2, 527 (2008)
3. A. Tomadin, R. Fazio, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 27, A130 (2010)
4. A.A. Houck, H.E. Türeci, J. Koch, Nature Phys. 8, 292 (2012)
5. S. Schmidt, J. Koch, Ann. der Physik 525, 395 (2013)
6. S.M. Barnett, P.M. Radmore, Methods in Theoretical Quantum Optics (Clarendon Press,
Oxford, 1997)
7. A. Imamo˘glu, H. Schmidt, G. Woods, M. Deutsch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1467 (1997)
8. N.W. Ashcroft, N.D. Mermin, Solid State Physics (Harcourt, Orlando, 1976)
9. D.F. Walls, G.J. Milburn, Quantum Optics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1994)
10. N. Marzari, A.A. Mostoﬁ, J.R. Yates, I. Souza, D. Vanderbilt, Rev. Mod. Phys. 84, 1419 (2012)
11. A.L. Fetter, J.D. Walecka, Quantum Theory of Many-Particle Systems (Dover, New York, 2003)
12. M. Lewenstein, A. Sanpera, V. Ahuﬁnger, Ultracold Atoms in Optical Lattices (Oxford Uni-
versity Press, USA, 2012)
13. M.J. Hartmann, F.G.S.L. Brandão, M.B. Plenio, Nature Phys. 2, 849 (2006)
14. A.D. Greentree, C. Tahan, J.H. Cole, L. Hollenberg, Nature Phys. 2, 856 (2006)
15. D. Angelakis, M. Santos, S. Bose, Phys. Rev. A 76, 031805 (2007)
16. H.-P. Breuer, F. Petruccione, The Theory of Open Quantum Systems (Oxford University Press,
USA, 2002)
17. L.D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz, Statistical Physics (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1980)
18. H. Carmichael, An Open Systems Approach to Quantum Optics (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1993)
19. N. Na, S. Utsunomiya, L. Tian, Y. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. A 77, 031803(R) (2007)
20. S. Schmidt, G. Blatter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 086403 (2009)
21. M. Aichhorn, M. Hohenadler, C. Tahan, P. Littlewood, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 216401 (2008)
22. P. Pippan, H. Evertz, M. Hohenadler, Phys. Rev. A 80, 033612 (2009)

1
Strongly Correlated Polaritons in Nonlinear Cavity Arrays
21
23. M. Hohenadler, M. Aichhorn, S. Schmidt, L. Pollet, Phys. Rev. A 84, 041608(R) (2011)
24. M. Hohenadler, M. Aichhorn, L. Pollet, S. Schmidt, Phys. Rev. A 85, 013810 (2012)
25. D. Rossini, R. Fazio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 186401 (2007)
26. D. Rossini, R. Fazio, G. Santoro, Europhys. Lett. 83, 47011 (2008)
27. M. Lewenstein, A. Sanpera, V. Ahuﬁnger, B. Damski, A. Sen(De), and U. Sen. Adv. Phys. 56,
243 (2007)
28. I. Bloch, J. Dalibard, W. Zwerger, Rev. Mod. Phys. 80, 885 (2008)
29. K. Toyoda, Y. Matsuno, A. Noguchi, S. Haze, S. Urabe, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 160501 (2013)
30. U. Schollwöck, Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 259 (2005)
31. T.D. Kühner, H. Monien, Phys. Rev. B 58, 14741(R) (1998)
32. T.D. Kühner, S.R. White, H. Monien. Phys. Rev. B 61, 12474 (2000)
33. J.K. Freericks, H. Monien, Phys. Rev. B 53, 2691 (1996)
34. M.P.A. Fisher, P.B. Weichman, G. Grinstein, D.S. Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 40, 546 (1989)
35. A. Tomadin, V. Giovannetti, R. Fazio, D. Gerace, I. Carusotto, H.E. Türeci, A. Imamo˘glu,
Phys. Rev. A 81, 061801(R) (2010)
36. F. Verstraete, J.J. García-Ripoll, J.I. Cirac, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 207204 (2004)
37. M. Zwolak, G. Vidal, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 207205 (2004)
38. S. Diehl, A. Micheli, A. Kantian, B. Kraus, H.P. Büchler, P. Zoller, Nature Phys. 4, 878 (2008)
39. D. Marcos, A. Tomadin, S. Diehl, P. Rabl, New J. Phys. 14, 055005 (2012)
40. J. Klaers, J. Schmitt, F. Vewinger, M. Weitz, Nature 468, 545 (2010)

Chapter 2
Phase Diagram and Excitations
of the Jaynes-Cummings-Hubbard Model
Sebastian Schmidt and Gianni Blatter
Abstract The Jaynes-Cummings-Hubbard model (JCHM) has emerged as a
fundamental model at the interface of quantum optics and condensed matter physics.
It describes strongly correlated photons in a coupled qubit-cavity array and predicts
a superﬂuid-Mott insulator transition of polaritons under quasi-equilibrium condi-
tions. Here, we review recent analytical as well as numerical results for the phase
diagram, elementary excitations and critical exponents of the JCHM and compare
them to closely related models such as the Bose-Hubbard and the Dicke model. We
comment on the fate of these results in open dissipative systems and outline schemes
for their experimental veriﬁability.
2.1
Introduction
Since its proposal by Greentree [1] and Angelakis [2], the study of the Jaynes-
Cummings-Hubbard model (JCHM) has become an active and versatile research
ﬁeld bridging two areas of modern physics: quantum optics and condensed matter.
The JCHM describes photons hopping in an array of coupled cavities and locally
interacting with qubits. Its Hamiltonian is given by
H =

i
hJC
i
−J

⟨i j⟩
a†
i a j ,
(2.1)
where hJC
i
denotes the local Jaynes-Cummings Hamiltonian
hJC
i
= ωc a†
i ai + ωxσ+
i σ−
i + g(σ+
i ai + σ−
i a†
i )
(2.2)
S. Schmidt (B) · G. Blatter
Institute for Theoretical Physics, Eth Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland
e-mail: schmidts@phys.ethz.ch
G. Blatter
e-mail: blatterj@phys.ethz.ch
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
D.G. Angelakis (ed.), Quantum Simulations with Photons and Polaritons,
Quantum Science and Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-52025-4_2
23

24
S. Schmidt and G. Blatter
with site index i, photon creation (annihilation) operators a(†)
i
and qubit raising
(lowering) operators σ+(−)
i
. The cavity mode frequency is ωc, the two qubit levels
are separated by the energy ωx and g denotes the light-matter coupling strength
(we set ℏ= 1). The second term in (2.1) describes photon hopping between nearest
neighbour sites with amplitude J. The light-matter interaction mediated by g leads
to the formation of polariton quasiparticles and introduces a nonlinearity into the
spectrum of the JCHM. Depending on the perspective, the JCHM can thus be viewed
as a lattice model for dressed photons, which gain an effective mass through cavity
conﬁnement and are interacting due to the nonlinearity mediated by the qubits or as
an effective spin lattice model, where effective spin-spin interactions are mediated
by photon exchange between distant cavities [2–5].
The physics of coupled cavity arrays is very rich reaching from strong correlation
phenomena and driven dissipative phase transitions, e.g., superﬂuid-Mott insulator
type transitions [1, 2, 6–28], self-trapping and Josephson-like phenomena [29–33],
crystalline-like phases of light [34–37] or fermionization of photons [38–40] to topo-
logical phenomena associated with the engineering of artiﬁcial gauge ﬁelds [41–48],
edge or Majorana-like modes [48–52] or the Fractional quantum Hall effect [53–56].
For recent reviews on the topic see Refs. [57–61].
One of the major appeals of the JCHM is the possibility to engineer this model
bottom-up in solid-state cavity or circuit QED architectures. Photonic lattices (with-
out the coupling to qubits) have already been engineered on a large scale with only
little disorder in cavity frequencies (as compared to the hopping rate) [43, 62]. Effec-
tive photon-photon interactions in a coupled qubit-cavity array were realised very
recently as well: In Ref. [33] a non-equilibrium delocalization-localization transition
(self-trapping) of photons has been observed as originally predicted in Ref. [31]. The
experiment was based on a two site version of the JCHM, i.e., a so-called Jaynes
Cummings dimer. It demonstrates a new scalable architecture for quantum simulation
of non-equilibrium many-body systems with a high-level of control over coherent
and dissipative dynamics.
A chemical potential for polaritons?
The global U(1) symmetry of the JCHM preserves the total number of polaritons
N = 
i(a†
i ai + σ+
i σ−
i ). It is thus convenient to introduce a chemical potential μ,
which ﬁxes the number of polaritons [1, 2], i.e.,
H →H −μN ,
(2.3)
Introducing such a chemical potential assumes the existence of a grand-canonical
ensemble and thus thermalisation. However, photonic systems are driven dissipative
systems and typically settle in a non-equilibrium steady state, which can be far from
equilibrium. It is thus important to identify situations under which calculations in
the grand-canonical ensemble are meaningful and experimentally veriﬁable. Below
we brieﬂy discuss two possible experimental schemes.
The ﬁrst situation considers incoherent pumping of a polaritonic system with
weak dissipation. For example, photons conﬁned in a dye-ﬁlled optical micro-cavity

2
Phase Diagram and Excitations …
25
condense into an equilibrium Bose-Einstein condensate with grand-canonical num-
ber statistics [63–65]. In such a system, effective thermalisation of photons occurs
through emission and absorption by dye-molecules, which themselves are coupled
to a large thermal phonon reservoir. Possible extensions of photonic condensates
to periodic photonic lattices are discussed in Ref. [66]. Note, that such incoherent
pumping mechanisms can also be realised in strongly interacting light-matter systems
based on exciton-polaritons [67] and superconducting qubits [68].
The second situation considers quenched dynamics. For example, a coupled qubit-
cavity array can be initialized in a Mott-like state using a large coherent pulse [19].
Observing the subsequent decay of such a special initial state under weak dissipation
reveals the quantum phase diagram of the Hamiltonian under equilibrium conditions,
i.e. the coherence of the system at long times approaches zero for J < Jc, i.e., in the
Mott phase, while it is nonzero for J > Jc, i.e., in the superﬂuid phase (Jc denotes
the critical hopping strength of the quantum phase transition in equilibrium). Note,
that the distinction between Mott and superﬂuid phases becomes sharp only when
dissipation vanishes, but otherwise is smoothened and washed out (similar to ﬁnite
temperature effects for ultra cold atoms in optical lattices as described by the Bose-
Hubbard model (BMH) [69]).
In this review we focus on the superﬂuid-Mott insulator transition of polaritons
under (quasi-) equilibrium conditions. In Chap.2, we discuss the atomic limit (J = 0)
and simple perturbative estimates for the phase diagram of the JCHM. In Chap.3,
we show that a linked-cluster expansion of the photonic Matsubara Green’s function
can be utilised to calculate the quantum phase diagram and elementary excitations
of the JCHM in the Mott phase. In Sect.2.3 we generalise such a strong coupling
approach to the superﬂuid phase using a slave-boson technique. In Chap.4 we brieﬂy
summarise the results of exact Quantum-Monte-Carlo simulations determining the
universality class and critical exponents of the JCHM. Finally, in Chap.5 we discuss
an intricate relation between the SF-MI transition in the JCHM and the super-radiance
phase transition in a multi-mode Dicke model. In particular, we show that a weak-
coupling mean-ﬁeld theory predicts the existence of a single Mott lobe even in the
absence of an underlying cavity array.
2.2
Degenerate Perturbation Theory
In the atomic limit (J = 0) the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian (2.1) are the dressed
polariton states |nσ⟩labelled by the polariton number n and upper/lower branch
index σ = ±. For n > 0 they can be written as a superposition of a Fock state with
n photons plus atomic ground state |n, g⟩and (n −1) photons with the atom in its
excited state |(n −1), e⟩,
|n+⟩= sin θn|n , g⟩+ cos θn|(n −1) , e⟩,
|n−⟩= cos θn|n , g⟩−sin θn|(n −1) , e⟩,
(2.4)

26
S. Schmidt and G. Blatter
with the angle tan θn = 2g√n/(δ + 2χn), χn =

g2n + δ2/4 and the detuning para-
meter δ = ωc −ωx. The corresponding eigenvalues are
ϵσ
n = −(μ −ωc)n −δ/2 + σ χn ,
σ = ± .
(2.5)
The zero polariton state |0−⟩= |0 , g⟩is a special case with ϵ−
0 = 0. Note, that
upper and lower polariton energies are separated by the so-called Rabi splitting
Ωn = 2

g2n + δ2/4.
Starting from the atomic limit result in Eqs.(2.4) and (2.5) we can obtain a rough
estimate for the quantum phase diagram of the JCHM at small tunnelling J ≪g by
calculating the excitation energies in straightforward degenerate perturbation theory.
To ﬁrst order, the chemical potentials at which the addition/removal of a lower polari-
ton costs no energy is given by (we assume a hypercubic lattice in D dimensions)
μp −ωc = χn −χn+1 −2DJ( f −−
n+1)2 + O(J 2/g) ,
μh −ωc = χn−1 −χn + 2DJ( f −−
n
)2 + O(J 2/g) .
(2.6)
The two equations in (2.6) deﬁne the upper and lower phase boundary in the quantum
phase diagram in Fig.2.1 for small values of the hopping parameter J/g. The point
where the two lines meet (i.e., μp = μh) is Jc ∼0.1g for n = 1 and represents
an upper limit for the size of the ﬁrst Mott lobe. By going to higher order in the
perturbative expansion for the ground-state energy and subsequent resummation of
0
1
2
3
4
J/g x 10
2
0
2
4
-1
-0.8
-0.6
-0.4
(μ−ωc)/g
-2
0
2
δ/g
0
4
8
J/g x 10
2
-2
0
2
δ/g
1
2
3
J/g x 10
3
n=2
n=1
n=1
n=2
Fig. 2.1 Quantum phase diagram for a hypercubic lattice in D = 2 (left ﬁgure) and D = 3 (right
ﬁgure). We show two Mott lobes for n = 1, 2 at zero detuning δ = 0. We compare ﬁrst-order
perturbation theory (dashed), RPA (dot-dashed) and quantum ﬂuctuations (solid) with recent results
from a quantum Monte-Carlo (ﬁlled dots) [11] and variational cluster (stars) [9] approach. The two
crosses (left ﬁgure) connected by the dotted line mark the parameter values used in Fig.2.2. The
insets show the critical hopping strength Jc/g at the tip of the lobe as a function of the detuning
δ for n = 1 and n = 2 calculated within strong-coupling RPA in D = 3 dimensions. Figure taken
with permission from Ref. [12]

2
Phase Diagram and Excitations …
27
the diverging strong-coupling series, e.g., via variational perturbation theory (VPT)
[70, 71], one could in principle determine the exact location of the phase boundary.
This has recently been achieved for the BHM [72, 73].
2.3
Greens Function Approach
In this section, we study the photonic Matsubara Green’s function
Gi j(τ; τ ′) = −⟨T ai(τ)¯a j(τ ′)⟩
(2.7)
withthetime-orderingoperatorT andtheHeisenbergoperator ¯a j(τ ′) = eHτ ′a†
je−Hτ ′.
A suitable method for the evaluation of the Matsubara Green’s function is a linked-
cluster expansion in terms of local cumulants originally developed by Metzner
et al. [74] for the Fermi-Hubbard model (FHM) and more recently applied to the
BHM [75].
First, we study the atomic limit (J = 0). For J = 0 the Matsubara Green’s func-
tion is local and given by
G0i j(τ; τ ′) = G0i(τ; τ ′) δi j = −⟨T ai(τ)¯ai(τ ′)⟩0 δi j ,
(2.8)
where the average ⟨. . . ⟩0 is taken with respect to the eigenstates of the local Hamil-
tonian in Eq.(2.4). We consider a spatially homogeneous system, drop the site index
i and obtain after a Fourier transformation
G0(ωm)=

n,σ,μ
e−βϵσ
n
Z

zμσ
n+1
Δμσ
n+1 −iωm
−
zσμ
n
Δσμ
n −iωm

(2.9)
with the partition function Z = 
nσ e−βϵσ
n and bosonic Matsubara frequencies
ωm = 2πm/β (here, β = 1/(kBT ) with temperature T and Boltzmann constant
kB). The spectral weights in (2.9) are deﬁned as zμσ
n
= ( f μσ
n )2 with the matrix
elements f σν
n
= ⟨n σ|a†|(n −1) ν⟩. At zero detuning (δ = 0) they are given by
f σν
n
=
√n + σ ν √n −1

/2 for n > 1 ( f σ−
1
= 1/
√
2).
Following the recipe in Metzner et al. [74], each term of the linked-cluster expan-
sion can be written diagrammatically in terms of n-particle cumulants represented by
2n-leg vertices and tunneling matrix elements symbolized by propagating lines con-
necting two vertices. The strong-coupling expansion provided by the linked-cluster
method is applicable to the JCHM because (i) the atomic limit Hamiltonian is local,
and (ii) anomalous averages of the photon operator with respect to the eigenstates
of the local Hamiltonian vanish, i.e., ⟨nσ|(a†)k|nσ⟩= 0 for k ∈N (since a single
photon excitation always changes the polariton number). In this case an inﬁnite set of
diagrams can be summed by calculating the irreducible part of the Green’s function
K(k, ωm) which is connected to the full Green’s function via the equation

28
S. Schmidt and G. Blatter
G(k, ωm) = K(k, ωm)/[1 −J(k)K(k, ωm)]
(2.10)
with the lattice dispersion J(k), e.g., for a hypercubic lattice J(k) = 2J D
i=1 cos
k · ai (ai denotes a lattice vector). To second order in J we obtain
K(ωm) =
+
= G0(ωm)+2DJ2 Q(ωm)
(2.11)
with
Q(ωm)=
	 β
0
dτdτ1dτ2 C(2)(τ10; τ2τ)G0(τ2; τ1)eiωmτ.
(2.12)
The quantum ﬂuctuation correction Q(ωm) involves the two-particle cumulant
C(2)(τ10; τ2τ), which is related to the local (atomic limit) two-particle Green’s func-
tion G(2)
0 (τ10; τ2τ) = ⟨T ai(τ1)ai(0)¯ai(τ2)¯ai(τ)⟩0 via
C(2)(τ10; τ2τ) = G(2)
0 (τ10; τ2τ) −G0(τ1; τ2)G0(0; τ) −G0(τ1; τ)G0(0; τ2).
(2.13)
The algebraic expressions for the two-particle cumulant and the quantum correction
Q(ωn) are lengthy, but can be calculated in a straightforward manner [12].
The object of interest is the inverse Greens function which tells us immedi-
ately about the phase boundary G−1(0, 0)|Jc(μ) = 0 and the dispersion relation
G−1(k, iωm →ω + i0+) = 0. It is thus convenient to introduce the strong-coupling
self-energy (k, ωm) via G(k, ωm)−1 = G0(ωm)−1 −(k, ωm). From (2.11) we
obtain to second order
(k, ωm) = J(k) + 2DJ 2Q(ωm)/G0(ωm).
(2.14)
The ﬁrst term on the r.h.s. is usually called the strong-coupling random-phase approx-
imation (RPA), whereas the second term denotes the leading correction due to quan-
tum ﬂuctuations. The RPA corresponds to a summation of all self-avoiding walks
(chaindiagrams)throughthelattice.Theleadingquantumcorrectionincludesinaddi-
tion all one-time forward/backward hopping processes (bubble diagrams) between
two neighbored sites.
Although we have carried out our calculations at ﬁnite temperature, we will only
consider the T = 0 case from now on. At the quantum phase transition the energy of
long wavelength ﬂuctuations vanishes and we obtain an explicit expression for the
critical hopping strength
J −1
c
= D G0(0)

1 +

1 + 2Q(0)/(D G3
0(0))

.
(2.15)

2
Phase Diagram and Excitations …
29
If we ignore the second term under the square root in (2.15) we obtain the RPA phase
boundary 1/Jc = 2D G0(0) shown as a dashed-dotted line in Fig.2.1. This result
agrees exactly with the phase boundary as obtained from a numerical decoupling
mean-ﬁeld approach [1, 2]. The inclusion of quantum ﬂuctuations in (2.15) leads to
an improved phase boundary (solid line in Fig.2.1). In two dimensions the result in
Eq.(2.15) agrees well with Monte-Carlo calculations [11, 20, 22]. There is a small
deviation near the tip of the lobe, where quantum corrections are most important.
In the right panel of Fig.2.1 we present quantitatively accurate results for the phase
diagram in D = 3 (note, that the strong-coupling expansion becomes more accurate
in higher dimensions).
We now discuss the elementary excitations of the JCHM in the Mott phase based
on the RPA, i.e., by neglecting the second term in (2.14). An analytic continuation
of the Matsubara Green’s function via iωn →ω + i0+ yields the retarded real-time
Green’s function. Its poles and residues provide us with the dispersion relations and
mode strengths of the fundamental excitations. In general, we obtain four poles, the
conventional (Bose-Hubbard like) lower polariton particle (hole) modes ω−
(p,h) and
two modes ω+
(p,h) which correspond to an upper polariton particle (hole) excitation
(conversion modes). The presence of the latter signals a clear deviation from the
usual Bose-Hubbard like physics and is due to the composite quasi-particle nature
of polaritons.
The conversion modes exist already in the atomic limit, but have been over-
looked in early numerical approaches. One reason might be that their bandwidth and
strengths are very small as compared to the conventional modes. However, extended
numerical studies have conﬁrmed the prediction in [14]. The weakness of the conver-
sion modes throughout the Mott lobe allows us to set their dispersion relations ω+
(p,h)
and mode strength s+
(p,h) approximately equal to ω+
(p,h) ≈Δ+
(p,h)
and s+
(p,h) ≈z+
(p,h)
with the atomic-limit particle (hole) gaps Δσ
p ≡Δσ−
n+1 (Δσ
h ≡Δ−σ
n ) and mode
strengths zσ
p ≡zσ−
n+1 (zσ
h ≡−z−σ
n ), respectively. If we neglect their contribution to
the one-particle cumulant (2.9), we can derive simple analytic formulas for the dis-
persion relations of the conventional modes, i.e.,
ω−
(p,h) = (Δ+ −J(k) z+ ± Ω) /2
(2.16)
with Ω =

Δ2
−+ J(k)2 z2
+ −2J(k) z−Δ−and the abbreviations Δ± = Δ−
p ± Δ−
h
and z± = z−
p ± z−
h . The strength of the modes are given by
s−
(p,h) =
z+ ω−
(p,h) −z−
(p,h)Δ−
(h,p) −z−
(h,p)Δ−
(p,h)
ω−
(p,h) −ω−
(h,p)
.
(2.17)
The dispersions in (2.16) are plotted in Fig.2.2 deep inside the Mott regime and at
the tip of the lobe with n = 1. As shown in the inset of Fig.2.2 the energy needed for
a conventional excitation is an order of magnitude smaller than for a conversion exci-
tation. The strengths of the conventional modes s−
(p,h) grow with increasing tunneling

30
S. Schmidt and G. Blatter
(0,0)
(π,π)
(π,0)
-0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
ω
−/g
(0,0)
(π,π)
(π,0)
(0,0)
(0,0)
(π,π) (π,0)
(0,0)
0
2
4
 ω
(−,+)/g
-2
0
2
 δ/g
0
1
2
3
W/g
-π
0
π
-π
0
π
p
p
h
h
−
Fig. 2.2 Particle/hole dispersion of the conventional modes ω−
(p,h) for D = 2 and n = 1 at zero
detuning δ = 0. Left ﬁgure Deep inside the Mott insulator (see cross in Fig.2.1) for (μ −ωc)/g =
−0.78 and J/g = 0.01. The inset shows the conventional modes ω−
(p,h) together with the conversion
mode ω+
p . Right ﬁgure At the phase boundary (see cross in Fig.2.1) for (μ −ωc)/g = −0.78 and
J/g = 0.04. The inset shows the bandwidth W of the conventional particle mode ω−
p as a function
of detuning δ at the tip of the lobe. Figure taken with permission from Ref. [12]
strength while the strengths of the conversion modes s+
(p,h) stay approximately con-
stant. If we are only interested in low energy excitations we can thus indeed neglect
the contributions from upper polaritons throughout the Mott phase. They will always
remain gapped even at the phase boundary. We will make use of this result in the next
section, where we will also calculate the excitation spectra in the superﬂuid phase
using a slave-boson approach.
2.4
Slave-Boson Approach
In the previous section we derived an analytic strong-coupling theory for the phase
diagram and the elementary excitations in the Mott phase of the JCHM based on a
linked-cluster expansion (LCA) of the Matsubara Greens function. Here, we gener-
alise such a strong-coupling approach to the superﬂuid phase using a slave-boson
technique [18], which was previously applied to the BHM [76].
2.4.1
Slave-Boson Formulation
A convenient starting point is the polariton representation [13] of the boson operator
ai =

nσν
f σν
n Pν†
in−1Pσ
in
(2.18)

2
Phase Diagram and Excitations …
31
in terms of standard algebra operators Pσ†
in = |nσ⟩ii⟨0| and matrix elements f σν
n
deﬁned below Eq.(2.9). In this new basis the JCHM becomes
H =

i
∞

n=0

σ
ϵσ
n Pσ†
in Pσ
in −J

⟨i j⟩

n,n′=1

σ,σ′
ν,ν′
f σσ′
n
f νν′
n′
Pσ†
in Pσ′
in−1Pν′†
jn′−1Pν
jn′ .
(2.19)
Theupperpolaritonbranchwithσ, σ′ = +leadstoadditionalhighenergyconversion
modes in the Mott phase with small spectral weight and bandwidth as discussed in
the previous section. We thus neglect the upper branch as well as particle conversion
hopping from now on and drop the branch index σ. This leads to the simpliﬁed
Hamiltonian
H =

i
∞

n=0
ϵn P†
in Pin −J

⟨i j⟩

n,n′=1
fn fn′ P†
in Pin−1P†
jn′−1Pjn′ .
(2.20)
with ϵn ≡ϵ−
n and fn ≡f −−
n
.
2.4.2
Gutzwiller Ansatz
In order to calculate the phase boundary and static observables in the superﬂuid phase
near a Mott lobe with ﬁlling n ≥1, we restrict the Hilbert space to states with n and
n ± 1 bosons and make a Gutzwiller Ansatz for the ground-state wave function
|ψ⟩=

i

cos(θ)P†
i0+ sin(θ)(sin(χ)P†
i−1+cos(χ)P†
i1)

|0⟩,
where we also dropped the index n and changed the notation to P†
iα ≡P†
in+α, ϵn+α ≡
ϵα, and fn+α ≡fα. Note, that this variational wave function is normalized to unity
and satisﬁes the completeness relation, i.e.

nσ
Pσ†
in Pσ
in = 1 .
(2.21)
It is straightforward to show that if the constraint (2.21) is fulﬁlled, the polariton
operators also obey bosonic commutation relations.
The expectation value ϵvar = ⟨ψ|H|ψ⟩yields the variational energy
ϵvar = ϵ0 cos(θ)2 + sin(θ)2 
ϵ−1 sin(χ)2 + ϵ1 cos(χ)2
−J D/2 sin(2θ)2 
f0 cos(χ) + f−1 sin(χ)
2 ,
(2.22)

32
S. Schmidt and G. Blatter
which has to be minimized with respect to the variational parameters θ and χ (here,
D denotes the dimension of a hypercubic lattice), yielding
tan(2χ) =
4J Df0 f1 cos(θ)2
ϵ−1 −ϵ1 + 2J D( f 2
1 −f 2
0 ) cos(θ)2
(2.23)
and
cos(2θ) =
1
2J D
ϵ1 cos(χ)2 + ϵ−1 sin(χ)2 −ϵ0
[ f0 sin(χ) + f1 cos(χ)]2
.
(2.24)
The lobe boundaries are then determined by the vanishing of the order parameter
φc = ⟨ψ|a|ψ⟩= sin(θ) [ f0 sin(χ) + f1 cos(χ)]2 /2.
(2.25)
Setting φc = 0 (i.e., θ = 0) in (2.23) and (2.24) and eliminating χ yields the relation
ϵ−1 −ϵ1 = −Jz( f 2
1 −f 2
0 ) ±

Q
(2.26)
with
Q = U 2 −2Jz( f 2
0 + f 2
1 )U + J 2z2( f 2
1 −f 2
0 )2
(2.27)
and
U = ϵ−1 −2ϵ0 + ϵ1 .
(2.28)
Equation(2.26) constitutes an expression for the mean-ﬁeld boundaries of the Mott
lobes in the JCHM shown in Fig.2.3 (the energies ϵα contain the chemical potential).
Note, that they agree exactly with those obtained from the RPA in the previous
section.
2.4.3
Quadratic Fluctuations
In order to ﬁnd the elementary excitations we deﬁne a new set of operators
R† = (G†
i , E†
1i, E†
2i)T , which is obtained from the original polariton basis P† =
(P†
i0, P†
i−1, P†
i1)T via a unitary transformation R† = T P† with
T =
⎛
⎝
cos(θ) sin(θ) cos(χ) sin(θ) sin(χ)
−sin(θ) cos(θ) cos(χ) cos(θ) sin(χ)
0
−sin(χ)
cos(χ)
⎞
⎠.
(2.29)

2
Phase Diagram and Excitations …
33
Fig.2.3 QuantumphasediagramfortheJCHMasobtainedfromslave-bosontheory,i.e.,Eq.(2.26).
Shown are the lowest three Mott lobes with polariton numbers N = 1, 2, 3. Dotted lines represent
the critical hopping strength’s Jc/g for which the chemical potential μ and detuning δ are chosen
such as to fullﬁll particle-hole symmetry. Finite detuning |δ| > 0 decreases the critical hopping
strength Jc/g for N > 1, but the lowest Mott lobe (N = 1) steadily increases when tuning through
the resonance (δ = 0). Figure taken with permission from [18] (with minor modiﬁcations)
The operator G† creates a new vacuum state, i.e., the mean-ﬁeld ground state
|ψ⟩= 
i G†
i |0⟩, and E†
1i, E†
2i are orthogonal operators creating excitations above
the ground-state. We express the Hamiltonian in terms of these new operators and
eliminate Gi by using the constraint (2.21) in the restricted Hilbert space
Gi ≈

1 −E†
1i E1i −E†
2i E2i
(2.30)
Expanding the square root everywhere in the Hamiltonian to quadratic order in E(†)
(1,2)i
yields, after a Fourier transformation, an effective quadratic Hamiltonian
Heff = ϵvar +

k
E†
k heff,k Ek
(2.31)
where E = (E1k, E2k, E†
1−k, E†
2−k)T and heff,k is a 4 × 4 matrix
heff,k =
 g f
f g

,
(2.32)
with f, g denoting 2 × 2 matrices deﬁned in the appendix. The sum over k runs over
the ﬁrst Brioullin zone. The effective Hamiltonian can be diagonalized by a bosonic
Bogoliubov transformation yielding

34
S. Schmidt and G. Blatter
Heff = ϵvar + ϵﬂuct +

α=±

k
ϵα(k)d†
αkdαk
(2.33)
with a ﬂuctuation-generated correction of the ground-state energy
ϵﬂuct = E(θ, χ) +

α=±

k
ϵα(k)/2
(2.34)
and d†
αk creating excitations with energy
ϵ±(k) =

A(k) ±

A(k)2 −B(k)
(2.35)
with rather lengthy expressions for E(θ, χ), A(k), and B(k) given in the appen-
dix of Ref. [26]. In the Mott phase, these spectra agree with the expressions for
particle/hole like modes in Eq.(2.16). In the superﬂuid phase, we obtain a gap-
less, linear Goldstone mode ϵ−(k) = cs|k| + O(k2) with sound velocity cs. A sec-
ond mode, the so-called amplitude or Higgs mode, generally remains gapped with
ϵ+(k) = Δa + O(k2) (except for the tip of the lobe). For a more detailed discussion
of the excitation spectra we refer to the caption in Fig.2.4.
2.5
Critical Exponents
In the previous two sections we have calculated the dispersion relations for the
elementary excitations of the JCHM in the Mott and superﬂuid phases. The long
wavelength behavior of the dispersion at k →0 right at the phase boundary deter-
mines the dynamical critical exponent z deﬁned by ω ∼ξ−z ∼kz with the diverging
correlation length ξ ∼|J −Jc|−ν and its associated critical exponent ν. If the phase
boundary is approached away from the tip of the lobe, either the particle (upper phase
boundary) or the hole (lower phase boundary) gap vanishes linearily Δ ∼|J −Jc|
and the dispersion remains quadratic ω ∼k2. The situation changes at the tip of the
lobe, where particle and hole gaps vanish simultaneously with a square-root behav-
ior Δ ∼|J −Jc|1/2, while their dispersions become linear ω ∼k (see Fig.2.4). This
indicates a special transition at the tip of the lobe, reminiscent of an emergent particle-
hole symmetry.
Consequently, according to the analytical results of the previous sections the
dynamical critical exponent has the generic value z = 2 everywhere in the phase
diagram except for the special critical point at the tip of the lobe where it changes
to z = 1. At k = 0 the gap vanishes as Δ ∼|J −Jc|zν when the tunneling strength
approaches its critical value Jc. This leads to a mean-ﬁeld exponent ν = 1/2 every-
where in the phase diagram. Thus on a mean-ﬁeld level, the JCHM has the same
critical exponents as the BHM [69] with a change of its universality class along the

2
Phase Diagram and Excitations …
35
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0
1
2
3
0
0.2
0.4
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
J/Jc0
0
0.2
0.4
Δ /g , cs/g
0
1
2
3
0
0.2
0.4
0
1
2
3
0
0.2
0.4
0
1
2
3
0
0.2
0.4
(a) μ=μc0
(b) μ=1.2μc0
cs
cs
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
Fig. 2.4 Elementary excitations of the JCHM as a function of the effective hopping strength J/Jc0
at zero detuning δ/g = 0 and for a μ = μc0 where μc0 denotes the critical chemical potential at
the tip of the lobe with critical hopping strength Jc = Jc0 (top ﬁgure) and b away from the tip at
μ = 1.2μc0 with Jc = 0.566Jc0 (bottom ﬁgure). Shown are the gaps of particle (dashed) and hole
(solid) modes in the Mott phase (J < Jc) and as well as the gaps of the Amplitude mode (dashed)
and the sound velocity of the Goldstone mode (solid). The insets show the corresponding excitation
spectra at (i) J = 0.5Jc0 (in the Mott phase) (ii) J = Jc0 (at the tip of the lobe) (iii) J = 1.5Jc0 (in
the superﬂuid phase) (iv) J = 0.566Jc0 (at the phase boundary away from the tip of the lobe). At the
phase boundary, the particle and hole mode of the Mott phase are identical with the Goldstone and
Amplitude modes of the superﬂuid phase. At the tip of the lobe (ii), where the polariton density can
remain constant during the superﬂuid-insulator transition, the Amplitude mode becomes gapless and
linear (its mass vanishes). The sound velocity of the Goldstone mode remains non-zero, conﬁrming
a special point in the phase diagram with dynamical critical exponent z = 1. Away from the tip (iv),
the Amplitude mode remains gapped and the Goldstone mode becomes quadratic with a vanishing
sound velocity corresponding to a generic dynamical critical exponent z = 2. Figure taken with
permission from [18] (with minor modiﬁcations)
phase boundary. This result has also been predicted using scaling arguments based
on an effective action approach [13].
However, early Quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) calculations of the superﬂuid den-
sity [11] suggested that the universality class at the tip of the Mott lobe of the JCHM
is different from the BHM. This controversy between analytical and numerical ﬁnd-
ings has been resolved in Ref. [20] in favour of the early analytical arguments in
Refs. [12, 13]. In Ref. [20] extensive QMC simulations of the superﬂuid density

36
S. Schmidt and G. Blatter
and the compressibility were carried out on the two-dimensional square lattice by
using much larger system sizes as compared to previous studies. Below we brieﬂy
summarise these results.
The ﬁnite-size scaling form of the superﬂuid density ρs is known from Ref. [69]
and reads
ρs = L2−D−z ˜ρs[(J −Jc)L1/ν, β/Lz] .
(2.36)
Fixing the ratio α = β/Lz, the quantity
Xzν(L) = L D−2+zρs[(J −Jc)L1/ν, α] = ˜ρs[(J −Jc)L1/ν, α]
(2.37)
depends only on the distance from the critical point, i.e., (J −Jc)L1/ν. Thus plotting
Xzν(L) as a function of J for different system sizes L allows us to determine the
critical value Jc, where curves for different L intersect. In Ref. [20] this quantity
has been calculated via QMC simulations using world lines in the stochastic series
expansion (SSE) representation (see Ref. [14] and references therein).
Figure2.5a shows the rescaled superﬂuid density ρsL as a function of the hopping
strength J/g assuming z = 1 for system sizes ranging from 20 × 20 to 40 × 40. The
intersect of the curves leads to the estimate of the critical hopping strength Jc/g =
0.05241(1). Figure2.5b shows Xzν(L) as a function of (J −Jc)L1/ν. One observes a
clear scaling collapse as expected from Eq.(2.37). Note, that here a correlation length
exponent ν = 0.6715 (as found numerically for the BHM [77]) has been assumed.
We can thus conclude that universal scaling at the tip of the lobe is observed for a
dynamical critical exponent z = 1 conﬁrming unambiguously the prediction of the
analytical calculations in Refs. [12, 13].
0.0
0.1
0.2
 0.052
 0.0524
 0.0528
ρs L
J / g
(a)
L=20
L=26
L=30
L=34
L=40
0.0
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
ρs L
(J-Jc) L1/ν / g
(b)
L=20
L=26
L=30
L=34
L=40
Fig. 2.5 (Color online) Scaling of the superﬂuid density ρs across the ﬁxed-density transition at the
tip of the lobe with μ/g = 0.185 [11] using L × L square lattices and βg = 2L. The intersect of Lρs
for different lattice sizes L in a single point in panel a is evidence for a dynamical critical exponent
z = 1, and deﬁnes the critical point at Jc/g = 0.05242(1). b Scaling collapse using Jc/g = 0.05242
and the exact critical exponent ν = 0.6715 [77]. Figure taken with permission from Ref. [20]

2
Phase Diagram and Excitations …
37
2.6
Relation to the Dicke Model
In this section we discuss a remarkable relation between the superﬂuid-Mott insulator
transition of polaritons in coupled qubit-cavity arrays and the superradiance phase
transition of the Tavis-Cummings or Dicke model [78–82]. In particular, we argue
that a weak-coupling mean-ﬁeld theory for the Dicke model predicts the existence
of a single Mott lobe, where the universality class of the phase transition changes at
the tip of the lobe just as for the JCHM [26].
The Dicke model describes the interaction of a single photonic mode with a
number of Ns qubits and can be written as
H = ˜ωca†
0a0 + ˜ωx

i
σ+
i σ−
i +
g
√Ns

i

σ+
i a0 + h.c.

,
(2.38)
where we have also introduced a Dicke model chemical potential μD for polari-
tons according to the recipe in Eq.(2.3) leading to the deﬁnition ˜ωc = ωc −μD and
˜ωx = ωx −μD. A weak-coupling mean-ﬁeld theory for the Dicke model (at zero
temperature and in a frame rotating at the cavity frequency ωc) predicts a phase tran-
sition from a normal phase with ψ = ⟨a0⟩= 0 to a superradiant state with ψ ̸= 0 at
the critical coupling strength [79, 81]
g2 = −μD|δD −μD| .
(2.39)
However, for μD > δD and negative detuning δD < 0 we observe the appearance
of a second normal phase corresponding to a Mott lobe with all two-level systems
inverted, i.e., with one excitation per cavity (n = 1) [26]. The corresponding zero
temperature phase diagram is shown in Fig.2.6. The phase boundary of this lobe can
be obtained from Eq.(2.39) as
μD = 1
2

δD ±

δ2
D −4g2

.
(2.40)
with the tip of the lobe at δD = −2g and μD = −g.
We now argue that this interesting result can be understood as a special limit of
the JCHM: We ﬁrst Fourier transform the photon operators in Eq.(2.1) to momentum
space
ai =
1
√Ns

k
akeik·ri
(2.41)
such that the JCHM can be written as
H =

k
˜ωka†
kak +

i
˜ωxσ+
i σ−
i +

ik
gik
√Ns

σ+
i ak + h.c.

(2.42)

38
S. Schmidt and G. Blatter
δ
Fig. 2.6 Quantum phase diagram of the Dicke model and the JCHM at inﬁnite bandwidth and
inﬁnite negative detuning for ﬁxed μD, δD see text) showing the transition from the vacuum (n = 0)
to a superﬂuid state as well as the existence of a single Mott lobe with n = 1. Figure taken with
permission from Ref. [26]
where ˜ωk = ˜ωc −2J D
α=1 cos(kα) with
˜ωc = ωc −μ,
˜ωx = ωx −μ and gik =
geik·ri (Ns denotes the number of lattice sites). This Hamiltonian represents a many-
mode Dicke model, as studied in Refs. [83, 84]. The case studied in those works,
however, considered a quadratic photon spectrum, equivalent to expanding the lattice
dispersion for small k vectors yielding
˜ωk = ˜ωc −2DJ + Jk2 ≡Jk2 −μD ,
(2.43)
wherewehavedeﬁnedaDicke-modelchemicalpotentialμD = μ + 2DJ −ωc (such
that μD < 0 is required for thermodynamic stability). Following Ref. [26], it is also
useful to deﬁne a Dicke-model detuning δD = δ + 2DJ, which measures the detun-
ing between the qubit (2LS) energy and the bottom of the photon band so that
˜ωx = δD −μD. With this quadratic expansion the generalised Dicke model in (2.42)
describes Ns localised two-level systems coherently coupled to a continuum of pho-
tonic modes with an effective photonic mass 1/2J. Note, that if one neglects all ﬁnite
momentum modes, Eq.(2.42) reduces to the single-mode Dicke model in Eq.(2.38)
with a0 = ak=0.
Thus, if one considers the limit of inﬁnite bandwidth J →∞and inﬁnite negative
detuning δ →−∞, the ground state of the JCHM at ﬁxed chemical potential will
mostly be composed of qubit excitations such that higher k modes can be neglected.
In that case we expect that the long wavelength physics of the JCHM is similar to
the Dicke model. Indeed, in Ref. [26] we have shown that if one takes the limit of
inﬁnite bandwidth and negative detuning such that μD and δD remain ﬁxed, the phase
diagraminFig.2.3mapsexactlytotheoneinFig.2.6.Thisisaremarkableconnection

2
Phase Diagram and Excitations …
39
since both phase diagrams have been derived using very different methods, i.e., a
weak-coupling mean-ﬁeld theory on one hand and a strong-coupling slave-boson
theory on the other. Moreover, also the excitation spectra as calculated from both
theories match exactly at the phase boundary of the Mott lobe [26]. In Fig.2.3 one
can see the reason for this success: the size of the lowest Mott lobe increases for large
J and large negative detuning δ, while the size of all other lobes decreases. Thus,
only one lobe survives in Fig.2.6. All other modes are pushed towards μD = 0 and
vanish. This is in strong contrast to the Bose-Hubbard model, where a weak-coupling
Bogoliubov-like theory describing weakly interacting atomic BEC‘s, fails to predict
the existence of Mott lobes and gapped Higgs-like modes [85].
Acknowledgements We thank Martin Hohenadler, Markus Aichhorn, Jonathan Keeling and Lode
Pollet for valuable discussions. This work was supported by a Ambizione award (S.S.) of the Swiss
National Science Foundation.
References
1. A.D. Greentree, C. Tahan, J.H. Cole, L. Hollenberg, Nat. Phys. 2, 856 (2006)
2. D. Angelakis, M. Santos, S. Bose, Phys. Rev. A 76, 031805 (2007)
3. J. Cho, D.G. Angelakis, S. Bose, Phys. Rev. A 78, 062338 (2008)
4. G. Zhu, S. Schmidt, J. Koch, New J. Phys. 15, 115002 (2013)
5. M. Hartmann, F. Brandão, M. Plenio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 160501 (2007)
6. M. Hartmann, F. Brandão, M. Plenio, Nat. Phys. 2, 849–855 (2006)
7. D. Rossini, R. Fazio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 186401 (2007)
8. D. Rossini, R. Fazio, G. Santoro, Europhys. Lett. 83, 47011 (2008)
9. M. Aichhorn, M. Hohenadler, C. Tahan, P. Littlewood, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 216401 (2008)
10. M.J. Hartmann, F.G.S.L. Brandao, M.B. Plenio, New J. Phys. 10, 033011 (2008)
11. J. Zhao, A.W. Sandvik, K. Ueda (2008). arXiv:0806.3603
12. S. Schmidt, G. Blatter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 086403 (2009)
13. J. Koch, K.L. Hur, Phys. Rev. A 80, 023811 (2009)
14. P. Pippan, H. Evertz, M. Hohenadler, Phys. Rev. A 80, 033612 (2009)
15. P.A. Ivanov, S.S. Ivanov, N.V. Vitanov, A. Mering, M. Fleischhauer, K. Singer, Phys. Rev. A
80, 060301 (2009)
16. M. Knap, E. Arrigoni, W. von der Linden, Phys. Rev. B 81, 104303 (2010)
17. M. Knap, E. Arrigoni, W. von der Linden, Phys. Rev. B 82, 045126 (2010)
18. S. Schmidt, G. Blatter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 216402 (2010)
19. A. Tomadin, V. Giovannetti, R. Fazio, D. Gerace, I. Carusotto, H. Türeci, A. Imamoglu, Phys.
Rev. A 81, 061801 (2010)
20. M. Hohenadler, M. Aichhorn, S. Schmidt, L. Pollet, Phys. Rev. A 84, 041608(R) (2011)
21. K. Liu, L. Tan, C.H. Lv, W.M. Liu, Phys. Rev. A 83, 063840 (2011)
22. M. Hohenadler, M. Aichhorn, L. Pollet, S. Schmidt, Phys. Rev. A 85, 013810 (2012)
23. C. Nietner, A. Pelster, Phys. Rev. A 85, 043831 (2012)
24. M. Schiró, M. Bordyuh, B. Öztop, H.E. Türeci, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 053601 (2012)
25. F. Nissen, S. Schmidt, M. Biondi, G. Blatter, H.E. Türeci, J. Keeling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108,
233603 (2012)
26. S. Schmidt, G. Blatter, J. Keeling, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 46, 224020 (2013)
27. T. Grujic, S.R. Clark, D. Jaksch, D.G. Angelakis, Phys. Rev. A 87, 053846 (2013)
28. T. Yuge, K. Kamide, M. Yamaguchi, T. Ogawa (2014). arXiv:1401.6229
29. D. Sarchi, I. Carusotto, M. Wouters, V. Savona, Phys. Rev. B 77, 125324 (2008)

40
S. Schmidt and G. Blatter
30. D. Gerace, H.E. Türeci, A. Imamoglu, V. Giovannetti, R. Fazio, Nat. Phys. 5, 281–284 (2009)
31. S. Schmidt, D. Gerace, A. Houck, G. Blatter, H.E. Türeci, Phys. Rev. B 82, 100507 (2010)
32. N. Schetakis, T. Grujic, S. Clark, D. Jaksch, D. Angelakis, J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. 46,
224025 (2013)
33. J. Raftery, D. Sadri, S. Schmidt, H.E. Türeci, A.A. Houck (2013). arXiv:1312.2963
34. M. Hartmann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 113601 (2010)
35. T. Grujic, S.R. Clark, D.G. Angelakis, D. Jaksch, New J. Phys. 14, 103025 (2012)
36. A.L. Boité, G. Orso, C. Ciuti, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 233601 (2013)
37. J. Jin, D. Rossini, R. Fazio, M. Leib, M.J. Hartmann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 163605 (2013)
38. I. Carusotto, D. Gerace, H.E. Türeci, S. De Liberato, C. Ciuti, A. Imamoˇglu, Phys. Rev. Lett.
103, 033601 (2009)
39. M. Kiffner, M. Hartmann, Phys. Rev. A 81, 021806 (2010)
40. A.G. D’Souza, B.C. Sanders, D.L. Feder, Phys. Rev. A 88, 063801 (2013)
41. J. Koch, A. Houck, K. Le Hur, S. Girvin, Phys. Rev. A 82, 043811 (2010)
42. A. Nunnenkamp, J. Koch, S.M. Girvin, New J. Phys. 13, 095008 (2011)
43. M. Hafezi, E.A. Demler, M.D. Lukin, J.M. Taylor, Nat. Phys. 7, 907–912 (2011)
44. A. Kamal, J. Clarke, M.H. Devoret, Nat. Phys. 7, 311–315 (2011)
45. R.O. Umucalilar, I. Carusotto, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 206809 (2012)
46. M. Hafezi, S. Mittal, J. Fan, A. Migdall, J.M. Taylor, Nat. Photon 7, 1001–1005 (2013)
47. C.E. Bardyn, S.D. Huber, O. Zilberberg (2013). arXiv:1312.6894
48. A. Petrescu, A.A. Houck, K. Le Hur, Phys. Rev. A 86, 053804 (2012)
49. C.E. Bardyn, A. Imamoglu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 253606 (2012)
50. M.J. Hwang, M.S. Choi, Phys. Rev. B 87, 125404 (2013)
51. B. Kumar, S. Jalal, Phys. Rev. A 88, 011802 (2013)
52. A.A. Zvyagin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 217207 (2013)
53. J. Cho, D. Angelakis, S. Bose, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 246809 (2008)
54. A. Hayward, A.M. Martin, A.D. Greentree, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 223602 (2012)
55. M. Hafezi, M.D. Lukin, J.M. Taylor, New J. Phys. 15, 063001 (2013)
56. R.O. Umucalilar, M. Wouters, I. Carusotto, Phys. Rev. A 89, 023803 (2014)
57. M. Hartmann, F. Brandão, M. Plenio, Laser Photonics Rev. 2, 527–556 (2008)
58. A. Tomadin, R. Fazio, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 27, 130–136 (2010)
59. A.A. Houck, H.E. Türeci, J. Koch, Nat. Phys. 8, 292–299 (2012)
60. I. Carusotto, C. Ciuti, Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 299 (2013)
61. S. Schmidt, J. Koch, Annalen der Physik 525, 395–412 (2013)
62. D.L. Underwood, W.E. Shanks, J. Koch, A.A. Houck, Phys. Rev. A 86, 023837 (2012)
63. J. Klaers, J. Schmitt, F. Vewinger, M. Weitz, Nature 468, 545–548 (2010)
64. P. Kirton, J. Keeling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111(Sep), 100404 (2013)
65. J. Schmitt, T. Damm, D. Dung, F. Vewinger, J. Klaers, M. Weitz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112(Jan),
030401 (2014)
66. J. Klaers, J. Schmitt, T. Damm, D. Dung, F. Vewinger, M. Weitz, Proc. SPIE 8600, 8600L
(2013)
67. H. Deng, H. Haug, Y. Yamamoto, Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 1489 (2010)
68. O. Astaﬁev, A.M. Zagoskin, A.A. Abdumalikov, Y.A. Pashkin, T. Yamamoto, K. Inomata, Y.
Nakamura, J.S. Tsai, Science 327, 840 (2010)
69. M.P.A. Fisher, P.B. Weichman, J. Watson, D.S. Fisher, G. Grinstein, Phys. Rev. B 40, 546
(1989)
70. H. Kleinert, Path Integrals in Quantum Mechanics, Statistics, Polymer Physics, and Financial
Markets (World Scientiﬁc, Singapore, 2006)
71. H. Kleinert, S. Schmidt, A. Pelster, Annalen der Physik 14, 214 (2005)
72. F.E.A. dos Santos, A. Pelster, Phys. Rev. A 79, 013614 (2009)
73. N. Teichmann, D. Hinrichs, M. Holthaus, A. Eckardt, Phys. Rev. B 79, 100503 (2009)
74. W. Metzner, Phys. Rev. B 43, 8549 (1991)
75. M. Ohliger, A. Pelster (2008). arXiv:0810.4399
76. S.D. Huber, E. Altman, H.P. Büchler, G. Blatter, Phys. Rev. B 75, 085106 (2007)

2
Phase Diagram and Excitations …
41
77. B. Capogrosso-Sansone, S.G. Söyler, N. Prokof’ev, B. Svistunov, Phys. Rev. B 77, 015602
(2008)
78. R. Dicke, Phys. Rev. 93, 99–110 (1954)
79. K. Hepp, E.H. Lieb, Ann. Phys. 76, 360–404 (1973)
80. Y.K. Wang, F.T. Hioe, Phys. Rev. A 7, 831 (1973)
81. K. Hepp, E. Lieb, Phys. Rev. A 8, 2517–2525 (1973)
82. M. Tavis, F.W. Cummings, Phys. Rev. 170, 379 (1968)
83. J. Keeling, P.R. Eastham, M.H. Szymanska, P.B. Littlewood, Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 226403 (2004)
84. J. Keeling, P.R. Eastham, M.H. Szymanska, P.B. Littlewood, Phys. Rev. B 72, 115320 (2005)
85. D. van Oosten, P. van der Straten, H.T.C. Stoof, Phys. Rev. A 63, 053601 (2001)

Chapter 3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven
Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
Changsuk Noh, Stephen R. Clark, Dieter Jaksch
and Dimitris G. Angelakis
Abstract Coupled resonator arrays have been shown to exhibit interesting many-
body physics including Mott and Fractional Hall states of photons. One of the main
differences between these photonic quantum simulators and their cold atoms coun-
terparts is in the dissipative nature of their photonic excitations. The natural equi-
librium state is where there are no photons left in the cavity. Pumping the system
with external drives is therefore necessary to compensate for the losses and realise
non-trivial states. The external driving here can easily be tuned to be incoherent,
coherent or fully quantum, opening the road for exploration of many body regimes
beyond the reach of other approaches. In this chapter, we review some of the physics
arising in driven dissipative coupled resonator arrays including photon fermionisa-
tion, crystallisation, as well as photonic quantum Hall physics out of equilibrium.
We start by brieﬂy describing possible experimental candidates to realise coupled
resonator arrays along with the two theoretical models that capture their physics, the
Jaynes-Cummings-Hubbard and Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonians. A brief review of the
analytical and sophisticated numerical methods required to tackle these systems is
included.
3.1
Introduction
One of the key problems in physics is to understand strongly correlated many-body
systems. Fully solving a many-body Hamiltonian, analytically or numerically, is
C. Noh (B) · S.R. Clark · D. Jaksch · D.G. Angelakis
Centre for Quantum Technologies, National University of Singapore,
2 Science Drive 3, Singapore 117542, Singapore
e-mail: undefying@gmail.com
D.G. Angelakis
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Technical University of Crete,
73100 Chania, Crete, Greece
e-mail: dimitris.angelakis@gmail.com
S.R. Clark · D. Jaksch
Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
D.G. Angelakis (ed.), Quantum Simulations with Photons and Polaritons,
Quantum Science and Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-52025-4_3
43

44
C. Noh et al.
however a notoriously difﬁcult problem. An increasingly plausible way around this
issue is to use an experimentally accessible and well-controlled quantum system (e.g.,
cold atoms in optical lattices) to simulate the physics of another complex quantum
system(e.g.,electronsina2DlatticedescribedbytheHubbardmodel)[1].Whilecold
atoms [2] and trapped ions [3] arose as strong candidates for quantum simulators [4,
5] of interacting fermions/bosons and quantum spin systems, respectively, photonic
systems based on linear optics and Circuit QED architectures were also recently
proposed as alternative candidates with their own advantages [6, 7]. One prominent
example is the simulation of strongly interacting condensed matter models such as
the Bose-Hubbard model [8] in coupled resonator arrays (CRAs) [7, 9–11].
The Bose-Hubbard (BH) model is a lattice model for a single bosonic species
with nearest-neighbour hopping and an on-site interaction. In Ref. [8], it was shown
that the competition between the two processes leads to a quantum phase transition
between the superﬂuid and Mott-insulating phases, which has been demonstrated
experimentallywithultracoldatomsinanopticallattice[12, 13].Torealiseaphotonic
superﬂuid-Mott phase transition in a CRA one needs to build up a Bose-Hubbard-
like Hamiltonian. The hopping between the lattice sites is naturally provided by
an optical coupling between resonators, whereas to realise the on-site interaction,
one has to induce some kind of nonlinearity in each resonator. For this purpose, an
(artiﬁcial) atom can be coupled to each resonator, or for the case of solid-state cavities
an intrinsic Kerr-nonlinearity may be considered. In the latter case, the dynamics of
the CRA is governed by the BH model, whereas in the former case the dynamics
depends on the type of the doped atom. When the atom is a two-level system, for
which the coupling to the cavity mode is of the Jaynes-Cummings type, the resulting
CRA is now known as the Jaynes-Cummings-Hubbard (JCH) system.
Following an initial realisation that photons in CRAs undergo superﬂuid-Mott
phase transition [14–16], the equilibrium phases of the JCH model has been exten-
sively investigated [17] (see also chapters by Schmidt & Blatter and Tomadin &
Fazio). However, for photons it is more natural to consider a driven dissipative sce-
nario, where photons are continuously pumped into the system to counteract unavoid-
able losses. This has led to the study of CRAs in non-equilibrium driven dissipative
regimes, where strongly correlated many-body behaviour can be observed. The aim
of this chapter is to discuss efforts in this direction. We discuss in detail a few topical
examples, mostly on driven dissipative systems, but also on transient effects in dis-
sipative arrays. We begin by providing a short survey of experimental platforms that
could realise CRAs and then discuss generic models that describe these systems.
Candidates for realising CRAs
Photonic crystals are defect semiconductors with holes periodically introduced to an
otherwise uniform substrate. This induces a spatial dependence of refractive index,
and thus gives rise to photonic band gaps within the infra-red to visible range [18].
A cavity is introduced to the system by creating an isolated photonic mode within
the band gap, for example by removing one or more holes, that are strongly conﬁned
to the photonic crystal plane. Figure3.1 illustrates such coupled photonic crystal
cavities. Photon-photon interactions can be induced by growing a semiconductor

3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
45
Fig. 3.1 Photonic crystal: a Periodic holes are introduced to modulate the refractive index of
the material, giving rise to band gaps in the material. Defect cavities, represented by red circles,
introduce isolated photonic states within the band gap. Photons can hop between neighbouring
cavities, as represented by red arrows, due to modal overlap. b When a quantum dot is grown inside
the defect cavity, the interaction between the quantised electronic levels of the quantum dot and the
cavity modes can be described by the Jaynes-Cummings model
nanostructure called quantum dot in each cavity. Due to the tight conﬁnement of
electrons in a quantum dot, discrete energy levels form and when one of the tran-
sitions match the cavity frequency the resulting dynamics is well described by the
Jaynes-Cummings Hamiltonian (see Sect.3.2 for a quick introduction to the Jaynes-
Cummings model). The advantages of photonics crystal cavities include low photon
losses, and extremely small mode volumes on the order of a cubic wavelength λ3.
In another promising semiconductor-based platform, a quantum well is sand-
wiched between two Bragg reﬂectors. The reﬂectors create an effective cavity, with
a mode that interacts with the exciton in the quantum well. This creates the so-called
exciton-polaritons which inherit nonlinearities from the electron-hole interaction.
The interested reader is referred to chapters [Gerace] and [Kim] for more details on
these devices.
Integrated waveguide arrays are another interesting candidate. In this set-up, the
formation of resonators involve precise etching of concave mirror arrays into silicon
[19] with Bragg-inscribed optical ﬁbres placed above them (see Fig.3.2a, b). CRAs
can be realised by introducing laser-written waveguides in places of optical ﬁbres
[20], such that the photon tunneling is allowed by evanescent coupling between
the waveguides (see Fig.3.2c). Phase shifters can then be used to tune the coupling
strength, while the nonlinearity can be introduced by placing an atom on each concave
mirror cavity.
Superconducting circuits, our last candidate, is the most promising platform for
realising CRAs [7, 21–24]. They enjoy low photon loss rates due to superconductivity
and good scalability due to highly-accurate fabrication procedures available. Various
circuit designs exist to create an artiﬁcial two-level atom, all of which however share
the common feature of exploiting the intrinsic nonlinearity of one or more Josephson
junctions. Such an artiﬁcial atom can be coupled to superconducting transmission
line resonators to mimic the Jaynes-Cummings interaction in cavity QED, as shown
in Fig.3.3 [25]. The resulting system is often called the circuit QED (cQED) system

46
C. Noh et al.
Fig. 3.2 Integrated optical waveguide: a An array of periodic concave mirrors etched into Si can
be fabricated with high-precision [19], while b resonators may be formed by the addition of Bragg-
inscribed ﬁbres above them. c CRAs are realised by replacing the ﬁbres with waveguides, inscribed
with different refractive indices by a strong UV “writing” laser [20]. Photon tunneling between
neighbouring waveguides/cavities is enhanced by optimising waveguide paths
Fig. 3.3 Superconducting circuit QED: a A superconducting coplanar waveguide resonator fabri-
cated on a silicon chip using optical lithography. Green tapering structures fanning out to the edges
of the chip are input and output feed lines. The center conductor is separated from the lateral ground
planes by a gap as shown in the zoom. b Effective 2-level system, a superconducting qubit, coupled
to the coplanar waveguide resonator. A superconducting island connected by a pair of Josephson
junctions to the superconducting reservoir is placed in the gap between the central conductor and
the bottom ground plane. c Many stripline resonators fabricated into a JCH system
in analogy to cavity-QED. A comparison between the various realisations of CRAs
using currently available parameters are summarised in Table3.1. Note that a large
cooperativity (the ratio between the interaction strength g and the loss rate γ) is
required in most proposals for equilibrium simulations.

3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
47
Table 3.1 Comparison of typical CRA parameters for different architectures. Note that the val-
ues quoted for integrated optics platform are not taken from actual experiments, but are realistic
parameters predicted in Ref.[26]
Parameter
Symbol
Photonic crystals
Integrated optics
Superconducting
Resonance
frequency
ωc/2π
325THz
380THz
10GHz
JC parameter
g/2π, g/ωc
20GHz
33MHz
200MHz
Cavity decay rate
γ/2π
1GHz
10MHz
100kHz
Atom decay rate
κ/2π
8GHz
10MHz
2kHz
Cooperativity
g/γκ
2.5
10
≫1
Resonator
coupling
J/2π
100GHz
2GHz
10MHz
3.2
Modelling CRAs
There are two models often used to describe CRAs, depending on whether the non-
linearity is assumed to be intrinsic to the resonator, or is explicitly introduced by
coupling to each resonator a two-level atom. When losses are neglected, the former
case is described by the BH model (from here on, we assume ℏ= 1)
ˆHBH = −J

⟨i, j⟩

ˆa†
i ˆa j + h.c.

+ U
2

i
ˆa†
i ˆa†
i ˆai ˆai + ωc

i
ˆa†
i ˆai,
(3.1)
whereas the latter is described by the JCH model:
ˆHJCH = −J

⟨i, j⟩

ˆa†
i ˆa j + h.c.

+ g

i

ˆa†
i ˆσ−
i + h.c.

+ ωc

i

ˆa†
i ˆai + ˆσ+
i ˆσ−
i

−Δ

i
ˆσ+
i ˆσ−
i .
(3.2)
Here ˆa is the photon annihilation operator, ˆσ−is the atomic lowering operator, J is the
photon hopping rate between neighbouring cavities, U is the intrinsic nonlinearity
of the resonator, g is the coupling strength between the resonator and the two-level
system, ωc is the natural frequency of the resonator, and Δ is the detuning between
the resonator and the two-level system. When J = 0, ˆHJC H becomes the Jaynes-
Cummings model, which describes the physics of a two-level atom coupled to a
resonator mode when the coupling strength g is much smaller than the atomic and
resonator frequencies [27]. The Kerr-nonlinearity in the BH model also comes from
some sort of interaction with matter, but in the regime where only the overall effects
of the material on the resonator mode are considered. These effects are usually weak,
but can be enhanced in some systems as reviewed in [10].

48
C. Noh et al.
Withlossesincluded,theHamiltoniandescriptionisnolongersufﬁcient.However,
it is possible to model such open systems by coupling the system of interest to a bath
of harmonic oscillators. Assuming weak system-bath coupling and a few general
properties of the bath, one can obtain an equation of motion for the reduced density
matrix of the system alone [27]. The resulting quantum master equation (QME) can
be written as
dρ/dt = −i

ˆHα, ρ

+

j
γ j
2

2ˆa jρˆa†
j −ˆa†
j ˆa jρ −ρˆa†
j ˆa j

,
(3.3)
whereρisthedensityoperatorandα ∈{JCH, BH}.Thesecondtermontherighthand
side is a Lindblad noise term we will call Lloss, which accounts for the dissipation in
the cavities where γ j is the loss rate of cavity j. For the JCH systems, an additional
source of dissipation, due to decay of the excited atomic state, can also be taken into
account by adding another Lindblad noise term
Ldecay{ρ} =

j
κ j
2

2ˆσ−
j ρˆσ+
j −ˆσ+
j ˆσ−
j ρ −ρˆσ+
j ˆσ−
j

,
(3.4)
where κ j is the decay rate for the jth two-level atom. To compensate for the losses,
experimentalists usually drive one or more resonators with lasers. Such driving can
be modelled by adding the term
ˆHdrive =

j
Ω j(t)ˆa†
j + Ω∗
j (t)ˆa j,
(3.5)
to the Hamiltonian, where Ω j(t) = Ω je−iωLt is the Rabi frequency of the driving
laser. Incoherent driving can also be added in the form of a Lindblad noise operator.1
For example, the cavity array driven by a thermal reservoir ﬁeld with average photon
number ¯n is described by
dρ/dt = −i

ˆHα, ρ

+ (¯n + 1)

j
γ j
2

2ˆa jρˆa†
j −ˆa†
j ˆa jρ −ρˆa†
j ˆa j

+ ¯n

j
γ j
2

2ˆa†
jρˆa j −ˆa j ˆa†
jρ −ρˆa j ˆa†
j

.
(3.6)
3.3
Computing the Properties of CRAs
Given the QME description of a CRA, in most cases we will concentrate on the
properties of the non-equilibrium steady state (NESS), found by solving dρ/dt = 0,
in analogy to the ground state properties of the equilibrium systems. We will also
1One way to see this is to derive the rate equation for the diagonal density operator elements from
the master equation.

3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
49
be interested in the transient open system dynamics given the system is prepared
in some initial state. For either task we are faced with integrating the QME for
a BH or JCH system—a technically challenging problem due to the exponential
growth in the Hilbert space dimension with the number of sites (e.g. resonators or
resonator + atoms) considered. Developing numerical algorithms to aid in studying
driven dissipative strongly-correlated many-body quantum systems is one of the
most difﬁcult problems in computational physics. However, the last decade has seen
impressive progress in the development of computational representations of the state
of quantum lattice systems as tensor networks [28–30], in particular in 1D via so-
called matrix product states (MPS) [31, 32].
The key feature of MPS is that they provide a compact and efﬁcient ansatz for
describing weakly-entangled pure quantum states well suited to open chains of sites
[32]. This has been used with much success to describe the low-lying excited states
and zero-temperature unitary dynamics of cold-atom systems, e.g. the −i

H ′
α, ρ

term in the QME [33–37]. These methods have been readily adapted [38–40] to
describe dissipative systems with Lindblad noise terms which are local incoherent
processes, like Lloss and Ldecay relevant to CRA. This is done by unravelling the QME
into quantum trajectories where many evolutions of pure states, described by an MPS,
are made and stochastically interrupted by quantum jumps [41–45]. By averaging
over many trajectories then recovers the properties of the full density matrix ρ [46].
In the appendix we describe in more detail this very powerful method.
3.4
Non-equilibrium Many-Body Phases
of Photons in CRAs
In this section, we will review in detail a selection of many-body phenomena arising
in non-equilibrium scenarios. To set the background, we start with a comparison
between the physics of JC and Kerr-nonlinear resonator, followed by a description
of strong photon-bunching phenomenon in a driven dissipative two-site (dimer) case.
Next, a transient phenomenon called localisation-delocalisation of photons in a JCH
dimer is presented, which shows a nice example of how CRAs are implemented in
a circuit-QED platform. Continuing our review with driven dissipative phenomena,
we discuss fermionisation and crystallisation of photons in 1D CRAs as well as the
NESS phases and quantum Hall-like physics in 2D arrays. Last subsection provides a
brief survey of other interesting driven dissipative studies that we do not have enough
space to cover in detail.
3.4.1
Jaynes-Cummings Versus Kerr-Nonlinear Resonator
In the limit of zero atom-photon detuning, the eigenstates of the Jaynes-Cummings
Hamiltonian, i.e., the J = 0 and Δ = 0 case of (3.2), are the polariton (dressed

50
C. Noh et al.
(b)
(a)
Fig. 3.4 Low-lying eigenstates of the a Jaynes-Cumming model and the b Bose-Hubbard model.
Effective photon-photon interaction is provided by the anharmonicity in the spectrum of a given
polariton branch. Taken from Grujic et al. [47]
photon-atom) states |m, ±⟩=
1
√
2 (|G, m⟩± |E, m −1⟩) having eigenenergies
Em± = ωcm ± g√m (see Fig.3.4a). Here, G and E refer to the ground and excited
states of the atom, while m is the number of photons in the resonator. Imagine driving
the lowest ‘−polariton’ branch |1, −⟩by setting ωL = ωc −g. Because of the non-
linearity induced by the atom, the transition to the excited state |2, −⟩is detuned by
the amount E2−−2E1−= g(2 −
√
2). Compare this to the single-site BH system—a
Kerr-nonlinear resonator—where the detuning is simply U as depicted in Fig.3.4b.
When photons are restricted to the lowest manifolds, we may therefore take the
effective on-site interaction strength of the JC system as Uef f = g(2 −
√
2) for zero
atom-photon detuning. For non-zero detuning the expression becomes
Uef f
g
= Δ
2g + 2
	
 Δ
2g
2
+ 1 −
	
 Δ
2g
2
+ 2.
(3.7)
The ‘repulsion’ between photons induced by the nonlinearity can be quantiﬁed
by the (equal-time) second-order intensity correlation function
g(2) = ⟨ˆa† ˆa† ˆa ˆa⟩/⟨ˆa† ˆa⟩2,
(3.8)
as shown in Fig.3.5. Note the dips in g(2) when the laser ﬁeld (with laser-cavity
detuning Δc = ωL −ωc) is resonant with the eigenstates of each model. In partic-
ular, the dip is most prominent and falls below 1 when the lowest excited state is
driven (the situation depicted in Fig.3.4), signifying that the presence of a pho-
ton in a resonator prevents another one from entering the it. This phenomenon is
called photon-blockade or photon anti-bunching. Stronger the repulsion, stronger
the blockade or anti-bunching effect, i.e., g →0.
Despite this similarity between the JC and Kerr resonators, there are qualitative
differences which become important when modelling CRAs as ﬁrst investigated
by Grujic et al. [47]. Let we look at the single resonator case for simplicity. First,

3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
51
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 3.5 Steady state values of photonic/atomic population (blue solid/red dashed curves) and
the second-order intensity correlation function g(2) (green dot-dashed curve) as functions of the
driving laser-cavity detuning. a Jaynes-Cummings resonator with zero atom-photon detuning. The
Lorentzian proﬁle of the empty driven dissipative resonator is shown for comparison (blue dashed
curve). b Kerr-nonlinear resonator. Vertical dashed lines mark expected resonances in each model,
corresponding to the labeled states. Parameters are: Ω/γ = 2, g/γ = 20 (JC), and U/γ ≈11.7
(Kerr, as calculated from Eq. (3.7)). c Comparison of the steady-state photon numbers for a Kerr
resonator with parameters as used in (b) and a JC resonator with Δ/g = −10 and g/γ ≈1.6 × 104.
Taken from Grujic et al. [47]
broad similarities between the two models are apparent upon comparing the left
wing of Fig.3.5a (corresponding to the lower (−) polariton branch) to Fig.3.5b:
there are peaks at the eigen-modes of the resonators accompanied by the dips in
g(2). However, the JC model displays richer structure, as indicated by the presence
of two symmetric wings (corresponding to the two species of polaritons) and shift
in the lowest excitation state with respect to the linear case (due to the atom-photon
interaction).
It is then natural to ask if the two models can be made equivalent at all, so that
the physics of the JC resonator can be described by an effective Kerr model. Indeed
this is possible as shown in Fig.3.5c. To achieve good agreement, one needs to
take the photonic limit of the JC model in which the photonic component of the
polaritons are dominant. For the—polaritons this requires setting a large negative
detuning Δ ≪−g. However, this means reduced effective atom-photon interaction
and g must be increased in order to compensate for it. In Fig.3.5c, g/γ ≈1.6 × 104
was required to achieve good agreement for Δ/g = −10.
The above example shows that the JC and Kerr resonators are qualitatively differ-
ent systems unless care is taken to ensure that they are in the right parameter regimes.
The same conclusion holds for an array of resonators, meaning that, within realistic
regimes of interactions, a phenomenon found in one type of array is not guaranteed

52
C. Noh et al.
to be reproduced in another. This provides ﬂexibility in choosing CRAs and enriches
physics that can be found in them. Later in this section, we will see further examples
that highlight the similarities and differences between the two systems.
3.4.2
Photon Super-Bunching
Let us start with the simplest system of 2 coupled Kerr-nonlinear cavities and investi-
gate the effects of an interplay between the hopping and on-site interaction. Here we
focus on the small-sized equivalent of the ‘Mott’ state, meaning that the driving ﬁeld
will be set on two-photon resonance with the lowest-energy eigenstate in the two-
photon manifold |E(2)
−⟩∝|2, 0⟩+ |0, 2⟩+ (U +
√
U 2 + 16J 2)/2
√
2J|1, 1⟩. That
is, ωL = ωc + (U −
√
U 2 + 16J 2)/4. Note that this state converges to the ‘Mott’
state |1, 1⟩as U →∞.
Studying this set-up, Grujic and coworkers have discovered that strong photon
bunching (g(2) ≫1) can be observed even when U is signiﬁcantly stronger than J
[48]. This is depicted in Fig.3.6, which plots the local g(2) of the emitted photons as
a function of J and U. Note that the diagram is broadly divided into three regions,
deﬁned by the Poissonian (g(2) ≈1), anti-bunched (g(2) < 1), and bunched (g(2) > 1)
statisticsoftheemittedphotons.Thecrossoverpointsfromanti-bunchingtobunching
are depicted by the black line, showing that there is a critical coupling strength, Jc,
below which no bunching can be observed. This is further illustrated in Fig.3.6b,
where the auto-correlations along the two white lines in (a) are drawn for various
values of the driving strength. In both the linear (U ≪γ) and the hardcore (U ≫γ)
limit, expected behaviours are observed: in the linear regime, the steady state is a
(b)
(a)
Fig. 3.6 Photon super-bunching due to photon tunneling in the presence of the Kerr nonlinearity. a
Emitted photon statistics g(2) as a function of the photon tunneling strength J and Kerr nonlinearity
U. Above some critical threshold Jc indicated by the black curve, photon emission is bunched
(g(2) > 1). Otherwise, photon emission is anti-bunched. b Emitted photon statistics g(2) as a function
of Kerr nonlinearity U above and below the critical tunneling strength Jc. Super-bunching can be
observed for tunneling strengths larger than Jc. We note that the deﬁnition of U used in the ﬁgure
is two times larger than the deﬁnition used in Eq. (3.1). Taken from Grujic et al. [48]

3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
53
coherent state, inheriting the Poissonian statistics from the driving laser, while in
the hardcore regime, no more than a single photon per resonator can be injected,
resulting in completely anti-bunched light. The behaviour of photons in between
these extreme limits, however, depends strongly on the actual values of U and J.
For J > Jc, there can be strong bunching (g(2) ≫1) even with signiﬁcant repulsion
between photons U > J. Similar behaviour was found in the JCH dimer also [48].
The origin of strong bunching can be traced to the relative enhancement of the two-
photon sector in the NESS, relative to the single-photon sector, as the nonlinearity is
increased. In the linear case the NESS is a coherent state, meaning that the probability
of having two-photons in the second cavity is equal to the square of the probability to
have a single photon, giving rise to the observed coherence. Initially with increasing
U/J, this distribution is modiﬁed such that the probability of having two photons is
enhanced, i.e., it is larger than the square of the probability of having a single photon,
because the driving ﬁeld is detuned from the single-particle manifold. This explains
the initial rise in g(2). However, this trend cannot continue indeﬁnitely because the
|2, 0⟩+ |0, 2⟩portion in the driven two-photon eigenstate decreases with increasing
U/J. At some point the |1, 1⟩part of the two-photon eigenstate starts to dominate
and the system exhibits antibunching. The interplay between the enhanced total two-
photon sector and the suppressed local two-photon sector with increase in U/J gives
rise to the observed behaviour in g(2).
3.4.3
Localisation-Delocalisation Transition of Photons
Instead of continuously driving the system, let us now prepare the system in a certain
state and observe its dynamics. The steady state of the system will be the trivial
vacuum state, but we can still observe interesting physics in the transient dynamics.
In particular, strong atom-photon interaction gives rise to a dramatic transition from
a localised phase to a delocalised phase as ﬁrst discovered by Schmidt et al. [49].
In this set-up, photons are initially localised within a single site of a dimer. With-
out atom-photon coupling, the initially localised photons hop into the unoccupied
cavity. However, as the atom-photon interaction is increased, there is a sharp transi-
tion to the localised regime where photons are trapped in the initial cavity. Similar
delocalisation-localisation transition, or photon freezing, was ﬁrst discovered in the
BH-type systems and is known as self-trapping [50–55]. The result has been gener-
alised to larger arrays by Schetakis et al. [56].
The system is represented schematically in Fig.3.7. There are M resonators with
the left-side resonators initially occupied by N0 photons per resonator with the atoms
in the ground state. The transition between localised and delocalised phases is nicely
captured by the photon imbalance deﬁned as
Z(t) =
M/2
j=1⟨ˆa†
j(t)ˆa j(t)⟩−M
j=M/2+1⟨ˆa†
j(t)ˆa j(t)⟩
M
j=1⟨ˆa†
j(t)ˆa j(t)⟩
,
(3.9)

54
C. Noh et al.
Fig. 3.7 Schematic representation of the JCH system exhibiting ‘freezing’ of photons. The left
cavity of a dimer is initially pumped to contain 4 photons per resonator. The tunneling ratio is J
and the atom-photon coupling strength is g
Fig. 3.8 Photon number imbalance (blue curves) and the time-averaged imbalance (red curves)
for the lossless dimer with 7 initial photons. a Below the critical coupling strength, g = 0.3gcl
c ,
showing delocalised dynamics. b Above the critical coupling strength, g = 2.0gcl
c , showing localised
dynamics
or rather the time-averaged version of it, which we will denote as ¯Z. Using this
deﬁnition, the localised regime is characterised by| ¯Z| ≈1 and the delocalised regime
by ¯Z ≈0.
Figure3.8 provides a succinct account of the delocalised (left hand side) and
localised (right hand side) dynamics for the lossless dimer with 7 initial photons.
It shows the imbalance Z and the time average of it ( ¯Z(t)) for two values of atom-
photon coupling strength: One well below the critical coupling strength, g = 0.3gcl
c
(left hand side), and the other is well above it, g = 2.0gcl
c (right hand side), where
gcl
c is the critical coupling strength which in the semiclassical approximation can be
derived as gcl
c ≈2.8√N0J [49]. Below the critical coupling strength, photons are
free to travel back and forth between the cavities and the average imbalance ¯Z goes
to zero with time. Above the critical strength, however, photons are self-trapped and
cannot move to the right half of the array (rapid oscillations in the photon number is
due to an energy exchange with the atom). This self-trapping behaviour stems from
the fact that, for the symmetric system, the two states with opposite imbalance 1 and
-1 are approximate eigenstates of the system. For the dissipationless dimer, the time
scale of the oscillation between the states of opposite imbalance can be found within
the degenerate perturbation theory as 1/(cN0 J(J/g)N0−1) with cN0 a constant that
depends on N0 [49]. In the strongly nonlinear regime, the time scale diverges with
increasing N0, i.e., the photons are effectively trapped in the initial site.

3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
55
Detailed calculation shows that the localisation transition is shifted to smaller g
values and the transition is smoothened in the quantum case, i.e. gqu
c
< gcl
c . With
dissipation, the imbalance goes to zero trivially as the photons leave the system,
but within the decay time, the localisation behaviour can be clearly observed. Inter-
estingly, the dissipation can help one to achieve the transition from the delocalised
regime to the localised regime. This follows from the fact that the critical coupling
strength gqu
c increases with the number of photons in the system (as described by the
semiclassical approximate formula gcl
c ∝√N0J). Consider an experimental situa-
tion in which g is ﬁxed and less than gqu
c . As the photons leave the system, the total
photon number decreases and consequently gqu
c decreases along with it. This means
that gqu
c
will eventually dip below g, at which point the system enters the localised
regime.
Such dissipation-induced transition has been observed experimentally in a super-
conducting circuit platform by Rafery et al. [57]. In this experiment, the atom-photon
interaction is initially turned off by detuning the superconducting qubits out of reso-
nance, and the resulting linear system is driven by a coherent pulse. Coherent oscil-
lations of photons automatically prepare the required initial state with imbalance 1 at
a certain time, at which point the interaction is ramped up by bringing the qubits into
resonance. Figure3.9 depicts the experimentally measured phase diagram, in which
the homodyne signal of the photons from the initially unoccupied site is shown as a
function of the initial mean photon number Ni and time. Up to about Ni ≈20, the
atom-photon interaction strength g is greater than the critical strength gqu
c
and the
photons are localised. Increasing the initial mean photon number beyond Ni > 20,
g becomes smaller than gqu
c
and the photons start to oscillate between the two sites.
However, as the system loses photons, the localised regime is recovered as the total
number of photons in the system dips below some critical number.
Fig. 3.9 Phase diagram of the dissipation-induced delocalisation-localisation transition for the
two-site system. Homodyne signal from the initially unoccupied site as a function of initial photon
number (Ni) and time. For large enough Ni the system starts in the delocalised regime, but as time
progresses and photons are lost from the cavity, the system enters the localised regime. Taken from
Raftery et al. [57]

56
C. Noh et al.
3.4.4
Fermionisation of Hardcore Photons
In Sect.3.4.2, we have seen that the local second-order intensity correlation function
reveals anti-bunching behaviour in the strongly interacting limit (U/J ≫1). The
physical picture is that two-photons cannot occupy the same site because of strong
repulsion between them. This is reminiscent of the fermionic behaviour, where the
Pauli exclusion principle prohibits two fermions from occupying the same state. In
fact, in 1 dimensional systems in equilibrium, strong interactions between bosons
are known to induce fermionic behaviour [58]. As the on-site nonlinearity U in the
BH model approaches inﬁnity, double occupancy of any resonator is completely
suppressed and the bosonic wave function of the system can be written in terms of
the wave function of free fermions [59]. That such fermionisation can be observed
in driven dissipative CRAs was ﬁrst noticed by Carusotto et al. [60]. By calculating
the spectrum and intensity-intensity correlation functions of the output light in the
NESS, it was shown that the strongly correlated many-body nature of the photons can
be readily observed. Here we follow the work by Grujic et al. [47], which investigated
an analogous phenomenon in the JCH system. Readers are refered to Ch. [Gerace]
or the original article [60] for further details on the BH system.
Consider a homogeneously driven 3-site cyclic array of nonlinear resonators.
The eigenstates of this system in the hardcore regime can be determined by the
aforementioned bose-fermi mapping. These eigenstates are conveniently labelled by
quasi-momenta (of the Bloch modes), where the lowest eigenstates are found to be
the one-particle state at zero momentum |q = 0⟩, and the two-particle state |q, −q⟩
with equal and opposite momenta q = π/3 [60].
The ﬁrst evidence of the presence of fermionised photons can be observed in the
steady-state excitation number as shown in Fig.3.10a. For the BH model, we clearly
see the two lowest-lying fermionic energy eigenstates |q = 0⟩and |π/3, −π/3⟩at
Δc = −2J, −J in the hard-core regime (black dashed curve). Also shown is an
effect of ﬁnite U/J: the peak is red-shifted towards lower energy (black solid curve).
The JCH system shows the almost identical behaviour in the ‘photonic regime’
of polaritons, where the atom-photon detuning is large compared to the coupling
strength g such that the photonic contribution to polaritons dominates over the atomic
contribution. Photon numbers in the hardcore regime of the JCH model are calculated
by truncating to at most one polariton excitation in each cavity.
From these calculations we conclude that the (JC) polaritons are also fermionised
in the strongly interacting regime. However, achieving strongly interacting regime for
the photonic polaritons requires a very large value of coupling strength (g/γ ≈2 ×
105 has been used in Fig.3.10a) to compensate for the large atom-photon detuning.
So, the question arises: Can we observe the same phenomenon for a more modest
value of g? Fig.3.10b displays the total excitation number for g/γ ≈800, showing
that similar physics can be observed by reducing the values of Δ and g. It is interesting
to note that the quantitative agreement to the fermionised limit is better achieved for
Δ = g.

3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
57
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 3.10 a Steady state photon number as a function of laser-cavity detuning for both the BH and
JCH systems. One particle peaks are located on the left (Δc = −2J) and two-particle peaks on the
right. Strongly nonlinear cases are shown by the solid blue (BH) and the dotted red (JCH) curves,
whereas the strictly hard-core limit is shown by the dotted black (BH) and the dotted green (JCH)
curves. Parameters are M = 3 cavities, J/γ = 20, Ω/γ = 0.5, Δ/g = −10, and g/γ ≈2 × 105.
b Analogous photon number spectra for the JCH model with a smaller atom-photon detuning Δ.
g/γ ≈800 as calculated from Eq. (3.7). c The auto- and cross-correlations measured at the two-
particle peak as a function of nonlinearity in both the BH and JCH (Δ = 2J) models. Values of U
are determined from Eq. (3.7). Taken from Grujic et al. [47]
Further evidence of fermionisation can be obtained by inspecting the second-
order intensity correlations between photons. For this purpose, the auto-correlations
g(2)
j, j and the cross-correlations g(2)
j, j+1 are depicted in Fig.3.10c. The driving ﬁeld is
tuned at the two-particle resonance. We have already seen the behaviour of the auto-
correlations in Sect.3.4.2. In the weakly nonlinear regime, the resonance peaks cor-
responding to different values of N (the total number of photons in the array) overlap,
and the photons inherit the Poissonian nature of the pump ﬁeld [60]. With increas-
ing nonlinearity, the two-photon peak initially gives rise to strong photon bunching,
before fermionisation takes place at which point the photons become strongly anti-
bunched. Fermionisation of photons is further corroborated by the cross-correlations,
which increases with the nonlinearity, meaning that the photons are preferentially
located next to each other.
3.4.5
Polariton Crystallisation
In the above scenario we assumed homogeneous driving, i.e., all sites were driven
with the driving ﬁeld of the same intensity and phase. Let us now see an exam-
ple of what happens when the system is driven inhomogeneously. The case where

58
C. Noh et al.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 3.11 a Steady state intensity correlations for a cyclic 16-site JCH system, driven by lasers
exciting the π/2 momentum mode. Connecting lines are drawn to guide the eye. Parameters are
J/γ = 2, g/γ = 10, and |Ωk|/γ = 2. Also shown (solid green) are the intenstiy correlations for the
BH system with a ‘matched’ Kerr nonlinearity U/γ ≈6. b Closer view of the correlation function. c
The atomic and photonic population in each resonator in the steady state for three different values of
atom-resonator detuning, as well as the on-site intensity correlations. Taken from Grujic et al. [47]
the nearest-neighbour driving ﬁelds have a phase difference of π/2 (Ωk = Ω
exp(ikπ/2)) has been studied by Hartmann [61]. This system exhibits an intrigu-
ing phenomenon of photon crystallisation, which will be brieﬂy reviewed here. We
follow the presentation in [47], which generalised the BH system in the original
proposal to the JCH system. Interested readers are recommended to read the original
paper [61] for an in-depth analysis of the effects of the inhomogeneous driving.
The system consists of a cyclic ring of 16 cavities, with the above mentioned
driving ﬁeld arrangement. The latter creates a ﬂow of polaritons around the ring,
with momentum π/2, when the laser frequency is set to the lowest energy transition.
The interplay between the ﬂow and on-site interaction gives rise to the phenomenon
of polariton crystallisation: there is a larger probability of ﬁnding photons in neigh-
bouring cavities than in cavities further apart. This is evident in the second-order
correlation function as shown in Fig.3.11a, b: the on-site anti-bunching is accompa-
nied by nearest-neighbour intensity correlations that are stronger than correlations
between more distant cavities. The interpretation is that the polaritons form dimers
across two neighbouring sites which then move together around the array.
Both the BH and JCH systems clearly yield similar qualitative results, although
there are qualitative differences in the small detuning limit considered here. As noted
in the previous subsection, only in the ‘photonic regime’—where the photon-atom
detuning is very large and g even larger—would one expect a quantitative match.

3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
59
Furthermore, the atom-photon detuning provides an additional knob in the JCH sys-
tem that is absent in the BH system: it controls the composition of the polaritons.
The photonic and atomic contributions to the polaritons are depicted in Fig.3.11c
for three different values of atom-cavity detuning. In this regime, the atomic con-
tribution increases with Δ, which explains the enhanced on-site anti-bunching with
increasing Δ.
3.4.6
Phases in 2D Arrays
So far, we have limited our attention to 1D arrays, for which the steady-state or time-
evolution could be studied numerically using either exact diagonalisation methods or
the MPS formalism. Now we would like to discuss the physics of 2D arrays, where
a whole new range of physics are waiting to be explored. However, there is a slight
problem. In 2D, the application of tensor network ansatz does not work very well due
to an unfavourable scaling of entanglement and are therefore difﬁcult to investigate
numerically. For this reason studies up to now have either focused on small systems
or employed variants of mean-ﬁeld analysis. Here, we give a brief survey of recent
studies of 2D CRAs based on the latter.
Initially, thedynamics of interactingphotons after aninitial preparationintheMott
state were studied by Tomadin and coworkers [62]. To solve the master equation,
the authors employed the cluster mean-ﬁeld approach, which reduces the whole
system to a cluster of cavities plus mean-ﬁelds representing the rest of the system it
is interacting with. For a single-site-cluster case, this amounts to making the mixed
state equivalent of the usual mean-ﬁeld approximation ˆa†
i ˆa j →⟨ˆa†
i ⟩ˆa j + ˆa†
i ⟨ˆa j⟩. In
the typical quench scenario, the dynamics of interacting photons show characteristic
differences depending on whether the system parameters are in the Mott or superﬂuid
regime. Such signatures are also observed in the dissipative cases and are manifest
in the coherence of the cavity emission. In the Mott-regime the equal-time second-
order intensity correlation function stays zero, while in the superﬂuid-regime it gains
a ﬁnite value within the photonic lifetime.
A mean-ﬁeld phase diagram of the steady-state density matrix in the driven dissi-
pative scenario has also been explored. Firstly, the phase diagram of the driven dissi-
pative 2D BH array was mapped out by Le Boité et al. [63, 64], who found regions of
unstable, mono-stable, and bi-stable phases. Despite Mott-lobe-like structures char-
acterised by one stable solution with photon-antibunching, the phase diagram is very
different from its equilibrium counterpart, showing rich many-body physics arising
in the non-equilibrium scenario. Secondly, Jin and co-workers have investigated the
phases of a 2D BH array, but with an extra component of nearest-neighbour cross-
Kerr interaction (V 
i, j ˆni ˆn j) [65, 66]. Due to this extra term, the NESS phases were
shown to be classiﬁed into a uniform phase and a checkerboard phase. In the uniform
phase, two neighbouring cavities have equal densities whereas in the checkerboard
(or staggered) phase they have a ﬁnite density-difference. Furthermore, the NESS
can show non-trivial oscillatory behaviour, hinting at a non-equilibrium analog of
the supersolid phase.

60
C. Noh et al.
Clearly, the validity of these mean-ﬁeld results should be conﬁrmed with
approaches that take into account longer-ranged quantum correlations across the lat-
tice. Numerical methods that go beyond the cluster mean-ﬁeld approaches are under
development. These include a hybrid real-space renormalisation group approach
called ‘Corner space renormalisation method’ [67] and a self-consistent projection
operator theory that derives an exact equation of motion for the reduced density
matrices of an arbitrary sub-lattice [68].
3.4.7
Quantum Hall Physics with Light
It is possible to engineer artiﬁcial gauge ﬁelds for photons in a 2D CRA and thereby
achieve photonic quantum Hall systems. There are several proposals to prepare and
probe (integer or fractional) photonic quantum Hall states, but we will focus on recent
developments on driven dissipative signatures in photonic quantum Hall systems and
refer the interested reader to Ch. [Hafezi].
In a lattice system, gauge ﬁelds such as magnetic ﬁelds can be included by the
so-called Peierls substitution:
J

⟨i, j⟩
ˆa†
i ˆa j + h.c. →J

⟨i, j⟩
eiφi, j ˆa†
i ˆa j + h.c.
(3.10)
Essentially, a particle traveling around any loop accumulates a phase factor corre-
spondingtothesumofφi, j overtheloop.Itispossibletoengineersuchsite-dependent
hopping amplitudes in two-dimensional CRAs, to create an artiﬁcial magnetic ﬁeld.
Then, in analogy to the electronic systems, the presence of the on-site interaction
gives rise to a photonic fractional Hall effect. The latter can be checked by perform-
ing measurements on the output photons and calculating the overlap with the bosonic
Laughlin state [69], or can be inferred from the second-order intensity correlation
function of the collective mode [70]. Here, we review the work by Umucalılar and
Carusotto [69].
Consider a 4 by 4 lattice in the hard-core limit U/J →∞, which is weakly
pumped such that only up to 2 photons are allowed in the system at any given time.
The effective magnetic ﬁeld strength B is set such that the number of ﬂux quanta,
the total magnetic ﬂux divided by the ﬂux quantum, is 4. This choice gives the ﬁlling
fraction 1/2 when there are two photons in the system. In a conventional fractional
quantum Hall system, the ground state is described by the bosonic analogue of a
generalised Laughlin wave function [71]. However, the steady-state of the proposed
driven dissipative set-up surely does not coincide with this state because there are 0
and 1 photon manifolds. Interestingly, though, the two-photon sub-manifold of the
steady-state density matrix exhibits a strong overlap with the generalised Laugh-
lin wave function. This has been shown in [69], where the two-photon amplitude
ψi j ≡Tr[ρss ˆai ˆa j] has been calculated numerically and compared with the bosonic
Laughlin state. Note that ψi j can be measured experimentally by performing multiple

3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
61
Fig. 3.12 a Schematic illustration of the experimental set-up to measure the two-photon amplitude
ψi j. b Comparison of the normalised two-photon amplitude for a ﬁxed i = i0 (red thick arrows) and
the generalised Laughlin function (black thin arrows). The reference site i0 is marked by a circle.
Reprinted with permission from Umucalılar and Carusotto [69]. Copyright (2012) by the American
Physical Society
homodyne measurements as schematically illustrated in Fig.3.12a. An example of
a numerically calculated ψi j is shown in Fig.3.12b, along with the corresponding
Laughlin wave function. The system is driven at a two-photon resonance and weak
dissipation γ/J = 0.03 and weak driving Ω/γ = 0.1 are assumed. An overlap of
up to 98.9% can be achieved for γ/J = 0.002, while for a more realistic loss rate
γ/J = 0.05, the overlap value is 90.0%. These high overlap values show that despite
the losses and driving, one can prepare strongly-correlated photonic states which are
analogues of the Laughlin state of fractional quantum Hall systems.
A driven dissipative analogue of the integer quantum Hall effect has also been
proposed in a linear 2D CRA, where an experimentally viable scheme to measure
the global Chern number (and even the local Berry curvature) was devised [72].
In this proposal, a photonic analogue of the integer quantum Hall system is inves-
tigated, in which there is a constant force driving a current. Such a force can be
modelled by a position dependent energy term H f = F 
m,n n ˆa†
m,n ˆam,n (force in -y
direction). Recall that in integer quantum Hall systems the driven current induces a
Hall current in the x-direction, whose conductivity is quantised. This quantisation
is robust against various imperfections due to its topological nature, and is captured
by the Chern number associated with each Bloch band. Remarkably, it is possible
to measure the Chern number in a driven dissipative set-up as proposed by Ozawa
and Carusotto [72]. Alternative methods, based on tuning of twisted boundary con-
ditions, to experimentally measure the topological invariants in driven-dissipative
settings were proposed by Hafezi [73] and Bardyn and coworkers [74].
To understand the method by Ozawa and Carusotto, consider a linear 2D array
(of size 41 × 41), with the central site driven by a coherent ﬁeld of amplitude Ω.
Then, because the system is linear, we can replace the operators ˆam,n by complex
amplitudes am,ne−iω0t. When the driving force is absent, i.e., F = 0, the injected
photons either disperse through the lattice (Fig.3.13a, b) or stay localised within the
central site (Fig.3.13c), depending on whether the driving frequency lies within a
Bloch band or a band gap. With the driving force turned on (F = 0.1J), however,
the photons clearly ‘travel’ towards the left as shown in Fig.3.13d. It is possible to
show that the displacement in the center of mass ⟨x⟩≡
m,n m|am,n|2/ 
m,n |am,n|2
is related to the Berry curvature ΩB(k) by the formula [72]

62
C. Noh et al.
Fig. 3.13 a–d Distributions
of the photon amplitudes
|am,n| on a 41 × 41 lattice. a
F = 0, γ = 0.01J, and a
pump frequency within the
lowest band. b The same as
in (a) but with larger loss rate
γ = 0.02J. c The same as in
(a) but the pump frequency
lies within a band gap. d The
same as in (a) but with
F = 0.1J. e Displacement
⟨x⟩as a function of F/J, for
a pump frequency within the
lowest band. The solid blue
line is for γ/J = 0.05 and
the dashed green line is for
γ/J = 0.08. Reprinted with
permission from Ozawa and
Carusotto [72]. Copyright
(2014) by the American
Physical Society
⟨x⟩= F

MBZ γΩB(k)n2(k)

MBZ n(k)
.
(3.11)
Here, MBZ stands for the magnetic Brillouin zone; n(k) = [(ωL −E(k))2 +
γ2]−1, where ωL is the driving frequency; E(k) is the energy dispersion of the corre-
sponding band. In the large-loss limit where γ is bigger than the width of the Bloch
band under consideration but smaller than the band gap, the above formula reduces
to
⟨x⟩≈qC F
2πγ ,
(3.12)
where C is the Chern number. On the other hand, if the loss rate is very small
compared to the width of the Bloch band, the formula reduces to
⟨x⟩≈
¯ΩB(ωL)F
2γ
,
(3.13)
where ¯ΩB(ωL) is the averaged Berry curvature on the E(k) = ωL curve. Examples
of the linear dependence of ⟨x⟩on F is shown in Fig.3.13e.
Therefore, depending on the value of the loss rate, one can either directly measure
the Chern number or the local Berry curvature. For the lowest Bloch band, which
has C = −1, the theoretically calculated value using the above method was shown
to be as close as −0.97, demonstrating that the signature of the integer quantum
Hall effect can be directly measured in the driven dissipative set-up. Furthermore,

3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
63
the ability to measure the Berry curvature allows one to detect nontrivial properties
of the photonic honeycomb lattice in the absence of an external magnetic ﬁeld. In
the latter, there are two bands near the Dirac points whose degeneracy is lifted when
two neighbouring sites have different energies. Even though the total Chern number
vanishes in the absence of a synthetic magnetic ﬁeld, the two bands are known to
possess nontrivial Berry curvatures. Because the Chern number vanishes, one needs
to resolve the Berry curvature in order to detect the system’s nontrivial properties,
which can be done using the above method.
3.4.8
Other Works
There are a number of interesting works on driven dissipative CRAs that we could
not cover due to spatial limitations. Here we provide a brief survey of some of these,
so that the interested readers can refer to original articles.
First of all, there are many works that investigate properties of photons emitted
from a dimer. Liew and Savona discovered the phenomena of ‘unconventional photon
blockade’, where photon blockade is achieved in the weakly Kerr-nonlinear regime
in which anti-bunching would otherwise be absent [75]. This was shown to result
from an interference of excitation pathways [76] and was generalised to a coupled
resonator with second-order nonlinearity [77]. The ﬂuorescence spectrum and the
spectrum of the second-order intensity correlation function of the JC dimer were
calculated in [78], both for coherent and incoherent driving ﬁelds, while photon
statistics in a BH dimer were investigated with emphasis on photon anti-bunching
in [79, 80]. Scaling of this anti-bunching behaviour with increasing array size was
studied within a mean-ﬁeld theory [81]. In a slightly different setting, transport of
photons in a BH array of up to 60 sites was studied using an MPS method adapted to
mixed states [82]. Here, only the ﬁrst cavity is driven and the underlying many-body
states were shown to be visible in the transmission spectrum. Transport of quantum
light in a BH dimer was also studied, showing that more detailed information about
the underlying correlated states is revealed when one uses two photons of different
energies instead of a coherent ﬁeld as the input [83].
Other works look at connections with well-known condensed matter systems.
A quantum optical analogue of the Josephson interferometer in a three-site set-up
was proposed by Gerace and co-workers [84]. There, in analogy to the Josephson
junction,twoendcavitiesaredrivenbycoherentﬁeldswithdifferentphases,whilethe
middle cavity contains single-photon nonlinearity. The interplay between tunneling
and interaction gives rise to rich physics in the steady-state, details of which can
be found in Ch. [Gerace]. A driven dissipative realisation of the Kitaev chain [85]
was proposed by Bardyn and ˙Imamo˘glu [86], showing that Majorana zero modes
can be created and detected in a CRA. To obtain the so-called p-wave pairing term,
the authors propose to use parametric driving in the strongly-interacting regime.
Photons are then effectively spin-1/2 particles, allowing one to use Jordan-Wigner
transformation to achieve the Kitaev chain.

64
C. Noh et al.
3.5
Summary and Outlook
In this chapter, we have reviewed out-of-equilibrium many-body physics in coupled
resonator arrays. A short survey of possible experimental platforms was provided,
along with two theoretical models (Jaynes-Cummings-Hubbard and Bose-Hubbard)
to describe them as well as the master equation description of driven dissipative
CRAs. Then we reviewed a range of many-body non-equilibrium phenomena, start-
ing from those arising in a two-site set-up and ﬁnishing with phenomena in 2D arrays.
A brief survey of many interesting works that could not be covered in detail was then
given.
The study of driven dissipative CRAs has only recently begun and there are many
exciting avenues to be explored. Experimentally, it is still quite challenging to build
an array of resonators with large nonlinearity, although splendid progress is being
made in the ﬁeld of circuit-QED as we have seen in Sect.3.4.3. Controlling the
ﬂuctuations of local parameters is another limitation. Theoretically, one can look at
ways to enhance the effects of nonlinearity, as in unconventional quantum blockade,
to help ease the requirement of strong nonlinearity. More pressing is the development
oftheoreticaltoolstostudydrivendissipative2Darrays.Aswehavealludedtoearlier,
1D systems can be simulated efﬁciently using the MPS formalism, but 2D system are
waiting for further developments. There is already progress in this direction as we
brieﬂy mentioned at the end of the last section, and more will surely follow. With the
on-going developments in both the experimental and theoretical fronts, many more
exciting discoveries will surely follow in this nascent ﬁeld.
Acknowledgements C. Noh and D.G. Angelakis would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial support
provided by the National Research Foundation and Ministry of Education Singapore (partly through
the Tier 3 Grant “Random numbers from quantum processes”), and travel support by the EU IP-
SIQS. S.R. Clark and D. Jaksch acknowledge support from the European Research Council under
the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013)/ERC Grant Agreement
no. 319286 Q-MAC.
Appendix: Matrix Product States and Quantum Trajectories
In this Appendix we provide some more details about MPS methods and quantum
trajectories approach. First we specify the problem to be solved in general.
Quantum Master Equation
It is known that the most general form of a Markovian time-local master equation
that preserves the trace, Hermiticity, and positivity of the system’s density matrix ρ
must be of so-called Lindblad form [44, 46]:
dρ
dt = −i[ ˆH, ρ] +

α

ˆLαρ ˆL†
α −1
2

ˆL†
α ˆLα, ρ

,
(3.14)

3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
65
where the Lindblad operators ˆLα = √γα Aα and ˆH is the Hamiltonian describing
the unitary part of the system’s dynamics. The γα are identiﬁed as the characteristic
rates at which ‘jump operators’ Aα act on the system. In the case of CRAs the jump
operators are the bosonic mode operators ˆa j or atomic ladder operator ˆσ−
j which
act locally on a site j. The locality of the jump operators and the nearest-neighbour
nature of the JCH and BH Hamiltonians in 1D are crucial to the applicability of MPS
methods to solve this problem.
Matrix Product States
Generally we consider an L site chain composed of subsystems with d-dimensional
Hilbert space spanned by states enumerated as | j⟩, with j ∈{1, . . . , d}. The Hilbert
space for the total system is then spanned by the product basis |j⟩= | j1, . . . , jL⟩≡
| j1⟩⊗· · · ⊗| jL⟩. An arbitrary pure state of the system is then
|⟩=

j
c j1 j2... jL |j⟩,
(3.15)
which is described by d L complex amplitudes c j1 j2... jL. To circumvent this intractable
description the MPS ansatz parameterises the amplitudes of a state in terms of a
product of matrices indexed by the local conﬁgurations as
|⟩=

j
 ¯LTA j1A j2 . . . A jL ¯R
 |j⟩.
(3.16)
Here the A jm are a set of d matrices (one for each local state | jm⟩) of dimension
χ × χ, while ¯L and ¯R are boundary vectors which collapse the product into a scalar
complex amplitude. This ansatz has only Ldχ2 complex numbers, so if χ is ﬁxed
and small it provides a compact class of states [32].
A special feature of MPS is that the dimension of the matrices χ is directly
related to the entanglement of the system when it is bipartitioned. If a state is weakly
entangled then it will possess an accurate MPS representation with a small ﬁxed χ.
Given an MPS, reduced density matrices for subsets of sites, norms and expectation
values of observables can be efﬁciently computed, essentially via products of the
state’s constituent matrices [31, 32]. These features become especially useful for
1D systems which are described by a Hamiltonian ˆH = 
m ˆhm,m+1 composed of at
most nearest-neighbour terms. Many such systems are now known to possess weakly
entangled ground states and low-lying excited states. Thus an MPS description of
them is both natural and effective [32].
To ﬁnd ground states and excited states of ˆH the highly successful density matrix
renormalisation group (DMRG) method [32–34, 37] was developed which is essen-
tially a variational minimiser over the MPS ansatz. For our purposes here however
the extension of DMRG to time-evolution via the time evolving block decimation
(TEBD) algorithm is most relevant [35, 36]. Here we sketch some of the key points to
this method. Our task is to apply unitary time-evolution described by the propagator
ˆU(δt) = exp(−i ˆHδt) to an initial MPS for a small time step δt.

66
C. Noh et al.
First, we break up the exponential using a Suzuki-Trotter decomposition [87] such
as
ˆU(δt) =
 
odd m
exp(−i ˆhm,m+1δt)
 
even m
exp(−i ˆhm,m+1δt)

+ O(δt2),
(3.17)
where we have utilised that all the odd Hamiltonian terms ˆhm,m+1 commute among
themselves, and similarly for the even terms. Higher order Trotter decompositions
have a similar form. What we are left with is a product of unitary operators (or
gates) exp(−i ˆhm,m+1δt) acting on nearest-neighbouring pairs of sites which have to
be applied to the MPS initial state in sequence.
Second, upon applying a gate exp(−i ˆhm,m+1δt) to an MPS the matrices A jm
and A jm+1 for the two sites m and m + 1 get merged together into a joint matrix
B jm, jm+1. To bring the state back into MPS form the matrix B jm, jm+1 needs to be
factorised. This is achieved by using a singular value decomposition (SVD) which
breaks B jm, jm+1 →˜A jm ˜A jm+1 yielding new updated matrices describing the evolved
MPS [35, 36]. During this operation the dimensions of the new ˜A matrices can grow
and so after repeated applications of gates the MPS can eventually become intractably
large. However, the singular values outputted by the SVD provide a quantitative
means of truncating the dimension down, essentially compressing the state and thus
ensuring that the MPS remains tractable. This truncation will only be accurate if
the evolution does not generate too much entanglement. Once all the gates in the
decomposition are applied we have an MPS approximation for |(δt)⟩= ˆU(δt) |⟩,
and the procedure can be repeated to evolve further in time [32].
Quantum Trajectory Algorithm
Rather than simulating the dynamics of an open system by evolving its density matrix
ρ directly, an alternative approach is to propagate stochastic realisations of individual
system state vectors {|i(t)⟩} [41–43]. These ‘quantum trajectories’ are piecewise
deterministic processes, interrupted randomly by ‘quantum jumps’ due to the sys-
tem’s interaction with the environment. An approximation to the density matrix may
be obtained by averaging the contributions i = {|i(t)⟩⟨i(t)|} of many trajec-
tories [45]. The details of the ‘unravelling’ of the Lindblad master equation into
stochastic wave functions are described in Ref. [46]. Here we give a practical recipe
on how to generate quantum trajectories.
For a set of Lindblad operators { ˆLα}, we construct a non-unitary effective Hamil-
tonian ˆHeff:
ˆHeff = ˆH −i
2

α
ˆL†
α ˆLα.
(3.18)
Evolution under the Schrödinger equation with this effective Hamiltonian leads to
a decay in the norm of the wave-function as a consequence of interactions with the
environment. Trajectories are then generated as follows.

3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
67
1. Begin the simulation by initialising the system in a state |⟩= |(0)⟩.
2. Draw a randomly chosen number r ∈[0, 1].
3. Evolve the system under the action of the non-Hermitian Hamiltonian of Eq.
(3.18). This will involve computing |(t)⟩= exp(−i ˆHefft) |(0)⟩. Due to the
decaying norm of the state, physical expectation values are calculated during this
evolution using the normalised form of the state |(t)⟩/|||(t)⟩||.
4. Continue the evolution until the norm falls below the randomly chosen number,
i.e. when the condition |||(tjump)⟩|| < r is ﬁrst met. One of the possible quantum
jumps now occurs.
5. The jump operator to be applied is chosen by ﬁrst generating the normalised
probability distribution
Pα =
|| ˆLα(tjump)⟩||2

β || ˆLβ(t.jump)⟩||2 ,
(3.19)
then randomly selecting a jump operator index j from this weighted distribution.
The normalised state after the application of the chosen operator is
ˆL j|(tjump)⟩
|| ˆL j|(tjump)⟩||
.
(3.20)
We continue looping over steps 2–5 until the end of our simulation window.
Crucially all the steps in this algorithm, such as the time-evolution in step 3, the
computation of norms in step 4 and the application of a jump operator in step 5,
can be implemented efﬁciently on MPS so long as the Hamiltonian and Lindblad
operators act locally or on nearest-neighbour sites.
References
1. R.P. Feynman, Simulating physics with computers. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 467–488 (1982)
2. I. Bloch, J. Dalibard, S. Nascimbéne, Quantum simulations with ultra cold quantum gases. Nat.
Phys. 8, 267–276 (2012)
3. R. Blatt, C.F. Roos, Quantum simulations with trapped ions. Nat. Phys. 8, 277–284 (2012)
4. J.I. Cirac, P. Zoller, Goals and opportunities in quantum simulation. Nat. Phys. 8, 264–266
(2012)
5. T.H. Johnson, S.R. Clark, D. Jaksch, What is a quantum simulator? EPJ Quantum Technol. 1,
10 (2014)
6. A. Aspuru-Guzik, P. Walther, Photonic quantum simulators. Nat. Phys. 8, 285–291 (2012)
7. A.A. Houck, H.E. Türeci, J. Koch, On-chip quantum simulation with superconducting circuits.
Nat. Phys. 8, 292–299 (2012)
8. M.P.A. Fisher, P.B. Weichman, G. Grinstein, D.S. Fisher, Boson localization and the superﬂuid-
insulator transition. Phys. Rev. B 40(1), 546–570 (1989)
9. A. Tomadin, R. Fazio, Many-body phenomena in QED-cavity arrays. J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 27(6),
A130–A136 (2010)
10. I. Carusotto, C. Ciuti, Quantum ﬂuids of light. Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 299–366 (2013)

68
C. Noh et al.
11. S. Schmidt, J. Koch, Circuit QED lattices: towards quantum simulation with superconducting
circuits. Ann. Phys. 525, 395–412 (2013)
12. D. Jaksch, C. Bruder, J.I. Cirac, C.W. Gardiner, P. Zoller, Cold Bosonic atoms in optical lattices.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3108–3111 (1998)
13. M. Greiner, O. Mandel, T. Esslinger, T.W. Hänsch, I. Bloch, Quantum phase transition from a
superﬂuid to a Mott insulator in a gas of ultracold atoms. Nature 415, 39–44 (2002)
14. M.J. Hartmann, F.G.S.L. Brandão, M.B. Plenio, Strongly interacting polaritons in coupled
arrays of cavities. Nat. Phys. 2, 849–855 (2006)
15. A.D. Greentree, C. Tahan, J.H. Cole, L.C.L. Hollenberg, Quantum phase transitions of light.
Nat. Phys. 2, 856–861 (2006)
16. D.G. Angelakis, M.F. Santos, S. Bose, Photon-blockade-induced Mott transitions and XY spin
models in coupled cavity arrays. Phys. Rev. A 76, 031805 (2007)
17. M.J. Hartmann, F.G.S.L. Brandao, M.B. Plenio, Quantum many-body phenomena in coupled
cavity arrays. Laser Photon Rev. 2, 527–556 (2008)
18. J.D. Joannopoulos, S.G. Johnson, J.N. Winn, Photonic Crystals: Molding the Flow of Light
(Princeton University Press, 2008)
19. M. Trupke, E.A. Hinds, S. Eriksson, E.A. Curtis, Z. Moktadir, E. Kukharenka, M. Kraft,
Microfabricated high-ﬁnesse optical cavity with open access and small volume. App. Phys.
Lett. 87, 211106 (2005)
20. G. Lepert, M. Trupke, E.A. Hinds, H. Rogers, J.C. Gates, P.G.R. Smith, Elementary array of
Fabry-Pérot waveguide resonators with tunable coupling. App. Phys. Lett. 103, 111112 (2013)
21. A. Blais, R.S. Huang, A. Wallraff, S.M. Girvin, R.J. Schoelkopf, Cavity quantum electrody-
namics for superconducting electrical circuits: an architecture for quantum computation. Phys.
Rev. A 69, 062320 (2004)
22. O. Astaﬁev, A.M. Zagoskin, A.A. Abdumalikov, Y.A. Pashkin, T. Yamamoto, K. Inomata,
Y. Nakamura, J.S. Tsai, Resonance ﬂuorescence of a single artiﬁcial atom. Science 327, 840
(2010)
23. L. Frunzio, A. Wallraff, D. Schuster, J. Majer, R. Schoelkopf, Fabrication and characterization
of superconducting circuit qed devices for quantum computation. Appl. Supercond. 15, 860–
863 (2005)
24. M.H. Devoret, S. Girvin, R. Schoelkopf, Circuit-qed: how strong can the coupling between a
Josephson junction atom and a transmission line resonator be? Ann. Phys. 16, 767–779 (2007)
25. A. Wallraff, D.I. Schuster, A. Blais, L. Frunzio, R.S. Huang, J. Majer, S. Kumar, S.M. Girvin,
R.J. Schoelkopf, Strong coupling of a single photon to a superconducting qubit using circuit
quantum electrodynamics. Nature 431, 162–167 (2004)
26. G. Lepert, M. Trupke, M.J. Hartmann, M.B. Plenio, E.A. Hinds, Arrays of waveguide-coupled
optical cavities that interact strongly with atoms. New J. Phys. 13, 113002 (2011)
27. D.F. Walls, G.J. Milburn, Quantum Optics (Springer, Berlin, 1994)
28. F. Verstraete, V. Murg, J.I. Cirac, Matrix product states, projected entangled pair states, and
variationalrenormalizationgroupmethodsforquantumspinsystems.Adv.Phys.57,143(2008)
29. J.I. Cirac, F. Verstraete, Renormalization and tensor product states in spin chains and lattices.
J. Phys. A Math. Theor. 42, 504004 (2009)
30. S. Al-Assam, S.R. Clark, D. Jaksch, Tensor Network Theory (TNT) Library. http://www.
ccpforge.cse.rl.ac.uk/gf/project/tntlibrary/
31. D. Perez-Garcia, F. Verstraete, M.M. Wolf, J.I. Cirac, Matrix product state representations.
Quantum Inf. Comput. 7, 401 (2007)
32. U. Schollwöck, The density-matrix renormalization group in the age of matrix product states.
Ann. Phys. 326, 96 (2011)
33. S.R. White, Density matrix formulation for quantum renormalization groups. Phys. Rev. Lett.
69, 2863 (1992)
34. S.R. White, Density-matrix algorithms for quantum renormalization groups. Phys. Rev. B 48,
10345 (1993)
35. G. Vidal, Efﬁcient classical simulation of slightly entangled quantum computations. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 91, 147902 (2003)

3
Out-of-Equilibrium Physics in Driven Dissipative Photonic Resonator Arrays
69
36. G. Vidal, Efﬁcient simulation of one-dimensional quantum many-body systems. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 93, 40502 (2004)
37. U. Schollwöck, The density-matrix renormalization group. Rev. Mod. Phys. 77, 259 (2005)
38. M. Zwolak, G. Vidal, Mixed-state dynamics in one-dimensional quantum lattice systems: a
time-dependent superoperator renormalization algorithm. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 207205 (2004)
39. F. Verstraete, J.J. Garcia-Ripoll, J.I. Cirac, Matrix product density operators: simulation of
ﬁnite-temperature and dissipative systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 93, 207204 (2004)
40. A.J. Daley, J.M. Taylor, S. Diehl, M. Baranov, P. Zoller, Atomic three- body loss as a dynamical
three-body interaction. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 40402 (2009)
41. C.W. Gardiner, A.S. Parkins, P. Zoller, Wave-function quantum stochastic differential equations
and quantum-jump simulation methods. Phys. Rev. A 46, 4363 (1992)
42. R. Dum, A.S. Parkins, P. Zoller, C.W. Gardiner, Monte Carlo simulation of master equations
in quantum optics for vacuum, thermal, and squeezed reservoirs. Phys. Rev. A 46, 4382 (1992)
43. J. Dalibard, Y. Castin, K. Molmer, Wave-function approach to dissipative processes in quantum
optics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 68, 580 (1992)
44. H.J. Carmichael, An Open Systems Approach to Quantum Optics (Springer, 1993)
45. M.B. Plenio, P.L. Knight, The quantum-jump approach to dissipative dynamics in quantum
optics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 101 (1998)
46. H.P. Breuer, F. Petruccione, The Theory of Open Quantum Systems (Oxford University Press,
2002)
47. T. Grujic, S.R. Clark, D. Jaksch, D.G. Angelakis, Non-equilibrium many-body effects in driven
nonlinear resonator arrays. New J. Phys. 14, 103025 (2012)
48. T. Grujic, S.R. Clark, D. Jaksch, D.G. Angelakis, Repulsively induced photon super-bunching
in driven resonator arrays. Phys. Rev. A 87, 053846 (2013)
49. S. Schmidt, D. Gerace, A.A. Houck, G. Blatter, H.E. Türeci, Nonequilibrium delocalization-
localization transition of photons in circuit quantum electrodynamics. Phys. Rev. B 82,
100507(R) (2010)
50. S.M. Jensen, The nonlinear coherent coupler. IEEE J. Quantum Electron. QE-18, 1580 (1982)
51. J.C. Eilbeck, P.S. Lomdahl, A.C. Scott, The discrete self-trapping equation. Phys. D 16, 318
(1985)
52. A. Smerzi, S. Fantoni, S. Giovanazzi, S.R. Shenoy, Quantum coherent atomic tunenlling
between two trapped Bose-Einstein condensates. Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 4950 (1997)
53. M. Albiez, R. Gati, J. Fölling, S. Hunsmann, M. Cristiani, M.K. Oberthaler, Direct observation
of tunenlling and nonlinear self-trapping in a single bossing Josephson junction. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 95, 010402 (2005)
54. S. Levy, E. Lahoud, I. Shomroni, J. Steinhauer, The ac and dc Josephson effects in a Bose-
Einstein condensate. Nature 449, 579–583 (2006)
55. D. Sarchi, I. Carusotto, M. Wouters, V. Savona, Coherent dynamics and parametric instabilities
of microcavity polarities in double-well systems. Phys. Rev. B 77, 125324 (2008)
56. N. Schetakis, T. Grujic, S.R. Clark, D. Jaksch, D.G. Angelakis, Frozen photons in Jaynes
Cummings arrays. J. Phys. B 46, 224025 (2013)
57. J. Raftery, D. Sadri, S. Schmidt, H.E. Türeci, A.A. Houck, Observation of a dissipation-induced
classical to quantum transition. Phys. Rev. X 4, 031043 (2014)
58. M.A. Cazalilla, R. Citro, T. Giamarchi, E. Orignac, M. Rigol, One dimensional bosons: from
condensed matter systems to ultracold gases. Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1405–1466 (2011)
59. M. Girardeau, Relationship between systems of impenetrable bosons and fermions in one
dimension. J. Math. Phys. 1, 516 (1960)
60. I. Carusotto, D. Gerace, H.E. Tureci, S. De Liberato, C. Ciuti, A. Imamoˇglu, Fermionized
photons in an array of driven dissipative nonlinear cavities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 033601
(2009)
61. M.J. Hartmann, Polariton crystallization in driven arrays of lossy nonlinear resonators. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 104, 113601 (2010)
62. A. Tomadin, V. Giovannetti, R. Fazio, D. Gerace, I. Carusotto, H.E. Türeci, A. Imamoglu,
Signatures of the superﬂuid-insulator phase transition in laser-driven dissipative nonlinear
cavity arrays. Phys. Rev. A 81, 061801(R) (2010)

70
C. Noh et al.
63. A. Le Boité, G. Orso, C. Ciuti, Steady-state phases and tunenlling-induced instabilities in the
driven dissipative Bose-Hubbard model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 233601 (2013)
64. A. Le Boité, G. Orso, C. Ciuti, Bose-Hubbard model: relation between driven dissipative steady
states and equilibrium quantum phases. Phys. Rev. A 90, 063821 (2014)
65. J. Jin, D. Rossini, R. Fazio, M. Leib, M.J. Hartmann, Photon solid phases in driven arrays of
nonlinearly coupled cavities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 163605 (2013)
66. J. Jin, D. Rossini, M. Leib, M.J. Hartmann, R. Fazio, Steady-state phase diagram of a driven
QED-cavity array with cross-Kerr nonlinearities. Phys. Rev. A 90, 023827 (2014)
67. S. Finazzi, A. Le Boité, F. Storme, A. Baksic, C. Ciuti, Corner space renormalization method
for driven dissipative 2D correlated systems. arXiv:1502.05651 (2015)
68. P. Degenfeld-Schonburg, M.J. Hartmann, Self-consistent projection operator theory for quan-
tum many-body systems. Phys. Rev. B 89, 245108 (2014)
69. R.O. Umucalılar, I. Carusotto, Fractional quantum Hall states of photons in an array of dissi-
pative coupled cavities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 206809 (2012)
70. M. Hafezi, M.D. Lukin, J.M. Taylor, Non-equilibrium fractional quantum Hall state of light.
New. J. Phys. 15, 063001 (2013)
71. F.D.M. Haldane, E.H. Rezayi, Periodic Laughlin-Jastrow wave functions for the fractional
quantized Hall effect. Phys. Rev. B 31, 2529 (1985)
72. T. Ozawa, I. Carusotto, Anomalous and quantum Hall effects in lossy photonic lattices. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 112, 133902 (2014)
73. M. Hafezi, Measuring topological invariants in small photonic systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112,
210405 (2014)
74. C.-E. Bardyn, S.D. Huber, O. Zilberberg, Measuring topological invariants in small photonic
lattices. New. J. Phys. 16, 123013 (2014)
75. T.C.H. Liew, V. Savona, Single photons from coupled quantum modes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104,
183601 (2010)
76. M. Bamba, A. Imamoglu, I. Carusotto, C. Ciuti, Origin of strong photon antibunching in weakly
nonlinear photonic molecules. Phys. Rev. A 83, 021802(R) (2011)
77. D. Gerace, V. Savona, Unconventional photon blockade in doubly resonant microcavities with
second-order nonlinearity. Phys. Rev. A 89, 031803(R) (2014)
78. M. Knap, E. Arrigoni, W. von der Linden, Emission characteristics of laser-driven dissipative
coupled-cavity systems. Phys. Rev. A 83, 023821 (2011)
79. M. Leib, M.J. Hartmann, Bose-Hubbard dynamics of polaritons in a chain of circuit quantum
electrodynamics cavities. New. J. Phys. 12, 093031 (2010)
80. S. Ferretti, L.C. Andreani, H.E. Türeci, D. Gerace, Photon correlations in a two-site nonlinear
cavity system under coherent drive and dissipation. Phys. Rev. A 82, 013841 (2010)
81. F. Nissen, S. Schmidt, M. Biondi, G. Blatter, H.E. Türeci, J. Keeling, Nonequilibrium dynamics
of coupled qubit-cavity arrays. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 233603 (2012)
82. A. Biella, L. Mazza, I. Carusotto, D. Rossini, R. Fazio, Photon transport in a dissipative chain
of nonlinear cavities. Phys. Rev. A 91, 053815 (2015)
83. C. Lee, C. Noh, N. Schetakis, D. Angelakis, Few-photon transport in nonlinear cavity arrays:
probing signatures of strongly correlated states. Phys. Rev. A 92, 063817 (2015)
84. D. Gerace, H.E. Türeci, A. Imamoglu, V. Giovannetti, R. Fazio, The quantum-optical Josephson
interferometer. Nat. Phys. 5, 281–284 (2009)
85. A.Y. Kitaev, Unpaired Majorana fermions in quantum wires. Phys. Usp. 44, 131 (2001)
86. C.-E. Bardyn, A. ˙Imamo˘glu, Mjorana-like modes of light in a one-dimensional array of non-
linear cavities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 253606 (2012)
87. M. Suzuki, Fractal decomposition of exponential operators with applications to many-body
theories and monte carlo simulations. Phys. Lett. A 146, 319 (1990)

Chapter 4
Topological Physics with Photons
Mohammad Hafezi and Jacob Taylor
Abstract In this chapter, we review the recent progress in the implementation of
synthetic gauge ﬁelds for photons and the investigation of topological features such
as quantum Hall physics in photonic systems. We ﬁrst discuss the implementation
of magnetic-like Hamiltonians in coupled resonator systems and provide a pedagog-
ical connection between the transfer matrix approach and the couple mode theory to
evaluate the system Hamiltonian. Furthermore, we discuss the investigation of non-
equilibrium fractional quantum Hall physics in photonic systems. In particular, we
show that driven strongly interacting photons exhibit interesting many-body behav-
iors which can be probed using the conventional optical measurement techniques.
Finally, we present a scheme to implement three-body interaction in circuit-QED
architecture to realize some of the fractional quantum Hall parent Hamiltonians with
Pfafﬁan wavefunction as ground state.
4.1
Introduction
In physics, symmetries play a crucial role in determining the behavior of a sys-
tem. Translation invariance leads to momentum conservation, while time reversal
invariance leads to energy conservation. However, in large systems, symmetries of
the system, which are present in the microscopic Hamiltonian, may not be stable to
interactions between bodies, leading to the concept of spontaneous symmetry break-
ing, and the natural emergence of different phases of matter. However, in the early
1980s, it was realized that some physical observables are dictated by the topology
of the system, rather than the symmetries of the Hamiltonian [1].
The hallmark example of such topological features is the quantum Hall regime of
two dimensional electron gas systems. This simplest case has provided the greatest
illumination, in which semi-classical understandings of single particle physics, in the
M. Hafezi · J. Taylor (B)
Joint Quantum Institute, College Park, USA
e-mail: hafezi@umd.edu
J. Taylor
e-mail: jmtaylor@umd.edu
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
D.G. Angelakis (ed.), Quantum Simulations with Photons and Polaritons,
Quantum Science and Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-52025-4_4
71

72
M. Hafezi and J. Taylor
form the skipping orbits and edge states, provides useful qualitative and even quan-
titative predictions of the transverse conductance in such a system. More generally,
non-interacting theories of particles in lattices have a natural method of examining
topological features, simply by computing topological invariants of the system at
an energy band over the exact solutions of the Bloch wave vectors. This is physi-
cally motivated by the connection to electronic systems, where a Fermi sea ﬁlls all
available states up to a speciﬁed energy, and it is the properties near that energy that
determine the low-frequency response of the system.
An analogous behavior can also been seen in bosonic systems. Speciﬁcally, work-
ing with photons in the non-interacting regime, a single-particle ’shell’ of ﬁxed
energy can be explored in a photonic system simply by looking at the monochro-
matic response of the system, i.e., examining its transmission spectrum.
In both cases, the crucial theoretical object to compute is the Berry curvature.
Mathematically, if we deﬁne single-particle solutions to the (classical) wave equation
forlightuk(r) = exp(−ikr)ψk(r)inalatticesystemwithtranslationinvariance(such
that k is a good ‘quantum’ number), we can deﬁne the Berry potential
A = −Im⟨uk|∇k|uk⟩
Unfortunately,whilemeasuringthephaseofthesingle-particlesolutionsisinprin-
ciple feasible, in practice is leaves much to be desired. Instead, there is another topo-
logical feature which may be easier to observe: the existence of transport (extended
solutions of the wave equation) near the edges of the system when the ‘bulk’ of
the system, has only localized solutions. These edge states are the hallmark exper-
imental signature of non-trivial topological order, and arise due to the boundary
conditions—in this case, the edge of the disk is different than a sphere or a torus.
In this chapter we describe an approach for generating and testing topological
features in photonic (light-based) systems. Our approach relies heavily upon dramatic
successes in understanding related physics in spin Hall systems in condensed matter
physics, and in approaches to generating ‘synthetic’ magnetic-like effects (synthetic
gauge ﬁelds) in atomic systems. Many of these ideas are available in the literature
for further reading; here we focus on the pedagogical aspects of these approaches.
4.2
Gauge Field and Topological Features
in Noninteracting Photonic System
We begin by examining the simplest case for a topological system: charged particles
in a magnetic ﬁeld as in the integer quantum Hall effect. Recall that the generator of
translations for a charged particle in a magnetic ﬁeld is fundamentally different than
that of a particle without the ﬁeld. Speciﬁcally, the transformation of the momentum
from p to p −e
c A takes an operator U = exp(−ia · p/ℏ) to one with a non-trivial
additional phase φi j =
e
cℏ
 r j
ri A(r) · dr. Thus, for the particle translating about a

4
Topological Physics with Photons
73
closedloop,thetotalphasepickedupbecomesφ =
e
ℏc

A · dr,i.e.,theﬂuxenclosed
in the loop for ∇× A ̸= 0.
The role the magnetic ﬁeld is then simply to generate terms in translation that act
as a phase in hopping. More generally, it was realized in atomic systems that any
added terms to the Hamiltonian that play an analogous role to φi j, i.e., to have a
non-trivial phase when the particle hops from lattice site to lattice site, can produce
behavior analogous to the phase a charged particle accrues while moving in a real
magnetic ﬁeld [2]. Such effective ﬁelds are denoted synthetic gauge ﬁelds, as they do
not explicitly have a gauge symmetry attached to them, but merely mimic the effects
of a real, classical gauge ﬁeld such as the vector potential in electromagnetism. The
primary beneﬁt of such synthetic gauge ﬁeld ideas is the wide variety of possible
approaches that implement such ﬁelds.
Similarly, for particles conﬁned to a lattice, we replace the momentum terms by
the usual Bloch-band approximation, p2 →−J 
⟨i j⟩a†
i a j where the sum is over
nearest neighbors and a†
i creates a particle at lattice site i. Using our analogy of
translations, we see immediately that a†
i a j is an approximation to the translation
Uri j; an effective ﬁeld arises when we have a nontrivial phase in hopping (Peierls’s
substitution). Speciﬁcally,
−J

⟨i j⟩
a†
i a je−iφi j
where φi j ∼
 r j
ri A · dl is the effective phase in tunneling, and now A is the effective
gauge potential which can be obtained by inverting this relationship.
4.2.1
Magneto-Optic Effects and MW Experiment
In direct analogy to quantum Hall physics for electronic systems, photonic sys-
tems can also exhibit similar physics and have edge states. More speciﬁcally, in
the presence of strong Faraday effect, it was theoretically predicted [3], and later
experimentally demonstrated [4], can lead to generation of edge state. However, this
approach relied upon magneto-optical effects, which are extremely weak at optical
frequencies. Thus, studying the effect of gauge ﬁelds—such as the magnetic ﬁeld—
on photons was limited to the microwave domain. Fortunately, there are alternative
ways to simulate the effect of gauge ﬁeld for photons. In the following we provide a
detailed discussion on a scheme which relies on differential optical path lengths in an
array of coupled ring resonators. In Sect.4.2.3, we brieﬂy discuss other approaches
to synthesize gauge ﬁelds photonic systems.
We note that there have been parallel efforts in the ultracold atoms community
to synthesize magnetic ﬁeld for neutral particles [2, 5–8] and various techniques to
detect the resulting topological invariants [9–15].

74
M. Hafezi and J. Taylor
4.2.2
Synthetic Gauge Field in Coupled Resonators
In this section, we show that the coupled resonators can simulate a magnetic-like
Hamiltonian based on differential optical path lengths [16–18]. In particular, a non-
zero magnetic ﬁeld can be synthesized using an imbalance between the optical paths
that connect resonators. In order to show this, we ﬁrst review the equivalence between
the transfer matrix method and the coupled mode theory for two simple systems: a
singleresonatorandathree-resonatorsystemcoupledtotwoprobingwaveguides.For
the three-ring system, we show that the asymmetric coupling of the middle resonator
can be described by a non-zero magnetic-phase in the effective Hamiltonian.
We begin by the simplest example: a ring resonator coupled to two waveguides,
as shown in Fig.4.1a. In photonics, such system is known as the add/drop ﬁlter. We
assume that the resonator has a single optical mode. Therefore, using the coupled
mode theory (input-output formalism [19]), we can write the dynamics of the ﬁeld
inside the resonator as:
dE
dt = (−κin −2κex)E −

2κexEine−iωt,
(4.1)
where κex is the coupling rate between the probing-waveguide and the resonator and
κin is the ﬁeld decay rate to undesired modes. We assumed that a monochromatic
ﬁeld with the amplitude Ein and the detuning ω drives the system, as shown in
Fig.4.1a. The output ﬁeld in the drop port is related to the ﬁeld inside the resonator
by: Eout = √2κexE. Consequently, by solving the dynamics in the Fourier domain,
we obtain the transmission in the drop port as:
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
ω /FSR
rSM 2
rTM 2
d
a
b
c
g
h
e f
input
drop (r)
through(t)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4.1 a A resonator connected to two probing waveguides b The transfer matrix formalism
and the coupled mode theory yield the same results, for frequencies around the resonance. The
parameters are ϵ = 0.5, α′L = 0.05

4
Topological Physics with Photons
75
rSM =
√2κexE
Eine−iωt =
2κex
iω −2κex −κin
.
(4.2)
Now, we evaluate the transmission properties using the transfer matrix formalism.
The waveguide-resonator coupling regions can be described as:
Mcoupl = 1
t
 −r2 + t2 r
−r
1

,
 d
c

= Mcoupl
a
b

,
 g
h

= Mcoupl
 f
e

,
where t and r are the transmission and reﬂection coefﬁcients of the coupling regions.
Furthermore, we assume that the propagation constant is β = 2πn/λ, where n is
the index of refraction and λ is the wavelength, and the absorption constant is α′.
Therefore, the free propagation inside the resonators is given by:
Mprop =
eiβL/2−α′L/2
0
0
e−iβL/2+α′L/2

,
 f
e

= Mprop
 d
c

.
(4.3)
We are interested in a limit where the coupling loss can be ignored (i.e. |t|2 + |r|2 =
1) and the junctions are highly reﬂective. In other words: r →
√
1 −ϵ2, t →iϵ,
where ϵ ≪1. The regime of interest is near the resonant frequency of the resonator,
and is much smaller than the free spectral range (FSR), so we consider βL ≪1.
Since the propagation loss over a typical distance in these systems is not large, we
take α′L ≪1. The input ﬁeld is only present at one port, as shown in Fig.4.1a, so
we can replace: a = 1, h = 0. Keeping terms to the total 2nd order in ϵ2, βL, α′L,
both in the numerator and the denominator, we ﬁnd that the ﬁeld in the drop channel
can be simpliﬁed as:
rSM =
ϵ2
iβL −α′L −ϵ2 .
(4.4)
Now, if we use the following substitutions:
ϵ2 →4πκex
FSR , α′L →2πκin
FSR
, βL →2π ω
FSR,
(4.5)
we see that Eqs.(4.4) and (4.2) are equivalent. One can also compare these two
approaches, using the exact expressions, as shown in Fig.4.1b. Both formalism agree
with each other around the resonant frequency.
In the following, we show that the dynamics of two ring resonators that are cou-
pled through a middle off-resonant ring can be effectively written as two resonators
coupled with a “hopping phase”. We evaluate transport properties in both cases and
show that they are identical, around the resonant frequency of the side resonators.

76
M. Hafezi and J. Taylor
a
e
u
h
q
m
r
c
l
n
p
k
input
(a)
(b)
t
r
Fig. 4.2 a Two ring resonator coupled with a hopping phase (φ) b Two ring resonators coupled
throughanoff-resonantmiddlering.Thesetwosystemsareequivalentaroundtheresonantfrequency
of side resonators
First, we derive the transmission and reﬂection coefﬁcients of two rings coupled
with a hopping phase. The Hamiltonian describing such system can be written as:
H = −J ˆa†
2 ˆa1e−iφ −J ˆa†
1 ˆa2e+iφ
(4.6)
where J isthetunnelingrateandφisthehoppingphasephase,asdepictedinFig.4.2a.
Note that by hopping phase we mean a Hamiltonian of the kind written in Eq.(4.6).
This should not be confused with optical non-reciprocity which requires an external
ﬁeld, cf. Refs. [20, 21]. Similar to the single resonator case, using coupled mode
theory, we can write the dynamics of the ﬁeld inside the resonators as:
d
dt
a1
a2

=
−κin −κex
i Je+Iφ
i Je−Iφ
−κin −κex
 a1
a2

−

2κex
Ein
0

.
(4.7)
The output ﬁeld of the resonators is given by: aout
2
= √2κexa2, aout
1
= 1 + √2κexa1.
Consequently, the transmission and reﬂection coefﬁcients, as deﬁned in Fig.4.2, are
given by:
rSM =
√2κexa2
Ein
= −
2ie−iφJκex
J 2 + (iω −κex −κin)2
(4.8)
tSM =
√2κexa1 + 1
Ein
= 1 + 2κex(+iω −κex −κin)
J 2 + (+iω −κex −κin)2 .
Now, we consider two ring resonators that are coupled through a middle off-resonant
ring, as shown in Fig.4.1b. We use the transfer matrix formalism to derive the trans-
mission of the system. The transfer matrix for the waveguide-resonator and resonator-
resonator coupling regions, respectively, are given by:

4
Topological Physics with Photons
77
M1 = 1
t1
−r2
1 + t2
1 r1
−r1
1

M2 = 1
t2
−r2
2 + t2
2 r2
−r2
1

.
where ti andri are the transmission and reﬂection coefﬁcients of the coupling regions.
Therefore, the waveguide-resonator couplings can be written as:
 e
h

= M1
a
c

,
 l
s

= M1
r
k

.
(4.9)
We assume that the length of the side resonators (the middle resonator) is L (L + η),
so that the middle resonator remains off-resonant with the other two. Furthermore, the
middle resonator is shifted vertically by x to induce the hopping phase, as we show.
Therefore, the free propagation inside the side resonators is described by Eq.(4.3).
The propagation inside the middle rings is given by:
m
p

= M2
ei βL/2+iβη−i2βx−α′L/2
0
0
e−i βL/2−iβη−i2βx+α′L/2

M2
u
q

.
(4.10)
Again, keeping terms to the total 2nd order in ϵ2
i , βL, α′L, we ﬁnd that the ﬁeld in
the drop channel can be simpliﬁed as:
rTM =
2e−iβxϵ2
1ϵ2
2
2
	
2α′L −2iβL + ϵ2
1

ϵ2
2cos(βη) −i
	
2α′L −2iβL + ϵ2
1

2
+ ϵ4
2

sin(βη)
.
(4.11)
To compare this expression with the one obtained from the single-mode approxima-
tion (Eq.4.8), we use the following substitutions:
ϵ1
2 →4πκex
FSR
, ϵ2
2 →4πJ
FSR , α′L →2πκin
FSR
, βL →2π ω
FSR , βx →φ
(4.12)
and we have
rTM =
2e−iφJκex
2J(κex + κin −iω) cos(βη) −i

J 2 + (κex + κin −iω)2
sin(βη). (4.13)
In the special case where βη = 3π/2, this expression reduces to Eq.(4.8). This means
that if the middle ring is precisely anti-resonant with the side rings, the three rings
can be effectively described by two resonators coupled with a hopping phase. If we
have βη = π/2, the two models are again the same, only the sign of the tunneling
is reversed (J →−J). When the middle resonator deviates from the anti-resonant
condition (βη = π/2, 3π/2, . . .), the system can still be effectively described by

78
M. Hafezi and J. Taylor
T
-2πα(y-1)
2πα(y-1)
+2πα
site-resonator
link-resonator
-2
(b)
(a)
πα(y+1)
2πα(y+1)
2παy
-2παy
−4
−2
0
2
4
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
ω/J
α
Edge band
 bulk 
band
Fig. 4.3 a A 2D lattice of coupled resonators which be described by a magnetic tight-binding
model (Eq.4.14) b Hofstadter butterﬂy spectrum. Each point represents a transmission greater than
0.005, for a 10 × 10 lattice with torus boundary condition and coupling κex/J = 0.02. The red line
is a guide for the eye to show the spectrum at the speciﬁc magnetic ﬁeld (α = 0.25). The bulk and
edge band are highlighted
two resonators with a hopping phase, however, the effective tunneling is Jeff →
J/ sin(βη) and system is shifted in frequency by ω →ω −J cot(βη).
Now, we consider a two-dimensional system of coupled resonators, where two
sets sets of resonators play the role of sites and links of a lattice, as shown in Fig.4.3.
We arrange the system so that the phase imbalance in only present in the row link-
resonator and increases by the row number. The dynamics of the system near the
resonance of the site resonators is described by the following Hamiltonian
Hmag = −J

x,y
ˆa†
x+1,y ˆax,yei2παy + ˆa†
x,y ˆax+1,ye−i2παy
+ ˆa†
x,y+1 ˆax,y + ˆa†
x,y ˆax,y+1,
(4.14)
where a†
x,y is the creation operator at site (x, y), J is the effective tunneling rate
between resonators and α characterizes the phase imbalance. In particular, a photon
hopping around a plaquette, in the counter-clockwise direction, acquires the phase
2πα, in direct analogy to Aharanov-bohm phase. Therefore, α is the effective mag-
netic ﬂux per plaquette and the total magnetic ﬂux is Nφ = αNx Ny.
In this discussion, we assumed only counter-clockwise photons in the site- (link-)
resonators. The opposite circulating photon experience the opposite magnetic ﬁeld.
Therefore, the system is equivalent to two copies of integer quantum Hall systems
with opposite magnetic ﬁelds, in direct analogy to a special case of the quantum spin
Hall physics in electronic systems [22].
The Hamiltonian in Eq.4.14 is identical to that of an electron on a lattice with a
uniform magnetic ﬁeld and the spectrum of the system is known as the Hofstadter
butterﬂy, when Nx, Ny →∞. The spectrum of such photonic system can be probed

4
Topological Physics with Photons
79
using transmission spectroscopy. By applying the input-output formalism, we can
evaluate different transport coefﬁcients. In this section, the dynamics is linear, there-
fore, the “quantum” input-output formalism reduces to the “classical” coupled mode
theory, by replacing the ﬁeld operator with the corresponding expectation value, i.e.,
⟨ˆax,y⟩= ax,y. The ﬁeld dynamics of the resonators is given by:
d ˆax,y
dt
= i[H, ˆax,y] +

−κin −κex(δx,xinδy,yin + δx,xoutδy,yout)

ˆax,y
−

2κex(δx,xinδy,yin)Eine−iωt
(4.15)
where κex is the coupling rate between the probing-waveguide and the site resonators
and κin is the ﬁeld decay rate to undesired modes. “in” (“out”) represents the res-
onators to which the input (output) probing waveguides are connected. We assume
a monochromatic input ﬁeld at the left-bottom corner resonator, with amplitude Ein
and detuned by ω from the resonance, as shown in Fig.4.3a. Going to the Fourier
domain and evaluating the steady-state solution, we can obtain the transmission in
the output channel as T = |axout,yout/Ein|2.
Since an inﬁnite system can be simulated by a ﬁnite system with periodic boundary
conditions, we study a 10 × 10 lattice with torus boundary condition. Figure4.3b,
shows the transmission proﬁle when the mangetic ﬂux varies from 0 to 2π. We
observe that a ﬁnite version of the Hofstadter’s fractal appears.
In a ﬁnite lattice, there exist states between magnetic bulk bands which are known
as ‘edge states’. In direct analogy to quantum Hall physics, such quasi-one dimen-
sional states localized at the perimeter of the system which carry current. In particular,
for certain frequency bands, the ﬁeld in resonators located in the bulk (away from the
edges) undergoes destructive interference and, therefore, the light intensity is non-
zero only at the edges. This is illustrated in Fig.4.4a. For each edge state, there is a
corresponding edge state with an opposite chirality. More speciﬁcally, the forward-
and backward-propagating edge states take different paths, and consequently, they
have different resonances at detunings, equal in magnitude and opposite in sign.
Again in direct analogy to integer quantum Hall edge state, such edge states
are immune to disorders in the form of random potential. In particular, when an
impurity is located on the edge—the resonator is detuned (U ˆa†
x,y ˆax,y)—the edge
state routes around it, as shown in Fig.4.4b for the test case of a single disordered
site. More precisely, scattering which would reverse the current is prevented because
the backward going edge state has a different energy, as discussed above, preventing
elastic scattering.
Transport through edge states requires the photon to traverse the perimeter of
the system, leading to a time delay proportional to the transverse resonators. Since
such transport is robust against frequency mismatch among resonators, such two-
dimensional systems provide a robust alternative to conventional CROW in photonic
delay lines [16].

80
M. Hafezi and J. Taylor
input
output
input
output
Intensity
(normalized)
(b)
(a)
Fig. 4.4 Light intensity for a 10 × 10 lattice a in the absence and b in the presence of disorder.
For (b) the resonator (x,‘y)=(5, 1) is detuned by U = 20J. For both ﬁgures, the parameters are:
(κex, κin)/J = 0.2, 0.1, α = .25) and the system is excited at ω = 2J
While the implementation of gauge ﬁelds has been achieved, the measurement
of the expected topological orders remains elusive due to the inapplicability of the
conventional Hall conductance measurements to photonic systems. How can one
directly measure the integer topological invariants, e.g., the winding number of the
edge states or the Chern number of the bulk state in a photonic system? In other words,
how do the integer values manifest themselves in an optical realization of quantum
Hall Hamiltonians. Recently, there have been a number of proposals to achieve this
end by beneﬁting from individual site addressability to manipulate synthetic gauge
ﬁelds in photonic systems [23–25]. In particular, following Laughlin/Halperin’s argu-
ment [26, 27], it is suggested that the spectral shift and edge state transfer can be
experimentally observed using standard transmission spectroscopy [24].
4.2.3
Other Approaches: Helical Waveguides, Polarization
Scheme, Modulation
A wide variety of additional approaches have been considered, and are detailed
elsewhere in this book. We brieﬂy highlight that synthetic gauge ﬁelds can be
implemented by the application of strong magnetic ﬁeld [3, 4], polarization control
[28], opto-mechanically [20], via bi-anisotropic metamaterials [29]. Other exam-
ples include: emulation of edge states as localized state at the two ends of a one-
dimentional array [30], topological states in photonic quasi-crystals [31], strain
induced magnetic ﬁeld [32]. At the same time, there have been efforts to implement
synthetic gauge ﬁelds in circuit-QED systems [33, 34]. In particular, breaking time-
reversal symmetry using biased circulators [35, 36], qubit-assisted tunneling [37].

4
Topological Physics with Photons
81
Focusing on time- or space-dependent modulation scheme [21, 38], a repeating
structural along the direction of propagation of a waveguide, or a periodically varying
two dimensional system, can implement another version of a topological system:
a Floquet insulator [39, 40]. Here we highlight such Floquet approaches with a
simple example, from Refs. [21, 41]. Consider two adjacent optical resonances with
annihilation operators aL and aR at frequencies ωL and ωR. Furthermore, imagine the
two resonators are coupled parametrically (via, e.g., a Josephson parametric coupler),
with a coupling
V = −J
	
cos(νt + φ)a†
LaR + H.c.

.
Working in the interaction picture (aL →e−iωLtaL, and similarly for R), we see that
the cosine can be split into a forward and backward rotating phase term:
VI = −J
2
	
e−iνt−iφei(ωL−ωR)ta†
LaR + eiνt+iφei(ωL−ωR)ta†
LaR

+ H.c.
When |ωL −ωR| ≈ν, i.e., the pump in the parametric coupler matches the frequency
difference, only the ﬁrst term contributes, while the second term rapidly averages to
zero in a rotating wave approximation. Consequently, a photon in the left resonator
can ‘hop’ to the right resonator, picking up a phase e−iφ which is set by the phase of
the pump ﬁeld. Thus, in an array of such resonators, varying φ with index number
in the array can implement a synthetic gauge ﬁeld.
4.3
Interacting Photons and Many-Body Regime
In this section, we show that the above system can be extended to investigate strongly
interacting photonic states. In particular, by inducing strong photon-photon interac-
tion, we show that certain fractional quantum Hall states can be generated, and their
signature can be probed using the correlation function measurement.
4.3.1
Strong Kerr Nonlinearity and Laughlin State of Light
Photon-photon interaction can be mediated by coupling emitters (e.g., atoms) to
each resonator, as shown in Fig.4.5. In the strong coupling regime, where the pho-
ton blockade is observed [42–44], this interaction can be represented as an on-site
interaction in a Bose-Hubbard model for a coupled array of resonators [45–47]. As
shown in Refs. [48–51], in the presence of a synthetic magnetic ﬁeld, such interact-
ing system of photons can be described by a Hamiltonian which is identical to the
fractional quantum Hall Hamiltonian on a lattice:

82
M. Hafezi and J. Taylor
atomic 
ensembles
control
field
Δ’
Δ
Ω
Ω
Γ
Γ
Fig. 4.5 Atomic ensembles are coupled to resonators to mediate interaction. inset: Mediating
interacting using N-level atomic ensemble. A control ﬁeld couples the internal levels, and provides
on-site interaction for photons
Hmag = −J

x,y
ˆa†
x+1,y ˆax,yei2παy + ˆa†
x,y ˆax+1,ye−i2παy
+ ˆa†
x,y+1 ˆax,y + ˆa†
x,y ˆax,y+1 + U ˆa†
x,y ˆax,y(ˆa†
x,y ˆax,y −1).
(4.16)
Such Hamiltonian can be implemented by adding strong optical nonlinearity in
the scheme presented in the previous section. As an example case, one can use an
ensemble of N-level atoms to mediate onsite two-body interaction of the Kerr-type
(Fig.4.5) [46], which still preserves the propagation direction (clockwise or coun-
terclockwise) used in Ref. [16]. In this approach, the optical cavity and ensemble
enter into a slow-light regime, where the excitations are dark state polaritons [52]
ˆΨx,y ∝Ω ˆax,y −g
√
N ˆSx,y, where Ω is the pump ﬁeld, g is the vacuum Rabi cou-
pling, N is the number of ensemble atoms, and ˆSx,y is the spin-wave operator
describing coherence between two atomic states |a⟩and |c⟩(from Fig.4.5 inset).
These bosonic excitations lead to an overall increase of dynamical timescales by
η = c/vg ≫1, the ratio between the speed of light and group velocity for the dark
state polariton, but they can also interact via a self-Kerr interaction with state |d⟩
[53]. Coupling atoms to the photonic system introduces loss which can be reduced
by detuning the cavity resonance from the emitter transitions (Δ, Δ′ ≫Γ ). As dis-
cussed in Ref. [54], to observe any many-body effect and to have a ﬁnite gap, the
effective interaction between photons (U ≃g2/Δ′) should be at least comparable
to the tunneling rate J. These conditions can be satisﬁed for systems with a large

4
Topological Physics with Photons
83
Purcell factor (g2/κΓ ≫1). The same criterion applies to implementation of such
scheme in the microwave domain.
Following Refs. [54, 55], the ground state of Eq. (4.16) are the fractional Quantum
Hall states when the mangetic ﬁeld is dilute (α < 0.4). In particular, when the ﬁlling
factor (ν = Nph/Nφ), which is the ratio between the number of photons (Nph) and
the total magnetic ﬁeld Nφ = αNx Ny, is one half, the ground state of the system
can be faithfully described by Laughlin wavefunction (α < 0.25). For numerical
simulation, one has to consider a torus boundary condition to mimic the effect of an
inﬁnite system. One a torus the Laughlin wavefunction is written using the Jacobi
theta function. The detailed discussion of the overlap calculation can be found in
Ref. [54]. The remarkable overlap with the Laughlin state in the photonic case is
discussed in Refs. [48–51].
One can prepare a Laughlin state by adiabatically melting a Mott-insulator of
photons, similar to the atomic method discussed in Ref. [55]. However, this requires
both preparation of Nph Fock states and photon lifetimes long enough to allow for the
melting to be adiabatic. Moreover, the direct experimental veriﬁcation of the Laugh-
lin overlap is a difﬁcult task which requires number post-selection (Nph) and state
tomography in a Hilbert space with dimension
 Nx Ny
Nph

. Therefore, it is important
to ﬁnd an implementation and a detection scheme that is more relevant for photonic
system.
More generally most of the studies in many-body photonic system is inspired by
analogies to electronic systems which are mainly focused on ground state proper-
ties. However, a photonic system is naturally an open driven system. Therefore, the
most relevant approach to understand and manipulate many-photon states involves
understanding the non-equilibrium dynamics in such systems [56–61]. For example,
in a one-dimensional system strong interaction between photons leads to their fermi-
onization, which can be probed in the output correlation functions of an externally
driven system, both in a discrete array [56] and in the continuum limit [58].
For the fractional quantum Hall system, Ref. [51] demonstrates that by weakly
driving the system, a few photon Laughlin state can be prepared and experimentally-
relevant observables such as the correlation function of the zero-mode can show
certain signatures of the Laughlin state. Since the system is driven and lossy, it
may seem that the master equation formalism is required to fully described the
system. However, as shown in Ref. [51], when the system is weakly driven, one can
resort to the stochastic wavefuction approach. More precisely, if we are interested
in evaluating the correlation function of any order, ﬁnding the steady-state of the
effective Hamiltonian is sufﬁcient and the effect of the “quantum jumps” can be
ignored. Such simpliﬁcation allows one to explore larger systems, compared to the
master equation approach, and to avoid ﬁnite size effects, which usually undermines
the numerical results.
When all the resonators are driven with a laser ﬁeld, the input ﬁeld consists of
a Poisson distribution of photons. When photons are injected at the frequency cor-
responding to the Laughlin state at the Nph-photon manifold, photons reconﬁgure
themselves and form a wave function which corresponds to the Laughlin state. The

84
M. Hafezi and J. Taylor
0.01
.1
1
10
(a)
(b)
10
2
overlap
g
(3)
CM
0.1
1
0.01
.1
1
10
U/J
10
−3
10
2
−3.4
−3.2
−3
ωp /J
Fig. 4.6 Overlap with the Laughlin wave function (ν = 1/2), and the correlation function of the
zero mode (g(3)
C M) are shown as a function of: a the pump frequency for hard-core bosons b the
interaction strength for Δ = −3.095J, as shown by an arrow on (a). The overlap with the Laughlin
function is evaluated for Nph = 3 manifold. The total magnetic ﬂux is Nφ = 6. The simulations are
performed for a 6 × 6 lattice, torus boundary condition, and the maximum number of photon is 3.
κ = 0.01J, β = 0.01. All calculated quantities are dimensionless
remarkable overlap of this photonic state with the Laughlin wave function in the Nph-
photon manifold is shown in Fig.4.6a. Note the frequency required to be resonant
with the Laughlin state is at the vicinity of the free photon state (Hofstadter’s spec-
trum). We can relax the hard-core constraint and investigate the same observables.
In the weak interaction limit, the system approaches the classical response, as shown
in Fig.4.6b. In the absence of interaction, using transport measurements—varying
the pump frequency and measuring reﬂection/transmission– one recovers the Hofs-
tadter’s butterﬂy spectrum as in Fig.4.3b, but regardless of the pump frequency, the
correlation function remains equal to one.
To summarize, the driven strongly interacting photons exhibits interesting many-
body behaviors and the emergence of FQH states of photons can be probed by using
the conventional optical measurement techniques. One of the remaining question is
to investigate other many-body signatures of these states such as their topological
properties and fractional statistics.
4.3.2
Three-Body Interaction and Pfafﬁan States of Light
One particularly curious class of interacting topological systems are those corre-
sponding to parent Hamiltonians, where theoretical understanding of fractional quan-
tum Hall states can be inverted to construct a Hamiltonian who has the desired state
as its ground state. Notably, states with anyonic quasiparticle excitation spectra cor-

4
Topological Physics with Photons
85
respond to particularly simple classes of parent Hamiltonians [62]. For the case of the
Pfafﬁan, the Hamiltonian in the continuum limit involves just an uniform external
magnetic ﬁeld and a short-range three-particle interaction [41]. In the case of the
Read-Rezayi state [63]—universal for quantum computing—it is similarly simple,
but with a four-particle short range interaction [64].
Crucially, in both cases two-body interactions are detrimental for creating the
appropriate ground state and low energy quasiparticle spectrum. This necessitates
some degree of creativity in developing devices with appropriate three- or four-body
interactions without having a corresponding low-energy two-body scattering term.
Potential approaches using resonances in scattering such as Feshbach resonances for
cold atomic systems have suggested that resonant behavior can dramatically alter
the short-range nature of interaction, and have lead to suggestions for developing
appropriate parent Hamiltonians using cold atoms.
An analogous approach is also available for superconducting systems, where
the nature excitations of the system are bosonic, i.e., in the microwave photonic
regime. Restricting the discussion to a lattice of resonators, one seeks resonators
with the property that there is an on-site, three-particle interaction but no two-particle
interaction. This mimics the appropriate low-energy behavior necessary to recover
the parent Hamiltonian of choice for, e.g., the Pfafﬁan state. Towards that end, we
can examine the simple case of a superconducting qubit with an inductive shunt.
Writing
H = EC
n2
2 + EL
(φ −φx)2
2
−E J cos(φ)
with [φ, n] = i as appropriate canonical ﬂux and number variables, we can setup a
scenario near φx = π/4 where the potential (EL and E J terms taken together) is an
asymmetric double-well. The excitations of the lower energy well can be thought
of as various photon number states of the resonator, consistent with an harmonic
oscillator approximation to the well. However, the ﬁrst bound state of the higher
well can cause a resonance, which dramatically shifts the position of an energy
eigenstate (Fock state) that sits near the bound state (Fig.4.7a). This leads to an
effective n-body interaction on the site, where n is the nth energy eigenstate above
the ground state for the lower well.
Suppression of the n −1 and smaller interactions, as well as maintaining nearly
bosonic coupling between resonators, is beyond the scope of this chapter but is
considered in Ref. [41]. There, several of us realized that stronger interactions are
possible by further reducing the barrier, where the residual effect of the resonance
persists long after the nominal bound state has been removed. Combining such a
circuit QED approach to nonlinear elements with periodic variation of couplers
many enable a complete generation of the Pfafﬁan parent Hamiltonian, as shown
numerically in Ref. [41].

86
M. Hafezi and J. Taylor
0
5
10
−13.2
−13.1
−13
−12.9
−12.8
−11.7
−11.6
−11.5
−11.4
−11.3
−11.2
−11.1
−11
−11
Energy/J 
short range
long range
NN and NNN
n
10−2
100
10
2
10
−5
10
−4
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
U  /6J
3
U   /4J
2
10
102
103
104
105
2
0
2
4
6
10
5
0
5
10
15
(a)
(c)
(b)
φ
0
E EL
Fig. 4.7 a Anharmonic potential of a hybrid qubit V (φ) at ﬁnite external ﬂux. Nominal solutions
of the left well and right well can be energetically aligned by appropriate choice of EC and φx,
leading to a resonance enhancement of nonlinearity near the third excited state. b Lowest energy
many-body eigenenergies for several different effective magnetic ﬁelds, demonstrating the many-
body gap between the three-fold degenerate ground Pfafﬁan state and excited states for a system
with bosons hopping on a lattice, from Ref. [41]. c Many-body gap as a function of two-particle U2
and three particle U3 interactions, indicating the beneﬁt of reduced two-body interaction to improve
the many-body gap for Pfafﬁan state preparation
4.4
Outlook
As we brieﬂy discussed in this review, there are promising platforms to investigate
synthetic gauge ﬁelds in the optical domain. The advantage in the optical domain
is the relative ease of implementing the synthetic gauge ﬁelds and the possibility
of preforming the experiments on the non-interacting models at room temperature.
However, the challenge in the optical domain remains to be the weakness of nonlin-
earity and the difﬁculties in reaching photon-blockade on each resonators without
inducing any inhomogeneity.
On the other hand, there has been recent investigation in the microwave domain to
implement synthetic gauge ﬁeld [35, 37] and explore many-body effects [65]. The
advantage in the microwave domain is the presence of strong nonlinearity provided
by the Josephson junctions. However, the challenges are the operation at very low
temperature which requires dilution fridges and the presence of inhomogeneity in
fabricated arrays of qubits.
In both cases, due to the open nature of photonic systems, preparation and detec-
tion should be performed in a driven regime. This arises many interesting theoretical
questions to investigate many-body features such as incompressibility, fractional sta-
tistics in non-equilibrium systems. For example, new effective ﬁeld theories should
be developed to treat excitations in such bosonic systems. An intriguing bright future
awaits for theoretical and experimental investigation of many-body physics, both in
the optical and the microwave domains.

4
Topological Physics with Photons
87
References
1. W.X. Gang, Quantum Field Theory of Many-Body Systems: from the Origin of Sound to an
Origin of Light and Electrons (Oxford University Press, USA, 2007)
2. J. Dalibard, F. Gerbier, G. Juzeli¯unas, P. Öhberg, Colloquium: artiﬁcial gauge potentials for
neutral atoms. Rev. Mod. Phys. 83(4), 1523–1543 (2011)
3. F.D.M. Haldane, S. Raghu, Possible realization of directional optical waveguides in photonic
crystals with broken time-reversal symmetry. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100(1), 13904 (2008)
4. Z. Wang, Y. Chong, J.D. Joannopoulos, M. Soljacic, Supplementary: observation of unidirec-
tional backscattering-immune topological electromagnetic states. Nature 461(7265), 772–775
(2009)
5. V. Galitski, I.B. Spielman, Spin-orbit coupling in quantum gases. Nature (2013)
6. Y.J. Lin, R.L. Compton, K. Jimenez-Gracia, J.V. Porto, I.B. Spielman, Synthetic magnetic
ﬁelds for ultracold neutral atoms. Nature 462(7273), 628 (2009)
7. J. Struck, C. Ölschläger, M. Weinberg, P. Hauke, J. Simonet, A. Eckardt, M. Lewenstein, K.
Sengstock, P. Windpassinger, Tunable gauge potential for neutral and spinless particles in
driven optical lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108(22), 225304 (2012)
8. M. Aidelsburger, M. Atala, S. Nascimbène, S. Trotzky, Y.A. Chen, I. Bloch, Experimental
realization of strong effective magnetic ﬁelds in an optical lattice. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107(25),
255301 (2011)
9. H.M. Price, N.R. Cooper. Mapping the berry curvature from semiclassical dynamics in optical
lattices. Phys. Rev. A (2012)
10. E. Alba, X. Fernandez-Gonzalvo, J. Mur-Petit, J.K. Pachos, J.J. García-Ripoll, Seeing topo-
logical order in time-of-ﬂight measurements. Phys. Rev. Lett. 107(23), 235301 (2011)
11. D.A. Abanin, T. Kitagawa, I. Bloch, E. Demler, Interferometric approach to measuring band
topology in 2D optical lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 165304 (2013)
12. N. Goldman, J. Beugnon, F. Gerbier, Detecting chiral edge states in the hofstadter optical
lattice. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108(25), 255303 (2012)
13. X.J. Liu, K.T. Law, T.K. Ng, P.A. Lee, Detecting topological phases in cold atoms. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 111, 120402 (2013)
14. A. Dauphin, N. Goldman, Extracting the chern number from the dynamics of a fermi gas:
implementing a quantum hall bar for cold atoms. Phys. Rev. Lett. 111(13), 135302 (2013)
15. Mittal et al., Nat. Photonics 10, 180–183 (2016)
16. M. Hafezi, E.A. Demler, M.D. Lukin, J.M. Taylor, Robust optical delay lines with topological
protection. Nat. Phys. 7(11), 907–912 (2011)
17. M. Hafezi, S. Mittal, J. Fan, A. Migdall, J.M. Taylor, Imaging topological edge states in silicon
photonics (Nat, Photon, 2013)
18. G.Q. Liang, Y.D. Chong. Optical resonator analog of a two-dimensional topological insulator.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 110(20) (2013)
19. C. Gardiner, M. Collett, Input and output in damped quantum systems: quantum stochastic
differential equations and the master equation. Phys. Rev. A 31(6), 3761–3774 (1985)
20. M. Hafezi, P. Rabl, Optomechanically induced non-reciprocity in microring resonators. Opt.
Express 20(7), 7672–7684 (2012)
21. K. Fang, Z. Yu, S. Fan, Realizing effective magnetic ﬁeld for photons by controlling the phase
of dynamic modulation. Nat. Photon 6(11), 782–787 (2012)
22. B.A. Bernevig, S.-C. Zhang, Quantum spin Hall effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 96(10), 106802 (2006)
23. T. Ozawa, I. Carusotto, Anomalous and quantum hall effects in lossy photonic lattices. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 112(13), 133902 (2014)
24. M. Hafezi, Measuring topological invariants in photonic systems. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112(21),
210405 (2014)
25. A.V. Poshakinskiy, A.N. Poddubny, L. Pilozzi, E.L. Ivchenko, Radiative topological states in
resonant photonic crystals (2013)
26. R. Laughlin, Quantized Hall conductivity in two dimensions. Phys. Rev. B 23(10), 5632–5633
(1981)

88
M. Hafezi and J. Taylor
27. B. Halperin, Quantized Hall conductance, current-carrying edge states, and the existence of
extended states in a two-dimensional disordered potential. Phys. Rev. B 25(4), 2185–2190
(1982)
28. R.O. Umucalilar, I. Carusotto, Artiﬁcial gauge ﬁeld for photons in coupled cavity arrays. Phys.
Rev. A 84, 043804 (2011)
29. A.B. Khanikaev, S.H. Mousavi, W.K. Tse, M. Kargarian, Photonic topological insulators. Nat.
Mater. (2012)
30. Y. Kraus, Y. Lahini, Z. Ringel, M. Verbin, O. Zilberberg, Topological states and adiabatic
pumping in quasicrystals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 109(10), 106402 (2012)
31. M. Verbin, O. Zilberberg, Y.E. Kraus, Y. Lahini, Y. Silberberg, Observation of topological
phase transitions in photonic quasicrystals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 110(7), 076403 (2013)
32. M.C. Rechtsman, J.M. Zeuner, A. Tünnermann, S. Nolte, Strain-induced pseudomagnetic ﬁeld
and photonic Landau levels in dielectric structures. Nat. Photon (2012)
33. R.J. Schoelkopf, S.M. Girvin, Wiring up quantum systems. Nature 451(7179), 664–669 (2008)
34. M.H. Devoret, R.J. Schoelkopf, Superconducting circuits for quantum information: an outlook.
Science 339(6124), 1169–1174 (2013)
35. J. Koch, A.A Houck, K. Le Hur, S.M. Girvin, Time-reversal symmetry breaking in circuit-QED
based photon lattices. Phys. Rev. A 82, 043811 (2010)
36. A. Petrescu, A.A. Houck, K. Le Hur, Anomalous Hall effects of light and chiral edge modes
on the Kagome lattice. Phys. Rev. A 86, 053804 (2012)
37. E. Kapit, Quantum Simulation architecture for lattice bosons in arbitrary, tunable external
gauge ﬁelds. Phys. Rev. A 87, 062336 (2013)
38. M.C. Rechtsman, J.M. Zeuner, Y. Plotnik, Y. Lumer, D. Podolsky, F. Dreisow, S. Nolte, M.
Segev, A. Szameit, Photonic ﬂoquet topological insulators. Nature 496(7444), 196–200 (2013)
39. T. Kitagawa, M.S. Rudner, E. Berg, E. Demler, Exploring topological phases with quantum
walks. Phys. Rev. A 82(3), 033429 (2010)
40. N.H. Lindner, G. Refael, V. Galitski, Floquet topological insulator in semiconductor quantum
wells. Nat. Phys. 7(6), 490–495 (2011)
41. M. Hafezi, P. Adhikari, J.M. Taylor, Engineering three-body interaction and Pfafﬁan states in
circuit QED systems. Phys. Rev. B 90, 060503 (R) (2014)
42. K.M. Birnbaum, A. Boca, R. Miller, A.D. Boozer, T.E. Northup, H.J. Kimble, Photon blockade
in an optical cavity with one trapped atom. Nature 436(7047), 87–90 (2005)
43. D. Englund, A. Faraon, I. Fushman, N. Stoltz, P. Petroff, J. Vuckovic, Controlling cavity
reﬂectivity with a single quantum dot. Nature 450(7171), 857–861 (2007)
44. K. Srinivasan, O. Painter, Linear and nonlinear optical spectroscopy of a strongly coupled
microdisk-quantum dot system. Nature 450(7171), 862–866 (2007)
45. A.D. Greentree, C. Tahan, J.H. Cole, L.C.L. Hollenberg. Quantum phase transitions of light.
Nat. Phys. 2(12), 856–861 (2006)
46. M.J. Hartmann, F.G.S.L. Brandao, M.B. Plenio, Strongly interacting polaritons in coupled
arrays of cavities. Nat. Phys. 2(12), 849–855 (2006)
47. D.G. Angelakis, M.F. Santos, S. Bose, Photon-blockade-induced Mott transitions and XY spin
models in coupled cavity arrays. Phys. Rev. A 76(3), 31805 (2007)
48. J. Cho, D. Angelakis, S. Bose, Fractional quantum Hall state in coupled cavities. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 101(24), 246809 (2008)
49. R.O. Umucalilar, I. Carusotto, Fractional quantum Hall states of photons in an array of dissi-
pative coupled cavities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 206809 (2012)
50. A.L.C. Hayward, A.M. Martin, A.D. Greentree, Fractional quantum Hall physics in Jaynes-
Cummings-Hubbard lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108(22), 223602 (2012)
51. M. Hafezi, M.D. Lukin, J.M Taylor. Non-equilibrium fractional quantum Hall state of light.
New J. Phys. 15, 063001 (2013)
52. M. Fleischhauer, M. Lukin, Dark-state polaritons in electromagnetically induced transparency.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 84(22), 5094–5097 (2000)
53. A. Andre, M. Bajcsy, A.S. Zibrov, M.D. Lukin, Nonlinear optics with stationary pulses of light.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 94(6), 063902 (2005)

4
Topological Physics with Photons
89
54. M. Hafezi, A.S. Sorensen, E. Demler, M.D. Lukin, Fractional quantum Hall effect in optical
lattices. Phys. Rev. A 76(2), 023613 (2007)
55. A. Sørensen, E. Demler, M. Lukin, Fractional quantum Hall states of atoms in optical lattices.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 94(8), 086803 (2005)
56. I. Carusotto, D. Gerace, H. Tureci, S. De Liberato, C. Ciuti, A. Imamoˇglu, Fermionized photons
in an array of driven dissipative nonlinear cavities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 103(3), 033601 (2009)
57. A. Tomadin, V. Giovannetti, R. Fazio, D. Gerace, I. Carusotto, H.E. Tureci, A. Imamoglu,
Signatures of the superﬂuid-insulator phase transition in laser-driven dissipative nonlinear
cavity arrays. Phys. Rev. A 81(6), 061801 (2010)
58. M. Hafezi, D.E. Chang, V. Gritsev, E.A. Demler, M.D. Lukin, Photonic quantum transport in
a nonlinear optical ﬁber. EPL (Europhys. Lett.) 94, 54006 (2011)
59. A. Nunnenkamp, J. Koch, S.M. Girvin, Synthetic gauge ﬁelds and homodyne transmission in
Jaynes-Cummings lattices. New J. Phys. 13, 095008 (2011)
60. F. Nissen, S. Schmidt, M. Biondi, G. Blatter, H.E. Tureci, J. Keeling, Nonequilibrium dynamics
of coupled qubit-cavity arrays. Phys. Rev. Lett. 108(23), 233603 (2012)
61. M. Schiró, M. Bordyuh, B. Öztop, H. Tureci, Phase transition of light in cavity QED lattices.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 053601 (2012)
62. M. Greiter, Mapping of Parent Hamiltonians: from Abelian and Non-Abelian Quantum Hall
States to Exact Models of Critical Spin Chains, vol. 244 (Springer, Heidelberg, 2011)
63. N. Read, E. Rezayi, Beyond paired quantum Hall states: parafermions and incompressible
states in the ﬁrst excited Landau level. Phys. Rev. B 59(12), 8084–8092 (1999)
64. C. Nayak, S.H. Simon, A. Stern, M. Freedman, S.D. Sarma, Non-Abelian anyons and topolog-
ical quantum computation. Rev. Mod. Phys. 80(3), 1083 (2008)
65. A.A. Houck, H.E. Türeci, J. Koch, On-chip quantum simulation with superconducting circuits.
Nat. Phys. 8(4), 292–299 (2012)

Chapter 5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
Na Young Kim and Yoshihisa Yamamoto
Abstract A quantum simulator is a purposeful quantum machine that can address
complex quantum problems in a controllable setting and an efﬁcient manner. This
chapter introduces a solid-state quantum simulator platform based on exciton-
polaritons, which are hybrid light-matter quantum quasi-particles. We describe the
physical realization of an exciton-polariton quantum simulator in semiconductor
materials (hardware) and discuss a class of problems, which the exciton-polariton
quantum simulators can address well (software). A current status of the experimental
progress in building the quantum machine is reviewed, and potential applications are
considered.
5.1
Introduction
We live in the twenty-ﬁrst century—the heart of the Information Age. A transi-
tion to the Information Age was greatly accelerated in the late 1990s by the rapid
development of the technologies in digital computation, and short- and long-distance
communications. Now computers are indispensable appliances in modern society,
inﬂuencing all aspects of our lifestyle and activities. Classical computer hardware
has been sophisticated as well as functionalized in terms of size, integrability and
speed, pacing up with the advancement of electronics. Figure5.1 collects images of
landmark machines throughout the computer history: a primitive Babbage automatic
N.Y. Kim (B)
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Institute for Quantum Computing,
University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave. West,
Waterloo, ON N2L 3G1, Canada
e-mail: nayoungstanford@gmail.com
Y. Yamamoto
Edward L. Ginzton Laboratory, Stanford University, 348 Via Pueblo Mall,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA
Y. Yamamoto
National Institute of Informatics, 2-1-2 Hitotsubashi, Chiyoda-ku,
Tokyo 101-8430, Japan
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
D.G. Angelakis (ed.), Quantum Simulations with Photons and Polaritons,
Quantum Science and Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-52025-4_5
91

92
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
Fig. 5.1 Historical computing machines. a The ﬁrst fully automatic Babbage analytic calculator
in the 19th century. b An image of the Colossus, the ﬁrst electronic digital Turing computer.
c Photos of the supercomputers, the ﬁrst generation CRAY-1 built in 1970s (left), and Milkyway-2,
the most powerful supercomputer in 2013. d A multi-functional smart phone and a tablet computer
calculator, which could only compute simple arithmetics (Fig.5.1a), a ﬁrst digital
Turing machine (Fig.5.1b), which was programmable, and cutting-edge supercom-
puters equipped with multiple processors (Fig.5.1c) to palm-sized personal comput-
ers, which allow an individual to multitask actively and productively (Fig.5.1d). On
top of the state-of-the-art computer platforms, myriads of software programs have
also been designed and implemented successfully.
Notwithstanding that contemporary computers are impressively powerful and
continuously improving, there still exist countless physical problems associated with
many degrees of freedom, which demand unprecedented levels of performance in
speed, ﬂexibility and required resources beyond what the currently available comput-
ers can offer. Computer scientists theorized the computational complexity in regard to
inherent difﬁculties of problem nature. Mechanically, this complexity may be quan-
tiﬁed by computation time and resources for obtaining the right solution of a given
problem. Quantum many-body problems belong to the category of the most complex
class, that is often considered to be intractable by classical computers. This perplex-
ing fact ignites the need of novel computing machines for tackling such effortful
challenges.
In 1982, Richard P. Feynman conceived a simple but brilliant idea, building a
machine governed by quantum mechanical rules [1]. Hence, this quantum machine

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
93
should be able to solve any quantum many-body problems [2] by nature in an efﬁcient
and economical way. This approach is dubbed quantum simulation. This seed of idea
is evolved to a universal quantum simulator by Lloyd [3], which mimics a quantum
system of interest through coherent operations on the simulating system. Last decade,
quantumsimulationbecameafast-growingthemeinquantumscienceandtechnology
both theoretically and experimentally. Several review articles have been published
on the progress of quantum simulation research activities [4–6].
5.1.1
Digital and Analog Quantum Simulators
The ultimate goal of the engineered quantum machine is to reach a universally accept-
able explanation of unanswered phenomena [4–6]. Often, physicists set up toy mod-
els, anticipating to explain the key features of the target phenomenon. Similarly,
a quantum simulator aims a designated toy model, and it is prepared in two dis-
tinct ways: one is to build a bottom-up system with local addressing and individual
manipulation, and the other is to directly map its time evolution of the system of
interest onto the controlled time evolution of the simulating one [4–6]. The for-
mer approach is named digital quantum simulator (DQS). In the DQS, quantum
problems are tackled by arranging a large number of qubits, a unit of quantum
information or a state vector, followed by executing coherent unitary operations to
manipulate these qubits. The universal DQS is an omnipotent quantum computer that
can solve any quantum many-body problems efﬁciently [7]. The advantage of this
scheme is the ability to supervise and identify errors during operations, which can
be ﬁxed by error-correction algorithms. A reliable and accurate solution can thusly
be obtained. However, even simple prime number factorization problems require
tremendous resources by the very nature, which is a major challenge to be overcome
towards the implementation of a large-scale DQS [6, 7].
On the other hand, the latter approach known as an analog quantum simulator
(AQS) is free from such expensive restrictions since it only tries to resemble the
system of interest as closely as possible. It does not need to deﬁne individual qubits
and/or to perform error correction. In addition, the AQS is constructed for a speciﬁc
problem not all quantum problems. Accordingly, the physical resources to build an
AQS are much less required than those for a DQS. Therefore, scientists in many
disciplines have started in establishing their own platforms of AQSs, combining
currently available technology and benchmarking some famous toy models [8–12].
Despite technical advantages of the AQS, there are fundamentally serious issues [13]:
what speciﬁc problems are chosen to be simulated by the AQS?; and, what guaran-
tees the reliability of the obtained solution to unknown problems with the AQS? In
other words, it is meaningless to perfectly answer problems irrelevant to any real
phenomena even if the AQS solves them accurately. Unfortunately, no methods to
single out sources of errors in the AQS, not to mention no error correction protocols,
are yet known. Hence, we all should remember the underlying predicament of the
AQS when we employ the AQS for signiﬁcant contributions to our knowledge base.

94
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
Keeping this in mind, in this section, we survey hardware and software of currently
available AQSs.
5.1.1.1
Hardware of the Analog Quantum Simulators
The term ‘hardware’ here speciﬁes physical elements of the AQSs akin to classi-
cal computer hardware. The AQS research activities were sparked by seminal work
in 2002 [14], where I. Bloch and his colleagues observed a superﬂuid-insulator
phase transition in ultracold Bose gases. This observation may be understood by the
same physics of the metal-insulator transition in condensed-matter materials [14].
Assessing this successful demonstration, we generalize hardware of the AQS in three
aspects: particles, artiﬁcial lattices and detection schemes. For the last decade or so,
the AQSs were built upon a variety of particles, diverse methods to engineer lattice
geometries, and specialized probe techniques. Figure5.2 illustrates a few represen-
tative AQS platforms.
Current AQSs are based on ultracold bosonic [8] and fermionic [15] atoms,
trapped ions [9, 16, 17], electrons [18–21], superconducting qubits [11, 22], linear
Fig. 5.2 Quantum Simulator Platforms. a An illustration of ultracold atom gas in a two-dimensional
optical lattice taken from Ref. [8]. b A schematic of a two-dimensional triangular lattice formed by
9Be+ ions in a Penning trap adapted from Ref. [17]. c A proposed microwave photon lattice using
superconducting resonators and qubits in Ref. [22]. Reprinted ﬁgure with permission from Koch
et al., Phys. Rev. A 82, 043811 (2010). Copyright(2010) by the American Physical Society. d, Scan-
ning electron microscopy image of a honeycomb lattice by nanofabrication in a two-dimensional
electron gas system presented in Ref. [20]. e A schematic picture of a planar photonic quantum
simulator integrating essential components proposed in Ref. [10]. f An exciton-polariton quantum
simulator in GaAs-based semiconductors. Permission of Figs. (a, b, e) is acquired from Nature
Publishing group

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
95
photons [10], photons and polaritons in a cavity QED arrays [23–25] and exciton-
polaritons [26, 27]. Many new particles or quasi-particles will likely join the list
in the near future. Next, how are lattice potentials shaped for these particles? To
trap cold quantum gases, pairs of oppositely propagating lasers are used to form
spatial standing waves, periodic potentials in one-, two- and three-dimensions, also
called optical lattices. This technique is superb in almost defect-free lattices and the
controllability of the potential amplitude by adjusting the intensity of the participat-
ing lasers. Responses of atoms to potential changes are recorded by time-of-ﬂight
absorption imaging, which maps the momentum distribution of particles. For exam-
ple, the presence or absence of diffraction peaks as interferences distinguish the
coherent metallic phase from the incohrent insulating phase [8, 14, 15]. Recently,
a high-resolution real-space imaging technique was developed to perform a parity
measurement of trapped atoms at a single site, which enabled quantiﬁcation of cor-
relation functions [8]. For charged ionic particles, a Paul trap was used to establish
a string of ions [16], and a Penning trap to arrange hundreds of ions in a triangular
lattice [17]. Typically the internal states of ions according to external manipulation
are detected by ﬂuorescence signals with photodetectors. Among many techniques
for conﬁning electrons in semiconductors, the direct application of DC or AC electric
and magnetic ﬁelds, strain ﬁelds for piezoelectric materials, and the direct etching
processes are well established and controlled [21]. DC and AC resistance, magne-
toresistance and thermal resistances are quantities to characterize electrical transport
properties under speciﬁc trapping potentials. Other particles, superconducting qubits,
photons and polaritons share a common feature in light, and they are classiﬁed as
photonic quantum simulators, a central topic of Sect.5.1.2.
5.1.1.2
Software of the Analog Quantum Simulators
Let us turn to what software AQSs can run as applications. Early on, atomic AQSs
studied a Hubbard Hamiltonian [28], one of the simplest but important toy models
in condensed matter physics, for example, to exploit the electronic metal-insulator
phase transition such as in transition-metal oxides [29]. The Hamiltonian consists
of two energy terms to describe interacting particles in a lattice: a kinetic term t for
a nearest-neighbor hopping energy and an on-site Coulomb interaction energy term
U. The Hamiltonian operator ˆH is expressed in terms of particle operators ˆc†, ˆc with
a site index i, j, a spin index σ and a particle density ˆn = ˆc†ˆc,
ˆH = −t

<i,j>,σ
(ˆc†
i,σˆcj,σ + h.c.) + U
N

i=1
ˆni↑ˆni↓,
where <i, j> denotes the nearest-neighbor interaction on the lattice and h.c. is the
hermitian conjugate. Even though it is simple, the analytical solutions in higher
dimensions than one dimension are not available, and obtaining solutions for even

96
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
a small number of lattice sites in two dimension is numerically expensive. Both
Bose and Fermi-Hubbard Hamiltonians have been studied using bosonic [8, 14] and
fermionic [15] gases and electrons [21].
The next one is an Ising Hamiltonian to study quantum magnetism dominantly
favored in trapped ions [16, 17]. It is related to some of the challenging problems
in condensed matter physics, such as the construction of a phase diagram of quan-
tum matter and in particular quantum criticality as sketched in Fig.5.3a [30, 31].
Recently, stimulated by the discovery of new quantum matter arising from spin-
orbital physics, tremendous efforts have been put into its simulation. Synthesizing
the effective magnetic ﬁelds [32–34] to selectively manipulate the internal states of
atoms in lattices provides a route to investigate the spin-orbital couplings in atom
AQSs [34].
In quantum chemistry, AQSs will be useful to understand the static [35] and
dynamical [36] properties of molecules. Figure5.3b depicts a proposal on how to
Fig. 5.3 Representative quantum many-body problems as possible applications of quantum simu-
lators. a A ﬁnite temperature phase diagram for the dimer antiferromagnet near the quantum critical
point gc regimes adapted from Ref. [31]. b An exemplary hydrogen chemical reaction (top) to be
simulated in coupled quantum dot systems (bottom) illustrated in Ref. [37]. c An artistic view of a
Hawking radiation. d A nucleon inner structure with quarks in quantum chromodynamics

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
97
implement the scattering process between a hydrogen atom and a hydrogen molecule
using a coupled quantum dot system. The electron redistribution in three quantum
dots under electrical gates would be anticipated to provide insights of the hydrogen
dynamics [37].
Phenomena in cosmology and high-energy physics are often explored using
gigantic apparatus due to the huge energy scales (>keV) involved. However, the
development of AQSs may grant an easy access to investigate such physics in tan-
gible laboratory settings. For instance, a Hawking radiation emitted from black
holes (Fig.5.3c) would be possibly explored with atomic superﬂuids [38] or exciton-
polaritons [39]. Relativistic Dirac physics has been addressed in a trapped ion [40],
and artiﬁcial Dirac points are created in fermionic atomic gases [41] and copper-
oxide molecules [42]. In the future, quark physics inside the nucleus (Fig.5.3d)
would be an interesting quantum problem for AQSs. Since the aforementioned ones
are a tiny subsection of quantum many-body problems in condensed matter physics,
quantum chemistry, high-energy physics, cosmology, and nuclear physics, the phase
space of AQS applications is almost boundless once reliable and functional AQSs
are constructed.
5.1.2
Photonic Analog Quantum Simulators
Besides the many promising physical realizations of AQSs discussed earlier, this sub-
section specializes photonic AQSs, where light is a part of the particles. They include
microwave photons coupled to superconducting qubits [11, 22], strongly interact-
ing photons in assorted cavity shapes [10, 23–25] and strongly coupled exciton-
polaritons [26, 27]. Most photonic systems would enjoy a planar structure, advan-
tageous en route to large-scale architectures with the help of advanced nanofab-
rication processing techniques. Photonic AQSs have also been proposed to reveal
quantum phase transition of light [23, 25]. In addition, mapping the light polariza-
tion to a pseudo-spin ‘1/2’ system allows to explore spin physics and magnetism.
The unavoidable loss process through optical cavities makes photonic AQSs well
suited to simulate open environment and non-equilibrium physics.
It is true that the exciton-polariton AQS also possesses an inherent photonic
nature. However, the non-negligible matter nature from the excitons distinguishes the
exciton-polariton AQS from other photonic AQSs. This particular chapter is devoted
to this hybrid light-matter exciton-polariton AQS and begins by outlining both hard-
ware and software aspects in Sect.5.2 and Sect.5.3, respectively. Section5.2 explains
the fundamentals of exciton-polaritons and their condensation properties followed
by technical details of lattice formation and experimental probes. Potential physi-
cal problems the exciton-polariton AQS could target to address will be discussed
in Sect.5.3. We give an overview of our experimental progress in constructing an
exciton-polariton AQS, and perspective remarks in Sect.5.4.

98
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
5.2
Hardware of Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
We review the physical components of the exciton-polariton quantum simulator hard-
ware: microcavity exciton-polaritons as our particle, methods to engineer periodic
potential landscapes for exciton-polaritons and microphotoluminescence imaging
and spectroscopy as detection schemes.
5.2.1
Particle:Exciton-Polariton Condensates
5.2.1.1
Microcavity Exciton-Polariton
A ‘polariton’ is a general term for a quasipatricle as an admixture of a photon and a
certain excitation. An exciton-polariton refers in particular to a resulting quasiparti-
cle when a photon is mixed with an exciton in a semiconductor. Here, we consider
exciton-polaritons in a two-dimensional (2D) microcavity structure with embedded
quantum-wells (QWs) sketched in Fig.5.4a. A photon is conﬁned in a cavity and an
exciton resides in the QWs. In 1992, C. Weisbuch et al. reported the ﬁrst observation
of photon-exciton coupled modes from a λ-cavity, where a single GaAs QW sits in
the middle of the cavity [43]. Since its discovery, the microcavity exciton-polariton
system has been an attractive solid-state domain to investigate quantum boson sta-
tistical effects such as condensation and superﬂuidity as well as to develop novel
devices like polariton lasers or ultrafast spin switches both in theory and experi-
ments [44–46]. In this section, we summarize fundamentals of exciton-polaritons
and their condensation properties.
Wannier Exciton
Semiconductors are a class of materials with a gapped electronic excitation. Numer-
ous elemental and compound semiconductors have been the backbone of revolu-
tionary electronic, optical and optoelectronic devices in the 20th century. Atoms
are organized in a speciﬁc crystal structure, and the electrons of these atoms are
brought together to form energy bands. In thermal equilibrium, all electrons are in
the valence band, which is often called the system ground state or vacuum state. This
stable low energy state is separated from the above excited states by an energy gap,
and it is electrically insulating and optically dark. Suppose light shines onto a semi-
conductor. When the absorbed photon energy is bigger than the gap energy, it can
promote electrons from the valence band to the conduction band, leaving positively-
charged quasi-particles (holes) behind in the valence band. Similar to the hydrogen
atom, where an electron is bound to a nucleus by Coulomb attraction, in perturbed
semiconductors, an electron and a hole attract each other, creating an exciton, a
Coulombically bound lower energy state [47].
This hydrogen-like entity is parameterized by a Bohr radius aB, the extent of the
electron-hole (e −h) pair wavefunction and a binding (or Rydberg) energy EB, an

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
99
Fig. 5.4 Microcavity exciton-polaritons. a A monolithically grown microcavity structure where
multi-quantum wells (red layers) are embedded. b A calculated reﬂectance spectrum of a λ-sized
cavity surrounded by pairs of a distributed Bragg mirror. c A reﬂectance spectrum of two microcavity
exciton-polaritons,upperpolariton(UP)andlowerpolariton(LP),resultingfromthestrongcoupling
between a cavity photon and a quantum well (QW) exciton (c). The energy separation of the double
dips is the direct measure of the coupling strength between the photon and exciton denoted as Ω.
d The energy dispersions of three conﬁgurations to mix the photon and the QW exciton modes,
more photon-like LP mode (left, red-detuned), half-light and half-matter polaritons (middle, zero-
detuned), and more exciton-like LP (right, blue-detuned). e–g Experimental signatures of exciton-
polariton condensations. e Pump-power dependent LP population images (top) and spectra (bottom)
in the momentum space and f LP ground-state occupancy as a function of pump power (left) and
energy (right) taken from Ref. [57]. g Interference of LP condensates to exhibit spatial coherence
from Young’s double slit measurements reportd in Ref. [64]. Nature granted permission of Figs. (e,
f) from Ref. [57] and Fig. (g) from Ref. [64]

100
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
energy cost to dissociate the pair. The complicated many-body system is simpliﬁed
to a single particle picture by introducing an effective mass and a medium dielectric
constant. Effective masses of electrons and holes in semiconductors are smaller than
the bare electron mass, and the dielectric constant can be as large as 13 times of the
vacuum case. Therefore, compared to he hydrogen atom (EB = 13.6 eV, aB = 0.5 Å),
a semiconductor exciton has a larger aB on the order of 0.1–10 nm and much weaker
EB in the range of a few meV to 1 eV. In large-dielectric-constant inorganic semi-
conductors like Si, GaAs, CdTe or ZnSe, the electric ﬁeld is noticeably screened by
the surrounding charges, yielding the weaker Coulomb interaction between electrons
and holes. As a result, excitons are spread over many lattice sites, and are classiﬁed
as ‘Wannier excitons’. Since the exciton is a primary excitation of semiconductors,
it lives for a ﬁnite time and the system eventually returns to its equilibrium vacuum
state. Typically, GaAs QW excitons have aB ∼6–10 nm, EB ∼10 meV, and lifetimes
of 100 ps-1 ns [48].
Composed of two fermions, electron and hole, an exciton behaves as a composite
boson at low temperatures and in the low-density limit (nX), where exciton wave-
functions do not easily overlap each other in a given volume. In 2D, the regime is
marked by a density nXa2
B ≪1. Excitons in this dilute density regime obey Bose-
Einstein statistics, and are expected to be condensed in the system ground state
[49, 50].
Cavity Photon
In semiconductors, alternating λ/4-thick layers with different refractive indices
makes a distributed Bragg reﬂector (DBR), a dielectric mirror. Reﬂectance of the
DBR increases with the number of the layer pairs and the refractive index contrast.
At the interface of two layers, photons near wavelength λ will reﬂect and construc-
tively interfere from all interfaces. The simplest but useful resonator is a Fabry-Perot
(FP) planar cavity, where photons are bounced back and forth between the DBR
pairs. A λ-sized optical cavity would support only one longitudinal cavity mode for
a sub-micron λ value. Such a structure appears as a reﬂectance dip at the particu-
lar photon frequency of the designed cavity mode in broad-band reﬂectance spec-
troscopy (Fig.5.4b). One ﬁgure of merit to describe a cavity is the quality-factor (Q),
which relates to how long photons reside inside the cavity. The reported Q-factors of
an empty FP DBR cavity ranges from a few thousands upto a million, corresponding
to cavity photon lifetimes around 1–100 ps.
It is worth mentioning that a cavity photon would have an ‘effective mass’ mc in
the transverse plane. The growth direction conﬁnement imposes that the longitudinal
component k⊥of the light wave vector is given by 2π/λ, which is much bigger than
the transverse (or in-plane) wavenumbers k∥. Therefore, in the regime of k∥≪k⊥,
the cavity photon energy Ec can be approximated as follows:
Ec = ℏv|k| = ℏv

k2
⊥+ k2
∥= ℏvk⊥

1 +

k∥
k⊥
2
,
∼ℏvk⊥

1 +
k2
∥
2k2
⊥

≡Ec0 +
ℏ2k2
∥
2mc ,

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
101
where ℏis the Planck’s constant divided by 2π, v is the velocity in the medium,
Ec0 = ℏvk⊥, and mc satisﬁes the following relation mc = h/vλ. In the visible to
near infrared regions, mc values around 10−5me, and the energy dispersion (Ec −k∥
relation) becomes parabolic with a stiff curvature due to extremely light effective
mass.
Exciton-Polaritons
Consider a two-level single atom in a high-Q-cavity, which is one of the well-known
problems in the cavity quantum electrodynamics. When the atomic transition energy
is precisely on resonance with the cavity mode energy, the coherent energy transfer
between the atom and the photon occurs reversibly at the “Rabi frequency” provided
that the atom and cavity decay rates are much slower than the energy exchange rate.
Spectroscopically, the strongly mixed modes appear as an anti-crossing energy gap
known as “vacuum Rabi splitting”, a manifestation of strongcoupling between two
modes.
Let us now turn into our case, a QW placed at the maximum of the photon ﬁeld
inside a high-Q DBR cavity. A photon is absorbed to excite an exciton in the QW, and
a photon is re-created inside the cavity resulting from the radiative recombination
of the e −h pair in the exciton, which can excite an exciton in turn. Such reversible
and coherent energy transfer between photon and exciton modes continues within the
cavity lifetimes. When this coupling occurs much faster than any other decay process
in the system, the QW-cavity system also enters into a strong coupling regime. And
there emerge new photon-dressed excitons, which we name exciton-polaritons (or
cavity polaritons). As a result, two anti-crossed energy branches, upper polariton
(UP) and lower polariton (LP), appear and there exist two dips at UP and LP energy
states separated by the interaction strength Ω in reﬂectance spectroscopy (Fig.5.4c).
In a linear signal regime, the coupled-cavity photon-QW exciton Hamiltonian ˆH is
written by a cavity photon operator ˆak with energy ℏωph, a QW exciton operator ˆCk
with ℏωexc and their in-between interaction coupling constant Ωk,
ˆH = ℏ

k
[ωphˆa†
k ˆak + ωexc ˆC†
k ˆCk −iΩk( ˆak
† ˆCk −ˆak ˆC†
k)],
where k is the simpliﬁed notation for k∥. Introducing an exciton-polariton operator
at a momentum k as a linear superposition of the cavity photon and the QW exciton
modes ˆPk = uk ˆCk + vk ˆak, the Hamiltonian is diagonalized, reaching a simpliﬁed
Hamiltonian ˆHT
ˆHT =

k
ℏΩk ˆP†
k ˆPk,
and the exciton-polariton energy dispersion is explicitly given by

102
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
ℏωk =1
2

ℏ(ωexc + ωph) + iℏ(γph + γexc)

± 1
2

(2ℏΩk)2 + (ℏ(ωexc −ωph) + iℏ(γexc −γph))2.
γph is the photon-mode decay rate through the cavity, and γexc is the non-radiative
decay rate of the exciton.
Figure5.4d illustrates the energy (E) versus the transverse wavenumber (k∥) of
independent cavity photon and exciton modes in blue dashed lines and the UP and LP
in red straight lines. Effective masses and lifetimes of UP and LP are determined as a
weighted average of individual constituents, taking into account of photon and exci-
ton fractions. Near k∥= 0, the photon-like LP branch has an extremely light effective
mass, but it is exciton-like at large k∥values with a ﬂatter dispersion, correspond-
ing to a heavy mass. Depending on fractions of photons and excitons (|uk|2, |vk|2),
three different detuning regimes (red, zero, blue) are possible as shown in Fig.5.4d.
A detuning parameter Δ is deﬁned as Δ(k∥= 0) = Ec(k∥= 0) −Eexc(k∥= 0). For
instance, the negative Δ is red detuned, where the photon fraction is bigger, whereas
the positive Δ is blue-detuned with exciton dominance.
5.2.1.2
Optical Processes: Radiative Recombination
Versus Relaxation Processes
Before delving into the properties of exciton-polariton condensation in the follow-
ing section, we give a simple picture of optical processes inside a QW-microcavity
structure. As seen earlier, when the QW-microcavity is excited by an external pump,
e −h pairs are created. These high-energy particles are quickly cooled down to large-
momentum excitons or exciton-like polaritons. The dynamics of exciton-polaritons
can be primarily understood by the interplay between radiative recombination and
energy relaxation processes. The former radiative recombination rate of exciton-
polaritons at k∥is simply determined by the lifetime of photon and exciton modes with
appropriate fractional values for each mode. Therefore, small k∥exciton-polaritons
decay faster due to short-lived photons, whereas those of large k∥, more exciton-like
ones, have smaller radiative recombination rates, and hence a longer lifetime.
Two dominant exciton-polariton relaxation processes have been extensively stud-
ied: one is due to exciton-phonon interaction [48, 51], and the other due to exciton-
exciton interaction [52, 53]. Tassone and his colleagues quantiﬁed polariton-acoustic
phonon scattering rates in a microcavity with a single GaAs QW, which were cal-
culated by the deformation potential interaction using a Fermi golden rule [48, 51].
Setting up semiclassical Boltzmann rate equations, Tassone et al. observed that large-
momentum polaritons are efﬁciently relaxed to lower energy regions through the
emission or absorption of acoustic phonons, and that these scattering processes are
inelastic and incoherent. However, they also found that phonon scattering is signiﬁ-
cantly reduced towards low k∥values of the LP branch, where the LP effective mass

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
103
becomes lighter and the LP density of states is smaller. Hence, exciton-polaritons
are rather parked at the deﬂection of the LP dispersion branch, the bottleneck effect.
To overcome the bottleneck effect, people have resorted to another important
relaxation process induced by elastic exciton-exciton scattering in the 2D QW [54].
When two excitons encounter, two nearby excitons interact via either direct or
exchange interactions among electrons and holes. The direct term comes from dipole-
dipole interactions of excitons, which are considered to be negligible in QW. Up to
ﬁrst order, the dominant mechanism is short-ranged Coulomb exchange interactions
between electron and electron or between hole and hole [52, 54]. An exchange inter-
action strength is roughly on the order of 6EBa2
B/S, where S is the quantization area.
Conserving energy and momentum, coherent scatterings are further ampliﬁed by the
number of LP, which is the bosonic ﬁnal-state stimulation effect. This process is a
crucial mechanism to accumulate LPs near k∥= 0, reaching condensation.
5.2.1.3
Exciton-Polariton Condensation
At low temperature and a dilute density, exciton-polaritons are also regarded as com-
posite bosons, governed by Bose-Einstein statistics. Immediately after the discovery
of the exciton-polaritons in the microcavity-QW structure [43], people recognized the
possibility of exciton-polariton condensation [55]. To validate exciton-polariton con-
densation at k∥= 0, we should clarify system conditions with care: ﬁrst, the exciton-
polariton density is low enough, not exceeding the Mott density, which describes
the state where the concept of excitons breaks down due to particle screening. The
Mott density is roughly set by 1/a2
B in 2D, and it is critical to maintain the GaAs
exciton density per QW at less than 1012 cm−2. One way to achieve this is to increase
the number of QWs in the cavity, decreasing the average exciton density per QW
by the assumption that the created excitons are equally distributed over all QWs.
We commonly place 4, 6, 8 or 12 GaAs QWs in a AlAs cavity for this reason. Sec-
ond, coherence among exciton-polaritons at k∥= 0 should occur spontaneously not
from the coherence of the pump laser. A safe manner of the excitation scheme is
to choose the excitation laser energy to be much higher than the polariton ground
state (incoherent excitation), which injects either high energy e −h pairs or excitons
as we described in the previous Sect.5.2.1.2. Through incoherent phonon scattering
processes, the initial energy and momentum of the injected particles are lost, and LPs
are cooled down to the lowest energy and momentum state, establishing coherence
through the polariton-polartion coherent scattering processes.
A series of experimental evidence or signatures of exciton-polariton condensation
neark∥= 0 werereportedinGaAs,CdTeandGaNinorganic[56–61]andorganic[62,
63] semiconductors. A ﬁrst piece of evidence is the observation of macroscopic popu-
lation at the system ground state. Figure5.4e shows pump-power dependent LP pop-
ulation distribution in momentum space (top panel) and their spectroscopic images
(bottom panel) in CdTe-based semiconductors reported by Kasprzak et al. [57].
When the particle density reaches quantum degeneracy threshold, bosons attract
to be in the same state, thermodynamically favorable state enhanced by the boson

104
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
stimulation effect [56, 57, 59]. Next, the essential physical concept of the condensa-
tion is off-diagonal long-range order related to spatial coherence in condensation [57,
60, 64]. As a system order parameter, the complex-valued LP wavefunction ψ(r, φ)
is ψ(r, φ) = √n(r) exp(−iφ(r)) determined by two real values, the LP density n(r)
and the real-space phase φ(r). By means of an interferometer, the phase information
of the order parameter is obtained, and the spatial coherence has been measured [57,
60]. Section5.2.1 gave an overview of basic mathematical description of exciton-
polaritons, the primary optical processes to lead to condensation and its general
characterization in a standard QW-microcavity structure. The next subsection will
summarize methods of engineering lattices for exciton-polaritons.
5.2.2
Lattice: Photonic and Excitonic Lattices
The second aspect of the exciton-polariton quantum simulator hardware is how
to impose artiﬁcial crystal lattices on exciton-polaritons. Exploiting the duality of
exciton-polaritons emphasized in Sect.5.2.1, we are able to create the potential land-
scape for either photon or exciton modes. Within a 2D planar microcavity-QW struc-
ture, the engineered lattices lie in zero-, one- or two-dimensions. In this section
we describe various designs to create the lateral potential lattices attempted in the
exciton-polariton systems.
5.2.2.1
Methods of Creating Polation Lattices
Figure5.5 collects a variety of methods to produce in-plane potentials for exciton-
polaritons. We classify them into two groups, excitonic and photonic traps depending
on which component is modiﬁed by the method. A mechanical stress induced by a
sharp pin (Fig.5.5a) shifts the QW exciton energy to a lower energy side (red-shifted)
actingasanexcitontrap[65].Itsinducedpotentialstrengthcanbeaslargeashundreds
of meV, and lateral sizes of the potential are determined primarily by tip sharpness.
Because QWs are far below the top surface, QW excitons face a rather broadened
potential, whose lateral size is on the order of micrometer. Applying electric ﬁelds
is widely used to modify the QW exciton energy via the quantum-conﬁned Stark
effect [66]. Magnetic ﬁelds shift the QW exciton energy as well. Although AC elec-
tric and magnetic ﬁelds can be applied, to the best of our knowledge all of the above
methods have so far been implemented using static sources. Dynamical potentials
were successfully launched by surface acoustic waves in piezoelectric GaAs semi-
conductors, which basically patterns propagating trap potentials [67]. So far, 1D [68]
and 2D square [69] lattices have been produced. This method still suffers from lim-
ited potential depth on the order of hundreds of µeV and a small number of possible
patterns according to the symmetry properties of the host material’s piezoelectric
tensor.

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
105
Fig. 5.5 Generations of trapping potentials in microcavity exciton-polaritons. a Mechanical strain
introduced by a pin near the sample changes the exciton energy (Ref. [59]). b A honeycomb lattice of
exciton-polaritons induced by a three-spot laser pump proﬁle Ref. [77]. c A partial (left, Ref. [71])
and complete etching (right, Ref. [73]) methods to introduce a photonic trap. Reprinted ﬁgures
with permission from Nardin et al., Phys. Rev. B 82, 045304 (2010) (left), and Galbiati et al.,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 126403 (2012) (right). Copyright(2010, 2012) by the American Physical
Society. d A dynamic phonon lattice in a piezoelectric GaAs microcavity-QW structure reported
in Ref. [67]. Reprinted ﬁgure with permission from de Lima et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 045501
(2006). Copyright(2006) by the American Physical Society. e A weakly modulated in-plane one-
dimensional photon lattice employing a thin-metal ﬁlm technique on a grown wafer. A ﬁgure is
adapted from Ref. [64]
On the other hand, several clever techniques were devised for photon traps. Chem-
ical and dry etchings are common techniques for semiconductor processing. Either
partially etching the cavity layer [70, 71] or completely etching all layers, except for
the designed area [72] (Fig.5.5c), is done on microcavity-QW wafers. Partial cavity-
layer etching method was developed in B. Deavaud’s group in Switzerland, and
resulted in tens of meV-strong potential, which quantizes cavity photon modes like
zero-dimensional quantum-dot [70, 71]. Recently, the complete etching method for
making a single pillar was extended to make 1D wire [74] and 2D pillar-array poten-
tials [75]. Despite recent progress, roughness of the sidewall surface has been the
primary concern and caused degradation of the quality of QWs as well as spoiling
the strong coupling regime especially for sub-micron sized pillars. Partial cavity-
layer etching technique is in this sense less detrimental. Lately, several groups have
noticed that the pump laser proﬁle can be designed to trap exciton-polaritons through
stimulated scattering gain under the pump proﬁle [76, 77]. This technique can also
be implemented to induce vortex lattices of exciton-polaritons due to the particle-
particle repulsive interactions shown in Fig.5.5b [77].

106
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
Our group employs a thin metal-ﬁlm technique to spatially manipulate cavity
photon-mode energy illustrated in Fig.5.5e [64, 78]. Patterned by electron-beam
lithography followed by a metal deposition on a grown wafer, a metal ﬁlm modulates
spatially the cavity lengths. The basic principle of such effect on the photon mode
can be understood by looking at the boundary conditions of the electromagnetic
(EM) ﬁelds at the interface between the top semiconductor layer and the metal ﬁlm.
Unlike bare surfaces of the semiconductor layer to vacuum or air where EM ﬁelds
smoothly decay to an open medium, EM ﬁelds are pinned to be zero at the metal-
semiconductor interface. Consequently, EM ﬁelds are squeezed under the metal ﬁlm,
effectively shortening the cavity-layer thickness, which results in a higher photon
energy. This method enjoys the simplicity and design ﬂexibility, and it is completed
as a post-processing step to the grown wafer, leaving the QWs intact. 1D [64] and
2D [79–82] geometries have been preprared. Despite the advantages, the generated
potential strength is weak (100–400µeV), and its actual lateral potential proﬁle in
the QW planes is broadened for the same reason as mentioned for the strain-induced
potential described earlier [78]. In all excitonic and photonic potentials, real potential
strength for exciton-polaritons should be adjusted by the fraction of the modiﬁed
component at different detuning values.
5.2.3
Probes: Photoluminescence
Now we turn to the third aspect of the hardware, the measurement schemes to identify
optical properties of exciton-polaritons in the QW-microcavity structures.
5.2.3.1
Photoluminscence Setup
Optical properties of semiconductors are probed in various ways: absorption, reﬂec-
tion, transmission and luminescence through responses to optical excitations [47].
Exciton-polariton characteristics are primarily examined via photoluminescence
(PL). High energy light shines onto a QW-microcavity structure, creating exciton-
polaritons which are eventually leaked out through the cavity in a form of photons.
The energy, wavenumber (momentum), polarization of the exciton-polaritons are
uniquely transferred to those of the leaked photons. Thus, by observing the leaked
photons, we obtain energy, momentum and polarization information of the exciton-
polaritons using a spectrometer and the temporal dynamics using a streak camera.
Since the QW-exciton binding energy in GaAs and CdTe semiconductors is around
10 meV, experiments are performed in a cryostat held at low temperatures around 4–
10 K, where thermal energy cannot dissociate the excitons. In GaN, ZnO or organic
semiconductors whose exciton binding energy exceeds the room-temperature ther-
mal energy ∼26 meV, their PL setup can be operated at room temperatures without
cryostats and cryogenics, which is a huge advantage in cost and space.

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
107
Fig. 5.6 Schematics of Fourier-optic measurement setups for exciton-polariton optical character-
ization. a A real space conﬁguration of the sample plane mapped to an image plane of detectors.
b A Fourier transformed setup to access the momentum space information by inserting one more
lens. b A Mach-Zehnder interferometer to access phase in real-space. d A Hanbury Brown-Twiss
intensity correlator setup
Fourier Optics
A standard micro-photoluminescence setup is constructed by the concept of Fourier
optics. It allows us to access exciton-polaritons both in real and reciprocal spaces. In
Fourier optics, a lens transforms an image located at one focal plane to its Fourier
transformed image at the opposite focal plane [83]. Real space in one side of the lens
becomes momentum space on the other side of the lens, and vice versa. We implement
a compact and powerful setup in real and momentum spaces with different sets of
lenses drawn in Fig.5.6a and b, respectively, utilizing this transformation property.
We put a simple charge-coupled detector to record intensities of each pixel at the
arrival of photons, a spectrometer to provide energy-resolved spectra and a streak
camera for the temporal responses.

108
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
5.2.3.2
Measurement Setup for Coherence Functions
R.J. Glauber established a guiding framework in quantum optics, that character-
izes statistical properties of the EM ﬁelds [84]. Normalized coherence functions
g(n)(r1, t1; r2, t2; ...; rn, tn) for all orders n are clearly deﬁned. Let us pay a particular
attention to the ﬁrst two coherence functions written by a ﬁeld operator ˆψ(r, t) at
different positions (r1, r2) and times (t1, t2):
g(1)(r1, t1; r2, t2) =
⟨ˆψ†(r1, t1)) ˆψ(r2, t2)⟩

⟨ˆψ†(r1, t1) ˆψ(r1, t1)⟩⟨ˆψ†(r2, t2) ˆψ(r2, t2)⟩
,
where ⟨⟩indicates the thermal averaging, and
g(2)(r1, t1; r2, t2) = ⟨ˆψ†(r1, t1)) ˆψ†(r2, t2) ˆψ(r2, t2)) ˆψ(r1, t1)⟩
⟨ˆψ†(r1, t1) ˆψ(r1, t1)⟩⟨ˆψ†(r2, t2) ˆψ(r2, t2)⟩
.
It becomes easier to interpret the above formulas when we look at the same posi-
tion or at the same time. g(1)(r1; r2) tells us the spatial coherence property of the ﬁeld,
a measure of long-range spatial order. g(1)(t1; t2) quantiﬁes the temporal coherence
property related to the spectral linewidth. When we rewrite the second-order coher-
ence function in terms of the particle density operator n(r, t) = ˆψ†(r, t) ˆψ(r, t) and
the variance Δn(r, t) = n(r, t) −⟨n(r, t)⟩, the meaning of g(2)(r, t) becomes clear,
g(2)(r, t; r, t) = ⟨n(r, t)2⟩
⟨n(r, t)⟩2 = 1 + ⟨Δn(r, t)2⟩
⟨n(r, t)⟩2 .
That is the variance of the number distribution, giving the information of the
intensity-intensity correlation.
The optical properties of exciton-polaritons have also been characterized with
these ﬁrst two coherence functions, and we brieﬂy describe standard setups to mea-
sure these quantities: an interferometer for the ﬁrst-order coherence function and a
Hanbury Brown-Twiss setup for the second-order coherence function.
Interferometry
As mentioned earlier, the condensate order parameter is complex-valued with two
real variables, particle density n(r) and phase φ(r). The imaging intensity is pro-
portional to the exciton-polariton density, but the phase information, which is as
important as the density, is lost in imaging. For photons, we construct interferom-
eters as a means to extract this phase information. For exciton-polaritons, Michel-
son and Mach-Zehnder interferometers (Fig.5.6c) are used, where the 2D signals
interfere with a constant-phase plane wave as reference 2D signal. Analyzing the
visibility contrast of this interference image can give a relative phase map of the
exciton-polaritons. In combination with the above-mentioned Fourier optics tech-
niques, the interference measurement can be performed both in real and reciprocal

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
109
Table 5.1 Exciton-polariton toolbox
Real space
Momentum space
Density
n(r; E; t)
n(k; E; t)
Phase
φ(r; E; t)
φ(k; E; t)
First order correlation
g(1)(r1, r2; E; t)
g(1)(k1, k2; E; t)
intensity correlation
g(2)(r1, r2; E; t)
g(2)(k1, k2; E; t)
spaces. Furthermore, time-resolved and energy-resolved interferograms are also pos-
sible together with a spectrometer and a streak camera.
A time-integrated phase map at two different real space coordinates reveals the
spatial coherence function g(1)(r1; r2), with which we measure the off-diagonal long-
range order, a crucial concept of exciton-polariton condensation [57, 60, 85, 86]. The
temporal coherence function g(1)(t1, t2) can be measured using the streak camera,
which tells us the dephasing time of the condensates.
Hanbury Brown-Twiss Setup
A historical Hanbury Brown-Twiss setup [87] consists of two photon detectors
(Fig.5.6d), which record the number of arrival photons. The data of these detec-
tors are analyzed for the second-order coherence functions. Zero-time delay g2(0)
tells us statistical attribute of exciton-polariton condensates. As a well-known fact
for a coherent state g2(0) equals to 1, while it is 2 for a thermal state. Compared to
purely coherent or thermal states, g2(0) of the exciton-polariton condensates is found
to be between 1 and 2 [56, 88, 89]; namely exciton-polaritons may not be in a purely
coherent nor thermal state. The deviation from g2(0) = 1 in exciton-polaritons would
come from polariton-polariton repulsive interactions.
Overall, Table5.1 summarizes the exciton-polariton toolbox to obtain quantita-
tive information of both static and dynamic variables, energy and time in real and
momentum spaces.
5.3
Software of Exciton-Polariton Analog Quantum
Simulators
We have discussed that how the exciton-polariton AQS can be physically realized
in Sect.5.2, reviewing the basics of exciton-polaritons and their condensation prop-
erties followed by several ways to engineer exciton-polariton crystals. Then, a col-
lection of measurement setups was explained to assess the optical properties of
exciton-polaritons. In this section, we describe applications of the exciton-polariton
AQS, what physical problems can be studied within single-particle and many-particle
physics.

110
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
5.3.1
Single-Particle Physics
When we examine a system consisting of many particles in a crystal structure, the
ﬁrst task to know is the band structure of the system, which reﬂects the topology
of the crystal lattices and closely links to the physical properties of the system. It is
incredibly difﬁcult to calculate the exact band structures of such a system including
all particles as well as their degrees of freedom. Instead of giving up this formidable
task, physicists have come up with clever approximations and developed insightful
numerical techniques, which illuminate principal nature of the system. A mean-
ﬁeld approximation has been very useful and successful, which reduces the many-
body problem into a single-particle physics. It is truly amazing that such a simple
single-particle description can faithfully represent the crucial electrical and optical
properties of semiconductors assuming a dielectric constant and an effective mass of
constituent particles. Learning from this invaluable lesson, we ﬁrst evaluate the band
structures of exciton-polaritons in artiﬁcially patterned lattices with four different
2D geometries.
There are salient phenomena in solid-state materials, which root from the orbital
nature of electrons, especially high-orbital electrons with p-, d- and f -wave spatial
symmetry [29]. Unlike s-orbitals, high-orbital wavefunctions share energy degener-
acy and exhibit anisotropic distributions in space. Interplaying with spin and charge
degrees of freedom, the orbital nature of electrons is responsible for famous phe-
nomena: metal-insulator transition [90], colossal magnetoresistance [29, 91], and the
newly discovered iron-pnictide superconductors [92, 93]. Several schemes were pro-
posed to elucidate orbital physics in bosonic atom-lattice AQS [94, 95], and orbital
states of coherent boson gases were selectively prepared by population transfer from
the ground states [96–99].
We are also captivated by a few fascinating features which fall within single-
particle physics. A charged particle in a magnetic ﬁeld would lead to a quantum Hall
effect, resulting from time-reversal symmetry breaking [100]. This physics can be
studied in exciton-polariton AQS because the QW exciton is subject to the Zeeman
splitting in magnetic ﬁelds. Since rotating condensates and the quantum Hall effect
are isomorphic in mathematical models [101], exciton-polariton condensates can
exhibit quantum Hall physics by rapid rotation. Furthermore, spin-orbital motion of
QW excitons can be understood within a single-particle description.
5.3.2
Many-Particle Physics
Despite the success of single-particle approximations, there are a large number of
problems in nature beyond single-particle physics. Knowing that materials are com-
posedofmanyatoms,itisimpossibletoneglectthemany-particlephysicscompletely.
The simplest example is a two-body interaction, such as a long-ranged Coulomb
interaction between two charged particles, which is prevalent in condensed matter

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
111
systems. The earlier example, the Hubbard Hamiltonian is widely used to describe
properties of transition metal oxides and high-temperature superconductors [2]. At
the extremes of the ratio of the two energy terms, the system behaves completely
different, either metallic for the stronger kinetic energy case or insulating for the
strong interaction case [2].
Motivated by the seminal work in the atom-lattice system [14], Byrnes and
colleagues derived the Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian in exciton-polariton conden-
sates under a 2D periodic potential, identifying a region in phase space to observe
superfulid-Mott transitions in exciton-polaritons [26]. Here the on-site interaction
term is calculated from exciton-exciton exchange interactions, and the interesting
phase transition in 2D is predicted to occur around U/t ∼23, requiring a strong
lattice potential of about 6 meV and a small lattice constant on the order of 0.5µm.
A current challenge to demonstrate this proposed phase transition is to generate a
sub-micron trap size to increase the interaction term. Unfortunately, aforementioned
methods discussed in Sect.5.2.3 are not able to fulﬁll this stringent requirement. The
thin-metal-ﬁlm technique can lithographically create a trap size as small as 50 nm;
however, its potential is too weak, less than 1 meV. If we are able to realize this phase
transition, we open a new world such that the Mott-insulating phase would be a basis
for generating single-photon arrays on a macroscopic scale [27], as an initial step
towards universal quantum computation.
Terças et al. proposed a scheme of applying a gauge ﬁeld to a propagating exciton-
polariton condensate from the transverse electric and transverse magnetic modes
of the cavity and their energy splitting [102]. It is a timely research direction to
address spin-orbital interactions as a driving force to search for new quantum matter
including topological insulators. Recent progress in this direction of research was
reported to observe similar insulating states in photonic systems [103, 104]. The
exciton-polaritonAQSisanappropriateplatformtoinvestigatethesephenomena,and
we envision that exciton-exciton interactions would go beyond photonic insulating
states, which would be much closer to real material dynamics.
One of the challenging problems is dynamics in open environments or a driven-
dissipative situation. The non-equilibrium nature of exciton-polariton systems,
unavoidable loss and constant replenishment to compensate loss, may be advan-
tageous to investigate difﬁcult open system dynamics. At present, concrete ideas to
address this problem in the exciton-polariton AQS are yet to be developed; however,
it is worthwhile deﬁning reachable problems which the exciton-polariton AQS can
contribute uniquely well.
5.4
Exciton-Polaritons in Two-Dimensional Lattices
We launched the research project to build an exciton-polariton AQS in 2006,
impressed by the atomic AQS in 2002. Section5.4 updates the current status of our
exciton-polariton AQS based on GaAs semiconductors, and we present experimental
results in exciton-polariton-lattice systems.

112
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
5.4.1
Experiment
5.4.1.1
Device
Our wafer under study was grown by molecular beam epitaxy, which has a superb
controllability and ﬁdelity of the layer thickness down to atomic length-scales. An
AlAs λ/2-cavity is capped with DBRs by an alternating layer of Ga0.8Al0.2As and
AlAs. The 16 and 20 pairs of top and bottom DBRs form a planar Fabry-Perot cavity
with a quality factor Q ∼3000, resulting in a cavity photon lifetime of around 2 ps.
At the three antinodes of the EM ﬁeld in the cavity, a stack of four 7-nm-thick
GaAs QWs separated by a 3 nm-thick AlAs barrir are inserted respectively for the
purpose of diluting the exciton density per each QW. The whole structure is designed
at λ ∼770 nm, close to the emission wavelength of the 7-nm-thick GaAs QW
exciton. The vacuum Rabi splitting of the 12 GaAs QWs is ∼15 meV, which was
experimentally conﬁrmed from position-dependent reﬂectance spectra. The wafer
also has spatial detunings, which can vary between −15 and 15 meV. Most of the
experiments were performed with devices at near zero or red detuning areas of the
wafer (−3 to −5meV).
5.4.1.2
Lattices
We prepared exciton-polariton 2D lattice devices with the previously grown GaAs
wafer. Three basic (square, triangular and honeycomb) and one complex (kagome)
lattices were designed and patterned by electron-beam lithography. A 23/3 nm-Ti/Au
think ﬁlm was deposited as a ﬁnal step of the fabrication. All of these semiconductor
processing steps are considered standard and simple. The center-to-center distance
of the nearest neighbor sites are ﬁxed between 2 and 20µm. Figure5.7a presents
a photo of three basic lattices in one device. The photon potential depth ranges
between 200–400µeV, consequently the actual potential strengths for the LPs are
around 100–200µeV at different detuning positions [78]. The kinetic energy at the
boundaries of the ﬁrst Brillouin zone (BZ) is around 0.4–1meV for lattice constants
2–4 µm. Comparing the potential energy with the kinetic energy, these potentials
only weakly perturb the exciton-polaritons.
Owing to weak lattice potentials, justiﬁably, the band structures of given lattices
are calculated using a single-particle plane-wave basis. The complex bands are often
displayed along high symmetry points, following the point-group theory. Figure5.7b,
c are BZs of square and honeycomb lattices with high symmetry points denoted as
Γ, X, M and K(K′). In particular, these points are closely related to the degree of
rotational symmetry in the lattice geometries. Γ and M in the square lattice satisfy
four-fold rotational symmetry, whereas X(Y) has two-fold rotational degeneracies.
A weak periodic potential lifts band degeneracies at high symmetry points, and
momentum valleys are protected by the gap energy, comparable to the periodic
potential strength on the order of 100µeV.

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
113
Fig. 5.7 a A photograph of the two-dimensional lattices with square-, triangular- and honeycomb-
geometries patterned by photolithography and deposited with a thin Ti/Au metal-ﬁlm. Brillouin
zones of the square (b) and the honeycomb (c) lattices denoted by high symmetry Γ , M, X, K
and K′ points according to the rotational symmetry of the geometries. d In-phased s-orbital (lower
energy) and anti-phased coherent p-orbital polaritons in a one-dimensional array [64]. e A dxy-
orbital polariton condensation occurring at high-symmetry four M points in the ﬁrst Brillouin zone
(BZ) of the square lattice taken from Ref. [79]. The white bar is the ﬁrst BZ size, 2π/a with a
lattice constant a = 4 µm. f The real-space interferogram of the f -orbital condensation at non-zero
Γ points in the honeycomb lattice. The white bar is a scale bar of 4 µm
5.4.1.3
Experimental Setup
A low-temperature micro-photoluminescence setup was built as a basic characteriza-
tion tool to study exciton-polaritons in lattices. Since the GaAs QW exciton binding
energy is around 10 meV, we kept the device temperatures below 10K to avoid
thermal dissociation of the excitons. With a replaceable lens, one can select the mea-
surement domain to be either real or reciprocal space. For this sample, we ﬁxed the
pump laser energy to 1.61543 eV (∼767.5 nm) around 6 meV above the LP ground
state energy in the linear regime. 3-ps-long laser pulses enter the sample obliquely
at ∼60◦(∼7.4 × 106 m−1) at a 76MHz repetition rate.
By changing pump power, one can control the density of injected exciton-
polaritons in QWs. Using this basic setup, polariton population distributions were
mapped in real and momentum spaces. A nonlinear density increase in population
marks the quantum degeneracy threshold. Lattice potentials modify a single-particle
LP dispersion to band structures of LPs. Complex order parameters of condensates
in lattices are constructed by interferometry, which can help us to determine relative
phases in real space. A homodyne detection scheme is implemented in a Mach-

114
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
Zehnder conﬁguration. A reference signal at a ﬁxed frequency and a wavenumber is
combined against signals of interest. The interference contrast is directly related to
the visibility, and the relative phase in real space is extracted.
5.4.2
Bosonic Orbital Order
The gain-loss dynamics in exciton-polaritons is advantageous to form conden-
sates beyond zero momentum. Thermal exciton-polaritons are injected from a high
energy and large momentum particle reservoir, and undergo relaxation down through
polariton-phonon and polariton-polariton scattering processes. Since polaritons have
a ﬁnite lifetime to leak through the cavity, condensation is stabilized at non-zero
momentum states in band structures resulting from the balance between two time
scales: the relaxation time to the lower energy states versus the decay time through the
cavity. For this very reason, we have observed polariton condensates of high-orbital
symmetry: dxy-wave condensation at M points in the square lattice, singlet f -wave
condensations at Γ and degenerate p-wave condensations at K (or K′) points in both
triangle and honeycomb lattices. The degeneracy and anisotropic distribution of high
orbital symmetry have been identiﬁed with the complex order parameter constructed
from interferograms.
The meaning of high-orbital boson order can be found in the following context. We
know that high-orbital electrons play a crucial role in special electrical, chemical and
mechanical properties of solid state materials. s-orbital fundamental bosons cannot
make any complementary picture to such high-orbital fermionic physics. However,
the complex-valued high-orbital bosons can be as important as those of fermions.
Along this same spirit, we have observed the anti-phased p-orbital condensates in
one-dimensional arrays from the diffraction peaks in energy- and angle-resolved
spectroscopy shown in Fig.5.7d [64]. In 2D lattices, meta-stable momentum val-
leys are available at high symmetry points. At appropriate pump powers, coherent
exciton-polaritons are accumulated at non-zero momentum meta-stable bands. dxy-
wave symmetry is favorable at M points of the square lattice, as a signature of narrow
coherent diffraction peaks captured in the momentum space image (Fig.5.7e) [79].
In hexagonal geometries, 4fy3−3x2y-like orbital symmetry in space is identiﬁed from
an interferogram, where alternating phase shifts by π at six lobes in real space is
unequivocally detected as shown in Fig.5.7f.
Degenerate p-orbital condensates are stabilized at the vertices K and K′ points in
the ﬁrst hexagonal BZ of triangular-geometry lattices. This observation of degener-
ate condensates raises a fundamental conceptual question of condensation regarding
spontaneous symmetry breaking, condensate fragmentation and the statistical mix-
ture of degenerate condensates. In order to address this important question, we have
measured g(2)(t = 0) in momentum space, which is further described in the following
subsection.

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
115
5.4.3
Degenerate High-Orbital Condensates
Six vertices of the ﬁrst BZ in the honeycomb lattice are grouped into inequivalent
K and K′ points, which are connected with reciprocal lattice vectors. K and K′
points hold reﬂection or inversion symmetry, namely, they are mirror imaged. Three
degenerate energy states at K and K′ points are split into a high energy singlet and
lower energy doublets. The upper singlet state with p-orbital symmetry is interesting
as a vortex-antivortex state from the linear combination of all three K points, which
are rotated by 2π/3 [82]. We call vortex to be a topological defect, whose density
is zero at the core and whose phase continuously changes by 2π. An antivortex has
the opposite phase-rotation direction. Both vortices and antivortices are located at
the trap sites with zero density. The vortex-antivortex order is exactly opposite for
K (Fig.5.8a) and K′ (Fig.5.8a) points revealing the reﬂection symmetry, conﬁrmed
via a modiﬁed Mach-Zehnder interferometer.
Next we study the dynamics of the degenerate condensates at K and K′ points by
measuring intensity correlation functions in momentum space. g(2)(K, K; τ = 0) and
g(2)(K′, K′; τ = 0) are the autocorrelation functions at the same K and K′ points with
zero time delay τ = 0. We also detect cross-correlation functions g(2)(K, K′; τ = 0)
between K and K′ signals. Experimental results of pump-power dependent corre-
lation functions are presented in Fig.5.8c (left), and theoretical simulation results
Fig. 5.8 p-orbital
degenerate vortex-antivortex
condensates in a honeycomb
lattice. Raw interferograms
(left) and extracted phase
maps (right) to identify a
vortex-antivortex
single-particle state at K (b)
and mirror-symmetric K′ (c)
points. c, Second-order
intensity-intensity auto- and
cross-correlation functions
of two degenerate p-orbital
condensates: experimental
data (left) and simulation
(right)

116
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
based on complex-number Langevin equations are displayed in Fig.5.8c (right). A
value of less than 1 for g(2)(K, K′; τ = 0) indicates anti-correlation between the
two intensities, which we interpret as the mode competition between K and K′ con-
densates stochastically. At ﬁrst, one state would be selected randomly between two
possibilities, then that chosen path would be more favorable due to subsequent stim-
ulated scatterings. At a given pump power, the total particle number is ﬁxed such
that a larger intensity in one state links to a smaller intensity in the other, yielding the
anticorrelation. At present, we cannot answer interesting physical questions such as
spontaneous symmetry breaking or fragmentation of degenerate condensations, pri-
marily because our measurements are limited to be time averaged over many pulses.
A single shot measurement will lead us to reach a conclusive answer, whose setup
may be available in the near future.
5.5
Outlook
We have given an overview of the exciton-polariton-lattice system for the applica-
tion of quantum simulators, specially designed functional quantum machines. Phys-
ical elements of the exciton-polariton AQS hardware were concretely identiﬁed,
and the ﬁrst generation exciton-polariton AQS has already been experimentally pre-
pared and tested. The initial tasks of the exciton-polariton AQS are to directly map
the band structures of 2D lattices by means of angle-resolved photoluminescence
spectroscopy. We have identiﬁed meta-stable exciton-polariton condensates with
high-orbital symmetries at non-zero momentum states. The selectivity of conden-
sate orbital symmetry is controlled by the particle density with pump laser intensity
in order to balance lifetime and a relaxation time in the polariton band structures.
The main limitations of the ﬁrst generation exciton-polariton AQS are a weak
potential depth and a micron-sized trap unit, yielding a small gap energy at high
symmetry points which is not easily detectable due to a broader spectral linewidth of
the generated signals. Hence, how to produce stronger potentials is an imminent goal
to be accomplished in order to run interesting software programs. Next, in a micron-
sized site, two-particle polariton-polariton interaction is still too weak; estimated
value is around tens of µeV for GaAs QW excitons. It is a primary hindrance to
study many-body physics. Unless overcoming this challenge, the initial exciton-
polariton AQS can solely investigate problems within single-particle physics, such
as quantum Hall effects. Either the direct application of magnetic ﬁelds, rapid rotation
or generation of a gauge ﬁeld would be incorporated in this direction of researches.
As a ﬁnal remark, we actively seek a class of unique problems the exciton-
polariton AQS can simulate much better than other AQS platforms. Appreciating
the non-equilibrium nature of the exciton-polariton system, we anticipate that the
exciton-polariton AQS may be a promising testbed to examine dynamical prob-
lems in open-dissipative environments. A starting point is to set up a testable toy
model through careful and systematic assessment. Witnessing the incredible devel-
opment of classical computers, we also put our faith in the continuous advancement of

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
117
quantum simulators in all platforms, which would deepen our knowledge of quantum
many-body problems in various areas and would provide crucial insights and novel
methods for quantum engineering and technologies.
Acknowledgements We acknowledge Navy/SPAWAR Grant N66001-09-1-2024, the Japan Soci-
ety for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) through its “Funding Program for World-Leading Innova-
tive R&D on Science and Technology (FIRST Program)”. We deeply thank our collaborators: Dr.
K. Kusudo and Dr. N. Masumoto for experimental measurement and device fabrication; Prof. A.
Forchel, Dr. S. Höﬂing, Dr. A. Löfﬂer for providing the wafers; Prof. T. Fujisawa, Dr. N. Kumada for
supporting the device fabrication; Prof. T. Byrnes, Prof. C. Wu, Dr. Z. Cai for theoretical discussions.
N.Y.K thank Dr. C. Langrock for critical reading of the manuscript.
References
1. R. Feynman, Simulating physics with computers. Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 467–488 (1982)
2. G.D. Mahan, Many-Particle Physics (Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, 1981)
3. S. Lloyd, Universal quantum simulators. Science 273, 1073–1078 (1996)
4. I. Buluta, F. Nori, Quantum simulators. Science 326, 108–111 (2009)
5. J.I. Cirac, P. Zoller, Golas and opportunites in quantum simulation. Nat. Phys. 8, 264–266
(2012)
6. I.M. Georgescu, S. Ashhab, F. Nori, Quantum simulation. Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 153–195
(2014)
7. T.D. Ladd, F. Jelezko, R. Laﬂamme, Y. Nakamura, C. Monroe, J.L. O’Brien, Quantum com-
puters. Nature 464, 45–53 (2010)
8. I. Bloch, J. Dalibard, S. Nascimbéne, Quantum simulations with ultracold quantum gases.
Nat. Phys. 8, 267–276 (2012)
9. R. Blatt, C.F. Roos, Quantum simulations with trapped ions. Nat. Phys. 8, 277–284 (2012)
10. A. Aspuru-Guzik, P. Walther, Photonic quantum simulators. Nat. Phys. 8, 285–291 (2012)
11. A.A. Houck, H. Türeci, J. Koch, On-chip quantum simulation with superconducting circuits.
Nat. Phys. 8, 292–299 (2012)
12. D. Lu, B. Xu, N. Xu, Z. Li, H. Chen, X. Peng, R. Xu, J. Du, Quantum chemistry simulation
on quantum computers: theories and experiments. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 14, 9411–9420
(2012)
13. P. Hauke, F.M. Cucchietti, L. Tagliacozzo, I. Deutsch, M. Lewenstein, Can one trust quantum
simulators? Rep. Prog. Phys. 75, 082401 (2012)
14. M. Greiner, O. Mandel, T. Esslinger, T. Hänsch, I. Bloch, Quantum phase transition from a
superfulid to a Mott insulator in a gas of ultracold atoms. Nature 415, 39–44 (2002)
15. T. Esslinger, Fermi-Hubbard physics with atoms in an optical lattice. Annu. Rev. Condens.
Matter Phys. 1, 129–152 (2010)
16. K. Kim et al., Quantum simulation of the transverse Ising model. New J. Phys. 13, 105003
(2011)
17. J.W. Britton, B.C. Sawyer, A.C. Keith, C.-C. Joseph Wang, J.K. Freericks, H. Uys, M.J. Bier-
cuk, J.J. Bollinger, Engineered two-dimensional Ising interactions in a trapped-ion quantum
simulator with hundreds of spins. Nature 484, 489–492 (2012)
18. T. Byrnes, P. Recher, N.Y. Kim, S. Utsunomiya, Y. Yamamoto, Quantum simulator for the
Hubbard model with long-range Coulomb interactions using surface acoustic waves. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 99, 016405 (2006)
19. T. Byrnes, N.Y. Kim, K. Kusudo, Y. Yamamoto, Quantum simulation of Fermi-Hubbard
models in semiconductor quantum dot arrays. Phys. Rev. B 78, 075320 (2007)

118
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
20. G. De Simoni, A. Singha, M. Gibertini, B. Karmakar, M. Polini, V. Piazza, L.N. Pfeiffer,
K.W. West, F. Beltram, V. Pellegrini, Delocalized-localized transition in a semiconductor
two-dimensional honeycomb lattice. Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 132113 (2010)
21. A. Singha, M. Gibertini, B. Karmakar, S. Yuan, M. Polini, G. Vignale, M.I. Katsnelson, A.
Pinczuk, L.N. Pfeiffer, K.W. West, V. Pellegrini, Two-dimensional Mott-Hubbard electrons
in an artiﬁcial honeycomb lattice. Science 332, 1176–1179 (2011)
22. J. Koch, A.A. Houck, K. Le Hur, S.M. Girvin, Time-reversal-symmetry breaking in circuit-
QED-based photon lattices. Phys. Rev. A 82, 043811 (2010)
23. D.G. Angelakis, M.F. Santos, S. Bose, Photon-blockade-induced Mott transitions and XY spin
models in coupled cavity arrays. Phys. Rev. A 76, 031805(R) (2007)
24. M.J. Hartmann, F.G.S.L. Brandão, M.B. Plenio, Strongly interacting polaritons in coupled
arrays of cavities. Nat. Phys. 2, 849–855 (2006)
25. A.D. Greentree, C. Tahan, J.H. Cole, L.C.L. Hollenberg, Quantum phase transitions of light.
Nat. Phys. 2, 856–861 (2006)
26. T. Byrnes, P. Recher, Y. Yamamoto, Mott transitions of excitons polaritons and indirect exci-
tons in a periodic potential. Phys. Rev. B 81, 205312 (2010)
27. N. Na, Y. Yamamoto, Massive parallel generation of indistinguishable single photons iva the
polaritonic superfulid to Mott-insulator quantum phase transition. New J. Phys. 12, 123001
(2010)
28. J. Hubbard, Electron correlations in narrow energy bands. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 276, 238–257
(1963)
29. Y. Tokura, N. Nagaosa, Orbital physics in transition-metal oxides. Science 288, 462–468
(2000)
30. S. Sachdev, Quantum magnetism and criticality. Nat. Phys. 4, 173–185 (2008)
31. S. Sachdev, B. Keimer, Quantum criticality. Phys. Today 64(2), 29–35 (2011)
32. D. Jaksch, P. Zoller, Creation of effective magnetic ﬁelds in optical lattices: the Hofstadter
butterﬂy for cold neutral atoms. New J. Phys. 5, 56 (2003)
33. Y.-J. Lin, R.L. Compton, K. Jiménez-García, J.V. Porto, I.B. Spielman, Synthetic magnetic
ﬁelds for ultracold neutral atoms. Nature 462, 628–632 (2009)
34. V. Glitski, I.B. Spielman, Spin-orbit coupling in quantum gases. Nature 494, 49–54 (2013)
35. A. Aspuru-Guzik, A.D. Dutoi, P.J. Love, M. Head-Gordon, Simulated quantum computation
of molecular energies. Science 309, 1704–1707 (2005)
36. I.S. Kassal, S.P. Jordan, P.J. Love, M. Mohseni, A. Aspuru-Guzik, Quantum algorithms for
the simulation of chemical dynamics. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105, 18681–18686 (2008)
37. AYu. Smirnov, S. Savel’ev, L.G. Mourokh, F. Nori, Modelling chemical reactions using semi-
conductor quantum dots. Eur. Phys. Lett. 80, 67008 (2007)
38. S. Giovanazzi, Hawking radiation in sonic black holes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94, 061302 (2005)
39. D. Gerace, I. Carusotto, Analog Hawking radiation from an acoustic black hole in a ﬂowing
polariton superﬂuid (2012). arXiv:1206.4276
40. R. Gerritsma, G. Kirchmair, F. Zähringer, E. Solano, R. Blatt, C.F. Roos, Quantum simulation
of the Dirac equation. Nature 463, 68–71 (2009)
41. L. Tarruell, D. Greif, T. Uehlinger, G. Jotzu, T. Esslinger, Creating, moving and merging Dirac
points with Fermi gas in a tunable honeycomb lattice. Nature 483, 302–305 (2012)
42. K.K. Gomes, W. Mar, W. Ko, F. Guinea, H.C. Manoharan, Designer Dirac fermions and
topological phases in molecular graphene. Nature 483, 306–310 (2012)
43. C. Weisbuch, M. Nishioka, A. Ishikawa, Y. Arakawa, Observation of the coupled exciton-
photon mode splitting in a semiconductor quantum microcvity. Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 3314–3317
(1992)
44. A. Kavokin, J. Baumberg, G. Malpuech, F.P. Laussy, Microcavities (Clarendon Press, Oxford,
2006)
45. D. Snoke, P. Littlewood, Polariton condensates. Phys. Today 63(8), 42–47 (2010)
46. H. Deng, H. Haug, Y. Yamamoto, Exciton-polariton Bose-Einstein condensation. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 82, 1490–1537 (2010)
47. P.Y. Yu, M. Cardona, Fundamentals of Semciodnuctors. Springer (1996)

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
119
48. F. Tassone, C. Piermarocchi, V. Savona, A. Quattropani, P. Schwendimann, Photolumines-
cence decay times in strong-coupling semiocnductor microcavities. Phys. Rev. B 53, R7642–
7645 (1996)
49. E. Hanamura, H. Haug, Condensation effects of excitons. Phys. Rep. 33C, 209–284 (1997)
50. A. Grifﬁn, D.W. Snoke, S. Stringari, Bose-Einstein Condensation (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 1995)
51. F. Tassone, C. Piermarocchi, V. Savona, A. Quattropani, P. Schwendimann, Bottleneck effects
in the relaxation and photoluminescence of microcavity polaritons. Phys. Rev. B 56, 7554–
7563 (1997)
52. F. Tassone, Y. Yamamoto, Exciton-exciton scattering dynamics in a semiconductor microcav-
ity and stimulated scattering into polaritons. Phys. Rev. B 59, 10830–10842 (1999)
53. D. Porras, C. Ciuti, J.J. Baumberg, C. Tejedor, Polariton dynamics and Bose-Einstein con-
desnation in semiconductor microcavities. Phys. Rev. B 66, 085304 (2002)
54. C. Ciuti, V. Savona, C. Piermarocchi, A. Quattropani, P. Schwendimann, Role of the exchange
of carriers in elastic exciton-exciton scattering in quantum wells. Phys. Rev. B 58, 7926–7933
(1998)
55. A. Imamoglu, R.J. Ram, S. Pau, Y. Yamamoto, Nonequilibrium condensates and lasers without
inversion: exciton-polariton lasers. Phys. Rev. A 53, 4250–4253 (1996)
56. H. Deng, G. Weihs, C. Santori, J. Bloch, Y. Yamamoto, Condensation of semiconductor
microcavity exciton polaritons. Science 298, 199–202 (2002)
57. J. Kapsrzak et al., Bose-Einstein condensation of exciton polaritons. Nature 443, 409–414
(2006)
58. H. Deng, D. Press, S. Götzinger, G.S. Solomon, R. Hey, K.H. Ploog, Y. Yamamoto, Quantum
degenerate exciton-polaritons in thermal equilibrium. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 146402 (2006)
59. R.B. Balili, V. Hartwell, D. Snoke, L. Pfeiffer, K. West, Bose-Einstein condensation of micro-
cavity polaritons in a trap. Science 316, 1007–1010 (2007)
60. H. Deng, G.S. Solomon, R. Hey, K.H. Ploog, Y. Yamamoto, Spatial coherence of a polariton
condensate. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 126403 (2007)
61. S. Christopoulos et al., Room-temperature polariton lasing in semiconductor microcavities.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 126405 (2007)
62. S. Kéna-Cohen, S.R. Forrest, Room-temperature polariton lasing in an organic single-crystal
microcavity. Nat. Photon. 4, 371–375 (2010)
63. J.D. Plumhof, T. Stöferle, L. Mai, U. Scherf, R. Mahrt, Room-temperature Bose-Eistein
condensation of cavity exciton-polaritons in a polymer. Nat. Mater. 13, 247–252 (2014)
64. C.W. Lai et al., Coherent zero-state and π-state in an exciton-poalriton condensate array.
Nature 450, 529–533 (2007)
65. R.B. Balili, D.W. Snoke, L. Pfeiffer, K. West, Actively tuned and spatially trapped polaritons.
Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 031110 (2006)
66. D.A.B. Miller, D.S. Chemla, T.C. Damen, A.C. Gossard, W. Wiegmann, T.H. Wood, C.A.
Burrus, Band-edge electroabsorption in quantum well structures: the quantum-conﬁned stark
effect. Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 2173–2176 (1984)
67. M.M. De Lima, M. van der Poel Jr., P.V. Santos, J.M. Hvam, Phonon-induced polariton
superlattices. Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 045501 (2006)
68. E.A. Cerda-Méndez et al., Polariton condensation in dynamic acoustic lattices. Phys. Rev.
Lett. 105, 116402 (2010)
69. E.A. Cerda-Méndez, D. Sarkar, D.N. Krizhanovskii, S.S. Gavrilov, K. Biermann, M.S. Skol-
nick, P.V. Santos, Exciton-polariton gap solitons in two-dimensional lattices. Phys. Rev. Lett.
111, 146401 (2013)
70. O. El Daïf et al., Polariton quantum boxes in semiconductor microcvities. Appl. Phys. Lett.
88, 061105 (2006)
71. G. Nardin, Y. Léger, B. Pietka, F. Morier-Genoud, B. Deveaud-Plédran, Phase-resolved imag-
ing of conﬁned exciton-poalriton wave functions in elliptical traps. Phys. Rev. B 82, 045304
(2010)

120
N.Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto
72. J. Bloch, F. Boeuf, J.M. Gérard, B. Legrand, J.Y. Marzin, R. Planel, V. Thierry-Mieg, E.
Costard, Strong and weak coupling regime in pillar semiconductor microcavities. Phys. E 2,
915 (1998)
73. M. Galbiati, L. Ferrier, D.D. Solynshkov, D. Tanese, E. Wertz, P. Senellart, I. Sagnes, A.
Lemaître, E. Galopin, G. Malpuech, J. Bloch, Polariton condensation in photonic molecules.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 126403 (2012)
74. E. Wertz et al., Spontaneous formation and optical manipulation of extended polariton con-
densates. Nat. Phys. 6, 860–864 (2010)
75. T. Jacqmin et al., Direct observation of Dirac cones and a ﬂatband in a honeycomb lattice for
polartions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 116402 (2014)
76. G. Roumpos, W.H. Nitsche, S. Höﬂing, A. Forchel, Y. Yamamoto, Gain-induced trapping of
microcavity exciton polariton condensates. Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 126403 (2010)
77. G. Tosi, G. Christmann, N.G. Berloff, P. Tsotsis, T. Gao, Z. Hatzopoulos, P.G. Lagoudakis,
J.J. Baumberg, Geometrically locked vortex lattices in semiconductor quantum ﬂuids. Nat.
Commun. 3, 1243 (2012)
78. N.Y. Kim et al., GaAs microcavity exciton-polaritons in a trap. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 116402
(2010)
79. N.Y. Kim et al., Dynamical d-wave condensation of exciton-polaritons in a two-dimensional
square-lattice potential. Nat. Phys. 7, 681–686 (2011)
80. N. Masumoto, N.Y. Kim, T. Byrnes, K. Kenichiro, A. Löfﬂer, S. Höﬂing, A. Forchel, Y.
Yamamoto, Exciton-poalriton condensates with ﬂat banda in a two-dimensional kagome lat-
tice. New J. Phys. 14, 065002 (2012)
81. N.Y. Kim, K. Kenichiro, A. Löfﬂer, S. Höﬂing, A. Forchel, Y. Yamamoto, Exciton-poalriton
condensates near the Dirac point in a triangular lattice. New J. Phys. 15, 035032 (2013)
82. K. Kusudo, N.Y. Kim, A. Löfﬂer, S. Höﬂing, A. Forchel, Y. Yamamoto, Stochastic formation
of polariton condensates in two degenerate orbital states. Phys. Rev. B 87, 214503 (2013)
83. E. Hecht, Optics, Addison-Wesley (2001)
84. R.J. Glauber, The quantum theory of optical coherence. Phys. Rev. 130, 2529–2539 (1963)
85. G. Roumpos, M. Lohse, W.H. Nitsche, J. Keeling, M.H. Szymanska, P.B. Littlewood, A.
Löfﬂer, S. Höﬂing, L. Worschech, A. Forchel, Y. Yamamoto, Power-law decay of the spatial
correlation function in exciton-polariton condensates. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 109, 6467–6472
(2012)
86. W.H. Nitsche, N.Y. Kim, G. Roumpos, C. Schneider, M. Kamp, S. Höﬂing, A. Forchel, Y.
Yamamoto, Algebraic order and the Berezinskii-Kosterlitz-Thouless transition in an exciton-
polariton gas (2014). arXiv:1401.0756
87. B.R. Hanburry, R.Q. Twiss, The test of a new type of stella interferometer on Sirrus. Nature
177, 27–29 (1956)
88. T. Horikiri, P. Schwendimann, A. Quattropani, S. Höﬂing, A. Forchel, Y. Yamamoto, Higher
order coherence of exciton-polariton condensates. Phys. Rev. B 81, 033307 (2010)
89. M. Aßmann et al., From polariton condensates to highly photonic quantum degenerate states
of bosonic matter. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 108, 1804–1809 (2011)
90. M. Imada, A. Fujimori, Y. Tokura, Metal-insulator transition. Rev. Mod. Phys. 70, 1039–1263
(1998)
91. M.B. Salamon, M. Jaime, The physics of manganites: Structure and transport. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 73, 583–628 (2001)
92. K. Ishida, Y. Nakai, H. Hosono, To what extent iron-pnictide new superconductors have been
clariﬁes: a progress report. J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 78, 062001 (2009)
93. I.I. Mazin, J. Schmalian, Pairing symmetry and pairing state in ferropnictides: theoretical
overview. Phys. C 469, 614–627 (2009)
94. A. Isacsson, S.M. Girvin, Multiﬂavor bosonic Hubbard models in the ﬁrst excite Bloch band
of an optical lattice. Phys. Rev. A 72, 053604 (2005)
95. L.W. Vincent, C. Wu, Atomic matter of nonzero-momentum Bose-Einstin condensation and
orbital current order. Phys. Rev. A 74, 013607 (2006)

5
Exciton-Polariton Quantum Simulators
121
96. T. Müller, S. Fölling, A. Widera, I. Bloch, State separation and dynmics of ultracold atoms in
higher lattice orbitals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 200405 (2007)
97. G. Wirth, M. Ölschläger, A. Hemmercih, Evidence for orbital superﬂuidity in the P-band of
a bipartite optical square lattice. Nat. Phys. 7, 147–153 (2011)
98. M. Ölschläger, G. Wirth, A. Hemmercih, Unconventional superﬂuid order in the F band of a
bipartite optical square lattice. Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 015302 (2011)
99. P. Soltan-Panahi, D. Lühmann, J. Struck, P. Windpassinger, K. Sengstock, Quantum phase
transition to unconventional multi-orbital superﬂuidity in optical lattices. Nat. Phys. 8, 71–75
(2012)
100. J.H. Davies, The Physics of Low-dimensioanl Semiconductors: An Introduction (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1997)
101. M. Roncaglia, M. Rizzi, J. Dalibard, From rotating atomic rings to quantum Hall states. Sci.
Rep. 1, 43 (2011)
102. H. Terças, H. Flayac, D.D. Solnyshkov, G. Malpuech, Non-abelian gauge ﬁelds in photonic
cavities. Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 066402 (2014)
103. M.C. Rechtsman, J.M. Zeuner, Y. Plotnik, Y. Lumer, D. Podolsky, F. Dreisow, S. Nolte, M.
Segev, A. Szameit, Photonic Floquet topological insulators. Nature 496, 196–200 (2013)
104. A.B. Khanikaev, Mousavi S. Hossein, W.-K. Tse, M. Kargarian, A.H. MacDonald, G. Shvets,
Photonic topological insulators. Nat. Mater. 12, 233–239 (2013)

Chapter 6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear
Nanophotonic Platforms
D. Gerace, C. Ciuti and I. Carusotto
Abstract Modern nano-fabrication technologies allow to realize photonic propa-
gation and conﬁnement to unprecedented degree of compactness, and very close
to lossless conditions. Such ﬁgures of merit are inherently driving the possibility
to reach a strong enhancement of optical nonlinearities in ordinary semiconductor
platforms, which have been mainly used for opto-electronics purposes so far. After
reviewing the basic nanophotonic platforms that are used today in integrated quan-
tum photonics, with a focus on photonic crystal cavities and cavity arrays, we will
give an overview of recent theoretical descriptions of the strongly correlated photonic
concepts in such systems. The focus will be on small-scale systems, compatible with
modern nanofabrication capabilities, and on physical quantities of direct experimen-
tal access, such as ﬁeld intensity and second-order correlation function. A few topical
cases that will be reviewed include novel quantum photonic devices of increasing
system size and complexity, from the quantum optical Josephson interferometer in
a three-cavity system, to the out-of-equilibrium phase crossover from delocalized to
strongly interacting many-body states in cavity arrays.
6.1
Introduction
Strongly correlated systems have been a benchmark of condensed matter physics for
several decades. Traditionally, the deﬁnition applies to many-body systems where the
mutual interactions between its constituting particles are strong enough to prevent a
D. Gerace (B)
Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Pavia, via Bassi 6, 27100 Pavia, Italy
e-mail: dario.gerace@unipv.it
C. Ciuti
Laboratoire Matériaux et Phénomènes Quantiques, Université Paris
Diderot-Paris 7, Bâtiment Condorcet, 10 rue Alice Domon et Léonie Duquet,
75205 Paris Cedex 13, France
e-mail: cristiano.ciuti@univ-paris-diderot.fr
I. Carusotto
INO-CNR BEC Center and Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Trento,
38123 Povo, Italy
e-mail: carusott@science.unitn.it
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
D.G. Angelakis (ed.), Quantum Simulations with Photons and Polaritons,
Quantum Science and Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-52025-4_6
123

124
D. Gerace et al.
separable description of its many-body wavefunction. In a strongly correlated system
the magnitude of interactions, such as the Coulomb repulsion between electrons in
a solid, is typically sizable as compared to the kinetic energy per particle. Exam-
ples belonging to the realm of strongly correlated systems in condensed matter are
superconducting materials, where the Coulomb interaction between electrons and
ions gives rise to a new many-body ground state responsible for the dissipationless
current ﬂow, or diluted magnetic impurities in metals, i.e., the so-called Kondo sys-
tems, where a many-body singlet state hybridized with a free electron gas is formed
[1]. More recently, nanostructured materials and artiﬁcially engineered many particle
systems, such as semiconductor quantum dots on one side, or trapped alkali atoms on
the other, have allowed the exploration of the rich many-body physics of strongly cor-
related systems in controllable experimental settings. In mesoscopic transport exper-
iments, a laterally conﬁned region in a two-dimensional electron gas allows to reach
the Coulomb blockade regime: when the energy cost to add a single electron to the
many-bodyconﬁnedstateislargerthankBT andthequantizedenergybetweensingle-
particle states, single-electron tunneling is blocked [2]. Another example is given by
the superﬂuid to Mott-insulator transition predicted for Bose particles trapped at the
minima of a periodic potential, which was experimentally realized with ultra-cold
atoms in optical lattices [3, 4], described by the well known Bose-Hubbard model
[5]. Depending on the ratio between the hopping energy between neighboring sites,
J, and the on-site interaction energy, U, the ground state of the N-particle system
at integer ﬁlling ranges from a coherently delocalized state describing the superﬂuid
(for J ≫U) to a Mott-insulator state (for J ≪U), which is a quantum phase transi-
tion [6]. Restricting to the one-dimensional geometry, the so-called Tonks-Girardeau
gas of impenetrable bosons is a further case of a strongly correlated state, where the
many-body wave function is characterized by nodes whenever two particles spatially
approach each other. As it was shown by Girardeau [7], a rigorous mapping between
the one-dimensional gas of impenetrable bosons and a gas of noninteracting spinless
fermions occurs. Again, experimental evidence for such a strongly correlated system
was given in a gas of ultra-cold atoms in one-dimensional optical lattices [8, 9] (see
also [10] for a recent review).
Following these exciting demonstrations, the analogy between two-body inter-
particle interactions and photon-photon scattering in strongly nonlinear systems has
been consequently triggering an intense theoretical effort to explore the analogies
between nonlinear cavity arrays and the physics of strongly correlated systems. The
basic building block in this direction is the so-called photon blockade effect, i.e., the
photonic analog of the Coulomb blockade. This terminology was ﬁrst proposed in
1997 [11] to describe the following situation: in the presence of a strong enough opti-
cal nonlinearity, photons in a single-mode cavity effectively behave as impenetrable
bosonic particles. In the last decade, such an effect has been probed in different
cavity quantum electrodynamics settings, from single atoms ﬂying in optical res-
onators [12], to photonic crystal integrated devices [13, 14]. In fact, the analog of
the superﬂuid-to-Mott insulator quantum phase transition was ﬁrst proposed in 2006
[15–17], relying on the capability of experimentally realizing multi-cavity arrays

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
125
where strong photon-photon interactions in each cavity could drive the photonic sys-
tem from a coherent, superﬂuid state to a correlated Mott-insulator state of photons.
The observability of this phase transition in realistic devices was ﬁrst theoretically
proposed in a quasi-equilibrium scenario, i.e., in very weakly dissipative systems
and neglecting the intrinsic driven-dissipative nature of open photonic systems. The
role of losses was later recognized as a crucial one to be taken into account for
the effective observability of an analog quantum phase transition in open photonic
systems, and simultaneously triggered the motivation to study the interplay between
coherent and strongly correlated many-body states in a naturally out-of-equilibrium
framework, which is interesting both from theoretical and experimental point of
views. In this respect, the next crucial step was to include in the theoretical modeling
either photon dissipation or pumping mechanisms, which is an essential element to
replenish the photon population and reach a dynamical equilibrium in steady state.
The ﬁrst works addressing and possibly taking advantage of the non-equilibrium
nature in the context of strongly correlated photonic systems were in 2009 [18,
19]. These works, some of which were reviewed earlier in this volume and will
come across here again from the nanophotonic perspective, essentially pioneered the
concept of using photon correlation measurements as a unique probe of the crossover
to the strongly correlated regime, even when the interplay between tunneling and
interactions occurs in the steady state of a driven-dissipative open system.
In this chapter we explore the potentialities of integrated photonic platforms,
namely photonic crystal integrated circuits, to investigate the rich physics of strongly
correlated photons. The focus will be on small-scale systems that could be experi-
mentally realized with state-of-the art technology. For this reason, we will ﬁrst review
the main physical properties of nanophotonic platforms based on photonic crystals,
where record ﬁgures of merit in terms of light propagation and conﬁnement can
currently be achieved. In the second part, we will review a few examples of strongly
correlated photonic devices, pointing out analogies and differences with respect to
the corresponding systems in equilibrium.
6.2
Nanophotonic Platforms: Light Propagation
and Conﬁnement
Modern semiconductor technologies allow to manufacture and process different
materials with unprecedented degree of control. By applying mature fabrication
approaches such as epitaxial growth, high-resolution lithography, and advanced
material etching, it is currently possible to realize fully integrated nanophotonic
platforms for the control of light propagation and conﬁnement. Within the context of
the present chapter, photonic platforms are particularly suited for enhancing nonlin-
ear optical interactions, speciﬁcally the third-order nonlinear susceptibility, through
conﬁnement of the electromagnetic ﬁeld in a diffraction-limited volume (i.e., on the
order of the wavelength cubed), as it will be discussed in the following. Moreover,
in the spirit of integrated quantum photonic technologies [20] it is important to keep

126
D. Gerace et al.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6.1 Schematic representation of modern nanophotonic platforms. a Semiconductor microcav-
ities, where photons are bound to the microcavity plane by two Bragg mirrors, and laterally conﬁned
through local variation of the microcavity thickness (upper sketch, from [21]); surface states can be
engineered and guided through low-index claddings (lower sketch, from [22]). b Photonic crystal
integrated circuits with single and multi-cavity systems coupled to access waveguides
propagation of light signals within the same photonic systems, very much like in
microelectronic circuits where metallic wires allow for the propagation of electrons
between different components.
Here we will mainly refer to semiconductor-based nanophotonic platforms, where
photons can propagate over distances much larger than their wavelength, and at the
same time be trapped in three-dimensional resonators enhancing optical nonlineari-
ties. Nanophotonic resonators can be obtained by laterally etching a planar microcav-
ity, i.e., in a micropillar geometry [23, 24]. These structures are particularly suited
for out-of-plane emission. However, in order to keep the photonic ﬁeld conﬁned in
the plane of the high-index cavity layer as in an integrated circuit, shallow photon
conﬁnement can be achieved by small diameter mesas, as schematically pictured in
Fig.6.1a. These nanostructures are usually employed in the context of strong light-
matter coupling between the planar microcavity photons and elementary electron-
hole excitations bound to a two-dimensional quantum well layer placed at the ﬁeld
antinodes. Such geometry is able to enhance the nonlinear properties by generat-
ing mixed light-matter excitations, called exciton-polaritons [25], which inherit the
intrinsically strong nonlinear interaction derived from Coulomb scattering between
electron-hole pairs [26], while simultaneously retaining the light photon mass and
most of the desired properties of a nanophotonic platform. Recently, polariton states
have been observed at the surface of a planar microcavity without top mirror [27,
28], so called Bloch-surface wave polaritons [22]. Nanophotonic platforms based on
propagating polaritons with very low-loss can be envisioned in surface engineered

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
127
structures, such as the one schematically sketched in the lower panel of Fig.6.1a,
typically working in the near-infrared electromagnetic spectrum. Alternatively, a
different concept of compact, efﬁcient and low-loss nanophotonic platforms can be
engineered in a planar photonic crystal slab, e.g., a thin layer of a high-index semicon-
ductor periodically textured with holes, where line and point defects can be designed
in the periodic lattice to allow for waveguides, cavities, and coupled resonators in
the same planar structure, as schematically shown in Fig.6.1b. The most remarkable
features of photonic crystal cavities are the unprecedented ﬁgures of merit, such as
extremely high values of the Q-factor and the extremely small mode volumes, as
it will be detailed in the following. Moreover, large ﬂexibility in materials choice
make these platforms a particularly versatile tool to investigate strongly correlated
photonic systems on chip.
6.2.1
Photonic Crystal Waveguides, Cavities, and Polaritons
We focus our attention on the speciﬁc type of nanophotonic platforms constituted by
semiconductor photonic crystals patterned in thin ﬁlm planar waveguides, either sus-
pended (membraned photonic crystal slabs) or placed on a low-index substrate (lower
cladding layer), as already sketched in Fig.6.1b. Recent progress has allowed these
systems to achieve unprecedented ﬁgures of merit in terms of light control on-chip
[29]. In particular, extremely low loss waveguiding is now possible in systems made
of both III–V and group IV semiconductor materials [30–32], which are the most
relevant ones for applications in quantum optoelectronics. Nanophotonic resonators
in photonic crystals allow to conﬁne photons in volumes that are on the order of their
cubic wavelength for more than a nanosecond [33, 34]. Given the relevance that such
nanostructures are likely to play in the integrated quantum photonics scenario, we
brieﬂy introduce the main physical aspects of light propagation and conﬁnement in
photonic crystal slabs.
Photonic crystals are artiﬁcially nanostructured materials where the refractive
index is periodic along one, two or three spatial directions. The simple analogy
with electronic band dispersion in a periodic potential, such as the one in crystalline
solids, has allowed to transfer to the photonic realm a few basic concepts such as
photonic bands, and photonic band gaps. In essence, the dielectric modulation acts
as an effective periodic potential for photon propagation, which can open forbidden
frequency regions in the electromagnetic energy dispersion for wave vectors along
the periodicity direction [35]. From a theoretical point of view, the photonic band dis-
persion in such a structure can be calculated by solving the linear Maxwell equations
as a linear eigenvalue problem in steady state, which can be directly deduced in the
approximation of harmonic time dependence, and for the magnetic ﬁeld explicitly
reads
ˆO(r)H(r) = ΩH(r),
(6.1)

128
D. Gerace et al.
with a differential operator deﬁned as
ˆO(r) = ∇×
 1
ε(r)∇× ,
(6.2)
and the eigenvalues Ω = ω2/c2, where c = 1/√ε0μ0 in SI units. After the solution
of the second-order equation for the magnetic ﬁeld, the electric ﬁeld can be obtained
from the obvious relation
E(r) =
i
ωε0ϵ(r)∇× H(r).
(6.3)
The operator ˆO is hermitian and positive deﬁnite [35], thus it has real and posi-
tive eigenvalues with a complete set of orthonormal eigenvectors. The eigenvectors
H(r) are the ﬁeld patterns of the harmonic modes whose frequencies are obtained by
the corresponding eigenvalues as ω = c
√
Ω, with the periodicity condition on the
spatially-dependent dielectric constant expressed as ε(r) = ε(r + R). Here, R is a
vector deﬁned by the linear combination of primitive lattice vectors ai. The photonic
crystal structure is invariant for any discrete translation deﬁned by a direct lattice
vector R, with dimensionality of the vectorial space deﬁned by the number of dimen-
sions in which ε(r) is periodic. As we can see, the operator formalism is very similar
to the Hamiltonian formulation of quantum mechanics, and the spatial periodicity of
the effective potential for this electromagnetic problem allow for a direct application
of concepts and theorems known from solid state theories, such as Bloch’s theorem.
The discrete translation operator ˆTR commutes with the “Hamiltonian” ˆO and the
two operators possess a common set of eigenvectors; the wave vector k is a good
“quantum number” for this problem.
Ideally, only three-dimensional photonic crystals allow for a full control over
light propagation and conﬁnement. However, it is difﬁcult to manufacture fully three-
dimensional photonic crystals at visible or near-infrared wavelengths, although tech-
nology is progressing fast in this direction [36, 37]. For this reason, in the past few
years much attention has been devoted to developing and optimizing light propa-
gation and conﬁnement in two-dimensional photonic crystal slabs. Hence, here we
specify to photonic crystals in planar geometry, also for their direct analogy with pla-
nar circuits. In Fig.6.2a we show a typical lattice of air holes textured in a high-index
(e.g., silicon or GaAs) thin ﬁlm, with a thickness d on the order of half the pitch
of the photonic lattice, a. The holes have a radius r/a. The main symmetry points
in reciprocal space are indicated in the upper panel of the ﬁgure. Equation6.1 can
be solved with usual linear eigenvalue diagonalization, after expanding the solution
on a proper basis set of eigenmodes. In the speciﬁc case of photonic crystal slabs, a
possible and convenient choice is to expand the electromagnetic ﬁeld in terms of a
separable basis of plane waves in the plane, and guided modes of the vertical dielec-
tric stack. Within this formalism, the photonic modes of the photonic crystal slab
are radiatively coupled to propagating modes in the upper and lower (semi-inﬁnite)
cladding by perturbation theory, which allows to calculate losses as an imaginary part

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
129
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
 
Energy  (eV)
M
M
K
Photonic Band Gap 
w 
a 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
 
Energy  (eV)
k ( /a)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6.2 Photonic band structure and line-defects in a triangular lattice: a direct and reciprocal
triangular lattices in two dimensions, where the high symmetry points are deﬁned, and photonic
mode dispersion in a membrane waveguide of thickness d/a = 0.5, with a hole radius r/a = 0.3,
and a lattice constant a = 260 nm, which gives a photonic gap centered around 1.4 eV (about 880nm
in wavelength). The two continuous lines in the ﬁgure represent the light dispersion in the uniform
cladding layers (air in this case) and in the high-index core layer (a dielectric constant ε = 12 was
used in this case). b Line-defect in the triangular lattice along the Γ K symmetry direction (so-called
W1 waveguide), with the corresponding guided mode dispersion and electric ﬁeld intensity proﬁles
in the large (small) group velocity region, respectively
of photonic eigenmodes [38]. This approach has been named “guided-mode expan-
sion” (GME) [39]. An example of photonic mode dispersion is given in Fig.6.2a for
the triangular lattice. Modes whose dispersion falls below the light line of upper and
lower claddings (in this case there is a unique light line deﬁned by ω = c|k|/n) are
truly guided within the patterned layer by total internal reﬂection, i.e., they are ide-
ally lossless, while modes falling above the light line are guided resonances, which
acquire a ﬁnite linewidth due to coupling to the continuum of radiative modes in
the claddings. It can be clearly identiﬁed that the spatial modulation of the dielectric
proﬁle strongly modiﬁes the dispersion of the otherwise uniform planar waveguide,
introducing regions where propagation of photons in the plane of the photonic crys-
tal layer is inhibited (photonic band gap). It is precisely this property that allows
to introduce very efﬁcient defect states within the gap, with a mechanism similar
to the one producing surface or localized electronic defect states in semiconductors
or insulators. Defect states can easily be calculated by GME, by using the tech-
nique of supercell expansion: the unit cell is chosen in such a way to fully include

130
D. Gerace et al.
the defect region, allowing for a sufﬁcient distance between neighboring cells for
the hopping between conﬁned modes to be negligible; this cell can periodically be
repeated along the direction where translational symmetry still holds, to correctly
calculate the defect mode dispersion. An example of such a calculation is given in
Fig.6.2b: by removing a whole row of holes in the otherwise periodic lattice, the
wave vector in the direction aligned with the defect is still a good quantum number
over which dispersion can be represented, and the new photonic mode appearing
within the gap corresponds to a defect mode free to propagate along the line defect.
As a conﬁrmation, the electric ﬁeld intensity, |E(r)|2, is plotted for two different
regions in the defect mode dispersion. The high group velocity mode corresponds
to an index-guided mode, i.e., its conﬁnement in the direction perpendicular to the
propagation direction is physically determined by total internal reﬂection between
the defect (high-index) region and the textured (lower index) region around, anal-
ogously to common one-dimensional dielectric waveguides [40]. Such modes have
been experimentally probed with very low propagation losses in the range of dB/cm
[30]. On the other hand, the ﬁeld pattern is signiﬁcantly different in the low group
velocity region, where the nature of modes directly comes from constructive inter-
ference induced by the photonic lattice, which justiﬁes deﬁning them as gap guided
modes. The propagating defect mode has a region below the light line, where losses
can only be induced by fabrication imperfections of the surrounding photonic lattice
[41]. In fact, demonstrations of very low-loss propagation has been reported in the
main semiconductor material platforms, such as silicon [32] or GaAs [31].
A key building block for integrated nanophotonics can be realized by exploiting
the photonic band gap in a two-dimensional photonic crystal membrane to create a
three-dimensional resonator with extremely optimized ﬁgures of merit in terms of
photon lifetime and spatial conﬁnement. A point-defect in a photonic crystal lattice,
which is obtained by removing one or more holes from the underlying lattice, gives
rise to fully localized states spectrally situated within the photonic gap, as shown
in Fig.6.3a. Here, the dispersion of localized modes within the gap is represented
in a ﬁctitious Brillouin zone, deﬁned by a two-dimensional supercell that allows to
calculate defect modes even in the presence of breaking of translational symmetry
(here, the supercell lattice period along the Γ K direction is 10 times the underlying
triangular lattice pitch, which is largely sufﬁcient for convergence of defect mode
energies within the gap). It should be noted that the nature of these conﬁned modes
is related to the propagating mode of the W1 waveguide, as it can be recognized
by comparing the electric ﬁeld intensity proﬁle with the dispersion in the low group
velocity region in Fig.6.2b. Since light cannot escape in the plane, being conﬁned
by the photonic band gap, the main source of intrinsic losses for these cavity modes
is radiation into the claddings induced by coupling to radiation modes. In fact, this
is the main reason for these resonances to exhibit a ﬁnite linewidth, deﬁned from
the ratio between resonance frequency and Q-factor for each cavity mode (focusing
on the fundamental cavity mode, γ = ω0/Q). This linewidth is related to the photon
lifetime within the nanocavity, τ = 1/γ. Interestingly, photonic crystal cavity modes
can be engineered to strongly suppress Fourier modal components falling above the
light line in air, which are the main responsible for out-of-plane leakage. This can

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
131
0.00
0.05
0.10
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
 
Energy  (eV)
k  ( /a)
a
2a
0.4 
0.6 
0.2 
0.5 
0.3 
0.1 
1.8 
1.0 
1.4 
0.6 
0.2 
(a)
(c)
(b)
Fig. 6.3 Point defect in a triangular photonic lattice, the so-called L3 cavity (three missing holes
along Γ K): a defect modes (calculated in a ﬁctitious supercell), b fundamental cavity mode ﬁeld
intensity proﬁle in the (x, y) (at z = 0) and (x, z) (at y = 0) planes, respectively, and c far-ﬁeld
optimization of the fundamental cavity mode emission in the upper half-space
be achieved by suitably shifting the holes nearby the cavity region [42, 43], yielding
theoretical Q-factors on the order of 109 [34]. Measured Q-factors are mainly material
and wavelength dependent. Record values have been reported in silicon at resonances
in the range λ = 1.5 µm (typical telecom band), where values of the order of 106–107
have been shown [44, 45]. In GaAs the measured values are limited to about 7 × 105
[46], which is currently the record value at the same telecom wavelengths. It should
be noted that such nanocavities are particularly suited to being excited via evanescent
waveguide-cavity coupling, as schematically represented in Fig.6.1b. On the other
hand, such large Q-factors are not compatible with efﬁcient light excitation and/or
emission out of plane, since the very principle of Q-factor optimization requires the
suppression of Fourier modal components radiating out-of-plane. In fact, the far-ﬁeld
proﬁle calculated for a high-Q cavity is represented in Fig.6.3c, on the left panel,
showing a poor spatial overlap with the typical gaussian proﬁle of a focusing lens. In
order to increase light collection in the vertical direction, for speciﬁc experiments or
applications in which excitation/collection is out-of-plane, clever hole engineering
allows to recover a gaussian far-ﬁeld proﬁle, at the expense of Q-factor [47]: a
second-order lattice can be superimposed (i.e., by modifying the holes around the
cavity with a periodicity 2a), thus producing folding of Fourier components around
the normal incidence, as shown in the right panel of Fig.6.3c. In fact, it has been
shown that a compromise can be found between having a vertically optimized far-
ﬁeld emission and a Q-factor in the range of 105 [48], which is still quite relevant
for most applications in integrated nonlinear and quantum photonics.

132
D. Gerace et al.
Since we will be concerned with strongly nonlinear photonic systems, it is worth
reminding that in standard photonic devices based on semiconductor technology,
the optical nonlinearity of the material medium used to conﬁne the photons remains
moderate and the device operation is still far from the strongly nonlinear condition.
One of the possible strategies to enhance solid state nonlinearities relies on coupling
the photonic modes to some active material showing a sharp material resonance in
the same spectral region. In this way, the excitonic content of the resulting polariton
modes introduces strong interactions, which could possibly lead to nonlinear behav-
ior at the single or few photon level. The possibility to tailor the photonic mode
dispersion through the two-dimensional pattern of a planar waveguide also allows
to engineer radiation-matter coupling in such nanophotonic platforms. In particu-
lar, mixed light-matter excitations can be obtained by coupling a low-loss photonic
mode to a conﬁned electron hole pair in a quantum well (QW), also called a QW
exciton. These are the elementary excitations of a semiconductor inheriting most
of the photonic modes peculiar properties, i.e., light effective mass and hence high
group velocity, while enhancing their nonlinear optical properties, which are mainly
due to exciton-exciton scattering within the QW layer. Such elementary excitations
are actively exploited in semiconductor microcavities, such as the ones depicted in
Fig.6.1a. Similar theoretical treatments of light-matter coupling in photonic crystal
slabs leads to the prediction of new mixed excitations called photonic crystal polari-
tons [49], whose dispersion is shown, e.g., in Fig.6.4 for a square lattice. The lattice
constant can be chosen to match the photonic mode dispersion at a given point in the
Brillouin zone with the QW exciton resonance, in this case at ℏωex = 1.485 eV (as
typical of InGaAs QW in GaAs barriers). The eigenmode dispersion represented with
a full line in the ﬁgure describes extended polariton states on the two-dimensional
photonic lattice of holes. We notice that around the normal incidence (Γ point in the
ﬁgure), the photonic crystal polariton dispersion closely mimics the typical micro-
cavity polariton behavior in planar microcavities, where polariton condensation due
to the large exciton nonlinearity has been observed [50], and recently stimulated
Fig. 6.4 A photonic crystal
slab with an embedded
quantum well, direct and
reciprocal square lattices,
and mode dispersion of
photonic crystal polaritons
(these results were originally
published in [49]). The
photonic crystal slab has
thickness d/a = 0.3, hole
radius r/a = 0.34, and the
lattice constant is set to the
value a = 430 nm. Reprinted
with permission from APS
kx
ky
X
a
2r
y
x
M
z
a
d
QW
y
x
lower cladding

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
133
further interest for the study of quantum ﬂuid properties out-of-equilibrium [26].
Tailoring of the exciton-polariton dispersion with a photonic crystal lattice has been
shown experimentally [51]. Moreover, photonic crystal polariton conﬁnement in a
far-ﬁeld optimized L3 nanocavity has allowed to demonstrate an ultra-low threshold
polariton laser [52].
Nanophotonic platforms with several coupled elements based on photonic crys-
tal slabs have been realized in different materials, from commonly employed III–V
semiconductors [46], to CMOS-compatible silicon-on-insulator wafers [29], and dia-
mond [53]. In particular, quantum photonic experiments can be designed on photonic
crystal platforms, where efﬁcient coupling of light into the photonic chips and inde-
pendent control of the different resonator elements can be achieved [54, 55]. More-
over, optical coupling of neighboring photonic crystal resonators via the overlap of
the evanescent tails has been demonstrated for two-dimensional arrays of photonic
crystal cavities [56, 57], which allows to envision a straightforward realization of
a variety of integrated conﬁgurations of multi-cavity arrays coupled to input/output
photonic crystal waveguiding channels. Also, advanced post-fabrication techniques
have been developed for ﬁne tuning of cavity modes and inter-cavity coupling in such
arrays [58, 59]. This unprecedented capability of designing, realizing, and control-
ling a fully integrated platform for quantum photonic experiments is at the basis for
motivating the investigation of strongly correlated photonic systems on-chip, which
is the main topic of the present chapter.
6.2.2
Effective Photon-Photon Interactions
Strongly correlated photonic systems rely on the ability to enhance the nonlinear
interactions in suitably engineered photonic systems. The nonlinear optical response
of solids is commonly very weak, such that several photons are typically needed to
produce appreciable nonlinear effects. From a theoretical point of view, the nonlinear
optical response to the applied electric ﬁeld of a generic dielectric material is given
by [60]
Di(r, t) = ε0εi j(r)E j(r, t) + ε0[χ(2)
i jk(r)E j(r, t)Ek(r, t)
+ χ(3)
i jkl(r)E j(r, t)Ek(r, t)El(r, t) + . . .], (6.4)
where the summation over repeated indices (labeling the three spatial directions) is
understood. Equation6.4 deﬁnes the relative dielectric permittivity tensor of the
medium, εi j(r) = δi j + χ(1)
i j (r). Enhancing optical nonlinearities requires strong
electric ﬁeld intensities, such as the ones that can be obtained in a photonic crystal
resonator made of a nonlinear material. In the following, we specify to the case of a
single mode of the electromagnetic ﬁeld conﬁned in a centrosymmetric medium, i.e.,
we can assume the second-order nonlinear contribution to be negligible, χ(2)
i jk(r) = 0.
Nonlinearities of the third-order are usually deﬁned as Kerr-type contributions, due

134
D. Gerace et al.
to the χ(3) tensor elements in Eq.(6.4). Since we will be interested in quantum effects,
we can expand the electric ﬁeld of the cavity mode in a spatially inhomogeneous
(i.e., a photonic crystal cavity) nonlinear medium as
ˆE(r, t) = i
ℏω0
2ε0
1/2 
ˆa α(r)
√ε(r)e−iω0t −ˆa† α∗(r)
√ε(r)eiω0t

,
(6.5)
with the corresponding magnetic ﬁeld being given by ω0μ0 ˆH(r) = −i∇× ˆE(r). In
Eq.(6.5) ˆa (ˆa†) deﬁnes the destruction (creation) operator of a single photon in the
mode, obeying standard commutation relations [ˆa, ˆa†] = 1, and α(r) is the normal-
ized three-dimensional cavity ﬁeld proﬁle, i.e., satisfying

|α(r)|2dr = 1. Canoni-
cal quantization is obtained by the time-averaged total energy density in the mode,
Hem =

dr

E(r) · D(r) + |H(r)|2
/2, after which a nonlinear second-quantized
hamiltonian can be obtained (neglecting the zero-point energy in the quantization of
the electromagnetic ﬁeld) [61]
ˆH = ℏω0 ˆa† ˆa + ℏU ˆa† ˆa† ˆa ˆa.
(6.6)
As it is evident from the formal expression of Eq.(6.6), the third-order χ(3) non-
linearity corresponds in the language of Feynman diagrams to four-legged vertices
describing, among others, binary collisions between photons pairs, thus fully mim-
icking the contact-type interaction of charged particles in condensed matter physics,
which lies at the heart of the development of strongly correlated photonic analogies.
The photon-photon interaction can be approximated as [62]
U ≃3ℏω2
0
4ε0
χ(3)
ε2
r
	
|α(r)|4dr = 3ℏω2
0
4ε0Veff
χ(3)
ε2
r
,
(6.7)
with the effective cavity mode volume deﬁned as V −1
eff =

|α(r)|4dr. In fact, an
order of magnitude estimate can be given for each deﬁned combination of materials
constituting the nanophotonic resonator, by assuming constant values for the average
real part of the nonlinear susceptibility and relative dielectric permittivity, χ(3) and
εr respectively.
The elementary building block towards strongly correlated photonic systems is
the so-called photon blockade effect [11, 63], which is schematically described in
Fig.6.5: when two photons inside a resonant system produce a nonlinear shift of its
responsefrequency,U, that is larger thantheline-broadeninginducedbylosses, γ, the
two-photon state according to Hamiltonian (6.6) is spectrally shifted by an amount
2U ≫γ, and an input radiation ﬁeld resonant with the linear cavity frequency, ω0,
will not be able to inject into the cavity more than one photon at a time. Hence,
in the presence of such a strong single-photon nonlinearity, photons in single-mode
cavities effectively behave as impenetrable bosons. The experimental conﬁguration
for photon blockade can be modeled by adding a coherent pumping term to obtain
the standard Kerr-type hamiltonian that is usually employed in quantum optics [61]

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
135
0+2U 
0
 
0 
p
 
p
 
2  photons 
1  photon 
2U 
0+2U 
0
 
0
 
0
 
0
 
g(2) ( ) 
U>>  
 (1/ ) 
Fig. 6.5 Schematic description of single-photon blockade from a strongly nonlinear system: a
train of photons is incident on a single-mode resonator with frequency ω0 and linewidth γ, a second
photon is not able to enter the cavity if the nonlinear coupling U ≫γ, because of the shift of the
two-photon resonance. This blockade can be probed by measuring antibunched light emission at
the output of the cavity, as shown in the calculated g(2)(τ) for U/γ = 100
ˆH = ℏ(ω0 −iγ/2)ˆa† ˆa + ℏU ˆa† ˆa† ˆa ˆa + ℏFe−iωpt ˆa† + ℏF∗eiωpt ˆa,
(6.8)
where F is the coherent pumping rate at the pump frequency ωp, and losses in the
system are quantiﬁed through the intrinsic cavity decay rate, γ, which can be added as
an imaginary part of the cavity mode resonance frequency and is related to the mode
Q-factor as Q = ω0/γ. As a result, the transmitted light across the cavity shows a
strongly reduced probability of detecting a single photon soon after a ﬁrst one has
been detected. Such a statistical property, which is strictly related to the quantum
nature of the emitted radiation, is called photon antibunching, and it is quantiﬁed
by the condition g(2)(0) < g(2)(τ), where the usual deﬁnition for the steady state
second-order correlation function is [64]
g(2)(τ) = g(2)(t →∞, τ) = ⟨ˆa†(t)ˆa†(t + τ)ˆa(t + τ)ˆa(t)⟩
⟨ˆa†(t)ˆa(t)⟩⟨ˆa†(t + τ)ˆa(t + τ)⟩.
(6.9)
Thus, the ﬁgure of merit quantifying the single-photon nonlinear behavior of the
cavity mode is the normalized zero-time delay second-order correlation, deﬁned
as g(2)(0) = ⟨ˆa†2 ˆa2⟩/⟨ˆa† ˆa⟩2, which in the low-excitation limit can be expressed as
g(2)(0) = [1 + 4(Δ/γ)2]/[1 + 4(Δ + U)2/γ2], where Δ=ω0 −ωp. For g(2)(0) →
0 the cavity behaves as an almost ideal single-photon source [64], which occurs when
U/γ ≫1, with Q2/V 2
eff being the relevant ﬁgure of merit to be optimized. Single
photons are released from the cavity at the bare frequency, ω0. A numerical simulation

136
D. Gerace et al.
of the antibunched g(2)(τ) is shown in Fig.6.5 for U/γ = 100. The physical meaning
is the following: the probability of detecting more than one photon goes to 1 only
after the ﬁrst photon has been released from the cavity, with the typical cavity photon
lifetime τ ∼1/γ.
It should be noted that typical material nonlinearities are quite weak, with nonlin-
ear susceptibility elements on the order of χ(3) ∼10−18–10−17 m2/V2 for the main
semiconductor crystals used in optoelectronics [60]. A simple order of magnitude
estimate for a L3 photonic crystal cavity made of such materials (e.g., GaAs or Si),
after Eq.(6.7), gives values in the range of ℏU ≃10−3–10−2 µeV, which requires
Q-factors of the order of 108 or larger for observing appreciable single-photon non-
linear effects at telecom wavelengths. Even if unprecedented enhancement of optical
nonlinearities has been shown as a consequence of photonic crystal conﬁnement in
diffraction-limited volumes [46, 65], such large Q-factors have not been achieved
at time of writing. Hence, alternative strategies have been proposed to experimen-
tally realize the single-photon blockade regime. First, cavity quantum electrodynam-
ics (CQED) can be employed to achieve single-photon nonlinear behavior, e.g., by
exploiting the strong anharmonicity introduced by a single atomic-like emitter into a
high quality factor resonator [63, 66]. After the ﬁrst experimental demonstration of
single-photon blockade employing caesium atoms strongly coupled to a Fabry-perot
resonant mode [12], a successful route in this direction employing solid state res-
onators has been to insert an electronic quantum dot (QD) in a photonic crystal cavity.
A QD typically consists of a nanometer-scale semiconductor aggregate surrounded
by a larger gap semiconductor in all three spatial directions, such that the electron and
hole wave functions are conﬁned and excitonic transitions display a discrete, atomic-
like energy spectrum. When one of these transitions is strongly coupled to the high-Q
photonic mode, a Jaynes-Cummings (JC) system is recovered [67]. The photon sta-
tistics of a JC nonlinear system1 is very similar to the one represented in Fig.6.5 [69].
First experimental evidence of photon blockade was reported for a QD embedded in
a photonic crystal L3 nanocavity driven by an off-resonant pump [70], followed soon
after by an experiment under resonant coherent excitation [13]. Later work showed
signiﬁcantly clearer signatures of strong photon-photon interactions in such kind of
systems [14]. From the point of view of realizing strongly correlated states of pho-
tons in a many-cavity geometry, QD-based architectures suffer from the signiﬁcant
drawback that neither the spatial position of individual QD nor the exact energy of the
electronic transitions can be controlled during the growth stage, as the different dots
self-organize at random positions with random sizes. This can become an issue when
extending this building block to multi-cavity systems. Hence, a promising route to
overcome this difﬁculty using spatially localized emitters may be related to the use
of QW as the active material responsible for the enhanced nonlinearity. In this case,
since the thickness of the QW material can be controlled at the mono-layer precision,
the experimental problem of correctly positioning the emitter is completely elimi-
1We notice that the ﬁgure of merit to be optimized for coupled QD-cavity based single-photon
nonlinearities scales as Q/
√
V eff (see, e.g., Ref. [68]), while antibunching scales as Q2/V 2
eff for
the Kerr-type nonlinearity.

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
137
nated, and the electronic contribution to inhomogeneous broadening can be strongly
suppressed. A theoretical treatment of the nonlinear dynamics of conﬁned polaritons
in a single-mode cavity, such as the one in Fig.6.3, yields a formal Hamiltonian
similar to Eq.(6.6). In this case, the nonlinearity is still of the Kerr-type, with an
explicit U ∝1/Aeff scaling (here Aeff is the effective cavity mode area, which can
be estimated from the cavity mode proﬁle). For details on this approach, we refer
to [71]. Further proposals to enhance Kerr-type optical nonlinearities in the solid
state involve using the biexciton contribution to the polariton-polariton scattering
[72], engineering doubly resonant nanocavities in materials with χ(2) contribution to
the nonlinear response [73], or exploiting quantum interference effects in photonic
molecules [74, 75]. Presently, it is still unclear whether the nonlinearity stemming
from collisions between delocalized polaritons can eventually lead to the U ≫γ
regime required for single-photon blockade, but further experimental developments
are likely to appear in the near future. In the following, we will not be concerned
with the speciﬁc nature of the Kerr-type nonlinearity of the single-mode resonator,
which will be considered as a building block of a strongly correlated nanophotonic
platform assuming that the quantum dynamics of such an elementary system can
always be reduced to a Hamiltonian like in Eq. (6.6).
6.3
Strongly Correlated Photons on Chip
We give an overview of a few small-scale systems, compatible with the nanophotonic
platforms reviewed in the previous Section, where strong photon correlations may
result in the realization of novel quantum devices, or the study of some fundamental
physical phenomena in a new scenario, triggered by the driven-dissipative nature of
photonic systems. A photonic crystal platform like the one represented in Fig.6.1b
can be described by linear and nonlinear elements: photons (or polaritons) propagat-
ing in line-defects are subject to a linear dispersion, the effects of nonlinearities being
strongly reduced by the one-dimensional nature of the density of states. This is espe-
cially true for index-guided modes with large group velocity (see Fig.6.2b). On the
other hand, photons (or polaritons) conﬁned in photonic crystal cavities in the photon
blockade regime may be described by single-photon nonlinear elements, owing to
the enhanced nonlinearities, as a result of wavelength-scale mode conﬁnement and
extremely reduced losses.
6.3.1
Master Equation Treatment of Open Quantum Systems
Strongly correlated photonic systems can be studied by coupling elementary building
elements described by the nonlinear quantum Hamiltonian (6.6), i.e., a generalized
Bose-Hubbard model, also called the driven-dissipative Kerr-Hubbard (KH) Hamil-
tonian

138
D. Gerace et al.
ˆH = ℏ

i

ωi ˆa†
i ˆai + U ˆa†
i ˆa†
i ˆai ˆai + Fie−iωpt ˆa†
i + F∗
i eiωpt ˆai

+

<i, j>
ℏJ ˆa†
i ˆa j + ˆHdiss,
(6.10)
where the sum is over the number of coupled cavities, and each operator ˆai represents
photonic (or polaritonic) quanta of a single-mode resonator, which for simplicity can
be all assumed with the same bare resonant frequency (i.e., ωi = ω0, for every i),
while neighboring resonators are evanescently coupled with the same tunnel-rate, J,
such as in a photonic crystal cavity array, and the sum is extended to next neighbor
sites only. We notice that each resonator is independently pumped at a rate Fi, which
can be achieved either through in-plane waveguide coupling, as in the schematic of
Fig.6.1, or through out-of-plane coupling in case of far-ﬁeld engineered photonic
crystal cavities (see Fig.6.3). In Eq.6.10, ˆHdiss exactly describes coupling of the
conﬁned degrees of freedom to the radiation environment, as opposed to describing
losses by an imaginary part of mode frequencies as in Eq.(6.8). Since the main
source of losses results from cavity photon leakage into radiative modes out of
the photonic crystal slab plane (reservoir), they can be correctly taken into account
within a quantum Master equation approach in the Born-Markov approximation, i.e.,
a Liouville-von Neumann equation [76]
∂
∂t ρ = i
ℏ[ρ, ˜HKH] + L(ρ),
(6.11)
where ˜HKH is the KH Hamiltonian written in the rotating frame with respect to the
pump frequency
˜HKH = ˆR(t) ˆHKH ˆR†(t) −iℏˆR d ˆR†
dt
= ℏ

i
[(ω0 −ωp)ˆa†
i ˆai + U ˆa†
i ˆa†
i ˆai ˆai + F ˆa†
i + F∗ˆai] + ℏJ

<i, j>
ˆa†
i ˆa j,
(6.12)
with ˆR(t) = exp{iωpt 
i(ˆa†
i ˆai)}. After tracing out the environment degrees of free-
dom responsible for the coupling of the conﬁned modes to the external bath, the
Liouvillian can be expressed in the usual Lindblad form [76]
L(ρ) =

i
γi
2 [2ˆaiρˆa†
i −ˆa†
i ˆaiρ −ρˆa†
i ˆai],
(6.13)
where we are neglecting other decoherence mechanisms (such as pure dephasing),
and γi are the photon (polariton) dissipation rates in each cavity, for which we will
assume γi = γ for every i in the following. In photonic crystal integrated circuits,
whichweareconsideringas model platforms inthepresent chapter, thecoefﬁcients γi
arephysicallyrelatedtotheout-of-planelossesofphotonicnanocavities(seeprevious
section), and possibly to leakage into access waveguides within the same photonic
crystal chip, which will determine a total resonance linewidth to each resonator.

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
139
These coefﬁcients can be estimated in perturbation theory, as outlined in Sect.6.2.1,
for each speciﬁc design.
We notice that the KH model of Eq.(6.12) is just an example of a wide class of
models describing systems of strongly interacting photons, depending on the nature
of the single-photon nonlinearity in the elementary building block. For example, an
array of coupled photonic crystal cavities each one containing a strongly coupled
QD would be described by a Jaynes-Cummings-Hubbard (JCH) model, whose pre-
dictions in the low-excitation regime can be shown to be in qualitative agreement
with the driven-dissipative KH model, with proper parameter matching between the
two models [77]. Differences arise when considering the formation of many-body
states [78]. However, due to difﬁculties in practically realizing a JCH with uniform
QD-cavity coupling throughout a multi-cavity array, we will rather restrict our theo-
retical analysis to different versions (depending on the number of sites or the lattice
geometry) of the generic KH model, in which the nonlinearity either comes from the
bulk material χ(3), or rather from a polariton-polariton contact-type coupling due to
QW exciton scattering, as outlined before.
6.3.2
Examples of Strongly Correlated Photonic Systems
As it was mentioned in Sect.6.2.2, the second-order correlation function can be
used as an operational probe of the single-photon nonlinear behavior in a photon
blockade experiment. We argue that the same quantity can also be assessed as a
quantitative probe of the interplay between tunneling and on-site interactions in a
driven-dissipative KH model, and by extension it can potentially be considered as
an analog “order parameter” able to discriminate between globally coherent and
strongly correlated quantum phases out-of-equilibrium. The latter point represents
one of the main motivating scopes in the context of theoretical research activi-
ties connected with strongly correlated photonic systems, requiring the study of
ideal conﬁgurations with inﬁnite number of lattice sites. In such a limit, an ana-
log of the superﬂuid-to-Mott insulator quantum phase transition has been explored
with advanced mean-ﬁeld approaches, extended to the out-of-equilibrium nature of
strongly correlated photonic systems [79]. Recently, a non-equilibrium version of the
celebrated Bose-Hubbard phase diagram has been calculated in steady state under
continuous coherent pumping conditions [80], opening the way to deeper investiga-
tions over the rich many-body physics of driven-dissipative cavity arrays. In fact, the
open nature of photonic systems is responsible for a wealth of unexplored features
due to the interplay of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics, quantum optics, and
many-body physics, which is likely to bring new exciting theoretical developments
in the future.
In this last part of the chapter, we have chosen to review a few topical examples
of strongly correlated photonic systems that can be realized on integrated photonic
crystal platforms with state-of-art technology. The aim is to reveal new features due
to the genuine non-equilibrium interplay of coherent tunneling and on-site interac-

140
D. Gerace et al.
tions, in systems that can be readily accessible and measurable by optical means.
To this aim, and to give a quantitative assessment of the above statement on photon
correlation measurements, we will review a few proposals involving small coupled-
cavity arrays of driven-dissipative elements, and study the interplay between U and J
within the master equation framework. In the following, we will mainly be concerned
with the zero-time delay correlation function in steady state, which can be calculated
by numerically solving the master equation (6.11) with the condition dρ/dt = 0, as
a function of the relevant parameters ratio U/J in Hamiltonian (6.12).
6.3.2.1
Quantum Photonic Devices: A Quantum Optical Josephson
Interferometer
Thephysicsofstronglycorrelatedelectronshasbeenthoroughlyexploredintransport
experiments with mesoscopic devices in the nineties. One of the strongly correlated
electronic devices is a phase-biased Cooper pair transistor, which is a quantum ver-
sion of the Josephson junction. In a common Josephson junction, two macroscopic
superconducting states are separated by an insulating layer. The tunnel current ﬂow-
ing at zero bias through the junction has an oscillating dependence on the phase
difference between the two macroscopic wave functions at the two sides of the insu-
lating barrier, ψ(φ1) = √ρ exp (iφ1) and ψ(φ3) = √ρ exp (iφ3), i.e., I = IJ sin φ
with φ = φ1 −φ3 (DC Josephson effect). The mesoscopic version of this device is
schematically shown in Fig.6.6a, where the insulating layer is substituted with a
gate controlled Cooper pair box. Strong electron correlations can thus inhibit the
Josephson tunnel current when the charging energy of the mesoscopic insulating
island (a superconducting QD) is much larger than the tunneling rate to and from the
superconducting leads, as a direct consequence of strong charge correlations between
Cooper pairs conﬁned on the mesoscopic island, in direct analogy with the Coulomb
blockade [2]. This Josephson interferometer was ﬁrst proposed in [81], and later real-
ized in [82]. Besides these striking demonstrations, the interplay between coherent
tunnel coupling and on-site interactions typical of such strongly correlated systems
has been exploited in many ground-breaking experiments, such as the observation of
a quantum phase transition in Josephson junction arrays [83] and the experimental
test of the number-phase uncertainty principle [84].
The realization of a quantum optical version of a Josephson interferometer in inte-
grated photonic crystal platforms is shown Fig.6.6b: the mesoscopic insulating island
is replaced by a nonlinear resonator, while the macroscopic superconducting phases
have their natural quantum optical analog in coherent states with well-deﬁned phases
[64]. The latter can be simulated either with two external linear cavities (e.g., with a
larger mode volume than the central cavity, such that the single photon nonlinearity
in Eq.6.7 be much smaller than γ), or tunnel coupled photonic crystal waveguides,
as ﬁrst proposed in [18]. The master equation is solved for the corresponding three
sites model adapted from the general Hamiltonian (6.12), where the external sites are
labelledwithindices1and3,respectively,andthecentralnonlinearsiteis2.Whilethe
operation of both electronic and photonic versions is based on the quantum mechani-

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
141
(b)
(a)
g
V
( 1)
e
2
(
3)
Fig. 6.6 a Scheme of a Josephson interferometer based on a Cooper pair island between two
macroscopic superconducting phases, where the island charge state can be modulated through an
external gate voltage (Vg), corresponding to the mesoscopic superconducting device realized in
[82]. b The analog quantum optical device in a nanophotonic platform, where the macroscopic
superconducting states are replaced by coherent states with well deﬁned phase, represented either
by two photonic crystal waveguides or two linear cavities; the charging island is replaced by a
nanocavity with a single-photon nonlinearity. The suppression of Josephson-like oscillations as a
function of the phase difference is shown for light emitted from the central cavity, on increasing
ratio U/J (from Ref. [18]). Panel b reprinted with permission from NPG
cal conjugation between phase and number variables, the quantum optical Josephson
interferometer is an intrinsically open system. Signatures of strong photon correla-
tions can be found either in the light emitted from the central cavity, or in its autocor-
relation function. The ﬁrst quantity is proportional to the average photon population
in the central cavity, which can be calculated as ⟨n2⟩= ⟨ˆa†
2 ˆa2⟩= Tr{ˆa†
2 ˆa2ρss}, where
ρss is the calculated steady state density matrix at weak continuous wave pumping
F/γ ≪1 (we assume γ2 = γ here) and at resonant frequency, ωp = ω2. The result is
shown in Fig.6.6b as a function of the phase difference, φ = φ1 −φ3, and for increas-
ing value of the ratio U/J in the model. For U = 0, regular interference between the
two coherent states occurs in the emitted light intensity from the central cavity, with
an analytic expression ⟨n2⟩= nmax cos2 (φ/2) [18], which is eventually the optical
analog of Josephson current oscillations. In analogy with the mesoscopic Joseph-
son interferometer, also here the increasing photon-photon interaction U/J yields
a suppression of Josephson-like behavior, as clear from the ﬁgure. In the strongly
correlated limit U/J →∞, the average cavity population at φ = 0 (φ = 2π) goes
to the steady state value of ⟨n2⟩= 0.5, as a consequence of the photon number being
locked either on the |0⟩or on the |1⟩Fock states, respectively. Such behavior is wit-
ness of the crossover from the delocalized to the correlated regime: at large hopping
(U ≪J) the state of the system is approximately a coherent state, and phases are

142
D. Gerace et al.
g(2)(0)
<n( =0)>
Fig. 6.7 Second-order correlation function at zero-time delay (results originally published in Ref.
[18]) and steady state population (at φ = 0) for light emitted from the central cavity, as a function
of U/γ and J/γ, respectively. Dashed lines are a guide to the eye, indicating the boundary of the
phase crossover. Reprinted with permission from NPG
well deﬁned, in the sense that there are strong ﬂuctuations in the number operator and
so phase ﬂuctuations are suppressed. In the opposite situation (U ≫J), the number
state is better deﬁned (oscillating between 0 and 1 owing to the photon blockade),
and large phase ﬂuctuations in the central cavity suppress the global coherence of
the system and hence the visibility of Josephson-like oscillations.
It is then interesting to analyze how this crossover reﬂects into the photon statistics
of light emitted from the central cavity. A full picture of this quantitative behavior is
shown in Fig.6.7. Here, g(2)(0) = Tr{ˆa†
2 ˆa†
2 ˆa2 ˆa2ρss}/⟨n2⟩2 and ⟨n2(φ = 0)⟩are plot-
ted versus U/γ and J/γ, respectively. The second-order correlation clearly displays
a neat transition from Poissonian to sub-Poissonian light (antibunched) statistics as
the interaction strength U is increased. The threshold for antibunched light emission
is a function of J. For J ≪γ, the threshold nonlinearity isUth ∼γ, while for J ≫γ,
Uth is linear in J. These two regimes are connected by a smooth crossover region,
which can be deﬁned by the condition g(2)(0) = 0.5. The crossover from Poissonian
to antibunched behavior reﬂects in a clear way the crossover from delocalized to
localized states. As J is increased, the relevant eigenstates of the coupled system
are superpositions of center and outer cavity states while in the opposite case the
good eigenstates are the Fock states due to the onset of photon blockade. A similar
behavior can be recognized in the photon population, for which the strongly corre-
lated region is identiﬁed by ⟨n2(φ = 0)⟩= 0.5 in the phase space deﬁned by U/γ
and J/γ, as evident also from the previous Figure.2
From a fundamental physical perspective, it is worth emphasizing that the main
contribution of the present analogy was to establish the use of photon correlation mea-
surements as effective probes of the interplay between macroscopic coherence and
2We notice that a slightly more complicated behavior, which does not hinder the main conclusions
outlined above, occurs for the system of three coupled cavities, sketched in Fig.6.6b, when the
external resonators have a comparable dissipation rate as the central cavity γ1,3 ∼γ, since the
coupled modes affect the physical response of the system at large J/γ [18].

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
143
interactions in small-scale strongly correlated photonic systems, which may even-
tually contain the key to interpret possible phases of driven-dissipative quantum-
nonlinear cavity-arrays which operate under non-equilibrium conditions. On the
other hand, given the enormous impact of the Josephson devices in electronics,
from metrology to quantum information processing, a quantum optical Josephson
interferometer might also constitute the building block for a new class of quantum
optical devices. As an example, we notice that such a device can also be employed
as a single-photon transistor in an integrated quantum photonic circuit. In fact, the
same system shown in the schematic pictures of Fig.6.6b can be seen as a three-point
device where a single control photon absorbed by the central cavity from the vertical
direction is able to suppress the phase coherence between the two coherent photonic
states propagating in each waveguide channel, where information can be encoded.
Photonic crystal platforms appear particularly suited to this purpose, since the col-
lection efﬁciency of the middle cavity can be increased by far-ﬁeld optimization
techniques, as already shown in Fig.6.3.
6.3.2.2
Out-of-Equilibrium Crossover Between Quantum States:
The Driven-Dissipative Photonic Dimer
To generalize the system described in the previous Section towards multi-cavity
arrays mimicking the physics of strongly correlated systems, but still keeping the
system size at a level that is accessible to exact numerical simulation and/or analytic
solution, we consider a two-site KH model [85], or a photonic dimer, represented
schematically in Fig.6.8 with the corresponding version in a photonic crystal plat-
form. When the two resonators, both assumed nonlinear with the same coefﬁcient
U as in Eq.6.7, are symmetrically pumped at the same rate F/γ ≪1, the statistical
analysis of the light emitted from the system shows a crossover from Poissonian
to antibunched radiation similar to the behavior in Fig.6.7. In particular, we notice
that there is a rather sharp boundary dividing the limiting values g(2)(0) = 1 from
g(2)(0) = 0 as a function of U/γ and J/γ: when the inter-cavity tunneling dominates
(J ≫U) the light emitted is coherent, reﬂecting the statistics of the coherent laser
beams. In fact, in this regime the system state is delocalized over the two cavities
(photons can occupy either the symmetric or the antisymmetric combinations of the
two isolated cavity modes). In the limit of dominant nonlinearity (J ≪U), the emit-
ted light is antibunched as in the single-photon blockade case, since for U ≫J, γ
the number of photons in each cavity can only ﬂuctuate between 0 and 1. However,
it is worth stressing that this case is different from the single cavity photon block-
ade (which is the limit for J = 0 in the present case), since at increasing J/γ the
crossover from g(2)(0) = 1 to g(2)(0) = 0 takes place at larger and larger values of
U/γ (see dashed line in the ﬁgure). Hence, not only more than a single photon per
pump beam will be prevented from entering the corresponding resonator (U ≫γ),
but photons will be prevented from tunneling from one cavity to the other (U ≫J),
being locked on each cavity.

144
D. Gerace et al.
Fig. 6.8 Scheme of the driven-dissipative photonic dimer (upper panel), which can be practically
realized with a photonic crystal molecule in an integrated photonic platform (lower panel). The cor-
responding second-order correlation function at zero-time delay is plotted as a function of U/γ and
J/γ, respectively (results originally published in Ref. [85]). The dashed line is a plot of the function
J(U) corresponding to the condition g(2)(0) = 0.5, marking the crossover boundary. Reprinted
with permission from APS
We can interpret this state as the precursor of a Mott insulating state of photons in
an inﬁnite array of cavities, which requires more sophisticated generalization of the
mean-ﬁeld approach to effectively calculate the signatures of an out-of-equilibrium
quantum phase transition [79]. However, the simplicity of this system also allows
for an analytic solution of the master equation in the steady state condition and for
F/γ ≪1, where truncation of the Hilbert space to maximum double occupancy in
each cavity is justiﬁed. In this case, such an analytic solution perfectly matches the
full numerical one [85]. Interestingly, this simple two-site system already shows a
clear interplay between tunneling and on-site interactions in a steady state condition,
in which the second-order auto-correlation function can be again used as an effective
probe of the quantum phase of the global system and the relative crossover on varying
the system parameters. It has been later shown that, under proper conditions, such
quantity can indeed be used to discriminate between different many-body quantum
states out of equilibrium in driven-dissipative (inﬁnitely extended) cavity arrays
described by the KH model, in close analogy to the mean-ﬁeld order parameter in
the phase diagram of the equilibrium Bose-Hubbard model [80].
6.3.2.3
Photon Fermionization: Out-of-Equilibrium
Tonks-Girardeau Gas
To further assess the use of photon correlation measurements to detect out-of-
equilibrium strongly correlated photonic states, we describe a few sites analog of
a one-dimensional chain of sites occupied by strongly interacting bosons. In the

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
145
a
Fig. 6.9 Schematic representation of a one-dimensional lattice of tunnel-coupled wells, and cor-
responding single-particle wave functions. In the strongly interacting regime, the many-body wave
function has nodes corresponding to multiple occupation of the same potential well
limit of impenetrable bosons in an inﬁnite lattice with periodicity a, as in the scheme
of Fig.6.9, such system is known as the Tonks-Girardeau gas. When U →∞in the
one-dimensional Bose-Hubbard model at thermodynamic equilibrium, the many-
body wave function of the Tonks-Girardeau gas is characterized by nodes whenever
two particles approach each other in the same lattice site, as a direct consequence
of the one-dimensional nature of the lattice. From a mathematical point of view,
it was elegantly shown by Girardeau [7] that a rigorous mapping exists between
the one-dimensional gas of impenetrable bosons and a gas of non-interacting and
spinless fermions. In fact, the energy spectra of the two systems are identical, while
a signature of the strong correlations existing between the bosons is evidenced in
the momentum distributions, which remain instead quite different from the purely
fermionic ones: the pseudo-wave vectors qi ∈[−π/a, π/a] of the fermions occu-
pying the lattice sites (where i = 1 . . . Np runs over the total number of particles)
do not have a direct meaning in terms of physical observables of the bosonic sys-
tem. In particular, they do not correspond to their physical momentum k [7]. A truly
remarkable fact of the Bose-Fermi mapping is that the periodicity condition on the
N-body wavefunction does not directly transfer to the single-particle orbitals of the
fermionized wavefunction: depending on the number Np of particles in the system,
the fermionic orbitals have to fulﬁll either periodic (if Np is odd) or anti-periodic
(if Np is even) boundary conditions [86, 87]. This reﬂects on the quantization of
the pseudo-wavevector q = 2πn/M (if Np is odd) or q = 2π(n + 1/2)/M (if Np
is even), where n is an integer number and M is the number of sites. While it is
practically impossible to detect this difference in a standard realization of the one-
dimensional strongly interacting boson gas with cold atomic clouds [8, 9], a small
number of sites would enable to evidence such a striking feature.
A possible realization of a strongly correlated gas of fermionized photons in an
integrated photonic platform is shown in Fig.6.10a for the smallest possible one-
dimensional chain of photonic crystal nanocavities designed in a triangular lattice
(e.g., three L3 cavities as in Fig.6.3). This system was ﬁrst proposed in [19]. In order
to realize a KH model with uniform next neighbor tunneling rates, J, the cavities can
be placed at 60◦angle from each other (imposed by the triangular symmetry of the
underlying photonic crystal lattice), in a necklace conﬁguration such that periodic
boundary conditions can be realized (i.e., the last cavity of the array corresponds
to the ﬁrst in the Hamiltonian). As sketched in this ﬁgure, such quantum photonic

146
D. Gerace et al.
/3 
2 /3 
- /3 
-2 /3 
ka (rad)
g(2)(i1,i2) 
pump, kp =0 
n(k) 
3
2
1
0
1
2
3
2
1
0
1
2
 
 
Energy (J)
−45
−40
−35
−30
−25
−20
−15
10
−3
10
−2
10
−1
10
0
Δω  /γ
p
n abs
U/J=0.25
U/J=1
U/J=1.7
U/J=2.8
U/J=4.5
U/J=11.8
U/J=50
Np odd
Np even
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 6.10 a Realization of an out-of-equilibrium Tonks-Girardeau gas of interacting photons in
a photonic crystal platform, made of a necklace of three tunnel-coupled nanocavities at 60◦in a
triangular lattice photonic crystal. b The quantized momenta for even and odd number of particles,
respectively, is superimposed to the ideal dispersion of an inﬁnitely extended one-dimensional chain
of lattices; the one-dimensional band dispersion is plotted in units of J, giving a total bandwidth 4J
as in usual tight-binding schemes. c Absorption spectra of the photonic array for ﬁxed J/γ = 20
and increasing ratio U/J, showing convergence of the high-energy absorption peak towards the
Np = 2 state, i.e., the asymptotic value (for U →∞) Δωp = −J (results originally published in
Ref. [19]). Reprinted with permission from APS
systemprovidesexperimentalaccesstoawiderrangeofobservablesthaninultra-cold
atoms, from spectroscopic measures of absorption and transmission, to correlation
measurementsoftheout-of-placeemittedradiation.Thepeculiarpseudo-wavevector
quantization rule outlined above is shown, as an example, in Fig.6.10b, which exactly
describes the case with M = 3. The quantized momenta are superimposed to the
one-dimensional cosine-like band dispersion of the ideally inﬁnite lattice, with a
bandwidth 4J around the reference energy level (i.e., the bare cavity frequency ω0
in this case). After the numerical solution of the master equation in steady state,
Fig.6.10c shows the calculated absorption for different values of the ratio U/J (at
ﬁxed J/γ = 20), as a function of the pump frequency detuning from the bare cavities
frequency, Δωp = ωp −ω0, for a pump rate F/γ = 0.5 and pump wave vector kp =
0. Evidently, the main peak at Δωp = −2J corresponds to absorption from the
resonance of the one particle state with q = 0. The additional feature that emerges
in the strongly interacting regime (U/J ≫1) is clearly related to the two-particle
state, which is well captured by the lowest fermionized state with the pairs of photons

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
147
i1 = i2
i1 = i2
Fig. 6.11 The Np = 2 absorption peak at different Δωp is tracked as a function of U/J: at large
nonlinearity, the absorption peak occurs closer and closer to the limiting pump detuning Δωp = −J.
The dashed lines represent the asymptotic values in the dilute (U/J ≪1) and strongly interacting
(U/J ≫1) limits, respectively. In the lower panel, the corresponding cross- and auto-correlation
functions at zero time-delay are shown as a function of U/J
(Np = 2) occupying pseudo-momenta orbitals with q = ±π/3. We notice that the
half-integer value of the pseudo-momentum is a clear signature of the fermionization,
and reﬂects in the asymptotic position of the peak at Δωp/J = −2 cos(π/3) = −1.
As already shown in the previous examples, further information on the micro-
scopic nature of the many-body physics of the system can be obtained by the inten-
sity correlations of the emitted light. In the present case, we can generally deﬁne the
correlation functions on the necklace as
g(2)
i1,i2(τ = 0) =
⟨ˆa†
i1 ˆa†
i2 ˆai2 ˆai1⟩
⟨ˆa†
i1 ˆai1⟩⟨ˆa†
i2 ˆai2⟩
,
(6.14)
where i1,2 labels the site, and the auto (cross) correlation is for i1 = i2 (i1 ̸= i2).
These two functions are plotted in the lower panel of Fig.6.11 as a function of U/J,
for a pump frequency tuned exactly on resonance with the (U/J-dependent) two-
photon transition, whose peak is tracked in the upper panel of the same Figure.
When the system is dilute, or weakly interacting (U/J ≪1), the resonance peaks
corresponding to different values of Np overlap, hence the emitted light inherits
the Poissonian statistics of the coherent pump, g(2)
i1,i2(τ = 0) →1. In the opposite,
strongly interacting regime (U/J ≫1) the two-particle state has the fermionized
form similar to the Tonks-Girardeau gas. As a consequence, for the Np = 2 state
there is a large probability that the pair of photons occupies different sites (strong
bunching in the cross-correlation function), while little probability that they be on
the same site (strong antibunching of autocorrelation). This is a striking operational
demonstration of a genuine, out-of-equilibrium fermionization of a strongly inter-
acting gas of photons on-chip. It is worth mentioning that different aspects of the

148
D. Gerace et al.
steady state of an array of nonlinear and lossy optical resonators driven by coherent
lasers have been later addressed in [88]. In particular, for weak driving intensity the
steady state has been shown to be dominated by interactions in such a way that pho-
ton crystallize into dimers localized on neighboring sites and anticorrelations appear
between distant sites.
6.4
Conclusions and Outlook
In summary, we have presented an overview of the rich possibilities offered by inte-
grated photonic platforms made of two-dimensional photonic crystal lattices pat-
terned in thin ﬁlm semiconductors for the realization of strongly correlated photonic
systems. Such systems allow to design and realize low-loss waveguides and cavities
for photon propagation and conﬁnement on-chip. We have described their essential
physics, and the enhanced nonlinearities that can be envisioned. Coupled multi-cavity
arrays and waveguides in photonic crystal platforms could allow to fully address the
interplay between tunneling and photon correlations on chip. The driven-dissipative
nature of the photon gas is responsible for a wealth of unexplored features due to
the interplay of non-equilibrium statistical mechanics, quantum optics, and many-
body physics. Regarding strongly correlated photonic systems potentially realized
in such platforms, we have described small scale systems, fully compatible with
state-of-the art fabrication capabilities, where the interplay between inter-site inter-
actions and on-site correlations can be meaningfully probed. In particular, we have
concentrated on quantities of direct experimental access in photonics, such as ﬁeld
intensities, transmission or reﬂection, photon correlations. With respect to the latter,
we have shown in systems of increasing complexity how the second-order correlation
function of emitted photons can represent a key probe allowing to operationally dis-
criminate between delocalized and strongly correlated regimes, even under typical
driven-dissipative conditions of open quantum photonic systems.
The ﬁeld of strongly correlated photonic systems is a relatively new one, and as
such a large number of questions are still calling for a theoretical assessment and/or
new experimental ways of being addressed. In this respect, nanophotonic platforms
are likely to play an important role in the emerging activity aimed at probing the ﬁrst
theoretical predictions made in the past few years, as well as preparing the ground
for the new questions that will certainly arise. In perspective, we can identify a few
research direction that will deﬁnitely beneﬁt from developing strongly correlated
photonic systems on-chip, besides unravelling the open questions regarding out-of-
equilibrium statistical mechanics. On one side, the interplay of artiﬁcial gauge ﬁelds
and strongly correlated photonic systems might lead to the generation of topologi-
cally nontrivial states of a photon gas, such as out-of-equilibrium Laughlin [89] or
Majorana [90] states. On another side, driven-dissipative cavity arrays might become
the preferential platform to engineer continuous-variable bipartite and quadripartite
entanglement, and eventually cluster entangled states [91], with potential impact on
a photonics-based quantum information architecture in the near future. Finally, the

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
149
increasing interest in quantum simulators is a further arena where nanophotonic cir-
cuits of strongly correlated photons could play a key role [92]. In fact, even if the
idea of simulating quantum matter with other well-controlled quantum systems has
found its most straightforward realization with ultra-cold atoms in optical lattices,
it is nevertheless true that open systems-based quantum simulators provide a novel
complement by naturally accessing non-equilibrium physics.
Acknowledgements This chapter was meant to provide a short review of some of our research
works on strongly correlated photonic systems in integrated photonic platforms. For all these contri-
butions, and for fruitful inspiration and several useful discussions, we are indebted to L.C. Andreani,
S. De Liberato, R. Fazio, S. Ferretti, M. Galli, V. Giovannetti, A. Imamoˇglu, V. Savona, and H.E.
Türeci.
References
1. A.C. Hewson, The Kondo Problem to Heavy Fermions (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1993)
2. U. Meirav, E.B. Foxman, Semicond. Sci. Technol. 11, 255 (1996)
3. D. Jaksch, C. Bruder, J.I. Cirac, C.W. Gardiner, P. Zoller, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 3108 (1998)
4. M. Greiner, O. Mandel, T. Esslinger, T.W. Hänsch, I. Bloch, Nature 415, 39 (2002)
5. M.P.A. Fisher, P.B. Weichman, G. Grinstein, D.S. Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 40, 546 (1989)
6. S. Sachdev, Quantum Phase Transitions (Cambridge University Press, New York, 2011)
7. M.D. Girardeau, J. Math. Phys. 1, 516 (1960)
8. B. Paredes et al., Nature 429, 277 (2004)
9. T. Kinoshita, T. Wenger, D.S. Weiss, Science 305, 1125 (2004)
10. M.A. Cazalilla, R. Citro, T. Giamarchi, E. Orignac, M. Rigol, Rev. Mod. Phys. 83, 1405 (2011)
11. A. Imamoˇglu, H. Schmidt, G. Woods, M. Deutsch, Phys. Rev. Lett. 79, 1467 (1997)
12. K.M. Birnbaum, A. Boca, R. Miller, A.D. Boozer, T.E. Northup, H.J. Kimble, Nature 436, 87
(2005)
13. A. Faraon, I. Fushman, D. Englund, N. Stoltz, P. Petroff, J. Vuˇckovi´c, Nat. Phys. 4, 859 (2008)
14. A. Reinhard, T. Volz, M. Winger, A. Badolato, K.J. Hennessy, E.L. Hu, A. Imamoˇglu, Nat.
Photon. 6, 93 (2012)
15. M.J. Hartmann, F.G.S.L. Brandão, M.B. Plenio, Nat. Phys. 2, 849 (2006)
16. A.D. Greentree, C. Tahan, J.H. Cole, L.C.L. Hollenberg, Nat. Phys. 2, 856 (2006)
17. D.G. Angelakis, M.F. Santos, S. Bose, Phys. Rev. A 76, 031805(R) (2007)
18. D. Gerace, H.E. Türeci, A. Imamoˇglu, V. Giovannetti, R. Fazio, Nat. Phys. 5, 281 (2009)
19. I. Carusotto, D. Gerace, H.E. Türeci, S. De Liberato, C. Ciuti, A. Imamoˇglu, Phys. Rev. Lett.
103, 033601 (2009)
20. J.L. O’Brien, A. Furusawa, J. Vuˇckovi´c, Nat. Photon. 3, 687 (2009)
21. O. El Daïf, A. Baas, T. Guillet, J.-P. Brantut, R. Idrissi, Kaitouni, J.L. Staehli, F. Morier-Genoud,
B. Deveaud, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 061105 (2006)
22. M. Liscidini, D. Gerace, D. Sanvitto, D. Bajoni, Appl. Phys. Lett. 98, 121118 (2011)
23. J.M. Gérard, D. Barrier, J.Y. Marzin, R. Kuszelewicz, L. Manin, E. Costard, V. Thierry-Mieg,
T. Rivera, Appl. Phys. Lett. 69, 449 (1996)
24. G. Panzarini, L.C. Andreani, Phys. Rev. B 60, 16799 (1999)
25. L.C. Andreani, in Electron and Photon Conﬁnement in Semiconductor Nanostructures, ed. by
B. Deveaud, A. Quattropani, P. Schwendimann (IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2003), p. 105
26. I. Carusotto, C. Ciuti, Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 299 (2013)
27. S. Pirotta, M. Patrini, M. Liscidini, M. Galli, G. Dacarro, G. Canazza, G. Guizzetti, D.
Comoretto, D. Bajoni, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 051111 (2014)

150
D. Gerace et al.
28. G. Lerario, A. Cannavale, D. Ballarini, L. Dominici, M. De Giorgi, M. Liscidini, D. Gerace,
D. Sanvitto, G. Gigli, Opt. Lett. 39, 2068 (2014)
29. M. Notomi, A. Shinya, A. Mitsugi, S. Kuramochi, H.Y. Ryu, Opt. Express 12, 551 (2004)
30. S.J. McNab, N. Moll, Y.A. Vlasov, Opt. Express 11, 2927 (2003)
31. Y. Sugimoto, Y. Tanaka, N. Ikeda, Y. Nakamura, K. Asakawa, K. Inoue, Opt. Express 12, 1090
(2004)
32. L. O’Faolain, X. Yuan, D. McIntyre, S. Thoms, H. Chong, R.M. De La Rue, T.F. Krauss,
Electron. Lett. 42, 1454 (2006)
33. Y. Takahashi, H. Hagino, Y. Tanaka, B.S. Song, T. Asano, S. Noda, Opt. Express 15, 17206
(2007)
34. M. Notomi, Rep. Prog. Phys. 73, 096501 (2010)
35. J.D. Joannopoulos, S.G. Johnson, J.N. Winn, R.D. Meade, Photonic Crystals: Molding the
Flow of Light (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2008)
36. K. Aoki, D. Guimard, M. Nishioka, M. Nomura, S. Iwamoto, Y. Arakawa, Nat. Photon. 2, 688
(2008)
37. J.M. van den Broek, L.A. Woldering, R.W. Tjerkstra, F.B. Segerink, I.D. Setija, W.L. Vos, Adv.
Mater. 22, 25 (2012)
38. T. Ochiai, K. Sakoda, Phys. Rev. B 64, 045108 (2001)
39. L.C. Andreani, D. Gerace, Phys. Rev. B 73, 235114 (2006)
40. A. Yariv, P. Yeh, Photonics: Optical electronics in modern communications (Oxford University
Press, New York, 2007)
41. D. Gerace, L.C. Andreani, Opt. Lett. 29, 1897 (2004)
42. Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B.S. Song, S. Noda, Nature 425, 944 (2003)
43. L.C. Andreani, D. Gerace, M. Agio, Photon. Nanostruct. Fundam. Appl. 2, 103 (2004)
44. H. Sekoguchi, Y. Takahashi, T. Asano, S. Noda, Opt. Express 22, 916 (2014)
45. Y. Lai, S. Pirotta, G. Urbinati, D. Gerace, M. Minkov, V. Savona, A. Badolato, M. Galli, Appl.
Phys. Lett. (to be published, May 2014)
46. S. Combrié, A. De Rossi, Q.V. Tran, H. Benisty, Opt. Letters 33, 1908 (2008)
47. N.-V.-Q. Tran, S. Combrié, A. De Rossi, Phys. Rev. B 79, 041101(R) (2009)
48. S.L. Portalupi, M. Galli, C. Reardon, T.F. Krauss, L. O’Faolain, L.C. Andreani, D. Gerace,
Opt. Express 18, 16064 (2010)
49. D. Gerace, L.C. Andreani, Phys. Rev. B 75, 235325 (2007)
50. J. Kasprzak, M. Richard, S. Kundermann, A. Baas, P. Jeambrun, J.M.J. Keeling, F.M. Marchetti,
M.H. Szyma´nska, R. André, J.L. Staehli, V. Savona, P.B. Littlewood, B. Deveaud, L.S. Dang,
Nature 443, 409 (2006)
51. D. Bajoni, D. Gerace, M. Galli, J. Bloch, R. Braive, I. Sagnes, A. Miard, A. Lemaître, M.
Patrini, L.C. Andreani, Phys. Rev. B 80, 201308(R) (2009)
52. S. Azzini, D. Gerace, M. Galli, I. Sagnes, R. Braive, A. Lemaître, J. Bloch, D. Bajoni, Appl.
Phys. Lett. 99, 111106 (2011)
53. A. Faraon, C. Santori, Z. Huang, V.M. Acosta, R.G. Beausoleil, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 033604
(2012)
54. D. Englund, I. Fushman, A. Faraon, J. Vuˇckovi´c, Photon. Nanostruct. Fundam. Appl. 7, 56
(2009)
55. R. Bose, D. Sridharan, G. Solomon, E. Waks, Opt. Express 19, 5398 (2011)
56. N. Caselli, F. Intonti, F. Riboli, A. Vinattieri, D. Gerace, L. Balet, L.H. Li, M. Francardi, A.
Gerardino, A. Fiore, M. Gurioli, Phys. Rev. B 86, 035133 (2012)
57. A. Majumdar, A. Rundquist, M. Bajcsy, V.D. Dasika, S.R. Bank, J. Vuˇckovi´c, Phys. Rev. B 86,
195312 (2012)
58. N. Caselli, F. Intonti, C. Bianchi, F. Riboli, S. Vignolini, L. Balet, L.H. Li, M. Francardi, A.
Gerardino, A. Fiore, M. Gurioli, Appl. Phys. Lett. 101, 211108 (2013)
59. T. Cai, R. Bose, G.S. Solomon, E. Waks, Appl. Phys. Lett. 102, v141118 (2013)
60. R. Boyd, Nonlinear Optics (Academic Press, California, 1992)
61. P.D. Drummond, D.F. Walls, J. Phys. A 13, 725 (1980)
62. S. Ferretti, D. Gerace, Phys. Rev. B 85, 033303 (2012)

6
Strongly Correlated Photons in Nonlinear Nanophotonic Platforms
151
63. M.J. Werner, A. Imamoˇglu, Phys. Rev. A 61, 011801(R) (1999)
64. R. Loudon, The Quantum Theory of Light (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2003)
65. M. Galli, D. Gerace, K. Welna, T.F. Krauss, L. O’Faolain, G. Guizzetti, L.C. Andreani, Opt.
Express 18, 26613 (2010)
66. L. Tian, H.J. Carmichael, Phys. Rev. A 46, 6801(R) (1992)
67. E.T. Jaynes, F.W. Cummings, Proc. IEEE 51, 89 (1963)
68. L.C. Andreani, G. Panzarini, J.-M. Gérard, Phys. Rev. B 60, 13276 (1999)
69. S. Rebi´c, A.S. Parkins, S.M. Tan, Phys. Rev. A 69, 035804 (2004)
70. K. Hennessy, A. Badolato, M. Winger, D. Gerace, M. Atatüre, S. Gülde, S. Fält, E. Hu, A.
Imamoˇglu, Nature 445, 896 (2007)
71. A. Verger, C. Ciuti, I. Carusotto, Phys. Rev. B 73, 193306 (2006)
72. I. Carusotto, T. Volz, A. Imamoˇglu, Europhys. Lett. 90, 37001 (2010)
73. A. Majumdar, D. Gerace, Phys. Rev. B 87, 235319 (2013)
74. T.C.H. Liew, V. Savona, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 183601 (2010)
75. M. Bamba, A. Imamoˇglu, I. Carusotto, C. Ciuti, Phys. Rev. A 83, 021802(R) (2011)
76. H.J. Carmichael, An Open Systems Approach to Quantum Optics (Springer, Berlin, 1993)
77. T. Grujic, S.R. Clark, D. Jaksch, D.G. Angelakis, New J. Phys. 14, 103025 (2012)
78. F. Nissen, S. Schmidt, M. Biondi, G. Blatter, H.E. Türeci, J. Keeling, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108,
233603 (2012)
79. A. Tomadin, V. Giovannetti, R. Fazio, D. Gerace, I. Carusotto, H.E. Türeci, A. Imamoˇglu,
Phys. Rev. A 81, 061801(R) (2010)
80. A. La Boité, G. Orso, C. Ciuti, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 233601 (2013)
81. K.A. Matveev, M. Gisselfält, L.I. Glazman, M. Jonson, R.I. Shekhter, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2940
(1993)
82. P. Joyez, P. Lafarge, A. Filipe, D. Esteve, M.H. Devoret, Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 2458 (1994)
83. L.J. Geerligs, L.E.M. de Groot, A. Verbruggen, J.E. Mooji, Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 326 (1989)
84. W.J. Elion, M. Matters, U. Geigenmüller, J.E. Mooji, Nature 371, 594 (1994)
85. S. Ferretti, L.C. Andreani, H.E. Türeci, D. Gerace, Phys. Rev. A 82, 013841 (2010)
86. E.H. Lieb, W. Liniger, Phys. Rev. 130, 1605 (1963)
87. I. Carusotto, Y. Castin, New J. Phys. 5, 91 (2003)
88. M.J. Hartmann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 113601 (2010)
89. R.O. Umucalilar, I. Carusotto, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 206809 (2012)
90. C.E. Bardyn, A. Imamoˇglu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 253606 (2012)
91. T.C.H. Liew, V. Savona, New J. Phys. 15, 025015 (2013)
92. A.A. Houck, H.E. Türeci, J. Koch, Nat. Phys. 8, 292 (2012)

Chapter 7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum
Electrodynamics
Guillermo Romero, Enrique Solano and Lucas Lamata
Abstract Superconducting circuits have become a leading quantum platform for the
implementation of quantum information tasks. Here, we revise the basic concepts of
circuit network theory and circuit quantum electrodynamics for the sake of analog
and digital quantum simulations with microwave photons in superconducting circuit
lattices. We prove that superconducting circuits are a promising quantum technology
for building scalable quantum simulators, enjoying unique and distinctive properties
when compared to more advanced platforms as trapped ions and optical lattices.
7.1
Introduction
Nowadays, the ﬁeld of quantum simulations [1–7] is one of the most active in quan-
tum information science. Following the original idea by Feynman [8], and its sub-
sequent development by Lloyd [9], this ﬁeld has experienced a signiﬁcant growth
in the last decade. The motivation is the fact that a large quantum system cannot
be efﬁciently simulated with a classical computer due to the exponential growth of
the Hilbert space dimension with the number of quantum subsystems. On the other
hand, it should be feasible to reproduce the dynamics of quantum systems making
use of other, controllable, quantum platforms, which constitute a quantum simulator.
G. Romero (B)
Departamento de Física, Universidad de Santiago de Chile (USACH),
Avenida Ecuador 3493, 9170124 Santiago, Chile
e-mail: guillermo.romero@usach.cl
E. Solano · L. Lamata
Department of Physical Chemistry, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU,
Apartado 644, 48080 Bilbao, Spain
e-mail: enr.solano@gmail.com
L. Lamata
e-mail: lucas.lamata@gmail.com
E. Solano
IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Maria Diaz de Haro 3,
48013 Bilbao, Spain
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
D.G. Angelakis (ed.), Quantum Simulations with Photons and Polaritons,
Quantum Science and Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-52025-4_7
153

154
G. Romero et al.
Superconducting circuits [10–12] and circuit quantum electrodynamics (QED) [13–
15] represent prime candidates to implement a quantum simulator with interacting
microwave photons because of their scalability and controllability. There have been
already some proposals for quantum simulations in superconducting qubits, as is the
case of the quantum simulation of Anderson and Kondo lattices [16], sudden phase
switching in a superconducting qubit array [17], molecular collisions [18], quantum
phases [19], Holstein polarons [20], and quantum magnetism [21, 22]. Moreover,
two pioneering experiments on digital quantum simulators of fermions [23] and spins
[24] have been performed.
Inthis chapter, weintroducethemainconcepts of superconductingcircuits andcir-
cuit QED, and their performance as a quantum simulator with interacting microwave
photons. In particular, in Sect. 7.2, we will describe the circuit network theory and
the Hamiltonian description of a quantum circuit. In Sect. 7.3, we provide an intro-
duction to circuit QED and cavity-cavity coupling mechanism, pointing out the cou-
pling regimes of light-matter interaction as building blocks for circuit QED lattices.
In Sect. 7.4, we discuss the analog quantum simulation of many-body states of light
and relativistic phenomena. In addition, in Sect. 7.5, we present our recent proposals
of digital quantum simulations in circuit QED, such as spin chains and quantum ﬁeld
theories. Finally, in Sect. 7.6, we present our concluding remarks.
7.2
Circuit Network Theory
Nowadays, integrated quantum circuits [10–12] have become a leading technology
for quantum information processing and quantum simulations. These devices present
noticeable features such as scalability, controllability, and tunable physical parame-
ters which in turn allow us to engineer complex Hamiltonians. In this sense, it is
important to understand how an integrated circuit shows its quantum nature, and
how to design two-level systems or qubits. To achieve it, there are three features
that one should point out: (i) ultra-low dissipation provided by superconductivity,
(ii) ultra-low noise reached by low temperatures, and (iii) nonlinear, non dissipative
elements implemented by Josephson junctions.
(i) Ultra-low dissipation. In an integrated circuit, all the metallic parts have to
be made out of superconducting materials with negligible resistance at the
qubit operating temperature and at the qubit frequency transition. In particular,
current experiments make use of low temperature superconductors [25] such as
aluminum or niobium which in turn allow quantum signals to propagate without
experiencing dissipation, thus any encoded quantum information may preserve
its coherence.
(ii) Ultra-low noise. In a physical realization one can access qubit energies ℏωq
that belong to the range 1–10GHz. In order to avoid thermal ﬂuctuations that
may spoil the quantum coherence of qubits, integrated circuits must be cooled
down to temperatures of about T ≈20mK. In general, the energy scales that

7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
155
Fig. 7.1 a Schematic
representation of a
Josephson junction. It
consists of two bulk
superconductors linked by a
thin insulator layer (≈2nm).
b In the zero-voltage state, a
JJ can be characterized by a
critical current IJ and a
capacitance CJ . c In circuit
network theory, a JJ can be
described by a single cross
that links two nodes
(a)
(b)
S
I
S
IJ
CJ
(c)
appear in the system should satisfy the conditions kT ≪ℏωq and ℏωq ≪Δ,
where Δ is the energy gap of the superconducting material.
(iii) Nonlinear, non dissipative elements. In order to engineer and manipulate two-
level systems, it is necessary the access to a device that allows unequal spaced
energy levels at the zero-voltage state, where no dissipative current ﬂows
through it. These conditions are matched by tunnel junctions [26] as depicted
in Fig.7.1. The Josephson junction (JJ) is a device that consists of two bulk
superconductors linked by a thin insulator layer, typically of 1–2nm.
7.2.1
Hamiltonian Description of a Circuit Network
In general, an electrical circuit network is formed by an array of branches and nodes
as depicted in Fig.7.2a. Each branch may contain linear or non linear devices such as
inductors, capacitors, or Josephson junctions, and it can be characterized by a branch
ﬂux (φb) and a branch charge (qb) which are deﬁned in terms of the branch voltages
and branch currents (see Fig.7.2b) by
φb(t) =
 t
t0
dt′ Vb(t′),
(7.1)
qb(t) =
 t
t0
dt′ Ib(t′).
(7.2)
However, these variables do not constitute the degrees of freedom of the circuit
because they are linked by the circuit topology through Kirchhoff’s laws. Indeed, the
sum of all voltages around a closed path Γ has to be zero 
Γ [b] Vb = 0. In addition,
the sum of all currents of branches tied to a node has to be zero 
ν[b] Ib = 0, where
ν determines a speciﬁc node of the network.

156
G. Romero et al.
node
branch
b
(a)
(b)
ν
Γ
Vb(t)
Ib(t)
Fig. 7.2 a Electrical circuit network formed by an array of branches and nodes. Each branch may
contain an inductor, a capacitor, or a Josephson junction. b A single branch is characterized by a
voltage drop Vb(t) and a current Ib(t). As in a classical electrical circuit, one has to choose the sign
convention for currents and voltages, and the Kirchhoff’s laws allow us to compute the classical
motion equations
In order to describe the dynamics of an electrical circuit, one should identify
the independent coordinates φn, their associated velocities ˙φn, and to formulate the
corresponding Lagrangian L(φn, ˙φn) = T −V , where T and V stand for the kinetic
and potential energies, respectively. A detailed analysis of this procedure can be
found in Refs. [27–29], and here we summarize the main concepts.
In circuit theory, one can deﬁne node ﬂuxes (φn) which are variables located at
the nodes of the network. These variables depend on a particular description of the
topology of the circuit, and such a description is based on the spanning tree concept
presented in Ref. [27]. Speciﬁcally, one of the nodes is chosen to be the reference by
letting them to act as the ground, say φN = 0. From the ground node one chooses a
unique path that connects to the active nodes without closing loops. Figure7.3 shows
two possible choices of node ﬂuxes and the spanning tree (T). The latter deﬁnes two
kind of branches in the network: the set of branches that belong to the spanning
tree (blue branches), and the set of closure (C) branches each associated with an
irreducible loop (grey branches). In terms of node ﬂuxes, each branch belonging
to the spanning tree can be deﬁned as φb(T ) = φn+1 −φn. In addition, the closure
branches must be treated in a special way because of the constraint imposed by
the ﬂux quantization [25]. The above condition establishes that for a closed loop
threaded by an external magnetic ﬂux ext, the sum of all ﬂux branches that belong
to that loop satisﬁes the rule 
Γ [b] φb −ext = m0, where 0 = h/2e is the ﬂux
quantum, and m is an integer. In this sense, the treatment for a closure branch follows
the relation φb(C) = (φn+1 −φn) −ext.

7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
157
(b)
(a)
g
g
φ1
φ2
φ3
φ4
φ5
φ1
φ2
φ3
φ4
φ5
Fig. 7.3 Two possible choices of the spanning tree in an electrical circuit. From the ground node
φN = 0, one chooses single paths that pass through a branch (blue branches) to connect actives
nodes. The remaining branches (grey branches) that close a loop have a special treatment due to
the ﬂux quantization condition
The building blocks of a general electrical circuit are capacitors, inductors, and
Josephson junctions. From these elements it is possible to formulate the correspond-
ing Lagrangian by taking into account their corresponding energies as follows
T = C j
2 ( ˙φn+1 −˙φn)2,
(7.3)
V =
1
2L j
(φn+1 −φn)2,
(7.4)
VJ J = C j,J
2 ( ˙φn+1 −˙φn)2 −E j,J cos
φn+1 −φn
ϕ0

,
(7.5)
where C j, L j, C j,J, and E j,J stand for the jth capacitance, inductance, Josephson
capacitance, and Josephson energy, respectively. This procedure allows us to know
the matrix capacitance of the system which, in turn, allows us to formulate the
Hamiltonian through a Legendre transformation.
7.3
Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
Nowadays, quantum technologies offer a testbed for fundamentals and novel applica-
tions of quantum mechanics. In particular, circuit QED [13–15] has become a leading
platform due to its controllability and scalability, with different realizations involving
the interaction between on-chip microwave resonators and superconducting circuits

158
G. Romero et al.
which in turn allow to implement transmon, ﬂux, or phase qubits [12]. Here, we
brieﬂy describe the interaction between a coplanar waveguide resonator (CWR) and
a superconducting circuit be transmon [30] or ﬂux qubit [31]. This in turn will per-
mit us to introduce the Jaynes-Cummings (JC) Hamiltonian [32] and the quantum
Rabi Hamiltonian [33] that form the building blocks for analog quantum simulations
of many-body physics. In addition, we also describe some physical mechanism for
the interaction between microwave resonators, allowing us to consider circuit QED
lattices with interacting microwave photons.
7.3.1
Circuit QED with a Transmon Qubit
Circuit QED with a transmon qubit ﬁnds applications in quantum information
processing (QIP), where it is possible to implement single- and two-qubit quan-
tum gates [34–40], and three-qubit entanglement generation [41–43]. These pro-
posals ﬁnd a common basis in the light-matter interaction described by the Jaynes-
Cummings model [32].
Figure7.4a represents the electrostatic coupling between a quarter-wave cavity
and a transmon qubit, as implemented in current experiments [44]. For the lowest
cavity eigenfrequency, the spatial distribution of the voltage V (x) follows the proﬁle
shown in Fig.7.4c. Here, the transmon has to be located at the cavity end to assure
a maximum coupling strength. Figure7.4b shows the effective circuit for the above
situation. Two Josephson junctions with capacitance CJ and Josephson energy E J are
shunted by an additional large capacitance CI. This system is coupled to the cavity,
with capacitance and inductance Cr and Lr, by a comparably large gate capacitance
Cc. In addition, the transmon is coupled to an external source of dc voltage Vg through
the capacitance Cg. It is noteworthy to mention that the capacitances CI, Cc, and Cg
represent effective quantities seen by the transmon, see Ref. [30].
The effective Hamiltonian of the joint cavity-transmon system reads
H = 4EC(n −ng)2 −E J cos ϕ + ℏωra†a + 2iβeV 0
rmsn(a −a†),
(7.6)
where n and ϕ stand for the number of Cooper pairs transferred between the
islands and the gauge-invariant phase difference between them, respectively. In
addition, a(a†) annihilates(creates) a single photon of frequency ωr, EC = e2/2C
is the charging energy, with C = CI + CJ + Cc + Cg is the total capacitance
associated with the transmon, ng = CgVg/2e is the effective offset charge, and
V 0
rms = √ℏωr/2Cr.
The transmon qubit is less sensitive to charge noise due to an added shunting
capacitance CI between the superconducting islands [30]. This lowers EC, resulting
in an energy ratio of E J/EC ≈50. In this case, the two lowest energy levels have an
energy splitting that can be approximated by
ℏωq ≈

8EC Emax
J
| cos(πext/0)| −EC.
(7.7)

7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
159
Flux line
Cavity
Readout/Driving
Cr
CI
Cc
Lr
EJ
EJ
Φext
Φext
EJ1
EJ2
EJ3
EJ4
Flux qubit
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
V x
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
0
Cg
Vg
Transmon 
Fig. 7.4 Schematic of circuit QED with a transmon qubit. a A λ/4 cavity is capacitively coupled
to a transmon device. It is also shown the ﬂux line that provides an external magnetic ﬁeld threading
a SQUID loop, and an additional cavity for measuring and driving the qubit. b Effective lumped
circuit element of the cavity-transmon system. c Voltage distribution for a λ/4 cavity, where ℓstands
for the cavity length. d A ﬂux qubit formed by three Josephson junctions is galvanically coupled to
an inhomogeneous cavity by means of a fourth junction with Josephson energy EJ4. This kind of
coupling allows us to reach the ultrastrong coupling regime
Notice that the qubit energy can be tuned by an external magnetic ﬂux ext applied to
the superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID), see Fig.7.4b. In this two-
level approximation, the dynamics of the cavity-transmon system can be described
by the Jaynes-Cummings Hamiltonian [32]
HJC = ℏωq
2 σz + ℏωra†a + ℏg(σ+a + σ−a†),
(7.8)
which exhibits a continuous U(1) symmetry. Here, the two-level system is described
by the Pauli matrices σ j ( j = x, y, z), and g is the cavity-qubit coupling strength.
Notice that working at or near resonance (ωq ∼ωr), the above Hamiltonian holds
true in the rotating-wave approximation (RWA) where the system parameters satisfy
the condition {g, |ωq −ωr|} ≪ωq + ωr.
7.3.2
Circuit QED with a Flux Qubit
Circuit QED can also be implemented by means of the inductive interaction between
the persistent-current qubit [31], or ﬂux qubit, and a microwave cavity [15]. This

160
G. Romero et al.
speciﬁc scenario has pushed the technology to reach the ultrastrong coupling (USC)
regime [45–50] of light-matter interaction, where the qubit-cavity coupling strength
reaches a considerable fraction of the cavity frequency. In particular, two experiments
have shown a cavity-qubit coupling strength g = 0.12ωr with a ﬂux qubit galvani-
cally coupled to an inhomogeneous cavity [49] (see Fig.7.4d), and to a lumped circuit
element [50] where the Bloch-Siegert shift has been observed. In both experiments,
the RWA does not allow to explain the observed spectra. However, it has been shown
that the system properties can be described by the quantum Rabi Hamiltonian [33]
HRabi = ℏωq
2 σz + ℏωra†a + ℏgσx(a + a†).
(7.9)
Unlike the JC dynamics in Eq. (7.8), the quantum Rabi Hamiltonian exhibits a
discrete parity (Z2) symmetry which establishes a paradigm in the way of under-
standing the light-matter interaction. For instance, it has been shown in Ref. [51]
that the dissipative dynamics is not longer described by standard master equations
of quantum optics [52]. In addition, the USC regime may have applications such as
parity-protected quantum computing [53], and ultrafast quantum gates [54].
The quantum Rabi Hamiltonian allows also to describe the deep strong coupling
(DSC) regime [55], where the coupling strength is similar or larger than the cavity
frequency. This coupling regime has interesting consequences in the breakdown of
the Purcell effect [56], and it has also been simulated in a waveguide array [57].
7.3.3
Cavity-Cavity Interaction Mechanisms
The versatility of superconducting circuits allow us to design complex arrays involv-
ing the interaction among several microwave cavities. There are two possible physical
mechanisms to couple them, that is, by means of the capacitive coupling of two half
wave cavities (Fig.7.5a), or two quarter wave cavities via current-current coupling
mediated by a SQUID (Fig.7.5b). In both cases, it is possible to show that the cavity-
cavity interaction can be described by a nearest-neighbor Hamiltonian
H = ℏ

n
ωna†
nan + ℏ

⟨n,n′⟩
Jnn′a†
nan′,
(7.10)
where an(a†
n) stands for the annihilation(creation) operator associated with the nth
mode of frequency ωn. Here, we assume the RWA in the hopping term provided by
the condition {Jnn′, |ωn −ωn′|} ≪ωn + ωn′, and the single-mode approximation in
each cavity. These are valid assumptions for realistic parameters that determine the
hopping amplitude. For instance, if we consider the coupling capacitance Cc ≪Cr,
where Cr is the total cavity capacitance, it can be shown that [58]

7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
161
(a)
(b)
…
…
…
…
λ/2
λ/2
λ/4
λ/4
SQUID
Cc
λ/2
λ/4
SQUID
Cc
Fig. 7.5 Schematic of cavity-cavity interaction. a Capacitive coupling of half wave cavities.
b Current-current coupling of quarter wave cavities. The latter is mediated by a SQUID device.
Inset red dots represent a transmon qubit capacitively coupled to a microwave cavity
Jnn′ = 1
2
√ωnωn′Ccun(x)un′(x′)

ends
,
(7.11)
where un(x) stands for the spatial dependence of the charge distribution along the
cavity.
In the case of Fig.7.5b, where the coupling is mediated by the SQUID, it has been
shown that the hopping amplitude reads [59]
Jnn′ ∝1
2
L J(ext)
√ωnωn′ ∂xun(x)∂xun′(x′)

ends
,
(7.12)
where L J(ext) is the ﬂux-dependent Josephson inductance associated with the
SQUID. In analogy to the capacitive coupling case, it is assumed the weak cou-
pling regime L0
J ≪Lr where L0
J = ϕ2
0/E J is the bare Josephson inductance of the
SQUID, Lr is the total inductance of the cavity, and ϕ0 = 0/2π is the reduced
ﬂux quantum. It is noteworthy to mention that this kind of coupling mechanism also
generates single-mode squeezing in each cavity that may spoil the implementation
of Eq. (7.10). This can be avoided by considering an array of cavities with different
lengths as depicted in Fig.7.5b, and by tuning the system parameters to fulﬁll the
RWA [59].

162
G. Romero et al.
7.4
Analog Quantum Simulations with Superconducting
Circuits
7.4.1
Quantum Simulations: The Jaynes-Cummings Regime
In the previous chapters, we have shown the basic elements of superconducting cir-
cuits and circuit QED. In particular, we have introduced some coupling mechanisms
that allow us to model a real physical system in terms of the Jaynes-Cummings (7.8)
Hamiltonian, but also the coupling mechanisms between microwave cavities. Since
the microwave technology shows unprecedented scalability, control, and tunability of
physical parameters, circuit QED represents a prime candidate to study many-body
states of light [60] through the analog quantum simulation of the Bose-Hubbard
(BH) model [61–63], the Jaynes-Cummings-Hubbard (JCH) model [64, 65], the
fractional quantum Hall effect through the implementation of synthetic gauge ﬁelds
[58, 66–70], spin lattice systems [71, 72], and the bosonic Kagome lattice [73–75].
In the analog quantum simulation of the JCH model
HJCH =
N

j=1
ω0σ+
j σ−
j +
N

j=1
ωa†
ja j + J
N

⟨i j⟩
(aia†
j + H.c.),
(7.13)
the whole system is composed of elementary cells that may consist of a transmon
qubit capacitively coupled to a microwave resonator [76], where the dynamics is
described by the JC Hamiltonian. In addition, the connection between neighboring
cells is achieved by the capacitive coupling between half-wave cavities in a linear
array, see Fig.7.5a. Notice that the two-site JCH model has been already implemented
in the lab [77]. Remark that more complex geometries [58] may be achieved, thus
establishing an additional advantage over quantum optics platforms [78].
Unlike standard setups of cavity QED in the optical or microwave regimes, cir-
cuit QED allows us to engineer nonlinear interactions between microwave photons
provided by nonlinear elements such as Josephson junctions. In particular, the cavity-
cavity coupling mediated by SQUID devices, as depicted in Fig.7.5b, may represent
a prime candidate on the road of simulating the Bose-Hubbard model with attractive
interactions [79, 80], but also the full Bose-Hubbard and extended models may also
be simulated [81]. It is noteworthy that the Bose-Hubbard-dimer model has been
already implemented in a circuit QED setup [82]. The latter proposal and the experi-
ment presented in Ref. [77] encourage the theoretical work for the sake of simulating
many-body states of light and matter. In addition, the driven-dissipative dynamics of
many-body states of light [83–89], and applications of polariton physics in quantum
information processing [90, 91] may also be simulated with state-of-the-art circuit
QED technologies. The coupling mechanisms appearing in circuit QED allow us
to study interesting variants of standard models of condensed matter physics. For
instance, photon solid phases have been analyzed in the out of equilibrium dynamics
of nonlinear cavity arrays described by the Hamiltonian

7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
163
H =

i
[−δa†
i ai + Ω(ai + a†
i )] −J

⟨i, j⟩
(aia†
j + H.c.) + U

i
ni(ni −1) + V

⟨i, j⟩
nin j,
(7.14)
which exhibits Bose-Hubbard interaction as well as nearest-neighbor Kerr nonlin-
earities [92]. The latter is a direct consequence of the nonlinearity provided by the
Josephson energy in the SQUID loop.
Circuit QED technologies allow also to study two-dimensional arrays of coupled
cavities, as stated in Refs. [73, 74], with the implementation of the bosonic Kagome
lattice. This provides room to the application of powerful numerical techniques such
astheprojectedentangled-pairstates (PEPS)[75, 93, 94]withtheaimofstudyingthe
interplay between light and matter interactions, as well as predicting new many-body
states of light. It is noteworthy to mention that the study of a quantum simulator for
the Kagome lattice may predict new physics that otherwise would not be accessible
with classical simulations.
7.4.2
Quantum Simulations: The USC Regime of
Light-Matter Interactions
In the previous section, we have shown the ability of superconducting circuits to
simulate many-body states of light, where the building block or unit cell corresponds
to a cavity interacting with a two-level system in the strong coupling (SC) regime. In
this case, the cavity-qubit coupling strength exceeds any decay rate of the system such
asphotonlosses,spontaneousdecay,anddephasingofthequbit[95].CircuitQEDhas
also reached unprecedented light-matter coupling strength with the implementation
of the USC regime [45–50] and potentially the DSC regime [55, 56]. In this sense,
it would be interesting to exploit these coupling regimes aiming at building new
many-body states of light, where the building block consists of a cavity-qubit system
described by the quantum Rabi model in Eq. (7.9).
Recently, it has been pointed out the importance of the counter-rotating terms in
order to describe many-body effects in the Rabi-Hubbard model [96–98]
HRH =

i
H (i)
Rabi −J

⟨i, j⟩
(aia†
j + H.c.).
(7.15)
This model exhibits a Z2 parity symmetry-breaking quantum criticality, long order-
range superﬂuid order, as well as the break of the conservation of local polariton
number at each site. This leads to the absence of Mott lobes in the phase diagram as
compared with the Bose-Hubbard model. The extension of the Rabi-Hubbard model
to the two-dimensional case may represent an additional example where a quantum
simulator could outperform classical simulations.
Theaboveresultsmakeitnecessarytointroduceaquantumsimulatorthatprovides
the quantum Rabi model (QRM) in a controllable way. As stated in Ref. [99], this task
can be done by making use of a two-tone driving on a two-level system of frequency

164
G. Romero et al.
ωq, that interacts with a single mode of a microwave cavity of frequency ω. In the
rotating-wave approximation, the Hamiltonian describing the above situation reads
H = ℏωq
2 σz + ℏωa†a −ℏg(σ†a + σa†)
−ℏΩ1(eiω1tσ + e−iω1tσ†) −ℏΩ2(eiω2tσ + e−iω2tσ†).
(7.16)
Here, Ω j and ω j represent the Rabi amplitude and frequency of the jth microwave
signal, respectively. The simulation of the QRM can be accomplished in a speciﬁc
rotating frame as follows. First, we write the Hamiltonian (7.16) in the reference
frame that rotates the frequency ω1. This leads to
H R1 = ℏ(ωq −ω1)
2
σz + ℏ(ω −ω1)a†a −ℏg
	
σ†a + σa†
−ℏΩ1
	
σ + σ†
−ℏΩ2
	
ei(ω2−ω1)tσ + e−i(ω2−ω1)tσ†
.
(7.17)
Second, we go into the interaction picture with respect to H R1
0
= −ℏΩ1
	
σ + σ†
such that H I(t) = ei H
L1
0 t/ℏ
H R1 −H R1
0

e−i H
R1
0 t/ℏ. The above transformation can
be implemented by means of a Ramsey-like pulse as described in Ref. [99]. In the
dressed-spin basis, |±⟩= (|g⟩± |e⟩) /
√
2, the interaction Hamiltonian we can be
written as
H I(t) = −ℏ(ωq −ω1)
2
	
e−i2Ω1t |+⟩⟨−| + H.c.

+ ℏ(ω −ω1)a†a
−ℏg
2
	|+⟩⟨+| −|−⟩⟨−| + e−i2Ω1t |+⟩⟨−|
−ei2Ω1t |−⟩⟨+|
a + H.c.

−ℏΩ2
2
	|+⟩⟨+| −|−⟩⟨−| −e−i2Ω1t |+⟩⟨−|
+ei2Ω1t |−⟩⟨+|
ei(ω2−ω1)t + H.c.

.
(7.18)
Third, if we tune the external driving frequencies as ω1 −ω2 = 2Ω1, and for a
strong ﬁrst driving, Ω1, the Hamiltonian (7.18) can be represented as
Heff = ℏ(ω −ω1)a†a + ℏΩ2
2 σz −ℏg
2 σx
	
a + a†
,
(7.19)
which corresponds to the quantum Rabi model. For values Ω2 ∼(ω −ω1) ∼g/2,
the original cavity-qubit system is capable of simulating the dynamics associated
with the USC/DSC regime. The simulated interaction strength corresponds to the
ratio geff/ωeff, where geff ≡g/2 and ωeff ≡ω −ω1. Figure7.6 shows the two-level
system dynamics for an effective ratio geff/ωeff = 1 and two different values of the
effective qubit frequency Ω2. The initial condition is the ground state of the qubit

7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
165
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
1
 efft/2
 efft/2
P
g
0
0.5
1
1.5
0
1
Fig. 7.6 The population of the ground state for the two-level system, Pg(t), has been calculated
by integrating the exact (solid line) dynamics in Eq. (7.16) and the effective (circles) Hamiltonian
dynamics in Eq. (7.19). We have considered two different cases: (left panel) Ω2 = 0; (right panel)
Ω2 = 2π × 10MHz. The simulated interaction strength corresponds to geff/ωeff = 1. Figure from
Ref. [99], used under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 licence
and the vacuum state for the ﬁeld, |ψ(0)⟩= |g⟩⊗|0⟩. This dynamics corresponds
to the one predicted in Ref. [55] for the deep strong coupling regime.
This quantum simulation may pave the way for building a complete toolbox
of complex cavity arrays where the unit cell can be tuned, at will, from the strong
coupling regime, described by the Jaynes-Cummings model, to the USD/DSC regime
described by the quantum Rabi model.
7.4.3
Quantum Simulations of Quantum Relativistic
Mechanics
The quantum simulation of the quantum Rabi model [99] allows us to access a wide
range of physical phenomena such as cat-state generation and simulating relativistic
quantum mechanics on a chip [100]. The latter can be achieved in a similar way
as the QRM by applying three classical microwaves, that is, a two-tone driving on
a two-level system interacting with a single cavity mode in the SC regime, and a
driving on the cavity mode. This process is modeled by the Hamiltonian
H = ℏωq
2 σz + ℏωa†a −ℏg(σ+a + σ−a†) −ℏΩ(σ+e−i(ωt+ϕ) + σ−ei(ωt+ϕ))
−λ(σ+e−i(νt+ϕ) + σ−ei(νt+ϕ)) + ℏξ(aeiωt + a†e−iωt),
(7.20)
where Ω, λ, and ξ stand for the driving amplitudes, ω is the resonator frequency,
and ν is the driving frequency, respectively. As stated in Ref. [100], if we consider a
strong microwave driving Ω ≫{g, λ} and the condition ω −ν = 2Ω, the effective
Hamiltonian, in the rotating frame, reads

166
G. Romero et al.
−5
−2.5
0
2.5
5
−5
−2.5
0
2.5
5
X
(a)
P
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
−5
−2.5
0
2.5
5
−5
−2.5
0
2.5
5
X
(b)
P
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
−5
−2.5
0
2.5
5
−5
−2.5
0
2.5
5
X
(c)
P
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
−5
−2.5
0
2.5
5
−5
−2.5
0
2.5
5
X
(d)
P
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
−5
−2.5
0
2.5
5
−5
−2.5
0
2.5
5
X
(e)
P
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
−5
−2.5
0
2.5
5
−5
−2.5
0
2.5
5
X
(f)
P
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Fig. 7.7 Wigner function W(x, p) representation of the ﬁeld state in the microwave cavity. We
have computed the time evolution by means of the Hamiltonian (7.20) for a time of 60ns. We used
realistic parameters g = 2π × 10 MHz, Ω = 2π × 200 MHz, ξ = g/2. a λ = 0 with the initial
state |+, 0⟩; b λ = 0 with the initial state |+,
√
2i⟩; c λ =
√
2g with the initial state |+, 0⟩; d
λ =
√
2g with the initial state |+,
√
2i⟩; e λ = 4
√
2g with the initial state |e, 0⟩; and f λ = 4
√
2g
with the initial state |e,
√
2i⟩. Figure from Ref. [100], used under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 3.0 licence
Heff = ℏλ
2 σz + ℏg
√
2
σy ˆp + ℏξ
√
2ˆx,
(7.21)
where ˆx = (a + a†)/
√
2 and ˆp = i(a† −a)/
√
2 are the ﬁeld quadratures satisfying
the commutation relation [ˆx, ˆp] = i. The above Hamiltonian describes a 1 + 1 Dirac
particle in a linear external potential U = ℏξ
√
2ˆx, where the terms ℏg/
√
2 and ℏλ/2
represent the speed of light and the mass of the particle, respectively.
Adding an external potential U(x) allows us to simulate the scattering of a single
relativistic particle. In particular, we can start by considering the case of a mass-
less Dirac particle whose Hamiltonian is given by HK = ℏg/
√
2σy ˆp + ℏξ
√
2 ˆx.
Figure7.7a and b show the evolution of the initial states |+, 0⟩and |+,
√
2i⟩, respec-
tively, where |+⟩stands for the positive eigenstate of σy and |0⟩the vacuum state
for the ﬁeld. Here the ﬁeld state remains coherent while experiencing two inde-
pendent displacements along the ˆx-quadrature proportional to g/
√
2, and along the
ˆp-quadrature. It is remarkable that the external potential does not modify the rec-
tilinear movement in position representation. This phenomenon corresponds to the
Klein paradox, which states that a massless Dirac particle may propagate through
the potential barrier with probability different from zero.

7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
167
As the quantum simulation allows us to tune the physical parameters at will, we
can also study the scattering of a massive nonrelativistic Schrödinger particle. In this
case, the dynamics is governed by the Hamiltonian HNRel = ℏσz ˆp2/λ + ℏξ
√
2 ˆx.
Note that this Hamiltonian assures that any initial Gaussian state remains Gaussian
as time elapses. This can be seen in Fig.7.7e and f where the initial states are |e, 0⟩and
|e,
√
2i⟩, respectively. The mass of the particle has been chosen such that ℏλ/2 = 4 ×
ℏg/
√
2. Figure7.7e shows how the particle is scattered backwards by the potential.
For the case of Fig.7.7f, the particle has an initial positive kinetic energy that allowed
it to enter the external potential, though after 60ns it moves backwards.
These two limiting cases have shown a total transmission or reﬂection. It is natural
that a particle with an intermediate mass features only partial transmission/reﬂection.
Figure7.7c shows the scattering of a massive particle with ℏλ/2 = ℏg/
√
2 prepared
in the initial state |+, 0⟩. We see how the wave packet splits into spinor components
of different signs which move away from the center. Furthermore, If some initial
kinetic energy is provided to the wavepacket, as shown in Fig.7.7d with initial state
|+,
√
2i⟩, the particle enters the barrier to stop and break up sooner or later.
The simulation of the Dirac Hamiltonian, together with all available technology in
circuit QED, may have interesting consequences in the study of many-body states of
light. For instance, one may have access to Dirac lattices and their possible extension
to Dirac materials [101].
7.5
Digital Quantum Simulations with Superconducting
Circuits
In many situations, the quantum simulator does not evolve according to the dynamics
of the system to be simulated. Therefore, it is appropriate to employ digital techniques
to emulate a wider variety of quantum systems [9]. Digital quantum simulators are
akin to universal quantum computers, with the advantage that in principle with a
small number of qubits one will already be able to outperform classical computers.
Thus, one does not need to reach thousands of qubits to perform interesting quantum
simulations of mesoscopic quantum systems.
ThedigitalquantumsimulatorsarebasedonthefactthatmostmodelHamiltonians
are composed of a ﬁnite number of local terms, H = N
k=1 Hk, where each of them
acts upon a reduced Hilbert space, or at least is efﬁciently implementable with a
polynomial number of gates. In these cases, the system dynamics can be obtained
via digital decomposition into stroboscopic steps, via Trotter techniques,
e−i Ht = (e−i H1t/n . . . e−i HN t/n)n + O(t2/n).
(7.22)
By making n large, the error can be made in principle as small as desired. Naturally
there will be a limit to the size of n that will be given by the ﬁnite ﬁdelity of the local
gates.

168
G. Romero et al.
There have been already a number of experiments on digital quantum simulators,
either in quantum photonics [102], or in trapped ions [103]. Regarding superconduct-
ing circuits, some theoretical proposals for digital quantum simulations have been
put forward [104, 105], and we will review these in the next sections.
7.5.1
Digital Quantum Simulations of Spin Systems with
Superconducting Circuits
In this section, we analyze the realization of digital quantum simulations of spin
Hamiltonians in a superconducting circuit setup consisting of several transmon
qubits coupled to a microwave resonator [104]. Although our protocol is appro-
priate for every superconducting qubit with sufﬁciently long coherence time, we
consider speciﬁcally a transmon qubit device. This kind of qubits are typically used
because of its insensitivity to charge ﬂuctuations [30]. Nevertheless, depending on
the speciﬁc phenomena to simulate, one can consider other superconducting qubits
for quantum simulations. First, we show how one can simulate the Heisenberg model
in a circuit QED setup with state-of-the-art technology. Then, we consider typical
simulation times and their associated ﬁdelities with current superconducting qubit
technology, showing the potential of superconducting qubits in terms of digital quan-
tum simulators. Finally, we study the necessary resources with realistic parameters
for a versatile quantum simulator of spin models able to emulate a general many-body
spin dynamics.
Digital methods can be employed to emulate the Heisenberg model with current
circuit QED technology. Even though the latter does not feature the Heisenberg
interaction from ﬁrst principles, one can nevertheless analyze a digital quantum
simulation of this model. We show that a set of N transmon qubits coupled through
a resonator is able to simulate Heisenberg interactions of N spins, which in the
symmetric-coupling case is given by
H =
N−1

i=1
J
	
σx
i σx
i+1 + σy
i σy
i+1 + σz
i σz
i+1

.
(7.23)
Here σ j
i , j ∈{x, y, z} are Pauli matrices that refer to the ﬁrst two levels of the ith
transmon qubit.
We start by the simplest case, with only two spins. The XY exchange interaction
can be implemented by dispersive coupling of two transmon qubits with a common
resonator [13, 34, 106], H xy
12 = J
	
σ+
1 σ−
2 + σ−
1 σ+
2

= J/2
	
σx
1σx
2 + σy
1σy
2

. The XY
interaction can be mapped through local rotations of the qubits onto the effective
Hamiltonians
H xz
12 = Rx
12(π/4)H xy
12 Rx†
12(π/4) = J/2
	
σx
1σx
2 + σz
1σz
2

,
(7.24)

7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
169
Hxy
Hxy
Hxy
Hxy
Hxy
Hxy
R†
y
R†
y
R†
y
R†
x
R†
x
R†
x
Ry
Ry
Ry
Rx
Rx
Rx
Hxy
Hxy
Rx
Hxy
Ry
Rx
Ry
R†
y
R†
y
R†
x
R†
x
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7.8 Schemes for the proposed digital quantum simulations with superconducting transmon
qubits. a Heisenberg model for two qubits. b Heisenberg model for three qubits. Here, Rx(y) ≡
Rx(y)(π/4) and Rx ≡Rx(π/2). We point out that exchanging each of the R matrices with its
adjoint does not affect the protocols. Reprinted with permission from [104], Copyright (2014)
American Physical Society
H yz
12 = Ry
12(π/4)H xy
12 Ry†
12(π/4) = J/2
	
σy
1σy
2 + σz
1σz
2

.
(7.25)
Here, Rx(y)
12 (π/4) = exp[−iπ/4(σx(y)
1
+ σx(y)
2
)] is a local rotation of the ﬁrst and
second qubits with respect to the x(y) axis. The XYZ Heisenberg Hamiltonian H xyz
12
can thus be performed according to the following protocol (see Fig.7.8a). Step 1—
The two qubits interact with the XY Hamiltonian H xy
12 for a time t. Step 2—Single
qubit rotations Rx
12(π/4) are applied to both qubits. Step 3—The two qubits interact
with H xy
12 Hamiltonian for a time t. Step 4—Single qubit rotations Rx†
12(π/4) are
applied to both qubits. Step 5—Single qubit rotations Ry
12(π/4) are applied to both
qubits. Step 6—The two qubits interact according to the H xy
12 Hamiltonian for a time t.
Step 7—Single qubit rotations Ry†
12(π/4) are applied to both qubits. Accordingly, the
ﬁnal unitary operator reads
U12(t) = e−i H xy
12 te−i H xz
12 te−i H yz
12 t = e−i H12t.
(7.26)
This evolution emulates the dynamics of Eq. (7.23) for two transmon qubits. Fur-
thermore, arbitrarily inhomogeneous couplings can be engineered by performing
different evolution times or couplings for the different digital gates. Here we point
out that a single Trotter step is needed to obtain a simulation with no digital errors,
because of the fact that H xy
12 , H xz
12 , and H yz
12 operators commute. Accordingly, in this
case the only error source will be due to the accumulated gate errors. We consider
two-qubit gates with a process ﬁdelity error of about 5% and eight π/4 single-qubit
gates with process ﬁdelity errors of about 1%. Therefore, we will have a total process
ﬁdelity of this protocol of about 77%. Furthermore, the total protocol time for a π/4
Heisenberg phase is around 0.10µs. Throughout this section, we estimate the pro-
tocol times by adding the respective times of all the gates, for which we take into
account standard superconducting qubit values.

170
G. Romero et al.
We now analyze a digital algorithm for the emulation of the Heisenberg dynam-
ics for a system of three spins. In this case, one has to consider noncommuting
Hamiltonian gates, involving Trotter errors. This three-spin model can be directly
extrapolated to an arbitrary number of spins. We propose the following digital pro-
tocol for its realization (see Fig.7.8b). Step 1—Qubits 1 and 2 couple through XY
Hamiltonian for a time t/l. Step 2—Qubits 2 and 3 couple through XY Hamiltonian
for a time t/l. Step 3—The gate Rx
i (π/4) is applied to each qubit. Step 4—Qubits 1
and 2 couple through XY Hamiltonian for a time t/l. Step 5—Qubits 2 and 3 couple
through XY Hamiltonian for a time t/l. Step 6—The gate Rx†
i (π/4) is applied to
each qubit. Step 7—The gate Ry
i (π/4) is applied each qubit. Step 8—Qubits 1 and 2
couple through XY Hamiltonian for a time t/l. Step 9—Qubits 2 and 3 couple through
XY Hamiltonian for a time t/l. Step 10—The gate Ry†
i (π/4) is applied to each qubit.
Finally, the global unitary evolution operator per Trotter step is given by
U123(t/l) = e−i H xy
12 t/le−i H xy
23 t/le−i H xz
12 t/le−i H xz
23 t/le−i H yz
12 t/le−i H yz
23 t/l.
Here, the sequence has to be repeated l times following Eq. (7.22), to implement
an approximate dynamics of Eq. (7.23) for the three qubits. Each of these Trotter
steps consists of four single-qubit gates at different times (performed collectively
upon different sets of qubits) and six XY gates, with a total step time around 0.16 µs,
well below typical decoherence times in transmon qubits [107]. In Fig.7.9a and b,
we depict the ﬁdelity loss associated with the digital error of the emulated XYZ
dynamics for three transmon qubits, together with straight horizontal lines showing
the error of the imperfect gates multiplied by the number of Trotter steps, i.e., the
total accumulated gate imperfection. One can appreciate time intervals dominated
by the digital Trotter error and time intervals where the largest error source in the
digital quantum simulation is produced by experimental gate imperfections. One can
take into account Hamiltonians with open and periodic boundary conditions, adding
an extra coupling between the ﬁrst and the last spin. Extending our protocol to N
π/8
π/8
π/4
π/4
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.2
0.1
0
0
0
0
1 −F
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7.9 Loss of ﬁdelity for the emulated Heisenberg model for three qubits, in the range θ =
[0, π/4], θ ≡Jt. The wavy lines represent digital errors, while the straight lines represent the
accumulatedgateerrorduetoasteperrorofε.Redsolid (blackdotted)linesareassociatedwithlower
(higher) digital approximations l. a ε = 10−2, l = 3, 5, and b ε = 5 × 10−2, l = 2, 3. Reprinted
with permission from [104], Copyright (2014) American Physical Society

7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
171
transmon qubits with open or periodic boundary conditions, we estimate an upper
bound on the second-order digital Trotter error, given by Eopen = 24(N −2)(Jt)2/l
and Eperiodic = 24N(Jt)2/l.
In order to assess the proposals in a realistic circuit QED setup, we made numerical
simulations for the Heisenberg dynamics between two qubits in the transmon regime
coupled to a stripline waveguide resonator. We estimate the inﬂuence on the proposal
of a state-of-the-art XY dynamics, given as an effective dispersive Hamiltonian,
obtained at second order from the ﬁrst order one,
Ht =
2

i=0
2

j=1
ω j
i |i, j⟩⟨i, j| + ωra†a +
2

i=0
2

j=1
gi,i+1(|i, j⟩⟨i + 1, j| + H.c.)(a + a†).
(7.27)
Here, ωr is the resonance frequency of the resonator, and ω j
i is the transition
frequency of the ith level, with respect to the ground state, of the jth transmon
qubit. We take into account the ﬁrst three levels for each qubit, and an anharmonic-
ity factor given by αr = (ω j
2 −2ω j
1)/ω j
1 = −0.1, standard for transmon qubits [30].
We consider equal transmons with frequencies ω1,2
1
≡ω1 = 2π × 5 GHz. The fre-
quency of the resonator is ﬁxed to ωr = 2π × 7.5 GHz. We take into account
the coupling strength between the different levels of a single transmon qubit [30]
gi,i+1 = √i + 1g0, being g0 = 2βeVrms = 2π × 200 MHz. The experimental para-
meters we consider are standard for circuit QED platforms and they can be opti-
mized for each speciﬁc platform. The transmon-resonator Hamiltonian, in inter-
action picture with respect to the free energy 
i, j ω j
i |i, j⟩⟨i, j| + ωra†a, pro-
duces an effective interaction between the ﬁrst two levels of the two qubits Heff =
[g2
01ω1/(ω2
1 −ω2
r )](σx
1σx
2 + σy
1σy
2), where we have neglected the cavity population
⟨a†a⟩≈0 and renormalized the qubit energies to include Lamb shifts. Here, we have
considered the set of Pauli matrices for the subspace spanned by the ﬁrst two levels
of each transmon qubit, e.g. σx
1(2) ≡|0, 1(2)⟩⟨1, 1(2)| + H.c.
In order to analyze the inﬂuence of decoherence in a state-of-the-art circuit QED
setup, we compute the master equation evolution,
˙ρ = −i[Ht, ρ] + κL(a)ρ +
2

i=1
	
ΓφL(σz
i )ρ + Γ−L(σ−
i )ρ

,
(7.28)
where we deﬁne the Lindblad operators L( ˆA)ρ = (2 ˆAρ ˆA† −ˆA† ˆAρ −ρ ˆA† ˆA)/2. We
consider a damping rate for the cavity of κ = 2π × 10 kHz, and a decoherence and
decay rate for a single transmon qubit of Γφ = Γ−= 2π × 20 kHz. We compute a
numerical simulation for the XYZ dynamics for two transmon qubits, following the
scheme as in Fig.7.8a, using for the XY exchange gate steps the outcome of the
evolution obtained from Eq. (7.28), and perfect single-qubit gates. We plot our result
in Fig.7.10. The dynamics for the density operator ρ, encoding the evolution of the

172
G. Romero et al.
θ
F
σx
1
σx
1 ρ
σx
2 ρ
σx
2
π/8
π/4
−0.25
0
0.25
0.5
0.75
1
0
Fig. 7.10 Evolution of the emulated Heisenberg Hamiltonian for two superconducting transmon
qubits, initialized in state 1/
√
5(|↑⟩+ 2|↓⟩) ⊗|↓⟩. The ﬁdelity F = Tr(ρ|ΨI ⟩⟨ΨI |) represents the
performance of the protocol for the simulated phase θ. The ideal spin evolution ⟨σx
i ⟩for both trans-
mon qubits is depicted versus average values ⟨σx
i ⟩ρ which are given through the qubit Hamiltonian
Ht. Reprinted with permission from [104], Copyright (2014) American Physical Society
two transmon qubits, is contrasted to the ideal quantum dynamics |Ψ ⟩I, evolving with
the Hamiltonian in Eq. (7.23), where J = g2
01ω1/(ω2
1 −ω2
r ) ≈2π × 6 MHz. It can
be appreciated that the simulation ﬁdelities F = Tr(ρ|ΨI⟩⟨ΨI|) obtained are good
for nontrivial evolutions. We point out that the application of the XYZ Hamiltonian
on an initial state, corresponding to an eigenstate of the ZZ operator, would be just
equivalent to the one of the XY exchange dynamics. To show characteristic behavior
of the XYZ interaction, we considered an initial state which does not have this
feature. One can as well appreciate the standard short-time ﬁdelity ﬂuctuations due
to the spurious terms of the dispersive exchange Hamiltonian. Making use of a larger
detuning of the qubits from the cavity, the contribution of the non-dispersive part of
the interaction can be reduced, increasing the total protocol ﬁdelity.
Summarizing, we have proposed a digital quantum simulation of spin systems
with circuit QED platforms. We have analyzed a prototypical model: the Heisenberg
interaction. Moreover, we have studied the feasibility of the protocol with current
technology of transmon qubits coupled to microwave cavities. These protocols may
be generalized to many-body spin systems, paving the way towards universal digital
quantum simulation of spin models with superconducting circuits.
7.5.2
Digital Quantum Simulations of Quantum Field
Theories with Superconducting Circuits
Our current knowledge of the most fundamental processes in the physical world is
based on the framework of interacting quantum ﬁeld theories [108]. In this con-
text, models involving the coupling of fermions and bosons play a prominent role.

7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
173
In these systems, it is possible to analyze fermion-fermion scattering mediated by
bosons, fermionic self-interactions, and bosonic polarization. In this section, we
will study [105] a quantum ﬁeld theory model with the following assumptions: (i)
1 + 1 dimensions, (ii) scalar fermions and bosons, and described by the Hamiltonian
(ℏ= c = 1)
H =

dp ωp(b†
pbp + d†
pdp) +

dk ωka†
kak +

dx ψ†(x)ψ(x)A(x).
(7.29)
Here, A(x) = i

dk λk
√ωk/4π(a†
ke−ikx −akeikx) is a bosonic operator, with cou-
plingconstantsλk,andψ(x)isafermionicﬁeld,b†
p(bp)andd†
p(dp)areitscorrespond-
ing fermionic and antifermionic creation(annihilation) mode operators for frequency
ωp, while a†
k(ak) is the creation(annihilation) bosonic mode operator associated with
the frequency ωk. We propose a protocol for the scalable and efﬁcient digital-analog
quantum simulation of interacting fermions and bosons, based on Eq. (7.29), mak-
ing use of the state-of-the-art circuit QED platforms. In this fast-evolving quantum
technology, one has the possibility of a strong coupling of artiﬁcial atoms with a
one-dimensional bosonic continuum.
In order to map the proposed model to the circuit QED setup, we consider a further
assumption in Eq. (7.29): (iii) one fermionic and one antifermionic ﬁeld modes [109]
that interact via a bosonic continuum. Accordingly, the interaction Hamiltonian is
given by
Hint = i

dxdkλk
 ωk
2

|Λ1(p f , x, t)|2b†
inbin + Λ∗
1(p f , x, t)Λ2(p ¯f , x, t)b†
ind†
in
(7.30)
+ Λ∗
2(p ¯f , x, t)Λ1(p f , x, t)dinbin + |Λ2(p ¯f , x, t)|2dind†
in
 
a†
k e−ikx −akeikx
.
The fermionic and antifermionic creation and annihilation operators obey anticom-
mutation relations {bin, b†
in} = {din, d†
in} = 1, and the bosonic creation and annihi-
lation operators satisfy commutation relations [ak, a†
k′]=δ(k −k′). Here, we have
spanned the ﬁeld ψ(x) in terms of two comoving anticommuting modes as a ﬁrst
order approximation, neglecting the remaining anticommuting modes. These are
given by the expressions,
b†
in =

dp Ω f (p f , p)b†
pe−iωpt
(7.31)
d†
in =

dp Ω ¯f (p ¯f , p)d†
pe−iωpt,
(7.32)
where Ω f, ¯f (p f, ¯f , p) are the fermion and antifermion wavepacket envelopes with
average momenta p f and p ¯f , respectively.
Thus, the fermionic ﬁeld reads
ψ(x) ≃Λ1(p f , x, t)bin + Λ2(p ¯f , x, t)d†
in,
(7.33)

174
G. Romero et al.
where the coefﬁcients can be computed by considering the anticommutators
{ψ(x), b†
in} and {ψ(x), din} as follows
Λ1(p f , x, t) = {ψ(x), b†
in} =
1
√
2π

dp
2ωp
Ω(p f , p)ei(px−ωpt),
(7.34)
Λ2(p ¯f , x, t) = {ψ(x), din} =
1
√
2π

dp
2ωp
Ω(p ¯f , p)e−i(px−ωpt), (7.35)
where we have considered ψ(x) in the Schrödinger picture.
With this proposal, we think that emulating the physics of a discrete number of
fermionic ﬁeld modes coupled to a continuum of bosonic ﬁeld modes will signiﬁ-
cantly enhance the quantum simulations of full-ﬂedged quantum ﬁeld theories.
We now use the Jordan-Wigner transformation [110, 111] that maps fermi-
onic mode operators onto tensor products of spin operators: b†
l = l−1
r=1 σ−
l σz
r, and
d†
m = m−1
r=1 σ−
mσz
r, wherel = 1, 2, . . . , N/2, m = N/2 + 1, . . . , N, with N the total
number of fermionic and antifermionic modes. Thus, Hamiltonian (7.30) is reduced
to just three different kinds of couplings: single and two-qubit gates interacting
with the bosonic continuum H1 = iσ j

dxdk gk(a†
ke−ikx −akeikx), H2 = i(σ j ⊗
σℓ)

dxdk gk(a†
ke−ikx −akeikx), with σq = {σx, σy, σz} for q = 1, 2, 3, and cou-
plings that involve only bosonic ﬁeld modes, H3 = i

dxdk gk(a†
ke−ikx −akeikx).
Therefore, the quantum simulator should produce a way of generating multiqubit
entangling gates and coupling qubit operators to a bosonic continuum through a
digital-analog method [109].
Circuit QED platforms consisting of the coupling between coplanar waveguides
(CPW) and transmon qubits [112–114] are an appropriate setup to implement our
digital-analog simulator model. We depict in Fig.7.11a, a scheme of our setup, which
is based on a microwave transmission line supporting a continuum of electromag-
netic ﬁeld modes (open line) that interacts with three qubits in the transmon regime.
UMS (- /2,0)
UC
UA
qubit 1
qubit 2
ancilla qubit
UMS ( /2,0)
(b)
(a)
Fig. 7.11 a Scheme of our protocol for emulating fermion-fermion scattering in QFTs. An open line
supporting a bosonic continuum is coupled to three superconducting transmon qubits. A second,
one-dimensional stripline waveguide, forming a cavity, contains a single bosonic mode of the
microwave ﬁeld and couples with two superconducting transmon qubits. Each of the qubits can
be locally addressed through external ﬂux drivings generating ﬂuxes  j
ext and ¯ j
ext to adjust the
coupling and its associated frequencies. b Sequential protocol of multiple and single qubit gates,
in a single digital step, acting on transmon qubits to produce two-qubit gates interacting with the
continuum. Reprinted with permission from [105], Copyright (2015) American Physical Society

7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
175
Moreover, we consider a microwave stripline resonator with a single bosonic mode
coupled only with two of the qubits. We point out that two superconducting transmon
qubits may interact at the same time with both CPWs, while the ancilla transmon
qubit will interact only with the open transmission line.
In our proposal [105], we take into account tunable couplings among each trans-
mon qubit and the CPWs, as well as tunable transmon qubit energies via applied mag-
netic ﬂuxes. More speciﬁcally, our method for emulating fermion-fermion scattering
will be based on the capacity to turn on/off each CPW-qubit coupling with tunable
parameters. The latter may be performed by using controlable coupling supercon-
ducting qubits, [112, 113] and typical techniques of band-pass ﬁlter [115] to apply
in the open line, in the sense that just a ﬁnite bandwidth of bosonic ﬁeld modes
plays a role in the evolution. In this respect, to decouple a superconducting qubit
from the open transmission line may be achieved by shifting the qubit frequency
outside of the permitted bandwidth. Moreover, our proposal may be extrapolated to
many fermionic ﬁeld modes by considering more superconducting transmon qubits,
as shown in Fig.7.12.
In our proposal, the transmon qubit-continuum and the transmon qubit-resonator
couplings are expressed through the interaction Hamiltonian
Hint =
i
3

j=1
σy
j

dk β(Φ j
ext, ¯Φ j
ext)gk(a†
ke−ikx j −akeikx j)
+ i
2

j=1
α(Φ j
ext, ¯Φ j
ext)g jσy
j (b† −b),
(7.36)
where a†
k(ak) and ωk are the creation(annihilation) operator and the free energy
associated with the kth continuum ﬁeld mode, respectively. In addition, b†(b) denotes
the creation(annihilation) bosonic operator in the microwave cavity, and σy is the
corresponding Pauli operator. The couplings gk and g j are a function of speciﬁc
properties of the CPW as for example the photon frequencies and its impedance.
Moreover, x j denotes the jth transmon qubit position, and the function β(α) can be
changed over the interval [0, βmax]([0, αmax]) via applied magnetic ﬂuxes Φ j
ext and
¯Φ j
ext, which are externally driven on the jth superconducting qubit. We point out that
these external magnetic ﬂuxes allow as well to modify the qubit frequency.
We show now how the interaction Hamiltonian (7.36) can emulate the evolu-
tion associated with Hamiltonian (7.30). We plot in Fig.7.11b the quantum gates
needed for emulating two-qubit operations interacting with the continuum in a sin-
gle digital step [9, 109] to be performed by our digital-analog emulator. In this
proposal, making use of a superconducting circuit framework, each unitary oper-
ator will be associated with the dynamics under the Hamiltonian (7.36) for corre-
sponding external ﬂuxes  j
ext and ¯ j
ext. More concretely, the operators acting on
the ﬁrst two superconducting transmon qubits are, sequentially applied, a Mølmer-
Sørensen [116] operator UMS(π/2, 0) performed through the cavity [117], a local

176
G. Romero et al.
rotation UC = exp[−φσy
1

dk gk(a†
ke−ikx −akeikx)] that produces an interaction
between the spin matrices and the bosonic ﬁeld continuum, and the inverse Mølmer-
Sørensen operator UMS(−π/2, 0). The combination of the three gates will produce
the corresponding two-qubit gate coupled with the continuum of bosonic modes,
H2 = i(σ j ⊗σℓ)

dk gk(a†
ke−ikx −akeikx).
The Uc operator will be employed independently on each superconducting trans-
mon qubit to produce the corresponding single-qubit gates interacting with the
bosonic continuum. Moreover, the auxiliary transmon qubit permits to produce the
operators involving only the bosonic ﬁeld modes by using a gate,
UA = exp[−φσz
A

dkgk(a†
ke−ikx −akeikx)],
(7.37)
where σz
A is the corresponding Pauli operator. The necessary operator is achieved
by initializing the auxiliary qubit in an eigenstate of σz
A. An equivalent sequence of
operators can be applied on more superconducting qubits for scaling the model in
order to emulate couplings involving many fermionic ﬁeld modes.
The path for scaling this proposal to many fermionic ﬁeld modes is to take into
account more superconducting transmon qubits interacting both with the resonator
andwiththeopenline,asweplotinFig.7.12.Whenoneconsiders N superconducting
qubits, N fermionic ﬁeld modes can be emulated. Therefore, our protocol can realize
a large number of fermionic ﬁeld modes coupled to the bosonic ﬁeld continuum.
This proposal will represent a signiﬁcant step forward towards an advanced quantum
simulation of full-ﬂedged quantum ﬁeld theories in controllable superconducting
qubit setups.
Making use of the proposed method, one can extract information of relevant
features of quantum ﬁeld theories, as for example pair creation and annihilation
of fermions as well as self-interaction, mediated via a bosonic ﬁeld continuum.
This quantum simulation is based on unitary gates related to Hamiltonian (7.30).
In this respect, as opposed to standard perturbative techniques in quantum ﬁeld
theories, the realization of our proposal will be associated with an inﬁnite number
of Feynman diagrams and a ﬁnite number of fermionic ﬁeld modes. Accordingly,
+
+
+
+
…
…
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7.12 a Schematic representation for the realization of N fermionic ﬁeld modes interacting
with a bosonic continuum. Each fermionic ﬁeld mode is mapped onto a nonlocal spin operator
implemented among N superconducting transmon qubits. b Feynman diagrams related to the quan-
tum simulation of two fermionic ﬁeld modes interacting with a bosonic continuum in a circuit QED
setup, as described in the text. Reprinted with permission from [105], Copyright (2015) American
Physical Society

7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
177
this path towards full-ﬂedged QFTs is at variance from standard techniques, because
it needs the addition of more fermionic ﬁeld modes instead of more perturbative
Feynman diagrams. On the other hand, the fact that we consider a continuum of
bosonic ﬁeld modes in circuit QED makes our protocol nearer to the targeted theory.
To conclude, we have introduced a method for a digital-analog quantum emulation
of fermion-fermion scattering and quantum ﬁeld theories with circuit QED. This
quantum platform beneﬁts from strong coupling between superconducting transmon
qubits with a microwave cavity and a continuum of bosonic ﬁeld modes. Our method
is a signiﬁcant step forward towards efﬁcient quantum simulations of quantum ﬁeld
theories in perturbative and nonperturbative scenarios.
7.6
Conclusion
We have presented the topic of analog and digital quantum simulations in the light
of circuit QED technologies. In particular, we have discussed the basic concepts
of circuit network theory and their applications to electric circuits operating at the
quantum degeneracy regime imposed by the superconducting state.
We have shown how circuit QED with a transmon or a ﬂux qubit represents a build-
ing block for circuit QED lattices of interacting microwave photons aiming at simu-
lating Hamiltonians of condensed matter physics such us the Bose-Hubbard model,
the Jaynes-Cummings-Hubbard model, models with nearest-neighbor Kerr nonlin-
earities that exhibit Bose-Hubbard features, the bosonic Kagome lattice, and the
Rabi-Hubbard model. The latter has interesting predictions provided by the counter-
rotating terms that appear in the system Hamiltonian.
Regarding the digital approach of quantum simulations, we have presented two
recent developments, i.e., the simulation of spin systems, and the digital/analog
simulation of quantum ﬁeld theories exempliﬁed by the fermion-fermion scattering
mediated by a continuum of bosonic modes. These theoretical efforts are based on
the state-of-the-art in circuit QED with transmon qubits, and may pave the way for
experimental developments in the near future.
Acknowledgements We acknowledge funding from the Basque Government IT472-10; Spanish
MINECO FIS2012-36673-C03-02; Ramón y Cajal Grant RYC-2012-11391; UPV/EHU UFI 11/55;
UPV/EHU Project EHUA14/04; Chilean FONDECYT 1150653; PROMISCE; SCALEQIT EU;
Spanish MINECO/FEDER FIS2015-69983-P and Basque Goverment IT986-16 projects.
References
1. V. Kendon, K. Nemoto, W.J. Munro, Philos. Trans. R. Proc. A 368, 3609 (2010)
2. J.I. Cirac, P. Zoller, Nat. Phys. 8, 264 (2010)
3. P. Hauke, F.M. Cucchietti, L. Tagliacozzo, I. Deutsch, M. Lewenstein, Rep. Prog. Phys. 75,
082401 (2012)

178
G. Romero et al.
4. T. Schätz, C.R. Monroe, T. Esslinger, New J. Phys. 15, 085009 (2013)
5. I. Buluta, F. Nori, Science 336, 108 (2009)
6. I.M. Georgescu, S. Ashhab, F. Nori, Rev. Mod. Phys. 86, 153 (2013)
7. T.H. Johnson, S.R. Clark, D. Jaksch, EPJ Quant. Technol. 1, 10 (2014)
8. R.P. Feynman, Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 467 (1982)
9. S. Lloyd, Science 273, 1073 (1996)
10. M.H. Devoret, J.M. Martinis, in Superconducting Qubits, ed. by D. Esteve, J.-M. Raimond, J.
Dalibard. Quantum Entanglement and Information Processing, Les Houches Session LXXIX
(Elsevier, Heidelberg, 2004), p. 443
11. F.K. Wilhelm, J. Clarke, Nature 453, 1031 (2008)
12. M.H. Devoret, R.J. Schoelkopf, Science 339, 1169 (2013)
13. A. Blais, R.-S. Huang, A. Wallraff, S.M. Girvin, R.J. Schoelkopf, Phys. Rev. A 69, 062320
(2004)
14. A. Wallraff, D.I. Schuster, A. Blais, L. Frunzio, R.-S. Huang, J. Majer, S. Kumar, S.M. Girvin,
R.J. Schoelkopf, Nature 431, 162 (2004)
15. I. Chiorescu, P. Bertet, K. Semba, Y. Nakamura, C.J.P.M. Harmans, J.E. Mooij, Nature 431,
159 (2004)
16. J.J. García-Ripoll, E. Solano, M.A. Martin-Delgado, Phys. Rev. B 77, 024522 (2008)
17. L. Tian, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 167001 (2010)
18. E.J. Pritchett, C. Benjamin, A. Galiautdinov, M.R. Geller, A.T. Sornborger, P.C. Stancil, J.M.
Martinis, arXiv:1008.0701
19. Y. Zhang, L. Yu, J.-Q. Liang, G. Chen, S. Jia, F. Nori, Sci. Rep. 4, 4083 (2014)
20. F. Mei, V.M. Stojanovi´c, I. Siddiqi, L. Tian, Phys. Rev. B 88, 224502 (2013)
21. O. Viehmann, J. von Delft, F. Marquardt, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 030601 (2013)
22. A. Kurcz, A. Bermudez, J.J. García-Ripoll, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 180405 (2014)
23. R. Barends et al., Nat. Commun. 6, 7654 (2015)
24. Y. Salathé et al., Phys. Rev. X 5, 021027 (2015)
25. M. Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity, 2nd edn. (Krieber, Malabar, 1985)
26. T.A. Orlando, K.A. Delin, Foundations of Applied Superconductivity (Addison-Wesley, 1991)
27. M.H. Devoret, in Quantum Fluctuations in Electrical Circuits, ed. by S. Reynaud, E. Gia-
cobino, J. Zinn-Justin. Quantum Fluctuations, Les Houches Session LXIII (Elsevier, Heidel-
berg, 1997), p. 351
28. G. Burkard, R.H. Koch, D.P. DiVincenzo, Phys. Rev. B 69, 064503 (2004)
29. S.E. Nigg, H. Paik, B. Vlastakis, G. Kirchmair, S. Shankar, L. Frunzio, M.H. Devoret, R.J.
Schoelkopf, S.M. Girvin, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 240502 (2012)
30. J. Koch, T.M. Yu, J. Gambetta, A.A. Houck, D.I. Schuster, J. Majer, A. Blais, M.H. Devoret,
S.M. Girvin, R.J. Schoelkopf, Phys. Rev. A 76, 042319 (2007)
31. T.P. Orlando, J.E. Mooij, L. Tian, C.H. van del Wal, L.S. Levitov, S. Lloyd, J.J. Mazo, Phys.
Rev. B 60, 15398 (1999)
32. E.T. Jaynes, F.W. Cummings, Proc. IEEE 51, 89 (1963)
33. D. Braak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 100401 (2011)
34. J. Majer, J.M. Chow, J.M. Gambetta, J. Koch, B.R. Johnson, J.A. Schreier, L. Frunzio, D.I.
Schuster, A.A. Houck, A. Wallraff, A. Blais, M.H. Devoret, S.M. Girvin, R.J. Schoelkopf,
Nature (London) 449, 443 (2007)
35. P.J. Leek, S. Filipp, P. Maurer, M. Baur, R. Bianchetti, J.M. Fink, M. Göppl, L. Steffen, A.
Wallraff, Phys. Rev. B 79, 180511 (2009)
36. A. Blais, J. Gambetta, A. Wallraff, D.I. Schuster, S.M. Girvin, M.H. Devoret, R.J. Schoelkopf,
Phys. Rev. A 75, 032329 (2007)
37. L. DiCarlo, J.M. Chow, J.M. Gambetta, L.S. Bishop, B.R. Johnson, D.I. Schuster, J. Majer,
A. Blais, L. Frunzio, S.M. Girvin, R.J. Schoelkopf, Nature 460, 240 (2009)
38. G. Haack, F. Helmer, M. Mariantoni, F. Marquardt, E. Solano, Phys. Rev. B 82, 024514 (2010)
39. R.C. Bialczak, M. Ansmann, M. Hofheinz, E. Lucero, M. Neeley, A.D. O’Connell, D. Sank,
H. Wang, J. Wenner, M. Steffen, A.N. Cleland, J.M. Martinis, Nat. Phys. 6, 409 (2010)

7
Quantum Simulations with Circuit Quantum Electrodynamics
179
40. T. Yamamoto, M. Neeley, E. Lucero, R.C. Bialczak, J. Kelly, M. Lenander, M. Mariantoni,
A.D.O’Connell,D.Sank,H.Wang,M.Weides,J.Wenner,Y.Yin,A.N.Cleland,J.M.Martinis,
Phys. Rev. B 82, 184515 (2010)
41. J.M. Fink, R. Bianchetti, M. Baur, M. Göppl, L. Steffen, S. Filipp, P.J. Leek, A. Blais, A.
Wallraff, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103, 083601 (2009)
42. M. Neeley, R.C. Bialczak, M. Lenander, E. Lucero, M. Mariantoni, A.D. O’Connell, D. Sank,
H. Wang, M. Weides, J. Wenner, Y. Yin, T. Yamamoto, A.N. Cleland, J.M. Martinis, Nature
467, 570 (2010)
43. L. DiCarlo, M.D. Reed, L. Sun, B.R. Johnson, J.M. Chow, J.M. Gambetta, L. Frunzio, S.M.
Girvin, M.H. Devoret, R.J. Schoelkopf, Nature 467, 574 (2010)
44. J.P. Groen, D. Ristè, L. Tornberg, J. Cramer, P.C. de Groot, T. Picot, G. Johansson, L. DiCarlo,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 090506 (2013)
45. C. Ciuti, G. Bastard, I. Carusotto, Phys. Rev. B 72, 115303 (2005)
46. J. Bourassa, J.M. Gambetta, A.A. Abdumalikov Jr., O. Astaﬁev, Y. Nakamura, A. Blais, Phys.
Rev. A 80, 032109 (2009)
47. D. Hagenmüller, S. De Liberato, C. Ciuti, Phys. Rev. B 81, 235303 (2010)
48. P. Nataf, C. Ciuti, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 023601 (2010)
49. T. Niemczyk, F. Deppe, H. Huebl, E.P. Menzel, F. Hocke, M.J. Schwarz, J.J. Garcia-Ripoll,
D. Zueco, T. Hümmer, E. Solano, A. Marx, R. Gross, Nat. Phys. 6, 772 (2010)
50. P. Forn-Díaz, J. Lisenfeld, D. Marcos, J.J. García-Ripoll, E. Solano, C.J.P.M. Harmans, J.E.
Mooij, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 237001 (2010)
51. F. Beaudoin, J.M. Gambetta, A. Blais, Phys. Rev. A 84, 043832 (2011)
52. H.-P. Breuer, F. Petruccione, The Theory of Open Quantum Systems (Clarendon, Oxford,
2006)
53. P. Nataf, C. Ciuti, Phys. Rev. Lett. 107, 190402 (2011)
54. G. Romero, D. Ballester, Y.M. Wang, V. Scarani, E. Solano, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 120501
(2012)
55. J. Casanova, G. Romero, I. Lizuain, J.J. García-Ripoll, E. Solano, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 263603
(2010)
56. S. De Liberato, Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 016401 (2014)
57. A. Crespi, S. Longhi, R. Osellame, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 163601 (2012)
58. A. Nunnenkamp, J. Koch, S.M. Girvin, New J. Phys. 13, 095008 (2011)
59. S. Felicetti, M. Sanz, L. Lamata, G. Romero, G. Johansson, P. Delsing, E. Solano, Phys. Rev.
Lett. 113, 093602 (2014)
60. I. Carusotto, C. Ciuti, Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 299 (2013)
61. M.P.A. Fisher, P.B. Weichman, G. Grinstein, D.S. Fisher, Phys. Rev. B 40, 546 (1989)
62. M.J. Hartmann, F.G.S. Brand˜ao, M.B. Plenio, Nat. Phys. 2, 849 (2006)
63. M.J. Hartmann, M.B. Plenio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 99, 103601 (2007)
64. A.D. Greentree, C. Tahan, J.H. Cole, L.C.L. Hollenberg, Nat. Phys. 2, 856 (2006)
65. D.G. Angelakis, M.F. Santos, S. Bose, Phys. Rev. A 76, 031805(R) (2007)
66. J. Cho, D.G. Angelakis, S. Bose, Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 246809 (2008)
67. J. Koch, A.A. Houck, K. Le Hur, S.M. Girvin, Phys. Rev. A 82, 043811 (2010)
68. S. Mittal, J. Fan, S. Faez, A. Migdall, J.M. Taylor, M. Hafezi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 087403
(2014)
69. F. Grusdt, F. Letscher, M. Hafezi, M. Fleischhauer, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 155301 (2014)
70. T. Kitagawa, M.A. Broome, A. Fedrizzi, M.S. Rudner, E. Berg, I. Kassal, A. Aspuru-Guzik,
E. Demler, A.G. White, Nat. Commun. 3, 882 (2012)
71. J. Cho, D.G. Angelakis, S. Bose, Phys. Rev. A 78, 062338 (2008)
72. A. Kay, D.G. Angelakis, Eur. Phys. Lett. 84, 20001 (2008)
73. A.A. Houck, H.E. Türeci, J. Koch, Nat. Phys. 8, 292 (2012)
74. D. Underwood, W.E. Shanks, J. Koch, A.A. Houck, Phys. Rev. A 86, 023837 (2012)
75. A. Hosseinkhani, B.G. Dezfouli, F. Ghasemipour, A.T. Rezakhani, H. Saberi, Phys. Rev. A
89, 062324 (2014)
76. S. Schmidt, J. Koch, Ann. Phys. (Berlin) 525, 395 (2013)

180
G. Romero et al.
77. J. Raftery, D. Sadri, S. Schmidt, H.E. Türeci, A.A. Houck, Phys. Rev. X 4, 031043 (2014)
78. S. Haroche, J.-M. Raymond, Exploring the Quantum (Oxford University Press, New York,
2006)
79. M. Leib, M.J. Hartmann, New. J. Phys. 12, 093031 (2010)
80. M. Leib, M.J. Hartmann, Phys. Scr. T153, 014042 (2013)
81. J. Tangpatinanon, D.G. Angelakis, Unpublished
82. C. Eichler, Y. Salathe, J. Mlynek, S. Schmidt, A. Wallraff, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 110502 (2014)
83. D.G. Angelakis, S. Bose, S. Mancini, Eur. Phys. Lett. 85, 20007 (2009)
84. D.G. Angelakis, L. Dai, L.C. Kwek, Eur. Phys. Lett. 91, 10003 (2010)
85. I. Carusotto, D. Gerace, H.E. Türeci, S. De Liberato, C. Ciuti, A. Imamoglu, Phys. Rev. Lett.
103, 033601 (2009)
86. M.J. Hartmann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 113601 (2010)
87. T. Grujic, S.R. Clark, D. Jaksch, D.G. Angelakis, New J. Phys. 14, 103025 (2012)
88. T. Grujic, S.R. Clark, D. Jaksch, D.G. Angelakis, Phys. Rev. A 87, 053846 (2013)
89. N. Schetakis, T. Grujic, S.R. Clark, D. Jaksch, D.G. Angelakis, J. Phys. B At. Mol. Opt. Phys.
46, 224025 (2013)
90. D.G. Angelakis, A. Kay, New. J. Phys. 10, 023012 (2008)
91. E.S. Kyoseva, D.G. Angelakis, L.C. Kwek, Eur. Phys. Lett. 89, 20005 (2010)
92. J. Jin, D. Rossini, R. Fazio, M. Leib, M.J. Hartmann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 110, 163605 (2013)
93. F. Verstraete, V. Murg, J. Cirac, Adv. Phys. 57, 143 (2008)
94. N. Schuch, I. Cirac, D. Pérez-García, Ann. Phys. 325, 2153 (2010)
95. H.-P. Breuer, F. Petruccione, The Theory of Open Quantum Systems (Oxford University Press,
Clarendon, 2006)
96. H. Zheng, Y. Takada, Phys. Rev. A 84, 043819 (2011)
97. M. Schiró, B. Öztop, H.E. Türeci, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 053601 (2012)
98. G. Zhu, S. Schmidt, J. Koch, New J. Phys. 15, 115002 (2013)
99. D. Ballester, G. Romero, J.J. García-Ripoll, F. Deppe, E. Solano, Phys. Rev. X 2, 021007
(2012)
100. J.S. Pedernales, R. Di Candia, D. Ballester, E. Solano, New J. Phys. 15, 055008 (2013)
101. T.O. Wehling, A.M. Black-Schaffer, A.V. Balatsky, Adv. Phys. 76, 1 (2014)
102. B.P. Lanyon, J.D. Whitﬁeld, G.G. Gillet, M.E. Goggin, M.P. Almeida, I. Kassal, J.D. Bia-
monte, M. Mohseni, B.J. Powell, M. Barbieri, A. Aspuru-Guzik, A.G. White, Nat. Chem. 2,
106 (2009)
103. B.P. Lanyon, C. Hempel, D. Nigg, M. Müller, R. Gerritsma, F. Zähringer, P. Schindler, J.T.
Barreiro, M. Rambach, G. Kirchmair, M. Hennrich, P. Zoller, R. Blatt, C.F. Roos, Science
334, 57 (2011)
104. U. Las Heras, A. Mezzacapo, L. Lamata, S. Filipp, A. Wallraff, E. Solano, Phys. Rev. Lett.
112, 200501 (2014)
105. L. García-Álvarez, J. Casanova, A. Mezzacapo, I.L. Egusquiza, L. Lamata, G. Romero, E.
Solano, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 070502 (2015)
106. S. Filipp, M. Göppl, J.M. Fink, M. Baur, R. Bianchetti, L. Steffen, A. Wallraff, Phys. Rev. A
83, 063827 (2011)
107. C. Rigetti, J.M. Gambetta, S. Poletto, B.L.T. Plourde, J.M. Chow, A.D. Córcoles, J.A. Smolin,
S.T. Merkel, J.R. Rozen, G.A. Keefe, M.B. Rothwell, M.B. Ketchen, M. Steffen, Phys. Rev.
B 86, 100506(R) (2012)
108. M.E. Peskin, D.V. Schroeder, Quantum Field Theory (Westview Press, 1995)
109. J. Casanova, A. Mezzacapo, L. Lamata, E. Solano, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108, 190502 (2012)
110. P. Jordan, E. Wigner, Z. Phys. 47, 631 (1928)
111. A. Altland, B. Simons, Condensed Matter Field Theory (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 2010)
112. J.M. Gambetta, A.A. Houck, A. Blais, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 030502 (2011)
113. S.J. Srinivasan, A.J. Hoffman, J.M. Gambetta, A.A. Houck, Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 083601
(2011)
114. J.M. Chow et al., Nat. Commun. 5, 4015 (2014)
115. D.M. Pozar, Microwave Engineering (Wiley, 2012)
116. K. Mølmer, A. Sørensen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 1835 (1999)
117. A. Mezzacapo, L. Lamata, S. Filipp, E. Solano, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113, 050501 (2014)

Chapter 8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays:
From Zitterbewegung to Photonic
Topological Insulators
F. Dreisow, M.C. Rechtsman, J.M. Zeuner, Y. Plotnik, R. Keil,
S. Nolte, M. Segev and A. Szameit
Abstract Simulating the evolution of a nonrelativistic quantum-mechanical particle
in a periodic potential by propagating an optical wave packet in an array of evanes-
cently coupled waveguides has received continuous and increasing attention in recent
years. However, one can also simulate the evolution of a relativistic quantum particle
in free space, as described by the spinor-type Dirac equation, by carefully design-
ing the periodic optical potential. In this chapter, the optical simulation of various
phenomena based on the Dirac equation will be discussed, such as Klein tunneling,
Zitterbewegung, relativistic gauge ﬁelds, and photonic topological insulators, which
all can be realized in the framework of paraxial optics in periodic media, without
requiring specially synthesized materials with subwavelength controlled properties.
F. Dreisow · J.M. Zeuner · S. Nolte · A. Szameit (B)
Abbe Center of Photonics, Institute of Applied Physics, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena,
Max-Wien-Platz 1, 07743 Jena, Germany
e-mail: alexander.szameit@uni-jena.de
F. Dreisow
e-mail: f.dreisow@uni-jena.de
J.M. Zeuner
e-mail: julia.zeuner@uni-jena.de
S. Nolte
e-mail: stefan.nolte@uni-jena.de
M.C. Rechtsman · Y. Plotnik · M. Segev
Physics Department, Solid State Institute Technion, 32000 Haifa, Israel
e-mail: mcrworld@gmail.com
Y. Plotnik
e-mail: yonatanplotnik@gmail.com
M. Segev
e-mail: msegev@techunix.technion.ac.il
R. Keil
Institut für Experimentalphysik, Universität Innsbruck, Technikerstrasse 25,
6020 Innsbruck, Austria
e-mail: robert.keil@uibk.ac.at
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
D.G. Angelakis (ed.), Quantum Simulations with Photons and Polaritons,
Quantum Science and Technology, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-52025-4_8
181

182
F. Dreisow et al.
8.1
Introduction
Integrated waveguide arrays for simulating single particle nonrelativistic quantum-
mechanics effects have received signiﬁcant attention in the last two decades [1].
The underlying idea of mapping nonrelativistic quantum mechanics onto an opti-
cal model system is the conceptual similarity between the Schrödinger equation for
matter waves and the scalar paraxial wave equation for optical waves. This formal
correspondence allowed for the observation of various classical analogues of nonrel-
ativistic phenomena commonly associated with the evolution of electrons in periodic
potentials, such as optical Bloch oscillations [2], optical dynamic localization [3], and
Anderson localization in disordered lattices [4]. It has been a common belief that the
useofopticalwaveguidesasamodelsystemforquantummechanicscarriestheintrin-
sic drawback of being limited to nonrelativistic phenomena and that the observation
of optical analogues of relativistic phenomena requires subwavelength structured
media like photonic crystals or metamaterials [5–7]. However, only recently it has
been realized that, by carefully designing the underlying periodic potential, paraxial
light propagation is capable of simulating the evolution of a relativistic quantum par-
ticle, as described by the spinor-type Dirac equation [8, 9]. Thus, optical analogues
of such important phenomena as Klein tunneling [8, 10], Zitterbewegung [11], rela-
tivistic gauge ﬁelds [12], and photonic topological insulation [13] can be realized in
the framework of paraxial optics in periodic media, without requiring specially syn-
thesized media with subwavelength controlled properties. Such optical simulations
offer various beneﬁts, such as the direct measurement of the wave function and the
long coherence time of light beams.
The ﬁrst part of the chapter deals with the fabrication technology of the photonic
lattices, where ultrashort femtosecond (fs) laser pulses are tightly focused into a
bulk material, resulting in permanent waveguides within the bulk. In the second part,
various relativistic emulations in one-dimensional lattices are presented, including
the Zitterbewegung of a photonic wave packet, Klein tunneling and pair creation.
In the third part of this chapter we focus on the implementation of the graphene
geometry in form of photonic honeycomb lattices (known as photonic graphene),
which is the basis for several new phenomena such as relativistic pseudo-magnetic
ﬁelds, topological edge states and photonic topological insulators.
8.2
Fabrication Technology
For the detailed investigation of relativistic effects in photonic lattices, the latter have
to meet a variety of conditions. The coupling between the individual lattice sites has
to be highly homogeneous to prevent disorder effects. Furthermore, the properties
of every single waveguide should be tuneable, which in particular allows for the
insertion of artiﬁcial defects. Moreover, a diversity of topologies has to be realizable
inordertoinvestigatethelightevolutioninone-andtwo-dimensionalperiodiclattices

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
183
as well as in non-periodic conﬁgurations such as waveguide interfaces and junctions.
Additionally, the fabricated arrays should be stable and permanent. It turns out that
the fs laser writing technique is an excellent approach to fulﬁl these requirements
[14].
When ultrashort laser pulses are tightly focused into the bulk material, nonlinear
absorption takes place leading to optical breakdown and the formation of a micro
plasma, which induces a permanent change of the material’s molecular structure. In
the particular case of fused silica as the processed material (refractive index nbulk =
1.45), the density is locally increased [15], yielding an increase of the refractive
index [16]. This phenomenon is commonly explained by the fact that bulk fused silica
consists of molecular ring structures composed of several Si O2 molecules, which are
partially broken by the fs laser radiation (see Fig.8.1a). Subsequent recombination to
smaller ring structures, which are composed of fewer Si O2 molecules with a higher
packing density, yields the observed densiﬁcation and, hence, a local increase of the
refractive index. When the spherical aberrations caused by the sample surface are
small, the dimensions of these induced changes are approximately given by the size
of the focal region of the writing objective and can be calculated using
w0 = M2
λ
πNA ,
b = M2
λ
πNA2 .
(8.1)
Fig. 8.1 Writing waveguides in fused silica using fs laser pulses. a In the focal region of the writing
objective, the high light intensities partially break the silica bonds. After reconﬁguration this results
in densiﬁcation and a locally increased refractive index. b Moving the sample transversely to the
beam results in an elongated index increase: a waveguide is created. c The guided mode intensity
|A(x, y)|2 at λ = 633 nm (left) and the cross section of the refractive index distribution (right) of
an individual waveguide

184
F. Dreisow et al.
Here, λ is the optical wavelength, w0 is the FWHM (full width at half maximum)
radius of the focal spot and b is the associated Rayleigh length. The quantity M2 char-
acterizes the difference between a real laser beam and a diffraction-limited Gaussian
beam, while NA is the numerical aperture. By moving the sample transversely with
respect to the beam, a continuous modiﬁcation is obtained and a waveguide is cre-
ated [17]. Such a guide can be written along arbitrary paths since the only limiting
factor in the placement of the focus is the focal length of the writing objective [18].
Furthermore, all structural changes are permanent and stable after fabrication.
Writingwaveguidesisaveryactiveﬁeldofresearch.Maintopicsareinvestigations
on inscriptions in a variety of bulk media, on directly inﬂuencing the refractive index
distribution of individual guides by beam shaping, minimizing propagation losses,
detailed analysis of the multiple fabrication parameters, and more. We refer the
interested reader to recent reviews on this topic and the references therein [19–22].
The waveguides used for the experiments presented in this chapter were usually
fabricated by a Ti:Sapphire laser system (RegA/Mira, Coherent Inc.) with a repetition
rate of 100 kHz at a laser wavelength of 800nm. The beam was typically focused
into polished fused-silica samples by a 20× microscope objective with a numerical
aperture of 0.35. This relatively weak focusing ensures that the created refractive
index change is almost independent on the writing depth inside the material, so that
evenlargewaveguidearrays arestill homogeneous inthevertical dimension. Asketch
of the writing setup is shown in Fig.8.1b. The resulting refractive index change (for
a ﬁxed polarization) can be obtained from the mode-amplitude distribution A(x, y)
of the waveguides via the inverse Helmholtz-Equation [23],
n2(x, y) = n2
eff −λ2
4π2
∇2 A(x, y)
A(x, y)
(8.2)
whichcanbeapproximatedbyusingtheassumptionneff = nbulk.Atypicalwaveguide
mode and the corresponding refractive index distribution obtained by using Eq.8.2
are shown in Fig.8.1c.
The guiding properties of the individual waveguides are strongly dependent on the
writingparameters.Withinthemulti-dimensionalparameterspacethepulseduration,
pulse energy and the writing speed are the key parameters inﬂuencing the resulting
refractive index distribution. The optimal processing parameters with respect to the
described setup are a pulse duration of about 150fs and a pulse energy of 0.3µJ,
respectively [24]. Keeping these parameters ﬁxed by only changing the writing speed
v, a speciﬁc tuning of the refractive index modulation is achieved. It could be shown
thatforwritingspeedsofabout500µm/s< vwriting <1500µm/sthewaveguidelosses,
measured by a cut-back method, are approximately constant (see Fig.8.2a). However,
the refractive index modulation decreases for increasing writing speeds due to the
smaller overlap between successive pulses, as shown in Fig.8.2b. This can be used
in particular to speciﬁcally introduce defects in a waveguide array with constant
waveguide spacing.
As a particular feature, the light intensity distribution can be directly monitored
inside the samples using a ﬂuorescence microscopy technique [25, 26]. During the

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
185
Fig. 8.2 Characteristics of fs laser-written waveguides. a The losses are approximately independent
of the writing speed. b The refractive index change is a function of the writing speed. Figures from
[24]
Fig. 8.3 Fluorescence microscopy. a Experimental setup to observe the ﬂuorescence radiation.
b Observed ﬂuorescence pattern of a straight waveguide array
writing process non-bridging oxygen hole centers (NBOHCs) are generated due to
breaking of molecular bonds. The NBOHCs have a broad absorption band around
2.0 eV [27] and exhibit an absorption maximum at 620nm [28]. Hence, when launch-
ing red light from a HeNe laser at λ = 633nm (corresponding to 1.95 eV) into
the waveguides, these color centers are excited and the resulting ﬂuorescence (at
λ = 650nm) can be directly observed. Since the color centers are formed exclu-
sively inside the waveguides, this technique yields a high signal-to-noise ratio. In
contrast to ﬂuorescent polymers (see e.g. [29]), the bulk material causes almost no
background noise. The experimental setup is sketched in Fig.8.3a. The laser beam
is launched into the waveguide array using a 4× microscope objective (NA = 0.25).
The ﬂuorescence distribution representing the diffraction pattern is imaged onto
a CCD camera using a 5× objective (NA = 0.13). Most of the scattered HeNe-
laser light is blocked by a 650nm longpass ﬁlter which improves the image quality

186
F. Dreisow et al.
considerably. The electronic noise of the camera is suppressed by averaging over
several (usually 10) images. The waveguide arrays have very high length-to-width
aspect ratio with sample lengths of up to 100mm and lattice widths in the order of
a few hundred microns. To overcome the problem to visualize a lattice with such
a high length-to-width aspect ratio, while maintaining a high spatial resolution, the
camera is translated along the sample and multiple images are recorded, scaled down
to 20 pixels in the propagation direction and stitched together yielding images with
a resolution of 40µm × 0.5µm per pixel. Additionally, the propagation losses in the
samples are removed by rescaling. For this purpose, the light propagation in a single
waveguide is monitored and the recorded intensity is ﬁtted with an exponentially
decaying function, which is used to normalize the ﬂuorescence images. In Fig.8.3b,
a ﬂuorescence microscope image of light propagation in a waveguide array after a
single waveguide excitation is shown. Importantly, the dependence of the ﬂuores-
cence intensity on the intensity of the propagating light is approximately linear, so
that not only qualitative, but also quantitative measurements can be performed.
8.3
One-Dimensional Lattices
The evolution of a Dirac particle in a single spatial dimension is governed by its two
chiral components. Mathematically, this can be represented by a two-component
wavefunction [30]. There are two avenues to realize such a spinor wave in an optical
setting. One can realize a waveguide array including Bragg reﬂection gratings yield-
ing counter-propagating waves [31] or implement a waveguide array with binary
substructure. The latter again has two options. Either one can modify the coupling
constants or alternating high and low refractive indices [32] both yielding a binary
waveguide array with the potential to simulate spinor waves. Let us ﬁrst concentrate
on a pure index modulation. Therefore, we consider a waveguide array consisting
of high refractive index change on even waveguides and low index change on odd
waveguides (see Fig.8.4a). The index change is assumed to be small such that we can
assume an unaffected and homogeneous coupling constant κ and an index mismatch
2δ. This leads to the following discrete Schrödinger equation for the amplitudes in
the mth channel am:
i dam
dz + κ(am+1 + am−1) + (−1)mδam = 0 .
(8.3)
This equation is most accurate in the limit where the guided modes of the
waveguides are tightly bound and well separated from one another. Applying Bloch’s
theorem allows the computation of the eigenvalue spectrum. With the plane wave
ansatz am = φei(βzz−mβxΛ) one ﬁnds the eigenvalues βz (which represent the longi-
tudinal wave number) to be
β±
z = ±

δ2 + 4κ2 cos2(βxΛ)
(8.4)

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
187
Fig. 8.4 The ﬁgure shows a a sketch of the binary waveguide array. It consists of an alternating
sequence of high (A) and low (B) refractive indices. The arrows mark a broad excitation under the
Bragg angle θB. b shows the band structure of the system. It is split in two opposite bands, which
are separated by a gap of 2δ. The dotted curves shows the hyperbolic approximation close to the
edge of the band (βx = π/2Λ)
with the waveguide spacing Λ. The setting supports two bands denoted with the
positive and negative sign. The non-vanishing index mismatch δ opens a gap between
these bands, which has the smallest spacing at the edge of the Brillouin zone βxΛ =
π/2 with βx as the transverse wave number. Note here, that the Brillouin zone has
only half the width −π/2 ≤βxΛ ≤π/2 compared to the homogeneous array −π ≤
βxΛ ≤π. The reason is that the Wigner-Seitz cell contains two waveguides and,
therefore, in reciprocal space the unit cell has only half the size.
In the vicinity of the edges of the band structure βxΛ ≈±π/2 one can approx-
imate β±
z as two hyperbolas with opposite sign. For the approximation we intro-
duce the shifted transverse and normalized wavenumber q, which is deﬁned as
q = βxΛ −π/2. Hence we can write
β±
z ≈±

δ2 + κ2q2
(8.5)
as the dispersion relation of the waveguide system (Fig.8.4b). One can immediately
recognize the energy momentum dispersion relation of a free relativistic particle. In
this analogy, q corresponds to the particle’s momentum and βz to its energy. The
quantities δ and κ correspond to mass and speed of light, respectively.
We will show now explicitly that the system governed by Eq.8.3 indeed follows
the dynamics of the Dirac equation. We perform the analysis at q ≈0. Hence, we
demand the excitation width of the light ﬁeld to be rather broad, covering at least
several lattice sites. Therefore, the spectrum G(βxΛ) can be assumed to be narrow.
The average momentum will be zero if the light beam is sent under the Bragg angle
θB = λ/4n0Λ into the waveguides. As this results in a phase shift of π/2 between
adjacent waveguides, we can set the waveguide amplitudes to a2m = (−1)mψ1 and
a2m−1 = −i(−1)mψ2, where we will see soon that ψ1 and ψ2 are the two components

188
F. Dreisow et al.
of the Dirac spinor ψ. For a better demonstration of the required analogy to the Dirac
equation we introduce continuous transverse coordinates normalized to the size of
the unit cell ξ ↔m = x/2Λ, which is allowed here as we use a broad beam such that
the amplitudes change only marginally with the waveguide position. The spinor is
then depending on ξ and evolves with z: ψ = ψ(ξ, z). Applying the new amplitudes
to Eq.8.3 and using the fact that the derivation reads as ∂a/∂ξ →am+1 −am, we
ﬁnally arrive at:
i ∂ψ
∂z = −iκσx
∂ψ
∂ξ + δσzψ
(8.6)
with the Pauli matrices
σx =
 0 1
1 0

and
σz =
 1 0
0 −1

.
(8.7)
Equation8.6 is the optical version of the well known Dirac equation, where the
coupling constant κ equals the velocity of light κ ↔c and δ is proportional to the
particle’s mass δ ↔mc2/ℏ. Note that the evolution of the optical beam takes place
along the spatial coordinate z instead of time t. Moreover, the ﬁeld amplitudes ψ1
and ψ2 are describing the occupation amplitudes of light in the two sublattices of the
binary array.
8.3.1
Photonic Zitterbewegung
Let us now describe the wave dynamics of a relativistic particle. It was Erwin
Schrödinger who analyzed the dynamics underlying Dirac’s equation [33]. He found
that a free relativistic electron performs a fast oscillating motion due to the inter-
ference of positive and negative energy states in the two branches of the energy
momentum relation. The motion also known as Zitterbewegung has a very high fre-
quency (∼1021Hz) and an amplitude of the oscillation of the order of the Compton
wavelength (λC = h/mec =≈10−12m) of an electron. Therefore so far it has not
been possible to directly observe the Zitterbewegung for free particles as no physical
method exists to achieve this temporal resolution. The ﬁrst observation of the Zitter-
bewegung was reported in a simulator using trapped ions [34] only recently, 80years
after the prediction of Schrödinger, which demonstrates that the observation of the
Zitterbewegung is a challenging task.
An oscillating motion of the light beam is also expected in our optical setting. To
show this we derive the expectation value for the transverse coordinate depending
on the longitudinal coordinate ξ(z). Therefore we start with a ﬁeld excitation as
required above with E(ξ, 0) = G(ξ)eiπξ, with a broad envelope G(ξ) tilted at the
Bragg angle θB. We introduce the Fourier transform of the excitation as ˆG(g) =
(2π)−1 
dξG(ξ)e−iξq. One can start the derivation by using this expression and

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
189
the deﬁnition of the center of mass as the expectation value ξ(z) =

dξξ(|ψ1|2 +
|ψ2|2)/

dξ(|ψ1|2 + |ψ2|2). A detailed calculation, see e.g. [9] leads to the result:
ξ(z) = ξ(0) + 4πκ3z

dq

q
β±
z
2
| ˆG(q)|2 + 2πκδ2

dq

1
β±
z
3
| ˆG(q)|2 sin2(β±
z z)
(8.8)
If the excitation G(ξ) is sufﬁciently broad, then the spectrum ˆG is narrow and
allows the approximation β±
z ≈±δ. This results in
ξ(z) = ξ(0) + v0z + κ
2δ sin(2δz)
(8.9)
The ﬁrst term of this expression describes the initial position of the excitation, i.e.,
the position of the particle. The second term shows that the particle performs a (small)
linear transverse translation with velocity v0 arising from the initial momentum
of the excitation. The last term describes an oscillatory motion around the mean
position, which is the Zitterbewegung. Its amplitude is deﬁned by RZB = κ/2δ =
ℏ/2mc and the oscillation frequency is given by ωZB = 2δ = 2mc2/ℏ. The frequency
is determined by the energy gap of 2δ in the dispersion relation Eq.8.5, whereas the
amplitude can additionally be adjusted for a ﬁxed frequency by the coupling constant
κ. Even though the expression in Eq.8.9 shows a perfect harmonic oscillation we
would like to emphasize that this term is usually damped due to the ﬁnite excitation
width and thus due to the extended excitation in reciprocal space.
Let us now have a look on the complete dynamics observed in a real waveguide
array. The experiments have been reported in [11], where binary waveguides were
fabricated using the femtosecond laser inscription technique. The investigation was
performed at the wavelength of λ = 633nm allowing for an observation of the prop-
agation pattern by the help of ﬂuorescence waveguide microscopy [25] in fused silica
glass. The lattice period was set to Λ = 16µm leading to a Bragg angle θB = 0.39◦
and a coupling constant κ = 0.14mm−1. The width of the excitation beam was
105µm which covers approximately 7 lattice sites. Hence, the excitation spectrum
can be treated as sufﬁciently small. The binary character was implemented by tuning
the writing speeds during the laser inscription process achieving slight index change
differences and therefore obtaining the necessary detunings δ [24, 35].
We observed three different regimes of Zitterbewegung. First we analyze the far
relativistic regime using a small mass by employing a small detuning δ = 0.5κ.
From Eq.8.9 we expect a small frequency and large amplitude. Figure8.5a depicts
the experimental result together with numerical simulation of the respective discrete
Schrödinger equation (Fig.8.5b). Figure8.5c shows the analysis of the center of mass
position, which is directly related to expectation value by the relation
⟨m(z)⟩=
	N
m=1 m|am|2
	N
m=1 |am|2
= 2ξ + 1
2 ,
(8.10)

190
F. Dreisow et al.
Fig. 8.5 Observation of the
far relativistic regime of the
Zitterbewegung (δ = 0.5κ).
a Measured propagation
image, b corresponding
calculation using Eq.(3),
c evolution of the beam
center of mass ⟨m(z)⟩
obtained from the
ﬂuorescence image shown in
(a) (solid line) and from the
numerical calculation in
(b) (dashed line)
where N is the number of lattice sites. One can clearly see the oscillations of the
beam accompanied by a transverse drift, as predicted by Eq.8.9. The oscillation
period ΛZB = 2π/ωZB = π/δ = 45 mm corresponding to approximately 2 cycles
in the 80mm long sample. The Zitterbewegung’s amplitude is approximately one
waveguide. There is a good agreement between experimental results and numerical
simulations demonstrating the asset of our Dirac modeling system. In the relativistic
regime,wesetδ = 1.1κinthesameorderasκandweexpectashortoscillationperiod
ΛZB and a moderate amplitude RZB. In Fig.8.6 one can see an oscillatory motion
with 4 cycles and a period of ΛZB = 20 mm. The Zitterbewegung’s amplitude is
weaker with only 0.45 waveguides. The drift velocity is also reduced as one obtains
a total drift of 2.5 waveguides after 80mm propagation length compared to a total
drift of 6 waveguides in Fig.8.5. This is explained by the fact that the drift velocity v0
decreasesastheratioδ/κincreases.Theweakrelativisticregime(Fig.8.7)isobtained
at δ = 2.1κ, where one attains an even shorter oscillation period ΛZB = 10.7 mm.
The amplitude is even smaller with only 0.25 waveguides (4µm) only. The drift
also decreases to less than one waveguide. This is in agreement to the fact that
for sufﬁciently large masses (detunings) the evolution becomes classical and no
Zitterbewegung is observed.

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
191
Fig. 8.6 Same as Fig.8.5
but the relativistic regime
(δ = 1.1κ). The period is
shorter and the amplitude is
smaller
Fig. 8.7 Same as Fig.8.5
but the weak relativistic
regime (δ = 2.1κ). The
period is shortest and the
amplitude almost vanishes

192
F. Dreisow et al.
Fig. 8.8 a Shows a sketch of the design of the sample, the waveguides are periodically curved and
have alternating spacings. b Shows the corresponding band structure. Compared to the binary index
detuned array, here, no gap opens between two bands and a diabolic point exists. Note that the point
of interest is here at βx = 0 and not at the Bragg angle
8.3.2
Emulation of Massless Dirac Particles
In the previous section, we modelled the Dirac equation in a waveguide lattice by
using a binary refractive index of the sites. However, as an alternative avenue one
can implement a binary coupling constant (see Fig.8.8a for a sketch of the setting).
In particular, by introducing coupling strengths with equal magnitude but alternating
signs, one can obtain a situation analogous to a massless Dirac equation [36]. This
results in the discrete Schrödinger equation:
i dam
dz + (−1)mκ(am+1 −am−1) = 0 .
(8.11)
Let us ﬁrst discuss the solutions of this equation. The dispersion relation reads
[36]:
β±
z = ±2κ sin(βxΛ)
(8.12)
and is displayed in Fig.8.8b. Around βx = 0 the two bands intersect. In the vicinity
of this intersection, the dispersion curve can be approximated with a linear slope. The
two opposite signs resemble two intersecting branches forming a so-called diabolic
point commonly associated with massless Dirac particles. The diabolic point has its
name from the singularity at βx = 0 where no uniquely deﬁned group velocity exists
and gives amongst other phenomena rise to conical diffraction. Conical diffraction
has been ﬁrst observed in biaxial crystals where the light spreads in a cone [37].
On a screen one observes a ring, which changes in diameter with changing screen
position but the width of the ring stays constant. For our one-dimensional problem
this means that light would spread into two branches propagating under a ﬁxed angle
in the positive and negative direction with constant beam width.
This light evolution can also be interpreted in terms of relativistic quantum
mechanics. The two beams propagating under opposite angles mimic the wave pack-
ets of a massles Dirac fermion and its anti-particle. They move away from each

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
193
other, which can be directly seen from the relativistic energy momentum relation
p = ±
√
E2 −m2c4/c, which simpliﬁes for the massless case to the linear relation
p = ±E/c.
As the system describes massless particles, we expect an equation comparable
to Eq.8.6 but without the last term on the right hand side. For the derivation we
follow the same formalism as for the Zitterbewegung. We rewrite the amplitudes to
a2m = ψ1 and a2m−1 = ψ2, where ψi are the components of the spinor ψ. Note that
now the deﬁnition of the spinor is different than in the scenario of massive particles
since we are interested in the central region of the dispersion relation and a ﬂat phase
is required.
Undergoing the transition from discrete to quasi-continuous coordinates as above
ξ ↔m = x/2Λ, and ∂a/∂ξ →am+1 −am, we ﬁnally arrive at
i ∂ψ
∂z = −iκσx
∂ψ
∂ξ .
(8.13)
This equation is precisely the Dirac equation for the massless particle. To observe
the respective dynamics in a waveguide array we still need to achieve alternating
positive and negative coupling constants. To this end, we utilize an effective coupling
constant in sinusoidally curved waveguide arrays, which reads as [38]
κm,eff = κm(Λm)J0

A4π2n0
Pλ Λm

.
(8.14)
Here, J0(x) is the Bessel function of order 0, A is the modulation amplitude, P is
the modulation period, Λm is the spacing between waveguides m and m + 1, κm(Λm)
the coupling strength between a pair of straight waveguides with that separation and
n0 is the refractive index of the substrate material (see Fig.8.8a). The coupling
constant is effective as it describes the light propagation only after every full period.
Depending on its argument, the Bessel function can be either positive or negative.
One ﬁnds that J0(μ) > 0 for 0 < μ < 2.405 and J0(μ) < 0 for 2.405 < μ < 5.52.
Hence, we can obtain the alternating signs of κm,eff just by changing the spacing of
adjacent waveguides Λm for ﬁxed P and A. For our binary waveguide array we need
alternating coupling constants, hence, we use two different lattice constants Λ1and
Λ2. To achieve symmetry in the coupling constants they need to fulﬁll the following
conditions with ﬁxed parameters for the curvature:
κ+
eff = κ(Λ1)J0(μ(Λ1))
(8.15)
κ−
eff = −κ+
eff = κ(Λ2)J0(μ(Λ2)) .
(8.16)
For the experimental implementation [36], we ﬁxed the amplitude and the period
of the sinusoidal waveguide curving to A = 10.1µm and P = 6 mm, respectively.
Together with the alternating lattice periods Λ1 = 13.9µm and Λ2 = 18.1µm we
obtained effective coupling constants κ±
eff ≈±0.2 cm−1. The waveguide array was

194
F. Dreisow et al.
Fig. 8.9 The images show the observation of the massless particle evolution. a The experimental
observationshowsclearlytheoscillationofthewaveguides.bDigitallystraighteningthewaveguides
make the conical diffraction visible. The beam splits in two parts corresponding to particle and anti-
particle. c Corresponding numerical simulation
Fig. 8.10 The ﬁgure shows the analysis of the center of mass (a) and the variance (b) of the upper
and lower part in Fig.8.9b, c
excited with a broad Gaussian beam with ﬂat phase covering 5 lattice sites. The
experimental and theoretical propagation images (Fig.8.9) show clearly the separa-
tion of the beam into two non-spreading parts moving constantly away from each
other. To further substantiate the effect of conical diffraction the center of mass and
the variance are plotted in Fig.8.10. Whereas the absolute value of the barycenter
increases constantly for both beams the variance stays rather the same during prop-
agation. This effect is characteristic for the approximately linear shape of the band
structure in the origin. The constant slope with opposite sign in both bands is respon-
sible for the propagation under a ﬁxed angle and the vanishing local curvature leads
to the non-diffracting beams with constant variance.

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
195
8.3.3
Photonic Klein Tunneling
KleintunnelingdescribesthephenomenonwhererelativisticFermionstunnelthrough
a strong repulsive potential without exponential damping as expected by a quantum
tunneling processes [39]. This work was extensively discussed [40–42], and although
there has been experimental evidence in Graphene heterojunctions [43, 44] it has
remained disputed [46] until the successful simulation of Klein tunneling, ﬁrst in
trapped ions [45] and a little later in waveguide arrays [10]. The latter work will be
discussed in the following.
In order to model Klein tunneling in waveguide arrays, we again employ our
setting with a binary index detuned waveguide array that mimics Dirac dynamics
according to Eq.8.6. The required potential step is implemented by an offset in the
refractive index between the left and the right side of the lattice. Hence, our model
system will be composed of two different regions, where in each the refractive index
of the waveguides is alternating around a different average value. The wave travels
from the higher index region (x < 0) towards the lower index region (x > 0) (see
Fig.8.11a, b) corresponding to a free particle impinging a potential wall.
The solution of this problem are forward and backward traveling waves at x < 0:
ψ(x < 0) =

ck
E −mc2

e
ikx
ℏ+ B

−ck
E −mc2

e−ikx
ℏ
(8.17)
and a forward travelling wave for x > 0:
ψ(x > 0) = D

cp
E −V −mc2

e
ipx
ℏ.
(8.18)
Here, E is the energy of the particle related to its momentum k by the energy
momentum dispersion relation E2 = c2k2 + m2c4 and p = ±

(E −V )2 −m2c4/c
is the momentum within the potential wall. B and D are constants. To satisfy conti-
nuity at x = 0 one requires
Fig. 8.11 a Sketch of the Klein tunneling process. A relativistic particle wave with energy E travels
towards a potential barrier V > E. The relativistic particle experiences no exponential damping
after crossing the potential barrier. b refractive index proﬁle of a optical analogous waveguide
array simulating Klein tunneling, the potential step is achieved by constantly shifting the refractive
indices c corresponding propagation constants and d band structure showing the typical band in
both regions. The bands on the right side are shifted to lower values as the refractive indices are
weaker

196
F. Dreisow et al.
ck(1 −B) = cpD
(8.19)
(E −mc2)(1 + B) = (E −V −mc2)D ,
(8.20)
which yields
1 −B
1 + B = p
k
(E −mc2)
(E −V −mc2) ≡1
η .
(8.21)
The reﬂection and transmission coefﬁcients R and T read then as
R =
1 −η
1 + η
2
,
T =
4η
(1 + η)2 .
(8.22)
It can be easily seen that if the energy of the particle is smaller than the potential
step E < V −mc2, η will become negative and therefore R > 1 and T < 0. In many
articles and books this fact is referred to as the Klein paradox. It is not, however, what
Klein wrote down. Klein noted in his original manuscript that Pauli had pointed out to
him that for x > 0, the particle momentum within the potential wall is p, whereas the
group velocity is vg = dE/dp = pc2/(E −V ). So if the transmitted particle moved
from left to right, vg has to be positive which implies that p had to be assigned its
negative value p = −

(E −V )2 −m2c4/c. This result ﬁnally teaches us that the
even for inﬁnite height of the potential step (V →∞) the transmission is non-zero.
ThisiswhatwelearnfromKleinswork:AccordingtotheDiracequationfermionscan
pass through strong repulsive potentials without the expected exponential damping
according to a conventional quantum tunneling process.
To investigate Klein tunneling in waveguide arrays we design our system similar
to that for Zitterbewegung but with an offset Δm, which is deﬁned as Δm = 0 for
m < 0 (region I) and Δm = Δ for m ≥0 (region II) [47]. The discrete Schrödinger
equation reads
i dam
dz + κ(am+1 + am−1) +

(−1)mδ + Δm

am = 0 .
(8.23)
For the uniform binary array, we obtained a band structure composed of two bands
that are hyperbolic near the band edge βxΛ = π/2. Due to the introduction of the
potential step we obtain again two of such bands but with their mean value shifted
by Δ. Hence, for appropriate values of Δ the lower band in region I overlaps with
the upper band in region II. Light is now able to tunnel from region I into region II,
which is analogue to Klein tunneling. The tunneling rates depend on the degree of
relativity and on the height of the potential step. The transmission is highest when
the overlap of two bands is maximal.
The experimental analysis was performed in femtosecond laser written waveguide
arrays [10]. The propagation constants are set according to Fig.8.11c, resulting in a
band structure shown in Fig.8.11d. The incident beam has Gaussian shape covering
approximately 9 waveguides and is tilted around the Bragg angle. For simplicity we

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
197
Fig. 8.12 Well overlapping bands shown in (a) allow for a broad region of Klein tunneling. The
potential step is rather large. b measured and simulated transmission obtained from (b). The tunnel-
ing region spans from 0 to 0.3π, b (upper row) shows the measured beam propagation for different
angles of incidence, meaning a probing of Klein tunneling at different positions of the band structure.
(lower row) illustrates the corresponding simulations
use here the dimensionless incident angles q, which are shifted towards the edge of
the band q = βxΛ −π/2. The ﬁrst sample was designed with a detuning δ = 0.15
mm−1 in both regions and an offset Δ = 0.6 mm−1. This is a rather high potential
step so that the lower band in region I overlaps completely with the upper band in
region II (Fig.8.12a). As we have a large overlapping region in the experiments we
ﬁnd a large range for incident angles around the Dirac point (q = 0) where tunneling
occurs. For q = 0.15π the transmission reaches values of up to ≈80%. Far away
from the Dirac point (q = 0.35π) the tunneling amplitude is negligibly small and
the light is completely reﬂected at the potential step at m = 0. At the Dirac point the
transmission drops to zero, which can be attributed to different momenta belonging
to same energies in region I and II. A complete scan of the incident angles is shown
in Fig.8.12b, c, where experimental images are compared with numerical solutions
of the coupled mode equations. The transmission is obtained by integrating the light
intensity in the regions I and II, respectively. The transmission is normalized to the
total power in the array. For further analysis one can derive an analytical expression
for the tunneling rates depending on the potential step and detuning [47]. If the
overlap of the bands is much smaller (δ = 0.125 mm−1 and Δ = 0.25 mm−1, see
Fig.8.13) one obtains a smaller region of Klein tunneling. Whereas in the previous
experiment the tunneling range was [0, 0.3π], the smaller overlap yields only half the
tunneling range [0, 0.15π], which is consistent to the quantum-mechanical pictures,
where both, energy and momentum conservation have to be fulﬁlled.

198
F. Dreisow et al.
Fig. 8.13 Same as Fig.8.12 but for a smaller potential step. The bands are not well overlapping (a)
and therefore the tunneling is rather ineffective. Two exemplary angles where tunneling is observed
are shown in (b) together with the corresponding simulations. Only in a small region (0–.15π) one
can achieve tunneling (c)
8.3.4
Emulation of Pair Creation
Beyond Zitterbewegung and Klein tunneling, the Dirac equation even predicts phe-
nomena which do not conserve the number of particles. The paradigmatic example
is of course the electron-positron pair production due to the vacuum instability in
an external electric ﬁeld [48, 49]. The negative energy levels described by the Dirac
equation are ﬁlled up to the vacuum state and, therefore, allow the possibility to
pull electrons out of the vacuum. This leaves a hole in the reservoir of negative
energy states, resulting in the creation of a positron as the anti-particle to the elec-
tron. So far there are two known mechanisms that initiate this process. By applying
an electrostatic ﬁeld the electron can directly tunnel through the energy gap between
negative and positive energy levels. This effect is known as the Schwinger mech-
anism [40]. However, enormous ﬁeld strengths are required to observe this effect
and therefore no observation in any lab has been performed yet. On the other hand
one can drive a dynamic process by an external AC ﬁeld, known as dynamical pair
production [50]. For this process at least an experimental proposal exists, in which
two counter-propagating ultrastrong laser ﬁelds are used. But also this implementa-
tion is challenging and has not been achieved so far. The observation in a waveguide
array as a model system allows this experiment to be simulated in a conventional
laboratory setup (Fig.8.14).
In optical waveguide arrays we can simulate an external ﬁeld by applying a cur-
vature with the proﬁle x0(z) to the waveguides [3, 38, 51], such that an external
ﬁeld Ex is proportional to ¨x0(z) and equivalent to a local shift of the waveguide’s
propagation constants. This can be written in terms of complex coupling constants,
employing a phase term [52]:
i dam
dz + κeiφam+1 + κe−iφam−1 + (−1)mδam = 0 .
(8.24)
The phase φ is depending on the longitudinal coordinate and is deﬁned as φ(z) =
2πn0Λ/λ × dx0(z)/dz. For straight waveguides, i.e., φ = 0, the system is equivalent
to the two-band lattice described in Sect.8.3.1, in which Zitterbewegung can be
observed. In the general scenario, however, Eq.8.24 results in the modiﬁed Dirac
equation

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
199
Fig. 8.14 The ﬁgure shows how dynamic pair production can be observed in the optical model
system. a shows the sketch of the sample. The lattice consists of high and low index waveguides
A and B. The index proﬁle is shown at the top. Below the longitudinal design is depicted. The
sample contains an initial section of a single cycle oscillation mimicking the external AC driving
ﬁeld. Here the pair is created. A subsequent section separates the beams. The beam propagating
to the right is the original undistorted beam. The beam propagating to the left determines the pair
creation rate. b shows the corresponding band structure. Initially the wave packet is excited in the
upper band marked with the red dot. Due to the external ﬁeld an interband transition to the lower
band occurs, which corresponds to the pair creation. The created particle and the excitation have
opposite propagation angles, indicated by an arrow. After a certain propagation distance the beams
can be distinguished in real space
i dψ
dz + iκσx
dψ
dξ + 2κφ(z)σxφ −δσzφ = 0 ,
(8.25)
where ˙φ(z) ∼¨x0(z) ∼Ex. The pair creation process can be explained in a simple
optical picture. One can understand this process as a tunneling from the upper band
(negative energy) to the lower band (positive states) caused by the external electric
ﬁeld. This effect changes the occupation probabilities in both bands. As both bands
exhibit opposite slopes, the propagation direction of the light beams is opposite as
well. Propagating the beam further beyond the AC ﬁeld area yields a spatial separa-
tion of the respective fractions, such that they can be distinguished. The separated
droplet represents the positive energy state and, therefore, the created electron. At the
output the both beams are integrated and normalized to the total power yielding the
band occupation in each bands. The occupation of the lower band (positive energy)
determines the pair creation probability.
For the experimental realization [53], we generated the required AC pulse by
implementing a sinusoidally curved region at the beginning of the waveguide arrays.
The period of the cycle was 6.67mm and the peak-to-peak amplitude A0 was varied
from 0µm to 48µmm in 13 realizations to study the inﬂuence of the external ﬁeld
strength. A straight section until the end of the sample with total length of 90mm
followed afterwards. The waveguide spacing was Λ = 12µm yielding a coupling

200
F. Dreisow et al.
Fig. 8.15 Exemplary propagation images (a, c) and corresponding simulations (b, d) for a super-
lattice with a small detuning of δ = 0.4κ. The images show results for the amplitudes A0 = 20µm
(a, b) and A0 = 28µm (c, d). The tunneling is incomplete for both samples. The simulations are
performed in the reference frame, where the waveguides appear straight
constant of κ = 0.24 mm−1. Two different samples were fabricated to study the
inﬂuence of the particle’s mass. To excite an electron from the negative energy
states, we slightly tuned the incident angle of the broad Gaussian beam (covering 9
waveguides) to precisely half the Bragg angle, which insures the excitation of only
one band as well as fulﬁlling the close-to Bragg angle approximation. For vanishing
external ﬁeld (A0 = 0µm) we see a propagation to the right side of the sample.
When increasing the ﬁeld strength, an inter-band transition is observed, which is
manifested as a breakup of the beam to the left side of the sample. Consequently, the
output is split into two beams. For the ﬁrst sample (Fig.8.15), which has an index
detuning of δ = 0.4κ, a maximum of the tunneling rate of 40% was achieved for an
amplitude of A0 = 28µm. This fractional tunneling coincides with the theoretical
predictions and models the situation when the frequency of the driving AC ﬁeld was
not properly adjusted to the particle’s mass. Note, that in the experiments a third
beam is visible, which is a remainder of the injected laser light that did not couple
into the waveguides. This beam is not relevant to the physics of the simulated pair
creation process and it is not observed in the numerical simulations, which are based
on a discretized (tight-binding) model of light transport.

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
201
Fig. 8.16 Same as. Figure8.15 but for a optimized photon energy (oscillation frequency) to the rest
energy (detuning). Samples for A0 = 20µm, A0 = 28µm and A0 = 44µm are shown (top experi-
ment, bottom simulation). An almost complete tunneling (98%) is observed for (c, d). Increasing
the driving ﬁeld reduces the tunneling again
The tunneling rate is signiﬁcantly increased when the particle’s mass is properly
adjusted. An optimization of the tunneling was achieved by tuning the particle’s
mass δ with a ﬁxed frequency of the driving ﬁeld. For a particle mass of δ = 0.8κ
we achieved a transition probability of almost 100% (see Fig.8.16). The probability
decreases again at higher amplitudes, which means for the pair production process
that, for a certain mass, the frequency of the driving ﬁeld and the amplitude have to
fulﬁll a particular relation to obtain maximum pair creation probability. The results
are summarized in Fig.8.17 where the tunneling rates for all 13 ﬁeld strengths are
plotted. One can clearly see that for small and large mass the pair creation probability
is a non-monotonic of the AC ﬁeld amplitude, i.e., it reaches a maximum and decrease
afterwards. One can additionally see that the tunneling probability for the large mass
approaches almost 100% for A0 = 28µm (black curve and data points).
To summarize this part of the chapter, we have found that waveguide arrays
provide a convenient way to observe relativistic quantum mechanics described by
the Dirac equation. We have shown that binary waveguide lattices can either describe
massive or massless particles depending on whether the binary character is applied
to the refractive index of the waveguides or the inter-site coupling. By choice of the
waveguide conﬁguration, a variety of scenarios can be investigated, ranging from
free dynamics via scattering at potential barriers to such elusive phenomena as pair
creation. It is even possible to simulate Dirac particles with a spatially dependent
mass, which directly relates to impurity spins in antiferromagnetic materials and
their mutual correlation [54].

202
F. Dreisow et al.
Fig. 8.17 Measurements and simulations are summarized for 13 different amplitudes. a shows
the pair production probability versus driving ﬁeld amplitude for both realizations (δ = 0.4κ and
δ = 0.8κ). A maximum close to 100% is obtained for the larger detuning only. b, c Output cross
sectional images depending on the amplitude. For a low detuning a pair production rate of 50%
cannot be exceeded, while for the high detuning one approaches almost unity for A0 = 28µm
8.4
Two-Dimensional Lattices: Photonic Graphene
The ﬁrst part of this chapter focused on the realization of Dirac physics in one-
dimensional lattices. However, perhaps the most well-known realization of this rel-
ativistic dispersion relation in a lattice geometry is two-dimensional: i.e., it arises
in graphene [55, 56]. Graphene is a two-dimensional honeycomb lattice of carbon
atoms; it is composed of two interpenetrating triangular lattices, and therefore has a
two-member basis. Its lattice vectors may be written as:
r1 = Λ(
√
3, 0) ,
r2 = Λ(
√
3, 3)/2 ,
(8.26)
and the positions of the elements in the unit cell may be written as:
ρ1 = (0, 0) ,
ρ2 = Λ(0, 1) ,
(8.27)
where Λ is the nearest-neighbor spacing, and
√
3Λ is the lattice constant. The physics
of graphene has been discussed extensively [56]; the present discussion is devoted to
photonic graphene, namely, a lattice of evanescently-coupled waveguides wherein
the diffraction of light is governed by the same equations as the motion of electrons
in graphene (see Fig.8.18a, b). The honeycomb system has been termed photonic
graphene due to this correspondence [12]. The notion of photonic graphene was

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
203
Fig. 8.18 a Schematic diagram of the honeycomb photonic graphene lattice with lattice termina-
tions, namely the bearded, zig-zag and armchair edges indicated; b Microscope image of the input
facet of a photonic lattice showing elliptical waveguides arranged in the honeycomb geometry; c
Spatial band structure (longitudinal wavenumber, βz, of the paraxial wavefunction envelope, plotted
as a function of transverse wavenumbers βx and βy). The band structure describes the diffraction
properties of wavepackets propagating in the photonic lattice
introduced in 2007 [5] in the context of the observation of lattice solitons in the
honeycomb lattice. Other systems that obey the same mathematical properties of
graphene have been discussed in the context of photonic crystal slabs [57], molecular
assemblies [58], microwave resonators [59], Bose-Einstein condensates [60], and
exciton-polariton condensates [61]. The focus of this discussion, however, will be
on photonic lattices: arrays of coupled waveguides.
Similarly to one-dimensional lattices, when the waveguides are single-mode, the
system can be accurately modelled by the following discrete Schrödinger equation:
i dam
dz + βmam +

<n>
κm,nam = 0 ,
(8.28)
where κnm is the coupling constant between waveguides n and m. The summation
is taken over neighboring waveguides up to some cutoff distance in the transverse
plane, which is determined by the evanescent coupling decay length. Unless stated
otherwise, we consider only nearest-neighbor coupling (κn,m = κ for neighboring
waveguides, and 0 otherwise). In order to write down z-independent equations for
static solutions, we take am = φm exp{iβzz}, and therefore arrive at:
−βzφm + βmφm +

<n>
κm,nφm ≡

n
Hm,nφm .
(8.29)
This represents an eigenvalue equation for the static solutions to these linear
coupled-mode equations. Here, the matrix H is a Hamiltonian whose eigenvalues
and eigenvectors represent the propagation constants and mode proﬁles of the static
solutions of Eq.8.28. When the system is periodic, we may use Bloch’s theorem to
represent the solutions of Eq.8.29 in reciprocal space. Namely, we take:

204
F. Dreisow et al.
φ(A)
m
= Aeiβ·R(A)
n
,
φ(B)
m
= Beiβ·R(B)
n
,
(8.30)
where φ(A)
m represents the amplitude on the mth waveguide on the A-sublattice (sim-
ilarly for φ(B)
m ); β = (βx, βy) is the Bloch wave vector; R(A)
n
is the position of the
mth waveguide on the A-sublattice (similarly for R(B)
n ); and A, B are deﬁned by
Eq.8.30. Plugging this into Eq.8.28, we obtain the following dispersion relation for
βz as a function of β:
βz = ±



κ2

1 + 4 cos2
βyΛ
2

+ 4 cos
βyΛ
2

+ cos

βx
√
3Λ
2

.
(8.31)
This band structure diagram is plotted in Fig.8.18c: it consists of two bands (due
to the fact that the unit cell contains two waveguides), and the bands cross at singular
points that reside at the Brillouin-zone vertices. These are the Dirac points—there
are two unique such points per Brillouin zone. They exhibit conical dispersion and
are described (locally in reciprocal space) by a two-dimensional Dirac Hamiltonian
[56], namely:
HDirac = 3κ
2 p · σ ,
(8.32)
where p is the momentum measured from the Dirac point (or β −β0, where β0 is
a vertex point of the Brillouin zone where the Dirac point lies), and σ is a vector
composed of Pauli matrices, (σx, σy). Note that the dispersion relation of this Hamil-
tonian only describes wave propagation in the vicinity of a given Dirac point, not
elsewhere in the spectrum.
8.4.1
New Edge States in Photonic Graphene
The discussion up to this point has described the spectral properties of extended
Bloch states propagating in a honeycomb photonic lattice. However, some of the most
fascinating graphene physics arises not in the bulk of the crystal, but on the edges.
Although there are an inﬁnite number of ways to terminate the honeycomb lattice, the
three simplest—and most widely referred to—are the so-called zig-zag, bearded, and
armchair edges (labeled in Fig.8.18a). In order to examine the effect of terminating
the lattice, a unit cell with a ‘strip’ geometry must be considered (which is periodic in
the x-direction but is terminated in the y-direction). The strip geometry incorporates
Bloch periodic boundary conditions in one direction, implying an inﬁnite system
size in the x-direction, but a ﬁnite termination in the vertical direction. The ﬁnite
termination (which is also called discrete Dirichlet boundary conditions) allows for
the incorporation of boundary effects, such as the occurrence of states localized at
the edges.

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
205
Edge calculations reveal that both the zig-zag and bearded edges exhibit states
that are localized to the edges (i.e., decay exponentially from the edges in the ver-
tical direction in Fig.8.18a and are extended horizontally), but in the unperturbed
honeycomb lattice, the armchair edge does not [62, 63]. In coupled mode theory, the
bearded edge exhibits a state that resides in the central 2/3 of the Brillouin zone in the
x-direction, whereas the zig-zag edge exhibits an edge state that resides in the com-
plementary 1/3 of the zone. These states are well known from graphene physics, and
arise as a result of the band crossings at the Dirac points [62]. Edge states that arise
as a result of band crossings are called Shockley states [64], and can be derived using
the bulk-edge correspondence principle via the Zak phase [65]—further discussion
of these derivations can be found in Refs. [66].
The edge states of photonic graphene in the limit of nearest-neighbor hopping
have completely ﬂat dispersion (in other words, βz(βx) is completely ﬂat, meaning
the edge states do not move or broaden as a function of z) [62]. However, this is not the
case if next-nearest-neighbor coupling is included. A more general calculation which
accounts for such non-nearest neighbour couplings is given by the full Schrödinger
equation
i ∂ψ(x, y, z)
∂z
+
λ
4πn0
∇2
⊥ψ(x, y, z) + 2πΔn
λ
ψ(x, y, z) = 0
(8.33)
with ψ(x, y, z) as the envelope function of the electric ﬁeld and Δn as the refractive
index change of the waveguides. The full Schrödinger equation is diagonalized to
ﬁnd the eigenvalues and eigenstates as a function of β. The edge states for the
bearded and zig-zag edges are shown for the complete diagonalization of Eq.8.33
in Fig.8.19a. Here, the eigenstates for a honeycomb strip terminated on one side
Fig. 8.19 a Edge band structure indicating the presence of edge states residing at the center of
the edge Brillouin zone (and occupying 2/3 thereof) for the bearded edge, as well as the outer part
of the Brillouin zone (occupying the remaining 1/3) for the zig-zag edge; b Experimental results
showing the fraction of optical power remaining on the bearded edge (blue) and the zig-zag edge
(green); c Edge band structure for the bearded edge, zoomed in around the van Hove singularity at
the zone boundary. An edge state (classiﬁed as a Tamm state) that is not predicted by tight-binding
theory emerges from the band as a result of a self-induced defect. The range of βx and βz for this
plot is indicated by a box with a dashed outline in (b)

206
F. Dreisow et al.
with the bearded edge and the other side with the zig-zag edge are shown. Note
that the band structure is composed of bulk modes that permeate the entire bulk of
the lattice, as well as edge states that reside only on the edges of the lattice. The
bearded edge state occupies approximately the central two thirds of the zone and the
zig-zag edge state occupies the outer third, in accordance to the exact values in the
nearest-neighbor tight-binding limit. In order to experimentally probe the presence
or absence of an edge state at a given transverse wavevector (parallel to the edge), βx,
an elliptical beam is launched at the edge in question. The parallel tilt of the beam
controls βx. Figure8.19b shows the fraction of power remaining on the edge as a
function of βx: a large value indicates the presence of a highly conﬁned edge state,
and a low value indicates bulk excitation and no edge state. For the zig-zag edge, it is
clear that the edge state resides in the outer part of the spectrum, as explained directly
from Fig.8.19a. However, for the bearded edge, there exist edge states both at the
center of the Brillouin zone (the well-known state) and at the zone boundaries (an
anomalous state). This indicates the presence of a novel type of edge state that was
not known in the graphene literature, and was found only in the context of photonic
graphene [67, 68]. The fact that it was not seen before is, in some sense, not a surprise:
the bearded edge is not chemically stable in graphene itself. The state resides at a
van-Hove singularity (where there exists a high degeneracy due to a saddle point
in the bulk band structure). Figure8.19c shows the edge dispersion zoomed in at
the Brillouin zone boundary in the upper band: notice the presence of an edge state
emerging from the bulk bands there (there is another edge state in the lower band).
The mechanism for the formation of this edge state may be explained as follows.
The bearded edge contains two ‘missing bonds’ on the edge (see Fig.8.18a). The
absence of these bonds provides a small correction to the self-energy term when
deriving the coupled mode equations, Eq.8.28, from the full continuous Schrodinger
equation, Eq.8.33. This is explained in fuller detail in Ref. [67]. This term acts as
an effective defect on the edge. It has been previously shown that small defects on
the edge can lead to the emergence of edge states at the van Hove singularity [69]:
therefore despite the lack of any real defect on the edge, this ‘effective’ defect induces
an edge state. Therefore, it can be classiﬁed as a Tamm state [70] (also since it does
not arise from any form of band crossing, and is therefore not a Shockley state).
8.4.2
Generation of Pseudo-Magnetic Fields Due
to Inhomogeneous Strain
In 1998, Kane and Mele [71] showed that if graphene is strained from its honeycomb
lattice geometry in a particular way, the resulting description of the electron wave
dynamics around the Dirac point was equivalent to a charged, massless relativistic
particle in a magnetic ﬁeld (it was later termed a pseudomagnetic ﬁeld). Building
on this work, Guinea et al. [72] showed that a particular functional form of the

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
207
strain would lead to a constant pseudomagnetic ﬁeld (directed perpendicular to the
graphene plane, that is, in z-direction). Speciﬁcally, the standard two-dimensional
Dirac Hamiltonian picks up a gauge ﬁeld:
HDirac = 3κ
2 p · σ →3κ
2 ( p + A(x, y)) · σ ,
A(x, y) = B0
2 (−y, x)
(8.34)
where A(x, y) is a vector potential (i.e., gauge ﬁeld) that corresponds to a constant
magnetic ﬁeld in the symmetric gauge. The strength of the magnetic ﬁeld, B0, is a
function of the strain tensor: a full derivation of how the pseudomagnetic ﬁeld comes
about as a result of strain is discussed in Refs. [56, 72]. The pseudomagnetic ﬁeld
was ﬁrst shown experimentally by straining graphene in a bubble-geometry [73]. A
very important distinction with real magnetic ﬁelds must be noted here: an imposed
external magnetic ﬁeld breaks time-reversal symmetry, where a pseudomagnetic ﬁeld
does not. The reason is that the pseudomagnetic ﬁeld acts in opposite directions for
the two unique Dirac cones in the graphene spectrum, thus preserving time-reversal
symmetry for the system as a whole.
When a magnetic ﬁeld is imposed on a two-dimensional system, the result is the
appearance of Landau levels in the eigenvalue spectrum—this is no different for a
pseudomagnetic ﬁeld. Landau levels are regions of very high degeneracy (and thus
high density-of-states), which can be thought of as the result of quantization of the
cyclotron orbit of charged particles rotating in a magnetic ﬁeld. Since photons prop-
agating through a honeycomb photonic lattice obey the same governing equations
as electrons in graphene, Landau levels should appear in the photonic spectrum of
propagation constants, βz for a honeycomb photonic lattice with the same strain as
discussed in Ref. [72]. This effect was explored in Ref. [12], observing Landau levels
in a photonic spectrum for the ﬁrst time. Figure8.20a, b show a single Dirac cone in
the spectrum with and without an applied constant magnetic ﬁeld, respectively. Note
that all of the states in the spectrum cluster in highly degenerate spectral regions. The
positions of the Landau levels in the spectrum are given by βz = ±ω0
√|N|, where
N is the integer Landau level index, and ω0 = 3
√
BκΛ/2.
The calculation showing the mode proﬁles of the Landau levels is given in Ref.
[56]; note, however, that the derivation assumes an inﬁnite system size. Systems in
nature must of course be ﬁnite, and whenever this is the case, there exist localized
states lying on the edges of the structure. As is shown in Ref. [12], an excitation of the
armchair edge overlaps with modes that lie band gaps between Landau levels. Recall
that without strain, the armchair edge exhibits no localized modes in the spectrum
and therefore light cannot be conﬁned on this edge. As shown in Fig.8.20c–f together
with Fig.8.20g–j, increasing the degree of strain of the lattice causes light input on the
armchair edge to become localized there. This is a result of band gap guidance, but not
in an ordinary band gap—instead, the light is guided in gaps lying between Landau
levels. Further results in Ref. [12] show that indeed the guided states spectrally reside
in the Landau level region.
To conclude this section, it is important to discuss the technological motivation
behind studying aperiodic photonic structures, and in particular, those with Landau

208
F. Dreisow et al.
Fig. 8.20 a Dirac cone in an unstrained honeycomb system; b Landau levels resulting from the
inhomogeneous strain; c–f Microscope images of the input facets of the arrays with increasing
inhomogeneous strain (the waveguide into which light is launched is indicated by a yellow arrow);
g–j Experimental images of output facets of the arrays after light is injected into a single waveguide
on the armchair edge. Localization of the wavepacket implies that the states excited lie within band
gaps between Landau levels
levels in their spectra. A Landau level is an energy level with extremely high degener-
acy and thus high density-of-states. Since the efﬁciencies of many photonic processes
are directly proportional to the ambient density of photonic states (this is called the
Purcell effect [74]), the ability to manipulate this over a large-scale photonic device
could be extremely important across applications where the Purcell effect plays an
important role. Examples of these include slow light-based devices, where the high
density-of-states at the band edge of a photonic crystal is associated with enhanced
nonlinear all-optical control [75]; wavelength-scale cavity lasing [76]; and large-area
lasing for biosensing [77], among many others. A high density-of-states is usually
associated with a physical mechanism for why light remains conﬁned in a given
region for a long period of time compared to its inverse frequency: (1) in the case of
a cavity, the mechanism is that light can be thought of as bouncing back and forth
within the cavity geometry, keeping it mostly in one place; (2) in the case of slow light,
the mechanism is self-evident from its name: light goes more slowly and therefore
stays in one region for a longer time; (3) in the case of Landau levels, light circulates
in cyclotron orbits of the pseudomagnetic ﬁeld, allowing it to be conﬁned on long

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
209
time scales. This suggests that Purcell enhancement applications are most certainly
achievable using pseudomagnetic ﬁelds and photonic Landau levels, especially if the
device in question is signiﬁcantly larger than the scale of a wavelength. Falling into
this category would be directional lasing, biosensing, and even photovoltaic cells.
8.4.3
Photonic Floquet Topological Insulators
Starting in 2005, a new topological insulator revolution started with papers demon-
strating the quantum spin Hall effect [78, 79]. A topological insulator is a material
that is an insulator in the bulk, but metallic on its edges. In other words, it has a
bulk band gap, but it has surface states that cross that band gap, and since the Fermi
energy lies within the band gap, current ﬂows along the surfaces. In two dimensions,
the surface states are effectively one-dimensional, meaning that they are edge states.
In this scenario, the edge states are completely robust to any kind of scattering as
a result of defects or disorder on the edge: they pass through with perfect trans-
mission and no reﬂection (and no scattering into the bulk either). The reason that
they have this property is that either they are forbidden from backscattering into
the backwards-propagating state (in the case of the spin-Hall effect), or there is no
backwards propagating state available for them to scatter into, as in the case of the
quantum anomalous Hall effect, as described by the Haldane model [80]. The reason
that these states are called topologically protected has to do with the fact that their
existence is associated with topological invariants of the band structure [81] (via the
bulk-edge correspondence principle), but this is a topic that goes beyond the scope
of the present chapter. For a thorough discussion, see Ref. [82].
In photonic graphene as discussed previously, there are edge states associated
with the bearded and zig-zag edges of the structure. However, these are not the
non-scattering topologically protected edge states discussed above, since they may
easily backscatter into counterpropagating states. In order to eliminate the counter-
propagating states, time-reversal symmetry has to be broken. Here, since the time
coordinate of the usual Schrödinger equation gets replaced by the longitudinal coor-
dinate, z (as discussed above), one must break z-reversal symmetry to eliminate the
counterpropagating state. The way this is done is by making the waveguides helical
in shape, rather than straight. This gives a chirality to the structure, thus establishing
a preferred rotation direction (in the present work, it is clockwise). This structure is
shown schematically in Fig.8.21a. The period of the helix in the z-direction is 1cm,
and the structure is 10cm long (meaning 10 periods of helical rotation). It was shown
there that the helical rotation gives rise to a ﬁctitious force: a circularly polarized
electric ﬁeld, in the reference frame co-moving with the helices. This in turn implies
that the Hamiltonian describing the system is time-dependent, and therefore must be
solved using Floquet boundary conditions (which are simply Bloch-periodic bound-
ary conditions in time). This puts our structure in a class called Floquet topological
insulators [83–85]. Further details are discussed in Ref. [13], which constituted
the ﬁrst realization of topological protection in optics. Topological protection was

210
F. Dreisow et al.
Fig. 8.21 a Schematic diagram of helical waveguides rotating in a counter-clockwise sense. The
helicity of the waveguides breaks z-reversal symmetry, which enables transverse topological pro-
tection, as discussed in the text. b As a result of the helicity, the honeycomb band structure opens a
band gap; c Edge band structure of the zig-zag edge showing the presence of topologically-protected
states. The left-propagating state resides on the top, and the right-propagating state resides on the
bottom, and thus they form a single clockwise edge channel propagating around the entire array. No
counterclockwise channel exists in the band gap. d Experimental results showing that when light is
launched into the top right waveguide (indicated by yellow arrow) of a honeycomb array (shaped
like an equilateral triangle), it propagates around a lattice defect (which takes the form of a missing
waveguide) without backscattering. A microscope image of structure is shown in the inset
proposed and achieved in the microwave regime earlier [86–88]. Subsequent to the
photonic realization of Floquet topological insulators, a condensed matter realization
was found using ultrafast optics techniques [89].
As a result of the helical rotation of the photonic lattice, the degeneracy at the Dirac
cones is broken, and a band gap is opened (as shown in Fig.8.21b). Moreover, the
structure possesses topologically protected edge states (and non-zero Chern number),
as can be seen in the edge dispersion plot shown in Fig.8.21c. Note that there are
two edge states crossing one another in the dispersion diagram; the right-mover
(negative slope) resides on the top edge, and the left-mover (positive slope) resides
on the bottom edge of the structure. In fact, these edge states taken together with
those that reside on the left and right (armchair) edges constitute one chiral edge state
(per momentum β) that circulates around the structure in a helical fashion. There is
no counterclockwise-propagating channel; therefore there can be no scattering. This
is demonstrated in Fig.8.21d, in the following way. The honeycomb photonic lattice

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
211
Fig. 8.22 a Microscope image for the input facet of an equilateral-triangle-shaped photonic topo-
logical insulator (helical honeycomb photonic lattice). b–j Output facets of different honeycomb
photonic lattices with increasing helix radius. The displacement of the optical power along the edge
from the excited waveguide (indicated by the yellow circle) initially increases with helix radius, but
then reaches a maximum and eventually goes to zero
is arranged in an overall equilateral triangular shape. A single waveguide is removed
from the right edge, to act as a defect. Light is injected in the upper-right waveguide,
which has signiﬁcant overlap on the edge states of the system. The light propagates
through the structure and past the defect without backscattering. This can be taken
as evidence of topological protection.
More evidence of topological protection can be obtained by examining the depen-
dence of the group velocity of the edge state on the radius of the helix. In order to
do so, multiple arrays were fabricated, each with a different helix radius, R. When
light is injected into the top-left waveguide of the photonic topological insulator, in
general it gets displaced in a clockwise direction along the edge. The degree to which
it is displaced yields the group velocity of the state. This can be seen via the output
facet of the array, as shown in Fig.8.22a–i, each with increasing helix radius. Note
that around R = 8µm, the group velocity reaches its maximum, and then decreases
for larger helix radius. This is conﬁrmed by results from Floquet tight-binding simu-
lations, where the group velocity dependence is found to be in quantitative agreement
with experiment. At the point where the group velocity reaches zero again the valence
and conduction bands touch and the system undergoes a topological transition. This
can be directly seen in Fig.8.23. In the language of topological insulators, the Chern
number of the valence band changes from −1 to 2.
In summary, photonic graphene provides a rich platform for the study of Dirac
dispersion phenomena. The realization of anomalous edge states, optical pseudomag-
netism and Landau levels, as well as photonic topological protection dramatically
demonstrates this fact. At this stage, the effects of mean ﬁeld interactions (in other
words, optical nonlinearities), have just begun to be studied. For example, solitons
have been predicted to exist in the topological band gap in the presence of the Kerr
nonlinearity [90]. There is certain to be more very rich nonlinear Dirac physics
that will arise in the optical context. Deep questions remain, such as: are nonlin-
ear topological edge states stable against interactions? Can transport be quantized
in a photonic system, much as it is in quantum Hall topological systems with non-
zero Chern number? What is the nature of topological edge states in non-Hermitian

212
F. Dreisow et al.
Fig. 8.23 Group velocity
dependence on the helix
radius, R, calculated from a
tight-binding model
systems? These questions and others will likely yield deep topological physics in the
optical domain for years to come—these are questions that optics provides a unique
platform to address.
References
1. S. Longhi, Laser Photon. Rev. 3, 243 (2009)
2. T. Pertsch et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 4752 (1999) (R. Morandotti et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 83,
4756 (1999))
3. S. Longhi et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 243901 (2006)
4. T. Schwartz et al., Nat. Lond. 446, 52 (2007) (Y. Lahini et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 013906
(2008))
5. F.D.M. Haldane, S. Raghu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 013904 (2008) (R.A. Sepkhanov, Ya.B. Baza-
liy, C.W.J. Beenakker, Phys. Rev. A 75, 063813 (2007); O. Peleg, G. Bartal, B. Freedman, O.
Manela, M. Segev, D.N. Christodoulides, Phys. Rev. Lett. 98, 103901 (2007); O. Bahat-Treidel,
O. Peleg, M. Segev. Opt. Lett. 33, 2251 (2008))
6. X. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 113903 (2008)
7. L.G. Wang, Z.G. Wang, J.X. Zhang, S.Y. Zhu, Opt. Lett. 34, 1510 (2009)
8. O. Bahat-Treidel et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 104, 063901 (2010)
9. S. Longhi, Opt. Lett. 35, 235 (2010)
10. F. Dreisow et al., Euro. Phys. Lett. 97, 10008 (2012)
11. F. Dreisow et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 143902 (2010)
12. M.C. Rechtsman et al., Nat. Photon. 7, 153 (2013)
13. M.C. Rechtsman et al., Nature 496, 196 (2013)
14. A. Szameit, S. Nolte, J. Phys. B 43, 163001 (2010)
15. J. Chan, T. Huser, S. Risbud, D. Krol, Opt. Lett. 26, 1726 (2001)
16. A. Streltsov, N. Borelli, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B 19, 2496 (2002)
17. K. Miura, J. Qui, H. Inoue, T. Mitsuyu, K. Hirao, Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 3329 (1997)
18. S. Nolte, M. Will, J. Burghoff, A. Tünnermann, Appl. Phys. A. 77, 109 (2003)
19. K. Itoh, W. Watanabe, S. Nolte, C.B. Schaffer, MRS Bull. 31, 620 (2006)
20. R.R. Gattass, E. Mazur, Nat. Phot. 2, 219 (2008)
21. G. Della Valle, R. Osellame, P. Laporta, J. Opt. A 11, 013001 (2009)

8
Dirac Dynamics in Waveguide Arrays: From Zitterbewegung …
213
22. M. Ams, G.D. Marshall, P. Dekker, J.A. Piper, M.J. Withford, Laser Photo Rev. 3, 535 (2009)
23. I. Mansour, F. Caccavale, J. Lightwave Technol. 14, 423 (1996)
24. D. Blömer et al., Opt. Exp. 14, 2151 (2006)
25. A. Szameit, F. Dreisow, H. Hartung, S. Nolte, A. Tünnermann, Appl. Phys. Lett. 90, 241113
(2007)
26. F. Dreisow et al., Opt. Exp. 14, 3474 (2008)
27. L. Skuja, T. Suzuki, K. Tanimura, Phys. Rev. B 52, 15208 (1995)
28. M. Stevens-Kalceff, A. Stesmans, J. Wong, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 758 (2002)
29. H. Trompeter, T. Pertsch, F. Lederer, D. Michaelis, U. Streppel, A. Brauer, U. Peschel, Phys.
Rev. Lett. 96, 023901 (2006)
30. H. de Vries, Physics Quest: Understanding Relativistic Quantum Field Theory, Physics-
Quest.org (2013)
31. J. Feng, Opt. Lett. 18, 1302–1304 (1993)
32. A.A. Sukhorukov, Y.S. Kivshar, Opt. Lett. 28, 2345–2347 (2003)
33. E. Schrödinger, Sitzungsber. Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Phys. Math. Kl. 24, 418 (1930)
34. R. Gerritsma et al., Nature 463, 68 (2010)
35. F. Dreisow et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 143602 (2008)
36. J.M. Zeuner et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 023602 (2012)
37. H. Lloyd, Trans. R. Irish Acad. 17, 145 (1837)
38. S. Longhi, Opt. Lett. 30, 2137 (2005)
39. O. Klein, Z. Phys. 53, 157 (1929)
40. F. Sauter, Z. Phys. 69, 742 (1931)
41. F. Hund, Z. Phys. 117, 1 (1941)
42. J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 82, 664 (1951)
43. N. Stander, B. Huard, D. Goldhaber-Gordon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, 026807 (2009)
44. A.F. Young, P. Kim, Nat. Phys. 5, 222 (2009)
45. R. Gerritsma et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 060503 (2011)
46. D. Dragoman, Phys. Scr. 79, 015003 (2009)
47. S. Longhi, Phys. Rev. B 81, 075102 (2010)
48. E.S. Fradkin, D.M. Gitman, ShM Shvartsman, Quantum Electrodynamics with Unstable Vac-
uum (Springer, Berlin, 1991)
49. H.K. Avetissian, Relativistic Nonlinear Electrodynamics (Springer, New York, 2006)
50. E. Brezin, C. Itzykson, Phys. Rev. D 2, 1191 (1970)
51. G. Lenz, I. Talanina, M. de Sterke, Phys. Rev. Lett. 83, 963 (1999)
52. S. Longhi, Phys. Rev. A 81, 022118 (2010)
53. F. Dreisow, S. Longhi, S. Nolte, A. Tünnermann, A. Szameit, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109, 110401
(2012)
54. R. Keil et al., Nat. Commun. 4, 1368 (2013)
55. K.S. Novoselov et al., Nature 438, 197 (2005)
56. A.H. Castro et al., Rev. Mod. Phys. 81, 109 (2009)
57. R.A. Sepkhanov, Y.B. Bazaliy, C.W.J. Beenakker, Phys. Rev. A 75, 063813 (2007)
58. K.K. Gomes, W. Mar, W. Ko, F. Guinea, H.C. Manoharan, Nature 483, 306 (2012)
59. U. Kuhl et al., Phys. Rev. B 82, 094308 (2010)
60. L. Tarruell, D. Greif, T. Uehlinger, G. Jotzu, T. Esslinger, Nature 483, 302 (2012)
61. T. Jacqmin et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 116402 (2014)
62. M. Kohmoto, Y. Hasegawa, Phys. Rev. B 76, 205402 (2007)
63. Y. Kobayashi, K. Fukui, T. Enoki, K. Kusakabe, Y. Kaburagi, Phys. Rev. B 71, 193406 (2005)
64. W. Shockley, Phys. Rev. 56, 317 (1939)
65. J. Zak, Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 2747–2750 (1989)
66. P. Delplace, D. Ullmo, G. Montambaux, Phys. Rev. B 84, 195452 (2011)
67. Y. Plotnik et al., Nat. Mater. 13, 57–62 (2014)
68. M.C. Rechtsman et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 103901 (2013)
69. D.C. Mattis, Ann. Phys. 113, 184 (1978)
70. I.E. Tamm, Phys. Z. Sowjetunion 1, 733 (1932)

214
F. Dreisow et al.
71. C.L. Kane, E.J. Mele, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 1932 (1997)
72. F. Guinea, M.I. Katsnelson, A.K. Geim, Nat. Phys. 6, 30 (2010)
73. N. Levy et al., Science 329, 544 (2010)
74. E. Purcell, Phys. Rev. 69, 681 (1946)
75. M. Soljacic, J.D. Joannopoulos, Nat. Mater. 3, 211 (2004)
76. O. Painter et al., Science 284, 1819 (1999)
77. B. Zhen et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 110, 13711–13716 (2013)
78. C.L. Kane, E.J. Mele, Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 226801 (2005)
79. B.A. Bernevig, T.L. Hughes, S.-C. Zhang, Science 314, 1757 (2006)
80. F.D.M. Haldane, Phys. Rev. Lett. 61, 2015 (1988)
81. M.Z. Hasan, C.L. Kane, Colloquium: topological insulators. Rev. Mod. Phys. 82, 3045–3067
(2010)
82. B.A. Bernevig, Topological Insulators and Topological Superconductors (Princeton University
Press, 2013)
83. T. Oka, H. Aoki, Phys. Rev. B 79, 081406 (2009)
84. N.H. Lindner, G. Refael, V. Galitski, Nat. Phys. 7, 490 (2011)
85. T. Kitagawa, E. Berg, M. Rudner, E. Demler, Phys. Rev. B 82, 235114 (2010)
86. F.D.M. Haldane, S. Raghu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 013904 (2008)
87. Z. Wang, Y. Chong, J.D. Joannopoulos, M. Soljacic, Phys. Rev. Lett. 100, 013905 (2008)
88. Z. Wang, Y. Chong, J.D. Joannopoulos, M. Soljacic, Nature 461, 772 (2009)
89. Y.H. Wang, H. Steinberg, P. Jarillo-Herrero, N. Gedik, Science 342, 453 (2013)
90. K. Lumer, Y. Plotnik, M.C. Rechtsman, M. Segev, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111, 243905 (2013)

