
This book is the second volume of the Theoretical Minimum series. 
The first volume, The Theoretical Minimum: What You Need to Know 
to Start Doing Physics, covered classical mechanics, which is the core 
of any physics education. We will refer to it from time to time simply 
as Volume I. This second book explains quantum mechanics and its re-
lationship to classical mechanics. The books in this series run parallel 
to Leonard Susskind’s videos, available on the Web through Stanford 
University (see www.theoreticalminimum.com for a listing). While cov-
ering the same general topics as the videos, the books contain additional 
details, and topics that don’t appear in the videos.


QUANTUM  
MECHANICS

Also by Leonard Susskind
The Theoretical Minimum
What You Need To Know to Start Doing Physics 
(with George Hrabovsky)
The Black Hole War
The Cosmic Landscape

QUANTUM  
MECHANICS
The Theoretical Minimum
LEONARD SUSSKIND  
and ART FRIEDMAN
A Member of the Perseus Books Group  
New York

Copyright © 2014 by Leonard Susskind and Art Friedman
Published by Basic Books,
A Member of the Perseus Books Group
All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this book may 
be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission except in the 
case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information, 
address Basic Books, 250 West 57th Street, 15th Floor, New York, NY 10107–1307.
Books published by Basic Books are available at special discounts for bulk purchases 
in the United States by corporations, institutions, and other organizations. For more 
information, please contact the Special Markets Department at the Perseus Books 
Group, 2300 Chestnut Street, Suite 200, Philadelphia, PA 19103, or call (800) 810–
4145, ext. 5000, or e-mail special.markets@perseusbooks.com.
Designed by Art Friedman and Leonard Susskind
Hilbert’s Place drawings were created by Margaret Sloan.
A CIP catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
ISBN (hardcover): 978-0-465-03667-7
ISBN (ebook): 978-0-465-08061-8
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

For our parents,
who made it all possible:
Irene and Benjamin Susskind
George and Trudy Friedman


Contents
 
Preface 
xi
 
Prologue 
xv
 
Introduction 
xix
  1 Systems and Experiments 
1
  2 Quantum States 
35
  3 Principles of Quantum Mechanics 
51
  4 Time and Change 
93
  5 Uncertainty and Time Dependence 
129
  6 Combining Systems: Entanglement 
149
  7 More on Entanglement 
183
  8 Particles and Waves 
235
  9 Particle Dynamics 
273
10 The Harmonic Oscillator 
311
 
Appendix 
347
 
Index 
353


Preface
Albert Einstein, who was in many ways the father of quan-
tum mechanics, had a notorious love-hate relation with the
subject. His debates with Niels Bohr—Bohr completely ac-
cepting of quantum mechanics and Einstein deeply skeptical—
are famous in the history of science. It was generally ac-
cepted by most physicists that Bohr won and Einstein lost.
My own feeling, I think shared by a growing number of physi-
cists, is that this attitude does not do justice to Einstein’s
views.
Both Bohr and Einstein were subtle men. Einstein tried
very hard to show that quantum mechanics was inconsis-
tent; Bohr, however, was always able to counter his argu-
ments. But in his ﬁnal attack Einstein pointed to something
so deep, so counterintuitive, so troubling, and yet so ex-
citing, that at the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century it
has returned to fascinate theoretical physicists. Bohr’s only
answer to Einstein’s last great discovery—the discovery of
entanglement—was to ignore it.
The phenomenon of entanglement is the essential fact
of quantum mechanics, the fact that makes it so diﬀerent
from classical physics. It brings into question our entire un-
xi

xii
PREFACE
derstanding about what is real in the physical world. Our
ordinary intuition about physical systems is that if we know
everything about a system, that is, everything that can in
principle be known, then we know everything about its parts.
If we have complete knowledge of the condition of an auto-
mobile, then we know everything about its wheels, its engine,
its transmission, right down to the screws that hold the up-
holstery in place. It would not make sense for a mechanic to
say, “I know everything about your car but unfortunately I
can’t tell you anything about any of its parts.”
But that’s exactly what Einstein explained to Bohr—
in quantum mechanics, one can know everything about a
system and nothing about its individual parts—but Bohr
failed to appreciate this fact. I might add that generations
of quantum textbooks blithely ignored it.
Everyone knows that quantum mechanics is strange, but
I suspect very few people could tell you exactly in what way.
This book is a technical course of lectures on quantum me-
chanics, but it is diﬀerent than most courses or most text-
books. The focus is on the logical principles and the goal
is not to hide the utter strangeness of quantum logic but to
bring it out into the light of day.
I remind you that this book is one of several that closely
follow my Internet course series, the Theoretical Minimum.
My coauthor, Art Friedman, was a student in these courses.
The book beneﬁted from the fact that Art was learning the
subject and was therefore very sensitive to the issues that
might be confusing to the beginner. During the course of
writing, we had a lot of fun, and we’ve tried to convey some

xiii
of that spirit with a bit of humor. If you don’t get it, ignore
it.
Leonard Susskind
When I completed my master’s degree in computer science at
Stanford, I could not have guessed that I’d return some years
later to attend Leonard’s physics lectures. My short “career”
in physics ended many years earlier, with the completion of
my bachelor’s degree. But my interest in the subject has
remained very much alive.
It appears that I have lots of company—the world seems
ﬁlled with people who are genuinely, deeply interested in
physics but whose lives have taken them in diﬀerent direc-
tions. This book is for all of us.
Quantum mechanics can be appreciated, to some degree,
on a purely qualitative level. But mathematics is what brings
its beauty into sharp focus. We have tried to make this amaz-
ing body of work fully accessible to mathematically literate
nonphysicists. I think we’ve done a fairly good job, and I
hope you’ll agree.
No one completes a project like this without lots of help.
The people at Brockman, Inc., have made the business end of
things seem easy, and the production team at Perseus Books
has been top-notch. My sincere thanks go to TJ Kelleher,
Rachel King, and Tisse Takagi. It was our good fortune to
work with a talented copy editor, John Searcy.
I’m grateful to Leonard’s (other) continuing education
students for routinely raising thoughtful, provocative ques-
tions, and for many stimulating after-class conversations.
PREFACE

Rob Colwell, Todd Craig, Monty Frost, and John Nash of-
fered constructive comments on the manuscript.
Jeremy
Branscome and Russ Bryan reviewed the entire manuscript
in detail, and identiﬁed a number of problems.
I thank my family and friends for their kind support and
enthusiasm. I especially thank my daughter, Hannah, for
minding the store.
Besides her love, encouragement, insight, and sense of
humor, my amazing wife, Margaret Sloan, contributed about
a third of the diagrams and both Hilbert’s Place illustrations.
Thanks, Maggie.
At the start of this project, Leonard, sensing my real mo-
tivation, remarked that one of the best ways to learn physics
is to write about it.
True, of course, but I had no idea
how true, and I’m grateful that I had a chance to ﬁnd out.
Thanks a million, Leonard.
Art Friedman
PREFACE
xiv

Prologue
Art looks over his beer and says, “Lenny, let’s play a round
of the Einstein-Bohr game.”
“OK, but I’m tired of losing. This time, you be Artstein and
I’ll be L-Bore. You start.”
“Fair enough. Here’s my ﬁrst shot: God doesn’t play dice.
Ha-ha, L-Bore, that’s one point for me.”
“Not so fast, Artstein, not so fast. You, my friend, were
the ﬁrst one to point out that quantum theory is inherently
probabilistic. Heh heh heh, that’s a two-pointer!”
“Well, I take it back.”
“You can’t.”
“I can.”
“You can’t.”
Few people realize that Einstein, in his 1917 paper, ”On the
Quantum Theory of Radiation,” argues that the emission of
gamma rays is governed by a statistical law.
xv

xvi
PROLOGUE
A Professor and a Fiddler Walk into a Bar
Volume I was punctuated by short conversations between
Lenny and George, ﬁctional personas who were loosely based
on two John Steinbeck characters.The setting for this volume
of the Theoretical Minimum series is inspired by the stories
of Damon Runyon. It’s a world ﬁlled with crooks, con artists,
degenerates, smooth operators, and do-gooders. Plus a few
ordinary folks, just trying to get through the day. The action
unfolds at a popular watering hole called Hilbert’s Place.
Into this setting stroll Lenny and Art, two greenhorns
from California who somehow got separated from their tour
bus. Wish them luck. They will need it.
What to Bring
You don’t need to be a physicist to take this journey, but
you should have some basic knowledge of calculus and linear
algebra. You should also know something about the material
covered in Volume I. It’s OK if your math is a bit rusty.
We’ll review and explain much of it as we go, especially the
material on linear algebra. Volume I reviews the basic ideas
of calculus.
Don’t let our lighthearted humor fool you into thinking
that we’re writing for airheads. We’re not. Our goal is to
make a diﬃcult subject “as simple as possible, but no sim-
pler,” and we hope to have a little fun along the way. See
you at Hilbert’s Place.

© Margaret  Sloan 


Introduction
Classical mechanics is intuitive; things move in predictable
ways. An experienced ballplayer can take a quick look at a
ﬂy ball, and from its location and its velocity, know where
to run in order to be there just in time to catch the ball. Of
course a sudden unexpected gust of wind might fool him, but
that’s only because he didn’t take into account all the vari-
ables. There is an obvious reason why classical mechanics is
intuitive: humans, and animals before them, have been using
it many times every day for survival. But no one ever used
quantum mechanics before the twentieth century. Quantum
mechanics describes things so small that they are completely
beyond the range of the human senses. So it stands to reason
that we did not evolve an intuition for the quantum world.
The only way we can comprehend it is by rewiring our intu-
itions with abstract mathematics. Fortunately, for some odd
reason, we did evolve the capacity for such rewiring.
Ordinarily, we learn classical mechanics ﬁrst, before even
attempting quantum mechanics.
But quantum physics is
much more fundamental than classical physics. As far as we
know, quantum mechanics provides an exact description of
every physical system, but some things are massive enough
xix

xx
INTRODUCTION
that quantum mechanics can be reliably approximated by
classical mechanics. That’s all that classical mechanics is:
an approximation. From a logical point of view, we should
learn quantum mechanics ﬁrst, but very few physics teach-
ers would recommend that. Even this course of lectures—the
Theoretical Minimum series—began with classical mechan-
ics. Nevertheless, in these quantum lectures, classical me-
chanics will play almost no role except near the end, well
after the basic principles of quantum mechanics have been
explained. I think this is really the right way to do it, not
just logically but pedagogically as well. That way we don’t
fall into the trap of thinking that quantum mechanics is basi-
cally just classical mechanics with a couple of new gimmicks
thrown in. By the way, quantum mechanics is technically
much easier than classical mechanics.
The simplest classical system—the basic logical unit for
computer science—is the two-state system. Sometimes it’s
called a bit. It can represent anything that has only two
states: a coin that can show heads or tails, a switch that
is on or oﬀ, or a tiny magnet that is constrained to point
either north or south. As you might expect, especially if you
studied the ﬁrst lecture of Volume I, the theory of classical
two-state systems is extremely simple—boring, in fact. In
this volume, we’re going to begin with the quantum version
of the two-state system, called a qubit, which is far more
interesting. To understand it, we will need a whole new way
of thinking—a new foundation of logic.

Lecture 1
Systems and
Experiments
Lenny and Art wander into Hilbert’s Place.
Art: What is this, the Twilight Zone? Or some kind of fun
house? I can’t get my bearings.
Lenny: Take a breath. You’ll get used to it.
Art: Which way is up?
1.1
Quantum Mechanics Is
Diﬀerent
What is so special about quantum mechanics? Why is it so
hard to understand? It would be easy to blame the “hard
mathematics,” and there may be some truth in that idea.
But that can’t be the whole story. Lots of nonphysicists are
1

2
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
able to master classical mechanics and ﬁeld theory, which
also require hard mathematics.
Quantum mechanics deals with the behavior of objects
so small that we humans are ill equipped to visualize them
at all. Individual atoms are near the upper end of this scale
in terms of size. Electrons are frequently used as objects of
study. Our sensory organs are simply not built to perceive
the motion of an electron.
The best we can do is to try
to understand electrons and their motion as mathematical
abstractions.
“So what?” says the skeptic. “Classical mechanics is ﬁlled
to the brim with mathematical abstractions—point masses,
rigid bodies, inertial reference frames, positions, momenta,
ﬁelds, waves—the list goes on and on. There’s nothing new
about mathematical abstractions.” This is actually a fair
point, and indeed the classical and quantum worlds have
some important things in common.
Quantum mechanics,
however, is diﬀerent in two ways:
1. Diﬀerent Abstractions. Quantum abstractions are fun-
damentally diﬀerent from classical ones. For example,
we’ll see that the idea of a state in quantum mechanics
is conceptually very diﬀerent from its classical counter-
part. States are represented by diﬀerent mathematical
objects and have a diﬀerent logical structure.
2. States and Measurements. In the classical world, the
relationship between the state of a system and the re-
sult of a measurement on that system is very straight-
forward. In fact, it’s trivial. The labels that describe

1.2. SPINS AND QUBITS
3
a state (the position and momentum of a particle, for
example) are the same labels that characterize mea-
surements of that state. To put it another way, one
can perform an experiment to determine the state of a
system. In the quantum world, this is not true. States
and measurements are two diﬀerent things, and the
relationship between them is subtle and nonintuitive.
These ideas are crucial, and we’ll come back to them again
and again.
1.2
Spins and Qubits
The concept of spin is derived from particle physics. Par-
ticles have properties in addition to their location in space.
For example, they may or may not have electric charge, or
mass. An electron is not the same as a quark or a neutrino.
But even a speciﬁc type of particle, such as an electron, is
not completely speciﬁed by its location. Attached to the elec-
tron is an extra degree of freedom called its spin. Naively,
the spin can be pictured as a little arrow that points in some
direction, but that naive picture is too classical to accurately
represent the real situation. The spin of an electron is about
as quantum mechanical as a system can be, and any attempt
to visualize it classically will badly miss the point.
We can and will abstract the idea of a spin, and for-
get that it is attached to an electron. The quantum spin
is a system that can be studied in its own right. In fact,
the quantum spin, isolated from the electron that carries it

4
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
through space, is both the simplest and the most quantum
of systems.
The isolated quantum spin is an example of the gen-
eral class of simple systems we call qubits—quantum bits—
that play the same role in the quantum world as logical
bits play in deﬁning the state of your computer.
Many
systems—maybe even all systems—can be built up by com-
bining qubits. Thus in learning about them, we are learning
about a great deal more.
1.3
An Experiment
Let’s make these ideas concrete, using the simplest example
we can ﬁnd. In the ﬁrst lecture of Volume I, we began by
discussing a very simple deterministic system: a coin that
can show either heads (H) or tails (T). We can call this a
two-state system, or a bit, with the two states being H and
T. More formally we invent a “degree of freedom” called σ
that can take on two values, namely +1 and −1. The state
H is replaced by
σ = +1
and the state T by
σ = −1.
Classically, that’s all there is to the space of states. The
system is either in state σ = +1 or σ = −1 and there is

1.3. AN EXPERIMENT
5
nothing in between. In quantum mechanics, we’ll think of
this system as a qubit.
Volume I also discussed simple evolution laws that tell
us how to update the state from instant to instant.
The
simplest law is just that nothing happens. In that case, if
we go from one discrete instant (n) to the next (n + 1), the
law of evolution is
σ(n + 1) = σ(n).
(1.1)
Let’s expose a hidden assumption that we were careless
about in Volume I. An experiment involves more than just
a system to study. It also involves an apparatus A to make
measurements and record the results of the measurements.
In the case of the two-state system, the apparatus interacts
with the system (the spin) and records the value of σ. Think
of the apparatus as a black box1 with a window that displays
the result of a measurement. There is also a “this end up”
arrow on the apparatus. The up-arrow is important because
it shows how the apparatus is oriented in space, and its di-
rection will aﬀect the outcomes of our measurements. We
begin by pointing it along the z axis (Fig. 1.1). Initially,
we have no knowledge of whether σ = +1 or σ = −1. Our
purpose is to do an experiment to ﬁnd out the value of σ.
Before the apparatus interacts with the spin, the window
is blank (labeled with a question mark in our diagrams).
After it measures σ, the window shows a +1 or a −1. By
1“Black box” means we have no knowledge of what’s inside the
apparatus or how it works. But rest assured, it does not contain a cat.

6
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
Spin
up
?
Apparatus
Before Measurement (A)
Spin
up
+1
Apparatus
After Measurement (B)
Z
X
Y
Figure 1.1: (A) Spin and cat-free apparatus before any mea-
surement is made. (B) Spin and apparatus after one mea-
surement has been made, resulting in σz = +1. The spin
is now prepared in the σz = +1 state. If the spin is not
disturbed and the apparatus keeps the same orientation, all
subsequent measurements will give the same result. Coordi-
nate axes show our convention for labeling the directions of
space.
looking at the apparatus, we determine the value of σ. That
whole process constitutes a very simple experiment designed
to measure σ.
Now that we’ve measured σ, let’s reset the apparatus to
neutral and, without disturbing the spin, measure σ again.
Assuming the simple law of Eq. 1.1, we should get the same
answer as we did the ﬁrst time. The result σ = +1 will be

1.3. AN EXPERIMENT
7
followed by σ = +1. Likewise for σ = −1. The same will be
true for any number of repetitions. This is good because it
allows us to conﬁrm the result of an experiment. We can also
say this in the following way: The ﬁrst interaction with the
apparatus A prepares the system in one of the two states.
Subsequent experiments conﬁrm that state. So far, there is
no diﬀerence between classical and quantum physics.
Spin
up
-1
Apparatus
Apparatus Flipped 180°
Z
X
Y
Figure 1.2: The apparatus is ﬂipped without disturbing the
previously measured spin.
A new measurement results in
σz = −1.
Now let’s do something new. After preparing the spin
by measuring it with A, we turn the apparatus upside down
and then measure σ again (Fig. 1.2). What we ﬁnd is that if
we originally prepared σ = +1, the upside down apparatus
records σ = −1. Similarly, if we originally prepared σ = −1,
the upside down apparatus records σ = +1. In other words,

8
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
turning the apparatus over interchanges σ = +1 and σ = −1.
From these results, we might conclude that σ is a degree of
freedom that is associated with a sense of direction in space.
For example, if σ were an oriented vector of some sort, then
it would be natural to expect that turning the apparatus over
would reverse the reading. A simple explanation is that the
apparatus measures the component of the vector along an
axis embedded in the apparatus. Is this explanation correct
for all conﬁgurations?
If we are convinced that the spin is a vector, we would
naturally describe it by three components: σz, σx, and σy.
When the apparatus is upright along the z axis, it is posi-
tioned to measure σz.
Spin
up
-1 or +1
Apparatus
Apparatus Rotated 90°
    
Z
X
Y
Figure 1.3: The apparatus rotated by 90◦. A new measure-
ment results in σz = −1 with 50 percent probability.
So far, there is still no diﬀerence between classical physics

1.3. AN EXPERIMENT
9
and quantum physics. The diﬀerence only becomes apparent
when we rotate the apparatus through an arbitrary angle,
say
π
2 radians (90 degrees).
The apparatus begins in the
upright position (with the up-arrow along the z axis).
A
spin is prepared with σ = +1. Next, rotate A so that the
up-arrow points along the x axis (Fig. 1.3), and then make a
measurement of what is presumably the x component of the
spin, σx.
If in fact σ really represents the component of a vector
along the up-arrow, one would expect to get zero. Why?
Initially, we conﬁrmed that σ was directed along the z axis,
suggesting that its component along x must be zero. But we
get a surprise when we measure σx: Instead of giving σx = 0,
the apparatus gives either σx = +1 or σx = −1. A is very
stubborn—no matter which way it is oriented, it refuses to
give any answer other than σ = ±1. If the spin really is a
vector, it is a very peculiar one indeed.
Nevertheless, we do ﬁnd something interesting. Suppose
we repeat the operation many times, each time following the
same procedure, that is:
• Beginning with A along the z axis, prepare σ = +1.
• Rotate the apparatus so that it is oriented along the x
axis.
• Measure σ.
The repeated experiment spits out a random series of plus-
ones and minus-ones. Determinism has broken down, but
in a particular way. If we do many repetitions, we will ﬁnd

10
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
that the numbers of σ = +1 events and σ = −1 events
are statistically equal. In other words, the average value of
σ is zero. Instead of the classical result—namely, that the
component of σ along the x axis is zero—we ﬁnd that the
average of these repeated measurements is zero.
Spin
up
-1 or +1
Apparatus
Apparatus Rotated
by an Arbitrary Angle
m
^
n^
Ө
Figure 1.4: The apparatus rotated by an arbitrary angle
within the x–z plane. Average measurement result is ˆn · ˆm.
Now let’s do the whole thing over again, but instead of
rotating A
to lie on the x axis, rotate it to an arbitrary
direction along the unit vector2 ˆn. Classically, if σ were a
vector, we would expect the result of the experiment to be
the component of σ along the ˆn axis. If ˆn lies at an angle θ
2The standard notation for a unit vector (one of unit length) is to
place a “hat” above the symbol representing the vector.

1.3. AN EXPERIMENT
11
with respect to z, the classical answer would be σ = cos θ.
But as you might guess, each time we do the experiment we
get σ = +1 or σ = −1. However, the result is statistically
biased so that the average value is cos θ.
The situation is of course more general. We did not have
to start with A oriented along z. Pick any direction ˆm and
start with the up-arrow pointing along ˆm. Prepare a spin
so that the apparatus reads +1. Then, without disturbing
the spin, rotate the apparatus to the direction ˆn, as shown
in Fig. 1.4. A new experiment on the same spin will give
random results ±1, but with an average value equal to the
cosine of the angle between ˆn and ˆm. In other words, the
average will be ˆn · ˆm.
The quantum mechanical notation for the statistical av-
erage of a quantity Q is Dirac’s bracket notation ⟨Q⟩. We
may summarize the results of our experimental investigation
as follows: If we begin with A oriented along ˆm and conﬁrm
that σ = +1, then subsequent measurement with A oriented
along ˆn gives the statistical result
⟨σ⟩= ˆn · ˆm.
What we are learning is that quantum mechanical systems
are not deterministic—the results of experiments can be sta-
tistically random—but if we repeat an experiment many
times, average quantities can follow the expectations of clas-
sical physics, at least up to a point.

12
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
1.4
Experiments Are Never Gentle
Every experiment involves an outside system—an apparatus—
that must interact with the system in order to record a re-
sult. In that sense, every experiment is invasive. This is
true in both classical and quantum physics, but only quan-
tum physics makes a big deal out of it. Why is that so?
Classically, an ideal measuring apparatus has a vanishingly
small eﬀect on the system it is measuring. Classical experi-
ments can be arbitrarily gentle and still accurately and repro-
ducibly record the results of the experiment. For example,
the direction of an arrow can be determined by reﬂecting
light oﬀthe arrow and focusing it to form an image. While
it is true that the light must have a small enough wavelength
to form an image, there is nothing in classical physics that
prevents the image from being made with arbitrarily weak
light. In other words, the light can have an arbitrarily small
energy content.
In quantum mechanics, the situation is fundamentally
diﬀerent. Any interaction that is strong enough to measure
some aspect of a system is necessarily strong enough to dis-
rupt some other aspect of the same system. Thus, you can
learn nothing about a quantum system without changing
something else.
This should be evident in the examples involving A and
σ. Suppose we begin with σ = +1 along the z axis. If we
measure σ again with A oriented along z, we will conﬁrm the
previous value. We can do this over and over without chang-
ing the result. But consider this possibility: Between suc-
cessive measurements along the z axis, we turn A through

1.5. PROPOSITIONS
13
90 degrees, make an intermediate measurement, and turn it
back to its original direction. Will a subsequent measure-
ment along the z axis conﬁrm the original measurement?
The answer is no. The intermediate measurement along the
x axis will leave the spin in a completely random conﬁgura-
tion as far as the next measurement is concerned. There is
no way to make the intermediate determination of the spin
without completely disrupting the ﬁnal measurement. One
might say that measuring one component of the spin destroys
the information about another component. In fact, one sim-
ply cannot simultaneously know the components of the spin
along two diﬀerent axes, not in a reproducible way in any
case. There is something fundamentally diﬀerent about the
state of a quantum system and the state of a classical system.
1.5
Propositions
The space of states of a classical system is a mathematical
set. If the system is a coin, the space of states is a set of
two elements, H and T. Using set notation, we would write
{H, T}. If the system is a six-sided die, the space of states
has six elements labeled {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}. The logic of set the-
ory is called Boolean logic. Boolean logic is just a formalized
version of the familiar classical logic of propositions.
A fundamental idea in Boolean logic is the notion of a
truth-value. The truth-value of a proposition is either true
or false. Nothing in between is allowed. The related set
theory concept is a subset. Roughly speaking, a proposition
is true for all the elements in its corresponding subset and
false for all the elements not in this subset. For example,

14
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
if the set represents the possible states of a die, one can
consider the proposition
A: The die shows an odd-numbered face.
The corresponding subset contains the three elements
{1, 3, 5}.
Another proposition states
B: The die shows a number less than 4.
The corresponding subset contains the states {1, 2, 3}.
Every proposition has its opposite (also called its negation).
For example,
not A: The die does not show an odd-numbered face.
The subset for this negated proposition is {2, 4, 6}.
There are rules for combining propositions into more com-
plex propositions, the most important being or, and, and
not. We just saw an example of not, which gets applied to
a single subset or proposition. And is straightforward, and
applies to a pair of propositions.3 It says they are both true.
Applied to two subsets, and gives the elements common to
both, that is, the intersection of the two subsets. In the die
example, the intersection of subsets A and B is the subset
of elements that are both odd and less than 4. Fig. 1.5 uses
a Venn diagram to show how this works.
3And may be deﬁned for multiple propositions, but we’ll only con-
sider two. The same goes for or.

1.5. PROPOSITIONS
15
The or rule is similar to and, but has one additional
subtlety. In everyday speech, the word or is generally used
in the exclusive sense—the exclusive version is true if one or
the other of two propositions is true, but not both. However,
Boolean logic uses the inclusive version of or, which is true if
either or both of the propositions are true. Thus, according
to the inclusive or, the proposition
Albert Einstein discovered relativity or Isaac Newton was
English
is true. So is
Albert Einstein discovered relativity or Isaac Newton was
Russian.
The inclusive or is only wrong if both propositions are false.
For example,
Albert Einstein discovered America4 or Isaac Newton was
Russian.
The inclusive or has a set theoretic interpretation as the
union of two sets: it denotes the subset containing anything
in either or both of the component subsets. In the die ex-
ample, (A or B) denotes the subset {1, 2, 3, 5}.
4OK, perhaps Einstein did discover America. But he was not the
ﬁrst.

16
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
1              3              5
2              4              6
Subset A:
Die shows an
odd-numbered
face.
Subset B:
Die shows a
number < 4
Space of States for a Single Die
.
Figure 1.5: An Example of the Classical model of State
Space. Subset A represents the proposition “the die shows
an odd-numbered face.” Subset B: “The die shows a num-
ber < 4.” Dark shading shows the intersection of A and B,
which represents the proposition (A and B). White num-
bers are elements of the union of A with B, representing the
proposition (A or B).
1.6
Testing Classical Propositions
Let’s return to the simple quantum system consisting of a
single spin, and the various propositions whose truth we
could test using the apparatus A. Consider the following
two propositions:
A: The z component of the spin is +1.

1.6. TESTING CLASSICAL PROPOSITIONS
17
B: The x component of the spin is +1.
Each of these is meaningful and can be tested by orienting
A along the appropriate axis. The negation of each is also
meaningful. For example, the negation of the ﬁrst proposi-
tion is
not A: The z component of the spin is −1.
But now consider the composite propositions
(A or B): The z component of the spin is +1 or the x
component of the spin is +1.
(A and B): The z component of the spin is +1 and the
x component of the spin is +1.
Consider how we would test the proposition (A or B).
If spins behaved classically (and of course they don’t), we
would proceed as follows:5
• Gently measure σz and record the value. If it is +1,
we are ﬁnished: the proposition (A or B) is true. If σz
is −1, continue to the next step.
• Gently measure σx. If it is +1, then the proposition
(A or B) is true. If not, this means that neither σz
nor σx was equal to +1, and (A or B) is false.
5Recall that the classical meaning of σ is diﬀerent from the quantum
mechanical meaning. Classically, σ is a straightforward 3-vector; σx
and σz represent its spatial components.

18
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
There is an alternative procedure, which is to interchange the
order of the two measurements. To emphasize this reversal
of ordering, we’ll call the new procedure (B or A):
• Gently measure σx and record the value. If it is +1 we
are ﬁnished: The proposition (B or A) is true. If σx is
−1 continue to the next step.
• Gently measure σz. If it is +1, then (B or A) is true.
If not, it means that neither σx nor σz
was equal to
+1, and (B or A) is false.
In classical physics, the two orders of operation give the same
answer. The reason for this is that measurements can be
arbitrarily gentle—so gentle that they do not aﬀect the re-
sults of subsequent measurements.
Therefore, the propo-
sition (A or B) has the same meaning as the proposition
(B or A).
1.7
Testing Quantum Propositions
Now we come to the quantum world that I described earlier.
Let us imagine a situation in which someone (or something)
unknown to us has secretly prepared a spin in the σz = +1
state.
Our job is to use the apparatus A
to determine
whether the proposition (A or B) is true or false. We will
try using the procedures outlined above.
We begin by measuring σz. Since the unknown agent has
set things up, we will discover that σz = +1. It is unnecessary
to go on: (A or B) is true. Nevertheless, we could test σx

1.7. TESTING QUANTUM PROPOSITIONS
19
just to see what happens. The answer is unpredictable. We
randomly ﬁnd that σx = +1 or σx = −1. But neither of these
outcomes aﬀects the truth of proposition (A or B).
But now let’s reverse the order of measurement. As be-
fore, we’ll call the reversed procedure (B or A), and this time
we’ll measure σx ﬁrst. Because the unknown agent set the
spin to +1 along the z axis, the measurement of σx is ran-
dom. If it turns out that σx = +1, we are ﬁnished: (B or A)
is true. But suppose we ﬁnd the opposite result, σx = −1.
The spin is oriented along the −x direction. Let’s pause here
brieﬂy, to make sure we understand what just happened. As
a result of our ﬁrst measurement, the spin is no longer in its
original state σz = +1. It is in a new state, which is either
σx = +1 or σx = −1. Please take a moment to let this idea
sink in. We cannot overstate its importance.
Now we’re ready to test the second half of proposition
(B or A). Rotate the apparatus A to the z axis and mea-
sure σz. According to quantum mechanics, the result will be
randomly ±1. This means that there is a 25 percent probabil-
ity that the experiment produces σx = −1 and σz = −1. In
other words, with a probability of 1
4, we ﬁnd that (B or A)
is false; this occurs despite the fact that the hidden agent
had originally made sure that σz = +1.
Evidently, in this example, the inclusive or is not sym-
metric. The truth of (A or B) may depend on the order in
which we conﬁrm the two propositions. This is not a small
thing; it means not only that the laws of quantum physics
are diﬀerent from their classical counterparts, but that the
very foundations of logic are diﬀerent in quantum physics as
well.

20
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
What about (A and B)?
Suppose our ﬁrst measure-
ment yields σz = +1 and the second, σx = +1. This is of
course a possible outcome. We would be inclined to say that
(A and B) is true.
But in science, especially in physics,
the truth of a proposition implies that the proposition can
be veriﬁed by subsequent observation. In classical physics,
the gentleness of observations implies that subsequent exper-
iments are unaﬀected and will conﬁrm an earlier experiment.
A coin that turns up Heads will not be ﬂipped to Tails by
the act of observing it—at least not classically. Quantum
mechanically, the second measurement (σx = +1) ruins the
possibility of verifying the ﬁrst. Once σx has been prepared
along the x axis, another mesurement of σz will give a ran-
dom answer. Thus (A and B) is not conﬁrmable: the second
piece of the experiment interferes with the possibility of con-
ﬁrming the ﬁrst piece.
If you know a bit about quantum mechanics, you proba-
bly recognize that we are talking about the uncertainty prin-
ciple. The uncertainty principle doesn’t apply only to posi-
tion and momentum (or velocity); it applies to many pairs
of measurable quantities. In the case of the spin, it applies
to propositions involving two diﬀerent components of σ. In
the case of position and momentum, the two propositions we
might consider are:
A certain particle has position x.
That same particle has momentum p.
From these, we can form the two composite propositions

1.8. INTERLUDE: COMPLEX NUMBERS
21
The particle has position x and the particle has
momentum p.
The particle has position x or the particle has
momentum p.
Awkward as they are, both of these propositions have mean-
ing in the English language, and in classical physics as well.
However, in quantum physics, the ﬁrst of these propositions
is completely meaningless (not even wrong), and the second
one means something quite diﬀerent from what you might
think. It all comes down to a deep logical diﬀerence between
the classical and quantum concepts of the state of a system.
Explaining the quantum concept of state will require some
abstract mathematics, so let’s pause for a brief interlude on
complex numbers and vector spaces. The need for complex
quantities will become clear later on, when we study the
mathematical representation of spin states.
1.8
Mathematical Interlude:
Complex Numbers
Everyone who has gotten this far in the Theoretical Mini-
mum series knows about complex numbers. Nevertheless, I
will spend a few lines reminding you of the essentials. Fig.
1.6 shows some of their basic elements.
A complex number z is the sum of a real number and an
imaginary number. We can write it as
z = x + iy,

22
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
Complex Numbers
Ƶ
r cos (Ƶ)
r sin Ƶ
Imaginary Axis
Real Axis
Y
X
r
z = x + iy
Figure 1.6: Two Common Ways to Represent Complex Num-
bers. In the Cartesian representation, x and y are the hor-
izontal (real) and vertical (imaginary) components. In the
polar representation, r is the radius, and θ is the angle made
with the x axis. In each case, it takes two real numbers to
represent a single complex number.
where x and y are real and i2 = −1. Complex numbers can
be added, multiplied, and divided by the standard rules of
arithmetic. They can be visualized as points on the complex
plane with coordinates x, y. They can also be represented in
polar coordinates:

1.8. INTERLUDE: COMPLEX NUMBERS
23
z = reiθ = r(cos θ + i sin θ).
Adding complex numbers is easy in component form: just
add the components.
Similarly, multiplying them is easy
in their polar form: Simply multiply the radii and add the
angles:

r1eiθ1 
r2eiθ2
= (r1r2) ei(θ1+θ2).
Every complex number z has a complex conjugate z∗that is
obtained by simply reversing the sign of the imaginary part.
If
z = x + iy = reiθ,
then
z∗= x −iy = re−iθ.
Multiplying a complex number and its conjugate always gives
a positive real result:
z∗z = r2.
It is of course true that every complex conjugate is itself a
complex number, but it’s often helpful to think of z and z∗
as belonging to separate “dual” number systems. Dual here
means that for every z there is a unique z∗and vice versa.

24
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
There is a special class of complex numbers that I’ll call
“phase-factors.” A phase-factor is simply a complex number
whose r-component is 1.
If z is a phase-factor, then the
following hold:
z∗z = 1
z = eiθ
z = cos θ + i sin θ.
1.9
Mathematical Interlude:
Vector Spaces
1.9.1
Axioms
For a classical system, the space of states is a set (the set of
possible states), and the logic of classical physics is Boolean.
That seems obvious and it is diﬃcult to imagine any other
possibility. Nevertheless, the real world operates along en-
tirely diﬀerent lines, at least whenever quantum mechanics
is important. The space of states of a quantum system is not
a mathematical set;6 it is a vector space. Relations between
the elements of a vector space are diﬀerent from those be-
tween the elements of a set, and the logic of propositions is
diﬀerent as well.
Before I tell you about vector spaces, I need to clarify the
term vector. As you know, we use this term to indicate an
6To be a little more precise, we will not focus on the set-theoretic
properties of state spaces, even though they may of course be regarded
as sets.

1.9. INTERLUDE: VECTOR SPACES
25
object in ordinary space that has a magnitude and a direc-
tion. Such vectors have three components, corresponding to
the three dimensions of space. I want you to completely for-
get about that concept of a vector. From now on, whenever
I want to talk about a thing with magnitude and direction
in ordinary space, I will explicitly call it a 3-vector. A math-
ematical vector space is an abstract construction that may
or may not have anything to do with ordinary space. It may
have any number of dimensions from 1 to ∞and it may
have components that are integers, real numbers, or even
more general things.
The vector spaces we use to deﬁne quantum mechanical
states are called Hilbert spaces. We won’t give the mathe-
matical deﬁnition here, but you may as well add this term
to your vocabulary. When you come across the term Hilbert
space in quantum mechanics, it refers to the space of states.
A Hilbert space may have either a ﬁnite or an inﬁnite number
of dimensions.
In quantum mechanics, a vector space is composed of
elements |A⟩called ket-vectors or just kets.
Here are the
axioms we will use to deﬁne the vector space of states of a
quantum system (z and w are complex numbers):
1. The sum of any two ket-vectors is also a ket-vector:
|A⟩+ |B⟩= |C⟩.

26
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
2. Vector addition is commutative:
|A⟩+ |B⟩= |B⟩+ |A⟩.
3. Vector addition is associative:
{|A⟩+ |B⟩} + |C⟩= |A⟩+ {|B⟩+ |C⟩} .
4. There is a unique vector 0 such that when you add it
to any ket, it gives the same ket back:
|A⟩+ 0 = |A⟩.
5. Given any ket |A⟩, there is a unique ket −|A⟩such that
|A⟩+ (−|A⟩) = 0.
6. Given any ket |A⟩and any complex number z, you can
multiply them to get a new ket. Also, multiplication
by a scalar is linear:
|zA⟩= z|A⟩= |B⟩.
7. The distributive property holds:
z {|A⟩+ |B⟩} = z|A⟩+ z|B⟩
{z + w} |A⟩= z|A⟩+ w|A⟩.

1.9. INTERLUDE: VECTOR SPACES
27
Axioms 6 and 7 taken together are often called linearity.
Ordinary 3-vectors would satisfy these axioms except for
one thing: Axiom 6 allows a vector to be multiplied by any
complex number. Ordinary 3-vectors can be multiplied by
real numbers (positive, negative, or zero) but multiplication
by complex numbers is not deﬁned.
One can think of 3-
vectors as forming a real vector space, and kets as forming a
complex vector space. Our deﬁnition of ket-vectors is fairly
abstract. As we will see, there are various concrete ways to
represent ket-vectors as well.
1.9.2
Functions and Column Vectors
Let’s look at some concrete examples of complex vector spaces.
First of all, consider the set of continuous complex-valued
functions of a variable x. Call the functions A(x). You can
add any two such functions and multiply them by complex
numbers. You can check that they satisfy all seven axioms.
This example should make it obvious that we are talking
about something much more general than three-dimensional
arrows.
Two-dimensional column vectors provide another con-
crete example.
We construct them by stacking up a pair
of complex numbers, α1 and α2, in the form
 α1
α2

and identifying this “stack” with the ket-vector |A⟩. The
complex numbers α are the components of |A⟩. You can add
two column vectors by adding their components:

28
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
 α1
α2

+
 β1
β2

=
 α1 + β1
α2 + β2

.
Moreover, you can multiply the column vector by a complex
number z just by multiplying the components,
z
 α1
α2

=
 zα1
zα2

.
Column vector spaces of any number of dimensions can be
constructed. For example, here is a ﬁve-dimensional column
vector:
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
α1
α2
α3
α4
α5
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
.
Normally, we do not mix vectors of diﬀerent dimensionality.
1.9.3
Bras and Kets
As we have seen, the complex numbers have a dual version:
in the form of complex conjugate numbers. In the same way,
a complex vector space has a dual version that is essentially
the complex conjugate vector space.
For every ket-vector
|A⟩, there is a “bra” vector in the dual space, denoted by ⟨A|.
Why the strange terms bra and ket? Shortly, we will deﬁne
inner products of bras and kets, using expressions like ⟨B|A⟩
to form bra-kets or brackets. Inner products are extremely

1.9. INTERLUDE: VECTOR SPACES
29
important in the mathematical machinery of quantum me-
chanics, and for characterizing vector spaces in general.
Bra vectors satisfy the same axioms as the ket-vectors,
but there are two things to keep in mind about the corre-
spondence between kets and bras:
1. Suppose ⟨A| is the bra corresponding to the ket |A⟩,
and ⟨B| is the bra corresponding to the ket |B⟩. Then
the bra corresponding to
|A⟩+ |B⟩
is
⟨A| + ⟨B|.
2. If z is a complex number, then it is not true that the bra
corresponding to z|A⟩is ⟨A|z. You have to remember
to complex-conjugate. Thus, the bra corresponding to
z|A⟩
is
⟨A|z∗.
In the concrete example where kets are represented by col-
umn vectors, the dual bras are represented by row vectors,

30
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
with the entries being drawn from the complex conjugate
numbers. Thus, if the ket |A⟩is represented by the column
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
α1
α2
α3
α4
α5
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
,
then the corresponding bra ⟨A| is represented by the row

α∗
1
α∗
2
α∗
3
α∗
4
α∗
5

.
1.9.4
Inner Products
You are no doubt familiar with the dot product deﬁned for
ordinary 3-vectors. The analogous operation for bras and
kets is the inner product. The inner product is always the
product of a bra and a ket and it is written this way:
⟨B|A⟩.
The result of this operation is a complex number. The ax-
ioms for inner products are not too hard to guess:
1. They are linear:
⟨C| { |A⟩+ |B⟩} = ⟨C|A⟩+ ⟨C|B⟩.

1.9. INTERLUDE: VECTOR SPACES
31
2. Interchanging bras and kets corresponds to complex
conjugation:
⟨B|A⟩= ⟨A|B⟩∗.
Exercise 1.1:
a) Using the axioms for inner products, prove
{⟨A| + ⟨B|} |C⟩= ⟨A|C⟩+ ⟨B|C⟩.
b) Prove ⟨A|A⟩is a real number.
In the concrete representation of bras and kets by row and
column vectors, the inner product is deﬁned in terms of com-
ponents:
⟨B|A⟩
=

β∗
1
β∗
2
β∗
3
β∗
4
β∗
5

⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
α1
α2
α3
α4
α5
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
=
β∗
1α1 + β∗
2α2 + β∗
3α3 + β∗
4α4 + β∗
5α5. (1.2)
The rule for inner products is essentially the same as for dot
products: add the products of corresponding components of
the vectors whose inner product is being calculated.

32
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
Exercise 1.2: Show that the inner product deﬁned by Eq.
1.2 satisﬁes all the axioms of inner products.
Using the inner product, we can deﬁne some concepts that
are familiar from ordinary 3-vectors:
• Normalized Vector: A vector is said to be normalized
if its inner product with itself is 1. Normalized vectors
satisfy,
⟨A|A⟩= 1.
For ordinary 3-vectors, the term normalized vector is
usually replaced by unit vector, that is, a vector of unit
length.
• Orthogonal Vectors: Two vectors are said to be or-
thogonal if their inner product is zero. |A⟩and |B⟩are
orthogonal if
⟨B|A⟩= 0.
This is the analog of saying that two 3-vectors are or-
thogonal if their dot product is zero.
1.9.5
Orthonormal Bases
When working with ordinary 3-vectors, it is extremely useful
to introduce a set of three mutually orthogonal unit vectors
and use them as a basis to construct any vector. A simple

1.9. INTERLUDE: VECTOR SPACES
33
example would be the unit 3-vectors that point along the x,
y, and z axes. They are usually called ˆi, ˆj, and ˆk. Each is of
unit length and orthogonal to the others. If you tried to ﬁnd
a fourth vector orthogonal to these three, there wouldn’t be
any—not in three dimensions anyway. However, if there were
more dimensions of space, there would be more basis vectors.
The dimension of a space can be deﬁned as the maximum
number of mutually orthogonal vectors in that space.
Obviously, there is nothing special about the particular
axes x, y, and z. As long as the basis vectors are of unit length
and are mutually orthogonal, they comprise an orthonormal
basis.
The same principle is true for complex vector spaces. One
can begin with any normalized vector and then look for a
second one, orthogonal to the ﬁrst. If you ﬁnd one, then
the space is at least two-dimensional. Then look for a third,
fourth, and so on. Eventually, you may run out of new direc-
tions and there will not be any more orthogonal candidates.
The maximum number of mutually orthogonal vectors is the
dimension of the space. For column vectors, the dimension
is simply the number of entries in the column.
Let’s consider an N-dimensional space and a particular
orthonormal basis of ket-vectors labeled |i⟩.7 The label i runs
from 1 to N. Consider a vector |A⟩, written as a sum of basis
7Mathematically, basis vectors are not required to be orthonor-
mal. However, in quantum mechanics they generally are. In this book,
whenever we say basis, we mean an orthonormal basis.

34
LECTURE 1. SYSTEMS AND EXPERIMENTS
vectors:
|A⟩=

i
αi|i⟩.
(1.3)
The αi are complex numbers called the components of the
vector, and to calculate them we take the inner product of
both sides with a basis bra ⟨j|:
⟨j|A⟩=

i
αi⟨j|i⟩.
(1.4)
Next, we use the fact that the basis vectors are orthonormal.
This implies that ⟨j|i⟩= 0 if i is not equal to j, and ⟨j|i⟩= 1
if i = j. In other words, ⟨j|i⟩= δij. This makes the sum in
Eq. 1.4 collapse to one term:
⟨j|A⟩= αj.
(1.5)
Thus, we see that the components of a vector are just its
inner products with the basis vectors. We can rewrite Eq.
1.3 in the elegant form
|A⟩=

i
|i⟩⟨i|A⟩.

Lecture 2
Quantum States
Art: Oddly enough, that beer made my head stop spinning.
What state are we in?
Lenny: I wish I knew. Does it matter?
Art: It might. I don’t think we’re in California anymore.
2.1
States and Vectors
In classical physics, knowing the state of a system implies
knowing everything that is necessary to predict the future
of that system. As we’ve seen in the last lecture, quantum
systems are not completely predictable. Evidently, quantum
states have a diﬀerent meaning than classical states. Very
roughly, knowing a quantum state means knowing as much
as can be known about how the system was prepared. In the
last chapter, we talked about using an apparatus to prepare
the state of a spin. In fact, we implicitly assumed that there
35

36
LECTURE 2. QUANTUM STATES
was no more ﬁne detail to specify or that could be speciﬁed
about the state of the spin.
The obvious question to ask is whether the unpredictabil-
ity is due to an incompleteness in what we call a quantum
state. There are various opinions about this matter. Here is
a sampling:
• Yes, the usual notion of quantum state is incomplete.
There are “hidden variables” that, if only we could ac-
cess them, would allow complete predictability. There
are two versions of this view. In version A, the hidden
variables are hard to measure but in principle they are
experimentally available to us. In version B, because
we are made of quantum mechanical matter and there-
fore subject to the restrictions of quantum mechanics,
the hidden variables are, in principle, not detectable.
• No, the hidden variables concept does not lead us in
a proﬁtable direction. Quantum mechanics is unavoid-
ably unpredictable. Quantum mechanics is as complete
a calculus of probabilities as is possible. The job of a
physicist is to learn and use this calculus.
I don’t know what the ultimate answer to this question will
be, or even if it will prove to be a useful question. But for our
purposes, it’s not important what any particular physicist
believes about the ultimate meaning of the quantum state.
For practical reasons, we will adopt the second view.
In practice, what this means for the quantum spin of
Lecture 1 is that, when the apparatus A acts and tells us
that σz = +1 or σz = −1, there is no more to know, or

2.2. REPRESENTING SPIN STATES
37
that can be known. Likewise, if we rotate A and measure
σx = +1 or σx = −1, there is no more to know. Likewise for
σy or any other component of the spin.
2.2
Representing Spin States
Now it’s time to try our hand at representing spin states us-
ing state-vectors. Our goal is to build a representation that
captures everything we know about the behavior of spins.
At this point, the process will be more intuitive than formal.
We will try to ﬁt things together the best we can, based on
what we’ve already learned. Please read this section care-
fully. Believe me, it will pay oﬀ.
Let’s begin by labeling the possible spin states along the
three coordinate axes.
If A is oriented along the z axis,
the two possible states that can be prepared correspond to
σz = ±1. Let’s call them up and down and denote them by
ket-vectors |u⟩and |d⟩. Thus, when the apparatus is oriented
along the z axis and registers +1, the state |u⟩has been
prepared.
On the other hand, if the apparatus is oriented along
the x axis and registers −1, the state |l⟩has been prepared.
We’ll call it left. If A is along the y axis, it can prepare the
states |i⟩and |o⟩(in and out). You get the idea.
The idea that there are no hidden variables has a very
simple mathematical representation: the space of states for
a single spin has only two dimensions. This point deserves
emphasis:

38
LECTURE 2. QUANTUM STATES
All possible spin states can be represented in a two-
dimensional vector space.
We could, somewhat arbitrarily,1 choose |u⟩and |d⟩as
the two basis vectors and write any state as a linear super-
position of these two. We’ll adopt that choice for now. Let’s
use the symbol |A⟩for a generic state. We can write this as
an equation,
|A⟩= αu|u⟩+ αd|d⟩,
where αu and αd are the components of |A⟩along the basis
directions |u⟩and |d⟩. Mathematically, we can identify the
components of |A⟩as
αu
=
⟨u|A⟩
αd
=
⟨d|A⟩.
(2.1)
These equations are extremely abstract, and it is not at all
obvious what their physical signiﬁcance is. I am going to
tell you right now what they mean: First of all, |A⟩can
represent any state of the spin, prepared in any manner. The
components αu and αd are complex numbers; by themselves,
they have no experimental meaning, but their magnitudes
do. In particular, α∗
uαu and α∗
dαd have the following meaning:
• Given that the spin has been prepared in the state
|A⟩, and that the apparatus is oriented along z, the
1The choice is not totally arbitrary.
The basis vectors must be
orthogonal to each other.

2.2. REPRESENTING SPIN STATES
39
quantity α∗
uαu is the probability that the spin would
be measured as σz = +1. In other words, it is the
probability of the spin being up if measured along the
z axis.
• Likewise, α∗
dαd is the probability that σz would be down
if measured.
The α values, or equivalently ⟨u|A⟩and ⟨d|A⟩, are called
probability amplitudes. They are themselves not probabil-
ities. To compute a probability, their magnitudes must be
squared. In other words, the probabilities for measurements
of up and down are given by
Pu
=
⟨A|u⟩⟨u|A⟩
Pd
=
⟨A|d⟩⟨d|A⟩.
(2.2)
Notice that I have said nothing about what σz is before it is
measured. Before the measurement, all we have is the vector
|A⟩, which represents the potential possibilities but not the
actual values of our measurements.
Two other points are important: First, note that |u⟩and
|d⟩are mutually orthogonal. In other words,
⟨u|d⟩
=
0
⟨d|u⟩
=
0.
(2.3)

40
LECTURE 2. QUANTUM STATES
The physical meaning of this is that, if the spin is prepared
up, then the probability to detect it down is zero, and vice
versa.
This point is so important, I’ll say it again: Two
orthogonal states are physically distinct and mutually exclu-
sive. If the spin is in one of these states, it cannot be (has
zero probability to be) in the other one. This idea applies to
all quantum systems, not just spin.
But don’t mistake the orthogonality of state-vectors for
orthogonal directions in space. In fact, the directions up and
down are not orthogonal directions in space, even though
their associated state-vectors are orthogonal in state space.
The second important point is that for the total proba-
bility to come out equal to unity, we must have
α∗
uαu + α∗
dαd = 1.
(2.4)
This is equivalent to saying that the vector |A⟩is normalized
to a unit vector:
⟨A|A⟩= 1.
This is a very general principle of quantum mechanics that
extends to all quantum systems: the state of a system is
represented by a unit (normalized) vector in a vector space of
states. Moreover, the squared magnitudes of the components
of the state-vector, along particular basis vectors, represent
probabilities for various experimental outcomes.

2.3. ALONG THE X AXIS
41
2.3
Along the x Axis
We said before that we can represent any spin state as a
linear combination of the basis vectors |u⟩and |d⟩. Let’s try
doing this now for the vectors |r⟩and |l⟩, which represent
spins prepared along the x axis. We’ll start with |r⟩. As you
recall from Lecture 1, if A initially prepares |r⟩, and is then
rotated to measure σz, there will be equal probabilities for
up and down. Thus, α∗
uαu and α∗
dαd must both be equal to
1
2. A simple vector that satisﬁes this rule is
|r⟩= 1
√
2|u⟩+ 1
√
2|d⟩.
(2.5)
There is some ambiguity in this choice, but as we will see
later, it is nothing more than the ambiguity in our choice of
exact directions for the x and y axes.
Next, let’s look at the vector |l⟩. Here is what we know:
when the spin has been prepared in the left conﬁguration,
the probabilities for σz are again equal to
1
2. That is not
enough to determine the values α∗
uαu and α∗
dαd, but there
is another condition that we can infer. Earlier, I told you
that |u⟩and |d⟩are orthogonal for the simple reason that, if
the spin is up, it’s deﬁnitely not down. But there is nothing
special about up and down that is not also true of right and
left. In particular, if the spin is right, it has zero probability
of being left. Thus, by analogy with Eq. 2.3,
⟨r|l⟩= 0
⟨l|r⟩= 0.

42
LECTURE 2. QUANTUM STATES
This pretty much ﬁxes |l⟩in the form
|l⟩= 1
√
2|u⟩−1
√
2|d⟩.
(2.6)
Exercise 2.1: Prove that the vector |r⟩in Eq. 2.5 is orthog-
onal to vector |l⟩in Eq. 2.6.
Again, there is some ambiguity in the choice of |l⟩. This is
called the phase ambiguity. Suppose we multiply |l⟩by any
complex number z. That will have no eﬀect on whether it is
orthogonal to |r⟩, though in general the result will no longer
be normalized (have unit length). But if we choose z = eiθ
(where θ can be any real number), then there will be no
eﬀect on the normalization because eiθ has unit magnitude.
In other words, α∗
uαu + α∗
dαd will remain equal to 1. Since
a number of the form z = eiθ is called a phase-factor, the
ambiguity is called the phase ambiguity. Later, we will ﬁnd
out that no measurable quantity is sensitive to the overall
phase-factor, and therefore we can ignore it when specifying
states.
2.4
Along the y Axis
Finally, this brings us to |i⟩and |o⟩, the vectors representing
spins oriented along the y axis. Let’s look at the conditions
they need to satisfy. First,
⟨i|o⟩= 0.
(2.7)

2.4. ALONG THE Y AXIS
43
This condition states that in and out are represented by or-
thogonal vectors in the same way that up and down are.
Physically, this means that if the spin is in, it is deﬁnitely
not out.
There are additional restrictions on the vectors |i⟩and
|o⟩. Using the relationships expressed in Eqs. 2.1 and 2.2,
and the statistical results of our experiments, we can write
the following:
⟨o|u⟩⟨u|o⟩
=
1
2
⟨o|d⟩⟨d|o⟩
=
1
2
⟨i|u⟩⟨u|i⟩
=
1
2
⟨i|d⟩⟨d|i⟩
=
1
2.
(2.8)
In the ﬁrst two equations, |o⟩takes the role of |A⟩from Eqs.
2.1 and 2.2. In the second two, |i⟩takes that role. These
conditions state that if the spin is oriented along y, and is
then measured along z, it is equally likely to be up or down.
We should also expect that if the spin were measured along
the x axis, it would be equally likely to be right or left. This
leads to additional conditions:
⟨o|r⟩⟨r|o⟩
=
1
2
⟨o|l⟩⟨l|o⟩
=
1
2

44
LECTURE 2. QUANTUM STATES
⟨i|r⟩⟨r|i⟩
=
1
2
⟨i|l⟩⟨l|i⟩
=
1
2.
(2.9)
These conditions are suﬃcient to determine the form of the
vectors |i⟩and |o⟩, apart from the phase ambiguity. Here is
the result:
|i⟩
=
1
√
2|u⟩+
i
√
2|d⟩
|o⟩
=
1
√
2|u⟩−
i
√
2|d⟩.
(2.10)
Exercise 2.2: Prove that |i⟩and |o⟩satisfy all of the con-
ditions in Eqs. 2.7, 2.8, and 2.9. Are they unique in that
respect?
It’s interesting that two of the components in Eqs. 2.10 are
imaginary. Of course, we’ve said all along that the space of
states is a complex vector space, but until now we have not
had to use complex numbers in our calculations. Are the
complex numbers in Eqs. 2.10 a convenience or a necessity?
Given our framework for spin states, there is no way around
them. It’s somewhat tedious to demonstrate this, but the
steps are straightforward. The following exercise gives you
a road map.
The need for complex numbers is a general
feature of quantum mechanics, and we’ll see more examples
as we go.

2.5. COUNTING PARAMETERS
45
Exercise 2.3: For the moment, forget that Eqs. 2.10 give us
working deﬁnitions for |i⟩and |o⟩in terms of |u⟩and |d⟩, and
assume that the components α, β, γ, and δ are unknown:
|i⟩= α|u⟩+ β|d⟩
|o⟩= γ|u⟩+ δ|d⟩.
a) Use Eqs. 2.8 to show that
α∗α = β∗β = γ∗γ = δ∗δ = 1
2.
b) Use the above result and Eqs. 2.9 to show that
α∗β + αβ∗= γ∗δ + γδ∗= 0.
c) Show that α∗β and γ∗δ must each be pure imaginary.
If α∗β is pure imaginary, then α and β cannot both be real.
The same reasoning applies to γ∗δ.
2.5
Counting Parameters
It’s always important to know how many independent pa-
rameters it takes to characterize a system.
For example,
the generalized coordinates we used in Volume I (referred to
as qi) each represented an independent degree of freedom.
That approach freed us from the diﬃcult job of writing ex-
plicit equations to describe physical constraints. Along sim-
ilar lines, our next task is to count the number of physically
distinct states there are for a spin. I will do it in two ways,
to show that you get the same answer either way.

46
LECTURE 2. QUANTUM STATES
The ﬁrst way is simple. Point the apparatus along any
unit 3-vector2 ˆn and prepare a spin with σ = +1 along that
axis. If σ = −1, you can think of the spin as being oriented
along the −ˆn axis. Thus, there must be a state for every
orientation of the unit 3-vector ˆn. How many parameters
does it take to specify such an orientation? The answer is
of course two. It takes two angles to deﬁne a direction in
three-dimensional space.3
Now, let’s consider the same question from another per-
spective. The general spin state is deﬁned by two complex
numbers, αu and αd. That seems to add up to four real pa-
rameters, with each complex parameter counting as two real
ones. But recall that the vector has to be normalized as in
Eq. 2.4. The normalization condition gives us one equation
involving real variables, and cuts the number of parameters
down to three.
As I said earlier, we will eventually see that the physical
properties of a state-vector do not depend on the overall
phase-factor. This means that one of the three remaining
parameters is redundant, leaving only two—the same as the
number of parameters we need to specify a direction in three-
dimensional space.
Thus, there is enough freedom in the
expression
αu|u⟩+ αd|d⟩
2Keep in mind that 3-vectors are not bras or kets.
3Recall that spherical coordinates use two angles to represent the
orientation of a point in relation to the origin. Latitude and longitude
provide another example.

2.6. REPRESENTING SPIN STATES
47
to describe all the possible orientations of a spin, even though
there are only two possible outcomes of an experiment along
any axis.
2.6
Representing Spin States as
Column Vectors
So far, we have been able to learn a lot by using the abstract
forms of our state-vectors, that is, |u⟩and |d⟩and so forth.
These abstractions help us focus on mathematical relation-
ships without worrying about unnecessary details. However,
soon we will need to perform detailed calculations on spin
states, and for that we’ll need to write our state-vectors in
column form. Because of “phase indiﬀerence,” the column
representations are not unique, and we’ll try to choose the
simplest and most convenient ones we can ﬁnd.
As usual, we’ll start with |u⟩and |d⟩. We need them to
have unit length, and to be mutually orthogonal. A pair of
columns that satisﬁes these requirements is
|u⟩=
 1
0

(2.11)
|d⟩=
 0
1

.
(2.12)
With these column vectors in hand, it will be easy to create
column vectors for |r⟩and |l⟩using Eqs. 2.5 and 2.6, and for
|i⟩and |o⟩using Eqs. 2.10. We’ll do that in the next lecture,
where these results are needed.

48
LECTURE 2. QUANTUM STATES
2.7
Putting It All Together
We have covered a lot of ground in this lecture. Before mov-
ing on, let’s take stock of what we’ve done. Our goal was to
synthesize what we know about spins and vector spaces. We
ﬁgured out how to use vectors to represent spin states, and
in the process we got a glimpse of the kind of information a
state-vector contains (and does not contain!). Here is a brief
outline of what we did:
• Based on our knowledge of spin measurements, we chose
three pairs of mutually orthogonal basis vectors. Pair-
wise, we named them |u⟩and |d⟩, |r⟩and |l⟩, and |i⟩
and |o⟩. Because the basis vectors |u⟩and |d⟩repre-
sent physically distinct states, we were able to assert
that they are mutually orthogonal.
In other words,
⟨u|d⟩= 0. The same holds for |r⟩and |l⟩, and also for
|i⟩and |o⟩.
• We found that it takes two independent parameters to
specify a spin state, and then we arbitrarily chose one
of the orthogonal pairs, |u⟩and |d⟩, as our basis vec-
tors for representing all spin states—even though the
two complex numbers in a state-vector require four real
numbers to specify them. How did we get away with
this? We were clever enough to notice that these four
numbers are not all independent.4 The normalization
constraint (total probability must equal 1) eliminates
one independent parameter, and “phase indiﬀerence”
4Please indulge in a self-satisﬁed grin.

2.7. PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
49
(the physics of a state-vector is unaﬀected by its overall
phase-factor) eliminates a second.
• Having chosen |u⟩and |d⟩as our main basis vectors,
we ﬁgured out how to represent the other two pairs
of basis vectors as linear combinations of |u⟩and |d⟩,
using additional orthogonality and probability-based
constraints.
• Finally, we established a way to represent our main
basis vectors as columns. This representation is not
unique. In the next lecture, we’ll use our |u⟩and |d⟩
column vectors to derive column vectors for the two
other bases.
While achieving these concrete results, we got a chance to
see some state-vector mathematics in action and learn some-
thing about how these mathematical objects correspond to
physical spins. Although we will focus on spin, the same
concepts and techniques apply to other quantum systems as
well. Please take a little time to assimilate the material we’ve
covered so far before moving on to the next lecture. As I said
at the beginning, it will really pay oﬀ.


Lecture 3
Principles of Quantum
Mechanics
Art: I’m not like you, Lenny. My brain just wasn’t built for
quantum mechanics.
Lenny: Nah, mine wasn’t either. Just can’t really visualize
the stuﬀ. But I’ll tell you, I once knew a guy who thought
just like an electron.
Art: What happened to him?
Lenny: Art, all I’m gonna tell you is that it sure wasn’t
pretty.
Art: Hmm, I guess that gene didn’t ﬂy.
No, we were not built to sense quantum phenomena; not
the same way we were built to sense classical things like
force and temperature. But we are very adaptable creatures
and we’ve been able to substitute abstract mathematics for
51

52
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
the missing senses that might have allowed us to directly
visualize quantum mechanics. And eventually we do develop
new kinds of intuition.
This lecture introduces the principles of quantum me-
chanics.
In order to describe those principles, we’ll need
some new mathematical tools. Let’s get started.
3.1
Mathematical Interlude:
Linear Operators
3.1.1
Machines and Matrices
States in quantum mechanics are mathematically described
as vectors in a vector space. Physical observables—the things
that you can measure—are described by linear operators.
We’ll take that as an axiom, and we’ll ﬁnd out later (in
Section 3.1.5) that operators corresponding to physical ob-
servables must be Hermitian as well as linear. The corre-
spondence between operators and observables is subtle, and
understanding it will take some eﬀort.
Observables are the things you measure. For example,
we can make direct measurements of the coordinates of a
particle; the energy, momentum, or angular momentum of a
system; or the electric ﬁeld at a point in space. Observables
are also associated with a vector space, but they are not
state-vectors. They are the things you measure—σx would
be an example—and they are represented by linear opera-
tors. John Wheeler liked to call such mathematical objects
machines. He imagined a machine with two ports: an input

3.1. INTERLUDE: LINEAR OPERATORS
53
port and an output port. In the input port you insert a vec-
tor, such as |A⟩. The gears turn and the machine delivers a
result in the output port. This result is another vector, say
|B⟩.
Let’s denote the operator by the boldface letter M (for
“machine”). Here is the equation to express the fact that M
acts on the vector |A⟩to give |B⟩:
M|A⟩= |B⟩.
Not every machine is a linear operator. Linearity implies a
few simple properties. To begin with, a linear operator must
give a unique output for every vector in the space. We can
imagine a machine that gives an output for some vectors,
but just grinds up others and gives nothing. This machine
would not be a linear operator. Something must come out
for anything you put in.
The next property states that when a linear operator
M acts on a multiple of an input vector, it gives the same
multiple of the output vector. Thus, if M|A⟩= |B⟩, and z
is any complex number, then
Mz|A⟩= z|B⟩.
The only other rule is that, when M acts on a sum of vectors,
the results are simply added together:
M{|A⟩+ |B⟩} = M|A⟩+ M|B⟩.
To give a concrete representation of linear operators, we re-
turn to the row and column vector representation of bra-

54
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
and ket-vectors that we used in Lecture 1. The row-column
notation depends on our choice of basis vectors. If the vector
space is N-dimensional, we choose a set of N orthonormal
(orthogonal and normalized) ket-vectors. Let’s label them
|j⟩, and their dual bra-vectors ⟨j|.
We are now going to take the equation
M|A⟩= |B⟩
and write it in component form. As we did in Eq. 1.3, we’ll
represent an arbitrary ket |A⟩as a sum over basis vectors:
|A⟩=

j
αj|j⟩.
Here, we’re using j as an index rather than i so you won’t be
tempted to think that we’re talking about the in spin state.
Now, we’ll represent |B⟩in the same way and plug both of
these substitutions into M|A⟩= |B⟩. That gives

j
M|j⟩αj =

j
βj|j⟩.
The last step is to take the inner product of both sides with
a particular basis vector ⟨k|, resulting in

j
⟨k|M|j⟩αj =

j
βj⟨k|j⟩.
(3.1)
To make sense of this result, remember that ⟨k|j⟩is zero if
j and k are not equal, and 1 if they are equal. That means
that the sum on the right side collapses to a single term, βk.

3.1. INTERLUDE: LINEAR OPERATORS
55
On the left side, we see a set of quantities ⟨k|M|j⟩αj. We
can abbreviate ⟨k|M|j⟩with the symbol mkj. Notice that
each mkj is just a complex number. To see why, think of
M operating on |j⟩to give some new ket-vector. The inner
product of ⟨k| with this new ket-vector must be a complex
number. The quantities mkj are called the matrix elements
of M and are often arranged into a square N × N matrix.
For example, if N = 3, we can write the symbolic equation
M =
⎛
⎝
m11
m12
m13
m21
m22
m23
m31
m32
m33
⎞
⎠.
(3.2)
This equation involves a slight abuse of notation that would
give a purist indigestion. The left side is an abstract linear
operator and the right side is a concrete representation of it
in a particular basis. Equating them is sloppy but it should
not cause confusion.
Now let’s revisit Eq. 3.1 and replace ⟨k|M|j⟩with mkj.
We get

j
mkjαj = βk.
(3.3)
We can write this in matrix form as well. Eq. 3.3 becomes
⎛
⎝
m11
m12
m13
m21
m22
m23
m31
m32
m33
⎞
⎠
⎛
⎝
α1
α2
α3
⎞
⎠=
⎛
⎝
β1
β2
β3
⎞
⎠.
(3.4)

56
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
You’re probably familiar with the rule for matrix multipli-
cation, but I will remind you just in case. To compute the
ﬁrst entry on the right, β1, take the ﬁrst row of the matrix
and “dot” it into the α column:
β1 = m11α1 + m12α2 + m13α3.
For the second entry, dot the second row of the matrix with
the α column:
β2 = m21α1 + m22α2 + m23α3.
And so on. If you are not familiar with matrix multiplication,
run to your computer and look it up right away. It’s a crucial
part of our tool kit, and I will assume you know it from now
on.
There are both advantages and disadvantages to repre-
senting vectors and linear operators concretely with columns,
rows, and matrices (known collectively as components). The
advantages are obvious. Components provide a completely
explicit set of arithmetic rules for working the machine. The
disadvantage is that they depend on a speciﬁc choice of basis
vectors. The underlying relationships between vectors and
operators is independent of the particular basis we choose,
and the concrete representation obscures that fact.
3.1.2
Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
In general, when a linear operator acts on a vector, it will
change the direction of the vector. This means that what

3.1. INTERLUDE: LINEAR OPERATORS
57
comes out of the machine will not just be the input vector
multiplied by a number. But for a particular linear operator,
there will be certain vectors whose directions are the same
when they come out as they were when they went in. These
special vectors are called eigenvectors. The deﬁnition of an
eigenvector of M is a vector |λ⟩such that
M|λ⟩= λ|λ⟩.
(3.5)
The double use of λ is admittedly a little confusing. First
of all, λ (as opposed to |λ⟩) is a number—generally a com-
plex one, but still a number. On the other hand, |λ⟩is a
ket-vector. Furthermore, it is a ket with a very special rela-
tionship to M. When |λ⟩is fed into the machine M, all that
happens is that it gets multiplied by the number λ. I’ll give
you an example. If M is the 2 × 2 matrix
 1
2
2
1

,
then it’s easy to see that the vector
 1
1

just gets multiplied by 3 when M acts on it. Try it out. M
also happens to have another eigenvector:

1
−1

.

58
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
When M acts on this eigenvector, it multiplies the vector
by a diﬀerent number, namely −1. On the other hand, if M
acts on the vector
 1
0

,
the vector is not simply multiplied by a number. M alters
the direction of the vector as well as its magnitude.
Just as the vectors that get multiplied by numbers when
M acts on them are called eigenvectors of M, the constants
that multiply them are called eigenvalues. In general, the
eigenvalues are complex numbers. Here is an example that
you can work out for yourself. Take the matrix
M =
 0
−1
1
0

and show that the vector
 1
i

is an eigenvector with eigenvalue −i.
Linear operators can also act on bra-vectors. The nota-
tion for multiplying ⟨B| by M is
⟨B|M.
I will keep the discussion short by telling you the rule for this
type of multiplication. It is most simple in component form.

3.1. INTERLUDE: LINEAR OPERATORS
59
Remember that bra-vectors are represented in component
form as row vectors.
For example, the bra ⟨B| might be
represented by
⟨B| =

β∗
1
β∗
2
β∗
3

.
The rule is again just matrix multiplication. With a slight
abuse of notation,
⟨B|M =

β∗
1
β∗
2
β∗
3

⎛
⎝
m11
m12
m13
m21
m22
m23
m31
m32
m33
⎞
⎠.
(3.6)
3.1.3
Hermitian Conjugation
You might think that if M|A⟩= |B⟩then ⟨A|M = ⟨B|, but if
you do you are wrong. The problem is complex conjugation.
Even when Z is just a complex number, if Z|A⟩= |B⟩, it is
not generally true that ⟨A|Z = ⟨B|. You have to complex-
conjugate Z when going from kets to bras: ⟨A|Z∗= ⟨B|.
Of course, if Z happens to be a real number, then complex
conjugation has no eﬀect—every real number is equal to its
own complex conjugate.
What we need is a concept of complex conjugation for
operators. Let’s look at the equation M|A⟩= |B⟩in com-
ponent notation,

i
mjiαi = βj,
and form its complex conjugate,

60
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH

i
m∗
jiα∗
i = β∗
j .
We would like to write this equation in matrix form, using
bras instead of kets. In doing this, we have to remember that
bra-vectors are represented by rows, not columns. For the
result to work out correctly, we also need to rearrange the
complex conjugate elements of the matrix M. The notation
for this rearrangement is M†, as explained below. Our new
equation is
⟨A|M† =

α∗
1
α∗
2
α∗
3

⎛
⎝
m∗
11
m∗
21
m∗
31
m∗
12
m∗
22
m∗
32
m∗
13
m∗
23
m∗
33
⎞
⎠.
(3.7)
Look carefully at the diﬀerence between the matrix in this
equation and the matrix in Eq. 3.6. You will see two diﬀer-
ences. The most obvious is the complex conjugation of each
element, but you can also see a diﬀerence in the element in-
dices. For example, where you see m23 in Eq. 3.6, you see
m∗
32 in Eq. 3.7. In other words, the rows and columns have
been interchanged.
When we change an equation from the ket form to the
bra form, we must modify the matrix in two steps:
1. Interchange the rows and the columns.
2. Complex-conjugate each matrix element.
In matrix notation, interchanging rows and columns is called
transposing and is indicated by a superscript T. Thus, the
transpose of the matrix M is

3.1. INTERLUDE: LINEAR OPERATORS
61
⎛
⎝
m11
m12
m13
m21
m22
m23
m31
m32
m33
⎞
⎠
T
=
⎛
⎝
m11
m21
m31
m12
m22
m32
m13
m23
m33
⎞
⎠.
Notice that transposing a matrix ﬂips it about the main di-
agonal (the diagonal from the upper left to the lower right).
The complex conjugate of a transposed matrix is called
its Hermitian conjugate, denoted by a dagger. You could
think of the dagger as a hybrid of the star-notation used in
complex conjugation and the T used in transposition.
In
symbols,
M† =

MT∗.
To summarize: if M acts on the ket |A⟩to give |B⟩, then it
follows that M† acts on the bra ⟨A| to give ⟨B|. In symbols:
If
M|A⟩= |B⟩,
then
⟨A|M† = ⟨B|.
3.1.4
Hermitian Operators
Real numbers play a special role in physics. The results of
any measurements are real numbers. Sometimes, we mea-
sure two quantities, put them together with an i (forming a

62
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
complex number), and call this number the result of a mea-
surement. But it’s actually just a way of combining two real
measurements. If we want to be pedantic, we might say that
observable quantities are equal to their own complex con-
jugates. That’s of course just a fancy way of saying they
are real. We are going to ﬁnd out very soon that quantum
mechanical observables are represented by linear operators.
What kind of linear operators? The kind that are the clos-
est thing to a real operator. Observables in quantum me-
chanics are represented by linear operators that are equal to
their own Hermitian conjugates. They are called Hermitian
operators after the French mathematician Charles Hermite.
Hermitian operators satisfy the property
M = M†.
In terms of matrix elements, this can be stated as
mji = m∗
ij.
In other words, if you ﬂip a Hermitian matrix about the main
diagonal and then take its complex conjugate, the result is
the same as the original matrix. Hermitian operators (and
matrices) have some special properties. The ﬁrst is that their
eigenvalues are all real. Let’s prove it.
Suppose λ and |λ⟩represent an eigenvalue and the corre-
sponding eigenvector of the Hermitian operator L. In sym-
bols,

3.1. INTERLUDE: LINEAR OPERATORS
63
L|λ⟩= λ|λ⟩.
Then, by the deﬁnition of Hermitian conjugation,
⟨λ|L† = ⟨λ|λ∗.
However, since L is Hermitian, it is equal to L†. Thus, we
can rewrite the two equations as
L|λ⟩= λ|λ⟩
(3.8)
and
⟨λ|L = ⟨λ|λ∗.
(3.9)
Now multiply Eq. 3.8 by ⟨λ| and Eq. 3.9 by |λ⟩. They become
⟨λ|L|λ⟩= λ ⟨λ|λ⟩
and
⟨λ|L|λ⟩= λ∗⟨λ|λ⟩.
Obviously, for both equations to be true, λ must equal λ∗. In
other words, λ (and therefore any eigenvalue of a Hermitian
operator) must be real.

64
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
3.1.5
Hermitian Operators and
Orthonormal Bases
We come now to the basic mathematical theorem—I will call
it the fundamental theorem—that serves as a foundation of
quantum mechanics. The basic idea is that observable quan-
tities in quantum mechanics are represented by Hermitian
operators. It’s a very simple theorem, but it’s an extremely
important one. We can state it more precisely as follows:
The Fundamental Theorem
• The eigenvectors of a Hermitian operator are a com-
plete set. This means that any vector the operator
can generate can be expanded as a sum of its eigen-
vectors.
• If λ1 and λ2 are two unequal eigenvalues of a Hermi-
tian operator, then the corresponding eigenvectors are
orthogonal.
• Even if the two eigenvalues are equal, the correspond-
ing eigenvectors can be chosen to be orthogonal. This
situation, where two diﬀerent eigenvectors have the
same eigenvalue, has a name: it’s called degeneracy.
Degeneracy comes into play when two operators have
simultaneous eigenvectors, as discussed later on in Sec-
tion 5.1.
One can summarize the fundamental theorem as follows: The
eigenvectors of a Hermitian operator form an orthonormal
basis. Let’s prove it, beginning with the second bullet item.

3.1. INTERLUDE: LINEAR OPERATORS
65
According to the deﬁnition of eigenvectors and eigenval-
ues, we can write
L|λ1⟩= λ1|λ1⟩
L|λ2⟩= λ2|λ2⟩.
Now, using the fact that L is Hermitian (its own Hermitian
conjugate), we can ﬂip the ﬁrst equation into a bra equation.
Thus,
⟨λ1|L = λ1⟨λ1|
L|λ2⟩= λ2|λ2⟩.
By now, the trick should be obvious, but I will spell it out.
Take the ﬁrst equation and form its inner product with |λ2⟩.
Then, take the second equation and form its inner product
with ⟨λ1|. The result is
⟨λ1|L|λ2⟩= λ1⟨λ1|λ2⟩
⟨λ1|L|λ2⟩= λ2⟨λ1|λ2⟩.
By subtracting, we get
(λ1 −λ2)⟨λ1|λ2⟩= 0.
Therefore, if λ1 and λ2 are diﬀerent, the inner product ⟨λ1|λ2⟩
must be zero. In other words, the two eigenvectors must be
orthogonal.

66
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
Next, let’s prove that even if λ1 = λ2, the two eigenvec-
tors can be chosen to be orthogonal. Suppose
L|λ1⟩
=
λ|λ1⟩
L|λ2⟩
=
λ|λ2⟩.
(3.10)
In other words, there are two distinct eigenvectors with the
same eigenvalue. It should be clear that any linear combi-
nation of the two eigenvectors is also an eigenvector with
the same eigenvalue. With this much freedom, it is always
possible to ﬁnd two orthogonal linear combinations.
Let’s see how. Consider an arbitrary linear combination
of these two eigenvectors:
|A⟩= α|λ1⟩+ β|λ2⟩.
Operating on both sides with L, we get
L|A⟩= αL|λ1⟩+ βL|λ2⟩,
L|A⟩= αλ|λ1⟩+ βλ|λ2⟩,
and ﬁnally
L|A⟩= λ(α|λ1⟩+ β|λ2⟩) = λ|A⟩.
This equation demonstrates that any linear combination of
|λ1⟩and |λ2⟩is also an eigenvector of L, with the same

3.1. INTERLUDE: LINEAR OPERATORS
67
eigenvalue. By assumption, these two vectors are linearly
independent—otherwise, they would not represent distinct
states. We will also suppose that they span the subspace
of eigenvectors of L that have eigenvalue λ.
There is a
straightforward process, called the Gram-Schmidt procedure,
for ﬁnding an orthonormal basis for a subspace, given a set
of independent vectors that spans the subspace. In plain En-
glish, we can ﬁnd two orthonormal eigenvectors by writing
them as a linear combination of |λ1⟩and |λ2⟩. We outline
the Gram-Schmidt procedure below, in Section 3.1.6.
The ﬁnal part of the theorem states that the eigenvectors
are complete. In other words, if the space is N-dimensional,
there will be N orthonormal eigenvectors. The proof is easy
and I will leave it to you.
Exercise 3.1: Prove the following: If a vector space is N-
dimensional, an orthonormal basis of N vectors can be con-
structed from the eigenvectors of a Hermitian operator.
3.1.6
The Gram-Schmidt Procedure
Sometimes we encounter a set of linearly independent eigen-
vectors that do not form an orthonormal set.
This typi-
cally happens when a system has degenerate states—distinct
states that have the same eigenvalue. In that situation, we
can always use the linearly independent vectors we have, to
create an orthonormal set that spans the same space. The
method is the Gram-Schmidt procedure I alluded to earlier.
Fig. 3.1 illustrates how it works for the simple case of two

68
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
linearly independent vectors. We start with the two vectors
⃗V1 and ⃗V2, and from these we construct two orthonormal
vectors, ˆv1 and ˆv2.
Figure 3.1: The Gram-Schmidt Procedure. Given two lin-
early independent vectors, ⃗V1 and ⃗V2, that are not necessar-
ily orthogonal, we can construct two orthonormal vectors, ˆv1
and ˆv2. ⃗V2⊥is an intermediate result used in the construc-
tion process. We can extend this procedure to larger sets of
linearly independent vectors.
The ﬁrst step is to divide ⃗V1 by its own length, |⃗V1|, which
gives us a unit vector parallel to ⃗V1.
We’ll call that unit
vector ˆv1, and ˆv1 becomes the ﬁrst vector in our orthonormal
set. Next, we project ⃗V2 onto the direction of ˆv1 by forming
the inner product ⟨⃗V2|ˆv1⟩. Now, we subtract ⟨⃗V2|ˆv1⟩from
⃗V2. We’ll call the result of this subtraction ⃗V2⊥. You can see
in Fig. 3.1 that ⃗V2⊥is orthogonal to ˆv1. Lastly, we divide
⃗V2⊥by its own length to form the second member of our

3.2. THE PRINCIPLES
69
orthonormal set, ˆv2. It should be clear that we can extend
this procedure to larger sets of linearly independent vectors
in more dimensions. For instance, if we had a third linearly
independent vector, say ⃗V3, pointing out of the page, we
would subtract its projections onto each of the unit vectors
ˆv1 and ˆv2, and then divide the result by its own length.1
3.2
The Principles
We are now fully prepared to state the principles of quantum
mechanics, so without further ado, let’s do it.
The principles all involve the idea of an observable, and
they presuppose the existence of an underlying complex vec-
tor space whose vectors represent system states. In this lec-
ture, we present the four principles that do not involve the
evolution of state-vectors with time. In Lecture 4, we will
add a ﬁfth principle that addresses the time development of
system states.
An observable could also be called a measurable.
It’s
a thing that you can measure with a suitable apparatus.
Earlier, we spoke about measuring the components of a spin,
σx, σy, and σz. These are examples of observables. We’ll
come back to them, but ﬁrst let’s look at the principles:
• Principle 1: The observable or measurable quantities of
quantum mechanics are represented by linear operators
L.
1In this example, the term out of the page does not mean ⃗V3 is
necessarily orthogonal to the plane of the page.
The ability to use
nonorthogonal vectors as a starting point is the main feature of the
Gram-Schmidt Procedure.

70
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
I realize that this is the kind of hopelessly abstract
statement that makes people give up on quantum me-
chanics and take up surﬁng instead. Don’t worry—its
meaning will become clear by the end of the lecture.
We’ll soon see that L must also be Hermitian. Some
authors regard this as a postulate, or basic principle.
We have chosen instead to derive it from the other
principles. The end result is the same either way: the
operators that represent observables are Hermitian.
• Principle 2: The possible results of a measurement are
the eigenvalues of the operator that represents the ob-
servable. We’ll call these eigenvalues λi. The state for
which the result of a measurement is unambiguously
λi is the corresponding eigenvector |λi⟩. Don’t unpack
your surfboard just yet.
Here’s another way to say it: if the system is in the
eigenstate |λi⟩, the result of a measurement is guaran-
teed to be λi.
• Principle 3: Unambiguously distinguishable states are
represented by orthogonal vectors.
• Principle 4: If |A⟩is the state-vector of a system, and
the observable L is measured, the probability to ob-
serve value λi is
P(λi) = ⟨A|λi⟩⟨λi|A⟩.
(3.11)
I’ll remind you that the λi are the eigenvalues of L,
and |λi⟩are the corresponding eigenvectors.

3.2. THE PRINCIPLES
71
These brief statements are hardly self-explanatory, and we’ll
need to ﬂesh them out. For the moment, let’s accept the ﬁrst
item, namely that every observable is identiﬁed with a lin-
ear operator. We can already begin to see that an operator
is a way of packaging up states along with their eigenval-
ues, which are the possible results of measuring those states.
These ideas should become clear as we move forward.
Let’s recall some important points from our earlier dis-
cussion of spins. First of all, the result of a measurement
is generally statistically uncertain. However, for any given
observable, there are particular states for which the result is
absolutely certain. For example, if the spin-measuring ap-
paratus A is oriented along the z axis, the state |u⟩always
leads to the value σz = +1. Likewise, the state |d⟩never gives
anything but σz = −1. Principle 1 gives us a new way to look
at these facts. It implies that each observable (σx, σy, and
σz) is identiﬁed with a speciﬁc linear operator in the two-
dimensional space of states describing the spin.
When an observable is measured, the result is always a
real number drawn from a set of possible results. For exam-
ple, if the energy of an atom is measured, the result will be
one of the established energy levels of the atom. For the fa-
miliar case of the spin, the possible values of any of the com-
ponents are ±1. The apparatus never gives any other result.
Principle 2 deﬁnes the relation between the operator repre-
senting an observable and the possible numerical outputs of
the measurement. Namely, the result of a measurement is
always one of the eigenvalues of the corresponding operator.
Thus, each component of the spin operator must have two

72
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
eigenvalues equal to ±1.2
Principle 3 is the most interesting. At least I ﬁnd it so. It
speaks of unambiguously distinct states, a key idea that we
have already encountered. Two states are physically distinct
if there is a measurement that can tell them apart without
ambiguity. For example, |u⟩and |d⟩can be distinguished by
measuring σz. If you are handed a spin and told that it is
either in the state |u⟩or the state |d⟩, to ﬁnd out which of
the two states is the right one, all you have to do is align A
with the z axis and measure σz. There is no possibility of a
mistake. The same is true for |l⟩and |r⟩. You can distinguish
them by measuring σx.
But suppose instead that you are told the spin is in one
of the two states, |u⟩or |r⟩(up or right). There is nothing
you can measure that will unambiguously tell you the spin’s
true state. Measuring σz won’t do it. If you get σz = +1,
it is possible that the initial state was |r⟩since there is a 50
percent probability of getting this answer in the state |r⟩. For
that reason, |u⟩and |d⟩are said to be physically distinguish-
able, but |u⟩and |r⟩are not. One might say that the inner
product of two states is a measure of the inability to dis-
tinguish them with certainty. Sometimes this inner product
is called the overlap. Principle 3 requires physically distinct
states to be represented by orthogonal state-vectors, that is,
vectors with no overlap. Thus, for spin states, ⟨u|d⟩= 0 but
⟨u|r⟩=
1
√
2.
2We have not yet explained what we mean by a “component” of
the spin operator. We will do so shortly.

3.2. THE PRINCIPLES
73
Finally, Principle 4 quantiﬁes these ideas in a rule that
expresses the probabilities for various outcomes of an experi-
ment. If we assume that a system has been prepared in state
|A⟩, and subsequently the observable L is measured, then the
outcome will be one of the eigenvalues λi of the operator L.
But, in general, there is no way to tell for certain which of
these values will be observed. There is only a probability—
let us call it P(λi)—that the outcome will be λi. Principle 4
tells us how to calculate that probability, and it is expressed
in terms of the overlap of |A⟩and |λi⟩. More precisely, the
probability is the square of the magnitude of the overlap:
P(λi) = |⟨A|λi⟩|2
or, equivalently,
P(λi) = ⟨A|λi⟩⟨λi|A⟩.
You might be wondering why the probability is not the over-
lap itself. Why the square of the overlap? Keep in mind
that the inner product of two vectors is not always positive,
or even real. Probabilities, on the other hand, are both pos-
itive and real. So it would not make sense to identify P(λi)
with ⟨A|λi⟩. But the square of the magnitude, ⟨A|λi⟩⟨λi|A⟩,
is always positive and real and thus can be identiﬁed with
the probability of a given outcome.
An important consequence of the principles is as follows:
The operators that represent observables are Hermitian.

74
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
The reason for this is twofold. First, since the result of an
experiment must be a real number, the eigenvalues of an
operator L must also be real. Secondly, the eigenvectors that
represent unambiguously distinguishable results must have
diﬀerent eigenvalues, and must also be orthogonal. These
conditions are suﬃcient to prove that L must be Hermitian.
3.3
An Example: Spin Operators
It may be hard to believe, but single spins—as simple as
they are—still have a lot more to teach us about quantum
mechanics, and we plan to milk them for all they’re worth.
Our goal in this section is to write down the spin operators
in concrete form, as 2 × 2 matrices. Then, we’ll get to see
how they work in speciﬁc situations. We’ll build up our spin
operators and state-vectors shortly. But before we dive into
the details, I’d like to say a little more about how operators
are related to physical measurements. The relationship is a
subtle one, and we’ll say more about it as we go.
As you know, physicists recognize various types of physi-
cal quantities, such as scalars and vectors. It should come as
no surprise, then, that an operator associated with the mea-
surement of a vector (such as spin) has a vector character of
its own.
In our travels so far, we have seen more than one kind of
vector. The 3-vector is the most straightforward and serves
as a prototype.
It’s a mathematical representation of an
arrow in three-dimensional space, and is often represented by
three real numbers, written out as a column matrix. Because
their components are real-valued, 3-vectors are not quite rich

3.4. CONSTRUCTING SPIN OPERATORS
75
enough to represent quantum states. For that, we need bras
and kets, which have complex-valued components.
What sort of vector is the spin operator σ? It is deﬁnitely
not a state-vector (a bra or a ket).
It’s not exactly a 3-
vector either, but it does have a strong family resemblance
because it’s associated with a direction in space. In fact, we
will frequently use σ as though it were a simple 3-vector.
However, we’ll try to keep things straight by calling σ a 3-
vector operator.
But what does that actually mean? In physical terms,
it means this: Just as a spin-measuring apparatus can only
answer questions about a spin’s orientation in a speciﬁc di-
rection, a spin operator can only provide information about
the spin component in a speciﬁc direction.
To physically
measure spin in a diﬀerent direction, we need to rotate the
apparatus to point in the new direction. The same idea ap-
plies to the spin operator—if we want it to tell us about
the spin component in a new direction, it too must be “ro-
tated,” but this kind of rotation is accomplished mathemat-
ically. The bottom line is that there is a spin operator for
each direction in which the apparatus can be oriented.
3.4
Constructing Spin Operators
Now, let’s work out the details of spin operators. The ﬁrst
goal is to construct operators to represent the components
of spin, σx, σy, and σz. Then we’ll build on those results to
construct an operator that represents a spin component in
any direction. As usual, we begin with σz. We know that σz
has deﬁnite, unambiguous values for the states |u⟩and |d⟩,

76
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
and that the corresponding measurement values are σz = +1
and σz = −1. Here is what the ﬁrst three principles tell us:
• Principle 1: Each component of σ is represented by a
linear operator.
• Principle 2: The eigenvectors of σz are |u⟩and |d⟩.
The corresponding eigenvalues are +1 and −1.
We
can express this with the abstract equations
σz|u⟩
=
|u⟩
σz|d⟩
=
−|d⟩.
(3.12)
• Principle 3: States |u⟩and |d⟩are orthogonal to each
other. This can be expressed as
⟨u|d⟩= 0.
(3.13)
Recalling our column representations of |u⟩and |d⟩from Eqs.
2.11 and 2.12, we can write Eqs. 3.12 in matrix form as
 (σz)11
(σz)12
(σz)21
(σz)22
  1
0

=
 1
0

(3.14)
and
 (σz)11
(σz)12
(σz)21
(σz)22
  0
1

= −
 0
1

.
(3.15)

3.4. CONSTRUCTING SPIN OPERATORS
77
There is only one matrix that satisﬁes these equations. I
leave it as an exercise to prove
 (σz)11
(σz)12
(σz)21
(σz)22

=
 1
0
0
−1

(3.16)
or, more concisely,
σz =
 1
0
0
−1

.
(3.17)
Exercise 3.2:
Prove that Eq. 3.16 is the unique solution
to Eqs. 3.14 and 3.15.
This is our very ﬁrst example of a quantum mechanical
operator. Let’s summarize what went into it. First, some ex-
perimental data: there are certain states that we called |u⟩
and |d⟩, in which the measurement of σz gives unambiguous
results ±1. Next, the principles told us that |u⟩and |d⟩are
orthogonal and are eigenvectors of a linear operator σz. Fi-
nally, we learned from the principles that the corresponding
eigenvalues are the observed (or measured) values, again ±1.
That’s all it takes to derive Eq. 3.17.
Can we do the same for the other two components of spin,
σx and σy? Yes, we can.3 The eigenvectors of σx are |r⟩and
|l⟩, with eigenvalues +1 and −1 respectively. In equation
form,
3We are not trying to slip in a political slogan. Really. Just say no
to slogans.

78
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
σx|r⟩
=
|r⟩
σx|l⟩
=
−|l⟩.
(3.18)
Recall that |r⟩and |l⟩are linear superpositions of |u⟩and
|d⟩:
|r⟩
=
1
√
2|u⟩+ 1
√
2|d⟩
|l⟩
=
1
√
2|u⟩−1
√
2|d⟩.
(3.19)
Substituting the appropriate column vectors for |u⟩and |d⟩,
we get
|r⟩=

1
√
2
1
√
2

|l⟩=

1
√
2
−1
√
2

.
To make Eqs. 3.18 concrete, we can write them in matrix
form:
 (σx)11
(σx)12
(σx)21
(σx)22
 
1
√
2
1
√
2

=

1
√
2
1
√
2

and

3.4. CONSTRUCTING SPIN OPERATORS
79
 (σx)11
(σx)12
(σx)21
(σx)22
 
1
√
2
−1
√
2

= −

1
√
2
−1
√
2

.
If you write these equations out in longhand form, they turn
into four easily solved equations for the matrix elements
(σx)11, (σx)12, (σx)21, and (σx)22. Here is the solution:
 (σx)11
(σx)12
(σx)21
(σx)22

=
 0
1
1
0

or
σx =
 0
1
1
0

.
Finally, we can do the same for σy. The eigenvectors of σy
are the in and out states |i⟩and |o⟩:
|i⟩= 1
√
2|u⟩+
i
√
2|d⟩
|o⟩= 1
√
2|u⟩−
i
√
2|d⟩.
In component form, these equations become
|i⟩=

1
√
2
i
√
2

|o⟩=

1
√
2
−i
√
2

,
and an easy calculation gives

80
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
σy =
 0
−i
i
0

.
To summarize, the three operators σx, σy, and σz are repre-
sented by the three matrices
σz
=
 1
0
0
−1

σx
=
 0
1
1
0

σy
=
 0
−i
i
0

.
(3.20)
These three matrices are very famous and carry the name of
their discoverer. They are the Pauli matrices.4
3.5
A Common Misconception
This is a convenient time to warn you about a potential haz-
ard. The correspondence between operators and measure-
ments is fundamental in quantum mechanics. It is also very
easy to misunderstand. Here’s what is true about operators
in quantum mechanics:
1. Operators are the things we use to calculate eigenvalues
and eigenvectors.
2. Operators act on state-vectors (which are abstract math-
ematical objects), not on actual physical systems.
4Along with the 2 × 2 identity matrix, they are also quaternions.

3.5. A COMMON MISCONCEPTION
81
3. When an operator acts on a state-vector, it produces
a new state-vector.
Having said what is true about operators, I want to warn
you about a common misconception. It is often thought that
measuring an observable is the same as operating with the
corresponding operator on the state. For example, suppose
we are interested in measuring an observable L. The mea-
surement is some kind of operation that the apparatus does
to the system, but that operation is in no way the same as
acting on the state with the operator L. For example, if the
state of the system before we do the measurement is |A⟩, it
is not correct to say that the measurement of L changes the
state to L|A⟩.
To make sense of this, let’s look closely at an example.
Fortunately, the spin example of the previous subsection is
just what we need. Recall Eqs. 3.12:
σz|u⟩= |u⟩
σz|d⟩= −|d⟩.
In these situations, there is no trap because |u⟩and |d⟩are
eigenvectors of σz. If the system is prepared in, say, the |d⟩
state, a measurement will deﬁnitely give the result −1, and
the σz operator transforms the prepared state into the cor-
responding post-measurement state, −|d⟩. The state −|d⟩is
the same as |d⟩except for a multiplicative constant, so the
two states are really the same. No problems here.

82
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
But now let’s review the action of σz on the prepared
state |r⟩, which is not one of its eigenvectors. From Eq. 3.19,
we know that
|r⟩= 1
√
2|u⟩+ 1
√
2|d⟩.
Acting on this state-vector with σz gives the result
σz|r⟩= 1
√
2σz|u⟩+ 1
√
2σz|d⟩
or
σz|r⟩= 1
√
2|u⟩−1
√
2|d⟩.
(3.21)
OK, here is our trap. Despite what you might think, the
state-vector on the right-hand side of Eq. 3.21 is deﬁnitely
not the state that would result from a measurement of σz.
That measurement result would be either +1, leaving the
system in state |u⟩, or −1, leaving it in state |d⟩. Neither
of these results would leave the system state-vector in the
superposition represented by Eq. 3.21.
But surely that state-vector must have something to do
with the measurement result? In fact, it does. We’ll ﬁnd
part of the answer in Lecture 4, where we’ll see how the new
state-vector allows us to calculate the probabilities of each
possible outcome of the measurement. However, the result of
a measurement cannot be properly described without taking
the apparatus into account as part of the system.
What
actually does happen during a measurement is the subject
of Section 7.8.

3.6. 3-VECTOR OPERATORS REVISITED
83
3.6
3-Vector Operators Revisited
Now, let’s revisit the idea of a 3-vector operator.
I have
called σx, σy, and σz the components of spin along the three
axes, implying that they are the components of some kind
of 3-vector. This is a good time to return to the two notions
of vectors that come up all the time in physics. First, there
is your garden-variety vector in ordinary three-dimensional
space, which we’ve decided to call a 3-vector.
As we’ve
seen, a 3-vector has components along the three directions
of space.
The other completely distinct meaning of the term vector
is the state-vector of a system. Thus, |u⟩and |d⟩, |r⟩and |l⟩,
and |i⟩and |o⟩are state-vectors in a two-dimensional space
of spin states. What about σx, σy, and σz? Are they vectors,
and if so, what kind?
Clearly, they are not state-vectors; they are operators
(written as matrices) that correspond to the three measur-
able components of spin. In fact, these 3-vector operators
represent a new type of vector. They are diﬀerent both from
state-vectors, and from ordinary 3-vectors.
However, be-
cause spin operators behave so much like 3-vectors, it does
no harm to think of them in that way, and that’s what we’ll
do here.
We measure spin components by orienting the apparatus
A along any one of the three axes and then activating it.
But then why not orient A along any axis and measure the
component of σ along that axis? In other words, take any
unit 3-vector ˆn with components nx, ny, and nz, and orient

84
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
the apparatus A with its arrow along ˆn. Activating A would
then measure the component of σ along the axis ˆn. There
must be an operator that corresponds to this measurable
quantity.
If σ really behaves like a 3-vector, then the component of
σ along ˆn is nothing but the ordinary dot product of σ and
ˆn.5,6 Let’s denote that component of σ by σn, so that
σn = ⃗σ · ˆn
or, in expanded form,
σn = σxnx + σyny + σznz.
(3.22)
To clarify the meaning of this equation, keep in mind that
the components of ˆn are just numbers. They themselves are
not operators. Eq. 3.22 describes a vector-operator that is
constructed as the sum of three terms, each containing a
numerical coeﬃcient nx, ny, or nz. To be more concrete, we
can write Eq. 3.22 in matrix form:
σn = nx
 0
1
1
0

+ ny
 0
−i
i
0

+ nz
 1
0
0
−1

.
5We’ll start using the notation ⃗σ, except when referring to compo-
nents, such as σx.
6The careful reader may object, because the result of this “ordi-
nary” dot product is a 2 × 2 matrix rather than a scalar, so it’s not
quite ordinary. Perhaps there is some comfort in the fact that the re-
sulting matrix operator corresponds to a vector component, which is a
scalar. It all works out in the end.

3.7. REAPING THE RESULTS
85
Or even more explicitly, we can combine these three terms
into a single matrix:
σn =

nz
(nx −iny)
(nx + iny)
−nz

.
(3.23)
What is this good for? Not much, until we ﬁnd the eigenvec-
tors and eigenvalues of σn. But once we do that, we will know
the possible outcomes of a measurement along the direction
of ˆn. And we will also be able to calculate probabilities for
those outcomes. In other words, we will have a complete pic-
ture of spin measurements in three-dimensional space. That
is pretty darn cool, if I say so myself.
3.7
Reaping the Results
We are now positioned to make some real calculations, some-
thing that should make your inner physicist jump for joy.
Let’s look at the special case where ˆn lies in the x–z plane,
which is the plane of this page. Since ˆn is a unit vector, we
can write
nz = cos θ
nx = sin θ
ny = 0,
where θ is the angle between the z axis and the ˆn axis. Plug-
ging these values into Eq. 3.23, we can write
σn =
 cos θ
sin θ
sin θ
−cos θ

.

86
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
Exercise 3.3: Calculate the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of
σn. Hint: Assume the eigenvector λ1 has the form
 cos α
sin α

,
where α is an unknown parameter.
Plug this vector into
the eigenvalue equation and solve for α in terms of θ. Why
did we use a single parameter α? Notice that our suggested
column vector must have unit length.
Here are the results:
λ1 = 1
|λ1⟩=
⎛
⎝
cos θ
2
sin θ
2
⎞
⎠
and
λ2 = −1
|λ2⟩=
⎛
⎝
−sin θ
2
cos θ
2
⎞
⎠.
Notice some important facts. First, the two eigenvalues are
again +1 and −1. This should come as no surprise; the ap-
paratus A can only give one of these two answers no matter
which way it points. But it’s good to see this come out of
the equations. The second fact is that the two eigenvectors
are orthogonal.

3.7. REAPING THE RESULTS
87
We are now ready to make an experimental prediction.
Suppose A initially points along the z axis and that we pre-
pare a spin in the up state |u⟩. Then, we rotate A so that it
lies along the ˆn axis. What is the probability of observing
σn = +1? According to Principle 4, and using the row and
column expansions of ⟨u| and |λ1⟩, the answer is
P(+1) = |⟨u|λ1⟩|2 = cos2 θ
2.
(3.24)
Similarly, for the same setup,
P(−1) = |⟨u|λ2⟩|2 = sin2 θ
2.
(3.25)
With this result, we have come nearly full circle.
When
introducing spins, we made the claim that if we prepare a
large number of them in the up state and then measure their
component along ˆn, at angle θ to the z axis, then the average
value of the measured results would be cos θ—the same result
we would get for a simple 3-vector in classical physics. Does
our mathematical framework give the same result? It had
better! If a theory disagrees with experiment, it’s the theory
that has to leave town. Let’s see how well our theory holds
up so far.
Unfortunately, we need to cheat a little by using an equa-
tion that we will not fully explain until the next lecture. This
is the equation that tells us how to calculate the average
value (also called the expectation value) of a measurement.
Here it is:
⟨L⟩=

i
λiP(λi).
(3.26)

88
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
It’s worth mentioning that Eq. 3.26 is just a standard formula
for an average value. It’s not unique to quantum mechanics.
To calculate the expectation value of a measurement cor-
responding to the operator L, we multiply each eigenvalue
by its probability, and then sum the results. Of course, the
operator we’re looking at now is just σn, and we already have
all the values we need. Let’s plug them in. Using Eqs. 3.24
and 3.25, along with our known eigenvalues, we can write
⟨σn⟩= (+1) cos2 θ
2 + (−1) sin2 θ
2
or
⟨σn⟩= cos2 θ
2 −sin2 θ
2.
If you remember your trigonometry, this gives
⟨σn⟩= cos θ,
which agrees perfectly with experiment. Yes! We’ve done it!
Having come this far, you might want to try your hand
on a slightly more general problem. As before, we start with
the apparatus A pointing in the z direction. But now, once
the spin has been prepared in the up state, we can rotate
A to an arbitrary direction in space for the second set of
measurements. In this situation, ny ̸= 0. Go ahead and try
it.
Exercise 3.4: Let nz = cos θ, nx = sin θ cos φ, and ny =
sin θ sin φ. Angles θ and φ are deﬁned according to the usual
conventions for spherical coordinates (Fig. 3.2). Compute
the eigenvalues and eigenvectors for the matrix of Eq. 3.23.

3.7. REAPING THE RESULTS
89
Figure 3.2:
Spherical Coordinates.
This diagram illus-
trates conventional spherical coordinate labels r, θ, and φ.
It also illustrates the conversion to Cartesian coordinates:
x = r sin θ cos φ, y = r sin θ sin φ, and z = r cos θ.

90
LECTURE 3. PRINCIPLES OF QUANTUM MECH
You could also try working out a much more elaborate
example involving two directions, ˆn and ˆm. In this setup, A
not only ends up in an arbitrary direction; it also starts out
in a (diﬀerent) arbitrary direction.
Exercise 3.5: Suppose that a spin is prepared so that σm =
+1. The apparatus is then rotated to the ˆn direction and σn
is measured. What is the probability that the result is +1?
Note that σm = σ · ˆm, using the same convention we used
for σn.
The answer is the square of the cosine of half the angle be-
tween ˆm and ˆn. Can you show it?
3.8
The Spin-Polarization
Principle
There is an important theorem that you can try to prove. I
will call it
The Spin-Polarization Principle: Any state of a
single spin is an eigenvector of some component of the
spin.
In other words, given any state
|A⟩= αu|u⟩+ αd|d⟩,
there exists some direction ˆn, such that
⃗σ · ⃗n |A⟩= |A⟩.

3.8. THE SPIN-POLARIZATION PRINCIPLE
91
This means that for any spin state, there is some orientation
of the apparatus A such that A will register +1 when it
acts. In physics language, we say that the states of a spin
are characterized by a polarization vector, and along that
polarization vector the component of spin is predictably +1,
assuming of course that you know the state-vector.
An interesting consequence of this theorem is that there
is no state for which the expectation values of all three com-
ponents of spin are zero. There is a quantitative way to ex-
press this. Consider the expectation value of the spin along
the direction ˆn. Since |A⟩is an eigenvector of ⃗σ · ⃗n (with
eigenvalue +1), it follows that the expectation value can be
expressed as
⟨⃗σ · ⃗n⟩= 1.
On the other hand, the expectation value of the perpendicu-
lar components of σ are zero in the state |A⟩. It follows that
the squares of the expectation values of all three components
of σ sum to 1. Moreover, this is true for any state:
⟨σx⟩2 + ⟨σy⟩2 + ⟨σz⟩2 = 1.
(3.27)
Remember this fact. We will come back to it in Lecture 6.


Lecture 4
Time and Change
There is a massive, quiet, intimidating man sitting alone at
the end of the bar. His T-shirt says “−1.”
Art: Who is that “Minus One” guy over in the corner? The
bouncer?
Lenny: He’s way more than a bouncer. He’s
THE LAW.
Without him, this whole place would fall apart.
4.1
A Classical Reminder
In Volume I, it took a little more than a page to explain
what a state is in classical mechanics. The quantum version
has taken three lectures, three mathematical interludes, and
according to my rough count, about 17,000 words to get to
the same place.
But I think the worst is over.
We now
know what a state is. However, just as in classical physics,
93

94
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
knowing the states of a system is only half the story. The
other half involves a rule about how states change with time.
That’s our next job.
Let me just give you a quick reminder about the na-
ture of change in classical physics. In classical physics, the
space of states is a mathematical set. The logic is Boolean,
and the evolution of states over time is deterministic and re-
versible. In the simplest examples we considered, the state-
space consisted of a few points: Heads and Tails for a coin,
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} for a die. The states were pictured as a set
of points on the page, and the time evolution was just a
rule telling you where to go next. A law of motion consisted
of a graph with arrows connecting the states.
The main
rule—determinism—was that wherever you are in the state-
space, the next state is completely speciﬁed by the law of
motion. But there was also another rule called reversibility.
Reversibility is the requirement that a properly formulated
law must also tell you where you were last. A good law cor-
responds to a graph with exactly one arrow in and one arrow
out at each state.
There is another way to describe these requirements. I
called it the minus ﬁrst law, because it underlies everything
else. It says that information is never lost. If two identical
isolated systems start out in diﬀerent states, they stay in
diﬀerent states. Moreover, in the past they were also in dif-
ferent states. On the other hand, if two identical systems are
in the same state at some point in time, then their histories
and their future evolutions must also be identical. Distinc-
tions are conserved. The quantum version of the minus ﬁrst
law has a name—unitarity.

4.2. UNITARITY
95
4.2
Unitarity
Let us consider a closed system that at time t is in the quan-
tum state |Ψ⟩. (The use of the Greek letter Ψ [psi] for quan-
tum states is traditional when considering the evolution of
systems.) To indicate that the state was |Ψ⟩at the speciﬁc
time t, let’s complicate the notation a bit and call the state
|Ψ(t)⟩. Of course, this notation suggests a bit more than just
“the state was |Ψ⟩at time t.” It also suggests that the state
may be diﬀerent at diﬀerent times. Thus, we think of |Ψ(t)⟩
as representing the entire history of the system.
The basic dynamical assumption of quantum mechanics
is that if you know the state at one time, then the quantum
equations of motion tell you what it will be later. Without
loss of generality, we can take the initial time to be zero
and the later time to be t. The state at time t is given by
some operation that we call U(t), acting on the state at time
zero. Without further specifying the properties of U(t), this
tells us very little except that |Ψ(t)⟩is determined by |Ψ(0)⟩.
Let’s express this relation with the equation
|Ψ(t)⟩= U(t)|Ψ(0)⟩.
(4.1)
The operation U is called the time-development operator for
the system.

96
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
4.3
Determinism in Quantum
Mechanics
At this point, we need to draw some careful distinctions.
We are setting up U(t) in such a way that the state-vector
will evolve in a deterministic manner. Yes, you heard me
correctly—the time evolution of the state-vector is deter-
ministic. This is nice because it provides us with something
we can try to predict. But how does that square with the
statistical character of our measurement results?
As we’ve seen, knowing the quantum state does not mean
that you can predict the result of an experiment with cer-
tainty. For example, knowing that the state of a spin is |r⟩
may tell you the outcome of a measurement of σx but tells
you nothing about a measurement of σz or σy. For this rea-
son, Eq. 4.1 is not the same as classical determinism. Clas-
sical determinism allows us to predict the results of experi-
ments. The quantum evolution of states allows us to com-
pute the probabilities of the outcomes of later experiments.
This is one of the core diﬀerences between classical and
quantum mechanics. It goes back to the relationship between
states and measurements we mentioned at the very beginning
of this book. In classical mechanics, there’s no real diﬀerence
between states and measurements. In quantum mechanics,
the diﬀerence is profound.

4.4. A CLOSER LOOK AT U(T)
97
4.4
A Closer Look at U(t)
Conventional quantum mechanics places a couple of require-
ments on U(t). First, it requires U(t) to be a linear operator.
That is not very surprising. The relationships between states
in quantum mechanics are always linear. It goes along with
the idea that the state-space is a vector space. But linearity
is not the only thing that quantum mechanics requires of
U(t). It also requires the quantum analog of the minus ﬁrst
law: the conservation of distinctions.
Recall from the last lecture that two states are distin-
guishable if they are orthogonal.
Being orthogonal, two
diﬀerent basis vectors represent two distinguishable states.
Suppose that |Ψ(0)⟩and |Φ(0)⟩are two distinguishable states;
in other words, there is a precise experiment that can tell
them apart, and therefore they must be orthogonal:
⟨Ψ(0)|Φ(0)⟩= 0.
The conservation of distinctions implies that they will con-
tinue to be orthogonal for all time. We can express this as
⟨Ψ(t)|Φ(t)⟩= 0
(4.2)
for all values of t. This principle has consequences for the
time-development operator U(t). To see what they are, let’s
ﬂip the ket-vector Eq. 4.1 to its bra-vector counterpart:
⟨Ψ(t)| = ⟨Ψ(0)|U†(t).
(4.3)

98
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
Notice the dagger that indicates Hermitian conjugation. Now,
let’s plug Eqs. 4.1 and 4.3 into Eq. 4.2:
⟨Ψ(0)|U†(t)U(t)|Φ(0)⟩= 0.
(4.4)
To examine the consequences of this equation, consider an
orthonormal basis of vectors |i⟩. Any basis will do.
The
orthonormality is expressed in equation form as
⟨i|j⟩= δij,
where δij is the usual Kronecker symbol.
Next, let’s take |Φ(0)⟩and |Ψ(0)⟩to be members of this
orthonormal basis. Substituting into Eq. 4.4 gives
⟨i|U†(t)U(t)|j⟩= 0
(i ̸= j)
whenever i and j are not the same. On the other hand, if i
and j are the same, then so are the output vectors U(t)|i⟩
and U(t)|j⟩. In that case, the inner product between them
should be 1. Therefore, the general relation takes the form
⟨i|U†(t)U(t)|j⟩= δij.
In other words, the operator U†(t)U(t) behaves like the unit
operator I when it acts between any members of a basis
set. From here it is an easy matter to prove that U†(t)U(t)
acts like the unit operator I when it acts on any state. An
operator U that satisﬁes

4.5. THE HAMILTONIAN
99
U†U = I
is called unitary. In physics lingo, time evolution is unitary.
Unitary operators play an enormous role in quantum
mechanics, representing all sorts of transformations on the
state-space. Time evolution is just one example. Thus, we
conclude this section with a ﬁfth principle of quantum me-
chanics:
• Principle 5: The evolution of state-vectors with time
is unitary.
Exercise 4.1: Prove that if U is unitary, and if |A⟩and |B⟩
are any two state-vectors, then the inner product of U|A⟩
and U|B⟩is the same as the inner product of |A⟩and |B⟩.
One could call this the conservation of overlaps. It expresses
the fact that the logical relation between states is preserved
with time.
4.5
The Hamiltonian
In the study of classical mechanics, we became familiar with
the idea of an incremental change in time. Quantum mechan-
ics is no diﬀerent in this respect: we may build up ﬁnite time
intervals by combining many inﬁnitesimal intervals. Doing
so will lead to a diﬀerential equation for the evolution of
the state-vector.
To that end, we replace the time inter-
val t with an inﬁnitesimal time interval ϵ and consider the
time-evolution operator for this small interval.

100
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
There are two principles that go into the study of incre-
mental changes. The ﬁrst principle is unitarity:
U†(ϵ)U(ϵ) = I .
(4.5)
The second principle is continuity. This means that the
state-vector changes smoothly. To make this precise, ﬁrst
consider the case in which ϵ is zero. It should be obvious that
in this case the time-evolution operator is merely the unit
operator I. Continuity means that when ϵ is very small, U(ϵ)
is close to the unit operator, diﬀering from it by something
of order ϵ. Thus, we write
U(ϵ) = I −iϵH.
(4.6)
You may wonder why I put a minus sign and an i in front
of H. These factors are completely arbitrary at this stage.
In other words, they are a convention that has no content.
I used them with an eye toward the future, when we will
recognize H as something familiar from classical physics.
We will also need an expression for U†. Remembering
that Hermitian conjugation requires the complex conjuga-
tion of coeﬃcients, we ﬁnd that
U†(ϵ) = I + iϵH†.
(4.7)
Now we plug Eqs. 4.6 and 4.7 into the unitarity condition of
Eq. 4.5:
(I + iϵH†)(I −iϵH) = I .

4.5. THE HAMILTONIAN
101
Expanding to ﬁrst order in ϵ, we ﬁnd
H† −H = 0
or, in a format that is more illuminating,
H† = H.
(4.8)
This last equation expresses the unitarity condition. But it
also says that H is a Hermitian operator. This has great sig-
niﬁcance. We can now say that H is an observable, and has
a complete set of orthonormal eigenvectors and eigenvalues.
As we proceed, H will become a very familiar object, namely
the quantum Hamiltonian. Its eigenvalues are the values that
would result from measuring the energy of a quantum sys-
tem. Exactly why we identify H with the classical concept of
a Hamiltonian, and its eigenvalues with energy, will become
clear shortly.
Let’s return now to Eq. 4.1 and specialize it to the in-
ﬁnitesimal case t = ϵ. Using Eq. 4.6, we ﬁnd
|Ψ(ϵ)⟩= |Ψ(0)⟩−iϵH|Ψ(0)⟩.
This is just the kind of equation that we can easily turn into
a diﬀerential equation. First, we transpose the ﬁrst term on
the right side over to the left side, and then divide by ϵ:
|Ψ(ϵ)⟩−|Ψ(0)⟩
ϵ
= −iH|Ψ(0)⟩.

102
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
If you remember your calculus (see Volume I for a quick
review), you’ll recognize that the left-hand side of this equa-
tion looks exactly like the deﬁnition of a derivative. If we
take the limit as ϵ →0, it becomes the time derivative of the
state-vector:
∂|Ψ⟩
∂t
= −iH|Ψ⟩.
(4.9)
We originally set things up so that the time variable was
zero, but there was nothing special about t = 0. Had we
chosen another time and done the same thing, we would
have gotten exactly the same result, namely, Eq. 4.9. This
equation tells us how the state-vector changes: if we know
the state-vector at one instant, the equation tells us what it
will be at the next. Eq. 4.9 is important enough to have a
name. It is called the generalized Schr¨odinger equation, or
more commonly, the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation.
If we know the Hamiltonian, it tells us how the state of an
undisturbed system evolves with time. Art likes to call this
state-vector Schr¨odinger’s Ket. He even wanted to render
the Greek symbol with little whiskers,1 but I had to draw
the line somewhere.
4.6
What Ever Happened to ¯h?
I’m sure you have all heard of Planck’s constant. Planck him-
self called it h and gave it a value of about 6.6×10−34 kg m2 /s.
1OK, not really.

4.6. WHAT EVER HAPPENED TO ¯H?
103
Later generations redeﬁned it, dividing by a factor of 2π and
calling the result ¯h:
¯h = h
2π = 1.054571726 · · · × 10−34 kg m2/s.
Why divide by 2π? Because it saves us from having to write
2π in lots of other places. Considering the importance of
Planck’s constant in quantum mechanics, it seems a little
odd that it hasn’t come up yet. We’re going to correct that
now.
In quantum mechanics, as in classical physics, the Hamil-
tonian is the mathematical object that represents the energy
of a system. This raises a question that, if you are very alert,
may have been a source of confusion. Take a good look at
Eq. 4.9. It doesn’t make dimensional sense. If you ignore
|Ψ⟩on both sides of the equation, the units on the left side
are inverse time. If the quantum Hamiltonian is really to be
identiﬁed with energy, then the units on the right side are
energy. Energy is measured in units of joules, or kg · m2/s2.
Evidently, I’ve been cheating a little bit.
The resolution
of this dilemma involves ¯h, a universal constant of nature,
which happens to have units of kg · m2/s. A constant with
these units is exactly what we need to make Eq. 4.9 consis-
tent. Let’s rewrite it with Planck’s constant inserted in a
way that makes it dimensionally consistent:
¯h∂|Ψ⟩
∂t
= −iH|Ψ⟩.
(4.10)
Why is it that ¯h is such a ridiculously small number? The
answer has much more to do with biology than with physics.

104
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
The real question is not why ¯h is so small; it’s why you are
so big.
The units that we use reﬂect our own size.
The
origin of the meter seems to be that it was used to measure
rope or cloth: it’s about the distance from a person’s nose
to his or her outstretched ﬁngers. A second is about as long
as a heartbeat. And a kilogram is a nice weight to carry
around.
We use these units because they are convenient,
but fundamental physics doesn’t care that much about us.
The size of an atom is about 10−10 meters. Why so small?
That’s the wrong question. The right one is: Why are there
so many atoms in an arm? The reason is simply that to make
a functioning, intelligent, unit-using creature, you need to
put together a lot of atoms. Similarly, the kilogram is many
times larger than an atomic mass because people don’t carry
around single atoms; they get lost too easily. The same goes
for time, and our long, plodding second.
In the end, the
reason that Planck’s constant is so small is that we are so
big and heavy and slow.
Physicists who are interested in the microscopic world are
likely to use units that are more tailored to the phenomena
that they study. If we used atomic length scales, time scales,
and mass scales, then Planck’s constant would not be such an
unwieldy number; it would be much closer to 1. In fact, units
for which Planck’s constant equals 1 are a natural choice
for quantum mechanics, and it’s a common practice to use
them. However, in this book, we will usually retain ¯h in our
equations.

4.7. EXPECTATION VALUES
105
4.7
Expectation Values
Let’s take a short break to discuss an important aspect of
statistics, namely the idea of an average value or mean value.
We mentioned this idea brieﬂy in the previous lecture, but
now it’s time to take a closer look.
In quantum mechanics, average values are called expecta-
tion values. (In some ways, this is a poor choice of words; I’ll
tell you why later.) Suppose we have a probability function
for the outcome of an experiment that measures an observ-
able L. The outcome must be one of L’s eigenvalues, λi, and
the probability function is P(λi). In statistics, that average
(or mean) value is denoted by a bar over the quantity being
measured. The average of the observable L would be ¯L. In
quantum mechanics, the standard notation is diﬀerent, hav-
ing grown out of Paul Dirac’s clever bra-ket notation. We
represent the average value of L with the notation ⟨L⟩. We’ll
soon see why the bra-ket notation is so natural, but ﬁrst let’s
discuss the meaning of the term average.
From a mathematical point of view, an average is deﬁned
by the equation
⟨L⟩=

i
λiP(λi).
(4.11)
In other words, it is a weighted sum, weighted with the prob-
ability function P.
Alternatively, the average can be deﬁned in an experi-
mental way. Suppose a very large number of identical exper-
iments is made, and the outcomes are recorded. Let’s deﬁne

106
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
the probability function in a direct observational manner.
We identify P(λi) as the fraction of observations whose re-
sult was λi. The deﬁnition 4.11 is then identiﬁed with the
experimental average of the observations. The basic hypoth-
esis of any statistical theory is that if the number of trials
is large enough, the mathematical and experimental notions
of probability and average will agree. We will not question
this hypothesis.
I’ll now prove an elegant little theorem that explains the
bra-ket notation for averages. Suppose that the normalized
state of a quantum system is |A⟩. Expand |A⟩in the or-
thonormal basis of eigenvectors of L:
|A⟩=

i
αi|λi⟩.
(4.12)
Just for fun, with no particular agenda in mind, let’s com-
pute the quantity ⟨A|L|A⟩. The meaning of this should be
clear: First act on |A⟩with the linear operator L.2 Then,
take the inner product of the result with the bra ⟨A|. Let’s
do the ﬁrst step by letting L operate on both sides of Eq.
4.12:
L|A⟩=

i
αiL|λi⟩.
Remember that the vectors |λi⟩are eigenvectors of L. Using
the fact that L|λi⟩= λi|λi⟩, we can write
2We would get the same result if we had let L act on ⟨A| ﬁrst.

4.7. EXPECTATION VALUES
107
L|A⟩=

i
αiλi|λi⟩.
The last step is to take the inner product with ⟨A|. We do
that by expanding the bra ⟨A| in eigenvectors on the right-
hand side, and then using the orthonormality of the eigen-
vectors. The result is
⟨A|L|A⟩=

i
(α∗
i αi)λi.
(4.13)
Using the probability principle (Principle 4) to identify (α∗
i αi)
with the probability P(λi), we immediately see that the ex-
pression on the right side of Eq. 4.13 is the same as the
expression on the right side of Eq. 4.11. That is to say,
⟨L⟩= ⟨A|L|A⟩.
(4.14)
Thus, we have a quick rule to compute averages. Just sand-
wich the observable between the bra and ket representations
of the state-vector.
In the previous lecture (Section 3.5), we promised to ex-
plain how the action of a Hermitian operator on a state-
vector is related to the results of physical measurements.
Armed with our knowledge of expectation values, we can now
keep that promise. If we look back at Eq. 3.21, we see an
example of an operator, σz, acting on state-vector |r⟩to pro-
duce a new state-vector. We can view this equation as half
of the calculation for the expectation value of the measure-
ment σz—the right-hand part of the sandwich, if you will.

108
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
The rest of that calculation involves taking the inner prod-
uct of this state-vector with the dual vector ⟨r|. So when σz
acts on |r⟩in Eq. 3.21, it produces a state-vector from which
we can calculate the probabilities of each σz measurement
outcome.
4.8
Ignoring the Phase-Factor
In previous lectures, we said that we can ignore the overall
phase-factor of a state-vector, and promised to explain why
in a later section. Having worked out the rule for averages,
we’ll take a short detour to keep that promise.
What does it mean to “ignore the overall phase-factor”?
It means we can multiply any state-vector by a constant
factor eiθ, where θ is a real number, without changing the
state-vector’s physical meaning. To see this, let’s multiply
Eq. 4.12 by eiθ and call the result |B⟩:
|B⟩= eiθ|A⟩= eiθ 
j
αj|λj⟩.
(4.15)
Note that we changed the index in the summation from i to
j to avoid confusion. It’s easy to see that |B⟩has the same
magnitude as |A⟩, because eiθ has a magnitude of one:
⟨B|B⟩= ⟨Ae−iθ|eiθA⟩= ⟨A|A⟩.
The same pattern of cancellation preserves other quantities
as well. For example, |A⟩’s probability amplitudes αj be-
come eiθαj for |B⟩, so the probability amplitudes are diﬀer-
ent. However, it’s the actual probability, not the amplitude,

4.9. CONNECTIONS TO CLASSICAL MECHANICS 109
that has physical meaning. If a system is in state |B⟩, and
we perform a measurement, the result will be the eigenvalue
of |λj⟩with probability
α∗
je−iθeiθαj = α∗
jαj,
which is the same result we would get for state |A⟩. Finally,
let’s use the same trick for the expectation value of a Her-
mitian operator L. Applying Eq. 4.14 to state |B⟩, we can
write
⟨L⟩= ⟨B|L|B⟩.
Using Eq. 4.15 for |B⟩, we get
⟨L⟩= ⟨Ae−iθ|L|eiθA⟩
or
⟨L⟩= ⟨A|L|A⟩.
In other words, L has the same expectation value in state
|B⟩as it does in state |A⟩. Promise kept.
4.9
Connections to Classical
Mechanics
The average, or expectation value, of an observable is the
closest thing in quantum mechanics to a classical value. If

110
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
the probability distribution for an observable is a nice bell-
shaped curve, and not too broad, then the expectation value
really is the value that you expect to measure. If a system is
so big and heavy that quantum mechanics is not too impor-
tant, then the expectation value of an observable behaves
almost exactly according to classical equations of motion.
For this reason, it is interesting and important to ﬁnd out
how expectation values change with time.
First of all, why do they change with time? They change
with time because the state of the system changes with time.
Suppose the state at time t is represented by ket |Ψ(t)⟩and
bra ⟨Ψ(t)|. The expectation value of the observable L at time
t is
⟨Ψ(t)|L|Ψ(t)⟩.
Let’s see how this changes by diﬀerentiating it with respect to
t and using the Schr¨odinger equation for the time derivatives
of |Ψ(t)⟩and ⟨Ψ(t)|. Using the product rule for derivatives,
we ﬁnd that
d
dt⟨Ψ(t)|L|Ψ(t)⟩= ⟨˙Ψ(t)|L|Ψ(t)⟩+ ⟨Ψ(t)|L| ˙Ψ(t)⟩,
where, as usual, the dot means time derivative.
L itself
has no explicit time dependency, so it just comes along for
the ride.
Now, plugging in the bra and ket versions of
Schr¨odinger’s equation (Eq. 4.10), we get
d
dt⟨Ψ(t)|L|Ψ(t)⟩= i
¯h ⟨Ψ(t)|HL|Ψ(t)⟩−i
¯h ⟨Ψ(t)|LH|Ψ(t)⟩

4.9. CONNECTIONS TO CLASSICAL MECHANICS 111
or, more concisely,
d
dt⟨Ψ(t)|L|Ψ(t)⟩= i
¯h ⟨Ψ(t)| [HL −LH] |Ψ(t)⟩.
(4.16)
If you are used to ordinary algebra, Eq. 4.16 has a strange
appearance. The right-hand side contains the combination
HL−LH, a combination that would ordinarily be zero. But
linear operators are not ordinary numbers: when they are
multiplied (or applied sequentially), the order counts.
In
general, when H acts on L|Ψ⟩, the result is not the same
as when L acts on H|Ψ⟩. In other words, except for spe-
cial cases, HL ̸= LH. Given two operators or matrices, the
combination
LM −ML
is called the commutator of L with M, and it is denoted by
a special symbol:
LM −ML = [L, M].
It’s worth noticing that [L, M] = −[M, L] for any pair of
operators. Armed with the notation for commutators, we
can now write Eq. 4.16 in a simple form:
d
dt⟨L⟩= i
¯h ⟨[H, L]⟩
(4.17)
or, equivalently,
d
dt⟨L⟩= −i
¯h ⟨[L, H]⟩.
(4.18)

112
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
This is a very interesting and important equation. It relates
the time derivative of the expectation value of an observable
L to the expectation value of another observable, namely
−i
¯h[L, H].
Exercise 4.2: Prove that if M and L are both Hermitian,
i[M, L] is also Hermitian. Note that the i is important. The
commutator is, by itself, not Hermitian.
If we assume that the probabilities are nice, narrow, bell-
shaped curves, then Eq. 4.18 tells us how the peaks of the
curves move with time. Equations like this are the closest
thing in quantum mechanics to the equations of classical
physics. Sometimes we even omit the angle brackets in such
equations and write them in a shorthand form:
dL
dt = −i
¯h[L, H].
(4.19)
But keep in mind that a quantum equation of this type
should be in the middle of a sandwich, with a bra ⟨Ψ| on
one side, and a ket |Ψ⟩on the other. Alternatively, we can
think of it as an equation that tells us how the centers of
probability distributions move around.
Does Eq. 4.19 have a familiar look to it? If not, go back
to Lectures 9 and 10 in Volume I, where we learned about
the Poisson bracket formulation of classical mechanics. On

4.9. CONNECTIONS TO CLASSICAL MECHANICS 113
page 172, the following equation can be found:3
˙F = {F, H}.
(4.20)
In this equation, {F, H} is not a commutator; it is a Pois-
son bracket. But still, Eq. 4.20 is suspiciously similar to Eq.
4.19. In fact, there is a close parallel between commutators
and Poisson brackets, and their algebraic properties are quite
similar. For example, if F and G represent operators, both
commutators and Poisson brackets change their sign when
F and G are interchanged. Dirac discovered this, and re-
alized that it represents an important structural connection
between the mathematics of classical mechanics and that of
quantum mechanics. The formal identiﬁcation between com-
mutators and Poisson brackets is
[F, G]
⇐⇒
i¯h{F, G}.
(4.21)
To facilitate comparison with Eq. 4.19, we can substitute the
symbols L and H that we’ve been using in this section.
[L, H]
⇐⇒
i¯h{L, H}.
(4.22)
Let’s try and make this identiﬁcation as clear as possible. If
we start with Eq. 4.19,
dL
dt = −i
¯h[L, H],
3Volume I, Lecture 9, Eq. 10. Another one of those elegant French
inventions.

114
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
and then use the identiﬁcation of Eq. 4.22 to write the clas-
sical analog, the result is
dL
dt = −i
¯h(i¯h{L, H})
or
dL
dt = {L, H},
which matches the pattern of Eq. 4.20 exactly.
Exercise 4.3: Go back to the deﬁnition of Poisson brackets
in Volume I and check that the identiﬁcation in Eq. 4.21 is
dimensionally consistent. Show that without the factor ¯h, it
would not be.
Equation 4.21 solves a riddle. In classical physics, there
is no diﬀerence between FG and GF. In other words: clas-
sically, commutators between ordinary observables are zero.
From Eq. 4.21, we see that commutators in quantum me-
chanics are not zero, but that they are very small. The clas-
sical limit (the limit at which classical mechanics is accurate)
is also the limit at which ¯h is negligibly small. Therefore, it is
also the limit at which commutators are very small in human
units.
4.10
Conservation of Energy
How can we tell whether something is conserved in quan-
tum mechanics? What do we even mean by saying that an
observable—call it Q—is conserved? At the very minimum,

4.10. CONSERVATION OF ENERGY
115
we mean that its expectation value ⟨Q⟩does not change with
time (unless of course the system is disturbed).
An even
stronger condition is that ⟨Q2⟩(or the expectation value of
any power of Q) does not change with time.
Looking at Eq. 4.19, we can see that the condition for
⟨Q⟩not to change is
[Q, H] = 0.
In other words, if a quantity commutes with the Hamilto-
nian, its expectation value is conserved. We can make this
statement stronger. Using the properties of commutators,
it’s easy to see that if [H, Q] = 0, then [Q2, H] = 0, or
even more generally, [Qn, H] = 0, for any n. It turns out
that we can make a stronger claim: if Q commutes with the
Hamiltonian, the expectation values of all functions of Q
are conserved. That’s what conservation means in quantum
mechanics.
The most obvious conserved quantity is the Hamiltonian
itself. Since any operator commutes with itself, one can write
[H, H] = 0,
which is exactly the condition that H is conserved. As in
classical mechanics, the Hamiltonian is another word for the
energy of a system—it’s a deﬁnition of energy. We see that
under very general conditions, energy is conserved in quan-
tum mechanics.

116
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
4.11
Spin in a Magnetic Field
Let’s try out the Hamiltonian equations of motion for a sin-
gle spin. We will ﬁrst need to specify a Hamiltonian. Where
do we get it from? In general, the answer is the same as in
classical physics: derive it from experiment, borrow it from
some theory that we like, or just pick one and see what it
does. But in the case of a single spin, we don’t have many
options. Let’s start with the unit operator I. Since I com-
mutes with all operators, if it were the Hamiltonian, nothing
would change with time. Remember, the time-dependence of
an observable is given by the commutator of the observable
with the Hamiltonian.
The only other choice is a sum of the spin components.
In fact, that’s exactly what we would get from experimen-
tal observation of a real spin—say an electron’s spin—in a
magnetic ﬁeld. A magnetic ﬁeld ⃗B is a 3-vector—ordinary
vector in space—and is speciﬁed by three Cartesian compo-
nents, Bx, By, and Bz. When a classical spin (a charged
rotor) is put into a magnetic ﬁeld, it has an energy that de-
pends on its orientation. The energy is proportional to the
dot product of the spin and the magnetic ﬁeld. The quantum
version of this is
H ∼⃗σ · ⃗B = σxBx + σyBy + σzBz,
where the symbol ∼means “proportional to.” Remember
that σx, σy, and σz represent the components of the spin
operator in the above quantum version.

4.11. SPIN IN A MAGNETIC FIELD
117
Let’s take a simple example in which the magnetic ﬁeld
lies along the z axis. In that case, the Hamiltonian is propor-
tional to σz. For convenience, we’ll absorb all the numerical
constants, including the magnitude of the ﬁeld (but not ¯h),
into a single constant ω and write
H = ¯hω
2 σz.
(4.23)
The reason for the 2 in the denominator will become clear
soon.
Our goal is to ﬁnd out how the expectation value of the
spin varies with time—in other words, to determine ⟨σx(t)⟩,
⟨σy(t)⟩, and ⟨σz(t)⟩. To do this, we just go back to Eq. 4.19,
and plug in these components of L. We get
˙
⟨σx⟩
=
−i
¯h⟨[σx, H]⟩
˙
⟨σy⟩
=
−i
¯h⟨[σy, H]⟩
˙
⟨σz⟩
=
−i
¯h⟨[σz, H]⟩.
(4.24)
Plugging in H = ¯hω
2 σz from Eq. 4.23, we get
˙
⟨σx⟩
=
−iω
2 ⟨[σx, σz]⟩
˙
⟨σy⟩
=
−iω
2 ⟨[σy, σz]⟩

118
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
˙
⟨σz⟩
=
−iω
2 ⟨[σz, σz]⟩.
(4.25)
The things we are computing on the left side of the equa-
tions are supposed to be real quantities. The factor i in these
equations seems like trouble. Fortunately, the commutation
relations between σx, σy, and σz will save the day. By plug-
ging in the Pauli matrices from Eq. 3.20, it’s easy to verify
that
[σx, σy]
=
2iσz
[σy, σz]
=
2iσx
[σz, σx]
=
2iσy.
(4.26)
Each of these equations also has an i, which will cancel the i
in Eqs. 4.25. Notice that the factors of 2 also cancel, resulting
in some very simple equations:
˙
⟨σx⟩
=
−ω⟨σy⟩
˙
⟨σy⟩
=
ω⟨σx⟩
˙
⟨σz⟩
=
0.
(4.27)
Does this look familiar? If not, go back to Volume I, Lecture
10. There, we studied the classical rotor in a magnetic ﬁeld.

4.12. SOLVING THE SCHR ¨ODINGER EQUATION
119
The equations were exactly the same, except that instead of
expectation values, we were studying the actual motion of a
deterministic system. Both there and here, the solution is
that the 3-vector-operator ⃗σ (or the 3-vector ⃗L in Volume I)
precesses like a gyroscope around the direction of the mag-
netic ﬁeld. The precession is uniform, with angular velocity
ω.
This similarity to classical mechanics is very pleasing, but
it’s important to take note of the diﬀerence. Exactly what
is precessing? In classical mechanics, it’s just the x and y
components of angular momentum. In quantum mechanics,
it’s an expectation value. The expectation value for a σz
measurement does not change with time, but the other two
expectation values do. Regardless, the result of each individ-
ual measurement of each spin component is still either +1 or
−1.
Exercise 4.4:
Verify the commutation relations of Eqs.
4.26.
4.12
Solving the Schr¨odinger
Equation
The iconic Schr¨odinger equation that appears on T-shirts
has this form:
i¯h∂Ψ(x)
∂t
= −¯h2
2m
∂2Ψ(x)
∂x2
+ U(x)Ψ(x).
At this point, let’s not worry about the meaning of the sym-

120
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
bols except to note that it is an equation that tells you how
something changes with time. (The “something” is a repre-
sentation of the state-vector of a particle.)
The iconic Schr¨odinger equation is a special case of a
more general equation that we’ve already met in Eq. 4.9. It is
part deﬁnition and part principle of quantum mechanics. As
a principle, it says that the state-vector changes continuously
with time, in a unitary way. As a deﬁnition, it deﬁnes the
Hamiltonian, and therefore the observable called energy. Eq.
4.10,
¯h∂|Ψ⟩
∂t
= −iH|Ψ⟩,
is sometimes called the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equa-
tion. Because the Hamiltonian operator H represents en-
ergy, the observable values of energy are just the eigenvalues
of H. Let’s call these eigenvalues Ej and the corresponding
eigenvectors |Ej⟩. By deﬁnition, the relation between H, Ej,
and |Ej⟩is the eigenvalue equation
H|Ej⟩= Ej|Ej⟩.
(4.28)
This is the time-independent Schr¨odinger equation, and it’s
used in two diﬀerent ways.
If we work in a particular matrix basis, then the equation
determines the eigenvectors of H. One puts in a particular
value of the energy Ej and looks for the ket-vector |Ej⟩that
solves the equation.
It is also an equation that determines the eigenvalues Ej.
If you put in an arbitrary value of Ej, in general there will

4.12. SOLVING THE SCHR ¨ODINGER EQUATION
121
not be a solution for the eigenvector. Let’s take a very sim-
ple example: Suppose the Hamiltonian is the matrix ¯hω
2 σz.
Since σz has only two eigenvalues, namely ±1, the Hamil-
tonian also has only two eigenvalues, ± ¯hω
2 . If you put any
other value on the right-hand side of Eq. 4.28, there will not
be a solution. Because the operator H represents energy,
we often call Ej the energy eigenvalues and |Ej⟩the energy
eigenvectors of the system.
Exercise 4.5: Take any unit 3-vector ⃗n and form the oper-
ator
H = ¯hω
2 σ · ⃗n.
Find the energy eigenvalues and eigenvectors by solving the
time-independent Schr¨odinger equation. Recall that Eq. 3.23
gives σ · ⃗n in component form.
Let’s suppose we have found all the energy eigenvalues
Ej and the corresponding eigenvectors |Ej⟩. We can now use
that information to solve the time-dependent Schr¨odinger
equation. The trick is to use the fact that the eigenvectors
form an orthonormal basis and then expand the state-vector
in that basis. Let the state-vector be called |Ψ⟩and write
|Ψ⟩=

j
αj|Ej⟩.
Since the state-vector |Ψ⟩changes with time and the basis
vectors |Ej⟩do not, it follows that the coeﬃcients αj must

122
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
also depend on time:
|Ψ(t)⟩=

j
αj(t)|Ej⟩.
(4.29)
Now feed Eq. 4.29 into the time-dependent equation. The
result is

j
˙αj(t)|Ej⟩= −i
¯hH

j
αj(t)|Ej⟩.
Next, we use the fact that H|Ej⟩= Ej|Ej⟩to get

j
˙αj(t)|Ej⟩= −i
¯h

j
Ejαj(t)|Ej⟩
or, regrouping,

j

˙αj(t) + i
¯hEjαj(t)

|Ej⟩= 0.
The ﬁnal step should be easy to see. If a sum of basis vec-
tors equals zero, every coeﬃcient must be zero. Hence, for
each eigenvalue Ej, αj(t) must satisfy the simple diﬀerential
equation
dαj(t)
dt
= −i
¯hEjαj(t).
This, of course, is the familiar diﬀerential equation for an
exponential function of time, in this case with an imaginary
exponent. The solution is
αj(t) = αj(0)e−i
¯h Ejt.
(4.30)

4.12. SOLVING THE SCHR ¨ODINGER EQUATION
123
This equation tells us how the αj change with time. It is
quite general and not restricted to spins, provided that the
Hamiltonian does not depend explicitly on time.
This is
our ﬁrst example of the deep connection between energy and
frequency, which recurs over and over throughout quantum
mechanics and quantum ﬁeld theory. We will return to it
often.
In Eq. 4.30, the factors αj(0) are the values of the coeﬃ-
cients at time zero. If we know the state-vector |Ψ⟩at time
zero, then the coeﬃcients are given by the projections of |Ψ⟩
on the basis eigenvectors. We can write this as
αj(0) = ⟨Ej|Ψ(0)⟩.
(4.31)
Now let’s put the whole thing together and write the full
solution of the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation:
|Ψ(t)⟩=

j
αj(0) e−i
¯h Ejt |Ej⟩.
When we use Eq. 4.31 to replace αj(0), this equation be-
comes
|Ψ(t)⟩=

j
⟨Ej|Ψ(0)⟩e−i
¯h Ejt |Ej⟩.
(4.32)
Eq. 4.32 can be written in the more elegant form,
|Ψ(t)⟩=

j
|Ej⟩⟨Ej|Ψ(0)⟩e−i
¯h Ejt,
(4.33)

124
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
which emphasizes that we’re summing over the basis vectors.
You may wonder how we just happen to “know” |Ψ(0)⟩. The
answer depends on the circumstances, but usually, we as-
sume we can use some apparatus to prepare the system in a
known state.
Before we discuss the bigger meaning of these equations,
I want to restate them as a recipe. I’ll assume you already
know enough about the system and its space of states to get
started.
4.13
Recipe for a Schr¨odinger Ket
1. Derive, look up, guess, borrow, or steal the Hamilto-
nian operator H.
2. Prepare an initial state |Ψ(0)⟩.
3. Find the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of H by solving
the time-independent Schr¨odinger equation,
H|Ej⟩= Ej|Ej⟩.
4. Use the initial state-vector |Ψ(0)⟩, along with the eigen-
vectors |Ej⟩from step 3, to calculate the initial coeﬃ-
cients αj(0):
αj(0) = ⟨Ej|Ψ(0)⟩.
5. Rewrite |Ψ(0)⟩in terms of the eigenvectors |Ej⟩and
the initial coeﬃcients αj(0):
|Ψ(0)⟩=

j
αj(0)|Ej⟩.

4.13. RECIPE FOR A SCHR ¨ODINGER KET
125
What we’ve done so far is to expand the initial state-vector
|Ψ(0)⟩in terms of the eigenvectors |Ej⟩of H. Why is that
basis better than any other? Because H tells us how things
evolve with time. We will use that knowledge now.
6. In the above equation, replace each αj(0) with αj(t)
to capture its time-dependence.
As a result, |Ψ(0)⟩
becomes |Ψ(t)⟩:
|Ψ(t)⟩=

j
αj(t)|Ej⟩.
7. Using Eq. 4.30, replace each αj(t) with αj(0)e−i
¯h Ejt:
|Ψ(t)⟩=

j
αj(0)e−i
¯h Ejt|Ej⟩.
(4.34)
8. Season according to taste.
We can now predict the probabilities for each possible
outcome of an experiment as a function of time, and we
are not restricted to energy measurements. Suppose L has
eigenvalues λj and eigenvectors |λj⟩.
The probability for
outcome λ is
Pλ(t) = |⟨λ|Ψ(t)⟩|2.

126
LECTURE 4. TIME AND CHANGE
Exercise 4.6: Carry out the Schr¨odinger Ket recipe for a
single spin.
The Hamiltonian is H =
ω¯h
2 σz and the ﬁnal
observable is σx. The initial state is given as |u⟩(the state
in which σz = +1).
After time t, an experiment is done to measure σy. What
are the possible outcomes and what are the probabilities for
those outcomes?
Congratulations! You have now solved a real quantum me-
chanics problem for an experiment that can actually be car-
ried out in the laboratory. Feel free to pat yourself on the
back.
4.14
Collapse
We’ve seen how the state-vector evolves between the time
that a system is prepared in a given state and the time that
it is brought into contact with an apparatus and measured. If
the state-vector were main focus of observational physics, we
would say that quantum mechanics is deterministic. But ex-
perimental physics is not about measuring the state-vector.
It is about measuring observables. Even if we know the state-
vector exactly, we don’t know the result of any given mea-
surement. Nevertheless, it is fair to say that between obser-
vations, the state of a system evolves in a perfectly deﬁnite
way, according to the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation.
But something diﬀerent happens when an observation is
made.
An experiment to measure L will have an unpre-
dictable outcome, but after the measurement is made, the
system is left in an eigenstate of L. Which eigenstate? The

4.14. COLLAPSE
127
one corresponding to the outcome of the measurement. But
this outcome is unpredictable. So it follows that during an
experiment the state of a system jumps unpredictably to an
eigenstate of the observable that was measured. This phe-
nomenon is called the collapse of the wave function.4
To put it another way, suppose the state-vector is

j
αj|λj⟩
just before the measurement of L. Randomly, with probabil-
ity |αj|2, the apparatus measures a value λj and leaves the
system in a single eigenstate of L, namely |λj⟩. The entire
superposition of states collapses to a single term.
This strange fact—that the system evolves one way be-
tween measurements and another way during a measure-
ment—has been a source of contention and confusion for
decades. It raises a question: Shouldn’t the act of measure-
ment itself be described by the laws of quantum mechanics?
The answer is yes. The laws of quantum mechanics are
not suspended during measurement. However, to examine
the measurement process itself as a quantum mechanical
evolution, we must consider the entire experimental setup,
including the apparatus, as part of a single quantum sys-
tem. We’ll discuss that topic—how systems are combined
into composite systems—in Lecture 6. But ﬁrst, a few words
about uncertainty.
4We have not yet explained what a wave function is, but we’ll do
so shortly, in Section 5.1.2.


Lecture 5
Uncertainty and Time
Dependence
Lenny: Good evening, General. Nice to see you again.
The General: Lenny? Is that you? It’s been forever. Well,
a long time anyway. Who’s your friend?
Lenny: His name is Art.
Art, shake hands with General
Uncertainty.
5.1
Mathematical Interlude:
Complete Sets of Commuting
Variables
5.1.1
States That Depend On More Than
One Measurable
The physics of a single spin is extremely simple, and that’s
what makes it so attractive as an illustrative example. But
129

130
LECTURE 5. UNCERTAINTY & TIME DEP
that also means there’s a lot it can’t illustrate. One property
of a single spin is that its state can be fully speciﬁed by the
eigenvalue of a single operator, say σz. If the value of σz
is known, then no other observable—such as σx—can also
be speciﬁed.
As we have seen, measuring either of these
quantities destroys any information we may have had about
the other one.
But in more complicated systems, we may have multiple
observables that are compatible; that is, their values can be
known simultaneously. Here are two examples:
• A particle moving in three-dimensional space. A basis
of states for this system is speciﬁed by the position of
the particle, but this takes three position coordinates.
Thus, we have states that are speciﬁed by three num-
bers, |x, y, z⟩. We will see later that all three spatial
coordinates of a particle can be simultaneously speci-
ﬁed.
• A system composed of two physically independent spins;
in other words, a system of two qubits. Later, we will
see how to combine systems to form bigger systems.
But for now we can just say that the two-spin system
can be described by two observables. Namely, we have
a state in which both spins are up, another in which
both are down, another in which the ﬁrst is up while
the second is down, and another in which these spins
are reversed. To put it more brieﬂy, we can charac-
terize the two-spin system by two observables: the z
component of the ﬁrst spin and the z component of
the second spin. Quantum mechanics does not forbid

5.1. INTERLUDE: COMMUTING VARIABLES
131
simultaneous knowledge of these two observables. In
fact, one can choose any component of one spin and
any component of the other spin. Quantum mechanics
allows simultaneous knowledge of both.
In these situations, we need multiple measurements to fully
characterize the state of the system. For example, in our two-
spin system, we measure each spin separately and associate
these measurements with two diﬀerent operators. We’ll call
these operators L and M.
A measurement leaves the system in an eigenstate (con-
sisting of a single eigenvector), corresponding to the value
(an eigenvalue) that was measured. If we measure both spins
in a two-spin system, the system winds up in a state that
is simultaneously an eigenvector of L and an eigenvector of
M. We call this a simultaneous eigenvector of the operators
L and M.
The two-spin example gives us something concrete to
think about, but keep in mind that our results will be far
more general—they will apply to any system that is charac-
terized by two diﬀerent operators. And as you might guess,
there is nothing magic about the number two. The ideas pre-
sented here generalize to larger systems that require many
operators to characterize them.
To work with two diﬀerent compatible operators, we’ll
need two sets of labels for their basis vectors. We’ll use the
labels λi and μa. The symbols λi and μa are the eigenvalues
of L and M. The subscripts i and a run over all the possible
outcomes of measurements of L and M. We assume that

132
LECTURE 5. UNCERTAINTY & TIME DEP
there is a basis of state-vectors |λi, μa⟩that are simultaneous
eigenvectors of both observables. In other words,
L|λi, μa⟩= λi|λi, μa⟩
M|λi, μa⟩= μa|λi, μa⟩.
To make these equations a little less precise but a little easier
to read, I will sometimes leave out the subscripts:
L|λ, μ⟩= λ|λ, μ⟩
M|λ, μ⟩= μ|λ, μ⟩.
In order to have a basis of simultaneous eigenvectors, the
operators L and M must commute.
This is easy to see.
We begin by acting on any of the basis vectors with the
product LM, and then use the fact that the basis vector is
an eigenvector of both:
LM|λ, μ⟩= Lμ|λ, μ⟩,
or
LM|λ, μ⟩= λμ|λ, μ⟩.
The eigenvalues λ, μ are of course just numbers and it doesn’t
matter which one appears ﬁrst when we multiply them. Thus,
if we reverse the order of these operators, and let the opera-
tor ML act on the same basis vector, we get the same result:

5.1. INTERLUDE: COMMUTING VARIABLES
133
LM|λ, μ⟩= ML|λ, μ⟩,
or, more succinctly,
[L, M] |λ, μ⟩= 0,
(5.1)
where the right-hand side represents the zero vector. This
result would not be very helpful if it were only true for a
particular basis vector. But the reasoning that leads us to
Eq. 5.1 is valid for any of the basis vectors. That’s enough to
ensure that the operator [L, M] = 0. If an operator annihi-
lates every member of a basis, it must also annihilate every
vector in the vector space.1
An operator that annihilates
every vector is exactly what we mean by the zero operator.
Thus, we prove that if there is a complete basis of simulta-
neous eigenvectors of two observables, the two observables
must commute. It turns out that the converse of this theo-
rem is also true: if two observables commute, then there is
a complete basis of simultaneous eigenvectors of the two ob-
servables. To put it simply, the condition for two observables
to be simultaneously measurable is that they commute.
As we mentioned earlier, this theorem is more general.
One may need to specify a larger number of observables to
completely label a basis. Regardless of the number of ob-
servables that are needed, they must all commute among
themselves. We call this collection a complete set of com-
muting observables.
1Do you see why?

134
LECTURE 5. UNCERTAINTY & TIME DEP
5.1.2
Wave Functions
Now we’ll introduce a concept called the wave function. For
now, ignore the name; in general, the quantum wave function
may have nothing to do with waves. Later, when we study
the quantum mechanics of particles (Lectures 8–10), we’ll
ﬁnd out about the connection between wave functions and
waves.
Suppose we have a basis of states for some quantum sys-
tem. Let the orthonormal basis vectors be called |a, b, c, . . .⟩,
where a, b, c, . . . are the eigenvalues of some complete set of
commuting observables A, B, C, . . . . Now, consider an arbi-
trary state vector |Ψ⟩. Since the vectors |a, b, c, . . .⟩are an
orthonormal basis, |Ψ⟩can be expanded in terms of them:
|Ψ⟩=

a,b,c,...
ψ(a, b, c, . . . )|a, b, c, . . .⟩.
The quantities ψ(a, b, c, . . . ) are the coeﬃcients that enter
the expansion. Each of them is also equal to the inner prod-
uct of |Ψ⟩with one of the basis vectors:
ψ(a, b, c, . . . ) = ⟨a, b, c, . . . |Ψ⟩.
(5.2)
The set of coeﬃcients ψ(a, b, c, . . . ) is called the wave func-
tion of the system in the basis deﬁned by the observables
A, B, C, . . . . The mathematical deﬁnition of a wave function
is given by Eq. 5.2, which seems formal and abstract, but the
physical meaning of the wave function is profoundly impor-
tant. According to the basic probability principle of quan-
tum mechanics, the squared magnitude of the wave function

5.1. INTERLUDE: COMMUTING VARIABLES
135
is the probability for the commuting observables to have val-
ues a, b, c, . . . :
P(a, b, c, . . . ) = ψ∗(a, b, c, . . . ) ψ(a, b, c, . . . ).
The form of the wave function depends on which observables
we choose to focus on. That’s because calculations for two
diﬀerent observables rely on diﬀerent sets of basis vectors.
For example, in the case of a single spin, the inner products
ψ(u) = ⟨u|Ψ⟩
and
ψ(d) = ⟨d|Ψ⟩
deﬁne the wave function in the σz basis, while
ψ(r) = ⟨r|Ψ⟩
and
ψ(l) = ⟨l|Ψ⟩
deﬁne the wave function in the σx basis.
An important feature of the wave function follows from
the fact that the total probability sums to one:

a,b,c,...
ψ∗(a, b, c, . . . ) ψ(a, b, c, . . . ) = 1.

136
LECTURE 5. UNCERTAINTY & TIME DEP
5.1.3
A Note About Terminology
The term wave function, as used in this book, refers to the
collection of coeﬃcients (also called components) that mul-
tiply the basis vectors in an eigenfunction expansion. For
example, if we expand a state-vector |Ψ⟩as follows,
|Ψ⟩=

j
αj|ψj⟩,
where the |ψj⟩are the orthonormal eigenvectors of a Her-
mitian operator, the collection of coeﬃcients αj—the things
we called ψ(a, b, c, . . . ) just above—is what we mean by the
wave function. In situations where the state-vector is ex-
pressed as an integral rather than a sum, the wave function
is continuous rather than discrete.
So far, we have been careful to distinguish the wave func-
tion from the state-vectors |ψj⟩, and this is a common con-
vention. However, some authors refer to wave functions as
though they are the state-vectors. This ambiguous use of ter-
minology can be confusing. It becomes less confusing when
you realize that a wave function really can represent a state-
vector. It is reasonable to think of the αj coeﬃcients as the
coordinates of the state-vector in a speciﬁc basis of eigen-
vectors.
This is similar to saying that a set of Cartesian
coordinates represents a particular point in 3-space relative
to a speciﬁc coordinate frame. To avoid confusion, just try
to be aware of which convention is being followed. In this
book, we will generally use uppercase symbols, such as Ψ, to
represent state-vectors, and lowercase symbols, such as ψ, to
represent wave functions.

5.2. MEASUREMENT
137
5.2
Measurement
Let’s return to the concept of measurement.
Suppose we
measure two observables L and M in a single experiment,
and the system is left in a simultaneous eigenvector of these
two observables. As we learned in Section 5.1.1, this means
that L and M must commute.
But what if they don’t commute? Then, in general, it is
not possible to have unambiguous knowledge of both. Later
on, we will make this more quantitative in the form of the
uncertainty principle, Heisenberg’s being a special case.
Let’s go back to our touchstone, the problem of a single
spin.
Any observable of a spin is represented by a 2 × 2
Hermitian matrix, and any such matrix has the form
 r
w
w∗
r′

,
with the diagonal elements being real and the other two be-
ing complex conjugates. The implication is that it takes ex-
actly four real parameters to specify this observable. In fact,
there is a neat way to write any spin observable in terms of
the Pauli matrices, σx, σy, and σz, and one more matrix: the
unit matrix I. As you recall,
σx =
 0
1
1
0

σy =
 0
−i
i
0


138
LECTURE 5. UNCERTAINTY & TIME DEP
σz =
 1
0
0
−1

I =
 1
0
0
1

.
Any 2 × 2 Hermitian matrix L can be written as a sum of
four terms,
L = aσx + bσy + cσz + dI ,
where a, b, c, and d are real numbers.
Exercise 5.1: Verify this claim.
The unit operator I is oﬃcially an observable because it
is Hermitian, but it’s a very boring one. There is only one
possible value this trivial observable can have, namely 1, and
every state-vector is an eigenvector. If we ignore I, then the
most general observable is a superposition of the three spin
components σx, σy, and σz. Can any pair of spin components
be simultaneously measured? Only if they commute. But it
is easy to calculate the commutators for these spin compo-
nents. Just use the matrix representation to multiply them
in both orders, and then subtract.
The commutation relations we listed in Eqs. 4.26,
[σx, σy]
=
2iσz

5.3. THE UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
139
[σy, σz]
=
2iσx
[σz, σx]
=
2iσy,
tell us straightaway that no two spin components can be
simultaneously measured, because the right-hand sides are
not zero. In fact, no two components of the spin along any
axes can be simultaneously measured.
5.3
The Uncertainty Principle
Uncertainty is one of the hallmarks of quantum mechanics,
but it is not always the case that the result of an experiment
is uncertain. If a system is in an eigenstate of an observable,
then there is no uncertainty about the result of measuring
that observable.
But whatever the state, there is always
uncertainty about some observable. If the state happens to
be an eigenvector of one Hermitian operator—call it A—
then it will not be an eigenvector of other operators that
don’t commute with A. Thus, as a rule, if A and B do not
commute, then there must be uncertainty in one or the other,
if not both.
The iconic example of this mutual uncertainty is the
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, which in its original form
had to do with the position and momentum of a particle.
But Heisenberg’s ideas can be expanded into a much more
general principle that applies to any two observables that
happen not to commute. An example would be two compo-
nents of a spin. We now have all the ingredients necessary
to derive the general form of the uncertainty principle.

140
LECTURE 5. UNCERTAINTY & TIME DEP
5.4
The Meaning of Uncertainty
We need to be very certain about what we mean by uncer-
tainty if we want to quantify it. Let’s suppose the eigenval-
ues of the observable A are called a. Then, given a state |Ψ⟩,
there is a probability distribution P(a) with the usual prop-
erties. The expectation value of A is the ordinary average:
⟨Ψ|A|Ψ⟩=

a
aP(a).
Roughly speaking, this means that P(a) is centered around
the expectation value. What we will mean by “the uncer-
tainty in A” is the so-called standard deviation. To compute
the standard deviation, begin by subtracting from A its ex-
pectation value. We deﬁne the operator ¯A to be:
¯A = A −⟨A⟩.
By deﬁning ¯A in this way, we have subtracted an expecta-
tion value from an operator, and it’s not completely clear
what that means. Let’s take a closer look. The expectation
value is itself a real number. Every real number is also an
operator, namely an operator proportional to the identity or
unit operator I. To make the meaning clear, we can write ¯A
in a more complete form:
¯A = A −⟨A⟩I.
The probability distribution for ¯A is exactly the same as the
distribution for A except that it is shifted so that the average

5.4. THE MEANING OF UNCERTAINTY
141
of ¯A is zero. The eigenvectors of ¯A are the same as those of
A and the eigenvalues are just shifted so that their average
is zero as well. In other words, the eigenvalues of ¯A are
¯a = a −⟨A⟩.
The square of the uncertainty (or standard deviation) of A,
which we call (ΔA)2, is deﬁned by
(ΔA)2 =

a
¯a2P(a)
(5.3)
or
(ΔA)2 =

a
(a −⟨A⟩)2P(a).
(5.4)
This may also be written as
(ΔA)2 = ⟨Ψ| ¯A2|Ψ⟩.
If the expectation value of A is zero, then the uncertainty
ΔA takes the simpler form
(ΔA)2 = ⟨Ψ|A2|Ψ⟩.
In other words the square of the uncertainty is the average
value of the operator A2.

142
LECTURE 5. UNCERTAINTY & TIME DEP
5.5
Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality
The uncertainty principle is an inequality that says the prod-
uct of the uncertainties of A and B is larger than something
that involves their commutator. The basic mathematical in-
equality is the familiar triangle inequality. It says that in
any vector space, the magnitude of one side of a triangle is
less than the sum of the magnitudes of the other two sides.
For real vector spaces, we derive
|X||Y | ≥|X · Y |
(5.5)
from the triangle inequality,
|X| + |Y | ≥|X + Y |.
5.6
The Triangle Inequality and
the Cauchy-Schwarz Inequality
The triangle inequality is motivated, of course, by the prop-
erties of ordinary triangles, but it’s actually far more general
and applies to a large class of vector spaces. You can get the
basic idea by looking at Fig. 5.1, where the sides of the tri-
angle are taken to be ordinary geometric vectors in a plane.
The triangle inequality is just the statement that the sum of
any two sides is bigger than the third side, and the under-
lying idea is that the shortest path between two points is a
straight line. The shortest path between point 1 and point
3 is side Z, and the sum of the other two sides is certainly
bigger.

5.6. TRIANGLE & C-S INEQUALITIES
143
Figure 5.1: The Triangle Inequality. The sum of the lengths
of vectors ⃗X and ⃗Y is greater than or equal to the length of
vector ⃗Z. (The shortest path between two points is a straight
line.)
The triangle inequality can be expressed in more than one
way. We’ll start with the basic deﬁnition and then massage
it into the form we need. We know that
|X| + |Y | ≥|Z|.
If we think of X and Y as vectors that can be added, we can
write the above as
| ⃗X| + |⃗Y | ≥| ⃗X + ⃗Y |.
If we square this equation, it becomes
| ⃗X|2 + |⃗Y |2 + 2| ⃗X||⃗Y | ≥| ⃗X + ⃗Y |2.

144
LECTURE 5. UNCERTAINTY & TIME DEP
But the right-hand side can be expanded as
| ⃗X + ⃗Y |2 = | ⃗X|2 + |⃗Y |2 + 2( ⃗X · ⃗Y ).
Why? Because | ⃗X + ⃗Y |2 is just ( ⃗X + ⃗Y )·( ⃗X + ⃗Y ). Collecting
these results, we get
| ⃗X|2 + |⃗Y |2 + 2| ⃗X||⃗Y | ≥| ⃗X|2 + |⃗Y |2 + 2( ⃗X · ⃗Y ).
Now, we just subtract | ⃗X|2 + |⃗Y |2 from each side and then
divide by 2, leaving us with
| ⃗X||⃗Y | ≥⃗X · ⃗Y .
(5.6)
This is another form of the triangle inequality. It says that,
given any two vectors ⃗X and ⃗Y , the product of their lengths
is greater than or equal to their dot product.
This is no
surprise—the dot product is often deﬁned as
⃗X · ⃗Y = | ⃗X||⃗Y | cos θ,
where θ is the angle between the two vectors. But we know
that the cosine of an angle always stays in the range −1
to +1, so the right-hand side must always be less than or
equal to | ⃗X||⃗Y |. This relationship is true for vectors in two
dimensions, three dimensions, or an arbitrary number of di-
mensions. It’s even true for vectors in complex vector spaces.
It’s generally true for vectors in any vector space, provided

5.6. TRIANGLE & C-S INEQUALITIES
145
the length of the vector is deﬁned as the square root of the
vector’s inner product with itself. As we go forward, we plan
to use Inequality 5.6 in the squared form, that is,
| ⃗X|2|⃗Y |2 ≥( ⃗X · ⃗Y )2
or
| ⃗X|2|⃗Y |2 ≥| ⃗X · ⃗Y |2.
(5.7)
In this form, it’s called the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
For complex vector spaces, the triangle inequality takes
a slightly more complicated form. Let |X⟩and |Y ⟩be any
two vectors in a complex vector space. The magnitudes of
the three vectors |X⟩, |Y ⟩, and |X⟩+ |Y ⟩are
|X|
=

⟨X|X⟩
|Y |
=

⟨Y |Y ⟩
|X + Y |
=

(⟨X| + ⟨Y |)(|X⟩+ |Y ⟩)
(5.8)
We now follow the same steps as we did for the real case:
First write
|X| + |Y | ≥|X + Y |.

146
LECTURE 5. UNCERTAINTY & TIME DEP
Then square it and simplify:
2|X||Y | ≥|⟨X|Y ⟩+ ⟨Y |X⟩|.
(5.9)
This is the form of the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality that will
lead to the uncertainty principle. But what does it have to
do with the two observables A and B? We’ll ﬁnd out by
cleverly deﬁning |X⟩and |Y ⟩.
5.7
The General Uncertainty
Principle
Let |Ψ⟩be any ket and let A and B be any two observables.
We now deﬁne |X⟩and |Y ⟩as follows:
|X⟩
=
A|Ψ⟩
|Y ⟩
=
iB|Ψ⟩.
(5.10)
Notice the i in the second deﬁnition. Now, substitute 5.10
into 5.9 to get
2

⟨A2⟩⟨B2⟩≥|⟨Ψ|AB|Ψ⟩−⟨Ψ|BA|Ψ⟩|.
(5.11)
The minus sign is due to the factor of i in the second deﬁni-
tion in 5.10. Using the deﬁnition of a commutator, we ﬁnd
that
2

⟨A2⟩⟨B2⟩≥|⟨Ψ|[A, B]|Ψ⟩|.
(5.12)

5.7. GENERAL UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
147
Let’s suppose for the moment that A and B have expectation
values of zero. In that case, ⟨A2⟩is just the square of the
uncertainty in A, that is, (ΔA)2, and ⟨B2⟩is just (ΔB)2.
Thus we can rewrite Eq. 5.12 as
ΔA ΔB ≥1
2|⟨Ψ|[A, B]|Ψ⟩|.
(5.13)
Reﬂect on this mathematical inequality for a moment. On
the left side, we see the product of the uncertainties of the
two observables A and B in the state Ψ. The inequality
says that this product cannot be smaller than the right side,
which involves the commutator of A and B. Speciﬁcally, it
says that the product of the uncertainties cannot be smaller
than half the magnitude of the expectation value of the com-
mutator.
The general uncertainty principle is a quantitative ex-
pression of something we already suspected: if the commu-
tator of A and B is not zero, then both observables cannot
simultaneously be certain.
But what if the expectation value of A or B is not zero?
In that case, the trick is to redeﬁne two new operators in
which the expectation values have been subtracted oﬀ:
¯A = A −⟨A⟩
¯B = B −⟨B⟩.
Then repeat the whole process, replacing A and B with ¯A
and ¯B. The following exercise serves as a guide.

148
LECTURE 5. UNCERTAINTY & TIME DEP
Exercise 5.2:
1) Show that ΔA2 = ⟨¯A2⟩and ΔB2 = ⟨¯B2⟩.
2) Show that [ ¯A, ¯B] = [A, B].
3) Using these relations, show that
ΔA ΔB ≥1
2|⟨Ψ|[A, B]|Ψ⟩|.
Later, in Lecture 8, we will use this very general version of
the uncertainty principle to prove the original form of Heisen-
berg’s Uncertainty Principle: The product of the uncertain-
ties of the position and momentum of a particle cannot be
less than half of Planck’s constant.

Lecture 6
Combining Systems:
Entanglement
Art: This is a pretty friendly place after all.
Except for
Minus One, I don’t see too many loners.
Lenny: Mingling is only natural at a place like this. And not
just because it’s cramped. Just keep track of your wallet and
don’t get too entangled.
6.1
Mathematical Interlude:
Tensor Products
6.1.1
Meet Alice and Bob
Figuring out how systems combine to make bigger systems
is a large part of what we do in physics. I hardly need to tell
you that an atom is a collection of nucleons and electrons,
each of which could be considered a quantum system in its
own right.
149

150
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
When talking about composite systems, it’s easy to get
bogged down in formal language like System A and System
B. Most physicists prefer lighter-weight, informal language
instead, and Alice and Bob have become near-universal sub-
stitutes for A and B. We can think of Alice and Bob as pur-
veyors of composite systems and laboratory setups of every
description. Their inventory and expertise are limited only
by our imaginations, and they gladly tackle diﬃcult or dan-
gerous assignments like jumping into black holes. They’re
true geek superheroes!
Let’s say that Alice and Bob have provided two systems—
Alice’s system and Bob’s system. Alice’s system—whatever
it is—is described by a space of states called SA, and similarly
Bob’s system is described by a space of states called SB.
Now let’s say that we want to combine the two systems
into a single composite system. Before going any further,
let’s be more speciﬁc about the systems we’re starting with.
For example, Alice’s system could be a quantum mechanical
coin with two basis states H and T. Of course, a classical
coin must be in either one state or the other, but a quantum
coin can exist in a superposition:
αH|H

+ αT|T

.
You’ll notice that I’ve used an unusual notation for Alice’s
ket-vectors.
This is to distinguish them from Bob’s kets.
The new notation is intended to discourage us from adding
vectors in Alice’s space SA to vectors in Bob’s space SB.
Alice’s SA is a two-dimensional vector space—it is deﬁned
by the two basis vectors |H

and |T

.

6.1. INTERLUDE: TENSOR PRODUCTS
151
Bob’s system might also be a coin, but then again it
might be something else. Let’s assume it’s a quantum die.
Bob’s space of states SB would then be six-dimensional, with
the basis
|1⟩
|2⟩
|3⟩
|4⟩
|5⟩
|6⟩
denoting the six faces of the die. Just like Alice’s coin, Bob’s
die is quantum mechanical, and the six states can be super-
posed in a similar way.
6.1.2
Representing the Combined System
Now imagine that Bob’s and Alice’s systems both exist, and
form a single composite system. The ﬁrst question is: How
could we construct the state-space—call it SAB—for the com-
bined system? The answer is to form the tensor product of
SA and SB. The notation for this operation is
SAB = SA ⊗SB.
To deﬁne SAB, it is enough to specify its basis vectors. The
basis vectors are exactly what you might expect. The top

152
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
Bob’s state-labels
Alice’s
state
labels
Alice’s
system
Bob’s
system
-
1
2
3
4
5
6
H
T
H1
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
H2
H3
H4
H5
H6
State-Labels for Combined System SAB
H
Figure 6.1: The basis states of the composite system SAB,
shown as a table.
Across the top are the state-labels for
Bob’s die.
The state-labels for Alice’s coin are shown on
the left. The state-labels for the combined system are the
table entries. Each combined state-label shows the state of
each of the two subsystems. For example, the state-label H4
denotes a state in which Alice’s coin shows H and Bob’s die
shows 4.

6.1. INTERLUDE: TENSOR PRODUCTS
153
half of Fig. 6.1 shows a table whose columns correspond to
Bob’s six basis vectors and whose rows correspond to Alice’s
two basis vectors.
Each box in the table denotes a basis
vector for the SAB system. For example, the box labeled H4
represents a state in SAB in which the coin shows Heads and
the die shows the number 4. In the combined system, there
are twelve basis vectors altogether.
There are various ways to represent these states symbol-
ically. We could represent the H4 state using explicit nota-
tion, as |H} ⊗|4⟩or |H}|4⟩. Usually, it’s more convenient
to use the composite notation |H4⟩. This emphasizes that
we’re talking about a single state with a two-part label. The
left half labels Alice’s subsystem, and the right half labels
Bob’s. The explicit and composite notations both have the
same meaning—they refer to the same state.
Once the basis vectors are listed—in this case, twelve
of them—we can combine them linearly to form arbitrary
superpositions. Thus, the tensor product space in this case
is twelve-dimensional. A superposition of two of these basis
vectors might look like
αh3|H3⟩+ αt4|T4⟩.
In each case, the ﬁrst half of the state-label describes the
state of Alice’s coin, and the second half describes the state
of Bob’s die.
Sometimes, we’ll need to refer to an arbitrary basis vector
in SAB. To do that, we’ll use ket-vectors that look like this,
|ab⟩,

154
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
or like this,
|a′b′⟩.
In this notation, the a or a′ (or whatever the left-hand char-
acter of the label happens to be) represents one of Alice’s
states, and the b or b′ represents one of Bob’s states.
There is one aspect of this notation that is tricky. Even
though our SAB state-labels are doubly indexed, ket-vectors
like |ab⟩or |H3⟩represent a single state of the combined
system. In other words, we’re using a double index to label
a single state. This will take some getting used to. Alice’s
part of the state-label is always on the left and Bob’s part is
always on the right—keeping Alice and Bob in alphabetical
order makes this convention easy to remember.
The rules are the same for more general systems. The
only diﬀerence is that the two A-states and the six B-states
would be replaced by NA and NB states respectively, and the
tensor product would have dimension
NAB = NANB.
Systems with three or more components can be represented
by tensor products of three or more state spaces, but we
won’t do that here.
Now that we’ve described Alice’s and Bob’s separate spac-
es SA and SB, as well as the combined space SAB, there’s still
one more bit of notation to set up. Alice has a set of oper-
ators, labeled σ, that act on her system. Bob has a similar

6.2. CLASSICAL CORRELATION
155
set for his system, which we can label τ, so we don’t mix
them up with Alice’s. Alice may have several σ operators,
and likewise Bob may have several τ operators. With this
framework in hand, we’re ready to explore composite sys-
tems in greater depth. Later on, in Lecture 7, we’ll explain
how to work with tensor product operators in component
form—expressed as matrices and column vectors.
By now, there should be no doubt in your mind that
quantum physics is diﬀerent from classical physics, right
down to its logical roots. In this lecture and the next one,
I am going to hit you even harder with this idea. We are
going to discuss an aspect of quantum physics that is so
diﬀerent from classical physics that, as of this writing, it
has puzzled—and aggravated—physicists and philosophers
for almost 80 years. It drove its discoverer, Einstein, to the
conclusion that something very deep is missing from quan-
tum mechanics, and physicists have been arguing about it
ever since. As Einstein realized, in accepting quantum me-
chanics, we are buying into a view of reality that is radically
diﬀerent from the classical view.
6.2
Classical Correlation
Before we get to quantum entanglement, let’s spend a few
minutes on what we might call classical entanglement. In the
following experiment, Alice (A) and Bob (B) will get some
help from Charlie (C).
Charlie has two coins in his hands—a penny and a dime.
He mixes them up and holds them out, one in each hand, to

156
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
Alice and Bob, and gives one coin to each of them. No one
looks at the coins and no one knows who has which. Then,
Alice gets on the shuttle to Alpha Centauri while Bob stays
in Palo Alto. Charlie has done his job and doesn’t matter
anymore (sorry, Charlie).
Before Alice’s big trip, Alice and Bob synchronize their
clocks—they have done their relativity homework and ac-
counted for time dilation and all that. They agree that Alice
will look at her coin just a second or two before Bob looks
at his.
Everything proceeds smoothly, and when Alice gets to
Alpha Centauri she indeed looks at her coin.
Amazingly,
the instant she looks at it, she immediately knows exactly
what coin Bob will see, even before he looks. Is this crazy?
Have Alice and Bob succeeded in breaking relativity’s most
fundamental rule, which states that information cannot go
faster than the speed of light?
Of course not. What would violate relativity would be
for Alice’s observation to instantly tell Bob what to expect.
Alice may know what coin Bob will see but she has no way
to tell him—not without sending him a real message from
Alpha Centauri, and that would take at least the four years
required for light to make the trip.
Let’s do this experiment many times, either with many
Alice-Bob pairs or with the same pair spread out over time.
In order to be quantitative, Charlie (he’s back now, having
accepted our apology) paints a “σ = +1” on each penny and
a “σ = −1” on each dime. If we assume that Charlie really
is random in the way he shuﬄes the coins, then the following
facts will emerge:

6.2. CLASSICAL CORRELATION
157
• On average, both A and B will get as many pennies as
dimes. Calling the values of A’s observations σA and
B’s observations σB, we can express this fact mathe-
matically as
⟨σA⟩
=
0
⟨σB⟩
=
0.
(6.1)
• If A and B record their observations and then get to-
gether back in Palo Alto to compare them, they will
ﬁnd a strong correlation.1 For each trial, if A observed
σA = +1, then B observed σB = −1, and vice versa.
In other words, the product σAσB always equals −1:
⟨σAσB⟩= −1.
Notice that the average of the products (of σA and σB) is not
equal to the product of the averages—Eqs. 6.1 tell us that
⟨σA⟩⟨σB⟩is zero. In symbols,
⟨σA⟩⟨σB⟩̸= ⟨σAσB⟩,
or
⟨σAσB⟩−⟨σA⟩⟨σB⟩̸= 0.
(6.2)
1Actually, it’s a perfect correlation in this example.

158
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
This indicates that Alice’s and Bob’s observations are corre-
lated. In fact, the quantity
⟨σAσB⟩−⟨σA⟩⟨σB⟩
is called the statistical correlation between Bob’s and Alice’s
observations. It’s called the statistical correlation even if it is
zero. When the statistical correlation is nonzero, we say the
observations are correlated. The source of this correlation
is the fact that originally Alice and Bob were in the same
location and Charlie had one of each type of coin. The cor-
relation remained when Alice went to Alpha Centauri simply
because the coins didn’t change during the trip. There is ab-
solutely nothing strange about this or about Inequality 6.2.
It is a very common property of statistical distributions.
Suppose you have a probability distribution P(a, b) for
two variables a and b. If the variables are completely uncor-
related, then the probability will factorize:
P(a, b) = PA(a)PB(b),
(6.3)
where PA(a) and PB(b) are the individual probabilities for
a and b. (I added subscripts to the function symbols as a
reminder that they could be diﬀerent functions of their ar-
guments.) It is easy to see that if the probability factorizes
in this fashion, then there is no correlation; in other words,
the average of the product is the product of the averages.
Exercise 6.1: Prove that if P(a, b) factorizes, then the cor-
relation between a and b is zero.

6.2. CLASSICAL CORRELATION
159
Let me use an example to illustrate the kind of situation
that leads to factorized probabilities. Suppose that instead
of a single Charlie, there are two Charlies—Charlie-A and
Charlie-B—who have never communicated. Charlie-B mixes
up his two coins and gives one to Bob—the other one is
discarded.
Charlie-A does exactly the same thing except that he
gives a coin to Alice instead. This is the type of situation that
leads to factorized product probabilities with no correlation.
In classical physics we use statistics and probability the-
ory when we are ignorant about something that is, in princi-
ple, knowable. For example, after mixing up the coins in the
ﬁrst experiment, Charlie could have made a gentle observa-
tion (a quick peek) and then let Alice and Bob have their
coins.
This would have made no diﬀerence in the result.
In classical mechanics, the probability distribution P(a, b)
represents an incomplete speciﬁcation of the system state.
There is more to know—more that could be known—about
the system.
In classical physics, the use of probability is
always associated with an incompleteness of knowledge rel-
ative to all that could be known.
A related point is that complete knowledge of a system in
classical physics implies complete knowledge of every part of
the system. It would not make any sense to say that Charlie
knew everything that could be known about the system of
two coins but was missing information about the individual
coins.
These classical concepts are deeply ingrained in our think-
ing. They are the foundation of our instinctual understand-
ing of the physical world, and it’s very hard to get past

160
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
them. But get past them we must, if we are to understand
the quantum world.
6.3
Combining Quantum Systems
Charlie’s two coins formed a single classical system, com-
posed of two classical subsystems. Quantum mechanics also
allows us to combine systems, as we found out in the Math-
ematical Interlude on tensor products (Section 6.1).
Alice and Bob have kindly agreed to provide a variant
of the coin/die system they loaned us for the Interlude on
tensor products. Instead of a coin and a die, the new system
is built up from two spins, meaning that we’ll have a chance
to put our knowledge of single spins to work.
As before, we will sometimes use the oddball notation |a

to remind us that Alice’s state-vectors are not in the same
state-space as Bob’s, and that we’re not allowed to add them
together. On the other hand, recall that each member of an
orthonormal basis for SAB is labeled by a pair of vectors, one
from SA and one from SB. We will make frequent use of the
notation |ab⟩to label a single basis vector of the combined
system. These doubly indexed basis vectors can be added
together, and we’ll be doing that a lot.
As we explained in the Interlude, labeling a basis vector
with a pair of indices takes some getting used to. You should
think of the pair ab as a single index labeling a single state.
Let’s look at an example. Consider some linear operator
M acting on the space of states of the composite system. As
usual, it can be represented as a matrix. The matrix ele-
ments are constructed by sandwiching the operator between

6.4. TWO SPINS
161
basis vectors. Thus, the matrix elements of M are expressed
as
⟨a′b′|M|ab⟩= Ma′b′,ab.
Each row of the matrix is labeled with a single index (a′b′)
of the composite system and each column with (ab).
The vectors |ab⟩are taken to be orthonormal, which
means that their inner products are zero unless both labels
match. This does not mean that a matches b, but rather
that ab matches a′b′. We can also express this idea using the
Kronecker delta symbol:
⟨ab|a′b′⟩= δaa′δbb′.
The right side is zero unless a = a′ and b = b′. If the labels
do match, the inner product is one.
Now that we have the basis vectors, any linear superpo-
sition of them is allowed. Thus, any state in the composite
system can be expanded as
|Ψ⟩=

a,b
ψ(a, b)|ab⟩.
6.4
Two Spins
Returning to our example, let’s imagine two spins: Alice’s
and Bob’s. To put it in a context that we can visualize, imag-
ine that the spins are attached to two particles and that the
two particles are ﬁxed in space at two nearby but diﬀerent
locations.

162
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
Alice and Bob each have their own apparatuses, called
A and B respectively, that they can use to prepare states
and measure spin components. Each can be independently
oriented along any axis.
We are going to need names for the two spins. When
we only had one spin, we simply called it σ, and it had
three components along the x, y, and z axes. Now we have
two spins, and the question is how to label them without
cluttering the symbols with too many sub- and superscripts.
We could call them σA and σB, and the components, σA
x , σB
y ,
and so on. For me, that’s just too many subscripts to keep
track of, especially on the blackboard. Instead, I’ll follow the
same convention we used in the Interlude on tensor products.
I’ll call Alice’s spin σ and assign the next letter in the Greek
alphabet, τ, to Bob’s spin. The full sets of components for
Alice’s and Bob’s spins are
σx, σy, σz
and
τx, τy, τz.
According to the principles that we laid out earlier, the space
of states for the two-spin system is a tensor product. We can
make a table of the four states, just as we did in the Interlude.
This time, it’s a 2 × 2 square, comprising four basis states.
Let’s work in a basis in which the z components of both
spins are speciﬁed. The basis vectors are

6.5. PRODUCT STATES
163
|uu⟩, |ud⟩, |du⟩, |dd⟩,
where the ﬁrst part of each label represents the state of σ,
and the second part represents τ. For example, the ﬁrst basis
vector |uu⟩represents the state in which both spins are up.
The vector |du⟩is the state in which Alice’s spin is down
and Bob’s spin is up.
6.5
Product States
The simplest type of state for the composite system is called
a product state. A product state is the result of completely
independent preparations by Alice and Bob, in which each
uses his or her own apparatus to prepare a spin. Using ex-
plicit notation, suppose Alice prepares her spin in state
αu|u

+ αd|d

and Bob prepares his in the state
βu|u⟩+ βd|d⟩.
We assume each state is normalized:
α∗
uαu + α∗
dαd
=
1
β∗
uβu + β∗
dβd
=
1.
(6.4)

164
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
And in fact these separate normalization equations for each
subsystem play a crucial role in deﬁning product states. If
they did not hold, we would not have a product state. The
product state describing the combined system is
|product state⟩=

αu|u

+ αd|d

⊗

βu|u

+ βd|d

,
where the ﬁrst factor represents Alice’s state and the second
factor represents Bob’s. Expanding the product and switch-
ing to composite notation, the right-hand side becomes
αuβu|uu⟩+ αuβd|ud⟩+ αdβu|du⟩+ αdβd|dd⟩.
(6.5)
The main feature of a product state is that each subsystem
behaves independently of the other. If Bob does an exper-
iment on his own subsystem, the result is exactly the same
as it would be if Alice’s subsystem did not exist. The same
is true for Alice, of course.
Exercise 6.2: Show that if the two normalization conditions
of Eqs. 6.4 are satisﬁed, then the state-vector of Eq. 6.5 is
automatically normalized as well. In other words, show that
for this product state, normalizing the overall state-vector
does not put any additional constraints on the α’s and β’s.
I’ll mention here that tensor products and product states
are two diﬀerent things, despite their similar-sounding names.2
2Sometimes, we’ll use the term tensor product space, or just product
space, instead of tensor product.

6.6. PRODUCT STATE PARAMETERS
165
A tensor product is a vector space for studying composite
systems. A product state is a state-vector. It’s one of the
many state-vectors that inhabit a product space. As we will
see, most of the state-vectors in the product space are not
product states.
6.6
Counting Parameters for the
Product State
Let’s consider the number of parameters it takes to specify
such a product state. Each factor requires two complex num-
bers (αu and αd for Alice, βu and βd for Bob), which means
we need four complex numbers altogether. That’s equivalent
to eight real parameters. But recall that the normalization
conditions in Eqs. 6.4 reduce this by two. Furthermore, the
overall phases of each state have no physical signiﬁcance, so
the total number of real parameters is four. That’s hardly
surprising: it took two parameters to describe the state of a
single spin, so two independent spins require four.
6.7
Entangled States
The principles of quantum mechanics allow us to superpose
basis vectors in more general ways than just product states.
The most general vector in the composite space of states is
ψuu|uu⟩+ ψud|ud⟩+ ψdu|du⟩+ ψdd|dd⟩,
where we have used the subscripted symbols ψ (instead of

166
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
α and β) to represent the complex coeﬃcients. Again, we
have four complex numbers, but this time we only have one
normalization condition,
ψ∗
uuψuu + ψ∗
udψud + ψ∗
duψdu + ψ∗
ddψdd = 1,
and only one overall phase to ignore.
The result is that
the most general state for a two-spin system has six real
parameters. Evidently, the space of states is richer than just
those product states that can be prepared independently by
Bob and Alice. Something new is going on. The new thing
is called entanglement.
Entanglement is not an all-or-nothing proposition. Some
states are more entangled than others. Here is an example of
a maximally entangled state—a state that’s as entangled as
it can be. It is called the singlet state, and it can be written
as
|sing⟩= 1
√
2

|ud⟩−|du⟩

.
The singlet state cannot be written as a product state. The
same is true for the triplet states,
1
√
2

|ud⟩+ |du⟩

1
√
2

|uu⟩+ |dd⟩

1
√
2

|uu⟩−|dd⟩

,

6.8. ALICE AND BOB’S OBSERVABLES
167
which are also maximally entangled. The reason for calling
them singlet and triplet will be explained later.
Exercise 6.3: Prove that the state |sing⟩cannot be written
as a product state.
What is it about maximally entangled states that is so fas-
cinating? I can sum this up in two statements:
• An entangled state is a complete description of the
combined system. No more can be known about it.
• In a maximally entangled state, nothing is known about
the individual subsystems.
How can that be? How could we know as much as can pos-
sibly be known about the Alice-Bob system of two spins, and
yet know nothing about the individual spins that are its sub-
components?
That’s the mystery of entanglement, and I
hope that by the end of this lecture you will understand the
rules of the game, even if the deeper nature of entanglement
remains a paradox.
6.8
Alice and Bob’s Observables
So far, we’ve discussed the space of states of the Alice-Bob
two-spin system, but not its observables. Some of these ob-
servables are obvious, even if their mathematical representa-
tion is not. In particular, using their apparatuses A and B,
Alice and Bob can measure the components of their spins:

168
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
σx, σy, σz
and
τx, τy, τz.
How are these observables represented as Hermitian opera-
tors in the composite space of states? The answer is sim-
ple. Bob’s operators act on Bob’s spin states exactly as they
would if Alice had never shown up. The same goes for Alice.
Let’s review how the spin operators act on the states of a
single spin. First, let’s look at Alice’s spin:
σz|u

=
|u

σz|d

=
−|d

σx|u

=
|d

σx|d

=
|u

σy|u

=
i|d

σy|d

=
−i|u

.
(6.6)
Of course, Bob’s setup is identical to Alice’s, so we can write
a parallel set of equations showing how the components of τ
act on Bob’s states:

6.8. ALICE AND BOB’S OBSERVABLES
169
τz|u⟩
=
|u⟩
τz|d⟩
=
−|d⟩
τx|u⟩
=
|d⟩
τx|d⟩
=
|u⟩
τy|u⟩
=
i|d⟩
τy|d⟩
=
−i|u⟩.
(6.7)
Now let’s consider how the operators should be deﬁned when
acting on the tensor product states, |uu⟩, |ud⟩, |du⟩, and |dd⟩.
The answer is that when σ acts, it just ignores Bob’s half
of the state label. There are many possible combinations
of operators and states, but I will pick a few at random.
You can ﬁll in the others, or look them up in the appendix.
Starting with Alice’s operators, we ﬁnd that
σz|uu⟩
=
|uu⟩
σz|du⟩
=
−|du⟩
σx|ud⟩
=
|dd⟩
σx|dd⟩
=
|ud⟩

170
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
σy|uu⟩
=
i|du⟩
σy|du⟩
=
−i|uu⟩
τz|uu⟩
=
|uu⟩
τz|du⟩
=
|du⟩
τx|ud⟩
=
|uu⟩
τx|du⟩
=
|dd⟩
τy|uu⟩
=
i|ud⟩
τy|dd⟩
=
−i|du⟩.
(6.8)
Again, the rule is that Alice’s spin components act only on
the Alice half of the composite system.
The Bob half is
a passive spectator that does not participate. In terms of
symbols, when σx, σy, or σz acts, Bob’s half of the spin state
does not change.
And when Bob’s τ spin operators act,
Alice’s half is similarly passive.
We are being a little loose with our notation. The vectors
of a tensor product space are new vectors, built up from the
vectors of two smaller spaces. Technically, the same is true
for the operators. If we were being pedantic, we would insist
on writing the tensor product versions of σz and τx as σz ⊗I
and I ⊗τx, respectively, where I is the identity operator.
In fact, we can highlight two important properties of tensor

6.8. ALICE AND BOB’S OBSERVABLES
171
product operators by rewriting the equation
σz|du⟩= −|du⟩
(6.9)
as
(σz ⊗I) (|d⟩⊗|u⟩)
=
(σz|d⟩⊗I|u⟩)
=
(−|d⟩⊗|u⟩).
(6.10)
This notation is cumbersome, and we’ll usually stick to the
simpler language of Eq. 6.9. However, the language of Eq.
6.10 makes two things clear:
1. A composite operator σz ⊗I is operating on a compos-
ite vector |d⟩⊗|u⟩to produce a new composite vector
−|d⟩⊗|u⟩.
2. Alice’s half (the left half) of the composite operator
only aﬀects her half of the composite vector. Likewise,
Bob’s half of the operator only aﬀects his half of the
vector.
We’ll have more to say about composite operators in the
next section. Furthermore, in Lecture 7, the language of Eq.
6.10 will help us see how to work with tensor products in
component form.

172
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
Exercise 6.4: Use the matrix forms of σz, σx, and σy and
the column vectors for |u

and |d

to verify Eqs. 6.6. Then,
use Eqs. 6.6 and 6.7 to write the equations that were left out
of Eqs. 6.8. Use the appendix to check your answers.
Exercise 6.5: Prove the following theorem:
When any one of Alice’s or Bob’s spin operators acts on a
product state, the result is still a product state.
Show that in a product state, the expectation value of any
component of ⃗σ or ⃗τ is exactly the same as it would be in
the individual single-spin states.
This last exercise proves something important about product
states. In a product state, every prediction about Bob’s half
of the system is exactly the same as it would have been in the
corresponding single-spin theory. The same goes for Alice.
An example of this property of product states involves
what I called the Spin-Polarization Principle in Lecture 3.
A useful way to state that principle is:
For any state of a single spin, there is some direction for
which the spin is +1.
As I explained, this means that the expectation values of the
components satisfy the equation
⟨σx⟩2 + ⟨σy⟩2 + ⟨σz⟩2 = 1,
(6.11)
which tells us that not all the expectation values can be zero.
This fact continues to hold for all product states. However,

6.8. ALICE AND BOB’S OBSERVABLES
173
it does not hold for the entangled state |sing⟩. In fact, for
the |sing⟩state the right-hand side of Eq. 6.11 becomes zero,
as we’ll show next.
Recall that the entangled state |sing⟩is deﬁned as
|sing⟩= 1
√
2

|ud⟩−|du⟩

.
Let’s look at the expectation values of σ in this state. We
have all the machinery we need to compute them. First, let’s
consider ⟨σz⟩:
⟨σz⟩= ⟨sing|σz|sing⟩
=
⟨sing|σz
1
√
2

|ud⟩−|du⟩

.
Here is where Eqs. 6.8 come in (along with Exercise 6.4,
which completes this set of equations!). They tell us how σz
acts on each basis vector. The result is
⟨sing|σz|sing⟩= ⟨sing| 1
√
2

|ud⟩+ |du⟩

or
⟨σz⟩= 1
2

⟨ud| −⟨du|

|ud⟩+ |du⟩

.
A quick inspection shows that this is equal to zero. Next,
let’s consider ⟨σx⟩:

174
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
⟨σx⟩= ⟨sing|σx|sing⟩
=
⟨sing|σx
1
√
2

|ud⟩−|du⟩

or
⟨σx⟩= 1
2

⟨ud| −⟨du|

|dd⟩−|uu⟩

.
Again, this equation gives us zero. Finally, let’s look at ⟨σy⟩:
⟨σy⟩= ⟨sing|σy|sing⟩
=
1
2

⟨ud| −⟨du|

i|dd⟩+ i|uu⟩

.
As you may have guessed, we are left with zero once more.
Thus, we have shown that for the state |sing⟩,
⟨σz⟩= ⟨σx⟩= ⟨σy⟩= 0,
and indeed all expectation values of σ are zero. Needless to
say, the same is true for the expectation values of τ. Clearly,
|sing⟩is very diﬀerent from a product state. What does all
this say about the measurements we can make?
If the expectation value of a component of σ is zero, it
means that the experimental outcome is equally likely to be

6.9. COMPOSITE OBSERVABLES
175
+1 or −1. In other words, the outcome is completely uncer-
tain. Even though we know the exact state-vector, |sing⟩, we
know nothing at all about the outcome of any measurement
of any component of either spin.
Perhaps this means that the state |sing⟩is somehow
incomplete—that there are details of the system that we were
sloppy about and didn’t measure. After all, earlier we saw
a perfectly classical example in which Alice and Bob knew
nothing about their coins until they actually looked at them.
How is the quantum version diﬀerent?
In our “classical entanglement” example involving Alice,
Bob, and Charlie, it is perfectly clear that there was more
to know. Charlie could have sneaked a peek at the coins
without changing anything, because classical measurements
can be arbitrarily gentle.
Might there be so-called hidden variables in the quantum
system? The answer is that according to the rules of quan-
tum mechanics, there is nothing to know beyond what is
encoded in the state-vector—in the present case, |sing⟩. The
state-vector is as complete a description of a system as it is
possible to make. So it seems that in quantum mechanics, we
can know everything about a composite system—everything
there is to know, anyway—and still know nothing about its
constituent parts.
This is the true weirdness of entangle-
ment, which so disturbed Einstein.
6.9
Composite Observables
Let’s imagine a quantum mechanical Alice-Bob-Charlie setup.
Charlie’s role is to prepare two spins in the entangled state

176
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
|sing⟩. Then, without looking at the spins (remember, quan-
tum measurements are not gentle), he gives one spin to Alice
and one to Bob. Although Alice and Bob know exactly what
state the combined system is in, they can predict nothing
about the outcome of their individual measurements.
But surely knowing the exact state of the composite sys-
tem must tell them something, even if the state is highly
entangled.
And in fact it does.
However, to understand
what it tells them, we have to consider a wider family of
observables than the ones that Alice and Bob can measure
separately, each using only his or her own detector. As it
turns out, there are observables that can only be measured
by using both detectors. The results of such experiments
can only be known to Alice or Bob if they come together
and compare notes.
The ﬁrst question is whether Alice and Bob can simulta-
neously measure their own observables. We have seen that
there are quantities that cannot be simultaneously measured.
In particular, two observables that do not commute cannot
both be measured without the measurements interfering with
each other. But for Alice and Bob, it is easy to see that ev-
ery component of σ commutes with every component of τ.
This is a general fact about tensor products. The operators
that act on the two separate factors commute with one an-
other. Therefore, Alice can make any measurement on her
spin and Bob can make any measurement on his, without
either interfering with the other’s experiment.
Let’s suppose Alice measures σz and Bob measures τz,
and then they multiply the results.
In other words, they
conspire to measure the product τzσz.

6.9. COMPOSITE OBSERVABLES
177
The product τzσz is an observable that is mathematically
represented by ﬁrst applying σz to a ket and then subse-
quently applying τz. Keep in mind that these are just the
mathematical operations that deﬁne a new operator: they
are diﬀerent from the act of performing a physical measure-
ment.
You don’t need an apparatus to multiply two op-
erators; you just need a pencil and paper. Let’s see what
happens if we apply the product τzσz to the state |sing⟩:
τzσz
1
√
2

|ud⟩−|du⟩

.
First, using the table in Eqs. 6.8, apply σz:
τzσz
1
√
2

|ud⟩−|du⟩

= τz
1
√
2

|ud⟩+ |du⟩

.
Now, apply τz to get
τzσz
1
√
2

|ud⟩−|du⟩

= 1
√
2

−|ud⟩+ |du⟩

.
Notice that the end result is just to change the sign of |sing⟩:
τzσz|sing⟩= −|sing⟩.
Evidently, |sing⟩is an eigenvector of the observable τzσz
with eigenvalue −1. Let’s examine the signiﬁcance of this
result. Alice measures σz and Bob measures τz; when they
come together and compare results, they ﬁnd they’ve mea-
sured opposite values.
Sometimes, Bob measures +1 and

178
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
Alice measures −1.
Other times, Alice measures +1 and
Bob measures −1. The product of the two measurements is
always −1.
There should be nothing surprising in this result. The
state-vector |sing⟩is a superposition of two vectors, |ud⟩
and |du⟩, both of which comprise two spins with opposite
z components.
The situation is altogether similar to the
classical example involving Charlie and his two coins.
But now we come to something that has no classical ana-
log. Suppose that instead of measuring the z components of
their spins, Alice and Bob measure the x components. To
ﬁnd out how their outcomes are correlated, we must study
the observable τxσx.
Let’s act on |sing⟩with this product. Here are the steps:
τxσx|sing⟩
=
τxσx
1
√
2

|ud⟩−|du⟩

=
τx
1
√
2

|dd⟩−|uu⟩

=
1
√
2

|du⟩−|ud⟩

or, more simply,
τxσx|sing⟩= −|sing⟩.
Now this is a bit surprising: |sing⟩is also an eigenvector
of τxσx with eigenvalue −1. It is far less obvious from just
looking at |sing⟩that the x components of the two spins

6.9. COMPOSITE OBSERVABLES
179
are always opposite. Nevertheless, every time Alice and Bob
measure them, they ﬁnd that σx and τx have opposite values.
At this point, you will probably not be surprised to learn that
the same thing is true for the y components.
Exercise 6.6: Assume Charlie has prepared the two spins
in the singlet state. This time, Bob measures τy and Alice
measures σx. What is the expectation value of σxτy?
What does this say about the correlation between the two
measurements?
Exercise 6.7: Next, Charlie prepares the spins in a diﬀerent
state, called |T1⟩, where
|T1⟩= 1
√
2

|ud⟩+ |du⟩

.
In these examples, T stands for triplet. These triplet states
are completely diﬀerent from the states in the coin and die
examples. What are the expectation values of the operators
σzτz, σxτx, and σyτy?
What a diﬀerence a sign can make!
Exercise 6.8:
Do the same for the other two entangled
triplet states,
|T2⟩= 1
√
2

|uu⟩+ |dd⟩

|T3⟩= 1
√
2

|uu⟩−|dd⟩

,
and interpret.

180
LECTURE 6. ENTANGLEMENT
Finally, let’s consider one more observable. This one can-
not be measured by Alice and Bob making separate measure-
ments with their individual apparatuses, even if they come
together and compare notes.
Nevertheless, quantum me-
chanics insists that some kind of apparatus can be built to
measure the observable.
The observable I am referring to can be thought of as the
ordinary dot product of the vector-operators ⃗σ and ⃗τ:
⃗σ · ⃗τ = σxτx + σyτy + σzτz.
One might think that a value for this observable can be found
if Bob measures all components of τ, while Alice measures all
components of σ; then they could multiply the components
and add them up. The problem is that Bob cannot simul-
taneously measure the individual components of τ, because
they don’t commute. Likewise, Alice cannot measure more
than one component of σ at a time. To measure ⃗σ ·⃗τ, a new
kind of apparatus must be built, one that measures ⃗σ·⃗τ with-
out measuring any individual component. It’s far from ob-
vious how that could be done. Here is a concrete example of
how such a measurement could be carried out: Some atoms
have spins that are described in the same way as electron
spins. When two of these atoms are close to each other—
for example, two neighboring atoms in a crystal lattice—the
Hamiltonian will depend on the spins. In some situations,
the neighboring spins’ Hamiltonian is proportional to ⃗σ · ⃗τ.
If that happens to be the case, then measuring ⃗σ ·⃗τ is equiv-
alent to measuring the energy of the atomic pair. Measuring
this energy is a single measurement of the composite opera-

6.9. COMPOSITE OBSERVABLES
181
tor and does not entail measuring the individual components
of either spin.
Exercise 6.9: Prove that the four vectors |sing⟩, |T1⟩, |T2⟩,
and |T3⟩are eigenvectors of ⃗σ·⃗τ. What are their eigenvalues?
Take a look at your results from this last exercise. Do
you see why one of these state-vectors is called the singlet,
while the other three are called triplets? The reason is that
if you look at their relation to the operator ⃗σ · ⃗τ, the singlet
is an eigenvector with one eigenvalue, and the triplets are all
eigenvectors with a diﬀerent degenerate eigenvalue.
Here is a good exercise that combines the concept of en-
tanglement with the concepts of time and change from Lec-
ture 4. Use it to review the ideas of unitary time evolution
and the meaning of the Hamiltonian.
Exercise 6.10: A system of two spins has the Hamiltonian
H = ω
2 ⃗σ · ⃗τ.
What are the possible energies of the system, and what are
the eigenvectors of the Hamiltonian?
Suppose the system starts in the state |uu⟩. What is the
state at any later time? Answer the same question for initial
states of |ud⟩, |du⟩, and |dd⟩.


Lecture 7
More on Entanglement
Hilbert’s Place, summer 1935:
Two scruﬀy regulars come through the swinging doors, in the
midst of an intense conversation. The one with the wild gray-
ish hair and frayed sweater says, “No, I will not accept your
theory unless you can tell me what the elements of physical
reality are.”
The other one looks around, throws up his hands in obvi-
ous frustration, and says to Art and Lenny, “There he goes
again. Elements of physical reality, EPRs, EPRs, that’s all
he ever thinks about. Albert, stop being obsessive and just
accept the facts.”
“Never! I cannot accept that one can know everything there
is to know about a thing, and still know nothing about its
parts. That’s utter nonsense, Niels.”
“Sorry, Albert. That’s just the way it is. Here, let me buy
you a beer.”
183

184
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
In this lecture, we will look at entanglement in greater depth.
To do that, we’ll need some additional mathematical tools.
First, we’ll ﬁnd out how to work with tensor products in
component form. Then, we’ll learn about a new operator
called the density matrix.
These tools are not inherently
hard to master, but they do require some patience and a fair
amount of index wrangling.
7.1
Mathematical Interlude:
Tensor Products in
Component Form
In Lecture 6, we explained how to form the tensor product of
two vector spaces using the abstract notation of bras, kets,
and operator symbols like σz. How does that translate into
columns, rows, and matrices?
Building tensor products from matrices and column vec-
tors is not hard. The rules are straightforward, as we’ll see
below.
The tricky part is understanding why these rules
work—why they allow us to build matrices and column vec-
tors that have the properties we want. We’ll tackle the issue
in two diﬀerent ways. First, we’ll build composite operators
using the tried-and-true method we developed in Lecture 3.
Then we’ll show you how to build composite operators di-
rectly from their component operators.

7.1. INTERLUDE: TENSOR PRODUCT MATRICES 185
7.1.1
Building Tensor Product Matrices
from Basic Principles
Back in Lecture 3, we showed you how to write any observ-
able M in matrix form, relative to a speciﬁc basis. Take a
moment to review Eqs. 3.1 through 3.4. In that section, we
calculated the numerical values mjk of M’s matrix elements
with the expression
mjk = ⟨j|M|k⟩,
(7.1)
where |j⟩and |k⟩represent the basis vectors. Each |j⟩, |k⟩
combination generates a diﬀerent matrix element.1
Our plan is to apply this formula to some tensor prod-
uct operators and see what we get. Because of our double-
indexing convention for tensor product basis vectors, the
“sandwiches” in these equations will look a little diﬀerent
from the ones in Eq. 7.1. On each end of the sandwich, we
will cycle through the basis vectors |uu⟩, |ud⟩, |du⟩, and |dd⟩.2
To keep things simple, we’ll use the operator σz ⊗I as an
example, where I is the identity operator. As we have seen,
σz ⊗I acts on Alice’s half of the state-vector with σz, and
does absolutely nothing to Bob’s half. Because we are work-
ing in a four-dimensional vector space, the resulting matrix
1In Lecture 3, we happened to write the index j on the left side of
M, and k on the right, the opposite of what we’re doing here. Because
j and k are index variables, this makes no diﬀerence as long as we
maintain consistency within a group of equations.
2Of course, we could have used a diﬀerent set of basis vectors, such
as |rr⟩, |rl⟩, etc. Doing so would result in a diﬀerent set of matrix
elements.

186
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
will be 4 × 4. Omitting multiple ⊗symbols to avoid visual
clutter, we can write the matrix like this:
σz ⊗I =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
⟨uu|σzI|uu⟩
⟨uu|σzI|ud⟩
⟨uu|σzI|du⟩
⟨uu|σzI|dd⟩
⟨ud|σzI|uu⟩
⟨ud|σzI|ud⟩
⟨ud|σzI|du⟩
⟨ud|σzI|dd⟩
⟨du|σzI|uu⟩
⟨du|σzI|ud⟩
⟨du|σzI|du⟩
⟨du|σzI|dd⟩
⟨dd|σzI|uu⟩
⟨dd|σzI|ud⟩
⟨dd|σzI|du⟩
⟨dd|σzI|dd⟩
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
.
(7.2)
To evaluate these matrix elements, we could allow σz and I
to operate either to the left or to the right. Let’s assume
σz operates to the left and I operates to the right. Since
I does nothing, all we care about is what σz does to the
bra vector on its left. And within that bra vector, σz only
acts on the leftmost (that is, Alice’s) state-label. Using the
rules we’ve already worked out (see Eqs. 6.6 and 6.7), we
can carry out all of these σz operations to obtain a matrix
of inner products:
σz ⊗I =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
⟨uu|uu⟩
⟨uu|ud⟩
⟨uu|du⟩
⟨uu|dd⟩
⟨ud|uu⟩
⟨ud|ud⟩
⟨ud|du⟩
⟨ud|dd⟩
−⟨du|uu⟩
−⟨du|ud⟩
−⟨du|du⟩
−⟨du|dd⟩
−⟨dd|uu⟩
−⟨dd|ud⟩
−⟨dd|du⟩
−⟨dd|dd⟩
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
.
(7.3)

7.1. INTERLUDE: TENSOR PRODUCT MATRICES 187
Because these eigenvectors are orthonormal, the matrix re-
duces to
σz ⊗I =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
−1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠.
(7.4)
How do we write the eigenvectors |uu⟩, |ud⟩, |du⟩, and |dd⟩
as column vectors?
For now, I’ll just tell you that we’ll
represent |uu⟩and |du⟩as
|uu⟩=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠,
|du⟩=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
0
0
1
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠.
(7.5)
Let’s see what happens when σz⊗I operates on these column
vectors. Applying the matrix to |uu⟩results in
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
0
0
−1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠.
In other words,
(σz ⊗I)|uu⟩= |uu⟩,
just as we expect. What if we apply the same matrix to the
column vector |du⟩in Eqs. 7.5? Carrying out the matrix
multiplication results in −|du⟩, just as it should.

188
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
7.1.2
Building Tensor Product Matrices
from Component Matrices
The above method for calculating matrix elements is very
general—it works for all observables. If we need to construct
the tensor product of two operators, and we already know the
matrix elements of the building blocks, we can combine them
directly. Here is the rule for combining 2×2 matrices to form
4 × 4 matrices:
A ⊗B =
 A11B
A12B
A21B
A22B

(7.6)
or
A ⊗B =
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
A11B11
A11B12
A12B11
A12B12
A11B21
A11B22
A12B21
A12B22
A21B11
A21B12
A22B11
A22B12
A21B21
A21B22
A22B21
A22B22
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠.
(7.7)
The same pattern works for matrices of any size. This kind
of matrix multiplication is sometimes called the Kronecker
product, a term that only applies to matrices—it’s the matrix
version of the tensor product. The Kronecker product of two
2×2 matrices is a 4×4 matrix, and the pattern is similar for
matrices of arbitrary size. In general, the Kronecker product
of an m×n matrix and a p×q matrix is an mp×nq matrix.
All of this applies perfectly well to column and row vec-
tors, which are just specialized matrices. The tensor product
of two 2 × 1 column vectors is a 4 × 1 column vector. If a
and b are 2 × 1 column vectors, their tensor product looks
like this:

7.1. INTERLUDE: TENSOR PRODUCT MATRICES 189
 a11
a21

⊗
 b11
b21

=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
a11b11
a11b21
a21b11
a21b21
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠.
(7.8)
Let’s see how this works out for Alice and Bob. First, we’ll
construct the four tensor product basis vectors, using |u⟩
and |d⟩as building blocks. Recall Eqs. 2.11 and 2.12 from
Lecture 2,
|u⟩=
 1
0

|d⟩=
 0
1

.
If we plug the appropriate combinations of |u⟩and |d⟩into
Eq. 7.8, our four 4 × 1 column vectors are
|uu⟩=
 1
0

⊗
 1
0

=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
|ud⟩=
 1
0

⊗
 0
1

=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
0
1
0
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
|du⟩=
 0
1

⊗
 1
0

=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
0
0
1
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠

190
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
|dd⟩=
 0
1

⊗
 0
1

=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
0
0
0
1
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠.
(7.9)
Next, we’ll use the rule from Eq. 7.7 to combine the operators
σz and τx. Using Eqs. 3.20 to deﬁne matrices σz and τx, this
rule gives the tensor product matrix
σz ⊗τx =
 1
0
0
−1

⊗
 0
1
1
0

=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
−1
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠.
Let’s compare this result with the product of σx and τz,
σx ⊗τz =
 0
1
1
0

⊗
 1
0
0
−1

=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
−1
1
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠.
Notice that σx⊗τz is not the same as σz⊗τx. That is natural,
because they represent diﬀerent observables.
So far, so good. But next, we’ll see something a little
more interesting. With the help of a few exercises, we’ll try to
convince you that the Kronecker product really is the tensor
product for matrices—in other words, that Alice’s half of the
matrix only aﬀects her half of the column vector, and likewise
for Bob. This is tricky because of the way the Kronecker
product mixes up the elements of its building blocks.

7.1. INTERLUDE: TENSOR PRODUCT MATRICES 191
As an example, let’s look at how σz ⊗τx acts on |ud⟩.
Translating the abstract symbols into components, we can
write
(σz ⊗τx)|ud⟩=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
−1
0
0
−1
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
0
1
0
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎝
1
0
0
0
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎠.
But the column vector on the right-hand side corresponds
to |uu⟩in Eqs. 7.9. Translated back into abstract notation,
this becomes
(σz ⊗τx)|ud⟩= |uu⟩.
This is exactly what we want—a matrix representation of
our abstract operators and state-vectors that replicates their
known behavior.
The following exercise will help crystallize the idea that
the σ-half of σ⊗τ only aﬀects Alice’s half of the state-vector,
and that the τ-half only aﬀects Bob’s. The one after that
provides some practice working out the matrix elements of an
operator, assuming that we already know what the operator
does to each basis vector.
Exercise 7.1:
Write the tensor product I ⊗τx as a matrix,
and apply that matrix to each of the |uu⟩, |ud⟩, |du⟩, and
|dd⟩column vectors.
Show that Alice’s half of the state-
vector is unchanged in each case. Recall that I is the 2 × 2
unit matrix.
Exercise 7.2:
Calculate the matrix elements of σz ⊗τx by
forming inner products as we did in Eq. 7.2.

192
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
The third exercise is a bit tedious, but it really nails things
down. Consider the equation
(A ⊗B) (a ⊗b) = (Aa ⊗Bb).
(7.10)
As in Eqs. 7.7 and 7.8, A and B represent 2 × 2 matrices (or
operators), and a and b represent 2 × 1 column vectors. The
exercise asks you to expand the equation into components
and show that the left side matches the right side.
Exercise 7.3:
a) Rewrite Eq. 7.10 in component form, replacing the sym-
bols A, B, a, and b with the matrices and column vectors
from Eqs. 7.7 and 7.8.
b) Perform the matrix multiplications Aa and Bb on the
right-hand side. Verify that each result is a 4 × 1 matrix.
c) Expand all three Kronecker products.
d) Verify the row and column sizes of each Kronecker prod-
uct:
• A ⊗B: 4 × 4
• a ⊗b: 4 × 1
• Aa ⊗Bb: 4 × 4
e) Perform the matrix multiplication on the left-hand side,
resulting in a 4 × 1 column vector. Each row should be the
sum of four separate terms.
f) Finally, verify that the resulting column vectors on the
left and right sides are identical.

7.2. INTERLUDE: OUTER PRODUCTS
193
7.2
Mathematical Interlude:
Outer Products
Given a bra ⟨φ| and a ket |ψ⟩, we can form the inner product
⟨φ|ψ⟩. As we’ve seen, the inner product is a complex number.
However, there is another kind of product called the outer
product, written
|ψ⟩⟨φ|.
The outer product is not a number; it is a linear operator.
Let’s consider what happens when |ψ⟩⟨φ| acts on another ket
|A⟩:
|ψ⟩⟨φ| |A⟩.
In these examples, we’re using spacing instead of parenthe-
ses to show the grouping of operations. Remember that all
operations with bras, kets, and linear operators are associa-
tive, which means we’re allowed to group them any way we
like, as long as we keep the same ordering from left to right.3
The action of the outer product operator is very simple and
can be deﬁned as
|ψ⟩⟨φ| |A⟩≡|ψ⟩⟨φ|A⟩.
3Sometimes we can change left-to-right ordering as well, but that
requires more care.

194
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
In other words, we take the inner product of ⟨φ| with |A⟩(the
result is a complex number) and multiply it by the ket |ψ⟩.
The bra-ket notation is so eﬃcient that it practically forces
the deﬁnition on us. That was the genius of Paul Dirac. It’s
easy to prove that the outer product can also act on bras:
⟨B| |ψ⟩⟨φ| ≡⟨B|ψ⟩⟨φ|.
A special case is the outer product of a ket with its corre-
sponding bra, |ψ⟩⟨ψ|. Assuming that |ψ⟩is normalized, this
operator is called a projection operator. Here is how it acts:
|ψ⟩⟨ψ| |A⟩= |ψ⟩⟨ψ|A⟩
Note that the result is always proportional to |ψ⟩. A pro-
jection operator can be said to project a vector onto the
direction deﬁned by |ψ⟩. Here are some properties of projec-
tion operators that you can easily prove (remember that |ψ⟩
is normalized to 1):
• Projection operators are Hermitian.
• The vector |ψ⟩is an eigenvector of its projection oper-
ator with eigenvalue 1:
|ψ⟩⟨ψ| |ψ⟩= |ψ⟩
• Any vector orthogonal to |ψ⟩is an eigenvector with
eigenvalue zero. Thus, the eigenvalues of |ψ⟩⟨ψ| are all
either 0 or 1, and there is only one eigenvector with
unit eigenvalue. That eigenvector is |ψ⟩itself.

7.2. INTERLUDE: OUTER PRODUCTS
195
• The square of a projection operator is the same as the
projection operator itself:
|ψ⟩⟨ψ|2 = |ψ⟩⟨ψ|.
• The trace of an operator (or any square matrix) is de-
ﬁned as the sum of its diagonal elements. Using the
symbol Tr for trace, we can deﬁne the trace of an op-
erator L to be
Tr L =

i
⟨i|L|i⟩,
which is just the sum of L’s diagonal matrix elements.
The trace of a projection operator is 1. This follows
from the fact that the trace of a Hermitian operator is
the sum of its eigenvalues.4
• If we add all the projection operators for a basis sys-
tem, we obtain the identity operator:

i
|i⟩⟨i| = I.
(7.11)
Finally, here is a very important theorem about projection
operators and expectation values. The expectation value of
4A Hermitian matrix M can be diagonalized by a transformation
P†MP, where P is a unitary matrix whose columns are the normalized
eigenvectors of M. The trace of M is invariant under this transforma-
tion. We have not proved this well-known result.

196
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
any observable L in state |ψ⟩is given by
⟨ψ|L|ψ⟩= Tr |ψ⟩⟨ψ| L.
(7.12)
Here are the steps to prove it. Pick any basis |i⟩. Then, using
the deﬁnition of trace, write
Tr |ψ⟩⟨ψ| L =

i
⟨i|ψ⟩⟨ψ|L|i⟩.
The two factors in the summation are just numbers, so we
can reverse their ordering,
Tr |ψ⟩⟨ψ| L =

i
⟨ψ|L|i⟩⟨i|ψ⟩.
Carrying out the sum and using  |i⟩⟨i| = I, we get
Tr |ψ⟩⟨ψ| L = ⟨ψ|L|ψ⟩.
The right side is just the expectation value of L.
7.3
Density Matrices: A New Tool
Up to now, we have learned how to make predictions about
a system when we know the system’s exact quantum state.
But more often than not, we don’t have complete knowledge
of the state. For example, suppose Alice has prepared a spin
using an apparatus oriented along some axis. She gives the
spin to Bob but doesn’t tell him the axis along which the
apparatus was oriented. Perhaps she gives him some partial

7.3. DENSITY MATRICES
197
information, such as the fact that the axis was either along
the z axis or the x axis, but she refuses to tell him more than
that. What does Bob do? How does he use this information
to make predictions?
Bob reasons as follows: If Alice prepared the spin in the
state |ψ⟩, then the expectation value of any observable L is
Tr |ψ⟩⟨ψ|L = ⟨ψ|L|ψ⟩.
On the other hand, if Alice prepared the spin in state |φ⟩,
then the expectation value of L is
Tr |φ⟩⟨φ|L = ⟨φ|L|φ⟩.
What if there is a 50 percent probability that she prepared
|ψ⟩and a 50 percent probability that she prepared |φ⟩? Ob-
viously, the expectation value is
⟨L⟩= 1
2Tr |ψ⟩⟨ψ|L + 1
2Tr |φ⟩⟨φ|L.
All we are doing is averaging over Bob’s ignorance of the
state prepared by Alice.
But now we can combine the terms into a single expres-
sion by deﬁning a density matrix ρ that encodes Bob’s knowl-
edge. In this case the density matrix is half the projection
operator onto |φ⟩plus half the projection operator onto |ψ⟩,
ρ = 1
2|ψ⟩⟨ψ| + 1
2|φ⟩⟨φ|.

198
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
We’ve now packaged all of Bob’s knowledge of the system
into a single operator ρ. At this point, the rule to compute
expectation values becomes very simple:
⟨L⟩= Tr ρL.
(7.13)
We can generalize this. Suppose that Alice tells Bob that she
has prepared one of several states—call them |φ1⟩, |φ2⟩, |φ3⟩,
and so on. Moreover, she speciﬁes probabilities P1, P2, P3, . . .
for each of these states. Bob can still package all his knowl-
edge into a density matrix:
ρ = P1|φ1⟩⟨φ1| + P2|φ2⟩⟨φ2| + P3|φ3⟩⟨φ3| + . . . .
Furthermore, he can use exactly the same rule, Eq. 7.13, to
compute the expectation value.
When the density matrix corresponds to a single state, it
is a projection operator that projects onto that state. In this
case, we say that the state is pure. A pure state represents
the maximum amount of knowledge that Bob can have of a
quantum system. But in the more general case, the density
matrix is a mix of several projection operators. We then say
that the density matrix represents a mixed state.
I have used the term density matrix, but strictly speaking,
ρ is an operator. It only becomes a matrix when a basis is
chosen. Suppose we choose the basis |a⟩. The density matrix
is just the matrix representation of ρ with respect to this
basis:

7.4. ENTANGLEMENT AND DENSITY MATRICES 199
ρaa′ = ⟨a|ρ|a′⟩.
If the matrix representation of L is La′,a then 7.13 takes the
form
⟨L⟩=

a,a′
La′,aρa,a′.
(7.14)
7.4
Entanglement and Density
Matrices
Classical physics also has its notion of pure and mixed states,
although they are not called by those names. Just to illus-
trate, let’s consider a system of two particles moving along
a line. According to the rules of classical mechanics, we can
calculate the orbits of the particles if we know the values
of their positions (x1 and x2) and momenta (p1 and p2) at
a certain instant in time. The state of the system is thus
speciﬁed by four numbers: x1, x2, p1, and p2. If we know
these four numbers, we have as complete a description of the
two-particle system as it is possible to have: there is no more
to know. We can call this a pure classical state.
Often, however, we don’t know the exact state, but only
some probabilistic information.
That information can be
encoded in a probability density
ρ(x1, x2, p1, p2).
A classical pure state is just a special case of a probability

200
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
density, in which ρ is nonzero at only one point. But more
generally, ρ will be smeared out, in which case we could call
it a classical mixed state.5 When ρ is smeared out, it means
our knowledge of the system state is incomplete. The more
smeared out it is, the greater our ignorance.
One thing should be completely obvious from this exam-
ple: if you know the pure state for the combined two-particle
system, then you know everything about each particle. In
other words, a pure state for two classical particles implies
a pure state for each of the individual particles.
But this is exactly what is not true in quantum mechanics
when a system is entangled. The state of a composite system
can be absolutely pure, but each of its constituents must be
described by a mixed state.
Let’s take a system composed of two parts, A and B. It
could be two spins or any other composite system.
In this case, we will suppose that Alice has complete
knowledge of the state of the combined system.
In other
words, she knows the wave function
Ψ(a, b).
There is nothing missing from her knowledge of the combined
system. Nevertheless, Alice is not interested in B. Instead,
she wishes to ﬁnd out as much as she can about A without
looking at B. She selects an observable L that belongs to
A, and that does nothing to B when it acts. The rule for
5By smeared out, we mean that ρ(x1, x2, p1, p2) will be nonzero for
a range of values of its arguments, not just one value. The greater this
range, the more smeared out ρ becomes.

7.4. ENTANGLEMENT AND DENSITY MATRICES 201
calculating the expectation value of L is
⟨L⟩=

ab,a′b′
Ψ∗(a′b′)La′b′,abΨ(ab).
(7.15)
So far, this is entirely general. However, if the observable L
is associated only with A, then it acts trivially on the b-index
and we can write the expectation value as
⟨L⟩=

a,b,a′
Ψ∗(a′b)La′,aΨ(ab).
(7.16)
Now, Alice can summarize all of her knowledge, at least for
the purpose of studying A, in terms of a matrix ρ:
ρaa′ =

b
Ψ∗(a′b)Ψ(ab).
(7.17)
Surprisingly, Eq. 7.16 has exactly the same form as Eq. 7.14
for expectation value of a mixed state. Indeed, only in the
very special case of a product state will ρ have the form of
a projection operator. In other words, despite the fact that
the composite system is described by a perfectly pure state,
the subsystem A must be described by a mixed state.
There’s a subtle point about our notation for density ma-
trices that’s worth noticing: in Eq. 7.17, the right-hand in-
dex of ρ, that is, the a′ index, corresponds to the complex
conjugage state-vector Ψ∗(a′b) in the summation. This is a
consequence of our convention
Laa′ = ⟨a|L|a′⟩

202
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
for labeling the matrix elements of an operator L. Applying
this convention to
ρ = |Ψ⟩⟨Ψ|
results in
ρaa′ = ⟨a|Ψ⟩⟨Ψ|a′⟩,
or
ρaa′ = Ψ(a)Ψ∗(a′).
7.5
Entanglement for Two Spins
Before leading you further into the world of entanglement,
I’ll give you a simple deﬁnition and a quick warm-up exercise.
If Alice only has a single spin in a known state, her density
matrix is deﬁned to be
ρaa′ = ψ∗(a′)ψ(a).
This equation tells you how to calculate an element of Alice’s
density matrix. If we stick with our familiar σz basis, each
index a and a′ can take the values up and down, so Alice has
a 2 × 2 density matrix.

7.5. ENTANGLEMENT FOR TWO SPINS
203
Exercise 7.4:
Calculate the density matrix for
|Ψ⟩= α|u⟩+ β|d⟩.
Answer:
ψ(u) = α;
ψ∗(u) = α∗
ψ(d) = β;
ψ∗(d) = β∗
ρa′a =
 α∗α
α∗β
β∗α
β∗β

.
Now try plugging in some numbers for α and β. Make sure
they are normalized to 1. For example, α =
1
√
2, β =
1
√
2.
This simple example is a good way to understand the prop-
erties of density matrices. You can refer back to it as we look
at the more complex example of an entangled state.
Suppose we know the wave function of a composite sys-
tem, for example
ψ(a, b),
but we are only interested in Alice’s subsystem. In other
words, we want to keep track of everything that Alice can
ever measure. Do we have to know the whole wave function?
Or is there some way to get rid of Bob’s variables?
The
answer to the latter question is yes; we can capture Alice’s
complete description in terms of a density matrix ρ.
Let’s consider an observable L of Alice’s system. Like
any observable, it can of course be represented as a matrix:

204
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
La′b′,ab = ⟨a′b′|L|ab⟩.
Remember, for the composite system, the pair ab is really a
single index labeling a basis vector.
When we say, “L is an Alice-observable,” what we mean
is that L does nothing to Bob’s half of the state-label. This
forces some restrictions on the form of L. The idea is to ﬁlter
out (set equal to zero) any of L’s matrix elements that have
the eﬀect of changing Bob’s half of the state-label. In other
words, L has the special form
La′b′,ab = La′a δb′b.
(7.18)
This simple-looking equation requires some explanation, and
you may want to review the material on tensor products in
component form, in the Interlude on tensor products (Sec-
tion 6.1). The left-hand side of the equation is an element of
a 4 × 4 matrix. Each of its two indices can take four distinct
values: uu, ud, du, or dd. What about the right-hand side?
The matrix element La′a also has two indices, but each of
them can take only two distinct values: u or d. In fact, the
same symbol L refers to two diﬀerent matrices on each side
of Eq. 7.18.
At ﬁrst glance, it appears as though we have equated a
4 × 4 matrix to a 2 × 2 matrix, and indeed that would be
a problem. However, the factor δb′b makes everything work
out. The term La′a δb′b is an element of the tensor product
of two 2 × 2 matrices, and that tensor product is a 4 × 4

7.5. ENTANGLEMENT FOR TWO SPINS
205
matrix.6 Here is the way to read Eq. 7.18:
The 4 × 4 matrix La′b′,ab can be factored into a tensor
product of the two 2 × 2 matrices La′a and δb′b, where δb′b
is equivalent to the 2 × 2 identity matrix.
Now, let’s calculate the expectation value of L (the 4 × 4
version) using the full apparatus of the composite system:
⟨Ψ|L|Ψ⟩=

a,b,a′,b′
ψ∗(a′, b′) La′b′,ab ψ(a, b).
As I warned, there are lots of indices. But it gets simpler if
we use the special form of the matrix L. The factor δb′b in
Eq. 7.18—a Kronecker delta—ﬁlters out any elements that
change Bob’s half of the label, and leaves the others intact.
It tells us to set b′ = b to get
⟨Ψ|L|Ψ⟩=

a′,b,a
ψ∗(a′, b) La′,a ψ(a, b).
(7.19)
For the moment, let’s ignore the sums over a and a′, and
concentrate instead on the sum over b. We encounter the
quantity
ρa′a =

b
ψ∗(a, b) ψ(a′, b).
(7.20)
The 2 × 2 matrix ρa′a is Alice’s density matrix. Notice that
ρa′a does not depend on any b-index since it has already been
6We could also call it a Kronecker product, since we’re talking about
matrices. The formal distinction is not important for our purposes.

206
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
summed over b. It is purely a function of Alice variables a
and a′. In fact, we only kept the b’s in the equation to make
the example in the next section easier to follow.
We can simplify Eq. 7.19 by plugging in ρa′a from Eq.
7.20. The expectation value of L (the 2 × 2 version) then
becomes
⟨L⟩=

a′a
ρa′a La,a′.
(7.21)
In summing over b, we have collapsed a 4 × 4 matrix down
to a 2 × 2 matrix. This makes sense. We expect an operator
that acts on the composite system to be a 4 × 4 matrix, and
we expect an Alice operator to be 2 × 2.
Notice that the right side of Eq. 7.21 is a sum of diagonal
matrix elements. In other words, it’s the trace of the matrix
ρL, which we can write as
⟨L⟩= Tr ρL.
The lesson is this: To calculate Alice’s density matrix ρ,
we may need to know the full wave function, including the
dependence on Bob’s variables. But once we know ρ, we can
forget where it came from, and use it to calculate anything
about Alice’s observations. As a simple example, we can use
ρ to calculate the probability P(a) that Alice’s system will
be left in the state a if a measurement is performed.
To
determine P(a), we begin with P(a, b), the probability that
the combined system is in state |ab⟩. That’s just
P(a, b) = ψ∗(a, b)ψ(a, b).

7.5. ENTANGLEMENT FOR TWO SPINS
207
By the standard rules of probability, if we sum over b, we get
the probability for a:
P(a) =

b
ψ∗(a, b)ψ(a, b).
This is just a diagonal entry in the density matrix:
P(a) = ρaa.
(7.22)
Here are some properties of density matrices:
• Density matrices are Hermitian:
ρaa′ = ρ∗
a′a.
• The trace of a density matrix is 1:
Tr(ρ) = 1.
Eq. 7.22 should help make this clear because the left
side is a probability.
• The eigenvalues of the density matrix are all positive
and lie between 0 and 1. It follows that if any eigenvalue
is 1, all the others are 0. Can you interpret this result?
• For a pure state:
ρ2 = ρ
Tr(ρ2) = 1

208
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
• For a mixed or entangled state:
ρ2 ̸= ρ
Tr(ρ2) < 1
The last two properties give us a clear way to distinguish
mathematically between pure and mixed states. A subsys-
tem of an entangled state (such as Alice’s half of the singlet
state) is considered a mixed state.
It’s worth taking a moment to understand these two prop-
erties a little better. To simplify things, we will assume that
ρ is a diagonal matrix—in other words, all of its oﬀ-diagonal
elements are zero. This simpliﬁcation costs us nothing be-
cause ρ is Hermitian, and it turns out that every Hermitian
matrix can be expressed in diagonal form in some basis.7
Taking the square of a diagonal matrix is quite simple: all
you need to do is square each individual element. Since ρ rep-
resents a mixed state, and the diagonal elements of ρ must
add up to 1, none of the diagonal elements of ρ can equal
1. Otherwise, ρ would represent a pure state. Therefore, ρ
must have at least two positive diagonal elements that are
less than 1. Squaring these elements gives a new matrix ρ2
whose elements are even smaller. This accounts for both of
the mixed-state properties of ρ.
Before you try the next exercises, I’ll mention one more
thing about the trace. It turns out that the trace has many
7As we mentioned earlier, in Section 7.2, a Hermitian matrix M
can be diagonalized by a transformation P†MP, where P is a unitary
matrix whose columns are the normalized eigenvectors of M.

7.5. ENTANGLEMENT FOR TWO SPINS
209
interesting mathematical properties. One of its more useful
properties is that the trace of a product of two matrices does
not depend on their order of multiplication. In other words,
TrAB = TrBA,
even if
AB ̸= BA.
I mention this because you will sometimes see the trace of the
density matrix written as Tr Lρ, instead of Tr ρL. These
two expressions are equivalent.
Exercise 7.5:
a) Show that
 a
0
0
b
2
=
 a2
0
0
b2

.
b) Now, suppose
ρ =
 1
3
0
0
2
3

.
Calculate
ρ2
Tr(ρ)
Tr(ρ2).
c) If ρ is a density matrix, does it represent a pure state or
a mixed state?

210
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
Exercise 7.6:
Use Eq. 7.22 to show that if ρ is a density
matrix, then
Tr(ρ) = 1.
7.6
A Concrete Example:
Calculating Alice’s Density
Matrix
So far, the discussion of density matrices may have been a
little abstract for some readers. Here is a worked-out ex-
ample that should help bring density matrices into sharper
focus. Recall the deﬁnition of Alice’s density matrix from
Eq. 7.20:
ρa′a =

b
ψ∗(a, b) ψ(a′, b).
(7.23)
Now, consider the state-vector
|Ψ⟩
=
1
√
2

|ud⟩+ |du⟩

.
Notice that two of the basis vectors have a coeﬃcient of
1
√
2,
while the other two have coeﬃcients of zero. The state is
normalized because the sum of the squared coeﬃcients is 1.
Also, all four coeﬃcients happen to be real, which simpliﬁes
the process of complex conjugation.

7.6. CALCULATING ALICE’S DENSITY MATRIX
211
Let’s calculate Alice’s density matrix for this state. First,
for all possible inputs a and b, we’ll list the values of ψ(a, b).
Recall that these are just the basis vector coeﬃcients:
ψ(u, u)
=
0
ψ(u, d)
=
1
√
2
ψ(d, u)
=
1
√
2
ψ(d, d)
=
0.
Next, we’ll use these four equations to calculate each element
of Alice’s density matrix by expanding the summation of Eq.
7.23. In the expansion, notice that for every factor of the
form ψ∗(a, b)ψ(a′, b), Bob’s input is the same for both factors.
We discard any terms that do not have this property. This is
what we mean by “setting b′ equal to b in the summation.”
Here is the expansion:
ρuu
=
ψ∗(u, u)ψ(u, u) + ψ∗(u, d)ψ(u, d) = 1
2
ρud
=
ψ∗(u, u)ψ(d, u) + ψ∗(u, d)ψ(d, d) = 0
ρdu
=
ψ∗(d, u)ψ(u, u) + ψ∗(d, d)ψ(u, d) = 0
ρdd
=
ψ∗(d, u)ψ(d, u) + ψ∗(d, d)ψ(d, d) = 1
2.
These values are the elements of a 2 × 2 matrix:

212
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
ρ
=
 1
2
0
0
1
2

.
(7.24)
The trace of our matrix is 1. And our density matrix is done.8
Exercise 7.7: Use Eq. 7.24 to calculate ρ2. How does this
result conﬁrm that ρ represents an entangled state? We’ll
soon discover that there are other ways to check for entan-
glement.
Exercise 7.8: Consider the following states:
|ψ1⟩
=
1
2

|uu⟩+ |ud⟩+ |du⟩+ |dd⟩

|ψ2⟩
=
1
√
2

|uu⟩+ |dd⟩

|ψ3⟩
=
1
5

3|uu⟩+ 4|ud⟩

.
For each one, calculate Alice’s density matrix and Bob’s den-
sity matrix. Check their properties.
7.7
Tests for Entanglement
Suppose I gave you a wave function
ψ(a, b)
8Art’s a poet, and he’s not even aware of it.

7.7. TESTS FOR ENTANGLEMENT
213
for the composite SAB system. How could you tell whether
the corresponding state is entangled?
I am not referring
to an experimental test but to a mathematical procedure.
A related question is whether there are varying degrees of
entanglement. If there are, how could you quantify them?
Entanglement is the quantum mechanical generalization
of correlation. In other words, it indicates that Alice can
learn something about Bob’s half of the system by measur-
ing her own. In the classical example of the previous lecture,
I illustrated the idea of correlation using coins. If Alice ob-
serves the coin that Charlie gave her, she not only knows
whether her own coin is a penny or a dime; she also knows
which coin Bob has. That’s the experimental picture. The
mathematical indication of correlation is that the probability
function P(a, b) does not factorize (that is, it does not look
like Eq. 6.3).
Whenever the probability distribution does
not factorize, there are nonzero correlations as I described in
Inequality 6.2.
7.7.1
The Correlation Test for
Entanglement
Let’s assume that A is an Alice observable and B is a Bob
observable. The correlation between them is deﬁned in terms
of the average values (also known as the expectation values)
of the individual observables, and of their product. Suppose
that
⟨A⟩

214
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
⟨B⟩
⟨AB⟩
are these expectation values. The correlation C(A, B) be-
tween A and B is deﬁned as
C(A, B) = ⟨AB⟩−⟨A⟩⟨B⟩.
Exercise 7.9: Given any Alice observable A and Bob ob-
servable B, show that for a product state, the correlation
C(A, B) is zero.
From this exercise, we can learn something about entan-
glement. If a system is in a state where one can ﬁnd any
two observables A and B that are correlated—meaning that
C(A, B) ̸= 0—then the state is entangled. Correlations are
deﬁned to lie in the range −1 to +1. These extreme values
represent the greatest possible negative and positive corre-
lations. The greater the magnitude of C(A, B), the more
entangled is the state.
If C(A, B) = 0, then there is no
correlation (and no entanglement) at all.
7.7.2
The Density Matrix Test for
Entanglement
To calculate correlations, you have to know about both Bob’s
part and Alice’s part of the system, along with the system
wave function. But there is another test for entanglement

7.7. TESTS FOR ENTANGLEMENT
215
that only requires us to know Alice’s (or Bob’s) density ma-
trix. Let’s suppose that the state |Ψ⟩is a product state of
a Bob factor |φ⟩and an Alice factor |ψ

. That means the
composite wave function is also the product of a Bob factor
and an Alice factor:
ψ(a, b) = ψ(a)φ(b).
Now, let’s work out Alice’s density matrix. We use the deﬁ-
nition in Eq. 7.20 to get
ρa′a = ψ∗(a)ψ(a′)

b
φ∗(b)φ(b).
But if Bob’s state is normalized, then

b
φ∗(b)φ(b) = 1,
which makes Alice’s density matrix particularly simple:
ρa′a = ψ∗(a)ψ(a′).
(7.25)
Notice that it only depends on the Alice variables. Perhaps
it’s not very surprising that everything we need to know
about Alice’s system is contained in Alice’s wave function.
Now, I’m going to prove a key theorem about the eigen-
values of Alice’s density matrix, under the assumption of
a product state. It is true only for unentangled states and
serves to identify them. The theorem says that for any prod-
uct state, Alice’s (or Bob’s) density matrix has exactly one

216
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
nonzero eigenvalue, and that eigenvalue is exactly 1. We be-
gin the theorem by writing the eigenvalue equation for the
matrix ρ:

a′
ρa′aαa′ = λαa.
In other words, the matrix ρ acting on the column vector
α gives back the same vector multiplied by an eigenvalue λ.
Using the simple form of ρ in Eq. 7.25, we can write
ψ(a′)

a
ψ∗(a)αa = λαa′.
(7.26)
Now, you may notice a couple of things. First, the quantity

a
ψ∗(a)αa
has the form of an inner product. If the column vector α is
orthogonal to ψ, then the left side of Eq. 7.26 is zero. Such
a vector is an eigenvector of ρ with eigenvalue zero.
If the dimension of Alice’s space of states is NA, then
there are NA −1 vectors orthogonal to ψ. Each one of them
is an eigenvector of ρ with eigenvalue 0. That leaves only one
possible direction for an eigenvector with a nonzero eigen-
value, namely the vector ψ(a). In fact, if we plug in αa =
ψ(a), we do indeed ﬁnd that it is an eigenvector of ρ with
eigenvalue 1.
To summarize the theorem: If the composite Alice-Bob
system is in a product state, then Alice’s (or Bob’s) density

7.7. TESTS FOR ENTANGLEMENT
217
matrix has one and only one eigenvalue equal to 1, and all
the rest are zero. Moreover, the eigenvector with a nonzero
eigenvalue is nothing but the wave function of Alice’s half of
the system.
In this situation, Alice’s system is in a pure state. All of
Alice’s observations are described as if Bob and his system
never existed and Alice had an isolated system described by
the wave function ψ(a′).
The opposite extreme of a pure state is a maximally en-
tangled state.
Maximally entangled states are states of a
combined system in which nothing is known about either
subsystem, even though they are complete descriptions of
the system as a whole—as complete as quantum mechanics
allows. The state |sing⟩is a maximally entangled state.
When Alice calculates her density matrix for a maximally
entangled state, she ﬁnds something very disappointing: the
density matrix is proportional to the unit matrix. All the
eigenvalues are equal, and given that they all sum to unity,
each eigenvalue is equal to 1/NA. In other words,
ρa′a =
1
NA
δa′a.
(7.27)
Why is Alice disappointed? Go back to Eq. 7.22. This equa-
tion says that the probability for a particular state a is the
diagonal element of ρ, but Eq. 7.27 tells us that all the prob-
abilities are equal. What could be less informative than a
probability distribution so structureless that every possible
outcome is equally probable?

218
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
Maximal entanglement implies a complete lack of infor-
mation about Alice’s subsystem for experiments that only
involve that one subsystem. On the other hand, it implies
a large correlation between Alice’s and Bob’s measurements.
For the singlet state, if Alice measures any component of her
spin, she automatically knows the result Bob would get if
he were to measure the same component of his spin. This is
exactly the kind of knowledge that is precluded in a product
state.
So in each type of state, some things are predictable and
some are not. In a product state, we can make statistical pre-
dictions about measurements made on each separate subsys-
tem, but Alice’s measurements tell her nothing about Bob’s
system. In a maximally entangled state, on the other hand,
Alice can predict nothing about her own measurements, but
she knows a great deal about the relation between her out-
comes and Bob’s.
7.8
The Process of Measurement
We have seen that quantum systems evolve in what look
like irreconcilably diﬀerent ways: by unitary evolution be-
tween measurements, and by wave function collapse when
measurements take place. This circumstance has led to some
of the most contentious debates and confusing claims about
so-called reality. I’m going to steer away from those debates
and stick to the facts. Once you know how quantum me-
chanics works, you can decide for yourself whether you think
there is a problem.
Let’s begin by noting that every measurement involves

7.8. THE PROCESS OF MEASUREMENT
219
a system and an apparatus. But if quantum mechanics is
a consistent theory, then it should be possible to combine
the system and apparatus into a single bigger system. For
simplicity let’s take the system to be a single spin. The appa-
ratus A is the same one that we used in the very ﬁrst lecture.
The window in the apparatus can show three possible read-
ings. The ﬁrst is blank—it represents the neutral state of
the apparatus before it comes in contact with the spin. The
two other readings record the two possible outcomes of the
measurement: +1 or −1.
If the apparatus is a quantum system (of course, it must
be), then it is described by a space of states. In the simplest
description, the apparatus has exactly three states: a blank
state and two outcome states. Thus, the basis vectors for
the apparatus are
|b

| + 1

| −1

.
Meanwhile, the basis states of the spin can be taken to be
the usual up and down states:
|u⟩
|d⟩.
From these two sets of basis vectors, we can build up a com-
posite (tensor product) space of states that has the six basis
vectors

220
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
|u, b⟩
|u, +1⟩
|u, −1⟩
|d, b⟩
|d, +1⟩
|d, −1⟩.
The detailed mechanics of what takes place when system
meets apparatus may be complicated, but we are free to
make some assumptions about how the combined system
evolves. Let’s assume the apparatus starts in the blank state
and the spin starts in the up state. After the apparatus in-
teracts with the spin, the ﬁnal state (by assumption) is
|u, +1⟩.
In other words, the interaction leaves the spin unchanged
but ﬂips the apparatus to the +1 state. We write this as
|u, b⟩→|u, +1⟩.
(7.28)
Similarly, we can require that if the spin is in the down state,
it ﬂips the apparatus to the −1 state:
|d, b⟩→|d, −1⟩.
(7.29)

7.8. THE PROCESS OF MEASUREMENT
221
So by looking at the apparatus after it interacts with the
spin, you can tell what the spin was initially.
Now, let’s
assume that the initial spin state is more general, namely
αu|u⟩+ αd|d⟩.
If we include the apparatus as part of the system, the initial
state is
αu|u, b⟩+ αd|d, b⟩.
(7.30)
This initial state is a product state, speciﬁcally a product of
the initial spin state and the blank apparatus state. You can
check that it is completely unentangled.
Exercise 7.10: Verify that the state-vector in 7.30 repre-
sents a completely unentangled state.
Because we know from Eqs. 7.28 and 7.29 how the individual
terms in 7.30 evolve, we can easily determine the ﬁnal state:
αu|u, b⟩+ αd|d, b⟩→αu|u, +1⟩+ αd|d, −1⟩.
This ﬁnal state is an entangled state. In fact, if αu = −αd,
it is the maximally entangled singlet state. Indeed, one can
look at the apparatus and immediately tell what the spin
state is: if the apparatus reads +1 ,the spin is up, and if it
reads −1, the spin is down. Moreover, the probability that
the ﬁnal apparatus shows +1 is

222
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
α∗
uαu.
This number represents a probability—it’s exactly the same
as the original probability that the spin was up. In this de-
scription of a measurement, no collapse of the wave function
takes place. Instead, entanglement between the apparatus
and the system just happens by unitary evolution of the
state-vector.
The only problem is that, in a certain sense, we have
merely delayed the diﬃculty.
It is not very satisfying to
be told that the apparatus “knows” the spin state unless
the experimenter—let’s say Alice—is allowed to look at the
apparatus. Isn’t it true that when she does so, she will col-
lapse the wave function of the composite system? Yes and
no. For all of Alice’s purposes, yes; she will conclude that
the apparatus, and the spin, are in one of the two possible
conﬁgurations and will proceed accordingly.
But now let’s bring Bob into the picture. So far, he has
not interacted with the spin, the apparatus, or Alice. From
his point of view, all three form a single quantum system. No
wave function collapse took place when Alice looked at the
apparatus. Instead, Bob says that Alice became entangled
with the other two component systems.
That’s all well and good, but what happens when Bob
looks at Alice? For his purposes, he has collapsed the wave
function. But then there is good old Charlie . . .
Does the last entity to look at the system collapse the
wave function, or does it just get entangled?
Or is there

7.9. ENTANGLEMENT AND LOCALITY
223
a last looker?
I won’t try to answer these questions, but
what should be apparent is that quantum mechanics is a
consistent calculus of probabilities for a certain kind of ex-
periment involving a system and an apparatus. We use it,
and it works, but when we try to ask questions about the
underlying “reality,” we get confused.
7.9
Entanglement and Locality
Does quantum mechanics violate locality? Some people think
so.
Einstein railed against the “spooky action at a dis-
tance” (spukhafte Fernwirkung) that he claimed was implied
by quantum mechanics. And John Bell became almost a cult
ﬁgure by proving that quantum mechanics is nonlocal.
On the other hand, most theoretical physicists, particu-
larly those who study quantum ﬁeld theory, which is riddled
with entanglement, would claim the opposite: quantum me-
chanics done correctly ensures locality.
The problem, of course, is that the two groups mean dif-
ferent things by locality. Let’s begin with the quantum ﬁeld
theorist’s understanding of the term.
From this point of
view, locality has only one meaning: it is impossible to send
a signal faster than the speed of light. I will show you how
quantum mechanics enforces this rule.
First, let me expand the deﬁnition of Alice’s system and
Bob’s system. So far, I have used the term Alice’s system
to mean some system that Alice carries with her and can do
experiments on. For the rest of this section, I will use the
term to mean something else: Alice’s system consists not
only of some system that she carries, but also the apparatus

224
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
that she uses, and even herself. The same thing, of course,
goes for Bob’s system. The basis ket-vectors
|a

describe everything that Alice can interact with. Likewise,
the ket-vectors
|b⟩
describe everything that Bob can interact with.
And the
tensor product states
|ab⟩
describe the combination of Alice’s and Bob’s worlds.
We will assume that Alice and Bob may have been close
enough to interact sometime in the past, but at present Alice
is on Alpha Centauri and Bob is in Palo Alto. The Alice-Bob
wave function is
ψ(ab),
and it may be entangled. Alice’s complete description of her
system, her apparatus, and herself is contained in her density
matrix ρ:
ρaa′ =

b
ψ∗(a′b) ψ(ab).
(7.31)

7.9. ENTANGLEMENT AND LOCALITY
225
Consider this question: Can Bob, at his end, do anything to
instantly change Alice’s density matrix? Keep in mind that
Bob can only do things that the laws of quantum mechanics
allow.
In particular, Bob’s evolution, whatever causes it,
must be unitary. In other words, it must be described by a
unitary matrix
Ubb′.
The matrix U represents whatever happens to Bob’s system,
whether or not Bob does an experiment. It acts on the wave
function to produce a new wave function, which we’ll call
the “ﬁnal” wave function:
ψfinal(ab) =

b′
Ubb′ ψ(ab′).
We can also write the complex conjugate of this wave func-
tion:
ψ∗
final(a′b) =

b′′
ψ∗(a′b′′) U†
b′′b.
Notice that we added primes to some of the symbols to avoid
mixing them up in the next step. Now, let’s calculate Alice’s
new density matrix. We’ll use Eq. 7.31, but we’ll replace the
original wave functions with the ﬁnal ones:
ρaa′ =

b,b′,b′′
ψ∗(a′b′′) U†
b′′b Ubb′ ψ(ab′).

226
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
There are lots of indices ﬂying around now, but the math
isn’t as hard as it looks. In fact, look at how the U matrices
enter through the combination
U†
b′′b Ubb′.
This combination is just the matrix product U†U. But recall
that U is unitary. This tells you that the product U†U is the
unit matrix δb′′b′. As before, this amounts to an instruction
to include all the terms where b′′ = b′, and to ignore all the
others. With this simpliﬁcation, we get
ρaa′ =

b
ψ∗(a′b) ψ(ab).
This is exactly the same as Eq. 7.31. In other words, ρaa′
is exactly the same as it was before U acted. Nothing that
happens at Bob’s end has any immediate eﬀect on Alice’s
density matrix, even if Bob and Alice are maximally entan-
gled. This means that Alice’s view of her subsystem (her
statistical model) remains exactly as it was. This remark-
able result may seem surprising for a maximally entangled
system, but it also guarantees that no faster-than-light signal
has been sent.

7.10. QUANTUM SIM: INTRO TO BELL’S THM
227
7.10
The Quantum Sim: An
Introduction to Bell’s
Theorem
It’s interesting that unitarity played a prominent role in
guaranteeing that no signal can be sent instantaneously. If
U had not been unitary, Alice’s ﬁnal density matrix would
indeed have been aﬀected by Bob.
What was it, then, that disturbed Einstein so much that
he spoke of spooky action at a distance?
To answer this
question, it’s important to understand that he and Bell were
talking about a totally diﬀerent notion of locality. To illus-
trate this, I am going to invent a computer game. What
my new computer game does is try to fool you into thinking
there is a quantum spin in a magnetic ﬁeld inside the com-
puter. You get to do experiments to test this possibility. See
Fig. 7.1 for a schematic.
Here’s how it works: Inside the computer, the memory
stores two complex numbers, αu and αd, subject to the usual
normalization rule,
α∗
uαu + α∗
dαd = 1.
At the beginning of the game, the α coeﬃcients are initialized
at some value. The computer then solves the Schr¨odinger
equation to update the α’s exactly as if they were the com-
ponents of the spin’s state-vector.
The computer also stores the classical three-dimensional
orientation of the apparatus in the form of two angles or a

228
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
Figure 7.1: Quantum Sim. The computer screen displays the
user-controlled orientation of the apparatus. For simplicity,
only the two-dimensional orientation is shown here. The user
can press the M button whenever she or he wants to measure
the spin (not shown). Between measurements, the spin state
evolves according to the Schr¨odinger equation.
unit vector.
The keyboard allows you to set these angles
and change them at will. One more element is stored in the
memory, namely the value (either +1 or −1) representing
the number in the window of the apparatus. The computer
screen shows the apparatus. As the experimenter, you get
to choose how your apparatus will be oriented. There is also

7.10. QUANTUM SIM: INTRO TO BELL’S THM
229
a measure button M that activates the apparatus.
The ﬁnal element of the program is a random number
generator that produces the measurement results +1 or −1
with probabilities α∗
uαu and
α∗
dαd, respectively.
Keep in
mind that random number generators are not really gen-
erators of random numbers; they are random number sim-
ulators. They are based on entirely classical deterministic
mechanisms, using things like the digits of π to generate
numbers. Nevertheless, they are good enough to fool you.
The game begins, and the computer continually updates
the values of αu and αd. You wait as long as you want and
then hit the M button. Then, with the aid of the random
number generator, the game produces an outcome that is
displayed on the screen. Based on this outcome, the com-
puter updates the state by collapse. If the outcome is +1,
the value of αd is reset to zero, and the value of αu is reset to
unity. If the outcome is −1, the value of αd is reset to unity,
and the value of αd is reset to zero. Then, the Schr¨odinger
equation takes over until you hit M again.
Being a good experimenter, you do many trials and col-
lect statistics, which you compare with quantum mechanical
predictions. If everything works properly, you conclude that
quantum mechanics is the correct description of whatever is
taking place in the computer. Of course, the computer is still
entirely classical, but it simulates a quantum spin without
much diﬃculty.
Next, let’s try the same thing with two computers, A
and B, simulating two quantum spins.
If the spins start
in a product state and never interact, we can simply play

230
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
the game on each of the two computers without any cross
talk. But now, Alice, Bob, and Charlie return to help us
out. Charlie, of course, wants to create an entangled pair.
He begins by connecting the two computers with a cable
to form a single computer, and we assume the cable can
send instantaneous signals.
In its memory, the combined
computer now stores four complex numbers,
αuu, αud, αdu, αdd,
and it updates these numbers using the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion.
Each computer screen shows an apparatus.
Alice’s
screen shows A and Bob’s screen shows B.
Each virtual
apparatus can be independently oriented, and each can be
independently activated by its own M button. When either
M button is pressed, the joint memory (with the aid of the
random number generator) sends a signal to the correspond-
ing apparatus and produces an outcome.
Can this device simulate the quantum mechanics of the
two-spin system? Yes, it can—as long as the cable connect-
ing the computers is not disconnected, and as long as it can
send messages instantaneously. But unless the system is in
a product state and stays in a product state, disconnecting
the two computers will destroy the simulation.
Can we prove this? Again, the answer is yes—and that is
the essential content of Bell’s theorem. Any classical simu-
lation of quantum mechanics that tries to spatially separate
Alice’s and Bob’s apparatuses must have an instantaneous
cable connecting the separate computers with a central mem-
ory that stores and updates the state-vector.

7.11. ENTANGLEMENT SUMMARY
231
But doesn’t this mean that locality-violating information
can be sent through the cable? It would, if Alice, Bob, and
Charlie were allowed to do anything that nonrelativistic clas-
sical systems can do.9 But if the only operations that are
allowed are those that simulate quantum operations, then
the answer is no. As we’ve seen, quantum mechanics does
not allow Alice’s density matrix to be aﬀected by Bob’s ac-
tions.
This problem is not a problem for quantum mechanics.
It’s a problem for simulating quantum mechanics with a clas-
sical Boolean computer. That’s the content of Bell’s theo-
rem: The classical computers have to be connected with an
instantaneous cable to simulate entanglement.
7.11
Entanglement Summary
Of all the counterintuitive ideas quantum mechanics forces
upon us, entanglement may be the hardest one to accept.
There is no classical analog for a system whose full state de-
scription contains no information about its individual sub-
components. Nonlocality is surprisingly diﬃcult to even de-
ﬁne. The best way to come to terms with these issues is
to internalize the mathematics. What follows is a compact
summary of what we’ve learned about entanglement. In par-
ticular, we’ve tried to map out the diﬀerences between entan-
gled, unentangled, and partially entangled states by creating
“rap sheets” for three speciﬁc examples—the singlet state,
a product state, and a “near singlet” state. We hope this
9In other words, systems that permit signals to be sent instantly.

232
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
format will help clarify the mathematical similarities and
diﬀerences. Please take some time to review this material
and work the exercises before moving on.
State-Vector Rap Sheet 1
Name: Product State (No Entanglement)
Wanted for: Excessive Locality, Impersonating a Classical
System
Description: Each subsystem is fully characterized. There
are no correlations between Alice’s and Bob’s systems.
State-Vector: αuβu|uu⟩+ αuβd|ud⟩+ αdβu|du⟩+ αdβd|dd⟩
Normalization: α∗
uαu + α∗
dαd = 1,
β∗
uβu + β∗
dβd = 1
Density Matrix: Alice’s density matrix has exactly one
nonzero eigenvalue, which equals 1. The eigenvector with
this nonzero eigenvalue is the wave function of Alice’s sub-
system. The same goes for Bob.
Wave Function: Factorized: ψ(a)φ(b)
Expectation Values:
⟨σx⟩2 + ⟨σy⟩2 + ⟨σz⟩2 = 1
⟨τx⟩2 + ⟨τy⟩2 + ⟨τz⟩2 = 1
Correlation: ⟨σzτz⟩−⟨σz⟩⟨τz⟩= 0

7.11. ENTANGLEMENT SUMMARY
233
State-Vector Rap Sheet 2
Name: Singlet State (Maximum Entanglement)
Wanted for: Nonlocality, Complete Quantum Weirdness
Description: The composite system as a whole is fully char-
acterized. There is no information about Alice’s or Bob’s
subsystems.
State-Vector:
1
√
2

|ud⟩−|du⟩

Normalization: ψ∗
uuψuu + ψ∗
udψud + ψ∗
duψdu + ψ∗
ddψdd = 1
Density Matrix:
Full Composite System: ρ2 = ρ, and Tr(ρ2) = 1.
Alice’s Subsystem: Density matrix is proportional to the unit
matrix, having equal eigenvalues that add up to 1. Hence,
each measurement outcome is equally likely. ρ2 ̸= ρ, and
Tr(ρ2) < 1.
Wave Function: Not Factorized: ψ(a, b)
Expectation Values:
⟨σz⟩,⟨σx⟩,⟨σy⟩= 0
⟨τz⟩,⟨τx⟩,⟨τy⟩= 0
⟨τzσz⟩,⟨τxσx⟩,⟨τyσy⟩= −1
Correlation: ⟨σzτz⟩−⟨σz⟩⟨τz⟩= −1

234
LECTURE 7. MORE ON ENTANGLEMENT
State-Vector Rap Sheet 3
Name: “Near-Singlet” (Partial Entanglement)
Wanted for: Indecision, General Wishy-Washiness, Trou-
ble Telling up from down
Description: There is some information about the compos-
ite system, and some about each subsystem. Incomplete in
each case.
State-Vector:
√
0.6|ud⟩−
√
0.4|du⟩
Normalization:
ψ∗
uuψuu + ψ∗
udψud + ψ∗
duψdu + ψ∗
ddψdd = 1
Density Matrix:
Full Composite System: ρ2 ̸= ρ, and Tr(ρ2) < 1.
Alice’s Subsystem: ρ2 ̸= ρ, and Tr(ρ2) < 1.
Wave Function: Not Factorized: ψ(a, b)
Expectation Values:
⟨σz⟩= 0.2
⟨σx⟩, ⟨σy⟩= 0; ⟨τz⟩= −0.2
⟨τx⟩, ⟨τy⟩= 0
⟨τzσz⟩= −1
⟨τxσx⟩= −2
√
0.24
Correlation: ⟨σzτz⟩−⟨σz⟩⟨τz⟩= −0.96 for this example.
For partially entangled states in general, correlation is be-
tween −1 and +1, but not exactly 0.
Exercise 7.11: Calculate Alice’s density matrix for σz for
the “near-singlet” state.
Exercise 7.12:
Verify the numerical values in each rap
sheet.

Lecture 8
Particles and Waves
Art and Lenny have had enough entanglement for now. They’re
ready for something simpler.
Lenny: Hey Hilbert, do you have anything in one dimension?
Hilbert: Let me check. Single dimensions are very popular
lately. Sometimes we run out.
Art: I’d settle for something classical, if that’s all you have.
Hilbert: Not here, friend. We’d lose our license.
Art: Good point.
To the person in the street, quantum mechanics is all about
light being particles and electrons being waves. But up until
now, I’ve hardly mentioned particles, and the only mention
of waves has been the wave function, which so far has had
nothing to do with waves. So when do we get to the “real”
quantum mechanics?
235

236
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
The answer, of course, is that real quantum mechanics
is not so much about particles and waves as it is about
the nonclassical logical principles that govern their behav-
ior. Particle-wave duality is an easy extension of the things
you’ve already learned, as we’ll see in this lecture. But before
we get into the physics, I want to review some mathematics,
some of which is old—it appeared in earlier lectures—and
some of which is new.
8.1
Mathematical Interlude:
Working with Continuous
Functions
8.1.1
Wave Function Review
We’ll be using the language of wave functions in this lecture,
so let’s review some of that material before we dive in. In
Lecture 5, we discussed wave functions as abstract objects,
without explaining what they had to do with either waves
or functions. Before correcting this omission, I will review
what we discussed earlier.
Begin by picking an observable L, with eigenvalues λ and
eigenvectors |λ⟩. Let |Ψ⟩be a state-vector. Since the eigen-
vectors of a Hermitian operator form a complete orthonormal
basis, the vector |Ψ⟩can be expanded as
|Ψ⟩=

λ
ψ(λ) |λ⟩.
(8.1)
As you recall from Sections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3, the quantities

8.1. INTERLUDE: CONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS
237
ψ(λ)
are called the wave function of the system. But notice: the
speciﬁc form of ψ(λ) depends on the speciﬁc observable L
that we initially choose. If we pick a diﬀerent observable, the
wave function (along with the basis vectors and eigenvalues)
will be diﬀerent, even though we’re still talking about the
same state. Therefore, we should qualify the statement that
ψ(λ) is the wave function associated with |Ψ⟩. To be more
precise, we should say that ψ(λ) is the wave function in the
L-basis. If we use the orthonormality properties of the basis
vectors,
⟨λi|λj⟩= δij,
then the wave function in the L-basis may also be identiﬁed
with the inner products (or projections) of the state-vector
|Ψ⟩onto the eigenvectors |λ⟩:
ψ(λ) = ⟨λ|Ψ⟩.
You can think of the wave function in two ways. First of all,
it is the set of components of the state-vector in a particular
basis. These components can be stacked up to form a column
vector:
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
ψ(λ1)
ψ(λ2)
ψ(λ3)
ψ(λ4)
ψ(λ5)
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
.

238
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
Another way to think of the wave function is as a function of
λ. If you specify any allowable value of λ, the function ψ(λ)
produces a complex number. One can therefore say that
ψ(λ)
is a complex-valued function of the discrete variable λ. When
thought of in this way, linear operators become operations
that are applied to functions, and give back new functions.
One last reminder: the probability for an experiment to
have outcome λ is
P(λ) = ψ∗(λ)ψ(λ).
8.1.2
Functions as Vectors
Up until now, the systems we have studied have had ﬁnite
dimensional state-vectors. For example, the simple spin is
described by a two-dimensional space of states. For this rea-
son, the observables have had only a ﬁnite number of possible
observable values. But there are more complicated observ-
ables that can have an inﬁnite number of values. An example
is a particle. The coordinates of a particle are observables,
but, unlike spin, the coordinates have an inﬁnite number of
possible values. For instance, a particle moving along the x
axis can be found at any real value of x. In other words, x
is a continuously inﬁnite variable. When the observables of
a system are continuous, the wave function truly becomes
a function of a continuous variable. To apply quantum me-
chanics to this kind of system, we have to expand the idea

8.1. INTERLUDE: CONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS
239
of vectors to include functions.
Functions are functions, and vectors are vectors—they
seem like diﬀerent things, so in what sense are functions
vectors? If you think of vectors as arrows pointing in three-
dimensional space, then they are not the same as functions.
But if you take the broader view of vectors as a set of math-
ematical objects satisfying certain postulates, then functions
can indeed form a vector space. Such a vector space is of-
ten called a Hilbert space after the mathematician David
Hilbert.
Let’s consider the set of complex functions ψ(x) of a sin-
gle real variable x. By complex functions, I mean that for
each x, ψ(x) is a complex number. On the other hand, the
independent variable x is an ordinary real variable. It can
take on any real value from −∞to +∞.
Now, let’s nail down what we mean when we say “Func-
tions are vectors.” This is not a loose analogy or a metaphor.
With appropriate restrictions (that we’ll come back to), func-
tions like ψ(x) satisfy the mathematical axioms that deﬁne
a vector space. We mentioned this idea brieﬂy in Section
1.9.2, and now we’ll make full use of it. Looking back at the
axioms that deﬁne a complex vector space (in Section 1.9.1),
we can see that complex functions satisfy all of them:
1. The sum of any two functions is a function.
2. The addition of functions is commutative.
3. The addition of functions is associative.
4. There is a unique zero function such that when you add
it to any function, you get the same function back.

240
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
5. Given any function ψ(x), there is a unique function
−ψ(x) such that ψ(x) + (−ψ(x)) = 0.
6. Multiplying a function by any complex number gives a
function and is linear.
7. The distributive property holds, which means that
z[ψ(x) + φ(x)] = zψ(x) + zφ(x)
[z + w]ψ(x) = zψ(x) + wψ(x),
where z and w are complex numbers.
All of this implies that we can identify the functions ψ(x)
with the ket-vectors |Ψ⟩in an abstract vector space. Not sur-
prisingly, we can also deﬁne bra vectors. The bra vector ⟨Ψ|
corresponding to the ket |Ψ⟩is identiﬁed with the complex
conjugate function ψ∗(x).
To use this idea eﬀectively, we’ll need to generalize some
of the items in our mathematical tool kit.
In earlier lec-
tures, the labels that identiﬁed wave functions were mem-
bers of some ﬁnite discrete set—for example, the eigenvalues
of some observable.
But now the independent variable is
continuous. Among other things, this means that we cannot
sum over it using ordinary sums. I think you know what
to do, though. Here are function-oriented replacements for
three of our vector-based concepts, two of which you will
easily recognize:
• Integrals replace sums.

8.1. INTERLUDE: CONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS
241
• Probability densities replace probabilities.
• Dirac delta functions replace Kronecker deltas.
Let’s look at these items more closely.
Integrals Replace Sums:
If we really wanted to be rigor-
ous, we would begin by replacing the x axis by a discrete set
of points separated by a very small distance ϵ, and then take
the limit ϵ →0. It would take several pages to justify each
step. But we can avoid this trouble by a few intuitive deﬁni-
tions, such as replacing sums with integrals. Schematically,
this concept can be written as

i
→

dx.
For example, if we want to compute the area under a curve,
we divide the x axis up into tiny segments and then add up
the areas of a large number of rectangles, exactly as we do
in elementary calculus. When we let the segments shrink to
zero size, the sum becomes an integral.
Let’s consider a bra ⟨Ψ| and a ket |Φ⟩and deﬁne their
inner product. The obvious way to do this is to replace the
summation in Eq. 1.2 with an integral. We deﬁne the inner
product to be
⟨Ψ|Φ⟩=
 ∞
−∞
ψ∗(x)φ(x)dx.
(8.2)

242
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
Probability Densities Replace Probabilities:
Later,
we will identify
P(x) = ψ∗(x)ψ(x)
as a probability density for the variable x. Why a probability
density and not just a probability? If x is a continuous vari-
able, then the probability that it will have any exact value is
typically zero. A more useful question to ask is: What is the
probability that x lies between two values, x = a and x = b?
Probability densities are deﬁned so that this probability is
given by an integral:
P(a, b) =
 b
a
P(x) dx =
 b
a
ψ∗(x)ψ(x) dx.
Because the total probability should be 1, we can deﬁne a
normalized vector by
 ∞
−∞
ψ∗(x)ψ(x) dx = 1.
(8.3)
Dirac Delta Functions Replace Kronecker Deltas:
So
far, this should be very familiar. The Dirac delta function
may be less so. The delta function is the analog of the Kro-
necker delta, δij. The Kronecker delta is deﬁned to be 0 for
i ̸= j and 1 for i = j. But it can also be deﬁned another way.
Consider any vector Fi in a ﬁnite dimensional space. It is
easy to see that the Kronecker delta satisﬁes

8.1. INTERLUDE: CONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS
243

j
δijFj = Fi.
That’s because the only nonzero term in the sum is the one
where j = i. Within the summation, the Kronecker symbol
ﬁlters out all the F’s except Fi. The obvious generalization is
to deﬁne a new function that has similar ﬁltering properties
when used inside an integral. In other words, we want a new
entity
δ(x −x′)
with the property that, for any function F(x),
 ∞
−∞
δ(x −x′) F(x′)dx′ = F(x).
(8.4)
Eq. 8.4 deﬁnes this new entity, called the Dirac delta func-
tion, which turns out to be an essential tool in quantum
mechanics. But despite its name, it isn’t really a function
in the usual sense. It is zero whenever x ̸= x′, but when
x = x′ it is inﬁnite. In fact it is just inﬁnite enough that the
area under δ(x) equals 1. Roughly speaking, it is a function
that is nonzero over an inﬁnitesimal interval ϵ, but on that
interval it has the value 1/ϵ. Thus, its area is 1, and, more
importantly, it satisﬁes Eq. 8.4. The function
n
√πe−(nx)2

244
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
n =1
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
n =2
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
n =3
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
n =4
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
n =5
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
n =6
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
n =7
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
n =8
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
n =9
8
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
4
5
n =10
Figure 8.1: Dirac Delta Function Approximations.
These
approximations are based on
n
√πe−(nx)2 and plotted for in-
creasing values of n.

8.1. INTERLUDE: CONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS
245
approximates the delta function reasonably well as n be-
comes very large. Fig. 8.1 plots this approximation for in-
creasing values of n. Even though we stop at n = 10, a very
small value, notice that the graph has already become very
narrow and sharply peaked.
8.1.3
Integration by Parts
Before discussing linear operators, we’ll take a short detour
to remind you of a technique called integration by parts. It’s
fairly simple, and indispensable for our purposes. We’ll be
using it again and again. Suppose we take two functions,
F and G, and consider the diﬀerential of their product FG.
We can write
d(FG) = FdG + GdF
or
d(FG) −GdF = FdG.
Taking the deﬁnite integral gives us
 b
a
d(FG) −
 b
a
GdF =
 b
a
FdG
or
FG

b
a −
 b
a
GdF =
 b
a
FdG.

246
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
This is the standard formula that you may remember from
calculus. But in quantum mechanics the limits of integration
tend to span the entire axis, and our wave functions must
go to zero at inﬁnity to be properly normalized. Therefore,
the ﬁrst term of this expression will always evaluate to zero.
With that in mind, we can use a simpliﬁed version of inte-
gration by parts:
 ∞
−∞
F dG
dx dx = −
 ∞
−∞
dF
dx Gdx.
This form is correct as long as F and G go to zero appropri-
ately at inﬁnity, so that the boundary term becomes zero.
You will do yourself a big favor if you just memorize this pat-
tern: Switch the derivative from one factor of the integrand
to the other at the cost of a minus sign.
8.1.4
Linear Operators
Bras and kets are half the story in quantum mechanics; the
other half is the concept of linear operators and, in particu-
lar, Hermitian operators. This raises two questions:
• What is meant by a linear operator on a space of func-
tions?
• What is the condition for a linear operator to be Her-
mitian?
The concept of a linear operator is simple enough: it’s a
machine that acts on a function and gives another function.

8.1. INTERLUDE: CONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS
247
When it acts on the sum of two functions, it gives the sum
of the individual results. When it acts on a complex numer-
ical multiple of a function, it gives the same multiple of the
original result. In other words, it is (surprise!) linear.
Let’s look at some examples. One simple operation we
can perform on a function ψ(x) is to multiply it by x. That
gives a new function xψ(x), and you can easily check that the
action is linear. We’ll represent the “multiply by x” operator
with the symbol X. By deﬁnition, then,
X ψ(x) = xψ(x).
(8.5)
Here’s another example. Deﬁne D to be the diﬀerentiation
operator:
D ψ(x) = dψ(x)
dx
.
(8.6)
Exercise 8.1: Prove that X and D are linear operators.
This, of course, is a minute subset of the possible linear op-
erators that can be constructed, but we will soon see that X
and D play a very central role in the quantum mechanics of
particles.
Now, let’s consider the property of Hermiticity. A con-
venient way to deﬁne a Hermitian operator is through its
matrix elements, by sandwiching it between a bra and a ket.
You can sandwich an operator L in two diﬀerent ways:

248
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
⟨Ψ|L|Φ⟩
or
⟨Φ|L|Ψ⟩.
In general, there is no simple relation between these two
sandwiches. But in the case of a Hermitian operator (for
which, by deﬁnition, L† = L) there is a simple relation: the
two sandwiches are complex conjugates of each other:
⟨Ψ|L|Φ⟩= ⟨Φ|L|Ψ⟩∗.
Let’s see whether the operators X and D are Hermitian.
Recalling that
X ψ(x) = xψ(x),
and using the inner product formula Eq. 8.2, we can write
⟨Ψ|X|Φ⟩=

ψ∗(x)xφ(x)dx
and
⟨Φ|X|Ψ⟩=

φ∗(x)xψ(x)dx.
Because x is real, it’s easy to see that these two integrals are
complex conjugates of each other, and therefore that X is
Hermitian.

8.1. INTERLUDE: CONTINUOUS FUNCTIONS
249
What about the operator D? In this case, the two sand-
wiches are
⟨Ψ|D|Φ⟩=

ψ∗(x)dφ(x)
dx
dx
(8.7)
and
⟨Φ|D|Ψ⟩=

φ∗(x)dψ(x)
dx
dx.
(8.8)
To determine if D is Hermitian, we need to compare these
two integrals and see if they are complex conjugates of each
other. In this form, it’s a bit diﬃcult to tell. The trick is to
do the second integral by parts. As we explained, integration
by parts allows you to switch the derivative from one factor
in the integrand to the other, as long as you change the sign
at the same time. Therefore, the integral in Eq. 8.8 can be
rewritten as
⟨Φ|D|Ψ⟩= −

ψ(x)dφ∗(x)
dx
dx.
(8.9)
Now, we just need to compare the two expressions in Eqs. 8.7
and 8.9, which turns out to be easy. Because of the minus
sign, it’s clear that they are deﬁnitely not complex conju-
gates of each other. Instead, their relationship is captured
by
⟨Ψ|D|Φ⟩= −⟨Φ|D|Ψ⟩∗,
which is the diametric opposite of what we wanted. Unlike
the X operator, D is not Hermitian. Instead, it satisﬁes

250
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
D† = −D.
An operator with this property is called anti-Hermitian.
Although anti-Hermitian and Hermitian operators are
opposites, it’s very easy to go from one to the other. All
you have to do is multiply by the imaginary number i or
−i. Therefore we can use D to construct an operator that is
Hermitian, namely
−i¯hD.
If we look at the action of this new Hermitian operator on
wave functions, we ﬁnd that
−i¯hDψ(x) = −i¯h dψ(x)
dx
.
(8.10)
Keep this formula in mind. It will soon play a leading role
in deﬁning a very important property of particles—their mo-
mentum.
8.2
The State of a Particle
In classical mechanics, the “state of a system” means every-
thing you need to know to predict the system’s future, given
the forces acting on it. That, of course, means the positions
of all the particles comprising the system, as well as the mo-
menta of those particles. From a classical perspective, the
instantaneous positions and momenta are entirely indepen-
dent variables. For example, for a particle of mass m moving

8.2. THE STATE OF A PARTICLE
251
along a one-dimensional axis x, the momentary state of the
system is described by the pair (x, p). The coordinate x is
the location of the particle, and p = m ˙x is its momentum.
Taken together, these two variables deﬁne the phase space
of the system. If we also know the force on the particle as
a function of its position, Hamilton’s equations permit us to
calculate its position and momentum at all later times. They
deﬁne a ﬂow through the phase space.
Given this, one might guess that the quantum state of
a particle would be spanned by a basis of states labeled by
position and momentum:
|x, p⟩.
The wave function would then be a function of both vari-
ables:
ψ(x, p) = ⟨x, p|Ψ⟩.
However, this is incorrect. We’ve already seen that things
that would be simultaneously knowable in classical physics
may not be in quantum mechanics. Diﬀerent components of
a spin, say σz and σx, are an example. One cannot know
both components simultaneously; therefore, one does not
have states in which both components are speciﬁed.
The
same is true for x and p: specifying both values is too much.
Whether we’re talking about spins (σz, σx) or positions and
momenta (x, p), the incompatibility is ultimately an experi-
mental fact.

252
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
What then can we know about the particle on the x axis,
if not x and p? The answer is x or p; for according to the
mathematics of position and momentum operators, the two
do not commute. But I emphasize that this is not something
you could have predicted in advance; it is the distillation of
many decades of experimental observations.
If the position of a particle is an observable, there must
be a Hermitian operator associated with it.
The obvious
candidate is the operator X. The ﬁrst step in understanding
this fundamental connection between the intuitive concept
of position and the mathematical operator X is to work out
the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of X. The eigenvalues are
the possible values of position that can be observed, and the
eigenvectors represent the states of deﬁnite position.
8.2.1
The Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors
of Position
The obvious next question is: What are the possible out-
comes of measuring X, and what are the states in which it
has a deﬁnite (predictable) value? In other words, what are
its eigenvalues and eigenvectors? We’ll start with X. The
eigen-equation for X is
X|Ψ⟩= x0|Ψ⟩,
where the eigenvalue is denoted by x0. In terms of wave func-
tions, this becomes
xψ(x) = x0ψ(x).
(8.11)

8.2. THE STATE OF A PARTICLE
253
This last equation seems strange. How can x times a function
be proportional to the same function? On the face of it, this
seems impossible. But let’s pursue it. We can rewrite Eq.
8.11 in the form
(x −x0)ψ(x) = 0.
Of course, if a product is zero, then at least one of the factors
must be zero. But the other factors may be diﬀerent from
zero. Thus, if x ̸= x0, then ψ(x) = 0. That’s a very strong
condition. It says that for a given eigenvalue x0, the function
ψ(x) can be nonzero at only one point, namely at
x = x0.
For an ordinary continuous function this condition would be
deadly: no sensible function can be zero everywhere except
at one point, and be nonzero only at that point. But that is
exactly the property of the Dirac delta function
δ(x −x0).
Evidently, then, every real number x0 is an eigenvalue of X,
and the corresponding eigenvectors are functions (we often
call them eigenfunctions) that are inﬁnitely concentrated at
x = x0. The meaning of this is clear: the wave functions
ψ(x) = δ(x −x0)

254
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
represent states in which the particle is located right at the
point x0 on the x axis.
It of course makes a lot of sense that the wave function
representing a particle known to be at x0 is zero everywhere
except at x0. How could it be otherwise? But it is gratifying
to see the mathematics conﬁrm this intuition.
Consider the inner product of a state |Ψ⟩and a position
eigenstate |x0⟩:
⟨x0|Ψ⟩.
Using Eq. 8.2, we get
⟨x0|Ψ⟩=
 ∞
−∞
δ(x −x0)ψ(x).
By the deﬁnition of delta functions given in Eq. 8.4, this
integral evaluates to
⟨x0|Ψ⟩= ψ(x0).
(8.12)
Because this is true for any x0, we can drop the subscript
and write the general equation
⟨x|Ψ⟩= ψ(x).
(8.13)
In other words, the wave function, ψ(x), of a particle moving
in the x direction is the projection of a state-vector |Ψ⟩onto
the eigenvectors of position. We will also refer to ψ(x) as
the wave function in the position representation.

8.2. THE STATE OF A PARTICLE
255
8.2.2
Momentum and Its Eigenvectors
Position is intuitive; momentum is less so, particularly in
quantum mechanics. It will only be later that we see the
connection between the operator that we identify with mo-
mentum and the familiar classical concept of mass times ve-
locity. But I assure you that we will make the connection.
For now, let’s take the abstract mathematical route. The
momentum operator in quantum mechanics is called P, and
it is deﬁned in terms of the operator −iD:
−iD = −i d
dx .
As we saw earlier in Eq. 8.10, we need the factor −i to make
this operator Hermitian.
We could just deﬁne P to be −iD, but if we did, we
would run into a problem later when we connect these ideas
to those of classical physics. The reason should be clear—
there’s a dimensional mismatch.
In classical physics, the
units of momentum are mass times velocity—in other words,
mass times length divided by time (ML/T). On the other
hand, the operator D has units of inverse length, or 1/L. The
resolution of the mismatch is provided by Planck’s constant
¯h, which has units of ML2/T. The correct relation between
P and D is therefore
P = −i¯hD
(8.14)
or, in terms of its action on wave functions,
Pψ(x) = −i¯h dψ(x)
dx
.
(8.15)

256
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
Quantum physicists often use units in which ¯h is exactly one,
and in that way simplify the equations. As tempting as it is,
we won’t do that here.
Let’s work out the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of P. The
eigen-equation in abstract vector notation is
P|Ψ⟩= p|Ψ⟩,
(8.16)
where the symbol p is an eigenvalue of P. Eq. 8.16 can also be
expressed in terms of wave functions. Using the identiﬁcation
P = −i¯h d
dx ,
we can write the eigen-equation as
−i¯hdψ(x)
dx
= pψ(x)
or
dψ(x)
dx
= ip
¯h ψ(x).
This is a type of equation that we’ve run into before. The
solution has the form of an exponential:
ψp(x) = Ae
ipx
¯h .
The subscript p is just a reminder that ψp(x) is the eigen-
vector of P with the speciﬁc eigenvalue p. It is a function of
x, but it is labeled by an eigenvalue of P.

8.2. THE STATE OF A PARTICLE
257
The constant A multiplying the exponential is not deter-
mined by the eigenvector equation. That’s nothing new; the
eigenvalue equation never tells us the overall normalization
of the wave function. As a rule, we ﬁx the constant by requir-
ing the wave function to be normalized to unit probability.
An example that goes all the way back to Section 2.3 is the
eigenvector of the x component of spin:
|r⟩= 1
√
2|u⟩+ 1
√
2|d⟩.
The factor 1/
√
2 is there to make sure the total probability
is 1.
Normalizing the eigenvectors of P is a more subtle oper-
ation, but the result is simple. The factor A is only slightly
more complicated than in the spin case. To save time, I will
tell you the answer and leave it for you to prove later. The
correct factor is A = 1/
√
2π. Thus,
ψp(x) =
1
√
2πe
ipx
¯h .
(8.17)
A point of some interest follows from Eqs. 8.13 and 8.17. The
inner product of a position eigenvector |x⟩and a momentum
eigenvector |p⟩has a very simple and symmetric form:
⟨x|p⟩
=
1
√
2πe
ipx
¯h
⟨p|x⟩
=
1
√
2πe
−ipx
¯h .
(8.18)

258
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
The second equation is simply the complex conjugate of the
ﬁrst. These results are easy to verify if you keep in mind that
|x⟩is represented by a delta function. I’d like to mention two
important points before moving further:
1. Eq. 8.17 represents a momentum eigenfunction in the
position basis. In other words, although it represents
a momentum eigenstate, it is a function of x, and not
an explicit function of p.
2. We’ve been using the symbol ψ for both position and
momentum eigenstates. A mathematician might not
approve of using the same symbol for two diﬀerent
functions, but physicists do it all the time. ψ(x) is just
the generic symbol for whatever function we happen to
be discussing.
At this juncture, we begin to get a glimmer of why the wave
function is called the wave function. What you should notice
is that the eigenfunctions (wave functions representing eigen-
vectors) of the momentum operator have the form of waves—
sine waves and cosine waves, to be precise. In fact, we can
now see one of the most fundamental aspects of the wave-
particle duality of quantum mechanics. The wavelength of
the function
e
ipx
¯h
is given by

8.2. THE STATE OF A PARTICLE
259
λ = 2π¯h
p
because the value of the function is unchanged if we add 2π¯h
p
to the variable x:
e
ip(x+ 2π¯h
p
)
¯h
= e
ipx
¯h e2πi = e
ipx
¯h .
Let’s pause for a moment to discuss the importance of this
connection between momentum and wavelength.
It’s not
just important: in many ways, it is the relationship that
deﬁned twentieth-century physics.
Over the last hundred
years, physicists have primarily been concerned with uncov-
ering the laws of the microscopic world.
This has meant
ﬁguring out how objects are built out of smaller objects.
The examples are obvious: molecules are made from atoms;
atoms from electrons and nuclei; nuclei from protons and
neutrons. These subnuclear particles are constructed out of
quarks and gluons. And the game goes on as scientists search
for ever smaller and more hidden entities.
All of these objects are too small to see with the best
optical microscopes, let alone the naked eye. The reason is
not just that our eyes are insuﬃciently sensitive. The more
important fact is that eyes and optical microscopes are sensi-
tive to the visible spectrum, which comprises wavelengths at
least a few thousand times longer than the size of an atom.
As a rule, you can’t resolve objects much smaller than the
wavelength you’re using to look at them. For this reason, the
story of twentieth-century physics was in large part a quest

260
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
for smaller and smaller wavelengths of light—or any other
kind of wave. In Lecture 10, we will discover that light of a
given wavelength is composed of photons whose momentum
is related to the wavelength by exactly the relation
λ = 2π¯h
p .
The implication is that to probe objects of ever smaller size
one needs photons (or other objects) of ever larger momen-
tum. Large momentum inevitably means large energy. It’s
for that reason that the discovery of the microscopic proper-
ties of matter required increasingly powerful particle accel-
erators.
8.3
Fourier Transforms and the
Momentum Basis
The wave function ψ(x) has the important role of determin-
ing the probability for ﬁnding the particle at position x:
P(x) = ψ∗(x)ψ(x).
As we will see, no experiment can determine both the posi-
tion and momentum of a particle simultaneously. But if we
forego determining anything about the position, momentum
can be measured precisely. The situation is quite analogous
to that of the x and z components of a spin. Either value
can be measured, but not both.

8.3. FOURIER TRANSF/MOMENTUM BASIS
261
What is the probability that a particle has momentum
p if we choose to measure it? The answer is a straightfor-
ward generalization of the principles laid down in Lecture
3. The probability that a momentum measurement will give
momentum p is
P(p) = | ⟨P|Ψ⟩|2.
(8.19)
The entity ⟨P|Ψ⟩is called the wave function of |Ψ⟩in the
momentum representation. Naturally, it is a function of p
and is denoted by a new symbol:
˜ψ(p) = ⟨P|Ψ⟩.
(8.20)
It is now clear that there are two ways to represent a state-
vector. One way is in the position basis and the other is
in the momentum basis. Both wave functions—the position
wave function ψ(x) and the momentum wave function ˜ψ(p)—
represent exactly the same state-vector |Ψ⟩. It follows that
there must be some transformation between them such that
if you know ψ(x), the transformation produces ˜ψ(p), and vice
versa. In fact, the two representations are Fourier transforms
of each other.
8.3.1
Resolving the Identity
We are about to see the great power of the Dirac bra-ket
notation in simplifying complicated things. First, let’s recall
an important idea from earlier lectures. Suppose we deﬁne
an orthonormal basis of states through the eigenvectors of

262
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
some Hermitian observable.
Call the basis vectors |i⟩. In
Lecture 7, I explained a very useful trick, and now we are
going to see just how useful it is. It’s called resolving the
identity. The trick given in (Eq. 7.11) is to write the identity
operator I (the operator that acts on any vector to give the
same vector) in the form
I =

i
|i⟩⟨i|.
Because momentum and position are both Hermitian, the
sets of vectors |x⟩and set |p⟩each deﬁne basis vectors. By
replacing summation with integration we discover two ways
to resolve the identity:
I =

dx|x⟩⟨x|
(8.21)
and
I =

dp|p⟩⟨p|.
(8.22)
Let’s suppose that we know the wave function of the abstract
vector |Ψ⟩in the position representation. By deﬁnition, it is
equal to
ψ(x) = ⟨x|Ψ⟩.
(8.23)
Now suppose we want to know the wave function ˜ψ(p) in
the momentum representation. Here are the steps laid out
in detail:

8.3. FOURIER TRANSF/MOMENTUM BASIS
263
• First, use the deﬁnition of the momentum-representation
wave function:
˜ψ(p) = ⟨p|Ψ⟩.
• Now, insert the unit operator between the bra- and
ket-vectors, in the form given in Eq. 8.21:
˜ψ(p) =

dx⟨p|x⟩⟨x|Ψ⟩.
• The expression ⟨x|Ψ⟩is just the wave function ψ(x),
and ⟨p|x⟩is given to us by the second equation of Eqs.
8.18:
⟨p|x⟩=
1
√
2πe
−ipx
¯h .
• Putting it all together, we ﬁnd that
˜ψ(p) =
1
√
2π

dxe
−ipx
¯h ψ(x).
(8.24)
This equation shows us exactly how to transform a given
wave function in the position representation into the cor-
responding wave function in the momentum representation.
What is it good for? Suppose the position wave function
for some particle is known; however, the goal of your exper-
iment is to measure the momentum, and you want to know

264
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
the probability of observing momentum p. The procedure is
to ﬁrst calculate ˜ψ(p) by using Eq. 8.24 and then compute
the probability
P(p) = ˜ψ∗(p) ˜ψ(p).
It’s just as easy to go the other way.
Suppose we know
˜ψ(p) and wish to recover ψ(x). This time, we use Eq. 8.22
to resolve the identity. Here are the steps (notice that they
look suspiciously similar to the earlier ones):
• First, use the deﬁnition of the position-representation
wave function:
ψ(x) = ⟨x|Ψ⟩
• Now, insert the unit operator between the bra- and
ket-vectors, in the form given in Eq. 8.22:
ψ(x) =

dp⟨x|p⟩⟨p|Ψ⟩.
• The expression ⟨p|Ψ⟩is just the wave function ˜ψ(p),
and ⟨x|p⟩is given to us by Eqs. 8.18. But this time,
it’s the ﬁrst of the two equations.
⟨x|p⟩=
1
√
2πe
ipx
¯h .

8.4. COMMUTATORS AND POISSON BRACKETS 265
• Putting it all together, we ﬁnd that
ψ(x) =
1
√
2π

dpe
ipx
¯h ˜ψ(p).
Let’s take another look at the two equations for going back
and forth from position to momentum. Notice how symmet-
rical they are.
The only asymmetry is that one equation
contains e
ipx
¯h and the other contains e
−ipx
¯h :
˜ψ(p)
=
1
√
2π

dxe
−ipx
¯h ψ(x)
ψ(x)
=
1
√
2π

dpe
ipx
¯h ˜ψ(p).
(8.25)
The relation between the position and momentum represen-
tations summarized by Eqs. 8.25 is that they are reciprocal
Fourier transforms of one another.
In fact, these are the
central equations in the ﬁeld of Fourier analysis. I want you
to notice how easy it was to derive those equations using
Dirac’s elegant notation.
8.4
Commutators and Poisson
Brackets
Earlier, in Lecture 4, we formulated two important principles
about commutators. The ﬁrst had to do with the connec-
tion between classical mechanics and quantum mechanics;

266
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
the second had to do with uncertainty. I now will ﬁnish up
this very long lecture by showing you what these principles
have to do with X and P.
We’ll start with the connection between commutators
and classical physics.
As you may recall, we found that
commutators have a great similarity to Poisson brackets, a
relationship we made explicit in Eq. 4.21. If we plug in the
operator symbols L and M that we’ve been using in this
lecture, we get
[L, M]
⇐⇒
i¯h{L, M},
(8.26)
and we’re reminded that the equations for quantum motion
strongly resemble their classical equivalents. This suggests
that we may learn something by computing the commutator
of the observables X and P. Fortunately, this is easy to do.
First, let’s see what the product XP does when it acts
as an operator on an arbitrary wave function ψ(x). Recalling
Eqs. 8.5 and 8.15, we can write
Xψ(x) =
xψ(x)
Pψ(x) =
−i¯hdψ(x)
dx
.
Together, these equations tell us how the product XP acts
on ψ(x):
XPψ(x) = −i¯hx dψ(x)
dx
(8.27)
Now, let’s try it with X and P in the opposite order:

8.4. COMMUTATORS AND POISSON BRACKETS 267
PXψ(x) = −i¯h d

xψ(x)

dx
.
To calculate this last expression, we just use the standard
rule for diﬀerentiating the product xψ(x). Using this rule,
it’s easy to see that
PXψ(x) = −i¯hx dψ(x)
dx
−i¯hψ(x).
(8.28)
Now, we’ll subtract Eq. 8.28 from Eq. 8.27 to show how the
commutator acts on the wave function:
[X, P]ψ(x) = XPψ(x) −PXψ(x)
or
[X, P]ψ(x) = i¯hψ(x).
In other words, when the commutator [X, P] acts on any
wave function ψ(x), all it does is multiply ψ(x) by the num-
ber i¯h. We can express this by writing
[X, P] = i¯h.
(8.29)
This in itself is extremely important. The fact that X and P
don’t commute is the key to understanding why they are not
simultaneously measurable. But things get even more inter-
esting when we compare this equation with Equivalence 8.26,
which relates commutators to classical Poisson brackets. In

268
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
fact, Eq. 8.29 suggests that the corresponding classical Pois-
son bracket is
{x, p} = 1,
which is exactly the classical relation between coordinates
and their conjugate momenta (see Volume I, Lecture 10, Eq.
8). Ultimately, it is this connection that explains why the
quantum concept of momentum is connected to the classical
concept.
Using the general uncertainty principle from Lecture 5,
we can now specialize to the case
[X, P] = i¯h.
and
ΔXΔP ≥¯h
2.
We’ll do that in the next section.
Now let’s recall the second principle involving commuta-
tors. In Lecture 4, we found that two observables L and M
cannot be determined simultaneously unless they commute.
If they don’t commute, you cannot measure L without in-
terfering with a measurement of M. It is not possible to ﬁnd
simultaneous eigenvectors of two noncommuting observables.
This led to the general uncertainty principle.

8.5.
HEISENBERG UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
269
8.5
The Heisenberg Uncertainty
Principle
And now, ladies and gentlemen, here’s what you’ve all been
waiting for. At long last: the Heisenberg Uncertainty Prin-
ciple.
The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle is one of the most
famous results of quantum mechanics: it not only asserts
that the position and momentum of a particle cannot be
simultaneously known, but it also provides an exact quan-
titative limit for their mutual uncertainties. At this point,
I suggest that you revisit Lecture 5, where I explained the
general uncertainty principle. We did all the work there, and
now we get to reap the beneﬁts.
As we’ve seen, the general uncertainty principle puts a
quantitative limit on the simultaneous uncertainties of two
observables A and B. This idea was captured in Inequality
5.13:
ΔA ΔB ≥1
2|⟨Ψ|[A, B]|Ψ⟩|.
Now let’s apply this principle directly to the position and
momentum operators X and P. In this case, the commutator
is just a number and its expectation is that same number.
Replacing A and B with X and P gives
ΔX ΔP ≥1
2|⟨Ψ|[X, P]|Ψ⟩|,
and replacing [X, P] with i¯h results in

270
LECTURE 8. PARTICLES AND WAVES
ΔX ΔP ≥1
2|i¯h⟨Ψ|Ψ⟩|.
But ⟨Ψ|Ψ⟩equals 1, and the end result is
ΔX ΔP ≥1
2¯h.
No experiment can ever beat this limitation. You can try
your best to determine a particle’s momentum and position
simultaneously in a reproducible manner, but no matter how
careful you are, the uncertainty in the position times the
uncertainty in the momentum will never be less than 1
2¯h.
As we saw in Section 8.2.1, the wave function of an eigen-
state of X is highly concentrated about some point x0; in this
eigenstate, the probability is also perfectly localized. On the
other hand, the probability P(x) for a momentum eigenstate
is uniformly spread over the entire x axis. To see this, let’s
take the wave function in Eq. 8.17 and multiply it by its
complex conjugate:
ψ∗
p(x)ψp(x) =

1
√
2πe
−ipx
¯h 
1
√
2πe
ipx
¯h 
= 1
2π.
The result is completely uniform, with no peaks anywhere
on the x axis. Evidently, a state with deﬁnite momentum is
completely uncertain in its position.
Fig. 8.2 illustrates the deﬁnition of uncertainty for the
position variable x. In the top half of the ﬁgure, you can
see that the uncertainty Δx is a measure of how spread out
the function is in relation to its expectation value ⟨x⟩. The

8.5.
HEISENBERG UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
271
label d shows the deviation of one point in relation to ⟨x⟩;
this may be a positive or negative quantity. The uncertainty
Δx is the result of an averaging process over all possible d’s
and characterizes the function as a whole. To prevent the
positive d’s from canceling the negative ones, each d value is
squared during this averaging process.
The bottom half of Fig. 8.2 shows how the calculation
can be simpliﬁed by shifting the origin to coincide with ⟨x⟩.
The numerical value of Δx is unchanged by this shift.
Figure 8.2: Uncertainty Basics.
Top: ⟨x⟩to right of ori-
gin. Deviations d may be positive or negative. Overall un-
certainty Δx (> 0) derived from the average value of d2.
Bottom: Origin shifted right, ⟨x⟩= 0, Δx has same value.


Lecture 9
Particle Dynamics
Art and Lenny expected some action at Hilbert’s Place. But
all the state-vectors were absolutely still—frozen, you might
say.
Lenny: This is boring, Art. Doesn’t anything ever happen
around here? Hey Hilbert, why is this joint so still?
Hilbert: Oh, don’t worry. Things will pick up as soon as the
Hamiltonian gets here.
Art: The Hamiltonian? He sounds like a real operator.
9.1
A Simple Example
The ﬁrst two volumes of the Theoretical Minimum series
have largely focused on two questions. The ﬁrst is: What do
we mean by a system and how do we describe the momentary
states of a system? As we’ve seen, the classical and quantum
answers to this question are very diﬀerent. Classical phase
273

274
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
space—the space of coordinates and momenta—is replaced
in quantum theory by the linear vector space of states.
The second big question is: How do states change with
time?
In both classical mechanics and quantum mechan-
ics, the answer is according to the minus ﬁrst law. In other
words, states change so that information and distinctions
are never erased. In classical mechanics, this principle led
to Hamilton’s equations and Liouville’s theorem. Earlier, in
Lecture 4, I explained how in quantum mechanics this law
led to the principle of unitarity, which in turn led to the
general Schr¨odinger equation.
Lecture 8 was all about the ﬁrst question: How do we
describe the state of a particle? Now, in the current lecture,
we come to the second question, which we might rephrase:
How do particles move in quantum mechanics?
In Lecture 4, I laid out the basic rules for how quan-
tum states change with time. The essential ingredient is the
Hamiltonian H, which in both classical and quantum me-
chanics represents the total energy of a system. In quantum
mechanics, the Hamiltonian controls the time evolution of a
system through the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation:
i¯h∂|Ψ⟩
∂t
= H|Ψ⟩.
(9.1)
This lecture is all about the Original Schr¨odinger Equation—
the equation that Schr¨odinger wrote down to describe a quan-
tum mechanical particle. The Original Schr¨odinger Equation
is a special case of Eq. 9.1.
The motion of ordinary (nonrelativistic) particles in clas-
sical mechanics is governed by a Hamiltonian, equal to the

9.1. A SIMPLE EXAMPLE
275
kinetic energy plus the potential energy. We will soon come
to the quantum version of this Hamiltonian, but ﬁrst let’s
look at a Hamiltonian that’s even simpler.
We’ll start with the simplest Hamiltonian I can think of.
In this case, the Hamiltonian operator H is a ﬁxed constant
times the momentum operator P:
H = cP.
(9.2)
This example is rarely written down, though it turns out to
be quite instructive. The constant c is a ﬁxed number. Is cP
a reasonable Hamiltonian for a particle? Yes it is, and in a
moment we’ll ﬁnd out what kind of particle it describes. For
now, just notice that Eq. 9.2 is diﬀerent from what we might
expect for a nonrelativistic particle. In other words, it’s not
P2/2m. This simpler example is worth exploring ﬁrst, just
to see how the mathematical apparatus works.
How do we represent this example in terms of wave func-
tions ψ(x) in the position basis?
We’ll start by plugging
our operators into the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation
(Eq. 9.1):
i¯h∂ψ(x, t)
∂t
= −ci¯h∂ψ(x, t)
∂x
.
Notice that we’re now writing ψ as a function of both x and
t. Canceling the i¯h terms gives us
∂ψ(x, t)
∂t
= −c∂ψ(x, t)
∂x
,
(9.3)

276
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
which is a pretty simple equation. In fact, any function of
(x −ct) is a solution. By “function of (x −ct),” I mean any
function that depends not on x and t separately, but only on
the combination (x−ct). To see how this works, just consider
an arbitrary function ψ(x −ct) and look at its derivatives.
If you take the partial with respect to x, you just get
∂ψ(x −ct)
x
because the derivative of (x −ct) with respect to x is 1. But
if you take the partial with respect to t, you get
−c∂ψ(x −ct)
∂t
.
It’s clear that this combination of derivatives satisﬁes Eq.
9.3; therefore any function of this form solves the Schr¨odinger
equation.
Now, let’s see how a function ψ(x −ct) behaves. What does
it look like? How does it evolve with time? Suppose we start
by looking at a snapshot at t = 0. We can call the snapshot
ψ(x) because it tells us what ψ looks like at every point in
space at the speciﬁc time t = 0. Of course, we don’t want
just any function of (x −ct). We want the total probability
 ∞
−∞
ψ∗(x)ψ(x)dx
to equal 1. In other words, we want ψ(x) to fall oﬀnicely
to zero at inﬁnity so that the integral doesn’t blow up. Fig.

9.1. A SIMPLE EXAMPLE
277
Figure 9.1: Fixed Shape Wave Packet Moving at Fixed Speed
c
9.1 shows ψ(x) schematically. With these characteristics, it
makes sense to call ψ(x) a wave packet.
Now that we’ve described the snapshot ψ(x) at t = 0,
what happens if we let time move forward? As t increases,
the wave packet keeps the exact same shape. Every feature
of the complex-valued function ψ(x, t) moves with uniform
velocity c to the right.1
I had a reason for giving the name c to our constant—the
symbol c often stands for the speed of light. So is this par-
ticle a photon? No, not really. But our description of this
hypothetical particle is pretty close to the correct descrip-
tion of a neutrino that moves at the speed of light. (Real
1This includes both the real and the imaginary parts of ψ(x).

278
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
neutrinos probably move at a speed that is immeasurably
smaller than the speed of light.) This Hamiltonian would be
a very good description of a one-dimensional neutrino except
for one problem: the particle described by our wave function
can only move to the right. To round out this description,
we would have to add another possibility—that the particle
could also move to the left!2
Our right-going zaxon3 has another oddball feature—its
energy can be either positive or negative. This is because
the P operator, as a vector, can take on positive or negative
values.
In general, the energy of a particle with negative
momentum is negative, and the energy of a particle with
positive momentum is positive. I won’t say more about this
except that the problem of negative energy for this kind of
particle was solved by Dirac, who used it to establish the
theoretical basis for antiparticles. For our purposes, we can
ignore this issue and simply allow the energy of our particle
to be either positive or negative.
Since the wave function of our particle moves rigidly
down the x axis, so does the probability distribution. As
a result, the expectation value of x moves in exactly the
same way, which is to say that it moves to the right with
velocity c. That’s the essential quantum mechanics of this
system. However, there is another important thing to keep
in mind. When we said the velocity c is a ﬁxed constant, we
2Our right-going particles remind me of Dr. Seuss’s classic story
“The Zax,” and I’m tempted to call them “right-going zaxons.” There’s
no telling how the story would have turned out if Theodor Geisel had
known more about neutrinos.
3There. I’ve said it.

9.1. A SIMPLE EXAMPLE
279
weren’t kidding. Our particle can only exist in a state where
it moves at this particular velocity. It can never slow down
or speed up.
How does this compare with the classical description of
such a particle? Starting with the same Hamiltonian, a clas-
sical physicist would just write Hamilton’s equations. With
H = cP, Hamilton’s equations are
∂H
∂p = ˙x
and
∂H
∂x = −˙p.
Carrying out the partial derivatives, these become
∂H
∂p = ˙x = c
and
∂H
∂x = −˙p = 0.
Thus, in the classical description of our particle, the momen-
tum is conserved, and the position moves with ﬁxed velocity
c. In the quantum mechanical description, the whole proba-
bility distribution and the expectation value move with ve-
locity c. In other words, the expectation value of position
behaves according to the classical equations of motion.

280
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
9.2
Nonrelativistic Free Particles
Only massless particles can move at the velocity of light, and
I might add, they can only move at that velocity. All known
particles other than photons and gravitons are massive and
can move at any velocity less than c. When they move with a
velocity much less than c, they are said to be nonrelativistic
and their motion is governed by ordinary Newtonian mechan-
ics, at least classically. The earliest application of quantum
mechanics was to the motion of nonrelativistic particles.
I showed earlier (in Lectures 4 and 8) that Poisson brack-
ets play the same mathematical role in classical mechanics as
commutators do in quantum mechanics. Written with these
constructs, the classical and quantum mechanical equations
of motion are almost identical in form. In particular, the
Hamiltonian comes into play in the same way with Poisson
brackets as it does with commutators. So, if you want to
write down the quantum mechanical equations of a system
whose classical physics you already know, it’s very reason-
able to try using the classical Hamiltonian, translated into
operator form.
For a nonrelativistic free particle, the natural Hamilto-
nian to try is p2/2m. When we say the particle is free, what
we really mean is that no forces are acting on it, and there-
fore we can ignore potential energy. All we care about is the
kinetic energy, which is deﬁned as
T = 1
2mv2.
As you recall, the momentum for a classical particle is

9.2. NONRELATIVISTIC FREE PARTICLES
281
p = mv.
The Hamiltonian is just the kinetic energy, which we can
write in terms of the momentum p. This gives us
H = 1
2mv2 = p2
2m
for the Hamiltonian of a classical nonrelativistic free parti-
cle. Unlike the right-going zaxon of the previous example,
the energy of this particle does not depend on its direction
of motion. That’s because the energy is proportional to p2
rather than p itself. So we’ll start with a particle whose en-
ergy is p2/2m and work out the Schr¨odinger equation (the
original one that Schr¨odinger discovered) for a free particle.
Our plan is to follow the same process we used in the
previous example, using the Hamiltonian to write a time-
dependent Schr¨odinger equation. As usual, the left side of
the equation is
i¯h∂ψ
∂t .
We’ll derive the right-hand side by rewriting the classical
Hamiltonian—the kinetic energy—as an operator. The clas-
sical kinetic energy is
p2/2m.
The quantum version replaces p with P:

282
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
H = P2/2m.
What is the meaning of this? As we’ve seen, the operator P
is deﬁned as
P = −i¯h ∂
∂x.
The square of P is just the operator that you get by allowing
P to act twice in succession. Thus,
P2 = (−i¯h ∂
∂x)(−i¯h ∂
∂x),
or
P2 = −¯h2 ∂2
∂x2,
and the Hamiltonian becomes
H = −¯h2
2m
∂2
∂x2.
Finally, if we equate the left- and right-hand sides of the
time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation, we get
i¯h∂ψ
∂t = −¯h2
2m
∂2ψ
∂x2 .
(9.4)
This is the traditional Schr¨odinger equation for an ordinary
nonrelativistic free particle. It is a particular kind of wave
equation, but, in contrast to the previous example, waves

9.3. TIME-INDEPENDENT SCHR ¨ODINGER EQ
283
of diﬀerent wavelength (and momenta) move with diﬀerent
velocities. Because of this, the wave function does not main-
tain its shape. Unlike the zaxon wave function, it tends to
spread out and fall apart. This is shown schematically in
Fig. 9.2.
Figure 9.2: Typical Wave Packet for a Nonrelativistic Free
Particle. Top: The initial wave packet is compact and highly
localized. Bottom: Over time, the wave packet moves to the
right and spreads out.
9.3
Time-Independent
Schr¨odinger Equation
We are going to solve the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equa-
tion for nonrelativistic free particles, but ﬁrst we need to

284
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
solve the time-independent version. The time-independent
equation is essentially the eigenvector equation for the Hamil-
tonian,
H|Ψ⟩= E|Ψ⟩,
written explicitly in terms of the wave function ψ(x):
−¯h2
2m
∂2ψ(x)
∂x2
= Eψ(x).
(9.5)
It’s very easy to ﬁnd a complete set of eigenvectors that
satisfy this equation.
In fact, momentum eigenvectors do
the job. Let’s try the function
ψ(x) = e
ipx
¯h
(9.6)
as a possible solution. Carrying out the derivatives, we ﬁnd
that this function is indeed a solution to Eq. 9.5, as long as
we set
E = p2/2m.
(9.7)
This should come as no surprise—after all, E represents an
energy eigenvalue in Eq. 9.5.
Exercise 9.1: Derive Eq. 9.7 by plugging Eq. 9.6 into Eq.
9.5.
As we saw in Section 4.13, every solution to the time-independent
Schr¨odinger equation allows us to construct to a time-dependent

9.3. TIME-INDEPENDENT SCHR ¨ODINGER EQ
285
solution. All we need to do is multiply the time-independent
solution—in this case e
ipx
¯h —by e−i Et
¯h = e−i p2t
2m¯h. Thus, a com-
plete set of solutions can be written as
ψ(x, t) = exp i(px −p2t
2m)
¯h
.
Any solution is a sum, or integral, of these solutions:
ψ(x, t) =

˜ψ(p)

exp i(px −p2t
2m)
¯h

dp.
You can start with any wave function at t = 0, ﬁnd ˜ψ(p) by
Fourier transform, and let it evolve. The shape will change
because the waves for diﬀerent p values travel at diﬀerent
velocities. But, as we will soon see, the overall wave packet
will travel at velocity ⟨p/m⟩just as a classical particle would.
This simple general solution has an important implica-
tion.
Among other things, it says that the momentum-
representation wave function changes with time in a very
simple way:
˜ψ(p, t) = ˜ψ(p) exp i(px −p2t
2m)
¯h
.
In other words, only the phase changes with time, while the
magnitude remains constant. What makes this so interesting
is that the probability P(p) does not change at all with time.
This, of course, is a consequence of momentum conservation,
but it only holds if there are no forces acting on the particle.

286
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
9.4
Velocity and Momentum
So far, I haven’t explained the connection between the oper-
ator P and the classical notion of momentum—namely, mass
times velocity, or
v = p/m.
(9.8)
What do we mean by the velocity of a quantum mechanical
particle?
The simplest answer is that we mean the time
derivative of the average position ⟨Ψ|X|Ψ⟩:
v = d⟨Ψ|X|Ψ⟩
dt
or, more concretely, in terms of wave functions,
v = d
dt

ψ∗(x, t) x ψ(x, t).
Why does ⟨Ψ|X|Ψ⟩vary with time? Because ψ depends on
time, and in fact we know just how. The time dependence of
ψ is governed by the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation.
We could use that fact to work out how ⟨Ψ|X|Ψ⟩varies with
time. I’ve done it this way—by brute force—and it takes sev-
eral pages. Fortunately, the abstract methods you learned in
earlier lectures make it easier; in fact, we have already done
most of the work in Lecture 4. In fact, before we proceed,
I recommend that you review Lecture 4, especially Section
4.9, from the beginning to the appearance of Eq. 4.17. To
restate Eq. 4.17,

9.4. VELOCITY AND MOMENTUM
287
d
dt⟨L⟩= i
¯h ⟨[ H, L ] ⟩.
In words: the time derivative of the expectation value of any
observable L is given by i/¯h times the expectation value of
the commutator of the Hamiltonian with L. Applying this
principle to the velocity v, we ﬁnd that
v =
i
2m¯h⟨[ P2, X ] ⟩.
(9.9)
Now, all we have to do is compute the commutator of P2
and X. A couple of simple steps shows that
[ P2, X ] = P[ P, X ] + [ P, X ]P.
(9.10)
This relation can be conﬁrmed by expanding each commu-
tator and spotting some obvious cancellations.
Exercise 9.2: Prove Eq. 9.10 by expanding each side and
comparing the results.
The last step uses the standard commutation relation
[ P, X ] = −i¯h.
Substituting this into Eq. 9.10 and plugging that result into
Eq. 9.9, we ﬁnd that
v = ⟨P⟩
m

288
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
or, perhaps more familiarly,
⟨P⟩= mv.
(9.11)
We have proved exactly what we set out to prove: the mo-
mentum is equal to the mass times the velocity, or, more
exactly, the average momentum equals the mass times the
velocity.
To get a better idea of what this means, let’s suppose
the wave function has the form of a packet, or fairly narrow
lump. The expectation value of x will be approximately at
the center of the lump. What Eq. 9.11 tells us is that the
center of the wave packet travels according to the classical
rule p = mv.
9.5
Quantization
Before moving on to the subject of forces in quantum me-
chanics, I want to pause and discuss what we have done. We
started with a well-known and well-trusted classical system—
the free particle—and quantized it. We can codify this pro-
cedure as follows:
1. Start with a classical system. This means a set of co-
ordinates x and momenta p. In our example, there was
only one coordinate and one momentum, but the pro-
cedure is easy to generalize. The coordinates and mo-
menta come in pairs, xi and pi. The classical system
also has a Hamiltonian, which is a function of the x’s
and p’s.

9.5. QUANTIZATION
289
2. Replace the classical phase space with a linear vec-
tor space.
In the position representation, the space
of states is represented by a wave function ψ(x) that
depends on the coordinates—in general, all of them.
3. Replace the x’s and p’s with operators Xi and Pi. Each
Xi acts on the wave function to multiply it by xi. Each
Pi acts according to the rule
Pi →−i¯h ∂
∂xi
.
4. When these replacements are made, the Hamiltonian
becomes an operator that can be used in either the
time-dependent or time-independent Schr¨odinger equa-
tion. The time-dependent equation tells us how the
wave function changes with time. The time-independent
form allows us to ﬁnd the eigenvectors and eigenvalues
of the Hamiltonian.
This procedure of quantization is the means by which the
classical equations of a system converted to quantum equa-
tions. It has been used over and over, in ﬁelds ranging from
the motion of particles to quantum electrodynamics; there
have even been (not so successful) attempts to quantize Ein-
stein’s theory of gravity. As we saw in one simple case, the
procedure guarantees that the motion of expectation values
is closely related to classical motion.
All of this raises a “chicken and egg” question: Which
comes ﬁrst—classical theory or quantum theory?
Should

290
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
the logical starting point of physics be classical or quantum
mechanical? I think the answer is obvious. Quantum me-
chanics is the real description of nature. Classical mechanics,
while beautiful and elegant, is nevertheless an approxima-
tion. Roughly speaking, it holds true when wave functions
maintain their shape as packets.
Sometimes, we’re lucky
and the quantum theory of a system can be guessed—and
that’s all it is, a guess—by starting with a familiar clas-
sical system and quantizing it. Sometimes this works. The
quantum motion of electrons, deduced from the classical me-
chanics of particles, is a case in point. Quantum electrody-
namics, deduced from Maxwell’s equations, is another. But
sometimes there is no classical theory to use as a starting
point. The spin of a particle has no real classical counter-
part. And the quantization of general relativity has largely
failed. Quantum theory is probably much more fundamental
than classical theory, which generally should be understood
as an approximation.
That being said, I will now continue to quantize the mo-
tion of particles, but this time incorporating the eﬀects of
forces.
9.6
Forces
The world would be a dull place if all particles were free.
Forces are what make particles do interesting things, such as
assembling themselves into atoms, molecules, chocolate bars,
and black holes. The force on any given particle is the sum
total of the forces exerted on it by all the other particles in
the universe. In practice, we usually assume that we know

9.6. FORCES
291
what all the other particles are doing and replace their eﬀect
by a potential energy function for the particle that we are
studying. This much is true in both classical and quantum
mechanics.
The potential energy function is denoted by V (x). In clas-
sical mechanics it’s related to the force on a particle by the
equation
F(x) = −∂V
∂x .
If the motion is one-dimensional, the partial derivative can
be replaced by an ordinary derivative, but I will leave it as
is. If we then combine this equation with Newton’s second
law, F = ma, we get
md2x
dt2 = −∂V
∂x .
In quantum mechanics, we proceed diﬀerently; we write a
Hamiltonian and solve the Schr¨odinger equation. Incorpo-
rating the potential energy into this program is straightfor-
ward. The potential energy V (x) becomes an operator V
that gets added to the Hamiltonian.
What kind of operator is V? The answer is easiest to
express if we think in the language of wave functions rather
than in terms of abstract bras and kets. When the operator
V acts on any wave function ψ(x), it multiplies the wave
function by the function V (x).
V|Ψ⟩→V (x)ψ(x).

292
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
Just as in classical mechanics, once forces are included, the
momentum of a particle is not conserved. In fact, Newton’s
laws of motion can be stated in the form
dp
dt = F
or
dp
dt = −∂V
∂x .
(9.12)
The rules of quantization require us to add V(x) to the
Hamiltonian,4
H = P2
2m + V(x),
(9.13)
and modify the Schr¨odinger equations in the obvious way:
i¯h∂ψ
∂t
=
−¯h2
2m
∂2ψ
∂x2 + V (x)ψ
Eψ
=
−¯h2
2m
∂2ψ
∂x2 + V (x)ψ.
(9.14)
What eﬀect does this have? The additional term certainly
aﬀects the way ψ changes with time. That of course must
be so if the average position of a wave packet is to follow
a classical trajectory.
To check our reasoning, let’s see if
it does.
First of all, does Eq. 9.11 still hold?
It should,
4Technically, this is true for free particles as well. However, in the
case of free particles we set V (x) equal to 0.

9.6. FORCES
293
because the connection between momentum and velocity is
unaﬀected by the presence of forces.
Because a new term has been added to H, there will be a
new term in the commutator of X and H. Potentially, that
could modify the expression for velocity in Eq. 9.9, but it’s
easy to see that this doesn’t happen. The new term involves
the commutator of X with V(x). But multiplying by x and
multiplying by a function of x are operations that commute.
In other words,
[X, V(x)] = 0.
Therefore, the connection between velocity and momentum
is unaﬀected by forces in quantum mechanics, as is the case
in classical mechanics.
The more interesting question is: Can we understand the
quantum version of Newton’s law? As stated above, this law
can be written as
dp
dt = F.
Let’s calculate the time derivative of the expectation value of
P. Again, the trick is to commute P with the Hamiltonian:
d
dt⟨P⟩=
i
2m¯h ⟨[P2,P]⟩+ i
¯h ⟨[V, P]⟩.
(9.15)
The ﬁrst term is zero because an operator commutes with
any function of itself. To compute the second term, we’ll use

294
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
an equation that we haven’t proved yet:
[V(x), P] = i¯h dV (x)
dx
.
(9.16)
Plugging Eq. 9.16 into Eq. 9.15, we get
d
dt⟨P⟩= −⟨dV
dx ⟩.
Now, let’s prove Eq. 9.16. Letting the commutator act on a
wave function, we can write
[V(x), P]ψ(x) = V (x)(−i¯h d
dx )ψ(x) −(−i¯h d
dx )V (x)ψ(x).
(9.17)
This is easily simpliﬁed and results in Eq. 9.16. Thus, we
have shown that
d
dt⟨P⟩= −⟨dV
dx ⟩,
(9.18)
which is the quantum analog of Newton’s equation for the
time rate of change of momentum.
Exercise 9.3: Show that the right-hand side of Eq. 9.17
simpliﬁes to the right-hand side of Eq. 9.16. Hint: First ex-
pand the second term by taking the derivative of the product.
Then look for cancellations.

9.7. LINEAR MOTION/CLASSICAL LIMIT
295
9.7
Linear Motion and the
Classical Limit
You might think we have proved that the expectation value
of X exactly follows the classical trajectory. But what we’ve
actually proved is quite diﬀerent. This diﬀerence exists be-
cause the average of a function of x is not the same as the
function of the average of x. If Eq. 9.18 had read
d
dt⟨P⟩= −dV (⟨x⟩)
d⟨x⟩
[This is wrong]
(and, let me emphasize, it does not), then indeed we would
say that the average position and momentum satisfy the clas-
sical equations. But in reality the classical equations are only
approximations, good whenever we can replace the average
of dV/dx by the function of the average of x. When is it
reasonable to do this?
The answer is whenever the V (x)
varies slowly compared to the size of the wave packet. If V
varies rapidly across the wave packet, the classical approx-
imation will break down. In fact, in that situation a nice,
narrow wave packet will get broken up into a badly scattered
wave that has no resemblance to the original wave packet.
The probability function will also get scattered. Then you’ll
have no choice but to solve the Schr¨odinger equation.
Let’s look at this point more closely.
Mathematically,
we’ve made no assumptions about the shapes of our wave
packets. But we have tacitly thought of them as being nicely
shaped functions with a single maximum, smoothly trailing
oﬀto zero in the positive and negative directions. This con-

296
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
dition, though not explicit in our mathematical assumptions,
does have a real impact on whether a particle behaves the
way classical mechanics would lead us to expect.
Figure 9.3: Bimodal (Two-Humped) Function, Centered at
x = 0. Note that ⟨x⟩= 0, but Δx > 0.
To illustrate this point, let’s consider a slightly “weird”
wave packet. Fig. 9.3 shows a bimodal wave packet (having
two maxima), centered at the origin of the x axis. Now, let’s
consider some function of x, say F(x), where F represents
force. The expectation value of F(x) is not the same as the
function F of the expectation value of x. In other words,
⟨F(x)⟩̸= F(⟨x⟩).
The right-hand side is a function of the center of the wave
packet. It is not the same as the left-hand side, which corre-

9.7. LINEAR MOTION/CLASSICAL LIMIT
297
sponds to our results from the previous section—⟨F(x)⟩has
the same form as the right-hand side of Eq. 9.18.5
Let me give you an example where these two expressions
could be extremely diﬀerent. Suppose that F is equal to x
squared:
F = x2.
And suppose the wave packet looks like Fig. 9.3. What’s the
expectation value of x? It’s zero, and so is F(⟨x⟩), because
F(0) = 02 = 0. On the other hand, what is the expectation
value of x2? It’s greater than zero. So when a wave packet
is not a nice, single bump that is mainly characterized by its
center, it’s not always true that the time rate of change of the
momentum is the force evaluated at the expectation value of
x. It’s only when the wave function is concentrated over a
fairly narrow range that the expectation value of F(x) is the
same as F(⟨x⟩). So we have cheated a little in saying our
quantum equation of motion looks classical. That depends
on the wave packet being coherent and well localized.
Everything else being equal, when the mass of a particle
is large, the wave function tends to be very well concen-
trated.
If there are no very sharp spikes in the potential
function V (x), then it will be a good approximation to re-
place ⟨F(x)⟩with F(⟨x⟩). When V (x) has spikes, however,
the wave packet tends to break up. For example, suppose we
have a nice wave packet moving to the right, and it hits a
point structure, like an atom, with a potential function sim-
5Recall that −⟨dV
dx ⟩represents force in that equation.

298
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
ilar to Fig. 9.4. The wave packet will spread out and disinte-
grate. If, on the other hand, it hits a very smooth potential,
then it will go through the smooth potential, moving more or
less according to the classical equations of motion. We don’t
expect quantum mechanics to reproduce classical mechanics
in every possible circumstance. We expect it to reproduce
classical mechanics in circumstances where it should—where
the particles are heavy, the potentials are smooth, and noth-
ing causes the wave function to disintegrate or scatter.6

Figure 9.4: Spiky Potential Function. Potential functions
with sharp peaks tend to cause wave functions to scatter.
The smaller these features are in relation to the wave packet,
the more the wave packet will scatter, and the less “classical”
it will become.
What physical situations lead to “bad potentials” that
break up the wave function? Suppose a potential has fea-
6Not as eloquent as Garrison Keillor’s tagline, but true all the same.

9.7. LINEAR MOTION/CLASSICAL LIMIT
299
tures that have a certain size associated with them. Think of
Fig. 9.4 on steroids, with lots of large, closely packed spikes.
Suppose we call the size of these features δx, and that δx is
signiﬁcantly smaller than the incoming particle’s uncertainty
in position:
δx < Δx.
If the sharp features of V (x) exist on a scale that is much
smaller than the size of the incoming wave packet, the packet
will break into a lot of little pieces. Each one will scatter oﬀ
in a diﬀerent direction.
Roughly speaking, when the fea-
tures of the potential are shorter than the wavelength of the
incoming particle, the wave function will tend to break up.
Let’s say you take a bowling ball and ask, “What is Δx?”
We can use the uncertainty principle to gain some intuition
about this question. Typically, Δp × Δx is bigger than ¯h.
But in many reasonable cases it’s of order ¯h:
ΔpΔx ∼¯h.
Now, p is about as concentrated as it can be, but for an or-
dinary macroscopic object, the uncertainty relation is pretty
much saturated—the left-hand side is roughly equal to ¯h.
The reasons for this are very complicated, and I won’t go
into them here. Instead, let’s assume this is true and work
out the implications. What is Δp? It’s mΔv, which gives us
mΔvΔx ∼¯h.

300
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
Rearranging the symbols, we can then write
ΔvΔx ∼
¯h
m
or
Δx ∼
¯h
mΔv.
Now, if I put a bowling ball on the ground, I know very well
that the uncertainty in its velocity is not very big. As the
ball gets heavier and heavier, you might expect the uncer-
tainty in velocity to get smaller and smaller. But, in any
case, the right-hand side has an m in the denominator, and
regardless of Δv, as m gets smaller, Δx will get bigger. And
in particular, it will tend to get bigger than the features in
the potential.
In the quantum mechanical limit where m is very small
and Δx tends to be big, the wave function will move under
the inﬂuence of a ragged potential, which it sees as being
much sharper and more featured than the wave function it-
self. That’s when the wave function breaks up. On the other
hand, as m gets very large, Δx gets small. For a large bowl-
ing ball, the wave packet might be very concentrated. When
it moves through a spiky potential, this tiny wave function
encounters a potential whose features are (comparatively)
very broad.
Moving through broad smooth features does
not break the wave function into pieces. Large masses and
smooth potentials characterize the classical limit. A particle
with low mass, moving through an abrupt potential, behaves
like a quantum mechanical system.

9.8. PATH INTEGRALS
301
What about electrons? Are they massive enough to be-
have classically? The answer depends on the interplay be-
tween the potential and the mass. For example, if you have
two capacitor plates separated by a centimeter, with a smooth
electric ﬁeld between them, then the electron will move across
the gap like a nice, coherent, almost classical particle. On
the other hand, the potential associated with the nucleus of
an atom always has a sharp feature in it. If an electron wave
packet hits this potential, it will scatter all over the place.
Before leaving this topic, I’d like to mention minimum-
uncertainty wave packets.
These are wave packets where
ΔxΔp is equal to ¯h/2 (as opposed to being greater). In other
words, in these cases, ΔxΔp is as small as quantum mechan-
ics allows. These wave packets have the form of a Gaussian
curve, and they’re often called Gaussian wave packets. Over
time, they spread out and ﬂatten. Such wave packets are not
that common, but they do exist. A bowling ball at rest is a
good approximation. In Lecture 10, we’ll see that the ground
state of a harmonic oscillator is a Gaussian wave packet.
9.8
Path Integrals
Classical Hamiltonian mechanics focuses on the step-by-step
incremental changes in the state of a system. But there is
another way to formulate mechanics—the Principle of Least
Action—in which the focus is on entire histories. For a par-
ticle, this means looking at the full trajectory of the particle
from some initial time to some ﬁnal time. The content of
the two approaches is the same, but the emphasis is diﬀer-

302
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
ent. Hamiltonian mechanics zeros in on some instant and
tells you how the system changes between that instant and
the next. The least action principle steps back and takes a
global look. One can imagine nature sampling all possible
trajectories and picking the one that minimizes the action
between a pair of ﬁxed initial and ﬁnal points.7
Quantum mechanics also has a Hamiltonian description
that concentrates on incremental changes.
It’s called the
time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation, and it’s very general.
As far as we know, it can be used to describe all physical
systems. Still, it seems fair to ask, as Richard Feynman did
almost seventy years ago, whether there is a way to look at
quantum mechanics that pictures whole histories. In other
words, is there a formulation that parallels the Principle of
Least Action? I will not explain Feynman’s path integral
description in detail in this lecture, but just to whet your
appetite I’ll give you a hint of how it works.
First, let me very brieﬂy remind you of the classical least
action principle as I explained it in Volume I. Suppose that
a classical particle starts at position x1 at time t1 and arrives
at position x2 at time t2 (Fig. 9.5). The question is: What
is the trajectory that it took between t1 and t2?
According to the least action principle, the actual trajec-
tory is the one of minimum action. Action is of course a tech-
nical term, and it stands for the integral of the Lagrangian
between the end points of the trajectory. For simple systems,
7Strictly speaking, the principle should be called the Principle of
Stationary Action. Actual trajectories are stationary points of the ac-
tion and not always minima. For our purposes, this ﬁne point is not
important.

9.8. PATH INTEGRALS
303
Figure 9.5: Classical Trajectory.
This shows one path a
particle may take when moving from point 1 (x1, t1) to point
2 (x2, t2). To keep things simple, the ˙x axis, representing the
particle’s velocity in the x direction, is not shown.
the Lagrangian is the kinetic energy minus the potential en-
ergy. Thus, for a particle that moves in one dimension, the
action is
A =
 t2
t1
L(x, ˙x)dt
(9.19)
or

304
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
Figure 9.6: First Step Toward Quantizing the Trajectory.
Break the particle’s path into two equal parts (equal in time,
that is).
The particle has the same starting and ending
points, but now its trajectory passes through the interme-
diate point x.
A =
 t2
t1
m ˙x2
2
−V (x)

dt.
The idea is to try out all possible trajectories connecting the
two end points, and calculate A for each one of them. The

9.8. PATH INTEGRALS
305
Figure 9.7: Further Steps Toward Constructing the Path
Integral. Keeping the same starting and ending points, break
the path up into a large number of equally sized segments.
winner is the one that has the least action.8,9
Now, let’s turn to quantum mechanics. The idea of a
well-deﬁned trajectory between two points makes no sense
in quantum mechanics because of the uncertainty principle.
8That’s how it works conceptually, anyway. In practice, the Euler-
Lagrange equations provide a shortcut, as explained in Volume I.
9To keep our diagrams simple, we don’t display an ˙x axis even
though the Lagrangian clearly depends on ˙x.

306
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
However, a question that we can ask is: Given that a particle
starts out at (x1, t1), what is the probability that it will show
up at (x2, t2) if an observation of its position is made?
As always in quantum mechanics, the probability is the
square of the absolute value of a complex amplitude. The
global version of quantum mechanics asks:
Given that a particle starts out at (x1, t1), what is the
amplitude that it will show up at (x2, t2)?
Let’s call that amplitude C(x1, t1; x2, t2) or, more simply, just
C1,2. The initial state of the particle is |Ψ(t1)⟩= |x1⟩. Over
the time interval between t1 and t2, the state evolves to
|Ψ(t2)⟩= e−iH(t2−t1)|x1⟩.
(9.20)
The amplitude to detect the particle at |x2⟩is just the inner
product of |Ψ(t2)⟩with |x2⟩. Its value is
C1,2 = ⟨x2|e−iH(t2−t1)|x1⟩.
(9.21)
In other words, the amplitude to go from x1 to x2 over the
time interval t2 −t1 is constructed by sandwiching e−iH(t2−t1)
between the initial and ﬁnal positions. To simplify the for-
mula, let’s deﬁne t2 −t1 to be t. Then the amplitude is
C1,2 = ⟨x2|e−iHt|x1⟩.
(9.22)
Now, let’s break the time interval t into two smaller intervals
of size t/2 (see Fig. 9.6). The operator e−iHt can be written

9.8. PATH INTEGRALS
307
as the product of two operators:
e−iHt = e−iHt/2e−iHt/2.
(9.23)
By inserting the identity operator in the form
I =

dx|x⟩⟨x|,
(9.24)
we can rewrite the amplitude as
C1,2 =

dx⟨x2|e−iHt/2|x⟩⟨x|e−iHt/2|x1⟩.
(9.25)
This form of the equation looks more complicated, but has
a very interesting interpretation. Let me put it in words.
The amplitude to get from x1 to x2 over time interval t is
an integral over an intermediate position x. The integrand is
the amplitude to go from x1 to x over the time interval t/2
multiplied by the amplitude to go from x to x2 over another
time interval t/2.
Fig. 9.6 shows the same idea in visual terms. Classically,
to go from x1 to x2, the particle must pass through an inter-
mediate point x. But in quantum mechanics the amplitude to
go from x1 to x2 is an integral over all possible intermediate
points.
We can carry this idea further and divide the time in-
terval into a great many tiny intervals, as illustrated in Fig.
9.7. I won’t write out the complicated formulas, but the idea
should be clear. For each tiny time interval, say of size
we
include a factor
e,

308
LECTURE 9. PARTICLE DYNAMICS
e−iϵH.
Then, between each pair of factors, we insert the identity
so that the amplitude C1,2 becomes a multiple integral over
all the intermediate locations. The integrand is built from
products of expressions with the form
⟨xi|e−iϵH|xi+1⟩.
If we deﬁne U(ϵ) as
U(ϵ) = e−iϵH,
then we can write the entire product as
⟨x2|U N|x1⟩
or
⟨x2|UUUU . . . |x1⟩.
In this equation, U appears N times as a factor, where N
is the number of epsilon steps. We can then insert identity
operators between the U’s.
Such an expression can be called the amplitude for the
given path. But the particle does not travel along a par-
ticular path. Instead, in the limit of a large number of in-
ﬁnitesimal time intervals, the amplitude is an integral over

9.8. PATH INTEGRALS
309
all possible paths between the end points. The elegant fact
that Feynman discovered is that the amplitude for each path
bears a simple relation to a familiar expression from classical
mechanics—the action for that path. The exact expression
for each path is
eiA/¯h,
where A is the action for the individual path.
Feynman’s formulation can be summarized by a single
equation:
C1,2 =

paths
eiA/¯h.
(9.26)
The path integral formulation is not merely an elegant math-
ematical trick; it has real power. In fact, it can be used to
derive both Schr¨odinger equations, and all the commutation
relations of quantum mechanics. But it really comes into its
own in the context of quantum ﬁeld theory, where it is the
principal tool for formulating the laws of elementary particle
physics.


Lecture 10
The Harmonic Oscillator
Art: I think I see it, Lenny. The whole picture is slowly com-
ing into focus. Minus One, General Uncertainty, entangled
pairs, the Hamiltonian—even the degenerates. What’s next?
Lenny: Oscillations, Art. Vibrations. You’re a ﬁddler—play
us a last tune tonight. Something with good vibes.
Of all the ingredients that go into building a quantum de-
scription of the world, two stand out as especially fundamen-
tal. The spin, or qubit, of course is one of them. In classical
logic, everything can be built out of yes-no questions. Sim-
ilarly, in quantum mechanics, every logical question boils
down to a question about qubits. We spent a lot of time
in earlier lectures learning about qubits.
In this lecture,
we’ll learn about the second basic ingredient of quantum
mechanics—the harmonic oscillator.
The harmonic oscillator isn’t a particular object like a
hydrogen atom or a quark. It’s really a mathematical frame-
work for understanding a huge number of phenomena. This
311

312
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
concept of the harmonic oscillator also exists in classical
physics, but it really comes to the fore in quantum theory.
One example of a harmonic oscillator is a particle moving
under a linear restoring force; for example, the iconic weight
on the end of a spring. An idealized spring satisﬁes Hooke’s
law: the force on the displaced mass is proportional to the
distance it has been displaced. We call the force a restoring
force because it pulls the mass back toward the equilibrium
position.
Another example is a marble rolling back and forth at the
bottom of a bowl, with no energy being lost to friction. What
characterizes these systems is a potential energy function
that looks like a parabola:
V (x) = k
2x2.
(10.1)
The constant k is called the spring constant. If we recall
that the force on an object is minus the gradient of V, we
ﬁnd that the force on the object is
F = −kx.
(10.2)
The negative sign tells us that the force acts opposite to the
displacement and pulls the mass back toward the origin.
Why are harmonic oscillators so prevalent in physics? Be-
cause almost any smooth function looks like a parabola close
to a minimum of the function. Indeed, many kinds of sys-
tems are characterized by an energy function that can be
approximated by a quadratic function of some variable rep-
resenting a displacement from equilibrium. When disturbed,

313
these systems will all oscillate about the equilibrium point.
Here are some other examples:
• An atom situated in a crystal lattice.
If the atom
is displaced slightly from its equilibrium position, it
gets pushed back with an approximately linear restor-
ing force. This motion is three-dimensional and really
consists of three independent oscillations.
• The electric current in a circuit of low resistance often
oscillates with a characteristic frequency. The math-
ematics of circuits is identical to the mathematics of
masses attached to springs.
• Waves. If the surface of a pond is disturbed, it sends
out waves. Someone watching at a particular location
will see the surface oscillate as the wave passes by. This
motion can be described as simple harmonic motion.
The same goes for sound waves.
• Electromagnetic waves.
Just like any other wave, a
light wave or a radio wave oscillates when it passes you.
The same mathematics that describes the oscillating
particle also applies to electromagnetic waves.
The list goes on and on but the math is always the same.
Just to have an example in mind, let’s picture the oscillator
as a weight hanging from a spring. Needless to say, we hardly
need quantum mechanics to describe an ordinary weight and
spring, so let’s imagine a very tiny version of this same sys-
tem and then quantize it.

314
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
10.1
The Classical Description
Let’s use y to denote the height of the hanging weight. We’ll
choose the origin so that the weight is at y = 0 when it’s
in equilibrium—that is when the weight is hanging at rest.
To study this system classically, we can use the Lagrangian
method that we learned about in Volume I. The kinetic and
potential energies are 1
2m ˙y2 and 1
2ky2 respectively.
As you recall, the Lagrangian is the kinetic energy minus
the potential energy:
L = 1
2m ˙y2 −1
2ky2.
First, we’ll put the Lagrangian into a certain standard form
by changing from y to another variable that we will call x.
This coordinate is not something new. It still represents the
displacement of the mass. By switching from y to x, we’re
just making a convenient change of units. Let’s deﬁne the
new variable as
x = √m y.
In terms of x, the Lagrangian becomes
L = 1
2 ˙x2 −1
2ω2x2.
(10.3)
The constant ω is deﬁned as ω =

k
m and happens to be
the frequency of the oscillator.

10.1. THE CLASSICAL DESCRIPTION
315
By making this change of variables, we can describe every
oscillator in exactly the same form. In this form, oscillators
are distinguished from each other only by their frequency ω.
Now, let’s use Lagrange’s equations to work out the equa-
tions of motion. For this one-dimensional system, there is
only one Lagrange equation, namely
∂L
∂x = d
dt
∂L
∂˙x .
(10.4)
Carrying out these operations on Eq. 10.3, we ﬁnd that
∂L
∂˙x = ˙x.
(10.5)
This is called the canonical momentum conjugate to x. Dif-
ferentiating with respect to time gives
d
dt
∂L
∂˙x = ¨x,
(10.6)
and now we have the right-hand side of Eq. 10.4. Turning
to the left-hand side, we ﬁnd that
∂L
∂x = −ω2x.
(10.7)
Setting the left and right sides (Eqs. 10.7 and 10.6) of the
Lagrange equation equal to each other, we get
−ω2x = ¨x.
(10.8)

316
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
This equation is, of course, equivalent to F = ma. Why is
there a minus sign? Because the force is a restoring force—
its direction is opposite to the direction of the displacement.
By now you have seen this type of equation enough to know
that the solution contains sines and cosines.
The general
solution is
x = A cos(ωt) + B sin(ωt),
(10.9)
which shows us that ω is indeed the frequency of the oscil-
lator. When we diﬀerentiate twice, we pull out a factor of
ω2.
Exercise 10.1: Find the second time derivative of x in Eq.
10.9, and thereby show that it solves Eq. 10.8.
10.2
The Quantum Mechanical
Description
Now, let’s return to our microscopic version of the weight-
and-spring system—let’s say no bigger than a single molecule.
At ﬁrst, this seems ridiculous. How could we ever build a
spring that small? But in fact nature provides all sorts of
microscopic springs. Many molecules consist of two atoms—
for example, a heavy atom and a light one. There are forces
holding the molecule in equilibrium with the atoms separated
by a certain distance.
When the light atom is displaced,
it will be attracted back to the equilibrium location. The

10.2. QUANTUM MECHANICAL DESCRIPTION
317
molecule is a miniature version of the weight-and-spring sys-
tem, but is so small that we have to use quantum mechanics
to understand it.
Having worked out the classical Lagrangian, let’s try to
build a quantum mechanical description of our system. The
ﬁrst thing we need is a space of states. As we’ve seen, the
state of a particle moving on a line is represented by a wave
function ψ(x). There are many possible system states, and
each one is represented by a diﬀerent wave function. A func-
tion ψ(x) is deﬁned in such a way that ψ∗(x)ψ(x) is the
probability density (the probability per unit interval) to ﬁnd
the particle at position x:
ψ∗(x)ψ(x) = P(x).
In this equation, P(x) represents the probability density. We
now have a sort of kinematics—a speciﬁcation of what the
system states are.
Can ψ(x) be any function at all? Aside from the require-
ment that it must be continuous and diﬀerentiable, the only
extra condition is that the total probability of ﬁnding the
particle at any position must be 1:
 +∞
−∞
ψ∗(x)ψ(x)dx = 1.
(10.10)
This would not seem to be much of a restriction. Whatever
the right-hand side of this equation is, we could always mul-
tiply ψ by some constant to make the integral equal to 1—
unless the integral is either zero or inﬁnity. Since ψ∗(x)ψ(x)

318
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
is positive, we don’t have to worry about zero, but inﬁnity
is a diﬀerent matter altogether; there are lots of functions
that would make the integral in Eq. 10.10 blow up.
The
conditions for a sensible wave function thus include the re-
quirement that ψ falls to zero fast enough that the integral
converges. Functions that meet this condition are called nor-
malizable.
There are two questions we might ask about our harmonic
oscillator:
• How does the state-vector change as a function of time?
To answer this question, we need to know the Hamil-
tonian.
• What are the oscillator’s possible energies? These are
also determined by the Hamiltonian.
So to know anything useful we need the Hamiltonian. Fortu-
nately, we can derive it from the Lagrangian, and I’ll remind
you how in a moment. But ﬁrst recall that the canonical
momentum conjugate to x is deﬁned as ∂L/∂˙x.1 Combining
this with Eq. 10.5, we get
p = ∂L
∂˙x = ˙x.
Using the straightforward deﬁnition from classical mechan-
ics, we ﬁnd that the Hamiltonian for the harmonic oscillator
is
1This idea is explained in Volume I.

10.2. QUANTUM MECHANICAL DESCRIPTION
319
H = p ˙x −L,
where p is the canonical momentum conjugate to x, and L
represents the Lagrangian.2
We could work directly from
this deﬁnition, but instead we’ll take a shortcut. Because
the Lagrangian is the kinetic energy minus the potential en-
ergy, the Hamiltonian is the kinetic energy plus the potential
energy—in other words, the total energy. The Hamiltonian
for the oscillator can therefore be written
H = 1
2 ˙x2 + 1
2ω2x2.
So far, so good, but we’re not quite ﬁnished. We’ve expressed
kinetic energy in terms of velocity; in quantum mechanics,
however, we need to represent our observables as operators,
and we don’t have a velocity operator. To take care of this,
we’ll have to recast things in terms of position and canoni-
cal momentum, which does have a standard operator form.
Rewriting the Hamiltonian in terms of canonical momentum
is easy because
p = ∂L
∂˙x = ˙x,
which allows us to write
H = 1
2p2 + 1
2ω2x2.
(10.11)
2We don’t need to use a summation sign because there’s only one
degree of freedom.

320
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
That’s the classical Hamiltonian. We can now turn it into a
quantum mechanical equation by reinterpreting x and p as
operators, deﬁned by their action on ψ(x). As we’ve done be-
fore, we’ll use the boldface symbols, X and P, to distinguish
our quantum operators from their classical counterparts, x
and p. From previous lectures, we know exactly how these
operators work. X just multiplies the wave function by the
position variable:
X|ψ(x)⟩
=⇒
xψ(x).
And P takes the same form it does for other one-dimensional
problems:
P|ψ(x)⟩
=⇒
−i¯h d
dx ψ(x).
Now, we can ﬁgure out the action of the Hamiltonian on a
wave function by letting P act twice on the wave function.
This is the same procedure we followed in Lecture 9. In other
words,
H|ψ(x)⟩
=⇒
1
2

−i¯h ∂
∂x

−i¯h ∂ψ(x)
∂x

+ 1
2ω2x2ψ(x),
or
H|ψ(x)⟩
=⇒
−¯h2
2
∂2ψ(x)
∂x 2
+ 1
2ω2x 2ψ(x).
(10.12)
We’re using partial derivatives because in general ψ also de-
pends on another variable, time. Time is not an operator and

10.3. THE SCHR ¨ODINGER EQUATION
321
does not have the same status as x, but the state-vector does
change with time, and we therefore treat time as a param-
eter. The partial derivative indicates that we’re describing
the system “at a ﬁxed time.”
10.3
The Schr¨odinger Equation
Eq. 10.12 shows how the Hamiltonian operates on ψ. Now,
let’s put it to work. As we said in the previous section, one of
its jobs is to tell you how the state-vector changes with time.
So let’s write out the time-dependent Schr¨odinger equation:
i∂ψ
∂t = 1
¯hHψ.
Substituting for H using 10.12, we get
i∂ψ
∂t = −¯h
2
∂2ψ
∂x2 + 1
2¯hω2x2ψ.
(10.13)
This equation says that if you know ψ (both the real and
imaginary parts) at some particular time, you can predict
what it will be at a future time. Notice that the equation is
complex—it contains i as a factor. This means that even if ψ
starts out being real-valued at time t = 0, it will very shortly
develop an imaginary part. Any solution ψ must therefore
be a complex function of x and t.
You can solve this equation in a number of ways. For
example, you can solve it numerically on a computer. Start
with a known value of ψ(x) and update it slightly by calcu-
lating the derivative. Once you have the derivative, calcu-
late how ψ(x) changes in a small increment of time. Then,

322
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
add this incremental change to ψ(x) and keep doing it over
and over. It turns out that ψ(x) will do some interesting
things—it will move around somehow. In fact, under certain
circumstances, it will form a wave packet that moves around
very much like a harmonic oscillator.
10.4
Energy Levels
The other thing you can do with the Hamiltonian is calcu-
late the energy levels of the oscillator, by ﬁnding the energy
eigenvectors and eigenvalues. As we learned in Lecture 4,
once you know these eigenvectors and eigenvalues, you can
ﬁgure out the time dependence without solving any diﬀer-
ential equations. That’s because you already know the time
dependence of each energy eigenvector. You may want to
review the Schr¨odinger’s Ket recipe we gave in Section 4.13.
For now, let’s concentrate on ﬁnding the energy eigen-
vectors themselves, using the time-independent Schr¨odinger
equation:
H|ψE⟩= E|ψE⟩.
The subscript E indicates that ψE is the eigenvector for a
particular eigenvalue E. This equation deﬁnes two things:
the wave functions ψE(x) and the energy levels E.
Let’s
make things less abstract by expanding H using Eq. 10.12:
−¯h2
2
∂2ψE(x)
∂x2
+ 1
2ω2x2ψE(x) = EψE(x).
(10.14)
To solve this equation, we must:

10.4. ENERGY LEVELS
323
• Find the allowable values of E that permit a mathe-
matical solution.
• Find the eigenvectors and possible eigenvalues of the
energy.
This is a little trickier than you might think. There turns
out to be a solution to the equation for every value of E,
including all the complex numbers, but most solutions are
physically absurd. If we just start at some point and solve
the Schr¨odinger equation by making little incremental steps,
we will almost always ﬁnd that ψ(x) grows or “blows up”
as x becomes large. In other words, we may be able to ﬁnd
solutions to the equation, but only very rarely will we ﬁnd a
normalizable solution.
In fact, for most values of E, including all the complex
numbers, the solutions of Eq. 10.14 grow exponentially as x
approaches ∞, −∞, or both. This type of solution makes
no physical sense; it tells us that there is an overwhelm-
ing probability that the oscillator coordinate is inﬁnitely far
away. Clearly, we want to impose some condition that gets
rid of such solutions. So let’s impose one:
Physical solutions of the Schr¨odinger equation must be
normalizable.
This is a very powerful constraint. In fact, for almost
all values of E, there are no normalizable solutions. But for
certain very special values of E such solutions do exist, and
we will ﬁnd them.

324
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
10.5
The Ground State
What is the lowest possible energy level for a harmonic oscil-
lator? In classical physics, the energy can never be negative
because the Hamiltonian has an x2 term and a p2 term; to
minimize energy, we just set p and x equal to zero.
But
in quantum mechanics, that’s asking too much. The uncer-
tainty principle says that you can’t set both x and p equal
to zero. The best you can do is ﬁnd a compromise state in
which x and p are not too spread out. Because you have
to compromise, the lowest possible energy will not be zero.
Neither p2 nor x2 will be zero. Because the operators X2
and P2 can have only positive eigenvalues, the harmonic os-
cillator has no negative energy levels, and in fact, it has no
state with zero energy either.
If all the energy levels of a system must be positive, there
must be a lowest allowable energy and a wave function to go
with it. This lowest energy level is called the ground state
and is denoted by ψ0(x). Keep in mind that the subscript
0 does not mean that the energy is zero; it means that it is
the lowest allowable energy.
There is a very useful mathematical theorem that helps
identify the ground state. We won’t prove it here, but it is
very simple to state:
The ground-state wave function for any potential has no
zeros and it’s the only energy eigenstate that has no
nodes.
So all we have to do to ﬁnd the ground state of our har-
monic oscillator is to ﬁnd a nodeless solution for some value

10.5. THE GROUND STATE
325
of E. It doesn’t matter how we ﬁnd it—we can use mathe-
matical tricks, make guesses, or just ask the professor. Let’s
use the latter method. (I’ll play the role of the professor.)
Figure 10.1: Harmonic Oscillator Ground State
Here is a function that works:
ψ(x) = e−ω
2¯h x2.
(10.15)
This function is shown schematically in Fig. 10.1. As you
can see, it’s concentrated near the origin, where we expect
the lowest energy state to be concentrated. It goes to zero
very quickly as it moves away from the origin, so the integral
of the probability density is ﬁnite. And, importantly, it has
no nodes. So it has a chance of being our ground state.
Let’s see if we can ﬁgure out what the Hamiltonian does
to this function. The ﬁrst term of the Hamiltonian (the left
side of Eq. 10.14) tells us to apply the operator

326
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
−¯h2
2
∂
∂x2
to ψ(x). Let’s calculate that term, one derivative at a time.
The ﬁrst step is
∂ψ(x)
∂x
= −ω
2¯h(2x)e−ω
2¯h x2,
which simpliﬁes to
∂ψ(x)
∂x
= −ω
¯hxe−ω
2¯h x2.
When we take the second derivative, there will be two terms
because of the product rule:
∂2ψ(x)
∂x2
= −ω
¯he−ω
2¯h x2 + ω2
¯h2 x2e−ω
2¯h x2.
Let’s plug this result back into Eq. 10.14, and at the same
time replace ψ on the right side with our guess, e−ω
2¯h x2:
¯h
2ωe−ω
2¯h x2 −1
2ω2x2e−ω
2¯h x2 + 1
2ω2x2e−ω2
2¯h x2 = Ee−ω
2¯h x2.
After canceling the terms proportional to x2e−ω
2¯h x2, we dis-
cover the remarkable fact that solving the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion just reduces to solving
¯h
2ωe−ω
2¯h x2 = Ee−ω
2¯h x2.

10.6. CREATION/ANNIHILATION OPERATORS
327
As you can see, the only way we can solve this equation is to
set the energy E equal to ω¯h
2 . In other words, we’ve found not
only the wave function but also the value of the ground-state
energy. Calling the ground-state energy E0, we can write
E0 = ω¯h
2 .
(10.16)
The ground-state wave function, meanwhile, is just the Gaus-
sian function the professor gave us:
ψ0(x) = e−ω
2¯h x2.
He’s a clever fellow, that professor.
10.6
Creation and Annihilation
Operators
Over the course of these lectures, we have seen two ways of
thinking about quantum mechanics. They go all the way
back to Heisenberg and Schr¨odinger. Heisenberg liked alge-
bra, matrices, and, had he known what to call them, linear
operators.
Schr¨odinger, by contrast, thought in terms of
wave functions and wave equations, the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion being one famous example. Of course, the two ways of
thinking are not contradictory; functions form a vector space
and derivatives are operators.
So far, in our study of the harmonic oscillator we have fo-
cused on functions and diﬀerential equations. But the more
powerful tool in many cases—particularly for the harmonic

328
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
oscillator—is the operator method.
It reduces the entire
study of wave functions and wave equations to a very small
number of algebraic tricks, which almost always involve the
commutation relations. In fact, whenever you see a pair of
operators, my advice is to ﬁgure out their commutator. If
the commutator is a new operator that you haven’t seen be-
fore, ﬁnd its commutator with the original pair. That’s when
the fun happens.
Obviously, this advice can lead to an unending chain of
boring computations. But once in a while you may get lucky
and ﬁnd a set of operators that close under commutation.
Whenever that happens, you’re in business; as we will see,
operator methods have tremendous power.
Now, let’s apply this approach to our harmonic oscillator.
We begin with the Hamiltonian expressed in terms of the
operators P and X:
H = P2 + ω2X2
2
.
(10.17)
To ﬁgure out the rest of the energy levels, we’ll use some
tricks. The idea is to cleverly use the properties of X and
P (in particular, the commutation relation [X, P] = i¯h) to
construct two new operators, called creation and annihila-
tion operators. When a creation operator acts on an energy
eigenvector (or eigenfunction), it produces a new eigenvector
that has the next higher energy level. An annihilation opera-
tor does just the opposite: it produces an eigenvector whose
energy is one level lower than the energy of the eigenvector
it started with. So, roughly speaking, the thing that they
create and annihilate is energy. They’re also called raising

10.6. CREATION/ANNIHILATION OPERATORS
329
and lowering operators. But remember: operators act on
state vectors, not on systems. To see how these operators
work, let’s rewrite the Hamiltonian in the form
H = 1
2(P2 + ω2X2).
(10.18)
This is a classical as well as a quantum mechanical Hamil-
tonian, and it would be just as correct to use the lowercase
symbols p and x. However, we’re using the boldface P and X
because we plan to focus on the quantum mechanical Hamil-
tonian.
Let’s start by doing a manipulation that is correct for
classical physics but will require some modiﬁcation for quan-
tum mechanics. In the parentheses above, we have a sum of
squares. Using the formula
a2 + b2 = (a + ib)(a −ib),
it seems that we can rewrite the Hamiltonian as
H “ = ” 1
2(P + iωX)(P −iωX),
(10.19)
and that’s almost correct. Why almost? Because quantum
mechanically, P and X do not commute, and we need to be
careful about the order of operations. Let’s expand our fac-
tored expression and see how it might diﬀer from the original
Hamiltonian in Eq. 10.18. Keeping careful track of the order
of factors, we can expand the expression as follows:

330
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
1
2(P + iωX)(P −iωX) = 1
2(P2 + iωXP −iωPX −i2ω2X2)
= 1
2(P2 + iω(XP −PX) −i2ω2X2)
= 1
2(P2 + iω(XP −PX) + ω2X2)
= 1
2(P2 + ω2X2) + 1
2iω(XP −PX).
Look at the right-hand set of parentheses in the ﬁnal line.
We have seen that expression before—it’s the commutator
of X and P. In fact, we already know its value:
(XP −PX) = [X, P] = i¯h.
Thus, the expression for our factored Hamiltonian becomes
1
2(P2 + ω2X2) + 1
2iωi¯h
or
1
2(P2 + ω2X2) −1
2ω¯h.
In other words, the factored expression we started out with
in Eq. 10.19 is actually smaller than the Hamiltonian by ω¯h
2 .
To recover the actual Hamiltonian, we need to add the ω¯h
2
back in:
H = 1
2(P + iωX)(P −iωX) + ω¯h
2 .

10.6. CREATION/ANNIHILATION OPERATORS
331
Rewriting the Hamiltonian this way and that way may seem
like an exercise in futility, but trust me, it’s not. First of
all, the last term is just an additive constant that adds the
numerical value ω¯h
2 to every energy eigenvalue. We can ignore
it for now. Later, after we’ve solved the rest of the problem,
we can add it back in. The guts of the problem are found
in the expression (P + iωX)(P −iωX). It turns out that
these two factors, (P + iωX) and (P −iωX), have some
very remarkable properties. In fact, they are the raising and
lowering operators (or creation and annihilation operators)
that I told you about earlier. For now, these are just names,
but as we go along we’ll see that the names were well chosen.
The obvious deﬁnitions would be
a−= (P −iωX)
for the lowering operator, and
a+ = (P + iωX)
for the raising operator. But history sometimes preempts
the obvious. Historically, the raising and lowering operators
have been deﬁned with an extra factor in front of them. Here
are the oﬃcial deﬁnitions:
a−=
i
√
2ω¯h
(P −iωX),
(10.20)
a+ =
−i
√
2ω¯h
(P + iωX),
(10.21)

332
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
If we use these deﬁnitions, the Hamiltonian starts to look
very simple:
H = ω¯h(a+a−+ 1/2).
(10.22)
There are only two properties of a+ and a−that we need
to know. The ﬁrst is that they are Hermitian conjugates of
each other. That follows from their deﬁnitions. The other
property is what really gives them juice. The commutator
of a+ and a−is
[a−, a+] = 1.
This is easy to prove. First, we use the deﬁnitions to write
[a−, a+] =
1
2ω¯h [(P −iωX), P + iωX)]
The next step is to use the commutation relations [X, X] = 0,
[P, P] = 0, and [X, P] = i¯h.
Apply these to the above
equation, and you will quickly ﬁnd that [a−, a+] = 1.
We can make the Hamiltonian in Eq. 10.22 even simpler
by deﬁning a new operator,
N = a+a−,
called the number operator. Once again, this is just a name,
but as we’ll see, it’s a very good name. Stated in terms of
the number operator, the Hamiltonian becomes
H = ω¯h(N + 1/2).
(10.23)

10.6. CREATION/ANNIHILATION OPERATORS
333
So far, all we’ve done is deﬁne some symbols, a+, a−, and
N, that make the Hamiltonian look deceptively simple; it’s
not clear that we are actually any closer to ﬁguring out the
energy eigenvalues. To proceed further, let’s recall my earlier
advice: whenever you see two operators, commute them. In
this case, we already know one commutator:
[a−, a+] = 1.
(10.24)
Next, let’s ﬁnd the commutator of the raising and lowering
operators with the number operator N.
We’ll do this by
brute force. Here are the steps:
[a−, N] = a−N −Na−= a−a+a−−a+a−a−.
Now, we’ll combine the terms in the form
[a−, N] = (a−a+ −a+a−)a−.
This looks complicated until we notice that the expression
in the parentheses is just [a−, a+], which just happens to be
1. Using this fact to simplify, we get
[a−, N] = a−.
We can do the same thing with a+ and N. The result is
almost the same except for the sign. Here is the whole list
of commutators in one neat package:

334
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
[a−, a+]
=
1
[a−, N]
=
a−
[a+, N]
=
−a+.
(10.25)
This is what you might call a commutator algebra: a set of
operators that closes under commutation. Commutator al-
gebras have wonderful properties that make them one of the
theoretical physicist’s favorite tools. We are now going to see
the power of this commutator algebra in the iconic example
of the harmonic oscillator, using it to ﬁnd the eigenvalues
and eigenvectors of N. Once we know these, we can imme-
diately read oﬀthe eigenvalues of H from Eq. 10.23. The
trick is to use a kind of induction procedure: we begin by
supposing we have an eigenvalue and eigenvector of N. Call
the eigenvalue n and the eigenvector |n⟩. By deﬁnition,
N|n⟩= n|n⟩.
Now, let’s consider a new vector, obtained by acting on |n⟩
with a+. Let’s prove that the result is a diﬀerent eigenvector
of N, with a diﬀerent eigenvalue. Again, we accomplish this
by straightforward application of the commutation relations.
We’ll start by writing the expression N(a+|n⟩) in a slightly
more complicated form,
N(a+|n⟩) = [a+N −(a+N −Na+)]|n⟩.
The expression in brackets on the right-hand side is the same
as Na+, with the term a+N added and then subtracted. But

10.6. CREATION/ANNIHILATION OPERATORS
335
notice that the expression in parentheses is the last of the
commutators from Eqs. 10.25. If we plug that in, we get
N(a+|n⟩) = a+(N + 1)|n⟩.
The last step is to use the fact that |n⟩is an eigenvector of
N with eigenvalue n. That means we can replace (N + 1)
with (n + 1):
N(a+|n⟩) = (n + 1)(a+|n⟩).
(10.26)
As always, when we run on autopilot, we have to keep our
eyes open for interesting results. Eq. 10.26 is interesting. It
says that the vector a+|n⟩is a new eigenvector of N with
eigenvalue (n+1). In other words, given the eigenvector |n⟩,
we have discovered another eigenvector whose eigenvalue is
increased by 1. All of this can be summarized by the equa-
tion
a+|n⟩= |n + 1⟩.
(10.27)
Obviously, we can do this again and again to ﬁnd the eigen-
vectors |n+2⟩, |n+3⟩, and so on. Remarkably, we ﬁnd that
if there is an eigenvalue n, there must be an inﬁnite sequence
of eigenvalues above it, spaced by integers. The name raising
operator seems well chosen.
What about the lowering operator? Not surprisingly, we
ﬁnd that a−|n⟩produces an eigenvector whose eigenvalue is
one unit lower:
a−|n⟩= |n −1⟩.
(10.28)

336
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
This suggests that there must be an unending sequence of
eigenvalues below n, but that can’t be correct. We already
know that the ground state has positive energy, and because
H = ω¯h(N+1/2) the downward sequence must end. But the
only possible way it can end is for there to be an eigenvector
|0⟩such that when a−acts on it, the result is zero. (We
should not confuse |0⟩with the zero vector.3) Symbolically,
this can be expressed as
a−|0⟩= 0.
(10.29)
Being the lowest energy state, |0⟩is the ground state, and its
energy is E0 = ω¯h/2. It is an eigenvector of N with an eigen-
value 0. We often say that the ground state is annihilated
by a−.
So you see, the abstract construction of a+, a−, and N
paid oﬀ. It allowed us to ﬁnd the entire spectrum of har-
monic oscillator energy levels without solving a single diﬃ-
cult equation. This spectrum consists of the energy values,
En
=
ω¯h(n + 1/2)
=
ω¯h ( 1/2, 3/2, 5/2, . . . ).
(10.30)
This quantization of harmonic oscillator energy levels was
one of the ﬁrst results of quantum mechanics, and arguably
the most important. The hydrogen atom is a wonderful ex-
ample of quantum mechanics, but it is, after all, just the
3The 0 vector is the vector whose components are all zero. The
vector |0⟩, on the other hand, is a state-vector with nonzero compo-
nents.

10.7. BACK TO WAVE FUNCTIONS
337
hydrogen atom. The harmonic oscillator, on the other hand,
shows up everywhere, from crystal vibrations to electric cir-
cuits to electromagnetic waves.
The list goes on.
Even
macroscopic oscillators, like a child on a swing, have quan-
tized energy levels, but the presence of Planck’s constant in
Eq. 10.30 means that the spacing between levels is so tiny
that they are completely undetectable.
The unending spectrum of positive energy levels for a
harmonic oscillator is sometimes called a tower, and some-
times called a ladder. It is illustrated schematically in Fig.
10.2.
10.7
Back to Wave Functions
This exercise has amply demonstrated the remarkable power
of operator algebras, and the operator method is indeed re-
markable. But it’s also very abstract. Is it useful in helping
us ﬁnd wave functions, which are more concrete and easier
to visualize? Absolutely.
Let’s begin with the ground state. We just saw in Eq.
10.29 that the ground state is the unique state that is annihi-
lated by a−. Now, let’s rewrite Eq. 10.29 in terms of the po-
sition and momentum operators, and the ground-state wave
function ψ0(x):
i
√
2ω¯h
(P −iωX)ψ0(x) = 0,
or, dividing by the constant factor,
(P −iωX)ψ0(x) = 0.

338
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
Figure 10.2: Harmonic Oscillator Energy Level Ladder. En-
ergy levels are evenly spaced. a+ and a−raise and lower the
energy level respectively. N has a lower limit of zero (the
ground state), but no upper limit.
If we now replace P with −i¯h d
dx, we get a ﬁrst-order diﬀer-
ential equation that is much simpler than the second-order
Schr¨odinger equation:
dψ0
dx = −ωx
¯h ψ0(x).
This is a simple diﬀerential equation that you can easily

10.7. BACK TO WAVE FUNCTIONS
339
solve. Or, you can just check that the ground-state wave
function
e−ω
2¯h x2
in Eq. 10.15 solves it. Calculating the wave functions for
the excited (nonground) states is even easier—we don’t even
have to solve any equations. Let’s go up the ladder to n =
+1. We can do that by applying a+ to the ground state.
Let’s call the wave function of this new state ψ1(x).
To avoid dragging the constant −i/
√
2ω¯h around in our
calculations, we’ll just drop it in our deﬁnition of a+. This
only aﬀects the numerical coeﬃcient. The resulting equation
is
ψ1(x) = (P + iωX)ψ0(x)
or
ψ1(x) =

−i¯h ∂
∂x + iωx

e−ω
2¯h x2.
Factoring out the i, we get
ψ1(x) = i

−¯h ∂
∂x + ωx

e−ω
2¯h x2.
The “hardest” part of working this out is performing an easy
derivative of e−ω
2¯h x2. Here is the result:
ψ1(x) = 2iωxe−ω
2¯h x2,

340
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
or
ψ1(x) = 2iωxψ0(x).
The only important diﬀerence between ψ0 and ψ1 is the pres-
ence of the factor x in ψ1. This has an eﬀect: it causes the
wave function of the ﬁrst excited state to have a zero, or
node, at x = 0. This is a pattern that continues as we go up
the ladder: each successive excited state has an additional
node. We can see this pattern emerge by calculating the sec-
ond excited state at n = 2. All we have to do is apply a+
again:
ψ2(x) = i

−¯h ∂
∂x + ωx

xe−ω
2¯h x2
.
We can see right away that the ωx term will result in an ωx2
term. The −∂
∂x, meanwhile, will result in two terms because
of the product rule for derivatives. One of these terms will
come from the exponential (producing another ωx).
The
other will come from taking the derivative of x. It’s clear
that what we’ll end up with is a quadratic polynomial. If we
work out these derivatives, the resulting wave function is
ψ2(x) = (−¯h + 2ωx2)e−ω
2¯h x2.
And so it goes, all the way up the ladder. We can see another
pattern here: each eigenfunction is a polynomial in x multi-
plied by e−ω
2¯h x2. Because the exponential goes to zero faster

10.7. BACK TO WAVE FUNCTIONS
341
than any of these polynomials grows, each eigenfunction ap-
proaches zero asymptotically as x goes to plus or minus in-
ﬁnity. Also, because the degree of each polynomial is one
greater than the degree of the previous one, each eigenfunc-
tion has one more zero than the previous one.4 This also ex-
plains why successive eigenfunctions alternate between being
symmetric and antisymmetric. Speciﬁcally, eigenfunctions
with polynomials of even degree are symmetric, while those
with polynomials of odd degree are antisymmetric.
The
polynomials in this sequence are very well-known. They’re
called the Hermite polynomials.
The ground-state eigen-
function e−ω
2 x2, which appears in all of these higher-energy
eigenfunctions, is symmetric in x.
Fig. 10.3 displays the eigenfunctions for several diﬀer-
ent energy levels.
Each successive eigenfunction oscillates
more rapidly than the one before it. This corresponds to
an increase in momentum. The more rapidly the wave func-
tion oscillates, the greater the momentum of the system. At
higher energy levels, the wave function also becomes more
spread out. In physical terms, this means the mass is mov-
ing farther from the equilibrium point, and moving faster.
These eigenfunctions contain another important lesson.
Although they approach zero asymptotically (quite rapidly)
they never quite reach zero. That means there is a small
but ﬁnite chance of ﬁnding the particle “outside the bowl”
that deﬁnes its potential energy function. This phenomenon,
4It turns out that these zeros occur for real values of x, but that’s
not obvious from what we’ve seen. In a physical sense, the zeros seem a
little weird, because they are points where the moving mass will never
be found, even though it’s merrily whizzing back and forth.

342
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
known as quantum tunneling, is completely unknown in clas-
sical physics.
10.8
The Importance of
Quantization
We’ve climbed a high mountain in these lectures, but it’s not
the last mountain. Looking out from the present vantage
point, we can get a glimpse of the enormous landscape of
quantum ﬁeld theory. That’s material for another book. Or
maybe three. But still, we can see a bit of the terrain from
where we are.
Consider the example of electromagnetic radiation in a
cavity, as shown in Fig. 10.4. In this context, a cavity is
a region of space bracketed by a pair of perfectly reﬂecting
mirrors that keep the radiation bouncing endlessly back and
forth. Think of the cavity as a long metallic tube that the
radiation can travel along in both directions.
There are many wavelengths that can ﬁt into the cavity.
Let’s consider waves of length λ. Like all waves, these waves
oscillate, very much like a mass on the end of a spring. But
it’s important not to get confused here: the oscillators are
not masses attached to springs.
What’s really oscillating
are the electric and magnetic ﬁelds. For each wavelength,
there is a mathematical harmonic oscillator describing the
amplitude or strength of the ﬁeld. That’s a lot of harmonic
oscillators all running simultaneously. Fortunately, however,
they all oscillate independently, so we can focus our attention
on waves of one particular wavelength and ignore all the

10.8. THE IMPORTANCE OF QUANTIZATION
343
ψ0(x)
ψ 2
0 (x)
ψ1(x)
ψ 2
1 (x)
ψ2(x)
ψ 2
2 (x)
ψ3(x)
ψ 2
3 (x)
ψ4(x)
ψ 2
4 (x)
ψ20(x)
ψ 2
20(x)
Figure 10.3: Harmonic Oscillator Eigenfunctions.
Ampli-
tudes are shown on the left, probabilities on the right. The
higher-energy wave functions oscillate more rapidly and are
more spread out.

344
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
Figure 10.4: Electromagnetic Radiation in a Cavity
others.
There is only one important number associated with a
harmonic oscillator—namely, its frequency.
You probably
already know how to calculate the frequency of a wave of
length λ:
ω = 2πc
λ .
In classical physics, of course, the frequency is just the fre-
quency.
But in quantum mechanics, the frequency deter-
mines the quantum of energy of the oscillator.
In other
words, the energy contained in waves of length λ has to be
(n + 1/2)¯hω.
The term (1/2)¯hω is not important for our purposes. It’s
called the zero-point energy, and we can ignore it. If we do,
the energy of waves of length λ becomes
2π¯hc
λ
n,
where n can be any integer from zero on up. In other words,

10.8. THE IMPORTANCE OF QUANTIZATION
345
the energy of an electromagnetic wave is quantized in indi-
visible units of
2π¯hc
λ
.
For a classical physicist this is very odd. No matter what
you do, the energy always comes in unbreakable units.
You may already know that these units are called pho-
tons. In fact, photon is just another name for the quantized
unit of energy in a quantum harmonic oscillator. But we
can also describe the same facts another way. Being indivis-
ible, photons can be thought of as elementary particles. A
wave excited to its nth quantum state can be thought of as
a collection of n photons.
What is the energy of a single photon? That’s easy. It’s
just the energy that it takes to add one more unit, namely
E(λ) = 2π¯hc
λ
.
Here, we can see something that has dominated physics for
well over a century: the shorter the wavelength of a photon,
the higher its energy. Why would a physicist be interested in
making short-wavelength photons, given that they are costly
in energy? The answer is to see more clearly. As discussed
in Lecture 1, to resolve an object of a given size, you must
use waves of that size or smaller. To see a human ﬁgure, a
wavelength of a few inches is good enough. To see a tiny
speck of dust, you may need visible light of a much smaller
wavelength. To resolve the parts of a proton, the wavelength
must be smaller than 10−15 meters, and the corresponding

346
LECTURE 10. THE HARMONIC OSCILLATOR
photons must be very energetic. In the end, it all goes back
to the harmonic oscillator.
On that note, my friends, we conclude this volume of the
Theoretical Minimum series. I look forward to seeing you in
Special Relativity.
© Margaret  Sloan 

Appendix
Pauli Matrices
σz
=
 1
0
0
−1

σx
=
 0
1
1
0

σy
=
 0
−i
i
0

347

348
APPENDIX
Action of Spin Operators
|u⟩=
 1
0

⇐⇒
σz|u⟩= |u⟩
σx|u⟩= |d⟩
σy|u⟩= i|d⟩
|d⟩=
 0
1

⇐⇒
σz|d⟩= −|d⟩
σx|d⟩= |u⟩
σy|d⟩= −i|u⟩
|r⟩=
 
1
√
2
1
√
2
!
⇐⇒
σz|r⟩= |l⟩
σx|r⟩= |r⟩
σy|r⟩= −i|l⟩
|l⟩=
 
1
√
2
−1
√
2
!
⇐⇒
σz|l⟩= |r⟩
σx|l⟩= −|l⟩
σy|l⟩= i|r⟩
|i⟩=
 
1
√
2
i
√
2
!
⇐⇒
σz|i⟩= |o⟩
σx|i⟩= i|o⟩
σy|i⟩= |i⟩
|o⟩=
 
1
√
2
−i
√
2
!
⇐⇒
σz|o⟩= |i⟩
σx|o⟩= −i|i⟩
σy|o⟩= −|o⟩

APPENDIX
349
Change of Basis
|r⟩
=
1
√
2|u⟩+ 1
√
2|d⟩
|l⟩
=
1
√
2|u⟩−1
√
2|d⟩
|i⟩
=
1
√
2|u⟩+
i
√
2|d⟩
|o⟩
=
1
√
2|u⟩−
i
√
2|d⟩
Spin Component in the ˆn Direction
Vector Notation
σn = ⃗σ · ˆn
Component Form
σn = σxnx + σyny + σznz
More Concretely
σn = nx
 0
1
1
0

+ ny
 0
−i
i
0

+ nz
 1
0
0
−1

Combined in a Single Matrix
σn =

nz
(nx −iny)
(nx + iny)
−nz


350
APPENDIX
Spin Operator Multiplication
Tables
A word about notation: Table 3 below uses the symbol i in
two diﬀerent ways. Inside a ket, such as |io⟩, it is part of a
state-label—io signiﬁes “in-out.” But when i appears outside
of a ket symbol, as in i|oo⟩, it signiﬁes the unit imaginary
number.
Table 1: Up-Down Basis
2-Spin Eigenvectors
|uu⟩
|ud⟩
|du⟩
|dd⟩
σz
|uu⟩
|ud⟩
−|du⟩
−|dd⟩
σx
|du⟩
|dd⟩
|uu⟩
|ud⟩
σy
i|du⟩
i|dd⟩
−i|uu⟩
−i|ud⟩
τz
|uu⟩
−|ud⟩
|du⟩
−|dd⟩
τx
|ud⟩
|uu⟩
|dd⟩
|du⟩
τy
i|ud⟩
−i|uu⟩
i|dd⟩
−i|du⟩

APPENDIX
351
Table 2: Right-Left Basis
2-Spin Eigenvectors
|rr⟩
|rl⟩
|lr⟩
|ll⟩
σz
|lr⟩
|ll⟩
|rr⟩
|rl⟩
σx
|rr⟩
|rl⟩
−|lr⟩
−|ll⟩
σy
−i|lr⟩
−i|ll⟩
i|rr⟩
i|rl⟩
τz
|rl⟩
|rr⟩
|ll⟩
|lr⟩
τx
|rr⟩
−|rl⟩
|lr⟩
−|ll⟩
τy
−i|rl⟩
i|rr⟩
−i|ll⟩
i|lr⟩
Table 3: In-Out Basis
2-Spin Eigenvectors
|ii⟩
|io⟩
|oi⟩
|oo⟩
σz
|oi⟩
|oo⟩
|ii⟩
|io⟩
σx
i|oi⟩
i|oo⟩
−|ii⟩
−|io⟩
σy
|ii⟩
|io⟩
−|oi⟩
−|oo⟩
τz
|io⟩
|ii⟩
|oo⟩
|oi⟩
τx
i|io⟩
−i|ii⟩
i|oo⟩
−i|oi⟩
τy
|ii⟩
−|io⟩
|oi⟩
−|oo⟩


2 × 2 matrices, combining, 188
3-vector operators, 75, 83–85, 119
3-vectors, 25, 27, 74–75, 83
orthogonal unit vectors and, 
32–33
4 × 4 matrices, from combined 2 × 2 
matrices, 188
Addition
of complex numbers, 23
vector, 26
Amplitude, 39, 108, 342, 343
for paths, 306–309
and rule, 14, 15, 20
Annihilation operators, 327–337
Anti-Hermitian operator, 250
Antisymmetric eigenfunctions, 341
Apparatus, measurement and, 5–13, 
37–38, 71, 75, 81–82, 83–84, 91, 
126–127, 180, 219–224, 227–230
Associative property, 26, 193, 239
Atoms, 259, 290, 311
in crystal lattice, 313
hydrogen, 336–337
quantum mechanics and, 2, 71, 
149, 316
size of, 104
spins of, 180–181
wave packets and, 297, 301
Average,140–141, 157–158, 213, 271, 
286, 288, 292, 295
bra-ket notation for, 106–107
defining, 105–106
See also Expectation values
Average value, 105
Axioms, vector space, 24–27
Basis of simultaneous eigenvectors, 
131–133
Basic vectors, 32–34, 38, 40, 41, 
48–49, 54, 55, 64, 67, 97, 
98, 106, 120–125, 130–136, 
173, 185, 189, 191,195, 196, 
198, 202, 204, 208, 210, 211, 
219, 224, 236, 237, 251, 258, 
260–263, 275
components, 56
entangled states, 165–167
labeling, 150.151, 152, 153, 154, 
160–163
product states, 163–165
Bell, John, 223, 227
Bell’s theorem, 227–231
Boolean logic, 13–18
Bracket notation, 11
Bra-ket notation, 105
for averages, 106–107
Bras (bra vectors), 28–30, 240
inner product and, 30–32
linear operators and, 58–59
outer products and, 194
Index
353

354 
INDEX
Canonical momentum, 315, 318–320
Canonical momentum conjugate to 
x, 315, 318–320
Cartesian coordinates, 89, 116,  
136
Cartesian representation, of complex 
number, 22
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, 142
triangle inequality and, 142–146
Change
in classical physics, 94
continuity and, 100
unitarity and incremental, 100
Classical entanglement, 155–160
Classical equations, quantization 
and, 289–290
Classical limit, 295–301
Classical physics
change in, 94
change in expectation values over 
time and, 109–114
commutators and, 266–268
momentum in, 255
particle dynamics and, 279
pure and mixed states and, 
199–200
quantum mechanics vs., 2–3
testing propositions of, 16–18
Collapse of the wave function, 
126–127
Column vectors, 27–28, 49
kets and, 29
spin states as, 47
Commutation relations, 118, 119, 
138–139, 287, 309, 328, 332, 
334
Commutative property, 26
Commutator algebra, 334–337
Commutators, 111–116, 138, 142, 
146, 147, 269, 280, 287, 293, 
294,
classical physics and, 266–268
operators and, 328, 330, 332, 333, 
334, 335
Poisson brackets and, 112–114, 
265–268
Commuting variables, complete sets 
of, 129–136
wave functions, 134–136
Complex conjugate, 23
Complex conjugate numbers, 28, 30
Complex conjugation, for operators, 
59–61
Complex numbers, 21–30, 34, 38, 
42, 44
addition of, 23
eigenvalues and, 58
multiplication of, 23
phase-factors, 24
representations of, 22
Complex vector spaces, orthonormal 
basis and, 33
Component matrices, building 
tensor product matrices from, 
188–192
Component, 56
of 3-vector, 25, 74–75, 83, 116
addition of, 27
of angular momentum, 119
of basis vector, 56
of generic state, 38
inner products and, 31, 34
multiplication of, 28
of phase factor, 24
of spin, 9, 13, 16–17, 20, 37, 69, 
71, 75, 77, 83–84, 87, 90–91, 
116–117, 119, 130–131, 138–
139, 162, 167–168, 170, 174–
175, 176, 178–179, 180–181, 
218, 222, 251, 257, 260, 349
of spin operator, 71–72, 75, 116
of state-vector, 40, 227, 237, 336n
of system, 154, 222
of vector, 8, 9–10
wave functions and, 136
Component form
of addition, 23, 27–28
of bra-vectors, 59
equation in, 54, 59, 79
 of multiplication, 58–59
of tensor product operators, 155, 
171–172, 184, 188, 204

INDEX 
355
Component matrices, 188–192
Composite observables, 175–181
Composite operator
composite vectors and, 171
energy and measurement of, 
180–181
Composite state, two spin, 161–181
Composite systems
mixed and pure states and, 
200–201
observables in, 167–175
product states, 163–165
representing, 151–155
tensor products and, 150–155
See also Entanglement
Composite vectors, composite 
operators and, 171
Conservation of distinctions,  
97–99
Conservation of energy, 114–115
Conservation of overlaps, 99
Continuity, 100–101
Continuous functions, 236–250
functions as vectors, 238–245
integration by parts, 245–246
linear operators, 246–250
wave functions and, 236–238
Correlation
of near-singlet state, 234
of product state, 232
of singlet state, 233
Correlation test for entanglement, 
213–214
Creation operators, 327–337
Crystal lattice, atom in, 313
Degeneracy, 64
Density matrices, 184, 196–199
calculating, 210–212
entanglement and, 199–202
of near-singlet state, 234
notation for, 201–202
of product state, 232
properties of, 207
for single spin, 202–203
of singlet state, 233
two-spin system and, 203–217, 
231
Density matrix test for 
entanglement, 214–218
Determinism
in classical physics, 94
in quantum mechanics, 9–11, 96
Dirac, Paul, 105, 113, 194, 278
Dirac delta functions, 241, 242–245, 
253
Dirac’s bracket notation, 11
Distributive property, 26
Dot product, 30, 31, 144, 180
Down states, 219–221
Dual number systems, 23
Eigen-equation, 256
Eigenfunctions, 253
alternation between being 
symmetric and antisymmetric, 
340–341
for energy levels, 341, 343
harmonic oscillator, 341, 343
Eigenstate, collapse of the wave 
function and, 126–127
Eigenvalues, 56–59, 70, 71–72
of density matrix, 207, 215–217
energy, 121, 322–323
of Hermitian operators, 62–63
of operators, 80
of position, 252–254
of spin operator, 76, 77–78
Eigenvectors, 56–59, 70
of annihilation operator, 328
of creation operator, 328
defined, 57
energy, 121, 322–323
of Hermitian operator, 64–67
of momentum, 255–260
of operators, 80
of position, 252–254
of projection operator, 194
simultaneous, 131–133
of spin operator, 76, 77–80
Einstein, Albert, 155, 175, 223, 227
Electric current, 313

356 
INDEX
Electromagnetic radiation in cavity, 
342–345
Electromagnetic waves, 313
Electrons, 2, 149, 259, 301
spin of, 3–4, 116, 180, 290
wave packets and, 301
waves and, 235
Energy
composite operator and, 180–181
conservation of, 114–115
creation and annihilation 
operators and, 328–337
frequency and, 123
harmonic oscillator and, 314–316, 
317–319
of particle with negative 
momentum, 278
of photon, 345
See also Hamiltonian
Energy eigenvalues, 121, 322–323
Energy eigenvectors, 121, 322–323
Energy levels
eigenfunctions for, 341, 343
harmonic oscillators and, 322–323, 
336–337, 338
Entangled states, 165–167
Entanglement, 149–181
Bell’s Theorem and, 227–231
classical, 155–160
combining quantum systems, 
160–161
composite observables, 175–181
correlation test for, 213–214
density matrices and, 184, 
199–202, 210–212
density matrix test for, 214–218
entangled states, 165–167
example: calculating a density 
matrix, 210–212
locality and, 223–226
of near-singlet state, 234
observables and, 167–175
process of measurement and, 
218–223
of product state, 163–165, 232
of singlet state, 233
summary of, 231–234
tests for, 212–218
for two spins, 161–163, 202–210
Euler-Lagrange equations, 305n
Expectation values, 87–88, 91, 
105–108
change over time in, 109–114
conservation of, 115
correlation test for entanglement 
and, 213–214
for density matrix, 198
of entangled state, 172–175
of near-singlet state, 234
particle dynamics and, 278–279
of product state, 232
of projection operator, 195–196
of singlet state, 233
in spin over time, 116–119
Experiments
apparatus and, 5–13
invasiveness of, 12–13
probabilities for outcomes of (see 
Probabilities for experimental 
outcomes)
two-state system, 4–11
Feynman, Richard, 302, 309
Forces, 290–294
Fourier transforms, 260–261, 265, 
285
Frequency
energy and, 123
of harmonic oscillator, 344–345
Functions
Dirac delta, 241, 242–245, 253
Gaussian, 327
normalizable, 318
potential, 291, 297–298
probability, 105–106, 213, 295
as vectors, 238–245
vector space, 27–28
zero, 239
See also Continuous functions; 
Eigenfunctions; Wave functions
Fundamental theorem of quantum 
mechanics, 64

INDEX 
357
Gaussian curve, 301
Gaussian function, 327
Gaussian wave packets, 301
General Schrödinger equation, 102, 
274
General uncertainty principle, 
146–148, 268, 269–270
Gluons, 259
Gram-Schmidt procedure, 67–69
Gravitons, 280
Ground states, 324–327
annihilation of, 336
wave functions for, 337–339
Hamiltonian, 99–102
canonical momentum and, 
319–320
conservation of, 115
entanglement and, 181
for harmonic oscillator, 318–320, 
321, 322–323, 324–326, 329–
334, 336
motion of particles and, 274–278
nonrelativistic free particles and, 
280–283
quantum, 101, 103
spin in magnetic field, 116–119
time evolution of system and, 274
Hamiltonian operator, Schrödinger 
ket and, 124
Hamilton’s equations, 274, 279
Harmonic oscillator, 311–346
annihilation operators, 327–337
classical description, 314–316
creation operators, 327–337
energy levels, 322–323
ground state, 324–327
prevalence in physics, 311–313
quantization and, 342–346
quantum mechanical description, 
316–321
Schrödinger equation, 321–322
wave functions, 337–342
Harmonic oscillator energy level 
ladder/tower, 337, 338
Heisenberg, Werner, 327
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, 
139–140, 148, 269–271
Hermite, Charles, 62
Hermite polynomials, 341
Hermitian
density matrices as, 207, 208
momentum as, 262
position as, 262
projection operators as, 194
Hermitian conjugation/conjugate, 
59–61, 62, 63, 65, 97–98, 100, 
332
Hermitian matrix, 62, 137–138, 
195n, 208
Hermitian observable, 262
Hermitian operators, 52, 101, 112, 
138, 255
action on state-vector, 107–108
in composite space of states, 168
eigenvector of, 139, 236, 262
expectation value of, 109
linear operators as, 70, 73–74, 
246–250
orthonormal bases and, 64–67
orthonormal edge vectors of, 136
overview, 61–63
particles and, 252
trace of, 196
Hilbert, David, 239
Hilbert spaces, 25, 239
Hooke’s law, 312
Hydrogen atom, 336–337
Identity, resolving, 261–264
Identity operator, from projection 
operators, 195
Inner products, 28–29, 30–32, 193
Integrals, replacing sums, 240, 241
Integration by parts, 245–246
Kets (ket vectors), 28–30
axioms of, 25–27
composite systems and, 153–154
inner product, 30–32
Schrödinger, 124–126
Kinematics, 317

358 
INDEX
Kronecker delta, 205
replaced by Dirac delta functions, 
241, 242–245
Kronecker product, 188–192, 205n
Kronecker symbol, 98, 161
Lagrange equation, 314–316
Lagrangian, 302–303, 314–316, 318, 
319
Law of evolution, 5
Least action principle, 301–305
Linearity, 27, 53
Linear motion, 295–301
Linear operators, 52–69, 246–250
eigenvalues, 56–59
eigenvectors, 56–59
Gram-Schmidt procedure, 67–69
Hermitian conjugation, 59–61
Hermition operators, 61–63
Hermition operators, orthonormal 
bases and, 64–67
machines and matrices, 52–56
observables and, 69–70, 73
outer product as, 193–196
properties of, 53
time-development operator, 97
Liouville’s theorem, 274
Locality
defined, 223–224
Einstein vs. Bell and, 227
entanglement and, 223–226
Lowering operators (annihilation 
operators), 327–337
Machines, matrices and, 52–56
Magnetic field, spin in, 116–119
Mathematical concepts
complete sets of commuting 
variables, 129–136
complex numbers, 21–24
continuous functions, 236–250
functions as vectors, 238–245
integration by parts, 245–246
linear operators, 52–69, 246–250
outer products, 193–196
tensor products, 149–155
tensor products in component 
form, 184–192
vector spaces, 24–34
Matrices
4 ⋅ 4, 188
machines and, 52–56
Pauli, 80, 118, 137
tensor product, building, 185–192
2 ⋅ 2, 188 [is this entry out of 
lexical sequence?]
Matrix elements, 55
Matrix multiplication, 56, 59
Matrix notation, transposing in, 
60–61
Maximally entangled state, 217, 221
Maxwell’s equations, 290
Mean value, 105
Measurables, states that depend on 
more than one, 129–133
Measurement, 137–139
apparatus and, 5–11, 219–223
collapse of the wave function and, 
126–127
multiple, 129–133
operators and, 80–82
process of, 218–223
states and, 2–3
Minimum-uncertainty wave packets, 
301
Minus first law, 94, 274
quantum version of, 94–95, 97
Mixed states, 198, 199–200
composite system and, 200–201
density matrices and, 208–209
Momentum
canonical, 315, 318–320
connection between quantum and 
classical physics, 268
eigenfunctions and, 341
eigenvectors of, 255–260
forces and, 292–294
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 
and, 269
proposition for, 20–21
velocity and, 286–288, 293
wavelength and, 259–260

INDEX 
359
Momentum basis, 260–265
Momentum operator, 255–257
Momentum representation, of wave 
function, 260–265
Motion of particles. See Particle 
dynamics
Multiplication
of column vector, 28
of complex numbers, 23
matrix, 56, 59
vector, 26
Near-singlet state
correlation, 234
density matrix, 234
description of, 234
entanglement status of, 234
expectation values, 234
normalization, 234
state-vector, 234
wave function, 234
Negation, 14
Neutrino, 3
moving at speed of light,  
277–278
Newton’s law, 291, 292
quantum version of, 293–294
Nonlocality, 231
Nonrelativistic free particles, 
280–283
Normalizable functions, 318
Normalization
of near-singlet state, 234
of product state, 232
of singlet state, 233
Normalized vector, 32, 40
not rule, 14
Number operator, 332–333
Observables
complete set of commuting, 133
composite, 175–181
composite system, 167–175
defined, 52
linear operators and, 69–70, 73
multiple, 130–131
Observations, collapse of the wave 
function and, 126–127
Operator method
harmonic oscillator and, 328–337
wave functions and, 337–342
Operators
3-vector, 75, 83–85, 119
annihilation, 327–337
anti-Hermitian, 250
commutators and, 328, 334
composite, 171, 180–181
creation, 327–337
Hamiltonian, 124
Hermitian (see Hermitian 
operators)
identity, 195
linear (see Linear operators)
measurement and, 80–82
misconception regarding, 81–82
momentum, 255–257
number, 332–333
projection, 194–195
spin, 74–80
state-vectors and, 80–81
time-development, 95, 97–99
time-evolution, 99–102
unitary, 95, 97–99
zero, 133
Original Schrödinger equation,  
274
nonrelativistic free particle and, 
281–283
or rule, 14, 15, 19
Orthogonal basis vectors, 48
Orthogonal states, 39–40, 97
Orthogonal state-vectors, 70, 72
Orthogonal vectors, 32, 64–67, 70
Orthonormal bases, 32–34
Gram-Schmidt procedure, 67–69
Hermitian operators and, 64–67
Outer products, 193–196
Overlap, 72, 73
Parameters, counting, 45–47
Partial derivatives, time and, 
320–321

360 
INDEX
Particle dynamics, 273–309
example, 273–279
forces, 290–294
linear motion and classical limit, 
295–301
nonrelativistic free particles, 
280–283
path integrals, 301–309
quantization, 288–290
time-independent Schrödinger 
equation, 283–285
velocity and momentum, 286–288
Particle moving in three-dimensional 
space, measuring, 130
Particles, 235–236
coordinates of, 238
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 
and, 269–271
Hermitian operators and, 252
wave function and probability for 
finding position of, 260–265
Particles, state of, 250–260
eigenvalues and eigenvectors of 
position, 252–254
momentum and its eigenvectors, 
255–260
Particle-wave duality, 236
Path integrals, 301–309
Pauli matrices, 80, 118, 137
Phase ambiguity, 42
Phase-factors, 24, 42, 46, 108–109
Phase indifference, 47, 48–49
Photons, 260, 277, 280, 345–346
Planck’s constant, 102–104, 148, 
255, 337
Poisson brackets, 280
commutators and, 112–114, 265–268
Polarization vector, 91
Polar representation of complex 
number, 22–23
Position
eigenvalues and eigenvectors of, 
252–254
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 
and, 269
proposition for, 20–21
Position representation, of wave 
function, 260–262, 263–265
Potential functions, 291
spiky, 297–298
Precession, of spin in magnetic field, 
119
Principle of Least Action, 301–305
Principle of Stationary Action, 302n
Probabilities for experimental 
outcomes, 8, 19, 48–49, 70, 
72–73, 87–90, 238, 306
replaced by probability densities, 
241, 242
Schrödinger ket and, 124–126
Probability
entanglement and, 206–207, 222
wave function and, 260–261, 264, 
270
Probability amplitudes, 39, 108–109
Probability density, 199, 317, 325
replacing probabilities, 241, 242
Probability distribution, 110, 112, 
213
in classical mechanics, 158–159
particle dynamics and, 278–279
uncertainty and, 140–141
Probability function, 105–106, 213, 
295
Product states, 163–165
correlation, 232
counting parameters for, 165
density matrix, 232
density matrix test for 
entanglement and, 215–218
description of, 232
entanglement status, 232
expectation values, 232
normalization, 232
state-vector, 232
wave function, 232
Projection operators, 194
properties of, 194–195
Propositions
classical, 13–16
classical, testing, 16–18
quantum, testing, 18–21

INDEX 
361
Pure states, 198, 199–200
composite system and, 200–201
density matrices and, 207–209, 
217
Quantization, 288–290
importance of, 342–346
Quantum abstractions, 2
Quantum electrodynamics, 290
Quantum field theory, 342
path integrals and, 309
Quantum Hamiltonian, 101, 103
Quantum mechanics
as calculus of probabilities, 36
classical mechanics vs., 2–3
conservation of energy and, 
114–115
focus of, 1–3
fundamental theorem of, 64
Planck’s constant and, 102–104
testing propositions of, 18–21
Quantum mechanics, principles of, 
69–74, 99
3-vector operators, 83–85
application, 85–90
operators, measurement and, 
80–82
spin operators, 74–75
spin operators, constructing, 
75–80
spin-polarization principle, 90–91
Quantum Sim, 227–231
Quantum spins, 3–4, 36–37, 227, 
229–230
Quantum states, 35–49
along the x axis, 41–42
along the y axis, 42–45
counting parameters, 45–47
incompleteness of, 36
representing spin states as column 
vectors, 47
spin states, 37–40
states and vectors, 35–37
Quantum systems, combining, 
160–161
Quantum tunneling, 341–342
Quarks, 3, 259, 311
Qubits, 3–4, 5, 311
measuring system of two, 130–131
Raising operators (creation 
operators), 327–337
Real numbers, quantum mechanics 
and, 61–63
Reversibility, 94
Row vectors, bras and, 29–30
Schrödinger, Erwin, 327
Schrödinger equations
generalized (see Time-dependent 
Schrödinger equation)
original, 274, 281–283
path integrals and, 309
solving, 119–124
spin state evolution and,  
227–230
time-dependent (see Time-
dependent Schrödinger 
equation)
for time derivatives, 110–112
time-independent, 120–121, 124, 
283–285, 286, 289
Schrödinger ket, 124–126
Schrödinger’s Ket, 102
Sets, Boolean logic and, 13–16
Simultaneous eigenvectors, 131–133
Singlet state, 166–167, 181
correlation, 233
density matrix, 233
description of, 233
entanglement status of, 233
expectation values, 233
normalization, 233
state-vector, 233
wave function, 233
Space of states, 4–5, 13, 16, 24, 25, 
37, 40, 44, 71, 94, 124, 150–151, 
160, 162, 165, 166, 167–168, 
216, 219, 238, 274, 289, 317
Speed of light, particles moving at, 
277–278
Spherical coordinates, 89–90

362 
INDEX
Spin
3-vector operators and, 83–85
along the x axis, 41–42
along the y axis, 42–45
density matrix for, 202–203
expectation values of, 87–88, 91
interaction with apparatus,  
5–13
in magnetic field, 116–119
number of distinct states for, 
45–47
quantum, 3–4, 36–37, 227, 
229–340
uncertainty principle and, 20
See also Qubits; Two spins
Spin components, simultaneous 
measurement of, 138–139
Spin operators, 74–75
constructing, 75–80
Spin-Polarization Principle, 90–91, 
172
Spin states
as column vectors, 47
representing, 37–40
Schrödinger’s equation and 
evolution of, 227–230
Spring constant, 312
Standard deviation, 140, 141
State
of apparatus, 219–220
change over time, 94, 274
maximally entangled, 217, 221
measurement and, 2–3
mixed (see Mixed states)
near-singlet (see Near-singlet 
state)
of particles, 250–260
pure (see Pure states)
quantum (see Quantum states)
in quantum mechanics, 2
singlet (see Singlet state)
that depend on more than one 
measurable, 129–133
triplet, 166–167, 179, 181
unambiguously distinct, 70, 72
State-labels, for composite system, 
152, 153, 154, 160–161
State of system, in classical vs. 
quantum physics, 21, 273–274
State space, Boolean logic and, 
13–16
State-vectors, 70
action of Hermitian operator on, 
107–108
as complete description of system, 
175
evolution of with time, 99
of near-singlet state, 234
operators and, 80–81
phase-factor and, 108–109
physical properties of, 46
of product state, 163–165, 232
representing spin states using, 
37–40
of singlet state, 233
time derivative of, 102
time evolution of, 95–96
wave functions and, 136
See also Bras (bra vectors); Kets 
(ket vectors); Singlet state; 
Triplet states
Statistical correlation, 158
Subset, 13, 14, 15–16
Sums, integrals replacing, 240
Symmetric eigenfunctions, 340–341
Systems
number of parameters 
characterizing, 45–47
quantum, combining, 160–161
See also Composite systems; Two-
spin system
Tensor products, 149–155, 165, 176
Tensor products in composite form, 
184–192
building tensor product matrices 
from basic principles, 185–187
building tensor product matrices 
from component matrices, 
188–192

INDEX 
363
Tests for entanglement, 212–218
Time
change in expectation values over, 
109–114
conservation of distinctions and, 
97–99
determinism and, 96
partial derivatives and, 320–321
time-evolution operator, 99–102
unitarity, 95, 98–99
See also Schrödinger equations
Time dependence, 116, 125, 286, 
322. See also Uncertainty
Time-dependent Schrödinger 
equation, 102
harmonic oscillation and, 321–323
particle dynamics and, 274, 
275–276, 289, 302
solving, 120, 121–124
state of system and, 126
Time derivatives, 102
Schrödinger equation for, 110–112
Time-development operator, 95
conservation of distinctions and, 
97–99
Time evolution, 274
determinism and, 96
entanglement and, 181
unitary operators and, 98–99
Time-evolution operator, 99–102
Time-independent Schrödinger 
equation, 120–121, 124
particle dynamics and, 283–285, 
286, 289
Trace
of density matrix, 206, 207, 209
of projection operator, 195, 196
properties of, 209
Trajectories, path integrals, 301–309
Transposing, 60–61
Triangle inequality, 142–146
Triplet states, 166–167, 179, 181
Truth-value, 13–14
Two spins, 161–181
entanglement for, 202–210
Two-spin system
Bell’s theorem and, 230–231
density matrix of, 202–212, 
214–218, 226, 231
Two-state system, experiment on, 
4–11
Uncertainty
Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, 142
defined, 140–141
triangle inequality and Cauchy-
Schwarz inequality, 142–146
Uncertainty principle, 20, 139–140, 
146–148
Heisenberg, 139–140, 148
Unitarity, 95, 98–99, 100
Unitary evolution, 218, 222, 225
Unitary matrix, 225
Unitary operators, 95, 97–99
Unitary time evolution, 181
Unit matrix, 137
density matrix and, 217
Unit (normalized) vector, 32
state of system and, 40
Unit operator, as observable, 138
Up states, 71, 87–88, 219–220, 
221–222
Vector addition, 26
Vectors
basis (see Basis vectors)
column, 27–28, 29, 47, 49
concept of, 24–25
functions as, 238–245
normalized, 32, 40
orthogonal, 32, 64–67, 70
polarization, 91
quantum states and, 35–37
row, 29–30
three-(3-vector), 25, 27, 32–33, 
74–75, 83
unit, 32, 40
See also Bras (bra vectors); 
Eigenvectors; Kets (ket 
vectors)

364 
INDEX
Vector space, 24–34
axioms, 24–27
bras, 28–30
column vectors, 27–28
functions and, 27–28, 239–240
inner products, 30–32
kets, 28–30
orthonormal bases, 32–34
tensor product as, 165
triangle inequality and, 142–146
Velocity
momentum and, 286–288, 293
of quantum mechanical particle, 
286–288
Venn diagram, 14, 16
Wave functions, 134–135, 236–238
action of Hamiltonian on, 320–321
calculating density matrices and, 
206–207
collapse of, 126–127
entanglement and, 212–213
ground-state, 324–327
locality and, 225–226
measurement and collapsing, 218, 
222–223
momentum and, 255–259
momentum representation, 
260–265
of near-singlet state, 234
operator method and, 337–342
position representation, 254, 
260–262, 263–265
of product state, 232
representing particles, 253–254
of singlet state, 233
state-vectors and, 136
Wavelength, momentum and, 
259–260
Wave packets, 295–301
bimodal, 296–297
Gaussian, 301
harmonic oscillation and, 322
minimum-uncertainty, 301
moving at fixed speed, 276–277
for nonrelativistic free particle, 
283
Waves, 235–236
harmonic oscillator and, 313
Wheeler, John, 52
x axis, spins along, 41–42
y axis, spins along, 42–45
Zaxon, 278
Zero function, 239
Zero operator, 133

