Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications 
I cannot tell how the truth may be 
I say the tale as it was said to me 
--- Sir Walter Scott 

Fundamental Theories of Physics 
An International Book Series on The Fundamental Theories of Physics: 
Their Clarification, Development and Application 
Editor: 
ALWYN VAN DER MERWE, University ()f Denver, US.A. 
Editorial Advisory Board: 
JAMES T. CUSHING, University of Notre Dame, US.A. 
GIANCARLO GHIRARDI, University of Trieste, Italy 
LAWRENCE P. HORWITZ, Tel-Aviv University, Israel 
BRIAN D. JOSEPHSON, University of Cambridge, UK. 
CLIVE KILMISTER, University (~f London, UK. 
PEKKA J. LAHTI, University ofTurku, Finland 
ASHER PERES, Israel Institute ()fTechnology, Israel 
EDUARD PRUGOVECKI, University of Toronto, Canada 
TONY SUDBURY, University ()fYork, u.K. 
HANS-JURGEN TREDER, Zentralinstitutfiir Astrophysik der Akademie der 
Wissenschaften, Germany 
Volume 137 

Quantum Mechanics: 
Theory and Applications 
by 
Ajoy Ghatak 
Indian Institute of Technology 
New Delhi, India 
and 
S. Lokanathan 
Jawahar Lal Nehru Planetarium, 
Bangalore, India 
SPRINGER SCIENCE+ BUSINESS MEDIA, B.V. 

A c.r.P. Catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress. 
ISBN 978-1-4020-2129-9 
ISBN 978-1-4020-2130-5 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4020-2130-5 
Printed on acidJree paper 
All Rights Reserved 
© 2004 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 
Originally published by Kluwer Academic Publishers in 2004 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 2004 
No part of this work may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, microfilming, recording 
or otherwise, without written permission from the Publisher, with the exception 
of any material supplied specifically for the purpose of being entered 
and executed on a computer system, for exclusive use by the purchaser of the work. 

To our teachers: 
Professor H.A. Bethe 
Professor D.S. Kothari 
Professor RC. Majumdar 
Professor R Serber 

Table of Contents 
Acknow ledgements 
Preface 
Prologue 
Chronological Development of Quantum Mechanics: 
A Very Brief Account 
Physical Constants 
Part I: Mathematical Preliminaries 
Chapter I: The Dirac Delta Function 
Chapter 2: Fourier Transforms 
Part II: Basic Quantum Mechanics 
ix 
Xl 
XV 
xli 
xlvii 
3 
19 
Chapter 3: Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
31 
Chapter 4: Time Dependent Schrbdinger Equation 
71 
Chapter 5: Propagation of Wave Packets and Concept of Group Velocity 
89 
Chapter 6: Bound State Solutions of the SchrOdinger Equation 
lIS 
Chapter 7: Linear Harmonic Oscillator: I 
Solution of the Schrbdinger Equation and Relationship 
with the Classical Oscillator 
159 
Chapter 8: One-Dimensional Barrier Transmission Problems 
197 
Chapter 9: Angular Momentum I-The Spherical Harmonics 
221 
Chapter 10: Spherically Symmetric Potentials Hydrogen Atom Problem, 
Rotation Vibration Spectra, Three-Dimensional Oscillator 
245 
Chapter 11: Dirac's Bra and Ket Algebra 
291 
Chapter 12: Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
Solutions Using Bra and Ket Algebra 
308 
Vll 

viii 
Chapter 13: Angular Momentum II 
Using Bra and Ket Algebra 
339 
Chapter 14: Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
The Stern-Gerlach Experiment, Larmor Precession 
and Magnetic Resonance 
357 
Chapter 15: Angular momentum III 
Eigenfunctions Using Operator Algebra 
389 
Chapter 16: The Double Well Potential and the Krbnig-Penney Model 
401 
Chapter 17: The JWKB Approximation 
423 
Chapter 18: Addition of Angular Momenta: 
The Clebsch-Gordan Coefficients 
478 
Chapter 19: Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
493 
Chapter 20: Effects of Magnetic Field 
534 
Chapter 21: The Variational Method 
560 
Chapter 22: The Helium Atom and the Exclusion Principle 
579 
Chapter 23: Some Select Topics 
598 
Chapter 24: Elementary Theory of Scattering 
625 
Chapter 25: Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
676 
Chapter 26: The Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation and the 
Einstein Coefficients 
716 
Chapter 27: The Quantum Theory of Radiation and Its Interaction with 
Matter 
742 
Chapter 28: Relativistic Theory 
779 
Appendices 
809 
Index 
855 

Acknow ledgements 
We are indebted to our colleagues at lIT Delhi and at Rajasthan University for 
many enlightening discussions related to many aspects of quantum mechanics. 
We are indebted to various authors and publishers for their permissions to use 
material from their publications. We are very grateful to Professor Victor F. Weis-
skopf and W.H. Freeman & Co. for allowing us to reprint the essay What is Quan-
tum Mechanics-in fact, Professor V. Lakshminarayanan of University of Mis-
souri at St. Louis had brought to our attention the essay by Professor Weisskopf. 
We express our gratitude to the Niels Bohr Archives in Copenhagen for provid-
ing the original photograph on the Stem-Gerlach experiment. We are also grate-
ful to Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading; Mc-Graw-Hill Book Co., New 
York; Oliver and Boyd Ltd., Edinburgh; Oxford University Press, Oxford; Penguin 
Books Ltd., Middlesex and Prentice Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs for permission to 
adapt figures, tables and a few analysis from the following books: G. Baym, Lec-
tures on Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley (1969); P.A.M. Dirac, Principles 
of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford University Press (1958); H. Enge, Introduction 
to Nuclear Physics, Addison-Wesley (1966); R.P. Feynman, R.B. Leighton and 
M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, Vol. III, Addison-Wesley (1965); 
LS. Hughes, Elementary Particles, Penguin (1972); v.I. Kogan and V.M. Galit-
sky, Problems in Quantum Mechanics, Prentice-Hall (1963); R.A. Newing and J. 
Cunningham, Quantum Mechanics, Oliver and Boyd (1967); L. Pauling and E.B. 
Wilson, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-HilI (1935); L.I. Schiff, 
Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hili (1955); N. TraIIi and F.R. PomiIla, Atomic 
Theory, McGraw-Hili (1969). 
We are very grateful to Mr Monish Das, Dr. Rajeev Jindal, Dr. Vipul Rastogi, 
Dr. Mukesh Pratap Singh and Mr Prem Bhawnani for their help in creating some 
of the figures using GNUPLOT and Mathematica. We also thank Mr. Norman Lim 
of National University of Singapore for carrying out numerical calculations associ-
ated with some of the figures in Chapter 8. We are also grateful to Mr Monish Das, 
Mr Prem Bhawnani and Mrs. Bhawna Bhardwaj, for their help in the preparation 
of the manuscript. 
We end with the quotation (which we found in a book by G.L. Squires): I have 
learnt much from my teachers, but more from my pupils. To all our pupils, we owe 
a very special debt. 
IX 
Ajoy Ghatak 
S. Lokanathan 

Preface 
Quantum mechanics has long been recognized as an essential ingredient in the 
training of a student in Physics, Chemistry and Electrical Engineering. No matter 
which specialization the student chooses in his later career, it is necessary for him to 
develop not merely an understanding of the basic principles of quantum mechanics 
but an ability to apply these principles in his field. 
Textbooks on quantum mechanics addressed to students at under-graduate and 
post-graduate levels generally have few solved problems; moreover, the problems 
suggested are largely of an academic nature with a greater emphasis on theory than 
on applications. This book makes an attempt to present the basic concepts in quan-
tum mechanics with emphasis on applications in other areas like nuclear physics, 
astrophysics, solid state physics, quantum optics, etc. Each chapter is followed by 
a number of problems. The solutions to most of these problems have been given at 
the end of the chapter. This will enable the student to refer to the solutions when 
necessary and at the same time provide him an opportunity, if he so wishes, to 
solve some or all of these problems by himself before consulting the solutions. 
The emphasis has not been on rigour but on making results plausible and helping 
the students to become familiar with methods for solving problems. The book has 
evolved from lectures given by the authors (to students of physics and engineering) 
at the Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi and at University of Rajasthan, 
Jaipur. 
As a prologue to the book we have reprinted an essay, 'What is Quantum 
Mechanics?', by Professor Victor F. Weisskopf. It is so well written that we felt 
it would motivate the reader to learn more of this fascinating subject. Following 
the prologue are two short chapters on mathematical preliminaries-one on the 
Dirac delta function and the other on Fourier transforms. The two topics are so 
extensively used in quantum mechanics that even if the students are familiar with 
them, it would be of great advantage to discuss these topics (again) in about two to 
three lectures right in the beginning of the course. 
After the mathematical preliminaries, we have discussed (in Chapter 3) wave-
particle duality and the uncertainty principle. In Chapter 4, we have introduced 
the SchrOdinger equation and in Chapter 5, we have discussed the solutions of the 
SchrOdinger equation corresponding to a free particle leading to a study of the time 
evolution of a wave packet. In Chapter 6 bound state solutions of the Schrodinger 
equation are discussed. 
Xl 

xu 
We have given a somewhat lengthy account of the Dirac notation of bras and 
kets; since this is used frequently in advanced work, it was felt that the student 
would benefit greatly if he became familiar with it right at the beginning. Imme-
diately after solving the SchrOdinger equation for the linear harmonic oscillator 
problem (Chapter 7), we usually introduce Dirac's bra and ket algebra (Chapter 
11) and then solve again the linear harmonic oscillator problem using the bra-ket 
algebra (Chapter 12). It is then very straightforward to study the time evolution 
of the coherent state and its relationship with the classical oscillator; such an 
analysis brings out many salient aspects of quantum mechanics. After this, we 
usually discuss the angular momentum problem in detail (Chapters 9, 13 and 15), 
which allows us to obtain very elegantly the expressions for spherical harmonics. 
We then obtain solutions of the Schrodinger equation for spherically symmetric 
potentials-in particular, for the hydrogen atom problem and for the three- dimen-
sional isotropic oscillator problem (Chapter 10). Chapter 14 is on the Stern-Gerlach 
experiment which is indeed one of the most beautiful experiments in quantum 
mechanics. The principle of magnetic resonance has also been discussed and, in the 
process, we have been able to give an exact solution of the Schrodinger equation 
corresponding to a time dependent Hamiltonian. The chapter also has a short essay 
on the EPR Paradox. 
Chapter 16 discusses the double well problem and also the Kronig-Penney 
model. In Chapter 17 we have also given a detailed account of the JWKB solu-
tions of the SchrOdinger equation; the JWKB methodology represents one of the 
very powerful approximate methods that is extensively used not only in quantum 
mechanics but also in many other areas. The first seventeen chapters have been 
developed into a video course which is now available through FITT (Foundation 
for Innovation & Technology Transfer) at lIT, New Delhi. 
Chapter 18 discusses addition of angular momenta and introduces the Clebsch-
Gordan coefficients. Chapters 19, 20, 2 I and 22 discuss time independent pertur-
bation theory, effects of magnetic fields, the variational method and the Helium 
atom. In Chapter 23, we have given a detailed discussion of some select topics 
which range from the concept of quasi-bound states to the Thomas-Fermi model 
of the atom. 
Chapters 24, 25, 26 and 27 discuss the elementary theory of scattering, time 
dependent perturbation theory, the semi-classical theory of radiation and the quan-
tum theory of radiation. Finally in Chapter 28, the Dirac equation and some of its 
solutions are discussed. 
In order to have a better appreciation of the theory, most of the figures corre-
spond to actual numerical calculations; these were generated using GNUPLOT and 
Mathematica. 
We do hope the reader enjoys going through the book; we would greatly appre-
ciate receiving suggestions for further improvement. 

xiii 
We have dedicated this book to Professor H.A. Bethe who taught one of us 
(AG) at Cornell, to Professor R. Serber who taught the other (SL) at Columbia, 
and to Professor D.S. Kothari and Professor R.C. Majumdar who taught both of us 
at Delhi University. To them we would like to extend our gratitude and respect for 
introducing us to the most beautiful subject in science. 
Ajoy Ghatak 
S. Lokanathan 

Prologue * 
What is quantum mechanics? 
Victor F. Weisskopf 
There is no doubt that the most outstanding development in modern science was 
the conception of quantum mechanics. It showed, better than anything else, the 
human capability to comprehend the fundamental principles that underlie the world 
in which we live-even when these principles run contrary to our experience in 
dealing with our everyday environment. The French philosopher-mathematician 
Henri Poincare said, It is hardly necessary to point out how much quantum theory 
deviates from everything that one has imagined until now; it is, without doubt, the 
greatest and deepest revolution to which natural philosophy has been subjected 
since Newton. 
Much happened in physics between the time of Newton and the time of quantum 
mechanics. The discoveries and insights over the last three centuries share a charac-
teristic feature: seemingly unconnected phenomena turned out to be manifestations 
of the same fundamental principle. It was a period of unification of disparate fields 
of experience. Here are some of the most important steps. 
Newton showed that the motion of the planets is governed by the same law as the 
free fall of an object on earth. Thus, he unified terrestrial and celestial mechanics. 
In contrast to the belief of the ancients, he showed that the world of the earth and 
of the heavens is governed by the same laws. 
Scientists in earlier days believed that heat was some peculiar substance called 
caloric, which flowed from a hot object to a colder one. Physicists in the nineteenth 
century recognized that heat is the random motion or random vibration of the 
constituents of matter. Thus, thermodynamics and mechanics were unified. This 
feat is connected with the names of J.B. Mayer, B. Rumford, R.E. Clausius, L. 
Boltzmann, and J.W. Gibbs. 
For a long time, the phenomena of electricity, magnetism, and light appeared 
to be unconnected. In the first half of the nineteenth century, one of the great uni-
fications of physics took place. Faraday and Maxwell, together with many others, 
were able to show that all three phenomena are manifestations of the electromag-
netic field. And so the field concept entered into physics. The simplest example is 
the electric field of an electric charge that exerts a force on another charge when 
the latter falls within its range. An electric current produces a magnetic field that 
* This essay has been reprinted from the book The Privilege of Being a Physicist by Vic-
tor F. Weisskopf. Copyright © 1989 by Victor F. Weisskopf. Used with kind permission of Professor 
Weisskopf and W.H. Freeman and Company, New York. 
xv 

XVI 
exerts a force on magnetic materials. Such fields may even propagate through space 
independently of any charges or magnets, in the form of electromagnetic waves, of 
which visible light is one example. The field concept is less directly connected to 
our everyday experience than the concept of a particle, but it can easily be realized 
by our senses. For example, if one feels the attraction of a piece of iron by a 
magnet, one obtains the immediate impression that there is something surrounding 
the magnet that acts upon the iron. Finally, Einstein unified space, time, and gravity 
in his special and general theories of relativity. 
Quantum mechanics also united two branches of science: physics and chem-
istry. But it did much more. In previous great developments in physics, fundamental 
concepts were not too different from those of our everyday experience, such as 
particle, position, speed, mass, force, energy, and even field. We often refer to those 
concepts as classical. The world of atoms cannot be described and understood with 
those concepts. For atoms and molecules, the ideas and concepts formed in dealing 
with the objects in our immediate environment no longer suffice. Surprising forms 
of behavior were observed that not only needed a different language but required 
new concepts to understand the properties of atoms. 
Figure I. Werner Heisenberg, Wolfgang Pauli, and Enrico Fermi at a conference in 1927, reflecting 
their enthusiasm for and joy of the new quantum mechanics. 
A small group of people conceived of and formulated these new ideas in the 
middle twenties of this century. The most important among them were W. Heisen-
berg, a German; E. Schrodinger, an Austrian; P.A.M. Dirac, an Englishman; W. 
Pauli, another Austrian; and M. Born, another German. They worked at different 

xvii 
places, but the centre of activities was in Copenhagen, where they met frequently 
under the leadership of the great Niels Bohr. Bohr was the ideal leader of such a 
group. Older than most of the others, who were then in their twenties or early thir-
ties, he contributed enormously to the conception of the new ideas by his constant 
questioning, by his criticism, and by his enthusiasm. The crowd that assembled 
around him was a group of devoted forward-looking people who, free of the bonds 
of convention, attacked the deepest riddles of nature with a spirit of joy that can 
hardly be described. That joy of insight is a sense of involvement and awe, an 
elated state of mind akin to what you feel on top of a mountain after a hard 
climb, at the shore of the blue sea, or when you hear a great work of music. It 
comes not only after personal achievement, but also after finally understanding an 
important new insight gained by the work of others. For every real scientist, it is 
great compensation for the hard work and trouble he must endure (see Fig. I). 
The quantum revolution changed our old concepts of reality in many respects. 
We are going to describe this drama in five parts-a prologue, plus four acts: 
Prologue 
Riddles of prequantum physics 
Act I 
Discovery of wave-particle duality 
Act II 
How wave-particle duality miraculously solves the riddles of 
prequantum physics 
Act III 
Act IV 
Prologue: 
Significance of wave-particle duality and the new reality of the 
quantum state 
The quantum ladder: An extension of quantum mechanics to 
nuclear and subnuclear phenomena and to the history 
of the universe 
RIDDLES OF PREQUANTUM PHYSICS 
Before quantum theory was conceived, physicists were unable to explain some of 
the most ubiquitous phenomena in our environment. Here are a few examples: A 
piece of iron, when heated, becomes first red, then yellow, then white, but nobody 
could explain why. The different colors emitted by a piece of matter come from 
the irregular heat motion of the electrons in the atoms of iron. Fast motion emits 
higher frequencies of light than slow motion. The frequency determines the color 
of the light. The laws of thermodynamics tell us that any form of motion should 
receive the same amount of energy at a given temperature, an amount that increases 
when the temperature rises. Thus we expect only an increase of intensity of the 
emitted light, not a change from red to yellow to white. This change represented 

xviii 
an unsolved riddle, somewhat like today's ignorance of the nature of memory. We 
use memory constantly, but nobody knows precisely what it is. 
We can consider more examples of unsolved questions of that period: Why 
are copper and silver metals and oxygen a gas? Why do metals have properties 
so different from other solids, such as rocks? Why do these properties persist, 
even after heating, melting, evaporating, and subsequent cooling to the original 
temperature? Why do oxygen atoms bind to hydrogen atoms to form water? Why 
does sodium gas emit yellow light when heated? Why is it that burning 1 kilogram 
of coal produces approximately 6000 calories? Why is the size of atoms about a 
hundred millionth of a finger's breadth? No one could provide any answers to these 
questions at the turn of the century. 
More problems were generated by the discovery of the electron by J.J. Thomson 
in England and H.A. Lorentz in the Netherlands at the end of the last century and, 
in particular, by further discoveries by E. Rutherford and H.G. Mosely at the begin-
ning of this century. They found that atoms consist of a heavy, positively charged 
atomic nucleus surrounded by much lighter electrons. Because the electric force 
between the positively charged nucleus and the negatively charged electrons is of 
the same form as the attraction between the sun and the planets, they concluded that 
atoms must be tiny planetary systems, with the nucleus as sun and the electrons 
as planets. Moreover, it was found that all elements seem to have this planetary 
structure and differ only in numbers of electrons. For example, hydrogen has one 
electron; helium, two; iron, twenty-six; and uranium, ninety-two. 
It was difficult to understand how elements that are so different-some are 
gases, some are metals, some are liquids-differ in their atomic structure by only 
a few electrons. For example, the element neon, which has ten electrons, is a 
chemically inactive gas; however, the element sodium, which has eleven electrons, 
is one of the most chemically active metals. An electron increase of 10 percent 
completely changes the character of the atom! No one could explain this apparent 
inconsistency between quantity and quality. 
Four observations defied all understanding at the turn of the century. 
1. The color of objects at various stages of heating (red, yellow, white). 
2. The very different specific properties of elements whose number of electrons 
is almost the same. 
3. The fact that atoms do not change their properties in spite of the many colli-
sions and interactions that they suffer in a gas or in an ordinary piece of matter. 
They quickly resume their original qualities after the perturbation. Their sta-
bility and their ability to regenerate is completely at odds with what we would 
expect from a planetary system. If our solar system were to collide or pass 
another star at a close distance its orbits and patterns would be completely 
changed and it would not return to its original form. 

xix 
4. The energy content of the atom is quantized. An atom can assume a series of 
definite energies only and never a value in between. This most surprising fact 
was found at the beginning of this century and is also completely foreign to 
a planetary system. There is no reason why the energy of planetary motion 
cannot change by arbitrarily small amounts, for example, when a meteorite 
hits a planet. An atom, however, can accept or lose only definite amounts of 
energy, those that would change its energy from one of the values in the series 
to another. 
It became clear to prequantum physicists that the analogy between an atom and 
a planetary system breaks down completely when atomic properties and processes 
are examined in detail. On the other hand, these observations left no doubt that 
the atom consisted of a positively charged nucleus surrounded by electrons, which 
ought to form a planetary system, according to the laws of mechanics known at 
that time. Everything, including our own bodies, consists of atoms. Obviously, the 
most urgent problem for physics at that time was to resolve these contradictions 
and to achieve a better comprehension of the structure and behavior of atoms. 
Act I: Discovery of wave-particle duality 
Not until the first quarter of this century did physicists find the path to the solu-
tion. It all began with a series of startling discoveries that seemingly had no direct 
connection with atomic structure. These discoveries showed that light, believed to 
be a wave, exhibited particle properties and that electrons, believed to be particles, 
exhibited wave properties. Let us call it the wave-particle duality. 
Often, when it is difficult to find an explanation for one group of strange find-
ings, another group of unexplained observations helps us to resolve both diffi-
culties. It's often easier to solve two riddles than one. Two different disturbing 
observations may lead more readily than one such observation to a solution. That 
was the case with the wave-particle duality, since it showed the way to understand 
the strange properties of the atomic world. 
Let us first look at the duality itself. We have all learned in school that light is 
an electromagnetic wave. We perceive the different wave lengths, or frequencies 
of vibration of these waves, as different colors. Red has a longer wave length and 
lower frequency than yellow or blue. How did we know that light is a wave? Let us 
look at water waves to learn about a characteristic property of waves: interference. 
When two wave trains merge, originating from two different points, they combine 
in a typical way. When the crest of one wave coincides with the crest of another, the 
two together create a stronger motion. When the crest of one wave coincides with 
the trough of another, the two wave motions cancel each other in a phenomenon 
called interference. Figure 2 shows the interference of two water waves originating 

xx 
Figure 2. Interference patterns produced by two water waves originating from two neighbor- ing 
points. [Physical Science Study Committee, Physics, D.C. Heath, Boston, 1967]. 
from two different points. We see that they reinforce each other in certain directions 
and wipe each other out in other directions. The same phenomenon was observed 
long ago by Thomas Young in light waves, as sketched in Fig. 3 and shown in Fig. 
4. The two light waves are produced by illuminating a screen with two slits. Of 
course, there is a difference between water and light waves: In the former case, the 
water surface oscillates and in the latter it is the electric and magnetic field strength 
that oscillates in space. 
Great was the surprise, therefore, when it turned out that the energy of a light 
beam cannot be subdivided indefinitely. An ordinary wave can be strong, weak, or 
still weaker, with no restrictions on its intensity or lack thereof. Not so with light 
waves! The observed light energy seems to occur in lumps called light quanta, or 
photons. The energy of a light beam is always a multiple of such lumps, never half 
a lump or ten-and-a-quarter lumps. This is a strange finding. How could it be that 
the energy of a wave cannot assume an arbitrary value, but must be a multiple of a 
definite quantum? The energy of a light wave is indeed quantized; this property was 
shown beyond any doubt. Figure 5 is an example of how it could be observed. It is 
a photograph of what we see when a light ray (in this case, an X-ray-light of very 

Sclttn 
with 
sjnak $Iit 
Scrttn 
with 
double slit 
Vl(WinS 
ICf!lCI1 
XXI 
Figure 3. Arrangement for demonstrating interference of light. The first slit defines the incoming 
wave; the second has two openings, thus producing two waves; the third shows the interference 
stripes seen on the screen at right [After Atkins, Physics, Wiley, New York, 1965]. 
high frequency) penetrates through a cloud chamber, that is a container of saturated 
steam. The vapor is in a state of pressure and temperature at which it is about to 
form droplets. Just a bit of energy deposited here and there will form a droplet. If 
the bit of energy is larger, a bigger droplet is formed; if smaller, a tinier one will 
appear. Now, looking at the picture, we see (as we might well expect) that the light 
ray gets weaker penetrating the liquid. However, it gets weaker in a special way: 
The droplets do not become smaller, but their number does. The unchanging size of 
the droplets indicates that light consists of quanta: the effect of each quantum is the 
same all along the light beam, but there are fewer droplets farther down the road 
(to the right of the picture) because part of the energy has already been used up. If 
the ray were a true wave, its intensity would have become weaker and would have 
produced smaller droplets. The weakening shows itself not by smaller drops but by 
fewer ones. Each light quantum maintains the same strength, but there are fewer of 
them when the beam becomes weaker. These and other similar observations reveal 
the graininess of light. 
Light grains (photons, or light quanta) are very small indeed. That is why they 
were not discovered earlier. Their energy was found to be proportional to the fre-
quency of light. This relationship is expressed in the simple formula, E = hf, 
where E is the energy of the photon, f the frequency, and h is a famous number 

XXll 
Figure 4. Patterns seen on the screen at the extreme right of the arrangement of Fig. 3. Upper pattern 
with red light; lower pattern with violet light. The lower pattern is narrower because of the shorter 
wave length. [Physical Science Study Committee, Physics, D.C. Heath, Boston, 1967]. 
called Planck's constant. If we measure energies in electron volts and frequencies 
in ups and downs per second, the numerical value of h is 4 x 10- 15 . Let us keep this 
formula in mind since it will be a clue to understanding many other riddles. Radio 
waves have very low frequencies and, therefore, very small quanta, according to 
this formula. The quanta are so small that it is very difficult to observe them. 
Visible light has larger quanta, but they are still extremely small. A million millions 
arriving at the same place and time would be felt as a little prick on a finger. The 
eye, of course, is very sensitive to them. X-rays are very high frequency radiation, 
and so their quanta are much larger, but still rather small. 
The graininess of light, together with the series of definite energy values of 
an atom, forces us to a new interpretation of the mechanism of light emission by 
atoms. The atom may lose or gain energy only by amounts that correspond to the 
differences between its definite energy values. For example, when an atom happens 
to be in a state of higher energy, it may get into one of lower energy by emitting a 
. . I. 
• 
•• 
" . . . .  
.' 
. '  
Figure 5. The cloud chamber shows the absorption of photons, one by one, and the weakening of 
the beam as photons are removed. The photons enter from the left and are absorbed by the argon 
atoms of the gas. They eject photoelectrons, whose tracks produce little droplets that show white in 
the photograph. You can see that the beam is weakened if you divide the photograph in half; there 
are seventeen tracks on the left half and only nine on the right. The light is actually an X-ray beam of 
a wavelength about 0.2 Angstroms. [w. Gentner, N. Maier-Leibnitz, and W. Bothe, Atlas Typischer 
Nebelkam- meriider, Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1940]. 

xxiii 
photon. The photon would be such as to carry the energy difference. Thus, an atom 
should emit light with very definite frequencies, namely, those whose quanta are 
equal in energy to the differences between the atomic energy values. This predic-
tion turned out indeed to be the case, and it explains the characteristic frequencies 
emitted by each atomic species. Quanta of yellow light of a sodium lamp carry an 
energy equal to the difference between the lowest and the next higher state of the 
sodium atom. This regularity showed that there is a logical connection between 
two mysterious facts: the quantized energy of atoms and the graininess of light. 
What does this amount to? We come to the startling conclusion that light has 
particle properties, in spite of the fact that so many indications-interference, for 
one-have shown that light is a wave! 
The mystery deepened considerably as a result of a second surprising discovery: 
particles-electrons, for example-have wave properties! The French physicist L. 
de Broglie predicted this duality by ingenious intuitive insight, even before it was 
discovered by experiment. Under certain conditions, electrons emerging from two 
nearby points do not add their intensities but give rise to weaker beams in some 
directions and to stronger beams in others, similar to the interference of two water 
waves or light beams, as was shown in Figs. 2 and 3. What we call a particle 
exhibits properties that we ordinarily ascribe only to waves. What is the electron, 
a particle or a wave? What is a light ray, a wave train or a beam of particles? 
Eddington found a telling terminology, calling photons and electrons wavicles. 
The fundamental relation between particle energy and wave frequency, E = hf, 
holds also for particles. A similar relation exists between the particle momentum 
and the wave number k (the number of wave lengths in one centimeter): p = hk. 
These relations are called de Broglie relations. They both contain the fundamental 
number h, the Planck constant. 
Obviously, we run into terrible difficulties and contradictions by assuming that 
something is a wave and particle at the same time. A school of fish swimming in a 
lake is completely different from a wave on its surface. Each fish in the school is lo-
calized, as is each particle in a particle beam, whereas a wave is necessarily spread 
out over space. These contradictions will be raised in Act III of our drama. Such 
everyday concepts as particle and wave are not applicable in the atomic realm with-
out restrictions. This will lead us to a new conception of reality. For the moment, let 
us assume that entities such as electrons and light are indeed wavicles-exhibiting 
both wave and particle properties-and see what follows from this assumption. 
Act II: How wave-particle duality miraculously solves the riddles of 
prequantum physics 
First, we can easily see a solid material becomes first red, then yellow, then blue 
and white when it is heated to higher temperatures. What are heat and temperature? 

XXIV 
In a warm material, atoms and molecules perform irregular vibrations of all kinds. 
The energy of these random motions, thermal energy, is proportional to the temper-
ature: the hotter the material, the faster the particles vibrate. Atoms and molecules 
contain electrically charged particles; when they vibrate, they emit light. But light 
is quantized; it comes in lumps of energy. If the thermal energy is not sufficient to 
produce a light quantum of a given color, that color cannot show up. Thus, a piece 
of iron at room temperature does not emit visible light because at that temperature 
the thermal energy is less than the energy of the quanta of visible light. (Iron, at 
room temperature, does emit infrared light, whose quanta are of lower energy; we 
cannot see it but we can measure it, and we feel it as a heat radiation). At a higher 
temperature, thermal energy reaches the energy of a visible quantum. Red light 
has the lowest frequency and therefore the lowest quantum in the visible range; 
then comes yellow, then blue. Thus red is the first color to be seen when the iron 
is heated. As the temperature is increased, iron becomes yellow-red, then white, 
because the sum of red, yellow, and blue is white. 
In 1900, Max Planck was the first to realize that quantum theory would lead to 
a correct description of the radiation of incandescent matter. His way of explain-
ing it was different from the description given here and somewhat more involved. 
Nevertheless, his ideas gave impetus to the development of quantum theory. 
What is much more impressive, however, is that the wave-particle duality also 
explains the stability and specificity of atoms and their special quantized states with 
definite energy values. The wave nature of electrons bestows properties on atoms 
that are quite different from what we expect of planetary systems. 
To understand the difference, we must learn something about confined waves. 
When a wave is confined to a restricted region in space, it can assume only certain 
definite wave patterns. A violin string suspended between two end points can set 
up only those vibrations whose half wave length fits once or twice, or any integral 
number of times, into the space between the two points of attachment, as shown in 
Fig. 6. 
Not only are the shapes of the vibrations determined, but also the frequencies 
(the number of ups and downs per second), once the tension of the string is kept 
fixed. Each of the different vibrations that can be set up has its characteristic fre-
quency; the string can vibrate only a set of selected frequencies. The lowest of 
these frequencies, the easiest to set up, is the one whose half wavelength just fits 
the distance between the fixed ends of the string. 
The lesson learned from the string is generally true for all kinds of waves. 
Whenever waves are confined to a finite space, we observe special wave forms and 
a set of assigned frequencies that are characteristic of the system. Most musical 
instruments are built on this principle. Stringed instruments make use of the series 
of discrete frequencies characteristic of the string; a wind instrument is based on 
natural frequencies of air waves enclosed in the pipe of the instrument, whether it 
is a trumpet or an organ pipe. Another interesting example of this phenomenon is 

xxv 
I ·I! : III , 
.. 
-"'~lilllllIlIUI UllllllljIIlIIWllUJlijUIJUII!II !UUlUILlW'U'IL<"
. · · 
Figure 6. Waveforms of a string fixed at both ends. 
a metal plate fixed at its center. If we use a violin bow to set it in vibration, we will 
find again a definite set of vibrations, with characteristic frequencies and shapes. 
We make these shapes visible by strewing sand on the plate. The sand accumulates 
at places where there is no vibration, thus delineating the shapes of the vibrations 
in Chladni figures, as shown in Fig. 7. It is entirely possible to calculate the shape 
of these patterns and predict at which frequency of vibration they will appear. All 
we need to know are the shape and elastic properties of the plate. 
Can electron waves be confined too? Indeed, they are confined in an atom! The 
positive charge of the nucleus attracts the electron and prevents it from leaving the 
immediate neighborhood of the nucleus. Now we come to the most astounding part 
of the second act of our drama. In 1926, Erwin Schr6dinger calculated the shapes 
and frequencies of the characteristic patterns that develop when electron waves are 
confined by the electric attraction of the nucleus. It is a straightforward problem of 
the dynamics of confined waves. What did he get? As expected, he found a series 
of distinct vibrations, each with its own definite shape and frequency. This is a big 
step toward solving the riddles of the atom. It not only shows that there are indeed 
well-defined modes of vibration in the atom but also reveals a connection between 
the wave nature of the electron and the existence of discrete states in the atom. 
Here we are touching on the very nerve of nature. When an electron is confined 
to a limited region around the nucleus, wave properties of the electron permit only 
certain special, predetermined patterns of vibrations. 
The real success of this idea came about when Schr6dinger calculated the wave 
patterns of the hydrogen atom-the simplest of all atoms, with its single electron 
confined by the nucleus. The result was overwhelming. He found a series of states 
of vibration that correspond in every respect to the observed quantum states of 
the hydrogen atom. The extension of waves in space corresponded very well with 

XXVI 
Figure 7. Vibrations of a circular metal plate fixed in the center [Chladni figures]. 
the observed size of the hydrogen atom. But the most surprising and convincing 
result of his calculations concerned the energy of quantum states. How do we get 
at the energies of the different states of vibration? We use the fundamental relation 
between the frequency f and the energy E: energy is frequency multiplied by 
Planck's constant. 
When Schr6dinger calculated the frequencies of these vibrations and multiplied 
them by Planck's constant, he got exactly the observed energies of the quantum 
states of hydrogen! An incredible success. Everyone who contemplates this fan-
tastic discovery sympathizes with Italian physicist Enrico Fermi, who used to say, 
when presenting this calculation in his lectures,It has no business to fit so well ! 
Confined electron waves in atoms cannot be observed directly. We can measure 
their extension, and frequencies (to be exact, we measure the differences between 
frequencies, which are observed as energy differences), but we cannot see them or 
photograph them because they would be destroyed by the light we would have to 
use in order to see them. This will be the topic of the next act in our presentation. 

XXVII 
lp. 
2p, 
21', 
3p 
3p 
4d 
4d 
4d 
'of 
4f 
U 
~ 
4p 
4f 
Sf 
sf 
H 
D 
sf 
Sd 
Sd 
6f 
Figure 8. Mathematical models of vibrations of electron waves confined by a central charge. 
[Adapted from Introduction to Atomic Spectra by H.E. White, McGraw-Hill, 1934.] 
One can make models, however, representing the results of Schrodinger's calcula-
tions. It is instructive and impressive to look at pictures of these models. Figure 8 
shows the electron wave patterns, in order of increasing frequency, or energy, the 
successive quantum states of an electron confined by a nucleus. The lowest state, 
the ground state, is the simplest one; it has spherical symmetry. The next states 
have figure-eight forms; the higher the frequency, the more involved the patterns. 

xxviii 
These are thc fundamental patterns of matter. They are the shapes, the only 
shapes, that the electron vibration can assume under conditions prevailing in atoms-
that is, under the influence of a central force (the attraction of the nucleus) that 
keeps the electron confined. We may call them the primal shapes of nature. These 
patterns are the original building blocks from which nature combines and forms 
everything we find around us. 
Let us see how the other properties of atoms are explained in terms of these 
patterns. We begin with the stability of atoms and the regeneration of their orig-
inal shapes and properties after being disturbed. Take the hydrogen atom: under 
ordinary conditions, when temperatures and pressures are not too high, the atom 
is found in the quantum state of lowest energy: it vibrates in the simplest possible 
pattern, the uppermost one in Fig. 8. To change from the lowest pattern to the next, 
the frequency, and therefore the energy, must be increased; for the hydrogen atom, 
the difference in energy is 10 electron volts (eV). Unless collisions or perturbations 
are able to deliver that amount of energy or more, a hydrogen atom stays unchanged 
in the lowest statc or pattern. Since, at room temperature, the thermal energy is only 
to of an electron volt, collisions at room temperature cannot change the hydrogen 
atom's energy, or frequency. Under these conditions, the atom is stable. It remains 
in the lowest pattern. 
Wave patterns also explain the regeneration ability of atoms. Say a hydrogen 
atom is deformed during a collision; it must assume the original pattern again when 
the perturbation is over. There are no other patterns available for the electron except 
at much higher energies. Let us look at a violin string: the player's finger presses 
down on the string; that pressure corresponds to a deformation. When the finger is 
removed, the string assumes its natural vibration. 
How do these patterns explain the specificity of atoms and the variety of ele-
ments? Here, the Pauli exclusion principle enters. It says that no more than two 
electrons may vibrate in the same pattern and that those two must have opposite 
spin. Therefore, while the hydrogen atom, with its single electron vibrates in the 
simplest possible pattern in its lowest state of energy, other atoms exhibit more 
complex patterns, even in their state of lowest energy. Each second additional 
electron must assume the next higher pattern of the scale. This accounts for the 
variety of nature, because otherwise electrons in all atoms would vibrate in the 
lowest pattern and all elements would have roughly the same properties: the world 
would not contain as many different materials and forms. 
Pauli discovered his principle empirically by analyzing the properties of atoms. 
But later on he was able to show that it follows from the fundamental laws of quan-
tum mechanics. Unfortunately, his conclusions are too complicated to be explained 
in the frame of this essay. 
The Pauli principle is the reason why neon, with ten electrons, is so different 
from sodium, with eleven. Since no more than two electrons are allowed to assume 
the same pattern, the ten electrons in the neon atom vibrate in five different patterns, 

XXIX 
the first five shown in Fig. 8. As it happens, these five patterns fit together in such a 
way that the atom has a rounded shape, without any indentations or elevations. That 
is why neon is chemically inactive. The sodium atom, however, is irregular because 
the additional eleventh electron is forced to vibrate in a different pattern, according 
to the Pauli principle. This isolated electron is loosely bound and therefore ready to 
interact with electrons around other atoms. Sodium, therefore, is chemically active. 
When an atom's electron patterns fit into a nicely rounded shape, or closed atomic 
shell, the atom is an inactive gas. The atom with the next higher number of electrons 
can be expected to be a chemically active substance, with very different properties 
coming from the new occupied pattern. Atoms having one or a few electrons over 
and above the closed shell are those that form metals, such as sodium. The addi-
tional electrons jump easily from atom to atom and therefore give rise to the high 
electric and thermal conductivity of metals. That is why they feel cold when we 
touch them. Body heat is quickly carried away by the additional electrons. 
Atomic structure provides interesting examples of how quantity determines 
quality. From the number of electrons in an atom, we can deduce the kind of 
properties a particular atom will have in its ground state by combining the various 
patterns of vibration. A telling instance happened when plutonium was produced 
in nuclear reactions for the first time. (Plutonium does not exist in nature because it 
is radioactive and decays into other elements in about 40,000 years.) The amounts 
of plutonium that were created were too small to permit any observation about 
its properties; however, it was known that the plutonium atom contained ninety-
four electrons. Thus, we were able to determine its properties from the patterns of 
the electrons vibrating around the nucleus. It was found that it must be a metal; 
it must have specific weight of about 20 grams per cubic centimeter; it must be 
brown; it must have a certain electric and thermal conductivity and elasticity. All 
this information could be obtained from the single number ninety-four. It was a 
great moment when the first cubic millimeter of plutonium was finally produced 
and these projections were confirmed. This incident illustrates the tremendous 
predictive power of atomic quantum mechanics. 
The connection between quantity (number of electrons) and quality (properties 
of the atom) points to an essential difference between quantum mechanics and 
classical physics. In the classical science, there is no well-defined state of lowest 
energy. If the electrons around the plutonium nucleus followed classical laws, the 
state of the plutonium atom would depend on the initial positions and velocities of 
the ninety-four electrons. No two plutonium atoms would be really identical. The 
same would be true, even for the hydrogen atom, with one electron since there are 
an infinite number of different ways for the one electron to circle the nucleus with 
a certain energy. There isn't even a lowest energy. The wave nature of electrons has 
changed all this. There is only one wave oflowest frequency (frequency determines 
energy), the one at the top of Fig. 8. In plutonium (as in any other atom) there is 

xxx 
only one way to put the electrons in pairs into the wave forms such as those shown 
in Fig. 8-at the lowest possible energy. 
We therefore conclude that atoms with a fixed number of electrons are all alike; 
they behave identically. Gold, with seventy-nine electrons, has the same properties 
in the United States as in the Soviet Union because there is only one unique way of 
putting seventy-nine electrons into patterns of the kind shown in Fig. 8 and obtain 
the lowest possible energy, the ground state. There are, of course, other ways to 
distribute the seventy-nine electrons, but then we would obtain higher energies: 
higher quantum states of gold. They represent a series of energy values-the spec-
trum of gold-the lowest of which is 2.3 e V above the ground state. These states 
occur only at very high temperatures, but there will always be the same series of 
states. 
Quantum mechanics introduced a concept that does not exist in classical physics: 
the concept of exact identity between atomic systems. In the classical picture we 
can always imagine arbitrary, small differences between atoms. In quantum me-
chanics, these are either exactly alike or measurably different-an important trait 
of nature. 
The patterns shown in Fig. 8 and their inherent symmetries determine the be-
haviour of atoms. They also help us to understand how atoms combine to form 
molecules and how atoms form regular arrays in crystals. The simple beauty of 
a crystal reflects the fundamental shapes of the atomic patterns on a larger scale. 
Ultimately, all the regularities of form and structure that we see in nature, ranging 
from molecular structure to the hexagonal shape of a snowflake or the intricate 
symmetries of living forms in flowers and animals, are based on the symmetries of 
these atomic patterns. The world abounds in characteristic forms and shapes, but 
only quantum mechanics can tell us-at least in principle-where they all come 
from. 
Electron patterns also explain why 6000 calories of heat are produced from 
burning a kilogram of coal. Energy is gained when carbon dioxide is formed from a 
carbon atom (in coal) and an oxygen molecule (in air) because the electron patterns 
of carbon and oxygen fit together better in carbon dioxide and therefore have lower 
energy than in the oxygen molecule and the carbon crystal. The amount can be 
calculated, and when multiplied by the number of atoms in a kilogram of coal, the 
result is 6000 calories. The reason why oxygen combines so easily with hydrogen 
to give water is that the eight electrons of oxygen are just two electrons short of the 
closed shell that we found in neon. Thus, they form a round shape when the two 
holes are filled with the electrons of two hydrogen atoms, so we get H20! 
Even the phenomena of life are based upon the characteristic electron patterns 
and their stability. The structure of DNA comes from the specific way in which 
electron patterns of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and other atoms fit to-
gether and form the well-known helix. They are resistant to thermal motion at room 

XXXI 
temperature; more energy is required to change those patterns and to disentangle 
them. 
Consequently, the DNA helix has its own stability, which explains why the same 
flowers emerge every spring and children resemble their parents. 
Schrodinger's calculations and the subsequent tremendous development of our 
understanding of the properties of atoms, molecules, gases, liquids, and solids have 
shown that the structure of matter in our environment is based on the electric 
force between atomic nuclei and electrons and how the wave-particle duality of 
the electrons respond to it. 
There is an interesting historical relation. Kepler thought that planetary orbits 
in the solar system had very definite size ratios. He connected them with the size 
ratios of simple polyhedrons. In fact, it is not so, for the sizes of the planetary orbits 
are, to a large extent, accidental. But now Kepler's idea reappears in the atomic 
world, where it is clearly understood as a typical property of electrically confined 
waves. There is a kind of harmony among the different frequencies of the electron 
patterns, a chord that can be considered a rebirth of the Pythagorean harmony of 
the spheres. These harmonies may not be particularly pleasing as musical chords to 
our ears, but they certainly appeal to our intellectual ears when they offer so much 
insight into the structure of the material world. 
Act III: Significance of wave-particle duality and the new reality of the 
quantum state 
Act II demonstrated that the wave-particle duality plays a decisive role in the 
dynamics of atoms. The wave nature of electrons permitted us to understand the 
puzzling properties of atoms, such as the stability, specificity, and discrete energy 
states. But the fundamental question remains: How can the electron be a particle 
and a wave at the same time? It is not a true particle, because it exhibits wave prop-
erties, and it is not a true wave, since its amplitude is fixed in the following sense: 
if the electron assumes one of the wave patterns of Fig. 8, it vibrates with a certain 
intensity. It cannot vibrate with half that intensity, since that would correspond to 
half an electron and there is no such thing. It is neither a wave nor a particle. 
Its wave nature is exhibited not only in the patterns of Fig. 8. Beams of free 
electrons that are not bound to atoms also show wave and particle properties. As 
mentioned before, electrons emerging from two nearby points exhibit interference 
under certain conditions, similar to the water waves in Fig. 2. On the other hand, 
the intensity of the wave representing an electron beam cannot assume any value, 
as an ordinary wave would, but only those values corresponding to a definite num-
ber of particles. Furthermore, when two electron beams cross each other and the 
electrons of one beam are scattered by the other, scattered electrons have just the 
momenta and energies we would expect from two particles colliding; however, 

XXXlI 
the directions in which they emerge are distributed according to the scattering laws 
of waves! 
Why can't we find out, by exact observations, whether an electron is a wave or 
a particle? Couldn't we try to follow the electron motion in the atom, step by step, 
to see whether it is a localized particle moving along an orbit or a vibrating wave 
spread over a region? This question goes to the heart of quantum physics. One of 
the features of classical physics is the divisibility of physical processes, the idea 
that a process can be thought of as a succession of particular partial processes. Ac-
cording to that idea, each process can be followed, step by step, in time and space. 
The orbit of an electron around the nucleus would be thought of as a succession 
of small displacements. In contrast, a wave would be thought of as a continuous 
oscillatory movement spread over a region of space. 
Here we meet one of the basic concepts of quantum mechanics. There are fun-
damental reasons why such tracing cannot be carried out. The idea of divisibility of 
motion is in serious trouble, and the trouble comes from the graininess of light. In 
order to see the details of the electron motion in the atom, we must use light waves 
with a very small wavelength, the size of the atom. Such light, however, has a high 
frequency and therefore a large energy quantum. In fact, light whose wavelength is 
as small as an atom has a quantum of energy that would be far more than enough 
to tear the electron away from the atom. When light hits an electron, it will knock 
it out of the atom and destroy the very object of our examination. This is so, not 
only when light is used to observe an object, but quite generally all measurements 
that could be of use to decide between the wave and the particle nature of the 
electron have the same result. If we attempt to perform these measurements, the 
object changes its state completely. 
The quantum nature of light or of any other means of observation introduces a 
coarseness that makes it impossible to decide between wave and particle. It does 
not allow us to subdivide the atomic orbit into a succession of partial motions, 
whether they are particle displacements or wave oscillations. If we force a subdi-
vision of the process and try to look more accurately at the wave in order to find 
out where the electron really is, we will have destroyed the subtle individuality 
of the atom that give rise to all its characteristic properties. The argument that an 
entity cannot be both a wave and a particle, because a wave is spread over space 
whereas a particle is concentrated at a definite position, no longer holds within 
atomic dimensions. The habitual concepts of location and spread are no longer 
applicable; any effort to observe them would destroy the object. 
Here quantum mechanics enters as a new and revolutionary concept. The great 
new insight of quantum physics is the recognition that individual states of the 
atom-we call them quantum states-are each indivisible wholes that exist only 
as long as they are not attacked by penetrating means of observation. The quan-
tum state is the state the atom assumes when it is left alone to adjust itself to the 
prevailing conditions. If we try to measure the location of an electron with those 

xxxiii 
penetrating means, we not only will destroy the quantum state, but will indeed find 
the electron at some place, but that place is not predictable. 
Electrons do not have a predictable position in the atom, because position is 
a classical concept, not directly applicable in the atomic realm. The results of 
our physical measurements, however, are always classical magnitudes; that is, we 
measure magnitudes of position, velocity, and energy. Therefore, we should not 
be surprised if, in some cases, all we can predict are probabilities; furthermore, the 
quantum state has been thoroughly changed after measurement. What we should be 
surprised about is that physicists were able to construct a mathematical formalism 
(quantum mechanics) for dealing with quantum reality that allows us to calculate 
those probabilities. 
The restrictions to the application of classical concepts, such as position, veloc-
ity, and momentum, are codified by the famous Heisenberg uncertainty relations. 
When we ask what is the position or the velocity of an electron in a quantum state, 
we cannot always expect a definite answer. The Heisenberg uncertainty relations 
tell us, for example, to what degree, within a quantum state of an atom, the location 
and the velocity of an electron is left undetermined. They are the warning posts 
that advise us how far we are allowed to apply habitual classical concepts before 
we get into trouble with reality. Up to here and no further may you apply your 
old-fashioned concepts. 
An important consequence follows. Certain statements about the atom must 
remain probabilistic because our concepts-for example, electron position-are 
not appropriate in the atomic quantum state. If we force the concept on the atom, 
we get only a probability for an answer: the electron will be found here with 
this probability and there with another probability. The phrase, If you ask a silly 
question, you get a silly answer, should be applied in this form: If you ask an 
inappropriate question, you get a probabilistic answer. Outside the confines of 
the Heisenberg relations, however, for objects much larger than atoms, we can 
still apply classical concepts without trouble. The orbit of an earth satellite can be 
calculated and predicted with practically unlimited accuracy. 
The quantum state has a more subtle individuality than ordinary macroscopic 
states of matter. Reality exhibits different, seemingly contradictory properties, when 
examined in different ways. In the words of David Bohm: The electron may be re-
garded as an entity that has potentialities for developing either particle properties 
or wave properties, depending on the type of instruments with which it interacts. 
Some philosophers like to say that, according to quantum mechanics, the world 
around us is not real and depends on our minds, because our observations disturb 
and change the objects. I disagree. True enough, typical quantum properties unfold 
only if atoms are not subject to methods of observation that penetrate their interior. 
But they are not exposed to such perturbations under ordinary conditions, and that 
is why characteristic quantum properties are manifest everywhere: in the color of 
objects; in the structure of crystals; in the mechanical, electrical, and chemical 

XXXlV 
properties of different substances; and, in the last instance, in the phenomena of 
life. In most of our studies of material properties, we try to maintain, not to disturb, 
the quantum states, since they gives rise to the reality of interest to us. Sure enough, 
if an atomic phenomenon is observed too closely by our clumsy instruments we 
destroy the very object of interest, its quantum state, with all its seemingly con-
tradictory properties. But just these properties are responsible for the behavior and 
appearance of matter in our environment. Hence, it is the quantum state that is 
real and exists independently from us. If close observations destroy it, and if we 
cannot describe it with our everyday concepts, too bad for those observations and 
concepts! What is real are the objects and their quantum states, since they represent 
nature. The inapplicability of some of our concepts does not make the objects less 
real. 
Although an unambiguous description of atomic reality is impossible with our 
ordinary concepts of material processes, we have an unambiguous mathematical 
scheme that gives the right predictions and probabilities for any observation. A 
physical description, however, must make use of such seemingly contradictory 
concepts as the wave picture and the particle picture. Neither can give a complete 
description, but both are necessary to understand the phenomenon in its entirety. 
Each of these mutually exclusive perspectives gives only a partial, one-sided view; 
both are needed for a full understanding. Niels Bohr introduced the term comple-
mentarity to describe this novel situation. This is why we face a richer reality in 
the quantum world than the classical picture has ever been able to describe. 
Act IV: The quantum ladder 
An extension of quantum mechanics to nuclear and subnuclear 
phenomena and to the history of the universe 
After its conception, quantum mechanics developed in two distinct directions. The 
first, broadest development was toward a better understanding of the properties 
of agglomeration of atoms, such as molecules, liquids, and solids. Quantum me-
chanics turned out to be the key to many previously unexplained properties of 
materials-such as their behaviour at high and low temperatures-and of chemical 
reactions and molecule formations. Knowing the quantum states of atoms made it 
possible to understand what happens when atoms are joined to molecules, liquids, 
or solids. Electrical and optical properties of metals, for example, tum out to be 
consequences of peculiar properties of electronic quantum states in the regular 
array of atoms in metal. The disappearance of electric resistance in some met-
als in low temperature (superconductivity) could now be explained. New forms 
of electric conductors, semiconductors, for example, were found and understood. 

xxxv 
These new insights led to the invention of the transistors and the microchip, which 
revolutionized electronic technology. 
The other development of quantum mechanics is less broad but deeper: it goes 
into the depth of the structure of matter, into the structure of the atomic nucleus, 
and later into the structure of the constituents of the nucleus. The same quantum 
mechanics that once explained atomic behavior is now found to operate on a deeper 
level within atomic nuclei and even within their constituents. 
Let us look at the atomic nucleus. It is a very small, massive, positively charged 
entity, roughly speaking, about 10,000 times smaller in diameter than the atom. It 
is responsible for the structure of atoms, since its positive electric charge attracts 
electrons and keeps them confined in the atom. That confinement produces the 
characteristic quantum states, such as those depicted in Fig. 8. 
Rutherford, who in 1911 discovered the internal structure of atoms, observed 
in 1917 that atomic nuclei also have an internal structure. He found that they con-
tained protons. The proton itself is nothing other than the nucleus of the simplest 
atom, the hydrogen atom. The additional constituent contained in other nuclei was 
recognized by Chadwick, who in 1932 discovered the neutron-a particle very 
similar in mass and character to the proton, except that it carries no electric charge, 
whereas the proton carries one unit of positive charge. Atomic nuclei were found 
to be composed of protons and neutrons, with the positive charge of a nucleus 
provided by its protons. 
With this discovery, a new branch of physics began: nuclear physics. First of all, 
the mere existence of a conglomerate of protons and neutrons suggests the action of 
a new kind of force. Electric forces could not keep protons and uncharged neutrons 
together; indeed, protons would be driven out because charged particles of equal 
sign repel each other. There must be a strongly attractive force acting between 
neutrons and protons to keep them together in such a small entity as the nucleus. 
We call it the nuclear force-such a force was indeed observed and measured. 
Then, in the 1930s, a repeat performance of quantum mechanics took place. 
Protons and neutrons are also subject to the wave-particle duality, as are all par-
ticles. The nuclear force confines them into a small area of space. Confinement 
produces characteristic wave patterns, not unlike those shown in Fig. 8. Thus, 
nuclei, like atoms, are expected to exhibit typical quantum states, with properties 
such as stability and regeneration, except that the relevant energies and energy 
differences are much larger. 
Here we come to an important principle of quantum mechanics: the energy-size 
relation. It refers to the energies of quantum states of a confined system of parti-
cles. The smaller the size of the system, the greater are those energies and energy 
differences between quantum states. They also depend on the mass greater of the 
constituents: the higher the mass, the smaller the energies. We will concentrate on 
the size dependence here; it is the more important one. 

XXXVI 
The nucleus is very much smaller than the atom. Therefore, the energies of the 
quantum states and the energy intervals between them are much greater. We call 
nuclear physics the next higher rung of the quantum ladder, the lowest rung being 
atomic and molecular physics. Indeed, it takes millions of electron volts (a unit 
of one million is a mega-electron-volt or MeV) to lift a nucleus from its lowest 
quantum state to the next one, whereas in an atom, it takes only a few electron 
volts (roughly between one and ten). Nuclear reactions imply energy exchanges 
of millions of electron volts, whereas chemical reactions between atoms deal with 
exchanges of only a few. This is why nuclear explosives are so much more powerful 
than ordinary ones. 
When a nucleus performs a transition from a higher to a lower quantum state, 
the energy difference is emitted in the form of a photon, just as it is in an atom, 
but the nuclear light called gamma rays is much more energetic than atomic light. 
In the nuclear regime, another kind of emission appears: sometimes, instead of 
a photon, a pair of particles is emitted, an electron and a neutrino, in a process 
known as radioactivity. It could not have occurred in the atomic regime, because 
it requires energies not available in atomic processes. An electron and a neutrino 
must be created. According to Einstein's famous equivalence of energy and mass-
E = me2-the creation of an electron requires the availability of at least ~ MeV, 
which is the energy corresponding to the electron mass. A neutrino is massless; it 
does not require a minimum energy to be created. Such energies as the mass energy 
of the electron are not available in transitions between atomic quantum states, but 
they are available in transitions between nuclear quantum states. 
Because of the large difference in energy, nuclear processes occur under very 
different conditions from atomic or molecular ones, processes that require energy 
exchanges of only a few electron volts. This is approximately the energy of photons 
coming from the sun. Therefore, the surface of the earth abounds with phenomena 
based on interactions of atoms and molecules. The atomic nuclei necessarily stay 
in their lowest quantum state under such conditions and therefore act as unchang-
ing entities. In our terrestrial world, nuclei never get naturally excited; they are 
never lifted into their higher quantum states; and they appear completely stable. 
Nuclear physics is dormant on earth. We observe nuclear phenomena only when 
we construct machines-cyclotrons, synchrotrons, and other particle accelerators 
or nuclear reactors-that can produce the necessary energies. 
The nuclear processes found on earth, apart from man-made ones, are the de-
cays of some naturally radioactive substances, such as radium, thorium, or ura-
nium, responsible for much of the heat produced deep in the interior of the earth. 
But they are not of terrestrial origin. They were produced when the matter that now 
constitutes the earth was ejected with tremendous energies by a supernova explo-
sion seven billion years ago. They represent the last embers of the great nuclear fire 
that created the elements. 

xxxvii 
The places of nuclear processes in nature are those regions where millions of 
electron volts are available. That happens in the interior of stars and in the ex-
plosions of supernovas. Indeed, nuclear reactions in the center of the sun are the 
sources of solar heat. They are the nuclear fire in which hydrogen nuclei are burnt 
to helium nuclei (not unlike the burning of coal to carbon dioxide in a coal fire). It 
will last four or five billion years before burning out. 
There is an even higher rung of the quantum ladder. Certain strange occurrences 
in cosmic rays, unaccountable on the basis of nuclear physics, had already been 
observed in the 1930s. The decisive discovery was made in 1950, when E. Fermi 
and his collaborators found that the proton has an excited quantum state. Soon 
thereafter, many more quantum states of the proton and neutron were discovered, 
pointing toward an internal structure of nuclear particles. Like the atom and the 
nucleus, they seemed to be a composite system made of some constituent particles 
that are combined by some kind of force and form typical wave patterns that lead 
to discrete quantum states. 
These discoveries opened up a new world of phenomena: the third rung of the 
quantum ladder, the subnuclear realm. As expected from the energy-size relation, 
the relevant energies are much larger. They are measured by the giga-electronvolt 
(Ge V), that is, a billion electron volts. The first excited state of the proton is 0.3 
GeV above the ground state. This is the reason why subnuclear phenomena are 
dormant, even in the nuclear realm. New types of accelerators of many GeV are 
needed to observe them. 
It turned out to be a most surprising world, not yet fully exploited and under-
stood. The constituents of the proton and neutron were identified. They received 
the ugly name quarks. A very strong new force was identified that holds quarks 
together within the proton. So far, the picture turned out to be similar to the one at 
the lower ranges of the quantum ladder. The different quantum states of the proton 
and neutron could again be interpreted as confined waves of quarks. 
There are a number of unexpected new features that are to some extent still 
surprising and difficult to explain. For example, it seems to be impossible to ex-
tricate a quark from a proton or neutron. They cannot be liberated from confining 
bonds, but they can be observed to move within the proton and neutron in contrast 
to the situation on the lower rungs: the atom can be decomposed into nucleons and 
electrons; the nucleus can be decomposed into protons and neutrons. 
Furthermore, a number of new short-lived entities show up: mesons and heavy 
electrons. Both entities need gigavolt energies to be created. They exist only for a 
short time. They transform themselves quickly into other known particles, such as 
ordinary electrons, neutrinos, and photons. 
Antimatter comes to play an important role on the third rung: What is it? For 
every particle there is a corresponding antiparticle with exactly the same mass but 
opposite charge. There are antiatoms made up of positive antielectrons and negative 
anti nuclei composed of antiprotons and antineutrons. But antimatter cannot exist 

XXXV1l1 
together with ordinary matter, because an antiparticle and a particle annihilate each 
other on contrast and transform themselves into energy. This is a transformation of 
one kind of energy into another kind of energy. Inversely, if energy in sufficient 
concentration is available, it can transform itself into a pair consisting of parti-
cle and antiparticle. The energy concentrations necessary for such processes are 
very high and available to a sufficient degree only at the third rung of the quan-
tum ladder, so as to make antimatter an important ingredient of the subnuclear 
phenomena. 
The existence of antimatter is another triumph of quantum mechanics. In the 
early 1930s, the British physicist PA.M. Dirac showed that the equations of quan-
tum mechanics and relativity theory required that there be an antiparticle to every 
particle. It also followed that particle-antiparticle pairs can be created from other 
forms of energy and annihilated into energy. Dirac could not believe that result 
because, at that time, antimatter had not yet been found. He was deeply astonished 
by these strange consequences of his calculations. These equations seemed to him 
more intelligent than their author. It was an unusual feat of the human mind to 
predict the existence of antimatter by pure intellectual insight before it was actually 
observed in nature. 
Let us return to the subnuclear world, which is revealed with the help of very 
high energy beams produced by powerful accelerators. When a particle carrying 
many gigavolts of energy impinges upon a target, an explosion of newly created 
particles takes place: protons, antiprotons, electrons, anti electrons, mesons, and 
other particles emerge all over. Figure 9 gives a telling picture of the variety of 
such events. 
In the past three decades, the quantum ladder has acquired a new significance. 
There seems to be a connection between the infinitely small, the elementary con-
stituents of matter, and the infinitely large, the origin and history of the universe 
as a whole. The connecting link is the discovery of the expansion of the universe. 
There are a number of indications that celestial objects move away. If this is so, we 
would expect that in the distant past, the concentration of mass ought to have been 
much greater. Indeed, about fifteen billion years ago, all space should have been 
filled with almost infinitely concentrated matter. Such concentration would have 
to be accompanied by extremely high pressure and temperature. Thus, we are led 
to the tentative conclusion that the universe started with a primal bang, where all 
space was filled with highly concentrated matter of extremely high temperature and 
energy, which decompressed and diluted itself, first quickly and then more slowly, 
until it reached its present state. 
One of the most uncanny discoveries of the last decade was the observation of a 
pervading cool radiation coming from all directions in space, with all the properties 
of an optical reverberation of the radiation emitted during the initial hot period in 
the life of the universe. It was another indication of the great happening at the 
beginning of the universe. 

xxxix 
Figure 9. A bubble-chamber picture of a 25-GeV proton beam impinging on a hydrogen atom and 
producing new particles. [Courtesy of CERN, Geneva, Switzerland.] 
Developments from the primal bang to our present state are intimately con-
nected to the quantum ladder. In the first instants after the bang, energy concentra-
tion was indeed so high that the phenomena of the third rung of the quantum ladder 
was the order of the day, or more appropriately, the order of the microsecond. At 
that time, space was filled with quarks, antiquarks, gluons, electrons, antielectrons, 
and neutrinos and with an intense light radiation of extremely energetic photons. 
Then, as the universe expanded, energy concentration diminished rapidly. Particles 
and antiparticles annihilated, producing more radiation and short-lived mesons. 
After a few microseconds, a slight surplus of quarks over antiquarks (not quite 
understood today) remained, and the quarks assembled into protons and neutrons. 
Then the temperature dropped further because of the expansion. After about 10 
seconds, some protons and neutrons assembled into helium nuclei. We now step 
down to the second rung of the quantum ladder: the nuclear realm. It probably took 
several hundred thousand years to cool down sufficiently to allow electrons to be 
bound by the nuclei to form atoms, arriving at the first rung. It then took billions 
of years to reach the present situation. Galaxies and stars were formed, and on 
the surface of some planets, the atomic and molecular world developed the great 
variety of forms and materials we now see on earth. 

xl 
This view of the development of the universe is to some extent hypothetical and 
unproven. It is much less certain than the validity of quantum mechanics and our 
knowledge of the properties of molecules, atoms, and nuclei. 
The quantum ladder symbolized the steady increase in depth of our knowledge 
about the structure of matter. It started with ordinary chunks of matter composed 
of atoms and molecules, whose structure was revealed on the first rung. It then 
proceeded to the structure of atomic nuclei and-finally today-to the quarks as 
constituents of the proton or neutron. There may exist yet unknown higher rungs 
of the ladder. The development of the universe happened in the opposite direction, 
down the quantum ladder, as it were. The very beginnings are shrouded in the 
unknown, since we know nothing about the higher rungs of the ladder that may 
come into play in the first, extremely short time intervals. But we have clearer 
ideas about the evolutionary history of the world from a microsecond after the 
primal bang to the present universe. It was a series of gradual steps, from the 
simple to the complicated, from the unordered to the organized, from the hot, 
formless gas of elementary particles to the cooler, structured atoms and molecules; 
still further to the more structured liquids and solids, and finally to sophisticated 
self-reproducing living organisms. Steps in this history that are still hidden in ig-
norance and guesswork include what happened immediately after the primal bang, 
the mechanisms forming galaxies and clusters of galaxies, and the details of the 
origin and development of life on our planet. 
The drama of the development of quantum mechanics has not ended, but we 
have arrived at the present limits of our knowledge. This limit lies far beyond what 
could have been expected at the turn of the century, when quantum mechanics 
was conceived. Ingenious use of accelerators and instrumentation revealed even 
deeper structures of matter, still subject to the rules of quantum mechanics in 
more developed forms. It is certainly an encouraging thought that we were able, 
in our laboratories, not only to understand the deeper structure of matter, but also 
to recreate the processes and phenomena that, in all probability, happened in nature 
only in the first instants of its existence. 

Chronological Development of Quantum Mechanics: 
A Very Brief Account 
The development of quantum mechanics as a unified structure did not take place in 
the smooth way that is usually presented in a textbook. For a textbook to present 
this development in chronological fashion is, however, not really a fruitful way of 
presenting the subject to the student. On the other hand, we feel that every student 
ought to have some sense of perspective of this development. As mentioned by 
Ludwig [1] 'without taking account of its historical development, an existing the-
ory often appears almost as if it had "fallen from heaven". However the question 
of the development of a theory is important not only to satisfy our curiosity but 
also because much can be learnt from it for the future'. Keeping this in mind we 
give a very brief account of the chronological development of quantum mechanics 
highlighting some of the important facts associated with the development and also 
giving reference to books (which are usually available in most libraries) where 
some of the original papers have been reprinted. We hope that this introduction 
will induce the reader to go back to some of the articles written by the masters of 
the subject so that he is able to get a perspective of the field as it developed. 
We should mention that perhaps the most comprehensive account of the chrono-
logical development of quantum mechanics is given in the book by Jammer [2] 
which has also given detailed references of most of the important publications 
during the development of the field (and where they could be found). There are 
numerous other books/articles written on the historical development of the subject; 
particular reference can be made to Born [3], Condon [4], Cropper [5] and ter Haar 
[6]. We give below a brief account of the chronological development: 
1900: In a paper entitled 'On an improvement of Wien's equation for the spec-
trum', Planck "guessed" the blackbody radiation formula and found that it is in 
excellent agreement with the experimental data. In a subsequent paper entitled 'On 
the theory of the energy distribution law of the normal Spectrum' he derived this 
formula by introducing a drastic assumption that the oscillators can only assume 
discrete energies. Planck wrote "We consider, however-this is the most essential 
point of the whole calculation-E to be composed of a very definite number of 
equal parts and use thereto the constant of nature h = 6.65 X 10-27 erg sec. 
This constant multiplied by the common frequency \J of the resonators gives us the 
energy element E in erg., ... ". The two papers of Planck are reprinted by ter Haar 
[6]. It may be of interest to mention that in an unpublished letter to R.W. Wood, 
Planck wrote (quoted from Ref. 2) that the postulate of energy quanta was 'an act 
of desparation' done because 'a theoretical explanation had to be supplied at all 
xli 

xlii 
cost, whatever the price' . Planck was awarded the 1918 Nobel prize in Physics for 
his discovery of energy quanta; his Nobel lecture was on 'The genesis and present 
state of development of the quantum theory'. 
1905: In a paper entitled 'On a heuristic point of view about the creation and 
conversion of light' (reprinted in Ref. 6), Einstein introduced the light quanta. In 
this paper he wrote that for explanation of phenomena like blackbody radiation, 
production of electrons by ultraviolet light (which is the photoelectric effect) it is 
necessary to assume that "when a light ray starting from a point is propagated, 
the energy is not continuously distributed over an ever increasing volume, but 
it consists of a finite number of energy quanta, localized in space, which move 
without being divided and which can be absorbed or emitted only as a whole". 
Einstein received the 1921 Nobel prize in Physics for his discovery of the law of 
photoelectric effect and not for his theory of relativity. It is interesting to note that 
Einstein did not have the symbol h in his paper; he used the quantity Rf3v j N for the 
energy of the light quanta where R j Nand f3 are actually k and h j k respectively. 
1913: In a paper entitled 'On the constitution of atoms and molecules' (reprinted 
in Ref. 6), Bohr gave the first successful interpretation of atomic spectra. (The 
experimental study of atomic spectra was started around 1860 and in 1885 Balmer 
gave his famous empirical formula which came to be known as Balmer series). 
Niels Bohr's logic of argument was somewhat as follows: For an electron rotating 
in a circular 1 orbit around a proton the potential energy is _e2 j a, the kinetic energy 
(~mv2) is e2 j2a and therefore the binding energy is given by 
Eb = e2j2a 
The frequency Vi of the orbiting electron is given by 
Vi = _v_ = (2Eb)I/2 _1_ 2E" = .j2E~/2 
2JTa 
m 
2JT e2 
JTe2m l /2 
Bohr than assumed that "during the binding of the electron, a homogeneous radia-
tion is e111i.tted of a frequency v = ~V'; then from Planck's theory, we might expect 
that the amount of energy emitted by the process considered is equal to r h v, where 
h is Planck's constant and r an entire number". Thus 
which gives 
E" = rhv = -rhv' = -rh 
_ 
_b_ 
1 
1 [(2)1/2 E3/2] 
22m 
JTe2 
2JT2me4 
Eb =---
r 2h2 
1 Actually Bohr's consideration was for elliptical orbits; here, for the sake of simplicity we are 
considering circular orbits. 

xliii 
and when an atom makes a transition from one stationary state (r = rd to another 
(r = (2) a light quantum of frequency 
is emitted. The above formula agreed with the experimental data. 
It should be mentioned that the quantization of angular momenta was put for-
ward by Bohr in a subsequent paper in the same year. Bohr was awarded the 1922 
Nobel prize in Physics for his investigation of the structure of atoms, and of the 
radiation emanating from them. His Nobel lecture on 'The structure of the atom' 
gives a summary of the important results in atomic theory. 
1914: In a paper entitled 'On the excitation of 2536 A mercury resonance line by 
electron collisions' (reprinted in Ref. 6), Franck and Hertz showed that by vary-
ing the kinetic energies of the electrons hitting an atom it is possible to produce 
controlled excitation of atoms and molecules; the experiment proved the discrete 
energy states of atoms, a hypothesis put forward by Bohr in 1913. Franck and Hertz 
received the 1925 Nobel prize in Physics for their discovery of the laws governing 
the impact of an electron upon an atom. 
1917: In a paper entitled 'On the quantum theory of radiation '; (reprinted in Ref-
erences 6 and 7), Einstein put forward the existence of stimulated emission and 
introduced the famous A and B coefficients which are now known as the Einstein 
coefficients. 
1922: Stern and Gerlach performed their famous experiment which demonstrated 
that in the presence of a strong inhomogeneous magnetic field, a beam of silver 
atoms split into two beamlets. This provided a confirmation of space quantization. 
1923: Compton reported his studies on the scattering of X-rays by solid materials 
(mainly graphite) and showed that the shift of the wavelength of the scattered 
photon could be explained by assuming the photon having momentum equal to 
hiA. Compton shared the 1927 Nobel prize in Physics 'Jor his discovery of the 
effect named after him'. The original papers of Compton have been reprinted in a 
book by Shankland [8]. 
1924: In a paper entitled Investigations on quantum theory [reprinted in Ref. 1], de 
Broglie suggested the idea of waves associated with electrons. He recognized that 
the condition for the kth orbit 
implies 
h 
2rr rk = n -- = n A 
mVk 

xliv 
i.e. the circumference of the allowed orbit contains an integral number of wave-
lengths. He wrote 'in order to have a stable state the length of the channel must 
be in resonance with the wave'. De Broglie was awarded the 1929 Nobel prize in 
Physics for his 'discovery of the wave nature of electrons'. 
1925: Pauli in his paper entitled 'On the connection between the completion o{ 
electron groups in an atom with the complex structure of spectra' (reprinted in 
Ref. 6) put forward the "fourth quantum number of the electron" and the exclusion 
principle. He was awarded the 1945 Nobel prize in Physics for the discovery of the 
exclusion principle. 
1925: After studying Pauli's paper, Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit put forward the idea 
of the spinning electron. 
1925 to 1928: In 1925 Heisenberg put forward the 'quantum-theoretical mechan-
ics based exclusively on relationships between quantities observable in principle', 
which was further developed by Born and Jordan in the same year. The commu-
tation relation was first introduced by Born and Jordan. Born later wrote '/ shall 
never forget the thrill / experienced when / succeeded in condensing Heisenberg's 
ideas on quantum conditions in the mysterious equation pq - qp = h/27Ti'. 
SchrMinger's papers came in 1926. His three famous papers under the same title 
'Quantization as an eigenvalue problem' appeared in quick succession in 1926. 
In between he had also published a paper with the self-explanatory title 'On the 
relationship of the Heisenberg-Born-lordan Quantum Mechanics to mine'. The 
original papers of Schrodinger, Heisenberg, Born and Jordan are reprinted in Ref. 
1. In 1926 Born suggested that the square of the wave function should be inter-
preted as the probability density of particles. In 1927 Heisenberg formulated his 
famous uncertainty principle2 and in the same year Born developed the quan-
tum mechanical theory of scattering of electrons by atoms and Dirac succeeded 
in developing the quantum theory of radiation which could explain satisfactorily 
the phenomena of interference as well as the emission and absorption of light by 
matter3. In 1928 Dirac gave his relativistic equation which led to the prediction of 
the 'positive electron' which was later called the positron. In 1932, Anderson ob-
served such a particle in cosmic radiation where they could be distinguished from 
electrons by the opposite curvature of their tracks in the presence of a magnetic 
field. 
The 1932 Nobel prize in Physics went to Heisenberg for the creation of quan-
tum mechanics. The 1933 Nobel prize in Physics was shared by Schrodinger and 
2 Heisenberg's book The Physical Principles of" Quantum Mechanics is a very entertaining book 
to read on the uncertainty principle. 
3 A very nice account of Dirac's quantum theory of radiation has been given in a review paper 
by Fermi [9]; of course, the classic treatise by Dirac [10J should be a must for all persons trying to 
understand quantum mechanics. 

xlv 
Dirac for the discovery of new productive forms of atomic theory and the 1954 
Nobel prize in Physics went to Max Bornfor his fundamental research in quantum 
mechanics, especially for his statistical interpretation of the wave function. 
1927: Davisson and Germer and independently G.P. Thomson observed electron 
diffraction patterns produced by metal foils which established the existence of 
de Broglie waves. The 1937 Nobel prize in Physics was shared by Davisson and 
Thomsonfor their experimental discovery of the diffraction of electrons by crystals. 
1928: Gamow in Germany and Gurney and Condon in USA reported the first ma-
jor application of quantum mechanics, namely, the barrier leakage interpretation 
of the natural radioactive decay of some elements emitting alpha particles. The 
theory could satisfactorily explain the fact that an alpha particle can remain inside 
a nucleus for about 109 years before it comes out. Condon in 1952 wrote: "I think 
it is fair to say that the barrier-leakage idea was the opening of the modern period 
of the application of quantum mechanics to nuclear physics". 
1931: In order to explain the continuous beta ray spectrum, Pauli in 1931 suggested 
the existence of the neutrino. 
1934: Fermi developed the famous theory of beta decay. 
Although the development of quantum mechanics continues even today, we felt 
that Fermi's beta decay theory should be an appropriate point to 'sign off' (keeping 
in view the scope of the present book). We conclude by mentioning the following 
incident (quoted from May 1982 issue of Physics Today): 
After attending a seminar given by one of Oppenheimer's pupils on Fermi's 
beta ray theory, Fermi remarked to Emilio Segre, 'Emilio, I am getting rusty 
and old. I cannot follow the highbrow theory developed by Oppenheimer's 
pupils any more. I went to their seminar and was depressed by my inability 
to understand them; only the last sentence cheered me up. It was: "And this is 
Fermi's theory of beta decay".' 
References 
1. G. Ludwig, Wave Mechanics, Pergamon Press, Oxford (1968). 
2. M. Jammer, The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics, Mc-Graw-
Hill Book Co., New York (1966). 
3. M. Born, Physics in my Generation, Springer Verlag, New York (1969). 
4. E.U. Condon, 60 years of Quantum Mechanics, Physics Today, 15,45, Octo-
ber issue (1962). 

xlvi 
5. W.H. Cropper, The Quantum Physicists and an Introduction to their Physics, 
Oxford University Press, New York (1970). 
6. D. ter Haar, The Old Quantum Theory, Pergamon Press, Oxford (1967). 
7. F.S. Barnes, Laser Theory, IEEE Press, New York (1972). 
8. R.S. Shankland (Ed.), Scientific Papers of A.H. Compton, University of Chicago 
Press, Chicago (1973). 
9. E. Fermi, Quantum Theory of Radiation, Reviews of Modem Physics, 4, 87 
(1932). 
10. P.A.M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford (1958). 

Physical Constants 
C = coulomb; esu = electrostatic units; 
e V = electron volt; F = farad; G = gauss; 
H = henry; Hz = hertz = cycles/s; J = joule; 
K = kelvin (degree Kelvin); m = metre; N = newton; 
s = second; T = tesla 
Digits in parentheses following each quoted value represent the standard devia-
tion error in the final digits of the quoted value; e.g., 1.60217733(49) implies 
1.60217733±0.00000049, etc. Most of the quoted values are taken from 'The Fun-
damental Physical Constants' by E. Richard Cohen and Barry N. Taylor, Physics 
Today, August 1995. 
Conversion factors 
1 N = 105 dynes 
IJ= 107 ergs 
leV = 1.60217733 (49) x lO-19 J 
1 C = 1 amp· s = 2.997924580 (J 2) x lO9 esu 
1 T = 1 weber· m-2 = lO4 G 
1 F = 
1 C2 • N- I • m- I 
1 H = 1 weber· amp-I = IN . m . S2 . C-2 
I Electron mass (= moc2) = 0.5lO99906 (15) MeV 
I Proton mass (= m pc2) = 938.27231 (28) MeV 
1 Neutron mass (= m nc2) = 939.56563 (28) MeV 
1 atomic mass unit = 1.6605402 (J 0) x lO-27 kg 
(atomic mass unit in the unified atomic mass scale 12C = 12) 
xlvii 

xlviii 
Quantity 
Speed of light in vacuum 
Planck's constant 
Electronic charge 
Electron rest mass 
Proton rest mass 
Ratio of proton mass to 
electron mass 
Neutron rest mass 
Deuteron mass 
Permeability of vacuum 
Permittivity of vacuum 
Symbol 
c 
Ii = hl2rr 
q (mks) 
m"lme 
Inn 
mel 
{to 
EO = I/{toc2 
Fine structure constant 
a = q 2/4rrEQ lie (mks) } 
e2 / lie (cgs) 
Rydberg constant 
Roc = (q2 14][EO ) 2 
lIle 14][ Ii\' (mks) 
= mee4 /4][ 1i 3e (cgs) 
Non-relativistic 
ionization potential 
of hydrogen atom 
wi th infinite proton 
Roche 
mass 
Bohr radius 
ao = (4][EO 1i2) I (meq2) 
(mks) 
= liZ I mee2 (cgs) 
Bohr magneton 
(tB = q 1i12me (mks) 
= e "/2mec (cgs) 
Electron 
{te [= (geI2){tB] 
magnetic 
moment 
Free-electron g -factor 
ge = 2{tel{tB 
Proton magnetic 
(tp 
moment 
Neutron 
l{tn I 
magnetic 
moment 
Nuclear magneton 
qli 
(tN =--
2m" 
Boltzmann constant 
k 
Value 
Uncertainty 
(parts per 
million) 
299792458 m.e l 
Exact 
1.05457266 (63) x 1O-34 1.s 
0.60 
1.60217733 (49) x 10- 19 C 
0.30 
9.1093897(54) x 10-31 kg 
0.59 
1.6726231 (10) x 10-27 kg 
0.59 
1836.152701 (37) 
0.02 
1.6749286 (10) x 10-27 kg 
0.59 
3.3435860 (20) x 10-27 kg 
0.59 
4rr (= 12.566370614 ... ) x 10-7 H.m- I Exact 
8.854187817 ... x 10- 12 Em- I 
Exact 
7.29735308(33) x 10-3 
0.045 
11a = 137.0359895(6 I) 
10973731.534( 13) m- I 
109737.31534(13) cm- I 
2.1798741(13) x 10- 18 J 
13.6056981(40) eV 
0.529177249(24) x 10- 10 m 
0.529177249(24) x 10-8 cm 
9.2740154(31) x 1O-24 1.rl 
9.2740154(31) x 10-21 erg.G- 1 
9.2847701 (31) x 10-24 J.T- 1 
2.0023 I 9304386(20) 
1.41060761(47) x 10- 26 1.T- 1 
0.96623707(40) x 10-26 1.T- 1 
5.0507866(17) x 1O-27 1.r l 
1.380658(12) x 10-23 1.K- 1 
8.617385(73) x 10-5 eY.K- 1 
0.045 
0.0012 
0.0012 
0.60 
0.30 
0.045 
0.045 
0.34 
0.34 
0.34 
I x 10-5 
0.34 
0.41 
0.34 
8.5 
8.4 

Part I 
Mathematical Preliminaries 

Chapter 1 
The Dirac Delta Function 
... Strict/y, of course, 8(x) is not a proper function of x, but can be regarded 
only as a limit of a certain sequence of functions. All the same one can use 8 (x) 
as though it were a proper function for practically all the purposes of quantum 
mechanics without getting incorrect results. One can also use the differential co-
efficients of 8 (x), namely, 8' (x), 8" (x), ... , which are even more discontinuous 
and less 'proper' than 8 (x) itself. 
1.1. Introduction 
-
P.A.M. DIRAC in The Physical Interpretation of Quantum 
Dynamics, 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London (A) 113, 621-641 
(1926). 
The Dirac delta function is used so extensively in quantum mechanics that we felt 
we should discuss it right in the beginning of the book, rather than relegating it to 
an appendix! 
The Dirac delta function is defined through the equations 
8(x-a) = 0 
x i= a 
(1) 
a+f3 ! 8(x -a) dx 
1 
(2) 
where ex, f3 > O. Thus the delta function has an infinite value at x = a such that the 
area under the curve is unity. For an arbitrary function that is continuous at x = a, 
we have 
a+f3 ! f (x) 8 (x - a) dx 
a-Ci 
3 
u+f3 
f(a)! 8(x-a) dx 
a-Ci 
[because of Eq. (1)] 
f (a) 
(3) 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

4 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
It is readily seen that if x has the dimension of length, 15 (x - a) would have 
the dimension of inverse length. Similarly, if x has the dimension of energy then 
15 (x -
a) would have the dimension of (energyr 1• 
1.2. Representations of the Dirac delta function 
There are many representations of the Dirac delta function. Perhaps the simplest 
representation is the limiting form of the rectangle function Ra (x) defined through 
the following equation 
Ra (x) 
2rr 
o 
for 
for 
-rr<x-(l<(5 
Ix - al > (5 
The function Ra (x) is plotted in Fig. 1.1 for various values of rr. Now 
14 
12 
10 
Rcr(x) 
8 
6 
4 
2 
00 
Rectangle Function 
~(j=0.04 
~(j=0.1 
Ir--I+t+---'I~ (j = 0.4 
2 
3 
X 
(4) 
4 
Figure 1.1. Plots of Ra (x) for a = 2 and (J = 0.04, 0.1 and 0.4. In each case the area under the 
curve is unity. For (J --+ 0, the function Rrr (x) has all the properties of the Dirac delta function. 
+00 
ll+a 
f ReT (x) dx = 2~ f dx = I 
(irrespective of the value of (5) 
-00 
(I-a 
For (5 --+ 0, the function Ra (x) becomes more and more sharply peaked but the 
area under the curve remains unity. In the limit of (5 --+ 0, the function ReT (x) has 
all the properties of the delta function and we may write 
15 (x -
a) = lim ReT (x) 
a--+O 
(5) 

The Dirac Delta Function 
5 
Now, 
+00 
a+(T 
f f (x) R(T (x) dx = 2~ f f (x) dx 
-00 
We assume the function f (x) to be continuous at x = a. Thus when a ---+ 0, in 
the infinitesimal interval -a < x - a < a, f (x) may be assumed to be a constant 
[= f (a)] and taken out of the integral. Thus 
+00 f f (x) 8 (x - a) dx 
-00 
+00 
lim f f (x) R(T (x) dx 
(T--+O 
-00 
a+(T 
lim _I f (a) f dx 
(T--+O 2a 
a-IT 
= f (a) 
Another very useful representation of the delta function is the limiting form of the 
Gaussian function (see Fig. 1.2) 
Gaussian Representation of the Delta Function 
5 
4 
3 
Gcr{x) 
2 
1 
cr = 0.4 
0 0 
1 
4 
x 
Figure 1.2. Plots of G(T (x) for a = 2 and a = 0.04,0.2 and 0.4. In each case the area under the 
curve is unity. For a -+ 0, the function G(T (x) has all the properties of the Dirac delta function. 
I 
[(X - a)2] 
G (T (x) = 
~ 
exp -
2 
' 
a y 2n 
2a 
(6) 

6 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Since 
+fOC 
2 
fir 
[ f32 ] 
e- ax +f3x dx = Y ~ exp 4a 
-00 
[see Appendix A], we readily get 
+00 f G(J (x) dx = I 
(7) 
-00 
irrespective of the value of CJ which is assumed to be positive. Further, the function 
has a width "-' CJ and at x = a, it has a value 1/ (CJ5). Thus, in the limit of 
CJ -+ 0, G (Y (x) has all the properties of the delta function (see Fig. l.2) and we 
therefore have the following representation of the delta function 
8 (x - a) = lim 
~ 
exp [_ (x - ~)2], 
CJ > ° 
(Y->O CJ V 2][ 
2CJ 
(8) 
Another important representation of the Dirac delta function is through the follow-
ing integral 
+00 
8 (x - a) = _1_ f e±ik(x-a) dk 
27r 
-00 
In order to prove Eq. (9) we first note that 
+x 
_1_ f e±i k(x-a) dk = sin g (x - a) 
27r 
7r (x - a) 
-x 
Using Laplace transform or complex variable techniques one can show that 
+00 
-
dx = 1 
1 f sin g (x - a) 
7r 
(x-a) 
, 
g>O 
-00 
irrespective of the value of g which is assumed to be greater than zero. Now 
sin gx 
lim -- =g 
x->o 
X 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 

The Dirac Delta Function 
Thus for a large value of g, the function 
sin g (x - a) 
Jf (x - a) 
7 
is sharply peaked around x = a (see Fig. 1.3) and has a unit area under the curve 
irrespective of the value of g; thus in the limit of g ---+ 00, it has all the properties 
of the delta function and we may write 
sing(x-a) 
8(x-a)= lim 
/i--+OO 
Jf (x - a) 
Equation (9) readily follows from Eqs (10) and (12). 
6 
4 
2 
o 
-2 
x 
(12) 
4 
Figure 1.3. Plots of the func- tion sin [g (x - a) In (x - a)] for a = 2 and g = 5,20. In each case 
the area under the curve is unity. For g ~ 00, the function is very sharply peaked at x = a and has 
all the properties of Dirac delta function. 
1.3. Derivative at a discontinuity 
We next consider a ramp function defined by the following equation (see Fig. 1.4); 
Fu (x) = { ~ 
(x - a + u) 
2a 
1 
It can be readily seen that 
dFu 
-
= Ru (x) 
dx 
for x < a - a 
for Ix - al < a 
(13) 
for x > a + a 
(14) 

8 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Fa (x) 
1 
0.5 
o o 
1 
Ramp Functions 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
X 
Figure 1.4. The ramp function defined by Eg. (13) for a = 3 and () = O. I and 2. 
where R(5 (x) is the rectangle function defined by Eq. (4). Now 
lim F(5 (x) = H (x - a) 
(5-->0 
7 
(15) 
where H (x - a) is known as the Heaviside unit step function defined by the fol-
lowing equation (see Fig. 1.5) 
Thus 
H (x - a) 
o 
x<a 
x>a 
d 
-H(x-a)=o(x-a) 
dx 
(16) 
(17) 
implying that the derivative of the unit step function is the Dirac delta function 
which is shown in Fig. 1.5; usually cO (x - a) is shown as a vertical arrow of 
height c at x = a. Equation (17) also follows from the fact that for a continuous 
function f (x) (with (1, f3 > 0) 
{[+fI f f (x) ~ 
H (x - a) dx 
dx 
([-ex 
f3 
a+fI 
f (x) H (x - a{~a -f f' (x) H (x - a) dx 
{I-(j 
{[+fI 
f (a + f3) - f f' (x) dx 
{[ 
f (a + f3) - [f (a + f3) - f (a)] 
f (a) 

The Dirac Delta Function 
9 
Unit step function and its derivative 
2 
, 
H(x-a) 
1 -
00 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
X 
(a) 
2 
Ir(x-a) 
1 
o (x-a) 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
X 
(b) 
Figure 1.5. (a) The Heaviside unit step function. (b) Its derivative is the Dirac delta function which 
is usually represented by a vertical 
arrow of unit height. 
We therefore get 
a+# f f(x) ~H(x-a) dx=f(a) 
dx 
a-a 
ct, f3 > 0 
(18) 

10 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Comparing the above equation with Eq. (3) we readily get Eq. (17). Obviously 
d 
-[aH(x-a)]=a8(x-a) 
(19) 
dx 
Thus we get the following important result: 
If a function has a discontinuity of a at x = a then its derivative (at x = a) is 
a8(x -a). 
Example 1.1 We consider the symmetric function 
Thus 
and 
1/1 (x) = A e- K Ixl 
1/1 (x) = A eK x 
A e- Kx 
x < 0 } 
x>O 
(20) 
(21) 
1/1' (x) = K A eK x 
X < 0 } 
= 
-KAe- Kx 
x>O 
(22) 
which are plotted in Fig. 1.6 for K = 1, A = 1. Since 1/1' (x) has a discontinuity of 
- 2K A at x = 0, we get 
1/1" (x) = K21/1 (x) - 2A K 8 (x) 
(23) 
which is also plotted in Fig. 1.6. 
1.4. Important properties of the Dirac delta function 
+00 
8 (x - a) 
f(x)8(x-a) 
8 (a - x) 
f(a)8(x-a) 
J f (x) 8' (x - a) dx 
- f' (a) 
1 
8[e(x-a)] = -8(x-a) 
lei 
(24) 
(25) 
(26) 
(27) 
where c is real and not equal to zero. In Eqs (25) and (26), f (x) is assumed to be a 
"well-behaved" function and continuous at x = a. The proof of Eq. (26) is simple: 
+00 J 
f(x)8'(x-a) dx 
+00 
+00 
f(x) 8(x-a)I_00 - J f'(x) 8(x-a) dx 
-00 
-00 
- f' (a) 

The Dirac Delta Function 
11 
2 
-4 -3 -2 -I 
2 
3 
4 
.-1 
x 
(a) 
-2 
2 
vex) 
-4 
2 
3 
4 
-1 
x 
(b) 
-2 
2 
v' (x) 
-4 -3 
-2 
-1 
2 
4 
-1 
x 
(c) 
-2 
FiRure 1.6. (a) A plot of the symmetric function as given by Eg. (20) for K = 1, A = I. Its first and 
second derivatives are plotted in (b) and (c). Since 1J; I (x) has a discontinuity of -2K A at x = 0, 
1J;"(X) is -2K A8(x) at x = o. 
Further 
We also have 
+00 
8 [(x -
a) (x + a)] 
I 
-
[8 (x - a) + 8 (x + a)] 
2a 
a>O 
f 8 (x - x') 8 (x - x") dx = 8 (x' - x") 
-00 
In order to prove Eg. (29) we write 
+00 
F (x', x") = f 8 (x - x') 8 (x - x") dx 
-00 
(28) 
(29) 
(30) 

12 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Now 
+00 
+00 
+00 
f f (x') F (x', x") dx' f dx 8 (x - x") f dx' f (x') 8 (x - x') 
-00 
-00 
-00 
+00 f dx 0 (x - x") f (x) 
-00 
f (x") 
If we compare the above equation with Eq. (3) we get Eq. (29). 
1.5. The completeness condition in terms of the Dirac delta function 
Let 1/fn (x) form a complete set of orthonormal functions in the domain -00 < 
x < 00. The orthonormality condition would require 
+00 f Vr~, (x) Vrll (x) dx = omn 
(31 ) 
-00 
where omn is the Kronecker delta function defined through the following equation 
for 
m;F n 
for 
m = n 
(32) 
Since 1/f n (x) form a complete set of functions, we can expand an arbitrary "well-
behaved" function ¢ (x) in terms of 1/f n (x): 
00 
¢ (x) = L 
en 1/fn (x) 
(33) 
n=0.1,2 .... 
In order to determine CIl' we multiply the above equation by Vr~, (x) and integrate 
to obtain 
+00 f 1/f~, (x) ¢ (x) dx 
-00 
00 
+00 
L 
Cn f 1/f~n (x) Vrn (x) dx 
11=0.1... 
-00 
00 
n=0.1,2 .... 

The Dirac Delta Function 
13 
Thus 
+00 
e" = f 1/f~ (x) ¢ (x) dx 
(34) 
-00 
Substituting in Eq. (33) we get 
00 
[+00 
] 
'" (xl ~ "~t;=2 L 
V,; (x') ¢ (x') dx' 
1/f n (x) 
where we have put a prime on the integration variable so that it does not get 
confused with the variable of 1/f n (x). Carrying out the summation first we get 
+00 
00 
¢ (x) = f dx' ¢ (x') L 
1/f~ (x') 1/f" (x) 
-00 
n=(l,!.2 .... 
Comparing with Eq. (3) we may write 
00 L 
1/f~ (x') 1/f n (x) = 8 (x - x') 
(35) 
n=0.1.2 .... 
which represents the completeness condition. 
As an example, the Hermite Gauss functions 
n = 0, 1,2, ... 
(36) 
with 
I 
N n = --;::.==:=== 
lnhn n! 
(37) 
form a complete set of orthonormal functions (in the domain -00 < x < (0) sat-
isfying Eqs (31) and (35); in Eq. (36) Hn (x) are the Hermite polynomials (see Sec. 
7.3). Thus 
Similarly the functions 
1/fn(x) = (2n:I)1 Pn(x) 
n = 0, I, ... 
(39) 

14 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
form a complete set of orthonormal functions in the domain -I ::: x ::: + I . In Fig. 
1.7 we have plotted the function 
N L (2n: I) P
n (x) P
II (x') 
n=0.1.2 .... 
for x' = 0.6 with N = 12 and 20. As N -+ 00, the sum will sharply peak at 
x = 0.6 and approach 8 (x - 0.6). 
N 
Figure 1.7. The sum L ell;l) Pn (xl Pn (0.6) for N = 12 and N = 20. As N becomes 
n=O.l.. .. 
large, the sum will sharply peak at x = 0.6 approaching 8 (x - 0.6). 
1.6. Delta function as a distribution 
We should point out that the delta function is actually a distribution. In order to 
understand this let us consider the Maxwellian distribution 
, 
[ 
7 ] 
m 
'2 
mv-
N (v) = 4nNo (--)- v exp ---
2nkT 
2kT 
(40) 
where k represents the Boltzmann's constant, T the absolute temperature and m the 
mass of each molecule. In Eq. (40), N (v) dv represents the number of molecules 
whose speeds lie between v and v + dv. The total number of molecules is given by 
No: 
00 f N (v) dv 
o 
'fOC 
[ 
2] 
m 
"2 
mv 
4n No (--) -
v exp - --
dv 
2nkT 
2kT 
o 
( 
m 
) ~ (2k T ) ~ I fOO 
1 
4nNo --
--
-
x 2e-x dx 
2nkT 
m 
2 
o 

The Dirac Delta Function 
where x == mv21 (2kT). The integral is r G) = ~JJT. Thus 
00 f N (v) dv = No 
o 
15 
(41 ) 
It may be noted that whereas No is just a number, the quantity N (v) has the 
dimensions of (velocity)-I. Obviously, if we ask ourselves how many molecules 
have the precise speed vo, the answer would be zero. This is the characteristic of a 
distribution. On the other hand, in addition to the distribution given by Eq. (40), if 
we do have NI molecules all of them having the same speed VI, the corresponding 
distribution function would be given by 
m 
~ 
2 
[mv2] 
N (v) = 4rrNo (--) lJ exp - -
+ NJo (v - vd 
2rrkT 
2kT 
(42) 
where 0 (v - vd represents the Dirac delta function and has the dimensions of 
inverse velocity. 
1. 7. The three-dimensional Dirac delta function 
The three-dimensional Dirac delta function 0 (r - r') is defined by the following 
equation 
o (r - r') = 0 (x - x') o(y - y') 0 (z - Zl) 
(43) 
Thus 
ffff(r)o(r-r') dr=f(r') 
(44) 
where the domain of integration over the variable r should include the point r'; 
dr = dx dy dz. It is obvious that we can have many representations of the three-
dimensional Dirac delta function. For example, we may write [cf. Eqs (6) and (9)] 
~ ( 
'), 
I 
[ 
(x - X,)2 + (y - y')2 + (z _ ZI)2] 
o r - r = hm 
, 
exp - --'--------'---------'--------'-
IT---+O (2rr)2(J"3 
2(J"2 
(45) 
and also 
+00 +00 +00 
o (r - r') = (2~)3 f 
f 
f eik . (r-r') dkx dky dkz 
(46) 
-00 -00-00 
where k . (r - r') is a compact form of writing 
kx (x - x') + kv(y - y') + kz (z - Zl) 

16 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Further, if (r, 8, ¢) represent the spherical polar coordinates then 
8(r-r') = 
8(r - r')8(8 - 8')8(¢ - ¢') 
r2 sin 8 
8(r - r') 
----::--- 8(Q _ Q') 
r2 
where Q represents the solid angle and 
Further 
with 
We also have 
1.8. Problems 
8(Q _ Q') = 8(8 - 8')8(¢ - ¢') 
sin 8 
+1 
L L Y/;W, ¢') Ylm(8, ¢) 
/=O,l" .. II1=~1 
8(r) 
8(r) = 8(x) 8(y) 8(z) = --2 
4rrr 
CXJ f 8(r - r') dr' = I 
() 
Problem 1.1 For 1 (x) = lxi, show that 
f" (x) = 28 (x) 
Problem 1.2 Consider the following 
1(7 (x) = { ~ e~(J(x~a) 
x<a 
x~a 
where a > 0, Plot the above function for a = J and 10 and show that we may 
write 
8 (x - a) = lim 1(7 (x) 
(J --+ CXJ 
Problem 1.3 Consider the function 
1/J (x) = { -x (I - a) 
-(J-x)a 
O<x<a 
a < x < I 

The Dirac Delta Function 
17 
Show that 
Problem 1.4 Prove that 
xo' (x) = -0 (x) 
Problem 1.5 The functions 
1/In (x) = J2 sin (nJTx) 
form a complete set of functions in the interval 0 ::: x ::: 1 satisfying the boundary 
conditions 
1/1 (0) = 0 = 1/1 (I) 
Plot 
N 
2 L sin (nJTx) sin (nJTx') 
n=0,1.2 ... 
with x' = 0.6 (in the domain -1 < x < 1) for N = 10 and 20. As N ~ 00 the 
sum will approach 0 (x - 0.6). 
1.9. Sample questions 
Q. 1 
Evaluate 1/1" (x). 
Q. 2 Consider a function 
1/I(x) = 0 
for x < 0 
= 4x for x > 0 
f(x) = 20 
x < 0 
(50j()X 
0 < X < () 
= 50 
x > () 
Plot f(x) and dfldx as a function of x. 
Q. 3 Evaluate 
(a) Lt ~exp(_(x-a)2) 
IT --:.0 () 
2(} 2 
sing(x - a) 
(b) 
Lt 
g-->oo 
(x-a) 
[Answer: (b) JTo(x - a)] 

18 
Q. 4 Consider the function 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
f(x) = ax 
0 < x < a 
L -x 
aa--
a < x < L 
L -a 
Evaluate and plot f (x), l' (x) and 1" (x) in the domain 0 < x < L. 
Q. 5 Consider the function 1j;(x) = A exp[ -K Ixl]' Evaluate and plot 1j;(x), 1j;' (x) 
and 1j;" (x). Determine the second order differential equation satisfied by 
1j;(x). 
1.10. References and suggested reading 
1. P.A.M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics (Fourth Edition), Claren-
don Press, Oxford (1958). 
2. J. Lighthill, Introduction to Fourier Analysis and Generalised Functions, Cam-
bridge University Press (1958). 
3. A.K. Ghatak, I.C Goyal and S.l. Chua, Mathematical Physics, Macmillan 
India Limited, New Delhi (1995). 

Chapter 2 
Fourier Transforms 
The greatest mathematics has the simplicity and inevitableness of supreme poetry 
and music, standing on the borderland of all that is wonderful in Science, and 
all that is beautiful in Art. Mathematics transfigures the fortuitous concourse of 
atoms into the tracery of the finger of God. 
-
H. W. TURNBULL 
in The Great Mathematicians 
2.1. Introduction 
Fourier transforms play an important role in quantum mechanics and as such, we 
devote a (short) chapter giving a brief account of Fourier transforms. 
2.2. Fourier integral theorem 
In the previous chapter we had shown the following integral representation of the 
Dirac delta function 
Since 
we may write 
+00 
<5 (x - x') = _1 f e±i k(X~X') dk 
2][ 
~OO 
+00 
f (x) = f <5 (x - x') f (x') dx' 
~OO 
+00 +00 
f (x) = 2~ f f e±i k(X~X') f (x') dx' dk 
~OO ~OO 
19 
(I) 
(2) 
(3) 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

20 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Thus if we define 
+00 
F(k) = _1_ f f(x) e-ikx dx 
hii 
(4) 
-00 
then 
+00 
f (x) = _1_ f F (k) e+i kx dx 
hii 
(5) 
-00 
The function F (k) is known as the Fourier transform of the function f (x) and 
Eq. (5) enables us to calculate the original function from the Fourier transform. 
Equations (4) and (5) constitute what is known as the Fourier Integral Theorem 
which is valid when the following conditions are satisfied (see, e.g. Ref. I and 2): 
(i) The function f (x) must be a single valued function of the real variable x 
throughout the range -00 < x < 00. It may however have a finite number of 
finite discontinuities. 
1
+00 
(ii) The integral 
-00 I f (x) I dx must exist. 
From Eq. (3) it is obvious that in Eqs (4) and (5) there is no reason why the 
factors ei k x and e-i k x cannot be interchanged, i.e. we could have defined 
+00 
F(k) = ~ f f(x) eikx dx 
(6) 
-00 
Then 
+00 
f (x) = _1_ f F (x) e-ikx dx 
hii 
(7) 
-00 
However, in all of what follows we will use the definitions given by Equations (4) 
and (5). 
Example 2.1 As an example we consider a Gaussian function given by 
f (x) = A e _x 2 /2(52 
Its Fourier transform is given by 
(8) 

Fourier Transforms 
21 
or 
F (k) = Aa exp [_~k2a2] 
(9) 
where we have made use of the following integral (see Appendix A): 
+CXJ 
(if 
2 
f e-ax2+fJx dx = V ~ exp [:al Re a> 0 
(10) 
-CXJ 
As can be seen from Eg. (9), the function F (k) is also a Gaussian; thus the Fourier 
transform of a Gaussian is a Gaussian. We may note that the Gaussian function 
given by Eg. (8) has a spatial width given by [see Fig. 2.l(a)] 
fix) 
F(k) 
x 
(a) 
k 
(b) 
1 
!1.k - -
() 
(II) 
Figure 2.1. (a) The Gaussian function f (x) as given by Eq. (8). (b) The Fourier transform of the 
Gaussian function is also a Gaussian in the k-space. 
Its Fourier transform, F (k), has a width given by [see Fig. 2. 1 (b)1 
Thus 
1 
I1k"-' -a 
I1x 11k "-' 1 
which is a general characteristic of the Fourier transform pair. 
(12) 
(13) 
Example 2.2 As another example, we calculate the Fourier transform of the 
rectangle function 
(x_) __ { 1 , Ixl < 211 a 
f (x) = rect 
a 
0 , Ixl> 2 a 
(14) 

22 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Its Fourier transform will be given by (see Fig. 2.2): 
or 
+a/2 
F(k)=_I- J 
e-ikxdx 
5 
-(1/2 
H 
sin (ka/2) 
F (k) = -
JT 
k 
( 15) 
Once again, the rectangle function has a width a and its Fourier transform has 
a width 
JT 
11k "-' -
a 
In quantum mechanics, one uses the variable 
where 
p = Ilk 
h 
11=-
2JT 
(16) 
(17) 
h (::::::: 6.626 x 10-34 J-s) represents the Planck's constant. In terms of the variable 
p, Eq. (3) can be written in the form 
+OC +00 
1jf (x) = _1_ f f e±i p(x-x')f1z1jf (x') dx'dp 
2JT 11 
-(X) -(X) 
Thus, if we define 
F(k) 
.f(x) 
- al2 
x 
al2 
k 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 2.2. The rectangle function is shown in (a). Its Fourier transform is shown in (b). 
+00 
a (p) = J2~ 11 J 
1jf (x) exp [ - ~ px] dx 
-(X) 
(18) 
(19) 

Fourier Transforms 
23 
then 
+00 
1/1 (x) = v'2~ n f a (p) exp [* pxJ dp 
(20) 
-00 
We will use the above equation in Chapter 5. 
2.3. Parseval's theorem 
The equality expressed by the following equation 
+00 
+00 
f If (x)1 2 dx = f IF (k)1 2 dk 
(21) 
-00 
-00 
is known as Parseval's theorem. The proof is simple: 
+00 
+00 
Proof f If (x)1 2 dx = f f* (x) f (x) dx 
-00 
-00 
where we have used Eq. (5) and its complex conjugate. Thus 
+00 f If (x)1 2 dx 
-00 
+00 
+00 
[+00 
] 
L 
dk L 
dk' F* (k) F (k') 
2~ L 
ei(k-k')x dx 
+00 
+00 
f dk f dk' F* (k) F (k') 8 (k - k') 
-00 
-00 
+00 f dk IF (k)1 2 
-00 
Similarly, we can easily show from Eqs (19) and (20) that 
+00 
+00 
f 11/1 (x)1 2 dx = f la (p)12 dp 
(22) 
-00 
-00 

24 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The implication of the above equation will be discussed in Chapter 5. 
2.4. Fourier transform of a time-dependent function 
In order to get a better physical insight to the Fourier transform, we consider a time 
dependent function f (t). For such a function we write the Fourier transform in the 
following form 
+00 
F (w) = --
f (t) elOJ! dt 
1 f 
. 
v'2rr 
. 
(23) 
-00 
Thus 
+00 
1 f 
. 
f(t) = v'2rr 
F(w) e-IOJt dw 
(24) 
-00 
The above equations are nothing but Eqs. (6) and (7) with x and k replaced by t 
and w respectively. As a simple example, we consider an optical pulse having a 
Gaussian envelope: 
(25) 
whose real part represents the actual electric field which is plotted in Fig. 2.3(a) for 
wor = 15. The Fourier transform can be readily evaluated and is given by 
fit) 
1"(0) 
(a) 
--. o:rr 
(b) 
15 
Figure 2.3. (a) The real part of the function as given by Eq. (25) for wor = 15. (b) The corresponding 
Fourier transform. 
[ 
(w -
WO)2 r2] 
F (w) = A (Y exp -
2 
(26) 
where we have used Eq. (10). The function F (w) is known as the frequency spec-
trum and is plotted in Fig. 2.3(b). One can see that the duration of the pulse is ~ r 

Fourier Transforms 
and the corresponding spectral width is given by 
implying 
I 
/').w"-' -
r 
r /').W '" I 
25 
(27) 
(28) 
Thus a pulse of duration r has necessarily a spectral width'" 1 / r; this is indeed 
the result obtained in coherence theory (see, e.g. Chapter] 4 of Ref. 3). 
2.5. Problems 
Problem 2.1 (a) Show that the Fourier transform of the function 
f (x) = A e-a1xl ; a > 0 
is given by 
A 
2a 
F (k) = -
-----::------,:-
-/2ir a 2 + k2 
which is known as the Lorentzian distribution. 
(b) Hence show that 
-00 
(c) Use Parseval's theorem to prove 
Problem 2.2 Using Eqs (8) and (9) show that 
+00 
+00 
f If (x)1 2 dx = f IF (k)1 2 dk 
-00 
which is the Parseval's theorem. 
Problem 2.3 Assume 
-00 
1/1 (x) 
~ 
exp [~pox] 
o 
Ixl < L 
Ixl > L 
(29) 
(30) 
(31) 
(32) 
(33) 

26 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Use Eqs (19) and (20) to calculate a (p) and interpret the result physically. Use 
Parseval's theorem to prove 
Problem 2.4 Assume 
+00 f 
sin2 ~ 
-- d~ =7r 
~2 
-00 
f(f) = Ae-iwot 
Calculate F (w) and interpret the result physically. 
2.6. Sample questions 
Q. 1 Consider the function 
Calculate its Fourier spectrum 
+00 
1 f 
. 
g(w) ="f2rr 
f(t) e-1wt dt 
-00 
(34) 
(35) 
and evaluate approximately b..wb..t. Evaluate f(t) using the expression for 
g(w). 
Q. 2 Consider the function 
Calculate its Fourier spectrum 
+00 
g(k) = _1_ f ((x) e-ikx dx 
"f2rr 
. 
-00 
and evaluate approximately b..x b..k. Evaluate f (x) using the expression for 
g(k). 
Q. 3 Calculate the Fourier transform of the following functions 

Fourier Transforms 
27 
a) 
f(x) = A eikox Ixl < Lj2 
o 
Ixl > Lj2 
b) f(x) = A e-lxl/L 
c) f(x) = A 
-
00 < x < 00 
In each case make an estimate of L'u and f.,.k and interpret physically. 
2.7. References and suggested reading 
1. R.N. Bracewell, The Fourier Transform and its Applications, McGraw-Hill, 
New York (1986). 
2. E.C. Titchmarsh, Introduction to the Theory of Fourier Integrals, Clarendon 
Press, Oxford (1948). 
3. A. Ghatak, Optics, (Second Edition), Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi (1992). 

Part II 
Basic Quantum Mechanics 

Chapter 3 
Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
For the rest of my life, I will reflect on what light is. 
-
ALBERT EINSTEIN, CA. 1917. 
All the fifty years of conscious brooding have brought me no closer to the answer 
to the question, 'What are light quanta?' Of course today every rascal thinks he 
knows the answer, but he is deluding himself. 
-
ALBERT EINSTEIN, 1951. 
3.1. Introduction 
As we know, the values of the mass and charge of electrons, protons, neutrons, 
alpha-particles, etc., are known with tremendous accuracy-approximately one 
part in a billion. Their velocities can also be changed by application of electric and 
magnetic fields. Thus, we usually tend to visualize them as tiny particles. However, 
they also exhibit diffraction and other effects which can only be explained if we 
assume them to be waves. Similarly, using light beams, there are experiments on 
interference, diffraction, etc., which can only be explained if we assume a wave 
model for light. There are also phenomena, like photoelectric effect, which can 
only be explained if we assume a particle model of light. Thus, answers to questions 
like what is an electron or what is light are very difficult. Indeed electrons, protons, 
neutrons, photons, alpha-particles, etc. are neither particles nor waves. The modern 
quantum theory describes them in a very abstract way which cannot be connected 
with everyday experience. To quote Feynman [Ref. 1 ]: 
Newton thought that light was made up of particles, but then it was discovered 
that it behaves like a wave. Later, however (in the beginning of the twentieth 
century), it was found that light did indeed sometimes behave like a particle. 
Historically, the electron, for example, was thought to behave like a particle, 
and then it was found that in many respects it behaved like a wave. So it really 
behaves like neither. Now we have given up. We say: 'It is like neither'. 
31 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

32 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
There is one lucky break, however-electrons behave just like light. The 
quantum behaviour of atomic objects (electrons, protons, neutrons, photons, 
and so on) is the same for all, they are all 'particle-waves', or whatever you 
want to call them. 
In this chapter, we will qualitatively discuss the wave-particle duality and how 
it can be explained on the basis of the uncertainty principle and the probabilistic 
interpretation of matter waves. 
3.2. The corpuscular and wave models of light 
The corpuscular model is perhaps the simplest model of light. According to this 
model, a luminous body emits a stream of particles in all directions. The particles 
are assumed to be very tiny so that when two light beams overlap, a collision 
between two particles rarely occurs. Using the corpuscular model, one can explain 
the laws of reflection and refraction. Contrary to popular belief, the corpuscular 
model of light is due to Descartes rather than to Newton. The law of refraction was 
discovered experimentally in 1621 by Snell. Descartes' derivation of Snell's law 
was published in 1637; this derivation is equivalent to the corpuscular derivation, 
which is usually attributed to Newton. Newton was only about eight years old when 
Descartes died and the first edition of Newton's Optiks (in which he had discussed 
the corpuscular model) was published in 1704. It was probably because of the 
popularity of Newton's Optiks that the corpuscular theory is usually attributed to 
Newton. 
Although the corpuscular model explains the propagation of light through free 
space and can be made to predict the correct forms of the laws of reflection and 
refraction, there came up a large number of experimental observations (like inter-
ference, diffraction, polarization etc.), which could not be explained on the basis of 
the corpuscular model of light. Indeed, in 1804, Thomas Young performed the fa-
mous two slit interference experiment which could only be explained on assuming 
a wave model of light. Young showed that the wavelength of the light waves was 
around 6 x 10-5 cm. Because of the smallness of the wavelength, the diffraction 
effects are small and therefore light approximately travels in straight lines. Around 
1816, Fresnel gave a satisfactory explanation of the diffraction phenomenon by 
means of a wave theory and calculated the diffraction patterns produced by various 
types of apertures and edges. In 1816, Fresnel along with Arago performed the 
famous experiment on the superposition of linearly polarized light waves, which 
was explained by Young, by assuming that light waves were transverse in character. 
Around the second quarter of the nineteenth century, the wave theory seemed 
to be well established and since it was thought that a wave requires a medium for 
its propagation, the elastic ether theory was developed. Indeed, in 1832 Fresnel 
derived the expressions for the reflection and transmission coefficients by using 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
33 
models for ether vibrations. However, there were considerable difficulties in the 
understanding of the ether theory and since we now know that the ether does not 
exist, we will not go into the details of the various theories. 
The nineteenth century also saw the development of electricity and magnetism. 
Around 1857 Maxwell generalized Ampere's law by stating that a changing elec-
tric field can also set up a changing magnetic field. He summed up all the laws 
of electricity and magnetism in the form of equations which are now referred to 
as Maxwell's equations. From these equations, he derived a wave equation and 
predicted the existence of electromagnetic waves (see, e.g., Chapter 19 of Ref. 2). 
From the wave equation so derived, he showed that the velocity of the electro-
magnetic waves can be calculated from experiments in which a certain quantity of 
electric charge is measured by two different methods. These measurements were 
carried out in 1856 by Kohlrausch and Weber, and from their data, Maxwell found 
that the speed of the electromagnetic waves in air should be about 3.107 x 108 
mls. He found that this value was very close to the measured value of the speed 
of light which according to the measurement of Fizeau in 1849 was known to be 
3.14858 x 108 mls. Maxwell argued that these two numbers cannot be accidentally 
equal and with faith in rationality of nature, he propounded his famous electro-
magnetic theory of light according to which, light waves are electromagnetic in 
nature. Associated with a light wave, there would be changing electric and mag-
netic fields, the changing magnetic field produces a time and space varying electric 
field and the changing electric field produces a time and space varying magnetic 
field, this results in the propagation of the electromagnetic wave even in free space. 
In 1888, Heinrich Hertz carried out experiments which could produce and detect 
electromagnetic waves produced by discharging electrically charged plates through 
a spark gap. The frequency of the emitted electromagnetic waves depended on the 
values of the inductance and capacitance of the circuit. Hertz's experimental results 
provided dramatic confirmation of Maxwell's electromagnetic theory. In addition, 
there were so many other experimental results which were quantitatively explained 
by using Maxwell's theory that around the end of the nineteenth century physicists 
thought that one finally understood what light really was. 
3.3. Particle nature of radiation: the photoelectric effect 
In 1887, Hertz discovered that a metal irradiated by a light beam would emit 
electrons. These electrons are known as photoelectrons and can be collected by 
a metal plate P2 as shown in Fig. 3.1. The photoelectrons constitute a current 
between the plates PI and P2 which can be detected by means of an ammeter 
A. When the voltage across the plates is varied, the current also varies; typical 
variations of the current with voltage are shown in Fig. 3.2. The figure corresponds 
to monochromatic light of a particular wavelength and different curves correspond 

34 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
to different intensities of the beam. From the figure one can draw the following 
conclusions: 
(i) At zero voltage there is a finite value of the current implying that some of the 
emitted photoelectrons reach the metal surface P2. 
(ii) As the voltage is increased, the current increases till it reaches a saturation 
value; this will happen when the plate P2 collects all the emitted photoelec-
trons. 
(iii) If the plate P2 is kept at a slightly negative potential, there is a weak current 
implying that some of the photoelectrons do manage to reach the plate P2 . 
However, beyond a certain voltage (which is shown as - Vc in the figure) the 
current is zero; V is known as the cutoff voltage and the quantity Iq I Vc will 
represent the maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons (q represents the 
charge of the electron). For example, for sodium Vc ~ 2.3 Volts and for copper 
Vi ~ 4.7 Volts. 
(iv) If we do not change the wavelength of the incident radiation but make it more 
intense, the magnitude of the current will become larger as shown in Fig. 
3.2 implying a greater emission of photoelectrons. Notice that the value of 
the cutoff potential remains the same; this important result implies that the 
maximum kinetic energy of the emitted photoelectrons does not depend on 
the intensity of the incident radiation. 
(v) If the frequency of the incident radiation is increased then the cutoff poten-
tial and hence the maximum kinetic energy of the electron (= I q I Vc ) varies 
linearly with the frequency as shown in Fig. 3.3. Further, for frequencies 
less than a critical value (shown as Vc in Fig. 3.3), there is no emission of 
photoelectrons no matter what the intensity of the incident radiation may be. 
At first sight it appears that since electromagnetic waves carry energy, the wave 
model for light should be able to explain the emission of photoelectrons from a 
metal surface. However, there are certain peculiarities associated with photoelectric 
effect, which cannot be satisfactorily explained by means of a wave model: 
1. The first peculiarity is the fact that the maximum kinetic energy of the elec-
trons does not depend on the intensity of the incident radiation, it only de-
pends on its frequency; further, a greater intensity leads to a larger number of 
electrons constituting a larger current. Thus, a faint violet light would eject 
electrons of greater kinetic energy than an intense yellow light although the 
latter would produce a large number of electrons. A wave model would, how-
ever, predict that a large intensity of the incident radiation would result in a 
greater kinetic energy of the emitted electrons. 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
35 
I ncident Light 
Large Current 
Weak 
urrent 
Figure 3.1. If light (of certain frequency) is allowed to fall on a metal like sodium, electrons are 
emitted which can be collected by the plate B. (a) and (b) correspond to positive and negative voltage 
applied to the plate B. Even when the plate is kept at a low negative voltage, one can detect a small 
current. 
2. The second peculiarity is the fact that there is almost no time lag between the 
times of incidence of the radiation and the ejection of the photoelectron. For 
weak intensities of the incident beam the wave theory predicts a considerable 
time lag for the electrons to absorb enough energy to leave the metal surface. 
This can be illustrated by considering a specific example. One can observe 
a detectable photocurrent if the surface of sodium metal is illuminated by 
violet light of intensity as low as 10-10 W/cm2 . Now, ten layers of sodium 
will contain 
6 X 1023 X 10 X 10-8 
-------- ~ 2 X 1015 atoms/cm2 
23 
where we have assumed the density of sodium to be ~ 1 g/cm3 . 

36 
... = 
~ 
:.. 
:.. = 
U 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
v 
Figure 3.2. Typical variation of the photocurrent with voltage. The curves correspond to light (of the 
same frequency) having different intensity. 
5 
> 
~ 4 
>. 
CI 
... 
Q) 
r::: 
3 
W 
CJ 
:;:; 
Q) 
r::: i: 2 
E 
~ 
E 
'x 
1 
III 
:E 
0 
0 
5 
Sodium 
10 
Frequency (x 10 ) Hz 
Copper 
15 
20 
Figure 3.3. The variation of the maximum kinetic energy of the electrons as a function of frequency 
of the incident light for cesium, sodium and copper. The intercepts on the horizontal axis represent 
the cutoff frequencies of different metals. 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
37 
Assuming that the energy is uniformly absorbed by the upper ten layers of sodium, 
each atom would receive energy at the rate of 
10- 10 
--- ~ 5 X ]026 J / s ~ 3 x ]0-7 e V / s 
2 X ]015 
Assuming that an electron should acquire an energy ~ leV to escape from the 
metal, we should expect a time lag of order ]07 sec (~few months). However, the 
experiments show that there is no detectable time lag between the incidence of the 
radiation and the emission of the photoelectrons. 1 
In 1905, Einstein provided a simple explanation of the above mentioned pe-
culiarities. He argued that light consisted of quanta of energy h v (where v is the 
frequency) and that the emission of a photoelectron was the result of the interaction 
of a single quantum (i.e., of the photon2) with an electron. In his 1905 paper,3 
Einstein wrote 
Monocromatic radiation behaves as if it consists of mutually independent 
energy quanta of magnitude [h v]. 
Einstein's photon theory gives a very satisfactory explanation of the photoelectric 
effect. According to this theory a light beam (of frequency v) essentially consists 
of individual corpuscles called photons. Each photon carries an energy equal to h v. 
This corpuscular model can explain all the observations discussed above. Thus, for 
all frequencies below the cutoff vc , each photon will carry energy less than hvc 
which will not be sufficient to eject the electron from the metal. For v > v" a 
major fraction of the excess energy [= h (v -
v c)] appears as kinetic energy of the 
emitted electron. Further, the non-measurable time lag between the incidence of the 
radiation and the ejection of the electron follows immediately from the corpuscular 
nature of the radiation. 
Indeed, the observed maximum kinetic energy of the photoelectrons is linearly 
related to the frequency of the incident radiation and one may write (see Fig. 2.3) 
Tmax = -B + hv = h(v - vc), 
(1) 
where B(= hvJ is a constant and h is the Planck's constant (= 6.627 x ]0-27 
erg-sec). The frequency Vc represents the cutoff frequency and is a characteristic 
of the metal. For example, 
for cesium B ~ 1.9 eV ::::} Vc ~ 4.6 X ]014 Hz 
for sodium B ~ 2.3 eV ::::} Vc ~ 5.6 X ]014 Hz 
for copper B ~ 4.7 eV ::::} Vc ~ 11.4 X ]014 Hz 
I Indeed. in 1928. Lawrence and Beams had devised an experiment to find out whether the time 
lag was :'S 3 x 10-9 sec; the experiment gave a negative result. 
2 The term photon was introduced by G.N. Lewis in 1926. 
3 Annalen der Physik, 17, 132 (1905). 

38 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
In Fig. 3.3, Vc is the intercept on the horizontal axis. In 1909, Einstein wrote 
[quoted from Ref. 3] 
It is undeniable that there is an extensive group of data concerning radia-
tion which shows that light has certain fundamental properties that can be 
understood much more readily from the standpoint of the Newton emission 
(particle) theory than from the standpoint of the wave theory. It is my opinion, 
therefore, that the next phase of the development of theoretical physics will 
bring us a theory of light that can be interpreted as a kind offusion of the 
wave and emission theories. 
We may note the prediction of Einstein. Einstein received the 1921 Noble prize in 
Physics for his discovery of the law of photoelectric effect and not for his theory of 
relativity. To quote Max Jammer (Ref. 4). 
Owing to Einstein's paper of 1905, it was primarily the photoelectric ef-
fect to which physicists referred as an irrefutable demonstration of the ex-
istence of photons and which thus played an important part in the conceptual 
development of quantum mechanics. 
The validity of Eq.(1) was established in a series of beautiful experiments by Mil-
likan who also made the first direct determination of Planck's constant h. In his 
Nobel lecture, Millikan said (see Ref. 5) 
After ten years of testing and changing and learning and sometimes blunder-
ing, all efforts being directed from the first toward the accurate experimental 
measurement of the energies of emission of photoelectrons, now as a function 
of temperature, now of wavelength, now of material (contact e.m.f relation), 
this work resulted, contrary to my own expectation, in the first direct experi-
mental proof in 1914 of the exact validity, within narrow limits of experimen-
tal error, of the Einstein equation [Eq. (1 )], and the first direct photoelectric 
determination of Planck's constant h. 
Millikan further wrote: Einstein's equation is one of exact validity (always within 
the present small limits of experimental error) and of very general applicability, 
is perhaps the most conspicuous achievement of Experimental Physics during the 
past decade. 
We may mention here that after a year or two after the foregoing photoelectric 
work was completed, Duane and his associates found unambiguous proof of a 
relation, which is just the inverse of Einstein's. They bombarded a metal target with 
electrons of known and constant energy and found that the maximum frequency of 
the emitted X-rays was given, with much precision, by the following equation 
1 
2mv2 = hv 
(2) 
In making this transition from Planck's quantised oscillators to quanta of radiation, 
Einstein had made a very important conceptual transition, namely, he introduced 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
39 
the idea of corpuscular behaviour of radiation. Although Newton had described 
light as a stream of particles, this view had been completely superseded by the wave 
picture of light, a picture that culminated in the electromagnetic theory of Maxwell. 
The revival of the particle picture now posed a severe conceptual problem, one of 
reconciling wave and particle like behaviour of radiation. It also soon became ap-
parent that matter also exhibited both types of behaviour. For example, an electron 
with an accurately measured value of mass and charge could undergo diffraction in 
a manner similar to that of light waves. We will now give a brief account of some 
of the other important experimental evidence showing wave-particle duality which 
led to the development of the quantum theory. 
Incident Photon (hv) 
• 
(a) 
Figure 3.4. The Compton scattering of a photon: (a) shows the incidence of a photon (of frequency 
v) on an electron at rest, (b) shows the scattered photon (having a reduced frequency Vi) propagating 
along the direction which makes an angle rP with the original direction; the electron also acquires a 
momentum. 
3.4. The Compton effect 
We have seen that Einstein's explanation for the photoelectric effect implies that 
quanta of light (photons) carry a definite amount of energy. The Compton effect 
provided an unambiguous example of a process in which a quantum of radiation 
carrying energy as well as momentum scatters off an electron [see Fig. 3.4]. Now, 
if u represents the energy per unit volume associated with a plane electromagnetic 
wave, Maxwell's equations predict that the momentum per unit volume associated 
with the electromagnetic wave would be u / c, where c represents the speed of light 
in free space. Since each photon carries an energy equal to hv, it should have a 

40 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
momentum given by the following equation: 
hv 
h 
p = -
= -
(3) 
C 
A 
In 1923 Compton investigated the scattering of X-rays by a block of paraffin and 
found that the wavelength of the radiation scattered at an angle of 90° is greater 
than the wavelength of the incident radiation. In other words, the frequency v' of 
the scattered wave is smaller than the frequency of the incident wave. Compton 
was able to explain the result4 quantitatively as that of an elastic collision between 
a photon of energy E = h v and the momentum given by Eq.(3). Compton was 
awarded the 1927 Nobel Prize in Physics ''for his discovery of the effect named 
after him". 
The light quantum imparts some of its energy to the electron and emerges with 
less energy. Thus the scattered radiation has a lower frequency. The kinematics of 
this collision process can be worked out on elementary application of the laws of 
conservation of energy and momentum [see Sec. 3.4.1]. These calculations give the 
following expression for the shift in the wavelength 
2h 
e 
~A=-sin2-
(4) 
moc 
2 
where A is the angle of scattering of the light quantum [see Fig. 3.4] and mo 
represents the rest mass of the electron. If we substitute the values of h, mo and 
c, we obtain 
~A = A' - A = 0.0485 sin 2 ~ 
2 
(5) 
where A is measured in Angstroms. The above equation shows that the maximum 
change in the wavelength is about 0.05 A, and as such for a measurable shift one 
must use radiation of smaller wavelength. In Fig. 3.5 we have given the schematic 
of the experimental arrangement for the measurement of the Compton shift:. A 
monochromatic beam of X-rays (or y-rays) is allowed to fall on a sample scatterer 
and the scattered photons were detected by means of a crystal spectrometer. The 
crystal spectrometer allows one to find the intensity distribution (as a function 
of A) for a given value of y. In Fig. 3.6 we have shown the wavelength of the 
scattered photon at different angles with respect to the primary beam as obtained 
by Compton in his original experimentS in 1923. The solid curve corresponds 
4 According to the classical explanation of Compton scattering, the electron undergoes oscilla-
tory motion because of the electric field associated with the incident electromagnetic radiation. The 
accelerated electron emits electromagnetic waves and because of Doppler shifts due to the motion of 
the electron, the emitted wavelength differs from the wavelength of the incident radiation; however, 
the classical theory predicts that for a given angle of scattering a continuous range in the value of 
the scattered wavelength should be formed, which is contrary to experimental findings. The details 
of this analysis are given in Section 2.9 of Ref. 6. 
S The original papers of Compton have been published in a book on Scientific Papers of L.H. 
Compton: X-ray and Other Studies. edited by R.S. Shankland, University of Chicago Press, 1975. 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
:.. 
0 
...... 
~ s 
... --
~ 
0 u 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
s~~----
41 
Figure 3.5. Outline of the experimental arrangement for the measurement of the Compton shift. A 
collimated beam of monochromatic X-rays is scattered by the scatterer S; the wavelength of the 
scattered photon is measured by the detector D . 
. 06 
1
·05 
.04 
.02 
.01 
135 
A = 0.022 + 0.0485 sin 2 ~ 
• ,Experimental Data 
of Compton 
2 
Figure 3.6. The variation of wavelength of the scattered photon with the angle of scattering. The 
solid curve corresponds to Eq.(5) with A = 0.022 A. The dots represent the experimental points 
obtained by Compton. The figure has been adapted from the original paper of A.H. Compton on A 
Quantum theory on the scattering of X-rays by Light Elements, Physical Review, 1923, Vol. 21, 382. 

42 
9=00 
9= 450 
I 
.£ 0 I---'-+'--~------l 
'" c 
~ 
0'---0~.7~00~DL-0-.~75-0---J 
o 
A (A)--.. 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Molybdenum 
Ka line 
Primary 
Figure 3.7. The intensity variation as a function of the wavelength of the scattered photon. The 
vertical line (marked P) corresponds to the unmodified wavelength A = 0.711 A. The second vertical 
line (marked T) corresponds to the wavelength as predicted by Eq.(4). The figure has been adapted 
from A.H. Compton's original paper on 'The spectrum of Scattered X-rays". Physical Review, 1923, 
22,409. 
to Eq.(S) with 'A = 0.022 A. (Notice that the corresponding photon energy is 
'" 6.6 X 10- 27 x 3 x 1010/2.2 x 1O- IOergs > 0.5 MeV, which corresponds to a 
y-ray). The good agreement between theory and experiment proves that radiation 
behaves as if it consists of corpuscles of energy h v having a momentum h v / c. 
The experimental findings of Compton are shown in Fig. 3.7; the experiment 
corresponds to the Molybdenum K a line ('A = 0.711 A). The sample used was 
graphite. Notice that at each value of e, there are two peaks; the first peak appears 
at almost the same wavelength as the primary beam. This peak is because of the fact 
that the photon may be scattered by the whole atom; consequently, the quantity mo 
appearing in Eq.( 4) is not the electron mass but the mass of the carbon atom (which 
is about 22,000 times that of the mass of the electron). Thus the wavelength shift 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
43 
is negligible. The second peak corresponds to the Compton shift. In each figure, 
the two vertical lines correspond to the unmodified wavelength and the modified 
wavelength as given by Eq.(5) and one can see a good agreement between the 
predicted and observed values. 
Further evidence of the validity of the above theory was provided by the exper-
iments carried out by Compton and Simon who studied the scattering of X-rays 
through supersaturated water-vapor. In the scattering process, the recoil electrons 
formed tracks of condensed droplets; however, the light quantum did not leave 
any track. Now, if the light quantum undergoes another Compton scattering then 
from the track of the second recoil electron one can determine the path of the light 
quantum by simply joining the line of the starting points of the two recoil electrons. 
Although there was considerable uncertainty in the analysis of the experimental 
data (because of the presence of many tracks) Compton and Simon could establish 
agreement between theoretical results and experimental data. 
3.4.1. KINEMATICS OF COMPTON SCATTERING 
We next consider the scattering of a photon by an electron as shown in Fig. 3.4. 
The scattered photon is assumed to have a frequency v'. Conservation of energy 
leads to 
hv = hv' + Ek 
(6) 
where Ek represents the kinetic energy imparted to the electron. Conserving the x 
and y components of the momentum, we have 
and 
hv 
hv' 
-
= -cose + pcos¢ 
c 
c 
hv' 
o = -
sin e - p sin ¢ 
c 
(7) 
(8) 
where p represents the momentum of the electron after collision, e and ¢ represent 
the angles made by the scattered photon and the electron with the original direction 
of the photon (see Fig. 3.4). It will be shown that for a measurable Compton's 
effect, the frequency v should be in the X-ray or in the y-ray region (for X-rays 
A ::; 1 A and h v :::: 104 e V). For such high energy photons, the velocity imparted to 
the electron is comparable to the speed of light and one must use proper relativistic 
expressions for Ek and p. 
According to the theory of relativity, the kinetic energy Ek of the scattered 
electron would be given by 
2 
2 
2 
2 
moc 
2 
Ek = E - moc = mc - moc = ~ 
- moc 
(9) 

44 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where fJ 
v / C, mo represents the rest mass of the electron, v the speed of the 
electron and c the speed of light in free-space; the quantities E and moc2 are known 
as the total energy and the rest mass energy of the electron. Further, the relativistic 
momentum of the electron is given by 
mov 
p = mv = ---=== 
~ 
Now, 
or 
Thus, 
EZ + 2EkmOC2 = p 2c2 
Substituting for Ek form Eq.(3), we get 
h2(1) -
1)')2 + 2h(1) - 1)')moc2 = p2c2 
Further, Eqs.(7) and (8) can be rewritten in the form 
and 
h1) 
h1)' 
P cos ¢ = -
- -
cos e 
c 
c 
h1) 
p sin ¢ = -
sin e 
c 
In order to eliminate ¢, we square and add to obtain 
2 
(h1))2 
(h1)')2 
2h21)1)' 
P = -
+ -
---cose 
c 
c 
c2 
Substituting in Eq.(1l), we obtain 
or 
h2(1)2 - 21)1)' + 1)'2) + 2h(1) - 1)')moc2 
= h21)2 + h21)'2 - 2h21)1)' cos e 
2h(1) - 1)')moc2 
----- = h 2(l - cose) 
21)1)' 
(10) 
(11 ) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
45 
or 
I 
h 
!1"A ="A - A = -(1 - cos e) 
moe 
or 
2h 
e 
L'lA = -- sin2 -
moe 
2 
(15) 
which gives us the Compton shift.6 
3.5. The photon mass 
Because of the fact that the photon has energy (= h v / e) we may assume it to have 
an inertial mass given by 
hv 
(16) 
Thus when a light beam passes near a heavy star, its trajectory ought to get de-
flected. Indeed, the light coming from a distant star does get slightly deflected 
when passing near the sun, which has been experimentally observed. 
Also, we may expect that when a photon leaves a star, its energy should de-
crease because of the gravitation field. This indeed happens and manifests itself in 
decrease in frequency which is usually referred as the gravitational red shift. One 
can approximately calculate the red shift by noting that the potential energy on the 
surface of the star would be 
GMm 
GM hv 
v::::::---=---·-
R 
R 
e2 
(17) 
where M is the mass of the star, R its radius and G the gravitational constant. Thus 
when the light beam reaches earth its frequency would become 
or 
I 
GMhv 
hv = hv - ---
R 
c2 
v -
Vi 
v 
v 
GM 
Re2 
(18) 
(we have neglected the effect of the earth's gravitational field). From the above 
equation, we see that if the mass of the star is so large so that the RHS exceeds 
unity then the light beam will not be able to escape from the star-that is a black 
hole. We should mention that in discussing black holes, we must use general theory 
6 In the derivation of the Compton shift we have assumed that the electron is free although we 
know that the electrons are bound to the atoms. The assumption of a free electron is justified because 
the binding energy ("'=' few eV) is usually very much smaller in comparison to the photon energy « 
1000 eV). 

46 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
of relativity using which one obtains the following value for the limiting radius of 
the star: 
2GM 
R,.=--
. 
C2 
(19) 
which is known as the Schwarschild radius. If the mass of the star is contained 
inside a sphere of radius 
R < Rs 
then a light beam will never leave the star and the star will be known as a black 
hole. Thus if 
M ~ lOMs ~ 2 x lO34 g 
(where Ms is the mass of the sun-see Table 6.1) 
2 x 6.67 X lO-8 x 2 X 2034 
----------- cm 
(3 x 1010)2 
~ 30km 
Indeed black holes with radius'" lo km have been detected! 
3.6. Wave nature of matter 
Experiments by Wilson with his cloud chamber had clearly shown the particle like 
behaviour of alpha and beta particles. These are emitted by radioactive elements 
and when they pass through supersaturated vapor, they form tracks of condensed 
droplets. For alpha particles, these tracks are nearly straight lines; however, for 
electrons, the tracks are irregularly curved. The existence of continuous tracks 
suggest that the emissions from the radioactive substance can be regarded as minute 
particles moving with high speed. Further, the fact that electrons could be deflected 
by electric and magnetic fields and also the fact that one could accurately determine 
the ratio of their charge to mass suggest very strongly that electrons are parti-
cles. This view remained unchallenged for a number of years. [C.T.R. Wilson was 
awarded the 1927 Nobel Prize in Physics ''Jor his method of making the paths of 
electrically charged particles visihle by condensation ofvapor"J. 
At this stage one could ask if matter may not show wave-like behaviour also 
just as light exhibited corpuscular and wave-like behaviour. In 1925, de Broglie 
proposed just such a hypothesis and argued that the relation given by Eq.(3), be-
tween wavelength and momentum applied for electrons as well. In his 1925 paper, 
he wrote: The basic idea of quantum theory is, of course, the impossibility of con-
sidering an isolated fragment of energy without assigning a certain frequency to it; 
de Broglie was awarded the 1929 Nobel Prize in Physics ''Jor his discovery of the 
wave nature of electrons". Later, de Broglie wrote [quoted from p. 58 of Ref. 3] 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
47 
I was convinced that the wave-particle duality discovered by Einstein in his 
theory of light quanta was absolutely general and extended to all of the phys-
ical world, and it seemed certain to me, therefore, that the propagation of a 
wave is associated with the motion of a particle of any sort-photon, electron, 
proton or any other. 
In 1927, Davisson and Germer studied the diffraction of electrons from single 
crystals of nickel and showed that the diffraction patterns could be explained if 
the electrons were assumed to have a wavelength given by the de Broglie relation 
h 
A =-
P 
(20) 
where p is the momentum of the electron. Shortly afterwards, in 1928, G.P. Thom-
son carried out electron diffraction experiments by passing electrons through thin 
polycrystalline metal targets. The diffraction pattern consisted of concentric rings 
similar to the Debye-Scherrer rings obtained in the X-ray diffraction pattern. By 
measuring the diameters of the rings and from the known structure of the crystals, 
Thomson calculated the wavelength associated with the electron beam which was 
in agreement with the de-Broglie relation. In 1937, Davisson and Thomson shared 
the Nobel prize for their experimental discovery of the diffraction of electrons by 
crystals. Max Jammer [Ref. 4] has written: Thomson, the father, was awarded the 
Nobel prize for having shown that the electron is a particle, and Thomson, the son, 
for having shown that the electron is a wave. 
3.6.1. DIFFRACTION OF X-RAYS BY CRYSTALS 
Before we discuss the Davisson-Germer experiment, we thought it would be more 
appropriate to discuss briefly the diffraction of X-rays by crystals. We consider a 
monochromatic beam of X-rays to be incident on a crystal. In Fig. 3.8 the horizon-
tal dotted lines represent a set of parallel crystal planes with Miller indices (hkl). 
WI W2 and W3 W4 represent the incident and reflected wavefronts respectively. Ob-
viously, the secondary wavelets emanating from the points A, Band C are in phase 
on W3 W4 and the waves emanating from the points A I, B I and C I will also be in 
phase on W3 W4 if 
XB I + BIY = mA, 
m = 1,2,3, ... 
(21) 
or when 
2dhk1 sin e = mA 
(22) 
where dhkl is the interplanar spacing between crystal planes of indices (hkl), m = 
1, 2, 3, ... is called the order of diffraction and e is known as the Bragg angleJ 
7 W.H. Bragg (the father) and w.L. Bragg (the son) were awarded the 1915 Nobel Prize in Physics 
"for their services in the analysis of crystal structure by means of Rontgen rays". 

48 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Equation (22) is known as Bragg's law and gives the angular positions of the rein-
forced diffracted beams in terms of the wavelength A of the incoming X-rays and 
of the interplanar spacings dhkl of the crystal planes. When the condition expressed 
by Eq.(22) is not satisfied, destructive interference occurs and no reinforced beam 
will be produced. Constructive interference occurs when the condition given by 
Eq.(22) is satisfied leading to peaks in the intensity distribution. For solids which 
crystallize in cubic structures (which are discussed later), the interplanar spacing 
dhkl between two closest parallel planes with Miller indices (hkl) is given by 
(23) 
where a represents the lattice constant. In order to calculate the angles of diffraction 
we substitute Eq.(23) in the Bragg's law [Eq.(22)] to obtain 
2a 
r::=;;===:=:;;==:;;;: sin e = m A 
Jh2 + k2 + [2 
(24) 
We restrict ourselves only to first order reflections (m = I); higher order reflections 
are usually rather weak. Thus, Eq.(24) can be written in the form: 
where 
sine =~../N 
2a 
(25) 
(26) 
Now, for a simple cubic lattice, all values of (hkl) are possible implying the fol-
lowing possible values of N: 
N=1,2,3,4,5,6,7, ... 
(SC) 
(27) 
Similarly, for a BCC lattice h + k + l must be even implying 
N = h 2 + k2 + l2 = 2,4,6,8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18,20,22, . . . 
(BCC) 
(28) 
Finally, for an FCC lattice, Miller indices are either all even or all odd implying 
N = h 2 + k 2 + [2 = 3,4,8,11,12,16,19,20,24,27,... 
(FCC) 
(29) 
For a given structure and for given values of A and a, one can now easily calculate 
the different values of e. For example, if we consider A = 1.540 A and 1.544 A 
(corresponding to the CuK,,1 and CUK,,2 lines) then for sodium (which is a BCC 
structure with a = 4.2906 A), the various values of e are 
(14.70°,14.74°) (21.03°,21.09°) (26.08°,26.15°) (30.50°,30.59°) 
(34.58°,34.68°) (38.44°,38.56°) (42.18°,42.32°) (45.88°,46.03°) 
(49.59°,49.76°) (53.38°,53.58°) (57.33°,57.56°) (61.54°,61.82°) 
(66.22°,66.56°) (79.41°,80.23°) 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
49 
I 
I 
-0.-0-.-0-4_. 
Al 
Bl 
C1 
-0. - 0- . - 0- . -
. -0 • -
• - 0- . -0. -
. -0 • -
. -
0 
-0. - 0- . - 0- . -
. -0 • -
• - 0- . -0. -
. -0 • -
• -
0 
Figure 3.8. Reflection of a plane wave by a set of parallel crystal planes characterized by the Miller 
indices (hkl). When the Bragg condition 2d sine = rnA is satisfied, the waves scattered from 
different rows will be in phase. 
The two values inside the parentheses correspond to the two wavelengths 1.540 A 
and 1.544 A respectively. Because of the presence of two wavelengths one obtains 
double lines for each family of planes which become resolvable only at higher 
scattering angles. 
We do not wish to go into the details of X-ray crystallography, we would only 
like to mention that for given X-ray wavelengths, one measures different values of 
e-an analysis of which gives the crystal structure; interested readers may look up 
any book on solid state physics [see, e.g., Ref. 7]. 
We may point out that when one uses monochromatic X-rays, Bragg's formula 
cannot be satisfied for an arbitrary value of e. Hence one rotates the single crystal 
so that reflection can occur for a discrete set of e values. This method can only 
be employed if single crystals of reasonable size are available. If this is not the 
case, one can still use monochromatic X-rays provided the sample is in the powder 
form so that there are always enough crystallites of the right orientation available 
to satisfy the Bragg relation. A powder will consist of a large number of randomly 
oriented micro-crystals; each micro-crystal is essentially a single crystal. As the 
X-ray beam passes through such a polycrystalline material, the orientation of any 
given set of planes, with reference to the X-ray beam, changes from one micro-
crystal to the other. Thus, corresponding to any given set of planes there will be a 

50 
xy 
~eam 
Polycrystalline 
Powder 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Figure 3.9. When a monochromatic X-ray beam falls on a polycrystalline sample one obtains the 
Debye-Scherrer rings. 
large number of crystals for which Bragg's condition will be satisfied, and on the 
photographic plate one will obtain concentric rings [see Fig. 3.9]; each ring will 
correspond to a particular value of dhkl and a particular value of m. 
3.6.2. THE DAVISSON-GERMER EXPERIMENT 
Figure 3.10 gives a schematic of the original experimental set up of Davisson and 
Germer (some details are given in the Nobel lecture of Davisson-see Ref. 8). 
In the experiment, an electron beam [accelerated by a (variable) potential] was 
incident normally on a single crystal of nickel. A collector was designed to accept 
only elastically scattered electrons. Corresponding to a particular set up, Fig. 3.11 
shows the intensity variation as a function of ¢ for different accelerating potentials; 
¢ represents the angle between the incident and the scattered beams (see Fig. 3.10). 
It may be seen that for 54 eV electrons, the scattered intensity is maximum which 
occurs at ¢ :::::0 50°. Now 
28 = J[ - ¢ 
Thus the Bragg angle is given by e :::::0 65°. Further, for 54 e V electrons use of 
non-relativistic formulae will give accurate results and therefore the corresponding 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
51 
~,~a~.~ 
Voltage 
• 
• 
Incident Electron --a-
Beam 
Nickel/1/ 
crystal 
Incident 
electron beam 
• 
• 
• 
~Electron 
Gun 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
¢J/2 
I 
• 
I 
'Detector & 
Galvanometer 
Polar intensity 
variation of the 
scattered beam 
I 
I 
I 
~ 
/ • 
Nickel 
atoms 
Figure 3.10. Schematic of the original setup of Davisson and Germer, (b) Bragg reflection from 
atomic planes of nickel. 

52 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Figure 3.11. Polar diagram showing intensity variation as a function of ¢ for different accelerating 
potentials (adopted from Ref. 8). 
de-Broglie wavelength is given by 
A = 
h 
h 
p 
6.626 X 10-34 
---;:.================ ~ 1.67 x 10- 10 m 
)2 x 9.109 x 10-34 x (54 x 1.602 x 10- 19) 
~ 1.67 A 
N ow, for nickel 
D~2.15A 
And the inter-planar spacing will be given by 
d 
D . 
<P 
sm 2 
2.15 sin 25° ~ 0.909 A 
The Bragg angle e = 65°, thus Eq.(22) [with m = 1] will give 
A = 2d sin e ~ 1.65 A 
(30) 
(31 ) 
(32) 
(33) 
which compares well with Eq.(30). In Fig. 3.12(a) we have shown the Debye-
Scherrer rings produced by scattering of X-rays by zirconium oxide crystals and 
Fig. 3.12(b) shows the rings produced by scattering of electrons by gold crystals. 
The two figures clearly show the similarity in the wave-like properties of X-rays 
and electrons. 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
53 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 3.12. (a) Debye-Scherrer rings produced by scattering of X-rays by zirconium crystals. (b) 
Debye-Scherrer rings produced by scattering of electrons by gold crystals [after Ref. 9). 
3.7. Uncertainty principle 
The reconciliation of the corpuscular nature with the wave character of light (and 
also of the electron) has been brought about through the modern quantum theory; 
and perhaps the best known consequence of wave-particle duality is the uncertainty 
principle of Heisenberg which can be stated as follows: 
If the x-coordinate of the position of a particle is known to an accuracy b.x, 
then the x-component of the momentum cannot be determined to an accuracy 
better than b.px :=::::, hi b.x, where h is the Planck's constant. 
Alternatively, one can say that if b.x and b.px represent the accuracies with which 
the x-coordinate of the position and the x-component of the momentum can be 
determined, then the following inequality must be satisfied 
(34) 
We do not feel the effect of this inequality in our everyday experience because 
of the smallness of the value of Planck's constant (:=::::, 6.6 x I 0~27 erg sec). For 
example, for a tiny particle of mass 1 0~6 gm, if the position is determined within an 
accuracy of about I 0~6 cm, then according to the uncertainty principle, its velocity 
cannot be determined within an accuracy better than b. v :=::::, 6 x 1O~ 16 cm/sec. 
This value is much smaller than the accuracies with which one can determine the 
velocity of the particle. For a particle of a greater mass, b. v will be even smaller. 
Indeed, had the value of Planck's constant been much larger, the world would 
have been totally different. In a beautifully written book, Gamow (Ref. 10) has 
discussed what our world would be like if the effect of the uncertainty principle 
were perceivable by our senses. 

54 
x 
t 
0---. y 
Z 
s 
III 
d 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
S 
P 
A 
B 
S' 
Figure 3.13. Diffraction of a photon (or an electron) beam by a long narrow slit of width h. 
3.7.1. THE SINGLE SLIT DIFFRACTION EXPERIMENT 
We will now show how the diffraction of a light beam (or an electron beam) can 
be explained on the basis of the corpuscular nature of radiation and the uncertainty 
principle. Consider a long narrow slit of width b as shown in Fig. 3.13. Now, one 
can always choose the distance between the source and the slit large enough so that 
Px can be assumed to have an arbitrarily small value. For example, for the source 
at a distance d, the maximum value of Px of the photons approaching the slit will 
be 
b 
hv b 
P- = -.-
d 
c 
d 
which can be made arbitrarily small by choosing a large enough value of d. Thus 
we may assume the light source to be sufficiently far away from the slit so that 
the photons approaching the slit can be assumed to have momentum only in the y-
direction. Now, according to the particle model of radiation, the number of particles 
reaching the point P (which lies in the geometrical shadow) will be extremely 
small; further, if we decrease the width of the slit, the intensity should decrease, 
which is quite contrary to the experimental results because we know that the beam 
undergoes diffraction and the intensity at a point like P would normally increase 
if the width of the slit is made smaller. Thus, the classical corpuscular model is 
quite incapable of explaining the phenomenon of diffraction. However, if we use 
the uncertainty principle in conjunction with the corpuscular model, the diffraction 
phenomenon can be explained in the following manner: When a photon (or an 
electron) passes through the slit, one can say that 
~x ~ b 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
55 
which implies that we can specify the position of the photon to an accuracy b. If 
we now use the uncertainty principle, we would have 
h 
~p ~­
x 
b 
(35) 
i.e., just by making the photon pass through a slit of width b, the slit imparts a 
momentum in the x-direction which is ~ h/b. It may be pointed out that before 
the photon entered the slit, Px (and hence ~Px) can be made arbitrarily small by 
putting the source sufficiently far away. Thus we may write ~Px ~ O. It would 
however be wrong to say that by making the photon pass through the slit, ~Px~x 
is zero; this is because of the fact that ~Px ~ 0 before the photon entered the slit. 
After the photon has entered the slit, it is confined within a distance b in the x 
direction and hence ~p 
x ~ h / b. Further, since before the photon entered the slit 
Px ~ 0, we will therefore have 
h 
IPxl ~ ~Px ~­b 
But P x = P sin e, where e is the angle that the photon coming out of the slit makes 
with the y-axis (see Fig. 3.13). Thus 
or 
. 
h 
psme ~­
b 
h 
sine ~ -pb 
(36) 
The above equation predicts that the possibility of a photon travelling at an an-
gle e with the y-direction is inversely proportional to the width of the slit; i.e., 
smaller the value of b, greater is the value of e and greater is the possibility of the 
photon to reach deep inside the geometrical shadow. This is indeed the diffraction 
phenomenon. Now, the momentum of a photon is given by 
Thus Eq.(36) becomes 
h 
p=-
A-
A-
sine ~ -
b 
(37) 
(38) 
which is the familiar diffraction theory result. We can therefore say that the wave-
particle duality is a consequence of the uncertainty principle and the uncertainty 
principle is a consequence of the wave-particle duality. To quote Max Born [Ref. 
11] 
Physicists of today have learnt that not every question about the motion of 
an electron or a photon can be answered, but only those questions which are 
compatible with the uncertainty principle. 

56 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
900 
)..-4.43A 
Slit width 
600 
300 
Or---~--~~~--~--~----~ 
1 3 
.5 1 2 
S.6 microns 
I 
.~ .. j 
O~--~--~--~--~--~----~ 
2 
• '. 
4.1 microns 
. _: ___ '~'~~:~':e~'~' _ ~.:.:_ 
0~----2~0~-~I~O--~O~-I~O--~2~O----~ 
Angular Position (seconds arc) 
Figure 3.14. Angular broadening of a neutron beam by small slits [after Ref. 12]. 
Returning to Eq.(37), we may mention that de Broglie had suggested that the equa-
tion A = hip is not only valid for photons but is also valid for all particles like 
electrons, protons, neutrons, etc. Indeed, the de Broglie relation has been verified 
by studying the diffraction patterns produced when electrons, neutrons, etc. pass 
through a single crystal; the patterns can be analysed in a manner similar to the X-
ray diffractions. In Fig. 3.14, we show the experimental data of Shull (Ref. 12) who 
studied the Fraunhofer diffraction of neutrons by a single slit and his experimental 
results agree with the intensity distribution as predicted by the wave theory with A 
given by Eq.(37). 
3.8. Probabilistic interpretation of matter waves 
In the previous section we have seen that if a photon passes through a slit of width 
h, then the momentum imparted in the x-direction (which is along the width of the 
slit) is ~ hlh. The question arises whether we can predict the trajectory of an in-
dividual photon. The answer is no. We cannot say where an individual photon will 
land up on the screen; we can only predict the probabilities of arrival of the photon 
in a certain region of the screen. We may, for example say that the probability for 
the arrival of the photon in the region lying between the points A and B (see Fig. 
3.13) is 0.85. This would imply that if the experiment was carried out with a large 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
57 
number of photons, about 85% of them would land up in the region AB; but the 
fate of an individual photon can never be predicted. This is in sharp contrast to 
Newtonian mechanics where the trajectories are always predetermined. It should 
be mentioned that if we place a light detector on the screen, then it will always 
record one photon or none and never half of a photon. This essentially implies 
the corpuscular nature of the radiation. However, the probability distribution is the 
same as predicted by the wave theory and therefore if one performs an experiment 
with a large number of photons (as is indeed the case in most experiments) the 
intensity distribution recorded on the screen is the same as predicted by the wave 
theory. 
In order to explicitly show that diffraction is not a many photon phenomenon, 
Taylor in 1909 carried out a beautiful experiment which consisted of a box with a 
small lamp which casts the shadow of a needle on a photographic plate. The inten-
sity of the light was so weak that between the slit and the photographic plate, it was 
almost impossible to find two photons. In fact to get a good fringe pattern Taylor 
made an exposure lasting for several months. The diffraction pattern obtained on 
the photographic plate, was the same as predicted by the wave theory. 
The corpuscular nature of radiation and the fact that one cannot predict the tra-
jectory of an individual photon can be seen from Fig. 3.15 which consists of series 
of photographs showing the quality of pictures obtainable from various number of 
photons. The photograph clearly shows that the picture is built up by the arrival 
of concentrated packets of energy and the point at which a particular photon will 
arrive is entirely a matter of chance. The figure also shows that the photograph is 
featureless when a small number of photons are involved and as the number of pho-
tons reaching the photographic plate increases, the intensity distribution becomes 
the same as would be predicted by the wave theory. To quote Feynman 
... it would be impossible to predict what would happen. We can only predict 
the odds! This would mean, if it were true, that physics has given up on the 
problem of trying to predict exactly what will happen in a definite circum-
stance. Yes! physics has given up. We do not know how to predict what would 
happen in a given circumstance, and we believe now that it is impossible-
that the only thing that can be predicted is the probability of different events. 
It must be recognized that this is a retrenchment in our earlier idea of un-
derstanding nature. It may be a backward step, but no one has seen a way to 
avoid it. 
A somewhat similar situation arises in radioactivity. Consider a radioactive nucleus 
having a half-life of say 1 hour. If we start with 1000 such nuclei, then on an 
average 500 of them would undergo radioactive decay in 1 hour and about 250 
of them in the next I hour and so on. Thus, although to start with, all nuclei 
are identical, some nuclei would decay in the very first minute and some nuclei 
can survive for hours without undergoing radioactive decay. Thus, one can never 
predict as to which nucleus will undergo decay in a specified period; one can only 

58 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Figure 3.15. Photographs showing the quality of a picture obtainable from various numbers of pho-
tons: (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) correspond to 3 x 103 photons, 1.2 x 104 photons, 9.3 x 104 
photons, 7.6 x 105 photons, 3.6 x 106 photons and 2.8 x 107 photons respectively. (From A. Rose, 
Quantum Effects in Human Vision, Advances in Biological and Medical Physics, Vol. Y, Academic 
Press, 1957). 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
59 
i ~ 
/ 
---
G 
~ ~ 
Figure 3.16. Schematic of the setup of the Michelson interferometer. G represents a beam splitter, 
M, and M2 represent plane mirrors. 
predict the probability of its undergoing decay in a certain interval of time. This is 
indeed a beautiful manifestation of quantum mechanics. To quote Feynman again 
A philosopher once said it is necessary for the very existence of science that 
the same conditions always produced the same results. Well they don't! 
3.9. An understanding of interference experiments 
Let us consider the interference experiment involving the Michelson interferometer 
in which a light beam is partially reflected by a beam splitter and the resulting 
beams are made to interfere (see Fig. 3.16). According to Dirac [Ref. 13] 
... we describe the photon as going partly into each of the two components 
into which the incident beam is split. The photon is then, as we may say, 
in a translational state given by the superposition of the two translational 
states associated with the two components .... For a photon to be in a definite 
translational state it need not be associated with one single beam of light, but 
may be associated with two or more beams of light, which are the components 
into which one original beam has been split. In the accurate mathematical 
theory each translational state is associated with one of the wave functions 
of ordinary wave optics, which may describe either a single beam or two or 
more beams into which one original beam has been split. 
These translational states can be superposed in a manner similar to the one em-
ployed while considering the interference of two beams. Thus, each photon goes 
partly into each of the two components and interferes only with itself. If we try 
to determine the fate of a single photon by measuring the energy in one of the 
components then Dirac argues: 
The result of such a determination must be either a whole photon or nothing 
at all. Thus the photon must change suddenly from heing partly in one beam 

60 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
A 
p 
S 
So 
B 
P' 
Figure 3.17. Young's double hole experimental arrangement for obtaining the interference pattern. 
and partly in the other to be entirely in one of the beams. This sudden change 
is due to the disturbance in the translational state of the photon which the 
observation necessarily makes. It is impossible to predict in which of the two 
beams the photon will be found. Only the probability of either result can be 
calculated. Our description of the photon allows us to infer that, after such an 
energy measurement, it would not be possible to bring about any interference 
effects between the two components. So long as the photon is partly in one 
beam and partly in the other, inteiference can occur when the two beams are 
superposed, but this probability disappears when the photon isforced entirely 
into one of the beams by an observation. 
In a similar manner, we may consider the two-hole interference experiment 
similar to that performed by Young. The experimental arrangement is shown in 
Fig. 3.17 where a weak light source So illuminates the hole S and the light emerg-
ing from the holes S, and S2 produce the interference pattern on the screen P P' . 
The intensity is assumed to be so weak that in the region between the planes AB 
and P pi there is almost never more than one photon. Individual photons are also 
counted by a detector on the screen P pi and one finds that the intensity distribution 
has a cos2 pattern similar to that shown in Fig. 3.17. The corpuscular nature of 
the radiation is evident from its detection in the form of single photons and never 
a fraction of a photon. The appearance of the interference pattern is because of 
the fact that a photon interferes with itself. The quantum theory tells us that a 
photon partially passes through the hole S, and partially through S2. This is not 
the splitting of the photon into two halves but only implies that if we wish to find 
out through which hole the photon passed, then half the time it will be found to 
have passed through the hole S 1 and half the time through S2. As in the case of 
the Michelson interferometer, the photon is in a state which is a superposition of 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
61 
two states, one corresponding to the wave emanating from hole SI and the other to 
the one emanating from hole S2. The superposed state will give rise to an intensity 
distribution similar to that obtained by considering the superposition of two waves. 
It may be noted that if we had employed a device (like a microscope) which would 
have determined which hole the photon had passed through, then the interference 
pattern on the screen would have been washed out. This is a consequence of the 
fact that a measurement always disturbs the system. This is beautifully discussed 
in Ref. 1. Thus we may say that the photons would arrive as packets of energy 
but the probability distribution (on the screen) will be proportional to the intensity 
distribution predicted by using a wave model. 
In a recent paper, Tonomura and his co-workers (Ref. 14) have demonstrated the 
single electron build up of an interference pattern. Their results are shown in Fig. 
3.18. It may be seen that when there are very few electrons they arrive randomly; 
however, when a large number of electrons are involved, one obtains an intensity 
distribution similar to the one predicted by wave theory. 
Example 3.1 In this example we will use the uncertainty principle to determine 
the size of the hydrogen atom. The example demonstrates the far-reaching conse-
quences of the uncertainty principle. 
We consider the hydrogen atom which consists of a proton and an electron. 
Since the proton is very much heavier than the electron, we consider only the 
motion of the electron. Let the electron be confined to a region of linear dimension 
~ a. Thus according to the uncertainty principle 
p ~ /"+,.p ~ lila 
(39) 
where Ii = h 12rr; the reason for using Ii rather than h will be mentioned later. The 
kinetic energy of the electron will be given by 
p2 
li2 
K.E. = -
~--
2m 
2ma2 
(40) 
Now, there exists an electrostatic attraction between the two particles; the corre-
sponding potential energy being given by 
q2 
P.E.=---
4rr Eoa 
(41) 
where q (~ 1. 6 X 10-19 C) represents the magnitude of the charge of the electron 
and EO (~ 8.854 X 10- 12 CN-2m-2) represents the permittivity of free space. Thus 
the total energy is given by 
E 
K.E. + P.E. 
li2 
q2 
(42) 

62 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Fifiure 3./8. Buildup of the electron interference pattern. Number of electrons in (a), (b), (c), (d) and 
(e) are 10, 100,3000,20000 and 70000 respectively. [Adapted from Ref. 14]. 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
63 
The system would settle to a state of lowest energy; thus we must set dE / da equal 
to zero: 
implying 
a = ao = ----,(-(-/2--:-) 
m 
4rrF.1l 
(43) 
If we substitute the values of Ii (:::::::; 1.055 X 10-34 Js), m (:::::::; 9.11 x 10-31 kg), 80 
and q we would obtain 
a = ao :::::::; 0.53 x 10- 10 m = 0.53 A 
(44) 
Thus we get the remarkable result that the size of the hydrogen atom is a direct 
consequence of the uncertainty principle. To quote Feynman: 
So we now understand why we do not fall through the floor . ... In order to 
squash the atoms close together, the electrons would be confined to smaller 
space and by the uncertainty principle, their momenta would have to be higher 
on the average, and that means high energy; the resistance to atomic compres-
sion is a quantum mechanical effect . .. 
We next substitute the value of a from Eq.(43) in Eq.(42) to obtain 
E 
(45) 
Substituting the values of V, m, q and 80, we get 
E 
:::::::; -2.17 X 10- 19 J 
:::::::; -13.6eV 
(46) 
which is nothing but the ground state energy of the hydrogen atom. Thus, that the 
ionization potential of hydrogen atom is:::::::; 13.6 eV follows from the uncertainty 
principle. We may point out that the uncertainty principle can be used to give only 
an order of magnitude of the size of the hydrogen atom or its ionization potential; 
we had intentionally chosen the constants in such a way that the ground state energy 
comes out to be correct. It is for this reason that we had chosen Ii instead of h in 
Eq.(39). 

64 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
3.10. The Franck-Hertz experiment 
We conclude this chapter with a brief discussion of the Franck-Hertz experiment. 
In 1914 James Franck and Gustav Hertz (nephew of Heinrich Hertz) performed a 
beautiful experiment demonstrating conclusively the quantized nature of the energy 
levels of atoms-the quantized energy states of the atom was predicted by Niels 
Bohr8 in 1913. Indeed while introducing Franck and Hertz for receiving the Nobel 
Prize, it was mentioned " ... Bohr's hypotheses of 1913-that the atom can exist 
in different states, each of which is characterized by a given energy level and that 
these energy levels govern the spectral lines emitted by the atoms-are no longer 
mere hypotheses but experimentally proved facts. The methods of verifying these 
hypotheses are the work of James Franck and Gustav Hertz, for which they have 
been awarded the Physics Nobel Prize for 1925". The Nobel Prize was awarded 
''Jor their discovery of the laws governing the impact of an electron upon an atom". 
The experimental setup of Franck and Hertz is shown in Fig. 3.19. The electrons 
are produced by a heated tungsten filament. These electrons are accelerated by a 
wire mesh G kept at a distance of a few centimeters from the filament. The wire 
mesh is kept at a positive potential V which can be varied. There is a plate P 
behind the wire mesh which was kept at a small negative potential so that very low 
energy electrons {after passing through G} would not reach the plate P. A typical 
variation of the plate current (as obtained by Franck and Hertz) with the voltage V 
is shown in Fig. 3.20. As can be seen when V reaches 4.9V (or a multiple of that) 
there is a sudden drop in the current. This was due to the fact that the electrons 
attaining 4.9 eV of energy excite the Hg atom and lose its entire energy and are 
no more collected by the plate P. Indeed when the Hg atom de-excites itself, it 
produces a photon of wavelength 2536 A for which 
hv 
hc 
A 
4.geV 
6.63 X 10-34 x 3 X 108 
2.536 x 10-7 
J 
(47) 
Thus the Franck-Hertz experiment confirms the discrete energy states of the Hg-
atom. Similarly, The Franck-Hertz experiment was performed using other atoms. 
3.11. Problems 
Problem 3.1 An electron of energy 200 eV is passed through a circular hole of 
radius 10-4 cm. What is the uncertainty introduced in the angle of emergence? 
8 Neils Bohr was awarded the 1922 Nobel Prize in Physics "for his services in the investigation 
of the structure of atoms, and of the radiation emanating from them". 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
Electron Source 
Mercury 
vapour 
-------+_ r-----------~----;~----------~ 
Figure 3.19. The schematic of the experimental set-up of Franck and Hertz. 
65 
A 
Problem 3.2 In continuation of the previous problem, what would be the corre-
sponding uncertainty for a 0.1 g lead ball thrown with a velocity 103 cm/sec through 
a hole 1 cm in radius? 
Problem 3.3 Use the uncertainty principle to estimate the energy of the ground 
state of a two-electron atom of nuclear charge Ze. 
[Hint: Use a method similar to that used in Example 3.1.] 
Problem 3.4 Calculate the uncertainty in the momentum of a proton which is con-
fined to a nucleus of radius equal to 10- 13 cm. From this result, estimate the kinetic 
energy of the proton inside the nucleus and the strength of the nuclear interaction. 
What would be the kinetic energy for an electron if it had to be confined within a 
similar nucleus? 
Problem 3.5 Let a source (with A = 5 x 10-5 cm) of power 1 watt be used in the 
experimental arrangement shown in Fig. 3.17. 
(a) Calculate the number of photons that are being emitted by the source per 
second. 
(b) Assume that the radii of the holes S, SI and S2 to be 0.02 cm and SoS = 
SSI = SS2 = 100 cm and the distance between the planes AB and P pi to 
be also 100 cm. Show that in the region between the planes A Band P pi one 
can almost never find two photons. 

66 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
350r-----------~~----------~------------~ 
300+-------------~------------_+--------~~_H 
250+-____________ ~----------~~--------;_--_; 
2vO+---------____ ~--------~--_+------_+----_4 
150'+-----------~~------~----_+~--~~----_4 
IOO+---------~--~----~------_+4_~~------_4 
50+-______ ~----~~+_--------_+------------_4 
o 
5 
10 
15 
Volt 
Figure 3.20. The variation of the plate current with voltage V as measured in the original experiment 
of Franck and Hertz (adapted from Ref. 15). 
3.12. Solutions 
Solution 3.1 
p ~ J2mE = [2 x 0.9 x 10-27 x 3.2 X 10- 1°]1/2 ~ 8 X 10- 19 gem/sec 
Now 
Solution 3.2 
Ii 
~ 10-27 erg sec 
~p ~ -
= 
= 5 X 10-24 gem/sec. 
~x 
2 x 10-4 em 
~p, 
6 
e ~ --' ~ 6 x 10- radians ~ 1 sec of arc 
p 
p ~ 102 em g/see, 
Ii 
~p ~ -
~ 5 X 10-28 gem/sec. 
~x 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
67 
e ~ 5 x 1O~30 radians ~ 1O~34 sec of arc 
Solution 3.3 Let the dimensions of the region of localization for the first and second 
electrons be al and a2. Then the spread in momenta (and therefore the momenta 
themselves) would be given by 
Thus 
Kinetic Energy ~ ~ [~+ ~] 
2m 
al 
a2 
(48) 
The potential energy of the interaction of the electrons with a nucleus of charge Ze 
is 
-Ze2 (~+~) 
al 
a2 
and the interaction energy between the electrons is ~ e2/(al + a2) because the 
separation between the two electrons is ~ (al + a2); for convenience, we are using 
cgs units so that q2 I (4n co) is replaced by e2. The total energy is, therefore, given 
by 
For E to be minimum 
dE 
da2 
The solution would be 
Pi 2 
Ze2 
e2 
--+--
=0 
mai 
aT 
(al + a2)2 
liZ 
Ze 2 
e2 
--+--
=0 
ma~ 
ai 
(al + a2)2 
Pi 2 
al = a2 = -- . --
me2 
Z -
1. 4 
( 
1)2 
4 
( 
1)2 
E ~ -
Z - 4 
:~ = -
Z - 4 
x 27.2 eV 
(49) 
(50) 
The values of E calculated using the above equation compare rather well with the 
experimental data as shown in Table 3.1. The energy is in units of me4 12Pi2 = 13.6 
e V, the ionization potential of the hydrogen atom. 
Solution 3.4 The proton is confined within a sphere of radius ro ~ 1O~13 cm. Thus 
the uncertainty in the momentum must be at least of the order of Pi I ro, or 
Pi 
p~ -
ro 

68 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Tah/e 3.1. Ground state energy (in units of me4/2\1 2 ) of various two electron atoms. 
[Adapted from Ref. 16] 
He 
Experimental value -S.807 
-14.S6 
Calculated value using Eq.(SO) 
-6.12S 
-27.31 
-IS.12 
Be++ 
B+++ 
C++++ 
-44.06 
-64.80 
-28.12 
-4S.12 
-66.12 
Therefore, the kinetic energy of the proton will be given by 
p2 
1i2 
E=-""--
2mp 
2mpr(~ 
where m p is the mass of the proton. On substitution, we get 
E 
(1.05 x 10-27 erg-sec)2 
2 x 1.67 X 10-24 g X (10- 13 cm)2 
3 x 10-5 ergs;::: 20 MeV 
Since the proton is bound inside the nucleus, the average of the potential energy, 
(V), must be negative and greater in magnitude than the kinetic energy. Therefore 
-(V) ;:: 20 MeV 
which indeed gives the correct order of the potential energy. The uncertainty in 
momentum for the electron is again Ii/ro; however, since the rest mass of the 
electron is very much smaller than that of the proton, the velocity of the electron is 
very close to c and we have to use the extreme relativistic formula for the energy, 
eli 
(3 x 101°)(1.05 x 10-27) 
E = ep = -
;::: 
MeV"" 200 MeV 
ro 
10- 13 x 1.6 X 10-6 
Although electrons do emerge from nuclei in ,B-decay, they seldom have energies 
exceeding a few million electron volts. Thus one does not expect the electron to be 
a basic constituent of the nucleus; the rare occasions when ,B-decay occurs may be 
attributed to the transformation of a neutron into a proton and an electron (and the 
neutrino) so that the electron is in fact created at the instant the decay occurs. 
Solution 3.5 (a) The energy of each photon will be 
he 
6.6 x 10-27 x 3 X 1010 
hv=-;::: 
5 
;:::4x1O-12 ergs=4x1O- 19 J 
A 
5 x 10-
Thus the number of photons emitted per second will be 
1 Watt 
IX 
------,1"::-9 - = 2.5 x 10 
4 x 10-
J 

Particles and Waves and the Uncertainty Principle 
69 
Similarly, the number of photons passing through either SI or S2 will approximately 
be 
2.5 X 1010 x 2 x rr x (0.02)2 
---2-rr-x-(1-0-0-,)2,---- = 1000 per second 
where we have assumed that after passing through S, the photons are evenly dis-
tributed in the hemisphere; this is strictly not correct because the diffraction pattern 
is actually an Airy pattern-nevertheless, the above calculations would be qual-
itatively correct. The distance between the planes A Band P p' is 100 cm [see 
Fig. 3.17] which will be traversed by a photon in a time 3 x 10-9 sec. Thus, 
approximately every thousandth of a second a photon enters the region and the 
space is traversed much before the second photon enters. Therefore, in the region 
between AB and P p' one will (almost) never find two photons. This is somewhat 
similar to the case when, on an average, 100 persons pass through a room in one 
year and the time that each person takes to cross the room is::::o 1 second, thus it 
will be highly improbable to have two persons simultaneously in the room. 
3.13. References and suggested reading 
1. R.P. Feynman, R.B. Leighton and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, 
Vol. III, Addison Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, Mass. (1965). 
2. A. Ghatak, Optics, Second Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi (1992). 
3. W.H. Cropper, The Quantum Physicists and an Introduction to their Physics, 
Oxford University Press, New York (1970). 
4. M. Jammer, The Conceptual Development of Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-
Hill, New York (1965). 
5. R.A. Millikan, The Electron and the light-quanta from the experimental point 
of view, Nobel Lecture delivered in May 1924, Reprinted in Nobel Lectures in 
Physics, Elsevier Publishing Co., Amsterdam (1965). 
6. D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J. (1951). 
7. A.R. Verma and O.N. Srivastava, Crystallography for Solid State Physics, 
Wiley Eastern, New Delhi (1982). 
8. C.J. Davisson, The discovery of electron waves, Nobel Lecture delivered in 
December, 1937, Reprinted in Nobel Lectures in Physics, Elsevier Publishing 
Co., Amsterdam (1965). 

70 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
9. R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, Quantum Physics, John Wiley & Sons, New York 
(1974). 
10. G. Gamow, Mr. Tompkins in Wonderland, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge (1940). 
II. M. Born, Atomic Physics, Blackie & Son, London (1962). 
12. e.G. Shull, Neutron Diffraction: A General Tool in Physics in Current Prob-
lems in Neutron Scattering, Proceedings of the Symposium held at CNEN 
Casaccia Center in September 1968, CNEN, Rome (1970). 
13. PA.M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford (1958). 
14. A. Tonomura, J. Endo, T. Matsuda, T. Kawasaki and H. Ezawa, Demonstration 
of single-electron build up of an interference pattern, Am. J. Phys. 57 (2). 117 
(1989). 
15. J. Franck, Transformations of kinetic energy of free electrons into excitation 
energy of atoms by impacts, Nobel Lecture delivered in December, 1926, 
Reprinted in Nobel Lectures in Physics, Elsevier Publishing Co., Amsterdam 
(1965). 
16. 1.1. Goldman and YD. Krivchenkov, Problems in Quantum Mechanics, 
Pergamon Press, London (1961). 

Chapter 4 
Time Dependent Schrodinger Equation 
The scientist builds his theories as much with a kind of inspired artistry as with 
the strict procedures of logic. A great theory can no more be put together entirely 
with straightforward reasoning processes than a great symphony can be written 
with textbook principles of composition. The composer must have a finely tuned 
ear; the scientist must have a finely tuned insight. Just as the composer "hears" his 
incomplete symphony as if it were being played by a full orchestra, the ,~cientist 
must "see" his theory extending far beyond its early, primitive limitations. In the 
beginning the work has a strange, complex sound; its beauty is subtle and few are 
able to understand and appreciate it. But gradually, with patience and faith and 
mastery of technique, the artist-scientist manages to bring the essential elements 
of his art together and to weave them into a powerful and moving whole (in music 
this is the creation of a single artist, but in science it finally requires the efforts 
of many). Eventually, sometimes much later, the work plays to larger audiences 
and is accepted into the standard repertoire. 
-
W.H. CROPPER in The Quantum Phvsicists. 
Oxford University Press, New York (1970), p. 179. 
4.1. Introduction 
In the previous chapter we discussed some experiments which showed that particles 
like electrons, protons, neutrons, atoms, etc., exhibit wavelike properties. Indeed 
the wavelength is related to the momentum through the de Broglie relation: 
h 
A= 
(I) 
p 
or 
p = lik 
(2) 
where k = 27T /A and Ii = h/27T, h being the Planck's constant. Thus we write 
p = lik 
(3) 
where k denotes the wave vector. Further, as established by Einstein's explanation 
of the photoelectric effect, the energy E of the particle is related to the frequency 
71 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

72 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
through the relation 
(4) 
In this chapter we would like to obtain an equation, the solution of which 
would describe the behaviour of particles like the electron and the proton. I The 
corresponding solutions should describe the corpuscular and wavelike behaviour 
of the particle and should also be consistent with the uncertainty principle. Thus 
we assume that the trajectory of a particle should be describable by a wave function 
\II (r, t) whose magnitude is large in regions where the probability of the occur-
rence of the particle is large; in other regions where the particle is less likely to 
be found, the magnitude of W should be small. Indeed we will show that 1 W 12 dr 
can be interpreted to represent the probability of finding the particle in the volume 
element dr. 
In Sec. 4.2 we will obtain an equation (known as the Schrbdinger equation) 
satisfied by \II and will show that in quantum mechanics the dynamical variables 
like position, momentum, energy, etc., are represented by linear operators which, 
in general, do not commute with each other (see Sec. 4.3). In Sec. 4.4 we will give 
a physical interpretation of the wave function and in Sec. 4.5 we will give formulae 
which will enable us to calculate the expectation values of various observables 
(like position, momentum, energy, etc.); these will lead to the relation between 
classical and quantum motions (Ehrenfest's theorem) and also to the uncertainty 
principle which will be quantitatively discussed in Sec. 4.6. In the next chapter we 
will discuss the motion of a wave packet which will describe the trajectory of a free 
particle; the wave function describing the motion of the wave packet will obviously 
be a solution of the Schrbdinger equation and will be shown to be consistent with 
the uncertainty principle. In Chapters 6, 7, 8 and lOwe will obtain exact solutions 
of the Schrbdinger equation corresponding to problems of physical interest. 
4.2. The Schrodinger equation 
The simplest type of wave is a plane monochromatic wave described by the wave 
function 
\II Cr, t) = A ei(k.r-Ivt) 
(5) 
which represents a disturbance of amplitude A and of wavelength A = 27r I k trav-
elling in the direction of its wave vector k with phase velocity wi k. If we assume 
the propagation to be along the x-axis, then 
k=kx 
(6) 
I As discussed in the previous chapter, radiation also exhibits wave and particle like properties. 
The quantum theory of radiation is discussed in Chapter 27. 

Time Dependent Schrodinger Equation 
and we have 
W (x, t) = A ei(kx-w() 
which on using Eqs (2) and (4) takes the form 
W (x, t) = A exp [~(pX - Et)] 
Successive differentiation of Eq. (8) gives us 
aw 
ili- = EW(x,t) 
at 
aW 
-ili-=pw(x,t) 
ax 
Now for a free non-relativistic particle 
p2 
E=-
2m 
and therefore from Eqs (9) and (11) we get 
aW 
li 2 a2w 
ili-=----
at 
2m ax2 
73 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) 
which is the one-dimensional time dependent Schr6dinger equation for a free par-
ticle. In the next chapter we will discuss the most general solution ofEq. (13). 
Equations (9) and (10) suggest that E and p can be represented by the operators 
i Ii }( and -i Ii oOx respectively: 
a 
E --+ i Ii- , 
at 
a 
p--+-ili-
ax 
Thus Eq. (13) can also be written in the form 
p2 
E\II = -
\II (x, t) 
2m 
(4) 
(15) 
where it is implied that E and p are to be replaced by their operator representations. 

74 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The three-dimensional generalization is very straightforward. Instead ofEq. (8) we 
have 
\II (r,t) 
A exp [~ (p.r - Et) ] 
Aexp [* (Pxx + PyY + pzz - Et)] 
(16) 
Thus 
a \II 
i n-
E\II 
at 
a'l1 
-in-
Px \II 
ax 
n2 a2\11 
2 
----
££\11 
2m ax2 
2m 
etc. Since 
p2 
1 
E = _ = _ (p2 + P 2 + p_.2) 
2m 
2m) 
y 
, 
we immediately have 
(17) 
which is the three-dimensional SchrOdinger equation for a free particle. Once again 
the operator representation of E and components of p would be 
a 
E--+in-at 
where the last step implies2 
p--+-inV 
(\8) 
2 At this point it is necessary to mention that the entire theory could have been equally well 
developed if we had assumed 
\11= exp [-~ (p.r - Et)] 
to represent a plane wave propagating in the direction of p. The operator representations of E and p 
would then have been E --+ -i Ii ,It and p --+ +i Ii V and the Schrbdinger equation for a free particle 
would have been [cf. Eq. (17) J 
(J\II 
1i2 
-i Ii- = -- v 2 \11 
at 
2m 
The later analysis and the various solutions could have been obtained in a similar manner. However 
the sine and cosine functions of the type sin [* (px - Et)], which also represent plane waves, are 
quite unsuitable because then the operator representation of the type given by Eqs (18) and (19) 
would not have been possible. 

Time Dependent Schrodinger Equation 
a 
Px -+ -i fi-
ax a 
Py -+ -i fi-
ay 
a 
pz -+ -i fi-
az 
Further, Eq. (17) can be written in the form 
I (2 
2 
2) 
p2 
EW = -
Px + Pv + P7 
W = -
W 
2m 
.' 
2m 
75 
(19) 
(20) 
Till now we have assumed the particle to be free. If we now assume the par-
ticle to be in a field characterised by the potential energy function V (r, t) then 
according to classical mechanics, the total energy would be given by 
p2 
E = -
+ V (r, t) 
2m 
(21 ) 
Since the potential energy function does not depend on p and E, Eqs (18)-(21) 
suggest that the wave function should satisfy 
i fi- = -
+ V (r, t) W = -- V2W + VW 
aw 
[p2 
] 
[fi2 
] 
at 
2m 
2m 
(22) 
which is the time dependent Schr6dinger equation for a particle in a field charac-
terised by the potential energy function V (r, t). Equation (22) is usually written in 
the form 
where 
aw 
i fi- = HW 
at 
p2 
fi2 
2 
H = -
+ V = --V + V 
2m 
2m 
(23) 
(24) 
is known as the Hamiltonian operator. The corresponding one-dimensional equa-
tion is 
aw 
[ fi2 a2 
] 
i fi- = HW = ---- + V (x) W 
at 
2m ax2 
(25) 
It should be mentioned that the method for obtaining the Schr6dinger equation is 
far from rigorous. We have tried to put together the corpuscular and wave char-
acteristics of the particle and have assumed that the particle can be described by 
a wave function W which, in general, is complex, and satisfies Eq. (22). To quote 
Feynman 

76 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Where did we get that [equation] from? Nowhere. It is not possible to derive it 
from anything you know. It came out of the mind ofSchrodinger. 
By solving Eg. (22) (under appropriate boundary and initial conditions) one can 
predict the results of various measurements which we will do in this and the fol-
lowing chapters. Indeed the validity of the Schrodinger equation comes from the 
agreement of the theoretical results (obtained by solving the Schrodinger equation) 
with experimental data. 
4.3. The commutator 
Because of the operator representation of Px [see Eq. (19)] we have 
[ aw 
a 
] 
[xp, - Pxx] W = -i n x~ -
ax (xW) 
or 
[xp, - pxx] W = i liW 
Since W is an arbitrary function, the operator [xPx - Pxx] / i n is simply the unit 
operator. We write 
[xPx - Pxx] == [x,Px] = in 
(26) 
which is known as the commutation relation. The quantity 
fa,,8] = a,8 -,8a = - [,8, a] 
(27) 
is said to be the commutator of the two operators a and ,8. It is easy to show that 
But 
[x, y] 
[x, py] 
[ Px, PY] 
[y, z] 
[y, pz] 
[ pn Pz] 
[z, xl 
[z, p,] 
[ P;, p,] 
[y,pv] = [z,p;] =in 
o 
o 
o 
Commutation relations playa very important role in quantum mechanics and we 
will use them in later chapters. 

Time Dependent Schrodinger Equation 
77 
4.4. Physical interpretation of \}J and the probability current density 
We rewrite the Schrbdinger equation [Eqo (22)]: 
a4J 
/i 2 
+i /i- = --V24J + V4J 
at 
2m 
and its complex conjugate 
o a 41* 
/i 2 
2 * 
* 
-/ /i- = --v 41 + V4J 
at 
2m 
(28) 
(29) 
where V (r, t) is assumed to be real. If we multiply Eqo (28) by 41* and Eqo (29) by 
41 and subtract we would obtain 
Since 
a2 
a2 
a2 
V2 =_+_+_ 
ax 2 
a y2 
a Z2 
we can rewrite Eqo (30) in the form 
-
41 41 + -+-+- =0 
a ( *) [aJt 
aJr 
aJz ] 
at 
ax 
a y 
a z 
where 
~ 
[41 a4J* _ 41* a4J] 
2m 
ax 
ax 
~ 
[41 aw* _ 41* aw] 
2m 
a yay 
~ 
[41 a4J* _ 41* aw] 
2m 
a z 
a z 
Equation (31) can be written in the form3 
where 
ap 
-+VoJ=O 
at 
3 Equation (32) could have been directly written by using vector algebra as 
On 
in 
;m [\jJ* \72 \jJ + \jJ \72 \jJ* ] 
2m \7 0 [\jJ* \7 \jJ + \jJ \7 IJ!*] 
\7 
0 J 
(30) 
(31 ) 
(32) 

78 
and 
p = \{.I*\{.I 
in 
J =- [\{.I V \{.I * - \{.I*V\{.I] 
2m 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(33) 
(34) 
Equation (32) is nothing but the equation of continuity in fluid dynamics (see Ap-
pendix B) where p represents the number of particles per unit volume and J the 
current density. Thus we may associate \{.I*\{.I with position probability density in 
the sense that \{.I * \{.I de will be proportional to the probability of finding the particle 
in volume element de. Now, since the Schrodinger equation is a linear equation, 
a multiple of \{.I would also be a solution and we may choose the multiplicative 
constant such that 
(35) 
where the integration is over the entire space. Equation (35) is known as the nor-
malization condition. If the wave function is normalized [i.e. if it satisfies Eq. (35)J 
then I \{.I 12 de can be interpreted to represent the probability of finding the particle 
in the volume element de and Eq. (35) implies the fact that the particle has to be 
found somewhere in space. Further, 
(36) 
can be associated with probability current density (see Appendix B); here Re 
stands for the real part of the quantity inside the bracket. It is of interest to men-
tion that the quantity ~ V represents the momentum operator p [(see Eq. (19)] and 
therefore we may write 
(37) 
where v = pi m represents the velocity operator. Equations (33) and (37) are 
consistent with the fact that in fluid dynamics 
J = pv 
(38) 
As an example we consider the wave function 
\{.I = exp [~ (p . r -
E t) ] 
(39) 

Time Dependent Schriidinger Equation 
79 
which, however, cannot be normalized as the position probability density is con-
stant everywhere.4 But 
[ * Pi 
] 
p 
J = Re 
W -. V W = -
= v 
1m 
m 
(40) 
which is consistent with Eg. (38) because p = 1. It may be noted that in Egs (39) 
and (40), P and E are numbers. 
We conclude this section by noting that 
I ~~ dr = - I 
V . J dr 
Q 
Q 
-I J·n dS 
(41) 
s 
where Q represents an arbitrary volume bounded by the surface S with n repre-
senting the outward unit normal on the surface, and in the last step we have used 
Gauss's theorem. Thus if the integration is carried over entire space and if the wave 
function vanishes at infinity, then 
(42) 
which is essentially a conservation condition. 
4.5. Expectation values 
By associating w*w with position probability density we can calculate the expec-
tation or average values of the position of the particle. Thus the expectation value 
of the x-coordinate would be given by 
(x) = 
.::......::.,.11::".....,,-1 x_w*_w _dr 
III W*W dr 
(43) 
where the integration is over the entire space. If we assume the wave function to be 
normalized [see Eg. (35)], then 
(x) = I w*xw dr 
(44) 
4 A realistic wave function will be a wave packet which will be discussed in the next chapter. 

80 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where for the sake of convenience we are replacing the triple integral sign by a 
single integral. We have also put x between \11* and \11 for reasons which will 
become clear later in this section. In a similar manner we can write for (y) and (z). 
In general, for any function f (r), the expectation value will be given by 
(J (r)) = I \11* f (r) \11 dr 
In particular 
(V (r,t)) = I \11* V (r,t) \11 dr 
N ow since E = p2/2m + V, we should have 
(E) = (;~ ) + (V) 
(45) 
(46) 
(47) 
Further, if we multiply the SchrOdinger equation [Eq. (22)] by \11* and integrate 
over all space, we would get 
The last term in this equation is simply (V) [see Eq. (46)] and therefore Eqs (46), 
(47) and (48) will be consistent only if we assume 
and 
(E) = I \I1*i 1i~\I1 dr 
at 
(49) 
(50) 
Since iii :, and -
;~ \72 are the operator representations of E and p2/2m, we can 
say that the general recipe of determining the expectation value of any quantity is 
to replace it by its operator representation, operate it on \11 and premultiply by \11* 
and then integrate. Thus 
(Px) = III \11* ( -i Ii ~~) dr 
(p}) = III \11* (_li2~~;) dr 
(Py) = III \11* (-i Ii ~:) dr 
(51 ) 
(52) 
(53) 

Time Dependent Schrodinger Equation 
81 
etc. Using the above recipe for calculation of the expectation values and also using 
the Schri:idinger equation one can show that (see Problem 4.5) 
d -(x) 
dt 
-(~~) 
(54) 
(55) 
The above equations show that there is agreement between quantum and clas-
sical motions in the sense that in quantum theory the expectation values satisfy 
Newton's laws of motion. Equations (54) and (55) were first derived by Ehrenfest 
and the general relationship (between classical and quantum motions) is known as 
Ehrenfest's theorem. 
In the next section we will use various expressions for the expectation values to 
give an exact statement of the uncertainty principle. 
4.6. Exact statement and proof of the uncertainty principle 
In the previous chapter we had discussed experiments which showed that it is not 
possible to measure simultaneously the position of a particle along a particular (say 
x) direction and also the corresponding momentum Px with unlimited accuracy. 
Indeed we showed that .6.x .6.Px ::: h, where .6.x and .6.px were uncertainties in 
the measurement of x and Px respectively. In this section we will give precise 
definitions of ~x and ~Px and using the results of the previous section, we will 
make an exact statement of the uncertainty principle. First, in analogy with the 
definition of standard deviation in statistics, we define the uncertainties in x and Px 
as: 
(56) 
(57) 
where, for the sake of convenience, we have dropped the subscript on p. We will 
establish that 
I 
.6.x .6.p > -n 
-2 
(58) 
with the equality sign only for a Gaussian wave function. Equation (58) represents 
the exact statement of the uncertainty principle. In order to prove Eq. (58) we would 
use the following inequality 
f 1*f dr f g*g dr 2: ~ [f (J*g + fg*)dr r 
(59) 

82 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where I and g are arbitrary functions of the space coordinates; however, they must 
be single valued and all the integrals in Eq. (59) must exist. The proof of Eq. (59) 
is quite simple. We define three integrals 
a = J f* I dr, 
h = J 1* g dr, 
c = J g* g dr 
Now 
J 
IAI + gl2 dr = aA2 + (h + h*) A + C ~ 0 
because IAI + gl2 ~ 0 everywhere; we have assumed A to be a real quantity. 
Obviously for the above inequality to be satisfied we must have 
which proves Eq. (59); the equality sign in Eq. (59) will occur when I is a multiple 
of g. 
We will consider the special case5 of (x) = 0 and (p) = 0 and assume 
Thus 
J 1*1 dr 
I 
g 
a \II 
p\ll = -i fi-
ax 
ix \II 
fi2 
dydz 
-
-
dx 
If J 
a\ll* a\ll 
ax 
ax 
If [ a\ll 1+
00 J 
a2 \11 
] 
fi2 
dy dz 
\11* -a:; -00 -
\11* ax 2 dx 
fff w' ( _h2 :~;) dxdydz ~ (p,') 
where we have used Eq. (52) and the fact that \II vanishes at infinity. Further, 
J g*g dr = J \II*x 2 \11 dr = (x 2 ) 
5 For (x) i-° 
and (p) i- 0, we must choose 
f=(p-(p))111 
and 
g = (x -
(x) III 
(60) 
(61) 

Time Dependent Schrodinger Equation 
and 
f (J*g + fg*) dr 
-Ii f atJ!* xtJ! dr - Ii f atJ! xtJ!* dr 
ax 
ax 
-Ii f a~ (tJ!*xtJ!) dr + Ii f tJ!*tJ! dr 
Ii 
83 
because tJ! is normalized and tJ!* xtJ! would vanish at x = ±oo. On substitution 
in Eq. (59), we immediately get the uncertainty relation given by Eq. (58). The 
uncertainty product is a minimum for a Gaussian wave function (see Problem 4.8). 
4.7. The eigenfunctions of the operator Px 
For an arbitrary operator Ct, the equation 
(62) 
represents an eigenvalue equation; in the above equation, A is a number which may, 
in general, be complex. We consider the eigenvalue equation of the momentum 
operator 
a 
Pop ljr = -i Ii-ljr = pljr 
ax 
(63) 
where Pop (= -i Ii ;;'r) is the operator representation of Px (we are dropping the 
subscript x) and p (a number) represents the eigenvalue. For the time being, we 
assume ljr to be a function of x alone so that Eg. (63) can be written in the form 
I 
dljr 
i 
----=-p 
ljr (x) dx 
Ii 
The integration is simple and we get 
ljr (x) = ljr (x) = _1_. _ ei pxjh 
p 
J2n Ii 
(64) 
which are known as the momentum eigenfunctions. Obviously p has to be real, 
otherwise ljr p (x) will blow up either as x ---+ +00 or as x ---+ -00; p can take any 
real value between -00 and +00. The factor 1/ J2n Ii makes the wave function 
normalized; thus (see Sec. 1.3): 
+00 f ljr;" (x) ljr p (x) dx = 8 (p -
pi) 
(65) 
-00 

84 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The functions 1/1 p (x) also form a complete set of functions because of which we 
have 
+00 f 1/1; (x) 1/1 p (x') dp = 8 (x - x') 
(66) 
-00 
The above equation is said to represent the fact that 1/1 P (x) (with -00 < p < +(0) 
represents a complete set of functions because an arbitrary "well behaved" function 
f (x) can always be expanded in terms of 1/1 p (x): 
where (see Sec. 2.2) 
f (x) 
+00 
_1_ f a(p) ei pxln dp 
J2n Ii -00 
-00 
+00 
a(p) = J2~ Ii f f (x) e-i "xln dx 
-00 
(67) 
(68) 
In Sec. 5.2 we will show that the wave function 1/1" (x) [as given by Eq. (63)] is 
also an eigenfunction of the operator 
I 
H=-p 2 
2m 
x 
(69) 
Thus 1/1 p (x) is said to represent a simultaneous set of eigenfunctions of the opera-
tors Px and p} 12m. 
It can easily be seen that the wave function 
1 
[i 
] 
1/1 p (r) = 
3 exp h (Pxx + PrY + pzz) 
(2nli)2 
rt 
(70) 
(where Px, pyand pz are numbers) represents a complete set of simultaneous 
eigenfunctions of the operators corresponding to the X-, Y- and z-components 
of the momentum. They are also eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian operator cor-
responding to a free particle: 
H = _1 p2 = _1 (p 2 + P 2 + p}) 
2m 
2m 
x 
y 
, 

Time Dependent Schrodinger Equation 
85 
Furthermore, 
(71 ) 
and 
(72) 
which respectively represent the orthonormality and the completeness conditions. 
4.8. Problems 
Problem 4.1 Using the operator representations of Px, Py and pz prove that 
[x,Py]
= 
0 =[Y,Pz] 
} 
[Px, py] = ? = [ pz, Px] 
[y, py] = Iii = [z, pz] 
Problem 4.2 Consider a Gaussian wave packet given by (see Example 5.1): 
1 
[(X - XO)2] 
( i 
) 
1/1 (x) = 
1 exp -
2 
exp - pox 
(nO' 2)4 
20' 
Ii 
Show that it is normalized and that 
1 
[(X-XO)2] 
J= -- exp ----
JnO'2 
20'2 
Interpret the result physically. 
Problem 4.3 Assume 
where 
1 . k 
1/1 (r) = _el 
r 
r 
r = J x2 + y2 + Z2 
Calculate J and interpret the result physically. 
Po~ 
-x 
m 
Problem 4.4 Show by partial integration of Eg. (51) that (Px) is real. 
(73) 
(74) 
(75) 
(76) 
Problem 4.5 Using the general recipe that the expectation value of an observable 
characterised by the operator (9 is given by 
((9) = f \11*(9 \II de 
(77) 

86 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
prove that 
and 
d 
I 
-(x) = -
(Px) 
dt 
m 
d 
(av) 
-(Px) = -
-
dt 
ax 
These equations are referred to as Ehrenfest's theorem. 
Problem 4.6 Using Eq. (77) prove that 
-((9) = -
w* [H, (9] W de + 
w* -W de 
d iff 
a(9 
dt 
Ii 
at 
(78) 
(79) 
(80) 
where [H, (9] = H (9 -
(9 H represents the commutator of Hand (9 and ~~ is due 
to the explicit time dependence of the operator (9. 
[Hint: Differentiate Eq. (77) inside the integral sign and use Eq. (24). You 
may use the Hermitian nature of H (see Problem 6.1) or else substitute for H 
and integrate by parts as in the solution of Problem 4.5.] 
Problem 4.7 For the ground state and the first excited state of the harmonic 
oscillator the wave functions are: 
[ 
mw 2] 
exp -
2li x 
and 
[ 
mw 2] 
x exp -
2li x 
respectively (see Sec. 7.3). Show that the values of the uncertainty product ,6.x ,6.P 
are 41i and ~Ii (see also Sec. 12.3). 
Problem 4.8 Show that the uncertainty product ,6.x ,6.P is minimum (= 41i) for a 
Gaussian wave function. 
4.9. Solutions 
Solution 4.3 Using Eq. (34), we get 
lik I ~ 
v ~ 
J=--r=-r 
m r2 
r2 
(8\ ) 
which corresponds to a spherical wave whose intensity decreases according to the 
inverse square law. 

Time Dependent Schrodinger Equation 
Solution 4.4 
-i n f 'l1* a'l1 dr 
ax 
-in II dydz [ ~'~[: -Z 
~ at dX] 
= in! 'l1 aa~* dr 
= (Px)* 
Solution 4.5 Differentiating Eq. (44) we get 
~(x) = f ['l1*x a'l1 + a'l1* x 'l1] dr 
dt 
at 
at 
_I 
['l1*xv2'l1 _ (V2'l1*) x'l1] dr 
·n f 
2m 
where use has been made of Eqs (28) and (29). Now 
f (V2\11*) x\ll dr = f V . (x\llV\II*) dr - f (V 'l1*) . V (x\ll) dr 
87 
(82) 
(83) 
The first integral on the right can be transformed to a surface integral by use of 
Gauss theorem and this integral would vanish because a wave packet vanishes at 
infinity. Thus 
f (V2'l1*) x'l1 dr = - f (V 'l1*) . V (x'l1) dr 
-f V ('l1* V x'l1) dr + f 'l1*V2 (x'l1) dr 
The first integral on the right again vanishes. On substitution in Eq. (83) we get 
-
(x) = _I 
\11* [xV2'l1 - V2 (x \II) ] dr 
d 
·n f 
dt 
2m 
~ f 'l1* (-i n a'l1) dr = ~(Px) 
(84) 
m 
ax 
m 
U sing a method similar to that used above one gets 
:t (Px) = -i n f [a~* ~; + 'l1* a~ aai] dr 
f 'l1* [ V ~; - lx (V'l1)] dr = (- ~~) 
(85) 

88 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Solution 4.8 The uncertainty product is minimum when f is a multiple of g (see 
Sec. 4.6); thus 
or 
a '11 
-i 11- = C ix'l1 
ax 
I a '11 
-
-
= (const) x 
'11 ax 
The integration of the above equation gives a Gaussian function. 
4.10. Sample questions 
Q. I 
a) What are the normalized eigenfunctions of the operator 
d 
Px = -i 11-
dx 
b) Derive the orthonormality and completeness condition for these eigen-
functions. 
Q. 2 Consider the Hamiltonian corresponding to a free particle in one-dimension 
What are the corresponding eigenvalues and normalized eigenfunctions? Is 
there any degeneracy? 

Chapter 5 
Propagation of Wave Packets and Concept of Group Velocity 
Quantum mechanics allows us in principle to predict nearly everything around 
us, within the limits set by the uncertainty principle ... 
-
STEPHEN HAWKING in A Brief History of Time, 
Bantam Books, New York (\988). 
5.1. Introduction 
We will devote this chapter to the solution of the time dependent SchrOdinger equa-
tion for a free particle. In quantum mechanics, a free particle is described by a wave 
packet (which is nothing but a superposition of plane waves) and the solution of 
the time dependent Schrodinger equation will allow us to study the time evolution 
of the packet and how it would disperse in free space. We will also show how the 
uncertainty principle is contained in the solution of the SchrOdinger equation. 
5.2. The general solution of the one-dimensional Schrodinger 
equation for a free particle 
We start with the one-dimensional time dependentSchrodinger equation [see Eq. 
(25) of the previous chapter] 
aw 
i/1- = Hw 
at 
with the Hamiltonian H given by 
p2 
/12 
a2 
H = -
+ V (x) = -- -- + V (x) 
2m 
2m ax2 
For a free particle 
V (x) = 0 
89 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

90 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and Eq. (l) becomes 
(4) 
which represents the one-dimensional time dependent Schrodinger equation for a 
free particle. In order to solve the above equation we use the method of separation 
of variables: 
\II (x, t) = 1/J(x) T(t) 
(5) 
Substituting in Eq. (4) and subsequent division by 1/J (x) T (t) gives us 
. 
1 
dT 
1i2 I d21/J 
lli----=----=E 
T (t) dt 
2m 1/J dx2 
(6) 
Since the LHS is a function of t alone and the RHS is a function of x alone, we 
have set them equal to a constant (= E) which represents the total energy of the 
particle. From Eq. (6) we readily have 
dT 
iE 
dt = - h T (t) 
(7) 
the solution of which is given by 
T (t) = (constant)e-i E t / IJ 
(8) 
Obviously E has to be real; if E is complex, the solution will blow up as t ---+ +00 
or as t ---+ -00. From Eq. (6) we also have 
d21/J 
p2 
dx2 + 1i2 1/J (x) = 0 
(9) 
where 
p = J2mE 
(10) 
represents the momentum of the particle. The solution of Eq. (9) will be of the form 
Obviously E cannot be negative because then p would be imaginary and the solu-
tions will blow up as x ---+ +00 or -00. Thus we must have 
(i) E real and positive, and 
(ii) p can take any real value between -00 and +00. 
We write the solution of Eq. (9) as I 
1/J (x) = __ 1_ eipx / IJ • 
p 
J2n Ii 
' 
-00 < p < +00 
(II) 
I The functions 1/1 p (x) are simultaneous eigenfunctions of the momentum operator p and the 
Hamiltonian H (see Sec. 4.7). 

Wave packets and concept of group velocity 
91 
where the factor 1/ .J2rr Ii makes it normalized: 
+00 f ljf; (x) ljfp, (x) dx = 8 (p -
pi) 
(12) 
-00 
The functions ljf p (x) also satisfy the completeness condition [see Eq. (66) of the 
previous chapter]. 
The complete solution is therefore given by [see Eq. (5)]: 
\II (x, t) = 
1 
exp [-Iii (px -
E t)] 
J2rr Ii 
1 
J2rr Ii 
(13) 
For positive values of p, the above equation represents a plane wave propagating 
along the +x direction; similarly, for negative values of p, it represents a plane 
wave propagating along the -x direction. Since p can take any value from -00 to 
+00, the most general solution of Eq. (4) (i.e. of the time dependent SchrMinger 
equation for a free particle) is given by 
+00 
\II (x, t) = .J2~ Ii f a(p) exp [~ (px - ;~ t)] dp 
(14) 
-00 
which is essentially a superposition of plane waves. Equation (14) describes the 
time evolution of a one-dimensional wave packet. In Example 5.1 we will discuss 
the time evolution of a Gaussian wave packet; however, we will first discuss some 
general properties of the solution given by Eq. (14): 
If \II (x, 0) is normalized, i.e. if 
+00 f 1\11 (x, 0)1 2 dx = 1 
(15) 
-00 
then one can readily show that (see Problem 5.1) 
+00 f 1\11 (x, t)1 2 dx = 1 
(16) 
-00 

92 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Physically, this is obvious because I \II (x, 0) 12 dx represents the probability of 
finding the particle between x and x + dx at time t. 
The time evolution of the centre of the wave packet (i.e. the trajectory of the 
particle) is given by 
+00 
(x) = j x 1\11 (x, t)1 2 dx 
(17) 
-00 
The spatial spread of the wave packet is given by 
I 
~x = [(x 2) -
(X)2)2 
(18) 
where 
+00 
(x 2 ) = j x 2 1\11 (x, t)1 2 dx 
(19) 
-00 
Furthermore (see Problems 5.1 and 5.2), 
+00 j la(p)12 dp = I 
(20) 
-00 
+joo 
[a\ll(x,t)] 
+joo 
(p)= 
\11* (x,t) -in 
ax 
dx= 
pla(p)1 2 dp 
(21) 
-00 
-00 
2 
+jOO 
[2 a2\11(X,t)] 
+joo 
2 
7 
(p ) = 
\11* (x, t) -n 
ax2 
dx = 
p la(p)l- dp 
(22) 
-00 
-00 
Equations (20)-(22) clearly show that the quantity la(p)12 dp can be interpreted 
as the probability of the momentum lying between p and p + dp. 
5.3. The time evolution of a wave packet 
Let us suppose that at t = 0, a particle is described by the wave function \II (x, 0). 
Knowing \II (x, 0) we wish to determine the time evolution of the wave function 
\II (x, t) from which we would obtain the trajectory of the particle. 
From Eq. (14) we have 
+00 
\II (x, 0) = J2~ n j a(p) exp [~ px] dp 
(23) 
-00 

Wave packets and concept of group velocity 
93 
Thus using the inverse Fourier transform relation [see Sec. 2.2]: 
+00 
a(p) = -J2~ Pi f \II (x, 0) exp [ -~ px] dx 
(24) 
-00 
Therefore, the recipe is as follows: 
U sing the known expression for \II (x, 0), we first determine a (p) by carrying out 
the integration in Eq. (24); we then substitute a(p) in Eq. (14) and carry out the 
integration over P to obtain \II (x, t) and hence the time evolution of the wave 
packet. 
Example 5.1 The Gaussian wave packet We assume that at t = 0, a free particle 
is described by the Gaussian wave function: 
\II (x, 0) = 
I e-x /2ao exp - pox 
1 
2 
2 
(i ) 
(JT0"5) 4 
Pi 
(25) 
The wave function is normalized, i.e. 
+00 f 1\11 (x, 0)1 2 dx = 1 
(26) 
-00 
Thus 
2 
1 
2 
2 
P (x) dx = 1 III (x, 0)1 
dx = -- e-x lao dx 
.jJi0"0 
(27) 
would represent the probability of finding the particle between x and x + dx (at 
t = 0). The following average values are readily obtained (see Problem 5.4): 
(x) = 0 
(28) 
I 
0" 
~x 
[(x2) _ (x)2]I = _0 
(29) 
.j2 
(p) 
Po 
(30) 
~P = 
I 
Pi 
[(p2) _ (p)2F = __ 
.j2 0"0 
(31) 
Thus (at t = 0) the wave function given by Eq. (25) describes a particle which 
is localized within a distance ~ 0" 0 around x = 0 and moving with an average 
momentum of Po (in the + x direction) with a momentum spread approximately 
equal to Pi/O"o. Thus the uncertainty principle is contained in Eq. (25)! 

94 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
In order to study the time evolution of the wave packet, we use Eq. (24) to 
calculate a (p): 
a(p) 
I 
1 
+JOO 
2/2 2 
[i 
] 
---
I 
e-x 
(Yo exp - - (p -
Po) x dx 
J2n Ii (n0- 2) 4" 
Ii 
o 
-00 
(32) 
where we have used the relation (see Appendix A) 
(33) 
The momentum probability distribution is given by 
[ 
2 
] 
2 
0-0 
0- 0 
2 
la(p)1 = 
r;; exp -2 (p -
Po) 
ynli 
Ii 
(34) 
The above equation shows that the average momentum is Po with a spread ~ lijo-o. 
In Fig. 5.1 we have plotted I \jJ (x, 0) 12 and la(p) 12 for 
0-0 = 5 nm 
and Inm 
It may be seen that as we decrease the value of 0- (i.e. as the wave function becomes 
more localized), the value of the momentum spread bop decreases. 
We next substitute for a(p) from Eq. (32) in Eq. (14) and carry out the straight-
forward integration to obtain 
\jJ (X, r) = 
I 
I 
n 4 [0-0 (l + ir))2 
(35) 
where we have introduced the following dimensionless variables: 
x 
X 
0-0 
Ii 
r 
--2 t 
(36) 
mo-o 
Po 0-0 
a 
Ii 

Wave packets and concept of group velocity 
la(p)12 
-:-;1 o'-=---s -~O--S-=-=~l 
OX (nm) ~ 
u"~,"m 
-3-2-1 
1 2 3(p-po)ln (nm) 
_C"CIO:---_-S--"----+-'---o--s -~IOx (nm) 
Figure 5.1. Plots of 1\jJ (x. 0)1 2 and la(Pll 2 for uo = 5 nm and I nm. 
The corresponding probability distribution is given by 
or, 
where 
2 
I 
[ 
(X-ar)2] 
IW(X,r)1 = 
r;:; 
exp -
( 
2) 
ylIa(r) 
l+r 
2 
I 
IW(x,t)1 = 
r;:; 
ylW (t) 
ex [_ (x - f/ftr] 
p 
a 2 (t) 
95 
(37) 
(38) 
(39) 
which represents the spatial broadening of the wave packet with time. In Fig. 5.2 
we have plotted the x dependence of the real part of the wave function [given by 
Eg. (35)] at 
r = 0, 0.5 and 1.0 
with a = 15. In Fig. 5.3 we have plotted the x dependence of the probability 
distribution function at 
r = 0, 0.5, 1.0 and 1.5 
Figures 5.2 and 5.3 show that the centre of the wave packet moves with the 
velocity Pol m which is the group velocity of the wave packet (see Sec. 5.5). One 
can readily verify that 

96 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
- 5 
o 
5 
10 
15 
20 
X 
Figure 5.2. The variation of Re[1JI (X, r)] with X for r = 0, 0.5 and 1.0; ct = 15. 
o 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
30 
X 
Figure 5.3. The variation of the probability distribution IIJI (X, r) 12 with X for r = 0, 0.5, 1.0 and 
1.5; ct = 15. Notice the spreading of the wave packet. 
+00 f 1\lJ (X, t)12 dx = 1 
(40) 
-00 
for all values of time as it indeed should be. It may also be noted that using Eq. (35) 
we readily get 
+00 
(x) f \lJ* (x, t) x \lJ (x, t) dx 
-00 
Po -t 
m 
(41 ) 

Wave packets and concept of group velocity 
97 
- 20 
- 15 
- 10 
-5 
o 
5 
10 
15 
20 
x 
Figure 5.4. The spatial variation of Re[\II (X, T)] for T = -1, 0 and + 1; a = 15. Notice that if the 
wave packet initially corresponds to the top curve, it will first undergo spatial compression. 
"t = -1 
-20 
-15 
-10 
-5 
o 
5 
10 
15 
20 
X 
Figure 5.5. The spatial variation of 1\11 (X, T)1 2 for T = -1,0 and +1; a = 15. Notice the spatial 
compression of the wave packet. 
and 
+oc 
(x 2 ) f x 2 1\11 (x, t) 12 dx 
-00 
(42) 
giving 

98 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
x = 45 
o 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Figure 5.6. The temporal variation of Re[1lJ (X, r)] for X =0,15.30 and 45: IX = 15. Notice the 
temporal dispersion of the wave packet. 
Spatial spread of the wave packet 
(43) 
The momentum distribution [as given by Eg. (32)] remains the same at all times 
and therefore 
Ii 
I'1p = --
for all values of t 
V2CJo 
(44) 
Thus 
I'1p I'1x = ~Ii [1 + li:t24J~ 
2 
m CJo 
(45) 
showing that the uncertainty product is minimum at t = 0. 
In Figs 5.4 and 5.5 we have plotted Re[\II (X, r)] and I \II (X, r)1 2 for negative 
values of time. Thus, if at t = 0, the wave function corresponds to the top curve of 
Fig. 5.4, then it will first undergo compression. 
In Fig. 5.6 we have shown the temporal variation of the wave function at differ-
ent values of X. The temporal dispersion may be noted. 

Wave packets and concept of group velocity 
99 
5.4. The free particle propagator 
In the previous section we have shown that if \}J (x, 0) is known then \}J (x, t) can 
be calculated by first calculating a (p) [using Eg. (24)] and then calculating \}J (x, t) 
[using Eg. (14)]. Indeed, one can directly determine \}J (x, t) by using the relation 
I +00 
[ 
2] 
\}J (x, t) = (~):;: f \}J (x', 0) exp im (x - x') 
dx' 
2rrllit 
2lit 
-00 
(46) 
without making any explicit calculation of a (p). Thus all one has to do is to sub-
stitute the form of the wave function at t = 0 and carry out the above integration to 
obtain \}J (x, t). The proof of Eg. (46) is very simple: We substitute for a(p) from 
Eg. (24) in Eg. (14) to obtain 
+00 
+00 
III (x, t) = 2: Ii f dx' f dp \}J (x', 0) exp [- kpx'] 
-00 
-00 
or 
+00 
\}J (x, t) = f dx' III (x', 0) K (x, x', t) 
(47) 
-00 
where 
K(X,x',t) 
+00 
[ ]  
1 
i i i  
p2 
- f exp [- p (x - x)] exp ---t dp 
2rr Ii 
Ii 
Ii 2m 
-00 
= (~)~ exp [im (x - xl)2] 
2Jrllit 
2lit 
(48) 
where we have used Eg. (33). The guantity K (x, x', t) is known as the free particle 
propagator. As a simple example, if we assume \}J (x, 0) to be given by Eg. (25), 
then carrying out the integration in Eg. (46) we would readily obtain Eg. (35). 
Often it is more convenient to use Eg. (46) to obtain \}J (x, t). The two- and three-
dimensional generalization ofEg. (46) is discussed in Sec. 5.6. 

100 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
5.5. Group velocity of a wave packet 
In wave theory a (one-dimensional) wave packet is formed by the superposition of 
plane waves: 
\}J (x, t) = --
A (k) ei(kx-wt) dk 
I 1+
00 
5 
-00 
(49) 
where the frequency w is a known function of k: 
w = w (k) 
(50) 
Equation (50) is known as the dispersion relation. For example, for a free (non-
relativistic) particle 
implying 
or, 
p2 
E=-
2m 
Ii 
w (k) = -
k2 
2m 
Now, for a purely monochromatic wave 
A (k) = AoD (k - ko) 
If we substitute the above expression for A (k) in Eq. (49) we would get 
\}J (x, t) = ~ 
ei(kox-wot) 
5 
where 
Wo = w (ko) 
(51 ) 
(52) 
(53) 
(54) 
(55) 
Equation (54) is never achieved in practice. Usually A (k) is a very sharply peaked 
function around k = ko; see, e.g. Fig. 5.1. In all of what follows we will assume 
that there exists only a small range 11k (around k = ko) where the amplitudes of 
the component waves A (k) have significant values; beyond k = ko ± 11k, A (k) 
is assumed to be negligible. Under such an assumption, it is possible to assign an 
average velocity of the wave packet provided w (k) is a smoothly varying function 
in the domain ko - 11k :s: k :s: ko + 11k. This average velocity is known as the group 
velocity. We write 
A (k) = IA (k)1 ei</>(k) 
(56) 

Wave packets and concept of group velocity 
101 
and assume that IA (k)1 is very sharply peaked when k lies in a small interval f).k 
around k = ko and negligible everywhere else so that we may write 
\II (x, t) ~ _1_ f dk IA (k)1 eilkx-w(k)t+<jJ(k)] 
..fiif 
(57) 
M 
where the integration extends over the domain f).k where IA (k)1 has appreciable 
values. Next, we make Taylor expansions of w (k) and ¢ (k) around k = ko: 
w (k) = w (ko) + dw I 
(k - ko) + ~ d 2w I 
(k - kO)2 + ... 
dk k=ko 
2 dk2 k=ko 
(58) 
¢ (k) = ¢ (ko) + -
(k - ko) + - -
(k - kO)2 + ... 
d¢ I 
1 d2¢ I 
dk k=ko 
2 dk2 k=ko 
(59) 
We substitute the above expansion in Eq. (57) and assume that in the domain 
of integration f).k, w (k) and ¢ (k) do not vary significantly so that the terms in-
volving quadratic and higher powers of (k - ko) can be neglected; under such an 
approximation one obtains 
\II (x, t) ~ f (x, t) ei(kox-wot+<jJo) 
(60) 
where Wo == w (ko), ¢o == ¢ (ko) and f (x, t), which represents the envelope of 
the wave packet, is given by 
f(x,t) = -1-fdkIA(k)1 ei(k-ko)(x-xo-vgt) 
..fiif 
(61 ) 
M 
where 
Xo = _ d¢ I 
dk k=ko 
and 
dwl 
v~ =-
, 
dk k=ko 
(62) 
Since the function f (x, t) depends on x and t only through the combination x -
Vgt, the wave packet propagates without any distortion with velocity Vg which is 
known as the group velocity of the packet. It should be pointed out that the packet 
remains undistorted as long as the neglect of second and higher order terms in 
Eqs (58) and (59) is justified (see Problem 5.9 and Example 5.1). However, if the 
w-k relation is strictly linear, the packet will never undergo any distortion2 . 
2 A medium is said to be non-dispersive when the w-k relation is linear. For example, for 
electromagnetic waves in free space 
w (k) = ck 

102 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Now, from Eq. (61) we have 
f (x, 0) = ~ f IA (k)1 ei(k-ko)(x-xo) dk 
M 
(63) 
It is immediately seen that at x = Xo, the integrand is everywhere positive and the 
value of the integral is maximum. For Ix - Xo I :: 1 I l1k the exponential function 
oscillates rapidly in the domain of integration and the value of the integral is very 
small. This immediately leads to the relation 
t:J.k t:J.x ~ 1 
(64) 
which when multiplied by n gives the uncertainty relation: 
(65) 
Thus, at t = 0 the wave packet is sharply peaked at x = Xo and as t increases, 
the centre ofthe packet, Xc (t), moves according to the equation 
Xc (t) = Xo + Vgt 
(66) 
This was explicitly seen in Example 5.1 where we discussed the spreading of a 
Gaussian wave packet. Now, since (see Sec. 4.1) 
E =nw 
and 
p = fzk 
we get 
dw 
dE 
v ----
g -
dk -
dp 
Thus for a non-relativistic particle for which E = p2/2m, we have 
dE 
P 
vK = -
= - = v 
dp 
m 
where c represents the speed of light in free space. For such a case. Eq. (49) becomes 
+CXJ 
_1_ f dk A(k) ,)k(x-ct) 
llJ(x.t) = & 
-CXJ 
f (x -
et) 
(67) 
(68) 
(69) 
(70) 
implying that the packet travels undistorted with speed c. Thus the free space is a non-dispersive 
medium for electromagnetic waves. On the other hand, whenever the UJ-k relationship is not linear 
[see, C.g. Eq. (52)] the medium is said to be dispersive and a wave packet undergoes distortion (see 
Example 5.1). 

Wave packets and concept of group velocity 
Further, for a relativistic particle 
E2 = p2e2 + m2e4 
(where m represents the rest mass) we have 
But 
giving 
Thus 
dE 
pe2 
dp 
E 
pe2 
-=V 
E 
103 
(71) 
(72) 
(73) 
Equations (70) and (73) tell us that the group velocity of the packet is to be associ-
ated with the velocity of the particle. 
The phase velocity v p is defined through the relation 
w 
vp =-k 
(74) 
and represents the velocity of propagation of an infinitely long monochromatic 
plane wave. Only when w is proportional to k are vp and Vg equal. In general, it is 
the group velocity of a packet which is of physical significance. 
5.6. Free particle propagator for the two- and three-dimensional 
Schrodinger equation 
The two- and three-dimensional generalization of Eq. (46) is obvious: 
The general solution of the two-dimensional Schrodinger equation 
aw 
fi2 ( a2 
a2 ) 
i fi -
= --
-
+ -
W (x, y, t) 
at 
2m 
ax2 
ay2 
is given by 
+00 +00 
(75) 
W(x,y,t) = f f W(x',y',O) Kz(x,y,x',y';t) dx'dy' 
(76) 
-00 -00 
where 

104 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
K2 (x, y, x', y'; t) = (~) 
exp [im [(X - xf + (y - y')2J] 
(77) 
2m Pit 
2 Pit 
Similarly, the general solution of the three-dimensional Schrodinger equation 
oW 
Pi 2 
i Pi -
= -- \72 W (x Y z t) 
at 
2m 
' , , 
(78) 
is given by 
+00 +00 +00 
w(x,y,z,t) = f f f w(x',y',z',O) K3(x,y,Z,x',y',z';t) dx'dy'dz' 
-00 -IX-oo 
(79) 
where 
K3(X,y,Z, x',y',z';t) 
3 
= (~)"2 exp [~ [(x _ xf + (y - y')2 + (z - Z')2J] 
2m Pit 
2 Pi t 
(80) 
5.7. Problems 
Problem 5.1 Using Eq. (14) show that if 
+00 f Iw(x,0)1 2 dx = 1 
(81) 
-00 
then 
+00 f la(p)12 dp = 1 
(82) 
-00 
and 
+00 f Iw(x,t)1 2 dx = 1 
(83) 
-00 
Give physical interpretations of the above equations. 
Problem 5.2 For an arbitrary (normalized) wave function W (x), we define 
+IX 
a(p) = J2~ Pi f w (x) exp [ -~ px] dx 
(84) 
-00 

Wave packets and concept of group velocity 
Show that 
+00 
(p) = f a*(p) p a(p) dp 
-00 
and 
+00 
(p2) = f a*(p) p2 a(p) dp 
-00 
Problem 5.3 Using Eg. (84) show that 
+00 
(x) f \}l* (x) x \}l (x) dx 
-00 
+00 
iii f a*(p) 0 a(p) dp 
op 
-00 
105 
(85) 
(86) 
(87) 
Comparison of Egs. (85) and (87) with Egs. (44) and (51) of the previous chapter 
shows that a(p) plays the same role in momentum space as x does in ordinary 
space. Further, Eg. (87) tells us that the operator representation of x in momentum 
space is i Ii JJp . 
Problem 5.4 (a) For the Gaussian wave packet given by Eg. (25) evaluate (x), 
(x2), (p), (p2) and show that 
1 
lu l:J.p =-Ii 
2 
(88) 
(b) Repeat the calculation for \II (x, t) given by Eg. (35) and derive Egs (43)-(45). 
Problem 5.5 Assume \II (x, 0) to be given by Eg. (25). Use Eg. (46) to derive Eg. 
(35). 
Problem 5.6 Consider a two-dimensional wave packet given by 
\}l (x, y, 0) = [(_1 2) ~ exp [-~] eLhPOX] [(~) 
~ exp [-~]] 
7T cr xO 
2cr xO 
7T cr yO 
2cr yO 
(89) 
(a) Determine a(px, Py) and then evaluate the probability distribution l\}l(x, y, t)12. 
Interpret the results physically. 
(b) Substitute Eg. (89) directly in Eg. (76) and obtain I \II (x, y, t)1 2 and show that 
one obtains the same result. 

106 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Problem 5.7 Single Slit Diffraction Pattern Consider again a two-dimensional 
wave packet given by 
W(x, y, 0) = [(~) k exp [_ x 2
2 ] ek pox] 1f,,(Y) 
(90) 
IT 0" xO 
20" xO 
where 
1f" (y) 
1 
Vb 
o 
Iyl < b/2 ) 
Iyl > b/2 
(91) 
(a) Determine a(px, Py) and interpret it physically. Show that the subsequent 
evaluation of W (x, t) is difficult to carry out. 
(b) Use Eq. (76) to evaluate IW(x, y, t)1 2 and interpret it physically. 
Problem 5.8 Double Slit Diffraction Pattern In the previous problem assume 
for (d - b)/2 < Iyl < (d + b)/2 
(92) 
elsewhere 
which corresponds to a double slit (each of width b) separated by a distance d. 
Calculate la(py) 12 dpy and interpret the result physically. 
Problem 5.9 (a) For the wave packet given by Eq. (57) show that it remains 
undistorted for t « to where 
21i 
(93) 
where use has to be made of Eqs (67) and (68) and the uncertainty relation. 
(b) For a particle of mass 10-4 g and localized within ~x "-' 10-3 cm calculate to 
and compare its value for an electron localized in a distance of 10-8 cm. Interpret 
the two results physically. 
(c) Calculate to for the Gaussian wave packet and show that the exact results 
obtained in Example 5.1 are consistent with Eq. (93). 
Problem 5.10 Consider the three-dimensional wave packet describing the motion 
of a free particle 
W(x, y, z, 0) = N exp [-2:
2f - 2~2l - 2:232] exp [~pox] 
(94) 
Discuss physically the motion of such a wave packet. Calculate the value of 
a(px, PY' pz) and then W(x, y, z, t). 

Wave packets and concept of group velocity 
107 
Problem 5.11 Consider the three-dimensional momentum space wave function 
a (p) = N exp [ - :p] 
(95) 
Calculate \II (r, 0). 
Problem 5.12 (a) From Eq. (14) show that 
a(p) = ~exp [~ ~ 
t] +/00 \II (x, t) exp [-~ px] dx 
(96) 
V 2n Ii 
Ii 2m 
Ii 
-00 
which is independent of time. 
(b) Substitute the expression for \II (x, t) from Eq. (35) and show that after evalu-
ating the above integral one obtains Eq. (32) (obviously!). 
5.8. Solutions 
Solution 5.1 Equation (82) follows directly from Parseval's theorem (see Sec. 
2.3). In order to prove Eq. (83), we take the complex conjugate of Eq. (14) and 
obtain 
+00 
+00 
+00 
+00 
/ 
1\11 (x, t)12 dx = 2; Ii / dx / 
dp / dp' a*(p') a(p) 
-00 
-00 
-00 
-(X) 
Since 
I 
+/00 
[i 
,] 
, 
--
exp -(p - p)x dx = 8(p - p) 
2n Ii 
Ii 
(97) 
-00 
[see Eq. (9) of Chapter 1], after carrying out the integration over p' we readily get 
+00 
+00 
/ 
1\11 (x, t)1 2 dx = / 
la(p)12 dp = 1 
(98) 
-00 
-(X) 
Solution 5.2 
+00 
\II (x) = J2~ Ii / 
a(p) exp [~ px] dp 
(99) 
-00 

108 
Thus 
(p) 
-ili!W*aw dx 
ax 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
-; h Z 
<V' (x) [ ,h~ Ii Z * 
p' alp') exp (* p'x) dP] 
dx 
Z 
dpa'(p) [Z dp' p'a(p')8(p - P')] 
+CXl ! a*(p) pa(p) dp 
(l00) 
-CXl 
Similarly, one can calculate for (p2). 
Solution 5.3 Use Eq. (84) to evaluate a*(p) and ~;: and substitute in the RHS of 
Eg. (87). Alternatively, we can substitute the expression 
+CXl 
W (x) = y'2~ Ii ! a(p) exp [~ px] dp 
-CXl 
and its complex conjugate in the integral 
+CXl ! w*(x) x \II (x) dx 
-CXl 
and carry out the integration over p by parts. 
Solution 5.4 
+CXl 
(x) f W*(x,O)xW(x,O) dx 
-CXl 
o 

Wave packets and concept of group velocity 
109 
(see Appendix A). Further (p) = 0 because the integrand would be an odd func-
tion. Finally 
Solution 5.6 
(a) We define the two-dimensional Fourier transform 
+00 +00 
a(px, Py) = 2~ h f f 'l1(x, y, 0) exp [~(PxX + pYY)] dx dy 
(101) 
~OO ~OO 
and 
+00 +00 
'l1(x, y, t) = 2~ Ii f f a(px, PI') exp [ -~(PxX + pyy)] dpx dpy 
(102) 
~OO ~OO 
Since 'l1 (x, y, 0) is a product of a function of x and of y, the integrals over x and y 
il) Eq. (101) separate out and we obtain 
(103) 
where 
(104) 
and 
( 2)! 
[ 2 ] 
avo 
avo 
2 
a(Py) = 
--2 
exp --2 PI' 
nh 
2h 
. 
(l05) 
Obviously, the quantity 
(106) 
represents the probability of finding Py in the interval dpy; this is nothing but the 
diffraction of a Gaussian beam. 

110 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(b) We substitute Eqs (104) and (l05) in Eq. (102) and carry out the integration to 
obtain 
IW(x,y,t)1 2 
I 
x --t 
{ 
[ 
(
Po )2]) 
J]rCJ x (t) exp -
CJ} ~) 
I I 
[l ]) 
x 
exp ---
J]rCJ v (t) 
CJ; (t) 
where 
CJ x (t) 
CJ xO 
I + ~ 
-
[ 
/i2 2 ] ~ 
m 
CJ xO 
[ 
/i 2t 2 ]1 
CJ v (t) = 
CJyO 1+-
2 -
4 
m CJ yO 
Equation (107) shows the diffraction broadening along the y-direction. 
Solution 5.7 Equation (103) still remains valid with 
_ /h sin (Pvb)/2/i 
a(Pr) - y ~ pyb/2li 
(107) 
(l08) 
(109) 
Thus the probability that (after passing through the slit) the y-component of the 
momentum lies between Py and PI + dpy would be given by 
(110) 
where 
pyb 
P sine b 
nb sine 
f3 = 2li = 
2li 
= 
A 
(I I I) 
and use has been made of the de Broglie relation 
h 
A =-
(112) 
P 
Thus, far away from the slit, we will observe the intensity distribution given by 
sin2 f3 
I=Io~ 
which is nothing but the single slit Fraunhofer diffraction pattern. 
(113) 
In order to get W(x, y, t) we must substitute for a(px, Py) in Eq. (102); how-
ever, the y integral would be difficult to carry out. Instead we must directly evaluate 

Wave packets and concept of group velocity 
111 
\II (x, y, t) by using Eq. (76). The final result can be expressed in terms of Fresnel 
integrals (see Appendix C). 
Solution 5.8 
Thus 
(114) 
where 
b Pv 
nb sine 
f3 = 211 = 
A 
(115) 
and 
d Pv 
nd sine 
Y=-' = 
211 
A 
(116) 
Equation (114) is nothing but the double slit Fraunhofer diffraction pattern. 
Solution 5.9 (a) If we substitute for w (k) from Eq. (58) in Eq. (57) we would get 
ei(kOx~wt) f 
\II (x,t) =,J2ii 
A(k) eiq,(k) 
2n 
/::"k 
x exp [i (x - vgt)(k - ko) - ia(k - ko)2t] dk 
where 
I d2wl 
a ="2 dk 2 k=ko 
Since IA (k)1 is assumed to have a negligible value for Ik - kol > 11k, the term 
involving a would make a negligible contribution for t « to where to is given by 
Eq. (93). 
In order to understand Eq. (93) physically, we notice that there is a spread ~ /1p 
in the momentum associated with the packet. Thus if we consider two portions of 
the packet, one corresponding to Po -
/::,.J < P < Po and the other corresponding 
to Po < P < Po + /::"J, then the velocity of the two packets will differ by ~!. Thus 
there will be distortion in the packet when 
tl1p 
-- ~ I1x 
(the initial width of the packet) 
2m 
The above condition is consistent with Eq. (93). 

112 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(b) For m ~ 10-4 g, b.x ~ 10-3 cm, to "'-' 2 X 1017 S"'-' 1010 years. On the other 
hand, for an electron with b.x ~ 10-8 cm, to ~ 10-16 sec. Thus for a macroscopic 
particle the distortion is negligible and hence a classical description is adequate. 
Solution 5.10 For a three-dimensional wave packet describing a free particle 
\II (r, t) = 
1 
3 Iffa(p) exp [~(p. r - Et)] dp 
(117) 
(2n 1i)2 
Ii 
and 
a(p) = 
I 
3 Iff \II (r, t) exp [-~ (p. r - Et)] dr 
(118) 
(2n 1i)2 
Ii 
where 
p. r = pxx + Pvy + PzZ, 
dr = dxdydz, 
dp = dPxdpydp; 
and 
p2 
1 (2 
2 
2) 
E = 2m = 2m p x + p y + p z 
On substitution of Eq. (94) in Eq. (118), the three-dimensional integral becomes a 
product of three one-dimensional integrals giving 
where 
we 
have 
used 
the 
fact 
that 
the 
normalization 
constant 
N = n-3/ 4/ (a 10'20'3) 1/2. If we substitute for a(p) in Eq. (117) we would get 
where 
If we assume a 1 to be very large then there is propagation along the x-axis and 
diffraction along the y- and z-directions. 

Wave packets and concept ofgroup velocity 
113 
Solution 5.11 In order to calculate N we use spherical polar coordinates to get 
2IT 
IT 
00 
I = INI2 f d¢ f sine de f e-2p//::,p p2 dp 
o 
0 
0 
which gives N = (/).p )3/2 l..(ii. Thus 
IN 12 
f2IT 
fOO 
[ 
p] fIT 
[i p r cos e ] 
\lI (r, 0) = (2rrli)3/2 
d¢ 
p2dp exp - /).p 
exp -
Ii 
sine de 
o 
0 
0 
where we have assumed pz along r. On carrying out the integration we get 
1 
ro 
\lI (r, 0) = -
(2ro)3/2 
2 
rr 
(r2 + ro2) 
where ro = iii /).p. 
5.9. Sample questions 
Q. 1 
a) Write the one-dimensional time dependent SchrMinger equation for a 
free particle. 
b) Write the general solution of the above equation. 
c) If we know \lI (x , 0), write the recipe for determining \lI (x, t). 
Q. 2 Starting from the one-dimensional Schrodinger equation for a free particle 
show that the solution can be written in the form 
+00 
\lI(x, t) = f \lI(X', 0) K(x, x'; t) dx' 
-00 
Derive the expression for K(x, x'; t) .What will be the form of K(x, x'; O)? 
Q. 3 Given 
where 
2/2 2 
i 
\lI(x, y, 0) = e-x 
a 
eliPOx 1jJ(y) 
1jJ(y) = 1 Iyl < bl2 
o Iyl > bl2 

114 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
a) What is the probability of finding the particle between x and x + dx 
and y and y + dy? 
b) Calculate the probability for the x-component of the momentum to lie 
between Px and Px + dpx and y-component of the momentum to lie 
between Py and Py + dpy. Give a physical interpretation in terms of 
the single slit diffraction pattern. 

Chapter 6 
Bound State Solutions of the Schrodinger Equation 
Only questions about the results of experiments have a real significance and it is 
only such questions that theoretical physics has to consider. 
-
P.A.M. DIRAC 
in The Principles of Quantum Mechanics 
6.1. Stationary states 
When the Hamiltonian for a system is independent of time, there is an essential 
simplification in that the general solution of the Schrodinger equation can be ex-
pressed as a function of spatial coordinates and a function of time. Thus, assuming 
the potential energy function to be independent of time, the one-dimensional time 
dependent Schrodinger equation [see Eq. (25) of Chapter 4] is given by 
a \II 
n2 a2\11 
i n- = -- -- + V (x) \IJ (x, t) 
at 
2{1 ax2 
(1) 
where {1 represents the mass of the particle. The above equation can be solved by 
using the method of separation of variables 
\II (x, t) = 1/1 (x) T (t) 
(2) 
Substituting in Eq. (1) and dividing by \II (x, t), we obtain 
i n dT 
I 
[ n2 d 21/1 
] 
T (t) dt = 1/1 (x) 
- 2{1 dx2 + V (x) 1/1 (x) 
(3) 
The variables have indeed separated out in the sense that the LHS is a function of 
time alone while the RHS is a function of space alone; thus each side must be equal 
to a constant, say E. We have therefore 
i n d T 
I 
[ n 2 d 21/1 
] 
-
-
= -- -- -- + V (x) 1/1 (x) = E 
T dt 
1/1 (x) 
2{1 dx2 
(4) 
115 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

116 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
or 
T (t) = e-iEtjli 
(5) 
and 
1i2 d2 1/1 (x) + V (x) 1/1 (x) = E 1/1 (x) 
211 
dx 2 
(6) 
so that the solution can be written as 
\lJ (x, t) = 1/1 (x) e-iEt / 1i 
(7) 
Now, Eq. (6) can be written as 
H1/I (x) = E1/I (x) 
(8) 
where 
1i2 
d2 
p2 
H = -- -- + V (x) = -
+ V (x) 
211 dx 2 
211 
(9) 
represents the Hamiltonian operator and E is a number. Equation (8) is an eigen-
value equation and E is the energy eigenvalue. In general, the eigenvalues can have 
a discrete set along with a continuous range of eigenvalues and the general solution 
of Eq. (1) is of the form 
\lJ (x, t) = L Cn 1/In (x) e-iEl/t/h 
(10) 
n 
where 1/1 n (x) are the eigenfunctions of H and En are the corresponding energy 
eigenvalues; Cn are constants which can be determined from the form of \lJ (x, 0). 
In Eq. (10), L denotes a summation over the discrete states and integration over 
the continuum states 1 . 
Equation (6) is usually written in the form 
d 21/1 
211 
-2 + -2 [E -
V (x)] 1/1 (x) = 0 
dx 
Ii 
(II) 
which is known as the one-dimensional time independent Schrbdinger equation. 
In Sec. 6.2 we will discuss two theorems regarding the boundary and continuity 
conditions of the wave function. In Secs 6.3 and 6.4 we will discuss the degeneracy 
of a state and the orthogonality of the eigenfunctions and in Sec. 6.5 we will 
discuss the parity of the eigenfunctions. In Sec. 6.6 we will give the solution of 
I In Chapter 5 we had solved Eq. (I) for a free particle for which V (x) = O. There the eigenvalues 
formed a continuum (0 < E < (0) and the L in Eq. (10) was indeed an integral over the continuum 
states [see Eq. (14) of Chapter 5]. 

Bound State Solutions 
117 
the eigenvalue equation [Eq. (8)] for some simple problems. In Sec. 6.7 we will 
discuss the properties of the wave function associated with the three-dimensional 
SchrOdinger equation and in Sec. 6.8 we will obtain solutions of the SchrOdinger 
equation for a particle in a three-dimensional box. In Secs 6.9 and 6.10 we will 
discuss applications of the particle in a box problem to free electrons inside a metal 
and also inside a white dwarf star. 
6.2. Boundary and continuity conditions 
In Sec. 4.4 we have interpreted the wave function 1/1 as the probability amplitude, 
therefore 1/1 should be single-valued and 11/1 (x) 12 dx has to be finite for finite values 
of dx. Thus 
lim 11/112 dx = 0 
dx-+O 
In practice this is satisfied by demanding that 1/1 be finite everywhere. 
We also have the following theorems. 
THEOREM 1. The derivative of the wave function d1/l j dx is always continuous 
as long as the potential energy V (x) is finite, whether or not it is continuous2. 
Proof We integrate the Schrodinger equation [Eq. (11)] from x -
E to X + E to 
obtain 
X+E 
X+f 
f d21/1 dx = - 2J1 f [E -
V (x)] 1/1 (x) dx 
dx 2 
/i 2 
X-E 
X-f 
or 
X+E 
, 
, 
2J1 f 
1/1 (x + E) -1/1 (x - E) = -p;2 
[E - V (x)] 1/1 (x) dx 
(12) 
X-E 
Since V (x) is assumed to be finite (it could, however, be discontinuous), the RHS 
tends to zero as E --+ O. Thus 1/1' is continuous at any value of x. It is obvious that 
1/1 has to be necessarily continuous everywhere. 
Alternatively one may argue that if d1/l jdx is discontinuous, then d 21/1 jdx 2 
must be a delta function (see Sec. 1.3); this will be inconsistent with Eq. (12) as 
long as V (x) does not become infinite. 
2 It may be mentioned that in many texts the continuity of 1jr and d1jr jdx is taken to be an axiom. 
This is not correct because it follows from the fact that 1jr (x) satisfies a second order differential 
equation [see Eq. (II »). Indeed, when V (x) becomes infinite, d1jr jdx is not continuous (see Sec. 
6.6.1). 

118 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
THEOREM 2. If the potential energy function V (x) is infinite anywhere, the 
proper boundary condition is obtained by assuming V (x) to be finite at that point 
and carrying out a limiting process making V (x) tend to infinity. Such a limiting 
process makes the wave function vanish at a point where V (x) = 00 (see Problem 
6.2). 
6.3. Degeneracy 
If there is more than one linearly independent wave function belonging to the same 
energy eigenvalue E, the energy level is said to be degenerate. If there are g linearly 
independent wave functions (iff 1,1/12' ... 1/1 g) belonging to the same energy state, 
then the energy level is said to be g-fold degenerate. It can be easily shown that 
any linear combination of the degenerate wave functions 
1/1 = c11/11 + C21/12 + ... + cg 1/lg 
is also an eigenfunction belonging to the same energy eigenvalue. We will prove 
this for g = 2, the generalization is straightforward. Since 1/1 1 and 1/1 2 are eigen-
functions belonging to same eigenvalue E 1, we have [see Eq. (6)]: 
and 
ti2 d21/1 1 
-- --2 + V (x) 1/11 = E1 1/11 
2M dx 
ti2 d21/12 
- 2M dx2 + V (x) 1/12 = E1 1/12 
If we multiply the first equation by CI and the second equation by C2 and add, we 
would get 
ti 2 d2 
-- --2 (C11/1 1 + c21/12) + V (x) (C11/l1 + c21/12) = EI (C11/11 + c21/12) 
(13) 
2M dx 
which shows that the linear combination c11/11 + c21/12 is also an eigenfunction 
belonging to the same eigenvalue E 1. 
6.4. Orthogonality of eigenfunctions 
We shall first prove that all energy eigenvalues En are real and that if Ell -I- Eb 
the corresponding eigenfunctions are necessarily orthogonal. We write the one-
dimensional Schrbdinger equation for the two states corresponding to the eigen-
values En and Ek : 
( 14) 

Bound State Solutions 
119 
/12 d 21/1k 
-- -- + V (x) 1/Ik = Ek 1/Ik 
(15) 
2M dx 2 
If we multiply Eg. (14) by 1/It and multiply the complex conjugate of Eg. (15) by 
1/1 n and subtract, we would get 
or, 
-00 
-00 
The left-hand side is simply 
ti 2 [ 
* d1/l n 
d1/l t] 1+
00 
--
1/1 -
-1/1 -
2M 
k dx 
n dx 
-00 
which would vanish if the wave functions are assumed to vanish at infinity. Thus 
we get 
00 
(En - Ek*) J 
1/1/1/1 n dx = 0 
(17) 
-00 
00 
If k = n, then since J 11/1" 12 dx is necessarily positive3, we must have 
-00 
(18) 
proving that all eigenvalues are real. Further, for En i- Eb 
00 J 
1/I/1/In dx = 0 
(19) 
-00 
which represents the orthogonality condition. 
If Ek = En, i.e. if there are two (or more) wave functions belonging to the same 
eigenvalue, then the corresponding wave functions are not necessarily orthogonal. 
Since any linear combination of degenerate state wave functions is also a possible 
eigenfunction (see Sec. 6.3) one can always construct suitable linear combinations 
which are mutually orthogonal (see Problems 6.3 and 6.4). 
3 Except in the trivial case when the wave function vanishes everywhere. 

120 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Since the Schrbdinger equation is a linear equation, if ljI is a solution, cljl is 
also a solution where c is an arbitrary complex number. One can always choose the 
constant such that 
(20) 
-00 
which is known as the normalization condition. Equations (19) and (20) can be 
combined in the form 
(Xl ! ljIk* ljI n dx = Okn 
-00 
where Okn is the Kronecker delta function defined through the equation 
kf.n 
k=n 
Equation (21) is known as the orthonormality condition. 
6.5. Parity 
In this section we will show that if 
v (x) = V (-x) 
(21) 
(22) 
(23) 
i.e. if the potential energy function is symmetric about x 
0, then the eigen-
functions of the Schrbdinger equation are either symmetric functions of x [ljI (x) 
= ljI ( - x)] or antisymmetric functions4 of x [ljI (x) = -ljI ( -x)]. In order to 
prove this, we first write the Schrbdinger equation 
/'i 2 d 2lj1(x) 
--
+ V (x) ljI (x) = E ljI (x) 
2f.L 
dx2 
(24) 
Making the transformation x -+ -x we get 
/'i 2 d2lj1 (-x) 
--
+ V (x) ljI (-x) = E ljI (-x) 
2f.L 
dx 2 
(25) 
4 The theorem is strictly true for non-degenerate states only. For degenerate states the wave func-
tions need not be symmetric or anti symmetric functions of x. However, even for degenerate states one 
can always construct appropriate linear combinations which are either symmetric or antisymmetric 
functions of x. 

Bound State Solutions 
121 
where we have used the fact that V (-x) = V (x). Comparing Eqs (24) and (25) 
we see that 1/1 (x) and 1/1 ( - x) are eigenfunctions belonging to the same energy E. 
Thus, if the state is non-degenerate, then 1/1 ( - x) must be a multiple of 1/1 (x): 
1/1 (-x) = ).. 1/1 (x) 
Clearly 
1/1 (x) =).. 1/1 (-x) = )..21/1 (x) 
so that)..2 = lor).. = ±1. Hence 
1/1 (-x) = ± 1/1 (x) 
(26) 
proving the theorem. The eigenfunctions which belong to the class ).. 
+ 1 are 
said to have even parity and those with)" = -1 to have odd parity. 
For a degenerate state 1/1 ( - x) need not be a multiple of 1/1 (x). Indeed, if 1/1 ( - x) 
is not a multiple of 1/1 (x) then, from Eqs (24) and (25), it immediately follows that 
1/1 (-x) must be another independent solution corresponding to the same energy 
level. Further any linear combination of 1/1 (x) and 1/1 ( -x) could also be a possible 
eigenfunction (see Sec. 6.3) and we can always choose linear combinations 
[1/1 (x) + 1/1 (-x)] 
and 
[1/1 (x) -1/1 (-x)] 
which are symmetric and antisymmetric functions of x respectively. Thus even for 
degenerate states one can always choose appropriate linear combinations which are 
either symmetric or anti symmetric functions of x. 
6.6. Some exact solutions of the one-dimensional Schrodinger 
equation 
In this section we will consider two potential energy distributions for which an 
exact solution of the one-dimensional SchrOdinger equation will be obtained. In 
Sec. 6.6.1 we will consider a particle inside an infinitely deep potential well which 
will be followed by considering the effects of the potential well of finite depth. 
In the next chapter we will consider the linear harmonic oscillator problem and in 
Chapter 16 we will consider the double well problem. 
6.6.1. PARTICLE IN A ONE-DIMENSIONAL INFINITELY DEEP POTENTIAL WELL 
We will determine the energy levels and the corresponding eigenfunctions of a 
particle of mass fl in a one-dimensional infinitely deep potential well characterised 
by the potential energy variation of the form 

122 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
v (x) 
o for 0 < x < a 
00 for x < 0 and for x > a 
(27) 
(The corresponding three-dimensional problem is discussed in Sec. 6.8). For 0 < 
x < a, the one-dimensional Schrodinger equation becomes 
(28) 
where 
(29) 
The general solution of this equation is 
VI = A sinkx + B coskx 
Since the boundary condition at a surface at which there is an infinite potential step 
is that 1/1 is zero (see Sec. 6.2, Theorem 2), we must have 
1/1 (x = 0) = 1/1 (x = a) = 0 
(30) 
The above condition also follows from the fact that since the particle is inside an 
infinitely deep potential well, it is always confined in the region 0 < x < a and 
therefore 1/1 must vanish for x < 0 and x > a; and for 1/1 to be continuous, Eq. (30) 
must be satisfied. Using the boundary condition given by Eq. (30), we get 
1/1 (x = 0) = B = 0 
and 
1/1 (x = a) = A sin ka = 0 
Thus, either 
or 
ka = nrr ; 
n = 1,2, ... 
(31) 
The condition A = 0 leads to the trivial solution of 1/1 vanishing everywhere, the 
same is the case for n = o. Thus the allowed energy levels are given by 
(32) 
The corresponding eigenfunctions are 

Bound State Solutions 
123 
(0 < X < a) 
(33) 
where the factor .J21a is such that the wave functions form an orthonormal set [cf. 
Eg. (21)]: 
a f 1jf~ (X) 1jf n (X) dx = Omn 
o 
(34) 
It may be noted that whereas 1jf n (x) is continuous everywhere, d 1jf n (x) I dx is 
discontinuous at x = 0 and at x = a. This is because of V (x) becoming infinite 
at x = 0 and at x = a (see Sec. 6.2). Figure 6.1 gives a plot of the first three 
eigenfunctions and one can see that the eigenfunctions are either symmetric or 
anti symmetric about the line x = a 12; this follows from the fact that V (x) IS 
symmetric about x = al2 (see Sec. 6.5). 
1/', (x) 
r-----------~~----------~4El 
1/', (x) _--_ 
~------------------------~El 
o 
a 
-x 
Figure 6.1. The energy eigen- values and eigenfunctions for a particle in an infinitely deep potential 
well. Notice that the eigenfunctions are either symmetric or anti symmetric about x = a12. 
The following points are also to be noted. 

124 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(i) E cannot be negative because if we assume E to be negative then the boundary 
conditions at x = 0 and at x = a cannot be simultaneously satisfied (see also 
Problem 7.1). 
(ii) The eigenvalues form a discrete set. 
(iii) The eigenfunctions given by Eq. (33) form a complete set, i.e. an arbitrary 
(well-behaved) function which satisfies the same boundary conditions (viz., 
vanishing at x = 0 and at x = a) can be expanded in terms of the eigenfunc-
tion of H: 
where f (x) is an arbitrary well-behaved function (with f (0) = f (a) = 0) 
and en are constants which can be determined by mUltiplying both sides of the 
above equation by 1/1,: (x) and integrating from 0 to a to obtain 
a 
a 
f 1/1,: (x) f (x) dx = L en f 1/1,: 1/In (x) dx = L e/1 omll = elll (36) 
o 
/1 
0 
n 
where we have used the orthonormality condition given by Eq. (34). Substi-
tuting for em in Eq. (35) we would readily get (cf. Sec. l.5): 
L 1/1 n* (x') 1/1" (x) = ~ f sin c: x) sin C: x') = 0 (x - x') 
n 
11=1,2.,,, 
0< x, x' < a 
(37) 
which represents the completeness condition. 
(iv) The most general solution of the time dependent SchrMinger equation [Eq. 
(I)] with V (x) given by Eq. (27) would be 
oc 
\Ii (x, t) = L en 1/1" (x) e-iEllt/1i 
(38) 
" 
Substituting for 1/1 n (x) and En we get 
\Ii (x, t) = f 
en ( ~ sin mrx) exp [-i n2rr2 ~ t] 
(39) 
V -;; 
a 
2 fL a-
n=I,2. 

Bound State Solutions 
125 
Since 
\II (x, 0) = L Cn 1/1 n (x) 
(40) 
n 
the coefficients Cn can be determined from the initial form of the wave func-
tion: 
a 
Cn = f 1/1 n* (x) \II (x, 0) dx 
() 
(41) 
(v) We assume \lI (x, 0) to be normalized: 
This would imply 
a 
a f 1\11 (x, 0)1 2 dx = 1 
() 
f L Cn* 1/1 n* (x) L Cm 1/1 m (x) dx 
() 
n 
m 
a 
L L Cn* Cm f 1/1 n* (x) 1/1 m (x) dx 
n 
n 
() 
LL cll*CmOmn 
n 
m 
n 
(42) 
(43) 
where we have used the orthonormality condition given by Eq. (34). Now, 
using Eq. (38) 
a f 1\11 (x,t)1 2 dx 
() 
a 
L L Cn* Cm ei(En-Em)t/h f 1/In* (x) 1/1 m (x) dx 
/J 
m 
() 
n 
m 
/J 
(44) 
Thus, if the wave function is normalized at t = 0, then it will remain nor-
malized at all times. Further, we can interpret Eq. (44) by saying that 1 C n 12 
represents the probability of finding the system in the nth state which remains 

126 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
the same at all times. Thus there are no transitions. Indeed, whenever the 
potential energy function is time-independent, we obtain what are known as 
stationary states and there is no transition between states.5 
(vi) As a simple example, let us assume that the particle is described by the fol-
lowing wave function (at t = 0): 
(45) 
Thus, if we carry out a measurement of energy, the probabilities of obtaining 
the values E 1, £2 and £3 would be i, ~, and ~ respectively. How will such 
a state evolve with time? Well, we just multiply each term by the appropriate 
time dependent factor to obtain \II (x, t) [see Eq. (10)]. 
\II (x, t) 
where 
Obviously 
a f 1\11 (x, t)1 2 dx = I 
o 
(46) 
for all values of t. In Fig. 6.2 we have shown the time evolution of the proba-
bility distribution 
P (x, t) = 1\11 (x, t)12 
for \II (x, t) given by Eq. (46) at 
t 
7T 
37T 
- = 0, - , 7T, -
and 27T 
to 
2 
2 
5 A simple solution of thc Schrodinger equation corresponding to a time dependent Hamiltonian 
is discussed in Sec. 14.6. 

Bound State Solutions 
IW (x ,I) 12 
~ =0 
to 
t 
" 
to - 2 
127 
---+x 
Figure 6.2. The time evolution of the probability distribution 1\lJ (x, t)12 corresponding to Eq. (46) 
at t / to = 0, 'f rr, 3~ and 2rr . 
At all values of time, the probability of finding the system in a particular state 
remains the same. Further, the average value of the energy is given by 
I 
I 
I 
(E) = - El + - E2 + - Eo 
6 
2 
3'> 
[ 1 
] rr 2 /i2 
-6+ 2 + 3 
21W 2 
6 21W 2 
(47) 
Thus, if one carries out a large number of measurements (of energy) on iden-
tical systems characterized by the same wave function as given by Eg. (46), 
then the average value of the energy would be given by Eg. (47). 
(vii) What happens to the wave function if E -=f=. En; i.e. if E is not one of the 
eigenvalues? For such a case the boundary conditions cannot be satisfied and 

128 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
therefore it cannot be an allowed value of energy. For example, if 
O.81n 2 li 2 
E = ---::--
2tW2 
then for the wave function to vanish at x = 0 we must have 
O.9nx 
1/I(x) = A sin--
a 
which cannot vanish at x = a. 
6.6.2. PARTICLE IN A ONE-DIMENSIONAL POTENTIAL WELL OF FINITE DEPTH 
We next consider the square well potential (Fig. 6.3) 
v (x) 
a 
a 
o for -- < x < -
2 
2 
a 
Vo for JxJ > -2 
(48) 
We first look for solutions corresponding to E < Vo. The Schrodinger equation 
can be written in the form 
where 
and 
a 
o for JxJ < -2 
a 
o for JxJ > -2 
2 
2f.l 
K 
= -
(Vo -
E) 
li 2 
(49) 
(50) 
Since V (-x) = V (x), the solutions are either symmetric or antisymmetric in x. 
Corresponding to the symmetric solution we may write 
a 
JxJ <"2 
a 
(51) 
1/1 (x) 
A coskx 
Bexp[-KJXJJ 
JxJ> "2 
where in the region Jx J > a /2, we have rejected the solution exp(K Jx J) because 
then 1/1 (x) will go to infinity as JxJ -+ 00. Continuity of 1/1 (x) and d1/l /dx (see 
Sec. 6.2) at x = a /2 leads to 
ka 
[ 
K a ] 
A cos 2 = B exp -2 
(52) 

Bound State Solutions 
129 
a = 2.0 
'--ir---tj = 1.02987 
Figure 6.3. A potential well of finite depth. The eigenvalues and eigenfunctions correspond to 
a = 2.0. 
and 
ka 
[ 
K a] 
-Ak sin 2 = -B K exp -2 
(53) 
For non-trivial solutions one gets 
1 
ka 
K 
[Vo - E]2 
tan-=-= 
2 
k 
E 
(54) 
The roots of the transcendental equation (54) determine the discrete values of E 
(for given values of f1" a and Vo) and one has to use numerical or graphical methods 
to obtain the energy levels. For a particular value of E, the ratio A/ B can be 
determined by using either Eq. (52) or Eq. (53) using which one can determine 
1jJ (x) within a multiplicative constant. The value of A (and hence of B) can be 
determined by using the normalization condition (see Problem 6.7). 
It is of interest to point out that for Vo » E, the RHS of Eq. (54) tends to 00 so 
that one obtains 
p = 0,1,2, ... 
or 
(2p + 1)2 n 2 /i 2 
E= 
. 
2f1,a 2 
' 
p = 0,1,2, ... 
(55) 
which is the same as Eq. (32) with n now restricted to odd values because we have 
considered only the symmetric solution. Further for Vo ---+ 00, K will tend to 00 
and the wave function would vanish in the region Ixl > a/2. 
For the antisymmetric solution (for which 1jJ is proportional to sin kx inside the 
well and to exp (-K Ix I) outside the well) the transcendental equation determining 

130 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
the energy eigenvalues would be [cf. Eq. (54)]. 
which for Vo ---+ 00 would give 
p = 1,2,3, ... 
Equations (54) and (56) can be put in the more convenient form 
1 
1] tan 1] 
(a 2 -
1]2) '2 (Symmetric case) 
1 
-1] cot 1] 
(a 2 -
1]2)2 (Anti symmetric case) 
where 
and 
(56) 
(57) 
(58) 
(59) 
For a given value of a, the right-hand sides of Eqs (58) and (59) are a portion of a 
circle and therefore the roots can easily be determined using numerical methods. In 
Fig. 6.4 we have plotted the functions 1] tan 1] (solid curve) and -1] cot 1] (dotted 
curve) as a function of 1]. Their points of intersection with the portion of the circle 
determines the eigenvalues. It is easy to see that 
for 0 < a < JT /2 , 
for 
JT /2 < a < JT , 
for JT < a < 3JT /2 , 
etc. 
there will be only one symmetric state; 
there will be one symmetric and one antisymmetric state; 
there will be two symmetric and one antisymmetric state; 
Example 6.1 As an example, we consider a proton (of mass 1.67 x 1 0~27 kg) inside 
a one-dimensional well with Vo :::: 25 MeV:::: 4 x 1O~12 J and a :::: 3.65 x 1O~15 
m. Thus 
I 
_ (2/LVoa2) 2 "-' 
a -
2 
-
2.0 
4h 
(60) 

Bound State Solutions 
4 
2 
~ tan ~ I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1<-- ~ cot ~ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I , , , , 
I , , , , , , 
, , , 
I 
O~----~7---~--~~~--~~----~---
,8 
TJ 
-2 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I , , 
I 
I 
I 
, , 
I , , , 
, , , 
131 
Figure 6.4. The variation of 1] tan 1] (solid curve) and -1] cot 1] (dotted curve) as a function of 1]. The 
points of intersection of these curves with the quadrant of a circle of radius Ci determine the discrete 
eigenvalues corresponding to the potential well of finite depth. 
Since a < 7f, there will be one symmetric state and one anti symmetric state; the 
roots of Eqs (58) and (59) for a = 2 are given by (see Fig. 6.3) 
1] = 1.02987 (=} E:::::: 6.63 MeV) 
for the symmetric state and 
1] = 1.89549 (=} E:::::: 22.45 MeV) 
for the anti symmetric state 
Till now we have assumed E < Vo; had we considered values of E > Vo, we would 
have found that all values of E (greater than Vo) could be possible, i.e. the energy 
eigenvalues would be continuously distributed in the domain Vo < E < 00. How-
ever, the wave function would not have vanished at large distances from the origin 
(see Chapter 8). Such solutions are of great importance in connection with the 
scattering of a particle by a force field where the energy is specified in advance and 
the behaviour of the wave function at great distances is found in terms of energy. 

132 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
6.7. Three-dimensional Schrodinger equation 
In previous sections we had discussed the stationary states of the one-dimensional 
SchrMinger equation; the corresponding considerations for the three-dimensional 
equation are very straightforward. For example, by using the method of separation 
of variables, the solution of the time dependent Schrc)dinger equation 
(61 ) 
is of the form 
W (r, t) = 1/1 (r) exp [-iEtjli] 
(62) 
where 1/1 (r) is the solution of the eigenvalue equation [cf. Eq. (8)] 
H 1/1 (r) = E1/I (r) 
(63) 
and 
li2 
I 
H = __ \72 + V (r) = -
[p} + p} + p_2] + V (r) 
(64) 
2~ 
2~· 
L 
represents the Hamiltonian operator and E the energy eigenvalue. The potential 
energy function has been assumed to be independent of time. In general, the eigen-
values can have a discrete set along with a continuous range of eigenvalues and the 
general solution of Eq. (61) is of the form 
W (r, t) = L cn1/ln (r) exp [-iEtjli] 
(65) 
n 
where L denotes a sum over the discrete states and an integration over the con-
n 
tinuum. 
Equation (64) is usually written in the form 
\721/1 + 2~ [E _ V (r)] 1/1 (r) = 0 
Ii 
(66) 
which is known as the three-dimensional time independent Schrbdinger equation. 
As in Sec. 6.2, the wave function satisfies continuity and boundary conditions. 
Thus 
(i) The wave function and its gradient are continuous everywhere as long as the 
potential energy function is finite. 
(ii) The wave function should also be single-valued everywhere so that it corre-
sponds to a definite physical situation. 

Bound State Solutions 
133 
(iii) For a degenerate state any linear combination of the degenerate eigenfunctions 
is also a possible eigenfunction. 
The orthogonality of the wave functions can be proved by using a method 
similar to the one used in Sec. 6.4. Indeed, instead of Eqs (14) and (15), we will 
have 
(67) 
(68) 
If we multiply Eq. (67) by 1jf k* and multiply the complex conjugate of Eq. (68) by 
1jf n and subtract, we would get 
By using the Gauss theorem, the LHS becomes a surface integral 
where Ii represents the unit outward normal on the surface. The surface integral 
would vanish if the volume integral is over the entire space. Thus, as in Sec. 6.4, 
we will have 
(69) 
proving that all eigenvalues are real and the wave functions belonging to different 
energy levels are orthogonal. By appropriate normalization we can always have 
(70) 
which is the orthonormality condition. For degenerate states one can always con-
struct appropriate linear combinations so that the orthonormality condition is sat-
isfied (see Problem 6.3). 
As a simple example, we will, in the next section, solve the three-dimensional 
SchrOdinger equation for a particle inside a cube of length L. 

134 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
6.8. Particle in a three-dimensional box 
In this section we will solve the SchrMinger equation for a potential energy varia-
tion of the form 
V(x,y,z) 
o for 0 < x < L , 0 < y < L , 0 < z < L 
00 everywhere else 
(71 ) 
which represents a particle in an infinitely deep potential well inside a cube of side 
L. This problem has an important applications in many areas. For example, in the 
free electron theory of metals, the valence electrons can be approximately assumed 
to be free and confined inside a box (see Sec. 6.9). Similarly, the free electron 
theory allows us to understand the basic physics behind the white drawf stars (see 
Sec. 6.10). The free electron theory is also the basis of the Thomas-Fermi model 
of the atom (see Sec. 23.6). 
Now, the Schrbdinger equation is given by 
(72) 
with the boundary condition that 1/1 should vanish everywhere on the surface of the 
cube. We use the method of separation of variables and write 1/1 = X (x) y (y) z (z) 
to obtain 
(73) 
The first term is a function of x alone, the second term of y alone, etc., so that each 
term has to be set equal to a constant. We write 
1 d 2X 
___ = _k 2 
X dx 2 
x 
(74) 
and similar Equations for Y (y) and Z (z) with 
2 
2 
2 
2fJE 
kx + k" + k_ = -2-
. 
, 
Pi 
(75) 
We have set each term equal to a negative constant; otherwise the boundary condi-
tions cannot be satisfied. The solution of Eq. (74) is 
X (x) = A sin kxx + B cos kxx 
(76) 
and since 1/1 has to vanish on all points on the surfaces x = 0 and x = L we must 
have B = 0 and kx = nx7r / L with n, = 1,2, ... (cf. Sec. 6.6.1). Similarly for k\, 

Bound State Solutions 
135 
and kz. Using Eq. (75) we get 
(77) 
The corresponding normalized wave functions are 
( 8 )1/2 
nxlr 
. nvlr 
. nzlr 
o/(X,y,Z) = 
L3 
sinT x Slll-Z-Y slllT Z 
(78) 
6.8.1. THE DENSITY OF STATES 
If g (E) dE represents the number of states whose energy lies between E and 
E + dE then g (E) is known as the density of states and it represents a very 
important quantity in the theory of solids. In order to calculate g (E) we first 
calculate N (E) which represents the total number of states whose energies are 
less than E. Obviously 
and therefore 
Now, 
E 
N (E) = f g (E) dE 
o 
dN (E) 
gee) = -dE-
2 
2 
2 
2flL 2 E 
2 
nx + nv + n z = 
2 = R (say) 
-
lr 2 /i 
(79) 
(80) 
(81) 
Thus N (E) will be the number of sets of integers whose sum of squares is less 
than R2. In the n x , ny, n z space each point corresponds to a unit volume and if we 
draw a sphere of radius R then the volume of the positive octant will approximately 
represent6 N (E); we have to take the positive octant because nx , ny and n z take 
positive values. Thus 
(82) 
6 If the reader finds it difficult to understand he may first try to make the corresponding two-
dimensional calculations in which one is interested in finding the number of sets of integers such that 
n} + n l < R2. If one takes a graph paper then each corner corresponds to a set of integers and 
each point can be associated with a unit area. Thus the number of sets of integers would be IT R2 /4 
where the factor 1/4 is because of the fact that we are interested in the positive quadrant. 

136 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where an additional factor of 2 has been introduced as a state can be occupied by 
two electrons. Using Eq. (80) we get 
(2 11 )3/2 V 
g (E) = 
I"" 
E1/2 
(83) 
2][2113 
where V (= L 3) represents the volume of the box. 
Often it is more convenient to express the density of states in momentum 
space. Now for a free non-relativistic particle 
Thus the equation 
would readily give 
g(p) dp = geE) dE 
V 
2 
g(p) = ][211 3 P 
6.8.2. RELATIVISTIC CONSIDERATIONS 
(85) 
(86) 
Equation (84) represents the non-relativistic relation between energy and momen-
tum. The corresponding relativistic relation is given by 
(87) 
where M represents the rest mass of the particle. Now, it so happens that if one 
solves Dirac's relativistic equation then the density of states in the momentum 
space is still given by Eq. (86) (see, e.g. Ref. 2). Since 
E dE = c2p dp 
we get 
(88) 
In the extreme relativistic limit 
we obtain 
(89) 

Bound State Solutions 
137 
6.9. Free electrons in a metal 
The problem corresponding to a particle in a box has a very important application in 
the free electron theory of metals where the valence electrons can be approximately 
assumed to be free and confined inside the metal. Now, the probability of finding 
an electron with energy E is given by the Fermi-Dirac function 
1 
F(E) = I + e(E-EF)/kT 
(90) 
The quantity E F is referred to as the Fermi energy. At absolute zero (T = 0), we 
have 
I
I E < EFo 
F(E) = 
o E> EFo 
(91) 
where the subscript zero implies that we are calculating the Fermi energy at T = O. 
Equation (91) tells us that all states below the Fermi level are filled up and all states 
above the Fermi level are empty. For such a situation (when all the lowest quantum 
states are occupied), the electron gas is said to be completely degenerate. Now the 
total number of electrons (inside the box) is given by 
which at T = 0 becomes 
00 
N = f geE) F(E) dE 
o 
E"i) 
N = f geE) dE 
() 
Simple manipulations give us 
(92) 
(93) 
(94) 

138 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where n (= N / V) represents the number of free electrons per unit volume. Substi-
tuting the numerical values of various constants we get 
EFo ~ 5.84 X 10-27 n2/ 3 erg 
~ 3.65 x 10- 15 n 2/ 3 eV 
(95) 
where n is measured in cm-3. For example, for sodium with one free electron per 
atom and having a density of 0.97 g/cm3 we get 
6.023 X 1023 x 0.97 
n ~ 
::: 2.54 x 1022 electrons/cm3 
23 
Thus 
The total energy of the gas at absolute zero will be given by 
Era 
8 = J E geE) F(E) dE 
o 
(2M )3/2 V 
5/2 
-------,-- EF; 
5rr2/i3 
0 
(96) 
If we use Eg. (93) we would get the following expression for average energy per 
particle 
(97) 
In general, the Fermi energy E F is dependent on temperature. However, when 
kT « EFo' we say that the electron gas is strongly degenerate-or, almost com-
pletely degenerate. In Problem 6.13 we will discuss the variation of E with tem-
perature for a strongly degenerate gas and we will show 
EF(T) = EF(T) = EFo 
I - ~ -
+ ~ -
'" 
[ 
2 (kT)2 
4 (kT)4 
] 
12 
EFo 
720 
EFo 
(98) 
and the average energy per electron is 
3 
[ 
5rr2 (kT)2 
] 
(E) = -EFo 1 + -
-
... 
5 
12 
Efo 
(99) 

Bound State Solutions 
139 
In order to get numerical appreciation of the corrections, we consider sodium for 
which EFo ~ 3.15 eY. Thus, at T = 3000 K (kT ~ 0.0259 eV) 
kT ~ 8.2 x 10-3 
EFo 
and the correction terms in Eqs. (98) and (99) are very small. Indeed 
and 
Even for T ~ 50000 K 
and 
3 
{E) ~ -EFo[l - 2.8 X 10-4 + A 
5 
kT 
-
~ 0.137 
EFo 
EF ~ 3.10 eV 
Thus even at such high temperatures, the corrections are very small. In Fig. 6.5 we 
----
Gi' 
~ 0.5 
o o 
1 
--
............. , , , , 
2 
, , , , , , 
\ , , , 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
, 
\ 
\ 
'. 
3 
E(eV) 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
T=500 K 
T=7000 K 
T=O K 
, 
\ 
\ 
4 
""" 
'~ ---
5 
----
6 
Figure 6.5. The Fermi-Dirac distribution function for sodium (EFo = 3.1S eV) at OaK, SOaK and 
7000oK. 
have plotted the Fermi-Dirac distribution function for sodium at T = OaK, 5000 K 

140 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and 7000°K. At T = OaK, the electron gas is in the lowest energy state and all 
states below are occupied. At T = SOooK, the probability of occupancy remains 
very close to that at T = OaK except in the close vicinity of E = E F. Because 
of this, it is extremely unlikely that the low energy electrons will get excited to 
higher energy states. Thus, when the temperature is raised, only those electrons 
which are within k T of E F get excited to higher energy states. It is for this reason 
that the specific heat for the electron gas is much below the classical value. We 
will explicitly show this below. On the other hand, at T = 7000o K, the occupancy 
probability is significantly different from that at T = OaK. Also, one can see that 
EF (at which F(E) = ~) is visibly smaller than EFo; at T = SOooK, this difference 
is extremely small. 
6.9.1. THE SPECIFIC HEAT OF THE ELECTRON GAS 
Assuming I free electron per atom, we will have No free electrons per kmol of the 
metal where 
No ;::::; 6.023 X 1026 kmole- i 
represents the Avagadro's number. Thus [using Eg. (99)] the total energy of the 
electron gas per kilomole of the metal would be 
3 
[5][2 (kT)2 
] 
8 = No (E) ;::::; - NoE r(l 
I + -
-
+ A 
S 
12 
EFo 
( 100) 
The specific heat (at constant volume) of the electron gas would therefore be given 
by 
(C v )ciectronic 
(101) 
On the other hand, if electrons are assumed to behave like a classical gas, the 
average energy per electron would be 
3 
(E)cl = -kT 
2 
(102) 
where the subscript 'cl' refers to the fact that we are considering a classical gas. 
Thus the total energy of the electron gas (per kilomole of the metal) would be given 
by 
(103) 

Bound State Solutions 
141 
where R = Nok ~ 8.316 x 103 J/kmol.K represents the universal gas constant. 
From Eq. (103) we readily obtain 
3 
3 
(CV)cl = -R = -Nok 
2 
2 
Thus 
(CV)electronic = (CV )c1 [~;~] 
Now for sodium at T ~ 300oK, 
kT 
-
~ 8.2 X 10-3 
EFo 
and therefore 
I 
(C v )elcctronic ~ 37 (C v )cl 
In general, at normal temperatures since 
kT -« 1 
EFo 
(104) 
(105) 
the electronic contribution to the specific heat is much less than what would be 
expected if we had assumed the electrons to behave like a classical gas. This 
is indeed borne out by experimental data. The physical reason for this has been 
discussed at the end of the previous section. We may mention here that at high 
temperatures when kT » E Fo ' the Fermi energy EF becomes negative and we 
may neglect the unity in the denominator of Eq. (90) to obtain 
(106) 
Thus if N (E)d E represents the number of electrons whose energies lie between E 
and E + dE then 
N(E)dE 
g(E)F(E)dE 
const. EI/2e-E/kT dE 
which corresponds to the classical Maxwellian distribution; using the above equa-
tion we would readily get Eq. (02). The total number of electrons would be given 
by 
(Xl 
N = (2/-l)3/2_V_e EF / kT J 
EI/2e-E/kT dE 
2][ 2 fi3 
o 

142 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Simple algebra and use of Eq. (94) would give 
EF = -kTln -- --
[ 3v1rr ( kT ) 3/2] 
4 
EFo 
(107) 
showing that the Fermi energy becomes negative. 
6.10. White dwarf stars 
Another example of a highly degenerate electron gas is the inside of a white dwarf 
star where the electron densities are so high that the electron gas is in a highly 
degenerate state. In this section, we will discuss the basic physics associated with 
a white dwarf star. However, before we discuss the details, we should mention that 
in astrophysics almost everyone uses the cgs units and in these units, the values of 
some important constants (which we will be using) are given in Table 6.1. 
Tahle 6.1. Values of some physical constants 
Quantity 
Symbol 
Value 
Mass of the hydrogen atom 
I11H 
1.673 x 10-24 g 
Mass of the electron 
l11e 
9.110 x lO-2g g 
Speed of light in vacuum 
c 
2.998 x lOlO cm/s 
Planck·s constant 
h 
1.055 x lO-27 erg s 
Gravitational constant 
G 
6.672 x lO-x cm3 s-2 g-I 
Mass of the sun 
MS 
l. 989 x lO33 g 
Radius of the sun 
Rs 
6.960 x 1010 cm 
We assume that the star to be in hydrostatic equilibrium under its own grav-
itation, i.e., the inward directed gravitational force exactly balances the outward 
directed force due to the gas pressure. We also assume the star to be of uniform 
density p (this is quite a drastic assumption; however, it allows us to obtain analyt-
ical results for important parameters associated with the star). Thus the mass of the 
spherical shell whose inner and outer radii are rand r + dr will be given by 
(l08) 
We next consider the gravitational force acting on this spherical shell. Obviously, 
the mass lying outside the shell does not contribute and the gravitational force due 
to the sphere of radius r would be given by 
G [p~r3] dM 
(109) 

Bound State Solutions 
143 
where G represents the gravitational constant. The gravitational force will be di-
rected inwards and if d P represents the increment in pressure over the distance dr 
then for the star to be in hydrostatic equilibrium we must have 
(110) 
Using Eq. (l08) we get 
dP 
4n 
2 
-=--Gp r 
dr 
3 
(Ill) 
The above equation is the basic equation in understanding stellar structures-of 
course, under the assumption of the constancy of density inside the star. Carrying 
out the straightforward integration we get 
2n 
per) = _Gp2(R2 - r2) 
3 
(112) 
where R represents the radius of the star where the pressure vanishes. Thus the 
pressure at the center of the star is approximately given by 
2n 
2 2 
Pc = -Gp R 
3 
Now, for Sirius B (which is a white dwarf star) 
M ~ 1. 05 M., ~ 2.1 x 1033 g } 
R ~ 5.5 X 108 cm 
(113) 
(14) 
where Ms and Rs represent the mass and radius of the sun; the corresponding values 
are given in Table 6.1. Equation (114) gives the following value for the average 
density of Sirius B 
(115) 
Notice that the radius of the star is about 5500 kIn (which is slightly smaller than 
that of the earth) whereas the mass is about the same as that of the sun leading to 
extremely high densities (about 3000 kg/cm3). At such high densities, inspite of 
very high temperatures, the electrons may form a degenerate gas. We may mention 
that in a white dwarf star the densities are such that whereas the electron gas is 
in a degenerate state, the gas consisting of protons and other nuclei is in a non-
degenerate state so that the perfect gas law is applicable to these nuclei. However, 
the pressure due to the gas formed by these nuclei is usually negligible in compar-
ison to the pressure due to the degenerate electron gas and therefore we need only 
consider the pressure due to the degenerate electron gas. 
Returning to Eq. (113) if we substitute the values of Rand p (for Sirius B) we 
would get 
(116) 

144 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The above expression may be compared with the pressure at the center of the sun 
which is about 1.2 x 1017 dynes/cm2. Thus the pressure at the center of the white 
dwarf star Sirius B is about 3 million times more than the pressure at the center 
of the sun! Further, because of very high temperatures, the stellar matter is in a 
completely ionized state; thus, if we assume the atoms are of atomic number Z and 
atomic weight A, the number of electrons per unit volume will be given by 
Z P 
ne=--
AmH 
( 117) 
where m H represents the mass of the (neutral) hydrogen atom. Assuming that the 
stellar matter contains primarily heavy elements (which is indeed true for white 
dwarf stars), we may write AI Z ~ 2; thus, for p ~ 3 x 106 g/cm3, we get 
For the above value of n e , Eq.(94) would give 
We may note two points: 
1. At T ~ 107 K 
EFo ~ 0.3 MeV 
EFo ~ 400» I 
kT 
Thus even at such high temperatures, the electron gas can be assumed to be 
almost completely degenerate. 
2. The value of EFo (~ 0.3 MeV) may be compared with the rest mass energy 
of the electron which is about 0.5 MeV. Thus we should use relativistic ex-
pressions relating energy and mass. Nevertheless, we will use non-relativistic 
formulae and hope that their use should at least give us values which will be 
of the right order. 
Now, in the non-relativistic theory, the pressure due to the degenerate electron gas 
is given by7 
(118) 
7 In the elementary kinetic theory of a gas, the pressure is given by (see, e.g., Sec. 23.5 of Ref. 1) 
2 
P = -n(E) 
3 
where (E) represents the average kinetic energy of the gas particles. If we now use Egs. (94) and 
(97), we would get Eg. (118). 

Bound State Solutions 
145 
Thus 
P = _ (3rr2)2/3 
_ ~ 
1i2 
[Z 
J5/3 
5fL 
A mH 
(119) 
Assuming the pressure is primarily due to the degenerate electron gas, we will have 
Since 
M 
P = 4][ R3 
3 
We get after simple manipulations 
RWd = ~ (3rr 2)1/3 ~ 
(~)5.3 _1_ 
5 
2 
fLG 
AmH 
M!jl 
(120) 
(121) 
(122) 
where the subscript wd stands for white dwarf. If we substitute the numerical 
values of various constants (see Table 6.1), and assume AI Z ;::::; 2, we would get 
3.6 X 10 19 
. 
RWd = 
1/3 
cgs umts 
M· 
wd 
(123) 
where RWd is in centimeters and MWd is in grams. For Sirius B, M ;::::; 2.1 x 1033 g, 
and Eq. (123) would give us R ;::::; 2.8 X 108 cm; although it is much smaller than 
the actual value of R, we do get the correct order. The discrepancy is due to neglect 
of relativistic effects and the assumption of constancy of density of stellar matter. 
Equation (123) gives the very important result that higher the mass ofthe white 
dwarf star, smaller will be the radius-leading to higher densities. Although, this 
is borne out by experimental data on white-dwarf stars, Eq.(122) predicts that as 
the mass tends to become extremely large, the radius of the star approaches zero! 
This is incorrect because as the densities become higher, relativistic effects become 
more important. Indeed, in the extreme relativistic limit, one gets the following 
expression for the pressure [see, e.g., Ref. 2] 
(124) 
If we equate this to the gravitational pressure given by Eq.(l13) we would get 
M ;::::; ~ ~ (IiC)3/2 (~)2 
4'12 
G 
AmH 
(125) 

146 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The above is indeed a remarkable result-in the sense that the limiting mass de-
pends mainly only on the values of some universal constants. If we substitute the 
values of various constants, and assume AI Z ~ 2, we would get 
M = 0.87 X 1033 g ~ OA4M., 
(126) 
In fact, if one carries out a more careful analysis (in particular, if one takes into 
account the density variation inside the star) one gets 
M = MCh = 2.86 X 1033 g ~ lA4M, 
(127) 
This limiting mass is known as the Chandrasekhar limit [and hence the subscript 
'Ch']-after the famous Indian physicist S. Chandrasekhar who had derived this 
result [for a detailed account of Chandrasekhar's work on white dwarf stars we 
refer the reader to his classic treatise entitled Introduction to the Study of Stellar 
Structures (Ref. 2)]. Equation (127) is consistent with experimental data on white-
dwarf stars. 
6.11. Neutron stars 
While collapsing, if the mass of the degenerate core (of the star) is close to the 
Chandrasekhar limit (~ 1. 44Ms ), the electron energy becomes so large that the 
following capture process takes place 
p + e -+ n + IJ e 
(128) 
resulting in the formation of a neutron star in which the gravitational pressure 
is balanced by the pressure due to the degenerate neutron gas. Assuming that a 
neutron star consists only of neutrons, the neutron density would be given by [cf. 
Eq. (117)] 
p 
nn =-
mn 
where mn represents the mass of the neutron. Thus Eq. (120) takes the form 
If we now use Eq. (121) and simplify we would get 
R 
= ~ (3JT 2 ) 1/3 ti 2 (_1 )8/3 
nl 
5 
2 
G 
mn 
M/:e 
(129) 
(130) 
(131 ) 
where Rns and Mns represent respectively the mass and the radius of the neutron 
star. For Mns ~ lAMs ~ 2.78 X 1033 g, we obtain 
Rns ~ 404 km 
( 132) 

Bound State Solutions 
147 
Because of the assumption of constancy of density, the above value of the radius 
may be an underestimate by a factor of about 2 or 3-so assuming 
Rns ~ 10 km 
(\33) 
we obtain the following value for the average density. 
which is indeed an enormous number-even greater than the density of nuclear 
matter. 
6.12. Conclusions 
In this chapter we have obtained bound state solutions of the one- and three-
dimensional Schrbdinger equations for some specific potential energy distrib-
utions. In the next chapter we will obtain solutions of the one-dimensional 
Schrbdinger equation for the linear harmonic oscillator problem and discuss the 
relation with the classical oscillator. 
In chapter 10 we will show that as long as the potential is spherically symmetric 
(i.e. as long as the potential depends only on the magnitude of the distance from a 
fixed point), the angular part of the wave function is a spherical harmonic and the 
potential energy function enters only in the radial part of the equation. In the same 
chapter we will solve the hydrogen atom problem and obtain the discrete states 
for the Coulomb potential and will show that the results are consistent with the 
experimental data. 
6.13. Problems 
Problem 6.1 (a) Show that the eigenvectors of the Hermitian matrix 
( 0 I 0) 
100 
002 
are orthogonal to each other. Normalize these vectors to form a complete set of 
orthonormal vectors. 
(b) Repeat the calculation for the matrices 
( 0 -i 0) 
i 
0 0 
003 

148 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and 
(1 -1) 
-1 1 
Problem 6.2 In order to determine the boundary condition of V (x) going to infinity 
at a particular value of x (say x = 0), we consider the following limiting process: 
assume V (x) = 0 for x < 0 and V (x) = Vo for x > 0; in the limit of Vo ---+ 00, 
show that 1/f vanishes in the region x > O. 
Problem 6.3 Let ¢ I, ¢2, ... , ¢ g represent a set of linearly independent eigenfunc-
tions corresponding to a degenerate state. Construct appropriate linear combina-
tions so that the wave functions form an orthonormal set. 
Problem 6.4 Discuss the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the matrix 
( I 0 0) 
010 
002 
Show that the vectors 
belong to the degenerate state but do not form an orthonormal set. Use the results 
of the previous problem to obtain an orthonormal set. 
Problem 6.5 Consider the potential energy variation given by 
!
oox<O 
Vex) = 
0 
0 < x < b 
Vo x ~ b 
(134) 
(a) Derive the transcendental equation determining the energy eigenvalues for 
the bounded states. Show that they correspond to the anti symmetric states for the 
potential energy distribution given by Eq. (48) with b = a12. 
(b) Obtain the normalized wave function. 
(c) Assuming 
2f.L Vob2 
2 
---;:-- = 9n 
/1 2 
show that there will be three bound states with 
~ = 2.83595, 5.64146and8.33877 
where 

Bound State Solutions 
o 
2 
---~.--
, 
\ 
................... 
3 
4 
E(eV) 
T=2000 K 
T=O K 
5 
Figure 6.6. A plot of N(£) for sodium at T = OaK and 2000oK. 
149 
6 
Problem 6.6 For the one-dimensional potential well (see Sec. 6.6.2) derive the 
transcendental equations determining the discrete eigenvalues [i.e., Eqs. (58) and 
(59)] without making the assumption that the wave functions have to be symmetric 
and antisymmetric functions of x. 
Problem 6.7 Use the normalization condition to determine the values of A and B 
in Eq. (51). 
Problem 6.8 For copper we may assume one free electron per atom. Its density is 
about 8.94 g/cm3 and its atomic mass is 63.5. Calculate EFo and show that at room 
temperatures (T ~ 3000 K), the electron gas is almost completely degenerate. 
[ADS: EFo ~ 7.0 eV] 
Problem 6.9 (a) In the free electron theory if N(E)dE represents the number of 
electrons/unit volume whose energy lie between E and E + dE, show that it is 
given by 
N(E) = 
. 3n/2 
E- 3/ 2 EI/2 
e(lo'-EF)/kT + 1 
Fa 
(135) 
where n represents the total number of electrons per unit volume. 
(b) For sodium plot N(E) as a function of E for T = OaK and 20000K (see Fig. 
6.6). Assume EF(T) ~ EFo ~ 3.15 eY. Justify this assumption. 

150 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Problem 6.10 (a) Assume the sun to consist only of free electrons and protons. 
U sing the data given in Table 6.1, calculate for proton gas and for the electron gas. 
(b) Inside the sun we may assume T ~ lO7oK calculate EFo/ kT in each case. 
[Ans: 0.018 eV and 33 eV for the proton and electron gas.] 
Problem 6.11 Assuming the density of the neutron star to be 7 x 1014 g/cm3, 
calculate and compare with rest mass energy. 
[Ans: EFo ~ 100 MeV] 
Problem 6.12 (a) Using the data given in Problem 6.8 calculate EF for copper at 
lOOO°K. 
(b) Evaluate d F / dE and plot it for T = 1000°K. Show that it is a very sharply 
peaked function around E = E F. 
(c) At T = 0, show that d F / dE is a delta function. 
Problem 6.13 Assuming EFa/ kT » 1, derive Eqs.(98) and (99). 
[Hint: Integrate Eq. (92) (and a similar equation for c) by parts and use the previous 
problem]. 
Problem 6.14 Consider the potential energy variations given by 
Vex) 
00 
x < 0 
yx x> 0 
(136) 
Show that the solution of the Schrodinger equation can be written in terms of Airy 
function (see Appendix D) and that the energy eigenvalues are given by 
( 1i2y2)1/3 
En = --
Cn 
2m 
(137) 
where 
CI = 2.33811; 
C2 = 4.08795; 
C3 = 5.52056; 
etc. 
(138) 
Problem 6.15 Show that for 
Vex) = -S8(x) 
there is only one bound state with 
What is the corresponding eigenfunction? 
Problem 6.16 (a) Solve the one-dimensional SchrMinger equation for 
Vex) = -Vo 
a 
Ixl <-2 
a 
o Ixl >"2 
(139) 
(140) 
(141 ) 

Bound State Solutions 
151 
and derive the transcendental equation which would determine the energy eigen-
values. 
(b) Show that if we let a ---+ 0 and Vo ---+ 00 such that 
aVo ---+ S 
we would obtain only one bound state with energy as given in the previous problem. 
6.14. Solutions 
Solution 6.1 (a) The eigenvalues are + 1, -1 and 2; the corresponding normalized 
eigenvectors are 
Further 
showing that an arbitrary vector can be written as a linear combination of 1/11' 1/12 
and 1/13. 
Solution 6.2 Since V (x) = 0 for x < 0 and V = Vo for x > 0 the solution of the 
SchrMinger equation is 
1/1 (x) 
A sin kx + B cos kx 
for 
x < 0 
Ce- KX 
for 
x > 0 
where k = (2/-LEjh2)1/2 and K = [2/-L(Vo -
E)jh2]1/2; we have assumed Vo > E 
and rejected the solution eKX which goes to 00 as x ---+ 00. Continuity of 1/1 and 
d1/l jdx at x = 0 gives 
C=B 
C = -~A = _ (_1_)1/2 A 
K 
~-1 
E 
Thus as Vo ---+ 00, C ---+ 0 (and hence B ---+ 0) implying that 1/1 = 0 for x ~ O. 
Solution 6.3 Let 
(142) 

152 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
II is known as the length of the vector VI. We next define 
C21 is such that V2 is orthogonal to 1f; 1 • 
or 
similarly 
C31 = f 1f;7¢3dx 
and 
C32 = f 1f;;¢3dx 
are such that V3 is orthogonal to 1f; I and 1f; 2' In general 
Vn+1 
1f;n+1 = -l-' 
n+1 
(143) 
(144) 
Thus VI, V2, ... form an orthonormal set. This is known as Schmidt's orthogonal-
ization procedure. 
Solution 6.4 We choose 
then 
C21 ~ (l I 0) ( ~ ) ~ I 
so that 

Bound State Solutions 
153 
1/1 I and 1/1 2 form an orthonormal set correspond to the degenerate eigenvalue. It 
may be mentioned that 
and _1 (~1) 
-J2 
0 
also form an orthonormal set. Thus there can be infinite number of orthonormal 
sets. 
Solution 6.5 
1/1 (x) 
Asinkx 
A sin kbe-K(x-h) 
Continuity of d 1/1 I dx at x = b will give us 
-~ cot~ = Ja 2 _ ~2 
(145) 
where 
and 
? 
2/lvEb2 
~- = 
112 
The normalization condition will give us 
A = _1_ 
~ _ sin 2~ + 
sin2 ~ 
[ 
]
-1/2 
.jb 2 
4~ 
2Ja2 _ ~2 
(146) 
Solution 6.6 The wave function which would not blow up as x -+ ±oo would be 
given by 
{ 
AeKX 
for x < -a12 
1/1 = 
B sinkx + C coskx for -a12 < x < al2 
De-KX 
for x > al2 
(147) 
Continuity of 1/1 and d1/l Idx at x = ±a12 will give us four equations from which 
we may obtain 
2B sin 1) = (D -
A)e-~, 
2kB cos 1) = K( -D + A)e-$ 
2C cos 1) = (D + A)e-~, 
2kC sin 1) = K(D + A)e-~ 
where 1) = kal2 and ~ = Ka12. From this we immediately see that either B = 0 
and D = A (the symmetric solution) and one obtains Eq. (58), or C = 0 and 
D = -A (the anti symmetric solution) and one obtains Eq. (59). 

154 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Solution 6.7 For the symmetric mode 
and the normalization condition gives us 
(2)1/2 [ 
sinka 
2COS2(ka/2)]-1/2 
IAI = -
1+--+----
a 
ka 
Ka 
Solution 6.13 For metals like Na, Cu, etc., EFo ~ few eV, since kT ~ 0.025 eV 
(at T ~ 300K). EFo/ kT » 1. Now 
00 
N = f g(E)F(E)dE 
o 
[ 
00] 
2 
3/2 V 
2 
00 
2 
d F 
(f.1,) 
- E3/2F(E)1 
--fE3/2_dE 
2:rr 2113 
3 
0 
3 
dE 
(2f.1,)3/2 V El2 
3:rr 2113 
00 
f 
-Er"/kT 
o 
( 
XkT)3/2 dF 
1+-
-dx 
EF 
dx 
where x = (E -
EF)/kT. Assuming EFo/kT » I and since dF/dx is very 
sharply peaked around x = 0, we replace the lower limit by -00, expand (I + 
xkT / E F)3 /2 in a binomial series and integrate term by term to obtaing 
N = 
8 
00 
2 J x 2e-x (1 + e-x )-2dx 
-00 
-00 

Bound State Solutions 
or, 
Thus 
Similarly 
CXJ 
(E) f Eg(E)F(E)dE 
o 
from which we get 
3 
[ 
5][2 (kT)2 
] 
(E) ::::::; -nEFo 1+-
-
+ A 
5 
12 
EFo 
ISS 
Solution 6.14 In the region 0 < x < 00, the Schrodinger equation is given by 
which can be written in the form 
where 
with 
y 
X= -x, 
ex 
~ = X-£ 
E 
£ =-
ex 
The solution of Eq. (149) is given by 
(148) 
(149) 
(150) 
(151) 
Since Bi(~) --+ 00 as ~ --+ 00 (see Fig. 2 of Appendix D), we must choose C2 = o. 
Further, since V (x) = 00 for x < 0, we must have 
1/f(x = 0) = ° 
(152) 

156 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
4~~~~~----~~-------------------
2 
4 
-x=~ 
a 
6 
8 
10 
Figure 6.7. The potential energy distribution as given by Eq. (136). The first three eigenvalues and 
the corresponding eigenfunctions are also shown. 
implying 
1/f(~ = -8) = 0 
(153) 
or, 
Ai(-8) = 0 
( l54) 
Now Ai(~) = 0 for 
~ = an = -2.33811, -4.08795, -5.52056, ... 
(155) 
using which we readily get Eq. (137), the corresponding eigenfunctions being 
1/fn(x) = (const)Ai(~) = (const)Ai(X + an) 
(156) 
where an represent the zeros of the Airy function [see Eq. (155) and Table 1 of 
Appendix D]. The energy eigenvalues are shown as horizontal lines in Fig. 6.7 
along with the corresponding eigenfunctions. 
Solution 6.15 The Schrodinger equation is given by 
d21/f 
2f1, 
dx2 + /i2[E + S8(x)]1/f(x) = 0 
Thus for x < 0 and x > 0, 1/f (x) will satisfy the equation 
d 21/f 
--7 -
K21/f(X) = 0 
x < 0 and x > 0 
dx-
where 
(157) 
(158) 
(159) 

Bound State Solutions 
157 
For bound states E is negative and therefore K2 is a positive quantity. The solution 
of Eq. (158) which vanishes as x ---+ +00 and x ---+ -00 would be given by 
ljJ(x) 
Ae-KX 
x > 0 
AeKX 
x < 0 
(160) 
which takes into account the continuity of ljJ(x) at x = O. Now, integrating Eq. 
(157) we obtain 
+£ 
+CXJ 
+0 
f d2ljJ 
2fLE f 
2fLS f 
-2 dx = --2 
ljJ(x)dx - -2 
8(x)ljJ(x)dx 
dx 
n 
n 
-E 
-CXJ 
-£ 
where 8 is an infinitesimally small quantity. Since ljJ (x) is continuous at x = 0, the 
first term on the RHS of the above equation would vanish and we would get 
dljJ I 
-
dljJ I 
= - 2fL2S ljJ(O) = _ 2fL~A 
dx X=£ 
dx X=-£ 
n 
n 
From Eq. (160), we would get 
Thus 
or 
fL S2 
E=--
2n 2 
(161) 
(162) 
(163) 
(164) 
The corresponding normalized eigenfunction is given by (see also Example 1.1) 
(165) 
Solution 6.16 The transcendental equation determining the energy eigenvalues 
corresponding to symmetric states is given by 
(166) 
where 
[ 
]
1/2 
~ = ';2 (Vo + E)a 2 
(167) 

158 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and 
(168) 
Notice that for bound states E is negative with I E I < Vo. When Vo --+ 00 and 
a --+ 0 such that Voa --+ S we obtain 
2 
{LS 
2 
a =-a 
2112 
(169) 
which tends to zero. Thus the root of Eq. (166) will correspond to a very small 
value of ~ (see Fig. 6.4) so that we may replace tan ~ by ~ to obtain 
~2 = ja 2 _ ~2 
or 
or 
~2 = l [-I ±JI +4a 2] 
We neglect the minus sign and make a binomial expansion to obtain 
e ~ a 2 - a 4 
(170) 
or 
or 
(171) 
6.15. References 
I. D. Halliday and R. Resnick, Physics Parts I & II, John Wiley, New York 
(1978). 
2. S. Chandrasekhar, Introduction to the Study of Stellar Structure, Dover 
Publications, New York (1957). 

Chapter 7 
Linear Harmonic Oscillator: I 
Solution of the Schrodinger Equation and 
Relationship with the Classical Oscillator 
In 1924 Niels Bohr wrote} ;'/\s frequently emphasized, these principles, although 
they are formulated by the help of classical conceptions, are to be regarded purely 
as laws of the quantum theory, which gives us, not-withstanding the formal nature 
of the quantum theory, a hope in the future of a consistent theory, which at the 
same time reproduces the characteristic features of the quantum theory, important 
for its applicability, and, nevertheless, can be regarded as a rational generalization 
of classical electrodynamics." About three years later this consistent theory was 
accomplished. In fact, there was rarely in the history of physics a compre-
hensive theory which owed so much to one principle as quantum mechanics 
owed to Bohr's correspondence principle. 
7.1. Introduction 
-
MAX JAMMER in The Conceptual Development of 
Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hili, New York (1966), p. 118. 
The linear harmonic oscillator problem is one of the most fascinating problems 
in quantum mechanics. It allows us to understand the basic features of a quantum 
system along with its transition to the classical domain. It has applications in many 
problems in physics; e.g. in studying the vibrational spectra of molecules, quantum 
theory of radiation, etc. In this chapter, we will first obtain solutions of the one-
dimensional Schrodinger equation corresponding to the linear harmonic oscillator 
and then discuss the time evolution of the coherent states of the oscillator which 
represent the quantum mechanical analogs of the classical oscillator. 
I N. Bohr, "On the application of the quantum theory to atomic structure," Proceedings of the 
Camhridge Philosophical Society (Supplement), Part I (Cambridge University Press, 1924), p. 42. 
159 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

160 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
7.2. Solution of the time dependent Schrodinger equation 
The one-dimensional time dependent Schrbdinger equation is given by 
where 
a\IJ 
i Ii- = H \IJ (x, t) 
at 
1i2 d 2 
H = -
-
-- + V (x) 
2f.L dx 2 
represents the Hamiltonian and 
Potential energy function 
(I) 
(2) 
(3) 
represents the potential energy of the one-dimensional harmonic oscillator2 ; in 
the above equation f.L represents the mass of the oscillator and w represents the 
classical frequency of the oscillator. Thus Eq. (1) takes the form 
Time dependent Schrodinger equation 
(4) 
which represents the time dependent Schrbdinger equation for the linear harmonic 
oscillator problem. We try to solve the above equation by using the method of 
separation of variables: 
\IJ (x, t) = 1jf (x) T (t) 
Substituting in Eq. (4) and dividing by 1jf (x) T (t) we obtain 
i Ii dT 
1 
[ 
1i 2 
d 2 
1 
2 2J 
T (t) dt = 1jf (x) 
-
2f.L dx2 + 2. f.L w x 
1jf (x) 
2 The restoring force of a linear oscillator is given by 
F = -kx 
(5) 
where k(= fL(2) represents the force constant and x represents the displacement from the equilib-
rium position. The potential energy is the work done to bring it to the position x from the equilibrium 
position x = 0 and is given by 
or 
v (x) = {X Fdx = ~kx2 
io 
2 
122 
V (x) = -fLw x 
2 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
161 
The left-hand side ofthe above equation is a function of t alone and the right-hand 
side is a function of x alone; therefore both sides must be set equal to a constant 
which we represent by E (the total energy of the oscillator3) 
The solution of the equation 
is given by 
iii dT 
----=E 
T (t) dt 
T (t) = (constant) exp [ _ i ~ t] 
Equation (6) also gives us 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
which represents an eigenvalue equation; i.e. (as we will show later) only for some 
specific values of E will we have "well-behaved" solutions of Eq. (9). We rewrite 
Eq. (9) in the form 
(10) 
We may mention that the (time independent) SchrOdinger equation is often written 
in the form 
HljJ (x) = EljJ (x) 
(11) 
where H is the operator corresponding to the Hamiltonian of the system [see Eq. 
(2)] and the eigenvalue E is simply a number. 
In order to solve Eq. (10) we introduce the variable 
3 As mentioned in Chapter 4 
H 
~ = yx 
p2 
-
+ V (x) 
2M 
fj2 a2 
- -
-
+ V (x) 
2M ax2 
represents the operator corresponding to the total energy of the system and is known as the Hamil-
tonian of the system. The eigenvalues 
En [see Eg. (28)] are the allowed values of the total 
energy. 

162 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where the parameter y will be chosen so that Eq. (10) reduces to a convenient form. 
Now 
and 
d1/f 
d1/f 
d~ 
dVI 
dx 
df dx = y df 
d21/f _ 
2 d21/f 
dx2 -
y 
d~2 
Thus, Eq. (10) becomes 
d21/f [2 JL E 
JL2u} ~2 ] 
d~2 + /i2y2 - ~ 
y4 
1/f (~) = 0 
We choose y such that the coefficient of ~2 is unity, thus 
( JLw)i 
y= -n 
Thus, the Schrodinger equation takes the form 
where 
A _ 2JLE _ 2E 
-
n2y2 -
nw 
In order to solve Eq. (13) we make the transformation4 
Thus 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
4 The transformation given by Eg. (15) is suggested from the fact that in the region ~2 » A, the 
function 
indeed satisfies Eg. (13) because 
for large ~. This suggests that it might be possible to find an exact solution of Eg. (13) of the form 
given by Eg. (15). We reject the solution with positive exponent because then the solution would 
diverge as ~ -----+ ±oo. 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
163 
and 
d 2'tjf = [d2U _ 2~ du + (~2 _ I) u (~)] e-~~2 
d~2 
d~2 
d~ 
Substituting in Eq. (13) we get 
Hermite equation 
d 2u 
du 
-
-
2~ -
+ (A -
1) u (~) = 0 
d~2 
dl; 
(16) 
which is known as the Hermite equation. We will solve the above equation by 
assuming a power series solution 
00 
u (~) = L 
Cr e+r 
(17) 
r=0.1.2,. .. 
Substituting in Eq. (16) we get 
00 L 
Cr (s + r) (s + r -
I) ~s+r-2 
r=0,1,2, ... 
00 
-2 L 
Cr (s + r) I;I+r + (A -
1) L Cr e+r = 0 
r=0,1,2, ... 
0,1,2, ... 
or 
00 L 
Cr (s + r) (s + r -
I) ~r 
r=0,1,2, ... 
00 L 
Cr (2s + 2r -
A + 1) ~r+2 = 0 
r=0,1,2,. .. 
or 
cos(s-I)+cl (s+l)s~ 
00 
+ L [cr (s + r) (s + r -
1) -
Cr -2 (2s + 2r - 3 - A) Hr = 0 
r=2,3,. .. 
Since, the above equation has to be valid for all values of ~, the coefficients of 
various powers of ~ must be equal to zero giving 
s (s -
I) = 0 
CI S (s + I) = 0 
(18) 
(19) 

164 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
2s + 2r - 3 -
I\. 
Cr = ------- Cr -2; r > 2 
(s + r) (s + r -
1) 
-
(20) 
Equation (18) is known as the Indicial Equation and we must have 
s = 0 
or I 
The root s = 0 makes c, indeterminate and therefore the root s = 0 would deter-
mine both the independent solutions (see also Problem 7.6). Substituting s = 0 in 
Eq. (20) we get 
which gives 
2r - 3 - I\. 
C 
-
Cr-2, 
r -
r (r -
1) 
r~2 
1- I\. 
2! 
Co, 
(l -
1\.) (5 - 1\.) 
4! 
C5 = 
3-1\. c, 
3! 
(3 - 1\.) (7 - 1\.) 
5! 
(21) 
(22) 
c" 
etc. 
Because C2, C4,'" are related to Co; and C3, C5,'" are related to c" we can split 
the solution in even and odd series. Thus we may write 
or 
u (~) 
u (~) = [co + C2~2 + C4~4 + ... J 
+[Cl~+C3~3+ ... J 
Co [1 + 1 -
I\. e + (l -
1\.) (5 - 1\.) ~4 + ... J 
2! 
4! 
[ 
3 - I\. 
1 
(3 - 1\.) (7 - 1\.) . 5 
J 
+ C] 
~ + --
~- + 
~ + ... 
3! 
5! 
(23) 
Since the values of Co and c, can be arbitrary we have obtained two independent 
solutions of Eq. (16) and therefore the above equation represents the most general 
solution ofEq. (16). It may be readily seen that when 
I\. = 1, 5, 9, ... 
the even series becomes a polynomial and the odd series remains an infinite series. 
Similarly, for 
I\. = 3, 7, 11, ... 
the odd series becomes a polynomial and the even series remains an infinite series. 
Thus when 
I\. = 2n + 1; 
n = 0, I, 2, ... 
one of the solutions becomes a polynomial. Returning to Eq. (21) we have 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
Cr-2 
Thus 
2r - 3 - A 
r (r -
1) 
2 
--+ -
r 
C 
lim _r_ = ° 
r--;.oo Cr -2 
165 
for large r 
(24) 
which shows that both the infinite series in Eq. (23) will converge for all values of 
~. We next consider the expansion of e~2 : 
00 
e~2 = L 
r=0.2.4"" 
implying 
br 
br ~r ; 
G - I)! 
.cl 
2 . 
I 
b --
r -
(~)! 
2 
(25) 
r 
Thus the ratio Cr / Cr -2 (in the limit oflarge r) is the same as that of the coefficients 
of ~r and ~r-2 in the expansion of e~2. Consequently, if the series in Eq. (23) is 
not terminated, u (~) will behave as e~2 for large5 ~; therefore 1/1 (~) will behave as 
e~;;2 [see Eq. (15)]. Thus the boundary condition 
1/1 (~) ---+ ° 
as 
~ ---+ ±oo 
(26) 
will not be satisfied. For the wave function to satisfy the boundary condition given 
by Eq. (26), the infinite series must be terminated to a polynomial and as mentioned 
earlier, this can happen only when A is an odd integer, i.e. when 
A=2n+1 
n = 0,1,2, ... 
(27) 
Substituting in Eq. (14) we get 
Energy eigenvalues 
n = 0, 1,2, ... 
(28) 
which represent the (discrete) energy eigenvalues of the operator H. 
5 This is because of the fact that only for large values of ~ will the large r terms dominate in the 
expansion and only then will the infinite series behave as exp(~2). 

166 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
7.3. The eigenfunctions 
In order to detennine the corresponding eigenfunctions we rewrite Eg. (23): 
U (~) = Co 
1 + -- ~ + 
~ + ... 
[ 
I -
A 
2 
(l - A) (5 - A) 
4 
] 
21 
41 
+Cl 
~ + --
~- + 
~ + ... 
[ 
3 -
A 
1 
(3 - A) (7 - A) 
5 
] 
31 
51 
(29) 
For example, for A = 9 (n = 4), the even series becomes a polynomial and the odd 
series remains an infinite series. We must therefore choose Cl = 0 ; the polynomial 
solution is given by 
u (~) = Co [1 -4e + ~~4] 
Similarly, for A = 7 (n = 3), the odd series becomes a polynomial and the even 
series remains an infinite series. We must therefore choose Co = 0; the polynomial 
solution is given by 
u (0 = Cl [~ - ~~3] 
Now, if the multiplication constant Co or Cl is chosen such that the coefficient of 
the highest power of ~ in the polynomial becomes 2n, then these polynomials are 
known as Hermite polynomials which are denoted by Hn (~). For example, for 
A = 9(n = 4), if we choose 
Co = 12 
the coefficient of ~4 becomes 24 and therefore, 
Similarly, for A = 7 (n = 3), we choose 
Cl = -12 
giving 
Hermite polynomials 
The first few Hennite polynomials are given by 
1; 
HI (~) 
41;2 - 2; 
H3 (~) 
(30) 
Higher order Hermite polynomials can be determined from the following recur-
rence relation 
Hn+1 (0 = 2~ HII (~) - 2n Hn- 1 (~) 
(31 ) 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
167 
Returning to Eg. (IS) we therefore have 
n = 0,1,2, ... 
where Nn represents a multiplicative constant. If we impose the normalization 
condition 
+00 f Io/n (x)1 2 dx = 1 
-00 
we would get (see Appendix E) 
1 
Nn = [2n~fi r 
which is usually referred to as the normalization constant. The normalized eigen-
functions are given by (see also Sec. 7.8): 
n = 0, 1,2, ... 
Normalized eigenfunctions 
The first four normalized eigenfunctions are given by 
1 
0/3 (x) = (48~r~ (8 y 3x3-12yx) exp [_~y2x2] 
and are plotted in Fig. 7.1. The horizontal lines correspond to the eigenvalues 
Eigenvalues 
1 
E = -nw 
2 
' 
3 -nw 
2 
' 
5 -nw 
and 
2 
' 
7 -nw 
2 
(32) 
(33) 
For a given value of E the classically allowed region of the oscillator corre-
sponds to 
Ixl ::s xo 

168 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Normalized Harmonic Oscillator Wave Functions for n = 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 
-4 
4 
6 
Figure 7.1. The harmonic oscillator potential and the first four eigenfunctions. The horizontal 
lines correspond to the eigenvalues ~h(v, ~hw, ~hw and ;hw. The dashed portions of the curves 
correspond to the classically forbidden regions. 
where 
xo = [~]~ 
f.L w2 
(34) 
represents the classical turning point of the oscillator. The corresponding value of 
~ will be given by 
( f.Lw)~ (2E)1 
~ 0 = y Xo = h 
f.L w2 
or 
~ 0 = J (2n + 1) ; 
n = 0,1,2, ... 
(35) 
where we have used Eq. (28). Thus the classically allowed region would be given 
by 
I~ I < J2n + 1; n = 0, 1, 2, ... 
In Fig. 7.1, the dashed portions of the curves correspond to the classically forbidden 
regions and as can be seen, this is consistent with the above equation. 
In Figs 7.2 and 7.3 we have plotted 11/10 (x) 12 and 11/112 (x) 1 2 as a function 
of~. Obviously if the oscillator is in the nIh state, 11/In (x)1 2 dx would represent 
the probability of finding the particle between x and x + dx. The corresponding 
classical distribution function is given by (see Problem 7.3) 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
169 
0·8 
0·6 
0·4 
0·2 
o~~----~~------~--------~------~ 
~ 
2 
Figure 7.2. The dark curve represents the probability distribution function 11/10 (01 2 for the ground 
state of the harmonic oscillator; the corresponding classical distribution as given by Eq. (36) is also 
shown. 
Classical distribution function 
Ixl < xo 
(36) 
Pel (x) dx represents the probability of finding the particle between x and x + dx 
and represents the fractional time that it spends in the interval dx. Although Pel (x) 
blows up at Ix I = xo, 
+xo J 
Pel (x) dx = I 
(37) 
-Xo 
In Figs 7.2 and 7.3 we have shown the probability distributions as predicted by 
the classical and quantum mechanical theories. For large values of n , [1/f n (x) [2 
undergoes very rapid oscillations and the average value is in good agreement with 
the corresponding classical value. Obviously, larger the value of n better will be 
the agreement-this is what is predicted by Bohr's Correspondence Principle. 
The wave functions given by Eq. (32) form an orthonormal set (see Sec. 6.4): 
Orthonormality condition 
+jOO 
* 
{O m::j=n 
1/fm (x) 1/fn (x) dx = omn = 
I m = n 
(38) 
-00 
The eigenfunctions and the eigenvalues form a discrete set and there are no con-
tinuum eigenfunctions. The infinite number of discrete eigenfunctions form 

170 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
0-3 
0-25 
f\ 
1\ 
,1'i'12(n 12 
,/ 
0-2 
0·15 
\ 
r; 
0-1 
~ 
/ 
0·05 ) 
~ 
lJ 
o 
-6 
-4 
-2 
o 
2 
4 
6 
Figure 7.3. The dark curve represents the probability disribution function 11/112 (~) 12 for the n = 12 
state of the harmonic oscillator; the average of this distribution closely resembles the classical 
distribution given by Eq. (36) which has also been shown. 
a complete set in the sense that an arbitrary "well-behaved" square integrable6 
function ¢ (x) (defined in the interval -00 < x < (0) can be expanded in terms 
of1/ln(x): 
00 
¢ (x) = L en 1/1 n (x) 
(39) 
n=O 
In order to determine en, we multiply the above equation by 1/I~, (x) and integrate 
to obtain 
Thus 
+00 
00 L 
en omn 
n=O,1,2, __ 
en = f 1/1~ (x) ¢ (x) dx 
-00 
6 By square integrable we imply 
to be finite 
(40) 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
If we substitute the above expression for Cn in Eg. (39) we would obtain 
Thus (see Sec. 1.5): 
Completeness condition 
00 L o/~ (Xl) 0/ n (x) = 8 (x - Xl) 
n=O 
which represents the completeness condition of the Hermite-Gauss functions. 
7.4. The most general solution of the time dependent Schrodinger 
equation 
Using Egs (5) and (8) we can write the solution of Eg. (4) in the form 
[ 
i E t] 
III (x, t) = 0/ (x) exp --11-
171 
(41) 
Since the allowed values of E are given by Eg. (28) [with the corresponding eigen-
functions given by Eg. (32)], the most general solution of Eg. (4) would be given 
by 
00 
III (x, t) = L 
Cn o/n (x) 
n=0.1,2 .... 
[ 
i Ent ] 
exp --11-
(42) 
or 
00 
III (x,t) = 
(43) 
n=0,1,2, ... 
Determination of III (x, t) 
Thus if we know III (x, 0), i.e. if we know the state of the oscillator at t 
0, 
III (x, t) can be determined as follows: 
(i) Since 
00 
\II (x, 0) = L 
Cn o/n (x) 
n=0,1,2, ... 
we get 
+00 
Cn = f o/~ (x) III (x, 0) dx 
(44) 
-00 

172 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(ii) We substitute the calculated value of en in Eg. (43) and sum the series to ob-
tain7 \lI (x, t). This will describe the time evolution ofthe wave packet. Obviously 
if 
+00 f 1\lI (x, 0)1 2 dx = 1 
(45) 
-(X) 
then 
(46) 
n 
implying (see Problem 7.9) 
+00 f 1\lI (x, t)1 2 dx = 1 
(47) 
-(X) 
The quantity len 12 can be interpreted to represent the probability of finding the 
oscillator in the nth state which does not change with time. As can be seen from 
Eg. (43), the wave functions superpose with different phases at different times. 
As a simple example, let 
\lI (x, 0) = ~ % (x) + if{ 0/2 (x) 
(48) 
Obviously 
+00 J 
1\lI (x, 0)1 2 dx = I 
-oc 
and the time evolution of the wave function would be given by 
\lI (x, t) = ~ % (x) e- i {ut/2 + if{ 0/2 (x) e-5iwt/2 
(49) 
If we make a measurement of energy, there will be rd probability of finding it 
in the ground state (with E = 4 nw ) and rd probability of finding it in the 
second excited state ( with E = 
~ nw). These probabilities do not change with 
time; however, once the measurement is made, the oscillator will jump to one of 
the eigenstates of the system. 
7 IJ! (x, t) will describe the time evolution of the wave packet. The method is quite similar to the 
one we used for a free particle (see Sec. 5.3). 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
173 
For the oscillator described by Eq. (48), the average energy will be given by 
which will never be measured! 
7.5. The coherent state 
In this section we will define the coherent state and in the following section we will 
consider its time evolution. We first define the annihilation operatorS a: 
Annihilation operator 
/-Lwx+ip 
a= 
J2/-Lliw 
(50) 
Replacing p by -i lidjdx we get 
(51) 
We next write the eigenvalue equation for the operator a: 
(52) 
Coherent states 
where ex represents the eigenvalue of the operator a. The eigenfunctions 1/1 a (x) de-
scribe what are known as coherent states. In order to solve the eigenvalue equation 
Eq. (52), we substitute for a from Eq. (51) to obtain 
or 
_1_ d,p" (x) ~ _ iU" x + a )2/"" 
1/1 a (x) 
dx 
Ii 
Ii 
S The properties of creation and annihilation operators a and a are discussed in Chapter 12 while 
solving the harmonic oscillator problem using Dirac's bra and ket algebra. 

174 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Carrying out the integration, we get 
-
-
X 2 +a --x + constant 
I"W 
J2W
V 
2fi 
fi 
I 
2 
- 2" (~ -
~o) + constant 
where 
and 
~o=ha 
Thus 
or 
(53) 
where the constant factor has been chosen such that the wave function is normal-
ized. Obviously, the ground state wave function 1fo(x) is a coherent state corre-
sponding to ~ 0 = 0. 
7.6. Time evolution of a coherent state: relationship with the classical 
oscillator 
Let us assume that at t = 0, the oscillator is in the coherent state, i.e. 
(54) 
We wish to study its time evolution; i.e. if \{I (x, 0) is given by the above equation 
then what is \{I (x, t)? Since for the harmonic oscillator problem 
CX) 
\{I (x, t) = 
(55) 
n=0.1.2 ... 
we have 
00 
\{I (x, 0) 
L 
en 1fn (x) 
(56) 
11=0.1.2 .... 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
175 
Thus [see Eg. (40)] 
+00 
Cn f 1jJ~ (x) W (x, 0) dx 
-00 
(2":~" ) 7 [ 
H" ($) e-l<'] 
-CXl 
(57) 
where the explicit evaluation of the integral has been carried out in Appendix E. 
Substituting for Cn in Eg. (55) we get 
(58) 
Indeed one can obtain an analytical expression for the sum; the final result is (the 
details are given in Appendix E): 
1 
yz 
W (x, t) =-1 
7[4 
[ 
I 
2 
exp 
- 2: (~ -
~ 0 cos wt) 
- i (~ wt + ~ ~ 0 sin wt - ~ ~ 02 sin 2wt) ] 
The probability distribution is therefore given by 
IW (x, t)1 2 = 5rr exp [- (~ -
~o coswt)2] 
Notice that 
+00 f IW (x, t)1 2 dx = 1 
-00 
(59) 
(60) 
(61) 
for all values of t, as it indeed should be. The time evolution of the coherent state 
is described by Eg. (59) 
In Figs 7.4 and 7.5 we have plotted IW (x, t)1 2 as a function of ~ for different 
values of time and as can be seen, the centre of the wave packet executes simple 
harmonic motion like a classical harmonic oscillator. The average energy of the 

176 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
-10 
-5 
o 
5 
10 
-~ 
Figure 7.4. The ~ -dependence of 1 IV (x, t) 12 for ~ 0 = 8 ( (n) = 32) at OJt = 0, rr /2, rr , 
3rr /2, 2rr and Srr /2. Notice that the centre of the wave packet executes simple harmonic motion. 
oscillator is given by 
Average energy 
(E) = [(n) +~] I1w 
Thus a large (average) energy of the oscillator will imply a large value of (n). Later 
in this section we will show that 
(n) = 
n=I,2 .... 
2 
I 
2 
n lenl = 2~O 
Figures 7.4 and 7.5 correspond to 
(n)=32 
(~o=8) 
and 
(n) = 2048 
(~o = 64) 
respectively. Obviously, as we increase the value of (n), the wave packet becomes 
more and more localized. We may mention that for a classical oscillator with fL = 
0.1 g, W = 1 S-l, Xo = I em 
{iiW 
13 
~o = V h 
xo;::::; 10 
so that 
(n) = 5 x 1025 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
177 
~ 
~ 
! 
A 
~ 
-100 
-50 
o 
50 
100 
--------.. 
~ 
Figure 7.5. The ~ -dependence of 1 \lJ (x, t) 12 for ~ 0 = 64 «(n) = 2048) at wt = 0, 7T /2, 7T, 37T /2, 27T 
and 57T /2. Notice that the centre of the wave packet executes simple harmonic motion. 
which is an enormously large number. The particle would then be very localized 
and a classical description would be very accurate. 
Using Eg. (58) one can readily calculate the various expectation values, e.g., 
+00 
(x) f \II*(x,t)x\ll(x,t)dx 
where 
-00 
-00 
-00 
1 
-
~ 0 cos wt = Xo cos wt 
y 
~ 
Xo= -
Yo 
represents the amplitude of the classical oscillator. Other integrals can be similarly 
evaluated, but the evalution is much easier using bra and ket algebra which we will 
discuss in Chapter 12. The final results are given below: 
(x) = Xo cos wt 
(62) 

178 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(p) 
-fJ.,wxo sinwt 
-Po sinwt 
(63) 
where 
Po = fJ.,wXo 
The above equations imply 
d 
(p) = fJ., dt (x) 
(64) 
This is nothing but the manifestation of Ehrenfest's theorem (see Sec. 4.5) accord-
ing to which the expectation values satisfy Newton's laws of motion. 
From Eqs (62) and (63) we find that (x) lags (p) by a phase ~ just as we have 
for a classical oscillator. Furthermore (see Problem 12.6), 
(x 2 ) 
(p2) 
Thus 
giving 
x 2 
I 
cos2wt +-2 
0 
2y 
P02 
y 2n2 
sin2wt +--
2 
1 
~x ~P = 2n 
which represents the minimum uncertainty product9 . Further, 
Thus 
I 
2 
2 
I 
(E) = 2 fJ., w Xo + 2 nw 
(65) 
(66) 
(67) 
(68) 
(69) 
(70) 
9 The values for ~x and ~p remain the same for all values of time and are the same for the 
ground state wave function 1/10 (x). Indeed, the ground state wave function 1/10 (x) is also a coherent 
state corresponding to ex = 0 (i.e. zero eigenvalue). 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
179 
Notice the appearance of the zero point energy ~nw. For a classical oscillator the 
total energy is just ~ f.L w2 X02. 
In order to have a physical understanding of (E) we recall that energy eigen-
states of the harmonic oscillator are given by [see Eq. (28)] 
E = (n +~) nw 
Thus 
(E) = [(n) +~] nw 
(71 ) 
Comparing the above equation with Eq. (70) we get 
1 
2 
2 
1 
2 
(n) = 2 y Xo = 2 ~ 0 
(72) 
Now 
00 
IJ1 (x, t) = 
n=0,1,2, ... 
Thus, the quantity 
Pn 
lell e ~++~){VT 
len 12 = :! (~~()2r e~!~o2 
(73) 
represents the probability of finding the oscillator in the nth state IO , This implies 
that if the oscillator is in a coherent state and if we make a measurement of energy 
then len 12 would represent the probability of obtaining the value (n + ~) nw. The 
average value of n is given by 
00 
(n) = L 
n Icn l2 
11=0,1,2, ... 
It 2 (1 2) 
I Ie 2 
e~2'O 
2~0 
e 2'O 
I 
2 
1 2 
2 
2~() = 2Y Xo 
__ (-21 ~02)n~1 
(n -
I)! 
10 It may be seen that the probability of finding the oscillator in the nth state does not change with 
time. At different times, the states superpose with different phases which results in the time variation 
of the probability distribution Ill! (x, t) 12. 

180 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
consistent with Eq. (72). Similarly 
00 
(n 2 ) = L 
n2 len 12 
n=0.1,2 .... 
I 
(1 
)n-I 
(n - 1+1) 
-
~022 
(n-I)! 
2 
1 
2 
1 
2 
( 
)
2 
2 ~o 
+ 2~0 
Thus 
[ 2 
2] 1 
I 
!I::\ 
6.n = (n) -
(n) 
= -J2~o = V (n) 
We summarize the above results: 
6.n 
6.n 
(n) 
1 
2 
I 
2 
2 
2~0 = 2Y xo 
(n)2 + (n) 
1 
[(n2 ) -
(n)2p = J0) 
1 
~ 
(74) 
(75) 
(76) 
(77) 
the last equation implying that the fractional uncertainty in n decreases as (n) 
increases. The probability of finding the oscillator in the nth state is therefore given 
by 
(n \n 
P _ 1 12 -
-<n> _I 
11 -
Cn 
-
e 
n! 
(78) 
which is known as a Poisson distribution. In terms of (n), we express the various 
expectation values 
Expectation values in terms of (n) 
1 
(x) = xo cos wt = -.J20) cos wt 
(79) 
Y 
(p) 
fotW .J20) 
d 
--
2(n) sinwt = fot-(x) 
Y 
dt 
(80) 
(x 2 ) 
~ [2(n) cos2 wt + ~ ] 
Y-
2 
(81 ) 
(p2) 
/L2W2 [ 
1 ] 
~ 
2(n) sin2 wt + 2 
(82) 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
(E) 
-
(p2) + -fJ,U} (X2) = 
(n) + -
nw 
1 
1 
[I] 
2fJ, 
2 
2 
.6. x 
J(x2) -
(x)2 
I 
Xo 
Xo 
.j(ii) 
.6.p 
J(p2) - (p)2 
I 
Po 
Po 
.j(ii) 
(E2) 
[(n2) + (n) +~] n2w2 
.6.E 
1 
[(E2) -
(E)2)2 
.6.n 
.j(ii) 
-
(E) 
(E) 
(n) + ~ 
(n) + ~ 
In Figs 7.6, 7.7 and 7.8 we have plotted icnl 2 as a function of n for 
and 
(n) = 10 (.6.n::::::: 3.1, .6.n ::::::: 0.31); 
(n) 
(n) = 100 (.6.n = 10, .6.n = 0.1) 
(n) 
(n) = 106 (.6.n = 103, .6.n = 0.001) 
(n) 
181 
(83) 
(84) 
(85) 
(86) 
(87) 
(88) 
(89) 
(90) 
We find that as the value of (n) increases the value of .6.n also increases implying 
that a large number of states get excited; however, the value of .6..n / (n) (and hence 
of .6. E / (E)) decreases implying that the fractional spread in energy becomes very 
small. 
Relation with a classical oscillator 
In order to relate the above analysis to a classical oscillator, we consider a small 
mass (fJ, ~ 0.002 g) executing simple harmonic motion with w = I S-I (implying 
a time period of 2rr seconds). If the amplitude of motion (= xo) is 1 cm then 
(x) 
(p) 
cost 
-0.002 sint 
(91) 
(92) 

182 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
012 
\ 
01 
0·08 
len 12 
0·06 
0·04 
1\ 
0-02 A 
0 
0 
5 
n 
Figure 7.6. The variation of len 12 with 11 for (n) = 10. Notice that although only about 20 states are 
excited, L'lx, !=E have an appreciable value ("'-' 0.316). 
xo 
PO 
0·05 
0-04 
0·03 
I en 12 
0·02 
0-01 
0 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
n 
Figure 7.7. The variation of len 12 with 11 for (n) = 100. 
where (x), t and (p) are measured in cm, sand g cm/s respectively. Further 
implying 
and 
I'1E 
(E) 
M 
~ 10-12 
(n) + ~ 
(93) 
(94) 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
183 
Thus although a very large number of states (~ 1012) get excited, the fractional 
spread in energy is extremely small and a classical description should be very 
accurate. Also 
f"...p = f"...x = _1_ ~ 10-12 
Po 
Xo 
M 
(95) 
Bohr's correspondence principle 
implying that both position and momentum can be determined with tremendous 
precision. This is the domain of classical physics and is a consequence of Bohr's 
correspondence principle according to which the results from quantum the-
ory must go over to results from classical mechanics when very large number of 
quanta are involved. 
<n> = 1000000 
0·0005 
0·0004 
0·0003 
1 Cn 12 
0·0002 
0·0001 
0 
998000 
1000000 
1002000 
1004000 
n 
Figure 7.B. The variation of len 12 with n for (n) = 106. Although a very large number of states are 
excited (,,=:: 106), the values of ""x, ""P and ""EE, are extremely small. 
xo 
Po 
0 
On the other hand, if the mass of the particle is so small that 
then 
(n) = 10 
f"...E 
-
~ 0.301 
Eo 
f"...p 
f"...x 
-
= -
::::::0.316 
Po 
Xo 
and a quantum mechanical description would be necessary. 
We may mention here that when a laser is operated much beyond the threshold, 
it generates a coherent state excitation of the cavity mode. Thus, for such a beam if 

184 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
one carries out a photon counting experiment one should find that the probability 
of measuring n quanta in a certain interval oftime is given by [see Eq. (73)] 
PI1 = e-(I1) (n)" 
n! 
(96) 
where (n) represents the average number of counts measured in that time interval. 
Equation (96) is known as the Poisson distribution and is indeed verified through 
experiments (see, e.g. Ref. I and 2). 
7.7. The propagator 
The general solution of the time dependent Schr6dinger equation for the linear 
harmonic oscillator problem is given by [see Eq. (42)]: 
00 
. 
,I, () -i(n+1),vI 
el1 
'I-' II 
X 
e 
(97) 
W(x,t)= 
n=0.1.2 .... 
Thus 
00 
W (x, 0) = L 
e" Vr 11 (x) 
(98) 
11=0,1,2 ... 
from which we obtain 
+00 
CI1 = J 
ljf~ (x') W (x', 0) dx' 
(99) 
-00 
where we have put a prime on x so that the integration variable does not get 
confused with x in Eq. (97). We substitute for en from Eq. (99) in Eq. (97) to 
obtain 
(100) 
Thus we may write 
+00 
W (x, t) = J K (x, x', t) W (x', 0) dx' 
(101 ) 
-00 
where 
00 
K(X,x',t)= 
(02) 
11=0,1,2 .... 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
185 
represents the propagator. The above equation may be compared with the results 
obtained in Sec. 5.4. If we substitute for 0/ n (x) from Eq. (32) then it is possible to 
sum the infinite series (see, e.g., Chapter 6 of Ref. 3); the final result is 
K (x,x',t) = 
Y 
I 
exp [-
. ~2 
{(X2+XI2) 
(2rr i sin wt) '2 
2l SIll wt 
x cos wt - 2 x x'} ] 
(103) 
Thus for the linear harmonic oscillator problem, the time evolution of an arbitrary 
wave packet can easily be carried out by substituting for \II (x, 0) in Eq. (10 1) and 
carrying out the integration. Indeed, if we substitute Eq. (54) for \II (x, 0) and carry 
out the integration in Eq. (10 I) we would get Eq. (59). 
7.8. Solutions in terms of the confluent hypergeometric function 
The equation 
d 2y 
dy 
x- + (c - x)- - ay(x) = 0 
dx 2 
dx 
(104) 
is known as the confluent hypergeometric equation. For c "I- 0, ± I, ±2, ... the 
general solution ofEq. (104) is given by [see Appendix F] 
y(x) = C l IF,(a, c,x) + C2Xl-c ,F,(a - c + 1,2 - c,x) 
(lOS) 
where 
ax 
a(a+l)x2 
1 F, (a, c, x) = 1 + - - + 
- + ... 
c l! 
(c + c,) 2! 
(106) 
is known as the confluent hypergeometric function. Obviously, for a = c 
x 2 
1 Fl (a, a, x) = 1 + x + 2T + ... = eX 
Thus although the series is convergent for all values of x, it blows up at infinity. 
Indeed the asymptotic form of ,Fl (a, c, x) is given by 
,F, (a, c, x) ---+ xu-cex 
X-HXl 
(107) 
We go back to the Schrodinger equation for the harmonic oscillator problem and 
rewrite Eq. (16) 
d 2u 
du 
-
-
2~- + (1\ -
l)u(~) = 0 
d~2 
d~ 
(108) 
We define 
'f] = ~2 

186 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Thus 
du 
du 
-
= -2~and 
d~ 
dl] 
and Eq. (18) becomes 
d2u 
(1 
) du A - I 
-
+ - - I] 
-
+ --u(l]) = 0 
dl]2 
2 
dl] 
4 
which is the confluent hypergeometric equation with 
1 
c=-2 
Thus for any given value of A 
and 
A - I 
and 
a = ---
4 
(109) 
(110) 
(111) 
(112) 
will represent the two independent solutions of the Schrodinger equation [Eq. (13)]. 
Now, as mentioned earlier, if the infinite series given by Eq. (106) is not made into a 
polynomial, it will diverge as xu-cex and therefore 0/ 1 (~) and 0/2 (~) will behave l ! 
as exp(1/2~2) for ~ -+ ±oo. The even solution becomes a polynomial for 
A = 1,5,9, ... 
and the odd solution becomes a polynomial for 
A = 3,7,11, ... 
The results are the same as derived in Sec. 7.2. Indeed 
(_\ )n-2!.'l F (_!!. .!. ". 2) 
~'I! 
2'2'" 
( _I)(n-I)/2_n'_2" F (_!!..=..!. ;). ,,2) 
e'll)!"! 1 
2 '2''> 
for n = 0, 2, 4, ... 
for n = 1,3,5, ... 
(1\3) 
II We may mention here that we can always choose appropriate linear combinations of 1/J I (~) 
and 1/J2(~) so that they decay as ~ ---+ +00 or as ~ ---+ -00. In fact such linear combinations are 
the Dv functions (see Solution 17.6); however, we cannot have a linear combination which will 
decay as ~ ---+ +00 as well as for ~ ---+ -00, unless of course, A is one of the eigenvalues, This is 
somewhat similar to the functions cosh x and sinh x which diverge as x ---+ ±oo: however, the linear 
combination cosh x + sinh x decays as x ---+ -00 but diverges as x ---+ +00. 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
187 
The solutions expressed by Eq. (113) are very convenient to use for a bounded 
parabolic potential (Problem 7.15), double oscillator (Problem 17.6), etc. 
7.9. Problems 
Problem 7.1 Show that the energy eigenvalues of the one-dimensional SchrOdin-
ger equation can never be less than the absolute minimum of V (x). 
Problem 7.2 For a wave packet [see Eq. (51) of Chapter 4] 
+00 
(p) = f \Ii * (x, t) (-iliaax ) \Ii (x, t) dx 
-00 
Use Eq. (59) for \Ii (x, t) to derive Eq. (63). 
Problem 7.3 (a) Derive Eq. (36) for the probability distribution function for a 
classical oscillator. (b) Using the asymptotic form of the Hermite polynomials 
for large values of n, show that the quantum mechanical probability distribution 
function agrees with the corresponding classical result. (This is a consequence of 
the Bohr's correspondence principle.) 
Problem 7.4 For the harmonic oscillator in its ground state, show that the proba-
bility of finding it beyond the classical turning points is approximately 0.16. 
Problem 7.S (a) Substitute the function 
1jf (x) = A e-hx2 
in Eq. (10) to show that it indeed satisfies the equation only if 
and 
(b) Substitute the function 
I 
E = -liw 
2 
If.1w 
b=--
2 Ii 
1jf (x) = A e-cx4 
in Eq. (10) and show that it can never satisfy the equation. 
Problem 7.6 (a) The ground state wave function 

188 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
is one of the solutions of Eq. (13) for A = I. Obtain the other solution in the form 
of an integral and show that it would behave as exp [~~2] for large values of x. 
[Hint: Write 0/ (x) = 0/0 (x) ¢ (x) and obtain the differential equation satisfied 
by¢(x)] 
(b) Repeat the above analysis for 0/) (~) and 0/ 2 (~). 
Problem 7.7 A harmonic oscillator is in a state described by the wave function 
W (x, 0) = ~ % (x) + ~ 0/) (x) + ~ eiH / 3 0/2 (x) 
2 
y2 
y2 
where 0/ n (x) are the normalized Hermite-Gauss wave functions [see Eq. (32)]. 
(a) Is the wave function nonnalized ? 
(b) What is W (x, t)? 
Problem 7.8 (a) Assume 
w (x, 0) = 0/ IX (x) 
with (n) = 400. Evaluate 
~x 
~P 
~E 
Xo 
Po 
Eo 
and Pn 
(b) Repeat the analysis for (n) = 108 and physically interpret the results. 
Problem 7.9 Assuming the normalization condition given by Eq. (45), derive 
Eqs. (46) and (47). 
Problem 7.10 Assuming W (x, 0) to be given by Eq. (54), use Eq. (101) to derive 
Eq. (59). 
Problem 7.11 Using Eqs (32) and (51) show that 
In general 
a% (x) 
ao/) (x) 
a0/2 (x) 
ao/ n (x) = v'n 0/ n-) (x) 
(114) 
Problem 7.12 Equations (50) and (51) define the operator a. The adjoint of this 
operator is defined by the equation 
or 
I 
a = ~ 
(fLWX - i p) 
y 2fL fiw 
(115) 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
Show that 
and 
189 
( 116) 
(117) 
(118) 
Problem 7.13 In this and the following problem replace f.L by m in the definitions 
of a and a. 
Solve the eigenvalue equation 
to obtain 
1 
[ 
2] 
1 
2 
(x - xo) 
1/! f3 (x) = (r;;: ) exp -
2 
ylrao 
20'0 
(119) 
where 
(120) 
and 
1 .j2 f3 
Xo= ---
Yf.L+ v 
(121) 
Obviously we must choose f.L > v; for f.L = I and v = 0 we get the coherent states. 
1/! f3 (x) describes what is known as a squeezed state. 
Problem 7.14 (a) Assuming \If (x, 0) to be 1/! f3 (x) as given in the previous prob-
lem, show by using Eq. (101) that 
1 
[ 
(X-xocoswt)2] 
1 \If (x, t)1 2 = fi 
exp -
2 
lra(t) 
a (t) 
(122) 
where 
1 
1 
a (t) = .j2 
[(y 0'0)4 + 1 + {(y 0'0)4 -l} cos 2wt P 
(123) 
2y2ao 
Discuss the time evolution of a (t). 
(b) Show that 
and 
Xo cos wt 
1 
(x)2 + "20'2 (t) 
(124) 
( 125) 
(126) 

190 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Problem 7.15 Bounded Harmonic Potential 12 
1. Consider the bounded linear harmonic potential given by 
I 
~fLW2X2 
V(x) = 
2 
00 
Ixl < i/2 
(127) 
Ixl > t/2 
where x = ±1/2 represent the two boundaries of the potential. Show that the 
eigenvalues A are obtained by solving the following transcendental equations 
I FI (I ~ A, ~'~6) = 0 for even solutions 
I FI (3 ~ A , ~, ~6) = 0 for odd solutions 
where ~o = yl/2. 
(128) 
2. For ~6 = 0.5 and 2, solve the above equations numerically to obtain the first 
few eigenvalues A. 
[Ans: The eigenvalues are (5.00, 19.88,44.57,79.12, ... ) and (1.49, 5.49, 1l.73, 
20.38, ... ) for ~6 = 0.5 and 2.0 respectively, one could have guessed the eigenvalue 
5.0 directly-how?]. 
Problem 7.16 Consider the bounded linear harmonic potential given by 
x=O 
(129) 
x>O 
Show that the eigenvalues are 
A = 3,7, II, ... 
What are the corresponding eigenfunctions? 
7.10. Solutions 
Solution 7.1 We write the Schrodinger equation in the form 
12 One of the very early works on the bounded harmonic oscillator was by D.S. Kothari and 
Ee. Auluck, Science and Culture, 6, pp 370-1, 1940. 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
191 
2m 
112 
[V (x) - E] 1/1 (x) 
If V (x) > E for all values of x then everywhere 1/1" (x) has the same sign as 
1/1 (x) . We assume 1/1 to be positive at some value of x; then 1/1" (x) will also be 
positive. Hence if 1/1' is positive, then 1/1 -+ 00 as x -+ 00 and if 1/1' is negative, 1/1 
will tend to 00 as x -+ -00. In either case, 1/1 (x) will blow up either at +00 or at 
-00. We can have a similar argument if we assume 1/1 to be negative at some value 
of x. 
Solution 7.3 For the classical oscillator we may assume 
x = Xo sin wt 
where Xo represents the amplitude of motion. For 0 < t < T /2, the velocity is 
everywhere positive and we may write 
If P (x) dx represents the probability of finding the particle between x and x + dx, 
then 
Thus 
P (x) dx = Fractional time spent 
between x and x + dx 
dx/v 
T /2 
1 
P (x) dx = 
dx 
Jf JX02 - x 2 
According to quantum theory (see Eq. (32)) 
(130) 
P(x) = 11/In(x)1 2 = 
Y.fii exp(-~2) H/(O 
(13\) 
2n n! 
Jf 
For large values of n, the asymptotic expression is given by (see, ego Reference 4) 
Hn (~) "" 
-_. -
en/32 cos 
2n + -
f3 - -
2(n+2)/2 /if' 
[( 
1) 
nn] 
J2 cos f3 
J2nJf 
2 
2 
(132) 
where f3 is the smallest positive angle whose sine is (~/ J2rl). For large values of 
n, we may take the average value of the cos2 term as ~. Further, 
J2n + 1 
J2rl 
Y 
Y 

192 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Thus 
Elementary algebra gives 
Solution 7.4 The required probability is 
00 
2 f IWo(x)1 2 dx 
Xo 
::::: 0.16 
Solution 7.6 1/1 n (~) [as given by Eq. (32)] is one of the solutions of the equation 
d2 1/1 
-2 + [(2n + I) - e] 1/1 (~) = 0 
d~ 
(133) 
In order to obtain the other solution, we write 
Thus 
1/1/1 (~) = 1/1~ (~) cp (~) + 21/1~ (~) cp' (~) + 1/1 n (~) cp/l (~) 
Substituting in Eq. (133) we get 
[d;~n + [(2n + 1) -
~2] 1/In (~)] cp (~) 
+ 21/1~ (~) cp' (~) + 1/In (~) cp" (~) = 0 
(134) 
Since 1/1 n (~) is a solution of Eq. (133) the first term in the LHS vanishes and we 
obtain 
or 
2 1/1~ (~) + cp/l (~) = 0 
1/1 n (~) 
cp' (~) 
d 
-
[2 In 1/In (~) + Incp' (~)] = 0 
d~ 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
193 
or 
Thus 
For n = 0, we therefore have 
or 
~ 
¢ (~) = C 1 f e~2 d~ + C2 
Thus 
which represents the general solution of Eq. (133). The last term is nothing but 
1/10 (~) . Since the integral behaves as exp (~2), the first term would behave as e~~2. 
Indeed 
The quantity within the brackets is the term proportional to C1 in Eq. (29)-as it 
indeed should be. 
Solution 7.14 From Eq. (123) we may note the following 
(a) If 
1 
Y 0"0 = 1 :::} 0"0 = -
Y 
i.e. if the initial width is the same as the ground state width, then 
2 
2 
I 
0" (t) = 0" 0 = -
Y 
(independent of time) 
Thus the width does not change and we have the coherent state. 
(b) In Fig. 7.9 we have plotted the time evolution ofthe wave packet for a squeezed 
state corresponding to YO"o = 1.5 with ~o = 5; the corresponding variation of ~x 
with time is shown in Fig. 7.10. As can be seen, we find that the width of the wave 

194 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
~---------------1~/2 
~t-----~ 
~~----------------~~ 
~---------------13~/2 
~ 
____ ~ 
____ ~ 
____ ~~ 
__ ~~ 
__ ~ 
__ ~2n 
-15 
-10 
-5 
0 
10 
15 
--+ ~ 
Figure 7.9. The variation of I III (x, t)12 at wt 
(y (To = 1.5; ~o = 5). 
0, rr /2 , rr, 3rr /2 ,2rr for a squeezed state 
packet decreases below the ground state width; this is known as "squeezing" which 
has important applications. 
(x) 
and 
Thus 
+oc 
+00 
J xIW(x)12 dx= 
I J 
xe-(x-xocoswt)2j(J2(t) dx 
~ 
(J (t) 
-oc 
-00 
Xo cos wt 
-00 
1 
~x = .j2 (J (t) 
showing that ~x oscillates with time (see Fig. 7.10) with its value becoming 
smaller than the ground state value. 
7.11. Sample questions 
Q. I 
a) Write the Hamiltonian H for the linear harmonic oscillator problem. 

Harmonic Oscillator: I 
195 
0·9 
0·8 
!>.x 
0·7 
0·6 
0·5 
0-4 
0 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
----7 rot 
Figure 7.10. The variation of ~x with wt for a squeezed state (yaO = 1.5; ~o = 5). The horizontal 
line corresponds to the ground state. 
b) For what value of g, would the function xe-gx2 be an eigenfunction of 
H? What is the corresponding eigenvalue? 
c) For what values of a and f3 would the function (l + ax 2 ) e-fJx2 be an 
eigenfunction of H? What is the corresponding eigenvalue? 
Q. 2 In the linear harmonic oscillator problem we assume 
(135) 
and obtain 
Cr = 
2s + 2r - 3 -
A 
Cr-2 
(s + r)(s + r -
1) 
r::::2 
where A = 2E / nw. We use s = 0 as the root of the indicial equation. 
a) Why should the infinite series in Eq. (135) be made into a polynomial? 
b) For what values of A will the infinite series become a polynomial? 
c) Determine the normalized eigenfunction for the first excited state. 
a) Consider the operator 
f..lwx + ip 
a = ----,===_ 
J2f..lnw 
where symbols have their usual meaning. Replace p by the corre-
sponding differential operator and obtain the eigenfunctions and eigen-
values of the operator a. Normalize the eigenfunction. 

196 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
b) Discuss the solution of the eigenvalue equation for a. 
7.12. References and suggested reading 
1. F.T. Arechi, Quantum Optics and Photon Statistics, in Lasers and Their Ap-
plications, A. Sona (ed.), Gorden and Breach, New York, p. 497. 
2. R. Loudon, The Quantum Theory of Light, Clarendon Press, Oxford 
(1973). 
3. A.K. Ghatak, I.e. Goyal and SJ. Chua, Mathematical Physics, Macmillan 
India Limited, New Delhi (1995). 
4. J.L. Powell and B. Craseman, Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley 
(1961). 

Chapter 8 
One-Dimensional Barrier Transmission Problems 
It is possible in quantum mechanics to sneak quickly across a region which is 
illegal energetically. 
-
RICHARD FEYNMAN I 
8.1. Introduction 
In the previous two chapters we considered the bound states corresponding to 
one-dimensional potentials. For example, we showed that for a particle in a one-
dimensional potential well of finite depth (see Sec. 6.6.2 and Fig. 6.3) there exist 
a number of discrete states (for E < Vo), the corresponding wave functions van-
ishing at large distances from the origin. In this chapter we will consider solutions 
for E > Vo and will show that the corresponding wave functions in the region 
Ix I > a /2 do not vanish at large distances from the origin and E can have any 
arbitrary value (greater than Vo). Thus, for such a potential well there exists a finite 
number of bound states (with E < Vo) and a continuum of states for which E > Vo. 
A good example is the neutron-proton problem. For E < 0 we have the deuteron 
nucleus (see Example 10.6) and for E > 0 we have the neutron-proton scattering 
problem (see, e.g. Sec. 24.5.3). 
It may be mentioned that there are situations where the continuous spectrum 
does not exist at all; e.g. for the infinitely deep potential well (see Sec. 6.6.1), 
the linear harmonic oscillator (see Sec. 7.3), etc. On the other hand, there may 
be situations where the discrete spectrum may not exist at all and one may have 
only the continuous spectrum; examples of such a situation are the potential step 
and the rectangular potential barrier discussed in Secs 8.2 and 8.3, the free particle 
discussed in Sec. 5.2, etc. Further, there may be a continuum along with an infinite 
number of discrete states as in the hydrogen atom problem. 
I The author found this quotation in The Quantum Universe by T. Hey and P. Walters, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge (1987). 
197 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

198 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The solutions corresponding to the continuous spectrum are of great importance 
in connection with the scattering of a particle by a potential field. For example, in 
Secs. 8.2 and 8.3 we will consider the incidence of a particle (of specified energy) 
on a potential step and on a rectangular potential barrier respectively and in each 
case we will calculate the reflection and transmission coefficients2. Such barrier 
transmission problems have many practical applications, e.g. in Esaki tunnelling 
(see Problems 8.8 and 17.11), field emission (see Problem 17.9), a-decay (see 
Sec. 17.7), etc. However, unfortunately for most practical cases the exact solu-
tion is very difficult and one usually resorts to approximate techniques; one such 
technique is the JWKB approximation which will be discussed in Chapter 17 along 
with some practical applications. 
8.2. The potential step 
We first consider a potential step (see Fig. 8.1) for which 
"--+Ae i kx 
~ 
Be -ikx 
V=o 
v (x) = 0 
for x < 0 
= Vo for x> 0 
v (x) 
v = Vo 
Vor-----------------~ 
--------------------~-------------------- x 
o 
Figure 8.1. The reflection of a wave by a potential step at x = O. 
(1) 
We consider the incidence of a particle (of energy E ) from the left of the barrier. 
Classically, if E > Vo, the particle penetrates the barrier and keeps on moving 
2 In the corresponding three-dimensional situation, the scattering occurs into a solid angle dQ; 
see Chapter 19 of Ref. I. 

Barrier Transmission 
199 
(with reduced kinetic energy) in the positive x-direction; on the other hand, if 
E < Vo the particle is reflected back at x = 0 because the particle does not have 
sufficient energy to be in the region x > O. Quantum mechanically, we will show 
that for E > Vo, the particle may undergo reflection and for E < Vo, although the 
reflection coefficient is unity, the wave function is non-zero in the region x > 0 
implying that there is a finite probability of finding the particle in the region x > O. 
E> Vo 
We will first discuss the case E > Vo. The Schrodinger equation is 
and 
where 
The solutions are 
k __ [272E] 1/2 
[2 
] 
1/2 
ft 
and kJ = n7 (E -
Va) 
1/1 (x) = A eikx + B e-ikx 
for x < 0 
C eik1x + D e-ik1X for x > 0 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
If we 
multiply 
the 
wave 
functions 
by 
the 
time 
dependent 
factor 
exp (-i Et / Ii), we can interpret the terms A eikx and C eik1X as waves propagating 
in the +x direction and the terms B e-ikx and B e-ik1x as waves propagating in the 
- x direction. Since we are considering the incidence of a particle from the left of 
the barrier at x = 0, there cannot be a wave propagating in the -x direction in the 
region x > 0 and hence we must put D = O. Continuity of 1/1 and d1/l / dx at x = 0 
gives us 
and 
from which we readily obtain 
A+B=C 
k -k1 
B=--A 
k +kl 
2k 
C=--A 
k +k1 
(5) 
(6) 

200 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Now, the current density is given by [see Eq. (36) of Chapter 5] 
J = Re 
1/1 ' -. -
x 
[ 
* 11 01/1] 
A 
lm OX 
(7) 
If ii, i,. and it represent the magnitude of the current densities associated with the 
incident wave (corresponding to A eikx ), reflected wave (corresponding to B e-ikx ) 
and the transmitted wave (corresponding to C eiklX ) respectively then use ofEq. (7) 
would readily give 
11k 
2 
ii=-IAI 
(8) 
m 
11k 
2 
i,. = -IBI 
(9) 
m 
and 
11k 
it = _1 ICI2 
(10) 
m 
Reflection and transmission coefficients 
Thus the reflection and transmission coefficients are given by 
(II) 
and 
it 
k\ ICI 2 
4kk, 
T -
-
- -- -
------::-
-
ii -
klAI2 -
(k+kd 2 
(12) 
It is easy to see that R + T = 1 as it indeed should be. 
E < Vo 
For E < Va, the analysis remains similar except that k, has to be replaced by i K: 
[ 2m 
] 1/2 
k 1 --+ i K = i f12 (Vo - E) 
(13) 
In the region x > 0 we now have solutions C e-KX and D eKX ; the latter we have to 
reject because it increases indefinitely with x. Continuity of 1/1 and d1/l /dx leads 
to: 
where 
k - iK 
' 
B = -- A = e-2/{x A 
k + iK 
K 
tan a = -
k 
(14) 
(15) 
Equation (14) tells us that there is a phase change on reflection but the amplitude 
of the reflected wave is the same as that of the incident wave. In the region x > 0, 
since the wave function is now real, the transmitted current vanishes and one has 
R = 1 and T = 0 
(16) 

Barrier Transmission 
201 
It may be noted that although the transmission coefficient vanishes, the wave func-
tion is not zero in the region x > 0, i.e. there is a finite probability of finding 
the particle in the classically-forbidden region. However, in order to observe the 
particle in the region x > 0, L'lx ~ 11K (see Problem 8.7) and therefore the 
uncertainty in the momentum should be given by 
Ii 
L'lp > -
~ IiK ~ J2m (VO - E) 
~ L'lx 
(17) 
The uncertainty in the kinetic energy will be ~ (~~2 ~ (Vo - E) which should be 
sufficient to raise it to the classically-allowed region. Thus, if we try to observe the 
particle in the region x > 0, we necessarily impart so much of kinetic energy to it 
that the total energy is greater than Vo. 
In order to get a better physical insight, we should consider the reflection (and 
transmission) of a wave packet. This is discussed in Sec. 8.4 (see also Problem 8.6). 
8.3. The rectangular potential barrier 
We next consider a potential barrier of the type shown in Fig. 8.2. Classically, for 
-----t Ae i k x 
<;--Be -ikx 
v (x) 
Vo~------------~ 
-----tFe ikx 
x 
o 
a 
Figure 8.2. The reflection and transmission of a wave by a rectangular potential barrier. 
a particle of energy E incident on the barrier, if E < Vo the particle gets reflected 
by the barrier and if E > Vo, the particle gets transmitted through the barrier. We 
will see that according to quantum mechanics, even for E < Vo there is a finite 
probability of the particle tunnelling through the barrier. This is entirely a quantum 

202 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
mechanical effect and field emission of electrons (see Problem 17.9), emission 
of a-particles from the nucleus (see Sec. 17.7) are examples of this tunnelling 
phenomenon. Further, for E > Va, there may be a finite probability for reflection. 
E < Va 
We first consider E < Va. For such a case the solutions of the Schr6dinger equation 
in the three regions are given by: 
1/1 = A eikx + B e-ikx 
x < 0 
C eKX + D e-KX 
0 < x < a 
(18) 
F eikx + G e-ikx 
x > a 
where 
(2mE)1/2 
(2m (Va _ E»)1/2 
k = --
and 
K = 
h2 
h2 
(19) 
As in Sec. 8.2 we set G = 0 because there cannot be a wave propagating in the -x 
direction in the region x > a. Continuity of 1/1 and d 1/1 / dx at x = 0 and at x = a 
gIves us 
Thus 
and 
A+B 
ik (A - B) 
K 
C+D 
C-D 
I ( 
ik) 
1 ( 
ik) 
C=2 1+~ A+2 l-~ B 
1 (ik) 
1 ( 
ik) 
D=2 l-~ A+2 l+~ B 
Continuity conditions at x = a give us 
and 
Thus 
and 
C 
D 
ik 
·k 
C eKa -
D e-Ka = _ Fe' a 
K 
C 
-} (1 + i:) F e-Ka eika 
D -} (1 - i:) F eKa eika 
--'-( 1_+_'.:.:,.:_) e - 2Ka = 
(1 - !f-) 
(1 + !f-) A + (1 - !lj-) B 
(I - !f-) A + (1 +!f-) B 
(20) 
(21) 
(22) 
(23) 

Barrier Transmission 
203 
where in the last step we have used Eqs. (20) and (21). Simple manipulations give 
us 
We also have 
B 
A 
F 
A 
2ikK e-ika 
(kl - K2) sinhKa + 2ikK cosh Ka 
Reflection and transmission coefficients 
(24) 
(25) 
The above equations will lead to the following expressions for the reflection and 
transmission coefficients: 
(26) 
(27) 
where 
E 
E=-
Vo 
(28) 
and 
(29) 
is a dimensionless variable characterising the potential. In writing Eqs. (26) and 
(27) we have used the fact that 
Ka = a,JT-=E 
Notice that 
Further for K a » I 
(30) 
E> Vo 
For E > Vo, the analysis is very similar, excepting that, in the region 0 < x < a, 
instead of the solutions e±Kx we will have solutions e±ik1x where 
_ [2m (E - VO)]1/2 
kl -
/i 2 
Thus we have to replace K by ik J , everywhere. The final results are 
[ 
4E (E _ 1) 
] - 1 
R = 
I + -.,..--~-==-
sin2 (a vE=l) 
(31) 
(32) 

204 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
T = [1 + _sin_2 -'-( a_V_E _----'...1 ) ] -I 
4E(E-1) 
(33) 
Once again R + T = 1. In writing Eqs (32) and (33) we have used the fact that 
kla=a~ 
In Fig. 8.3 we have plotted variations of the reflection and transmission coef-
............ _ .......... .. 
0·5 
3 
4 
---+£(=E1Vo) 
Figure 8.3. The solid and dotted curves correspond respectively to the variation of the reflection 
and transmission coefficients with E = (E / Vo) for a rectangular potential barrier (see Fig. 8.2) with 
IX = 10.0. 
ficients with E (= E / Vo) for a = 10.0. It may be noticed that the transmission 
coefficient is unity for 
(34) 
or 
a= ~I. 2(~1), 3(~1), ... 
(35) 
where Al = 2rr / k 1. Thus whenever the barrier width is a multiple of AI /2, perfect 
transmission occurs; this is similar to the interference pattern observed in a Fabry-
Perot etalon. This is also observed for a potential well as discussed in Problem 8.1. 
8.4. The reflection and transmission of a wave packet 
In the analysis discussed in Secs 8.2 and 8.3 we obtained expressions for reflection 
and transmission coefficients by considering the time independent solutions of the 

Barrier Transmission 
205 
SchrMinger equation. However, in order to get a better physical insight we con-
sider the incidence of a wave packet on a potential barrier. For the sake of simplicity 
we consider the reflection of a wave packet by a potential step, similar analysis can 
be carried out for other potential barriers also. 
We will assume E < Vo so that the solutions of the Schr6dinger equation are 
given by 
1fr (x) = A eikx + B e-ikx 
x < 0 
C e- KX 
x > 0 
Continuity conditions would give us [cf. Eqs (5) and (6)]: 
k - iK 
B=--A 
k + iK 
2k 
C=--A 
k + iK 
Thus the solution in the region x < 0 can be written in the form 
where 
ex (k) = tan- 1 (~) = tan- 1 JVo; E 
(36) 
(37) 
(38) 
(39) 
(40) 
Since all values of E are possible, we can construct a wave packet formed by the 
superposition of plane waves (cf. Sec. 5.5): 
fJ 
\lI (x, t) = 2~ f A (k) [eikx + e-2ia (k) e-ikx ] e-iw(k)t dk 
(41) 
o 
where 
Iik 2 
w(k) =-
2m 
and the upper limit f3 corresponds to E = Vo: 
We write Eq. (41) as a superposition of incident and reflected wave packets 
\lI (x, t) = \lIi (x, t) + \lIr (x, t) 
where 
(42) 
(43) 
(44) 

206 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Incident wave packet 
f3 
Wi (x, t) = ~ f [A (k)[ eilkx-(v(k)t+</>(k)] dk 
(45) 
o 
Reflected wave packet 
f3 
Wr (x, t) = ~ f [A (k)[ e-i[kx+w(k)t+21l'(k)-q,(k)1 dk 
(46) 
o 
and 
A (k) = [A (k)[ eiq,(k) 
(47) 
If we assume [A (k) [ to be a sharply peaked function around k = ko and carry out 
an analysis similar to that given in Sec. 5.5, we would readily obtain the following 
expressions for the centre of the wave packet associated with the incident and 
reflected waves 
where 
and 
Time delay 
. inc ( ) 
Xc 
t = Xo + v~t 
x/eft (t) = -Xo -
VJ<t + r 
d¢1 
Xo= --
dk k=ko 
v~ = dw I 
dk k=ko 
Ii ko 
m 
J 
f32 -
ko2 
dal 
r =-2 -
dk k=ko 
2 
(48) 
(49) 
(50) 
(51) 
(52) 
represents the time delay3 introduced during the reflection of the wave packet. 
Obviously, Xo is negative; further, both x/nc (t) and x/ell (t) should be negative 
bacause the solution given by Eq. (41) corresponds to the region x < O. Now at 
t = 0 we assume the packet to be far away from the barrier (see Fig. 8.4) and as t 
increases the packet moves towards the barrier. At a much later time the reflected 
3 This can be physically understood from the fact that since the wave function is finite in the 
region x > 0 (see Sec. 8.2) the packet can be thought of as penetrating into the region x > 0 for a 
certain distance and then coming back (see the discussion at the end of this section and Problem 8.5); 
the corresponding optical problem is discussed in Chapter 11 of Ref. 2. 

Barrier Transmission 
207 
packet moves towards the left (see Fig. 8.6) with the same group velocity VK' At 
intermediate times the incident and reflected waves interfere near x = ° 
and the 
total wave function is quite complicated (see Fig. 8.5). Finally, the transmitted wave 
packet (in the region x > 0) will be given by 
Transmitted wave packet 
f3 
Wt = l-jIA(k)1 ~ 
v2JT 
v k2+K2 
(53) 
o 
x exp [-K (k)x - i {(w (k) t + a (k) -
1> (k»)] dk 
where w (k) is given by Eq. (42) and use has been made of the fact that the ampli-
tude of the transmitted wave packet is given by [see Eq. (6)] 
2k 
2k 
-ia(k) 
C=--A= 
e 
k + iK 
(k2 + K2) 1/2 
(54) 
As a simple example, we assume that at t = 0, the particle is described by a 
localized Gaussian wave packet given by the following equation (cf. Example 5.1) 
(55) 
We assume Xo » IJ so that the particle is localized far away from the potential 
step. The quantity Piko represents the average momentum of the wave packet. Now 
+00 
A(k) ~ ~ j W(x,O) e-ikx dx 
(56) 
-00 
where we have put the limits from -00 to +00 because for Ix - Xo I > 41J the 
integrand has a negligible value. Carrying out the integration, we readily get 
Thus 
8 
W (X, r) = const. j exp [-4a2 (K -
1)2 - i (K -
1) y] 
o 
(57) 
x [eiKX + r (K) e-iKX ] e-iK2r/2 dK 
(58) 

208 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where we have introduced the following dimensionless variables 
Further 
where 
K = -kko' X = kox, r = 
t 
2 
m/(IikO) 
a = kolJ, Y = koxo, 8 = 
r (K) __ 
1 _-_if_(K_) 
l+if(K) 
K ~2 
f (K) = - = -
- I 
k 
K2 
Vo 
Figure 8.4 shows the results of the numerical integration for 
a = 10, f3 = -100, 8 = 2 
~ = 0 
~ = 50 
t = 100 
o 
o 
--+ x 
o 
o 
(59) 
(60) 
(61) 
Figure 8.4. The reflection of a Gaussian wave packet by a potential step at r = 0, 50, 100, 150 and 
250; C1 = 10, f3 = ~ 100 and 8 = 2. [Calculations courtesy 
Mr. Norman Lim] 

Barrier Transmission 
209 
at 
r = 0, 50, 100, ISO and 200 
The figure shows the penetration of the wave packet inside the barrier and also the 
slight broadening of the reflected wave packet. Figure 8.5 shows the corresponding 
probability distributions at different values of r. 
t-
o 
-150 
--~;O 
-.-~ ; 50 
-t; 100 
...... ~ ; 150 
---~ = 200 
/1-
/ 
I 
-100 
-50 
o 
Potential 
_Step 
50 
Figure 8.5. Variation of I\II(X, r)12 for the Gaussian wave packet at different values of r; Ci = 10, 
fJ = -100 and 8 = 2. Note the broadening of the wave packet. [Calculations courtesy Mr. Norman 
Lim] 
We conclude this section by noting that Goldberg et af. (Ref. 3) have obtained 
numerical solutions of the time dependent SchrMinger equation to study the re-
flection and transmission of a wave packet by a square well and by a rectangular 
barrier. One of their results is shown in Fig. 8.6. Figure 8.6(a) tells us that at t = to 
the particle (localized around x = a) is described by a Gaussian wave packet and 
is approaching the square well potential. Figures 8.6(b), 8.6(c) and 8.6(d) give us 
the form of the wave packet at subsequent times. It is interesting to note that at 
t = tl the particle is described by two packets one centered around x = XI and the 
other around x = X2. Thus at t = tl the particle is at both the places in the sense 
that there are finite probabilities of finding the particle around x = XI as well as 
around x = X2; however, if we try to determine the position of the particle then it 
will be found either near x = XI or near x = X2. A similar situation arises when 
a light wave gets partially reflected by a dielectric (like glass). In classical optics, 
we have a reflected beam and a transmitted beam. However, if we consider a single 
photon then it would be described by a wave function associated with the reflected 

210 
I 
~ 
~ 
<a) 
(b) 
114-1 
(e) 
<d) 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Figure 8.6. Reflection and transmission of a wave packet by a square well; the mean energy of the 
packet corresponds to the well depth [adapted from Ref. 3]. 
beam superposed by a wave function associated with the transmitted beam; thus it 
is present in the reflected beam as well as in the transmitted beam. If we make a 
measurement then it will be found either in the reflected beam or in the transmitted 
beam. 
8.5. Problems 
Problem 8.1 Consider a square well potential given by 
v (x) = - Vo 
o 
Ixl < al2 
Ixl > al2 
(62) 
(see Fig. 8.7). In Sec. 6.6.2 we had discussed the bound states for such a potential 
well. Discuss the solutions of the Schrodinger equation for E > 0 and assuming 
the incidence of a particle of energy E from the left show that the transmission 

Barrier Transmission 
211 
v (x) 
-012 
'-----_-,-______ x 
012 
'--__ ---' - v 0 
Figure 8.7. The square well potential 
coefficient is given by 
(63) 
where 
(64) 
Notice that transmission resonance occurs when k2a = mT. Interpret the result 
physically. It may be mentioned that such transmission resonances occur in the 
scattering of electrons from noble gases such as argon and neon. This is known as 
the Ramsauer-Townsend effect (see also Sec. 24.5.2 and e.g. Ref. 4, p. 133). 
Problem 8.2 Consider a potential barrier of the form (see Fig. 8.8) 
Vex) 
.--_+-_...,Vo 
x 
-0/2 
0/2 
Figure 8.8. A rectangular potential barrier. 
v (x) = Vo 
Ixl < al2 
o 
Ixl > al2 
(65) 

212 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
In the region Ix I > a/2, the solution ofthe SchrOdinger equation can be written as 
A e ikx + B e~ikx 
x < -a/2 
F e ikx + G e~ikx 
x > +a/2 
Using continuity conditions at x = ±a/2 show 
where 
( A) = (R]] R12) (F) 
B 
R21 
R22 
G 
[COSh Ka -
i~ sinh Ka ] e~ika 
(ir/2) sinhKa = -R2] 
KkK k 
---, r=-+-
k KkK 
(66) 
(67) 
(68) 
k and K are defined through Eq. (19). For E < Vo, K is real and for E > Vo, K is 
purely imaginary. 
Problem 8.3 In the previous problem if we set G = 0 then it will physically 
correspond to the situation of a wave incident from the left of the barrier and 
getting partially reflected and partially transmitted by it. Calculate the transmission 
coefficient for the cases E < Vo and E > Vo and show that the results are the same 
as obtained in Sec. 8.3. 
Problem 8.4 Consider a periodic potential of the form4 (see Fig. 8.9) 
v (x) = Vo 
-a/2 < x < +a/2 
o 
a/2<x<a/2+b 
(69) 
with 
v (x + I) = V (x) 
(70) 
where I = a + b represents the periodicity of the potential. We label the nth valley 
(of the periodic potential) as 
(n -
1) 1+ a/2 < x < nl - a/2 
(71 ) 
with n = 0, ± I, ±2, ... and write the solution of the Schrodinger equation in the 
nth valley as 
1/f (x) = All exp [ia (x - nl)] + BII exp l-ia (x - nl)] 
(72) 
4 Such a periodic potential is of great importance in band theory of solids (see, e.g., Ref. 5). The 
present method of solution for the periodic potential is adapted from Ref. 6; see also Sections 16.3 
and 23.3. 

Barrier Transmission 
where we have defined 
v (x) 
I-b ...... 
-a12 
al2 
~b~a--
Figure 8.9. The periodic potential. 
a ~ /2mE 
fj2 
x 
so that the notation is consistent with that in Sec. 16.3. We write 
213 
(73) 
(74) 
Use continuity conditions to determine R II , R 12 , ... and show that the matrix ele-
ments are independent of n. Thus it immediately follows that 
(75) 
Using the boundary condition that the wave function must remain finite as x -+ 
±oo, obtain the equation which lead to the allowed and forbidden energy bands. 
Problem 8.5 Consider a potential barrier given by the following equation 
z<o 
Z > 0 
(76) 
with V2 > VI. Consider the incidence of a plane wave (at an angle) on the surface 
z = O. Solve the three-dimensional SchrMinger equation in the two regions and 
using continuity conditions determine the laws of reflection and refraction. 
[Hint: Without any loss of generality assume the x-axis to lie in the plane of 
incidence so that the y-dependence of the wave function can be neglected.] 
Problem 8.6 In Sec. 8.4 we had considered the reflection of a wave packet by 
a potential step and had assumed that the component waves, the superposition of 

214 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
which gives the wave packet, correspond to E < Vo. Discuss the reflection (and) 
transmission of a wave packet whose component waves correspond to E > Vo. 
Problem 8.7 For the potential step problem (see Sec. 8.2) the wave function in 
the region x > 0 is of the form e- KX • Calculate (x), (x 2) and show that lu ~ 11K. 
00 
00 
[Hint: (x) = J 
x e- 2KX dxl J e- 2KX dx, etc.] 
o 
0 
Problem 8.8 Consider a potential energy variation given by 
v (x) = 0 
= Vo (1 + ~) 
x < -d and x > 0 
-d < x < 0 
(77) 
Obtain an exact solution of the Schrbdinger equation and obtain an expression for 
the transmission coefficient. 
[Hint: In the region -d < x < 0 write the solution in terms of Ai (x) and Bi (x) 
-
see Appendix D and also Problems 6.8 and 17.9.] 
Problem 8.9 Consider a delta function potential of the form 
V(x)=S8(x) 
(78) 
Show that the transmission amplitude (= F I A) and the transmission coefficient 
(= 1 F I A 12) are 
ik 
and 
E 
respectively. 
[Hint: In the results given in Sec. 8.3 take the limit of Vo ---+ (Xl and a ---+ 0 such 
that the product Voa ---+ S.] 
8.6. Solutions 
Solution 8.1 For a particle incident from the left, the solutions of the Schrbdinger 
equation are: 
'ljf = A eikx + B e-ikx 
C eik2X + D e-ik2X 
F eikx 
x < -a12 
al2 < x < -a12 
x> al2 
(79) 

Barrier Transmission 
215 
The continuity conditions at x = ±a/2 immediately lead to the transmission coef-
ficient (= IF / A 12). For k2a = mr the transmission coefficient is unity and this is 
again similar to what happens in a Fabry-Perot etalon. 
Solution 8.4 The continuity conditions immediately give 
Rll = 
eiab [COSh Ka -
i~ sinh Ka ] 
R12 = _iJ sinhKa eia(a+b) 
R22 = R 1r, R21 = Rl~ 
(80) 
where CJ and T are defined through Eq. (68). Now the eigenvalues of R matrix are 
given by 
(81) 
where we have used the fact that RIIR22 -
R12R21 = I and I} = Rll + R22 = 
R II + R I~ which is a real quantity. Further, any column vector can also be written 
as a sum of two eigenvectors and therefore we may write 
where 
(:J and (:J 
are eigenvectors corresponding to the eigenvalues A+ and A_ respectively. Thus 
(82) 
Clearly if II} I > 2, the two roots are real and the wave function will diverge either 
for x ~ 00 or x ~ -00. Thus we must have 
(83) 
for which IA+ 1 = lA_I = 1. Since I} is real we can always write 
(84) 
or 
CJ 
cos <p = cosh Ka cos ab + 2" sinh Ka sin ab 
(85) 

216 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
For ab = mT, it immediately follows that Eqs. (83) and (85) cannot be satisfied 
and hence such energy values are not allowed. By plotting rJ/2 as a function of E 
one can readily obtain regions of allowed and forbidden energies-these are the 
energy bands and are discussed in any book on solid state physics. 
For E > Va, the corresponding equation becomes 
k 2 + a 2 
cos¢ = cosk1a cosab -
1 
sink1u sinab 
2ak 1 
(86) 
which again lead to allowed and forbidden energy bands. 
In order to get a numerical appreciation, we consider the limiting case of Va -+ 
00 and a -+ 0 such that 
mb 
t1 Vaa -+ P 
(This is known as the Kronig-Penney model.) For such a case, Eq. (85) becomes 
P . 
cos ¢ = -
sm ab + cos ab 
ab 
(87) 
Equation (87) forms the basic equation of the Kr6nig-Penney model, the solution 
of which leads to the formation of energy bands (corresponding to a periodic po-
tential). Using another method, we will rederive Eq. (87) in Sec. 16.3 where we 
will also discuss the physical implications, viz., the formation of energy bands. 
Solution 8.5 The three-dimensional Schr6dinger equation 
with 
2m 
V21jf + -2 [E -
V (z)] 1jf (x, y, z) = 0 
Ii 
V (z) 
Z<O 
z>O 
(88) 
(89) 
can easily be solved by using the method of separation of variables. The solution 
corresponding to the reflection and transmission of a particle is given by 
1jf = A exp [i (klxX + k1zz)] + B exp [i (k2xX - k2zz)] 
z < 0 
C exp [i (k3xX + k3zz)] 
z > 0 
(90) 
where we have assumed (without any loss of generality) that k 1y = 0, i.e. the 
x-axis is chosen to lie in the plane of incidence (see Fig. 8.10). Further, 
2 
2 
222m 
k 1x + k 1z = k2x + k2z = t1 (E - Vd 
(91 ) 
and 
(92) 

Barrier Transmission 
217 
z~ 
y 
X 
v = V2 
z=o------------------~~----------------
Figure 8.10. The reflection and refraction of a plane wave at the plane z = o. 
For the wave function to be continuous at z = 0 (for all values of x) we must have 
(93) 
Thus kzz = klz [see Eq. (91)] implying that the angles of incidence and reflection 
are equal. Further, if i and r represent the angles of incidence and refraction then 
k 
(liZ) 
Ij2 
. 
. 
Ix 
k 
SIn I = 
= 
Ix 
(k 2 + k 2) Ij2 
2m (E -
VI) 
Ix 
Iz 
and a similar relation for sin r, from which we immediately obtain 
sin i = (E - V2) I j2 
sinr 
E -
VI 
which is nothing but Snell's law. The critical angle is given by 
.. (E - V2) Ij2 
SIn le = 
E -
VI 
(94) 
(95) 
(96) 
For i > ie, k3z is purely imaginary and there is an exponentially decaying wave in 
the region z > o. 
Now, continuity of 1/1 and d1/l / dz at z = 0 gives lcf. Eqs (5) and (6)] 
B 
klz - k3z 
· 
(. 2 . 
. 2. ) I j2 
cos I -
sm Ie -
sm 1 
-
A 
klz + k3z 
· 
(. 2 . 
. 2. ) I j2 
COS 1 + sm Ie -
sm 1 
(97) 
and 
C 
2klz 
2cos i 
A 
klz + k3z 
· 
(. 2. 
. 2.) I j2 
cos 1 + sm Ie -
sm I 
(98) 

218 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
For i > ie, I B / A I = 1 and the reflection coefficient is unity. However, the wave 
function is given by 
Sill I -
Sill 1(' 
[ 
( . 2. 
. 2. )] /2] 
1/f = C exp [i KX sin i] exp -K Z 
. 
. 
Sill Ie 
(99) 
where K = [2m (E -
V2) / n2r/2. The above wave function gives the following 
expression for the current density: 
_ nK sin i 
12 
2 
Sill I -
Sill Ie 
[ 
( . 2 . 
. 2 . ) 1/2 ] 
ix -
---;;;- sinic IC exp -
K 
sini, 
Z 
(100) 
iy = i z = 0 
Such a wave which is propagating in a particular direction and has an exponentially 
decreasing amplitude in another direction is known as an evanescent wave and is a 
subject of considerable importance in optics. Because of this evanescent wave, the 
beam (on reflection) undergoes a lateral shift which is known as the Goos-Hanchen 
effect (see, e.g. Chapter II of Ref. 2). 
Solution 8.6 For E > Vo, the incident, reflected and transmitted wave packets 
would be [cf. Eqs (45), (46) and (53)] 
00 
1/finc (x, t) = ~ f IA (k)1 
f3 
1/frcft (x,t) 
1/ftr (x, t) 
xexp[i(kx-w(k)t-cjJ(k))] dk 
xexp[-i(kx-w(k)t+cjJ(k))] dk 
00 
1 f 
2k 
-
IA(k)1 ----r===~ 
.j2if 
k + Jk2 - f;2 
f3 
x exp [i ( J 
F - j32 X - w (k) t + cjJ (k)) ] dk 
where we have used Eqs. (5) and (6) and the fact that 
k] = [2m (~2- Vo) l/2 = [k2 _ j32r/2 
(101) 
(102) 
(103) 
(104) 

Barrier Transmission 
219 
Notice that since B / A and C / A are real [see Eqs. (5) and (6)], there are no 
additional phase factors appearing in the exponent. Thus the centre of the wave 
packet associated with the incident, reflected and transmitted waves would be 
[cf. Eqs (48) and (49)] 
Xo + Vgt 
} 
-Xo -
Vgt 
I 
Vg 
Xo -
+ v't 
Vg 
g 
(lOS) 
where 
Ii) k02 -
f32 
m 
Vi = ___ _ 
g 
(106) 
which represents the group velocity in the region x > O. The expression for v~ 
follows from the fact that 
(k2 
f32) 1/2 
_ 
-
x -wt -
[( 2 
2)1/2 
ko 
] 
ko -
f3 
+ (k02_{l2)1/2 (k - ko) + ... x 
- [w (ko) + (k - ko) ~c:: I 
+ ... J 
t 
k=ko 
[ ( 2 
2) 1/2 
] 
ko 
ko -
f3 
x - w (ko) t + (k - ko) ~ 
V ko -fJ 
dk k-ko 
{ 
) k02 -
f32 dw I 
1 
x x-
ko 
-
t + ... 
8.7. References and suggested reading 
1. P.R. Holland, The Quantum Theory of Motion, Cambridge University Press 
(1993). 
2. A.K. Ghatak and K. Thyagarajan, Contemporary Optics, Plenum Press, New 
York (1978); Reprinted by Macmillan India Limited, New Delhi. 
3. A. Goldberg, H.M. Sachey and J.L. Schwartz, Computer generated motion 
pictures of one-dimensional quantum mechanical transmission and reflection 
phenomena, Am. 1. Phys., 35, 177 (1967). 
4. N.F. Mott and H.S.W. Massey, The Theory of Atomic Collisions, Oxford 
University Press, London (1949). 

220 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
5. AJ. Dekker, Solid State Physics, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 
(1952). 
6. E. Merzbacher, Quantum Mechanics, John Wiley, New York (1970). 
7. G. Baym, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, W.A. Benjamin, New York 
(1969). 

Chapter 9 
Angular Momentum I-The Spherical Harmonics 
The final criterion of truth is the agreement of a theory with experience, and it is 
only when all attempts to describe the facts in the frame of accepted ideas fail that 
new notions are formed, at first cautiously and reluctantly and then, if they are 
experimentally confirmed, with increasing confidence. In this way the classical 
philosophy of science was transformed into the modern one ... 
-
From MAX BORN'S Preface in Physics in My Generation, 
Springer Verlag, New York (1969). 
9.1. Introduction 
In this chapter we will discuss the basic theory of angular momentum which plays 
an extremely important role in the study of quantum mechanics. We will first define 
the angular momentum operator through the classical relation L = r x p and 
replace p by its operator representation -i Ii V [see Eq. (18) of Chapter 4]. We will 
then show that the representations of L z and L 2 (= L} + L i + L n in spherical 
polar coordinates (r, e, <jJ) are given by the following differential operators 
and 
a 
L = -i Ii -
Z 
a<jJ 
L = -Ii -- -
sme-
+ -- --
2 
2 [1 
a (. 
a) 
I a2 ] 
sin e ae 
ae 
sin2 e a<jJ2 
In Sec. 9.3 we will solve the eigenvalue equation 
(I) 
(2) 
(3) 
where A Ii 2 represents the eigenvalues of the operator L 2. We will show that A takes 
the values I (I + 1) where I = 0, 1,2, 3, ... and for each value of [ there is (2[ + 1)-
fold degeneracy; i.e. there are (21 + I) eigenfunctions corresponding to the same 
eigenvalue [(l + 1) li 2 - these eigenfunctions are known as spherical harmonics and 
221 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

222 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
are denoted by Ylm (e, ¢). Thus the eigenvalue equation (3) can be written in the 
form 
(4) 
where 
I = 0, 1, 2, 3, ... 
and for each value of I, we have 
m=-I,-1+1, ... +1 
The spherical harmonics are actually simultaneous eigenfunctions of L2and L z; i.e. 
(5) 
These eigenfunctions will be used in the theory of the hydrogen atom (Chapter 
10) - in fact, for any problem characterized by a spherically symmetric potential 
V (r). In Sec. 9.4 the commutation relations between L" L y and L z will be derived 
which will be the starting equations in Chapter 13. The relationship of angular 
momentum with rotations will be discussed in Sec. 9.5. 
9.2. The angular momentum operator and its representations in 
spherical polar coordinates 
In classical mechanics the angular momentum of a particle is defined through the 
relation 
L =r x p 
(6) 
where rand p represent the position and linear momentum of the particle. Thus 
Lx = ypz - ZPy 
(7) 
with similar relations for Ly and Lz. In quantum mechanics we replace Px, Py and 
pz by the corresponding operators [see Eq. (19) of Chapter 4] to obtain the follow-
ing operator representations of L r , Ly and L z: 
Operator representations of Lx, Lv , L z 
Lx 
YPz. - ZPv 
-i Ii Y -
-
Z -
( 
() 
a ) 
az 
ay 
Ly 
zpx - xpz 
(
a 
a ) 
-i Ii 
Z ax - x az 
(8) 
Lz 
XPy - YPx 
-i Ii (x ~ - y ~) 
ay 
ax 

Angular Momentum I 
223 
In order to determine the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the operator 
L2 (= L} + C; + Ln it is convenient to express Lx, Ly and L z in spherical polar 
coordinates which are defined through the following equations: 
Thus 
giving 
x 
y 
z 
r2 
tan2 e 
tan¢ 
r sine cos ¢ } 
r sin e sin ¢ 
r cose 
x2 + l + Z2 
(x2 + y2) 
Z2 
y 
x 
ar 
2r-=2x 
ax 
ae 
2 tan e sec2 e -ax 
2 
r tan e sec e cos ¢ 
2 
a¢ 
y 
I 
sec ¢ -
= -- = -- cosece sec¢tan¢ 
ax 
x2 
r 
ar 
ax 
ae 
ax 
a¢ 
ax 
sine cos ¢ 
1 
- cos e cos ¢ 
r 
I 
-- sin ¢ cosec e 
r 
I 
ax 
x 
( ar ) 
(ax) 
Notice that -
= sin e cos ¢> = -. Thus 
-
#- 1/ -:-
. 
ar 
r 
ax 
iJr 
(9) 
(10) 
(11) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
(I5) 
(16) 
(17) 
(18) 

224 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Similarly one can obtain ~.~ ,~~, etc. Now 
Lzl/f(r, e, </» 
= -i n [x ol/f _ y Ol/f] 
ay 
ax 
-i n [x (Ol/f or + ol/f oe + ol/f o</» 
ar oy 
oe ay 
a</> oy 
_y (al/f ar + al/f ae + al/f a</»] 
ar ax 
ae ox 
o</> ox 
-in[rsinecos</> {~~ (sine sin</» + ~~ (~cosesin</» 
+ ~~ (~cos</>cosece)} -rsinesin</> {~~ 
al/f (1 
) 
x (sin e cos </» + -
- cos e cos </> 
ae 
r 
or, 
(19) 
Operator representations of Lx, Ly and Lz in spherical polar coordinates 
Since the above equation holds for arbitrary l/f (r, e, </», we have the following 
operator representation for L z: 
Similarly (see also Problem 9.5) 
o 
L = -in-
z 
o</> 
Lx = in (Sin</> ~ + cote cos</> ~) 
oe 
a</> 
Ly = in (-cos</> ~ + cote sin</>~) 
oe 
o</> 
The operator L 2 is defined through the following equation: 
L 2 = L 2 + L 2 + L? 
x 
y 
,. 
where the square of an operator is defined by 
(20) 
(21) 
(22) 
(23) 

Angular Momentum I 
etc. Thus 
2 
. 
2 a ao/ 
2 a2o/ 
L z ,I, (r, e, A.) = LzL'" = (-zli) --- = -Ii -2 
'I' 
'f' 
, 'I' 
a¢ a¢ 
a¢ 
Hence, the operator representation of L z2 is given by 
a2 
L2 = _1i2 _ 
Z 
a¢2 
225 
(24) 
Similarly one can obtain the operator representations of L} and L'} (although the 
algebra is much more involved). Adding up, one obtains (see also Problem 9.7) 
L = -Ii ---
sme- + -- --
2 
2 [ 
I 
a (. 
a) 
I 
a2 ] 
sin e ae 
ae 
sin2 e a¢2 
(25) 
It may be noted that (see Problem 9.8) 
(26) 
9.3. Eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of L 2 
In this section we will solve the eigenvalue equation 
(27) 
where "A 1i2 represents the eigenvalues of L2 and Y (e, ¢) the corresponding eigen-
functions. We will show that "A takes the values l (l + 1) where l = 0, 1, 2, ... and 
the corresponding eigenfunctions are the spherical harmonics. For each value of l 
there will be (2l + 1) fold degeneracy; i.e. there will be (2l + 1) eigenfunctions 
belonging to the same eigenvalue l (l + 1) Ii 2 . 
Now, substituting for L 2 from Eq. (25) in Eq. (27), we obtain 
1 
a ( 
ay) 
1 
a2y 
-
-
sin e -
+ -- -- + "AY (e ¢) = ° 
sin e ae 
ae 
sin2 e a¢2 
' 
(28) 
In order to solve the above equation, we try the method of separation of variables 
and write 
Y (e, ¢) = 8 (e) <I> (¢) 
(29) 
On substitution and subsequent multiplication by sin2e / Y (e, ¢) we obtain 
-- -- -
sine -
+ "A8(e) = -- -
= m 2 
sin2 e [1 
d ( 
d 8) 
] 
1 d2 
<I> 
8 
sin e de 
de 
<I> d¢2 
(30) 

226 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The variables have indeed separated out and we have set each side equal to a 
positive constant m 2, the reason for which will shortly become clear. Equation 
(30) gives us 
d 2¢ 
-2 +m2¢(¢) = 0 
d¢ 
the solution of which is given by 
For the wave function to be a single-valued, we must have 
¢ (¢ + 2rr) = ¢(¢) 
or 
giving2 
m=0,±1,±2, ... 
We label the functions by the subscript m 
I 
. 1> 
¢m(¢)= 
~elm ; m=0,±1.±2, ... 
v 2rr 
where the factor 1/ hii ensures that 
2][ f 1 ¢m (¢) 12 d¢ = 1 
o 
which is the normalization condition. Indeed 
Orthonormality condition 
2][ f ¢:' (¢) ¢m (¢) d¢ = i5mm , 
o 
which represents the orthonormality condition for ¢m (¢). 
The equation satisfied by 0)(e) is [from Eq. (30)] 
I d ( 
dG) ( 
m2) 
-
-
sin e -
+ A - --
G(e) = 0 
sin e de 
de 
sin2 e 
(31) 
(32) 
(33) 
(34) 
2 
I d 2 CP 
It immediately follows that we could not have set - -? to a positive (or complex) constant 
cp d¢-
for then the wave function would not have been single-valued. 

Angular Momentum I 
227 
Writing cos 8 = fL and e (8) = F(,l), we obtain 
d 
[ 
2 dF] 
[ 
m2] 
-
(1 -
fL ) -
+ A - --
F (fL) = 0 
dfL 
dfL 
1 -
fL2 
(35) 
We first consider the case m = 0 and then m 1'= O. 
9.3.1. CASE I: m = ° 
For m = 0, Eq. (35) reduces to 
2 d 2F 
dF 
(1 -
fL ) dfL2 -
2fL dfL + AF(fL) = 0 
(36) 
As in the case of the linear harmonic oscillator problem, we try a power series 
solution 
oc 
F(fL) = L ar fLr+, 
(37) 
r=O,I.. .. 
Differentiating (37) term by term and substituting in (36), we obtain 
oc L 
[(r + s) (r + s -
1) ar fLr+s- 2 
r=0,1,2, ... 
- {(r + s) (r + s -
1) + 2 (r + s) -
A} arfLr+'] = 0 
Since the above equation is to be valid for all values of fL, we equate the coefficients 
of each power of fL to zero. Thus 
s (s -
1) ao = ° 
s (s + 1) al = 0 
and 
(38) 
(39) 
(r + s + 2) (r + s + I) ar+2 
[(r+s) (r+s+ I) -A] ar 
The roots of the indicial equation [Eq. (38)] are 
s = 0 or s = 1 
For s = 0, the recurrence relation is3 
ar 
r(r + 1) - A 
(r + I )(r + 2) 
r = 0,1,2, ... 
(40) 
(41) 
(42) 
3 Since the root s = 0 makes al indeterminate, it provides all the necesssary independent 
solutions. (see, e.g. Ref. 3); indeed, we do obtain two independent solutions [see Eg. (43)]. 

228 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Since ar+2 is related to ar we may write Eq. (37) as 
(43) 
The quantities inside the square brackets represent the two independent solutions 
of Eq. (36). From Eq. (42) it is readily seen that 
1· 
ar+2 
1 
1m --= 
(44) 
r-->oo ar 
Thus if the infinite series in Eq. (43) is not terminated, it will diverge at 
f-L = ± 1 (i.e. at e = ° 
and e = JT). Since that is not admissible, the series has 
to be tenninated which can happen only if 
A = l(l + 1); 1= 0,1,2, ... 
(45) 
Thus when A = 0, 2, 6, 12, ... one of the series will terminate at a, f-L'. For example, 
for 1= 4 
and 
a6 = a8 = ... = ° 
Thus the polynomial solution is given by 
(46) 
where the constant ao has been chosen such that 
(47) 
For even values of I, the odd series will not terminate (see Problem 9.2) and we 
must set al = 0. Similarly, for an odd value of I the odd series will tenninate at 
f-LI and we must set ao = 0. The resulting polynomials are known as the Legendre 
polynomials p/(f-L) which are assumed to satisfy Eq. (47). The first few Legendre 
polynomials are 
Legendre polynomials 

Angular Momentum I 
229 
The Legendre polynomials satisfy the following relation (see, e.g. Reference 4; see 
also Problem 9.10): 
+1 f p/(/-i)P/'(/-i)d/-i = _2_ DIl' 
21 + 1 
-I 
(49) 
Higher order Legendre polynomials can be obtained from the following recurrence 
relation 
21-1 
(1-1) 
P,(/-i) = -/-/-iP'-1 (/-i) - -Z-PI - 2(/-i); I ~ 2 
(50) 
Thus for m = 0, the well-behaved orthonormal sets of solutions of Eqs (35) and 
(28) are 
(51) 
and 
(52) 
respectively. The subscripts of y(e, ¢) represent the values of 1 and m. The 
orthonormality condition is 
f f Y"o Y,.o ,in () de dq, ~ [2~ { 
dq,] [1, e" (e),'>, (e) ,in e de] ~ Ow 
(53) 
9.3.2. CASE Il: m =1= ° 
The 'brute force' method for obtaining y/mce, ¢) is to directly solve Eq. (35); this 
is done in Appendix G. However, the most straightforward and elegant way of 
obtaining the solutions is through the use of the ladder operators: 
Ladder operators 
-
. 
-
it/> [ a. 
a ] 
L+ -
Lx + ILv - lie 
-
+ I cote -
. 
ae 
a¢ 
(54) 
L_ = L - iL = lie-i¢ [-~ + i cote ~J 
x 
Y 
ae 
a¢ 
(55) 
U sing operator algebra, in Chapter 13 we have shown that 
L+Yt.m = [(I - m) (l + m + 1)]1/2 Ii Yt,m+1 
(56) 
and 
L_Yt,m = [(I + m) (I -
m + 1)]1/2 Ii Yt.m- I 
(57) 

230 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
From very general considerations we have also shown that for a given value of l, m 
can only take values -l, -l + I, ... + l. From Egs (56) and (57) we also see that 
and 
L_YI,_I = 0 
Now from Egs (54) and (56) we can write 
-1/2 
i</> [ a. 
a ] 
Y/,rn+l = [(l- m) (i + m + 1)] 
e 
ae + I cote a¢ 
Y/,/11 
(58) 
(59) 
(60) 
Thus if we start from m = 0, we can readily obtain Yl.1; 
Y1,2;... YIJ. As an 
example, we consider l = 2. Now, from Egs. (52) and (48) 
(61) 
Thus 
J 5 
ei </> [~+ i cote~] (3cos2 e - 1) 
96rr 
ae 
a¢ 
- (15 sin e cos e ei </> 
YS;; 
(62) 
and 
-J 15 ei </> [~ + i cote~] (~sin 2e ei </» 
32rr 
ae 
a¢ 
2 
J 
15 
sin2 e e2i </> 
32rr 
(63) 
Similarly, using the relation 
YI rn-l = [(i + m) (i - m + l)r l / 2 e-i </> [-~ + i cote ~] Y/ rn 
(64) 
, 
ae 
a¢' 
we can obtain YI,_land Y/,-2' The resulting wave functions are automatically nor-
malized. Thus if one knows the expression of PI (cos 8) then by repeated applica-
tion of Egs (60) and (64) one can explicitly determine Ylm for all values of m. The 
expressions for spherical harmonics have been given in Sec. 15.3 and satisfy the 
following orthonormality condition: 

Angular Momentum I 
Orthonormality condition 
2Jf 
Jf 
J 
d¢ J 
sine de Y/;n (e, ¢) YZ'm' (e, ¢) = Oil' 0mm' 
o 
0 
Thus the eigenvalue equation for L 2 [see Eq. (24)] takes the form 
L2YZm(e, ¢) = i(l + 1) n2YZm(e, ¢) 
231 
(65) 
(66) 
where 1 (I + 1) n2 (with l = 0, I, 2, ... ) represent the eigenvalues of L 2 ; Y1m (8, ¢) 
being the corresponding eigenfunctions. The eigenvalue i (i + 1) n2 is (2i + I) fold 
degenerate; i.e. corresponding to a particular value of i there will be (2i + 1) values 
of m (= -I, -/ + 1, ... , l -
1, i). Since the ¢-dependence of YZm(e, ¢) is of the 
form eimq, , one obtains 
or 
(67) 
where we have used Eq. (20). Thus YZm(e, ¢) are simultaneous eigenfunctions of 
L 2 and L z. It is easy to show that they are not eigenfunctions of Lx and L y except 
for the case l = 0, m = O. In fact, it is impossible to construct eigenfunctions 
of any but L 2 and one of the three components of L. However, by choosing 
appropriate linear combinations, it is possible to have simultaneous eigenfunctions 
of L2 and Lx and also of L2 and Ly (see Problems 15.5 and 15.6). 
9.4. The commutation relations 
In this section we will show that the components of the angular momentum opera-
tor do not commute. For example, 
LxLy - LyLx 
(ypz - Zpy) (zPx - xpz) - (zPx - xpz) (ypz - Zpy) 
Y PzZPx -
ypz xpz - ZPy ZPx + zpyxpz. 
- ZPxYPz + ZPxZPy + xpzypz - XpzZPy 
YPx (pzz - zpz) + PyX (zPz - pzz) 
in [xPy - YPx] = i nLz 
where we have used the commutation relations derived in Sec. 4.3. Thus 
(68) 

232 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Similarly, 
[Lv, Lz] = i I1Lx 
[Lz' Ly] = i I1Lv 
(69) 
(70) 
These commutation relations will be the starting point in Chapter 13 where we 
will show that if we just use these commutation relations (and general axioms 
of quantum mechanics) then the angular momentum components can have values 
O,~ 11, 11, ~ 11, 211 etc.4 The existence of systems having components of angular 
momenta taking the values which are half integral multiplies of 11 lead to extremely 
imporant considerations. We will discuss these in Chapters 13 and 14. 
9.5. Angular momentum and rotations 
We now show that the angular momentum is related to the rotations of a system. 
In fact, each component of L is related to an infinitesimal rotation about the cor-
responding axis. For example, the effect of a rotation about the z-axis through an 
angle ~a results in the following transformations (see Fig. 9.1): 
x' 
y' 
z' 
x cos(~a) + y sin(~a) I 
-x sin(~a) + y cos(~a) 
Z 
If we assume ~a to be infinitesimal, we may write 
y' 
z' 
x + y ~a I 
y -x ~a 
Z 
x' 
Rotational operator 
(71) 
(72) 
Thus, if Rz(~a) represents the rotational operator corresponding to a rotation 
about the z-axis through an infinitesimal angle ~a, then the effect of this rotation 
on an arbitrary function lj! is given by 
lj! (x', y', z') 
lj!(x+y~a, y-x~a,z) 
,lc(X v z) + v~a alj! -
x~a ~lj! 
If' 
, ~ , 
~ 
ax 
a y 
4 It may be noted that in this chapter we have shown that components of angular momenta, defined 
as r x p, can only have eigenvalues 0, 11,211, ... 

Angular Momentum I 
233 
y 
, 
'l 
Figure 9.1. Rotation through an angle 6.ct about z-axis. 
where we have retained only the first term in the Taylor expansion because 6.a is 
infinitesimal. Thus, 
Rz(6.a)1jf(x, y, z) = [1 + 6.a (y aOx - x OOy)] 1jf(x, y, z) 
Since 
L z = xp" - YPx = i Ii [y~ -x~] 
. 
ax 
oy 
we may write 
Since 1jf (x, y, z) is arbitrary, we can write 
(73) 
Similarly, 
(74) 
and 
(75) 
The operators Lx, Ly and L z are called the generators ofthe infinitesimal rotations 
about the three coordinate axes. 
In order to find Rz(a) for some finite rotation a about the z-axis, we note that 
the effect of a small increase in the magnitude of a, from a to a + 6.a, is to follow 

234 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
the finite rotation Rz(a) by the infinitesimal rotation Rz(!':-,.a) to give 
Thus 
dR7 
R7 (a + ~a) -
R7(a) 
i 
--' = lim 
' 
'= --L7 
da 
L'>a~+O 
~a 
n ' 
The above equation can be integrated to give 
(76) 
where we have incorporated the boundary condition that Rz (0) 
I. It may be 
mentioned that the exponential of an operator has no meaning except as the infinite 
series given below: 
I 
I 
/9 = 1 + (9 + 2! (9(9 + 3! (9(9(9 + ... 
(77) 
Equations (73)-(75) can be used to obtain the differential operator represen~ 
tation of the components of the angular momentum operator in spherical polar 
coordinates [see Eqs. (20)-(22)]. For example, if we consider rotation about the 
z-axis through an infinitesimal angle ~a, then the transformations of the spherical 
polar coordinates are given by 
r ---+ r, e ---+ e, ¢ ---+ ¢ -
~a 
Therefore, 
Rz(~a)1jJ(r, e, ¢) = 1jJ(r, e, ¢ -
~a) 
or 
I - !., (~a) L z 1jJ(r, e, ¢) = 1jJ(r, e, ¢) - ~a-
[
. ]  
a1jJ 
n 
a¢ 
Since, the above equation is valid for arbitrary 1jJ one obtains the following differ-
ential operator representation of L z [see Eg. (20)] 
a 
L = -in-
c 
a¢ 
Similarly, one can obtain the corresponding representations for Lx and Lv (see 
Problem 9.5). 

Angular Momentum 1 
235 
9.6. Problems 
Problem 9.1 
(a) In the simplest model of a rotating diatomic molecules, it is assumed to be a 
rigid rotator, i.e. the distance between the two atoms is assumed to be fixed. 
Show from classical considerations, that the rotational energy of such a rigid 
rotator is given by 
L2 
2/ue2 
where fl represents the reduced mass, re the distance between the two atoms 
(assumed to be fixed) and L represents the angular momentum of the mole-
cule about the axis passing through the centre of mass. Obtain the quantized 
rotational energy levels. 
(b) Molecules like HCl, HF, LiH can be considered as rigid rotators and because 
these molecules have permanent dipole moments, transitions take place only 
between adjacent rotational energy levels (this is the selection rule). Show that 
this leads to equally spaced lines in the emission as well as in the absorption 
spectra. 
(c) The rotational absorption spectrum of HCI appears at wave numbers 21.18, 
42.36,63.54, 84.72 and 105.91 cm- I . Show that re ~ 1.3A ; assume MCI :::c:: 
35 MH and MH :::c:: 1.68 x 1O-24g. It may be mentioned that these lines corre-
spond to the far-infrared region where frequencies can be measured with great 
accuracy; as such the accuracy in the detennination of re is limited on account 
of the validity of the simple rigid rotator theory rather than the accuracy in the 
measurement of positions of the spectral lines. 
Problem 9.2 Po (fl) = I, PI (fl) = fl and P2 (fl) = (3 fl2 -
1) /2 represent one 
of the solutions of Eq. (36) for l = 0, I and 2 respectively. Now, the second order 
differential equation (36) would have two independent solutions. Obtain analytical 
expressions for the second solution and show that it is consistent with the solution 
given by Eq. (43). 
[Hint: Write F(fl) = </J(fl)Pn(fl) and solve the equation satisfied by </J(fl).] 
Ans: The second independent solution is given by 
I 
l+fl 
-I 
- In -- = tanh 
fl 
2 
I - fl 
fl 
l+fl 
-I 
- In -- - I = fl tanh 
fl -
1 
2 
I-fl 
5 A nice elementary account of diatomic molecular spectra has been given in Ref. 5. 
(78) 
(79) 

236 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
1 
2 
I+fl, 
3 
Q2(fl,) = -(3fl, -
I) In -- - -fl, 
(80) 
4 
I-fl, 
2 
corresponding to I = 0, 1 and 2 respectively. Notice that QIl (fl,) diverges as fl, ---+ 
±1. 
Problem 9.3 
(a) Using the recurrence relation Eg. (50) and Eg. (48), derive expressions for 
Ps(fl,) and P6(fl,). 
(b) Using Egs (42), (43) and (47) derive Ps(fl,) and P6(fl,) corresponding to A = 
30 and A = 42 respectively. 
Problem 9.4 Derive the commutation relations 
(a) 
[Lz'x] 
iii y, 
[Lz' Px] 
[Lz' Y] 
-ilix, [Lz'py] 
[Lz, z] 
0, 
[Lz' Pz] 
(b) 
iii Py 
-i lipx 
° 
Problem 9.5 Assuming Rz(a) = 1 - * 
aLz [see Eg. (73)] and similar relations for 
Rr and Rv, obtain explicit differential operator representations of L r, L\. and L z in 
spherical polar coordinates. 
Problem 9.6 Prove that 
L =L. +L +L =-Ii -- -
sme- +----
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 [I a (. 
a) 
1 a2 ] 
x 
Y' 
sine ae 
ae 
sin2 e aqi 
(81 ) 
Problem 9.7 
(a) Using Egs (54) and (55) prove that 
(82) 
(b) Substitute the differential operator representations of L+ and L_ [see 
Egs (54) and (55)] to prove Eg. (25). 
Problem 9.8 Using vector methods, prove that 
L 2ljJ = (-i lir x V)2ljJ = _1i2r2V 2ljJ + 1i2 :r (r2 ~~) 
(83) 

Angular Momentum I 
237 
Problem 9.9 Using the following representation of Pr 
Pr = -i Ii (~ + ~) 
3r 
r 
(84) 
prove that 
p2 
( 
1i2 2) 
Pr2 
L2 
2m 
= - 2m V 
= 2m + 2m r2 
(85) 
Interpret the above equation physically. 
Problem 9.10 Starting from Eq. (36) prove the orthogonality condition for Legen-
dre polynomials 
9.7. Solutions 
Solution 9.1 
+1 f P,(fL)PdfL) dfL = ° for [ -I- [' 
-\ 
(a) The rotational kinetic energy is 11 (Ii, where 1 (= fLr/) is the moment of 
inertia about the axis passing through the centre of mass and fL being the 
reduced mass. Further the angular momentum L = 1 w. Thus 
L2 
L2 
Rotational Kinetic Energy = -
= --2 
21 
2fLre 
(86) 
Using Eq. (66), we get the following expression for the rotational energy 
levels 
J (J + 1) 1i2 
E = ----:,----
2fLr; 
(87) 
where J (= 0, I, 2, ... ) is known as the rotational quantum number; we have 
written J (J + 1) instead of I (l + 1) so as to be consistent with the spectroscopic 
notation. 
(b) For emission it = Ji -
1 if and i refer to the final and initial states) and the 
wave number of the emitted radiation is given by 
(88) 

238 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where 
h 
B=---
8rr 2Mr}c 
is known as the rotational constant. Thus the lines are equally spaced. Simi-
larly for absorption J t = Ii + 1 and 
(89) 
(c) The absorption spectra should therefore appear at 2B, 4B, 6B, 8B, ... corre-
sponding to Ii = 0, I, 2, 3, ... respectively. From the data given one readily 
finds B ~ 10.59 cm- I . Thus 
Since 
we readily get 
h 
B = 
7 
2 
~ 10.59 cm-' 
8rr-Mre c 
MH MCi 
MH + MCi 
35 
35 
-24 
~ -MH ~ -
x 1.68 x 10 
g 
36 
36 
Solution 9.2 We consider the case l = I and write 
Substituting in Eq. (36) for A = 2 we get 
CP"(M) 
2 
1 
1 
--=--+-----
cP' (M) 
M 
I - M 
I + M 
Carrying out the integration, we get 
or 
CP(M) = C I 
-
- + - In -- + C2 
[ 
I 
I 
I + M] 
M 
2 
1- M 
where C, and C2 are constants of integration. Thus 
(90) 

Angular Momentum I 
239 
which represents the general solution of Legendre's equation for l = 1. Obviously 
the second term is a multiple of PI ("') and the first term is C I Q 1 ("'). If we expand 
Q 1 ("') in a power series in '" we would obtain the infinite series given by the first 
term inside the square brackets of Eq. (43). 
Solution 9.S Let us suppose that when there is a rotation about the x-axis by 
an angle /::'a, e becomes e + 8e and 1> becomes 1> + 81>; obviously, r remains 
unchanged. Now, for rotation about the z-axis [see Eq. (72)] 
x -+ x + y/::'a, y -+ y - x/::'a, and z -+ z 
Similarly, for rotation about x-axis 
y -+ y + z/::,a, 
Z -+ Z -
y/::'a, and x -+ x 
which are obtained by replacing z, x, y by x, y and z respectively. 
Thus 
and 
or 
and 
which give 
and 
Thus 
But 
8x 
8 (r sin e cos 1» = ° 
8 y 
8 (r sin e sin 1» = z/::,a 
8z = 8(rcose) = -y/::'a 
cos e (8e) cos 1> - sin e sin 1> 81> = 0, 
cos e (8e) sin 1> + sin e cos 1> 81> = cos e /::'a 
- sin e 8e = - sin e sin 1> 8a 
8e = sin 1> /::'a 
81> = cot e cot 1> 8e = cot e cos 1> /::'a 
Rx (/::'a) lj; (r, e, 1» 
lj; (r, e + 8e, 1> + 81» 
alj; . 
lj; (r, e, 1» + ae sm1> /::'a 
alj; 
+ -
cot e cos 1> /::'a 
131> 
(91) 
(92) 

240 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Therefore 
Lx = iii [Sin¢ ~ + cote cos¢ ~J 
ae 
a¢ 
Similarly 
Lv = i Ii [- cos ¢ ~ + cote sin ¢ ~] 
. 
ae 
a¢ 
Solution 9.7 Using Eqs (54) and (55), we get 
L+L-l/f 
= (i Ii) e' 
e-1 
-
- ie- 1 
-
cote-
21> [ 
1> a2l/f1> a ( 
al/f) 
ae2 
ae 
a¢ 
-i cot e ~ (e- i1> al/f) + cot2 e ~ (e-i1> al/f)] 
a¢ 
ae 
a¢ 
a¢ 
= -Ii 
-
+ -- -
+ cot e - + cot e -
-
I cot e -
2 [ a2 
i 
a 
a 
2 
a2 
. 
2 
a2
] 
ae2 
sin2 e a¢ 
ae 
a¢2 
a¢2 
Therefore 
Similarly 
Since 
one obtains 
Solution 9.8 
L2l/f 
(-i lir x V)2l/f = _1i2 (r x V). (r x Vl/f) 
-1i2r. [V x (r x Vl/f)] 
(by interchanging the dot and cross) 
-1i 2r. [(Vl/f.V) r - Cr.V) Vl/f - Vl/f (V.r) + r (V.Vl/f)] 
(93) 
(94) 
(95) 
(96) 

Angular Momentum I 
241 
where we have used a vector identity. Thus 
2 [ 3lj1 
(3 ) 
3lj1 
2 
2 
] 
-Ii r- -r. r -'\7lj1 -r -
3+r '\7 ljI 
3r 
3r 
3r 
2 [ 
3lj1 
232lj1 
2 
2 
] 
-Ii -2r- - r -
+ r '\7 ljI 
3r 
3r2 
2 2[ 2 
1 3 (23lj1)] 
-Ii r 
'\7 ljI - -
-
r-
r2 3r 
3r 
-Ii -- -
sme -
+ ----
2[ 1 
3 (. 
3lj1) 
1 
32lj1 ] 
sin e 3e 
3e 
sin2 e 3</J2 
Solution 9.9 
2 
1i2 
(~+~) (~+~)ljI 
ELljI 
2m 
2m 
3r 
r 
3r 
r 
1i2 [ a2", 
'" 
2 a", 
1 ] 
2m ---+--+-ljI 
3r2 
r2 
r 3r 
r2 
1i2 
2m [13 (23lj1)] 
r2 3r 
r a; 
(97) 
using which Eq. (85) follows immediately. Now, in classical mechanics, the 
kinetic energy of a particle (in spherical polar coordinates) is p;j2m + L2j2mr2 
where Pr represents the radial component of the momentum and L 2 the square of 
the angular momentum6 . Thus, in quantum mechanics the radial component of the 
angular momentum is represented by Eq. (84). 
Solution 9.10 We rewrite Eq. (36) as 
6 Classically. 
Therefore 
and 
L = (r x p) = r peg - r P</>¢ 
2 
2 
2 
2 
L2 
p2 = Pr + Pe + P</> = Pr +:2 
r 
(98) 

242 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
which is known as the Sturm-Liouville form (see, e.g. Chapter 12 of Reference 4). 
Thus 
(99) 
and 
(100) 
We multiply Eq. (99) by PI' (Il) and Eq. (100) by P, (Il) and integrate to obtain 
+1 
[l(l + 1) -l'(l' + 1)] f PI(Il)PI'(Il) dll 
~I 
=0 
because at both limits, the Legendre polynomials have a finite value. Thus for l i-
l', PI (Il) and PI' (Il) are orthogonal in the domain -I .::s Il .::s + 1. 
9.8. Sample questions 
Q. 1 In the angular momentum problem, the e dependent equation for 
m = 0 is 
(101 ) 

AnRular Momentum I 
243 
Q. 2 
where fl = cos e. We assume 
00 
F(fl) = L ar fl r+s 
and obtain 
ar 
r=O 
(r + s)(r + s + 1) - A 
(r + s + 2)(r + s + 1) 
The indicial equation gives s = 0. 
a) Why should the infinite series in Eq. (101) be terminated? 
(102) 
b) For what values of A will the infinite series become a polynomial? 
c) Determine the polynomial solution for A = 12. What is the normaliza-
tion condition? Normalize the polynomial solution corresponding to 
A = 12. 
d) For A = 12, obtain the second solution of Eq. (101) in terms of an 
integral. 
e) Substitute the polynomial solution 
(103) 
in Eq. (101) and determine the values of ao, ai, a3, as and A for which 
Eq. (103) is a solution ofEq. (101). 
[Ans: (e) There will be 3 cases. If we assume as i- 0, then A = 30, 
etc. If we assume as = 0, then A = 12, etc.] 
a) Write Y2,o(e, ¢) (normalized). 
b) Derive expressions for Y2,-I(e, ¢) and Y2,-2(e, ¢). Are they normal-
ized? 
c) Show that (Yu - YI,-d, (Yu + YI.-I + v'2 YI,o) and (YI,I + Y],-I -
v'2 YI•O) are eigenfunctions of L< and L2. What are the corresponding 
eigenval ues? 

244 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Q. 3 Using Ladder operators write the right-hand sides in terms of spherical har-
monies 
(a) 
L2y4.3(e, ¢) = 
(b) 
L zY4.0(e, ¢) = 
(c) 
LYYS.I(e, ¢) = 
(d) 
L_Ys._s(e, ¢) = 
(e) 
L z y4•3(e, ¢) = 
(f) 
L2Ys.2(e, ¢) = 
(g) 
LJS.2(e, ¢) = 
(h) 
LxYS.2(e, ¢) = 
(i) 
L+ YS.3(e, ¢) = 
(j) 
Lx y4.3(e, ¢) = 
(k) 
L< YI.Oce, ¢) = 
(I) 
Lx y2.1(e, ¢) = 
(m) 
LYYS.2(e, ¢) = 
(n) 
Lv Y4.3(e, ¢) = 
(0) 
LyYl.o(e, ¢) = 
(p) 
L,.Y2.1(e, ¢) = 
[ADs: (c) :i [58 YS•2(e, ¢) - 50 Ys,oce, ¢) J. 
9.9. References and suggested reading 
I. G. Baym, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, W.A. Benjamin, New York (1969). 
2. M.E. Rose, Elementary Theory of Angular Momentum, John Wiley, New York 
(1957). 
3. J. Irving and M. Mullineux, Mathematics in Physics and Engineering, 
Academic Press, New York (1959). 
4. A.K. Ghatak, I.C. Goyal and S.J. Chua, Mathematical Physics: I, Macmillan 
India Limited, New Delhi (1995). 
5. H.B. Dunford, Elements of Diatomic Molecular Spectra, Addison-Wesley, 
Reading, Massachusetts (1968). 

Chapter 10 
Spherically Symmetric Potentials Hydrogen Atom Problem, 
Rotation Vibration Spectra, Three-Dimensional Oscillator 
Schrodinger's brilliant paperl was undoubtedly one of the most influential con-
tributions ever made in the history of science. It deepened our understanding 
of atomic phenomena, served as a convenient foundation for the mathematical 
solution of problems in atomic physics, solid state physics, and, to some ex-
tent, also in nuclear physics, and finally opened new avenues of thought. In fact, 
the subsequent development of non-relativistic quantum theory was to no small 
extent merely an elaboration and application of Schrodinger's work. 
-
MAX JAMMER in The Conceptual Development of Quantum 
Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, New York (1966), p. 267. 
10.1. Introduction 
In Sec. 6.7 we had shown that for a particle of mass f..t in a field described by the 
potential energy function V (r), the solution of the time dependent Schrodinger 
equation 
(1) 
is of the form 
\II (r, t) = 1/f (r) e-iEt / h 
(2) 
The wave function 1/f (r) is the solution of the eigenvalue equation 
H 1/f (r) = E 1/f (r) 
(3) 
where 
(4) 
1 E. Schrodinger, Quantization as an Eigenvalue Problem, Annalen der Physik, 79, 361 (1926). In 
this paper, Schrodinger had put forward his famous equation and had given the solution correspond-
ing to the hydrogen atom problem. The paper has been reprinted in Wave Mechanics by G. Ludwig, 
Pergamon Press, Oxford (1968). 
245 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

246 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
represents the Hamiltonian operator and E the energy eigenvalue. The potential 
energy function has been assumed to be independent of time. 
In Sec. 10.2 we will show that as long as the potential is spherically symmetric 
(i.e. as long as the potential depends only on the magnitude of the distance from a 
fixed point) the angular part of the wave function is a spherical harmonic and the 
potential energy function enters only in the radial part of the equation. In Sec. 10.3 
we will show that for a system consisting of two particles, whenever the potential 
energy depends only on the magnitude of the distance between the two particles, 
the problem can be reduced to a one particle problem along with a uniform transla-
tional motion of the centre of mass. In Sec. lOA we will solve the hydrogen atom 
problem and obtain the discrete states for the Coulomb potential and will show 
that the results are consistent with experimental data. In Sec. 10.5 we will discuss 
the vibration-rotation spectra of diatomic molecules and in Sec. 10.6 (and Prob-
lem 10.12) we will discuss the three-dimensional oscillator; the two-dimensional 
oscillator will be discussed in Problem 10.13. 
10.2. Spherically symmetric potentials 
One of the most important problems in quantum mechanics is that of the motion of 
a particle in a potential which depends only on the magnitude of the distance from 
a fixed point: 
V (r) = V (r) 
(5) 
Such a potential is referred to as a spherically symmetric potential. Now, in spher-
ical polar coordinates 
(6) 
where we have used the fact that the operator representation of L 2 is given by the 
following equation (see Sec. 9.2): 
L2=_li2 ---
sine- +---
[ 
1 a ( 
a ) 
I 
a2] 
sin e ae 
ae 
sin2 e a</J2 
Thus the three-dimensional SchrMinger equation 
V 21/f + 2~ [E -
V (r)] 1/f (r, e, </J) = 0 
Ii 
(7) 
(8) 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
can be written in the form 
1 d (2d1/f) 
2/-1 
L21/f 
-- r-
+-[E-V(r)]1/f(r,e,¢)=-
r2 dr 
dr 
ti 2 
ti2r2 
247 
(9) 
In order to solve the above equation we use the method of separation of variables 
and write 
1/f (r, e, ¢) = R (r) Y (e, ¢) 
Substituting in Eq. (9) we get 
(10) 
Y (e~ ¢) !!...- (r2 dR) + 2~ [E _ V (r)] R (r) Y (e, ¢) = R2(r) L 2 Y (e, ¢) 
r 
dr 
dr 
ti 
ti r2 
Dividing by R (r) Y (e, ¢) jr2, we obtain 
1 
d (2dR) 
2/-1r2 
--- r-
+--[E-V(r)] 
R (r) dr 
dr 
ti 2 
1 
1 
ti2 Y (e, ¢) L2 Y (e, ¢) = A (11) 
where we have set the terms equal to a constant A because the left-hand side of the 
above equation depends only on r while the other term depends only on e and ¢. 
The above equation gives us the eigenvalue equation 
(12) 
In Sec. 9.3 we had shown that the eigenvalues of L2 are I (I + I) ti2 i.e. well-
behaved solutions are obtained when 
A = I (I + 1); I = 0, I, 2, ... 
(13) 
the corresponding eigenfunctions being the spherical harmonics 
Y1m (e, ¢); m = -I, -I + 1, ... , 1- 1, I 
(14) 
(see Secs 9.3, 9.4 and 15.3). Thus Eq. (11) can be written in the form 
Radial part of the Schrodinger equation 
d2R 
2dR(r) 
2/-1 [ 
1(l+I)ti2] 
-
+ - -- + -
E -
V (r) -
R (r) = 0 
dr2 
r 
dr 
ti 2 
2/-1r2 
(15) 
which is known as the radial part of the SchrMinger equation. If we define a new 
radial function 
u (r) = r R (r) 
(16) 
Eq. (15) becomes 
d 2u (r) 
2/-1 [ 
I (l + 1) ti 2 ] 
---::-- + -
E - V (r) -
u (r) = 0 
dr2 
ti2 
2/-1r2 
(17) 

248 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Comparing this with Eq. (11) of Chapter 6, we may consider the radial motion to 
be similar to the one-dimensional motion of a particle in a potential 
I (l + 1) 1i2 
V (r) + 
2 
2fl,r 
(18) 
Now, according to classical mechanics, if a particle (of mass fl,) is rotating (with 
speed v) in a circular orbit of radius r then the angular momentum associated with 
such a circular motion is given by 
L = fl,vr 
To maintain such a circular motion there must be a centripetal force given by 
fl,V 2 ~ 
L2 
~ 
F=--r=--r 
r 
fl,r 3 
(19) 
where the negative sign implies that the force should be directed towards the origin. 
The corresponding potential energy is - L 2 j2fl,r2 which should be supplied by 
V (r) and hence the effective potential is V (r) + L 2 j2fl,r2 which is consistent with 
Eq. (17) if we replace L2 by I (I + I) 1i2 . 
10.3. The two body problem 
We would like to solve the SchrMinger equation corresponding to the hydrogen 
atom which consists of two particles, viz., the electron and the proton. The interac-
tion between the electron and the proton is described by the Coulomb potential: 
Coulomb potential 
where 
q2 
VCr) = ---
4JTEor 
(20) 
(21 ) 
represents the magnitude of the distance between the two particles. In writing Eq. 
(20) we have used the MKS system of units so that 
q 
1.6 x 10- 19 C 
EO 
8.854 X 10- 12 MKSunits 
and V (r) is measured in joules. In this book we will be almost always using the 
MKS system of units; however, since CGS units are used in many books, we give 
below the corresponding expression for V (r) in CGS units: 
e2 
V (r) =--
r 
(22) 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
249 
where e ::::: 4.8 x 10-'0 esu represents the electronic charge in CGS units and V (r) 
is measured in ergs. 
We may note that the Coulomb potential described by Eq. (20) depends only on 
I rl - r21, i.e. on the magnitude of the distance between the two particles. Indeed, 
we will prove the general result that for a two body problem, whenever the potential 
energy depends only on the magnitude of the distance between the two particles, 
the problem can always be reduced to a one body problem along with a uniform 
translational motion of the centre of mass. Now, for 
(23) 
the Hamiltonian is given by 
or 
112 
112 
H = -- V I2 - -
V22 + V (Irl - r21) 
(24) 
2m, 
2m2 
where we have made use of the recipe of replacing p by -i 11 V; the subscripts 1 
and 2 refer to the two particles. Further, 
a2 
a2 
a2 
V? - -- + -- + -
etc. 
- ax 2 
ay 2 
az 2 ' 
, 
, 
1 
where (x" y" zd and (X2' Y2, Z2) represent the coordinates of the electron and the 
proton respectively. Now, for the Hamiltonian given by Eq. (24), the Schrodinger 
equation is 
[_£ V,2 - £ vl + V (Ir, - r 21)] \lI (r" r2) = E \lI (r" r2) 
2m, 
2m2 
(25) 
It can easily be shown that if we try to separate the variables by assuming 
the variables will not separate. However, if we introduce the centre of gravity co-
ordinates 
Centre of gravity coordinates 
(26) 
and the relative coordinate 
(27) 

250 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
of the two particles, then the Schrodinger equation becomes (see Appendix H) 
(28) 
where 
m]m2 
f.l= 
m] +m2 
(29) 
is known as the reduced mass. Since the potential does not depend on R at all, we 
write 
\{I (R, r) = 1jf (r) <I> (R) 
(30) 
and the Schrodinger equation is now separable giving the following equation for 
<1>: 
(31) 
the solution of which is 
(32) 
where 
Equation (32) represents a plane wave and describes the uniform translational 
motion of the hydrogen atom as a whole. On the other hand, 1jf (r) describes the 
internal motion of the atom and satisfies the equation 
(33) 
h 
,,2 
( iJe 
iJ2 
iJ2 ) 
dE' hI' 
... h d'f'/" 
were v = 
iJx2 + iJy2 + iJz2 an 
r IS t ere atIVe energy, I.e. It IS tel terence 
between the total energy E and the centre of mass energy E R: 
(34) 
Thus we have shown that whenever we have a two body problem with the potential 
energy function depending on Irl -
r21, one need solve only one equation rEq. 
(33)], which is the same as that for a single particle described by the potential 
energy function V (r) with the difference that the mass is replaced by the reduced 
mass and the coordinates are the relative coordinates. 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
251 
10.4. The hydrogen-like atom problem 
We consider a one-electron atom with a nucleus of charge Zq. The potential energy 
function is given by 
Potential energy function 
where 
Z=I 
Z=2 
Z=3 
Zq2 
VCr) = ---
4JTEor 
for the H -atom problem, 
for the singly ionized 
He-atom problem (He+), 
for the doubly ionized 
Li -atom problem (Li++) , 
(35) 
etc. In order to solve Eq. (33), we use the same method as discussed in Sec. 10.2 
and write 
u (r) 
1jJ (r) = R (r) Ylm (e, ¢) = -
Ylm (e, ¢) 
(36) 
r 
The radial part of the wave function satisfies the following equation [see Eq. (15)]: 
Radial part ()f Schrodinger equation 
~~ [r2dR] + 2Jlv [E + Zq2 _ 1 (l + 1) 1i 2 ] R (r) = 0 
(37) 
r2 dr 
dr 
1i2 
4JTEor 
2Jlvr2 
where we have removed the subscript on E since we are interested only in the 
energy levels associated with the relative motion and 
meMN 
Jlv= me+MN 
(38) 
where me and M N represent the mass of the electron and that of the nucleus 
respectively. In order to solve Eq. (37) we introduce the dimensionless variable 
p = y r 
where the parameter y is to be conveniently chosen later. Equation (37) becomes 
1 d [2dR] 
[2JlvE 
2Jlv 
Zq2 
1 (I + 1)] 
--
p -
+ -+----
R(p)=O 
p2 dp 
dp 
1i2y2 
Y 1i2 4JTEop 
p2 
(39) 
We choose2 
2 _ 8Jlv lEI __ 8JlvE 
Y -
1i2 
-
1i2 
(40) 
2 We are looking for energy levels corresponding to bound states; therefore t." < O. 

252 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and set 
2jJ,Z ( q2 ) 
( 
jJ, 
) 1/2 
A = n2 y 
47TEO 
= Zca 21EI 
where c is the speed of light in free space and 
q2 
a == --=----
47TEonc 
137 
the fine structure coefficient. Thus, Eg. (39) becomes 
~~ 
[p2 dR ] + [_~ +!:. _/(1 + I)] R(p) =0 
p2 dp 
dp 
4 
P 
p2 
(41 ) 
(42) 
(43) 
In order to obtain an exact solution of Eq.(43) we introduce the function F (p) 
defined through the relation3 
(44) 
[A direct method for obtaining solutions of Eg. (43) in terms of confluent hyper-
geometric functions is discussed in Sec. 10.4.2]. Now, if we substitute Eg. (44) in 
(43) we would obtain 
d2F 
dF 
p2 -2 + (2 - p) p -
+ [(A -
1) p -I (I + I)] F (p) = 0 
(45) 
dp 
dp 
We now try a series solution of the form 
F (p) = L Cp pl+P 
1'=0, I, ... 
Substituting this into Eg. (45) we obtain 
or, 
00 L C p [(s + p)(8 + P + I) - I (l + 1)] pI' 
p=O 
00 
- L C p [s + p - A + 1] pl'+1 = 0 
1'=0 
00 
(46) 
Co [s (s + I) - I (I + I)] + L {C p+ 1 [(s + p + I) (s + P + 2) - I (I + I)] 
p=o 
-Cp [s + p - A + I]} pfl+ 1 = 0 
3 As in the harmonic oscillator problem (see footnote 4 in Chapter 7) if wc look for solutions 
valid for p -+ +00, we find that R (p) ~ pn exp (±p/2) satisfies Eg. (43) for large values of p. This 
suggests that we look for a solution of the form given by Eg. (44). 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
253 
We therefore obtain the indicial equation 
Indicial equation 
s (s + 1) - I (l + 1) = 0 
Thus 
5 = l or -I - I 
(47) 
For F (p) to be well-behaved4 as p --* 0 we must choose the root 5 = I. We also 
obtain the following recurrence relation 
Recurrence relation 
5+p-A+l 
(5 + P + 1) (s + p + 2) - l (l + 1) 
p+l+l-A 
(p + I) (p + 21 + 2) 
where in the last step we have put s = l. For large values of p 
(48) 
which is also the ratio of the terms in the expansion5 of exp (p). Thus, if the series 
(46) is not terminated then F (p) will behave as exp (p) and R (p ) will behave as 
exp (4 p) for p --* 00 and will diverge; it may be noted that the infinite series given 
by Eq. (46) is convergent for all values of p, however, it will behave as exp(p) for 
large values of p. We can terminate the series by requiring that 
Total quantum number 
A=n=p+l+l 
(49) 
4 For s = -I -
I, one of the expansion coefficients C p becomes infinite and one has to use a 
special method for obtaining the second solution of Eq. (45); see, e.g., Sec. 2.3 (case 4) of Ref. I. 
Alternatively, one can use a method to obtain directly the second solution (see Problems 10.6 and 
10.7). In any case, this solution diverges at p = 0 and hence is rejected. 
5 
where 
Thus 
2 
00 
ef! = I + p + ~! + ... = L C ppP 
p=o 
I 
Cp = -p! 
Cp+l 
-- = -- ~ -
for large p. 
Cp 
p + I 
p 

254 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
then C,,+I = O. Since p and I can be positive integers or zero, n can have the values 
1,2,3, .... The number n is called the total quantum number. Using Eqs (41) and 
(49) we obtain 
flZ2 
q2 
2 
En = -IEnl = - 2n 2 112 (47TEJ ; n = 1,2, ... 
Often it is more convenient to write the above equation as 
Energy eigenvalues 
flZ 2a 2c2 
En = - I Ell I = -
? 
; 
n = I, 2, ... 
2n-
(50) 
where a is the tine structure constant [see Eq. (42)]. Substituting in Eq. (40) we 
readily obtain 
with 
2Z 
Y=-
nao 
112 
an = 
~ 0.52 X 10- 10 m 
fl(q2 j47TEO) 
representing the Bohr radius. Thus 
2Z 
2 
p=-r=-~ 
nao 
n 
where we have introduced the new variable ~ 
Z 
~ =-r 
ao 
which is independent of the total quantum number n. 
(51 ) 
(52) 
(53) 
(54) 
Equation (50) gives the energy levels of the hydrogen atom (see Fig. 10.1). 
Before the development of quantum mechanics, it was known from experimental 
studies of the hydrogen atom spectrum, that the energy levels are given by 
1 
Ell = -EH · 2' n = 1,2, ... 
n 
(55) 
and from observations EH was found to be 13.6 eY. Bohr then devised a model6 
which gave Eq. (55) and predicted EH should be 
fl 
( 
q2 ) 2 
2112 
47TEO 
6 This is now known as the old quantum theory. 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
4 
3 
2 
Lyman series 
~H+-
III Balmer series 
Paschen series 
Figure 10.1. Energy levels of the hydrogen atom. 
E(eV) 
o 
-1.51 
-3.4 
-13.6 
255 
It was the first (and the most dramatic) success of Schrodinger's wave mechanics 
that it could reproduce this result from a basic equation of motion for the system. 
Now 
For the hydrogen atom 
mN = mp :::::::: 1.6726 x 10-27 kg 
giving 
f.LH :::::::: 9.1045 x 10-31 kg 
where we have taken me :::::::: 9.1095 x 10-31 kg. On the other hand, for the deuterium 
atom 
mN = mf) :::::::: 3.3436 x 10-27 kg 
giving 
f.LD:::::::: 9.1070 x 10-31 kg 
Now, for the n = n 1 ----+ n = n2 transition, the wavelength of the emitted radiation 
is given by 
Wavelength of emitted radiation 
he 
A=----
or, 
(56) 

256 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
When n2 = I, 2 and 3 we have what is known as Lyman series, the Balmer series 
and the Paschen series respectively (see Fig. 10.1). For the n = 3 ---+ n = 2 
transition, the wavelengths of the emitted radiation comes out to be 
6565.2 A and 
6563.4 A 
for hydrogen and deuterium respectively. The corresponding wavelengths for the 
n = 4 ---+ n = 2 transition are 
4863.1 A and 
4861.7 A 
Such a small difference in the wavelength was first observed by Urey in 1932 which 
led to the discovery of deuterium. In spectroscopy the energy levels are usually 
written in wavenumber units which are obtained by dividing by he: 
E 
Z2 
Tn = ~ = --R 
he 
n 2 
(57) 
where 
(58) 
is known as the Rydberg constant. Values of the Rydberg constant for different 
hydrogen like atoms are given below 
R = 109677.58 cm- 1 (for the hydrogen atom) 
109707.56 cm- i (for the deuterium atom) 
109722.40 cm- i (for the He+ -atom) 
109728.90 cm- 1 (for the Li++ -atom) 
The slight difference in the values is because of the difference in the values of the 
reduced mass fl,. The eigenfunctions are usually denoted by Rnl(r). As an example, 
we calculate R20(r) implying n = 2 and I = O. The recurrence relation [Eg. (48)] 
gives 
Thus 
and 
We therefore have 
p+l+l-A 
(p+1)(p+21+2) 
1 
C i = --Co 
2 
p-l 
(p + 1 )(p + 2) 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
257 
Since n = 2, we have p = ~ [see Eq. (53)] and therefore if we use the nonnaliza-
tion condition 
we would readily get 
where 
00 f IRnl (r)1 2r 2dr = 1 
o 
1 (Z )3/2 ( 1) 
R20(r) = -
-
1 -
-~ e-;/2 
.J2 
ao 
2 
Z 
~ =-r 
ao 
(59) 
(60) 
Similarly, one can calculate other wave functions. We give below the first few 
Rnt(r) 
( Z )3/2 
RIO(r) = 2 
ao 
e-~ 
(61) 
1 (Z )3/2 
R21 (r) = --
-
~e-~/2 
205 
ao 
(62) 
2 
( Z )3/2 ( 
2 
2) 
R30(r) = __ -
1 -
-~ + _~2 e-U3 
3.)3 
ao 
3 
27 
(63) 
(64) 
R32(r) = 
-
~2e-E,13 
4 (Z )3/2 
81~ ao 
(65) 
All wavefunctions are nonnalized [see Eq.(59)]. The radial functions are usu-
ally expressed in tenns of the Associated Laguerre functions (see Appendix I); 
however, it is more convenient to express in terms of confluent hypergeometric 
functions (see Sec. 10.4.2). The complete wavefunction is given by 
(66) 
where Y1m (e, <p) are the spherical harmonics tabulated in Sec. 15.3. Looking at Eq. 
(50) we see that the energy depends on the total quantum number n. Since for each 
n we have values of l ranging from 0 to n - 1 [see Eq.(49)] and for each value of 
l, the m values range from -l to +1 [see Sec. 9.3], there are 
n-[ 
L)21 + 1) = n2 
(67) 
1=0 

258 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
states 1/!nlm belonging to a particular energy. The degeneracy with respect to m is 
due to spherical symmetry of the potential energy function. But the I-degeneracy 
is peculiar to the Coulomb field and is, in general, removed for non-Coulomb 
potentials (see e.g., Problem 10.12). 
1004.1. THE PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTION FUNCTIONS 
Since Yo,o = 1 1,J4n, the ground state wave function is spherically symmetric and 
is given by 
2 (Z)3/2 
1/!1,O,O = 
r::t= 
-
exp(-Zrlao) 
'\I47T 
ao 
(68) 
If P (r )dr represents the probability of finding the electron between rand r + dr, 
Thus per) = 0 at r = 0 and at r = 00 and has a maximum value at r = ao/Z, 
This implies that the position of the electron is not certain but we can say for 
the hydrogen atom (for which Z = I) that most probably the electron will be 
found around the Bohr radius. This is consistent with the uncertainty principle I see 
Chapter 3]. It may be noted that 
00 f P(r)dr = I 
o 
(70) 
as it indeed should be. The probability distribution functions for the first few I = 0 
states are given below: 
( Z) 
2 -21; 
PI,O,(J = 
ao 
4~ e 
(71 ) 
Z 
I 
I 
2 -I; 
( 
) 
( 
)
2 
P2,O,o = 
ao 
:2 
1 -:2~ 
4~ e 
(72) 
P3,O,O = (~) ~ (1 - ~~ + 227~2 r 
ee-21;/3 
(73) 
( Z) 1 ( 
3 
I 2 
1 3) 2 2 -U2 
P4,O,O = 
ao 16 
I -
4~ + 8~ - 192 ~ 
~ e 
(74) 
For higher excited states the probability distribution is maximum at a greater dis-
tance from the nucleus (see Fig, 10.2). In Fig, 10.3 we have given typical density 
plots of Ilfrll,l,m 12 on the y = 0 plane, 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
259 
10 
20 
20 
30 
40 
50 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
Figure 10.2. The probability distribution function P(r) for the (1.0,0), (2,0,0), (3,0,0) and 
(4,0, 0) states. 
Figure 10.3. Top row: Density plots of 10/10012,10/20012 and 10/3 0012. Bottom row: Density plots 
of 10/2.1.012,10/3,1.01 2 and 10/3,2.01 2. All d'e~sity plo~s ~re on the y'~ 0 plane. 
10.4.2. SOLUTION IN TERMS OF THE CONFLUENT HYPERGEOMETRIC 
FUNCTION 
We rewrite Eq.(l5) for the Coulomb potential [see Eq.(20)] 
(75) 

260 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Once again we introduce the dimensionless variable 
p = yr 
[where the parameter y is defined by Eq.(40)] to obtain 
d 2u [I A l(l + I)] 
-
+ - - + - -
u (p) = 0 
dp2 
4 
P 
p2 
(76) 
where A is the same as given by Eq. (41). Now as p -+ 00, the first term inside the 
square bracket is the most dominating term and we may approximately write 
d2u 
1 
-
- -u(p) = 0 
dp2 
4 
the solutions of which are given by e±p/2. We reject the exponentially amplifying 
solution and write 
u(p) ~ e-p / 2 as p -+ 00 
(77) 
Now as p -+ 0, the third term inside the square brackets is the most dominating 
term and we may approximately write 
If we write 
then we readily obtain 
g (g -
I) = I (l + 1) 
giving 
g = -lor (I + 1) 
If we reject the g = -I solution [because it will diverge for p -+ 0], we may write 
u(p) ~ p'+1 
as p -+ 0 
(78) 
Equations (77) and (78) suggest that we try to solve Eq. (76) by defining y(p) 
through the following equation 
(79) 
Simple manipulations will show that y(p) satisfies the following equation: 
d 2y 
dy 
p- + (c - p)- - ay(p) = 0 
dp2 
dp 
(80) 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
261 
where 
a 
1+1-).. 
c 
21 + 2 
(81) 
Equation (80) is known as the confluent hypergeometric equation (see Appendix 
F) and using the power series method one can very easily show that one of the 
solutions ofEq. (80) [which is finite at the origin] is given by [see Appendix FI 
ap 
a(a+l)p2 
y(p) = ,F,(a,c,p)=l+--l'+ ( 
1)-2' +1\ 
(82) 
c. 
c c+ 
. 
which is known as the confluent hypergeometric function. Thus the complete 
solution of Eq.(76), which is well behaved at p = 0, is given by 
u(p) = N pl+'e-p/2 ,F, (a, c, p) 
(83) 
where 
y3/2 
{ 
(n + I)! 
} '/2 
N = (21 + I)! 
2n (n - I -
I)! 
(84) 
represents the normalization constant so that 
CXl 
00 
f u2(r)dr = f R2(r)r2dr = 1 
(85) 
o 
0 
We may mention the following: 
(i) The solution given by Eq.(83) is a rigorously correct solution of Eq.(76). Writ-
ing the solution in the form of Eq.(79) does not involve any approximation. 
(ii) The infinite series given by Eq. (82) is convergent for all values of p in the 
domain ° 
< p < 00. 
(iii) For a = c, the infinite series given in Eq. (82) is simply eP ; thus as p ---+ 00, 
u(p) will diverge as pl+'eP/ 2 • 
(iv) Indeed 
,F,(a,c,p) -+ p"-cep 
(86) 
p-+oo 
(see Appendix K). Thus 
(87) 

262 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and will blow up as p ---* 00 [although the infinite series given by Eq.(82) is 
always convergent!]. In order to avoid this we must make the infinite series a 
polynomial which can happen only if a is a negative integer: 
a = -nr: 
nr = 0, 1,2, ... 
(88) 
Thus 
A = l + I + nr = n; 
n = 1,2, ... 
(89) 
The quantities nr and n are usually referred to as the radial quantum number 
and the total quantum number respectively. 
We should mention that Eq. (83) is very convenient to use and Eq. (82) is quite 
easy to remember! For example, for n = 3, I = 2, we will have 
which can easily be seen to be identical to Eq. (65). 
10.5. Vibration rotation spectra of diatomic molecules 
In this section we will briefly discuss the vibration rotation spectra of diatomic 
molecules. In the simplest model, the potential energy function (between the two 
atoms of the molecule) is assumed to be represented by a Hooke's law type of 
interaction so that 
(90) 
where k is the force constant and re represents the equilibrium distance between 
the atoms (see Fig. lOA). Since the potential is spherically symmetric, the radial 
part of the SchrOdinger equation is given by [see Eq. (17)] 
(91 ) 
4 
~-------. 
• 
• e--/-. ------e. m2 
Center of mass 
Figure 10.4. The diatomic molecule. 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
263 
where u (r) = r R (r) and, to be consistent with the spectroscopic notation, we have 
written J (J + 1) instead of I (l + 1); J = 0, 1, 2, .... Further, 
in, in2 
f.L= 
in, +in2 
represents the reduced mass with in, and in2 representing the mass of the two atoms 
of the diatomic molecule. The boundary conditions are 
u(r = 0) = ° 
= u(r = (0) 
Introducing the variable 
p = r - re 
we get 
d 2u 
2f.L [ 
J(J + l)n 2 
1 2] 
-
+ -
E -
- -kp 
u (p) = ° 
dp2 
n2 
2f.Lr; 
2 
(92) 
where in the denominator we have replaced re + p by re; the error involved is 
negligible for small vibrations (see e.g., Sec. 10.5.1). The boundary conditions 
become 
u(p = -re) = ° = u(p = (0) 
which, for small vibrations, is approximately the same as 
u(p = -00) = ° = u(p = (0) 
(93) 
Equation (92) and the above boundary conditions are equivalent to the one-
dimensional harmonic oscillator problem [see Sec. 7.2] so that we may write 
J(J+l)n 2 
( 
1) 
E -
:::::: 
v + -
nw 
2f.Lr,~ 
2 
(94) 
where 
and v = 0, 1, 2, ... represents the vibration quantum number. We rewrite Eq.(94) 
as 
(95) 
where 
J(J+l)n 2 
Er = 
J = 0,1,2, ... 
2f.Lr; 
and 
(96) 
Ev = (v + 1) nw; v = 0, 1, 2, ... 

264 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Tahle 10.1. Rotational and vibrational constants of some 
diatomic molecules [adapted from Ref. 4]. 
Molecule 
rp (A) 
g = ...!!L (cm- I ) 
2nc 
1i2 2 (eV) 
2/Lre 
H2 
0.74 
4395 
7.56 x 10-3 
HD 
0.74 
3817 
5.69 x 10-3 
N2 
1.09 
2360 
2.48 x 10-4 
02 
1.21 
1580 
1.78 x 10-4 
LiH 
1.60 
1406 
9.27 x 10-4 
HCI35 
1.27 
2991 
1.32 x 10-3 
NaCI3S 
2.51 
380 
2.36 x 10-5 
KBr79 
2.94 
231 
9.1 x 10-6 
represent the rotational and vibrational energies respectively. In spectroscopy, the 
energy levels are usually written in wave number units which are obtained by 
dividing by he: 
where 
T(cm- I ) = ~ = (v +~) g + 
BJ(1 + 
1) 
he 
2 
w 
g=-
2nc 
is known as the vibrational constant and 
h 
B = --::-----::-
8n 2e(p/i) 
(97) 
(98) 
(99) 
is known as the rotational constant. Table 10.1 gives vibrational and rotational 
constants of some diatomic molecules. 
The rotation-vibration states are schematically shown in Fig. 10.5. The upper 
state energy levels (v = 1) are given by 
3 
T'(cm- I ) = BJ'(1' + 1) +-g 
2 
and the lower state energy levels (v = 0) are given by 
1 
T"(cm- I ) = B1"(1" + 1) + -g 
2 
The transition lines for which 
b.J = J" - J' = 1 
(100) 
(101) 
(102) 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
265 
are referred to as the P branch and the lines for which 
b.J = J" - J' = 1 
are referred to as the R branch. Now, for the P branch we have the following 
transitions 
(v = 1, J = J') ++ (v = 0, J = J' + 1); 
J' = 0,1,2,3, K 
and the corresponding frequencies will be given by 
g + B[J'(1' + 1) - (1' + 1)(1' + 2)] 
g - 2B(1' + 1) 
g - 2B, g - 4B, g - 6B, K (P branch) 
for J' = 0, 1,2, K respectively. On the other hand, for the R branch we have the 
following transition 
(v = 1, J = 1') ++ (v = 0, J = J' -
1); 
J' = 1,2,3, K 
for which 
g + 2BJ' 
g + 2B, g + 4B, g + 6B, K (R branch) 
for J' = 1, 2, 3, K respectively. 
Example 10.1 The experimental values of the v = ° 
-+ v = 1 absorption lines of 
HCl35 are given below 7 : 
2906.3 
-I 
em 
-I 
2927.5 
-I 
21.2 em 
P branch 
em 
em-I 
-I 
21.2 
2948.7 em 
-I 
2969.9 em-I 
21.2 em 
-I 
42.3 em 
3012.2 em-I 
21.2 
-I 
em 
3033.4 
-I 
R branch 
em 
21.2 em-I 
3054.6 
-I 
em 
21.2 
-I 
em 
3075.8 
-I 
em 
7 Data taken from Ref. 3; this reference also gives an accurate description of infrared band 
analysis. 

266 
J'. 5 
4 
3 
2 
I o 
J" .) 
4 
3 
2 
I o 
I 
I. 
I 
-t.J·1+I 
1 I 
l 
1 
.JM1-1,~ 
:--
I 
1 
1 
I 
I 
, •.••..... 
J c 
4 
3 
2 
I 6 vo 
I 
2 3 4 
5 
J ". 5 4 
3 
2 
I 
0 
I 2 
3 4 
v~ 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
f~ 
3000 
2900 
2800 
2700 
~ 
Reciprocal wavelength (cm- ') 
Figure 10.5. The vibration-rotation states (and the corresponding spectra) for HCI. The slightly 
different frequencies at each absorption line are due to the presence of the two isotopes Cl35 and 
Cl37 [adapted from Ref. 3]. 
Thus 
2B ~ 21.2 cm- 1 ::::} B ~ 10.6 cm- I 
Now 
35 
35 
-24 
fL ~ -mH ~ -
X 1.67 X 10 
g 
36 
36 
~ 1.62 X 10-24 g 
Using Eq. (99) we get re ~ 1.27 A. Further 
w 
2969.9 + 3012.2 
1 
Ii = -- ~ 
~ 2991 em-
2rre 
2 
giving 
w ~ 5.63 X 1014 S-I 
and 
k ~ 5.14 X 105 dynes/em 
The absorption lines 2948.7 cm- 1 and 2969.9 cm- i correspond to (v = 0, J = 
2) -+ (v = 1, J = 1) and (v = 0, J = 1) -+ (v = 1, J = 0) transitions in the P 
branch. Similarly, the absorption lines 3012.2 cm- i and 3033.4 cm- 1 correspond 
to (v = 0, J = 1) -+ (v = I, J = 2) and (v = 0, J = 0) -+ (v = 1, J = I) 
transitions in the R branch. 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
267 
Figure 10.5 shows the spectra of HCI; the slightly different frequencies at each 
absorption line are due to the presence of two isotopes of chlorine (HC135 and 
HCI37). Notice that the I'll = 0 transitions are forbidden. 
Example 10.2 The experimental values of the v = 0 ---+ v = I absorption lines of 
C I20 16 are given below8 
2154.77 
-I 
em 
em-I 
2158.63 
-I 
3.86 
em 
-I 
2162.49 
-I 
3.86 
em 
em 
-I 
2166.35 
em-I 
3.86 
em 
-I 
-I 
7.72 
em 
2174.07 
em 
3.86 
-I 
-I 
em 
2177.93 
em 
3.86 em-I 
-I 
2181.79 
em 
3.86 
-I 
-I 
em 
2185.65 
em 
Thus 
B = 1.93 cm- I 
Now 
12 x 16 
/I :::::: ---m :::::: 1.145 x 10-23 g 
t'" 
28 
H 
Using Eq. (99) we get re :::::: 1.13 A. Further 
giving 
w 
g = -
:::::: 2170.21 cm- I 
2:rrc 
w :::::: 4.088 x 1014 S-I 
and 
k:::::: 1.91 x 106 dynes/em 
It is interesting to note that since the degeneracy of each rotational level is (21 + 1), 
at thermal equilibrium 
Number of molecules in the rotational level 1" 
Number of molecules in the rotational level 1" = 0 
" 
[ 
E(J = 1", v) - E(J = 0, V)] 
= (21 + I)exp ------kT-----
= (21" + 1)e-a }"(J"+I) 
(103) 
where 
/12 
1 
a=--·-
2/Lr; 
kT 
(104) 
8 Data adapted from Ref. 3. 

268 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Equation (103) shows that the population increases with 1" and attains its maxi-
mum value around 
For Hel, 
and at room temperatures, 
implying 
1/ 1[f2 ] 
J 
~"2 '1-;;-1 
I 
kT ~ -
eV 
40 
1/ 1[f2 ] 
J 
~"2 'I -;; - I 
~ 2.6 
(105) 
For J" = 1,2,3 and 4 the quantity on the RHS of Eq.(l03) takes the values 
2.7,3.6,3.7 and 3.13 respectively. Thus at room temperature, the population is 
maximum for the transition occurring from the level 1" = 3. Indeed, from the 
absorption spectra, it is possible to deduce the temperature of the gas. 
10.5.1. A MORE ACCURATE ANALYSIS OF THE VIBRATION ROTATION 
SPECTRA 
In order to obtain a more accurate expression for energy eigenvalues associated 
with the vibration-rotation spectra, we rewrite Eq. (91) in the form 
d2u 
2/L 
d p2 + f!2 F (p) u (p) = 0 
where 
F (p) 
J(J+I)n 2 ( 
p)-2 
I 
2 
E -
1 + -
- -kp 
2/Lr} 
re 
2 
( 
2p 
3p2 ) 
I 
2 
E -
Er 
1 - -
+ -
- - kp 
re 
r} 
2 
where Er is given by Eq. (??). Thus 
1 '[ 
2 
7J 
F(p):::E-Er--k (p-a) -a-
2 
where 
k' = k (1 + 3r) 
(106) 
(107) 
(108) 
(109) 
(110) 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
and 
a=(1:3r)re 
Thus Eq. (106) can be written in the form 
where 
and 
d2u 
2M [, 1, 2] 
-
+ -
E -
- k ~ 
u (~) = 0 
dp2 
112 
2 
~=p-a 
1 
E' = E - Er + - k' a 2 
2 
269 
(111) 
(112) 
(113) 
( 114) 
Equation (112) represents the Schrodinger equation for the linear harmonic oscil-
lator. Assuming u (~ = -00) = 0 = u (~ = 00) we get the following expression 
for the energy eigenvalues 
E' ~ (v + D 
h If; v ~ Q, I, 2, ' , , 
(1 15) 
or, 
Energy eigenvalues 
E = Er [1-
r 
] + (v+~) hJ~(1 +31') 
(116) 
1+ 3r 
2 
M 
which represents a more accurate expression for the energy eigenvalues. However, 
the corrections are usually small because in most cases 
For example, for HCI35 
r«1 
w 
V = -
;:::::; 2886 cm- 1 
2rre 
;:::::; 5.436 x 1014 S-1 
Mw2 
;:::::; 
~~ x 1.67 X 10-24 x (5.44 X 10 14)2 
;:::::; 4.80 X 105 dynes/em 
where, for consistency with books on spectroscopy, we have used CGS units. Thus 
~ kre2 
;:::::; 
~ x 4.8 x lOs x (1.27 X 10-8)2 ergs 
;:::::; 24.2 eV 

270 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where we have assumed re ~ 1.27 A for the equilibrium spacing between hydrogen 
and chlorine atoms. Thus 
J (J + 1) 
lilo 
r = 
2W,.- ~ 5 X 10-5 J (J + 1) 
! kr 2 
2 
e 
showing that the correction terms in Eq. (116) are very small. The effect of anhar-
monic terms is discussed in Ref. 3. 
10.6. The three-dimensional harmonic oscillator 
In this section we will consider the three-dimensional harmonic oscillator described 
by the potential energy function 
Potential energy function 
( 117) 
Thus in Cartesian coordinates, the three-dimensional Schrodinger equation be-
comes 
1/f (x, y. z) = 0 
(118) 
We use the method of separation of variables to solve the above equation and write 
1/f(x,y,z) = X(x) Y(y)Z(z) 
(119) 
Thus 
211 [ 
1 
2 2 
1 
2 2 
I 
2 2] 
+ -
E -
-I/W X 
-
-I/W Y -
-I/W Z 
XYZ = 0 
112 
21"' 
I 
21"' 
2 
21"' 
3 ' 
or 
(120) 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
271 
The variables have indeed separated out. The first term inside the square brackets 
on the LHS of the above equation is a function of x alone; similarly the second and 
the third terms are functions of y and z and since their sum is equal to a constant, 
we must set each term equal to a constant 
(121) 
(122) 
(123) 
where 
(124) 
Now, if we define 
-f9WI 
YI-
--
Ii 
(125) 
Eq. (121) takes the form 
(126) 
We had encountered the above equation in Chapter 7 while discussing the linear 
harmonic oscillator problem. If we apply the boundary condition that X (~) -+ ° 
as t; -+ ±oo we would find that AI can only take the values 1,3,5, ... ; i.e. 
Thus 
A I = (2n I + I) ; n I = 0, I, 2, ... 
{LWI 
gl = (2nl + I) T 
The corresponding normalized eigenfunction would be (see Sec. 7.3): 
where HnJ (~) are the Hermite polynomials and 
Similarly 
(\27) 
(128) 
(129) 
(\30) 

272 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and 
with 
n2, n3 = 0,1,2, ... 
The corresponding nonnalized eigenfunctions would be 
and 
where 
and 
Thus 
1f;(x,y,Z) 
(131) 
where 
The corresponding energy eigenvalues would be given by 
or, 
Energy eigenvalues 
E = Enj ,n2,n3 = (n] +}) nw] + (n2 +}) nW2 + (n3 +}) nW3; 
n], n2, n3 = 0,1,2,3,... 
(132) 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
10.6.1. THE ISOTROPIC OSCILLATOR 
For an isotropic oscillator 
giving 
E 
When n = 0, we must have 
(nl + n2 + n3 + D /1w 
(n+~)/1w; n=0,1,2, ... 
On the other hand, when n = I, we could have 
or 
nl=0,n2=1,n3=0 
or 
n 1 = 0, n2 = 0, n3 = I 
273 
(133) 
(134) 
Thus we will have a three-fold degenerate state. Similarly, the energy level corre-
sponding to n = 2 will be six-fold degenerate. In general, the degree of degeneracy 
will be 
I 
1 + 2 + ... + n + (n + 1) = "2 (n + 1) (n + 2) 
( 135) 
Now, for the isotropic oscillator, the potential energy function can be written as 
Potential function 
(136) 
Since the potential is spherically symmetric, we could write the solution of the 
Schrodinger equation in the form 
1jf (r, e, ¢) = R (r) Ylm (e, ¢) 
(137) 
where R (r) satisfies the following equation 
1 d [ 2 d R] 
2fL [ 
1 
2 2 
I (I + 1) /1 2 ] 
--
r -
+ -
E -
-fLW r -
R (r) = 0 
r2 dr 
dr 
/1 2 
2 
2fLr2 
(138) 
One can directly solve the above equation (see Problems 10.12); however, it may 
be instructive to choose appropriate linear combinations9 of the wave functions 
9 We may recall that if Vrl. Vr2."" Vr g represent g linearly independent wave functions for a 
g-fold degenerate state then any linear combination of them (like CJ Vr 1 + c2Vr2 + ... ) is also an 
eigenfunction corresponding to the same energy eigenvalue. 

274 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
given by Eq. (131) so that they are of the form of Eq. (137). We illustrate this for 
the first three states: 
THE GROUND STATE 
The ground state energy is given by 
3 
Eo = Eo,o,o = 2: liw 
which corresponds to 
The corresponding eigenfunction is given by 
(139) 
where 
Y = Y I = Y2 = Y 3 = j 
flW Ii 
(140) 
We can also rewrite 0/0 as 
0/0 (r, e, ¢) = Ro,o (r) YO,O 
(141 ) 
where 
2y 3/ 2 
Roo (r) = __ e-y2r2/2 
, 
n 1/4 
(142) 
The function Ro.o (r) is automatically normalized. 
THE FIRST EXCITED STATE 
The energy eigenvalue corresponding to the first excited state is given by 
which will occur when 
or, when 
or, when 
n 1 = 0, n2 = 0 and n3 = 1 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
275 
Thus there will be three linearly independent eigenfunctions belonging to the same 
energy eigenvalue; hence the first excited state is said to be a three-fold degenerate 
state. The corresponding eigenfunctions would be 
1f' 00 = C,xe-y2r2/2 = C,rsine cos</Je-y2r2/2 
2 2/2 
2 2/2 
1f0.1.0 = C, ye-y r 
= C,rsine sin</Je-Y r 
1f00, = C, ze-y2r2/2 = C,rcose e-y2r2/2 
where 
V2 
C, = __ y5/2 
JT3/4 
The eigenfunctions of the form of Eq. (137) are given by 
I 
../2 (1f, + i1f2) = -Rl,l (r) Yu (e, </J) 
1 
../2 (1f, - i1f2) = R", (r) Yl.-, (e, </J) 
1f 3 = R l.l (r) Yl.() (e, </J) 
where 
~
JT 
1 
5/2 
_ 2r2/2 
Rl,l (r) = -. -- . y 
r e y 
3 
JT3/4 
THE SECOND EXCITED STATE 
(143) 
(144) 
(145) 
(146) 
(147) 
(148) 
(149) 
Similarly, the second excited state (with £2 = 
~ nw) is six-fold degenerate with 
n" n2 and n} taking the following sets of values 
(2,0,0); (0,2,0); (0,0,2); 
(1,1,0); (0,1,1); and (1,0,1). 
Since H2 (~) = (4e - 2) , the corresponding eigenfunctions are 
1f 4 = 1f 2.0.0 
1f5 = 1f0.2.0 
1f 6 = 1f 0.0.2 
1f 7 = 1f l,l ,0 
1f 8 = 1f (J, I. , 
0/9 = 1f"0,, 
C2 (4y 2x 2 - 2) e-y2r2/2 
C2 (4y2y2 - 2) e-y2r2/2 
C2 (4 y 2Z2 - 2) e-y2r2/2 
V2C2 (2yx) (2yy) e-y2r2/2 
v'2C2 (2y y) (2yz) e-y2r2/2 
../2c2 (2yz) (2yx) e-y2r2/2 
(150) 

276 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where 
_ 
1 (y )3/2 
C2 - --
--
2~ ~ 
(151 ) 
The eigenfunctions of the form of Eg. (137) are given by 
1 
¢4= vS (0/4 + o/s +0/6) 
R2,o (r) YO.O (e, ¢) 
(152) 
1 
¢s = V6 (-0/4 -o/s +20/6) 
Ru(r) Y2,o(e,¢) 
(153) 
¢6 = l (0/4 -o/s +i~0/7) 
R2,2(r) Y2,2(e,¢) 
(154) 
¢7 = l (0/4 -o/s - i~0/7) 
R2,2 (r) Y2,-2 (e, ¢) 
(155) 
1 
¢s = - ~ 
(0/9 + io/s) 
R2,2 (r) Y2.1 (e, ¢) 
(156) 
I 
¢9 = ~ 
(0/9 - io/s) 
R2,2 (r) Y2,-1 (e, ¢) 
(157) 
where 
R2,o(r) 
~ (5rr y/2 (4y2r2 _ 6) e-y"r 2/2 
(158) 
R2,2 (r) Ifs ( 
y )3/24 2 2 -y2r"/2 
-
-
y r e 
15 
~ 
( 159) 
10.7. Problems 
Problem 10.1 
(a) Consider a spherically symmetric potential energy function of the form 
V (r) 
o O<r<a 
(160) 
00 r>a 
which represents an infinitely deep potential well of radius a. Consider the 
I = 0 case and determine the energy eigenvalues and the normalized eigen-
functions. 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
277 
(b) In continuation of part (a), show that for a general value of l the energy 
eigenvalues are given by 
E 
=~(gl,n)2. 
1=0,1,2, .. . 
n,l 
2{-t 
a 
' 
n = 1, 2, .. . 
(161) 
where gf,n represent the zeroes of the spherical Bessel function if (x); i.e, 
n, 
4.4934, gl2 
5.7635, g22 
2n, 
7.7253, gl3 
9.0950, g23 
3n, , .. 
10.9041, .. . 
12.3229, .. . 
Show that the corresponding normalized eigenfunctions are 
(162) 
(163) 
Problem 10.2 A quantum dot can be approximately described by an electron (of 
a certain effective mass) inside an infinitely deep spherical well as discussed in the 
previous problem. Assume a :::::: 0.4 {-tm and the effective mass of the electron to be 
0.065 me, calculate the frequency of radiation emitted when the electron makes a 
transition from the first excited state to the ground state, 
[ADS: Approximately 0.91 GHz] 
Problem 10.3 
(a) We next consider the electron (of effective mass {-t) to be confined inside an 
infinitely deep cylindrical well of height b and radius a. Solve the Schrtidinger 
equation in cylindrical coordinates and show that the energy eigenvalues are 
given by 
/i 2 [(In)2 (a mn )2] 
Em,l,n = 2{-t 
b 
+---;;-
(164) 
where m = 0, 1,2".,; 1= 1,2,3, ... and a mn represent the zeroes of lm(x), 
Thus 
aO! 
2.4048, a02 
5.5201, a03 
8,6537, ... 
all 
3.8317, al2 
7.0156, al3 
10,1735, ... 
a21 
5.1356, a22 
8.4172, a23 
11.6198, ... 

278 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(b) Show that the corresponding normalized eigenfunctions are 
(165) 
(c) For a = b = 0.4 p,m, p, = 0.065 me calculate the frequency of emission for 
transition between the first excited state and the ground state. 
Problem 10.4 The deuteron nucleus consists of a neutron and a proton. The 
neutron-proton interaction can be approximately described by the following spher-
ically symmetric potential function 10 
V (r) 
ex) 
r < b 
-VO 
b < r < a +b 
( 166) 
o 
r>a+b 
(a) Obtain the transcendental equation determining the energy eigenvalues cor-
responding to the I = 0 state and show that if we assume Vo = 40 Me V 
and a ::= 1.896 x 10-15 m, we obtain E ::= -2.25 MeV which represents the 
binding energy of the deuteron. 
(b) Also assuming b ~ 0.4 X 10- 15 m show that for the ground state 
(167) 
which compares well with the experimental value of 8.4 x 1O-15m (data 
quoted from Ref. 6); the value of b is suggested from the high energy ex-
periments, see also Ref. 5. 
Problem 10.5 Use the recurrence relation [Eq. (48)] and the normalization con-
dition to derive Equations (61)-(65) and also the following radial functions corre-
sponding to n = 4: 
1 (Z )3/2 [ 
3 
1 2 
I 3] 
-~/4 
R4,O (r) = -
-
I -
-
~ + - ~ - -
~ 
e 
4 
ao 
4 
8 
192 
(168) 
10 The potential function described by Eq. (166) is known as the hard core potential according to 
which the two particles cannot get closer than a certain distance b. This type of potential is indeed 
suggested by scattering experiments, It may be mentioned that the actual potential energy function 
describing nuclear forces is very complicated but many low energy phenomena are rather insensitive 
to the form of potential energy function and are reasonably well described, by a short-range attractive 
force of the type given by Eq. (166). For more details see Ref. 6. 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
279 
~( )3/2 [ 
] 
1 
5 
Z 
1 2 
1 
3 
1;4 
-
-
-
~ - - ~ + -
~ 
e- / 
16 
3 
ao 
4 
80 
(169) 
R4,1 (r) 
R4.2 (r) 
_1 (~)3/2 [~2 _ ~ 
~3] e-U4 
64~ ao 
12 
(170) 
R4,3 (r) = 
1 
Z 
3 
-1;/4 
( )3/2 
768J35 
aO 
~ e 
(171) 
Problem 10.6 For n = 1 and 1 = 0, one of the solutions of Eq. (45) is a constant. 
Find the other solution of the equation in tenns of an integral and show that it 
diverges for P ~ 0 as well as for P ~ 00. 
Problem 10.7 In continuation of the previous problem, the well-behaved solutions 
ofEq. (45) are 
Co (1 - t p) 
for n = 2, 1=0 
CoP 
for n = 2, 1 = 1 
Co (1-p+}p2) 
for n = 3, 1=0 
Co (p - tP2) 
for n = 3, 1 = 1 
COp2 
for n = 3, 1 = 2 
Determine the other independent solution in terms of an integral. 
Problem 10.8 
(a) Consider the spherically symmetric potential well 
VCr) = -Vo exp(-rja) 
(172) 
For 1 = 0, solve the Schr6dinger equation by making the following transfor-
mation 
~ = exp(-rj2a) 
(173) 
which will transfonn Eq. (17) into a Bessel's equation. (Bessel functions are 
briefly discussed in Appendix J). 
(b) Obtain the energy eigenvalue assuming f.L = 0.8369 X 10-27 kg (correspond-
ing to the deuteron problem), Vo = 40 MeV and a = 1.854 x 10-15 m. 
Problem 10.9 Show that Ro,o (r), Rl,l (r), R2,o (r) and R2,2 (r) as given by 
Equations (142), (149), (158) and (159) satisfy Eq. (138); detennine the corre-
sponding eigenvalues. 

280 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Problem 10.10 (a) Using the data given in the first column of Table 10.1, ver-
ify the data given in the last column. (b) In each case calculate the value of the 
rotational constant B. 
Problem 10.11 For HCl35 and HCl37 calculate the frequencies (in cm- I) for the 
following transitions 
(v = I, i = if) -----+ (v = 0, i = if + 1); i j = 4, 3, 2, 1,0 (P branch) 
and 
(v = 1, i = if) -----+ (v = 0, i = 1" - 1); ii = 5,4,3,2,1 (R branch) 
and compare with the positions shown in Fig. lOA. Assume 
o W l  
re = 1.27 A and -
= 2885.9 cm-
2nc 
for both the molecules. 
Problem 10.12 For the isotropic three-dimensional harmonic oscillator problem 
[Eq. (136)] solve the radial part of the Schrodinger equation [Eq. (138)] and show 
that the results are consistent with those obtained in Sec. 10.6. 
[Hint: Make the transformation ~ = y2r2 (y = JfLW/ Ii) and remove the first 
derivative in the resulting equation]. 
Problem 10.13 We next consider the two-dimensional isotropic oscillator for 
which the potential energy variation is given by 
(174) 
where 
(a) Using a method similar to that used in Sec. 10.6, solve the two-dimensional 
SchrMinger equation in Cartesian coordinates to obtain the following 
eigenfunctions and eigenvalues 
(175) 
E = (n + 1) Ii W 
(176) 
where n = nl + n2; n], n2 = 0, 1,2, ... 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
281 
(b) Solve the two-dimensional Schrodinger equation in polar coordinates and 
obtain solutions in terms of the confluent hypergeometric function. 
[Hint: Make the transformation ~ = y2 p2 and remove the first derivative in 
the resulting equation]. 
Problem 10.14 Consider the spherically symmetric potential energy function 
A 
B 
VCr) = 2" - -
(A > 0, B > 0) 
r 
r 
(177) 
Show that the radial part of the Schrodinger equation is of the same form as for 
the hydrogen atom problem; the corresponding discrete energy eigenvalues being 
given by 
2B2 
8 A Ip 
[ 
]
~2 
Ep = - lit (2p + 1) + {(21 + 1)2 + :2 } 
(178) 
where p = 0, 1, 2, .... Determine the normalized eigenfunctions in terms of the 
confluent hypergeometric function. 
Problem 10.15 Consider the spherically symmetric potential energy function 
A 
VCr) = 2" + Br2 (A > 0, B > 0) 
r 
(179) 
Show that the radial part of the SchrMinger equation is of the same form as that 
of the isotropic oscillator [Eq. (138)]; the corresponding energy eigenvalues being 
given by 
( B) 1/2 [ 
{ 
8 A} 1/2] 
Ep = Ii 
2fl 
4p + 2 + (21 + 1)2 + :2 
(180) 
where p = 0, 1, 2, ... 
10.8. Solutions 
Solution 10.1 For 0 < r < a, the radial part of the Schrodinger equation [Eq. 
(15)] can be written in the form 
d 2 R 2 
d R 
[ 
l (l + 1)] 
-
+ - -
+ 1 -
R (p) = 0 
dp2 
pdp 
p2 
(181) 
where 
p = kr 
(182) 

282 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
For I = 0, the transformation u (p) = P R (p) would give 
d2u 
dp2 + u (p) = 0 
(183) 
the solutions of which are sin p and cos p. Thus 
sinp 
cosp 
R (p) = A -
+ B -
(I = 0) 
p 
p 
The second solution would blow up at p = 0 and therefore we must have B = O. 
Further, 
glvmg 
R (a) = 0 :::} ka = mr 
n2rr 2li2 
E = En = ---
2f1a 2 
n = 1,2,3, ... 
The complete wave function would be 
sinkr 
1jf n.O,O (r, e, <p) = A ~ 
Yo.o 
For I = 1, the solution 'well-behaved' at p = 0 will be 
( sin p cos p) 
R(p)=A ---
p2 
p2 
(184) 
(185) 
(186) 
as can be verified by direct substitution. The boundary condition R (a) = 0 would 
give the transcendental equation 
tanka = ka 
(l = 1) 
which determines the energy eigenvalues. In general, we have the solution 
R (p) = A it (p) 
(187) 
where it (p) represents the spherical Bessel function (see Sec. 5.4 of Ref. 1). The 
energy eigenvalues are determined by solving the equation 
it (ka) =0 
(188) 
Solution 10.4 If we use the boundary conditions 
u (r = b) = 0 = u (r = (0) 
(189) 
the solution of Eq. (17) for I = 0 and for V (r) given by Eq. (166) would be 
u (r) 
A sin k (r - b) 
b < r < a + b 
B e-Kr 
r > a + b 
(190) 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
283 
where 
(191) 
f.L being the reduced mass; for bound states E < 0 and therefore K2 > O. Obviously 
lEI < Vo. Continuity of the wave function and its derivative at r = a + b would 
readily give [cf. Eg. (59) of Chapter 6] 
-I; cotl; = Ja 2 _1;2 
(192) 
where 
I; = ka 
(193) 
and 11 
2 x 0.8369 X 10-27 x 40 X 106 x 1.602 X 10-19 x (1.896 X 10-15 )2 
(1.055 X 10-34)2 
1.86 
Solving Eg. (192), we get I; ::::-: 1.81 giving 
Vo-IEI 
--- = - tan I; ::::-: 4.1 
lEI 
'* E ::::-: -2.25 MeV 
which compares well with the actual value of -2.225 MeV. Further 
11 Since 
we get 
00 
(r2) = f r21u (r)1 2 
o 
a+b 
dr=A 2 f r 2 sin2 k(r-b) dr 
h 
00 
+B2 f r 2 exp(-2Kr) dr 
a+h 
mn ~ 1.67543 x 10-27 kg, mp ~ 1.6726485 x 10-27 kg 
(194) 
(195) 
(196) 
( 197) 

284 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
with 
[ 
2K 
] 1/2 
A = --
and B = Aexp[K (a + b)) sinka 
1 +Ka 
(198) 
Solution 10.6 For n = I and I = 0, Eq. (45) can be written in the form 
1 d 2 F 
( 
2) 
dF jdp dp2 = 
1 - P 
Thus 
In (~:) = p - 21n p + constant 
or, 
dF 
p2_ = K eP 
dp 
where K is a constant. Thus 
f 
eP 
F (p) = K 
p2 dp + Co 
( 199) 
which represents the general solution of Eq. (45). Integrating term by term, we get 
I 
1 
1 
2 
I 
3 
--+lnp+-p+--p +--p + ... 
p 
2! 
2 . 3! 
3 ·4! 
(200) 
which represents the second independent solution of Eq. (45) for n = I and l = O. 
Solution 10.7 We have to first make the transformation 
F (p) = G (p) <l> (p) 
where <l> (p) is the known solution 12. We illustrate the procedure by considering 
the n = 2, I = I case for which <l> (p) = p; thus 
F (p) = p G (p) 
Substituting in Eq. (45) we obtain 
I 
/I 
4 
-G =1--
G' 
p 
Carrying out the integration we get 
dG 
K 
P 
-=-e 
dp 
p4 
12 The same procedure was used in Problem 7.6. In the previous problem, <P (p) was a constant 
and therefore the transformation was not necessary. 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
285 
Thus 
G(p) = K f ;4 eP dp+Co 
or, 
F(p) = K P f ;4 eP dp+Cop 
(201) 
which represents the general solution of Eq. (45); the second term represents the 
known solution <l> (p). Integrating term by term, we obtain for the second solution 
I 
111 
1213 
- -
- - - - + - pin p + - p + -p + ... 
3p2 
2p 
2! 
3! 
4! 
5! 2 
For n = 2, l = I we have 
(202) 
Solution 10.8 The transformation ~ = exp ( - {a) transforms Eq. (17) into the 
Bessel's equation, the solution of which (not diverging at ~ = 0 or r = 00) is 
(203) 
where 
v = [- 8JLIi~a2r/2 and g = [8JL:~a2r/2 
(204) 
The condition that u (r = 0) = 0 gives 
(205) 
which determines the energy eigenvalues. It may be mentioned that for g < 2.405 
(the first zero of 10 (x)) there is no root of Eq. (205) and consequently no discrete 
mode exists. Now 
2 
1/2 
g = (8 x 0.8369 x 10- 27 x 40 X 106 x 1.602 X 10-19 x (1.854 x 10-15 ) ) 
(1.055 x 10-34)2 
~ 3.64 
The solution of the transcendental equation 
Iv (3.64) = 0 
gives v ~ 0.858628 which gives E ~ -2.223 MeV. The corresponding wave 
function is plotted in Fig. 17.9. 

286 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Solution 10.11 Using Eqs. (100) and (101) we obtain for the (v = 1, J = J ') ---+ 
(v = 0, J = l' + 1) transition 
I::!.E 
w 
, 
-=--2B(1 +1) 
he 
2Ire 
Now, assuming re = 1.27 A we get 
and 
Thus, if we take 
we would get 
I::!.E 
he 
w 
-
= 2885.9 cm- i 
2Ire 
(2779.8,2779.6); (2801.0,2800.9); 
(2822.2,2822.1); (2843.5,2843.4) and (2864.7,2864.6) 
for J' = 4,3,2, 1 and 0 respectively. The two numbers in the paranthesis corre-
spond to HCl37 and HCl35 respectively. 
Solution 10.12 The transformation 
transforms Eq. (138) to the following form 
d 2 R 
3 d R 
[E 
I (l + 1) 
~ ] 
~-+--. + --
--
R(~)=O 
d~2 
2 dt; 
2tzw 
4t; 
4 
(206) 
In order to remove the term involving the first derivative we write 
R(t;) = t;P u(t;) 
(207) 
and obtain p = -3/4. The equation satisfied by u(O is of the same form as Eg. 
(72) with 
Ell 
A = -- and f1 = - + -
2tzw 
2 
4 
The solution well-behaved at the origin will be [see Eq. (77)] 
(208) 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
where 
1 
I 
3 
E 
a=fL+-- A =-+----
2 
2 
4 
2tiw 
and 
3 
c = 2fL + 1 = l + -2 
287 
Once again, for the wave function to be well behaved as r -+ 00 we must have 
a = -nr ; nr = 0, 1,2, ... 
which would give us 
E = (2nr + I + ~) tiw 
(209) 
and the complete wave function would be given by 
(210) 
where the normalization constant is given by 
N= 
(211) 
Solution 10.13 In polar coordinates (p, ¢), the two-dimensional SchrMinger 
equation is given by 
1 a (a1/f) 
1 a21/f 
2fL 
-- p-
+ -- + -
[E - V(p)] 1/f(p, ¢) = ° 
pap 
ap 
p2 a¢2 
ti2 
(212) 
Since the potential energy function depends on p only and for the wavefunction to 
be single valued, the solution can be written in the form [see Section 9.3] 
1/f(p, ¢) = R(p) [~eim<p]; m = 0, ±l, ±2,... 
(213) 
with R (p) satisfying the equation 
~~ (p dR) _ m2 R(p) + 2fL [E _ ~fLw2p2] R(p) = ° 
pdp 
dp 
p2 
ti2 
2 
(214) 
If we make the transformation 

288 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
we would readily obtain 
d 2 R 
d R 
[E 
m 2 ~ ] 
~-+-+ -----
R(~)=O 
d~2 
d~ 
2tiw 
4~ 
4 
(215) 
To remove the first derivative we make a transformation similar to that given by 
Eq. (207) and obtain p = -~. The equation satisfied by u(~) is of the same form 
as Eq. (72) with 
E 
m 
A = -- and Il = -
2tiw 
2 
Since only m 2 appears in Eq. (215) we will assume m > 0 and in the final result re-
place m by Iml. Following an exactly similar procedure as in the previous problem 
we obtain 
1jf(p,¢) 
[N plml e~y2p2/2 I FI (-n, Iml + I, y2p2)] 
X [~eim¢] 
(216) 
with 
E = (2n + 1m I + 1) tiw; n = 0, 1, 2, ... 
(217) 
10.9. Sample questions 
Q. I In the hydrogen atom problem the radial part of the Schrodinger equation 
can be written in the form 
I d (2dR) (A I 
l(l + 1)) 
-
-
p -
+ - - - -
R (p) = 0 
p2 dp 
dp 
p 
4 
p2 
(218) 
where 
( 
8 E) 1/2 
P = Y r ; Y = -
~2 
(219) 
A = Za (_~~2)'/2 
(220) 
and l = 0, 1, 2, .... If we assume a solution of the form 
00 
R(p) = e~p/2 L Cp pP+s 
(221) 
p=O,I, ... 

Spherically Symmetric Potentials 
289 
then we obtain 
s+p-A+l 
(222) 
(s + p + 1)(s + p + 2) -l(l + I) 
and for the solution to be well-behaved at p = 0 we must put s = l. 
a) For what values of p the infinite series in Eq. (221) be a convergent 
series? 
b) For what values of A will the infinite series in Eq. (221) become a 
polynomial? What will be the corresponding energy eigenvalues? 
c) Determine the eigenfunctions Rnl (r) for 
(A = I, I = 0), (A = 2, l = 0) (A = 2, I = 1) 
(A = 3, l = 0), (A = 3, l = 1) and (A = 3, I = 2) 
In each case normalize the wave function from first principles. 
d) For (A = 2, l = 1), (A = 3, l = 2) determine the second solution 
of Eq. (218) in the form of an integral and show that it is singular at 
p =0. 
e) Discuss the degeneracy of the level corresponding to A = 3. 
Q. 2 Given that the 2 independent solutions of 
are 
YI (x) = Xll+~ e-x /2 1 Fl (a, c, x) 
and 
Y2(X) = x-/1+~ e-x /2 1 Fl (a - c + 1,2 - c, x) 
where a = fL + ~ - k, c = 2fL + l. Now, the radial part of the SchrOdinger 
equation for the hydrogen atom problem can be transformed to the form 
where symbols have their usual meaning. 
a) Find the values of y, a and c. 

290 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
b) Derive with justification the energy eigenvalues. 
c) Derive the normalized wave function RS4(r) [n = 5, l = 4]. 
10.10. References and suggested reading 
1. A.K. Ghatak, I.e. Goyal and S.J. Chua, Mathematical Physics, Macmillan 
India Limited, New Delhi (1995). 
2. H.E. White, Introduction to Atomic Spectra, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New 
York (1934). 
3. H.B. Dunford, Elements of Diatomic Molecular Spectra, Addison-Wesley Pub-
lishing 
Co., 
Reading, 
Massachusetts (1968). 
4. R. Eisberg and R. Resnick, Quantum Physics of Atoms, Molecules, Solids, 
Nuclei, and Particles, John Wiley & Sons, New York (1974). 
5. H.A. Sachs, Nuclear Theory, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, Massa-
chusetts (1953). 
6. H. Enge, Introduction to Nuclear Physics, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 
Reading, Massachusetts (1966). 

Chapter 11 
Dirac's Bra and Ket Algebra 
Dirac to whom in my opinion we owe the most logically perfect presentation of 
quantum mechanics . .. 
-
ALBERT EINSTEIN I 
11.1. Introduction 
In this chapter we will introduce Dirac's bra and ket algebra in which the states of a 
dynamical system will be denoted by certain vectors (which, following Dirac, will 
be called as bra and ket vectors) and operators representing dynamical variables 
(like position coordinates, components of momentum and angular momentum) by 
matrices.2 In the following two chapters we will use the bra and ket algebra to 
solve the linear harmonic oscillator problem and the angular momentum problem. 
In both the chapters we will show the advantage of using the operator algebra in 
obtaining solutions of various problems. 
11.2. The bra and ket notation 
A state of a system can be represented by a certain type of vector, which we call 
a ket vector and represent by the symbol I ). In order to distinguish the ket vectors 
corresponding to different states, we insert a label; thus, the ket vector (or simply 
the ket) corresponding to the state A is described by the symbol I A ). Kets form a 
linear vector space implying that if we have two states described by the kets I A ) 
and I B ), then the linear combination 
c] I A ) + C2 I B ) 
(I) 
] Quoted from N. Mukunda, The World of Bohr and Dirac, Wiley Eastern Limited, New Delhi 
(1993), p. 4. 
2 Portions of this chapter have been adapted from Ref. I; this is with the kind permission of 
Oxford University Press. 
291 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

292 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
is a vector in the same space; here C1 and C2 are arbitrary complex numbers. To 
quote Dirac (p. 16 of Reference 1): 
.. . each state of a dynamical system at a particular time corresponds to a ket 
vector; the correspondence being such that if a state results from the superposition 
of certain other states, its corresponding ket vector is expressible linearly in terms 
of the corresponding ket vectors of the other states, and conversely. 
Further, the ket 1 A ) and ciA) (where c is an arbitrary non-zero complex 
number) correspond to the same state. In other words the state of the system is de-
fined by the 'direction' of the vectors. In this respect the superposition principle in 
classical and quantum theories differ. For example, the superposition of a vibrating 
string on itself gives, in classical physics, a mode with twice the amplitude and four 
times the energy of the initial state of vibration. In contrast, in quantum mechanics, 
the superposition of a state on itself gives the same state. 
Now, with every vector space there can be associated a dual vector space such 
that one can form a scalar product of the two vectors, one from each space. The 
vectors of the space dual to that of the ket vectors will be called bra vectors or 
simply 'bras' and will be denoted by ( I. The scalar product of the ket 1 A ) and bra 
( B 1 is denoted by ( B 1 A ) and is a complex number. The logic is very similar to 
the one we have in theory of matrices where with every column vector there can be 
associated a row vector and the scalar product of the two gives a number. We will 
elaborate on this point in Sec. 11.7. 
A bra is said to be a null bra if the scalar product vanishes for any ket, thus 
( B 
1 = 0 
if 
( B 1 A ) = 0 
for any 
1 A ) 
(2) 
Two bras are said to be equal if their scalar product with an arbitrary ket are equal, 
thus 
( B 1 1 = ( B2 1 
if 
( B 1 1 A ) = ( B2 1 A) for any 1 A ) 
(3) 
It is further assumed that 
(i) There is a one-to-one correspondence between kets and bras in the sense 
that a state of a dynamical system represented by 1 A ) can be equally well 
represented by the corresponding bra ( A I. Further, if 
IP)=IA)+IB) 
then 
(PI=(AI+(BI 
(4) 
and if 
IR)=cIA) 
then 
(R 1 = c ( A 1 
(5) 
where c is a complex number and c its complex conjugate. 
(ii) 
(AIB)=(BIA) 
(6) 

Dirac's Bra and Ket Algebra 
293 
where the bar on the top implies the complex conjugate of the quantity. Putting 
I B ) = I A ) we get 
(AIA)=(AIA) 
implying that the scalar product ( A I A ) is a real number. We further assert 
that 
(AIA)~O, 
(7) 
the equality sign holds only when I A ) = 0, i.e. where I A ) is a null ket. 
If ( A I B ) = ° 
then the kets I A ) and I B ) are said to be orthogonal to each 
other. If 
(AIA)=1 
then the ket I A ) is said to be normalized. Since the kets I A ) and c I A ) 
correspond to the same state we may always associate normalized kets to each 
state. It can be easily seen that a normalized ket is defined only within an 
arbitrary phase factor e iy (where y is a real number). 
We may mention here the relationship between the Schrodinger wave functions 
developed in earlier chapters to the bra and kets developed in this section. If I 1/f ) 
and I ¢ ) represent the kets corresponding to the states described by the wave func-
tions 1/f (r) and ¢ (r) respectively, then 
Scalar product 
( ¢ I 1/f ) = f ¢* (r) 1/f (r) dr = ( 1/f I ¢ ) 
(8) 
where the integration is over the entire space. The integral is usually referred to as 
the scalar product of the two functions. 
11.3. Linear operators 
An operator a converts a ket I A ) into another ket I B ) 
IB)=aIA) 
(9) 
An operator is said to be linear if it satisfies the following equation 
where CI, C2, ... are arbitrary complex numbers. Henceforth, we will consider only 
linear operators. An operator a is said to be a null operator if 

294 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Null operator 
a I A ) = 0 
for any 
I A ) 
(11 ) 
Thus a necessary and sufficient condition for an operator to be a null operator is 
( A I a I A ) = 0 for any I A ) 
( 12) 
An operator is said to be an unit operator if 
Unit operator 
a I A ) = I A) for any I A ) 
(13) 
It can be easily seen that a number can be regarded as a linear operator. 
Two operators a and fJ are said to be equal if and only if 
(AlaIA)=(AlfJIA) fur~y IA) 
(14) 
The sum (or difference) of two operators a and fJ is defined through the equation 
(a ± fJ) I A ) = a I A ) ± fJ I A ) 
(15) 
Further 
Associative Law 
a + (fJ + y) = (a + fJ) + y = a + fJ + y 
(16) 
and 
(17) 
where c] is an arbitrary complex constant. The product of two operators a and fJ is 
defined through the equation 
(fJ a) I A ) = fJ (a I A )) = fJ I B ) 
(18) 
where I B ) = a I A ). In general 
(19) 
The commutator of two operators is defined by (see Sec. 4.3) 
[a, fJ] = afJ - fJa = - [fJ, a] 
(20) 
So far we have assumed a linear operator to act on kets; we can make a linear 
operator a operate on bras as well; the rule is that the bra has to be put on the left 
of the operator like ( P I a and the operation is defined through the equation 
{(Pla}IA) 
(PI{aIA)} 
( P I B ) 
for any I A ) 

Dirac's Bra and Ket Algebra 
295 
where 
IB)=aIA) 
(The combination a ( B I is meaningless.) Indeed because of the associative law 
we need not put any brackets and simply write 
( P I af3y I A) 
It is interesting to note that the combination I B ) ( A I can be considered as a linear 
operator because 
{IB)(AI}IP) 
IB){(AIP)} 
c I B) 
because ( A I P ) (= c) is just a complex number. 
Adjoint of an operator 
The adjoint of the operator a is denoted by Ci and is defined through the equation 
(AICiIB)=(BlaIA) 
(21) 
where ( B I a I A ) is the complex conjugate of the number ( B I a I A ). Now 
(AI:BIB) 
(BIf3IA)=(BlaIA) 
(AlaIB)=(AlaIB) 
(22) 
because the complex conjugate of the complex conjugate of a number is the original 
number itself. Since Eq. (22) holds for arbitrary I A ) and I B ) we have 
a=a 
(23) 
Adjoint of a product of two operators 
i.e. the adjoint of the adjoint of a linear operator is the original operator itself. 
Further, the adjoint of the product of the two operators a and f3 is the product of 
the adjoint of the two operators in reverse order, i.e. 
af3=f3a 
(24) 
Proof The proof is simple. Let 
aIA)=IP) 
then 
(AICiIB) 
(BlaIA)=(BIP) 
( P I B ) 
[using Eq. (6)] 

296 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Since the above equation holds for arbitrary I B ) we have 
( P I = ( A I a = conjugate of a I A ) 
Thus, if 
IQ)=a,BIA) 
Then 
(QI=(Ala,B 
But, if we write 
I Q)=a,8IA)=aIR) 
where I R ) = ,8 I A ) (consequently ( R I = ( A 1,8), then 
(QI=(Rla=(AI,8a 
Comparing Eqs (26) and (27) we get Eq. (24). In general 
a,8y ... = ... y ,B a 
Self-adjoint operator 
An operator is said to be self-adjoint if 
A self-adjoint operator is also called a real operator or a Hermitian operator. 
11.4. The eigenvalue equation 
For the linear operator a, consider the equation 
(25) 
(26) 
(27) 
(28) 
(29) 
(30) 
where an is an arbitrary complex number. Equation (30) represents an eigenvalue 
equation; I An ) is said to be an eigenket of the operator a, all being the correspond-
ing eigenvalues. It can be easily seen that c I An ) (where c is an arbitrary complex 
number) is also an eigenket belonging to the same eigenvalue an. Now, if there is 
more than one ket (and they are not linearly dependent on each other3) belonging 
3 A ket I P ) is said to be linearly dependent on the ket I AI), I A2 ) ... and I AN ) if we can 
write 
N 
I P ) = L e/1 I An ) 
n=1 

Dirac's Bra and Ket Algebra 
to the same eigenvalue, i.e. if 
Degeneracy 
297 
(31) 
(32) 
then the state is said to be a degenerate state (compare discussion in Sec. 6.3). If 
there are g linearly independent kets belonging to the same eigenvalue then the 
state is said to be g-fold degenerate. For the sake of simplicity, let us consider a 
two-fold degenerate state described by Egs (31) and (32). If we multiply Eg. (31) 
by Cl and Eg. (32) by C2 and add we would get 
ex I P ) = al I P ) , 
where 
I P ) = el I A 1 ) + e2 I A2 ) 
implying that the linear combination ell A 1 ) + e2 I A2 ) is also an eigenket be-
longing to the same eigenvalue. Similarly, one can discuss for a g-fold degenerate 
state. 
11.4.1. ORTHOGONALITY OF EIGENFUNCTIONS 
When ex is real, it can easily be shown that all the eigenvalues are real and for 
two different eigenvalues (i.e. for an -I- am) the corresponding eigenfunctions are 
necessarily orthogonal, i.e. 
for 
(33) 
Further, one can always normalize the kets and choose an appropriate linear com-
bination for the kets belonging to a degenerate state such that (see Problem 6.3) 
( An I Am ) = 8nm 
The proof is very simple. Premultiplying Eg. (30) by ( An I we get 
( An I ex I An ) = an ( An I An ) 
(34) 
Now ( An I An ) is always real and not a null ket [otherwise Eg. (30) has no 
meaning]. Further, since ex is real 
( An I ex I An ) = ( An I a I An ) = ( An I ex I An ) 
implying that ( An I ex I An ) is also real and hence an must be real. Further, in 
order to prove Eg. (33) we consider 
(35) 
(36) 

298 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
If we put 1 P ) = a 1 A2 ), then 
( P 1 = ( A2 1 a = ( A2 1 a 
Also 
because a2 is real. Thus 
(37) 
Premultiplying Eq. (35) by ( A2 1 and postmultiplying Eq. (37) by 1 A, ) gives 
( A2 1 a 1 A, ) = a, ( A2 1 A, ) = a2 ( A2 1 A, ) 
which immediately gives the orthogonality condition given by Eq. (33). 
Since the formalism is symmetrical with respect to bras and kets we also have 
the eigenvalue equation 
where ( Bn 1 are the eigenbras and bn the corresponding eigenvalues. It can be 
easily seen that when a is a real operator and if 1 A ) is an eigenket, then ( A 1 is 
an eigenbra belonging to the same eigenvalue. Equation (37) tells us that ( A2 1 is 
an eigenbra of the operator a belonging to the same eigenvalue a2. 
11.5. Observables 
Any dynamical quantity (like the position coordinates, or components of the mo-
mentum or angular momentum, etc.) that can be measured is known as an ob-
servable. We assume that observables can be represented by linear operators and 
the operators corresponding to different observables need not commute. Further, 
the result of measurement of any observable must be an eigenvalue of the opera-
tor corresponding to the observable and since the measured value must be a real 
number we assume that an observable is always represented by a real linear 
operator. We denote the eigenkets of the observable a by 1 an ) which we assume 
to form an orthonormal set: 
Since 1 an ) form a complete set, an arbitrary ket 1 P ) can be expanded in terms of 
them 
1 P ) = L Cn 1 an ) 
n 
If we now make a measurement of a, the probability of the outcome aI/is 1 
Cn 12; we 
have assumed 1 P ) to be normalized. Further, as a result of the measurement, the 

Dirac's Bra and Ket Algebra 
299 
system would collapse to one of the states I an ), For degenerate states, one can 
always choose an appropriate linear combination so that they form an orthonormal 
set (see Sec, 6,3 and Problem 6,3), 
Let us assume that a dynamical system is in a state which is an eigenket of 
the observable a belonging to the eigenvalue a 1. Now, if a measurement of the 
observable a is made, then it is certain that the value al will be obtained. On the 
other hand, if the system is in a state described by the normalized ket 
I P ) = CI I a I ) + C2 I a2 ) 
[ ( PIP) = I ], then a measurement of a would lead either to a I or a2 with prob-
abilities ICI12 and ic212 respectively. Since ( PIP) 
I, it immediately follows 
that 
(38) 
In general, the outcome of the measurement of an observable is one of its eigenval-
ues and therfore, if the system is in an arbitrary state, then a measurement of a will 
make the dynamical system jump to one of the eigenstates of a. We further assume 
that the possible eigenstates of a to which the dynamical system may jump are such 
that the original state should be linearly expressible in terms of the eigenstates. 
Thus, any state can be expressed as a linear combination of the eigenkets of the 
observable and therefore, the eigenkets of an observable must form a complete 
set. 
A beautiful example of the above argument is the famous Stern-Gerlach exper-
iment where an inhomogeneous magnetic field (in the z-direction) splits the silver 
beam into two components, one going in the +z direction and the other going in 
the - z direction; the experiment tries to make a measurement of the z-component 
ofthe angular momentum (which we denote by lz) and the result shows that lz has 
only two eigenvalues. We will have a detailed discussion of this experiment in Sec. 
14.4. 
11.6. The completeness condition 
We have just stated that the eigenkets of an observable form a complete set. Let 
In), n = 0, 1,2, ... denote these eigenkets and let I P ) denote an arbitrary ket. 
Thus 
I P) = L Cn In) 
n 
where L denotes a sum over the discrete states and an integration over the con-
tinuum states. Since the eigenkets can be assumed to form an orthonormal set 
(( min ) = D mn) we have 
( m I P ) = L Cn ( min) = L Cn Dmn = Cm 
n 
n 

300 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Thus 
I P I = ~ I n I c" = {~ I n I ( n III P I 
(39) 
Since the above equation holds for an arbitrary ket I P ), the quantity inside the 
curly brackets must be a unit operator 
(40) 
n 
which is usually referred to as the completeness condition. The above equation may 
be compared with the completeness condition of the Schrodinger wave functions 
[see Eq. (41) of Chapter 7]. 
11.7. Examples from matrix algebra 
The various axiomatic rules discussed so far can be readily understood if we con-
sider some simple examples from the theory of matrices. Let us consider a 3 x 3 
Hermitian matrix ex given by 
ex=(~ b~) 
002 
We have assumed ex to be a 3 x 3 matrix; we could have assumed it to be of an 
arbitrary order. 
Let 
I A ) = (:~ ) 
and 
(l3 
denote two arbitrary column vectors in the same field (i.e. having 3 rows). Now 
corresponding to every ket vector there is a bra vector which, in this case, is nothing 
but a row vector. Thus 
( A I = (aj, (l2, (l3) 
and 
( B I = (~, h2 , h3) 
where aj, (l2, ... are the complex conjugates of (l" (l2, .... The scalar product is 
given by 
( A I B ) 

Dirac's Bra and Ket Algebra 
which is a complex number. Obviously 
(AIB)=(BIA) 
Further 
( A I A ) = lal12 + la21 2 + la31 2 :::: 0 
The scalar product ( A I A ) = 0 if and only if 
a] = a2 = a3 = 0 
which corresponds to a "null vector". Since 
30] 
implying that a linear operator operating on a null vector will always give a null 
vector. Further 
IA)= IB) 
if and only if 
a] = h, a2 = b2 and 
a3 = h 
Now, it can be easily shown that the eigenvalues of the operator a are + I, -1 and 
+ 2. The corresponding normalized eigenvectors are 
11) = ~(l) 
12) 
_1 (-~) 
h 
0 
and 
13)=(D 
One can easily see that 
Orthonormality condition 
( i I j ) = oij ; 
i, j = 1,2,3 
which represents the orthonormality condition. Further, they form a complete set 
of functions in the sense that an arbitrary vector (in the three-dimensional space) 
can be expressed as a linear combination of I 1 ), I 2 ) and I 3 ). Thus 
I A ) = a] ~a2 I 1 ) + a] ~a2 I 2) + a31 3 ) 

302 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Further 
Completeness condition 
11)(11+12)(21+13)(31 
which represents the completeness condition [see Eq. (40)). 
11.8. Simultaneous eigenkets of commuting observables 
In this section we will show that if two observables commute then one can have a 
complete set of simultaneous eigenkets of the two observables. 
Let a and f3 represent the operators corresponding to two observables. We 
assume that the two operators commute, i.e. 
af3 = f3a 
(41) 
Let 1 a, ) be an eigenket of a belonging to the eigenvalue a, : 
a 1 a1 ) = a, 1 a, ) 
(42) 
then 
[using Eq. (42)] 
or 
a {f3 1 a, )} = a, {f3 1 a, )} 
(43) 
where the last step follows from the fact that a1 is a number. Equation (43) tells us 
that f3 I a, ) is also an eigenket of a belonging to the same eigenvalue a,. If I a 1 ) 
corresponds to a non-degenerate state, then Eq. (43) tells us that 
f3 
1 a, ) 
must be a multiple of 1 a1 ) 
implying 
(44) 
where f3 1 is a number. Thus 1 a 1 ) must be an eigenket of f3. Hence, all eigenkets 
of a which correspond to nondegenerate states, must also be eigenkets of f3 and 
hence these will be simultaneous eigenkets. 

Dirac's Bra and Ket Algebra 
303 
We next consider the case when the eigenvalue a I corresponds to a degenerate 
state. To keep the analysis simple let the state be two-fold degenerate and let the 
eigenkets be I a I ) and I a2 ); i.e. 
(45) 
(46) 
The kets I al ) and I a2 ) are assumed to be orthogonal to each other. Now, since 
f31 al ) and f31 a2 ) are eigenkets of a belonging to the same eigenvalue al [see 
Eq. (43)], they must be expressible as a linear combination of I al ) and I a2 ): 
f31 al ) = ell I al ) + el21 a2 ) 
(47) 
and 
(48) 
The kets I al ) and I a2 ) need not be eigenkets of f3; however, we may always 
choose appropriate linear combinations so that they are eigenkets of f3 (and hence 
simultaneous eigenkets of a and f3). Let the required linear combination be 
Then 
f3 [dl I al ) + d2
1 a2 )] = f3' [dl I al ) + d2
1 a2 )] 
If we now use Eqs (47) and (48), we would obtain 
Since I a I ) and I a2 ) are orthogonal to each other, we get 
and 
dl el2 + d2 (e22 - f3') = 0 
For non-trivial solutions, we must have 
I ell - f3' e2l 
I = 0 
el2 
e22 - f3' 
(49) 
the roots of which will give the two allowed values of f3'. Once f3' is known, we can 
obtain the ratio d l / d2 which will give the simultaneous eigenket. As an example 
we consider the two matrices 

304 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
which commute with each other, i.e. 
Now, the eigenvalues of 0" x are + 1 and -1 and are non-degenerate; hence both the 
eigenvectors are also eigenvectors of a. Thus 
(which are eigenvectors of 0" x) represent a complete set of simultaneous eigenvec-
tors of 0" x and a. They form a complete set in the sense that an arbitrary vector can 
be represented as a linear combination of I 1 ) and I 2 ) 
(~) = (a ~b) [~ ( ~ )] + (a _ b) [~ ( _~ )] 
It may be seen that 
( ~) and 
(~) 
are eigenvectors of a but not eigenvectors of 0" x. However, I 1 ) and I 2 ) can be 
expressed as a linear combination of the above vectors. 
We next consider the two matrices 
Once again 
0" za = aO" z 
and the eigenvectors 
(b) and 
(~) 
form a complete set of simultaneous eigenvectors of 0" z and a. Similarly 
form a complete set of simultaneous eigenvectors of 
O"y = (~ -~) and 
a = (~ ~) 
Notice that although 0" x, 0" y and () z do not commute with each other, they commute 
independently with a; and one can form simultaneous eigenkets of either 0" x and a 
or of 0" y and a or of 0" z and a. 

Dirac's Bra and Ket Algebra 
305 
11.9. Problems 
Problem 11.1 Determine the orthonormal set of the eigenvectors of the matrix 
-~ ~) 
o 2 
Prove the completeness condition. 
Problem 11.2 Repeat the above problem for the matrix 
o 
-~ n 
Problem 11.3 Prove that 
IP)(QI=IQ)(PI 
Problem 11.4 Consider the linear operator a defined by the equation 
Write the eigenvalue equation for a and show that eigenvalues of a are ± 1. Also 
show that (l ± a) I P ) (where I P ) is an arbitrary ket) are eigenkets of a be-
longing to the eigenvalues ± 1. Notice that an arbitrary ket can always be written 
as 
1 
1 
I P ) = "2 (l + a) I P ) + "2 (l - a) I P ) 
which shows that eigenkets of a form a complete set. 
Problem 11.5 Consider the matrices Ie 
.,fi 
~) 
-
.,fi 
0 
2 
0 
.,fi 
Ie 
-i.,fi -i[z ) 
"2 
i{! 
0 
i.,fi 
0 
0 
~I ) 
0 
0 

306 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and 
(1 0 0) 
f3= 
0 
1 0 
001 
Show that ai, a2 and a3 commute independently with f3 but not with each other. 
Construct simultaneous set of eigenvectors of a I and f3. Repeat the analysis for a2 
and f3 and for a3 and f3. 
11.10. Solutions 
Solution 11.1 The normalized eigenvectors are 
I 1 ) = _1 (~); I 2 ) = _1 (-~); I 3 ) = (~) 
v'2 
0 
v'2 
0 
I 
Solution 11.3 Let a = I P ) ( Q I and let 
Thus 
I B) = a I A ) = [( Q I A )] I P ) 
(BI 
(QIA) (PI 
(AIQ) (PI 
But ( B I = ( A I Ii ). Therefore 
a=IQ)(PI 
Solution 11.5 Simultaneous eigenvectors of a I and f3 are 
~ ( ~) , _1 ( 
~) and _I (-A) 
2 
1 
v'2 
-1 
J5 
1 
Simultaneous eigenvectors of a2 and f3 are 
Simultaneous eigenvectors of a3 and f3 are 
(i:), (n and 0) 

Dirac's Bra and Ket Alf;ebra 
307 
11.11. References and suggested reading 
1. P.A.M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford (1958). 
2. G. Baym, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, W.A. Benjamin, New York (1969). 
3. H.S. Green, Matrix Methods in Quantum Mechanics, Barnes and Noble, New 
York (1968). 
4. H.c. Ohanian, Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Prentice-Hall, Englewood 
Cliffs, New Jersey (1990). 

Chapter 12 
Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
Solutions Using Bra and Ket Algebra 
HEISENBERG banished the picture of electron orbits with definite radii and 
periods of rotation, because these quantities are not observable; he demanded 
that the theory should be built up by means of quadratic arrays .... Instead of 
describing the motion by giving a coordinate as a function of time x (t), one 
ought to determine an array of transition probabilities Xmn. By consideration of 
known examples discovered by guesswork he found the rule tllr determining the 
array of the square (x2)mn and applied it with success to simple examples such 
as the harmonic and anharmonic oscillator. This was in the summer of 1925. 
HEISENBERG, suffering from a severe attack of hay fever, took leave of absence 
for a course of treatment at the seaside and handed over his paper to me for 
publication . .. 
The significance of the idea was immediately clear to me, and 1 sent the man-
uscript to the Zeitschrift fur Physik. HEISENBERG'S rule of multiplication 
left me no peace, and after a week of intensive thought and trial, I suddenly 
remembered an algebraic theory that I had learned from my teacher, ROSANES, 
in Breslau. Such quadratic arrays are quite familiar to mathematicians and are 
called matrices, in association with a definite rule of multiplication. 1 applied 
this rule to HEISENBERG'S quantum condition and found that it agreed for the 
diagonal elements. It was easy to guess what the remaining elements must be. 
namely, null; and immediately there stood before me the strange formula 
pq - qp = h/2rri 
This meant that coordinates q and momenta p are not to be represented by 
the values of numbers but by symbols whose product depends on the order of 
multiplication-which do not 'commute', as we say. 
My excitement over this result was like that of the mariner who, after long voyag-
ing, sees the desired land from afar, and my only regret was that HEISENBERG 
was not with me. I was convinced from the first that we had stumbled on the 
lruth. Yet again a large part was only guesswork, in particular the vanishing of 
the nondiagonal elements in the foregoing expression. For this problem I secured 
the collaboration of my pupil PASCUAL JORDAN, and in a few days we suc-
ceeded in showing that I had guessed correctly. The joint paper by JORDAN and 
myself contains the most important principles of quantum mechanics. including 
its extension to electrodynamics. 
308 
-
MAX BORN in Ph\'sics in III\, Generation, 
Springer Verlag, New York (1969). 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

Linear Harmonic Oscillator 1I 
309 
12.1. Introduction 
In Chapter 7 we had solved the SchrOdinger equation for the linear harmonic oscil-
lator problem. In this chapter we will use Dirac's bra and ket algebra to solve the 
same problem. Although the final results are the same, the analysis using bra and 
ket algebra is extremely elegant; it allows us to determine the various expectation 
values and also explicit expressions for the wave functions with considerable ease. 
The time evolution of the coherent state can also be studied in a very straightfor-
ward manner. For all this, we feel that the use of the operator algebra in solving 
the harmonic oscillator problem should be understood right in the beginning of the 
quantum mechanics course. 
12.2. The solution of the eigenvalue problem 
For the linear harmonic oscillator problem, the Hamiltonian is given by 
Hamiltonian 
(1) 
where the symbols have been defined in Sec. 7.2. Since H, p, and x are observ-
abies 
H = H, P = p, x = x 
(2) 
Further, the operators x and p will be assumed to satisfy the commutation relation 
(see Sec. 4.3) 
[x,p]=xp-px=ili 
Our objective is to solve the eigenvalue equation 
H I H') = H' I H' ) 
(3) 
(4) 
where I H') is the eigenket of the operator H belonging to the eigenvalue H'. 
lt may be noted that in the above equation H is an operator and H' is simply a 
number. 
Definitions of a and a 
It is convenient to introduce the dimensionless complex operator 
1 
a = 
1/2 (/LWX + ip) 
(2/L liw) 
Since x = x and p = p, the adjoint of a would be given by 
1 
a = (2p, nw)1/2 (/LWX - ip) 
(5) 
(6) 

310 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
In terms of the above operators 
nwaa = 
I 
-
(/UJJX + ip) (f.lwx -
ip) 
2f.l 
I 
-
[f.l2WX2 + p2 - iwf.l(xp - px)] 
2f.l 
1 
H+ -nw 
2 
where we have used Eqs (1) and (3). Similarly 
Thus 
and 
Commutation relation 
From Eq. (7) 
and from Eq. (8) 
Thus 
Similarly 
I 
liwaa = H - - liw 
2 
1 
H = "2nw(aa + aa) 
aa-aa = [a, a] = I 
I 
nwaaa = Ha + - nwa 
2 
I 
nwaaa = aH - - nwa 
2 
aH - Ha = [a, H] = nwa 
a H - Ha = [a, H] = -nwa 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
(II) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
The above equation can also be obtained by taking the adjoint of Eq. (13). Now, let 
I P ) = a I H') 
where I H' ) is an eigenket of H belonging to the eigenvalue H' [see Eq. (4)]. 
Then 
and 
nw ( PIP) 
( P 1= (H' I a 
nw ( H' I aa I H' ) 
I 
I 
I 
[ 
] 
(H I H -
"2 nwl H) 
using Eq. (8) 
1 
(H' -
-nw) (H' I H') [using Eq. (4)] 
2 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
311 
where (H' -
~ nw) has been taken outside as it is just a number. But ( PIP) and 
( H' I H' ) are positive numbers (see Sec. 11.2) and therefore 
and 
if and only if 
Conversely, 
, 
1 
H > -nw 
-2 
1 
H' = -nw 
2 
I P } = a I H' } = 0 
1 
a I H' } = 0 only when H' = 2" nw 
(15) 
(16) 
(17) 
That H' should be positive follows from the fact that the expectation values of x 2 
and p2 should be positive or zero for any state of the system. This can be seen from 
the following: 
1 
1 
( Q I H I Q ) = 2/-l ( Q I p2 I Q ) + 2" /-lW2 ( Q I x 2 I Q ) 
where I Q} represents an arbitrary state of the system. Let 
IR}=pIQ} 
then 
(RI=(Qlp=(Qlp 
because p is a Hermitian operator. Thus 
( R I R ) = ( Q I p2 I Q ) ~ 0 
the equality sign if and only if I R ) is a null ket. Similarly 
( Q I x 2 I Q ) ~ 0 
Thus 
(QIHIQ)~O 
proving that the expectation value of the energy of the oscillator should be positive 
for any state of the system. 
Next, let us consider the operator H a operating on I H'): 
Ha I H') 
(aH - nwa) I H' ) [using Eg. (13)] 
(aH' - nwa) I H') 
(H' - nw) a I H') 
(18) 

312 
Thus 
if I H' ) is an eigenket of H 
then 
a I H' ) is also an eigenket of H 
belonging to the eigenvalue H' - liw provided 
I 
1 
H -I- 2:liw 
because if H' = 41iw, a I H' ) is a null keto Thus, if 
I 
1 
H -I- 2: liw 
then 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
H' - liw is also an eigenvalue of H. 
Similarly, if 
then 
Therefore, 
I 
1 
H - I1w -I- - I1w 
2 
H' - 2liw is also an eigenvalue of H. 
H' -liw, H' - 21iw, H' - 3Iiw, ... 
are all eigenvalues of H. This, however, cannot go on indefinitely because it will 
then contradict Eq. (15). Further, it can only terminate at H' = 41iw, because then 
1 
a I 2:l1w) = 0 
Thus the possible eigenvalues can be 
1 
3 
5 
-liw -liw -liw 
2 
'2 
'2 
' 
We cannot have any other eigenvalue. In order to prove this let us assume that 
H' = 
~ liw is an eigenvalue. Then from Eq. (18), ~ liw, 
~ liw, -~ liw, ... will 
be eigenvalues because a I H') cannot be a null keto Obviously, this will contradict 
Eq. (15). 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
313 
We next show that we will have an infinite number of eigenvalues. Now, using 
Eg. (14) 
Ha I H') 
(aH + liwa) I H' ) 
(aH' + liwa) 1 H' ) 
(H' + liw) a 1 H' ) 
(19) 
implying that (H' + liw) is another eigenvalue of H, with a 1 H' ) as the eigenket 
belonging to it, unless a 1 H' ) = O. However, a 1 H') can never be a null ket, 
since it would lead to 
o 
liwaa 1 H') = (H + 11iw) 1 H') [using Eg. (7)] 
( H' + 1 
hw) 1 H' ) 
giving H' + ~ hw = 0, which contradicts Eg. (15). Thus if H' is an eigenvalue, 
then H' + liw is always another eigenvalue of H, and so are 
H' + 2hw, 
H' + 3hw, ... 
and so on. Hence the eigenvalues of the Hamiltonian for the linear harmonic oscil-
lator problem are 
Eigenvalues 
I -hw 
2 
' 
3 -hw 
2 
' 
5 -hw 
2 
' 
extending to infinity, which is the same as obtained in Sec. 7.2. 
(20) 
We now relabel the eigenfunctions with the index n; thus 1 n ) denotes the 
eigenfunction corresponding to the eigenvalue (n + ~) hw: 
H 1 n ) = (n + ~) liw 1 n) ; n = 0, 1, 2, ... 
(21) 
Since 1 n ) are eigenkets of the Hermitian operator H, they must be orthogonal to 
each other; we further assume that the states 1 n ) are normalized, so that 
( min) = omn 
(22) 
Further, since 1 0 ) corresponds to H' = ~ hw, we must have 
aIO)=O 
(23) 
Now, for n = 1, 2, 3, ... a 1 n ) is an eigenket of H belonging to the eigenvalue 
(n -
~) hw [see Eg. (18)]; therefore a 1 n ) must be a multiple of 1 n - I ): 
a In) = an I n - 1 ) 

314 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
In order to determine an, we calculate the square of the length of a In): 
( n I aa In) = Ian 12 (n -
11 n - 1) = Ian 12 
But 
I 
nw ( n I aa In) 
( n I (H - 2 nw) In) 
1 
I 
( n I (n + 2) nw - 2 nw In) 
n nw (n In) = n nw 
Thus 
and therefore we may write 
aln)=v'nln-I) 
Similarly 
a In) = l(n + 1) In + I ) 
Thus, if 10) denotes the ground-state eigenket, then 
a 
II) = J)IO), 
and, in general, 
a 
a 
(a)2 
12) = 
11 M 10) = MIlO), 
...; 1...;2 
...;21 
In) = (a)n 10) 
In! 
(a)3 
13) = 
MIlO), ... 
...;31 
(24) 
(25) 
(26) 
We can think of an excited state In) of the oscillator as containing n quanta of 
energy nw, in addition to the zero-point energy of 4 nw. The operator a, according 
to Eq. (25), creates a quantum of energy; and, therefore, a is called the creation 
operator. Similarly, the operator a, according to Eq. (24), annihilates a quantum of 
energy; and, therefore, a is called the annihilation or destruction operator. 
The eigenkets of H form a complete set of orthogonal kets; thus (see Sec. 11.6) 
L 
In)(nl = I 
n=O.I.2 .... 
Solution of the linear harmonic oscillator problem 
Thus the solution of the linear harmonic oscillator problem can be summarized 
through the following equations: 
H In) = (n + 1) nw In); n = 0,1,2, ... 
( min) = omn 
L 
In)(nl = 1 
11=0.1,2, ... 
(27) 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
Further, 
a In) 
a 10) 
aln) 
In I n -
1) 
o 
Jfi+Tln+1) 
315 
We may pause here for a moment and appreciate the beauty of the operator algebra 
which has enabled us to solve the eigenvalue equation; the only assumption has 
been the commutation relation along with the basic axioms of quantum mechanics. 
12.3. The uncertainty product 
In this section we will calculate the uncertainty product ~x ~p for the harmonic 
oscillator states. The uncertainties ~x and ~p are given by (see Sec. 4.6) 
and 
where 
(x) = (n I x In), 
( p ) = ( nip In), 
( x 2 ) = ( n I x 2 In) 
( p2 ) = ( n I p2 In) 
(28) 
(29) 
represent the expectation values of the operators in the nth eigenstate of the oscil-
lator. Now, using Eqs. (5) and (6) 
( n ) 1/2 
X = --
(a+a) 
2JLw 
(30) 
( n ) 1/2 
P = i 
JL 2 W 
(a - a) 
(31) 
Thus 
( x ) 
( n ) 1/2 
(nlxln)= -
(nla+aln) 
2JLw 
( n ) 1/2 
2JLw 
[~ 
( n In + 1) + In ( n In -
1) ] 
[using Eqs (24) and (25)] 
o 

316 
and 
Similarly 
glvmg 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Pi 
( n I X 2 In) = -- [ ( n I Zi Zi In) + ( n I Zia In) 
2/uv 
+ ( n I aZi In) + ( n I aa j n )] 
Pi 
-
[0 + n + (n + 1) + 0] 
2JLw 
Pi 
1 
-
(n +-) 
2JLw 
2 
(32) 
1 
(p) = (n j p j n) = 0 and (p2) = JLwPi(n + 2) 
(33) 
1 
6x 6p = (n + -) Pi 
2 
(34) 
the minimum value (= ~ Pi) occurring for the ground state. Once again, we may 
see the ease with which we can use the operator algebra to calculate the various 
expectation values. We may recall that if we were to use the solutions obtained in 
Sec. 7.3, then 
+00 
(x 2 ) = J o/~ (x) x2 o/n (x) dx 
(35) 
-00 
and 
+00 
p2 ) = J 
o/~ (x) [ _Pi 2 ::2 ] 
o/n (x) dx 
(36) 
-ex) 
where o/n(x) are the Hermite-Gauss functions lsee Eq. (35) of Chapter 7] repre-
senting the normalized eigenfunction of the harmonic oscillator problem. Although 
the final results are the same, the explicit evaluation of the integrals in Eqs (35) and 
(36) is fairly tedious. 
12.4. Harmonic oscillator wave functions 
In Sec. 12.2 we had shown that 
ajO)=O 
(37) 
where I 0 ) represents the eigenket corresponding to the ground state. Now, if 
%(x) represents the Schr6dinger wave function corresponding to the ground state, 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
317 
the above equation would imply 
1 
~ 
(fLWX + ip) %(x) = 0 
y2fLliw 
(38) 
where we have used Eq. (5) which defines the operator a. Replacing p by -i lid / dx, 
we get 
0, 
or 
(fLWX + Ii :X) %(x) = 0 
d% 
fLW 
-
= -- x %(x) 
dx 
Ii 
1 
0/0 
d%(x) 
dx 
fLW 
=--x 
Ii 
Carrying out the straightforward integration we get 
or 
where 
In %(x) = - fLW x 2 + const 
21i 
y = J 
fLli
W 
If we use the normalization condition 
+00 f I%(x) 12 dx = 1 
-00 
we would readily get 
Normalized ground state wave function 
%(x) = [5n ]'/2 e-~y2X2 
(39) 
which represents the normalized ground state wave function [see Eq. (33) of Chap-
ter 7]. Since 
we may write 
7i 1 n) = ~ 
1 n + 1) 
1 n + 1) = ~ 
a 1 n) 
yn+1 

318 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
or 
(40) 
or 
1 
[fiW {fd] 
-x -
--
1fr (x) 
[2 (n + 1)]1/2 
Ii 
flW dx 
n 
[2 en ~ 1)]1/2 [~ - :~] 1frn(x) 
(41) 
where 
Thus 
(42) 
which is automatically normalized! Further, 
(43) 
and 
(44) 
In general, 
Wave function of the n lh state 
(45) 
which can be proved by induction (see Problem 12.7). Equations (42), (43) and 
(44) are identical to the expressions derived in Sec. 7.3. 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
319 
12.5. The coherent state 
In this section we will obtain the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of the annihilation 
operator a, i.e. we will solve the eigenvalue equation 
Eigenvalue equation of a 
ala)=ala) 
(46) 
The eigenkets I a ) describe what are known as coherent states which represent the 
quantum mechanical analogs ofthe "classical oscillator" (see also Sec. 7.4). Since 
the eigenkets of an observable form a complete set, we expand I a ) in terms of the 
kets In): 
00 
I a) = L 
Cn In) 
(47) 
n=0.1.2 .... 
Now 
00 
00 
a I a) = L 
Cn a I n) = L cn-Jli In -
1 ) 
n=0.1.2, ... 
n=I,2 .... 
Also 
00 
a I a ) = a I a ) = a L 
Cn In) 
n=0,1,2, ... 
Thus 
CI I 0) + c2h I 1 ) + c3J3 I 2) + ... = a (co I 0) + CI I 1 ) + C2 I 2) + ... ) 
or 
In general, 
Thus 
acO, 
aCI _ 
a 2 
h - h
Co , 
C 
a 3 
a Js = .j3!co, ... 
an 
Cn = 
~ 
Co 
vn! 
I a ) = Co 
00 
an 
L -In) 
Fn! 
n=0,1,2 .... 

320 
If we normalize I a ), we would get 
00 
I Co 12 L 
n=O,I,2, ... 
or 
within an arbitrary phase factor. Thus 
and 
n 
a 
-1.laI2 
c=--e
2 
nJn1 
00 
an 
" 
-I 
n) 
LJn1 
n=O,I,2, ... 
which represents the (normalized) coherent state, 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(48) 
(49) 
Notice that there is no restriction on the value of a, i.e, a can take any complex 
value, 
12.6. Time evolution of the coherent state 
The time dependent SchrMinger equation for the linear harmonic oscillator prob-
lem is given by 
a 
ill-I\{!) 
at 
HI\{!) 
(50) 
In order to solve the above equation, we use the method of separation of variables 
(cf, Sec, 7,2) 
I \lJ ) = e-iEt / li I 'l/f ) 
(51 ) 
where I 'l/f ) are the eigenkets of the Hamiltonian H: 
HI'l/f)=EI'l/f) 
(52) 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator 1I 
321 
In Sec. 12.2 we have solved the above eigenvalue equation and have shown that E 
can take the following discrete values: 
with 1 n ) representing the corresponding (normalized) eigenkets. Thus the most 
general solution of Eq. (50) is given by 
1 \II (t) ) 
00 
-; (n+~)wt 1 
) 
Cn e 
n 
(53) 
n=O,I,2, ... 
where the coefficients Cn are to be determined from the following equation (cf. Sec. 
7.3): 
00 
1 w (0) ) = L 
Cn 1 n ) 
(54) 
n=O,I.2, ... 
If 1 \II (0) ) is normalized, i.e. if 
( w (0) 1 \II (0) ) = 1 
(55) 
then 
00 
00 
1 
L 
c~ ( miL Cn In) 
m=O,1,2, ... 
n=O,I,2, ... 
00 
00 
L 
L 
c~cn(mln) 
m=O, 1,,2 .... n=O, 1,2, ... 
00 
00 
L 
L 
C~Cn Omn 
m=O, 1 ,2, ... n=O, 1,2, ... 
Thus 
00 L 
1 Cn 12= 1 
(56) 
n=O,I,2, ... 

322 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and we may interpret icll1 2 to represent the probability of finding the oscillator in 
the nth state (which would not change with time). Furthermore, using Eq. (53) 
00 
00 
( \11 (t) I \11 (t)) = 
c* c e i(m-Il)"'t (m I n) 
m'l1 
n=0.1.2, .. m=O, 1,2" .. 
00 
00 
c* c e i(m-n)O)f 8 
m n 
mn 
n=O, 1,2, ... m=0,1,2, ... 
00 L 
I cn 12= I 
n=0,1,2" .. 
Thus if I \11 (0) ) is normalized, then I \11 (t) ) is also normalized for all values of 
time, 
Let us assume that at t = 0, the oscillator is in a coherent state, i.e, 
I \11 (t = 0) ) =1 a ) 
For the coherent state, Cn is given by Eq. (48) and therefore, 
Time evolution of the coherent state 
00 
1\I1(t)) 
L 
Cn e -iEllf/1i In) 
1l=0,1,2, ... 
e--2ilaI2 
~ [all ] -i(n+h),vf 
L 
10 e 
"In) 
vn! 
1l=0,1,2" .. 
(57) 
The above equation describes the time evolution of the coherent state, We would 
next like to calculate the corresponding time variations of (x) and (p) which rep-
resent the expectation values of x and p: 
Since 
and 
(x) 
( \11 (t) I x I \11 (t) ) 
(p) 
(\I1(t) I p I \I1(t)) 
x ~ j h 
(a +Gl 
2/uu 
IjMfiW 
_ 
p = i -2- (a - a) 
(58) 
(59) 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
We must first calculate ( a ) and ( a ). Now 
CX) 
n 
( 
) 
I 
2 
()(. 
I 
a I \II (t)) = e- 2lal L --e -/ n+ 2 (vi a In) 
Fn! 
n=0,1,2, ... 
CX) 
II 
( 
) 
(){ 
. 
1 
L -
e -/ n+ 2 (VI.Jn+T I n + 1 ) 
Fn! 
11=0,1,2, ... 
Since 
we get 
( a ) 
( \II (t) I a I \II (t) ) 
CX) 
* ( 
*)11 
(){ 
(){(){ 
_-'-------'._ e i IV I 
n=0.1,2, ... 
n! 
or 
( \II (t) I a I \II (t) ) = (){*e ilVI 
SimilarIyi 
(\II (t) I a I \II (t)) = (){ e -ilVt 
Thus 
Expectation value of x 
(x) 
(\II(t) Ix I \II(t)) 
J It ('" (I) I a + a I '" (I) ) 
2/JJ.tJ 
J 
It rae -;0" + a' e;"'] 
2f.lW 
(gn 
-
I (){ I cos (W t - ¢) 
f.lW 
1 Alternatively, if we take the complex conjugate of Eq. (62), we would obtain Eq. (63). 
323 
(60) 
(61) 
(62) 
(63) 

324 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where we have written 
Thus we may write 
where 
Similarly, 
a =1 a 1 e+irjJ 
( x) = Xo cos (wt - ¢) 
fgn 
Xo = -I a 1 
J-Lw 
Expectation value of p 
( p ) J 
J-L ~w + w (t) 1 a - a 1 W (t) ) 
J2J-Lnw t [ae-iwt - a*eiwt ] 
-J-Lwxo sin(wt - ¢) 
From Eqs (64) and (66) we may write 
d(x) 
( p ) = J-LTt 
(64) 
(65) 
(66) 
(67) 
which is nothing but the equation of motion for a classical particle (see Sec. 4.5). 
Once again, it is much more convenient to use the bra and ket algebra to evaluate 
the various expectation values. 
12.7. The number operator 
Consider the operator 
(68) 
Using Eq. (8) we may write 
(69) 
Since 
H 1 n ) = (n + ~) nw 1 n ) 
we have 
Nap 1 n) = n 
1 n ) 
(70) 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
325 
Thus 1 n ) are also the eigenkets of Nop , the corresponding eigenvalues being nand 
since n takes the values 0, 1,2, ... , the operator Nop is called the number operator. 
For this reason, 1 n ) are often referred to as number states. Obviously 
( m 1 Nop 1 n ) = n omn 
12.8. The unitary transformation 
Let 1\11;) represent a set of orthonormal kets, i.e. 
We consider a transformation 
I<P;) = L Uijl\llj) 
} 
(71) 
(72) 
If the kets 1 <P;) also form a set of orthonormal kets, i.e. if (<Pi 
1 <p}) = 0 i} then the 
transformation is said to be unitary and Ui} is said to be a unitary matrix. Now 
m 
n 
In 
11 
or 
UU = 1 
(73) 
where U represents the hermitian adjoint of U. Thus if U describes an arbitary 
transformation then 
U = U- J 
12.9. The Schrodinger and Heisenberg pictures 
While solving the linear harmonic oscillator problem in Sec. 12.2, we had assumed 
the observables x, p and H to be real operators and independent of time. This is the 
so-called Schrodinger picture and the time development of the ket describing the 

326 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
quantum mechanical system is obtained by solving the time dependent Schrodinger 
equation: 
a 
i n-I\lI(t)) = HI\lI(t») 
at 
(74) 
If the Hamiltonian is independent of time, we can integrate the above equation to 
obtain 
(75) 
where the exponential of an operator is defined through the power series 
c? 
I 
I 
e =1+(9+-(9·(9+-(9·(9·(9··· 
2! 
3! 
(76) 
That Eq. (75) is the solution of Eq. (74) can be immediately seen by direct substi-
tution. Next, let In) represent the eigenkets of H: 
then by inserting the unit operator [see Eq. (27)] in Eq. (75) we obtain 
1<1>(1)) = e-'H'I' I 
~ 
In)(nl\I<I>(O)) 
= I>-iEnl/lil n ) [(nl\ll(O»)] 
11 
(77) 
The above equation may be used to study the time development of states. Now, the 
expectation value of an observable characterised by the operator (9 is given by 
((9) = (\Il(t)I(9I\1l(t») 
If we substitute for 1\Il(t») from Eq. (75), we would get 
((9) = (\lI(0)leiH1 / Ii (9 e-iH1 / /) 1\lI(O») 
(\Il(O) I (9H(t)I\lI(O») 
where the operator (9 H (t) is defined by the following equation: 
(78) 
(79) 
(80) 
Eqs (78) and (79) tell us that the expectation values remain the same if we endow 
the operators (9 H (t) with the entire time dependence but assume that the kets are 
time dependent. This is known as the Heisenberg picture (and hence the subscript 
H) in which operators representing the observable change with time but the ket 
describing the system is time independent. On the other hand, in the Schrodinger 
picture [see Eqs (77) and (78)], we may visualize the basis vectors (here In) as a 
fixed set of vectors and I \lI (t)) (describing the system) as moving. 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator 1/ 
327 
From Eq. (80), we have, 
~(9H(t) = eiHt / Ii a(9 e-iHt / Ii + ~eiHt/ Ii[H(9 _ (9 H] e-iHt/ 1i 
dt 
at 
n 
where aa~ is introduced to allow for any explicit time dependence of the operator. 
If there is no such explicit time dependence, we may write 
or 
Heisenberg equation a/motion 
-H [eiHt / 1i (9 e-iHt/ li ] 
(9H(t)H -
H(9H(t) 
(81) 
(82) 
Equation (82) gives the time dependence of an operator in the Heisenberg picture 
and is called the Heisenberg equation a/motion. 
If the Hamiltonian is assumed to be independent of time in the Schrodinger 
representation, then it is also independent of time in the Heisenberg representation: 
(83) 
It should be mentioned that if H had an explicit time dependence, the analysis 
would have been much more involved (see, e.g. Chapter 5 of Ref.2). 
We next consider the operators ex and f3 which, in the Schrodinger representa-
tion, satisfy the commutation relation 
[ex, f3] = iy 
or 
exf3 -
f3ex = iy 
If we mUltiply on the left by eiHt/ Ii and on the right by e-iHt / n, we obtain 
eiHt/fiex e-iHt/ne-iHt/n f3e-iHt / 1i 
_eiHt / Ii f3 e-iHt / fl eiHt / fl ex e-iHt / fi 
i eiHt / fi ye-iHt / n 
(84) 
(85) 
(86) 
where we have inserted e-iHt/fieiHt/fi (= I) between ex and f3. Using Eq. (80), we 
get 
(87) 

328 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
which shows the physical equivalence of Heisenberg and Schr6dinger pictures. 
As an illustration we consider the harmonic oscillator problem. However, before 
we do so, we note that 
(88) 
and 
(89) 
Thus if P (p) and X (x) can be expanded in a power series in p and x respectively 
we will have 
and 
Harmonic oscillator problem 
ap 
[X, pep)] = i n-
ap 
ax 
[p, X(x)] = -i /1-
ax 
Now for the harmonic oscillator problem 
(90) 
(9\ ) 
p2 
1 
p2(t) 
1 
H = -
+ -mu}x2 = H = _H_ + -muix2 (t) 
(92) 
2m 
2 
H 
2m 
2 
H 
where we have used Eq. (83). Thus, using Eq. (83) 
(93) 
and 
(94) 
These are the Hamilton's equations of motion (see e.g. Ref.3). The solution of the 
above equations are 
p 
. 
x coswt + -
smwt 
mw 
-mwx sin wt + p cos wt 
(95) 
(96) 
where x = x H (t = 0) and p 
PH (t = 0) represent the operators in the 
Schr6dinger representation. Further, 
= a e-iwr 
(97) 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
329 
where a = aH(t = 0). Similarly 
(98) 
These relations will be used in Chapter 27. 
12.10. The density operator 
Let the kets 10), II), 12), ... In), ... form a complete set of orthonormal kets; i.e. 
L 
In)(nl = I 
(99) 
n 
and 
(min) = omn 
(100) 
An arbitrary ket I P) can be expanded in terms of the ket In) 
IP) = LCnln ); CI1 = (niP) 
(101) 
n 
A state can be characterised by the density operator p defined by the following 
equation 
p = IP)(PI 
(102) 
Trace of an operator 
The trace2 of an operator is defined to be equal to the sum of the diagonal matrix 
elements for any complete set of states; thus 
Tr 0 = L(nIOln) 
(103) 
n 
Hence 
Tr(IP)(QI) = L(nIP)(Qln) 
11 
or 
Tr(IP)(QI) = (QIP) 
(104) 
where in the last step we have used Eq. (27). Thus 
Trp = TrIP)(PI = (PIP) = I 
(105) 
2 Abbreviated as T r. 

330 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where we have assumed I P) to be normalized. Also 
Pnn = (n I P) (P In) = Icn l2 
implying that the diagonal matrix elements of the density operator represent the 
probabilities of the system in the base states. 
Expectation value 
Now, the expectation value of the operator 0 is given by 
(0)= (PIOIP)=L(PIOln)(nIP) 
n 
L(n I P)(P I 0 In) 
n 
L(n I pOI n) 
n 
Tr(p 0) 
(106) 
Perhaps the most important application of the density operator is in the field of 
statistical mechanics where we consider an ensemble of a large number of identical 
systems; each system may be in a different quantum state (see, e.g. Ref. 4). 
If W\jJ represents the probability of finding the system in the state characterized 
by I w), then the corresponding density operator is given by 
(107) 
where the summation is carried over all possible states of the system; the density 
operator contains all the information about the ensemble. Obviously, since 
(108) 
we have 
Tr p = L W\jJTrlw)(wl 
\jJ 
\jJ 
(109) 
Radiation field inside a cavity 
As an example, we consider the radiation field at thermal equilibrium (at temper-
ature T) inside a cavity. We will show in Chapter 27 that the radiation field can 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
331 
be visualized as consisting of an infinite number of simple harmonic oscillators. 
The energy of each oscillator can decrease or increase by integral multiples of 
nw!c; if we consider nWA as the energy of a photon, then each oscillator can have 
energy corresponding to n!c photons. Restricting ourselves to a particular mode (i.e. 
to a particular frequency which we will denote by w), the probability of finding 
n photons (i.e. the probability of finding the system in the nth excited state) is 
proportional to 
exp ( __ 
:; ) ~ exp [ __ 
(n _~~=---i) n_w] 
Thus 
exp [ _ (n~~nw] 
exp[ -n~] 
1 + e-~ + e-2~ + ... 
e-ni; 
1/ (1 _ e-~) = e-ni; (I - e-i;) 
where ~ = nw/kT. Thus 
or 
p = [1 - e-i;] L e-ni; In) (nl 
11 
n 
(because aa is the number 
operator, see Sec. 12.7) 
[I - e-I;] e-I;aa L In)(nl 
n 
p = [1 - e-i;] e-i;aa 
The above equation can be put in the form 
where H represents the Hamiltonian of the system. 
(110) 
(Ill) 
(112) 

332 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
12.11. Problems 
Problem 12.1 Show that 
implying that the expectation values of the potential and kinetic energies are equal. 
Problem 12.2 Using Eqs (25) and (26) evaluate the matrix elements 
( m I a In) and (m I 7i In) 
Write the matrices representing a and 7i and show that they are not Hermitian. 
Problem 12.3 Using Eqs (30) and (31) and the results of the previous problem 
show that 
-
01+l 
( Ii) 1/2 
2f.lw 
for m = n + 1 
(mlxln) = ( Ii) 1/2 
-
v'n 
2f.lw 
for m = n - I 
o 
otherwise 
and 
( Ii) 1/2 
i 
f.l 2 W 
01+l for m = n + I 
(mlpln) = 
( Ii) 1/2 
-i f.l 2 W 
v'n 
for m = n - 1 
o 
otherwise 
Write the matrices representing x and p and show that they are both Hermitian. 
Problem 12.4 (a) Show that 
Ii 
-
J(n + I)(n + 2) for m = n + 2 
2f.lw 
Ii 
-- (2n + 1) 
for m = n 
2f.lw 
Ii 
-- In(n -
\) 
for m = n - 2 
2f.lw 
o 
otherwise 
(b) Similarly evaluate (mlp2In) and show that 
(m I ~~ + ~f.lW2X21 n) = (n + ~) liwo mn 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
333 
(The above result follows directly from the fact that In) are the orthonormal eigen-
kets of H; thus the matrix representing H would be diagonal with diagonal ele-
ments representing the energy eigenvalues). 
Problem 12.5 Show that 
(nlx4In) = ~ (/L: r 
(n2 + n + ~) 
Problem 12.6 Show that the operator a cannot have any eigenkets and similarly 
the operator a cannot have any eigenbras. 
[Hint: Write the eigenvalue equation and express the eigenket as a linear combi-
nation of In); similarly, express the eigenbra as a linear combination of ( n I], 
Problem 12.7 (a) Let 
( n ) = (a I Nop I a ) 
(113) 
represent the expectation value of the number operator Nop (= aa) corresponding 
to the coherent state. Show that 
( n ) =1 a 12 
(114) 
and 
00 
an 
I a ) = e-(n)/2 Lin) 
R 
11=0,1,2, ... 
(115) 
(b) If we write 
(116) 
show that the above equations are the same as given by Eqs (56), (57) and (113) of 
Chapter 7. 
Problem 12.8 Using Eqs (5S) and (59) and assuming a to be real, prove 
( W (t) I x 2 I W (t) ) 
(117) 
( w (t) I p2 I w (t) ) 
(1IS) 
( w (t) I H I 4J (t) ) 
(119) 
( w (t) I Nop I w (t) ) 
(120) 
( w (t) I N;'p I w (t) ) 
(121) 
(122) 

334 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where 
~ 0 ( = -J2 a ) = y Xo 
( 123) 
Show that the above equations are the same as derived in Sec. 7.5. 
Problem 12.9 Prove Eq. (45) by induction. 
Problem 12.10 For a two-dimensional isotropic oscillator 
1 
I 
H = -
(p 2 + p~) + - flw2 (x2 + i) 
(124) 
2fl 
x 
.\ 
2 
Show that 
(125) 
where 
(126) 
and 
(127) 
Show that the eigenvalues would be liw, 2 liw, ... and will be n-fold degenerate. 
Problem 12.11 If I a ) and I f3 ) are eigenkets of the operator a belonging to the 
eigenvalues a and f3 respectively, then show that 
The above equation shows that the eigenkets are not orthogonal. 
Problem 12.12 
(a) Show that 
(b) If 
IW(t = 0)) = la) 
then show that 
IW(t») = e-iUJot/2 e-a2 / 2 ecdwot{j 10) 
[Hint: IW(t)) = e-iHt / fj IW(O») and use Eq. (8) for H]. 
(128) 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
335 
12.12. Solutions 
Solution 12.2 
( m I a In) = In( min - 1 ) = In om, n-l 
(129) 
and 
( m I a In) = ~( 
min + 1 ) = ~ 
om, n+l 
(130) 
Thus the matrices which represent a and a are 
0 y'! 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
v'2 
0 
0 
a= 
0 
0 
0 
v'3 
0 
(131 ) 
0 
0 
0 
0 
J4 
and 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
y'! 
0 
0 
0 
0 
a= 
0 
v'2 
0 
0 
0 
(132) 
0 
0 
v'3 
0 
0 
which are non-Hermitian matrices, 
Solution 12.8 We will evaluate ( \IJ (t) I p2 I \IJ (t) ); other expectation values 
can be evaluated in a similar manner, Using Eg. (59) 
( \IJ(t) I p2 I \IJ(t) ) 
_Il ~w ( \IJ (t) I (a - a) (a - a) I \IJ (t) ) 
-
Il ~w [( \IJ(t) I a a I \IJ(t) ) 
-
( \IJ(t) I a a I \IJ(t) ) 
-
( \IJ(t) I a a I \IJ(t) ) 
+( \IJ(t) I a a I \IJ(t) )] 
(133) 

336 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Now using Eqs (57) and (61) 
( \II(t)1 a a 1\II(t)) 
00 
00 
m+n 
= e-a2 L 
L 
_a __ ei(l11-n)w( (m 1 aa 1 n) 
Jm!n! 
111=0,1,2, ... n=0,1,2, ... 
00 
a l11+n 
= e-a2 
'"""' 
'"""' -- ei(m-n)uJ( In(n -
1) 8 
~ ~ Jm!n! 
V 
m,n-2 
m=O,I, ... n=2.3 .... 
00 
00 
a 2m+2 
__ e-2iwt 
m! 
= e-a2 L 
m=0,1,2, ... 
If we take the complex conjugate of the above equation, we would get 
( \II(t) 1 a a 1 \II(t) ) = a 2 e2iwt 
Similarly 
( \II(t) 1 a a 1 \II(t) ) = 1 + a 2 
and 
( \II(t) 1 a a 1 \II(t) ) = a 2 
Thus 
( \II(t) 1 p2 1 \II(t) ) 
-
/L ~w [2a 2 cos 2wt -
1 - 2a2] 
2/L I1w a 2 sin2 wt + /L ~w 
P02 sin2 wt + ~ y2 112 
where 
Po = J2/L I1w a 
consistent with Eq. (66). 
Solution 12.9 We assume Eq. (45) to be valid so that 
o/n+l (x) = 
[2(n 11)]1/2 Lnn~J]T l/2 (~- f~) [Hn (~)e-~2/2J 
(134) 
(135) 
(136) 
(137) 
(138) 
(139) 
[2n+1 (n: 1)!J]T l/2 [2~ Hn (~) -
Hnl (~)] e-~2/2 
(140) 
Now, if we use the well-known recurrence relations 
2~ Hn (~) = 2n HIl - 1 (~) + Hn+l (~) 
(141) 

Linear Harmonic Oscillator II 
337 
and 
(142) 
we readily get 
(143) 
Equation (140) therefore becomes 
(144) 
Thus if Eq. (45) is valid then Eq. (144) must also be valid. Since Eq. (45) is valid 
for n = 0, 1 and 2 [see Eqs (42)-(44)], it must be valid for all integer values of n. 
Thus, we have been able to derive the normalized Hermite-Gauss functions in a 
very straightforward manner. 
12.13. Sample questions 
Q. I In the linear harmonic oscilltor problem, let In) represent the set of ortho-
normal eigenkets of H. 
a) Evaluate 
(4 I x 2 I 6), 
(5 I p2 I 6) 
b) Are 10), 11) and 12) eigenkets of a? 
c) Evaluate (i) H[a a In)], (ii) H[aa In)] 
d) If 
I 
1\II(t = 0») = y'2[ll) + iI3)] 
then what would be 1\II(t»)? 
[Ans: (b) Only 10) is an eigenket of a. 
(c) (ii) In(n -
l)(n -
~) IIwln)]. 
Q. 2 At t = 0, the linear harmonic oscillator is in the coherent state given by 

338 
a) 
b) Nonnalize [a) and detennine Co. 
c) What would be [\}.I(t))? 
d) Assume a to be real and calculate 
and 
(\}.I(t) [ p [ 41(t)) 
(\}.I(t) [ x [ 41(t)) 
(41(t) [ a [ 41(t)) 
(41(t) [ a [ 41(t)) 
12.14. References and suggested reading 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
1. P.A.M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford (1958). 
2. G. Baym, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, W.A. Benjamin, New York (1969). 
3. H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Read-
ing, Massachusetts (1950). 
4. W.H. Louisell, Quantum Statistical Properties of Radiation, John Wiley, New 
York (1973). 

Chapter 13 
Angular Momentum II 
Using Bra and Ket Algebra 
In a one-page letter to the Editor of Naturwissenschaften dated 17 October 1925, 
Samuel A. Goudsmit and I proposed the idea that each electron rotates with an 
angular momentum 1i/2 and carries, besides its charge e, a magnetic moment 
equal to one Bohr magneton l , e 1i/2mc ... 
-
GEORGE E. UHLENBECK in Fifty Years otSpin: Personal 
Reminiscences, Physics Today, p. 43, June 1976. 
13.1. Introduction 
In Chapter 9 we had introduced the quantum mechanical angular momentum op-
erator L and had shown that its components satisfy the following commutation 
relations: 
[ L" L y] = 
~ Ii L z I 
[Lv, Lz] = zliLx 
[Lz, Lz] = i liLy 
We had also shown that the square of the angular momentum operator 
L2 (= Lx 2 + L/ + L z 2) commutes with Lx ,Ly and L z; i.e. 
(1) 
(2) 
In this chapter we will use just these commutation relations (and basic axioms 
of quantum mechanics) to show that if one makes a measurement of a Cartesian 
component of the angular momentum operator then it will always be an integral 
or a half integral multiple of Ii, a result which is one of the remarkable features of 
quantum mechanics. It may be mentioned that in Chapter 9 we had shown that L z 
(and similarly L, and Ly) can only have eigenvalues 0, Ii, 21i, ... 
1 Using CGS units, the value of one Bohr magneton is e 1i/2mc; in MKS units, the value is 
e Ii/2m. See also Sec. 14.5. 
339 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

340 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
In Sec. 13.2 we will obtain the eigenvalues of a Cartesian component of the 
angular momentum operator and of the square of the angular momentum operator. 
In Sec. 13.3 we will consider the representation of the angular momentum operator 
in terms of matrices and discuss their significance. In Secs. 13.4 and 13.5 we 
will derive the angular momentum matrices for .i = 4 and.i = 1. In the next 
chapter we will discuss the famous Stern-Gerlach experiment which demonstrated 
the quantization of angular momentum. 
13.2. Eigenvalues 
In this section we will use the commutation relations [see Eqs (1) and (2)] to 
determine the eigenvalues of a particular component of the angular momentum 
operator. For reasons to be discussed later, we will denote the angular momentum 
operator by J and use a system of units in which Ii = 1. Thus, Eqs (I) and (2) 
become 
[lx,lv] 
[12,lz] 
and other equations can be written in cyclic order. 
(3) 
(4) 
It is convenient to use the Dirac notation introduced in Chapter 11. Since 12 
and lz commute, we can construct a complete set of orthonormal eigenkets which 
are simultaneous eigenkets of the operators 12 and lz belonging to the eigenvalues 
A and m respectively (see Sec. II.S). Thus, 
Ladder operators 
We define the ladder operators 
and 
Now 
Thus 
A/A, m) 
miA, m) 
L = lx - ifl' 
[lz, lx] + i [lz' lv] 
if,. + lx = 1+ 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(S) 
(9) 

Angular Momentum II 
341 
Similarly 
(10) 
We also have 
or 
(11 ) 
Similarly 
(12) 
Further 
(13) 
and 
(14) 
i.e. Land 1+ are adjoints of 1+ and L respectively. In writing Egs (13) and (14) 
we have used the fact that since Ix, Jy and Iz are observables, they are represented 
by real operators: 
Ix = Ix, Iy = Iy , Iz = Iz 
We first show that A ::0: m 2. Now 
where 
(p II/+J/I p) 
( p 1 Ix Ix 1 P) + (p IIy Jy 
1 p) 
(QIQ)+(RIR)::o:O 
1 Q ) = Ix 1 P ), 1 R ) = Iy 1 P ) 
and since Ix and Iy are real operators 
( Q 1 = ( P 1 Ix = ( P 1 Ix 
and 
( R 1 = ( P 1 Iy = ( P 1 Iy 
(15) 
In the last step of Eg. (15) we have used Eg. (25) of Chapter 11. If we choose 
1 P ) = 1 A , m ), then 
o :s ( A, m 112 -
I z 21 A, m ) = (A - m 2) ( A, m 1 A, m ) 
Thus 
(16) 
We next consider the effect of the ladder operator on the ket 1 A, m ). Using Eg. 
(9) we get 

342 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
or 
1z [1+ I A , m )] = (m + I) [1+ I A, m )] 
Further, since 12 commutes with 1x and 1v we will have 
[12, h] = 0 
or 
or 
(17) 
(18) 
Equations (17) and (18) tell us that 1+ I A , m ) is a simultaneous eigenket of the op-
erators 12 and 1z belonging to the eigenvalues A and (m + I), provided 1+ I A, m ) 
is not a null ket. Similarly, using Eq. (10) one can show 
1z [L I A, m )] = (m -
I) [L I A, m )] 
(19) 
implying that 1_ I A , m ) is a simultaneous eigenket of 12 and 1z belonging to the 
eigenvalues A and (m -
1) respectively provided L I A , m ) is not a null ket. We 
may, therefore, write 
1+ I A, m ) = C+ I A, m + 1 ) 
(20) 
and 
L I A, m ) = C_I A, m - I ) 
(21 ) 
These equations show why h are called ladder operators; 1+ is an operator that 
raises the eigenket to the next higher value of m and L is an operator that low-
ers the eigenket to the next lower value of m. In a similar manner we may ar-
gue that 1+ I A , m + 1 ) and L I A , m -
I ) are proportional to I A , m + 2 ) and 
I A , m - 2 ) respectively. This, however, cannot go on indefinitely; otherwise we 
will violate the condition A ::: m 2 . Consequently, there must exist a particular value 
of m, say m = j, for which 
1+ I A, j ) = 0 
Operating on the left by 1_, we obtain [using Eq. (12)] 
(12 -
1z 2 -
1z) I A, j ) = 0 
or 
(A - / - j) I A, j ) = 0 
Since I A, j ) t=- 0, the number A - / - j = 0; and hence,2 
A=j(j+l) 
(22) 
(23) 
(24) 
2 The reader not yet attuned to operator algebra may pause here and relleet on Eqs (22) and (23) 
to see how we treat them ditlerently. In Eq. (22) neither the operator 1+ nor the ket lA, j) need be 
zero in order to produce a null ket. For example, d;;~) = 0 does not permit us to identify either 
::2 or x with a null quantity. But in Eq. (23), a ket is multiplied by a number and one of them must 
vanish. 

Angular Momentum II 
We can detennine the lowest value of m, say j', by requiring 
Operating on the left by J+ and using Eq. (11) we obtain 
or 
A=j'(J'-I) 
Using Eqs (24) and (25) we obtain 
j' (j' - 1) = j (j + 1) 
343 
(25) 
Thus either j' = j + 1 (which we reject since j' is supposed to be less than j), or 
·1 
• 
j =-j 
(26) 
Thus, we have a family of kets which correspond to the same eigenvalue 
A [= j (j + 1)] of J2 but different eigenvalues of Jz. These we denote by 
IA,j), IA,j-l), ... , IA,-j) 
(27) 
Successive application of the ladder operator J _ on I A, j ) should ultimately 
lead to I A, - j ). (Also, successive application of J+ on I A, - j ) should lead 
to I A, j ).) This will happen only if 2j is an integer, so that the allowed values of 
j are 
Allowed values of j 
1 
3 
j = 0, 2' 1, 2'··· 
(28) 
and for each value of j the m values go from - j to j in steps of unity. Thus there 
are (2j + 1) eigenkets of J2, each having the same eigenvalue j (j + 1). We label 
the eigenkets as 
Ij,m); m=-j, -j+l, ... , j-l, j 
with j = 0, 1/2, 1, 3/2 .... The kets are assumed to satisfy the orthonormality 
condition 
( j' , m' I j , m ) = 0 jj' omm l 
(29) 
Thus we obtain the important result that the Cartesian components of the angu-
lar momentum operator (say Jz) can have half integral values. On the other hand, 
components of orbital angular momenta, defined as r x p , can have only eigen-
values 0, h, 2h, etc. (see Sec. 9.3). The question arises whether nature provides 

344 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
systems which do have values ~ Ii for angular momenta. It is remarkable that the 
most elementary system known, the electron, is an example of this. Obviously 
we cannot write this spin angular momentum as an operator operating on the 
coordinates of the electron. Spin has no classical analogue and is introduced in 
non-relativistic theory in an ad hoc manner; the relativistic Dirac theory provides a 
natural explanation of this. The suggestion about spin came from a study of Zeeman 
patterns from which it appeared that the (2l + 1) multiplicity of levels often turned 
out to be even. We may mention here that an attempt was made to attribute spin to 
the rotation of the electron about its axis but this exercise proved abortive. 
13.3. The constants C + and C_ 
We now determine the normalization constants C+ and C_. First, we note that if 
we define 
1 P ) = 1+ 1 j ,m ) = C+ 1 j ,m + 1 ) 
then 
( P 1 = ( j, miL = C.; ( j , m + 1 1 
(since1+ = L) 
Thus 
( PIP) = ( j , m 1 L1+ 1 j, m ) = IC+1 2 ( j , m + 1 1 j, m + 1 ) 
But 
( j , m 1 L1+ 1 j, m ) 
( j , m I 12 -
1z 2 -
1z I j, m ) 
j (j + 1) - m2 - m = (j - m) (j + m + 1) 
Hence 
1 
C+ = [(j -m)(j+m+ 1))2 
or 
1 
1+ Ij, m) = [(j - m) (j +m + 1)]21 j, m + 1) 
(30) 
Similarly 
1 
L 1 j, m) = [(j + m) (j - m + 1)]2 Ij, m - 1 ) 
(31) 
Notice that the coefficients in front of 1 j , m + 1 ) and 1 j , m - 1 ) are zero for 
m = + j and m = - j respectively. Thus 
1+ 1 j, j ) = 0 
(32) 
and 
Llj,-j)=O 
(33) 

Angular Momentum II 
345 
13.4. Angular momentum matrices corresponding to j = ! and the 
Pauli spin matrices 
We will consider the matrix representation of the components of the angular mo-
mentum operator (corresponding to j = 
~) in a system in which 12 and 1z are 
diagonal, i.e. we will choose as basis vectors the simultaneous eigenfunctions of 
12 and 1z. Now, corresponding to j = ~ we have m = ~ and -~; thus we have 
two base states which we denote by I 1 ) and I 2 ): 
Base states 
and 
Obviously 
1z I 1) = ~ Pi I I ), 
12 I 1) = 
~ Pi 2 I I ) , 
The (i j)th matrix element of an operator (9 is defined by 
(9i j = ( i I (9 I j ) 
Consequently 
(1Z)12 = ( 1 I 1z 12) = 0 = ( 2 I 1z I 1 ) = (1zhI 
1 
1 
(1z)ll = ( 1 I 1z I I ) = 2 Pi, 
(1z)22 = ( 2 I 1z 12) = -2 Pi 
Similarly 
and 
Now 
( j , m I 1x I j , m ) 
1 
H(} + m + 1) () - m) F Pi (J, m' I j, m + I ) 
1 
(34) 
(35) 
(36) 
+H () + m) () - m + 1) F Pi (J , m' I j, m - 1 ) 
1 
~ [() + m + 1) () - m)F Pi Dm',m+! 
I 
+~ [() +m) (j - m + 1))2 Pi Dm',m-l 

346 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
i.e. the matrix element is zero unless m' = m + 1 or m' = m -
I. Thus 
(IX)11 = ( 1 I ix I 1 ) = ( ~, ~ I ix I ~, ~ ) = 0 
and similarly (ix h2 = O. However, 
(I<)12 
( I I ix 12) = ( ~, ~ I ix I ~ , -~ ) 
I 
~ [G -
~ + 1) (~+ ~)F Ii = ~ Ii = (IxhI 
Similarly 
and 
Pauli spin matrices 
Thus the angular momentum matrices for j = ~ are 
We can also write 
where 
o-v 
and 
1 
J = -lifT 
2 
~ 1i2 (1 0) 
4 
0 I 
(37) 
(38) 
(39) 
(40) 
(41 ) 
are known as Pauli spin matrices. Further o-}, o-}, and 0- z2 are all unit matrices. 
It may be noted that the Pauli spin matrices as ~ell as in iv, i z and J2 are all 
Hermitian. Further, the eigenvalues of Jt , J y and I z are + ~ Ii and -
~ Ii. Thus, if 
we make a measurement of Jx (or Jv or JJ we will either get +~ Ii or -~ Ii. 

Angular Momentum II 
347 
Spin up and spin down states 
Now, the simultaneous eigenfunctions of J2 and Jz are 
(42) 
and 
12) = I ~, -~ ) = (~ ) 
(43) 
which are known as the spin up (I t ) and spin down (I ~ ) states. They are also 
denoted by 1 Z t ) and 1 Z ~ ) states implying that ifthe electron is in the state (say) 
1 Z ~ ) and if the z-component of the spin angular momentum is measured then the 
measurement will yield -~ n. 
From the matrices representing Jx and Jv, one can calculate the corresponding 
eigenvalues and eigenvectors and one can immediately see that 
(44) 
~ 
I (I) I ~ 
1 ~ 
1 x~)=-
=-1 zt)--I z~) 
V2 
-I 
V2 
V2 
(45) 
We also have 
(46) 
and 
(47) 
Thus if a system is in the 1 Z t ) state and if one makes a measurement of Jx , 
then the probability of obtaining the value +~n is ~ and the value -~n is also ~. 
This will become more explicit when we discuss the Stern-Gerlach experiment in 
the next chapter. 
Similarly one can write down for the 1 y t ) and 1 y ~ ) states in terms of 1 x t ) 
& 1 x ~ ) and 1 Z t ) & 1 Z ~ ) states. 
13.5. Angular momentum matrices for j = I 
In this section we will derive the angular momentum matrices corresponding to 
j = 1; the procedure will be similar to that in the previous section. Now, for j = 1 

348 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
we have m = I, 0 and -1; thus we have three base states which we denote by 
I I ) , I 2 ) and I 3 ): 
I 1 ) 
Ij=l,m=1) 
I 1, 1 ) 
I 2 ) 
Ij=l,m=O) 
I 1,0 ) 
I 3 ) 
Ij=l,m=-l) 
I I, -I ) 
Obviously 
lz I I) = Il I 1 ) 
lz 12) = 0 
lz I 3 ) 
-Il I 1 ) 
and 
lz 2 I 1 ) 
21l 2 11) 
lz 2 I 2 ) 
21l212) 
lz 2 I 3 ) 
2112 I 3 ) 
Thus when the base kets are I I ) , I 2 ) and I 3 ), the matrices representing 12 and 
lz are diagonal and are given by 
Matrix representing lz 
and 
Matrix representing 12 
Further 
and 
/, ~h 0 
0 J) 
0 
0 
/2 ~ 2n2 0 
0 D 
I 
0 
1+ I 1 ) = 0 
1+ 12) 
hili I ) 
1+ 13) =hIl12) 
L I I) = h1l12) 
L12) 
h1l13) 
L 13) = 0 
(48) 
(49) 
(50) 
(51 ) 
(52) 
(53) 
(54) 
(55) 

Angular Momentum II 
Thus, for example, 
( 1 I lx I 2 ) 
1 2 ( 1 I 1+ + L 12) 
_1 Ii 
viz 
Similarly other matrix elements can be calculated. The final result is 
Matrix representing lx 
Similarly, 
Matrix representing Jv 
Finally, 
and 
1 
o 
-i 
o 
13.6. The Pauli wavefunction and the Pauli equation 
349 
(56) 
(57) 
(58) 
(59) 
(60) 
The electron is endowed with two internal degrees of freedom corresponding to 
values of ± ~ Ii for the component of its intrinsic angular momentum along a speci-
fied axis (say the z-axis). Accordingly, we need two wave functions to describe the 
state of an electron at each point in space. Writing them in matrix form, we have 
(61) 

350 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Such single column matrices are known as spinors3 and the wave function is known 
as the Pauli wave function (hence the subscript P on 1jf). Writing 
(62) 
we say that any spinor can be written as a linear combination of the basic spinors 
and 
(63) 
Thus 
and 
would represent the probabilities of obtaining the I z t) and I z -t) states respec-
tively and we must have 
(64) 
Since the electron requires information regarding its spin as well as position 
coordinates, the Pauli wave function satisfies the equation 
Pauli equation 
(65) 
where H represents the Hamiltonian. For the hydrogen atom, in the absence of any 
interaction other than the Coulomb interaction, H, will be of the form 
H 1jf p = [ - ;~ V2 . I + V (r) . I] 1jf p 
(66) 
where I is the 2 x 2 unit matrix. Thus 1jf + and 1jf _ satisfy the same equation and 
the spin up and spin down states have the same energy. On the other hand, if we 
take into account the spin-orbit interaction, H will be of the form 
(67) 
3 Spinors are characterized by special properties under rotations. We do not wish to leavc the 
impression that they are just single column matrices. 

Angular Momentum II 
351 
where (see Sec. 20.5) 
(68) 
which is known as the Pauli operator for H'. Obviously, now the equations for 
1/1 + and 1/1 _ will be coupled and one has to use perturbation theory to consider the 
effect of H'. This will be discussed in Problem 19.12. 
13.7. Some historical remarks 
In Sec. 13.2 we had shown that Cartesian components of the angular momentum 
operator can have values which are half integral multiples of n. Indeed, it was in 
1925 that G.E. Uhlenbeck and S. Goudsmit introduced the idea that an electron has 
a spin angular momentum of ± ~ n. May be it would be of interest to give a brief 
historical perspective of the development of the subject. 
To quote Uhlenbeck, 
... He (Sam Goudsmit) had told me about Pauli's proposal to ascribe four 
quantum numbers to each electron. He now continued with the discussion of the 
famous paper of January 1925 in which Pauli formulated the exclusion principle; 
no two electrons could have the same four quantum numbers . ... Sam himself 
had simplified the argument by introducing the quantum numbers, n, I, m[ and 
ms instead of those used by Pauli, and he noticed that then ms was always ±1/2. 
1 was impressed, but since the whole argument was purely formal, it seemed 
like abracadabra to me. There was no picture that at least qualitatively connected 
Pauli's formalism with the old Bohr atomic model. it was then that it occurred to 
me that, since (as [ had learned) each quantum number corresponds to a degree 
of freedom of the electron, the fourth quantum number must mean that the electron 
had an additional de!{ree offreedom-in other words, the electron must be rotating! 
Sam has written that he did not know at that time what a degree of freedom was. 
This may be so, as Sam had not done his exam in mechanics yet; in fact, he never 
passed this exam, and as a result he did not have the right to teach mechanics in the 
Dutch high schools even after he got his Ph.D. However, this did not prevent him 
later from teaching the graduate course in mechanics at the University of Michi-

352 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
gan, which he did regularly because he liked the subject so much; furthermore, it 
was much appreciated by the students. 
In spite of this he appreciated right away that if the angular momentum of the 
electron was Pi /2, one had a picture of the alkali doublets as the two ways the 
electron could rotate with respect to its orbital motion. In fact, if one assumed that 
the gyromagnetic ratio for the rotation was twice the classical value, so that the 
magnetic moment was 
e 
Pi 
2-- - = one Bohr magneton 
2mc 2 
then the properties formerly attributed to the core were now properties of the 
electron .. .. 
I remember that when this became clear to us, we had a feeling of euphoria, 
but we also both agreed that one could not possibly publish such stuff. Since it had 
not been mentioned by any of the authorities (we did not know about Kronig, of 
course) it must for some reason be nonsense. But, of course, we told Ehrenfest, 
who was immediately interested. I am not sure precisely what happened next. Sam 
is wrong when he writes that he was satisfied and did not think any more about 
how our model could be justified. I remember that he wrote me a postcard from 
Amsterdam very soon afterward, in which he asked whether I was sure that the 
gyromagnetic ratio had to be e /2mc classically-perhaps it was different for the 
rotation of an extended charged body. I showed this postcard to Ehrenfest, who 
then recalled a paper by Max Abraham about the magnetic properties qf rotating 
electrons. I studied this paper very hard and found there to my great sati:;faction 
that if the electron has only surface charge the gyromagnetic ratio was 2e /2mc, 
just as we had postulated! I think that when I showed this to Ehrenfest he thought 
(as he told us later) that our idea was either very important or nonsense, but that it 
should be published. The Abraham calculations were non relativistic and based on 
the old-fashioned rigid electron, so that they were at best only suggestive. Anyway, 
Ehrenfest told us to write a short, modest Letter to Naturwissenschaften and to 
give it to him. "Und dann werden wir Herrn Lorentz fragen." ("And then we 
will ask Mr. Lorentz.") A letter qf 16 October to H.A. Lorentz in which he mentions 
this (among other things) was found and shown to me by Martin Klein. 
Lorentz, who was of course the great old man of Dutch physics, was retired and 
lived in Haarlem but gave a lecture in Leiden every Monday at 11 :00 am, in which 
he discussed the recent developments in physics. Everybody who could possibly 
make it came. So when school started in the middle of October (remember, we had 
long vacations) I had the opportunity to tell Lorentz about our ideas. Sam was 
not present because he had to resume his duties at the Zeeman laboratory. Lorentz 
was very kind and interested, although I also got the impression that he was rather 
skeptical. He said that he would think about it and that we should talk again the 
next Monday. 

Angular Momentum II 
353 
In fact, when we met that day he showed me a stack of papers full of calcula-
tions written in his beautiful handwriting, which he tried to explain to me. They 
were above my head but I understood enough to realize that there were serious 
difficulties. If the radius of the electron was 
2/ 
2 
ro = e 
mc 
and if it rotated with an angular momentum Pi /2, then the suiface velocity would be 
about ten times the light velocity! If the electron had a magnetic moment e Pi/2mc, 
its magnetic energy would have to be so big that, to keep the mass m, its radius 
would have to be at least ten times roo 
It seemed to me that if one extended the Abraham calculations properly as 
Lorentz had apparently done (and published in revised form), then our picture of 
a quantized rotation of the electron could not possibly be reconciled with classical 
electrodynamics. I told this to Ehrenfest, of course, and said that his second alter-
native had turned out to be the right one. The whole thing was nonsense, and it 
would be better that our Letter not be published. Then, to my surprise, Ehrenfest 
answered that he had already sent the Letter off quite a while ago, and that it 
would appear pretty soon. He added: "Sie sind beide jung genug urn sich eine 
Dummheit leisten zu konnen!" (" You are both young enough to be able to afford 
a stupidity!") 
This is not yet the end of the story. Our letter appeared in the middle of Novem-
ber, and soon afterwards (21 November) Goudsmit received a letter from Heisen-
berg, whom he knew quite well. In this letter Heisenberg expressed his appreciation 
for Sam's courageous idea and agreed that it would remove all of the difficulties of 
the Pauli theory. 
13.8. Problems 
Problem 13.1 For an eigenstate of J2 and Jz, show that 
(69) 
and 
(70) 
From the above results develop a classical model for angular momentum. 
Problem 13.2 In Sec. 13.3 we had derived the angular momentum matrices in a 
representation in which J2 and Jz are diagonal. Carry out a similar analysis in a 
representation in which J2 and Jx are diagonal; assume j = ~ . 

354 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Problem 13.3 Show that the Pauli spin matrices satisfy the following relation 
(71 ) 
where Eijk , which is known as the totally antisymmetric unit tensor, is defined by 
E321 
E213 
with all other components equal to zero. 
Problem 13.4 Using Eq. (71) show 
(cyclic indices) 
-I 
(anticyc\ic indices) 
(0" . A) (0" . B) = A . B + iO"· (A x B) 
where A and B are arbitrary vectors. Thus 
where n is an arbitrary unit vector. 
(72) 
(73) 
Problem 13.5 For j = 4, obtain the eigenvectors of s\ and express them as a 
linear combination of I z t ) and I z '" ) states. 
Problem 13.6 (a) Using (37) write the matrices for J+ and L (for j = 4) and 
derive 
J+ I I ) 
J+ 12) 
L I I ) 
L 12) 
o 
!i I 1 ) 
!i12) 
o 
where I I ) and I 2) are given by Eqs (42) and (43). 
(b) Similarly, using Eqs (56) and (57) write the matrices for J+ and L (for j = I) 
and derive Eqs (50)-(55). 
Problem 13.7 In Sec. 13.4 and 13.5 we had derived the angular momentum 
matrices corresponding to j = 4 and j = I in a representation in which J2 and J~ 
are diagonal. Carry out a similar analysis for j = 3/2. 

Angular Momentum II 
13.9. Solutions 
Solution 13.1 
( j , m I J, I j , m) 
=~(j,mlhlj,m)+~(j,mILlj,m)=O 
[using Eqs (30 - 31)] 
(j,mIJ/lj,m) 
= ~[( j ,m I J+J+ I j ,m ) + ( j, m I J+L I j ,m ) 
+ (i, m I J_J+ Ii, m) + (i, miLL Ii, m)] 
= ~ [0 + {(j + m) (j - m + I} ~ ( i ,m I J + I j , m - 1 ) 
I 
+ {(j - m) (j + m + 1)}:2 ( j ,m I L I j , m + 1 ) + 0] 
= ~ 1i 2 [.i (j + I) - m2] 
etc. Obviously 
and 
(J ,m I J2 I j ,m ) = j (j + 1) 1i 2 
355 
(74) 
(75) 
(76) 
From the above equations we can develop a classical model for angular momen-
tum. The total angular momentum vector OP (whose length is assumed to be 
J j (j + 1) Ii) is assumed to precess about the z-axis (see Fig. 13.1). As it pre-
cesses, the z-component of OP (= 0 Q) remains constant, which we assume to be 
equal to m Ii. The x- and y-components of OP change with time and their average 
value is zero. Now 
(77) 
represents ( J/ ) + ( J} ) consistent with Eq. (74). Thus for the state I j , m ) we 
may assume the total angular momentum vector precessing about the z-axis. 
Solution 13.2 
1) 
I (0 
o ,Jz = "2 Ii 
i 
Solution 13.3 The following properties of the Pauli matrices are easily established 
ax a r = ia z' 
etc. 
axa y +ayax = 0, 
etc. 
from which Eq. (71) immediately follows. 
(78) 
(79) 
(80) 

356 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
z 
'---..,.p 
a 
Figure J 3. J. A classical model for the angular momentum vector. 
Solution 13.4 
«(T' A) «(T' B) = L CTiAi CTj B j = (A· B) + i(T' (A x B) 
(81) 
i j 
as can be verified by expanding the RHS and using Eqs (78)-(80). 
Solution 13.7 
J\, 
( 
0 
~ 
~ n ~ 0 
202 
o 
0 j ~) 
( 
0 
-i~ 
1 
i~ 0 
-2i 
-n 
2 
0 
2i 
3 
2 o 
o 
o 
o 
0 
o 
1 2 o 
o 
o 
o 
o 
3 
-2 
2_.!2 2(~ ~ 
J -
4 n 
0 
0 
o 0 
: 0 -i~03) 
i~ 

Chapter 14 
Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
The Stern-Gerlach Experiment, Larmor Precession 
and Magnetic Resonance 
A replica of the postcard sent by Walther Gerlach to Niels Bohr on February 8, 
1922. The left-hand image of the beam profile without the magnetic field shows 
the effect of the finite width of the collimating slit. The right-hand image shows 
the beam profile with the magnetic field. Only in the centre of the apparatus is 
the magnitude of the magnetic field gradient sufficiently strong to cause splitting. 
The pattern is smeared because of the range of speeds of the atoms coming 
from the oven. Translation of the message: "My esteemed Herr Bohr, attached 
is the continuation of our work [vide Zeitschr. f. Phys. 8, 110 (1921)]: the 
experimental proof of directional quantization. We congratulate you on the 
confirmation of your theory! With respectful greetings. Your most humble 
Walther Gerlach." 
-
Adapted from J.S. TOWNSEND, A Modern Approach to 
Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hili, New York (1992). The 
photograph was kindly provided by the Niels Bohr Archives in 
Copenhagen. 
357 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

358 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
14.1. Introduction 
The analysis of the spin half problem is of great significance because it is not only 
of tremendous practical importance but it also allows us to understand some of the 
fundamental postulates of quantum mechanics. 
We will first discuss the magnetic moment associated with the orbital angular 
momentum of a charged particle, this will be followed by the magnetic moment 
associated with the spin angular momentum of the electron. We will then discuss 
the famous Stem-Gerlach experiment which had led to the concept of space quan-
tization. We will then obtain solutions of the time depcndent Schrbdinger equation 
corresponding to the spin half particle in a uniform magnetic field thereby giving a 
quantum mechanical description of the Larmor precession. We will conclude this 
chapter with an analysis of magnetic resonance experiments and in the process we 
will obtain rigorous solutions of the Schrbdinger equation for a time dependent 
Hamiltonian. 
14.2. Orbital angular momentum and magnetic moment 
Consider a particle (of mass m and charge Q ) rotating in a circular orbit of ra-
dius r (see Fig. 14.1). As shown in the figure, the angular momentum vector L is 
perpendicular to the plane of the circular orbit and its magnitude is given by 
L 
v 
Q 
Figure 14.1. A particle (of mass m and charge Q) rotating in a circular orbit of radius r. 
L = mvr 
The rotating charge constitutes a current I which is given by 
I 
Q x (Number of rotations in a unit time) 
v 
Q 2nr 
(I) 
(2) 
Now, at large distances from the loop, the magnetic field produced by the circu-
lating current loop is the same as that by a magnet of dipole moment f.1 given 
by 
f.1 = I x Area of the loop 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
Thus 
or 
v 
f-i = Q- nr2 
2nr 
Magnetic moment due to orbital motion 
Q 
Itl =-L 
2m 
359 
(3) 
where the subscript I implies that we are considering the magnetic moment due to 
the orbital motion. Equation (3) is a classical result; however, quantum mechanics 
also gives the same result. Equation (3) tens us that if Q is positive then It and L 
are in the same direction and if Q is negative, It and L are in opposite directions. 
14.3. Spin angular momentum and magnetic moment 
As mentioned in Sec. 13.6, Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit (in 1925) had introduced the 
idea that an electron has a spin angular momentum of ±~ n; associated with this 
spin angular momentum, the electron has a magnetic moment which is given by 
Spin magnetic moment 
q 
It = -g-s 
2m 
(4) 
where q (::: 1.6 x 10- 19 C) represents the magnitude of the electronic charge, 
m (::: 9.1 x 10-31 kg) represents the electron mass and g (::: 2.0023) is known as 
the Lande g factor; s represents the spin angular momentum operator. In Sec. 13.4 
we had shown that the cartesian components of the j = ~ angular momentum 
operator can be represented by 2 x 2 matrices; these are given by 
I 
Sx = 2n () x 
, 
1 
sy=-n(}y, 
.. 
2 
. 
1 
sz=-n(}7 
2 
' 
(5) 
where () x' () y and () z are Pauli spin matrices and are given by 
Pauli spin matrices 
We may mention here that the magnetic moment of the proton is given by 
(7) 

360 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where q (:::::: 1.6 x 10- 19 C) represents the proton charge, Mp (:::::: 1.673 x 10-27 kg) 
represents the proton mass and gp :::::: 5.56. Even the neutron (which has no charge) 
has a spin magnetic moment given by 
q 
JLIl = -gil 2M S 
n 
(8) 
where q (:::::: 1.6 x 10- 19 C) represents the magnitude of the electron charge, 
Mn (:::::: 1.675 x 10-27 kg) represents the neutron mass and g" :::::: 3.83. The mag-
netic moment of the neutron is attributed to its internal charge distribution. 
14.4. The Stern-Gerlach experiment 
Let us consider the operator corresponding to Sz: 
Sz = ~ n (6 
_~) 
(9) 
The eigenvalues of Sz are +~ n and -~ n; the corresponding (normalized) eigen-
vectors are 
(10) 
which are usually referred to as spin up and spin down states. They are also referred 
as z up and z down states. Now, if we try to make a measurement of Sz then it will 
be one of its eigenvalues, i.e. either +~n or -~n. Indeed this is what happens in 
the Stern-Gerlach experiment where one passes neutral Ag atoms through an inho-
mogeneous magnetic field in the z-direction. For a silver atom in its ground state, 
the angular momentum is just the spin angular momentum of the electron 1 and 
therefore the magnetic moment of the silver atom is simply that of the electron2. 
The atoms behaving like magnets of moment JL, will be acted upon by a force given 
by 
F = -VV = V (JL' B) 
(11) 
where V (= - JL . B) represents the interaction energy. We assume the magnetic 
field to be predominantly in the z-direction and therefore3 
aR~ 
F = f-Lz V Bz ~ f-Lz az' z 
(12) 
1 The silver atom has 47 electrons; 46 electrons form a state with L = ° 
and S = 0, i.e. the total 
angular momentum of the silver atom (in its ground state) is just that due to the last electron. 
2 The Stern-Gerlach experiment cannot be performed with electrons; this is because of the fact 
that since the electron has a charge, it will experience a Lorentz force. On the other hand, although 
the neutral Ag atom possesses the magnetic moment of the electron, it does not have any charge and 
therefore does not experience any Lorentz force. 
3 In Example 14.2 we will discuss the Larmor precession where we will show that the compo-
nents of s perpendicular to B will vary with time and will average out to zero. On the other hand, 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
361 
where fl,z represents the z-component of the magnetic moment. Now, travelling 
a distance l through the region of the magnetic field, the beam will experience a 
deflection ~z given by 
Deflection of the beam 
~z = ~ (Fz) t2 = _l_fl" dB (~)2 
2 
M 
2M 'dZ 
v 
(13) 
where M is the mass and v the velocity of the atoms. 
The atomic velocities, although not unique, will range around a mean value v 
determined by the temperature of the oven. In the absence of the magnetic field, 
the beam, defined by the slits, forms a narrow line. 
Now, according to the classical theory 
fl,z = fl, cos e 
(14) 
where e is the angle that the direction of the magnetic moment makes with the 
direction of the magnetic field. Thus, as the atoms come out of the oven, their 
magnetic moment would point in every possible direction and we should expect 
all values of () (between 0 and Jr) to be possible. Consequently, when the field 
is turned on, the line ought to widen continuously in the z-direction, the deflec-
tion depending on the value of e. Thus, classicalIy, the largest deflections wilI 
occur for atoms whose magnetic moments are aligned along or opposite the z-
direction (i.e. for cos e = ± 1); and for atoms for which cos () = 0, the deflection 
should be zero. However, when the experiment was performed (see Fig. 14.2), the 
detector recorded a two line pattern showing that the silver beam had split into 
two components on passing through the inhomogeneous magnetic field. Since the 
displacement is proportional to fl,Z' the result of the above experiment implies that 
an attempt to measure fl,z would lead to one of the two eigenvalues +fl,o and -fl,o' 
The quantization of the z-component of the magnetic moment suggests that the 
atomic magnets would be oriented in a quantized manner in space; this is often 
referred to as space quantization. In Fig. 14.2, the two beams emerging from the 
magnet would correspond to the rz t) and rz t) states respectively. 
Now, the eigenvalues of Sx (and also of Sy) are ±~ Ii. Thus, there is nothing 
sacred about the z-direction; if the inhomogeneous magnetic field was applied in 
the x-direction, we would have again obtained only two beams but this time they 
will correspond to the rx t) and rx t) states. 
Referring back to Fig. 14.2, let us suppose that we block the rz t) beam and 
allow only the rz t) beam to pass through. If we allow this beam to pass through 
the component parallel to B will remain constant. Thus, although I a:;" I "" I aa~' I because of the 
Maxwell equation (V . B = 0), since B is predominantly in the z-direction, we may neglect the 
terms proportional to /-Lx and /-Ly in Eq. (12) because they will average out to zero. 

362 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
z 
Iz 1 
C 
I I 
y 
I I 
( 
Oven collimators 
Iz 1 
Figure 14.2. In the Stern-
Gerlach experiment the beam of silver atoms (coming out of the oven) is first collimated and then 
passed through an inhomogeneous magnetic field in the z--direction. 
an inhomogeneous magnetic field in the z-direction, then since it is already in 
the Ii t) state, we will get only one spot on the screen as shown in Fig. 14.3 
z 
Iz 1 
Iz l) 
y 
Figure 14.3. If we block the Iz t) beam (in Fig. 14.2) and allow the rz t) beam to pass through an 
inhomogeneous magnetic field in the z--direc-
tion, we would get only one spot on the screen. 
What would happen if we allow the Ii t) beam to pass through an inhomogeneous 
magnetic field in the x-direction as shown in Fig. 14.4? Obviously we are now 
trying to measure Sx and therefore we must expand the Ii t) state in terms of the 
eigenfunctions of Sx' Simple matrix algebra gives us the following (normalized) 
eigenfunctions of s x: 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
363 
Ii j) 
... GJ 
x 
I· .. 
Figure 14.4. If we allow the Ii t) beam to pass through an inhomogeneous magnetic field in the 
x-direction, we would get two spots on the screen corresponding to Ix t) and Ix .).) states. 
and 
~ 
I ( 1) 
Ix+)= y'2 
-1 
Now, 
r.:;-
(1) I ~ 
1 ~ 
IZ t) = 
0 
= y'2 Ix t) + .j2 Ix +) 
Thus if the system is in the rz t) state and if we try to measure St then we would 
get one of the two eigenvalues (+~ Ii and -~ Ii) with equal probabilities (= D. In 
a particular measurement, one can never say for sure whether the Ag-atom will be 
found in the Ix t) state or in the Ix +) state -
one can only predict the probabilities 
of such an event so that if the experiment is carried out with a large number of Ag 
atoms then (approximately) half of them will be found in the Ix t) state and half 
of them in the Ix +) state. What should we have expected classically? Well, since 
the magnet was initially pointing in the z-direction, the magnetic moment vector 
would make an angle of 7T /2 with the x-axis resulting in a zero force acting on the 
magnet. Thus, classically, we should not have expected any deflection at all! 
We end this section by mentioning that in 1927 Phipps and Taylor carried out 
the Stern-Gerlach experiment using a beam of hydrogen atoms. This experiment 
conclusively showed that the observed magnetic moment is due to the electron. 
14.5. The Larmor precession 
The magnetic moment of the neutral Ag atom is the same as that of an electron and 
is given by 
gq 
q 
JL = -- s:::::: --s 
2m 
m 
(15) 
where the symbols have been defined earlier. If such a particle is placed in a static 
magnetic field given by 
B = Eoz 
( 16) 

364 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
then the potential energy associated with the magnetic field would be given by 
where 
and 
Bohr magnetron 
1 
Ho = -It· B = "2 liwoO" z 
qBo 
Wo == 
m 
Ms = Iql Ii :::::: 9.274 x 10-24 J/T 
2m 
(17) 
(18) 
(19) 
represents the Bohr magneton. Since the eigenvalues of 0" z are + 1 and -1, this is 
essentially a two-state problem and the solution of the eigenvalue equation 
would be given by 
Ho In) = En In) 
; n = 1,2 
E I = ~ liwo {} 11) = rz t) = ( ~ ) 
E2 = -~ liwo {} 12) = rz {-) = ( ~ ) 
(20) 
(21 ) 
(22) 
Therefore, the most general solution of the time dependent Schrbdinger equation 
would be 
I\IJ (t») 
a 
i Ii-I\IJ (t») = Ho I\IJ (t») 
at 
2 L CII e-iE"t/1i In) 
n=l 
(23) 
(24) 
where the coefficients C1 and C2 are to be determined from the knowledge of 
I\IJ (t = 0»): 
C 1 = (1 I \IJ (0») 
and 
C2 = (2 I \IJ (0») 
Of course, if the system is initially in the rz t) or Ii' {-) state, then it will remain in 
that state for all time to come; these are the stationary states of the problem. 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
365 
Example 14.1 As an example, we assume that at t = 0, the atom is in the Ix t) 
state. Since 
we readily get 
C1 = (Z tl x t) = ~ (I 0) ( ~ ) = ~ 
Similarly C2 = 1/J2. Thus 
or 
where 
Iw (t)) = _1 e-ie ( I ) + _1 eie (0) 
J2 
0 
J2 
1 
I 
(] == -wot 
2 
(25) 
(26) 
Equation (25) describes the time evolution of the state. For example, if we wish to 
determine (sx), then 
1 
(sx) 
2n(w(t) I()x I Wet)) 
l n (eie e-ie ) (~ ~) ( :::: ) 
or 
(27) 
Similarly 
(28) 
and 
(29) 
The above equations physically imply that the direction of the spin angular mo-
mentum vector rotates about the z-axis with angular velocity wOo We should point 
out that the above equations represent average values of s x, S v and s z; however, 
if we carry out a measurement of sz, then we would obtain either +1 n or -1 n 
(i.e. one of the eigenvalues) but since they will occur with equal probabilities the 
average value of Sz would be zero. On the other hand, the probabilities of obtaining 
the Ix t) and Ix +) states are 
I (X tl W (t))1 2 and I (X +1 W (t))1 2 

366 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
which can readily be evaluated to give 
cos2 (lwot) and sin2 (lwot) 
respectively. Thus if one carries out a measurement of s< then one would get either 
+ ~ Ii or -
~ Ii with probabilities 
and therefore the average value of Sx would be 
(Sr) = (1 Ii) cos2 (lwot) + (-1 Ii) sin2 (lwot) 
1 
2" Ii cos wot 
(30) 
consistent with Eq. (27). One can carry out a similar analysis for evaluating (5\"). 
Example 14.2 We next consider the more general case when 
[when ¢ = IT /2, we obtain the results of the previous example]. Obvious I y 
so that 
IIJl (t») 
Thus 
or 
Similarly 
C 1 = cos ~ and C2 = sin ~ 
cos t e~ill rz t) + sin t e iO rz -J,) 
2 
2 
(
COS i 
~:W) 
sm 2 e 
1 
(5r ) = 2" Ii (1Jl (t) I ax IIJl (t») 
1 
. 
(sx) = - Ii sm¢ coswot 
2 
(31 ) 
(32) 
(33) 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
367 
and 
(34) 
From the above equations we can develop a classical model for the precession of 
the spin angular momentum vector about the z-axis (see Fig. 14.5). 
"'"o-----.y 
x 
Figure 14.5. The Larmor precession. 
From Eqs (29), (30) and (31) it readily follows that if at t = 0, s is assumed 
to lie in the x-z plane then s will lie in the y-z plane at t = rc /2wo, 3rc /2wo, . .. 
Thus the spin angular momentum vector (represented by the vector OP) can be 
assumed to precess about the z-axis with angular velocity Wo; this is known as 
Larmor precession. Further, the z-component of the spin angular momentum vec-
tor (represented by 0 Q) remains constant with time [see Eq. (34)]. Of course, if 
one measures any cartesian component of s one would only get +1 Ii or -1 h. 
Classical treatment 
We may mention here that the same expression for the Larmor frequency is ob-
tained from classical considerations. This can be seen as follows: 4 : If an atomic 
magnet (of dipole moment /L) is suspended freely in a magnetic field B, it will 
experience a torque r given by 
r=/LxB 
(35) 
which tries to align the magnet along the direction of B. Since the atomic magnet 
has an angular momentum (say J) then classical mechanics tells us that (see also 
Problems 14.4 and 14.7) 
or 
dJ 
-=r=/LxB 
dt 
!:1J = ({LBo sin¢) !:1t 
(36) 
(37) 
4 For more details, the reader is referred to The Feynman Lectures on Physics, Vol. II, Chapter 34. 

368 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where ¢ is the angle that f.L makes with Band Bo represents the magnitude of B. 
Since f.L has the same direction as J, ~J will be at right angles to J and the angular 
momentum vector will precess about the direction of B. 
z 
I"'''·'' .----
.... Ci.-.. -...... " 
'. --, -..... -. 
o 
Figure 14.6. Larmor precession using classical mechanics. The magnetic field is in the z-direction. 
Referring to Fig. 14.6, if we assume that at t = 0, J is along OP and at t = f:).t, 
it is along OQ, then 
AP = ] sin¢ 
and 
f:).] 
AP x ex 
(10 sin¢) x (wo~t) 
(38) 
where Wo represents the angular velocity associated with the precession. Compar-
ing Eqs (37) and (38) we get 
fLBo 
q Bo 
q Bo 
wo=--=g--::::::--
J 
2m 
m 
(39) 
14.6. Principle of the magnetic resonance experiment 
In the examples discussed in the previous section, we have considered an elec-
tron in a uniform magnetic field (of magnitude Bo) in the z-direction. The energy 
eigenvalues were 
_ ~ nwo (wo = gqBo :::::: qBo) 
2 
2m 
m 
Electron in a uniform and a rotating r.f field 
The corresponding eigenkets were the spin up and spin down states respectively 
(denoted by Ii" t) and rz t)). In this section we will show that in addition to 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
369 
the uniform magnetic field (in the z-direction), if we apply a rotating r.f. (radio 
frequency) field in the x-y plane given by 
(40) 
then this r.f. field would cause transitions between the spin up and spin down states. 
Now, in the presence of the r.f. field, the Hamiltonian is given by 
H = Ho+H' 
(41) 
where 
1 
Ho = 2 I1woa z 
(42) 
and 
H' 
-/L·B 
gq 
1 b 
[ 
~ 
.~] 
-
. -
flU' B] cos wt x + B] SIll wt y 
2m 
2 
or 
H' = /LBB] [ax coswt+a y sinwt] 
(43) 
where /LB is defined through Eq. (19). If we substitute for a x and a y from Eq. (6) 
we would get 
Our objective is to solve the SchrOdinger equation 
We write 
a 
i 11-1q, (t)) = (Ho + H') Iq, (t)) 
at 
2 
Iq, (t)) = L en (t) e-iEntjli In) 
n=] 
(44) 
(45) 
(46) 
The physical significance of the above equation is obvious: At each instant of time, 
we are expanding the wave function as a linear combination of the eigenfunc-
tions of Ho which form a complete set. Thus the expansion given by Eq. (46) is 

370 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
rigorously correct. Substituting Eg. (46) in Eg. (45) we get 
2 
2 
in L dirn e-iEnt/ h In) + L Cn (t) En e-iEnt/ h In) 
11=! 
/1=1 
2 
= Ho L Cn (t) e-iEnt/ h In) 
n=! 
2 
+H' L Cn (t) e-iEnt/ h In) 
1l=1 
2 
= L C" (t) e-iEnt/ Pi E" In) 
n=! 
2 
+ L Cn (t) e-iEnt/ Pi H' In) 
,,=1 
where we have used Eg. (20). The second term on the LHS cancels with the first 
term on the RHS and we obtain 
in dC ! e-iEjt/IiIO+indC2 e-iEzt/PiI2) 
dt 
dt 
= C1 (t) e-iEjt/ h H'li) + C2 (t) e-iE2t/ Pi H' 12) 
(47) 
If we premultiply by (II, we would get 
i ndCI = C2 (t) ei(Ej- E2)t/1i [!lBB! e-iw1 ] 
dt 
where we have used the following relations 
and 
We define 
(I I I) 
(I I H' I I) 
(I I H' I 2) 
I, (l I 2) = 0 
!lBB! (I 0) (~i(VI ~-iWI) ( ~ ) 
o 
(48) 
(49) 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
using which Eq. (48) can be written in the following form 
i dCI = (01 C2 (t) ei«VO-(v)1 
dt 
371 
(50) 
where we have used Eqs (21) and (22). Similarly, if we premultiply Eq. (47) by (21 
we would get 
(51) 
If we differentiate the above equation and sustitute for dC\/dt and CI (t) from 
Eqs (50) and (51) we would readily get 
where 
d 2C2 
. 
dC2 
2 
dt2 - 21~dt + WI C2 (t) = 0 
W-Wo 
~=---
2 
Assuming a solution of the form 
we readily get 
where 
r=j~2+WI2 
Thus the general solution of Eq. (52) is given by 
We assume that at t = 0, the atomic magnet is in the rz t) state. Thus 
C\ (0) = 1 and C2 (0) = 0 
and Eq. (57) can be written in the form 
We now use Eq. (51) to determine CI (t): 
C I (t) = i dC2 
-2itH 
WI ----at e 
_I _ 
cos rt + -
sin rt 
e-1f':..f 
·Ar [ 
i~ 
]. 
(VI 
r 
(52) 
(53) 
(54) 
(55) 
(56) 
(57) 
(58) 
(59) 

372 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The condition C I (0) = I gives us 
Thus, we obtain 
WI 
A=-
if 
[
it:. 
] 
t-
C I (t) = 
cos rt + r sinft e- I 
t 
and 
WI 
'A 
C (t) = -
sin ft e1tit 
2 
ir 
and 1\.11 (t)) is completely determined [see Eq. (46)]. Further, 
and 
giving the obvious result that 
Spin-flip probability 
(60) 
(61 ) 
(62) 
(63) 
(64) 
The quantity 1 C2 (t) 12 represents the probability of spin-flip; it oscillates between 0 
and w/ / r2, the maximum value occurring at 
7T 
37T 
t = 2f ' 2r , ... 
(65) 
Equation (63) can be rewritten in the form 
2 
2 
WI 
2 
Pspin-flip = IC2 (t)1 = 
2 
I 
2 sin rt 
WI + 4 (w -
wo) 
(66) 
Resonance 
For (w -
wo) / Wj » 1, the spin-flip probability is small. The condition W = Wo 
is known as the resonance condition and at resonance, the spin-flips for certainty 
at t = 7T /2r . 37T /2r , .... The resonance condition is achieved either by varying 
the frequency of the r.f. field (w) or by varying the strength of the dc magnetic field 
Bo (and hence wo). Notice that the resonance becomes sharper as the value of B, 
is made smaller-see Fig. 14.7. 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
05 
WI 
-
~ 0·1 
0J0 
373 
2 
3 
4 
0J0 
Figure 14.7. The resonance condition corresponds to w = wo' where the spin flips for certainty. 
The solid and the dashed curves correspond to WI /wo (= B1 / Bol = 0.1, and 0.02 respectively. The 
resonance becomes sharper 
for smaller values of B. 
Principle of ESR and NSR experiments 
Now, at a particular temperature, the number of particles in the rz t) state (which 
has higher energy) will be less in comparison to the number of particles in the 
rz t) state. Further, when a transition occurs from the rz t) state to the rz t) state, 
energy is supplied by the r.f. field. At resonance, the probability of spin-flip will be 
maximum and hence the power supplied by the r.f. field will be maximum. This is 
the basic principle behind the electron spin resonance (ESR) and nuclear magnetic 
resonance (NMR) experiments which primarily involve obtaining the resonance 
condition w = Wo0 This condition can be used either to accurately measure static 
magnetic fields (assuming the value of the electron magnetic moment or the proton 
magnetic moment) or to determine the magnetic moment of the atomic system. 
14.7. The EPR paradox 
Theories derive their authority from observations and experiments. What one can 
infer from experiments is crucial in deciding the validity of a theory. One of the 
most important activities of experiments is to make measurements on a system 
which is used to infer its properties. Nevertheless, in classical physics no particu-
lar emphasis is made on the process of measurements since it is assumed that in 
principle measurement of a property can be made with as high a degree of preci-
sion as necessary without interfering with system measured. This is fundamentally 
impossible in quantum physics in a direct measurement; for example, if we wish 

374 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
to determine the position of an electron, at least one photon must be exchanged 
between the electron and the observing apparatus and that does disturb the system. 
Indeed the elementary discussion of the uncertainty principle was based on these 
ideas (see Chapter 3). 
But it is not always necessary to rely on directly interfering with a system to 
measure a property. For example in particle physics one often deduces the prop-
erties of a particle from the known properties of others produced in a 'collision'. 
The necessary ingredients for such inferences are well established conservation 
laws governing the process (such as angular momentum). We are able to draw such 
inferences because the system studied had been a part of a bigger system from 
which it separated and yet retains 'memory' of its lineage. Thus even when parts 
are well separated subsequently, a measurement on one part of the system will give 
information on the other part. 
All this is not unusual in that they are a feature of measurements in classical 
physics. This is to caution us from unwarranted surprise at results of Quantum 
Mechanics (we will abbreviate this by QM). However, there are peculiar features 
in QM which lead to predictions that we do not encounter in classical physics. 
Perhaps the most spectacular is the one that goes by the name of the 'EPR paradox' 
named after the authors of a famous paper describing a gedanken (i.e, thought) 
experiments. EPR showed that in a quantum process long distance correlations do 
seem to violate common sense when applied to simultaneous measurements of the 
so called incommensurate observables that do not commute (such as position of 
a particle, say the x-coordinate and the x-component of its momentum). We shall 
present a reconstructed version, due to David Bohm6 using spin measurements. 
Consider a molecule composed of two atoms A and B each of which has a spin 
4 (i.e, angular momentum 4n). Assume that the spin of the molecule itself is 0. 
Suppose at time t = 0, the molecule dissociates and the component atoms A and 
B, go off in opposite directions. Soon they will be far apart so that we can think of 
them as isolated from each other so that we would expect that measurements on A 
do not disturb B and vice-versa. 
Now in Clasical as well as in Quantum Mechanics, angular momenta of iso-
lated systems stay constant. This means that each of the components of spin of the 
system will be conserved (i.e, will be unchanged). Let us denote the components 
of spin of A as SX (A), sy(A) and sz(A) and similarly the components of B. In QM, 
there is then the additional feature that each of these components can only take 
the values +4n or -4n. It will be more convenient to talk of the integer quantities 
cr x = 2sx In etc., whose values can be + I or -1. For simplicity, we shall refer to 
these components of cr as 'spin'. 
5 A. Einstein, B. Podolsky and N. Rosen, Physical Review 47, 777 (1935). 
6 Quantum Theory, D. Bohm, Prentice Hall, N.J. (1951). 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
375 
Now the spin components of the molecule are all zero-since its total spin is 
zero and conservation of angular momentum demands: 
a xCA) + a xCB) = 0 } 
ay(A) + ay(B) = 0 
az(A) + az(B) = 0 
(67) 
Thus, measurement of a component of spin of either atom determines the value 
of the same component of the other atom. For example, if we measure and obtain 
a xC A) = + 1, then we would have inferred that a xC B) = -1. This is a typical 
example of indirect measurement that we have talked about and is not at all a 
peculiarity of QM. The spin components of A and Bare correlated-a result of 
the conservation laws applicable to classical systems as well. But QM does impose 
two restrictions. The first, as we have already mentioned, is that the only possible 
results that we can obtain by measuring any spin component are ±11i (or, in terms 
of the Pauli variables a, ± 1). The second is that only one component of spin of 
each atom can have definite values. For example, we cannot talk of atom A being 
simultaneously in the spin states specified by a xCA) = + 1 and a yeA) = -1. This 
statement still requires elaboration. 
In classical mechanics, when we make a measurement and obtain a value, we 
can think of the system being in a state as specified by the value obtained-unless 
it is a very bad measurement. In principle, a good measurement implies that if we 
can prepare a system to be in the same condition several times, then each time 
we shall obtain the same value on measurement. This permits us to indulge in 
such language as "the system has an angular momentum of 15 units". A more 
picturesque way of stating this is that there is an element of reality in the quantity 
measured. In QM too, occasionally such a statement is valid but in general it is 
not. Thus, when we measure the spin component a x (A) and obtain a value + I, we 
ought not, in general, assume that the atom A is precisely in the state specified by 
that value. This does not mean that the measurement made by us is necessarily a 
bad one-a careless one; it is merely a normal manifestation of a quantum system 
that a measurement of ax (A) has a probability of giving as answer + 1 or -1 
and we happen to have obtained one of those values. This particular property of 
'probability' is not peculiar to QM; after all, the probability of a head in a toss of 
a coin is 1 but a specific result can be a head and we cannot conclude anything 
about the behaviour of the coin under the 'same' conditions in subsequent tosses. 
Now it would seem quite reasonable to assume that when the atoms A and B are far 
apart, they cease to interact; if now, we measure the x component of spins of both 
A and B simultaneously there is no reason to suspect that a measurement of one 
influences the other. Nevertheless, there need be no surprise if we always find that 
the two results are correlated in the sense that if we obtain + 1 for a x (A) we always 
obtain -1 for a xCB) or vice-versa. This correlation, in fact, is what one will obtain 

376 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
in such a measurement of the above quantum system; a classical system will also 
exhibit such a perfect correlation. 
Now in the case of a classical system, this perfect correlation will have an easy 
explanation, namely that the angular momentum component carried by A will have 
to be opposite that carried by B. Indeed it makes sense to say that A and B have 
those angular momenta. In the quantum system, we already have a little problem. 
Although it need not occasion any surprise that we obtain a value (J AA) = + 1, it 
may seem a little odd that we simultaneously obtain a correlated value (Jx (B) = -1 
always. However, this is a relatively minor difficulty as we shall see. We can invent 
a simple model to reproduce such a correlation for a quantum system. 
On the other hand such a definite correlation does seem to suggest that we 
may, in some sense, assume that there is an element of reality in these quantities 
(JAA) and (JAB). Indeed, if we only measured (J AA), we can now be confident 
of predicting the value of (J AB). Now suppose we measure simultaneously the x 
component of the spin of A and the y component of the spin of B and obtain (as 
is possible) (J x (A) = + 1 and (J y(B) = -1. Now the first two relations in Eg. (67) 
permit us to infer, with certainty, that (JAB) = -1 and (Jy(A) = +1. We would 
conclude that there indeed is an element of reality in all these four quantities. In 
fact, the argument is easily extended to conclude that all the six components of 
angular momenta have elements of reality. In a classical system, that statement is 
indeed true; alas, it violates one of the fundamental results of QM, that we cannot 
assign simultaneously values for more than one spin component of each atom. 
An explanation for this seeming violation of QM that suggests itself is that 
somehow, the measurement of a spin component of A has influenced-disturbed-
the state of B so that our conclusions about the elements of reality pertaining 
to B are not valid any more. In fact, the statement that two components of spin 
of the same atom, say (J AA) and (Jy(A), cannot both be assigned definite values 
simultaneously is sometimes explained by saying that the measurement of one does 
physically influence the other. On the other hand, it is extremely difficult to think 
of such a physical influence of the well separated atoms A and B. In principle, the 
measurements can be completed before any physical influence can travel from one 
to the other. Current advances of technology do permit such experiment. 
In one sense, the term EPR Paradox is a misnomer. What is strange here is that 
the prediction of QM does not accord with what may seem to be just common 
sense. This point was made succinctly by Einstein: "The following idea character-
izes the relative independence of objects far apart in space: External influence on 
one has no direct influence on the other." 
To repeat: the EPR discussion and predictions are within the framework of QM. 
There is no particular confusion about how to calculate the various probabilities 
since the rules of QM are quite precise. For example, the joint probability of, say 
(J x (A) = + I and (JAB) = + 1 is zero and the joint probability of (J,(A) = + I 
and (Jy(B) = +1 is ~; these are results that an experiment will bear out and there 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
377 
will be no violation of QM. Thus there are no specific contradictions within the 
framework of QM. The problem is really a conceptual one - reconciling ourselves 
to an injury to common sense. 
14.7.1. A TOY MODEL FOR SPIN 
One of the odd things in QM is that no matter in which direction we choose to 
measure a component of spin (angular momentum) of a spin ~ particle such as our 
atoms in the EPR example, we are bound to get an answer of either +~n or -~n, 
(i.e., + 1 or -1 for the (J values). Text books on QM display the mathematical appa-
ratus that reproduces this result. Now in classical mechanics, angular momentum 
can take on a continuous range of values. Nevertheless, discreteness by itself is 
not to be thought of as a strange result that arises fundamentally from quantum 
mechanical behaviour. Take for example, our (overused!) example of tossing a 
coin. Despite the large variety of conditions during the toss, all the conditions 
somehow conspire to produce just one of two discreet possibilities-head or tail. 
Thus if it is only discreteness that we want to reproduce in the quantum version of 
spin measurement, we should be able to invent a classical model to do the trick. 
The following is one such: 
Suppose, as in a classical system, the axis of the spin angular momentum is 
along a direction specified by the unit vector p. We now postulate that if we mea-
sure the spin component along any direction a such that a . p is positive, then the 
result of measurement will be + I; otherwise, it will be -1. To picture this, think of 
the direction p (the direction of polarization) as the one from the center of a sphere 
(of unit radius) to the north pole. Then, if the measurement of angular momentum 
is along the direction a directed from the center to a point on the upper hemisphere, 
the result will be + 1 and if it is to point on the lower hemisphere, the result will be 
-1. 
It turns out that this model is much too crude to reproduce the QM results of 
probabilities for obtaining the results + lor-I; but it entirely demystifies the 
perfect correlation of the values of (J xCA) and (J x (B), in the EPR example. When 
the molecule splits, in that example, conservation of angular momentum demands 
that the spin axes of the atoms A and B must be exactly in the opposite directions. 
It is therefore inevitable that if one of them points to the upper hemisphere, the 
other points to the lower hemisphere and the result of measurement, the perfect 
correlation, is not surprising. The problem posed by the EPR paradox, however, is 
not quite this trivial, as we shall see. 
Let us now look at the probabilities that we expect from the crude model above 
and compare them with the predictions of QM. As stated above, the directions of 
spin of A and B, in our toy model, are opposite each other. Thus, if the polarization 
of A is along p, that of B is along -po Now suppose we choose to measure the spin 

378 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
components of A and B along directions not quite opposite each other, but along 
directions that make an angle JT -
rp with each other. 
What will be the probability for obtaining various pairs of results? (There are, 
obviously, four possibilities.) To obtain + 1 for one atom and -1 for the other, 
the two directions of measurement must point to opposite hemispheres (recall that 
the polar direction of our sphere is the direction p of polarization of A). A little 
thought will convince us that the probability for this to happen is I -
rp j JT; i.e, 
to obtain + 1 for A and -1 for B is half this probability, the other half will be 
for obtaining -I for A and + I for B. The other probabilities can be similarly 
worked out. The table below gives the results. The last column gives the value of 
the product a !peA) . a z(B). 
a!p(A) 
az(S) 
Probability 
a!p(A)· az(E) 
+ 
~(I - 'P/n) 
-I 
+ 
~(I - rp/n) 
-I 
+ 
+ 
rp /2n 
+1 
rp /2n 
+1 
The average value (a!p(A). az(E») is the sum of the products of the third and 
fourth columns and is -1 + 2rp j JT • 
Let us now look at the probabilities according to QM. This requires a bit of 
elementary QM. Assume that we measure the spin of A along a direction Ii in the 
x-z plane at an angle rp to the z-axis. Then the relevant spin component for A is the 
operator: 
A .  
( cos rp sin rp 
) 
(J' • n = a x sm rp + CJ 7 cos rp = 
. 
, 
sm rp - cos rp 
Denote the 'up' spin eigenvector (along Ii) by the spinor: ( ~ ). Then, 
(J' • Ii ( : ) = ( ~) (since the eigenvalue is + 1) 
This gives bja = tan(rpj2), and the normalized 'up' state is: 
Similarly the 'down' state (eigenvalue: -1) can be shown to be: 
A, ( _) = ( - sin ~ ) 
n 
cos '£. 2 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
379 
(We have chosen irrelevant phase factors suitably.) These results are well known 
from elementary QM. 
Now suppose we know that the spin state of the atom B is Bz( -), i.e, it is in 
a definite state of spin, along the -z-direction. Then, A must be in the spin state 
denoted by Az(+). We can write: 
A z(+) = ( b ) = coscp/2Aii(+) + sincp/2An(-) 
so that the probability of obtaining + 1 for the spin of A in the n direction is 
cos2(cp/2) and, for obtaining -1 is sin2(cp/2). 
We can now construct a table of probabilities for the various alternatives exactly 
as we did for the crude model. (We denote the state of the two atoms in the first 
column; the notation is self evident.) 
State 
Probability 
O'cp(A)· O'z(B) 
An(+)Bz(-) 
~(cos2('P/2» 
-1 
An(-)B;(+) 
~(cos2('P/2» 
-1 
An(+)Bz(+) 
~(sin2('P/2» 
+1 
An(-)Bz(-) 
~ (sin2('P/2» 
+1 
Calculating as before, we obtain (a cp(A)·a z(B») = - cos cpo It is easily checked 
that the total probability adds to I. Neither the probabilities nor the mean value 
(a cp(A) . a z (B)) agrees with the toy model. Remarkably, the probabilities do agree 
for the specific values of cp = 0, JT /2 and JT. J. S. Bell commented ruefully, on 
this fortuitous agreement: "indeed the discussion for long entirely concentrated in 
the points (specified by these three angles)". Bell's attention was now devoted to 
the correlations at other angles too and he produced some remarkable inequalities 
which could test whether QM can be replaced by more sophisticated versions of 
our toy model. 
14.7.2. BELL'S INEQUALITIES 
We have seen that our toy model was unable to reproduce all the features of QM. Is 
it possible that a more sophisticated model can? Now it may seem that the trouble 
with QM is that the state of a system is not completely specified by the wave 
function of a system. (It is one of the tenets of QM that the wave function does 
contain all the information that can be known about the system.) For example, state 
specified as A z (+) for the spin wave function implies that the atom is definitely po-
larized in the z-direction. If we measure the spin component in any other direction, 
we do not get the same answer each time. Instead, we obtain the values + I and 
-I with certain probabilities. Could it not be that this indeterminate behaviour of 

380 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
A (in regard to its x and y components) is only because we are unaware of other 
parameters pertaining to the system A, whose values (if we knew them) would 
completely specify the spin state of A? In other words, if we knew the values of 
these hidden variables, we can predict in each measurement, whether we shall get 
+ I or -1 for the x or y spin components (assuming that its z component is known 
to be + 1). The theory then, will no longer be a statistical one and we will not have 
to reckon with fluctuations in the results of measurements. Such states which are 
completely specified will be called dispersion free states. 
Let us assume that in the EPR example, the spin state of each of the two atoms 
will be completely specified by a hidden variable A (this can even represent more 
than one hidden variable, although we shall think of it as just one in the discussion 
below). Now the essential requirement for a predictable result of each measure-
ment is not that there should be a one to one correspondence of A and spin but 
rather that if you know A you can predict the spin (for example, in our toy model, 
measurement of a spin component in a direction pointing to anywhere on an entire 
hemisphere would give the same result). Specifically, we assume that for a range 
of values of A, we shall obtain + I and for another, -1. 
Assume now that each splitting of a molecule is characterized by a specific 
value of A within a range dA. The probability for a particular value of A within 
an interval dA is denoted by p(A)dA so that: 
f p(A)dA = 1 
(68) 
Now the values of a!p(A) and az(B) are automatically assumed to be determined 
by the value of the parameter A. We therefore denote these values by a !peA, A) 
and a z (B, A). We must remember however, that these quantities can really be only 
+1 or -\. Now the expectation value of the spin product (a!p(A, A)· az(B, A») 
IS: 
C(q?) = f dA . p(A)a !peA, A) . a z(B, A) 
(69) 
For another value e (representing the direction of the spin component of A mea-
sured) we may write: 
c(e) = f dA . p(A)ag(A, A) . aJB, A) 
(70) 
The difference is: 
C(q?) - c(e) = f dA . p(A)a z(B, A)[a !peA, A) - ae(A, A)] 
= f dA . p(A)a z(B, A)a !peA, A)[1 -
a !peA, A) . ae(A, A)] 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
381 
where we have used the result that O"~ is always + 1. The modulus of the above is: 
[C(cp)-C(e)[ s ! dA·p(A)O"z(B, A)O"ep(A, A)[I-O"ep(A, A)'O"eCA, A)] (71) 
In this integrand, the probability peA) should always be non-negative (assuming 
that we stick to conventional ideas of probability). Further, the term within the 
square brackets is always non-negative, so that we can rewrite the inequality as: 
IC(cp)-C(e)1 s f dA'p(A)IO"z(B, A)O"ep(A, A)I[l-O"ep(A, A)'O"e(A, A)] (72) 
Since 100z(B, A)O"ep(A, A)I = I, we have: 
IC(cp) -
C(e)1 ::: f dA· p(A)[l -
O"ep(A, A) . O"e(A, A)] 
= 1 - ! dAp(A)O" ep(A, A) . O"e(A, A) 
(73) 
Now 0" ep(A, A) measures the spin component of A in the 'cp' direction for a fixed 
A. Perfect correlation in the EPR example implies that this must give the result: 
O"ep(A, A) = -O"ep(B, A), so that we have: 
IC(cp) -
C(e)1 ::: I + f dAp(A)O" ep(B, A) . O"e(A, A) 
(74) 
The integral in the above expression signifies the expectation value of a simultane-
ous measurement of B in the 'cp' direction and of A in the 'e' direction. We now 
specialize to the case when these three directions all lie in the same plane. We then 
expect that this correlation can only be a function of the difference e - cp, so that: 
f dAp(A)O" ep(B, A) . O"e(A, A) = C(e -
cp) 
(75) 
Thus we have the result: 
IC(cp) -
C(e)1 - C(e -
cp) ::: 1 
(76) 
This is one version of the Bell inequalities. 
Let us now check if QM obeys this inequality. Now the QM results, it may be 
recalled, is that C(cp) = - cos cpo If we specifically choose e = 2cp, we obtain: 
1 -
cos cp + cos 2cpl + cos cp ::: 1 
a result that is easily shown to be violated for cp = Jf /6, for example. The inequality 
would read: 
1 - v'3 
v'3 
+- < 1 
2 
2 -

382 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Since the left hand side is ~ 1.23, it is obvious that QM in general violated Bell's 
inequality, derived ostensibly from very general arguments of what we expect from 
a deterministic theory. The question, however, is what do experiments say? The 
experiments clearly favour QM. Bell's great contribution was to take the debate of 
the conceptual status of QM from a purely philosophical debate to the laboratory. 
So far, the results all seem to be consistent with QM-in other words, they violate 
the Bell inequalities. 
It is important to take stock of what all this means in a very general sense. It is 
not just that the hidden variable models are consistent with determinism. They have 
the pleasing feature that they do not demand mysterious long distance correlations 
between the spin components of two (non-interacting?) systems such as the atoms 
A and B in the EPR example. Rather, correlations that we do observe are, in these 
models, those that were there to begin with, persist. There is a continuity which 
is missing (it would seem) in QM. The QM version demands a correlation that 
seems to appear (mysteriously) rather suddenly, on measurement, between A and 
B. If we think of such a correlation appearing as a result of a physical commu-
nication between A and B, then that communication is almost instantaneous-at 
least, it would have to travel faster than light. It is this non-locality implicit in 
the correlations that is the mystery of QM. Thus experimental tests on QM have 
specifically addressed themselves to this question, apart from just testing the Bell 
inequalities. This spooky action-at-a-distance verification is quite difficult; experi-
ments have become possible only because of the spectacular technical advance that 
have come in recent years. This is a case, often repeated in history, of seemingly 
free philosophical debates coming under the scrutiny of experimental tests. 
14.8. Problems 
Problem 14.1 In the Stern-Gerlach experiment using Ag atoms, assume the oven 
temperature to be 1000 K, with 
I ~ 25 cm 
and 
aBz ~ 103 Tesla/m (= 104 Gauss/cm) 
az 
Calculate the separation of the two components. 
Problem 14.2 In Example 14.1 we had assumed the magnetic field in the z-
direction. If the static magnetic field is assumed in the x-direction we will have 
I 
Ho = 2" liwoa x 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
383 
What would be the eigenvalues and eigenkets of Ho? Assume 
Evaluate 1\11 (t»). 
Problem 14.3 For a uniform magnetic field Bo along the y-direction the Hamil-
tonian is given by 
I 
Ho = - Piwoay 
2 
. 
(a) What are the eigenvalues and normalized eigenkets of Ho? 
(b) What is the general solution of the time dependent Schrodinger equation? 
(c) Assume 1\11 (0») = [i t). Evaluate 1\11 (t») and (sz}. 
Problem 14.4 Using Eqs (32), (33) and (34), prove 
Similarly 
and 
Thus we may write 
(fLy) Bz - (fLz) By 
- ~ [(Sy) Bz - (sz) By] 
d 
-
(s) = (r) = (IL) x B 
dt 
(77) 
(78) 
(79) 
(80) 
Problem 14.5 In the magnetic resonance experiment discussed in Sec. 14.6, the 
time evolution of the wave function can be written in the form [see Eq. (46)]: 
(81) 
Using the expressions for C 1 (t) and C2 (t) at resonance (=} ~ = 0), show that 
(82) 
I 
(sv) = -
2" Pi sin (2W1 t) cos wot 
(83) 

384 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and 
(84) 
Problem 14.6 Using the results of the previous problem, verify Egs (77), (78) and 
(79). 
Problem 14.7 Using Egs (46), (60) and (61), show that 
-
sin2rt sinwt - -
coswt 
hWl [ 
~ 
2r 
r 
+~ cos2rt coswt] 
(85) 
hWl [_ sin 2rt cos wt + ~ sin wt 
2r 
r 
- ~ cos2rt sinwtJ 
(86) 
and 
(87) 
Hence prove 
- :It [(Sy) Bz -
(sz) By] 
-wo(Sy)+2Wl (sz) sinwt 
(88) 
and similar relations for 
and 
14.9. Solutions 
Solution 14.1 Because of collimation, the atoms entering the inhomogeneous 
magnetic field have their velocities in the y-direction; thus 
3 
1 
2 
1 
2 
-kT = -Mv ~ -Mv 
2 
2 
2 
y 
where T is the temperature of the oven. Thus 
v, ~ j3kT 
.. 
M 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
Thus Eq. (13) becomes 
Now 
Thus 
f-Lz = ± q h :::::: ±9.27 x 1O-24J/T 
2m 
~z ~ ± 
(0.25)2 
x 9.27 X 10-24 x 103m 
6 x 1.38 x 10-23 x 103 
~ ±0.7cm 
The separation is about 1.4 cm. 
Solution 14.2 The eigenkets of Ho are now given by 
__ 
1 (1) 
11) = Ix t) = -J2 
1 
and 
__ 
1 ( 1) 
12) = Ix +) =.j2 -1 
385 
Thus the general solution of the time dependent SchrOdinger equation is given by 
Eq. (24) with 11) and 12) given by the above equations. Now 
I W (0)) 
Thus 
IW (t)) 
cos t rz t) + sin t rz +) 
2 
2 
1[1 __ 
1 
__ 
] 
cos"2 -J2 Ix t) + -J2 Ix +) 
+ sin t [_I_IX t) __ I_Ix i)] 
2 h 
h 
_1_ (cos t + sin t) Ix t) + _1_ (cos t - sin t) Ix +) 
h 
2 
2 
h 
2 
2 
-
2 ( 1 . 1) 
°e 
( 1 . 1) 
°e 
cos "2 + SIll "2 
e -, + cos "2 -
SIll "2 
e' 

386 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where e = wot /2. 
Solution 14.3 (b) 
1\11 (0)) 
where e = wot /2. 
(c) 
Thus 
Iw(t)) = 
. 
( coswot/2) 
smwot/2 
Solution 14.4 Using Eq. (32), we get 
d 
1 
-
(sx) = - -liwo sin <p sin wot 
dt 
2 
Since Bx = 0 = By and Bz = Bo 
Solution 14.5 At resonance 
qBo [1 . . ] 
- ----;;;-
2" Ii sm <p sm wot 
1 
- - liwo sin <p sin wot 
2 
W = Wo (=} ~ = 0 and r = WI) 
and Eqs (60) and (61) simplify to 
and 
C2 (t) = -i sin WI t 
Now 
and 
(89) 
(90) 
(91) 
(92) 

Experiments with Spin Half Particles 
Thus 
(Sx) 
(\11 (t) I Sx I \11 (t)) 
1 "iii (\11 (t) I ax I \11 (t)) 
C 1* (t) C2 (t) eiw()t + C2* (t) C 1 (t) e-i(Vot 
where we have used the relations 
(l I ax I 1) = 0 = (2 I a x 12) 
and 
(I I a x I 2) = 1 = (2 I ax I 1) 
Substituting for C1 (t) and C2 (t) we readily obtain 
Similarly 
and 
1 
(.1'7) = - Ii cos (2Wl t) 
, 
2 
The last equation shows the spin-flip at 
n 
3n 
5n 
t=-
-
2Wl ' 2Wl ' 2Wl ' 
Solution 14.6 From Eq. (77) we readily have 
d 
, _ 
q Bo () 
q B I sin wt 
-
(sx) -
- -
Sv + 
(sz) 
dt 
m' 
m 
where we have used Eq. (40). Now, 
and 
q Bo () 
q B I sin wt 
. _ 
1 
. 
--
Sv + 
(sz) -
-liwo sm(2wlt) cos wot 
m' 
m 
2 
Similarly one can prove other equations. 
387 
(93) 
(94) 
(95) 

388 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
14.10. References and suggested reading 
1. G. Baym, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, W.A. Benjamin, Inc., New York 
(1969). 
2. R.P. Feynman, R.B. Leighton and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, 
Vol III, Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts (1965). 
3. C.P. Slichter, Principles of Magnetic Resonance, Harper and Row, New York 
(1963). 
4. I.S. Townsend, A Modern Approach to Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hili, 
New York (1992). 

Chapter 15 
Angular momentum III 
Eigenfunctions Using Operator Algebra 
It seems that if one is working from the point of view of getting beauty in one's 
equations, and if one has a really sound insight, one is on a sure line of progress. 
-
P.A.M. DIRAC in The Evolution o{the Physicist's Picture o{ 
Nature, Scientific American, May 1963. 
15.1. Introduction 
In Chapter 13 we had shown that we can have a set of simultaneous eigenkets of 
the operators 12 and l z: 
where 
and 
12 I), m) 
l z I), m) 
j () + I) n2 Ij,m) 
mn I),m) 
135 
j = 0, 2' I, 2' 2, 2"" 
m=-),-)+I, ... ,) 
Further, we had defined the ladder operators through the equations 
and 
1_ = 1+ = Ix - i ly 
which were shown to have the following properties: 
1 
1+ Ij,m)=[(}-m)(}+m+1)F n Ij,m+l) 
I 
L 
Ij,m)=[(}+m)(}-m+I)]2 n Ij,m-I) 
389 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

390 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Thus, 
(9) 
and 
L 
Ii, - j) = 0 
(10) 
In this chapter, we will use the above equations and the operator representations of 
the angular momentum operators to derive explicit expressions for the eigenfunc-
tions of L 2 and L;. It will be seen that the procedure discussed in this chapter is 
extremely straightforward in determining the explicit expressions for the spherical 
harmonics. 
15.2. The spherical harmonics 
Operator representations 
In Sec. 9.2 we had shown the following operator representations of the components 
of the angular momentum operator 
Lx 
i n [sin cp ~ + cot e cos cp 
ae 
a:J 
Ly 
i n [ - cos cp ~ + cot e sin cp 
ae 
a:J 
a 
Lz 
-in-
acp 
Thus 
L+ 
Lr + i Ly 
nei¢ [JL + i cote 
ae 
ai~J 
and 
L_ 
Lx-iLy 
ne-i¢ [_JL + i cote JL ] 
ae 
acp 
Simultaneous eigenfunction of L2 and L z 
Let Ylm (e, cp) represent the simultaneous eigenfunction of L 2 and L; 
[cf. Eqs (I) and (2)]: 
where 
L2 Ylm (e, cp) 
L z Ylm (e, cp) 
I (1+ I) n2 Ylm (e,cp) 
mnYlm (e,cp) 
m = -l, -l + 1, ... 1- I,I 
(II) 
(12) 
(13) 
(14) 
( 15) 
( 16) 
(17) 
(18) 

Angular Momentum III 
Using Ego (13) , Ego (17) becomes 
3Y 
-i /i- = m /iY (e, ¢) 
3¢ 
If we use the method of separation of variables 
we would obtain 
Y (e,¢) = F(e) <I>(¢) 
d<l> 
-
= im <I> (¢) 
d¢ 
the solution of which is given by 
1 
<I> (¢) = <l>m (¢) = ~ 
y2rr 
For <I> (¢) to be single-valued 
<I> (¢ + 2rr) = <I> (¢) 
we must have 
ei m 2n = 1 
implying 
m = 0, ± 1, ±2, 0 
0 
0 
The factor 1/.j2rr makes <l>m (¢) normalized: 
Normalization condition 
Furthermore 
Orthonormality condition 
2n 
2n f l<I>m (¢)12 d¢ = 1 
o 
f <1>:, (¢) <l>m (¢) d¢ = omm' 
o 
Now, using Ego (10) we obtain 
L_ 
Y1,_1 (e, ¢) = 0 
391 
(19) 
(20) 
(21 ) 
(22) 
(23) 
(24) 
(25) 
(26) 

392 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
or, using Eg. (15) 
Ii e-i¢ [-~ + i cote ~] Yl,-l (e, ¢) = 0 
ae 
a¢ 
or 
or 
or 
Integrating, we get 
or, 
or, 
dF 
- -
+ I cot e F (e) = 0 
de 
1 
dF 
-
= lcote 
F (e) de 
In F (e) = l In (sin e) + constant 
[ F (e) ] 
In 
, = constant 
(sin e) 
The normalization condition 
gives us 
where 
][ J 
IF (e)1 2 sine de = I 
o 
+1 
IC_12 f (1- f12)' df1 = 1 
-1 
f1 = cos e 
(27) 
(28) 
(29) 
For a particular value of l, the integral in Eg. (29) can be readily evaluated by 
making an expansion of the integrand and integrating term by term; the evaluation 
for an arbitrary value of I is a bit tedious-the final result is: 
I 
C_ = _1_ [(21 + 1)!]2 
2' l! 
2 
(30) 

Angular Momentum III 
393 
within an arbitrary phase factor. Thus 
I 
1 
[(2l + I)!] '1 
F(e) --
-
2l l! 
2 
(31 ) 
and using Eq. (21) we would get 
I 
Y 
(8 "') 
sinl e e -if</> 
1 
[(2l4+n I)! ] '2 
l.-I 
,'f/ = 21 l! 
(32) 
In order to determine YI ._1+ 1 ; YI.-l+2 etc., we use Eq. (7) to write 
I 
L+ Ylm (e,1) = [(l - m) (l + m + 1)]2 Ii Yl,m+l (e,1) 
(33) 
Thus 
I 
I 
Y'.m+1 
Ii [(l - m) (l + m + l)r '2 
L+ 
Y1,m 
[(I - m)(l + m + l)r '2 e' 
-
+ i cote-
I 
.</> [ a 
a ] 
ae 
a1 
(34) 
Starting with m = -l and by repeated use of the above formula, one can readily 
obtain the (normalized) expressions for all values of m. We show this through two 
examples. 
Example 15.1 For I = 1, we have 
Using Eq. (34) we get 
Y1,-1 (e, 1) l{f; 
'A. 
-
-
sine e-''I' 
2 
4n 
j 3 
sine e-i</> 
8n 
I 
Vi 
ei</> [~ + i cote~] j3 [ sin e e-i</>] 
ae 
a1 V S;; 
j 3 
ei</> [cos e + cos e] e-i</> 
16n 
j 3 
cose 
4n 

394 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Similarly 
1 
nh L+ Y1,o(e,<1» 
1 
ei¢ [~ + i cote ~] j 3 
cos e 
h 
ae 
a 
<1> 
47T 
_ f3 sine e i¢ 
'Is; 
Example 15.2 For l = 2, we have 
h-2(e,<1» 
= 
(
-81 j45
7T!) 
S1'02 e e -2iq, 
{IS sin2 e e -2iq, 
'In;; 
Using Eg. (34) with l = 2, m = -2, we get 
I 
Y2,-1 (e,<1» = 
r; 
L+ Y2,-2(e,<1» 
v4n 
~ ei¢ [~ + i cote ~] j 15 [sin2 e e -2i¢] 
2 
ae 
a 
<1> 
327T 
Similarly 
Further, 
j IS 
sin e cos e e -i¢ 
87T 
-j 15 
sin e cos e 
87T 
1 
r; L+ Y2,I 
nv4 /lf
5 
2 
?'''' 
-
sin e e-'<Y 
327T 
[sine cose e-i¢] 

Angular Momentum III 
Similarly, for the 1 = 3 case, we have 
Therefore 
Y3,-2 (e, </J) 
1 
Y3,-3 (e, </J) = 
3 
2 3! [47~] ~ 
Jt 
sin3 e e -3i<l> 
J 
6:~ sin3 e e -3i<l> 
1 
J6 
ei<l> [~ + i cot e ~] J 35 [sin3 e e - 3i<l>] 
ae 
a</J 
64n 
J 105 
sin2 e cos e e -2i<l> 
32n 
395 
We can repeat the process to obtain Y3,-1 (e, </J), 
Y3,Q (e, </J), etc. The final results 
are summarized in the next section. 
We should point out that, as in the case of the harmonic oscillator problem, if the 
wave function with which we start is properly normalized, then all subsequent wave 
functions obtained by applying the ladder operator are automatically normalized. 
15.3. Expressions for spherical harmonics 
1 = 0; 
21 + I = 1; 
m = 0 
I 
Yo,() = .J4JT 
1 = 1; 
21 + 1 = 3; 
m = -I, 0, + 1 
Y1,-1 (e, </J) J 
3 sine e-i<l> = -Yt 1 
8n 
' 
j3 COse 
'14; 
YI,1 (e,</J) = -J 3 sineei<l> = -y* 
8n 
1,-1 
1=2; 2/+1=5; m=-2,-1,O,1,2 
y 
(e A..) -
{T5 . 2 e -2i<l> _ Y* 
2,-2 
''f' 
- V 32; Sill 
e 
-
2,2 
(35) 
(36) 
(37) 
(38) 
(39) 

396 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
j 15 
sine cose 
e~iq, -
_y* 
8JT 
-
2,1 
j 5 
(3 cos2 e - 1) 
16JT 
- j 15 
sin e cos e 
8JT 
eiq, - -y* 
-
2,~1 
Y2,2(e,cp) = j 15 
sin2 e 
e 2iq, = y* 
32JT 
2,~2 
l = 3; 
2l + 1 = 7; 
m = -3, -2, - 1,0, 1,2,3 
j 35 sin3 e 
e ~3iq, = _ y* 
MJT 
3,3 
j 105 
sin2 e cos e e ~2iq, = Y3~2 
32JT 
j 21 
(5cos2e _ I) sine e~i(} = _y* 
MJT 
3,1 
(7 ~ (5cos3e-3cose) 
V 4;; 2 
The above equations are consistent with those derived in Sec. 9.3. 
15.4. The I = ~ case 
(40) 
(41) 
(42) 
(43) 
(44) 
(45) 
(46) 
(47) 
In the entire analysis presented in this chapter we have assumed l to be a posi-
tive integer (including the value zero) and therefore m takes positive and negative 
integer values. What happens if we push our luck and try to obtain the wave func-
tions for l = ~, ~, ~, ... ? We will see that the procedure leads to ill-behaved and 
inconsistent wave functions. 
Let us assume l = ~; then 
Thus [see Eq. (21)] 
1 
1 
m = --
or +-
2 
2 
1 
<Pm (cp) = 
r,:c 
",,2JT 
(48) 
Of course, such a wave function is not single-valued; however, 1 <t> (<p) 12 is single 
valued and one may argue that the wave function described by the above equation 
may be acceptable. We consider the case m = - 4 so that Eq. (32) becomes 
(49) 

Angular Momentum III 
397 
where C is a constant. Using Eq. (34) for I =~, m = -~ we obtain 
Y1. 1. (e, ¢) 
If, L+ 
Yl ~l 
2'2 
livl 
2' 
2 
C ei¢ [iPe + i cote l¢] [~e~i¢/2] 
C 
cos e 
e~i¢/2 
Jsine 
which is incorrect because we should have had (see Problem 15,8): 
Yl 1. = (const) ~ 
e~i¢/2 
(50) 
2'2 
Thus we must restrict the 1 values to 0, 1, 2, 3, ... with m going from -I to +1. 
15.5. Problems 
Problem 15.1 
Show by explicit differentiation that 
L+ Yl.I 
0 
L+ Y2,2 
0 
and 
L+ Y3.3 = 0 
where the L+ operator is given by Eq. (14) and Yl,l, 
Y2.2 and Y3.3 are given by 
Eqs (38), (43) and (44) respectively. 
Problem 15.2 With 1 = 4, use Eq. (26) to show that 
Y ~ = j 315 sin4 e e ~4i¢ 
4. 4 
5127T 
(51) 
Using Eq. (34) derive Y4.~3, Y4.~2' Y4,~j, Y4,o, Y4,j, Y4,2, Y4,3 and Y4,4. 
Problem 15.3 Show that YO,o is a simultaneous eigenfunction of L 2 , Lx' Ly 
and L z. What are the corresponding eigenvalues? 
Problem 15.4 Use 
to show 
1 
M Ii Yj 0 
v2 
' 
(52) 
1 
J2 Ii (Yl,l + Yj,~j) 
(53) 
1 
Lr Yl.~j 
M Ii Yj 0 
v2 
' 
(54) 

398 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Verify the above equations by using the operator representation of Lx [see Eq. 
(II )]. 
Problem 15.5 The functions YI.I, YIJ) and YI. _I are simultaneous eigenfunctions 
of L2 and Lz (and not of Lx and Lv). Using the results of the previous problem 
show that 
Lx 1j; I 
Ii 1j; I 
Lx 1j;2 
0 
Lx 0/3 
-Ii 0/3 
where 
I 
[YI.I + Yl.- I + h 
YI.OJ 
1j;1 
-
2 
I 
1j;2 
J2 [YI.I - Yl.- I] 
1j;3 = l [YI,I + Yl.- I - h 
Yl.oJ 
Thus 1j; I' 1j; 2' and 1j; 3 are simultaneous eigenfunctions of L 2 and Lx· 
Problem 15.6 Using Eqs (7) and (8), show that 
(55) 
(56) 
(57) 
(58) 
(59) 
(60) 
(6\ ) 
(62) 
(63) 
Also verify the above equations by using the operator representation of Ly [see Eq. 
(12)]. Using the above equations determine the eigenfunctions of L,; these will be 
simultaneous eigenfunctions of L 2 and L,. 
. 
Problem 15.7 The angular part of the wave function is described by the following 
equation: 
0/ (e, ¢) = ~ [-2i (3 sine sin¢ + J 
3 
cose] 
2 
Vs:; 
2n 
(a) If we make a measurement of L z, what values will we obtain and with what 
probabilities? Evaluate (L z). 
(b) If we make a measurement of Lx, what values will we obtain and with what 
probabilities? Evaluate (Lx). 

Angular Momentum III 
Problem 15.8 Using the condition 
L+ YI,/ = 0 
show that 
Y/,l = (const) 
sin1e ei I ¢ 
Problem 15.9 For m = 0, we have 
f2i+T 
Y/,o (e, 1Y) = Y ~ 
PI (cose) 
Thus 
YI,O = (3 cose 
Y4; 
399 
(64) 
(65) 
(66) 
Use ladder operators to show that YI,-J and YI,+J are given by Eq, (36) and Eq. 
(38). Similarly, 
Y2,() = J 
4~ ~ (3 cos2 e - 1) 
Use ladder operators to determine Y2,2, 
Y2,1, Y2,-I, and Y2,-2. 
15.6. Solutions 
Solution 15.5 Let 
1/1 (e, 1Y) = ex YJ,J + f3 YI,o + Y Y1,-1 
represent the required linear combination which is an eigenfunction of Lx. Thus 
Lx [ex Yl,l + f3 YI,o + Y Yl,-I] 
= A [ex YJ,J + f3 YI,o + Y YI,-I] 
where A represents the eigenvalue which can be +n, 0 or -no Using Eqs (51 )-(53), 
the above equation becomes 
ex :;'Y n Y1 () + ~ n (YI I + YI - J) 
'\12 
' 
'\12 
' 
, 
= A [ex Yu + f3 YI,o + Y YI,-I] 
Thus 
n = Af3 
n=Aex=AY 

400 
Hence 
A=O 
A =-/1 
1 
a=y =J2f3 
=} 
a = -y; 
f3 = 0 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
1 
a=y =- J2 f3 
The three eigenfunctions are therefore given by Eqs (58)-(60). 
Solution 15.7 
1jf(e,cp) 
~ [-J 8~ sine (ei<P - e-i<P) + J 
2~ cose] 
~ [ Yu + YI,-I + v'2 YI,oJ 
If we make a measurement of L z we would get the values +Ii, 0 or -Ii with 
probabilities *, ~ and * respectively. Further 
(L z ) = f f 1jf* (e, ¢) L z 1jf (e, ¢) 
sine de d¢ 
1 
1 
= -1i--1i+0=0 
4 
4 
On the other hand, if we make a measurement of Lx, we should express 1jf (e, ¢) 
as a linear combination of 1jf I, 1jf 2, and 1jf 3 which represent the eigenfunctions of 
Lx [see Eqs (55)-(57)]. We find 
and therefore if we make a measurement Lx, we will for certain obtain the value 
+Ii. Obviously, 

Chapter 16 
The Double Well Potential and 
the Kronig-Penney Model 
I look upon quantum mechanics with admiration and suspicion. 
-
ALBERT EINSTEIN in a letterl to his intimate friend Paul 
Ehrenfest, dated August 28, 1926. 
16.1. Introduction 
In this chapter we will first discuss the solutions of the Schrodinger equation for 
the double well problem which will be followed by a discussion of the ammonia 
molecule as a two state system. We will also discuss the Kronig-Penney model 
leading to the formation of energy bands in a solid. 
16.2. Two isolated wells 
Before we consider a double well structure, we consider two isolated wells as 
shown in Fig. 16.1. The potential energy variation corresponding to the well on 
the left is given by 
v (x) = I 
~ 
Vo 
x<O 
O<x<a 
x>a 
The SchrOdinger equation in regions 0 < x < a and x > a would be given by 
d 21jf 
--2 + k2 1jf (x) = 0 for 0 < x < a 
dx 
(1) 
(2) 
I Actually the original letter was in German and it read Der Quanten-Mechanik stehe ich 
bewundernd-misstrauisch gegeniiber . ... [Quoted from M. Jammer, The Conceptual Development 
of Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York (1966)]. 
401 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

402 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
a = 31t 
loo 
Figure 16.1. The first three eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of two isolated wells for a = 3JT. 
and 
where 
and 
d21j.r 
-- - K21j.r (x) = 0 for x > a 
dx 2 
2 
2mE 
k =-
n2 
2 
2m 
K 
= -
(Vo - E) 
n2 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
We are assuming E < Vo. As discussed in Sec. 6.2, the wave function should 
vanish at x = 0 so that 
1j.r (x) = A sin kx for 0 < x < a 
(6) 
and 
1j.r (x) = C e-K(x-a) for x > a 
(7) 
where we have rejected the exponentially amplifying solution in the region x > a. 
Continuity of 1j.r (x) and d1j.r jdx at x = a gives us 
Transcendental equation 
(8) 

Double Well Potential and the Krijnig-Penney Model 
403 
where 
(9) 
and 
Ct= 
(10) 
Numerical example 
Let us assume Ct = 37T. Thus 
(see Fig. 16.1 where the vertical axis represents the energy in units of li 2 j2ma 2.) 
The solution of the transcendental equation [Eq. (8)] gives us three bound states 
for which 
~ = 2.83595, 5.64146 and 8.33877 
(11) 
We define the normalized energy eigenvalue 
(12) 
Thus the corresponding discrete values of 8 are given by 
8 = 8.0426, 31.8261 and 69.5351 
(13) 
The energy eigenvalues (represented by horizontal lines) and the corresponding 
eigenfunctions are shown in Fig. 16.1. Obviously, the particle would belong to one 
of the wells and there will not be any tunnelling from one well to the other. 
16.3. The double well potential 
We next consider the solution of the one-dimensional SchrMinger equation (see 
Eq. (11) of Chapter 6) for a double well potential characterized by the following 
potential energy distribution 
Potential energy 
V (x) = 1 
00
\/'00 
for 
for 
for 
0< Ixl < b 
b < Ixl < a +b 
Ixl > a + b 
(14) 
(see Fig. 16.2.) The analysis of such a structure is one of the most beautiful prob-

404 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
[ 3--
[ 2--
[1--
-1·2 
100 
---
80 
60 
40 
20 
- 0·2 
v (x) 
(Til 2 ma2) 
---
0·2 
---~~xla 
12 
Figure 16.2. The double well potential and the corresponding energy eigenstates for Ci = 3rr and 
h / a = 0.2. The short horizontal lines on the extreme left represent the degenerate energy eigenvalues 
corres- ponding to two isolated wells [see Fig. 16.1]; each of the levels get split because of the 
coupling between the two wells. 
lems in quantum mechanics. It not only allows us to understand the formation 
of energy bands in a solid; it also allows us to understand quantitatively how an 
electron confined in the first well (at t = 0) would tunnel to the second well and 
then return to the first well. 
Since V (-x) = V (x), the solutions will be either symmetric or antisymmetric 
functions of x. We assume E < Va. Thus the Schr6dinger equation can be written 
in the form 
and 
d21jf 
2 
-
-
K 1jf (x) = 0 for 
Ixl < b 
dx 2 
d 21jf 
-2 + k 2 1jf (x) = 0 for b < Ixl < a + b 
dx 
(15) 
(16) 
where k2 and K2 have been defined earlier [see Eqs (4) and (5)]. The solution 
symmetric in x would be given by 
Symmetric solution 
if', (x) ~ { 
A, cosh KX 
for Ixl < b 
A. coshKb sin [k (a + b -
Ixl)] 
,\ 
smka 
(17) 
for b < Ix I < a + b 

Double Well Potential and the Kronig-Penney Model 
405 
where we have assumed the continuity of 1/1 (x) at x 
b. Further, since V (x) 
becomes infinite at x = a + b, the wave function has to vanish at x = a + b which 
has been incorporated in the solution given by Eq. (17). Continuity of d1/l / dx at 
x = b readily gives us 
k 
tan ka = - - coth (Kb) 
(18) 
K 
which represents the transcendental equation determining the energy eigenvalues 
corresponding to symmetric states. Similarly, the antisymmetric solution would be 
given by 
Antisymmetric solution I 
Au sinhKx 
,1,. (x) = 
A sinhKb sin [k (a + b - x)] 
'P,\ 
a 
slnka 
-A sinh Kb sin [k (a + b + x)] 
u 
slnka 
for Ixl < b 
for b < x < a + b 
for - (a + b) < x < -b 
(19) 
where, once again, we have assumed 1/1 (x) to be continuous at x = ±b. Continuity 
of d1/l /dx at x = +b (or at x = -b) would give us 
k 
tan ka = - - tanh (Kb) 
K 
(20) 
which represents the transcendental equation determining the energy eigenvalues 
corresponding to anti symmetric states. Eqs (18) and (20) can be rewritten in the 
following form 
Transcendental equations 
-~ cot~ = Ja2 - ~2 tanh [Ja2 _ ~2 (~)] 
(symmetric states) 
(21) 
and 
-~ cot~ = Ja2 - ~2 coth [Ja2 _ ~2 (~)] 
(anti symmetric states) 
(22) 
where ~ and a have been defined through Eqs (9) and (10) respectively. For 
b / a --+ 00, Eqs (21) and (22) reduce to Eq. (8) and we have degenerate states 
(see Fig. 16.1). 
Numerical example 
As a numerical example, we assume 
b 
a = 3JT and - = 0.2 
a 

406 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The ~ values [as obtained by solving Eqs (21) and (20)] are given by 
1
2.82154 (s), 5.60021 (s), 8.23678 (s) 
~= 2.84990 (a), 5.68284 (a), 8.47649 (a) 
(23) 
where s and a refer to symmetric and antisymmetric states. These are shown as 
horizontal lines in Fig. 16.2. The normalized energy eigenvalues 
Normalized energy eigenvalues 
would be given by 
so that 
8 = 17.96109 (s), 
31.3624 (s), 
67.8445 (s) 
8.12193 (a), 32.2947 (a), 71.8509 (a) 
b.8::::: 0.16084, 0.9323, 4.0064 
(24) 
(25) 
(26) 
Comparing Fig. 16.2 with Fig. 16.1 we find that there is a coupling between the 
wells and each level splits into two levels2 ; the splitting becoming more for higher 
energy states [see Eq. (26)]. 
Figures 16.3 and 16.4 give the spatial variation of the first four wave functions. 
In Fig. 16.3, the solid and dashed curves correspond to the first energy eigenstate 
(8 = 7.96109) and the second energy eigenstate (8 = 8.12193) respectively. 
Similarly, in Fig. 16.4, the solid and the dashed curves correspond to the third and 
the fourth eigenstates respectively (8 = 31.3624 and 32.2947). Notice that they 
are alternately symmetric and antisymmetric functions of x. Let us suppose that at 
t = 0, a particle is described by the wave function 
1 
\{I (x, t = 0) = -
[1jf(l) (x) + 1jf(l) (x)] 
..fi 
s 
a 
(27) 
where 1jf,;1) (x) and 1jf~l) (x) represent respectively the lowest symmetric and the 
lowest anti symmetric wave functions shown in Fig. 16.3; and the factor of 1/..fi 
makes it normalized. How will the wave function evolve with time? Well, as in 
earlier chapters, we just have to multiply 1jf,;1) (x) and 1jf~1) (x) by appropriate time 
dependent phase factors to obtain 
\{I (x, t) = -
1jf(1) (x) exp -
_,1_' _ 
+ 1jf(1) (x) exp _ _ a_ 
1 [ 
( iE(l)t) 
( iE(l)t)] 
..fi 
,\ 
Pi 
([ 
Pi 
(28) 
2 If there are three wells then each level will split into three levels. In general. if there are N such 
wells (see Fig, 8.9) each level will form a band comprising of N levels; these are the energy bands in 
a solid; see also Sec. 23.3. 

Double Well Potential and the Kronig-Penney Model 
" 
... _--"" 
'" (l)(X)~ 
a 
, 
-0·2,;, ...... 
, 
, , 
" 
-0·5 
407 
X/a __ 
Figure 16.3. The solid and dashed curves correspond to the first energy eigenstate (8 = 7.96109) 
and the second eigenstate (8 = 8.12193) respectively. 
ti'a(2) (x) 
,_, 
c:: 
, ,/ 
, 
, 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
I 
\ 
- 1·2 
-0·2 " 
, 
I 
, 
,'-0·5 
I 
I 
0·2 
1·2 
Figure 16.4. The solid and the dashed curves correspond to the third and the fourth eigenstates 
respectively (8 = 31.3624 and 32.2947). 
which represents a rigorously correct solution of the time dependent Schrodinger 
equation corresponding to the double well potential. The above equation can be 
rewritten in the form 
\II (x, t) = ~ 
e-iE~I)tlli [ljf;l) (x) + ljf~l) (x) e-in tiT] 
(29) 
where 
(30) 

408 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and 
ti 2 
flE(I) = E(I) -
E(1) = _-flS(I) 
a 
s 
2ma2 
(31) 
From Eq. (29) it immediately follows that at t = 0, 2T, 4T, ... 
1\11 (x, t)1 2 = l [1J!;I) (x) + 1J!~II) (x)]2 
(32) 
and the particle is most likely to be found in the first well. On the other hand, at 
t = T, 3T, 5T, '" 
(33) 
and the particle is most likely to be found in the second well. Thus the particle 
tunnels through the barrier in a time ~ T. Figure 16.5 gives the time evolution of 
Ilfl (x , t) 12 
~t =T 
01 
Figure 16.5. Time evolution of IIJI(x, nl2 [as given by Eg. (29)] for t = 0, T, 2T and 3T. 
1\11 (x, t)1 2 for t = 0, T, 2T and 3T. It may be seen that the particle which has a 
very high probability of being found in the first well at t = 0 tunnels to the second 
well at t = T and then tunnels back to the initial state at t = T. At t = T /2, 
the probability of finding the particle in either of the wells would be approximately 
equal. 

Double Well Potential and the Kronig-Penney Model 
409 
11 > 
12 > 
Figure 16.6. The two states of the ammonia molecule. 
16.4. The ammonia molecule as a two-state system 
The ammonia molecule has a nitrogen atom and three hydrogen atoms forming a 
pyramid (see Fig. 16.6). The potential energy function associated with the ammonia 
molecule can be, to a first approximation, described by a double well potential 
(similar to the ones shown in Figs 16.2 and 17.9) and with x representing the 
distance between the nitrogen atom and the plane containing the hydrogen atoms. 
We assume that only two states are needed for the dynamical description of the 
ammonia molecule; these two states of the molecule are: 
1. the state with the nitrogen atom above the plane of the hydrogen atoms (see 
the top figure in Fig. 16.6), and 
2. the state with the nitrogen atom below this plane (see bottom figure in Fig. 
16.6). 

410 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
We denote these states by 11) and 12) respectively. The state3 of the ammonia 
molecule can be assumed to be described by 
1\11 (t)) = C I (t) 11) + C2 (t) 12) 
(34) 
This is referred to as the two state approximation. The time evolution is described 
by the equation 
or, 
a 
i /1- 1\11 (t)) = H 1\11 (t)) 
at 
i /1 [dCI II) + dC2 12)] = Cl (t) H 11) + C2 (t) H 12) 
dt 
dt 
If we premultiply the above equation by (11 we would obtain 
Similarly, 
where 
. dCI 
1/1- = Hll CI (t) + HI2 C2 (t) 
dt 
HII 
(I I H 11) 
HI2 
(I I H 12) 
(35) 
(36) 
(37) 
(38) 
etc. We really do not know the precise values for HII , H 12 , etc., However, from the 
symmetry of the problem we may write4 
(39) 
3 We must point out that II) and 12) are not the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian. In order to 
understand this point. we refer to the case of two isolated wells shown in Fig. 16.1. If we consider 
only the lowest state then 1/11 and 1/12 are the eigenfunctions of the isolated wells; the eigenfunctions 
of the double well are approximately given by 
(I) 
I 
1/1., 
(x) ~ v0. [1/11 (x) + 1/12 (x)] 
and 
(see Figs 16.1 and 16.3). 
4 The notation and the analysis are essentially based on the Feynman lectures (see Chapter 19 
of Ref. 1); see also Ref. 2. To quote Feynman In the discussion up to this point. we have assumed 
values of Eo and A without knowing how to calculate them. According to the correct physical theory, 
it should be possible to calculate these constants in terms of the positions and motions of all the nuclei 
and electrons. But nobody has ever done it. Such a system involves ten electrons andj(lUr nuclei alld 
that's just too complicated a problem. As a matter offact, there is no one who knows much more 
about this molecule than we do. 

Double Well Potential and the Krijnig-Penney Model 
and 
Thus 
and 
dC I 
i n- = Eo C1 (t) - A C2 (t) 
dt 
dC2 
i n- = -A C1 (t) + Eo C2 (t) 
dt 
The solution of the above equations is very straightforward. We assume 
C1 (t) = CI e-iEt / /j 
and 
to obtain 
(E -
Eo) CI + A C2 = 0 
and 
A CI + (E -
Eo) C2 = 0 
Thus 
( E -
Eo 
A 
) = 0 
A 
E -
Eo 
or, 
or, 
E = Eo ± A 
The levels split (similar to the splitting shown in Fig. 16.2). Further, 
Cl = +C2 for E = Eo -
A 
and 
CI = -C2 for E = Eo + A 
Thus the eigenstates are 
Approximate eigenstates 
and 
411 
(40) 
(41) 
(42) 
(43) 
(44) 
(45) 
(46) 
(47) 

412 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
In the two state approximation, these are the eigenfunctions of the total Hamil-
tonian (see, e.g. Figs 16.1 and 16.3). If 
the system will be in an eigenstate of the system. However, if 
C 1 (0) = 1 
and 
C2 (0) = 0 
we would obtain 
C 1 (t) = cos (~t) e-iEot/h 
(48) 
and 
C2 (t) = i sin ( ~t) eiEot/ Ii 
(49) 
giving 
(50) 
and 
IC2 (t)12 = sin2 ( ~t) 
(51 ) 
We may compare this with the evolution of the wave packet discussed in Exam-
ple 14.1. 
In above, what we have essentially implied is that if we assume 11) and 12) as 
base kets, then the representation of the Hamiltonian is given by 
H = (HII HI2) = (Eo -A ) 
H21 
H22 
A 
Eo 
(52) 
and the eigenvalues of the above matrix are 
Eo±A 
(53) 
Now, the two states 11) and 12) of the ammonia molecule (see Fig. 16.6) have 
equal and opposite dipole moments. Thus in the presence of an electric field 8 we 
may write 
(54) 

Double Well Potential and the Kr(jnig-Penney Model 
413 
where J.l represents the electric dipole moments. Thus instead of Eq. ( 52) the 
Hamiltonian matrix is 
Hamiltonian matrix 
-A 
) 
Eo - J.l8 
The corresponding eigenvalues would be 
Eigenvalues 
E 
Eo ± [A2 + J.l282r/2 
Eo ± [ A + 2~ J.l2 82 ] 
where the last expression is valid for J.l 8 « A. 
(55) 
(56) 
Now, if a collimated beam of ammonia molecules is passed through an in-
homogeneous electric field whose gradient is in a direction perpendicular to the 
beam then the force acting on the molecules in the lower state will be opposite in 
direction to the force acting on the molecules which are in the upper state. Thus 
the two molecular states can be separated by passing the molecules through an 
inhomogeneous electric field. The molecules in the upper state are then passed 
through a resonant cavity whose resonance frequency (vo equals 2Aj n, then for 
particular lengths of the cavity all the ammonia molecules (as they pass through the 
cavity) will make a transition to the lower state, thereby emitting electromagnetic 
waves at the resonant frequency. It should be mentioned that if the two states were 
not separated, then the molecules in the lower state would have taken the energy 
from the cavity and made a transition to the upper state. This is nothing but the 
condition for population inversion which is necessary for the operation of laser or 
maser. For more details about the working of the maser, the reader is referred to 
Ref. I and also to the Nobel lecture of Townes (Ref. 3). 
S To quote Feynman again, All anyone can say is that when there is an electric field, the energy 
of the two states is different. the difference being proportional to the electric field. We have called 
the coefficient of proportionality 2p.,. but its value must be determined experimentally. We can also 
say that the molecule has the amplitude A to flip over, but this will have to be measured experimen-
tally. Nobody can give us accurate theoretical values of p., and A, because the calculations are too 
complicated to do in detail. 

414 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
16.5. The Kronig-Penney model 
In this section we will discuss solutions of the one-dimensional Schrbdinger equa-
tion 
d21jr 
2m 
dx2 + tt [E - V (x)] 1jr (x) = 0 
(57) 
for a periodic potential6 given by 
Periodic potential 
V (x + L) = V (x) 
(58) 
Now, according to Bloch's theorem (see e.g. Ref. 5), for a periodic potential given 
by Eq. (58), the solution of the onc-dimensional Schrodinger equation is of the 
form 
1/1 (x) = eikxu (x) 
where u (x) has the periodicity of the lattice, i.e. 
Thus 
or, 
Now 
Thus 
or, 
or, 
u (x + L) = u (x) 
1/1 (x + L) = eik(xH) u «x + L» 
eikL eikx u (x) 
1/1 (x + L) = eikL 1/1 (x) 
d1jr 
Ok 
Ok du 
-
= i k e[ . x u (x) + e[ x -
dx 
dx 
d1/l I 
ik eik(x+L) u (x) + eik(x+L) du 
dx x+L = 
dx 
e ikL d1jr I 
dx x 
d1/l I 
-ikL d1/l I 
dx ., = e 
dx x+L 
d1/l I 
-ikL d1jr I 
dx X=-E = e 
dx L-E 
(59) 
(60) 
(6\ ) 
(62) 
6 We may recall that in Problem 8.4 we had used a matrix method to solve the Schrbdinger 
equation. We will use here a method discussed by Wolfe in Ref. 4. 

Double Well Potential and the Kronig-Penney Model 
415 
We assume the periodic potential to be given by 
+00 
V (x) = A L 8 (x - nL) 
(63) 
11=-00 
which represents a series of delta functions (see Fig. 16.7). If we refer to Eq. (69) 
V() 
x 
-4L -3L -2L -L 
L 
2L 
3L 
4L 
Figure 16.7. A periodic potential described by a 
series of delta functions. 
of Chapter 8 (which is shown in Fig. 8.9) and make a ---+ 0 and Vo ---+ 00 such that 
the product 
Vo a ---+ A 
(64) 
we will obtain a series of delta functions as shown in Fig. 16.7. 
We first calculate the discontinuity of d1/fjdx at a point where V (x) is a delta 
function (compare Problems 6.9 and 6.10). Now, 
d21/f 
2m 
dx2 + fi2 [E -
V (x)] 1/f (x) = 0 
(65) 
If we integrate the above equation from x = -E to X = +E we would obtain 
+E 
E 
E 
f d21/f 
2mE f 
2mA f 
-
dx = ---
1/f (x) dx + ----;:;-2 
8 (x) 1/f (x) dx 
dx 2 
h2 
fl 
-E 
-E 
-E 
or 
~~ IX=E 
d1/f 1 
2mA 
-
= +-2 1/f (0) 
dx X=-E 
h 
(66) 
which is consistent with the results of Problem 6.9. Thus 
d1/f 1 
2mA 
-
- -2 1/f(0) 
dx X=E 
h 

416 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
If we now use Eq. (62) we would get 
-ikL d1/l1 
e 
-
dx L-E 
d1/l1 
2mA 
-
- -2 1/1(0) 
dx X=E 
Ii 
(67) 
Let us consider the solution of the Schrodinger equation in the region (see Fig. 
16.7) 
E < X < L -
E 
(E ---+ 0) 
where V (x) = O. Thus we may write the solution as 
1/1 (x) = D e iCiX + B e-iCiX ; 
E < X < L -
E 
where 
2 
2mE 
a =--
1i2 
Using the condition given by Eq. (61) we get 
e-ikL 1/1 (L) = 1/1 (0) 
or, 
e-ikL [D e iCiL + B e-iCiLJ = D + B 
or, 
where 
f3=(a-k)L 
and 
y = (a + k) L 
Now, 
d1/l 
[. 
. ] 
-
= ia D e lCiX -
B e-1CiX 
dx 
Since [see Eq. (67)] 
d1/l1 
_ 2m: 1/1 (0) = e-ikL d1/l1 
dx X=E 
Ii 
dx L-E 
we get (in the limit of E ---+ 0) 
2mA 
ia (D -
B) -7 (D + B) 
e-ikL ia (De iCiL _ Be-iCiL ) 
ia (D eif3 -
B e-iy ) 
(68) 
(69) 
(70) 

Double Well Potential and the Kronig-Penney Model 
or, 
where 
[ 
." 
2i P ] 
[ 
. 
2i P ] 
1 - e'l' + La 
D + I - e-IY -
La 
B = 0 
mAL 
P=--
li 2 
We rewrite Eq. (70) 
From Eqs (71) and (73) we readily get 
or 
( 
." 
2i P) ( 
.) 
( 
. R) ( 
. 
2i P ) 
1 -
e'l' + La 
1 - e-IY + 1 -
ell' 
1 - e-IY -
La 
= 0 
. " ( 
. 
2i P [ 
. " 
. ] 
2(I-elf') l-e-IY ) = -
I_elf' -1 +e-IY 
La 
_ 2iP [ei(O'-k)L _ e-i(O'+k)L] 
La 
4P 
"kL 
-
e- l 
sinaL 
La 
On the other hand, the left-hand side is given by 
Thus we get 
2 [1 -
eifJ - e-iy + ei(tl-Y)] 
2 [1 - e-ikL (eikL + e-iO'L) + e-2ikL ] 
2e-ikL [eikL _ 2 cosaL + e-ikL ] 
4e-ikL [coskL - cosaL] 
sin a L 
P -- + cosaL = coskL 
aL 
We rewrite the above equation as 
f (~) = coskL 
where 
sin~ 
f (~) = P -~- + cos ~ 
and 
~ = aL 
From Eq. (74) it readily follows that we must have 
-I :s f (~) :s + I 
417 
(71) 
(72) 
(73) 
(74) 
(75) 
(76) 
(77) 
(78) 

418 
f(~) 
I I 
f(~) 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Figure 16.8. 
f(~) as a function of ~ for P = 10 (top figure) and for P = 5 (bottom figure). 
In Fig. 16.8 we have plotted f (~) as a function of ~ for P = 10 (top figure) and 
for P = 5 (bottom figure). In Fig. 16.9 we have made corresponding plots of f (~) 
as a function of 
2 
E 
8 = ~ = (r?/2mU) 
(79) 
The shaded regions in Fig. 16.8 correspond to If (~)I ::: 1 and therefore represent 
allowed values of energy. Notice the formation of allowed and forbidden energy 
bands. Obviously, 
p-+o 
corresponds to a free particle with all values of E possible. On the other hand, for 
P -+ 00 
we must have 
~ =mr 
(80) 
implying 
n2JT2Ji2 
E = EI1 = 
(81) 
2mU 
which represent the energy levels of a particle in an infinitely deep potential well 
(see Sec. 6.6.1). 

Double Well Potential and the Kronig-Penney Model 
419 
f(~) 
II 
9 
f(~) 
3 
-11\t--->....,L.-__ 
--.::.....L ___ 
.......:..:~_=::::,~500 
Figure 16.9. Variation off(~) with 8(= ~2) for P = 10 (top figure) and for P = 5 (bottom figure). 
In Tables 16.1 and 16.2 we have tabulated the values of ~ where f (~) = + I or 
-I. From the corresponding values of ~2 we can readily calculate the energy gap 
between successive bands from the following relation 
Energy gap 
!1E 
1i 2 
2mL2 !1(~2) 
0.152 !1(~2) eV 
(82) 
where we have used m = 9.1095 x 10-31 kg, Ii = 1.0546 X 10-34 J.s and L = 
5A.= 5 x 10- 10 m. It may be seen that the band gap increases with P. 
16.6. Problems 
Problem 16.1 In the numerical example discussed in Sec. 16.3 calculate the value 
of the tunnelling time T (in seconds) for a = 2A. and a = sA. 

420 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Table 16.1. Energy gap of an electron at various wave numbers 
P = 5; 
A = 7.62 eV A.; 
L=5xlO- 10m 
~ 
k(A.)-1 
f(~) 
~2 
M~2) 
/':;.E (eV) 
0 
6 
0 
5.22 
0.80 
2.28445 
0 
+1 
5.21871 
rr 
0.628 
-1 
rr2 
12.8 
1.9 
4.76129 
0.628 
-1 
22.6699 
2rr 
1.2566 
+1 
4rr2 
16.23 
2.47 
7.46368 
1.2566 
+1 
55.7065 
3rr 
1.88496 
-1 
9rr2 
17.81 
2.71 
10.3266 
1.88496 
-I 
106.639 
4rr 
2.51327 
+1 
16rr2 
18.61 
2.84 
13.2862 
2.51327 
+1 
176.524 
5rr 
3.14159 
-I 
25rr 2 
19.05 
2.90 
16.3031 
3.14159 
-1 
265.792 
Problem 16.2 Numerically solve Eqs (21) and (22) for a = 3JT and b/a = 0.5 
and show that the splitting of the energy levels become smaller. 
Problem 16.3 For the Krbnig-Penney model discussed in Sec. 16.5, calculate the 
band gap energies (in electron volts) for P = 2 and P = 20. 
[ADs: For P = 2, the band gap energies are approximately 0.46 eV, l.02 eV, 1.16 
eV, 1.20 eY.] 
Problem 16.4 For x » I 
cothx::::: I +2e-2x 
and 
tanhx::::: I - 2e-2x 
Using the above expressions, show that Eqs (21) and (22) can be written in the 
following approximate forms 
k 
2k 
tan ka ~ -- =f -
e-2Kb 
K 
K 

Double Well Potential and the Kronig-Penney Model 
421 
Table /6.2. Energy gap of an electron at various wave numbers 
P = 10; 
A = 15.24 eV A; 
L=5xlO- 10 m 
~ 
k(A)-l 
f(s) 
s2 
L'l(~2) 
L'lE (eV) 
0 
II 
0 
6.90 
1.05 
2.6265 
0 
+1 
6.90 
rr 
0.63 
-1 
rr2 
18.30 
2.79 
5.30732 
0.63 
-1 
28.17 
2rr 
1.26 
+1 
4rr2 
25.60 
3.90 
8.06714 
1.26 
+1 
65.08 
3rr 
1.88 
-1 
9rr 2 
30.17 
4.60 
10.9087 
1.88 
-I 
119.0 
4rr 
2.51 
+1 
16rr2 
33.66 
5.04 
13.8192 
2.51 
+1 
191.0 
5rr 
3.14 
-I 
25rr 2 
34.92 
5.32 
16.7827 
3.14 
-I 
281.7 
where the upper and lower signs correspond to the symmetric and anti symmetric 
states. 
For k / K « I we obtain 
giving 
n2Jr2/i2 
£ (0) ~ __ -:-
/1 
2ma2 
Write k = k(O) + k(l) and assuming kOla « 1 show that 
2£ (0) 
4£ (0) 
(0) 
£ 
~ £ (0) ___ 
/1 _ 
::r __ 
/1 _ 
e-2Kn b 
/1 
/1 
(0)'" 
(0) 
K/1 a 
K/1 a 
which shows the splitting of the energy levels. In the above equation 

422 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
16.7. References and suggested reading 
1. R.P. Feynman, R.B. Leighton and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on Physics, 
Vol. 3, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, Massachusetts (1965). 
2. J.S. 
Townsend, 
A 
Modern 
Approach 
to 
Quantum 
Mechanics, 
McGraw-Hill, New York (1992). 
3. CH. Townes, Production of Coherent Radiations by Atoms and Molecules, 
in Nobel Lectures in Physics (1963-1970), Elsevier Publishing Co., Amster-
dam (1972). The Nobel lecture has also been reprinted in the book LASERS: 
Theory and Applications by K. Thyagarajan and A.K. Ghatak, Plenum Press, 
New York (1981). 
4. J.C Wolfe, Summary of the Kronig-Penney Electron, Am. 1. Phys. 46 (10), pp. 
1012-1014 (1978). 
5. N.F. Mott and H. Jones, The Theory of the Properties of Metals and Alloys, 
Clarendon Press, Oxford (1936). 

Chapter 17 
The JWKB Approximation 
God is a mathematician of very high order and He used very advanced mathe-
matics in constructing the universe. 
-
P.A.M. DIRAC I 
17.1. Introduction 
The exact solution of the SchrOdinger equation can be obtained only for a few po-
tential energy variations. In this chapter we will develop a widely used approximate 
method which gives a direct solution of the one-dimensional SchrOdinger equation 
where 
Validity 
2f-l 
k2 (x) = -2 [E - V (x)] 
n 
(1) 
(2) 
and other symbols have their usual meaning. The method, which is usually abbre-
viated as the JWKB (after Jeffreys, Wentzel, Kramers and Brillouin) method, is 
applicable to potentials which are slowly varying such that 
I 1 dk I 
-- «k(x) 
k (x) dx 
(3) 
We may mention here that Eq. (1) is also encountered in many other areas of 
physics and engineering (see, e.g. Ref. 1-3). For example, in electromagnetic the-
ory, if a plane electromagnetic wave propagating in the x-direction is incident nor-
mally on an inhomogeneous medium characterized by the refractive index variation 
I Quoted from The Quantum Physicists by W.H. Cropper, Oxford University Press, New York 
(\970), p. 5. 
423 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

424 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
n (x), then the electric field satisfies Eq. (1) with 
where 
2nc 
AO= --
w 
(4) 
(5) 
represents the free space wavelength, c the speed of light in free space and 
w (= 2n v) is the angular frequency of the wave. For such a plane wave, the wave 
function 1ft is either Ey or Ez; Ex is taken to be zero (see, e.g. Ref. I). Since 
w 
k (x) = -
n (x) 
c 
Eq. (3) can be written in the form 
I 
1 dn I 
2n 
n (x) dx «T 
where 
2n 
AO 
A(X)=-=-
k (x) 
n (x) 
represents the local wavelength. We rewrite Eq. (7) as 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
where we have omitted the factor of 2n. The quantity on the left-hand side approx-
imately represents the change in the refractive index in a distance of one wave-
length; thus Eq. (9) implies that the refractive index should change very little over 
a distance A. This is the condition for the validity of the JWKB approximation.2 
We may mention here that a second-order differential equation of the type 
d 2y 
dy 
p (x) dx 2 + q (x) dx + r (x) y (x) = 0 
(10) 
can always be transformed to Eq. (1) (see Problem 17.4); thus the JWKB method 
can be applied to obtain direct solutions of Eq. (10). In Sec. 17.2 we will derive the 
JWKB solutions and will show that they are not valid near the turning points where 
k 2 (x) = O. In Sec. 17.3 we will give the connection formulae which connect the 
2 As A ---f 0, the JWKB approximation should become more and more accurate. This is also 
the geometrical optics limit. In quantum mechanics this would imply the approach towards classical 
mechanics. It is because of this reason that the lWKB formalism is often referred to as the semi-
classical theory. 

The JWKB Approximation 
425 
JWKB solutions from the left of the turning point to the right of the turning point 
(and vice versa); a heuristic derivation of the connection formulae will be given at 
the end of this chapter (Sec. 17.8). 
In Sec. 17.4 we will use the JWKB solutions to derive an equation which 
would give the energy eigenvalues of the one-dimensional SchrOdinger equation. 
In Sec. 17.5 we will use the JWKB solutions to study the tunnelling problem in 
quantum mechanics. In Sec. 17.6 we will discuss the JWKB solutions of the radial 
part of the Schrodinger equation for spherically symmetric potentials correspond-
ing to I = O. In Sec. 17.7 we will discuss the tunnelling of alpha particles from the 
nucleus. 
17.2. The JWKB solutions 
We first note that if k2 (x) is a constant, the solution ofEq. (I) would be given by 
1/1 (x) = e±ikx 
(11) 
where we have omitted the arbitrary multiplicative constant. This suggests that we 
may tryout a solution of the form 
1/1 (x) = ei !lex) 
(12) 
where u (x) is to be determined. Substituting Eq. (12) in Eq. 0), we get 
. d2u 
(dU)2 
2 
1--
-
+ k (x) = 0 
dx2 
dx 
(13) 
The solution given by Eq. (12) is exact, provided u (x) is a solution of Eq. (13). 
Now, if k2 (x) was independent of x then d 2u/dx2 = 0; thus when k2 (x) is slowly-
varying, we may neglect the term proportional to d 2u/dx2 to obtain 
(~:r=k2(X) 
(14) 
implying 
x 
U (x) = ± J 
k (x) dx 
(15) 
Thus, in this approximation, we obtain 
Zeroeth-order JWKB solution 
V' (x) '" "'0 (x) = exp [ ±i f 
k (x) dX] 
(16) 

426 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
which is usually referred to as the zeroeth-order JWKB solution. The physical 
interpretation of Eq. (16) is as follows: For a slowly-varying refractive index, there 
is a change in phase only which is given by the integral 
x 
t::.</J= !k(X) dx 
It is for this reason that the JWKB method is often referred to as the phase-integral 
method (see, e.g. Ref. 4). 
In order to obtain the condition for the validity of the solution given by Eq. (16), 
we differentiate l/I 0 (x) twice to obtain 
d2l/1o 
[ 
dk] 
--2 + k2(x)=r=i-
l/Io(x)=O 
dx 
dx 
(17) 
Thus l/Io (x) [as defined by Eq. (16)] rigorously satisfies Eq. (17). If we compare 
Eq. (17) with Eq. (I) we find that the two equations are the same provided we can 
neglect the term proportional to dk/dx in comparison with e (x), i.e. provided 
(18) 
or 
1 1 dk I 
- -
«k (x) 
k dx 
(19) 
which represents the condition for the validity of the JWKB solution. Points for 
which k2 (x) = 0 are known as turning points3 and obviously the JWKB solutions 
are not valid near the turning points. 
In order to obtain a more accurate solution, we write 
V' (x) = F (x) "'0 (x) = F (x) exp [±i J 
k (x) dX] 
(20) 
where F (x) is yet to be determined. We substitute Eq. (20) in Eq. (l) to obtain 
d2F 
dF 
dk 
-
± 2i k- ± i -
F (x) = 0 
dx 2 
dx 
dx 
(21) 
Once again Eq. (20) represents a rigorous solution of Eq. (1) provided F (x) is 
the solution of Eq. (2 I). Since F (x) is expected to be slowly-varying, we neglect 
3 Why are they called turning points') For example, for the harmonic oscillator problem for which 
V (x) = 1tlW2 x 2 [see Example l7.I], classical mechanics tells us that the particle will turn back at 
x = ±J2E / tlW2 which are the turning points [see Eq. (46)]. Similarly, if a particle is thrown up in 
earth's gravitational field [see Example 17.2] it will turn back at x = E /y ; y = tlg. 

The lWKB Approximation 
d 2 F / dx 2 to obtain 
or 
or 
The solutions 
lWKB solutions 
1 dF 
I 
dk 
--+---=0 
F dx 
2k (x) dx 
:x [lnF(x) Jk(x)] = 0 
const 
F (x) -----= 
- vk(X) 
x 
const 
±i f 
k(x) dx 
1jf (x) = Jk (x) e 
427 
(22) 
(23) 
are known as the JWKB solutions. The condition for the validity of the above 
solution is given in Problem 17.3. 
17.2.1. THE GENERAL JWKB SOLUTIONS 
The general JWKB solution is the linear combination 
>fr (x) = v'~;x) cxp [i J 
k (x) dX] + v'~;x) exp [ -i J 
k (x) dX] 
(24) 
We could also have used the sine and cosine solutions: 
V' (x) = v'~;x) sin (J k (x) dX) + v'~;x) cos (J k (x) dX) 
(25) 
Till now we have assumed k2 (x) to be positive. For k2 (x) < 0, we write Eg. (1) as 
(26) 
where 
(27) 
Using a method similar to that used in the preceding section, we obtain the follow-
ing general JWKB solution 
>fr (x) = ~ 
exp [J K (x) dX] + ~ 
exp [-J 
K (x) dX] 
(28) 

428 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The solutions given by Eqs (24), (25) and (28) are valid when k 2 (x) and K2 (x) are 
slowly-varying, i.e. when 
(29) 
A more precise condition is given in Problem 17.3. 
17.3. The connection formulae 
We next consider a typical variation of k2 (x) (see Fig. 17.1). The point x 
a 
I 
I 
Ie 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
JWKB solution not valid 
/ 
.J 
Trigonometric_-+-----.::\r-__ 
---ooI1 
JWKB solutions 
a 
--------+---------~~~~~~-------x 
I 
/ 
l--Exponential 
I Turning point' 
JWKB solutions 
Figure 17.1. A typical variation of k2(x) where the oscillatory trigonometric solutions are to the left 
of the turning point at x = a and exponential solutions are to the right of the turning point. 
represents the turning point where k2 (x) = O. Obviously, the JWKB solutions (as 
given in the preceding section) are valid far to the left of the turning point and 
also far to the right of the turning point. The question now arises that if we know 
the JWKB solutions to the left of the turning point, then how can we determine 
the JWKB solutions to the right of the turning point and conversely. This is done 
through what are known as the connection formulae which are given by (see Sec. 
17.8) 
~ 
sin [fa k (x) dx +~] ++ ~ 
exp [- fX K (x) dX] 
(30) 
yk(x) 
4 
K(X) 
x 
a 

The JWKB Approximation 
429 
and 
~ 
cos [fa k (x) dx + 
~] *+ ~ 
exp [+ fX K (x) dX] 
(31) 
yk(x) 
4 
K(X) 
x 
a 
Thus, the JWKB solution given by 
~ 
sin [fa k (x) dx +~] 
yk(x) 
4 
x 
in the region x < a goes over to an exponentially decaying solution in the region 
x > a, and the solution 
~ 
cos [fa k (x) dx + ~] 
k(x) 
4 
x 
in the region x < a goes over to an exponentially amplifying solution in the region 
x> a. 
Similarly, if the variation of k2 (x) is similar to that shown in Fig. 17.2, the 
I ," 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
JWKB 
solution 
not valid 
I 
: Trigonometric 
f- JWKB solutions 
Turning pOint~ 
~----------~,~~--+------------------------x 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Exponential 
I 
JWKB~: 
solutions 
I 
I 
Figure 17.2. A typical variation of k2(x) where the oscillatory trigonometric solutions are to the 
right of the turning point at x = a. 
connection formulae would be given by 
~ 
exp [- fa K (x) dX] *+ ~ 
sin [fX k (x) dx + ~] 
(32) 
K (x) 
k (x) 
4 
x 
a 

430 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
~ 
exp [+ fa K (x) dX] ++ ~ 
cos [fX k (x) dx +~] 
(33) 
K(X) 
yk(x) 
4 
x 
a 
17.4. Application of the JWKB solutions to eigenvalue problems 
One of the very important applications of the JWKB method is in the solution 
of the eigenvalue equations encountered in many areas like quantum mechanics, 
waveguide theory, etc. One usually comes across the equation 
(34) 
with k2 (x) becoming negative for x --+ +00 and also for x --+ -00 (see, e.g. Fig. 
17.3). The general approach is as follows: We start with an exponentially decaying 
solution in the region where x is large and positive, and use connection formulae 
to obtain the solution in the region where x is negative and large. We then derive 
the condition so that there is only an exponentially decaying solution in the region 
x --+ -00. This condition leads to eigenvalues of the problem which are contained 
in k2 (x). 
k\x) 
x 
Fi/?ure 17.3. A typical variation of k 2 (x) corresponding to the eigenvalue problem. The points x = ({ 
and x = h represent the turning points. 
In most problems we have two turning points4 which we denote by 
Turning points 
x = a and 
x = b 
(35) 
4 Figure 17.3 corresponds to the situation where we have two turning points. We can have more 
than two turning points (see Problems 17.5 and 17.6); however, for bound state problems, k2 (x) 
must become negative for x -+ 00 and also for x -+ -00. 

The JWKB Approximation 
431 
We first look for the JWKB solution for x > b (Region III) where k2 (x) is negative. 
If we use the boundary condition that 1/f (x) must tend to 0 as x -+ 00, we must 
choose the exponentially decaying solution in Region III; thus 
'hn (x) ~ ~ 
cxp [ - { K (x) dX] 
(36) 
where 
(37) 
Using the connection formula given by Eq. (30) we obtain the following JWKB 
solution in Region II (a < x < b): 
1/fIl (x) = ~ 
sin [/h k (x) dx +~] 
k (x) 
4 
x 
(38) 
Now in order to use the connection formulae given by Eqs (32) and (33) (to obtain 
the JWKB solution in Region I) the argument of the sine or cosine function should 
be 
Thus, we write 
I 
k (x) dx + ~ ~ (l k (x) dx + I ) -U 
k (x) dx + :) 
(39) 
using which, we obtain 
tIl (x) ~ ~ 
cos [0 -U 
k (x) dx + ~ ) ] 
(40) 
where 
h 
e = I k (x) dx 
(41 ) 
a 
Thus 
1/f II (x) 
(2A cos e) k cos [/ k (x) 
a 
+(2ASino);/wsin[1 k(x) dX+~] 
dX+~ ] 
(42) 

432 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Using the connection formulae given by Eqs (32) and (33), we obtain (in Region I) 
2A cosO ~!(" exp [ + I 
K (xl dX] 
+ A sin e k, cxp [ -I K (xl dX] 
0/1 (x) 
(43) 
The first term on the term right-hand side of this equation represents an exponen-
tially growing solution5 that should not be present; we therefore require 
cos e = 0 :::} e = (n + ~) 7T 
or 
IWKB quantization condition 
h 
e = f k (x) dx = (n + ~) 7T 
(44) 
a 
The above eigenvalue equation is a general relation and holds good for an arbitrary 
k2 (x) as long as it becomes negative6 for x ---+ +00 and x ---+ -00. 
Example 17.1 For the linear harmonic oscillator problem 
Harmonic oscillator problem 
Thus 
(45) 
5 This can be seen by noting that if K (x) were equal to a constant (= K) then 
For x ---+ -00, the above solution would blow up exponentially. 
6 If k 2 (x) becomes positive when x tends either to +00 or -00, we have what is known as a 
scattering problem; the quantization condition does not exist and a continuum of energy values is 
possible (see also Sec. 17.5). 

The JWKB Approximation 
and the turning points are given by 
a = _/ 2£ 
J-LW2 
and 
Thus the JWKB quantization condition becomes 
JWKB quantization condition 
where 
and 
b f k (x) dx 
a 
J-LW fb [2E _ X2]1/2 dx 
Pi 
J-LW2 
a 
+v'A f [A - ~2r/2 d~ 
-v'A 
Y = jJ-L",W 
~ = Y x; 
rt 
2E 
A=-
Piw 
If we make the substitution 
~ = h sine 
we will readily get 
[ e 
1 
] +n 12 
( 
1 ) 
A - + - sin 2e 
= 
n + -
If 
2 
4 
-n12 
2 
or 
A = (2n + 1); n = 0, 1, 2, ... 
giving 
Energy eigenvalues 
433 
(46) 
(47) 
(48) 
(49) 
(50) 
Comparing with Eq. (28) of Chapter 7 we find that, for the linear harmonic oscil-
lator problem, the JWKB quantization condition happens to give the exact result! 

434 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Having determined the allowed values of A, the JWKB solutions are completely 
known and are given by 
lWKB solutions 
1jf (x) 
[ a] 
(-It A 
.jK(Xj cxp - [ 
K (x) dx ,x < a 
(51 a) 
[ X] 
(_1)12 2A 
rr 
~ 
sin f k (x) dx + -
,a < x < h 
k (x) 
4 
a 
(51 b) 
~ 
sin [fh k (x) dx +~] , 
a < x < h 
k (x) 
4 
x 
(SIc) 
~ 
exp [-I K (x) dx l x > b 
(Sid) 
Indeed the above solution is valid for an arbitrary variation of k2 (x) as long as 
there are two turning points and k 2 (x) remains negative for x < a and x > h. For 
the linear harmonic oscillator problem the integrals are easy to evaluate: 
h f k (x) dx 
x 
Also 
~ f JA - ~2 d~ 
~ , [I . 
~I ~ 
~ r:---;;J~ 
I\. 
- Sill 
-
+ -y A - s-
2 
.fi.. 
2A 
~ 
[ rr 
I. ~I 
~ 
I 
~J 
A 4" - 2: Sill 
.fi.. -
2:~ y A -
~-
I 
--
Jk (x) 
(52) 
For example, for n = 1 (A = 3), the JWKB wave function (in the region -.fi.. < 
x < J)..) would be given by [using Eq. (SIc)J: 
1jf (~) = 
2A 
. [ 
3. ~l ~ 
~~] 
(3_~2)1/4SIll rr-2: slll 
J3-2:y3-~-
2A 
. [3 . 
~l 
~ 
~ ~J 
1/4 SIll -Sill 
M+-y3-~-
(3_~2) 
2 
v3 
2 

The JWKB Approximation 
The same result would be obtained by using Eq. (51 b): 
1/1 (~) = 
which is an anti symmetric function of ~. Similarly, 
and 
t J 
K (x) dx 
A 
-~ 
~ 
J ~ 
1 ~ 
1 
~+V~2-A 
V ~2 - A d~ = -
-~ V ~2 - A + - A In 
2 
2 
.Ji. 
~ 
Using Eqs (5Ia) and (5Id) we obtain (for A = 3): 
1/1 (~) = 
A 
[I ~ 
3 
-
exp 
-~ 
~ - 3 - -In 
(~2_3)1/4 
2· 
2 
A 
[I ~ 
3 ~+~] 
----- exp 
-
-~ ~ - 3 + - In 
(~2 _ 3)1/4 
2 
2-J3 
435 
(53) 
(54) 
~ < -v'3 
which represents an anti symmetric function of ~. In an exactly similar manner 
we can show that for A = 7, I I, 15, ... 1/1 (~) will be anti symmetric and for A = 
1,5,9, 13, ... 1/1 (~) will be a symmetric function of ~. 
The JWKB wave functions are now completely determined except for an arbi-
trary multiplicative constant. We consider anti symmetric wave functions (n = 1, 
3,5, ... ) and assume that 1/1 (~) has a unit slope at ~ = O. This gives 
(_I)(n-l)/2 
A = 
; n = 1,3,5, ... 
J2n + 1 
(55) 
The corresponding exact wave function would be (see Sec. 7.3) 

436 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Exact wave function 
1 
(n-I), 
( 
1 ) 
ljrEXACT (~) = 2 (_1)(n-I)/2 ~ 
Hn (~) exp -
2~2 
(56) 
where we have chosen the multiplicative constant so that ljr' (0) = I. In Figs 17.4 
and 17.5 we have plotted the exact (viz., the Hermite-Gauss functions) and the 
JWKB wave functions for n = 3 and 5. Except near the turning points, the JWKB 
wave functions agree well with the exact wave functions. 
The JWKB solutions allow us to understand the general solution of 
the Schrbdinger equation. Let us assume that E is not one of the eigenvalues, i.e. 
E i=-
~ I1w, ~ I1w, .... Then, if we start with an exponentially decaying solution 
in the region x < a, we will end up with an exponentially amplifying solution in 
the region x > b. Similarly, if we start with an exponentially decaying solution in 
the region x > b, we will end up with an exponentially amplifying solution in the 
region x < a. These are the two independent solutions of the Schrbdinger equation 
when E is not one of the eigenvalues. 
Example 17.2 Consider the potential energy variation given by (see Fig. 6.5) 
Potential corresponding to free fall under gravity 
-4 
v (x) = ex) 
x < 0 
~JWKB 
yx x> 0 
2 
1/1 (x) 
1.5 
-I 
-1.5 
-2 
4 x 
~JWKB 
(57) 
Figure 17.4. Exact and JWKB wave functions corresponding to n = 3 [adapted from Ref. 3]. 
The above potential energy variation corresponds to the free fall of a particle in 
earth's gravitational field; obviously y = J.Lg. Since 
2J.L 
k2 (x) = -~ [E -
V (x)] 
11-
(58) 

The JWKB Approximation 
437 
IJI (x) 
-2 
Figure 17.5. Exact and JWKB wave functions corresponding to n = 5 [adapted from Ref. 3]. 
the turning points are x = ° 
and x = E / y. Thus the eigenvalue equation [Eq. (44)] 
becomes 
E/y f k (x) dx 
o 
(59) 
1/2 E/y 
1/2 
(2M) f (E - Y x)I/2 dx = ~ (2M) 
E 3/2 
/1 2 
3y 
/1 2 
o 
implying 
Energy eigenvalues 
(/12 2)113 [3 
]2/3 
E = En = 
2: 
4" (2n + I) 7T 
; n = 0, 1, 2, ... 
(60) 
which represents the JWKB energy eigenvalues of the system. Thus 
(61) 
or 
8/1 = 1.7707, 3.6838, 5.1775, ... 
(62) 
corresponding to n = 0, 1, 2, .... It may be noted that the above values do not 
compare very well with the exact values which arc (see Problem 6.8) 
2.3381, 4.0879, 5.5206, ... 
(63) 

438 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The JWKB result does not compare very well with exact results because of the fact 
that there is an infinite discontinuity of V (x) [and hence of k2 (x)] at x = 0. Now, 
because of V (x) becoming 00 at x = 0, the exact wave function must vanish there. 
Incorporating this condition, the JWKB wave function in the region ° 
< x < E j Y 
would be given by 
l/fJWKB (x) 
where 
and 
Thus 
l/fJWKB (x) 
;ksin[Ik(X)dX] O<x<E/y 
.;t(X) sin [e - (1 k (x) dx + ~ ) ] 
b 
e = ! k (x) 
If 
dx+-4 
o 
E 
h= -
y 
k sinO cos [1 k (xl dx + ~] 
- "'~" cosO sin [[ k (xl dx + ~ ] 
(64) 
(65) 
(66) 
(67) 
(68) 
The first term on the right-hand side will go over to an exponentially amplifying 
solution in the region x > h and therefore we must have sin e = 0, or, 
Thus 
Modified quantization condition 
b 
e = nlf 
! k (x) dx = (n - ~) If; n 
= 1.2 .... 
o 
(69) 
(70) 
The above equation represents the modified quantization condition and substituting 
for k (x) we will readily obtain 
En 
[3 ( 
1) ]2/3 
en = (n2y2j2/tf/3 = 4 2n - 2: 
If 
(71) 

The lWKB Approximation 
439 
or 
8n = 2.3203,4.0818,5.5172, ... 
(72) 
for n = 1, 2, 3, .... The above eigenvalues compare very well with the exact values 
[see Eg. (63)]. The corresponding JWKB wave functions would be given by Eg. 
(64) with 
where 
( 2 ) 1/2 
k (x) = 
;;. 
(E - y X)I/2 
( 2/1 a ) 1/2 
1/2 
li 2 
~ 
E - yx 
~== 
=8-X 
a 
y 
X== -x 
a 
and a is to be defined later. Thus 
(73) 
(74) 
x 
1/2 s 
fk(X)dX=(~::) f~1/2d~ 
(75) 
o 
e 
We choose a such that the factor in front of the integral is unity, i.e. 
a == (1i~:2 y/3 
(76) 
[see Solution 6.8]. Thus 
x 
jk(X)dX 
o 
= 
~ [83/ 2 -
(8 - X)3/2] 
The JWKB solution [Eg. (64)] is therefore given by 
1/IJWKB (X) = 8 1/ 4 (8 1_ X)I/4 sin [~ {83/ 2 -
(8 - X)3/2}] 
(77) 
0< X < 8 
(78) 
where we have chosen the constant such that d 1/1 / d X is unity at X = O. For X > 8, 
the JWKB solution will be given by 
V;JWKB (X) = - 28,~?c~n~)'1' exp [- [ K (x) dX] 
(_I)n+1 
[2 
3/2] 
2S1/4(X_s)I/4 exp -3" (X - 8) 
, X > 8 
(79) 

440 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Figure 17.6 gives a plot of the JWKB wave function for n = 2 corresponding to 
which 
8 = 82 = 4.0818 
(80) 
Comparison has been made with the exact wave-function which is given by (see 
Solution 6.8) 
Exact wave function 
1 
o/EXACT (X) =. 
Ai (X + a2) 
AI' (a2) 
where a2 = -4.08795 represents the second zero of Ai (x). 
0·5 
~--~~----~----~----~--~I~O x 
--D·5 
-I 
-1·5 
0·2 
0·15 
0·] 
0·05 
I , 
-
-
I 
JWKB 
II.) 
1fEXAcr(X) - 1fJWKB (x) 
2 
" I 
I 
I 
I 
6 
x 
8 
10 
(81) 
Figure 17.6. (a) Comparison of the JWKB wave function as given by Egs (78) and (79) (shown as 
dashed curve) with the exact wave function as given by Eg. (81) (shown as solid curve) corresponding 
to the second energy state (n = 2) for the potential energy variation given by Eg. (57). (b) A plot of 
VrEXACT(x) - VrJWKB(x) as a function of x [adapted from Ref. 3). 

The lWKB Approximation 
441 
17.5. Application of the JWKB solutions to the tunnelling probability 
calculations 
We next consider the tunnelling problem in quantum mechanics. Consider a po-
tential energy variation of the type shown in Fig. 17.7(a). A particle of arbitrary 
(positive) energy E approaches the potential energy barrier from the lefe. Our 
objective is to calculate the probability for the particle to tunnel through the barrier 
and also the probability for its reflections. 
In Fig. 17.7(b) we have shown the corresponding variation of k2 (x); the two 
turning points are denoted by a and b. In the regions x > b and x < a, E would 
be greater than V (x) and the Schr6dinger equation will be the form 
where 
d 21/f 
-2 +k2 (x) 1/f (x) =0 
dx 
2/1 
k2 (x) = -2 [E - V (x)] 
Ii 
(82) 
In order to describe incoming and outgoing waves, we will choose the JWKB 
solutions given by the exponential functions lsee Eq. (24)] rather than sine and 
cosine solutions. Since in Region III we only have a wave propagating in the +x 
direction, the corresponding solution will be given by 
(83) 
where we have introduced a phase factor of JT /4 for convenience in using the 
connection formulae. Now in order to use the connection formulae [Eqs (32) and 
(33)], we rewrite Eq. (83) as 
1/f JII (x) 
c [ ;fu) cos (! k (x) dx + i ) ] 
iC 
2 
. 
JT 
[ 
( X)] 
+ 2 
,;r(ij stn [k (x) dx + 4 
(84) 
7 This is typical of a scattering problem in which the energy is specified in advance and the 
behaviour of the wave function is found in terms of the energy. This is in contrast to the eigenvalue 
problem where the wave function vanishes as x --* ±oo leading to discrete values of the energy of 
the particle. 
8 The corresponding problem in electromagnetic theory would be when a light beam is incident 
on a thin layer of a rarer medium at an angle of incidence greater than the critical angle. 

442 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
V(x) 
a 
b 
(a) 
I 
Region I 
Region II 
I Region !II 
I 
(b) 
Figure 17.7. (a) A typical variation of V(x) corresponding to a scattering problem. A particle of 
energy E is incident from the left. The points x = a and x = b represent the turning points where 
V(x) = E. (b) The corresponding variation of k2(x). 
We now use Eqs (32) and (33) to obtain the following JWKB solutions in Region II: 
1/fn(x) 
C .;,k cxp ( + ! 
K (xl dX) 
+;f [k exp (- j.(Xl dX)] 
(85) 
Now, in order to use the connection formulae [given by Eqs (30) and (31)] for 
obtaining the solution in Region I, we must have 
x f 
K (x) dx 
a 

The JWKB Approximation 
443 
in the exponent. Thus we write 
b 
b 
x 
f K (x) dx = f K (x) dx - f K (x) dx 
(86) 
x 
a 
a 
so that o/Jl becomes9 
o/u (x) 
~ "'}," exp ( -/ 
K (x) dX) 
+i~e [ k exp ( + / K (x) dX) ] 
(87) 
where 
(88) 
We can now use the connection formulae given by Eqs (30) and (31) to obtain 
ice 
1 
(fa 
rr) 
+-2- ../kW COS 
x k (X) dx + 4" 
In order to express 0/1 as a superposition of incident and reflected waves, we write 
the sine and cosine functions as a sum of exponentials to obtain 
where 
a 
A 
-i J k(x) dx 
= ../kWe 
x 
[incident wave propagating to the right] 
a 
B 
i Jk(x) dx 
+../kWe
x 
[incident wave propagating to the left] 
(89) 
(90) 
9 Notice that the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (85) is the exponentially amplifying term 
with respect to the point x = b; this term becomes an exponentially decaying term with respect to 
the point x = a [see the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (87)]. 

444 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and 
(91) 
Transmission and reflection coefficients 
Thus the transmission and reflection coefficients are given by 
(92) 
(93) 
Notice that in spite of all the approximations made in the JWKB theory we still get 
R+T=l 
In most practical cases e « 1 and in this approximation 
h -2! K(X) dx 
T ~ e2 = e 
a 
(94) 
a formula that is widely used in literature. 
Example 17.3 Transmission through a parabolic barrier As a simple application 
of Eq. (94) we consider a parabolic barrier of the form 
Parabolic barrier potential 
o 
Ixl > d 
(95) 
(see Fig. l7 .8). For E < Va, the turning points are the roots of the equation 
implying 
(
E) 1/2 
(E) 
1/2 
a = -d 1 - -
and b = +d 1 - -
Vo 
Vo 

The lWKB Approximation 
445 
Vex) 
________ 
________ L-______ 
________ 
Figure 17.8. Parabolic variation of Vex) as given by Eq. (95). 
Thus 
e 
(96) 
It may be noted that E > Vo, there are no turning points and the JWKB formula 
(Eq. (94)] would predict T = I which is not correct. Rigourous analysis will show 
that there is a finite reflection even for E > Vo. 
Example 17.4 In this example we will show how to use the connection formulae 
when there are more than two turning points. Although the analysis does get a bit 
involved, we urge the students to work it out in detail so that the tricks in using the 
connection formulae are completely understood. 
We consider a V (x) variation of the type shown in Fig. 17.9(a) with the incident 
energy E such that 
VI < E < Vo 
so that the corresponding k2 (x) variation [shown in Fig. 17.9(b)] has four turning 
points I o. For the sake of simplicity we assume a symmetric potential so that the 
turning points are at x = ±a and at x = ±b. In region V (i.e. for x > b), we will 
10 For E < VI we will have only two turning points and one can carry out an analysis similar to 
that in Sec. 17.5. 

446 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
have an outgoing wave and hence the wave function will be of the form 
ljfv (x) 
~ cx{ a 
k (x) dx + ~ ) ] 
~cos [{ k(x) dx + ~] + ;5. sin [{ k(x) dx + ~] 
(97) 
which would go over to [cf. Egs (84)-(88)] 
where 
~ k exp [-J 
K (x) 
a 
+i C e _1_ exp [+ IX K (x) 
2 
fi'(X) 
a 
We again use the connection formulae [Egs (30)-(3\)] to obtain 
(98) 
(99) 
~ 
III (x) ~ ~ [~sin U 
k (x) dx + ~ ) + ;~ cos U 
k (x) dx + ~ ) ] 
Writing 
[ k (x) dx + ~ ~ (£ k (x) dx + ~ ) - (l k (x) dx + ~ ) 
we get 
ljf III (x) 
~ [u cos a - ; f sin a) cos (L k dx + ~ ) 
+ (~ sin a + ;! cos a) sin (L k dx + ~ ) ] 
(l00) 

The JWKB Approximation 
447 
v (x) 
~--------________ J-______________ 
~~x 
(a) 
II 
k 2 (x) III 
IV 
V 
----~-----4~----~--~~----~-----x 
(b) 
Figure 17.9. (a) A particle of energy E is incident on a symmetric potential well surrounded by a 
barrier. (b) The corresponding variation of k2(x). 
where 
+a 
ex == f k (x) dx 
-a 
This would go over to 
1fr1I (x) 
};" [(~cosa ~ if sinO') tcxp (~ I, K(X) dX) 
+ (* sinO' + if cosa H exp (I, K (x) dX) ] 
(101) 

448 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where we have used the fact that K (x) = K (-x) so that 
cxp ( -l 
K (x) dX) ~ exp (-I «x) dX) ~ e [scc Eq. (99)] 
Further use of connection formulae gives 
where 
and 
k [(~ cosa - iF sina) ~ sin (J k (x) dx + ~ ) 
+ [ (~ sin a + i! cos a H 
cos ({ k (x) dx + ~ ) 
k cxp [ - i (I k (x) dx + ~ ) ] 
(wave propagating to the right) 
+ k ex{ (l k (x) dx + ~ ) ] 
(wave propagating to the left) 
A = ~ [2 sin a + i cos a (:2 + :2) ] c 
i 
(e 2 
4 ) 
B = "2 cos a 4 - e2 
C 
Reflection and transmission coefficients 
Thus the reflection and transmission coefficients are given by 
( ~ _ ~)2 cos2 a 
g2 
4 
4 
4sin2a + (~+ ~)2 cos2a 
g2 
4 
(102) 
(103) 
(104) 
(l05) 
(106) 

The lWKB Approximation 
449 
It can be readily seen that R + T = 1. Further, 
T = 1 (R = 0) 
(107) 
when 
(108) 
-a 
Equation (l08) represents the eigenvalue condition for the potential well and Eq. 
(l07) tells us that the double barrier is completely transparent for energies corre-
sponding to the eigenvalues of the potential well. 
17.6. JWKB solutions for spherically symmetric potentials 
For a spherically symmetric potential V (r), the radial part of the wave function 
R (r) satisfies the equation 
~~ [r2dR ] + 2fL [E _ V (r) _ l (l + 1)] R (r) = 0 
r2 dr 
dr 
fi2 
2fLr2 
(109) 
where E is the energy eigenvalue and the other symbols have their usual meanings 
(see Sec. 10.2). If we make the transfonnation 
R (r) = u (r) 
r 
and consider the l = 0 case, we readily obtain 
d2u 
-2 + k2 (r) u (r) = 0, 
dr 
where 
2fL 
k2 (r) = -2 [E - V (r)] 
fi 
(110) 
(111) 
(112) 
Since u (0) must be zero, the JWKB solution in the region 0 < r < rt is given by 
UJ (r) ~ ./kA(r) sin [{ k (r) dr] 
(113) 
where rt is the turning point where k (r) is zero. In order to obtain the JWKB 
solution in the region r > r t , we carry out the usual manipulation: 
I 
k (r) dr ~ U 
k dr + ~ ) -U 
k dr + ~ ) 

450 
Thus 
UI (r) 
where 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
k [Sine cos U 
kdr+ ~) 
- cos 0 s;n U 
k dr + ~ ) ] 
rr 
e = j k(r) dr + ~ 
o 
(114) 
The first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (114) goes over to an exponentially 
amplifying solution and therefore we must have 
or 
e =mr 
rr 
jk(r) dr=(n-~);r; n=I,2,3, ... 
o 
( 115) 
The solution of the above equation would lead to the allowed energy eigenvalues 
[see Problem 17.8]. Further 
[ 
r 
] 
A(-I)n+1 
UII (r) ~ $(r) exp -f 
k (r) dr 
(116) 
17.7. Application of the JWKB method to alpha decay 
In this section we will use results obtained by using the JWKB approximation to 
calculate the lifetime of nuclei emitting alpha particles. Now, the potential as seen 
by the a particle is approximately given by (see Fig. 17.10) 
V (r) = - Vo 
r < R 
ZZq2 
4;r cor 
r> R 
( 117) 
where R represents the radius of the nucleus, zq and Zq represent the charges of 
the alpha particle and of the daughter nucleus respectively (obviously z = 2); we 

The JWKB Approximation 
451 
VCr) 
~----~----~---------------. r 
b 
- Vo 
Figure 17. J Oa. The potential energy variation as seen by the alpha particle. Outside the nucleus (i.e., 
for r > R) the alpha particle experiences a repulsive Coulomb force. The points r = Rand r = h 
are the turning points. 
have assumed that a nucleus of charge (Z + 2)q decays to a (daughter) nucleus of 
charge Zq and an alpha particle of charge 2q: 
Z+2XA+4 ~ zyA + 2He4 
( a particle) 
The potential energy distribution given by Eq.(117) corresponds to the a particle 
being free inside the nucleus and bound to it; outside the nucleus, the a-particle 
experiences the repulsive Coulomb force. The tunnelling probability is given by 
where 
G 
where 
T ~ exp(-2G) 
fj} 
R 
zZq2 
---Edr 
41Tt:or 
(118) 
zZq2 
b = 
(119) 
41Tt:oE 
represents the outer turning point [see Fig. 17.lO(a)]. Making the substitution r = 
b cos2 e we readily get 
G= 
(120) 

452 
1.5 
10 
5 
-5 
-10 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Nd 144/
/
0 
Hf 174 
I 
'0 
/ 
Gd 152 
/ 
Pt 19q/ 
/ 
oSm 147 
II Th 232 
U 2351 
U 23H 
j+ 
Sm 14610 
I 
U236 
I 
Gd 1501 
oU 234 
I 
U233 
Eu 147/ 
Am 241 
Gd149? 
0 
Tb 15101 
Ra 226 
Gd 14} 
UU2j~1 
Dy 153/0.'-.-___ 
_ 
/ ,.-
Eq. (33) 
Dy 1521" Po 229 
/ f-tU"-'2:-:"30.,---Eq. (34) 
Fm 253 ... + Ac 225 
Tb 149/0+ Fm 251 
z 
Fm 250+4+ f1m2i~4 
Nd 60 
Sm 62 
Eu 63 
Gd 64 
Tb 65 
Dy 66 
Hf 72 
Pt 78 
Po 84 
At 35 
Rn 86 
Fr 87 
Ra 88 
Ac 89 
Th 90 
Po 91 
U 
92 
Am 95 
Fm 100 
/ 
Fm 255 & Fm 252 
Dy 150/ 
~;1~t Po 199 
/ 
Po197&218 
Pb 21 y... 
Po 19~ U 227 
/ 
/ 
Po216 
/ 
At217 
Fr21%+ Po215 
/1 Po 214 
I~ Po213 
/ 
Rn 215 
o a-emitters with Z below 82 
+ a-emitters with Z above 82 
-15 '-----;'';;--------:-'c:------:!7,:------+:--~ X 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Figure 17.10b. Variation oflogr [where r is in years] with X[= (Zlft) - Z2/3]. [Adapted from 
Ref. 6]. 

The JWKB Approximation 
453 
Now, if the speed of the a particles inside the nucleus is '" v then 
v 
Number of times the a-particle hits the barrier per unit time""' -
(121) 
R 
Thus the probability per second of escape (which is the inverse of the mean life-
time) is given by 
1 
v 
_ ~ _e-2G 
T 
R 
(122) 
As we will show below, in most cases R / b « 1 so that the quantity inside the 
square brackets of Eq.(120) can be written as 
COS-I~-J~ - ~: ~ ~ ~ ~ 
~ ~-2~ 
Substituting the value of b from Eq.(l19) we obtain 
( 2 2) 1/2 [ 
fR] 
2G ~ 2zZa 
~c 
~ - 2'1 [; 
where 
q2 
1 
a = -"---
4IT coTJC 
137 
represents the fine structure constant. Now, 
where m p represents the mass of the proton and since fJ, ~ 4m p we get 
2.53Z [IT 
fR] 
2G~~ 2-2'1[; 
where E is measured in MeV and we have assumed z = 2. Also 
4ITcoE 
2ZaTJ (m p c2 ) 
mpc 
E 
2Z(1.05 x 10-34) (1) (938) 
(1.67 x 10-27)(3 x 108) 
137 
E 
(123) 
(24) 

454 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
or 
Z 
h ::::::; 2.87 X 10- 15 _ 
E 
(125) 
where h is measured in meters and E in MeV. Now, the radius of the nucleus is 
approximately given by 
R::::::; (1.07 x 1O- 15 )A 1/3 (m) 
(126) 
where A represents the mass number and R is measured in meters. Thus we obtain 
Thus 
Now, 
Since 
(2E 
Cy~ 
we obtain 
v ::::::; 6.93 X 1Q6JE (mjs) 
where E is measured in MeV and v is measured in meters/second. Thus 
v 
-
::::::;6.47 x 102IEI/2A-I/3 (S-I) 
R 
Substituting in Eq.(122) we get 
I 
[ 
3.97Z 
] 
-;;::::::; [6.47 x 1021 .J£A-1/ 3]exp -
,j£ +3.09Z I / 2A 1/ 6 
or 
(127) 
(128) 
(129) 
(130) 
(131) 
~ 
1 
1 
1.724Z 
1/2 
1/6 
loglO T ~ -21.8 - -Iog lo E + - loglo A + 
;,::; - 1.34Z 
A 
(132) 
2 
3 
v E 
where T is measured in seconds and E in MeV. Let us next consider some exam-
ples: We consider the following radioactive decay 
(133) 

The JWKB Approximation 
455 
Thus Z = 82, A = 208 and E = 8.9 MeV. Substituting in Eq.(132) we get 
10glO T ~ -21.8 - 0.5 + 0.8 + 47.4 - 29.5 
~ -3.6 
(134) 
giving 
T ~ 10-4 s 
(The corresponding experimental value is '"" 3 x 10-7 s.) On the other hand, for the 
radioactive decay 
92U23S --+ 90Th234 + a(4.2 MeV) 
(135) 
we get 
loglo T ~ -21.8 - 0.3 + 0.8 + 75.7 - 31.6 
~ 23 
(136) 
or 
T ~ 1023 s 
The corresponding experimental value is 1017 s. Although the theoretical values are 
not in agreement with the experimental values, one may note the enormous range 
in the values of T, from'"" 10 17 S for U238 to '"" 3 X 10-7 s for P0212 which is also 
predicted by our approximate theoretical analysis. One may note from Equations 
(134) and (135) that it is the term 
1.724Z 
v'E 
which is most important in Eq.(132). In Ref. 6, the empirical formula 
[ Z 
2/3] 
log 
T = CI 
-
- Z 
- C2 
10 
v'E 
(137) 
has been shown to agree well with the experimental data [see Fig. l7.10(b)]. In 
Eqs.(l32) and (137) 
T is the half life in years 
Z is the atomic number of the daughter nucleus 
and 
E is the energy of the a-particle in Me V 
The two lines in Fig. 17.1 O(b) correspond to 
C I = 1.61 (MeV) 1/2, 
C2 = 28.9 
(138) 

456 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and 
C 1 = 1.70(MeV) 1/2, 
C2 = 30.0 
(139) 
For example, for the radioactive decay given by Eq.(l35) 
E ::::::; 4.2 MeV 
and 
Z = 90 
Thus using Eqs.(l38) and (139) we get 
T ::::::; 109.5 years::::::; 3 x 1016.5 S 
and 
T ::::::; 10 10.5 years::::::; 3 x 10 17.5 s 
Similarly, for the decay given by Eq.(133) we would get [using Eq.(138)] 
T ::::::; 10- 15 years::::::; 3 x 10-8 S 
Thus the empirical formula gives results close to the experimental values. It may 
be noted that if we assume A ::::::; 2Z, the term 1.34Z 1/ 2 A 1/6 in Eq.(132) will give 
1.5Z2/3. 
We next show that in both the examples discussed above 
R -« 1 
b 
as was assumed earlier in the section. For example, corresponding to the radioactive 
decay given by Eq.(l35), Eq.(l26) gives 
R ::::::; 6.59 X 10- 15 m 
Further, from Eq.(l19) 
b::::::; 6.15 X 10- 14 m 
giving 
R b ::::::; 0.11 
proving R / b « 1. Further, for the 4.2 MeV a-particle 
v::::::; 1.42 X 107 m/s 
This value of v may be compared with the value obtained from the uncertainty 
principle [see Chapter 3] 
v 
6.6 X 10-34 1.s. 
h 
f..LR 
(4 x 1.67 x 10-27 kg) x (6.59 X 10- 15 m) 
::::::; 1.50 X 107 m/s 

The lWKB Approximation 
457 
17.8. Derivation of connection formulae 
As mentioned earlier in Sections 17.1 and 17.2, the JWKB solutions are not valid 
near the turning points where k2(X) = O. Now, in the vicinity of a turning point, 
we may approximate k2 (x) by a linear function. Thus, referring to Fig. 17.1, in the 
neighbourhood of the turning point x = a, we may write 
(140) 
we assume a to be positive. Substituting the above expression for k2(x) in Eq.(1), 
we get 
d 21j; 
-
- a(x - a)1j;(x) = 0 
dx 2 
The above equation can be written in the form 
where 
We next write the JWKB solutions of Eq. (142). 
(141) 
(142) 
(143) 
For z > 0, we define K2 (z) = z [cf. Eq. (26)]: thus the JWKB solutions are 
1 
ZI/4 exp [± n 
(144) 
where 
z 
l; = J 
K (z) dz = ~ Z3/2 
(z > 0) 
(145) 
o 
On the other hand, for z < 0, 
k2 (z) = -z = Izl 
(146) 
Thus the JWKB solutions are 
I 
1 
. 
~ 
cos l; and ~/4 sm l; 
Izl 
Izl 
(147) 
where 
o 
l; = f (_Z)I/2 dz = ~ (_Z)3/2 
(z < 0) 
(148) 

458 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Combining Eqs (145) and (148), we may write 
2 
( = _ Iz13/2 
3 
(149) 
Now, the exact solutions of Eq. (142) are Ai (z) and Bi (z) which have been dis-
cussed in Appendix D. The asymptotic forms of Ai (z) and Bi (z) are given by [see 
Eqs (22)-(25) of Appendix D] 
Ai (z) 
---+ 
I 
_I; 
(150) 
e 
z-----++oo 2-J7i ZI/4 
I 
. ( 
IT) 
(151 ) 
---+ 
sm 
+-
z-----+ -CXJ -J7ilzll/4 
i; 
4 
where ( = % IZI3/2. Notice that the asymptotic forms are the JWKB solutions. Thus 
for k2 (z) = -z, the connection formula is given by 
2 
. ( 
IT) 
1_( 
~ 
sm (+ -
B 174 e 
Izl 
4 
z 
(152) 
implying that sin (l; + ~) goes over to the exponentially decaying solution. Simi-
larly, the asymptotic forms of Bi (z) are given by 
1 
H 
-=-----,---,-,-e 
2-J7i ZI/4 
Bi (z) 
---+ 
(153) 
1 
(IT) 
-J7ilzll/4cOS (+"4 
(154) 
z-----+-oo 
yielding the connection formula 
I 
( 
IT) 
1 
I; 
~ 
cos (+ -
B 1/4 e 
Izl 
4 
z 
(155) 
Connection formulae 
Since k 2 (z) = -z, Eqs (152) and (155) can be generalized to 
~ 
sin [fa k (z) dz +~] B ~ 
exp [- fZ K (z) dZ] 
(156) 
V k (Z) 
4 
V K (z) 
Z 
a 
~ 
cos [fa k (z) dz + 
~] B ~ 
exp [+ fZ K (z) dZ] 
(157) 
V k (Z) 
4 
V K (Z) 
z 
a 

The lWKB Approximation 
459 
17.9. Some historical remarks 
The approximate solutions of Eq. (1) as given by Eqs (24)-(28) are usually referred 
to as the WKB solutions. However, they were first put forward by Harold Jeffreys 
in a 1924 paper entitled On certain approximate solutions of linear differential 
equations of the second order (Ref. 7). Even the connection formulae were given 
by Jeffreys. Indeed this paper along with three other papers by Jeffreys formed 
part of a dissertation highly commended by the adjudicators for the Adams Prize 
of the University of Cambridge for the year 1923. The applications of the JWKB 
solutions to problems in quantum mechanics came much later and were given by 
Wentzel (Ref. 8), Kramers (Ref. 9) and Brillouin (Ref. 10). We feel that since the 
solutions were first put forward by Jeffreys, it should be referred to as the JWKB 
method; this is indeed what has been done by Froman and Froman (see Ref. 11). 
17.10. Problems 
Problem 17.1 Consider the symmetric linear profile given by 
v (x) = y lxi, 
y > ° 
Use the JWKB quantization condition [Eq. (44)] to obtain the following 
En = [3 (n + D~2fiy]2/3 ; n = 0,1, ... 
4(2m) 
(158) 
(159) 
Problem 17.2 In continuation of Problem 17.1, consider the more general power 
law profile given by 
v (x) = y Ixl a
; 
y > 0, a > ° 
Show that the energy eigenvalues are given by 
[( 
I) 
I/a 
(3 
1)]2a/(a+2) 
n + -
Jr fiy 
r - + -
E -
2 
2 
a 
n -
2(2m)1/2r G) r (1 +~) 
[Hint: You may use the following relation 
I f t z- I (l -
t)w-I 
o 
dt = B (Z, W) = r (Z) r (W)] 
r (Z + W) 
(160) 
(161 ) 
(162) 

460 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Problem 17.3 Show that the JWKB solution given by Eq. (23) would represent 
an accurate solution of Eq. (l) provided 
(163) 
[Hint: Obtain the differential equation satisfied by 1/1 (x) as given by Eq. (23).] 
Problem 17.4 Show that the equation 
d2y 
dy 
dx 2 + f (x) dx + g (x) y (x) = 0 
(164) 
can be transformed to the form given by Eq. (1) if we make the transformations 
with 
>fr (x) ~ y (x) exp [ ~ J f(x) dX] 
2 
I df 
1,2 
k (x) = g (x) - -- -
- j 
(x) 
2dx 
4 
(165) 
(\66) 
Problem 17.5 Consider a double well symmetric potential as shown in Fig. 
17.11. Using the JWKB connection formulae, show that (for E < Vo) the energy 
eigenvalues are determined by solving the following transcendental equation 
cot [f. k (x) dX] d~ 
exp [ -l K (x) dX] 
(167) 
where the + and -
signs on the right-hand side correspond to symmetric and 
anti symmetric solutions respectively; in the above equation x = ±a and x = ±b 
represent the turning points. The above equation is not expected to give accurate 
results for E close to Vo (why?). 
[Hint: Start with an exponentially decaying solution in Region V (x > h) and use 
connection formulae to obtain solutions in Region III (-a < x < a).] 
Problem 17.6 
(a) Use the results of the previous problem to determine the energy levels of a 
double oscillator given by 
(168) 
(b) Obtain the exact solution for the above potential energy distribution and com-
pare the exact eigenvalues with the corresponding JWKB result. 

The IWKB Approximation 
461 
v (x) 
-a 
a 
x 
Figure 17.11. A double well potential which is symmetric about x = O. The points x = ±a and 
x = ±b are the turning points [adapted from Ref. 31. 
Problem 17.7 Consider the three-dimensional isotropic oscillator for which (see 
Sec. 10.7): 
For I = 0, solve Eq. (115) to obtain 
E = (2n + ~) flw; n = 0, 1, 2, ... 
which happens to be the exact result! 
[Hint: The integration has to be carried out in a way similar to that given in 
Example 17.1.] 
Problem 17.8 
(a) The deuteron nucleus consists of a neutron and a proton and the neutron-
proton interaction can be approximately described by the following potential 
energy variation: 
V (r) = - Vo e-r/ a 
(169) 
(see also Problem 10.8). Carry out the integration in Eq. (115) and derive the 
transcendental equation which would give the eigenvalues. 
(b) For the values of various parameters given in Problem 10.6, solve the tran-
scendental equation to obtain the energy eigenvalue. 
(c) Plot the JWKB and exact solutions having the same slope at r = 0. 

462 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Problem 17.9 
(a) Consider the triangular barrier for which the potential energy variation IS 
given by (see Fig. l7.12) 
Vex) = 0 
x<O 
Vo - ax 0 < x < a 
(170) 
o 
x>a 
Show that (for E < Va) the JWKB tunnelling probability is given by 
... 
--------~~--------_+------~~x 
a 
a 
Figure 17.12. The triangular barrier. 
(171) 
where 
g= (~y!3 
/1 2a 2 
Vo, 
E 
8= 
Vo 
(b) The above potential energy variation is applicable to the field emission of 
electrons from a metal surface. Then Va = E F + <p and a = (-q) F where 
E F represents the Fermi energy, <p the work function, q « 0) the electronic 
charge and F the strength of the electric field. Assume T = 0 K and calculate 
the dependence of the electric current the electric field. 
Problem 17.10 The potential energy distribution given by Eq. (169) can also be 
(approximately) applied to a quantum well laser and to the a-decay problem. For a 
quantum well laser 
Va 
a=-
LD 
(172) 

The JWKB Approximation 
463 
where Lois the Debye length and is typically few nanometers. Further 50 me V ~ 
Vo < 500 me V. Assuming 
Vo::::' 50meV 
and 
L D ::::' 1 nm 
show that g ::::' 1.1. 
On the other hand, in the a-decay problem for Vo ~ 20 MeV with a ~ 3R 
(R ~ 10- 14 m being the radius ofthe nucleus) show that g ::::' 15. 
Problem 17.11 For the potential energy function given by Eq. (169) one can obtain 
exact solutions of the SchrOdinger equation in terms of the Airy functions. Calcu-
late the corresponding tunnelling probability and compare with the corresponding 
JWKB results. 
Problem 17.12 Obtain the JWKB eigenvalues for the following potential energy 
distribution 
v = - Vo sech2 (~) 
(173) 
Problem 17.13 In the radial part of the SchrOdinger equation [Eq. (109)] make the 
following transformations 
R(r) 
1 
- u(r) 
(174) 
r 
r 
eX 
(75) 
ao 
X (x) = u(x) e-x / 2 
(176) 
to obtain 
(177) 
where 
2ma2 
[ 
__ 
0 e2x 
E -
V(aoe X ) 
112 
(1+1.)2112 
] 
2 
e-2x 
2ma5 
(178) 
and ao is a conveniently chosen length parameter. Notice that as r goes from 0 to 
00, x goes from -00 to +00. Thus show that the eigenvalue equation [Eq. (44)] 
leads to 
(179) 

464 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where 
2 
2m [ 
(l + ~)2 ti2] 
k] (r) = fi2 
E -
VCr) -
2mr2 
(180) 
and r] and r2 are the turning points of kJ (r). 
Problem 17.14 Using the results of the previous problem, find the eigenvalues 
corresponding to the Coulomb potential 
17.11. Solutions 
Ze2 
VCr) =--
r 
(181 ) 
Solution 17.5 For V (x) as shown in Fig. 17. 11, the corresponding variation of 
k2(x) for E < Va and E > Va are shown in Figs 17.13 and 17.14 respectively. 
Notice that for E < Va, there are 4 turning points and for E > Va there are only 2 
turning points. We assume E < Va (see Fig. 17.13). We start with an exponentially 
E<~ mw'd.' 
Figure 17.13. For the Vex) variation as shown in Fig. 17.11, the variation of k2(x) with x for 
E < Va. 
decaying solution in Region V (x > b) 
>frv (x) ~ .lw exp [ - { 
K (x) dX] 
x>h 

The JWKB Approximation 
465 
This would go over to (in the region a < x < b) 
1/I[V (x) 
~ sin [[ k (x) dx + ~ ] 
~ sin [(8+ f) - ({ k (x) dx + ~ ) ] 
a<x<b 
where 
b 
e = f k (x) dx 
a 
Thus 
1/1 [V (x) 
~ [cose cos ({ k (x) dx + ~ ) 
+ sin 0 sin U 
k (x) dx + ~)l a < x <h 
which would go over to 
1/1 III (x) 
~ [cose exp (( dX) 
+ t sin 0 cxp ( -{ KdX) ] 
in the region -a < x < +a. The condition that the wave function has to be either a 
symmetric (:::} 1/1' (0) = 0) or an antisymmetric function of x (:::} 1/1 (0) = 0) leads 
to Eq. (167). 
Solution 17.6 Figures 17.13 and 17.14 correspond to the double well potential 
with 
We define 
ex = (2E 
V~ 
and 
"0 = !2VO 
liw 
(182) 
(183) 

466 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
E > ~ mw 2 d.2 
Figure 17.14. For the V(x) variation as shown in Fig. 17.1 I. the variation of k2(x) with x for 
E> Vo. 
We first assume E < Vo (i.e. a < ao). Now 
b 
e = J 
k(x) dx 
a 
+a J 
[a 2 -
~2]1/2 d~ = ~ a 2 
-a 
where 
~ = J 
mfiw (x - d) 
Other integrations can easily be carried out. For E > Vo, we use Eg. (44). The final 
results are 
(i) For E < Vo 
(0 < a < ao) 
( IT 
2) 
I 
[ 
(2 
2)1/2 
2 
lao] 
cot "2 a 
= ±2" exp -ao ao - a 
+ a cosh-
~ 
(184) 
and 
(ii) For E > Vo (a > ao) 
IT 
2 
(2 
2)1/2 
2. -I ao 
( 
I) 
-a + ao a - ao 
+ a Sill 
-
= 
m + -
IT 
2 
a 
2 
(185) 

The IWKB Approximation 
467 
The corresponding wave functions are given by (for E < Vo): 
(186) 
Similarly, 
(187) 
and 
1/J1II(~) = 
(~2 _C(2)J/4 [cos (~a2) exp(n 
+ ~ sin (~a2) expc- n ] 
(188) 
where 
XI 
-(1 
~(~) = f K(X) dx = f 
(~2 - ( 2)1/2 d~ 
x 
~ 
(189) 
Figure 17.15 shows the normalized energy eigenvalues a 2 for the double oscillator 
as a function of a o2; a large value of ao (and hence of a) implies a large distance be-
tween the centers of the two oscillators. The solid and the dashed curves correspond 
to the exact and the JWKB calculations, respectively. As a --+ 00, a 2 (= 2E / liw) 
approaches (2n + 1) and the levels become two-fold degenerate; thus the system 
becomes equivalent to two independent harmonic oscillators. Further, for a --+ 0, 
we have the eigenvalue structure of a single harmonic oscillator. The exact solution 
for the double oscillator problem is given in terms of the confluent hypergeometric 
functions. For V (x) given by Eq. (167), the Schrodinger equation is 
d21/J 
2m { 
1 
2 
2 } 
-
+ -
E - -mw [Ixl - d] 
1/J = ° 
dx 2 
1i2 
2 
(190) 

468 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
In terms of the variables 
rY= (2 ) 
1/2 
~W 
(x - d) for x > 0 
and 
(l91) 
r= (2 
y/2 
~W 
(x + d) for x < 0 
Eq. (189) becomes 
Figure 17.15. Normalized energy eigenvalues for the double oscillator as a function of 0'02. 
d21/f 
[ 
1 
1 2] 
-+ V+---rY 
1/f(rY) =0 
drY2 
2 
4 
for x > 0 
( 192) 
and 
d 21/f 
[ 
1 
1 2] 
-
+ v + - - - r 
1/f(r) = 0 
dr 2 
2 
4 
for x < 0 
(193) 
where 
l! = ~ (2E _ 1) = ~(a2 -
1) 
2 
liw 
2 
(194) 
The boundary conditions for solving Eqs (191) and (192) are 1/f ---+ 0 as rY ---+ 00 
and r ---+ -00. For a = 0, rY = rand Eqs (191) and (192) become equivalent to 
the linear harmonic oscillator problem and l! will then be 0, 1, 2, .... The solution 
of Eq. (191) that vanishes for rY ~ 00 is the parabolic cylinder functions Du(rY), 
(see Ref. 12) which are related to the confluent hypergeometric function through 

The JWKB Approximation 
469 
the relation 
(195) 
Since Dv(o-) ~ 0 as 0- ~ 00 we must choose Du(o-) for x > 0 and Du( -r) 
for r < O. In any case, since V ( - x) = V (x), the wave functions will be either 
symmetric or anti symmetric in x; thus, we need only the solution for x > O. The 
eigenvalue equation for the symmetric and anti symmetric wave functions are 
D~(o-)Ix=o = 0 
symmetric 
(196) 
and 
anti symmetric 
(197) 
The solution given by the above equations are plotted in Fig. 17.15. As mentioned 
earlier, for a ~ 0, the solutions correspond to a single oscillator and for a ~ 00 
we have two-fold degeneracy corresponding to two non-interacting oscillators. 
Solution 17.8 
where 
E 
1 
8 = --
and r( =aln-
Vo 
8 
For a bound state - Vo < E < 0 implying 0 < 8 < 1. If we make the substitution 
~2 = e-r/ll - 8 
we obtain 
f 
[ 
je-r/ll - 8] 
k (r) dr = -g Je- r/ll - 8 - v'& tan- I 
8 
where 
!81'Voa2 
g = 
/;2:::::: 3.64 
for the numerical values given in Problem 10.8. The transcendental equation deter-
mining the energy eigenvalues is given by 
r;; -1!1=8 ( 1)][ 
~ 
- v8tan V ----e--8- = 
n - 4 g 

470 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
For g = 3.64 we obtain 
8:::::: 0.0593 
Thus 
E :::::: -2.372 MeV 
which may be compared with the exact value of -2.223 MeV. In Fig.17.16 we 
have plotted the JWKB and exact wave functions having the same slope at r = O. 
'" (P) 
10 
-----+p(=rla) 
Figure 17.16. Exact and JWKB ground state wave functions corresponding to Eq. (III) (l = 0) for 
the potential energy distribution given by Eq. (169) (adapted from Ref. 3). 
Solution 17.9 
(b) The current density is given by 
J = (-qe) I T :t n (Px) dpx 
(198) 
where n (Px) d P x represents the number of electrons per unit volume whose 
Px lies between Px and Px + dpx' Now at low temperatures (i.e. T « EF / k), 
the Fermi function is approximately given by: 
F(E) = 
o 
for E < EFo 
for E > EFo 
(see Sec. 6.9). Using the expression for density of states (see Sec. 6.8.1), we 
get 
n (Px) dpx = :3 dpx II dPr dpx 
2rr 
[2f1l(Et"-Ex)JI/2 
:3 dpx I de I 
PI dPI 
o 
0 

The IWKB Approximation 
471 
where we have used polar coordinates and PI = (p} + py2) 1/2. Thus 
47Tm 
n (Px) dpx = ~ 
(EF - Ex) dpx 
Substituting this in Eq. (198), we get 
(199) 
( 
2)1/2 
. 
where 'f} = EFo -
Ex, 4> = Vo -
E Fo ' f3 = (4/3a) 2mlli 
. Makmg a 
binomial expansion of (l + 'f} j¢J ) 3/2, retaining up to the first -order term and 
extending the upper limit to 00, we get 
J ~ Ao F 2 exp (-Bol F) 
where we have used a = Iql F and 
An 
Bo 
Iql2 
87T h <1> 
1.54 X 10-6 
2 
----Aim 
<1> 
-lqll/2..!!!:.. 
<1>3/2 
4 
(2 )1/2 
3 
1i2 
6.85 X 109 <1>3/2 V 1m 
(200) 
(201) 
(202) 
<1> = 4>1 Iq I being the work function measured in electron volts. Equation 
(200) is known as the Fowler-Nordheim field emission formula and agrees 
with experimental data. Notice that the field emission (sometimes referred to 
as cold emission) is due to the tunnelling phenomenon and hence is a purely 
quantum mechanical effect. 
Solution 17.11 The solution of the one-dimensional SchrOdinger equation is given 
by 
x < 0 
C Ai(~) + D Bi(~) 0 < x < a 
(203) 
F eik(x-a) 
x>a 
where 
( 2m )1/3 
~ = --
[Vo - ax - E] 
1i2a 2 
and Ai(~) and Bi(~) are the Airy functions [see Appendix D]. Continuity of 1/f(x) 
and d 1/f I dx at x = 0 and at x = a readily gives as tunnelling probability 
_I F 12 _I aoc~ -
a~ Co 12 
Texact -
-
A 
alc~ -
a~cl 
(204) 

472 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where 
ao = Bi' (~o) + iJg8 Bi (~o) 
al = 
Bi'(~d+iJg8Bi(~l) 
Co = Ai' (~o) + iJg8 Ai (~o) 
CI = Ai'(~o)+iJg8Ai(~I) 
~o = ~(x = 0) = g(l - 8) 
~I = -g8 
and use has been made of the Wronskian [see, e.g. Ref. 13] 
W[Ai, Bi] = Ai(~) Bi' (O -
Ai ' (~) Bi(~) = ~ 
JT 
(205) 
In Figs 17.17 and 17.18 we have plotted the variations of Tex act and TJWKB with 
0.8 
0.6 
T 
0.4 
0.2 
o 
, 
JWKB 
g=O.! 
I 
I 
· ----~I----~ 
0 .. 2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
£ = E/Vo 
Figure 17.17. Variation of Texact and TJWKB with 8 for g = 0.1 [After Ref. 141. 
8 for g = 0.1 and g = 1.0. In Ref. 14 it has been shown that the JWKB result is 
accurate for g ::: 0.1. 
Solution 17.12 
2mVo [E 
(X)] 
k2(x ) = ~ 
Vo + sech2 -;; 
(206) 

The JWKB Approximation 
473 
g= 1 
--
0,8 
exact 
0.6 
0,2 
0,6 
0.8 
£ = ElVa 
Figure 17.18. Variation of Texact and TJWKB with e for g = 1.0 [After Ref. 14]. 
and the quantization condition [Eq. (44)] becomes 
( 2mVoa 2 )1/2+ja(8) 
( 
1) 
tz2 
[sech2~ - 8]1/2 d~ = 
n + 2" 
Jr 
(207) 
-a(8) 
where 
x 
E 
r;; 
~ = -, 8 = -- and ex = sech- 1v8 
a 
Vo 
(208) 
For bound states E < 0 and, since E can never be less than the minimum value of 
V, we have 
0<8<1 
Equation (206) requires the solution of the integral 
If 
+a(8) 
1(8) = j [sech2~ - 8]1/2 d~ 
-a(8) 
f(x) 
lex) = j F(x, y) dy 
g(x) 
(209) 
(210) 
(211 ) 

474 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
then 
Therefore 
lex) 
dJ ! aF 
df 
dg 
-
= 
-
dy + F[x, f(x)] -
- F[x, g(x)] -
dx 
ax 
dx 
dx 
g(x) 
+0' 
-
= --
[sech2~ - 8]1/2 d~ 
dJ 
1 ! 
d8 
2 
-0' 
(212) 
(213) 
In our case, the last two terms vanish because the limits are the turning points where 
the integrand vanishes. In fact, since this always happens, this technique is very 
often used in the evaluation of the integral appearing in the JWKB quantization 
condition. If we now make the transformation 
17 = sinh ~ 
then 
d17 
d17 = cosh ~ d~ ===? d~ = 
2 1/2 
(1+17) 
and Eq. (212) becomes 
dJ 
d8 
Simple integration gives 
IT 
J (8) = IT (1 - vie) 
(214) 
where we have used the condition J (1) = 0 [see Eq. (209)J. Thus, the energy 
eigenvalues are given by 
En = _112 [(2mvoa2)1/2 _ (n + ~)]2 
2ma2 
112 
2 
(215) 
In this case we can also obtain an exact solution of the Schrbdinger equation; the 
final result is 
_112 [v 
( 
1)]2 
En = 2ma2 2 -
n + 2 
(216) 

The lWKB Approximation 
475 
where 
(217) 
The JWKB eigenvalues are recovered if the first tenn in the brackets is large with 
respect to 1. The eigenfunctions are 
1/1(0') = [1 -
O'r(v-I)/2 W(o') 
(218) 
where a = - sinh2(x/a) and W(o') is the polynomial solution of the hypergeo-
metric equation. 
Solution 17.13 The JWKB quantization condition is given by 
or 
where 
with 
fi 
r2 ( 
2 )1/2 
2m f 
Ze2 
(I + 4) 112 
(1) 
-
E + -
-
dr = n + -
n 
11 2 
r 
2mr2 
2 
rl 
~2 
1(8) = f [-8 -
Veff(~)]1/2 d~ 
8= 
~= 
a= 
~l 
Z 
a 
Vet·t (~) = -- + -
. . 
~ 
~2 
E 
Eo' 
Eo = 
r 
ao = 
ao 
1 ( 
1 r 
2 1 + 2 
me4 
112 
112 
me2 
Following the method used in the previous solution, we obtain 
dl 
nZ 
---
d8 
483/ 2 
(219) 
(220) 
(221) 
(222) 
Further, the minimum value of Velf (~) is - Z2 /4a, which occurs at ~ = 2a / Z. 
Thus, 
(223) 

476 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
because ~ 1 becomes equal to ~2. Equation (221) can now be integrated. Using Eq. 
(222), we obtain 
Z2 
8 = ----_::_ 
2(n + 1+ 1)2 
(224) 
which is also the exact result with total quantum number (n + I + I). 
17.12. References and suggested reading 
I. Y.L. Ginzberg, The Propagation of Electromagnetic Waves in Plasmas, Perg-
amon Press, New York (1964). 
2. M.1. Adams, An Introduction to Optical Waveguides, John Wiley, Chichester 
(1981). 
3. A.K. Ghatak, R.L. Gallawa and I.e. Goyal, Modified Airy Function and WKB 
Solutions to the Wave Equation, National Institute of Standards & Technology 
Monograph #176, US Government Printing Office, Washington (1991). 
4. J. Heading, An Introduction to Phase Integral Methods, Mathuen and Co., 
London (1962). 
5. S. Gasiorowicz, Quantum Physics, John Wiley, New York (1969). 
6. E.K. Hyde, I. Perlman and G.T. Seaborg, The Nuclear Properties of the Heavy 
Elements, Vol. I, Prentice-Hall, USA (1964). 
7. H. Jeffreys, On Certain Approximate Solutions of Linear Differential 
Equations olSecond Order, Proc. London Math. Soc., Vol. 23, No.2, 428-436 
(1923). 
8. G. Wentzel, Eine Verallgemeinerung der quantenbedingung fur die Zweeke 
der Wallenmechanik, Zeits. f. Physik, Vol. 38,518-529 (1926). 
9. H.A. Kramers, Wellenmechanik und Halbzahlige Quantisierung, Zeits. f. Physik, 
Vol. 39, 828-840 (1926). 
10. L. Brillouin, The Undulatory Mechanics of Schrodinger, Compt. Rend. Acad. 
Sci., Paris, Vol. 183,24-26 (1926). 
11. N. Froman and P.O. Froman, JWKB Approximation: Contributions to the 
Theory, North Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam (1965). 

The lWKB Approximation 
477 
12. W. Magnus, F. Oberhettinger and R.P. Soni, Formulas and Theorems for the 
Special Functions of Mathematical Physics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin (1966). 
13. A.K. Ghatak, I.e. Goyal and S.1. Chua, Mathematical Physics, Macmillan 
India Limited, New Delhi (1995). 
14. A.K. Ghatak, E.G. Sauter and LC. Goyal, Validity of the JWKB formula for 
a triangular potential barrier, European Journal of Physics, 18, 199-204 
(1997). 

Chapter 18 
Addition of Angular Momenta: 
The Clebsch-Gordan Coefficients 
Quantum Mechanics is a framework theory which according to prevailing present 
opinion, applies to every kind of physical system ... 
-
ABNER SHIMONyl 
18.1. Introduction 
When a system is made of composite parts which interact with each other, it is the 
total angular momentum which is conserved and is of great importance. Indeed, 
the angular momenta to be combined may pertain to the same particle, namely, its 
orbital and spin angular momenta; or may pertain to the orbital (or spin) angular 
momenta of two different particles. 
As an example, we consider the hydrogen atom problem. If we include the 
spin-orbit interaction, the Hamiltonian is given by (see Sec. 20.5) 
H = Ho+ HI 
(1) 
where 
Ho = 
/12 
__ V2 + V(r) 
2m 
H'= ~(r)L . s = ~(r) (Lxsx + Lysv + LzsJ 
and 
I Abner Shimony in Conceptual Foundations oj'Quantum Mechanics in The New Phvsics (Editor: 
Paul Davis), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1989. 
478 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

Addition of Angular Momenta 
479 
It can be immediately seen that whereas L z and Sz commute with Ho, they do not 
commute with H'. Indeed, 
[Lz' H] = [Lz, Ho] + [Lz, H'] 
~(r) ([Lz' Lx] Sx + [Lz, Lv] Sy + [Lv Lz] sz) 
i Pi~(r) (Lvsx - Lxsy) 
where we have used the results of Sec. 9.4. Thus Lz does not commute with H. 
Similarly 
[sz, H] = i Pi~(r) (Lxsy - Lysx) = - [Lz, H] 
immediately giving 
(2) 
where l z = Lz + Sz represents the z-component of the total angular momentum 
operator. Thus 1, (and similarly lx and ly) commute with H and are constants of 
motion. 
We next consider the helium atom, the Hamiltonian of which is given by (see 
Sec. 22.2) 
H = Ho+ H' 
(3) 
where 
and 
e2 
e2 
H ' =-=---
rl2 
irl - r2i 
Once again LIz and L 2z commute with Ho but do not commute with H'; indeed 
(4) 
implying that the components of the total angular momentum are constants of 
motion. 
In this chapter we will consider the addition of angular momenta quite generally. 
Let Jl and J2 denote two angular momentum operators satisfying the commutation 
relations (see Eq. 3 of Chapter 13): 
[llx,llv] 
[hx, h y ] 
(5) 
and other equations can be written in cyclic order2; we are using a system of units 
in which Pi = 1. We also have 
[it, llx] = 0 = U~, hx], etc. 
2 Often the commutation relations are written in the following form 
JxJ=iJ 

480 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
We assume that the components of Jl and J2 commute with each other, i.e. 
[llx, hx] = 0 = [hr, h y], etc. 
We define the total angular momentum operator J: 
Now 
[ly, lz] = lylz - lJy 
(fly + h y) (lIz + hz) - (lIz + hz) (lly + hI') 
(flyllZ - llzlly) + (hyhz - hJ2y) 
i (llx + hx) = ilx 
(6) 
(7) 
implying that the components of J satisfy the same commutation relations as that 
of an angular momentum operator. Thus (see also Problem 18.1) 
where 
12 = J; + J; + lz2 = (llx + hx)2 + ... + ... 
lt + fj + 2JI . J2 
(8) 
(9) 
where we have used the relation JI . J2 = J2 . JI because components of JI com-
mute with components of J2. Since the total angular momentum vector is a con-
stant of motion we will, in this chapter, construct vectors which are simultaneous 
eigenvectors of 12 and lz. 
Let 0/ 1 (jl, md be the simultaneous eigenvector of 112 and liz, i.e. 
(10) 
and 
llzo/I(jl, md = mI'Ij;I(jI, md 
(see Sec. 13.2). Similarly let 0/2(h, m2) represent the simultaneous eigenvectors 
of 1'] and hz. Now the operators ll, li, liz and hz commute with each other and 
the product functions 
(II) 
represent a set of simultaneous eigenvectors of 112, li. liz and hz. Further, for 
given values of )1 and h there will be (2)1 + I) possible values of m I and (2h + I) 
possible values of m2. Thus there will be (2)1 + 1)(2h + 1) possible eigenvectors. 
because 

Addition of Angular Momenta 
481 
Now, the operators J12, fl, J2 and Jz also commute with each other (see Prob-
lem 18.1) and thus one can construct vectors ¢(}I, 12, ), m) which are simultaneous 
eigenvectors of the operators Jr, fl, J2 and Jz belonging to the eigenvalues}1 (}I + 
I), 12(12 + I), } (j + 1) and m respectively. In Sec. 18.2 we will show that the 
allowed values of } are 
Allowed values of } 
}I + 12, }I + 12 - 1, ... I}I - 121 
and since for each value of } there will be (2) + 1) values of m, the total number 
of ¢ functions (for given values of }I and h) will be 
j=j]+h 
L (2) + 1) = (2Jt + 1)(212 + 1) 
j=lj]-hl 
which is the same as the number of 1/f functions. 
(12) 
We can choose either the 1/f functions or the ¢ functions as the base states and 
can represent each of the 1/f functions as a linear combination of ¢ functions and 
conversely. Now the 1/f functions as well as the ¢ functions form orthonormal sets 
and if we normalize them then the transformation 
is unitary and the coefficients 
are known as the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. The coefficients play an extremely 
important role in spectroscopy and also in scattering theorl. The general formulae 
for calculating these coefficients are complicated. In Sec. 18.3 we will calculate 
these coefficients for }1 = 12 = ~ and give tables for calculation of these coef-
ficients for 12 = ~ and 12 = 1 (for arbitrary values of }I). In Problem 18.3 we 
will calculate these coefficients for }I = 1 and 12 = ~. It can be easily seen that 
1/f (j, , 12, m" m2) are eigenfunctions of Jz belonging to the eigenvalue (m, + m2) 
but, in general, they are not eigenfunctions of J 2. In Sec. 18.4 we discuss the 
isospin and show how Clebsch-Gordan coefficients can be used in pion-nucleon 
systems. 
3 Some of the uses of Clebsch-Gordan coefficients in spectroscopy problems are discussed in 
Chapter 19. Applications in scattering theory can be found in Ref I and 2 and most of the texts in 
nuclear physics. 

482 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
18.2. The possible values of j 
Let us first consider the case i, = 1 and 12 = ~; thus m, takes the values 1,0 and 
-1 and m2 takes the values ~, -
~. Consequently, there are six 1/f functions 
1/f (I, ~), 1/f (0, ~), 1/f (-1, ~) 
1/f (1, -D, 1/f (0, -~) and 1/f (-1, -~) 
(15) 
where we have omitted the values of i, and 12- The numbers inside the parenthesis 
denote the values of m, and m2. Clearly, the values of m(= m, + m2) are 
3' '+' , 
d 
3 
2' 2' -2' 
2' -2' an 
-
2 
respectively. The maximum value of m is ~ and thus one of the i values must be 
~ which will give rise to four states with m = 
~, ~, -
~, -
~. The remaining two 
states must correspond to i = 
~ with m = 
~ and -
~. Thus the allowed values of 
i are ~ and ~ and the corresponding ¢ vectors being 
and 
¢ G, D, ¢ (~, -~) 
where the numbers inside the paranthesis are the values of i and m; once again we 
have omitted the values of i1 and h. Now 
because these are the only functions which correspond to m = ~. Further, since 
1/f (0, ~) and 1/f (1, -~) correspond to m = 
~,¢ (~, ~) and ¢ (~, ~) should be 
linear combinations of 1/f (0, D and 1/f (1, -
~). Similarly ¢ G, - D and ¢ G, - ~) 
should be linear combinations of 1/f (0, - D and 1/f ( -1, D and finally 
Let us next consider the general case and assume, without any loss of generality, 
that i, :::: 12- The maximum values of m1 and m2 will be i, and 12 and therefore 
the maximum value of j will be 
(16) 
and there will be only one 1/f vector and only one ¢ vector which will correspond 
to m = i, + 12 which should be equal. Thus 
(17) 

Addition of Angular Momenta 
483 
The next largest value of m will be i, + 12 - 1 which will give rise to two 1jf vectors 
1jf(j"12 - 1) and 1jf(j, - 1, h) 
(18) 
and two ¢ vectors 
¢(j, + 12, i, + 12 - 1) and ¢(j, + 12 -
1, i, + 12 - 1) 
(19) 
where we have omitted i" i2 inside the brackets. The next value of m will be 
i, + 12 - 2 which give rise to three 1jf vectors and three ¢ vectors. In general, for 
m = i, + 12 - k, we will have the following (k + 1) 1jf vectors 
and the following ¢ vectors 
¢(j, + 12, i, + 12 - k); ¢(j] + 12 - I, iI + 12 - k); ... 
¢(j] + 12 - k, iI + 12 - k) 
(21) 
Each ¢ vector can be expressed as a linear combination of the (k + 1) 1jf vectors, 
the constant coefficients being the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. Now, since i] 2: 12 
the maximum value of k should be such that 12 - k equals -12 [see Eq. (20)] or 
kmax = 212 and therefore 
(22) 
Thus the allowed values of i are 
Allowed values of i 
i, + 12, i, + 12 - I, ... , i, - 12 
(23) 
18.3. Clebsch-Gordan coefficients for j1 = h = ~ 
. 
. 
I 
J, = J2 = 2: 
For il = 12 = 4, m] = ±4 and m2 = ±4 giving four 1jf functions 
1jf (4, 4), 1jf (4, - 4) , 1jf ( - 4, 4) and 1jf (-4, -4 ) 
The allowed values of i are 1 and 0 and hence the four ¢ functions are 
¢(1,1), ¢(1,0), ¢(1, -1) and ¢(O,O) 
Obviously 
¢(1, 1) = 1jf (4, 4) 
(24) 

484 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and 
(25) 
Further 
(26) 
and 
(27) 
Now 
L¢Y(l,1) = L 0/ (~, ~) = (11)-0/ G, ~) + (12)-0/ (~, D 
or, using Eq. (31) of Chapter 13, we get 
v'2¢Y(l, 0) = 0/ (-~, D + 0/ G, -~) 
Thus 
¢Y (1, 0) = ~ [0/ ( - ~, ~) + 0/ (~, - ~) J 
(28) 
and since ¢y(0, 0) must be orthogonal to ¢Y(l, 0) we must have [see also Problem 
18.2(c)] 
¢y(0,0) = ~ [-0/ (-~, ~) + 0/ (~, -DJ 
(29) 
(within an arbitrary phase factor). It can be easily seen that by using ladder opera-
tors on ¢Y(1, 0) or on ¢YO, -1) we cannot get ¢y(0, 0) (see also Problem 18.2). We 
can thus write 
¢Y(l, 1) 
0/ G, ~) 
(~ 
0 
0 
D 
0/ G, -D 
¢Y(l,0) 
1 
1 
.)2 
.)2 
(30) 
¢yO, -I) 
0 
0 
0/ (-~, ~) 
1 
1 
.)2 
-.)2 
¢y(0, 0) 
0/ (-~, -D 
Singlet and triplet states 
The matrix elements are the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. Corresponding to ) 
o there is only one state ¢y(0, 0) which is therefore known as a singlet state; for 
) = 1 there are three states [¢Y(1, 1), ¢Y(l, 0) and ¢Y(1, -I)] and therefore) = 1 
is referred to as the triplet state. Notice that the singlet state is antisymmetric with 
respect to the interchange of m 1 and m2 whereas the triplet state is symmetric (see 
also Sec. 22.6). 
The Clebsch-Gordan coefficients for 12 = ~ and 12 = 1 are tabulated4 in Tables 
18.1 and 18.2. We consider the case 12 = ~. For an arbitrary value of) 1 the possible 
values of ) would be 
. 
1 
Jl +-2 
1 
and 
)1 --
2 
4 Tables 18.1 and 18.2 have been adapted from Ref. 3. 

Addition of Angular Momenta 
485 
i= 
.h + 1 
i] 
il - 1 
Table 
18.1. Clebsch-Gordan Coefficients for 
. 
I (. 
I 
I' 
I 
. 
) 
.12 = 2; iI, 2' m, m2 .II, 2,.I m 
i= 
. , 
.II + 2 
. , 
il -
2 
1 
m2 = 2: 
1 
i, +m + 2: 
\ 
2il + 1 
1 
i, -m +-2 
-\ 
2il + 1 
1 
i, - m +-2 
\ 
2iJ + 1 
1 
.h +m + 2: 
\ 
2iJ + 1 
Table 18.2. Clebsch-Gordan Coefficients for h = I; (i!, I, m,m2I.h, I, im) 
m2 = 1 
m2 =0 
m2 =-1 
(j, + m)(j, + m + I) 
(jl -m + 1)(jt +m + 1) 
(j1-m)Ch-m+l) 
(2i, + 1 )(2i, + 2) 
(2i, + 1)(j, + I) 
(2i] + 1 )(2i] + 2) 
Ci] + m)(jt - m + 1) 
m 
(.h - m) Ci] + m + I) 
2i! (jl + I) 
~.h Ci] + I) 
2i,CiI + I) 
Ch-m)(h+m) 
Cit +m + l)(h +m) 
2i, (2i, + 1) 
i, (2i, + 1) 
2.h (2i! + 1) 
Thus using the top row of Table 18.1, we can write 
JI + 2: + m 
. 
I 
1 
1 
.] 
( 
) 
2j, + 1 1/f 
JI, 2,m l =m - 2,m2 = 2 
+ 
jt + 1. - m (1 
1 
1 ) 
2 
,/, 
J'I -
ml = m + - m2 = --
(31) 
2j1 + 1 
If' 
, 2' 
2' 
2 
If we assume j1 = 4, then we would readily get Eqs. (24), (25) and (28) corre-
sponding to m = 1, -1 and 0 respectively. Similarly, using the bottom row of the 
table, we can write for ¢(j1, 4, j1 - 4, m). Now, for an electron in a hydrogen atom 
j1 = land 
,f, (l 1 
1 ) 
( I ) 
( Rnl Y
1m/ ) 
If' 
'2' ml, 2 = Rnl(r)y1m/(e, ¢) 
0 
= 
0 
(32) 
corresponding to the spin up state of the electron. Similarly we can write the wave 
function for the spin down state. 

486 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Example 18.1 As an example of using Table 18.1, let us consider the n = 3, I = 2 
state of the hydrogen atom. Since 
1 
)1 = I = 2 
and .h = s = 2 
we will have j = 
~ and ~. For the j = 
~ state we will have to use the first row of 
Table 18.1 to obtain 
</> ()I = 2,.h = 1, ) = )1 + 1, m) 
t+m+l (. . 1 
I 
I) 
= 
5 
1/1 
JI = 2, J2 = 2' ml = m - 2' ms = 2 
!2-m+! ( 
I 
I 
1) 
+ 
5 
21/1)1 = 2,.h = 2' ml = m + 2' ms = -2 
where for all wave functions we are assuming n = 3. Notice that ml + m, = m for 
both 1/1 functions. Thus 
¢ (2,~,~, m) ~ !l :m R32 (r)Y',m_! (~) +! l 
~ m 
R32(r)Y2m+l (n 
~
5+m 
_2 __ R Y 
1 
5 
32 2,m- 2 
! 
l ~ m R32Y2,m+! 
Thus, for example, the wave function corresponding to the m 
32 D5/2 states would be 
( 2 ~ ~ _~) = ([fR32(r)Y2._2(e, </») 
</> 
'2'2' 
2 
f4 
V SR32(r)Y2,-1 (e, </» 
-
~ state of the 
Similarly, the wave function corresponding to the m = +~ state of the 32 D3/2 
would be (we will now have to use the second row of Table 18.1) 

Addition of Angular Momenta 
487 
18.4. The concept of isospin 
In this section we briefly introduce the concept of isospin and mention the use 
of Clebsch-Gordan coefficients while considering the addition of isospin; such 
considerations are of great importance in high energy scattering studies5 . 
It is well known that except for their differences in charge, neutrons and protons 
have similar properties. Thus neutron and proton can be thought of as eigenstates 
of the nucleon. Now a group of elementary particles can be thought of possessing 
isospin T if there are (2T + 1) particles possessing nearly identical properties except 
for their charge. Thus protons and neutrons can be thought of possessing isospin 
T = ~ with T z = + ~ and T z = - ~ states corresponding to the proton and neutron 
respectively6. Similarly, JT -mesons have an isospin of 1 since they occur in 2"[ + 1 (= 
3) forms as positively charged JT+(T z = 1), uncharged JTO(T z = 0) and negatively 
charged JT - (T z = - 1) mesons. The charge of the nucleons or mesons is given by 
(33) 
where B is known as the baryon number and has the value + 1 for nucleons and ° 
for mesons. 
As an example, we consider the isospin of a system of two nucleons. Assuming 
that for isospin also, we can add the angular momenta in a manner similar to that 
discussed in Sections 18.2 and 18.3, we have four possible states 
¢(l,1) = lfr (~,~) 
¢(l,O) = ~ [lfr (~, -~) + lfr ( -~, ~)] 
¢(1, -1) = lfr ( -~, -~) 
¢(O, 0) = ~ [lfr (l, -~) -lfr ( -~, ~)] 
(34) 
(35) 
(36) 
(37) 
Obviously lfr(~, ~) corresponds to 2 protons because Tlz = T2z = ~ and similarly 
¢(l, -1) corresponds to 2 neutrons; both ¢(1, 0) and ¢(O, 0) correspond to one 
proton and one neutron. However, ¢(l, 0) is a symmetric function and ¢(O, 0) is 
5 For a nice discussion on isospin the reader is referred to the books by Sachs (Ref. 4), Sethe 
and Morrison (Ref. 5), etc. A good discussion on the analysis of high energy nuclear scattering 
experiments can be found in Ref. 2 and 5. 
6 One may see the analogy with the spin angular momentum where .l'z = + ~ and - ~ correspond 
to the spin up and spin down states (see Sec. 14.4). 

4SS 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
antisymmetric. Now, the ground state of deuteron is a mixture of 3 SI and 3 DI states 
(see e.g., p 114 of Ref. 6), thus it is symmetric in coordinates. It corresponds to spin 
1 and therefore it is also symmetric in spins of the two nucleons. The generalized 
Pauli principle (see e.g. Ref. 4 of Ch. 7) requires that the wave function should be 
antisymmetric in isospin variables and hence the isospin state must be 1>(0, 0). 
18.5. Problems 
Problem 18.1 Show that the operators Ir, Ii, 12 and Iz commute with each other. 
In particular show that whereas 12 does not commute with lIz and hz but it does 
commute with I z = lIz + hz. 
Problem 18.2 
(a) In Sec. IS.3, we had operated 1>( 1, 1) by L and obtained the Clebsch-Gordan 
coefficients. Show that the same coefficients are obtained if we had operated 
1>(1, -1) by 1+. 
(b) Operate 1>(1,0) [see Eq. (2S)] by L to obtain Eq. (25). 
(c) Operate Eg. (27) by L or 1+ to show that C3 = C4. 
Problem 18.3 Calculate from the first principles the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients 
for JI = I and 12 = ~ and show that the results are consistent with Table IS.I. 
V se the calculated coefficients to write the wave functions for the p-states of an 
electron (I = I, s = ~) for 
and for 
J = ~ (mj = ~,-~) 
Problem 18.4 (a) Calculate from the first principles the Clebsch-Gordan coeffi-
cients for JI = 2 and 12 = ~ and show that the results are consistent with Table 
IS.2. 
(b) V sing Table IS.1 calculate the wave function for the following states of the 
hydrogen atom: 
(i) 42 D5/2 and 42 D3/2 states corresponding to m = ~. 
(ii) 42 F7/2 and 42 F'i/2 states corresponding to m = 
~ and m = -
~. 

Addition of Angular Momenta 
489 
Problem 18.5 In the electron spin-orbit interaction problem jl = 
l, h = 
s = 4 
and j = l ± 4 [see Eg. (23)]. Assuming that the system is in a state in which i12, 
1',}, i 2 and i z are well-defined show that 
mil 
(s ) - ± 
] 
z -
(2l + 1) 
(38) 
where the upper and lower signs correspond to j = l + 4 and j = /- 4 respectively. 
Problem 18.6 For a state in which i~, fi, i lz and hz have the well-defined values 
jl (jl + 1) 1l 2, h(h + 1) 1l2 , ml II and m2 II show that 
(39) 
Problem 18.7 If h (= 1) and h(= 4) represent the isospin of pions and nucleons 
(see Sec. 18.4), then the total isospin of a pion nucleon system j, would be either 
~ or 4. Show that 
In+p) 
Ij = 
~, jz =~) = 
I~'~) 
(40) 
In+n) 
~I~' ~)+~I~'~) 
(41) 
InOp) 
~I~'~) -~I~'~) 
(42) 
InOn) 
~I~ -~)+/II~ -~) 
3 2' 
2 
3 2' 
2 
(43) 
In-p) 
/II~' -~) -~I~' -~) 
(44) 
In-n) 
I~ -~) 
2' 
2 
(45) 
18.6. Solutions 
Solution 18.1 
Since i l2 and /} commute with each other and also with i lx , hx, i l v ... , etc. 

490 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
[12, In = [12, In = O. Further, 
[1]2, lz] = [1]2, I]J + [If, hz] = 0 
Similarly [Ii, lz] = O. However, [12, lIz] =1= 0, indeed 
[I2, lIz] = [112, lIz] + [Ii, lIz] + 2 (llx [hx, liz] + [ht, lIz] hx) 
+ (lly [hy, lIz] + [Ily, lIz] hy) + (lIz [hz, liz] + [lIz, lIz] hz) 
2(-illyhx +ih<h,,) 
(46) 
Similarly 
(47) 
Thus 
Solution 18.3 We follow a procedure similar to that used in Sec. 18.3. Now, i] = I; 
12 =~; ml = +1,0, -I; m2 = ±~; i =~, ~ and 
(48) 
(49) 
Thus 
L¢ G, -~) = [(11)- + h)-] 1jf (I, ~) 
If we use Eq. (31) of Chapter 13 we would get 
(50) 
If we operate again by L (or operate Eq. (50) by 1+) we would get 
(51) 
Now ¢ (~,~) has to be a linear combination of 1jf (I, -D and 1jf (0, D (because 
only these 1jf functions give m = ~), thus we may write 
Since it has to be orthogonal to ¢ (~, ~) we must have 

Addition ()f Angular Momenta 
491 
or 
¢ (~, ~) = CI [1/r (1, -~) - Jz1/r (0, D] 
Using the normalization condition we get CJ = ft, giving 
¢ G, D = ft1/r (1, -D - 1f1/r (0, ~) 
(52) 
Operating ¢ (~, ~) by 1_ we get 
¢ (~, -D = ~1/r (0, -~) - ft1/r (-1, D 
(53) 
Equations (49)-(54) give that Clebsch-Gordan coefficients. Notics that the ¢ func-
tions automatically form an orthonormal set. 
The Pauli wave functions can readily be written. For example, using Eq. (52) 
we obtain 
Similarly one can obtain other wave functions. 
Solution 18.5 Writing I for )1, in Eq. (31) we obtain 
and similarly for) = I -
~. 
Solution 18.7 
I) = ~,)z = ~) 
I) = ~,)z = -~) 
Now, using Eqs (51) and (52) 
I) J z = 1, hz = ~) = In + p) 
I) J Z = - 1, hz = - ~) = In -n) 
(54) 
(55) 
(56) 
(57) 

492 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and 
I· 3· 
') 
/21 
0 )+ (II - ) 
} = 2'}Z = -2 = V:3 If n 
V:3 If P , etc. 
(58) 
Similarly we may use Eqs (53) and (54). Simple algebra will then give Eqs (42)-
(45). 
18.7. References and suggested reading 
1. VI. Korgan, and VM. Galitsky, Problems in Quantum Mechanics, Prentice-
Hall Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey (1963). 
2. R.A. Cence, Pion Nucleon Scattering, Princeton University Press, Princeton 
(1969). 
3. E.U. Condon and G.H. Shortley, The Theory of Atomic Spectra, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge (1951). 
4. H.A. Sachs, Nuclear Theory, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, Massa-
chusetts (1953). 
5. H.A. Bethe and P. Morrison, Elementary Nuclear Theory, John Wiley, New 
York (\956). 
6. E. Fermi, Nuclear Physics, University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1950). 

Chapter 19 
Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
We can imagine that this complicated array of moving things which constitute 
"the world" is something like a great chess game being played by the gods, and 
we are observers of the game. We do not know what the rules of the game are; all 
we are allowed to do is to watch the playing. Of course, if we watch long enough, 
we may eventually catch on to a few of the rules. The rules of the game are 
what we mean by fundamental physics. Even if we know every rule, however 
... what we really can explain in terms of those rules is very limited, because 
almost all situations are so enormously complicated that we cannot follow the 
plays of the game using the rules, much less tell what is going to happen next. 
We must, therefore, limit ourselves to the more basic question of the rules of the 
game. If we know the rules, we consider that we "understand" the world. 
-
RICHARD FEYNMAN 1 
19.1. Introduction 
In Chapters 6, 7, 10 and 16 we had obtained exact solutions of the SchrCidinger 
equation for specific potential energy variations. However, for most problems in 
quantum mechanics, it is extremely difficult to obtain exact solutions of the 
Schrodinger equation and one has to resort to approximate methods. The three most 
important approximate methods are (i) the perturbation method, (ii) the variational 
method and (iii) the JWKB method; the perturbation method will be discussed in 
this chapter. We may mention here that the variational method (which is discussed 
in Chapter 21) can give good estimate of the ground state energy by choosing 
an appropriate trial function; however, the method becomes quite cumbersome 
when one has to apply to higher excited states. On the other hand, the JWKB 
method (discussed in Chapter 17) gives an approximate but direct solution of the 
SchrCidinger equation. The JWKB method is applicable when the potential energy 
variation is smoothly varying and when the SchrCidinger equation is separable to 
I The authors found this quotation in The Making of the Atomic Bomb by Richard Rhodes, Simon 
& Schuster, New York (\986). 
493 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

494 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
a one-dimensional equation; if these conditions are satisfied, the method gives 
information about all the states of the problem. 
The perturbation method, which is the subject matter of this chapter, is applica-
ble when the Hamiltonian can be written as a sum of two parts 
H = Ho+H' 
(1) 
where the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of Ho are known and the effect of H' can 
be assumed to be small; Ho is usually referred to as the unperturbed Hamiltonian 
and H' is known as the perturbation. We write the eigenvalue equation for the 
unperturbed Hamiltonian: 
(2) 
where En and Un are known eigenvalues and orthonormal eigenfunctions of Ho 
respectively. Our aim is to develop a perturbation method to solve the Schrbdinger 
equation 
H1/In = Wn1/ln 
(3) 
and obtain approximate expressions for Wn and 1/111" In Sec. 19.2 we will develop 
the perturbation theory for non-degenerate states which will be followed by con-
siderations for degenerate states (Sec. 19.3). The theory that we will develop has 
been extensively applied to solve many problems in quantum mechanics; some of 
these applications will be discussed in this chapter. The effect of the magnetic field 
can also be studied by using perturbation theory which will be discussed in the next 
chapter. 
19.2. Non-degenerate case 
We introduce a parameter2 g and write 
2 This method is often used in mathematics. For example. if we wish to solve the equation 
u = a + EU2 
where I' is a small number. we may write 
U = Uo + I' U 1 + E2U2 + ... 
(i) 
If we substitute this series in. Eq. (i) above and equate powers of E. we obtain Uo = a. u 1 = U6 = 
a 2; u2 = 2uOU 1 = 2a3, etc. Thus 
In this particular case. the exact solution of Eq. (i) can also be found: 
u = 211' [I - (I - 4aE) ~ ] = a + Ea2 + 21'2 a 3 + ... 
where we have chosen that root which makes u ---+ a as I' ---+ O. Further. the series will be convergent 
only when 4aE < l. For further details on perturbation techniques. see References I and 2. 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
H = Ho+gH' 
Next, we express 1fr I! and WI! as power series3 in g, i.e. we write 
495 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 
where the superscripts 0, 1,2, " .... refer to the zeroeth order, first order, second 
order perturbation and the parameter g is assumed to take a continuous range of 
values between 0 and 1. In the final result we will set g = 1. We substitute the 
expansions given by Eqs (5) and (6) in Eq. (3) to obtain 
(Ho + gH') (1fr~0) + g 1fr~I) + g21fr~2) + ... ) 
= (W,;O) + g W~I) + g2WP) + ... ) (1fr~0) + g 1fr~I) + g21fr~2) + ... ) 
(7) 
Since the above equation is supposed to be valid for all values of g lying between 
o and 1, the coefficients of equal powers of g on either side of the equation must 
be same i.e. 
Ho1fr~O) 
Ho1fr~I) + H'1fr~O) 
Ho1fr~2) + H'1fr~l) 
W(O)",(O) 
I! 
'I'n 
W(O),,,(I) + W(l)",(O) 
11 
'f'n 
n 
'f'n 
W(0)",(2) + W(I)",(l) + W(2)",(0) 
11 
'fin 
11 
'f'n 
11 
'f'n 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
etc. Equation (8) tells us that 1fr~0) and W~O) are the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues 
of the unperturbed Hamiltonian. Thus 
,,,(0) _ 
'I'll 
-
Un 
(1 I) 
and 
w(O) = E 
n 
n 
(12) 
We will be considering the effect of the perturbation H' on the nth state which will 
be assumed to be discrete and non-degenerate4 ; however, other states need neither 
be discrete nor be non-degenerate. 
3 For example, if H' is proportional to the strength of the electric field 8 then 1jJ ~1) , 1jJ ~2), 1jJ ~3) ... 
will be proportional to 8, 8 2, 8 3, respectively; 1jJ ~O) will be independent of 8. In some cases, such 
a power series may not be convergent [see, c.g. Eq. (37)]; indeed if it is an asymptotic series (see 
Appendix K), the first few terms may give fairly good results. 
4 The corresponding theory for degenerate states is discussed in Sec. 19.3. 

496 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
19.2.1. FIRST ORDER PERTURBATION 
We assume that the eigenfunctions of the unperturbed Hamiltonian, Ho, form a 
complete set; thus we may express 1jf~1) as a linear combination of the functions 
Un: 
,fr(1) = ~ 
a(l) U 
'f'n 
L..,.; 
m 
m 
(13) 
m 
where the superscript refers to the fact that we are considering first order per-
turbation. The summation appearing in the above equation actually represents a 
summation over discrete states and integration over the continuum. If we substitute 
the above expansion in Eq. (9), we would obtain 
Ho La~) U m + H'1jf~O) = W~O)1jf~l) + W~I)1jf~O) 
(14) 
m 
or 
~ (l)E 
H' 
E ~ (1) 
Well 
L..,.; am 
mUm + 
Un = 
n L..,.; am Um + 
n 
U I1 
(15) 
m 
m 
where we have used Eqs (2) and (11). If we now multiply the above equation by uZ 
and integrate, we would get 
~ (1)£ 8 
H' -
E ~ (1)8 
W(I)8 
L..,.; am 
m km + 
kll -
11 L..,.; am 
km + 
n 
kn 
m 
m 
or, carrying out the summations we get 
(1) (E 
E) 
W(l)8 
-
H' 
ak 
n -
k + 
11 
kn -
kn 
where 
H~n == f uZH'ul1dr =< k IH'I n > 
and we have used the orthonormality condition 
< kim >= f uZumdr = Okm; 
the integrations are over the entire space. For k = n, Eq. (16) gives 
W(I) = H' = f u*H'u dr =< niHil n > 
11 
1111 
k 
11 
(16) 
(17) 
(18) 
which represents the first order perturbation to the energy. For k i= n, Eq. (16) 
gives 
(19) 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
497 
Notice that we have not been able to determine a~l). However, it can be easily seen 
from Eq. (9) that if we add an arbitrary multiple of Un to 1/I~1), the equation remains 
unaltered. Hence, without any loss of generality, we may assume 
a(l) = 0 
n 
(20) 
Such a choice implies 
(21) 
19.2.2. SECOND ORDER PERTURBATION 
We next expand 1/1~2) as a linear combination of the eigenfunctions of Ho; thus, we 
write 
,/,(2) = ~ 
a(2)u 
'Pn 
L 
m 
m 
(22) 
m 
where the superscripts refer to the fact that we are considering second order per-
turbation. Substituting the above expansion in Eq. (0) we get 
m 
m 
m 
m 
Multiplying by uZ and integrating we obtain 
~ (2)E 
~ 
~ (I)H' 
Lam 
mUkm + Lam 
km 
m 
m 
E ~ 
(2)~ 
H' ~ 
(l)~ 
W(2h 
= 
n Lam Ukm + 
nn Lam Ukm + 
n 
Ukn 
m 
m 
or 
a(2) (E - E ) + W(2)8 
= ~ 
a(l) H' -
a(l) H' 
k 
n 
k 
n 
kn 
L 
m 
km 
k 
nn 
m 
For k = n, we get 
W(2) 
~ 
a(l) H' -
a(l) H' 
n 
L 
m 
nm 
n 
nn 
m 
~ (l)H ' 
Lam 
nm 
In 
(mt-n) 
(23) 
where the prime over the summation indicates that we have omitted the term 
m = n. Thus, using Eq. (19), we get 

498 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(24) 
where we have used the relation H~m = 
(H~Il)*' The above equation gives the 
second order perturbation to the energy eigenvalue. Further, for k #- n, Eq. (23) 
gives 
(25) 
Similarly, we may obtain WP) . The final result is 
Wn = 
W,;O) + W~1) + W,;2) + W,;3) + ... 
(26) 
IH' 12 
E + H' + ",' 
mil 
n 
nn 
~ E _ E 
m 
n 
m 
+lL' L 
m 
k 
k#-n 
k#-m 
19.2.3. Two SIMPLE EXAMPLES 
In order to illustrate the use of the perturbation theory to non-degenerate states we 
consider a perturbation of the form ~bx2 to the linear harmonic oscillator problem. 
Thus 
and 
1 
H' = -bx2 
2 
The eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of Ho are well known (see Sec. 7.2) 
(28) 
(29) 
(30) 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
where 
W 
~ = 
( n + l) liw; n = 0, 1, 2, 3 ... 
NI1HI1 (~)exp(-g2) 
(k 
[y 
]1/2 
y"ii' Nil = 
fi2l1n! 
ff- [ ]
1/4 
flW 
flk 
yx, y = h = h2 
499 
(31) 
(32) 
(33) 
Notice that the exact solution can easily be obtained; all that one has to do is replace 
k by k + b. Thus if we write 
Ho/Il = Wll o/l1 
(34) 
where 
H = Ho+H' 
(35) 
then 
( 
I ) 
(k [ 
b] 1/2 
WI1 = 
n +"2 IiY"ii 
I + k 
(36) 
or 
W =(n+~)1i [[I+~~_~b2 + ... ] 
11 
2 y"ii 
2k 
8P 
(37) 
the binomial expansion being valid when % < 1. If we compare Eq. (37) with Eq. 
(6), we obtain 
W(O) 
n 
(n+ Dn!€ ~ E" 
(38) 
W(l) 
~(n+~)n!€~ 
(39) 
11 
2 
2 
flk 
W(2) = 
11 
_~(n+~)n!€h' 
8 
2 
fl k 2 ' etc. 
(40) 
where W~o) represent the unperturbed eigenvalue, and W~I) and W,;2) represent the 
first and the second order perturbations respectively. Notice that W~I) is linear in 
b, WP) is quadratic in b, etc. Further, the power series is convergent only when 
hi k < I. 

500 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Let us now employ perturbation theory to calculate W,:)), WP), etc. Now, 
00 
W~)) = 1b f u~(X)X2un(x)dx=1b<nlx2In> 
-00 
~ (n + ~) Ii fI ~ 
2 
2 
y-;z k 
(41) 
where we have used the results derived in Solution 12.4. Equation (41) agrees with 
Eq. (39). In order to calculate WP) we note that 
(42) 
is non-zero only when m = n - 2, m = norm = n + 2 (see Solution 12.4). Thus 
(~b)2 [1< n -
21 x 2 1n >12 + 1< n + 21 x 2 1n >12] 
2 
En - En- 2 
En - En+2 
_~ b2 _li_ (n +~) 
(43) 
8 
/-L2W3 
2 
which agrees with Eq. (40). 
Another simple example is to consider a linear harmonic oscillator of charge Q 
perturbed by an electric field S in the +x-direction. Thus 
1i2 d2 
1 
Ho = --- + -/-L(j}x2 
2/-L dx 2 
2 
(44) 
and 
H' = -QSx 
(45) 
Now, 
< m IHII n >= -QS < m Ixl n > 
is non-zero only when m = n ± 1 (see Problem 12.3). Thus W,:)) = 0 and 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
501 
In this case also one can find an exact solution of the problem by shifting the origin. 
This can easily be seen because 
H= 
where t; = x -
Q~. Thus the exact eigenvalue spectrum is 
ILW 
(46) 
It may be noted that in this case the second order theory happens to give the exact 
results. 
19.3. Perturbation theory for degenerate states 
In the perturbation theory developed in Sec. 19.2, the zeroeth order wave function 
satisfies the equation 
H ",(0) = W(O)",(O) 
o 'f' n 
n 
'f' Il 
(47) 
(see Eq. 8). The above equation implies that 1/r~0) is the eigenfunction correspond-
ing to the unperturbed Hamiltonian. If we consider the perturbation to the n'h state 
then we put 
w(O) = E 
and ",(0) = U 
Il 
n 
V'1l 
n 
(48) 
where Un and En represent the eigenfunction and the energy eigenvalue for the 
nth state respectively. Now, for a degenerate state, any linear combination of the 
eigenfunctions is also a possible eigenfunction (see Sec. 6.3); consequently, 1/r~0) 
cannot be completely specified by its unperturbed energy. Further, we notice from 
Eq. (16) that corresponding to a degenerate state if k "I n but Ek = En then H~1l 
must be zero (otherwise a2) will be infinite, see Eq. 19). Hence, we must choose5 
5 This also follows from the fact that in calculating the first order perturbation when we use the 
expansion 
1/1 = 1/1(0) + 1/1(1) + 1/1(2) + ... 
we must know precisely 1/1(0) which represents the eigenfunction to which 1/1 will collapse when the 
perturbation is made to go to zero. However, for a degenerate state, we have no apriori knowledge 
which would allow us to predict as to which linear combination will 1/1 collapse to. Indeed, Eq. 
(16) tells us that we must choose such linear combinations so that H£" = 0 for k oF n (among the 
degenerate eigenfunctions). 

502 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
for 1jf~O) such linear combinations of Un so that H~n = 0 for k -I- n. Obviously, the 
choice of the linear combination will depend on the form of H'. We illustrate the 
procedure by considering the splitting of the first excited state of the H-atom by an 
electric field; the splitting of spectral lines due to an electric field is known as Stark 
effect. The n = 2 state of the H-atom is 4-fold degenerate. The eigenfunctions6 
are (see Sec. lOA): 
(n = 2, I = 0, m = 0) 
(n = 2, l = 1, m = 0) 
(49) 
(n = 2, l = 1, m = 1) 
(n = 2, l = 1, m = -1) 
where 
I 
1 ( 
r) 
r/2a 
Rzo (r) = -- 1--
e-
0 
M2 
3/2 
2a 
y Lao 
0 
(50) 
and 
I 
I 
r 
r /2a 
R21 (r) = -- --- e-
0 
2 !L6 
3/2 a 
yO a o 
0 
(51 ) 
The corresponding (unperturbed) eigenvalue is [see Sec. lOA] 
where -EH (~ -13.6eV) represents the ground state energy of the hydrogen 
atom; the corresponding ground state wave function is denoted by Uo. Let the 
required linear combination be 
If we substitute this linear combination in the following equation (see Eq. 9) 
6 It should be noted that we could have started with linear combinations of UJ. U2, U3 and U4; 
however, the functions should form an orthonormal set. 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
503 
we would obtain 
Ho L a~)um + HI [c,u, + C2U2 + C3U3 + C4U4] 
m 
= wiO) L a~l)um + wil) [c,u, + C2U2 + C3U3 + C4U4] 
(52) 
m 
where we have assumed 
m 
Thus 
m 
m 
Multiplying by uT and integrating we obtain 
(1) W(O) 
[HI 
HI 
HI 
HI] 
W(O) (I) 
W(l) 
G, 
2 + c, 
II + C2 
'2 + c3 
13 + c4 
14 = 
2 a, + 
2 c, 
where we have used the fact that Em(= wiO» represents the unperturbed energy 
eigenvalue. Further 
H:j = ! u7 HI u j de 
Rearranging we obtain 
c, (H{, - wi'») + C2H{2 + C3H{3 + C4H{4 = 0 
(53) 
Similarly, if we multiply Eq. (52) by u;, u; and u~ and integrate, we would obtain 
respectively the following equations 
(54) 
H I 
HI 
. (HI 
w(l») 
HI - 0 
ci 
3' + C2 
32 + (3 
33 -
2 
+ c4 34-
(55) 
c,H~, + c2H~2 + c3H~3 + C4 (H~4 - w?») = 0 
(56) 
Obviously, for a g-fold degenerate state, we will obtain a set of g equations. Now 
for nontrivial solutions 
HI -
W(I) 
II 
2 
H{2 
H{3 
H{4 
H~, 
HI _ W(l) 
H~3 
H~4 
22 
2 
=0 
(57) 
H~, 
H~2 
HI _ W(I) 
H~4 
33 
2 
H~, 
H~2 
H~3 
HI -
W(I) 
44 
2 

504 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
which is known as the secular equation. 
Now, for the hydrogen atom, if r] and r2 represent the position coordinates of 
the electron and proton respectively, then 
p = q(r2 - r]) = -qr 
(58) 
would represent the electric dipole moment of the atom. [n the above equation q 
(> 0) represents the charge of the proton and r = r] - r2 represents the relative co-
ordinate [see Sec. 10.3]. Thus, in the presence of the electric field e the interaction 
energy would be given by 
H' = _po e 
Assuming a static electric field (of magnitude e) in the z -direction we get 
Now 
H' = qez = qercose 
(q > 0) 
f f f [gR2I(rl COso] [qucosO] 
x [ -J 8~ R'I (rl sin oe;.] r'dr sin OdOd¢ 
o 
(59) 
(60) 
(2IT 
"'" 
because Jo e' d<jJ = O. Due to the same reason, the matrix elements H~2' H[3' 
H~], H{4' H~] and H~2 would vanish. By carrying out the integration over e, it 
can easily be shown that H[ l' H~2' H~3' H~4 and H~4 would vanish. The only non-
vanishing? matrix elements would be H{2 and H~]. Now 
00 
,j3(qe) f _l ___ 
l_~ r2 (1 _ 
~) e-r/aor2dr 
4rr 
.J2 2J6 a6 ao 
2ao 
o 
? This could have been directly deduced from the following reasoning: since all the wave 
functions have definite parities and since H' has odd parity 
J 
U7 H'u ]dr = ... = J uTH'u4dr = 0 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
00 
2rr 
X J 
COS2 e sinede J 
d¢ 
o 
0 
-3qeao = -g 
where g = 3qeao. Thus the secular equation becomes 
_W(l) 
2 
-g 
0 
0 
-g 
-W(!) 
0 
0 
2 
=0 
0 
0 
_W(l) 
0 
2 
0 
0 
0 
-W(!) 
2 
The roots are 
(1) 
0 0 
W2 = +g, -g, , 
Now, if we substitute the values of the matrix elements, Eqs.(53)-(56) become 
-CI wil) - c2g = 0 
-cIg -
C2 wil) = 0 
C3 w?) = 0 
(I) 
0 
C4W2 = 
505 
(61) 
(62) 
Clearly for wil) = g, C1 = -C2, C3 = C4 = 0 and the required linear combination 
IS 
1 
¢I = ,J2(ul - U2) 
(63) 
where the factor 1/,J2 is such that ¢ I is normalized. Similarly for wi!) = - g, 
CI = C2, C3 = C4 = 0 and the required linear combination is 
(64) 
For the root wil) = 0, CI = C2 = 0 and C3 and C4 are indeterminate. Thus 
(65) 
The splitting of the level is shown in Fig. 19.1. As can be seen the levels character-
ized by the wave functions U3 and U4 remain degenerate and the degeneracy is said 
to be partially lifted. The above theoretical predictions agree with corresponding 
experimental values for electric field strengths less than about 106 volts/m. For 
higher fields, the quadratic Stark effect has to be taken into account. Eventually, 

506 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
3 aoq£ 
1 
--E 
4 
H 
(n =2) 
+ 
"1,U4 
3 aoq£ 
Figure 19. I. The splitting of the n = 2 level of the hydrogen atom by the electric field. 
for field strengths greater than 107 volts/m, autoionization occurs and Stark effect 
disappears. 
19.4. Examples from matrix algebra 
The use of the perturbation approach can be illustrated by considering examples 
from matrix algebra. We will discuss first the non-degenerate case and then the 
degenerate case. Obviously, while considering examples from matrix algebra one 
must always have Hermitian matrices. 
Case 1: Non-degenerate case 
Let us consider the matrix 
H=(1~8 
8 
) 
c 
-1+8 
We write H = Ho + H', where 
Ho = (~ ~l) and 
H' = (; ;) 
Ho is assumed to represent the unperturbed matrix and H' represents the per-
turbation and we assume E « I. The eigenvalues of Ho are + I and - 1; the 
corresponding orthonormal eigenfunctions are 
Now 
11) = ( ~) and 
12) = ( ~ ) 
H[, = (I 0) (: ;) ( ~ ) = E 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
and 
Thus, in the first-order perturbation theory, the eigenvalues are 
1 + E 
and 
- 1 + E 
The exact eigenvalues of H are given by 
A 
E ± (1 + E2) I /2 
I 
1+ E + _E2 + S· 
2 
' 
and 
1 2 
-
1 + E -
-E + S 
2 
which agrees with the perturbation theory result. 
Case 2: Degenerate case 
As before, we write H = Ho + H' with 
Ho = (6 ~) and 
H' = (: : ) 
507 
and assume E « I. Clearly the matrix Ho has only one eigenvalue, viz., + I, which 
is two fold-degenerate. Further, any column matrix ( ~ ) is an eigenvector. We 
may choose 
as the base vectors. Thus 
Similarly 
H~2 = H;2 = H~l = E 
Therefore, the secular equation is 
I E-W 
E 
1=0 
E 
E -
W 
which gives 
W = 0 
and 
W = 2E 
The degeneracy is lifted and according to first order perturbation theory the 
eigenvalues are 
and 
1+ 2E 

508 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
If we denote the eigenfunction by 
then 
and 
For 
and 
For 
and 
Notice that 
i.e., we have chosen such linear combinations in which HI is diagonal. It is easy to 
show that if we try to directly determine the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of H, 
we would obtain 
or 
A=l+£±£ 
Thus, it so happens that the first order perturbation theory gives the exact results. 
19.5. Fine structure of the hydrogen atom 
Important Note: In this section, in order to be consistent with the notation 
used in most books on spectroscopy, we will be using CGS units. In order to 
get the corresponding formulae in the MKS units, we must replace 
q2 
e2 by --
4:n: 80 
Alternatively, we can replace e2 by anc where a (= 1/137) is the fine structure 
constant. Then the formulae will be valid both in MKS and CGS units. 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
509 
The theory of the hydrogen atom developed in Chapter IO was based on the non-
relativistic expression for the Hamiltonian given by 
where 
p2 
H = Ho = -
+ V (r) 
2m 
Ze2 
VCr) =--
r 
(67) In Sec. 10.4 we had solved the eigenvalue equation 
Ho1/l = E1/I 
(66) 
(67) 
(68) 
and had shown that the discrete energy levels corresponding to the Hamiltonian Ho 
are given by 
where 
Z 2E H 
n 2 
' 
e2 
(X=-~---
lie 
137.036 
n = 1,2,3, ... 
(69) 
(70) 
is the fine structure constant and other symbols have been defined in Sections 10.3 
and 10.4. The corresponding orthonormal wavefunctions are given by (see Sec. 
10.4) 
(71) 
where Rnl (r) are the radial part of the wave function (see Sec. 10.4 and Appendix I) 
and Y'm (e, ¢) are the spherical harmonics (see Chapters 9 and 15). Transitions be-
tween states (corresponding to different values of n) lead to Lyman series, Balmer 
series, etc., (see Fig. 10.1). However, if these spectral lines are seen through a high 
resolution spectroscope then usually each line is seen to consist of more than one 
line. This splitting is usually referred to as the fine structure of the spectral lines 
which is due to a combination of the effect due to relativity and also due to the 
interaction of the spin angular momentum of the electron with its orbital angular 
momentum-we will use first order perturbation theory to study the effects due 
to relativity and also due to spin-orbit interactions. We may mention here that 
when the atoms are put in a magnetic field then the spectral lines undergo fur-
ther splitting-this is known as Zeeman effect. This will be discussed in the next 
chapter. 

510 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
19.5.1. RELATIVISTIC EFFECTS 
Now, according to the special theory of relativity, the relation between the energy 
and momentum for a free particle is given by 
(72) 
where m represents the rest mass of the particle and e the speed of light in free 
space. In the presence of the potential V (r), the above equation modifies to 
We replace p by -iii to obtain the relativistic SchrMinger equation 
If we write E = E' + me2, the above equation can be written as 
where 
and 
(Ho + H')1/J = E'1/J 
1i2 
Ho = __ \72 + VCr) 
2m 
H' = _ [E' -
V(r)]2 
2me2 
If we neglect H', we get the non-relativistic Schrodinger equation 
Ho = 1/J = E'1/J 
(73) 
(74) 
(75) 
(76) 
(77) 
(78) 
which is the same as Eq.(68). We will now use first order perturbation theory to 
study the effect of H'. Now, if 1/Jnlm represent the hydrogen atom wave functions 
(see Sec. 10.4) then 
f f f 1/J~l'm,H'1/Jlllmdr = - 2~e2 f f f 1/J~I'III,rEI1 -
V (r)f1/Jnlmdr 
- 2~c2 {I [ 
E" + Z:2 r 
[R", (r) [2,2 dr } OW'mm' 
where Ell represents the energy levels of the hydrogen atom [see Eq.(69)]. The 
above equation tells us that we already have a representation in which H' is 
diagonal. Thus the relativity correction would be given by 
(1) 
I 
[2 
2 ( 1 ) 
2 4 ( I )] 
tJ.Ere1 = Wre1 = - 2me2 
E/1 + 2E" Ze 
-; + Z e 
r2 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
where 
00 
(~) == f ~[R/JI(r)]2r2dr 
r" 
r" 
o 
Substituting the expression for (1) and (~) from Appendix I we obtain 
r 
r 
I 
[ Z4 
2 
2Z2 
2 Z 
4 
2 
1 
] 
---2 4EH - -2 EHZe -2 +4Z EH 
( 
I) 
2me 
n 
n 
aon 
n3 1 + 2: 
_ Z
2E
H (aZ)2 [_n _~] 
n 2 
n 
1 + 1 
4 
2 
Thus 
!}'E 1 = E (aZ)2 [_n _~] 
re 
n 
n 
1+1 
4 
2 
In wavenumber units we get 
where 
!}'Erei 
a 2Z 4 [n 
3] 
-I 
!}'Trei = ----;;-;:- = -~R 1 + ~ - 4 cm 
mea2 
R=--
2h 
511 
(79) 
(80) 
(81) 
(82) 
represents the Rydberg constant whose numerical values are given in Sec. 10.3. For 
the hydrogen atom Z = 1, and substituting the values of R and a we obtain 
5.845 [n 
3] 
-I 
!},T, 1 ~ - -- -- -
-
cm 
re 
n4 
1 + 1 
4 
2 
(83) 
Thus because of relativistic effects, the eigenstates corresponding to a particular 
value of n will split and the degeneracy will be partially removed. For the n = 2 
state we have 
!}'Trel ~ -1.1870cm- 1 
forn=2,1=0 
~ -0.2130 cm- I 
for n = 2,1 = 1 
Similarly, the n = 3 state will split into 3 levels corresponding to 1 = 0, 1 and 2. 
Figure 19.2 which corresponds to the n = 2 state of the hydrogen atom. However, 
the results are not in agreement with the experimental data; one has to take into 
account the spin-orbit interaction which will be discussed next. 

512 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
n=2 ""T"" ............ --------------------------
0.213 
~ 
/=1 
2 
0.1217 cm-I 2 P3/2 
0.2435 cm-I 
1.1870 cm-I 
/= 0 
Relativity Correction 
0.7304 cm-I 
22pI/2 
Relativity 
+Spin-orbit 
Correction 
Figure 19.2. The perturbation due to relativistic effects and spin-orbit interaction for the 11 = 2 state 
of the hydrogen atom. 
19.5.2. THE SPIN-ORBIT INTERACTION 
In a hydrogen-like atom the spin-orbit interaction H' is given by (see Sec. 20.5) 
(84) 
Since 
J2 = L 2 + S2 + 2L . s 
we get 2L· s = J2 - L 2 -
s2; thus we will have to choose a representation in which 
J2, L 2 and S2 are well-defined and calculate the spin-orbit correction. The Pauli 
Operator for (see Sec. 13.6) is given by 
I 
Zali I 
2 
2 
2 
(H)p = ---[(J )p - (L )1' -
(s )p] 
4m2c r3 
Thus, the Pauli wave equation is given by 
where 
( Ho 
(Ho)p = 
0 
( 
1i2 
Ze2 
o ) 
__ V 2 --
_ 
2m 
r 
Ho 
-
o 
(85) 
(86) 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
513 
and 
represents the Pauli wave function. The Pauli wave equation for the unperturbed 
Hamiltonian is given by (see Sec. 13.6) 
or 
(87) 
Consequently, W(O) will simply represent the energy levels of hydrogen like atom 
problem: 
Z2 
4 
(0) _ 
_ 
me 
W 
-
En - ----
2n 2li 2 
Z 2E H 
(88) 
and 1/f~) will be the hydrogen atom wave functions which are simply Rnl Ylm, (e , ¢ ); 
we have put a subscript 1 to m to distinguish it from m,1 and m j which correspond to 
spin and total angular momentum quantum numbers. Thus the Pauli wave functions 
for the spin up and the spin down states would be given by 
(1/f~»)p = 1/f (n, I, ml, m l = +~) = RnlY1m,lt) = RnlYlml (b) 
( Rn/~/ml ) 
(89) 
and 
(0) 
( 
1) 
(1/f - )p = 1/f 
n, I, ml, m,1 = -'2 
In the absence of the spin-orbit interaction, both the wave functions correspond to 
the same energy. Thus, in order to determine the splitting due to spin-orbit interac-
tion we must choose a representation in which H' is diagonal, i.e. we must choose 
such linear combinations of (1/f~»)p and (1/f~»)p in which L . s or J2, L2 and s2 
are well defined. This can easily be obtained by using Clebsch-Gordon coefficients 
(see Table 18.1) 
(¢l)P = ¢(n'l,j=l+~,mj) 

514 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
I+m+.!. 
( 
I 
I) 
-2-1-+-
J -l-=-21/f n, I, m, = mj - 2' ms = 2 
+ I-m+.!. 
( 
I 
I) 
__ 
c-J _-=-21/f n, I, m, = mj + -, m\ = --
21+1 
2' 
2 
A similar expression can be written down for 
Now 
(12)p¢ = j (j + l)li 2¢ } 
(L2)p¢ = l(l + 1)li2¢ 
(s2) p¢ = ~li2¢ 
(91) 
(92) 
Thus, the first order perturbation due to the spin-orbit interaction would be given 
by 
Ws(~~) = ! dr¢+(H')p¢ 
Zlia ! 
I 
+ 
2 
2 
2 
-2-
dr-3¢ [(1 )p - (L )p -
(s )p]¢ 
4m c 
r-
zlia [ 
3] 2! I 
--
j (j + 1) - 1 (l + 1) -
-
Ii 
d r -
4m 2c 
4 
r3 
[ I ± m j + ~ 
2 
2 
1 =f mj + ~ 
2 
2] 
x 
2/+1 
IRnIIIYI,mj_~I+ 
2/+1 
IRIl,IIY"lIlj+~1 
where the upper and lower signs correspond to j = 1 + ~ and j = 1- ~ respectively, 
Carrying out the integration over the angles we obtain: 
Zli3a [ 
3] ( I ) 
t-Es- o = -- j(j + I) -I(l + I) -
-
-
4m 2c 
4 
r3 
(93) 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
U sing the expression for (-h) from Appendix I we get 
b..Es- o = 2n3(l + 1)(2l + 1) 
Z4a 4mc2 
2n3l(2l + 1) 
1 
for j = l + 2 
1 
for j = 1- -2 
In wavenumber units 
or, 
n3(l + l)(2l + 1) 
1 
for j = l + 2 
1 
for j = I + 2 
Thus for the hydrogen atom (Z = 1), one obtains for n = 2 [see Fig. 19.2]. 
Similarly 
1.097 X 105 (_1_)2 cm- 1 
48 
137 
~ 0.1217 cm- 1 
b..Ts- o (n = 
2, l = 
1, j =~) ~ -0.2435 cm- 1 
b..T,_o (n = 2, 1= 0, j = ~) 
+0.7304 cm- 1 
b..T,-o (n = 
1, 1= 0, j =~) = +5.8435 cm- 1 
515 
(94) 
(95) 
The sum of the relativity and spin orbit correction is referred to as the fine structure 
splitting which we will denote by b.. Trs: 
For j = I + ~ 

516 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where we have used Eqs. (81) and (95). Simple manipulations and use of the 
relation j = I + ~ would give 
fj.T,tOo = _ a
2Z 4 R [_n __ 
~]. 
s 
4 
. 
1 
4' 
n 
J+ 2 
1 
j = I ±-2 
(96) 
Even for j = I -
~, the above expression is valid. We must mention here that the 
selection rules for transitions between doublets are 
fj.1=±1 
and 
fj.j=O,±1 
(97) 
The total quantum number may change by any integral amount. 
19.5.3. FINE STRUCTURE OF THE HYDROGEN ATOM 
For the hydrogen atom Z = 1 and substituting the values of a and R we get 
5.845 [n 
3]_1 
fj.Trs ;:::::: ---4-
-·--1 -
-4 cm 
n 
J + 2 
(98) 
The fine structure of various levels of the hydrogen atom are shown in Fig. 19.3. 
Now, the n = 3 --+ n = 2 transition corresponds to the Ha line of the Balmer 
n=1 
n =2 
n=3 
-
0.091 cm-! 
0.018 em" 2 
3 DS/2 
0.036 cm-{' 3 20 
312 
3 2P312 
0.364 cm-' 
0.108 em-' 
n=4 
0.006 cm"4 2F 
\\\ '--f---, 
7/2 
0.008 em-{4 ~FSI2 
_,4 OS/2 
0.015 em { 4 20 3/2 
4 2P312 
{ 4 ~P'12 
4 Sll2 
Figure 19.3. Fine structure of various levels of the hydrogen atom. 
series of the hydrogen atom (Je ;:::::: 6564.7 A). The fine structure leads to 5 lines 
corresponding to the following transitions (see, e.g., Ref. 3): 
fj.T(cm- l ) 
32SI/ 2 --+ 22P3/ 2 -0.071 
32 D3/2 --+ 22 P3/ 2 +0.037 
32 DS/2 --+ 22 P3/ 2 +0.073 
32 PI /2 --+ 22 SI/2 +0.294 
32 D3/2 --+ 22 PI/2 +0.402 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
517 
The third and the fifth lines are the most intense-separated by 0.329 cm- I 
consistent with experimental findings. 
19.5.4. SPECTRA OF THE IONIZED HELIUM ATOM 
We consider the n = 4 to n = 3 transition for the He+ atom. Substituting the value 
of R [as given in Sec. 10.4] we get 
T(n = 4) - T(n = 3) = -43889.6 [~ -
~] 
16 
9 
or, 
T43 ~ 21335 cm- I 
which corresponds to A ~ 4687.2 A. Now, from Eq.(96) 
93.49 [n 
3]_1 
t.T[s ~ ---4-
-'--1 -
-4 cm 
n 
J+i 
Various lines corresponding to the fine structure of the 4687 A line are shown in 
Fig. 19.4; they are 
0.46 em-I 
1.48 cm-1 
Figure 19.4. Fine structure of the n = 4 to n = 3 transition of the ionized helium atom. 
t.T(cm- l ) 
1 =} 42S I/ 2 ---+ 32 D3/2 -0.321 
2 =} 42 P3/2 ---+ 32 DS/2 -0.168 
3 =} 42 FS/2 ---+ 32 DS/2 +0.755 
4 =} 42F7/2 ---+ 32Ds/2 +0.197 
5 =} 42 D3/2 ---+ 32 P3/2 +0.409 
6 =} 42 FS/2 ---+ 32 D3/2 +0.653 
7 =} 42 P1/2 ---+ 32 SI/2 +1.410 
8 =} 42 D3/2 ---+ 32 P I/2 +2.140 

518 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The wavenumber difference between the two most intense lines (4 and 6) would be 
0.653 - 0.197::::::; 0.46 cm- I 
which agrees with experimental data; the experimental data has been given in Sec. 
9.5 of Ref. 3. 
19.6. Almost degenerate perturbation theory 
We next consider the case when the levels are almost degenerate, i.e. the corre-
sponding energy eigenvalues are very nearly equal. For such a case the perturbation 
theory for non-degenerate states is strictly not valid because the corresponding 
expansion coefficient would become very large (see Eq.19). We give here an 
approximate perturbation theory for a group of two levels which are almost de-
generate. Let uland U2 represent the eigenfunctions of the two levels with energy 
eigenvalues EI and E2 i.e., 
We write 
ljf ::::::; CI U I + C2 + U2 
and substitute in the eigenvalue equation 
to obtain 
and 
where 
Hljf = Wljf 
Hij f u~Hujdr = f u~(Ho+H')ujdr 
EJo iJ' + HI 
, 
IJ 
Equations (lO I) and (l02) give us the secular determinant 
I HII -
W 
HI2 
1=0 
H21 
H22 -
W 
which gives us 
(99) 
(100) 
(lO I) 
(02) 
(103) 
(104) 
1 
1 
2 
2 1/2 
WI 2 = -[HI I + Hn] ± -[(HI I -
H 22 ) + 41Hd ] 
(lOS) 
'2 
2 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
519 
It is to be noted that when E I = E2 one obtains the result for degenerate states (see 
Sec.19.3). On the other hand, when IH" - H221 » IHI21, one gets (by making a 
binomial expansion) 
(106) 
Thus 
IH'12 
W -
E 
H' 
12 
1 -
1+ 
11 + (EI + H{I) - (E2 + H~2) 
(107) 
(and a similar expression for W2) which agree with the result obtained by using 
non-degenerate perturbation theory to order g2 because the term (H{ I -
H~2) in the 
denominator of the third term is itself of order g; g is the parameter introduced in 
Eq.(4). Thus Eq.(105) represents the general expression which in the appropriate 
limiting forms go over to the expressions corresponding to non-degenerate and 
degenerate state perturbation theory. 
19.7. Dalgarno's method 
If it becomes necessary to calculate the second order correction (viz., W(2» one 
has to evaluate the infinite sum given by Eq.(24) which, in general, is extremely 
difficult to carry out. However, in some cases it is possible to directly solve Eq.(9) 
and obtain an analytical expression for 1/I~1) using which one can evaluate WP) by 
using the following expression: 
W~2) = J 
1/I~O)* H'1/I~I)dT -
W~I) J 
1/I~O)* 1/I~I)dT 
(108) 
The above equation is obtained by mUltiplying Eq.(10) by 1/I~O)* and integrating. 
This method is due to Dalgarno and is known as Dalgarno's method (see Ref. 4). 
We will illustrate its use by considering the Stark effect problem for the ground 
state of the hydrogen atoms. The perturbation is H' = qer cos e (see Eq.S8). Now 
WI(O) = -EH and it is easy to show that WI(l) = O. We rewrite Eq.(9) as 
(109) 
Thus 
__ V2 - -- + EH 
1/1(1) = -qer cose----e-r/ ao 
[ 
/12 
q2] 
1 
2 
2f-l 
4rr cor 
1 
J4n a6/2 
(110) 
---
8 Epstein has given another method for calculating the Stark effect problem in hydrogen atom. 
The method has been discussed in Ref. 5, p. 195. 

520 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where we have substituted the ground state wave function from Eqs.(36) and (59) 
of Chapter 10. Since l/J;l) should go to zero as € 
---+ 0, we need find only the 
solution to the inhomogeneous part of the equation. We assume 
l/J~I) = R(r) cos e 
(Ill) 
Thus 
[ 1 d ( dR) 
1 
d ( 
d 
) 
] 
2- r-
cose + 2' 
-
sine- cose R(r) 
r dr 
dr 
r sm e de 
de 
[ ld(2dR) 
2 
] 
--
r -
- -R(r) cose 
r2 dr 
dr 
r2 
(112) 
We substitute in Eq.(lIO) and introduce the variable [see Eq.(54) of Chapter 10] 
~ = r / ao, where ao is the Bohr radius. Simple manipulations would give 
where 
1 d ( 2 d R ) 2 
(2) 
_~ 
-. -
~ -
-
-R(~) + - - 1 
R(~) = C~e 
~2 d~ 
d~ 
~2 
~ 
C = --q_€-
EHJnao 
Let us introduce F (~) such that 
R(~) = ~ F(~)e-~ 
On substitution in Eq.(113), we obtain 
d 2F 
dF 
~- + (4 -
2~)- - 2F(O = C~ 
d~2 
d~ 
( 113) 
(114) 
(115) 
(116) 
We are interested in determining the inhomogeneous part of the solution. We find 
that F(~) = a + b~ satisfies Eq.(l16) provided we choose a = 2b = C /2. Thus 
we obtain 
and therefore 
l/J~I) = - ~ ~ (I + ~~) e-~ cose 
Substituting in Eq.(l 08) we get 
W?) = I 
l/J~O) H'l/J;I)dr 
III [_I ~e-r/ao] [qer cos e] 
ILF 3/2 
y,+n ao 
(117) 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
521 
where EH(~ 13.6 eV) is a positive number. The above result is in MKS units. In 
CGS units (which is often used in such problems), the result is 
(2) 
9 a5 
2 2 
9 3 2 
W 
= ---e e = --a e 
1 
8 EH 
4 0 
where we have used the result EH = e2/2ao. Thus we may write 
Thus the polarizability9 for the normal hydrogen atom is given by 
9 
ex = -a6 = 0.677 x 10-24 cm3 
2 
Similarly, one can obtain expressions for 1jf ;2) (r) and W j(4) (see, e.g. Ref. 4). 
19.8. Problems 
(119) 
(120) 
Problem 19.1 Consider an electron inside an infinitely deep one dimensional 
potential well: 
Vex) 
0 for 0 < x < L 
00 
for x < 0 and x > L 
(see Sec.6.6.1). Assuming a perturbation of the form H' = - Qex show that in the 
first order perturbation theory each level gets shifted by -
~ Qe L. Further, show 
that for the ground state (n = 1) 
where 
C2 = 
32 4 (JL~2) (-QeL), etc. 
27rr 
n 
Problem 19.2 Consider the one-dimensional harmonic oscillator problem. Assum-
ing perturbation H' = f3x4 show that 
W 
-
n 
n 
-
(I) 
3f3 
(2 
1) 
n 
-
2(wu/n)2 
+ + 2 
(121) 
9 For details on polarizability one may refer to Ref. 5, Sec. 2ge and 49f; Ref. 6, Sec. 5.3. 

522 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
[Hint: see Problem 12.5]. 
Problem 19.3 Let the matrix 
be written in the form P = Po + pi, where 
Po = ( 6 ~) and 
pi = (~ ~) 
Consider pi as the perturbation and use second order perturbation theory to 
calculate the eigenvalues of P. Compare the results with the ones obtained by 
diagonalizing the matrix P. 
Problem 19.4 Let the matrix 
( I £ 
0 
) 
P = 
£ I 
0 
002+£ 
be written in the form P = Po + pi where 
and 
pi = (! ~ ~) 
00£ 
Consider pi as the perturbation and use degenerate state perturbation theory to 
calculate the eigenvalues of P. 
Problem 19.5 Consider a particle in an infinitely deep potential well inside a cube 
of dimension L (see Sec. 6.8). Consider a perturbation of the form 
Apply first order perturbation theory to the first excited state which is 3-fold 
degenerate. Is the degeneracy completely lifted? 
Problem 19.6 Consider a Hamiltonian of the form 
H = Ho+ H' 
where 
(122) 
and 
(123) 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
523 
The above Hamiltonian represents two identical oscillators (along the same axis) 
with an interaction between the two. (If we replace Xl by X, and X2 by y, we would 
have a two-dimensional oscillator which has been discussed in Problem 10.13). 
Treat H' as a perturbation and calculate the first order shift in the energy level of 
the first excited state. This problem can also be solved exactly. Obtain the exact 
solution and compare with the result obtained by using perturbation theory. 
Problem 19.7 In continuation of the previous problem, consider again two identical 
oscillators with an interaction given by 
(124) 
Treat H' as a perturbation and show that in the first order perturbation theory, the 
ground state is not shifted and the 2-fold degenerate first excited state split whose 
energies are 
( 2 ± ~~) 
/1u)" 
4M 
' 
The corresponding eigenfunctions being 
Problem 19.8 Using first order perturbation theory calculate the ground state 
energy of a helium-like atom; assume the interaction between the two electrons 
to represent the perturbation. Show that the first ionization potential for a single 
electron is given by 
(~Z2 - ~z) EH 
(125) 
Assume the nucleus to be infinitely heavy. 
Problem 19.9 While solving the Schrodinger equation for a hydrogen-like atom 
one assumes the nucleus to be a point charge. Using first order perturbation theory 
calculate the effect of the finite size of the nucleus assuming the nucleus to be a 
sphere of radius RN with its charge uniformly distributed throughout its volume. 
(The effect of the finite size of the nucleus is usually referred to as volume effect 
and is important while considering isotope shift). 
Problem 19.10 The previous problem has an important application in muonic 
atoms 10 which consists of a {l-meson and a nucleus (mIL ~ 207me ). First show 
that the Bohr radius for the muonic atom is comparable to the nuclear radius for 
Z ~ 45; thus for Z ~ 45 the muon orbit may be inside the nucleus. Assuming the 
10 Muonic atoms may be formed when a muon slows down through matter. Such atoms have been 
obtain for Z = I to heavy elements like uranium. 

524 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Coulomb potential to be a perturbation, calculate the energy levels of the muonic 
atom. 
Problem 19.11 In the n = 4 to n = 3 transition of the He+ -atom calculate the 
separation between the three lines corresponding to the following transitions 
and 
42 F7/2 -+ 32 D5/2 
42 F5/2 -+ 32 D3/2 
42 D3/2 -+ 32 PI/2 
[Ans: ~ 0.45 cm- I , 1.48 cm- I ] 
Problem 19.12 (a) In the n = 3 to n = 2 transition of the hydrogen atom 
(the Ha line of the Balmer series) calculate the separation between the two lines 
corresponding to the following transitions 
32 D5/2 -+ 22 P3/2 
32 D3/2 -+ 22 PI / 2 
(b) The Hf3 line of the Balmer series of the hydrogen atom corresponds to the 
n = 4 -+ n = 2 transition. The two most intense lines of the fine structure of the 
H f3 line corresponds to 
and 
42 D3/2 -+ 22 PI/2 
transitions. Calculate the separation between the two lines. 
(c) Show that there would be 3 lines resulting from the 2 D -+2 P transition. 
Problem 19.13 A plane rotator is defined by the Hamiltonian H = M~ /21 where 
I is the moment of inertia and Mz is the operator of the component of angular 
momentum along the axis of rotation z. Replace M z by -iii ail</> and find the eigen-
values and normalized eigenfunctions of H. (You will only have to assume that the 
wave functions should be single-valued.) If the rotator be perturbed by a constant 
field in its plane, in which its potential energy is 8 cos </J, show that to the order 8 2, 
the displacement of the level Em is 
Problem 19.14 A particle moves in a potential that is central except for a small 
non-central perturbation 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
525 
Show that in first order perturbation theory, the energies of the states s of the system 
are unaffected and that the three p states (l = 1; m = 1, 0, -1) are respectively 
perturbed by ~ A, A and -
~ A where A is determined from the form of the central 
potential and of F(r). 
[Hint: The unperturbed eigenfunctions of the p states are of the form 
R(r)Yl,1(e, <1»; R(r)Y',o(e, <1» and R(r)Y,,_,(e, <l>H 
Problem 19.15 Consider the interaction between two hydrogen atoms in their 
ground state (this kind of interaction is known as Van der Waal's interaction). Let A 
and B denote the positions of the nuclei of the two atoms; these nuclei are assumed 
to be fixed in space and separated by a distance R-see Fig.19.5. Show that the 
z-aXIS 
R 
Figure /9.5. The hydrogen atom molecule; A and B denote the positions of the two nuclei. 
Hamiltonian can be written in the form 
H = Ho+ H' 
(126) 
where 
(127) 
and 
(128) 
Xl, X2, etc. represent the x-coordinates of the electrons 1 and 2 with respect to the 
nulei A and B respectively. Use perturbation theory to calculate the effect of H'. 
(The variational analysis of the hydrogen molecule and the hydrogen molecule ion 
is discussed in Sec. 21.7, Problems 21.4 and 21.5). 
19.9. Solutions 
Solution 19.5 If we refer to Sec. 6.8 then the energy eigenvalue corresponding to 
the first excited state is given by 

526 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The state is 3-fold degenerate; the wave functions are 
Now 
/8 . 2rr x . rr y . rr z 
UI = Y v slllT slllT SIn T; 
/8 . rrx . 2rry . rrz 
U2 = yvSlllTSlllTSInT; 
a. 
rr x . rr y . 2rr z 
U3 = 
-SIn-Slll-Slll--' 
L3 
L 
L 
L ' 
[nx = 2, ny = 1, nz = I] 
[nx = l,n y = I,n" = 2] 
H:j = f u7 H'u jde = k f f f u7x 2U j dxdydz 
Simple integrations show that 
HI = 0 
for i .../.. I' 
'.I 
i. 
Thus we already have a representation in which H' is diagonal. Further 
, 
2(1 I) 
H =kL 
- - -
=gl 
'.I 
3 
8rr 2 
(say) 
and 
I 
, 
? (1 
1) 
H22 = Hv, = kL-
- - --
= g2 
.. 
3 
2rr2 
(say) 
Hence the secular determinant is 
W (I) 
gl -
1 
o 
o 
o 
W(l) 
g2 -
1 
o 
o 
o 
W (I) 
g2 -
1 
=0 
The roots are gl, g2, g2; the degeneracy is partially lifted and the perturbed energy 
levels are 
W,(O) + g" 
W1(O) + g2 
and 
W1(O) + g2 
Solution 19.6 The normalized eigenfunctions of Ho are 
where 
[ILk] 1/4 
~,= YXl'~2 = YX2 = Y = fl2 
The corresponding eigenvalues are [see also Problem 10.11 J 
W~~:n2 = (n 1 + n2 + l)liw 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
527 
The first excited state is two-fold degenerate (n I = 0, n2 = I and n I = I, n2 = 0) 
the corresponding eigenvalue being 2nw. If we write Ul = 0/6°~, U2 = o/iob and 
, 
, 
then H{l = H~2 = 0 and 
-00 
-00 
A 
A 
, 
-= -nw=H21 
2y2 
2k 
-00 
On solving the secular equation, we obtain 
A 
W(l) = ±-nw 
2k 
the corresponding eigenfunctions being 
1 
1 
(0) 
(0) 
;:;-(Ul ± U2) = ;:;-(0/0 I ± 0/ 1 0) 
y2 
y2" 
The exact eigenvalues of H can be determined if we introduce the new variables 
Thus 
H = -- -- + -
+ -(k + A)7]2 + -(k -
A)7]2 
n2 ( a2 
( 2 ) 
I 
I 
2M a I7T 
a 
17~ 
2 
I 
2 
2 
The exact energy levels of which are given by [see Problem 10.13] 
n 1, n2 = 0, 1, 2, ... 
If we make a binomial expansion of the square root in powers of AI k then the first 
order terms will be the same as obtained from the perturbation theory. 

528 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
VCr) 
1 
Figure /9.6. The solid curve shows the variation of VCr) [as given by Eq. (130)] when the effect of 
the finite size of the nucleus has been taken into account. The dashed curve in the region r < R N is 
the extension of the 1/ r variation. 
Solution 19.911 The charge density inside the nucleus is 
Ze 
4rr R3 
3 
N 
Thus the force acting on the electron will be given by 
Ze2 4n 3 1 
F(r) = ----r -
for 
0::: r ::: RN 
4rr R3 3 
r2 
3 
N 
Since F(r) = -av jar, we obtain (see Fig.19.6) 
VCr) = 
Ze2 (3 1 
r2 ) 
--- ----
RN 
2 
2 R~ 
for 
r 
(129) 
(130) 
where the zero of the potential energy has been assumed at r = 00 and use has been 
made of the fact that V (r) is continuous at r = R N. The perturbation is therefore 
given by 
H' 
_ Ze2 (~ _ ~~) + Ze2 
RN 
2 
2 R~ 
r 
for 
0::: r ::: RN 
= 0 
for r:::: RN 
11 Solutions 19.9 and 19.10 have been adapted from Ref. 7. 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
529 
Consequently 
RN 
2][ 
W~I) = f r2dr 1][ sinBdB f d¢[1fr~O)]* H'1fr~O) 
o 
0 
Since the radius of the nucleus is usually much smaller than the Bohr radius, we 
may assume the wave function to remain constant over the region of integration; 
thus we may replace 1fr~0) by its value at r = O. Consequently 
RN 
W~I) ~ [Rnl (0)]2 f H'r2dr f f IY1m(B, ¢)1 2 sin BdBd¢ 
o 
~ ~ Z4 (RN)2 EH810 
5 n 3 
ao 
where we have used the relation 
and EH ~ 13.6 eY. A positive value of W~l) was expected because the potential 
energy increases due to the finite size of the nucleus (see Fig. 19.6). Thus 
(0) 
(I) 
Z2EH [ 
4 Z2R6A2/3 
] 
Wn ~ Wn + Wn 
= ---2-
1 -
-5 
2 
8/0 
n 
aon 
(131 ) 
where we have used the relation RN = RoA 1/3, A being the mass number of the 
nucleus and Ro ~ 1.07 X 10-15 m. For hydrogen, 
(132) 
which is indeed a very small correction. 
Solution 19.10 For orbits inside the nucleus, we may write [see Eq. (130)] 
Ho = _~V2 _ Ze 2 (~- ~-=-) 
2m/L 
RN 
2 
2 R~ 
and 

530 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where mil represents the mass of the muon. Now, Ho is the same as one obtains 
in the 3-dimensional harmonic oscillator problem (see Solution 10.12). The radial 
part of the Schrbdinger equation is of the form 
The energy levels are given by 
3 Ze2 
( 
3) 
E = --- + 2p + l + -
tiu)' 
2 RN 
2' 
(133) 
where 
l = 0,1,2, ... ; 
p = 0,1,2, ... 
and 
(134) 
Further 
(I) 
2 JOO 
2 [ 1 (3 
r2) 1] 
2 
W 
= Ze 
IR II 
-
- - --
- -
r dr 
p 
RN 
2 
2R~ 
r 
(135) 
RN 
where the wave functions can be expressed in terms of confluent hypergeometric 
functions (see Solution 10.12 and Appendix F). 
As an example 1 2 , if we consider the 2P ---+ 1 S transition in lead (Z = 82) and 
assume the nucleus to be a point charge, the energy liberated would be 
-Z EH 
-
-
-
= 207Z EH-
~ 14MeV 
mil 
2 
[ 1 
1 ] 
2 
3 
me 
F 
22 
4 
If we take into account the effect due to spin and due to relativistic effects, the 
above value increases by 2 Me V to give 16 MeV; however, the experiments show 
that a photon of energy "'-' 6 Me V is emitted. If we calculate the 1 S energy level 
from Eq.(l33) and the 2P energy level from the expression 
then the energy difference between the 2P and IS states comes out to be 3.6 MeV. 
If we now use Eq.(l35) to incorporate the correction for the 1 S energy state one 
obtains a value of 5 MeV which is close to the experimental value. 
12 Data taken from Ref. 7. A nice discussion on muonic atoms has been given by these authors. 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
531 
Solution 19.15 13 The perturbation H' is given by 
e 2 
e 2 
e 2 
e2 
H'=-+-----
R 
r12 
RIB 
R2A 
(136) 
The terms e 2 / R, e2/ r12, -e2 / riB and _e2/ r2A represents the interaction between 
the two protons, the two electrons, the first electron with the nucleus at B and the 
second electron with the nucleus at A respectively. We expand H' in powers of 
1/ R: 
1 _ 2z1 
XI + YI + ZI 
_ 
I 
2Z2 
X2 + h + Z2 
{ 
2 
2 
2 } -1/2 
{ 
2 
2 
2 } -I /2] 
R + 
R2 
+ R + 
R2 
e2 
::::::: 
R3(XI X2+YIY2- 2ZIZ2) 
(137) 
Let l/IiO) represent the wave functions of the unperturbed Hamiltonian and let Ik) 
represent the corresponding eigenket; the ground state is assumed to correspond to 
k = I. Thus 
l/I;O) = uI00(rdu lOO(r2) 
( 138) 
where Unlm represent the hydrogen atom wave functions. Obviously 
because integral like 
would vanish. Now 
w?) = L:'I(lIH'lk)1 2 > --L:'I(lIH'lk)1 2 
k 
E I - EkE I -
Ep 
k 
(140) 
13 This solution is adapted from Ref. 9. 

532 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where the prime on I: indicates that the term k = I has been omitted from the 
summation. 14 Further the pth state (p -I I) corresponds to the lowest state for 
which (11 H'I p) does not vanish and the inequality follows from that fact that Ek :::: 
Ep. Now 
L 1(1IH'lk)12 -1(1IH'11)1 2 
k 
L I (lIH'lk)121(kIH'II) 12 
k 
(141) 
where we have used Eq.(139) and the relation 
L Ik)(kl = I 
k 
(see Eq.(40) of Chapter 11), Now 
4 
e (11 2 2 
2,2 
4 2 2 
2 
R6 
x 1x2 + Ylh + ZlZ2 + XIX2YIY2 
4XIX2ZIZ2 -4YIY2zlz211) 
(142) 
Further 
me4 
me4 
e4 
E) = -- -
-
=--
21i2 
21i2 
ao 
and the lowest state for which I (II H'lk) I -I 0 corresponds to n 1 = n2 = 2. Thus 
and 
Hence 
or 
(143) 
14 The L actually represents summation over discrete states and integration over continuum. 

Time Independent Perturbation Theory 
533 
19.10. References and suggested reading 
1. R. Bellman, Perturbation Techniques in Mathematics, Physics and Engineer-
ing, Dover Publishing, New York (1966). 
2. A. H. Nayfeh, Introduction to Perturbation Techniques, John Wiley & Sons, 
New York (1981). 
3. H. E. White, Introduction to Atomic Spectra, McGraw-Hill, New York (1934). 
4. A. Dalgamo, Stationary Perturbation Theory, in Quantum Theory: 1 Ele-
ments: (Ed: D. R. Bates), Academic Press, New York (1961). 
5. L. Pauling and E. B. Wilson, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-
Hill Book Co., New York (1935). 
6. M. Karplus and R. N. Porter, Atoms and Molecules, W. A. Benjamin, New 
York (1970). 
7. A. A. Sokolov, Y. M. loskutov and I. M. Temov, Quantum Mechanics, Holt, 
Rinehart and Winston, New York (1966). 
8. F. K. Ritchmeyer, E. H. Kennard and T. Lauritsen, Introduction to Modern 
Physics, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York (1955). 
9. L. 1. Schiff, Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York (1968). 

Chapter 20 
Effects of Magnetic Field 
... On the basis of my earlier results on the classification of spectral terms in a 
strong magnetic field, the general formulation ofthc exclusion principle became 
clear to me. 
-
WOLFGANG PAULI in his Nobel lecture. 
20.1. Introduction 
Studies on the interaction of magnetic field with particles are of immense im-
portance in many diverse areas. For example, in spectroscopy, the splitting of 
lines in a magnetic field (which leads to Zeeman and Paschen-Back effects, see 
Problems 20.1-2004) is a subject of considerable importance (see, e.g. Ref. 1). In 
solid state physics, the calculation of diamagnetic and paramagnetic susceptibilities 
(see Problem 20.11) and the experiments on electron spin resonance and nuclear 
magnetic resonance (see Chapter 14), have immense practical importance (see, e.g. 
Ref 2-5). 
In this chapter we will discuss the interaction of magnetic field with particles. 
We will first develop the Hamiltonian of a charged particle in an electromagnetic 
field (Sec. 20.2) and will then discuss the interaction of the magnetic field with the 
orbital angular momentum and spin angular momentum of the electron (Secs 20.3 
and 2004). For example, we will show that the possible values of the magnetic mo-
ment component of the electron (because of its orbital motion) along the direction 
of the magnetic field are 
(1) 
where I 
I In Chapter 10, the magnetic quantum number is denoted by m, here it is denoted by m, to avoid 
confusion with the electron mass m. 
534 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

Effects of Magnetic Field 
qli 
fLB == -
= 9.274 X 10-24 Joule/tesla 
2m 
9.274 X 10-28 Joule/gauss 
(l tesla = 104 gauss) 
535 
(2) 
is known as the Bohr magneton, m[ is the magnetic quantum number; the charge 
of the electron has been assumed to be -q(q :::::: 1.602 x 10-19 C). Thus for a d-
electron (l = 2) the possible values of orbital magnetic moment along the direction 
of the magnetic field are 
corresponding to m{ = +2, + 1,0, -1 and -2 respectively. 
On the other hand, the magnetic moment components due to the spin angu-
lar momentum of the electron, along the direction of the magnetic field are (see 
Secs 14.3 and 14.4). 
(3) 
where g is known as the Lande's g facto?- (:::::: 2.0023). The corresponding proton 
magnetic moment is 
(4) 
where gp :::::: 5.56, and 
qli 
fLp = 2M :::::: 5.051 x 10-31 Joule/gauss. 
In Sec. 20.5 we will discuss the spin-orbit interaction. 
20.2. The Hamiltonian 
We first define the vector and scalar potentials. From the Maxwell's equation 
V·B=O 
(5) 
2 The relativistic theory of Dirac predicts R = 2; however, relativistic quantum electrodynamics 
shows that 
R = 2 + ~ + O(ex 2) 
2rr 
where ex (4][~: lie ~ 1~7) is the fine structure constant. For the proton, g is very much different 
from 2 and hence it is not really a pure Dirac particle. It may be mentioned that neutral particles like 
neutrons; A. "EO (which have spin ~) have finite magnetic moments; e.g. for the neutron P-n=-3.83 
(q j2mn )s. where mn is the neutron mass. Physically this arises from internal current distributions. 

536 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
it immediately follows that B can be expressed as the curl of a vector 
B=VxA 
(6) 
where A is known as the vector potential. Further, if we substitute this in the 
equation 
we would get 
Thus we may set 
aB 
V x S =--
at 
aA 
S=---V</J 
at 
where </J is known as the scalar potential. 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
We next consider the motion of a charged particle (of charge Q) in an electro-
magnetic field. The force acting on the charged particle is given by 
F = Q [S + v x B] 
(10) 
or 
m-=F=Q ---V</J+vx(VxA) 
dv 
[ 
aA 
] 
dt 
dt 
Now 
(v x V x A)x = Vy (aA y _ aAx) _ Vz (aAx _ aAz) 
. 
ax 
ay 
az 
ax 
a 
dAx 
aAx 
-(v·A)--+-
ax 
dt 
at 
where use has been made of the following relation 
dAx _ aAx (v aAx v aAx v aAx) 
d -
OJ 
+ 
x a 
+ 
Y a 
+ 
Z a 
t 
(It 
x· Y 
z 
Thus 
d dt [my + QA] = V (-Q</J + Q(v· A)) 
(II) 
The above equation can be written in the form 
d (aL) 
aL 
-
-
--
dt 
ai 
ax 
(12) 

Effects of Magnetic Field 
(and similar equations with x replaced by y and z) where 
I 
L = -my . v -
Q</J + QA . v 
2 
537 
(13) 
Equation (12) is the Lagrangian equation of motion (see, e.g. Ref. 6) and L denotes 
the Lagrangian. The conjugate momenta are given by 
aL 
Px = ai = mvx + QAx 
or 
p = mv+ QA 
(14) 
The Hamiltonian is given by 
H=p·v-L 
P . [~ (p _ QA)] _ ~m [~ (p _ QA)] 2 
I 
+Q</J- QA· -(p- QA) 
m 
1 
2 
2m [p - QA] + Q</J 
(15) 
Equation (15) represents the Hamiltonian describing the non-relativistic motion of 
a charged particle in an electromagnetic field. 
In order to write the SchrOdinger equation, we replace the operator p by -i fi V 
to obtain 
where 
aw 
i fi- = Hw 
at 
I. 
2 
H = -
[-lfiV - QA] + Q</J 
2m 
20.3. The Schrodinger equation corresponding to a static 
electromagnetic field 
For a static electromagnetic field the wave function can be written in the form 
w(r, t) = l/f(r) e-iEt / 1l 
where l/f (r) satisfies the equation 
I -[-i fiV - QA]2l/f + Q</Jl/f = El/f 
2m 
(16) 
(17) 
(18) 

538 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
or 
Now, in the Coulomb gauge3, V . A = 0 and we have 
V . (Aljf) = (V . A)ljf + A· Vljf = A . Vljf 
which gives 
li2 2 
iQIi 
[Q2 2] 
--V ljf + -A· Vljf + -A + Q</J ljf = Eljf 
2m 
m 
2m 
Further, for a uniform magnetic field, we can always write4 
I 
A = -(B x r) 
2 
Thus the second term in Eg. (20) becomes 
i Q Ii 
-A· Vljf = 
m 
i Q Ii 
-(B x r) . Vljf 
2m 
_RB . [r x (-i liV)]ljf 
2m 
Q 
Q 
--B· (r x p)ljf = --(B· L)ljf 
2m 
2m 
-/Lo . Bljf 
where L = r x p represents the orbital angular momentum and 
Q 
/Lo = 2m L 
3 From Eg. (6) we see that B is left unchanged if we add gradient of a scalar to A: 
A ---+ A' + Vx 
(19) 
(20) 
(21) 
(22) 
(23) 
We may choose X such that V . A = 0; this is known as the Coulomh gauge (for further details, see, 
for example, Ref. 7): 
4 
Also notice that 
V x A = 
~ V x (B x r) = ~ [(V· r)B - (B· V)r] 
1 
2:l3B - BJ = B 
V·A = !V.(Bxr)=![r.(VxB)-B.(Vxr)I=O 
because the field is uniform. 

Effects qf Magnetic Field 
539 
can be interpreted as the magnetic moment associated with the orbital motion of the 
charged particleS (the subscript () signifies that the magnetic moment refers to the 
orbital motion). This follows from the fact that the interaction energy of a magnet 
(with magnetic moment Ito) in a uniform magnetic field is given by6 
U = -lLo ' B 
(24) 
Equation (20) therefore assumes the form 
n2 
2 
( Q 
) 
Q2 
2 
--\7 1/1 -
-L· B 
1/1 + -(B x r) 1/1 + Qcp1/l = E1/I 
2m 
2m 
8m 
(25) 
The second term has just been physically interpreted as the magnetic interaction 
energy associated with the circulatory motion of the charged particle; the third term 
can also be interpreted in terms of a potential energy function (see, e.g., Ref. 10, 
Section 10.6), however the considerations are rather involved. Further, since the 
term is proportional to the square of the magnetic field, it makes a negligible 
contribution unless the fields are extremely high. 
20.4. The interaction of the magnetic field with the spin angular 
momentum of the electron 
In Sec. 14.3 we had discussed that the electron is endowed with an intrinsic spin 
angular momentum given by 
I 
s = -n(1 
2 
(26) 
where ITx, ITy and IT 2 are the Pauli matrices. Further, the magnetic moment associ-
ated with the spin angular momentum of a particle of charge Q has the form [cf. 
Eq. (23)] 
Q 
IL = g-s 
2m 
(27) 
As mentioned earlier, for the electron g :::::: 2 and Q = -q; on the other hand, for 
the proton g :::::: 5.56, Q = +q and m has to be replaced by the proton mass. 
5 Equation (23) can be physically understood by noting that a charge Q rotating (in the anticlock-
wise diection) in a circle of radius r with speed v constitutes a current 1= Q/(2:rrr/v) and therefore 
the magnetic moment associated with the motion is given by (see, e.g. Ref. 8, Section 34-3). 
Qv 
Qv 
2~ 
Q 
Q 
Il=-A=-:rrr z=-rxp=-L 
2:rrr 
2:rrr 
2m 
2m 
where we have assumed the circular motion to be in the x-y plane and the area vector A points in the 
positive z-direction for anticlockwise motion. 
6 See, e.g. Ref. 9, p.19. 

540 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Thus the total magnetic moment of the electron is given by 
ILtatal = _!L [L + gs] ::::: _!L [L + 2s] 
2m 
2m 
(28) 
20.5. The spin-orbit interaction 
In order to physically understand the spin-orbit interaction we note that an observer 
who is at rest with the electron sees the nucleus moving around him; the circulating 
nucleus constitutes a current and produces a magnetic field at the electron given by 
where E represents the electric field produced at the electron by the nucleus and v 
the velocity of the electron. For a central potential 
Thus 
IdV 
-qE = -VV = ---r 
r dr 
I I dV 1 
B=----L 
qe2 r dr m 
(29) 
(30) 
where L = r x p represents the angular momentum. The interaction energy with 
the magnetic moment of the electron is given by 
Hs- a = -~IL. B = -~ [-g!LsJ . [_I ~ dV ~L] 
222m 
qe2 r dr m 
_g_~dVL.s 
4m 2e2 r dr 
(31 ) 
where an additional factor of ~ has been introduced; this is known as the Thomas 
procession factor and comes from a proper relativistic treatment (Ref. I I). The 
subscript s-o on H implies spin-orbit interaction. For the Coulomb potential 
and 
where 
Zq2 
VCr) = ---
4nEor 
gZ tux I 
Hs- o = ---L·s 
4m2c r3 
q2 
I 
Ci = ---
4n EO lie 
137 
(32) 

Effects of Magnetic Field 
541 
represents the fine structure constant. It may be mentioned that the spin-orbit inter-
action comes out automatically through a proper relativistic treatment. 
20.6. Problems 
Problem 20.1 For a hydrogen atom placed in a weak uniform magnetic field (in 
the z-direction) the Hamiltonian will be of the form 
where 
and 
H = Ho+H' 
p2 
Ho = -
+ VCr) 
2m 
(33) 
(34) 
(35) 
represents the interaction with the magnetic field [see Eq. (24)]; we have neglected 
the effects due to spin angular momentum of the electron (see Problem 20.2). Treat 
H' as perturbation and show that s states (I = 0) are not split whereas the p-states 
(I = 1) are split into three states separated by the energy interval t-t B B. This is 
known as the normal Zeeman effect. 
[Note: In this particular problem the perturbation calculation gives the exact re-
sults.] 
Problem 20.2 In continuation with the previous problem, if we take into account 
the effects due to spin angular momentum of the electron, the Hamiltonian will be 
of the form 
H = Ho+H'+H" 
(36) 
where Ho is given by Eq. (34), H' represents the spin-orbit interaction [see Eq. 
(32)] 
and 
I 
g Z liet 1 
H = fer) L . s, fer) = ---
4m2c r3 
(37) 
(38) 
represents the interaction with the magnetic field (see Eq. (28)). Assume that the 
effect of H" to be small in comparision to the effect of H', use the wave functions 
corresponding to H' as the perturbation (see Solution 19.12) to calculate the effect 
of H". This is known as the weak-field anamolous Zeeman effect, or just Zeeman 
effect. 

542 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Problem 20.3 Consider again the hydrogen-like atom in a magnetic field B. As-
sume the magnetic field to be so strong that the effect of the spin-orbit interaction 
to be small compared to the effect of the magnetic field. Using the eigenfunctions 
of Ho + HI!, calculate the perturbation due to spin-orbit interaction. This is known 
as the Paschen-Back effect. 
Problem 20.4 The previous two problems correspond to weak magnetic field and 
strong magnetic fields respectively. For the intermediate field case, HI + H" has 
to be treated as perturbation to Ho. Use degenerate state perturbation theory to 
calculate the effect of HI + H ". 
Problem 20.5 In the following problem we will consider the effect of the proton 
magnetic moment and hence the hyperfine structure. However, before we do so, we 
note that the electron and proton can ever their spin up or down; thus there are four 
possible spin states 
let p t), Ie t p "'), Ie", p t) and Ie", p "') 
(39) 
where the state Ie t p "') corresponds to electron spin up and proton spin down, 
etc. Show that the operator 
(40) 
is the spin exchange operator, i.e. when P operates on any of the 4 states, the spin 
directions are exchanged. Thus 
Pie t p "') = Ie", p t) , etc. 
In Eg. (40) (1 e and (1 p represent the Pauli spin matrices for electron and proton 
respectively; further (1 e acts only on the electron spin and (1" acts only on the 
proton spin. 
Problem 20.6 The magnetic field due to the proton magnetic moment interacts 
with the magnetic moment of the electron to give rise to the following interaction 
energy for s states [see Eg. (23-193) of Ref. 12]: 
where 
I 
E 
H::::::~(1('.(11' 
n-
E = 3~~MpMB = 3~~ (gp 4::,,) (ge !;) 
(41 ) 
(42) 
gp(:::::: 5.56) and gee:::::: 2.0) represent the g factors of proton and electron respec-
tively; ao represents the Bohr radius and Mp represents the proton mass. Show for 
the ground state (n = I) H' leads to the (hyperfine) splitting of 4E which leads to 
the 21 cm line. 

Effects of Magnetic Field 
543 
Problem 20.7 In continuation of the previous problem, if we put the hydrogen 
atom in a magnetic field, the interaction energy (for n = 1) is 
(43) 
Calculate the corresponding splitting and the spin wave functions. 
Problem 20.8 In Example 14.1, instead of solving the time dependent Schrodinger 
equation, solve the Heisenberg equation of motion for sx, Sy and Sz. For 
1\11(0)) = cos (~<p ) rz t) + sin (~<p ) rz ~) 
(44) 
calculate (sAt)), (sv(t)) and (sz(t)) and interpret the results physically. 
Problem 20.9 For a uniform magnetic field in the z-direction, we may assume 
Ax = 0, Ay = xB, Az = 0 
(45) 
(Notice that V xA = BZ and V·A = 0). Write down the corresponding Schrodinger 
equation for an electron and obtain an exact solution of the same 7 . How would the 
eigenvalues get modified if the magnetic moment associated with the spin angular 
momentum is also taken into account. 
Problem 20.10 In the above problem, if we assume A to be given by Eq. (21), show 
that the same values for the energy eigenvalues are obtained; the wave functions 
however differ by an unimportant phase factor. 
Problem 20.11 In continuation of Problem 20.10, consider an electron in a spheri-
cally symmetric potential experiencing a uniform magnetic field in the z-direction 
for which A may be assumed to be of the form 
1 
1 
Ax = --yB, Av = -xB, A z = 0 
2 
. 
2 
(46) 
Carry out a perturbation analysis and show that if (HI) and (H2 ) represent the 
perturbations proportional to Band B2 then whenever (Hd :F 0, 
(47) 
Derive expressions for diamagnetic and paramagnetic susceptibilities. 
Problem 20.12 In the above problem if we assume A to be given by Eq. (45) show 
that the final results are the same. 
Problem 20.13 The potential energy of a two-dimensional harmonic oscillator can 
be written as 
(48) 
7 This solution leads to the orbital diamagnetism of free electrons (see, e.g. Ref. 2, Chapter XVI). 

544 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Determine the energy levels and wave functions of the oscillator placed in a uni-
form magnetic field along the z-direction 
[Hint: Assuming A to be given by Eq. (46), solve Eq. (20) or Eq. (25)]. 
20.7. Solutions 
Solution 20.1 The perturbation is 
(49) 
The eigenfunctions of Ho are (see Sec. lOA) 
(50) 
Since 
(51) 
we get 
(52) 
and, consequently the off-diagonal elements are zeros. The Zeeman splitting is 
therefore given by 
(53) 
Thus a level characterised by the orbital angular quantum number I splits up into 
(21 + 1) levels. However, because of the selection rule 
f:.m/ = 0, ±l 
(54) 
we get three lines of frequencies 
fLBB 
fLBB 
Wo - --
Wo Wo + --
Ii" 
Ii 
(55) 
which is known as the normal Zeeman effect. 
Solution 20.2 Because of the spin-orbit interaction, the levels split and each 
level is characterised by definite values of J2, L2 and 52 (see Problem 19.12); 
8 Indeed u(n, t, m/) are the exact eigenfunctions of H(= Ho + H') corresponding to the 
eigenvalue En + MBBm/. 

Effects of Magnetic Field 
the corresponding Pauli wave functions are given by 
and 
where 
l+-+m· 
[ 
1 
] 1/2 
2t + 1 } 
Rnl(r) YI, mj-~ 
[ 
1 
] 1/2 
l + --m 
2 
} 
Rnl(r) YI m+l 
2l+1 
'J2 
1 
j± = I ± 2 
545 
(56) 
for} = I+~ 
(57) 
for} = 1- ~ 
The states corresponding to j = I + ~ and j = l -
~ are (21 + 2) and 2l-fold 
degenerate. Now, the Pauli operator for H" is 
(58) 
Since 
a 
L z YI m-1 = -i Ii- YI m _1 = (m) -~) Ii YI m-1 
, 
J 
2 
a¢' J 
2 
' 
J 
2 
we immediately have (for j = I + ~) 
l+-+m 
1 
1 
[ 
1 
] 1/2 
2t+ 1 J 
(m) - 2 + 2g)Rnl(r) YI, mi-~ 
l+--m 
1 
1 
[ 
1 
] 1/2 
212 + 1 } 
(m) + 2 - 2 g)Rnl(r) YI. mi+~ 
The off-diagonal elements are obviously zero and the perturbation is thus given by 
~ = f ¢tcj+,m}) (H")p¢(j+,mj) dr 
(2l+g)m 
1 
f.L B B 
) for j = I + -
(21 + 1) 
2 
(59) 

546 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and similarly, 
(21 + 2 - g)m j 
. 
1 
L'l = M B B 
for J = l -
-
(21 + 1) 
2 
(60) 
Thus the j = I + ~ and j = l -
~ split into (21 + 2) and 21 levels. Further, if we 
assume g = 2, Egs (59) and (60) can be combined to give 
. + 1 
1 
L'l = MBB~ 
m·; j = I ± -
1+1 
J 
2 
2 
(61 ) 
Figure 20.1 shows the splitting of the P-state of an alkali atom. For the P-state, 
I = 1 and we may have j = 3/2 and 112. Thus 
:!m· for 
3 
J 
'l:. m· for 
J' = -21 
3 
J 
Thus the j = 3/2 level will split into 4 states (mj = -~, -~ ~ ~) and the j = ~ 
level will split into 2 states (m j = -
~, ~) as shown in Fig. 20.l. In the figure the 
two states corresponding to B = 0 represent the fine structure splitting given by 
Eg. (117) of Chapter 19 (see Problem 19.12). 
8 
rnl rns 
1 1/2 
4 
0 1/2 
i 
v 
---:s 
0 
-1 1/2 
1 -1/2 
-4 
0 -1/2 
-1 -1/2 
0.0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2 .. 5 
3.0 
3.5 
B 
Figure 20.1. The splitting of the P-state of an alkali atom by magnetic field. The two states 
corresponding to B = 0 represent the fine structure splitting. 
Solution 20.3 It is obvious that the functions 
(62) 
and 
11/1 (n, I, ml, -1)) = In, I, ml, Z +) 
(63) 
are the exact eigenfunctions of Ho + H" belonging to the eigenvalues 

Effects ()f Magnetic Field 
and 
En+/t~B [mln-~gn] 
respectively. The above equations can be combined to give 
En + /tBB(ml + 2m,.) 
547 
(64) 
where ms = ~ and m., = -~ correspond to the spin up and spin down states and 
we have assumed g = 2. Now, for the two states given by Eqs (62) and (63), Lz 
and S2 are well-defined and expectation values of L" sX, Ly and s\' are zero (see 
Problem 13.1). Thus the perturbation is given by 
(f(r)L . s) 
(65) 
where 
2n 3 1 (l + ~) (l + I) 
(66) 
where we have used Eq. (II) of Appendix I. Thus the energy levels are given by 
(67) 
where 
ml = -I, ... , -I and m, = +i and - 1 
(68) 
Equation (67) represents the Paschen-Back effect and as can be seen the operators 
L2, S2, Lz and S2 have well-defined values for each state; this is referred to as 
by saying that S2, L 2 , L z and Sz are good quantum numbers. The splitting for the 
P-state of an alkali atom is shown in Fig. 20.1. In the figure :B = /tBB / S n.l. At 
B = 0, we have the fine structure splitting. For small values of B, Eq. (66) is to be 
used and for large values of B, Eq. (67) is to be used. Both equations are limiting 
forms of Eq. (76) which should be used for intermediate values of B. 
Solution 20.4 We should first mention that for weak fields 52, L 2, J2 and Jz are 
good quantum numbers, and on the other hand, for strong fields s2, L2, Lz and S2 
are good quantum numbers. However, for intermediate fields neither of them are 
good quantum numbers and one must calculate the off-diagonal elements as is done 
in degenerate state perturbation theory. 
We choose as our representation, the eigenstates for the strong field case9 ; these 
are given by Eqs (62) and (63). Now, from Eq. (67) 
(1/1 (n, I, ml, ±~) JH"J1/I (n, I, ml, ±~)) 
= (m ± ~) /tBB 
(69) 
9 We could have equally well chosen the eigenstates for the weak field case. 

548 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
wherelo 
1 
m[ + ~ 
for m., = ~ 
m = m[ +ms = 
1 
m[ -
2: 
for m.,. = -~ 
The off diagonal elements like 
would vanish because 11/1 (n, l, m{, ± D ) are eigenstates of H ". 
Next in order to calculate the matrix elements of 
2 
(70) 
we write 
11/1 (n, l, m[ = m -
~,+~)) 
( I + m + ~) 1/2 
21 + 1 
I¢(n, I, h, m)) 
( 
I) 1/2 
1- m +-
-
21 + 1 2 
I¢(n, t, i-, m)) 
(71) 
11/1 (n,l,m[ = m + L -n) 
l-m +-
( 
1) 1/2 
21 + 1 2 
I¢(n, I, i+, m)) 
( 
)
1/2 
l +m + ~ 
+ 
I¢(n, I, i-, m») 
2l + 1 
(72) 
where i± = l ± ~. Further, ¢ are eigenfunctions in the representation L 2 , s2, 12 
and 1z and we have used the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients from Chapter 18 (see 
Table 18.1). Now 
1 2 1¢(n, l, i+, m)) 
1 2 1¢(n, I, i-, m)) 
(I + ~) (l + i) 1i2 1¢(n, I, i+, m)) 
(I -
~) (l + n 1i2 1¢(n, I, i-, m)) 
(73) 
(74) 
J 0 The quantity III is denoted by m j in Problem 20.2. For convenience, we are dropping the 
subscript j. 

Effects of Magnetic Field 
549 
The operator L 2 has the eigenvalues l (l + 1) Ii 2 and s2 has the eigenvalue ~ (~) 1i2 = 
~ 1i2. Thus (omitting the subscripts n, l): 
( ( 
1 1) I J2 - L 2 - s2 I ( 
1 1)) 
1/1 m/ = m -
2' 2 
2 
1/1 m/ = m -
2' 2 
l + m + 1 
l - m + 1 
J2 _ L2 _ s2 
[( 
)
1/2 
( 
) 1/2 
] 
= 
21 + 1 2 
(¢(j+, m)1 -
21 + 1 2 
(¢(j-, m)1 
2 
l+m+-
l-m+-
[ ( 
I ) 1/2 
(I 
) 1/2 
] 
x 
2l + 1 2 
I¢(j+, m») -
2l + 1 2 
I¢(j-, m») 
l+m+~l{. . 
3} 
2 
= 
2l+1 
2 l+U++1)-I(l+1)-4 Ii 
l-m+~l{.. 
3}21( 1)2 
+ 
J-U- + 1) -l(l + 1) - -
Ii = -
m - -
Ii 
21 + 1 2 
4 
2 
2 
Further, the only non-vanishing, non-diagonal matrix elements are 
(1/1 (m/ = m -
~, 4) IL· sl1/l (m/ = m + 4, -4)) 
= (1/1 (m/ = m + ~, -~) IL . sl1/l (m/ = m -
~, ~)) 
= ~ [ (l + m + ~) (l _ 
m + ~) ]'/2 1i2 
Thus, considering HI + HI! as perturbation, secular determinant is (see Sec. 19.3): 
~(m-D sn.l+(m+D {tBB-W 
~sn./[(l+m+D(I-m+DJ'/2 
~sn./[(I+m+D(I-m+D]'/2 
-~(m+D sn,l+(m-D {tBB-W 
where SI1,1 is given by Eq. (66). Equation (75) gives 
W, + W [~'".l -2ml'BB 1 
+ [- G'".l)' /(l + 1) 
The solutions are 
1 
W = --SI11 + mJMBB 
4 ' 
2 2 (2 1)] 
-mMBBSn,l+MBB 
m -4 
=0 
I [ 
2 
2 
±4 4MBB + 8s 
11,/ m jMBB 
+s~.l(2l + 1)2]'/2 
=0 
(75) 
(76) 

550 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where we have reintroduced the subscript j on m. It may be noted that 
(i) For B = 0 
I 
W = 4Sn ,! [-I ± (21 + I)] 
(77) 
which is the fine structure splitting (see Problem 19.12). 
(ii) For small B 
1 
1 
[8(m jM B B) ] 1/2 
W ---+ --Sn 1+ (m iMBB) ± -S"I (21 + 1) I + 
~ 
4' 
. 
4' 
Sn,!(21+1)-
I 
21 + I ± 1 
-Sn,[-I±(21+1)]+ 
m,MBB 
(78) 
4' 
21+1 
. 
which is the Zeeman effect (see Problem 20.2). 
(iii) For large B 
which is the same as given by Eg. (67) provided we note that mi = ml + m, 
and the upper and lower signs in Eg. (79) correspond to ms = +~ and m, = 
-
~ respectively. 
For the P-state of an alkali atom, I = 1, and we may write Eg. (76) in the form 
W 
1 
1 / 
-
= -- + mj 2 ± -'1422 + 8m j :B + 9 
Sn'! 
4 
4 
(80) 
where 2 = M B B / S /1,!' In Fig. 20.1 we have plotted the splitting of the P -state of 
an alkali atom. 
Solution 20.5 We first note that 
and 
(T y It) = (~ -~) ( ~ ) = i It) 
where It) and It) states are the rz t) and rz t) states respectively. Similarly, 
(Tx It) = It) and (Tv It) = -i It) 

Effects qj'Magnetic Field 
551 
Since the components of (1 e operate only on the electron spin state and the compo-
nents of (1 p operate only on the proton spin state we have, for example, 
aexa px Ie t p t) 
aeya py Ie t p t) 
a eza pz Ie t p t) 
a ex Ie t p t) = Ie t p t) 
-ia ey Ie t p t) = Ie t p t) 
-a ez Ie t p t) = -Ie t p t) 
aexa px Ie t p t) +aeVa py Ie t p t) +aeza pz Ie t p t) 
21e t p t) - Ie t p t) 
Therefore 
1 
Pie t p t) ="2 [1 +(1e· (1p] Ie t p t) = Ie t p t) 
Similarly one can consider other operations to obtain 
Pie t p t) = Ie t p t), Pie t p t) = Ie t p t) 
(81) 
and 
Pie t p t) = Ie t p t) 
which shows that P is the spin exchange operator. 
Solution 20.6 Since H' is proportional to (1 e . (1 p' we have to look for a represen-
tation in which (1 e . (1 p is diagonal. Introducing the angular momentum operators 
I 
I 
81 = "2 11(1 e , 82 = "211(1 p and 8 = 81 + 82 
(82) 
we have 
(83) 
We have to look for a representation in which S2, s? and si are diagonal. This is 
easily obtained from the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients (see Table 18.1) and one has 
the four states 
II) 
12) 
13) 
Ie t p t) 
letpt) 
I 
~ 
[Ie t p t) + Ie t p t)] 
1 
14) = v0- [Ie t p t) - Ie t p t)] 
(84) 
(85) 
The first three states represent the triplet state and the fourth state represents 
the singlet state. For the triplet state the values of S2, s? and si are 2112 , ~ 112 and 

552 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
~ 112 respectively; the corresponding values for the singlet state are 0, ~ 112 and ~ 112 
respectively. Thus the values of 51 . 52 are: 
~ [2 - ~ - ~] 112 = ~ 112 for the triplet state 
2 
4 
4 
4 
and 
I [3 3] 
2 
3 2 
. 
-
- - - -
11 = - - 11 
for the smglet state 
2 
4 
4 
4 
Consequently for n = 1, the energy for the triplet and singlet states are 
E 1 + E and E 1 -
3E 
(86) 
the separation is 
4E = 32 (gp~) (g q 11) 
3a6 
4Mp 
4m 
(87) 
the corresponding wavelength (= hc/4E) is about 21 cm which is the famous 
21 cm line used by the radio astronomers to measure the amount of hydrogen in 
the galaxy. The measured value of the frequency is (quoted from Ref. 13) 
v = (1420405751.800 ± .028) Hz 
which is one of the most accurately determined quantities. 
Solution 20.7 The states Ie t p t) and Ie ~ p ~) are eigenstates of H' belonging 
to the eigenvalues 
and 
-fLsB + fLpB + E 
It is easy to see that Ie t p ~) and Ie ~ p t) are not eigenstates. We write 
Now 
Hila) 
Thus 
Similarly, 
I a) = let p ~) and I b) = I e ~ p t) 
H' Ie t p ~) = fLBB Ie t p ~) + fLBB Ie t p ~) + E(2? -
1) Ie t p ~) 
(fLBB + fLpB - E) la) + 2E Ib) 
(bIH'lb) = (-fLBB -
fLpB - E), (aIH'lb) = 2E 

Effects afMagnetic Field 
The secular detenninant is 
which gives 
(aIH'la) - w 
(aIH'lb) 
553 
(bIH'la) 
= 0 
(bIH'lb) - W 
(88) 
the corresponding wave functions can easily be found. For B ---+ 0 we get the 
results of the previous problem. 
Solution 20.8 In the Heisenberg representation (see Sec. 12.9) 
Thus 
dsx 
in-
dt 
dsy 
in-
dt 
dsz 
in-
0 
dt 
The solutions are therefore 
The expectation values are 
s x (0) cos wot + Sy (0) sin wot 
-sx(O) sinwot + Sy(O) coswot 
sz(O) 
(89) 
(90) 
(91) 
(92) 
(93) 
(sAt») = (\{I(O)lsAt)I\{I(O») = (sAO») coswot + (Sy(O») sinwot 
(94) 
etc. For I \{I (0)) = Ix t) 
(95) 
and we obtain the same result as in Example 14.1. For 
I \{I (0») = cos <E rz t) + sin <E rz t) 
2 
2 
(96) 
sAO) I \{I (0)) = ~ n cos ~(T x ( ~ ) + ~ n sin ~(T x ( ~ ) 

554 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Thus 
1 
(sAO)) = 2nsin¢ 
Similarly (Sy(O)) = 0 and (sz(O)) = ~ n cos ¢. Physically this implies that at t = 0, 
the spin is in the x-z plane at an angle with the z-axis. Using Eqs (91 )-(93), we get 
I 
(sAt)) 
2 n sin ¢ cos wot 
(97) 
(Sy(t)) 
1 
-2 n sin ¢ sin wot 
(98) 
1 
(sz(t)) 
2 n cos¢ 
(99) 
which shows the precessional motion (see Example 14.2). 
Solution 20.9 Equation (20) with ¢ = 0, Q = -q and A given by Eq. (45) 
becomes 
2 
2m [ 
iq n a 1/1 
1 2 2 2] 
V 1/1 + -) E + -Bx- - -q B x 
1/1 = 0 
n-
m 
ay 
2m 
(100) 
The solution of Eq. (100) is of the form 
(101 ) 
where u(x) satisfies the following equation 
d2u(x) 
2m [ 
Pz2 q2 B2 ( 
PI' )2] 
--+- E----- x+-
u(x)=O 
dx 2 
n2 
2m 
2m 
qB 
(102) 
Equation (102) is very similar to the linear harmonic oscillator problem (see Sec. 
7.2). The energy eigenvalues are 
E = _z + n + - nL = ~ + (2n + 1)f.lB B 
p2 
( 
I) 
B 
p2 
2m 
2 
m 
2m 
(103) 
where n = 0, I, 2, .... The corresponding u (x) are the Hermite-Gauss functions. 
For a fixed value of n, the continuous energy bands are called Landau bands (see, 
e.g. Ref. 14). Notice that Eq. (103) is independent of P)' and hence there is infinite 
degeneracy. If spin angular momentum is also taken into account, we would get 
p_2 
( 
1) 
E = -' + 2n + 1 ± -
f.l B B 
2m 
2 
(104) 

Effects of Magnetic Field 
555 
Solution 20.11 Equation (20) (for Q = -q and A given by Eq. (46)) gives the 
following expression for the Hamiltonian 
fl22 
iqflB( a a) 
q2B2
7 
2 
H = --v + VCr) - -- x- - y- + --(x- + y ) 
2m 
2m 
ay 
ax 
8m 
Ho + HI + H2 
(l05) 
where 
Ho 
(106) 
(107) 
H2 = 
(l08) 
The term HI represents the interaction between the magnetic moment of the atom 
and the external magnetic field and gives rise to paramagnetism. The term H2 can 
be interpreted as the interaction of the magnetic moment induced in the atom with 
the magnetic field (see, e.g. Ref. 15, Sec. 18.3); this gives rise to diamagnetism. 
Treating HI and H2 as perturbations we get 
and 
If (HI) i=- 0 then (assuming m, '" 1) 
(H2) = q B (r2 sin2 e) '" q B a2 
(HI) 
4fl 
4fl 0 
where ao(==: 0.5 x 10- 10 m) represents the Bohr radius. Thus 
(H2 ) 
-- '" 1.6 X 10-19 
20 
4 X 10-34 
x 0.25 x 10-
B 
10-6 B (B measured in tesla) 
10- 10 B (B measured in Gauss) 
Since the laboratory magnetic fields almost never exceed 105 Gauss, 
(109) 
(110) 
(Ill) 
(112) 

556 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
hence whenever the paramagnetic term is non-zero, it dominates over the diamag-
netic term. Thus for I > 0, (H2) dominates and for I = 0, the diamagnetic term 
determines the magnetic behaviour. Indeed, for such a case (sin2 e) = ~ and 
(113) 
2 
The induced magnetic moment is therefore -
%111 (r2) B; thus if there are N atoms 
per unit volume with each atom having Z electrons, we get the following expres-
sion for the diamagnetic susceptibility 
(114) 
consistent with the classical result (see, e.g. Ref. 15, Sec. IS.3). The diamagnetic 
susceptibility therefore depends on the charge distribution in the atoms. For further 
details and comparison with experimental data, see, e.g. Ref. 4. In order to calulate 
the paramagnetic susceptibility, we note that the magnetic moment per unit volume, 
P, is the statistical average over all possible states: 
P 
L mlMB exp[ -rmiJ 
N-------
Lexp[-rmtl 
Lm/(l - rm/ + ... ) 
(NM ) I 
NMB 
~ -NMB __ 
B -I(l + I) 
L(i - rml + ... ) 
kT 
3 
(lIS) 
where N represents the number of atoms per unit volume and the summation over 
ml goes form -I to +1. Further, 
r = MBB 
kT 
which has been assumed to be very small compared to unity and use has been made 
of the relation 
+1 L ml = 0, 
1111=-1 
+1 
I 
L mj = "3 1(l + 1)(21 + 1) 
1111=-/ 
Thus 
NM1 
Xpara = 3kT I(l + I) 
(116) 

Effects of Magnetic Field 
557 
If we take into account the effect of spin in a multi-electron atom, ml, has to be 
replaced by M/ + 2M" to obtain 
N fL~ [,£Ml 
4'£M;] 
X = 
kT 
2L + 1 + 2S + I 
NfL2 
__ 
B [L(L + 1) + 4S(S + 1)] 
3kT 
( 117) 
The 1/ T dependence of the susceptibility [see, Eqs (I 16) and (I 17) ] is known as 
Curie law. For further details, see Ref. 4. 
Solution 20.13 We assume A to be given by Eq. (46), i.e. 
1 
1 
A = -- yB 
x 
2 
' 
A, = -xB, 
~ 
2 
(I18) 
We can then use either Eq. (20) or Eq. (25). If we use Eq. (20) then the second term 
on the LHS would become 
i Q 11 
-A·VljJ 
fL 
i QI1B [_y~ + x~] 
2fL 
ax 
ay 
QB 
-
2fL [xpy - yPx] 
QB 
il1QB a 
--Lz =+---
2fL 
2fL a1 
(119) 
Thus Eq. (20) [or Eq. (25)] takes the following form in the 2-dimensiona1 polar 
coordinates (p, 1): 
Now for ljJ to be single value we must have 
ljJ(p, 1) = [~ 
eim</J] R(p); 
Thus R (p) will satisfy the equation 
m=0,±1,±2 
1 d (dR) 
2fL [( 
QBml1) 
1 
22m2] 
- -
p- + -
E + 
+ - fLW P -
-
R (p) = 0 
pdp 
dp 
112 
2fL 
2 
p2 
where 
_ (2 
Q2 B2)1/2 
W-
Wo+ --2-
4fL 
(I 20) 
(121) 
(122) 
( 123) 

558 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Equation (122) is of the same form as that of a 2-dimensional harmonic oscillator 
and we can solve either using Cartesian coordinates (see Sec. 10.6) or using cylin-
drical coordinates (see Problem 10.12). If we use Cartesian coordinates, the energy 
eigenvalues would be given by 
mQnB 
E=(nl+n2+l)nw-
; nl.n2=0.1.2,... 
(124) 
2fJ, 
The corresponding eigenfunctions would be appropriate linear combinations of the 
Hermite-Gauss functions which are also eigenfunctions of L z; i.e. the </J depen-
dence of the wave function must be of the form of exp(im</J). 
20.8. References and suggested reading 
I. H.E. White, Introduction to Atomic Spectra, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New 
York (1934). 
2. F. Seitz, The Modern Theory of Solids, McGraw-Hili Book Co., New York 
(1940). 
3. c.P. Slichter, Principles (~f Magnetic Resonance, Harper and Row, New York 
( 1963). 
4. J.H. VanVleck, The Theory of Electric and Magnetic Susceptibilities, Oxford 
University Press, London (1932). 
5. D. Wagner, Introduction to the Theory of Magnetism, Pergamon Press, Oxford 
(1972). 
6. H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 
Reading, Massachusetts (1950). 
7. J.D. Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics, John Wiley, New York (1962). 
8. D. Halliday, R., Resnick and J. Walker, Fundamentals (~f Physics, Fourth 
Edition, John Wiley & Sons, New York (1993). 
9. W.K.H. Panofsky and M. Philips, Classical Electricity and Magnetism, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, Massachusetts (1962). 
10. J.L Powell, and B. Craseman, Quantum Mechanics, Addison-Wesley Publish-
ing Co., Reading, Massachusetts (1961). 
11. L.H. Thomas, The motion of the spinning electron, nature, 117, p. 514 (1926). 

Effects (~f Magnetic Field 
559 
12. G. Baym, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, W.A. Benjamin, Inc., New York 
(1969). 
13. R.P. Feynman, R.B. Leighton and M. Sands, The Feynman Lectures on 
Physics, Vol. III, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, Massachusetts 
( 1965). 
14. H. Kroemer, Quantum Mechanics for Engineering, Material science and 
Applied Physics, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs (1994). 
15. AJ. Dekker, Solid State Physics, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 
( 1952). 

Chapter 21 
The Variational Method 
All science is either physics or stamp collecting. 
-
ERNST RUTHERFORD 
21.1. Introduction 
In many cases stationary perturbation theory cannot be applied successfully as 
there may not be a closely related problem which is capable of exact solution. 
In this chapter, we shall describe the variational method for evaluating the 
energies of the ground state and the first few discrete states of a bound system, 
approximately. We shall then apply it to calculate the ground state energy of the 
helium atom and the hydrogen molecular ion. 
21.2. The basic principle 
Let Wn denote the exact set of eigenfunctions of the hamiltonian H 
(1) 
These eigenfunctions constitute a complete set of functions in the sense that an 
arbitrary bounded quadratically integrable function ¢ can be expanded in terms of 
the eigenfunctions. Thus we may write 
(2) 
Evidently, the quantity 
(H) = f W,7 H Wndr 
(3) 
560 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

The Variational Method 
561 
yields the energy En, assuming that the Wn are normalised. Consider, now, the 
quantity 
E _ f ¢*H¢dr _ (¢ IHI¢) 
</> -
f ¢*¢dr -
(¢ I ¢) 
(4) 
(If we use normalized functions ¢, E</> resembles (H). 
We can show that E</> will always be larger than Eo, the lowest of the spectrum 
En. (Eo is the ground state energy). 
Before proving this simple result, one can see how this comes about. The effect 
of H on the ket vector I ¢) is, in general, to rotate it, except when I ¢) is one of 
the eigenkets of H. Thus the scalar product, formed with the bra (¢ I and H I ¢) 
will be an extremum for the precise case when H I ¢) and I ¢) point in the same 
direction. 
We have, on substitution for ¢ from Eq. (2) in Eq. (3) 
Since 
we obtain 
La,~anEn 
E</> = _n=-__ 
La~an 
n 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
Subtracting Eo, the energy of the ground state, from both sides of the equation, we 
have 
L Ian 12 (En - Eo) 
E</> - Eo = _n ___ ----;;:--_ 
L lan l2 
(8) 
n 
Now 
En ::: Eo 
because by definition Eo is the ground state energy, and since Ian 12 ::: 0 for all n, 
we must have 
or 
(9) 
This important inequality can be used to obtain an upper bound to the ground 
state energy Eo. We choose a suitable function ¢ known as the trial function which 
depends on a number of variable parameter Ci (i = 1, ... p). This trial function is 

562 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
substituted in Eq. (3) and the parameters are chosen so as to make E¢ a minimum 
by solving the p equations 
aE¢ 
. 
-
= ° (/ = 1,2, ... , p) 
aCi 
(10) 
The minimum value of E determined in this way provides an upper bound to Eo, 
which will be close to the actual value if the trial function has a form closely 
resembling that of the actual ground state function 0/0' Many different types of 
trial functions have been tried for the simple atoms and molecules, and some of 
these have been applied to much more complicated systems. 
21.3. The hydrogen atom as an example 
In order to illustrate the use of the variational method, we apply it to the hydrogen 
atom problem. If we choose 
¢ = Al exp ( -a ;0) 
we already have the correct form of the wave function (see Sec. lOA). We will 
calculate 
E (a) -
,----f -:o-¢ *_H_¢_d_T 
- f ¢*¢dT 
and set a E / aa = 0, this will give us the value of a for which E is a minimum. We 
first normalize ¢: 
00 
00 
1 = J 
4:rrr 2dr ¢*¢ = 4:rr IA112 J 
exp [ - 2::] r2dr 
o 
0 
giving 
Thus 
¢ = ( a
3
J ) 1/2 exp (-a~) 
:rr Uo 
Uo 

The Variational Method 
563 
Since 1 (r) is now normalized, E (a) = f 1* H 1dr. Further, since 1 depends only 
on r, we need only keep the part of H which depends on r, i.e. 
Hradial = _~ ~ ~ (r2~) _ e2 
2m r2 3r 
3r 
r 
The integrals are easy to evaluate and one obtains 
[ 1l2a2 
e2a] 
E(a) = --2 --
2mao 
ao 
Setting dEjda = 0 gives a = (me2 j1l2) ao = l. Thus 
e2 
E (a) Imin= --
2ao 
(11) 
(12) 
which is the exact result, as it indeed should be, because we had started out with 
the correct form of 1. 
It is instructive to see what we would obtain if we use other forms of the trial 
function (see also Problem 2l.1). We choose 
Normalizing, we get 
A = (~)3/4 
na2 o 
The integrals are again easy to evaluate and one obtains 
E (a) = [~a _ 22/3 (~) 112] e2 
2 
n 
ao 
The minimum value of E is obtained when a = 8j9n, the corresponding energy 
being 
e2 
E (a) Imin= -0.85-
2ao 
In Fig. 21.1 we have plotted the following normalized functions 
0/1 
( ~ 
)'/\xp (-a~), a = 1 
nag 
ao 
0/2 
( 2a y/4 exp ( -a r2) , a = ~ 
na2 
a2 
9n 
o 
0 
"h 
_a_ 
~exp -a~ ,a =-
( 5) 1/2 
( 
) 
3 
3nag 
ao 
ao 
2 
(13) 
(14) 
(15) 
(16) 

564 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
the values of a are such that one obtains minimum energies for that particular form 
of function. 
0.6 r---,----r---.--y---,----r---.---, 
,pI 
0.4 
0.2 
1.0 
2.0 
r/ao 
3.0 
4.0 
Figure 21.1. The variation of the normalized trial functions as given by Eqs (14), (15) and (16). 
It can be seen that although 0/3 is closer to the actual wave function 0/1 than 0/2 
for large r, the energy obtained for 0/2 is a better estimate. The reason is that for 
calculating energy eigenvalues, the wave function for large r does not contribute 
as much as for smaller values of r. 
This observation illustrates an important point, namely, that the 'best' form of 
wave function depends on the particular problem at hand. If, we are interested 
primarily in the large r behaviour of the wave function for calculating a physical 
quantity for the system, the function that yields a better energy estimate may not 
nevertheless be an appropriate wave function. 
21.4. The helium atom 
Another illustration of the variational method is the application to the ground state 
of helium. If we assume that the two Is electrons move independently in the field 
of the nucleus (i.e. neglecting their mutual repulsion), the wave function will be 
where rl and r2 are the coordinates of the two electrons, with the origin at the 
nucleus and Z = 2, the nuclear charge (see Fig. 22.1). 
The interaction of the electrons will result in their being held little more loosely 
by the nucleus. We therefore choose a trial function of the form 

The Variational Method 
565 
Z,3 
[Z'] [Z'] 
cfJ (rl' r2) = --3 exp -~ exp -~ 
nao 
ao 
ao 
(17) 
with Z' representing an effective nuclear charge and regard it as a variational para-
meter; we expect the best value of Z' to be somewhat less than the nuclear charge. 
Since cfJ is normalized, 
The above integral has been evaluated in Sec. 22.4 and Problem 22.2, the minimum 
value is 
( 
5 )2 e2 
( 
5 )2 
Eo = -2 Z - -
-
= -2 Z - -
x 13.6 eV 
16 
2ao 
16 
which occurs when 
, 
5 
Z =Z--
16 
(18) 
(19) 
This value of the energy is better than the value obtained from first order perturba-
tion theory (see Sec. 22.3). Putting Z = 2, we get 
( 27)2 e2 
e2 
Eo = -
16 
ao = -2.85 ao 
(20) 
The experimental value for the minimum energy required to remove both the elec-
trons from a helium atom is 2.904 e2 / ao. It is worthwhile pointing out that a large 
number of trial functions have been used to obtain the ground state energy of the 
helium atom. Some of the trial functions used and the corresponding ground state 
energies are tabulated in Table 21.1. 
It should be noted that in general, the accuracy of the calculated value of the 
ground state energy increases with increase in the number of terms. 
21.5. Application to excited states 
Suppose we choose a ket I cfJ) which has no component along the ground state axis, 
i.e. I cfJ) lies entirely in the 'plane' of the remaining eigenkets in the Hilbert space. 
If we now vary I cfJ), (keeping the variation within this 'plane'), we ought to arrive 
at the best estimate for the energy of the first excited state. 

566 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Table 21.1. Variation Functions for the Normal Heli urn Atom* 
(Symbols s = rl~r2. t = rl~r? , U = rl2/aO 
Experimental value** W = -5.8736 RHe he) 
Variation function, with best 
values (~f eon.l'tants*** 
1. e-2s 
-Z" 
, 
27 
2. e 
, Z = 16 = 1.6875 
3. e-z '" coshet, Z' = 1.67, c = 0.48 
-z" 
2, 
4. e 
(I + c2t ), Z = \.69, e2 = 0.142 
5. e- Z '" eCu , Z' = 1.86, e = 0.26 
6. e- Z" (1 + CI u), Z' = 1.849, ct = 0.364 
7. e- Z " (l + ct U + c2t2), Z' = 1.816, 
CI = 0.30, C2 = 0.13 
8. e-z'" (I + CI u + C2t2 + qs + q.l'2 + ('su 2 ), 
z' = 1.816, CI = 0.353, C2 = 0.128, 
C3 = -0.101, C4 = 0.033, e5 = -0.032 
* Adapted from Sec. VIII-29d of Ref. 1. 
Energy (in units 
of -RHe hc) 
5.50 
5.6953 
5.7508 
5.7536 
5.7792 
5.7824 
5.80488 
5.80648 
Deviation from 
experiment (ill 
units of - RHe hc) 
0.31 
0.1120 
0.0565 
0.0537 
0.0281 
0.0249 
0.00245 
0.00085 
2rr2/u4 
I 
** RHe = ~ 
= 109722.4 cm- . (M is the reduced mass of the electron and the 
nucleus). 
*** The normalization factor is omitted of these functions, 1 is due to Unsold, 2 to Kellner, 3 
to Eckart and Hylleraas and the remainder to Hylleraas. 
We do this by first restricting our choice ¢ to be orthogonal to 1/fo. Let 
¢ = X -
1/fo f 1/f~x dr 
(21 ) 
Since ¢ is now orthogonal to 1/fo (as can be easily seen by evaluating f ¢*1/fodr), 
we have 
00 
the coefficient ao being zero. 
We can now evaluate E", as before and show that 
oc L lan l2 (En - Ed 
1 
and conclude E", > E 1 using the same arguments as before. 

The Variational Method 
567 
Thus, one chooses an appropriate fonn X with a set of variable parameters, then 
define <p as in Eg. (21) and go through the variation procedure. 
Evidently, this procedure can be continued for higher states; we define 
N-J 
<p = X - L 1/1" f 1/I~x dr 
n=O 
(22) 
<p is now orthogonal to the lowest N -
I states and we can estimate the energy of 
the Nth state. However, the procedure is guite cumbersome as one goes to higher 
levels. It is sometimes possible to choose a trial function <p directly from symmetry 
considerations so that orthogonality to lower state eigenfunctions is ensured. 
21.6. Linear variation functions 
A trial function can also be chosen as a linear combination of a set of complete 
orthonormal function Un: 
The variational energy is therefore given by 
or 
where 
E = =--1,,-1/1_* H_1/I_d_r 
11/1*1/Idr 
n 
n 
m 
n 
n 
In 
Differentiating Eg. (24) with respect to Ck and setting oEjock = 0, we obtain I 
L c~ Hnk - E c% = 0 
For non-trivial solutions the detenninant must vanish. Thus 
I Hij -
EOij I = 0; i, j = 1, 2, ... , m 
J What would be the equation if we had differentiated Eq. (24) with respect to cp 
(23) 
(24) 
(25) 
(26) 
(27) 

568 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Eq. (27) is known as the secular equation. Eq. (27) will, in general, give m roots 
of E. For a particular value of E, the coefficient Ck can be found by using Eq. (26) 
and the nonnalization condition 
(28) 
n 
The lowest root of E and the corresponding wave function represent approxima-
tions to the energy and the wave function of the ground state of the system. Other 
roots and the corresponding wave functions represent approximation to the excited 
states. 
Often, it is more convenient to use a set of basis functions which are not neces-
sarily orthogonal. In that case, the secular equation takes the form 
(29) 
where 
(30) 
is known as the overlap integral. 
21.7. The Hi ion 
As an example of the linear combination method, we consider the Hi ion. The 
Hamiltonian, neglecting the nuclear kinetic energy and the spin-orbit interaction, 
is given by 
(31 ) 
where rA = Ir - RAI, rB = Ir - RBI, R = IRA - RBI, r being the position of 
the electron, RA and RB being the positions of the two protons. 
If R is large, then there will be a large probability for the electron to be either 
near A or near B but not both. Indeed, in the former case we have approximately 
a I s hydrogen atom wave function centred at A and in the latter case at B. This 
suggests that we use a linear combination as a trial function, i.e. 
(32) 

The Variational Method 
569 
Note that the wave functions UIA and UIB which are the Is wave functions at A 
and B are not orthogonal. A single electron wave function as above is called a 
molecular orbital. This particular form of a linear combination of atomic 'orbitals' 
making a molecular orbital is called LCAO-MO for short. We now use Eq. (29). 
The normalised wave functions are given by 
UIA = (~)1/2 exp[-rA/ao] 
nao 
UIB = (~) 1/2 exp [-rB/ao] 
nao 
The integrals in Eq. (29) should now be evaluated 
~fexp[-(2rA/ao)]dr = 1 = SBB 
JTao 
and 
( e2 _ L) SAB - L 
f l exp (-rA/aO) 
R 
2ao 
nag 
rA 
x exp (-rB/aO) dr 
(33) 
In order to evaluate the integrals in the expressions for SAB, HAA and HAB, it is 
convenient to introduce the confocal elliptic coordinates 
rA+rB 
rA-rB 
f.l= 
,v=---
R 
R 
(34) 

570 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and the azimuthal angle ¢. Obviously, 
and 
00 
+1 
2n 
f Fdr = f dfl f dv f d¢ ~3 (fl2 -
v2) F (fl, v, ¢) 
(35) 
1 
~I 
0 
The integrations can easily be carried out. The results are as follows: 
SAB = SBA = [I +~ + ~~2] e~~ 
H A A = H B B = [ - ~ + (~ + I) e ~ 2~ ] :~ 
HAB = HBA = [(~ - ~) SAB - (l +~) e~~] :~ 
where ~ = Rjao. Now the secular equation [Eq. (29)] is of the form 
Thus 
or 
HAA -
SAAE 
HBA -
SBAE 
HAB -
SABE 
HBB -
SBBE 
HAA ± HAll 
E±=----
I ± SAB 
=0 
The corresponding wave functions can easily be found 
1 
1jf 
-
(UIA + UIB) 
+ - v'2 (l + SAB) 1/2 
1 
1jf 
= 
(UIA -
UIB) 
~ 
v'2 (I -
SAB)1/2 
(36) 
(37) 
(38) 
(39) 
(40) 
(41 ) 
Obviously 1jf + is symmetric with respect to the interchange of the nuclei and 1jf ~ 
is anti symmetric. 
Since the dissociation energy is E H + E H+ -
E H+ we define 
2 
(42) 

The Variational Method 
571 
We substitute the expressions for H AA , HAB and SAB from Eq. (36) and calculate 
S± as a function of ~ (see Fig. 21.2). The quantity S+ (which corresponds to the 
symmetric state) has a minimum value2 for ~ ~ 2.4 giving R ~ 1.3 A, the 
corresponding value of S+ being -1.76 eY. Experimentally R ~ 1.06 A and the 
dissociation energy is 2.8 eY. A better agreement between theory and experiment 
is obtained by introducing a variational parameter in the trial function (see Problem 
21.4). 
4 
2 
a r 
-2 a 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
Rlao 
Figure 21.2. The vanatlOn of 8± as a function of Rlaa. The minimum of 8+ occurs at 
R "" 2.45aO "" 1.3A at which 8+ "" -1.76 eV. 
We may point out certain shortcomings of the chosen trial function. For exam-
ple, if we let R --+ 0 we should obtain the He+ ion the ground state energy of 
which is - 2e2 / ao, whereas Eqs (39) and (36) will give 
The discrepancy is due to the choice of the trial function which, for R --+ 0, 
becomes the Is hydrogen atom wave function which is obviously incorrect. This is 
the reason why we find the binding too weak. 
We should, however, point out that for R --+ 00, 1jf + should describe the system 
accurately. 
2 The wave function 1jf + which leads to negative energy values is known as a 'bounding orbital'; 
on the other hand, since 1jf _ leads to positive energy values, it is known as an 'anti-bonding orbital'. 

572 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
21.8. Problems 
Problem 21.1 For the ground state of the hydrogen atom use the following as trial 
wave functions 
(43) 
where a is the parameter to be varied and aa is Bohr radius. Show that the values 
of a for which minimum energy is obtained are 1.5 and nl4 respectively, the 
corresponding energies being -0.75 EH and -0.81 EH. Discuss with the results 
obtained in Sec. 21.3. 
Problem 21.2 The neutron-proton short-range interaction can be approximately 
described by the square well potential 
v 
-Va 0 < r < a 
o 
r>a 
(44) 
(a) For l = 0 obtain the exact solution of the Schrodinger equation and show that 
for Va = 40 MeV and a = 1.896 x 10- 13 cm, the ground state energy is given by 
E = -2.223 MeV which is the experimental value for the binding energy of the 
deuteron3 . 
(b) Next assume a trial wave function of the form 
¢ '" exp [-f3r/a] 
(45) 
Using the values of Va and a given in part (a) carry out a variational analysis (with 
f3 as the variational parameter) to obtain the ground state energy of the deuteron 
and compare with the exact result. 
Problem 21.3 The neutron-proton interaction can also be described by the expo-
nential potential 
V = -Vo e-r /(/ 
(46) 
(a) For l = 0 has exact solution of the Schrodinger equation can be obtained in 
terms of Bessel functions (see Problem 10.8). Show that for Vo = 40 MeV and 
a = 1.854 x 10- 13 cm, the ground state energy is given by E = -2.223 MeV. 
(b) Assuming a trial function of the form given by Eq. (45) carry out a variational 
analysis to obtain the ground state energy of the deuteron. 
Problem 21.4 (a) In Sec. 21.4 we have solved the Hi ion problem assuming linear 
combination of the 1 s hydrogen atom wave functions as trial function. In order to 
3 In Problems 21.2(a) and 21.3(a) the values of Va and a are chosen such that the minimum energy 
eigenvalue agrees with the experimental value. 

The Variational Method 
573 
obtain a better estimate of E±, assume the trial function to be a linear combination 
of the following functions (see Eqs 32 and 33) 
( 
3)1/2 
[ 
r A] 
UIA = a/nao 
exp -a ao 
(47) 
( 
3)1/2 
[ 
rB] 
UIB = a/nao 
exp -a-
ao 
(48) 
with a as the variational parameter. Show that for a ;:::;:; 1.238 the minimum value 
of E+ (= -15.95 eV) is obtained; Calculate the corresponding dissociation energy 
and the separation between the two protons and compare with the experimental 
values given in Sec. 21.4. 
(b) If the minimum value of E+ is obtained for R = Ro then 
dE+J 
-
-0 
dR R=Ro 
(49) 
and we may write 
(50) 
where Eo ;:::;:; -15.95 eY. From the calculations in part (a) of the problem, obtain 
the value of k. Compare the above equation with Eq. (90) of Chapter 10 and obtain 
the zero-point energy corresponding to the vibrational motion. Add this to E+ to 
obtain a better estimate for the dissociation energy. The discussion of the hydrogen 
ion problem (Solution 21.4) is bsed on the analysis given in Ref. 3. 
Problem 21.5 For the hydrogen molecule problem discussed in Problem 19.15, 
estimate the ground state energy by assuming a trial function of the form 
(51) 
where H' is given by Eq. (96) of Chapter 19, A is the variational parameter4 
(assumed to be real) and 
(52) 
UIOO (rd and UIOO (r2) being the wave functions corresponding to the ground state 
of the hydrogen atom, the coordinates rl and r2 are defined in Fig. 19.2. 
4 This problem is adapted from Ref. 2; the justification for such a choice of the trial function is 
also given there. 

574 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
21.9. Solutions 
Solution 21.2 (a) The solution of the radial part of the Schrodinger equation for the 
square well potential is discussed in Problem lOA (with b = 0). We write E = -B 
where B is the binding energy of the deuteron. The equation that determines the 
energy eigenvalues for I = 0 is 
[ 
] 1/2 
cotk1a = -K/k1 = -
B/ (Vo -
B) 
(53) 
where K2 = 2MB /li2 and k? = 2M (Vo - B) /17 2. Now M = (mnml')/(mn + ml') ~ 
0.8369 x 10--24gm. For Vo:::::: 40 MeV, a:::::: 1.896 x lO-13cm we obtain B:::::: 2.223 
MeV. 
(b) The normalized trial wave function is given by 
[ 
f33 ] 1/2 
4>= na3 
exp[-f3r/ a] 
Thus 
Substituting for V (r) from Eq. (44) and carrying out the integration, we get 
li 2 
EfJ = -2 [f32 - 2y {I - (I + 2f3 + 2(32) e-2fJ }] 
2Ma 
where 
MVoa2 
y = --2- :::::: 1.73 
Ii 
The minimum occurs when dEfJ/dfJ = 0 giving 
1 
f3e- 2fJ = -
= 0.1445 
4y 
On solving the above equation we get f3 :::::: 0.93. Thus 
EfJ :::::: -lA3MeV 
(54) 
(55) 
(56) 
(57) 
(58) 
As can be seen the error is quite large which is due to the fact that the choice of the 
trial function is poor. 
Solution 21.3 (a) Referring to the solution of Problem 10.8, we have 
M voa 
[ 8 
IT 2] 1/2 
K = 
112 
:::::: 3.64 
(59) 

The Variational Method 
575 
The solution of the equation Iv (g) = 0 gives 
[ 8fJv Ba2 ] 1/2 
v = 
1i2 
::::::: 0.858 
(60) 
giving B = 2.223 MeV. 
(b) We substitute for V (r) from Eq. (46) in Eq. (55) and carry out the integration 
to obtain 
where 
1i2 [2 
8y f33 
] 
E fJ = -2fJv-a-2 
f3 -
-O-+-2f3-)-:::-3 
fJv Voa2 
y = --2- ::::::: l.655 
Ii 
The minimum occurs when dEfl/df3 = 0 giving 
(l + 2(3)4 = 24 Y = 39.73 
f3 
On solving the above equation we get f3 = 0.6088. Thus 
EfJ = -2. 14MeV 
(61) 
(62) 
Solution 21.4 The analysis is similar to the one given in Sec. 21.4; the result for 
E+ is 
where I; = a~ = aR/ao. For a = 1 we will get the results of Sec. 21.4. Now we 
may write the above equation in the form 
(64) 
where 
(65) 
and 
(66) 

576 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
We take a and ~ as two independent parameters. Setting dE+/da = 0, we get 
(67) 
Thus 
(68) 
The above two equations enable us to plot a and E+ as a function of ~ (see Fig. 
21.3) the minimum value of E+ (~ -0.5865fo ~ -15.95eV) occurs at 
~ ~ 2.48 
for which a ~ 1.238 
Thus 
Dissociation energy = EH -
EH+ ~ -13.6 + 15.95 eV = 2.35 eV 
2 
R = f. ao ~ 2.003 ao ~ 1.06 A 
a 
(b) Following Ref. 3, we fit the curve for E+ to a parabola (around the minimum 
value) and one can show 
where R is in centimeters. Thus 
d 2E 
-2+ ~ 1.19 x 105 ergs/cm2 
dR 
Since M = mnmp/(mn + mp) ~ 0.837 x 10-24 gm, we have using Eq. (99) of 
Chapter 10, the following value for the zero-point energy 
1.19 X 105 
1 If 
1 
-27 
E· = -n -~-xlO 
x 
Vlh 
2 
M 
2 
0.837 X 10-24 
~ 1.89 X 10-13 erg ~ 0.12 eV 
Thus the dissociation energy becomes 2.23 e V. 
Solution 21.5 
E _ J ¢*H¢dr 
<P -
J ¢*¢dr 
where H = Ho + H' (see Problem 19.15), dr = dr), dr2 and the integral is over 
a six-dimensional space. Now 

The Variational Method 
577 
1.2 
0.8 
0.4 
0.0 
(E+lmin 
-0.4 
E+(in units of ~) 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
( 
Figure 
21.3. The 
variation 
of 
E+ 
and 
a 
with 
1;. 
The 
minimum 
value 
of 
E+ (~-O.5865fo ~ -15.95eV) occurs at I; = 2.48 at which a = 1.238. 
and 
Thus 
/ ¢*¢ dr 
/ u6dr + 2A / Uo H'uodr + A2 / Uo H'2 Uo dr 
1 +A2 / uoH'2 Uo dr 
where we have used the relation 1 
Uo H'uodr = 0 
which can be verified by direct integration. Further, 
1 
¢*H¢dr = 1 
uo{1+AH')(Ho+H I )uo{1+AH')dr 
/ Uo Ho Uo dr + 1 
Uo H' Uo dr 
+A [/ Uo H' Ho Uo dr + / Uo Ho (uo H')dr 
+ 1 
Uo H' Uo H' dr + 1 
Uo H'2 Uo dr] 
+A2 [1 Uo H' Ho (uoH') dr + 1 
Uo H'3 Uo dr] 
Eo + [Eo + A 1 
Uo H' Uo dr + Eo 1 
Uo Uo H' dr 

578 
+2 f Uo H'2 Uo dr] 
Eo + 2A f Uo H'2UO dr 
the other integrals going to zero. Thus 
Eo + 2A f Uo H'2uodr 
1 + A2 f uoH'2uodr 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
~ Eo + (2A - A2 Eo) f Uo H'2uodr 
Setting dE / d A = 0, we get A = 1/ Eo thus the minimum value of Eq, is given by 
1 f 
12 
Eq, = Eo + -
Uo H uodr 
Eo 
The integral is evaluated in Problem 19.15, on substitution we get 
6e2a5 
Eq, = Eo ___ 
0 
R6 
Combining the result of Problem 19.15 we may write 
21.10. References and suggested reading 
1. L. Pauling and E. B. Wilson, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-
Hill Book Co., New York (1935). 
2. L.I. Schiff, Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York (1968). 
3. S. Flugge, Practical Quantum Mechanics, Springer Verlag, New York (1974). 

Chapter 22 
The Helium Atom and the Exclusion Principle 
... According to this point of view the doublet structure of alkali spectra as well 
as the deviation from Lannor's theorem is due to a particular two-valuedness of 
the quantum theoretic properties of the electron, which cannot be described from 
the classical point of view. 
-
WOLFGANG PAULI (1924). 
22.1. Introduction 
Schrodinger's equation, as we have seen in chapter 10, gives the same energies for 
the hydrogen atom as the Bohr model. It is only when we consider many electron 
systems that new effects are manifest, the most important being those due to the 
Pauli exclusion principle which is fundamental to an understanding of the building 
up of the periodic table. In this chapter, we shall first consider the ground state of 
a two-electron system, namely the helium atom and then go on to examine a few 
excited states in order to understand the basic principles of the study of atomic 
structure. 
22.2. The independent particle approximation 
The potential energy of the helium-like atom contains an extra term, apart from 
the-electron nucleus interaction: namely, the repulsive energy of the two electrons. 
The Hamiltonian is 
H 
(1) 
579 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

580 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Here rl and r2 represent the coordinates of the two electrons with respect to the 
nucleus (which is assumed to be stationary) and rl2 = I rl -
r21 is the distance 
between the two electrons-see Fig. 22.1; for the helium atom, Z = 2. Now the 
term e2 / rl2 is of the same order of magnitude as the other two terms in the potential 
energy; nevertheless, we shall begin by neglecting it. (We shall see, later, how to 
incorporate this term). The resulting approximation may be called the independent 
particle model. In this approximation, the Schrodinger equation 
I- T 12 -2 
-e 
-e 
2e 
Figure 22.1. The helium atom consists of a nucleus of charge 2e and two electrons. 
( -
1i2 VT _ ~ 
V~ _ Ze2 _ ze2 ) U (rl, r2) = E u (rl, r2) 
(2) 
2m 
2m 
rl 
r2 
may be separated by writing 
(3) 
giving identical equations for Ua and Uh: 
(4) 
(5) 
with 
E = Eo + Eh 
(6) 
Equations (4) and (5) tell us that the two electrons 1 and 2 move independently of 
each other and the total energy of the system is simply the sum of the energies of 
the non-interacting electrons. 
Since Eqs. (4) and (5) are the same as for a hydrogen-like atom, the solutions 
are immediately written down (see Sec. 10.2) 
(7) 
and a similar expression for u,,(r2)' A particular eigenstate is characterised by 
specifying a and b, i.e. by specifying the two sets of quantum numbers n I, 11, m I 
and n2, l2, m2. 

The Helium Atom 
581 
Similarly, the energy eigenvalues can easily be written down. Both Ea and Eh 
would be of the form 1 
(8) 
where 
me4 
EH = -2 ::::: 13.605 eV 
211 
(9) 
represents the ionization energy of the hydrogen atom. In this approximation, then 
the ground state is the one with both electrons in the 1 s state (designated as the I s2 
configuration), the total energy being (for Z = 2) 
-4 EH - 4 EH = -108.8 eV 
(10) 
This is to be compared with the observed value of -79.0 eY. 
22.3. Electron interaction energy 
One way to estimate this is to regard e2 / r12 as a perturbation. The first order 
correction to the ground state energy is, then 
( ~) = If U~oo (rt) U~oo (r2) 
e
2 
u!oo(rd UlOO(r2) drt dr2 
(11) 
r!2 
ir! - r2i 
which has been evaluated in Problem 22.1, the result is 
( e2 ) 
5Z 
-
= -EH ~ 34.02 eV 
r!2 
4 
(12) 
where we have assumed Z = 2. Thus the total energy is -74.8 eV, only 4.2 eV 
above the experimental value. Such a large "correction" makes the perturbation 
approach suspect and we turn to other methods. 
! The Hamiltonian given by Eg. (1) assumes infinite mass of the nucleus. The effect of the finite 
mass of the nucleus can be approximately taken into account by replacing the electron mass m by 
the reduced mass f.L (= mM /(m + M)) where M is the mass of the nucleus - see Problem 22.6 (cf. 
Sec. 10.2). 

582 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
22.4. Variational method 
The effect of the repulsive tenu, e2/ r12, is to reduce the nuclear attraction on each 
electron. One way to acccomodate this is to assume hydrogen-like wave functions 
corresponding to an effective nuclear charge Z', which will be assumed to be a 
variable parameter. Thus, we assume the (normalized) wave function as [cf. Eg. 
(65) of chapter 10]: 
(13) 
The Hamiltonian, however, remains as in Eg. (I) with Z as afixed number; for 
He, Z = 2. We have to minimise the integral (see Secs 21.2 and 21.4): 
which has been evaluated in Problem 22.2. The result is 
E (Z') = [ _2Z'2 + 4Z' (Z' - Z) + 1 z'] EH 
The minimum of ECZ') occurs when 
so that 
5 
Z' = ZeIT = Z - -
~ 1.69 
16 
E 
-2 Z~ff EH 
~ -76.2 eV 
(14) 
(15) 
(16) 
(17) 
Other trial functions (having more complicated fonus) have also been used, some 
yielding values within 0.01% of the observed one-see Table 21.1. 
22.5. Exchange degeneracy and identical particles 
In Sec. 22.2 we saw that in the independent particle model, the wave function 
(18) 

The Helium Atom 
583 
is a solution ofthe SchrMinger equation corresponding to the energy E = Ea + Eh . 
Since the Schr6dinger equation [Eq. (2)J is completely symmetrical in the two 
electrons, it is obvious that the wave function2 
(19) 
is also a solution of the Schr6dinger equation corresponding to the same eigenvalue 
Ea + Eh . Thus we have a degeneracy which is known as the exchange degeneracy 
because it arises due to the possibility of exchanging the two electrons.3 We could 
also construct the linear combinations 
I 
u+=-
-.12 
I 
u_ = -.12 
(20) 
(21) 
which are also solutions ofEq. (2) belonging to the same energy Ea + Eh ; the factor 
Jz has been introduced so that the wave functions are normalized. The solutions 
u+ and u_ are known as the symmetric and anti symmetric solutions because when 
the indices I and 2 are interchanged, u+ remains the same whereas u_ changes 
sign. We will shortly see that it is essential that we use either the symmetrical or 
anti symmetrical solution rather than solutions given by Eq. (18) and Eq. (19) which 
are neither symmetric nor antisymmetric. This is due to the indistinguishability of 
identical particles like electrons. It may be mentioned that in classical mechanics, 
identical particles are always distinguishable in the sense that it is possible to keep 
track of individual particles. However, in quantum mechanics, since it is not possi-
ble to keep track of individual particles (without disturbing the system), identical 
particles are indistinguishable. Thus considering a two-electron system, if the two 
electrons are interchanged, we must get the same wave function except (possibly) 
for an unimportant phase factor4 , i.e. 
u (r[, r2) = ei</J u (r2, r[) 
(22) 
where ¢ is a real constant. Now, if P12 represents the particle interchange operator 
then 
(23) 
2 The wave function given by Eq. (18) corresponds to the state where the first electron is in the 
state a and the second electron in the state b whereas Eq. (19) corresponds to the first electron in 
state b and the second electron in state a. 
3 The exchange degeneracy exists as long as we neglect the electron--e1ectron interaction. If the 
interaction between electrons is taken into account, the levels, in general, will split up (see Sec. 22.6). 
4 One could also argue that the probability of finding the first electron at r[ and the second 
electron at r2 must be equal to the probability of finding the first electron at r2 and the second 
electron at rl giving 
which would lead to Eq. (22). 

584 
and 
Further 
Thus 
gIvmg 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
P12 u (r2, rd = e-i<jJ P12 u (r\, r2) 
e-i¢ u (r2, r\) 
e-2i¢ u (r\ , r2) 
(24) 
(25) 
The above equation shows that the wave function should be either symmetrical or 
anti symmetrical with respect to the interchange of the indices. 
It may be mentioned that if the two particles are in the symmetric (or antisym-
metric) state then they will remain in the symmetric (or antisymmetric) state for all 
times. This follows from the Schrodinger equation 
. 
1 
\II=-H\II 
iii 
(26) 
implying that ~ has the same symmetry as \II (because H is always symmetrical 
with respect to the change of indices as the two electrons are identical; see, e.g. Eg. 
(1)). Hence if \II (r\ , r2, t = 0) is symmetric then it will remain symmetric at b.t 
and so on. 
22.6. The Pauli exclusion principle 
Till now we have not considered the spin angular momentum associated with the 
electron. We denote the spin functions by I X±) where I X+) and I X-) represent 
the spin up and spin down states.s For the two electron system, the spin func-
tions are I X ± (l)) and I X ± (2)) where the numbers in the parenthesis refer to 
the first and second electron. Because of the indistinguishability of the electrons, 
we must construct appropriate linear combinations which are either symmetric or 
anti symmetric with respect to the interchange of indices; these states are denoted 
by 
(27) 
5 Thus, if the electron is in the spin up (or spin down) state then the measurement of the z-
component of the spin angular momentum will lead to + 1 
h (or - 1 Pi). At some places it will be 
convenient to dcsignate the states I X +) and I X _) as It) and 1+) respectively. 

The Helium Atom 
I Xs) 
I X ~ (l) X ~ (2») = lIt 2 t) 
1 
J2 [I X+ (1) X~ (2»)+ I X~ (1) X+ (2»)] 
1 
J2 [lIt 2 t)+ 11 t 2 t)] 
1 
h[1 X+(1)X~(2»)- I X~(l)X+(2»)] 
1 
h [I I t 2 t)- I I t 2 t)] 
585 
(28) 
(29) 
(30) 
the first three functions being symmetric and the last one being antisymmetric. The 
first function, for example, corresponds to both the functions being in the spin up 
state and so on. 
Now, in Sec. 18.3 we had seen that the first three states (known as the triplet 
state) corresponds to total spin S = 1 and the fourth state (known as the singlet 
state) corresponds to the total spin S = 0; in Eqs (27)-(29), X -:-' X ~ and X; 
correspond to S = 1 (with ms = 1,0, -1) and XS correspond to S = O. 
We consider the ground state (1s2) of the helium atom. The total wave function 
will be 
(31 ) 
multiplied by the appropriate spin function. Now, it is an experimental fact that the 
ground state of the helium atom does not split up in a magnetic field; consequently 
it must be a singlet rather than a triplet state, i.e. we must have the following wave 
function representing the ground state 
I 
UIOO (rd UIOO (r2) -Ji [I X+ (1) X~ (2»)- I X~ (1) X+ (2»)] 
(32) 
Thus the ground state wave function is antisymmetric.6 Analysis of higher excited 
states of helium (and also of other atoms) shows that the wave function for a system 
of electrons must be antisymmetric with respect to the interchange of two electrons. 
Consequently, if the space dependent function is symmetric then the spin function 
should be anti symmetric and vice versa. The general wave function (for a 2 electron 
system) should therefore be of the form 
6 The ground state is denoted by 1 So. The superscript 1 denotes a singlet (total spin = 0), S denotes 
L = 0, the subscript 0 is to indicate J = O. It is unfortunate that an S state here may be confused 
with total spin; certain coventions have to be adhered to, however! 

586 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(33) 
where the subscripts a and b include the spin state, i.e. they represent n, I, m and 
ms. It is obvious that if a = b (i.e. if both the electrons have the same set of values 
of n, I, m and ms) then 
1/f = 0 
which is the Pauli exclusion principle7 according to which in an atom no two 
electrons can have the same set of values of the four quantum numbers n, I, m and 
ms. Thus the anti symmetric nature of the total wave function leads automatically 
to the Pauli exclusion principle. 
For a system of N electrons, the anti symmetric wave function is given by the 
Slater determinant 
1/f (/1 (I) 1/f"1 (2) 
1/fa l (N) 
1 
1/f= ~ 
1/f a2 (1) 1/f "2 (2) 
(34) 
1/f aN (I) 
•••••• 1/faN (N) 
It is immediately obvious that if a1 = a2 then the two rows would become the same 
and the determinant would vanish. 
Particles that are described by antisymmetric wave functions are known as 
Fermions and they are said to obey Fermi-Dirac statistics; examples of such par-
ticles are electrons, protons, neutrons, etc. On the other hand, particles which are 
7 At this stage it may be worthwhile to mention that Pauli had put forward the exclusion principle 
before Uhlenbeck and Goudsmidt had introduced the idea of the spinning electron. In order to give 
satisfactory explanations of the spectra of alkali atoms and of the anamolous Zeeman effect, Pauli 
argued that for a general classification of each of the electron in an atom, four quantum numbers 
are needed. In his Nobel lecture, Pauli mentions that "I proposed the assumption of a new quantum 
theoretic property of the electron, which 1 called a two valuedness not describable classically". He 
then put forward his exclusion principle according to which there can never be two or more equivalent 
electrons in an atom which have the same values of all four quantum numbers. Pauli in his Nobel 
lecture also mentions that "the physicists found it difficult to understand the exclusion principle, 
since no meaning in terms of a model was given to the fourth degree of freedom of the electron. 
The gap was filled by Uhlenbeck and Goudsmit's idea of the electron spin which made it possible to 
understand the anomalous Zeeman effect simply by assuming that the spin quantum number of one 
electron is ~ and that the quotient of the magnetic moment to the mechanical angular moment has 
for the spin a value twice as large as for the ordinary orbit of the electron". For a nice discussion on 
the historical development, the reader is referred to the Nobel lecture of Pauli and to Ref I and 2; the 
original article of Pauli has been reprinted in Ter Haar's book (Ref. I) 

The Helium Atom 
587 
described by symmetric wave functions are known as Bosons and they are said to 
obey Bose-Einstein statistics; examples of such particles are photons, pions, etc. 
Pauli has proved that particles with half integral spin are Fermions and particles 
with integral spin are Bosons; the proof is, however, much beyond the scope of this 
book. 
22.7. Excited states of helium8 
For the first excited state, we have the possible configurations Is2s and Is2p. 
Once again, if we ignore the electron-electron interaction, we have the independent 
particle model and the spatial part of the wave functions would be of the form 
(35) 
where I = 0 for 2s and I = 1 for 2p states. This wave function, however, does not 
have the symmetry property required and the correct combinations are 
(36) 
and 
1 
u_ = ,J2 [UIOO (rd U210 (r2) -
UIOO (r2) U2LO (rdJ 
(37) 
(For the ground state 1 s2 configuration, u_ would vanish identically). 
We now incorporate spin wave functions. We have already seen that the singlet 
state I X s) is antisymmetric and the triplet state is symmetric I X t) (see Eqs (27)-
(30». In accordance with the exclusion principle, only the following antisymmetric 
combinations are permissible 
(singlet) 
(38) 
(triplet) 
(39) 
where the subscripts sand t refer to the singlet and triplet states respectively. Now, 
if we ignore the interaction of the electrons, these four states are degenerate; its 
inclusion lifts the degeneracy. Qualitatively, we can see this as follows. For a 
space symmetric wave function, there is a considerable probability for the two 
electrons to come close together (i.e. U+ can be large for r) ~ r2) whereas for 
the space antisymmetric state, this probability is quite small. Thus, the repulsive 
energy of the two electrons gives a larger positive contribution for u+ than for u_. 
8 The ground state of lithium and the corresponding exchange correction has been discussed Ref. 
3. 

588 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
One, therefore, expects triplet states to lie lower than the singlet ones. We must 
emphasize that this difference in energy is not due to spin dependent forces but is a 
consequence of the exclusion principle and the electrostatic interaction of the two 
electrons. 
The configuration Is2s gives the singlet state 150 and the triplet 351 since we 
have L = 0 and 5 = 0 or 1, the subscript gives the I value. One can estimate the 
difference in their energies by a perturbation calculation. The first order correction 
to their energy is 
(40) 
(41) 
where 
Since9 
(Xs I XI·) = 1 = (XI I XI) 
(42) 
and since e 2/ rl2 does not involve spin, only the space part of the wave function 
appears in the perturbation calculation. Next, we substitute for u+ and u_ (from 
Eqs (36) and (37) with I = 0) in Eqs (40) and (41) to obtain 
f'lEs = 10 + Ko 
(43) 
(44) 
where 
and 
and in arriving at Eqs (43) and (44) we have used the fact that in the integrals II 
and K" we can interchange rl and r2. 
9 It is because of the relation (X s I X s) = I that the perturbation to the ground state energy will 
be simply Eg. (II) although the ground state wave function is given by Eg. (32). 

The Helium Atom 
589 
The integral J, (for l = 0) is of the same type as we had encountered in 
the ground state energy shift calculation, the term K, is known as the exchange 
integral. The evaluation is tedious but straightforward and yields 
J() ~ 9.1 eV 
Ko ~ 0.4 eV 
(47) 
A similar treatment can be given for the ls2p configuration. Since II = ° 
and 
l2 = I, L = 1 and for the singlet state (S = 0) J takes the value I; on the other 
hand, for the triplet state (S = 1) J takes the values 2, I ,0. Thus the possible states 
are 
I PI and 
3 P2 I 0 
(to be read as 'singlet P one' and 'triplet P two, one and zero'). Again the triplet 
levels lie lower than the singlet state, in fact 
JI ~ 10.2 eV 
(48) 
The corresponding energy levels are given in Fig. 22.2 (see also Problem 22.4). 
I PI (singlet) 
3 P2 ,I,O (triplet 
I So (singlet) 
3 So (triplet) 
(100, 21m) 
Figure 22,2, The splitting of the first excited state of the helium atom, 
22.8. Fine structure 
In order to remove the degeneracy within the triplet levels, it is necessary to include 
the spin-orbit interaction, This is the interaction between the magnetic moment 
(associated with spin) and the orbital motion of the electron and is represented by 
a term of the form 10 
(49) 
10 L, S are the orbital and spin quantum numbers of the atom, 

590 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
in the Hamiltonian. For a state with a particular value of L, Sand 1 we have 
1 
(L.S) =2: [1(J+I)-L(L+I)-S(S+I)] 
(50) 
which gives, 1, -1 and -2 for the 3 P2 , 3 PI and 3 Po states respectively. Writing 
(51 ) 
we have, for the spin-orbit correction, 2r, -2r and -4r for the above three terms 
giving the so called fine structure splitting which is ~ 10-4 eY. Finally, it may be 
pointed out that there is a further 21 + 1 degeneracy in each of these terms which 
can be removed by the application of a magnetic field. The total number of 3 P 
states is 5 + 3 + I = 9; this is (2S + 1) (2L + I) as may be expected. 
22.9. Helium spectra 
In order to compare the foregoing theory with experiment, we have to state the 
rules governing transitions between the various states. In the dipole approximation 
(to be discussed in Sec. 26.3), it can be shown that no transition occurs between 
singlet and triplet states. As a result, the energy level diagram of helium splits into 
two parts as shown in Fig. 22.3. The figure shows the energy levels when one of the 
electrons is in the Is state and the other in nl state. Note the following features. 
1. Singlet levels, belonging to a particular value of nand l have higher energy 
than triplet levels of the same nand l. 
2. For n = 2, the difference ls' _3 S is larger than Ip _3 P difference. This is 
because the exchange integral K for the P state is smaller; there is a smaller 
contribution from those regions where 1/ rl2 is large. 
3. The states 2 3 Sand 2 I S are metastable. The 2 IS ---+ liS transition is for-
bidden because of the selection rule ~l = ± I for dipole transitions and the 
2 3 S ---+ liS for this reason as well as the one mentioned earlier, forbid-
den triplet-singlet transitions. Thus helium exists as two 'gases' as it were, 
parahelium 11 atoms with S = 0 and orthohelium with S = I. 
11 Some earlier books called it parhelium. 

The Helium Atom 
22.10. Problems 
PAR HEll M 
'so 
'P, 
'0, 
·lsS. 
·1.4d ·1.Sd 
'IS4, 
·ls3d 
·ls4d 
"s3p "53d 
·,.35 
23 
22 
,'s?p( 2' P 1 
21 
20 
o 
.,,' ,,'51 
ORH'O :,ELlIJM 
3S 
'PO'P. Jp~ 
·ISSp. 
·1.4s 
"5). 
3 
-r··'5?S( 2 S 1 
19.77.V 
1 
·,.Sp 
·154p 
.ls3p 
'0, '0,'0, 
. ISSd 
'. Is4d 
. 's3d 
I 
I 
L...-____ 
---L __________ .J 
Figure 22.3. The energy levels of the helium atom. 
591 
Problem 22.1 Evaluate the integral in Eg_ (11) and calculate the ground state en-
ergy of 2 electron systems like He, Li+, Be++ and B+++. Determine the ionisation 
energy and compare with the corresponding experimental values which are 24.63 
eV, 75.64 eV, 153.87 eV and 259.31 eV respectively. 
Problem 22.2 Evaluate the integral in Eg. (14) and calculate the ionisation energy 
for 2-electron systems. Compare with the corresponding result obtained by using 
perturbation theory. 
Problem 22.3 
U sing the expressions 
I (Z)3/2 
U 100 (r) = 
r::.= 
-
2 e-zr/ao 
v4JT 
ao 
(52) 
U200 (r) = --
-
2 - -
e-Zr/2ao 
1 (Z )3/2 ( 
zr) 
AJT 
2ao 
ao 
(53) 
and 
( 
) 3/2 
ff 
Z 
Zr 
Zr 2a 
3 
U2l0 (r) = -
-- e-
/ 
0 
-
cose 
2ao 
aovS 
4JT 
(54) 

592 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
evaluate the integrals in Egs (45) and (46). [You will have to use the relation given 
by Eg. (63)]. For Z = 2 show that 
10~9.leV 
Ko~OAeV 
11 ~ 10.2 eV 
KI ~ 0.1 eV 
Problem 22.4 Using the above values of 10 , Ko, 11 and Kl draw the energy lev-
els of the Is2s and Is2p states of helium atom (see Fig. 22.2) and calculate the 
ionization energies of the corresponding states. 
Problem 22.5 In the independent particle model (see Sec. 22.2), the first excited 
state of the helium atom is 8-fold degenerate 12 (we are neglecting spin). In order to 
evaluate the electron interaction energy (e2/ r12) we must choose a representation 
in which the perturbation is diagonal. Show that, in order to make HI (= e2/ r12) 
diagonal we must choose the appropriate symmetric and antisymmetric forms [see 
Egs (36) and (37)]. [Pauling and Wilson (Ref A) have explicitly shown this by 
solving a 8 x 8 determinant]. 
Problem 22.6 
(a) In the hydrogen atom problem we had shown that the two body problem can be 
reduced to a one body problem with electron mass replaced by the reduced mass. 
In the helium atom problem (which is a 3 body problem) one can approximately 
take into account the effect of nuclear motion in the following manner: 
If RJ and R2 represent the position of the two electrons and Rn that of the 
nucleus (of mass M) then the Hamiltonian is of the form 
1 
2 I (2 
2) 
2 (2 
2 
I) 
H = -2M-Pn + -2m-
PI + P2 
- e 
IRI - Rnl + IR2 - Rnl -
-IR-1---R-
2 1 
(55) 
where 
p2 
I 
(56) 
Introduce the coordinates 
(57) 
and the center of mass coordinate R 
(M + 2m) R = M Rn + m (Rl + R2) 
(58) 
12 There will be 4 wave functions like u 1 00 (rl) u2lm (r2) and 4 like U2lm (rl) u 100 (r2) . 

The Helium Atom 
593 
and show that 
H 
(59) 
where 
mM 
f.L=m+M 
(60) 
is the reduced mass of an electron with the nucleus. Since M » f.L the term 
-b PI . P2 will be small in comparison to the preceeding term and in the first ap-
proximation can be neglected. In this approximation, the resulting Hamiltonian is 
of the same form as Eq. (l) except for m being replaced by f.L and for an additional 
term involving the translational motion of the center of mass. 
(b) Use first order perturbation theory to show that using a wave function of the 
form given by Eq. (3), the effect of the term -b PI . P2 is zero. 
22.11. Solutions 
Solution 22.1 The normalized hydrogen atom ground state wave function is given 
by Eq. (52). Thus 
(61) 
Substituting in Eq. (11) we get 
(62) 
Now 
(63) 
where e is the angle between rl and r2 (see, e.g. Ref. 5, p. 176). Further, in 
evaluating the second integral, if we choose the z2-axis along rl, then 

594 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Introducing 
2Zrl 
2Zr2 
PI = -- and P2 = --
ao 
ao 
we get 
00 
X )1 L (~~ Y II PI (cos e) sine de d<Jy + I P~ dp2e- P2 
I 
PI 
X ~2 Z; (~;)'ff P[(cosO) sinO dO d4> ] 
l;,~o fff p;dp, sinO,dO,d¢,e-P' [~, I 
pie-"dp, 
+ 7 
P2e- P2dP2] 
PI 
5 
e2 
5Z 
- Z- = -EH 
(64) 
8 
ao 
4 
where we have used the relation 
Jr f PI (cos e) sin e de 
o 
2 for 1=0 
o for I ~ I 
(65) 
Thus, according to the first order perturbation theory, the ground state energy is 
given by 
_2Z2 EH + ~ZEH = ( _Z2 + ~z) 2EH 
( _Z2 + ~z) x 27.21eV 
(66) 
The calculated values are tabulated in Table 22.1. Since the ground state energy of 
a one-electron atom is - Z2 E H, the ionisation energy is given by 
[ ( Z2 -
~ z) 2E H -
Z2 E H ] 
= [Z2 -
~z] EH 
(67) 

The Helium Atom 
595 
Table 22.1. Ground State and Ionization Energies of Two Electron Atoms 
Atom 
Z 
Ground State 
Difference 
Energy using 
Ionization Energy 
he tween 
Perturbation 
Experi-
Perturbat-
Variational 
Experimental 
Theory 
mental 
ion Theory 
Method 
Values and 
[Eq. (66)] 
value 
[Eq. (67)] 
[Eq. (73)] 
Perturhation 
Theory Results 
He 
2 
-74.83 eV 
24.63 eV 
20.40 eV 
23.06 eV 
4.23 eV 
Li+ 
3 
-193.87 eV 
75.64 eV 
71.43 eV 
74.08 eV 
4.21 eV 
Be++ 
4 
-367.30 eV 
153.87 eV 
149.66 eV 
152.31 eV 
4.21 eV 
B+++ 
5 
-595.20 eV 
259.31 eV 
255.09 eV 
257.75 eV 
4.22 eV 
In Table 22.1 we have tabulated the ionization energy as given by the above equa-
tion and compared with the corresponding experimental values. It is interesting to 
note that the absolute error remains almost the same; however, the percentage error 
decreases with increase in Z. Physically this is due to the fact that for large Z, the 
term -Ze2 (~ + ~) would dominate over the term e2 jr12. 
r1 
r2 
Solution 22.2 Since exp [ - Z' r j ao] is the ground state wave function for a 
hydrogen-like atom with charge Z' e, we must have 
(68) 
Thus 
E (Z') = If ¢* [-2Z'2 EH + (z' - z) e2 (~ + ~) + ~] ¢ dr, dr2 (69) 
r, 
r2 
r'2 
Now 
and 
e2 If A.* (1.. + 1..) A. dr dr = 2e2 If 1¢12 dr dr 
'f' 
r, 
r2 
'f' 
2 
r,' 2 
2 
= 2Z'~ = 4Z'EH 
ao 
If * e2 
5 , 
¢ -
¢ dr,dr2 = -Z EH 
r12 
4 
(70) 
(71) 
[see Eq. (64)]. On substitution we get Eq. (15) and the condition ~i, = 0 leads to 
, 
5 
Z = Zeff = Z --
.. 
16 

596 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Thus the ground state energy is 
(72) 
and the corresponding ionization energy is 
(73) 
which gives a much better estimate than the perturbation theory result (see Table 
22.1). 
Solution 22.4 According to the first order perturbation theory the energy levels for 
the Is2s and ls2p configurations are given by 
W(I) 
( -Z2EH -
~2 EH) + 1, ± K[ 
(74) 
where we have assumed Z = 2 and the upper and lower states correspond to singlet 
(parahelium) and triplet (orthohelium) states respectively. Substituting the values 
we get 
W(l) 
ls2., 
:::::: -58.9 ± 0.4 eV 
:::::: -58.5eV and - 59.3 eV 
(I) 
Wls2p :::::: -57.8±0.1 eV 
:::::: -57.7eV and - 57.9 eV 
The ionization energies are given by 
- Z2 E H -
W(l) :::::: 4.1 e V for the 1 s2s parahelium state (' So) 
:::::: 4. ge V for the 1 s2s orthohelium state e 
So) 
:::::: 3.3eV for the Is2p parahelium state C PI) 
:::::: 3.5eV for the Is2p orthohelium state e 
P210) 
(75) 
(76) 
(77) 
The corresponding experimental values are 3.97 eV, 4.76 eV, 3.368 eV and 3.623 
e V respectively. 
22.12. References and suggested reading 
1. D. Ter Harr, The Old Quantum Theory, Pergamon Press, Oxford (1967). 

The Helium Atom 
597 
2. M. Jammer, The Conceptional Development of Quantum Mechanics, 
McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York (1966). 
3. S. Flugge, Practical Quantum Mechanics, Springer Verlag, Berlin (1971). 
4. L. Pauling and E.B. Wilson, Introduction to Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-
Hill Book Co., New York (1935). 
5. J. Irving and N. Mullineux, Mathematics in Physics and Engineering, Acad-
emic Press, New York (1959). 

Chapter 23 
Some Select Topics 
I saw a medley of haphazard facts faJl into line and order . .. "But it's true," I said 
to myself "[t's very beautiful. And it's true." 
-
C.P. SNOW'. 
23.1. Introduction 
In this chapter we will discuss in detail some select topics which are of considerable 
importance in quantum mechanics. In Sec. 23.2 we will discuss the semi-classical 
as well as the more rigorous method for calculating the lifetime of quasi-bound 
states. In Sec. 23.3 we will present a perturbation analysis of a periodic structure 
characterized with a sinusoidal variation of potential energy variation. In Sec. 23.4 
we will describe a versatile matrix method for the analysis of a quantum mechani-
cal problems. Finally, in Sec. 23.5 we will discuss the Thomas-Fermi model of the 
atom. 
23.2. Thnnelling lifetime calculations 
23.2.1. SEMI-CLASSICAL APPROXIMATE ANALYSIS 
We first consider the bound states corresponding to the following potential energy 
variation (see Fig. 23.1) 
{
oox<o 
V(x) = 
0 
0 < x < a 
Vo x> a 
(1) 
, The authors found this quotation in John Gribbin's book In Search (if Schriidinger Cat, Black 
Swan Books (1984). 
598 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

Some Select Topics 
599 
In Sec. 16.2 we had discussed the solution of the SchrMinger equation for the 
above profile and had shown that the energy eigenvalues are determined by solving 
the following transcendental equation 
where 
k 
L = sin ka + - cos ka = 0 
K 
2 
2f.LE 
k =-
fi2 
and 
2 
2f.L(Vo - E) 
K = ----=---
/12 
Equation (2) can be written in the form 
-~ cot ~ = J 
a 2 -
~2 
where 
and 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
Let us assume a = 7. The solution of the transcendental equation [Eq. (2)] gives 
us bound states for which 
~ = 2.739488 
and 
5.401717 
We define the normalized energy eigenvalue 
E 
(~)2 
E -
-
-
Vo -
~ 
(6) 
Thus the corresponding discrete values of E are given by 
E :::: 0.153159 (= Ed 
and 
0.595480 (= E2) 
(7) 
The corresponding wave function is given by 
O<x<a 
(8) 
where the subscript b refers to the fact that we are considering particular bound 
states. If we normalize the wave function we would readily get 
(9) 
The discrete eigenvalues and corresponding eigenfunctions are shown in Fig. 23.1. 

600 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
1.0 
~ 
1/ 
----" 
0.8 
~ 0.6 
-...... 
H 
s:-
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 -
.. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
o 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
x/a 
Figure 23.1. The discrete eigenvalues and eigenfunctions corresponding to the potential energy 
distribution given by Eq. (1) with a = 7. 
Figure 23.2. Tunnelling through a rectangular potential barrier of height Vo and width d. 
We next consider tunnelling through a rectangular potential barrier (of width 
d) as shown in Fig. 23.1. We had discussed this in Sec. 8.3 and had shown that 
tunnelling probability is given by 
T = 
4E(l - E) 
(10) 
sinh2(Kd) + 4E(1 -
E) 
For Kd » 1, the expression for the tunnelling probability takes the form 
T ~ 16E(1 -
E) e-2Kd 
(11) 
We next consider a potential energy variation of the type shown in Fig. 23.3: 
Vex) = I 
~ 
Vo 
o 
x<O 
O<x<a 
a<x<a+d 
x>a 
(12) 
Now, according to the semi-classical theory, a particle confined inside the well 
(i.e. within the region 0 < x < a) will hit the barrier v j2a times a second, where 
v is the speed of the particle. Thus the probability per second of escape (which is 
the inverse of the mean lifetime) is given by 
1 
v 
-~-T 
T 
2a 

Some Select Topics 
601 
I/(x) 
II 
III 
----
~-----x 
a 
a+ d 
Figure 23.3. A tunnelling potential energy variation as given by Eq. (12). 
which can be simplified to the following form 
_ 
1 [2~a2] 
Ka 
~d 
T -
16 na2 
[E(1 _ E)l'j2 e 
(13) 
(this analysis is similar to the one that we had carried out while studying the alpha 
decay problem in Sec. 17.7). 
23.2.2. QUASI-BOUND STATES 
In above we have given a very simple semi-classical analysis for the calculation of 
the lifetime for a particle to tunnel through a barrier. For a more rigorous analysis, 
we must understand the concept of quasi-bound states which we will now discuss. 
We consider again the leaky structure shown in Fig. 23.3. For such a structure, 
if we solve the SchrMinger equation we would find that there are no discrete 
energy eigenstates and all values of E > 0 are allowed; these form the continuum 
eigenstates of the system. The solution of the SchrMinger equation in the three 
regions can be written in the form 
1 
A sin kx 
0 < x < a 
1/IE(x) = 
BeK(x-a) + Ce-K(x-a) 
a < x < a + d 
D+e1k(x-a-d) + D_e-ik(x-a-d) x > a + d 
(14) 
where (without any loss of generality) we have assumed E < Vo. Continuity of the 
wave function and its derivative at x = a and at x = a + d give us 
B l A [sin ka + ~ cos ka ] 
(15) 
C 
lA [sinka - ~ coska] 
(16) 
~ B [1 + ~] e Kd + ~C [1 - ~] e-Kd 
2 
ik 
2 
ik 
(17) 

602 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The orthogonality condition for these continuum eigenstates are given by 
which gives us 
00 f 1/f~!(x) 1/f E(X) dx = 8(E - E') 
o 
(18) 
(19) 
Now, if we assume Kd » 1, then the exponentially decaying term in Eq. (17) can 
be neglected, and in this approximation 
D* = D 
:::::; ~LA (I + ~) eKd 
-
+ 
4 
ik 
(20) 
where L has already been defined in Eq. (2). It is readily seen that since Kd » I, 
unless L ::::::; 0, 
I 
~± I» I 
(21 ) 
implying that the amplitude of the wave function is large in the region x > (a + d). 
However, for values of E such that L = 0 [i.e. when the condition for discrete 
bound states (corresponding to Fig. 23.1) are satisfied], then B = 0 and we have 
only the exponentially decaying solution in the region a < x < a + d [see Eq. 
(14)] and the amplitude of the oscillatory solution in the region x > (a +d) is very 
weak. Thus when 
(22) 
the wave function has the properties of a discrete eigenfunction in regions I and 
II having very weak oscillations in the region III. We refer the eigenfunctions 
corresponding to B = 0 as quasi-bound states. In Figs 23.4(a) and 23.5(a) we 
have plotted the eigenfunctions corresponding to ex = 7 with 
E = 0.153159(= EI) 
and 
0.595480 (= E2) 
respectively. As can be seen the wave functions are the same as for the bound state 
except for the weak oscillatory solution in the region x > (a + d). These are the 
quasi-bound states of the system. In Figs 23.4(b) and 23.5(b) we have plotted the 
eigenfunctions corresponding to 
E = 0.157159 
and 
0.675480 
respectively. Thus, we find that if we go slightly away from the quasi-bound state, 
there is a drastic change in the behaviour of the eigenfunction. In fact, if we plot 

Some Select Topics 
603 
as a function of E (see Fig. 23.6), we will get very sharply peaked Lorentzians, the 
width of which is directly related to the lifetime of the quasi-bound state. All the 
plots correspond to d/a = 0.75. 
1.0 
-
0=7 
d/a = 0.75 
0.8 
~ 0.6 :n 
' = 'I = 0.153159 
" 
::::--
0.4 
0.2 
\ 
----
0.0 -, 
0 
2 
10 
x/a 
1.0 
0=7 
0.8 
dla = 0.75 
, = 0.157159 
0.6 
t: 
0.4 
" 
:::-
0.2 
0.0 
-0.2 
-0.4 
0 
x/a 
Figure 23.4. (a) The quasi- bound state corresponding to E = E I = 0.153159. (b) The eigenfunction 
corresponding to E = 0.157159 
23.2.3. LIFETIME CALCULATION 
In this section we will discuss the rigorous theory for tunnelling of a particle from 
a potential well similar to that shown in Fig. 23.3. We assume that at t = 0, 
the particle is described by a wave function which corresponds to the bound state 
corresponding to Fig. 23.1: 
\l1(x, t = 0) = 1jJh(x) 
(23) 
where 1jJ h (x) is given by Eq. (8). In order to study its time evolution we must 
expand it in terns ofthe (continuum) eigenfunctions corresponding to the potential 
energy variation shown in Fig. 23.3. Thus we should write 
(24) 
For t > 0, the wave function would be given by 

604 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
~ 
~ 
" 
:;:-
S 
~ 
:;:-
(X) 
\.{I (x, t) = f 1(E)1/f E(X) e-iEt / h dE 
o 
1.0 
,---
o.s 
0.6 
0.4 
7 
0.2 
0.0 -
0 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
4 
6 
xla 
xla 
0.=7 
diu = 0.75 
( = " = 0.595480 
-
<>=7 
dla = 0.75 
(= 0.675480 
-
Figure 23.5. (a) The quasi- bound state corresponding to E = E2 = 0.595480 
(b) The eigenfunction corresponding to E = 0.675480 
(25) 
10 
10 
In order to determine 1(E), we multiply Eg. (24) by 1/f~I(X) and integrate over x 
to obtain 
(X) f 1/f~I(X) 1/fb(x) dx = f dE 1(E) f dx 1/f~I(X) 1/f E(x) 
o 
f dE 1(E) 8(E -
E') = 1(E') 
where use has been made of Eg. (18). Thus 
(X) 
1(E) = f 1/f~(x) 1/fb(x) dx 
o 
(26) 

Some Select Topics 
605 
4000 
:1000 
~ 
-+l 
q 
~ 2000 
1000 
0 
0.140 
0.145 
0.150 
0.155 
0.160 
0.165 
0.170 
E 
:JOOO 
~ 2000 
-+l 
q 
~ 
1000 
0 
J, \.. 
0.580 
0.585 
0.590 
0.59.) 
0.600 
0.605 
0.610 
( 
Figure 23.6. A plot of IAI D± 12 which shows two sharply peaked Lorentzians the widths of which 
are directly related to the lifetime of the quasi-bound states. 
Now, it is only around E ~ Eb that 0/ E(X) has almost the same spatial dependence 
as o/b(x) in regions I and II (see Figs 23.4 and 23.5) and therefore in the above 
equation, epeE) will be appreciable around E ~ Eb ; this we will explicitly find 
later. Thus we may write 
A 
0/ E(X) ~ -o/b(x) Regions I and II 
A" 
(27) 
Since in region III (x > a + d), 0/" (x) has a negligible value, we may neglect the 
contribution from region III to the integral in Eq. (26) to write 
a+d 
epeE) ~ f o/~(X) o/,,(X) dx 
o 

606 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
A 
dx=-
Ab 
In Appendix P we have shown that around E ~ Eh 
1 A 12 
r 
I 
IcfJ(E)1 2 ~ Ab 
~ -; (E - E;y + r 2 
where 
4k3 3 4 ",2 
hK ba 
rt 
- 2K hd 
e 
fLoA(l + Kba) 
r 
E;, 
E" - !3.E" 
2 
k2 
K" -
b r 
2Kbkb 
k" and Kh are the values of k and Kat E = E,,: 
[ 
] 1/2 
[ 
]1/2 
_ 
2fLE" 
. 
_ 
2fL(VO -
E,,) 
kb -
2 
• 
Kb -
2 
Ii· 
Ii 
(28) 
(29) 
(30) 
(31 ) 
(32) 
The probability that at time t, the particle is still inside the well is approximately 
given by the square of the overlap integral 
00 
p(t) ~ f \lJ*(x, 0) \lJ(x, t) dx 
o 
2 
The above integral has been evaluated in Appendix P and has been shown to be 
given by 
(33) 
where IcfJ(E) 12 has been given by Eq. (29). On substituting the expression for 
IcfJ(E)1 2 and carrying out the integration (see Appendix P), we get 
(34) 
where 
Tunnelling lifetime of quasi-bound states 
Ii 
I 
2fLa~ 
K/1 
2K d 
[ 0] K" (a + 1-) 
r = 2r = 16 
lia2 
[E,,(l _ E/,)p/2 e 
/I 
(35) 

Some Select Topics 
607 
is the mean lifetime of the quasi-bound state and 
Eb 
(kba )2 
Eb=-=--
Vo 
(X2 
(36) 
Equation (35) gives an analytical expression for the tunnelling lifetime of the quasi-
bound states. It should be noted that as d becomes large, the time that the particle 
spends inside the well becomes large. Equation (35) may be compared with the 
approximate expression given by Eq. (13). If we replace a by (a + IjKb) in Eq. 
(13) we would get Eq. (35). Since 1 j K b represents the perturbation depth of the 
wave function in the "classically forbidden region" (see Sec. 8.4) a + .l can be 
Kh 
interpreted as the effective width of the well. 
Now, in Appendix P we have also shown that [see Eq. (14) of Appendix P] 
1 A 12 
(1i2) 
kbKbr 
1 
D± 
~ 8 
2/L 
1+ Kba (E -
E~)2 + r 2 
(37) 
Thus if we are able to calculate IAjD±12 as a function of E, we would get a 
series of Lorentzians, each Lorentzian corresponding to a quasi-bound state of the 
structure. By fitting each peak to a Lorentzian, we would be able to get E;) and r 
and therefore the lifetime. Indeed for an arbitrary potential energy variation one 
can develop a matrix approach to calculate IAj D±12 as a function of E from which 
the lifetime of a quasi-bound state can be calculated (see, e.g. Ref 2 and 3). 
In Appendix P we have also shown that 
1 
/I (X (1 + K a) eK hd 1 
K 
1 
ID I = _At'" 
b 
1 ± ~ IE - E' 
irl 
± 
4 
h2k 
2 
'k 
b =F 
art 
bK bIb 
(38) 
Thus if we solve the eigenvalue equation 
(39) 
in the complex E plane, then the imaginary part of the root will give the value of 
r and hence the lifetime of the state. 
23.3. Perturbation theory for sinusoidally varying potentials 
In Sec. 16.5 we had discussed the solution of the Schrodinger equation corre-
sponding to a periodic potential described by a series of delta functions: this was 
the Kronig-Penney model of the lattice. In this section we present a perturbation 
approach to solve the SchrOdinger equation corresponding to a sinusoidal variation 
of the potential energy function. The results have been compared with numerical re-
sults obtained by solving the SchrOdinger equation using the Runge-Kutta method 

608 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and the perturbation theory results have been shown to be very accurate for rapid 
oscillations. In fact if the oscillations are very rapid (this will be quantified later) 
then the number of bound states are determined not by the number of wells but 
by the average potential energy variation. The perturbation method can easily be 
extended to potential energy variations which can be expressed as a sum of sine or 
cosine functions. 
We start with the one-dimensional Schrodinger equation 
d21jf 
2fL 
-2 + -2 [E - Vex)] 1jf(x) = 0 
dx 
Ii 
(40) 
We assume a sinusoidal variation of the potential energy variation given by the 
following equation (see Fig. 23.7) 
0.0 
'$ 
·0.5 
----
!;' 
:::-
-1.0 
D. = 0.2 
-1.5 
D. = o. 
-15 
-10 
-5 
0 
5 
10 
15 
( 
Figure 23.7. The sinusoidal variation of the potential energy function [Eq. (41) J; the average 
potential energy function [Eq. (51)] has been shown by dashed line_ 
Sinusoidal potential 
I
-VO[1 +~cos(2gx)] Ixl <a/2 
Vex) = 
o 
Ixl > a/2 
(41 ) 
We present here a perturbation approach to solve the Schr6dinger equation. We 
assume 
ga = (m + ~) 7T; m = 0,1,2,3, ... 
(42) 

Some Select Topics 
609 
so that V (x) = - Vo at x = +a /2. For the potential energy variation given by Eq. 
(41), Eq. (40) can be written in the form 
where we have introduced the following dimensionless variables: 
and 
2 
E 
Y = 2(1 - b)-
,6. 
a 2 = 2b~ 
,6. 
2 
2f.L Voa2 
a = ---=--
41i2 
b= -.! = ~ 
Vo 
Vo 
(43) 
(44) 
For ~ < ~o, Eq. (43) is similar to Mathieu's equation (see, e.g. Chapter 11 of Ref. 
4). Following Ref. 4, we write the solution of Eq. (43) in the following form 
(45) 
If we substitute the above expression in Eq. (43) and equate the coefficients of 
various powers of E, we would get 
o 
(46) 
-21/fo cos(20 
(47) 
= -21/fJ cos(2~) 
(48) 

610 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The solution of Eq. (46) is taken to be 
1jfo(~) = A cos(y ~ + ¢) 
(49) 
where the constant ¢ is detennined from the boundary conditions. However, for a 
symmetric V (x), the eigenfunctions are either symmetric (¢ = 0) or antisymmetric 
(¢ = Jr /2) functions of ~. If we substitute Eq. (49) in Eq. (47) we can solve for the 
particular integral to obtain 1jf I (~) and similarly solve Eq. (48) to obtain 1jf 2 (~) ••• 
etc. The final result is 
1jf(x) = 
I 
{COS[(2+Y)~+¢] 
A cos(y~ + ¢) + -fA 
4 
I +y 
+ cos[-(2 -
y)~ + ¢]} + ~f2A {_ 8~ sin[y~ + ¢] 
I-y 
32 
y(l_y2) 
cosr(4+y)~+¢] 
COS[-(4-Y)~+¢]} 
+ 
+ 
+ ... 
(1 + y)(2 + y) 
(1 - y)(2 -
y) 
C exp[-(T(I~I- ~o)] 
for I~I < ~o 
for I~I > ~o 
(50) 
The continuity of 1jf and d1jf /d~ at ~ 
~o would lead to the transcendental 
equation which would determine the energy eigenvalues. 
Obviously, the perturbation theory would be accurate for small values of f. 
However, we obtain the general result that for a given value of a, one can always 
choose a large enough value of m to give a large number of oscillations of the 
potential energy variation in the well and obtain a sufficiently small value of f so 
that the bound states are accurately detennined by solving for the average potential 
energy distribution given by 
1-Vo Ixl < a/2 
Vex) = 
o Ixl > a/2 
(51 ) 
We next present some numerical calculations to determine the validity of the per-
turbation method. We assume 
a = 7.0 
(52) 
We first consider the average potential energy variation given by Eq. (51). For 
such a value of a, the potential well will support 3 symmetric and 2 anti symmetric 
bound states. Table 23.1 gives the corresponding values of b (which represent the 
normalized energy eigenvalues). 
Tables 23.2 gives the b values for the ground state and the 3rd excited state for 
different L\ values for a fixed value of m (= I 0) and Table 23.3 give the b values for 
different m-values corresponding to L\ = 1. The tables give a comparision of the 
results using perturbation theory with the more accurate results obtained using the 
Runge-Kutta method. 
From the tables we make the following observations: 

Some Select Topics 
Table 23.1. The normalized en-
ergy eigenvalues corresponding 
to the average potential energy 
distribution [given by Eq. (51)] 
fora = 7. 
Mode Number 
h-value 
0 
0.9615098 
I 
0.8468413 
2 
0.6588388 
3 
0.4045254 
4 
0.1067140 
Tahle 23.2. The normalized energy eigenvalues of the ground state and the 3rd 
excited state corresponding to the sinusoidally varying potential energy distribution 
[given by Eq. (41)] for different values of II for m = 10 with a = 7. 
h-values 
E 
Ground State 
3rd excited state 
R-K Method 
Pert. Theory 
R-K Method 
Pert. Theory 
1.0 
0.090063 
0.986268 
0.995867 
0.460043 
0.462060 
0.5 
0.045032 
0.968165 
0.968969 
0.425971 
0.426323 
0.25 
0.022158 
0.963408 
0.963489 
0.413646 
0.413693 
0.1 
0.009006 
0.961928 
0.961930 
0.407784 
0.407787 
611 
1. The perturbation method, as expected, becomes more accurate for smaller L'l 
values. 
2. For each bound state, the perturbation method becomes more accurate for 
higher values of m; this is to be expected as a large value of m implies a small 
value of E. 
3. As the value of m increases, i.e. as the number of oscillations in the well 
increases, the value of b for each bound state converges to the b value cor-
responding to the average potential energy variation which are tabulated in 
Table 23.1. 
Figures 23.8 to 23.lO show the eigenfunctions corresponding to the ground state 
for various values of m and L'l using the perturbation theory and the (more accurate) 
Runge-Kutta method. The figures show that the perturbation theory gives an accu-

612 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Tahle 23.3. The normalized energy eigenvalues of the ground state and the 3rd ex-
cited state corresponding to the sinusoidally varying potential energy distribution 
[given by Eq. (41)] for different values of m for II = 1.0 with a = 7. 
h-values 
m 
E 
Ground State 
3ra excited state 
R-K Method 
Pert. Theory 
R-K Method 
Pert. Theory 
5 
0.328247 
1.042736 
1.046624 
0.490174 
0.446715 
10 
0.090063 
0.986268 
0.995867 
0.460043 
0.462060 
20 
0.023628 
0.968511 
0.969370 
0.425882 
0.426204 
50 
0.003893 
0.962920 
0.962960 
0.411655 
0.411675 
rate description of the eigenfunction for smaller ,6. values. It may be mentioned that 
even for maximum perturbation; the eigenfield is very accurate for m :::: 20. Figures 
23.11 shows the eigenfunction of the 3rd excited states for m = 20. Comparision 
of Figs 23.10 and 23.11 show that the perturbation theory works even better for 
the excited states. A similar behaviour can be seen for the other excited states also. 
Thus, we may conclude that the simple perturbation approach can be effectively 
used to analyse a sinusoidally varying potential energy distribution. 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
"-' 
-~ 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
-25 
-20 
-15 
-10 
-5 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
, 
Figure 23.R. Ground state eigenfunction for m = 10 (and II = 0.1) using Runge-Kutta method 
(continuous curve) and perturbation theory (dashed curve); the two curves almost completely overlap 
each other. 
23.4. The matrix method 
In this section we will describe a versatile matrix method to obtain solutions of 
the (one-dimensional) Schrbdinger equation for a variety of problems. The only 

Some Select Topics 
1.0 
0.8 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
"".-,,1 
" 
1 , 
1 
"I 
1 
-
1 
1 
,,' 
1 
1 
1 , 
r j 
1 
1 
1 
1 , 
1 , , , 
/\ 
\ 
\ .... '\ 
\ 
\ 
\ \r\ , 
\ 
\ 
\ \-, 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ , 
\ \', 
o.o~--~--~~~~~~~~--~--~--~--~ 
-2.5 
·20 
-15 
·10 
-5 
o 
~ 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
613 
Figure 23.9. Ground state eigenfunction for m = 10 (and ll. = 1.0) using Runge-Kutta method 
(continuous curve) and perturbation theory (dashed curve). 
1.0 
0.8 
-;;; 
0.6 
-0 
~ 
0.4 
0.2 
-30 
-20 
-10 
o 
~ 
10 
20 
30 
40 
Figure 23.10. Ground state eigenfunction for m = 20 (and ll. = 1.0) using Runge-Kutta method 
(continuous curve) and perturbation theory (dashed curve). 
approximation made would be to replace the actual potential energy variation by a 
piecewise step variation. Indeed, the method can be used to solve the general scalar 
wave equation 
(53) 
where, for problems in quantum mechanics 
(54) 

614 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
4 
2 
~ 
0 
~ 
-2 
-4 
-25 
-20 
-15 
-10 
-,) 
0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
~ 
Figure 23.11. 3rd excited state eigenfunction for m = 20 (and ~ = 1.0) using Runge-Kutta method 
(continuous curve) and perturbation theory (dashed curve); the two curves almost completely overlap 
each other. 
We assume piecewise step variation of V (x): 
V (x) = VI 
for 
x < d] 
I 
= Vj for dj _ 1 < x < d j ; j = 1,2, ... (N -
1) 
= VN for x > dN - 1 
(55) 
(see Fig. 23.12). Indeed an arbitrary variation of V (x) can always be approximately 
described by the above equation. The solution of Eq. (53) in the ph region can be 
written in the following form 
(56) 
where 
2 
2fJ 
k(x) = -[E - v.] 
] 
112 
] 
(57) 
As shown in Fig. 23.12, x = d j represents the position of the right boundary 
of the ph layer. Using the continuity of the wave function and its derivative (at 
x = d j ), it can be readily shown that the coefficients in the adjacent regions are 
related through the following matrix equation 
where 
( Aj+1 ) = S(j) ( Aj ) 
B j+ 1 
B j 
SCi) = 
II 
12 
( SC.j) SC.j)) 
S (j) S( j) 
21 
22 
(58) 
(59) 

Some Select Topics 
with 
and 
V(x) 
jlh Layer 
L-~----+-__ ~ 
__________ ~i 
__________ -4X 
d l 
dN _ 1 
Figure 23.12. Piecewise step variation of the potential energy distribution. 
S(j) -
11 
-
S(j) -
12 -
S(j) -
21 
-
S(J)-
22 -
_ I + _1_ elClj 
I [ 
k.]. 
2 
ki+1 
I [ 
k] . 
_ I __ 
1_ e-IClj 
2 
ki+1 
I [ 
k]. 
_ I -
_1_ elClj 
2 
kj+l 
_ I + _1_ e-IClj 
I [ 
k.] . 
2 
kj + 1 
615 
(60) 
By successive applications of Eq. (58), the coefficients in any layer can be ex-
pressed in tenns of the coefficients of the first layer 
( Aj+l ) = S(j) S(j-l) ... S(l) ( Al ) 
Bj +1 
Bl 
(61) 
Finally 
( AN) = (Gll G12) (AI) 
BN 
G2l G 22 
Bl 
(62) 
where the G matrix is given by 
G = S(N-l) S(N-2) ... S(1) 
(63) 
Thus, for given values of A I and Bland of energy E we can obtain the coefficients 
AN and BN. We should mention that if E > Vi, k~ is positive; however, if E < Vj, 
k; is negative and kj will be replaced by UKj) where 
2 
2 
2J..i 
K· = -k. = -[Vi - E] 
1 
1 
fl2 
. 
(64) 

616 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Thus, Eq. (56) takes the form 
1/f .(x) = A· e-Kj(x-dj - 1) + B· eKj(x-dj-l) 
J 
J 
} 
(65) 
We now consider specific cases: 
CASE I: BOUND STATE CALCULATIONS 
For a bound state, 1/f(x) -+ 0 as x -+ ±oo. The condition that 1/f(x) -+ 0 as 
x -+ -00 gives us 
(66) 
Without any loss of generality, we may assume BI = I so that 
(67) 
Now, BN represents the coefficient of the exponentially amplifying solution; thus 
the condition that 1/f(x) -+ 0 as x -+ +00 gives us BN = O. If we therefore plot 
G22 (E) 
as a function of E, then the values of E where G 22 (E) becomes zero represent the 
energy eigenvalues of the system. Thus the roots of the equation 
G22(E) = 0 
(68) 
would give us the energy eigenvalues (see Problem 23.3). 
CASE 2: SCATTERING PROBLEM 
If k? and k~ are both positive, we will have a scattering problem similar to what 
we have discussed in Chapter 8. For a wave incident from the left, we must have 
(see discussion in Sec. 8.3). Thus we would have 
and 
0= G21 A] + G 22 B] 
Therefore thc reflection coefficient would he given by 
R = 1~12 = I G2112 
A] 
G22 
(69) 
(70) 
(71) 

Some Select Topics 
617 
CASE 3: TUNNELLING STRUCTURE 
For a typical tunnelling structure shown in Fig. 23.3, Al = -BI (so that the wave 
function vanishes at x = 0) and a plot of 
as a function of E would give us approximate Lorentzians, the widths of which 
would enable us to calculate lifetimes of quasi-bound states. 
23.5. The Thomas-Fermi model of the atom 
In an atom consisting of a large number of electrons, the electrons can approxi-
mately be assumed to be in a degenerate state (a degenerate electron gas is dis-
cussed in Sec. 6.9). The electron gas is in a potential field and in the Thomas-Fermi 
model, we make two assumptions: 
1. The potential function varies very little over a wavelength. 
2. Further,the field is assumed to vary slowly enough so that we can consider a 
volume element dr which contains a large number of electrons and at the 
same time the field can be assumed to be approximately constant in this 
volume. 
We recall that the maximum kinetic energy for a degenerate electron gas is given 
by [see Eq. (94) of Chapter 6] 
1i2 [ 
2 
]2/3 
(K.E.)max = EFo = -
3n nCr) 
2ft 
where n (r) represents the number of electrons per unit volume. Further, 
Total Energy E = 
p2 
-
+ VCr) 
2ft 
p2 
-
- q<l>(r) 
2ft 
(72) 
(73) 
where <l> (r) represents the potential and -q represents the charge of the electron. 
Now, for a bound state, we must have E < 0; thus 
1i2 
q<l>(r) = (K.E.)max = -
[3n 2n(r) ]2/3 
2ft 
(74) 

618 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(This is a rather oversimplified model-for a more rigorous analysis one may look 
up Ref 6 and 7). Thus 
[2fLq <1> (r) ]3/2 
n (r) -
----::------
-
37T21i3 
(75) 
Now, for the theory to be self-consistent, the potential and the charge density should 
be related through the Poisson equation 
\72<1> = _ per) 
EO 
(76) 
where EO is the dielectric permittivity of free space and per) = -qn(r) represents 
the electron charge density. Substituting for nCr) from Eq. (75) we get 
\72<1> = 
q 
(2fLq)3/2 <1>3/2 
37T21i3Eo 
(77) 
We assume the nucleus (of charge Zq) to be at the origin of the coordinate system 
so that the potential is spherically symmetric and we may write 
\72<1> = ~~ [r 2d <1>] 
r2 dr 
dr 
(78) 
Further, as r ~ 0, the potential will be essentially due to the nucleus so that (as 
r ~ 0) it will behave as Zq j(47TEor). This suggests that we introduce the variable 
X (r) defined through the following equation 
Zq 
<1>(r) = -- x(r) 
47TEor 
so that we have the boundary condition 
x(O) = 1 
Using Eqs (78) and (79), Eq. (77) becomes 
(79) 
(80) 
(81 ) 
In order to put the above equation in a more convenient form we introduce the 
dimensionless variable x defined by the following equation 
r = yx 
where the parameter y is to be defined later. Substituting in Eq. (81) we get 
d2X(x) = [y3/2_4 _ ZI/2 (2fLq2)3/2] _1_ X(x) 
(82) 
dx2 
37T 1i3 
47TEO 
XI/2 

Some Select Topics 
619 
We choose y so that the quantity inside the square brackets is unity: 
1 (3n)2/3 
ti 2 
0.8853ao 
y = 2: 4 
ZI/3 (Mq 2 / 4nEo) -
ZI/3 
(83) 
where 
ti 2 
ao = 
::::: 0.53 x 10-10 m 
(Mq 2 / 4nEo) 
represents the Bohr radius. Thus Eq.(82) takes the form 
d 2 X _ 
1 
3/2 
dx2 -
XI/2 [X(x)] 
(84) 
which is known as the dimensionless Thomas-Fermi equation; from now on it will 
be abbreviated as the TF equation. For an isolated atom, the boundary conditions 
will be 
X(O) = 1 
and 
X (00) = 0 
(85) 
we will denote the solution of the TF equation which satisfies the boundary condi-
tions given by Eq. (85) by Xi(X). Now, using Eqs (75) and (79),we may write 
I 
[2Mzq2 
]3/2 
1 [2Z 1 
]3/2 
nCr) = --
Xi(r) 
= -
-- X,.(x) 
3n 2ti3 4nEor 
3n 2 
ao yx 
or, using Eq. (83) we get 
32 Z2 [Xi(X)]3/2 
n(r)=-- --
9n 3 a3 
x 
o 
(86) 
(87) 
Thus, if X i (x) is known, one can determine the charge distribution in the atom. It 
may be mentioned that Eq. (86) predicts an infinite electron density at the origin: 
this is one of the basic errors of the TF model-see, e.g, Ref. 8. Indeed, for an atom 
the TF model is correct only in the domain 
ao 
-
< r < ao 
Z ~ 
~ 
(88) 
where ao is the Bohr radius. The condition aol Z < r comes from the fact that at 
distances smaller than aol Z the quasi-classical approximation (which is the basis 
of the TF model) breaks down. On the other hand, for r > ao the de-Broglie 
wavelength of the electron becomes large. Fortuitously, in a complex atom most of 
the electrons are in the domain 
ao 
-<r<ao 
Z 
~ 
~ 

620 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
so that the TF model can be used to describe the complex atom system. 
In Problem 23.4 we have shown that a power series solution of the TF equation 
is given by 
(89) 
where Q2 is determined from the initial slope: 
Q2 = XI(O) 
(90) 
The power series is convergent for x < I and is useful (i.e. rapidly convergent) 
when x « 1. For x > 1, one normally uses a numerical method to solve the TF 
equation. Figure 23.13 gives the numerical solution of the TF equation for various 
values of the initial slope. When 
Q2 = Xl (0) = -1.58808 
(91 ) 
X (x) approaches zero asymptotically and the solution corresponds to an isolated 
atom. Thus [see Eq. (89)] 
4 
1 
X i (x) = 1 - 1.58808 x + - x 3/ 2 - 0.635232 X 5/ 2 + - x 3 + . . . 
(92) 
3 
3 
where the subscript i corresponds to the fact that we are considering an isolated 
atom. When 
Ix'(O)1 < 1.58808 
X (x) decreases to a minimum and then starts increasing again (see Fig. 23.13). 
One of the important advantages of the Thomas-Fermi model is the fact that the 
curve corresponding to an isolated atom is universal, i.e. for a given value of Zone 
has to calculate y [see Eq. (83)] and simply scale the x-axis [using the equation 
r = y x] to get X (r) as a function of r. Once X (r) is known, n (r) can be determined 
from Eq. (86). Because of this, detailed tables for the Thomas-Fermi function can 
be found in many places (see, e.g. References 10 and 11). A convenient formula 
(corresponding to an isolated atom) is given by (Ref. 12) 
Xi(X) ;::::; 0.35 e-O.3x + 0.55 e-1.2x + 0.1Oe-6.ox 
(93) 
The above formula gives an accurate description in the region 0 < x ::: 7. 
In Fig. 23.14 we have plotted the electron distribution function 
(94) 

Some Select Topics 
>i x 
i 
1·588 
1·58808 
8 
621 
1·58803 
10 
Figure 23.13. The Thomas-Fenni function X (x), as a function of x, for various values of the initial 
slope. The numbers on the curve represent the value of -a2. When a2 = -1.58808, X (x) approaches 
zero asymptotically and the solution corresponds to an isolated atom. The dotted curve represents the 
qualitative dependence of X (x) on x when la21 is greater than 1.58808. [Adapted from Ref. 9] 
as a function of r for the mercury atom (Z = 80); the quantity D(r) dr represents 
the number of electrons in the spherical shell whose inner and outer radii are r 
and r + dr respectively. The solid curve is obtained by using the TF model [e.g. 
by using the tables given in References 10 and II-or, may be, the approximate 
empirical formula given by Eg. (93)] and the dashed curve represents the actual 
numerical results-the peaks approximately corresponding to the Bohr orbits. 
23.6. Problems 
Note: In Problems 23.1-23.3 all symbols have the same meaning as in Sec. 23.2. 
Problem 23.1 Consider a potential variation corresponding to Fig. 23.3 with ex = 
6.0 and d/a = 1. Show that the quasi-modes correspond to 
E = E[ = 0.19932777 
and 
E = E2 = 0.75863041 

622 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
b 
120 
C 
01 '-
1: 
11 
"6 
80 
f 
40 
_(,Ia) 
Figure 23.14. The electron distribution function D(rH= 4nr2 n(r)] as a function of r for the Hg 
atom (Z = 80). The solid curve is obtained from the TF model and the dashed curve represents the 
actual numerical results [adapted from Ref. 121. 
Plot the corresponding wave functions and compare with the plots corresponding 
to 
E = EJ + 0.0005 
and 
E = E2 + 0.0.005 
Also plot 1 A / D 12 around E = E \ and E = E 2 and find the lifetime of the states. 
Problem 23.2 Consider again the potential variation corresponding to Fig. 23.3 
with ex = 5.0 and d/a = 1. Show that the quasi-modes correspond to 
E = E\ = 0.269514 
and 
E = E2 = 0.962869 
Plot the corresponding wave functions and compare the second plot with the plot 
corresponding to 
E = E2 + 0.001 
Show that the two plots almost overlap with each other (why?). 
Problem 23.3 (a) Consider the potential energy variation corresponding to Fig. 
23.1; we write the solution in the region x < a as sin(kx) and the solution in the 
regIOn x > a as 

Some Select Topics 
Show that B (the coefficient of the exponentially amplifying term) is given by 
B = sin(aJE) + J E 
cos (aJE) 
l-E 
623 
Assume a = 5.0 and plot B as a function of (in the domain 0 < E < 1) and show 
that the zeroes occur for values of E as given in the previous problem. 
(b) Repeat the calculations for a = 6.0. 
Problem 23.4 Substitute the power series solution 
X(x) = L 
ak xk/2 
k=O,I,2, ... 
ao + al x I /2 + a2 x + a3 x 3/2 + a4 x 2 + ... 
in the TF equation [Eq. (84)] and assuming X(O) = 1, derive Eq. (89). 
Problem 23.5 Let X i (x) represent the solution of the TF equation corresponding 
to an isolated atom; i.e. 
Xi(X) = I 
and the slope at x = 0 is -1.58808 so that Xi (00) = O. 
(a) Show that the function D(r) [as given by Eq. (94)] is proportional to the 
function 
F(x) = [XI/3 Xi(X)]3/2 
(b) Using the empirical formula [Eq. (93)] find the value of x where F(x) attains 
its maximum value. 
(c) Using the above result calculate for the Hg atom (Z = 80) the value of r at 
which D (r) attains its maximum value and compare with the value that can 
be approximately obtained from Fig. 23.14. 
[ADS: (b) ~ 0.39 (c) ~ 0,080ao] 
23.7. References and suggested reading 
1. 1.1. Goldman and Y.D. Krivchenkov, Problems in Quantum Mechanics, Dover 
Publications, New York (1993). 
2. A.K. Ghatak, K. Thyagarajan and M.R. Shenoy, A novel numerical tech-
nique for solving the one-dimensional Schrodinger equation using matrix ap-
proach:Application to quantum well structures, IEEE J. Quantum Electronics, 
24, 1524 (1988). 

624 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
3. A.K. Ghatak, I.e. Goyal and R.L. Gallawa, Mean life-time calculations of 
quantum well structures: A rigorous analysis, IEEE J. Quantum Electronics, 
26, 305 (1990). 
4. A.H. Nayfeh, Introduction to Perturbation Techniques, John Wiley, New York 
(1981). 
5. A.K. Ghatak, I.e. Goyal, R. Jindal and e.e. Davis, Analytical solutions for 
sinusoidally varying potentials, To be published. 
6. L.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, Quantum Mechanics: Non Relativistic The-
ory, Pergamon Press, Oxford (1965). 
7. R.P. Feynmann, N. Metropolis and E. Teller, Physical Review 75, 1561 (1949). 
8. J. Schwinger, Physical Review A22, 1827 (1980). 
9. J.e. Slater and H.M. Krutter, Physical Review 47,559 (1935) 
10. I.M. Torrens, Interatomic Potentials, Academic Press, New York (1972). 
II. S. Eliezer, A. Ghatak and H. Hora, An Introduction to Equations of State, 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1986). 
12. P. Gombas, Die statistiche theorie des atoms und ihre anwendungen, 
Springer Verlag, Wien (1949). 

Chapter 24 
Elementary Theory of Scattering 
Our actual situation in research work in atomic physics is usually this: we wish 
to understand a certain phenomenon, we wish to recognise how this phenomenon 
follows from the general laws of nature. Therefore, that part in the phenomenon 
is the natural 'object' in the theoretical treatment and should be separated in this 
respect from the tools used to study the phenomenon. This again emphasises a 
subjective element in the description of atomic events, since the measuring device 
has been constructed by the observer, and we have to remember that what we 
observe is not nature in itself but nature exposed to our method of questioning. 
24.1. Introduction 
-
WERNER HEISENBERG in Physics and Philosophy, 
Penguin, London (1989). 
In some of the earlier chapters we had considered solutions of the SchrOdinger 
equation which correspond to bound state problems where the wave function van-
ished at large distances from the origin; the corresponding energy levels were found 
to form a discrete set. In this chapter we will consider solutions of the SchrOdinger 
equation where the energy eigenvalues would be continuously distributed; for such 
a case the wave function would not vanish at large distances from the origin. Such 
solutions correspond to the scattering of a particle by a force field where the energy 
is specified in advance and the behaviour of the wave function is found in terms of 
energy. We should mention here that in Chapter 8 we did consider the scattering 
by a one-dimensional force field, the corresponding three-dimensional case will be 
considered here. 
Scattering experiments have provided most of the information about interac-
tions among atoms, nuclei and particles. The general technique is to have a colli-
mated beam of projectiles (particles) with well-defined energies and sometimes 
other properties, such as polarization, as well. The particles are then scattered 
by a target of atoms and the scattered particles are detected by means of a suit-
able detector. The measurement could be simply the intensity variation as a func-
tion of angle or could involve more detailed information like the change in the 
625 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

626 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
energy or the polarization state, etc. The most commonly used parameter which dis-
plays the results of scattering experiments is the cross-section. In Sec. 24.2 we will 
give the definition of the scattering cross-section according to classical mechanics 
which will be followed by the corresponding quantum mechanical definition. As 
mentioned earlier, scattering experiments provide information about interaction 
among atoms, nuclei and particles. Assuming a certain model for the interaction, 
one calculates the cross-section which is compared with experimental data. A good 
agreement between theory and experiment would suggest the validity of the model 
assumed. However, sometimes a variety of models give good agreement between 
theory and experiment and it becomes difficult to justify a particular model. In 
Secs 24.4-24.6 we will develop theoretical methods to calculate the cross-section 
and wherever possible, comparison will be made with available experimental data. 
24.2. The classical definition of scattering cross-section 
We first give the definition of the scattering cross-section according to classical 
mechanics. We consider a beam of particles moving along z-direction with a flux 
of 10 particles per unit area per unit time. The particles undergo scattering by 
a potential and one measures the angular distribution of scattered particles. The 
scattering cross-section u (e , cp) is defined by 
Number of particles scattered into solid angle dQ per unit time 
u (e, cp )dQ = ------=-----------"-----=-----
Incident Intensity 10 
(I) 
where dQ represents an infinitesimal solid angle in the direction (e, cp); the angle 
e represents the angle of scattering and cp represents the azimuthal angle; the origin 
has been assumed to be at the center of the force (see Fig. 24.1). For a spherically 
symmetric potential, u (e, cp) will be independent of cp. 
The total cross-section is given by 
rr 2rr 
U = II u(e,cp) dQ = I I u(e,cp) sine dedcp 
() 
() 
(2) 
Thus u 10 will represent the number of particles scattered out of the beam per unit 
time. For a spherically symmetric potential 
rr 
U = 2][ I u(e) sine de 
o 
(3) 
In classical mechanics, each particle has a well-defined trajectory and if we 
assume that all particles of the incident beam have the same speed Vo, there is 

Scattering Theory 
627 
'--- dA 
Incident . 
-~---------------
z 
Beam 
/ 
Scatterer 
Figure 24.1. The scattering of an incident beam. The particles scattered into the solid angle dQ is 
received by the detector. 
Figure 24.2. The classical trajectory of a particle scattered by a square well potential, s denotes the 
impact parameter. 
an unique angle of scattering e corresponding to a particular value of the impact 
parameter s. For example, for an attractive square well potential defined by 
VCr) = -Vo 
0 < r < a 
o 
r>a 
(4) 
the relation between the impact parameter s and the scattering angle e is given by 
(see Fig. 24.2 and Problem 24.20): 
e 
-2(i - r) = 2 [sin-I (:a) - sin-I (~)] for 0 < s < a 
(5) 
o 
for s > a 
where 
n = [E +E Vo] 1/2 
1 
2 
and E = 2mvo 
(6) 
Now, the number of particles which cross the annular area between sand s + ds is 
l2rr s ds and this must represent the number of particles scattered between e and 
e + de which from Eq. (1) is simply a(e)/2rr sine de. Thus 
/ 2rrs ds = -aCe) /2rr sine de 

628 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
or 
s 
ds 
(J(e) = - sine de 
(7) 
where the negative sign is due to the fact that e decreases with increase in the value 
of the impact parameter s. Equation (7) is quite general, if we now use the result 
given by Eq. (5) we would obtain 
n2a2 (n cos I.i. - 1) (n - cos !!.) 
(J(e) = __ 
2 
2 
4 cos ~ 
[1 + n 2 _ 2n cos ~] 2 
(8) 
Since no scattering occurs for s > a, we must have 
e < [n - 2sin- 1 (~)] 
(9) 
In a similar manner one can calculate the scattering cross-section for other forms 
of VCr) (see e.g. Chapter 3 of Ref. I). 
24.2.1. PHYSICAL INTERPRETATION OF THE CROSS-SECTION 
Let us consider a beam of particles of cross- sectional area A (and intensity 10 ) 
incident normally on a target as shown in Fig. 24.3. Let there be N scatterers per 
unit volume inside the target. If I (x) represents the intensity of the beam after 
penetrating through a distance x and if d I (x) represents the loss of intensity in 
traversing an additional distance dx then the total number of interactions (per unit 
time) in the volume element A dx will be given by 
-A dl(x) = (J I(x) (NAdx) 
(10) 
Figure 24.3. A beam of particles of cross-sectional area A (and intensity 10) incident normally on a 
target. 

Scattering Theory 
629 
where (J represents the total cross-section (see Eq. 3)', the quantity (N A dx) rep-
resents the number of scatterers in the volume element A dx and the negative sign 
is due to the fact that I (x) decreases with x; we have neglected multiple scatterings 
in the volume element A dx. Simple integration of Eq. (10) gives 
(11) 
where I; = N (J is known as the macroscopic cross-section and can be interpreted 
as the inverse of the mean free path. Further, it can be easily seen that the probabil-
ity that the particle undergoes its first scattering between x and x + dx will simply 
be given by 
p(x) dx = e-I:x I; dx 
where the factor e-I:x represents the probability that it does not undergo scattering 
in traversing a distance x and I; dx represents the probability that it does undergo 
scattering in traversing the distance dx. Obviously 
as it indeed should be. 
00 f p(x) dx = I 
o 
24.3. Quantum theory of scattering 
In quantum mechanics, strictly speaking, the scattering problem needs a temporal 
description, namely, how a wave packet representing the incident particle as t ~ 
-00 behaves as it passes through the region of perturbation and preceeds to t ~ 
00 (see Problem 24.19). However, when there is a steady current of particles in 
the beam, we often dispense with the temporal description. We merely calculate 
the current of particles at an infinite distance away from the target (as opposed to 
behaviour at t ~ 00). This is done by looking for asymptotic solutions of the time 
independent Schrbdinger equation. Since in this region the particles are free, we 
are dealing with the continuous spectrum of positive energies. 
We start with the time independent Schrbdinger equation 
\/21jf(r) + 2~ [E -
VCr)] 1jf(r) = 0 
Ii 
(12) 
, We are assuming here that the number of particles scattered is simply the sum of the numbers 
scattered by each atom. In the quantum theory, we will see that if different atoms of the target act 
coherently, then we cannot simply add scattering-cross sections as above since interference effects 
are involved. One then has to add the scattering probability amplitudes first. An example of this is 
the scattering of low energy neutrons in crystals (see Problems 24.15 and 25.1). 

630 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where, if we are considering a fixed scattering center, f.t represents the mass of 
the particle. On the other hand, if we are considering a two body interaction then 
f.t represents the reduced mass of the system provided the potential energy func-
tion depends only on the magnitude of the distance between the two particles, i.e. 
V = V (Irl - r21); such potentials are known as spherically symmetric potentials, 
examples of which are the square well potential [see Eq. (79)], the Coulomb po-
tential (see Sec. 10.3), etc. Then E (in Eq. (12)) represents the energy in the center 
of mass system and r = rl -
r2 represents the relative coordinate (see Secs 10.3 
and 24.8). The cross-section is calculated in the center of mass system and the 
relation which enables one to calculate the cross-section in the laboratory system 
is discussed in Sec. 24.8. 
In order to describe the scattering experiment we will obtain the solution of 
the SchrMinger equation [Eq. (12)] in the form of an incident plane wave and an 
outgoing scattered wave. Thus we seek solution of the form: 
. 
eikr 
1jr(r) -----+ e1kr + f(8)-
(13) 
r--+oo 
r 
where k = kz, z representing a vector along the z-axis. We may mention here 
that for a short -range force (i.e. when lim r V (r) = 0) the general form of the 
r---+oo 
asymptotic solution of the Schrodinger equation will be of the form (see Appendix 
0): 
eikr 
e-ikr 
f(8)- + g(8) -
(14) 
r 
r 
where the second term corresponds to an incoming wave and hence is neglected 
in Eq. (13). It may be noted that since the potential is assumed to be spherically 
symmetric, the amplitude of the scattered wave (i.e. the function f) is assumed to 
be independent of the azimuthal angle <p. 
If we multiply Eq. (13) by the appropriate time factor exp(-iEt/ Ii), it will be 
seen that the first term represents a plane wave propagating along the z-axis. Since 
leikz 12 = 1 the number of particles crossing an unit time is simply 
lik 
Voc =-
m 
(15) 
(see Eqs (38) and (40) of Chapter 4). Corresponding to the second term in Eq. (13) 
the current density is given by (see Sec. 4.4) 
J = Re [e-;kr f*(8) i: V (e~kr f(8)) ] 
(16) 
or 
(17) 

Scattering Theory 
631 
where we have neglected terms of 0 (~) which will make a negligible contribution 
at large values of r. The 1/ r2 dependence of J implies that the intensity of the 
scattered wave falls off according to the inverse square law (see Problem 4.3). The 
function fee) describes the angular distribution of the scattered wave and is known 
as the scattering amplitude. It should be pointed out that in our analysis we have 
calculated the current density due to the two parts of the wave function separately. 
This is justified because in an actual experiment the incident wave is collimated 
and does not interfere with the scattered wave. 
Now, in Fig. 24.1 the area dAis given by 
(18) 
Therefore, the number of particles scattered in the solid angle dQ will be equal to 
the number that cross the area d A and hence equal to 
(19) 
(T(e) = [:~] = If(e)1 2 
(20) 
Notice that multiplication of the RHS of Eq. (13) by an arbitrary constant would 
not have changed (T(e). 
In order to obtain a solution of Eq. (12) of the form of Eq. (13), we rewrite Eq. 
(12) in the form 
where 
2fL 
k2 = 2fLE/ 112 and F(r) = -2 VCr) ljf(r) 
11 
(21) 
We consider Eq. (21) as an inhomogeneous equation and write the equation in the 
form 
ljf(r) = ¢(r) + vCr) 
(22) 
where vCr) represents the solution to the inhomogeneous part ofEq. (21) and ¢(r) 
is a solution of the homogeneous equation 
(23) 
For the scattering problem in which the incident beam travels along k, we choose 
¢(r) = ei.k.r 
(24) 
2 In general, the scattering amplitude f depends on e and 4>; but for spherically symmetric 
potentials, the scattering amplitude and therefore a is independent of the azimuthal angle. 

632 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Now, in order to detennine the solution to the inhomogeneous equation, we intro-
duce the Green's function in the next section; an alternative derivation is given in 
Appendix N. 
24.4. The Green's function 
The Green's function of an operator L is defined through the following equation 
LG(r, r') = (o(r - r') 
(25) 
Once the Green's function is known, one can show that the solution of the inhomo-
geneous equation 
Lljf = F(r) 
(26) 
is given by 
ljf = f G(r, r')F(r')dr' 
where the (triple) integral is over the entire 3-dimensional space. We will first 
determine the Green's function of the operator \72 and then of the operator (\72 + 
k 2). 
24.4.1. THE GREEN'S FUNCTION FOR THE \72 OPEARTOR 
We will first show that 
\72 (~) = -4rro(r) = -4rro(x)o(y)o(z) 
(27) 
Now, for a function ljf (r) dependent only on the coordinate r, 
2 
I d [ 2 dljf] 
\7 ljf(r) = -- r-
r2 dr 
dr 
Elementary differentiation shows us that 
\72 (~) = ~~ [r2~ (~)] = 0 
for r =F 0 
r 
r2 dr 
dr 
r 
(28) 
At r = 0, the above expression is not defined because of the factor (1/ r2). Now 
where 
(I) 
1 
A 
F(r) == grad -
= --r 
r 
r2 

Scattering Theory 
633 
where r represents a unit vector along r. In order to evaluate div F at the origin, we 
consider a sphere of radius R surrounding the origin. Then on the spherical sur-
face, IFI has a constant value equal to (l / R2). Thus integrating over this spherical 
surface, we get 
][ 
2][ 
- ~2 f f (r . r R2 sin eded</J 
8=01>=0 
-4n 
(independent of the value of R). Using Gauss' theorem, 
f f Iv \72 (~) dr = f f Iv divFdr = f f F· dS 
where the volume integration is over a spherical volume of radius R and the surface 
integral is over the spherical surface of radius R. Thus 
Because of Eq.(28), V can be an arbitrary volume surrounding the origin. Thus the 
above equation would imply 
\72 (~) = -4no(r) = -4no(x)o(y)oz) 
If we shift the origin of the coordinate system to r', we would obtain 
-4no(r - r') 
-4no(x - x')o(y - y')o(z - z') 
The Green's function G(r, r') for the operator \7 2 is defined through the equation 
[see Eq. (25)] 
\72G(r, r') = o(r - r') 
Comparing the above two equations we get 
I 
G(r r') = -----
, 
4nlr-r'l 
(29) 
(30) 

634 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
24.4.2. THE SOLUTION OF THE EQUATION V2ljr(r) = F(r) 
We next obtain the solution of the equation 
V2ljr(r) = F(r) 
(31) 
If we multiply Eq.(29) by ljr(r') and Eq.(31) by G(r, r'), subtract the resulting 
equations and then integrate, we obtain 
f [ljr(r')V2G(r, r') - G(r, r')V 2ljr(r')]dr 
v 
= f ljr(r')8(r - r')dr' - f G(r, r')F(r')dr' 
v 
v 
Now, the integrand on the left hand side is simply div(ljrVG - GVljr). Thus if we 
use the Gauss' theorem, the above equation would become 
f (ljrVG - GVljr) . dS = ljr(r) - f G(r, r')F(r')dr' 
s 
where S represents the surface bounding the volume V; if this surface is taken at 
infinity and if the integrand is assumed to fall off faster than 1/ r2, then the left 
hand side of the above equation vanishes and we have 
Using Eq.(30), we get 
ljr(r) = f G(r, r')F(r')dr' 
v 
ljr(r) = - f F(r') 
dr' 
4n Ir - r'l 
As a simple example we consider the Poisson equation which is given by 
V2¢ = _ per) 
EO 
(32) 
(33) 
where ¢ is the electrostatic potential, per) the charge density and EO the permittivity 
of free space. Using Eq.(33) we may write the solution of the above equation as 
¢(r) = f 
per') 
dr' 
4nEoir - r'l 
(34) 
The above equation is essentially Coulomb's law in electrostatics because due to a 
point charge Q at the origin, the electrostatic potential at a distance r is simply 
Q 

Scattering Theory 
635 
Thus, since p(r')dr' represents the total charge in the infinitesimal volume element 
dr', its contribution to the electric potential at r would be 
per') 
-----dr' 
41Tcolr - r'l 
from which Eq.(34) readily follows. 
24.4.3. GREEN'S FUNCTION FOR THE (V2 + k2 ) OPERATOR 
Proceeding in a manner similar to that discussed in the previous section, we can 
show that 
Because of the above equation 
f [ 
eikr] 
f [ 
eikr ] 
(V2 + e)--;-
dr = 
(V2 + k2)-r-
r2drdQ 
v 
R 
where V is an arbitrary volume surrounding the origin and the second integral is 
over a sphere of radius R. Using Gauss's theorem we get 
Thus 
[ eikr 
eikr ] R 
[ikReikR - eikR ]41T + 41Tk2 r-.- - -'-2 
lk 
(lk) 
0 
-41T 
e±ikr 
(v2 + k2) __ = -41T8(r) 
r 
If we shift the origin, we obtain 
exp[±iklr - r'l 
(V 2 + k2 ) 
= 8(r - r') 
-41Tlr - r'l 
Thus the Green's function of the operator (V2 + k2 ) is given by 
1 e±iklr-r'l 
G(r, r') = -----
41T Ir - r'l 
and the solution of the equation 
(35) 

636 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
is given by 
f 
e±iklr-r'l 
1jJ(r) = ¢(r) -
F(r')dr' 
47Tlr - r'l 
(36) 
where ¢(r) is the solution to the homogeneous part of the equation. If we use Eq. 
(24) and the fact that 
2/1 
F(r) = -2 V(r)1jJ(r) 
h 
we would get 
1jJ±(r) = eik.r _ ~ f exp(±iklr - r'l) V(r')1jJ±(r')dr' 
(37) 
27Th2 
Ir - r'l 
[An alternative derivation of the above equation is given in Appendix N]. 
We make two remarks about these solutions. First, any linear combination of 
1jJ+ and 1jJ- will also be a solution. Secondly, we really have not solved anything 
since (37) is an integral equation with the unknown 1jJ± appearing on both sides. 
Actually, we need the asymptotic forms, i.e., the form of 1jJ (r) for r ---+ 00. If we 
assume that V (r') -I- 0 only for a finite region, say Ir'l < a then for r ---+ 00, the 
main contribution of the integral in Eq. (37) comes from a region where r' « r; 
thus we may write 
[ 
2r . r' 
r'2] 1/2 
Ir - r'l = r 1- -- + -
~ r - i-. r' 
r2 
r2 
and 
1 
1 
I ~ 
, 
--- ~ - + -r· r + ... 
Ir-r'l 
r 
r2 
so that 
or 
1jJ±(r) ----+ eik.r - ----
e±ik'.r'V(r')1jJ±(r')dr' 
/1 
e±ikr f 
r--+oo 
27T h2 
r 
where k' == ki- is a vector along the direction of scattering. The above equation is 
of the form 
e±ikr 
1jJ±(r) ----+ eik-r + fk(e, ¢)--
r--+oo 
r 
where e, ¢ are polar angles of the scattered particles. We recall that for the complete 
solutions we must multiply the above equation by the time part, e-i,vt , where k and 
(JJ are related by the free particle equation. 
h2k2 
--=hw 
2JL 

Scattering Theory 
637 
We now recognize that 1/f+ (r) represents a plane wave term plus an outgoing wave 
while 1/f- (r) represents a plane wave term plus an incoming wave term. We now 
restrict ourselves to the solution corresponding to the outgoing wave case 1/f+ (r). 
The term 
f)k(e, ¢) = -~ 1 
exp(-ik'· r') V (r')1/f+ (r')dr' 
(38) 
27T1i 
is called the scattering amplitude. Generally in scattering experiments the detector 
is placed outside the region of the incident beam and counts only the scattered part. 
It can be seen that the amplitude of the scattered beam is reduced by a factor 1/ r2. 
Once f (e, ¢) is known, the scattering cross-section can be calculated using the 
relation 
dCf 
2 
dQ = If(e, ¢)I 
24.5. The Born approximation 
The scattering amplitude [Eq. (38)] cannot be evaluated unless we know 1/f+ (r') in 
the first place. However, if the interaction energy V is treated as a small perturba-
tion, then we can solve for 1/f+ by the method of successive approximations. From 
Eq. (37) we obtain as the approximation [setting 1/f+ (r') ~ eik.r' in the integrand] 
1/f+(r) = e,k.r -
_t"_ 
V(r')e,kr dr 
. 
1/ 1 
exp(iklr - r'l) 
., 
1 
27T1i 2 
Ir - r'l 
(39) 
The next approximation is obtained by using this value of 1/f+ in the integral in 
(37), i.e. 
+ 
ik·r 
f.L 1 ,exp(iklr - r'l) 
, 
ik·r' 
, 
1/f2 (r) = e 
- --2 
dr 
V(r)e 
dr 
27T1i 
Ir - r'l 
( 
f.L )211 ' "exp(iklr - r'l) 
, exp(iklr' - r"l) 
"ik·r" 
+ --
dr r 
V (r ) 
V (r )e 
27T1i 2 
Ir - r'l 
Ir' - r"l 
The term 1/f~ (r) obtained by this procedure is called the nth Born Approximation. 
Frequently, one uses only the first term and it is referred to as the Born approxi-
mation. The first Born approximation for the scattering amplitude is obtained by 
setting 1/f+ (r') = eikr in Eq. (38) to obtain 
fee, ¢) = - 2:1i2 1 
V(r')e-iq.r'dr' 
(40) 
where liq = Ii (k' - k) is the momentum transfer in scattering. We may also write 
f.L 
fee, ¢) = - 27T1i 2 Vq 

638 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where 
is the Fourier transfonn of the potential. For spherically symmetric potentials 
V (r') = V (r') 
and one obtains 
where we have assumed the z' -axis to be along q, and 
, 
e 
q = Ik - kl = 2k sin -2 
(41 ) 
e being the angle of scattering (the angle between k' and k). Carrying out the 
integrations we get 
ex; 
fee) = __ 
t" 
V(r')--r,2dr' 
211 / 
sin qr' 
/12 
qr' 
(42) 
o 
and 
( 211)2 /00 
sinqr' 
2 
ace) = 
_t"_ 
V(r')--r,2dr' 
h 2 
qr' 
(43) 
o 
Suppose now V (r') is a potential which has the same sign everywhere. Then Eg. 
(42) shows that for large values of q there will be large phase differences from 
different regions of the scatterer (i.e. the exponential term oscillates) and effects 
from different regions will tend to reduce the scattcring amplitude. On the other 
hand for q = 0 (i.e. k' parallel to k) the amplitude will be the largest. The scattering 
amplitude in this case is 
leO) = -~2 
/ 
V (r')dr' 
. 
27Th 
The ratio f (q) If (0) is called the form factor. Another way of looking at the prob-
lem is to study the difference between a 'point' scatterer and a 'spread out' one. It 
is easy to see that, in general, the effect of a spread is to reduce the scattering. 
The Born approximation is useful when the scattered wave is negligible com-
pared to the incident wave. Looking at Eg. (39) this implies that 
~ 
V (r')eik.r'dr' «1 
/ 
eiklr-r'l 
27Th 2 
Ir - r'l 

Scattering Theory 
For short-range central potentials, we can put r ~ 0 and obtain a crude limit 
00 
2f1, f 'k' 
-2-
e' r sin kr' V (r')d r' «1 
Ii k o 
a result that is likely to hold for weak potentials and high energies. 
24.5.1. ApPLICATION OF BORN APPROXIMATION FOR THE SHIELDED 
COULOMB POTENTIAL 
639 
(44) 
As an example we consider the shielded Coulomb potential for which the potential 
energy function is given by (see, e.g. Ref. 3, Sec. 14.1)3 
Z,Z2e2 
(r) 
VCr) = 
r 
exp -;: 
where A is known as the shielding distance, substituting in Eq. (43) we get 
00 f e-r/Asinqrdr 
o 
2 
The integral is the imaginary part of h'; e-r/Aeiqr dr and gives 
Thus 
If we let A ~ 00, we get 
(J'= 
q 
4f1,2(ZJZ2e2)2 
( 4 p2 sin2 ~ + ~~) 2 
16£2 sin4 ~ 
2 
(45) 
(46) 
(47) 
which is exactly the same as obtained using classical mechanics (see Problem 
24.22). Indeed even the exact analysis (see Sec. 24.6) gives the same result. 
3 We are, for the sake of convenience, using the CGS units. In MKS units e2 should be replaced 
by q2 /4n cO but then there would be confusion between the charge q and the momentum transfer 
vector hq. 

640 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
24.6. Method of partial waves 
In the previous section we have discussed the Born approximation and have also 
given approximate conditions for its validity. When the Born approximation fails, it 
is necessary to use other methods; one such method is the method of partial waves 
which is applicable to the spherically symmetric potentials. For such a potential, the 
angular momentum of the scattered particle is a constant of motion. It is therefore 
advantageous to develop solutions in terms of angular momentum eigenfunctions. 
If the potential is of sufficiently short range (or the energy of the incident particles 
is low), it will tum out that only a few eigenfunctions with small angular momenta 
(that is only a few partial waves) will really be affected by the potential. Assuming 
that the incident momentum is 17k, large angular momenta correspond roughly to 
large values of the impact parameter4 and hence the particle is hardly deflected. If 
the range of the potential is a it usually suffices to consider angular momenta 117 
with 
l ::::, k a 
Before we give the details of the partial wave analysis, it is necessary to study the 
properties of spherical Bessel functions. 
24.6.1. SPHERICAL BESSEL FUNCTIONS 
For spherical symmetrically potential, the radial part of the Schrodinger equation 
is given by [see Sec. 10.2] 
I d [2dR] 
2JL [ 
l(l + 1)172] 
--
r -
+ -
E - VCr) -
R(r) = ° 
r2 dr 
dr 
172 
2JLr2 
(48) 
For a free particle V (r) = 0, and the above equation can be written in the form 
~~ 
(p2 dR ) + [1 _ l(l + 1)] R(p) = ° 
p2dp 
dp 
p2 
(49) 
where 
p = kr 
( 2JLE) 1/2 
and k = 
-2-
17 
Equation (49) is known as the spherical Bessel equation and the solutions are 
denoted by 
)/(p) 
and 
n/(p) 
which are known as the spherical Bessel functions. For I 
transformation 
R(p) = u(p) 
P 
0, if we make the 
4 Classically the angular momentum of the particle is mvos (see Fig. 24.2) and clearly for s > a 
(where a is the range of the potential) there is no scattering of the particle. 

Scattering Theory 
641 
then 
1 d ( 
2 d R ) 
1 d [ d U 
] 
1 d2 U 
p2 dp 
P dp = p2 dp P dp - u(p) = P dp2 
Thus Eq.(49) [for l = 0] simplifies to 
the solutions of which are sinp and cos p. Thus the 2 independent solutions of 
Eq.(49) [for l = 0] are 
I 
I 
Jo(p) = - sinp 
and 
noCp) = - cos p 
p 
p 
Obviously, no (p) is singular at the origin. The spherical Bessel functions are related 
to Bessel functions through the following equations (see Appendix J) 
U sing the expressions for Jo Cp) and no (1}) one can calculate higher order functions 
using the following recurrence relations 
Thus 
l 
Jt+lCP) = - Jt(p) - J{Cp); 
p 
Jo(p) 
JI (p) 
hCp) 
1 . 
-smp 
p 
1 
I 
-
sin p -
- cos P 
p2 
P 
(~ -~) sinp - ~ cosp 
p3 
P 
p2 
etc. Similarly 
noCp) 
1 
-cosp 
P 
1 
I . 
2cosP + - smp 
p 
p 
(~ -~) cosp - ~ sinp 
p3 
p 
p2 

642 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
;vjo(P) 
0.5 
~ .. ". .. 
P 
0 
I' 
/ 
2 
8 
10 
I 
Figure 24.4. The solid curves represent the variations of .io(p) and .i1 (p) with p. The dashed curve 
represents the asymptotic form of .il (p). The asymptotic form of .io(p) coincides with the exact 
variation. 
etc. One can see that the asymptotic forms are 
iz (p) ~ 
- sin 
p -
-
I 
( 
in) 
p-->oo p 
2 
(50) 
I 
( 
in) 
nl (p) ~ 
- cos 
p -
-
p-->oo p 
2 
The variations of io(p) and il (p), along with their asymptotic forms are shown in 
Fig. 24.4. 
24.6.2. EXPANSION FORMULA FOR A PLANE WAVE 
We assume that particles of momenta are incident along the z-direction. The plane 
wave representing the incident particle can be expanded ass: 
00 
e ik.r = e ikz = eikrcosl! = I>I(21 + l)p,(cose)jz(p) 
1=0 
(51 ) 
where p = kr; notice that there is no azimuthal angular dependence in the expan-
sion due to symmetry around the z-axis. The derivation of Eg. (51) is as follows: 
5 4 A more general formula is given by 
00 
+00 
eik.r=47TL L 
iZytmcek,4>klYlm(er,4>r).i!(kr) 
'=0 m=-OO 
where (ek, 4>kl and (e r , 4>rl are the polar angles of the vectors k and r respectively. 

Scattering Theory 
We start with the Schrodinger equation for a free particle 
V 21/f + k21/f = ° 
643 
(52) 
where k2 = 2JLE/1i2. The plane wave solution of the above equation is given by 
Equation (52) can also be solved in spherical polar co-ordinates. The solution of 
Eq.(52) with azimuthal symmetry (i.e., independent of ¢) must satisfy 
I a (2a1/f) 
1 
a (. a1/f) 
2 
-
-
r -
+ 
-
Sill e -
+ k 1/f = ° 
r2 ar 
ar 
r2 sine ae 
ae 
(53) 
Using the method of separation of variables we write 1/f(r, e) = R(r)e(e) and the 
above equation can be written in the form 
-- r-
+kr 
I d ( 2dR ) 
2 2 
R dr 
dr 
1 
d (. de) 
- C0(e) sine de 
sllle-;w 
l (l + 1) (say) 
(54) 
If we define JL = cos e, C~) (JL) can be shown to satisfy the Legendre's equation 
d2e 
de 
(1 - JL2)- - 2JL- + l(l + l)e(JL) = ° 
dJL2 
dJL 
For the solutions to be bounded at JL = ± 1 (e = 0, 7T), l must be 0, 1, 2 ... [see Sec. 
9.3] and the well behaved solution of the above equation would be the Legendre's 
polynomials: 
C~) (JL) = p/ (JL) 
Returning to Eq.(54), the function R(r) satisfies the equation 
1 d (?dR) 
[ 
l(l + 1)] 
-- p-- + 1 -
R(p) = ° 
p2dp 
dp 
p2 
where p = kr. The above equation is the spherical Bessel equation [Eq. (49)] and 
the solution which is finite at p = ° 
will be i/ (p ). Thus any bounded solution of 
Eq.(53) can be written as a linear combination of i/pp/(p). Thus, 
CXl 
eiP!1 = LQli/(p)p/(JL); 
p = kr 
1=0 
If we multiply both sides by Pm (JL)d JL, integrate and use the orthogonality relation 
of Legendre polynomials, we get 
(55) 

644 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The above equation must be valid for all values of p; we take the limit p ~ 00, 
then 
2 
1 
( 
mn) 
LHS ~ am 2m + 1 P 
SIll P - 2 
+1 
RHS ~ 2il 
( 
mn) 
If' 
d 
-
sin p -
-
-
-:-
e'PM-Pm({l)d{l 
p 
2 
IP 
d{l 
-1 
[integrating by parts] 
If we integrate the second term by parts we would obtain terms proportional to 
1/ p2; thus in the limit of p ~ 00 we may write 
2il 
( 
mn) 
RHS ~ -
sin p -
-
p 
2 
Thus 
and we obtain 
00 
eipco,e = L (2l + l)il J/(P)P/({l) 
/=0,1, ... 
From Eq.(55), we also get the integral representation of the spherical Bessel func-
tions 
(56) 
-00 
For any given value of l, we can substitute the expression for PI ({l) and evaluate 
the integral to obtain the expression for J/(P). Now the asymptotic form of J/(p) 
can be written as [see Eq. (50)]: 
Thus the asymptotic form of Eq. (51) will be 
eikz = eikrcosii ~ L (2~i;rl)[eikr - (-I)ie-ikr]P/(cose) 
(57) 
I 

Scattering Theory 
645 
Now for spherically symmetric potentials, the Schrodinger equation is given by 
[\72 + k2 - V (r)]1jJ (r) = 0 
where VCr) = 2/LV(r)/1i2. The solution of the above equation (with azimuthal 
symmetry) can be written in the form 
,Ir() 
" 
(21 + 1) ./u/(r) p ( 
e) 
'f' r = L.... 
I --
I cos 
/ 
k 
r 
(58) 
In writing down (58), we make the following observations: 
(a) Since, in the SchrMinger equation (21), the potential is spherically symmet-
ric, the spherical harmonics Ylm (e, </» are solutions (see Sec. 10.2); in this 
problem m = 0, because there is no </>-dependence. We can, therefore, take 
the general solution to be linear combination of Y/O or p/(cos e). 
(b) The factors (21 + l)il/ k are introduced for convenience. 
Clearly, for (58) to be correct, u/ (r) must satisfy the SchrMinger equation (21). 
Substituting (58) into (21) we obtain 
d 2u[ [2 
l(l + 1)] 
dr2 + k - VCr) -
r2 
u/(r) = 0 
(59) 
In Appendix 0, we have shown that for a short-range force for which 
lim rVer) = 0 
(60) 
r-+oo 
the asymptotic form of ut(r) will be exp(±ikr); thus we may write6 
r-+oo 
(61) 
6 This may be very easily seen for a potential which vanishes beyond a certain distance r = a; 
because then for r > a, Rt(r) (= ut(r)/r) satisfies the spherical Bessel equation [see Eq. (49)] and 
therefore 
Using the asymptotic forms of j[ and n/ [see Eq. (50)]: 
u[ (p) r~ ~ (at sin (p - l;) + ht cos (p _ l;) ) 
which is identical in form to Eq. (61) with 6, = tan-I (hi/at). 

646 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where the factor ~ has been introduced for the sake of convenience and the quan-
tities 8/ are known as phase shifts. We see that when V (r) = 0 everywhere, u/ (r) is 
simply krj/(kr) [see Eq. (59)] the asymptotic form of which is sin(kr-In /2). Thus 
8, is the "phase shift" introduced by the potential. Equation (61) can be written in 
the form 
Substituting (62) into (58), we obtain 
L (21 + 1) 
["'"k 
'"'"k ] 
1jf(r) ----+ 
. 
C/ el(}/el r - (-1) e-1o'e-1 r P/(cos8) 
r-+oo 
2zkr 
, 
This is to be compared with the form 
" 
eikr 
1jf(r) ----+ e1kz + -
f(8) 
r 
(62) 
(63) 
(21 
1) 
" 
"e ikr 
= L 2.; 
P/(cos8) [elkr - (-I)' e-1kr ] + -
f(8) 
(64) 
1 
I r 
r 
where we have used Eq. (57). Equations (63) and (64) represent the same func-
tion and hence the coefficients of eikr and e-ikr should be identical; equating the 
coefficients gives us 
and 
~ 
exp(2i81) -
1 
f(8) = L)21 + 1) 
2ik 
P,(cos 8) 
'=0 
(65) 
or 
(66) 
The total cross-section can be shown to be (see Problem 24.16) 
f 
4n 
00 
(J = 
If(8)1 2 dO. = k2 2)21 + 1) sin2 8, 
1=0 
(67) 
The above expression shows that as far as the total cross-section is concerned, the 
different partial waves contribute independently, there being no interference. This, 
however, is not the case for the differential cross-section. 

Scattering Theory 
647 
As an application of the method of partial waves, we will consider two exam-
ples. 
24.6.3. SCATTERING BY A HARD SPHERE 
We first consider the scattering by a hard sphere for which V (r) will be given by 
VCr) = Or> a 
(68) 
=00 r<a 
Since the region r < a is inpenetrable, the wave function must vanish at r = a. 
Now, for r > a the radial part of the SchrOdinger equation is [see Eq. (21)] 
d2u[ [2 
I (I + 1) ] 
--2 + k -
2 
u/(r) = ° 
dr 
r 
For I = 0, the solution (which vanishes at r = a) is given by 
uo(r) = A sin k(r - a) 
Comparing with Eq. (61) we get 
00 = -ka 
which is known as the s-wave (or l = 0) phase shift. 
In general, (for arbitray I) the solution is (see Appendix J): 
U sing the boundary condition at r = a we get 
A/ sin kr -
-
- -- cos kr -
-
[ (
In) 
j/(ka) 
( 
In)] 
2 
n/(ka) 
2 
Comparing with Eq. (61) we immediately get 
j/(ka) 
tan 0/ = ---
n/(ka) 
(69) 
(70) 
(71) 
(72) 
(73) 
(74) 
The above equation is an exact result; for I = 0, one immediately gets Eq. (71). 
For ka « 1 (i.e. for low energies), if we use Eq. (13) of Appendix J, we would get 
(ka)2/+1 
tano{ ~ --------
(21 + l)!! (21 - 1)!! 
(75) 

648 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Since ka « I, we get 01/00 « I, 0210, « I, etc. This result is consistent with our 
earlier statement that at low energies only few of the angular momenta contribute. 
Thus for sufficiently low energies, only 00 effectively contributes and using Eqs 
(67) and (71), we get 
(76) 
which is 4 times the result obtained by using classical mechanics (see Prob-
lem 24.21). At this point it may be worthwhile to discuss the conditions for the 
validity of the classical theory in describing the scattering process. The classical 
theory will be valid when one is justified in describing the scattering through the 
'trajectories' of the classical particle. The situation is analogous to the justification 
of the 'ray-picture' in optics which is valid when the refractive index changes very 
slowly in distances of the order of wavelength. This is also the condition for the 
validity of the JWKB approximation (see Chapter 17). When diffraction effects 
become important it is necessary to have a quantum mechanical description of the 
scattering process. 
For the hard sphere case, when ka » 1 
tan 0, ~ - tan (ka _ I;) 
(77) 
so that 
4n ''''ka 
(In) 
(J 
~ k2 L(2l + 1) sin2 -ka + 2 
'=0 
ka 
~ 4n f 
(xn) 
k2 
(2x + 1) sin2 -ka + 2 
dx 
0 
~ 2na2 
(78) 
which is still a factor of 2 more than the classical result. This is due to the fact 
that from the region e ~ 0 there is a contribution of na2 ; this contribution 
arises from the famous Poisson-diffraction phenomenon according to which when 
a plane wave is incident normally on an opaque disc, one always obtains a bright 
spot on the center of the geometric shadow (for further details one may look up 
Ref. 4, p. 215). 
24.6.4. SCATTERING BY A SQUARE WELL AND THE RAMSAUER EFFECT 
We next consider the s-wave scattering by a square well 
VCr) 
-Vo 
0 < r < a 
Or> a 
(79) 

Scattering Theory 
649 
For I = 0, the radial part of the SchrMinger equation would be [see Eq. (59)] 
o for 0 < r < a 
(80) 
o for r > a 
(81) 
where K2 = 2m(E + Vo)j 112 and k2 = 2mEj 1l2 . For r < a we must have 
Uo = A sinkr (the cosine solution will make Ro(r) = uo(r)jr go to infinity at 
r = 0). For r > a we write the solution in the form uo(r) = B sin(kr + 00). 
Continuity of u and its derivative at r = a gives 
or 
Thus 
where g = K cot Ka. 
k 
tan(ka + 00) = -
tan K a 
K 
00 =tan-' (; tanKa) -ka 
47T . 2 
47T [ 
1 ]-' 
-
SIll 00 = -
1 + --
k2 
k2 
tan200 
47T [k2+ (g+ktanka)2]-' 
1 
tank" 
-g-k-
(82) 
(83) 
Returning to Eq. (82) we notice that tan 00 (and hence the scattering cross-
section) would vanish if 
tan Ka 
K 
tanka 
k 
we are assuming ka « 1 so that 0" 02, etc., are negligible. Although the above 
equation has been derived for a square well potential, similar vanishing of the cross-
section would occur for a 'localizable' attractive potential. This effect was first 
observed by Ramsauer (and hence known as Ramsauer effect) who found that at 
low energies ('" 0.7 e V) the scattering cross-section of electrons by noble atoms 
was extremely small. The etfect was later explained by quantum theory. 
24.6.5. SCATTERING OF NEUTRONS BY PROTONS 
The neutron-proton interaction can be approximately described by the square 
well interaction [see Eq. (79)]. Thus, we may use the results of Sec. 24.5.2 to 

650 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
study the scattering of neutrons by protons. For low energies ka ----+ 0 and Eg. 
(83) becomes 
4n 
(Y ~ -----;;--
k2 
g2 
+ (I-ga)2 
(84) 
In order to determine the value of g (= K cot K a) we use the data on the binding 
energy for the ground state of deuteron; this is denoted by B and its value is ~ 
2.223 MeV. Now, for the ground state of deuteron E = -B and I = 0 so that 
for 
r > a 
being the reduced mass of the neutron-proton system. Continuity conditions at r = 
a gives us 
kJ cotkJa = -K 
(85) 
If B « Vo (which is indeed the case because Vo ~ 40 MeV), 
Thus 
( 2. )1/2 
g = K cot Ka ~ k] cotk]a = -K = -
~ B 
(86) 
Substituting in Eg. (84) we get 
m,,(E + B) 
(87) 
The last step is not very accurate because ga rv 0.3, nevertheless the above ex-
pression should give a reasonable estimate for (Y. However, if we assume E « 
B = 2.223 MeV then the above expression gives (Y ~ 2.4 X 10-24 cm2 whereas 
the experimental value is about 21 x 10-24 cm2 . This large discrepancy cannot be 
accounted for by the approximation made in the analysis. In 1935, Wigner made a 
suggestion which removed this difficulty. He pointed out that the ground state of 
the deuteron was a triplet; however, there is no reason why the neutron and proton 
could not interact with their spins antiparallel (i.e. through the singlet state). Let 
Es denote the energy of the neutron-proton system associated with the singlet state 
then 

Scattering Theory 
651 
(88) 
where ~ and ~ are the statistical weights of the triplet and singlet states (see 
Sec. 22.5). If we assume I Es I ~ 40 Ke V we get the right order of magnitude 
for a. However, it is not possible to decide whether the state is real or virtual7 . 
For low energies (E :::: 4 - 5 MeV) the experimental dependence of a on E is in 
reasonably good agreement with Eq. (88). 
24.6.6. ApPROXIMATE EXPRESSION FOR PHASE SHIFTS IN THE BORN 
APPROXIMATION 
In this section we will obtain approximate expressions for the phase shifts 
when they have small values. We start out with the equations satisfied by gz(r) 
[= krjz(kr)] and uz(r) [see Eqs (14) and (15) of Appendix J and Eq. (59) of this 
chapter]: 
o 
(89) 
d 2uz [2 
i(l + 1) 
] 
0 
dr2 + k -
r2 
- U(r) u,(r) = 
(90) 
We multiply Eq. (89) by Uz (r) and Eq. (90) by gz (r), subtract and integrate to 
obtain: 
r 
[
dUz(r) 
dgz]r! 
gz(r)-- - uz(r)-
= 
U(r)gz(r)uz(r) dr 
dr 
dr a 
() 
Both gz(r) and uz(r) vanish at r = 0, further, we let r ~ 
00, use the asymptotic 
forms [see Eq. (12) of Appendix J and Eq. (61)] to obtain for the left-hand side: 
g/uz _ uz(r/gZ ~ k sin (kr - 12l[) cos (kr - i2l[ + oz) 
dr 
dr r-'>oo 
-ksin (kr - I; + 0') cos (kr - I;) = -k sin oz 
7 Corresponding to the neutron-proton interaction in the triplet state Va "'" 21 MeV and it is 
possible to have a bound state (B "'" 3 MeV); on the other hand, when the spins are antiparaUel 
Va "'" 12 MeV and it is not possible to have a bound state. However, for E ~ 40 KeV it is possible 
to have a virtual (or a metastable) state with a finite lifetime (see, e.g. Ref 5,6 and 7). 

652 
Thus 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Table 24.1. Comparison of exact and approx-
imate values for phases 
80 
kaO 
Energy 
Exact 
Born 
(eV) 
Approximation 
1.0 
13.5 
0.905 
0.596 
2.0 
54 
0.695 
0.602 
3.0 
122 
0.568 
0.534 
4.0 
215 
0.490 
0.472 
5.0 
340 
0.432 
0.422 
* Table adapted from Ref. 7 see also Prob-
lem 24.6. 
(91) 
The above equation is exact. Now, if the phase shifts are small (which is likely 
to be valid for high energies or weak potentials) then in carrying out the above 
integration we may assume 
Thus 
00 
~ -
2M2 f V(r)[krj{(kr)f dr 
kh o 
00 
JTM f 
2 
~ -fj2 
[Jl+~ (kr)] r dr 
o 
(92) 
where use has been made of Eq. (10) of Appendix 1. Since Born approximation 
is also valid under the same conditions, the calculation of 6{ through Eq. (92) is 
known as the Born approximation. In Table 24.1 we have given the value for 60 
(for electron scattering by hydrogen-see Problem 24.6) obtained by using the 
Born approximation [Eq. (92)] and have compared with the exact values obtained 
by numerical solution of the differential equation. Notice that higher the values 
of k better is the agreement between the two numbers. The agreement with the 
experimental data is also satisfactory as discussed in Ref. 7. 

Scattering Theory 
653 
If we use Eq. (92) for 0/, we should expect (T(e) to be given by Eq. (47); this is 
indeed seen from the following: 
1 
00 
fee) = 2ik L (21 + l)p/(cose)[e2i8, -
I] [see Eq. (66)] 
/=0.1.2 ... 
[using Eq. (92)] 
00 
2f.J,!Sin qr 
2 
--
--V(r)r dr 
1i2 
qr 
o 
where q = 2k sin e /2 and use has been made of the identity (see, e.g. Ref. 8), 
sin qr 
qr 
L 
(21 + l)p/(cose)U{(kr)]2 
1=0.1,2, ... 
Equation (93) is identical to Eq. (46). 
24.7. Coulomb scattering 
The Coulomb potential 
is such that 
ZI Z 2e2 
VCr) =--
r 
lim rVer) 
r--+oo 
(93) 
(94) 
(95) 
does not tend to zero and hence does not describe a short-range force (see Appen-
dix 0). Thus the results of the previous sections are not applicable. However, the 
scattering problem corresponding to the Coulomb potential can be solved directly 
in parabolic coordinates, the direction of the beam being an axis of symmetry. The 
coordinate system is 
I 
x =.jf;i cos<jJ; y =.jf;i sin<jJ; z = -(~ -
rJ) 
2 
(96) 

654 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
We also have 
1 
r=-(~+YJ) 
2 
(97) 
In terms of the parabolic coordinates, the Schr6dinger equation [Eq. (12)] for the 
Coulomb potential becomes 
Since we want solutions independent of </J, we write 
so that we can separate the equations 
and 
with 
d ( d II ) (1 2 
). 
-
~- + 
-k~-(31 it=O 
d~ 
d~ 
4 
. 
d (dh ) (1 2 
). 
-
YJ- + -k YJ -
(32 
h = 0 
d17 
dYJ 
4 
/I Z Z e2 
((3 + (3 ) = fA' 1 2 
I 
2 
h2 
(98) 
(99) 
(100) 
(101) 
(102) 
The solution we want must be of the form of a plane wave moving along 
z-direction plus an outgoing spherical wave. These are proportional to 
(103) 
and 
(104) 
Both these forms suggest that we look for a solution of the form 
In other words, we choose 
(l05) 

Scattering Theory 
Substituting Eq. (lOS) into Eq. (100), we obtain 
c; -~ ~) eik~/2 + (lk2~ - 131) eikU2 = 0 
so that 
131 = ik/2 
Substituting this value of 131 in (101) we obtain, from Eq. (100 b), 
We try a solution of the form 
We have 
so that Eq. (106) becomes 
where we have written 
p,Z I Z2e2 
n= 
!i2k 
655 
(106) 
We want to reduce it to the equation satisfied by the confluent hypergeometric 
function, 
,d2g 
, dg 
1] -
+ 0 -1])- - ag = 0 
d1],2 
d1]' 
(07) 
We identify ik1] with 1]', -in with u. Now, the solution of Eq. (107) is (see 
Appendix F) 
(l08) 
For large values of z, the confluent hypergeometric function has the following 
behaviour (see Appendices F, K and L) 
(109) 

656 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Thus the asymptotic form of g can be written as 
where 
gl 
g2 
Writing 
Since 
we get 
Thus 
Similarly 
( -ik1J)in 
ro + in) 
(i k1J) -in-I eik~ 
r( -in) 
[-ik(r - zHn 
[-ik(r -
z)]in 
r(l + in) 
[ik(r - z)]-in-Ieik(r-z) 
r( -in) 
ein In[-ik(r-z)J 
eil1ln[k(r-zl] eill1n( -i) 
(-0 = e-irr / 2 
ein1n(-il = eil1 [-irr/2] = enrr / 2 
gl=------
r(l + in) 
g2 = ---------
ik(r - z)r( -in) 
We recall that the solution required is 
I 
(10) 
(III) 
(112) 
(113) 
From Eqs (1 II )-( 113) it is clear that ei kz g I gives a modified plane wave and ei kz g2 
gives a spherical wave. We can write 
We have 
We can write 
enrr / 2 
---. 
- {exp[in In[k(r - z)] + ikz] 
ro + zn) 
+ r(l + in) exp[ikr - in In[k(r - z)lJ} 
r(-in) 
ik(r-z) 
r(l + in) 
inr(l + in) 
r(-in) 
r(l - in) 
r(l + in) = jr(l + in)1 exp(io-n) 

Scattering Theory 
Finally 
enn /2 
{ 
---. 
-
exp[in In[k(r - z)] + ikz] 
r(l + In) 
+ 
n 
exp[ikr - in In k(r -
z) + i20' n]} 
k(r -
z) 
657 
(114) 
We note that only the phases of the incident and scattered waves are modified. 
However, the phase of the scattered wave is of the form -i n In[k(r - z)] + 2i 0' n so 
that it increases indefinitely for large r, although only logarithmically. We can still 
identify (putting z = r cos e) 
n 
fee) = 
exp[ -in In(l - cos e)] 
k(l - cos e) 
(lIS) 
as the part containing the angular dependence. This gives the differential cross-
section as 
(116) 
a result that agree with the classical result (see Problem 24.22) as well as with the 
Born approximation result [see Eg. (53)]. 
24.8. Considerations for identical particles 
In this section we will discuss the scattering of identical particles like scattering of 
protons by protons or of a-particles by a-particles. However, in order to point out 
the peculiarities for identical particles we first consider non-identical particles like 
scattering of protons by a-particles. In the center of mass system the two particles 
approach each other with the same momentum (see Fig. 24.5 and Sec. 24.8) and 
after scattering they are again moving in opposite directions. If the detector is such 
that it could detect either the a-particle or the proton then the detector will register a 
count if the particle gets scattered along the direction (e, ¢) or along (rr -e, rr +¢) 
(see Fig. 24.5). Thus the cross-section will be given by 
(117) 
However, since most scattering potentials are spherically symmetric, one gets 
(118) 

658 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
2 
1 
~ 
/ 
Figure 24.5. Scattering in the centre of mass system. 
The above equations gives the correct result for non-identical particles like scat-
tering of a-particles by protons; however, it gives wrong results for scattering of 
protons by protons or of alpha particles by alpha particles. This is because ofthe in-
distinguishability of identical particles due to which it is impossible to say whether 
it is the incident particle or the target particle which has reached the detector. Due 
to this indistinguishability, we must construct appropriate wave functions which 
are either symmetric or anti symmetric with respect to the interchange of indices 
(see Sec. 22.5). 
We first consider identical Fermions (like protons) for which the total wave 
function, space and spin, must be antisymmetric. This means that even the as-
ymptotic form of the wave function of a two-particle system must obey this rule. 
However, the space part of the wave function alone may be either symmetric or 
anti symmetric, depending on whether the spin part is antisymmetric or symmetric. 
Thus for the p-p system, the space wave function must be symmetric for the singlet 
and anti symmetric for the triplet case. In the center of mass system the collision 
may be represented as in Fig. 24.5. The asymptotic form of the wave function must 
therefore be a symmetric or an anti symmetric linear combination of the two cases. 
If 
ikr 
1/f(r) = eik.r + fce, ¢)=-
r 
describing the form for the first, then 
ikr 
'k 
e 
1/f(-r) = e- I ·r + fCn - e, n + ¢)-
( 119) 
r 
describes the second. The combinations are 
[1/f(r) ± 1/f( -r)] 

Scattering Theory 
The scattering cross-section is now 
aCe, ¢) 
If(e, ¢) ± f(n - e, ¢ + n)1 2 
If(e, ¢)1 2 + If(n - e, ¢ + n)1 2 
±2Re[f(e, ¢) f*(n - e, ¢ + n)] 
We note that in the absence of interference we get the classical result 
aCe, ¢) = If(e, ¢)1 2 + If(n - e, ¢ + n)1 2 
659 
(120) 
(121) 
This result merely says that the detector counting the scattered particles will not be 
able to say whether it is counting particle 1 or 2 so that the number counted at a 
particular angle is a sum of both probabilities. 
However, the complete quantum mechanical result, viz. Eq. (120), is more 
subtle than just this. It is actually the probability amplitudes that interfere. (This 
situation is quite similar to electron diffraction by the double slit see Chapter 3). 
At e = n /2, for a central potential, the results are particularly interesting. We 
obtain 
a (e = ~) 
sym = 4\ f (~ ) \2 
which is twice the result predicted by the classical equation (121). Moreover, 
a (e =~) . = 0 
2 
antI 
Thus the p - p triplet scattering at n /2 should be absent. For an unpolarized beam 
of protons, the cross-section is 
3 
I 
aCe) = 4 a(e)ltriplet + 4 a(e)lsinglet 
because the singlet state has statistical weight one and the triplet state three. Using 
Eq. (120), we obtain 
da 
dQ = If(e)1 2 + If(n - e)1 2 - Re[f(e) f*(n - e)] 
Equation (115) gives 
n 
fee) = 
2 
exp[-inln(2sin2 e/2)] 
2k sin e /2 
n 
f(n-e)= 
2 
exp[-inln(2cos2 e/2)] 
2kcos e/2 
Thus 
aCe) = n2 {liRe 
exp[ -in In(tan2 e /2)] } 
4k2 
sin4 e /2 + cos4 e /2 -
sin2 e /2 cos2 e /2 
n2 {I 
1 
COS[nln(tan2 e/2)]} 
4k2 
sin4 e /2 + cos4 e /2 -
sin2 e /2 cos2 e /2 
(122) 

660 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Here n = flZjZ2e2/ /12 k. This fonnula agrees with the experimental data at low 
energies which are not large enough so as to let the nuclear interaction become 
effective. For further details see Ref. 9. 
It is of interest to mention that for spinless particles (a- particles) the total wave 
function must be symmetric and therefore we must have 
a(&) = If(&) + f(n - &)1 2 
(123) 
The above equation gives 
(124) 
which is to be compared with the classical result [Eq. (118)] which gives a (& = I) 
= 21 f (I) 12. Thus the quantum theory predicts twice as much scattering as we 
would expect from classical theory; the experimental data confirms the quantum 
result. 
24.9. Laboratory and centre of mass coordinate systems 
In Sec. 10.3 we had shown that the two body problem can always be reduced to 
a one body problem provided the potential has spherical symmetry, i.e. the po-
tential energy depended only on the magnitude of the distance between the two 
particles. It was shown that the Schrodinger equation could be broken up into two 
one-particle equations, one describing the free motion of the centre of mass and 
the other describing the relative motion of the two particles (see Sec. 10.3 and 
Appendix H). Thus the cross-sections calculated in this chapter correspond to the 
centre of mass system and since all measurements are carried out in the laboratory 
system we must know how to relate the cross-sections in the two systems8 . It is the 
purpose of this section to know the relation between the two systems. 
We consider a particle of mass m j moving with velocity Vj towards the target 
particle of mass m2 which is initially at rest (see Fig. 24.6 a). The center of mass 
(shown by C in the figure) moves with velocity 
mjVj 
Vc = 
(125) 
ml +m2 
After scattering, the incident particle moves in a direction given by the angle 
(&0,1>0) the target particle also suffers a recoil and moves in a different direction. 
In the centre of mass system, the centre of mass is at rest and the two particles will 
approach each other with velocities m2Vj/(mj + m2) and -mjvj/(mj + m2). It 
R It may be mentioned here that while calculating the energies of the bound states in Chapter 5 
we could ignore the motion of the center of mass. 

Scattering Theory 
o~ 
Centre 
of mass 
0-
mlvl 
Vc= ---
m2 
ml +m2 
(a) 
Centre 
of mass 
(), I/> 
(b) 
661 
Vi 
(00,1/>0) 
• 
Figure 24.6. (a) The laboratory coordinate system in which the target particle (of mass m2) is initially 
at rest; Vc [as given by Eg. (125)] represents the velocity of the centre of mass. After scattering, the 
two particles fly off in different directions. (b) In the centre of mass system, the two particles approach 
each other with the same moments; the centre of mass is at rest. 
is easy to see that the total momenta of the two particles before scattering is zero 
and hence they must fly off in opposite directions after scattering as shown in Fig. 
24.6(b). In the centre of mass system, if the scattering angle is denoted by (e, 1» 
then for elastic scattering (i.e. when kinetic energies are conserved) the particles 
should move away with their original speeds as shown in Fig. 24.6(b). In order to 
get back to the laboratory system we must superpose the velocity of the centre of 
mass which will readily give 
sine 
m2Vj 
Vi coseo = 
cose + Vc 
m2+ m \ 
1> = 1>0 
where Vi is the speed of the particle of mass m j after scattering. Thus 
sine 
tan eo = -,-------
!!!..!.. + cose 
m2 
(126) 
(127) 

662 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Notice that when m2 » m I, the centre of mass is almost at rest, eo ::::: e and the 
two system of coordinates coincide. 
Since the laboratory and centre of mass scattering angles are not equal, the 
angular distribution of the cross-section will be different in the two systems; the 
relation between the two scattering cross-sections can be obtained by noting that 
the number of particles scattered in a given element of solid angle must be the same 
in two systems; thus 
0" (eo, </>0) sin eo deo d</>o = 0" (e, </» sin e de d</> 
or using Eq s (126) and (127) 
(l + y2 + 2y cos e)3/2 
O"(eo,</>o) = 
O"(e,</» 
11 + y cosel 
(128) 
(129) 
It is 0" (e, </» which is obtained from the theory, the above equation tells us how 
to transform it to the laboratory system which should be compared with the 
experimental data. 
24.10. Problems 
Problem 24.1 Calculate the differential cross-section for the following potentials, 
using the Born approximation: 
(a) The square well potential 
V (r) = - Vo for r < a 
o 
for 
r > a 
(b) The Gaussian potential 
You may have to use the relation 
/
00 
2 
1 (if 
2 
e-at cos(2f3t) dt = 2:{;; e-f3 la 
o 
Problem 24.2 The Yukuwa potential is given by 
-ar 
2 e 
VCr) = -g -
r 
(130) 
(131) 

Scattering Theory 
663 
which is of the same form as the shielded Coulomb potential [see Eq. (51)] with 
g2 playing the role of e2 so that the dimensionless parameter g2/ lie measures the 
strength of the interaction. Assuming that the neutron-proton interaction can be 
described by a Yukuwa potential (which is, however, not strictly true) and that 
1/ ex '"'-' 1.4 x 1 O~ 13 cm, estimate g2/ lie from the observed zero energy cross-section 
of about 3.6 x 1O~24 cm2 (this is the triplet cross-section, see Sec. 24.7). 
Problem 24.3 Assume the charge distribution of a scatterer to be given by 
(132) 
where f F(r) dr = 1 implying that the total charge of the scatterer is Zle. Con-
sider the scattering of a point charge Z2e, calculate Vq (see Eqs (42) and (43)) by 
using the Poisson equation and show that 
(133) 
where 
A(q) = f Q(r) e~iq.r dr 
(134) 
Problem 24.4 Using the results of the previous problem calculate the cross-section 
for a point charge for which 
F(r) = oCr) 
Compare with the result obtained in Sec. 24.4.1. 
Problem 24.5 Use the results of Problem 24.3 to calculate (J (e) for the following 
charge distributions: 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
( 4 
)~I 
Q(r) = 
; a3 
(Z,e) for r < a 
o 
for 
r > a (uniformaly charged sphere) 
(135) 
Z 1 e 
~r2 12a2 
. 
Q(r) = 
2 3/2 e 
(GaussIan) 
(2n a ) 
Z,e 1 
1 
Q(r) = --2 -
e~r a (Shielded Coulomb) 
4na r 
(136) 
(137) 

664 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where Z 1 e represents the total charge of the scatterer. Notice that all the cases will 
go over to the result of Problem 24.4 in the limit of a --* O. 
Problem 24.6 The scattering of fast electrons by a complex atom can be, in 
many cases, represented fairly accurately by assuming the following form for the 
potential energy distribution: 
V = -- + Ze2 
dr' 
Ze2 
f perl) 
r 
[r - r'[ 
(138) 
where the first term is the potential due to the nucleus and the second due to the 
atomic structure. For the hydrogen atom in the ground state, we may write 
I 
per) = [1/IOS)[2 = -3 exp(-2rjao) 
JTail 
Use the result of Problem 24.3 to calculate u(e). 
Problem 24.7 Modify the analysis of the previous problem to study the scattering 
by helium atom, the ground state function of which can be represented by (see 
Sec. 21.4) 
Z3 
27 
1/10 = -3 exp[ -Z(r1 + r2)jaO] , Z = -
JTao 
16 
Problem 24.8 Referring to Fig. 24.6 show that the total energy in the laboratory 
and centre of mass systems are related by 
(139) 
Problem 24.9 In the neutron-proton scattering, assuming that the range of the 
attractive force, a, to be approximately 3 x 10- 13 cm show that the scattering will 
be almost isotropic (in the centre of mass system) for neutron energy ::= lOMe V. 
(This is indeed borne out by experimental data). 
Problem 24.10 Assuming the mass of neutron to be equal to the mass of the 
proton, prove that there cannot be any back scattering in the scattering of neutron 
by protons. 
Problem 24.11 For neutron-proton scattering, make an angular distribution for 
l = 0 (s-wave), I = I (p-wavc) and I = 2 (d-wave) scattering in the centre of mass 
and laboratory coordinate systems. 
Problem 24.12 For a short force, use Eq. (92) to prove that 
o[ 
(ka)202 
(ka)4 
-
"-' -_. -
"-' --
etc. 
DO 
9' DO 
225' 
(140) 

Scattering Theory 
Problem 24.13 Consider a repulsive potential given by 
Show that 
where 
and 
VCr) = Vo 
0< r < a 
Or> a 
80 = tan- I [; tanh Ka] - ka for 
E < Vo 
tan-I [:1 tan KIa] - ka for 
E > Vo 
2 
2mE 
2 
' 
2 
k = -2- ,K = 2m (Vo - E) / n 
n 
665 
(141) 
Problem 24.14 For the square well potential discussed in Sec. 24.5.2 show that 
where 
Kj[(K a) 
al = -'----
jl(K a) 
For ka « 1, using the fonus of ){ (p) and n[ (p) for p -------+ 0, show 
tan - I [ _ _ a_o_k_a_2_] 
1 + aoa 
_I [(ka)3 1 - ala] 
tan 
------
3 2+ala ' etc. 
(142) 
Problem 24.15 Obtain an expression for the coherent scattering cross-section for 
many scattering centres. 
Problem 24.16 Show that the total cross-section, Eq. (67), follows from Eq. (66) 
on using the orthogonality of Legendre polynomials. 
Problem 24.17 In elastic scattering there is no absorption of the incident parti-
cle by the scatterer. Thus the outgoing and incoming intensities must be equal. 
Equation (63) shows that this implies that 81 must be real. Show that the reaction 
cross-section, defined as the number of particles removed from the beam per unit 
flux, is given by 
ar = Lar,! = L :Z(2l + 1)(1 -117112) 
I 
I 
(143) 

666 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where T) I = exp(2i 8 z) and T) I is called the collision amplitude. Show that while there 
can be scattering without absorption, there can be no absorption without scattering. 
Problem 24.18 Prove the optical theorem 
4rr 
lTtotaj = TIm[f(O)] 
where Im[f (0)] is the imaginary part of the forward scattering amplitude. 
Problem 24.19 Consider the scattering of the wave packet 
(144) 
\It (r, to) = 
I 3/2 f dk a (k) eikr 
(145) 
(2rr ) 
by a fixed short-range potential. The wave packet described by the above equation 
is assumed to be localized well out of the range of the potential as shown in Fig. 
24.7. Assuming that the particle is reasonably well localized in position space and 
at the same time has a fairly well defined momentum, calculate \It(r, t) at a time 
after the particle has been scattered by the target. 
Figure 24.7. 
• 
Scatterer 
[Hint: Express \It(r, to) in terms of the exact eigen states of the Schrbdinger 
equation; see Ref. 10] 
Problem 24.20 For the square well potential discussed in Sec. 24.2, show that the 
classical tragectory of the particle is the same as the path of a ray of light incident 
on a sphere of radius a with refractive index given by 
n = (E ~ Vo y/2 
(146) 
Problem 24.21 In the classical expression for the scattering cross-section for a 
square well potential [see Eq. (8)] if we let Vo ~ 
(Xl show that IT(e) becomes 
independent of e, i.e. the scattering becomes isotropic. For such a case show that 
the total cross-section is rr a2 . 
Problem 24.22 For a Couloumb potential [see Eq. (95)] show that the relation 
between the impact parameter and the scattering angle is given by 
ZjZ2e2 
e 
see) = 
2E 
cot "2 
(147) 
(see, e.g. Sec. 3.7 of Ref. I). Hence using Eg. (7) calculate the scattering cross-
section. 

Scattering Theory 
24.11. Solutions 
Solution 24.1 
(a) 
a 
2 
f sinqr r dr 
o 
4fL2V: 2 
-4-0- (sinqa - qacosqa)2 
11 q6 
where the symbols have the same meaning as in Sec. 24.4. 
(b) Simple integration gives 
_ 
fL 
1 
12 _ 
][ fL a Vo 
_q 2a 2 
( 
)
2 
2 
2 6 
2 
(j (e) -
--2 
Vq 
-
4 
e 
2][ 11 
11 
Solution 24.2 Using Eg. (52), we get 
where we have used Eg. (45). On carrying out the integration, we get 
or, 
( g2 ) 2 (fLe) 2 1 
(j ~ 
16][ 
-
-
-
k~O 
l1e 
11 
a 4 
Using the data given in the problem and the fact that 
667 
we get g2/ l1e '"" 1.3. This is very much larger than the 'strength' of electro-
magnetic coupling e2 / l1e '"" 1/137. However, the Yukawa potential is hardly a 
sufficiently accurate representation of the nuclear interaction and one should treat 
this value of g2/ l1e as only a rough estimate. 

668 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Solution 24.3 The Poisson equation is given by9 
(148) 
N ow, the Fourier transform of Eq. (43) gives 
1 f " 
V (r) = -3 
Vqe1q"r dq 
8n 
(149) 
or, 
Thus 
~ f (_q 2Vq) eiq"r dq = -4n Z2e Q (r) = -4n Z2e~ f A(q) eiq"r dq 
8n-' 
8n" 
where in the last step we have used the Fourier transform of Eq. (134). Thus 
or 
Solution 24.5 
(a) 
4n Z2e 
Vq = --2 -
A(q) 
q 
A(q) = f Q (r) e-iq"r dr 
2rr rr 
II 
Zle f f f ". 
"8 2 
• 
--
e-1ql cos r dr SIn e de d¢ 
4rr a 3 
3 
000 
(150) 
(151) 
3(Zle) 
. 
= 
"l 
[SIn qa - qa COS qa] 
(152) 
(qa)-
Hence 
9 Two points ought to be mentioned here: first we are working here in the CGS units (because in 
MKS units e should be replaced by q which would get confused with q) and secondly in MKS units 
the Poisson equation is 
v 2u = -[charge densityl/Eo 
where U is the potential (which is the potential energy per unit charge) and EO is the free space 
permittivity (see, e.g. Ref. 3). The final result obviously remains unchanged. 

Scattering Theory 
669 
(b) 
(154) 
(c) 
(155) 
Solution 24.6 Comparing with the notation of Problem 24.3, we have Z2 = -I 
and for the hydrogen atom Q (r) = eo (r) - ep (r); therefore 
... A (q) = e [I - F (q)] 
(156) 
where 
F(q) = f p (r) e-iq.r dr 
JT~6 f f f e-2r/ao e-iqrcosOr2 dr sine de d¢ 
(I + q2a5/4)2 
(157) 
is sometimes called the atomic form factor. Substituting for A(q) in Eq. (133) we 
get 
( 2fLe2)2 
2 
4 
2 
(J (e) = 
-2-
[1 - F(q)] = -2- [1 - F(q)] 
n q2 
aoq4 
2(8+q2a5f 
. e 
= 4ao 
4 ' q = 2k sm -2 
(158) 
(4 + q2a5) 
The total cross-section will be 
(J= 
where y = qao. Writing 
we can easily carry out the integration. For kao » 1, we obtain 
7JT 
(J ::::::: 3k2 
(159) 

670 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Solution 24.7 For the helium atom we have 
or 
2 
2 
2e 
2 f" 
1 
1 
12 
V(r)=--+e 
LI 
I l/fO(rl,r2) 
r 
n=l r - rn 
2Z3 e 
Q (r) = 2eo (r) - --3 exp [-2Zr/ao] 
JTa() 
Proceeding as in the previous problem we get 
( 
2 
2 2)2 
2 8 x (1.68) + q ao 
(5 (e) = 16 ao 
4 
(4 x (1.68)2 + q2a6) 
(160) 
(161) 
(162) 
Comparison of the theoretical results with experimental data show good agreement 
at electron energies above 100 eV (for further details, see Ref. 7). 
Solution 24.8 We refer to Fig. 24.6 
and 
(163) 
Solution 24.9 Scattering will be predominantly s-wave (l = 0) for ka < 1 or 
Thus 
Solution 24.10 Equation (127) gives 
and since e goes from 0 to JT, eo will be less than JT /2. 

Scattering Theory 
671 
Solution 24.12 For a short-range force, only small values of r will contribute to 
the integral; therefore 
a 
2fJ., 
(ka)2/+1 f 
(r)2/+1 
8, ;::::; --
V (r) -
r dr 
/12 [1.3 ... (21+l)f 
a 
(165) 
o 
where a denotes the range of the force, and we have made use of the formula 
. 
(kr)' 
i,(kr) ;::::; 1.3 ... (21 + 1) 
Evaluation of 8/ requires a knowledge of the potential, but an order of magnitude 
of the ratios is 
81 
(ka)2 
82 
(ka)4 
-,",-,--' -'"'-'--, etc. 
80 
9' 80 
225 
Solution 24.15 For a single scatterer, the asymptotic wave is given by 
'k7 
fk 
1/f '"'-' e' .. -
.:...- e' r 
r 
If the scatterer is located at ri then the distance to the detector is Ir - ri I (see Fig. 
24.8). There is, however, an extra phase change suffered by the incident wave by 
the time it reaches the scatterer so that 
(166) 
The total intensity of the scattered wave is 
(167) 
where Pi = Ir - rd. If we assume that all the scatterers are the same and their 
spread in much smaller than the distance of the detector, we can write 
where N is the number of scatterers. The first sum is the part that gives the incoher-
ent scattering and the second the coherent scattering. Notice that the second term in 

672 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
I 
z=o 
r 
Figure 24.8. If the scatterer is at r1, then the distance to the detector is 1 r - r I I. 
Eq. (167) is a double sum. The coherent part can give large variations with angle. 
If the scatterers are all randomly spaced, then the sum will average out to zero, if 
kl'1p» I 
where I'1p is roughly the spread of the scatterers. For kl'1p rv lone can get large 
values for coherent scattering. In the forward direction, 
Pi = Z -
Zi 
so that 
Pi -Pi =zi -Zi 
Thus the coherent intensity is 
(169) 
Again, if there is a regular arrangement of scatterers as in a crystal satisfying the 
condition 
k (Zi - zi + Pi - P J = 2nn 
one gets maxima. 
Equation (168) has to be modified for what is called 'the binding factor' in 
crystals. One writes 
(170) 

Scattering Theory 
673 
The cross-section for coherent scattering can be written as 
In those directions (Bragg angles) in which coherent scattering is appreciable, 
L "-' N 2 (remembering that we have a double sum). 
if=J 
Thus 
Solution 24.17 The net flux of particles through a sphere of radius R is given by 
[see Eq. (34) of Chapter 4] 
. 
Ii f[ *ao/ 
ao/*] 
2 
JR = -. 
0/ -
- 0/-
R dQ 
2fl,1 
ar 
ar 
r=R 
(171) 
Now 
ar R--'>oo 
and 
0/* ---+ L ~~:~ PI [rJ7 e-ikR -
(_1)1 eikR ] 
I 
We now cannot assume that 171,177 to be the same. Thus 
[ a 0/] 
'""' '""' (2l + 1) PI (2l' + 1) P['[17117r, -
I] 
.. ±2kR 
0/* -
= L 
L 
+ terms mvolvmg e 
I 
ar 
R 
-4ikR 
I 
If 
We can ignore the other two terms which oscillate rapidly and will average to zero. 
Thus (remembering that we want the net flux inward) 
h = 41i k L L f (2l + 1) (2l' + 1) PIP!, [1 - 17117r,] dQ 
(172) 
fl, 
I 
If 
Due to orthogonality relations 
we obtain 
f PI (cos e) PI' (cos e) d (cos e) = _2_ Oil' 
2l + 1 
4rr Ii '""' 
[ 
2] 
h = -
L 
(2l + 1) 1 -11711 
4kfl, 
I 

674 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The current in the lth partial wave is 
(173) 
Thus the reaction cross-section is 
(174) 
In Eg. (174), l17tl < I, for otherwise the outgoing current will exceed the incoming 
one. Since the scattering cross-section is 
1][ 
1 
12 
a sc = k2 (2l + I) 1 -
171 
and sees that a~c is largest for 171 = -1. In that case a~ vanishes. On the other 
hand, 17t = 0 gives the maximum reaction cross-section for which 
1 
t 
(21 + 1) ][ 
a sc = a r = 
k2 
. 
If there is no scattering (17/ = 1), there clearly is no reaction either. 
Solution 24.18 The total cross-section (from the previous problem) is 
where 
at = ~ (2l + 1) [2 -
171 - 17;] 
2][ 
k2 (21 + I) [1 - Re 17d 
and Re 17/ is the real part of 17/. From Eg. (65) we have for the forward scattering 
amplitude, 
f (0) = .L (21 + I) 17~~ I 
1 
= i.L (21 + 1) (I - 17/) 
/ 
2k 
This establishes the optical theorem 
4][ 
a = -
1m f (0) 
k 

Scattering Theory 
675 
24.12. References and suggested reading 
1. H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 
Reading, Massachusetts (1950). 
2. L.A. Pipes, Applied Mathematics for Engineers and Physicists, McGraw-Hill 
Book Co., New York (1958). 
3. J.R. Reitz and F.J. Milford, Foundations of Electromagnetic Theory, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading, Massachusetts (1960). 
4. A. Sommerfeld, Optics, Academic Press, New York (1950). 
5. D. Bohm, Quantum Theory, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 
(1951). 
6. H.A. Bethe and P. Morrison, Elementary Nuclear Theory, John Wiley, New 
York (1956). 
7. N.F. Mott and H.S.W. Massey, The Theory of Atomic Collisions, Oxford 
University Press, London (1949). 
8. G.N. Watson, A Treatise on the Theory of Bessel Functions, Cambridge 
University Press, London (1944). 
9. R.R. Roy and B.N. Nigam, Nuclear Physics, John Wiley, New York (1967). 
10. G. Baym, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, W.A. Benjamin, New York 
(1969). 

Chapter 25 
Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
... I think I can safely say that nobody understands quantum mechanics. 
~ 
RICHARD FEYNMAN. 
25.1. Time development of states 
When a system is isolated and the Hamiltonian is independent of the time, the 
energy eigenstates are true stationary states. If the system initially is in a particular 
state \lin which is an eigenstate of the Hamiltonian Ho, it will stay there for all time. 
The time dependence of \lin is of the form 
(1) 
where En is the energy for the state n. If, however, the Hamiltonian is time depen-
dent the energy is no longer a constant of motion. Knowledge of the behaviour of 
the system is obtained by solving the time dependent Schrodinger equation 
a 
i n-\II = H \II 
at 
(2) 
Unfortunately the structure of the Hamiltonian H in most cases does not permit a 
solution of this equation in closed form. 
In many physical problems, the time dependence of the Hamiltonian arises be-
cause of what may be thought of an external agency. An atom irradiated by light is 
an example. The time dependent part in such cases is usually a small perturbation 
representing the interaction of the system with the external agency. We may then 
write 
H = Ho + Vet) 
(3) 
where Ho may be thought of as the sum of Hamiltonians of two systems in isolation 
and V, their interaction. Instead of attempting a direct solution of Eq. (2), we pose 
676 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
677 
the problem in a slightly different manner. At a particular instant, say t = 0, the 
system may be regarded as being approximately in an eigenstate of Ho, labelled i. 
We would like to calculate the probability of finding the system in another state f, 
also an eigenstate of Ho at a later time! t. Under these circumstances, we shall talk 
of the system being in quasi-stationary states. In most of the physical problems, 
we only have quasi-stationary states. For example, an excited state of the hydrogen 
atom does decay and is not strictly a stationary state. At the other extreme, we may 
regard a state that lasts only for 10-20 sec. as quasi-stationary; the point is that this 
lifetime may still be much longer than the natural frequencies of the system. 
25.2. The transition probability 
Let l/f n denote the complete set of eigenkets of Ho 
Hol/fn = Enl/f11 = Iiwl1 l/f11 
(4) 
where EI1 (= liwn ) represent the corresponding energy eigenvalues. The wave func-
tion representing the actual state 'l1(t) can be expanded terms of l/f n: 
11 
where Ibl1 (t)1 2 can be interpreted as the probability of finding the system in the 
state n at time t. For the sake of convenience we write2 
so that 
(5) 
11 
Obviously, IC,(t)1 2 will also represent the probability of finding the system in the 
state n at time t. Our objective is to develop a perturbation theory for the calculation 
of Cn(t) for a given V(t). Now, from Eqs (2), (3) and (5) we have 
a 
i liat'l1(t) = (Ho + V) 'l1(t) 
(Ho + V) L CI1 (t) e-iwllt l/f n 
n 
(6) 
n 
! If V (t) acts for a finite duration, then the state i and f may be exact eigenstates of HO provided 
the perturbation is zero at the initial and final times of observation. 
2 The rapidly varying term in bl1 (t) is the exponential term. Indeed if V = 0, en (t) is independent 
of time. 

678 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where in the last step we have used Eq. (4). If we use Eq. (5), the left-hand side of 
the above equation becomes 
n 
i It L [en - iWnCn] e~i())nI1/ln 
n 
Thus we have 
n 
11 
where the second term on the left-hand side cancels the first term on the right-hand 
side. Multiplying on the left by 1/1: and remembering the orthonormality relation 
(8) 
we get 
(9) 
where 
It 
(10) 
V,·n(t) = ! 1/I~V(t)1/I11 dr = (slVln) 
(11) 
The set of equations (corresponding to various values of s) represented by Eq. (9) 
are exact. To solve them, we usually have to resort to perturbation techniques; there 
are, however, situations where one can obtain exact solutions of the time dependent 
equations; see, e.g. Sec. 14.6, see also Problem 26.8. 
Let us assume that at time t the amplitudes have not changed very much from 
their values at t = 0; i.e. we replace Cn (t) by Cn (0) on the right-hand side of Eq. 
(9). We can then integrate Eq. (9) to give 
t 
i It [C(t) - C(O)] = L Cn(O) ! Vmei<vsl/l dt 
11 
0 
(12) 
We can apply this to the case where we know that the system is in a particular state 
i at t = O. Thus 
C, (0) = 
for 
s = i 
o for s =F i 
(13) 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
679 
so that 
t 
1 f 
. 
C f (t) = iii 
V fi (t) e1W(it dt , f =I- i 
(14) 
o 
Equation (14) gives the probability amplitudes at later times of states other than the 
initial one. 
Suppose now that at t = ° 
the perturbation is switched on and for t > 0, is 
independent of time3 . Thus 
t 
1 
f' 
eievf;1 -
1 
Cf(t) = -.- Vfi 
e"vf;t dt = -Vf'i----
. 
Iii 
. 
liwfi 
(15) 
o 
Thus the probability for reaching the state f (at time t) is given by 
2 
2 1 sin2(wfit/2) 
Pf(t) = ICf(t)1 = !Vfil 1i2 
(wf;/2)2 
(16) 
We rewrite the above equation in terms of E f and Ei : 
2 [Sin(Ef -
Ei)t/21i]2 
Pf(t) = IVfi I 
(E f -
E;)/2 
(17) 
E; 
E; + 2~h 
E, + 4~h 
Ej 
Figure 25.1. The variation of Pf(t) [as given by Eg. (17)] as a function of Ei. Notice that the 
function is peakcd at Ef = Ei with a width f>E ~ hit. 
Figure 25.1 shows the behaviour of Pf(t) as a function of Ef. We note the follow-
mg: 
3 In the next chapter we will consider harmonic perturbations where V (t) will vary sinusoidally 
with time and will describe the atom-field interaction. 

680 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(i) The perturbation theory result, viz., Eq. (17), is valid only when P j (t) « 1. 
(ii) As long as t is small enough such that 
(18) 
the quantity Pj (t) is proportional to t 2 for all values of E j, in fact 
(19) 
(iii) 
Lt 
(20) 
Ef-+Ei 
Equation (17) represents the probability of transition to one particular state ljf f. In 
the applications that we would discuss, we would be interested in transitions to a 
group of closely spaced states. Thus the probability of transition to any of the states 
is given by 
(21 ) 
where PI (E j) dE j represents the number of final states in the energy interval dEl. 
The density of states is usually a very smoothly varying function and since Pj(t) 
is very sharply peaked around E, ;:::::; E;, we may write 
W;:::::; Pj(E;) ! Pj(t) dE, 
I'!.E 
(22) 
where !:J..E represents the central peak. We may now replace the limits of integra-
tion by -00 and +00 to obtain 
+00 
2 
2! [Sin(E j - E;)t/21i] 
P ·(E)IVI 
dEj' 
i 
I 
(E,-E;)/2 
-00 
or 
2][ 
7 
W;:::::; h IVji 1- PI(E;) t 
(23) 
The transition probability per unit time will be given by 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
681 
dw 
2:rr 
2 
r = -
= -lVlil Pf(Ed 
dt 
Pi 
. 
(24) 
which is usually referred to as Fermi's Golden Rule. We illustrate the above pro-
cedure with a specific example. Suppose a system A undergoes a transition to two 
parts A -+ a + b due to a perturbation. Our question may be framed thus: If at 
time t = ° 
we know that the system is in a specific state A, what is the probability 
that at a subsequent time t > 0, the system has "decayed" into parts a and b. 
According to Eq. (17), there is a finite probability that the final state will have an 
energy E f i=- Ei (Ei was the energy at t = 0) where E f - Ei ::5 Pil t. Thus we must 
sum probabilities over a set of states f within the interval-in fact, we shall sum 
over all states whatever the value of E f. But, Eq. (17) ensures that the contribution 
from states for which E f -
Ei » Pi I t is negligible. We are, therefore, inevitably 
interested in the density of states f, i.e. the more states there are satisfying the 
relation E f -
Ei ::5 Pi I t the more will be the transition probability. 
If we assume that the entire system is in a box of volume V, we shall then have 
to calculate the number of states of a and b within an interval d Ef of a particular 
value E f' say P (E f) dE f' compute the total probability for all these states and 
then integrate over all values of E f. Equation (17) will ensure that we do not have 
to go far from E, = Ei ; i.e. we are essentially interested in the density of states 
peEl = Ei)· 
We may mention here that in carrying out the integration in Eq. (23) we have 
assumed that t is large enough so that the function Pf(t) is very sharply peaked 
around E f = Ei (so that P f can be taken outside the integral); on the other hand, 
for the validity of perturbation theory, Pf(t) « 1 i.e. t should be small enough so 
that 
I VI .. 12 
_._'- t2 « I 
Pi 2 
(25) 
We digress here to mention that since Pf(t) is very sharply peaked around Ef = 
Ei , it should be possible to express it in the form of a delta function. Indeed, since 
I sin2 gx 
Lt -
= 8(x) 
g---+oo :rr f? 
x 2 
(26) 
we may write 
(27) 

682 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Thus Eq. (17) gives 
(28) 
a fOlmula which is often used. Equation (28) does appear nonsensical because it 
is zero for all values of Eli=- Ei and 00 for E I = E; and we know that PI (t) 
should be very small compared to unity. However, Eq. (28) has meaning only when 
it is multiplied by the smoothly varying function P I(E I) and integrated over all 
energies to give Eq. (24). 
25.3. Application to the theory of scattering 
In Chapter 24 we discussed elastic scattering in which we considered the scattering 
of a wave packet by a fixed potential V (r); this was done by obtaining a solution 
of the Schrodinger equation in the form of an incident plane wave and an outgoing 
scattered wave. Here we will consider another approach to the scattering problem 
by considering the scattering of a particle as a transition from an initial plane 
wave state to another plane wave state corresponding to a different direction of 
propagation. The two approaches will be shown to be equivalent although each 
approach has its own domain of application. 
We consider a particle in a cube of volume L 3 and initially in a plane wave state 
corresponding to momentum Pi. Thus the initial state of the particle is described 
by the wave function 
1 
1/f; = V/ 2 exp[ik; . r] 
(29) 
where 
(30) 
It may be mentioned that by confining the particle inside a large box and by impos-
ing the periodic boundary conditions (see Appendix M), the states become discrete; 
in fact the allowed values of kx, kv and kz are 
where 
n x , ny, n z = 0, ±l, ±2, ±3, ... 
We now assume that the perturbatation V (r) is switched on at t 
probability of transition to the final state 
I 
1/ff = V/ 2 exp(ikf . r) 
(31) 
(32) 
0. The 
(33) 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
683 
is given by [see Eq. (17)] 
P (t) = Ie (t)1 2 = 1V'12 
I 
[ Sin(Ej . - £)t/211]2 
f 
f 
jl 
(Et - E;)/2 
(34) 
where 
Vji = f o/j V 0/; dr 
~3 f V (r) exp( -iq . r) dr 
(35) 
and 
q = k j - k; 
(36) 
Equation (34) represents the probability of the particle getting scattered to a par-
ticular state corresponding to k f. If we wish to get the total probability of the 
particle getting scattered into the solid angle dr?, which we will denote by w dr?, 
then we must multiply Pr(t) by Pj(Et)dr? and integrate over all energies; here 
Pf (E f) dE fdr? represents the number of states whose final energy lies between 
E f and Er + d Ef and the direction of propagation in the solid angle dr?. Thus, 
using the method used in the previous section, we get 
wdr? = f Pf(t)Pf(Ef ) dEfdr? 
2:rr 
2 
~ IllVfil Pf(E;)t dr? 
(37) 
Thus the transition probability per unit time into the solid angle dr? is given by 
(38) 
Now, the density of final states is given by (see Eg. (10) of Appendix M): 
(39) 
Further, since there is only one particle in volume L 3, the number of particles per 
unit volume will be 1/ L 3; thus the incident intensity, I, will be 1/ L 3 multiplied by 
their velocity 11k / m: 
I 11k 
I (2mE)I/2 
1=--=-----
Vm 
V 
m 
(40) 

684 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
From the definition of the cross-section (see Sec. 24.3) the number of particles 
scattered into the solid angle dQ per unit time = I u dQ = r dQ; or, 
r dQ 
I 
[2:rr 
2 
] 
udQ = -- = 
3 
-lVol PI(E;) dQ 
I 
(hkjmL-) n . 
. 
(41 ) 
or 
( mL3 )2 
u dQ = 
2:rr n2 
I Vfi 12 dQ 
(42) 
Substituting for Vfi from Eq. (37), we get 
(43) 
which is identical to the expression obtained by using the Born approximation [see 
Eq. (41) of Chapter 24]. This is to be expected because both employ first-order 
perturbation theory. 
25.4. Adiabatic approximation 
In this section we will consider the case of a perturbation varying slowly with time. 
For such a case if we can solve the eigenvalue equation 
(44) 
then we should expect that if at t = 0 the system is in the (non-degenerate) state 
1jJ m (0) then at a later time the system will be in the state 1jJ m (t). We will show this 
explicitly in this section and also calculate the probability of transitions to other 
states. 
We assume the potential to be turned on from t = -00 so that the initial 
condition is [cf. Eq. (13)] 
so that [cf. Eq. (14)] 
Cs(-oo) = 1 for s = i 
= 0 for s i= i 
f 
1 f 
. 
C/(t) = -. 
Vr;(t)e'Wfif dt, f i= i 
In· 
-00 
(45) 
(46) 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
Partial integration of the above equation gives 
1 avf · . 
----' e"vlil dt 
fiW/i at 
If we assume that VfiCt) -+ 0 as t -+ -00, we can write 
t 
Cf(t) = __ '_ eiw{il + 
----' eiWf;1 dt 
Vf (t) 
/] avf · 
fiw fi 
fiw fi at 
-00 
The state of the system at the time t is given by (see Eq. (5)) 
\Ii(t) = CiCt)1/!;e-;w;1 + L C f (t)1/! fe-;Wf l 
fl.; 
685 
(47) 
Assuming that the initial state has not been depleted very much in time t, we can 
put C;(t) ~ 1. Substituting the values of C f(t) from Eq. (47), we obtain 
\Ii(t) = [1/!; - L fi~; .1/! f] e-iw;t 
fi=i 
f' 
t 
+t;£ 
1 avf , 
. 
----,-' e-,w/;t dt 
fiw fi at 
(48) 
The terms in the parenthesis in Eq. (48) represents the change in the state due to 
the application of a constant perturbation V (see Eqs 13, 19 and 20 of Chapter 19) 
and has nothing to do with transitions. It is therefore the second term in Eq. (48) 
that gives transitions. 
The adiabatic approximation is the assumption that the perturbation is turned 
on slowly, i.e. aVfi/at is small. Equation (47) suggests the transitions to other 
states are extremely unlikely in this case. Assuming that a V / a t i=- 0 in an interval 
tl to t2, we may write 
_1_ (aVfi) /12 eirvf;1 dt 
fiWfi 
at 
II 
C,(t) ~ 
_, _1_2 (aVfi) [eiWf;12 _ eiWfill] 
I fiWji 
at 
The condition that I C f (t) I « 1 gives 
I av 
--«1 
nW~i at 
(49) 
(50) 

686 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Since r fi = 1/ WIi is the period of the radiation associated with the transition, this 
statement implies that 
I av 
I 
----«-
IiwIi at 
r Ii 
25.5. The sudden approximation 
We next consider the case when the potential is turned on very rapidly i.e. 
I 
r « r Ii'" -
Wli 
(51) 
(52) 
which implies that the time in which the perturbation changes appreciably is very 
small in comparision to the period involved in the transition. As an example, we 
assume 
H = Ho for t < 0 
HI for t > 0 
(53) 
where Ho and HI are independent of time. Let 1/f nand 4>n represent the orthonormal 
set of wave functions of Ho and HI respectively. For t < 0, let the system be 
in an eigenstate of Ho (say 1/f m). Since the Schr6dinger equation is a first order 
equation in time, the wave function should be continuous at alI times (although its 
time derivative need not be continuous). Now, at t = 0 we express 1/f m as a linear 
combination of 4>,,: 
(54) 
n 
where 
(55) 
represents the probability amplitude for transition to the state 4>11. 
In general, in the sudden approximation we assume that a VIi / a t is essentialIy 
finite (and large) for a very small period of time say from T to T + To During this 
time the exponent in the integral in Eq. (47) changes very little so that 
Thus 
T+T 
__ e/{°liT 
-"- dt 
I 
". f aVt"i 
IiWli 
at 
T 
1 
" 
T 
__ e1wIi VIi 
IiWli 
2 
1 
2 
ICI(t)1 = -2-2 IVlil 
Ii W li 
(56) 
(57) 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
687 
From Eg. (56) we can see that the criterion for validity of sudden approximation is 
(58) 
The change of the perturbation in the sudden approximation looks somewhat as in 
Fig. 25.2. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
'T"~ 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Figure 25.2. A typical variation of the perturbation in the sudden approximation. 
25.6. Problems 
Problem 25.1 The interaction of the neutron with a lattice can be well represented 
by the Fenni pseudo-potential 
(59) 
n 
where m is the mass of the neutron, an is known as the bound scattering length 
of the nth nucleus, 8(r) is the three-dimensional Dirac delta-function, r(n) denotes 
the position of the nucleus and the summation is over all the nuclei in the lattice. 
Assume all the nuclei to have zero spin and no isotopes so that an is independent 
of n. Calculate the elastic scattering cross-section of neutrons by a simple cubic 
structure of lattice spacing d. (Neglect lattice vibrations). Show that the condition 
for non-vanishing scattering is that Bragg law be satisfied. 
[Hint: For a simple cubic structure 
where n I, n2 and n 3 take integral values.] 

688 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Problem 25.2 In the elementary theory of beta decay, the form of the interaction 
operator, H', is simply assumed to be a constant, which we denote by G. Thus the 
matrix element H[i of the interaction is defined as 
Hfi = G ! 1fjN1f>fv1fiN dr, 
where 1fiN and 1f fN are the normalized wave functions for the parent and daughter 
nucleus; 1f I' and 1f v are the normalized wave functions for the electron (positron) 
and the anti neutrino (neutrino) respectively. Experiments show that G ~ 10-48 
gm cms sec-2. Assuming the wavelengths of the leptons being considerably longer 
than nuclear dimensions, show from phase space considerations that 
_ G21Mfil2 
2 
[ 
2 
.2]~ 
P(Pe) dpe -
,7 p,,(Eo - E) (Eo - Ee) - mv( 
dpe, 
2n- Ii c3 
where P(Pe) dpe is the probability of emission per unit time of an electron with 
momentum between p" and Pe + dPe and 
M fi = ! 1fjN 1fiN dr 
What will be the mean lifetime r? 
(see, e.g. Ref 1 and 2). 
Problem 25.3 In this problem we will consider the scattering of fast electrons by 
hydrogen atom; we will neglect exchange collisions. The unperturbed Hamiltonian 
is given by 
1i 2 
1i2 
e2 
Ho = --V~ - -V; - -
(60) 
2m 
2m -
r2 
where rl and r2 represent the coordinates of the incident electron and the elec-
tron bound to the hydrogen atom respectively. The perturbation which causes the 
scattering will be given by 
e2 
e2 
H' = -
- -
(61) 
rl2 
rl 
where the two terms represent the incident electron-atomic electron interaction 
and the incident electron-atomic nucleus interaction respectively. Using the theory 
developed in Sec. 25.3 show that the scattering cross-section corresponding to the 
excitation of the hydrogen atom from I s state to the 2s state is given by 
kl 
128a6 
o-(e) = -
2 
ko [q2a6 +~] 
(62) 
where ao = 1i 2/me 2, 
l = (ko - k 1)2 = k(j + k? - 2kokl cos e 
(63) 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
689 
e is the scattering angle, Ii ko and Ii k I represent the momenta of the electron before 
and after the collision. (We may recall here that in Problem 24.6, we had discussed 
the elastic scattering of electrons by hydrogen atom; the present exercise is an 
example of inelastic scattering in which the energy of the scattered electron is 
different from the energy of the incident electron). 
Problem 25.4 A proton is travelling with an energy of 1 Me V in hydrogen gas. 
Estimate the minimum impact parameter for which there is appreciable energy 
transfer. 
Problem 25.5 Assuming that a heavy ion (with charge Z 1 e) of velocity v passes 
undefiected as it suffers a collision with an atom, calculate the probability of tran-
sition of the atom from the initial state m to the final state n and hence obtain a 
formula for the rate of energy loss of the heavy charged particle. 
Problem 25.6 The deuteron is a very loosely bound structure, the mean distance 
between the neutron and the proton being of the order of 4.3 fermi, which is consid-
erably larger than the range of the nuclear forces which is about 1.4 fenni (1 fermi= 
10- 13 cm). It is therefore possible for a deutron to undergo a grazing collision with 
a nucleus in such a way that the proton is stripped off the deuteron and is absorbed 
by the nucleus while the neutron emerges as a free particle. This process is called 
"stripping" . 
(a) Show that for a deuteron energy of 200 MeV, this process is an example of a 
sudden transition. 
(b) Calculate the energy distribution of the neutrons. 
Problem 25.7 Show that when perturbation is small (sudden approximation) the 
probability amplitude given by Eg. (55) reduces to the expression given by Eg. 
(57). 
Problem 25.8 The radioactive H3 nucleus decays to He3, 
H3 ----+ He3 + e- + v 
The electron energy is of the order of 10 Ke V. (It is actually a continuous spectrum 
but for most of it the above estimate is reasonable). When a tritium atom decays, 
the He3 is a structure with a single atomic electron which has to readjust its motion 
since the nuclear charge has changed. Show that the sudden approximation holds 
in this case and calculate the probability that the helium ion is in its ground state. 
Problem 25.9 Calculate the probability of excitation to the 2p state of a hydrogen 
atom, originally in its ground state, due to a homogeneous electric field with time 
dependence 
Eo 
r 
E=----
7r t 2 + r2 

690 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Discuss the limits of small and large values of T and their significance. 
Problem 25.10 Let 11jr(t)} denote the state of a system at time t. Let In} denote 
one of a complete set of eigenkets of an observable A, considered timeindependent. 
Derive the relation 
(64) 
where Cn(t) is the probability amplitude that the system is in the state In} at the 
time t and Hnn' is the matrix element (n I Hln') of the Hamiltonian. 
Problem 25.11 The KO is a meson produced in strong interactions such as 
the KO state being an eigenstate of the strong interaction Hamiltonian. Similarly, 
the antiparticle KO is also an eigenstate of the strong interaction Hamiltonian. On 
the other hand, in the absence of strong interactions (i.e. when the KO is all by 
itself and has no means of participating in strong interactions), the KO can decay 
via a weak interaction, the Hamiltonian for which may be regarded as very much 
smaller than the strong interaction Hamiltonian, Hw « HI' As a result of Hw the 
KO and KO are not eigenstates of the full Hamiltonian. As in Sec. 16.4, we choose 
as the two base states (eigenstates of Hs) I KO} and I KO). It turns out that the proper 
eigenstates are 
(65) 
and 
(66) 
This state I K 1°} decays into ]T+ +]T- or ]TO +]T0 with a lifetime T 1 ~ 0.9 X 10- 10 
sec. The lifetime of IK2°} which we denote by T2 is about 5.6 x 10-8 sec. Thus we 
may write 
1\II(t)} = [C1 IK10} e-iElt/iJ e-t / 2T1 
+C2 IK2 0 } e-iE2t/iJ e-t / 2T2 ] 
(67) 
Since T 2 » T 1, assume T 2 = 00 and calculate the probability that starting from a 
KO particle, we end up with KO particle at time t. 
Problem 25.12 
(a) A quantum mechanical system (say a linear oscillator) is in a state 1jr i (r) at 
t = 0 when it is subject to a large impulse F(t) of the form 
F(t) = poet) 
(68) 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
691 
Show that immediately after the impulse, the wave function of the system is 
(b) Obtain an expression for the probability that, following the impulse, the sys-
tem is found in the state n. 
Problem 25.13 Consider the reaction 
A+a-+B+b 
and the inverse reaction 
B+b-+A+a 
Show that, for the same center of mass energies 
cr A+a~B+h = (Pa)2 (2SB + 1)(2Sh + I) 
cr B+b~A+a 
Ph 
(2SA + 1)(2Sa + 1) 
(69) 
where the momenta Pa and Ph are measured in the center of mass system (c.m.s). 
Problem 25.14 Consider the nuclear reactions 
(70) 
and 
n+ + d -+ P + P 
(71) 
where p, d and n+ represent the proton, deuteron and n+ meson respectively. If 
cr pp-'>T(+d and cr T(+~pp represent the cross-sections for the processes described by 
Eqs (70) and (71) at the same center of mass energy, then using the results of the 
previous problem prove that 
( 
)
2 
3 
PT(+ 
cr pp~T(+d = - cr T(+d~ PI' (2sT( + I) --
2 
PI' 
(72) 
where ST( denotes the spin of the n-meson, PI' and P;; are the momenta of the 
proton and n+ meson respectively. 
Problem 25.15 For an incident proton energy of 340 Me V, the cross-section of the 
reaction PP -+ n+d is found to be 0.18 ± 0.06 mb. In another experiment for an 
incident deuterium energy of 29 Me V, the cross-section of the reaction n + d -+ P P 
is found to be4 3.1 ± 0.3 mb. Show that 
4 Data quoted from Ref. 3. Experimental results are of Cartwright et al. (Physical Review 91, 667, 
1953) and of Durbin et al. (Physical Review 83, 646, 1951; 84, 581, 1951). 

692 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(a) both the reactions correspond approximately to the same center of mass en-
ergy, and 
(b) that the pion spin is O. 
(m n + = 139.6 MeV jc2 
mp = 938.3 MeV jc2 
md = 1875.6 MeV jc2) 
Problem 25.16 The K+ meson has a decay mode 
K+ -+ n+ + n+ + n-
Assume that the decay rate can be calculated by the Golden Rule and that the 
matrix element causing the transition depends on the pion energies as 
M~---
JEI E2E3 
where ET = j PT + m 2 is the total energy (including the rest energy) of the first 
n meson etc. Calculate the energy distribution of the pions (say n-) in the rest 
system of K. 
25.7. Solutions 
Solution 25.1 The initial and final states of the neutron are given by 
1 
L3/2 exp[iko ' r] 
and 
I 
012 exp[ikl . r] 
Since the scattering is elastic, the initial and final states of the crystal are the same 
and lkol = lkll. The matrix element of transition is 
2n li 2a J 
" 
Hi; = 
mL3 
exp[ -ikl . r] ~ 
o(r - rn) exp(iko . r) dr 
n 
2n p;2 a "f 
-m-L--=3- ~ exp[ik· r]o(r - rn) dr 
1/ 
(73) 
n 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
693 
where 
k = ko - kJ 
(74) 
The differential cross-section for scattering is therefore given by 
dC5 
1 [ 
1 ] [2JT 
I 2] [mokJ 
3] 
dQ = N 
h~o £3 
T1Hfi I 
8JT 3 112 L 
(75) 
where the first bracketed term represents the incident flux and the last bracketed 
term the density of states. A factor II N is introduced to imply that dC5 IdQ is the 
differential cross-section per atom (N is the number of atoms in the crystal). For 
elastic scattering Ikol = Ikll and one obtains 
n 
For a simple cubic lattice, the lattice points are given by 
rn = d[nJx + n2Y + n3Z] 
where 
na = 0, 1,2, ... Na -
1; a = 1,2,3, ... 
(76) 
i.e. the crystal consists of Nl , N2 and N3 atoms along the X-, y- and z-axes, 
respectively and N = Nl N2N3 represents the total number of atoms. The origin is 
chosen at one of the comers of the crystal. Thus 
where 
2 
/)" = Lexp[ik. rnl 
n 
Nj-J N2-1 N3-J 
L L L exp[id(n1kx + n2kl' + n3kz)] 
nj=O n2=O n3=O 
/)"1= 
Nj-l 
L eidlljkx 
nj=O 
sin2 kxd 
2 
2 
(77) 
(78) 
For large values of Nl (~ 
(= N1) if 
] 08 in a typical crystal) the value of /)" 1 will be large 

694 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
l being an integer. 
If kxdl2n differs from an integer by more than a few times II NI then ~I will 
be negligible. Thus, one obtains maximum scattering when 
kxd = 2nl 
kyd = 2nm 
(79) 
kzd = 2nn 
where t, m and n are integers (these are the Miller indices). Thus 
(SO) 
Further, using Eq. (74) we get 
(Sl) 
where we have used the fact that Ikol = Ikll and 2e represents the scattering angle 
(see Fig. 25.3). Equating Eqs (SO) and (Sl) we get 
2dsine = [l2+m2+n2]1/2 A 
(S2) 
(J 
(J 
Figure 25.3. Bragg scattering of neutrons by a crystal. 
where A = 2n I ko. The above equation represents the Bragg condition for reflec-
tion from a set of planes of spacing dl(l2 + m2 + n2)1/2. A more detailed theory 
for elastic (as well as inelastic) scattering of neutrons from a simple Bravais lattice 
taking into consideration lattice vibrations has been given in Ref. 4. 
Solution 25.2 Since the wavelength of the leptons are much larger than nuclear 
dimensions (~ 10- 12 cm), we can replace the lepton wave functions with their 
value at the center of the nucleuss. Now 
5 We are neglecting the electrostatic distortion of the electron wave function caused by the charge 
on the nucleus; see Ref. I, p. 315. 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
and 
so that at r = 0 
Thus 
where 
1 
·k 
0/ (r) = -
e' v·r 
~ 
v'v' 
I 
0/ e (0) = 0/ v (0) = v'v' 
M fi = f o/jNo/iN dr 
Therefore, the probability of emission per unit time w, is, 
27T C 2 
2 dn 
w=--IMrl-
/i V2 
'dEo 
where 
Eo = Ee + E~ 
695 
Ee and E~ representing the energies of electron and neutrino respectively. We first 
calculate the probability for the electron going into the particular state; then Ee is 
fixed and 
dn 
dn 
dEo 
dE~ 
Now 
where m~ is the rest mass of the neutrino, thus 
dn 
dE~ 
In Appendix M we have shown that the number of states for which the magnitude 
of the momentum has between p~ and p~ + dp~ is given by 
Thus 
dn 
dEo 
V 
47Tp2 dp _ Vp~dpv 
(27T/i)3 
~ 
~ -
27T 2 /i 3 
(83) 
dn _ (~) Vp~ 
dE~ -
p~C2 
27T 2 /i 3 
--V--o--(Eo - E )[(Eo - E )2 - (m C2)2]1/2 
27T 2 /i3c3 
e 
e 
v 

696 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and 
-
G2IMfiI2(E _ E )[(E _ E)2 _ (m c2)2]1/2 
W -
rr 1i4 c3 V 
0 
e 
0 
e 
" 
(84) 
If P(Pe) dpe represent the probability (per unit time) of the momentum of the 
emitted electron to lie between Pe and Pc + dpe, then in order to obtain P(Pe) dpe 
we must multiply the above expression for w by the number of electron states 
whose momenta lie between Pe and Pc + dp", this is given by Lsee Eq. (83)] 
V p;dpc j2rr2 1i 3 . Thus 
The experimental data on the energy distribution of the emitted electrons show that 
the plot of [P(Pe)jp;]1/2 as a function of Ee is very nearly a straight line, which 
suggests that mv is zero or extremely small. A typical plot of [P(Pe)jp;]1/2 as a 
function of Ee corresponding to the n ---+ P + e- + v process is shown in Fig. 25.4; 
such a plot is known as the Kurie plot. The departure from the linearity is due to 
experimental errors and due to the finite velocity of the neutrons which undergo 
decay. We may mention here that for the f3 decay from nuclei of large Z values one 
should also consider the electrostatic distortion of the electron wave function (see 
e.g. Ref. 1). 
8 
f 
6 
I PIPe' 
'-2-1. 
Pe 
2 
0 
0 
1.00 
Ee (keV' 
Figure 25.4. The Kurie plot for the n ---+ p + e- + v process. The disagreement between theory and 
experiment at low energies is due to experimental errors and also due to the fact that neutrons form 
a beam rather than a solid or liquid [Adapted from Ref. I ; the original data is of I.M. Robson, Phys. 
Rev. 83, 349 ( 1951 ) I. 
The expression for the mean lifetime is obtained by integrating Eq. (85) over all 
values of p: 
dp 
T 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
697 
where Pmax represents the maximum kinetic energy of the emitted electrons and in 
writing the last equation we have assumed mv = O. Carrying out the integration we 
obtain 
r 
G21M 01 2 
Ii 
F( 
) 
-2-rr-3-11--',7'-c-
3 
TJ 0 
(86) 
where 
1 
1 
3 
1 
5 
I 
2 1/2 
. 
-I 
F(TJo) = -4TJo -
12TJo + 30TJo + 4(1 + TJo) 
smh 
TJo 
(87) 
and TJo = Pmax / me. Equation (86) tells us that if I Mli 12 does not change, the value 
of Fr must be a constant for different ,B-emitters; this is approximately borne out 
from experimental data (see, e.g. Ref 1 and 5). 
Solution 25.3 The initial and final states of the system, which are eigenfunctions 
of Ho, are given by6 
and 
,f, 
_ 
1 
iklorl ,f, 
( 
) 
If' I - .JV e 
If' 200 r2 
Energy conservation demands that 
or 
11 2k2 
me4 
1 
-----
2m 
811 2 
3m2e4 
kf = k~ - --4-
811 
Now, the matrix element for the transition is given by 
Since 
f 1f;;00(r2)1f;IOO(r2) dr2 = 0 
the integral involving e2/ r[ would vanish. Thus 
where 
I (r2) = f eiqorl 
dr[ = eiqor2 Iff eiqpcose p2 dp sin e de d¢ 
Ir[-r21 
p 
---
(88) 
6 This solution is adapted from Ref. 6; with kind permission of McGraw-Hill Book Company. 

698 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where p = r) - r2 and in carrying out the integration we have assumed the z-axis 
to be along q. Carrying out the integrations over e and ¢ we get 
The above integral does not have a well-defined value. In order to evaluate the 
integral we introduce an exponentially decaying factor e-AP carry out the integral 
and take the limit A -+ 0 to obtain 7 
00 
-
e,q·r2 lim 
sin q p e- P dp 
4rr . 
f 
A 
q 
A--->O 
4rr 
;q.r 
-e 
2 
q2 
o 
(89) 
Substituting the above result and the hydrogen atom wave functions in Eq. (88) we 
get 
Hi; = 
x 1(_1 ) 
~ e-r2 / ao j4rr e;q.r2] 
rra8 
q2 
where ao = ti 2/me 2. Once again we choose the z2-axis along q and carry out the 
straightforward integrations to obtain 
I 
1 16.J2rr a5 e2 
Hf ; = V ( 2 2 + 2.)3 
q ao 
4 
The differential cross-section can now be obtained by using the formulae given 
in Sec. 25.3; however, we must remember that in calculating I [see Eq. (40)] we 
should use ko and in calculating Pf [see Eq. (39)] we should use k]; consequently 
u (8) = ~ (~)2 V2JH;J 
ko 
2rr ti 2 
. 
(90) 
7 Such a procedure is justified because when r) » r2 
I 
I [ 
A 
A 
r2 ] 
I 
A 
A 
r2 
--- -'> -
I + r) . r2 -
= - + r] . r2 -
Ir) -
r21 
r) 
r) 
q 
r? 
and therefore, if we first carry out the integration over r2 then the result will fall off as 1/ rf; the 
integral containing the term l/q will vanish because of orthogonality of 1/1)00 and 1/1200' Thus for 
large r) the integrand will fall of as sin(qr) )/r) making the integral convergent. 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
699 
from which one immediately gets Eq. (62). A nice discussion on the total cross-
section has been given Sec. 30 of Ref. 6. One can similarly calculate the scattering 
cross-section for the Is --+ 2p transition. 
Solution 25.4 
Assume that the impact parameter is d (Fig. 25.5); the collision 
time, the time for which the potential energy changes appreciably, is of the order 
of 2d / v where v is the velocity of the proton. The change in potential energy is of 
the order e2 / d. If Piw is the energy required for excitation to the n = 2 state of the 
atom, Eq. (51) suggests that a transition will occur only if 
or 
Thus 
I' 
2d 
'I 
-------;;:----------.--------;----. proton 
\ 
\ 
d 
\ 1 / 
" 
/ 
\ 
/ 
\ 
/ 
" 
/ 
" 
/ 
" 
/ 
e-
Figure 25.5. 
ve2 Pi 
2d2 <--
~ (Piw)2 
/ 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Putting Piw ~ 10 e V, we get the estimate 
d <2.5A 
Solution 25.5 We assume that the heavy ion of charge Z,e, velocity v passes 
undeftected even as it suffers a collision with an atom (Fig. 25.6). If each atom 
of the medium (assumed to be of a single element) has Z2 electrons, the potential 
energy is 
(91) 
(92) 

700 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
In this expression, we treat ri as stationary and R (t) alone as a function of time. 
y 
t = 0 
R 
/ 
Center of the atom 
Figure 25.6. Collision of a heavy ion with an atom. 
This is in the spirit of the sudden approximation; it can be shown that if the col-
lision is adiabatic there is no loss of energy. We assume that at t = 0, the ion 
passes closest to the centre of the atom, the impact parameter being p. We take the 
coordinates of R to be (vt, p, 0), of ri to be (x), Yi, zd so that 
(93) 
We have to calculate matrix element (n IVI m) where m, n are the initial and final 
states of the atom. It is clear that the first term in Eg. (93) contributes nothing. We 
obtain 
(94) 
The transition probability is ICnm 12 where 
00 
cnm = -~ f Vnm exp (iwnmt) dt 
(95) 
-00 
For wnmt « I, we can replace the exponential by unity. The first term in Eg. (94) 
being odd in t, vanishes and 
(96) 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
701 
The integral is easily evaluated by setting vt = p tan e. We get 
i 
2 1 
Cl1m = --Z\e -
2YI1m 
Ii 
vp 
where Yl1m = (L Yi) 11m is the y-component of the dipole matrix element. The 
transition rate is 
2 
4Zle4 
1 
2 
Icl1m l = ~ 
22" Yl1m 
rt 
V p 
The average energy loss by the ion in such excitations of the atom (assuming that 
m is always the ground state) 
-
'"' 
2 
4Z?e4 
1 '"' 2 
8 = L 
(En - Em) Icnml = --2-22" LYnm (En - Em) 
Ii 
V P 
11 
n 
(97) 
It is shown in Problem 26.9 that the term 
a relation which is called the Thomas-Reiche-Kuhn sum rule; Z2 is the charge of 
the target atom. Hence 
-
2Zf Z2e4 
8 = 
(98) 
mv2p2 
We now use this formula for calculating the average energy loss -d E as the ion 
transverses a length dx of the medium. The number of collisions with atoms such 
that the impact parameter lies between p and p + dp is 
2nnp dpdx 
where n is the number of atoms per unit volume. The energy loss in dx is 
or 
Pmax 
2 
4 
f 
2Z Z2e 
-dE = 
\ 2 2 2nnp dpdx 
mv p 
dE 
dx 
Pmin 
In (Pmax) 
Pmln 
(99) 
In order to decide on the limits Pmax and Pmin we use the following arguments. 
Referring to Eqs (95) and (96), we can write 
C 
'" 
dt 
f 
exp (iwl1m t) 
nm 
(t2+p2/v2)3/2 

702 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
so that if pi v » II W nm ' we can in fact pull out the denominator from the integral 
and Cl1m -+ 0 since we shall be averaging over several periods even for small t. 
This, in fact, is the adiabatic limit. We therefore set P at this limit. 
V 
P max =--
Wnm 
It can be shown that when relativistic effects are included we should correct this to 
v 
v 
/3=-c 
(100) 
Pmax= 
~' 
W l1mV 1 - {3-
For Pmin' we note that the heavy ion 'sees' electrons moving towards it with mo-
menta"-' mv. The de Broglie wavelength is ~ lilmv. This must be the minimum 
value of the impact parameter; when the relativistic expression for momentum is 
introduced, 
Ii~ 
Pmin = 
(101) 
mv 
Inserting Eq. (100) and Eq. (101) in Eq. (99) we get 
dE 
dt 
(102) 
where liw is an average of the factors liwnm . Formula (102) is a simplified version 
of Bohr's treatment of the loss of energy of heavy ions in matter; it has important 
application in nuclear physics where it is often necessary to know how much energy 
is deposited by particles as they go through matters. 
Solution 25.6 [Reference: R. Serber, Phys. Rev. 72, 1008 (1947)] We neglect the 
effect of Coulomb interaction and assume that the collision time T = ro/v where 
ro is the range of the nuclear forces and v the deuteron velocity. The transition 
here is from the bound deuteron to the continuum, the relevant period being about 
W "-' 8dl Ii where 8d is the binding energy of the deuteron. Now Ed = ~ (2M) v2 
so that 
W T = ro 8d = ro (Ai 8d 
vii 
yE:;1i 
The deuteron binding energy can be expressed in terms of its 'radius' rd = iii 
J M8d so that 
W T = ro (&:; «I (for Ed "-' 200 MeVand 8d "-' 2.2 Mev) 
rd y E:; 
which suggests that the collision may be regarded as sudden. 
8 A more complete treatment was given by H.A. Bethe Ann. Phys. 5, 325 (1930). 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
703 
In the center of mass system of the deuteron, the state of the neutron changes 
from 
a 
e-ar 
1/I i = ~-r-
to 
(103) 
where a = J M Gd / Ii, M is the mass of the neutron, 1/1 i is the wave function of the 
deuteron outside the range of the nuclear force. But, as mentioned in the problem, 
since the deuteron size is much larger than the range, we can treat 1/1 i as valid 
for the entire space. 1/1 f is the wave function for the free neutron, A a constant of 
normalization. 
The probability for the transition is 
Now 
Thus 
pep) dp = ~:2If e-ip.r / n e~ar drl2 dp 
00 f sin kr e-ar dr 
o 
00 2rr 
2 
f f e-iprcos8/ne-arr dr2n sine de 
dp 
o 0 
00 
2 
f 
e-ar 
pr 
4n Ii 
dr-- sin-
P 
Ii 
o 
dp 
1 
k 
Im--- = ---
ik - a 
F + a 2 
dp 
Pcp) dp = B 
2 
(~: + ( 2) 
(104) 
(105) 
We now wish to transform the expression to the lab system in which the centre of 
mass of the deuteron moves along the z-direction with a velocity v where 
1 
2 
"2 (2M) v = Ed 
If we write 
(06) 
then, to the z-component we have to add the momentum of the centre of mass, 
Po = Mv = JMEd 

704 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(we neglect relativistic effects). The distribution in Px is [from Eg. (l05)] 
(107) 
We can relate pz to the neutron and deuteron energies in the laboratory system. If 
Pn is the neutron momentum in the laboratory system, we have 
Pn = P + Po where p« Po 
(l08) 
(The momenta p are the Fourier components of the deuteron wave function. Since 
the deuteron is a very loosely bound structure, these momenta are very much 
smaller then the kinetic energy of the deuteron). From Eg. (l08) we get 
p; = p2 + p~ + 2poPz ~ p~ + 2poPz 
In terms of the neutron energy E = p; 12M deuteron energy Ed 
P61 M this 
gIves 
(109) 
Thus Eg. (107) gives 
pee) dEcx 
dE 
OJ 0) 
This is a distribution which is peaked around E = 4 Ed with a width of !:1E 
2JBdEd. Moreover, it goes to a very small value for E = a so that we can 
normalize it by integrating (110) from E = -00 to +00. This gives 
JT 
J = C---
JBdEd 
so that the normalized distribution is 
pee) dE= ~ d~ 
JT 
(E - 4Edt + BdEd 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
705 
o 
50 
100 
150 
200 
250 
E (MeV) 
Figure 25.7. The variation of P(E) with E. 
The experimental distribution for Ed = 200 Me V agrees very closely with this 
expression with the peak at 95 Me V and a width of about 45 Me V. The above 
theory predicts a width of 2J8dEd ~ 42 MeV (see Fig. 25.7). 
Solution 25.7 The probability amplitude is 
(¢f IHI - Holo/i) 
Ef - Ei 
If V = HI -
Ho is small, we may replace (¢ f I by (0/ f I so that 
1 
(<P f I <if,) I' '" ~;~r 
Solution 25.8 That the sudden approximation holds may be seen on comparing the 
beta energy with the atomic binding energies. The change of the nuclear charge, 
hence the potential, occurs in approximately the time that the beta particle leaves 
the atom. This time is of the order of 1O-8/(eI5) '"'- 10-18 sec; w '"'- 1017 sec- I so 
that wr '"'- 0.1. The initial wave function is 1 (1) 3/2 
YooRIO (Z = 1) = ~ -
2e-r / ao 
y4n 
ao 
The final wave function is 
1 
( 2 )3/2 
YooRIO (Z = 2) = --
-
2e-2r/ ao 
J4n 
ao 
The probability is 
p = If Yoo* Rl~ (Z = 2) Yoo RIO (Z = 1) dr 12 

706 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The integral is 
or 
p = (~r ~ 0.703 
Solution 25.9 The perturbation is 
v = -eEz 
(assuming E IS along z) 
i.e. 
V=-eErcose 
(Ill) 
The transition probability is 
00 
2 
ICno l2 = nl2 ! (n IVI 0) eiUJ/ dt 
(112) 
-00 
where I 0) is the ground state; from Eg. (111) it is obvious that there are no 
transitions to the states m = ±l of 2P. The matrix element (210Ircosell00) 
is easily evaluated as (27 ~ao/35). This gives 
00 
2 
2 
1 215 2 2 2 r2 ! eiw/ 
ICI = -2 -Io e a OEO- 2 
2) dt 
n 3 
JT 
r + t-
-00 
The integral can be evaluated by going to the complex t plane on which poles 
occur at t = ±i r. Choosing the contour as the real axis (Fig. 25.8) closed by the 
upper half semicircle, it is easy to check that the contribution over the semicircle 
vanishes. Thus 
00 f 
ei(v/ 
. ((t-ir)eiUJI ) 
--:---- dt = 
21 JT 
2 
2 
r2 + t 2 
t + r 
I=;T 
-00 
Thus the probability is 
JT 
-un 
-e 
r 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
707 
1m t 
IT 
------~----~~--------~----~Ret 
Figure 25.8. The contour of integration. 
The limit T -+ (Xl corresponds to a turning on the perturbation slowly, i.e. WT » 1, 
when the transition probability vanishes. The other limit WT -+ 0 corresponds to 
the application of an impulsive perturbation, with 
. 
T 
hm 
=8(t) 
T-->O IT (t 2 + T2) 
Solution 25.10 Since 1 n) form a complete set, we may write 
1 \II (t») = L Cn (t) 
1 n) 
n 
If we substitute the above expression in the Schrodinger equation 
a 
i /1-
1 \II (t») = H 1 \II) 
at 
and operate by (m I, we would get Eq. (64). 
Solution 25.11 Since 1 \II (0») =1 KO), C) = C2 = 1/-/2, thus 
1 \IJ (t») = _1- [_1_ (I KO)+ 1 KO))e-iElt/he-t/2TI 
vfivfi 
+ _1 (I KO)-I KO))e-iE2f/h] 
(113) 
vfi 
Thus the probability that starting from a KO particle at t = 0 we end up with KO 
particle at time t is given by 
If the particles are at rest, then E2 - E) = c2 f}.m where f}.m is the mass difference 
of K)o and K2°. In Eq. (114) if we substitute 

708 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(lIS) 
then the mass difference can be determined from the variation of ICl2 with time 
(see Fig. 2S.9). 
0.4 
0.3 
N 
r..; 
0.2 
0.1 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
12 
14 
16 
tlr1 
Figure 25.9. The dependence of ICl 2 with time. 
The behaviour of the neutral K is analogous to that of polarized light. To see 
this, we first summarize the results of this problem. First, at production the neutral 
K, produced in strong interactions, is in the state KO. As time passes by, the KO 
which, according to Eqs (65) and (66), is an equal mixture of Kl ° and K2° decays; 
but it is only the K 1 ° part that decays-the K2 ° has a long lifetime. The residue, 
which is practically pure K 2° is, according to Eqs (6S) and (66) again a mixture 
of KO and KO. We can detect either component by setting up an appropriate de-
tector. In this case, the difference in the behaviour of KO and KO is in their strong 
interactions, and we therefore study a strong reaction induced by the neutral K. 
One can construct an analogy identifying the K ° and K 2 ° with the two plane 
polarized beams of light, one of which is selected by a polarizer. The Kl ° and KO 
then correspond to right and left circularly polarized light, with an absorber which 
selectively absorbs only the right circularly polarized light. 
Returning to Eq. (114), if we substitute experimental values one finds 
Thus 
(116) 
The time dependence of ICl 2 is shown in Fig. 2S.9 which is in agreement with 
experimental data. Experimentally, since KO and KO are both uncharged particles 
they leave no tracks; they are distinguished from the fact that KO does not interact 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
709 
with matter (except ellastically) whereas KO can interact with proton to produce 
A ° and n+ 
(117) 
Now in a hydrogen bubble chamber, KO is produced through the following reaction 
(118) 
The trajectory of A ° can be inferred from its subsequent decay to n - + p because 
both n- and proton leave tracks. When KO is produced in the bubble chamber 
(see Eq. (118)) both Klo and K2° are created [see Eqs (65) and (66)); however, 
Klo decays very quickly (either to n+ + n- or n° + nO). K2° has a large KO 
component and the KO interacts with hydrogen through the reaction given by Eq. 
(117). Indeed analysis of the experiment allows one to determine the difference. 
We conclude this problem by noting that conversion of KO to KO is a beautiful 
demonstration of quantum interference effects. 
Solution 25.12 
(a) The SchrMinger equation for the particle is 
a\lJ 
i Ii- = (T + V + U) \lJ 
at 
(119) 
where T, V are the kinetic and potential energy operators without the impulse 
and U represents the energy operator due to the impulse; 
-\lU = F(t) 
Integrating, we obtain 
U = -F· r = - P . ro (t) 
where we have chosen U = 0 at r = O. During the impulse, we can neglect 
T, V in comparison to U in Eq. (119) so that we have 
or 
Integrating, 
or 
a\lJ 
i Ii- = U(r, t) \lJ 
at 
a 
i Ii-[ln \lJ) = -p. ro(t) 
at 
i Ii In ( :~ ) = - P . r 
\lJ fer) = \lJ;(r) exp [~P' rJ 
(120) 

710 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(b) The final state given by Eq. (120) is not one of the eigenstates of the system. 
We can expand Wf in terms of these eigenstates wn (r) 
WI = w; exp [*P. rJ = L Cnwll(r) 
n 
Since W;, W n are eigenstates, we can use orthonormality to obtain the coefficients 
ICn l2 is the probability that the system is in the eigenstate n after the impulse. The 
above results have a ready application for the so called "Mossbauer effect". Here, 
the nucleus of an atom in a crystal lattice emits a y-ray, thus delivering an impulse 
to the crystal. If the crystal is originally in the ground state of its vibrational modes, 
we can calculate, as above, the probability that it remains in the ground state after 
the y-emission. In this situation, it is not the atom, which emits the y, which will 
vibrate (since this will leave the crystal in a different state) but the crystal as a 
whole will recoil without changing its internal state. The probability 
(121 ) 
for such an emission is called the Debye-Waller factor. If the system we are con-
sidering is, for example, a linear harmonic oscillator, the ground state is 
( 
I 
) 1/2 
( 
2 ) 
wo(x) = yin a 
exp - ;a2 
where a is the classical amplitude. For this one-dimensional case we have, in place 
ofEq. (121) 
W = exp( _k 2( 2 ) 
where lik = P. The recoil energy is 
p2 
1i2k2 
ER = 2M = 2M 
(122) 
where M is the mass of the entire recoiling system. For a crystal, M is very large 
and the energy E R is negligible. Thus the y -ray emitted by the excited nucleus 
appears with the full energy, i.e. the energy difference between the excited and 
ground states of the nucleus. For a fuller account of Mossbauer effect, the reader is 
referred to Ref. 7. 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
711 
Solution 25.13 We have the two reactions 
A+a-+B+b 
(123) 
and 
B+b-+A+a 
(124) 
We assume that the matrix element for the processes 
and 
are the same (this is referred to as the invaariance under time reversal). We further 
assume that the initial beams are unpolarized so that in calculating the cross-section 
we must sum over the final spin states and average over the initial spin states. Thus, 
for the reaction given by Eg. (123), instead of 1 V 12 in Eg. (24) we must have 
where the summation is over all the spin states. Similarly, for the reaction given by 
Eg. (124) we must have 
1 
-----L:1V12 
(2s 8 + 1)(2sb + 1) 
We next calculate the density of states. The number of states with magnitude of 
momentum lying between p and p + dp is given by [see Eg. (8) of Appendix P] 
(125) 
or 

712 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
For the reaction given by Eg. (123) p = IPsl = IPbl and if Es and Eb represent 
the total particle energies then9 
dE 
dEB 
dEb 
-
= -- + -- = VBb 
dp 
dp 
dp 
where v Bh is the relative velocity in the final state. Thus the density of states is 
given by 
dn 
dE 
(126) 
Substituting in the expression for the cross-section (Eg. (43)) and using Eg. (126) 
we get 
( 127) 
Similarly 
IPAI 2V 
I 
"2 
(J S+h--+A+a ex: 
~ 
IVI 
VhB VaA (2ss + 1)(2s" + 1) 
(128) 
(we are assuming the same center of mass energies). Thus 
(J A+a--+B+b 
IPsl2 (2s B + 1)(2s" + 1) 
(JS+h--+A+a 
IPAI 2 (2s A + 1)(2sa + 1) 
(129) 
where IPAI (= IPal) refers to the reaction given by Eg. (129). 
Solution 25.14 Using the results of the previous problem we get (at any scattering 
angle e) 
3 
(pn)2 
(Jpp--+n+d = (In+d--+pp -(2Sn + 1) 
-
4 
PI' 
(130) 
where we have used the facts that Sd = 1 and s p = ~. If we integrate over all angles, 
we must multiply by a factor of 2 to take into account the indistinguishability of 
9 
Therefore 
or 
where 
dE 
E- = c2p 
dp 
dE 
c2 p 
c2(movy) 
-=-= 
=V 
dp 
E 
(moc2y) 
( 
v2) ~1/2 
y= 1--
c2 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
713 
protons in the final state of the Jr+ d --+ pp reaction. Then 
( 
)
2 
3 
Pn 
a pp--+n+d = a n+d-+ pp - (2sn + I) -
2 
Pp 
(131) 
Solution 25.15 In the experiment of Cartwright et al. the incident proton energy of 
340 MeV corresponds to a meson energy of 22.3 Me V in the c.m.s. (see Sec. 24.8). 
On the other hand in the experiment of Durbin et al. the incident meson energy 
of 29 MeV corresponds to meson energy of 25 MeV in the c.m.s. Thus both 
the experiments correspond approximately to the same center of mass energies. 
Further, since the energies involved are small compared to the rest mass energies 
we may use the non-relativistic expressions giving 
Substituting in Eg. (131) we get 
(0.18 ± 0.06) = (3.1 ± 0.3) x 1.5 x 0.04 x (2sn + I) 
giving 
2sn + I ~ I 
or the spin of the Jr -meson is zero. For further details on the spin and parity of 
elementary particles see Ref. 3. 
Solution 25.16 This problem is really an excercise in the calculation of the density 
of states. Let E be the rest energy of the K+. We then have the constraints: 
E = EI + E2 + E3 
0= PI + P2 + P3 
(132) 
Let us assume that PI is held fixed. We now calculate the number of final states 
with this constraint. (Throughout these calculations we shall use the simple rule 
that the number of states is (2n\1)3 X phase volume). 
We are interested in the number of states d N such that the energies of two of the 
pions are fixed, within infinitesimal intervals, and the remaining parameter varied. 
If we fix PI and P2, it is clear that energy conservation will automatically fix the 
magnitude ofp3 (see Fig. 25.10). Looking at the diagram, we see that this also fixes 
e2 . Now the number dN is 
(133) 
where V is the volume of the box in which the event takes place and dQ I and dQ2 
are solid angle intervals within which PI and P2 lie. Once we consider PI, P2 fixed, 

714 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
P2 
PI 
Figure 25.10. 
we merely have to count d N as the number of states within the energy interval dE, 
a variation which is related directly to the interval (dQ2). To get this relation we 
use momentum conservation 
pi + p~ + 2PIP2COSe2 = pj 
Since P; + m; = E7 (we have used c = I) we can write Eq. (134) as 
PT + p~ + 2pI P2 cos e2 = Ej - m~ 
or 
PT + p~ + 2p]P2COSe2 = (E -
E] -
(2)2 -
m~ 
Since we keep PI, P2, E], E2 fixed, we get 
or 
(134) 
(135) 
(136) 
The orientation 1;2 in dQ2 is irrelevant so we can integrate over it. Moreover, we 
can now also integrate over dQ, since no further constraint is involved. This gives 
(137) 
Since Pidpi = EidEi, we have finally (inserting the factors c which we had dropped) 
dN 
8rr 2 V2 
p = -
= 
6 6 E ]E2 E3 dEldE2 
dE 
(2rr Ii) c 
The transition probability is, therefore, 
2rr 
7 
r = -IMI-p '" dEl dE2 = dtl dt2 
Ii 
(138) 
(\39) 

Time Dependent Perturbation Theory 
715 
where tl and t2 are kinetic energies of any two pions. The energy distribution of 
the n- is obtained by integrating over the energy of the other. But Eq. (139) tells 
us that there must be an equal number of n- emitted per unit energy for the entire 
energy range allowed by energy momentum constraint. 
It can be shown that if the pions are emitted in the l = 0 state (low energy) 
and the interaction of the pions in the final state can be neglected, (which means 
that they can be represented by plane waves) then the matrix element will have the 
simple dependence M '" 1/(EIE2E3)1/2 as assumed. This means that any deviation 
from the prediction Eq. (139), which can be called the "phase space spectrum", 
may be attributed to some interaction of the pions in the final state. In the extreme 
case where two of the pions really are the products of the decay of a particle which 
emerged from the original reaction, there would be a very strong deviation from 
the phase space spectrum. As an example, we may have 
n+ + d ---+ w + p + p 
1--+ (n+ + n- + nO) 
In a bubble chamber, only the 3 pions are seen but from their energy spectrum one 
can infer the existence and properties of w. A very short-lived particle such as the 
w is sometimes referred to as a resonance. 
25.8. References and suggested reading 
1. H. Enge, Introduction to Nuclear Physics, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 
Reading, Massachusetts (1966), 
2. E. Fermi, Quantum Theory of Radiation, Reviews of Modern Physics, 4, 87 
(1932). 
3. L.S. Hughes, Elementary Particles, Penguin, London (1972). 
4. A.K. Ghatak and L.S. Kothari, An introduction to Lattice Dynamics, 
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Reading Massachusetts (1972). 
5. M. Born, Physics in my Generation, Springer Verlag, New york (1962). 
6. L.I. Schiff, Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New York 
(1955). 
7. W.E. Lamb, Lectures on Mossbauer Effect, Tata Institute of Fundamental 
Research, Bombay (1960). 

Chapter 26 
The Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation and the Einstein 
Coefficients 
If we have an atom that is in an excited state and so is going to emit a photon, 
we cannot say when it will emit the photon. It has a certain amplitude to emit 
the photon at any time, and we can predict only a probability for emission; we 
cannot predict the future exactly. This has given rise to all kinds of nonsense and 
questions on the meaning of freedom of will, and of the idea that the world is 
uncertain .. 
26.1. Introduction 
-
R.P. FEYNMAN in Feynman Lectures on Physics, Vol. III, 
p.1422. 
In the previous chapter we developed time dependent perturbation theory which 
we will now use to study the interaction of an atom with electromagnetic field. The 
theory presented in this chapter is a curious mixture of classical and quantum pic-
tures. Matter, i.e. atoms, are assumed to exist in discrete (quasi-stationary) states. 
But the electromagnetic radiation with which it interacts, is described classically. 
This semi-classical theory of atom-field interaction will be discussed in Sec. 26.3 
which will enable us to calculate probabilities of absorption and induced emission. 
It may be mentioned that the semi-classical theory is insufficient to describe the 
spontaneous emission of radiation because the electromagnetic field is described 
classically; the fully quantum theory of radiation, which we will discuss in the next 
chapter, describes the spontaneous emission automatically. 
An ingenious idea of Einstein enabled him to obtain a relation which would 
determine the rate at which spontaneous emissions take place. The idea was based 
on consideration of matter in equilibrium with radiation assuming that the resultant 
radiation must obey Planck's law. Einstein introduced coefficients, which are now 
known as Einstein coefficients, which described induced emission, absorption and 
spontaneous emission. In Sec. 26.2 we will give the original argument of Einstein 
(Ref.!) which gave rise to the relation between different coefficients. In Sec. 26.3 
716 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

Semi-Classical Theory ()lRadiation 
717 
we will discuss the atom-field interaction using the semi-classical theory and will 
derive expressions for stimulated emission rate and stimulated absorption rate. In 
Sec. 26.4 we will use the Einstein relations to calculate the spontaneous emission 
rate and hence the lifetime of atomic states. In Sec. 26.5, we will discuss the 
selection rules governing the transitions. 
26.2. The Einstein coefficients 
Figure 26.1 represents two of the energy levels of an atomic system corresponding 
2 
E1 
Figure 26.1. The two states of an atomic system. The transition frequency is W21 = (E2 - EI )In. 
to energies EI and E 2. Let NI and N2 represent the number of atoms (per unit 
volume) in levels 1 and 2 respectively. An atom in the lower energy level can absorb 
radiation and get excited to the level £2. This excitation process can occur only in 
the presence of radiation. Such a process is known as stimulated absorption or 
simply as absorption. The rate of absorption would depend on the energy density, 
u (w), associated with the radiation field corresponding to the frequency 
(1) 
The energy density u (w) is defined such that u (w) dw represents the radiation 
energy per unit volume within the frequency interval wand w + dw. The rate of 
absorption would be proportional to NI and also to u (w). Thus, the number of 
absorptions per unit time per unit volume can be written as 
(2) 
where EJ2 is the coefficient of proportionality and is a characteristic of the energy 
levels. 
On the other hand, when the atom is in an excited state, it can make a transition 
to a lower energy state through the emission of electromagnetic radiation; how-
ever, in contrast to the absorption process, the emission process can occur in two 
different ways: 

718 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(i) The first is referred to as spontaneous emission in which an atom in the excited 
state emits radiation even in the absence of any incident radiation. It is thus 
not stimulated by any incident signal but occurs spontaneously. Further, the 
rate of spontaneous emissions is proportional to the number of atoms in the 
excited state; thus if we represent the coefficient of proportionality by A21 
then 
(3) 
would represent the number of spontaneous emissions per unit volume per 
unit time to the lower energy level. 
(ii) The second is referred to as stimulated emission in which an incident signal 
of appropriate frequency triggers an atom in an excited state to emit radiation. 
The rate of transition to the lower energy level is directly proportional to 
the energy density of the radiation at the frequency w. Thus the number of 
stimulated emissions per unit time per unit volume would be given by 
(4) 
The quantities A2" BI2 and B2J are known as Einstein coefficients and are 
determined by the atomic system. 
At thermal equilibrium, the number of upward transitions must be equal to the 
number of downward transitions. Thus, we may write 
or 
(5) 
From Boltzmann's law, we have the following expression for the ratio of the pop-
ulations of two levels at temperature T: 
N] 
[E2-EI] 
[hW] 
-
= exp 
= exp --
N2 
kBT 
kBT 
(6) 
where kB represents the Boltzmann constant. Thus, we may write 
A21 
U (w) = --------
B12 exp(hw/kBT) -
B21 
(7) 

Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation 
719 
Now, according to Planck's law the energy density of radiation (at thermal equilib-
rium) is given by (see, e.g. Ref 2 and 3): 
nu} 
1 
u(w) = -- -------
JT 2C3 exp (nwl kB T) - 1 
Comparing Eqs (7) and (8) we obtain I 
BI2 = B21 = B (say) 
and 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
Thus, the probabilities of stimulated absorption and stimulated emission are the 
same and the ratio of the A and B coefficients is given by Eq. (10). It is of interest 
to mention that at thermal equilibrium corresponding to ordinary temperatures 
(T '" 10000 K) the spontaneous emission rate for optical sources far exceeds the 
stimulated emission rate (see Problem 26.1). 
26.3. The atom-field interaction 
In order to calculate the Einstein coefficients we consider an atom in the presence 
of an oscillating electric field given byZ 
S (t) = e&o cos wt 
(11) 
which is switched on at t = O;erepresents the unit vector along the direction of the 
electric field and the oscillation frequency w is assumed to be close to the resonant 
frequency W21 [= (E2 - Ed In] corresponding to the transition from state 2 to 
state 1 (see Fig. 26.1). Now, the interaction energy of the electron with the electric 
field is given by 
H' (r, t) = qS.r =qSo (e'.r) cos wt 
(12) 
1 If the levels I and 2 are gl- and g2-fold degenerate, then NI/N2 = (gl/g2)exp (liw/kBT), 
BI2 = B21 (g2/gl) and A21/ B21 = Iiw3 /rr2(J. 
2 The electric field associated with an electromagnetic wave will be of the form e cos (wt -
k.r); however, for radiation in the visible region, the wavelength associated (~ 5 x 10-5 cm) is 
much larger than atomic dimensions (~ 10-8 cm) and we can use the value of 8 at r = O. This is 
immediately obvious from Eq. (17) where the atomic wave functions are almost zero for r :: 1O-8cm 
and since k ::::: 105cm-l, the quantity k.r « I in the domain of integration. 

720 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where q (> 0) represents the magnitude of the electronic charge3 . Let Ho repre-
sent the Hamiltonian corresponding to the atomic system and let 1/111 denote the 
eigenfunctions of Ho belonging to the energy Ell (= liw/1): 
(13) 
Our objective is to solve the equation 
oW (r,t) 
[ 
I 
] 
iii 
= HW = Ho + H (r, t) W (r, t) 
at 
(14) 
Following the approach developed in Sec. 25.2, we write 
W (r, t) = L CI1 (t) e~iwllt 1/1 /1 (r) 
(15) 
11 
and obtain [see Eg. (9) of the previous chapter] 
(16) 
where 
J 1/1~ (r) H' (r, t) 1/1 n (r) dr = (s I H'I n) 
1 
[ . 
. ] 
- q 80 e. (s Irl n) e"vt + e~/(vt 
2 
(17) 
Substituting for H' (r, t) from Eg. (12), we get 
iii dC, = ~8 "D C (t) [ei (v\Il+(v)t + ei(w.l'n~w)t] 
dt 
2 0 ~ SI1 
11 
(18) 
11 
where 
DSI1 = e.P.1I1 
(19) 
and 
PSI1 = q f 1/1; (r) r 1/111 (r) dr = q (s Irl n) 
(20) 
3 We are considering here a single electron atom with r representing the position vector of the 
electron with respect to the nucleus. Thus the electric dipole moment of the atom is given by p = -qr 
because the direction of the dipole moment is from the negative charge to the positive charge. The 
interaction energy of a dipole placed in an electric Held is -p.& which is precisely Eq. (12). It may be 
mentioned that the interaction term described by Eq. (12) is consistent with the Schrodinger equation 
for the electron in the dipole approximation (see Sec. 26.4). 

Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation 
721 
is known as the dipole matrix element. We assume that at t = 0 the atom is in the 
state tfr k' i.e. 
Cdt = 0) = I 
I 
cn (t = 0) = 0 for n"l- k 
(21) 
Equation (18) represents an infinite set of coupled equations and as a first approxi-
mation we replace en (t) by Cn (0) on the right-hand side of Eq. (18) giving 
Integrating, we obtain 
i 80 
[ei(Wsk+W)t -
1 
ei(Wsk-W)t - I ] 
C.1 (t) - Cs (0) = --2 
~ Dsk 
. ( 
+) + -.-(---) 
fl 
I Wsk 
W 
I Wsk -
W 
or, for s "I- k 
i80 
[ i(w +w)tj2 sin (Wsk +w)t/2 
C (t) - --D 
e 
sk 
s 
-
2/1 
sk 
(wsk+ w)/2 
+ ei(Wsk-W)tj2 sin (Wsk - w) t /2] 
(Wsk -
w) /2 
It can be easily seen that for large values of t, the function 
sin (Wsk -
w) t/2 
(Wsk -
w) /2 
(22) 
(23) 
is very sharply peaked around W ~ Wsk and negligible everywhere else (see Fig. 
26.2). Thus for states for which Wsk is significantly different from w, Cs (t) would 
be negligible, and transitions between such states will not be stimulated by the 
incident field. This implies that in the summation appearing on the right-hand side 
of Eq. (18) we need only consider those states which correspond closely to the 
resonance frequency. 
In an emission process, Ek > Es and hence Wsk (= Es~Ek )is negative; thus it 
is the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (22) which contributes. On the other 
hand, in an absorption process, Ek < Es and hence W.1k is positive and consequently 
it will be the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (22) which contributes. 
Let us consider the emission of radiation and assume that at t = 0 the atom is 
in state 2 (see Fig. 26.1). We also assume W to be close to W21 (= [E2 -
Ell / /1). 
The probability for the transition to state 1 is given by 
ID 
12 82 [Sin (-W21+W) t]2 
Ic (t)12 -
12 
0 
2 
1 
-
4/1 2 
-W21+W 
2 
(24) 

722 
'" ---33 
I 
I 
i :; 
~--­
'Ul 
21!' 
o -t 
(Wsk - w) 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
101!' 
- t 
Figure 26.2. For large values of t, the function given by Eq. (23) is a very sharply peaked function 
of (}) about (}) = (})sk. 
Equation (24) represents the probability for stimulated emission of radiation. In 
deriving this equation, we have assumed that ICI (t)12 « 1; thus the result will be 
valid when either 
(25) 
A more accurate result for a two state system will be discussed in Problem 26.8. 
Now, the intensity of an electromagnetic wave is related to 8 through the rela-
tion (e.g. Ref. 4, Sec. 19.5). 
I 
2 
1= -
Eoe 80 
2 
(26) 
where EO is the dielectric permittivity of free space and e is the speed of light in 
free space. Thus 
[ 
]
2 
I 
I 
sin 
W-W21 t 
Ic (t)12 = -ID 12 -
' 
( 
2 
) 
I 
I 
2 
12 
W-WOI 
EOC 
-2---
(27) 
We apply this formula to the case where there is a continuous spectrum of 
frequency4 and there is no correlation between the polarization vectors of different 
components (as in the case of black body radiation). If u (w) dw represents the 
radiation energy per unit volume in the frequency interval wand w + dw then I 
should be replaced5 by cu (w) dw and the expression integrated over all frequencies 
4 One could also have an interaction of a near monochromatic wave (as in a laser) with an atom 
having a broad frequency spectrum. This is discussed in Problem 26.10. 
5 The energy density associated with a monochromatic field is I Ie. 

Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation 
723 
to obtain the following expression for the transition probability 
1 --2 f 
[Sinew - W2J)t/2]2 
r 21 = --2 IDl2i 
u (w) 
dw 
2Eo Ii 
(w - (21)/2 
(28) 
where the bar denotes the averaging over different orientations: 
because 
cos2 e = _1_ r [2][ cos2 e sin ededljJ = ~ 
4n 10 10 
3 
(29) 
Assuming that u (w) varies much slowly in comparison to the quantity 
(30) 
we replace u (w) by its value at w = W2l and take it out of the integral (in Eq. 28) 
to obtain 
1 
2 
(31) 
r2J :::::: --2 IPl2i u (W21) G 
6Eo Ii 
where 
+00 
2 
+00 
G J [Sin(W21 - w)t /2] 
J sin2 ~ d 
:::::: 
dw = 2t 
-2-
~ 
(W2J - w)/2 
~ 
-00 
-00 
= 2nt 
Thus 
n IPl2i2 
(say) 
(32) 
r 21 :::::: ---2- u (w2d t = f3t 
3Eo 
Ii 
The above expression shows that the probability of transition is proportional to 
time with f3 (= 3E: li2 IPl2i2 u (W2d ) representing the proportionality constant. 
This immediately implies the radioactive decay law, because if there are N2 (t) 
atoms (per unit volume) in state 2 at time t and if -dN2 represents the number of 
transitions (per unit volume) in time dt then according to Eq. (32) 
(33) 

724 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
the negative sign implying that N2 will decrease with times. Equation (33) imme-
diately leads to 
(34) 
which is the radioactive decay law with 1/ f3 representing the mean lifetime of the 
state. 
It may be noted that Eq. (32) predicts an indefinite increase in the transition 
probability with time; however, the first-order perturbation theory itself breaks 
down when 121 is not appreciably less than unity. Thus, Eq. (32) is valid for times 
for which 
f3t « I 
(35) 
If the lifetime of the state is ~ 10-9 sec, then f3 ~ 109 seC I and we must have 
t « 10-9 sec 
(36) 
However, the large time behaviour6 is given by Eq. (34). 
It should also be noted that in our analysis we have assumed the quantity given 
by Eq. (30) to be very sharply peaked around w ~ W2l, for this to happen t should 
be large enough so thar7 
or 
Now in the optical region 
then we must have 
1 
-«1 
t W21 
1 
t» -
W21 
t » 10- 15 sec 
Thus t in Eq. (32) should satisfy Eq. (37). 
(37) 
Returning to Eq. (32), we get the following expression for the transition proba-
bility per unit time (which we denote by W2l): 
7r 
2 
W21 ::: --2 IPI2i U (W21) 
3Eo Ii 
(38) 
If there are N2 atoms per unit volume in state 2 then the number of stimulated 
emissions per unit time per unit volume would be given by 
(39) 
6 Equation (32) may, therefore, be interpreted as: If the state has not made a transition up to time 
t then the probability that it will make a transition in dt will be f3 dt from which Eq. (34) follows. 
7 This follows from the fact that the maximum of (30) occurs at w = W21 and the first zero at 
w = W21 ±![. 

Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation 
725 
Comparing the above equation with Eq. (4), we obtain 
E21 = 3~0 ~~ = j~~ ( 4;:0) If 1/rrr1/r2dr I2 
4:/:c 1 Olrl2) 12 
(40) 
where 
q2 
CI = ---
4JTEonc 
137 
(41 ) 
represents the fine-structure constant. 
The corresponding expression for stimulated absorption is obtained by starting 
with the first term on the right-hand side of Eq. (22) and proceeding in a similar 
manner. The final expression is identical to Eq. (40) except for an interchange of 
indices 1 and 2 and since 
(42) 
we get 
consistent with Eq. (9). 
26.4. Spontaneous emission rate 
Using Eqs (9), (10) and (40), we get the following expression for the A coefficient 
(43) 
For the 2P ---+ 1 S transition in the hydrogen atom, i.e. for the transition from any 
one of the (n = 2, I = 1, m = + 1 , 0, -1) states to the (n = 1, I = 0, m = 0) state, 
we get (see Problem 26.3) 
(44) 

726 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
independent of the initial value of m; here ao (= ~ 
2: 0.5 x lO- IOm) is the Bohr 
me 
radius. Further, for 2P --+ IS transition 
or 
3c 
w=-ex 
Sao 
On substitution in Eq. (43), we get 
A = 
- ex 
-
2: 6 X 108 sec- I 
( 4 )4 C 
9 
ao 
(45) 
The coefficient A gives the probability per unit time for spontaneous emission from 
state 2 to state 1. Thus if there are N2 atoms per unit volume in state 2 and if -dN2 
represents the number of atoms undergoing spontaneous transitions in time dt then 
(46) 
giving once again the radioactive decay law 
Thus the mean lifetime of the state is given by 
1 
r = -
2: 1.6 X 10-9 sec 
A 
(47) 
In Eq. (46), dt should be small enough so that Adt « 1. Equation (47) tells us 
that the mean lifetime of the hydrogen atom in the upper level corresponding to the 
2P --+ I S transition is about 1.6 x 10-9 sec. Transitions having such small life-
times are referred to as strongly allowed transitions8 . One can similarly calculate 
lifetimes for other atomic states. 
The spontaneous emission rate will give rise to finite widths of the spectral lines 
which can be estimated from the uncertainty principle 
(4S) 
8 In contrast, levels used in the laser transition are such that the upper level has a very long 
lifetime (~1O- 3 to 10-5 sec). They are referred to as metastable states. The strength of an atomic 
transition is usually expressed in terms of the f -value defined by the equation 
(=~mW21ID 12 
. 
3 
h 
21 
For strongly allowed transitions f ~ I and for transitions from metastable states f ~ 10-3 - 10-6. 

Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation 
727 
In practice, the observed widths are much larger because of other factors such as 
Doppler broadening, collision broadening, etc. 
We should also mention here that the A coefficient for the 2S --+ 1 S transition 
is zero. Such transitions are said to be forbidden transitions. 
26.5. The selection rules 
Whenever the quantity 
e· f o/jro/jdr 
(also written as e· (J Irl i) vanishes, the transition probability is zero [see Eq. 
(24)] and the corresponding transition is said to be forbidden (in the dipole approx-
imation)9; the subscripts i and f refer to initial and final states respectively. If we 
assume that the electron moves in a central field, then the angular part of the wave 
function will be of the form Ylm (e, ¢); thus, the initial and final states will be given 
by 
0/; = 
RniliYl;mi (e,¢) l 
o/f = 
Rnflf Y1pnt (e, ¢) 
Now, it can be shown that (see Problem 26.2) 
(I + m· + 1) (I - m + 1) 
* 
dr - G 8. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
[ 
( 
)
1/2 
fo/fzo/; 
-
If.l,+1 
(21;+1) (21;+3) 
(I + m·) (I - m·) 
8. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
8. 
( 
) IP] 
+ lr.l,-I 
(21; + 1) (21; + 3) 
mj,m, 
and 
(I + m + 1) (I + m· + 2) 
* 
±. 
d -G 8 
I 
I 
I 
I 
f o/f (x 
lY) 0/; r -
If·li+ 1 ( 
(21; + 1) (21; + 3) 
[ 
)
IP 
where 
( 
) 1/2] 
(l-m) (l- -m -1) 
±8. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
8. 
If,/,-I 
(21; + 1) (21; _ \) 
mr,in,±1 
00 
G = f r3 Rnflf (r) Rni1i (r) dr 
o 
9 See Problem 27.1 for higher order transitions. 
(49) 
(50) 
(51) 
(52) 

728 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where Rnl represents the radial part of the wave functions. Equations (50) and (51) 
tell us that for a transition to occur, we must have 
and 
~I = If - Ii = ± I I 
~m =mf -m; =0 
~I = If - Ii = ± 1 I 
~m = mf - m; = ±1 
(53) 
(54) 
which are known as the selection rules. Since spin angular momenta are not in-
volved, we have 
~j = ±l 
(55) 
as well. 
For the ~m = 0 transition, the dipole moment vector 
(56) 
is along the z-direction [because Px = Pv = O-see Eq. (51 )]. 
Now, if we consider an oscillatory dipole in the z-direction 
p = Po e-i!JJt Z 
then at large distaces from such a dipole, the electric and magnetic fields are of the 
form (see, e.g. Ref. 5). 
(k2pO) 
ei(kr-,ot) 
A 
8 
sine 
() 
(57) 
4rrEo 
r 
(Wk po) 
ei(kr-,ot) 
A 
Jf= -
~ 
sine 
4> 
(58) 
r 
where e represents the polar angle that r makes with the z-axis. Further, the Poynt-
ing vector (associated with the emitted radiation field) is given by 
wk3 p2 . 2 
cos2(kr - wt) A 
S = 
0 sm e 
2 
r 
16rr2Eo 
r 
(59) 
Thus the electric field associated with the emitted radiation will be linearly polar-
ized with its electric vector oscillating in the plane defined by z and the direction 
of the emitted radiation k (see Fig. 26.3). Further, the intensity ofthe radiation will 
vary as sin2 e (= re· if). For e = rr /2 (i.e. for the emitted radiation propagating 
along any direction which is perpendicular to the z-axis), the electric field vector 
will be oscillating in the z-direction. 

Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation 
729 
i 
k 
IJ 
Figure 26.3. The vector k represents the direction of propagation of the emitted radiation. The plane 
of the paper is defined by the vectors k and z. For the f).m = 0 transition, the polarization vector 
of the emitted radiation e will lie in the k - z plane with the intensity of radiation maximum for 
e = 7r /2 and zero for e = o. 
For the 
mf = mi + 1 
transition 
Pz = 0 
[see Eqs (50) and (51)]. Thus 
and 
(60) 
The above equation implies that the emitted radiation will be superposition of 
radiation from two dipoles oscillating (with a phase difference of Jr /2) in the x-
and y- directions. Using formulae similar to Eqs (57) and (58) one can easily if 
k is along x and y, the emitted radiation is plane polarized along the y- and x-
directions respectively and if k is along Z, the radiation is left circularly polarized. 
For k in any other direction, the polarization is elliptical. 
As an example, we consider the I D2 --+ I PI transition (as in the case of the Cd 
6438.17 A. line). Since we have neglected spin, we consider only singlet states. If 
we place the atom in a magnetic field in the z-direction, the levels will split up as 
shown in Fig. 26.4 (this is the Zeeman effect). Using the selection rules, we have 
Viewed ..1 to B 
[i.e. k along x (say)] 
Viewed II to B 
[i.e. k along z (say)] 
m f = mi (i.e. f'1m = 0) 
transitions plane 
polarized II to B 
(p - components) 
m f = mi ± 1 (i.e. f'1m = ± 1) transitions plane 
polarized ..1 to B 
(s - components) 
m f = mi (i.e. f'1m = 0) 
transitions not seen 
(p - components) 
m f = mi ± 1 (i.e. f'1m = ± 1) transitions circularly 
polarized 
(s -components) 

730 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
1 D2 ------+0::- ------,-,-I----r-H--
, , 
'--rf---rtl-+H--
------.. - - -J.L---+'----4'--
t1M = 
-1 
0 
(a) 
I I I 
s 
p 
S 
(b) 
Figure 26.4. (a) The Zeeman pattern for the I D2 --+ I PI transition. (b) If viewed ..L to B, three lines 
are seen; if light polarized II to B is allowed to reach the film then only the p components are seen 
and if light polarized ..L to B is allowed to reach the film then only the s components are seen. 
This is known as the normal Zeeman effect and the lines are known as the Lorentz 
triplet. 
In the presence of spin-orbit interaction of the form ~ (r) L, s , the atomic states 
are characterized by the quantum numbers l, s, j and m j (see Problem 20.2). The 
corresponding selection rules are 
However, 
l::,.j = 0, ±1 
} 
l::,.Z = ±1 
l::,.mj = 0, ±l 
(mj); = 0 --* (mj)f = 0 
transition forbidden if l::,.j = 0 
(61 ) 
It may be noted that the transition l::,.j = 0 is allowed but j; = j f = 0 transition 
is not allowed. The Zeeman pattern for the 2 P3/2, 112 --* 2 SI/2 transition (as in the 
case of D lines of Sodium) is shown in Fig. 26.5 (see also Problem 26.7). 

Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation 
mj 
mJ 
3/2 
: 
6/3 
1/2 
2/3 
- - - --- - - - - -
,;' 
2 P312 
:~-----t,,:-,- ------
--r-+'~r------- -1/2 -2/3 
-3/2 -6/3 
1/2 
1/3 
--t-++-t~r---.-+--r+- -1/2 -1/3 
1/2 
--------<, - -- - -- -- --
----'---'---'--------'--'--- -1/2 
-1 
~m = 
0 
-1 
1 
0 -1 
II 
p 
I I 
I I II" I 
Fine Structure Splitting 
Zeeman Splitting 
731 
Figure 26.5. The Zeeman pattern for the 2P3/2,1/2 --+ 2S1/2 doublet in sodium. Notice that the 
Zeeman splitting is different for different levels [the splitting is proportional to gm j' see Eg. (66) of 
Chapter 20]. The lower part of the figure shows that in the transition there are two p components and 
four s components. 
26.6. Problems 
Problem 26.1 Show that for optical frequencies, at thermal equilibrium (corre-
sponding to T ~ 10000 K), the number of spontaneous emissions far exceeds the 
number of stimulated emissions, 
Problem 26.2 Derive Eqs (50) and (51) and hence the selection rules. 
Problem 26.3 For he 2P --+ IS transition in hydrogen atom, prove that 
\(lS \r\2p)\2 = If 1frrSrl{r2PdrI2 = 25 (~) 10 a& 
independent of the initial value of m. Using the above result calculate the corre-
sponding lifetime for spontaneous emissions. 
Problem 26.4 Calculate the relative intensities of the two lines corresponding to 
the transitions 3 P --+ 1 Sand 2P --+ I S in the hydrogen atom spectrum assuming 
that equal number of atoms are excited to the 3P and 2P states. 

732 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Table 26.1. 
Transition 
Number of p-components 
Number of ,I'-components 
2DS/2-+2p3/2 
4 
8 
2C7/2-+2FS/2 
6 
12 
3 P2 -+ 3 S1 
3 
6 
2 
Problem 26.5 The first line of the Balmer series in hydrogen atom corresponds to 
the n = 3 to n = 2 transition, this line is known as the He, line. What would be the 
selection rules for the n = 3 to n = 2 transitions and the corresponding lifetimes. 
Problem 26.6 Obtain the angular distribution of the radiation emitted by the 
nP --+ n'S transition. 
Problem 26.7 For L - S coupling the selection rules are 
!},] = 0, ±l 
!},L=±l 
!}'S = 0 
!}'M = 0, ±1 
(J = 0 --+ ] = 0 transition forbidden) 
l 
(M = 0 --+ M = 0 transition forbidden for !},] = 0) 
(62) 
U sing the above selection rules, show that in the Zeeman splitting of the transitions 
given in the first column of Table 26.1, the number of p- and s- components would 
be as given in the second and third columns. 
Problem 26.8 Assuming that the atom can exist in two possible states charac-
terised by the wave functions 0/1 (r) and 0/2 (r) and considering the atom-field 
interaction to be ofthe form given by Eq. (12), obtain a solution of the Schr6dinger 
equation in the rotating wave approximation (i.e. neglect terms whose time depen-
dences are of the form exp [±i (w + W21) tD. 
Problem 26.9 Using Eqs (100) and (101) of Chapter 19 for 0/ (n, I,~, j, mj) 
derive the selection rules given by Eq. (61). 
Problem 26.10 In Sec. 26.3 we had considered interaction of an atom with a ra-
diation field having continuous spectrum of frequency. Carry out a similar analysis 
for a near monochromatic wave interacting with an atom having a broad frequency 
response. 

Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation 
733 
26.7. Solutions 
Solution 26.1 At thennal equilibrium, the ratio of the number of spontaneous to 
stimulated emissions is given by 
A 
( liw ) 
Bu(w)=exp 
kBT -1 
Now 
kBT 
1.38 x 10-23 (J/s) x 103 (sec) 
14-1 
-- :::::: 
:::::: 1.3 x 10 sec 
Ii 
1.054 x 10-34 (J.sec ) 
For the optical region A '" 6000A and hence w '" 3 X 1014 sec l . Thus BU~W) » I 
and the transitions are mainly due to spontaneous emissions. 
Solution 26.2 The selection rule f!.m = 0, ± 1 can be derived easily from the fact 
that the 4>-dependence of Ylm is of the form exp (i m4» and that 
Since 
z=rcos8, x±iy=rsin8e±i¢ 
2][ f ei(m'-m)¢d4> = 0 for 
m' i= m 
o 
the 4> integration in J 1/J'jZo/idr leads to the selection rule m f = mi and the 4> 
integration in J o/j (x ± iy) o/idr leads to mf = mi ±1. 
In order to obtain Eqs (50) and (51), we note that 
Z r 
cos 8 = r; 
YIO 
( 4 ) 1/2 I 
x ± iy = rsin8 e±i¢ = =fr (8;y/2 YI.±I 
Further, if we use the following recurrence relations 
(87T) 1/2 
-
YIIYlm-1 = 
3 
" 
[ (I +m)(l + 1 +m)]1/2 
(21 + 1) (21 + 3) 
Y/+l,m 
[ (Z- m) (I + 1 _ m)]1/2 
-
(21 + 1) (21 - 1) 
Y1-l,m 
(47T) 1/2 
--:3 
YLOY/. m 
[ (I + 1 + m)(l + 1 - m)]1/2 
(21 + 1) (21 + 3) 
Y1+1,m 
[ (l- m) (Z +m) ]1/2 
-
(21 + 1) (21 - 1) 
Y1-1,m 
(63) 
(64) 
(65) 

734 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
( 8 ) 1/2 
; 
Y1,-1 YZ,m+l 
(I - m) (I + 1 - m) 
[ 
]
IP 
(21 + 1) (21 + 3) 
YZ+l,m 
[ (I + m) (I + 1 + m)] ! /2 
-
(21 + I) (21 - I) 
Y,-I,m 
(66) 
and also the orthonormality condition of spherical harmonics, we immediately get 
Egs (50) and (51) from which the selection rules [Egs (53) and (54)] follow. 
Solution 26.3 We may directly use Egs (50) and (51); however, in this case, it 
is possible to calculate the matrix elements without using the recurrence relations 
[Egs (64) to (66)]. The eigenfunctions for the 2P and 1 S states are 
(67) 
and 
1 
1/fI = 1/flS = RIO (r) Yoo (e, ¢) = -J4JTR IO (r) 
(68) 
Substituting for R2! (r) and RIO (r) (see Sec. lOA) in Eg. (52) and carrying out the 
integration we get 
Thus 
G II ~J4; YIO Y1m sine ded¢ 
4y'2 (~) 5 aoom.o 
(69) 
Since 
we have 
(x ± iY)fi 
(70) 
Thus 
(71) 
and 
(72) 

Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation 
735 
It can be easily verified that 
(73) 
for m = + 1,0 and -I which gives the result as given by Eq. (44). The lifetime 
calculation is given in Sec. 26.4. 
Solution 26.4 Since the intensity of the emitted line is proportional to the energy 
emitted per second, the required ratio is given by 
where 
and 
AI = A(2P ---+ IS) = 
hWIAI 
R=--
hW2A2 
A2 = A (3P ---+ IS) = ~a :~ If 1jf~s nir3p drl2 
(74) 
Using the expressions for R31 (r), R21 (r) and R20 (r) (given in Sec. 10.4) in Eq. 
(52) and carrying out the integrations we get 
( 2)5 
256 
G I = G (2P ---+ IS) = 405 -
ao = 
/C ao 
3 
81'\1 6 
1 (3)4 
81 
G I = G (3P ---+ IS) = 
/C 
-
ao = 
/Cao 
4'\16 
2 
64'\16 
The angular integrals will be the same for both the transitions and the values will 
be the same as calculated in the previous solution. Thus 
R = (£EH)4 (256 X 64)2 = 256 ::::: 3.16 
~EH 
81 x 81 
81 
Solution 26.5 For the n = 3 to n = 2 transition one could have the following 
possible transitions: 3S ---+ 2P, 3P ---+ 2S, 3D ---+ 2P. In order to determine the 
total transition probability for a given initial state, one must sum over the possible 

736 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
final states. Thus, for the I 3, 0, 0 > state, the final state could be either of the 
following three states: I 2, I, I >, I 2, I, 0 > and I 2, I, - 1 > and the total 
transition probability (per unit time) would be given by 
4 
u} 
A (3S -+ 2P) = - a -2 ~ 1(2, I, m Ir13, 0, 0)12 
(75) 
3 
c 
~ 
m=I.O,~1 
where 
Thus, using Eqs (50) and (51) 
4 u} 
A (3S -+ 2P) = 3a~ [1(2,1, llxl3, 0, 0)1 2 + 1(2,1, Ilyl3, 0, 0)1 2 
+ 1(2, 1,0 Iz13, 0, 0)1 2 
+ 1(2, 1, -1 Ix13, 0, 0) 12 + I (2, I, -IlyI3, 0, 0) 12] 
(76) 
Each of the matrix elements could be calculated easily. For the 3 P -+ 2S transition 
one should consider a particular initial state, say I 3, 1,0 > and calculate the 
transition probability, which would be 
A (I 3, 1,0 > -+ I 2,0,0 » 
4 u} 
-a-2 1(2,0,0IrI3, 1,0)12 
3 
C 
4 u} 
-a-2 1(2,0,0IzI3, 1,0)12 
3 c 
[because mf = mi, see Eqs (50) and (51)] 
4 u} 
-a-IGI 2 
9 c2 
(77) 
where we have used the relation 
J J Y(~) cos e YIO sin e de dcjJ = ~ 
etc. 
Solution 26.6 Let the direction of propagation of the emitted radiation be denoted 
by k which makes the polar angles e, <I> with respect to the z-axis. Lefe] represent 
an unit vector in the k-zplane and perpendicular to k and lefe2 be the unit vector 
normal to the k - z plane. Thus the Cartesian components ofe] and ~ are 
A = 1, e]: - cos e cos <I> - cos Eo) sin <I> sin e 
A = 2, e2: sin <I> 
- cos <I> 

Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation 
The angular distribution of the emitted radiation is proportional to 
If 1/fj eA • r 1/f;dr 12 sin 8d8d<l:> 
Let us first consider A = 1 for which 
eA.r 
r [eh sin e cos ¢ + eAy sin e sin ¢ + eAZ cos e] 
, [ C; )'/2 ~ (- Yl.l + Y,._,) (- cos El cos <1» 
( 8 )1/2 1 
+; 
2i (- YI.1 - YI • -I) (- cos 8 sin <1:» 
( 4 )1/2 
] 
+; 
YI,osin8 
Thus for the n P --* n'S transition 
f 1/f/el.r1/f;dr = G ff Yo~(2;)'/2[(Yl,I_YI,_I)cOS(~)COS<l:> 
-i (Yl,I + YI,_I) cos 8 sin <I:> 
+J2ylO sin 8]YI m sine de d¢ 
where G is given by Eg. (52). Simple integrations give 
f 1/fj~.r1/fi dr = 
G 
'<I> 
-
cosC0e' 
.j6 
G 
. 
D 
-sm~ 
J3 
for m = 1 
for m = 0 
G 
'<I> 
--cos8e-1 
for m =-1 
.j6 
Similarly for A = 2 
I 
'<I> 
-e' 
for m = 1 
f 1/fje2.r1/f; dr = 
.j6 
0 
for m =0 
i 
-;<1> 
--e 
for m =-1 
.j6 
If we write the intensity distribution as 
l;,.d0. = fo!;.. (8, <1:» sin 8d8d<l:> 
737 
(78) 
(79) 
(80) 

738 
m 
o 
-I 
Table 26.2. 
A= 1 
~ cos2 e 
;in2 (~) 
1 cos2 (_) 
2 
A= 2 
I 
2" o 
I 
2" 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
the values of j~ are given in Table 26.2. Notice that A = 2 case is isotropic. 
Solution 26.8 Assuming that the atom can exist in only two possible states de-
scribed by the wavefunctions 1f1 (r) and 1f2 (r) we get from Eg. (18) 
and 
where 
iii dCI = ~80DI2C2 (t) [e-i(Iu'-w)t + e-i(w'+w)t] 
dt 
2 
I 
W= 
= W21 = -W12 
and use has been made of the fact that 
(81) 
(82) 
(83) 
and therefore D II = D22 = O. In the rotating wave approximation 10, we neglect 
the terms exp [±i (Wi + w) t] because of their very rapid oscillations to obtain 
(84) 
and 
(85) 
We assume a solution of the type 
(86) 
10 Salzman (see Ref. 5) has obtained exact numerical solution of the Schrodinger equation without 
using the rotating wave approximation. The final result for IC2 (t)1 2 is the same except for the 
presence of a weak high frequency oscillation superimposed on the solution as shown in Fig. 26.6. 

Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation 
O.Ir----------------. 
o ~~~:.--~==~---=~--'~.6~~~.~ 
0.1 
1.4to>. 
ol--~=:.::::::-.. ......... .:::::==:::::::S;.... __ ~ 
0.2 
o~=----------=--...... :::::.-_; 
1.0 
.. 
!: 0.8 
... 
iii 
~ 0.& 
li 
Q. z 0.4 
2 
~ 
z 0.2 
~ 
0- o 1-::::::.-------;=-......::::::--, 
0.2 
739 
Figure 26.6. Variation of the transition probability for a two level system for different frequencies of 
the electromagnetic field w as a function of time. The curves correspond to :J) 80/ n = 0.1 Wi. The 
solid line corresponds to Eq. (95) and the dotted curve corresponds to an exact numerical computa-
tion. Notice the presence of a weak high frequency oscillation present in the exact calculation which 
is due to the presence of the exp[±i (w + Wi) t J terms in Eqs (81) and (82). The graph for w = wo 
has been cut at {(,)O = 36 and shifted to the origin. [After Ref. 5J. 
then from Eq. (84) 
2liQ 
"('"' 
') 
C2 (t) = ---- e' ,,-w+w t 
80D12 
Substituting Eq. (86) and Eq. (87) in Eq. (85) we get 
2 
(' 
) 
I 
2 
Q + w - w Q -
-Qo = 0 
4 
where 
and 
D = D12 = DZI 
Equation (88) gives 
1 [, 
{' 
2 
z} 1/2] 
Q 1,2 = 2 - (w - w) ± (w - w) + Qo 
Thus the general solutions of Eqs (84) and (85) will be 
C 1 (t) = A1eiQ1t + A2eiQ2t 
(87) 
(88) 
(89) 
(90) 
(91) 
(92) 

740 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and 
(93) 
A I and A2 can be determined from initial conditions. For example, if the atom is 
initially in the ground state then 
(94) 
which gives 
C t 2 = [sin (Q't/2)]2 (QO)2 
1 2 ( )1 
Q' /2 
2 
(95) 
where 
[ 
2 
JI / 2 
Q' = (w' - w) + Q6 
(96) 
Equation (95) gives the transition probability for absorption which has been shown 
in Fig. 26.6. 
Now, at resonance, w = w' and 
(97) 
which shows that the system flip-flops between states 1 and 2. 
Solution 26.10 We consider a nearly monochromatic field (which is indeed true 
for a laser) interacting with atoms characterised by the line shape function g (w) . 
Thus N1g (w) dw and N 2g (w) dw represent the number of atoms per unit volume 
in levels I and 2 respectively which are capable of interacting with radiation of 
frequency between wand w + dw. Obviously 11, 
f g(w)dw = 1 
(98) 
Now, for a near monochromatic field, the energy (per unit volume) associated with 
the field (at frequency w) is given by 
I 
2 
U,V = "2 EoEo 
Thus, for such a case the probability for stimulated emission is given by 
[ , ]2 
I 
8 2f 
sinUJ-UJt 
r21 = 4 IDd 2 n~ 
g (w') 
~ dw' 
I IDd 2 
2 
4~ 
80 g (w) 2m 
Tr p2 
--2 -
!i (w) U,vt 
3n EO 
(99) 
(l00) 
II Different types of line shape functions have been discussed in Ref. 3-see also Problem 27.3. 

Semi-Classical Theory of Radiation 
741 
where in the last step we have replaced I Dd 2 by its average value. Since 
(101) 
(where r is the spontaneous emission lifetime), we obtain the following expression 
for the number of stimulated emissions per unit time per unit volume 
(102) 
26.8. References and suggested reading 
1. A. Einstein, On the Quantum Theory of Radiation, Physikalische Zeit schrift 
18, 121 (1917); this paper has been reprinted in the book by D. Ter Haar, The 
Old Quantum Theory, Pergamon Press, Oxford (1967). 
2. R. Loudon, The Quantum Theory of Light, Clarendon Press, Oxford 
(1973). 
3. K. Thyagarajan and A.K. Ghatak, Lasers: Theory and Applications, 
Plenum Press, New York (1981). 
4. A.K. Ghatak, Optics, Tata McGraw-Hill, New Delhi, (1992). 
5. W.R. Salzman, Time evolution of simple quantum mechanical systems:II. Two 
state system in intense fields, Phys. Rev. Lett. 26, 220 (1971). 
6. W.K.H. Panofsky and M.Phillips, Classical Electricity and Magnetism, 
Addison-Wesley (1962). 

Chapter 27 
The Quantum Theory of Radiation and its Interaction with 
Matter 
Quantum mechanics is very impressive. But an inner voice tells me that it is not 
yet the real thing. The theory produces a good deal but hardly brings us closer to 
the secret of the Old One. [ am at all events convinced that He does not play dice. 
-
ALBERT EINSTEIN in a letter to Max Born 4 December 1926. 
Neils Bohr's response is somewhat less well known} : But still, it cannot he .f{Jr 
us to tell God, how he is to run the world. 
27.1. Introduction 
In the previous chapter we developed the semi-classical theory of interaction of 
radiation with matter in which matter, i.e. atoms, were assumed to exist in discrete 
(quasi-stationary states) but the electromagnetic field with which it interacts was 
described classically. In this chapter we will develop the fully quantum theory of 
radiation and discuss its interaction with matter. 
We will first consider the Hamiltonian of an atomic system in a radiation field 
(Sec. 27.2). We will next show that the electromagnetic field in a closed cavity can 
be considered as an infinite set of oscillators, each corresponding to a particular 
value of the wave vector and particular direction of polarization. By imposing the 
commutation relations between the canonical variables, it will be shown that the 
energy of each oscillator can increase or decrease by integral multiples of certain 
quantum of energy; this quantum of energy is known as the photon. In Sec. 27.4 
we will use the quantum mechanical description of the radiation field to study its 
interaction with an atom and thereby obtain explicit expressions for the Einstein A 
and B coefficients which will be shown to be identical to the results obtained in 
the previous chapter. It may be mentioned that the theory developed in Sec. 27.4 
automatically leads to spontaneous emissions which in the semi-classical theory 
1 The authors found this quotation in lim Baggott's book on The Meaning of Quantum Theory, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford (1992). 
742 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
743 
had to be introduced in an ad hoc manner through the Einstein coefficients (see 
Sec. 26.4). In Sec. 27.5 we will discuss the properties of the eigenstates of the 
Hamiltonian of the radiation field and will show that the state which corresponds 
to a given number of photons for a particular mode does not correspond to the 
classical plane wave. Indeed, in Sec. 27.6, we will show that the eigenstates of 
the annihilation operator (which are known as the coherent states) resemble the 
classical plane wave for large intensities. In fact when a laser is operated much 
beyond the threshold, it generates a coherent state excitation of a cavity mode. 
Finally, in Sec. 27.7, we will show that it is difficult to give a quantum mechanical 
description of the phase of the electromagnetic wave. 
27.2. The Hamiltonian 
The Hamiltonian of an atomic system in a radiation field can be written as 
H = Ho+ H' 
Ha + Hr + H' 
(1) 
where Ha represents the Hamiltonian of the atom, Hr the Hamiltonian correspond-
ing to the pure radiation field, which is given by 
(2) 
and H' represents the interaction between the atom and the radiation field. In Eq. 
(2) EO and fLo represent the dielectric permittivity and magnetic permeability of 
free space, 8 and Je represent the electric and magnetic fields associated with the 
radiation field. For example, for a non-relativistic electron (of charge -q) in a 
radiation field, we have 
I 
H = -
(p + qA)2 + V + Hr 
2m 
(3) 
since the recipe is to replace the electron momentum operator p by p+qA (see Sec. 
20.2), where A is the vector potential and V is the potential energy of the electron. 
We can rewrite Eq. (3) as 
H = Ho+ H' 
(4) 

744 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where 
Ho = 
H'= 
Ha + Hr 
p2 
-
+ VCr) 
2m 
q 
q2 
-(A.p+p.A)+-A2 
2m 
2m 
(5) 
and Hr is given by Eq. (2). In Sec. 27.4 we will treat H' as a perturbation and 
) 
study the transitions between eigenstates of Ho. The term i~ A2 appearing in the 
expression for H' usually represents a very small perturbation and hence will be 
neglected. Thus the interaction term is given by 
Now 
H' = +i.. (A· p + p. A) 
m 
p·A\II= -ihV·(A\II) 
-i h [(V· A) \II + A . V \II] 
A . p\ll 
(6) 
where we have chosen the Coulomb gauge in which V . A = 0 (see Sec. 20.3). 
Thus 
H' = i..A . P = i..p . A 
(7) 
m 
m 
There are now two ways of proceeding further. The first is to treat the electro-
magnetic field classically; this has indeed been done in the previous chapter. The 
second and more powerful method is to quantize the radiation field and calculate 
rates of transition between states of matter and quanta; this will be done in Sections 
27.3 and 27.4. However, before we do so, we will first show (in Sec. 27.2.1) that 
the interaction term given by Eq. (12) of the previous chapter is consistent with Eq. 
(7) under certain approximation which is known as the dipole approximation. 
27.2.1. THE INTERACTION TERM IN THE SEMI-CLASSICAL THEORY OF 
RADIATION 
For a plane electromagnetic wave, the vector potential can be written in the form 
A = e Ao cos (k . r - wt) 
(8) 
where e represents the unit vector along A (denoting the polarization of the wave), 
and 
WA 
k=-k 
c 
(9) 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
745 
~ 
where k represents the unit vector along the direction of propagation. The condition 
V . A = 0 gives 
(10) 
implying that e is at right angles to the direction of propagation, i.e. the wave is 
transverse. The electric field is given by 
where 
Now 
aA 
A 
• 
8 = - -
= -e 80 SIll (k . r - wt) 
at 
H' = !.LA. p 
m 
80 = w Ao 
q80 
A 
[ 
~i(k.r~(vt) + i(kr~(Vt)] 
--e e 
e 
.p 
2mw 
(11) 
(12) 
The matrix element of transition is given by (cf. Eg. 17 of the previous chapter): 
q80 ['k 
. 
H:1l = (s I H' I n) = --e· (sl e' .rp In) e~l(Vt 
2mw 
+ (sl e~ikr p In) e~i(Vt] 
(13) 
where the kets In> and Is> are eigenstates of the atomic Hamiltonian Ha and 
represent the initial and final states. Now 
e±ik.r = 1 ± ik· r-~ (k. r)2 + ... 
2! 
Since atomic dimensions are ~ 1 0~8 cm and for optical wavelength 
we obtain (in the region of integration) kr « 1. Thus, negligible error will be 
involved if the exponential is replaced by unity2 and the transition is said to be an 
electric dipole transition - a very important case. In this approximation 
(s I e±ikr pin) ~ (s I pin) 
(14) 
2 However, if the replacement of e±ik.r by unity leads to a vanishing matrix element, one must 
use higher order terms like (± i k.r) , etc.; these are said to correspond to higher order transitions 
(see Problem 27.1) 

746 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Now the kets In> and Is> are eigenkets3 of the atomic Hamiltonian Ha: 
Further 
Thus 
or, 
Hence 
Ha In) 
Ha Is) 
En I n) = nWn I n) 
Es Is) = nws Is) 
p2 
Ha = -
+ V (r) 
2m 
[ 
p; + p2, + p~ 
] 
x,· 
. 
' + V (r) 
2m 
1 
2m ([x,Px]Px+Px[x,Px]) 
in 
-Px 
m 
m 
P = iii [r, Ha] 
m 
(s I pin) = iii (s I rHa -
Ha r I n) 
m 
iii (En - Es) (s I r I n) 
mWnl, 
-. -' (s I r I n) 
I 
where we have used Eg. (15) and conjugate of Eg. (16) and 
On substitution in Eg. (13), we get 
( I H' I ) - q80wns ~ ( I I ) [ iwt 
-iwt] 
S 
n -
e· s r n 
e 
- e 
2w 
(15) 
(16) 
(17) 
(18) 
(19) 
(20) 
The above eguation is of a form similar (although not identical) to that of Eg. 
(17) of the previous chapter. However, for W 
::::::: Iwns I after one carries out the 
integration which leads to Eg. (22) of the previous chapter, one obtains identical 
expressions for probabilities of absorption and of emission [see Eg. (24) of the 
previous chapter]. 
3 We may warn the reader of some confusion of notation. The intial and final states of the atomic 
Hamiltonian are also sometimes denoted by Ii> and If> and sometimes by I a > and I b >. 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
747 
27.3. Quantization of the radiation field 
We now develop the second method mentioned in Sec. 27.1. In this method, the 
electromagnetic field is described in terms of numbers of photons in various states. 
We consider first a pure radiation field. In Coulomb gauge, such a field can be 
derived from the vector potential A only, with <t> = 0 and 
In this gauge, the magnetic and electric fields are given by (see Sec. 20.2) 
and 
aA 
8=--
at 
(21) 
(22) 
(23) 
where we have assumed <t> = 0 since we are considering free space. Substituting 
for Jf and & in the Maxwell equation 
we get 
If we now use the identity4 
aD 
a& 
'V x Jf = -
= EO-
at 
at 
a2A 
V x (V x A) = -Eo/LO-2 
at 
(because V . A = 0), we finally obtain 
where 
(24) 
(25) 
(26) 
(27) 
(28) 
4 It may be worthwhile to point out that the operator \72 is defined by the following equation 
\72 A == \7 (\7 . A) - \7 x (\7 x A) 
However, 
( \72 At = \7 . (\7 Ax) 
i.e. a Cartesian component of \72 A is div grad of the Cartesian component but 

748 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
represents the speed of light in free space. Equation (27) represents the three-
dimensional wave equation. In order to solve the wave equation, we use the method 
of separation of variables: 
A (r, t) = A (r) q (t) 
(29) 
Thus 
I d2q 
q (t) V 2A (r) = A (r) -2 -2 
(30) 
c dt 
We next consider a Cartesian component (say the x-component) of A(r) which we 
denote by AAr); thus 
(31) 
Thus 
q (t) "'-' e~iwt 
(32) 
and 
(33) 
where k2 = (J} / c2. The solutions of Eq. (33) are plane waves; and similarly if we 
consider the y- and z-components we obtain 
A (r) = eik.r e 
(34) 
where k . k = e, e is the unit vector along A. The condition V . A = 0 gives us 
k . e = 0, implying the transverse character of the wave [see Eq. (10)]. 
The allowed values of k (and hence of w) are determined from the boundary 
conditions. If we assume the radiation to be confined in a cubical cavity of volume 
V (= L 3) and use the periodic boundary condition then 
A (x = 0, y, z) = A(x = L, y, z) 
etc. 
(35) 
gIVIng 
(36) 
Thus 
kx = 
2rrvx 
L 
ky = 2rrvy 
L 
V,, Vn V z = 0, ±1, ±2, ... 
(37) 
kz = 
2rr V z 
L 
The complete solution of Eq. (27) is therefore given by 
A (r, t) = L [qdt ) Adr) + q; (t) A~ (r)] 
(38) 
A 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
where 
eikAOreA 
IqAI e-iWAT 
749 
(39) 
(40) 
and the subscript A signifies the various modes of the field [see Eq. (37)] including 
the two states of polarization. Thus, a particular value of A corresponds to a partic-
ular set of values of vx , vY ' V z and a particular direction ofe. In Eq. (38) the second 
term on the RHS is complex conjugate of the first term making A necessarily real. 
Because of the allowed values of kA [see Eq. (37)], we readily obtain 
(41) 
v 
v 
where the integration is over the entire volume of the cavity. Using Eq. (38), we 
obtain the following expressions for the electric and magnetic fields: 
(42) 
(43) 
where 
(44) 
and 
(45) 
The total energy of the radiation field is given by 
(46) 

750 
Now 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
-q;..q/: f A;.. . A;, de - q;q/l f A~ . AIL de 
+q;ql: f A~ . A~ de] 
1 
-lEO V L 
L 
w;..wl1 [q;..ql1 0;".-11 
;.. 
11 
-q;..q~ 0;",11 - q;ql1 0;.../l + q;q~ 0;",-11] 
-~EO V L wUq;..q-;.. + q~q~;.. -
2q;..q~] 
(47) 
;.. 
Similarly one can evaluate f Jf . Jf de . The final result is 
(48) 
where use has to be made of the vector identity 
(a x b) . (c x d) = (a· c) (b . d) - (b· c) (a· d) 
(49) 
and the relation 
(50) 
Thus 
Hy = 2EoV Lw~q;.. (t) q~ (t) 
(51) 
;.. 
We next introduce the dimensionless variables Q;.. and p;.. defined through the 
equations 
and 
Thus 
Q;.. (t) = (EOV)I/2 (q;.. (t) + q~ (t)) 
1 ( 
2) 1/2 ( 
*) 
p;.. (t) = -:-
EO V w;.. 
q;.. (t) -
q;.. (t) 
I 
q;.. (t) = (4EOVW~rl/2 (w;..Q;.. (t) + iP;.. (t)) 
q~ (t) = (4EOVW~rI/2 (w;..Q;.. (t) - iP;.. (t)) 
(52) 
(53) 
(54) 
(55) 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
751 
and 
(56) 
where5 
(57) 
The Hamiltonian given by Eq. (57) is identical to that of the linear harmonic 
oscillator (see Sec. 12.2) which suggests that the electromagnetic field can be re-
garded as an infinite set of harmonic oscillators, one corresponding to each value 
of kA and to a particular direction of polarization. 
Quantization of electromagnetic field 
In order to quantize the electromagnetic field we use the same approach as in 
Sec. 12.2. We consider QA and PA to be real operators satisfying the commutation 
relations 
[QA (t) , PA (t)] 
[QA (t), PA, (t)] 
[QA (t) , Q/L (t)] 
QA (t) PA (t) - PA (t) QA (t) = iii 
0; A i- A' 
0= [PA (t), P/L (t)] 
(58) 
(59) 
(60) 
where all the operators are in the Heisenberg representation (see Sec. 12.9). We 
next introduce the dimensionless variables 
1 
CiA (t) = ~ 
[WAQA (t) - iPA (t)] 
V 2liWA 
(61) 
(62) 
Since [wA QA (t) + i PA (t)] is proportional to qA (t) [see Eq. (54)] which has a time 
dependence ofthe form e- iWAf , we may write (see also Sec. 12.8) 
Similarly, 
5 Notice that 
aHA = W~QA = w~ (EOV)1/2 (qA + qn = i (EOvw~)1/2 (liA - lin = -FA 
aQA 
Similarly 
aHA 
. 
aPA =+QA 
(63) 
(64) 
which are nothing but Hamilton's equations of motion [see, Ref. I]. Thus QA and PA are the 
canonical coordinates. 

752 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where 
aI, == a), (0) 
and 
a), == aA (0) 
Solving Eqs (61) and (62) for QA (t) and PA (t) we obtain 
QA (t) = 
Pdt) = 
j Ii 
[ad/) + adt)] 
2WA 
iJ n~A [aA (t) - a A (t)] 
(65) 
(66) 
(67) 
Substituting the above expressions for QA (t) and PA (t) in Eq. (57), we obtain 
1 
L "2 nWA (aA (t) a A (t) + a A (t) aA (t» 
A 
1 
L "2 nwA (aAaA + alcaA) 
(68) 
A 
If we now carry out an analysis similar to that followed in Sec. 12.2, we obtain 
(nA+l)nWA; nlc=0,1,2, ... 
(69) 
as the eigenvalues of HA and 
(70) 
as the eigenvalues of the total Hamiltonian Hr (= L HA). Thus, quantum mechan-
ically, we can visualize the radiation field as consisting of an infinite number of 
simple harmonic oscillators; the energy of each oscillator can increase or decrease 
by integral multiples of nwA. If we consider nWA as the energy of a photon, each 
oscillator can have energy corresponding to n A photons. 
The eigenkets of the total Hamiltonian would be 
(71) 
where nA represents the number of photons in the mode characterized by A. Thus 
H, In" n" ... n' .... ) = (~( n, + D 
flW,) In" n', ... n', ... ) 
(72) 
Further [see Eqs (24) and (25) of Chapter 12]: 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
753 
and 
Finally, the state of the radiation field need not be an eigenstate of Hn it could be 
a superposition of the eigenstates like that given by the following equation 
I \II) = L Cn1 ,n2""n!c, ... I nj, n2, ... n A, ... ) 
(76) 
nl, .. · 
Physically I Cn1 ,n2 ' •• • n!c, .. f would represent the probability of finding n I photons 
in the first mode, n2 in the second mode, etc. 
27.4. Spontaneous and stimulated emissions 
We next express the vector potential A (and hence the interaction term H') in terms 
of the operators a A and (h. Now using Eqs (54) and (61), we get 
( Ii) 1/2 
qdt) = 
adt) 
2Eo VW A 
(77) 
which is now to be considered as an operator. Using Eq. (38) we get 
(
Ii 
)1/2 
A = L 
[adt ) Adr) + adt) A~ (r)] 
A 
2Eo VW A 
(78) 
where all the operators are in the Heisenberg representation (see Sec. 12.9). In the 
Schrodinger representation, we will have 
(79) 
which will be independent of time. The interaction energy is 
H,=!LA.p 
(80) 
m 
or 

754 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Interaction energy 
(81 ) 
Now, the eigenvalue equations for Ha and Hr are 
(82) 
and 
H, In,. n, .... ) ~ [ ~ (n' + D 
n,o,] In,. n,,. .. n,,. .. ) 
(83) 
where 1 1/1 i ) and Ei represent respectively the eigenkets and energy eigenvalues 
of the isolated atom and 1 n j , n2, ... ) represent the eigenket of the pure radiation 
field with L (nle + D Piuh representing the corresponding eigenvalue (see Eq. 72). 
Ie 
Thus the eigenvalue equation for Ho will be 
(84) 
where 
(85) 
and 
1 un) =1 i) 1 n1,n2, ... nle, ... ) =1 i; nj,n2, ... nle, ... ) 
(86) 
represents the ket corresponding to the atom being in state 1 i) and the radiation 
being in the state 1 nj, n2, ... nle, ... ). 
Now the Schrodinger equation for the system consisting of the atom and the 
radiation field is 
i Pi~ = (Ho + H') 1 W) 
at 
(87) 
The solution of the above equation can be written as a linear combination of the 
eigenkets of Ho (cf. Eq. 15 of the previous chapter): 
1 W) = Len (t) e-iW"tj Ii 1 Un) 
(88) 
II 
Substituting in Eq. (87), we obtain 
i Pi" [den _ i Wn en] e-iW"tjli 1 un) 
L 
dt 
Pi 
n 
= Len (t) Wn e-iWntj Ii 1 un) + H' L en (t) e-iW"tj n 1 un) 
n 
n 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
755 
where we have used Eq. (84). Premultiplying by (us I we get (cf. Eq. 16 of Chapter 
26) 
iii dd~s = L (us I H' I un) ei(WI/I-Wn)t/ lien (t) 
(89) 
n 
Now using Eq. (81) 
(90) 
Because of the appearance of aA and Zh in the expression for H', the various terms 
in (us IH'I un) will be non-zero only if the number of photons in I us) differs by 
unity from the number of photons in I un). If we write out completely the right-hand 
side of Eq. (89) it will lead to a coupled set of an infinite number of equations which 
would be impossible to solve. We employ the perturbation theory and consider the 
absorption of one photon (of energy liwi) from the i th mode. Further, if we assume 
the frequency Wi to be very close to the resonant frequency corresponding to the 
transition from the atomic state I a) to I b), then Eq. (89) reduces to the following 
two coupled equations (see also Solution 27.3): 
(91 ) 
(92) 
where 
11) =Ia; nl,n2, ... nA, ... ,ni, ... ) 
(93) 
and 
12) =1 b; n],n2, ... nA, ... ,ni -1, ... ) 
(94) 

756 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
represent the initial and final states of the system. Obviously, because of relations 
like Eg. (115), H{J = 0 = H~2. Further, 
Thus, 
Now 
At-i 
W2 = Eb + L (nA + ~) hUh + (ni - I + ~) hWi 
A 
At-i 
(95) 
(96) 
(97) 
where in the last step we have used the dipole approximation in which we have 
replaced e-ikAor by unity (see Eg. 14). Ifwe now use Eg. (19) we get 
m 
(a I p I b) = ih (Eb - Ea) (a I rib) 
= -imwba(a I r I b) 
Thus 
(98) 
where 
~ 
iq 
~ 
Dub = q eA • (a I rib) = -- eA • (a I p I b) 
(99) 
mWba 
[see Eg. (20) of Chapter 26]. We next try to solve Egs (91) and (92) by using a 
method similar to that employed in Problem 26.8. We assume that at t = 0 the 
system is in the state represented by I 1) , i.e. 
(100) 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
757 
On working out the solution one obtains 
C 
t 2 -::::. (QO)2 [sin Q
1t/2]2 
I 2 ( )1 
2 
QI/2 
(101) 
where 
[ 
2 
2] 1/2 
2ni IDabl 
Wab 
QO = ------
liEo V 
Wi 
(102) 
and 
I 
[ 
2 
2] 1/2 
Q = (Wba - Wi) + QO 
(103) 
For Qat / Ii « I, we obtain 
2 
nw IDabl2 [sin (Wba - w) t/2]2 
IC2 (t)1 
-::::. ---
2 liEo V 
(Wha - w) /2 
(104) 
where we have dropped the subscript i and have taken into account the fact that 
IC2 (t)1 2 is negligible except when W ~ Wba and have thus replaced Wba by w. 
Equation (104) is the same as Eq. (24) of the previous chapter provided we replace6 
85 by 2n liw/ V EO. Using Eq. (104) and proceeding as in Sec. 26.4, we would get 
an expression for the Einstein B coefficient identical to Eq. (40) of Chapter 26. 
In a similar manner, if we consider the emission process, we would obtain 
2 
w(n+l) 
2[Sin(Wba- W)t/2]2 
IC2 (t)1 
-::::. 
2liEoV IDabl 
(wba- w)/2 
(lOS) 
where the initial and final states I I ) and I 2) are now given by7 
I initial): 11):1 b~ nl,n2, ... n" ... ) 
) 
I final) -
12) -I a, n"n2, ... n, + I, ... ) 
(106) 
Notice the presence of the term8 (n + 1) in Eq. (105). This implies that even if 
the number of photons were zero originally, the emission probability is finite. The 
term proportional to n in Eq. (lOS) gives the probability for induced or stimulated 
6 This is justified because the energy density associated with an electromagnetic field is ~EO 85 
and the energy density is also equal to n fiw/ V. 
7 We would have 
i h dC2 ::::: H~,e-i(WI-W2)t/IiCI (t)::::: H~,e-i(Wha-Wi)t 
dt 
and integration of which would lead to Eq. (105). However, it may be mentioned that the equation 
for CI (t) would be a sum over states as discussed in Solution 27.3. 
8 The appearance of the term (n + I) is because of the relation I (n + I 1211 n) 12 
= 
1Jn"+l(n + 1 In + 1)1 2 = (n + I). 

758 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
emission since the rate at which it occurs is proportional to the intensity of the 
applied radiation. On the other hand, the second term which is independent of n 
gives the spontaneous emission rate into the mode (see also Problem 27.3). It may 
be noted that the spontaneous emission probability into a particular mode is exactly 
the same as the stimulated emission probability caused by a single photon into the 
same mode. 
We next calculate the probability per unit time for spontaneous emission of 
radiation. If we consider the emission to be in the solid angle dQ then the number of 
modes for which the photon frequency lies between wand w+dw is (see Appendix 
M) 
Vw2 dw 
N (w) dwdQ = 
3 1 
dQ 
87T ("-
(107) 
Thus, the total probability of emission in the solid angle dQ would be given by 
r= IDabl 2 f [Sin (Wba - w) t/2]2 
V 
2 
w--w dwdQ 
2nEoV 
(Wba -w)/2 
87T 3C3 
IDabl 2 
1 f [Sin (Wbll - w) t/2J2 
----dQw-
dw 
2nEo87T 3c 3 
ba 
(wba- w )/2 
(108) 
where use has been made of the fact that the quantity inside the square brackets is 
a sharply peaked function around w = Wba. Carrying out the integration, using the 
fact that 
we obtain 
+00 f 
sin2 x 
-- dx =7T 
x 2 
-00 
r ~ -
21 (a I r I b) . el 2 dQ t 
I [ 
q2 
] w3 
27T 
47TEonc 
c 
Thus the transition rate is given by 
= -
21(a I r I b) . el 2 dQ 
1 [ 
q2 
] w3 
27T 
47TEonc 
c 
(109) 
(1lO) 
In order to calculate the total probability per unit time for the spontaneous emission 
to occur (the inverse of which will give the spontaneous lifetime of the state), we 
must sum over the two independent states of polarization and integrate over the 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
759 
solid angle. Assuming the direction of k to be along the z-axis, we may choose e 
to be along the x- or y- axes. Thus, if we sum 
over the two independent states of polarization, we obtain 
I(a 1 rib)· il 2 + I(a 1 rib)· 511 2 
= p2 + p2 = p2 sin2 e 
x 
y 
where P == (a Irl b) and e is the angle that P makes with the z-axis. Thus in order 
to obtain the Einstein A coefficient (which represents the total probability per unit 
time for the spontaneous emission to occur), in Eg. (110), we replace 1 (a Irl b) . e]2 
by 1 (a Irl b) 12 sin2 e and integrate over the solid angle dQ to obtain 
which is identical to Eg. (43) of the previous chapter. 
27.5. Properties of the eigenstates of the hamiltonian of the radiation field 
If we substitute for qic (t) from Eg. (77) in Eg. (44) we would obtain 
(112) 
where 
Q 
_. 
Wic 
[ik)J 
-
-ik).r] 
A 
(Ii) 
1/2 
Uic -
I --
aice 
- aice 
eic 
2EoV 
(113) 
and all operators are in the Schrbdinger representation. We consider the state of 
the radiation field for which there are nic photons in the ')..th state. The expectation 
value of Sic in this state would be given by 
(nl,n2,···,nic,···1 Sic I n l,n2,··.,nic,···) 
= (nIl n\)(n2 1 n2)··· (nic 1 Sic 1 nic) 
=0 
(114) 

760 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
because 
Similarly 
(nl, n2, ... , nA, ... I 8'1. I nt, n2, ... , nA, ... ) 
(nl I nd(n2 I n2)'" (nA I 8]: InA)'" 
( fiUh ) ( 
I ( 
ikA·r 
-
-ikA .r) ( 
-ik).·r 
-
-ikiJ) 
-
--
n A 
aAe 
- aAe 
aAe 
- aAe 
2EoV 
(::~ ) (n A + ~) 
where use has been made of relations like (see Sec. 12.2): 
(nA I aA aA InA) 
~ 
(nA I aA I nA + 1) = nA + I 
(n A I aA aA InA) 
~ 
(nA I aA InA -
1) = nA 
(nA I aA aA InA) 
0 
(nA I Zh aA InA) 
0 
The uncertainty in 8A, ~8A' can be defined through the relation 
( 115) 
(116) 
(1l7) 
(118) 
(119) 
(120) 
(121 ) 
Equation (114) tells us that the expectation value of the electric field in the state 
In) (= I n I, n2, ... nA ••• ) is zero. Since the average of sine waves with random 
phases is zero, we may loosely say that the state In) does not specify the phase9 . 
Some authors tend to explain this by resorting to the uncertainty principle 
~E ~t > fi 
(122) 
where ~E is the uncertainty in the energy of the radiation field and ~t is related 
to the uncertainty in the phase angle through the relation 
(123) 
Since E = (n + 1/2) fiw, ~E = fiw~n and we obtain 
~n ~¢ > I 
(124) 
9 We say it loosely because it is not possible to define a phase operator which is real (see Sec. 
27.7). 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
761 
If the number of photons is exactly known, then ~n = ° 
and consequently there 
is no knowledge of the phase. However, such arguments are not rigorously cor-
rect because it is not possible to give a precise definition of ~¢ (see Sec. 27.7). 
Nevertheless, we can say that the states described by 1 n) do not correspond to the 
classical electromagnetic wave with a certain phase. 
Returning to Eq. (116), we notice that the states 1 n) have a definite amplitude 
(2IiwA/EV)I/2 (nA + 1/2)1/2 for the mode A which is directly related to the number 
of photons. 
27.6. The coherent states 
We next consider the radiation field to be in one of the coherent states which are, the 
eigenkets of the operator aA (see Sec. 12.5). We will show that when the radiation 
field is in a coherent state, the field has properties very similar to that of a classical 
electromagnetic wave with a certain phase and amplitude. However, before we do 
so, we would like to discuss some of the properties of the coherent state. 
The coherent states satisfy the equation 
(125) 
where a A, which represents the eigenvalues of aA, can be an arbitrary complex 
number. In Sec. 12.5 we had shown that 
For convenience, we drop the subscript A and write the above equation as 
an 
1 a) = exp [-N /2] ~ JnT 1 n) 
(126) 
where N (= lal 2) represents the expectation value of the number operator Nap 
(see Sec. 12.7). Since 1 H) are eigenkets of H, if the field is in the coherent state 
at t = 0, then at a later time t, the state will be given by (see Sec. 12.6) 
It is easy to see that 
1\11 (0)) = la) 

762 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Fu rther 1 0 
*fIl 
n 
(w (t) lal W (t)) = e- N L L ~ 
ei(l11-n)wt-Fn+) (m In + I) 
111 
11 
Jm!n! 
* I 1211 
'0 '0' t -N L a a 
° 
t 
e ~ e 
=a*e"V 
n! 
(128) 
Similarly, or taking the complex conjugate of the above equation 
(w (t) lal W (t)) = a e-iwt 
(129) 
We now consider the radiation field to be in the coherent state and calculate the 
expectation value of 8 and 8 2: 
(W (t) 1&1 W (t)) = i ~ (W (t) lal W (t)) eikor 
( Ii )1/2[ 
2EoV 
-
(W (t) lal W (t)) e-ikor ] e 
( Ii ) 1/2 
. 
W 
[i(k-r-wt) 
* -i(k-r-u)I)] 
A 
I --
ae 
-a e 
e 
2EoV 
- 2 ~ la I sin (k . r - w t + 1» e 
( Ii) 
1/2 
2EoV 
(130) 
where 
(131 ) 
Thus the coherent state can be interpreted to represent a harmonic wave with phase 
1>. In a similar manner, we can calculate the expectation value 8 2. The result is 
(W (t) IS . SI W (t)) = (~) [41a12 sin2 (k· r - wt + 1» + 1] 
(132) 
2EoV 
Finally, the uncertainty in S would be given by (cf. Eq. 121): 
(~S)2 = (w (t) IS21 W (t)) -
(W (t) lSI W (t))2 
= (2::V) 
(133) 
Notice that the uncertainty ~8 is independent of the amplitude la I; thus, greater 
the intensity of the beam greater will be the proximity of the radiation field (cor-
responding to the coherent state) to the classical plane wave. Indeed when a laser 
10 In the Heisenberg representation. the expectation value ofa would have been 
(\jJ (0) la (t)1 \jJ (0») = (IX laei(VI I IX) = IX*eiw1 
which is the same as expressed by Eg. (128). 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
763 
is operated much beyond the threshold, it generates a coherent state excitation of a 
cavity mode. 
27.7. The phase operator 
In classical mechanics the displacement and momentum of a linear harmonic os-
cillator are given by 
(134) 
and 
(135) 
where A has been assumed to be real. In quantum mechanics, we have [see Eqs 30 
and 31 of chapter 12]: 
( Ii) 1/2 
X= --
[a+a] 
2mw 
(136) 
( Ii) 1/2 
P = imw --
[a - a] 
2mw 
(137) 
The above four equations suggest the phase operator <p to be defined through the 
following equations 
(138) 
and 
(139) 
where Rand <p are assumed to be Hermitian operators (see, e.g. Ref 2 and 3). 
However, such a definition will lead to inconsistent results as discussed below. 
Now, the number operator is given by 
or 
N 
-
R i¢ -i¢ R 
R2 
op = aa = 
e e 
= 
R = N I / 2 
op 
where the square root of an operator is defined through the relation 
N 
-
N 1/ 2 N 1/ 2 
op -
op 
op 
Since 
[a, a] = aa - aa = 1 
so, 
(140) 

764 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
or, prcmultiplying by ei¢, we get 
(141) 
The above equation is satisfied if ¢ and No!, satisfy the commutation relation 11 
(142) 
Thus 
or, 
(m - n) (m I¢I n) = -i8mlJ 
(143) 
which is certainly an impossibility! Thus the definition of a Hermitian ¢ through 
Eq. (138) leads to inconsistent results. 
27.8. Problems 
Problem 27.1 Consider the matrix element (s le-ik.re-. pi n) [see Eq. (13)]. Since 
in many cases of interest kR « I (where R represents the dimension of the 
system), we may write 
-ik·r l'k 
(k . r)2 + 
e 
= 
-1 ·r-
... 
2! 
(144) 
It can be shown that the term (k· r)n gives the electric 2n+1 pole and the magnetic 
2n pole transitions. Verify this statement for the case n = I. 
Problem 27.2 Obtain the selection rules for allowed transitions of a linear har-
monic oscillator. Calculate the lifetime of an oscillator in the first excited state. 
Problem 27.3 Show that the frequency distribution of the emitted radiation from 
an isolated atom is given by the natural line shape function 
K dw 
j . (w) dw - -------:---
-
(wo - w)2 + A2j4 
II This follows from the repeated application of Eg. (142) which gives 
Nopcpm -cp/llNop = -imcpm-I 
Now 
(145) 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
765 
where A represents the Einstein coefficient. 
Problem 27.4 Prove that the average number of photons in a coherent state is lal 2, 
i.e. 
(146) 
Problem 27.5 Show that the probability of finding n photons in a coherent state is 
a Poisson distribution 12 about the mean la 12: 
Nne- N 
I(n I a)1 2 =--
n! 
where N (= la 12) is defined in the previous problem. 
(147) 
Problem 27.6 Prove that the uncertainty in the number of photons in a coherent 
state is ,IN, i.e. 
(148) 
Thus the fractional uncertainty in the average number of photons !1N / N 
(= 1/,JN) goes to zero with increase in intensity. It may be worthwhile pointing 
out that even in nuclear counting, the uncertainty in the actual count is N 1/ 2 (see, 
e.g. Ref. 5). 
Problem 27.7 Show that fori 1/1 (t)) given by Eg. (127) 
(independent of time) 
Problem 27.8 Obtain an expression for the photodisintegration of the deuteron in 
the electric dipole approximation. Assume that the wave function of the deuteron 
may be approximated by 
[f e- Kr 
1/1= ---
2][ 
r 
(149) 
where IiK = (2/-L B) 1/2, /-L = ~M is the reduced mass of the system, B = 2.2 MeV 
is the binding energy. Neglect the interaction between neutron and proton in the 
final state [Hint: Use the Golden rule]. 
Problem 27.9 
12 The photon counting experiment is of considerable importance in detennining statistical prop-
erties of the light source. In a typical experiment, the light beam is allowed to fall on a phototube 
for a specific time interval T by having a shutter open in front of the detector for time T and one 
registers the number of photoelectrons so liberated. Then the shutter is again opened for an equal 
time interval T after a certain time delay and the experiment is repeated a large number of times. 
From the experiment one obtains the probability distribution of counting n photons in time T. From 
this one can derive the statistical properties of the sources (see, e.g. Ref. 4). 

766 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(a) Derive the Thomas-Reiche-Kuhn sum rule 
(b) Using the above sum rule show that for dipole transitions 
f () dE = 2rr 2a n2/ m 
( ISO) 
(151) 
Problem 27.10 If the quantum energy nw of light falling on an atom is greater 
than the ionization energy, I, of the atom the electron is raised into a state of the 
continuous spectrum. In this case light of all frequencies can be absorbed, and 
the absorption spectrum is continuous. The kinetic energy T of the electron after 
leaving the atom is determined by Einstein's equation 
T = nw - I 
(152) 
Show that for the incident radiation polarized with its electric vector along e, 
the photoelectric absorption cross-section of an atom, for the ejection of an electron 
from the K -shell, is given by 
where k is the wave vector of the ejected electron, q is the momentum transferred 
to the atom in units of n: 
W 
A 
q = k - - n 
(154) 
c 
Ii is the unit vector along the direction of propagation. Assume nw » I. [Use the 
Golden rule]. 
27.9. Solutions 
Solution 27.1 The relevant term in the matrix element is 
M = (5 IUk. r) (e. p)1 n) 
(155) 
Let us assume that the photon moves along the x-direction, and the polarization e 
is along the z-direction. Thus 
M = (s likxPzl n) = ik (5 IXPzl n) 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
767 
We write xpz as 
1 
I 
xpz = 2: [xpz + zPx] + 2: [xpz - zPx] 
Now, according to Eq. (17) 
Thus 
m 
XPz = fir [xzH" - x H"zl 
Similarly 
So that 
(156) 
and 
I 
I 
- (xp" - zp ) = -- L 
2 
' 
x 
2 
y 
(157) 
where Ly is the y-component of the angular momentum. Thus 
M = -ik(S 127n (Haxz -xzH,,) + lLyln) 
m 
I 
- 2n (Es -
En) (S Ixzl n) - 2:ik (s ILyl n) 
(158) 
The first term is the electric quardrupole term while the second is the magnetic 
dipole term (the magnetic moment is related to the angular momentum). 
Solution 27.2 The relevant matrix element for allowed transition is 
M = (m Ixl n) 
The only non-vanishing matrix elements correspond to 
m =n ± 1 
(see Problem 12.3) and the values are given by 
(n + llxl n) = J n ~ I 
2mw 
(n - llxl n) = J n In 
2mw 
(159) 

768 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Thus the selection rule is b.n = ± 1. The transition rate is given by (see Eq. (109)) 
wsp = -21 [4 q2 11 ] 
~ 2 1(0 IPxll)12 dQ 
If 
lfEO 
C 
m c 
Now 
I(OIPxll)l = _iJm~w 
(see Problem 12.3). Thus the integrated rate over the whole solid angle is 
al1w2 
r 
which gives the mean life r; here a (=:: Ij7) is the fine structure constant. 
(160) 
(161) 
(162) 
Solution 27.3 A spontaneous transition from a state b to a lower energy state a 
does not give radiation at a single frequency Whu. A finite lifetime r of the excited 
state gives it an energy width of the order 11/ r so that the emitted radiation has a 
frequency distribution. This argument may be made more precise by considering 
the simple case of an atom with only 2 states a and b (Eb > Eu) undergoing spon-
taneous transition from b to a. We will calculate here the frequency distribution 
of the emitted radiation from such a spontaneous transition; the analysis is based 
on the treatment given in Chapter 18 of Ref. 3 and is known as Weisskopf-Wigner 
theory of the natural line width. 
It is assumed that at t = 0, the atom is in the excited state b and the radiation 
field has no photons. We denote this state by 
11) =1 b;O,O,O, ... ) 
[see Eq. (93)]. The atom makes a transition to the state a emitting a photon of 
frequency W A in the mode characterized by A [see Eq. (71)]. We denote this state 
by 
I aA) =1 a; 0,0, ... , lA, 0, ... ) 
If we denote the corresponding probability amplitudes by 
then 
and 
C 1 (0) = 
01 } 
CUA (0) = 
Further [see Eqs (89)-(92)] 
dC l 
i 11- = "(lIH'1 aA) ei(WI-WaiJt/h CUA (t) 
dt 
L 
L (llH'1 aA) ei«VO-(v).)t CaA (t) 
A 
(163) 
(164) 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
and 
where 
and 
i 11 dCaA = (aA I H'll) e-i(Wo-W)JI C] (t) 
dt 
WI - WaA = Eb - (Ea + l1uh) = 11 (Wo -
WA) 
We try to solve Eqs.(164) and (165) by assuming l3 
CI (t) = e-Y 1/2 
769 
(165) 
(166) 
(167) 
(168) 
which satisfies the condition C I (0) = 1. It may noted that since I C 1 (t) 12 represents 
the probability of finding the atom in the upper state, the quantity 1/ y represents 
the mean lifetime of the state. If we substitute for C 1 (t) in Eq. (165) and carry out 
the integration we get 
(aA IH'll) e-[i(wo-wA)+y/2]I_l 
C aA (t) = -'----'----'---'- --------
11 
(wo -
w A) - iy /2 
We substitute Eqs (168) and (169) in (164) to obtain 
-i 11~ = L I(H'W 1- exp [i (wo -
w A) t + y t/2J 
2 
A 
11 
(wo-wA)-iy/2 
(169) 
(170) 
where (H') == (aA IH'll). The summation on the right-hand side of the above 
equation is over a number of states A with very nearly the same frequency. Under 
these circumstances, the summation can be replaced by an integral 
L ~ lIN (w) dwdQ 
A 
(171) 
where N (w) represents the density of states [see Eq. (107)]. Equation (170) then 
becomes 
where 
y = ~ [* II I(H'W N (w) J (w) dWdQ] 
I-exp[i(wo-w) t+yt/2J 
J(w)=----~------------~ 
(wo - w) - iy /2 
(172) 
(173) 
13 It should be mentioned that the present treatment is consistent with the treatment given in Sec. 
27.4. Indeed in Sec. 27.4 we have shown that A (as given by Eg. (111» represents the probability 
for unit time for the spontaneous emission to occur from which the decay given by Eg. (108) follows 
with y = A; this is explicitly shown later [see Egs (J 78) and (179)]. 

770 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
We will assume that y « Wo; i.e. the inverse of the lifetime (s 109 S-I) is much 
smaller than the characteristic frequencies (~ 1015 S-I), this will indeed follow 
from the final result. Under this assumption y can be neglected in Eq. (173) to 
obtain 
1 -
ei(wo-w)t 
J::: 
Wo -w 
I - cos [(wo -
w) t] 
. sin [(wo -
w) tJ 
-1------
(wo-w) 
(wo-w) 
(174) 
The first term has very rapid variation around w ::: Wo and gives negligible con-
tribution to any integral over w except around w ::: Wo where the function itself 
vanishes. Thus this term will lead to a small imaginary value of y. We are in any 
case interested in the real part of y (which would give the lifetime, etc.) which will 
be given by 
y C" ~ [k J l(ll')I' N (wol 
+00 
] 
! sin (wo -
w) t 
dQ 
dw 
(wo - w) 
-00 
(175) 
We have made two approximations here. First, we have pulled out factors which 
are essentially constant in the neighborhood of w ::: woo Secondly, the limits of 
the integral have been taken from -00 to +00 since in any case the contribution 
vanishes except around Wo . Thus 
Now 
y::: 2; [~ f [(H'W N (wo) dQ ] 
2rr I VW6 f [( ,)[2 
----
H 
dQ 
Ii Ii 8rr3c3 
(H') = (aA I H' I I) 
a; 0,0, ... 1A,0···1 - L 
( 
q 
( 
Ii 
) 1/2 
m 
A 
2Eo VW A 
x [aAeik)J + (lAe-ik).r] eA' plb, 0, 0, ... OA"') 
iq ( liUh ) 1/2 (a I rib) . eA 
2EoV 
(176) 
(177) 
where in the last step we have used the dipole approximation (see the discussion 
after Eq. (97)). On substitution in Eq. (176), we get 
(178) 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
771 
(cf. Eq. (110». On carrying out the integration and summing over the two states of 
polarization we get [see Eq. (111)], 
y=A 
(179) 
i.e. y is simply the Einstein A coefficient corresponding to spontaneous emissions 
as it indeed should be! 
Now the probability of a photon being emitted in the mode A is given by [see 
Eq. (169)]: 
2 
!(H'W 
1 
leaA (t = (0)1 = ~ 
( 
)2 
2/4 
rt 
Wo - wA + y 
(180) 
If we multiply the above equation by N (w) dwdQ which gives the number of 
modes in the frequency interval w to w + dw and in the solid angle dQ and carry 
out the integration over dQ and sum over the two states of polarization, we would 
get 
y 
dw 
g (w) dw = - ---.,----
2][ (wo - w)2 + y2/4 
(181 ) 
where we have used Eq. (178). The above equation indeed gives us the probability 
that the spontaneously emitted photon has its frequency between wand w + dw, 
which is nothing but the Lorenzian line shape. Notice that the above expression is 
normalized which implies that the probability that the atom makes a spontaneous 
transition from the upper state to the lower state is unity (as t --+ (0) as it indeed 
should be. 
Solution 27.6 
Similarly 
(because Nop In) = n In) ; see Sec. 12.7) 
-1",1" L lal 2n n 
e 
--
n! 
n 
N n - 1 
Ne- N L 
= N 
(182) 
(n -
I)! 
n=1 
(183) 
from which Eq. (148) follows. 

772 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Solution 27.8 The differential cross-section da is given by (see Sec. 25.3) 
en da = w dQ 
(184) 
where w dQ represents the probability (per unit time) of scattering into the solid 
angle dQ and n is the number of photons per unit volume corresponding to one 
photon in a box of volume, V i.e. 
n =-
V 
(185) 
Further, w dQ is given by the goldenrule (see Eg. (38) of Chapter 25): 
2n 
2 
w dQ = h N (E) dQ IV IH'I i)1 
(186) 
where N (E) represents the density of states and for the neutron-proton system in 
a final state of relative momentum p, it is given by (see Appendix M). 
N (E) dQ = 
fL V 3 P dQ 
(2n Ii)o 
(187) 
This N (E) dQ represents the number of states (per unit energy interval) such that 
the direction of p lies within a solid angle dQ and fL = M /2 is the reduced mass 
of the n -
p system. The kets Ii) and If) represent the initial and final states and 
since the initial state contains one photon and the final state none, we have [cf. Eg. 
(97)] 
V IH'I i) ~ !i 
e· (a Ipl b) 
(
Ii 
)1/2 
m 
2EoVw 
(188) 
where M is the proton mass. Thus 
Va 
IA 
12 
da = 
2 
P e· (a Ipl b) 
dQ 
4n Ii wM 
( 189) 
where 
a=---
4nEo lie 
137 
is the fine structure constant and we have used the fact that fL = M /2. Integration 
over all directions gives a factor 4n /3 thus 
The two states are given by 
1 
pV 
a = -a-2-I(a Ipl b)1 2 
3 Ii wM 
Ib) = __ 
e_ 
[f 
-Kr 
2n 
r 
(190) 
(191 ) 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
773 
la) = _1_ eip.r/n 
~ 
(192) 
The final state corresponds to a free neutron-proton system. We must remember 
that in Eq. (190), p is the operator -i IiV. The integration, however, poses no 
problem because 14 
I (a Ipl b) 12 = I (b Ipl a) 12 
p21(bla)1 
p2__ 
_e_e;p·r/nr2 dr sine ded¢; 
K If -Kr 
12 
2nV 
r 
00 n 
2 
Kp2 (2n)2 f f e-Kr eiprcos(}/nr dr sine de 
2nV 
o 0 
where we have chosen the polar axis along p . Carrying out the integrations, we get 
(193) 
If B is the binding energy of the deuteron, then 
(194) 
(This relation is slightly incorrect since the incident quantum carries a momentum 
liwj c which will give the center of mass some energy as well). Also it can be 
shown that the binding energy is related to the parameter K though the equation 
IiK = (M B) 1/2. We have finally 
8n 
1i2 BI/2 (liw _ B)3/2 
(J' :::::: -ex - -----,-----
3 
M 
(liw)3 
(195) 
The above equation gives the cross-section for photodisintegration of deuteron cor-
responding to the electric dipole moment interaction and is in good agreement with 
the experimental data at high y-ray energies (see e.g. Ref. 6 for a good discussion 
on comparison with experimental data). 
14 Notice that the final state is an eigenstate of p, i.e. 
( ip.r) 
(iP.r) 
pexp -h-
=-ihVexp -h-
=pexp[ip.r/h] 
where on the right-hand side. p is simply a number. 

774 
Solution 27.9 
We could also write 
Thus 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
L (n IxHa -
Haxl s) (s Ixl n) 
(see Eqs. 15 and 16) 
·n 
_I L (n IPxl s) (s Ixl n) 
(using Eq. 17) 
m 
in 
-
(n IPxxl n) 
(196) 
m 
(because Lis) (sl = 1) 
in 
-- (n IXPxl n) 
m 
in 
- 2m (n Ixpx - Pxxl n) 
n2j2m 
(197) 
This can be generalized to more than one electron in which case we get 
') 
h2 
L L (E, -
En) I(s IXil n)l~ = -2 Z 
. 
m 
(198) 
s 
where Z is the atomic number. Equation (198) is referred as the dipole sum rule or 
sometime also as the Thomas-Reiche-Kuhn sum role. The factors 
2m 
2 
J;2 (Es -
En) I(s Ixl n)1 = 1m 
(199) 
are called oscillator strengths. The reason for this terminology is that classically, 
j~n gives the number of electrons moving with oscillator frequency wsn . The quan-
tum mechanical result (199) shows that they need not be integers. 
(b) We start with the formula for the cross-section in the dipole approximation 
[see Eq. (184)-(186)]: 
dO" = 2lT N (E) !( ·!H'! i)!2 
dQ 
n cjV 
j 
(200) 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
775 
or, 
dO' 
2 
IA 
12 
dQ = 4rr a (Es -
En) e· (s Irl n) 
N (E) 
(201) 
If we integrate this over dE, the right-hand side of Eq. (201) may be regarded as 
sum over final states to give 
f a dE = 4rr 2a L (E,. -
En) I(s Ie. rl nW 
s 
(202) 
We consider a beam of photons with a fixed linear polarization, say e along the 
x-direction. We then have 
f a dE = 4rr 2a L (Es -
En) I(s Ixl n)1 2 
s 
(203) 
m 
Solution 27.10 For the electron initially in the K shell (ejection from which is 
comparatively probable), the initial wave function is given by 
(204) 
where 
a = ao = ti 2 ( 4rrEo) ~ 
Z 
m 
q2 
Z 
(205) 
For the evaluation of the matrix element the assumption will be made that tiw is 
much larger than the ionization potential of the atom so that to a good approxima-
tion, the final state can be represented by 
1 
·k 
1jf = __ e1 l·r 
Ift 
(206) 
where k1 represents the electron wave vector; we have put a subscript to k so that 
there is no confusion with the wave vector associated with the electromagnetic 
wave [see Eq. (208)]. Now the perturbing potential may be taken as [see Eq. (7)] 
where 
or 
H,=!iA.p 
m 
A = e Aoei(kr-wt) + cc 
A = 2e I Ao I cos (k . r - wt + <p) 
(207) 
(208) 
(209) 

776 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
In Eq. (208) "cc" denotes the complex conjugate of the first term so that A is 
necessarily real. Now, according to first-order perturbation theory, the amplitude 
of the final state at time t is given by [see Eq. (14) of Chapter 25] 
(210) 
where 
iqAo~ f * ik-r 
MI = ---;;;-e. 
l/ffe 
Pl/fi dr 
and 
. A* f 
M -
lq 
0 ~ 
,/,* 
-ik·r 
,f, d 
I -
- --e· 
'P t e 
P 'P i 
r 
m 
. 
As discussed in Sec. 25.3, the first term on the RHS of Eq. (210) contributes in an 
absorption process and the second term contributes in an emission process. Since 
we are interested in an absorption of a photon, we have [cf. Eq. (16) of Chapter 25] 
Following a procedure similar to that discussed in Sec. 24.2, we get the following 
expression for the transition probability to solid angle dQ: 
where 
2;r 
2 
W dQ = h IMII N(E) dQ 
N (E) dQ = mkl V2 dQ 
8;r3 Ii 
represents the density of final states (see Appendix M). Thus 
2;r 
mkl V 
2 
WdQ=-·--·IM11 dQ 
Ii 
8;r3 li 2 
Now, the electric field associated with the electromagnetic wave is given by 
aA 
~ . 
8 = - -
= - 2w I Ao I e sm (k . r - wt + cjJ) 
at 
The time averaged energy density is given by (see Eq. 46) 
2 
2] 
604w IAol .-2 
(212) 
(213) 
(214) 

Quantum Theory of Radiation 
777 
Thus 
Incident Intensity = 2Eouic IAol2 
and 
Incident Intensity 
2Eowc 
2 
Incident Flux = 
= -- IAol 
(215) 
liw 
Ii 
Hence 
or 
Now 
But 
Thus 
da 
dQ 
WdQ 
da=-----
Incident Flux 
M -
A 
A 
-/ ,·r /·r 
,1, d 
iq 
1 f 
·k 
·k 
1--- o--e· 
e 
e 
P'P· r 
m 
VI~ 
/ 
-i Ii f 
<jJ a 1/1 dr = iii f 1/1 a<jJ dr 
ax 
ax 
-f 1/1 px</J dr 
f <jJp1/I dr = - f 1/Ip<jJ dr = iii f 1/IV<jJ dr 
(216) 
(217) 
This also follows from the Hermitian property of p (see Problem 8.14). Using 
Eg. (217) we get 
~A _I_A. f ,1r·V i(k,-k)·r d 
m 
0 V 1/2 e 
'P / e 
r 
_ iq IiAo (e. kI) _1_ f [_1_] 1/2 
m 
VI/2 
Jia 3 
x exp [-iK. r-~J dr 
(218) 
where we have used the transverse character of light waves (i.e. e . k = 0) and 
(219) 
is the momentum transfer in units of Ii. In carrying out the integration, we choose 
the polar axis along K to obtain an expression for IMI12 which on substitution in 
Eg. (216) gives 
5 [ 
2 
]-4 
da 
lik j 
A 
2 
Z -
Z 
2 
-
= 32a -
(e. k j ) (-) (-) + K 
dQ 
mw 
ao 
ao 
(220) 

778 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where ()( is the fine structure constant. The above expression is in agreement with 
the experimental data. For a more thorough treatment of the photoelectric effect, 
see Ref. 3 p. 21. 
27.10. References and suggested reading 
1. H. Goldstein, Classical Mechanics, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Read-
ing, Massachusetts (1950). 
2. P.A.M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford (1958). 
3. W. Heitler, The Quantum Theory of Radiation, Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford (1954). 
4. F.T. Arecchi, Quantum Optics and Photon Statistics, in Lasers and Their 
Applications, (A. Sana, ed.), p. 497, Gordon and Breach, New York (1976). 
5. E. Bleuler and G.1. Goldsmith, Experimental Nucleonics, Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, New York (1952). 
6. H.A. Bethe and P. Morrison, Elementary Nuclear Theory, John Wiley, New 
York (1956). 

Chapter 28 
Relativistic Theory 
The new theories, if one looks apart from their mathematical setting, are built up 
from physical concepts which cannot be explained in terms of things previously 
known to the student, which cannot even be explained adequately in words at all. 
-
P. A. M. DIRAC in the Preface to the first edition of The 
Principles of Quantum Mechanics 
28.1. Introduction 
The quantum theory developed so far is non-relativistic. That it is not invariant 
under Lorentz transformations is obvious if one notes that the time dependent 
Schrodinger equation contains the first derivative in time and second derivatives 
in space coordinates. A simple procedure for building a relativistic theory is to 
follow an approach analogous to the one followed for the non-relativistic theory 
which is to start with the Hamiltonian formulation, with a relativistically correct 
Hamiltonian, and to replace the classical observables by operators. This is essen-
tially the procedure we adopt in this chapter. From the point of view of specific 
predictions, the non-relativistic theory fails in some major features. It fails to ex-
plain the spin of an elementary system, such as the electron, and the consequences 
thereof. Moreover, the theory cannot give a satisfactory account of high energy 
phenomena such as pair production, bremmstrahlung, etc. 
28.2. The Klein-Gordon equation 
We start with the relativistic Hamiltonian for a free particle 
H = Jc2p2 + m2c4 
where p is the momentum, m the rest mass. Introducing the operators 
a 
E ---* ili-
and 
p ---* -iliV 
at 
779 
(1) 
A. Ghatak et al., Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications
© Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 2004

780 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
and writing H 1/1 = £1/1 we obtain 
an equation beyond which theory can proceed only if we have a consistent scheme 
for interpreting the square root of the above operator. This can be done but leads to 
difficulties. (see, e.g., Ref. I). We avoid them by squaring Eq. (1) and replacing by 
the operators to obtain 
a21/1 
(_e2h2V 2 + m2e4)1/I = _17 2 __ 
at 2 
Dividing by e2h2 and rearranging the terms, we obtain the Klein-Gordon equation 
( 
2 
1 a2 
m2e2 ) 
V -
e2 at2 - 7 
1/1 = 0 
(2) 
The Klein-Gordon equation, it turns out, is the correct one for spinless particles and 
not for electrons. Although this equation is an important one for further develop-
ments of relativistic field theories, we shall not discuss it further here. The reason 
is that the equation is valid for certain classes of particles such as the IT - and K-
mesons which are strongly interacting. The approximation methods of elementary 
quantum mechanics, such as the perturbation theory, are usually inadequate for 
these anyway. 
28.3. The Dirac equation 
In this section we will discuss the Dirac equation and in subsequent sections of this 
chapter we will give some simple consequences of the Dirac equation; for more 
thorough treatments we refer the reader to References 1-8. The original argument 
of Dirac, in search of a relativistic equation was that it must be a first-order differ-
ential equation in time because knowledge of the wave-function alone at an initial 
time to should suffice to predict its value at a later time. Since in relativity, time 
and space coordinates are treated symmetrically, the equation (he argued) must be 
a first-order differential equation in space coordinates as well. Dirac started with a 
Hamiltonian of the form 
(3) 
where the coefficients Ci], Ci2, Ci3 and f3 are not mere numbers but (square) matrices. 
For brevity, we shall often write Eq.(3) as 
H = elY. • p + f3me2 

Relativistic Theory 
781 
It must be clear that Ol is not to be thought of as a vector; Ol • P is defined to be equal 
to alPx + a2Py + a3Pz. The wave equation corresponding to this Hamiltonian is 
(4) 
Since Ol and {3 are allowed to be matrices of numbers, it follows that the wave-
function 1fr must have more than one component; i.e., at each point the state of the 
particle will be described by more than one wavefunction. It follows that Eq.(4) will 
be capable of describing a particle with additional intrinsic degrees of freedom. The 
Hamiltonian given by Eq. (3) must still satisfy the energy-momentum relation 
We introduce the notation 
PI = Px, 
P2 = PY' 
P3 = Pz, 
P4 = iE/c 
XI = X, 
X2 = y, 
X3 = Z, 
and 
X4 = +ict. 
Thus Eq.(3) becomes 
and 
3 
H = c L:ajpj + {3mc2 
j=1 
H2 
e2 {~~(ajak +akaj)pjP'+ ta]P] 
+ me' t.(ajfi + fiaj)Pi + m'c4fi'} 
Equations (5) and (6) are consistent if 
and 
aj{3 + {3aj = 0 
a] = 1 
(5) 
(6) 
(7) 
(8) 
(9) 
(10) 
Since Eqs.(7)-( 1 0) are to be matrix relations, the symbols 0 and 1 on the right ought 
to be regarded as the null matrix and the unit matrix respectively. 

782 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
We first show that these matrices must be of even dimension. We have for 
example, 
a,f3 = -f3a, 
Multiplying by a, on the left, setting aT = 1 and taking the trace, we obtain 
Tracef3 = -Trace(a,f3a,) = -Trace(aTf3) = -Tracef3 
where we have used the result Trace(ABC) = Trace(CAB). We therefore have 
Trace f3 = 0, a result which applies to each of the a matrices as well. Equations 
(9) and (10) also tell us that the eigenvalues of the matrices must be ± I. Since the 
trace is just the sum of all eigenvalues, it follows that the + I and -I eigenvalues 
must occur the same number of times. Hence each of the matrices must be of even 
dimension N. Now N cannot be 2, since we can only have three 2 x 2 independent 
non-commuting matrices. We shall see that 4 x 4 matrices satisfy all the conditions. 
We may mention here that the Pauli spin matrices are given by (see Sec. 13.4) 
ax=(~ b) 
(II) 
(0 -i) 
cr.,. = 
i 0 
(12) 
and 
ax = (b ~1 ) 
(13) 
We can readily see that 
a; = a~ = a; = I 
(14) 
where the RHS represents the unit matrix. Further, the spin matrices satisfy the 
anticommutative relation [cf. Eqs. (8) and (9)] 
axa y + a ya x. = 0 l 
ava c + aza v = 0 
a za x + a xa z = 0 
(15) 
Comparing Eqs. (14) and (15) with Eqs. (7)-(10), we may choose the following 
representation for the a and f3 matrices: 
( ~ ~ ~ b) 
o I 0 0 
1 000 
( 
~ 
~ 0 ~i) 
o -l 0 0 
-i 0 0 0 
(16) 
(17) 

Relativistic Theory 
783 
( 
~ ~ ~ ~1) 
1 0 0 0 
o -I 0 0 
(18) 
( 0 u z ) 
a3 = 
U z 0 
= 
and 
fJ=(1 0)= 
o -1 
( ~ ~ ~I ~) 
o 0 0 -I 
(19) 
Obviously, each element of the 2 x 2 matrices shown above is itself a 2 x 2 matrix. 
One can immediately see that the above matrices satisfy Eqs.(7)-(1 0). For example, 
where the RHS is indeed a 4 x 4 null matrix. Equations (16)-( 18) can be written as 
(20) 
We note that all these matrices are Hermitian, i.e., 
Now, Eq. (4) can be written as 
a'tjr. 
me 
-- = -la . 'V'tjr + fJ-'tjr 
aX4 
h 
Multiplying by fJ on the left side, we have 
. 
a'tjr 
me 
-lfJa . 'V'tjr + fJ- + -'tjr = 0 
aX4 
h 
We define the following four y matrices. 
and 
Y4 = fJ 
Note that these y matrices are also Hermitian, i.e., y ~ = y w The Dirac equation 
now takes the form 
(21) 

784 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where K = mejn. It is usual to drop the summation over the repeated index JL and 
write simply 
[llfr 
Y,l- + K1/I = 0 
aXJ-L 
(A convention we shall adopt is to use Greek indices A, JL, v, etc., when their values 
range I to 4 and Roman ones i, j, k, etc for values ranging from I to 3). In terms 
of the momentum operator, we can write 
(y J-LPJ-L - ime)1/I = 0 
(22) 
Equations (21) and (22) are the covariant forms of Dirac equation; they do not 
appear to single out the space and time parts. However, writing them in those 
forms does not automatically guarantee that the equation is covariant under Lorentz 
transformations. 
We may mention here that the above equations are meaningful only if we inter-
pret 1/1 as a 4-row, I-column matrix (i.e., a spin or with 4 components). Equation 
(22) is a shorthand for the four equations (A = I, 2, 3, 4) 
4 
4 
L L{(Y J-Lha PJ-L - imcoJca}1/I a = 0 
(23) 
J-L=I 17=1 
where (y liha is the Ao-th component of the matrix All and 0 Aa is the Ao-th compo-
nent of the unit matrix. The summation over JL runs over 4-terms because these are 
4 space-time components. On the other hand, A and 0- takes values I to 4 because 
the Dirac matrices happen to be 4-dimensional. Thus, if one is not alert, there can 
be some confusion in the algebraic work. It is never really necessary to write the 
equation in this elaborate form, but if ever in doubt, the reader is advised to write 
it out in full. 
28.4. Probability and current density 
We introduce the Hermitian conjugate (adjoint) matrix 1/11 = (1/Ir1/l;1/I;1/I:) which 
is a I-row 4-column matrix. Multiplying Eq. (4) on the left by 1/1 t, we have 
(24) 
Similarly, starting with the adjoint of Eq. (4), 
-in(a1/lT jat) = incV1/I-i . ex + mc21/1t f3 
(25) 
(recall that a, f3 are Hermitian) and after mUltiplying by 1/1, we obtain 
(26) 

Relativistic Theory 
Subtracting (26) from (24), we can obtain the following: 
The above equation can be written in the form of the continuity equation 
(Jp 
• 
-+v'J=o 
at 
provided we make the identification 
4 
P = 1jJt1jJ = L1jJ~1jJA 
A=1 
and 
4 
j = c1jJtot1jJ = c L 
1jJ~(aha1jJa 
A.a=1 
28.5. An identity 
In this section we will prove the identity 
(u . A)(u . B) = A . B + iu . (A x B) 
785 
(27) 
(28) 
(29) 
(30) 
(31) 
which will be extensively used in this chapter. In the above equation a x, a y and 
a z represent the Pauli spin matrices and components of A and B are assumed to 
commute with components of u; however, components of A need not commute 
with components of B. Now 
(u . A)(u . B) 
(a xAx + a yAy + a zAz)(a xBx + a yBy + a zBz) 
(AxBx + AyBy + AzBz) + ia xCAyBz - AzBy) + ... + ... 
where we have used the relations 
and 
Thus 
(u . A)(u . B) 
a xa y = -a ya x = ia z etc. 
A· B + i[axCA x B)x +ay(A x B)y + ... J 
A . B + iu . (A x B) 

786 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
proving the identity. 
28.6. Plane wave solutions 
We start with the free particle Dirac equation: 
(m . p + {3me2) 1/1 (r, t) = E(r, t)1/I(r, t) 
(32) 
where we have explicitly indicated that p and E are the operators. We try plane 
wave solutions 
1/I(r, t) = X exp [~(p. r - Et)] 
(33) 
where p and E are now numbers, not operators and the X are spinors. Clearly 
Eq.(32) is satisfied if X obeys the equation 
(34) 
Again in Eq. (34), p and E are now numbers. Since ex and {3 can be conveniently 
expressed in terms of 2 x 2 matrices, we start by writing 
where u, v are themselves 2-component spinors. Using Eqs. (19) and (20), we 
obtain 
(e ( u ~ p u ~ p ) + (~ ~1) me2) ( ~ ) = E ( ~ ) 
(35) 
We can recover the four equations, if we want, by writing 
after solving for u and v. Equation (35) gives 
eu . pv = (E - mc2)u 
eu . pu = (E - m(2)v 
(36) 
(37) 
We can decouple u, v by solving (say) for v from (37) and substituting in (36). This 
gives us 
eu· p 
V= 
u 
E+me2 
(38) 
and 
e2(u . p)(u . p) 
2 
--E-+-m-e-2-u = (E - me )u 

Relativistic Theory 
787 
Since 
(1 . P(1 . P = p2 
(a number) 
[see Eg. (31)], we have 
e2 p2u = (E2 - m2e4)u 
(39) 
Apart from the trivial solution u = 0 (and hence v = 0) we have the result 
E = ±Je2p2 + m2e4 = E± 
(40) 
We note that for small momenta [see Egs. (36) and (37)] 
cp 
V 
Ivl '" 2me21ul '" 2e lui 
(for E = E+) 
and 
V 
lui'" -Ivl (for E = E_) 
2c 
where V is the velocity of the particle. Thus, for positive energies, u are large 
components and for negative energies, v are large components. For E = E+, we 
express v in terms of u 
e(1 . P 
v= 
u 
E+ + me2 
(41) 
Similarly for E = E_, we express u in terms of v 
e(1 . P 
u= 
v 
E_ - me2 
(42) 
We can obtain 4 linearly independent solutions from Egs. (41) and (42) as follows. 
Writing 
u = ( ~) or 
u = ( ~ ) 
and substituting in (41), in tum, we obtain two solutions. For example, u = ( ~ ) 
gives 
v 
(~~) = (E+: me2 ) (px ~\py Px_~:py) ( ~ ) 
(E+: me2 ) (px ~\py ) 
This solution is therefore, 
(43) 

788 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
The other solution for E = E+ can be constructed in the same way. 
+-N( 
~ 
) 
X t -
ep_/(E+ + me2 ) 
-epz/(E+ + m(2) 
(44) 
Similarly, for E = E_, we choose v = ( 6 ), ( ~ ) in tum and substitute in (42) 
to obtain 
( 
c~_/(E_ - mc21 ) 
- _ N 
-cpzl(E- - me ) 
Xt -
0 
' 
I 
In these equations we have used the symbols 
P± = Px ± ipy 
and the normalization N is chosen to satisfy 
for each of the solutions. It is easily shown that 
N= 1+ 
e p 
[ 
2 2 
] 1/2 
(lEI + me2)2 
and the different solutions (34) are orthogonal, 
X!Xb = 0 
The complete plane wave solutions take the form 
1jf p(J(r, t) = XP(J exp [~(p, r - Et)] 
(45) 
(46) 
(47) 
The suffix p is to tell us that we are dealing with plane waves of momentum p and 
the suffix (J. 
28.7. The electron in an electromagnetic field 
We modify the Dirac equation simply by replacing the operators 
pbyp - QA 

Relativistic Theory 
789 
and 
E by E - Q¢ 
where A and ¢ are the vector and scalar potentials (see Sections 20.2 and 20.3). 
The solutions will no longer be of the plane wave form. However, we still write 
1/f(r t) = (u(r,t») 
, 
vCr, t) 
and remember that the spinors u and v now incorporate the space-time dependence. 
Thus the Dirac equation can be written in the form 
(ca· (p - QA) + j3mc2)1/f(r, t) = (E -
Q¢)1/f(r, t) 
(48) 
Using Eqs. (19) and (20), the above equation can be written in the form 
c ( 
0 
0'. Jr ) 
( U ) = ( E - Q¢ - mc2 
0 
) ( u ) 
0' . Jr 
0 
V 
0 
E - Q¢ + mc2 
v 
where 
Jr == P - QA 
(49) 
Thus 
CO' . JrV = (E - Q¢ - mc2)u 
(50) 
and 
cO' . JrU = (E - Q¢ + mc2)v 
(51) 
We are interested in positive energy solutions and write 
E = mc2 + E' 
(52) 
where E' is the energy that appears in the (non-relativistic) Schrodinger equation. 
For small values of E' and Q¢ (<< mc2), we may write 
Thus Eq. (51) would give 
v ~ --0' ·JrU 
2mc 
Substituting in Eq. (50) we obtain for the large component 
1 
, 
-(0' . Jr)(O' . Jr)u = (E -
Q¢)u 
2m 
If we now use the identity given by Eq. (31), we would get 
(0' . Jr)(O' . Jr) = Jr . Jr + iO' . (Jr x Jr) 
(53) 
(54) 
(55) 
(56) 

790 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Now 
(n x n) 
(p -
QA) x (p - QA) 
- Q (p x A + A x p) 
where we have used the fact that the components Px, Py and pz commute with each 
other; however, since p is an operator, p x A =1= -Ax p. Indeed 
. [dA z 
dAy] 
-Iii -
- -
1fr 
dy 
dZ 
-ili(V x AL1fr 
-iIiBx 1fr 
Thus 
n x n = iliQB 
(57) 
Substituting in Eq. (56) we get 
(cr . n)(cr . n) = (p - QA)2 - Qlicr . B 
Equation (55) therefore becomes 
[ I 
2 
QIi 
], 
-
(p -
QA) - -cr . B + Q¢ u = E u 
2m 
2m 
(58) 
If we compare the above equation with the corresponding non relativistic 
Schrodinger equation, we find that we now have an important extra term. This 
term suggests that the electron in a magnetic field, acquires an extra energy 
QIi 
-p.,·B=--cr·B 
2m 
so that it behaves as if it has a moment JL associated with its spin, namely 
QIi 
qli 
p., = -cr = --cr 
2m 
2m 
(59) 
where Q = -q represents the actual charge of the electron; q ~ + 1.6 X 1O-19C 
represents the magnitude of the electronic charge. Thus the Dirac equation predicts 
that for a spin ~ particle, the magnetic moment is always given by the relation 
(59). While this prediction is in very good agreement with experiment it fails badly 

Relativistic Theory 
791 
for the proton and the neutron. It is possible to modify the equation keeping it 
relativistically invariantly introducing, ad hoc, an extra term that accounts for the 
anomalous magnetic moment of these particles (see, e.g., Ref. 6). 
28.8. The spin-orbit interaction 
Another new feature that may be expected is the interaction between the spin and 
orbital motions. We examine the higher order corrections to the Pauli equation in 
an electrostatic field. l Writing A = 0 we obtain from Eqs. (50) and (51) 
The charge density is 
From Eq. (61), we have 
so that 
c(o' . p)v = (E' - Q¢)u 
c(o' . p)u = (2mc2 + E' - Q¢)v 
1 
v ~ --0'. pu 
2mc 
p2 
vtv ~ ut--u 
4m2c2 
(60) 
(61 ) 
(62) 
This gives p = ut(l + p2j4m2c2)u (to order v2jc2) which suggests that to this 
order we cannot regard u as the wavefunction in the non-relativistic approximation. 
Instead, if we take 
'( 
p2) 
U = 1+--
2 -2 
u 
8m c 
and 
(63) 
then p = (u') t u' to order v2 j c2 so that it is u' that we want for the wavefunction. 
Our aim is to obtain an equation for u', taking care to retain terms up to order 1 j c2 . 
From Eq. (61), we have 
O'·p 
cO' . pu = (2mc2)v + (E' - Q¢)--u 
2mc 
where in the term multiplying (E' -
Q¢), which is small in comparison to 2mc2 , 
we have used the lower approximation (62) for v. Thus 
v = _1_ [1 _ (E' - Q¢)] 0' . pu 
2mc 
2mc2 
(64) 
1 We follow the analysis given in Ref. 7. 

792 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Substituting this into Eqo (60), we obtain 
(E' -
Q</»u = _1 (u 
0 p) (1 _ E' -
Q</» 
u 
0 pu 
2m 
2mc2 
1 [2 
E' 2 
Q 
] 
-
p - -p + --(u 
0 p)</>(u 
0 p) u 
2m 
2mc 
2mc2 
Rearranging terms, we get 
E' (1 + p: 2) u = [Q</> + _1 {p2 + JL(u 0 p)</>(u 
0 p)} u] 
4m c 
2m 
2mc 
We multiply this on the left by 1 - p2 j8m2c2, retain the terms up to 1 j c2 and use 
Eqo (63) 
The above equation gives us the required eigenvalue relation 
E'u' = Hu' 
Retaining terms up to the order 1 j c2 , we have 
p2 
p4 
Q 
2 
2 
Q 
H = Q</> + 2m -
8m3c2 -
8m2c2 (p </> + </>p ) + 4m2c2 (u 
0 p)</>(u 
0 p) 
Now 
where 
We also have 
(u 
0 p)</>(u 
0 p) 
</>(u 
0 p)(u 0 p) + (u 
0 p</»(u 
0 p) 
</>p2 + ili(u 0 E)(u 0 p) 
</>p2 + ili(E 0 P + iu 0 (E x p)] 
E = - V</> is the electric field 
-1i2['l2(</>U') - </>'l2u'] 
_1i2['l 0 (u''l</> + </>'lu') - </>'l2u'] 
_1i2[2'l</> 0 'lu' + ('l2</»u'] 
Writing this in terms of E and p, we obtain 
(66) 
(67) 

Relativistic Theory 
793 
Substituting (66) and (67) into expression of H, we obtain 
p2 
p4 
Qn 
Qn 2 
H = V + -
- -- - --O'·E x p- --\7·E 
(68) 
2m 
8m 3c3 
4m2c2 
8m2c2 
where 
V = Q¢ 
(69) 
represents the potential energy function. Now, the first two terms on the RHS ofEq. 
(68) represent the usual non relativistic terms. The third term is the kinetic energy 
correction up to order 1/ c2 as may be seen by expanding 
(see Sec. 19.5.1). The fourth term represents spin-orbit interaction; this can be seen 
by noting that for a spherically symmetric potential V (r) 
IdV 
QE = -\7V = ---r 
r dr 
Thus the spin-orbit interaction energy is given by 
where 
1 
S = -nO' 
2 
represents the spin angular momentum (see Sec. 14.3). Thus 
1 
1 dV 
Hs- o = 2m2c2 -; -;;;s . L 
For a hydrogen like atom problem, V (r) is given by the Coulomb potential 
Ze2 
VCr) =--
r 
(70) 
(71) 
(72) 
where, to be consistent with our notations in Sec. 19.5, we have used cgs units. 
Thus 
where 
Zan 1 
Hs- o = -2-3S' L 
2m cr 
e2 
1 
a=-~-
nc 
137 
(73) 
(74) 

794 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
is the fine structure constant. Equation (73) is the perturbation due to spin-orbit 
interaction that we had used in Sec. 19.5.2. 
The last term in Eq. (68) is a correction to the potential energy V, and is known 
as the Darwin term (see, e.g., Ref. 1 for more details). We may mention here that 
for the Coulomb potential [see Eq. (72)] the Darwin term is given by 
fi2 
HD = __ V2V 
8m 2e2 
rrfi 3 Za 
2m 2e oCr) 
where we have used the relation [see Sec. 24.3.1]: 
v 2 (~) = -4rro(r) 
(75) 
(76) 
Since Rnl (r = 0) = 0 for l = I, 2, 3, ... (see Sec. 10.4.2); the Darwin term 
contributes only for s (l = 0) states. Indeed for the ground state of the hydrogen 
like atom, the perturbation due to the Darwin term is given by 
rrfi 3Za 
(f..E)D = 
2 
2 
Io/noo(r = 0)1 2 
me 
28.9. Central potential 
rrfi 3Za 
Z3 
2m 2e n3rra 3 o 
(77) 
Let us now consider the solution of the Dirac equation for a particle in a central 
potential V (r); we follow the general method described in Ref. 8. The Hamiltonian 
IS 
H = ca . p + f3mc 2 + VCr) = Ho + VCr) 
(78) 
It can be shown that the free particle Hamiltonian HO does not commute with the 
orbital angular momentum L (see Problem 28.2). However, it does commute with 
J = L + S. Here 
fiS = ~fi~ = ~fi ((T 0) 
2 
2 
0 (T 
(79) 
For the central potential the Hamiltonian still commutes with J and J2 so that 
eigenfunctions can be conveniently chosen so that they belong to definite states of 
J2 and Jz. We label these states by j and m, the eigenvalue of J2 is j (j + I )fi2 and 
of Jz is mfi for the particular state. 

Relativistic Theory 
795 
We shall proceed by separating the variables in spherical polar coordinates, the 
appropriate coordinates in view of the spherical symmetry of V (r). To do this, it is 
convenient to introduce the operators (see Problem 28.5) 
and 
Note that 
Using the relation 
1 
Pr = -[xPx + YPv + ZPz - iii] 
r 
. 
1 
[ a 1] 
-[r·p-ili]=-ili -;-+-
r 
or 
r 
1 
(Xr = -(a· r) 
r 
(a· B)(a . C) = B . C + iI:. . (B x C) 
and putting B = r, C = p, we obtain 
(a· r)(a . p) 
rPr + iii + iI; . (r x p) 
rPr + iii (I; . L + 1) 
where we have used the definition L = (r x p)/Ii . Thus 
mra . p = rPr + iii (I; . L + 1) 
Multiplying by (Xr / r on the left, we obtain 
(Xr 
a . p = (XrPr + ili-(I; . L + I) 
r 
It is convenient to introduce the operator 
K = f3(I; ·L+ 1) 
(80) 
(81) 
(82) 
(83) 
(84) 
(85) 
It is easily shown that this commutes with the Hamiltonian. (This is the reason for 
the f3 in the definition of K) 
K2 = [f3(I; . L + I)f 
(I; . L + 1)2 
(I; . L)2 + 2I; . L + 1 
(since f3 commutes with 1:) 
Now 
(I; . L)2 = L 2 - I; . L 

796 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
using Eq. (82) and 
Thus 
K2 
L2 + ~. L + I 
( 
~)2 
I 
I 
L+ -
+ - = J2 +-
244 
(86) 
since the eigenvalue of }:;2 is 3. The eigenvalues of K2 are, therefore, 
I 
( 
1)2 
j(j+l)+4= j+2 
Since K commutes with the Hamiltonian, we can set up a representation in which 
K and H are diagonal. Now 
inc 
H = carPr + -arf3K + f3mc2 + VCr) 
(87) 
r 
We can now choose (matrix) representations of a r and f3 which satisfy the 
conditions 
a; = f32 = I 
and 
[a" f3 r l = 0 
(88) 
A 
simple one is f3 = (~ ~1) and a r = (~ ~i). Writing ljJ = ( ~: ). the 
relation H ljJ = EljJ gives the two coupled equations 
(E - mc2 -
V)ljJ u + (CPr + nrC K) ljJb = 0 
(89) 
and 
(90) 
The angle and spin dependent parts are included in K. If we choose ljJ u' ljJ b to be 
eigenfunctions of K (with eigenvalue denoted by the same symbol K), then in Eqs. 
(89) and (90), we need only concern ourselves with the radial parts of ljJ a and ljJ h' 
We set 
F 
ljJu=-' 
(91 ) 
r 
Noting that 
Pr (F) = _ in (r ~ + 1) (F) = _ in d F. etc. 
r 
r 
or 
r 
r dr 
we obtain 
(E-mc -V)F+nc -+-
=0 
2 
(dG 
KG) 
dr 
r 
(92) 

Relativistic Theory 
797 
and 
(E + me - V)G + he -
-
-
= 0 
2 
(dF 
KF) 
dr 
r 
(93) 
28.10. Energy levels of the Hydrogen atom 
For the hydrogen like atom, we set V (r) = - Ze2 / r. Before trying a series solu-
tions of Eqs. (92) and (93) let us look at the asymptotic behaviour of F and G. We 
may write (as r ----+ (0), 
whence 
dG 
(E - me2)F + hed; = 0 
dF 
(E + me2)G - he- = 0 
dr 
(94) 
Since we expect, for the bound state, F 
----+ 0 as r 
----+ 
00, we must have 
me2 > JEJ-otherwise, the solution to Eq. (94) will be oscillatory. For positive 
energies, this merely states that we expect the total energy of the atom to be some-
what less than the rest energy of the electron; one must not forget that we have not 
included the rest energy of the proton in the Hamiltonian in the first place. Thus, 
the asymptotic behaviour is 
(95) 
where 
(96) 
is an obviously convenient dimensionless variable. Eqs. (92) and (93) become 
where we have put 
me2 -
E 
--,---- -
v 
me2 + E -
, 
e2 
-
=ot 
he 
The asymptotic forms (95) suggest a solution of the following form 
F(p) = !(p)e-P, 
G(p) = g(p)e-P(lOO) 
(97) 
(98) 
(99) 
(l00) 

798 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
so that we have 
(101) 
(~ + Z~) g - (5£ -K - 1) f = 0 
v 
p 
dp 
p 
(102) 
Substituting 
00 
00 
(103) 
j=O 
j=O 
and comparing the coefficients of pS+ j-I, we shall get the following indicial 
equations: 
-vaj_1 + Zaaj + (j + s)bj + Kbj -
b j _ 1 = 0 
(104) 
I -b j _ 1 + Zabj - (j + s)aj + Kaj + aj_1 = 0 
(105) 
v . 
From the coefficients of the lowest term ps-I , we obtain 
Zaao + (s + K)bo = 0 
and 
Zabo -
(s -
K)ao = 0 
(lO6) 
Since ao and bo are not zero, we must have 
or 
(107) 
where the positive root is chosen to keep the functions F and G regular at the 
origin. Multiplying Eq. (105) by v and adding it to Eq. (\ (4) we obtain 
aj[(j + s - K) - Za] = bj[(j + s + K) + Za] 
(108) 
It can be shown, as was done for the Schr6dinger equation solution of the hydrogen 
atom, that if we let the series go to an infinite number of terms, the functions f (p) 
and g(p) will behave like e2p so that the solutions F(p) and G(p) will diverge. 
We must, therefore, assume that j = n', where n' is a fixed integer, the series 
terminates and an'+1 = 0 [and hence bn'+1 = 0, according to Eq. (l08)]. Setting 
j = n' + 1 in Eqs. (104) and (l05), we obtain 
(l09) 
Using Eq. (l08), with j = n', we obtain 
(n' + s -
K) - Za = -v[(n' + s + K) + Za] 
(110) 

Relativistic Theory 
or 
21)(n' + s) 
Za(1 -
1)2) 
Za 2E 
me2 +E 
799 
remembering that 1)2 = (me2- E)/(me2+ E). Squaring, we have (m 2e4 - E2)(n' + 
S)2 = Z2a2 E2. This gives 
E = me2 
1 + 
a 
[ 
Z2 2 ]-1/2 
(n' + s)2 
a here, it may be recalled, is the fine structure constant, 
e2 
1 
a==-~-
lie 
137 
(111) 
Now, the eigenvalues of K2 are (j + ~)2 so that s = J 
(j + ~ 2 -
Z 2a 2. To 
appreciate the change from the non-relativistic theory, let us introduce the small 
number 
so that s = j + ~ - c. We also introduce the principal quantum number 
Thus n' + s = n - c j, so that 
(112) 
Remembering that C j is also a function of Z 2a 2, one can expand E as a power 
series in Z2a 2 to obtain 
E . = me2 [1 _ 
Z2a 2 _ Z4a 4 (_n _ 
~)] 
n,) 
2n2 
2n4 
j + ~ 
4 
(113) 
Apart from the constant mass term, the second term in Eq. (113) is identical to 
the non-relativistic expression while the third gives the relativistic corrections. We 

800 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
label the energy levels as 
251/ 2 (for n = 2, j = 1/2 and l = 0) 
2PI/2 (for n = 2, j = 1/2 and I = 1) 
2P3/2 (for n = 2, j = 3/2 and I = 1) 
We note that, while non-relativistic theory predicts that these three states are all 
degenerate, Eq. (113) predicts that only 251/2 and 2P1/ 2 are degenerate while 2P3/ 2 
lies lower by about 10-4 eV; for detailed calculations see Sec. 19.5. In 1947, a 
crucial experiment by Lamb and Rutherford established that 251/2 lies about 1058 
MHz below 2PI/2 (the frequency corresponds to the energy difference ~ 4.4 x 
10-9 e V). Although this might appear a very small discrepancy, this experiment 
initiated very important developments which led to a consistent theory of quantum 
electrodynamics. 2 
28.11. Covariance of Dirac equation 
Let us first see what covariance demands. Assume that there are two observers in 
Lorentz frames ~ and ~/. We require that scalar quantities remain the same in 
the two systems while four vectors must transform like the space-time coordinates. 
Finally, although the wavefunctions for the two observers need not be the same, the 
recipe for writing down Dirac equation must be the same for both observers. The 
equation in ~ and ~' are to be 
(114) 
( a) I 
I 
YfJ--, +K 1/!(XfJ-)=O 
aXIL 
(l15) 
Notice that the Y fJ- are the same in both frames; they define the recipe and ought 
not to be changed. The coordinates X and x' are related through 
( 116) 
and the inverse transformation 
( 117) 
with the restrictions 
a;'fJ-afJ-V = D;.v 
(118) 
2 For a simple picture of the origin of the Lamb Shift see Chapter 4 of Ref. 4. 

Relativistic Theory 
801 
We have 
(119) 
Writing 
(120) 
and the inverse relation 
(121) 
we can rewrite Eq. (114) as 
(
a) -I 
, 
, 
Y",Qv", ax~ + K 
S 
1/1 (x",) = 0 
Multiplying on the left by S, we have 
( 
-1 a 
)" 
Qv",Sy",S 
ax~ + K 
1/1 (X",) = 0 
(122) 
This is identical with Eq. (115) provided we can find an S which satisfies 
Multiplying by aicv, summing over v and using relation (118), we obtain 
(123) 
For the complete proof of covariance one has to show that such an S exists. Here 
we merely assert that this is true and refer the interested reader to other works for 
explicit construction of S for every type of Lorentz transformation [see, e.g., Ref. 4 
and 5]. Equation (123) suggests that a set of matrices y~ = Qicv Yv will obey all the 
commutation properties of y v and would serve just as well. One could, therefore, 
have written down the equation in ~' frame as 
( ,a 
)" 
Yic ax~ + K 
1/1 (xJ = 0 
(124) 
and y~ and y v are related exactly as four vectors are in the two frames. Neverthe-
less, one must remember that the four y A are matrices and cannot be regarded as a 
physical vector. 

802 
t 
Allowed 
Region 
Normally 
Occupied 
! 
Forbidden 
Region 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(Electron Transition 
to Positive Energy) 
E 
2 
-m c 
Figure 28.1. The positive and negative energy states of the electron. 
28.12. The hole theory and positrons 
We have seen that the Dirac equation admits both positive and negative energy 
solutions. In the presence of a field one would expect the electron to make radia-
tive transitions to a negative energy state in fact, to E = -00. There are other 
difficulties with negative energies. An electron at rest in a negative energy state has 
a negative rest mass. Clearly, such electrons would move opposite to an applied 
force. The theory presented so far, is thus an incomplete physical theory. 
Dirac made a remarkable suggestion to avoid these difficulties. He assumed that 
all the negative energy states are normally occupied by electrons; i.e., vacuum is the 
state of fully occupied negative energy states and empty positive ones. An electron 
with positive energy now introduced into this system is prevented from making a 
transition to a negative energy state because of the exclusion principle. In vacuum, 
one therefore has this negative energy 'sea' of electrons giving an infinite charge 
density. Dirac, therefore, made a further assumption, namely, that electrons filling 
up negative energy states do not contribute to the external field, the total energy 
and momentum of the system. Only departures from the distribution in a vacuum 
will contribute to observable quantities. 
To see how this works, suppose a negative energy electron with an energy -I E; I 
and momentum p is removed from the negative energy sea, under the action of an 
external field, to a positive energy state (see Fig. 28.1). 
The system (the sea) is now deficient in energy -IE;I and momentum p. This 
means that the residual sea behaves as though it has a hole with energy I E; I and 
momentum -po (Notice that the hole has a positive energy I E; I.) Also, with the 
removal of charge -e, the net effect of the hole is that of a positive charge +e. 

Relativistic Theory 
803 
This hole therefore, behaves like a particle with the electronic mass m and charge 
e and is interpreted as a positron.3,4 
If the external field removes an electron of momentum Pi from a negative energy 
state -I Ei 1 to a state of momentum P f and positive energy +1 E f I, then the hole 
will have an energy + 1 Ei 1 and momentum -Pi. In other words, the final system 
now consists of an electron of energy 1 E f 1 and momentum P f and a positron of 
energy 1 Ei 1 and momentum -Pi· Clearly, the total energy 1 Ei 1 + 1 E f 1 and the total 
momentum P f - Pi of the two particles in the final states must have been supplied 
by the external field. Moreover, since 
this is the minimum required energy for this process, called pair production. Thus, 
the hole theory provides a simple explanation for the positron and phenomena such 
as the creation or annihilation of pairs. 
However what has been gained in interpretation has made the theory far more 
complicated. Electron-electron scattering, for example is no longer to be thought 
of a simple two body process. The vacuum,s with its infinite number of particles 
can participate in the phenomenon making the theory a many-body one. While it is 
true that for low energies generally the situation is not as drastic, nevertheless one 
should expect new phenomena to manifest themselves. 
28.13. Problems 
Problem 28.1 Show that the four spinors described by Eqs. (43)-(45) are ortho-
normal, i.e., 
where X ~, X b are any two of them. 
Problem 28.2 Show that L = r x P does not commute with the free particle Dirac 
Hamiltonian, while J = L + S does and hence J is a constant of the motion. Here 
S = 41iI:, where 
3 All observed states are states of positive energy. When making calculations for physical 
quantities it is necessary to select out final states of positive energy. 
4 The hole theory treats the positron on a different footing (at least in the physical interpretation) 
from the electron. Modern theories of quantum electrodynamics have avoided this distinction. 
S Dirac's original idea of the particle as an excitation of the strange 'vacuum' has been very 
fruitful and the idea is exploited in the theory of condensed states (see Kaempffer, Concepts in 
Quantum Mechanics, Academic Press, New York, 1965). 

804 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Problem 28.3 Prove 
(a· B)(a . C) = B . C + i~(B x C) 
(125) 
Problem 28.4 Verify that the rate of change of position operator (in the Heisenberg 
picture) is given by 
dr 
-
= ca 
dt 
(126) 
Discuss this result. 
Problem 28.5 (a) Use the operator representations of Px, Py and pz to show that 
1 
.. 
[Ol/f 
IJ 
-[xPx + YPy + zpz - IIi]l/f = -Iii -
+ -
r 
or 
r 
(b) Show that 
[r, PrJ = iii 
Problem 28.6 Assume that the frame b' introduced in Sec. 28.11 is obtained by a 
simple rotation of ~ about the z-axis by an angle <po Show that the following matrix 
S satisfies Eg. (123). 
(127) 
where 
I 
0')2 = 2[YI' Y2] = iYIY2 
(128) 
Problem 28.7 Suppose b' moves along the x-axis with respect to b with a velocity 
f3c. Show that the matrix S is given by 
S = exp [I; 0'14]' 
0"4 = iY,Y4 
(129) 
Writing 
<p = ie, show that tanh e = f3 
28.14. Solutions 
Solution 28.2 We consider first [Lx, H]. This is 
ca . [(ypz - zPv)p - p(ypz - zPv)] 
ca2(YPy - pyy)pz + ca3(-ZPz + pzz)py 
icli(a2Pz - a3Py) 

Relativistic Theory 
To calculate [~x, H], we note that 
so that 
This gives 
ic(ex . P~x -
~xex . p) 
2ic(CX 3Py -
CX2Pz) 
Thus ix = Lx + ~Ii~x (and similarly other components) commutes with H. 
Solution 28.3 From Heisenberg's equation, we have 
dr 
i 
dt = Jj"[H, r] 
We have 
dx 
i 
-
= -c[ex . px - xex . p] 
dt 
Ii 
We need only consider CXxPx in ex . p, the rest commute. Thus 
805 
Since the eigenvalues of cx x are ± 1, ±c are the only possible eigenvalues of each 
of the operators dr / dt. 
A precise velocity measurement requires the precise measurement of position 
at two different times which means the uncertainties in momenta approach infinity. 
In relativity, these correspond to the speed of light. 
Solution 28.6 We have 
(i¢) 
1 (i¢)2 2 
S = 1 + 2 
(T12 + 2! 2 
(T 12 + ... 
Now 

806 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
It is easily shown that 
s 
¢ 
. ¢ 
= cos '2 - Y 1 Y 2 sm '2 
We now have to show that 
or 
Here 
o 0 
- sin¢ cos¢ 
( 
cos¢ sin¢ 
aAV = 
0 
0 
o 0) 
1 0 
o 1 
o 
0 
(130) 
(131) 
(132) 
as may be seen from working out the coordinate transformations under the desired 
rotation 
Xl = ax 
For A = 3 and 4, Eq. (132) merely says that Sand Y/ commute. For example, 
the second term in S [see Eq. (130)] gives a term proportional to YIY2Y3 = 
- Y I Y 3 Y 2 = Y 3 Y I Y 2' We, therefore, merely have to prove the result for A = 1, 2. 
We have (for A = 1) 
and 
S 
¢. ¢ 
Y I = Y I cos '2 + Y2 sm '2 
(YI cos¢ + Y2 sin¢)S 
A., 
¢ 
A., 
• ¢ 
Y I cos 'f' cos '2 - Y 2 cos 'f' sm '2 
• 
A., 
¢ 
'A.,'¢ 
+ Y 2 sm 'f' cos '2 + Y I sm 'f' sm '2 
¢ 
. ¢ 
Y I cos '2 + Y 2 sm '2 
Similarly, we can establish the result for A = 2. 
Solution 28.7 The Lorentz transformation is defined by 
(
yO 0 i f3Y ) 
o 
1 0 
0 
aAV = 
0 
0 I 
0 
-if3y 0 0 
Y 
(133) 

Relativistic Theory 
807 
where y = (l - fi2)-1/2, not to be confused with the y matrices. Proceeding as in 
the previous problem, we have 
s 
¢. ¢ 
Y I = Y 1 cos "2 + Y 4 SIn "2 
and 
( 
¢·fi· ¢) 
(·fi 
¢ 
. ¢) 
Y I Y cos "2 + I Y SIn"2 + Y 4 I Y cos "2 - Y SIn "2 
from which we obtain (equating the two expressions) 
cos¢ 
cose = Y 
sin ¢ 
i sinh e = ifiy 
(where ¢ = ie) 
Thus 
tanhe = fi 
and 
e 
e 
S = cosh "2 - i Y I Y 4 sin "2 
(134) 
28.15. References 
1. G. Baym, Lectures on Quantum Mechanics, W. A. Benjamin, New York 
(1969). 
2. P. A. M. Dirac, The Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Fourth Edition, Oxford 
University Press, London (1958). 
3. T. P. Das, Relativistic Quantum Mechanics of Electrons, Harper & Row, New 
York (1973). 
4. J. D. Bjorken and S. D. Drell, Relativistic Quantum Mechanics, McGraw-Hill, 
New York (1964). 
5. J. A. Eisele, Modern Quantum Mechanics with Applications to Elementary 
Particle Physics, Wiley Interscience, New York (1969). 
6. A. S. Davydov, Quantum Mechanics, Pergamon Press, Oxford (1965). 

808 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
7. V. B. Berestetskii, E. M. Lifshitz and L. P. Pitaevskii, Relativistic Quantum 
Theory, Pergamon Press, Oxford (1971). 
8. L. I. Schiff, Quantum Mechanics, Third Edition, McGraw-Hill Book Co., New 
York (1968). 

Appendices 
Appendix A: Gamma functions and integrals involving Gaussian 
functions 
We will first show that 
+00 
2 
f e-ax2+{Jx dx = !'£ exp [ :a] Re a > 0 
-00 
We consider the integral 
Thus 
-00 
-00 
-00 -00 
Transforming to polar coordinates we get 
Thus 
+00 
I = f e-x2 dx = -JJr 
-00 
809 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 

810 
Now 
where z = x - !. Using Eq. (3) we get 
using which we obtain Eg. (1). We also get 
Thus 
00 f 
-1/2 -y d 
Y 
e 
Y 
o 
where r (z) is defined through the equation 
00 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
(4) 
(5) 
r (z) = f x z- 1 e-x dx 
o 
Re z > 0 
(6) 
For Re z > 1, if we integrate by parts we would obtain 
Since 
we obtain 
r (z) = (z -
1) r (z -
I) 
00 
r (1) = f e-x dx = 1 
o 
r (n + 1) = n! ; n = 0,1,2, ... 
(7) 
(8) 

Appendices 
Further since r G) = ..jii, we obtain 
r (~) = 
r (~) = 
r (~) = ?.Ll In 
2 
2 
2 yJt 
etc. Finally for n = 0, 1, 2, ... 
+00 
x 
e 
dx = r 
n + -
= --------'--'--
f 
2n 
_x 2 
(1) 
1 ·3·5 ... (2n -
1) ..jii 
2 
2n 
-00 
and 
+00 f x2n+! e-x2 dx = ° 
-00 
811 
(9) 
(10) 
(11 ) 

812 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Appendix B: Equation of continuity 
According to Gauss's theorem, 
f div J dr = f J . ii dS 
(12) 
Q 
S 
where Q represents an arbitrary volume bounded by the surface S with ii repre-
senting the outward unit normal on the surface. Now, if J is assumed to represent 
the current density then 
J . ii dS 
would represent the number of particles going out of the area dS (per unit time). 
Thus the right-hand side of Eq. (1) would represent the total number of particles 
going out of the volume per unit time. This is nothing but 
-~fp dr 
ot 
Q 
where p represents the number of particles per unit volume. Thus 
-:t f p dr = f div J dr 
Q 
Q 
Since the above equation holds for an arbitrary volume, we get 
op 
div J + -
= 0 
ot 
which represents the equation of continuity. 
(13) 
(14) 

Appendices 
813 
Appendix C: The Fresnel integrals 
If we substitute Eq. (90) [of Chapter 5] in Eq. (76) [of Chapter 5] we would obtain 
\II (x, y, t) = \II (x, t) \II(y, t) 
(15) 
where \II (x, t) is given by Eq. (35) [of Chapter 5] and 
+b/2 
fi£ I! [(y' - y)2m] 
\II(y, t) = --. -
~ 
exp i 
2m Pit vb 
2Pit 
dy' 
(16) 
-b/2 
We would like to express the right-hand side of the above equation in terms of the 
Fresnel integrals 
v 
C (v) = ! cos (rr;2) dx 
(17) 
o 
and 
v 
S (v) = f sin (rr;2) dx 
(18) 
o 
Thus we define the variable 
'/!f 
u = (y - y) 
-rr Pit 
(19) 
to obtain 
"'(y, t) = v'~ib -7" exp [i ,,;2] du 
(20) 
-fJ.- u 
where 
(21) 
and 
(22) 
where T is given by Eq. (36) [of Chapter 5] with (To replaced by (T xo. Straightfor-
ward algebra gives 
(23) 

814 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Obviously, the probability distribution will be symmetric about the y-axis and 
therefore we may replace M by - M to obtain 
1 
IIJ1(y, t)12 = 2b {re (M + v) - e (M - V)]2 + [S (M + v) -
S (M -
v)]2} 
(24) 
For a given value of v, the probability distribution (as a function of M) is a universal 
curve. The total probability distribution is therefore given by 
1'1> (x, y, 1)12 
~ [v"i'~ (I) exp [ _ (x ;, ~?2]] 
X [2~ {[e (M + v) - e (M - v)]2 
+[S(M+V)-S(M-V)]2} ] 
(25) 
where 
[ 
1i2 
] 1/2 
a(t)=axo 1+-
2 -
4 t 2 
m a xO 
(26) 
The analysis (and the corresponding intensity plots) are very similar to the calcu-
lation of the Fresnel diffraction pattern for a long narrow slit in wave optics (see, 
e.g. Sec. 5.10 of Ref. 1). 
Reference 
l. A.K. Ghatak and K. Thyagarajan, Optical Electronics, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge (1989); Reprinted by Foundation Books, New Delhi (1991). 

Appendices 
815 
Appendix D: Airy functions 
noindent Airy functions are the two independent solutions of the differential equa-
tion 
(27) 
The above equation is usually referred to as the Airy equation (after the well-
Ai(x) and Its Asymptotic Form 
Figure D.l. The solid curve represents the Airy function Ai (x). The dashed curves on the left and on 
the right side of the origin represent the asymptotic forms as given by Eqs (21) and (20) respectively. 
known British astronomer G.B. Airy). In order to solve Eq. (1) we tryout a power 
series solution 
y (x) = ao + ajX + a2x2 + ... 
Substituting in Eq. (1), we get 
2a2 + 3· 2a3x + 4· 3a4x2 + ... + n (n - 1) anx n- 2 + ... 
2 
n-2 + 
= aox + ajX + ... + an-3X 
... 
Thus 
and 
y (x) = ao [1 + ~ 
+ 
x6 
+ ... J 
3·2 
2·3·5·6 
+aj [x + 3x.
4
4 + 3. 4x.76. 7 + ... J 
where ao and aj are arbitrary constants. Thus we may write 
y (x) = ao! (x) + ajg (x) 
(28) 
(29) 
(30) 

816 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where 
1 3 
1·4 6 
1·4·7 9 
f (x) = 1 + -x + -x + 
x + ... 
3! 
6! 
9! 
(31) 
2 
4 
2·5 7 
2·5·8 10 
g (x) = x + -x + -x + 
x + ... 
4! 
7! 
1O! 
(32) 
The Airy functions Ai (x) and Bi (x) are defined as 
where 
Further, 
and 
Ai (x) 
Bi (x) 
ct! (x) -
C2 g (x) 
J3 [ct! (x) + C2 g (x)] 
Cl = Ai (0) = [32/3r (~) r
1 = 0.35503 
C2 = -Ai' (0) = [3 1!3r (l) r
1 = 0.25882 
Bi (0) = J3 Cl = 0.61493 
Bi' (0) = J3 C2 = 0.44829 
Bi(x) and Its Asymptotic Form 
2 
4 
__ x 
(33) 
(34) 
(35) 
(36) 
(37) 
(38) 
Figure D.2. The solid curve represents the Airy function B i (x). The dashed curves on the left and on 
the right side of the origin represent the asymptotic forms as given by Eqs (23) and (22) respectively. 
The two functions Ai (x) and Bi (x) represent the two independent solutions of 
Eg. (1). Actually, originally, Ai (x) and Bi (x) were defined through the following 

Appendices 
817 
integrals: 
+00 
00 
Ai (x) = 2~ f exp [i (~x + ~ ~3) ] d~ = ~ f cos [~x + ~ ~3 ] d~ 
-00 
0 
[ 2/3 (2)] -1 [ 
1 3 l· 4 6 1 . 
4 . 7 
9 
] 
3 r -
1 + -x + -x + 
x + ... 
3 
3! 
6! 
9! 
[
1/3 (l)]-I[ 
2 
4 
2.5
7 
2.5.8
10 
] 
-
3 r -
x + -x + -x + 
x + ... 
3 
4! 
7! 
1O! 
(39) 
(40) 
The Airy functions (and their derivatives) are related to Bessel functions through 
the following equations 
Ai (-x) 
Bi (-x) 
Ai (x) 
Bi (x) 
~ X 3/ 2 
x > 0 
3 
1 3JX [LI/3 (n + J+ I/3 (n] 
If 
[LI/3 (n - J+ I/3 (n] 
1 
1 (X)I/2 
3JX [LI/3 (n - 1+1/3 (n] =;"3 
K I / 3 (n 
If 
[LI/3 (n + 1+1/3 (n] 
(41) 
(42) 
(43) 
(44) 
(45) 
Using the asymptotic forms of Bessel functions, we have the following asymptotic 
(i.e. large Ix I) behaviour of the Airy functions: 
Ai (x) ----+ 
1 
_( 
(46) 
e 
x---+oo 2-J]Txl/4 
Ai (-x) ----+ 
-J]T~1/4 sin (s- +~) 
(47) 
x---+oo 
Bi (x) ----+ 
1 
{ 
(48) 
e 
x---+oo -Jrrx l/4 

818 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Bi (-x) x~ -JJi~1/4 cos (~+~) 
(49) 
The Airy functions along with their asymptotic forms are plotted in Figs 1 and 2. 
The asymptotic forms were used in Chapter 17 to determine the JWKB connection 
formulae. Zeros of Airy functions and their first derivatives are given in Table 1. 
Table I. Zeros of airy functions and their first derivatives*. 
Ai(as)=O 
Bi(h,I)=O 
Ai'(a~)=O 
Bi'(h~)=O 
S 
as 
h,I' 
a' s 
h'-
1. 
-2.33811 
-1.17371 
-1.01879 
-2.29444 
2. 
-4.08795 
-3.27109 
-3.24820 
-4.07316 
3. 
-5.52056 
-4.83074 
-4.82010 
-5.51240 
4. 
-6,78671 
-6.16985 
-6.16331 
-6.78129 
5. 
-7.94413 
-7.37676 
-7.37218 
-7.94018 
6. 
-9.02265 
-8.49195 
-8.48849 
-9.01958 
7. 
-10.04017 
-9.53819 
-9.53545 
-10.03770 
8. 
-11.00852 
-10.52991 
-10.52766 
-11.00646 
9. 
-11.93602 
-11.47695 
-11.47506 
-11.93426 
10. 
-12.82878 
-12.38642 
-12.38479 
-12.82726 
1 * Adapted from Reference 2. 
References 
1. H. Jeffreys and B. Jeffreys, Methods of Mathematical Physics, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge (1972). 
2. M. Abramowtiz and LA. Stegun, Handbook of Mathematical Functions, Na-
tional Bureau of Standards, United States Department of Commerce, Wash-
ington, D.e. (1964). 
3. A.K. Ghatak, I.e. Goyal and S.J. Chua, Mathematical Physics, Macmillan 
India Limited, New Delhi (1995). 

Appendices 
Appendix E: Integral and summation involving Hermite-Gauss 
functions 
We first write the generating function associated with Hermite polynomials 
Thus 
00 
sm 
L 
,Hm(~) 
m. 
m=O,1,2, ... 
If we multiply both sides by e-~2 and integrate we would obtain 
and 
+00 
LHS = e-s2 - t2 f e-~2-2(s+t)~ d~ 
-00 
where we have used Eq. (1) of Appendix A. Thus 
LHS = "jir e2st 
00 
n=O,I .... 
If we use Eqs (2) and (3) we would obtain 
or, 
+00 f um(~) un(~) d~ = Dmn 
-00 
where 
819 
(50) 
(51) 
(52) 
(53) 
(54) 

820 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Equation (4) represents the orthonormality condition of Hermite-Gauss functions. 
We next evaluate the integral 
+00 
In = f Hn (~) e _[$2_$~O+!~02] d~ 
(55) 
-00 
We multiply both sides of Eq. (1) by the exponential factor in the integrand of 
Eq. (1) and carrying out the integration we get 
+00 
e-s2-!~(? f e-1;2 e(2s+l;oH d~ 
-00 
where we have used Eq. (1) of Appendix A. Thus 
Comparing coefficients of sn on both sides we get 
using which we would readily get Eq. (57) of Chapter 7. 
We next consider the summation [see Eq. (58) of Chapter 7] 

Appendices 
821 
~ exp --~ 2 __ ~2 -
~wt 
( 
)
1/2 
[1 
1 .] 
fi 
4
0 
2 
2 
00 1 [1 
]n 
x L n! 
2~0 e-iwt 
Hn(~) 
n=O.I.. .. 

822 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Appendix F: The confluent hypergeometric equation 
The confluent hypergeometric equation is given by 
d 2 y 
dy 
x- + (c - x)- - ay (x) = 0 
dx 2 
dx 
where a and c are constants. If we substitute a power series solution 
00 
y (x) = Ldrx p+r , do =I- 0 
r=O 
in Eq. (1) we would obtain (see, e.g. Ref. 1) 
p = 0 or p = 1 - c 
Roots of indicial equation 
p+r+a-1 
dr = 
dr - 1 for r 2: 1 Recurrence relation 
(p+r+c-l)(p+r) 
CASE 1: c =I- 0, ±1, ±2, ±3, ... 
(56) 
(57) 
(58) 
(59) 
For c =I- 0, ± 1, ±2, ±3 ... , the two roots of the indicial equation will yield linearly 
independent solutions of Eq. (1); these are 
a x 
a (a + 1) x 2 
Yl (x) = 1 Fl (a, c, x) = 1 + - - + 
- + ... 
(60) 
c I! 
c (c + 1) 2! 
and 
1 c 
Y2 (x) = X-I F] (a - c + 1, 2 - c, x) 
(61) 
The function I F, (a, c, x) as defined by Eg. (5) is known as the confluent hyperge-
ometric function. Thus for c =I- 0, ±1, ±2, ±3, ... the general solution of Eq. (1) 
is given by 
CASE 2: c = 1 
This is the case of repeated roots of the indicial equation. In this case, we write the 
solution of Eq. (1) as 
_ p[ 
p+a 
(p+a)(p+a+l) 
2 
] 
Y (x, p) -
x 
1 + 
2 X + 
2 
2 
X + ... 
(p+l) 
(p+l) (p+2) 
(63) 

Appendices 
823 
The the two independent solutions are given by [see, e.g. Ref. 1 , Chapter 8] 
Y, (x) = [Y (x p)] 
= 1 + _a_ x + a (a + 1) x2 + ... 
, 
p=o 
(l !)2 
(2!)2 
,F,(a,l,x) 
(64) 
and 
Y2 (x) = 
-
= Yl (x) Inx + (l - 2a) x + 
- + -- - - - -
( 3Y) 
[ 
(1 
1 2 2) 
3 p 
p=o 
a 
a + 1 
1 
2 
x a (a + I) x2 + (~ + _1 __ ~ _ ~ _~) a (a + 1) (a + 2) x 3 + ... J 
(2!)2 
a 
a + 1 
1 
2 
3 
(3!)2 
(65) 
CASE 3: c = 0, -1, ±2, ±3, ... 
It can be seen that in this case the coefficients of one of the series [Eq. (5) or (6)] 
become infinite. Let us assume c = 0 which gives p = 0 and 1. Equation (4) can 
now be written as 
(p + r + a-I) 
dr = 
dr-,; r:::: 1 
(p + r -
1) (p + r) 
(66) 
Thus 
( ) d p(l 
p+a 
(p+a)(p+a+l) 2 
) 
Y x, P = 
OX 
+ 
X + 
X + ... 
p (p+ 1) 
p (p+ 1)2(p+2) 
(67) 
which we rewrite as 
( 
) 
b 
p ( 
p + a 
(p + a) (p + a + 1) 
2 
) 
Y x, P = OX 
P + 
x + 
x + ... 
(p + 1) 
(p + 1)2 (p + 2) 
(68) 
The two linearly independent solutions are: 
I 
(
a + 1 
(a + 1) (a + 2) 
3 
) 
Yl (x) = Y (x, p) p=o = a x + ~ 
x + 
12 . 22 . 3 
x + ... 
= ax,Fl(a+l, 2, x) 
(69) 
and 
3YI 
Y2 (x) = -
= y, (x) Inx+ 
3p p=O 
[ 1 + (l - a) x + (~+ _1_ -
~ -
~) 
a 
a+l 
1 
2 
x a (a + 1) x 2 + ... J 
12 .2 
(70) 

824 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Similarly, for c = -2, the two roots of the indicial equation are 
p = 0 and 3 
with 
y(x,p) 
(71) 
b 
p (I 
(p + a) 
(p + a) (p + a + 1) 
2 
) 
= opx 
+ 
x+ 
. 
x + ... 
(p-2)(p+ I) 
(p-2)(p-I)(p+ 1)(p+2) 
Since p = 0 represents the lower root, the two independent solutions would be 
Obviously 
I 
a (a + 1) (a + 2) 
3 
y(x, p) p=o = bo 
2.1. (3!) 
x 
3Y (X,p)1 
3p 
p=o 
1+ 
x 
[
(a + 3) 
1.4 
+ (a + 3) (a + 4) x 2 + ... J 
1.2.4.5 
(72) 
which is proportional to the second solution on the right-hand side of Eq. (7). On 
the other hand, for c = +2, the two roots of the indicial equation are 
p = 0 and 
-
I 
and the two independent solutions would be 
y(X,P)lp=-l and 
3Y (X,p)1 
3p 
p=-l 
where 
y (x, p) = bo (p + I) x P [ 1 + 
(p+a) 
x 
(p + 2) (p + 1) 
(p + a) (p + a + I) 
2 
J 
+ (p + 2)(p + 1) (p + 1) (p + 2) x + ... 
(73) 
We may mention that the associated Laguerre polynomials and the Hermite poly-
nomials can be expressed in terms of the confluent hypergeometric functions and 
are given by 
L 21+1 (x) = -
l(n+l)!]2 
F (I 
l-n 2l 
2 x) 
(74) 
n+! 
(n -I _ 1)!(2l + l)! 1 
1 + 
,+, 

Appendices 
825 
I 
n/2 n! 
(n 1 2) 
( - 1 ) 
~! 1 FI 
- 2' 2' x 
Hn (x) = 
, 
_ 1 3 
12 n. 
n 
2 
(_1)n- / 
n2)! 2x IF) (--2-' 2' x ) 
for n = 0, 2, 4 ... 
for n = 1, 3, 5 ... 
(75) 
As mentioned in Sec. 10.6, many eigenvalue equations can be transformed to an 
equation of the following form 
d 2u [1 A ~ - J-L2 ] 
-
+ -- + - + 
u (x) = 0 
dx2 
4 
X 
x 2 
Making the transformation 
u (x) = x J1+! e-x / 2 y (x) 
we readily obtain 
d 2y 
dy 
( 
1 
) 
X dx 2 + (2J-L + 1 - x) dx -
/-l + 2 - A 
y (x) = 0 
which is the confluent hypergeometric equation with 
1 
a = /-l + - - A and c = 2/-l + 1 
2 
Thus, for c =1= 0, ± 1, ±2, ... the two independent solutions are 
and 
(76) 
(77) 
(78) 
(79) 
(80) 
U2 (x) = x- J1+i e-x / 2 IFI (~ -
/-l -
A, -2/-l + 1, x) 
(81) 
For c = 0, ± 1, ±2, ... one has to proceed as detailed earlier. 
References 
1. A.K. Ghatak, I.C. Goyal and S.J. Chua, Mathematical Physics, Macmillan 
India Limited, New Delhi (1995). 
2. J. Irving and N. Mullineux, Mathematical Physics and Engineering, Acad-
emic Press, New York (1959). 

826 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Appendix G: Associated Legendre polynomials 
noindent We first consider positive values of m. Now in order to obtain the solution 
of Eg. (35) (of Chapter 9) for m > 0, we differentiate it m times to obtain 
d 2 p(m) 
d p(m) 
(I - fJ2) 
2 
- 2 (m + 1) -- + [A - m (m + 1)] p(m) (fJ) = ° (82) 
dfJ 
dfJ 
where 
dmp 
p(m) (fJ) = --
dfJm 
Further, in Eg. (35) [of Chapter 9], if we make the substitution 
(83) 
(84) 
then G(fJ) will be found to satisfy the same eguation as satisfied by p(m) [i.e. 
Eg. (l )]. Thus, for m = 1,2, 3, ... the solution of Eg. (35) [of Chapter 9] is the 
associated Legendre polynomial 
pm ( ) = (1 _ 2)m/2 dm PdfJ) 
/ 
fJ 
fJ 
dfJm 
(85) 
defined only for non-negative integers. Since p/(fJ) is a polynomial of degree l, we 
must have m :::: l. Obviously, 
(86) 
Thus, the well-behaved solutions of Eg. (28) (of Chapter 9) 
y/ «() ,J,) = (_I)m __ 
P m (cos ()) e,m</> . m > ° 
[ 2l + 1 (l - m)!] 1/2 
. 
m 
,¥, 
4n 
(I+m)! 
/ 
' 
-
(87) 
For negative values of m, Eg. (35) (of Chapter 9) and therefore the part dependent 
on () remains the same, only the ¢ dependent part changes. Thus, for m < 0, we 
may define the solution as 
Y/m «(), ¢) == (-l)myt_m «(), ¢); 
m < 0 
(88) 
Further, 
1 = 0, 1, 2, ... ; m = -I, -I + 1, ... , 1 -
1, 1 
(89) 

Appendices 
Appendix H: Schrodinger equation in centre of mass and relative 
coordinates 
The x-components of Eqs (26) and (27) of Chapter 10 are 
and 
Thus 
and 
or 
Similarly 
Thus 
where 
mIx, + m2X2 
x=-----
m, +m2 
aw 
ax 
aw ax 
-.-+-.-
ax 
ax, 
ax 
ax, 
aw 
m) 
aw 
-+ 
-
ax 
m, +m2 ax 
a [aw] ax 
a [aw] ax 
ax --a:; ax, + ax --a:; ax, 
2m) axf 
2m2 axi 
1i2 a2w 
1i2 a2w 
--------
2f.1 ax2 
2M a x2 
represents the reduced mass and 
827 
(90) 
(91) 
(92) 
(93) 
(94) 
(95) 

828 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
We therefore finally obtain 
(96) 

Appendices 
829 
Appendix I: Hydrogen atom wave functions 
For the hydrogen-like atom V = -Ze2jr (see Sec. 10.4) and the eigenfunctions 
are 
where 
o/nlm (r, e, <p) = Rnl (r) Ylm (e, <p) 
n 
1,2,3, ... 
m 
0,1,2, ... n 
-l,-l+I, ... +l 
(97) 
(98) 
and Ylm (e, <p) are the spherical harmonics which have been discussed in Secs 9.3 
and 15.3 and in Appendix G. The normalized radial functions are given by 
{ 1 
3 
]1/2 
2Z 
n -I - 1 , 
R (r) = -
(-) ( 
). 
e-(pI2) / L 21+1 (p) 
nl 
nao 
2n [en + 1)!]3 
n+1 
I 
1(2Z)3 
(n+l)! ]! e-pI2 /1 Fl(l+I-n,2l+2,p) 
= (2l + 1)! 
nao 
2n(n -l - I)! 
where 
and 
li 2 
2Z 
aO=-2' p=-r 
/U 
nao 
n-I-l 
2 
k 
L 21+1 
_" -I k+21+1 
[en + l)!] p 
n+1 (p) -
L () 
(n-l-I-k)!(2l+1+k)!k! 
k=O 
(99) 
(100) 
(101) 
are known as the associated Laguerre polynomials. It may be noted that p depends 
on n. The orthonormality condition is 
(Xl f Rn'I' (r) Rnl (r) r 2dr = 0nn'0ll' 
o 
and first few Rnl (r) are given by 
( Z )3/2 
RIO = 2 
ao 
e-~ 
R20 
(02) 
(103) 
(104) 

830 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
--
-
e U 1--+-
2 (Z )3/2 _ 3 ( 
2~ 
2~2) 
3J3 ao 
3 
27 
8 (Z)3/2 _c 3 ( 
~2) 
--
-
e sl 
~ --
27-J6 
ao 
6 
(105) 
4 
(Z )3/2 
e-l;f3e etc. 
81~ ao 
' 
where ~ = Zr/ao. Further 
U) 
~2 (~) 
C12 ) 
C
1
3 ) 
1 
(Z)2 
n3 (l + D ao 
1 
(Z)3 
n3 l (l + D (l + 1) 
ao 
(106) 
(r) 
n 
1+- 1-
-
2 [ 
1 { 
l (l + 1) }] ao 
2 
n 2 
Z 
where 
(Xl 
(rm) = ! rm [Rnl (r)f r2dr 
(107) 
o 
In general, for p > -2l - 3 
p + 1 
ao 
-----;:(2 (r P ) -
(2p + 1) Z (r P- 1) 
+~ [(2l + 1)2 _ p2] (~)2 (rP-2) = 0 
(l08) 
The above relation has been derived in Chapter III of Ref. 1. 
Reference 
1. F. Constantinescu and E. Magyari, Problems in Quantum Mechanics, Perga-
mon Press, Oxford (1971). 

Appendices 
831 
Appendix J: Bessel functions and spherical Bessel functions 
The differential equation 
d 2y 
dy 
x2-2 + x- + (x2 - n2) y(x) = 0 
dx 
dx 
(109) 
is known as the Bessel equation. For n -I 0, 1, 2, ... the two linearly independent 
solutions are 
and 
where 
(Xl 
1 
x n+2r 
in(x) = I)-I)' r!r(n + r + I) ("2) 
r=O 
For n = 0, 1, 2, ... Ln (x) is a multiple of in (x); indeed 
Ln (x) = (-1)n in (x) ; n = 0, 1, 2, ... 
For n = 0, 1, 2, ... the other independent solution is 
. 
cos VJT iv(x) - Lv(x) 
Yn(x) = hm ----.-----
v-->n 
SIn VJT 
In fact Yn (x) always represents an independent solution I . 
(110) 
(111) 
(112) 
For n = ±~, ±~, ... the infinite series given by Eq. (2) can be summed2 and 
one has 
i l/2(X) = ( 2 y/2 
( 2 y/2 
JTX 
sinx, i- 1/2(X) = 
JTX 
cosx 
h/2(X) = 
(JT2X y/2 Cinx 
) 
~ 
-cosx , 
(113) 
L 3/2(X) = (:xY/2 (- cosx 
. 
) 
-
SIll X 
X 
I The series representing Yn (x) is never really needed but is given below for the sake of 
completeness 
Yn(x) = 
2 [( X) 
I ~ 
(n - r -
I)! (x)-n+2r 
-
In-+y In(x)--L 
-
lr 
2 
2 
r! 
2 
r=O 
1 (Xl 
(x j2)n+2r 
] 
-- "'(_1)r 
{¢(r)+¢(r+n)} 
2 L 
r!(r +n)! 
r=O 
where y = n~(Xl [1 + 1 + 1 + ... + * 
-Inn] ~ 0.5772, ¢(r) = 1+ 1 + 00. + * 
with ¢(O) = O. 
2 This can also be seen by using the transformation w = x I /2 y(x) in Eq. (I), the resulting 
equation for n = 1 is wI! + w(x) = 0, the solutions of which are sin x and cos x. 

832 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
J±5/2(X), h7/2(X), etc. can be found from the recurrence relation 
2n 
The asymptotic forms are 
JIl+I (x) = -
JIl (x) - JIl - I (x) 
X 
(14) 
(115) 
We would like to introduce the Hankel functions which are often used (as indepen-
dent solutions of Eq. (1)) for their convenient asymptotic forms: 
(116) 
Spherical Bessel functions 
In the Bessel equation Eq. (I) corresponding to n = l + 1/2 (l = 0, I, 2, ... ) if we 
make the transformation f(x) = Jx y(x), we would obtain 
d 2 f 
2df 
[ 
l(l+I)] 
dx 2 + ~ dx + 1 -
x 2 
f (x) = 0 
(ll7) 
which is known as the spherical Bessel equation. Equation (9) is of the same form 
as the radial part of the SchrMinger equation (Eq. (15) of Chapter 10) with V (r) = 
( 
) 1/2 
o and x = 
2;2£ 
r. For l = 0, I, 2, ... the two independent solutions are known 
as the spherical Bessel functions and are defined through the following equations 
jl(X) = (~) 1/2 Jl+ I/2(X) 
} 
( JT ) 1/2 
nl(x) = (-1)1 2x 
L 1- 1/2(X) 
(118) 
Using the results given in the previous section it is easy to show that 
sinx 
sinx 
cosx 
jo(x) = 
jl (x) = -----
X 
x 2 
x 
(119) 
cosx 
cosx 
sinx 
no(x) = 
nl (x) = -----
etc. 
x 
x 2 
x 

Appendices 
833 
hex), n2(x), etc. can be obtained from the recurrence relation [see Eq. (6)]. Fur-
ther, the asymptotic forms are 
jl (x) -----+ 
1 . ( 
In) 
~ SIll 
X - 2 
X---+CXl 
nl(X) -----+ l cos (x _ I;) 
X---+CXl 
(120) 
and 
xl 
j, (x) -----+ 
(21 + 1)!! 
x---+o 
nl(x) -----+ 
(21 + 1)!! 
x---+o 
(21 + 1) x l+1 
(121) 
where (21 + 1)!! = 1.3.5 .... (21 + I). Finally, the function u(x) = xf(x) satisfies 
the equation 
d2 u 
[ 
I (l + 1)] 
-
+ 1-
u(x) = 0 
dx 2 
x 2 
(122) 
which is of the same form as Eq. (17) of Chapter 10 and Eq. (59) of Chapter 24 
( 
)
1/2 
with V (r) = 0 and x = 
2;2£ 
r. Obviously, the solution of Eq. (14) is given by 
u(x) = A[xj{(x)] + B[xnl(X)] 
(123) 
Modified Bessel functions 
In the Bessel equation [Eq. (1)] if we make the transformation ~ = -ix, we would 
obtain 
d 2y 
dy 
~2-2 + ~- -
(~2 +n2)y(~) = 0 
d~ 
d~ 
(124) 
The solutions are In (i ~) and Yn (i ~). For n i- 0, 1, 2, ... the two independent 
solutions are written as I±n(~) where 
CXl 
(l:j2)n+2r 
In(~) = i-n In(i~) = L -<;~-­
r!r(n + r + 1) 
r=O 
(125) 
The functions In(~) are known as modified Bessel functions with the asymptotic 
form 
1 
" 
I (I:) -----+ 
e' 
n <; 
X-+CXl (2n~) 1/2 
(126) 

834 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
These functions are not oscillatory in character [cf. Eg. (7)]. Often it is more 
convenient to choose 
Jr Ln(x) -
In (X) 
(Jr )1/2 
-x 
Kn(x) = -. 
-----+ 
-
e 
2 
SIll nJr 
x-->oo 
2x 
(127) 
as an independent solution. The functions Kn (x) are known as modified Bessel 
function of the second kind. 

Appendices 
835 
Appendix K: Asymptotic series 
In order to study the behaviour of various functions for large values of x, it is often 
convenient to expand them in inverse powers of x: 
[ 
a1 
a2 
] 
f (x) = ¢ (x) aD + ~ + x 2 + ... 
(128) 
where ¢ (x) is a known function whose behaviour for large x is known. The series, 
which is often divergent, is usually of great practical importance not only for a 
qualitative understanding of a function, but even in its computation for large values 
of x. 
Definition 
The series aD + (allx) + (a2Ix2) + ... is said to represent f (x) N (x) asymptot-
ically, if 
. 
N f (x) 
an 
hm 
x 
-- -
-
---+ 0 
1 [ 
N]) 
x~±oo 
¢ (x) 
~ 
xn 
(129) 
i.e. for a given value of N, the first N terms of the series can be made as close as 
may be desired to the ratio f (x) I ¢ (x) by making x large enough. When the series 
diverges, there will be an optimal number of terms of the series to be used to repre-
sent f (x) N (x) for a given x; and therefore, there will be an unavoidable error. 
This unavoidable error would decrease as Ix I increases. We will now consider a 
few examples: 
Example 1 Consider the exponential integral 
00 
f (x) = f e~Y dy 
x 
Integrating by parts 
f (x) 
x 

836 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Continuing this procedure, we get 
e- X
[ 
I 
2! 
3! 
(_l)nn!] 
f (x) = -x-
1 -
~ + x2 -
x2 + ... + --x-
n -
+ (-It+ 1 (n + I)! Joo e-Y dy 
x 
yn+2 
Thus, in this problem <p (x) = e-x Ix; ao = 1, al = -I, ... an = (-It n!. The 
limit of the ratio of two successive terms of the series is given by 
I T/J+ll 
n 
lim -- = lim - -+ 00 
n-->oo 
Tn 
n-->oo X 
Thus, the series diverges. Further, the two successive terms become equal in mag-
nitude for n = x, indicating that the optimum number of terms for a given x 
is roughly the integer closest to x. Typically, for x = 4, the exact value of 
xe+x f (x) Ix=4= 0.82533. 
However, the sum of the series including the 1 st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, 
8th and 9th term in the series are 1.00000, 0.75000, 0.87500, 0.78125, 0.87500, 
0.75781, 0.93360, 0.62347 and 1.24373 respectively. Thus the optimal value is 
0.78125 which occurs at N = 3 and 0.82533 - 0.78125 is the unavoidable error. 
Further, by taking a large number of terms the accuracy becomes poorer. 
Example 2 In a similar manner, one may discuss the asymptotic series of the error 
function, 
erfc (x) 
2 JOO 
\,2 
1 - erf (x) =;::; 
e-
dy 
"In 
x 
Example 3 Finally, we will consider the asymptotic form of the solutions of the 
confluent hypergeometric equation: (see also Appendix L) 
We substitute the series 
d 2y 
dy 
x- + (c - x) -
- ay = 0 
dx 2 
dx 
00 
y = emx L arx-s - r 
r=O 
On substitution and equating the highest power of x we obtain 
m = 0 or m = 1 

Appendices 
837 
(i) For m = 0, s = a, a] = -a (a - c + 1) ao, etc. giving 
_ 
-a [ 
a (a - c + 1) 
a (a + 1) (a - c + 1) (a - c + 2) 
] 
y -
aox 
I -
+ 
2 
••• 
l!x 
2!x 
(ii) For m = 1, s = c - a, a] = (c - a) (l - a) ao, etc. giving 
x {/-c [ 
(c - a) (l - a) 
(c - a)(c - a + I) (1 - a) (2 - a) 
] 
y = aoe x 
I + 
+ 
2 
... 
l!x 
2!x 
The asymptotic form of ] F] (a, c, x) is a linear combination of the above solutions. 

838 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Appendix L: Complex variable 
Complex integration 
In the theory of functions of a complex variable there is a famous theorem due to 
Cauchy which states that, if fez) is an analytic function of z in a certain region 
around a point z = a, then 
and 
f fez) dz = 0 
c 
_1_. f fez) dz = f(a) 
bTl 
z-a 
c 
(130) 
(131) 
where C is a closed contour taken around z = a in a contour-clockwise direction 
(Fig. 1). If fez) can be expanded around z = Zo in the form 
fez) = 
1m z 
o 
Re z 
Figure L.l. 
a_m 
a_m+ I 
a_I 
------- + ------.:~- + ... + --
(z - zo)m 
(z - zo)m-I 
z - Zo 
+ao + al (z - zo) + ... 
where m is ajinite integer, then it can be shown that 
_1_. f fez) dz = a-I 
2m 
c 
(132) 
(133) 
where C is a contour around z = Zo in the counter-clockwise direction. Note that 
in Eqs (3) and (4), fez) is not analytic at z = Zo; fez) has a pole of order m. If 
m = 1, the pole is said to be a simple pole. 

Appendices 
839 
The coefficient a_I in the expansion (3) is called the residue of the function 
fez). If the pole at z = Zo is a simple pole, then 
[(z - zo) f(z)]z=zo = a_I 
( 134) 
Eq. (5) is the recipe for evaluating at simple poles. When there are n poles within 
a contour C, we can generalize (4) to 
I f 
n 
-. fez) dz = Lar 
2Jrl 
C 
r=1 
(135) 
where a r is the residue at the rth pole. 
Eq. (6) remains unaltered, no matter how we distort the counter C as long as we 
do not cross any new poles. This technique is exploited frequently in mathematical 
manipulations. 
A remarkable property of an analytic function fez) is that all its derivatives are 
also analytic in the same region. It can be shown that Eq. (2) can be generalized to 
n 
n! f 
fez) 
f (a) = -2. 
( 
)n+1 dz 
Jrl 
Z - a 
(136) 
c 
Singularities 
A function f (z) which can be expanded with m .:s -1 but finite is said to have a 
singularity at Z = zoo 
It may turn out that an expansion of the form (3) is not possible for finite m. For 
example 
00 
-m 
fez) = ellz = ,,_z _ 
~m! 
m=O 
In this case the function fez) is said to have an essential singularity at Z = o. 
One should not get the idea that a singularity is merely a point at which the 
function goes to infinity. For example, fez) = Zl/2 cannot be expanded near z = 0 
in the fonn (3). Such singularities arise when we have multivalued functions and 
are called branch points. 

840 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Multivalued functions 
We discuss the example 
fez) = ZI/2 
Writing 
(137) 
and 
fez) = Reili 
we see that R = rl/2 and e = ¢/2. As ¢ goes from -Jf + E to Jf -
E where E 
is a small positive quantity, e goes from -Jf /2 + E /2 to Jf /2 -
E /2. As E -+ 0, 
¢ goes from -Jf to +Jf and z returns to its original value. However f does not. 
To describe this situation, one draws a double line such as I (Fig. 2), around the 
I 
b 
I 
(I 
z-plan, 
Figure L.2. 
branch point (z = 0 in this case). Whenever, one crosses this line (called branch 
line) on the z-plane, the function fez) will not return to its original value. 
It can be shown that branch points, occur in pairs and a branch line joins a pair 
of branch points. In the above example, z = 00 is the other branch point. 
Application to solution of confluent hypergeometric equation 
We apply the methods of contour integrals to solve the confluent hypergeometric 
equation 
zF" + (c - z)F' - aF = 0 
(138) 
This equation is of great importance in quantum mechanical problems, since many 
equation such as Hermite's equation, Legendre and associated Legendre equation 
and Bessel's equation can be converted to this form (see Appendix F). We write 

Appendices 
841 
tentatively, its solution as F(a, c, z). The method employed is to take the Laplace 
transform 
F = f eZI vet) dt 
c 
(139) 
where C is a contour in the complex t plane and v(t) a function to be chosen so as 
to give a solution of Eg. (9) with the desired behaviour. We note that 
and 
F'(z) = f teZI v(t) dt 
c 
[ eZI tV(t)] 
_ f ezt ~[tv(t)] dt 
z 
c 
z dt 
c 
This permits us to write 
and 
zF" = [eZlt2v]c - f eZI :t[t2V ] dt 
c 
zF' = [eZltv]c - f eZi :t [tv] dt 
c 
c F' = f ctveZI dt 
c 
so that Eg.(9) becomes 
f [ dV 
dv 
] 
[eZlt(t-I)v(t)]c-
eZI 
t 2-+2tv-t--v-ctv+av 
dt 
dt 
c 
dt = 0 (140) 
We now make the restriction that the contour C will be so chosen that 
[eZlt(t -l)v(t)Jc = 0 
(141) 
and the function vet) will be chosen so that the integrand in (11) vanishes; i.e. 
dv 
dt t(t -
1) = v[l - a + (c - 2)t] 
(142) 

842 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Eq. (13) is readily integrated3 to give 
and the condition for the contour, Eq. (12), becomes 
The solution is [from Eq. (0)] 
F = f eZI ta - I (t -
I)c-,,-1 dt 
c 
Before we proceed further, we note that if one substitutes 
F = Zl-c F, 
into Eq. (9), we obtain 
zF;' + (2 - c - z)F{ - (a - c + 1)F, = 0 
(143) 
(144) 
(145) 
(146) 
which is of the same form as (9). Thus, if we write the solution of (9) in the form 
F=F(a,c,z) 
then Zl-c F(a - c + 1,2 - c, z) is another independent solution of the confluent 
hypergeometric equation. Thus this solution is 
(147) 
Now the contour C need not be a closed one; all that is necessary is that Eq. (14) is 
obeyed so that the value of the function 1>(t)[= eZlt"(t -
l)a-c] must be the same 
at the two ends of the curve C. For Re z > 0, any contour which starts and ends 
at t = -00 clearly satisfies this. However, we shall consider the case Re c > Re 
a > 0 so that 1>(t) vanishes at t = 0 and t = 1. Hence we choose, for our contour, 
the portion of the real axis extending from 0 to 1. Thus, 
1 
F = f eZI t Ci-' (t - l)c-a-' dt 
o 
(_I)H~ , f :~ j '"+"-'(1 -1)H-' dl 
n=O 
0 
(48) 
3 This is the point of the whole exercise; the equation in v is a simpler than the original one in F. 

Appendices 
This series can be expressed in terms of r functions by using the relation 
Thus 
The series4 
1 f ta-l (1 - t)f3- 1 dt = r(a)r(,8) 
rea +,8) 
o 
F = (_1)c-a-l L Zn r(n + a)r(c - a) 
n! 
r(c+n) 
n 
is called the confluent hypergeometric series. Further 
F = (_l)a-c-l r(c - a) rea) F (a c 
) 
r(c) 
1 1 
, 
,Z 
843 
(149) 
(150) 
(151) 
A general solution of the hypergeometric equation can, therefore, be expressed 
as a linear combination of 
1 Fl (a, c, Z) 
and 
Asymptotic behaviour 
The function (21), written out in a series as 
a 
a(a + 1) Z2 
1 Fl (a, c, Z) = 1 + - z + 
- + ... 
c 
c(c+ 1) 2! 
(152) 
is convergent for all finite values of I z I; the only restriction is that c is not a negative 
integer. We now study the behaviour of this series for large values of Izl when a 
and c are integers. In this series, the term containing zn is 
For large n » a, c we have 
(a + n)! (c -
I)! zn 
(a - 1)! (c + n)! n! 
(a + n)! 
. 
--- "-' na- L "-' n(n -
1) ... (n - a + c + 1) 
(a - 1)! 
4 The peculiar notation 1 Fl is because this is a special form of generalized hypergeometric 
function n Fm (a, c, z). 

844 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
This gives, for the term with zn, 
(c - I)! na - c 
n 
(C - 1)! 
Zn 
--- -- Z 
~ --- -----
(a - I)! 
n! 
(a -
I)! (n - a + c)! 
Thus, for z ---+ 00, we have 
(c - 1)! 
zn 
(c - 1)! 
, 
1 FI '" 
""""" 
= 
za -c eZ 
(a - I)! ~ 
(n - a + c)! 
(a -
I)! 
n 
Thus 
(153) 
We have put the results in terms of the r functions because the result it turns 
out, is valid for non-integral values of a and c as well. While (24) gives the right 
asymptotic behaviour for Re z ---+ 00, it can be seen that for Re z ---+ -00, the 
limit goes to zero exponentially. In this case the limit given by (24) is not valid; 
however, the following result may be established 
,F,(a, c, z) = eZ ,F,(e - a, c, -z) 
(154) 
so that, for z ---+ -00, we substitute the asymptotic form (24) on the RHS of Eg. 
(25), to obtain 
(155) 
Connection with other functions 
It can be easily shown that the Hermite polynomials and the associated Laguerre 
polynomials are related to the confluent hypergeometric function (see Appendix 
F). Further, the Bessel functions are given by 
(156) 
For Re (v + ~) > 0, the following integral representation can be established by the 
methods discussed: 
1 
J () 
___ 1_-----,_ (~2)V f eizt (l - t 2 )v-I/2 dt 
v z = r.;: 
( 
1) 
y7rr v+ 2 
-I 
(157) 

Appendices 
845 
Appendix M: The periodic boundary conditions and the density of 
states 
In developing the scattering theory, we consider the particle inside a cube of volume 
L 3 and initially in a plane wave state corresponding to momentum p (see Sec. 25.3). 
Thus the particle is described by the wave function 
where 
1 
·k 
ljf = --e' ·r 
0/2 
1 
k=-p 
n 
and the factor L -3/2 normalizes the wave function 
{L t~ {L 
Jo Jo Jo 
Iljfl2 dx dy dz = 1 
(158) 
(159) 
The allowed values of k are determinated from the boundary conditions. It is 
convenient to use the periodic boundary conditions (see also Sec. 27.3): 
and 
giving 
ljf (x = 0, y, z) = ljf (x = L, y, z) 
ljf (x, y = 0, z) = ljf (x, y = L, z) 
ljf (x, y, z = 0) = ljf (x, y, z = L) 
exp [ikxL] = 1 = exp [ikyL] = exp [ikzL] 
(160) 
(161) 
Thus the allowed values of kx, ky and kz are given by [cf. Eq. (37) of Chapter 27]: 
2:rr n x 
2:rr n v 
2:rr n z 
kx = --, kv - -L 
. , kz -
L 
. 
L 
(162) 
where 
(163) 
Now, the number of states whose x- component of k lies between kx and 
kx + dkx would simply be the number of integers lying between Lkx/2:rr and 
L (kx + dkx) /2:rr; this number would be approximately equal to Ldkx /2:rr. Simi-
larly, the number of states whose y- and z- components of k lie between ky and 
ky + dky and kz and kz +dkz would, respectively, be 
L 
L 
-dk and -
dk 
2:rr 
y 
2:rr 
z 

846 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Thus there will be 
(164) 
states in the range dkxdkydkz of k. Obviously, the number of states in the range 
dpxdpydpz of p will be 
L3 
8rr 3 113 dpx dpy dpz 
( 165) 
Now if p (k) dk dQ represents the number of states whose JkJlies between k and 
k + dk and the direction of k lies in the solid angle dQ (= sin e de d¢) then 
(166) 
For a non-relativistic particle of mass m we have E = 112 k2 12m giving 
(167) 
If we integrate over dQ we would get the total number of states whose energies lie 
between E and E + dE 
L3 
g (E) dE = -- (2m)3/2 E'/2dE 
4rr2 n3 
(168) 
which is identical to the expression for g (E) derived in Sec. 6.8.1 (except for the 
additional factor of 2 introduced there) where we had assumed end point boundary 
conditions, i.e. 1jf was assumed to vanish on the surface of the cube. Thus the 
expression for density of states is independent of the boundary conditions used. 
Returning to Eg. (9) we note that for an electromagnetic field inside a cube (see 
Sec. 27.3) w = ck and one has 
L3 
p(w)dwdQ = --3-3 w2dwdQ 
8rr c 
(169) 
If we sum over two independent modes of polarization and integrate over the solid 
angle we would get 
(170) 

Appendices 
847 
Appendix N: Alternative derivation of the Green's function for the 
(V2 + k 2) operator 
The free particle Green's function is defined through the equation 
We Fourier analyze G and 8: 
G(r-r' = _1-3 jg(k')exP[ik'.(r-r')]dk' 
(2rr) 
8(r - r') = _1-3 j exp[ik'.(r - r')]dk' 
(2rr) 
(171) 
(172) 
(173) 
where we have used Eq. (46) of Chapter 1. Substituting these in Eq. (171) we get 
(_k,2 + k2)g(k') = I 
or 
(k') _ _ 
1 
g 
-
k'2 - k2 
(174) 
Thus 
, 
1 j 
I 
'" 
G(r - r) = --3 
2 
2 exp[ik .(r - r )]dk 
8rr 
(k' - k ) 
(175) 
which is the Green's function for the operator (V2 + k2 ). We may mention that 
the integrals in Eqs. (172), (173) and (175) are 3 dimensional integrals. We define 
a new variable p = r - r' and choose the direction of the polar axis (i.e., the 
direction of k~) along p to get 
so that 
G(p) 
or 
k'.(r - r') = k'.p = k' p cos e 
__ 1_ tx) k'2dk' [rr eik' P cose sin ede [2rr d¢ 
8rr 3 10 
k'2 - F 10 
10 
1 100 k'2dk' [eik,p_e-ik'P] 
--.2rr 
8rr 3 
0 
k'2 - F 
i k' p 
G 
----
dk' 
1 /+00 
[ 
k'eik'p 
] 
(p) -
4rr 2ip -00 
(k' + k)(k' - k) 
(176) 
(177) 
We integrate this by going over to the complex k' -plane. The integrand has poles 
on the real axis at k' = ±k. For the contour we shall choose the real axis closed by 

848 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
the infinitely far upper half semicircle (see Fig. N.1) since the factor eik' P ensures 
that the integral vanishes on the upper half semicircle; this follows from Jordan's 
lemma (see, for example, Ref. 1). There, however, remains the important question 
of how to go around the two poles. We shall choose the two contours shown in Figs 
D.l(a) and (b). In case (a), the result is 
I 
[k'eik'p] 
G(p) = ---2rri --
4rr2pi 
k'+k 
k'=k 
This gives 
(178) 
Similarly case (b) gives 
e-ikp 
G_(p) =--
4rrp 
(179) 
Another way of formulating the rules for evaluating G ± is that for G + we replace 
k in the denominator in the integral by k + i c and for G _ we replace k by k - i c 
always remembering that c is positive and letting c ~ O. 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure N.l. The two contours of integration chosen 
Reference 
1. J. Irving and N. Mullineux, Mathematics in Physics and Engineering, Acad-
emic Press, New York (1959). 

Appendices 
849 
Appendix 0: Asymptotic form of the radial part of the Schrodinger 
equation for a short-range force 
For a spherically symmetric potential, the radial part of the Schrodinger equation 
can be put in the form [see Eq. (59) of Chapter 24]: 
d2Ut(r) + [k2 _ VCr) _ l(l + 1)] Ut(r) = 0 
dr2 
r2 
(180) 
where Ut (r) = rRt (r), k2 = 2mE/ /i2, V (r) = 2mV (r) / /i2. In this appendix 
we will show that for a short-range force for which 
lim rV (r) = 0 
(181) 
r--'>oo 
the asymptotic form of U/ (r) is exp (± ikr). 
We first assume that at large values of r, the terms V (r) and I (I + 1) / r2 in Eq. 
(1) can be neglected. Then the solution will be Ut '" exp (± ikr), this suggests that 
we try a solution of the form 
u/ V) = A cxp [! f V) dr'J cxp [± ikrJ 
(182) 
If we substitute in Eq. (1), we would obtain 
df 
I (I + 1) 
-
+ f2 ± 2ik fer) = V (r) + 
2 
== W (r) 
(183) 
dr 
r 
If W (r) behaves as e-ar for r --l> 00 (then 1 is necessarily zero), f (r) will also 
behaves as e-ar as can be seen by substitution (the term f2 will be negligible). 
r 
Consequently the integral J f (r') dr' will tend to a constant value and Ut (r) 
a 
will behave as exp( ± i kr). On the other hand if W (r) '" A' / ra (ex > 0) then 
f (r) '" =f(A'/2ik) (l/ra ) (the terms involving dfldr and f2 would be negligi-
r 
ble). However, only for ex > 1, the integral J f (r') dr' would tend to a constant 
a 
value. Indeed for ex = 1 (i.e. for the Coulomb potential) we will have 
Ut (r) ---l> exp (± ikr ± ~ 
In r) 
r--'>oo 
21k 
(184) 
Thus the form of Ut (r) for r --l> 00 does not approach a definite phase; however, 
we can still obtain an expression for the scattering cross-section (see Sec. 24.6). 
Thus, if ex > 1, the asymptotic form of Ut (r) is indeed of the form of exp(± ikr). 

850 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
Appendix P: Tunnelling calculations 
The probability that at time t, the particle is still inside the well is approximately 
given by the overlap integral 
Now 
P(t)~ 
00 I \lJ*(x, 0) \lJ(x, t) dx 
o 
00 
2 
\lJ(x, t) = I dE ¢(E) 1/1 E(x) e-iEt/ 1J 
o 
[see Eg. (25) of Chapter 23]. Thus 
(185) 
(186) 
pet) ~ I! dx [! dE'¢*(E')Vr~'(X)] [! dE¢(E) VrE(X) e-iEt/ ll ] 12 
~ II dE' ¢*(E') I dE ¢(E) e-iEt / Il I dx 1/I~,(x) Vr E(x) 12 
Since the last integral is 8(E - E'), we readily get 
( 187) 
In order to evaluate the above integral, we must evaluate I¢(E) 12 which is given by 
[see Eg. (28) of Chapter 23]: 
(188) 
Now, Ab is given by [see Eg. (9) of Chapter 23] 
(189) 
In order to evaluate A, we express it in terms of D and then use Eg. (19) of 
Chapter 23. Since the wave packet is a superposition of states around the quasi-
bound state, I¢(E) 12 is very sharply peaked around E ~ Eb and therefore all 
calculations will be carried out around E ~ Eb . We begin with calculation of C 
around E = Eb ; we first note that at resonance 
(190) 

Appendices 
851 
[see Eq. (2) of Chapter 23]. Thus 
(191) 
where 
(192) 
[see Eq. (5) of Chapter 23]. Now, 
c= ~ A [sin ka - ~ cos ka ] k ~ kb 
K ~ Kb 
1 
[ 
kb 
] 
~ - A sin kba -
-
cos kba 
2 
Kb 
I 
[ kba 
kb K ba ] 
~ ±-A -+--
2 
a 
Kb a 
kba 
(193) 
~ ±A-
a 
Since 
BIE=Eb = 0 
we must make a Taylor series expansion of B around E = Eb: 
B ~ dB I 
(E - Eb ) 
dE E=Eh 
~ ~A [(acoska + ~coska _ ka sinka) dk 
2 
K 
K 
dE 
_!:"'-coska dK ] 
(E-Eb) 
K2 
dE E=Eh 
Since 
2 
2f.LE 
and 
2 
2f.L 
k =-
K = -(Vo - E) 
1i2 
1i2 
(194) 
we get 
dk 
f.L 
dK 
f.L 
1i2k 
and 
1i2K 
dE 
dE 
(195) 
Using the above equations [and Eq. (7)] we readily obtain 
1 
f.La 
B ~ --A 
2 
2 (l + Kba)(E - Eb) 
2 a Ii kbK b 
(196) 

852 
QUANTUM MECHANICS 
where we have used the fact that 
(197) 
Substituting for Band C from Eqs (12) and (9) in the expression for D± [see Eq. 
(17) of Chapter 23], we get 
where 
Since 
ID I = -A/"" 
b 
1 ± _b IE - E' 
irl 
I 
/la(! +K a)eKbd I 
K I 
± 
4 
b.2k 
2 
·k 
b =F 
a fl 
bK h 
I h 
r 
E' b 
I [ f-t ] 1/2 
ID+I=- -
Ii 
2:rr k 
and 
[see Eqs (19) and (9) of Chapter 23], we may write 
Thus Eq. (3) becomes 
If r 
e-iEt / Jj 
12 
P t 
~ 
-
dE 
( ) 
:rr (E -
E~)2 + r 2 
(198) 
(199) 
(200) 
(201) 
(202) 
(203) 
We may evaluate the integral from -00 to +00 since most of the contribution will 
come from the region near resonance (E ~ E~). We introduce the variable 
17= 
(E -
E~) 
Ii 
(204) 
to write 
pet) ~ 
2 
+00 
:h L 
(ry + i;);(~ _ if) dry 
(205) 
For t > 0, the integral may be evaluated by using complex variable techniques and 
Jordan's lemma. In the complex l7-plane we choose a contour which consists of the 

Appendices 
853 
real axis and a semicircle in the lower-half plane where the integral vanishes. There 
is a simple pole within the contour at 
so that 
pet) ~ 
where 
ir 
1]=--
Ii 
2 
r 
e-11 / n 
-
·2rri--.-
rr Ii 
_ 2,r 
Pi 
Ii 
T=-
2r 
represents the mean lifetime of the particle. 
(206) 
(207) 

Index 
Addition of angular momentum, 478 
Adiabatic approximation, 684 
Adjoint of an operator, 295 
Airy functions, 458, 815 
Alpha decay problem, 450 
Ammonia molecule, 409 
Angular momentum matrices, 345 
Angular momentum, 221 
addition of, 478 
and rotations, 232 
classical model for, 355 
eigenfunctions using operator 
algebra, 389 
operator representation of, 222 
using bra and ket algebra, 339 
Annihilation operator, 173, 314 
Anomalous Zeeman effect, 541 , 546 
Associated Legendre polynomial, 826 
Asymptotic series, 835 
Balmer series, 256 
Barrier transmission problem, 197 
Bessel functions, 831 
Beta decay problem, 688, 694 
Black holes, 46 
Bloch's theorem, 414 
Bohr's correspondence principle, 183 
Born approximation, 637 
Boundary conditions, 117 
Bounded harmonic potential, 190 
Bra vector, 292 
Bra and ket algebra, 291 
Bragg condition, 694 
Bragg reflections, 47 
Cold emission, 471 
Commutation relations, 76, 231 
Commutator, 76 
Completeness condition, 171, 299 
Compton effect, 39 
Confluent hypergeometric function, 185, 
259,822 
Connection formulae, 428, 458 
Continuity conditions, 117 
Continuity equation, 78, 812 
Corpuscular model of light, 32 
Coulomb potential, 248, 639 
Coulomb scattering, 653 
Creation operator, 314 
Current density, 77 
Dalgarno's method, 519 
Darwin term, 794 
Davisson-Germer experiment, 50 
Debye-Waller factor, 710 
Degeneracy, 118, 297 
Delta function, 3 
Delta function as a distribution, 14 
Delta function potential, 214 
Density of states, 135,683,845 
Density operator, 329 
Destruction operator, 314 
Deuterium, 256 
discovery of, 256 
Center of mass coordinate system, 249, 660, 
Deuteron problem, 279, 574 
Diamagnetic susceptibility, 556 
Diatomic molecules, 235, 262 
Diffraction of X-rays, 47 
Dipole matrix element, 720 
Dirac delta function, 3 
827 
Chandrasekhar limit, 146 
Classical oscillator, 174,324 
Clebsch-Gordon coefficients, 478 
Coherent state, 173,319,761 
time evolution of, 174, 320 
Diract equation, 780 
covariance of, 800 
Double barrier, 447 
Double well potential, 403 
Double oscillator, 460 
Double slit diffraction pattern, 106 
855 

856 
Ehrenfest's theorem, 81, 87,178 
Eigenvalue equation, 296 
Einstein coefficient, 717 
Electron magnetic moment, 535, 790 
Electron spin resonance (ESR) 
experiment, 373 
Electron spin, historical remarks of, 351 
EPR paradox, 373 
Equation of continuity, 78,812 
Evanescent wave, 218 
Exchange degeneracy, 582 
Exclusion principle, 579, 584 
Expansion formula, 642 
Expectation values, 79 
Fermi energy, 137 
Fermi's golden rule, 681 
Fermi-Dirac function, 137 
Field emission, 471 
Fine structure of hydrogen atom, 508 
First order perturbation theory, 496 
Fourier integral theorem, 14 
Fourier transforms, 14 
Fowler-Nordheim formula, 471 
Franck-Hertz experiment, 64 
Free electron theory, 137 
Free particle propagator, 99, 103 
Free particle, 89 
Fresnel integral, 813 
Gamma function, 809 
Gaussian wave packet, 93 
Gravitational red shift, 45 
Green's function, 632, 847 
Group velocity, 100 
Hard sphere, 647 
Harmonic oscillator problem, 159,308 
eigenfunctions of, 167, 316 
eigenvalues of, 167, 313 
JWKB solutions, 432 
most general solution of, 171 
propagator of, 184 
relationship with the classical oscillator, 
174,320 
Heisenberg equation of motion, 327 
Heisenberg picture, 325 
Heisenberg uncertainty principle -
see Uncertainty principle 
Helium atom, 523, 564, 579 
ionized, 517 
Hermite equation, 163 
Hermite Gauss functions, 167, 819 
completeness condition of, 171 
orthonormality condition of, 169 
Hermite polynomials, 166 
Hole theory, 802 
Hydrogen atom problem, 251, 797 
fine structure of, 508, 516 
wavefunctions of, 257, 829 
Hydrogen molecule ion, 568 
Hydrogen-like atom problem, 251 
Hyperfine structure, 542 
Infinitesimal rotations, 233 
Interference experiments, 59 
Ionized helium atom, 517 
Isospin, 487 
Isotope shift, 523 
Isotropic oscillator, 273 
JWKB approximation, 423 
condition for validity, 423 
historical remarks, 459 
JWKB connection formulae, 428 
JWKB quantization condition, 432 
Ket vector, 291 
Klein-Gordon equation, 779 
K-meson, problem, 690, 707 
Kronig-Penney model, 216,401,414 
Kurie plot, 696 
Ladder operators, 229, 340, 389 
Landau bands, 554 
Larmor precession, 363 
Lorentz triplet, 730 
Lorentzian line shape, 771 
Legendre polynomials, 228 
Linear harmonic oscillator - see Harmonic 
oscillator 
Linear operators, 293 
Linear potential, 150, 155,436 
Lyman series, 256 
Magnetic field, effects of, 534 
Magnetic moment due to orbital motion, 
539 

Magnetic moment, 535, 790 
Magnetic resonance experiment, 368 
Matrix method, 612 
Matter waves, 56 
probabilistic interpretation of, 56 
Michelson interferometer, 59 
Momentum operator, 73 
eigenfunctions of, 83 
Momentum probability distribution, 94 
Mossbauer effect, 710 
Muonic atom, 523, 529 
Neutron stars, 146 
Neutron-proton interaction, 572 
Neutron-proton scattering, 649 
Non-degenerate perturbation theory, 494 
Normal Zeeman effect, 541, 544 
Normalization condition, 78 
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) 
experiment, 373 
Null operator, 294 
Number operator, 324 
Observables, 298 
One dimensional potential well, 121 
Orbital angular momentum, 358 
and magnetic moment, 358 
Orthogonality condition, 119, 297 
Orthonormality condition, 120 
Parabolic barrier, 444 
Parity, 120 
Paschen series, 256 
Paschen-Back effect, 542, 547 
Pauli equation, 349 
Pauli exclusion principle, 579, 584 
Pauli spin matrices, 304, 346, 359, 782 
Pauli wave function, 349 
Periodic boundary conditions, 845 
Periodic potential, 212, 414 
Perturbation theory for degenerate 
states, 501 
Perturbation theory, time independent, 493 
Phase shift, 646, 651 
Phase velocity, 103 
Photoelectric effect, 33 
Photon mass, 45 
Positrons, 802 
Potential step, 198 
Probability current density, 77 
Quantization condition, 432 
Quantization of radiation, 751 
Quantum dot, 27 
Quantum theory of radiation, 742 
Quasi bound states, 601 
857 
Radial part of the SchrOdinger equation, 247 
Radial component of momentum, 241 
Radiation field, 330 
Radiation theory, 719, 742 
Rectangular potential barrier, 20 I , 211 
Reduced mass, 250 
Reflection coefficient, 203 
Relative coordinate, 249, 827 
Relativistic effects, 510 
Relativistic theory, 779 
Rotation spectra, 262 
Rotational constants, 264 
Rotational operator, 232 
Rotations, 232 
Scalar product, 292 
Scattering amplitude, 646 
Scattering theory, 625, 682 
Schmidt's orthogonalization procedure, 152 
SchrOdinger equation, 71 
radial part of, 247 
SchrOdinger picture, 325 
Second order perturbation theory, 497 
Selection rules, 727 
Self adjoint operator, 296 
Semi-classical theory of radiation, 719 
Simultaneous eigenkets, 302 
Single slit diffraction experiment, 54, 106 
Singlet state, 484 
Sinusoidal potential, 607 
Snell's law, 217 
Specific heat of the electron gas, 140 
Spherical Bessel function, 640, 831 
Spherical harmonics, 221, 390 
expressions for, 395 
orthonormality condition of, 231 
Spherically symmetric potentials, 246 
JWKB solutions, 449 
Spin angular momentum, 359 

858 
magnetic moment, 359 
Spin exchange operator, 551 
Spin matrices - see Pauli spin matrices 
Spin-orbit interaction, 512, 540, 791 
Spontaneous emission rate, 718, 725, 753 
Square well potential, 128,211,627 
Squeezed states, 189 
Stark effect, 502 
Stationary states, 115 
Stern-Gerlach experiment, 360 
Stimulated emission, 718, 722, 753 
Sudden approximation, 686 
Thomas-Fermi model, 617 
Three dimensional oscillator, 270, 461 
Three dimensional SchrOdinger 
equation, 132 
Time dependent perturbation theory, 676 
Time dependent Schrodinger equation, 71 
Time independent perturbation theory, 493 
Transition probability, 677 
Transmission coefficient, 203 
Triangular barrier, 462 
Triangular well, 150, 155,436 
Triplet state, 484 
Tunneling lifetime calculation, 598 
Tunnelling problem, 20 I, 441, 853 
Two body problem, 248 
Two dimensional oscillator, 334 
Two state system, 409 
Uncertainty principle, 31, 53 
exact statement of, 81 
proof of, 81 
Uncertainty product, 315 
Unit operator, 294 
Unitary transformation, 325 
Van der Waal's interaction, 523 
Variational method, 560 
Vibration rotation spectra, 262 
Vibration spectra, 262 
Wave function, 72 
physical interpretation of, 77 
Wave model of light, 32 
Wave nature of matter, 46 
Wave packet, 92 
group velocity of, 100 
reflection of, 204 
time evolution of, 92 
transmission of, 204 
White dwarf stars, 142 
WKB approximation - see JWKB 
approximation 
X-ray diffraction, 47 
Young's two-hole interference 
experiment, 60 
Zeeman effect, 541, 544, 546, 730 

Fundamental Theories of Physics 
Series Editor: Alwyn van der Merwe, University of Denver, USA 
I. 
M. Sachs: General Relativity and Matter. A Spinor Field Theory from Fermis to Light-Years. 
With a Foreword by C. Kilmister. 1982 
ISBN 90-277-1381-2 
2. 
G.H. Duffey: A Development of Quantum Mechanics. Based on Symmetry Considerations. 
1985 
ISBN 90-277-1587-4 
3. 
S. Diner, D. Fargue, G. Lochak and F. Selleri (eds.): The Wave-Particle Dualism. A Tribute to 
Louis de Broglie on his 90th Birthday. 1984 
ISBN 90-277-1664-1 
4. 
E. Prugovecki: Stochastic Quantum Mechanics and Quantum Spacetime. A Consistent Unific-
ation of Relativity and Quantum Theory based on Stochastic Spaces. 1984; 2nd printing 1986 
ISBN 90-277-1617-X 
5. 
D. Hestenes and G. Sobczyk: Clifford Algebra to Geometric Calculus. A Unified Language 
for Mathematics and Physics. 1984 
ISBN 90-277-1673-0; Pb (1987) 90-277-2561-6 
6. 
P. Exner: Open Quantum Systems and Feynman Integrals. 1985 
ISBN 90-277-1678-\ 
7. 
L. Mayants: The Enigma (~rProbability and Physics. 1984 
ISBN 90-277-1674-9 
8. 
E. Tocaci: Relativistic Mechanics, Time and Inertia. Translated from Romanian. Edited and 
with a Foreword by c.w. Kilmister. 1985 
ISBN 90-277-1769-9 
9. 
B. Bertotti, F. de Felice and A. Pascolini (eds.): General Relativity and Gravitation. Proceedings 
of the 10th International Conference (Padova, Italy, 1983). 1984 
ISBN 90-277-1819-9 
10. 
G. Tarozzi and A. van der Merwe (eds.): Open Questions in Quantum Physics. 1985 
ISBN 90-277-1853-9 
11. 
J.Y. Narlikar and T. Padmanabhan: Gravity, Gauge Theories and Quantum Cosmology. 1986 
ISBN 90-277-1948-9 
12. 
G.S. Asanov: Finsler Geometry, Relativity and Gauge Theories. 1985 
ISBN 90-277-1960-8 
13. 
K. Namsrai: Nonlocal Quantum Field Theory and Stochastic Quantum Mechanics. 1986 
ISBN 90-277-2001-0 
14. 
C. Ray Smith and W.T. Grandy, Jr. (eds.): Maximum-Entropy and Bayesian Methods in Inverse 
Problems. Proceedings of the 1st and 2nd International Workshop (Laramie, Wyoming, USA). 
1985 
ISBN 90-277-2074-6 
15. 
D. Hestenes: New Foundationsfor Classical Mechanics. 1986 
ISBN 90-277-2090-8; 
Pb (1987) 90-277-2526-8 
16. 
S.J. Prokhovnik: Light in Einstein's Universe. The Role of Energy in Cosmology and Relativity. 
1985 
ISBN 90-277-2093-2 
17. 
Y.S. Kim and M.E. Noz: Theory and Applications of the Poincare Group. 1986 
ISBN 90-277-2141-6 
18. 
M. Sachs: Quantum Mechanics from General Relativity. An Approximation for a Theory of 
Inertia. 1986 
ISBN 90-277-2247-1 
19. 
W.T. Grandy, Jr.: Foundations of Statistical Mechanics. Vol. I: Equilibrium Theory. 1987 
ISBN 90-277-2489-X 
20. 
H.-H von Borzeszkowski and H.-J. Treder: The Meaning of Quantum Gravity. 1988 
ISBN 90-277-2518-7 
21. 
C. Ray Smith and G.J. Erickson (eds.): Maximum-Entropy and Bayesian Spectral Analysis 
and Estimation Problems. Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop (Laramie, Wyoming, 
USA, 1983). 1987 
ISBN 90-277-2579-9 
22. 
A.O. Bamt and A. van der Merwe (eds.): Selected Scientific Papers of Alfred Lande. [1888-
1975]. 1988 
ISBN 90-277-2594-2 

23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
Fundamental Theories of Physics 
W.T. Grandy, Jf.: Foundations of Statistical Mechanics. Vol. II: Nonequilibrium Phenomena. 
1988 
ISBN 90-277-2649-3 
E.l. Bitsakis and C.A. Nicolaides (eds.): The Concept of Probability. Proceedings of the Delphi 
Conference (Delphi, Greece, 1987). 1989 
ISBN 90-277-2679-5 
A. van der Merwe, F. Selleri and G. Tarozzi (eds.): Microphysical Reality and Quantum 
Formalism, Vol. 1. Proceedings of the International Conference (Urbino, Italy, 1985). 1988 
ISBN 90-277-2683-3 
A. van der Merwe, F. Selleri and G. Tarozzi (eds.): Microphysical Reality and Quantum 
Formalism, Vol. 2. Proceedings of the International Conference (Urbino, Italy, 1985). 1988 
ISBN 90-277-2684-1 
I.D. Novikov and v.P. Frolov: Physics (If Black Holes. 1989 
ISBN 90-277-2685-X 
G. Tarozzi and A. van der Merwe (eds.): The Nature of Quantum Paradoxes. Italian Studies in 
the Foundations and Philosophy of Modern Physics. 1988 
ISBN 90-277-2703-1 
B.R. Iyer, N. Mukunda and c.v. Vishveshwara (eds.): Gravitation, Gauge Theories and the 
Early Universe. 1989 
ISBN 90-277 -2710-4 
H. Mark and L. Wood (eds.): Energy in Physics, War and Peace. A Festschrift celebrating 
Edward Teller's 80th Birthday. 1988 
ISBN 90-277-2775-9 
GJ. Erickson and C.R. Smith (eds.): Maximum-Entropy and Bayesian Methods in Science and 
Engineering. Vol. I: Foundations. 1988 
ISBN 90-277-2793-7 
GJ. Erickson and C.R. Smith (eds.): Maximum-Entropy and Bayesian Methods in Science and 
Engineering. Vol. II: Applications. 1988 
ISBN 90-277-2794-5 
M.E. Noz and YS. Kim (eds.): Special Relativity and Quantum Theory. A Collection of Papers 
on the Poincare Group. 1988 
ISBN 90-277-2799-6 
l.Yu. Kobzarev and Yu.I. Manin: Elementary Particles. Mathematics, Physics and Philosophy. 
1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0098-X 
F. Selleri: Quantum Paradoxes and Physical Reality. 1990 
ISBN 0-7923-0253-2 
J. Skilling (ed.): Maximum-Entropy and Bayesian Methods. Proceedings ofthe 8th International 
Workshop (Cambridge, UK, 1988). 1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0224-9 
M. Kafatos (ed.): Bell's Theorem, Quantum Theory and Conceptions of the Universe. 1989 
ISBN 0-7923-0496-9 
Yu.A. Izyumov and V.N. Syromyatnikov: Phase Transitions and Crystal Symmetry. 1990 
ISBN 0-7923-0542-6 
P.F. Fougere (ed.): Maximum-Entropy and Bayesian Methods. Proceedings of the 9th Interna-
tional Workshop (Dartmouth, Massachusetts, USA, 1989). 1990 
ISBN 0-7923-0928-6 
L. de Broglie: Heisenberg's Uncertainties and the Prohahilistic Interpretation (i Wave Mech-
anics. With Critical Notes of the Author. 1990 
ISBN 0-7923-0929-4 
W.T. Grandy, Jf.: Relativistic Quantum Mechanics of Leptons and Fields. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923- 1049-7 
Yu.L. Klimontovich: Turbulent Motion and the Structure of Chaos. A New Approach to the 
Statistical Theory of Open Systems. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1114-0 
W.T. Grandy, Jr. and L.H. Schick (eds.): Maximum-Entropy and Bayesian Methods. Proceed-
ings of the 10th International Workshop (Laramie, Wyoming, USA, 1990). 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1140-X 
P. Pllik and S. Pulmannova: Orthomodular Structures as Quantum Logics. Intrinsic Properties, 
State Space and Probabilistic Topics. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1207-4 
D. Hestenes and A. Weingartshofer (eds.): The Electron. New Theory and Experiment. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1356-9 

Fundamental Theories of Physics 
46. 
P.PJ .M. Schram: Kinetic Theory of Gases and Plasmas. 1991 
ISBN 0-7923-1392-5 
47. 
A. Micali, R. Boudet and J. Helmstetter (eds.): Clifford Algebras and their Applications in 
Mathematical Physics. 1992 
ISBN 0-7923-1623-1 
48. 
E. Prugovecki: Quantum Geometry. A Framework for Quantum General Relativity. 1992 
ISBN 0-7923-1640-1 
49. 
M.H. Mac Gregor: The Enigmatic Electron. 1992 
ISBN 0-7923-1982-6 
50. 
C.R. Smith, GJ. Erickson and P.O. Neudorfer (eds.): Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods. 
Proceedings of the 11 th International Workshop (Seattle, 1991). 1993 ISBN 0-7923-203 I-X 
51. 
OJ. Hoekzema: The Quantum Labyrinth. 1993 
ISBN 0-7923-2066-2 
52. 
Z. Oziewicz, B. Jancewicz and A. Borowiec (eds.): Spinors, Twistors, Clifford Algebras and 
Quantum Deformations. Proceedings of the Second Max Born Symposium (Wroc/aw, Poland, 
1992). 1993 
ISBN 0-7923-2251-7 
53. 
A. Mohammad-Djafari and G. Demoment (eds.): Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods. 
Proceedings of the 12th International Workshop (Paris, France, 1992). 1993 
ISBN 0-7923-2280-0 
54. 
M. Riesz: Clifford Numbers and Spinors with Riesz' Private Lectures to E. Folke Bolinder and 
a Historical Review by Pertti Lounesto. E.F. Bolinder and P. Lounesto (eds.). 1993 
ISBN 0-7923-2299-1 
55. 
F. Brackx, R. Delanghe and H. Serras (eds.): Clifford Algebras and their Applications in 
Mathematical Physics. Proceedings of the Third Conference (Deinze, 1993) 1993 
ISBN 0-7923-2347-5 
56. 
J.R. Fanchi: Parametrized Relativistic Quantum Theory. 1993 
ISBN 0-7923-2376-9 
57. 
A. Peres: Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods. 1993 
ISBN 0-7923-2549-4 
58. 
P.L. Antonelli, R.S. Ingarden and M. Matsumoto: The Theory of Sprays and Finsler Spaces 
with Applications in Physics and Biology. 1993 
ISBN 0-7923-2577-X 
59. 
R. Miron and M. Anastasiei: The Geometry of Lagrange Spaces: Theory and Applications. 
1994 
ISBN 0-7923-2591-5 
60. 
G. Adomian: Solving Frontier Problems (){Physics: The Decomposition Method. 1994 
ISBN 0-7923-2644-X 
61. 
B.S. Kerner and v.v. Osipov: Autosolitons. A New Approach to Problems of Self-Organization 
and Turbulence. 1994 
ISBN 0-7923-2816-7 
62. 
G.R. Heidbreder (ed.): Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods. Proceedings of the 13th 
International Workshop (Santa Barbara, USA, 1993) 1996 
ISBN 0-7923-2851-5 
63. 
J. Penna, Z. Hradil and B. Jurco: Quantum Optics and Fundamentals of Physics. 1994 
ISBN 0-7923-3000-5 
64. 
M. Evans and J.-P. Vigier: The Enigmatic Photon. Volume I: The Field B(3). 1994 
65. 
C.K. Raju: Time: Towards a COllstistent Theory. 1994 
66. 
A.K.T. Assis: Weber's Electrodynamics. 1994 
ISBN 0-7923-3049-8 
ISBN 0-7923-3103-6 
ISBN 0-7923-31:17-0 
67. 
Yu. L. Klimontovich: Statistical Theory (!{Open Systems. Volume I: A Unified Approach to 
Kinetic Description of Processes in Active Systems. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-3199-0; 
Pb: ISBN 0-7923-3242-3 
68. 
M. Evans and J.-P. Vigier: The Enigmatic Photon. Volume 2: Non-Abelian Electrodynamics. 
1995 
ISBN 0-7923-3288-1 
69. 
G. Esposito: Complex General Relativity. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-3340-3 

Fundamental Theories of Physics 
70. 
J. Skilling and S. Sibisi (eds.): Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods. Proceedings of the 
Fourteenth International Workshop on Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods. 1996 
ISBN 0-7923-3452-3 
71. 
C. Garola and A. Rossi (eds.): The Foundations of Quantum Mechanics Historical Analysis 
and Open Questions. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-3480-9 
72. 
A. Peres: Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods. 1995 (see for hardback edition, Vol. 57) 
ISBN Pb 0-7923-3632-1 
73. 
M. Ferrero and A. van der Merwe (eds.): Fundamental Problems in Quantum Physics. 1995 
ISBN 0-7923-3670-4 
74. 
EE. Schroeck, Jr.: Quantum Mechanics on Phase Space. 1996 
ISBN 0-7923-3794-8 
75. 
L. de la Pena and A.M. Cetto: The Quantum Dice. An Introduction to Stochastic Electro-
dynamics. 1996 
ISBN 0-7923-3818-9 
76. 
P.L. Antonelli and R. Miron (eds.): Lagrange and Finsler Geometry. Applications to Physics 
and Biology. 1996 
ISBN 0-7923-3873-1 
77. 
M.W. Evans, J.-P. Vigier, S. Roy and S. Jeffers: The Enigmatic Photon. Volume 3: Theory and 
Practice of the B(3) Field. 1996 
ISBN 0-7923-4044-2 
78. 
W.G.v. Rosser: Interpretation of Classical Electromagnetism. 1996 
ISBN 0-7923-4187-2 
79. 
K.M. Hanson and R.N. Silver (eds.): Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods. 1996 
ISBN 0-7923-4311-5 
80. 
S. Jeffers, S. Roy, J.-P. Vigier and G. Hunter (eds.): The Present Status of the Quantum Theory 
of Light. Proceedings of a Symposium in Honour of Jean-Pierre Vigier. 1997 
ISBN 0-7923-4337-9 
81. 
M. Ferrero and A. van der Merwe (eds.): New Developments on Fundamental Problems in 
Quantum Physics. 1997 
ISBN 0-7923-4374-3 
82. 
R. Miron: The Geometry of Higher-Order Lagrange Spaces. Applications to Mechanics and 
Physics. 1997 
ISBN 0-7923-4393-X 
83. 
T. Hakioglu and A.S. Shumovsky (eds.): Quantum Optics and the Spectroscopy of So/ids. 
Concepts and Advances. 1997 
ISBN 0-7923-4414-6 
84. 
A. Sitenko and V. Tartakovskii: Theory of Nucleus. Nuclear Structure and Nuclear Interaction. 
1997 
ISBN 0-7923-4423-5 
85. 
G. Esposito, A. Yu. Kamenshchik and G. Pollifrone: Euclidean Quantum Gravity on Manif()lds 
with Boundary. 1997 
ISBN 0-7923-4472-3 
86. 
R.S. Ingarden, A. Kossakowski and M. Ohya: Information Dynamics and Open Systems. 
Classical and Quantum Approach. 1997 
ISBN 0-7923-4473-1 
87. 
K. Nakamura: Quantum versus Chaos. Questions Emerging from Mesoscopic Cosmos. 1997 
ISBN 0-7923-4557-6 
88. 
B.R. Iyer and c.v. Vishveshwara (eds.): Geometry, Fields and Cosmology. Techniques and 
Applications. 1997 
ISBN 0-7923-4725-0 
89. 
G.A. Martynov: Classical Statistical Mechanics. 1997 
ISBN 0-7923-4774-9 
90. 
M.W. Evans, J.-P. Vigier, S. Roy and G. Hunter (eds.): The Enigmatic Photon. Volume 4: New 
Directions. 1998 
ISBN 0-7923-4826-5 
91. 
M. Redei: Quantum Logic in Algebraic Approach. 1998 
ISBN 0-7923-4903-2 
92. 
S. Roy: Statistical Geometry and Applications to Microphysics and Cosmology. 1998 
ISBN 0-7923-4907-5 
93. 
B.C. Eu: Nonequilibrium Statistical Mechanics. Ensembled Method. 1998 
ISBN 0-7923-4980-6 

Fundamental Theories of Physics 
94. 
V. Dietrich, K. Habetha and G. Jank (eds.): Clifford Algehras and Their Application in Math-
ematical Physics. Aachen 1996. 1998 
ISBN 0-7923-5037-5 
95. 
J.P. Blaizot, X. Campi and M. Ploszajczak (eds.): Nuclear Matter in Different Phases and 
Transitions. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5660-8 
96. 
Y.P. Frolov and I.D. Novikov: Black Hole Physics. Basic Concepts and New Developments. 
1998 
ISBN 0-7923-5145-2; Pb 0-7923-5146 
97. 
G. Hunter, S. Jeffers and J-P. Vigier (eds.): Causality and Locality in Modern Physics. 1998 
ISBN 0-7923-5227-0 
98. 
G.J. Erickson, J.T. Rychert and C.R. Smith (eds.): Maximum Entropy and Bayesian Methods. 
1998 
ISBN 0-7923-5047-2 
99. 
D. Hestenes: New Foundations for Classical Mechanics (Second Edition). 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5302-1; Pb ISBN 0-7923-5514-8 
100. 
B.R. Iyer and B. Bhawal (eds.): Black Holes, Gravitational Radiation and the Universe. Essays 
in Honor of C. Y. Vishveshwara. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5308-0 
101. P.L. Antonelli and T.J. Zastawniak: Fundamentals of Finslerian Diffusion with Applications. 
1998 
ISBN 0-7923-5511-3 
102. 
H. Atmanspacher, A. Amann and U. Muller-Herold: On Quanta, Mind and Matter Hans Primas 
in Context. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5696-9 
103. 
M.A. Trump and w.e. Schieve: Classical Relativistic Many-Body Dynamics. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5737-X 
104. 
A.I. Maimistov and A.M. Basharov: Nonlinear Optical Waves. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5752-3 
105. W. von der Linden, Y. Dose, R. Fischer and R. Preuss (eds.): Maximum Entropy and Bayesian 
Methods Garching, Germany 1998. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5766-3 
106. 
M.W. Evans: The Enigmatic Photon Volume 5: 0(3) Electrodynamics. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5792-2 
107. G.N. Afanasiev: Topological Effects in Quantum Mecvhanics. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5800-7 
108. 
Y. Devanathan: Angular Momentum Techniques in Quantum Mechanics. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-5866-X 
109. 
P.L. Antonelli (ed.): Finslerian Geometries A Meeting of Minds. 1999 
ISBN 0-7923-6115-6 
110. 
M.B. Mensky: Quantum Measurements and Decoherence Models and Phenomenology. 2000 
ISBN 0-7923-6227-6 
Ill. B. Coecke, D. Moore and A. Wilce (eds.): Current Research in Operation Quantum Logic. 
Algebras, Categories, Languages. 2000 
ISBN 0-7923-6258-6 
112. G. Jumarie: Maximum Entropy, Information Without Prohability and Complex Fractals. Clas-
sical and Quantum Approach. 2000 
ISBN 0-7923-6330-2 
113. 
B. Fain: Irreversibilities in Quantum Mechanics. 2000 
ISBN 0-7923-6581-X 
114. T. Borne, G. Lochak and H. Stumpf: Nonperturhative Quantum Field Theory and the Structure 
of Matter. 2001 
ISBN 0-7923-6803-7 
115. J. Keller: Theory of the Electron. A Theory of Matter from START. 2001 
ISBN 0-7923-6819-3 
116. 
M. Rivas: Kinematical Theory of Spinning Particles. Classical and Quantum Mechanical 
Formalism of Elementary Particles. 2001 
ISBN 0-7923-6824-X 
117. 
A.A. Ungar: Beyond the Einstein Addition Law and its Gyroscopic Thomas Precession. The 
Theory of Gyrogroups and Gyrovector Spaces. 2001 
ISBN 0-7923-6909-2 
118. 
R. Miron, D. Hrimiuc, H. Shimada and S.Y. Sabau: The Geometry of Hamilton and Lagrange 
Spaces. 200 I 
ISBN 0-7923-6926-2 

Fundamental Theories of Physics 
119. 
M. Pavsic: The Landscape of Theoretical Physics: A Global View. From Point Particles to the 
Brane World and Beyond in Search of a Unifying Principle. 2001 
ISBN 0-7923-7006-6 
120. 
R.M. Santilli: Foundations of Hadronic Chemistry. With Applications to New Clean Energies 
and Fuels. 2001 
ISBN 1-4020-0087-1 
121. S. Fujita and S. Godoy: Theory of High Temperature Superconductivity. 2001 
ISBN 1-4020-0149-5 
122. 
R. Luzzi, A.R. Vasconcellos and J. Galvao Ramos: Predictive Statitical Mechanics. A Nonequi-
librium Ensemble Formalism. 2002 
ISBN 1-4020-0482-6 
123. v.v. Kulish: Hierarchical Methods. Hierarchy and Hierarchical Asymptotic Methods in Elec-
trodynamics, Volume I. 2002 
ISBN 1-4020-0757-4; Set: 1-4020-0758-2 
124. B.C. Eu: Generalized Thermodynamics. Thermodynamics of Irreversible Processes 
and Generalized Hydrodynamics. 2002 
ISBN 1-4020-0788-4 
125. A. Mourachkine: High-Temperature Superconductivity in Cuprates. The Nonlinear Mechanism 
and Tunneling Measurements. 2002 
ISBN 1-4020-0810-4 
126. 
R.L. Amoroso, G. Hunter, M. Kafatos and J.-P. Vigier (eds.): Gravitation and Cosmology: 
From the Hubble Radius to the Planck Scale. Proceedings of a Symposium in Honour of the 
80th Birthday of Jean-Pierre Vigier. 2002 
ISBN 1-4020-0885-6 
127. W.M. de Muynck: Foundations of Quantum Mechanics, an Empiricist Approach. 2002 
ISBN 1-4020-0932-1 
128. v.v. Kulish: Hierarchical Methods. Undulative Electrodynamical Systems, Volume 2.2002 
ISBN 1-4020-0968-2; Set: 1-4020-0758-2 
129. M. Mugur-Schachter and A. van der Merwe (eds.): Quantum Mechanics, Mathematics, Cog-
nition and Action. Proposals for a Formalized Epistemology. 2002 
ISBN 1-4020-1120-2 
130. 
P. Bandyopadhyay: Geometry, Topology and Quantum Field Theory. 2003 
ISBN 1-4020-1414-7 
131. 
V. Garza and A. Santos: Kinetic Theory of Gases in Shear Flows. Nonlinear Transport. 2003 
ISBN 1-4020-1436-8 
132. 
R. Miron: The Geometry of Higher-Order Hamilton Spaces. Applications to Hamiltonian 
Mechanics. 2003 
ISBN 1-4020-1574-7 
133. 
S. Esposito, E. Majorana Jr., A. van der Merwe and E. Recami (eds.): Ettore Majorana: Notes 
on Theoretical Physics. 2003 
ISBN 1-4020-1649-2 
134. 
1. Hamhalter. Quantum Measure Theory. 2003 
ISBN 1-4020-1714-6 
135. 
G. Rizzi and M.L. Ruggiero: Relativity in Rotating Frames. Relativistic Physics in Rotating 
Reference Frames. 2004 
ISBN 1-4020-1805-3 
136. 
L. Kantorovich: Quantum Theory (If the Solid State: an Introduction. 2004 
ISBN 1-4020-1821-5 
137. 
A. Ghatak and S. Lokanathan: Quantum Mechanics: Theory and Applications. 2004 
ISBN 1-4020-1850-9 
138. 
A. Khrennikov: information Dynamics in Cognitive, Psychological, Social, and Anomalous 
Phenomena. 2004 
ISBN 1-4020-1868-1 
139. 
V. Faraoni: Cosmology in Scalar-Tensor Gravity. 2004 
ISBN 1-4020-1988-2 
KLUWER ACADEMIC PUBLISHERS - DORDRECHT I BOSTON I LONDON 

