

Citation: Swan, M.; dos Santos, R.P.;
Witte, F. Quantum Neurobiology.
Quantum Rep. 2022, 4, 107–126.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
quantum4010008
Academic Editor: Carlos F. Martino
Received: 26 January 2022
Accepted: 9 February 2022
Published: 13 February 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright:
© 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
quantum reports
Review
Quantum Neurobiology
Melanie Swan 1,*, Renato P. dos Santos 2 and Franke Witte 3
1
Computer Science, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK
2
Physics, Lutheran University of Brazil, Canoas 92425-900, RS, Brazil; renatopsantos@ulbra.edu.br
3
Economics, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK; f.witte@ucl.ac.uk
*
Correspondence: melanie@blockchainstudies.org; Tel.: +44-20-7679-2000
Abstract: Quantum neurobiology is concerned with potential quantum effects operating in the
brain and the application of quantum information science to neuroscience problems, the latter of
which is the main focus of the current paper. The human brain is fundamentally a multiscalar
problem, with complex behavior spanning nine orders of magnitude-scale tiers from the atomic and
cellular level to brain networks and the central nervous system. In this review, we discuss a new
generation of bio-inspired quantum technologies in the emerging ﬁeld of quantum neurobiology
and present a novel physics-inspired theory of neural signaling (AdS/Brain (anti-de Sitter space)).
Three tiers of quantum information science-directed neurobiology applications can be identiﬁed.
First are those that interpret empirical data from neural imaging modalities (EEG, MRI, CT, PET
scans), protein folding, and genomics with wavefunctions and quantum machine learning. Second
are those that develop neural dynamics as a broad approach to quantum neurobiology, consisting of
superpositioned data modeling evaluated with quantum probability, neural ﬁeld theories, ﬁlamentary
signaling, and quantum nanoscience. Third is neuroscience physics interpretations of foundational
physics ﬁndings in the context of neurobiology. The beneﬁt of this work is the possibility of an
improved understanding of the resolution of neuropathologies such as Alzheimer’s disease.
Keywords: quantum biology; quantum neurobiology; quantum neuroscience; biological physics;
neuroscience physics; quantum information science; neuropathology; theoretical neuroscience
1. Introduction
Quantum neurobiology is a topic within the broader ﬁeld of quantum biology. The
traditional concerns of quantum biology are studying quantum effects in biological systems
such as magneto-navigation, photosynthesis, and energy transfer [1]. With the advent of
quantum information science, the quantum biology research agenda is now being expanded
to include also quantum information science approaches to biological questions [2], arguing
that quantum models are needed to address the complexity of biology [3]. Representa-
tive projects include investigating excitation transport in photosynthetic light-harvesting
complexes that indicate speedups analogous to those found in quantum algorithms [4]
and explaining vibrational and environmental-assisted energy transport with quantum
walks [5]. The word “quantum” refers to the scale of atoms and molecules (10−9 to 10−15),
namely atoms at the nanometer scale (10−9), ions and photons at the picometer scale (10−12),
and sub-atomic particles at the femtometer scale (10−15).
Quantum neurobiology has a parallel deﬁnition, with the ﬁrst emphasis being the
investigation of potential quantum effects in the brain [6], also including quantum informa-
tion science methods being applied to neurobiological problems. This paper is principally
concerned with the latter. Regarding potential quantum effects in the brain, on the one
hand, there are proposals in favor of what might be termed the “quantum consciousness
hypothesis” [7–9]. On the other hand, many scientists are careful to distinguish that they
do not endorse this idea, instead supporting the possibility that the mathematical structure
Quantum Rep. 2022, 4, 107–126. https://doi.org/10.3390/quantum4010008
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/quantumrep

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
108
of quantum mechanics may help to explain neural behavior, but not the conjecture that
there is something quantum-like taking place in the brain [10–12].
Other research programs use quantum information science methods to model cogni-
tive processes such as perception, memory, and decision-making, without taking a view
regarding whether quantum effects operate in the brain [13]. Research programs also
target less-contentious topics of quantum-related activity in the brain through quantum
events [14] and superdeterminism [15]. Superdeterminism interprets quantum mechanics
as an effective statistical theory of hidden variables as opposed to one of fundamental
indeterminism. Evolutionary reasons might explain why biological systems of sufﬁcient
complexity display quantum-like behavior, independent of the physical origin of quantum
phenomena in physics. In this vein, quantum biology might crosspollinate back to founda-
tional physics with hidden variables formulations as a practical method for operating in
quantum domains (e.g., hidden-variable models of Bell correlations [16] and Kolmogorov-
related probability formulations [17]). In any case, the ﬁrst-principles step would seem to
be the enumeration of the underlying physiological processes as the building blocks that
might then be examined in relation to higher-order cognitive behavior [18].
Quantum neurobiology extends classical neurobiology as a multidisciplinary ﬁeld
relating biology to the fundamental and clinical neurosciences, investigating the form and
function of neurons, glia, axons, and dendrites in the nervous system, individually and in
ensemble, in health and disease. Various approaches are used to study multiscalar behavior
in the areas of neural signaling transduction and transmission, neural circuits and systems
neurobiology, nervous system development and aging, and the neurobiology of disease and
intervention, including by examining how quantum properties enhance cellular function,
with medical implications for neuropathology diagnosis and treatment [19].
1.1. The Human Brain
The brain is among the most complex systems known [20], with a behavior spanning
nine orders of magnitude-scale tiers in ways that have yet to be fully elucidated (Table 1).
However, in the “big data” era, the requirements associated with modeling the brain (which
has an estimated 86 billion neurons and 242 trillion synapses [21]) are coming within reach.
Biology became an information science with the advent of genomics, and neuroscience is
one of the fastest-growing areas in information biology, with data acquisition outpacing that
of most other biomedical ﬁelds [22]. Whole-brain scanning is revealing the simultaneous
activity of hundreds and thousands of neurons [23] with large-scale cortical recordings [24]
and whole-brain activity logging in behaving organisms [25]. Microscopy advances obtain
a single-molecule resolution that captures synaptic proteins at dendritic spines, myelination
along axons, and presynaptic densities at dopaminergic neurons with expansion light sheet
microscopy [26]. Neuropathologies may be treated at the synaptic scale with novel stem cell
therapies and pharmacological compounds to reverse the effect of dysfunctional genes [27].
Table 1. Levels of organization in the brain (Adapted from [28,29]).
No.
Level
Size (Decimal)
Size (m)
Size (m)
1
Nervous system
1
>1 m
100
2
Subsystem
0.1
10 cm
10−1
3
Neural network
0.01
1 cm
10−2
4
Microcircuit
0.001
1 nm
10−3
5
Neuron
0.000 1
100 µm
10−4
6
Dendritic arbor
0.000 01
10 µm
10−5
7
Synapse
0.000 001
1 µm
10−6
8
Signaling pathway
0.000 000 001
1 nm
10−9
9
Ion channel
0.000 000 000 001
1 pm
10−12
In high-throughput connectomics, ongoing work from the Allen Institute demonstrates
terabyte-scale processing for contemporary neuron reconstruction [30] and petabyte-scale

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
109
next-generation dataset acquisition methods [31]. To complete the human connectome
(and even the mouse connectome [32]), a qualitatively different form of computation
may be required, similar to the technology-driven inﬂection point in the sequencing of
the human genome, enabling its completion in 2001 [33]. Human connectomes are not
an immediate prospect, as the whole-brain fruit ﬂy connectome was only completed in
2018 [34]. The imaging, data processing, and storage requirements may be 1 zettabyte per
human connectome [35], which compares to the 59 zettabytes of data generated worldwide
in 2020 [36]. Neurobiological informatics data include not only genomics and connectomics,
but also synaptomics (mapping of synapses across the brain) and synaptosomics (the
synapse proteome, 1000 proteins implicated in 130 brain diseases) [37].
1.2. Quantum Neurobiology
These state-of-the-art advances in neurobiology pave the way for quantum neuro-
biology and facilitate the research aim of whole-brain neuroscience: full-volume, three-
dimensional analysis of the entire brain at multiple spatial and temporal scales. An im-
mediate practical task is integrating data obtained simultaneously from EEG, MEG, fMRI,
and diffusion tractography (nerve tract data) [38]. Quantum approaches are needed as
supercomputing (only able to model one third of the human brain in a recent project [39])
and other classically based methods make it clear that new platforms are needed for the
next phases of neuroscience data analysis. Simultaneously, quantum information science is
emerging as a vastly more scalable platform with three-dimensional modeling capabilities
appropriate to the representation of real-life brain phenomena such as neurons, glia, and
dendritic arbors. Quantum approaches allow new classes of neurobiological problems
to be addressed more fully, such as the investigation of neural signaling with synaptic
integration (aggregating thousands of incoming spikes from dendrites and other neurons)
and electrical–chemical signal transduction (incorporating neuron–glia interactions at the
molecular scale). This work describes the three areas of activity developing in quantum
neurobiology (Table 2) and proposes a novel theory of neural signaling (AdS/Brain, based
on the AdS/CFT correspondence (anti-de Sitter space/conformal ﬁeld theory)).
Table 2. Quantum neurobiology: three areas of quantum information science study.
1. Waves, Protein Folding, Genomics
2. Neural Dynamics
3. Neuroscience Physics
Waves
Superpositioned Data
AdS/Neuroscience
▪Quantum EEG
Quantum Probability
▪AdS/Brain
▪Quantum MRI
▪Updating (QBism)
▪AdS/Memory
Quantum Protein Folding
Neural Field Theories
▪AdS/Superconducting
Quantum Genomics
▪Synchrony
▪AdS/Energy
▪Sequencing
Filamentary Dynamics
Neuronal Gauge Theories
▪Gene Expression
Quantum Nanoscience
Network Neuroscience
▪Secure Transmission
▪Nanoparticle Fab
Random Tensors
Quantum SNNs
▪Molecular Codes
▪Melonic Diagrams
Symbol (▪) means the sub-levels.
2. Waves, Protein Folding, and Genomics
2.1. Wavefunctions: EEG, fMRI, CT, PET Integration
The ﬁrst widespread class of quantum neurobiology applications is the interpretation
of empirical data from various neural scanning modalities with wavefunctions and quan-
tum machine learning. The EEG-detectable potentials given off by the scalp have been
analyzed since 1875 [40], but a fuller picture of neural signaling also includes waveforms
related to astrocyte calcium signaling, neurotransmitter activity, and dendritic spikes [41].
Although quantum mechanical wavefunctions are naturally suggested, the intractability
of the Schrödinger wave equation has traditionally meant that EEG data are interpreted
with effective nonlinear wave models [42]. Quantum algorithms are now supplanting this
effort and being used to reconstruct medical images from MRI, CT, and PET scanners [43].

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
110
Near-term applications could be in the area of quantum BCIs (brain–computer interfaces),
interpreting EEG waveform data in a brain–machine communications network [44,45].
2.2. Quantum EEG
Quantum machine learning is emerging as an indispensable technique for ﬁnding the
best wavefunction to ﬁt the copious amounts of EEG data generated. A typical problem is
classifying EEG data for Parkinson’s disease patients as potential candidates for Deep Brain
Stimulation, analyzing 794 features from each of 21 EEG channels [46]. Quantum machine
learning is the application of machine learning techniques in a quantum environment,
formulating classical data with quantum methods, and also studying quantum problems
with machine learning methods [47]. Quantum formulations are available for the three
main machine learning architectures: neural networks [48], tensor networks [49], and kernel
learning [50]. A quantum perceptron (core machine learning unit) has been developed
for available quantum processors (the IBM Q-5 Tenerife) [51]. Quantum neural networks
have been proposed for EEG wavefunction modeling, in a standard gate-model quantum
circuit layout using quantum convolutional neural networks (CNN) [52], and also in a
more sequentially oriented quantum recurrent neural network (RNN) [53].
An alternative to quantum machine learning is quantum spike-activated neural net-
works (SNNs)—a bio-inspired neuromorphic computation model with threshold-triggered
activation similar to the natural neural ﬁring of the brain [54]. Exemplar quantum SNN
projects use Josephson junctions to study emergent behavior [55] and accelerated matrix
processing via synaptic weighting [56] and superposition modeling [57].
Framed as a signal processing problem, EEG data interpretation is an exercise of
noise ﬁltering followed by feature extraction and classiﬁcation. EEG data used in BCIs,
for example, have a low signal-to-noise ratio due to noise. A quantum approach applies
ﬁltering algorithms based on advances in processing techniques (Kullback–Leibler spatial
patterns and Bayesian learning) [44] in a quantum recurrent neural network (QRNN) format.
The QRNN characterizes a nonstationary stochastic signal as time-varying wave packets,
interpreted with the Schrödinger wave equation and a Hamiltonian (energy operator). The
QRNN outperforms traditional Kalman ﬁltering methods and is tested on real-time EEG
data and BCI competition test data. The feature extraction and classiﬁcation portion of EEG
data analysis is likewise performed with various quantum machine learning methods such
as entropy-based quantum support vector machines [58], quantum-inspired evolutionary
algorithms [59], and independent component analysis, wavelet transforms, and Fourier
transforms [60]. Finally, quantum methods are facilitating a new level of data resolution in
the examination of EEG data. One project investigates single-trial event-related potentials
(EEG segments time-locked to a cognitive events) with universal cortical building blocks in
the time and frequency domains [61], and another models electrical signals and calcium-ion
interactions together in a path integral approach [62].
2.3. Quantum MRI (Radiology)
Aside from EEG, MRI scans are the other main imaging modality for neural data.
Quantum machine learning techniques could also prove central to MRI data interpreta-
tion in the classiﬁcation of 120 different types of brain tumors, as classical deep learning
networks are already used to identify the six most common tumor types (glioma, brain
metastases, meningioma, adenoma, and neuroma) [63]. Qutrits (three-level quantum states)
may be conducive to brain tumor analysis since many quantum states are not binary. One
proposal suggests that a qutrit model might better correspond to grayscale imaging data,
using a quantum neural network model to segment brain lesions [64]. Whereas qubits are
a relatively simple system, expanding to higher dimension qudits (quantum information
digits) is non-trivial as it is difﬁcult to quantify the quantum correlations in the system
(using the diagonalization of correlation matrices for bipartite systems) [65]. Other quan-
tum MRI tumor segmentation projects use a quantum entropy classiﬁcation method [66]
and a quantum ﬁltering technique (for noise reduction preprocessing) together with a

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
111
quantum artiﬁcial immune system-inspired SoftMax function in a deep spiking neural
network (SNN) architecture [67]. Quantum algorithms are also deployed to analyze CT
scans; for example, to classify quantum data comparing COVID-19 and non-COVID-19
patient inﬂuenza and virus pneumonia lung CT scans, analyzed with TensorFlow Quantum
and a D-Wave Systems quantum annealer [68].
2.4. Quantum Protein Folding
Protein folding is an NP-hard computationally complex problem with advances in
both classical and quantum methods. The challenge is to predict the three-dimensional
structure that a protein will adopt based on the underlying sequence of amino acids.
Many neurodegenerative diseases (such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s) are thought to be
caused by an accumulation of misfolded proteins [69]. Classically, an important project is
AlphaFold, as Google’s DeepMind team extends its success in game playing [70] to protein
folding, as shown in the CASP-14 data competition [71]. An attention-based mechanism is
used to obtain atomically precise conﬁgurations by paying attention to global constraints
such as available space as opposed to exclusively local sequence interactions.
Quantum methods are also progressing, particularly with quantum annealing ma-
chines that model protein folding as a low-energy optimization. A lattice is used to
represent the spatial location of the different amino acid sequences in the protein. Although
annealers can easily analyze the median length of a human protein (375 amino acids),
research often focuses on neuropeptides as short protein strings that can be readily em-
ployed as intervention targets. One lattice-based quantum protein folding project studied
30,000 protein sequences with protein Hamiltonians, ﬁnding that simple manipulations
substantially improve folding performance [72]. A related project demonstrated the lattice-
based folding of a 7-amino acid neuropeptide (with the IBMQ Poughkeepsie 20-qubit
quantum computer) [73]. Quantum walks are an alternative to lattice structures, as the
QFold project proposes a quantum algorithm based on the torsion angles of amino acids,
deployed with quantum walks (on the IBMQ Casablanca quantum processor) [74].
2.5. Quantum Genomics
The quantum properties of DNA have been proposed for use in sequencing (for
example, interpreting electron tunneling current–voltage differences between the four
nucleotide bases as a strand of DNA passes through a nanopore [75]), but quantum methods
are mainly deployed in sequence reconstruction (aligning and merging reads to reassemble
the original genome). Quantum algorithms have been proposed (for both gate-array
and quantum annealing machines) to accelerate DNA sequence reconstruction [76] and
demonstrated on quantum annealing platforms to reconstruct short sequences (seven
nucleotides) [77]. Quantum annealing machines are also used in basic research to assess
the binding afﬁnity of gene regulatory proteins to the genome [78]. In other quantum
genomics demonstrations, a quantum machine learning algorithm is implemented for
Alzheimer’s disease to identify neurons that have irregular numbers of chromosomes (copy
number variation) with a Hamming distance-like genomic quantum classiﬁer (tested on
the IBMQX2 and IBMQ 16 Melbourne quantum platforms) [79]. Another project proposes
a cell culture analysis technique to assess the clonogenic survival potential of a cell to grow
and form a colony based on a quantum information-theoretic classiﬁer [80].
Quantum networks offer possibilities for the secure transfer of genome ﬁles; for
example, in next-generation federated data sharing for large-scale research using encrypted
blockchain-based quantum networks [81]. The beneﬁts of blockchain technology as a secure
smart network automation technology, particularly for genomic data sharing, have been
proposed [82] and have seen practical deployment for genomic data privacy in whole-
human genome sequencing projects such as Nebula Genomics [83]. Non-fungible genome
tokens (NGTs) provide users with permanent ownership of their genomic data on a publicly
readable ledger, enabling user-controlled, remunerated, transparent data-sharing [84].
Other research uses quantum networks for secure encrypted genome transmission, sending

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
112
data immediately as it is sequenced, demonstrating the world’s ﬁrst quantum cryptography
transmission of whole-genome sequence data [85].
3. Neural Dynamics
The second area of application in quantum neurobiology is neural dynamics, which
consists of superpositioned data modeling evaluated with quantum probability, neural
ﬁeld theories, ﬁlamentary dynamics, and quantum nanoscience.
3.1. Superpositioned Data and Quantum Probability
Studying complex systems often involves ﬁnding otherwise hidden correlations in
datasets. Progress has been made with deep learning networks and also now in the
modeling of classical data with quantum methods [86]. Superpositioned data are data
modeled in superposition as the quantum information representation of all possible system
states simultaneously. A standard model for superpositioned data is neural signaling,
in which system elements (“neurons”) exist simultaneously in two or more states until
collapsed in a measurement (“ﬁring event”). The basic setup is a two-state model in which
elements exist in both inactive (quiescent) and active (ﬁring) states until measured [87].
Another model is a neural ﬁeld theory with a three-state neural signaling system in which
the neuron states are quiescent, active, and recovering [88]. Neural signaling models
are used, both as a general heuristic to represent any kind of multistate system, and in
particular to study biological signaling in the brain.
Quantum information science approaches require a formulation of quantum prob-
ability (complex probability amplitudes) since the quantum properties of superposition
and interference violate classical total probability [89]; for example, leading to conjunction
and disjunction fallacies in commutativity [13]. Hence, quantum probability has been
formulated by von Neumann and others to apply quantum mechanical rules to probability
assignment [90,91]. A standard quantum information science primitive (building block)
used as a quantum variant of total probability is obtained through POVMs (positive op-
erator valued measures). POVMs are positive measures on a quantum subsystem of the
effect of a measurement performed on the larger system and give an interference term for
incompatible observables [92]. The main interpretation of quantum probability is with the
Born rule (a solvable probabilistic formulation of quantum mechanics), but there can be
others. Quantum Bayesianism methods, notably QBism (“cubism”) [93], is an emerging
standard for considering quantum system updating as the quantum version of Bayesian
updating that includes observer-based (subjective) aspects [94].
3.2. Neural Field Theories
Neural ﬁeld theories are a physics-based approach for modeling large-scale brain
behavior. An empirical project involving neural dynamics and neural ﬁeld theories is
combining data from different neural scanning modalities (EEG, fMRI, CT, and PET scans)
into a comprehensive view of brain activity. Integrating EEG and fMRI data, for example,
entails multiple spatiotemporal scales and dynamics regimes [38]. A key ﬁnding is that
epileptic seizure can be modeled by chaotic dynamics, which are understood, but the
normal resting state of the human brain is more complicated and is perhaps explained by
instability-bifurcation dynamics, in which there is one system organizing parameters, such
as an orbit that is interrupted periodically by countersignals to trigger a neural signal [95].
A standard modeling element is the Hopf bifurcation—a system-critical point at which a
periodic orbit appears or disappears due to a local change in stability [96,97].
Neural dynamics vary by scale and display unrecognized statistical distributions at
the most complex tiers of collective behavior [38]. Different neural dynamics models are
deployed respectively at the four main scales tiers of activity: single-neuron, local ensemble,
population group, and whole-brain. Small populations, represented by neural ensemble
models, often follow a normal statistical distribution, which can be described with a Gaus-
sian and modeled with a regular linear Fokker–Planck equation; in contrast, if not normally

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
113
distributed, the distribution might be non-Gaussian, but still a known distribution such as
a power law that can be modeled with specialized non-linear or fractional Fokker–Planck
equations. However, larger scale populations of neurons and whole-brain analysis have
unrecognized statistical distributions and require more sophisticated dynamics methods
such as Wilson–Cowan mean ﬁeld equations, the Jansen–Rit model, Floquet periodicity,
and oscillatory analysis [38]. Large-scale neural dynamics is an active research area with a
substantial opportunity for quantum neurobiology to make a contributive impact. Statisti-
cal approaches in neural ﬁeld theories continue to contribute to the development of new
mathematics for the understanding of theoretical neuroscience problems [98].
Biological systems have additional requirements compared with other domains in that
organisms do not exist in isolation but are rather constantly interacting with the environ-
ment and changing their behavior as a result. Hence, feedback loops and updating are
important in quantum biological system modeling. One such quantum information biology
approach is based on two-state superposition data modeling, system self-measurement,
and open system (environmental interaction) evolution dynamics [87]. A self-observation
feedback loop is included as the quantum version of the Helmholtz sensation-perception
theory (a unitary operator describes the process of interaction between the sensation and
perception states). Open system evolution dynamics are provided by a Lindbladian quan-
tum master equation. The model applies to all biological system scales (including protein,
cell, brain, human behavior, and ecosystem) and is tested to study epigenetic evolution and
the gene regulation of glucose-lactose metabolism in E. coli bacteria [99] and in a neural
code mapping model of human decision-making states [100].
A ﬁnal topic in neural dynamics is synchrony—a proposed bulk property of the
brain. Synaptic signals arrive simultaneously but travel varying distances and therefore
must have different propagation speeds [101]. Cortical recordings further reveal that
spontaneous traveling waves are a general topological property of large-scale neural
behavior [102]. One project studies synchrony in axon propagation speeds from data
recorded at multiple spatial scales [103]. A general framework is proposed to integrate
microscale current sources (produced by local ﬁeld potentials at membrane surfaces) in
a macro-columnar structure. Another project applies the Kuramoto model, a standard
formulation for studying synchrony in nonlinear systems ranging from insect swarms
to superconductors [104]. A solution is produced for the three main synchronization
phenomena in Kuramoto networks (phase synchronization, chimera states, and traveling
waves) with insight into complex behavior arising from connection patterns in nonlinear
networked systems.
3.3. Neuroﬁlamentary Dynamics
Neuroﬁlaments are neuron-speciﬁc proteins that provide structural support to the
neuronal cytoskeleton and are implicated in neural signaling (axonal and synaptic) via
dynamical behavior. In synaptic signaling, neuroﬁlamentary proteins are differentially
expressed in the presynaptic and postsynaptic compartments of glutamatergic (excitatory)
and GABAergic (inhibitory) synapses [105]. Neuroﬁlamentary dynamics likewise have a
role in axonal signaling. Research ﬁnds that the axon processes information at multiple
time scales [106,107] in the shape of vortex-like signals that can be captured with quan-
tum optics [108]. An axon has thousands of densely packed neuroﬁlaments beneath the
membrane. An intricate mechanism of electromagnetic and ionic signaling is suggested
in that the electromagnetic resonance of neuroﬁlaments ﬁrst identiﬁes relevant paths or
circuits (branch selection) extremely rapidly at a microsecond speed (10−6), which then
serves as an input to the ion channel transmission that proceeds on the order of millisec-
onds (10−3) [106]. Speciﬁcally, four ordered structures in the cytoskeletal ﬁlaments were
shown to exchange energy approximately 250 microseconds before a neuron ﬁres [107].
The research program integrates multiple time domains into a single temporal architecture,
extending the traditional Hodgkin–Huxley model used to study neural signaling, branch
selection, spike time-gap regulation, and synaptic plasticity [108]. Understanding ﬁlamen-

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
114
tary dynamics is important as these proteins are proposed as a blood-based biomarker of
neurodegenerative pathology, overcoming some of the challenges of amyloid-beta and tau
proteins as the traditional diagnostic markers for Alzheimer’s disease [109]. For example,
one study found blood-based neuroﬁlamentary protein fragment levels to be eight times
higher in neurological disease patients than controls [110].
3.4. Quantum Nanoscience for Neurobiology
Quantum nanoscience is the study of nanostructured systems that incorporate and
exploit quantum effects [111]. The fabrication of integrated circuits and nanomedicine are
two of the primary applications of quantum nanoscience [112,113]. Both are relevant to
quantum neurobiology—nanomedicine most directly—and nanocircuits in the effort to
create standardized quantum neural circuits to test behavior, pathological response, and
pharmacological intervention. Various projects are attempting to identify the structural–
functional organization of neural circuits per connectome project data, serial electron
microscopy, trans-synaptic tracing, and single-cell transcriptomics [114]. In nanomedical
fabrication, nanoparticles (precision-engineered objects with dimensions less than 100 nm)
are the focus of quantum neurobiological modeling and drug design.
3.4.1. Nanoparticle Neuroscience
Nanoparticles allow therapeutics to be delivered across the blood–brain barrier (BBB)
into the brain. A nanoparticle has a relatively large surface area and pores for housing ther-
apeutic agents. Adjusting the size and molecular weight of the delivery system containing
the drug can be used to target where the nanoparticles accumulate in the body and the
tissue that can be accessed. One project creates a blood–brain barrier-crossing nanoparticle
drug delivery platform to treat secondary injuries associated with traumatic brain injury
that can lead to Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and other neurodegenerative diseases [115]. The
therapeutic is a small interfering RNA (siRNA) molecule designed to inhibit the expression
of the tau protein (thought to play a role in neurodegeneration). The solution encapsulates
therapeutic agents into biocompatible nanoparticles with precisely engineered surface
properties to enable their transport into the brain and indicates a 50% reduction in the
expression of the tau protein as a result. In addition to nanoparticles, other contemporary
neuropathology resolutions are being explored such as CRISPR/Cas9 therapeutic strategies
(supplying or blocking proteins) in pre-clinical Alzheimer’s disease models [116].
3.4.2. Molecular Codes
A recent advance is precision molecular control, performed with quantum error
correcting methods (molecular codes), highlighting the integration of quantum information-
based systems and physical systems. Molecular codes are an extension of GKP bosonic
codes (Gottesman, Kitaev, Preskill) [117]). Bosonic codes are a method of quantum error
correction instantiating both the physical qubit and the logical qubits that protect it in a
self-contained system (the continuous variable environment of a harmonic oscillator) [118].
GKP bosonic codes correct errors (seen as molecular displacement) by reorienting the
position and momentum of an oscillator (oscillatory molecule) with known symmetric
rotations. Molecular codes extend GKP bosonic codes by allowing rotations to be performed
on asymmetric rigid bodies in free space, in quantum systems ranging from oscillators to
diatomic and polyatomic molecules [119]. Error-corrected molecular control is an important
capability in the quantum information-theoretic modeling of neural behavior as neural
circuits are instantiated in quantum hardware.
3.4.3. Autonomous Robotic Nanofabrication
Quality-controlled nanomedical fabrication might proceed with autonomous agents.
One project demonstrates the autonomous robotic nanofabrication of supramolecular struc-
tures from single molecules [120]. The method consists of controlling single molecules with
the machine learning agent-based manipulation of scanning probe microscope actuators

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
115
(using reinforcement learning (goal-directed updating) to remove molecules autonomously
with a scanning probe microscope from a supramolecular structure).
4. Neuroscience Physics
The third area of quantum neurobiology applications is neuroscience physics, which
is the neuroscience interpretation of foundational physics ﬁndings. Applications discussed
here include a suite of AdS/Neuroscience theories based on the AdS/CFT correspondence
(AdS/Brain, AdS/Memory, AdS/Superconducting, and AdS/Energy (brain Hamiltonian)),
neuronal gauge theories (symmetry-breaking, energy-entropy balances), network neuro-
science, and random tensors (high-dimensional systems).
Of particular interest is neural signaling—a problem involving synaptic integration (ag-
gregating thousands of incoming spikes from dendrites and other neurons) and electrical–
chemical signal transduction (incorporating neuron-glia interactions at the molecular scale).
The standard compartmental models used in computational neuroscience are not equipped
with the multi-variable partial differential equation (PDE) functionality needed to model
inter-neuronal spatial interactions [121,122]. For example, diffusion–reaction equations are
one possibility for integrating the activity of dendritic spikes that involves astrocyte calcium
signaling, protein cascades in dendritic arbors, and the proton and ion-based transfer of
molecules [123], all of which take place on the quantum (atomic and subatomic) scale [124].
Proposed quantum neurobiological solutions to the modeling of neural signaling con-
sider multiscalar models, phase transition, dynamical nonlinear systems, energy–entropy
relations, and high-dimensional representation.
4.1. AdS/Brain
AdS/Brain is a multiscalar theory of neural signaling based on the AdS/CFT cor-
respondence, which incorporates the four scale tiers of network, neuron, synapse, and
molecule [125]. The theory is the ﬁrst example of a multi-tier interpretation of the AdS/CFT
correspondence with successive levels of bulk–boundary correspondence. The suggested
implementation of the AdS/Brain theory is a matrix quantum mechanics formulation
(multi-dimensional matrix model [126]) with bMERA (brain) random tensor networks
evolved with Floquet periodicity-based neural dynamics.
The AdS/CFT correspondence (anti-de Sitter space/conformal ﬁeld theory) is a theory
positing that a physical system with a bulk volume can be described by a boundary theory
in one less dimension [127]. Speciﬁcally, the theory (gauge/gravity holographic duality)
states that a gravity theory (bulk volume) is equal to a gauge theory or quantum ﬁeld
theory (boundary surface) in one less dimension. The work constitutes one of the most-
cited papers in any ﬁeld (over 21,000 references as of December 2021), with applications in
all physics arXiv areas [128].
The AdS/CFT correspondence offers two perspectives of the same system and the
mathematics for solving in either direction. A typical bulk-to-boundary use case is the
AdS/SYK (Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev) formulation, starting with a known classical gravity theory
(Einstein gravity) in the bulk to solve for an unknown quantum ﬁeld theory describing
a superconducting material on the boundary. The mathematics of black holes (classical
gravity bulk) and unconventional materials (boundary) can be linked in that the two
systems have similar properties related to mass, temperature, and charge [129]. In the
other direction, boundary-to-bulk deployments start with a known quantum ﬁeld theory
on the boundary and attempt to deﬁne a theory of emergent structure such as an unknown
quantum gravity theory in the bulk [130]. Establishing bulk–boundary mappings, including
a quantum error correction setup (protecting a logical qubit in the bulk by linking it to an
ancilla of physical qubits in the boundary [131]), is an active research area [132].
The AdS/Brain theory proposes the ﬁrst instance of a multi-tier correspondence
(multiple graduated levels of bulk–boundary relationships) to instantiate the four scale tiers
of brain network, neuron, synapse, and molecule (and could be expanded to other tiers).
The model accommodates the entirety of the brain’s neural signaling processes between

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
116
axon, presynaptic terminal, synaptic cleft, postsynaptic density, and dendritic spiking
potentials from dendrite to soma. The bulk–boundary pair relationships are network–
neuron, neuron, synapse, and synapse–ion. The scales and measured signals are local
ﬁeld potentials at the brain network level (10−2 m), action potentials at the neuron level
(10−4 m), dendritic spikes at the synapse level (10−6 m), and ion docking at the molecular
level (10−10 m).
The AdS/Brain theory addresses the renormalization requirement in multiscalar sys-
tems (the ability to view a physical system at different scales). Renormalization programs
must tackle the inﬁnities that arise in quantum mechanics to reﬂect the fact that all possi-
ble particle locations and events can actually occur. Various renormalization group (RG)
methods have been proposed as a mathematical apparatus for smoothing systems so that
they may be viewed at different scale tiers on the basis of different parameters (degrees of
freedom). A key advance is the multiscale entanglement renormalization ansatz (MERA),
a tensor network structure that implements an iterative coarse-graining scheme to renor-
malize quantum systems on the basis of entanglement or other attributes [133]. The MERA
tensor network consists of alternating layers of disentanglers and isometries that consoli-
date a multi-tier system into a single view—a structure conducive to the AdS/Brain theory
and applied in a bMERA (brain) implementation.
The second requirement the AdS/Brain theory addresses is the issue that different
neural dynamics paradigms deﬁne the system evolution at each scale tier of the neural
signaling operation [38]. Floquet periodicity [134,135] propelled with continuous-time
quantum walks [136] is selected as the basis for a multiscalar model of brain network,
neuron, synapse, and ion channel dynamics, as these formalisms ﬂexibly accommodate
varying dynamical regimes within a system.
4.2. AdS/Memory
AdS/Memory is a neuroscience application of the AdS/CFT correspondence that
examines the problem of information storage. The research program applies the AdS/CFT
correspondence (in the form of black hole physics) to the computational neuroscience prob-
lem of memory formation [137]. Black holes and brains are efﬁcient at storing information,
and critically excited states might be the basis. A quantum neural network with holographic
properties (entropy scaling by area not volume) is introduced. The quantum optical neu-
ral network (with qudit-based bosonic modes) produces critical states (neuron excitatory
synaptic connections based on gravity-like interaction energy) that have an exponentially
enhanced capacity to store information. What is new is the investigation of what a system
can do in a highly excited state (as opposed to exclusively ﬁnding the system’s ground state
and related energy tiers). The largest memory capacity quantum state might not necessarily
be the ground state, but rather a highly excited critical state. There could be immediate
implications for quantum memory and also in quantum neurobiology in substantiating
the conceptualization of neural signaling as a criticality triggered phase transition. The
consideration of system extremes is a method also being applied, for example, to ﬁnd new
matter phases in systems that do not reach thermal equilibrium [134].
4.3. AdS/Superconducting
AdS/Superconducting uses the AdS/CFT correspondence to study phase transition,
which is not well understood in various domains including neural signaling and super-
conducting materials. Explaining how materials become superconducting at high critical
temperatures could be practically useful in producing superconducting chips that do
not require super-cooling. One approach deploys the AdS/CFT correspondence (in the
AdS/SYK program of using a known gravity theory to ﬁnd an unknown quantum ﬁeld
theory for a superconducting material) to study superconducting systems [138]. The setup
is a toy-model black hole, constrained to a box (like the gas-in-a-box or particle-in-a-box
model systems). The black-hole-in-a-box (unlike real black holes) can be manipulated
such that a condensate halo (of some material) forms around it. When an external electri-

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
117
cal ﬁeld is applied (like turning on a battery), the condensate becomes superconducting
due to the Higgs mechanism. In the general case (conﬁrmed by Large Hadron Collider
experiments), the Higgs mechanism “gives particles their mass” as the Higgs ﬁeld is a
universal ﬁeld throughout the universe that causes particles to become “heavy” as they
pass through a medium, giving them drag, or mass [139]. In the black hole condensate
situation, the particles that become massive are photons, preventing electric and magnetic
ﬁelds from traveling through the medium, causing the medium to become superconduct-
ing (electrons ﬂowing freely with inﬁnite conductivity and zero resistance). The result is
the AdS/Superconducting model, an experimental model for studying phase transition,
particularly in systems with ordered-disordered phases such as neural signaling.
4.4. AdS/Energy (Brain Hamiltonian)
The AdS/Brain theory provides a generic multiscalar model of neural behavior in-
terpretable at various bulk–boundary scale tiers with the AdS/CFT mathematics, which
renormalize entanglement (correlations) across system levels. Although entanglement is the
primary multiscalar quantity, energy-related formulations (expressed as a Hamiltonian) are
also possible. A ﬁrst law of thermodynamics (the ﬁrst law of entanglement entropy (FLEE))
has been deﬁned to posit that a change in boundary entropy is equivalent to a change in
bulk energy (Hamiltonian) [140]. Energy formulations are central to quantum systems, but
a formalism did not exist previously for solving the AdS/CFT correspondence in terms of
energy. The implication is that the AdS/CFT correspondence is immediately connected to
the wide range of energy-based Hamiltonian formulations in quantum-mechanical systems.
One line of research that has been more robustly enabled is that of scrambling: complex
systems (such as brains, black holes, and many-body quantum systems) are posited to
be fast-scramblers, dissipating information quickly such that a local measurement is no
longer possible [141]. Various SYK Hamiltonians and scrambling Hamiltonians [142] could
be applied in the AdS/Brain model structure to formalize neural signaling as a quantum
information scrambling problem.
4.5. Neuronal Gauge Theories
Neuronal gauge theories comprise another class of neuroscience physics approaches.
One symmetry-based project models the brain’s neural signaling operation on the basis
of gauge invariance and global symmetry [143]. Symmetry is the property of physical
systems looking the same from different points of view (whether a face, a cube, or the laws
of nature), and symmetry breaking is phase transition. A gauge theory is a ﬁeld theory in
which the Lagrangian (state of a dynamic system) does not change (is invariant) under local
gauge transformations (changes between possible gauges (levels or degrees of freedom) in
a system). This neuronal gauge theory interprets the brain as a multiscalar system with a
global symmetry, the invariant property of free energy minimization, that is broken and
rebalanced. Neural signaling breaks the symmetry and gauge ﬁelds are applied to rebalance
the invariant quantity (free energy). The gauge ﬁelds are part of the brain environment and
apply continuous forces to act on the brain elements to produce local perturbations that
counteract the effect of the local force stimulus as neural signals are dispatched in order
to bring the system back into its resting state. The gauge ﬁeld rebalancing mechanism
coordinates the multiscalar tiers of the brain on the basis of conserving the gauge-invariant
quantity, free energy minimization in this model, but could be otherwise.
Another neuronal gauge theory formulation [144] ﬁnds that the macroscopic brain
obeys the same kind of energy–entropy balances when at rest as microscopic processes
and likewise breaks the balance when performing physically and cognitively demanding
tasks (according to connectome project whole-brain imaging data [145]). Non-equilibrium
processes at the macroscale are studied with a dynamic Ising model showing how viola-
tions of the energy–entropy balance emerge from asymmetries in the interactions between
neural elements. A related gauge-theoretic model explores energy–entropy trade-offs in
the relation between the information content of brain states and neural energy [146]. Brain

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
118
states are modeled as the Shannon entropy content of parcels, and energy via the Boltz-
mann distribution, as the brain network seeks lower-energy stable states. The multiscalar
energy–entropy model is applied to explain how signal propagation along the structural
connectome of the brain may induce changes in the patterns of neural activity (again
similarly tested with empirical connectome data).
4.6. Network Neuroscience
Network neuroscience is a (quantum) information network neurobiology program that
takes a complex systems [20], network [147], physics [148], energy [146], and information-
based view of neurobiology [149]. The program unites elements of the brain network-level
view, energy, entropy (information), neural dynamics, structural–functional linkage, multi-
scalar systems and renormalization, microscale–macroscale interactions, an energy econ-
omy view of the brain, and information signaling theory (encoding and compressibility),
validated with empirical data from the human connectome project and other sources [145].
Recent ﬁndings of note are in the areas of renormalization, neural dynamics, neuronal
gauge theories, and information-based encoding.
Overall, the brain is seen as an information problem that can be modeled with entropy
and energy, with potential translation to quantum platforms. Renormalization techniques
might sidestep the usual difﬁculties of integrating a multiscalar environment by modeling
behavior as an information compression problem in which similar constraints impact all
tiers [149]. Likewise, network architecture and connectivity are indicated as system-wide
parameters that inﬂuence multiscalar behavior; for example, contributing to an oscillatory-
based understanding of local and global neural dynamics [150].
Network neuroscience sees practical demonstration by other connectome teams using
graph theory and differential geometry to study the spatiotemporal arrangements of
neurons, synapses, axons, and dendrites. A quantum approach to connectome analysis
calculates the eigenvectors of the human connectome with a graph Laplacian (Schrödinger
wavefunction element) [151]. The resulting harmonic wave is used to examine neural
ﬁelds as a basis for structure–function relationships in the human brain, implementing the
Wilson–Cowan neural ﬁeld theory with high-resolution MRI connectome graph data.
4.7. Random Tensors
Random tensors are a tensor network technology for the treatment of high-dimensional
multiscalar systems—an advance on par with MERA tensor networks (computation of
entangled quantum systems). Tensor networks are a structure for representing and manip-
ulating many-body quantum states as the factorization of high-order tensors (tensors with
a large number of indices) into a set of low-order tensors whose indices are summed to
form a network deﬁned by a certain pattern of contractions. Random tensors generalize
random matrices (2 × 2 matrix formulations) to three or more dimensions and have been
tested for as many as ﬁve dimensions (rank-5 tensors) [152].
Random tensors provide another model (in addition to matrix mechanics) for the
implementation of the AdS/Brain theory as a tensor ﬁeld theory of neural signaling.
Existing neural ﬁeld theories could be instantiated (with three-state neurons [88]) as tensor
ﬁeld theories [153] on quantum platforms. Likewise, the four dimensions (network–neuron–
synapse–molecule) of the AdS/Brain theory could be indexed with rank-4 random tensors,
modeling the quiescent-to-ﬁring signal as a matrix(2d)-to-tensor(3+d) phase transition
(planar-to-melonic (high-dimensional) graph representation).
These kinds of tensor ﬁeld theories and melonic graphs of neural signaling have the
dimensionality needed to instantiate synaptic integration research ﬁndings, extending the
sophistication of traditional computational neuroscience compartmental models. Spine
density gradients are known to be important in shaping dendritic response, and decreasing
spine density improves thresholded signal pooling (certain neurons pool the outputs of
many separately thresholded dendrites) [154]. Nonlinear models have also been used to
study the postsynaptic density and dendritic shape as elliptical spheroids, ﬁnding that the

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
119
curvature of dendritic geometry gives rise to pseudo-harmonic functions that can be used
to predict dendrite concentrations and their potential role in signal processing [155].
Differential geometry implementations bring a new resolution to the study of mito-
chondrial membrane architecture, whose metabolic impairment may contribute to neu-
rodegeneration [156]. Traditional ways of modeling mitochondria (ATP and heat) are
insufﬁcient as their idealized geometries distort metabolic ﬂux. Applying differential ge-
ometry to empirical TEM tomography data, however, allows a more robust analytic model
based on Gaussian curvature, surface area, volume, and membrane motifs, all of which
are related to the metabolic output of the mitochondria and require a multi-dimensional
approach. Such differential geometry methods might inﬂect into practical applications
treating mitochondrial bioenergetic stress response [157].
5. Discussion
The study of neuroscience is necessarily migrating to quantum information science
platforms, as quantum computing may become the computational vernacular of the day.
However, simply reinstantiating research programs with quantum information science
methods is not likely to solve neuroscience problems as expediently as also incorporating
the theoretical understanding available in foundational physics discovery. Hence, the
emerging ﬁeld of quantum information science-driven quantum neurobiology is outlined
in the three levels of its activity in wavefunction analysis, neural dynamics, and neuro-
science physics. These areas include the clinically motivated investigation of wave imaging,
protein folding, and genomics, the study of neural dynamical systems with superpositioned
data, quantum probability, and neural ﬁeld theories, and the neuroscience physics interpre-
tation of physics ﬁndings. A novel quantum theory of neural signaling is proposed—the
AdS/Brain theory, as the ﬁrst instance of a multi-tier AdS/CFT correspondence model
of successive levels of bulk–boundary relationships between network, neuron, synapse,
and molecular levels in the brain. Quantum solutions to key neural signaling challenges,
the synaptic integration of thousands of incoming signals and electrical–chemical signal
transduction, are proposed in several modalities.
There are many potential risks and limitations to quantum neurobiology. It may be too
early for quantum technologies since technical breakthroughs in quantum error correction
are needed to progress from NISQ (noisy intermediate-scale quantum) devices to fully
FTQC (fault-tolerant quantum computing) [158]. Modeling the complexities of the brain
may not be a near-term application even if quantum methods proceed. The challenge of
obtaining empirical data (due to both technical and privacy-related reasons) constrains the
ability to develop accurate neurobiological models. However, despite these limitations,
quantum neurobiology is extending the study of neuropathological disease.
Future directions in quantum neurobiology could explore topics linking physiological
building blocks to higher-order cognitive behavior as structural-functional relationships
are uncovered in genomics, connectomics, and cortical recording studies. Quantum in-
formation science and quantum measurement theories might be deployed to understand
not only neurobiological behavior but also psychological information processing [159] and
human decision-making [160], including via quantum BCI implementation.
Quantum neurobiological approaches could seek to interrelate three domains: scien-
tiﬁc theories of time, temporal modes of cognition, and the underlying time morphology
of biological processes. Physics ﬁndings related to time include time entanglement (tem-
poral correlations have a different structure than spatial correlations [161]), the Floquet
model [134], time symmetry breaking [162], time evolution [141], and quantum walks [136].
In the cognitive domain, Kantian neuroscience shows empirically how the spontaneity of
cognition is demonstrated by the constitutive role of the brain in processing incoming sen-
sory input [163] and correlates neurobiology and philosophy [164]. These approaches could
be further linked to the temporality of biological processes (cellular lifecycles, oscillatory
patterns, and circadian rhythms) [165].

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
120
The accelerated pace of the technology-driven “big data” era has sponsored the de-
velopment of a computational informatics ﬁeld as a complement to traditional academic
disciplines in many areas of the arts and sciences (ranging from digital humanities to
computational astronomy). Likewise, “quantum studies” ﬁelds are emerging as an accom-
paniment, pursuing quantum approaches to the underlying questions in the discipline
and enabling a new class of more precise problem-solving, thinking, and discovery, with a
standard slate of quantum information science methods [166]. Quantum neurobiology is in
the early stages of development but could potentially have an extremely transformative
impact on the ability to elaborate the intricacies of the human brain and better protect it
from disease and decline. A better understanding of the neurobiological role of quantum
effects (or quantum-analog effects) may also shed new light on fundamental interpretative
questions in quantum physics.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization and writing; M.S.; review and suggested additions; R.P.d.S.
and F.W. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Glossary
AdS/Brain
Multiscalar neuroscience interpretation of the AdS/CFT correspondence
AdS/CFT correspondence (anti-de
Theory positing that a physical system with a bulk volume can be described by a
Sitter space conformal ﬁeld theory)
boundary theory in one less dimension
AlphaFold
Protein folding predictor based on system-level attention to spatial constraints (from
DeepMind/Google)
Biological physics
Study of living processes through the application of physical principles
Bosonic codes
Self-contained photonic system for quantum error correction (e.g. harmonic oscillator)
Chaotic dynamics
Dynamical regimes of ballistic spread followed by saturation
Filamentary dynamics
Role of neuroﬁlaments (neuron-speciﬁc proteins) in axonal and synaptic signaling
GKP bosonic codes
Quantum error correction method by reorienting the position and momentum of a
(Gottesman, Kitaev, Preskill)
molecule with known symmetric rotations
Hamiltonian
(Quantum mechanics) operator corresponding to the total energy of a system
Hamming distance
Sum of positional mismatches of two bit strings
Hopf bifurcation
System critical point at which a periodic orbit appears or disappears per a local
change in stability
Information biology
Study of information processing activities performed by biosystems
Information scrambling
Rapid spread of information in a quantum system prohibiting local measurement
Josephson junction
Device consisting of two or more superconductors coupled by a link that
conducts electrons
Laplacian
(Schrödinger equation) operator representing the ﬂux density of the gradient ﬂow of
a function
Matrix
Array of numbers arranged in rows and columns used to study physical phenomena
(probability distribution)
Melonic diagram
(Melon-shaped) graph expression of a high-dimensional system
MERA (multiscale entanglement
Entangled quantum systems model
renormalization ansatz)
tensor networks
Molecular codes
Quantum error correction by performing rotations on asymmetric rigid bodies in free space
Nanoparticle neuroscience
Nanoparticles (100 nm objects) that cross the blood-brain barrier to perform an intervention
Neurobiology
Field investigating the form and function of the nervous system (neurons, glia, axons,
and dendrites)
Neuroﬁlament
Neuron-speciﬁc protein implicated in neuronal cytoskeletal structure and signaling
Neuromorphic computation
Electronic computation inspired by neural systems and spike thresholding
Neuropeptides
Small chains of amino acids (chemicals) synthesized and released by neurons
Neuroscience
Study of the structure and function of the nervous system and brain
Neuroscience physics
Neuroscience interpretation of foundational physics ﬁndings
Path integral
Approach of summing over all possible paths in a system
Protein folding problem
Predicting a protein’s ﬁnal 3D structure from the underlying sequence of amino acids
Quantum biology
Study of how quantum properties may play a governing role in biological functions
Quantum computing
Use of engineered quantum systems (with atoms, ions, photons) to perform computation
Quantum information biology
Study of biological systems with quantum information methods
Quantum internet
Information transmitted with quantum effects (entanglement), using quantum cryptography
Quantum machine learning
Machine learning applied in a quantum environment
Quantum memory (QRAM)
Quantum-mechanical computer memory, storing information with greater scalability as
quantum states in superposition (vs classical binary states)
Quantum nanoscience
Study of nanostructured systems that incorporate and exploit quantum effects
Quantum neurobiology
Discipline within quantum biology and biological physics that studies potential
quantum effects in the brain and applies quantum information science methods
to neurobiological questions

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
121
Quantum physics
Description of particles making up all matter including living organisms
Quantum probability
Quantum mechanical rules for assigning probabilities
Quantum walk
Quantum version of classical random walk based on coin-ﬂip operator and
lattice-graph propagation
Qutrit
Three-level quantum state, simultaneously in 0, 1, 2 until collapsed in a measurement
(vs two-state qubit)
Random tensors
Generalization of random matrices (2 × 2 matrix formulations) to 3+ dimensions
Renormalization
The ability to view a system at multiple scales by collapsing degrees of freedom (parameters)
Spike-activated
Bio-inspired neuromorphic computation based on thresholded activation
neural networks (SNNs)
Superdeterminism
Interpretation that quantum effects are the result of hidden variables (vs indeterminism)
Superpositioned data
Quantum information representation of all possible system states simultaneously
Tensor ﬁeld theories
Local ﬁeld theories whose ﬁelds transform as a tensor under a global or local
symmetry group
Tensor networks
Structure for manipulating high-dimensional data (many-body quantum states) as the
factorization of high-order tensors (many indices) into low-order tensors whose indices
are summed to form a contracted network
Transcription factors
Proteins regulating gene expression by attaching themselves to DNA
References
1.
Ball, P. Physics of life: The dawn of quantum biology. Nature 2011, 474, 272–274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2.
Whaley, K.B. Research Description. K. Birgitta Whaley Lab, UC Berkeley. 2021. Available online: https://vcresearch.berkeley.
edu/faculty/k-birgitta-whaley (accessed on 15 December 2021).
3.
Emani, P.S.; Warrell, J.; Anticevic, A.; Bekiranov, S.; Gandal, M.; McConnell, M.J.; Sapiro, G.; Aspuru-Guzik, A.; Baker, J.T.;
Bastiani, M.; et al. Quantum computing at the frontiers of biological sciences. Nat. Meth. 2021, 18, 701–709. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4.
Hoyer, S.; Sarovar, M.; Whaley, K.B. Limits of quantum speedup in photosynthetic light harvesting. New J. Phys. 2010, 12, 065041.
[CrossRef]
5.
Li, Z.Z.; Ko, L.; Yang, Z.; Sarovar, M.; Whaley, K.B. Interplay of vibration- and environment-assisted energy transfer. arXiv 2021,
arXiv:2110.09895v1.
6.
Tarlacia, S.; Pregnolato, M. Quantum neurophysics: From non-living matter to quantum neurobiology and psychopathology. Int.
J. Psychophysiol. 2016, 103, 161–173. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7.
Penrose, R. The Emperor’s New Mind; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 1989.
8.
Hameroff, S. Quantum coherence in microtubules. A neural basis for emergent consciousness? J. Cons. Stud. 1994, 1, 91–118.
9.
Fisher, M.P.A. Quantum Cognition: The possibility of processing with nuclear spins in the brain. Ann. Phys. 2015, 362, 593–602.
[CrossRef]
10.
Koch, C.; Hepp, K. Quantum Mechanics in the Brain. Nature 2006, 440, 611–612. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11.
Tegmark, M. The importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes. Phys. Rev. E 2000, 61, 4194. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12.
Bruza, P.D.; Wang, Z.; Busemeyer, J.B. Quantum cognition: A new theoretical approach to psychology. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2015, 19,
383–393. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13.
Broekaert, J.; Basieva, I.; Blasiak, P.; Pothos, E.M. Quantum-like dynamics applied to cognition: A consideration of available
options. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 2017, 375, 20160387. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14.
Jedlicka, P. Revisiting the Quantum Brain Hypothesis: Toward Quantum (Neuro)biology? Front. Mol. Neurosci. 2017, 10, 1–8.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
15.
Hossenfelder, S.; Palmer, T. Rethinking superdeterminism. Front. Phys. 2020, 8, 139. [CrossRef]
16.
Sen, I.; Valentini, A. Superdeterministic hidden-variables models I: Non-equilibrium and signaling. Proc. R. Soc. A 2020, 476,
20200212. [CrossRef]
17.
Kellner, J. Pitowsky’s Kolmogorovian Models and Super-determinism. Found. Phys. 2017, 47, 132–148. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18.
Churchland, P.S.; Ramachandran, V.S.; Sejnowski, T.J. A Critique of Pure Vision. In Large-Scale Neuronal Theories of the Brain; Koch,
C., Davis, J.L., Eds.; MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1994; pp. 23–60.
19.
Goh, B.H.; Tong, E.S.; Pusparajah, P. Quantum Biology: Does quantum physics hold the key to revolutionizing medicine? Prog.
Drug Discov. Biomed. Sci. 2020, 3, a0000130. [CrossRef]
20.
Bassett, D.S.; Gazzaniga, M.S. Understanding complexity in the human brain. Trends Cogn. Sci. 2011, 15, 200–209. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
21.
Martins, N.R.B.; Angelica, A.; Chakravarthy, K.; Svidinenko, Y.; Boehm, F.J.; Opris, I.; Lebedev, M.; Swan, M.; Garan, S.A.;
Rosenfeld, J.V.; et al. Human Brain/Cloud Interface. Front. Neurosci. 2019, 13, 1–23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22.
Motta, A.; Schurr, M.; Stafﬂer, B.; Helmstaedter, M. Big data in nanoscale connectomics, and the greed for training labels. Curr.
Opin. Neurobiol. 2019, 55, 180–187. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23.
Recanatesi, S.; Ocker, G.K.; Buice, M.A.; Shea-Brown, E. Dimensionality in recurrent spiking networks: Global trends in activity
and local origins in connectivity. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2019, 17, e1006446. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24.
Urai, A.E.; Doiron, B.; Leifer, A.M.; Churchland, A.K. Large-scale neural recordings link brain and behavior. arXiv 2021,
arXiv:2103.14662.
25.
Aimon, S.; Katsuki, T.; Jia, T.; Grosenick, L.; Broxton, M.; Deisseroth, K.; Sejnowski, T.J.; Greenspan, R.J. Fast near-whole-brain
imaging in adult Drosophila during responses to stimuli and behavior. PLoS Biol. 2019, 17, 2006732. [CrossRef]

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
122
26.
Gao, R.; Asano, S.M.; Upadhyayula, S.; Pisarev, I.; Milkie, D.E.; Liu, T.-L.; Singh, V.; Graves, A.; Huynh, G.H.; Zhao, Y.; et al.
Cortical column and whole-brain imaging with molecular contrast and nanoscale resolution. Science 2019, 363, eaau8302.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
27.
Trujillo, C.A.; Adams, J.W.; Negraes, P.D.; Carromeu, C.; Tejwani, L.; Acab, A.; Tsuda, B.; A Thomas, C.; Sodhi, N.; Fichter,
K.M.; et al. Pharmacological reversal of synaptic and network pathology in human MECP2-KO neurons and cortical organoids.
EMBO Mol. Med. 2021, 13, e12523. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28.
Sterratt, D.; Graham, B.; Gillies, A.; Willshaw, D. Principles of Computational Modelling in Neuroscience; Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge, UK, 2011; pp. 226–266.
29.
Sejnowski, T.J. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep learning in artiﬁcial intelligence. PNAS 2020, 117, 30033–30038. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
30.
Wang, Y.; Li, Q.; Liu, L.; Zhou, Z.; Ruan, Z.; Kong, L.; Li, Y.; Wang, Y.; Zhong, N.; Chai, R.; et al. TeraVR empowers precise
reconstruction of complete 3-D neuronal morphology in the whole brain. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1–9. [CrossRef]
31.
Yin, W.; Brittain, D.; Borseth, J.; Scott, M.E.; Williams, D.; Perkins, J.; Own, C.S.; Murﬁtt, M.; Torres, R.M.; Kapner, D.; et al. A
petascale automated imaging pipeline for mapping neuronal circuits with high-throughput transmission electron microscopy.
bioRxiv 2019, bioRxiv:791889. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32.
Abbott, L.F.; Bock, D.D.; Callaway, E.M.; Denk, W.; Dulac, C.; Fairhall, A.L.; Fiete, I.; Harris, K.M.; Helmstaedter, M.; Jain, V.; et al.
The mind of a mouse. Cell 2020, 182, 1372–1376. [CrossRef]
33.
Pennisi, E. The human genome. Science 2001, 291, 1177–1180. [CrossRef]
34.
Zheng, Z.; Lauritzen, J.S.; Perlman, E.; Robinson, C.G.; Nichols, M.; Milkie, D.; Torrens, O.; Torrens, O.; Fisher, C.B.; Fisher,
C.B.; et al. A Complete Electron Microscopy Volume of the Brain of Adult Drosophila melanogaster. Cell 2018, 174, 730–743.
[CrossRef]
35.
Lichtman, J.W.; Pﬁster, H.; Shavit, N. The big data challenges of connectomics. Nat. Neurosci. 2014, 17, 1448–1454. [CrossRef]
36.
Reinsel, D. IDC’s Global DataSphere Forecast Shows Continued Steady Growth in the Creation and Consumption of Data. IDC Report:
Worldwide Global DataSphere Forecast, 2020-2024: The COVID-19 Data Bump and the Future of Data Growth (Doc US44797920); IDC:
Singapore, 2020.
37.
Grant, S.G.N. The synaptomic theory of behavior and brain disease. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 2019, 83, 1–12. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
38.
Breakspear, M. Dynamic models of large-scale brain activity. Nat. Neurosci. 2017, 20, 340–352. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39.
Igarashi, J.; Yamaura, H.; Yamazaki, T. Large-Scale Simulation of a Layered Cortical Sheet of Spiking Network Model Using a Tile
Partitioning Method. Front. Neuroinform. 2019, 13, 1–15. [CrossRef]
40.
Haas, L.F. Hans Berger (1873-1941), Richard Caton (1842-1926), and Electroencephalography. J. Neur. Neurosurg. Psychia. 2003,
74, 9. [CrossRef]
41.
Fields, R.D. The Other Brain: From Dementia to Schizophrenia, How New Discoveries about the Brain Are Revolutionizing Medicine and
Science; Simon and Schuster: New York, NY, USA, 2009.
42.
Nunez, P.L. The brain wave equation: A model for the EEG. Math Biosci. 1974, 21, 279–297. [CrossRef]
43.
Kiani, B.T.; Villanyi, A.; Lloyd, S. Quantum Medical Imaging Algorithms. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2004.02036.
44.
Gandhi, V.; Prasad, G.; Coyle, D.; Behera, L.; McGinnity, T.M. Quantum neural network-based EEG ﬁltering for a brain-computer
Interface. IEEE Trans. Neur. Net. Learn. Sys. 2014, 25, 278–288. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45.
Miranda, E.R.; Venkatesh, S.; Hernani-Morales, C.; Lamata, L.; Martín-Guerrero, J.D.; Solano, E. Quantum Brain Networks: A
Perspective. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2106.12295v1.
46.
Koch, M.; Geraedts, V.; Wang, H.; Tannemaat, M.; Balck, T. 2019 Automated machine learning for EEG-based classiﬁcation of
Parkinson’s disease patients. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), Los Angeles, CA,
USA, 9–12 December 2019.
47.
Biamonte, J.; Wittek, P.; Pancotti, N.; Rebentrost, P.; Wiebe, N.; Lloyd, S. Quantum machine learning. Nature 2017, 549, 195–202.
[CrossRef]
48.
Farhi, E.; Neven, H. Classiﬁcation with quantum neural networks on near term processors. MIT-CTP 2018, 4985, 1–21.
49.
Grant, E.; Benedetti, M.; Cao, S.; Hallam, A.; Lockhart, J.; Stojevic, V.; Green, A.G.; Severini, S. Hierarchical Quantum Classiﬁers.
npj Quant. Inf. 2018, 4, 65. [CrossRef]
50.
Schuld, M.; Killoran, N. Quantum machine learning in feature Hilbert spaces. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 122, 040504. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
51.
Tacchino, F.; Macchiavello, C.; Gerace, D.; Bajoni, D. An artiﬁcial neuron implemented on an actual quantum processor. npj Quant.
Inf. 2019, 5, 1–8. [CrossRef]
52.
Aishwarya, S.; Abeer, V.; Sathish, B.B.; Subramanya, K.N. Quantum Computational Techniques for Prediction of Cognitive State
of Human Mind from EEG Signals. J. Quant. Comput. 2020, 2, 157–170. [CrossRef]
53.
Taha, S.M.R.; Taha, Z.K. EEG signals classiﬁcation based on autoregressive and inherently quantum recurrent neural network. Int.
J. Comput. Appl. Tech. 2018, 58, 340. [CrossRef]
54.
Benjamin, B.V.; Gao, P.; McQuinn, E.; Choudhary, S.; Chandrasekaran, A.R.; Bussat, J.-M.; Alvarez-Icaza, R.; Arthur, J.V.; Merolla,
P.A.; Boahen, K. Neurogrid: A Mixed-Analog-Digital Multichip System for Large-Scale Neural Simulations. Proc. IEEE 2014, 102,
699–716. [CrossRef]

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
123
55.
Gotetia, U.S.; Zaluzhnyya, I.A.; Ramanathanb, S.; Goteti, U.S.; Zaluzhnyy, I.A.; Ramanathan, S.; Dynes, R.C.; Frano, A. Low-
temperature emergent neuromorphic networks with correlated oxide devices. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2021, 118, e2103934118.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
56.
Schneider, M.L.; Donnelly, C.A.; Haygood, I.W.; Wynn, A.; Russek, S.E.; Castellanos-Beltran, M.A.; Dresselhaus, P.D.; Hopkins,
P.F.; Pufall, M.R.; Rippard, W.H. Synaptic weighting in single ﬂux quantum neuromorphic computing. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 1–7.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
57.
Sun, Y.; Zeng, Y.; Zhang, T. Quantum superposition inspired spiking neural network. iScience 2021, 24, 102880. [CrossRef]
58.
Li, Y.; Zhou, R.; Xu, R.; Luo, J. A quantum mechanics-based framework for EEG signal feature extraction and classiﬁcation. IEEE
Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. 2020, 1. [CrossRef]
59.
Ramos, A.C.; Vellasco, M. Quantum-inspired evolutionary algorithm for feature selection in motor imagery EEG classiﬁcation.
IEEE Cong. Evol. Comput. 2018, 1–8.
60.
Aljazaery, I.A.; Ali, A.A.; Abdulridha, H.M. Classiﬁcation of Electroencephalograph (EEG) Signals Using Quantum Neural
Network. Sig. Proc. Int. J. 2011, 4, 329–337.
61.
Melkonian, D. Quantum Theory of EEG with Application to the Single-Trial ERP Analysis. OBM Neurobiol. 2020, 5, 39. [CrossRef]
62.
Ingber, L. Quantum Calcium-Ion Interactions with EEG. Science 2019, 1, 20. [CrossRef]
63.
Chakrabarty, S.; Sotiras, A.; Milchenko, M.; LaMontagne, P.; Hileman, M.; Marcus, D. MRI-based Identiﬁcation and Classiﬁcation
of Major Intracranial Tumor Types Using a 3D Convolutional Neural Network: A Retrospective Multi-Institutional Analysis.
Radiology AI 2021, 3, e200301. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64.
Konar, D.; Bhattacharyya, S.; Panigrahi, B.K.; Behrman, E.C. Qutrit-inspired fully self-supervised shallow quantum learning
network for brain tumor segmentation. IEEE Trans. Neur. Net. Learn. Syst. 2021, in press. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65.
Frydryszak, A.; Jakobczyk, L.; Lugiewicz, P. Determining quantum correlations in bipartite systems—From qubit to qutrit and
beyond. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2017, 804, 012016. [CrossRef]
66.
Hasan, A.M.; Jalab, H.A.; Ibrahim, R.W.; Meziane, F.; Al-Shamasneh, A.R.; Obaiys, S.J. MRI Brain Classiﬁcation Using the
Quantum Entropy LBP and Deep-Learning-Based Features. Entropy 2020, 22, 1033. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67.
Ahmadi, M.; Shariﬁ, A.; Hassantabar, S.; Enayati, S. QAIS-DSNN: Tumor Area Segmentation of MRI Image with Optimized
Quantum Matched-Filter Technique and Deep Spiking Neural Network. BioMed Res. Int. 2021, 2021, 6653879. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
68.
Sengupta, K.; Srivastava, P.R. Quantum algorithm for quicker clinical prognostic analysis: An application and experimental study
using CT scan images of COVID-19 patients. BMC Med Informatics Decis. Mak. 2021, 21, 1–14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69.
Petrella, C.; Di Certo, M.G.; Barbato, C.; Gabanella, F.; Ralli, M.; Greco, A.; Possenti, R.; Severini, C. Neuropeptides in Alzheimer’s
Disease: An Update. Curr. Alzheimer Res. 2019, 16, 544–558. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
70.
Silver, D.; Schrittwieser, J.; Simonyan, K.; Antonoglou, I.; Huang, A.; Guez, A.; Hubert, T.; Baker, L.; Lai, M.; Bolton, A.; et al.
Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge. Nature 2017, 550, 354–359. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
71.
Jumper, J.; Evans, R.; Pritzel, A.; Green, T.; Figurnov, M.; Ronneberger, O.; Tunyasuvunakool, K.; Bates, R.; Žídek, A.; Potapenko,
A.; et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold. Nature 2021, 596, 583–589. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72.
Outeiral, C.; Morris, G.M.; Shi, J.; Strahm, M.; Benjamin, S.C.; Deane, C.M. Investigating the potential for a limited quantum
speedup on protein lattice problems. New J. Phys. 2021, 23, 103030. [CrossRef]
73.
Robert, A.; Barkoutsos, P.K.; Woerner, S.; Tavernelli, I. Resource-efﬁcient quantum algorithm for protein folding. npj Quant. Inf.
2021, 7, 38. [CrossRef]
74.
Casares, P.A.M.; Campos, R.; Martin-Delgado, M.A. QFold: Quantum Walks and Deep Learning to Solve Protein Folding. arXiv
2021, arXiv:2101.10279.
75.
Yuen, H.; Shimojo, F.; Zhang, K.J.; Nomura, K.I.; Kalia, R.K.; Nakano, A.; Vashishta, P. DNA Sequencing via Quantum Mechanics
and Machine Learning. Int. J. Comput. Sci. 2010, 4, 352–370.
76.
Sarkar, A.; Al-Ars, Z.; Bertels, K. QuASeR: Quantum Accelerated de novo DNA sequence reconstruction. PLoS ONE 2021, 16,
e0249850. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77.
Boev, A.S.; Rakitko, A.S.; Usmanov, S.R.; Kobzeva, A.N.; Popov, I.V.; Ilinsky, V.V.; Fedorov, A.K. Genome assembly using quantum
and quantum-inspired annealing. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 13183. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78.
Li, R.Y.; Di Felice, R.; Rohs, R.; Lidar, D.A. Quantum annealing versus classical machine learning applied to a simpliﬁed
computational biology problem. npj Quant. Inf. 2018, 4, 14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79.
Kathuria, K.; Ratan, A.; McConnell, M.; Bekiranov, S. Implementation of a Hamming distance-like genomic quantum classiﬁer
using inner products on ibmqx2 and ibmq 16 melbourne. Quant. Mach. Intell. 2020, 2, 1–26.
80.
Sergioli, G.; Militello, C.; Rundo, L.; Minafra, L.; Torrisi, F.; Russo, G.; Giuntini, R. A quantum-inspired classiﬁer for clonogenic
assay evaluations. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 2830. [CrossRef]
81.
Thomasian, N.M.; Kamel, I.R.; Bai, H.Z. Machine intelligence in non-invasive endocrine cancer diagnostics. Nat. Rev. Endocrin.
2021, in press. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82.
Swan, M. Blockchain: Blueprint for a New Economy; O’Reilly Media: Sebastopol, CA, USA, 2015.
83.
Grishin, D.; Obbad, K.; Church, G.M. Data privacy in the age of personal genomics. Nat. Biotech. 2019, 37, 1110–1117. [CrossRef]

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
124
84.
Pennic, F. Nebula Genomics Launches World’s First Genomic NFT—Blockchain. HIT Consultant. 27 May 2021. Available
online: https://hitconsultant.net/2021/05/27/nebula-genomics-launches-worlds-ﬁrst-genomic-nft-blockchain (accessed on
15 December 2021).
85.
Tohoku University (ToMMo and Tohoku University Hospital). World’s First Quantum Cryptography Transmission of Whole
Genome Sequence Data Opens Up Practical Applications. Press Release. 6 February 2020. Available online: https://www.tohoku.
ac.jp/en/news/university_news/worlds_ﬁrst_quantum_cryptography_transmission_of_whole_genome_sequence_data.html
(accessed on 15 December 2021).
86.
Bradley, T.-D.; Stoudenmire, E.M.; Terilla, J. Modeling Sequences with Quantum States: A Look Under the Hood. Mach. Learn. Sci.
Technol. 2020, 1, 035008. [CrossRef]
87.
Basieva, I.; Khrennikov, A.; Ozawa, M. Quantum-like modeling in biology with open quantum systems and instruments. BioSyst.
2021, 201, 104328. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88.
Buice, M.A.; Cowan, J.D. Statistical Mechanics of the Neocortex. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 2009, 99, 53–86. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89.
Lee, R.S.T. Quantum Finance: Intelligent Forecast and Trading Systems; Springer: Singapore, 2020.
90.
Von Neumann, J. Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics; Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ, USA, 1955.
91.
Khrennikov, A. Probability and Randomness: Quantum Versus Classical; Imperial College Press: London, UK, 2016.
92.
Nielsen, M.A.; Chuang, I.L. Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, 10th ed.; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge,
UK, 2010.
93.
Fuchs, C.A.; Schack, R. A quantum-Bayesian route to quantum-state space. Found. Phys. 2011, 41, 345–356. [CrossRef]
94.
Asano, M.; Basieva, I.; Khrennikov, A.; Ohya, M.; Tanaka, Y.; Yalmato, I. Quantum Information Biology: From information
interpretation of quantum mechanics to applications in molecular biology and cognitive psychology. Found. Phys. 2015, 45,
1362–1378. [CrossRef]
95.
Byrne, A.; Avitabile, D.; Coombes, S. A next generation neural ﬁeld model. Phys. Rev. E 2019, 99, 012313. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96.
Coombes, S. Waves, bumps, and patterns in neural ﬁeld theories. Biol. Cybern. 2005, 93, 91–108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97.
Cowan, J.D.; Neuman, J.; van Drongelen, W. Wilson-Cowan Equations for Neocortical Dynamics. J. Math. Neurosci. 2016, 6, 1–24.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
98.
Kass, R.E.; Amari, S.-I.; Arai, K.; Brown, E.N.; Diekman, C.O.; Diesmann, M.; Doiron, B.; Eden, U.T.; Fairhall, A.L.; Fiddyment,
G.M.; et al. Computational Neuroscience: Mathematical and Statistical Perspectives. Ann. Rev. Stat. Appl. 2018, 5, 183–214.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
99.
Asano, M.; Basieva, I.; Khrennikov, A.; Ohya, M.; Tanaka, Y.; Yalmato, I. A model of epigenetic evolution based on theory of open
quantum systems. Syst. Synth. Biol. 2013, 7, 161–173. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Khrennikov, A.; Asano, M. A quantum-like model of information processing in the brain. Appl. Sci. 2020, 10, 707. [CrossRef]
101. Nunez, P.L.; Nunez, M.D.; Srinivasan, R. Multi-Scale Neural Sources of EEG: Genuine, Equivalent, and Representative. A Tutorial
Review. Brain Topogr. 2019, 32, 193–214. [CrossRef]
102. Davis, Z.W.; Benigno, G.B.; Fletterman, C.; Desbordes, T.; Steward, C.; Sejnowski, T.J.; Reynolds, J.H.; Muller, L. Spontaneous
traveling waves naturally emerge from horizontal ﬁber time delays and travel through locally asynchronous-irregular states. Nat.
Commun. 2021, 12, 6057. [CrossRef]
103. Nunez, P.L.; Srinivasan, R.; Fields, R.D. EEG functional connectivity, axon delays and white matter disease. Clin. Neurophysiol.
2015, 126, 110–120. [CrossRef]
104. Budzinski, R.C.; Nguyen, T.T.; Doan, J.; Minac, J.; Sejnowski, T.J.; Muller, L.E. Geometry unites synchrony, chimeras, and waves in
nonlinear oscillator networks. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2111.02560v2.
105. Bragina, L.; Conti, F. Expression of Neuroﬁlament Subunits at Neocortical Glutamatergic and GABAergic Synapses. Front.
Neuroanat. 2018, 12. [CrossRef]
106. Singh, P.; Saxena, K.; Sahoo, P.; Ghosh, S.; Bandyopadhyay, A. Electrophysiology using coaxial atom probe array: Live imaging
reveals hidden circuits of a hippocampal neural network. J. Neurophysiol. 2021. [CrossRef]
107. Singh, P.; Sahoo, P.; Ghosh, S.; Saxena, K.; Manna, J.S.; Ray, K.; Krishnananda, S.D.; Poznanski, R.R.; Bandyopadhyay, A. Filaments
and four ordered structures inside a neuron ﬁre a thousand times faster than the membrane: Theory and experiment. J. Integr.
Neurosci. 2021, 20, 777–790. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
108. Singh, P.; Sahoo, P.; Saxena, K.; Manna, J.; Ray, K.; Ghosh, S.; Bandyopadhyay, A. Cytoskeletal Filaments Deep Inside a Neuron
Are not Silent: They Regulate the Precise Timing of Nerve Spikes Using a Pair of Vortices. Symmetry 2021, 13, 821. [CrossRef]
109. Yuan, A.; Nixon, R.A. Neuroﬁlament Proteins as Biomarkers to Monitor Neurological Diseases and the Efﬁcacy of Therapies.
Front. Neurosci. 2021, 15. [CrossRef]
110. Meeter, L.; Dopper, E.G.; Jiskoot, L.C.; Sanchez-Valle, R.; Graff, C.; Benussi, L.; Ghidoni, R.; Pijnenburg, Y.A.; Borroni, B.;
Galimberti, D.; et al. Neuroﬁlament light chain: A biomarker for genetic frontotemporal dementia. Ann. Clin. Transl. Neurol. 2016,
3, 623–636. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Laucht, A.; Hohls, F.; Ubbelohde, N.; Gonzalez-Zalba, M.F.; Reilly, D.J.; Stobbe, S.; Schröder, T.; Scarlino, P.; Koski, J.V.; Dzurak,
A.; et al. Roadmap on quantum nanotechnologies. Nanotechnology 2021, 32, 1–47. [CrossRef]
112. Kaarsberg, T. Innovations in Scanning Tunneling Microscope Control Systems for High-Throughput Atomically Precise Manufacturing;
U.S. Department of Energy, Advanced Manufacturing Ofﬁce: Washington, DC, USA, 2019.

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
125
113. Randall, J.N.; Owen, J.H.; Fuchs, E.; Lake, J.; Von Ehr, J.R.; Ballard, J.; Henriksen, E. Digital atomic scale fabrication an inverse
Moore’s Law: A path to atomically precise manufacturing. Micro Nano Engineering. 2018, 1, 1–14. [CrossRef]
114. Luo, L. Architectures of neuronal circuits. Science 2021, 373, eabg7285. [CrossRef]
115. Li, W.; Qiu, J.; Li, X.L.; Aday, S.; Zhang, J.; Conley, G. BBB pathophysiology–independent delivery of siRNA in traumatic brain
injury. Sci. Adv. 2021, 7, eabd6889. [CrossRef]
116. Hanafy, A.S.; Schoch, S.; Lamprecht, A. CRISPR/Cas9 Delivery Potentials in Alzheimer’s Disease Management: A Mini Review.
Pharmaceutics 2020, 12, 801. [CrossRef]
117. Gottesman, D.; Kitaev, A.; Preskill, J. Encoding a qubit in an oscillator. Phys. Rev. A 2001, 64, 012310. [CrossRef]
118. Chamberland, C.; Noh, K.; Arrangoiz-Arriola, P.; Campbell, E.T.; Hann, C.T.; Iverson, J. Building a fault-tolerant quantum
computer using concatenated cat codes. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2012.04108.
119. Albert, V.V.; Covey, J.P.; Preskill, J. Robust encoding of a qubit in a molecule. Phys. Rev. X 2020, 10, 031050. [CrossRef]
120. Leinen, P.; Esders, M.; Schütt, K.T.; Wagner, C.; Müller, K.R.; Tautz, F.S. Autonomous robotic nanofabrication with reinforcement
learning. Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, eabb6987. [CrossRef]
121. Poirazi, P.; Papoutsi, A. Illuminating dendritic function with computational models. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2020, 21, 303–321.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Tikidji-Hamburyan, R.A.; Narayana, V.; Bozkus, Z.; El-Ghazawi, T.A. Software for Brain Network Simulations: A Comparative
Study. Front. Neuroinform. 2017, 11, 1–16. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Williams, S.R.; Atkinson, S.E. Dendritic Synaptic Integration in Central Neurons. Curr. Biol. 2018, 18, R1045–R1047. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
124. Spruston, N.; Stuart, G.; Hausser, M. Dendrites, 3rd ed.; Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 2016; pp. 1–78.
125. Swan, M.; dos Santos, R.P.; Lebedev, M.; Witte, F. Quantum Computing for the Brain; World Scientiﬁc: London, UK, 2022.
126. Han, X.; Hartnoll, S.A. Deep Quantum Geometry of Matrices. Phys. Rev. X 2020, 10, 011069. [CrossRef]
127. Maldacena, J. The large N limit of superconformal ﬁeld theories and supergravity. J. Theor. Phys. 1999, 38, 1113–1133. [CrossRef]
128. Natsuume, M. AdS/CFT Duality User Guide; Springer: London, UK, 2016.
129. Sachdev, S. Strange metals and the AdS/CFT correspondence. J. Stat. Mech. 2010, 1011, P11022. [CrossRef]
130. Harlow, D.; Ooguri, H. Constraints on symmetry from holography. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019, 122, 191601. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
131. Pastawski, F.; Yoshida, B.; Harlow, D.; Preskill, J. Holographic quantum error-correcting codes: Toy models for the bulk/boundary
correspondence. J. High Energ. Phys. 2015, 1506, 149. [CrossRef]
132. Gross, D.J.; Rosenhaus, V. The bulk dual of SYK: Cubic couplings. J. High Energ. Phys. 2017, 1705, 92. [CrossRef]
133. Vidal, G. Entanglement renormalization. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 99, 220405. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
134. Else, D.W.; Monroe, C.; Nayak, C.; Yao, N.Y. Discrete Time Crystals. Ann. Rev. Cond. Matt. Phys. 2020, 11, 467–499. [CrossRef]
135. Coombes, S.; Lai, Y.M.; ¸Sayli, M.; Thul, R. Networks of piecewise linear neural mass models. Eur. J. Appl. Math. 2018, 29, 869–890.
[CrossRef]
136. Kendon, V. How to Compute Using Quantum Walks. EPTCS 2020, 315, 1–17. [CrossRef]
137. Dvali, G.; Gomez, C. Black Holes as Critical Point of Quantum Phase Transition. Eur. Phys. J. C 2014, 74, 2752. [CrossRef]
138. Hartnoll, S.A.; Horowitz, G.T.; Kruthoff, J.; Santos, J.E. Diving into a holographic superconductor. SciPost. Phys. 2021, 10, 9.
139. Arbab, A.I. Massive photons propagation in gravitational ﬁeld. Preprints.Org. 2018, 2018080236.
140. Faulkner, T.R.; Guica, M.; Hartman, T.; Myers, R.C.; Van Raamsdonk, M. Gravitation from Entanglement in Holographic CFTs.
J. High Energ. Phys. 2014, 1403, 51. [CrossRef]
141. Swingle, B.; Bentsen, G.; Schleier-Smith, M.; Hayden, P. Measuring the scrambling of quantum information. Phys. Rev. A 2016, 94,
040302. [CrossRef]
142. Belyansky, R.; Bienias, P.; Kharkov, Y.A.; Gorshkov, A.V.; Swingle, B. A Minimal Model for Fast Scrambling. arXiv 2020,
arXiv:2005.05362v2. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
143. Sengupta, B.; Tozzi, A.; Cooray, G.K.; Douglas, P.K.; Friston, K.J. Towards a Neuronal Gauge Theory. PLoS Biol. 2016, 14, 3.
[CrossRef]
144. Lynn, C.W.; Cornblath, E.J.; Papadopoulos, L.; Bertolero, M.A.; Bassett, D.S. Broken detailed balance and entropy production in
the human brain. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2005.02526. [CrossRef]
145. Barch, D.M.; Burgess, G.C.; Harms, M.P.; Petersen, S.E.; Schlaggar, B.L.; Corbetta, M. Function in the human connectome:
Task-fMRI and individual differences in behavior. Neuroimage 2013, 80, 169–189. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
146. Weninger, L.; Srivastava, P.; Zhou, D.; Kim, J.Z.; Cornblath, E.J.; Bertolero, M.A. The information content of brain states is
explained by structural constraints on state energetics. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2110.13781v1.
147. Bassett, D.S.; Zurn, P.; Gold, J.I. On the Nature and Use of Models in Network Neuroscience. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2018, 19, 566–578.
[CrossRef]
148. Lynn, C.W.; Bassett, D.S. The physics of brain network structure, function and control. Nat. Rev. Phys. 2019, 1, 318–332. [CrossRef]
149. Lynn, C.W.; Bassett, D.S. Compressibility of complex networks. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2011.08994.
150. Papadopoulos, L.; Lynn, C.W.; Battaglia, D.; Bassett, D.S. Relations between large-scale brain connectivity and effects of regional
stimulation depend on collective dynamical state. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2020, 16, 9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
151. Aqil, M.; Atasoy, S.; Kringelbach, M.L.; Hindriks, R. Graph neural ﬁelds: A framework for spatiotemporal dynamical models on
the human connectome. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2020, 17, e1008310. [CrossRef]

Quantum Rep. 2022, 4
126
152. Carrozza, S.; Harribey, S. Melonic large N limit of 5-index irreducible random tensors. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2104.03665v1. [CrossRef]
153. Benedetti, D.; Gurau, R.; Harribey, S.; Lettera, D. The F-theorem in the melonic limit. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2111.11792v1.
154. Ramdas, T.; Mel, B.W. Optimizing a Neuron for Reliable Dendritic Subunit Pooling. Neurosci. 2021, in press. [CrossRef]
155. Cugno, A.; Bartol, T.M.; Sejnowski, T.J.; Iyengar, R.; Rangamani, P. Geometric principles of second messenger dynamics in
dendritic spines. Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 11676. [CrossRef]
156. Mendelsohn, R.; Garcia, G.C.; Bartol, T.M.; Lee, C.T.; Khandelwal, P.; Liu, E.; Spencer, D.J.; Husar, A.; Bushong, E.A.; Phan, S.; et al.
Morphological principles of neuronal mitochondria. J. Comp. Neurol. 2021, in press. [CrossRef]
157. Sameti, M.; Castello, P.R.; Lanoue, M.; Karpova, T.; Martino, C.F. Assessing Bioenergetic Function in Response to Reactive Oxygen
Species in Neural Cells. React. Oxyg. Species 2021, 11, r14–r22. [CrossRef]
158. Preskill, J. Quantum computing 40 years later. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2106.10522.
159. Khrennikov, A.; Basieva, I.; Dzhafarov, E.N.; Busemeyer, J.R. Quantum Models for Psychological Measurements: An Unsolved
Problem. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, 10. [CrossRef]
160. White, L.C.; Pothos, E.M.; Busemeyer, J.R. Sometimes it does hurt to ask: The constructive role of articulating impressions.
Cognition 2014, 133, 1. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
161. Ringbauer, M.; Costa, F.; Goggin, M.E.; White, A.G.; Fedrizzi, A. Multi-time quantum correlations with no spatial analog. npj
Quant. Inf. 2018, 4, 37. [CrossRef]
162. Lin, H.W.; Maldacena, J.; Zhao, Y. Symmetries near the horizon. J. High Energ. Phys. 2019, 819, 49. [CrossRef]
163. Fazelpour, S.; Thompson, E. The Kantian brain: Brain dynamics from a neurophenomenological perspective. Curr. Opin. Nuerobiol.
2015, 31, 223–229. [CrossRef]
164. Hepp, K. Space, Time, Categories, Mechanics, and Consciousness: On Kant and Neuroscience. J. Stat. Phys. 2020, 180, 896–909.
[CrossRef]
165. Winfree, A.T. The Geometry of Biological Time; Springer-Verlag: Berlin, Germany, 1980.
166. Swan, M.; dos Santos, R.P.; Witte, F. Quantum Information Science. IEEE Internet Comput. 2022, 26, 7–14. [CrossRef]

