
QUANTUM THEORY AS AN
EMERGENT PHENOMENON
The Statistical Mechanics of Matrix Models
as the Precursor of Quantum Field Theory
Quantum mechanics is our most successful physical theory. However, it raises
conceptual issues that have perplexed physicists and philosophers of science for
decades. This book develops a new approach, based on the proposal that quantum
theory is not a complete, ﬁnal theory, but is in fact an emergent phenomenon aris-
ing from a deeper level of dynamics. The dynamics at this deeper level is taken
to be an extension of classical dynamics to non-commuting matrix variables, with
cyclic permutation inside a trace used as the basic calculational tool. With plausible
assumptions, quantum theory is shown to emerge as the statistical thermodynam-
ics of this underlying theory, with the canonical commutation–anticommutation
relations derived from a generalized equipartition theorem. Brownian motion cor-
rections to this thermodynamics are argued to lead to state vector reduction and to
the probabilistic interpretation of quantum theory, making contact with recent phe-
nomenological proposals for stochastic modiﬁcations to Schr¨odinger dynamics.
STEPHEN L. ADLER received his Ph.D. degree in theoretical physics from
Princeton. He has been a Professor in the School of Natural Sciences at the In-
stitute for Advanced Study since 1969, and from 1979 to 2003 held the State of
New Jersey Albert Einstein Professorship there.
Dr. Adler’s research has included seminal papers in current algebras, sum rules,
perturbation theory anomalies, and high energy neutrino processes. Dr. Adler has
also done important work on neutral current phenomenology, strong ﬁeld elec-
tromagnetic processes, acceleration methods for Monte Carlo algorithms, induced
gravity, non-Abelian monopoles, and models for quark conﬁnement. For nearly
twenty years he has been studying embeddings of standard quantum mechanics in
larger mathematical frameworks, with results described in this volume.
Dr. Adler is a member of the National Academy of Sciences, and is a Fellow of
the American Physical Society, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and
the American Association for the Advancement of Science. He received the J. J.
Sakurai Prize in particle phenomenology, awarded by the American Physical So-
ciety, in 1988, and the Dirac Prize and Medal awarded by the International Center
for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, in 1998.


QUANTUM THEORY AS AN EMERGENT
PHENOMENON
The Statistical Mechanics of Matrix Models
as the Precursor of Quantum Field Theory
STEPHEN L. ADLER
Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton

  
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge  , UK
First published in print format 
-    ----
-    ----
© S. L. Adler 2004
2004
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521831949
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of
relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place
without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
-    ---
-    ---
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of s
for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
hardback
eBook (NetLibrary)
eBook (NetLibrary)
hardback

To Sarah Brett-Smith, with love and admiration


Contents
Acknowledgements
page x
Introduction and overview
1
1
The quantum measurement problem
2
2
Reinterpretations of quantum mechanical foundations
6
3
Motivations for believing that quantum mechanics
is incomplete
9
4
An overview of this book
13
5
Brief historical remarks on trace dynamics
18
1
Trace dynamics: the classical Lagrangian and Hamiltonian
dynamics of matrix models
21
1.1
Bosonic and fermionic matrices and the cyclic
trace identities
21
1.2
Derivative of a trace with respect to an operator
24
1.3
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics of matrix models
27
1.4
The generalized Poisson bracket, its properties,
and applications
29
1.5
Trace dynamics contrasted with unitary Heisenberg
picture dynamics
32
2
Additional generic conserved quantities
39
2.1
The trace “fermion number” N
39
2.2
The conserved operator ˜C
42
2.3
Conserved quantities for continuum spacetime theories
52
2.4
An illustrative example: a Dirac fermion coupled
to a scalar Klein–Gordon ﬁeld
58
2.5
Symmetries of conserved quantities under pF ↔qF
62
3
Trace dynamics models with global supersymmetry
64
3.1
The Wess–Zumino model
64
3.2
The supersymmetric Yang–Mills model
67
vii

viii
Contents
3.3
The matrix model for M theory
70
3.4
Superspace considerations and remarks
72
4
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
75
4.1
The Liouville theorem
76
4.2
The canonical ensemble
81
4.3
The microcanonical ensemble
88
4.4
Gauge ﬁxing in the partition function
93
4.5
Reduction of the Hilbert space modulo ieff
100
4.6
Global unitary ﬁxing
106
5
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
117
5.1
The general Ward identity
119
5.2
Variation of the source terms
124
5.3
Approximations/assumptions leading to the emergence
of quantum theory
128
5.4
Restrictions on the underlying theory implied by further
Ward identities
139
5.5
Derivation of the Schr¨odinger equation
147
5.6
Evasion of the Kochen–Specker theorem and Bell
inequality arguments
151
6
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics and the
emergence of the probability interpretation
156
6.1
Scenarios leading to the localization and the energy-driven
stochastic Schr¨odinger equations
157
6.2
Proof of reduction with Born rule probabilities
170
6.3
Phenomenology of stochastic reduction – reduction
rate formulas
174
6.4
Phenomenology of energy-driven reduction
175
6.5
Phenomenology of reduction by continuous spontaneous
localization
185
7
Discussion and outlook
190
Appendices
193
Appendix A: Modiﬁcations in real and quaternionic
Hilbert space
194
Appendix B: Algebraic proof of the Jacobi identity for the
generalized Poisson bracket
194
Appendix C: Symplectic structures in trace dynamics
198
Appendix D: Gamma matrix identities for supersymmetric
trace dynamics models
201
Appendix E: Trace dynamics models with operator
gauge invariance
204

Contents
ix
Appendix F: Properties of Wightman functions needed for
reconstruction of local quantum ﬁeld theory
206
Appendix G: BRST invariance transformation for global
unitary ﬁxing
208
References
212
Index
220

Acknowledgements
I have many people to thank for their assistance in aspects of this work. The dis-
covery by my thesis student Andrew Millard of the conservation of ˜C provided the
underpinning for the entire project. I am greatly indebted to him, and to my other
collaborators in the course of parts of this work, Gyan Bhanot, Dorje Brody, Todd
Brun, Larry Horwitz, Lane Hughston, Achim Kempf, Indrajit Mitra, John Weckel,
and Yong-Shi Wu. I am grateful to Jeeva Anandan, Angelo Bassi, Todd Brun, Lajos
Di´osi, Larry Horwitz, Lane Hughston, Gerald Goldin, Stanley Liu, Peter Morgan,
Philip Pearle, Artem Starodubtsev, and several anonymous publisher’s reviewers,
for many insightful comments on the ﬁrst draft of this book. I am particularly in-
debted to Philip Pearle for detailed comments on the Introduction and Chapter 6, to
Larry Horwitz for a careful reading of the entire manuscript, and to Todd Brun and
Peter Morgan for remarks that led to the present form of Sec. 5.6. Finally, I wish
to thank my wife Sarah for her perceptive support throughout this long project.
I have beneﬁted from conversations and/or email correspondence with a great
many others as well; a list (undoubtedly incomplete) includes: Philip Anderson,
John Bahcall, Vijay Balasubramanian, Lowell Brown, Jeremy Butterﬁeld,
Tian-Yu Cao, Sudip Chakravarty, Freeman Dyson, Sheldon Goldstein, GianCarlo
Ghirardi, Siyuan Han, William Happer, James Hartle, Roman Jackiw, Abraham
Klein, John Klauder, Pawan Kumar, Joel Lebowitz, Anthony Leggett, James
Lukens, G. Mangano, Herbert Neuberger, Ian Percival, Michael Ramalis, Soo-
Jong Rey, Lee Smolin, Yuri Suhov, Leo Stodolsky, Terry Tao, Charles Thorn, Sam
Treiman, Walter Troost, Steven Weinberg, Frank Wilczek, David Wineland, and
Edward Witten.
Parts of this book are based on papers that were previously published in Nuclear
Physics B (Adler, 1994; Adler and Millard, 1996; Adler, 1997a) and in Physics
Letters B (Adler, 1997b; Adler and Horwitz, 2003), and I wish to thank Elsevier
Science, Ltd. for permission to use this material. I similarly wish to thank Institute
of Physics Publishing Ltd. for permission to use material originally published in
x

Acknowledgements
xi
Journal of Physics A: Math. Gen. (Adler, 2002). Finally, I wish to acknowledge
the American Physical Society for use of material originally published in papers
appearing in the Journal of Mathematical Physics (Adler, Bhanot, and Weckel,
1994; Adler, 1998; Adler and Kempf, 1998; Adler and Horwitz, 1996, 2000) and
in Physical Review D (Adler and Wu, 1994; Adler, 2000, 2003a).
I also wish to acknowledge the hospitality of the Aspen Center for Physics,
and of both the Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics and
Clare Hall at Cambridge University, as well as my home base at the Institute for
Advanced Study in Princeton. The Albert Einstein Professorship that I held while
writing this book was partially funded by the State of New Jersey, and my work
is also supported in part by the Department of Energy under Grant No. DE-FG02-
90ER40542.


Introduction and overview
Quantum mechanics is our most successful physical theory. It underlies our very
detailed understanding of atomic physics, chemistry, and nuclear physics, and the
many technologies to which physical systems in these regimes give rise. Addi-
tionally, relativistic quantum mechanics is the basis for the standard model of ele-
mentary particles, which very successfully gives a partial uniﬁcation of the forces
operating at the atomic, nuclear, and subnuclear levels.
However, from its inception the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics, and
the fact that “quantum measurements” in the orthodox formulation appear to re-
quire the intervention of non-quantum mechanical “classical systems,” have led to
speculations by many physicists, mathematicians, and philosophers of science that
quantum mechanics may be incomplete. Among the Founding Fathers of quantum
theory, Einstein and Schr¨odinger were both of the opinion that quantum mechanics
is in some way unsatisfactory, and this view has been ampliﬁed in more recent pro-
found work of John Bell, among others. In an opposing camp, many others in the
physics, mathematics, and philosophy communities have attempted to provide an
interpretational foundation in which quantum mechanics remains a complete and
self-contained system. Among the Founding Fathers, Bohr, Born, and Heisenberg
maintained that quantum mechanics is a complete system, and a number of re-
cent proposals have been made to improve upon or to provide alternatives to their
“Copenhagen Interpretation.” The debate continues, and has spawned an enormous
literature. While it is beyond the scope of this book to give a detailed review of all
the proposals that have been made, to set the stage we give a brief discussion of the
measurement problem in Section 1, and we survey some of the current proposals
to revise the interpretational foundation of quantum mechanics in Section 2.
The rest of this book, however, is based on the premise that quantum mechan-
ics is in fact not a complete system, but rather represents a very accurate asymp-
totic approximation to a deeper level of dynamics. Motivations for pursuing this
track are given in Section 3. The detailed proposal to be developed in this book
1

2
Introduction and overview
is that quantum mechanics is not a complete theory, but rather is an emergent
phenomenon arising from the statistical mechanics of matrix models that have a
global unitary invariance. We use “emergent” here in the sense that it is used
in condensed matter, molecular dynamics, and complex systems theory, where
higher level phenomena (phonons, superconductivity, ﬂuid mechanics, etc.) are
seen to arise or “emerge” as the expressions, in appropriate dynamical contexts,
of an underlying dynamics that at ﬁrst glance shows little resemblance to these
phenomena. Initial ideas in this direction were developed by the author and col-
laborators in a number of papers dealing with the properties of what we termed
“generalized quantum dynamics” or, in the terminology that we shall use in this
exposition,“trace dynamics.” The purpose of this book is to give a comprehensive
review of this earlier work, with a number of signiﬁcant additions and modiﬁca-
tions that bring the project closer to its goal. We shall also relate our proposal
to a substantial body of literature on stochastic modiﬁcations of the Schr¨odinger
equation, which we believe provides the low energy phenomenology, expressed
in terms of experimentally accessible observables, for the pre-quantum dynamics
that we develop here. A quick overview of what we intend to accomplish in the
subsequent chapters is given in Section 4, and some brief remarks on the history
of this project are given in Section 5.
Certain sections of this book are more technical in that they involve some knowl-
edge of supersymmetry techniques and, although included for completeness, are
not essential to follow the main line of development; these are marked with an as-
terisk (*) in the section head. The exposition of the text is based on dynamical vari-
ables that are matrices in complex Hilbert space, but many of the ideas carry over
to a statistical dynamics of matrix models in real or quaternionic Hilbert space, as
sketched in Appendix A. Discussions of other topics needed to keep our treatment
self-contained are given in further appendices, and our notational conventions are
reviewed in the introductory paragraphs preceding Appendix A.
1 The quantum measurement problem
Quantum mechanics works perfectly well in describing microscopic phenomena,
and even in describing phenomena in which many particles act coherently in one
or a small number of quantum states, as in Bose–Einstein condensates, superﬂuids,
and superconducting Josephson junctions. Conceptual problems arise only when
one tries to apply the rules of quantum mechanics simultaneously to a microscopic
system and to the macroscopic apparatus that is measuring the state of the mi-
croscopic system; this is the origin of the notorious “quantum measurement prob-
lem.” We shall give here a simpliﬁed, “bare bones” description of the measurement

Introduction and overview
3
problem, taking as an example a variant of the familiar Stern–Gerlach experiment.
(For a selection of papers on the measurement problem, see the reprint volume
Wheeler and Zurek, 1983.)
Consider a source emitting spin-1/2 particles with polarized spins, so that all
particles have spin component up along the x axis; that is, the initial beam is in
a state with Sx = 1/2. (We shall see in a moment how this is accomplished in
practice.) The particles then go through an inhomogeneous magnetic ﬁeld aligned
along the z axis, which splits the beam into two spatially displaced components,
corresponding to components of the beam with spin component Sz = 1/2 and
Sz = −1/2, as shown in Fig. 1a. The quantum mechanical description of what has
happened so far is simply the spin state decomposition (with appropriate phase
conventions)
|Sx = 1/2⟩=
1
√
2
(|Sz = 1/2⟩+ |Sz = −1/2⟩).
(1a)
At this point no measurement has been made; if we pass the split beams through
a second inhomogeneous ﬁeld with the direction of inhomogeneity reversed, as in
Fig. 1b, and devote great care to the isolation of the beams from environmental in-
ﬂuences, the two components of the beam merge back into one and what emerges
from the combined apparatus is the original state |Sx = 1/2⟩. (An analysis of is-
sues involved in achieving spin coherence, and further references, are given in
Sculley, Englert, and Schwinger, 1989.)
To make a measurement, one must intercept one or both beams with a macro-
scopic measuring apparatus that absorbs the beam and registers a count in some
form. When the measuring apparatus A intercepts both beams, we get the con-
ventional Stern–Gerlach setup pictured in Fig. 1c. This is described, in the von
Neumann (1932) model of measurement, by the evolution of the initial state
|Sx = 1/2⟩|Ainitial⟩into a state in which the measured system and the apparatus
are entangled
1
√
2
(|Sz = 1/2⟩|A+⟩+ |Sz = −1/2⟩|A−⟩),
(1b)
where |A+⟩is an apparatus state with a count shown on the upper counter and
none on the lower counter, while |A−⟩is an apparatus state with a count shown on
the lower counter and none on the upper counter.
Once an apparatus intervenes in this way, two salient features become apparent.
The ﬁrst is that it is impossible in practice to coherently recombine the total sys-
tem consisting of beam and apparatus so as to regain the initial state |Sx = 1/2⟩.
This feature, that the two legs of the apparatus have decohered, can be understood

4
Introduction and overview
within the framework of quantum mechanics: since the apparatus state is a com-
plex, large system, reversing the joint evolution of beams and apparatus with suf-
ﬁcient accuracy to preserve interference requires an unachievable control over the
apparatus state. This is all the more so because in general the apparatus is in in-
teraction with an external environment, into which phase coherence information is
rapidly dissipated, making a coherent recombination of the beams a practical im-
possibility. In density matrix language, the off-diagonal components of the density
matrix, when traced over the internal states of the apparatus and the environment,
rapidly vanish because of decoherence effects, leaving just diagonal components
that represent the probabilities for seeing the apparatus register an up or a down
Sz spin component. (For further discussions of decoherence theory, see Harris and
Stodolsky, 1981; Joos and Zeh, 1985; Zurek, 1991; and Joos, 1999.)
The second salient feature is that while there are deﬁnite probabilities for the ap-
paratus to register a spin up or a spin down component, the outcome of any given
run of a particle through the apparatus cannot be predicted; part of the time it regis-
ters in the “up” counter, and part of the time it registers in the “down” counter. (In
the above example, the probabilities for registering “up” and “down” are both 1/2,
but for general orientations of the apparatus axis the probabilities will be sin2 θ/2
and cos2 θ/2, with θ the angle by which the inhomogeneous magnetic ﬁeld is ro-
tated with respect to the x axis.) This unpredictability of individual outcomes is
the origin of the quantum measurement problem. If we maintain that quantum me-
chanics should apply to both the particle passing through the apparatus and to the
measuring apparatus itself, then the ﬁnal state at time t is described by a unitary
evolution U = exp(−i Ht) applied to the initial state, and this describes a superpo-
sition as in Eq. (1b), not an either–or choice between outcomes that are described
by orthogonal states in Hilbert space. Since environmental decoherence effects still
involve a unitary evolution (in an enlarged Hilbert space describing the system, ap-
paratus, and environment), they cannot account for this either–or choice observed
in the experimental outcomes. (See Adler, 2003b for a more detailed discussion of
this point, and for extensive literature references. For an opposing viewpoint, see
the review of Zurek, 2003.)
It is not necessary for the apparatus to intercept both beams for a measurement
problem to be apparent. Consider the apparatus illustrated in Fig. 1d, which in-
tercepts only the “down” leg of the experiment. If the particles are gated into the
apparatus at deﬁnite time intervals, then a count on the “down” meter indicates that
a particle has been detected there, and subsequent downstream measurements in
the “up” leg will detect no particle there. If there is no count on the “down” meter
(i.e., a “down” meter anti-coincidence), then one can say with certainty that the
particle has passed through the “up” leg of the apparatus and is in a polarized state
|Sz = 1/2⟩; this is how one produces a polarized beam. Decoherence accounts for

Introduction and overview
5
a
b
c
d
Figure 1
Beam paths through variants of the Stern-Gerlach experiment. Where
the beams separate or recombine, there are magnetic ﬁelds that are not shown. a.
Spin up and down components are separated and continue to propagate. b. Spin
up and down components are separated, propagate, and then are coherently re-
combined. c. Spin up and down components are separated and each impinges on
a detector. d. Spin up and down components are separated, the down component
impinges on a detector, while the up component continues to propagate, produc-
ing a spin up polarized beam.
the fact that we cannot in practice reconstitute the original state |Sx = 1/2⟩, but it
cannot account for the stochastic pattern in which polarized particles emerge from
the “up” leg of our apparatus.
There are two conventional ways to try to avoid the measurement dilemma just
stated. The ﬁrst is to assert that quantum mechanics has only a statistical interpre-
tation, and should only be applied to describe the statistical properties of multiple
repetitions of an experiment, but not to any individual run. However, with the ad-
vent of our ability to trap individual particles for long periods, and to manipulate
their quantum states (e.g., the particle emerging from the “up” beam in Fig. 1d
could be run into a trap, and manipulated there), this interpretation of quantum me-
chanics becomes dubious. The second is to adopt the Copenhagen interpretation,
and to state by ﬁat that the unitary state vector evolution of quantum mechanics
does not apply to measurement situations. One then adds to the unitary evolution
postulate a second postulate, that of state vector reduction, which states that after a
measurement one sees a unit normalized state corresponding to the measurement
outcome | f ⟩, with a probability given by the Born rule Pf = |⟨f |⟩|2 as applied
to the initial state |⟩being measured.
While perfectly consistent for all experiments that have been performed to date,
the Copenhagen interpretation is at odds with the our belief that quantum mechan-
ics should have universal applicability, and should describe the behavior of large
systems (such as a measuring apparatus) as well as microscopic ones. It also has
the bizarre feature of erecting a probabilistic theory, without an underlying sample
space of individual events, the coarse-grained behavior of which is described by the

6
Introduction and overview
probabilities. In all other applications of probability theory, probabilities emerge
from the fact that one cannot observe, or chooses not to observe, individual details
which deterministically specify the outcomes. Quantum mechanics is unique in
that probabilities (or in some formulations, expectation values) are introduced as a
postulate, without emerging by some well-deﬁned rule from an underlying sample
space of predictable individual events.
There are two logical possibilities for dealing with the problems just sketched.
The ﬁrst is to maintain that quantum mechanics is exactly correct, but in need
of an improved conceptual foundation. One way to do this is to generalize the
Copenhagen interpretation, so as to eliminate the apparently arbitrary distinction
between “system” and “apparatus,” and to give a set of extended interpretive rules
with general applicability. This is the goal of the “consistent histories” approach
to quantum foundations. Another way to do this is to extend the kinematic rules of
quantum mechanics so as to give a concrete speciﬁcation of a hidden sample space,
that is constructed so as to be in principle unobservable, which leads to Born rule
probabilities because full details of the sample space cannot be seen. This is what
is done in certain versions of the “many worlds” approach, and in the Bohmian
and Ax–Kochen approaches to quantum theory.
The second logical alternative is to consider the possibility that quantum me-
chanics is only a very accurate approximation to a deeper level of dynamics,
which in turn gives a uniﬁed understanding of both unitary Schr¨odinger evolu-
tion and measurement dynamics. In this case the sample space that is created is
not constructed so as to be unobservable, and detectable deviations from quantum
mechanics become possible, leading to experimental constraints on the model pa-
rameters. As in any approach that proceeds by creating a sample space, there are
so-called “hidden variables,” and so important constraints imposed by no-go the-
orems coming from the work of Kochen and Specker (1967), Bell (1964, 1987),
and others, have to be observed.
In Section 2 immediately following, we shall brieﬂy describe the approaches
that proceed from the assumption that quantum theory is exact but requires a new
conceptual foundation. In Section 3 we shall give motivations for considering the
possibility that quantum mechanics is in fact not an exact, ﬁnal theory, which leads
into the main themes of this book.
2 Reinterpretations of quantum mechanical foundations
A number of approaches to the reinterpretation of quantum foundations, assum-
ing that quantum theory is exact, have been explored in recent years. Our aim in
this section is to give a brief overview with entry points to the relevant literature,
without attempting either a detailed exposition or a critique.

Introduction and overview
7
2.1 Histories
The histories approach is a generalization of the Copenhagen interpretation, that
replaces the imprecise notions of an “apparatus” and a “measurement” with more
precise concepts based on histories. The basic objects in this approach are time-
dependent projectors Ek(tk) associated with events (deﬁned as properties at given
times) occurring in a history, and the probability of a history is then postulated to
be given by
p = Tr[En(tn) . . . E1(t1)ρE1(t1) . . . En(tn)],
(2a)
with ρ the initial density matrix. This deﬁnition, supplemented by the notion of a
family of decohering histories, which describes mutually exclusive evolutions with
probabilities that sum to unity, can be argued to lead to all of the usual properties
of quantum mechanical probabilities. In this interpretation, state vector reduction
appears only as a Bayesian statistical rule for relating the density matrix after a
measurement to that before the measurement. Detailed accounts of the histories
approach can be found in the book of Grifﬁths (2002), the review and books
of Omn`es (1992, 1994, 1999), and the lectures of Hartle (1992). The histories
approach involves no enlargement of the basic mathematical apparatus of quantum
mechanics, and may still be relevant as a detailed description of quantum behavior
even if quantum mechanics turns out to be an approximation to a deeper level of
dynamics.
The three approaches that we discuss next all enlarge the mathematical structure
of quantum mechanics, so as to create a sample space which forms the basis for
the probabilistic interpretation. However, in all three cases the attributes that dis-
tinguish “individuals” in the sample space are not observable, so that there are no
predictions that differ from those of standard quantum mechanics. Because these
theories reproduce the results of quantum mechanics, it is evident that the assump-
tions of the Kochen and Specker (1967) and Bell (1964) no-go results are evaded.
In the Bell case, for example, this results from nonlocality in the construction of
the hidden sample space.
2.2 Bohmian mechanics
In Bohmian mechanics (Bohm, 1952), in addition to the Schr¨odinger equation for
the N-body wave-function ψ(q1, . . . , qN, t) that obeys
i ¯h ∂ψ
∂t =

−
N

k=1
¯h2
2mk
∇2
qk + V

ψ,
(2b)

8
Introduction and overview
one enlarges the mathematical framework by introducing hidden “particles”
moving in conﬁguration space with coordinates Qk and velocities
vk = dQk
dt
=
¯h
mk
Im∇Qk log ψ(Q1, . . . , QN, t).
(2c)
The state of the individual system is then speciﬁed by giving both the wave func-
tion and the coordinates Qk of the hidden particles. If the probability in conﬁgu-
ration space is assumed to obey the Born rule p = |ψ|2 at some initial time, the
Bohmian equations then imply that this continues to be true at all subsequent times.
Arguments have been given that the Bohmian initial time probability postulate
follows from considerations of “typicality” of initial conﬁgurations. For detailed
expositions, see Bub (1997), D¨urr, Goldstein, and Zanghi (1992), and D¨urr,
Goldstein, Tumulka, and Zanghi (2003).
2.3 The Ax–Kochen proposal
Ax and Kochen (1999) extend the mathematical framework of quantum theory to
encompass the “individual,” by identifying the ray with the quantum ensemble,
and the ray representative, i.e., the U(1) phase associated with a particular state
vector, with the individual. They then give a mathematical construction to specify
a unique physical state from knowledge of the toroid of phases. They argue that if
the a priori distribution of phases is assumed to be uniform, then their construction
implies that the probabilities of outcomes obey the usual Born rule.
2.4 Everett’s “many worlds” interpretation
In the “many worlds” interpretation introduced by Everett (1957), there is no state
vector reduction, but only Schr¨odinger evolution of the entire universe. In this
interpretation, to describe N successive quantum measurements requires consid-
eration of an N-fold tensor product wave function. The mathematical framework
can be enlarged to create a sample space by considering the space of all possible
such tensor products, and deﬁning a suitable measure on this space. This proce-
dure, given in the De Witt and Graham (1973) versions of many worlds, is the
basis for arguments obtaining the Born rule as the probability for the occurrence
of a particular outcome, that is, as the probability of ﬁnding oneself on a particular
branch of the universal wave function.
Since the reinterpretations of quantum theory sketched here all aim, by con-
struction, to reproduce the entire body of predictions of nonrelativistic quantum
theory, they cannot be experimentally falsiﬁed (unless deviations from quantum
theory are eventually established). Thus, apart from issues of the extent to which
they can be generalized to encompass relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory, the choice

Introduction and overview
9
between them is somewhat a matter of taste. Rather than join in the already exten-
sive literature debating their strengths and weaknesses, we shall proceed now to
consider an alternative possibility, that quantum mechanics is in fact not an exact,
complete structure.
3 Motivations for believing that quantum mechanics is incomplete
As surveyed in the preceding section, one approach to the quantum measurement
problem and associated “paradoxes” of quantum theory is to continue to assume
that quantum mechanics is exactly correct, and to attempt to supply it with a new
foundational interpretation. However, there is another logical possibility, which
is to suppose that quantum mechanics is not exactly correct, but represents an
extremely accurate approximation to a qualitatively different level of dynamics.
Since quantum theory is an extraordinarily successful physical theory, one can ask
why try to replace it with something else? We respond to this question by listing
a number of motivations for considering the possibility that quantum mechanics,
and quantum ﬁeld theory, may require modiﬁcation at a deeper level.
3.1 Historical precedent
The historical development of physics contains many examples of theories that
seemed to be exact in the context for which they were developed, only to require
modiﬁcation when applied to a larger arena of phenomena. Newtonian mechanics
and Galilean relativity appeared to be exact in the context of planetary orbits, until
the need for their special and general relativistic extensions became apparent in the
early twentieth century. Classical predictability appeared to be exact in the con-
text of classical mechanics, thermodynamics, and statistical mechanics, until con-
fronted with the problems of the blackbody radiation spectrum and the discreteness
of spectral lines at the end of the nineteenth century. The Landau mean ﬁeld theory
of critical phenomena was considered to be exact, until confronted with experi-
mental data showing anomalous critical scaling, requiring the modern Kadanoff–
Fisher–Wilson theory of critical phenomena for its explanation. Given these
historical precedents, there seems to be no compelling reason to assume that quan-
tum mechanics is immune to the general rule, that theories are only valid within a
given regime, and may require modiﬁcation when extended beyond that regime.
3.2 The quantum measurement problem
As we have discussed in Section 1, the unitary evolution of standard quantum
mechanics does not describe what happens when measurements are made, but

10
Introduction and overview
conventionally has to be supplemented by an additional postulate of nonunitary
state vector reduction when a “measurement” is performed by a “classical” ap-
paratus. As many authors have stressed, an economical resolution of the mea-
surement “paradoxes” would be achieved if one could ﬁnd a more fundamental
underlying dynamics, from which the unitary evolution and the state vector reduc-
tion aspects of conventional quantum mechanics would emerge in a natural way
in the appropriate physical contexts. Such a resolution should show in a natural
way why quantum mechanics is probabilistic, by endowing it with an underlying
sample space, and should show how probabilities become actualities for individual
outcomes.
3.3 What is the origin of “canonical quantization”?
The standard approach to constructing a quantum ﬁeld theory consists in ﬁrst writ-
ing down the corresponding classical theory, and then “quantizing” it by reinter-
preting the classical quantities as operators, and replacing the classical Poisson
brackets by −i/¯h times the corresponding commutators or anticommutators. How-
ever, since quantum theory is more fundamental than classical theory, it seems
odd that one has to construct it by starting from the classical limit; the canonical
quantization approach has very much the ﬂavor of an algorithm for inverting the
classical limit of quantum mechanics. Moreover, it is known through the theorem
of Groenewold and van Hove (for a recent review, see Giulini, 2003) that the Dirac
recipe of replacing Poisson brackets by commutators cannot consistently be ap-
plied to general polynomials in the canonical variables, but only to the restricted
class of second-order polynomials. Additionally, what is the origin of Planck’s
constant ¯h? One might hope that in a new theory underlying quantum mechanics,
one would work with operators from the outset and proceed directly to operator
equations of motion without ﬁrst starting from the classical limit, and that one
would also achieve an understanding of why there is a fundamental quantum of
action.
3.4 Inﬁnities and nonlocality
An outstanding problem in quantum mechanics (or more speciﬁcally, in quantum
ﬁeld theory) is the presence of inﬁnities arising from the local structure of the
canonical commutation/anticommutation relations, and an outstanding puzzle in
quantum mechanics is the nonlocality seen, for example, in Einstein, Podolsky,
and Rosen (1935) type experiments. Both of these considerations motivate many
studies that have been made of quantum foundations, and in our view suggest that

Introduction and overview
11
quantum mechanics may arise from a deeper level of physics that is substantially
nonlocal.
3.5 Uniﬁcation of quantum theory with gravitation
There are a number of indications that conventional quantum ﬁeld theory must
be modiﬁed in a profound fashion in order for it to be successfully combined
with gravitational physics. In generic curved spacetimes, it is not possible to give
a precise formulation of the particle production rate, nor is there necessarily a
well-deﬁned concept of conserved energy. As is well known, when conventionally
quantized, general relativity leads to a non-renormalizable quantum ﬁeld theory.
Another indication that quantum ﬁeld theory must be modiﬁed when combined
with gravitational physics is provided by recent ideas on “holography,” which sug-
gest that the association of degrees of freedom with volume subdivisions must
break down near the Planck energy. These problems are among the motivations
for replacing quantum ﬁeld theory by a quantized theory of strings, but it is possi-
ble that modiﬁcation of the rules of quantum theory will also be needed to give a
fully successful uniﬁcation of the forces. In other words, in addition to exploring
“pre-geometrical” theories to explain quantum gravity, one may have to explore
“pre-quantum mechanical” theories as well.
3.6 The cosmological constant
Another indication that quantum mechanics may have to be modiﬁed to deal with
gravitational phenomena is provided by the problem of the cosmological constant.
In conventional quantum ﬁeld theory it is very hard to understand why the ob-
served cosmological constant is 120 orders of magnitude smaller than the natural
scale provided by the Planck energy. Either unbroken scale invariance or unbro-
ken supersymmetry would forbid the appearance of a cosmological constant, but
they also forbid the appearance of a realistic particle mass spectrum, and so in
conventional quantum theory they do not provide a basis for solving the cosmo-
logical constant problem. The difﬁculty that arises here can be formulated as a
mismatch between the single constraint needed – a sum rule dictating the vanish-
ing of the cosmological constant – and the inﬁnite number of constraints arising
from having conserved operator scale and conformal transformation generators or
a conserved operator supercurrent. One possible way to resolve the cosmological
constant problem would be to ﬁnd a deeper level of theory, in which the single
constraint needed to resolve the cosmological constant problem is matched, in a
naive counting sense, to the constraint arising from imposing scale invariance or
supersymmetry on that deeper level.

12
Introduction and overview
3.7 A concrete proposal
Last, but not least, we have a concrete proposal for how to replace quantum me-
chanics by a deeper level of physical theory, that will have signiﬁcant implications
for all of the issues just listed. Our proposal, already noted in the introductory para-
graphs, is that quantum mechanics is an emergent phenomenon arising from the
statistical mechanics of matrix models with a global unitary invariance. To be more
speciﬁc now, our idea is to start from a classical dynamics in which the dynamical
variables are non-commutative matrices or operators. (We will use the terms matrix
and operator interchangeably throughout this book, and do not commit ourselves as
to whether they are ﬁnite N × N dimensional, or inﬁnite dimensional as obtained
in the limit N →∞.) Despite the non-commutativity, a sensible Lagrangian and
Hamiltonian dynamics is obtained by forming the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian
as traces of polynomials in the dynamical variables, and repeatedly using cyclic
permutation under the trace, which restricts the dynamical variables to be “trace
class,” and is the motivation for calling the resulting dynamics “trace dynamics.”
We further assume that the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian are constructed without
use of non-dynamical matrix coefﬁcients, so that there is an invariance under si-
multaneous, identical unitary transformations of all of the dynamical variables, that
is, there is a global unitary invariance. We assume that the complicated dynami-
cal equations resulting from this system rapidly reach statistical equilibrium, and
then show that with suitable approximations, the statistical thermodynamics of the
canonical ensemble for this system takes the form of quantum ﬁeld theory. Specif-
ically, the statistical thermodynamics of the underlying trace dynamics leads to the
usual canonical commutation/anticommutation algebra of quantum mechanics, as
well as the Heisenberg time evolution of operators, and these in turn, imply the
usual rules of Schr¨odinger picture quantum mechanics. The requirements for the
underlying trace dynamics to yield quantum theory at the level of thermodynamics
are stringent, and include both the generation of a mass hierarchy and the exis-
tence of boson–fermion balance. We cannot at this point give the speciﬁc theory
that obeys all of the needed conditions; this is a topic for future work. There may
of course be no theory that satisﬁes our conditions, but our hope is that there will
be at least one underlying theory that ﬁts into the general framework developed
here.
The proposal just sketched corresponds to the relations between classical me-
chanics, quantum mechanics, and the underlying “trace dynamics” theory that is
qualitatively pictured in Fig. 2. At the top level is classical mechanics, for which
the dynamical variables are all commutative. Classical dynamical variables are
usually represented as ordinary numbers, but they can also be represented as ma-
trices in a Hilbert space, in which case they must all be taken as proportional to

Introduction and overview
13
the unit matrix. Through the canonical quantization procedure one arrives at the
middle level of quantum mechanics and quantum ﬁeld theory, from which one
recovers classical mechanics by taking a classical limit in which (passing over
many subtleties) Planck’s constant effectively approaches zero. In quantum me-
chanics the dynamical canonical coordinate and momentum variables are a special
class of inﬁnite matrices which obey the canonical commutation/anticommutation
relations. Our proposal is that there is another level, more basic than quantum
mechanics, governed by a global unitary invariant trace dynamics. Here the dy-
namical variables are completely general matrices, with no a priori assumption
of commutativity properties. From the equilibrium statistical mechanics of trace
dynamics, the rules of quantum mechanics emerge as an approximate thermody-
namic description of the behavior of low energy phenomena. “Low energy” here
means small relative to the natural energy scale implicit in the canonical ensemble
for trace dynamics, which we identify with the Planck scale, and by “equilibrium”
we mean local equilibrium, permitting spatial variations associated with dynamics
at the low energy scale. Brownian motion corrections to the thermodynamics of
trace dynamics then lead to ﬂuctuation corrections to quantum mechanics which
take the form of stochastic modiﬁcations of the Schr¨odinger equation, that can ac-
count in a mathematically precise way for state vector reduction with Born rule
probabilities.
The remainder of this book consists of a detailed development of the ideas just
outlined and diagrammed in Fig. 2.
4 An overview of this book
As a guide to the reader, we give here a brief overview of the book.
In Chapter 1 we introduce our notation for the non-commutative matrices that
form the dynamical variables of trace dynamics. Bosonic variables are represented
by ordinary complex matrices, while fermionic variables are represented by com-
plex Grassmann matrices. We then give the basic bilinear and trilinear cyclic trace
identities that are used in subsequent derivations. We next show, by using the cyclic
invariance of the trace of a polynomial (or more generally, a meromorphic func-
tion) in the dynamical variables, that one can consistently deﬁne an operator which
gives the derivative of a trace quantity with respect to an operator. Using this op-
erator derivative, we formulate a trace dynamics analog of classical Lagrangian
and Hamiltonian dynamics, which gives a classical dynamics of matrix models,
and we show that in this dynamics the trace Hamiltonian H = TrH is conserved.
We construct a generalized Poisson bracket appropriate to trace dynamics, dis-
cuss its properties, and give some applications. Finally, we contrast the dynami-
cal equations for the non-commuting matrices of trace dynamics with the unitary

14
Introduction and overview
CLASSICAL
MECHANICS
VARIABLES ARE
COMMUTATIVE
(ALL SCALAR MULTIPLES
    OF UNIT MATRIX)
CLASSICAL
LIMIT h
_
0
VARIABLES ARE
SPECIAL (INFINITE)
MATRICES
[qℓ,pm] = ih δℓm
[qℓ,qm] = 0    ETC.
SPACELIKE COMMUTATIVE
STATISTICAL
THERMODYNAMICS
“TRACE DYNAMICS”
            OR
“GENERALIZED QUANTUM DYNAMICS”
DYNAMICS ASSUMED TO BE
GLOBAL UNITARY INVARIANT,
PROVIDING THE BASIS FOR
EMERGENT QUANTUM MECHANICS
VARIABLES ARE
GENERAL MATRICES
NO A PRIORI
COMMUTATIVITY PROPERTIES
[qℓ, qm] =/  0    ETC.
BROWNIAN
MOTION
CORRECTIONS
SCHRöDINGER
EQUATION
QUANTUM
MECHANICS
CANONICAL
QUANTIZATION
STOCHASTIC
_
Figure 2
Diagrammatic relations between the various theories discussed in this
book: classical mechanics, quantum mechanics and quantum ﬁeld theory, trace
dynamics (also called generalized quantum dynamics), and stochastically modi-
ﬁed Schr¨odinger picture quantum mechanics.
evolution obtained by assuming a Heisenberg picture dynamics, in which the dy-
namical variables obey the usual canonical commutators/anticommutators of quan-
tum mechanics.
In Chapter 2 we explore further conserved quantities in trace dynamics. We
show that when there are equal numbers of fermionic canonical coordinate and
momentum factors in each term in the trace Hamiltonian, then there is a conserved
trace fermion number N. We next consider the class of trace dynamics models
that are global unitary invariant, that is, have a trace Hamiltonian that is con-
structed from the matrix dynamical variables using only c-number coefﬁcients,
thus excluding the use of non-dynamical matrices as coefﬁcients. For this class
of models, we show that there is a conserved operator with the dimensions of ac-
tion, which we call ˜C, which is equal to the sum of bosonic commutators [q, p]
minus the corresponding sum of fermionic anticommutators {q, p}, and which is
the conserved matrix-valued Noether charge corresponding to the assumed global
unitary invariance. This operator plays a fundamental role in our argument for an

Introduction and overview
15
emergent quantum mechanics. With the usual fermionic adjointness assignment ˜C
is anti-self-adjoint (but for alternative adjointness assignments ˜C can have a self-
adjoint part, which we assume, if present, to be very small). We proceed to give the
four-current analogs of N and ˜C when the trace Lagrangian is specialized to de-
scribe continuum spacetime theories, and also discuss the trace energy-momentum
tensor T µν, which is a conserved quantity when the underlying trace dynamics is
Poincar´e invariant. In this case the conserved charge ˜C is also Poincar´e invariant,
which explains why later on, when we assume that the low energy statistical ther-
modynamics is dominated by the ˜C term in the canonical ensemble, with the H
term, which deﬁnes the preferred frame implicit in the canonical ensemble, effec-
tively decoupled, a Poincar´e invariant quantum ﬁeld structure emerges. As a sim-
ple illustrative example of the trace dynamics formalism we consider the model
in which a Dirac fermion matrix ﬁeld is coupled to a scalar Klein–Gordon ma-
trix ﬁeld. Finally, we discuss the symmetry properties of the conserved quantities
under interchange of fermionic canonical coordinates and momenta.
In Chapter 3 (which can be omitted on a ﬁrst reading), we continue the discus-
sion of speciﬁc models that illustrate the formalism of trace dynamics, this time in
the context of theories with global supersymmetry. In succession, we discuss the
trace dynamics analogs of the Wess–Zumino model, the supersymmetric Yang–
Mills model, and the so-called “matrix model for M-theory.” Finally, we brieﬂy
describe difﬁculties encountered in attempting to extend this discussion to theo-
ries, such as supergravity, with local supersymmetry.
In Chapter 4 we begin the analysis of the statistical mechanics of matrix models.
We open by pointing out how our procedure differs from conventional approaches
to matrix models (see, e.g., Br´ezin and Wadia, 1993), in which the classical dy-
namics of these models is canonically quantized. By contrast, in developing an
emergent quantum theory we treat the classical dynamics of matrix models as fun-
damental, and analyze its consequences by using an appropriate generalization of
statistical mechanics. To introduce statistical methods, we ﬁrst deﬁne a natural
measure for matrix phase space, and show that this measure obeys a generalized
Liouville theorem. This then allow us to apply statistical mechanical methods, in
which we maximize the entropy subject to constraints, to derive the canonical en-
semble for trace dynamics, in which the generic conserved quantities H, N, and
˜C appear multiplied by Lagrange multipliers that represent generalized “tempera-
tures.” At this point we specialize the ensemble to one that has maximal symmetry
consistent with the ensemble average ⟨˜C⟩AV being non-zero, which we show im-
plies that ⟨˜C⟩AV can be written as ieff¯h, with ieff an anti-self-adjoint matrix with
square −1, and with ¯h the real positive factor deﬁned by this polar decomposition
of ⟨˜C⟩AV. The matrix ieff will play the role of i in our argument for an emer-
gent quantum theory and, as suggested by the notation, ¯h will play the role of the

16
Introduction and overview
reduced Planck’s constant. We continue the statistical analysis by showing that
the canonical ensemble can also be derived by starting from the microcanonical
ensemble, and considering the equilibrium of a large subsystem in contact with
a much larger “bath.” We then give a discussion (which can be omitted on a ﬁrst
reading) of gauge ﬁxing in the canonical ensemble for trace dynamics models with
a local gauge invariance. Finally, we discuss the implications of the fact that the
canonical ensemble only partially breaks the assumed global unitary invariance;
this analysis plays an important role in establishing, in the next chapter, a corre-
spondence between canonical ensemble averages in trace dynamics and Wightman
functions in an emergent quantum ﬁeld theory. First we formulate the need for a
global unitary ﬁxing in general terms, and then (in a section which can be omit-
ted on ﬁrst reading) give a detailed construction of global unitary ﬁxings for the
partition function.
Chapter 5 contains the heart of our argument for the emergence of quantum
ﬁeld theory from trace dynamics. The basic observation, developed through the
detailed derivations of this chapter, is that since the conserved operator ˜C is a sum
of bosonic commutators minus a sum of fermionic anticommutators, the equipar-
titioning of ˜C in canonical ensemble averages leads to an effective canonical com-
mutator (anticommutator) structure for the bosonic (fermionic) dynamical operator
variables. We proceed in analogy with the standard equipartition theorems of sta-
tistical mechanics, which we show can be viewed as simple Ward identities. We
begin by deriving a general Ward identity for trace dynamics, and showing that
its structure can be augmented by varying external source terms in the canonical
ensemble. We then show that if we make a low energy approximation, in which we
assume that the underlying trace Hamiltonian (or Lagrangian) is such that there is
a decoupling of contributions arising from variation of the H term in the canonical
ensemble, so that the averaged dynamics is dominated by the ˜C term, the struc-
ture of quantum theory emerges. The reason that dynamical information can be
extracted from equilibrium averages is that the trace dynamics equations of mo-
tion, in Hamiltonian form, take the ﬁrst-order form ˙x = Fx, with x a particular
phase space variable and with Fx an operator function of all of the phase space
variables. Hence by showing that, within our approximations, the canonical en-
semble average of Fx times a universal constant, in the presence of sources, is
equal to the corresponding canonical ensemble average of [x, H], we learn that
˙x is equivalently given by the usual Heisenberg evolution formula of quantum
mechanics. The universal constant, which plays the role of i times the reduced
Planck constant in the emergent quantum theory, is given by the ensemble aver-
age ⟨˜C⟩AV. In Chapter 4, this quantity was represented in polar form as ieff¯h, with
ieff a matrix square root of −1 and with the parts of the dynamical variables that
commute with ieff identiﬁed as the effective canonical variables of the emergent

Introduction and overview
17
quantum theory. With these identiﬁcations, a correspondence between canonical
ensemble averages in trace dynamics, and Wightman functions in an emergent
quantum ﬁeld theory, can be established. We note that, although polynomials in
the dynamical variables in general depend of the choice of unitary ﬁxing imposed
in Chapter 4, the Wightman functions and more generally transition probabilities
can be expressed in terms of trace quantities that are independent of the unitary
ﬁxing. An examination of alternative Ward identities shows that our decoupling
approximation involves nontrivial constraints on the behavior of the underlying
theory, including certain support properties in operator phase space, and a require-
ment of boson–fermion balance which strongly hints at a need for supersymmetry.
Up to this point the emergent quantum theory is in the Heisenberg picture; we then
proceed to derive the Schr¨odinger equation for the emergent quantum theory. Fi-
nally, we discuss the Kochen–Specker (1967) and Bell (1964) “no-go” arguments
for hidden variable theories, and show how their assumptions are evaded by our
statistical mechanical argument for an emergent quantum theory.
In Chapter 6 we analyze Brownian motion corrections to the emergent quantum
theory, thereby making contact with a long line of investigations of phenomeno-
logical stochastic Schr¨odinger equations pioneered by Pearle (1976, 1979, 1984,
1989), Ghirardi, Rimini, and Weber (1986), Ghirardi, Pearle, and Rimini (1990),
Gisin (1984, 1989), Di´osi (1988a,b, 1989), and Percival (1994). Making simple
models for the form of the ﬂuctuation terms in the Ward identities arising from ˜C,
we give scenarios for deriving the standard localization and energy-driven stochas-
tic Schr¨odinger equations. We then review the proof that these equations are mem-
bers of a general class of stochastic equations that leads to state vector reduction
with Born rule probabilities, and review the formulas needed to estimate reduction
rates in the energy-driven and localization models. We discuss the phenomenol-
ogy of the energy-driven equation, giving constraints on its stochastic parameter
coming from current experiments, and giving a critical survey of mechanisms that
have been proposed to produce the energy dispersion needed for rapid state vector
reduction in measurement contexts. We ﬁnally brieﬂy survey the phenomenology
of the localization approach, referring the reader to the recent reviews of Bassi and
Ghirardi (2003) and Pearle (1999b) for a more detailed treatment. We conclude
that as of this writing the localization model is favored, both because the assump-
tions needed to derive it within our framework are more robust, and because there
are unresolved problems with the mechanisms that have been proposed to explain
reduction in the energy-driven model.
Finally, in Chapter 7 we indicate how our proposal for an emergent quantum
theory addresses the motivational questions raised above in Section 3, and discuss
some of the issues that will be relevant for future developments. We again em-
phasize here that, while we have given a general framework in which an emergent

18
Introduction and overview
quantum theory may appear, we have not identiﬁed the speciﬁc theory in which all
our requirements are realized.
We conclude this overview by noting work of other authors that also consid-
ers the premise that quantum mechanics may be modiﬁed at a deeper level. Both
’t Hooft (1988, 1997, 1999a,b, 2001a,b, 2002, 2003) and Smolin (1983, 1985,
2002) have proposed models for the emergence of quantum theory from an under-
lying level of dynamics. While their basic philosophy is very similar to that of this
book, the details of what they do differs substantially, and neither the statistical
mechanical canonical ensemble nor the conserved operator ˜C play a role in their
analyses. ’t Hooft proposes that beneath quantum theory there is a deterministic
classical, chaotic dynamics, with a set of attractors that determine the effective
emergent quantum theory. Smolin considers classical matrix models, with an ex-
plicit stochastic noise along the lines of that used by Nelson (1969, 1985) giving
rise to the quantum behavior. Despite the evident differences, there may be ele-
ments of their approaches that will ultimately be seen to share common ground
with ours. At a phenomenological level, Bialynicki-Birula and Mycielski (1976)
and Weinberg (1989a,b,c) have considered nonlinear, deterministic modiﬁcations
of the Schr¨odinger equation, and comparison of their models with experiment
(Bollinger et al., 1991) sets strong bounds on such possible modiﬁcations to con-
ventional quantum theory. Their models have been shown by Polchinski (1991),
Gisin (1989, 1990), and Gisin and Rigo (1995), to have the problem of predicting
superluminal signal propagation. When we discuss phenomenological modiﬁca-
tions of the Schr¨odinger equation in Chapter 6, the only nonlinearities will appear
in ﬂuctuating, stochastic terms, for which the experimental bounds are very weak,
and which do not give rise to superluminal signal propagation.
5 Brief historical remarks on trace dynamics
I close this introductory chapter with some brief historical remarks on trace dy-
namics, and on how the proposal that it can serve as a foundation for quantum
theory came about.
First of all, the idea of using a trace variational principle to generate operator
equations goes back to the inception of quantum mechanics; see Born and Jordan
(1925), who in Section 2 of their paper introduce a symbolic differentiation of op-
erator monomials under a trace that is identical to the bosonic case of the one used
here. They did not develop this idea further, and it remained unnoticed for many
years. A Hamiltonian variational principle based on this idea was later used by
Kerman and Klein (1963) to generate equations of motion for many-body physics.
I am indebted to A. Klein for bringing these references to my attention several
years ago; see Klein, Li, and Vassanji (1980) and Greenberg et al. (1996) for

Introduction and overview
19
further references to many-body theory applications. None of these early refer-
ences erect the full apparatus for trace dynamics constructed here in Chapters 1
and 2.
The idea of using the operator derivative of a trace as the basis for formulating
a new dynamical theory, as opposed to as a tool for studying standard quantum
theory, ﬁrst appeared in a paper (Adler, 1979) in which I made an unsuccessful at-
tempt to formulate a dynamics for the Harari–Shupe preon model. I subsequently
returned to trace dynamics, under the name “generalized quantum dynamics,” in
conjunction with the writing of my book Quaternionic Quantum Mechanics and
Quantum Fields (Adler, 1995) for two reasons. First of all, I was unable to ﬁnd any
extension of the canonical quantization procedure to quaternionic Hilbert space,
and so was led to study trace dynamics as a way to generate operator equations
of motion directly, without canonically quantizing a classical theory. In this con-
nection, the Hamiltonian version of trace dynamics and the generalized Poisson
bracket were formulated (Adler, 1994), and the Jacobi identity for the generalized
Poisson bracket was subsequently proved by Adler, Bhanot, and Weckel (1994).
Secondly, an anonymous publisher’s reviewer for the 1995 book raised the issue
of whether quaternionic Hilbert space might ameliorate the measurement prob-
lems of quantum mechanics. The answer turned out to be “no,” because quater-
nionic quantum theory simply substitutes quaternion unitary for complex unitary
Schr¨odinger evolution, and so the need for a separate state vector reduction pos-
tulate persists. Investigating this issue suggested, however, that trace dynamics,
which is not equivalent to a unitary evolution, might lead to a resolution of the
measurement problem. However, further development of this notion required a
way to get back from the more general trace dynamics to quantum mechanics. The
attempts to do this in Section 13.6 of the 1995 book only worked for one degree
of freedom, and did not have an obvious extension to systems with many degrees
of freedom, although in hindsight the discussion of Eqs. (13.90a–f) of that section
anticipated the form of the conserved operator ˜C. (For a recent paper along similar
lines, see Starodubtsev, 2002.)
At this point a crucial ingredient was supplied by Millard (personal commu-
nication, 1995), who as part of a thesis investigation (Millard, 1997) of trace dy-
namics theories with Weyl-ordered Hamiltonians, discovered the existence of the
conserved operator ˜C. Its structure was immediately suggestive of an equiparti-
tion argument for the emergence of quantum mechanics from trace dynamics, and
this was developed in detail in the paper of Adler and Millard (1996), which pro-
vides the basis for much of the material in Chapters 2 through 5 of this book.
Further progress was made in papers with other collaborators, in particular Adler
and Horwitz (1996), which constructed the microcanonical ensemble for trace dy-
namics and used this to rederive the canonical ensemble, and Adler and Kempf

20
Introduction and overview
(1998), which reexpressed the general argument for conservation of ˜C given by
Adler and Millard (1996) in terms of global unitary invariance, gave a group-
theoretic characterization of the maximally symmetric canonical ensemble, and
showed that there is a consistency requirement of boson–fermion balance. A key
remaining obstacle was that in the paper of Adler and Millard (1996), the canon-
ical ensemble averages of products of dynamical variables associated with spa-
tial points were identiﬁed with vacuum expectations of operators in the emergent
ﬁeld theory, and with this putative correspondence it was not possible to estab-
lish the Wightman spectral condition. In the spring of 2001, I revisited the entire
program, and discovered the need to take account of the fact that the canonical
ensemble does not fully break the assumed global unitary invariance, as noted in
Adler and Kempf (1998) and as discussed in detail in Section 4.5. Thus the un-
restricted canonical ensemble averages correspond to traces, rather than vacuum
expectations, of operator products, which is why there was an obstacle to identify-
ing them with Wightman functions. When the integrations deﬁning the canonical
ensemble are restricted to break this residual unitary invariance, it becomes pos-
sible to set up a consistent correspondence between the trace dynamics canonical
ensemble averages of operator products, and the vacuum expectations of the corre-
sponding operator products in the emergent quantum theory; my discovery of this
fact, as well as other technical progress made in the course of the 2001 research,
led to the decision to write this book. The full details of the global unitary ﬁx-
ing, given in Section 4.6 and Appendix G, were worked out in Adler and Horwitz
(2003) during the ﬁnal stages of my work on the book manuscript.
Finally, I make an historical and notational comment on the method by which
fermions are introduced into the theory. In all of the papers in the trace dynam-
ics program before 1997, fermions were introduced through a (−1)F operator in-
sertion in the trace, rather than by use of a Grassmann algebra as done in Adler
and Kempf (1998) and in this book. The principal results of the older work are
unaffected by this change, but certain details are altered. Also, in this book we
consistently use an adjoint convention in which two Grassmann odd grade matri-
ces χ1 and χ2 obey (χ1χ2)† = −χ†
2χ†
1. This convention is implicit in Adler and
Horwitz (2003), but the older papers, such as Adler (1997a,b), as well as the ﬁrst
draft of this book that appeared on the Los Alamos archive as hep-th/0206120,
use a convention in which (χ1χ2)† = χ†
2χ†
1. The results of this book (except for
Appendix G) can be readily expressed in this second convention by the inclusion
of additional factors of i in various places.

1
Trace dynamics: the classical Lagrangian and
Hamiltonian dynamics of matrix models
In this chapter we set up a classical Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics for
matrix models. The fundamental idea is to set up an analog of classical dynam-
ics in which the phase space variables are non-commutative, and the basic tool
that allows one to accomplish this is cyclic invariance under a trace. Since no as-
sumptions about commutativity of the phase space variables (such as canonical
commutators/anticommutators) are made at this stage, the dynamics that we set
up is not the same as standard quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanical behavior
will be seen to emerge only when, in Chapters 4 and 5, we study the statistical
mechanics of the classical matrix dynamics formulated here.
In Section 1.1, we introduce our basic notation for bosonic and fermionic ma-
trices, and give the cyclic identities that will be used repeatedly throughout the
book. In Section 1.2, we deﬁne the derivative of a trace quantity with respect to an
operator, and give the basic properties of this deﬁnition. In Section 1.3, we use the
operator derivative to formulate a Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics for ma-
trix models. In Section 1.4, we introduce a generalized Poisson bracket appropriate
to trace dynamics, constructed from the operator derivative deﬁned in Section 1.2,
and give its properties and some applications. Finally, in Section 1.5 we discuss the
relation between the trace dynamics time evolution equations, and the usual uni-
tary Heisenberg picture equations of motion obtained when one assumes standard
canonical commutators/anticommutators.
1.1 Bosonic and fermionic matrices and the cyclic trace identities
We shall assume ﬁnite-dimensional matrices, although ultimately an extension to
the inﬁnite-dimensional case may be needed. The matrix elements of these matri-
ces will be constructed from ordinary complex numbers, and from complex anti-
commuting Grassmann numbers. Just as a complex number can be decomposed
into real and imaginary parts, c = cR + icI with cR,I real, a complex Grassmann
21

22
Trace dynamics
number can be decomposed into real and imaginary parts, χ = χR + iχI with χR,I
real. Real Grassmann numbers are built up as products of a basis of real Grass-
mann elements χ1, χ2, . . . which obey the anticommutative algebra {χr, χs} = 0,
an algebra which implies in particular that the square of any Grassmann element
vanishes (for a further discussion of Grassmann algebras and references, see the
introduction to the Appendices). Clearly a product of an even number of Grass-
mann elements commutes with all elements of the Grassmann algebra, while the
product of an odd number of Grassmann elements anticommutes with any other
product constructed from an odd number of Grassmann element factors. Thus the
Grassmann algebra divides into two sectors: unity, together with the all products
of an even number of Grassmann elements, form what is called the even grade
sector of the Grassmann algebra, while all products of an odd number of Grass-
mann elements form what is called the odd grade sector of the algebra. Any even
grade element commutes with any even or odd grade element, while two odd grade
elements anticommute with one another. Grassmann elements are a familiar fea-
ture in the ﬁeld theory literature on path integrals and supersymmetry, where even
grade Grassmann elements represent bosonic ﬁelds, while odd grade Grassmann
elements represent fermionic ﬁelds. Even or odd grade Grassmann elements can
be combined with complex number coefﬁcients; we will then speak of even or odd
grade elements of the Grassmann algebra over the complex numbers.
Let B1 and B2 be two N × N matrices with matrix elements that are even grade
elements of a Grassmann algebra over the complex numbers, and let Tr be the
ordinary matrix trace, which obeys the cyclic property
TrB1B2 =

m,n
(B1)mn(B2)nm =

m,n
(B2)nm(B1)mn = TrB2B1.
(1.1a)
Similarly, let χ1 and χ2 be two N × N matrices with matrix elements that are
odd grade elements of a Grassmann algebra over the complex numbers, which
anticommute rather than commute, so that the cyclic property for these takes the
form
Trχ1χ2 =

m,n
(χ1)mn(χ2)nm = −

m,n
(χ2)nm(χ1)mn = −Trχ2χ1.
(1.1b)
Since the even and odd grade elements of a Grassmann algebra over the complex
numbers commute, one has a ﬁnal bilinear cyclic identity
TrBχ = Trχ B.
(1.1c)
We shall refer to the Grassmann even and Grassmann odd matrices B, χ as being
of bosonic and fermionic type, respectively. Clearly, operators that are of mixed

Bosonic and fermionic matrices
23
bosonic and fermionic type can always be linearly decomposed into components
that are purely bosonic or purely fermionic in character.
The extra minus sign that appears in the odd grade case of Eq. (1.1b) has impli-
cations for the adjoint properties of matrices. Letting Og be a matrix of grade g,
we deﬁne the adjoint by
(Og †)mn = (Og)∗
nm ,
(1.1d)
that is, irrespective of the grade g, we deﬁne the matrix adjoint as the complex
conjugate ∗of the matrix with row and column labels transposed. Letting now Og1
1
and Og2
2 be two matrices of grade g1 and g2 respectively, this deﬁnition implies that
(Og1
1 Og2
2 )†
mn = (Og1
1 Og2
2 )∗
nm =

k
(Og1
1 )∗
nk(Og2
2 )∗
km
= (−1)g1g2 
k
(Og2
2 )∗
km(Og1
1 )∗
nk = (−1)g1g2 
k
(Og2 †
2
)mk(Og1 †
1
)kn
= (−1)g1g2(Og2 †
2
Og1 †
1
)mn
(1.1e)
so that as a matrix statement we have
(Og1
1 Og2
2 )† = (−1)g1g2Og2 †
2
Og1 †
1
.
(1.1f)
Thus, two odd grade matrices χ1 and χ2 obey the adjoint rule (χ1χ2)† = −χ†
2χ†
1,
and a general string of matrices obeys the rule
(Og1
1 . . . Ogn
n )† = (−1)

i< j gi g j Ogn †
n
. . . Og1 †
1
.
(1.1g)
The difference between the adjoint convention used in this book, and one in which
there is no grading factor in Eqs. (1.1e–g), is discussed in the introduction to the
Appendices.
The cyclic/anticyclic properties of Eqs. (1.1a–c) are the basic identities from
which further cyclic properties can be derived. For example, from the basic bilinear
identities one immediately derives the trilinear cyclic identities
TrB1[B2, B3] = TrB2[B3, B1] = TrB3[B1, B2],
TrB1{B2, B3} = TrB2{B3, B1} = TrB3{B1, B2},
TrB{χ1, χ2} = Trχ1[χ2, B] = Trχ2[χ1, B],
Trχ1{B, χ2} = Tr{χ1, B}χ2 = Tr[χ1, χ2]B,
(1.2)
Trχ[B1, B2] = TrB2[χ, B1] = TrB1[B2, χ],
Trχ{B1, B2} = TrB2{χ, B1} = TrB1{B2, χ},
Trχ1{χ2, χ3} = Trχ2{χ3, χ1} = Trχ3{χ1, χ2},
Trχ1[χ2, χ3] = Trχ2[χ3, χ1] = Trχ3[χ1, χ2],

24
Trace dynamics
which are used repeatedly in trace dynamics calculations. In these equations,
and throughout the text, [X, Y] ≡XY −Y X denotes a matrix commutator, and
{X, Y} = XY + Y X a matrix anticommutator.
1.2 Derivative of a trace with respect to an operator
The basic observation of trace dynamics (Born and Jordan, 1925; Adler, 1994,
1995) is that, given the trace of a polynomial P constructed from non-commuting
matrix or operator variables (we shall use the terms “matrix” and “operator” in-
terchangeably throughout the book), one can deﬁne a derivative of the complex
number TrP with respect to an operator variable O by varying and then cyclically
permuting so that in each term the factor δO stands on the right. This gives the
fundamental deﬁnition
δTrP = TrδTrP
δO δO,
(1.3a)
or in the condensed notation that we shall use henceforth, in which P ≡TrP
δP = Tr δP
δOδO,
(1.3b)
which for arbitrary inﬁnitesimal δO deﬁnes the operator δP/δO. In general we
will take O to be either of bosonic or fermionic (but not of mixed) type, and we
will construct P to always be an even grade element of the Grassmann algebra.
(When P is fermionic, we can always make it bosonic by multiplying it by a
c-number auxiliary Grassmann element α.) With these restrictions, for δO of the
same type as O, the operator derivative δP/δO will be of the same type as O,
that is, either both will be bosonic or both will be fermionic. Although we have
introduced Eqs. (1.3a,b) for polynomials P, the deﬁnition immediately extends to
functions expressible as power series in polynomials, and by use of the operator
identity δX−1 = −X−1δX X−1, to meromorphic functions of polynomials in the
dynamical variables as well.
Let us illustrate the fundamental deﬁnition of Eqs. (1.3a,b) with some simple
examples. Suppose that P is a bosonic monomial containing only a single factor
of the operator O, so that P has the form
P = AOB,
(1.3c)
with A and B operators that in general do not commute with each other or with O.
Then when O is varied, the corresponding variation of P is δP = A(δO)B, and
so cyclically permuting B to the left we have
δTrP = ϵBTrB AδO,
δP
δO = ϵB B A,
(1.3d)

Derivative of a trace with respect to an operator
25
where ϵB = 1 when the operator B is bosonic, and where ϵB = −1 when the op-
erator B is fermionic. Note that since we are taking P to be bosonic, the operator
product AO is of the same bosonic or fermionic type as B, so we have ϵB = ϵAO
and could equally well write
δP
δO = ϵAOB A,
(1.3e)
which is the result that we would obtain by cyclically permuting AδO to the right
in the expression for δTrP. As a second illustration, suppose that P is a bosonic
monomial containing two factors of the operator O that is being varied, and so has
the general structure
P = AOBOC,
(1.3f)
with A, B, and C operators that in general do not commute with each other or
with O. Then applying the chain rule of differentiation, when O is varied the cor-
responding variation of P is δP = A(δO)BOC + AOB(δO)C. Thus we have in
this case
δTrP = Tr

ϵAOBOC A(δO) + ϵCC AOB(δO)

,
δP
δO = ϵAOBOC A + ϵCC AOB,
(1.3g)
with ϵC = 1(−1) according as whether C is bosonic (fermionic), and with ϵAO =
1(−1) according as whether the product AO is bosonic (fermionic). The general-
ization to the case when P contains NO factors of O follows the same pattern, with
δP now consisting of a sum of NO terms, in each of which a different factor O is
varied. In each of these terms, the factors are then cyclically permuted so that δO
stands on the right, identifying

by comparison with Eq. (1.3b)

the contribution
of the term in question to δP/δO.
The deﬁnition of Eq. (1.3b) has the important property that if δP vanishes for
arbitrary variations δO of the same type as O, then the operator derivative δP/δO
must vanish. To see this, let us expand δP/δO in the form
δP
δO =

n
CnKn,
(1.4a)
with the Kn distinct Grassmann monomials that are all c-numbers (i.e., multiples
of the N × N unit matrix), and with the Cn complex matrix coefﬁcients that are
unit elements in the Grassmann algebra. Let us choose δO to be an inﬁnitesimal α
times C†
p, with α a real number when O is bosonic, and with α a Grassmann ele-
ment not appearing in K p when O is fermionic.

There must be at least one such el-
ement, or else K p would make an identically vanishing contribution to Eq. (1.3b),

26
Trace dynamics
and could not appear in the sum in Eq. (1.4a).

We then have
0 =

n
TrC†
pCnKnα,
(1.4b)
and since the coefﬁcients of all distinct Grassmann monomials must vanish sepa-
rately, we have in particular
0 = TrC†
pC p.
(1.4c)
This implies the vanishing of the matrix coefﬁcient C p, and letting p range over
all index values appearing in the sum in Eq. (1.4a), we conclude that
δP
δO = 0.
(1.4d)
When O is bosonic, a useful extension of the above result states that the van-
ishing of δP for all self-adjoint variations δO, or alternatively, for all anti-self-
adjoint variations δO, still implies the vanishing of δP/δO. To prove this, split
each Cn in Eq. (1.4a) into self-adjoint and anti-self-adjoint parts, Cn = Csa
n + Casa
n ,
with Csa
n = Csa†
n
and Casa
n
= −Casa†
n
. For self-adjoint δO, Eq. (1.1a) implies
that TrCsa
n δO is real, and TrCasa
n δO is imaginary, and so by the reasoning of
Eqs. (1.4a–c), the vanishing of δP implies that both of these traces must van-
ish separately. Taking δO = Csa
p then implies the vanishing of Csa
p , while taking
δO = iCasa
p
then implies the vanishing of Casa
p . A similar argument, with the role
of reals and imaginaries interchanged (or equivalently, with multiplication of O by
the c-number i) applies to the case in which δO is restricted to be anti-self-adjoint.
In our applications, we shall often consider trace functionals P that are real,
which will be true when the adjointness properties of the operators from which P
is constructed imply that P −P† is either zero or is an operator with identically
vanishing trace. Real trace functionals P have the important property that when O
is a self-adjoint bosonic operator, then δP/δO is also self-adjoint. To prove this,
we make a self-adjoint variation δO, and use the reality of P to write
0 ≡ImTrδP ∝Tr

δP
δOδO −(δO)†
 δP
δO
†
= TrδO

δP
δO −
 δP
δO
†
.
(1.5)
This implies, by the extension given in the preceding paragraph, that the anti-self-
adjoint part of δP/δO must vanish. Similarly, when P is real and δO is anti-self-
adjoint, then δP/δO is also anti-self-adjoint.

Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics
27
1.3 Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics of matrix models
We can now proceed to use the apparatus just described to set up a Lagrangian
and Hamiltonian dynamics for matrix models. Let L[{qr}, {˙qr}] be a Grassmann
even polynomial function of the bosonic or fermionic operators {qr} and their time
derivatives {˙qr}, which are all assumed to obey the cyclic relations of Eqs. (1.1a–c)
and (1.2) under the trace. The discrete index r labels the matrix degrees of freedom
for a general matrix dynamics, and in later ﬁeld theory applications will be taken
as a label of inﬁnitesimal spatial boxes. Just as a classical dynamical system can
have any number of degrees of freedom, the numbers nB and nF of bosonic and
fermionic operators {qr} are arbitrary, and are unrelated to the dimension N of the
matrices that represent these operators. From L, we form the trace Lagrangian
L[{qr}, {˙qr}] = TrL[{qr}, {˙qr}],
(1.6a)
and the corresponding trace action
S =
	
dtL.
(1.6b)
We shall assume that the trace action is real valued, which requires that L be self-
adjoint up to a possible total time derivative and/or a possible term with vanishing
trace, such as a commutator. That is, we require
L −L† = d
dt 1 + [2, 3],
(1.6c)
with 1,2,3 arbitrary. Requiring that the trace action be stationary with respect to
variations of the qrs that preserve their bosonic or fermionic type, and using the
deﬁnition of Eq. (1.3b), we get
0 = δS =
	
dtTr

r
 δL
δqr
δqr + δL
δ ˙qr
δ ˙qr

,
(1.7a)
or after integrating by parts in the second term and discarding surface terms
0 = δS =
	
dtTr

r
 δL
δqr
−d
dt
δL
δ ˙qr

δqr.
(1.7b)
For this to hold for general same-type operator variations δqr, the coefﬁcient of
each δqr in Eq. (1.7b) must vanish for all t, giving the operator Euler–Lagrange
equations
δL
δqr
−d
dt
δL
δ ˙qr
= 0.
(1.7c)

28
Trace dynamics
Because, by the deﬁnition of Eq. (1.3b), we have
 δL
δqr

i j
=
∂L
∂(qr) ji
,
(1.8)
for each r the single Euler–Lagrange equation of Eq. (1.7c) is equivalent to the N 2
Euler–Lagrange equations obtained by regarding L as a function of the N 2 matrix
element variables (qr) ji. (For future reference, we note that the identity of Eq. (1.8)
still holds when L is replaced by a general complex valued trace functional A.)
Let us now deﬁne the momentum operator pr conjugate to qr by
pr ≡δL
δ ˙qr
,
(1.9a)
so that the Euler–Lagrange equations take the form δL/δqr = ˙pr. Since the La-
grangian is Grassmann even, pr is of the same bosonic or fermionic type as qr. We
can now introduce a trace Hamiltonian H by analogy with the usual deﬁnition
H = Tr

r
pr ˙qr −L.
(1.9b)
In correspondence with Eq. (1.8), the matrix elements (pr)i j of the momentum op-
erator pr just correspond to the momenta canonical to the matrix element variables
(qr) ji. Performing general same-type operator variations, and using Eq. (1.9a) and
the Euler–Lagrange equations, we ﬁnd from Eq. (1.9b) that
δH = Tr

r

(δpr)˙qr + prδ ˙qr

−Tr

r
 δL
δqr
δqr + δL
δ ˙qr
δ ˙qr

= Tr

r

(δpr)˙qr −˙prδqr

= Tr

r

ϵr ˙qrδpr −˙prδqr

.
(1.9c)
Therefore the trace Hamiltonian H is a trace functional of the operators {qr} and
{pr}
H = H[{qr}, {pr}],
(1.10a)
with the operator derivatives
δH
δqr
= −˙pr,
δH
δpr
= ϵr ˙qr,
(1.10b)
where ϵr = 1(−1) according to whether qr, pr are bosonic (fermionic).

The generalized Poisson bracket
29
1.4 The generalized Poisson bracket, its properties, and applications
Letting A and B be two bosonic trace functionals of the operators {qr} and {pr}, it
is convenient to deﬁne the generalized Poisson bracket
{A, B} = Tr

r
ϵr
 δA
δqr
δB
δpr
−δB
δqr
δA
δpr

.
(1.11a)
Then using the Hamiltonian form of the equations of motion, one readily ﬁnds that
for a general bosonic trace functional A[{qr}, {pr}, t], the time derivative is given
by
d
dt A = ∂A
∂t + Tr

r
 δA
δqr
˙qr + δA
δpr
˙pr

= ∂A
∂t + Tr

r
 δA
δqr
ϵr
δH
δpr
−δA
δpr
δH
δqr

= ∂A
∂t + Tr

r
ϵr
 δA
δqr
δH
δpr
−δH
δqr
δA
δpr

= ∂A
∂t + {A, H}.
(1.11b)
In particular, letting A be the trace Hamiltonian H, which has no explicit time de-
pendence when the Lagrangian has no explicit time dependence, and using the fact
that the generalized Poisson bracket is antisymmetric in its arguments, it follows
that the time derivative of H vanishes
d
dt H = 0.
(1.12)
An important property of the generalized Poisson bracket is that it satisﬁes the
Jacobi identity
{A, {B, C}} + {C, {A, B}} + {B, {C, A}} = 0.
(1.13a)
This can be proved algebraically in a basis independent way following Adler,
Bhanot, and Weckel (1994), as explained in Appendix B, and can also be proved
(Adler, 1994, App. A) by inserting a complete set of intermediate states into the
trace on the right of Eq. (1.11a) and using the complex valued analogs of Eq. (1.8),
giving
{A, B} =

m,n,r
ϵr

 δA
δqr

mn
 δB
δpr

nm
−
 δB
δqr

mn
 δA
δpr

nm

=

m,n,r
ϵr

∂A
∂(qr)nm
∂B
∂(pr)mn
−
∂B
∂(qr)nm
∂A
∂(pr)mn

.
(1.13b)

30
Trace dynamics
In the second line of Eq. (1.13b), the generalized Poisson bracket has been reex-
pressed as a sum of classical Poisson brackets in which the matrix elements of
qr, pr are the classical variables (which, depending on whether r is a bosonic or
fermionic index, are both either even or odd elements of a Grassmann algebra),
and the Jacobi identity of Eq. (1.13a) then follows from the Jacobi identity for
the classical Poisson bracket (as extended to a Grassmann algebra). As a result of
the Jacobi identity, if Q1 and Q2 are two conserved charges with no explicit time
dependence, that is if
0 = d
dt Q1 = {Q1, H},
0 = d
dt Q2 = {Q2, H},
(1.13c)
then their generalized Poisson bracket {Q1, Q2} also has a vanishing generalized
Poisson bracket with H, and is conserved. This has the consequence that Lie alge-
bras of symmetries can be represented as Lie algebras of trace functionals under
the generalized Poisson bracket operation.
More generally, the Jacobi identity implies that trace dynamics has an under-
lying symplectic geometry that is preserved by the time evolution generated by
the trace Hamiltonian, in analogy with corresponding symplectic structures in
classical dynamics. This is discussed in more detail in Appendix C, following
Adler and Wu (1994). Although it will not play a role in the sequel, we note
for completeness that if the algebra of trace functionals is extended so as to be
closed under multiplication as well as addition of trace functionals, then the opera-
tor variational derivative and the generalized Poisson bracket both obey the Leibniz
product rule
δ(AB)
δqr
= δA
δqr
B + AδB
qr
,
δ(AB)
δpr
= δA
δpr
B + AδB
pr
,
{AB, C} = {A, C}B + A{B, C}.
(1.14)
Hence the extended algebra of trace functionals forms a so-called Poisson algebra
(see, e.g., Giulini, 2003) under the combined operations of ordinary multiplication
of traces and the generalized Poisson bracket.
It will be useful at this point to introduce a compact notation for the op-
erator phase space variables, which emphasizes the symplectic structure. Let
us introduce the notation x1 = q1, x2 = p1, x3 = q2, x4 = p2, . . . , x2D−1 = qD,
x2D = pD, where by convention we list all of the bosonic variables before all of the
fermionic ones in the 2D-dimensional phase space vector xr, with D = nB + nF.

The generalized Poisson bracket
31
The generalized Poisson bracket of Eq. (1.11a) can now be rewritten as
{A, B} = Tr
2D

r,s=1
 δA
δxr
ωrs
δB
δxs

,
(1.15a)
and the operator Hamiltonian equations of Eq. (1.10b) can be compactly rewritten
as
˙xr =
2D

s=1
ωrs
δH
δxs
.
(1.15b)
The numerical matrix ωrs that appears here is given by
ω = diag(B, . . . , B, F, . . . , F),
(1.16a)
with the 2 × 2 bosonic and fermionic matrices B and F given respectively by
B =
 0
1
−1
0

,
F = −
 0
1
1
0

.
(1.16b)
It is easy to verify that the matrix ω obeys the properties
(ω2)rs = −ϵrδrs,
ωsr = −ϵrωrs = −ϵsωrs,
(ω4)rs = δrs,

r
ωrsωrt =

r
ωsrωtr = δst.
(1.17)
Henceforth, as in Eq. (1.17), we shall not explicitly indicate the range of the sum-
mation indices; the index r on qr, pr will be understood to have an upper summa-
tion limit of D, while the index r on xr will be understood to have an upper limit
of 2D.
Using this compact notation one can formally integrate the trace dynamics
equations of motion. Let jr be a constant source matrix of the same bosonic or
fermionic type as xr, and let us deﬁne
Xr = Tr jrxr,
(1.18a)
so that
δXr
δxu
= δru jr.
(1.18b)
Then the Hamiltonian equations of motion of Eq. (1.15b) can be rewritten, follow-
ing Adler and Horwitz (1996), as
˙Xr = Tr jr ˙xr = Tr

u
δru jr ˙xu
= Tr

s,u
δXr
δxu
ωus
δH
δxs
= {Xr, H} = −{H, Xr},
(1.18c)

32
Trace dynamics
which expresses ˙Xr as a generalized Poisson bracket with the trace Hamiltonian.
We can now formally integrate the equation of motion for Xr(t) by writing
Xr(t) = exp(−{H, . . .}t)Xr(0) exp({H, . . .}t)
= Xr(0) −t{H, Xr(0)} + 1
2t2{H, {H, Xr(0)}}
−1
6t3{H, {H, {H, Xr(0)}}} + . . .
(1.19)
1.5 Trace dynamics contrasted with unitary Heisenberg picture dynamics
In general, the matrix dynamics speciﬁed by Eqs. (1.15b) and (1.19) is not unitary,
in other words, Eq. (1.19) is not equivalent to an evolution of the form
xr(t) = U †(t)xr(0)U(t),
(1.20a)
for some unitary U(t). Expressed in generator form, by writing U(t) as U(t) =
exp(−iGt), the evolution of Eq. (1.15b) is not equivalent to a Heisenberg picture
time evolution (with ¯h = 1)
˙xr(t) = i[G, xr(t)].
(1.20b)
As a concrete example, consider the case with two degrees of freedom and the
trace Hamiltonian H = Tri{q1, p2}[q1, p1], with p1, p2, and q1 bosonic operators.
Then from Eq. (1.10b) we compute
˙q1 = i[{q1, p2}, q1],
˙q2 = i{q1, [q1, p1]},
˙p1 = −i

{p2, [q1, p1]} + [p1, {q1, p2}]

,
(1.20c)
˙p2 = 0,
which clearly cannot be represented in the unitary evolution form given in
Eq. (1.20b) for any choice of generator G. This statement holds true even
when Eq. (1.20c) is simpliﬁed by assuming the canonical algebra [qr, ps] = iδrs,
[qr, qs] = [pr, ps] = 0 (which involves an extension of the algebra of dynamical
variables to ones that are not trace class), so that the equations of motion read
˙q1 = 0,
˙q2 = −2q1,
(1.20d)
˙p1 = 0,
˙p2 = 0.

Trace dynamics contrasted
33
These equations cannot be represented, for any choice of G, as a Heisenberg evo-
lution ˙x = i[G, x] for all x = q1, q2, p1, p2, since the second line in Eq. (1.20d)
implies, assuming the canonical algebra, that G must contain a term proportional
to p2q1, whereas the third line in Eq. (1.20d) implies, together with the canoni-
cal algebra, that G has no dependence on q1! Equations (1.20d) can, however, at
one instant of time be represented as different Heisenberg evolutions for the two
canonical pairs q1, p1 and q2, p2
˙q1 = i[G1, q1],
˙q2 = i[G2, q2],
(1.20e)
˙p1 = i[G1, p1],
˙p2 = i[G2, p2],
with G1 = 0 and G2 = −{q1, p2}, a statement that we shall see can be extended
to the general case. The restriction of Eq. (1.20e) to one instant of time is re-
quired because, in this example, although the ﬁrst time derivatives of the rela-
tions [q1, p1] = i, [q2, p2] = i, [q1, q2] = 0, and [p1, p2] = 0 are consistent with
the equations of motion of Eqs. (1.20d,e), the ﬁrst time derivative of the relation
[p1, q2] = 0 is not, since
[ ˙p1, q2] + [p1, ˙q2] = −2[p1, q1] = 2i ̸= 0.
(1.20f)
In general, as we shall remark again below, multiple Heisenberg-like evolution
does not preserve an initially assumed canonical algebra, and so can be used to
represent the trace dynamics equations of motion only at one instant of time.
There is, however, a special case, discussed in Adler and Millard (1996), in
which the trace dynamics and the unitary Heisenberg picture evolutions coin-
cide. Let us consider a special class of operator Hamiltonians called Weyl-ordered
Hamiltonians, in which the bosonic operators are all totally symmetrized with re-
spect to one another and to the fermionic operators, and in which the fermionic
operators are totally antisymmetrized with respect to one another. (Note that in
the conventional quantum mechanical application of Weyl ordering, in which op-
erators such as q1 and p2 commute according to the canonical algebra, their
products do not need to be symmetrized; in trace dynamics, since no a priori
commutativity properties are assumed, Weyl ordering requires the symmetriza-
tion/antisymmetrization of all operator products.) Clearly, the most general Weyl-
ordered Hamiltonian which is a polynomial in the operator phase space variables
{xr} will be a sum of terms, which may be of different degrees, each obtained
by Weyl ordering a distinct monomial in the phase space variables. The contri-
bution of all such monomials of degree n may be simply represented by a gen-
erating function Gn constructed as follows. Let σr,
r = 1, . . . , 2D be a set of

34
Trace dynamics
parameters which are real numbers when ϵr = 1 and which are real Grassmann
numbers, which anticommute with each other and with all of the fermionic phase
space variables, when ϵr = −1. Then if we form
Gn = gn,
g =

s
σsxs,
(1.21a)
the coefﬁcient of each distinct monomial in the parameters σr will be a distinct
Weyl-ordered polynomial of degree n in the phase space variables {xr}. Corre-
sponding to the operator generating function Gn, we deﬁne a trace functional gen-
erating function
Gn = TrGn.
(1.21b)
The part of Gn which is even in the Grassmann parameters is then a generating
function for all non-vanishing trace functionals that correspond to the bosonic
Weyl-ordered monomials generated by Gn.
Let us now compare the trace dynamics equations of motion produced by Gn
for general operators {xr}, with the corresponding Heisenberg picture equations of
motion produced by Gn when the phase space variables {xr} are assumed to obey
the standard canonical algebra of quantum mechanics. In our compact phase space
notation, this algebra takes the form
xrxs −ϵrxsxr = iϵrωrs,
[xr, i] = 0,
(1.22a)
where we adopt the convention that if only one of xr, xs is bosonic, it is taken to
be the operator xr; alternatively, we can rewrite the ﬁrst line of Eq. (1.22a) with no
restrictions on the indices r, s by including a factor σs, giving
[xr, σsxs] = iωrsσs.
(1.22b)
As noted above, imposition of the canonical algebra involves an extension outside
the algebra of trace class matrix dynamical variables, since taking the trace of
Eq. (1.22b) leads to an inconsistency if one simultaneously assumes the validity of
cyclic permutation under the trace.
Applying the equations of motion of Eq. (1.15b) with Gn playing the role of the
trace Hamiltonian, we get
˙xr =

s
ωrs
δGn
δxs
=

s
ωrsngn−1σs.
(1.23a)

Trace dynamics contrasted
35
On the other hand, from the canonical algebra of Eq. (1.22b) we ﬁnd, for both
bosonic and fermionic xr, that
[xr, g] = i

s
ωrsσs,
(1.23b)
which in turn implies that
[xr, Gn] = ngn−1i

s
ωrsσs.
(1.23c)
But the Heisenberg picture equations of motion for the phase space variables, tak-
ing Gn as the operator Hamiltonian, are
˙xr = i[Gn, xr],
(1.23d)
which substituting Eq. (1.23c) becomes
˙xr =

s
ωrsngn−1σs,
(1.23e)
in agreement with Eq. (1.23a). We can now sum over all generating function con-
tributions Gn weighted by c-number coefﬁcients to obtain a general Weyl-ordered
Hamiltonian H, which has a corresponding trace Hamiltonian H = TrH, which
respectively generate the Heisenberg picture equation of motion
˙xr = i[H, xr]
(1.24a)
and the corresponding trace dynamics equation of motion of Eq. (1.15b).
Thus, for Weyl-ordered Hamiltonians formed with c-number coefﬁcients, we
conclude that the trace dynamics equations of motion generated by H agree with
the Heisenberg picture equations of motion generated by H, on an initial time slice
on which the phase space variables are canonical. It is also evident that on this time
slice
[H, i] = 0.
(1.24b)
But since Eq. (1.24b) guarantees that the Heisenberg picture equations of mo-
tion preserve the canonical algebra on the next time slice, integrating forward in
time step by step then implies that trace dynamics agrees with Heisenberg pic-
ture dynamics at all subsequent times, and therefore can be extended to a unitary
dynamics in this case.
When H is not Weyl ordered, as we have seen above, one can give explicit
examples in which the trace dynamics equations of motion do not correspond to
a unitary evolution, even when extended to the canonical algebra. The example of
Eq. (1.20c) required the use of two pairs of canonical variables q1,2, p1,2; using
our Weyl-ordering result, we shall now show that any trace dynamics for a single

36
Trace dynamics
pair of bosonic variables q, p, when extended to the canonical algebra [q, p] = i,
always can be represented as a unitary Heisenberg evolution. We shall proceed
by induction, and assume that the result has been proved for any trace dynamics
generated by a trace Hamiltonian H = TrH of degree n or less in p and q. Now
consider a trace Hamiltonian of degree n + 1, and suppose that the result has been
proved for those degree n + 1 trace Hamiltonians that can be reduced to Weyl-
ordered form by at most k interchanges of p and q. This hypothesis is true for k =
0, i.e., the case in which we start from a degree n + 1 Weyl-ordered Hamiltonian.
Consider now a trace Hamiltonian Hn+1,k+1 which is of degree n + 1 and which
requires k + 1 interchanges of p and q to reduce it to Weyl-ordered form. Doing
the ﬁrst of these k + 1 interchanges of p and q we have
Hn+1,k+1 = Hn+1,k + iTrX[q, p],
(1.25a)
with X a self-adjoint polynomial of degree n −1, where we have used the fact that
irrespective of the position of the q and p that are being interchanged, the resulting
commutator can always be cyclically permuted to the right. Varying Eq. (1.25a) we
have
δHn+1,k+1 = δHn+1,k + iTr(δX[q, p] + X[δq, p] + X[q, δp]).
(1.25b)
Now that we have taken variations, we can simplify the ﬁrst term on the right-
hand side by assuming the canonical algebra, so that after using cyclic invariance
to rearrange the second and third terms on the right we get
δHn+1,k+1 = δHn+1,k −δX + iTr([p, X]δq + [X, q]δp).
(1.25c)
Thus Eq. (1.25c) implies that
˙p = −δHn+1,k+1
δq
= −δHn+1,k
δq
+ δX
δq + i[X, p],
˙q = δHn+1,k+1
δp
= δHn+1,k
δp
−δX
δp + i[X, q].
(1.25d)
Now let us use the induction hypothesis, which states that the trace dynamics
equations generated by both Hn+1,k and X simplify, over the canonical algebra,
to Heisenberg picture equations of motion with generators Gn+1,k and G X respec-
tively. Thus we have
˙p = i[Gn+1,k, p] −i[G X, p] + i[X, p] = i[Gn+1,k+1, p],
˙q = i[Gn+1,k, q] −i[G X, q] + i[X, q] = i[Gn+1,k+1, q],
(1.26a)
where we have deﬁned
Gn+1,k+1 = Gn+1,k −G X + X,
(1.26b)

Trace dynamics contrasted
37
completing the induction. Therefore any trace dynamics in a single pair of bosonic
dynamical variables q, p simpliﬁes, when extended over the canonical algebra, to
a unitary Heisenberg dynamics.
When more than one canonical pair of bosonic or fermionic dynamical vari-
ables is present, the inductive argument just given generalizes in the following
way. The key step of Eq. (1.25a) now contains a sum of commutators of each
bosonic variable with all other bosonic and fermionic variables, and of anticom-
mutators of each fermionic variable with all other fermionic variables. The cyclic
rearrangements and inductive strategy used above now can be used to prove that
when restricted to the canonical algebra, the general trace dynamics equations of
motion can be expressed at one instant of time as a multiple Heisenberg-like evolu-
tion with different generators linking each distinct pair of operators. For example,
considering for simplicity just the case in which only bosonic dynamical variables
are present, Eq. (1.25a) generalizes to
Hn+1,k+1 = Hn+1,k + iTr

rs
(X1
[rs][qr, qs] + X2
[rs][pr, ps] + X3
rs[qr, ps]).
(1.27a)
Here the Xs are independent bosonic generators for each pair of index labels, and
we have followed the usual convention of denoting antisymmetry in subscripted
indices by [ ]. The inductive argument then shows that when simpliﬁed over the
canonical algebra, at one instant of time the trace dynamics equations of motion
take the form of a multiple Heisenberg-like evolution
˙qr = i

s

[G3
sr, qs] + 2[G2
[sr], ps]

,
˙pr = i

s

[G3
rs, ps] + 2[G1
[rs], qs]

,
(1.27b)
with the generators G obtained by combining the generators X with the generators
Gn+1,k and G X furnished by the inductive hypothesis. In the most general case,
the generators appearing in Eq. (1.27b) are all distinct, but in special cases some
can be zero or identical to others. When fermionic as well as bosonic variables
are present, there will be additional terms in Eq. (1.27a) involving commutators
of bosonic variables with fermionic variables, and anticommutators of fermionic
variables with one another, each with an independent operator coefﬁcient, which
give rise to corresponding additional terms in Eq. (1.27b).
The restriction to one instant of time is needed because the evolution of
Eq. (1.27b) does not preserve the structure of the canonical algebra (as is eas-
ily seen by application of the Jacobi identity for commutators), and so the trace
dynamics equations of motion, for an asymmetric Hamiltonian in the many vari-
able case, cannot be replaced by a canonical evolution even with the complicated

38
Trace dynamics
generator structure given in Eq. (1.27b). However, because of the indicated index
antisymmetry of G1
[rs] and G2
[rs], when only one bosonic canonical pair is present
the evolution of Eq. (1.27b) reduces to the much simpler Heisenberg evolution of
Eq. (1.26a), and so we recover our previous result.
The result of Eq. (1.27b) shows that when two or more canonical pairs of dy-
namical variables are present, in general Weyl ordering of the Hamiltonian is
needed for the trace dynamics equations of motion to simplify, when extended
over the canonical algebra, to unitary Heisenberg ones. When the trace dynam-
ics equations of motion for the generic case of an unsymmetrized Hamiltonian
are extended to the canonical algebra, the tightly constrained Heisenberg evolu-
tion found in the Weyl-ordered case, in which each dynamical variable evolves
with the same Hamiltonian generator, “fragments” into independent evolutions for
each dynamical variable. This phenomenon is relevant because non-Weyl-ordered
Hamiltonians appear in models of physical interest, such as the supersymmetric
Yang–Mills models described in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, and the non-supersymmetric
but operator gauge invariant models discussed in Appendix E, all of which involve
commutator terms in the construction of their Hamiltonians. More generally, the
fact that the trace dynamics equations of motion are not a unitary Heisenberg evo-
lution plays a role in Chapter 6, where we argue that the leading corrections to
an approximation of a unitary Heisenberg evolution take the form of rapidly ﬂuc-
tuating terms in the Schr¨odinger equation, that provide the theoretical basis for
stochastic localization models for state vector reduction.
To conclude this discussion, we emphasize that in the remainder of this
book we will not assume that the matrix variables obey canonical commuta-
tion/anticommutation relations. They are instead assumed to be completely gen-
eral trace class matrix operators with no special commutativity/anticommutativity
properties. An effective canonical algebra will be seen to hold as an approxima-
tion only for averages of the matrix variables over a statistical mechanical canoni-
cal ensemble. The discussion of this section then shows that, for a trace dynamics
generated from a Weyl-ordered Hamiltonian, this effective canonical algebra and
Heisenberg dynamics gives equations of motion that agree with those arising from
the underlying trace dynamics.

2
Additional generic conserved quantities
We have seen in Chapter 1 that the trace Hamiltonian H is always a conserved
quantity in the dynamics of matrix models. In this chapter we introduce two struc-
tural restrictions on the form of the trace Hamiltonian (or Lagrangian), which lead
to two further generic conserved quantities. The ﬁrst conserved quantity, discussed
in Section 2.1, is a trace quantity N analogous to the fermion number operator in
ﬁeld theory, and the second, introduced in Section 2.2, is an operator ˜C that is
reminiscent of the canonical commutator/anticommutator structure of ﬁeld theory.
These conserved quantities play a central role in the statistical mechanical analysis
of Chapters 4 and 5, where we shall see that when the low energy dynamics is ef-
fectively dominated by ˜C, with the trace quantities H and N effectively decoupled,
then the statistical thermodynamics of matrix models has the structure of quantum
ﬁeld theory.
When the index r labeling the dynamical variables is a spatial box label, and
when the corresponding trace Lagrangian is Poincar´e invariant, there will be ad-
ditional conserved quantities that play the role of trace generators of the Poincar´e
group under the generalized Poisson bracket introduced in Section 1.4. These con-
served quantities are all charges associated with corresponding conserved currents,
as discussed in Section 2.3. To illustrate the general trace dynamics formalism in
action, and to give examples of all of the conserved quantities introduced in this
Chapter, in Section 2.4 we analyze in detail the simple trace dynamics model de-
ﬁned by coupling a Dirac fermion to a scalar Klein–Gordon ﬁeld. Finally, in Sec-
tion 2.5 we discuss the symmetry properties of the conserved quantities under the
interchange of fermionic canonical coordinates and momenta.
2.1 The trace “fermion number” N
Although we shall allow the trace Hamiltonian to have arbitrary polynomial de-
pendences on the bosonic variables, let us for the moment restrict the fermionic
39

40
Additional generic conserved quantities
structure to have the bilinear form found in all renormalizable quantum ﬁeld the-
ory models, by taking H to have the form
H = TrH = Tr

r,s∈F
(prqs B1rs + pr B2rsqs) + purely bosonic.
(2.1a)
Here the notation ∈F indicates a sum over only the fermionic operator phase space
variables, and B1,2 are general polynomials in the bosonic variables. (Requiring
self-adjointness of H places restrictions on the form of B1rs and B2rs that are
given in Eq. (2.4f) below, but are not needed for the conservation argument that
follows.) From Eq. (2.1a) and the Hamilton equations of Eq. (1.10b), we have for
fermionic r, s
˙ps = −δH
δqs
= −

r∈F
(B1rs pr + pr B2rs),
˙qr = −δH
δpr
=

s∈F
(qs B1rs + B2rsqs).
(2.1b)
Let us now deﬁne the trace quantity N by
N = 1
2iTr

r∈F
[qr, pr] = iTr

r∈F
qr pr = −iTr

r∈F
prqr.
(2.2a)
Then for the time derivative of N we have, from the second of the three equivalent
forms of N
˙N = iTr

r∈F
(˙qr pr + qr ˙pr),
(2.2b)
which on substituting the fermion equations of motion of Eq. (2.1b) becomes
˙N = iTr

r,s∈F
[B2rs, qs pr] = 0.
(2.3)
Thus, N is a conserved trace quantity when the trace Hamiltonian has the bilin-
ear fermionic structure of Eq. (2.1a). Inverting the Legendre transformation of
Eq. (1.9b), the corresponding trace Lagrangian is
L = TrL = Tr

r∈F
pr ˙qr −Tr

r,s∈F
(prqs B1rs + pr B2rsqs) + purely bosonic.
(2.4a)
In order for the kinetic part of L to be self-adjoint up to a total time derivative, we
assign adjointness properties of the fermionic variables according to
pr = q†
r ,
(2.4b)

The trace “fermion number” N
41
which gives
(pr ˙qr)† = (q†
r ˙qr)† = −˙q†
r qr
= q†
r ˙qr −d
dt (q†
r qr) = pr ˙qr + total time derivative,
(2.4c)
as needed. (A more general construction of the fermionic kinetic Lagrangian,
and a correspondingly more general assignment of adjointness properties of the
fermionic variables, will be taken up at the end of Section 2.2.) Substituting
Eq. (2.4b) into Eq. (2.4a), the trace Lagrangian takes the form
L = Tr

r∈F
q†
r ˙qr −Tr

r,s∈F
(q†
r qs B1rs + q†
r B2rsqs) + purely bosonic.
(2.4d)
Correspondingly, substituting Eq. (2.4b) into Eq. (2.2a) for N we get
N = 1
2iTr

r∈F
[qr, q†
r ] = iTr

r∈F
qrq†
r = −iTr

r∈F
q†
r qr,
(2.4e)
showing that, since N is the trace of a self-adjoint quantity, it is real when the
fermionic adjointness properties are assigned as in Eq. (2.4b). From Eq. (2.4d), we
see that with the fermionic adjointness assignment of Eq. (2.4b), self-adjointness
of L and H requires that
B1rs = −B†
1sr , B2rs = −B†
2sr , all r, s.
(2.4f)
The resemblance of N to a fermion number operator suggests that it will be
conserved even when H is not bilinear, as long as each monomial in H has equal
numbers of fermionic operators pr and qs, with any values of the mode indices
r, s. This is indeed the case, and can be seen as follows. Let Hnq,n p be a mono-
mial term in H containing exactly nq factors of fermionic qs, and n p factors of
fermionic ps, with any values of the indices r, . . . labeling fermionic degrees of
freedom. Then by a simple counting argument (an application of Euler’s theorem
for homogeneous functions) we have
Tr

r∈F
δHnq,n p
δqr
qr = nqHnq,n p,
Tr

r∈F
δHnq,n p
δpr
pr = n pHnq,n p.
(2.5a)

42
Additional generic conserved quantities
Hence denoting by ˙Nnq,n p the contribution of Hnq,n p to ˙N = iTr 
r∈F(˙qr pr +
qr ˙pr) , we have by use of Eq. (1.10b)
˙Nnq,n p = −iTr

r∈F
δHnq,n p
δpr
pr + qr
δHnq,n p
δqr

= −iTr

r∈F
δHnq,n p
δpr
pr −δHnq,n p
δqr
qr

= −i(n p −nq)Hnq,n p.
(2.5b)
Hence if H is constructed solely from monomials which have equal numbers of
fermionic qs and ps, so that nq = n p for all monomial terms in H, then the trace
quantity N remains conserved. This gives the most general structural restriction on
H leading to conservation of N.
An alternative derivation of the conservation of N in the general case shows its
role as a Noether charge. When the numbers of fermionic operators pr and qs are
matched in every monomial, the trace Lagrangian
L = Tr

r∈F
q†
r ˙qr + terms with no time derivatives of fermions
(2.5c)
will be invariant under the substitutions qr →exp(iα)qr and q†
s →exp(−iα)q†
s
with α a real constant. When α is time dependent, this substitution results, to ﬁrst
order in α, in a shift in the trace Lagrangian
L →L + i ˙αTr

r∈F
q†
r qr = L −˙αN.
(2.5d)
The standard Noether’s theorem argument (an exposition of which, in the context
of continuum spacetime models, will be given below in Section 2.3) then tells us
that the coefﬁcient of ˙α in Eq. (2.5d) is a conserved charge, which again shows
that N is a constant of the motion.
2.2 The conserved operator ˜C
As a second structural specialization, let us restrict the class of matrix models
under consideration to those in which the only non-commuting matrix quantities
are the Lagrangian dynamical variables qr, ˙qs, or their Hamiltonian equivalents
qr, ps, for general index values r, s. In other words, we shall assume that the trace
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian are constructed from the dynamical variables using
only c-number complex coefﬁcients, excluding the more general case in which
ﬁxed matrix coefﬁcients are used. With this restriction, we shall show that there is

The conserved operator ˜C
43
a generic conserved operator
˜C ≡

r∈B
[qr, pr] −

r∈F
{qr, pr} =

r
(ϵrqr pr −prqr) =

r,s
xrωrsxs,
(2.6)
with the notation ∈B, ∈F denoting respectively sums over bosonic and fermionic
operator phase space variables. The existence of the conserved quantity ˜C was ﬁrst
discovered by Millard (personal communication, 1995 and thesis, 1997) under the
more restrictive assumption of a bosonic theory with a Weyl-ordered (i.e., sym-
metrized) Hamiltonian, but was soon seen to hold (Adler and Millard, 1996, and
with a Noether formulation Adler and Kempf, 1998) under the less restrictive con-
ditions assumed here.
When the Lagrangian and Hamiltonian are constructed using only c-number
ﬁxed coefﬁcients, there is a bosonic global unitary invariance which preserves the
adjointness properties of the dynamical variables (in the sense that when we set
yr = U †xrU, then y†
r = U †x†
r U.) That is, if there are no ﬁxed matrix coefﬁcients,
then the trace Lagrangian obeys
L[{U †qrU}, {U † ˙qrU}] = L[{qr}, {˙qr}],
(2.7a)
and the trace Hamiltonian correspondingly obeys
H[{U †qrU}, {U † prU}] = H[{qr}, {pr}],
(2.7b)
with U a constant unitary N × N matrix. Let us now ﬁnd the conserved charge
corresponding to this global unitary invariance. Setting U = exp , with  an anti-
self-adjoint bosonic generator matrix, and expanding to ﬁrst order in , Eq. (2.7b)
implies that
H[{qr −[, qr]}, {pr −[, pr]}] = H[{qr}, {pr}].
(2.8a)
But applying the deﬁnition of the variation of a trace functional given in Eq. (1.3b),
Eq. (2.8a) becomes
Tr

r

−δH
δqr
[, qr] −δH
δpr
[, pr]

= 0,
(2.8b)
which by use of the cyclic identities of Eqs. (1.2) yields
Tr

r
 δH
δqr
qr −ϵrqr
δH
δqr
+ δH
δpr
pr −ϵr pr
δH
δpr

= 0.
(2.8c)
Since the generator  is an arbitrary anti-self-adjoint N × N matrix, the matrix
that multiplies it in Eq. (2.8c) must vanish, giving the matrix identity

r
 δH
δqr
qr −ϵrqr
δH
δqr
+ δH
δpr
pr −ϵr pr
δH
δpr

= 0.
(2.9a)

44
Additional generic conserved quantities
But now substituting the Hamilton equations of Eq. (1.10b), Eq. (2.9a) takes the
form
0 =

r
(−˙prqr + ϵrqr ˙pr + ϵr ˙qr pr −pr ˙qr)
= d
dt

r
(−prqr + ϵrqr pr)
= d
dt

r∈B
[qr, pr] −

r∈F
{qr, pr}

,
(2.9b)
completing the demonstration of the conservation of ˜C. An analogous demonstra-
tion can be given starting from global unitary invariance of the trace Lagrangian
L. In place of Eq. (2.8b) one ﬁnds
Tr

r

−δL
δqr
[, qr] −δL
δ ˙qr
[, ˙qr]

= 0,
(2.9c)
and in place of Eq. (2.9a) one has

r
 δL
δqr
qr −ϵrqr
δL
δqr
+ δL
δ ˙qr
˙qr −ϵr ˙qr
δL
δ ˙qr

= 0.
(2.9d)
Substituting the Euler–Lagrange equations of Eq. (1.7c), together with the deﬁni-
tion of the canonical momentum from Eq. (1.9a), then leads again to Eq. (2.9b).
In Eqs. (2.7a,b) we have assumed that U is a time-independent unitary matrix.
When U and  are time dependent, under the substitution qr →qr −[, qr] the
time derivative of qr transforms according to ˙qr →˙qr −[, ˙qr] −[ ˙, qr], and
the trace Lagrangian changes, to ﬁrst order in , by
L →L −Tr

r
δL
δ ˙qr
[ ˙, qr].
(2.9e)
Substituting Eq. (1.9a) and using the cyclic identities of Eqs. (1.1a,b) and (1.2),
the added term can be rewritten as
−Tr

r
pr( ˙qr −qr ˙) = −Tr ˙

r
(ϵrqr pr −prqr) = −Tr ˙ ˜C.
(2.9f)
Application of the standard Noether’s theorem argument then tells us that the co-
efﬁcient of ˙ in Eq. (2.9f) is a conserved charge, which exhibits the role of the
conserved quantity ˜C as the conserved Noether charge associated with global uni-
tary invariance.
Assigning adjointness properties to the fermionic variables as in Eq. (2.4b), and
taking the bosonic variables qr to be self-adjoint (or anti-self-adjoint), which for

The conserved operator ˜C
45
a real trace Lagrangian implies that the corresponding bosonic pr are respectively
self-adjoint (or anti-self-adjoint), we see that the conserved operator ˜C is anti-self-
adjoint
˜C = −˜C†.
(2.10a)
(A more general adjointness structure for ˜C, corresponding to an alternative as-
signment of fermion adjointness properties, will be discussed shortly.) Also, from
the bilinear cyclic identities of Eqs. (1.1a,b), we see that ˜C is traceless
Tr ˜C = 0.
(2.10b)
Corresponding to the fact that ˜C is the conserved Noether charge in any matrix
model with a global unitary invariance, it is easy to see (Adler and Horwitz, 1996;
Adler and Millard, 1996) that ˜C can be used to construct the generator of global
unitary transformations of the Hilbert space basis. Consider the trace functional
G = Tr ˜C,
(2.11a)
with  a ﬁxed bosonic anti-self-adjoint operator, which can be rewritten, using
cyclic invariance of the trace, as
G = −Tr

r
[, pr]qr = Tr

r
pr[, qr].
(2.11b)
Hence for the variations of pr and qr induced by using G as canonical genera-
tor, which by deﬁnition (see Eq. (2.13a) below) have a structure analogous to the
Hamilton equations of Eq. (1.10b), we get
δpr ≡−δG
δqr
= [, pr],
δqr ≡ϵr
δG
δpr
= [, qr].
(2.11c)
Comparing with Eqs. (2.7b) and (2.8a), we see that these have just the form of an
inﬁnitesimal global unitary transformation.
The generalized Poisson bracket of the trace generators of two inﬁnitesimal
global unitary transformations G and G can be computed (Adler and Horwitz,
1996) by combining Eq. (2.11c) with the deﬁnition of the bracket in Eq. (1.11a),
with the result
{G, G} = Tr

r
ϵr
δG
δqr
δG
δpr
−( ↔)

= Tr

r
ϵr
	
−[, pr]ϵr[, qr] −( ↔)

= Tr

r
pr[[, ], qr] = G[,].
(2.12a)

46
Additional generic conserved quantities
Hence the Lie algebra of the generators G under the generalized Poisson bracket
is isomorphic to the algebra of the matrices  under commutation. Equation
(2.12a), which is an analog of the “current algebra” group properties of integrated
charges in quantum ﬁeld theory, can be generalized (Adler and Horwitz, 1996) to
an analog of the local current algebra of quantum ﬁeld theory as follows. Let us
write
˜C =

r
˜Cr,
˜Cr ≡ϵrqr pr −prqr,
(2.12b)
and let us deﬁne a “local” trace generator G;r by
G;r = Tr ˜Cr.
(2.12c)
Then a straightforward calculation, similar to that leading to Eq. (2.12a), shows
that
{G;r, G; s} = δrsG[,];r.
(2.12d)
In addition to the canonical generators for global unitary transformations given
in Eqs. (2.11a–c), we can also deﬁne general canonical transformations. Letting
G = TrG, with G self-adjoint but otherwise arbitrary, a general inﬁnitesimal
canonical transformation is deﬁned, in analogy with Eq. (2.11c), by
δpr = −δG
δqr
,
δqr = ϵr
δG
δpr
,
(2.13a)
which is the natural extension to trace dynamics of an inﬁnitesimal canonical
transformation in classical mechanics. In terms of the symplectic variables xr in-
troduced in Section 1.4, Eq. (2.13a) can be written in the compact form
δxr =

s
ωrs
δG
δxs
.
(2.13b)
Letting A ≡A[{xr}] be an arbitrary trace functional, we ﬁnd immediately that to
ﬁrst order under a canonical transformation
A + δA ≡A[{xr + δxr}]
= A + Tr

r
δA
δxr
δxr
= A + Tr

r,s
δA
δxr
ωrs
δG
δxs
= A + {A, G},
(2.14a)

The conserved operator ˜C
47
that is
δA = {A, G}.
(2.14b)
Comparing Eq. (2.13b) with Eq. (1.15b), we see that when G is taken as Hdt, with
H the trace Hamiltonian and dt an inﬁnitesimal time step, then δxr = ˙xrdt gives
the small change in xr resulting from the dynamics of the system over that time
step. So, as expected, the Hamiltonian dynamics of the system is a special case of
a canonical transformation.
Let us now consider canonical transformations with generators G which are
global unitary invariant, that is, which are constructed from the {xr} using only
c-number non-dynamical coefﬁcients. Global unitary invariance implies that these
generators obey
{G, G} = 0,
(2.15)
with G the global unitary generator of Eq. (2.11a). But using Eq. (2.14b),
Eq. (2.15) has the alternate interpretation that G is invariant under a canonical
transformation G which is global unitary invariant, and since the anti-self-adjoint
matrix  is arbitrary, this implies that ˜C is invariant under any canonical trans-
formation with a global unitary invariant generator.
	
This could also have been
deduced by a calculation in direct analogy with Eqs. (2.7a) through (2.9b).

This
invariance group of ˜C has the following signiﬁcance. Consider a Poincar´e invari-
ant trace dynamics ﬁeld theory with a global unitary invariant trace Lagrangian,
examples of which are given in Sections 2.3 and 2.4 and Chapter 3 below. In such
a theory, there is a set of trace functional Poincar´e generators, that represent the
Poincar´e group under the generalized Poisson bracket operation, without any as-
sumption of canonical commutators/anticommutators for the underlying dynami-
cal variables {xr}. These Poincar´e generators are global unitary invariant (that is, if
the Lagrangian involves only c-number non-dynamical coefﬁcients, this property
carries over to the trace energy-momentum tensor and to the trace Poincar´e gener-
ators), and so we can conclude from the above discussion of canonical invariance
that ˜C is Poincar´e invariant. This will be seen explicitly in the examples given in
Sections 2.3 and 2.4 and Chapter 3, and will play a role in our later analysis of
the emergence of quantum behavior from the statistical dynamics of global unitary
invariant matrix models.
For each phase space variable qr, pr, let us deﬁne the classical part qc
r , pc
r and
the non-commutative remainder q′
r, p′
r, by
qc
r = 1
N Trqr,
pc
r = 1
N Trpr,
q′
r = qr −qc
r ,
p′
r = pr −pc
r,
(2.16a)

48
Additional generic conserved quantities
so that bosonic qc
r , pc
r are c-numbers, fermionic qc
r , pc
r are Grassmann c-numbers,
and the remainders are traceless
Trq′
r = Trp′
r = 0.
(2.16b)
Then since qc
r , pc
r commute (anticommute) with q′
s, p′
s for r, s both bosonic
(fermionic), we see that the classical parts of the phase space variables make no
contribution to ˜C, and Eq. (2.6) can be rewritten as
˜C =

r∈B
[q′
r, p′
r] −

r∈F
{q′
r, p′
r}.
(2.16c)
Thus ˜C depends only on the non-commutative parts of the matrix phase space
variables.
We conclude this section by showing that the argument for the adjointness prop-
erties of ˜C can be generalized, allowing for the possibility that ˜C can have a
component which is self-adjoint, when we allow a more general assignment of
fermionic adjointness properties than that of Eq. (2.4b). Let us consider a trace
Lagrangian which has a fermionic kinetic term of the form
Lkin = Tr

r,s∈F
q†
r Ars ˙qs,
(2.17a)
with Ars for each r, s an N × N constant matrix. This trace Lagrangian will be
real, up to a total time derivative, provided that the set of matrices Ars obeys
Ars = A†
sr.
(2.17b)
The momentum ps canonically conjugate to qs is
ps = δL
δ ˙qs
=

r∈F
q†
r Ars,
(2.17c)
and the kinetic Lagrangian takes the form
Lkin = Tr

s∈F
ps ˙qs,
(2.17d)
which is clearly global unitary invariant as a function of the phase space variables
xr, even though L was not global unitary invariant when expressed in terms of the
original variables qr, q†
r . Let us now suppose that the remaining terms in L also
have the property that they are global unitary invariant when expressed in terms
of the phase space variables xr; then the trace Hamiltonian H will also be global
unitary invariant. The argument of Eqs. (2.7b) through (2.9b), which does not make
use of the adjointness assignment of Eq. (2.4b), then implies that ˜C of Eq. (2.6) is
still conserved.

The conserved operator ˜C
49
To see when the possibility of a self-adjoint component of ˜C can be realized,
we consider the fermionic part ˜CF, for which we have
˜CF = −

s∈F
{qs, ps} = −

r,s∈F
(qsq†
r Ars + q†
r Arsqs),
˜C†
F =

r,s∈F
(A†
rsqrq†
s + q†
s A†
rsqr) =

r,s∈F
(Arsqsq†
r + q†
r Arsqs), (2.18a)
where in rewriting ˜C†
F in the second line we have used the condition of Eq. (2.17b).
Adding the two equations, we get
˜CF + ˜C†
F = −

r,s∈F
[qsq†
r , Ars],
(2.18b)
showing that when the right-hand side of Eq. (2.18b) is non-zero, the operator ˜C is
no longer anti-self-adjoint. As a direct check that the commutator on the right-hand
side of Eq. (2.18b) is self-adjoint, we have
 
r,s∈F
[qsq†
r , Ars]
†
= −

r,s∈F
[A†
rs, qrq†
s ] = −

r,s∈F
[Asr, qrq†
s ]
=

r,s∈F
[qrq†
s , Asr] =

r,s∈F
[qsq†
r , Ars].
(2.18c)
When Ars is a c-number for all r, s, then the right-hand side of Eq. (2.18b) van-
ishes, and ˜C is anti-self-adjoint. Thus, with the c-number choice
Ars = δrs,
(2.18d)
which trivially satisﬁes the condition of Eq. (2.17b) and corresponds to the fermion
kinetic structure and adjointness assignment used in Eqs. (2.4a,b), we recover our
earlier conclusion that ˜C is anti-self-adjoint. Throughout most of this book we
shall use this simple choice of Ars, and we shall see that an anti-self-adjoint ˜C
naturally leads to an emergent quantum dynamics. However, in Chapter 6, where
we consider stochastic corrections to the Schr¨odinger equation, we shall consider
the possibility that ˜C can have a self-adjoint part as well.
As a very simple example of a nontrivial trace action that has a conserved ˜C
that is not anti-self-adjoint, consider
L = Tr[q†A(˙q + q B) + 1
2
˙B2],
(2.19a)
with A = A† a ﬁxed matrix and with B = −B† an anti-self-adjoint bosonic
operator. Then with qF = q, pF = q†A, and qB = B, pB = ˙B, the correspond-
ing trace Hamiltonian is
H = Tr(−pFqFqB + 1
2 p2
B),
(2.19b)

50
Additional generic conserved quantities
which is a global unitary invariant function of its arguments. Thus the operator
˜C = [qB, pB] −{qF, pF}
(2.20a)
is conserved, as can be checked explicitly by use of the operator equations of
motion
˙qF = −qFqB,
˙pF = qB pF,
˙qB = pB,
˙pB = pFqF.
(2.20b)
However, when A is not a c-number, the calculations of Eqs. (2.18b,c) show that
˜C has a piece that is self-adjoint
˜C + ˜C† = [A, qq†] = [A, qF pF A−1].
(2.21a)
The anti-self-adjoint and self-adjoint parts of ˜C are separately conserved, as we
readily verify from the equations of motion of Eq. (2.21)
d
dt (qF pF) = ˙qF pF + qF ˙pF = 0.
(2.21b)
We complete this discussion by exploring whether there is a connection be-
tween time-reversal noninvariance and the appearance of a self-adjoint piece in ˜C.
Let us deﬁne the anti-unitary time-reversal transformation T , in analogy with the
standard deﬁnition for fermion ﬁelds, by
T iT † = −i,
T qr(t)T † =

s∈F
Ursqs(−t),
T q†
r (t)T † =

s∈F
q†
s (−t)U †
rs.
(2.22a)
Here Urs is a unitary matrix for each r, s, and we note that under a linear superpo-
sition of the qr with complex coefﬁcients, one obtains an antilinear superposition
of the corresponding qs(−t), that is, a superposition with complex conjugated co-
efﬁcients. With this deﬁnition, we ﬁnd that the transformation of the expression
appearing in Eq. (2.17a) for the fermionic kinetic energy is
T
 
r,s∈F
q†
r (t)Ars∂tqs(t)

T †
= T
 
m,n∈F
q†
m(t)Amn∂tqn(t)

T †
=

r,s∈F

m,n∈F
q†
r (−t)U †
mr A∗
mnUns∂tqs(−t).
(2.22b)
Hence the kinetic action

dtLkin will be form-invariant under time-reversal

The conserved operator ˜C
51
provided
Ars = −

m,n∈F
U †
mr A∗
mnUns =

m,n∈F
U †
mr AT
nmUns,
(2.22c)
where in the second equality we have substituted the condition of Eq. (2.17b), and
where the superscript T denotes a transpose of the matrix structure of Anm, but
does not act on the summation indices m, n. Referring to Eq. (2.18a) and applying
the transformations of Eq. (2.22a) to evaluate T ˜CF(t)T †, we ﬁnd that
T ˜CF(t)T † + ˜CF(−t) =

r,s∈F

−qs(−t)q†
r (−t)Ars
−

m,n∈F
Unsqs(−t)q†
r (−t)U †
mr A∗
mn

.
(2.22d)
When Eq. (2.22c) can be satisﬁed by matrices Urs that are c-numbers for each
r, s, the factor Uns in the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (2.22d) can
be commuted through to the right. We can then use the condition of Eq. (2.22c)
to conclude that the two terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (2.22d) cancel, so
that T ˜CF(t)T † + ˜CF(−t) = 0 and ˜CF is time-reversal odd. Since this is also the
behavior expected for the bosonic part of ˜C (bosonic qs are time-reversal even,
while bosonic ps are time-reversal odd), we conclude that ˜C is time-reversal odd
when Eq. (2.22c) can be satisﬁed with c-number matrices Urs.
The condition of Eq. (2.22c) is evidently satisﬁed by the c-number matrix
Urs = δrs when we make the simplest choice Ars = δrs of Eq. (2.18d). So in
this case, which corresponds to the simplest fermionic adjointness assignment of
Eq. (2.4b), ˜C is purely anti-self-adjoint and is time-reversal odd. If we instead take
the somewhat more general choice Ars = Aδrs, with A = −A†, and also take Urs
to have the form Urs = δrsU, then Eq. (2.22c) simpliﬁes to
A = −U †A∗U = −U †ATU,
(2.22e)
with the superscript T denoting the matrix transpose. This condition can be sat-
isﬁed, but requires U to have a nontrivial matrix structure. For example, if we
let σ1,2,3 denote the standard Pauli spin matrices, and take A = A† = AT = σ3,
then the condition of Eq. (2.22e) is satisﬁed by taking either U = σ1 or U = σ2.
In this case Uns cannot be commuted through to the right in the second term on
the right-hand side of Eq. (2.22d), and ˜C has a term which is time-reversal even.
We conclude that the generalization of the fermionic kinetic term and adjointness
assignment that leads to the presence of a self-adjoint piece in ˜C also, in general,
leads to time-reversal violation.
To summarize the analysis so far, associated with a generic trace dynamics
model there are three generic conserved quantities, irrespective of whether the

52
Additional generic conserved quantities
degree of freedom index r plays the role of a spatial index. The trace Hamiltonian
H is always conserved, independent of structural assumptions. When each mono-
mial in H or L has equal numbers of fermionic operators pr and qs, there is a con-
served trace “fermion number” N given by Eq. (2.2a). When H is global unitary
invariant, the corresponding Noether charge gives a conserved operator ˜C with the
dimensions of action, given by Eq. (2.6). When fermionic adjointness is assigned
in the simplest manner, as in Eq. (2.4b), the operator ˜C is anti-self-adjoint and
is odd under time-reversal. For more general fermionic adjointness assignments,
as in Eqs. (2.17a–d), the operator ˜C can have a self-adjoint part, and there is in
general a violation of time-reversal symmetry.
2.3 Conserved quantities for continuum spacetime theories
Up to this point we have taken the index r labeling degrees of freedom to be a dis-
crete index. Let us turn now to the case of continuum spacetime theories, in which r
is a composite label indicating the spatial point ⃗x and the ﬁeld variable qℓevaluated
at that point, so that we have the correspondence qr(t) ↔qℓ(⃗x, t) ≡qℓ(x), where
in the ﬁnal expression we have adopted a four-vector notation (⃗x, t = x0) = x.
We shall consider in this section spacetime theories which are trace dynamics
analogs of standard local ﬁeld theories, in which the trace Lagrangian is con-
structed only from the ﬁeld variables qℓ(x) and their ﬁrst spacetime derivatives
∂µqℓ(x) = ∂qℓ(x)/∂xµ. Thus we have
L =

d3xL({qℓ(x)}, {∂µqℓ(x)}),
(2.23a)
with L the trace Lagrangian density. Requiring the trace action deﬁned by
Eq. (1.6b) to be invariant with respect to variations of the ﬁelds that vanish at
spatial inﬁnity, we have
0 = δS =

d4xTr

ℓ

δL
δqℓ(x)δqℓ(x) +
δL
δ∂µqℓ(x)δ∂µqℓ(x)

,
(2.23b)
which after an integration by parts gives
0 =

d4xTr

ℓ

δL
δqℓ(x) −∂µ
δL
δ∂µqℓ(x)

δqℓ(x).
(2.23c)
Requiring this to hold for general same-type operator variations δqℓ(x) then gives
the operator Euler–Lagrange equations
δL
δqℓ(x) −∂µ
δL
δ∂µqℓ(x) = 0.
(2.23d)

Conserved quantities for continuum spacetime theories
53
Working from the trace Lagrangian of Eq. (2.23a), let us now derive analogs of
the standard Noether’s theorem, by considering transformations that leave the trace
Lagrangian invariant. We begin by considering an internal symmetry transforma-
tion with an inﬁnitesimal c-number parameter α(x), under which the dynamical
variables transform as
qℓ(x) →qℓ(x) + α(x)
ℓ(x),
∂µqℓ(x) →∂µqℓ(x) + α(x)∂µ
ℓ(x) + ∂µα(x)
ℓ(x),
(2.24a)
with 
ℓ(x) speciﬁed functions constructed from the dynamical variables. Substi-
tuting Eq. (2.24a) into the trace Lagrangian, we see that the change in the trace
Lagrangian is given by
L →L +

d3x

ℓ
Tr

α(x)

δL
δqℓ(x)
ℓ(x) +
δL
δ∂µqℓ(x)∂µ
ℓ(x)

+ ∂µα(x)
δL
δ∂µqℓ(x)
ℓ(x)

.
(2.24b)
From the coefﬁcient of ∂µα(x), we extract a local trace current Jµ given by
Jµ(x) = Tr

ℓ
δL
δ∂µqℓ(x)
ℓ(x).
(2.24c)
Calculating the divergence of this current and simplifying by use of the Euler–
Lagrange equations of Eq. (2.23c), we get
∂µJµ(x) = Tr

ℓ

∂µ
δL
δ∂µqℓ(x)
ℓ(x) +
δL
δ∂µqℓ(x)∂µ
ℓ(x)

= Tr

ℓ

δL
δqℓ(x)
ℓ(x) +
δL
δ∂µqℓ(x)∂µ
ℓ(x)

.
(2.24d)
We see that the right-hand side of Eq. (2.24d) is identical with the coefﬁcient
of α(x) in the change in the trace Lagrangian in Eq. (2.24b). Hence when the
trace Lagrangian is invariant under the transformation of Eq. (2.24a) for constant
α(x), the trace current Jµ deﬁned by the variation of the trace Lagrangian for non-
constant α(x) is conserved.
As an application, let us consider a trace Lagrangian with a fermionic structure
analogous to that of Eq. (2.5c)
L = Tr

d3x

ℓ∈F
	
−ψℓ(x)γ µ∂µψℓ(x)

+ terms with no time derivatives of fermions
(2.25a)
where γ µ are the Dirac gamma matrices, ψℓ= ψ†
ℓγ 0, and where in our metric
conventions (γ 0)2 = −1. Suppose that this trace Lagrangian is invariant under

54
Additional generic conserved quantities
the fermionic rephasings ψℓ→exp(iα)ψℓand ψ†
ℓ′ →exp(−iα)ψ†
ℓ′, for arbitrary
ℓ, ℓ′ and with constant α. This will be true if in each term of L, for each factor
ψℓthere is also a factor ψ†
ℓ′. When α is not a constant, to ﬁrst order the trace
Lagrangian will then change under this rephasing according to
L →L −i

d3x∂µαTr

ℓ∈F
ψℓ(x)γ µψℓ(x).
(2.25b)
The Noether analysis of Eqs. (2.24a–d) then tells us that the coefﬁcient of −∂µα
in Eq. (2.25b) gives a conserved trace current Nµ(x)
Nµ(x) = iTr

ℓ∈F
ψℓ(x)γ µψℓ(x),
(2.25c)
which obeys
∂µNµ(x) = 0,
(2.25d)
so that the spatial integral of the time or zero component of this current gives a
conserved trace charge N
N =

d3xN0(x) = −i

d3x

ℓ∈F
ψ†
ℓ(x)ψℓ(x),
˙N = ∂0N = 0.
(2.25e)
Let us next consider the Noether’s theorem analog that follows when the trace
Lagrangian is global unitary invariant. In this case the relevant inﬁnitesimal trans-
formation has an operator-valued parameter (x), and from Eq. (2.8a) takes the
form
qℓ(x) →qℓ(x) −[(x), qℓ(x)],
∂µqℓ(x) →∂µqℓ(x) −[(x), ∂µqℓ(x)] −[∂µ(x), qℓ(x)].
(2.26a)
Substituting the transformation of Eq. (2.26a) into the trace Lagrangian, and using
the cyclic identities to permute factors of  and ∂µ to the right, we ﬁnd that the
trace Lagrangian transforms according to
L →L −Tr

d3x( ˜D + ˜Cµ∂µ),
(2.26b)
where we have deﬁned
˜D =

ℓ

ϵℓqℓ
δL
δqℓ
−δL
δqℓ
qℓ+ ϵℓ∂µqℓ
δL
δ∂µqℓ
−
δL
δ∂µqℓ
∂µqℓ

,
˜Cµ =

ℓ

ϵℓqℓ
δL
δ∂µqℓ
−
δL
δ∂µqℓ
qℓ

.
(2.26c)

Conserved quantities for continuum spacetime theories
55
Calculating the divergence of ˜Cµ, and simplifying by using the Euler–Lagrange
equations of Eq. (2.23d) then gives
∂µ ˜Cµ = ˜D.
(2.26d)
Thus, when the trace Lagrangian is global unitary invariant for constant ,
which requires the vanishing of ˜D, the current ˜Cµ, obtained as the coefﬁcient
of −∂µ(x) in the variation of L for non-constant (x), is conserved. The corre-
sponding conserved charge is
˜C =

d3x ˜C0 =

d3x

ℓ
(ϵℓqℓpℓ−pℓqℓ),
(2.27a)
where in the continuum case the canonical momentum is deﬁned by
pℓ(x) =
δL
δ∂0qℓ(x).
(2.27b)
When the trace Lagrangian density L is Poincar´e invariant, there are further
generic conservation laws, beyond the ones just discussed that are associated with
internal symmetry invariances. We derive these by following the standard textbook
treatments (see, e.g., Bjorken and Drell, 1965 and Weinberg, 1995). We consider
ﬁrst the consequences of a translation of the system by an inﬁnitesimal constant
displacement aµ, so that
L(x) = L({qℓ(x)}, {∂µqℓ(x)})
(2.28a)
is shifted to
L(x + a) = L({qℓ(x + a)}, {∂µqℓ(x + a)})
≃L({qℓ+ aσ∂σqℓ}, {∂µqℓ+ aσ∂σ∂µqℓ}).
(2.28b)
Subtracting Eq. (2.28a) from Eq. (2.28b) and using Eq. (2.23d), we get to ﬁrst
order in aµ the identity
aσ∂σL(x) = Tr

ℓ
 δL
δqℓ
aσ∂σqℓ+
δL
δ∂µqℓ
aσ∂σ∂µqℓ

= Tr

ℓ
	
∂µ
δL
δ∂µqℓ

aσ∂σqℓ+
δL
δ∂µqℓ
aσ∂σ∂µqℓ

= aσ∂µTr

ℓ
 δL
δ∂µqℓ
∂σqℓ

.
(2.28c)
Since aσ is arbitrary, factoring it away gives the identity
∂µT µσ = 0,
(2.29a)

56
Additional generic conserved quantities
with the trace energy-momentum tensor density T µσ given by
T µσ = ηµσL −Tr

ℓ
δL
δ∂µqℓ
∂σqℓ,
(2.29b)
where ηµσ = diag(1, 1, 1, −1) is the Minkowski metric. Conservation of the den-
sity T µσ implies that there is a conserved trace energy-momentum four-vector Pσ
deﬁned by
Pσ =

d3xT 0σ,
(2.29c)
the time component of which gives the conserved trace Hamiltonian
H = P0 = −L +

d3xTr δL
δ∂0qℓ
∂0qℓ.
(2.30)
We consider next the consequences of a four-space rotation of the system,
with an inﬁnitesimal rotation parameter ωµν = −ωνµ, so that the coordinate xν
is shifted to x′
ν = xν + ωνµxµ. Under this shift, the ﬁeld qℓ(x) is shifted by an
amount
δqℓ= qℓ(x′) −qℓ(x) −(1/2)ωµν

m
µν
ℓmqm(x),
(2.31a)
with ℓm a matrix characterizing the intrinsic spin structure associated with the
ﬁeld qℓ. By reasoning identical to that used in the case of a translational shift, we
ﬁnd the formula
δL = ωσµxµ∂σL
= Tr

ℓ
∂λ
 δL
δ∂λqℓ
δqℓ

.
(2.31b)
Substituting Eq. (2.31a) for δqℓand doing some algebra, and using the fact that the
rotation parameter ωσµ is a general antisymmetric tensor, we get the identity
∂λMλσµ = 0,
(2.32a)
with the trace generalized angular momentum density Mλσµ given by
Mλσµ = (xµησλ −xσηµλ)L + Tr

ℓ
δL
δ∂λqℓ

(xσ∂µ −xµ∂σ)qℓ+

m
σµ
ℓm qm

= xµT λσ −xσT λµ + Tr

ℓm
δL
δ∂λqℓ
σµ
ℓm qm.
(2.32b)

Conserved quantities for continuum spacetime theories
57
From the conservation of the trace density Mλσµ, we learn that the spatial integral
of the λ = 0 component of this density is a conserved charge
Mσµ =

d3xM0σµ,
(2.32c)
which together with Pσ gives the complete set of Poincar´e generators. Since we
have seen that the generalized Poisson bracket of any two conserved charges is
also a conserved charge, and since there are no further bosonic charges associated
with Poincar´e invariance, we know on general grounds that the trace Poincar´e gen-
erators will form a closed Lie algebra under the action of the generalized Poisson
bracket. Clearly, this Lie algebra will be in fact the Lie algebra of the Poincar´e
group, since it must be isomorphic to the algebra of the translational and rotational
transformations parameterized by aµ and ωµν, but verifying this by direct compu-
tation of generalized Poisson brackets in any speciﬁc model involves, in general, a
great deal of algebra.
The canonical formalism for constructing T µν gives an energy-momentum ten-
sor which is not symmetric in its indices, whereas the trace energy-momentum
tensor that couples to gravitation through the metric must be symmetric. This prob-
lem can be dealt with, as in the standard ﬁeld theory context, by adding a suitable
conserved asymmetric trace tensor to T µν, so as to give a sum that is symmetric,
conserved, and leads to no change in the trace four-momentum Pν. Let [µρ]ν(x)
be a trace tensor that is antisymmetric in the indices µ and ρ, and let us form the
total energy-momentum tensor T µν
tot according to
T µν
tot = T µν + ∂ρ[µρ]ν.
(2.33a)
Because of the antisymmetry of  in µ and ρ, the total tensor thus deﬁned is still
conserved on the µ index
∂µT µν
tot = ∂µT µν + ∂µ∂ρ[µρ]ν = 0.
(2.33b)
Also, because of the antisymmetry of , when µ = 0 the added term contains only
spatial derivative terms, which vanish when integrated over three space, and so the
energy-momentum four-vector calculated from T µν
tot is the same as that calculated
from T µν.
Let us now show that we can construct a  that renders T µν
tot symmetric. The
basic observation is that Eqs. (2.32a,b) and (2.29a), when combined, give the fol-
lowing expression for the antisymmetric part of T µν
−1
2(T µν −T νµ) = 1
2∂ρTr

ℓm
δL
δ∂ρqℓ
νµ
ℓmqm.
(2.34a)

58
Additional generic conserved quantities
This motivates the choice
[µρ]ν = 1
2Tr

ℓm
 δL
δ∂ρqℓ
νµ
ℓmqm −
δL
δ∂µqℓ
νρ
ℓmqm −
δL
δ∂νqℓ
µρ
ℓmqm

, (2.34b)
which is antisymmetric in µ and ρ, and the ﬁnal two terms of which are symmetric
in µ and ν. Thus by Eq. (2.34a), we have
∂ρ[µρ]ν = −1
2(T µν −T νµ) + symmetric in µ and ν,
(2.34c)
and so when ∂ρ[µρ]ν is added to T µν, it just removes the antisymmetric part of
T µν, leaving an expression that is completely symmetric in µ and ν.
There is one further “improvement” that can be made to the canonical energy-
momentum tensor. If φ is a self-adjoint scalar ﬁeld, then

T µν ≡−(∂µ∂ν −∂ρ∂ρηµν)Trφ2
(2.35a)
has the correct dimensions to be an addition to the energy-momentum tensor, and
is symmetric, divergenceless on both the µ and ν indices, and when µ = 0 involves
only spatial derivatives. Hence any numerical multiple of Eq. (2.35a) can be freely
added to the canonical energy-momentum tensor. The theory of scale and con-
formal invariance (Callan, Coleman, and Jackiw, 1970) shows, in fact, that when
scalar ﬁelds are present, for each self-adjoint scalar ﬁeld we must add Eq. (2.35a),
multiplied by a factor of 1/6, to the canonical energy-momentum tensor, in order
to get the energy-momentum tensor for a scalar theory that is scale and conformal
invariant in the massless limit. We shall not give the proof of this assertion, but
will illustrate it with a concrete example in the next section.
2.4 An illustrative example: a Dirac fermion coupled
to a scalar Klein–Gordon ﬁeld
To gain familiarity with the trace dynamics formalism, and to illustrate the con-
served quantities introduced in Sections 2.1 through 2.3, we formulate in this sec-
tion a trace dynamics analog of a simple ﬁeld theory model, in which a Dirac
fermion ﬁeld ψ is coupled to a self-adjoint scalar Klein–Gordon ﬁeld φ. Since
these are taken in trace dynamics to be matrix operator ﬁelds, φ(x) is a general
N × N self-adjoint Grassmann even grade matrix, and each spinor component
ψr(x) of ψ(x) is a general N × N Grassmann odd grade matrix. Letting Tr de-
note the trace over the N-dimensional matrix space, the trace Lagrangian for this
model is
L =

d3xTr

−1
2∂µφ∂µφ −1
2m2φ2 −ψγ µ∂µψ + mψψ
−λ
24φ4 + g1ψφψ + g2ψψφ

(2.36a)

Dirac fermion coupled to a scalar Klein–Gordon ﬁeld
59
with ψ = ψ†γ 0 as in Eq. (2.25a). In classical ﬁeld theory with commutative ﬁelds
the interaction terms with couplings g1 and g2 would not be distinct, but here, since
φ and the spinor components of ψ are generic non-commuting matrices, the two
orderings represent different interactions. Forming the variation of the trace action
S, integrating by parts, and using the cyclic identities, we ﬁnd
δS =

d4xTr(Aφδφ + δψ Aψ + Aψδψ),
(2.36b)
and so the Euler–Lagrange equations of motion take the form
0 = Aφ = ∂µ∂µφ −m2φ −λ
6φ3 −g1ψT ψT + g2ψψ,
0 = Aψ = −γ µ∂µψ + mψ + g1φψ + g2ψφ,
0 = Aψ = ∂µψγ µ + mψ + g1ψφ + g2φψ.
(2.36c)
Here, and in the following equations, the notation ψT and ψT indicates transposi-
tion of ψ and ψ with respect to their Dirac spinor indices only, with no action on
the matrix structure of the Dirac spinor components.
We can now go over to a Hamiltonian formalism, by exhibiting the time deriva-
tive terms of the trace Lagrangian
L =

d3x
1
2( ˙φ)2 −ψγ 0 ˙ψ + . . .

,
(2.37a)
which shows that the canonical momenta are
pφ = ˙φ ,
pψ = −ψγ 0 = ψ†, pψ = 0.
(2.37b)
Thus we ﬁnd that the trace Hamiltonian is
H =

d3xTr(pφ ˙φ + pψ ˙ψ) −L
=

d3xTr
1
2
	
( ˙φ)2 + ( ⃗∇φ)2 + m2φ2
+ ψ ⃗γ · ⃗∂ψ −mψψ
+ λ
24φ4 −g1ψφψ −g2ψψφ

,
(2.37c)
and the conservation of this can be veriﬁed directly by using the Euler–Lagrange
equations of Eq. (2.36c).
The trace Lagrangian of Eq. (2.36a) has equal numbers of ψ and ψ factors
in each term, and is global unitary invariant, and so will have the generic con-
served internal symmetry currents discussed in Section 2.3. To identify the trace
fermion number current, we replace ψ →ψ + iαψ and ψ →ψ −iαψ in the
trace Lagrangian, and pick out the coefﬁcient of −∂µα. This gives
Nµ = iTrψγ µψ,
(2.38a)

60
Additional generic conserved quantities
which by use of the Euler–Lagrange equations is seen to be conserved
∂µNµ = 0.
(2.38b)
The corresponding conserved trace fermion number is
N =

d3xN0 = −i

d3xTrψ†ψ.
(2.38c)
Similarly, to identify the current ˜Cµ associated with global unitary invariance,
we substitute φ →φ −[, φ], ψ →ψ −[, ψ], and ψ →ψ −[, ψ] into the
trace Lagrangian, and pick out the coefﬁcient of −∂µ. This gives
˜Cµ = −[φ, ∂µφ] + ψT (ψγ µ)T + ψγ µψ,
(2.39a)
which again by use of the Euler–Lagrange equations is seen to be conserved
∂µ ˜Cµ = 0.
(2.39b)
The corresponding conserved charge is
˜C =

d3x ˜C0 =

d3x(−[φ, ∂0φ] + ψT (ψγ 0)T + ψγ 0ψ)
=

d3x
	
[φ, ˙φ] −(ψT ψ†T + ψ†ψ)

=

d3x([φ, pφ] −{ψ, pψ}),
(2.39c)
in agreement with the general recipe of Eq. (2.6).
We turn next to properties of the energy-momentum tensor. Since the Dirac
matrix manipulations needed to symmetrize the fermionic part of the energy-
momentum tensor are not relevant for the points we wish to illustrate, let us sim-
plify the model so that we are dealing just with the trace dynamics analog of the
scalar φ4 model, with trace Lagrangian density
L = Tr

−1
2∂µφ∂µφ −1
2m2φ2 −λ
24φ4

,
(2.40a)
and with Euler–Lagrange equations
0 = ∂µ∂µφ −m2φ −λ
6φ3.
(2.40b)
The symmetrized, “improved” energy-momentum tensor for this model is
T µν = ηµνL + Tr∂µφ∂νφ −1
6(∂µ∂ν −∂σ∂σηµν)Trφ2.
(2.40c)

Dirac fermion coupled to a scalar Klein–Gordon ﬁeld
61
This is readily veriﬁed, by use of the Euler–Lagrange equation of Eq. (2.40b) and
the cyclic identities, to be conserved
∂µT µν = ∂νT µν = 0,
(2.40d)
and to have a Lorentz trace that is given just by the scalar ﬁeld mass term
ηµνT µν = −m2Trφ2.
(2.40e)
We note, however, that there is no operator energy-momentum tensor that is both
conserved and has a trace that vanishes when the mass m is zero. To see this, let us
form the obvious symmetrized candidate
tµν = ηµν
−1
2∂σφ∂σφ −1
2m2φ2 −λ
24φ4
+ 1
2(∂µφ∂νφ + ∂νφ∂µφ)
−1
6(∂µ∂ν −∂σ∂σηµν)φ2,
(2.41a)
so that
T µν = Trtµν.
(2.41b)
Then we ﬁnd that
ηµνtµν = −m2φ2,
(2.41c)
so that the trace vanishes when m = 0, but the operator candidate of Eq. (2.41a) is
not conserved
∂µtµν = λ
24[(∂νφ)φ3 −φ(∂νφ)φ2 −φ2(∂νφ)φ + φ3∂νφ].
(2.41d)
The right-hand side of Eq. (2.41d) is non-vanishing because in general the matrix
∂νφ does not commute with the matrix φ, but by the cyclic identities, it vanishes
inside a trace. Hence in trace dynamics, although there is always a conserved trace
energy-momentum tensor, in general there is no conserved operator analog. In
Chapter 7 we will relate this fact to a suggestion that the cosmological constant
problem, which has not been solvable within quantum ﬁeld theory, may ﬁnd a
solution in an underlying trace dynamics. (This suggestion was made in Adler
(1997c), but the attempt there to give a calculation of the induced cosmological
constant is not correct, since it did not take account of the necessity, discussed in
the Introduction and in Section 4.5 below, to ﬁx a residual global unitary invariance
of the canonical ensemble.)

62
Additional generic conserved quantities
2.5 Symmetries of conserved quantities under pF ↔qF
We close this chapter by discussing the symmetries of the various generic con-
served quantities under the interchange, within each fermionic canonical pair, of
the canonical coordinate with the corresponding canonical momentum. We begin
with the trace fermion number N, deﬁned in Eq. (2.2a) by
N = −iTr

r∈F
prqr.
(2.42a)
If we interchange pr ↔qr for each fermionic canonical pair, this becomes
N →−iTr

r∈F
qr pr = iTr

r∈F
prqr = −N,
(2.42b)
where we have used the cyclic property of the trace given in Eq. (1.1b). Thus N is
odd under interchange of fermionic canonical coordinates and momenta. Turning
next to the generic conserved operator ˜C, since Eq. (2.6) tells us that the fermionic
contribution to ˜C is
˜CF = −

r∈F
{qr, pr},
(2.42c)
we learn that ˜C is even under the interchange of fermionic canonical coordinates
and momenta.
Finally, let us consider the trace Hamiltonian H. Here the behavior under pF ↔
qF is structure dependent. If we consider the bilinear HF introduced in Eq. (2.1a),
with
HF = Tr

r,s∈F
(prqs B1rs + pr B2rsqs),
(2.43a)
then under interchange of all pF with qF this becomes
HF →Tr

r,s∈F
(qr ps B1rs + qr B2rs ps)
= −Tr

r,s∈F
(ps B1rsqr + psqr B2rs) = −Tr

r,s∈F
(prqs B2sr + pr B1srqs).
(2.43b)
Hence HF will be even under the interchange if we have
B1rs = −B2sr,
all r, s,
(2.43c)
and will be odd under the interchange if
B1rs = B2sr, all r, s.
(2.43d)

Symmetries of conserved quantities under pF ↔qF
63
The even case of Eq. (2.43c) is physically relevant for continuum ﬁeld theories
in which r is a spacetime box label. To see this we note that the standard Dirac
fermion kinetic Hamiltonian
HF kin =

d3xTrψ ⃗γ · ⃗∂ψ,
(2.44a)
given in Eq. (2.37c), can be rewritten using Eq. (2.37b) as
HF kin =

d3xTrpψγ 0 ⃗γ · ⃗∂ψ.
(2.44b)
Using the Majorana representation Dirac gamma matrices given in Appendix D,
we see that in Majorana representation γ 0 ⃗γ is a symmetric matrix in its spinor
indices. Since the partial derivative ⃗∂changes sign under integration by parts, we
see that Eq. (2.44b) corresponds to the case of Eq. (2.43c), and thus in Majorana
representation HF kin is even under interchange of pF with qF. When interactions
are included, a similar analysis shows that
HF int =

d3xTr(gSψ{φS, ψ} + gPψiγ5{φP, ψ} + gV ψi ⃗γ · [ ⃗A, ψ]),
(2.44c)
with φS, φP, and ⃗A respectively self-adjoint bosonic scalar, pseudoscalar, and vec-
tor matrix ﬁelds, gives an interaction trace Hamiltonian that is also even in Majo-
rana representation under interchange of pF and qF. Thus the usual commutator
form for a vector gauge ﬁeld coupling, and symmetrized scalar and pseudoscalar
ﬁeld couplings, lead to a fermionic trace Hamiltonian HF that is even in Majorana
representation under interchange of fermionic canonical coordinates and momenta.
Therefore, when the purely bosonic terms are included, we obtain in this case a to-
tal Hamiltonian H that is even under this interchange. We shall refer to these results
in our statistical mechanical discussion later on.

3
Trace dynamics models with global supersymmetry∗
In Section 2.4, we illustrated the trace dynamics formalism by constructing the
trace dynamics analog of a simple ﬁeld theory model, in which a Dirac fermion in-
teracts with a scalar Klein–Gordon ﬁeld. Much of the recent literature in quantum
ﬁeld theory has concerned itself with supersymmetric theories, in which invari-
ance under the Poincar´e group has been extended to invariance under the graded
Poincar´e group, and theories of this type are considered likely to play a central
role in the ultimate uniﬁcation of the forces. Our aim in this chapter (which can
be omitted on a ﬁrst reading) is to show that the trace dynamics formalism natu-
rally extends to globally supersymmetric theories. Speciﬁcally, we shall see that,
when there is a global supersymmetry, there is a conserved trace supersymmetry
current with a time-independent trace supercharge Qα, that together with the trace
four momentum obeys the Poincar´e supersymmetry algebra under the generalized
Poisson bracket of Eq. (1.11a). We shall illustrate this statement with three con-
crete examples, the trace dynamics versions (Adler 1997a,b) of the Wess–Zumino
model (Section 3.1), the supersymmetric Yang–Mills model (Section 3.2), and the
so-called “matrix model for M theory” (Section 3.3). These three examples are
worked out using component ﬁeld methods; we close in Section 3.4 with a short
discussion of a superspace approach, and of the obstruction that prevents the con-
struction of a trace dynamics theory with local supersymmetry.
3.1 The Wess–Zumino model
We begin with the trace dynamics transcription of the Wess–Zumino model. We
follow the notational conventions of West (1990), except that we normalize the
fermion terms in the action differently, and always use the Majorana representation
for the Dirac gamma matrices, in which γ 1,2,3 are real symmetric and γ 0, iγ 5 are
real skew-symmetric. (For useful cyclic identities satisﬁed by this representation
of the γ matrices, see Appendix D.) The trace Lagrangian for the Wess–Zumino
64

The Wess–Zumino model
65
model is
L =

d3xTr

−1
2(∂µA)2 −1
2(∂µB)2 −¯χγ µ∂µχ + 1
2 F2 + 1
2G2
−m(AF + BG −¯χχ)
−λ[(A2 −B2)F + G{A, B} −2 ¯χ(A −iγ5B)χ]

,
(3.1)
with A, B, F, G self-adjoint N × N Lorentz scalar matrices and with χ a Grass-
mann four-component column vector spinor, each spin component of which is a
self-adjoint Grassmann N × N matrix. The notation ¯χ is deﬁned by ¯χ = χ T γ 0,
with the transpose T acting only on the Dirac spinor structure, so that χ T is the
four-component row vector spinor constructed from the same N × N matrices that
appear in χ. The numerical parameters λ and m are respectively the coupling con-
stant and mass. Equation (3.1) is identical in appearance to the usual Wess–Zumino
model Lagrangian, except that we have explicitly symmetrized the term G{A, B};
symmetrization of the other terms is automatic (up to total derivatives that do not
contribute to the action) by virtue of the cyclic property of the trace.
Taking operator variations of Eq. (3.1) by using the recipe of Eq. (1.3b), the
Euler–Lagrange equations of Eq. (1.7c) take the form
∂2A = mF + λ({A, F} + {B, G} −2 ¯χχ),
∂2B = mG + λ(−{B, F} + {A, G} + 2i ¯χγ5χ),
γ µ∂µχ = mχ + λ({A, χ} −i{B, γ5χ}),
(3.2)
F = m A + λ(A2 −B2),
G = mB + λ{A, B}.
Transforming to Hamiltonian form, the canonical momenta of Eq. (1.9a) are
pχ = −¯χγ 0 = χ T ,
pA = ∂0A,
(3.3)
pB = ∂0B,
and the trace Hamiltonian is given by
H =

d3xTr
1
2[p2
A + p2
B + ( ⃗∇A)2 + ( ⃗∇B)2] + pχγ 0 ⃗γ · ⃗∇χ
+ 1
2(F2 + G2) −m ¯χχ −λpχγ 0{A −iγ5B, χ}

,
(3.4a)
in which F and G are understood to be the functions of A and B given by the ﬁnal
two lines of Eq. (3.2), and where we have taken care to write H so that it is mani-
festly symmetric in the identical quantities pχ and χ T . The trace three-momentum

66
Trace dynamics models with global supersymmetry
⃗P, which together with H forms the trace four-momentum Pσ of Eq. (2.29c), is
given by
⃗P = −

d3xTr(pA ⃗∇A + pB ⃗∇B + pχ ⃗∇χ),
(3.4b)
while the conserved trace quantity N of Eq. (2.4e) and the conserved operator ˜C
of Eq. (2.6) are given respectively by
N = −i

d3xTrχ T χ,
˜C =

d3x([A, pA] + [B, pB] −{χ, pχ}),
(3.5a)
with a contraction of the spinor indices in the ﬁnal term on the second line of
Eq. (3.5a) understood. The corresponding expressions for the conserved currents
Nµ and ˜Cµ, of which N and ˜C are the charges, are
Nµ = iTrχγ µχ,
˜Cµ = −[A, ∂µA] −[B, ∂µB] + χγ µχ + χ T (χγ µ)T
(3.5b)
= −[A, ∂µA] −[B, ∂µB] + 2χγ µχ,
with T indicating a transpose acting only on the Dirac spinor indices, and where
the simpliﬁcation leading to the ﬁnal line is possible because χ is a Majorana
spinor. Equations (3.4a,b) are clearly formed from the usual ﬁeld-theoretic ex-
pressions for the Hamiltonian and three-momentum by taking the trace, and sym-
metrizing factors where this is not already implicit from the cyclic properties of
the trace. Exactly the same procedure can be used to form the full trace energy-
momentum tensor density T µσ.
Let us now perform a supersymmetry variation of the ﬁelds given by
δA = ¯ϵχ,
δB = i ¯ϵγ5χ,
δχ = 1
2[F + iγ5G + γ µ∂µ(A + iγ5B)]ϵ,
(3.6)
δF = ¯ϵγ µ∂µχ,
δG = i ¯ϵγ5γ µ∂µχ,
with ϵ a c-number Grassmann spinor (i.e., a four-component spinor, the spin com-
ponents of which are 1 × 1 Grassmann matrices). Substituting Eq. (3.6) into the
trace Lagrangian of Eq. (3.1), a lengthy calculation shows that when ϵ is constant,
the variation of L vanishes. The calculation parallels that done in the conventional
c-number Lagrangian case, except that the cyclic properties of the trace and cyclic
identities obeyed by the Majorana representation γ matrices (see Appendix D) are
used extensively in place of commutativity/anticommutativity of the ﬁelds. When

The supersymmetric Yang–Mills model
67
ϵ is not constant, the variation of L is given by
δL =

d3xTr( ¯J µ∂µϵ),
¯J µ = −¯χγ µ
(γ ν∂ν + m)(A + iγ5B) + λ(A2 −B2 + iγ5{A, B})

,
(3.7a)
which identiﬁes the trace supercharge Qα as
Qα ≡

d3xTr ¯J 0α
=

d3xTr1
2(pχ + χ T )

(γ ν∂ν + m)(A + iγ5B) + λ(A2 −B2 + iγ5{A, B})

α.
(3.7b)
Here α is a constant auxiliary c-number Grassmann spinor that has been inserted
to make the argument of the trace a bosonic quantity, and we have again taken
care to express Qα symmetrically in the identical quantities pχ and χ T . It is
straightforward to check, using the equations of motion and the cyclic identity,
that ¯Jµ = Tr ¯J µ is a conserved trace supercurrent, which implies that the trace su-
percharge is time independent.
It is now straightforward (but tedious) to check the closure of the supersym-
metry algebra under the generalized Poisson bracket of Eq. (1.11a), which for the
Hamiltonian dynamics of the Wess–Zumino model gives
{Qα, Qβ} = Tr

δQα
δA
δQβ
δpA
+ δQα
δB
δQβ
δpB
−
4

d=1
δQα
δχd
δQβ
δpχd −

α ↔β
	

= ¯αγ 0βH −¯α ⃗γ β · ⃗P,
(3.8a)
with H and ⃗P the trace Hamiltonian and three-momentum given above. It is also
easy to check that Qϵ plays the role of the generator of supersymmetry transforma-
tions for the dynamical variables A, B, χ under the generalized Poisson bracket,
since we readily ﬁnd (for constant Grassmann even parameters a, b and Grassmann
odd spinor parameter c)
{Tr(aA + bB + cT χ), Qϵ} = Tr(aδA + bδB + cT δχ),
(3.8b)
with δA, δB, δχ the supersymmetry variations given by Eq. (3.6) above, after
elimination of the auxiliary ﬁelds F, G by their equations of motion.
3.2 The supersymmetric Yang–Mills model
As a second example of a trace dynamics model with global supersymmetry,
we discuss supersymmetric Yang–Mills theory. We start from the trace

68
Trace dynamics models with global supersymmetry
Lagrangian
L =

d3xTr
 1
4g2 F2
µν −¯χγ µDµχ + 1
2 D2

,
(3.9a)
with the ﬁeld strength Fµν and covariant derivative Dµ constructed from the gauge
potential Aµ according to
Fµν = ∂µAν −∂ν Aµ + [Aµ, Aν],
DµO = ∂µO + [Aµ, O]
(3.9b)
⇒DµFνλ + Dν Fλµ + DλFµν = 0.
In Eqs. (3.9a,b), the potential components Aµ are each an anti-self-adjoint, and
the auxiliary ﬁeld D is a self-adjoint, N × N matrix, and each spinor component
of χ is a self-adjoint Grassmann N × N matrix. The Euler–Lagrange equations of
motion are
D = 0,
γ µDµχ = 0,
(3.10a)
DµFµν = 2g2 ¯χγ νχ;
as usual for a gauge system, the ν = 0 component of Eq. (3.10a) is not a dynamical
evolution equation, but rather the constraint
DℓFℓ0 = 2g2 ¯χγ 0χ.
(3.10b)
Going over to the Hamiltonian formalism, the canonical momenta are given by
pAℓ= −1
g2 F0ℓ,
pχ = χ T ,
(3.11a)
and the axial gauge trace Hamiltonian is
H = HA + Hχ,
(3.11b)
with
HA =

d 3xTr

−g2
2
2

ℓ=1
p2
Aℓ−
1
2g2 F2
03
−1
2g2 (∂1A2 −∂2A1 + [A1, A2])2 −
1
2g2 [(∂3A1)2 + (∂3A2)2]

,
(3.11c)
F03 = 1
2g2
 ∞
−∞
dz′ϵ(z −z′)[−(pχχ + χ T pT
χ ) + D1 pA1 + D2 pA2]|z′,
Hχ =

d3xTr(pχγ 0γℓDℓχ),
where we have taken care to write H in a form symmetric in the identical quantities

The supersymmetric Yang–Mills model
69
pχ and χ T , and where ϵ(z) = 1(−1) for z > 0(z < 0). The trace three-momentum
is
Pm = −

d3xTr
 3

ℓ=1
FmℓpAℓ+ pχ Dmχ

,
(3.12)
and the conserved operator ˜C of Eq. (2.6) is given by
˜C =

d3x
 2

ℓ=1
[Aℓ, pAℓ] −{χ, pχ}

,
(3.13a)
with a contraction of the spinor indices in the ﬁnal term of Eq. (3.13a) understood.
By virtue of the constraint of Eq. (3.10b), the conserved operator ˜C can also be
written as
˜C = −

d3x
3

ℓ=1
∂ℓpAℓ= −

sphere at ∞
d2SℓpAℓ,
(3.13b)
which vanishes when the surface integral in Eq. (3.13b) is zero. The corresponding
conserved current ˜Cµ, of which ˜C is the charge, is given by
˜Cµ = 1
g2 [Aν, Fµν] + 2χγ µχ.
(3.13c)
The conserved trace quantity N and the corresponding conserved current Nµ have
the same form as in the Wess–Zumino model
N = −i

d3xTrχ T χ,
Nµ = iTrχγ µχ.
(3.14)
Making now the supersymmetry variations
δAµ = ig¯ϵγµχ,
δχ =
 i
8g[γµ, γν]Fµν + i
2γ5D

ϵ,
(3.15)
δD = i ¯ϵγ5γ µDµχ,
in the trace Lagrangian, with ϵ again a c-number Grassmann spinor, we ﬁnd using
cyclic invariance under the trace and the γ matrix identities given in Appendix
D that when ϵ is constant, the variation vanishes. When ϵ is not a constant, the
variation of L is given by
δL =

d3xTr( ¯J µ∂µϵ),
¯J µ = −i
4g ¯χγ µFνσ[γ ν, γ σ],
(3.16a)

70
Trace dynamics models with global supersymmetry
from which we construct the trace supercharge Qα as
Qα =

d3xTr i
8g(pχ + χ T )Fνσ[γ ν, γ σ]α,
(3.16b)
with α a constant c-number Grassmann spinor. Again, it is straightforward to
check, using the equations of motion and the cyclic identity, that ¯Jµ = Tr ¯Jµ is
a conserved trace supercurrent, which implies that the trace supercharge is con-
served.
One can now verify the closure of the supersymmetry algebra under the gener-
alized Poisson bracket of Eq. (1.11a), which for the Hamiltonian dynamics of the
supersymmetric Yang–Mills model gives
{Qα, Qβ} = Tr
 2

l=1
δQα
δAℓ
δQβ
δpAℓ
−
4

d=1
δQα
δχd
δQβ
δpχd −

α ↔β
	

= ¯αγ 0βH −¯α ⃗γ β · ⃗P,
(3.17)
with H and ⃗P given by Eqs. (3.11b,c) and Eq. (3.12) respectively. Examining
the role of the supercharge as a generator of transformations, in analogy with
Eq. (3.8b), the supercharge in the Yang–Mills case is found to generate the su-
persymmetry variations of Eq. (3.15), plus an inﬁnitesimal change of gauge.
3.3 The matrix model for M theory
As our third example of a trace dynamics model with global supersymmetry, we
consider the matrix model studied by Bergshoeff, Sezgin, and Townsend (1987,
1988), Claudson and Halpern (1985), Rittenberg and Yankielowicz (1985), and
Flume (1985), surveyed in de Wit (1997). This has recently been studied by de
Wit, Hoppe, and Nicolai (1988), Townsend (1996), Banks et al. (1997), and Banks,
Seiberg, and Shenker (1997) in a string-theory context under the name “the matrix
model for M theory”; for a review see Taylor (2001). This model, formulated in
zero spatial dimensions, has the trace Lagrangian L given by
L = Tr
1
2 Dt Xi Dt Xi + θ T Dtθ + 1
4[Xi, X j][Xi, X j] −iθ T γi[θ, Xi]

, (3.18)
with the covariant derivative deﬁned now by DtO = ∂tO −i[A0, O]. In
Eq. (3.18), a summation convention is understood on the indices i, j which range
from 1 to 9; A0 and the Xi are self-adjoint N × N complex matrices, while θ is
a 16-component fermionic spinor each element of which is a self-adjoint N × N
complex Grassmann matrix, with the transpose T acting only on the spinor struc-
ture but not on the N × N matrices, so that θ T is simply the 16-component row
spinor corresponding to the 16-component column spinor θ. The potential A0 has

The matrix model for M theory
71
no kinetic term and so is a pure gauge degree of freedom. Finally, the γi are a set
of nine 16 × 16 matrices, which are related to the standard 32 × 32 matrices µ
as well as to the Dirac matrices of spin(8), as conveniently described in Green,
Schwartz, and Witten (1987) and obeying identities summarized in Appendix D.
Starting from the trace Lagrangian of Eq. (3.18), using the deﬁnition of
Eq. (1.3b) to take operator variations, the operator Euler–Lagrange equations of
Eq. (1.7c) give the equations of motion of the matrix model
D2
t Xi = [[X j, Xi], X j] −i2θ T γ iθ,
Dtθ T = i[θ T γi, Xi] ⇒
Dtθ = i[γiθ, Xi],
(3.19a)
together with the constraint that the generic conserved operator ˜C of Eq. (2.6)
vanishes in this model
˜C = [Xi, Dt Xi] −2θ T θ = 0.
(3.19b)
The vanishing of ˜C here is an analog of the fact that in the supersymmetric Yang–
Mills model of Section 3.2, we found that ˜C is a surface integral at spatial inﬁnity,
and vanishes when this surface integral vanishes. The model of this section has the
structure of a zero spatial dimension supersymmetric Yang–Mills theory, and so
the surface integral at inﬁnity of Section 3.2 is replaced here by zero.
To transform the dynamics to trace Hamiltonian form, we deﬁne the canonical
momenta pXi and pθ by
pXi =
δL
δ(∂t Xi) = Dt Xi,
pθ =
δL
δ(∂tθ) = θ T ,
(3.20a)
so that the trace Hamiltonian is given by
H = Tr(pXi∂t Xi + pθ∂tθ) −L = Tr
1
2 pXi pXi −1
4[Xi, X j][Xi, X j]
+ ipθγi[θ, Xi] + i A0 ˜C

.
(3.20b)
Again, because pθ = θ T , we have written the trace Hamiltonian in a form that is
manifestly symmetric under the replacements pθ →θ T , θ →pT
θ .
Let us next consider the variation of the trace Lagrangian under the supersym-
metry transformation deﬁned by
δXi = 2iϵT γ iθ = −2iθ T γ iϵ,
δθ = −

i Dt Xiγi + 1
2[Xi, X j]γi j

ϵ + ϵ′,
(3.21)
δA0 = 2iϵT θ = −2iθ T ϵ.

72
Trace dynamics models with global supersymmetry
Here ϵ and ϵ′ are 16-component Grassmann c-number spinors, that is, they are
column vectors each of whose 16 components is an independent 1 × 1 Grassmann
matrix. Using the cyclic trace identities of Section 1.1 and the γ matrix properties
summarized in Appendix D, it is a matter of straightforward but lengthy calcu-
lation to verify that the trace Lagrangian is invariant under the transformation of
Eq. (3.21) when ϵ and ϵ′ are time independent. When ϵ and ϵ′ have a time depen-
dence, δL is no longer zero, but instead is given by
δL = ∂tTr

−θ T ϵ′ −(iθ T γi Dt Xi −1
2θ T γi j[Xi, X j])ϵ

+ Tr

2θ T ∂tϵ′ −(2iθ T γi Dt Xi + θ T γi j[Xi, X j])∂tϵ
	
.
(3.22a)
This identiﬁes the trace supercharges Q′
α and Qα as
Q′
α = Tr2θ T α,
Qα = Tr

−2iθ T γi Dt Xi −θ T γi j[Xi, X j]
	
α,
(3.22b)
with α a 16-component c-number Grassmann spinor, and their conservation is eas-
ily checked using the equations of motion and γ matrix identities. To check the
supersymmetry algebra, we must ﬁrst write the supercharges of Eq. (3.22b) in
Hamiltonian form, symmetrized with respect to pθ and iθ T , giving
Q′
α = Tr(pθ + θ T )α,
Qα = −Tr(pθ + θ T )

iγi pXi + 1
2γi j[Xi, X j]

α.
(3.22c)
Using the generalized Poisson bracket corresponding to the Hamiltonian structure
of our model, deﬁned now by
{A, B} = Tr

δA
δXi
δB
δpXi
−δB
δXi
δA
δpXi
−
16

d=1
 δA
δθd
δB
δpθd −δB
δθd
δA
δpθd

, (3.23)
it is straightforward to evaluate the supercharge algebra, and to show that it has the
expected form (Adler, 1997b).
3.4 Superspace considerations and remarks
The derivations of Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 have all been carried out in the com-
ponent formalism, which requires doing a separate computation for each Poincar´e
supersymmetry multiplet. However, there is a simple and general superspace ar-
gument for the results we have obtained. Recall that superspace is constructed
by introducing four fermionic coordinates θα corresponding to the four spacetime
coordinates xµ (see, e.g., West, 1990, Chapter 14). The graded Poincar´e algebra

Superspace considerations and remarks
73
is then represented by differential operators constructed from the superspace co-
ordinates, and superﬁelds are represented by ﬁnite polynomials in the fermionic
coordinates θα, with coefﬁcient functions that depend on xµ. To generalize the
superspace formulation to give trace dynamics models, one simply replaces these
coefﬁcient functions by N × N matrices (or operators), and inserts a trace Tr act-
ing on the superspace integrals used to form the action. Then the standard argu-
ment, that the action is invariant under superspace translations of the xµ and the
θα, still holds for the trace action formed this way from the matrix components of
the superﬁelds. We immediately see from this argument why it is essential for the
supersymmetry parameter ϵ to be a Grassmann c-number and not also a matrix;
this parameter appears as the magnitude of an inﬁnitesimal superspace translation,
and, since the superspace coordinates xµ and θα are c-numbers, the parameter ϵ
must be one also. The construction just given gives reducible supersymmetry rep-
resentations, and various constraints, constructed from differential operators with
Dirac γ matrix coefﬁcients acting on the superspace coordinates, must be applied
to the superﬁelds to pick out irreducible representations. Since these constraints act
linearly on the expansion coefﬁcients, and involve no non-commutative operators,
they can all be immediately generalized (with the usual replacement of complex
conjugation for c-numbers by the adjoint) to the case in which the coefﬁcient func-
tions are matrices or operators.
The simplicity of this argument suggests that generally, for rigid supersymmetry
theories for which there exists a superspace construction, there will exist a corre-
sponding trace dynamics generalization. The superspace argument also suggests
why it has not been possible (unpublished investigation by the author and Y.-S.
Wu) to construct trace dynamics generalizations of local supersymmetry theories,
such as supergravity. The commutator of two local supersymmetries with super-
symmetry parameters ϵ1 and ϵ2 is a linear combination (see, e.g., West, 1990,
Chapter 9) of a local Lorentz transformation, a general coordinate transformation,
and a supersymmetry transformation with supersymmetry parameter proportional
to
¯ϵ2γµϵ1ψµ,
(3.24)
with ψµ the Rarita–Schwinger gravitino ﬁeld. Even if we start with ϵ1,2 that are
c-numbers, the new supersymmetry parameter given by Eq. (3.24) will be matrix
valued in a trace dynamics generalization where the gravitino ﬁeld ψµ is matrix
valued. Thus, an extension of the results of this chapter to local supersymme-
tries would appear to require a generalization of the results presented above to
the case in which the supersymmetry parameter ϵ is matrix-valued, rather than a
c-number as assumed throughout our discussion. If, as we suspect, such a gener-
alization is not possible, there will be implications for the strategy to be followed

74
Trace dynamics models with global supersymmetry
in incorporating gravity and supergravity into a trace dynamics framework. For
example, perhaps the gravitational degrees of freedom should be treated not as
matrix quantities but only as c-number classical ones, a possibility consistent with
the view, discussed for example by Weinstein (2001), that perhaps gravity should
not be “quantized” in the same manner that other ﬁelds are. Another (not mutu-
ally exclusive) possibility is that perhaps the gravitational degrees of freedom are
emergent degrees of freedom arising from underlying degrees of freedom, with
the underlying degrees of freedom obeying a rigid supersymmetry with a trace
dynamics generalization.

4
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
Up to this point we have discussed matrix models as classical dynamical systems.
We shall now start laying the groundwork for the emergence of quantum mechani-
cal behavior from a matrix dynamics in which quantization is not assumed a priori.
We begin this discussion by emphasizing that we shall not follow the traditional
route (see Br´ezin and Wadia, 1993) of canonically quantizing a matrix model, in
which working from Eqs. (1.8) and (1.9a) one takes each classically conjugate
matrix element pair (qr)i j and (pr) ji = ∂L/∂(˙qr)i j, and elevates them to quan-
tum operators that satisfy canonical commutation relations, such as (for bosonic
degrees of freedom)
[(qr)i j, (qs)kl] = [(pr)i j, (ps)kl] = 0,
[(qr)i j, (ps)kl] = i ¯hδrsδilδ jk.
(4.1)
In this approach, each classical matrix qr, because it has N 2 matrix elements,
ends up spawning N 2 quantum operators. The canonical quantization approach
is appropriate, for example, when dealing with a matrix model that arises as a
discretized approximation to a continuum ﬁeld system, or as an approximation
to a many-body system with a large number of independent degrees of freedom.
In these cases, the matrix elements each represent a degree of freedom to which,
assuming that one is dealing with a quantum ﬁeld or a quantum many-body system,
the usual quantization rules apply. To repeat, this is not what we shall do, because
we are not assuming that quantum theory applies at the underlying trace dynamics
level.
Instead, we shall require that the only matrix (or operator) structure present is
that which is already present in the classical matrix model (and, in this aspect, our
approach shares a common philosophy with that of Smolin, 1983, 1985, 2002).
Thus, each qr and its associated pr correspond to a single operator degree of free-
dom, and these degrees of freedom do not obey any simple commutation algebra:
in general for bosonic degrees of freedom, [qr, qs], [pr, ps], and [qr, ps] will all
75

76
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
be non-zero, and similarly when fermionic degrees of freedom are included, with
anticommutators replacing commutators as appropriate. However, we shall argue
in Chapter 5 that in the statistical dynamics of matrix models with a global uni-
tary invariance, within thermodynamic averages over polynomials of the qs and
ps, the matrix variables qr and ps obey (when speciﬁc approximations are made)
an effective commutator/anticommutator algebra of the familiar canonical form.
In other words, we shall show that quantum behavior is an emergent feature of
the statistical mechanics of a particular class of matrix models, with each matrix
variable pair qr, pr corresponding to one quantum mechanical operator degree of
freedom.
The ﬁrst step in such a program is to set up the statistical mechanics of matrix
models, and that is what we shall do in this chapter. The basic prerequisite for ap-
plying statistical mechanical methods is to establish a Liouville theorem, and this
is addressed in Section 4.1, where we show that the natural matrix phase space
integration measure is invariant under general canonical transformations. Next, in
Section 4.2, we derive the canonical ensemble for trace dynamics, by maximizing
the entropy subject to the constraints imposed by the generic conserved quantities
established in Chapters 1 and 2. We also introduce here an assumption that will
be used in the subsequent analysis of Chapter 5, that the ensemble does not single
out any special states in the underlying Hilbert space. In Section 4.3, we give an
alternative derivation of the canonical ensemble, by starting from the microcanon-
ical ensemble. In Section 4.4, which can be skipped on a ﬁrst reading, we give the
analogs of standard gauge ﬁxing methods that are needed to formulate the canon-
ical ensemble for trace dynamics theories with a local gauge invariance, such as
the Yang–Mills model discussed in Section 3.2. In Section 4.5 we continue the
discussion of canonical ensemble averages begun in Section 4.2, by studying the
implications of the fact that the canonical ensemble leaves unbroken a subgroup of
the originally assumed global unitary invariance group. This necessitates a unitary
ﬁxing procedure for the canonical ensemble. The technical details of the unitary
ﬁxing are given in Section 4.6, which can also be skipped on a ﬁrst reading.
4.1 The Liouville theorem
We begin our statistical treatment of matrix models by deriving, following Adler
and Millard (1996), an analog of the Liouville theorem, which states that the ma-
trix model trace dynamics leaves a suitably deﬁned phase space volume element
invariant. We shall actually derive a more general result, showing that the phase
space volume element is invariant under the general canonical transformations in-
troduced in Eqs. (2.13a,b), of which evolution under the trace Hamiltonian dynam-
ics, and unitary transformation of the Hilbert space bases, are both special cases.

The Liouville theorem
77
Following the notation of Section 1.1, we denote the general matrix element of
the operator xr by (xr)mn, which can be decomposed into real and imaginary parts
according to
(xr)mn = (xr)0
mn + i(xr)1
mn,
(4.2a)
where (xr)A
mn with A = 0, 1 are real numbers. If for the moment we ignore ad-
jointness restrictions, the natural phase space measure is deﬁned by
dµ =

A
dµA,
dµA ≡

r,m,n
d(xr)A
mn;
(4.2b)
when adjointness restrictions are taken into account, certain factors in Eq. (4.2b)
become redundant and are omitted. For bosonic operators xr, we shall assume that
the matrix element phase space is unbounded, so that the limits for bosonic phase
space integrations with the measure of Eq. (4.2b) are −∞< (xr)mn < ∞. For
fermionic operators, Grassmann integration is effectively differentiation, and we
assume that the phase space is again unbounded in the sense that the usual Grass-
mann integration formulas, which are invariant under a constant translation of the
integration variable, are valid. (See the introductory paragraphs to the Appendices
for further details on Grassmann integrals and their manipulation, and references.)
Our strategy is ﬁrst to ignore adjointness restrictions and to prove the canonical
invariance of each individual factor dµA in the ﬁrst line of Eq. (4.2b), and then to
indicate how the argument is altered when adjointness restrictions are taken into
account.
Under the general canonical transformation of Eq. (2.13b), the matrix elements
of the new variables ˆxr ≡xr + δxr are related to those of the original variables xr
by
(ˆxr)A
mn = (xr)A
mn +

s
ωrs
 δG
δxs
A
mn
.
(4.3a)
Inserting a complete set of intermediate states into the fundamental deﬁnition
δG = Tr

s
δG
δxs
δxs,
(4.3b)
and using the reality of G, we get
δG =

s,m,n,A
ϵ A
 δG
δxs
A
mn
(δxs)A
nm,
(4.3c)

78
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
where ϵ0 = 1 and ϵ1 = −1. Thus, we see that
 δG
δxs
A
mn
= ϵ A
∂G
∂(xs)Anm
,
(4.3d)
a result that can also be obtained by decomposing Eq. (1.8) into real and imaginary
parts (with the factor ϵ A then arising from the facts that 1−1 = 1 while i−1 = −i).
Equation (4.3d) allows us to rewrite Eq. (4.3a) in terms of conventional partial
derivatives of the trace functional G
(ˆxr)A
mn = (xr)A
mn +

s
ωrsϵ A
∂G
∂(xs)Anm
.
(4.3e)
Differentiating Eq. (4.3e) with respect to (xr′)A
m′n′, we get for the transformation
matrix
∂(ˆxr)A
mn
∂(xr′)A
m′n′
= δrr′δmm′δnn′ +

s
ωrsϵ A
∂2G
∂(xs)Anm∂(xr′)A
m′n′
.
(4.4)
Since for an inﬁnitesimal matrix δX we have det(1 + δX) ≈1 + TrδX, we
learn from Eq. (4.4) that the Jacobian of the transformation is
J = 1 + ,
 =

r,s,m,n
ωrsϵ A
∂2G
∂(xs)Anm∂(xr)Amn
.
(4.5a)
Interchanging in the expression for  in Eq. (4.5a) the summation indices r and s,
and also interchanging the summation indices m and n, we get
 =

r,s,m,n
ωsrϵ A
∂2G
∂(xr)Amn∂(xs)Anm
.
(4.5b)
However, now using the fact (cf. Eq. (1.17)) that for bosonic r, s we have
ωsr = −ωrs,
∂2G
∂(xr)Amn∂(xs)Anm
=
∂2G
∂(xs)Anm∂(xr)Amn
,
(4.5c)
while for fermionic r, s we have
ωsr = ωrs,
∂2G
∂(xr)Amn∂(xs)Anm
= −
∂2G
∂(xs)Anm∂(xr)Amn
,
(4.5d)
we see that Eqs. (4.5a–d) imply that  = −; hence  vanishes and the Jacobian
of the transformation is unity.

The Liouville theorem
79
Now let us see how this argument is modiﬁed when we take the adjointness
restrictions on the phase space variables xr into account. Inspection of the ar-
gument just given shows that the diagonal (m = n) and off-diagonal (m ̸= n)
terms in the sum  vanish separately, and for each of these the summed contri-
bution from the canonical coordinate and momentum pair qr, pr for each ﬁxed
r also vanishes separately. This observation permits us to readily take the ad-
jointness restrictions into account; in the following discussion we shall write
dµ = dµBdµF, with dµB and dµF respectively the bosonic and fermionic in-
tegration measures.
For a bosonic pair of phase space variables qr, pr, the xr variables are indepen-
dent but are both self-adjoint or both anti-self-adjoint. We consider in detail the
self-adjoint case, for which we have
(xr)A
mn = ϵ A(xr)A
nm.
(4.6a)
This means that the integration measure must be redeﬁned to include only the
factors that are real diagonal in m, n (the imaginary diagonal ones are identically
zero), and only the upper diagonal off-diagonal factors (since the lower diagonal
ones are related to the upper diagonal ones by complex conjugation), so that the
bosonic integration measure becomes
dµB =

r,m
d(xr)0
mm

r,m<n,A
d(xr)A
mn.
(4.6b)
Equation (4.5b) is now replaced by
 =

r,s,m
ωsr
∂2G
∂(xr)0mm∂(xs)0mm
+

r,s,m<n,A
ωsr
∂2G
∂(xr)Amn∂(xs)Amn
,
(4.6c)
both terms of which vanish by virtue of the antisymmetry of ωsr in its in-
dices in the bosonic sector. The redeﬁnition of the measure in the anti-self-
adjoint case proceeds similarly, with the replacement of d(xr)0
mm by d(xr)1
mm in
Eq. (4.6b).
For a fermionic pair of phase space variables constructed according to the recipe
pr = q†
r of Eq. (2.4b), the xr variables are no longer independent. However, this
construction implies that
(pr)A
mn = ϵ A(qr)A
nm,
(4.7a)
and thus the fermionic integration measure must be redeﬁned as
dµF =

r,m,n,A
d(qr)A
mn.
(4.7b)

80
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
But now we note that
d(q0
r )mnd(q1
r )mnd(q0
r )nmd(q1
r )nm ∝d(q0
r + iq1
r )mnd(q0
r −iq1
r )mn
×d(q0
r + iq1
r )nmd(q0
r −iq1
r )nm
= d(qr)mnd(q†
r )mnd(qr)nmd(q†
r )nm
= d(qr)mnd(pr)mnd(qr)nmd(pr)nm,
(4.7c)
and so the integration measure of Eq. (4.7b) can be rewritten as
dµF =

r,m,n
d(xr)mn,
(4.7d)
with the d(xr)mn now complex differentials. The argument then proceeds just as
in the unrestricted case, but with omission of the superscript A, since we recall
that our original argument demonstrated the canonical invariance of the individual
factors dµ0 and dµ1 in Eq. (4.2b).
An alternative procedure, that uses only real Grassmann differentials, is to note
that for the measure of Eq. (4.7b), the sum over r in Eq. (4.5b) is restricted to
only range over fermionic variables qr, but not their conjugates pr. Since ωsr is
block diagonal over the canonical variables, the index s must correspond to the
variable pr conjugate to qr. Hence substituting Eq. (4.7a) into Eq. (4.5b), and
using Eqs. (1.16a,b), we have
 = −

r,m,n,A
∂2G
∂(qr)Amn∂(qr)Amn
= 0.
(4.7e)
Finally, one can show that similar arguments holds for the more general fermionic
adjointness assignment of Eqs. (2.17a–d), provided that Ars is such that det Aαβ ̸=
0, where Aαβ = (Ars)mn, with α and β the composite row and column indices
given by α = (r, m) and β = (s, n).
To summarize, we have shown that the matrix operator phase space integration
measure dµ is invariant under general canonical transformations. As noted at the
beginning of this section, an important corollary of this result follows when G is
taken as the generator dtH of an inﬁnitesimal time translation, since we then learn
that dµ is invariant under the dynamical evolution of the system, giving a trace dy-
namics analog of Liouville’s theorem of classical mechanics. Since no restrictions
on the form of the generator G were needed in the above argument for the invari-
ance of dµ, the argument applies even when G is formed from the operator phase
space variables using operator coefﬁcients. Thus, the integration measure dµ is
invariant under a unitary transformation on the basis of states in Hilbert space,
the effect of which on the variables {xr} can be represented by Eqs. (2.11a–c).
(Note, however, that this transformation is not itself global unitary invariant

The canonical ensemble
81
(cf. Eq. (2.12a)), and so is only a covariance, rather than an invariance, of the
conserved operator ˜C.)
4.2 The canonical ensemble
The matrix equations of motion of trace dynamics determine the time evolution
of the matrix qs and ps at all times, given their values on an initial time slice.
However, these initial values are themselves not determined. We shall now make
the assumption that for a large enough system, the phase space distribution of the
matrix variables rapidly loses memory of ﬁne details of their initial values, and
that over relevant experimental resolution times the system uniformly samples all
phase space conﬁgurations that are consistent with the generic conservation laws.
This allows us to represent time averages of physical quantities over experimental
resolution times as averages at a ﬁxed time, taken over an equilibrium ensemble
representing the different phase space conﬁgurations sampled by the time evolu-
tion of the system. We shall compute this equilibrium ensemble, which gives a
coarse-grained approximation to the detailed time-dependent dynamics of the sys-
tem, by the methods of statistical mechanics. Speciﬁcally, we shall assume that
in the equilibrium ensemble, the a priori distribution of matrix variables is uni-
form over the matrix operator phase space, so that the equilibrium ensemble is
determined solely by maximizing the combinatoric probability subject to the con-
straints imposed by the generic conservation laws. Liouville’s theorem implies that
if the assumption of a uniform a priori probability distribution is made at one time,
then it is valid at all later times, assuring the consistency of the concept of an equi-
librium ensemble. We do not propose to address the question of how the uniform
sampling of phase space conﬁgurations by the system dynamics (the so-called er-
godic hypothesis) comes about, since justifying this is still an actively studied issue
in rigorous statistical mechanics.
More speciﬁcally, let dµ = dµ[{xr}] denote the operator phase space measure
discussed in detail in the preceding section. In what follows we shall not need
the speciﬁc form of this measure, but only the properties that it obeys Liouville’s
theorem, and that the measure is invariant under inﬁnitesimal matrix operator shifts
δxr, that is
dµ[{xr + δxr}] = dµ[{xr}].
(4.8)
(This property will be used later on, when we discuss the equipartition or Ward
identities.) For a system in statistical equilibrium, there is an equilibrium phase
space density distribution ρ[{xr}] ≥0, such that
d P = dµ[{xr}]ρ[{xr}]
(4.9a)

82
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
is the inﬁnitesimal probability of ﬁnding the system in the operator phase space
volume element dµ, with the total probability equal to unity
1 =

d P =

dµ[{xr}]ρ[{xr}].
(4.9b)
The ﬁrst task in a statistical mechanical analysis is to determine the equilibrium
distribution ρ.
Since equilibrium implies that ˙ρ = 0, the equilibrium distribution can depend
only on conserved operators and conserved trace functionals. In the generic case
for a matrix model that is global unitary invariant, we have seen in Chapters 1
and 2 that, in addition to the conserved trace Hamiltonian H, there is a conserved
operator ˜C, which is anti-self-adjoint when fermionic adjointness is assigned as in
Eqs. (2.4b) and (2.18d). If the model is assumed to be constructed in a way that bal-
ances the numbers of fermionic qs and ps, there is additionally a conserved trace
“fermion number” N. When the discrete mode index r labels inﬁnitesimal boxes
in a spatial manifold, and the model is Poincar´e invariant on this manifold, there
will also be a locally conserved trace energy-momentum tensor density T µσ, from
which one can obtain by spatial integration not only the conserved trace Hamil-
tonian, but also conserved trace generators for three-momentum ⃗P, total angular
momentum ⃗J, and Lorentz boosts ⃗K.
We shall assume henceforth a statistical ensemble that is at rest. That is, we take
an ensemble that is neither spatially translating, rotating, nor accelerating, and so
the ensemble averages of ⃗P, ⃗J, and ⃗K are zero. When H contains no preferred
spatial direction, this is achieved by taking a distribution function that has no de-
pendence on ⃗P, ⃗J, and ⃗K. Thus, it sufﬁces to consider distribution functions that
depend only on the generic conserved quantities H, N, and ˜C, and so the general
equilibrium distribution has the form
ρ = ρ( ˜C, H, N).
(4.9c)
Note that for a system at rest, with ⃗P = 0, the Lorentz invariant trace mass
[P02 −⃗P2]
1
2 reduces to H, and does not appear as an additional argument of the
distribution function.
Since the ensemble picks out a preferred frame, which we tentatively identify
with the frame in which the cosmological black-body radiation is isotropic, it is
clearly not Lorentz invariant, even when (as we shall always assume) the underly-
ing trace dynamics action and equations of motion are Lorentz invariant. We shall
argue later on that this Lorentz noninvariance coming from the H dependence of
the ensemble decouples from the emergent quantum theory, the structure of which
is governed by the ˜C dependence of the ensemble. Since ˜C is Lorentz invariant,
by virtue of its invariance under global unitary invariant canonical transformations

The canonical ensemble
83
that generate Lorentz transformations of the trace action, the emergent quantum
theory will also be Lorentz invariant.
In addition to its dependence on the dynamical variables, ρ can also depend
on constant parameter values, with the functional form of ρ and the values of the
parameters together deﬁning the statistical ensemble. Including a traceless anti-
self-adjoint operator parameter ˜λ and real number parameters τ and η, which cor-
respond to the respective structures of ˜C, H, and N, the general form of the equi-
librium ensemble corresponding to Eq. (4.9c) is
ρ = ρ( ˜C, ˜λ; H, τ; N, η).
(4.9d)
The parameter τ has the dimensions of inverse mass, and is a trace dynamics ana-
log of the temperature in statistical mechanics, while the parameter η is dimen-
sionless, and is a trace dynamics analog of the chemical potential in statistical
mechanics. The operator parameter ˜λ has the dimensions of inverse action, and
is a feature of trace dynamics that has no analog in standard classical statistical
mechanics. As we noted a little earlier in our discussion, it is the ˜C dependence
of the canonical ensemble that gives rise to emergent quantum mechanics, and we
shall ﬁnd that it is the fact that ˜C has the dimensions of action that gives rise to
the appearance of Planck’s constant in this quantum mechanics. In the canonical
ensemble, we shall show shortly that the dependence on ˜C and ˜λ is only through
the single real number Tr˜λ ˜C, and so specializing to this case, Eq. (4.9d) becomes
ρ = ρ(Tr˜λ ˜C; H, τ; N, η).
(4.9e)
(When ˜C has a self-adjoint part, the appropriate generalization of Eq. (4.9e) is
obtained by dividing ˜C into self-adjoint and anti-self-adjoint parts ˜Csa and ˜Casa,
and including two operator parameters ˜λsa and ˜λasa with corresponding adjoint-
ness properties. This gives as the appropriately extended form of the canonical
ensemble
ρ = ρ(Tr˜λsa ˜Csa; Tr˜λasa ˜Casa; H, τ; N, η).
(4.9f)
We shall assume that a possible self-adjoint contribution Tr˜λsa ˜Csa to ρ is sufﬁ-
ciently small that it can be ignored in our present discussion; a role for a very
small self-adjoint term is discussed later on in Chapter 6.)
We shall now show that some signiﬁcant consequences follow from the general
form of Eq. (4.9e), together with the assumption that H is constructed from the
operators {xr} using only c-number coefﬁcients (as needed to insure its global
unitary invariance). For a general operator O, let us deﬁne the ensemble average

84
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
⟨O⟩AV by
⟨O⟩AV =

dµρO.
(4.10a)
Then when O is constructed from the {xr} using only c-number coefﬁcients,
since the only ﬁxed operator present in the integrands on the right-hand side of
Eq. (4.10a) is ˜λ, the ensemble average ⟨O⟩AV will have the form
⟨O⟩AV = FO(˜λ),
(4.10b)
with the function FO constructed from its argument using only c-number coefﬁ-
cients (in which we include the τ and η dependence). This can be simply proved
by making a global unitary transformation U on all of the phase space integration
variables in the numerator of Eq. (4.10a), which when O is constructed using only
c-number coefﬁcients, and using the unitary invariance of the integration measure
dµ, implies that FO(˜λ) = U FO(U −1˜λU)U −1, which shows that the matrix struc-
ture of FO(˜λ) can only involve ˜λ itself. As a consequence, the ensemble parameter
˜λ commutes with ⟨O⟩AV
[˜λ, ⟨O⟩AV] = 0.
(4.10c)
Let us now exploit the fact that the anti-self-adjoint operator ˜λ can always be
diagonalized by a unitary transformation on the basis of states in Hilbert space,
which we have seen is also an invariance of the integration measure dµ. Specializ-
ing to O = ˜C, the functional relationship of Eq. (4.10b) between ˜λ and ⟨˜C⟩AV then
implies that ⟨˜C⟩AV is diagonal in this basis as well. This brings ⟨˜C⟩AV into the fol-
lowing canonical polar form, written in terms of a real diagonal and non-negative
“magnitude” operator Deff and a unitary diagonal “phase” operator ieff
⟨˜C⟩AV = ieffDeff ,
Tr(ieffDeff) = 0,
ieff = −i†
eff,
i2
eff = −1,
[ieff, Deff] = 0.
(4.11a)
(Without ﬁrst diagonalizing, this representation also follows from the fact that
a general anti-self-adjoint matrix A can be written as A = U D, where D =
(A†A)
1
2 = (−A2)
1
2 is non-negative, and where U = AD−1 is unitary with U 2 =
−1.) Although the case of general Deff, which corresponds to an ensemble that is
asymmetrical in the Hilbert space basis, is interesting, we shall restrict ourselves
henceforth to the special case in which Deff is a real constant times the unit opera-
tor. In other words, we assume that the ensemble does not favor any state in Hilbert
space over any other, as a result of initial conditions for the underlying dynamics.
(Presumably these initial conditions arise at the origin of the universe in the “Big
Bang,” a better understanding of which could ultimately lead to a justiﬁcation of
our structural assumption that Deff is described by a single real number constant.)

The canonical ensemble
85
Since we shall see in Chapter 5 that this real constant, which has the dimensions
of action, plays the role of Planck’s constant in the emergent quantum mechanics
derived from the canonical ensemble, we shall denote it by ¯h, and so we have
⟨˜C⟩AV = ieff¯h ,
Trieff = 0.
(4.11b)
Since the relations ieff = −i†
eff and i2
eff = −1 imply that ieff can be diagonalized to
take the form idiag(±1, ±1, . . . , ±1), the condition Trieff = 0 of Eq. (4.11b) re-
quires that the plus and minus eigenvalues must be paired so as to give a vanishing
trace. Therefore the dimension N of the underlying matrix Hilbert space must be
even, say N = 2K, and ieff diagonalizes to the form
ieff = i diag(1, −1, 1, −1, . . . , 1, −1),
(4.11c)
with equal numbers of eigenvalues 1 and −1 along the principal diagonal. The re-
striction to even N is a direct result of our assumption that the magnitude matrix
Deff in Eq. (4.11a) is a multiple of the unit matrix; if one were to start off with
a matrix space with N odd, then Tr(ieffDeff) = 0 from Eq. (4.11a) would require
Deff to have one null eigenvalue, since a one-dimensional traceless matrix must
vanish. As we shall discuss in detail in Section 4.5, the assumption that Deff is a
multiple of the unit matrix is equivalent to the assumption that the canonical en-
semble breaks the global unitary invariance group U(N) to the maximal subgroup
that is consistent with having a non-vanishing value of ⟨˜C⟩AV.
We turn now to the calculation of the functional form of ρ in the canonical
ensemble, which is the ensemble relevant for describing the behavior of a large
system that is a subsystem of a very much larger system. The form of ρ is deter-
mined by maximizing the entropy (for standard statistical mechanical discussions,
see Sommerfeld, 1956 and ter Haar, 1995)
S = −

dµρ log ρ,
(4.12a)
subject to the constraints

dµρ = 1,

dµρ ˜C = ⟨˜C⟩AV,

dµρH = ⟨H⟩AV,
(4.12b)

dµρN = ⟨N⟩AV.

86
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
The standard procedure is to impose the constraints with Lagrange multipliers
θ, ˜λ, τ, η by writing
F =

dµρ log ρ + θ

dµρ +

dµρTr˜λ ˜C + τ

dµρH + η

dµρN,
(4.13a)
and maximizing −F (or equivalently, minimizing F), treating all variations of ρ
as independent. Equating to zero the derivative of Eq. (4.13a) with respect to ρ
then implies
ρ = exp(−1 −θ −Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN),
(4.13b)
which on imposing the condition that ρ be normalized to unity gives ﬁnally
ρ = Z−1 exp(−Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN),
Z =

dµ exp(−Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN).
(4.13c)
When ˜C has a self-adjoint part, Tr˜λ ˜C in Eq. (4.13c), and in subsequent equations
involving the canonical ensemble, is modiﬁed according to
Tr˜λ ˜C →Tr˜λsa ˜Csa + Tr˜λasa ˜Casa,
(4.13d)
with the superscripts “sa” and “asa” denoting self-adjoint and anti-self-adjoint
parts respectively. As noted following Eq. (4.9f), we shall assume, until we get
to Chapter 6, that any self-adjoint part of ˜C is very small, and shall not explicitly
carry along the extra terms in our formulas.
In order for the partition function of Eq. (4.13c) to be well deﬁned, the trace
Hamiltonian must be bounded from below in the bosonic variables, and must in-
crease rapidly enough as these variables become inﬁnite for the bosonic integrals
to converge at ±∞. Since ˜C grows as the bilinear product qp for each bosonic
canonical pair q, p, as long as H contains terms at least quadratic in p and q,
there will be an interval of convergence in the parameter ˜λ. Then, by choosing an
appropriate ˜λ within this interval of convergence, we in general expect that the en-
semble average of ˜C can be made to take any speciﬁed value, and so the condition
on this average given in the second equation of Eq. (4.12b) can be satisﬁed. Re-
quiring that ρ should be non-negative may also place restrictions on the fermionic
structure of H, since we must require, for example, that after the fermionic in-
tegrations in the partition function have been carried out, the effective measure
thus deﬁned on the bosonic variables should be non-negative. This can be guar-
anteed, for example, if the fermionic structure has a reﬂection symmetry which
gives the fermionic integral the form of a real number squared, in analogy with the
behavior of the fermionic Euclidean functional integral for vector-like quantum
ﬁeld theories studied in Vafa and Witten (1983, 1984). For example, if the trace

The canonical ensemble
87
Hamiltonian has the bilinear form in the fermionic variables given in Eq. (2.1a),
then the entire exponent in the partition function Z of Eq. (4.13c) is a quadratic
form in the fermionic variables xr, permitting the fermionic integral with the mea-
sure of Eq. (4.7d) to be evaluated as a determinant. Positivity is then guaranteed
if there is a reﬂection symmetry that leads to the factorization of this determinant
into the absolute value squared of a smaller determinant.
From Eq. (4.13c) we can derive some elementary statistical properties of the
equilibrium ensemble. For the entropy S, we ﬁnd
S = −⟨log ρ⟩AV = log Z + Tr˜λ⟨˜C⟩AV + τ⟨H⟩AV + η⟨N⟩AV.
(4.14a)
Since the ensemble averages which appear in Eq. (4.14a) are given by
⟨˜C⟩AV = −δ log Z
δ˜λ
,
⟨H⟩AV = −∂log Z
∂τ
,
⟨N⟩AV = −∂log Z
∂η
,
(4.14b)
Eq. (4.14a) takes the form
S = log Z −Tr˜λδ log Z
δ˜λ
−τ ∂log Z
∂τ
−η∂log Z
∂η
.
(4.14c)
Thus the entropy is a thermodynamic quantity determined solely by the partition
function. Taking second derivatives of the partition function, we can similarly de-
rive the thermodynamic formulas for the averaged mean square ﬂuctuations of the
conserved quantities ˜C, H, and N
2
Tr ˜P ˜C ≡⟨(Tr ˜P ˜C −⟨Tr ˜P ˜C⟩AV)2⟩AV
= ⟨(Tr ˜P ˜C)2⟩AV −⟨Tr ˜P ˜C⟩2
AV =

Tr ˜P δ
δ˜λ
2
log Z,
2
H ≡⟨(H −⟨H⟩AV)2⟩AV = ⟨H2⟩AV −⟨H⟩2
AV = ∂2 log Z
(∂τ)2 ,
(4.14d)
2
N ≡⟨(N −⟨N⟩AV)2⟩AV = ⟨N2⟩AV −⟨N⟩2
AV = ∂2 log Z
(∂η)2 ,
with ˜P an arbitrary ﬁxed anti-self-adjoint operator. Similar expressions hold for
the cross-correlations of Tr ˜P ˜C, H, and N, for example
⟨(Tr ˜P ˜C −⟨Tr ˜P ˜C⟩AV)(H −⟨H⟩AV)⟩AV = ⟨Tr ˜P ˜CH⟩AV −⟨Tr ˜P ˜C⟩AV⟨H⟩AV
= Tr ˜P δ
δ˜λ
∂
τ log Z.
(4.14e)

88
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
The complete set of such relations, in a more compact notation, is given in the
next section. As a ﬁnal remark, we note that the integration over phase space in
the canonical ensemble is performed with all variables taken at a ﬁxed time, which
we choose by convention to be t = 0. However, by using Eq. (1.19) to formally
integrate forward or backward in time, we can express any variable xr(t) at a gen-
eral time t in terms of its t = 0 value, and thus can form averages of phase space
variables at general times over the canonical ensemble.
In subsequent sections we shall follow the conventional practice of introducing
for each matrix variable xr a matrix source jr, of the same bosonic or fermionic
type and with the same adjointness properties as xr, which can be varied and then
set to zero after all variations have been performed. With the sources included, the
equilibrium distribution and partition function take the form
ρ j = Z−1
j
exp

−Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN −

r
Tr jrxr

,
Z j =

dµ exp

−Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN −

r
Tr jrxr

.
(4.15a)
Using the expression ⟨O⟩AV, j to denote the average of a general operator over the
equilibrium distribution of Eq. (4.15a) which includes sources, the variations of
log Z j with respect to its source arguments jr are related to the averages of the
xr by
ϵr⟨xr⟩AV,j = −δ log Z j
δjr
.
(4.15b)
4.3 The microcanonical ensemble
In the previous section, we derived the canonical ensemble for trace dynamics by
maximizing the entropy subject to the generic constraints, which were imposed
in an averaged sense. In this section, we shall give, following Adler and Horwitz
(1996), an alternative and more fundamental derivation of the canonical ensemble,
by starting from the microcanonical ensemble, in which the constraints are im-
posed in a sharp sense. We shall see that the canonical ensemble then arises as the
appropriate description of a large system in equilibrium with a much larger “bath,”
with the equilibrium conditions determining in an intrinsic manner the ensemble
parameters, or generalized “temperatures” ˜λ, τ, and η. Apart from using the micro-
canonical ensemble to derive the canonical ensemble in this section we shall not
employ the microcanonical ensemble further in our subsequent analysis. The rea-
son for our primary focus on the canonical ensemble is that the Ward identities that
imply emergent quantum behavior, which are derived in Chapter 5, are properties

The microcanonical ensemble
89
of the canonical ensemble but not, as we shall see, of the microcanonical ensem-
ble. Thus, if the microcanonical ensemble is taken to represent the entire universe,
our subsequent analysis suggests that emergent quantum mechanics is a property
only of subsystems of the universe that are large but still appreciably smaller than
the universe as a whole.
It is convenient at this point to introduce a condensed notation for the expo-
nent appearing in the canonical ensemble of Eq. (4.13c), which takes the anti-self-
adjointness of ˜C and ˜λ into account. Writing as in Eq. (4.2a)
( ˜C)mn = ( ˜C)0
mn + i( ˜C)1
mn,
(˜λ)mn = (˜λ)0
mn + i(˜λ)1
mn,
(4.16a)
the anti-self-adjointness restrictions on ˜C and ˜λ take the form
( ˜C)A
mn = −ϵ A( ˜C)A
nm , (˜λ)A
mn = −ϵ A(˜λ)A
nm,
(4.16b)
with ϵ0 = 1 and ϵ1 = −1 as before. Then a simple calculation shows that
Tr˜λ ˜C = −

n
(˜λ)1
nn( ˜C)1
nn −2

n<m
[(˜λ)0
nm( ˜C)0
nm + (˜λ)1
nm( ˜C)1
nm],
(4.16c)
with all the terms on the right-hand side independent. It is now convenient to in-
troduce a vector notation for the exponent in Eq. (4.13c), by deﬁning
ξ ≡(ξ1, . . . , ξ M)
≡

H, N, [( ˜C)1
nn, n = 1, . . . , N], [( ˜C)0
nm, n < m = 1, . . . , N],
[( ˜C)1
nm, n < m = 1, . . . , N]

,
σ ≡(σ 1, . . . , σ M)
≡

τ, η, −[(˜λ)1
nn, n = 1, . . . , N], −2[(˜λ)0
nm, n < m = 1, . . . , N],
−2[(˜λ)1
nm, n < m = 1, . . . , N]

,
(4.17a)
which permits us to write
Tr˜λ ˜C + τH + ηN = ⃗σ · ⃗ξ.
(4.17b)
(When ˜C has a self-adjoint part, one extends the deﬁnition of ξ to include the
non-vanishing matrix elements of both ˜Csa and ˜Casa, and the deﬁnition of σ to in-
clude the non-vanishing matrix elements of both ˜λsa and ˜λasa, in analogy with Eq.
(4.13d).) In other words, ⃗ξ is the vector of all the real number generic conserved
quantities, and ⃗σ is the vector of the corresponding canonical ensemble parame-
ters (which are analogs of the inverse temperature parameter β and the chemical

90
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
potential parameter µ of ordinary statistical mechanics). The dimensionality M of
both vectors is M = 2 + N 2.
We can now introduce the microcanonical ensemble ( ⃗), which is deﬁned as
the volume of the shell of phase space for the “universe” in which the conserved
quantities take the sharp values ⃗. In other words, we write
( ⃗) =

dµ
M

a=1
δ(a −ξa),
(4.18a)
which has an associated entropy
S( ⃗) = log ( ⃗).
(4.18b)
Let us now divide the universe into a “system” s, which is still large in a statistical
sense but is much smaller than the universe, and a “bath” b which is the comple-
ment of degrees of freedom in the universe not included in the system. We now
assume that the vector of conserved quantities ⃗ξ is to a good approximation ad-
ditively decomposable over the system and the bath, when both are very large. In
other words, we assume that
⃗ξ ≃⃗ξs + ⃗ξb,
(4.19a)
with ⃗ξs and ⃗ξb the values of the conserved quantities appropriate to the system and
to the bath, respectively. Taking the system and the bath to be deﬁned simply by
a partitioning of the canonical degrees of freedom qr, pr, additivity is automatic
for N and ˜C, which are additive sums over the degrees of freedom, but not for H,
which in general has couplings between the degrees of freedom. The assumption
of Eq. (4.19a) is then that the contribution to H from terms that couple the sys-
tem degrees of freedom to the bath degrees of freedom is much smaller than the
contributions that involve solely the system degrees of freedom or solely the bath
degrees of freedom. (This is almost certainly true, for example, for trace dynamics
models built from conventional spacetime ﬁeld theory Lagrangians, such as the
models of Sections 2.3 and 2.4 and Chapter 3, when the system is deﬁned as a
bounded ﬁnite region surrounded by the bath; the coupling terms from system to
bath then involve only the system degrees of freedom on the surface separating the
system from the bath.) Letting dµs and dµb be the phase space measures for the
system and the bath, so that dµ = dµsdµb, and introducing a dummy variable of
integration ⃗s, we can rewrite Eq. (4.18a) as
( ⃗) =

a

da
s b( ⃗ −⃗s)s( ⃗s),
(4.19b)

The microcanonical ensemble
91
with the system and bath microcanonical subensembles deﬁned by
s( ⃗s) ≡

dµs
M

a=1
δ(a
s −ξa
s ),
b( ⃗ −⃗s) ≡

dµb
M

a=1
δ(a −a
s −ξa
b ).
(4.19c)
We now assume that the integrand in Eq. (4.19b) has a maximum that dominates
the integral when the number of degrees of freedom is large. Although we give
no a priori justiﬁcation of this assumption, we shall later on show that it is self-
consistent. The necessary condition for the integrand in Eq. (4.19b) to have an
extremum at ⃗s = ⃗Xs is
∂
∂as
[b( ⃗ −⃗s)s( ⃗s)]| ⃗Xs = 0,
(4.20a)
which can be rewritten as
σ a ≡
∂
∂as
log s( ⃗s)| ⃗Xs =
∂
∂a log b( ⃗ −⃗s)| ⃗Xs.
(4.20b)
Thus, at the assumed maximum, the logarithmic derivatives in Eq. (4.20b) deﬁne
a set of equilibrium parameters ⃗σ common to the bath and the system. Recalling
the entropy deﬁnition of Eq. (4.18b), we can rewrite the bath phase space volume
at the extremum as
b( ⃗ −⃗Xs) = exp

Sb( ⃗ −⃗Xs)

≃exp

Sb( ⃗)

exp

−

a
Xa
s
∂
∂a log b( ⃗)

,
(4.20c)
which, neglecting a small shift from ⃗ −⃗X to ⃗ in the deﬁnition of the equilibrium
parameters ⃗σ, gives us
b( ⃗ −⃗Xs) ≃exp

Sb( ⃗)

exp(−⃗σ · ⃗Xs).
(4.20d)
By continuity, Eq. (4.20d) implies that for ⃗s in the neighborhood of the extremum
⃗Xs, we similarly have
b( ⃗ −⃗s) ≃exp

Sb( ⃗)

exp(−⃗σ · ⃗s).
(4.20e)
Returning now to Eq. (4.19b) and substituting the approximate form of
Eq. (4.20e) for the bath phase space volume factor, we get
( ⃗) ≃exp

Sb( ⃗)

Zs,
(4.21a)

92
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
with Zs the integral deﬁned by
Zs =

a

da
s exp(−⃗σ · ⃗s)s( ⃗s).
(4.21b)
On substituting Eq. (4.19c) for the system phase space volume s( ⃗s) and carry-
ing out the integration over the dummy variables a
s , we can rewrite Zs as
Zs =

dµs exp(−⃗σ · ⃗ξs).
(4.21c)
We conclude that when the system and bath are in equilibrium, and the overall
“universe” comprising the system and bath is in a microcanonical ensemble, the
system variables are weighted in the phase space integral according to the normal-
ized distribution
ρs = Z−1
s
exp(−⃗σ · ⃗ξs),
(4.22)
which deﬁnes the standard canonical ensemble. Since all of the above manipula-
tions go through if dµs is replaced by dµs fs, with fs any function of the system
variables, we have shown that the average ⟨fs⟩AV deﬁned in the microcanonical
ensemble
⟨fs⟩AV ≡

dµ 	M
a=1 δ(a −ξa) fs

dµ 	M
a=1 δ(a −ξa)1
(4.23a)
can be equivalently calculated as
⟨fs⟩AV ≃

dµsρs fs.
(4.23b)
This justiﬁes the use of the canonical ensemble in calculating thermodynamic av-
erages of system quantities.
As a consistency check on the calculation, we must verify that within our ap-
proximations, the extremum of Eq. (4.20a) is a maximum. Using the approximated
form of the integrand in Eq. (4.21b), the condition for an extremum is
∂
∂as
[−⃗σ · ⃗s + log s( ⃗s)] = 0.
(4.24a)
In other words, the extremum ⃗s = ⃗Xs is the solution of the equation
σ a =
∂
∂as
log s( ⃗s),
(4.24b)

Gauge ﬁxing in the partition function
93
in agreement with the deﬁnition of Eq. (4.20b). In order for the extremum to be a
maximum, the matrix of second derivatives
Mab( ⃗s) ≡
∂
∂as
∂
∂bs
[−⃗σ · ⃗s + log s( ⃗s)] =
∂
∂as
∂
∂bs
log s( ⃗s)
(4.24c)
must be negative deﬁnite. Regarding ⃗σ now as a variable ⃗σ( ⃗s) deﬁned by
Eq. (4.24b) for ⃗s away from the extremum ⃗Xs, the matrix of second derivatives
can be rewritten as
Mab( ⃗s) =
∂
∂as
σ b.
(4.24d)
This will be negative deﬁnite provided that the inverse matrix ∂a
s /∂σ b is nega-
tive deﬁnite (and bounded), with ⃗s = ⃗s(⃗σ) the location of the maximum of the
integrand in Eq. (4.21b), which for a large system is closely approximated by the
canonical ensemble average ⟨⃗ξs⟩AV. But from Eq. (4.21c), we see that
⟨ξa
s ⟩AV = −∂log Zs
∂σ a
,
(4.25a)
and differentiating again
∂⟨ξa
s ⟩AV
∂σ b
= −∂2 log Zs
∂σ a∂σ b = −⟨ξa
s ξb
s ⟩AV + ⟨ξa
s ⟩AV⟨ξb
s ⟩AV
= −⟨(ξa
s −⟨ξa
s ⟩AV)(ξb
s −⟨ξb
s ⟩AV)⟩AV,
(4.25b)
which is negative deﬁnite and bounded. Thus the assumption that the extremum in
the phase space integral is a maximum is self-consistent. Referring back to the cor-
relation formulas of Eqs. (4.14d,e), we see that Eq. (4.25b) gives the most general
such formula in our condensed notation.
4.4 Gauge ﬁxing in the partition function∗
Up to this point, in discussing the statistical mechanics of trace dynamics we
have assumed that one is dealing with an unconstrained system, leading to the
generic form of the canonical ensemble given in Eq. (4.13c). In order to apply
Eq. (4.13c) directly to a constrained system, one must ﬁrst explicitly eliminate the
constraints. A simple example where this is possible is provided by the trace dy-
namics transcription of supersymmetric Yang–Mills theory, discussed in Section
3.2. (Further examples of gauge invariant trace dynamics models are given in Ap-
pendix E.) In axial gauge, where A3 = 0, the covariant derivative D3 simpliﬁes to
D3 = ∂3, allowing the constraint of Eq. (3.10b) to be eliminated, giving the explicit

94
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
expression for the trace Hamiltonian of Eqs. (3.11b,c), and the corresponding ex-
pression for the conserved operator ˜C of Eq. (3.13a). The axial gauge partition
function is then given by Eq. (4.13c), with the bosonic phase space integration
measure dµB given by
dµB axial =

⃗x
2

ℓ=1
d Aℓ(⃗x)dpAℓ(⃗x).
(4.26)
The problem addressed in this section is how to generalize the axial gauge parti-
tion function to other gauges in which it may not be possible to explicitly integrate
out the constraint (Adler, 1998). The problem of correctly incorporating a gauge
invariance group with a continuous inﬁnity of group parameters and an inﬁnite
invariant group volume is a familiar one in the theory of path integrals, and we
shall use methods similar to the ones employed there to give a solution. However,
since the partition function singles out a Lorentz frame, we will have to make a
restriction not encountered in the Lorentz scalar path integral case, namely we will
consider only nontemporal gauge conditions that do not involve the scalar poten-
tial A0. This still allows us to consider gauge transformations that rotate the axial
gauge axis, or that transform to rotationally invariant gauges such as Coulomb
gauge. We shall also make the further assumption that the allowed gauge trans-
formations leave invariant the surface integral which, according to Eq. (3.13b),
determines ˜C, thus placing a restriction on the gauge transformation at the point
at inﬁnity. We proceed by developing an analog of the standard De Witt–Faddeev–
Popov method to write the axial gauge partition function in a general nontempo-
ral gauge, subject to the surface term restriction just stated. Since we have seen
in Chapter 3 that trace dynamics incorporates rigid supersymmetry, and since
Becchi–Rouet–Stora–Tyutin (BRST) invariance is a particular rigid supersymme-
try transformation, we shall ﬁnd that the generalized expression for the partition
function, when reexpressed in terms of ghost fermions, admits a BRST invariance.
As in our preceding discussion, we assume convergence of the partition function,
which may well require restrictions on the class of trace Hamiltonians being con-
sidered.
To express the partition function in a general nontemporal gauge, we follow
closely the treatment of the De Witt–Faddeev–Popov construction in the familiar
functional integral case, as given in the text of Weinberg (1996). Let us consider
the integral
ZG =

dµBdµFK[ f (Aℓ)]δ(Y) det F[Aℓ] exp(−Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN),
dµB =

⃗x
3

ℓ=1
d Aℓ(⃗x)dpAℓ(⃗x), dµF =

⃗x
4

d=1
dχd(⃗x),
(4.27a)

Gauge ﬁxing in the partition function
95
with ˜C given by Eq. (3.13b) and with the constraint Y given by
Y ≡
3

ℓ=1
DℓpAℓ+ 2 ¯χγ 0χ.
(4.27b)
The trace Hamiltonian H in Eq. (4.27a) is given by Eq. (3.11b), with the gauge
part HA given by
HA =

d3xTr

−g2
2
3

ℓ=1
p2
Aℓ−
1
4g2
3

ℓ,m=1
F2
ℓm

,
(4.27c)
which is valid in a general gauge on the constraint surface Y = 0 selected by the
delta function in Eq. (4.27a). The delta function of the anti-self-adjoint matrix
valued argument Y appearing in Eq. (4.27a) is given, in terms of ordinary delta
functions of the real (R) and imaginary (I) parts of the matrix elements, by
δ(Y) =

m<n
δ

(YR)mn
 
m≤n
δ

(YI)mn

.
(4.28a)
The integration measures over the anti-self-adjoint matrix Aℓand the self-adjoint
matrix χd are deﬁned by
d Aℓ=

m<n
d(AℓR)mn

m≤n
d(AℓI)mn, dχd =

m<n
d(χd
I )mn

m≤n
d(χd
R)mn,
(4.28b)
with the integration measure for dpAℓsimilar in structure to d Aℓ. The function
K[ f ] is an arbitrary integrable scalar valued function of the matrix valued argu-
ment f (Aℓ), which is used to specify the gauge condition. We shall treat f as
a column vector fα with α a composite index formed from the matrix row and
column indices m, n; the argument F[Aℓ] of the De Witt–Faddeev–Popov deter-
minant det F[Aℓ] appearing in Eq. (4.27a) is then deﬁned in terms of f by the
expression
Fα ⃗x,β ⃗y[Aℓ] ≡δfα

Aℓ(⃗x) + Dℓ(⃗x)

δβ(⃗y)
|=0,
(4.28c)
where δ is the usual functional derivative and β is the composite of the row and
column indices of the inﬁnitesimal gauge transformation matrix .
We now demonstrate two properties of the integral ZG deﬁned in Eq. (4.27a):
(i) ﬁrst, we show that when the gauge ﬁxing functions K[ f ] and f (Aℓ) are chosen
to correspond to the axial gauge condition, then Eq. (4.27a) reduces (up to an
overall constant) to the axial gauge partition function; (ii) second, we show that
ZG is in fact independent of the function f (Aℓ), and depends on the function
K[ f ] only through an overall constant. These two properties together imply that

96
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
ZG gives the wanted extension of the axial gauge partition function to general
nontemporal gauges.
To establish property (i), we make the conventional axial gauge choice
K[ f (Aℓ)] = δ(A3) =

m<n
δ((A3R)mn)

m≤n
δ((A3I)mn),
(4.29a)
so that

d A3K[ f (Aℓ)] =

d A3δ(A3) = 1.
(4.29b)
With this gauge choice
D3 pA3 = ∂3 pA3,
(4.29c)
which implies that
δ(Y) = δ

∂3 pA3 +
2

ℓ=1
DℓpAℓ+ 2 ¯χγ 0χ

= |∂3|−1δ

pA3 + 1
2

dz′ϵ(z −z′)

2

ℓ=1
DℓpAℓ+ 2 ¯χγ 0χ)

.
(4.29d)
Hence the integral over pA3 in ZG can be done explicitly, giving (up to an overall
constant factor coming from the Jacobian |∂3|−1) the expression
ZG =

dµB axialdµF
× exp(−Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN)|A3=0; pA3=−1
2

dz′ϵ(z−z′)
2
ℓ=1DℓpAℓ+2 ¯χγ 0χ
,
(4.30)
which agrees

recalling from Eq. (3.3) that 2 ¯χγ 0χ = −(pχχ + χ T pT
χ )

with the
axial gauge partition function constructed from HA of Eq. (3.11c).
To establish property (ii), we ﬁrst examine the gauge transformation proper-
ties of the various factors in the integral deﬁning ZG. We begin with the integra-
tion measure dµB. Under the inﬁnitesimal gauge transformation (with  anti-self-
adjoint)
Aℓ→Aℓ+ Dℓ = Aℓ+ ∂ℓ + [Aℓ, ],
(4.31a)
the inhomogeneous term ∂ℓ does not contribute to the transformation of the dif-
ferential d Aℓ. Therefore d Aℓobeys the homogeneous transformation law d Aℓ→
d Aℓ+ ℓ, with
ℓ≡[d Aℓ, ].
(4.31b)
Hence to ﬁrst order in , the Jacobian of the transformation (calculated by the

Gauge ﬁxing in the partition function
97
same reasoning that led from Eq. (4.4) to Eq. (4.5a)) is
J = 1 +

m<n
∂(ℓR)mn
∂(d AℓR)mn
+

m≤n
∂(ℓI)mn
∂(d AℓI)mn
= 1 +
 
m<n
+

m≤n

[(R)nn −(R)mm]
= 1,
(4.31c)
since the anti-self-adjointness of  implies that (R)nm = −(R)mn, and so the
diagonal matrix elements (R)nn are all zero. Thus each factor d Aℓ(⃗x) in the in-
tegration measure is gauge invariant. A similar argument applies to each factor
dpAℓ(⃗x) in the bosonic integration measure, and also to the fermionic integration
measure dµF and to the factor δ(Y) in the integrand, since χ and Y obey the homo-
geneous gauge transformation laws χ →χ + [χ, ], Y →Y + [Y, ]. Turning
to the exponential, the terms Trp2
Aℓ, TrF2
ℓm, and Trχ T χ are gauge invariant, and so
the trace Hamiltonian H and the trace fermion number N are gauge invariant. By
hypothesis, the surface term determining ˜C is left invariant by the class of gauge
transformations under consideration. To summarize, we see that the integral ZG
has the form
ZG =

dµG[Aℓ]K[ f (Aℓ)] det F[Aℓ]
(4.32a)
with the integration measure dµ = dµBdµF and the integrand factor
G[Aℓ] = δ(Y) exp(−Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN)
(4.32b)
both gauge invariant. Hence ZG has exactly the form assumed in the discussion
of Weinberg (1996), and the proof given there completes the demonstration of
property (ii).
Continuing to follow the standard path integral analysis, let us represent the De
Witt–Faddeev–Popov determinant det F[Aℓ] as an integral over complex anti-self-
adjoint fermionic ghost matrices ω and ˜ω, by writing
det F[Aℓ] =

dωd ˜ω exp
 
d3xd3y ˜ωα(⃗x)Fα ⃗x,β ⃗y[Aℓ]ωβ(⃗y)

,
(4.33a)
with
dω =

⃗x

m,n
dωmn(⃗x) ∝

⃗x

 
m<n
d Reωmn(⃗x)dImωmn(⃗x)
 

n
dImωnn(⃗x)

,
d ˜ω =

⃗x

m,n
d ˜ωmn(⃗x) ∝

⃗x

 
m<n
d Re ˜ωmn(⃗x)dIm ˜ωmn(⃗x)
 

n
dIm ˜ωnn(⃗x)

.
(4.33b)

98
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
Let us also take for K[ f ] the usual Gaussian
K[ f ] = exp

−1
2ξ

d3xTr f

Aℓ(⃗x))2

,
(4.33c)
and for f (Aℓ) the linear gauge condition
f (Aℓ) =

ℓ
LℓAℓ,
(4.33d)
in which Lℓcan be either a ﬁxed vector (such as δℓ3 in axial gauge) or a differential
operator (such as ∂ℓin Coulomb gauge), and a summation of ℓfrom 1 to 3 is
understood. With this choice of f (Aℓ), we ﬁnd from Eq. (4.28c) that
Fnm⃗x,pq ⃗y[Aℓ] = δfnm

Aℓ(⃗x) + Dℓ(⃗x)

δpq(⃗y)
=

ℓ
Lℓ
⃗x
∂δ(⃗x −⃗y)
∂xℓ
δnpδmq +δ(⃗x −⃗y)[(Aℓ)npδmq −δnp(Aℓ)qm]

,
(4.34a)
which when substituted into the exponent in Eq. (4.33a) gives, after integration by
parts

d3xd3y ˜ωα(⃗x)Fα ⃗x,β ⃗y[Aℓ]ωβ(⃗y) =

d3xTrω(⃗x)

ℓ
LℓDℓω(⃗x),
(4.34b)
where we have deﬁned ωmn = ˜ωnm. Hence the expression of Eq. (4.32a) for ZG
becomes
ZG =

dµdωdωG[Aℓ] exp

−

d3xTr
×

1
2ξ (

ℓ
LℓAℓ)2 −ω(⃗x)

ℓ
LℓDℓω(⃗x)

.
(4.35a)
An alternative way of writing Eq. (4.35a), that is convenient for exhibiting the
BRST invariance, is to introduce an auxiliary self-adjoint matrix ﬁeld h and to
reexpress Eq. (4.35a) as
ZG =

dµdhdωdωG[Aℓ] exp

−

d3xTr
×

ξ
2h2 + ih

ℓ
LℓAℓ−ω(⃗x)

ℓ
LℓDℓω(⃗x)

.
(4.35b)
Starting from Eq. (4.35b), we can now show that ZG has a BRST invariance of
the familiar form. Let θ be an ⃗x-independent real c-number Grassmann parameter

Gauge ﬁxing in the partition function
99
(i.e., a real 1 × 1 Grassmann matrix), and consider the variations deﬁned by
δω = ω2θ, δω = −ihθ, δh = 0,
δAℓ= Dℓωθ, δχ = [χ, ωθ] = {χ, ω}θ.
(4.36)
Letting ∗denote complex conjugation, since
(ω2)∗
ji =

ℓ
ω∗
jℓω∗
ℓi =

ℓ
ωℓjωiℓ= −

ℓ
ωiℓωℓj = −(ω2)i j,
(4.37a)
or in brief, (ω2)† = −(ω†)2 = −ω2, the property that ω is anti-self-adjoint is pre-
served by Eq. (4.36). Also, Eq. (4.36) leaves ω = ˜ωT anti-self-adjoint because h
is self-adjoint.
We next show that Eq. (4.36) deﬁnes a nilpotent transformation, in the sense
that the second variations of all quantities are zero. To verify this, we show that
the variations of ω2 and Dℓω, which are the coefﬁcients of θ on the right-hand
side of the ﬁrst and second lines of Eq. (4.36), are zero. (The variation of h on
the right-hand side of the third line of Eq. (4.36) is already seen to be zero by the
fourth line.) Evaluating the second variations of the ﬁrst two lines, by again using
Eq. (4.36), we have
δω2 = {δω, ω} = {ω2θ, ω} = ω2{ω, θ} = 0,
δDℓω = [δAℓ, ω] + Dℓδω = [Dℓωθ, ω] + Dℓω2θ
= −{Dℓω, ω}θ + {Dℓω, ω}θ = 0,
δ{χ, ω} = {δχ, ω} + {χ, δω} = {[χ, ωθ], ω} + {χ, ω2θ} = 0.
(4.37b)
To see that ZG is invariant, we note that the action on Aℓand χ of the BRST trans-
formation of Eq. (4.36) is just a gauge transformation (albeit with a Grassmann val-
ued generator  = ωθ, which is anti-self-adjoint since (ωθ)† = −θ†ω† = θω =
−ωθ), and so the factors dµ and G[Aℓ] are invariant. The measure dh is trivially
invariant, and the measure dω is invariant because δω has no dependence on ω.
Using
δdωmn = d(δω)mn = d(ω2θ)mn = (ωdω + dωω)mnθ,
(4.37c)
we have
δdωmn = (ωmmdωmn + dωmnωnn)θ + . . . = dωmn(ωnn −ωmm)θ + . . .
(4.37d)
with . . . denoting terms that contain matrix elements dωm′n′ with (m′, n′) ̸= (m, n).
Consequently the Jacobian of transformation for dω differs from unity by a term
proportional to

nm
(ωnn −ωmm)θ = 0,
(4.37e)

100
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
and so the measure dω is also invariant. To complete the demonstration that ZG is
BRST invariant, we have to show that the gauge ﬁxing part of the Hamiltonian
HG ≡

d3xTr
ξ
2h2 + ih

ℓ
LℓAℓ−ω

ℓ
LℓDℓω

,
(4.38a)
is BRST invariant. Since we have already seen that Dℓω is invariant, and since h
is trivially invariant, we have only to verify that
0 =

d3xTr

ih

ℓ
LℓδAℓ−(δω)

ℓ
LℓDℓω

=

d3xTrih

ℓ
LℓDℓ{ω, θ},
(4.38b)
which checks, completing the demonstration of BRST invariance of the general-
ized partition function.
4.5 Reduction of the Hilbert space modulo ieff
Our aim in this section is to further study the structure of averages of dynamical
variables over the canonical ensemble, and more speciﬁcally to study the impli-
cations of the fact that the canonical ensemble only partially breaks the originally
assumed global unitary invariance group. This analysis is needed in Section 5.3 to
establish the connection between vectors and operators in the underlying Hilbert
space, and vectors and operators in what will become the emergent physical quan-
tum mechanical Hilbert space.
We have seen in Section 4.2 that the canonical ensemble introduces an effective
imaginary unit operator ieff through
⟨˜C⟩AV = ieffDeff,
(4.39a)
where Deff is assumed to be a real constant times the unit operator, and that the
ensemble parameter ˜λ is functionally related to ⟨˜C⟩AV using only c-number coef-
ﬁcients. This means that the traceless, anti-self-adjoint parameter ˜λ must have the
form
˜λ = λieff,
(4.39b)
with λ a real c-number. Therefore if Ueff is a unitary matrix that commutes with
ieff
U †
effUeff = UeffU †
eff = 1,
[Ueff, ieff] = 0,
(4.39c)
then Ueff also commutes with ˜λ
[Ueff, ˜λ] = 0 ⇒Ueff˜λU †
eff = ˜λ
(4.39d)

Reduction of the Hilbert space modulo ieff
101
As a consequence, the canonical ensemble partially respects the assumed global
unitary invariance of the dynamics: the integration measure dµ, the trace Hamil-
tonian H, and the trace quantity N are all invariant under general global unitary
transformations of the matrix dynamical variables (cf. Eq. (2.7b) and the discus-
sion of Section 4.1), but as we shall see in detail, the term in the exponent in the
canonical ensemble Tr˜λ ˜C is invariant only under the subset Ueff of global unitary
transformations that commute with ieff. This has important consequences that we
shall explore in this section and the next. We shall develop a formalism for isolat-
ing the effects of the residual global unitary invariance, and, after establishing that
it is necessary to break this invariance in order to extract the full implications of
the canonical ensemble, we shall give an explicit method for breaking the residual
invariance by modifying the operator phase space measure.
Introducing the standard 2 × 2 Pauli matrices τ1, τ2, τ3, it is convenient to
rewrite Eq. (4.11c) in the form
ieff = iτ31K,
(4.40)
with 1K a K × K unit matrix, where we recall that we have taken the dimension
of the underlying matrix Hilbert space to be N = 2K. Letting τ0 = 12 denote
the 2 × 2 unit matrix corresponding to the Pauli matrices τ1,2,3, a general N × N
matrix M can be decomposed in the form
M = 1
2(τ0 + τ3)M+ + 1
2(τ0 −τ3)M−+ τ1M1 + τ2M2,
(4.41a)
with M+,−,1,2 four K × K matrices that operate on an independent Hilbert space
from that acted on by the Pauli matrices τ1,2,3. (In other words, the Ms act as unit
matrices on the 2-dimensional Hilbert space acted on by the Pauli matrices, while
the Pauli matrices act as unit matrices on the K-dimensional Hilbert space acted
on by the Ms.) Thus, corresponding to M = ieff, we would have M+ = −M−=
i1K, M1,2 = 0. For general M, let us deﬁne Meff and M12 by
Meff = 1
2(M −ieffMieff) = 1
2(τ0 + τ3)M+ + 1
2(τ0 −τ3)M−,
M12 = M −Meff = τ1M1 + τ2M2,
(4.41b)
so that Meff and M12 give, respectively, the parts of M that commute and anticom-
mute with ieff
ieffMeff = Meffieff,
ieffM12 = −M12ieff.
(4.41c)
Combining Eqs. (4.41b,c), we get the useful relation
2ieffMeff = {ieff, M}.
(4.41d)

102
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
We see that for the subset of matrix operators Meff that commute with ieff, the
original N-dimensional Hilbert space diagonalizes into two subspaces of dimen-
sion K, on the ﬁrst of which ieff acts as i1K and Meff acts as M+, and on the
second of which ieff acts as −i1K and Meff acts as M−. In Chapter 5 we shall
identify these two K-dimensional subspaces with the physical subspace and with
a second, complex conjugated copy of the physical subspace, respectively.
Using this notation, let us examine the unitary transformation behavior of the
term Tr˜λ ˜C in the partition function. Substituting Eq. (4.39b), we have
Tr˜λ ˜C = λTrieff ˜C.
(4.42a)
Under a general unitary transformation of the dynamical variables, we have
qr →U †qrU, pr →U † prU,
˜C →U † ˜CU,
(4.42b)
and so the right-hand side of Eq. (4.42a) becomes
λTrUieffU † ˜C,
(4.42c)
which in general differs from Eq. (4.42a) because a general U does not commute
with ieff. Thus the Tr˜λ ˜C term in the canonical ensemble breaks the global uni-
tary invariance of the underlying dynamics. However, when U in Eq. (4.42b) is
restricted to have the structure Ueff that commutes with ieff, the transformation of
Eq. (4.42b) is still an invariance of Eq. (4.42a), and hence is an invariance of the
canonical ensemble.
In group theoretic terms (Adler and Kempf, 1998), the original U(N) global
unitary invariance of H is broken, by the term Tr˜λ ˜C in the canonical ensemble,
to U(K) × U(K) × R, with R the discrete reﬂection symmetry that interchanges
the eigenvalues ±i of ieff. This is clearly the largest symmetry group of the en-
semble for which one can have ⟨˜C⟩AV ̸= 0. If one were to attempt to preserve
the full U(N) symmetry by taking an ensemble with ˜λ = iλ, with λ a c-number,
then in the canonical ensemble the term Tr˜λ ˜C would vanish by virtue of the trace-
lessness of ˜C, and the resulting ensemble would have ⟨˜C⟩AV = 0. Requiring the
largest possible nontrivial symmetry group plays the role in our derivation of mak-
ing the emergent Planck constant a c-number; if, however, we were to sacriﬁce all
of the U(N) symmetry by allowing a generic ˜λ, then the emergent canonical com-
mutation relations derived in Section 5.3 below would generically yield a matrix
¯h acting nontrivially on the states of Hilbert space, which would be inconsistent
with an emergent Heisenberg dynamics. It would clearly be desirable to have a
deeper justiﬁcation from ﬁrst principles of our choice of canonical ensemble, per-
haps based on a more detailed understanding of the underlying trace dynamics, but
at present we must simply introduce it as a postulate.

Reduction of the Hilbert space modulo ieff
103
The residual unitary invariance of the canonical ensemble has the following
consequence. Let us write the integration measure dµ as
dµ = d[Ueff]d ˆµ,
(4.43a)
with d[Ueff] the Haar measure for integration over the subgroup of global unitary
transformations Ueff that commute with ieff, and with d ˆµ the integration measure
over the operator phase space subject to the restriction that an overall global unitary
transformation Ueff is kept ﬁxed. Let us consider the canonical ensemble average
of a polynomial operator Reff, that is a function (with c-number coefﬁcients) of ieff
and of the underlying dynamical variables qr, pr and that commutes with ieff
Reff AV ≡⟨Reff⟩AV =

d[Ueff]d ˆµρReff

d[Ueff]d ˆµρ
.
(4.43b)
We can relate the general operator variables qr, pr to operator variables ˆqr, ˆpr that
have an overall Ueff rotation frozen, by writing
qr = U †
eff ˆqrUeff, pr = U †
eff ˆprUeff,
(4.43c)
and so correspondingly we have
Reff = U †
eff ˆReffUeff,
(4.43d)
with ˆReff obtained from Reff by the replacements qr, pr →ˆqr, ˆpr. Since the
canonical ensemble is invariant under unitary transformations that commute with
ieff, we have ρ = ˆρ, with ˆρ constructed in the same manner as ρ, but using the
variables ˆqr, ˆpr in place of qr, pr. Putting all these ingredients together, we can
rewrite Eq. (4.43b) in the form
Reff AV =

d[Ueff]U †
effReff ˆ
AVUeff

d[Ueff]
,
(4.44a)
with Reff ˆ
AV given by
Reff ˆ
AV ≡

d ˆµ ˆρ ˆReff

d ˆµ ˆρ
.
(4.44b)
Writing all matrix quantities in terms of + and −components according to
Eq. (4.41b), Eqs. (4.44a,b) separate into the independent ± components
Reff AV± =

d[Ueff±]U †
eff±Reff ˆ
AV±Ueff±

d[Ueff±]
,
(4.44c)

104
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
with Reff ˆ
AV± given by
Reff ˆ
AV± ≡

d ˆµ ˆρ ˆReff±

d ˆµ ˆρ
.
(4.44d)
In both the ± cases, the integral on the right-hand side of Eq. (4.44c) has the
general form
I[MK] =

d[UK]U †
K MKUK

d[UK]
,
(4.45a)
with MK a K × K matrix and with UK a K × K unitary matrix. But replacing
MK by V †
K MK VK, with VK unitary, and using the invariance property d[VKUK] =
d[UK] of the Haar measure, we see that I[MK] = I[V †
K MK VK] for arbitrary uni-
tary VK. Thus I[MK] is a linear, unitary invariant function of MK, which on the
unit matrix takes the value I[1K] = 1K. These properties imply that I[MK] is
given by the trace
I[MK] = 1
K 1KTrK MK.
(4.45b)
We learn from this that if we take an unrestricted average of Reff over the canon-
ical ensemble, the interesting matrix operator structure is averaged out. To preserve
this structure, we must restrict the integration in the canonical ensemble to leave
an overall global unitary transformation Ueff ﬁxed, as in Reff ˆ
AV of Eq. (4.44b).
A second, and perhaps deeper reason for requiring a global unitary ﬁxing in the
ieff = ±i subspaces is that, as we shall see in Section 5.3, Poincar´e transformations
and internal symmetry transformations in the emergent quantum theory both take
the form of global unitary transformations Ueff. Therefore we must completely
break this residual unitary invariance group in the canonical ensemble, in order for
the ensemble not to inadvertently include integrations over the symmetry groups
of the emergent theory. Since introducing a global unitary ﬁxing introduces arbi-
trary parameters into the unitary ﬁxed ensemble (just as introducing a gauge ﬁxing
introduces arbitrary parameters in gauge theories), we must make sure that phys-
ical observables in the emergent quantum theory correspond to quantities that are
independent of the choice of unitary ﬁxing. We shall see in Section 4.6 that trace
quantities are always independent of the unitary ﬁxing (i.e., they are the analogs of
gauge invariants in gauge theories), and we shall show in Section 5.3 that observ-
able matrix elements in the emergent quantum theory correspond to trace quanti-
ties in the underlying trace dynamics.
In practice, it is actually sufﬁcient to ﬁx only the SU(K) subgroup of the U(K)
group, since, when UK in Eq. (4.45a) is an overall phase times the unit matrix 1K,
it commutes with MK and does not wash out the matrix structure. The explicit

Reduction of the Hilbert space modulo ieff
105
construction given in Section 4.6 involves such an SU(K) ﬁxing. Henceforth, we
will use the term unitary ﬁxing to mean either a ﬁxing of the groups U(K) in the
ieff = ±i sectors, or a ﬁxing of their SU(K) subgroups. In constructing a unitary
ﬁxing, we shall always make the simplifying assumption that the structure of the
trace Hamiltonian is such that we cannot split the dynamical variables {xr} into
two disjoint sets {x I
r } and {x I I
r }, for which the trace Hamiltonian exactly separates
into disjoint pieces
H = HI[{x I
r }] + HI I[{x I I
r }].
(4.46)
If Eq. (4.46) were to hold, the fact that ˜C and N are additive over the dynamical
degrees of freedom would then imply exact factorization of the partition function
Z according to Z = Z I Z I I, and we would then have to address the same prob-
lem of ﬁxing a global unitary invariance at the level of both Z I and Z I I. Put
another way, we shall assume in the analysis of the next section that our trace
dynamics is irreducible, in the sense that it cannot be exactly reduced to two or
more independent trace dynamics systems. Once this assumption has been made,
it sufﬁces to ﬁx a global unitary rotation of any one canonical pair of dynamical
variables xR, xR+1, which we shall assume to be self-adjoint bosonic variables
(and which we shall denote by A, B in the more detailed discussion of the next
section).
In our applications of the restricted measure we will need to know the restricted
canonical average of ˜C. Since the unitary ﬁxing acts within the subspaces on which
ieff is diagonal, and does not mix the ieff = ±i subspaces, we have the unitary ﬁxed
analog of Eq. (4.10c)
[˜λ, ⟨O⟩ˆ
AV] = 0,
(4.47a)
for any operator O constructed from the {xr} using only c-number coefﬁcients.
Thus, for O = ˜C, the expectation ⟨˜C⟩ˆ
AV has the general form
⟨˜C⟩ˆ
AV = ieff¯h + 1
2(τ0 + τ3)+ + 1
2(τ0 −τ3)−,
(4.47b)
with + and −anti-self-adjoint traceless K × K matrices. The detailed struc-
ture of ± depends on the unitary ﬁxing, and there is no general reason for them
to vanish. Motivated by the extensive form of ˜C, and the fact that the unitary ﬁxing
is implemented on a single canonical pair, we shall assume, in the limit when the
number of canonical pairs is very large, that the matrices ± are small, and can be
neglected relative to the term ieff¯h that is independent of the choice of unitary ﬁx-
ing. This will be included among our assumptions/approximations in Section 5.3,
where we give conditions for emergence of an effective quantum mechanical struc-
ture.

106
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
4.6 Global unitary ﬁxing∗
Let us now give an explicit method for global unitary ﬁxing, following the analysis
of Adler and Horwitz (2003). We work now in one of the two K-dimensional
subspaces of the original N = 2K-dimensional Hilbert space, on which ieff acts as
a multiple of the unit matrix, so that there is a residual unbroken U(K) invariance
group. Typically, in matrix model calculations, an overall global unitary invariance
in the partition function is partially integrated out as a ﬁrst step, thus eliminating
a U(K)/U(1)K subgroup of the global unitary group. In this section we shall
proceed in an alternative fashion, by using the De Witt–Faddeev–Popov framework
to impose a set of unitary invariance ﬁxing conditions, that completely break the
SU(K) subgroup of the global unitary invariance group U(K). One can think of
this construction as a type of polar decomposition, based on computing the residue
modulo the action of the SU(K) subgroup. This allows one to deﬁne matrix-valued
correlation functions, which give additional structural information about the sys-
tem, but which (like gauge potentials in gauge ﬁeld theory) depend on the choice
of unitary ﬁxing.
We shall change notation for the underlying matrix variables in this section,
to follow that customary in the literature on matrix models (see, e.g., Br´ezin and
Wadia, 1993), and to keep the discussion of this section self-contained, shall repeat
a few of the results of the preceding section. We shall focus exclusively on the
bosonic sector of the theory, since the inclusion of fermions involves no further
complications. Let M1, . . . , MD be a set of K × K complex self-adjoint matrices
(note that in this section D plays the role played by 2nB earlier), and let S =
TrS(M1, . . . , MD) be an “energy” functional which is constructed using only c-
number coefﬁcients, from which we form a partition function Z deﬁned by
Z =

dM exp(−S).
(4.48a)
Here we have written
dM =
D

d=1
d[Md],
(4.48b)
and the integration measure d[M] for the self-adjoint matrix M is deﬁned in terms
of the real and imaginary parts of the matrix elements Mi j of M by the measure
introduced in Section 4.1,
d[M] =

i
dMii

i< j
dReMi jdImMi j.
(4.48c)

Global unitary ﬁxing
107
As we have already noted, the measure d[M] is unitary invariant, in other words,
if U is a ﬁxed K × K unitary matrix, then
d[U †MU] = d[M].
(4.49a)
If we make the same unitary transformation U on all of the matrices Md,
d =
1, . . . , D, then by our assumption that S involves no ﬁxed matrix coefﬁcients, S is
invariant by virtue of the cyclic property of the trace
S[{U †MU}] = S[{M}],
(4.49b)
and so the partition function Z has a global unitary invariance.
As we have seen in the preceding section, the global unitary invariance of Z
must be taken into account in calculating correlations of the various matrices Md
averaged over the partition function. Let Q[{M}] be an arbitrary polynomial in the
matrices M1, . . . , MD constructed using only c-number coefﬁcients, so that under
global unitary transformations, Q transforms as
Q[{U †MU}] = U †Q[{M}]U.
(4.50a)
Correspondingly, let
Q = TrQ,
(4.50b)
so that Q is a global unitary invariant. One can now consider the calculation of
averages of Q and of Q respectively over the ensemble deﬁned by Eq. (4.48a). In
the case of the trace polynomial Q one has
⟨Q⟩AV = Z−1

dM exp(−S)Q,
(4.51a)
which, because of the global unitary invariance, involves an overall structure-
independent unitary integration that is typically done as the ﬁrst step by using
the change of variables given by Mehta (1967) for one of the matrix arguments on
which Q depends. Let us now consider the corresponding average of the polyno-
mial Q over the ensemble
⟨Q⟩AV = Z−1

dM exp(−S)Q.
(4.51b)
Making a global unitary transformation on all of the matrix integration vari-
ables, and using the invariance of dM and of S and the covariance of Q given
in Eq. (4.50a), we then ﬁnd that
⟨Q⟩AV = U †⟨Q⟩AVU,
(4.52a)

108
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
for all unitary matrices U. Thus by Schur’s lemma (which applies since U(K)
acts irreducibly on the complex K-dimensional vector space) ⟨Q⟩AV must be
a c-number multiple of the unit matrix, so that by taking the trace, we learn
that
⟨Q⟩AV = K −1⟨Q⟩AV,
(4.52b)
and all nontrivial matrix information (e.g., the unitary orientation and nontrivial
operator properties) contained in Q has been lost. (Comparing with the discussion
of Section 4.5, Eq. (4.52b) is a rewriting of Eq. (4.45b) in the notation of the
present section.)
In order to retain access to the matrix information contained in Q, let us now
proceed in an alternative fashion. Let us deﬁne a measure ˆdM in which the SU(K)
subgroup of the global unitary invariance group has been ﬁxed. (The full global
unitary invariance group is the product of this SU(K) with a global U(1) that is an
overall phase times the unit matrix; since this U(1) commutes with Q, averaging
over it causes no loss of the matrix information contained in Q, and so ﬁxing the
overall U(1) is not necessary.) We then deﬁne the average of Q over the unitary
ﬁxed ensemble as
⟨Q⟩ˆ
AV = Z−1

ˆdM exp(−S)Q,
(4.53a)
now with
Z =

ˆdM exp(−S)
(4.53b)
the partition function in which the global unitary invariance has been broken, and
an orientation on the K-dimensional vector space has been ﬁxed. Clearly, the pro-
cedure just described is a global unitary analog of the gauge ﬁxing customarily
employed in the case of local gauge invariances. If we change the recipe for ﬁx-
ing the global unitary invariance, then the average deﬁned by Eq. (4.53a) will
change in a manner that is in general complicated. However, we will show that
the average of Q in the unitary ﬁxed ensemble is independent of the ﬁxing and is
equal to that deﬁned in Eq. (4.51a) by averaging over the original ensemble, so
that
⟨Q⟩ˆ
AV = ⟨Q⟩AV.
(4.54)
In other words, the average of the trace of Q takes the same value for any choice of
unitary ﬁxing. To make an analogy with local gauge ﬁxing in gauge theories, the
trace polynomials Q are analogs of gauge invariant functions, while polynomials
Q without a trace are analogs of gauge variant quantities. Just as the gauge variant

Global unitary ﬁxing
109
potentials contain useful information in gauge theories, the unitary ﬁxing-variant
averages of polynomials Q contain useful structural information about matrix
models.
To prove Eq. (4.54), we proceed by analogy with the standard De Witt–
Faddeev–Popov procedure used for local gauge ﬁxing. Let us write an in-
ﬁnitesimal SU(K) transformation in generator form as U = exp(G), with G
anti-self-adjoint and traceless. We take as the K 2 −1 inﬁnitesimal parameters
of the SU(K) transformation the real numbers g j,
j = 1, . . . , K 2 −1, with
those for j = 1, . . . , K(K −1) given by the real and imaginary parts of the
off-diagonal matrix elements of G, that is, by Re Gi j and Im Gi j for i < j.
The remaining ones for j = K(K −1) + 1, . . . , K 2 −1 are given by the dif-
ferences of the imaginary parts of the diagonal matrix elements of G, that is,
by Im(G11 −G22), . . . , Im(G11 −GK K). Let f j({M}), j = 1, . . . , K 2 −1 be
a set of functions of the matrices M1, . . . , MD with the property that the equa-
tions f j({M}) = 0, j = 1, . . . , K 2 −1 completely break the SU(K) invariance
group, so that the only solution of f j({M + [G, M]}) = 0, j = 1, . . . , K 2 −1 is
g j = 0, j = 1, . . . , K 2 −1. We consider now the integral
J =

dMG[{M}]K[{ f j(M)}]det
∂fi({M + [G, M]})
∂g j

G=0

,
(4.55a)
with the function K[{ f j(M)}] taken as
K[{ f j(M)}] =
K 2−1

j=1
δ( f j).
(4.55b)
Here G is a global unitary invariant function of the matrices M1, . . . , MD, such as
a trace polynomial Q or any function of trace polynomials (for example the sta-
tistical ensemble weight exp(−S)). Equation (4.55a) has the standard form of the
De Witt–Faddeev–Popov analysis, as formulated for example in the text of Wein-
berg (1996) (except that when dealing with a non-compact local gauge invariance,
where the limits of integration lie at inﬁnity, one can take the function K to be
a general function of gauge variant functions f j; in the compact case considered
here, the delta functions of Eq. (4.55b) must be used in order to make the integra-
tion limits irrelevant.) The standard De Witt–Faddeev–Popov argument then shows
that the integral in Eq. (4.55a) is independent of the constraints f j. Brieﬂy, the ar-
gument proceeds by replacing the dummy variable of integration dM by dMVK ,
where MVK = V †
K MVK, and integrating over the SU(K) matrix VK. The group
property of unitary transformations together with the chain rule then converts the
determinant in Eq. (4.55a) into a Jacobian transforming the VK integration into an

110
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
integration over the constraints f j, permitting the delta functions in Eq. (4.55b) to
be integrated to give unity. This shows that the result is independent of the con-
straints, and that it is the same as the result obtained by integrating over the origi-
nal unﬁxed ensemble, thus establishing Eq. (4.54). Clearly, this argument works
only when the function G is a unitary invariant, so that it has no dependence
on VK. For example, if G is replaced by a polynomial in the matrices without
an overall trace, then the unitary ﬁxing constraints cannot be eliminated by in-
tegrating over VK, and the result depends on the unitary ﬁxing in a complicated
way.
A speciﬁc realization of the general unitary ﬁxing can be given when D ≥2, so
that the set of matrices M1, . . . , MD contains at least two independent self-adjoint
matrices A = M1 and B = M2. We take the functions f j, j = 1, . . . , K 2 −1
to be linear functions of A and B, constructed as follows. As the f j for j =
1, . . . , K(K −1) we take the real and imaginary parts of the off-diagonal ma-
trix elements of A, that is, the functions Re Ai j and Im Ai j for i < j. Equat-
ing these functions to zero forces the matrix A to be diagonal. The K remain-
ing diagonal unitary transformations then commute with A, so that no further
conditions can be furnished by use of A alone. However, the diagonal SU(K)
transformations can always be used to make the off-diagonal matrix elements
in the ﬁrst row of the second matrix B have vanishing imaginary parts, leav-
ing a residual Z K−1
2
symmetry that is broken by requiring these matrix elements
to have positive semideﬁnite real parts. So for the remaining conditions f j for
j = K(K −1) + 1, . . . , K 2 −1, we take the K −1 functions ImB1 j, j > 1,
and we restrict the integrations over ReB1 j, j > 1 to run from 0 to ∞. Since
the function K chosen in Eq. (4.55b) enforces the conditions f j = 0 in a sharp
manner, they can be used to simplify the expression for the De Witt–Faddeev–
Popov determinant. A simple calculation now shows that when the f j all van-
ish, the matrix elements of the commutator [G, M] needed in Eq. (4.55a) are
given by
Re[G, A]i j = ReGi j(A j j −Aii),
Im[G, A]i j = ImGi j(A j j −Aii),
(4.56a)
Im[G, B]1 j = ReB1 jIm(G11 −G j j) + R,
with R a remainder containing only off-diagonal elements Gi̸= j of the matrix G.
Since Eq. (4.56a) shows that the matrix
∂fi({M + [G, M]})
∂g j

G=0

(4.56b)
is triangular (its upper off-diagonal matrix elements are all zero because R has no

Global unitary ﬁxing
111
dependence on the diagonal matrix elements of G), its determinant is given by the
product of its diagonal matrix elements. Thus we have
 ≡det
∂fi({M + [G, M]})
∂g j

G=0

=

i< j
(Aii −A j j)2
K

j=2
ReB1 j,
(4.57a)
the ﬁrst factor of which is the familiar squared Vandermonde determinant. Substi-
tuting Eqs. (4.55b) and (4.57a) into Eq. (4.55a), we thus arrive at the formula for
the unitary ﬁxed integral
J =

D

d=3
d[Md]

 K

i=1
d Aiid Bii

 K

j=2
dReB1 j

×

 
2≤i< j
dReBi jdImBi j

G[{M}],
(4.57b)
with the integrals over ReB1 j, j = 2, . . . , K running over positive values only.
The part of this analysis involving only a single matrix A is well-known in the lit-
erature (see Wadia, 1981; Yoneya and Itoyama, 1982; and Coleman, 1989); what
has been added here is the complete SU(K) ﬁxing obtained by imposing a condi-
tion on a second matrix B as well. The part of Eqs. (4.57a,b) involving each B1 j
is just a planar radial integral
 ∞
0
ρdρ, with ρ = |B1 j| = ReB1 j, where the asso-
ciated angular integral
 2π
0
dφ has been omitted because it corresponds to a U(1)
factor that has been ﬁxed by the condition φ = 0.
With this choice of unitary ﬁxing, the unitary ﬁxed average ˆ¯Q ≡⟨Q⟩ˆ
AV deﬁned
in Eq. (4.53a) has a characteristic form that is dictated by the symmetries of the
unitary ﬁxed ensemble. Since the unitary ﬁxing conditions are symmetric under
permutation of the basis states with labels 2, 3, . . . , K, and since this permutation
is also a symmetry of the unﬁxed measure dM, the matrix ˆ¯Q must be symmetric
under this permutation of basis states. Thus, there are only ﬁve independent matrix
elements
ˆ¯Q11 = α,
ˆ¯Q j j = β, j = 2, . . . , K,
ˆ¯Q1 j = γ, j = 2, . . . , K,
(4.57c)
ˆ¯Qi1 = δ, i = 2, . . . , K,
ˆ¯Qi j = ϵ, 2 ≤i ̸= j ≤K.
In this notation, the original unﬁxed average ¯Q ≡⟨Q⟩AV deﬁned by Eq. (4.52b) is

112
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
given by
¯Q = K −1Tr ˆ¯Q = K −1[α + (K −1)β],
(4.57d)
showing explicitly that there is a loss of structural information in using the unﬁxed
average. But even the unitary ﬁxed average has a structure that is greatly restricted
as compared with a general K × K matrix. (Similar reasoning applies to the partial
unitary ﬁxing in which one only imposes the condition that A should be diagonal.
Since this condition is symmetric under permutation of the basis states with la-
bels 1, . . . , K, the partially unitary ﬁxed average of a polynomial Q deﬁned by
integrating with the measure (	K
i=1 d Aii)
 	
i< j(Aii −A j j)2 	D
d=2 d[Md] must
also have this permutation symmetry, and thus must be a c-number times the unit
matrix.)
We now proceed to rewrite the unitary ﬁxed measure in a form that allows us
to determine the general form of Ward identities, and (in Appendix G) to identify
an associated BRST invariance transformation. We begin by introducing ghost in-
tegrals to represent the determinant . Let ωi j and ˜ωi j be the matrix elements of
independent K × K complex anti-self-adjoint Grassmann matrices ω and ˜ω. We
take ω to be traceless, Trω = 0, while we take ˜ω to have a vanishing 11 matrix
element, ˜ω11 = 0. The integration measure for ω is deﬁned by
dω =

i< j
dReωi jdImωi j
K

j=2
dIm(ω j j −ω11),
(4.58a)
while the integration measure for ˜ω is taken as
d ˜ω =

i< j
dRe ˜ωi jdIm ˜ωi j
K

j=2
dIm ˜ω j j.
(4.58b)
We can now use these Grassmann matrices to give a ghost representation of the
factors in Eq. (4.57a) involving the matrices A and B. Since the matrix A is diag-
onal, we have
Tr ˜ω[ω, A] =

i̸= j
˜ω ji(Aii −A j j)ωi j.
(4.59a)
Hence up to an overall sign, the square of the Vandermonde determinant
	
i< j(Aii −A j j)2 is given by the ghost integral

d′ω d′ ˜ω exp(Tr ˜ω[ω, A]),
(4.59b)
with the diagonal factors dIm(ω j j −ω11), dIm ˜ω j j,
j = 2, . . . , K omitted from
the primed integration measures d′ω and d′ ˜ω . To represent the second factor in

Global unitary ﬁxing
113
Eq. (4.57a) as a ghost integral, we use the diagonal matrix elements of ω and ˜ω in
an analogous fashion. Thus, up to a phase, the factor 	K
j=2 ReB1 j is given by the
ghost integral

K

j=2
dIm(ω j j −ω11)dIm ˜ω j j exp

 K

j=2
˜ω j j(ReB1 j)i(ω j j −ω11)

.
(4.59c)
By deﬁning a matrix X by X11 = 0; Xi j = 0, 2 ≤i, j ≤K; X1 j = X j1 =
i
2 ˜ω j j(ω j j −ω11), j = 2, . . . , K, the exponent in Eq. (4.59c) can be written as
TrX B, so that Eq. (4.59c) becomes

K

j=2
dIm(ω j j −ω11)dIm ˜ω j j exp(TrX B).
(4.59d)
Combining Eqs. (4.58a,b) and (4.59b,c,d), we see that up to an overall phase the
determinant  introduced in Eq. (4.57a) has the ghost representation
 ∝

dωd ˜ω exp(Tr ˜ω[ω, A] + TrX B).
(4.60)
Our next step is to rewrite the product of δ functions in Eq. (4.55b) and the
half-line restriction on the integrals over ReB1 j in terms of their Fourier rep-
resentations, by introducing three sets of auxiliary variables. One set are the
elements hi j of a self-adjoint K × K matrix h with vanishing diagonal matrix
elements, so that hii = 0, i = 1, . . . , K. The integration measure for this set is
deﬁned as
dh =

i< j
dRehi jdImhi j.
(4.61a)
The second set are K −1 real numbers Hj,
j = 2, . . . , K, with integration
measure
d H =
K

j=2
d Hj.
(4.61b)
In terms of these variables, the product of δ functions of Eq. (4.55b) can be repre-
sented (up to an overall constant factor) as
K 2−1

j=1
δ( f j) ∝

dhd H exp

iTrh A + i
K

j=2
HjImB1 j

.
(4.62a)

114
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
The third set are K −1 complex numbers k j, j = 2, . . . , K, integrated along a
contour on the real axis with integration measure
dk =
K

j=2
dk j/(k j −iϵ),
(4.62b)
with inﬁnitesimal positive ϵ. These can be used to insert a product of step functions
	K
j=2 θ(ReB1 j) into Eq. (4.57b)
K

j=2
θ(ReB1 j) ∝

dk exp

i
K

j=2
k jReB1 j

,
(4.62c)
allowing the integrals over the ReB1 j in Eq. (4.57b) to be taken from −∞to ∞.
Deﬁning a matrix Y by Y11 = 0; Yi j = 0, 2 ≤i, j ≤K; Y1 j = −Y j1 =
−1
2 Hj, the second term in the exponent in Eq. (4.62a) can be rewritten as
i K
j=2 HjImB1 j = TrY B, and so an alternative form of Eq. (4.62a) is
K 2−1

j=1
δ( f j) ∝

dhd H exp(iTrh A + TrY B).
(4.62d)
Similarly, deﬁning a matrix V by V11 = 0; Vi j = 0, 2 ≤i, j ≤K; V1 j = Vj1 =
1
2ik j, the exponent in Eq. (4.62c) can be rewritten as K
j=2 ik jReB1 j = TrV B,
and so an alternative form of Eq. (4.62c) is
K

j=2
θ(ReB1 j) ∝

dk exp(TrV B).
(4.62e)
These equations allow us to write Eq. (4.57b) in terms of the unrestricted measure
dM, and the ghost representation of , as
J = C

dMdhd Hdkdωd ˜ω exp

iTrh A + Tr ˜ω[ω, A]
+ Tr(V + X + Y)B

G[{M}],
(4.63)
with C an overall constant factor. This representation of J will be used to
discuss Ward identities obeyed by the matrix-valued correlations, while an
alternative form, given in Appendix G, will be used to establish a BRST
invariance.
We proceed now to derive Ward identities from unitary ﬁxed expectations of
trace polynomials Q; these Ward identities play a central role in the arguments for
an emergent quantum theory given in Chapter 5. Employing the speciﬁc unitary
ﬁxing of Eq. (4.63) in the deﬁnition of Eqs. (4.53a,b), as applied to Q = TrQ, and

Global unitary ﬁxing
115
using the cyclic property of the trace to rewrite Tr ˜ω[ω, A] as Tr{ ˜ω, ω}A, we have
Z⟨Q⟩ˆ
AV =

dMdhd Hdkdωd ˜ω exp

Tr(ih + { ˜ω, ω})A
+ Tr(V + X + Y)B

exp(−S)Q,
(4.64)
with Z here given by the expression on the right-hand side of Eq. (4.64) with Q
replaced by unity. Ward identities follow from the fact that the unrestricted mea-
sure dM is invariant under a shift of any matrix Md by a constant δMd, which
under the assumption that surface terms related to the shift vanish, implies
0 =

dMdhd Hdkdωd ˜ωδMd

exp

Tr(ih + { ˜ω, ω})A
+ Tr(V + X + Y)B

exp(−S)Q

.
(4.65a)
When S and Q are varied with respect to Md, the factor δMd can be cyclically
permuted as usual to the right in each term of the varied trace polynomials, giving
the familiar formulas
δMdS = Tr δS
δMd
δMd,
δMdQ = Tr δQ
δMd
δMd.
(4.65b)
Carrying through the variations of all terms of Eq. (4.65a), and dividing by Z, we
are left with an expression of the form
0 = Tr⟨Wd⟩ˆ
AVδMd.
(4.66a)
However, since δMd is an arbitrary self-adjoint matrix, the vanishing of the real
and imaginary parts of Eq. (4.66a) implies the matrix identity
0 = ⟨Wd⟩ˆ
AV.
(4.66b)
For d = 3, . . . , D, the variation δMd in Eq. (4.65a) acts only on the product
exp(−S)Q, and we have
Wd = δQ
δMd
−Q δS
δMd
.
(4.67a)
However, for d = 1 and d = 2, corresponding to M1 = A and M2 = B, there are
additional contributions to the Ward identities arising from variations of the traces
involving A and B in the ﬁrst exponential on the right-hand side of Eq. (4.65a),

116
Statistical mechanics of matrix models
which arose from the unitary ﬁxing procedure. Explicitly, we have
W1 = (ih + { ˜ω, ω})Q + δQ
δA −Q δS
δA,
W2 = (V + X + Y)Q + δQ
δB −Q δS
δB .
(4.67b)
Hence from Eq. (4.63) we are able to get explicit forms of all of the Ward iden-
tities, including those obtained by varying the matrices singled out in the uni-
tary invariance ﬁxing. Note that were we to employ the original ensemble average
of Eq. (4.51a), which has no unitary ﬁxing, in deriving the Ward identities, then
Eq. (4.52b) implies that we would only obtain the trace of the matrix relation of
Eq. (4.66b). In other words, unitary ﬁxing is essential for extracting the full content
of the Ward identities; without it, all nontrivial matrix structure is averaged out.

5
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
In Chapter 2, we have seen that a generic feature of matrix models with a global
unitary invariance is the existence of a conserved operator ˜C, which is given in
Eq. (2.6) as the sum of bosonic qr,pr commutators minus the corresponding sum
of fermionic anticommutators
˜C ≡

r∈B
[qr,pr] −

r∈F
{qr,pr} =

r,u
xrωruxu,
(5.1)
and which is anti-self-adjoint when we adopt the fermion adjointness assignment
of Eqs. (2.4b) and (2.18d). The operator ˜C and the trace quantities H and N play a
role in the equilibrium statistical mechanics of trace dynamics closely analogous to
that played by the energy in classical statistical physics. This analogy suggests the
idea (Adler and Millard, 1996) that the canonical commutation relations of quan-
tum ﬁeld theory may arise from a trace dynamics analog of the classical theorem
of equipartition of energy, in which the operator ˜C is effectively equipartitioned.
Because ˜C has the dimension of action, its associated Lagrange multiplier ˜λ has
the dimension of inverse action, and is the ensemble parameter that governs the
magnitude of the ensemble average of ˜C, which we shall ﬁnd plays the role of the
emergent Planck constant ¯h. If we assume that the Lagrange multiplier τ for H is
of order the inverse Planck energy, there can be a low energy regime in which the
equilibrium distribution is effectively decoupled from H, and is instead dominated
by the ˜C term in the canonical ensemble. In this regime, the trace Hamiltonian still
serves as generator of the effective equations of motion. If the underlying dynamics
has a Poincar´e invariant trace action, the Poincar´e covariance of the equations of
motion together with the Poincar´e invariance of ˜C will then give rise, when the dy-
namics is averaged over the canonical ensemble, to a Poincar´e covariant effective
dynamics, with the equipartition of ˜C giving this effective dynamics the standard
canonical commutation/anticommutation relations of quantum ﬁeld theory. Thus,
the combined effect of a decoupling of the effective, ensemble averaged, dynamics
117

118
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
from the non-covariant H term in the canonical ensemble, and of the equipartition
of ˜C, is the emergence of relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory as the low energy effec-
tive approximation to a relativistic trace dynamics.
To motivate the methods that we will use to develop these ideas, let us begin
by reviewing a simple derivation (Mohling, 1982) of the classical equipartition
theorem. Let H({xr}) be the classical Hamiltonian as a function of classical phase
space variables {xr}, and let dµ({xr}) be the classical phase space integration mea-
sure. We consider the integral

dµ∂[xr exp(−βH)]
∂xs
=

dµδrs exp(−βH)
−

dµxr
∂[βH]
∂xs
exp(−βH),
(5.2a)
the left-hand side of which is the integral of a total derivative of a function and
vanishes when the function vanishes sufﬁciently rapidly at inﬁnity. Assuming this,
we get
δrs =

dµxrβ(∂H/∂xs) exp(−βH)

dµ exp(−βH)
,
(5.2b)
which is the classical theorem of equipartition of energy. The method of deriva-
tion is similar to that used to derive Ward identities from functional integrals in
quantum ﬁeld theory (see, e.g., Kaku, 1993), and the equipartition theorem can be
viewed as a Ward identity application in classical statistical mechanics.
Emulating this derivation from classical statistical physics, in Section 5.1 we
derive the general Ward identity for the canonical ensemble in trace dynamics, in
the presence of external sources. In Section 5.2 we show that by suitable variation
of the source terms, we can get similar Ward identities obeyed by general polyno-
mials in the effective projections xreff of the matrix variables that were introduced
in Eqs. (4.41b,d). In Section 5.3 we introduce the assumptions and approximations
that, applied to the Ward identities of Sections 5.1 and 5.2, lead to the emergence
at low energies of an effective quantum ﬁeld dynamics. In Section 5.4 we take
a critical look at this analysis, based on the derivation of further Ward identities,
which we show lead to signiﬁcant restrictions on the class of underlying theories
that obey the assumptions of Section 5.3. One of these restrictions requires an ap-
proximate balance in the underlying dynamics between the numbers of bosonic
and fermionic degrees of freedom, which is suggestive of supersymmetry. The
derivation of Section 5.3 leads directly to an emergent Heisenberg dynamics; in
Section 5.5 we derive from this the emergent Schr¨odinger dynamics. Finally, in

The general Ward identity
119
Section 5.6 we show how the emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics from trace dy-
namics evades the Kochen–Specker theorem and Bell inequality arguments against
a “hidden variable” completion of quantum mechanics.
5.1 The general Ward identity
We now apply a procedure, similar to that of the derivation of the classical equipar-
tition theorem, to the statistical mechanics of matrix models. We begin by specify-
ing some notation. Let d ˆµ be the measure introduced in Section 4.5, in which the
integration over one canonical pair of dynamical variables xR, xR+1 is restricted
so as to break the subgroup of the global unitary group that commutes with ieff.
Also, let ⟨O⟩ˆ
AV be the average over the canonical ensemble, using this restricted
measure, of a general operator depending on the {xr}. This average is given by
⟨O⟩ˆ
AV =

d ˆµρO,
(5.3a)
with the normalized equilibrium distribution ρ given by Eq. (4.13c), as modiﬁed
by the replacement of dµ by the restricted integration measure d ˆµ in the partition
function Z. Since we shall wish to include sources, let ⟨O⟩ˆ
AV, j be the correspond-
ing average in the presence of a complete set { jr} of external sources, given by
⟨O⟩ˆ
AV, j =

d ˆµρ jO,
(5.3b)
with ρ j and the associated partition function Z j given by the expressions of
Eq. (4.15a) that include sources, now with restricted integration measure
ρ j = Z−1
j
exp

−Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN −

r
Tr jrxr

,
Z j =

d ˆµ exp

−Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN −

r
Tr jrxr

.
(5.3c)
Thus, in this notation, we have
⟨O⟩ˆ
AV = ⟨O⟩ˆ
AV,0,
(5.3d)
with the subscript 0 on the right-hand side denoting the average in which all
sources are zero, that is, with { jr} = {0}. In deriving the Ward identity, we shall
employ the fact that the integration measure dµ is invariant under a constant shift
xr →xr + δxr of any of the dynamical variables xr. When we use the restricted
integration measure d ˆµ, this invariance still holds, provided r is not equal to the
indices R, R + 1 of the variables xR, xR+1 for which the phase space integration

120
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
is restricted. In other words, with respect to the restricted measure we have
0 =

d ˆµδxr (ρO), r ̸= R, R + 1,
(5.4a)
with
δxr A = A|xr+δxr −A|xr .
(5.4b)
With this notation established, we begin our derivation by considering
Z j⟨Tr{ ˜C, ieff}W⟩ˆ
AV, j =

d ˆµ exp

−Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN
−

r
Tr jrxr

Tr{ ˜C, ieff}W,
(5.5a)
with W any bosonic (that is, even grade) polynomial function of the dynamical
variables, and where the trace Tr is understood to act on the product of all factors
standing to its right. (Later on, we will successively let W be either the operator
Hamiltonian H from which the trace Hamiltonian H is constructed, a single dy-
namical variable xt, or an operator G from which a trace canonical generator G
is constructed, in order to derive respectively in the emergent quantum theory the
Heisenberg equation of motion, the canonical algebra, or the form of a general
unitary canonical transformation.) Using Eqs. (5.4a,b), when we make a shift of
xs, s ̸= R, R + 1 in the integrand of Eq. (5.5a), we have
0 =

d ˆµδxs

exp

−Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN −

r
Tr jrxr

Tr{ ˜C, ieff}W

, (5.5b)
which on applying the chain rule for differentiation becomes
0 =

d ˆµ exp

−Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN −

r
Tr jrxr

× [(−Tr˜λδxs ˜C −τδxsH −ηδxsN −Tr jsδxs)Tr{ ˜C, ieff}W + δxsTr{ ˜C, ieff}W].
(5.5c)
We now have to evaluate the variations with respect to xs appearing in the vari-
ous terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (5.5c). From Eq. (5.1) for ˜C, we have
Tr˜λδxs ˜C = Tr˜λ

r
(δxsωsrxr + xrωrsδxs),
(5.6a)

The general Ward identity
121
which using ωsr = −ϵrωrs (cf. Eq. (1.17)) can be rewritten as
Tr˜λδxs ˜C = Tr˜λ

r
ωrs(−ϵrδxsxr + xrδxs).
(5.6b)
Cyclically permuting xr to the left in the ﬁrst term using Eqs. (1.1a,b), this simpli-
ﬁes to a commutator
Tr˜λδxs ˜C = Tr

˜λ,

r
ωrsxr

δxs.
(5.6c)
We next consider δxsH, which by Eqs. (1.3b) and (1.15b) through (1.17) is given
by
δxsH = Tr δH
δxs
δxs =

r
ωrsTr˙xrδxs.
(5.7)
Note that here, and in the subsequent formulas, ˙xrdt represents the forward time
step of the variable xr, considered as a function of the dynamical variables {xs}
on the time slice on which averages over the canonical ensemble are evaluated.
Turning next to the evaluation of δxsN, let us deﬁne ˜ωrs by
˜ωrs = diag(0, . . . , 0, 
B, . . . , 
B),
(5.8a)
where the skew symmetric 2 × 2 matrix 
B is deﬁned in Eq. (1.16b). Recalling
our convention that we list all bosonic variables before all fermionic ones in the
2D-dimensional phase space vector xr, the deﬁnition of Eq. (5.8a) states that ˜ωrs
acts as 0 on any bosonic phase space pair qr, pr and acts as 
B on any fermionic
phase space pair qr, pr, so that

r,u
˜ωruxrxu =

r∈F
[qr, pr],
(5.8b)
giving the quantity appearing in Eq. (2.2a) deﬁning N. Using the index interchange
relation ˜ωsr = ϵr ˜ωrs, we then ﬁnd
δxsN = 1
2i

r
Tr( ˜ωsrδxsxr + ˜ωrsxrδxs) = i

r
˜ωrsTrxrδxs.
(5.8c)
This completes the calculation of variations of terms that come from the exponent
in the canonical ensemble ρ.
The remaining terms come from
δxsTr{ ˜C, ieff}W = Tr({δxs ˜C, ieff}W + { ˜C, ieff}δxs W)
= Tr({ieff, W}δxs ˜C + { ˜C, ieff}δxs W),
(5.9a)
where to obtain the second line we have used the cyclic identity of Eq. (1.2). For

122
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of Eq. (5.9a), we use Eq. (5.6c), with ˜λ replaced
by {ieff, W} = 2ieffWeff (where we have used Eq. (4.41d)), giving
Tr{ieff, W}δxs ˜C = Tr

2ieffWeff,

r
ωrsxr

δxs.
(5.9b)
To evaluate the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (5.9a), we write the
operator structure of δxs W in the form
δxs W =

ℓ
W Lℓ
s δxsW Rℓ
s ,
(5.10a)
where ℓis a composite index that labels each monomial in the polynomial W, as
well as each occurrence of xs in the respective monomial term. In this notation we
have
δW
δxs
=

ℓ
ϵℓW Rℓ
s
W Lℓ
s ,
(5.10b)
with ϵℓthe grading factor appropriate to W Rℓ
s
and to W Lℓ
s xs (which must both be
of the same grade since we have deﬁned W to be bosonic). From the deﬁnition of
Eq. (5.10a), we obtain
Tr{ ˜C, ieff}δxs W =

ℓ
ϵℓTrW Rℓ
s { ˜C, ieff}W Lℓ
s δxs.
(5.10c)
When these results are collected and substituted back into Eq. (5.5c), this equa-
tion takes the form (after multiplication by Z−1
j )
0 = ⟨Trsδxs⟩ˆ
AV, j,
(5.11a)
with s a shorthand for the sum of the contributions coming from Eqs. (5.6a)
through (5.10c)
s =

−

˜λ,

r
ωrsxr

−τ

r
ωrs ˙xr −iη

r
˜ωrsxr −js

2Tr ˜CieffWeff
+ 2

ieffWeff,

r
ωrsxr

+

ℓ
ϵℓW Rℓ
s { ˜C, ieff}W Lℓ
s .
(5.11b)
Since the variation δxs is arbitrary, subject to the adjointness restrictions on xs, and
since both the real and imaginary parts of Eq. (5.11a) must vanish separately, we
can conclude from Eq. (5.11a) that
⟨s⟩ˆ
AV, j = 0.
(5.11c)

The general Ward identity
123
To get the ﬁnal form of the Ward identity, we perform several algebraic manip-
ulations on Eq. (5.11c). First of all, we form the effective projection by taking one
half of the anticommutator of Eq. (5.11c) with ieff (cf. Eq.(4.41d)). Since ˜λ = λieff
(cf. Eq. (4.39b)), and since ieff commutes with xreff, the ﬁrst term on the right-hand
side of Eq. (5.11b) drops out (in other words, only terms that anticommute with
ieff remain in the commutator [˜λ, xr]) and we are left with
⟨seff⟩ˆ
AV, j = 0,
(5.12a)
with seff given by
seff =

−τ

r
ωrs ˙xreff −iη

r
˜ωrsxreff −jseff

2Tr ˜CieffWeff
+ 2

ieffWeff,

r
ωrsxreff

+

ℓ
ϵℓ(W Rℓ
s { ˜C, ieff}W Lℓ
s )eff.
(5.12b)
(This step of the derivation requires use of the canonical ensemble: in the mi-
crocanonical ensemble, the analogous term arising from the ˜C dependence of the
ensemble  of Eq. (4.18a) does not have the form of a commutator [ ˜Cmicro, . . .],
where ˜Cmicro is the sharp value of ˜C in the microcanonical ensemble, and so does
not vanish on taking a suitably deﬁned effective projection. Put another way, if
one represents the delta function δ( ˜C −˜Cmicro) appearing in the microcanonical
ensemble as an integral
δ( ˜C −˜Cmicro) ∝

d ˜λ exp

iTr˜λ( ˜C −˜Cmicro)
	
,
(5.12c)
then the parameter ˜λ appearing in a commutator structure analogous to the ﬁrst
term in Eq. (5.11b) is an integration variable, and so an effective projection using
a ﬁxed ieff does not eliminate this term.)
Next, we multiply Eqs. (5.12a,b) by 1
2ωus, where u does not lie in the canonical
pair containing the indices R, R + 1 of variables xR, xR+1 for which the phase
space integration is restricted. We then sum s over index values within the canoni-
cal pair containing u using Eq. (1.17), which gives

s
ωusωrs = δur,
(5.13a)
and employ the analogous formula involving ˜ωrs

s
ωus ˜ωrs = −ξuδur,
(5.13b)

124
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
with ξu = 0 for any bosonic xu and with ξu = 1 (−1) for xu a fermionic q (p).
This gives the ﬁnal result
⟨ueff⟩ˆ
AV, j = 0,
(5.14a)
with ueff given by
ueff = 1
2

s
ωusseff
=

−τ ˙xueff + iηξuxueff −

s
ωus jseff

Tr ˜CieffWeff
(5.14b)
+ [ieffWeff, xueff] +

s,ℓ
ωusϵℓ

W Rℓ
s
1
2{ ˜C, ieff}W Lℓ
s

eff
.
This equation holds for all index values u not lying in the canonical pair con-
taining the indices R, R + 1; henceforth this restriction will be implicit, and
will usually not be restated explicitly each time the Ward identity formula of
Eqs. (5.14a,b) is used (and similarly for its analogs derived in Section 5.4). The
additional terms that are present in the Ward identities in which u belongs to the
pair R, R + 1, arising from variation of the unitary ﬁxing conditions on the in-
tegration measure, can be calculated (at least formally) by the method given in
Section 4.6.
5.2 Variation of the source terms
The Ward identity of Eqs. (5.14a,b) is exact, and still includes the full source
term structure. Our next step is to show how, through variation of the source
terms, we can generate similar Ward identities involving general polynomials
in the effective projections xreff of the dynamical variables. To see how such
polynomials can be generated, we use the notation introduced in Eq. (4.41b) to
rewrite the source term in the canonical ensemble by making the decomposi-
tions xr = xreff + xr12 and jr = jreff + jr12. Since for arbitrary operators A and
B we have TrAeffB12 = Tr(−1
2ieff){ieff, Aeff}B12 = Tr(−1
2ieff)Aeff{ieff, B12} = 0,
we get Tr jrxr = Tr( jreffxreff + jr12xr12), and so varying Z j with respect to jreff
brings down a factor of Trδjreffxreff. Stripping away the general variation δjreff
from the left then leaves us with a matrix factor xreff. (We choose not to strip away
the variation δjreff from the right, because by the cyclic identities this would leave
an extra factor ϵr to be kept track of.) As we shall see, doing this repeatedly al-
lows one to build up general polynomials, i.e., linear combinations with c-number
coefﬁcients of monomials of the form xreffxseff . . ..

Variation of the source terms
125
We can now state the result to be demonstrated in this section as follows: deﬁn-
ing Dxueff by
Dxueff = (−τ ˙xueff + iηξuxueff)Tr ˜CieffWeff
+ [ieffWeff, xueff] +

s,ℓ
ωusϵℓ

W Rℓ
s
1
2{ ˜C, ieff}W Lℓ
s

eff
,
(5.15a)
we can rewrite Eq. (5.14a) as
⟨Dxueff⟩ˆ
AV, j −

s
ωus jseff⟨Tr ˜CieffWeff⟩ˆ
AV, j = 0.
(5.15b)
Then we shall show that Eq. (5.15b) also implies the relations at zero sources
⟨SL(xteff)

DS(xreff)
	
SR(xteff)⟩ˆ
AV,0 = 0.
(5.15c)
Here S is a polynomial (with c-number coefﬁcients) in the effective variables xreff
(i.e., xreff, xseff, . . . which we call generically xreff), with the functional form of
S subject only to the restriction that it should not depend on the variables in the
canonical pair containing the indices R, R + 1. In order to be able to go “off-shell”
when we make contact later on with quantum ﬁeld theory, we have included in
Eq. (5.15c) left and right polynomials SL and SR (also with c-number coefﬁcients),
with the property that for all xt in SL,R and all xr in S, the structure constant ωtr
is zero. In other words, for the time being we assume that SL,R do not contain
variables that are the canonical conjugates of those that appear in S. A sufﬁcient
condition for this restriction to be dropped is discussed at the end of this section.
The action of D on S in Eq. (5.15c) is deﬁned by the Leibniz product rule
D(xreffxseff) = (Dxreff)xseff + xreff(Dxseff),
(5.15d)
and its extension to products of any number of factors xreff with general index
values.
Since the case of polynomial S, SL, and SR with c-number coefﬁcients can be
obtained by linearity from the case of monomial S, SL, and SR, it sufﬁces to prove
Eq. (5.15c) for the case in which we are dealing with monomials. Now for a D
deﬁned to act on products by the Leibniz product rule, and for a monomial S, we
have
DS(xreff) =

v
S(xreff, r ̸= v; Dxveff),
(5.16a)
with v indexing each occurrence of each xreff in S, and with all factor orderings left
undisturbed by the action of D. In other words, leaving factor orderings unchanged,
we include on the right-hand side of Eq. (5.16a) a term with D acting on each
individual variable xreff in S. Hence to establish Eq. (5.15c), it sufﬁces to prove

126
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
that for monomials S, SL, and SR, we have
⟨SL(xteff)

v
S(xreff, r ̸= v; Dxveff)SR(xteff)⟩ˆ
AV,0 = 0.
(5.16b)
To prove this assertion, we begin by multiplying Eq. (5.15b) by Z jδjueff and
taking the trace, giving
Z j⟨TrδjueffDxueff⟩ˆ
AV, j −Z j

s
ωusTr(δjueff jseff)⟨Tr ˜CieffWeff⟩ˆ
AV, j = 0.
(5.17a)
We now make sequential, independent variations of the sources jreff associated
with all xreff in the monomial S other than the one xueff that is explicitly exhibited
in Eq. (5.17a), as well as variations of the sources associated with all xteff in the
monomials SL,R. To get repeated factors of some particular xT eff, we make inde-
pendent source variations for each, and after all variations have been performed,
we set all sources equal to zero. In the second term in Eq. (5.17a), if jseff is not
varied in this process, it makes a vanishing contribution after the sources are set
to zero. The case when jseff is varied can only arise when we are varying with
respect to the source for a variable xveff contained in S, since by hypothesis the
coefﬁcient tensor ωut vanishes for all xteff in SL,R. In general, if we focus on two
variables xveff and xueff for which ωuv ̸= 0, the monomial S will have the form
. . . xueff . . . xveff . . . (or a similar expression with the roles of u and v interchanged;
we do not assume symmetrization of this structure over u and v), with . . . denot-
ing factors that are not explicitly exhibited. Correspondingly, the derivative DS
formed by use of the Leibniz rule will have the form
. . . (Dxueff) . . . xveff . . . + . . . xueff . . . (Dxveff) . . . .
(5.17b)
In forming the ﬁrst term in Eq. (5.17b) by source variations, the second term of
Eq. (5.17a) will contribute the second variation expression
. . . ωuvTr(δjueffδjveff) . . . ,
(5.17c)
while in forming the second term in Eq. (5.17b), there will be a corresponding
second variation expression
. . . ωvuTr(δjveffδjueff) . . . .
(5.17d)
Since both second variation expressions multiply identical factors, they contribute
through their sum
. . . [ωuvTr(δjueffδjveff) + ωvuTr(δjveffδjueff)] . . . .
(5.17e)

Variation of the source terms
127
However, this expression vanishes, because in the bosonic (fermionic) case ωuv
is antisymmetric (symmetric) in u, v, while the trace multiplying it is symmetric
(antisymmetric) in u, v.
Thus, in forming Eq. (5.16b) by source variation, the explicit source term in
Eq. (5.15b) does not contribute after all sources are set equal to zero, and so the
effect of multiple source variations is to lead to an expression of the form
Z⟨

r̸=u
Tr(δjreffxreff)Tr(δjueffDxueff) ⟩ˆ
AV,0 = 0,
(5.17f)
where r indexes variables that appear in both S and SL,R. Since the source varia-
tions in Eq. (5.17f) are all independent, we can use them to “break open” the traces
as in the discussion of Eqs. (1.4a–d), giving the expression
Z⟨

r̸=u
(xreff)nrmr (Dxueff)numu⟩ˆ
AV,0 = 0,
(5.17g)
with the average now involving a product of matrix elements. By linking the matrix
elements in Eq. (5.17g) in the appropriate order, we can form the general matrix
element of D acting on a general monomial S, multiplied on the left and right
by monomials SL,R containing variables xteff that are not linked by ωrt to any
variable xreff in S. This then gives the identity of Eq. (5.16b), completing the proof
of Eq. (5.15c).
Up to this point we have made no special assumptions about the nature of the
bosonic polynomial W appearing in the Ward identity. As we shall see later, in the
cases of greatest interest for applications of the Ward identity, the trace Tr ˜CieffWeff
can be approximated as zero inside canonical averages in which the source cur-
rents j have been set to zero. In this case, the derivation just given simpliﬁes
considerably, since there are then no second variation terms arising from vary-
ing jseff in Eq. (5.17a), because such second variation terms all appear with coefﬁ-
cient zero when the sources have been turned off. The symmetrization argument of
Eqs. (5.17b–e) can then be dispensed with, and, more signiﬁcantly, no restriction
on the arguments xt of the left and right polynomials SL,R is then needed. Thus for
these special choices of W the identity of Eq. (5.15c) holds for completely gen-
eral polynomials SL(xteff) and SR(xteff), giving a completely “off-shell” version of
the basic Ward identity which asserts the vanishing of DS(xreff). Once the Ward
identity has been extended off-shell in this way, we are assured that ﬂuctuations of
the effective variables xreff around their canonical ensemble average values have
been taken into account, and do not invalidate the argument for the emergence of
a quantum theory structure given in the next section.

128
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
5.3 Approximations/assumptions leading to the emergence
of quantum theory
Starting from Eqs. (5.15a–c), we proceed now to show that, with a few plausible
assumptions and approximations, the general formalism of quantum ﬁeld theory
emerges. The assumptions and approximations that we make all have the effect of
simplifying the structure of Dxueff. They are:
(1)
We assume that the support properties of ˙xueff and of ˜Ceff = −1
2ieff{ieff, ˜C}, as func-
tions deﬁned on the operator phase space, are such that the term
−τ ˙xueffTr ˜CieffWeff
= −τ ˙xueffTr ˜CeffieffWeff
(5.18a)
in Eq. (5.15a) can be neglected. Speciﬁcally, we shall assume that this comes about
in the following way. We assume that each dynamical variable xueff can be split into
“fast” and “slow” parts or components, so that we can write xueff = xfast
ueff + xslow
ueff .
We identify the time scale τ and mass τ −1 with the “fast” or “high” physical scale
given by the Planck scale, and we assume that the underlying theory develops a mass
hierarchy, so that observed physics corresponds to “slow” components xslow
ueff that are
very slowly varying in comparison to the time τ. The “fast” parts of the dynamical
variables will be insensitive to large-scale boundary conditions, such as experimental
probes, whereas the “slow” parts are sensitive to such boundary conditions, and are
what we observe in our experiments. We further assume that the “fast” components
xfast
ueff have disjoint support on the operator phase space from the support of ˜Ceff, so
that averages of products of the fast components with ˜Ceff are suppressed. Then for
the “slow” components xslow
ueff , the contribution to Eq. (5.18a) will be small because it
is suppressed by one power of the mass hierarchy, while for the “fast” components
xfast
ueff, for which ˙xfast
ueff may not be negligibly small, the contribution to Eq. (5.18a)
will be small by virtue of the assumed support properties. A detailed discussion of
the support assumption and its implications will be given in the next section. (This
assumption could perhaps be weakened to allow for the possibility that the ‘fast’
components of xueff have regions of common support with ˜Ceff, with rapid relative
phase oscillations making the contribution of Eq. (5.18a) to the Ward identities very
small. However, we shall not pursue this possibility further in what follows.)
(2)
We assume that the “chemical potential” η is zero or very small, so that the term
iηξuxueffTr ˜CieffWeff
(5.18b)
can be neglected. Since this term is identically zero for u bosonic (cf. the line fol-
lowing Eq. (5.13b)), this assumption is only operative in the fermionic sector of the
theory. As we have seen in Section 2.5, the trace fermion number is odd under inter-
change of fermionic canonical coordinates and momenta, whereas ˜C is even, and it
is easy to see from the construction of Section 4.1 that the integration measure is also
even. Hence when the trace Hamiltonian H is even under this interchange, then taking

The emergence of quantum theory
129
η to be exactly zero corresponds to choosing an ensemble in which the zero-source
ensemble average of the trace fermion number N is zero.
(3)
We assume that in the ﬁnal term of Eq. (5.15a), as a leading approximation when the
number of degrees of freedom is very large, we can replace the extensive conserved
quantity ˜Ceff by its zero-source ensemble average ⟨˜Ceff⟩ˆ
AV. Moreover, as noted in
Section 4.5, when there are very many degrees of freedom we assume that this unitary
ﬁxed average is the same as the unﬁxed average ⟨˜Ceff⟩AV = ieff ¯h. In other words, in
the ﬁnal term of Eq. (5.15a), we neglect the ﬂuctuations of ˜Ceff over the canonical
ensemble; these ﬂuctuations will be added back in Chapter 6, where we argue that
they are responsible for state vector reduction. (As discussed in the next section, the
corresponding replacement of ˜Ceff by its ensemble average cannot be made in the τ
term in Eq. (5.15a), since this would change the support properties in a signiﬁcant
way.) With this assumption, the ﬁnal term of Eq. (5.15a) becomes
−¯h

sℓ
ωusϵℓ(W Rℓ
s
W Lℓ
s )eff = −¯h

s
ωus

δW
δxs

eff
,
(5.18c)
where in simplifying we have made use of Eq. (5.10b).
(4)
We similarly assume that in the coefﬁcient of jseff in the second term in Eqs. (5.15b)
and (5.17a), we can also replace ˜Ceff by ieff¯h after the sources have been set to zero.
Thus the unwanted second variation terms in the zero-source Ward identities, aris-
ing from variation of this term with respect to the source current, all have a coef-
ﬁcient of the form ⟨P(xreff)TrWeff⟩ˆ
AV,0, with P some polynomial in its arguments
arising from the repeated variations of the source terms in the canonical ensemble.
Since TrWeff = Tr(W −ieffWieff)/2 = TrW = W, this coefﬁcient can equally well
be written as ⟨P(xreff)W⟩ˆ
AV,0, and vanishes for those W for which W is effectively
zero inside zero-source averages. The reasons that we shall give for expecting W to
be effectively zero will depend on our choice for W in the enumeration of cases that
follows. We shall generally assume that when W is a conserved trace generator with
⟨W⟩AV = 0, then we can approximate W as zero inside canonical averages ⟨W⟩ˆ
AV, jeff
in the presence of sources jeff, so that ⟨P(xreff)W⟩ˆ
AV,0 ≃0. (However, this assump-
tion on W can be dispensed with when the condition, that ωtr should vanish for all
arguments xt in SL,R and all arguments xr in S, is satisﬁed, since then the unwanted
second variation terms are absent. This happens, for example, when the polynomials
S, SL, SR in Eq. (5.15c) are constructed solely from canonical coordinates q, with no
arguments that are canonical momenta p.)
With assumptions (1)–(3), Eq. (5.15a) simpliﬁes dramatically to take the form
Dxueff = ieff[Weff, xueff] −¯h

s
ωus

δW
δxs

eff
,
(5.19a)
where we have used the fact that ieff commutes with all effective quantities to pull
it outside the commutator in the ﬁrst term. Consistent with our assumptions (1) and
(3) of a decoupling of the “fast” dynamics from the low energy phenomenological

130
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
theory, we shall assume that Weff of Eq. (5.19a), in its action on the low energy
or “slow” degrees of freedom, can be represented as a suitable operator function
Weff(xreff) constructed from the xreff, with the inﬂuence of the “fast” degrees of
freedom appearing only through some set of renormalized couplings and through
the average ieff¯h of ˜C. We can now use this simpliﬁed form of D in the Ward
identity with sources given in Eq. (5.15b), and in the Ward identity obtained after
source variations given in Eq. (5.15c). Assumption (4) allows us to use Eq. (5.15c)
without restrictions on the arguments xt of the left and right polynomial SL,R,
effectively taking Eq. (5.15c) “off-shell” and allowing us to interpret the vanishing
of the right-hand side of Eq. (5.19a) as an operator identity in the weak sense in
the effective theory.
As discussed in Adler and Millard (1996), specialization of the operator poly-
nomial W gives a number of important results.
(A) First, let us take W in Eq. (5.19a) to be the operator Hamiltonian
H = 
r pr ˙qr −L, with H = TrH the corresponding trace Hamiltonian, as in
Eq. (1.9b). Then by using the trace dynamics equation of motion of Eq. (1.15b),
Eq. (5.19a) simpliﬁes to
Dxueff = ieff[Heff, xueff] −¯h ˙xueff.
(5.19b)
Using Eq. (5.19b) in Eq. (5.15c), we learn that xueff obeys an effective Heisenberg
picture equation of motion, which holds when sandwiched between polynomials
SL,R that do not contain xu, and averaged over the zero-source canonical ensemble.
We now make the assumption that the canonical ensemble has vanishing average
trace energy H. Neglecting the ﬂuctuations of the extensive quantity H over the
canonical ensemble, which will be small for a large system, this also implies that
⟨P(xreff)H⟩ˆ
AV,0 vanishes. This allows us to neglect the unwanted source current
variation terms arising from Eq. (5.17a), and so the restriction that SL,R not con-
tain xu can be dropped. The restriction that u does not belong to the canonical
pair containing the indices R, R + 1 will not be signiﬁcant in the case where the
phase space variable label u is a spatial coordinate label, since we can then take
the canonical pair labeled by the indices R, R + 1 to lie outside the region of in-
terest. We learn from Eq. (5.19b) that the phase space ﬂow generated at the trace
dynamics level by the generalized Poisson bracket can be represented, when aver-
aged over the canonical ensemble and with our assumptions (1)–(4), by a unitary
Heisenberg picture phase space ﬂow of the standard quantum mechanical form,
with ieff playing the role of the usual i. This is the ﬁrst example of how, in our
framework, quantum mechanical relations are emergent from the underlying the-
ory, without the application of ad hoc “canonical quantization” rules.

The emergence of quantum theory
131
The assumption of vanishing ensemble trace energy can be recast as an assump-
tion that the underlying physics is scale invariant. As we have seen in Section 2.4,
in a scale-invariant theory the Lorentz trace of the trace energy-momentum
tensor vanishes, T µ
µ = 0. Since, when the τ terms can be neglected, averages over
the canonical ensemble are Lorentz invariant (because ˜C and N are Lorentz in-
variant), we have ⟨Tµν⟩ˆ
AV,0 = −ηµν⟨T00⟩ˆ
AV,0, and so in a scale-invariant the-
ory ⟨H⟩ˆ
AV,0 = 0. Thus, in a scale-invariant trace dynamics theory the effective
Heisenberg equation of motion of Eqs. (5.19b) and (5.15c) holds when sandwiched
between completely general polynomials SL,R constructed from the effective vari-
ables xeff. Note, however, that as we also have seen in Section 2.4, scale invariance
of the underlying dynamics does not imply vanishing of the Lorentz trace of an
operator energy-momentum tensor, and so the emergent quantum ﬁeld theory is
not restricted to be scale invariant! A suggestion that this may give a mechanism
for resolving the cosmological constant problem is discussed in Chaptter 7. We re-
mark that, when gravitation is included in our framework, achieving ⟨H⟩ˆ
AV,0 = 0
may involve a balance between gravitational and matter contributions.
Using now the assumption that Heff can be represented, in its action on the
low energy (or “slow”) degrees of freedom, by a suitable operator Hamiltonian
function Heff(xreff) constructed from the xreff, let us choose S in Eq. (5.15c) to be
this function Heff(xreff). Then substituting D from Eq. (5.19b) and using the chain
rule we learn that
⟨SL(xteff) ˙HeffSR(xteff)⟩ˆ
AV,0
= ⟨SL(xteff)ieff¯h−1[Heff, Heff]SR(xteff)⟩ˆ
AV,0 = 0,
(5.19c)
showing that within our approximations Heff behaves as a constant of the motion,
as required for consistency of the interpretation of Eqs. (5.19b) and (5.15c) as an
effective Heisenberg dynamics. In a similar way, by use of the chain rule we ﬁnd
that an arbitrary polynomial function Peff of the xreff obeys a relation of which
Eq. (5.19c) is a special case
⟨SL(xteff) ˙PeffSR(xteff)⟩ˆ
AV,0
=⟨SL(xteff)ieff¯h−1[Heff, Peff]SR(xteff)⟩ˆ
AV,0.
(5.19d)
The effective Heisenberg picture equation of motion obtained by substituting
Eq. (5.19b) into Eq. (5.15c) gives the forward time step dt ˙xueff on the time slice on
which the canonical ensemble is formed. When the underlying dynamics is time-
translation invariant, a similar relation holds on each future time slice, permitting
us to integrate forward with respect to time, giving the relation
xueff(t) = exp(ieff¯h−1Hefft)xueff(0) exp(−ieff¯h−1Hefft)
(5.19e)

132
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
when sandwiched between polynomials SL,R and averaged over the zero-ource
ensemble. (Alternatively, Eq. (5.19e) can be obtained, in Taylor expanded form,
by iterating Eqs. (5.19b) and (5.15c) together with use of Eq. (5.19c), to obtain
expressions for higher time derivatives of xueff in terms of multiple commutators
of xueff with Heff on the initial time slice, in analogy with the procedure used to
go from Eq. (1.18c) to (1.19).) Consider now the ensemble average of an arbitrary
polynomial S formed from dynamical variables taken at different times, multi-
plying another such polynomial S′, and advance all of the variables on which S
depends by the same time increment t, giving a time-evolved polynomial that
we denote by S|t. Then an application of Eq. (5.19e) to each variable on which
S depends gives the formula
⟨S′S|t⟩ˆ
AV,0 = ⟨S′ exp(ieff¯h−1Hefft)S exp(−ieff¯h−1Hefft)⟩ˆ
AV,0,
(5.20)
and similarly when S′ is to the right of S.
(B) Next, let us take W in Eq. (5.19a) to be σvxv, with σv an auxiliary c-number
parameter which is a real or complex number for v bosonic, and is a real or com-
plex Grassmann number for v fermionic, so that W in both cases is bosonic. We
then have δW/δxs = σvδsv, and Eq. (5.19a) becomes (after multiplication through
by ieff)
ieffDxueff = [xueff, σvxveff] −ieff¯hωuvσv.
(5.21a)
Equation (5.15c) then tells us that this expression vanishes when sandwiched be-
tween polynomials SL,R that do not contain the variable xu, and averaged over the
zero-source canonical ensemble. Moreover, the restriction on SL,R can be dropped
if we assume that the ensemble average of the classical part of xv vanishes, which
can be achieved in the presence of sources if we assume that the source currents
jreff have vanishing classical parts. With these assumptions, after taking variations
we have ⟨SL(Trxv)SR⟩ˆ
AV,0 = 0, eliminating the unwanted source current varia-
tion terms of Eq. (5.15b). When we assume that the source currents jreff have
no classical parts, the arguments of the polynomials SL,R generated by varying
these sources are correspondingly specialized to involve only the traceless parts of
the effective dynamical variables xreff. This will be sufﬁcient for our purposes,
since the traceless parts of the dynamical variables, and not their classical parts,
are the precursors of the emergent quantum degrees of freedom. The assumption
of vanishing averages of the classical parts of the dynamical variables is analo-
gous to the usual assumption of zero classical part made in ﬁeld quantization in
the absence of spontaneous symmetry breaking, and does not preclude dynamical
spontaneous symmetry breaking, in which composites constructed from products
of the fundamental dynamical variables have non-vanishing classical parts.

The emergence of quantum theory
133
Translating from the compact symplectic notation used in Eq. (5.21a) (cf. also
Eqs. (1.22a,b)) by recalling the deﬁnition of ωuv given in Eqs. (1.16a,b), and fac-
toring away the parameter σv with attention to the fact that it is Grassmann for
fermionic v, we learn from Eqs. (5.15c) and (5.21a) that when multiplied by left
and right polynomials SL,R and averaged over the zero-source ensemble, we have
the effective canonical commutators
[queff, qveff] = [pueff, pveff] = 0,
[queff, pveff] = ieff¯hδuv
(5.21b)
for u, v bosonic. Similarly, we have the effective canonical anticommutators
{queff, qveff} = {pueff, pveff} = 0,
{queff, pveff} = ieff¯hδuv
(5.21c)
for u, v fermionic, with the corresponding commutators of bosonic with fermionic
quantities all vanishing. In other words, the entire canonical algebra for boson
and fermion degrees of freedom is compactly encoded in the statement that the
right-hand side of Eq. (5.21a) vanishes. Thus, as suggested at the beginning of this
chapter, the Ward identities do in fact lead to an equipartitioning of ˜C, giving rise
in an emergent fashion to the canonical commutator/anticommutator structure that
is the basis for ﬁeld quantization.
Note that the emergence of the canonical algebra implicitly requires a limit-
ing process. As is well known, in a complex Hilbert space the canonical algebra
[q, p] = i ¯h, [q, i] = [p, i] = 0 cannot have ﬁnite-dimensional (or more gener-
ally, trace class) representations, since when cyclic permutation under the trace is
allowed, the trace of [q, p] is zero while the trace of i is i N, with N the dimen-
sion of the Hilbert space. Since our emergent Heisenberg algebra in the bosonic
case has the form [qeff, peff] = ieff¯h, and since Trieff = 0, a contradiction does
not arise at the level of a single commutator. However, let us consider a relation
derived by using the canonical commutator [q, p] = i ¯h twice, for example, the re-
lation q2 p2 + p2q2 −2qp2q = −2¯h2. Now there is a conﬂict with the trace class
assumption, even when the role of i is played by ieff, since assuming cyclic per-
mutation under the trace, the left-hand side of this identity would have a vanishing
trace, while the right-hand side has non-vanishing trace −2N ¯h2. However, it is
consistent for the canonical algebra to emerge as the limit N →∞of a matrix
algebra in an N-dimensional Hilbert space, or as an idealized approximation to a
matrix algebra in a Hilbert space with N large but ﬁnite, or as an approximation to
a more general type of trace class algebra.
(C) Finally, let us take W in Eq. (5.19a) to be a general self-adjoint polynomial G,
so that G is the generator of general canonical transformations of the trace dynam-
ics as described in Eqs. (2.13a,b). Then combining Eq. (5.19a) with Eq. (2.13b),

134
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
and dividing by ¯h, we get
¯h−1Dxueff = ieff¯h−1[Geff, xueff] −δxueff.
(5.22a)
This tells us that sandwiched between polynomials SL,R that do not contain the
variable xu, and averaged over the zero-source canonical ensemble, general in-
ﬁnitesimal canonical transformations are effectively generated by unitary transfor-
mations of the form
Ucan eff = exp(ieff¯h−1Geff).
(5.22b)
Moreover, when W is a conserved extensive generator G that is a symmetry of
the canonical ensemble, so that G effectively vanishes inside canonical averages,
then the restriction on SL,R can be dropped and Eq. (5.22b) holds as a general
“off-shell” relation. Examples of conserved generators satisfying this condition
are the trace momentum and trace angular momentum, which have vanishing gen-
eralized Poisson bracket with the trace Hamiltonian (as well as with the Poincar´e
invariants N and ˜C; see remarks below). The trace boost generators are linearly in-
creasing with time, because for a Poincar´e invariant underlying theory, their gener-
alized Poisson brackets with H are proportional to the trace momentum generators,
which are conserved. Since we have assumed a canonical ensemble that is at rest
and thus deﬁnes no preferred spatial vector, the canonical ensemble averages of the
trace boost generators are therefore also zero, and so the boosts will also be rep-
resented by unitary (or when spinors are present, pseudounitary) transformations.
In trace dynamics models deﬁned as continuum theories, such as the examples
of Sections 2.3 and 2.4 and Chapter 3, we therefore see that the canonical trace
Poincar´e generators are represented at the effective level by operator generators.
In particular, in Poincar´e invariant theories the trace three-momentum will have a
corresponding operator three-momentum ⃗Peff that is time independent (by similar
arguments to those used to show that Heff is time independent), and that generates
translations involving spatial displacement ⃗x through a unitary transformation
Utrans eff(⃗x) = exp(ieff¯h−1⃗x · ⃗Peff).
(5.22c)
In a similar manner, internal symmetries with generators G that are symmetries
of the trace Hamiltonian will have G effectively vanishing inside canonical aver-
ages, and so will also be represented by unitary transformations in the effective
quantum theory. Finally, let G = G = Tr ˜C be the conserved generator con-
structed in Eq. (2.11a) as the generator of global unitary transformations, with the
restriction now that  should be a matrix that commutes with ieff, and should have
vanishing trace in each of the two K-dimensional subspaces obtained by reduc-
ing the Hilbert space modulo ieff as in Section 4.5. This generator G vanishes in-
side canonical averages, since these restrictions enforce the condition Tr ieff = 0.

The emergence of quantum theory
135
Thus Eq. (5.22b) holds as an off-shell relation in this case also, and corresponds to
the global unitary transformations Ueff that produce nontrivial unitary changes of
basis in the emergent quantum theory, since the restrictions that we have imposed
exclude only those trivial transformations that act as an overall phase times the
unit matrix in each the K-dimensional subspaces on which ieff = ±i.
To sum up, we have shown that the basic structure of quantum ﬁeld theory – the
canonical commutator/anticommutator structure, time evolution in the Heisenberg
picture, and the unitary generation of canonical transformations – emerges from
the statistical thermodynamics of matrix models with a global unitary invariance.
In the above discussion the polynomials SL,R were constructed from phase space
variables (or at least, their traceless or non-classical parts) taken at the common
time used to form the canonical ensemble. However, once we have ascertained that
there are no restrictions on the labels of these variables (other than that they cannot
contain xR, xR+1, which can be taken to lie outside all relevant causal horizons),
pieces of the polynomials SL,R can be used to construct powers of the effective
Hamiltonian Heff, and the formal integration of the Heisenberg picture dynamics
given in Eqs. (5.19e) and (5.20) can be used to extend our results to identities sand-
wiched between general polynomial functions of the phase space variables taken
at general times. This extends the identities “off-shell” by giving them the status
of “weak” operator relations, that is relations that hold when averaged over all
smooth test functions formed from the traceless parts of the dynamical variables.
The results that we have obtained suggest a correspondence between operator
polynomials in the underlying trace dynamics, and operator polynomials in com-
plex quantum ﬁeld theory
S({xreff}) ⇔S({Xreff}),
(5.23a)
with the Xreff on the right quantized operators in a quantum theory with the role
of i played by the matrix ieff, which commutes with all of the Xreff. Since ieff di-
agonalizes into two K × K blocks as indicated in Eq. (4.40), the correspondence
of Eq. (5.23a) actually gives two uncoupled copies of a complex quantum ﬁeld
dynamics, on one of which ieff acts as i and on the other of which ieff acts as the
complex conjugate −i. Let us now focus on the copy on which ieff acts as i; sim-
ilar considerations apply to the copy on which ieff acts as −i. (Some speculations
on possible physical implications of the existence of two copies of the emergent
quantum theory, particularly with regard to cosmology, are given in Chapter 7.)
We now make two further structural assumptions:
(5)
In the continuum limit, with the indices r labeling inﬁnitesimal spatial boxes as
well as internal symmetry structure, the underlying trace Lagrangian L is Poincar´e
invariant.

136
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
(6)
The underlying dynamics leads to an Heff that is bounded from below by the mag-
nitude of the corresponding effective three-momentum operator ⃗Peff, and there is a
unique eigenvector ψ0 with lowest eigenvalue of Heff and zero eigenvalue of ⃗Peff.
(Although introduced here as an independent assumption, the existence of a lowest
eigenvector may follow from the boundedness assumption on Heff, and this in turn
may be deducible from an analogous boundedness assumption at the trace dynamics
level, stating that H is bounded from below by (⃗P · ⃗P)
1
2 .)
With these two assumptions we can make contact with quantum ﬁeld theory.
According to assumption (6), the eigenvector ψ0 acts as the conventional vacuum
state, and we have seen that within ensemble averages, the underlying matrices
obey properties analogous to those of quantum ﬁelds. With this motivation, we
propose the following precise correspondence between trace dynamics canonical
ensemble averages and Wightman functions in the emergent quantum ﬁeld theory
ψ†
0⟨S({xreff})⟩ˆ
AVψ0 = ⟨vac|S({Xreff})|vac⟩.
(5.23b)
(Equation (5.23b) applies to xs that are bosonic and fermionic canonical qs and
ps. Thus in the fermionic case, qreff ↔Qreff and preff ↔Preff. However, when
the fermionic quantized operators are rewritten in terms of reff and †
reff, the
correspondence reads ψreff ↔reff and ψ†
reff ↔ieff†
reff, since the correct def-
inition of the operator †
reff is Preff = ieff†
reff, as discussed in further detail in
Section 5.5.) When the underlying trace dynamics is Poincar´e invariant, the fact
that Poincar´e transformations are canonical transformations with global unitary in-
variant generators implies, by the discussion of Section 2.2, that ˜C is a Poincar´e
invariant. Hence the term Tr˜λ ˜C in the canonical ensemble is a Poincar´e invariant,
and in particular is a Lorentz scalar. By a similar argument, the trace fermion num-
ber N is a Poincar´e invariant. Although the term τH in the canonical ensemble is
not a Lorentz scalar, in the low energy regime where approximation (1) is valid,
so that variations in the τ term can be neglected in the Ward identities, the Lorentz
noninvariance associated with this term decouples, giving a Lorentz invariant ef-
fective ﬁeld theory. Hence with the assumptions and approximations that we have
made, the correspondence of Eq. (5.23b) deﬁnes Wightman functions of a Lorentz
invariant effective ﬁeld theory, as we shall now outline.
Let us brieﬂy enumerate the basic properties of Wightman functions (Streater
and Wightman, 1968) that are needed to reconstruct local quantum ﬁeld theory (see
Appendix F for details) and indicate why, with the correspondence of Eq. (5.23b),
it is plausible that they are obeyed. We assume for this argument that the subscript
r on the phase space variables xr labels inﬁnitesimal spatial boxes, so that we are
discussing the trace dynamics analog of a continuum ﬁeld theory.

The emergence of quantum theory
137
(i)
By constructing the Wightman functions from thermodynamic averages, they are
expected to have the requisite smoothness properties, i.e., they should be tempered
distributions.
(ii)
Lorentz covariance of the Wightman functions follows from Lorentz invariance of ˜C
and N and our assumption that the noninvariant τH terms in the canonical ensemble
effectively decouple from the low energy theory.
(iii)
The spectral condition for the Wightman functions follows from the formulas of
Eqs. (5.19e), (5.20), (5.22c), and the analog of Eq. (5.20) for spatial translations
(which combined give the effect, within canonical ensemble averages, of space-
time translation of the phase space variables), together with the spectral assumptions
stated in (6).
(iv)
Local commutativity of the Wightman functions follows from the canonical com-
mutation/anticommutation relations derived, in the approximation of neglecting the
τ terms, in Eqs. (5.21a–c), together with Lorentz covariance, which allows us to
transform any spacelike separated pair of variables into spatially separated variables
on the same time slice.
(v)
The hermiticity and positivity properties of the Wightman functions follow directly
from the correspondence with thermodynamics averages of Eq. (5.23b), since these
averages have analogous properties.
(vi)
The cluster property of the Wightman functions corresponds to the assumptions
about H made in the clustering argument used in the discussion of the microcanoni-
cal ensemble in Eqs. (4.19a–c).
Once the properties (i)–(vi) are obeyed, the fundamental reconstruction theorem
of Wightman shows that a local, relativistic quantum ﬁeld theory can be recon-
structed from the Wightman functions. Thus, under the approximations leading
to the correspondence of Eq. (5.23b), the canonical ensemble averages of trace
dynamics give rise, as an effective low energy dynamics, to a local relativistic
quantum ﬁeld theory.
In Section 4.5, we pointed out that when statistical averages are calculated with
a unitary ﬁxing that eliminates the residual global unitary invariance group com-
muting with ieff, then only averages of trace functions of the matrix variables are
independent of the choice of ﬁxing. This means that quantities like ⟨S({xreff})⟩ˆ
AV
depend on the choice of unitary ﬁxing. However, let us write the ground state pro-
jector 0 = ψ0ψ†
0 as a Cauchy integral over the resolvent for Heff
0 =
1
2πi

dz
1
z −Heff
,
(5.23c)
with the contour an inﬁnitesimal counterclockwise circle around z = 0. Then the
left-hand side of Eq. (5.23b) can be rewritten as
⟨Tr 1
2πi

dz
1
z −Heff
S({xreff})⟩ˆ
AV,
(5.23d)

138
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
which has the form of the average of a trace polynomial. Therefore the emergent
Wightman functions are independent of the choice of unitary ﬁxing. More gen-
erally, the measurable quantities in quantum theory are transition probabilities,
which can be written as (see the discussion of the Jordan formulation of quantum
theory in G¨ursey and Tze, 1996)
|⟨β|
|α⟩|2 = Tr
β
α,
(5.23e)
with 
 some self-adjoint operator. Since β and α can be written as contour in-
tegrals over the resolvents of the corresponding operators for which they are spec-
tral projectors, the transition probabilities in quantum theory can always be written
as trace functionals of operators, and so are also physical observables within our
framework.
To conclude this section, we note that there is a natural hierarchy of matrix
structures leading from the underlying trace dynamics, to the emergent effective
complex quantum ﬁeld theory, to the classical limit, as drawn in Fig. 2 of the Intro-
duction. In the underlying theory, the matrices xr are of completely general struc-
ture. No commutation properties of the xr are assumed at the trace dynamics level,
and since all degrees of freedom communicate with one another, the dynamics is
completely nonlocal. In the effective quantum theory, the xr are still matrices, but
with a restricted structure that obeys the canonical commutator/anticommutator al-
gebra. Thus, locality is an emergent property of the effective theory, even though
it is not a property of the underlying trace dynamics. Finally, in the limit in which
the matrices xr are dominated by their c-number or classical parts deﬁned in
Eqs. (2.16a,b), the effective quantum ﬁeld dynamics becomes an effective classical
dynamics. Thus, both classical mechanics and quantum mechanics are subsumed
in the more general trace dynamics, as reﬂected in the following hierarchy of ma-
trix structures, corresponding to increasing specialization: general →canonical
quantum plus c-number →c-number, classical. The Heisenberg uncertainty re-
lations characteristic of the canonical algebra of quantum mechanics appear only
at the middle level of this hierarchy of matrix structures. At the bottom or trace
dynamics level, there is no indeterminacy in the dynamics of the operator matrix
elements (at least in principle, given the initial conditions), because no dynamical
information has been discarded. Although one can form analogs of the Heisenberg
uncertainty relations for expectations of operator variances at the trace dynamics
level, they will involve unknown and effectively random operator commutators in
place of the usual quantum mechanical 1
2 ¯h. At the top or classical level, there are
no apparent indeterminacies because quantum uncertainties are masked by large
system size.

Restrictions implied by further Ward identities
139
5.4 Restrictions on the underlying theory implied by further
Ward identities
In this section we shall take a critical look at the assumptions and approximations
made in the previous section in the course of our argument for the emergence
of quantum behavior. We shall do this by deriving further Ward identities, and
showing that their consistency with the Ward identity derived in Section 5.1,
and with the approximations made in Section 5.3, places nontrivial constraints
on the structure of the underlying trace dynamics. In particular, these constraints
take the form of special support properties in operator phase space, and a re-
quirement of balance between the numbers of bosonic and fermionic degrees of
freedom.
The ﬁrst additional Ward identity is obtained by proceeding as we did start-
ing from Eq. (5.5a), but with the factor { ˜C, ieff} = 2ieff ˜Ceff appearing in the trace
Tr{ ˜C, ieff}W replaced at the outset by a constant, which we can take to be unity.
Thus, we start now from
Z j⟨TrW⟩ˆ
AV, j =

d ˆµ exp

−Tr˜λ ˜C −τH −ηN −

r
Tr jrxr

TrW, (5.24a)
and proceed as we did in Section 5.1. The derivation completely parallels that
leading to Eqs. (5.14a,b), except that the term corresponding to Eq. (5.9b), which
comes from the variation of the factor ˜C in Tr{ ˜C, ieff}W, is absent. Dropping this
term from Eq. (5.14b), replacing { ˜C, ieff} on the right-hand side by −2¯h and fac-
toring away −¯h, and using Eq. (5.10b) to simplify the ﬁnal term on the right, we
get
⟨′
ueff⟩ˆ
AV, j = 0,
(5.24b)
with ′
ueff given by
′
ueff =

−τ ˙xueff + iηξuxueff −

s
ωus jseff

W
+

s
ωus

δW
δxs

eff
.
(5.24c)
Correspondingly, after variation of source terms, instead of Eq. (5.16b) we now
get (for monomial S, SL, SR)
⟨SL(xteff)

u
S(xreff, r ̸= u; D′xueff)SR(xteff)⟩ˆ
AV,0 = 0,
(5.25a)

140
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
with D′xueff given by
D′xueff = (−τ ˙xueff + iηξuxueff)W
+

s
ωus

δW
δxs

eff
.
(5.25b)
It is apparent from Eq. (5.25b) that we cannot make an approximation of ne-
glecting both the η term and the τ term on the right-hand side, since this would
lead to the incorrect conclusion, for example, that
⟨

δW
δxs

eff
⟩ˆ
AV,0 = 0
(5.26a)
for general W. In other words, assumption (1) of Section 5.3, which we recall
states that
τ ˙xueffTr ˜CeffieffWeff = τ ˙xueffTr ˜CeffieffW
(5.26b)
can be neglected, cannot be extended to the assumption that the corresponding
expression obtained by replacing ˜Ceff by its ensemble average ieff¯h can also be
neglected. This does not invalidate the reasoning of Section 5.3, but does place
constraints on the support structure of the underlying trace dynamics. To give a
simple illustration, if f and g are non-negative functions, the vanishing of the
average ( f g)AV over a domain including the supports of f and g does not con-
tradict the fact that (( f )AVg)AV = ( f )AV(g)AV is non-zero and positive; what is
necessary and sufﬁcient to achieve the vanishing of the former is for f and g to
have nonintersecting domains of support, so that f = 0 where g > 0 and vice
versa. We are faced with a similar situation with respect to ˜Ceff, which although
not of deﬁnite sign has, by assumption, a non-vanishing canonical ensemble aver-
age ieff¯h. A sufﬁcient condition for us to be able to neglect Eq. (5.26b), without
contradicting Eq. (5.25b), is for ˙xueff and ˜Ceff to have disjoint domains of support,
which is why we have phrased assumption (1) in terms of support properties.
At the same time, we cannot impose this property by requiring the stronger
condition that xueff and ˜Ceff have disjoint support, since this would contradict as-
sumption (3), which states that { ˜C, ieff} can be replaced by its ensemble average in
the ﬁnal term in Eq. (5.15a). Thus, what is required is that the “slow” components
of xueff, for which τ ˙xueff is effectively zero, share a common domain of support
with ˜Ceff, and be slowly varying with respect to the scale of variations of ˜Ceff, so
that in “slow” terms in the Ward identity ˜Ceff is effectively equal to its ensemble
average. At the same time, we must require that the “fast” components of xueff,
for which ˙xueff is signiﬁcant, have disjoint support from ˜Ceff, so that the ensem-
ble average of their product is effectively zero. To see that these requirements are

Restrictions implied by further Ward identities
141
compatible, and sufﬁce to do what is needed, let us write
xreff = xslow
reff + xfast
reff,
(5.27a)
and postulate that ˜Ceff has disjoint support from xfast
reff. Then in the ﬁnal term of
Eq. (5.15a) we have

W Rℓ
s
1
2{ ˜C, ieff}W Lℓ
s

eff
=

W Rℓslow
s
1
2{ ˜C, ieff}W Lℓslow
s

eff
,
(5.27b)
so that the “fast” terms do not appear in this expression, and we can then apply
assumption (3) to replace ˜Ceff by ieff¯h in this term. Similarly, by the assumed
support properties
τ ˙xreffTr ˜CeffieffWeff = τ ˙xslow
reff Tr ˜CeffieffW slow
eff
≃0,
(5.27c)
but on the other hand
τ ˙xreffTrW = τ ˙xreffTrWeff = τ(˙xslow
reff + ˙xfast
reff)Tr(W slow
eff
+ W fast
eff )
≃τ ˙xfast
reffTr(W slow
eff
+ W fast
eff ) ̸= 0,
(5.27d)
so the additional Ward identity derived in Eq. (5.25b) (with the η term neglected)
can be satisﬁed.
More speciﬁc statements of our assumptions (1) and (3) can be given if we
specialize the underlying trace dynamics (i) to the supersymmetric case, where the
numbers nB and nF of bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom are equal, and
(ii) to the speciﬁc case of supersymmetric Yang–Mills theory, where we have seen
in Section 3.2 that ˜C reduces to a surface integral at spatial inﬁnity. As preparation
for these specializations, let us follow the notation of Eq. (4.41b) and write xr =
xreff + xr 12, which when substituted into Eq. (5.1) for ˜C gives
˜C =

r,s
ωrs(xreffxseff + xreffxs 12 + xr 12xseff + xr 12xs 12).
(5.28a)
Taking the effective projection, and using Eq. (4.41c), which implies that
(xs 12)eff = (xr 12)eff = 0 and that (xr 12xs 12)eff = xr 12xs 12 (since ieff anticom-
mutes with xr 12 and with xs 12, it commutes with their product), we get
˜Ceff =

r,s
ωrs(xreffxseff + xr 12xs 12).
(5.28b)
The ﬁrst term on the right-hand side in Eq. (5.28b) can be rewritten as

r,s
ωrsxreffxseff =

r∈B
[qreff, preff] −

r∈F
{qreff, preff}.
(5.28c)
Within ensemble averages, we have seen that the commutators and anticommuta-
tors in Eq. (5.28c) have the effective canonical values given in Eqs. (5.21b,c), and

142
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
so within averages Eq. (5.28c) is effectively (nB −nF)ieff¯h, and we have
˜Ceff ≃(nB −nF)ieff¯h +

r,s
ωrsxr 12xs 12,
(5.28d)
with nB and nF respectively the numbers of bosonic and fermionic matrix degrees
of freedom.
We can now apply this equation in two ways. First of all, within an ensemble
average containing no other factors, Eq. (5.28d) becomes
ieff¯h ≃(nB −nF)ieff¯h + ⟨

r,s
ωrsxr 12xs 12⟩ˆ
AV,0.
(5.29a)
This shows that if the difference nB −nF becomes inﬁnite, then there is an in-
consistency unless the second term in Eq. (5.29a) becomes large in such a way
as to cancel the inﬁnite part of the ﬁrst term. This is implausible, and so we con-
clude that consistency of our approximations requires that nB −nF should be ﬁ-
nite, even when nB becomes large. (A more precise version of this argument for
boson–fermion balance will be given shortly.) Specializing now to the case of su-
persymmetric theories, for which nB is exactly equal to nF, the ﬁrst term on the
right in Eq. (5.28d) vanishes, and we get
˜Ceff ≃

r,s
ωrsxr 12xs 12.
(5.29b)
From this equation, we see that the support properties stated in the lines preceding
Eq. (5.27a), that were expressed in terms of ˜Ceff, can now be expressed in terms
of support properties involving xs 12. Thus, a sufﬁcient condition for the needed
support properties is that xfast
ueff should have disjoint support from xs 12 for all u, s,
while xslow
ueff should have a common support with xs 12, in such a way that ˜Ceff can
be replaced by its ensemble average in expressions involving “slow” quantities.
From Eq. (5.29a) with nB −nF = 0, we see that ieff¯h obeys the sum rule
ieff¯h ≃⟨

r,s
ωrsxr 12xs 12⟩ˆ
AV,0.
(5.29c)
We have learned from this analysis that the quantities for which disjoint support
is required are distinct components under the separation into “eff” and “12” com-
ponents introduced in Eq. (4.41b). A further distinction is present in supersymmet-
ric Yang–Mills theories, in which we have seen that ˜C reduces to a surface term
at spatial inﬁnity, giving the emergence of quantum mechanics in these theories a
“holographic” ﬂavor. (For a review of recent ideas on a possible holographic struc-
ture of physical theories, see Bousso, 2002.) The degrees of freedom xr(vol) which
describe observable physics are then degrees of freedom residing in the interior
volume, whereas the components xr(surf) 12 entering into Eq. (5.29b) for ˜C reside

Restrictions implied by further Ward identities
143
on the surface at inﬁnity. For such theories, the required support properties state
that (i) for volume degrees of freedom, xfast
r(vol)eff should have disjoint phase space
support from degrees of freedom xr(surf) 12 residing on the surface at spatial inﬁn-
ity, so that τ ˙xr(vol)effTr ˜CeffieffWeff can be neglected even when τ ˙xr(vol)effTrWeff is
signiﬁcant; and (ii) the volume degrees of freedom xslow
r(vol)eff should have a common
support with the degrees of freedom xr(surf) 12 residing on the surface at inﬁnity and
should be slowly varying relative to ˜Ceff, so that we can freely replace ˜Ceff by its
ensemble average ieff¯h inside averages of products of factors xslow
r(vol)eff. (Recall that
the distinction between volume and surface here refers only to operator labels r,
and does not directly translate into support properties in the operator phase space.)
These statements are as far as we have been able to carry a general analysis of
the needed support properties. A further understanding of whether they can be re-
alized will require a study of speciﬁc models for the underlying trace dynamics;
constructing realistic candidates requires a solution to the problem of obtaining a
large hierarchy of scales between the underlying “fast” and the phenomenologi-
cal “slow” degrees of freedom, which was invoked as part of the justiﬁcation for
neglecting the τ terms in the Ward identities. This problem is the same as the
so-called hierarchy problem of particle uniﬁcation models, and its solution may
require deep new physical ideas. At a minimum, what our analysis has accom-
plished is to show that the support properties needed for assumptions (1) and (3)
are not contradictory, and so cannot be used in any obvious way to construct an
argument contradicting our program.
The support properties required for the emergence of quantum behavior can also
be characterized in physical terms as the requirement that the canonical ensemble
should possess a certain “rigidity”, in the sense that the contribution of the ensem-
ble variation (δρ/δxs)eff to the Ward identity of Section 5.1 can be neglected, as
posited in assumptions (1) and (2) of Section 5.3. The need for a rigid statistical
ensemble in our context suggests a possible analogy with the concept of London
rigidity in the theory of superconductivity. In the presence of an applied vector
potential ⃗A, the induced current density ⃗j in a metal is given by
⟨⃗j ⟩= −ne
m ⟨⃗p + e ⃗A⟩,
(5.29d)
with n, m, e, ⃗p respectively the electron density, mass, charge, and three-
momentum operator. In a normal metal the two terms on the right-hand side of
Eq. (5.29d) nearly cancel, leaving a small residual diamagnetism. However, in a
superconductor the rigidity of the wave function leads to the vanishing of ⟨⃗p⟩, giv-
ing perfect diamagnetism and the Meissner effect. An analogy with the analysis
of this section would equate normal metal behavior with the case in which ˜Ceff
can be replaced by its ensemble average in all terms, including the τ term, in the

144
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
Ward identities. In this case −¯h times the right-hand side of Eq. (5.24c) is equal
to the non-commutator part of the right-hand side of Eq. (5.15a) when the sources
js are set equal to zero, leading to vanishing of the emergent canonical commuta-
tor/anticommutator and to an effective classical dynamics. Similarly, the analogy
would equate superconducting behavior with the case in which the τ term con-
taining ˜Ceff can be dropped because of “rigidity” of (δρ/δxs)eff, leading as seen in
Section 5.3 to an emergent canonical commutator/anticommutator as an analog of
the superconductive Meissner effect. In this analogy, the Planck energy and the as-
sociated energy scale hierarchy would play the role of the superconductive energy
gap. We suggest that this analogy may be useful in identifying the particular un-
derlying trace dynamics for which the assumptions needed for emergent quantum
mechanics are realized.
We turn now to deriving a more precise statement (Adler and Kempf, 1998)
of the requirement of boson–fermion balance, which we achieve by deriving yet
another Ward identity. This is obtained by proceeding as we did starting from
Eq. (5.5a), but with { ˜C, ieff} replaced by ˜C in the trace factor Tr{ ˜C, ieff}W, so
that this factor is taken now as Tr ˜CW; since Tr{ ˜C, ieff}W = Tr ˜C{ieff, W}, this is
equivalent to replacing 2ieffWeff = {ieff, W} by W. Making these replacements in
Eq. (5.11b), we get the Ward identity
⟨′′
s ⟩ˆ
AV, j = 0,
(5.30a)
with ′′
s given by
′′
s =

−

˜λ,

r
ωrsxr

−τ

r
ωrs ˙xr −iη

r
˜ωrsxr −js

Tr ˜CW
(5.30b)
+

W,

r
ωrsxr

+

ℓ
ϵℓW Rℓ
s
˜CW Lℓ
s .
We now follow a different procedure from that used in Section 5.1, by immediately
taking the sources j to vanish, and by not taking an overall effective projection.
The contribution to the Ward identity of the ﬁrst term on the right-hand side of
Eq. (5.30b) can be rewritten as
−

˜λ, ⟨

r
ωrsxrTr ˜CW⟩ˆ
AV,0

,
(5.30c)
which vanishes by virtue of Eq. (4.47a). Multiplying by ωus and summing over s,
and evaluating the sums using Eqs. (5.13a,b), in place of Eqs. (5.14a,b) we now
get the Ward identity
⟨′′
u⟩ˆ
AV,0 = 0,
(5.31a)

Restrictions implied by further Ward identities
145
with ′′
u given by
′′
u = (−τ ˙xu + iηξuxu)Tr ˜CW
+[W, xu] +

s,ℓ
ωusϵℓW Rℓ
s
˜CW Lℓ
s .
(5.31b)
Let us now apply this to the particular choice W = σtxt, with σt again an auxil-
iary c-number parameter which is a complex number for t bosonic, and a complex
Grassmann number for t fermionic. Then (cf. Eqs. (5.10b,c)) we have only one
term in the sum over ℓ, with ϵℓ=1 = 1, W Lℓ=1
s
= σtδst, and W Rℓ=1
s
= 1, so that
the ﬁnal term in Eq. (5.31b) reduces to
ωut ˜Cσt,
(5.31c)
and has the ensemble average (continuing to assume that ⟨˜C⟩ˆ
AV = ⟨˜C⟩AV)
ωutieff¯hσt.
(5.31d)
Hence in this special case the Ward identity of Eqs. (5.31a,b) reduces to
0 = ⟨(−τ ˙xu + iηξuxu)Tr ˜Cσtxt⟩ˆ
AV,0 + ⟨[σtxt, xu]⟩ˆ
AV,0 + ωutieff¯hσt. (5.32a)
Since the ﬁnal two terms in Eq (5.32a) are manifestly traceless, and since ˜C is
traceless, projecting out the traceless part of the ﬁrst term using the notation of
Eq. (2.16a), and rearranging terms, we arrive at (Adler and Kempf, 1998)
⟨[xu, σtxt]⟩ˆ
AV,0 = ieff¯hωutσt + ⟨(−τ ˙x′
u + iηξux′
u)Tr ˜Cσtx′
t⟩ˆ
AV,0.
(5.32b)
Letting the indices t and u in Eq. (5.32b) be either both bosonic or both
fermionic, and in the fermionic case, for simplicity, setting the “chemical poten-
tial” η equal to zero (it is easy to extend the analysis to η ̸= 0), we get by referring
to Eqs. (1.16a,b) the respective relations
⟨[qr, pr]⟩ˆ
AV,0 =ieff¯h −τ⟨˙q′
rTr ˜C p′
r⟩ˆ
AV,0
r bosonic
⟨{qr, pr}⟩ˆ
AV,0 =ieff¯h −τ⟨˙q′
rTr ˜C p′
r⟩ˆ
AV,0
r fermonic.
(5.33a)
These are exact expressions, in which the terms proportional to τ are very small
corrections when we can assume support properties analogous to those stated in
assumption (1) of Section 5.3, but without the “eff” projections. The relations of
Eq. (5.33a) correspond to taking xu as a canonical coordinate q and xt as a canon-
ical momentum p; a similar set of relations is obtained by taking xu as a p and xt
as a q. Equating the two expressions for the canonical commutators (anticommu-
tators) obtained this way gives identities that are constraints on the averages over
the canonical ensemble that appear in the τ terms; another way of getting these

146
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
constraints is to note that the left-hand sides of the formulas in Eq. (5.33a) are an-
tisymmetric (symmetric) under interchange of qr with pr, whereas the right-hand
sides are not.
Substituting Eq. (5.33a) into the ensemble average of the expression of Eq. (5.1)
for ˜C, and using Eq. (4.11b), we get
ieff¯h =⟨˜C⟩ˆ
AV,0 = ⟨

r∈B
[qr, pr] −

r∈F
{qr, pr}⟩ˆ
AV,0
=

r∈B
−

r∈F

ieff¯h −τ

r∈B
−

r∈F

⟨˙q′
rTr ˜C p′
r⟩ˆ
AV,0.
(5.33b)
After division by ¯h, transposition of terms, and use of r∈B1 = nB, r∈F1 = nF,
this gives

r∈B
−

r∈F

¯h−1τ⟨˙q′
rTr ˜C p′
r⟩ˆ
AV,0 = ieff(nB −nF −1).
(5.33c)
When the condition of approximation (1) of Section 5.3 is satisﬁed, the left-hand
side of Eq. (5.33c) is a sum of very small terms. Let us consider the case in which
r includes the spatial label of a translation invariant ﬁeld theory, with sufﬁcient
convergence properties so that we may assume that this sum yields at most a ﬁnite,
bounded result. Then the numbers of bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom
per unit volume contributing on the right-hand side of Eq. (5.33c) must be equal,
since, if not, the right-hand side of Eq. (5.33c) would become inﬁnite as the spa-
tial volume grows to inﬁnity, contradicting the boundedness of the left-hand side.
Therefore, a trace dynamics that is a candidate pre-quantum mechanics must have
equal numbers of bosonic and fermionic degrees of freedom (up to a ﬁnite residue).
This is a much weaker requirement than supersymmetry, but of course is always
satisﬁed by supersymmetric theories. When the numbers of bosonic and fermionic
degrees of freedom are in balance, Eq. (5.33c) simpliﬁes to

r∈B
−

r∈F

¯h−1τ⟨˙q′
rTr ˜C p′
r⟩ˆ
AV,0 = −ieff,
(5.33d)
showing that the τ ˙xr terms neglected in making approximation (1) sum in
Eq. (5.33d) to give a total of unit magnitude.
The above analysis of boson–fermion balance has implications for the behavior
of ˜C in the thermodynamic limit of large system size. Although the bosonic and
fermionic contributions to ˜C each grow linearly with the size of the system, the
near cancellation of their contributions to ˜C suggests that the total rate of growth
of ˜C could be much smaller than those of the bosonic or fermionic parts taken sep-
arately. Hence, even though ˜C is formally an extensive thermodynamic quantity

Derivation of the Schr¨odinger equation
147
(it is additive for disjoint subsystems), it may remain bounded, or have much
smaller than a linear rate of growth, as the system size gets large. In the ﬁrst case
¯h would remain bounded in the limit of large system size, while in the second case
¯h could still be a weakly increasing function of system size; our general analysis
does not determine the expected behavior. The behavior that we ascribe to ˜C is
somewhat analogous to the behavior of the electric charge operator in electrically
neutral matter: the summed charges Q+ and Q−of the positively charged and
negatively charged constituents behave as extensive quantities, but they cancel in
their contribution to the total charge.
5.5 Derivation of the Schr¨odinger equation
In Section 5.3 we have argued that the statistical thermodynamics of matrix mod-
els with a global unitary invariance leads to an emergent Heisenberg picture quan-
tum mechanics. In this section we shall make the transition to the corresponding
Schr¨odinger picture formulation. We take as our starting point the correspondence
of operators in the underlying trace dynamics to operators in an effective quantum
theory given in Eq. (5.23b). Transcribing the canonical commutators inside aver-
ages of Eqs. (5.21a–c) into operator statements, in the sense of the correspondence
established in Section 5.3, we get
[Xueff, σv Xveff] = ieff¯hωuvσv,
(5.34a)
which encodes the canonical commutators
[Queff, Qveff] = [Pueff, Pveff] = 0,
[Queff, Pveff] = ieff¯hδuv
(5.34b)
for u, v bosonic, and the effective canonical anticommutators
{Queff, Qveff} = {Pueff, Pveff} = 0,
{Queff, Pveff} = ieff¯hδuv
(5.34c)
for u, v fermionic, with all boson–fermion commutators vanishing. Similarly, the
operator transcription of Eq. (5.19b) (in average) for the time evolution of xueff
becomes
˙Xueff = ieff¯h−1[Heff, Xueff],
(5.34d)
which extends by the chain rule to
˙Seff = ieff¯h−1[Heff, Seff],
(5.34e)
with Seff any polynomial function of the operators {Xreff}.
Before turning to the transition to the Schr¨odinger picture, we ﬁrst discuss
consistency issues raised by treating the fermionic anticommutators as operator

148
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
equations. If we were to assign fermionic adjoint properties according to
Qreff = reff,
Preff = i†
reff,
(5.35a)
then the non-vanishing anticommutator in Eq. (5.34c) would take the form
{ueff, †
veff} = −iieff¯hδuv.
(5.35b)
In the K-dimensional subspace of Hilbert space on which ieff acts as ±i,
Eq. (5.35b) becomes
{ueff, †
veff} = ±¯hδuv.
(5.35c)
The + sign case of Eq. (5.35c) corresponds to the normal ﬁeld theoretic fermionic
anticommutator, but the −sign case is inconsistent: Setting u = v, the −sign case
gives
{veff, †
veff} = −¯h,
(5.35d)
which is not possible because the left-hand side of this relation is the sum of two
positive semideﬁnite operators. Therefore the correspondence of Eq. (5.23b) must
include an extra −sign in †
veff in the ieff = −i sector; in other words, a consistent
form of the operator transcription of the adjointness assignment for fermions is
given by
ψreff = qreff ↔Qreff = reff,
ψ†
reff = preff ↔Preff = iτ3†
reff = ieff†
reff,
(5.36a)
with τ3 the 2 × 2 matrix introduced in Eq. (4.40). Correspondingly, the non-
vanishing anticommutator in Eq. (5.35b) is changed to
{ueff, †
veff} = ¯hδuv,
(5.36b)
which has the correct positive sign on the right in both the ieff = ±i sectors of
Hilbert space.
Turning to the boson sector, let us now introduce effective bosonic creation and
annihilation operators in the effective quantum theory, denoted by Areff and A†
reff,
by writing
Qreff =
1
√2(Areff + A†
reff),
Preff =
1
ieff
√2(Areff −A†
reff).
(5.37a)
Since ieff commutes with all effective operators, the deﬁnition of Eq. (5.37a) is
clearly consistent with the self-adjointness of Qr and Pr. Rewriting the commuta-
tor algebra of Eq. (5.34b) in terms of Areff and its adjoint, we get
[Aueff, Aveff] = [A†
ueff, A†
veff] = 0,
[Aueff, A†
veff] = ¯hδuv,
(5.37b)

Derivation of the Schr¨odinger equation
149
which, as was the case in Eq. (5.36b), has the correct positive sign on the right in
both the ieff = ±i sectors of Hilbert space. Note that again a factor of ieff appears in
the transformation from Qreff, Preff to the corresponding creation and annihilation
operators (which for both fermions and bosons, as deﬁned above, differ by a factor
of ¯h
1
2 from the customary ones).
We are now ready to discuss the transition from our emergent Heisenberg
picture quantum mechanics to the Schr¨odinger picture, and to derive the usual
nonrelativistic Schr¨odinger equation. Since the Heisenberg equation of motion of
Eq. (5.34e) and the commutation relations in the form given in Eqs. (5.36b) and
(5.37b) have the standard quantum mechanics form, what we do now is standard
quantum theory, and makes no explicit reference to emergent origins of the quan-
tum equations. Restricting ourselves to the case in which the effective Hamiltonian
has no intrinsic time dependence, we deﬁne Ueff(t) by
Ueff(t) = exp(−ieff¯h−1t Heff),
(5.38a)
so that
d
dt Ueff(t) = −ieff¯h−1HeffUeff(t),
d
dt Ueff(t)† =ieff¯h−1Ueff(t)†Heff.
(5.38b)
Then from the time-independent Heisenberg picture state vector ψ and a Heisen-
berg picture operator Seff(t) with no intrinsic time dependence, we can form a
Schr¨odinger picture state vector ψSchr and a Schr¨odinger picture operator Seff Schr
by the usual construction
ψSchr(t) =Ueff(t)ψ,
Seff Schr =Ueff(t)Seff(t)Ueff(t)†,
(5.39a)
giving
ieff¯h d
dt ψSchr(t) =HeffψSchr(t),
d
dt Seff Schr =0.
(5.39b)
To derive the nonrelativistic Schr¨odinger equation, let us consider the spacetime
continuum case in which r is the label ⃗x, so that the fermionic anticommutation
relations of Eq. (5.36b) take the form
{eff(⃗x), †
eff(⃗y)} = ¯hδ3(⃗x −⃗y).
(5.40a)
For simplicity, we shall restrict our discussion to single particle wave functions,
because no issues of principle are involved in the extension to the many-particle

150
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
case. Since we are assuming that Heff is bounded below and has the vacuum state
as its lowest energy eigenstate, and since Heff is expected to contain a standard
quadratic kinetic term, conventional ladder operator arguments suggest that the
nonrelativistic operator eff should annihilate the vacuum state |vac⟩. Assuming
this, we have
eff(⃗x)|vac⟩= 0,
(5.40b)
and sandwiching Eq. (5.40a) between ⟨vac| and |vac⟩we obtain
⟨vac|eff(⃗x)†
eff(⃗y)|vac⟩= ¯hδ3(⃗x −⃗y).
(5.40c)
In the bosonic case, we start from the bosonic commutation relation of Eq. (5.37b),
and assuming that the nonrelativistic operator Aeff annihilates |vac⟩, we end up
with
⟨vac|Aeff(⃗x)A†
eff(⃗y)|vac⟩= ¯hδ3(⃗x −⃗y),
(5.40d)
which has the same form as in the fermionic case. So it sufﬁces to restrict ourselves
henceforth to the fermionic case.
Let us now introduce a complete set of single fermion intermediate states into
Eq. (5.40c), by inserting 1 = 
n |n⟩⟨n| (with a discrete or continuous sum), giving

n
⟨vac|eff(⃗x)|n⟩⟨n|†
eff(⃗y)|vac⟩= ¯hδ3(⃗x −⃗y).
(5.41a)
If we now deﬁne a wave function n(⃗x) by
¯h
1
2 n(⃗x) =⟨vac|eff(⃗x)|n⟩,
¯h
1
2 ∗
n(⃗x) =⟨n|†
eff(⃗x)|vac⟩,
(5.41b)
then after dividing by ¯h, Eq. (5.41a) can be rewritten as

n
n(⃗x)∗
n(⃗y) = δ3(⃗x −⃗y),
(5.41c)
which is the usual completeness relation in coordinate representation. Multiplying
by

d3ym(⃗y), we get

n
n(⃗x)

d3y∗
n(⃗y)m(⃗y) = m(⃗x),
(5.41d)
which by linear independence of the n tells us that

d3y∗
n(⃗y)m(⃗y) = δnm,
(5.41e)

Evasion of the Kochen–Specker theorem and Bell inequality
151
which is the orthonormality condition in coordinate representation. Taking the time
derivative of the ﬁrst line of Eq. (5.41b) and using the Heisenberg equation of
motion of Eq. (5.34d), we get
¯h
1
2 d
dt n(⃗x) =⟨vac| d
dt eff(⃗x)|n⟩
=⟨vac|ieff¯h−1[Heff, eff(⃗x)]|n⟩.
(5.42a)
If we take Heff to be a one body operator of the form
Heff =

d3y†
eff(⃗y)Heff(⃗y)eff(⃗y),
(5.42b)
then the commutator appearing in Eq. (5.42a) is given by
[Heff, eff(⃗x)] = −Heff(⃗x)eff(⃗x),
(5.42c)
and so the right-hand side of Eq. (5.42a) becomes
−ieff¯h−1Heff(⃗x)⟨vac|eff(⃗x)|n⟩= −ieff¯h−1
2 Heff(⃗x)n(⃗x).
(5.42d)
Multiplying through by ieff¯h
1
2 , Eq. (5.42a) then yields the standard nonrelativistic
Schr¨odinger equation in coordinate representation
ieff¯h d
dt n(⃗x) = Heff(⃗x)n(⃗x).
(5.43)
This is of course all standard quantum mechanics and quantum ﬁeld theory
(which is why its extension to many-body wave functions and Fock space poses
no difﬁculties). The point of going through it in detail is to emphasize that once
we have obtained emergent canonical commutation relations and an emergent
Heisenberg equation of motion for operators, the Schr¨odinger picture and
Schr¨odinger equation of quantum mechanics follow in a straightforward way. To
complete the argument for an emergent quantum mechanics, we must address the
issue of how the probability interpretation (the Born rule) follows from our frame-
work; this is the topic of the next chapter. But before turning to this, we shall ﬁrst
discuss why the emergent quantum mechanics that we have derived from an under-
lying deterministic trace dynamics evades the standard Kochen–Specker theorem
and Bell inequality arguments against “hidden variable” theories.
5.6 Evasion of the Kochen–Specker theorem and Bell
inequality arguments
The idea that the probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics may reﬂect the ex-
istence of hidden variables that determine individual outcomes is an old one, and

152
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
has been much discussed in the physics, mathematics, and philosophy of science
literature. Two important barriers that stand in the way of a hidden variable exten-
sion of quantum theory are “no-go” theorems that have been proved by Kochen
and Specker (1967), on the one hand, and by Bell (1964, 1987), on the other.
These theorems show that under certain quite general, and apparently innocuous
assumptions, hidden variable interpretations of quantum mechanics either lead to a
mathematical contradiction, in the Kochen–Specker case, or to a conﬂict with ex-
periment, in the Bell case. Our aim in this section is to brieﬂy analyze the assump-
tions that enter into these “no-go” theorems, and to show why they are evaded in
our construction of quantum theory as an emergent phenomenon in trace dynamics
models.
We begin with the Kochen–Specker argument, which is based in its original
form on special properties of the spin-1 angular momentum matrices. Letting Sk
denote the spin operators with matrix elements (Sk)lm = iϵklm, where ϵklm is the
three index completely antisymmetric tensor (we have set ¯h equal to 1), a simple
calculation shows that for any three mutually orthogonal directions 1, 2, 3, the
operators S2
1, S2
2, S2
3 form a mutually commuting set. Since these operators each
have eigenvalues 0 or 1, and since S2
1 + S2
2 + S2
3 = 2, in any measurement two
of these three operators must take the value 1, and one must take the value 0. Let
us now assume that there are hidden variables internal to the quantum mechanical
spin system being measured, in one-to-one correspondence with the operators S2
k,
that take preassigned values which determine whether the measurement outcome
is a 0 or a 1. Kochen and Specker show that this is impossible, by identifying a
set of directions on the unit sphere that have mutually commuting spin-squared
operators, but which admit no consistent assignment of 0s and 1s subject to the
rule that each orthogonal triple must contain two 1s and one 0. (Although their
original construction is very complicated, a simpliﬁed version of their argument
has been given by Peres, 1993.) This shows that the quantum mechanics of spin 1
systems cannot be reproduced by a set of hidden variables that take precise values
which determine the measurement outcomes.
In the derivation of emergent quantum mechanics given in Section 5.3, the as-
sumptions of the Kochen–Specker argument are not fulﬁlled. In the precursor trace
dynamics, the matrix hidden dynamical variables corresponding to a spin triple in-
teract with all other dynamical variables, and in particular with those associated
with the measuring apparatus used to measure the spin-squared component. Since
different apparatus conﬁgurations are needed to measure the different spin-squared
components, the Kochen–Specker assumption that the hidden variables are inter-
nal to just the measured spin system, and have no contextual dependence on the
apparatus used to measure the spin, breaks down. Moreover, the assertion that the
squares of the spin operators, when measured, take exclusively the values 0 and 1,

Evasion of the Kochen–Specker theorem and Bell inequality
153
is a property of the states of the emergent quantum theory. This assertion depends
directly on the emergent canonical commutation relations, whereas the operator
algebras in the underlying theory involve matrix variables with unspeciﬁed com-
mutation properties. Thus, the Kochen–Specker argument cannot be formulated at
the underlying trace dynamics level. Note that in talking about measurements, we
are really going beyond what has been achieved so far in our construction of emer-
gent quantum theory, since in Section 5.3 we derived the unitary dynamics and
canonical algebra of quantum mechanics, but said nothing about how the wave
function assigns probabilities to measurement outcomes. A detailed discussion of
the emergence of probabilities will be given in Chapter 6; we shall take a quick
look ahead at this discussion shortly, in the course of analyzing the breakdown of
the Bell inequalities.
We consider next the Bell inequalities, which have engendered an immense
and still growing literature. Consider a spin-0 state that decays into two spin-1/2
particles, which move in opposite directions towards left and right Stern–Gerlach
analyzers A and B. The analyzers are constructed so that they measure the com-
ponent of spin along axes at respective angles α, β with respect to the z-axis.
Quantum mechanics assigns a probability P(a, b|α, β) for observing spin com-
ponents a = ±1/2, b = ±1/2 in the left and right analyzers. Suppose now that
there are hidden variables λ that determine the outcomes, so that there is a func-
tion P(a, b|α, β, λ) that takes only the values 0 or 1 on its support. If ρ(λ) is the
probability distribution of the hidden variables, then the law of conditional proba-
bility tells us that
P(a, b|α, β) =

dλρ(λ)P(a, b|α, β, λ).
(5.44a)
Bell now adds the additional requirement of local causality, which states that the
result from analyzer A must be independent of the setting of analyzer B, and vice
versa, since the setting angles α and β can be chosen just before the measurements
are made, not allowing time for a light signal to propagate across the distance sep-
arating the analyzers. Local causality requires that P(a, b|α, β, λ) must factorize
according to
P(a, b|α, β, λ) = PA(a|α, λ)PB(b|β, λ),
(5.44b)
which when substituted into Eq. (5.44a) gives
P(a, b|α, β) =

dλρ(λ)PA(a|α, λ)PB(b|β, λ).
(5.44c)
From Eq. (5.44c) Bell (1964), and subsequently Clauser et al. (1969), have derived

154
The emergence of quantum ﬁeld dynamics
inequalities on P(a, b|α, β) that are not satisﬁed by the quantum mechanical
expression for this probability. For a two-photon analog of Eq. (5.44c), the quan-
tum mechanical prediction, in the regime where the analogous inequalities are
violated, has been veriﬁed in experiments of Aspect and others. Thus, apart from
technical caveats that are still being debated, but that we believe are not decisive,
one is forced to the conclusion that if there are hidden variables that determine
quantum mechanical outcomes, they in some manner must violate the assumption
of local causality.
Turning now to our derivation of an emergent quantum mechanics from trace
dynamics, we see that if the usual Born probability interpretation also emerges as
a feature of trace dynamics, then the Bell inequalities must be violated, just as they
are in standard quantum mechanics. Hence Bell’s argument tells us that a violation
of local causality must be involved at some stage. Although the matrix dynamical
variables of trace dynamics are non-commutative in a completely general way, this
is not necessarily enough, since the Poincar´e invariant models studied in Sections
2.3 and 2.4 and Chapter 3 have quadratic Lagrangian terms emulating the familiar
ﬁeld theory forms. They thus give rise to retarded Green’s functions of the usual
form which can be used to perturbatively integrate the equations forward in time,
giving rise to the usual light cone causal constraints. Were this not so, it would
be possible to send information at superluminal speeds, contradicting observation.
However, our Ward identity derivation of Section 5.1 contains a source of violation
of local causality, which is the way in which the operator ˜C enters into the ﬁnal
term in Eq. (5.14b). Since we have seen that the boson and fermion contributions
to ˜C largely cancel, despite the fact that ˜C is an extensive quantity, it can have large
ﬂuctuations over the operator phase space. Correspondingly, in any ﬁnite subsys-
tem of the universe described by the canonical ensemble, ˜C has large ﬂuctuations
over the ensemble and hence as a function of time. These ﬂuctuations give rise to
corrections to the emergent quantum mechanics that we derived by replacing ˜C by
its ensemble average.
In Chapter 6 we argue that these ﬂuctuations do not affect the unit normaliza-
tion of states, but add stochastic terms to the effective Schr¨odinger equation that
describes the time development of a state. In order to preserve state normalization,
this Schr¨odinger equation in the generic case must be nonlinear in the state, which
introduces violations of local causality, since changes in the wave function at one
spatial point are instantaneously communicated, via the noise terms, to all spa-
tial points. We shall show explicitly that, by making simple and plausible models
for the structure of the ﬂuctuations in ˜C, they play the role of a Brownian “noise”
which drives state vector reduction, in such a way as to be precisely consistent with
Born rule probabilities. At the same time, we shall see that while the Brownian
terms in the stochastic Schr¨odinger equation are nonlinear, the average over the

Evasion of the Kochen–Specker theorem and Bell inequality
155
noise of the density matrix obeys a linear evolution equation, making superluminal
signal transmission impossible. Thus, since the probability interpretation of emer-
gent quantum mechanics comes about through the intervention of nonlocal effects
induced by the nonlinearity of the stochastic terms in the Schr¨odinger equation, the
assumptions underlying the Bell analysis are not obeyed, and the emergent theory
is not constrained by the Bell inequalities.

6
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
and the emergence of the probability interpretation
Up to this point we have worked in the thermodynamic limit, with our reasoning
based on the study of averages of dynamical variables in the canonical ensemble,
with all ﬁne grained structure averaged out. However, as in classical statistical me-
chanics, there are contexts in which ﬂuctuations around the averages, which can
be modeled in a natural way by a generalized Brownian motion, are important.
We shall argue in this chapter that Brownian motion corrections to emergent quan-
tum mechanics can provide the mechanism responsible both for reduction of the
state vector, and for the emergence of the Born and L¨uders probability rules. In
Section 6.1, we introduce a simple model for the leading ﬂuctuation corrections
to the thermodynamic limit, and from it show that, with suitable assumptions, one
can derive the standard stochastic Schr¨odinger equation for objective state vector
reduction. Depending on details of the model, the stochastic driving terms in this
equation can couple to the total energy, to a local density such as the energy or
particle number density, or to both the energy and a local density. In Section 6.2,
we give the proof that when the stochastic driving terms involve a set of mutually
commuting operators, this equation leads to state vector reduction with Born rule
probabilities. Finally, in Sections 6.3, 6.4 and 6.5 we discuss phenomenological
constraints on stochastic models for objective state vector reduction, placed by the
twin requirements that the excellent agreement of quantum mechanical predictions
with experiments must be maintained, while still allowing state vector reduction
to occur in measurement situations when the measuring apparatus itself is treated
quantum mechanically. We ﬁrst derive, in Section 6.3, formulas governing the re-
duction rate, and then apply them, in Sections 6.4 and 6.5, to the energy-driven
and localization reduction models respectively.
156

Scenarios leading to stochastic Schr¨odinger equations
157
6.1 Scenarios leading to the localization and the energy-driven
stochastic Schr¨odinger equations
As the starting point for obtaining stochastic corrections to the Schr¨odinger equa-
tion, we shall return to the general Ward identity of Eqs. (5.15a–c), in which the
source terms have been varied and then set equal to zero. We continue to make
approximations (1) and (2) of Section 5.3, that is, we neglect the τ and η terms
in Eq. (5.15a), but now we do not make the approximation of replacing ˜C by its
average value, so that Eq. (5.15a) takes the form
Dxueff = ieff[Weff, xueff] +

s,ℓ
ωusϵℓ

W Rℓ
s
1
2{ ˜C, ieff}W Lℓ
s

eff
,
(6.1a)
and Eq. (5.15c) states that this expression vanishes inside suitable canonical en-
semble averages. (To recapitulate some terminology, ieff is deﬁned, together with
¯h, from the ensemble average of ˜C in Eq. (4.11b); W is a general bosonic poly-
nomial in the matrix dynamical variables {xr}; the effective or “eff” projection
is deﬁned in Eqs. (4.41a–d); the structure coefﬁcients ωus and the grading factor
ϵℓare deﬁned in Eqs. (1.16a,b) and the line following Eq. (1.10b), respectively;
and, ﬁnally, the decomposition of W into left and right factors W Lℓ
s
and W Rℓ
s
with
respect to variations of xs is deﬁned in Eqs. (5.10a,b).) We shall now proceed in
two steps: ﬁrst we study the implications of Eq. (6.1a) for the normalization and
completeness of wave functions at a ﬁxed time, and then we study its implications
for the time development of wave functions, that is, for the Schr¨odinger equation
derived in Eq. (5.43).
For the ﬁrst step we observe, recalling the discussion preceding Eq. (5.31c),
that if we take W = σtxt, then there is only one term in the sum over ℓ, with
ϵℓ=1 = 1, W Lℓ=1
s
= σtδst, and W Rℓ=1
s
= 1, so that the ﬁnal term in Eq. (6.1a)
reduces to
ωut
1
2{ ˜C, ieff}σt.
(6.1b)
Continuing to assume that unitary ﬁxing does not appreciably change the aver-
age of ˜C, so that ⟨˜C⟩ˆ
AV,0 ≃⟨˜C⟩AV= ieff¯h, this term has zero-source ensemble
average
−ωut ¯hσt,
(6.1c)
and so setting the sources equal to zero in Eq. (5.15b), we get
⟨ieff[σtxteff, xueff] −ωut ¯hσt⟩ˆ
AV,0 = 0.
(6.2a)
Multiplying Eq. (6.2a) on the left by ψ†
0 and on the right by ψ0, and assuming the
correspondence between canonical ensemble averages at a speciﬁed initial time

158
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
and Wightman functions given in Eq. (5.23b), we see that
⟨vac|ieff[σt Xteff, Xueff] −ωut ¯hσt|vac⟩= 0.
(6.2b)
Using Eq. (6.2b) in place of Eq. (5.34a) as the starting point for the analysis of
Section 5.5, we learn that the vacuum expectation of Eq. (5.40a) is still given by
⟨vac|{	eff(⃗x), 	†
eff(⃗y)}|vac⟩= ¯hδ3(⃗x −⃗y),
(6.2c)
even when ﬂuctuations of ˜C about its ensemble average are taken into account.
(Equation (6.2c) is written for the fermion case; the same conclusion holds for
the boson case as well.) Thus, the orthonormalization and completeness of wave
functions at an initial time on which the canonical ensemble is formed, derived
in Eqs. (5.41a–e), also do not make use of the approximation of replacing ˜C by
its average value, as a result of the insensitivity of the vacuum expectation of the
canonical algebra to ﬂuctuations in ˜C. Although Eq. (6.2c) has been derived for
single fermion operators, similar relations hold in the case of multiparticle com-
posite operators, as long as the compositeness scale is small enough for the com-
posite system to be effectively treated as a point particle. To the extent that the time
evolution is approximated by a unitary Heisenberg evolution, the orthonormality
of states is preserved in time. In this chapter we shall be exploring the effects of
deviations from Heisenberg evolution, and we will see that in the approximation to
the dynamics that we use, state normalization is preserved in time, but states that
are initially orthogonal do not remain so under time evolution.
For the second step of our argument, we take W in Eq. (6.1a) to be the operator
Hamiltonian H, as we did in Eq. (5.19b) of Section 5.3, but we now take the ﬂuc-
tuations of ˜C about its ensemble average into account. We denote this ﬂuctuating
term by

 ˜C = ˜C −⟨˜C⟩ˆ
AV,0 ≃˜C −ieff¯h,
(6.3a)
so that the expression entering into Eq. (6.1a) takes the form
1
2{ ˜C, ieff} = −¯h + 1
2{
 ˜C, ieff}.
(6.3b)
Let us now rewrite the ﬂuctuation term on the right of Eq. (6.3b) as
1
2{
 ˜C, ieff} = −¯h(K + N),
(6.3c)
with K a ﬂuctuating c-number, and with N a ﬂuctuating matrix, with the split-
ting deﬁned so that under the correspondence of Eq. (5.23b), the quantum operator
analog of N is normal ordered, that is, has all annihilation operators ordered to
the right. Since we are primarily interested in the effect of the ﬂuctuations on

Scenarios leading to stochastic Schr¨odinger equations
159
nonrelativistic matter, we shall ignore boson ﬁeld contributions to N. Because the
quantum operator analog of N has fermion number zero, retaining only fermion
ﬁeld contributions implies that N contains no terms with only creation operators,
and thus it annihilates the vacuum state. We shall assume that the ﬂuctuations are
small quantities, so that working to ﬁrst order in the ﬂuctuations, we can separately
determine the effects of the K and N ﬂuctuation terms, and then add them. Hence
there are implicit error terms of the form O(K2), O(N 2), and O(KN) in our for-
mulas, which we shall not indicate explicitly. However, we shall see that once the
linear ﬂuctuation terms in the stochastic Schr¨odinger equation have been deter-
mined, general physical requirements will determine the structure of the implicit
higher-order terms.
As discussed in Chapter 2, when we make the standard fermionic adjointness
assignment, ˜C is anti-self-adjoint, which makes K real and N self-adjoint. We
shall ﬁnd that this leads to a structure for the stochastic Schr¨odinger equation that
does not lead to state vector reduction; what will be needed to get state vector
reduction is for K to have an imaginary part and/or for N to have an anti-self-
adjoint part, both corresponding to the presence of a self-adjoint piece in ˜C. We
shall assume that the introduction of a self-adjoint piece in ˜C does not change
the form of the canonical ensemble ρ, and that the ensemble expectation of the
self-adjoint part of ˜C vanishes, so that the self-adjoint part contributes only to
the ﬂuctuation 
 ˜C, leaving our formulas relating ieff to the ensemble average of
˜C unchanged. To see that these assumptions can be consistently realized, let us
return to the model set up in Eqs. (2.17a–c) and (2.18a–c), where we found that a
self-adjoint part of ˜C has the general form
˜Csa = −1
2

r,s∈F
[qsq†
r , Ars].
(6.4a)
If we take Ars to commute with ieff, then by Eq. (4.39b) and the cyclic identities
we have
Tr˜λ ˜Csa = −1
2

r,s∈F
Trqsq†
r [Ars, ˜λ] = 0,
(6.4b)
in other words, we get a real valued canonical ensemble without splitting Tr˜λ ˜C
into self-adjoint and anti-self-adjoint parts as in Eq. (4.13d). Similarly, we ﬁnd
that
⟨˜Csa⟩AV = −1
2

r,s∈F
[⟨qsq†
r ⟩AV, Ars] = 0,
(6.4c)
since the ensemble average ⟨qsq†
r ⟩AV is a function solely of ieff. However, the as-
sumption that Ars commutes with ieff does not imply the vanishing of {ieff, ˜Csa},

160
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
which is given by
{ieff, ˜Csa} = −1
2

r,s∈F
[{ieff, qsq†
r }, Ars] ̸= 0,
(6.4d)
and so there will be non-vanishing ﬂuctuation contributions to K and N, but oth-
erwise the structure of the Ward identities, which follows from the general form of
the canonical ensemble, is unaltered.
Therefore, making the assumptions just described, we shall continue to use
the Ward identity of Eqs. (5.15a–c), and the consequences derived from it in
Section 5.3. We begin by discussing the effects of the K term in Eqs. (6.3b,c),
which can be done in a model independent way. Since K is a c-number, when the
terms −¯h(1 + K) in Eqs. (6.3b,c) are substituted into Eq. (6.1a) we can still use
Eq. (5.10b) to evaluate the sum over ℓ, just as we did in Eq. (5.18c), giving to
leading order in K
Dxueff = ieff[Weff, xueff] −¯h(1 + K)

s
ωus
δW
δxs

eff
.
(6.5a)
Taking W to be the operator Hamiltonian H, we now ﬁnd that Eq. (5.19b) is re-
placed by
Dxueff = ieff[Heff, xueff] −¯h(1 + K)˙xueff,
(6.5b)
and since K is a c-number, to leading order in K we can replace ¯h ˙xueff by
ieff[Heff, xueff] in the K term, giving
Dxueff = ieff[Heff, xueff] −¯h ˙xueff −Kieff[Heff, xueff].
(6.5c)
This equation is still to be interpreted as an expression that vanishes when sand-
wiched between general polynomials SL,R, and averaged over the zero-source
canonical ensemble.
We turn next to the evaluation of the contribution of the matrix part N of the
ﬂuctuation 
 ˜C. To make a concrete statement about the contribution of this term,
we must introduce assumptions about the structure of the Hamiltonian H. Since
we will be primarily interested in the effects of ﬂuctuation corrections on a mea-
surement apparatus that consists of nonrelativistic matter, with a Hamiltonian that
is dominated by its rest mass terms, we will take as a simpliﬁed model for the H
describing the system and apparatus
H =

r
mr

d3x 1
2i[ψ†
r (⃗x), ψr(⃗x)] + constant
=

r

ℓ
1
2imr[ψ†
rℓ, ψrℓ] + constant.
(6.6)

Scenarios leading to stochastic Schr¨odinger equations
161
Here mr is the rest mass of the rth species, and we have ﬁrst written the oper-
ator terms in H in antisymmetrized form in terms of a coordinate basis ⃗x, and
then written them in terms of an arbitrary basis ℓlabeling a general complete set.
In writing Eq. (6.6) we have assumed that for the dynamical variables describing
ordinary matter, the matrix Ars appearing in Eq. (6.4a) is simply δrs, so that the
standard adjointness assignment of Eq. (2.4b) applies; this does not rule out the
presence of a nontrivial Ars for degrees of freedom that are much higher energy
than those involved in laboratory measurements. There is an additional assump-
tion implicit in our use of the antisymmetrized form of the mass term in Eq. (6.6),
arising from the fact that the symmetrized combination i{ψ†
rℓ, ψrℓ} has vanish-
ing trace and so does not contribute to the trace Hamiltonian H. Changing the
operator-ordering prescription by adding such a term to the operator Hamiltonian
H changes the contribution coming from the operator-valued ﬂuctuation term N
of Eq. (6.3c). We deal with this ambiguity by assuming that where factor ordering
of the operator Hamiltonian makes a difference in the calculation of the ﬂuctuation
terms, the Weyl-ordered recipe, which as we have seen in Section 1.5 minimizes
the differences between trace dynamics calculations and the corresponding canon-
ical quantum mechanical ones, is the appropriate ordering convention.
Since the model for H in Eq. (6.6) is bilinear in the ﬁelds, it is now easy to
evaluate the ﬁnal term in Eq. (6.1a) when W is taken as H, and when xu is taken
ﬁrst as ψrℓand then as ψ†
rℓ. Including the leading-order result of Eq. (6.5c) for
the K contribution, together with the approximate result for the N contribution
obtained by using the model of Eq. (6.6) for H and the deﬁnitions of Eqs. (5.10a)
and (1.16a,b), we get
Dψrℓeff = ieff[Heff, ψrℓeff] −¯h ˙ψrℓeff −Kieff[Heff, ψrℓeff] + 1
2i ¯hmr{N, ψrℓeff},
Dψ†
rℓeff = ieff[Heff, ψ†
rℓeff] −¯h ˙ψ†
rℓeff −Kieff[Heff, ψ†
rℓeff] −1
2i ¯hmr{N, ψ†
rℓeff}.
(6.7a)
These are again to be interpreted as expressions that vanish when sandwiched
between general polynomials SL,R, and averaged over the zero-source canonical
ensemble. We now wish to attempt to reinterpret the vanishing of Eq. (6.7a) as
an operator statement in the effective quantum ﬁeld theory, restricting ourselves
henceforth to the ieff = i sector. To do this several problems must be addressed,
that require further assumptions.
Since K and N are rapidly ﬂuctuating quantities in the underlying matrix phase
space, they do not have a direct transcription to the effective ﬁeld theory. However,
consistent with the idealization involved in describing an ergodic, time-dependent
matrix dynamics by the static canonical ensemble, it is natural to model them in

162
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
the effective ﬁeld theory transcription of Eq. (6.7a) as time-dependent Brownian
motions K(t) and N(t). Hence we provisionally reinterpret Eqs. (6.7a) and (5.15c)
as ﬁeld theory equations of motion
˙	rℓeff = i ¯h−1[Heff, 	rℓeff] −K(t)i ¯h−1[Heff, 	rℓeff] + 1
2imr{N(t), 	rℓeff},
˙	†
rℓeff = i ¯h−1[Heff, 	†
rℓeff] −K(t)i ¯h−1[Heff, 	†
rℓeff] −1
2imr{N(t), 	†
rℓeff}.
(6.7b)
(The factor of i arising from the correspondence between ψ†
rℓeff and 	†
rℓeff is com-
mon to all terms of Eq. (6.7b), and so cancels out.) When ˜C is anti-self-adjoint,
so that K(t) is real and N(t) is self-adjoint, the operator equations for ˙	rℓeff and
˙	†
rℓeff are consistent with one another, in that the right-hand side of the equation
for ˙	†
rℓeff is the adjoint of the right-hand side of the equation for ˙	rℓeff. However,
when ˜C has a self-adjoint part, so that K(t) has an imaginary part and N(t) has
an anti-self-adjoint part, the operator equations for ˙	rℓeff and ˙	†
rℓeff are no longer
consistent, since the adjoints of the contributions of the imaginary part of K(t)
and the anti-self-adjoint part of N(t) to the right-hand side of the equation for
˙	rℓeff appear with the wrong sign to give the right-hand side of the equation for
˙	†
rℓeff. This inconsistency indicates that when the ﬂuctuations in ˜C have a self-
adjoint part, we cannot directly apply the correspondence postulated in Eq. (5.23a)
between operators in the underlying trace dynamics and operators in the emer-
gent effective ﬁeld theory. We propose to avoid this inconsistency by regarding
Eqs. (6.7b) not as operator equations, but rather as constraints on the vacuum state
|vac⟩. Since N(t), as well as 	rℓeff, and (with an appropriate choice of the con-
stant in Eq. (6.6)) Heff all annihilate the vacuum, all terms in the equation for ˙	rℓeff
annihilate the vacuum, so this equation reduces to the triviality 0 = 0, while the
equation for ˙	†
rℓeff simpliﬁes to
˙	†
rℓeff|vac⟩= [i ¯h−1Heff −K(t)i ¯h−1Heff −1
2imrN(t)]	†
rℓeff|vac⟩.
(6.7c)
Splitting K into real and imaginary parts, and N into self-adjoint and anti-self-
adjoint parts, which we label with the respective subscripts 0 and 1, Eq. (6.7c)
takes the form
˙	†
rℓeff|vac⟩= [i ¯h−1Heff −K0(t)i ¯h−1Heff + K1(t)¯h−1Heff −1
2imrN0(t)
+ 1
2mrN1(t)]	†
rℓeff|vac⟩.
(6.7d)
The appropriate Hilbert space basis for a measured system together with the
measuring apparatus is provided by a set of states |({r, ℓ})⟩obtained by acting on

Scenarios leading to stochastic Schr¨odinger equations
163
the vacuum with a product of many different creation operators 	†
rℓeff for different
values of r and ℓ. To infer the equation of motion for |({r, ℓ})⟩that corresponds to
Eq. (6.7d), let us adopt for the moment an independent particle picture, so that the
operators Heff, N0(t) and N1(t) are sums of operators, that each act on individual
fermion degrees of freedom labeled by r and ℓ, and that commute with all other
fermion degrees of freedom. This assumption is clearly consistent with the model
for the dominant term in the Hamiltonian given in Eq. (6.6). So we write
Heff =

r ℓ
Heff;r ℓ,
N0(t) =

r ℓ
N0(t)r ℓ,
N1(t) =

r ℓ
N1(t)r ℓ,
(6.8a)
with all terms in the sums annihilating the vacuum state. Substituting Eq. (6.8a)
into Eq. (6.7c), the latter becomes
˙	†
rℓeff|vac⟩= [i ¯h−1Heff;r ℓ−K0(t)i ¯h−1Heff;r ℓ+ K1(t)¯h−1Heff;r ℓ
−1
2imrN0(t)r ℓ+ 1
2mrN1(t)r ℓ]	†
rℓeff|vac⟩.
(6.8b)
From this we see that a general basis state
|({r, ℓ})⟩=

r,ℓ
	†
rℓeff|vac⟩.
(6.8c)
obtained by acting on the vacuum with a product of creation operators 	†
rℓeff with
different values of r and ℓ, will obey the equation of motion
| ˙({r, ℓ})⟩= [i ¯h−1Heff −K0(t)i ¯h−1Heff + K1(t)¯h−1Heff −1
2iM0(t)
+ 1
2M1(t)]|({r, ℓ})⟩,
(6.8d)
where we have introduced the deﬁnition
M0,1(t) =

r ℓ
mrN0,1(t)r ℓ.
(6.8e)
Generalizing beyond the independent particle picture, we shall take Eqs. (6.8d,e)
as the equation of motion of a generic many particle basis state. Up to this point
we have stayed in Heisenberg picture, in which the basis states carry the time de-
pendence and the state |⟩representing the physical state of the measured system
and measuring apparatus is ﬁxed in time. The time evolution of the wave func-
tion ⟨({r, ℓ})|⟩will be the same, however, if we go over to the Schr¨odinger

164
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
picture in which the basis states |({r, ℓ})⟩are constant in time, and in which the
physical state |⟩carries the time dependence by evolving in the opposite sense to
Eq. (6.8d), so that
| ˙⟩= [−i ¯h−1Heff + K0(t)i ¯h−1Heff −K1(t)¯h−1Heff + 1
2iM0(t) −1
2M1(t)]|⟩.
(6.8f)
When K1 and M1 are non-vanishing, the modiﬁed Schr¨odinger equation of
Eq. (6.8f) does not preserve the norm of the state |⟩, which we suggest is a
reﬂection of the approximation involved in transcribing the time independent 
 ˜C
that ﬂuctuates over the underlying matrix phase space into time-ﬂuctuating pro-
cesses K(t) and N(t) in the effective ﬁeld theory. Since in the nonrelativistic limit
all particle species are conserved in number, we must restore conservation of the
norm under time evolution in order to obtain the physical state vector |	⟩. A norm-
preserving Schr¨odinger equation, incorporating the ﬂuctuation corrections, can be
obtained by identifying the physical state |	⟩with the renormalized |⟩
|	⟩=
|⟩
⟨|⟩
1
2
.
(6.9)
To complete the speciﬁcation of the stochastic dynamics for |	⟩, we must spec-
ify the nonvanishing time averages and the operator structure of the ﬂuctuating
terms in Eqs. (6.8d,f). We shall make the assumption that the ﬂuctuations can
be described as linear superpositions of white noise terms; this seems reasonable
both because we are postulating a large hierarchy of magnitude between the length
scale characterizing the ﬂuctuations of ˜C and the length scale characterizing the
emergent quantum degrees of freedom, and because in standard statistical mechan-
ics applications of Brownian motion, the assumption of a white noise spectrum is
generally a good approximation. Once we are dealing with white noise, the calcu-
lations are made much more tractable by using the standard Itˆo calculus represen-
tation of Brownian motion (for a pedagogical introduction to the Itˆo calculus, see
Gardiner (1990)), in which each independent Brownian motion is represented by
a differential dW n
t , which together with dt obey the Itˆo calculus rules
(dW n
t )2 = γndt,
dW n
t dW m
t
= 0, m ̸= n,
dW n
t dt = dt2 = 0.
(6.10a)
For the c-number ﬂuctuations K0,1 we write
i ¯h−1K0(t)dt = iβIdW I
t ,
−¯h−1K1(t) = βRdW R
t ,
(6.10b)

Scenarios leading to stochastic Schr¨odinger equations
165
with
(dW R
t )2 = (dW I
t )2 = dt,
dW R
t dW I
t = 0.
(6.10c)
We allow for the possibility that the operator ﬂuctuations M0,1 include a spatially
correlated noise structure, by writing
1
2iM0(t)dt = i

d3xdW I
t (⃗x)MI(⃗x),
−1
2M1(t) =

d3xdW R
t (⃗x)MR(⃗x),
(6.10d)
with
dW I
t (⃗x)dW I
t (⃗y) = γ dtδ3(⃗x −⃗y),
dW R
t (⃗x)dW R
t (⃗y) = γ dtδ3(⃗x −⃗y),
dW I
t (⃗x)dW R
t (⃗y) = 0,
dW I
t dW I
t (⃗x) = dW I
t dW R
t (⃗x) = 0,
dW R
t dW I
t (⃗x) = dW R
t dW R
t (⃗x) = 0.
(6.10e)
Thus Eq. (6.8f) now takes the form
|d⟩= [−i ¯h−1Heffdt + iβIdW I
t Heff + βRdW R
t Heff
+ i

d3xdW I
t (⃗x)MI(⃗x) +

d3xdW R
t (⃗x)MR(⃗x)]|⟩,
(6.10f)
up to implicit quadratic terms in the noise variables.
Equation (6.10f) is our basic result for the ﬂuctuation modiﬁed Schr¨odinger
equation, in the linearized approximation. In essence, what we have found is that
the ﬂuctuations of ˜C have the effect of replacing the usual Schr¨odinger equation
by a stochastic Schr¨odinger equation containing Brownian motion terms. Although
we have only retained linear terms in the ﬂuctuations in Eq. (6.10f), we shall now
show that in the white noise case, the quadratic terms are completely determined
by imposing the two general structural requirements of norm preservation and the
vanishing of superluminal signaling effects. Since according to the Itˆo calculus
rules, there are no cubic and higher-order ﬂuctuation terms, this completely speci-
ﬁes the structure of the stochastic Schr¨odinger equation.
To calculate the stochastic Schr¨odinger equation obeyed by the normalized state
vector |	⟩, we must evaluate the differential of Eq. (6.9), taking care to use the Itˆo
product rule (or stochastic integration by parts formula)
d(FG) = (dF)G + F(dG) + dFdG,
(6.11a)

166
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
which is the extension to the Itˆo calculus of the usual Leibniz chain rule for differ-
entiation. Deﬁning
δ = ⟨d|⟩+ ⟨|d⟩+ ⟨d|d⟩
⟨|⟩
,
(6.11b)
we readily ﬁnd
|d	⟩=
|⟩+ |d⟩
⟨|⟩
1
2 (1 + δ)
1
2
−|	⟩
= |	⟩

−1
2δ + 3
8δ2

+
|d⟩
⟨|⟩
1
2

1 −1
2δ

,
(6.11c)
with |d⟩given by Eq. (6.10f). From Eq. (6.10f), we calculate δ to be
δ = 2βRdW R
t ⟨Heff⟩+ 2

d3xdW R
t (⃗x)⟨MR(⃗x)⟩
+ (β2
R + β2
I )dt⟨H2
eff⟩+ γ dt

d3x⟨MI(⃗x)2 + MR(⃗x)2⟩,
(6.11d)
with the expectation ⟨⟩deﬁned by
⟨O⟩= ⟨|O|⟩
⟨|⟩
= ⟨	|O|	⟩.
(6.11e)
Writing Eq. (6.10f) as |d⟩= G|⟩and substituting it and Eq. (6.11d) into
Eq. (6.11c), we get the following result for |d	⟩
|d	⟩= [−1
2δ + 3
8δ2 +

1 −1
2δ

G]|	⟩
= [X + Qdt + Rdt −⟨Q + R⟩dt]|	⟩,
(6.12a)
with the operator X given by
X = −i ¯h−1Heffdt −1
2β2
I H2
effdt −1
2β2
R(Heff −⟨Heff⟩)2dt
−1
2γ dt

d3xMI(⃗x)2 −1
2γ dt

d3x(MR(⃗x) −⟨MR(⃗x)⟩)2
+ iβIdW I
t Heff + βRdW R
t (Heff −⟨Heff⟩)
+ i

d3xdW I
t (⃗x)MI(⃗x) +

d3xdW R
t (⃗x)(MR(⃗x) −⟨MR(⃗x)⟩), (6.12b)

Scenarios leading to stochastic Schr¨odinger equations
167
with the operator Q given by
Q = 1
2β2
I H2
eff + 1
2γ

d3xMI(⃗x)2
+ 1
2β2
R(H2
eff −4Heff⟨Heff⟩) + 1
2

d3x

MR(⃗x)2 −4MR(⃗x)⟨MR(⃗x)⟩

,
(6.12c)
and with the operator R denoting the implicit quadratic terms in the noise
that have been carried along through the calculation. The fact that R must en-
ter Eq. (6.12a) through the combination R −⟨R⟩follows, as shown by Adler
and Brun (2001), from the fact that since |	⟩is normalized, we must have
⟨d	|	⟩+ ⟨	|d	⟩+ ⟨d	|d	⟩= 0, which is automatically satisﬁed by the com-
bination (R −⟨R⟩)dt acting on |	⟩in Eq. (6.12a). From the evolution equation for
|	⟩given in Eq. (6.12a), we can use the Itˆo product rule to calculate the evolution
equation for the density matrix ˆρ = |	⟩⟨	|, with the result
d ˆρ = (d|	⟩)⟨	| + |	⟩(d⟨	|) + (d|	⟩)(d⟨	|)
= i ¯h−1[ ˆρ, Heff]dt −1
2(β2
R + β2
I )[Heff, [Heff, ˆρ]]dt
−1
2γ

d3x

[MR(⃗x), [MR(⃗x), ˆρ]] + [MI(⃗x), [MI(⃗x), ˆρ]]

dt
+ [ ˆρ, [ ˆρ, Q + R]]dt
+ βR[ ˆρ, [ ˆρ, Heff]]dW R
t + iβI[Heff, ˆρ]dW I
t
+

d3x

[ ˆρ, [ ˆρ, MR(⃗x)]]dW R
t (⃗x) + i[MI(⃗x), ˆρ]dW I
t (⃗x)

, (6.13a)
where we have used the identity (for any operator O) ˆρO ˆρ = |	⟩⟨	|O|	⟩⟨	| =
ˆρ⟨O⟩. Since the stochastic expectation E[ ] of all the Brownian differentials is zero
E[dW R,I
t
] = E[dW R,I
t
(⃗x)] = 0,
(6.13b)
we ﬁnd from Eq. (6.13a) that the stochastic expectation of the density matrix obeys
the ordinary differential equation
dE[ ˆρ]
dt
= i ¯h−1[E[ ˆρ], Heff] −1
2(β2
R + β2
I )[Heff, [Heff, E[ ˆρ]]]
−1
2γ

d3x

[MR(⃗x), [MR(⃗x), E[ ˆρ]]] + [MI(⃗x), [MI(⃗x), E[ ˆρ]]]

+ [ ˆρ, [ ˆρ, Q + R]].
(6.13c)
An important feature of Eq. (6.13c) is that apart from the ﬁnal term involv-
ing Q + R, the stochastic expectation E[ ˆρ] obeys a linear master equation of the

168
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
type studied by Lindblad (1976) and Gorini, Kossakowski, and Sudarshan (1976),
which is characteristic quite generally of open system dynamics. If the evolution
equation for E[ ˆρ] were nonlinear, then as shown by Gisin (1989, 1990), Gisin and
Rigo (1995), and Polchinski (1991), there would be a possibility of instantaneous
(faster than light) signaling. Assuming that the underlying dynamics is such that
faster than light signaling is absent in the emergent quantum theory, the implicit
quadratic term R is then ﬁxed to be −Q, so that the nonlinear term in Eq. (6.13c) is
cancelled to zero. Note that although the evolution of ˆρ in Eq. (6.13a) still contains
nonlinearities, they appear only in the unpredictably ﬂuctuating Brownian motion
terms, and so cannot be used for faster than light signaling. Taking Q + R = 0,
our ﬁnal result for the evolution of the normalized state vector |	⟩is
|d	⟩=

−i ¯h−1Heffdt −1
2β2
I H2
effdt −1
2β2
R(Heff −⟨Heff⟩)2dt
−1
2γ dt

d3xMI(⃗x)2 −1
2γ dt

d3x

MR(⃗x) −⟨MR(⃗x)⟩
2
+ iβIdW I
t Heff + βRdW R
t (Heff −⟨Heff⟩)
+ i

d3xdW I
t (⃗x)MI(⃗x) +

d3xdW R
t (⃗x)

MR(⃗x) −⟨MR(⃗x)⟩
	
|	⟩,
(6.14a)
and for the evolution of the density matrix ˆρ is
d ˆρ = i ¯h−1[ ˆρ, Heff]dt −1
2(β2
R + β2
I )[Heff, [Heff, ˆρ]]dt
−1
2γ

d3x

[MR(⃗x), [MR(⃗x), ˆρ]] + [MI(⃗x), [MI(⃗x), ˆρ]]

dt
+ βR[ ˆρ, [ ˆρ, Heff]]dW R
t + iβI[Heff, ˆρ]dW I
t
+

d3x

[ ˆρ, [ ˆρ, MR(⃗x)]]dW R
t (⃗x) + i[MI(⃗x), ˆρ]dW I
t (⃗x)

.
(6.14b)
Through the reasoning leading to Eqs. (6.14a,b) we have established a connec-
tion between the quantum dynamics emergent from matrix model dynamics, and
a large body of literature dealing with stochastic modiﬁcations to the Schr¨odinger
equation. The “continuous spontaneous localization” or CSL approach of Pearle
(1989) and Ghirardi, Pearle, and Rimini (1990) corresponds to taking MR(⃗x) to
have the structure
MR(⃗x) =

d3yg(⃗x −⃗y)

r
mr Nr(⃗y),
(6.14c)
with g(⃗x) a spherically symmetric, sharply peaked correlation function and with
Nr(⃗y) the number density of particle species r. (It is then natural to assume a

Scenarios leading to stochastic Schr¨odinger equations
169
similar structure for MI(⃗x), but as we shall see this term does not by itself lead to
state vector reduction.) The “energy driven” approach of Bedford and Wang (1975,
1977), Milburn (1991), Percival (1995, 1998), Hughston (1996), and Fivel (1997),
on the other hand, is obtained by taking MR(⃗x) = gHeff, with g a proportionality
constant (again, with this assumption, it is natural to assume a similar structure for
MI(⃗x)). There is a very large literature dealing with objective state vector reduc-
tion, which we shall not attempt to review here. For recent reviews focusing on the
spontaneous localization approach, and related references, see Bassi and Ghirardi
(2003) and Pearle (1999b), while for detailed mathematical and phenomenologi-
cal studies of the case in which the stochasticity is driven by the Hamiltonian see
Adler et al. (2001), Adler and Horwitz (2000), and Adler (2002, 2003a). The con-
nection between general Gaussian noise, and the simpler case of white noise, has
been discussed by Pearle (1993, 1995) and by Bassi and Ghirardi (2002). Looking
back from an historical perspective, the seminal ideas in the stochastic reduction
program arose from work over the last twenty-ﬁve years by Pearle (1976, 1979,
1982, 1984, 1989, 1990), Ghirardi, Rimini, and Weber (1986), Ghirardi, Pearle,
and Rimini (1990), Gisin (1984, 1989, 1990), Di´osi (1988a,b, 1989), and Percival
(1994, 1995, 1998). The main result coming from the stochastic Schr¨odinger pro-
gram, as embodied in Eqs. (6.14a,b), is that when the real (superscript R) noise
terms are nonzero, and the operator coefﬁcients of the noise terms are mutually
commutative and commute with Heff, the state vector reduces on the eigenstate
basis that diagonalizes the operator coefﬁcients of the noise terms, with reduction
probabilities given by the Born rule or (in the case of degeneracies) the L¨uders rule.
A detailed proof of this is given in Section 6.2, and a phenomenological discussion
of the localization and energy-driven models for objective state vector reduction is
given in Sections 6.3 through 6.5, leading to the conclusion that Eqs. (6.14a,b)
provide a theoretically and experimentally viable approach to the state vector re-
duction problem. Thus, the statistical mechanics of matrix models with a global
unitary invariance can lead not only to an emergent complex quantum mecha-
nics, but also to the emergence of the usual probabilistic framework needed for the
application of quantum theory.
One feature of stochastic Schr¨odinger equations that has led to much discussion
in the literature is the fact that the usual formulations are nonrelativistic, and at-
tempts to construct relativistic generalizations have encountered serious obstacles
(see, e.g., Pearle, 1990, 1999a and Adler and Brun, 2001). Within the framework
given here, this is not surprising, since the canonical ensemble that we have used
to derive emergent quantum mechanics picks out a preferred rest frame, which we
have tentatively identiﬁed with the rest frame of the cosmological blackbody ra-
diation. In the decoupling limit in which the τ terms are neglected and in which
ﬂuctuations in ˜C are neglected, we have argued that a Lorentz invariant effective

170
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
quantum theory results when the underlying trace Lagrangian is Lorentz invariant.
However, in order for ﬂuctuations in the canonical ensemble to have a ﬁnite magni-
tude, the convergence factor exp(−τH) in the canonical ensemble is needed, and
so ﬂuctuation processes in the ensemble are necessarily frame dependent. From
this point of view, the frame-dependent structure of the stochastically modiﬁed
Schr¨odinger equation is a natural feature.
6.2 Proof of reduction with Born rule probabilities
We give here the proof, following ideas in Ghirardi, Pearle, and Rimini (1990),
Hughston (1996), and Adler and Horwitz (2000), that with appropriate choices
of the operators appearing as coefﬁcients of the Brownian motion terms,
Eqs. (6.14a,b) imply state vector reduction with Born rule probabilities. For ease
of exposition, we consider a simpliﬁed version of Eqs. (6.14a,b) in which a single
operator A that commutes with Heff appears as coefﬁcient of the Brownian mo-
tion terms, and then will state the generalization of our results to the more realistic
multi-operator case at the end of the argument. Thus, we take for the stochastic
Schr¨odinger equations obeyed by |	⟩and its adjoint
d|	⟩= −i ¯h−1Heff|	⟩dt −1
2[β2
R(A −⟨A⟩)2 + β2
I A2]|	⟩dt
+ βR(A −⟨A⟩)|	⟩dW R
t + iβI A|	⟩dW I
t ,
d⟨	| = ⟨	|i ¯h−1Heffdt −⟨	|1
2[β2
R(A −⟨A⟩)2 + β2
I A2]dt
+ ⟨	|βR(A −⟨A⟩)dW R
t −⟨	|iβI AdW I
t ,
(6.15a)
and as the corresponding density matrix evolution (abbreviating |β|2 = β2
R + β2
I )
d ˆρ = i ¯h−1[ ˆρ, Heff]dt −1
2|β|2[A,[A, ˆρ]]dt + βR[ ˆρ,[ ˆρ, A]dW R
t + iβI[A, ˆρ]dW I
t .
(6.15b)
We begin by remarking that for any operator G commuting with Heff and with
A, we have
E[d⟨G⟩] = E[TrGd ˆρ] = TrGE[d ˆρ]
= TrG

i ¯h−1[E[ ˆρ], Heff] −1
2|β|2[A, [A, E[ ˆρ]]]

dt
= Tr

−i[G, Heff]¯h−1E[ ˆρ] −1
2|β|2[G, A][A, E[ ˆρ]]

dt = 0,
(6.16a)

Proof of reduction with Born rule probabilities
171
where as before E[ ] denotes the expectation with respect to the stochastic process,
with E[dW R
t ] = E[dW I
t ] = 0. Consider now the variance of A (the square of its
uncertainty), deﬁned by
V = ⟨(A −⟨A⟩)2⟩= Tr ˆρ A2 −(Tr ˆρ A)2.
(6.16b)
Using the Itˆo product rule of Eq. (6.11a), together with Eqs. (6.15b) and (6.16a),
we have
dE[V ] = E[dV ]
= E[Trd ˆρ A2 −2Tr ˆρ ATrd ˆρ A −(Trd ˆρ A)2]
= −E[(Trd ˆρ A)2]
= −β2
R E[

Tr([ ˆρ, A])22]dt = −4β2
R E[V 2]dt.
(6.16c)
In going from the second to the third line of Eq. (6.16c), we have used the fact that
E[FdW R
t ] = 0 for any stochastic function F deﬁned at time t (the Itˆo differential
dW R
t refers to the time interval from t to t + dt, and so is statistically independent
of functions involving the stochastic history only up to time t). Integrating with
respect to time, we see that the expectation E[V ] satisﬁes the integral equation
E[V (t)] = E[V (0)] −4β2
R
 t
0
dsE[V (s)2],
(6.16d)
which using the inequality 0 ≤E[(V −E[V ])2] = E[V 2] −E[V ]2 gives the in-
equality
E[V (t)] ≤E[V (0)] −4β2
R
 t
0
dsE[V (s)]2.
(6.16e)
Since the variance V is necessarily non-negative, Eq. (6.16e) implies that
E[V (∞)] = 0, and again using non-negativity of V this implies that V (s) van-
ishes as s →∞, apart from a set of outcomes occurring with probability zero.
Thus as t →∞, the stochastic Schr¨odinger equation of Eq. (6.15a) drives |	⟩to a
deﬁnite A eigenstate when the eigenvalues of A are nondegenerate, which for the
time being we assume. (We shall consider the degenerate case shortly.) Rewriting
the differential form of the inequality of Eq. (6.16e) as
−dE[V (t)]
dt
E[V (t)]−2 = dE[V (t)]−1
dt
≥4β2
R,
(6.16f)
integrating with respect to time, and using the fact that E[V (0)] = V (0) since the
stochastic effects act only after t = 0, we get the inequality (Hughston, 1996)
E[V (t)] ≤
V (0)
1 + 4β2
RV (0)t .
(6.16g)

172
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
This gives an explicit bound on E[V (t)] as a function of time, and will be used in
the next section to estimate reduction rates.
To see that Born rule probabilities emerge, we apply Eq. (6.16a) to the projec-
tors a ≡|a⟩⟨a| on a complete set of A eigenstates |a⟩. Since we have assumed
that A commutes with Heff, these projectors all commute with Heff and with A, and
so by Eq. (6.16a) the expectations E[⟨a⟩] are time independent; additionally, by
completeness of the states |a⟩, we have 
a⟨a⟩= 1. But these are just the condi-
tions for Pearle’s (1982, 1989) gambler’s ruin or martingale argument to apply. At
time zero, when the stochastic evolution has just started, E[⟨a⟩] = ⟨a⟩≡pa
is the absolute value squared of the quantum mechanical amplitude to ﬁnd the
initial state in A eigenstate |a⟩. At t = ∞, the system always evolves to a deﬁ-
nite A eigenstate, with the eigenstate | f ⟩occurring with some probability Pf . The
expectation E[⟨a⟩], evaluated at inﬁnite time, is then
E[⟨a⟩] =

f
⟨f |a| f ⟩Pf
= 1 × Pa +

f ̸=a
0 × Pf = Pa;
(6.17a)
hence pa = Pa for each a and the state collapses into energy eigenstates at t = ∞
with probabilities given by the usual quantum mechanical Born rule applied to the
initial wave function. It is also instructive to write Eq. (6.17a) as
E[⟨a⟩] = TrE[ ˆρ(∞)]a = Pa,
(6.17b)
which exhibits the role of
E[ ˆρ(∞)] =

f
Pf | f ⟩⟨f |
(6.17c)
as the conventionally deﬁned mixed state density matrix. We see that during the
collapse process, the expectation E[ ˆρ(t)] of the pure state density matrix ˆρ(t) with
respect to the Brownian ﬂuctuations, evolves from a pure state density matrix at
t = 0 to a mixed state density matrix at later times.
Let us now consider the case in which the operator A is degenerate. In this case,
let us choose a basis of A eigenstates so that, within each degenerate manifold, one
basis element coincides (after normalization) with the projection of the initial state
vector into that manifold, and the others are orthogonal to it. (If the projection of
the initial state vector into the manifold vanishes, any orthonormal basis for that
manifold sufﬁces.) We can then apply the argument just given for the nondegen-
erate case, using this specially chosen A eigenstate basis. We learn that the state
vector reduces to one of the members of this basis, with a probability equal to the
modulus squared of the projection of the initial state vector on this basis. Thus,

Proof of reduction with Born rule probabilities
173
the state vector reduces into one or another of the degenerate A eigenstate man-
ifolds, with the result of reduction being the normalized projection of the initial
state vector into that manifold, and with the probability of obtaining this outcome
equal to the squared modulus of the projection of the initial state into the mani-
fold (Gisin, 1984; Adler et al., 2001). This is precisely the result expected from
the L¨uders projection postulate, which generalizes the Born rule to the degenerate
case. Heuristically, the reason the L¨uders rule arises from Eq. (6.15a) is that this
equation has the form d|	⟩= O|	⟩, with O diagonal on an A basis. Thus any
A eigenstate component that has coefﬁcient zero in the eigenstate expansion of
the initial state vector cannot obtain a non-zero coefﬁcient through the subsequent
stochastic evolution.
Referring to Eqs. (6.16c–e), we see that state vector reduction occurs only when
βR ̸= 0, since the βI term in Eq. (6.15a) does not contribute to the evolution of the
variance of A. (The necessity for having βR ̸= 0 to achieve reduction motivates
the detailed discussion in Section 6.1 of how to achieve non-zero values for the
analogous quantities K1 and N1(t).) When βR = 0 Eq. (6.17a) remains valid, but
the variance of A remains constant, and so in this case the system stays for all time
in the same superposition of A eigenstates that was present at time t = 0, apart
from the insertion of stochastic phases proportional to βI in each A eigenstate
component.
Finally, we apply the proof just given to the energy-driven and localization mod-
els for reduction formulated in Section 6.1. In the case of the energy-driven model,
the reduction proof is immediately applicable with the choice A = Heff, and shows
that the initial state vector reduces to energy eigenstates with Born rule probabil-
ities. To treat the localization model, we note that the proof just given readily
generalizes to the case of multiple noise terms, the operator coefﬁcients of which
form a mutually commuting set with one another and with Heff. For the local-
ization model formulated in Section 6.1, the number density operators Nr(⃗y) do
form a mutually commuting set, but in general do not commute with the Hamil-
tonian Heff. Thus the proof just given demonstrates reduction to eigenstates of the
mutually commuting set of number density operators, with Born rule probabili-
ties, in the approximation in which the Hamiltonian-driven evolution of the state
vector can be neglected during the reduction time. Actually, in two circumstances
stronger statements can be made. First, when the Hamiltonian can be well approx-
imated by its rest mass terms, as in the model of Eq. (6.6), it then commutes with
the number density operators, and so the reduction proof applies. Second, even
without this approximation, it is often the case that the initial state is a superposi-
tion of states that have degenerate energies E, in which case the Hamiltonian Heff
can be replaced in its action on the initial state by the operator 1M E, with 1M the
unit operator on the degenerate energy manifold M spanned by the components

174
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
of the initial state. In this case, the Hamiltonian and number density operators ef-
fectively commute, so that the reduction proof can be used. This second scenario
applies, for example, when the initial state is a superposition of apparatus states
with identical energies, which are distinguishable by their macroscopic spatial dis-
placement.
6.3 Phenomenology of stochastic reduction – reduction rate formulas
We turn now to a discussion of phenomenological aspects of the stochastic
Schr¨odinger equation of Eq. (6.14a). Since we have seen in the preceding section
that the imaginary noise terms do not contribute to state vector reduction, we shall
simplify the discussion by omitting these terms. We shall also change notation by
writing βR = 1
2σ, since this is the notation employed in much of the literature on
the energy-driven stochastic equation, and we shall henceforth set ¯h equal to 1.
With these changes, Eq. (6.14a) becomes
|d	⟩=

−i Heffdt −1
8σ 2(Heff −⟨Heff⟩)2dt
−1
2γ dt

d3x

MR(⃗x) −⟨MR(⃗x)⟩
2
+ 1
2σdW R
t (Heff −⟨Heff⟩)
+

d3xdW R
t (⃗x)

MR(⃗x) −⟨MR(⃗x)⟩
	
|	⟩.
(6.18a)
We shall actually consider separately the cases of energy-driven stochastic reduc-
tion, for which Eq. (6.18a) takes the form
|d	⟩=

−i Heffdt −1
8σ 2(Heff −⟨Heff⟩)2dt + 1
2σdW R
t (Heff −⟨Heff⟩)

|	⟩
(6.18b)
and localization-driven reduction, for which Eq. (6.18a) takes the form
|d	⟩=

−i Heffdt −1
2γ dt

d3x(MR(⃗x) −⟨MR(⃗x)⟩)2
(6.18c)
. +

d3xdW R
t (⃗x)

MR(⃗x) −⟨MR(⃗x)⟩
	
|	⟩.
From Eq. (6.16g), we get inequalities (Hughston, 1996) that govern the reduction
rate in the two cases . For the energy-driven case of Eq. (6.18b), writing
V = ⟨(Heff −⟨Heff⟩)2⟩,
(6.19a)

Phenomenology of energy-driven reduction
175
we get
E[V (t)]
V (0)
≤
1
1 + σ 2V (0)t ,
(6.19b)
and so the reduction rate is bounded in terms of the initial state energy variance
(
E)2 = V (0) by
R ≥σ 2(
E)2.
(6.19c)
For the localization case of Eq. (6.18c), writing
V = ⟨

d3x(MR(⃗x) −⟨MR(⃗x)⟩)2⟩,
(6.20a)
we get
E[V (t)]
V (0)
≤
1
1 + 4γ V (0)t ,
(6.20b)
and so the reduction rate is bounded in terms of the initial state variance

d3x


MR(⃗x)
2 = V (0) by
R ≥4γ

d3x


MR(⃗x)
2,
(6.20c)
with the continuous spontaneous localization model corresponding to the choice
for MR(⃗x) given in Eq. (6.14c). Using these estimates of the reduction rate, we
shall address two principal issues. The ﬁrst is to determine bounds on the stochastic
terms implied by the agreement of current experiments with the predictions of
quantum mechanics, including an analysis of experiments in which coherence is
observed in multi-particle systems. The second is to see whether, consistent with
these bounds, the models actually explain state vector reduction in measurement
situations.
6.4 Phenomenology of energy-driven reduction
We begin with a discussion of the energy-driven reduction equation of Eq. (6.18b).
Because at present no deviations from the predictions of quantum mechanics have
been observed, there will clearly be experimental constraints on the magnitude of
the stochasticity parameter σ. These can be analyzed by using the bound on the re-
duction rate given in Eq. (6.19c). Since we see from this equation (or directly from
the stochastic Schr¨odinger equation) that σ has units (mass)−1
2 , it will be conve-
nient to write σ = M−1
2 , with M a characteristic mass scale for the ﬂuctuations
that give rise to the stochasticity in the Schr¨odinger equation. Equation (6.19c)

176
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
then takes the form
R ≥(
E)2/M,
(6.21a)
and we will quote constraints on σ in the form of lower bounds on M.
In addition to Eq. (6.21a), we shall also need the results of an analysis of
stochastic effects on the Weisskopf–Wigner analysis of decay rates and line shapes
given in Adler (2003a), which incorporates some simplifying observations of Di´osi
(personal communication, 2002). Di´osi observes that expectations of probabilities
can be calculated directly from the expectation of the density matrix, which from
Eq. (6.14b) (with M(R,I) = 0) has the same form for real (βR ̸= 0) or imaginary
(βI ̸= 0) stochastic noise terms. Hence expectations of probabilities arising from
the real noise equation Eq. (6.18b) will be the same as those arising from the imag-
inary noise equation
d|	⟩= −i Heff|	⟩dt −1
8σ 2H2
eff|	⟩dt + 1
2iσ Heff|	⟩dWt,
(6.21b)
with dWt = dW I
t normalized as dW 2
t = dt, which it is easy to show can be for-
mally integrated to give
|	(t)⟩= exp

−i Heff

t −1
2σ Wt

|	(0)⟩,
(6.21c)
where Wt =
 t
0 dWu is the Brownian motion with differential dWt. These consid-
erations lead to the following simple rule for calculating the stochastic modiﬁca-
tions of the expectations of probabilities governed by Eq. (6.18b). Let E[Pσ(t)]
be the expectation of a probability of physical interest, viewed as a function of σ
as well as of t, so that E[P0(t)] = P0(t) is the value calculated from the standard
Schr¨odinger evolution with no stochasticity. Here t is the elapsed time from the for-
mation of a non-stationary state, such as a metastable decaying state, or more gen-
erally, any given superposition of different energy eigenstates. Then Eqs. (6.21b,c)
imply the simple relation
E[Pσ(t)] = E

P0

t −1
2σ Wt

,
(6.21d)
between the probability calculated in the standard Schr¨odinger analysis, and
the stochastic expectation of the corresponding probability as calculated from
Eq. (6.18b), both starting from the same given initial state. The recipe is simply
this: take the known expression for the probability calculated in standard quantum
mechanics, replace t by t −1
2σ Wt, and take the stochastic expectation. The needed
stochastic expectations of powers of Wt are readily calculated from the Itˆo rules
of Eqs. (6.10c), (6.11a), and (6.13b), which can be used to derive the “exponential

Phenomenology of energy-driven reduction
177
martingale” formula
E[exp(σ Wt)] = exp
1
2σ 2t

,
(6.21e)
the Taylor expansion of which gives
E[Wt] = 0, E[W 2
t ] = t, E[W 3
t ] = 0, E[W 4
t ] = 3t2, . . . .
(6.21f)
(An alternative method is to use the fact that, for any function f (Wt), the expecta-
tion over the Brownian noise is given by
E[ f (Wt)] = (2πt)−1
2
 ∞
−∞
dWt exp

−W 2
t /(2t)

f (Wt),
(6.21g)
which gives E[W 2n
t ] = tn(2n −1) · (2n −3) · · · 1.)
As an example of the application of Eqs. (6.21d,e), let us consider the short time
survival probability of a decaying state |s(t)⟩. When σ = 0 we have for the stan-
dard answer, which gives the quantum Zeno effect (Misra and Sudarshan, 1977;
for recent discussions see Facchi and Pascazio, 2003 and Giulini et al., 1996)
|⟨s(0)|s(t)⟩|2 = 1 −⟨(H −⟨H⟩s)2⟩st2 + O(t3),
(6.22a)
with ⟨O⟩s≡⟨s(0)|O|s(0)⟩. Following the recipe, we obtain
E

t −1
2σ Wt
2	
= E

t2 −tσ Wt + 1
4σ 2W 2
t
	
= t2 + 1
4σ 2t.
(6.22b)
On substitution into Eq. (6.22a) this gives for general σ
E[|⟨s(0)|s(t)⟩|2] = 1 −⟨(H −⟨H⟩s)2⟩s

t2 + 1
4σ 2t

+ . . . .
(6.22c)
We see that there is a stochastic suppression of the quantum Zeno effect, since the
short time survival probability never has a regime in which there is a t2 behavior.
The stochastically induced t term in Eq. (6.22c) has precisely the form one would
expect from the stochastically induced reduction rate R estimated in Eq. (6.19c).
Applying the same reasoning to the Weisskopf–Wigner analysis (Adler, 2003a)
of decay processes, one learns that within the limits of their approximations, the
transition rate per unit time , and the standard Lorentzian line proﬁle formula,
are unaffected by the stochastic terms in Eq. (6.18b). Similarly, applying the rule
of Eq. (6.21d) to the Rabi oscillations of a two-level system (see Rabi, 1937; Rabi,
Ramsey, and Schwinger, 1954; and Feynman, Vernon, and Hellwarth, 1957), that
is started precessing at t = 0 in a constant magnetic ﬁeld with Rabi frequency 
and an initial density matrix ρ = (1 −⃗R · ⃗τ)/2 (where ⃗τ are the standard Pauli

178
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
matrices), one ﬁnds that
E[ ⃗Rσ(t)] = exp

−1
82σ 2t

⃗R0(t).
(6.23a)
This implies that the expected probabilities for ﬁnding the system in the upper (+)
and lower (−) state, when the system evolves under the stochastic Schr¨odinger
equation of Eq. (6.18b), are related to the corresponding σ = 0 probabilities by
1
2 −E[Pσ
±] = exp

−1
82σ 2t
 1
2 −P0
±

.
(6.23b)
Let us now apply the formulas of Eq. (6.21a) through Eq. (6.23b) to estimate
bounds on σ implied by the good agreement of standard quantum theory with
experiment. We ﬁrst discuss the constraints imposed by the maintenance of coher-
ence.
According to Eq. (6.21a), the sole criterion governing how rapidly the state vec-
tor reduces is the energy variance; whether the system is microscopic or macro-
scopic plays no role. We can rephrase Eq. (6.21a) as giving a lower bound on
the mass M in terms of the time tC over which a superposition of energy states
differing by 
E is observed to remain coherent
M > tC(
E)2,
(6.24a)
where we have assumed that the stochastic evolution starts at the beginning of the
time interval over which coherence is observed. For example, consider the recent
superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) experiments (Friedman
et al., 2000; van der Wal et al., 2000) that observe the existence of coherent super-
positions of macroscopic states consisting of oppositely circulating supercurrents.
The variance 
E in the Friedman et al. experiment is roughly 8.6 × 10−6eV,
with the circulating currents each corresponding to the collective motion of ∼109
Cooper pairs. Using the largest coherence times tC ∼5 × 10−6 s observed to date
(Vion et al., 2002; Yu et al., 2002), and taking the stochastic evolution to start
at the beginning of the observed coherence interval, we get a lower bound of
M > 3.5 × 10−16(eV)2s ∼5 × 10−10GeV. If experiments attain coherence times
of a millisecond, which may ultimately be feasible (J. Lukens, personal communi-
cation, 2002), this bound would be improved to M > 10−7GeV.
In the particle physics realm the most straightforward cases to consider are those
involving oscillations of neutrinos, K-mesons, or B-mesons, since these can be
treated as two-state systems with negligible interaction with the electromagnetic
ﬁeld, and so Eq. (6.24a) can be directly applied. Again, we assume that the
stochastic evolution starts with the creation of the oscillating system that is a coher-
ent superposition of energy eigenstates. For a two-state system with mass splitting

Phenomenology of energy-driven reduction
179

m, and mean energy E for the components, one has 
E = 
m2/(2E), and so
we get from Eq. (6.24a) the estimate
M > tC(
m2)2
4E2
= tC(
m)2 m
E
2
.
(6.24b)
For neutrinos (Lisi, Marrone, and Montanino, 2000; Adler, 2000), taking the co-
herence time tC to be the oscillation time 2π/(
E) = 4π E/(
m2), Eq. (6.24b)
becomes
M > 2π
E = π
m2
E
,
(6.24c)
which for the parameters appropriate to the atmospheric (
m2 ∼3 × 10−3(eV)2,
E ∼1GeV) and solar (
m2 ∼7 × 10−5(eV)2, E ∼1MeV) neutrino oscillation
observations, gives the respective estimates of M > 10−20GeV and M > 2 ×
10−19GeV. For K- and B-mesons at rest in the lab frame, taking the coherence
time tC to be the lifetime τS of the shorter-lived component (which is similar in
magnitude to the oscillation time), Eq. (6.24a) becomes
M > τS(
m)2,
(6.24d)
which for the parameters appropriate to the K-meson system (
m ∼4 ×
10−6eV, τS ∼.9 × 10−10 s) and to the B-meson system (
m ∼3 × 10−4eV,
τS ∼1.6 × 10−12 s) gives respective bounds of M > 2 × 10−15 GeV and M >
2 × 10−13 GeV. The K- and B-meson systems give better bounds than are ob-
tained from neutrinos because for the mesons m/E is of order unity, whereas for
neutrinos m/E is very small.
Another estimate can be obtained by applying the Rabi oscillation formula of
Eq. (6.23b) to the experiment of Itano et al. (1990), who carry out a proposal of
Cook (1988) to make repeated measurements of a two-level system while the vec-
tor ⃗R is precessing for a time interval t = π/, for which the exponential damping
factor in Eq. (6.23b) becomes exp(−1
8πσ 2). Corresponding to the experimental
value  = 320.7MHz and the fact that probabilities were observed to an accuracy
of about .02 in this experiment, and were found to agree with standard Schr¨odinger
theory, we get a bound of M > 2 × 10−15GeV, comparable to that obtained from
oscillations in the K-meson system.
Let us consider ﬁnally bounds coming from particle decay experiments (Adler,
2003a). Because the transition rate per unit time and Lorentzian line shape are
unaffected by σ, bounds on σ from particle decays result only from experiments in
which a metastable system is monitored as function of time from a known time (or
vertex location) of formation. According to the discussion leading to Eq. (6.22c),

180
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
for small times the effective transition rate per unit time is
R = 1
4σ 2(
E)2,
(6.25a)
with 
E the initial state energy variance. As already remarked, this can be in-
terpreted as an early time decay rate coming from spontaneous reduction induced
by the stochastic ﬂuctuation terms. In order for the rate of Eq. (6.25a) not to lead
to pronounced early time deviations from the observed decay rate , we must
have
R < .
(6.25b)
Using the standard Golden Rule formula for , and the formula (
E)2 =
(V 2)ss ≡⟨s|V 2|s⟩relating the energy variance to the initial state expectation of
the square of the decay-inducing perturbation V (assuming Vss ≡⟨s|V |s⟩= 0, as
is generally the case), we obtain the bound
M > (V 2)ss
4
=

m̸=s |Vsm|2
8π 
m̸=s |Vsm|2δ(Em −Es) ≡ED
8π ,
(6.26)
with ED deﬁning an energy characteristic of the decay process. In a particle
physics context, a ﬁrst guess would be to estimate ED as being of order the mass of
the decaying particle. The most massive decays, for which  has been measured by
tracking a metastable system from the point of formation, appear to be π0 →γ γ
decay, with an initial mass of 140 MeV, and charmed meson decays, with an initial
mass of around 2 GeV. Estimating ED in Eq. (6.26) as the decaying particle mass,
these give respective bounds on M of order 6 MeV and 80 MeV, respectively. If
M were signiﬁcantly larger than these bounds, one would have observed anoma-
lous accumulations of decay events close to the production vertex, as a result of
decays induced by spontaneous reduction. These bounds are signiﬁcantly better
than those obtained above from experiments that observe the maintenance of co-
herence in either an atomic or a particle physics context, but are still very weak
when compared to the Planck mass of 1019GeV, which as the probable scale for
the uniﬁcation of particle forces with quantum gravity, is a natural scale at which
new physics effects are expected.
We note ﬁnally that in the analysis of future experiments to improve the phe-
nomenological bounds on M, in addition to the analytical methods discussed here,
one may also have recourse to numerical simulation methods (Shack, Brun, and
Percival, 1995; Shack and Brun, 1997; Kloeden and Platen, 1997; Percival, 1998).
Powerful new techniques for performing such simulations, along with related ana-
lytical methods, are given by Brody and Hughston (2002).

Phenomenology of energy-driven reduction
181
We turn now to the second requirement that must be satisﬁed by a phenomenol-
ogy of state vector reduction, which is that it should lead to rapid reduction in
experimental situations where a probabilistic outcome is observed. According to
the von Neumann (1932) model for measurement, a measurement sets up a correla-
tion between states | fℓ⟩of a quantum system being measured, and macroscopically
distinguishable states |Mℓ⟩of the measuring apparatus M, in such a way that an
initial state
| f ⟩|Minitial⟩=

ℓ
cℓ| fℓ⟩|Minitial⟩
(6.27a)
evolves unitarily to

ℓ
cℓ| fℓ⟩|Mℓ⟩.
(6.27b)
An objective state vector reduction model must then account for the selection of
one of the alternatives | fℓ⟩|Mℓ⟩from this superposition, with a probability given
by |cℓ|2. From Eq. (6.21a), we see that in order for reduction to occur within a time
tR, given the mass M = σ −2 determining the stochasticity parameter, the energy
spread 
E between different states in the superposition of Eq. (6.27b) must be at
least

E = (M/tR)
1
2 .
(6.27c)
Thus, assuming that the relevant experimental measurement time is of order
10−8 s, which sets an upper bound on tR, and using the bound M > .1GeV ∼
10−7(eV)2 s that we obtained above, we ﬁnd that 
E must be greater than a few
eV for reduction to occur within the measurement time. (Of course, for values of
M larger than this lower bound, 
E must be correspondingly larger by a factor
of (M/.1GeV)
1
2 . For example, if we take M as the Planck mass, 
E would have
to be around 30GeV to give a 10−8 s reduction time.) Since in typical molecular
beam experiments the energy spread among the states | fℓ⟩can be very small frac-
tions of an eV, these energy spreads by themselves cannot quantitatively account
for state vector reduction. The only way for reduction to occur within typical mea-
surement times is for the energy spreads among the alternative apparatus states in
the superposition to be much larger than a few eV. Since in the ideal measurement
model there is no energy transfer from the microscopic system to the apparatus,
such an energy spread in the measurement apparatus states can be present, if at
all, only through the effects of environmental interactions. At this point the anal-
ysis becomes controversial. Hughston (1996) has suggested that accretion of en-
vironmental molecules on the apparatus gives a sufﬁcient energy spread between

182
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
measurement outcomes to drive reduction, and this has been followed up by a de-
tailed study by Adler (2002). However, Pearle (2003) and others have pointed out
that the accretion mechanism involves erecting an artiﬁcial boundary deﬁning the
apparatus as opposed to the environment, and if the analysis is based on a closed as
opposed to an open system, there is no accretion-induced energy spread between
different outcomes, and no energy-driven state vector reduction! To illustrate these
issues, we ﬁrst present the argument for environmentally induced energy variances
driving reduction, as given in Adler (2002), and then give a discussion of problems
with this scenario.
For environmental interactions to be effective in producing state vector reduc-
tion, they must lead to energy ﬂuctuations 
E of the apparatus in the course of
a measurement, that are large enough for Eq. (6.21a) to predict a reduction time
tR = −1
R
that is less than the time it takes to make the measurement. (This cri-
terion assumes that the energy ﬂuctuations in the apparatus can be interpreted
as corresponding to energy differences between the different measurement out-
comes. When the surface of accretion is sufﬁciently remote from the parts of the
apparatus that register measurement outcomes, this assumption could be ques-
tioned.) In order to make quantitative estimates, we must ﬁrst make a guess as
to the actual magnitude of M. Perhaps the most natural guess is that M should
be of order the Planck mass, 1019 GeV ∼1013(eV)2 s, which to give a reduc-
tion time of order 10−8 s requires, from Eq. (6.27c), 
E ∼3 × 1010eV = 30GeV,
i.e., of order the mass of a nitrogen molecule. However, the best lower bound
on M that we obtained is also consistent with M of order the electroweak
mass 2.5 × 102GeV ∼2.5 × 10−4(eV)2 s, which to give a reduction time of or-
der 10−8 s requires only 
E ∼100eV. For an intermediate scale M, of order
the geometrical mean of the electroweak mass and the Planck mass, reduction
within 10−8 s would require 
E ∼2 × 106eV = 2MeV, of order a few electron
masses.
The starting point for the analysis of environmental accretion is the observation
of Adler and Horwitz (2000), Adler (2002), and Pearle (2003) that the energy-
driven equation has good clustering properties. Speciﬁcally, if the total Hamilto-
nian is the sum of the Hamiltonians for two noninteracting subsystems, so that
H = H1 + H2, and if subsystem 1 is at the end point of its reduction process,
then the reduction dynamics for subsystem 2 is independent of the variables re-
ferring to subsystem 1. More generally, if one traces over the variables of sub-
system 1, the reduction dynamics for subsystem 2 takes the standard energy-
driven form governed by H2. Taking off from this observation, the analysis of
Adler (2002) consists of two parts. First, a splitting of the total system is made
into environment on the one hand, and measured system and measuring appa-
ratus on the other, which are assumed to be weakly coupled. The clustering

Phenomenology of energy-driven reduction
183
property in the absence of environmental coupling permits one to develop a weak-
coupling Hartree approximation when environmental couplings are included,
giving a modiﬁed reduction equation for the measured system plus measuring
apparatus. This takes the form of Eq. (6.18b), with a Hartree Hamiltonian con-
sisting of the Hamiltonian for the measured system and measuring apparatus,
plus the expectation of the interaction Hamiltonian between the apparatus and
the environment. Second, in terms of this Hartree picture, a detailed analysis is
given of mechanisms that can give apparatus energy ﬂuctuations large enough
to drive reduction with a Planckian M. The analysis of Adler (2002) considers
three possible sources of energy ﬂuctuations: thermal energy ﬂuctuations, ﬂuc-
tuations in apparatus mass from particle accretion processes, and ﬂuctuations in
apparatus mass from ampliﬁed ﬂuctuations in the currents that actuate the indi-
cator devices. Thermal energy ﬂuctuations were found to be unable to produce a
30GeV energy ﬂuctuation within the measurement time. On the other hand, both
energy ﬂuctuations from mass accretion, and from ampliﬁed current ﬂuctuations,
are relevant.
As illustrations of accretion-induced ﬂuctuations, assuming room temperature
and atmospheric pressure (760 Torr), the time for one molecule to be accreted
onto an area of 1cm2 is 3 × 10−24 s, while at an ultrahigh vacuum of 10−13 Torr
it is 3 × 10−8 s. Thus, for an apparatus in the atmosphere at standard tempera-
ture and pressure, where the bulk of the accreting atoms are nitrogen molecules,
the minimum apparatus area required for one molecule to accrete in a reduction
time of 10−8 s is 3 × 10−16cm2, with the corresponding minimum area needed
at a pressure of 10−13 Torr equal to 3cm2. Further estimates of this type can be
made. For example, even in the sparsely populated environment of intergalactic
space, one concludes that in a typical high precision molecular beam experiment,
the reduction time induced by particle accretion on a capsule large enough to en-
close the apparatus would be smaller, by at least an order of magnitude, than the
measurement time.
Estimates can also be made of energy ﬂuctuations arising from the ampliﬁed
ﬂuctuations in the currents which actuate experimental indicating or recording de-
vices. Of course, if power sources are included, there are no overall current ﬂuctu-
ations, but power supplies are typically large in area and so when included in the
system the accretion analysis just given indicates rapid reduction times. In a typ-
ical electrically ampliﬁed measurement, a ﬁnal total charge transfer Ne (with e
the charge of an electron) actuates an indicator or recording device. Assuming that
the ﬂuctuation in the current is the ampliﬁed ﬂuctuation in the initially detected
signal, for ampliﬁcation gain G we have 
N ∼G × (N/G)
1
2 = (NG)
1
2 . Let us
take N to correspond to a charge transfer of 1 milliampere (a voltage change of
10 volts at 10 k impedance) over a 10−8 second pulse, so that N ∼6 × 107,

184
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
and assume a gain G ∼104, giving 
N ∼8 × 105. Multiplying by the elec-
tron mass of .5 × 10−3GeV, we ﬁnd that the corresponding energy ﬂuctuation
is 
E ∼4 × 102GeV, which leads to state vector reduction in 5 × 10−11 s. Thus,
electric current ﬂuctuations play a signiﬁcant role in state vector reduction when
the “apparatus” is deﬁned to exclude power sources.
If instead we assume a value of M at the electroweak scale or at an interme-
diate scale, a much smaller 
E is needed, which can be supplied by accretion of
a few electrons at most. However, even with M as small as the lower bound of
.1GeV, thermal ﬂuctuations arising from immersion in the 3-degree Kelvin mi-
crowave background radiation are ineffective in causing state vector reduction,
since for an apparatus of 1cm2 area the typical energy ﬂuctuation associated with
the microwave background ﬂux in 10−8 s is only 
E ∼10−1eV, which is too
small.
The overall conclusion of this analysis is that, assuming the validity of the
apparatus–environment distinction, then for conditions under which laboratory
experiments are performed, as well as for conditions under which space capsule
experiments might be performed in the foreseeable future, state vector reduction
times as estimated by Eq. (6.21a) using the particle accretion mechanism are well
within experimental measurement times. However, as noted above, this conclu-
sion is controversial, and is subject to the following objections. First of all, it seems
somewhat counterintuitive that particle ﬂuxes should have to be invoked to achieve
deﬁnite measurement outcomes; one would like to think that a Stern–Gerlach ap-
paratus in intergalactic space, contained within layers of distant shielding that to-
tally absorb incident particles, would still function as on earth. This of course raises
the issue of how one deﬁnes the apparatus and how one deﬁnes the environment
in the accretion model. If one takes the Stern–Gerlach apparatus and its capsule
as the apparatus, but does not include an outer and distant layer of shielding, one
concludes that there is no energy-driven reduction; if one has to take the particle
absorbing outer layer of shielding into account, then the situation becomes very
much like the von Neumann recursion (an apparatus measuring an apparatus ad
inﬁnitum), which the objective reduction program is designed to avoid. Moreover,
as stressed by Pearle (2003), if one includes the outer layer of shielding in the ap-
paratus deﬁnition, then why not also include those particles that will hit the shield-
ing within the measurement time, in which case there is no accretion effect and no
energy-driven reduction. In other words, if one demands that there be reduction in-
dependent of the apparatus deﬁnition, then the accretion model for energy-driven
reduction is in jeopardy. As of this writing, we ﬁnd the objections to the accretion
model convincing, and conclude that although the Heff-driven stochastic terms in
Eq. (6.14a) are likely to be present, so that the bounds on them developed above are

Reduction by continuous spontaneous localization
185
relevant, they are unlikely to be able to account for state vector reduction through
the accretion mechanism.
Another objection to energy-driven reduction, discussed by Pearle (2003), is
that if there is reduction of isolated systems to energy eigenstates, then the energy
spectrum of the superpositions needed for there to be nontrivial dynamics will be
narrowed with the passage of time. This leads to a broadening of the time evolu-
tion of physical systems, with possible experimental tests, and to the possibility of
improved bounds on the mass M = σ −2 governing the stochasticity.
One other possibility that should be kept in mind is that spacetime geometry
ﬂuctuations may play a role in energy-driven reduction. In recent work summa-
rized in Ng (2003), holographic ideas are invoked to derive intrinsic limits, arising
from spacetime geometry ﬂuctuations, on the accuracy with which distances, time
intervals, and energies can be determined. For energy, Ng proposes the formula
δE ∼E(E/1019GeV)
2
3 . This formula is meant to apply in the microscopic realm
(it clearly makes no sense for energies near or larger than the Planck mass), so
let us suppose that it can be applied to a light nucleus from which an appara-
tus is constructed, with atomic weight of 10GeV, giving an energy uncertainty of
10−11GeV. If we suppose that for large objects these energy ﬂuctuations can be
added in quadrature, then for an apparatus containing 1024 nuclei we get an en-
ergy uncertainty of 1012 × 10−11GeV = 10GeV, which is the right magnitude to
give state vector reduction in about 10−8 s, for M of order the Planck mass. In
making this estimate we are implicitly assuming that the time scale for the 10GeV
ﬂuctuations is less than the measurement time of 10−8 s. Since this mechanism
does not involve a separation between measured system and environment, it may
avoid the objections discussed above. However, it must be regarded as very spec-
ulative until there is a more detailed understanding of spacetime ﬂuctuations in
energy, and particularly of the time scales on which they occur. For a discussion
and references relating to other ideas about a possible role for quantum gravity
effects in state vector reduction, see Penrose (1996) and Moroz, Penrose, and Tod
(1998).
6.5 Phenomenology of reduction by continuous spontaneous localization
We have seen in Section 6.1 that the ﬂuctuation 
 ˜C in general contains a matrix
part N, which in the rest-mass dominated approximation to the Hamiltonian of
Eq. (6.6) gives rise to the mass-weighted matrix M of Eq. (6.8e). The continuous
spontaneous localization (CSL) model (in its mass-proportional coupling form)
then follows by assuming a spatially correlated noise structure, as in Eq. (6.10d),
coupled to the particle number density operators as in Eq. (6.14c). The sharply

186
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
peaked correlation function g(⃗x) is assumed to have characteristic radius rC and
to be normalized to have spatial integral unity

d3xg(⃗x) = 1.
(6.28a)
Although the CSL literature often assumes a Gaussian form for the correlation
function, so that g(⃗x) ∝exp(−⃗x2/r2
C), Weber (1990) has shown that no partic-
ular choice of functional form is needed, and so it seems just as natural to take
the correlation function to be an exponential g(⃗x) ∝exp(−|⃗x|/rC). We shall see
explicitly, in the estimates given below, that the results are independent of the
detailed form of g(⃗x), and, indeed, are independent of the value of the correla-
tion length rC, provided that the latter lies between microscopic and macroscopic
dimensions. The value rC ∼10−5cm is typically assumed in the CSL literature.
Ultimately, one would want the underlying theory to predict the value of the cor-
relation length, but at the present stage of development this is not possible; hence
a challenge for implementing the CSL mechanism is providing a fundamental ra-
tionale for a correlation length of the required magnitude.
To study the phenomenology of the localization model, let us make the simpli-
fying assumption that only one species of particles is present, so that we can drop
the subscript r in Eq. (6.14c); this is in fact realistic since with mass proportional
couplings the contribution from the nucleons in an apparatus dominates that from
the electrons. We now follow the discussion given by Ghirardi, Pearle, and Rim-
ini (1990). Since the number density operator N(⃗y) = 	†
eff(⃗y)	eff(⃗y) obeys the
commutation relation [N(⃗y), 	†
eff(⃗x)] = δ3(⃗y −⃗x)	†
eff(⃗y), a state
|⃗r1, . . . , ⃗rn⟩∝
n

ℓ=1
	†
eff(⃗rℓ)|vac⟩,
(6.28b)
is an eigenstate of MR(⃗x) with eigenvalue
n(⃗x) = m
n

ℓ=1
g(⃗x −⃗rℓ).
(6.28c)
We now consider the reduction of a state |	⟩that is a superposition of a state
containing a group of n particles at locations ⃗rℓ, and a state containing a second
group of n particles at locations ⃗r ′
ℓ, with the separations between the two groups
larger than the correlation length rC, so that
|	⟩=
1
√2(|⃗r1, . . . , ⃗rn⟩+ |⃗r ′
1, . . . , ⃗r ′
n⟩).
(6.29a)

Reduction by continuous spontaneous localization
187
Then from Eq. (6.28c), we ﬁnd that the initial state variance V (0) needed in
Eqs. (6.20a–c) is
V (0)/m2 = ⟨

d3x

MR(⃗x) −⟨MR(⃗x)⟩
2⟩
=

d3x

1
2

n

ℓ=1
g(⃗x −⃗rℓ)
2 +

n

ℓ=1
g(⃗x −⃗r ′
ℓ)
2
−1
4
 n

ℓ=1
g(⃗x −⃗rℓ) +
n

ℓ=1
g(⃗x −⃗r ′
ℓ)
2

=

d3x 1
4
 n

ℓ=1
g(⃗x −⃗rℓ) −
n

ℓ=1
g(⃗x −⃗r ′
ℓ)
2
≃

d3x 1
4


 n

ℓ=1
g(⃗x −⃗rℓ)
2
+
 n

ℓ=1
g(⃗x −⃗r ′
ℓ)
2

≃

d3x 1
2
 n

ℓ=1
g(⃗x −⃗rℓ)
2
,
(6.29b)
where in the ﬁnal two lines we have used the facts that the two groups of particles
are separated by more than the correlation length and that the integrals over
the sums corresponding to each group are approximately the same. To evaluate
the integral in the ﬁnal line of Eq. (6.29b), we consider two limiting cases. In the
ﬁrst case, corresponding to macroscopic objects, we assume that each group of
particles has a spatial extent much larger than the correlation length, but that the
interparticle separation is much smaller than the correlation length and that the
particles are distributed with average density D0. Then we have

d3x 1
2
 n

ℓ=1
g(⃗x −⃗rℓ)
2
≃

d3x 1
2ng(⃗x −⃗r1)
n

ℓ=1
g(⃗r1 −⃗rℓ)
≃

d3x 1
2ng(⃗x −⃗r1)D0

d3yg(⃗r1 −⃗y) = 1
2nD0.
(6.29c)
Thus the initial state variance is given by V (0) ≃1
2m2nD0, and the reduction rate
is
R ≥2γ m2nD0.
(6.29d)

188
Brownian motion corrections to Schr¨odinger dynamics
In the second case, corresponding to microscopic objects such as large molecules,
in which each group of particles is tightly bunched within a radius much smaller
than the correlation length, we have

d3x 1
2
 n

ℓ=1
g(⃗x −⃗rℓ)
2
≃1
2n2

d3xg(⃗x)2
= c′n2r−3
C ,
(6.29e)
with c′ a dimensionless constant of order unity. So in this case the initial state
variance is V (0) = c′m2n2r−3
C , and (writing c = 4c′) the reduction rate is
R ≥cγ m2n2r−3
C .
(6.29f)
To bound the stochasticity parameter γ , instead of using experiments that ob-
serve coherent superpositions of energy eigenstates as in the discussion of Sec-
tion 6.4, we must now rely on experiments that observe coherent superpositions
of spatially displaced groups of particles. A useful bound comes from experiments
(Arndt et al., 1999; Nairz, Arndt, and Zeilinger, 2000; Nairz et al., 2001) that
achieve diffraction of C60 and C70 fullerenes containing n ∼103 nucleons on grat-
ings with spacings of 1 to 2.5 times 10−5 cm. Corresponding to the beam transit
time in these experiments of order 10−2 s, for localization not to spoil the diffrac-
tion pattern we require R << 102 s−1, which from the bunched case formula of
Eq. (6.29f) gives
γ << 10−4r3
C s−1GeV−2.
(6.30a)
Ghirardi, Pearle, and Rimini (1990) assume a correlation length rC ∼10−5cm,
and propose the value
γ ∼10−30cm3 s−1GeV−2,
(6.30b)
well within the upper limit of 10−19cm3 s−1GeV−2 given by Eq. (6.30a) (and also
well within other bounds derived in the CSL literature, obtained from the fact that
the CSL reduction mechanism leads to small system energy increases induced by
coupling to the noise). For a small macroscopic object with n ∼1013 and D0 ∼
1024cm−3, the formula of Eq. (6.29d) then gives a reduction time R ∼107 s−1.
So any instrument pointer displacement involving at least 1013 nucleons gives a
reduction time less than typical experimental measurement times.
What we have given here is only a quick sketch of the CSL reduction mech-
anism, in the context of our analysis of Sections 6.1 through 6.3. For a com-
prehensive discussion, the reader is referred to the review of Bassi and Ghirardi

Reduction by continuous spontaneous localization
189
(2003), where all aspects of the CSL approach, including objections that have
been raised and proposed answers to these objections, are analyzed in detail. Since
our introduction of the particle density in Eq. (6.14c) is an assumption, and other
assumptions have been made along the way in Section 6.1, we cannot claim to
have derived the CSL mechanism. But our arguments at least show that there is a
plausible route leading from the underlying trace dynamics to CSL reduction with
mass proportional couplings (which as argued by Pearle and Squires, 1994; Collett
et al., 1995; and Pearle et al., 1999; is the phenomenologically favored form of the
CSL model).

7
Discussion and outlook
In the preceding chapters we have developed a new approach to quantum mechan-
ics, based on the idea that quantum theory is an emergent phenomenon arising
from the statistical dynamics of an underlying matrix model. As we have seen,
a very rich structure arises from a few simple assumptions about the structure of
the underlying trace dynamics, such as its global unitary invariance and the use in
thermodynamic calculations of the maximally symmetric canonical ensemble that
gives a non-zero value to ⟨˜C⟩AV.
Our proposal suggests answers to a number of the motivating questions raised in
the Introduction. Canonical quantization is seen to emerge as a consequence of the
equipartition of ˜C, rather than being imposed as a postulate. A potential resolution
of the measurement problem appears as a consequence of the fact that the under-
lying dynamics is not unitary, with the unitary dynamics of quantum ﬁeld theory
emerging only as a thermodynamic approximation; when ﬂuctuation corrections
to this approximation are taken into account, our arguments suggest an underlying
dynamical origin for stochastic Schr¨odinger equation models for state vector re-
duction. The underlying dynamics is nonlocal, with the locality of quantum ﬁeld
theory again the result of the thermodynamic approximation; this suggests an ame-
lioration, in the underlying dynamics, of the inﬁnities of quantum ﬁeld theory, pro-
vides a basis for understanding the nonlocal “paradoxes” of quantum theory, and
may have implications as well as for early universe cosmology, where it may play
a role in establishing the large-scale uniformity of the universe. Our approach may
also have connections to recent work on string theory, where matrix models (as
reviewed in Taylor, 2001) play a prominent role.
A signiﬁcant feature of trace dynamics is that scale invariance is manifested
through the vanishing of the Lorentz trace of the trace energy-momentum tensor
T µ
µ , providing a single number condition. Similarly, we have seen that supersym-
metry in trace dynamics implies only the conservation of a trace supercurrent Jµ
(and its conjugate ¯Jµ), again providing a single number condition. Neither the
190

Discussion and outlook
191
vanishing of T µ
µ
nor the conservation of Jµ imply corresponding operator con-
straints. Thus in a suitably constructed uniﬁed trace dynamics theory of the forces,
it is possible that either scale invariance or supersymmetry could provide a single
number constraint forcing the vanishing of the cosmological constant, without si-
multaneously forcing the emergent quantum ﬁeld theory to be either massless or
exactly supersymmetric. For a ﬁrst attempt in this direction, see Adler (1997c),
but a detailed working out of the idea, taking into account the necessity for global
unitary ﬁxing in the canonical ensemble (as discussed in Section 4.5), has yet to
be given.
A large number of other questions are left unanswered. What we have done
in the preceding chapters is to establish a general framework, and to formulate
speciﬁc assumptions and approximations, that lead to the emergence of quantum
mechanics as an effective dynamics for low frequency or “slow” degrees of free-
dom. These observable degrees of freedom are assumed to be separated by a large
hierarchy of scale and effectively decoupled, from very high frequency or “fast”
degrees of freedom characterizing the underlying dynamics. We know empirically
that such a hierarchy of scales exists, but the mechanism that produces it is not
known, and we shed no new light on this question. We also note that our frame-
work leads to not one but two copies of quantum ﬁeld theory, corresponding to the
eigenvalues ±i of ieff; we have not attempted to assign a physical role to the second
copy, nor to the additional “off-diagonal” degrees of freedom corresponding to the
parts of the underlying matrices that anticommute with ieff. Since the discussions
of Section 2.3 and 2.4 and Chapter 3 show that no decomposition with respect
to ieff is involved in the coupling of matrix degrees of freedom to a c-number
spacetime metric, the second copy and the off-diagonal degrees of freedom both
couple to the spacetime metric in a manner similar to the ﬁrst copy. Hence they
act as source terms in the Einstein ﬁeld equations, and thus may be relevant for the
questions of “dark matter” or “dark energy” that are central to current cosmology
(but which may, of course, have more mundane explanations). We remark in this
connection that in real Hilbert space, discussed brieﬂy in Appendix A, the second
copy of quantum ﬁeld theory is absent. The reason is that in real Hilbert space ieff
cannot be diagonalized, and so itself plays the role of the imaginary unit of the
emergent complex quantum theory.
We stress that we have not identiﬁed a candidate for the speciﬁc matrix model
that realizes our assumptions: this is a task for the future. There may be a number
of theories that realize our assumptions, there may be none, in which case we have
erected an empty framework, or there may be only one, which could then provide
the underlying uniﬁed theory of physical phenomena that is the goal of current
researches in high-energy physics and cosmology. We have also not committed as
to whether the underlying Hilbert space is ﬁnite or inﬁnite, or as to whether the

192
Discussion and outlook
number of fundamental matrix degrees of freedom is ﬁnite (as suggested by recent
ideas, reviewed by Bousso, 2002, on “holographic” interpretations of quantum
theory) or is inﬁnite. It is possible that the underlying dynamics may be discrete,
and this could naturally be implemented within our framework of basing an under-
lying dynamics on trace class matrices.
To conclude, we believe that the kinematical framework of trace dynamics, as
developed in this book, provides a fruitful new direction for exploration in the
search for a unifying theory of particles and forces. Speciﬁcally, if quantum theory
is an emergent phenomenon, then the sought for uniﬁcation of gravitation with
the quantum ﬁeld theoretic standard model may not involve “quantizing” gravita-
tion. Rather, the ideas developed in this book suggest, one should seek a common
origin for both gravitation and quantum ﬁeld theory at the deeper level of physical
phenomena from which quantum ﬁeld theory emerges.

Appendices
To keep the discussion of this book self-contained, a number of topics that are
brieﬂy mentioned in the text are treated in more detail in the appendices that
follow.
The notation of the appendices follows that generally used in the text. Through-
out this book, we indicate sums explicitly, except that the usual Einstein summation
convention is used for sums over Greek letter four-vector and tensor indices, and
a summation convention is used for the indices i, j in Section 3.3. Our Minkowski
metric convention is ηµν = diag(1, 1, 1, −1), and we have taken the velocity of
light to be unity, so that c does not appear in the equations. However, Planck’s
constant ¯h is generally retained (except in the formulas of Sections 1.5 and 6.3
through 6.5 where we set ¯h = 1), because our approach implies that it has a dyna-
mical origin.
Fermionic quantities are represented throughout by Grassmann numbers. Real
Grassmann numbers are constructed as products of a basis χr of real Grassmann
elements, that obey the anticommutative algebra {χr, χs} = 0 for all r, s, which
implies that the square of any Grassmann element vanishes. Complex Grassmann
numbers have real and imaginary parts that are real Grassmann numbers. A product
of an even number of Grassmann basis elements, multiplied by a complex number
coefﬁcient, is called even grade or bosonic, and a product of an odd number of
Grassmann basis elements, with a complex number coefﬁcient, is called odd grade
or fermionic. Grassmann integration is deﬁned by

dχrχs = −

χsdχr = δrs,
and so is effectively the same as differentiation from the left. The seminal refer-
ence on applications of Grassmann numbers in physics is Berezin (1966), and a
good pedagogical account can be found in Section 1.3 of Cheng and Li (1988).
Often in the literature an adjointness convention (χrχs)† = χ†
s χ†
r is adopted for
all Grassmann matrices irrespective of grade, which implicitly treats the elements
χ1, χ2, . . . of the Grassmann algebra as operators with the nontrivial transposition
rule (χrχs)T = χ T
s χ T
r . As noted in Section 1.1, we follow the alternate convention
193

194
Appendices
in which (χrχs)† = (−1)gr gsχ†
s χ†
r , so that in our convention the Grassmann
elements (i.e., 1 × 1 Grassmann matrices) obey (χrχs)T = χrχs and have no im-
plicit operator structure.
Appendix A: Modiﬁcations in real and quaternionic Hilbert space
In a complex Hilbert space the scalars that are used to form superpositions of
Hilbert space vectors are complex numbers. In real Hilbert space the scalars take
only real number values, while in quaternionic Hilbert space the scalars can be
quaternions of the form r0 + r1i + r2 j + r3k, with r0,1,2,3 real, and with i, j, k the
quaternion imaginary units obeying the non-commutative algebra i2 = j2 = k2 =
−1 and i j = −ji = k, jk = −kj = i, ki = −ik = j. The distinguishing feature
of complex Hilbert space is that there is an anti-self-adjoint c-number i1 that com-
mutes with all operators on Hilbert space, and the trace can take complex values.
By contrast, in real and in quaternionic Hilbert space, there exists no anti-self-
adjoint c-number, since the only operators that commute with all operators on
Hilbert space are of the form r1, with r real, and hence are self-adjoint. Also, in
real and in quaternionic Hilbert space, the trace is real. In real Hilbert space the
reality of the trace is self-evident. In quaternionic Hilbert space it follows from
the fact that the diagonal sum 
n(B1B2)nn does not obey the cyclic property of
Eq. (1.1a) as a result of the non-commutativity of the matrix elements (B1)nm and
(B2)mn in the quaternion algebra; so the trace in the quaternionic case must be
deﬁned (Finkelstein, Jauch, and Speiser, 1959) as TrO = Re 
n Onn, which does
obey the cyclic properties of Eqs. (1.1a–c).
The main results of Chapters 1 through 6 generalize to the real and quaternionic
cases, except for those that depend on the fact that the complex trace can have
a non-zero imaginary part, or on the fact that in complex Hilbert space i acts as
an anti-self-adjoint c-number. An example of the former is the derivation leading
from Eq. (5.30a) to Eq. (5.33a), while examples of the latter are the discussions
in Sections 4.5 and 5.5 that use the diagonalization of ieff into ±i1K sectors, and
the part of the Brownian motion discussion of Section 6.1 that assumes a non-
zero imaginary part K1 (which is needed for energy-driven reduction, but not for
reduction by localization).
Appendix B: Algebraic proof of the Jacobi identity for the generalized
Poisson bracket
We give here a basis-independent, algebraic proof of the Jacobi identity for the
generalized Poisson bracket, following Adler, Bhanot, and Weckel (1994). For
ease of exposition, we shall use a more compact notation than was employed in

Algebraic proof of the Jacobi identity
195
Chapter 1. Derivatives with respect to qr and pr of a trace functional A will be de-
noted by Ar and Ar respectively. The operation Tr will be implied by a parenthe-
sis ( ); this means that we can cyclically permute the factors within a parenthesis,
if we include a factor ϵr every time a qr or pr is moved from the front of a paren-
thesis to the back, with ϵr = 1(−1) for bosonic (fermionic) degrees of freedom.
Thus, in our shorthand notation, (qrO) = ϵr(Oqr), and the generalized Poisson
bracket is given by
{A, B} =

r
ϵr

ArBr −BrAr
.
(B.1)
It is useful to illustrate with an example how derivatives are computed. Consider
the case where we have two kinds of matrix variables q1, p1 and q2, p2. Given
the trace functional A = (q1 p1q2q1 p2q1), its derivative with respect to q1 is
denoted by A1 and is given by
A1 = q1 p1q2q1 p2 + ϵ1ϵ2 p2q1q1 p1q2 + ϵ1 p1q2q1 p2q1.
(B.2)
The three terms result from the three possible q1 factors to differentiate, and the ϵ
factors come from cyclically permuting the matrix factors to bring the particular
q1 which is to be differentiated to the right.
The ﬁrst term on the left-hand side of the Jacobi identity of Eq. (1.13a), ex-
panded out in this notation, is
{A, {B, C}} =

r
{A, ϵr

BrCr −CrBr
},
(B.3a)
which can be expanded further to
{A, {B, C}} =

r,s
ϵrϵs

As

BrCrs −As

CrBrs −

BrCr
s As +

CrBr
s As
.
(B.3b)
Cyclic permutations of A, B, and C give the other two terms in Eq. (1.13a). Thus,
the left-hand side of Eq. (1.13a) is

r,s
ϵrϵs[

As

BrCrs −As

CrBrs −

BrCr
s As +

CrBr
s As
+

Bs

CrArs −Bs

ArCrs −

CrAr
s Bs +

ArCr
s Bs
+

Cs

ArBrs −Cs

BrArs −

ArBr
s Cs +

BrAr
s Cs
].
(B.4)
Let us ﬁrst consider how the terms in Eq. (B.4) cancel in the classical, c-number
case. A similar cancellation mechanism will also apply in the more general matrix
operator case. For c-numbers, the trace operation is trivial, derivatives of function-
als commute, and one can apply the Leibniz product rule to expand the terms. For

196
Appendices
instance

BrCrs = B s
r Cr + BrCrs.
(B.5)
Note that B s
r means that the qr derivative is applied before the ps derivative. Bs
r
would mean that the same derivatives are applied in the opposite order. This dis-
tinction is meaningless for c-number ﬁelds, where derivatives commute, but it is
crucial for noncommutative operators {qr} and {pr}.
Equation (B.5) implies that each summand term in Eq. (B.4) will generate two
terms. These terms cancel in pairs in the c-number case. For example, in the ﬁrst
term in Eq. (B.4), consider the derivative with respect to ps applied to Br. This gen-
erates the term +AsB s
r Cr. This cancels against the term −ArBr
sCs obtained by
applying the derivative with respect to ps on Br in the eleventh term (the dummy
indices r and s need to be interchanged for the terms to be the same). The other
half of the eleventh term will in turn be cancelled by a part of the eighth term, and
so on. After twelve such double terms have been computed, we come back to the
beginning and all terms have been cancelled.
The order in which these cancellations occur classically in the summand of
Eq. (B.4) is as follows
←→(As

BrCrs)←→(

AsBs
r Cr)←→(

ArCr
s Bs)←→(Ar

CsBsr)←→
(Cs

ArBrs)←→(

CsAs
r Br)←→(

CrBr
s As)←→(Cr

BsAsr)←→
(Bs

CrArs)←→(

BsCs
r Ar)←→(

BrAr
s Cs)←→(Br

AsCsr)←→,
(B.6)
where we have used the fact that r and s are dummy indices and have interchanged
them in some of the terms, and where the lower right of Eq. (B.6) links back to the
upper left. By Eq. (B.5), each entry in Eq. (B.6) generates two terms; one of these
cancels against a term from the entry to the immediate left in the chain, and the
other cancels against a term from the entry to the immediate right.
We will now proceed to show that in the general operator case, the cancella-
tions occur in a similar way. However, the absence of both commutativity and
the Leibniz product rule for operators makes the proof a little less trivial. For the
rest of this discussion, we focus, as in Eq. (B.6), on the summands which appear,
summed over r and s, in the Jacobi identity. Also, we will assume that A, B, C are
monomials in {qr} and {pr}. The proof for the general case of polynomial func-
tionals follows from expanding out the generalized Poisson brackets in Eq. (1.13a)
in terms of monomials.
When one computes the derivative of some monomial with respect to qr (say),
each particular occurrence of qr generates one term in the result. Consider the

Algebraic proof of the Jacobi identity
197
expression

BrCrs,
(B.7)
which appears in the ﬁrst entry of Eq. (B.6). In this expression, there are three
derivatives, and there is a sum over the set of choices of which occurrence of qr,
pr, and ps is differentiated in the appropriate factors. Each one of the set of choices
will produce a particular monomial term in the result. If qr appears N(B, qr) times
in the monomial B, and pr appears N(C, pr) times in C, and so on, then the
number of terms produced by Eq. (B.7) is at most N(B, qr)N(C, pr)[N(B, ps) +
N(C, ps)].
We will show that in Eq. (B.4), each such monomial term in the result, for ﬁxed
r, s (i.e., for a ﬁxed choice of qr, pr, qs, ps), will cancel with its counterpart in the
order deﬁned by Eq. (B.6). Consider the case where the ps derivative is applied
to B in the ﬁrst entry and the qr derivative is applied to B in the second entry of
Eq. (B.6). For these to give non-vanishing contributions, B must contain at least
one instance of both qr and ps. Therefore the most general form for B is
B = (αqrβps),
(B.8)
where α and β are arbitrary monomials (and could possibly contain qr and ps).
The displayed qr and ps are the particular instances of these coordinates in B upon
which the derivatives will act.
We have
(As(BrCr)s) = (As((αqrβps)rCr)s)
= ϵαϵr(As(βpsαCr)s)
= ϵαϵrϵβϵs(AsαCrβ),
(B.9)
and
((AsBs)rCr) = ((As(αqrβps)s)rCr)
= ((Asαqrβ)rCr)
= ϵβ(βAsαCr)
= (AsαCrβ).
(B.10)
If B is not identically zero (in which case the equality of Eqs. (B.9) and (B.10) is
trivial), it must have an even number of fermion factors. Therefore, ϵαϵrϵβϵs = 1,
and so the right-hand sides of Eqs. (B.9) and (B.10) are always the same. Fi-
nally, these same cancellations can be shown to occur for every summand term
in Eq. (B.4) in the order indicated by Eq. (B.6), and apply both to the summands
with r ̸= s and to those with r = s, including the parts of the summands with r = s

198
Appendices
in which there are two derivatives with respect to the same variable qr (or pr). This
proves that the Jacobi identity is true for arbitrary bosonic and fermionic matrix
operator variables {qr} and {pr}.
Appendix C: Symplectic structures in trace dynamics
We shall demonstrate here that there is a close correspondence (Adler and Wu,
1994) between the tangent vector ﬁeld and symplectic structures of trace dynamics
and of classical mechanics. (For expositions of the symplectic structure of classi-
cal mechanics, see Arnold, 1978 and Abraham and Marsden, 1980.) Let XA be
the tangent vector ﬁeld associated with a trace functional A, deﬁned as a formal
derivative operator by
XA ≡Tr

r

ϵr
δA
δqr
δ
δpr
−δA
δpr
δ
δqr

,
(C.1)
which by deﬁnition acts on any trace functional B as
XAB = BXA + (XAB),
(C.2)
with (XAB) given by (cf. Eq. (1.11a))
(XAB) = Tr

r

ϵr
δA
δqr
δB
δpr
−δA
δpr
δB
δqr

= Tr

r
ϵr
 δA
δqr
δB
δpr
−δB
δqr
δA
δpr

= {A, B}.
(C.3)
In terms of this operator, the time development of a general trace functional
B[{qr}, {pr}] with no intrinsic time dependence, under the dynamics governed by
A as trace Hamiltonian, can be written as (cf. Eq. (1.11b))
dB
dt = −(XAB).
(C.4)
Thus the tangent vector ﬁeld XA can be viewed as (minus) the directional deriva-
tive along the time evolution orbit (called the phase ﬂow in the classical mechanics
literature) of the phase space point ({qr}, {pr}), which is determined by the Hamil-
tonian equations of motion
˙pr = −δA
δqr
,
˙qr = ϵr
δA
δpr
,
(C.5)
with A acting as the trace Hamiltonian and with the dot denoting a time deriva-
tive. Following the terminology of classical mechanics, we call a tangent vector

Symplectic structures in trace dynamics
199
ﬁeld of the form of Eq. (C.1) a Hamiltonian vector ﬁeld. It is easily veriﬁed that
the directional derivative XA obeys the Leibniz product rule when applied to the
generalized Poisson bracket
(XA{B, C}) = {(XAB), C} + {B, (XAC)},
(C.6)
because this equation is equivalent to the Jacobi identity of Eq. (1.13a).
Let us now study the algebraic structure of Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds, by com-
puting the action of the commutator of two tangent vector ﬁelds XA and XB on a
third trace functional C
([XA, XB]C) = (XA(XBC)) −(XB(XAC))
= {A, {B, C}} −{B, {A, C}}
= {A, {B, C}} + {B, {C, A}}.
(C.7)
Using Eq. (C.3) with A replaced by {A, B} and B replaced by C, we also get
(X{A,B}C) = {{A, B}, C}},
(C.8)
and subtracting Eq. (C.8) from Eq. (C.7) gives ﬁnally
(([XA, XB] −X{A,B})C)
= {A, {B, C}} + {C, {A, B}} + {B, {C, A}} = 0.
(C.9)
Hence the validity of the Jacobi identity for the generalized Poisson bracket im-
plies that the Hamiltonian vector ﬁelds XA obey the commutator algebra
[XA, XB] = X{A,B},
(C.10)
and thus form a Lie algebra that is isomorphic to the Lie algebra of trace function-
als under the generalized Poisson bracket. This gives a trace dynamics analog of a
standard result in classical mechanics.
We next show that the symplectic geometry of classical mechanics extends to
trace dynamics, and, as in the classical case, it is preserved by phase space ﬂows
produced by Hamiltonian time evolutions. Symplectic geometry is deﬁned by an
antisymmetric metric in the tangent or cotangent spaces of a phase space. (This
contrasts with Riemannian geometry, which is deﬁned by a symmetric metric in
the tangent or cotangent spaces of a manifold.) To avoid differential forms, let us
work in the cotangent space, which is spanned by covariant vectors, the compo-
nents of which form the gradient of a function on phase space. The standard sym-
plectic metric, or inner product, between two classical functions on phase space is
provided by their classical Poisson bracket. The analogs of classical functions in
trace dynamics are trace functionals, with differentials given by the phase space

200
Appendices
version of Eq. (1.3b)
δA = Tr

r
 δA
δqr
δqr + δA
δpr
δpr

.
(C.11)
We can then use the generalized Poisson bracket to deﬁne a generalized symplectic
structure  on the operator phase space, by deﬁning the inner product between two
cotangent vectors δA and δB by
(δA, δB) ≡{A, B}.
(C.12)
To see that this symplectic structure is preserved by the Hamiltonian dynamics
given by Eq. (C.4), we observe that the time derivative of the inner product along
the phase ﬂow is
d
dt (δB, δC) = d
dt {B, C} = {{B, C}, A},
(C.13a),
while that of the differential δB along the same ﬂow is, by Eqs. (C.4) and (C.5)
d
dt δB = δ ˙B = δdB
dt = δ{B, A}.
(C.13b)
Therefore we have
(δ ˙B, δC) + (δB, δ ˙C) = { ˙B, C} + {B, ˙C}
= {{B, A}, C} + {B, {C, A}},
(C.13c)
which comparing with Eq. (C.13a) and using the Jacobi identity of Eq. (1.13a)
implies that
d
dt (δB, δC) = (δ ˙B, δC) + (δB, δ ˙C).
(C.14)
In other words, the symplectic structure is invariant under Hamiltonian phase ﬂow.
This statement can be viewed as a dual form of the Liouville theorem for trace
dynamics.
Thus, trace dynamics, with non-commuting operator phase space variables,
nonetheless has an underlying symplectic geometry which is preserved by the
time evolution generated by any trace Hamiltonian, or equivalently, by the ﬂow
corresponding to any general canonical transformation as deﬁned in Eq. (2.13a).
Hence, in analogy with classical mechanics, the basic concepts and theorems of
trace dynamics will be invariant under the group of transformations that preserve
its generalized symplectic structure.

Gamma matrix identities
201
Appendix D: Gamma matrix identities for supersymmetric
trace dynamics models
We give here the gamma matrix identities needed for carrying out the calculations
involving supersymmetric trace dynamics models sketched in Sections 3.1, 3.2 and
3.3.
For the calculations of Sections 3.1 and 3.2, it is convenient to use Majorana
representation γ matrices constructed explicitly as follows. Let σ1,2,3 and τ1,2,3 be
two independent sets of Pauli spin matrices; then we take
γ 0 = −γ0 = −iσ2τ1,
γ 1 = γ1 = σ3,
γ 2 = γ2 = −σ2τ2,
(D.1a)
γ 3 = γ3 = −σ1,
γ5 = iγ 1γ 2γ 3γ 0 = −σ2τ3,
γ 0γ5 = τ2,
so that γ 0, γ5, γ 0γ5 are skew symmetric and γ 1,2,3 and γ 0γ 1,2,3 are symmetric,
and
γ 0γ µT γ 0 = γ µ.
(D.1b)
For this choice of γ matrices, the four matrices γ µ are real.
To prove supersymmetry of the trace dynamics version of the Wess–Zumino
model, one uses cyclic invariance of the trace together with the cyclic identity
valid for Majorana representation γ matrices

cycle a→b→d→a
[γ 0
abγ 0
cd + (γ 0γ5)ab(γ 0γ5)cd] = 0.
(D.2)
To prove supersymmetry of the trace dynamics version of the supersymmetric
Yang–Mills model, one uses cyclic invariance of the trace together with another
cyclic identity valid for Majorana representation γ matrices

cycle a→b→d→a
(γ 0γ µ)ab(γ 0γµ)cd = 0.
(D.3)
To verify closure of the supersymmetry algebra under the generalized Poisson
bracket, one can proceed in either of two ways. The ﬁrst is to directly rearrange
into the expected form, verifying along the way the various γ matrix identities
that are needed; for example, in the case of the Wess–Zumino model, one needs
the cyclic identity of Eq. (D.2) together with the additional identity (with ℓ, m, n

202
Appendices
spatial indices, and ϵℓmn the three index antisymmetric tensor with ϵ123 = 1)
γ ℓ
abγ 0
cd + γ ℓ
dbγ 0
ca −(γ ℓγ5)ab(γ 0γ5)cd −(γ ℓγ5)db(γ 0γ5)ca
= δad(γ 0γℓ)bc −(γ 0γℓ)adδbc −i

m,n
ϵℓmn(γℓγmγ5)ad(γℓγn)cb.
(D.4)
An alternative method for verifying the closure of the supersymmetry algebra is
to ﬁrst Fierz transform using the standard Fierz identity given in Eq. (A.80) of the
book of West (1990), so as to isolate expressions of the form αT β, and then to
show that the coefﬁcients of the various terms of this type, with different Dirac
matrix structures , have the form required by closure.
The identities of Eqs. (D.2–4) are representation covariant, in that they do not
take the same form in representations in which the Dirac gamma matrices are com-
plex rather than real. To see this, we note that the matrices in a general representa-
tion γ µ
G are related to the Majorana representation matrices γ µ given above by
γ µ
G = U †γ µU = U T ∗γ µU,
(D.5)
with U a unitary matrix which in general is complex, as a result of which the
row and column indices transform with different matrices. However, the identities
of Eqs. (D.2–4) mix row and column indices; for example, in Eq. (D.2) there is
one term in the cyclic sum in which a is a row index, and two terms in which
a is a column index. (By way of contrast, the more familiar Fierz identities only
interchange two row indices, and so do not mix row and column indices.) Hence
we cannot get a representation invariant form of the identity by two applications
of Eq. (D.5), since in the second and third terms of the cyclic sum, we will have
a row index contracted with a U and a column index contracted with a U∗, which
does not correspond with Eq. (D.5). However, we can easily get a representation
covariant form of Eq. (D.2) by contracting all indices with a U∗, and wherever U ∗
contracts with a column index using the identity
U ∗= UU∗TU ∗= Uγ ∗, γ ≡U TU,
(D.6)
with γ a matrix that appears in the book of Adler (1995, pp. 341–342) (and which
is introduced there because it plays a role in the transformation properties of the
Dirac equation in quaternionic quantum mechanics). We can then apply Eq. (D.5)
to all the gamma matrices, giving for Eq. (D.2), for example, the representation
covariant form

cycle a→b→d→a
[(γ 0γ ∗)ab(γ 0γ ∗)cd + (γ 0γ5γ ∗)ab(γ 0γ5γ ∗)cd] = 0.
(D.7)
For a change of representation which preserves reality of the γ matrices, we have
U∗= U,
γ = U TU = U∗TU = 1, and Eq. (D.7) is identical to Eq. (D.2), but

Gamma matrix identities
203
for general changes of representation the identity is form covariant but not form
invariant.
For the calculations in the “M Theory” model of Section 3.3, one uses a set
γi of nine 16 × 16 matrices, that are related (Green, Schwartz, and Witten, 1987;
Cremmer and Julia, 1979) to the standard 32 × 32 matrices µ as well as to the
Dirac matrices of spin(8). A number of properties of the real, symmetric matrices
γi play a role in the calculation. These matrices satisfy the anticommutator algebra
{γi, γ j} = 2δi j,
(D.8)
as well as the cyclic identity

cycle p→q→n→p
(δmnδ pq −γ mn
i
γ pq
i
) = 0,
(D.9)
with i summed over and with the indices m, n, p, q spinorial indices ranging from
1 to 16. (The identity of Eq. (D.9) also has the same spinor index appearing both
as a row and as a column index, and so is only form covariant under changes of
gamma matrix representation, and is obtained by chiral projection with 1
2(1 −i9)
from Eq. (4.A.6) of Green, Schwartz, and Witten, 1987.) Deﬁning
γi j = 1
2[γi, γ j],
(D.10a)
so that
γiγ j = δi j + γi j,
(D.10b)
one readily derives from Eq. (D.9) an identity given by Banks, Seiberg, and
Shenker (1997)
γ mn
i j γ pq
i
+ γ pq
i j γ mn
i
+ (m ↔p) = 2(γ nq
j δmp −γ mp
j
δnq),
(D.10c)
with i again summed over. By standard gamma matrix manipulations using
Eq. (D.8), one also derives the fact that the matrix
Ai jk = γiγ jγk −δi jγk + δikγ j −δ jkγi
(D.11)
is totally antisymmetric in the indices i, j, k (it is just the antisymmetrized product
γ[iγ jγk] with normalization factor 1
6), as well as the identity
1
2{γℓm, γi j} = γ[ℓγmγiγ j] + δℓjδim −δmjδiℓ,
(D.12)
with the ﬁrst term on the right the antisymmetrized product including normaliza-
tion factor 1
24.

204
Appendices
Appendix E: Trace dynamics models with operator gauge invariance
In Section 3.2, we studied the trace dynamics version of the supersymmetric Yang–
Mills model, which is an example of a general class of trace dynamics models
with a local operator gauge invariance, and a corresponding operator constraint. In
Section 4.4, we discussed methods for taking this constraint into account in form-
ing the canonical ensemble and the partition function. Lest it appear that operator
gauge invariance is intrinsically linked to supersymmetry, we give here further
examples discussed by Adler (1994, 1995) of trace dynamics models, now non-
supersymmetric, which admit an operator gauge invariance.
As our ﬁrst example, we consider a matrix scalar ﬁeld φ, which is not restricted
to be self-adjoint (or anti-self-adjoint), and which is subjected to the general local
gauging
φ →UφU ′†,
UU † = U †U = U′U′† = U′†U′ = 1,
(E.1a)
with U and U ′ independent unitary matrices. (Thus, the superscript ′ (prime) in
this Appendix does not have the signiﬁcance of “non-commutative part” as in the
discussion of Eqs. (2.16a–c) of Chapter 2.) Let us introduce independent anti-self-
adjoint gauge potentials Bµ, B′
µ which transform as
Bµ →U BµU † −(∂µU)U †,
B′
µ →U′B′
µU ′† −(∂µU ′)U ′†,
(E.1b)
and the covariant derivative and ﬁeld strengths
Dµφ = ∂µφ + Bµφ −φB′
µ,
Fµν = ∂µBν −∂ν Bµ + [Bµ, Bν],
F′
µν = ∂µB′
ν −∂ν B′
µ + [B′
µ, B′
ν],
(E.1c)
which correspondingly transform as
Dµφ →U DµφU ′†,
Fµν →U FµνU †,
F′
µν →U′F′
µνU ′†.
(E.1d)
Then the trace Lagrangian density given by
L = Lφ + LB + LB′,
Lφ = Tr
1
2 [−(Dµφ)†Dµφ −m2φ†φ] −λ
4 (φ†φ)2
	
,
LB = Tr
 1
4g2 Fµν Fµν

,
LB′ = Tr

1
4(g′)2 F′
µν F′µν

,
(E.2a)
is gauge invariant, as may be veriﬁed by substituting Eqs. (E.1a–d) and using cyclic
invariance under the trace. The trace Lagrangian L and action S are formed from

Trace dynamics models
205
L by the usual recipe
L =

d3xL,
S =

dt L.
(E.2b)
When we form the Euler–Lagrange equations by varying S, through δFµν and
δF′
µν we encounter new covariant derivatives ˆDµ and ˆD′
µ deﬁned by
ˆDµO = ∂µO + [Bµ, O],
ˆD′
µO = ∂µO + [B′
µ, O],
δFµν = ˆDµδBν −ˆDνδBµ,
δF′
µν = ˆD′
µδB′
ν −ˆD′
νδB′
µ,
(E.3a)
and in integrating by parts we use the following “intertwining identities” that are
easily derived from Eqs. (E.1c) and (E.3a)
ˆDµ(ρη†) = (Dµρ)η† + ρ(Dµη)†,
ˆD′
µ(ρ†η) = (Dµρ)†η + ρ†Dµη,
∂µTr (ρη†) = Tr [(Dµρ)η† + ρ(Dµη)†],
∂µTr (ρ†η) = Tr [(Dµρ)†η + ρ†Dµη],
(E.3b)
which apply when ρ and η are both bosonic or both fermionic in type. We then get
the operator equations of motion
DµDµφ −(m2 + λφφ†)φ = 0,
ˆDµFµν = g2Jν,
Jν = 1
2 [(Dνφ)φ† −φ(Dνφ)†],
ˆD′µF′
µν = g′2J ′
ν,
J ′
ν = 1
2 [(Dνφ)†φ −φ†Dνφ],
(E.3c)
in which the ν = 0 components of the gauge ﬁeld equations are constraints.
We turn next to the case of fermion ﬁelds, starting again with the operator gaug-
ing in which there is a fermion ψ transforming as
ψ →UψU′†.
(E.4a)
The trace Lagrangian density analogous to Eqs. (E.2a) is
L = Lψ + LB + LB′,
(E.4b)
with LB and LB′ as in Eq. (E.2a), and with Lψ given by
Lψ = Tr(−ψ†γ 0γ µDµψ + imψ†γ 0ψ),
Dµψ = ∂µψ + Bµψ −ψ B′
µ.
(E.4c)
This Lagrangian density is again gauge invariant, and varying the trace action S to
get the corresponding Euler–Lagrange equations, we ﬁnd the operator equations

206
Appendices
of motion
(−γ µDµ + m)ψ = 0,
ˆDµFµν = g2Jν,
Jν = ψT γ T
ν γ 0T ψ†T ,
ˆD′µF′
µν = (g′)2J ′
ν,
J ′
ν = ψ†γ 0γνψ,
(E.4d)
with T indicating Dirac index (but not operator) transposition. Since ψ and ψ† are
non-commutative matrix operators, the current Jν is not equal to −J ′
ν, as it would
be if ψ, ψ† were c-number Grassmann spinors. Again, the ν = 0 components of
the gauge ﬁeld equations are constraints.
A further discussion of the bosonic and fermionic models brieﬂy described here,
including their Hamiltonian form and their discrete symmetries, can be found in
Adler (1994, 1995).
Appendix F: Properties of Wightman functions needed for reconstruction
of local quantum ﬁeld theory
We review here, following Streater and Wightman (1968), the properties of Wight-
man functions that are needed for the reconstruction from them of local quantum
ﬁeld theory. For simplicity, we consider only the case of a single self-adjoint scalar
ﬁeld φ(x). Letting |vac⟩denote the vacuum state, which is assumed unique, the
Wightman functions are deﬁned by
W(x1, x2, . . . , xn) = ⟨vac|φ(x1)φ(x2) . . . φ(xn)|vac⟩,
(F.1)
for all n ranging from 0 to ∞. Starting from the axioms of local quantum ﬁeld
theory, a number of properties of these functions can be derived. Conversely, given
Wightman functions satisfying the following properties, one can reconstruct a local
quantum ﬁeld theory:
(i)
Smoothness properties
The functions W({x}) must be tempered distributions.
(ii) Covariance
The functions W({x}) must satisfy the requirements of Poincar´e invariance. Trans-
lation invariance requires that
W(x1, x2, . . . , xn) = W(x1 −x2, x2 −x3, . . . , xn−1 −xn)
≡W(ξ1, ξ2, . . . , ξn−1) ≡W({ξ}).
(F.2)

Properties of Wightman functions
207
Lorentz invariance for a scalar ﬁeld φ requires that
W({ξ}) = W({ξ}),
(F.3)
with  ν
µ a proper orthochronous Lorentz transformation. When ﬁelds with spin
appear in the Wightman functions, Eq. (F.3) must be modiﬁed to include the ap-
propriate Wigner rotations acting on the spin indices.
(iii) Spectral condition
Let ˜W(p1, p2, . . . , pn) and ˜W(q1, q2, . . . , qn−1) be the Fourier transforms of the
Wightman functions deﬁned by
˜W(p1, p2, . . . , pn) =

dx1 . . . dxn exp

−i
n

j=1
p j · x j

W(x1, x2, . . . , xn),
˜W(q1, q2, . . . , qn−1) =

dξ1 . . . dξn−1 exp

−i
n−1

j=1
q j · ξ j

W(ξ1, ξ2, . . . , ξn−1).
(F.4)
These must be related by
˜W(p1, p2, . . . , pn) = (2π)4δ
 n

j=1
p j

× ˜W(p1, p1 + p2, . . . , p1 + p2 + . . . + pn−1), (F.5a)
and we must have
˜W(q1, q2, . . . , qn−1) = 0,
(F.5b)
for any q j not in the forward light cone deﬁned by q0 ≥|⃗q |. (We have fol-
lowed here the notation of Streater and Wightman (1968); in the notation that
we have used in Chapters 1–7, dx would be written as d4x and δ(p) as δ4(p) =
δ(p0)δ3( ⃗p).)
(iv) Local commutativity
The Wightman functions must obey
W(x1, . . . , x j, x j+1, . . . , xn) = W(x1, . . . , x j+1, x j, . . . , xn),
j = 1, 2, . . . , n −1,
(F.6)
whenever x j and x j+1 are spacelike separated.

208
Appendices
(v) Hermiticity and positivity conditions
The Wightman functions must obey the hermiticity condition
W(x1, . . . , xn) = W(xn, . . . , x1)∗,
(F.7a)
where ∗denotes the complex conjugate. They must also obey the positivity condi-
tion

j,k

. . .

dx1 . . . dx jdy1 . . . dyk f j(x1, . . . , x j)∗
× W(x j, . . . , x1, y1, . . . , yk) fk(y1, . . . , yk) ≥0,
(F.7b)
for all ﬁnite sequences f0, f1(x1), f2(x1, x2), . . . of test functions.
(vi) Cluster property
The Wightman functions must cluster, in the sense that
lim
S→∞[W(x1, . . . , x j, x j+1 + Sa, . . . , xn + Sa)
−W(x1, . . . , x j) W(x j+1, . . . , xn)] = 0,
(F.8)
when the unit four-vector direction a of increasing separation S is spacelike,
The proof of the reconstruction theorem, assuming Wightman functions obeying
the conditions enumerated above, is given in Streater and Wightman (1968), and a
recent discussion is given in Strocchi (1993).
Appendix G: BRST invariance transformation for global unitary ﬁxing
In this Appendix we formulate a BRST invariance transformation associated with
the global unitary ﬁxing given in Section 4.6, again following the treatment given
in Adler and Horwitz (2003). Our starting point is an alternative ghost representa-
tion for the De Witt–Faddeev–Popov determinant , obtained by using Eq. (4.59c)
for the factors associated with the matrix B to give
 ∝

dωd ˜ω exp

Tr ˜ω[ω, A] +
K

j=2
˜ω j j(ReB1 j)i(ω j j −ω11)

.
(G.1)
Yet another equivalent form for  is obtained by noting that
[B, ω]1 j = B1 j(ω j j −ω11) + S,
(G.2a)
with the remainder S denoting terms that only involve matrix elements ωi j with
i ̸= j. The remainder S makes a vanishing contribution to the Grassmann inte-
grals when Eq. (G.2a) is substituted for B1 ji(ω j j −ω11) in Eq. (G.1), since one

BRST invariance transformation
209
factor of (ω j j −ω11) for each j = 2, . . . , K is needed to give a non-vanishing
integral, and each such term in the exponent is already accompanied by a fac-
tor ˜ω j j, so that terms with additional such factors vanish inside the Grassmann
integrals. (We are just using here the fact that with ζ, ˜ζ Grassmann variables,

dζd ˜ζ exp(˜ζ Wζ + Uζ) =

dζd ˜ζ exp(˜ζ Wζ + ˜ζU) = W, with no dependence
on U.) Since the diagonal matrix elements of ω are pure imaginary, Eq. (G.2a)
implies that
(ReB1 j)i(ω j j −ω11) = −Im[B, ω]1 j,
(G.2b)
which when substituted into Eq. (G.1) gives the alternative formula
 ∝

dωd ˜ω exp

Tr ˜ω[ω, A] −
K

j=2
˜ω j jIm[B, ω]1 j

.
(G.3)
We will also need the Fourier representations of Eqs. (4.62a–c) for the delta
function and step function constraints. An alternative form of the step function
constraint of Eq. (4.62c) is obtained by including in the exponent an additional
term −K
j=2 κ jRe[B, ω]1 j, with κ j auxiliary Grassmann parameters that are not
integrated over. This term is linear in ω but does not involve ˜ω, and so by the
same argument as in the preceding paragraph, it makes a vanishing contribution
when the step function constraint is substituted into the overall formula for J
and the Grassmann integrals over ω and ˜ω are carried out. Using the alternative
forms of  and of the step function constraint to rewrite Eq. (4.63), we get a new
representation for the unitary-ﬁxed integral
J = C

dMdhd Hdkdωd ˜ω
× exp

iTrh A + Tr ˜ω[ω, A] +
K

j=2
(i HjImB1 j −˜ω j jIm[B, ω]1 j
+ ik jReB1 j −κ jRe[B, ω]1 j)

G[{M}],
(G.4)
with C an overall constant factor. This representation of J will be used to establish
a BRST invariance.
We now show that Eq. (G.4) is manifestly invariant under the nilpotent BRST
transformation
δA = [A, ω]θ, δB = [B, ω]θ, δMd = [Md, ω]θ, d = 3, . . . , D,
δω = ω2θ, δ ˜ωi j = −ihi jθ, i ̸= j, δ ˜ω j j = −i Hjθ, j = 2, . . . , K,
(G.5)
δh = 0, δHj = 0, δk j = 0, δκ j = −ik jθ,

210
Appendices
with θ a c-number Grassmann parameter. (The part of this transformation involv-
ing ω is patterned after the BRST transformation for the local operator gauge in-
variant case studied by Adler (1998) and used in Section 4.4.) We ﬁrst remark
that since Eq. (G.5) has the form of an inﬁnitesimal unitary transformation act-
ing on the matrix variables Md with generator ωθ that is anti-self-adjoint (since
(ωθ)† = −θ†ω† = θω = −ωθ), the global unitary invariant function G[{M}] and
the matrix integration measure dM are both invariant. We consider next the terms
in the exponent in Eq. (G.4). From Eq. (G.5) we have
δ[A, ω] = [δA, ω] + [A, δω] = [[A, ω]θ, ω] + [A, ω2θ]
= −(ω[A, ω] + [A, ω]ω)θ + [A, ω2]θ = −[A, ω2]θ + [A, ω2]θ = 0.
(G.6a)
Hence for the terms in the exponent of Eq. (G.4) involving A, we get
δ(iTrh A + Tr ˜ω[ω, A]) = iTrhδA + Tr(δ ˜ω)[ω, A]
= iTrh[A, ω]θ + Tr(−ihθ)[ω, A] = 0.
(G.6b)
For the terms in the exponent of Eq. (G.4) involving B but not involving the pa-
rameters k j inside the summation over j we have
δ(i HjImB1 j −˜ω j jIm[B, ω]1 j) = i HjImδB1 j −(δ ˜ω j j)Im[B, ω]1 j
= i HjIm[B, ω]1 jθ + i HjθIm[B, ω]1 j = 0,
(G.6c)
since δ[B, ω] = 0 by the same argument as in Eq. (G.6a). Finally, the terms in
the exponent involving the step function parameters k j and κ j are invariant by
a similar argument. So the entire exponent of the representation in Eq. (G.4) is
manifestly BRST invariant.
Continuing the BRST analysis, since Trστ = −Trτσ for any two Grassmann
odd grade matrices τ and σ, we have Trω2 = −Trω2 = 0, and so the condition
that ω should be traceless is preserved by Eq. (G.5). (On the other hand, ω2
11 is
non-zero even when ω11 is zero, which is why we must use a traceless condition,
rather than a condition ω11 = 0, for ω.) Also, since
(ω2)† = −(ω†)2 = ω2,
(G.6d)
the property that ω is anti-self-adjoint is preserved by Eq. (G.5). The property that
˜ω is anti-self-adjoint is preserved by Eq. (G.5) because the matrix h is self-adjoint.
The integration measures dh and d H are trivially invariant, while the measure d ˜ω

BRST invariance transformation
211
is invariant because δ ˜ω has no dependence on ˜ω. Since
δ(dωi j) = d(δω)i j = d(ω2θ)i j =

ωdω + (dω)ω

i jθ,
(G.7a)
we have
δ(dωi j) = (ωiidωi j + dωi jω j j)θ + . . . . = dωi j(ω j j −ωii)θ + . . .
(G.7b)
with . . . denoting terms that contain only matrix elements dωi′ j′ with (i′, j′) ̸=
(i, j). Hence there is no Jacobian contribution from the diagonal terms in the mea-
sure dω, while the Jacobian arising from transformation of the off-diagonal terms
in dω differs from unity by a term proportional to

i̸= j
(ω j j −ωii)θ = 0,
(G.7c)
and so the measure dω is also invariant. Finally, nilpotence of the BRST trans-
formation follows from Eq. (G.6a), and its analogs with A replaced by B or by a
general Md, together with
δω2 = {δω, ω} = {ω2θ, ω} = ω2{θ, ω} = 0.
(G.7d)
This completes the demonstration of BRST invariance under Eq. (G.5) of the rep-
resentation of the unitary-ﬁxed integral given in Eq. (G.4).

References
Numbers in square brackets following each reference indicate the pages where the
reference is cited.
Abraham, R. and J. E. Marsden (1980). Foundations of Mechanics, 2nd edn (Reading,
MA: Benjamin/Cummings), p. 194. [198]
Adler, S. L. (1979). Algebraic chromodynamics. Phys. Lett. B 86, 203–205. [19]
(1994). Generalized quantum dynamics. Nucl. Phys. B 415, 195–242.
[19,24,29,204,206]
(1995). Quaternionic Quantum Mechanics and Quantum Fields (New York: Oxford
University Press), Secs. 13.5–13.7 and App. A. [19,24,202,204,206]
(1997a). Poincar´e supersymmetry representations over trace class non-commutative
graded operator algebras. Nucl. Phys. B 499, 569–582. [20,64]
(1997b). The matrix model for M theory as an examplar of trace (or generalized
quantum) dynamics. Phys. Lett. B 407, 229–233. [20,64,72]
(1997c). A strategy for a vanishing cosmological constant in the presence of scale
invariance breaking. Gen. Rel. and Grav. 29, 1357–1362. [61,191]
(1998). Gauge ﬁxing in the partition function for generalized quantum dynamics.
J. Math. Phys. 39, 1723–1729. [94,208]
(2000). Remarks on a proposed Super–Kamiokande test for quantum gravity induced
decoherence effects. Phys. Rev. D 62, 117901. [179]
(2002). Environmental inﬂuence on the measurement process in stochastic reduction
models. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 35, 841–858. [169,182,183]
(2003a). Weisskopf–Wigner decay theory for the energy-driven stochastic Schr¨odinger
equation. Phys. Rev. D 67, 025007. [169,176,177,179]
(2003b). Why decoherence has not solved the measurement problem: a response to
P. W. Anderson. Stud. Hist. Philos. Mod. Phys. 34, 135–142. [4]
Adler, S. L., G. V. Bhanot, and J. D. Weckel (1994). Proof of Jacobi identity in
generalized quantum dynamics. J. Math. Phys. 35, 531–535. [19,29,194]
Adler, S. L., D. C. Brody, T. A. Brun, and L. P. Hughston (2001). Martingale models for
quantum state reduction. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen 34, 8795–8820. [169,173]
Adler, S. L. and T. A. Brun (2001). Generalized stochastic Schr¨odinger equations for state
vector collapse. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 34, 1–13. [167,169]
Adler, S. L. and L. P. Horwitz (1996). Microcanonical ensemble and algebra of conserved
generators for generalized quantum dynamics. J. Math. Phys. 37, 5429–5443.
[19,31,45,46,88]
212

References
213
(2000). Structure and properties of Hughston’s stochastic extension of the Schr¨odinger
equation. J. Math. Phys. 41, 2485–2499. [169,170,182]
(2003). Global unitary ﬁxing and matrix-valued correlations in matrix models. Phys.
Lett. B. 570, 73–81. [20,106,208]
Adler, S. L. and A. Kempf (1998). Corrections to the emergent canonical commutation
relations arising in the statistical mechanics of matrix models. J. Math. Phys. 39,
5083–5097. [19,20,43,102,144,145]
Adler, S. L. and A. C. Millard (1996). Generalized quantum dynamics as pre-quantum
mechanics. Nucl. Phys. B 473, 199–244. [19,20,33,43,45,76,117,130]
Adler, S. L. and Y.-S. Wu (1994). Algebraic and geometric aspects of generalized
quantum dynamics. Phys. Rev. D 49, 6705–6708. [30,198]
Arndt, M., O. Nairz, J. Vos-Andreae, C. Keller, G. van der Zouw, and A. Zeilinger (1999).
Wave-particle duality of C60 molecules. Nature 401, 680–682. [188]
Arnold, V. I. (1978). Mathematical Methods of Classical Mechanics (New York;
Springer-Verlag), p. 211. [198]
Ax, J. and S. Kochen (1999). Extension of quantum mechanics to individual systems.
arXiv: quant-ph/9905077. Revised version in preparation. [8]
Banks, T., W. Fischler, S. H. Shenker, and L. Susskind (1997). M theory as a matrix
model: a conjecture. Phys. Rev. D 55, 5112–5128. [70]
Banks, T., N. Seiberg, and S. Shenker (1997). Branes from matrices. Nucl. Phys. B 490,
91–106. [70,203]
Bassi, A. and G. C. Ghirardi (2002). Dynamical reduction models with general Gaussian
noise. Phys. Rev. A 65, 042114. [169]
(2003). Dynamical reduction models. Physics Reports 379, 257–426.
[17,169,188]
Bedford, D. and D. Wang (1975). Toward an objective interpretation of quantum
mechanics. Nuovo Cim. 26, 313–325. [169]
(1977). A criterion for spontaneous state reduction. Nuovo Cim. 37, 55–62. [169]
Bell, J. S. (1964). On the Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen paradox. Physics 1, 195–200.
[6,7,17,152,153]
(1987). Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press). [6,152]
Berezin, F. A. (1966). The Method of Second Quantization (London: Academic Press).
[193]
Bergshoeff, E., E. Sezgin, and P. K. Townsend (1987). Supermembranes and
eleven-dimensional supergravity. Phys. Lett. B 189, 75–78. [70]
(1988). Properties of the eleven-dimensional supermembrane theory. Ann. Phys. 185,
330–368. [70]
Bialynicki-Birula, I. and Mycielski, J. (1976). Nonlinear wave mechanics. Ann. Phys.
100, 62–93. [18]
Bjorken, J. D. and S. D. Drell (1965). Relativistic Quantum Fields (New York:
McGraw-Hill), Sec. 11.4. [55]
Bohm, D. (1952). A suggested interpretation of the quantum theory in terms of “hidden”
variables, I and II. Phys. Rev. 85, 166–193. [7]
Bollinger, J. J., D. J. Heinzen, W. M. Itano, S. L. Gilbert, and D. J. Wineland (1991).
Atomic physics tests of nonlinear quantum mechanics, in Atomic Physics 12:
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Atomic Physics, ed. J. C. Zorn
and R. R. Lewis (New York: American Institute of Physics Press). [18]
Born, M. and P. Jordan (1925). Zur quantenmechanik. Zeit. f. Phys. 34, 858–888 (see
pp. 861–863). [18,24]

214
References
Bousso, R. (2002). The holographic principle. Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 825–874. [142,192]
Br´ezin, E. and S. R. Wadia (ed.) (1993). The Large N Expansion in Quantum Field Theory
and Statistical Mechanics (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc). [15,75,106]
Brody, D. C. and L. P. Hughston (2002). Efﬁcient simulation of quantum state reduction.
J. Math. Phys. 43, 5254–5261. [180]
Bub, J. (1997). Interpreting the Quantum World (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press). [8]
Callan, C., S. Coleman, and R. Jackiw (1970). A new improved energy-momentum
tensor. Ann. Phys. 59, 42–73. [58]
Cheng, T.-P. and L.-F. Li (1988). Gauge Theory of Elementary Particle Physics (Oxford:
Clarendon Press). [193]
Claudson, M. and Halpern, M. B. (1985). Supersymmetric ground state wave functions.
Nucl. Phys. B 250, 689–715. [70]
Clauser, J. F., M. A. Horne, A. Shimony, and R. A. Holt (1969). Proposed experiment to
test local hidden-variable theories. Phys. Rev. Lett. 23, 880–884. [153]
Coleman, S. (1989). Aspects of Symmetry (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press),
pp. 394–395. [111]
Collett, B., P. Pearle, F. Avignone, and S. Nussinov (1995). Constraint on collapse
models by limit on spontaneous X-ray emission in Ge. Found. Phys. 25, 1399–1412.
[189]
Cook, R. J. (1988). What are quantum jumps? Phys. Scr. T 21 49–51. [179]
Cremmer, E. and B. Julia (1979). The SO(8) supergravity. Nucl. Phys. B 159, 141–212.
[203]
de Wit, B. (1997). Supersymmetric quantum mechanics, supermembranes and Dirichlet
particles. Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl. 56B, 76–87. Theory of Elementary Particles, ed.
D. L¨ust, H.-J. Otto, and G. Weigt (Amsterdam: North-Holland). [70]
de Wit, B., J. Hoppe, and H. Nicolai (1988). On the quantum mechanics of
supermembranes. Nucl. Phys. B 305, 545–581. [70]
De Witt, B. S. and N. Graham (1973). The Many-Worlds Interpretation of Quantum
Mechanics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press). [8]
Di´osi, L. (1988a). Quantum stochastic processes as models for state vector reduction. J.
Phys. A: Math. Gen. 21, 2885–2898. [17,169]
(1988b). Continuous quantum measurement and Itˆo formalism. Phys. Lett. A 129,
419–423. [17,169]
(1989). Models for universal reduction of macroscopic quantum ﬂuctuations. Phys.
Rev. A 40, 1165–1174. [17,169]
D¨urr, D., S. Goldstein, R. Tumulka, and N. Zanghi (2003). Quantum Hamiltonians and
stochastic jumps. arXiv: quant-ph/0303056. [8]
D¨urr, D., S. Goldstein, and N. Zanghi (1992). Quantum equilibrium and the origin of
absolute uncertainty. J. Stat. Phys. 67, 843–907. [8]
Einstein, A., B. Podolsky, and N. Rosen (1935). Can quantum-mechanical description of
physical reality be considered complete? Phys. Rev. 47, 777–780. [10]
Everett, H., III (1957). “Relative State” formulation of quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod.
Phys. 29, 454–462. [8]
Facchi, P. and S. Pascazio (2003). Unstable systems and quantum Zeno phenomena in
quantum ﬁeld theory, in Fundamental Aspects of Quantum Mechanics, ed.
L. Accardi and S. Tasaki (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc). [177]
Feynman, R. P., F. L. Vernon, Jr., and R. W. Hellwarth (1957). Geometrical representation
of the Schr¨odinger equation for solving maser problems. J. Appl. Phys. 28, 49–52.
[177]

References
215
Finkelstein, D., J. M. Jauch, and D. Speiser (1959). Notes on quaternion quantum
mechanics. CERN Report 59-7 (unpublished). Reprinted in Logico-Algebraic
Approach to Quantum Mechanics II, ed. C. Hooker (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1979). [194]
Fivel, D. I. (1997). An indication from the magnitude of CP violation that gravitation is a
possible cause of wave-function reduction. arXiv: quant-ph/9710042. [169]
Flume, R. (1985). On quantum mechanics with extended supersymmetry and nonabelian
gauge constraints. Ann. Phys. 164, 189–220. [70]
Friedman, J. R., V. Patel, W. Chen, S. K. Tolpygo, and J. E. Lukens (2000). Quantum
superposition of distinct macroscopic states. Nature 406, 43–45. [178]
Gardiner, C. W. (1990). Handbook of Stochastic Methods (Berlin: Springer-Verlag),
Chap. 4. [164]
Ghirardi, G. C., P. Pearle, and A. Rimini (1990). Markov processes in Hilbert space and
continuous spontaneous localization of systems of identical particles. Phys. Rev. A
42, 78–89. [17,168,169,170,186,188]
Ghirardi, G. C., A. Rimini, and T. Weber (1986). Uniﬁed dynamics for microscopic and
macroscopic systems. Phys. Rev. D 34, 470-491. [17,169]
Gisin, N. (1984). Quantum measurements and stochastic processes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 52,
1657–1660. [17,169,173]
(1989). Stochastic quantum dynamics and relativity. Helv. Phys. Acta 62, 363–371.
[17,18,168,169]
(1990). Weinberg’s non-linear quantum mechanics and supraluminal communications.
Phys. Lett. A 143, 1–2. [18,168,169]
Gisin, N. and M. Rigo (1995). Relevant and irrelevant nonlinear Schr¨odinger equations. J.
Phys. A: Math. Gen. 28, 7375–7390. [18,168]
Giulini, D. (2003). That strange procedure called quantization, in Aspects of Quantum
Gravity – From Theory to Experimental Search, Bad Honnef 2002 School, ed. D.
Giulini, C. Kiefer, and C. L¨ammerzahl (Berlin: Springer-Verlag). [10,30]
Giulini, D., E. Joos, C. Kiefer, J. Kupsch, J. O. Stamatescu, and H. D. Zeh (1996).
Decoherence and the Appearance of a Classical World in Quantum Theory (Berlin:
Springer-Verlag), Sec. 3.3.1. [177]
Gorini, V., A. Kossakowski, and E. C. G. Sudarshan (1976). Completely positive
dynamical semigroups of N-level systems. J. Math. Phys. 17, 821–825. [168]
Green, M. B., J. H. Schwarz, and E. Witten (1987). Superstring Theory, Vol. I
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 220, 246, and 288. [71,203]
Greenberg, W. R., A. Klein, I. Zlatev, and C.-T. Li (1996, revised 2001). From Heisenberg
matrix mechanics to EBK quantization: theory and ﬁrst applications. arXiv:
chem-ph/9603006. [18]
Grifﬁths, R. B. (2002). Consistent Quantum Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press). [7]
G¨ursey, F. and C.-H. Tze (1996). On the Role of Division, Jordan and Related Algebras in
Particle Physics (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc), pp. 38–39. [138]
Harris, R. A. and L. Stodolsky (1981). On the time dependence of optical activity.
J. Chem. Phys. 74, 2145–2155. [4]
Hartle, J. B. (1992). Spacetime quantum mechanics and the quantum mechanics of
spacetime, in Gravitation et Quantiﬁcations, Les Houches summer school 1992, ed.
B. Julia and J. Zinn-Justin (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1995), pp. 285–480. [7]
Hughston, L. P. (1996). Geometry of stochastic state vector reduction. Proc. Roy. Soc.
Lond. A 452, 953–979. [169,170,171,174,181]
Itano, W. M., D. J. Heinzen, J. J. Bollinger, and D. J. Wineland (1990). Quantum Zeno
effect. Phys. Rev. A 41, 2295–2300. [179]

216
References
Joos, E. (1999). Elements of environmental decoherence, in Decoherence: Theoretical,
Experimental, and Conceptual Problems, ed. P. Blanchard, D. Giulini, E Joos,
C. Kiefer, and I.-O. Stamatescu (New York: Springer-Verlag), pp. 1–17. [4]
Joos, E. and H. D. Zeh (1985). The emergence of classical properties through interaction
with the environment. Z. Phys. B 59, 223–243. [4]
Kaku, M. (1993). Quantum Field Theory (New York: Oxford University Press), pp.
407–410. [118]
Kerman, A. and A. Klein (1963). Generalized Hartree-Fock approximation for the
calculation of collective states of a ﬁnite many-particle system. Phys. Rev. 132,
1326–1342, App. B. [18]
Klein, A., C. T. Li, and M. Vassanji (1980). Variational principles for particles and ﬁelds
in Heisenberg matrix mechanics. J. Math. Phys. 21, 2521–2527. [18]
Kloeden, P. E. and E. Platen (1997). Numerical Solutions of Stochastic Differential
Equations (Berlin: Springer-Verlag). [180]
Kochen, S. and E. P. Specker (1967). The problem of hidden variables in quantum
mechanics. J. Math. Mech. 17, 59–87. [6,7,17,152]
Lindblad, G. (1976). On the generators of quantum dynamical semigroups. Commun.
Math. Phys. 48, 119–130. [168]
Lisi, E., A. Marrone, and D. Montanino (2000). Probing possible decoherence effects in
atmospheric neutrino experiments. Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 1166–1169. [179]
Mehta, M. L. (1967). Random Matrices (New York: Academic Press), Chapt. 3. [107]
Milburn, G. J. (1991). Intrinsic decoherence in quantum mechanics. Phys. Rev. A 44,
5401–5406. [169]
Millard, A. C. (1997). Non-Commutative methods in quantum mechanics, Princeton
University Ph.D. thesis, Sec. 3.3. [19,43]
Misra, B. and E. C. G. Sudarshan (1977). The Zeno’s paradox in quantum theory. J. Math.
Phys. 18, 756–763. [177]
Mohling, F. (1982). Statistical Mechanics: Methods and Applications (New York: Halsted
Press/John Wiley), pp. 270–272. [118]
Moroz, I., R. Penrose, and P. Tod (1998). Spherically-symmetric solutions of the
Schr¨odinger-Newton equations. Class. Quantum Grav. 15, 2733–2742. [185]
Nairz, O., M. Arndt, and A. Zeilinger (2000). Experimental challenges in fullerene
interferometry. J. Mod. Optics 47, 2811–2821. [188]
Nairz, O., B. Brezger, M. Arndt, and A. Zeilinger (2001). Diffraction of complex
molecules by structures made of light. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 160401. [188]
Nelson, E. (1969). Derivation of the Schr¨odinger equation from Newtonian mechanics.
Phys. Rev. 150, 1079–1085. [18]
(1985). Quantum Fluctuations (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press). [18]
Ng, Y. J. (2003). Selected topics in Planck-scale physics. arXiv: gr-qc/0305019, Sec. V.
[185]
Omn`es, R. (1992). Consistent interpretations of quantum mechanics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 64,
339–382. [7]
(1994). The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press). [7]
(1999). Understanding Quantum Mechanics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press). [7]
Pearle, P. (1976). Reduction of the state vector by a nonlinear Schr¨odinger equation. Phys.
Rev. D 13, 857–868. [17,169]
(1979). Toward explaining why events occur. Int. Journ. Theor. Phys. 18, 489–518.
[17,169]

References
217
(1982). Might God toss coins? Found. Phys. 12, 249–263. [169,172]
(1984). Experimental tests of dynamical state-vector reduction. Phys. Rev. D 29,
235–240. [17,169]
(1989). Combining stochastic dynamical state-vector reduction with spontaneous
localization. Phys. Rev. A 39, 2277–2289. [17,168,169,172]
(1990). Toward a relativistic theory of statevector reduction, in Sixty-Two Years of
Uncertainty: Historical, Philosophical, and Physical Inquiries into the Foundations
of Quantum Mechanics, ed. A. I. Miller (New York: Plenum Press). [169]
(1993). Wavefunction collapse models with nonwhite noise, in Perspectives on
Quantum Reality, ed. R. Clifton (Dordrecht: Kluwer), pp. 93–109. [169]
(1995). Ways to describe dynamical state-vector reduction. Phys. Rev. A 48, 913–923.
[169]
(1999a). Relativistic collapse model with tachyonic features. Phys. Rev. A 59, 80–101.
[169]
(1999b). Collapse models, in Open Systems and Measurements in Relativistic Quantum
Field Theory, Lecture Notes in Physics 526, ed. H.-P. Breuer and F. Pettrucione
(Berlin: Springer-Verlag). [17,169]
(2003). Problems and aspects of energy-driven wavefunction collapse models.
arXiv: quant-ph/0310086. Phys. Rev. A 69 (in press). [182,184,185]
Pearle, P. and E. Squires (1994). Bound state excitation, nucleon decay experiments, and
models of wave function collapse. Phys. Rev. Lett 73, 1–5. [189]
Pearle, P., J. Ring, J. I. Collar, and F. T. Avignone III (1999). The CSL collapse model and
spontaneous radiation: an update. Found. Phys. 29, 465–480. [189]
Penrose, R. (1996). On gravity’s role in quantum state reduction. Gen. Rel. Grav. 28,
581–600. [185]
Percival, I. (1994). Primary state diffusion. Proc. Roy. Soc. London A 447, 189–209.
[17,169]
(1995). Quantum spacetime ﬂuctuations and primary state diffusion. Proc. Roy. Soc. A
451, 503–513. [169]
(1998). Quantum State Diffusion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
[169,180]
Peres, A. (1993). Quantum Theory: Concepts and Methods (Dordrecht: Kluwer), pp.
196–201. [152]
Polchinski, J. (1991). Weinberg’s nonlinear quantum mechanics and the
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen paradox. Phys. Rev. Lett. 66, 397–400. [18,168]
Rabi, I. I. (1937). Space quantization in a gyrating magnetic ﬁeld. Phys. Rev. 51,
652–654. [177]
Rabi, I. I., N. F. Ramsey, and J. Schwinger (1954). Use of rotating coordinates in
magnetic resonance problems. Rev. Mod. Phys. 26, 167–171. [177]
Rittenberg, V. and S. Yankielowicz (1985). Supersymmetric gauge theories in quantum
mechanics. Ann. Phys. 162, 273–302. [70]
Sculley, M. O., B.-G. Englert, and J. Schwinger (1989). Spin coherence and
Humpty-Dumpty. III. The effects of observation. Phys. Rev. A 40, 1775–1784. [3]
Shack, R. and T. A. Brun (1997). A C++ library using quantum trajectories to solve
quantum master equations. Comp. Phys. Commun. 102, 210–228. [180]
Shack, R., T. A. Brun, and I. C. Percival (1995). Quantum state diffusion, localization and
computation. J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 28, 5401–5413. [180]
Smolin, L. (1983). Derivation of quantum mechanics from a deterministic non-local
hidden variables theory, I. The two dimensional theory. Institute for Advanced Study
preprint. [18,75]

218
References
(1985). Stochastic mechanics, hidden variables and gravity, in Quantum Concepts in
Space and Time, ed. C. J. Isham and R. Penrose (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1986). [18,75]
(2002). Matrix models as non-local hidden variables theories. arXiv: hep-th/0201031.
Published in Fukuoka 2001, String theory, pp. 244–261. [18,75]
Sommerfeld, A. (reprinted 1956). Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics (New York:
Academic Press), Secs. 28, 29, 36, and 40. [85]
Starodubtsev, A. (2002). A note on quantization of matrix models. arXiv: hep-th/0206097.
[19]
Streater, R. F. and A. S. Wightman (1968). PCT, Spin and Statistics, and all That (New
York: Benjamin). [136,206–208]
Strocchi, F. (1993). Selected Topics on the General Properties of Quantum Field Theory,
Lecture Notes in Physics Vol. 51 (Singapore: World Scientiﬁc). [208]
Taylor, W. (2001). M(atrix) theory: matrix quantum mechanics as a fundamental theory.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 73, 419–462. [70,190]
ter Haar, D. (1995). Elements of Statistical Mechanics, third edn (Oxford and Boston,
MA: Butterworth Heinemann), Sec. 5.13. [85]
’t Hooft, G. (1988). Equivalence relations between deterministic and quantum mechanical
systems. J. Stat. Phys. 53, 323–344. [18]
(1997). Quantummechanical behavior in a deterministic model. Found. Phys. Lett. 10,
105–111. [18]
(1999a). Quantum gravity as a dissipative deterministic system. Class. Quant. Grav. 16,
3263–3279. [18]
(1999b). Determinism and dissipation in quantum gravity, in Basics and Highlights in
Fundamental Physics, Erice 1999 Summer School, ed. A. Zichichi (Singapore:
World Scientiﬁc, 2001), pp. 397–413. [18]
(2001a). How does God play dice? (Pre-)determinism at the Planck scale, in Quantum
[Un]speakables, from Bell to Quantum Information, ed. R. A. Bertlmann and A.
Zeilinger (Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2002), pp. 307–316. [18]
(2001b). Quantum mechanics and determinism, in Proceedings of the Eighth Int. Conf.
on Particles, Strings and Cosmology, ed. P. Frampton and J. Ng (Princeton, NJ:
Rinton Press), pp. 275–285. [18]
(2002). Determinism beneath quantum mechanics. arXiv: quant-ph/0212095. To appear
in Proceedings of Quo Vadis Quantum Mechanics, Temple University, PA,
September 25, 2002. [18]
(2003). Determinism in free bosons. Int. Journ. Theoret. Phys. 42, 355–361. [18]
Townsend, P. K. (1996). D-branes from M-branes. Phys. Lett. B 373, 68–75. [70]
Vafa, C. and E. Witten (1983). Restrictions on symmetry breaking in vector-like gauge
theories. Nucl. Phys. B 234, 173–188. [86]
(1984). Parity conservation in quantum chromodynamics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 535–536.
[86]
van der Wal, C. H., A. C. J. ter Haar, F. K. Wilhelm, R. N. Schouten, C. J. P. M. Harmans,
T.P. Orlando, S. Lloyd, and J. E. Mooij (2000). Quantum superposition of
macroscopic persistent-current states. Science 290, 773–777. [178]
Vion, D., A. Aassime, A. Cottet, P. Joyez, H. Pothier, C. Urbina, D. Esteve, and M. H.
Devoret (2002). Manipulating the quantum state of an electrical circuit. Science 296,
886–889. [178]
von Neumann, J. (1932). Mathematische grundlagen der quantenmechanik (Berlin:
Springer-Verlag). Engl. transl.: R. T. Beyer (1971). Mathematical Foundations of

References
219
Quantum Mechanics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press), Chapter VI.
[3,181]
Wadia, S. R. (1981). Integration over a large random matrix by Faddeev–Popov method,
Chicago preprint EFI 81/37, archived at the Stanford Linear Accelerator library.
[111]
Weber, T. (1990). Quantum mechanics with spontaneous localization revisited. Nuovo
Cimento B 106, 1111–1124. [186]
Weinberg, S. (1989a). Particle states as realizations (linear or nonlinear) of spacetime
symmetries. Nucl. Phys. B Proc. Suppl. 6, 67–75. Spacetime Symmetries, ed. Y. S.
Kim and W. W. Zachary (Amsterdam: North-Holland). [18]
(1989b). Precision tests of quantum mechanics. Phys. Rev. Lett. 62, 485–488. [18]
(1989c). Testing quantum mechanics. Ann. Phys. 194, 336–386. [18]
(1995). The Quantum Theory of Fields, Vol. I (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press), Sec. 7.4. [55]
(1996). The Quantum Theory of Fields, Vol. II (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press), Sec. 15.5. [94,97,109]
Weinstein, S. (2001). Naive quantum gravity, in Physics Meets Philosophy at the Planck
Scale, ed. C. Callender and N. Huggett (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
[74]
West, P. (1990). Introduction to Supersymmetry and Supergravity, extended second edn
(Singapore: World Scientiﬁc). [64,72,73,198,202]
Wheeler, J. A. and W. H. Zurek (ed.) (1983). Quantum Theory and Measurement
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press). [3]
Yoneya, T. and H. Itoyama (1982). Internal collective motions and the large-N limit in
ﬁeld theories. Nucl. Phys. B 200, 439–456. [111]
Yu, Y., S. Han, X. Chu, S.-I. Chu, and Z. Wang (2002). Coherent temporal oscillations of
macroscopic quantum states in a Josephson junction. Science 296, 889–892. [178]
Zurek, W. H. (1991). Decoherence and the transition from quantum to classical. Phys.
Today 44 (10), 36–44. [4]
Zurek, W. H. (2003). Decoherence, einselection, and the quantum origins of the classical.
Rev. Mod. Phys. 75, 715–775. [4]

Index
Ars
deﬁned 48
generalized choice of 51
simplest choice of 49, 51, 161
time-reversal invariance condition on 50–51
adjoint
assigment of fermionic variables 40–41, 44–45,
48–52
condition on fermionic trace Hamiltonian 40–41
properties of operator derivative 26
rule for products 23, 193–194
anticommutation relations, canonical
effective or emergent 12, 16, 76, 117, 133,
137–138, 141, 144, 147
local structure of 10, 190
of quantum theory 14, 34–38, 75, 147
not assumed 21, 75
anticommutator, notation deﬁned as {X, Y} 14, 24
approximations leading to quantum theory see
quantum theory, approximations
averages
⟨O⟩AV deﬁned 83–84
⟨O⟩AV, j deﬁned 88
⟨O⟩ˆ
AV and ⟨O⟩ˆ
AV, j deﬁned 119
over unitary ﬁxed ensemble 108, 111–112
axial gauge
deﬁned 93–94
trace Hamiltonian 95
Ax–Kochen approach see quantum theory
B-mesons 178–179
Becchi–Rouet–Stora–Tyutin (BRST) invariance 94,
98–100, 112, 114, 208–211
nilpotence of 99, 209, 211
Bell inequalities 6, 7, 17, 119, 151–155
bilinear fermionic structure 40–41
Bohmian approach see quantum theory
boldface, deﬁned to indicate trace quantities 24
Born rule 5, 6, 8, 13, 17, 151, 154, 156, 169–174
boson–fermion balance 12, 17, 20, 118, 139, 142,
144–147, 154
boson or bosonic
commutators in ˜C 14, 16
creation and annihilation operators 148
type (even grade) deﬁned 22–23
Brownian motion 13, 17, 154, 156–192; see also
stochastic Schr¨odinger equation
˜C 14–20, 39, 42–52, 54–55, 60, 62, 117
anti-self-adjoint 15, 45, 117
average in canonical ensemble 84–85, 129
average in unitary ﬁxed ensemble 105, 129, 157
conservation discovered by Millard x, 19, 43
construction of global unitary generators from 45
current for 54–55, 60, 66, 69
dependence on non-commutative parts of phase
space variables 48
equipartition of 16, 19, 117, 133
fermionic part of 49
ﬂuctuations of 17, 129, 146–147, 154, 158
invariance properties of 47
“M” model expression 71
Noether formulation 44, 54–55
Poincar´e invariance of 47, 136–137
rate of growth with system size 146–147
self-adjoint component of 15, 48–52, 83, 159–160,
162
supersymmetric Yang–Mills model expression 69,
141–143
time-reversal properties of 50–52
traceless 45
Wess–Zumino model expression 66
canonical
algebra not trace class 133
anticommutation relations see anticommutation
relations, canonical
220

Index
221
commutation relations see commutation relations,
canonical
ensemble 12, 15–17, 20, 38, 76, 81–88, 123; see
also equilibrium distribution
momentum pr deﬁned 28
quantization 10, 13, 19, 75, 190
transformations 46–47, 76–80, 133–135, 200
chain rule see Leibniz rule
charmed meson decay 180
“chemical potential” see equilibrium distribution,
parameters of
classical mechanics 12, 13, 198–200
clustering
and energy-driven stochastic equation 182
and unitary ﬁxing 105
in deriving canonical from microcanonical
ensemble 90, 137
of Wightman functions 137, 208
coherence
maintenance of 178
time tC 178–179
commutation relations, canonical
effective or emergent 12, 16, 76, 117, 133,
137–138, 141, 144, 147, 153
local structure of 10, 190
of quantum theory 14, 34–38, 75, 147
not assumed 21, 75
commutator, notation deﬁned as [X, Y] 14, 24
completeness relation 150, 157–158
cosmological blackbody radiation 82, 169
cosmology of early universe 190
conformal invariance 11, 58
conserved quantities; see also trace dynamics
for continuum spacetime theories 52–58
global unitary invariance of 43, 101
operator ˜C 42–52; see also ˜C
symmetry under interchange of qF with pF 62–63
trace fermion number N 39–42
trace Hamiltonian H 29
vector notation for 89
constrained system, gauge ﬁxing in 93–100
continuum spacetime theories 52–63, 135–136, 149
conventions for metric, summation, Grassmann
quantities 193–194
Copenhagen interpretation see quantum theory
correlation
function g(⃗x) deﬁned 168
length rC deﬁned 186
correlations, in canonical ensemble 87, 93
cosmological constant 11, 131, 191
covariant derivative 68, 204–205
current algebra 46
cyclic identities; see also trace
bilinear 22
trilinear 23
D = nB + nF deﬁned 30
dark matter, energy 191
decoherence 4, 5
degenerate manifold 172–173
density matrix 167, 170, 172
for mixed state 172
derivative δP/δO; see also trace, operator derivative of
deﬁned 24
properties of 24–26
De Witt–Faddeev–Popov
determinant 95, 97, 208–209
method 94, 106, 109–111
Dirac
fermion 15, 39, 58–60, 63
gamma matrices 53, 63, 73, 201–203
dynamical variables, “fast” and “slow” parts of 128,
140–141, 191
effective Hamiltonian and/or three-momentum 131,
136, 150
effective projection deﬁned 101
Einstein ﬁeld equations 191
Einstein–Podolsky–Rosen experiments 10
energy gap 144
energy-momentum
four-vector 56–57
operator tensor 61
trace tensor 15, 55–57, 60–61, 131, 190–191
ensemble
canonical see canonical, ensemble or equilibrium
distribution
microcanonical see microcanonical ensemble
entropy 15, 76, 85, 87, 90–91
epsilon symbol ϵ A deﬁned 78
epsilon symbol ϵB, ϵr, or ϵℓdeﬁned 24–25, 28, 122
equilbrium ensemble see canonical, ensemble or
equilibrium distribution
equilibrium distribution ρ 81–82
averages over deﬁned 83–84, 88; see also averages
ﬂuctuations of conserved quantities in 87, 93
parameters of 83, 128, 145
residual unitary invariance of 103
sources included in 88
unitary ﬁxed 108
vector notation for parameters of 89
equipartition 16, 19, 81, 117–118, 133, 190
in classical statistical mechanics 117–118
Euler–Lagrange equations
for continuum theory 52
for Dirac fermion coupled to scalar 59
for generic trace dynamics 27–28
for operator gauge invariant models 205–206
for scalar 60–61
for supersymmetric models 65, 68, 71
use to show conservation of ˜C 44

222
Index
Euler’s theorem 41
expectation E[. . .]
deﬁned 167
of density matrix 167–168, 176
of probabilities 176–177
of variance 171–172
extensive generators 134
“fast” parts of dynamical variables 128, 140–141, 191
fermion or fermionic
adjoint convention 20, 23, 193–194
adjoint properties of canonical variables 40–41, 44,
48–52, 117, 148, 159
anticommutators in ˜C 14, 16
creation, annihilation operators †
reff, reff deﬁned
136, 147–148
introduction into theory 20
structure of trace Hamiltonian and Lagrangian
39–42
trace charge or number 39–42, 54, 60, 62, 66, 69,
129
trace current 53–54, 59–60, 66, 69
type (odd grade) deﬁned 22
ﬁeld strength 68, 204
Fierz identities 202
Figure 1 3–5
Figure 2 12–14, 138
ﬂuctuation(s)
accretion induced 181–184
corrections to Ward identities 17, 18, 127, 156–170,
190
in ampliﬁed currents 183–184
in conserved quantities 87, 93
in energy 181–185
in spacetime geometry 185
four-vector notation 52
fullerene diffraction 188
gambler’s ruin 172
γ matrices for Dirac equation; see also Dirac
representation covariant identities for 202–203
γi matrices for “M” model 70–71
identities for 203
gauge
axial 93–96
Coulomb 94
ﬁxing 16, 93–100, 104, 108
nontemporal 94, 96
potential 68
properties of conserved quantities 97
general relativity 11
generalized Poisson bracket see Poisson bracket
generalized quantum dynamics 19; see also trace
dynamics
ghost fermions 94, 97–100, 112–116, 208–211
global unitary invariance 13, 20, 190
breaking by canonical ensemble 16, 20, 85,
100–102
BRST invariance for ﬁxing 208–211
effect of ﬁxing on Ward identities 116
ﬁxing of 16, 20, 61, 103–116, 191
Noether charge ( ˜C) for 45, 54–55
Noether current or theorem for 54–55
of ensemble averages of trace polynomials 107
of generators 47, 136
of matrix models 12, 45, 76, 135, 169
of trace Hamiltonian and/or Lagrangian 12, 14, 43,
47–48, 83
trace generators for 45
Golden Rule 180
grade see Grassmann algebra
Grassmann algebra or quantities 13, 20–24, 193–194,
206, 208–209
adjoint convention 23, 193–194
even and odd grade sectors 22–23, 193
integrals over 77, 193
gravitation 11, 131, 180, 185, 191
gravitino 73
Hamilton equations
for generic trace dynamics 28, 31
formal integration of 32
use to show conservation of ˜C 43–44
Hamiltonian; see also effective Hamiltonian or trace
or matrix models
phase ﬂow 200
rest mass dominated 160, 173, 185
vector ﬁeld 199
Heisenberg picture or evolution 12, 14, 16, 17, 118,
130–131, 135, 147, 149, 158, 163
contrasted with trace dynamics 21, 32–38
time integrated form 131–132, 135
Heisenberg uncertainty relations 138
hidden variables 6, 17, 119, 152–155
hierarchy
of mass or energy scales 128, 143, 191
of matrix structures 12, 13, 138
Hilbert space 12
complex 2, 21–22, 194
quaternionic 2, 19, 194
real 2, 191, 194
reduction modulo ieff 100–105
histories see quantum theory
holography 142, 185, 192
ieff 15, 16, 130, 140, 157
decomposition of general matrix with respect to
101–102
reduction of Hilbert space modulo 100–105
independent particle picture 163

Index
223
indeterminacy 138
inﬁnities 10, 11, 190
integration measure see measure
internal symmetries 134
intertwining identities 205
Itˆo calculus 164–167, 171, 176
Jacobi identity 29, 194–199
Jacobian 78, 96–97, 99, 211
K deﬁned 85
role in effective projection 101–2, 134–135
K-mesons 178–179
Klein–Gordon scalar 15, 39, 58–61
Kochen–Specker theorem 6, 7, 17, 119, 151–153
Lagrangian see trace, matrix models
Legendre transformation 40
Leibniz rule (chain rule) for differentiation 25, 30,
120, 125–126, 131, 166, 195–196, 199
Lie algebra of trace functionals 30, 46, 199
Liouville theorem 15, 76–81, 200
locality as an emergent property 138
London rigidity 143
Lorentz see also Poincar´e group invariance
invariance of ˜C 47, 131, 136–137
noninvariance of canonical ensemble 82, 136
noninvariance of stochastic reduction 169–170
trace 61, 131, 190
Lorentzian proﬁle 177, 179
L¨uders rule 156, 169, 173
Majorana representation 63–64, 201–202
many worlds see quantum theory
martingale 172, 176–177
master equation 167–168
matrix 12, 21–24
matrix models 2, 12, 13, 15, 18, 21–38, 106, 109, 169,
190
Lagrangian and Hamiltonian dynamics 21, 27–28
measure for matrix integration 15, 76–81, 90, 95–97,
103, 106–107, 210–211
canonical invariance of 77–80
global unitary invariance of 80–81, 106–107
Haar 103–104
modiﬁed (unitary ﬁxed) 101, 103–116, 119
permutation symmetry of 111–112
shift invariance of 81, 115, 119
measure for classical phase space 118
measurement
apparatus 2–6, 9, 10, 152–153, 156, 160, 162–163,
181, 184
contextual dependence in 152
problem see quantum theory
Meissner effect 143
meromorphic function 13, 24
metric
convention 193
spacetime 191
microcanonical ensemble 16, 19, 76, 88–93
approximation by canonical ensemble 92
Ward identities in 123
N deﬁned as dimension of Hilbert space 22
relation N = 2K 85
N deﬁned as trace fermion number 39–42; see also
fermion, trace charge
nB, nF deﬁned as numbers of bosonic, fermionic
canonical coordinates 27
neutrinos 178–179
Noether theorem or charge 14, 39, 42–44, 53–57
associated current 53–56
for internal symmetry 53
for Poincar´e invariant theory 55–58
noise see ﬂuctuation(s) or Brownian motion
nonlocality 10–11, 138, 155, 190
normalization of wave functions 157–158, 164–165,
167–168
number density Nr(⃗y)
deﬁned 168
mutual commutativity of 173–174
omega matrix ωrs deﬁned and properties of 31
omega matrix ˜ωrs deﬁned 121
operator see also matrix
gauge invariance 204–206, 210
orthonormality 151, 158
partition function
conditions for existence 86–87
global unitary invariance of 107
Z deﬁned 86, 106
Z j deﬁned 88
Pauli spin matrices 51, 101, 177–178, 201
phase space variables
classical and non-commutative parts of 47–48, 138
indices R, R + 1 deﬁned 105
phenomenology
of continuous spontaneous localization reduction
185–189
of energy-driven reduction 175–185
pi zero decay 180
Planck constant 15, 16, 83, 85, 102, 117, 193
sum rule involving 142, 146
Planck mass, energy, or scale 11, 13, 128, 144,
180–183, 185
Poincar´e group invariance 15, 39, 47, 82–83, 104,
117, 134–137
associated Noether charges and currents 55–58
generators 56–57, 134

224
Index
Poincar´e group invariance (cont.)
graded 64, 72–73
of Wightman functions 206
Poisson algebra 30
Poisson bracket
classical 10, 195–196
generalized 13, 21, 130, 199–200
generalized, deﬁned and properties of 29–32
generalized, of trace generators 46–47, 57, 64, 67,
70, 134
generalized, of trace supersymmetry generators 64,
67, 70, 72, 201
Jacobi identity for 19, 194–198
quantum ﬁeld theory 8, 9, 11–13, 15–17, 39, 46, 118,
125, 128, 131, 135, 151, 191
correspondence of operators with trace dynamics
135–136, 147–149, 157–158, 162
reconstruction from Wightman functions 136–137,
206–208
second copy of 191
quantum theory
approximations/assumptions leading to 128–147,
157, 191
Ax–Kochen approach 6, 8
Bohmian approach 6–8
Copenhagen interpretation 5, 6
emergent 16, 128–155
histories approach 6, 7
many worlds approach 6, 8
measurement problem in 2–6, 9, 10, 19, 190
probabilistic interpretation 5–7, 10, 151, 156–189
relation to trace dynamics 12–13
statistical interpretation 5
quantum Zeno effect 177
R, R + 1 indices of phase space variables
deﬁned 105
exception to shift invariance of restricted measure
119–120, 130, 135
Rabi oscillation or frequency 177, 179
reduction (of state vector) 5, 7, 8, 10, 17, 19, 154,
156–190
rate of 17, 175–189
representation covariant gamma matrix identities
202–203
sample space 5–7, 10
scale invariance 11, 58, 131, 190–191
Schr¨odinger equation 17
nonlinear deterministic 18
stochastic see stochastic Schr¨odinger equation
Schr¨odinger picture 12, 118, 147–151, 156–189
Schur’s lemma 108
sigma parameters σr deﬁned 33–34
“slow” parts of dynamical variables 128, 131,
140–141, 191
source terms jr 16, 31, 88, 118–119, 124–127,
129–130, 132, 139, 144, 157
with vanishing classical parts 132
spin structure 56
statistical interpretation see quantum theory
statistical mechanics of matrix models 2, 12, 15, 17,
39, 75ff
Stern–Gerlach experiment 3–5, 153, 184
stochastic Schr¨odinger equation 13, 17, 18, 49,
156–190
accretion model for energy variance 181–185
continuous spontaneous localization (CSL) 17,
156–157, 168–169, 173–175, 185–189
energy-driven 17, 156–157, 169, 173–185
environmental effects on 181–185
Lorentz noninvariance 169–170
phenomenological constraints on 156, 175–189
reduction rate formulas 174–175, 180, 188
simulation methods for 180
stochasticity parameter
γ deﬁned 188
M deﬁned 175
σ deﬁned 174
string theory 11, 70, 190
sum rule for ieff ¯h 142, 146
summation convention 193
superconducting quantum interference device
(SQUID) 178
supergravity 15, 73–74
superluminal propagation 18, 154–155, 165, 168
superspace 64, 72–74
supersymmetry and supersymmetric 11, 15, 17,
141–142, 146, 190–191
algebra closure 67, 70, 72–73
gamma matrix identities for 201–203
local 15, 64, 73–74
“M”theory matrix model 15, 64, 70–72, 203
supercurrent 11, 190
trace dynamics models 64–74
Wess–Zumino model 15, 64–67, 201
Yang–Mills model 15, 64, 67–70, 76, 93–100,
141–142, 201
support properties 17, 128–129, 139–144
possible superconductive analog 143–144
survival probability 177
symplectic notation deﬁned 30–31
symplectic structures 198–200
T superscript used to denote transpose 51, 59, 65–66,
70, 193, 206
thermodynamics 13, 15, 156, 190; see also statistical
mechanics of matrix models
time-reversal transformation 50–52

Index
225
Tr notation for trace 22
trace
action 27
angular momentum density 56–57
class 12, 32, 34, 38, 133, 192
current 53–54, 66, 69
cyclic permutation under 12, 13, 21–25
dynamics see trace dynamics
energy-momentum four-vector (four-momentum)
56–57, 66
energy-momentum tensor 15, 55–58, 60–61
fermion number 14, 39–42, 59–60
generators 45–47, 129
Hamiltonian decoupling 15, 16, 136, 169
Hamiltonian deﬁned 12, 28
Hamiltonian properties 13, 29, 39–40, 47–48,
62–63
Hamiltonian, speciﬁc models 40, 59, 65, 68, 71,
95
Lagrangian 12, 15, 16, 27, 52
Lagrangian, speciﬁc models 40, 48, 58–59, 64–65,
67–68, 70
Lagrangian density 52, 60, 204
notation Tr for 22
operator derivative of 18, 21, 24–26; see also
derivative δP/δO
Poincar´e generators 57, 82, 134
polynomial deﬁned and properties of 24–26
real, in real and quaternionic Hilbert space 194
supercharge 64, 67, 70, 72
supersymmetry current 64, 67, 70
three-momentum 65–67, 136
trace dynamics 12–14, 16–19, 21–38
conserved operator ˜C in 42–52; see also ˜C
contrasted with unitary Heisenberg evolution 21,
32–38
correspondence of operators with quantum ﬁeld
theory 135–136, 147–148
Euler–Lagrange equations for 27–28
formal integration of equations of motion 32
generic conserved quantities in 13–15, 39–63, 82;
see also conserved quantities
Hamilton equations for 28, 31, 198
Hamiltonian form of 19; see also trace,
Hamiltonian . . .
irreducible 105
operator gauge invariance in 68, 93–100, 204–206
supersymmetric models with 64–74
symplectic geometry of 30, 198–200
tangent vector ﬁeld 198–199
transition probabilities 17, 177, 179–180
two-level (or state) system 177–179
unitary ﬁxing 17, 76, 104–116, 124, 191, 208–211;
see also global unitary invariance
physical quantities independent of 137–138
unitary canonical generators 134–135
unitary invariance, global see global unitary
invariance
vacuum state 136, 150, 158, 162–163, 206
Vandermonde determinant 111–112
variance 171, 175, 178, 180, 187–188
von Neumann
measurement model 3, 181
recursion 184
W Rℓ
s
and W Lℓ
s
deﬁned 122
Ward identity/identities 16, 17, 81, 112, 114–116,
117–147, 154, 157, 160
effect of unitary ﬁxing on 115–116
“off-shell” extension 127, 130, 134–135
restrictions on underlying theory implied by
139–147
Weisskopf–Wigner theory 176–177
Weyl ordering 19, 33–38, 43, 161
generating function for 33–34
white noise 165, 169
Wightman functions 16, 17, 136–138, 158, 206–208
cluster property of 137, 208
reconstruction of quantum ﬁeld theory from 137,
206–208
spectral condition 20, 137, 207
Zeno effect see quantum Zeno effect

