
RAINBOWS END
To the Internet-based cognitive tools that are changing our lives — Wikipedia,
Google, eBay, and the others of their kind, now and in the future
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful for the advice and help of:
Jeff Allen, David Baxter, Ethan Bier, John Carroll, Randy Carver, Steven Cherry,
Connie Fleenor, Robert Fleming, Peter Flynn, Mike Gannis, Harry Goldstein,
Thomas Goodey, Barbara Gordon, Judith Greengard, Dipak Gupta, Patricia
Hartman, Patrick Hillmeyer, Cherie Kushner, Sifang Lu, Sara Baase Mayers,
Keith Mayers, Terry McGarry, Sean Peisert, William Rupp, Peter H. Salus, Mary
Q. Smith, Charles Vestal, Joan D. Vinge, Gabriele Wienhausen, and William F.
Wu.
I am very grateful to James Frenkel for the wonderful job of editing he has done
with this book. Jim and Tor Books have been very patient with me in the long
process of creating Rainbows End.

Prologue
Dumb Luck and Smart Thinking
The first bit of dumb luck came disguised as a public embarrassment for the
European Center for Defense Against Disease. On July 23, schoolchildren in
Algiers claimed that a respiratory epidemic was spreading across the
Mediterranean. The claim was based on clever analysis of antibody data from
the mass-transit systems of Algiers and Naples.
CDD had no immediate comment, but in less than three hours, public-health
hobbyists reported similar results in other cities, complete with contagion maps.
The epidemic was at least one week old, probably originating in Central Africa,
beyond the scope of hobbyist surveillance.
By the time CDD got its public-relations act together, the disease had been
detected in India and North America. Worse yet, a journalist in Seattle had
isolated and identified the infectious agent, which turned out to be a
Pseudomimivirus. That was about as embarrassing a twist as the public-relations
people could imagine: Back in the late teens, CDD had justified its enormous
budget with a brilliant defense against the New Sunrise cult. The Sunrise Plague
had been the second-worst Euro-terror of the decade. Only CDD’s leadership
had kept the disaster from spreading worldwide.
The Sunrise Plague had been based on a Pseudomimivirus.
There were still good people at CDD. They were the same specialists who had
saved the world in 2017. They quickly resolved the July 23 issue. Public
Relations could now spin a more or less accurate statement: Yes, this
Pseudomimi had evaded the standard announcement protocols. The failure was a
simple software error at the Center’s “Current Events” website. And yes, this
Pseudomimi might be a derivative of the Sunrise Plague. Denatured strains of
the original, death-optimized, virus continued to echo around the world, a
permanent addition to the background noise of the biosphere. Three had already
been sighted that year, one just five days before, on July 18. Furthermore (and
here the public-relations people regained their usual elan), all such events were
subclinical, having essentially no perceptible symptoms. The Pseudomimiviruses
had an enormous genome (well, enormous for a virus, small for almost anything

else). The New Sunrise cult had transformed that genome into a Swiss Army
knife of death, with a tool to counter almost every defense. But without such
optimization, the Pseudomimis were clunky bags of DNA junk. “And so, in
conclusion, we at CDD apologize for failing to announce this routine event.”
A week passed. Two weeks. There were no further captures of the organism.
Antibody surveys showed that the epidemic never got much farther than the rim
of the Mediterranean. CDD’s claims for the outbreak were absolutely correct.
This kind of “subclinical respiratory epidemic” was almost a contradiction in
terms. If not one victim in a thousand even gets the sniffles, the virus is almost
dependent on charity to make its way in the world.
The CDD explanations were accepted. The public-health hobbyists had been
scaremongering a commonplace event.
In fact, there was only one misrepresentation in the CDD story, and that
successfully eluded public notice: The failure to announce the virus had not been
a mess-up at the public website. Instead, it had been a glitch in the Center’s just-
revised internal alert system. So the responsible specialists had been as ignorant
of the event as the general public; it was the hobbyists who had alerted both.
In the inner circles of EU intelligence, there were people who were not forgiving
of such lapses. These were people who countered terror on a daily basis. These
were people whose greatest successes were things you never heard about — and
whose failures could be bigger than the Sunrise Plague.
Understandably, these people were both paranoid and obsessive. The EU
Intelligence Board assigned one of its brightest agents, a young German named
Günberk Braun, to oversee a quiet reorganization at CDD. In those parts of
intelligence where Braun was known, he was somewhat famous — as the most
obsessing of the obsessive. In any case, he and his teams quickly revamped the
internal reporting structure of the CDD, then undertook a Center-wide review
that was to last six months and consist of random “fire drills” that would probe
threats and conjectures more bizarre than the epidemiologists had ever imagined.
For CDD, those six months promised to be a torment for the incompetent and a
revelation for the brilliant. But Braun’s fire-drill regime lasted less than two
months, and was ended by an advertisement at a soccer match.
The first meeting of the Greece-Pakistan Football Series was held in Lahore on

September 20. The Greece-Pakistan Series had some tradition behind it — or
perhaps the supporters were just old-fashioned. In any case, the advertising was
very much a blundering, twentieth-century affair. There were commercials where
each advert was seen by everyone. Display space was sold on the inner
barricades of the stadium, but even that was not targeted per viewer.
A remarkable thing happened at the match (two remarkable things, if you count
the fact that Greece won). At halftime a thirty-second advert for honeyed
nougats was shown. Within the hour, several freelance marketing analysts
reported a spike-surge of nougat sales, beginning three minutes after the advert.
That single advertisement had repaid its sponsor one hundred times over. Such
was the stuff of dreams — at least for those unwhole-somely fixated on the
marketing arts. Throughout the afternoon, these millions debated the remarkable
event. The advertisement was analyzed in every detail. It was an uninspired
thing, quite in keeping with the third-rate company that produced it. Importantly,
it contained no subliminal messing about (though finding such was the main
hope of those who studied it). The delay and abruptness of the surge were quite
unlike a normal advertisement response. Within hours, all reasonable
participants agreed that the Honeyed Nougat Miracle was just the kind of mirage
that came from modern data-dredging capabilities: if you watch trillions of
things, you will often see one-in-a-million coincidences. At the end of the day,
the whole affair had canceled itself out, just another tiny ripple in the myriad
conversations of public life.
Certain observers did not lose interest. Günberk Braun, like most in the inner
circles of the EUIB, had an enormous (let’s be frank: an apprehensive) respect
for the power of open intelligence analysis. One of his teams noticed the
Honeyed Nougat Miracle. They considered the discussion. True, the event was
almost surely a mirage. And yet, there were additional questions that could be
asked; some were questions that governments had a special knack for answering.
And that brings us to the second bit of dumb luck. On a whim, Braun called for a
fire drill: the analytical resources of the CDD would be pointed at the public-
health significance of the Honeyed Nougat Miracle. Whatever the practical
content of the mystery, this would exercise the Center in the conduct of a secret,
real-time, emergency investigation. At that, it wasn’t much crazier than his
previous drills. By now, the brighter of the CDD’s specialists were very much in
the swing of such festivities. They quickly generated a thousand conjectures and
imagined half a million tests. These would be seeds for the search trees of the

investigation.
Over the next two days, the CDD analysts proceeded down their trees, extending
and pruning — all the time exercising statistical restraint; this sort of work could
generate more mirages than the marketing hobbyists had ever dreamed. Just the
topic list would fill an old-time phone book. Here are the good parts,
dramatically arranged:
There was no connection between the buying surge and the honeyed-nougat
advert. This conclusion was not based upon theoretical analysis: CDD showed
the advertisement to small response groups. All of the halftime publicity was
similarly tested. One of the stadium displays — an advertisement for a dating
service, which had aired only briefly — caused occasional interest in nougats.
(The dating-service advert was a bit of design-artist excess, its background of
intersecting lines a distracting moire pattern.) Proceeding down the test tree, the
dating-service advertisement was played for a number of specialized audiences.
For instance, it had no enhanced effect on persons with antibodies to the July 23
Pseudomimivirus.
The dating-service advertisement did provoke nougat lust when shown to those
who’d been infected by the earlier, July 18 Pseudomimi, the one that CDD had
properly reported.
As a child, Günberk Braun had often daydreamed of how, in an earlier time, he
might have prevented the firebombing of Dresden, or stopped the Nazis and their
death camps, or kept Stalin from starving the Ukraine. On off days, when he
couldn’t move nations, little Günberk imagined what he might have done in
1941 December 7 at a radar outpost in Hawaii, or as an American FBI agent in
the summer of 2001.
Perhaps all young boys go through such a phase, largely ignorant of historical
context, simply wanting to be savior heroes.
But when Braun considered this latest report, he knew he was in the middle of
something as big as his childhood fantasies. The July 18 Pseudomimi and the
advertising at the football match — together they amounted to an extremely well
disguised test of a new weapon concept. In its developed form, such a weapon
would make the Sunrise Plague look like a malignant toy. At the least, biological
warfare would become as precise and surprising as bullets and bombs: slyly

infect a population with the slow random spread of disease, all but undetected,
and then bam, blind or maim or kill — singly with an email, or by the billions
with a broadcast, too quickly for any possible “defense against disease.”
If Braun had been a CDD person, this discovery would have precipitated
immediate alarums to all the disease defense organizations of the Indo-European
Alliance, as well as to the CDC in America and the CDCP in China.
But Günberk Braun was not an epidemiologist. He was a spook, and he was
paranoid even for that. Braun’s fire drill was under his personal control; he had
no trouble suppressing the news there. Meantime, he used his resources in the
EUIB and the Indo-European Alliance. Within hours, he was deep into a number
of projects:
He brought in the best cult expert in the Indo-European intelligence community
and set her loose on the evidence. He reached out to the military assets of the
Alliance, in Central Africa and all the failed states at the edge of the modern
world. There were solid clues about the origin of the July 18 Pseudomimi.
Though this research was not bioscientific, Braun’s analysts were very similar to
the best at CDD — only smarter, more numerous, with far deeper resources.
Even so, they were lucky: over the next three days, they put two and two (and
two and two and two…) together. In the end, he had a good idea who was behind
the weapons test.
And for the first time in his life, Günberk Braun was truly terrified.

Mr. Rabbit Visits Barcelona
Within the intelligence services of the Indo-European Alliance, there were a
handful of bureaucratic superstars, people such as Günberk Braun of the EUIB.
Hopefully, their identities were unknown — or a mass of contradictions — to the
general public. The superstars had their own heroes. In particular, when people
like Günberk Braun were confronted with the most desperate problems, there
was a place to get help. There was a certain department in India’s External
Intelligence Agency. It didn’t show up in EIA organization charts, and its
purpose was happily undefined. Basically, it was whatever its boss thought it
should be. That boss was an Indian national known (to those very few who knew
of him at all) as Alfred Vaz.
Braun took his terrifying discovery to Vaz. At first, the older man was as taken
aback as Braun himself had been. But Vaz was a fixer. “With the proper human
resources, you can solve almost any problem,” he said. “Give me a few days.
Let’s see what I can dig up.”
○
In downtown Barcelona, three days later:
The rabbit hopped onto the unoccupied wicker chair and thence to the middle of
the table, between the teacups and the condiments. It tipped its top hat first at
Alfred Vaz and then at Günberk Braun and Keiko Mitsuri. “Have I got a deal for
you!” it said. Altogether, it was an unremarkable example of its type.
Alfred reached out and swiped his hand through the image, just to emphasize his
own substance. “We’re the ones with the deal.”
“Hmph.” The rabbit plunked its ass down on the table and pulled a tiny tea
service out from behind the salt and pepper. It poured itself a drop or two —
enough to fill its cup — and took a sip. “I’m all ears.” It wiggled two long ones
to emphasize the point.
From the other side of the table, Günberk Braun gave the creature a long stare.
Braun was as ephemeral as the rabbit, but he projected a dour earnestness that
was quite consistent with his real personality. Alfred thought he detected a

certain surprised disappointment in the younger man’s expression. In fact, after a
moment, Günberk sent him a silent message.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
This is the best you could recruit, Alfred?
Alfred didn’t reply directly. Instead, he turned to the creature sitting on the table.
“Welcome to Barcelona, Mr. Rabbit,” he said. He waved at the towers of the
Sagrada Familia, which soared up and up from just across the street. The
cathedral was best seen without virtual elaboration; after all, the reality of Gaudi
architecture was gaudy beyond the imagination of modern revisionists. “Do you
have any idea why we selected this location for our meeting?”
The rabbit sipped its tea. Its gaze slid in a very un-rabbity way to take in the
noisy crowds that swept past the tables, to scan the costumes and body-plans of
tourists and locals. “Ah, is it that Barcelona is a place for the beautiful and the
bizarre, one of the few great cities of the twentieth century whose charm
survives in the modern world? Could it be that on the side, you and your families
are taking touchy-feely tours through Pare Güell and writing it all off on your
expense accounts?” He stared at Braun and at Keiko Mitsuri. Mitsuri was
frankly masked. She looked a bit like Marcel Duchamp’s nude, built from a
shifting complex of crystal planes. The rabbit shrugged. “But then again, maybe
you two are thousands of kilometers away.”
Keiko laughed. “Oh, don’t be so indecisive,” she said, speaking with a
completely synthetic accent and syntax. “I’m quite happy to be in Pare Güell
right now, feeling reality with my very own real hands.”
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
In fact, I’m in my office, admiring the moonlight on Tokyo Bay.
The rabbit continued, ignorant of the silent-messaging byplay: “Whatever. In any
case, the real reasons for meeting here: Barcelona has very direct connections to
wherever you’re really from, and modern security to disguise what we say. Best
of all, it has laws banning popular and police snooping… unless of course you
are the EU Intelligence Board.”
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:

Well, that’s one-third of a correct guess.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
Mr. Rabbit himself is calling from some distance. An EU real-time
estimate hung in the air above the little creature’s head: seventy-five percent
probability that the mind behind the rabbit image was in North America.
Alfred leaned toward the rabbit and smiled. As the agent with physical presence,
Vaz had limitations — but some advantages, too. “No, we’re not the secret
police. And yes, we wanted some secure communication that was a bit more
personal than text messaging.” He tapped his chest. “In particular, you see me
physically here. It builds trust.” And should give you all sorts of invalid clues.
Vaz waved to a waiter, ordered a glass of Rioja. Then, turning back to the
creature on the tablecloth: “In recent months, you have bragged many things,
Mr. Rabbit. Others brag similarly nowadays, but you have certificates that are
difficult to come by. Various people with notable reputations have endorsed your
abilities.”
The rabbit preened. This was a rabbit with many implausible mannerisms.
Physical realism did not rank high in its priorities. “Of course I am highly
recommended. For any problem, political, military, scientific, artistic, or
amorous — meet my terms, and I will deliver.”
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
Go ahead, Alfred. Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz: Yes, the minimal version of
course. Nothing more till we see some results that we couldn’t make
for ourselves.
Alfred nodded as if to himself. “Our problem has nothing to do with politics or
war, Mr. Rabbit. We have only some scientific interests.”
The rabbit ears waggled. “So? Post your needs to the answer boards. That may
get you results almost as good as mine, almost as fast. And for certain, a
thousand times cheaper.”
Wine arrived. Vaz made a thing of sniffing the bouquet. He glanced across the
street. The bidding on physical tour slots to the Sagrada Familia was closed for
the day, but there was still a queue of people near the cathedral entrance, people

hoping for no-shows. It proved once again that the most important things were
those you could touch. He looked back at the gray rabbit. “We have needs that
are more basic than picking the brains of a few thousand analysts. Our questions
require serious, um, experimentation. Some of that has already been done. Much
remains. All together, our project is the size you might imagine for a government
crash research program.”
The rabbit grinned, revealing ivory incisors. “Heh. A government crash
program? That’s twentieth-century foolishness. Market demands are always
more effective. You just have to fool the market into cooperating.”
“Maybe. But what we want to do is…” The hell of it was, even the cover story
was extreme. “What we want is, um, administrative authority at a large physical
laboratory.”
The rabbit froze, and for an instant it looked like a real herbivore, one suddenly
caught in a bright light. “Oh? What kind of physical lab?”
“Globally integrated life sciences.”
“Well, well, well.” Rabbit sat back, communing with itself — hopefully with
itself alone. EU Intelligence set a sixty-five percent probability that Rabbit was
not sharing the big picture with others, ninety-five percent that it was not a tool
of China or the U.S.A. Alfred’s own organization in India was even more
confident of these assumptions.
The rabbit set down his teacup. “I’m intrigued. So this is not an information-
provision job. You really want me to subvert a major installation.”
“Just for a short time,” said Günberk.
“Whatever. You’ve come to the right fellow.” Its nose quivered. “I’m sure you
know the possibilities. In Europe there are a scattering of top institutions, but
none is totally integrated — and for now they remain in the backwash of sites in
China and the U.S.A.”
Vaz didn’t nod, but the rabbit was right. There were brilliant researchers the
world over, but only a few data-intensive labs. In the twentieth century, technical
superiority of major labs might last thirty years. Nowadays, things changed
faster, but Europe was a little behind. The Bhopal complex in India was more

integrated, but lagging in micro-automation. It might be several years before
China and the U.S.A. lost their current edge.
The rabbit was chuckling to itself: “Hm, hm. So it must be either the labs in
Wuhan or those in Southern California. I could work my miracles with either, of
course.” That was a lie, or else Alfred’s people had totally misjudged this fine
furry friend.
Keiko said, “We’d prefer the biotech complex in San Diego, California.”
Alfred had a smooth explanation ready: “We’ve studied the San Diego labs for
some months. We know they have the resources we need.” In fact, San Diego
was where Günberk Braun’s terrible suspicions were focused.
“Just what are you planning?”
Günberk gave a sour smile. “Let us proceed by installments, Mr. Rabbit. For the
first installment, we suggest a thirty-day deadline. We’d like from you a survey
of the San Diego labs’ security. More important, we need credible evidence that
you can provide a team of local people to carry out physical acts in and near
those labs.”
“Well then. I will hop right on it.” The rabbit rolled its eyes. “It’s obvious you’re
looking for an expendable player, somebody to shield your operation from the
Americans. Okay. I can be a cutout. But be warned. I am very pricey and I will
be around to collect afterwards.”
Keiko laughed. “No need to be melodramatic, Mr. Rabbit. We know of your
famous skills.”
“Quite right! But so far you don’t believe in them. Now I’ll go away, sniff
around San Diego, and get back to you in a couple of weeks. I’ll have something
to show you by then, and — more important for me — I’ll have used my
enormous imagination to specify a first payment in this installment plan that Mr.
So-German-Seeming has proposed.” He gave a little bow in Günberk’s direction.
Mitsuri and Braun were radiating bemused silence, so it was Alfred who carried
on the conversation. “We’ll chat again then. Please remember that for now we
want a survey only. We want to know whom you can recruit and how you might
use them.”

The rabbit touched its nose. “I will be the soul of discretion. I always know
much more than I reveal. But you three really should improve your
performances. Mr. So-German is just an out-of-date stereotype. And you, senora,
the work of impressionist art reveals nothing and everything. Who might have a
special interest in the San Diego bio labs? Who indeed? And as for you — ”
Rabbit looked at Vaz. “That’s a fine Colombian accent you’re hiding.”
The creature laughed and hopped off the table. “Talk to you soon.” Alfred leaned
back and watched the gray form as it dodged between the legs of passersby. It
must have a festival permit, since other people were evidently seeing the
creature. There was no poof of vanishment. The rabbit remained visible for
twenty meters up Carrer de Sardenya, then darted into an alley and was finally
and quite naturally lost to sight.
The three agents sat for a moment in apparently companionable silence, Günberk
bent over his virtual wine, Vaz sipping at his real Rioja and admiring the stilted
puppets that were setting up for the afternoon parade. The three blended well
with the normal touristy hurly-burly of the Familia district — except that most
tourists paying for café seating on C. de Sardenya would have had more than a
one-third physical presence.
“He is truly gone,” Günberk said, a bit unnecessarily; they could all see the EU
signals analysis. A few more seconds passed. The Japanese and Indian
intelligence agencies also reported in: Rabbit remained unidentified.
“Well that’s something,” said Keiko. “He got away clean. Perhaps he can
function as a cutout.”
Günberk gave a weary shrug. “Perhaps. What a disgusting twit. His kind of
dilettante is a cliche a century old, reborn with each new technology. I wager
he’s fourteen years old and desperately eager to show off.” He glanced at Vaz.
“Is this the best you could come up with, Alfred?”
“His reputation is not a fraud, Günberk. He has managed projects almost as
complex as what we have in mind for him.”
“Those were research projects. Perhaps he is a good — what’s the term? —
‘weaver of geniuses.’ What we want is more operational.”
“Well, he correctly picked up on all of the clues we gave him.” There had been

Alfred’s accent, and the network evidence they had planted about Keiko’s origin.
“Ach ja,” said Günberk, and a sudden smile crossed his face. “It’s a bit
humiliating that when I am simply myself, I’m accused of overacting! Yes, so
now Mr. Rabbit thinks we are South American drug lords.”
The shifting crystal mists that were Keiko’s image seemed to smile. “In a way,
that’s more plausible than what we really are.” The heirs of drug wars past had
been in eclipse this last decade; access to “ecstasy and enhancement” was so
widespread that competition had done what enforcement could never
accomplish. But the drug lords were still rich beyond the dreams of most small
countries. The ones lurking in failed states might be crazy enough to do what
they three had hinted at today.
Günberk said, “The rabbit is manageable, I grant that. Competent for our needs?
Much less likely.”
“Having second thoughts about our little project, Günberk?” This was Keiko’s
real voice. Her tone was light, but Alfred knew she had her own very serious
misgivings.
“Of course,” said Günberk. He fidgeted for a moment. “Look. Terror via
technical surprise is the greatest threat to the survival of the human race. The
Great Powers — ourselves, China, the U.S. — have been at peace for some
years, mostly because we recognize that danger and we keep the rest of the
world in line. And now we discover that the Americans — “
Keiko: “We don’t know it’s the Americans, Günberk. The San Diego labs
support researchers all over the world.”
“That is so. And a week ago I was as dubious as you. But now… consider: The
weapons test was a masterpiece of cloaking. We were incredibly lucky to notice
it. The test was a work of patience and professionalism, at the level of a Great
Power. Great Powers have their own inertia and bureaucratic caution. Field
testing must necessarily be done in the outside world, but they do not run their
weapons development in labs they do not own.”
Keiko made a sound like faraway chimes. “But why would a Great Power plot a
revolution in plague delivery? What profit is there in that?”

Günberk nodded. “Yes, such destruction would make sense for a cult, but not for
a superpower. At first, my conclusion was a nightmare without logic. But my
analysts have been over this again and again. They’ve concluded that the
‘honeyed-nougat symptom’ was not simply a stand-in for lethal disease. In fact,
it was an essential feature of the test. This enemy is aiming at something greater
than instant biowarfare strikes. This enemy is close to having an effective
YGBM technology.”
Keiko was completely silent; even her crystals lost their mobility. YGBM. That
was a bit of science-fiction jargon from the turn of the century: You-Gotta-
Believe-Me. That is, mind control. Weak, social forms of YGBM drove all
human history. For more than a hundred years, the goal of irresistible persuasion
had been a topic of academic study. For thirty years it had been a credible
technological goal. And for ten, some version of it had been feasible in well-
controlled laboratory settings.
The crystals shifted; Alfred could tell that Keiko was looking at him. “Can this
be true, Alfred?”
“Yes, I’m afraid so. My people have studied the report. Günberk’s luck was
extraordinary, since this was really a simultaneous test of two radical
innovations. The honeyed-nougat compulsion was far more precise than needed
for a test of remote disease triggering. The perpetrators knew what they were
coding for — consider the cloaking advertisement for nougats. My analysts think
the enemy may be capable of higher semantic control in as little as a year.”
Keiko sighed. “Damn. All my life, I’ve fought the cults. I thought the great
nations were beyond the most monstrous evils… but this, this would make me
wrong.”
Günberk nodded. “If we are right about these labs and if we fail to properly…
deal… with them, that could be the end of history. It could be the end of all the
striving for good against evil that has ever been.” He shook himself, abruptly
returning to the practical. “And yet we are reduced to working through this
damned rabbit person.”
Alfred said gently, “I’ve studied Rabbit’s track record, Günberk. I think he can
do what we need. One way or another. He’ll get us the inside information, or
he’ll create enough chaos — not attributable to us — that any evil will be clearly

visible. If the worst is true, we’ll have evidence that we and China and even the
nonculpable parties in the U.S.A. can use to stamp this out.” Suppression attacks
on the territory of a Great Power were rare, but there was precedent.
All three were silent for a moment, and the sounds of the festival afternoon
swept around Vaz. It had been so many years since his last visit to Barcelona…
Finally, Günberk gave a grudging nod. “I’ll recommend to my superiors that we
proceed.”
Across the table, Keiko’s prismatic imagery shimmered and chimed. Mitsuri’s
background was in sociology. Her analyst teams were heavily into psychology
and social institutions — much less diversified than the teams working for
Alfred, or Günberk. But maybe she would come up with some alternative that
the other two had missed. Finally she spoke: “There are many decent people in
the American intelligence community. I don’t like doing this behind their back.
And yet, this is an extraordinary situation. I have clearance to go ahead with Plan
Rabbit — ” she paused ” — with one proviso. Günberk fears that we’ve erred in
the direction of employing an incompetent. Alfred has studied Rabbit more, and
thinks he’s at just the right level of talent. But what if you are both wrong?”
Günberk started in surprise. “The devil!” he said. Alfred guessed that some very
quick silent messaging passed between the two.
The prisms seemed to nod. “Yes. What if Rabbit is significantly more competent
than we think? In that unlikely event, Rabbit might hijack the operation, or even
ally with our hypothetical enemy. If we proceed, we must develop abort-and-
destroy plans to match Rabbit’s progress. If he becomes the greater threat, we
must be prepared to talk to the Americans. Agreed?”
“Ja.”
“Of course.”
○
Keiko and Günberk stayed a few minutes more, but a real café table on C. de
Sardenya in the middle of the festival was not the proper place for virtual
tourists. The waiter kept circling back, inquiring if Alfred needed anything more.
They were paying table rent for three, but there were crowds of real people
waiting for the next available seating.

So his Japanese and European colleagues took their leave. Günberk had many
loose ends to deal with. The inquiries at CDD must be gracefully shut down.
Misinformation must be layered carefully about, concealing things both from the
enemy and from security hobbyists. Meantime, in Tokyo, Keiko might be up the
rest of the night, pondering Rabbit traps.
Vaz stayed behind, finishing his drink. It was amazing how fast his table space
shrank, accommodating a family of North African tourists. Alfred was used to
virtual artifacts changing in a blink of the eye, but a clever restaurateur could do
almost as well with physical reality when there was money involved.
In all Europe, Barcelona was the city Alfred loved the most. The Rabbit was
right about this city. But was there time to be a real tourist? Yes. Call it his
annual vacation. Alfred stood and bowed to the table, leaving payment and tip.
Out on the street, the crowds were getting rather extreme, the stilt people
dancing wildly about among the tourists. He couldn’t see the entrance of the
Sagrada Familia directly, but tourism info showed the next certain tour slot was
ninety minutes away.
Where to spend his time? Ah! Atop Montjuïc. He turned down an alley. Where
he emerged on the far side, the crowds were thin… and a tourist auto was just
arriving for him. Alfred sat back in the single passenger cockpit and let his mind
roam. The Montjuïc fortress was not the most impressive in Europe, and yet he
had not seen it in some time. Like its brethren, it marked the bygone time when
revolutions in destruction technology took decades to unfold, and mass murder
could not be committed with the press of a button.
The auto navigated its way out from the octagonal city blocks of the Barcelona
basin and ran quickly up a hillside, grabbing the latch of a funicular that dragged
them swiftly up the side of Montjuïc. No tedious switchback roadway for this
piece of automation. Behind him, the city stretched for miles. And then ahead, as
they came over the crest of the hill, there was the Mediterranean, all blue and
hazy and peaceful.
Alfred got out, and the tiny auto whipped around the traffic circle, heading for
the cable-car installation that would take its next customer in an overflight across
the harbor.
He was at just the spot he had ordered on the tourist menu, right where

twentieth-century guns faced out from the battlements. Even though these
cannon had never been used, they were very much the real thing. For a fee, he
could touch the guns and climb around inside the place. After sundown there
would be a staged battle.
Vaz strolled to the stone barrier and looked down. If he blocked out all the
tourism fantasy, he could see the freight harbor almost two hundred meters
below and a kilometer away. The place was an immensity of freight containers
rambling this way and that, chaos. If he invoked his government powers, he
could see the flow of cargo, even see the security certificates that proclaimed —
in ways that were validated by a combination of physical and cryptographic
security — that none of the ten-meter boxes contained a nuke or a plague or a
garden-variety radiation bomb. The system was very good, the same as you
would find for heavy freight anywhere in the civilized world. It had been the
result of decades of fear, of changing attitudes about privacy and liberty, of
technological progress. Modern security actually worked most of the time. There
hadn’t been a city lost in more than five years. Every year, the civilized world
grew and the reach of lawlessness and poverty shrank. Many people thought that
the world was becoming a safer place.
Keiko and Günberk — and certainly Alfred — knew that such optimism was
dead wrong.
Alfred looked across the harbor at the towers beyond. Those hadn’t been here
the last time he visited Barcelona. The civilized world was wealthy beyond the
dreams of his youth. Back in the 1980s and 1990s, the rulers of modern states
realized that success did not come from having the largest armies or the most
favorable tariffs or the most natural resources — or even the most advanced
industries. In the modern world, success came from having the largest possible
educated population and providing those hundreds of millions of creative people
with credible freedom.
But this Utopia was a Red Queen’s Race with extinction.
In the twentieth century, only a couple of nations had the power to destroy the
world. The human race survived, mostly by good luck. At the turn of the century,
a time was in view when dozens of countries could destroy civilization. But by
then, the Great Powers had a certain amount of good sense. No nation-state
could be nuts enough to blow up the world — and the few barbaric exceptions

were Dealt With, if necessary with methods that left land aglow in the dark. By
the teens, mass death technology was accessible to regional and racial hate
groups. Through a succession of happy miracles — some engineered by Alfred
himself — the legitimate grievances of disaffected peoples were truly addressed.
Nowadays, Grand Terror technology was so cheap that cults and small criminal
gangs could acquire it. That was where Keiko Mitsuri was the greatest expert.
Even though her work was hidden by cover stories and planted lies, Keiko had
saved millions of lives.
The Red Queen’s Race continued. In all innocence, the marvelous creativity of
humankind continued to generate unintended consequences. There were a dozen
research trends that could ultimately put world-killer weapons into the hands of
anyone having a bad hair day.
Alfred walked back to the nearest cannon, paying the touch fee with a wave of
his hand. He leaned against the warm metal, sighting out over the blue
mediterranean haze, and imagining a simpler time.
Poor Günberk. He had the truth exactly backwards. Effective YGBM would not
be the end of everything. In the right hands, YGBM technology was the one
thing that could solve the modern paradox, harnessing the creativity of
humankind without destroying the world in the process. In fact, it was
humankind’s only hope for surviving the twenty-first century. And in San Diego,
I am so close to success. He had insinuated his project into the bio labs three
years earlier. The great breakthrough had come less than a year ago. His test at
the soccer match had proven the delivery system. In another year or so, he’d
have developed higher semantic controls. With that, he could reliably control
those immediately around him. Much more important, he could spread the new
infection across whole populations and engineer a few universally viewed
transmissions. Then he would be in control. For the first time in history, the
world would be under adult supervision.
That had been the plan. Now incredibly bad luck had jeopardized it. But I should
look at the bright side; Günberk came to me to fix the problem! Alfred had spent
a lot of effort digging up “Mr. Rabbit.” The fellow was clearly inexperienced,
and every bit the egotistical fool that Günberk believed. Rabbit’s successes were
just barely impressive enough to make him acceptable. They could manage
Rabbit. I can manage Rabbit. From inside the labs, Alfred would feed the Rabbit

just the right misinformation. In the end neither Rabbit nor Alfred’s colleagues
in the Indo-European Alliance would realize they had been fooled. And
afterward, Alfred could continue undisturbed with what might well be the last,
best chance for saving the world.
Alfred climbed into the gun turret and admired the fittings. The Barcelona tourist
commission had spent some real money on rebuilding these artifacts. If their
mock battle this evening meshed with this physical reality, it would be very
impressive. He glanced at his Mumbai schedule — and decided to stay in
Barcelona a few more hours.

The Return
Robert Gu should be dead. He knew that, he truly did. He had been a long time
dying. He wasn’t really clear on how long. In this unending present, he could see
only blurs. But that didn’t matter, since Lena had turned the lights down so low
that there was nothing to see. And the sounds: for a while he had worn things in
his ears, but they were devilishly complicated and always getting lost or worn
out. Getting rid of them had been a blessing. What sounds remained were vague
mumblings, sometimes Lena complaining at him, pushing and poking.
Following him into the John, for God’s sake. All he really wanted was to go
home. Lena wouldn’t let him do that simple thing. If it really was Lena at all.
Whoever, she wasn’t very nice. I just want to go home….
○
And yet, he never did quite die. The lights were often brighter now, though
blurry as ever. There were people around and voices, the high-pitched tones he
remembered from home. They talked as if they expected to be understood.
Things had been better before, when everything was a mumbling blur. Now he
hurt all over. There were long drives to see the doctor, and afterward the pain
was always worse. There was some guy who claimed to be his son, and claimed
that wherever he was now was home. Sometimes they rolled him outside to feel
the bright sun on his face and listen to the birds. No way was this home. Robert
Gu remembered home. There had been snow on big mountains he could see
from his folks’ backyard. Bishop, California, U.S.A. That was the place, and this
wasn’t it.
But even though this wasn’t home, his little sister was here. Cara Gu had been
around before, when things were dark and mumbling, but she’d always been just
out of sight. This was different. At first he was just aware of her high, piping
voice, like the wind bells his mother kept on the porch at home. Finally, one day
he was out on the patio, feeling the sunlight brighter and warmer than it had
seemed in a long time. Even the blurs were sharp and colorful. There was Cara’s
high little voice asking him “Robert this” and “Robert that” and —
“Robert, would you like it if I showed you around the neighborhood?”

“What?” Robert’s tongue felt all sticky, his voice hoarse. It suddenly occurred to
him that with all the mumbling and darkness maybe he hadn’t spoken in some
time. And there was something else that that was even more strange. “Who are
you?”
There was silence for a moment, as if the question were foolish or had been
asked many times before. “Robert, I’m Miri. I’m your grand — “
He jerked his hand as much as it would move. “Come closer. I can’t see you.”
The blur moved directly in front of him, into the middle of the sunlight. This was
not some hint of presence behind his shoulder or in his memory. The blur
became a face just inches from his own: he could see the straight black hair, the
small round countenance smiling at him as if he were the greatest guy in the
world. It really was his little sister.
Robert reached forward, and her hand was warm in his. “Oh, Cara. It’s so good
to see you.” He wasn’t home, but maybe he was close. He was quiet for a
moment.
“I’m… I’m glad to see you, too, Robert. Would you like to go for a ride around
the neighborhood?”
“… Yes, that would be nice.”
Things happened fast then. Cara did something and his chair seemed to spin
around. It was dark and gloomy again. They were inside the house and she was
fussing like she always did, this time getting him a hat. She still teased though,
as in asking him if he needed to go to the bathroom. Robert sensed that the thug
who claimed to be his son was lurking just to one side, watching it all.
And then they were out — what, the front door? — and onto a street. Cara
stayed beside his wheelchair as they strolled and rolled down an empty street
lined with tall, thin trees… palm trees, that’s what they were. This wasn’t
Bishop. But this was Cara Gu — though on her very best behavior. Little Cara
was a good kid, but she could only be good for so long and then she would find
some devilish tease and have him chasing her all over the house, or vice versa.
Robert smiled to himself and wondered how long the angelic phase would last
this time. Maybe she thought he was sick. He tried unsuccessfully to turn in his
chair. Well, maybe he was sick.

“See, we live on Honor Court. Over there, that’s the Smithsons’ house. They
transferred here from Guam last month. Bob thinks they’re growing five —
oops, but I’m not supposed to talk about that. And the boyfriend of the base
commander lives in that house by the corner. I’m betting they’ll be married by
the end of the year… And there are some kids from school I don’t want to talk to
just now.” Robert’s wheelchair took an abrupt turn, and they were heading down
a side street.
“Hey!” Robert tried again to turn in his chair. Maybe those kids were friends of
his! Cara was teasing after all. He slumped down in the chair. There was the
smell of honey. Bushes seemed to hang low above them. The houses were gray
and greenish blurs. “Some tour!” he groused. “I can’t see a Dam Ned thing.”
The wheelchair abruptly slowed. “Really?” The little wretch was all but
chortling. “Don’t worry, Robert! There’s some devious twiddling that can fix
your eyes.”
Grump. “A pair of glasses would fix them, Cara.” Maybe she was hiding them
from him.
There was something about the brightness and the dry wind that swept these
streets — wherever this was. It made him wonder what he was doing tied down
to a wheelchair. They toured around a couple more blocks. Cara fussed endlessly
over him. “Are you too warm, Robert? Maybe you don’t need that blanket.”
“The sun is going to burn your head, Robert. Let me tilt your cap down a little
bit.” At one point there were no houses. It seemed that they were on the edge of
a long slope. Cara claimed they were looking off toward the mountains — but all
Robert could see was a hazy line of tan and faded ochre. They were nothing like
the mountains that shouldered into the sky above Bishop, California, U.S.A.
Then they were back indoors, in the house they had started from. Things were as
dark and gloomy as ever, the room lights swallowed up in darkness. Cara’s
bright voice was gone. She was off to study for her classes, she said. No classes
for Robert. The thug was feeding him. He still claimed to be Robert’s son. But
he was so big. Afterward there was another ignominious potty stop, more like a
police interrogation than a trip to the can. And then Robert was left mercifully
alone, in the darkness. These people didn’t even have television. There was just
the silence, and the dim and faraway electric lights.

I should be sleepy. He had a vague memory of nights fading off into nights
fading off into years, of drowsing sleep that came right after dinner. And then
later waking, walking through strange rooms and trying to find home. Arguing
with Lena. Tonight was… different. He was still awake. Tonight he was thinking
of things that had just happened. Maybe that was because he had made it
partway home. Cara. So he hadn’t found his folks’ house on Crombie Street and
the bedroom that looked out on the old pine tree and the little cabin he had built
in its branches. But Cara was part of all that, and she was here. He sat for a long
time, his thoughts slowly crunching forward. Across the room, a single lamp was
kind of a whirlpool in the darkness. Barely visible, the thug was sitting by the
wall. He was talking to someone, but Robert couldn’t see who.
Robert ignored the guy, and thought hard. After a while he remembered
something very scary. Cara Gu had died in 2006. They hadn’t said a word to
each other for years before that.
And when she died, Cara had been fifty-one years old.
○
West Fallbrook had been a handy place in the early years of the century. Busy
too. Right next to Camp Pendleton, it had been the base’s largest civilian
community. A new generation of marines had grown up here… and prosecuted a
new generation of war. Robert Gu, Jr., had seen the tail end of that frenzy,
arriving at a time when Chinese-American officers were welcomed back to
positions of trust. Those had been high and bittersweet days.
Now the town was bigger, but the marines weren’t nearly such a large part of it.
Military life had become a lot more complicated. Between little bits of war,
Lieutenant Colonel Gu found that West Fallbrook was a nice place to raise a
daughter.
“I still think it’s a mistake for Miri to call him ‘Robert.’” Alice Gu looked up
from her work. “We’ve been over this before, dear. It’s how we’ve brought her
up. We’re ‘Bob’ and ‘Alice,’ not ‘Ma’ and ‘Pa’ or whatever silliness is currently
approved. And Robert is ‘Robert,’ not ‘Grandpapa.’ ” Colonel Alice Gong Gu
was short and round-faced and — when she wasn’t deadly stressed — motherly.
She had graduated numero uno from Annapolis, back when being short and
round-faced and motherly were definite career minuses. She’d be a general

officer by now except that higher authority had discovered more productive and
dangerous work for her. That accounted for some of her kookie ideas. But not
this one; she had always insisted that Miri address her parents as if they were all
just pals.
“Hey, Alice, I’ve never minded that Miri calls us by our first names. There’ll
come a time when besides loving us, the Little General will also be our peer,
maybe our boss. But this is just confusing my old man — ” Bob jerked a thumb
at where Robert Senior sat, half slumped and staring. “Play back the way Dad
was acting this afternoon. See how he lit up. He thinks Miri is my aunt Cara,
when they were little kids!”
Alice didn’t answer right away. Where she was, it was midmorning. Sunlight
glittered off the harbor behind her. She was running support for the U.S.
delegation in Jakarta. Indonesia was joining the Indo-European Alliance. Japan
was already a member of that bizarrely named club. The joke was that the “Indo-
Europeans” would soon have the world surrounded. There was a time when
China and the U.S.A. would not have taken that as a joke. But the world had
changed. Both China and the U.S. were relieved by the development. It left them
with more time to worry about real problems.
Alice’s eyes flickered this way and that as she nodded at an introduction,
laughed at some witty comment. She walked a short distance with a couple of
self-important types, chattering all the while in Bahasa and Mandarin and
Goodenuf English, of which only the English was intelligible to Bob. Then she
was alone again. She leaned a little toward him, and gave him a big grin. “Well
that sounds like a good thing!” she said. “Your father has been beyond all
rational discourse for how many years? And now suddenly he’s engaged enough
to have a good time. You should be thrilled. From here, he’ll only get better.
You’ll have your father back!”
“… Yes.” Yesterday, he’d said goodbye to the last of the in-home caregivers.
Dad should improve very fast now. The only reason he was still in a wheelchair
was that the docs wanted to make sure his bone regeneration was complete
before they let him loose in the neighborhood.
She saw the expression on his face, and cocked her head to one side. “Are you
chicken?”

He glanced at his father. The Paraguay operation was just a few weeks away. A
covert op at the edge of the world. The prospect was coming to seem almost
attractive. “Maybe.”
“Then let our Little General do her thing and don’t worry.” She turned and
waved at someone beyond his vision. “Oops.” Her image flickered out and there
was only silent messaging —
Alice → Bob:
Gotta go. I’m already covering for Secretary Martinez, and local
custom does not approve of timesharing.
Bob sat for a moment in the quiet living room. Miri was upstairs, studying.
Outside, the late afternoon slid into evening. A peaceful time. Back when he was
a kid, this was when Dad would bring out the poetry books, and Dad and Mom
and little Bobby would have a readalong. Actually, Bob felt a happy nostalgia for
those evenings. He looked back at his father. “Dad?” No answer. Bob leaned
forward and tried to shout diffidently. “Dad? Is there enough light for you? I can
make it lots brighter.”
The old man shook his head distractedly. Maybe he even understood the
question, but he gave no other indication. He just sat there, slumped to the side.
His right hand rubbed again and again at the wrist of his left. And yet, this was a
big improvement. Robert Gu, Sr., had been down to eighty pounds, a barely
living vegetable, when UCSF Medical School took him on for their new
treatment. It turned out the UCSF Alzheimer’s cure worked where the years of
conventional treatment had failed.
Bob did a few errands on base, checked the plans for the upcoming Paraguay
operation… and then sat back and just watched his father for a few minutes.
I didn’t always hate you.
As a child, he had never hated his old man. Maybe that wasn’t surprising. A kid
has very little to compare to. Robert was strict and demanding, on that little
Bobby had been very clear. For even though Robert Senior had often and loudly
blamed himself for being such an easygoing parent, sometimes that seemed to
contradict what Bob saw at his friends’ homes. But it had never seemed
mistreatment to Bob.

Even when Mom left Dad, even that hadn’t turned Bob against the old man.
Lena Gu had taken years of subtle abuse and she couldn’t take any more, but
little Bobby had been oblivious of it all. It wasn’t till later, talking to Aunt Cara,
that he realized how much worse Robert treated others than he had ever treated
Bob.
For Lieutenant Colonel Robert Gu, Jr., this should be a joyous time. His father,
one of America’s most beloved poets, was returning from an extended campout
in the valley of the shadow of death. Bob took a long look at Robert’s still,
relaxed features. No, if this were cinema, it would be a Western and the title
would be The Return of the SOB.

A Minefield Made in Heaven
“My eyeballs are… fizzing!”
“This shouldn’t be painful. Do they actually hurt?”
“… No.” But the light was so bright that Robert saw fiery color even in the
shadows. “It’s all still a blur, but I haven’t seen this well in…” he didn’t know
how long; time itself had been a darkness “… in years.”
A woman spoke from right behind his shoulder. “You’ve been on the retinal
meds for about a week, Robert. Today we felt we had a working population of
cells present, so we decided to turn them on.”
Another woman’s voice: “And we can cure your blurred vision even more easily.
Reed?”
“Yes, Doctor.” This voice came from the man-shaped blur directly in front of
him. The figure leaned near. “Let me put this over your eyes, Robert. There’ll be
a little numbness.” Big gentle hands slipped glasses across Robert’s face. At
least this was familiar; he was getting new lenses fitted. But then his face went
numb and he couldn’t close his eyes.
“Just relax and look to the front.” Relaxing was one thing, but there was no
choice about looking to the front. And then… God, it was like watching a picture
come up on a really slow computer, the blurs sharpening into finer and finer
detail. Robert would have jerked back, but the numbness had spread to his neck
and shoulders.
“The cell map in the right retina looks good. Let’s do the left.” A few more
seconds passed, and there was a second miracle.
The man sitting in front of him eased the “glasses” off Robert’s head. There was
a smile on his middle-aged face. He wore a white cotton shirt. The pocket was
embroidered with blue stitching: “Physician’s Assistant Reed Weber.” I can see
every thread of it! He looked over the man’s shoulder. The walls of the clinic
were slightly out of focus. Maybe he’d have to wear glasses out-of-doors. The
thought set him laughing. And then he recognized the pictures on the walls. This
was not a clinic. Those wall hangings were the calligraphy that Lena had bought

for their house in Palo Alto. Where am I?
There was a fireplace; there were sliding glass doors that opened onto a lawn.
Not a book in sight; this was no place he had ever lived. The numbness in his
shoulders was almost gone. Robert looked around the room. The two female
voices — they weren’t attached to anything visible. But Reed Weber wasn’t the
only person in sight. A heavyset fellow stood on his left, arms akimbo, a broad
smile on his face. Robert’s look caught his, and the smile faltered. The man gave
him a nod and said, “Dad.”
“… Bob.” It wasn’t so much that memory suddenly returned as that he noticed a
fact that had been there all along. Bobby had grown up.
“I’ll talk to you later, Dad. For now I’ll let you wrap things up with Dr. Aquino
and her people.” He nodded at the thin air by Robert’s right shoulder — and left
the room.
The thin air said, “Actually, Robert, that’s about all we intended to do today. You
have a lot to do over the next few weeks, but it will be less chaotic if we take
things one step at a time. We’ll be keeping watch for any problems.”
Robert pretended to see something in the air. “Right. See you around.”
He heard friendly laughter. “Quite right! Reed can help you with that.”
Reed Weber nodded, and now Robert had the feeling that he and Weber were
truly alone in the room. The physician’s assistant packed away the glasses, and
various other pieces of loose equipment. Most were plain plastic boxes, prosaic
throwaways except for the miracles they had made. Weber noticed his look, and
smiled. “Just tools of the trade, the humdrum ones. It’s the meds and machines
that are floating around inside you that are really interesting.” He stowed the last
of the bricklike objects and looked up. “You’re a very lucky guy, do you know
that?”
I am in daylight now, where before it was night since forever. I wonder where
Lena is? Then he thought about the other’s question. “How do you mean?”
“You picked all the right diseases!” He laughed. “Modern medicine is kind of
like a minefield made in heaven. We can cure a lot of things: Alzheimer’s, even
though you almost missed the boat there. You and I both had Alzheimer’s; I had

the normal kind, cured at earliest onset. Lots of other things are just as fatal or
crippling as ever. We still can’t do much with strokes. Some cancers can’t be
cured. There are forms of osteoporosis that are as gruesome as ever. But all your
major infirmities are things we have slam-dunk fixes for. Your bones are as good
as a fifty-year-old’s now. Today we did your eyes. In a week or so we’ll start
reinforcing your peripheral nervous system.” Reed laughed. “You know, you’ve
even got the skin and fat biochemistry that responds to Venn-Kurasawa
treatments. It’s not one person in a thousand who steps on that heavenly
landmine; you’re even going to look a lot younger.”
“Next you’ll be having me playing video games.”
“Ah!” Weber reached into his equipment bag and pulled out a slip of paper. “We
can’t forget that.”
Robert took the paper and unfolded it all the way. It was really quite large,
almost the size of foolscap. This appeared to be letterhead stationery. At the top
was a logo, and in a fancy font the words “Crick’s Clinic, Geriatrics Division.”
The rest was some kind of outline, the main categories being: “Microsoft
Family,”
“Great Wall Linux,” and “Epiphany Lite.”
“Eventually you’ll want to use ‘Epiphany Lite,’ but in the meantime, just touch
the computer type you’re most familiar with.”
The items listed under “Microsoft Family” were the brand names of Microsoft
systems all the way back to the 1980s. Robert stared uncertainly.
“Robert? You — you do know about computers, right?”
“Yes.” The memory was there, now that he thought about it. He grinned. “But I
was always the last to get on board. I got my first PC in 2000.” And that was
because the rest of the English Department was brutalizing him for not reading
his email.
“Whew. Okay, you can imitate any of those old styles with that. Just lay it out
flat on the arm of your chair. Your son has this room set to play the audio, but
most places you’ll have to keep your fingers touching the page if you want to
hear output.” Robert leaned forward to get a close view of the paper. It didn’t

glow; it didn’t even have the glassy appearance of a computer display. It was just
plain, high-quality paper. Reed pointed at the outline items. “Now press the
menu option that corresponds to your favorite system.”
Robert shrugged. Over the years, the department had upgraded through a number
of systems, but — he pressed his finger to the line of text that said “WinME.”
There was no pause, none of the boot-up delays he recalled. But suddenly a
familiar and annoying musical jingle was in the air. It seemed to come from all
around, not from the piece of paper. Now the page was full of color and icons.
Robert was filled with nostalgia, remembering many frustrating hours spent in
front of glowing computer screens.
Reed grinned. “A good choice. WinME has been a simple rental for a long time.
If you picked Epiphany, we’d be whacking through their licensing jungle…
Okay, now the rest should be almost exactly what you know. Crick’s Clinic even
has some of the modern services filtered down so they look like browser sites.
This isn’t quite as good as what your son and I use, but you won’t have any more
trouble with ‘invisible voices’; you’ll see Rachel and Dr. Aquino on the page
here, if you want. Be cool, Robert.”
Robert listened to Weber’s mix of probably dated slang and tech talk, to the
joviality and the phrase structures that might suggest sarcasm. Once upon a time,
all that would have been enough for Robert to calibrate this fellow. Today, just
out of the murk of senility, he couldn’t be sure. So he probed a little. “I’m all
young again?”
Reed sat back, and gave an easy laugh. “Wish I could tell you that, Robert.
You’re seventy-five years old, and there are a lot more ways for the body to
break down than the MDs have even imagined. But I’ve been on your case for
six months. You’ve come back from the dead, man. You’ve almost got the
Alzheimer’s licked. It makes sense to try these other treatments on you now.
You’re going to have some surprises, mostly for the good. Just take it easy, roll
with the punches. For instance, I noticed that you recognized your son just now.”
“Y-Yes.”
“I was here just a week ago. You didn’t recognize him then.”
It was strange to poke into that dimness, but… “Yes. I knew I couldn’t have a
son. I wasn’t old enough. I just wanted to go home, I mean to my parents’ home

in Bishop. And even now, I was surprised to see that Bob is so old.”
Consequences were crashing down upon him. “So my parents are dead — “
Reed nodded. “I’m afraid so, Robert. There’s a whole lifetime that you’re going
to start remembering.”
“As a patchwork? Or oldest memories first? Or maybe I’ll get stuck at some
point — “
“The MDs can give you the best answers on that.” Reed hesitated. “Look,
Robert. You used to be a professor, right?”
I was a poet! But he didn’t think Reed would appreciate which was the more
valued rank. “Yes. Professor — well, Professor Emeritus — of English. At
Stanford.”
“Okay then. You were a smart guy. You have a lot to learn, but I’m betting you’ll
get those smarts back. Don’t panic if you can’t remember something. Don’t push
too hard, either. Practically every day the docs are going to restore some
additional capability. The theory is that this will be less disturbing for you.
Whether that’s right or wrong won’t matter if you keep cool. Remember you
have a whole loving family here.”
Lena. Robert lowered his head for a moment. Not a return to childhood, but a
kind of second chance. If he could come all the way back from the Alzheimer’s,
if, if… then he might have another twenty years left, time to make up for what
he had lost. So two goals: his poetry, and… “Lena.”
Reed leaned closer. “What did you say, sir?”
Robert looked up. “My wife. I mean my ex-wife.” He tried to remember more. “I
bet I’ll never remember what happened after I lost my marbles.”
“Like I say, don’t worry about it.”
“I remember being married to Lena and raising Bobby. We split up years ago.
But then… I also remember her being with me when the Alzheimer’s really
started to shut me down. And now she’s gone again. Where is she, Reed?”
Reed frowned, then leaned forward and zipped up his equipment case. “I’m

sorry, Robert. She passed away two years ago.” He stood and gave Robert a
gentle pat on the shoulder. “You know, I think we’ve made really good progress
today. Now I’ve got to run.”
○
In his former life, Robert Gu had paid even less attention to technology than he
had to current events. Human nature doesn’t change, and as a poet his job was to
distill and display that unchanging essence. Now… well, I’m back from the
dead! That was something new under the sun, a bit of technology somewhat too
large to ignore. It was a new chance at life, a chance to continue his career. And
where he should continue his art was obvious: with Secrets of the Ages. He had
spent five years on the cantos of that sequence, poems such as “Secrets of the
Child,”
“Secrets of the Young Lovers,”
“Secrets of the Old.” But his “Secrets of the Dying” had been an arrant fake,
written before he really started to die — no matter that people seemed to think it
was the most profound canto of the sequence. But now… yes, something new:
“Secrets of the One Who Came Back.” The ideas were coming and surely verse
would follow.
Every day there were new changes in himself, and old barriers suddenly
removed. He could easily accept Reed Weber’s advice to be patient with his
limitations. So much was changing and all for the better. One day he was
walking again, even if it was a lurching, unstable gait. He fell three times that
first day, and each time, he just bounced back to his feet. “Unless you fall on
your head, Professor, you’ll be fine,” Reed said. But his walking got steadily
better. And now that he could see — really see — he could do things with his
hands. No more pawing around in the dark. He had never realized how important
sight was to coordination. There are uncountable ways that things can lie and
tangle and hide in three dimensions; without vision you’re condemned to
compromise and failure. But not me. Not now. And two days after that…
… he was playing Ping-Pong with his granddaughter. He remembered the table.
It was the one that he’d bought for little Bobby thirty years ago. He even
remembered Bob taking it off his hands when he finally gave up his home in
Palo Alto.

Today Miri was pulling her punches, lobbing the ball high and slow across the
table. Robert moved back and forth. Seeing the ball was no problem, but he had
to be very careful or he’d swing too high. Careful, careful went the game —
until Miri had him down fifteen to eleven. And then he won five points, each
stroke a kind of spastic twitch that somehow smashed the white plastic into the
far edge of the table.
“Robert! You were just fooling me!” Poor, pudgy Miri raced from one corner of
the table to the other, trying to keep up with him. Robert’s slams had no spin, but
she wasn’t an expert player. Seventeen to fifteen, eighteen, nineteen. Then his
powerful swings got out of tune, and he was back to being a staggering spastic.
But now his granddaughter showed no mercy. She racked up six straight points
— and won the game.
And then she ran around the table to hug him. “You are great! But you’ll never
fool me again!” It didn’t do any good to tell her what Aquino had said, that the
reconstruction of his nervous system would cause randomly spiky performance.
He might end up with the reflexes of an athlete; more likely the endpoint would
be something like average coordination.
○
It was funny, how he paid attention to the day of the week. That had stopped
mattering even before he lost his marbles. But now, on the weekends, his
granddaughter was around all day.
“What was Great-Aunt Cara like?” she asked him one Saturday morning.
“She was a lot like you, Miri.”
The girl’s smile was sudden and wide and proud. Robert had guessed that this
was what she wanted to hear. But it’s true, except that Cara was never
overweight. Miri was like Cara, right in those last years of preadolescence when
her hero worship for her older brother had been replaced by other concerns. If
anything, Miri’s personality was an exaggeration of Cara’s. Miri was very bright
— probably smarter than her great-aunt. And Miri was already into the extreme
independence and moral certainty of the other. I remember that persistent
arrogance, thought Robert. That had been an enormous irritation; breaking her
of it had been what drove them apart.

Sometimes Miri had her little friends over. The boys and girls mixed pretty
indescriminately at this age and in this era. For a few brief years they were
almost matched for muscle. Miri loved to play doubles at Ping-Pong.
He had to smile at the way she bossed her friends around. She had them
organized into a tournament. And though she was scrupulously honest, she
played to win. When her side got behind, her jaw set in angry determination, and
there was steel in her eyes. Afterward she was quick to acknowledge her own
failures, and just as quick to critique her playmates.
Even when her friends were gone physically, they were often still around,
invisible presences like Robert’s doctors. Miri walked around the backyard
talking and arguing with nobody — a parody of all the cellphone discourtesy that
Robert remembered from his later years at Stanford.
Then there were Miri’s grand silences. Those didn’t match anything in his
recollection of Cara. Miri would push gently back and forth on the swing that
hung from the only good-sized tree in the backyard. She would do that for hours,
speaking only occasionally — and then to the empty air. Her eyes seemed to be
focused miles away. And when he asked her what she was doing, she would start
and laugh and say that she was “studying.” It looked much more like some kind
of pernicious hypnosis to Robert Gu.
Weekdays, Miri was off at school; a limo pulled up for her every morning,
always at the moment that the girl was ready to go. Bob was gone nowadays, “to
be back in a week or so.” Alice was home part of each day, but she was in a
distinctly short-tempered mood. Sometimes he would see her at lunch; more
often, his daughter-in-law was at Camp Pendleton until midafternoon. She was
especially irritable when she came back from the base.
Except for Reed Weber’s therapy sessions, Robert was left much to his own
devices. He wandered around the house, found some of his old books in
cardboard boxes in the basement. Those were almost the only books in the
house. This family was effectively illiterate. Sure, Miri bragged that many books
were visible any time you wanted to see them, but that was a half truth. The
browser paper that Reed had given him could be used to find books online, but
reading them on that single piece of foolscap was a tedious desecration.
It was remarkable foolscap, though. It really did support teleconferencing; Dr.

Aquino and the remote therapists were not just invisible voices anymore. And
the web browser was much like the ones he remembered, even though many
sites couldn’t be displayed properly. Google still worked. He searched for Lena
Llewelyn Gu. Of course, there was plenty of information about her. Lena had
been a medical doctor and rather well known in a limited, humdrum way. And
yes, she had died a couple of years ago. The details were a cloud of
contradiction, some agreeing with what Bob told him, some not. It was this
damn Friends of Privacy. It was hard to imagine such villains, doing their best to
undermine what you could find on the net. A “vandal charity” was what they
called themselves.
And that eventually got him into the News of the Day. The world was as much a
mess as ever. This month, it was a police action in Paraguay. The details didn’t
make sense. What were “moonshine fabs” and why would the U.S. want to help
local cops close them down? The big picture was more familiar. The invading
forces were looking for Weapons of Mass Destruction. Today they had found
nuclear weapons hidden beneath an orphanage. The pictures showed slums and
poor people, ragged children playing inscrutable games that somehow seemed to
deny the squalor all around. There was an occasional, almost lonely-looking,
soldier.
I’ll bet this is where Bob is, he thought. Not for the first time — or the
thousandth — he wondered how his son could have chosen such an ugly, dead-
end career.
○
Evenings they had something like a family meal, Alice and Robert and Miri.
Alice seemed happy to do the cooking, though tonight she looked like she hadn’t
slept for a couple of days.
Robert hung around the kitchen, watching mother and daughter slide trays from
the fridge. “TV dinners, that’s what we used to call this sort of thing,” he said. In
fact, this stuff had the appearance and texture of delicious food. It all tasted like
mush to him, but Reed said that was because his taste buds were ninety-five
percent dead.
Miri hesitated the way she often did when Robert tossed out some idea she
hadn’t heard before. But as usual, her response was full of confidence. “Oh,

these are much better than TV junk food. We can mix and match the parts.” She
pointed at the unmarked containers sizzling in — well, it looked like a
microwave. “See, I got the ice-cream dessert and Alice got… angel-hair
blueberries. Wow, Alice!”
Alice gave her a brief smile. “I’ll share. Okay, let’s get this into the dining
room.”
It took all three of them to carry everything, but no second trip was needed. They
set the food on the long dining table. The tablecloth was an intricate damask that
seemed to be different every night. The table itself was familiar, another hand-
me-down. Lena’s presence was still everywhere.
Robert sat down beside Miri. “You know,” he said, more to probe reactions than
anything else. “This all seems a bit primitive to me. Where are the robot servants
— or even the little automatic hands to put the TV dinners in the ‘wave and take
them out?”
His daughter-in-law gave an irritated shrug. “Where it makes sense, we have
robots.”
Robert remembered Alice Gong when she had married Bob. Back then, Alice
had been an impenetrable diplomat — so smooth that most people never realized
her skill. In those days, he had still had his edge both with verse and with people;
he took such a personality as a challenge. And yet, his former self had never
been able to find a chink in her armor. The new Alice only imitated the
composure of the old, and with varying success. Tonight was not one of her
better nights.
Robert remembered the news about Paraguay and took a stab in the dark.
“Worried about Bob?”
She gave him an odd smile. “No. Bob is fine.”
Miri glanced at her mother and then chirped, “Actually, if you want mechs, you
should see my doll collection.”
Mechs? Dolls? It was hard to dominate people when you didn’t know what they
were talking about. He backed up: “I mean, there are all the things that future
freaks have been predicting for a hundred years and that never happened. Things

such as air cars.”
Miri looked up from her steaming food. At one corner of the tray there really
was a bowl of ice cream. “We have air taxis. Does that count?”
“That gets partial credit.” Then he surprised himself: “When can I see one?” The
Robert of old would have dimissed mechanical contrivances as beneath any
mature interest.
“Any time! How about after dinner?” This last question was directed at Alice as
much as Robert.
That brought a more natural smile to Alice’s face. “Maybe this weekend.”
They ate in silence for a moment. I wish I could taste this stuff.
Then Alice was onto the topic she must have been saving up: “You know,
Robert, I’ve been looking at the medics’ reports on you. You’re almost up to
speed now. Have you considered resuming your career?”
“Why, of course. I’m thinking about it all the time. I’ve got new writing ideas —
” He gestured expansively, and was surprised by the fear that suddenly rose in
him. “Hey, don’t worry, Alice. I’ve got my writing. I’ve got job offers from
schools all around the country. I’ll be out of your way as soon as I get my feet
solidly on the ground.”
Miri said, “Oh no, Robert! You can stay with us. We like having you here.”
“But at this point don’t you think you should be actively reaching out?” said
Alice.
Robert looked back mildly. “How is that?”
“Well, you know that Reed Weber’s last session with you is next Tuesday. I’ll
bet there are still new skills you’d like to master. Have you considered taking
classes? Fairmont High has a number of special — “
Colonel Alice was doing pretty well, but she was handicapped by the thirteen-
year-old at Robert’s side. Miri piped up with “Yecco. That’s our vocational track.
A few old people and lots of teenage dumbheads. It’s dull, dull, dull.”

“Miri, there are basic skills — “
“Reed Weber has done a lot of that. And I can teach Robert to wear.” She patted
his arm. “Don’t worry, Robert. Once you learn to wear, you can learn anything.
Right now, you’re in a trap; it’s like you’re seeing the world through a little hole,
just whatever your naked eye sees — and what you can get from that” She
pointed at the magic foolscap that was tucked into his shirt pocket. “With some
practice you should be able to see and hear as good as anyone.”
Alice shook her head. “Miri. There are lots of people who don’t use contacts and
wearables.”
“Yes, but they’re not my grandfather.” And there was that defiant little thrust of
her jaw. “Robert, you should be wearing. You look silly walking around with
that view-page clutched in your hand.”
Alice seemed about to object more forcefully. Then she settled back, watching
Miri with a neutral gaze that Robert couldn’t fathom.
Miri didn’t seem to notice the look. She leaned her head forward, and stuck a
finger close to her right eye. “You already know about contacts, right? Wanna
see one?” Her hand came away from her eye. A tiny disk sat on the tip of her
middle finger. It was the size and shape of the contact lenses he had known. He
hadn’t expected anything more, but… he bent close and looked. After a moment,
he realized that it was not quite a clear lens. Speckles of colored brightness
swirled and gathered in it. “I’m driving it at safety max, or you wouldn’t see the
lights.” The tiny lens became hazy, then frosty white. “Uk. It powered down. But
you get the idea.” She popped it back into her eye, and grinned at him. Now her
right eye was fogged with an enormous cataract.
“You should get a fresh one, dear,” said Alice.
“Oh no,” said Miri. “Once it warms up, it’ll be good for the rest of the day.” And
in fact the “cataract” was fading, Miri’s dark brown iris showing through. “So
what do you think, Robert?”
That it’s a rather gross substitute for what I can do simply by reading my view-
page. “That’s all there is to it?”
“um, no. I mean, we can fix you up with one of Bob’s shirts and a box of

contacts right away. It’s learning to use them that’s the trick.”
Colonel Alice said, “Without some control it’s like old-time television, but much
more intrusive. We wouldn’t want you to be hijacked, Robert. How about this:
I’ll get you some trainer clothes and that box of contacts that Miri mentioned.
Meantime, give some thought to attending Fairmont High, okay?”
Miri leaned forward and grinned at her mother. “Betcha he’s wearing inside of a
week. He won’t need those loser classes.” Robert smiled benignly over Miri’s
head.
○
In fact, there had been job offers. His return had percolated onto the web, and
twelve schools had written him. But five were simply speaking invitations.
Three were for semester artist-in-residence gigs. And the others weren’t from
first-rank schools. It was not exactly the welcome Robert expected for one of
“the century’s literary giants” (quoting the critics here).
They’re afraid I’m still a vegetable.
So Robert kept the offers on ice and worked on his writing. He would show the
doubters he was as sharp as ever — and in the doing, he would overleap them, to
the sort of recognition he deserved.
But progress was slow on the poetry front. Progress was slow on a lot of fronts.
His face actually looked young now. Reed said such complete cosmetic success
was rare, that Robert was a perfect target for the “Venn-Kurasawa” process.
Wonderful. But his coordination remained spastic and his joints ached all the
time. Most ignominious, he still had to hike down to the John several times each
night to take a leak. That was surely the Fates reminding him he was still an old
man.
Yesterday had been Weber’s last visit. The guy had a menial mind, but it was
exactly matched to the menial aid he provided. I’ll miss him, I suppose. Not least
because now there was another empty hour in every day.
And progress was especially slow on the poetry front.
For Robert, dreams had never been an important source of inspiration (though he

had claimed otherwise in several well-known interviews). But wide-awake
attempts at creativity were the last resort of pedestrian minds. For Robert Gu,
real creativity most often came after a good night’s sleep, just as he roused
himself to wakefulness. That moment was such a reliable source of inspiration
that when he was having problems with writing he would often go the pedestrian
route in the evening, stock up his mind with the intransigencies of the moment…
and then the next morning, drowsing, review what he knew. There in the labile
freshness of new consciousness, answers would drift into view. In his years at
Stanford, he’d run the phenomenon past philosophers, religionists, and the hard-
science people. They’d had a hundred explanations, from Freudian psychology
to quantum physics. The explanation didn’t matter; “sleeping on it” worked for
him.
And now, coming out of years of dementia, he still had that morning edge. But
his control of the process was as erratic as ever. Some mornings, his mind was
awash with ideas for “Secrets of the One Who Came Back” and his revision of
“Secrets of the Dying.” Yet none of these morning brainstorms contained
poetical detail. He had the ideas. He had concepts down to the level of verse
blocks. But he didn’t have the words and phrases that made ideas into beauty.
Maybe that was okay. For now. After all, making the words sing was the highest,
purest talent. Didn’t it make sense that such would be his very last talent to
return?
In the meantime, many of his mornings were wasted on garbage insights. His
subconscious had turned traitor, fascinated by how things worked, by technology
and math. During the day, when he was surfing his view-page, he was constantly
diverted by topics unrelated to any artistic concern. He had spent one whole
afternoon on a “child’s introduction” to finite geometry, for God’s sake… and
the big insight he wakened with the next morning had been a proof of one of the
harder exercises.
Robert’s day time was a grinding bore, an endless search for the right words, all
the while trying to ignore the lure of his view-page. His evenings were spent
putting off Miri and her attempts to stick foreign objects onto his eyeballs.
Finally, morning insight came to his rescue. Rising toward wakefulness, thinking
dispassionately about his failure, he noticed the green junipers beyond his
window, the yard painted in soft pastels. There was a world outside. There were
a million different viewpoints there. What had he done in the past when progress

hit roadblocks? You take a break. Do something different; almost anything.
Going back to “high school” would get him out of this, get Miri out of his hair. It
would certainly expose him to different, even if narrow, viewpoints.
Alice would be so pleased.

An Excellent Affiliance
Juan Orozco liked to walk to school with the Radner twins. Fred and Jerry were
a Bad Influence, but they were the best gamers Juan knew in person. “We got a
special scam for today, Juan,” said Fred.
“Yeah,” said Jerry, smiling the way he did when something really fun or
embarrassing was on the way.
The three followed the usual path along the flood control channel. The concrete
trough was dry and bone white, winding its way through the canyon behind the
Mesitas subdivision. The hills above them were covered with iceplant and
manzanita; ahead, there was a patch of scrub oaks. What do you expect of San
Diego North County in early October?
At least in the real world.
The canyon was not a deadzone. Not at all. County Flood Control kept the whole
area improved, and the public layer was just as fine as on city streets. As they
walked along, Juan gave a shrug and a twitch just so. That was enough cue for
his Epiphany wearable. Its overlay imagery shifted into Hacek’s Dangerous
Knowledge world: The manzanita morphed into scaly tentacles. Now the houses
that edged the canyon were large and heavily timbered, with pennants flying.
High ahead was a castle, the home of Grand Duke Hwa Feen — in reality, the
local kid who did the most to maintain this belief circle. Juan tricked out the
twins in the leather armor of Knights Guardian.
“Hey, Jer, look.” Juan radiated, and waited for the twins to slide into consensus
with his view. He had been practicing a week to get these visuals in place.
Fred looked up, accepting the imagery that Juan had conjured. “That’s old stuff,
Juanito.” He glanced at the castle on the hill. “Besides, Howie Fein is a dwit.”
“Oh.” Juan released the vision in an untidy cascade. The real world took back its
own, first the landscape, then the sky, then the creatures and costumes. “But you
liked it last week.” Back when, Juan now remembered, Fred and Jerry had been
maneuvering to oust the Grand Duke.
The twins looked at each other. Juan could tell they were silent messaging. “We

told you today would be different. We’re onto something special.” They were
partway through the scrub oaks now. Coming out the far side, you could see
ocean haze; on a clear day — or if you used Clear Vision — you could see all
the way to the ocean. On the south were more subdivisions, and a patch of green
that was Fairmont High School. On the north was the most interesting place in
Juan Orozco’s neighborhood:
Pyramid Hill Amusement Park dominated the little valley that surrounded it. The
underlying rock was more a pointy hill than a pyramid, but the park’s
management thought “pyramid” was the sexier adjective. Once upon a time it
had been an avocado orchard, dark green trees clothing the hillsides. You could
see it that way if you used the park’s logo view. To the naked eye, there were still
lots of trees. But there were also lawns, and real mansions, and the launch tower.
Among other things. Pyramid Hill claimed to have the longest freefall ride in
California.
The twins were grinning at him. Jerry waved at the hill. “How would you like to
play Cretaceous Returns, but with real feeling?”
Pyramid Hill managers knew exactly what to charge for different levels of
touchy-feely experience. The low end was pretty cheap; “real feeling” was at the
top. “Ah, that’s too expensive.”
“Sure it is. If you pay.”
“And, um, don’t you have a project to set up before class?” The twins had shop
class first thing in the morning. “That’s still in Vancouver,” said Jerry.
“But don’t worry about us.” Fred looked upward, somehow prayerful and smug
at the same time. “‘UP/Express will provide, and just in time.’”
“Well, okay. Just so we don’t get into trouble.” Getting into trouble was the
major downside of hanging with the Radners. A couple of weeks earlier, the
twins had shown him how to avoid a product safety recall on his new wikiBay
bicycle. That had left him with a great martial-arts weapon — and a bike that
was almost impossible to unfold. Ma had not been pleased. “Hey, don’t worry,
Juan.” The three left the edge of the flood channel and followed a narrow trail
along the east edge of Pyramid Hill. This was far from any entrance, but the
twins’ uncle worked for County Flood Control and they had access to CFC
utilities support imagery — which just now they shared with Juan. The dirt

beneath their feet became faintly translu-cent. Fifteen feet down, Juan could see
graphics representing a ten-inch runoff tunnel. Here and there were pointers to
local maintenance records. Jerry and Fred had used such omniscience before and
not been caught. Today they were blending it with a map of the local network
nodes. The overlay view was faint violet against the sunlit day, showing
communication blind spots and active high-rate links.
The two stopped at the edge of a clearing. Fred looked at Jerry. “Tsk. Flood
Control should be ashamed. There’s not a localizer node within thirty feet.”
“Yeah, Jer. Almost anything could happen here.” Without a complete localizer
mesh, nodes could not know precisely where they and their neighbors were.
High-rate laser comm could not be established, and low-rate sensor output was
smeared across the landscape. The outside world knew only mushy vagueness
about this area.
They walked into the clearing. They were deep in a network blind spot, but from
here they had a naked-eye view up the hillside, to ground that must surely be
within Pyramid Hill. If they continued that way, the Hill would start charging
them.
But the twins were not looking at the Hill. Jerry walked to a small tree and
squinted up. “In fact, this is an interesting spot. They tried to patch the coverage
with an airball.” He pointed into the branches and pinged. The utility view
showed only a faint return, an error message. “It’s almost purely net guano at
this point.”
Juan shrugged. “The gap will be fixed by tonight.” Around twilight, when
aerobots flitted around the canyons, swapping out nodes here and there.
“Well, why don’t we help the county by patching things right now?” Jerry held
up a thumb-sized greenish object. He handed it to Juan.
Three antenna fins sprouted from the thing’s top. It was a typical ad hoc node.
The dead ones were more trouble than bird poop. “You’ve perv’d this thing?”
The node had Breaklns-R-Us written all over it, but perverting networks was
harder in real life than in games. “Where did you get the access codes?”
“Uncle Don gets careless.” Jerry pointed at the device. “All the permissions are
loaded. Unfortunately, the bottleneck node is still alive.” He pointed upward,

into the sapling’s branches. “You’re small enough to climb this, Juan. Just go up
and knock down the node.”
“Hmm.”
“Hey, don’t worry. Homeland Security won’t notice.”
In fact, the Department of Homeland Security would almost certainly notice, at
least after the localizer mesh was patched. But just as certainly they wouldn’t
care. DHS logic was deeply embedded in all hardware. “See All, Know All” was
their motto, but what they knew and saw was for their own mission. They were
notorious about not sharing with law enforcement. Juan stepped out of the blind
spot and took a look at the Sheriff’s Department view. The area around Pyramid
Hill had its share of arrests, mostly for enhancement drugs… but there had been
nothing hereabouts for several weeks.
“Okay.” Juan came back to the tree and scrambled up about ten feet, to where the
branches spread out. The old node was hanging from rotted Velcro. He knocked
it free and the twins caused it to have an accident with a rock. Juan shinnied
down from the tree. They watched the diagnostics for a moment. Violet mists
sharpened into bright spots as the nodes figured out where they and their perved
sibling were, and coordinated up toward full function. Now point-to-point, laser
routing was available; they could see the property labels all along the boundary
of Pyramid hill.
“Ha,” said Fred. The twins started uphill toward the property line. “C’mon, Juan.
We’re marked as county employees. We’ll be fine if we don’t stay too long.”
○
Pyramid Hill had all the latest touchy-feely gear. These were not just phantoms
painted by your contact lenses on the back of your eyeballs. On Pyramid Hill
there were games where you could ride a Scoochi salsipued or steal the eggs of
raptors — or games with warm furry creatures that danced playfully around,
begging to be picked up and cuddled. If you turned off all the game views, you
could see other players wandering through the woods in their own worlds.
Somehow the Hill kept them from crashing into each other.
In Cretaceous Returns, the sound of the freefall launcher was disguised as
thunder. The trees were imaged as towering ginkgoes, with lots of places you

couldn’t see through. Juan played the pure visual Cret Ret a lot these days, in
person with the twins, and all over the world with others. It had not been an
uplifting experience. He had been “killed and eaten” three times so far this week.
It was a tough game, one where you had to contribute or maybe you got killed
and eaten every time. So Juan had joined the Fantasists Guild — well, as a junior
wannabe member. Maybe that would make him clueful. He had already designed
a species for Cret Ret. His saurians were quick, small things that didn’t attract
the fiercest of the critics. The twins had not been impressed, though they had no
alternatives of their own.
As he walked through the ginkgo forest, he kept his eye out for critters with jaws
lurking in the lower branches. That’s what had gotten him on Monday. On
Tuesday it had been some kind of paleo disease.
So far things seemed safe enough, but there was no sign of his own contribution.
They had been fast breeding and scalable, so where were the little monsters?
Sigh. Sometime he should check out other game sites. They might be big in
Kazakhstan. Here, today… nada.
Juan stumped across the Hill, a little discouraged, but still uneaten. The twins
had taken the form of game-standard velociraptors. They were having a grand
time. Their chicken-sized prey were Pyramid Hill game bots.
The Jerry-raptor looked over its shoulder at Juan. “Where’s your critter?”
Juan had not assumed any animal form. “I’m a time traveler,” he said. That was
a valid type, introduced with the initial game release.
Fred flashed a face full of teeth. “I mean where are the critters you invented last
week?”
“I don’t know.”
“Most likely they got eaten by the critics,” said Jerry. The brothers did a joint
reptilian chortle. “Give up on making creator points, Juan. Kick back and use the
good stuff.” He illustrated with a soccer kick that connected with something that
scuttled across their path. That got lots of classic points and a few thrilling
moments of quality carnage. Fred joined in and red splattered everywhere.
There was something familiar about this prey. It was young and clever-

looking… a newborn from Juan’s own design! And that meant its mommy
would be nearby. Juan said, “You know, I don’t think — “
“The Problem Is, None Of You Think Nearly Enough.” The sound was premium
external, like sticking your head inside an old-time boom box. Too late, they saw
that the tree trunks behind them grew from yard-long claws. Mommy. Drool fell
in ten-inch blobs from high above.
This was Juan’s design scaled up to the max.
“Sh — ” said Fred. It was his last hiss as a velociraptor. The head and teeth
behind the slobber descended from the ginkgo canopy and swallowed Fred down
to the tips of his hind talons. The monster crunched and munched for a moment.
The clearing was filled with the sound of splintering bones.
“Ahh!” The monster opened its mouth and vomited horror. It was so good —
Juan flicker-viewed on reality: Fred was standing in the steaming remains of his
raptor. His shirt was pulled out of his pants, and he was drenched in slime —
real, smelly slime. The kind you paid money for.
The monster itself was one of the Hill’s largest mechanicals, tricked out as a
member of Juan’s new species.
The three of them looked up into its jaws.
“Was that touchy-feely enough for you?” the creature said, its breath a hot
breeze of rotting meat. For sure it was. Fred stepped backwards and almost
slipped on the goo.
“The late Fred Radner just lost a cartload of points” — the monster waved its
truck-sized snout at them — “and I’m still hungry. I suggest you move off the
Hill with all dispatch.”
They backed away, their gaze still caught on the monster’s teeth. The twins
turned and ran. As usual, Juan was an instant behind them. Something like a big
hand grabbed him. “You, I have further business with.” The words were a burred
roar through clenched fangs. “Sit down. Let’s chat.”
¡Caray! I have the worst luck. Then he remembered that it had been Juan Orozco
who had climbed a tree to perv the Hill entrance logic. Stupid Juan Orozco

didn’t need bad luck; he was already the perfect chump. And now the twins were
gone.
But when the “jaws” set him down and he turned around, the monster was still
there — not some Pyramid Hill rent-a-cop. Maybe this really was a Cret Ret
player! He edged sideways, trying to get out from under the pendulous gaze.
This was just a game. He could walk away from this four-story saurian. Of
course, that would trash his credit with Cretaceous Returns, maybe drench him
in smelly goo. And if Big Lizard took its play seriously, it might cause him
trouble in other games. Okay. He sat down with his back to the nearest ginkgo.
So he would be late another day; that couldn’t make his school situation any
worse.
The saurian settled back and slid the steaming corpse of Fred Radner’s raptor to
one side. It brought its head close to the ground, to look at Juan straight on. The
eyes and head and color were exactly Juan’s original design, and this player had
the moves to make it truly impressive. He could see from its battle scars that it
had fought in several Cretaceous hot spots. Juan forced a cheerful smile. “So,
you like my design?”
It flashed yard-long fangs. “I’ve been worse.” The creature shifted game
parameters, bringing up critic-layer details. This was a heavy player, maybe even
a game cracker! On the ground between them was a dead and dissected example
of Juan’s creation. Big Lizard nudged it with a foreclaw. “But the skin texture is
from a Fantasists Guild example library. The color scheme is a cliche. The plaid
kilt would be cute if it weren’t in all the Epiphany Now ads.”
Juan drew his knees in toward his chin. This was the same crap he had to put up
with at school. “I borrow from the best.”
The saurian’s chuckle was a buzzing roar that made Juan’s skull vibrate. “That
might work with your teachers. They have to eat whatever garbage you feed
them — at least till you graduate and can be dumped on the street. This design is
so-so. There have been some adoptions, mainly because it has good mechanics.
But if we’re talking real quality, it just don’t measure up.” The creature flexed its
custom battle scars.
“I do other things.”
“Yes, and if you never deliver, you’ll fail with them, too.”

That was a point that occupied a lot of Juan Orozco’s internal worry time. More
and more it looked like he was going to end up like his pa — only Juan might
never even get a job to be laid off from! “Try your best” was the motto of
Fairmont High. But trying your best was only the beginning. Even if you tried
your best, you could still be left behind.
These were not things he’d confess to another gamer. He glared back at the
slitted yellow eyes, and suddenly it occurred to him that — unlike teachers —
this guy was not being paid to be nice. And it was wasting too much time for this
to be some humiliating con. It actually wants something from met Juan
sharpened his glare. “And you have some suggestions, O Mighty Virtual
Lizard?”
“That… could be. Besides Cret Ret, I have other things going. How would you
like to take an affiliate status on a little project?”
Except for local games, no one had ever asked Juan to affiliate on anything. His
mouth twisted in bogus contempt. “Affiliate? A percent of a percent of… what?
How far down the value chain are you?”
The saurian shrugged and there was the sound of ginkgoes creaking against its
shoulders. “My guess is I’m way, way down. That’s how it is with most
affiliances. But I can pay real money for each answer I pipe upwards.” The
creature named a number; it was enough to ride the freefall every day for a year.
A payoff certificate floated in the air between them, showing the named amount
and a bonus schedule.
Juan had played his share of finance games. “I get twice that or no deal.” Then
he noticed the subrights section. The numbers were not visible. That could be
because anyone he recruited would get a lot more.
“Done!” said the Lizard, before Juan could correct his bid upward.
And Juan was sure it was smiling!
“… Okay, what do you want?” And what makes you think a dwit like me can
supply it?
“You’re at Fairmont High, aren’t you?”

“You already know that.”
“It’s a strange place, isn’t it?” When Juan did not reply, the critter said. “Trust
me, it is strange. Most schools, even charter schools, don’t schedule Adult
Education students in with the children.”
“Yeah, the vocational track. The old farts don’t like it. We don’t like it.”
“Well, the task from my upstream affiliate is to snoop around, mainly among
these old guys. Make friends with them.”
Yecco. But Juan glanced at the payoff certificate again. It tested valid. The
payoff adjudication was more complicated than he wanted to read, but it was
backed by Bank of America. “Who in particular?”
“Ah, that’s the problem. Whoever is at the top of my affiliance is coy. We’re just
collecting information. Basically, some of these senior citizens used to be big
shots.”
“If they were so big, how come they’re in our classes now?” It was just the
question the kids asked at school.
“Lots of reasons, Juan. Some of them are just lonely. Some of them are up to
their ears in debt, and have to figure how to make a living in the current
economy. Some of them aren’t good for much but a healthy body and lots of old
memories. They can be very bitter.”
“Unh, how do I make friends with people like that?”
“If you want the money, you figure out a way. Anyway, here are the search
criteria.” The Big Lizard shipped him a document. He browsed through the top
layer.
“This covers a lot of ground.” Retired San Diego politicians, bioscientists,
parents of persons currently in such job categories…
“There are qualifying characteristics in the links. Your job is to interest
appropriate people in my affiliance.”
“I… I’m just not that good at talking people up.” Especially people like this.

“Stay poor then. Chicken.” Juan was silent for a moment. His pa would never
take a job like this. Finally, he said, “Okay, I’ll go affiliate with you.”
“I wouldn’t want you doing anything you feel un — “
“I said, I’ll take the job!”
“Okay! Well then, what I’ve given you should get you started. There’s contact
info in the document.” The creature lumbered to its feet, and now its voice came
from high above. “Just as well we don’t meet again on Pyramid Hill.”
“Suits me.” Juan stood up. He made a point of slapping the creature’s mighty tail
as he walked off downhill.
○
The twins were way ahead of him, standing by the soccer field on the other side
of campus. As Juan came up the driveway, he grabbed a viewpoint in the
bleachers and gave them a ping. Fred waved back, but his shirt was still too
gooey for comm. Jerry was looking upward at the UP/Ex shipment falling
toward his outstretched hands. Just in time, for sure. The twins were popping the
mailer open even as they walked into the shop tent.
Unfortunately, Juan’s first class was at the end of the far wing. He ran across the
lawn, keeping his vision tied to unimproved reality: The buildings were mostly
three stories today. Their gray walls were like playing cards stacked in a rickety
array.
Inside, the choice of view was not entirely his own. Mornings, the school
administration required that the Fairmont News show all over the interior walls.
Three kids at Hoover High had won IBM career fellowships. Applause,
applause, even if Hoover was Fairmont’s unfairly advantaged rival, a charter
school run by the Math Ed Department at SDSU. The three young geniuses
would have their college education paid for, right through grad school, even if
they never worked a day at IBM. Big deal, Juan thought, trying to comfort
himself. Someday those kids might be very rich, but a percentage of their
professional fortunes would always go back to IBM.
He followed the little green nav arrows with half his attention… and abruptly
realized he had climbed two flights of stairs. School admin had re-arranged

everything since yesterday. Of course, they had updated his nav arrows, too. It
was a good thing he hadn’t been paying attention. He slipped into his classroom
and sat down.
○
Ms. Chumlig had already started.
Search and Analysis was Chumlig’s main thing. She used to teach a fast-track
version of this at Hoover High, but well-documented rumor held that she just
couldn’t keep up. So the Department of Education had moved her to the same-
named course here at Fairmont. Actually, Juan kind of liked her. She was a
failure, too.
“There are many different skills,” she was saying. “Sometimes it’s best to
coordinate with lots of other people who together can make the answers.” The
students nodded. Be a coordinator. That’s where the biggest and most famous
money was. But they also knew where Chumlig was going with this. She looked
around the classroom, nodding that she knew they knew. “Alas, you all intend to
be top agents, don’t you?”
“It’s what some of us will be.” That was one of the Adult Ed students. Winston
Blount was old enough to be Juan’s great-grandfather. When Blount had a bad
day he liked to liven things up by harassing Ms. Chumlig.
The Search and Analysis instructor smiled back. “It’s about as likely as being a
major league baseball star. The pure ‘coordinating agent’ is a rare type, Dean
Blount.”
“Some of us must be the administrators.”
“Oh.” Chumlig looked kind of sad for a moment, like she was figuring out how
to pass on bad news. “Administration has changed a lot, Dean Blount.”
Winston Blount sat back in his chair. “Okay. So we have to learn some new
tricks.”
“Yes.” Ms. Chumlig looked out over the class. “That’s an important point. This
class is about search and analysis, the heart of the economy. We obviously need
search and analysis as consumers. In almost all modern jobs, search and analysis

are how we make our living. But, in the end, we must also know something
about something.”
“Meaning those courses we got C’s in, right?” That was a voice from the peanut
gallery, probably someone who was physically truant.
Chumlig sighed. “Yes. Don’t let those skills die. You’ve been exposed to them.
Use them. Improve on them. You can do it with a special form of preanalysis
that I call ‘study.’”
One of the students actually held up a hand. She was that old.
“Yes, Dr. Xiang?”
“I know you are correct. But — ” The woman glanced around the room. She
looked about Chumlig’s age, not nearly as old as Winston Blount. But there was
kind of a frightened look in her eyes. “But some people are better than others.
I’m not as sharp as I once was. Or maybe others are just sharper… What
happens if we try our hardest, and it just isn’t good enough?”
Chumlig hesitated. How will she answer this! thought Juan. It was the real
question. “That’s a problem that affects everyone, Dr. Xiang. Providence gives
each of us our hand to play. In your case, you’ve got a new deal and a new start
on life.” Her look took in the rest of the class. “Some of you think your hand in
life is all deuces and treys.” At the front of the room were some really dedicated
students, not much older than Juan. They were wearing, but they had no clothes
sense and had never learned ensemble coding. As Chumlig spoke, you could see
their fingers tapping away, searching on “deuces” and “treys.”
“But I have a theory of life,” said Chumlig, “and it is straight out of gaming:
There is always an angle. You, each of you, have some special wild cards. Play
with them. Find out what makes you different and better. Because it is there, if
only you can find it. And once you do, you’ll be able to contribute answers to
others and others will be willing to contribute back to you. In short, synthetic
serendipity doesn’t just happen. By golly, you must create it.”
She hesitated, staring at invisible class notes, and her voice dropped down from
oratory. “So much for the big picture. Today, we’re going to talk about morphing
answerboard solutions. As usual, we’re looking to ask the right questions.”

○
Juan liked to sit by the outer wall, especially when the classroom was on the
third floor. You could feel the wall sway gently back and forth as the building
kept its balance. That sort of thing made his ma real nervous. “One second of
system failure and everything will fall apart!” she had complained at a PTA
meeting. On the other hand, house-of-cards construction was cheap — and it
could handle a big earthquake almost as easily as it did the morning breeze.
He leaned away from the wall and listened to Chumlig. That was why the school
made you show up in person for most classes; you had to pay a little bit of
attention just because you were trapped in a real room with a real instructor.
Chumlig’s lecture graphics floated in the air above them. She had the class’s
attention; there was a minimum of insolent graffiti nibbling at the edges of her
imagery.
And for a while, Juan paid attention, too. He really did. Answerboards could
generate solid results, usually for zero cost. There was no affiliation, just kindred
minds batting problems around. But what if you weren’t a kindred mind? Say
you were on a genetics board. If you thought transcription was a type of
translation, it could take you months to get anywhere.
So Juan tuned her out and wandered from viewpoint to viewpoint around the
room. Some were from students who’d set their viewpoints public. Most were
just random cams. He browsed Big Lizard’s task document as he paused
between hops. In fact, the Lizard was interested in more than just the old farts.
Some ordinary students made the list, too. This affiliance must be as wide as the
California Lottery.
He started some background checks. Like most kids, he kept lots of stuff saved
on his wearable. He could run a search like this very close to his vest. He didn’t
route to the outside world except when he could use a site that Chumlig was
talking about. She was real good at nailing the mentally truant. But Juan was
good at ensemble coding, driving his wearable with little gesture cues and eye-
pointer menus. As her gaze passed over him, he nodded brightly and replayed
the last few seconds of her talk.
As for the old students… competent retreads would never be here; they’d be rich
and famous, the people who owned most of the real world. The ones in Adult

Education were the has-beens. These people trickled into Fairmont all through
the semester. The oldfolks hospitals refused to batch them up for the beginning
of classes. They claimed that senior citizens were “socially mature,” able to
handle the jumble of a midsemester entrance.
Juan went from face to face, matching against public records: Winston Blount.
The guy was a saggy mess. Retread medicine was such a crapshoot. Some things
it could cure, others it couldn’t. And what worked was different from person to
person. Winston Blount had not been a total winner.
Just now the old guy was squinting intensely, trying to follow Chumlig’s
answerboard example. He had been in several of Juan’s classes. Juan couldn’t
see the guy’s med records, but he guessed that his mind was mostly okay; he was
as sharp as some of the kids in class. And once upon a time he had been an
important player at UCSD. Once upon a time.
Okay, put him on the “of interest” list.
And then there was Xiu Xiang. PhD physics, PhD electrical engineering; 2010
Winner of the President’s Medal for Secure Computation. Overall the hotstuff
index on her was almost Nobel-quality. Dr. Xiang sat hunched over, looking at
the table in front of her. She was trying to keep up on a view-page! Poor lady.
But for sure she would have connections.
Chumlig was still going on about how to morph results into new questions,
oblivious of Juan’s truancy.
Who’s next? Robert Gu. For a moment, Juan thought he had the wrong
viewpoint. He sneaked a glance to his right, toward where the Adult Education
crocks hung out. Robert Gu, PhD literature. A poet. He was sitting with the
crocks, but he looked about seventeen years old! Juan brought his apparent
attention back to Ms. Chumlig and inspected the new arrival close up. Gu was
slender, almost scrawny, and tall. His skin was smooth and unblemished. But he
looked like he was sweating. Juan risked a peek at outside medical references.
Aha! Symptoms of the Venn-Kurasawa treatment. Dr. Robert Gu was a lucky
man, the one in a thousand who fully responded to that piece of retread magic.
On the other hand, it looked to Juan like the guy had run out of luck after that.
He was fully unpingable. There was a crumpled piece of view-page on his desk,
but he wasn’t using it. Years ago, this guy had been more famous than Xiu

Xiang, but he was an even bigger loser now… What was “Deconstructive
Revisionism” anyway? Oh. Definitely not something on the Big Lizard’s list.
Juan slid the name into the trashcan. But wait, he hadn’t checked out Gu’s family
connections. He queried — and suddenly there was silent messaging hanging in
letters of silent flame all across his vision:
Chumlig → Orozco:
You have all day to play games, Juan! If you won’t pay attention
here, you can darn well take this course over.
Orozco → Chumlig:
Sorry. Sorry! He suspended his question queue and dropped the external
session. At the same time, he played back the last few minutes of her talk,
desperately trying to summarize. Most times, Chumlig just asked embarrassing
questions; this was the first she’d sminged him with a threat.
And the amazing thing was, she’d done it in a short pause, when everyone else
thought she was just looking at her notes. Juan eyed her with new respect.
○
“You were A little hard on the boy, don’t you think?” Rabbit was trying out new
imagery today, this based on classic Alice in Wonderland illustrations, complete
with engraving lines. The effect was fully silly on a three-dimensional body.
Big Lizard did not seem impressed. “You don’t belong down here. Juan is my
direct affiliate, not yours.”
“A bit overly sensitive, aren’t you? I’m simply spot-checking the depths of my
affiliance.”
“Well, stay out. Juan needs this class.”
“Of course I share your charitable motives.” The rabbit gave the lizard his most
dishonest leer. “But you cut him off just when he was looking at someone
especially interesting to me. I have provided you with a most excellent
affiliance. If you want my continued support, you must cooperate.”
“Listen you! I want the boy to reach out for himself, but I don’t want him to be

hurt.” Lizard’s voice trailed off, and Rabbit wondered if Chumlig was finally
having second thoughts. Not that it mattered. Rabbit was having fun, spreading
out across the Southern California social scene. Sooner or later, he would figure
out what this job was all about.

Dr. Xiang’s SHE
Shop class. It was by far Juan Orozco’s favorite class. Shop was like a premium
game; there were real gadgets to touch and connect. That was the sort of thing
you paid money for up on Pyramid Hill. And Mr. Williams was no Louise
Chumlig. He let you follow your own inclinations, but he never came around
afterward and complained because you hadn’t accomplished anything. It was
almost impossible not to get an A in Ron Williams’s classes; he was wonderfully
old-fashioned.
Shop class was also Juan’s best opportunity to make progess on Big Lizard’s
project, at least with the old farts and the do-not-call privacy freaks. He
wandered around the big gadget tent looking like an utter idiot. Juan had never
been any good at diplomacy games. And now he was schmoozing oldsters. Well,
trying to.
Xiu Xiang was really a nice lady, but she just sat at the equipment bench and
read from her view-page. She had the parts list formatted like some kind of
hardcopy catalog. “Once I knew these things,” she said. “See that.” She pointed
at a section in the museum pages: Xiang’s Secure Hardware Environment. “I
designed that system.”
Juan came up with “You’re world-class, Dr. Xiang.”
“But… I don’t understand even the principles of these new components. They
look more like pond scum than self-respecting optical semiconductors.” She read
one of the product descriptions, stopped at the third line. “What’s redundant
entanglement?”
“Ah.” He looked it up, saw pointers into jungles of background concepts. “You
don’t need to know about ‘redundant entanglement,’ ma’am. Not for this class.”
He waved at the product descriptions on Xiang’s view-page. The image sat like
carven stone, not responding to his gesture. “Go forward a few pages, you’ll find
the stuff we have available here in class. Look under” — jeez this was a pain,
spelling out navigation in words — “look under ‘fun functional compositions,’
and go from there.” He showed her how to use her view-page to ID local parts.
“You don’t need to understand everything.”

“Oh.” In a few moments she was playing with the possibilities, had downloaded
half a dozen component gadgets. “This is like being a child. Doing, without
understanding.” But then she started putting Buildlt parts together, doing pretty
well after Juan showed her how to find the interface specs. She laughed at some
of the descriptions. “Sorters and shifters. Solid-state robots. I bet I could make a
cutter out of this.”
“I don’t see it.” Cutter? “Don’t worry, you can’t hurt anything.” That wasn’t
quite true, but close enough. He sat and watched, made a few suggestions, even
though he wasn’t really sure what she was up to. Enough of establishing rapport;
he marked that box in his diplomacy checklist and moved on to the next stage.
“So, Dr. Xiang, do you keep in touch with your friends at Intel?”
“That was a long time ago. I retired in 2010. And during the war, I couldn’t even
get consulting jobs. I could just feel my skills rusting out.”
“Alzheimer’s?” He knew she was much older than she looked, even older than
Winston Blount.
Xiang hesitated, and for a moment Juan was afraid he had made the lady really
angry. But then she gave a sad little laugh. “No Alzheimer’s, no dementia. You
— people nowadays don’t know what it was like to be old.”
“I do so! All my grandparents are still alive. And I have a great-grandpa in
Puebla. He plays a lot of golf. Great-Grandma, she does have dementia — you
know, a kind they still can’t fix.” In fact, Great-Grandma had looked as young as
Dr. Xiang. Everyone thought she had really lucked out. But in the end that only
meant she lived long enough to run into something they couldn’t cure.
Dr. Xiang just shook her head. “Even in my day, not everyone went senile, not
the way you mean. I just got behind in my skills. My girlfriend died. After a
while I just didn’t care too much. I didn’t have the energy to care.” She looked at
the gadget she was building. “Now, I have at least the energy I had when I was
sixty. Maybe I even have the same native intelligence.” She slapped the table.
“And all I’m good for is playing with jacked-up Lego blocks!”
It almost looked like she was going to start crying, right in the middle of shop
class. Juan scanned around; no one seemed to be watching. He reached out to
touch Xiang’s hand. He didn’t have the answer. Ms. Chumlig would say he
didn’t have the right question.

○
There were still a few others to check out: Winston Blount, for instance. Not a
jackpot case, but he ought to be worth something to the Lizard. In shop class,
Blount just sat in the shade of the tent, staring off into space. The guy was
wearing, but he didn’t respond to messages. Juan waited until Williams went off
for one of his coffee breaks. Then he sidled over and sat beside Blount. Jeez, the
guy really looked old. Juan couldn’t tell exactly where he was surfing, but it had
nothing to do with shop class. Juan had noticed that when Blount wasn’t
interested in a class, he just blew it off. After a few minutes’ silence, Juan
realized that he wasn’t interested in socializing either.
So talk to him! It’s just another kind of monster whacking. Juan mor-phed a
buffoon image onto the guy, and suddenly it wasn’t so hard to cold-start the
encounter. “So, Dean Blount, what do you think of shop class?”
Ancient eyes turned to look at him. “I couldn’t care less, Mr. Orozco.”
O-kay! Hmm. There was lots about Winston Blount that was public record, even
some legacy newsgroup correspondence. That was always good for getting a
grown-up’s, um, attention.
Fortunately, Blount continued talking on his own. “I’m not like some of the
people here. I’ve never been senile. By rights, I shouldn’t be here.”
“By rights?” Maybe he could score points just by imitating an old-time shrink
program.
“Yes. I was Dean of Arts and Letters through 2012. I was on track to be UCSD
Chancellor. Instead I was pushed into academic retirement.”
Juan knew all that. “But you… you never learned to wear.”
Blount’s eyes narrowed. “I made it a point never to wear. I thought wearing was
a demeaning fad.” He shrugged. “I was wrong. I paid a heavy price for that. But
things have changed.” His eyes glittered with deliberate iridescence. “I’ve taken
four semesters of this ‘Adult Education.’ Now my resume is out there in the
ether.”
“You must know a lot of important people.”

“Indeed. Success is just a matter of time.”
“Y-You know, Dean, I may be able to help. No wait — I don’t mean by myself. I
have an affiliance you might be interested in.”
“Oh?”
He seemed to know what affiliance was. Juan explained Big Lizard’s deal. “So
there could be some real money in this.” He showed him the payoff certificates,
and wondered how much his recruit would see there.
Blount squinted his eyes, no doubt trying to parse the certificates into a form that
Bank of America could validate. After a moment he nodded, without granting
Juan numerical enlightenment. “But money isn’t everything, especially in my
situation.”
“Well, um, I bet whoever’s behind these certs would have a lot of angles. Maybe
you could get a conversion to help-in-kind. I mean, to something you need.”
“True.” They talked a few minutes, till the place got busy. Some of the shop
projects were finally showing results. At least two teams had made mobile
nodes, swarm devices. Tiny paper wings fluttered all around. The other swarmer
crawled in the grass and up the legs of the furniture and chairs. It stayed out of
clothes, but it was awfully close to being intrusive. Juan zapped a few of them,
but the others kept coming.
Orozco → Blount:
Can you read me?
“Of course I can,” replied the old man.
So despite Blount’s claims of withittude, he couldn’t manage silent messaging,
not even the finger tapping most grown-ups used.
The class period was almost over anyway. Juan looked up at the billowing tent
fabric. He was a little discouraged. He had covered almost everyone on the list,
and Winston Blount was the best he’d found: someone who couldn’t even sming.
“Okay. Well, keep my offer in mind, Dean Blount. And remember, there are only
a limited number of people I’m allowed to take in.” Blount rewarded this sales

jabber with a thin smile. “Meantime, I-I have other possibilities.” Juan nodded in
the direction of the weird new guy, Robert Gu.
Winston Blount didn’t follow Juan’s gaze, but you could tell he was sneaking a
peek sideways. For a moment the skin on his face seemed to tighten. Then the
smile returned. “May God have mercy on your soul, Mr. Orozco.”
○
Juan didn’t get his chance at Robert Gu till Friday, right after Ms. Chumlig’s
other class. Creative Composition was almost always the low point of Juan’s
school week. Chumlig was flexible as to media, but students had to stand up and
perform their own work. That was bad enough when you had to watch some
other kid mess up, but unbearable when you were the performer. Order of
appearance was decided at Ms. Chumlig’s whim. Normally worrying about that
would have occupied most of Juan’s attention. Today, he had other concerns that
mercifully blotted out the usual panic.
Juan skulked to the back of the class and slumped down, covertly watching the
others. Winston Blount was here, which was a surprise. He blew off this class
almost as often as he did shop. But he took me up on my offer. The Lizard’s
account showed that the old man had taken his first step toward signing on.
On the far side of the room, Robert Gu was surfing with his view-page. Even
that looked like a struggle for the guy. But it turned out that Gu was part of a
particular Marine Corps family — and when Juan had reviewed all of the
affiliation instructions he had found that that was a big plus. If he could just
interest Robert Gu in affiliation, he’d hit the top bonus level.
Chumlig’s voice cut across his thought. “No volunteers for first up? Well — ”
she looked off into the air, and then turned to Juan.
¡Caray!

So Much Technology, So Little Talent
Chumlig’s “Creative Composition” class was shaping up to be the low point of
Robert Gu’s first week at Fairmont High. Robert remembered his own high-
school years very well. In 1965, school had been easy, except for math and
science, which he didn’t care about anyway. Basically, he never did homework
in anything. But the poems he wrote, almost without conscious effort, were
already in a different world from what his poor teachers normally encountered.
They considered themselves blessed to be in his presence — and rightly so.
But in this brave new world he could see only a fraction of the “compositions”
the students allegedly created, and he had no doubt they could appreciate very
little about his work.
Robert sat at the edge of the class, doodling on his view-page. As usual, the
children were on the left side of the room, and the Adult Ed students were on the
right. Losers. He had learned a few names, even talked to the Xiang woman. She
said she was going to have to drop Chumlig’s composition class. She just didn’t
have the courage to perform in front of others. The only talent she had was in
obsolete engineering, but at least she was smart enough to know she was a loser.
Not like Winston Blount, the biggest loser of all. Occasionally he caught Winnie
looking his way, and Robert would smile to himself.
At the front of the class, Ms. Chumlig was coaxing today’s first performer. “I
know you’ve been practicing, Juan. Show us what you can do.”
“Juan” stood and walked to center stage. This was the kid who had been chatting
up the Adult Ed students in shop class. Robert remembered his earnest sales-rep
behavior. At a guess, the boy was on the low side of average, the kind that high
schools of Robert’s time graduated pro forma. But here, in the twenty-first
century, incompetence was no excuse: Chumlig seemed to have serious
expectations. The boy hesitated and then began waving his arms. Without any
visible effect. “I don’ know, Ms. Chumlig, it’s still not, um, fully ready.”
Ms. Chumlig just nodded patiently, and gestured for him to continue.
“Okay.” The boy squinted his eyes and his armwaving became even more
chaotic. It wasn’t dance, and the boy wasn’t speaking. But Chumlig leaned back

against her desk, and nodded. Much of the class watched the random mime with
similar attention, and Robert noticed that they were nodding their heads as if in
time to music.
Crap. More invisible nonsense. Robert looked down at his magic foolscap and
played with the local browser selections. Internet Explorer was much as he
remembered, but there were dropdowns that allowed him to “Select View.” Yes,
the fantasy overlays. He tapped on “Juan Orozco Performs.” The first overlay
looked like graffiti, rude commentary on Juan’s performance. It was the sort of
thing you might see on a note passed furtively from child to child. He tapped the
second view selection. Ah. Here the boy stood on a concert stage. The classroom
windows behind him opened onto a vast city as seen from a high tower. Robert
held his hand along the margin of the page, and there was sound. It was tinny
and faint compared with the room audio back in the house, but… yes, it was
music. It was almost Wagner, but then it rambled off into something that might
have been a marching song. In the window on Robert’s view-page, rainbows
formed around the boy’s image. Fluffy white — ferrets? — hopped into
existence at every jerk of his hands. Now all the other kids were laughing. Juan
was laughing too, but his handwaving became desperate. Ferrets covered the
floor, shoulder-to-shoulder, and the music was frenetic. The creatures misted
together into snow and lifted on miniature tornadoes. The boy slowed his
rhythm, and the sound became something like lullaby music. The snow
glistened, sublimating into invisibility as the music faded. And now Robert’s
browser window showed the same unmagical child who stood in reality at the
front of the room.
Juan’s peers applauded politely. One or two yawned.
“Very good, Juan!” said Ms. Chumlig.
It was as impressive as any advertising video that Robert had seen in the
twentieth century. At the same time it was essentially incoherent, a garbage
dump of special effects. So much technology, so little talent.
Chumlig talked the class through the components of Orozco’s effort, gently
asking the boy where he was going to take his work, suggesting that he
collaborate (collaborate!) with other students in putting words to the
composition.

Robert looked surreptitiously about the room. The windows were opened onto
the brown and sere hillsides of North County autumn. Out there, sunlight was
everywhere, and a slow breeze brought in the smell of honeysuckle. He could
hear kids playing on the far side of the lawn. Inside, the classroom was a cheap
plastic construction, utterly without esthetic sensibility. Yes, school was easy, but
it could also be mind-numbingly boring; he’d have to reread his own poems
about that. The forced confinement. The endless days of sitting still and listening
to witless talk, while the whole world waited outside.
Most of the students were actually looking in Chumlig’s general direction. Was
that just an artful scam? But when the woman asked a random child a snap
question, she got relevant — if halting — answers.
And then, much sooner than he had imagined:
“… quitting early today, so we have time for only one more presentation,” said
Ms. Chumlig. What has she been saying? Damn. Chumlig was looking directly
at him now. “Please show us your composition, Professor Gu.”
○
Juan slunk back to his seat, barely listening to Chumlig’s analysis. She was
always gentle in these public critiques, but the bad news was obvious all around
him. Only the Radner twins had posted something nice. Someone who looked
like a rabbit was grinning at him from the peanut gallery. Who was that? He
turned and plunked himself down in his chair.
“… so we have time for only one more presentation,” finished Ms. Chumlig.
“Please show us your composition, Professor Gu.”
Juan looked back at where Gu was sitting. What sort of presentation could he
make?
Robert Gu seemed to wonder the same thing: “I really don’t have anything that
the class would… appreciate. I don’t do audiovisuals.”
Chumlig smiled brightly. When she smiled like that at Juan, he knew his excuses
would count for nothing. “Nonsense, Professor Gu. You were — you are a poet.”
“Indeed.”

“And I made an assignment.”
Gu looked young, but when he cocked his head and eyed Ms. Chumlig, there
was such power in his gaze. Jeez, if only I could look like that when Chumlig has
me on the hot seat. The young-old man was silent for a second, and then he said
calmly. “I have written a short piece, but as I said it has none of — ” his gaze
swept the class, nailing Juan for an instant” — the pictures and sound that seem
expected.”
Ms. Chumlig gestured him forward. “Your words will do splendidly today.
Please. Come down.”
After a second, Gu stood and came down the steps. He moved fast, with kind of
a spastic lurch. Gossipy notes flew back and forth. For the moment, the class’s
attention was focused like Ms. Chumlig always wanted.
Chumlig stepped out of his way, and Robert Gu turned to face the class. Of
course, he couldn’t call a up word display. But he didn’t look at his view-page
either. He just looked at the class and said, “A poem. Three hundred words. I tell
you about the land of North County as it really is, here and beyond.” His arm
twitched outward, toward the open windows.
Then he just… talked. No special effects, no words scrolling through the air.
And it couldn’t really be a poem since his voice didn’t get all singsong. Robert
Gu just talked about the lawn that circled the school, the tiny mowers that circled
and circled across it. The smell of the grass, and how it squeezed down moist in
the morning. How the slope of the hills took running feet to the creek brush that
edged the property. It was what you saw here every day — at least when you
weren’t using overlays to see somewhere else.
And then Juan wasn’t really aware of the words anymore. He was seeing; he was
there. His mind floated above the little valley, scooted up the creek bed, had
almost reached the foot of Pyramid Hill… when suddenly Robert Gu stopped
talking, and Juan was dumped back into the reality of his place at the rear end of
Ms. Chumlig’s composition class. He sat for a few seconds, dazed. Words.
That’s all they were. But what they did was more than visuals. It was more than
haptics. There had even been the smell of the dry reeds along the creek bed.
For a moment no one said anything. Ms. Chumlig looked glassy-eyed. Either she
was very impressed or she was surfing.

But then a classic Pompous Bird flew up from the old farts’ side of the room. It
swooped across the room to drop a huge load of wet birdshit on Robert Gu. Fred
and Jer burst out laughing, and after a moment the whole class responded.
Of course, Robert Gu couldn’t see the special effects. For a second he looked
puzzled, and then he glared at the Radners.
“Class!” Ms. Chumlig sounded truly pissed. The laughter choked off and
everyone applauded politely. Chumlig held them to it for a moment, then
lowered her own hands. Juan could see she was scanning them all. Normally she
ignored graffiti. This time she was searching for someone to crucify. Her gaze
ended up in the old farts’ section, and she looked a little surprised.
“Very well. Thank you, Robert. That is all we have time for today. Class, your
next assignment is to collaborate and improve on what you have already done.
It’s up to you to find local partners for this step. Send me the teamings and your
game plan before we meet next time.” The Ignominious Details would be in the
mail by the time they got home.
Then the class bell — triggered by Chumlig, in fact — rang out. By the time
Juan got himself out of his chair, he was in the tail end of the mad rush for the
door. It didn’t matter. He was a little dazed by the strange form of virtual virtual
reality that Robert Gu had created.
Behind him he could see that Gu had finally figured out the class was over. He
would be outside with the rest of them in a few seconds. My chance to enlist him
for the Lizard. And maybe something else. He thought on the old man’s magic
words. Maybe, maybe, they could collaborate. Everybody had laughed at Robert
Gu. But before the Pompous Bird had been launched, before they had laughed,
Juan Orozco had felt the awed silence. And he did that with words alone…
○
When Robert walked to the front of the class, he was more irritated than
nervous. He had wowed students for thirty years. He could wow them with the
bit of verse he had composed for today. He turned, and looked out the class. “A
poem,” he said. “Three hundred words. I tell you about the land of North County
as it really is, here and beyond.” The poem was a pastoral cliche, composed last
night and based on his memories of San Diego and what he saw on the drive to
Fairmont. But for a few moments, his words held them, just as in the old days.

When he was done there was a moment of absolute silence. What
impressionable children. He looked over at the Adult Ed people, saw the jagged,
hostile smile on Winston Blount’s face. Envious as ever, eh, Winnie?
Then a pair of oafs near the front started laughing. That precipitated scattered
giggles.
“Class!” Chumlig stepped forward and everyone applauded, even Blount.
Chumlig said a few more words. Then the class bell rang and the students were
all rushing for the door. He started after them.
“Ah, Robert,” said Ms. Chumlig. “Please stay a moment. That bell ‘did not toll
for you.’” She smiled, no doubt pleased by her command of literary allusion.
“Your poem was so beautiful. I want to apologize to you, for the class. They had
no right to put the — ” She gestured at the air above his head.
“What?”
“Never mind. This is not a truly talented class, I fear.” She look at him
quizzically. “It’s hard to believe you’re seventy-five years old; modern medicine
is working miracles. I’ve had a number of senior students. I understand your
problems.”
“Ah, you do.”
“Anything you do in this class will be a favor for the others here. I hope you’ll
stay, help them. Rework your poem with some student’s visuals. They can learn
from you — and you can learn the skills that will make the world a more
comfortable place for you.”
Robert gave her a little smile. There would always be cretins like Louise
Chumlig. Fortunately, she found something else to focus on: “Oh! Look at the
time! I’ve got to start Remote Studies. Please excuse me.” Chumlig turned and
walked to the center of the classroom. She jabbed a hand toward the top row of
seats. “Welcome, class. Sandi, stop playing with the unicorns!”
Robert stared at the empty room, and the woman talking to herself. So much
technology…

○
Outside, the students had dispersed. Robert was left to ponder his reen-counter
with “academia.” It could have been worse. His little poem had been more than
good enough for these people. Even Winnie Blount had applauded. To impress
someone even when he hates you — that was always a kind of triumph.
“Mr. Gu?” The voice was tentative. Robert gave a start. It was the Orozco kid,
lurking by the classroom door.
“Hello,” he said, and gave the boy a generous smile.
Maybe too generous. Orozco came out of the shadows and walked along with
him. “I — I thought your poem was wonderful.”
“You’re too kind.”
The boy waved at the sunlit lawn. “It made me feel like I was actually out here,
running in the sunlight. And all without haptics or contacts or my wearable.” His
gaze came up to Robert’s face and then flickered away. It was a look of awe that
might have really meant something if the speaker had been anyone worthwhile.
“I’ll bet you’re as good as any of the top game advertisers.”
“I’ll bet.”
The boy dithered for an inarticulate moment. “I notice you’re not wearing. I
could help you with that. Maybe, maybe we could team up. You know, you could
help me with the words.” Another glance at Robert, and then the rest of the kid’s
speech came out in a rush. “We could help each other, and then there’s another
deal I can get you in on. It could be a lot of money. Your friend Mr. Blount has
already come on board.”
They walked in silence for a dozen paces.
“So, Professor Gu, what do you think?”
Robert gave Juan a kindly smile, and just as the kid brightened, he said, “Well,
young man, I think it will be a cold day in hell before I team with an old fool like
Winston Blount — or a young fool such as yourself.”

Zing. The boy stumbled back almost as if Robert had punched him in the face.
Robert walked on, smiling. It was a small thing, but like the poem, it was a start.

The Ezra Pound Incident
There was a dark side to Robert’s morning insights. Sometimes he would wake
not to a grand solution but to the horrid realization that some problem was real,
immediate, and apparently unsolvable. This wasn’t worrywart obsessiveness, it
was a form of defensive creativity. Sometimes the threat was a total surprise;
more often it was a known inconvenience, now recognized as deadly serious.
The panic attacks normally led to real solutions, as when he had withdrawn his
earliest long poem from a small press, hiding its naive shallowness from public
view.
And very rarely, the new problem was truly unsolvable and he could but flail and
rail against the impending disaster.
Last night, coming away from his presentation at Fairmont High, he’d been
feeling pretty good. The groundlings had been impressed, and so had the likes of
Winston Blount — who was a more sophisticated kind of fool. Things are
getting better. I’m coming back. Robert had drifted through dinner, pretty much
ignoring Miri’s pestering about all the things she could help him with. Bob was
still absent. Robert had halfheartedly badgered Alice with questions about
Lena’s last days. Had Lena asked for him at the end? Who had come to her
funeral? Alice was more patient than usual but still not a great source of
information.
Those were the questions he’d gone to sleep with.
He woke with a plan for finding answers. When Bob returned, they would have a
heart-to-heart talk about Lena. Bob would know some of the answers. And for
the rest… in Search and Analysis, Chumlig had been talking about the Friends of
Privacy. There were methods of seeing through their lies. Robert was getting
better and better at S&A. One way or another, he would recover his lost times
with Lena.
That was the good news. The bad news floated up as he lay there drowsing
through his scheme for turning technology into a searchlight on Lena — — -The
bad news was an absolute, gut certainty that replaced the vague uneasiness of
earlier days. Yesterday, my poetry impressed the groundlings. That was no reason
for joy, and he’d been a fool to be warmed by it for even an instant. Any blush of

pleasure should have vanished when little Juan Whosits had announced that
Robert was as brilliant as an advertising copywriter. Lord!
But Winston Blount had applauded Robert’s little effort. Winston Blount was
certainly competent to judge such verse. And here Robert’s morning insight
came up with the memory of Winnie applauding, the measured beat of Blount’s
hands, the smile on his face. That had not been the look of an enemy bested and
awed. Never in the old days would Robert have confused it for that. No, Winnie
had been mocking him. Winston Blount was telling him what he should have
known all along. His out-doorsy poem was shit, good only for an audience
accustomed to eating shit. Robert lay still for a long moment, a groan trapped in
his throat, remembering the banal words of his little poem.
That was the genius insight of this dark morning, the conclusion he had evaded
every day since he was brought back from the dead: I’ve lost the music in the
words.
Every day he was awash with ideas for new poetry, but not the smallest piece of
concrete verse. He had told himself that his genius was coming back with his
other faculties, that it was coming back slowly, in his little poems. All that was a
mirage. And now he knew it for a mirage. He was dead inside, his gifts turned
into vaporous nothingness and random mechanical curiosity.
You can’t know that! He rolled out of bed and went into the bathroom. The air
was cool and still. He stared out the half-open bathroom window at the little
gardens and twisted conifers, the empty street. Bob and Alice had given him an
upstairs room. It had been fun to be able to run up and down stairs again.
In truth nothing had changed about his problems. He had no new evidence that
he was permanently maimed. It was just that suddenly — with the full authority
of a Morning Insight — he was certain of it. But hell. For once this could be just
panic without substance! Maybe obsessing on Lena’s death was spilling over,
making him see death in all directions.
Yes. No problem. There was no problem.
○
He spent the morning in a panicked rage, trying to prove to himself that he could
still write. But the only paper was the foolscap, and when he wrote on it, his

scrawling penmanship was re-formed into neat, fontified lines. That had been an
irritation in days past, but never enough to force him to dig up real paper. Today,
now… he could see that his soul was sucked out of the words before he could
make them sing! It was the ultimate victory of automation over creative thought.
Everything was beyond the direct touch of his hand. That was what was keeping
him from finally connecting with his talents! And in the entire house there were
no real paper-and-ink books.
Aha. He rushed to the basement, pulled down one of the moldering cartons that
Bob had brought from Palo Alto. Inside, there were real books. When he was a
kid, he had practically camped out on the living-room sofa the whole summer.
They had no television, but every day he’d bring home a new pile of books from
the library. Those summers, lying on the sofa, he had read his way through
frivolous trash and deep wisdom — and learned more about truth than in an
entire school year. Maybe that was where he had learned to make words sing.
These books were mostly junk. There were school catalogs from before Stanford
went all online. There were handouts that his TAs had painfully Xeroxed for the
students.
But, yes, there were a few books of poetry. Pitifully few, and read only by
silverfish these last ten years. Robert stood up and stared at the boxes farther
back in the basement dimness. Surely there were more books there, even if
selected by brute chance, whatever was left after Bob auctioned off the Palo Alto
place. He looked down at the book in his hand. Kipling. Damned jingoistic
elevator music. But it’s a start. Unlike the libraries that floated in cyberspace,
this was something he could hold in his hands. He sat down on the boxes and
began to read, all the while pushing his mind ahead of the words, trying to
remember — trying to create — what should rightly be the rest of the poem.
An hour passed. Two. He was vaguely aware that Alice came down to announce
lunch, and that he waved her off impatiently. This was so much more important.
He opened more boxes. Some contained Bob and Alice’s own junk, even more
vacuous than what they had retrieved from Palo Alto. But he found a dozen
more books of poetry. Some of them were… good stuff.
The afternoon passed. He could still enjoy the poetry, but the enjoyment was also
pain. I can’t write a jot of the good stuff, except where I happen to remember it.
And his panic grew. Finally, he stood and threw Ezra Pound into the basement

wall. The spine of the old book split and it sprawled on the floor, a broken paper
butterfly. Robert stared for a moment. He had never harmed a book before, not
even if it bore the ugliest writing in the world. He walked across the room and
knelt by the ruin.
Miri chose that moment to come bouncing down the stairs. “Robert! Alice says I
can call an air taxi! Where would you like to go?”
The words were noise, scraping on his despair. He picked up the book and shook
his head. “No.” Go away.
“I don’t understand. Why are you digging around here? There are easier ways to
get what you want.”
Robert stood, his fingers trying to put Ezra Pound back together again. His eyes
found Miri. Now she had his attention. She was smiling, so sure of herself, in
maximum bossiness mode. And for the moment she didn’t understand the light
in his eyes. “And how is that, Miri?”
“The problem is that you can’t access what’s all around us. That’s why you’re
down here reading these old books, right? In a way you’re like a little kid — but
that’s good, that’s good! Grown-ups like Alice and Bob have all sorts of bad
habits that hold them back. But you’re starting almost fresh. It’ll be easy for you
to learn the new things. But not from dumbhead vocational classes. See? Let me
teach you how to wear.” It was the same wearisome nag as always, but she
thought she’d found a clever new angle.
This time, he would not let it pass. Robert took a step toward her. “So you’ve
been watching me down here?” he said mildly, building up to what he intended.
“um, just in a general way. I — “
Robert took another step toward her and shoved the mutilated book toward her
face. “Have you ever heard of this poet?”
Miri squinted at the broken spine.” ‘E,’ Y — oh, ‘Ezra Pound’? Well… yes, I’ve
got all her stuff. Let me show you, Robert!” She hesitated, then saw the foolscap
lying atop a box. She picked it up and it came to life. Titles streamed down the
page, the cantos, the essays — even, God help us, later criticism from the
mindless depths of the twenty-first century. “But seeing it on this page is like

looking through a keyhole, Robert. I can show you how to see it all around you,
with — “
“Enough!” said Robert. He slid his voice down till it was quiet, cutting, overtly
reasonable. “You simpleton. You know nothing and yet you presume to run my
life, just as you run the lives of your little friends.”
Miri had backed up a step. There was shock on her face, but that had apparently
not yet connected with her mouth. “Yes, that’s what Alice says, that I’m too
bossy — “
Robert took another step, and Miri was against the stairs. “You’ve spent your
whole life playing video games, convincing yourself and your friends that you’re
worth something, that you’re some kind of beautiful thing. I’ll bet your parents
are even foolish enough to tell you how clever you are. But it’s not a pretty thing
to be bossy when you’re a fat, brainless brat.”
“I — ” Miri’s hand rose to her mouth and her eyes grew wide. She took an
awkward step backwards, up the steps. His words were connecting now. He
could see the veneer of self-confidence and bright cheeriness collapsing.
And Robert pursued: “‘I,’ ‘I’ — yes, that’s probably what your self-centered little
mind thinks about most. It would be hard to bear your worthlessness otherwise.
But think about that before you come again trying to run my life.”
Tears welled in the girl’s eyes. She turned and sprinted up the stairs, her
footsteps not a pounding of childish force, but soft — almost as if she didn’t
want anything about herself to be sensed.
Robert stood for a moment, looking up the empty stairway. It was like standing
at the bottom of a well, with a patch of daylight across the top.
He remembered. There had been a time, when he was fifteen and his sister Cara
was about ten… when Cara became independent, bothersome. At the time
Robert had had his own problems — totally trivial from the altitude of seventy-
five years, but they’d seemed significant at the time. Getting past his sister’s
newfound ego, making her realize how little she counted in the general scheme
of things, that had given him such a rush of pleasure.
Robert stared up into the patch of daylight and waited for the rush.

○
Bob Gu got out of debrief late on Saturday. He had been delinquent about
tracking events at home; the Paraguay operation had been all-absorbing. Okay,
that was an excuse. But it was also the truth. There had been hot launchers under
that hostage orphanage. There in Asuncion, he had seen the abyss.
So it wasn’t until he arrived home that he got the local bad news…
His daughter was too big and grown-up to sit on his lap, but she sat close on the
sofa and let him take her hands in his. Alice sat on the other side; she looked
calm, but he knew she was totally freaked. Training jitters plus this problem at
home were almost too much for her. So it was past time to face up to family
responsibilities:
“It’s nothing you did, Miri.”
Miri shook her head. There were dark rings around her eyes; Alice said she had
stopped crying only an hour ago. “I was trying to help him and…” The sentence
dribbled off. Her voice held none of the confidence that had grown in it over the
last two or three years. Damn. In the corner of his eye, Bob could see that his
father was still ensconced in his room upstairs, silently sticking it to them all.
Visiting Dad was next on the agenda. The old man was going to have a surprise.
For now, there was something more important to set right. “I know you were,
Miri. And I think you have helped Grandpa a lot since he came to live with us.”
The old man would still be trying to find his shoes if she hadn’t. “You remember,
we talked about this when Grandpa came? He is not necessarily a nice fellow”
— except when he wants a favor, or he’s setting you up for a fall; then he can
charm almost any human ever horn.
“Y-Yes. I remember.”
“What he says when he’s trying to hurt you doesn’t have any connection with
whether you’ve been good or bad, clever or stupid.”
“B-But maybe I was too pushy. You didn’t see him this morning, Bob. He was so
sad. He thinks I don’t notice, but I do. His pulse was way up. He’s so afraid that
he can’t write anymore. And he misses Grandma, I mean Lena. I miss Lena! But
I — “

“It’s not your responsibility to solve this problem, Miri.” He glanced over Miri’s
head at Alice. “It’s mine, and till now I’ve messed up. Your job, well, that’s at
Fairmont Junior High.”
“Actually, we call it Fairmont High.”
“Okay. Look. Before Grandpa came, school was just about all you thought
about. That and your friends and your projects. Didn’t you tell me you’re going
to transform the place this Halloween?”
Some shred of her past enthusiasm lit Miri’s face. “Yeah. We’ve got the
backstory on all the SpielbergRowling stuff. Annette’s going to — “
“Then that and your regular schoolwork is what you should concentrate on.
That’s your mission, kiddo.”
“But what about Robert?”
Robert can go to hell. “I’ll talk to him. I think you’re right that he’s got a
problem. But, you know sometimes, well… there’s something you have to learn
as you grow up. Some people make their own problems. And they never stop
hurting themselves and messing up the people around them. When that’s the
case, then you shouldn’t keep hurting yourself for them.”
Miri’s head bowed and she looked very sad. And then she looked back at him.
Her jaw came up in that familiar, stubborn way. “Maybe that’s true about other
people… but this is my grandfather.”

No User-Serviceable Parts Within
After that remarkable Saturday, Robert Gu spent considerably less time at his
son’s home. He slept there, still in the upstairs room. Sometimes he even ate in
the dining room. Miri was always somewhere else. Alice was as impassive as
stone. When Bob was around, the hospitality was even more sparse. Robert was
living on borrowed time, and it had nothing to do with his medical condition.
He hung out in empty rooms at school, reading from his old books. He surfed the
web more than ever. Chumlig showed him some modern utilities that hid in his
view-page, things that could not even pretend to be WinME programs.
And he drove around town. That was as much to play with the automatic cars as
it was to see what San Diego had become; in fact, the suburban sprawl was just
as drab as in the past. But Robert discovered that his new, maimed personality
had a thing about gadgets. Cryptic machines were everywhere nowadays. They
lurked in walls, nestled in trees, even littered the lawns. They worked silently,
almost invisibly, twenty-four hours a day. He began to wonder where it all
ended.
One day after school, Robert drove into the far East County, past the endless,
ordinary suburbs. The housing didn’t thin out until he was well into the
mountains. But twenty miles beyond El Cajon, he came to a gap in the housing
and what looked like a war in progress. Dust plumes spouted from buildings
several hundred yards back from the highway. When he rolled down the window,
he heard what might have been artillery fire. A frontage road ran along a high
fence. A rusted sign said “UP/Express” something or other.
And then the strange firing range was behind him.
The highway was a long straight climb now, up past four thousand feet. It was
farther and farther between off-ramps. The auto slowly accelerated. According to
the awkward little dashboard display that he’d found in his WinME game folder,
they were doing better than 120 miles per hour. The boulders and scrub along the
shoulder were a blur, and the window rolled itself closed. He passed the manual
vehicles in far right lanes as though they were standing still. Someday, I have to
learn to drive again.

Then he was over the crest. The auto slowed, taking the curves at a mere fifty
miles per hour. He remembered driving this way with Lena, on a much smaller
Highway 8, maybe in 1970. Lena Llewelyn was new to California, new to the
U.S.A. She had boggled at the size of the place compared with her native
Britain. She’d been so open then, so trusting. That was even before she decided
to specialize in psychiatry.
The hills shed their faded green and stood as piles of rounded boulders. The
desert spread endlessly below and beyond. He came down from the mountains,
turned off Highway 8, and drove slowly along old desert roads toward Anza
Borrego State Park. The last of the suburbs were up on the ridgeline. Down here,
things were as they had been when he’d been in grad school — even as they had
been for centuries before that.
There were plenty of traffic signs on these smaller roads. Some were rusted and
tilted, but they were real. His gaze turned to watch a bullet-punctured stop sign
dwindle behind him. It was beautiful. A little farther on he came upon a dusty
path that ran off across endless desert. The automobile balked at following it:
“Sorry, sir, there’s no guidance that way, and I notice you don’t have a driver’s
license.”
“Ha. In that case, I’m taking a little walk.” Surprisingly, there was no objection
to that. He opened the door and stepped out into the breezy afternoon. He could
feel his spirit unlimber. He could see forever. Robert walked east along the rutted
dirt road. Here at last he had reached the natural world. His foot kicked
something metallic. A spent round? No. The gray lump had a triple antenna
sticking out of the top. He tossed it into the bushes. He was not beyond the web
even here. He pulled out his magic foolscap, surfed the local area. The picture
showed the ground around him, from some kind of camera built into the paper;
little signs floated above every weed — Ambrosia dumosa this and Encelia
farinosa that. Ads for the park’s gift shop scrolled across the top of the page.
Robert pressed 411. The expense meter at the corner of the page was running
now, almost five dollars a minute. That sort of money meant there was a human
at the other end. Robert talked to the paper. “So how far am I from — ” from the
natural world ” — how far am I from unimproved land?”
A tag changed color; his request had been subcontracted. A woman’s voice
replied, “You’re almost there; it’s another… two miles in the direction you are

heading. If I might suggest, sir, you don’t really need 411 to answer questions
like this. Just — “
But Robert had already stuffed the paper back in his pocket. He set out eastward,
his shadow breaking the trail ahead of him. It had been a very long time since he
had walked two miles. Even before the Alzheimer’s, walking two miles would
have been the stuff of an emergency. But today he was not even out of breath,
and the pain in his joints was muted. The most important thing about me is
broken, while almost everything else works. Reed Weber was right, it was a
heavenly minefield. I am so lucky.
Over the wind, he heard the sound of electric motors torquing up. His car was
driving off to do business elsewhere. Robert did not look back.
His shadow grew longer, the air cooler. And finally he had reached the beginning
of nature. A little voice spoke in his ear, announcing that he was leaving the
tagged section of the park. Beyond this point, only “low-rate emergency
wireless” was guaranteed. Robert walked on, across the unlabeled wilderness. So
this is the closest thing to being alone these days. It felt good. A cold, clean
purity.
For a moment, the recollection of Saturday’s confrontation with Bob swept over
him, more real than the desert evening. There had been times, years ago, when
he raged at his son, trying to shame him for wasting his talents in the military.
But last Saturday, the rage had flowed in the other direction.
“Sit!” the boy grown up had said to his father, in a tone that Robert had never
heard from him before.
And Robert had dropped onto the sofa. His son towered over him for a moment.
Then Bob sat down opposite him and leaned close. “Miri won’t talk about the
details, but it’s clear what you did this afternoon, mister.”
“Bob, I was just — “
“Shut up. My little girl has enough problems, and you will not add to them!” His
glare was long and steady.
“… I didn’t mean any harm, Bob. I had a bad day.” Some distant part of him
realized that he was whining, and that he couldn’t stop. “Where is Lena, Bob?”

Bob’s eyes narrowed. “You’ve asked me that before. I wondered if it was an
act.” He shrugged. “Now I don’t care. After today, I just want you out of here,
but… have you looked at your finances, Dad?”
It was going to come down to that. “Yes… there’s a finance package in my
WinME. My savings, I was a multimillionaire in 2000.”
“That’s three bubbles back, Dad. And you guessed wrong on every one. But at
this point you’re nearly certified as self-sufficient. You’d have a hard time
scaring up any public assistance. The taxpayers are not kind to seniors; old
people run too much of the country already.” He hesitated. “And after today, my
generosity has run out. Mom died two years ago — and dumped you decades
before that. But maybe you should wonder about other things. For instance,
where are all your old pals from Stanford?”
“I — ” Faces rose up in Robert’s mind. He’d been in the English Department at
Stanford for thirty years. There were lots of faces. Some of them belonged to
people who were years younger than he was. Where were they now?
Bob nodded at his silence. “Right. Not one has visited you, nor even tried to
contact you. I should know. Even before today, I figured that when you got your
strength back you’d start hurting whoever was nearest — and that would be
Miri. So I’ve been trying to farm you out to one of your old buddies. And you
know what, Dad? There’s not one who wants anything to do with you. Oh, there
are newsies. You won’t have to look far to find as many fans as ever — but
among them all there’s not a single friend.” He paused. “Now you don’t have
any options. Finish the semester; learn what you can. And then get out of our
house.”
“But Lena. What about Lena?”
Bob shook his head. “Mom’s dead. You had no use for her except when you
needed a servant or a kickball. Now it’s too late. She’s dead.”
“But — ” There were memories, but they clashed with one another. The last
decade at Stanford. The Bollingen Prize and the Pulitzer. Lena had not been
there to share them. She had divorced him just about the time Bob joined the
Marines. And yet — “You remember. Lena got me into that rest home, Rainbows
End. And then she was here, when things got really dark. She was here with
Cara” — his little sister, still ten years old, and dead since 2006. His words

stumbled to a halt.
Something glittered in his son’s eyes. “Yes, Mom was here, just like Cara. A
shame attack won’t work on me, Dad. I want you out of this house. End of the
semester at the latest.”
And that was the longest conversation Robert had had with anyone since
Saturday.
It was cold. He’d walked a long way into the desert. The night had risen partway
up the sky. Stars hung over a flat land that stretched forever be-yond him. Maybe
that should be the “Secret of the One Who Came Back”… that he just wanted to
go away again, walking forever into the bluish dark. He walked a bit farther,
then slowed, stopped beside a huge rough rock — and stared into the night.
After some minutes, he turned and started back into the bright twilight.
○
Juan got sidetracked from Big Lizard’s quest. School began to seriously intrude.
Chumlig wanted them to complete their projects and she wanted real results.
Worst of all, the school board had suddenly decided the class must demo their
creative compositions at Parents’ Night — in place of the final exam. Low
grades and Chumlig’s disappointment in him were bad enough; Juan already
knew he was a loser. But such public humiliation was something he desperately
wanted to avoid.
So for a while he was on a different quest: finding someone to team with in
composition class. The problem was, Juan was no good at writing. He wasn’t
more than so-so with math or answerboards. Ms. Chumlig said the secret of
success was “to learn to ask the right questions.” But to do that she also said you
had “to know something about something.” That wisdom and “everyone has
some special talent” were the drumbeats of her classes. But it didn’t help. Maybe
the best he could hope for was a team so big the losers would shield each other.
Today he sat at the back of the shop tent with Fred and Jerry. The twins had
missed their proper shop class that morning, so now they were wasting the rest
of the day here rather than in study hall. It was kind of fun. The two were
pretending to work on a magnetic orrery — a plagiarism so obvious that their
plans still had the source URLs written on them. About half the class had

completed something. Doris Schley’s paper airplanes were flying, but just this
afternoon her team had discovered terrible stability problems. They didn’t know
about Fred and Jerry’s unofficial project: The twins had hijacked the tent’s air-
conditioning. While they kicked back and fooled with the orrery, they were using
the fans to tumble Schley’s fliers.
Xiu Xiang sat hunched over the transport tray she had been working on lately.
She didn’t look so blank and despairing these days, even if she had warped the
transport surface to where it wasn’t good for anything. Xiang practically had her
nose buried in the equipment. Every so often she drew back and studied her
view-page, then returned to the unmoving wreck she had created.
Winston Blount had been scarce since Juan had put him onto the Lizard’s quest.
Juan counted that as encouraging; maybe Mr. Blount was working on the
affiliance.
Juan leaned into the cool air from the fans. Back here it was nice. It was hot and
noisy over by the outside entrance, but that’s where Robert Gu sat. Earlier, the
guy had been watching Dr. Xiang. Sometimes she seemed to be watching him
back, but even more secretly. Now Mr. Gu mainly stared at the traffic circle,
watching the cars that occasionally pulled up, picked up or dropped off
passengers, and then departed. The table in front of the fake teenager was littered
with Buildlt fragments, and several rickety-looking towers. Juan zoomed in on a
couple of them from a viewpoint in the tent above Gu’s head. Huh. The gadgets
had no motors, not even any control logic.
So Gu was going to crash in this class just as sure as Juan was in Composition. It
suddenly occurred to him that maybe he could resume the Lizard’s game, and
take one last whack at finding a teammate for Ms. Chumlig’s project. But I tried
him last week. Robert Gu was the best writer Juan had ever known. He was so
good he could kill you with his words. Juan tucked his chin in and tried to forget
last week.
And then he thought, The guy isn’t wearing, so he’s staring at nothing. He must
he bored out of his skull Juan dithered for another ten minutes, but shop class
had thirty minutes more to run and the Radners were way too focused on their
anti-aircraft guns.
Jerry → Juan:

Hey, where you going?
Juan → Radners:
Gonna make one more try with Gu. Wish me luck.
Fred → Juan:
It’s unhealthy to want a grade that bad.
Juan meandered across the pavilion, walking along the lab benches as if he were
studying the other projects. He ended up beside the strange old man. Gu turned
to look at him, and Juan’s casual cover evaporated. Gu’s sweaty face looked
almost as young as Fred Radner’s. But the eyes looked right into Juan, cold and
cruel. Last week, the guy had seemed friendly — right up to the moment he
ripped Juan apart. Now all Juan’s clever opening lines were gone; even the dumb
ones were hiding. Finally he managed to point at the crazy towers Robert Gu had
been working on. “What’s the project?”
The young-old man continued to stare at Juan. “A clock.” Then he reached into a
parts box and dropped three silver balls into the top of the tallest tower.
“Oh!” The balls bounced down connecting stairways. The first tower was
directly in front of Juan. Going to the right, each tower was a bit shorter and
more complex than the last. Mr. Gu had used most of the “classic parts” that Ron
Williams kept in stock. This was a clock? Juan tried to match it against old-time
clock patterns. There were no perfect fits, though the thing did have levers that
clicked back and forth against a whatchama-google… an escape wheel. Maybe
the balls tipping down the stairways were like the hands on a clock.
Gu continued to stare at him. “But it’s running fast,” he said.
Juan leaned forward and tried to ignore that stare. He captured about three
seconds of the contraption’s motion, enough to identify stationary points and
dimensions. There was an old mechanics program that came in handy for
medieval gadget games; he fed the description into it. The results were easy to
interpret. “You just gotta make that lever a quarter-inch longer.” He poked a
finger at a tiny spar.
“I know.”

Juan looked back at him. “But you’re not wearing. How did you figure that out?”
Gu shrugged. “A medical gift.”
“That’s pretty neat,” Juan said uncertainly.
“For what? To do what any child can do already?”
Juan didn’t have any answer for that. “But you’re also a poet.”
“And now I’m good with gadgets.” Gu’s hand twitched out, smashing through
the levers and wheels. Parts sprayed in all directions, some of them breaking
under the force of his blow.
That got everyone’s attention. The class was suddenly quiet — and blazing with
sming.
It was time to back off. But Juan really really needed help with Creative
Composition. And so he said, “You still know about words, though, right?”
“Yes, I still know about words. I still know about grammar. I can parse
sentences. I can even spell — hallelujah, without mechanical aid. What’s your
name?”
“Juan Orozco.”
“Yes, I remember. What are you good for, Mr. Orozco?”
Juan tucked his chin in. “I’m learning how to ask the right questions.”
“Do so, then.”
“um.” Juan looked at the other parts Gu had collected, things he hadn’t used in
his clock. There were rotary motors, there were wireless synchs, there were
programmable gear trains. There was even a transport tray like the one Dr. Xiang
had messed up. “So how come you don’t use any of these gadgets? That would
be lots easier.”
He expected Gu to spout some Chumliggy thing about solving a problem within
constraints. Instead, the other poked angrily at the components. “Because I can’t

see inside them. Look.” He nipped a rotary motor across the table.” ‘No user-
serviceable parts within.’ It’s stamped right in the plastic. Everything is a black
box. Everything is inscrutable magic.”
“You could look at the manuals,” said Juan. “They show internals.”
Gu hesitated. His hands were gathered into fists. Juan edged back a few inches.
“You can see internals? You can change them?”
Juan watched the fists. He’s flipping crazy. “You can see them easy. Almost
everything serves up its own manual. If it doesn’t, just Google on the part
number.” The look on Gu’s face sent Juan into fast mode: “As for changing the
internals… often they’re programmable. But otherwise, the only changes you
can make are when you order, back at the design and fab stage. I mean, these are
just components. Who’d want to change them once they’re made? Just trash ‘em
if they’re not working like you want.”
“Just components?” Gu looked out from under the fringes of the shop-class tent.
An automobile was tooling up Pala Avenue, heading for the school’s traffic
circle. “What about the fucking cars?”
“Unh.” The whole class was staring. Almost the whole class: Mr. Williams was
on break and out of contact.
Mr. Gu twitched for a few seconds. Then suddenly he was standing. He grabbed
Juan by the collar. “By God I’m going to have a look.”
Juan bounced along just ahead of Robert Gu’s angry, pushing hands. “Break
open a car? Why would you want to do that?”
“That’s the wrong question, kid.” At least they were walking away from the
traffic circle. Even if he went after an automobile, what damage could he do?
The car bodies were a trashy composite, easy to recycle, but strong enough to
take a fifty-mile-per-hour crash. Visions of battle lasers and monster
sledgehammers came to mind. But this was the real world.
Jerry → Juan:
What is the goofball up to?

Juan → Radners:
I dunno!
Robert Gu marched him across the tent to where Xiu Xiang was sitting. By the
time he arrived, the only evidence of madness was the faint twitchiness in his
face. “Dr. Xiang?”
The crazy man actually sounded relaxed and friendly, but Xiang hesitated a long
moment. “Yes,” she said.
“I’ve been admiring your project. Some kind of mass mover?”
Xiang tilted the warped surface up toward him. “Yes. It’s just a toy, but I thought
I could get a leverage effect by warping the surface.” Talking about the gadget
seemed to distract her from Gu’s weirdness.
“Very nice!” There was nothing but charm in Gu’s voice. “May I?” He picked up
the panel and studied the ragged edge.
“I had to cut out gores so the microgrooves wouldn’t bind,” she said, standing up
to point at her work.
Transport trays were for shedding dirt or sliding small containers. For most
things, they were better than robot hands, even if they didn’t look as impressive.
Juan’s mother had remodeled their kitchen with fake-marble transports;
afterward, everything she wanted was where it should be, in the fridge or oven or
on the cutting board, just when she needed it. Usually, the microgrooves couldn’t
slide anything faster than a couple of inches a second.
What Xiang was saying gave Juan an idea. Maybe the warped board was not
broken. He started to put the dimensions into a mechanics program —
But Robert Gu already seemed to know what the thing could do. “You could
triple the delivered force if you adjusted it, here.” He twisted the tray. It creaked
the way ceramics do when you’ve bent them almost to the breaking point.
“Wait — ” She reached for her project.
“I didn’t break it. This is even better. Come on over and I’ll show you.” His

words were all so open and friendly. But he was already walking away.
Xiang chased after him, but she didn’t act like a kid would when someone grabs
their property. She walked along beside Gu, her head tilted to get a look at the
wrecked transport tray. “But there’s no way to use that mechanical advantage
with just the batteries it’s rated for — ” The rest of what she said was
mathematical; Juan just saved it.
As Gu swept by the Radner twins, his right arm flicked out, grabbing a jar of
metal beads that Fred and Jerry were using for their orrery.
“Hey!” The Radners jumped to their feet and followed him, not saying much out
loud. The Adult Ed students were like untouchables. You didn’t mess with them
and vice versa.
Jerry → Juan:
What did we miss, Juan?
Fred → Juan:
Yeah. What did you say to him?
Juan danced backwards, lifting his hands to say that he was an innocent
bystander.
Almost an innocent bystander. As Gu walked past his workbench, he jerked his
chin toward the tent entrance. “Make yourself useful, Orozco. Get me some line
current.”
Juan scooted ahead. There were 110VAC sources on campus, though most were
indoors. He looked up public utilities and saw a big arrow pointing down into
the lawn. This outlet was used to power building reconfiguration when they
needed an extra auditorium. It had a thirty-foot extension reel. He ran to the spot
and pulled the line up from the fresh-cut grass.
Now all the kids — minus Schley’s team, which was suddenly overjoyed by the
improvement in their fliers’ performance — were following them out of the tent.
The car coming up the traffic loop was gliding to a stop at the curb behind him.
It was Ms. Chumlig, back from lunch.

Robert Gu caught up, Xiang right behind him and looking upset. Gu was no
longer making nice noises. He grabbed the power cord from Juan and plugged it
into the transport tray’s universal, bypassing the teeny battery pack that Dr.
Xiang had used. He tilted the tray on edge and poured the metal beads from the
Radners’ project into the top-edge opening.
Chumlig was out of the car. “What’s going on — “
The crazy man smiled at her. “My shop project, Louise. I’ve had enough of ‘no
user-serviceable parts within.’ Let’s take a look.” He leaned over the car’s front
hood and ran his finger down the printed words forbidding customer
maintenance. The kids stood in clusters, awed. Juan had never heard of anyone
at Fairmont High going wacko. Robert Gu was making history. The old man set
the transport tray against the automobile. So where is your battle laser, Mr.
Spaceman? Gu sighted along the edge of the tray, then glanced to his right, at the
Radner brothers. “You really don’t want to be standing there.”
Xiu Xiang was frantic, shouting at the twins. “Get back, get back!”
And now Juan was getting way unbelievable answers from his mechanics
program. He hopped back from the transport tray. Robert Gu didn’t need a battle
laser. For this job, he had something just as good.
Gu powered up the tray. The noise was like tearing cloth but loud, a crack-of-
doom sound. Real sparks sprayed from where the transport tray touched the car’s
hood. Twenty feet ahead of the car, where the Radners had been standing, there
was an oleander hedge. Some of the branches were as thick as Juan’s arm. Now
the white flowers were dancing like there was a breeze; one of the largest
branches snapped and fell on the sidewalk.
Gu slid the tray along the curve of the automobile, driving dozens of metal beads
per second into the hood, cutting an eighth-inch-wide slit in the composite. He
turned the tray — the cutter — and made a corner. Now the lawn near his feet
was ripped by the invisible ricochets.
In less than ten seconds, Gu had brought the cut around to itself. The carved
section fell into the dark of the car’s drive compartment.
Gu tossed Xiu Xiang’s project onto the lawn. He reached into the drive
compartment and flipped out the loose hull section. A ragged and maybe

disdainful cheer rose from the kids behind him. “Hey, dork! There has to be a
latch. Why didn’t you scam the lock?”
Gu didn’t seem to hear. He leaned forward to look into the interior. Juan edged
closer. The compartment was in shadow, but he could see well enough. Not
counting damage, it looked just like the manual said. There were some processor
nodes and fiber leading to the dozens of other nodes and sensors and effectors.
There was the steering servo. Along the bottom, just missed by Gu’s cutting, was
the DC bus to the left-front wheel. The rest was empty space. The capacitor and
power cells were in the back.
Gu stared into the shadows. There was no fire, no explosion. Even if he had
chopped into the back, the safeties would have prevented any spectacular
outcome. But Juan saw more and more error flags float into view. A junk wagon
would be coming real soon.
Gu’s shoulders slumped, and Juan got a closer look at the component boxes.
Every one had physical signage: no user-serviceable parts within.
The old guy stood and took a step away from the car. Behind them, Chumlig and
now Williams were on the scene, herding the students back into the tent. For the
most part, the kids were fully stoked by all the insanity. None of them, not even
the Radner brothers, ever had the courage to run amok. When they committed
something major, it was usually done in software, like what the guy had shouted
from the crowd.
Xiu Xiang gathered up her weird, Gu-improved, project. She was shak-ing her
head and mumbling to herself. She unplugged the gadget and took a step toward
Robert Gu. “I object to your appropriation of my toy!” she said. There was an
odd expression on her face. “Though you did improve it with that extra bend.”
Gu didn’t respond. She hesitated. “And I never would have run it with line
power!”
Gu waved at the guts of the dead car. “It’s Russian dolls all the way down, isn’t
it, Orozco?”
Juan didn’t bother to look up “Russian dolls.”
“It’s just throwaway stuff, Professor Gu. Why would anyone want to fool with
it?”

Xiu Xiang leaned around him, saw the nearly empty compartment, and the boxes
with their stamped-on labels. She look up at Gu. “You’re worse off than I am,
aren’t you?” she said softly.
Gu’s hand twitched up and for a moment Juan thought he was going to punch
her out. “You worthless bitch. You were never more than an engineer, and now
you have to reeducate even for that.” He turned and walked away along the
traffic circle, down the hill toward Pala Avenue.
Xiang took a step or two after Gu. From inside the school, Chumlig was
demanding that everyone come indoors; Juan reached out to touch Xi-ang’s arm.
“We gotta go back inside, Dr. Xiang.”
She didn’t argue, but turned and walked back toward the tent, her transport tray
held close. Juan followed her, all the time watching the crazy man as he departed
in the opposite direction.
○
Even with Robert Gu off campus, the rest of the afternoon was fairly exciting.
The school board invoked cloture. Well, they tried to invoke cloture. But they
had to allow the students contact with home, and most kids regarded this as an
opportunity to grab a journo affiliance. Juan had been close enough to provide
some of the best pictures of the “great automobile wrecking”; his mother was not
happy about that. She’d be even less happy when she noticed that “the madman”
was in three of Juan’s classes.
So anyway the campus was famous in San Diego and beyond, competing with
the billion other bizarrities of the day, all over the planet. Students from other
classes played hookey and came over. Juan saw a young, kind of plump kid
talking in person with Ms. Chumlig. Miri Gu.
By 3:00 p.m. the excitement had faded. This was past the end of classes for most
students. The Radners’ betting pool on Gu’s punishment had been bought out by
some guys in LA. Lucky for the twins. The trouble with instant fame was that
there was always something new coming to distract everyone’s attention.
Overall, it had been a wild day, but kind of sad.
Juan was almost home when he got a phone call.

A phone call? Well, Classic IM Lite was what Epiphany called it. This must be
his great grandpa. “Yes?” he replied, without thinking.
The call came as a window view from a synthetic camera. He was looking
upward, into a small bedroom. Bizarre decorations, though: hardcopy books
stacked in cardboard boxes. A distorted face filled most of the screen. Then the
caller sat back. It was Robert Gu, calling from his view-page.
“Hi kid.”
“Hi, Professor.” In person, Robert Gu was fully scary. In this cheap flat view, he
just looked small and crumpled.
“Look, kid…” The picture twisted and jerked. Gu was fidgeting with the page.
When it settled, the other’s face filled the screen again. “What you were talking
about last week. I think I could help out with your writing.”
Yes! “That would be tragic, Professor Gu.”
Gu gave him a blank look.
“I mean, that would be way cool. And I’d be happy to show you how to wear.”
He was already thinking how he would explain this to his ma.
“Right.” Gu’s face retreated, and he gave a shrug. “I suppose that would be fine
too. If they let me back in school, I’ll see you there.”

Carrot Greens
Make no mistake about it, this job of saving the world was no bed of roses.
Alfred glared at Günberk Braun’s latest report: “Covert Search for Grand Terror
in San Diego.” Things had been hard enough before Günberk spotted Alfred’s
YGBM project, but since the Barcelona meeting, Alfred’s duplicity had become
steadily more difficult to maintain. He had never expected that Braun could keep
such a careful watch on the San Diego labs. Alfred had had to shut down almost
all his activity there, even canceling his regular specimen outshipments; this
affair had set his schedule back by months.
The only bright spot was that Günberk and Keiko were going ahead with Plan
Rabbit. In fact, Rabbit had resurfaced a week ago, along with his initial survey
and his payment demands. The demands had been laughable, basically a
wholesale shopping list of enhancement drugs, just what you might think South
American drug lords could supply to a bright young businessman. As for his
survey — Rabbit had come up with a list of contacts in San Diego and a
complicated plan for getting direct surveillance equipment into the labs.
Günberk and Keiko had been respectively irritated and amused by the scheme,
but all three of them agreed they could make it work. The Americans would
know they had been probed, but unless things went very wrong, the operation
would be deniable.
Of course, what Günberk and Keiko saw was the easy part. The hard part was
what Alfred was hiding beneath Plan Rabbit. When this magnificent
intrusion/inspection was complete, there would be no evidence of his research
program. Working as the trusted leader of the operation, Alfred was confident
that he could accomplish that much. The triumph would be to leave credible
evidence that would point bird-dog Günberk somewhere far across the world —
and leave Alfred’s operation intact in San Diego. Failing that, Alfred would have
to rebuild his research setup — and his security — at second-rate sites. He could
lose a year or two of development time.
Would such a delay really matter? He had completed the hard part. The honeyed-
nougat test had demonstrated that he had a delivery system. In fact, his
Pseudomimi viral was far more robust that Günberk realized. If Grand Terror
had been Alfred’s goal, he was already in the winner’s circle; he could trigger

devastating psychosis, even customize for particular targets. The way to develop
higher mental controls was clear. But meantime, the human race was still
careening down a mountain road, with no one at the wheel. The Saturday-night
specials, the cheap delivery systems, the plagues — there was always the next
precipice, the Next Very Bad Thing. What if the Next Very Bad Thing was the
final, fatal Bad Thing, and what if they ran into it before he could take control?
So yes, anything he could do to save a few months was worthwhile. He pushed
away Günberk’s report and returned to planning just what he would do during
the brief hours when this operation put Günberk and Keiko and himself in
control of the San Diego labs.
He was so absorbed in his scheming that he almost didn’t hear the sound behind
him. There was a small popping noise and a little whoosh of air, typical game
sound effects. They were sounds that absolutely did not belong here. Alfred
flinched and turned.
Rabbit had grown. “Hi there!” it said. “I thought I’d pop up and give you a
special progress report, maybe ask for your help with some details.” Rabbit gave
Alfred a bucktoothed grin and sat back to enjoy a carrot. Sat back in the big
leather visitor’s chair across from Alfred’s desk. In Alfred’s office. His inner
office, the one here in the bombproof catacombs under Mumbai, at the heart of
India’s External Intelligence Agency.
Alfred had managed covert operations for almost seventy years. It had been
decades since he had been so rudely upset. It was like being young again — not
a good feeling. He stared at Rabbit for a moment, absorbing the terrible
implications of the creature’s presence. Perhaps it would be best to ignore those
for now. And so his reply was a random flail: “A progress report? We’ve seen
your progress. I personally was somewhat disappointed. You’ve accomplished
little — “
“That you can see.”
” — beyond creating a fog of foolishness, self-defeating as often as not. The
‘local agents’ you’ve recruited are incompetent. For example — ” Alfred made a
show of fetching records. Meantime, the people in the EIA analyst pool were
tracing Rabbit’s intrusion. They opened a graphics window above the creature’s
head. Rabbit was coming through routers on three continents.

“For example,” Alfred continued, picking a name almost at random, “take this
‘Winston Blount.’ Years ago, he was a top administrator at UCSD. But he never
had any personal connection with the founders of the bio labs, and today…” He
waved his hand in dismissal. “These people have so little connection with the
San Diego labs that I might validly ask what we are getting for our money.”
The Rabbit leaned across Alfred’s mahogany desk. Its reflection in the deep
varnish moved in perfect synchrony. “You might ask. And what great ignorance
that would reveal. You know what to look for and still this is all you have
discovered. Think how invisible this must be to the Americans. I am a phantom
that shows as brownian noise until — viola! — the jaws of my operation spring
shut.”
A smile stretched across Rabbit’s face. It gave its ears a wiggle, and gestured
around Alfred’s inner sanctum. “In a very small way — just a proof of principle,
really — those jaws closed on you today. You, the Japanese, the Europeans, you
all thought you had me fooled. What of your anonymity now, eh? Eh?”
Alfred glowered at the animal. No need to disguise his upset. But pray God this
is all he has discovered.
Rabbit settled its elbows on Alfred’s desk and continued chattily, “Don’t worry,
I’m not being so open with your pals in Japanese and EU Intelligence. I figure it
might panic them — and this is a project I’ve come to enjoy, meeting new
people, learning new skills. You understand.”
It cocked its head as if expecting some confidence in return.
Alfred pretended to consider the matter and finally gave Rabbit a judicious nod.
“Yes. Knowing our cover was blown — even to an insider such as yourself —
they would likely abort the mission. You did the right thing.”
The numbers above Rabbit’s ears were changing. The available routing
information was mostly bogus, but the network latencies — the delays — made
his analysts eighty percent confident that Rabbit was coming from North
America. Without help from the European signals intelligence people, he wasn’t
going to get any better estimate. But telling Günberk about this visit was the last
thing Alfred wanted to do.
So I must treat this son of a hitch as a respected colleague. Alfred sat back and

essayed a mild demeanor. “Between us then. What has been your progress?”
The rabbit tossed the butt end of his carrot onto Vaz’s desk and crossed his paws
behind his head. “Heh. I’ve almost completed assembling the operational team.
That file you’re looking at probably lists some of them, including the esteemed
Dean Blount. I can pay off most of these people with my own resources. One of
them may play ball in a spirit of good-natured adventure. The others need
inducements that the wealth of nations can satisfy. And the one thing the Indo-
European Alliance has is the wealth of nations.”
“As long as it is totally untraceable and doesn’t look like the wealth of nations.”
“Trust me. If these loons think about it at all, they’ll figure we really are South
American drug lords. Anyway, I’ll have their wish list for you in a week or so. If
all goes according to plan, you’ll have full access to the San Diego bio labs for
almost four hours, sometime in late December.”
“Excellent.”
“And then maybe you’ll tell me just what you’re looking for in those labs.”
“We believe the Americans are up to something there.”
Rabbit’s eyebrows raised. “A Great Power betraying its own kind?”
“It’s happened before,” though not since the early part of the century, the Sino-
American misunderstanding.
“Hmm.” For a brief moment, Rabbit seemed almost thoughtful. “I trust you’ll let
me in on what you discover.”
Alfred nodded. “If we can can keep this between the two of us.” In fact, Rabbit
learning about Alfred’s YGBM project would give new meaning to the phrase
“worst-case outcome.”
Fortunately, Rabbit did not push the issue. “There is one other thing,” said the
creature. “One last contact, an interesting fellow — in a way more interesting to
me than all your espionage hugger-mugger.”
“Very well.” Alfred resolved to accept whatever foolishness the other was

spouting.
A picture of a youngish Chinese fellow hung in the air. Vaz’s gaze swept through
the attached bio. No, this chap wasn’t young. “That’s Bob Gu’s father? You’re
going to fiddle with — ” He spluttered into silence, remembering recent events
in Paraguay. For a moment he forgot the need for placid acceptance; some types
of foolishness were very hard to swallow. “See here, this operation was to be
discreet. How could you — “
“Not to worry. I have zero interest in Junior. It’s just one of those crazy
coincidences. See, Bob Gu’s father is Alice Gu’s father-in-law.”
Hmm? Alfred parsed the contorted language. Then he realized that Rabbit was
talking about Alice Gong. Oh. Rabbit had left the land of the foolish and was
trekking deep into madness. Alfred was speechless.
“Ah, you know about Alice then? Did you know that she is tooling up for a full-
scale audit of San Diego bio-lab security? Just think! Real soon now, the
Americans are gonna go ask Alice to tighten up the guard there. Tracking her is
muy importante, old man.”
” .. Yes.” The EU and Japan would bail out if they knew Alice Gong Gu was on
this case. And Alice will surely detect what Ym doing at the bio labs. “So what
are you proposing?”
“I want to make sure Alice is not guarding the labs when we go in. I’ve had Gu
Senior on a line for several days. But that’s going too slowly. Besides — ”
another challenging, toothy grin ” — I’m dying to talk to the guy directly. We
need a zombie contact.” Another picture/bio popped up.
“An Indian national?”
“Subtle, am I not? Yes, though for the last two years Mr. Sharif has been living
in the U.S.A. He really has no connection with any Indo-European intelligence
service. I’ll contact him like the gentle cloud of coincidence that I am. If the
Americans identify him, he will be a perfect red herring. Your EU and Japanese
friends would be too cowardly to go for this. You, I think, have more courage. So
I’m here to give you a heads-up. Cover me on this. Keep your people out of
Sharif’s way. Sometimes he will really be me.”

Vaz was silent for a long moment. He had not known that Alice Gong Gu was
training for an audit of the San Diego labs. That was bad news. Very bad news. It
wasn’t enough that Gong be kept away one night. Then inspiration struck.
Alice’s genius came at a terrible sacrifice. He had stumbled on her secret several
years ago; in her own way, she risked more than Alfred ever had. And my
weapon, incomplete as it is, could stop her cold. He looked back at Rabbit.
“Indeed, you have my support in this. It should involve just the two of us.”
Rabbit preened.
“But if I may make a suggestion,” Alfred continued, one colleague to another. “It
may be best if we schedule things so that Alice Gu is on duty the night we go in.
With proper preparation, we may be able to turn her presence to our advantage.”
“Really?” Rabbit was literally bug-eyed with curiosity. “How is that?”
“I’ll have the details for you in a few days.” In fact, there were lots of details, but
not for Rabbit’s ears. Alfred was already posting the mission requirements to his
inner teams. How long would it take to build a Pseudomimivirus appropriate to
Alice’s special weakness? What was the surest delivery method? Indirect
infection was probably not practical here.
And what cover story would work best with this wretched rabbit?
Said rabbit was still looking at him expectantly.
“Of course,” Vaz continued, “there are aspects of the matter that I should best
keep to myself.”
“Heh. Of course. World-shaking plans, and so forth? Never mind, I am content
to remain your Great Cutout from Heaven. I’ll be in touch. Meantime — ”
Suddenly he was wearing a gray uniform studded with medals and draped with
aiguillettes. He stuck his arm out in a hitlerian salute. “Long live the Indo-
European Alliance!”
With that, the rabbit’s image vanished like the cheap theatrics it was.
Alfred sat motionless for almost two minutes, not responding to the shrill alarms
that pounded through the office network, not responding to the various staff
analyses that were already being generated. Alfred was rearranging his priorities.

He hadn’t known about Alice Gong Gu, but now he did and with enough time to
turn her presence into an advantage. It was a sad thing that he would harm this
woman who was actually fighting on his side, who had done more than almost
anyone to keep the world safe.
He forced his attention back on track. Besides dealing with Alice, there was
another new priority: to learn more about Rabbit, to learn how to destroy him.
○
Alfred Vaz had no official rank in the External Intelligence Agency, but he had
immense power there. Even with modern compartmentalization techniques, he
never could have cloaked his research programs otherwise. Now… well,
Rabbit’s visit to EIA headquarters was arguably the most spectacular intelligence
failure of the decade — but only if outsiders knew to argue about it! Alfred used
all his power in the Agency and all the secret political levers he had accumulated
over seventy years to keep the news within his own teams. If the EIA inspector
general had got a whiff of it, all Alfred’s plans would have unraveled. It was a
sad fact that his own government would probably count him as a traitor if it
knew of his efforts to save the world.
All this made investigating Rabbit’s jape a delicate affair. Somehow this enemy
had penetrated the most secure isolation firewall known. Rabbit had even
coopted hi-res localizer support (evident from his perfectly positioned imagery).
The obvious explanation was that Rabbit had succeeded in subverting the Secure
Hardware Environment. If that were so, then the foundation of all modern
security was suspect — and Rabbit’s visit was a clap of doom.
Surely Armageddon would not be announced by a silly rabbit? There followed
almost eighty hours of uncertainty as Alfred’s inner teams pounded away at the
mystery. Finally, his EIA analysts discovered the true explanation, something at
once comforting and deeply embarrassing to them: Rabbit had — admittedly
with extraordinary cleverness — exploited a combination of buggy software and
foolish registry settings, the kind of flaws that bedevil careless consumers. The
bottom line: Rabbit was far more dangerous than Alfred had originally thought,
but he was not the Next Very Bad Thing.
Vaz suffered through every moment of the suspense. But in the end, the most
infuriating aspect of the incident was the piece of carrot that Rabbit left on his

desk. With all the resources and expertise of the modern Indian state, it took EIA
signals intelligence almost three days to obliterate the logic that injected that
image into his office network.

An Excellent Thesis Topic
Miri kept a low profile around the house, even though that bothered Alice —
which was kind of contradictory, since Bob didn’t want her talking with Robert
anytime soon. Either way, they both seemed to think that given the chance,
Robert would just hurt her again.
Okay. She let Robert have the living room whenever he pleased. She made sure
she was outside when he was in. But she also snooped on him whenever she
honorably could.
Halloween was just around the corner. She should be over at her friends’ sites,
deep into final planning. She and Annette and Paula had done so much prep with
SpielbergRowling. Now it all seemed kind of dumb.
So Miri hung out with farther-away friends. Jin’s parents were shrinks in the
Provincial Medical Care Group in Hainan. Jin didn’t speak very good English,
but then Miri’s Mandarin was worse. Actually, language wasn’t a problem.
They’d get together on his beach or hers — depending on which side of the
world was daylight or had the nicest weather — and chatter away in Goodenuf
English, the air around them filled with translation guesstimates and picture
substitutions. Their little clique had contributed lots to the answerboards; it was
the most “socially responsible” of Miri’s hobbies.
Jin was full of theories about Robert: “Your grandfather was way gone-dead
before the doctors bring him back. No surprise he feel bad now.” He floated a
couple of academic papers in support of his point. Today Jin was hosting several
other kids who had senile or otherwise damaged old folks living at home. Mostly
they just listened, as sand crabs or simply presence icons. A few presented
human forms, maybe their real-world appearance. Now one of those — she
looked about ten years old — spoke up. “My great-great-aunt is like that. Back
in the twentieth, she was an account executive.” Hmm, account executive didn’t
mean anything like the English words might make you think. “By the teens she
was all crippled up. I’ve seen pictures. And she got drifty and depressed. My
grandma said she lost her edge and then she lost her job.”
One of the sand crabs reared back, a lurker drawn into the open. “So what’s new
in that? My brother is all unemployed and depressed, and he’s only twenty. It’s

hard to keep up.”
The ten-year-old ignored the interruption. “Gee-grantie was just old-fashioned.
Grandma got her a job as a landscape artist — ” The little girl slipped into pure
picturing, showing old-time cellphone advertisements for background scenery
you could rent for when people call and you’re in the bathroom. “Grantie was
good at that, but she never made as much money as before. And then video
landscapes went fully irrelevant. Anyway, she lived with my grandma for twelve
years. It sounds just like what you’re talking about, Miri.”
Twelve years! Vllgo bonkers after even a year of this. She glared at the little girl.
“So what happened then?”
“Oh, everything turned out fine in the end. My mom found a treatment site. They
specialize in upgraded specialties. Forty-eight hours at their clinic and Gee-
grantie had the skills of an ad manager.” Which was about the modern equivalent
of “account executive.”
Silence. Even some of the crabs looked a little shocked.
After a moment, Jin said, “That sound like JITT to me.”
“Just-in-time training? What if it is?”
“JITT is illegal,” said Miri. This is not something I want to talk about.
“It wasn’t illegal back then. And this JITT wasn’t so bad. Gee-grantie lives
pretty well as long as she keeps taking her upgrades. She seems happy, ‘cept that
she cries a lot.”
“Sound like mind control to me,” said Jin.
The little girl laughed. “It is not. You should know that, Jin Li! You, Chinese,
with two shrink parents.” Her eyes danced about, searching on things the others
could not see. “Your parents were in the army, weren’t they? They must know all
about mind control. That’s what you Han tried in Myanmar!”
Jin came to his feet, and kicked sand through the little girl’s image. “No! I mean,
that is year and year ago. Nobody do anything like that now. We certainly
don’t!”

Miri decided she didn’t like the little girl. What she said was more or less true,
but… Bob had talked to her once about the Myanmar Restoration, back when
she was doing a history project in the fifth grade. She had quoted him as “an
unamed source high in the American military”; in fact, he said the same thing as
most websites. You-Gotta-Believe-Me technology had been a Big Nightmare
possibility for years. Myanmar was the only place where YGBM had been tried
on a large scale. “It all comes down to the delivery problem,” Bob had said.
“The Chinese army had some new drugs, things that were very persuasive in a
research lab. But in the field? The Chinese sank half their budget into YGBM
and they didn’t get as much payoff as a good propaganda campaign.” Humans
had a million years of evolution learning to resist the power of suggestion; there
was no magic way to beat that!
Now Miri came to her feet, too. “Hey!” she said, in the tone Alice occasionally
used. “I didn’t come here to talk politics! I came for help with my grandfather.”
The little girl stared at her for a moment, her face quirked in an odd smile. The
air was full of support for Miri, unanimous minus one. After a moment, the little
girl shrugged. “I was just trying to help. Hey, I’ll be good. I’m all ears.” And she
demonstrated with a graphical exaggeration, growing wiggly rabbit ears.
So they all sat down again and had a quiet moment. Miri looked out along the
beach. She knew this was the true view even though she had never been to
Hainan in person. It was beautiful, a lot like the Cove in La Jolla, but this beach
was much bigger, with correspondingly more real people. Out near the horizon
there were three white peaks, icebergs on their way to coastal cities farther north.
Just like in California.
“Okay, then,” said Jin. “How we help Miri Gu? But no JITT. That’s a dead end.
Is your grandpa good at anything now day?”
“Well, he’s always been great with words, better than anyone I know. He has
poor clothes sense, but he’s become very quick with numbers and mechanical
things.” That brought a wave of interest; some of the crabs opened up with little
stories about numeracy. “But that just seems to send him into a rage.” She
showed them the story of the disemboweled automobile. If Louise Chumlig
hadn’t stood up for him, that would have gotten him expelled.
The little girl’s big ears had shrunk back to normal size. Of course, she had more

opinions: “Heh. I’m reading about him, what he was like before. He had a track
record back in the twentieth century. ‘Famous Poet,’ blah blah blah. But he was
only beloved by people who never met him.”
“That’s not true! Robert never suffered fools gladly, b-but — ” She ran out of
steam, remembering Lena and the stories about Graunty Cara. And remembering
the Ezra Pound Incident.
Jin dug his toes into the sand. “Let’s get back to track. Does he have any friends
in school?”
“N-No. He’s been matched up with Juan Orozco. That kid is like most in those
classes, a dumbhead.”
“What about friends from before?” said the little girl.
Miri shook her head. All the people Robert had known and helped when he was
a great poet, none of them had made contact. Was being a friend such a
temporary thing? “There are other old people in the class, but they’re on
different projects. They hardly talk at all.”
“Go for a personality match. There must be hundreds of people with
complementary problems.” The little girl smiled. “Then arrange for an accidental
collision? See, if your grandpa doesn’t know you’re working behind the scenes,
he can’t be resentful.” She looked up, as if surprised by insight: “Better yet —
once upon a time your grandpa stirred up a lotta critical interest. I bet there are
still graduate students who would love to fawn on him. Sell one of them a truly
excellent thesis topic!”
○
Afterward, Miri did a number of character searches. One of the guys in Robert’s
Fairmont classes had known him for years! She should have noticed that before.
The two had so much in common! If she could just get them together. Hmm. Too
bad that dummy Orozco was teaming with Robert… But Winston Blount was
into something outside of school, and that involved at least one other person who
had been in grad school with Robert way back in the 1970s.
How to set up something to bring them all together?

She also searched for graduate students who might want to talk with Robert. She
was confident that no grandparent of Miri Gu would be susceptible to false
flattery, but it would be nice for Robert to meet an outsider who obviously
respected him. If it was somebody with weak data skills… well, that might be
good, too; she might be able to help out directly.
She did a world search, the kind of thing that drags in yak herders desirous of
learning English. But this time — hey, she got a near perfect match in less than
five minutes. And this Sharif fellow was in Oregon, just far enough away that
most contact would be virtual and tweakable. For all her snottiness, the little girl
had made some really good suggestions.
Miri hesitated. In fact, all the really successful suggestions had been due to the
little girl. Maybe the “little girl” persona was covering something. Miri started a
query replicating out through everyone and everything that might provide
identity clues. But even if the kid were really ten years old, it wouldn’t prove
anything. Some fifth graders were scary.
○
The woman was tall, and dressed in black. “I understand you’re looking for
some help,” she said.
Huh? Zulfikar Sharif looked up from his beef taco. He hadn’t heard her
approach. Then he realized that he was still alone at his table in the back of the
OSU caf. He frowned at the apparition, “I’m not accepting fantasies.” God
protect me. I’ve been perverted still again.
The woman looked at him severely. She wasn’t more than thirty, but he couldn’t
imagine her on a date. “Young man, I am not your fantasy. You are looking for
help with a thesis topic, are you not?”
“Oh!” Zulfi Sharif was no lover of high technology, but now in his second year
in the OSU Literature Department, he’d become a bit desperate. His thesis
advisor was no help; Professor Blandings seemed most interested in having a
permanent, unpaid research assistant. So way back in January, Sharif had put out
feelers for help. That had provoked endless adverts for plagiarized and custom-
writ material. Annie Blandings was so obnoxious that Sharif was almost tempted
by some of the early offers — till his geekier friends pointed out how badly that
could go wrong.

Sharif had filtered out the plagiarists and the sarcastic jerkoffs. That left very
little. So much for high technology. He had spent the last two semesters
propping up Blandings’s career in Deconstructive Revisionism. In the remaining
time, he worked at a 411 job for the American Poetry Association and did his
best to craft a thesis out of vapor. He had come to America hoping for old-world
insight into the literature that he loved. Lately, he was beginning to wonder if he
should have stayed home in Kolkata.
And now, suddenly, this woman. The answer to my prayers. Yes, sure. He waved
her to be seated; at least that would embarrass her.
But the apparition knew exactly where it stood. It slid into the chair across the
table with scarcely an overlap of body and furniture.
“I was really expecting an email,” he said.
The woman in black just shrugged. Her imperious glance did not wa-ver. After a
moment, Sharif continued, “In fact, I am looking for a thesis topic. But I’ll have
you know, I’m not interested in fraud, or plagiarism, or collaboration. If you’re
selling that, then please shove off. I simply want the sort of pointers” — and
support — “that a good thesis advisor would give a student.”
The lady smiled a cruel smile, and it suddenly occurred to Sharif that she might
be connected to Annie Blandings. The old fart didn’t even wear — but maybe
she had friends who did.
“Nothing whatsoever illegal, Mr. Sharif. I simply saw your ad. I have a
tremendous opportunity for you.”
“And I don’t have much money!”
“I’m sure we can come to an arrangement. Interested?”
“Well… possibly.”
The lady in black leaned forward. Even her shadow matched the cafeteria
lighting. Sharif hadn’t realized that such precision was possible. “I don’t suppose
you know that Robert Gu is alive and well and living in Southern California?”
“Huh? Bullshit! He died some years ago. There hasn’t been…” His words

dribbled off before her silent stare. He tapped briefly at his phantom keypad,
calling up a standard search. Since he started working 411, he’d become rather
good at this kind of ultra-fast research. Results streamed across the tabletop.
“Okay. He just stopped writing. Alzheimer’s… and he’s come back!”
“Indeed. Does this suggest possibilities?”
“um.” Sharif continued his guppy imitation for a second or two. If I had just
looked for the right facts, I would have known this a month ago. “It does suggest
possibilities.” Interviewing Robert Gu would run a close second to chatting up
William Shakespeare.
“Good.” The lady in black tented her fingers. “There are complications,
however.”
“Like what?” An opportunity this good must be a scam.
“Robert — ” The woman’s image seem to freeze for an instant, maybe a
communications jitter. ” — Professor Gu has never suffered fools gladly. And
never less so than now. I can give you access capability in his private enum. It
will be up to you to intrigue him.”
Without the enum, getting through to the great man could be very difficult.
“How much?” he said. He had twenty thousand dollars in the student credit
union. Perhaps his brother in Kolkata could be hit up for one more loan.
“Ah, my price is not in dollars. I simply ask to tag along, occasionally to make a
suggestion or ask a question.”
“But I’ll have first use?”
“Of course.”
“I, well — — ” Sharif wavered. Robert Gu! “Okay, you’ve got a deal.”
“Very good.” The lady gestured for his hand. “Give me a moment of full
access.”
Epiphany Rule Number One, what they pound on in all the instructions: Full

access is only for parents and spouses — and then only if you like to take
chances. Whether it was her tone or his need Sharif was never sure, but he
reached out and touched the empty air. He matched the pointing gesture with a
lowering of security. The tingle in his fingers was surely his imagination, but
now the air between them was full of binding certificates.
Then the paperwork was done. What remained in the air was a single enum.
Sharif stared at the identifier with sudden apprehension. “So I just call him?”
She nodded. “Now you have that capability. But remember what I said about
his… his intolerance for fools. Do you know his works?” Or course.
“Do you admire them?”
“Yes! I honestly and intelligently admire the hell out of them.” It was a claim
that worked with all the profs Sharif knew. In this case, it was also the truth.
The lady nodded. “That may be enough. Keep in mind that Professor Gu is not
feeling well. He is still recovering from his illness. You may have to be directly
useful to him.”
“I’ll empty the man’s chamber pot if that will help.”
Again a brief freeze of expression. “Ah! I don’t think that will be necessary. But
he misses things from the past. He misses the way books used to be. You know,
those clunky things you have to carry around.”
Who is this creature? But he nodded. “I know all about, um, physical books. I
can show him plenty, and in person.” He was already looking up taxi services.
“Very good.” The apparition smiled. “Good luck, Mr. Sharif.” And it was gone.
Sharif sat for almost a minute, staring blankly into the space lately occupied by
the woman in black. And then he was consumed by the desire to share this news
with others. Fortunately, the caf was nearly empty this late at night, and Sharif
was not one of those who could message as quickly as they were overcome by
the whim. No, after a moment he realized that this was likely something he
should keep under his hat, at least until he’d established a connection with
Robert Gu.

Besides… second thoughts were percolating up. How could I be so stupid as to
let her into my wearable? He ran the Epiphany integrity check a couple of times.
Widgets of purity floated in the air above his taco. Epiphany said he was clean;
of course, if he’d been totally perverted that’s exactly what it would say.
Damnation. I don’t want to fry-clean my clothes. Not again!
Especially in this case. He looked at the golden enum: Robert Gu’s own direct
identifier. If he took the right approach, he would finally have his thesis. Not just
any ordinary thesis. Sharif considered Robert Gu to be from the highest rank of
modern literature, up there with Williams and Cho.
And Annie Blandings thought Gu was God.

Introduction to the Librareome Project
Wearable computers, what a concept. IBM PC meets Epiphany-brand high-
fashion. In fact, Robert might have mistaken his new wardrobe for ordinary
clothes. True, the shirts and pants were not a style he favored. There were
embroidered patterns both inside and out. But the embroidery was more
noticeable to the touch than the eye; Juan Orozco had to show him special views
to reveal the net of microprocessors and lasers. The main problem was the damn
contact lenses. He had to put them on every morning and then wear them all day.
There were constant twinkles and flashes in his eyes. But with practice, he got
control of that. He felt a moment of pure joy the first time he managed to type a
query on a phantom keyboard and view the Google response floating in the air
before him… There was a feeling of power in being able to draw answers out of
thin air.
And then there was what Juan Orozco called “ensemble coding.”
A week passed. Robert was practicing with his beginner’s outfit, trying to repeat
the coding tricks Juan had shown him. For the most part, even the simplest
gestures didn’t work when he first tried them. But he would flail and flail — and
when the command did work, the success gave him a pitiful spike of joy and he
worked even harder. Like a boy with a new computer game. Or a trained rat.
When the phone call came, he thought he was having a stroke. There were bright
flashes before his eyes, and a faraway buzzing sound. The buzzing broke into
words: “… very muzzzz like to… interview you zzzz’xx…”
Aha! Spam, or some kind of reporter.
“Why would I want to give an interview?”
“Bzzzt a short int… view.”
“Even a short one.” Robert’s reply was a reflex. It had been years since he’d had
the opportunity to dump on a journalist.
The light was still a glaring shapelessness, but when Robert straightened his
collar, the voice became sharp and perfect. “Sir, my name is Sharif, Zulfikar
Sharif. The interview would be for my Lit-in-English thesis.”

Robert squinted and shrugged, squinted again. And then suddenly he got it right:
his visitor was standing in the middle of the bedroom. I have to tell Juan about
this! It was his first real three-dimensional success, and everything that the kid
had claimed about retinal painting. Robert stood and stepped to the side, looking
behind the visitor. The image was so solid, so complete. Hmm. And yet the
visitor cast shadows contrary to the real lighting. I wonder whose fault that is?
His dark-skinned visitor — Indian? Pakistani? his voice held a South Asian lilt
— was still talking. “Please don’t say no, sir! Interviewing you would be my
great honor. You are a resource for all humanity.”
Robert walked back and forth in front of the visitor. He was still boggled by the
medium of the message.
“Just a small amount of your precious time, sir! That’s all I ask. And — ” He
looked around Robert’s room, probably seeing what was truly there. Robert had
not had a chance to set up false backgrounds. Juan had been going to show him
that yesterday, but they had gotten sidetracked by Robert’s side of the bargain —
tutoring the kid in English. Poor, subliterate Juan. This Sharif fellow on the other
hand: How bright are graduate students these days?
This particular graduate student was looking more and more desperate. His gaze
caught on something behind Robert. “Ah, books! You are one who still treasures
the real thing.”
Robert’s “bookcases” were made from plastic slats and cardboard boxes. But
they held all the books he had rescued from the basement. Some of them — the
Kipling — he would never have bothered with in the old days. But these were all
he had now. He looked back at Sharif. “Indeed I do. Your point, Mr. Sharif?”
“I just thought — it means we share the same values. By helping me, you’ll be
advancing those noble passions.” He paused — listening to some inner voice?
Since his lessons with Juan, Robert had become suspicious of people listening to
their inner voices. “Perhaps we could strike a bargain, sir. I would give almost
anything for a few hours of your opinions and reminiscence. I would be happy to
be your personal 411 agent. I’m an expert at such services; it’s how I pay my
way at OSU. I can guide you through the contemporary world.”
“I already have a tutor.” And when he considered the flippancy, he felt a twinge
of surprise. In a sense it was true: he had Juan.

Another significant silence. “Oh. Him.” Sharif — his image, perfect except for
the misplaced shadows and the shoes that disappeared a quarter inch into the
floor — walked around Robert. To get a closer look at the books? Suddenly,
Robert had even more questions for Juan Orozco. But Sharif was talking again:
“These are permanently printed? Not just-in-time chapbooks?”
“Of course!”
“Wonderful. You know… I could show you around the UCSD library.”
Millions of volumes.
“I can go down there myself, anytime.” But so far he hadn’t quite dared. Robert
looked at his little library. In the middle ages, a rich man might have so many
books. Now people with books were rare once again. But at UCSD, there was a
real, physical library. And going with his graduate student… that would be a
little like the old days.
He looked back at Sharif. “When?”
“Why not now?”
Robert would have to let Juan Orozco know this afternoon’s session was off. He
felt an instant of uncharacteristic embarrassment. Juan was going to show him
how to do glance searches, and Robert had promised Juan scansion. Robert
pushed the regrets aside. “Let’s go, then,” he said.
○
Robert took a car down to campus. For some reason, he couldn’t get a clear
image of Sharif inside the automobile. There was just his voice chattering away,
asking Robert for his opinion of everything they saw, offering opinions and facts
whenever Robert seemed even faintly puzzled.
Robert had driven past the outskirts of campus before; today he would see what
the place had finally become. Coming out of Fallbrook, there were the usual
subdivisions, unexceptional and dull. But just north of campus, he drove past
endless gray-green buildings. Here and there, windowless walkways stretched
across the canyons.

“Bioscience labs,” Sharif cheerfully explained. “They’re mostly underground.”
He fed Robert’s Epiphany with pointers to images and details. Ah. So these
doorless, windowless structures were not some twenty-first-century experiment
in communal living. In fact, there weren’t more than a few dozen people inside
them. The connecting corridors were for biosample transport.
Monstrous things might gestate in these buildings and in the caverns below. But
salvation, too. Robert gave them a little salute. Reed Weber’s heavenly minefield
was created in places like these.
These were the anterooms to UCSD. He braced himself for unintelligible
futurism: the main campus. His car drove down Torrey Pines Road. The
intersections were almost as he remembered, though there were no traffic lights
and no stopping. Cross traffic interleaved with smooth and eerie grace. Someday
I must write a lighthearted piece about the secret life of automobiles. He had
never seen one stop for much longer than it took passengers to get off and on.
Out in the desert, his car had departed almost immediately, stranding him. But by
the time he got back to the road, another had pulled up. The devices were always
moving. He imagined them circling the county, forever maneuvering so that no
customer ever need wait more than a few moments. But what do they do at night,
when business is scarce? That would be the topic of his poem. Were there hidden
garages, hidden car parks? There had to be garages for repair work — or at least
equipment swapouts. But maybe there was no other stopping. This was the stuff
of both poetry and futurism: Maybe at night when demand fell and they
otherwise would have to sleep without profit in some empty lot, maybe then they
conspired to clump together like Japanese transformer toys… to become freight
trucks hauling cargo that was too big for UP/Express.
In any case, the old parking lots on the north side of campus were gone, replaced
by gaming fields and house-of-cards-style office buildings. Robert had the car
drop him at the edge of the old campus, near where Applied Physics and Math
used to be.
“Nothing looks the same, even where there were buildings before.” In fact, there
seemed to be more open space than he remembered from the seventies.
“Don’t worry about it, Professor.” Sharif was still audio only. It sounded as if he
were reading from a brochure: “UCSD is an unusual campus, less traditional
than any other in the UC system. Most of the buildings were rebuilt after the

Rose Canyon earthquake. Here’s the official view.” Suddenly the buildings were
sturdy, reinforced concrete, much as he remembered.
Robert waved the fakery away, a gesture Juan had showed him early on. “Hands
off the main view, Mr. Sharif.”
“Sorry.”
Robert walked eastward across campus, sampling the ambience. On the gaming
fields, there was just as much rushing around as in the 1970s, half a dozen
separate games of touch football and soccer. Robert had never participated in
those, but one thing he’d admired about UCSD was that the students played
sports that were semi-pro spectator events at other schools.
Up close… well, the people he passed looked ordinary enough. There were the
familiar backpacks, with the handles of tennis rackets sticking out the top like
assault rifles.
Many people were talking to themselves, sometimes gesturing into the empty air,
or jabbing fingers at unseen antagonists. Nothing new in that; cellphone addicts
had always been one of Robert’s pet peeves. But these folks were more blatant
about it than the kids at Fairmont High. There was something foolish about a
fellow walking along, suddenly stopping to tap at his belt, and then talking to the
air.
The new, numerate Robert couldn’t resist keeping count of what he saw — and
he soon noticed something the old Robert might not have: There were many
college-age kids running around, but there were too many old people. One
person in ten looked really old, old as Robert truly was. One in three were lean
and spry, the twentieth-century cliche of “active senior citizens.” And some… it
took him a while to spot the few where modern medicine was all on target. Their
skin was firm and their stride was strong; they almost looked young.
Then the most encouraging sight of all: a pair of old duffers coming his way —
and both of them carrying books! Robert felt like grabbing their free hands and
dancing a jig. Instead he gave them a broad grin as they walked by.
○
Sharif agreed that stepping into an ordinary building — or even the campus

bookstore — wouldn’t be an effective way to find real books. “The university
library is your best bet, Professor.”
Robert walked down a gentle slope. The eucalyptus grove was more overgrown
than he remembered. The dry crowns rustled in the breeze above. The debris of
bark and twigs and branches crunched under his feet. Somewhere ahead of him,
a choir sang.
Then, through the trees, he saw the Geisel Library. Unchanged after all the
years! Well, the pillared supports were covered with ivy — but there was
nothing virtual about it. He walked out from under the trees and stared.
Sharif’s voice popped up, “Professor, if you’ll bear to the right, the sidewalk
goes to the main — “
That was the way Robert remembered, but he hesitated when the other’s voice
dropped away. “Yes?”
“Oops, heh. Just detour around to the left. There’s a mob of singers blocking the
main entrance.”
“Okay. What is all the singing about, anyway?”
Sharif made no reply.
Robert shrugged and followed his invisible guide’s suggestion, walking around
the north side of the building, down to what had been a lower-level parking lot.
From here the library towered above him. He remembered when it was built, the
criticisms: “It’s an expensive white elephant,”
“We’ve been hijacked by space cadets.” In fact, it did look like something
brought down from outer space: the six aboveground stories formed a huge
octahedron, touching ground on one vertex and clasped by fifty-foot pillars. In
Robert’s time, the structure had been concrete and sweeping glass. Now the
vines extended past the fifth story, obscuring the concrete. The library still
looked like it came from heaven, but now it was an ancient gem-mountain, and
the clasp was the green of a supporting earth.
The singers were louder. It sounded as if they were singing “La Marseillaise.”
But there were also chants that sounded like a good old-fashioned student

protest.
He was well under the overhang now. He had to look straight up to see the
undersides of the fourth, fifth, and sixth floors, to see where the concrete finally
emerged from the ivy.
Strange. The edges of each floor were straight as ever, but the concrete was laced
with irregular lighter lines. In the sunlight those lines glinted like silver wedged
in stonework.
“Sharif?”
No answer. I should look up the explanation. Juan Orozco could do such
searches almost without thinking. Then he smiled: the silvery crack lines were a
kind of playful mystery — and that might be their explanation. UCSD had a
tradition of weird and wonderful campus art.
Robert started toward the short stairway that led to a loading dock. This looked
like the most direct way into the library. There was a faded au-thorized staff only
sign painted on the wall. The freight door was rolled down shut, but a second,
smaller door was ajar. From within he could hear some kind of power saw —
carpentry? He remembered what Juan had said about getting Epiphany’s default
local views. He waggled his hand tentatively. Nothing. He gestured again, a little
differently: Oops. The loading dock was plastered with keep out signs. He
glanced up the hillside; somewhere beyond the crest would be the main entrance.
Epiphany showed him a mauve nimbus pulsating in time with the singing. Words
floated above the music “A has la Bibleotome!” — “Down with the Librareome
Project!” Now that he was hearing both real and remote voices, the music was
close to cacophony.
“What’s going on, Sharif?”
This time there was an answer: “It’s just another student protest. You’d never get
in through the front door.”
He stood still for a moment, filled with mild curiosity about what students
demonstrated against nowadays. No matter. He could look that up later. He
stepped nearer the half-opened door, looked down a dimly lit hallway. Despite
the phantasmic storm of warnings and rules, he saw no obstacle to free passage.
But now the strange sound was louder than the choir: rough, tearing growls

spaced by silence.
Robert stepped through the doorway.

Guardians of the Past, Handmaidens of the Future
From its beginning, the Elder Cabal had met on the sixth floor of the Geisel
Library. Winston Blount, calling in favors from his years at Arts and Letters, had
made that possible. For a while, he had even had a nice clubroom in the staff
lounge up here. That had been after the Rose Canyon quake, when the bright
young future freaks had been briefly leery of their own technological fixes and
floor space was available to those willing to risk the heights.
In the first years, there were almost thirty regulars. The membership had
changed from year to year, but they were mostly faculty and staff from the turn
of the century, almost all retired or laid off.
Time passed and the cabal dwindled. Blount himself had drifted away from the
group, discovering that there weren’t many more favors left for him to call in.
His plans for a resumed career had centered on the Fairmont Adult Ed program.
Then the Orozco boy had unintentionally pointed him at a magnificent shortcut:
the Librareome protest movement. And the inner circle of the cabal was perfect
for that. Perhaps it was just as well that the inner circle was exactly the cabal’s
entire remaining membership.
Tom Parker was sitting right beside the window wall. He and Blount peered
down upon the protesters. Parker chuckled. “So, Dean, are you going to preach
to the choir?”
Blount grunted. “No. But they can see us up here. Give the folks a wave,
Tommie.” Blount followed his own advice, raising his arms in a kind of blessing
upon the singers at the main entrance and the slightly smaller mob on the terrace
by the Snake Path. In fact, he had offered to speak at the demonstration. In the
old days he would have been a featured speaker. Now he was still a critical
player, but of zero publicity value. He flickered through some of the images that
glowed above the crowd. “My, this event is big. Layered in fact.” But some of
the layers were counterdemonstrations, obscene ghosts that capered through the
crowd to mock them. Damn them.
He turned off all enhancements, and noticed that Parker was grinning at him.
“Still trying to use those contact lenses, aren’t you Dean?” He patted his laptop

computer lovingly. “It just goes to show, you can’t beat the genius of a mouse-
and-windows environment.” Parker’s hands slid across the keyboard. He was
working through the layers of enhancement that Blount had been seeing directly
with his contacts. Tom Parker might be the sharpest fellow left in the cabal, but
he was hopelessly fixated on old ways. “I’ve customized my laptop to pick out
what’s really important.” Images flickered on his tiny screen. There were things
Winston Blount had not noticed in his contacts: someone had set a kind of
nimbus over the demonstrators. Impressive.
Tommie was still chuckling. “I can’t tell about that purple halo. Is it supposed to
be pro-or anti-Librareome?”
On the other side of Parker, Carlos Rivera leaned back from the window and
stretched. “Anti, according to the journalists. They say the halo is to bless the
guardians of the past.” The three watched silently for a moment. The sound of
the choir came through the high glass windows, but also from protesters around
the world. The combined effect was more symbolic than beautiful, since the
voices were so far out of synch.
After a moment, Carlos Rivera spoke again. “Almost a third of the physical
visitors are from out of town!”
Blount grinned back at him. Carlos Rivera was a strange young fellow, a
disabled veteran. He hardly met the cabal’s informal age requirements, but in
some ways he was almost as old-fashioned as Tommie Parker. He wore small
thick glasses, the kind that had been popular in the early teens. He had typer
rings on all his fingers and both thumbs. His shirt was one of the old
displayables. Right now it showed white letters on black: “Librarians: Guardians
of the Past, Handmaidens of the Future.” But the most important thing about
Carlos Rivera was that he was on the Library staff.
Parker was studying the numbers on his laptop. “Well, we’ve got the world’s
attention. We spiked at two million viewers a few moments back. And lots more
will be watching this asynchronously.”
“What does UCSD Public Relations say?”
Parker typed briefly on his laptop. “They’re lying low. The PR people would just
as soon that this be a non-event. Ha. But they’re getting pounded by the popular
press…” Parker leaned back and shifted into reminiscence. “There was a time, I

would have hidden my own cameras down on the lower floors. And if they
deadzoned me, I’d’ve broken into the PR site and pasted pictures of burning
books all across their press releases!”
“Duì,” said Rivera, nodding his head. “But that would be difficult nowadays.”
“Yup. Worse, it would take courage.” Tommie patted his laptop. “And that’s the
trouble with people nowadays. They’ve traded freedom for security. When I was
a young man, the cops didn’t live in every widget, and there wasn’t some clown
collecting royalties on every keystroke. Back then there was no ‘Secure
Hardware Environment’ and it didn’t take ten thousand transistors to make a
flipflop. I remember in ‘91, when I took down the” — and he was off on one his
stories. Poor Tommie. Modern medicine had not cured him of his need to tell
about old adventures again and again.
But Carlos Rivera seemed to love these stories. He nodded every few seconds,
his expression rapt. Blount sometimes wondered whether Rivera’s enthusiasm
should be held for or against the young fellow.
” — so anyway, by the time they thought to check for crimps in the fiber, we had
dumped all the files and — “
Now, for a wonder, Rivera was no longer listening. He had turned toward the
stacks, and his expression was full of surprise. He rattled off something in
Chinese, then thankfully slipped back into English: “I mean, please wait a
moment.”
“What?” Parker glanced at his laptop. “Have they started the shredders?”
Damn, thought Blount. He had been hoping that terrible moment could be
marked by the protesters.
“Yes,” said Rivera, “but that was several minutes ago, while you were talking.
This is something different. Someone has gotten into the loading area.”
Winston bounced to his feet — bounced as much as semirejuvenated joints could
be made to bounce. “I thought you said there was security down there?”
“I thought there was!” Rivera came to his feet, too. “I can show you.” Images
popped into Blount’s eyes, views from cameras on the north and east sides of the

building, more views than he could make sense of.
Blount waved the images away. “I want to see this for myself.” He plunged into
the library stacks, Rivera close behind.
“If we had known about this, we could have put some of our people down
there.” That was the problem nowadays. Security was so good that when it broke
down, no one was around to take advantage! In the back of Blount’s mind,
something marveled at his new priorities. There had been a time when Dean
Winston C. Blount had been the fellow on the establishment side, doing his best
to make sure that the know-nothings didn’t bust things up. Now… well, now, a
certain amount of hell-raising might be the only way to set the establishment
right.
“Has the choir seen this?”
“Dunno. The best views were quarantined.” Rivera sounded out of breath.
They detoured around the elevators and staff rooms that occupied the middle of
the floor. Now they were moving at right angles to the stacks. Far down the
book-lined shelves he glimpsed the sky beyond the windows. “You said there
was chance that Max Huertas might show up today.”
“Duì. Yes. There’s some chance he might come. Several libraries begin the
project this week, but UCSD is the star.” Huertas was more than just the money
behind the Librareome. He was also a major investor in the biotech labs near
campus. He had turned the university scene upside down with his Librareome
insanity, ultimately greasing it past an administration that should have fought
him to the death.
Blount’s jog slowed as they approached the windows. The UCSD campus had
suffered a revolution in the last decades. The vibrant building campaign of his
time as dean had been swept away by the Rose Canyon quake and the facile
logic of the modern university administrations. The campus had reverted to a
woodsy, low-density style, with buildings that might just as well have been
prefab Quonsets. In a sad, sad way it reminded him of the campus’s earliest
years, of his grad-school years. We built such a beautiful place here, and then we
let opportunism and remote learning and the damn labs dissipate it all. What
shall it profit a university, if it shall enroll five hundred thousand, and lose its
own soul?

He reached the northeast windows and looked down. The sixth floor was at the
building’s maximum overhang. You could see almost straight down — to a
stretch of cracked concrete, the library loading dock. And there was a guy down
there, furtively looking around. Carlos Rivera caught up with Blount and for a
moment they were both staring downward. Then Blount noticed that the younger
man was actually staring through the floor; he’d found some camera on the
lower levels. “That’s not Max Huertas,” said Carlos. “He’d come with a gang of
lackeys.”
“Yeah.” But it was someone who could persuade the Library rent-a-cops to let
him go down there. Blount tapped the glass. “Look up here, you jerk!” It was
amazing what little he could see from straight up. The stranger carried himself
with a twitchy awkwardness, like an old-timer coping with a regrown nervous
system… Blount was beginning to get a very bad feeling. And then the stranger
turned his gaze upward. It was like finding a large rat at your feet.
“Oh, Christ.” A strange combination of disgust and curiosity forced him to say:
“Just get him up here.”
○
After the sunny loading dock, the hallway seemed very dark. Robert hesitated,
adjusting to the light. The walls were streaked with scuff and scrape marks. The
floor was naked concrete. This was not a public area. It reminded him of years
ago when he and certain undergrads would sneak around in the utility cores of
these buildings.
Epiphany hung tiny labels on the doors and ceiling, and even the cracks in the
walls. They weren’t terribly informative, ID numbers and maintenance
instructions, the sort of thing that might have been paint-stenciled in the old
days. But — if he wanted to take the time — he could search through the signs
and get background information. And there were mysteries. A large, silver-
puttied crack in the wall was marked “cantilever-LimitCycle < 1.2mm:25s.”
Robert was about to search on that when he noticed a door decorated with a
larger banner, one that ticked out the seconds:
00:07:03 Librareome Equipment in Operation: KEEP OUT!
What the hell, this door was open too.

On the other side, the power-saw racket was louder. He walked fifty feet, past
plastic crates — “Rescued Data,” the labels said. At the end, behind some kind
of legged forklift, there was another unlocked door. And now he was on familiar
ground: he was at the bottom of the library’s central stairwell. He looked up and
up, into the foreshortened spiral of steps. Tiny flecks of white floated and
swirled in the column of light. Snowflakes? But one landed on his hand: a fleck
of paper.
And now the ripping buzz of the saw was still louder, and there was also the
sound of a giant vacuum cleaner. But it was the irregular ripping buzz that
echoed down the stairwell and beat him about the head. There was something
familiar about that, but it wasn’t an indoors kind of sound.
He started up the stairs, pausing at each landing. The dust and the noise were
worst at the fourth floor, labeled “Catalog Section PZ.” The door opened
smoothly. Beyond would be the library stacks. All the books you could ever
want, miles of them. The beauty of ideas waiting in ambush.
But this was like no stacks he had ever seen. The floor was draped in white
tarpaulin. The air was hazy with drifting debris. He took a breath, smelled pine
pitch and burnt wood — and for a moment he couldn’t stop coughing.
Brap, painfully loud now, coming from four aisles to his right. There were empty
shelves here, a littering of paper scraps and deep dust.
Brrap. Against logic, sometimes recognition comes hard. But finally, Robert
remembered the exact sound which that abrupt roar must be. He had heard it
occasionally throughout his life, but always the machine had been outdoors.
Brrrapl A tree shredder!
Ahead of him, everything was empty bookcases, skeletons. Robert went to the
end of the aisle and walked toward the noise. The air was a fog of floating paper
dust. In the fourth aisle, the space between the bookcases was filled with a
pulsing fabric tube. The monster worm was brightly lit from within. At the other
end, almost twenty feet away, was the worm’s maw — the source of the noise.
Indistinct in the swirling haze, Robert could see two white-suited figures, their
jackets labeled “Huertas Data Rescue.” The two wore filter masks and head
protectors. They might have been construction workers. In fact, this business
was the ultimate in deconstruction: first one and then the other would pull books

off the racks and toss them into the shredder’s maw. The maintenance labels
made calm phrases of the horror: The raging maw was a “NaviCloud custom
debinder.” The fabric tunnel that stretched out behind it was a “camera tunnel.”
Robert flinched from the sight — and Epiphany randomly rewarded his gesture
with imagery from within the monster: The shredded fragments of books and
magazines flew down the tunnel like leaves in tornado, twisting and tumbling.
The inside of the fabric was stitched with thousands of tiny cameras. The shreds
were being photographed again and again, from every angle and orientation, till
finally the torn leaves dropped into a bin just in front of Robert. Rescued data.
BRRRRRAP! The monster advanced another foot into the stacks, leaving another
foot of empty shelves behind it. Almost empty. Robert stepped into the aisle and
his hand caught on something lying on a shelf. It wasn’t dust. It was half a page,
a remnant of all the thousands of books that had already been sucked into the
“data rescue” equipment. He waved it at the white-suited workers and screamed
words that were lost in the noise of their shredder and the worm tunnel fans.
But the two looked up and shouted something back.
If the body of the glowing worm hadn’t been between him and them, Robert
might have rushed the pair. As it was, they just waved impotently at each other.
Then a third guy appeared, behind Robert. This one was an overweight thirty-
something wearing Bermuda shorts and a huge black T-shirt. The young man
was shouting at him in — what, Mandarin? He waved pleadingly for Robert to
follow him back toward the stairwell, away from the nightmare.
○
The sixth floor of the library was not part of the nightmare. In fact, it looked
pretty much as Robert remembered from the early 1970s. The guy with the big
T-shirt led him through the stacks to a study area on the south side of the
building. There was a short fellow with an ancient laptop computer, sitting right
by the windows. The little guy stood and stared. Then suddenly he laughed, and
stuck out his hand. “I’ll be damned. You really are Robert Gu!”
Robert took the proffered hand, and stood uncertainly for awoment. Book
shredders below, mystery man up here. And the crazy choir. He could finally see
the singers in the plaza.

“Ha. You don’t recognize me, do you, Robert?” No. The guy had lots of blond
hair, but his face was as old as the hills. Only his laughter was familiar. After a
second, he shrugged and waved for Robert to sit down. “I don’t blame you,” he
chattered on. “But recognition the other way is easy. You lucked out, Robert,
didn’t you? I’d guess the Venn-Kurasawa treatment worked a hundred percent
for you; your skin looks better than when you were twenty-five years old.” The
old man slid an age-spotted hand across his own features and smiled ruefully.
“But how’s the rest of you? You look a little twitchy.”
“I — I lost my marbles. Alzheimer’s. But — “
“Hey, right. I can tell.”
It was the heedless frankness that Robert suddenly recognized. Behind the
stranger’s face, Robert recognized the freshman who had made his
UCSD years significantly more exciting. “Tommie Parker!” The young squirt
who could never be put down, who had been a computer-science jock at UCSD
before he had even graduated from high school, before there had even been such
a major. The little guy who couldn’t wait for the future.
Tommie nodded, chuckling. “Yup. Yup. But it’s been ‘Professor Thomas Parker’
for a long time. You know I got my doctorate from MIT? Then I came back here
and I taught for almost forty years. You’re looking at a Member of the
Establishment.”
And seeing what time had done… for a moment Robert was silent. I should be
immune by now. He looked out the window at the crowds, away from Parker.
“So what’s going on, Tommie? You’re camped up here like some grand
commander.”
Parker laughed and typed at his keyboard. From what Robert could see of the
display, it was some ancient system, worse than his view-page — and nothing
like what he could get from Epiphany. But there was enthusiasm in Tom Parker’s
voice. “It’s this protest demonstration we set up. Against the Librareome
Menace. We didn’t stop the shredding, but — jeez, look at that. I got your break-
in on video.” Tommie’s display showed what looked like a telephoto image shot
from north of campus. A tiny figure that might have been Robert Gu was
entering the library’s freight area. “I don’t know how you got past security,
Robert.”

“Management wonders that too,” said the young man who rescued Robert. He
had sat down behind the front desk and brushed flakes of paper dandruff off of
his hair and T-shirt. Suddenly the “Chad is Bad” slogan on his shirt made a lot of
sense. He noticed Robert’s regard and gave him a little wave. “Hi, Professor Gu.
I’m Carlos Rivera, library staff.” His T-shirt morphed to white, which at least
made the little bits of paper less obvious.
“You’re part of this destruction?” He suddenly noticed the half page he had
saved from the shredder. He laid it gently on the table There were words there;
maybe he could figure out what they had been part of.
“No, no,” said Parker. “Carlos is helping us. In fact, all the librarians oppose the
shredding — excepting the administrators. And seeing that you got past library
security, I think we have allies even there. You’re a famous guy, Robert. And we
can use the video you got.”
“But I — ” Robert started to say he didn’t have a camera. Then he thought of the
clothes he was wearing. “Okay, but you’ll have to show me how to give it to
you.”
“No problem — ” began Rivera.
“You’re using that Epiphany junk, aren’t you, Robert? Yeah, you’ll have to get
some wearer to help you. Wearables are supposed to be such a convenience, but
mainly they’re an excuse for other people to run your life. Me, I’ll stick with the
proven solutions.” He patted his laptop. Through some fluke of memory, Robert
recognized the model. Twenty-some years ago, this gadget had been at the
cutting edge of power and miniaturization, barely eight inches by ten, with a
brilliant, millimeters-thin screen and a fancy camera. Now… even to Robert it
was a ponderous behemoth. How can it even talk to the modern magic?
Parker’s glance slid across to the librarian. “How did he make it into the
building, Carlos?”
Rivera said, “Wó bù zhidào.”
Tommie groaned. “You’re talking Chinese, Carlos.”
“Oops, sorry.” He glanced at Robert. “I was an army translator during the war,”
he said, as if that explained everything. “I don’t know how he got in, Professor

Parker. I saw him walking down from Warschawski Hall. I was using the same
viewpoints as our security does. But you notice that even after he got to the
shredders, there was still no one to stop him.” He turned, looked expectantly into
the stacks. “Maybe the dean has other people working on this.”
After a moment, an old man stepped out from behind the books. “You know I
don’t, Carlos.” He walked to the window without looking at Robert. Aha,
thought Robert, so this is where Winnie’s disappeared to the last couple of weeks.
Blount stared down at the plaza for several seconds. Finally he said, “The
singing has stopped. They know about Gu’s arrival, don’t they?”
“Yes, sir. Even though we haven’t published our own video, there’s plenty of
journalists floating around. At least three popular sources have IDed him.”
Outside, the crowd was cheering.
Robert tried the little shrug that Juan said would bring up local news. All he got
was advertising.
And Sharif was still silent.
After a moment, Blount walked back to the head of the table and sat down with a
wheeze. He hadn’t looked directly at Robert; Winnie didn’t seem nearly as
confident as in Chumlig’s class. How long has it been since we last played our
little political games? Robert gave Blount a steady look. That should cause
Epiphany to search on him. Also, in the old days, that look had always unnerved
the guy.
“Okay,” Blount nodded at Tom Parker, “tell our protestors to start the windup.
You know, the interviews and opinion pieces.”
“What about Mr. New Development here?” Tommie jerked a thumb in Robert’s
direction.
Blount finally looked at Robert. And Epiphany began streaming information
across his view: Google BioSource: Winston C. Blount, MA English from UCSD
1971, PhD English Literature from UCLA 1973, Associate Professor of English
at Stanford 1973-1980, Professor of Literature and later Dean of Arts and
Letters at UCSD 1980-2012. [Biblio, Speeches, Favorite things]…
“So, Winnie,” he said, “you still wheeling and dealing?”

The other’s face paled, but his reply was evenly worded. “Call me Winston, or
Dean Blount. If you please.” There was a time when he had gone by “Win.” It
was Robert who had cured him of that.
They stared at each other silently for another second. Finally, Blount said, “Do
you have an explanation for how you got in the service entrance?”
Robert gave a little laugh. “I just walked in. I’m the most ignorant of all,
Winston.” What had become of Zulfi Sharif?
Tommie Parker looked up from his laptop. “There is recent public information
on Robert Gu. Robert’s been in deep Alzheimer’s for almost four years. He’s one
of the late cures.” He glanced up at Robert. “Jeez, man, you almost died of old
age before you got well. On the other hand, it looks like you’ve had great
medical luck otherwise. So what brought you to UCSD on this of all days?”
Robert shrugged. It was surprising how much he did not want to go into his
problems with Bob and Miri. “The timing is just coincidence. I came down to
UCSD because… because I wanted to see the books.”
A not-so-friendly smile came to Blount’s face. “How very like you, that you
come the day we start burning them.”
Rivera protested, “It’s shredding, Dean. I mean, technically speaking. Except for
the chad, all the shredda is preserved.”
Robert looked at the torn paper he had brought from downstairs: shredda that
had escaped its final resting place? He held up the forlorn slip of paper.
“Honestly, I don’t know what’s going on. What was this? What madness
explains destroying the book this was part of?”
Winnie didn’t answer immediately; he waved at Rivera to pass him the fragment.
He set it on the table and stared for a second. His bitter smile grew a little wider.
“What pleasant irony. They’re starting in the PZ’s, aren’t they, Carlos?”
“Duì,” the young man replied, hesitantly.
“This,” Winnie waved the paper in the air, “is from a science-fiction book!” A
grim chuckle. “Those sci-fi bastards are just getting what they deserve. For thirty
years they had literature education hijacked — and this is what all their

reductionism has gotten them. Good riddance.” He crumpled the paper and
tossed it back at Robert.
Tommie grabbed the little ball of paper and tried to resuscitate it. “It’s just an
accident that science fiction came first, Dean.”
“Actually,” said Rivera, “there are rumors the shredders started with science
fiction because there would be fewer complainers among the geeks.”
“It doesn’t matter,” said Tommie. “They were scheduled to be well into other
stuff by the end of today.”
Winnie leaned forward. “What do you mean ‘were scheduled’?”
“You didn’t know?” Parker patted his laptop again; was he in love with the
ancient device or what? “The shredding ran into a minor technical problem.
They’ve shut down for the day.” He grinned. “The popular press says the ‘minor
technical problem’ is the sudden appearance of Robert in the middle of their
operation.”
Rivera hesitated, and light glinted in the depths of his thick eyeglasses. “Yes,” he
said. So the crowd outside had something to celebrate after all. Winnie got up,
looked out the window again, and sat down. “Very good, we’ve earned our first
victory! Relay our congratulations to the troops, Tommie.”
Robert raised his hands, “Will somebody please explain this madness to me?
There may be nothing burning, but this does seem like Fahrenheit 451. That’s
another science-fiction story, Winston.”
Rivera waved vaguely. “Search on keyword Librareome, Professor Gu.”
Robert gestured and tapped. How does Juan manage to do this without looking
like an idiot?
“Here, use my laptop. You’ll never figure out how to drag news out of
Epiphany.”
Winston Blount slapped the table. “He can do that on his own time, Tommie. We
have serious work to do.”

“Okay, Dean. But Robert has changed things. We can use his reputation.”
Rivera nodded. “Yes. He’s won practically every literary prize there is.”
“Stuff it,” said Blount. “We already have five Nobelists on board. Compared to
them, Gu is nothing special.” Blount’s glance flickered across Robert’s face. The
putdown he directed at Robert was accompanied by a minute hesitation,
probably too short for the others to notice.
The most important things about Winston Blount were not in his Google bio.
Once upon a time, Winnie had thought himself a poet. But he wasn’t; he was
merely articulate and the owner of a large ego. By the time they both arrived as
junior faculty at Stanford, Robert had lost patience with the poseur. Besides,
committee meetings would have been deadly dull if not for his hobby of
needling Winnie Blount. The guy had been an unending source of amusement
because he seemed to think he could outwit Robert. Semester after semester,
their verbal duels became more pointed, Winnie’s failure more obvious. It hadn’t
helped the other’s cause that Blount had no talent for what he wanted most, to
create significant literature. Robert’s lighthearted campaign had been
devastating. By the late 1970s, Poor Winnie was the laughingstock — quietly the
laughingstock — of the department. All that was left of his claims to
significance was his pomposity. He had departed Stanford, and Robert
remembered feeling the satisfaction of having done the world a good deed when
Blount found his proper place in the scheme of things, becoming an
administrator…
But he was probably just as good a poet as the new Robert Gu. I wonder if
Winnie really knows that?
Of course, Tommie Parker was oblivious of such undercurrents. He responded to
Blount’s comment as though it were a neutral statement of fact. “Someone thinks
he’s important, Dean. Someone who had the power to slip him past some fairly
good commercial security.” He turned to Gu. “Think back, Robert. I know
you’re new to the information scene — and Epiphany obscures an awful lot —
but did you notice anything strange today? I mean, before you got to the
library?”
“Well — ” He looked into the air above them. His web search was just beginning
to show results, text and pics about the “Librareome Project: rescuing prehistory

for the students of today.” That was certainly strange stuff. Otherwise… there
were the floating lights that meant various things. He tried to remember Juan’s
explanations. Ah. Sharif was back, a ruby icon that hovered just around the
corner of the stacks. “I’ve had some help, a grad student named Zulfikar Sharif.”
“Were you in contact with him as you came down toward the library?”
“Yes. Sharif thought I could get in easier if I didn’t try to walk through the
crowd at the main entrance.”
Rivera and Parker exchanged glances. “You didn’t see the security ribbons?
They should have guided you to the south side of building.”
“Professor, I think you were hijacked.”
Parker nodded. “Don’t feel bad about it, Robert. That sort of thing happens a lot
with wearables. We should track down this ‘Zulfikar Sharif character.”
Robert pointed to the ruby light. “I think he’s still here.”
The gesture must have been taken as a cue by his Epiphany — somehow making
the light a public thing: Rivera looked in the direction he was pointing. “Yes!
See that, Professor Parker?”
Tommie looked down at his laptop and massaged the touchpad. “Of course I see
him. I’ll bet he’s been listening via Robert. What say we invite him out for a
chat?”
Blount was squinting around, hopelessly. Evidently, he couldn’t see the ruby
glow. Nevertheless he took the question as directed at him. “Yes. Do it.”
Robert tapped a release. A second passed. The ruby tinkerbell floated down to
the edge of the table — and abruptly became a full-sized human being, dark-
skinned, with earnest eyes. Sharif smiled apologetically, and shuffled through the
edge of the table to “sit” on a chair on the other side. “Thank you so much for
invoking me, Professor Gu. And yes,” nodding to the others, “I have been
listening. Apologies for my various communication problems.”
“I call that taking advantage of a beginner’s ignorance,” said Parker.

Blount nodded emphatically. “I would say so! I — ” He hesitated, seemed to
think it over. “Ah, hell. What does it matter, Tommie? Everything we’re doing
today is perfectly open.”
Tommie grinned. “True! But one thing I’ve learned is you always look a gift
horse in the mouth. Sometimes they turn out to be the Trojan variety.” He looked
at the image in his laptop. “So, Mr. Sharif, I don’t care if you’ve been
eavesdropping or not. Just tell us what you’ve been doing with Robert Gu.
Someone led him down to the service entrance and through all sorts of security.”
Sharif smiled hesitantly. “In all honesty, I was as surprised as you about that.
Professor Gu and I were talking freely when he arrived on campus. He got rather
quiet as we came down the slope from your Warschawski Hall. And then for no
apparent reason, he turned left and we went around the north side of the library.
The next thing I knew he was walking into the freight entrance — and I lost
contact. I don’t know what more I can say. My own wearable security is of the
highest order, of course. um.” He hestitated a moment and then changed topic.
“Aren’t you taking this whole thing in the wrong way? I mean, the Librareome
Project will open up all past literature to everyone — and faster than any other
project could do it. What is wrong with that?”
This last was met with total silence. Winston Blount smiled thinly. “I don’t
suppose you’ve seen our website?”
“Ah, not as yet.” He paused and his eyes seemed to be looking far away. “Okay,
I see what you’re saying.” He smiled. “I suppose I should be on your side —
what you want will keep my 411 job safe! See here, I love the old poets, but old-
time literature is so hard to get at. If your interest is in post-2000 topics, critical
sources are everywhere and research gets results. But for the rest, you have to
search through that.” Sharif waved at the orderly ranks of books, the stacks that
filled the library’s sixth floor. “It can take days to gain even trivial insights.”
Lazy bum, thought Robert, and wondered at Sharif’s earlier enthusiasm for “real
books.” But he had noticed the trend even in his own teaching days. It wasn’t
just the students who refused to get their hands dirty. Even so-called researchers
ignored the universe of things that weren’t online.
Winnie glowered at the young man. “Mr. Sharif, you don’t understand the
purpose of the stacks. You don’t go into the stacks expecting the precise answer

to your burning-question-of-the-moment. It doesn’t work that way. In all the
thousands of times that I’ve gone hunting in the stacks, I’ve seldom found
exactly what I was looking for. You know what I did find? I found the books on
close-by topics. I found answers to questions that I had never thought to ask.
Those answers took me in new directions and were almost always more valuable
than whatever I originally had in mind.” He glanced at Rivera. “Isn’t that so,
Carlos?”
Rivera nodded, a little weakly, Robert thought.
But Winnie was absolutely right, so right that Robert had to say something on
the same side. “This is insanity, Sharif. Apparently, the Librareome Project is
someone’s idea for photographing and then digitizing the Library. But — ”
suddenly he was remembering things from his last years at Stanford ” — didn’t
Google already do that?”
“That’s true,” said Rivera. “In fact, that was our first argument, and perhaps still
the best one. But Huertas is a great salesman, and he does have arguments in his
favor. What he has in mind is fast and very, very cheap. Past digitizations have
not been as global or as unified as this will be. And Huertas has lawyers and
software that will allow him to render microroyalty payments across all the old
copyright regimes — without any new permissions.”
Winnie vented a sour laugh. “The real reason the administration people bought
into this is that they like Huertas’s money, and maybe even the publicity. But let
me tell you, Mr. Sharif, shredding destroys the books. That is the bottom line.
We will be left with a useless jumble.”
“Oh, no, Professor Blount. Read the overview. The pictures coming from the
camera tunnel are analyzed and reformatted. It’s a simple matter of software to
reorient the images, match the tear marks and reconstruct the original texts in
proper order. In fact — besides the mechanical simplicity of it all — that’s the
reason for the apparent violence. The tear marks come close to being unique.
Really, it’s not a new thing. Shotgun reconstructions are classic in genomics.”
“Oh, yeah?” Robert picked up the much-abused page that he had rescued from
the PZ stacks. He held it out like some limp murder victim. “So what perfection
of software is going to recover something that was torn from its binding and
never photographed?”

Sharif started to shrug and then saw the expression on Robert’s face. “Sir, it’s
really not a problem. There will be some loss, true. Even where everything is
properly photoed, the programs will make some mismatches. Potentially, the
error rate can be less than a few words per million volumes, far better than even
hardcopy republishing with manual copyediting. That’s why other major
libraries are participating in the project, to get accurate cross-checking.”
Other major libraries? Robert realized that his mouth was hanging open. He
shut up; he couldn’t think of anything to say.
Tommie stared into his laptop. “You seem suddenly well informed, Mr. Sharif.”
“But… well, I am wearing,” the young man said.
“Hmpf. And all you really want is to pursue your love of literature.”
“… Yes! My thesis advisor has based her entire career on Gu’s Secrets of the
Ages. And now I find out that the great poet is back from Alzheimer’s! It’s the
opportunity of a lifetime… Look. If you don’t believe the Google bio, check in
the 411 directories. I have lots of satisfied customers, many of them literature
students at UCSD — not that I give them an unethical degree of help! Not at
all.” Aha. Maybe ghostwritten homework was still a no-no, even in this brave
new world. “I don’t know what happened with Professor Gu today, but didn’t it
slow down the Librareome Project? Isn’t that what you want?”
Blount and Rivera were both nodding agreement.
“Yup,” said Tommie. “You’re a horse of some kind.”
“I am simply a Lit-in-English student!”
Tommie shook his head. “You could be almost anything. You could be a
committee. When you want to sound like a lit-lover, we get chat from a member
who knows about poetry.” Tommie tilted back his chair. “There’s an old saying:
The beginning of trust has to be an in-person contact. I don’t see any usable
chain of trust in your biography.”
Sharif stood and walked partway through the table. He looked upward, waving
his arms at the sky. “You want in-person? That I can supply. Look down here, at
the bench by the footpath.”

Tommie tilted his chair still farther back and glanced over his shoulder. Robert
walked to the window and looked down. Much of the crowd had dispersed,
leaving just a few knots of die-hard demonstrators. The footpath was a tiled
serpent that wound its way up the hillside, its head reaching just to the edge of
the library terrace. It was a very real mosaic, new artwork since Robert’s years at
UCSD.
“I came all the way from Corvallis just to see Professor Gu. Please don’t turn me
away now.”
And there by the path was a second Zulfi Sharif, this one not virtual at all. He
was looking up at them and waving.

The Miri Gang Is Born
For as long as Miri could remember, she’d had this problem with grandparents.
Alice’s parents — and Alice’s grandparents, too — had all been living in
Chicago; not one of them had survived. On Bob’s side of the family, Robert had
been almost dead, but then he came back! Now Miri was afraid she was losing
him all over again. And then there was Lena…
Lena Gu was only dead on the record. Lena had persuaded Bob to set up that lie
with the Friends of Privacy. Lena even ordered him to keep the details from
Miri. But Bob had told Miri what he was doing. That was smart, because Miri
would have figured it all out anyway. This way, Miri was imprisoned by her
promises to Bob. She hadn’t breathed a whisper of the truth to Robert, even
when they were still talking and he had been so desperate.
But now Miri was getting desperate. She hadn’t seen Lena in five months.
Almost, she had called Lena after the Ezra Pound Incident. But that would have
only confirmed Lena’s opinions of Robert. Bob just wanted to ignore Robert’s
problems; coward. Alice was no coward, but she was deep in training these days
and it wasn’t going well. Okay, I can handle this on my own, Miri had told
herself. She conceived a clever rehabilitation plan, working with Zulfi Sharif. At
first, that had been great. Sharif’s wearable had been easy to subvert; she had
direct access to Robert. But after Robert’s trip to UCSD, she realized that
someone else was using Sharif, too.
It was definitely time to visit Lena.
Miri waited till the weekend and took a car down to Pyramid Hill. The place was
really busy on Saturdays. Bob said it reminded him of the arcades of his
childhood. You had to travel physically to the park, but once you got there you
could do touchy-feely with all the best games. It was run by Baja Casinos, but
for kids not old enough to legally gamble. The important thing for Miri was that
the park had pretty good security. Even if Robert got curious about where she
was going, it was unlikely he could follow her through to Lena.
She unhooked her bicycle from the rack on the back of the car, and imaged it as
a small jackass. Her own persona was classic anime: big eyes, spiky hair, and
tiny mouth. That should turn off anyone who might otherwise try to play with

her.
Miri walked her jackass along a path that circled the hill. She overruled the
anime imagery to view what was most popular today. Ugh. It was mostly
Scooch-a-mouti nonsense. Salsipueds and baba llagas were everywhere. A year
ago, no one had heard of the Scoochis, and now they were bigger than some of
the corporate names. They had even dented the mega release of the latest
Cretaceous Returns. There were hundreds of different types of Scoochi
characters. Some were slyly stolen intellectual property. The rest were from
folklores at the edge of the world. The imagery was very, very cheap, without
any creative center. Maybe that’s why little kids were the biggest fans.
Near the top of the hill, a Lesser Scooch-a-mout roared into the sky. That sound
was not watts from some synthesizer. The departing Scooch-a-mout was how her
view imaged the park’s high ride. The ride capsule blasted from deep in the hill,
hit four gees before it coasted into the sky, giving its passengers almost a minute
of zero-gee before touching down in the park annex. It was the most spectacular
ride in Southern California. Nowadays Miri’s friends sniffed at it: “Might as well
be a UP/Ex package.” But when Miri was little, she had spent more than one
afternoon bouncing back and forth across the sky.
Today, she got halfway to the east exit without choosing a particular game. She
was careful not to touch, much less ride, the mechs. She especially avoided the
furry cuddly critters. Except at the exits, “You touch, you pay” was the rule at
Pyramid Hill. Maybe she should buy into a game just to shed some of the
marketing pressure.
She paused, looked across the hillside. There was lots of noise and action, but if
you listened carefully, you could tell that the kids in the bushes were actually
playing in other universes, all choreographed so neither players nor equipment
would get in each other’s way. She had picked the right cover; classical anime
was just too highbrow for these dorks.
“How about Twin Spirits? You only need two physicals for that.”
“Eep!” Miri almost tripped over her jackass. She twisted around, putting the bike
between her and the voice. There was a real person, also tricked out in anime
costume. Miri dropped down into the true view: Juan Orozco. Talk about bad
luck. She had never imagined he would be into classic anime.

She found her voice, a trilly high-pitched English thing that Annette Russell had
given her. “Not today, I’m afraid. I’m looking for something grander.”
Orozco — and the spiky-haired critter he presented — cocked his head
questioningly. “You’re Miri Gu, aren’t you?”
This was majorly bad etiquette, but what do you expect from an fourteen-year-
old loser? “So? I still don’t want to play.” She turned away and pushed her bike
along the path. Orozco followed right along. He had a fold-up bike that didn’t
get in his way at all.
“You know I’ve teamed with your grandpa in Ms. Chumlig’s composition
class?”
“I knew that.” Boogers! If Juan learned what Miri was up to, then Robert might
too. “Have you been tracking me?”
“That’s not against the law!”
“It’s not polite.” She didn’t look at him, just stomped along very quickly.
“I haven’t been watching second-by-second. I just was hoping to run into you,
and then I saw you coming in the west gate…” So maybe he had just set up
proximity alerts. “You know, your grandpa is trying to help me. Like with my
writing. I think I’m getting better at it. And I’m teaching him to wear. But… I
feel sorry for him. He seems to be angry all the time.”
Miri kept walking.
“Anyway, I was thinking… if he could get some of his old friends… maybe he
would feel better.”
Miri whirled on him. “Are you recruiting?”
“No! I mean, I have an affiliance that could benefit seniors, but that’s not what
this is about. Your grandpa is helping me at school, and I want to help him.”
They were coming down the Hill, approaching the east gate. This was the last
chance for Pyramid Hill to make money. The closer you got to the gate, the
harder the sell, across all park-supported realities. Furries danced playfully

around them, begging to be picked up. The critters were real mechanicals; if you
reached out to touch them, you’d find plush, deep fur under your hands, and real
heft to their bodies. Near the gate, management wanted to sell these little robots,
and a free feel goodbye had swayed thousands of otherwise resistant children.
When Miri was younger, she’d bought about one doll a month. Her favorites still
played in her bedroom.
She rolled her poor jackass through the crowd, avoiding the talking bears and the
miniature Scooch-a-mouts, and the real children. Then they were out the gate.
For a moment, Miri fumbled and lost her imagery. Now she was a plain fat girl,
and her bike was a dumb machine. Orozco just looked skinny and nervous. He
had a shiny new bike, but he couldn’t seem to get it unfolded.
I don’t want him to find out about Lena.
She jabbed a finger at the boy’s chest. “My grandfather is fine. He doesn’t need
to be recruited into some payoff scheme. Outside of school, you stay away from
him.” She flashed imagery that Annette had created for their Avengers clique.
The boy flinched.
“But I just want to help!”
“And furthermore, if I catch you tracking me…” She switched to a deniable
mode, a delayed delivery he wouldn’t see for several hours. Anonymous → Juan
Orozco:
If you really anger me, your school transcripts will look like you
tried to scam them.
Juan’s eyes widened slightly at the sudden silence. He would have some time to
stew over what was coming.
It was all empty threat of course; Miri believed in obeying the law, even if she
might pretend otherwise.
She ran her bike a couple of steps and hopped on, and almost fell off. Then she
recovered and coasted down the hill, away from Orozco.
○
The Rainbows End retirement community was in a valley northeast of Pyramid

Hill. The place was very old and famous. It had been founded sixty years ago,
ages before the suburbs ever got out this far. It hit its peak in the early twenty-
first century, when a wave of newly rich old people had arrived here.
Miri pedaled along the bike path, doing her best to stay out of everybody’s way.
Her guest pass was still valid, but kids were mostly second-class citizens at
Rainbows End. When she was young, visiting Lena here, she had thought the
village was magical. The real lawns were as beautiful as the fake ones in West
Fallbrook. There were real bronze statues. The colonnades and brickwork were
real too, finer than all but the most expensive of the shopping malls.
Since then, she had studied senior issues in school — and there was no way to
avoid certain cynical conclusions: There was still some real money in Rainbows
End, but it was money spent by people who couldn’t do any better. Most of those
who remained were living on vapor and biotech promises, unlucky in investment
and/or medicine.
Orozco had not tried to follow or cover his tracks; she had traced him eastward.
He’d finally gotten his bike unfolded and was pedaling toward the Mesitas
subdivision. She watched with narrowed eyes. Could Juan Orozco be the punk
who’d briefly hijacked Sharif at UCSD? No way. That had been a loud smart-
aleck who insisted on bragging. More important, Mr. Smart-Aleck really was
competent, maybe as sharp as Miri herself.
Okay. There were more important things to think about. Lena’s house was at the
far end of the second street up. It was time to image and imagine. She had
thought a lot about this meeting, thinking all the things she might say, all the sad
things she might see. Miri had constructed a special vision. It was based on
things she had been working on in some form since the second grade, when she
learned the personal significance of “variant-12 intractable osteoporosis.”
First, she made the trees along her path taller and wider, nothing like palms. As
she climbed the hill, their high leafiness was replaced by overarching boughs of
long-needled evergreens. Of course, Miri didn’t have any physical support for
this. She didn’t have game stripes in her shirt; she didn’t have micro-cooling.
The sun still beat on her, even if she made the sky overcast and the trees bend
low. Maybe she should think of the heat as some sort of spell. She had thought of
doing that before, but there were always other improvements that seemed more
important. After all the months of daydreaming, this vision was not beholden to

any commercial art. It borrowed from a hundred fantasies, but the effect was
Miri’s very own, for her concept of Lena. She had not put any of it public. Most
visions were much more fun when they were shared, but not this one.
Finally, she lurched to a stop and got off the bike. The last couple hundred feet
had to be on foot. There were a few other people around, but in her vision they
were unremarkable peasants. She saw the sidewalks and wheelchair ramps as
forest paths and mossy, timeworn steps. She stumbled more than once on the
inconsistencies, but that seemed only fair for a humble petitioner such as herself.
And then she was in the inner grove. There were occasional side paths, evidence
of cabins hidden deeper in the forest. Her trees were very old here, their huge
branches high above her head. Miri walked the bike along the ancient path. The
people of the inner grove were higher rank — not in the category of Lena, but
still powers to be respected. Miri kept her eyes on the ground and hoped that
none of them would talk to her.
She made the final turn, walked another fifty feet, to a wide, timbered cabin.
When she looked up, she could see breaks in the tree cover, but they didn’t
reveal sky. Instead she was looking up into sun-touched green. The highest
crown of the forest canopy stood right above this place. The witchery of witches.
The source of elder wisdom. She leaned her bike against the timbers and reached
up to hit the massive brass knocker. The sound boomed loud in her ears. She
ignored the junky twentieth-century melody that actually played; that was the
old doorbell that Lena had brought from Palo Alto.
A moment passed. Miri heard footsteps from within. Footsteps? The huge door
creaked inwards, and Miri’s envisioning was confronted with a significant
challenge: a woman, not much older-looking than the teachers at school. What
are you doing here! Miri stared for a moment, speechless. She rarely hit
surprises this big. After a moment she recovered herself and nodded respectfully.
“Xiu Xiang?”
“Yes. You’re Miri, aren’t you? Lena’s granddaughter?” She stepped aside and
gestured Miri in.
“um, I didn’t know you’d recognize me.” Miri stepped indoors, imagining
madly. Xiu Xiang looked too young to be a real witch. Okay, I’ll make her be
Lena’s apprentice, a watchamagoogle — a newbie witch!

Newbie Xiang smiled. “Lena has shown me pictures of you. We even saw you at
school once. Lena told me you would come around, um, sooner or later.”
“So… she’ll see me?”
“I’ll ask her.”
Miri gave a little bow. “Thank you, ma’am.”
Newbie Xiang led Miri to an upholstered chair next to a book-laden desk. “I’ll
be right back.”
Miri settled in the chair. Oops. It was hard plastic. As for the desk… well those
were real books, the kind some people used for just-in-time reading. The pages
were whatever you wanted, but they were real pages. Of course these were not
the thick and hoary things of Miri’s imaging, but they were piled deep. There
was a view-page on top, very much out of place, and a confession of ineptitude.
Miri quickly morphed it into a glowing grimoire. She edged forward in her chair
and looked at the books. Mechanics and electrical engineering. These would be
Newbie Xiang’s; Miri had studied the background of all the students in Robert’s
classes. The box of toys under the desk must be things she had built in shop
class. Miri recognized the warped transport tray from the news.
What an incredible coincidence that Xiu Xiang was rooming with Lena…
There were sounds behind her. The inner door was opening. It was Newbie
Xiang, with the senior witch right behind her. Miri was ready with imagery for
this. Lena’s real chair had six small wheels on articulated axles, very practical
and dull. But Mistress Gu’s chair had tall wooden wheels, sheathed in silver, and
canted outward. Little blue sparks chased each other around the rims as it
moved. And Miri imaged Lena dressed in heavy black, a black that absorbed the
room’s light in the classical magical way. A black that obscured the details of
what it clothed. Lena’s pointy, brimmed hat was hung jauntily from the chair’s
high backpost. And that was where Miri’s special effects ended. The rest she
always kept the way that Lena really was. In fact, all her vision was to give her
grandmother the proper frame, one that would reveal how wonderful she truly
was.
The senior witch looked Miri up and down and then said, “Didn’t Bob tell you to
let me be?” But she didn’t sound as angry as Miri had feared. “Yes. But I miss

you so much.”
“Oh.” She leaned forward slightly. “How is your mom, Miri? Is she okay?”
“Alice is fine.” Lena knew way too much about Alice, but she had no need-to-
know. Besides, she couldn’t help Alice. “I wanted to talk to you about some
other things.”
Mistress Gu sighed, and closed her deep-set eyes. When she opened them, she
might have been smiling. “Well, I’m glad to see you, kiddo. It’s just that I don’t
want to argue with you or Bob. And most of all, I don’t want You-Know-Who to
know that I’m still around.”
“I’ll only argue a little bit, Lena.” As much as will make positive headway and
still leave me welcome to come visit again. “You don’t have to worry about You-
Know-Who.” Mistress Gu’s own wording was straight out of fantasy tradition,
though it was sad that Robert should be cast as ultimate evil. “I promise I won’t
reveal you to him.” At least, not without your permission. “I took precautions
coming here. Besides, You-Know-Who is no good at snooping.”
Lena shook her head. “That’s what you think.”
Newbie Xiang sat down beside the wheelchair and watched them silently. Maybe
she could help. “You see You-Know-Who every day, don’t you, ma’am?” Miri
said.
“Yes,” said Xiang, “in shop class and Louise Chumlig’s Search and Analysis.”
“Ms. Chumlig’s not so bad” — at least for the bonehead classes. Miri was fast
enough to squelch the additional comment, but she felt herself blush even so.
Newbie Xiang didn’t seem to notice. “In fact, she’s quite good. I’ve been telling
Lena.” She glanced at the senior witch. “Louise knows things about asking
questions that took me a lifetime to understand. And more than anyone, she’s
shown me the importance of analysis packages.” She pointed at the old grimoire.
Miri was a little taken aback. Yes, Ms. Chumlig was a nice person, but she was
full of cliches, and she droned.
But even a junior witch is not someone you contradict, and Miri was very
anxious to be congenial. She dipped her head, “Yes, ma’am. Anyway, you see a

lot of You-Know-Who. Is he really such a terrible person?”
Xiu Xiang shook her head. “He is strange. He looks so young. Robert — I mean
‘You-Know-Who’ — can be very gracious, and then suddenly cut you dead. I’ve
seen him do that to several children. The old people steer clear of him. I think
Winston Blount hates him.”
Yes. Miri had watched Winston Blount in the UCSD library last Saturday. Most
of her attention had been absorbed in the battle for the persona of Zulfikar
Sharif, but she had not missed Blount’s hostility.
Newbie Xiang glanced at the frail lady in the wheelchair. “I’m afraid Lena is
right about him. He uses people. He admired my shop project and then walked
off with it.”
Lena cackled. That was something an elderly person could do well. In Miri’s
opinion it was the only positive thing about old age. “Xiu, Xiu. You told me you
were thrilled to see him chop that car.”
Newbie Xiang looked embarrassed. “Well, yes. I got into science with model
rockets and homemade RF controllers. I’d have been nothing without hands-on
experience. Nowadays, our access to real things is muffled by layers of
automated bureaucracy — and I guess my own SHE is partly to blame. So both
Robert and I wanted to break something, and I cheered him for acting. But what
I wanted was of no concern to him. I was just a convenient tool.”
Lena laughed again. “You’re so lucky. You learned in days what took me years.”
She raised a clawed hand to wipe at her hair. Modern medicine had not
completely failed Lena Gu. Five years ago she’d had Parkinson’s. Miri
remembered the tremors. Modern medicine had reversed her Parkinson’s, kept
her mind sharp, stopped various ills large and small. But her abnormal
osteoporosis was still beyond cure. As far back as the second grade, Miri had
been able to understand the technical “why” of that. The moral “why” was
something even Alice couldn’t explain.
Miri looked into the wizened face of the senior witch. “I-I’m glad it took you
years to see through You-Know-Who. Otherwise you two would never have had
Bob and raised him to marry Alice… and I would never be.”
Lena looked away. “Yes,” she grumped. “Bobby was the only reason I stayed

with your grandfather. We gave Bobby a good home. And he was halfway
human with the boy, at least till it was clear he couldn’t run Bob’s adult life. By
that time, Bob had escaped to the Marine Corps.” Her gaze flickered back to
Miri. “I congratulate myself on that. I made a terrible mistake marrying your
grandfather, but it brought two lovely lives into existence — and it only cost me
twenty years.”
“Don’t you ever miss him?”
Mistress Gu’s eyes narrowed. “That’s coming perilously close to arguing with
me, young lady.”
“Sorry.” Miri came over to kneel on the floor beside Lena’s wheelchair. She
reached out to hold Lena’s hand. The old woman smiled. She knew what was
coming, but she didn’t have completely effective defenses. “You had all those
years apart from him. I remember you visiting, back when You-Know-Who was
well and never visited.” Even then, Lena had been a little old lady, a busy doctor
who smiled the most when she was talking to Miri. “Were you happy then?”
“Of course! After all those years, I was free of the monster!”
“But when You-Know-Who began to lose his mind, then you helped him.”
Lena rolled her eyes and looked at Newbie Xiang. “When I say the word, you
kick this brat back on the street.”
Xiang looked uncertain. “Um, okay.”
“But that’s not… just yet.” Lena looked back at Miri. “We’ve been over this
ground before, Miri. Bob came here to Rainbows End and begged me to help.
Remember? He brought you along with him. Bob has never under-stood how
things were between Robert and me. God bless him, he doesn’t realize that all
the affection he saw was just for him. But between his pleading and your cute
little face, I agreed to help out with the monster’s final years…. And you know,
sometimes dementia softens a person up. There was a year or so, when Robert
was nearly helpless, but he could still recognize people and remember our years
together — there was a time when he was tractable. We actually got along for a
while!”
Miri nodded.

“And then they figured how to cure Robert’s brand of dementia. By then your
grandfather had declined from tractability into a kind of veggie state. Miri, I
would have stuck with him through the end if there hadn’t been the miracle cure.
But I could see what was coming. The monster would be back.” Lena punched a
crooked finger in her granddaughter’s direction. “Burn me once, shame on him.
Burn me twice, shame on me. So I stay out of the picture. Understand?”
But her other hand remained in Miri’s; the girl gave it a squeeze. “But couldn’t
this be different? By the time they cured Grandfather, part of him had already
died.” That had been Jin Li’s theory, not Miri’s. “I know he’s often angry now,
but that’s because he’s lost a lot. Maybe the bad things you remember are gone
too.”
Lena waved her free hand in the direction of Newbie Xiang. “Did you hear what
Xiu just said about his new nobleness of character?”
Miri thought fast: It never worked with Alice, but sometimes a quick change of
subject could distract Bob. She glanced at Newbie Xiang. “Lena, you’ve been
living here since Grandfather’s been sick. You could have moved anywhere
since you don’t visit us anymore, but you’re still just ten miles away.”
Lena’s chin came up. “I’ve lived in San Diego for years. I’m not going to give
up seeing my friends, shopping the old stores, hiking — well I have given up the
hiking. The point is that, even resurrected, You-Know-Who is not going to run
my life!”
“But — ” very thin ice here!” — did you know Dr. Xiang before?”
The senior witch’s lips thinned. “No. And now you’re going to point out, or let
plaintive silence imply, that since there are twenty-five hundred oldfolks here at
Rainbows End, this matchup couldn’t be coincidence.”
Miri was silent.
Finally Newbie Xiang spoke up. “It was my choice. I moved down here this
summer, about the time I got my get-up-and-go back. I’m one of the older people
living at Rainbows End, but I’m so bright and bubbly — ” a strange sad smile ”
— they don’t know what to do with me. So I volunteered to be a roommate. It’s
worked out well. Your grandma is ten years younger than I am, but that doesn’t
mean so much at our age.” She gave Lena’s shoulder a pat.

Miri remembered that Lena Llewelyn Gu had done years of psychiatric
consulting here at Rainbows End. If anyone could arrange a matchup with Xiu
Xiang, it was her. She opened her mouth to remark on this — and noticed the
warning glare in Lena’s eyes, as clear as any silent messaging could ever be.
After a moment, Lena shifted in her chair. “See, my girl? Pure coincidence. But I
do admit it’s been useful. Xiu keeps me advised of You-Know-Who’s adventures
in modern education.” She gave a nasty witchy smile that needed no help from
Miri’s special effects.
“Yes,” said Xiang. “We, we have our collective eyes on him.”
“The monster is not going catch up with me this time around.” Miri rocked back.
“You’re running a joint entity!” She hadn’t dreamed the two witches could be so
truly, modernly magical. “A what?” said Newbie Xiang.
“A joint entity. Partners with complementary strengths and weaknesses. In public
you are one, represented by the mobile partner. But what you can do and
understand is the best of each of you.” Xiang stared at her without
comprehension.
Oh. Miri pinged both women. Except for Lena’s medicals, they were fully
offline. Miri had been too distracted by her own imagining. “You aren’t wearing,
are you?”
Xiu gestured at her desk. “I have my view-page and these books. I’m trying to
learn so many serious things, Miri. I don’t have time to bother with wearing.”
Miri almost forgot her mission. “Dr. Xiang, you’re so wrong about wearables. I
mean, hasn’t Ms. Chumlig talked about that? Some analysis packages don’t have
traction if you run them with static video.”
Newbie Xiang gave a reluctant nod. “She showed me BLAST9. But that just
seems to be molecular design dressed up in game toy nonsense.”
“But you’ve only run them on your view-page!” The younger witch hunched
down. “I have so much to learn, Miri. I’m working through the simpler things,
what I can run on the view-page.” Lena watched the other woman for a second
and then she seemed to wilt back into her wheelchair. She looked down at her
granddaughter. “Poor Miri. You don’t understand. You live in a time that thinks

it can ignore the human condition.” She cocked her head. “You never read
Secrets of the Ages, did you?”
“Of course I’ve read it!”
“I’m sorry, Miri, I’m sure you have. After all, it’s my beloathed ex-husband’s
most famous achievement. And I’ll give him this; those poems are a work of
genius. Their ‘implacable weight’ is all his hurtfulness turned to support great
truths. But you can’t see that, can you, Miri? You are surrounded by medical
promises and halfway cures. It distracts you from the bedrock of reality.” She
paused and her head bobbed. It was almost like her old palsy, but maybe this was
simply indecision, wondering whether to say more. “Miri, the truth is, if we are
careful and lucky we live to be old, and weak, and very very tired. There comes
an end to striving.”
“No! You’ll get better, Lena. You’ve just had bad luck. It’s just a matter of time.”
There was a whisper of a witchly cackle, and Miri remembered that “It’s just a
matter of time” was the mantra of Robert’s poem cycle.
For a moment, grandmother and granddaughter glared certainty at each other.
Then Lena said, “And this is about where I figured our chat would come. I’m
sorry, Miri.”
Miri bowed her head. But I just want to help! Strange. That had been the Orozco
kid’s whine. To Miri. Okay, maybe he wasn’t a complete jerk. And maybe he
could help. But there was something else he’d said, and right now it was much
more important… Yes! Suddenly Miri saw how she could turn defeat into
victory. She looked up into her grandmother’s face and smiled innocently. “Did
you know, Lena… that You-Know-Who is learning to wear?”

The Mysterious Stranger
Even after three weeks, Robert and Juan still did most of their studying in
person, right after classes let out. They would walk out to the bleachers and one
ignoramus would endeavor to teach the other.
Occasionally Fred and Jerry Radner would tag along, unofficial third and fourth
ignoramuses. The twins had teamed with each other in Chumlig’s composition
class, but they seemed to take innocent pleasure in following Robert’s progress,
offering advice that was more colorful than Juan’s, but rarely as useful.
Then there was the fifth ignoramus. Xiu Xiang had chickened out of Creative
Composition, but she was still taking her other courses at Fairmont. And like
Robert, she was learning to wear; nowadays she wore a frilly, beaded blouse —
another kind of Epiphany beginner’s outfit. She was there the afternoon when
Robert and Juan ran into the Chileans. This was out on the track that circled the
athletics field. No one else seemed to be around; the varsity teams wouldn’t be
here for a while yet.
Miri → Juan:
Hey! Wake up, Orozco. Flag down <enum/>.
Juan → Miri:
Sorry, I didn’t see them.
Miri → Juan:
You missed them yesterday, too. Flag them before they shift to the
Radners. I told you these guys would make good practice.
Juan → Miri:
Okay, okay!
“Hey,” Juan said abruptly, “Dr. Gu, Xiu. Look!” He shipped an enum capability
to Robert’s Epiphany. It was just like the targets they’d been working with the
last few days. The kid claimed that if you practiced, this kind of interaction was
as natural as looking at where another person was pointing. It wasn’t that easy

for Robert Gu. He stopped and squinted at the icon. By default that should force
access. Nothing. He tapped on his phantom keypad. He noticed Xiang, a few feet
away, doing the same.
… And then suddenly there were a half-dozen students in evidence, all jabbering
in Spanish.
Miri → Juan, Lena, Xiu:
Okay, I think Robert sees them.
Lena → Juan, Miri, Xiu:
I see them! Can you, Xiu?
Xiu → Juan, Lena, Miri:
no yet i must —
Miri → Juan, Lena, Xiu:
Don’t try to message back, Dr. Xiang. You’re not fast enough yet;
Robert will get suspicious. Just talk out loud, as if to him and
Juan.
Xiang was silent for a moment, her fingers still tapping. She was even worse at
wearing than he was. But then she said, “Yes, I do see them!” She glanced at
Juan Orozco. “Who are they?”
“Friends of Fred and Jerry, from way south. Chile.”
Miri → Juan:
Tell them to play synch monster.
Juan → Miri:
Okay.
Juan rattled Spanish at the visitors, almost too fast for Robert to understand.
Something about helping beginners with a monster.
The others’ Spanish was even less intelligible. But maybe that didn’t matter. The

visitors stepped back, and the space was filled with a shambling purple
something.
Xiang laughed. “I see that too. But the creature… it’s not even pretending to be
real.”
Robert leaned close to the lopsided vision. “It’s pretending to be a stuffed
animal,” with crudely stitched seams and tufts of stuffing peeking from between
the joints. But the vision was almost seven feet tall, and when Robert
approached, it shambled back from him.
Robert laughed, “I’ve read about these things.”
Lena → Juan, Miri, Xiu:
I looked it up, Xiu. You move, it moves. But each of you can only
control a part of it.
“Oh.” Xiu Xiang stepped forward, blocking the creature’s retreat. Its rear legs
stopped but the front kept pushing, and it almost tipped over.
Miri → Juan:
Say the goal is to make it do a graceful dance.
Juan said, “The goal is we all cooperate to make it move. Dance around it, Xiu.”
She did. Music followed her motion. The creature’s rear legs reengaged, and its
butt end seemed to track her march. The children from Chile thought that was
hilarious.
When Robert cocked his wrist and wiggled a beat, the music came up.
Juan began clapping, and the beast’s shoulders twitched to the music. The
children from the Far South watched silently for a moment. They looked as solid
as the real Juan and Xiu Xiang, but they were no more expert than most San
Diego users. Their shadows went the wrong way, and their feet had only a casual
acquaintance with the surface of the lawn. But after an instant, the Chileans
seemed to hear the music and began clapping too. And now the critter’s tail —
their domain in this game? — began pumping up and down.

Robert expanded on his gestures, grabbing control of the creature’s floppy claws.
For a moment, the monster danced in synch with the music, each gesture
consistent. But the network delay was about half a second, and worse, it varied
randomly from a tiny fraction of a second to well over a second. The dance got
wilder as errors were corrected and overcorrected, until the tail was whacking at
the heel claws. The creature rotated onto its back and its legs flailed in random
directions.
Lena → Juan, Miri, Xiu:
That was fun!
“Damn!” said Robert.
But everybody was laughing, and not at any particular victim. One by one, the
faraway children disappeared, till only the real people were left, Robert and Juan
and Xiu Xiang.
“We could have done better, Juan!”
Lena → Xiu:
See? He’s always complaining. Give him another minute and he’ll be
making sly claims that you are to blame for everything that went
wrong.
Juan was still laughing. “I know, I know. But the network link was basura más
odiosa. There are game companies who give you cheapnet for free, because it
makes everyone so mad they upgrade to paying status.”
“Well then why did we try?”
“Hey, to practice. For fun.”
Robert remembered the inept international choir down at UCSD. “We should
have used a metronome. Can you bring these kids back?”
“Nah, we were just… like waving to each other. You know, in passing.”
In passing. “I didn’t see them at all until you showed them to me. How busy is
the aether?” Robert slashed the air with his hand. How many realities burbled

immanent?
“Out here in public, it’s lots too busy to view all at once. There’s probably three
or four hundred nodes in line of sight of your Epiphany. Each of those could
manage dozens of overlays. In a crowd there’d be hundreds of active realities,
and bazillions potentially — “
Miri → Juan:
Don’t go there. My grandfather is smart enough to add up teeny
clues and guess at us invisibles.
Juan → Miri:
Yeah? Well you’re making one clue yourself. Showing Mrs. Gu visible
to Xiu just confuses her. Look how she avoids where you have Lena
standing.
The boy seemed to lose his train of thought. “Of course, when there are just two
or three people around, the laser traffic is mostly just a potential.”
They walked farther along the track, the boy demonstrating how to surf through
the public views. Robert and Xiu Xiang practiced at his direction, sometimes
achieving a consensus view. Xiang seemed more relaxed than at the beginning of
the walk; at least she was walking a bit closer to Juan and Robert.
But Xiu didn’t respond when Robert joked, “I’d say we’re getting to be truly
awful.”
Lena → Xiu:
See!
Robert wondered at what a weird duck this Xiang woman was.
Xiu Xiang was weird in other ways. Though she had dropped the composition
class because she was too shy to perform in front of others, she loved the shop
class. Every day she seemed to be playing with something new from the class
inventory. That was the only time she was clearly happy, smiling and humming
to herself. Some of her projects were obvious to the new Robert, some he could
make good guesses about. She was happy to explain them. “Maybe there aren’t
any ‘user-serviceable parts’ inside,” she said, “but what I’ve built, I understand!”

She was doing the equivalent of a student semester project every day, and
enjoying every minute of it.
Xiu wasn’t entirely crazy; normally she didn’t show up when Robert Gu was
teaching Juan. Robert had never taught children, and he didn’t like incompetents.
For all Juan’s good intentions, he was both. And now Robert was pretending to
teach him to write.
“It’s easy, Juan,” Robert heard himself say. Lies on top of pretense! Well, maybe
not: writing crap was easy. Twenty years of teaching graduate poetry seminars
had shown him that. Writing well was a different thing. Writing beauty that sings
was something that no amount of schooling could teach. The geniuses must take
care of themselves. Juan Orozco was distinctly less able than the students of
Robert’s experience. By twentieth-century standards he was subliterate… except
where he needed words to access data or understand results. Okay, perhaps he
was not subliterate. Maybe there was some other word for these crippled
children. Paraliterate? And I bet I can teach him to write crap, too.
So they sat high in the bleachers, pounding words across the sky, Juan Orozco
oblivious of the runners below and the games far away. There came a time when
he didn’t play with his fonts anymore.
There came a day when he wrote something that had affect and image. It was not
utter crap. It was almost up to the standards of muddled cliche. The boy stared
into the sky for half a minute, his jaw slack. “That is so… bitchin’. The words,
they make me see things.” His gaze flickered sideways, to Robert. A smile
spread across his face. “You with wearing, me with writing. We’re getting really
good!”
“Perhaps equally so.” But Robert couldn’t help smiling back.
○
A week passed. Most evenings, Robert had interviews with Zulfi Sharif. After
school and sometimes on weekends, he and Juan worked together. Much of that
was remote now. They were still flailing around for a semester project. More and
more, Robert was intrigued with the problem of far coordination. Games, music,
sports, it all got jittery beyond a few thousand miles and a couple dozen routers.
The boy had bizarre plans for how they might put everything together. “We
could do something with music, manual music. That’s lots easier than game

synchronization.” Robert went for hours at a time without thinking about his
demented, maimed condition.
These school projects were more interesting to the new Robert Gu than Sharif’s
admiring interviews — and far more interesting than his occasional visits to
UCSD. The library shredding had been temporarily suspended, apparently due to
the demonstration and his own unintendedly dramatic appearance there. But
without the demonstrators, the library was a dead place. Modern students didn’t
have much use for it. There was just Winnie’s “Elder Cabal” up on the sixth
floor, rebels whose cause was suddenly on hold.
Robert and Xiu Xiang had mastered most of the Epiphany defaults. Now when
he looked at a real object in “just that way,” explanations would pop up. With the
proper squint or stare at attendant icons, he got the added detail he wanted. Look
at the object a different way, and he often could see through and beyond it! Xiu
wasn’t as good as Robert with the visuals. On the other hand, if she didn’t get
flustered, she was better at audio searches: when you heard a word you didn’t
know, if you could tag it, then search results would appear automatically. That
explained the marvelous vocabulary — and equally marvelous screwups — he
noticed in the children’s language.
Miri → Juan:
You should tell him that the nondefaults are a lot harder.
Juan → Miri:
Okay.
“You know, Dr. Gu, you and Xiu are, um, really good with the defaults. But we
should work on the nondefaults, too.”
Xiang nodded. She was remote today, too, though not as realistically as Juan
Orozco. Her image was perfectly solid, but her feet were melted into the
bleacher bench in front of her, and occasionally he got glimpses of —
background? Her apartment? He kidded her about that, but as usual when he
made a joke, it just made her even more quiet.
Lena -> Juan, Miri, Xiu:
What! What did he see?

Miri → Juan, Lena, Xiu:
Not to worry. Xiu has a good background filter. Besides, you’re in
the kitchen and she’s sitting in the living room.
Robert turned back to Juan. “So what are the most useful nondefaults?”
“Well, there’s silent messaging. The bit rate is so low, it works when nothing else
does.”
“Yes! I’ve read about sming. It’s like the old instant messaging, except no one
can see you’re communicating.”
Juan nodded. “That’s how most people format it.”
Lena → Juan, Miri, Xiu:
No! Let the SOB learn sming on his own!
Miri → Juan, Lena, Xiu:
Please, Lena!
Juan -> Lena, Miri, Xiu:
It’s something everyone uses, ma’am.
Lena → Juan, Miri, Xiu:
I said no! He’s already sneaky enough.
The boy hesitated.”… but it takes a lot of practice to do it smoothly. It can be
more trouble than it’s worth when you get caught.” Maybe he was remembering
run-ins with his teachers?
Xiang sat forward on the bench. She was leaning on some invisible piece of
furniture. “Well, what are some other things?”
“Ah! Lots of stuff. If you override the defaults you can see in any direction you
want. You can qualify default requests — like to make a query about something
in an overlay. You can blend video from multiple viewpoints so you can ‘be’
where there is no physical viewpoint. That’s called ghosting. If you’re really

slick, you can run simulations in real time and use the results as physical advice.
That’s how the Radners do so well in baseball. And then there’s the problem of
faking results if you hit a network soft spot, or if you want a sender to look more
realistic — ” The boy rattled on, but now Robert was able enough to record the
words; he would have to come back to this.
Lena → Juan, Miri, Xiu:
The monster’s eyes are glazing over. I think you’ve distracted him,
Juan.
Xiu said, “Okay, let’s start with the easiest, Juan.”
“That would be moving attention from face front.” The boy talked them through
some simple exercises. Robert had no idea how this looked to Xiu Xiang. After
all, she was already remote. For himself, looking directly backwards was easy,
especially if he took the view off his own shirt. But Juan didn’t want him to use
mirror orientation; he said that would just be confusing once he moved on to
other angles.
Without the defaults, things got very tedious. “I’ll spend my whole life just
tapping in commands, Juan.”
“Maybe if we use the eye menus,” Xiang said. Robert gave her an irritated look.
“I am, I am!”
Lena → Xiu:
Never criticize him. He’ll get back at you when it hurts the most.
Xiang’s gaze dropped from his. He looked at Juan. “I never see you tapping your
fingers.”
“I’m a kid; I grew up with ensemble coding. Hey, even my mom mostly uses
phantom typing.”
“Well, Xiu and I are retreads, Juan. We have learning plasticity and all that.
Teach us the command gestures or eyeblinks or whatever.”
“Okay! But this is not like the standard gestures you’ve already learned. For the
good stuff, everything is custom between you and your wearable. The skin

sensors pick muscle twinges that other people can’t even see. You teach your
Epiphany and it teaches you.”
Robert had read about this. It turned out to be just as weird as it sounded, a cross
between learning to juggle and teaching some dumb animal to help you juggle!
He and Xiu Xiang had about twenty minutes to make fools of themselves before
the soccer teams came out to play. But that was long enough that now Robert
could look all around himself with just a subtle shrug.
Juan was smiling. “You guys are really good, for — “
” — for oldfolks?” said Xiu.
Juan’s smile broadened. “Yeah.” He looked at Robert. “If you can do this maybe
I can learn to put words together… Look, I gotta go help my ma. She’s running a
tour this afternoon. See you all tomorrow, okay?”
“Okay,” said Xiang. “I should leave too. How is that most gracefully
accomplished?”
“Ha! Most graceful takes practice — but I want it to look cool to anyone
watching.” He pointed at the teams rowdying about on the soccer field. “For
them, I mean. So how about if I iconify-and-guide you, Dr. Xiang?”
“Very good.”
Xiang’s image collapsed into a ruby point of light.
The boy stood and grinned at Robert. “I think I have the geometry good enough
that no one has to cooperate on the receiving side.” His image climbed down the
bleachers. His shadow matching was much better than Sharif normally managed.
Xiang’s icon tagged along right above his shoulder. He reached the grass and
walked away along the edge of the bleachers, his figure shortening in
perspective.
And then abruptly, golden letters hung across Robert’s vision.
Xiang → Gu:
See you tomorrow!

Huh. So that’s what silent messaging looked like. Robert watched the two till
they were out of sight.
Lena → Miri, Xiu:
Wow! I can’t tell Juan’s image from the real people. That boy is
clever.
Miri → Lena, Xiu:
He did okay.
Robert had no more classes. He could go home now, too. There were plenty of
rides available; the cars flocked to the traffic circle when the children were going
home. But just now, Robert wasn’t keen on getting back to Fallbrook. He saw
that Miri would be arriving home in a few minutes. Bob was on watch duty
tonight — whatever that meant. Any run-in with Miri would bring Alice Gu into
action. Robert was amazed that he’d ever thought his daughter-in-law was
smooth and diplomatic. In a subtle way, she was scary. Or maybe it was simply
that Robert realized that if Alice ever became determined, he would be exiled to
“Rainbows End.” (He’d never been able to decide if that spelling was the work
of an everyday illiterate or someone who really understood the place.)
Okay, so hang around school and watch. There were dynamics here that were
unchanged since his childhood, perhaps unchanged since the beginning of
human history. He would rebuild his sense of superiority. He climbed to the
south corner of the bleachers, far above the kids forming up soccer teams, and
even clear of the secretive children who sat at the other end making barely veiled
jokes about everyone else.
Miri → Lena, Xiu:
He should be going home now.
Lena → Miri, Xiu:
Not my monster. See the far look in his eyes? He’s thinking about
everything that’s happened, figuring out just how to cause Xiu
grief.
Xiu → Lena, Miri:

He has seemed pretty normal since he went crazy in shop class.
Xiu → Lena, Miri:
No, Lena, please use silent messaging. I know I just sat down by
you at the kitchen table. But I want to get some practice.
Lena → Miri:
Sigh. Xiu’s a dear, but she can be so obsessive.
Xiu → Lena:
Yoo-hoo, Lena! What are you typing to Miri?
The sun was lowering behind him, and the shadow of the bleachers extended
partway onto the field. He had a naked-eye view of most of the campus. In fact,
the buildings looked like junk, the sort of thing you used to buy mail-order if you
needed some extra storage in your backyard. But it wasn’t all new junk. The
school’s main auditorium was wood, rebuilt here and there with plastic.
According to the labels he called up on overlay, it had originally been a pavilion
for showing horses!
Xiu → Lena, Miri:
I think he’s just training his Epiphany.
Focus on the soccer field. That looked like something from Bobby’s school years
— if you didn’t mind the fact that there were no line marks or goals. Robert
brought up the sports view, and now he could see the usual field layout. The
soccer kids moved out onto the field. They wore crash equipment, real helmets,
quite unlike what he remembered. The kids’ high-pitched voices wafted direct to
him without any magic of modern electronics. They circled around midfield,
seemed to be listening to someone.
With a whoop, the teams rushed toward each other, chasing — what?
An unseen ball? Robert searched frantically through his options, saw a flickering
parade of possible overlays. Aha! Now the teams had spectacular uniforms, and
there were umpires. In the bleachers, there was a scattering of adults —
teachers? parents? — what you’d expect for a contest that was more a class
event than varsity sport.

Xiu → Lena, Miri:
What is that game?
Miri → Lena, Xiu:
Egan soccer.
Xiu → Lena, Miri:
He’s just watching the game, Lena.
Lena → Miri, Xiu:
Maybe.
Xiu → Lena, Miri:
I think Juan is right about him, Lena. Let me talk to him. You’d
still be covered.
Xiu → Lena:
Don’t be that way.
Robert still couldn’t see the soccer ball. Instead, the field was now covered by a
golden fog. In places it came almost to the players’ waists. Tiny numbers floated
within the mist, changing with the thickness and brightness of the glow. When
the players of opposing teams rushed into close contact, the glow flared brightly,
and the children would angle around each other as if trying to line up a kick.
And then the light would erupt like an arc of wildfire across the field.
Xiu → Lena, Miri:
What about Sharif, Miri? You use him to talk to Robert, right?
Miri → Lena, Xiu:
Yes. I thought Sharif would be a perfect cat’s-paw. He has the
right academic background to talk to Robert. And he has terrible
personal hygiene! It was easy to take him over. Trouble is, so did
somebody else. Mostly we’re getting in each other’s way. Hey!

Xiu → Lena, Miri:
I’ve lost all the close-up views on your grandfather.
Miri → Lena, Xiu:
We’ve lost local audio, too. That was seamless. I didn’t know
Robert was that swift.
Lena → Miri, Xiu:
I warned you.
One child broke away from the others and raced along the golden fire, somehow
guessing just where and when it would flare up. The girl gave an odd, flailing
kick — and landed on her rear. For an instant there was a light in the nearest
goal, so sharp and intense it was as if all the fog had suddenly coalesced into the
fuzzy image of a soccer ball. Everybody was shouting, even the phantom adults
in the bleachers.
Robert made a grumpy noise. Even something as simple as a schoolyard game
didn’t make sense. He pulled at his cuff, trying to get a clearer view.
“It’s not your fault, my man. You’re seeing properly.” The voice seemed to be
coming from right beside him. Robert glanced over, but there was no body to
keep the voice company. He stared into the empty space, and after a moment, the
voice continued. “Just look at the scoreboard. Everything is fuzzy about this
game, even the score.” On the big scoreboard facing the bleachers, the goal was
recorded as 0.97. “I do think that should be rounded to one. That was an
excellent, near-certain goal the girl kicked.” On the field, the teams had retreated
to their sides. Another phantom kickoff was in progress.
Robert kept his eyes on the action below. He didn’t reply to the helpful voice.
“You don’t recognize the game, do you, Professor? It’s Egan soccer. See — ” A
reference floated across his vision, everything anyone could want to know about
Egan soccer. Out on the field, three kids had fallen over, and two had collided.
“Of course,” the voice continued, “it’s really just an approximation to the ideal.”
“I’ll bet,” said Robert, and he almost smiled. The stranger’s tone was confiding,
the speech affected — and almost every sentence was a mild putdown. It was a
pleasure to run into a type he understood so well. He turned and looked into the

empty space. “Run along, kid. You’re a long way from being able to play head
games with me.”
“I don’t play games, my man.” The reply started out angry, segued back to
patronizing good humor. “You are an interesting case, Robert Gu. I’m used to
manipulating people, but usually through intermediaries. I’m much too busy to
chat with bottom dwellers directly. But you intrigue me.”
Robert pretended to watch the game, but the voice continued, “I know what’s
eating you up inside. I know how much it bothers you that you can’t make
poetry anymore.”
Robert couldn’t suppress a start of surprise. The invisible stranger gave a little
chuckle; somehow he had distinguished the movement from Robert’s natural
twitchiness. “No need to be coy. You can’t disguise your reactions here. The
medical sensing on school grounds is so good that you might as well be hooked
up to a lie detector.”
I should just walk away. Instead he watched the “soccer” match for a few
moments. When he was sure he had proper control of his voice, he said, “You
are admitting to a crime, then.”
Another chuckle. “Of sorts, though it’s the crime of superior network skills. You
can think of me as something of a higher being, empowered by all the tools with
which mortal men have chosen to smarten the landscape.”
This must be a kid. Or maybe not. Maybe the visitor was invisible because even
his virtual presence on school grounds was a violation of law. Robert shrugged.
“I’d be happy to report your ‘superior network skills’ to interested parties.”
“You won’t do that. Primus, because the police could never identify me.
Secundus, because I can return to you what you have lost. I can give you back
your poetical voice.”
This time, Robert was in control and managed a creditable chuckle of his own.
“Ah,” said the other, “such suspicion. But also the beginning of belief! You
should read the news, or just loosen up your ad filters. In olden times, you had
athletes on steroids and students on amphetamines. Those drugs were largely
false promises. Nowadays, we have things that really work.”

A drug dealer, by God! Robert almost laughed for real. But then he considered
himself, his smooth skin, his ability to run and jump and scarcely feel out of
breath. What’s already happened would be magic by the standards of my past
life. Yes, this might be a drug dealer, but so what? “Where’s the profit in drugs
for recovering world-class poesy?” Robert spoke the words with proper
flippancy, then realized how much he was revealing. Maybe that didn’t matter.
“You are so old-fashioned, Professor.” The stranger paused. “See those hills to
the south of you?” Hills covered with endless housing. “A few miles beyond
them is one of the few places on Earth where physical location is still
important.”
“UCSD?”
“Close. I mean the biotech labs that surround the campus. What goes on in those
labs is nothing like twentieth-century medical research. Modern cures are
awesome things, but often they are unique to the individual patient.”
“You can’t finance research that way.”
“Don’t get me wrong. Broad-spectrum cures are still the big moneymakers. But
even those use custom analysis to guard against side effects. Yes, you are a
singleton case. The Alzheimer cures are sometimes incomplete, but the failures
are idiosyncratic. There is no other great poet who’s had your problem. As of
today, there is no cure.” This clown knew how to mix the brutal putdowns with
flattery. “But we live in an age of enhancement drugs, Professor, and many of
them are singleton hits. There is a chance, a very good chance, that the labs can
be caused to find you a cure.”
Magic. But what if he can do it? This is The Future. And I am alive again, and
maybe — Robert felt the hope growing within him. He couldn’t help it. This
SOB has me. I know it’s manipulation, but that doesn’t matter.
“So who am I dealing with, O Mysterious Stranger?” It was a losing question,
but it just slipped out.
“Mysterious Stranger? Um — ” There was a pause, no doubt as this para-literate
looked up the reference. “Why yes, you got my name on the very first try!
Mysterious Stranger. That is good.”

Robert gritted his teeth. “And I take it that getting your help involves something
dangerous or illegal.”
“Definitely illegal, Professor. And somewhat dangerous — for you, that is.
Whatever might cure you would be pushing into unknown medical territory. But
at the same time, very much worth it, don’t you think?”
Yes! “Maybe.” Robert kept the tension out of his voice, and glanced mildly at the
empty space beside him. “What’s the price? What do you want from me?”
The stranger laughed. “Oh, don’t worry. I simply want cooperation with a project
you’re already involved in. Keep seeing your pals at the UCSD library. Go along
with their plans.”
“And keep you up-to-date on them?”
“Ah, no need for that, my man. I am an all-encompassing cloud of knowingness.
No, what I need is your hands. Think of yourself as a droid who was once a poet.
So, Professor, do we have a deal?”
“I’ll think about it.”
“Once you do, I’m sure you’ll sign.”
“In blood, I suppose?”
“Oh, you’re so old-fashioned, Professor. No blood. Not yet.”
○
Lieutenant Colonel Robert Gu, Jr., had brought work home from the office.
That’s how he thought of it anyway, when he worked in the time that both he and
Alice thought should be theirs and Miri’s. But Miri had her own studying to do
tonight, and Alice… well, her latest assignment was the worst yet. She wandered
about, stony-faced and terse. Anyone else in her position would be dead by now,
or a raving lunatic. Somehow she hung on, often simulating something like her
natural self, and successfully managing the prep for her latest assignment. That’s
why the Corps keeps driving her harder and harder.
Bob pushed the thought away. There was a reason for such sacrifice. Chicago

was more than a decade past. There hadn’t been a successful nuclear attack on
the U.S. or any of the treaty organization countries in more than five years. But
the threat was always there. He still had nightmares about the launchers at that
orphanage in Asuncion, and what he had almost done to shut them down. And as
always, the web oozed with rumors of new technologies that would make the
classical weapons obsolete. Despite ubiquitous security, despite the efforts of
America, China, and the Indo-Europeans, the risks kept growing. There would
still be places that would come to glow in the dark.
Bob sifted through the latest threat assessments. Something was in the wind, and
it might be closer than Paraguay. The really bad news was two paragraphs
further on: An analyst pool at CIA thought the Indo-Europeans might be
somehow collaborating with bad guys. Christ! If the Great Powers can’t stand
together, how can humanity make it through this century?
There was motion behind him. It was his father, standing in the doorway.
“Dad,” he acknowledged politely.
His old man stared for a second. Bob made the general form of his paperwork
visible.
“Oops. Sorry, Son. You’re working?” He squinted at Bob’s desk.
“Yeah, some stuff from the office. Don’t worry if it looks blurry; it’s not on the
house menu.”
“Ah. I, I was wondering if I could ask you some questions.”
Bob hoped he didn’t look too surprised; this diffident approach was a first. He
waved for his father to take a seat. “Sure.”
“At school today, I was talking to someone. Voice only. The caller could have
been on the other side of the world, right?”
“Yes,” said Bob. “If it was from far away, you might notice.”
“Right. Jitter and latency.”
Is he just parroting jargon? Before he lost his mind, Dad had been a technical

ignoramus. Bob remembered once in the days of very-dumb-phones when Dad
insisted that his new cordless handset was a cheap substitute for a cellphone.
Mother had proven him wrong by having Bob take the cordless down the street
and try to call her home-business number.
She’d rarely made mistakes like that; the old man had been hell on her for weeks
afterward.
Dad was nodding to himself. “I suppose timing analysis could reveal a lot.”
“Yes. Your average high-school student is good at both sides of that game.” If
you hadn’t ruined things, you could learn all this from Miri.
His old man looked away, introspective. Worried?
“Is someone hassling you at school, Dad?” The thought was boggling.
Robert gave one of his old malevolent chuckles. “Someone is trying to hassle
me.”
“Um. Maybe you should talk to your teachers about this. You could show them
your Epiphany log of the incident. This is a standard sort of problem they have
to deal with.”
There was no return fire; the elder Gu just nodded seriously. “I know, I should. I
will. But it’s hard, you know. And given your job, well, you’ve spent years
working on life-and-death versions of these problems, right? You’d have the
most expert possible answers.”
It was the first time in Bob’s life that his old man had said anything nice about
his career. This must be a setup!
There was silence for a moment as the father waited with apparent patience, and
the son tried to think what to say next. Finally, Bob gave a laugh. “Okay, but the
military answers would be overkill, Dad. Not because we’re that much smarter
than a billion teenagers, but because we have the Secure Hardware Environment.
Down at the bottom we control all the hardware.” Leaving aside the moonshine
fabs and the hardware abusers.
“The fellow I was talking to this afternoon styled himself ‘an all-encompassing

cloud of knowingness.’ Is that bull? How much can he know about me?”
“If this jerk is willing to break some laws, he can find out a lot about you. That
probably includes your medical history, maybe even what you’ve said to Reed
Weber. As for spying on you moment to moment: He can usually watch you in
public places, though that depends on your defaults and the density of local
coverage. If he has confederates or zombies, he can learn what you do even in
deadzones, though that information wouldn’t come to him in real time.”
“Zombies?”
“Corrupted systems. Remember what things were like when I was a kid? Almost
any nastiness we had on home computers, we have on wearables now. The
situation would be absolutely intolerable without the SHE.” Dad looked blank,
or maybe he was Googling. “Don’t worry about it, Dad. Your Epiphany gear is
about as secure as you’d be comfortable wearing. Just remember that other folks
may not be so trustable.”
Robert seemed to be digesting what his son had said. “But aren’t there other
possibilities? Maybe little gadgets the, ah, kids can stick on you?”
“Yes! The little dufuses are no different than I was, but they have more
opportunities for mischief.” Last semester it had been the crawling-up-your-skirt
spidercams. For a while, the gadgets had been a god-damned mechanical
infestation. Miri had raged about the invasion for days, and then dropped the
issue so abruptly that Bob suspected she’d wrought some terrible revenge.
“That’s why you should always come into the house through the front hall. We
have a good commercial bug trap there. Just you and I talking here is as private
as your Epiphany can be… So what exactly is this fellow hitting you up for?
You’re from so far outside the school scene, I can’t imagine you being
successfully hassled.”
By God, Dad actually looks shifty! “I’m not really sure. I think it’s just the
hazing a new kid gets” — he gave a little smile — “even when the new kid
happens to be an old fart. Thanks for the advice, Son.”
“Sure thing.”
The old man sidled out of the room. Bob’s gaze followed him into the hall and
up the stairs to the privacy of his room. Dad was definitely a man with things on

his mind. Bob stared at the closed bedroom door for a moment, wondering at
life’s inversions and wishing he and Alice were like some folks, the ones who
snooped on their own miscellaneous dependents.

When Metaphors Are Real
For the next week Robert avoided UCSD, just to see if the Mysterious Stranger
would react.
He was beginning to feel confident with Epiphany, although he might never be
as skillful as kids who grew up wearing. Xiu Xiang was lagging behind him,
mainly because of her self-doubts. She had refused to wear for three days after
one particularly mistaken gesture had dumped her into — into she refused to say
what, but Robert suspected it was some kind of porn view.
The language in the Gu/Orozco project, while not poetry, had risen above the
level of egregious noise. Robert had a surprising amount of fun working with
video effects and network jitter. If their project had been shown in the 1990s, it
would have been taken as a work of genius. That was the power of the libraries
of cliches and visual gimmicks that lay in their tools. Juan was properly afraid it
wouldn’t count for much with Chumlig. “We need some added value or she’ll
fred us.” He Googled up some high schools with manual music programs.
“Those kids think it’s a tragic form of gaming,” he said. In the end, Robert
chatted up student musicians in Boston and southern Chile — far enough apart
to really exercise his network ideas.
Sharif had returned to Corvallis, but they had several more interviews. Some of
the guy’s questions were a lot more intelligent than Robert would have expected
from their first encounters.
He surfed the web a lot, to study up on security issues and — on occasion — to
see what had become of literature. What was art, now that surface perfection was
possible? Ah, serious literature was there. Most of it didn’t make much money,
even with the microroyalty system. But there were men and women who could
string words almost as well as the old Robert. Damn them!
Still silence from the Stranger. Either he had lost interest, or he understood his
power over Robert. It is so easy to win when your victim is desperate. It had
been a long time since anyone had beaten Robert Gu at a stare-down… but then
one Saturday he skipped his session with Juan. Instead, he took a car to UCSD.
Sharif showed up on the way. “Thank you for accepting my call, Professor Gu.”

The image sat down in the car seat, part of its butt disappearing into the
cushions. Zulfi didn’t look nearly as well put together as recently. “It’s been hard
to reach you lately.”
“I thought we covered a lot of ground on Thursday.”
Sharif looked pained.
Robert raised an eyebrow. “You’re complaining?”
“Not at all, not at all! But you see, sir, it’s possible that perhaps I’ve allowed my
wearable to become, um, perhaps somewhat corrupted. It’s possible that I’m
subject to some degree of… hijacking.”
Robert thought back on some of his recent reading. “That’s like being a little bit
pregnant, isn’t it?”
Sharif’s image shrank further into the upholstery. “Indeed, sir. I take your point.
But frankly, my systems are sometimes subject to a small degree of corruption. I
wager that is true of most users. I had thought the situation was manageable, but
things have reached the point where… well, you see, I did not interview you
Thursday. Not at all.”
“Ah.” So the Mysterious Stranger had had it both ways: bludgeoning Robert
with silence at the same time he carried on as another player.
Sharif waited a moment for Robert to say more, then rushed forward with
“Please, Professor, I do so very much wish to continue these interviews! Now
that we know there is this problem, we can easily work around it. I beg you not
to cut me off.”
“You could clean up your system.”
“Well, yes. In theory. I had to do that once in undergraduate school. Somehow, I
ended up the zombie in a cheating conspiracy. Not my fault at all, but the
University of Kolkata required me to fry-clean all my clothes.” He raised his
hands up in open-palmed prayer. “I’ve never been very good about backups; the
debacle cost me more than a semester of progress toward my degree. Please
don’t make me do that again. It would be even worse now.”

Robert looked out at traffic. His car had turned onto Highway 56 and was tooling
toward the coast. Up ahead were the first of the bio labs. And perhaps the
Mysterious Stranger was there too. By comparison, Sharif was a known quantity.
He looked back at the young fellow and said mildly. “Okay, Mr. Sharif. Carry on
in your slightly corrupted state.” An old memory struck him, how the computer
techs at Stanford had always badgered him about the latest antivirus updates.
“We’ll simply rise above all the petty vandalism.”
“Quite so, sir! Thank you so much.” Sharif paused, exuding profound relief.
“And I’m more eager than ever to proceed. I have my questions here
somewhere.” Hesitation and a blank stare as he changed mental gears. “Ah, yes.
Has there been any progress on the revised Secrets of the Ages?.”
“No,” Robert replied a little shortly. But this was the sort of question you’d
expect of the authentic Zulfi Sharif. Robert mellowed his answer with some half
truths: “I’m still doing high-level planning, you know.” He launched into a long
discussion of how, even though Guian poetry was sparse, its creation required
infinitely precise planning. He’d said things like that in the old days, but never
laid it on quite as thickly as now. Sharif ate it up.
“So over the next few weeks, I’m going to be visiting my old friends — you
know, in the library. That will give me some insights into the plight of the, er,
vanquished aged. You’re welcome to come along. If you watch carefully, you
may learn things about how I work. And afterwards, I’d be happy to critique
your conclusions.”
The younger man nodded eagerly. “Wonderful. Thank you!”
Amazing the thrill it was to have someone look up to him, even if it was the sort
of no-talent that he had shielded himself against all through his earlier life. This
must be how poor Winnie worked it, using big words and pomposity to fool the
even less inspired. Robert looked away from Sharif’s image, and tried to keep
his smile from turning predatory. And when Sharif gets smarter, I’ll know it’s the
Stranger.
○
There were no demonstrators at the library today, but — surprise — there were
lots of in-person students. This was heartwarmingly like his recollections of
years past, with the library the center of the university’s intellectual life. What

good things had happened in the last week? He and virtual Sharif walked
through the glass doors and took the elevator to floor six. The building interior
was not visible to Robert, even with his new access skills. Okay, look for recent
news items… but by then he was on the fifth floor. Lena → Juan, Miri, Xiu:
Hey! I’ve lost the view!
Juan → Lena, Miri, Xiu:
The sixth floor isn’t publicly searchable today.
Miri → Juan, Lena, Xiu:
Maybe if I just ask Robert for forwarding.
Sharif had faded to a luminescent reddish blob. “I can’t see anymore,” he said.
“And I’ll bet you’re the only person I can hear.”
Robert hesitated, then waved permissions in Sharif’s direction. Let’s see what the
cabal makes of that.
Winnie and Carlos Rivera were sitting at the window wall. Tommie was hunched
over his laptop.
“Ní háo, Professor Gu!” said Rivera. “Thanks for coming.”
Tommie looked up from his laptop. “But I’m not sure we want your little
friend.”
Sharif got support from an unexpected place. Winston Blount said, “Tommie, I
think Sharif might be of some use.”
Tommie shook his head. “Not anymore. Now that UCSD is shredded — “
“What?” The stacks were still full of books. Robert stepped back and ran his
hand across the spines. “These feel real to me,” he said.
“You didn’t see the propaganda on the lower floors?”
“No. I took the elevator, and so far I’m not very good at seeing through walls.”

Tommie shrugged. “We’re on the last unshredded floor. Like we figured, the
administration was just waiting for the fuss to die down. Then one night they
swooped in with extra shredders. They were done with two floors before we had
a clue. By then it was too late.”
“Damn!” Robert settled into a chair. “So what’s the point of protesting now?”
Winnie said, “It’s true that we can’t save UCSD. In fact, the clever SOBs have
twisted things around so that the Librareome Project is more popular with the
students than before. But so far, UCSD has the only library that’s been
shredded.”
Rivera burst into Mandarin: “Duì, dànshi tāmen xūyáo huí diào qitāde
túshūguān, yīnwèi — ” He hesitated, seemed to notice the blank looks. “S-Sorry.
I meant to say, they still need to destroy other libraries. For crosschecking. The
data reduction and virtual reassembly will be an ongoing project, tending
‘asymptotically toward perfect reproduction.’”
Robert noticed that Tommie Parker was watching with a faint smile. “So you do
have a plan?”
“I ain’t saying nothing while Sharif is here.”
Winnie sighed. “Okay, Tommie. Go ahead and shut him down.”
Sharif’s rosy glow moved a little ways out from the stacks. “It’s all right. I don’t
want to be a prob — ” The glow vanished.
Tommie looked up from his laptop. “He’s gone. And I’ve deadzoned the sixth
floor.” He pointed at an LED on the edge of his ancient-looking laptop.
Robert remembered some of Bob’s claims: “Even the Homeland Security
hardware?”
“Don’t tell, Robert.” He patted his computer. “Genuine Paraguayan inside,
shipped just before they shut the fabs down.” He gave them a shifty grin. “Now
it’s just us, unless one of you is wearing dirty panties.”
Blount looked pointedly at Robert. “Or unless one of us is a fink.”

Robert sighed. “This isn’t Stanford, Winston.” But what if the Mysterious
Stranger were actually a cop? That should have occurred to him before. He
pushed the thought away. “So what’s your plan?”
“We’ve been reading the Economist,” said Rivera. “Huertas International is on
shaky financial ground. Delays here at UCSD could force him to dump the
whole project.” He stared at Robert through his thick spectacles. You could see
images flickering around in the things.
“Even though they’ve shredded almost everything here?”
“Duì.” The young man leaned forward, and his T-shirt showed a torrent of
worried faces. “It’s like this. The Librareome Project isn’t just the video capture
of premillennium books. It’s not just the digitization. It goes beyond Google and
company. Huertas intends to combine all classical knowledge into a single,
object-situational database with a transparent fee structure.”
Object-situational database? This was beyond Robert’s newfound nerdliness. He
stared over Rivera’s head, trying to look up the term. Nothing was coming back.
Tommie’s deadzone, yeah.
Rivera took his stare as disbelief. “It’s really not that much data, Dr. Gu. A few
petabytes. The main thing is that it’s very heterogeneous compared to similar-
size datasets in most applications.”
“Of course. Your point?” From the corner of his eye, he saw a smile come to
Winnie’s face. The guy knew Robert was blowing smoke.
“So,” Rivera continued, “the Huertas collection will contain almost all human
knowledge up to about twenty years ago. All correlated and connected. It’s the
reason Huertas is paying the State of California to let him commit this atrocity.
Even the first rough compilation could be a gold mine. From the project start six
weeks ago, Huertas International has a six-month monopoly on the Librareome
they’re creating. That’s six months with sole access to real insight on the past.
There are dozens of questions that such a resource might resolve: Who really
ended the Intifada? Who is behind the London art forgeries? Where was the oil
money really going in the latter part of the last century? Some answers will only
interest obscure historical societies. But some will mean big bucks. And Huertas
will have exclusive rights to this oracle for six months.”

“But he has to get the data put together,” said Winnie. “If Huertas loses a few
weeks, there’ll be hundreds of organizations that decide they might as well wait
till the monopoly runs out — when they can get an even more complete answer
for free. It’s worse than that. Chinese Informagical has dibs on the British
Museum and the British Library, using much better equipment than Huertas has.
The Brits have shown more gumption than UCSD, but their digitization is due to
begin any time now. If Huertas gets any further behind, he and the Chinese will
be in a price war for the sale of first looks.”
“A regular death spiral!” Tommie’s amusement was without malice. He had
always been fascinated by how things come apart. Robert remembered in the
1970 brush fires, teenaged Tommie had been out in East County, helping with
communications — but also enjoying every minute of the disaster.
“So, unh…” Why does the Stranger want me in on this? Blount chuckled.
“Confused, Robert?”
Back at Stanford, Winnie wouldn’t have dared such an open gibe, at least not
after the first year. But now, the only comebacks Robert could imagine were
adolescent sarcasm. So he replied mildly, “Yes, I’m still in the dark.”
Blount hesitated, sensing one of the old-Robert traps. “The point is that we’re
talking about doing Huertas and the Librareome Project serious harm. We’re past
legal recourse, so anything that depends on delaying the enemy must involve
criminal behavior. Got it?”
“Yes. We really are conspirators.”
Rivera nodded. “And that by itself is a felony.”
Tommie laughed. “So what? I just subverted the DHS snoop layer! That’s a
national-security rap.”
“I don’t care if we’re talking high treason!” said Robert. If I can get back my
song. … “I mean, you know what a lover of books I am.”
The others nodded.
“So what is the plan?”

Blount gestured to Tommie. The little guy said, “Do you remember our
underground hikes?”
“In the 1970s? Yes, they were fun — in a brain-damaged way.”
Tommie’s grin broadened.
“You’re telling me the steam tunnels are still in use?”
“Yup. In the nineties that type of construction went out of style. There were lots
of new buildings that weren’t connected. But then in the oughts, folks wanted
Extremely High-Rate comms. And the bioscience people wanted automatic
specimen transport. These guys had lots of money.”
“Even more so, nowadays,” said Carlos.
Tommie nodded. “NIR lasers are not for them. They want xlaser and graser gear,
trillions of colors per path, and trillions of paths. Nowadays, the ‘steam tunnel’
network is not for power or heat. Now there are branches extending under Torrey
Pines Road to Scripps and Salk. I hear you can walk out under the ocean a short
ways, though heaven knows what they’re doing there. To the east, you can get
into every one of the biotech labs.”
Suddenly, Robert saw why the Mysterious Stranger was interested in the Elder
Cabal. Aloud, he said, “What does this have to do with the Librareome Project,
Tommie?”
“Ah! Well, you know that Max Huertas made his fortune out of biotech. He
owns some of the biggest labs in North America — including one just a few
thousand feet northeast of us. It was easy for him to modify his genome software
to support the Librareome. Okay, so he’s storing the shredda in vaults under the
north side of campus.”
“And?”
“And he’s not done with them! The shredding got him plenty of images, but the
coverage is not complete. He’s got to scan and rescan where there were problems
in the first pass. Now if there weren’t this time limit, he’d be better just to wait
till the next victim library goes up in shreds and use that for crosschecking, but
he’s in a rush.”

“That storage is also part of the Huertas propaganda,” said Winnie.
“When they’re done with the rescans, the shredda will be ‘safely preserved in the
Huertas vaults, for the sake of the archaeologists of future generations.’ Some of
our faculty actually bought into that!”
“Well,” said Rivera, “there’s a small amount of truth to the claim. The paper will
last longer in cool nitrogen than it would on library shelves.”
Winnie waved his hand dismissively. “The point is, the books have been
destroyed, and Huertas is going to destroy more libraries if he’s not stopped. Our
plan is — ” He looked around, and seemed to realize that he was on the edge of
prison time. “Our plan is to break into the steam tunnels and go to where Huertas
is storing the shredda. Tommie has come up with a way to make that shredda
unreadable.”
“What? We’re protesting the destruction of the library by destroying what’s
left?”
“Just temporarily!” said Tommie. “I’ve found an incredible aerosol glue. Spray it
on and the shredda will be like a huge chunk of particle-board. But after a few
months, the glue will just sublimate away.”
Rivera was nodding. “So we are not making things worse. I wouldn’t be here if I
thought we were wrecking what’s left of the books. Huertas’s scheme is
unnecessary brutality, trying to grab everything when a slower approach would
be just as good. Maybe we can derail him long enough so that the old-time book-
friendly digitizers can catch up — and no more libraries will be wrecked.” Now
his T-shirt was touting the American Library Association.
Robert leaned back and pretended to consider what they were saying. “You say
the Chinese are about to shred the British Library?”
Rivera gave a sigh. “Yes, and they’re going to whack the Museum, too. But the
EU is looking for an excuse to stop them. If we make Huertas look bad…”
“I see,” Robert said judiciously. He avoided Winnie’s eyes. Blount was already
suspicious enough. “Okay. The plan seems pretty feeble… but I guess it’s better
than nothing. Count me in.”

A grin spread wide across Tommie’s face. “Hey, Robert!”
Robert finally looked at Winston Blount. “Now the question is, why do you want
me in?”
Blount grimaced. “Another pair of hands. Various errands — “
Tommie rolled his eyes. “The fact is, we couldn’t dream of doing this before you
showed up.”
“Me? Why?”
“Ha. Think what we’re talking about: breaking into the steam tunnels, walking a
mile across one of the most secure bio labs on Earth. I bet I could get us in. But
could I hike us undetected across the bio labs? No way. That only works in old
Star Trek shows, where the Ventilation system’ was designed mainly to drive
idiot plots. This is the real world — and real-world security guys know about
tunnels too.”
“That still doesn’t answer the ‘Me? Why?’”
“What? Oh. I’m getting to that! Anyway, after our protest tactics fizzled, I began
to do some research.” Tommie patted his laptop. “Newsgroups, chat, search
engines — I used them all, along with crazy stuff that looks more like online
betting than anything else. Maybe the hardest part was to do it all without
alerting the feds. That slowed me up, but eventually I got a pretty good picture
of the labs’ security. It’s what you’d expect of a critical national security site.
Serious stuff, but clunky. The system is password-and user-intrinsic-oriented,
and mostly automatic. The intrinsic is a standard biometric — from certain
officers in the U.S. protective services. And guess who happens to be nearby and
on the access list?”
“My son.”
“Not quite. Your daughter-in-law.”
Alice. “That’s ridiculous. She’s some kind of Asian-affairs expert.” When she’s
not a mental basket case. And then he thought about the Mysterious Stranger.
“This is all too pat.”

Winnie: “Since when are you the security expert, Robert?”
I should keep my mouth shut. They’re going in the direction I want! But he’d lost
his old skills at verbal maneuver, and he blundered ahead: “Information like this
doesn’t turn up in a Google search .”
Tommie shook his head. But there was a look of pity in his eyes. “The world has
changed, Robert. Nowadays, I can get answers in ways that would have been
impossible twenty years ago. A hundred thousand people all over the world
collaborated in my search, in little bitty parts of it that no one ever recognized.
The biggest risk is that my results are simply bogus. Disinformation is king
nowadays. Even when the lies are not deliberate, there are the various fantasy
groups out there trying to torque reality around to their latest adventure game.
But if we’re getting fooled, it’s not an ordinary con job. There are details and
corroboration that come from too many independent sources.”
“Oh.” Robert made that sound impressed. In fact, he was impressed. Maybe the
Stranger could deliver.
○
They talked for another half hour, but nothing more specific was said about the
betrayal expected of Robert. Tommie had other tasks for them: They needed
some university passwords and some voice fakery. The entrances to the steam
tunnels were embedded in concrete now. There was no ground-level entrance as
there had been fifty years ago, when construction was under way. And there was
a problem with Tommie’s “aerosol glue.”
“The glue?” Tommie looked faintly embarrassed. “It doesn’t exist yet. But it’s
almost been invented.” Tommie had broached the concept on an ornamental
gardening forum, crossed that with some VCs. The Ornamental Shrub Society of
Japan was even now working with some Argentine biologists to create the final
form of the aerosol. The product should exist in less than two weeks, its first
showing to be in a Tokyo plant-training exhibit. A liter of advance product was
to be UP/Exed to Tommie shortly before that. He looked back at Robert’s
incredulity. “Hey, this is just what hacking is like nowadays.”
It was past 3:00 p.m. The shadow of the library had stretched into the east,
drowning nearby buildings. The four conspirators were done for the day.

Tommie stood. “We can do it! We may not even be caught. But if we are, so
what? It’ll be just like the old days.”
Carlos Rivera got up more slowly. “And it’s not like we’re harming anything.”
Tommie put a finger to his lips. “I’m lifting the deadzone, gentlemen.” He typed
on his laptop, and the LED on the top edge of the case was extinguished.
They were all silent for a moment, trying to think of safe things to say.
“Ah, okay.” Rivera glanced at Robert. “Would you like see what we — what the
library has done with the empty stacks?”
“You mean, what Tommie said was propaganda?”
Rivera gave a wan smile. “Yes, but it’s beautiful in a way. If it had been done
after a gentler digitization, I would love it without reservation.”
He led them around the floor, past the elevators. “The stairway entrance has the
best ambience.”
Winnie Blount grimaced, but Robert noticed that he was tagging along.
The stairwell was dimly lit. The naked-eye view showed concrete walls, seamed
here and there with the silvery lines he had seen from the outside. As he stepped
through the doorway, Robert’s view shifted to some kind of standard
enhancement: now the lighting came from gas mantle lamps set in the walls. The
shadowed concrete was gone. These walls were built from large stones, squared
with chisels, fitted together with scarcely room for mortar. Robert reached out to
touch the wall, snatched his hand back as he felt slippery stone — not clean
concrete!
Rivera laughed. “You’re expecting the usual disappointment, right, Dr. Gu?”
When touch contradicted visual illusion.
“Yeah.” Robert let his hand trail over the stone blocks, trace out the softer
patches of lichen.
“University administration has been very clever about this. They enlisted the
belief-circle community — and encouraged them to install touchy-feely graffiti.

Some of the props are impressive even without the visual overlays.”
They went down two flights of stairs. This must be the landing for the fifth-floor
entrance, but now the door was carven wood, gleaming darkly in the gaslight.
Rivera pulled at the pitted brass handle and the eight-foot-tall door swung open.
The light from beyond was actinic violet, wavering from dim to painfully bright.
There were sparking sounds. Rivera stuck his head through and chanted
something unintelligible. The lighting became more civil and the only sounds
were distant voices.
“It’s okay,” said the librarian. “Come on.”
Robert stepped through the half-opened door and looked around. This was not
the fifth floor of the Geisel Library, Planet Earth. There were books, but they
were oversized things, set on timbered racks that stretched up and up. Robert
bent back. The violet lights followed the stacks upward, limned their twisted
struts. It was like one of those fractal forests in old graphics. At the limits of his
vision, there were still more books, tiny with distance.
Whoa. He slipped, felt Tommie steady him with a hand in the small of his back.
“Neat, huh?” said Parker. “I almost wish I was wearing.”
“Y-Yeah.” Robert steadied himself on a nearby rack. The wood was real, thick,
and solid. He brought his gaze down to floor level and looked outward along the
aisle. The path through the stacks was twisted — and it didn’t end at the external
wall that must be there, just thirty or forty feet away. Instead, about where the
windows should be, there were sagging wooden steps. It was the sort of ad hoc
carpentry he had loved in old used-book stores. Beyond the steps, the stacks
themselves seemed to be tilted, as though gravity itself were pointing in a
different direction.
“What is all this?”
The three were silent for a second. Robert noticed that they seemed to be
wearing dark armor. Rivera’s outfit had some spiffy insignia. It also looked
suspiciously like a T-shirt and Bermuda shorts done in blackened steel plate.
“Don’t you get it?” Rivera said finally. “You three are Knights Guardian. And
I’m a Librarian Militant. It’s all from Jerzy Hacek’s Dangerous Knowledge

stories.”
Blount nodded. “You never read any of those, did you, Robert?”
Robert vaguely remembered Hacek from about the time he retired. He sniffed. “I
read the important things.”
They walked slowly down the narrow aisle. There were side paths. These led not
only left and right, but up and down. Snakelike hissing sounds came from some.
In others, he saw “Knights Guardian” hunched over tables that were piled with
books and parchment; light shone into their faces from the pages of opened
books. Illuminated manuscripts indeed. Robert stopped for a closer look. The
words were English, printed in a cracked Gothic script. The book was some kind
of economics text. One of the readers, a young woman with overgrown
eyebrows, glared briefly at the visitors, and then gestured into the air above.
High in the stacks, there was a thump, and a four-foot-wide slab of leather and
parchment came tumbling down. Robert hopped backward, almost stepping on
Tommie. But the falling book came to a hover just within the student’s reach.
The pages riffled themselves open.
Oh. Robert backed carefully out of the alcove. “I get it. These are the
digitizations of what’s been destroyed so far.”
“The first-pass digitization,” said Blount. “Bastard modern administrators got
more good press out of this than all the rest of their propaganda put together.
Everybody thinks it’s so clever and cute. And next week they’ll shred the sixth
floor.”
Rivera led them outward, toward the sagging wooden stairs. “Not everybody is
happy. The Geisel estate — Dr. Seuss — didn’t go along with the university on
this.”
“Good for them!” Blount kicked at the timbered stacks. “Our students might as
well go to Pyramid Hill.”
Robert gestured in the way that was supposed to revert vision to unen-hanced
reality. But he was still seeing purple light and ancient, leather-bound
manuscripts. He tapped the explicit reversion signal. Still no onset of reality.
“I’m stuck in this view.”

“Yup. Unless you take off your contacts or declare a 911, you can’t see what’s
really here. And that’s another reason for not using Epiphany.” Tom-mie waved
his open laptop like some talisman. “I can see the illusions, but only when I want
them.” The little guy walked down another side path, here poking at a book that
lay groaning on the floor, there stepping into an alcove to look at what the
patrons were doing. “This place is so cool!”
When they reached the wooden stairs, Rivera said, “Be careful. These things are
tricky.” About halfway down, the steps tilted and the perspective was all askew.
Winnie went first. He hesitated at the twist. “I’ve done this before,” he grunted,
almost to himself. “I can do it.” He stepped forward, started to stumble, and then
stood straight — but tilted compared with Robert and company.
When Robert reached the threshold, he closed his eyes. The Epiphany default
was to drop all overlays on “eyes-closed,” so he was briefly immune to the
visual trickery. He stepped forward — and there was no real tilt, just a simple
turn!
Tommie came right after him. There was a big grin on his face. “Welcome to the
Escher Wing!” he said. “The kids just eat this up.” At the bottom of the stairs
there was another ninety-degree turn. Parker said, “Okay, now we’re walking
back toward the building’s utility core, only we have the feeling that we’re still
wandering through unending books.”
Books ahead and behind, and off to the side, hidden in alleys. Books above, like
chimneys disappearing in purple light. He could even see books below them,
where rickety ladders seemed to drop off into the depths. If Robert looked at
them with slightly averted vision, the lettering on the spines and covers gave
back a blacklight glow, violet almost too deep to see, but very clear, with the
Library of Congress codes cryptic and runelike. The books were the ghosts — or
maybe the avatars — of what had been destroyed.
They made sounds, groaning, hissing, whispering. Conspiring. Deep in the
alleyways, some of the books were in chains.
“Gotta watch out for Das Kapital,” said Rivera.
Robert saw one of the tomes — the word fits for once! — pulling at its chains,
the links ringing loudly on massive eyebolts.

“Yup, Dangerous Knowledge yearns to be free.”
Some of the books must be real, touchy-feely props. The students in one alley
were piling books together. They stood back and the texts nuzzled into each
other in an orgy of napping pages. “So that’s bibliographical synthesis?”
Rivera followed his gaze. “Er, yes. This started out as the scam Dean Blount
said, something to endear the shredding project to the public. We represent
books as near-living things, creatures that serve and bewitch their readers. Terry
Pratchett and then Jerzy Hacek have been playing on that theme for years. But
we really didn’t appreciate the power of it all. We have some of the best Hacek
belief circles helping with this. Every database action has a physical
representation here, just as in Hacek’s Library Militant stories. Most of our users
think this is better than standard reference software.”
Winnie looked back at them. He had gotten far enough ahead that he seemed
foreshortened, as if they were seeing him through a telescope at some great
distance. He waved in disgust. “That’s the betrayal, Carlos. You librarians don’t
approve of the shredding, but look what you’ve done. These kids will lose all
respect for the permanent record of the human heritage.”
Tommie Parker was standing behind Robert. He muttered gleefully, “Winnie, the
kids had already lost all respect.”
Rivera looked down. “I’m sorry, Dean Blount. It’s the shredding that’s evil, not
the digitizing. For the first time in their lives, our students have modern access to
premillennium knowledge.” He waved at the students down in the alley. “And
it’s not just here. You can reach the library from the net, just minus the touchy-
feely gimmicks. Huertas is allowing limited access without charge, even during
his monopoly period. This is just the first-pass digitization, and only HB through
HX, but we’ve had more hits on our premillennium holdings in the last week
than we had in the last four years. And much of the new business is from
faculty!”
“Hypocritical bastards,” said Winnie.
Robert looked at the students in their alcove. The sex-between-books had ended,
but now the books floated in the air over the students’ heads and the pages sang
out in tiny voices to volumes still unsearched. Metaphor incarnate.

They trooped back toward the utility core. It turned out to be several times
farther than Robert remembered. The staggered aisles must take them around the
center of the real fourth floor.
Finally they were in sight of the eight-foot-tall doors. After everything else, the
carven wood was quotidian reality. Even the floor had flattened into something
solid and normal-looking.
And then that floor shifted under his feet.
“Wha — ” Robert flailed out, fell against the wall. Books shifted on their
shelves, and he remembered that some of those were as real and heavy as they
looked.
Lightning flashed in pulsing arcs.
Rivera was shouting in Mandarin, something about a fake earthquake.
Whatever it was, the swaying and shifting were real.
A groaning sound came from below, and bats rushed back and forth in the air
above. The swaying diminished, cycled around like a dancer doing a little jig.
And then it was over. The floor and walls felt as steady as they had been in
Robert’s grad-school years.
Tommie climbed back to his feet and helped Winston Blount up. “All okay?” he
said.
Blount nodded dumbly, too shaken for sarcasm.
“It’s never done that before,” said Tommie.
Carlos nodded. “Āiya, duibuqi, wó gāng xiäng qilái tāmen jīntiān shi xin
dōngxi,” he said, something about trying something new today.
Tommie patted the librarian on the shoulder. “Hey man, you’re talking Chinese.”
Rivera stared for a moment and then responded, still in Mandarin, but faster and
louder.

“It’s okay, Carlos. Don’t worry.” Tommie guided the young man down the stairs.
Rivera was still talking, but in bursts, repeating, “Wǒ zài shuō yīngyü ma? Shi
yīngyǓ ma?” Am I speaking English? Is it English?
“Just keep going, Carlos. You’ll be okay.”
Robert and Winnie brought up the rear. Blount was squinting his eyes in that
exaggerated way of his, searching. “Ha!” he said. “The bastards were using the
stability servos to shake the building. See.”
And for a wonder, Robert did see; all the practice was paying off. “Yes!” The
Geisel Library was one of the few buildings not replaced after the Rose Canyon
quake. Instead, they built active stabilization into the old frame. “So the admin
thought this would give a little extra realism…”
“We could have been killed,” said Blount.
They were at the third floor. Coming up the other way was a group of students;
at least, Robert assumed they were students, since they were laughing and most
had chosen monstrous forms. The two groups slid past each other, the oldsters
silent until the students had disappeared above them.
Tommie said, “What triggers the rock and roll, Carlos?”
Rivera weaved around an armoire that was built into the wall. Now he shouted,
“Am I speaking English yet?… Yes! Oh, thank God. Sometimes I dream I get
stuck forever.” He walked several paces, almost crying with relief. Then the
words came streaming out of him. “Yes, yes. I understood your question: I’m not
sure what triggers our fake earthquakes. I was at the meeting where we decided
to use the stability system this way. The trigger was supposed to be any attempt
to ‘open’ a book that contains knowledge ‘Mankind was not meant to know.’ Of
course, that’s a joke — except when it’s so deadly serious that Homeland
Security shows up. So I think we just trigger the shakes at random.”
They continued downward, Rivera all but babbling: “Our chief librarian is
totally committed on this. She’s also a big cheese in the local Hacek belief circle.
She wants to implement Hacek-appropriate penalties for users who break library
rules.”
Tommie’s look of concern was replaced by technical interest. “Jeez,” he said,

“Hacek torment pits?”
At the main floor, they stepped out onto the standard carpeting of the library’s
main foyer. An hour earlier, Robert and Sharif had gone through this area to get
to the elevators. Robert had scarcely noticed the clean, open space, the statue of
Theodor Seuss Geisel. Now it was a welcoming sanity. They walked through
glass doors into the afternoon sunlight.
Winnie turned to look up at the overhanging stories of the library. “They’ve
turned the place into a menace. That earthquake was, was…” Abruptly his gaze
came down from the sky. “Are you okay, Carlos?”
The librarian waved his hand. “Yes. Sometimes getting stuck is a little like an
epileptic seizure.” He wiped his face; he was drenched in sweat. “Wow. Maybe
this was a bad one…”
“You should get medical attention, Carlos.”
“I am. See?” Medical flags had popped up around his head. “I alarmed out on
the stairs. There’s at least one real doctor watching me now. I — ” He hesitated,
listening. “Okay, they want me at the clinic. Some kind of brain scan. I’ll see you
next time.” He saw the look on their faces. “Hey, don’t worry, guys.”
“I’ll come along,” said Tommie.
“Okay, but don’t talk. They’re prepping me for the scan.” The two walked off
toward the west-side traffic circle.
Robert and Winnie stared after them. Blount spoke with uncharacteristic
uncertainty. “Maybe I shouldn’t have hassled him about the Hacek stuff.”
“Is he going to be okay?”
“Probably. Every time another veteran gets permanently stuck, the VA looks real
bad. They’ll do their best for him.”
Robert thought back to all of Rivera’s strangeness. Normally, his Mandarin was
just short interjections, almost an affectation. If those had been in Spanish, he
might not even have noticed. But now — “What’s the matter with him, Winnie?”

Blount’s gaze was abstracted. He shrugged. “Carlos is a JITT.”
“What’s that?”
“Huh? Christ, Gu! Look it up.” He glared around the plaza. “Okay. Okay.” He
gave Robert a forced smile. “Sorry, Robert. JITT’s an easy search topic. You’ll
find lots of good discussion. The important thing is, we have to keep our eyes on
the ball. Um, Carlos would want that. A lot depends on you doing the right
thing.”
“But what is that? What — “
Winnie held up a hand. “We’re working on it. We’ll get you the details soon
enough.”
○
On the drive home, Robert looked up “JITT.” There were millions of hits, in
medicine, in military affairs, in drug enforcement. He picked the Global-Security
summary off the top of “respected contrarian” sources:
JITT, “just-in-time-training” (also, “just-in-time-trainee”, when referring to
a victim of the procedure). A treatment that combines addressin therapy and
intense data exposure, capable of installing large skill sets in less than 100
hours. Most famous for its tragic use in the <link>Sino-American
Conflict</link>, when 100,000 U.S. military recruits were trained in
Mandarin, Cantonese —
and a list of specialties that Robert had never heard of. In less than ninety days
the Americans had made up their military language gap. But then there were
problems —
This talent pool was decisive in ground operations; however, the human
price of the procedure was apparent even before the end of the war.
Robert Gu — and perhaps every student — has dreamed of shortcuts. Learn
Russian or Latin or Chinese or Spanish, overnight and painlessly! But be careful
what you wish for…. He read the sections on side effects: Learning a language,
or a career specialty, changes a person. Cram in such skills willy-nilly and you
distort the underlying personality. A very few JITTs suffered no side effects. In

rare cases, such people could undertake a second hit — even a third — before
the damage caught up with them. The rejection process was a kind of internal
war between the new viewpoints and the old, manifesting as seizures and altered
mental states. Often the JITT was stuck in some diminished form of his/her new
skill set… After the war, there was the legacy of the JITT-disabled veterans, and
continuing abuse by foolish students everywhere.
Poor Carlos.
And just what is the Mysterious Stranger promising me?
This had definitely been one of those future-shock days. Robert rolled down the
window and felt the breeze sweep by. He was driving north on 1-15. All around
was a dense suburbia much like the most built-up parts of twentieth-century
California, except that here the houses were a little drabber and the shopping
malls were more like warehouse districts. Strangely, there were real malls, even
in this brave new world. He had shopped in a couple of them. Some places had
plenty of solid architecture. Shopping “for the old at heart” was their motto; that
would not have worked in 2000.
Robert pushed away the mysteries (and the fear) and practiced with his
Epiphany. Let’s see the minimum adornment. Robert shrugged the familiar
gesture. Okay so far. He could see simple labeling. Everything, even the ice-
plant on the sides of the freeway, had little alphanumeric signs. Another shrug of
the shoulder, and he was seeing what the objects he was passing — more
accurately, the owners of the objects — wanted him to see. There was
advertising. The malls had guessed he was an old fart, and tuned their ads
accordingly. But there was none of the outright spam of some earlier sessions.
Maybe he finally had his filters set right.
Robert leaned back from the window and reached out to wider universes.
Colored maps appeared before his eyes. There were realities that were
geographically far away, not overlaid upon San Diego at all. Those must be like
the cyberspace crap of the eighties and nineties. Finally he got a window that
promised “public local reality only.” Yeah. Only two hundred thousand of them
for this part of San Diego County. He chose at random. Outside the car, the
North County hillsides were swept clean of the subdivisions. The road had only
three lanes and the cars were out of the 1960s. He noticed the tag on the
windshield of his car (now a Ford Falcon): San Diego Historical Society. Bit by

bit, they were reconstructing the past. Big hunks of the twentieth century were
available for people who wanted those simpler times.
Robert almost stayed with this view. It was so near his own grad-school years. It
was so… comforting. It also occurred to him that these history fans might be
allies of the Librareome Project. With Huertas’s database in place they could
proceed even faster with their reconstructed nostalgia.
He brought up the control window. There was something called “continuous
paratime traversal.” Or maybe he should pick on a particular writer. There was
Jerzy Hacek. No, he’d seen enough of “A Little Knowledge” for today.
How about Terry Pratchett? Okay. The subdivisions were adobe now. His car
was an artfully contorted carpet, swooping down a grassy slope that a moment
ago had been the grade north of Mountain Meadow Road. In the valley ahead,
there were colorful tents with signs painted in a cursive script that made the
roman alphabet look vaguely like Arabic calligraphy. There was a scrap of ocean
visible in the long, westward-tending valley. And sailing ships?
Robert Gu had read one Pratchett novel. His recollection was that the action
mainly took place in a city that resembled medieval London. This was different.
He tried to see into the tent city…
Miri → Lena, Xiu:
I have him again! See?
Xiu → Miri, Lena:
Wow. You’re driving right next to him?
Miri -> Lena, Xiu:
No, this is cobbled together from the hills, and various car cams.
Xiu → Miri, Lena:
He just seems to be looking around.
Miri → Lena, Xiu:
I have a lock on Sharif’s persona. We’ve got Robert all to

ourselves.
Lena → Miri, Xiu:
This is ridiculous.
Miri -> Lena, Xiu:
Okay, so now I’m Sharif, sitting right beside Robert… oh darn!
Someone gave a polite cough. Robert twisted around.
It was Sharif, sitting on the far end of the passenger seat. “Didn’t mean to
surprise you, Professor.” The vision smiled ingratiatingly. “I tried to reappear
earlier, but there were technical difficulties.”
“That’s fine,” said Robert, wondering vaguely if Tommie was still interfering.
Sharif waved at the landscape around them. “So what do you think?”
It was the land of San Diego with a little more water. And a different people, a
different civilization. “I thought I was dialing into one of the Terry Pratchett
stories.”
Sharif gave a shrug. “You got the main Pratchett belief circle all right. At least
for San Diego.”
“Yes, but — ” Robert waved at the grasslands. “Where’s Ankh-Morpork? Where
are the slums and the dives and the city guard?”
Sharif smiled. “Mainly in London and Beijing, Professor. It’s best to fit one’s
fantasy to follow something like the underlying geography. Pratchett writes of a
whole world. This here, is what fits San Diego.” Sharif stared for a moment.
“Yes, this is Abu Dajeeb. You know, the sultanate he put just south of Sumarbad
in The Fiery Crow.”
“Oh.” The Fiery Crow? “Written after you lost, ah — “
After I lost my marbles, yeah. “It’s, it’s immense. I can imagine someone writing
about such a place, but no one man or even a movie company could put together
all the — ” Robert shrank back from the window as a woman on a winged

iguana flew by. (He slipped into the real view, saw a Highway Patrol cruiser
speeding past.)
Sharif chuckled. “It’s not the work of one man. There’s probably a million fans
who’ve contributed to this. Like a lot of the best realities, it was also a
commercial effort, the most successful external cinema of 2019. In the years
since, it has just gotten better and better, an act of love on the part of the fans.”
“Hmm.” Robert had always resented the millions that went into the film
industry, and the writers who got rich from it. “I’ll bet Pratchett made a pretty
penny out of this stuff.”
Sharif gave a smirk. “More than Hacek. Not as much as Rowling. But the
microroyalties add up. Pratchett owns a rather large part of Scotland.”
Robert shifted away from the Pratchett imagery. There were others: Tolkien
views, and things he couldn’t recognize even from their labels. What was SCA?
Oh. In the SCA vision, the suburbs were transformed into villages behind walls,
and there were castles atop the higher hills. The county parklands looked fierce
and forested.
Sharif seemed to be following his imagery. He jerked a thumb at the Los Pumas
Valley park just sliding by on the right. “You should see the Ren-Faires. They
grab the whole park, sometimes run pretend wars between the barons of the
hilltops. It’s excellent, my man, truly excellent.”
Ah. Robert turned and took a close look at Sharif. The match to his earlier
appearance was perfect, except for the smartass grin on his face. “And you’re
not Sharif.”
The grin broadened. “I was wondering if you’d ever catch on. You really must
learn to be more paranoid about identity, Professor. I know, you’ve met Zulfi
Sharif in person. That is the graduate student you think it is, and just the groveler
he seems. But he doesn’t have good control. I can show up as Sharif whenever I
please.”
“That’s not what you said a few minutes ago.”
Sharif frowned. “That was different. You’ve got other fans. One of them is not
fully incompetent.”

Huh? Robert thought a second, then forced a smile. “Then perhaps you’d better
have some password so I don’t blurt all your secrets to the wrong Sharif, eh?”
The Mysterious Stranger didn’t look amused. “Very well… When I first say ‘my
man,’ that will trigger a certificate exchange. You don’t have to do a thing.” Now
Sharif’s face had a faint greenish tinge, and his eyes had a slant that had nothing
to do with epicanthic eyefolds. He smiled. “You’ll see your djinni and know it’s
really me. So what did you think of Tommie Parker’s plan?”
“Ah…”
Sharif — Stranger-Sharif — -leaned toward him, but there was no feel of motion
in the faux leather seat. “I am everywhere, and I appear however I wish, to
produce the results that I wish. Despite all Tommie’s cleverness, I was there.” He
stared into Robert’s eyes. “Heh. At a loss for words, aren’t you, Professor? And
that’s your whole problem, isn’t it? I want to help you with that, but first you’ll
have to help me.”
Robert forced a cool smile. A winning reply was nowhere to be found. The best
he could do was “You’re promising me a miracle, without showing me a particle
of evidence. And if it’s JITT you’re offering, I’m not buying. That’s not what
creativity is about.”
Sharif sat back. His laugh was open and pleasant. “Very true. JITT is a dread
miracle. But happy miracles are possible nowadays. And I can make them.”
His car had left the freeway. It drove the winding way along Reche Road. They
were only a few minutes from West Fallbrook and Bob’s place. The Mysterious
Stranger seemed to watch the scenery for a few moments. Then: “I really wanted
to get a head start on things today, but if you insist on hard evidence…” He
gestured and something flashed in the air between them. Normally that indicated
that data had been passed. “Take a look at those references. And here’s proof that
I was largely behind the breakthroughs described.”
“I’ll take a look and get back to you.”
“Please don’t take too long, Professor. What your merry crew is planning is dead
on arrival without your prompt help. And I need that if I am to help you.”
His car turned onto Honor Court and slowed to a stop just beyond Bob’s house.

It wasn’t even 4:30, but the ocean haze had moved in and things were getting
dark. Little clusters of children were playing here and there along the street. God
only knew what they were seeing. Robert stepped into the chill air and — there
was Miri pedaling a bicycle up the street toward him. They stared at each other
awkwardly. At least, Robert felt awkward. Normally they didn’t see each other
except with Bob or Alice. In the old days, I never would have felt an instant’s
discomfort for blasting this child. But somehow the concerted anger of Bob and
Alice — and Miri’s own stiff-necked courtesy — made him very uncomfortable.
I can’t stay here, owing children who should owe me.
Miri slid off her bike and stood beside him. She was looking into the car. Robert
glanced at the departing vehicle. He could see Sharif still sitting in the backseat;
maybe she could too. “That’s Zulfikar Sharif,” Robert said, rushing into
explanations like the guilty soul he was. “He’s interviewing me about the old
days.”
“Oh.” She seemed to lose interest.
“Hey, Miri, I didn’t know you had a bike.”
She walked the bike along beside him. “Yes,” she replied seriously. “It’s not
good for transportation, but Alice says that I need exercise. I like to ride around
Fallbrook and game out the latest realities.”
Thanks to the miracle of Epiphany, Robert could guess what she was talking
about.
“In fact, it’s not really my bike. This is Bob’s, from when he was younger than I
am.”
The tires looked new, but — his eyes traveled over the aluminum frame, the
peeling green and yellow paint job. Lord. Lena had insisted they buy this bike
for the boy. Memories of little Bobby came back, of when he was trying so hard
to learn to ride. He had been such a nuisance.
They walked the rest of the way to the door in silence, Robert lagging a bit
behind his granddaughter.

The Front Bathroom Incident
Winston Blount called a couple of times during the next few days. His cabal was
very anxious to talk further about “what we talked about.” Robert put him off
and refused to talk privately. He could almost hear Winnie’s teeth grinding in
frustration — but the guy gave him another week.
Robert had several more interviews with the real — well, he could hope it was
the real — Sharif. They were a heartwarming reminder of the Good Years, and
totally unlike his encounters with the Mysterious Stranger. The young grad
student gushed semi-intelligent enthusiasm, except that sometimes he seemed
fond of science fiction. Sometimes. When Robert mentioned this, Sharif looked
stricken. Ah. The Mysterious Stranger strikes again. Or maybe there were
three… entities… animating the image of Zulfikar Sharif. Robert began to track
each word, each nuance.
Juan Orozco’s compositions had blossomed. He could write complete sentences
intentionally. The boy seemed to think that this made Robert Gu a genius of a
teacher. Yes, and someday soon there will he chimpanzees who look up to me.
But that thought did not escape Robert’s lips. Juan Orozco was working to his
limits. He was doomed to mediocrity, much as Robert himself, and spreading the
pain of such knowledge was not appealing anymore.
The Mysterious Stranger stayed out of sight. Maybe he thought Robert’s own
need was the best salesman. The bastard. Robert returned again and again to the
references the Stranger had given him. They described three medical miracles of
the last ten months. One was an effective treatment for malaria. That was not
such a big deal, since cheaper cures had existed for years. But the other two
breakthroughs related to mood and intellectual disorders. They were not
examples of Reed Weber’s random “heavenly minefield.” Both had been
commissioned by the customers they cured.
So what? Miracles happened in this modern age. What proof was there the
Stranger could create them? He pulled up the documents the Stranger had given
him. Their visual represention was as medieval letters of credit, envelopes sealed
with wax. If one broke the metaphor, it was easy to look inside and see the lower
layers, a few megabytes of encryption. Useless nonsense. But if you followed
the metaphor from the top, then you found pointers to magic tools to employ the

certificates, and other pointers to the technical papers that explained what these
tools actually did with the underlying data.
For three days now, Robert had been digging through those papers. The old
Robert would not have had the intellect for this. God had taken away his true and
unique genius, and perversely given him this analytical talent in return. Playing
with protocols was fun. Okay, another couple of days and he would put it all
together — and call the Stranger’s bluff.
Meantime, he was falling further behind in his work with Juan for Chumlig’s
composition class.
“Will you have time to work on my graphics suggestions?” Juan asked one
afternoon. “Before tomorrow, I mean.” That was when their current weekly
project was due.
“Yes, sure.” The kid had been great about working to Robert’s directions. He felt
a sliver of shame for not reciprocating. “I mean, I’ll try. I’ve got this problem
with some outside things…”
“Oh, what? Can I help?”
Lord. “Some security documents. They’re supposed to prove that a, um, friend
of mine was really involved in solving a… game problem.” He made one of
them visible to Juan.
The kid looked at the wax and gilt and parchment. “Oh! A creditat. I’ve seen
certs like that. You — oops, yours has an outer envelope so only you can do all
the steps, but see — ” He grabbed the certificate and pointed where Robert
should do what.” — you gotta apply your own stamp first, and then you tear
along the server line and you’ll see a release like this.” Phantom transformations
spread in the air around him. “And if this friend of yours is not blowing smoke,
you’ll see bright green here and there’ll be a written description of his
contribution, backed by Microsoft or Bank of America or whoever.”
Then Juan had to go help his mother. As he faded away, Robert studied the
examples. He recognized some of the steps from the protocol descriptions, but,
“How did you know all that?”
Foolish question. The boy looked a little startled. “It’s just — it’s just kind of

intuitive, you know? I think that’s the way the interface is designed.” And then
he was completely gone.
No one was home right now, so Robert went downstairs and fixed himself a
snack. Then he played back the steps the boy had shown him. He had no excuse
for further delay. He hesitated a moment more… then applied the steps to each
of the “creditats.”
Bright green. Bright green. Bright green.
○
The Mysterious Stranger didn’t like to come visiting when Robert was indoors at
home. Maybe the USMC was not as incompetent as the Stranger claimed. Robert
began to look forward to his time away from home with anticipation and dread.
Very soon he must decide. Was betrayal a price he could pay for a chance to be
his old self once more?
Days passed. Still no contact. The Stranger wants me ripe for the picking.
When it finally happened, Robert was walking around the neighborhood, doing
another interview with Zulfikar Sharif. The young man hesitated in the middle of
a question and looked at him.
Miri → Juan:
I’m locked out!
Juan → Miri:
Again?
Miri → Juan:
Yes again!
Sharif’s earnest features took on the sly, greenish cast of the Mysterious
Stranger. “How is it going, my man?”
Robert managed a cool response. “Well enough.”

The Stranger smiled. “You look a bit peaked, Professor. Perhaps you’d be more
comfortable sitting down.” A car slid to a stop beside them. The door opened and
the phantom graciously waved Robert inside.
“This is more secure?” Robert said as they pulled away from the curb.
“This car is. Remember, I have powers far greater than your little friends.” He
settled in the back-facing seat. “So. Have you convinced yourself that I can help
you?”
“Maybe you can,” said Robert, a little bit proud of how level his voice sounded.
“I checked your creditats. You don’t seem to know anything about anything, but
you have this knack for bringing the right people together and being around
when those people solve serious problems.”
The Stranger waved his hand dismissively. “I don’t know anything about
anything? You are naive, Professor. Our world is overflowing with technical
expertise. Knowledge is piled metaphorical light-years deep. Given that, the
truly golden skill is the one I possess — to bring together the knowledge and
abilities that make solutions. Your Ms. Chumlig understands that. Schoolkids
certainly understand. Even Tommie Parker understands, though he has one
important detail backwards. In me,” another elaborate gesture, his hand
flattening against his turtleneck shirt, “in me, you have the far extreme of this
ability. I am world-class at ‘bringing-together-to-get-answers.’”
And with an ego to match. How does he get his way when he’s dealing with the
Einsteins and Hawkings of this era? Surely he doesn’t have everyone by the
short hairs?
The Stranger leaned forward. “But enough of me. Winnie Blount and his ‘Elder
Cabal’ are getting desperate. I’m not exactly desperate, but if you delay more
than another few days, I cannot guarantee an acceptable outcome. So. Are you
on board or not?”
“I — Yes. I am.” Twenty years ago, betraying Bob would not have bothered him.
After all, the idiot was an ingrate. Now, no glib excuse rose to mind, but… I’ll
do anything to recover what I lost. “What is this biometric information you want
on Alice?”
“Some sonograms we can’t take in public. A microgram blood spot.” The

Mysterious Stranger pointed at a small box that lay on the seat between them.
“Take a look.”
Robert reached down… and his fingers touched something hard and cool. The
box was real. That was a first for the Mysterious Stranger. He took a closer look.
It was gray plastic without any openings or even virtual labels. Wait, there was
the ubiquitous “no user-serviceable parts within.”
“So?”
“So, leave that in your front bathroom this evening. It will do the rest.”
“I won’t do anything to hurt Alice.”
The Stranger laughed. “Such paranoia. The point of all this is to pass unnoticed.
Alice Gu is in public places several times a week. If ill were wished her, those
would be the opportunities to take advantage of. But you and the cabal just need
biometrics… Any other questions?”
“Not just now.” Robert slipped the gray plastic box into his pocket. “I just can’t
imagine that twenty-first-century military security can be duped by something as
simple as a drop of blood and some sonograms.”
The Stranger laughed. “Oh, there’s much more to it than that. Tommie Parker
thinks he’s covering the angles, but without my help you four would not even get
into the steam tunnels.” He looked at Robert’s stiff expression and laughed
again. “Think of your part as being the user interface.” He gave a little bow.
“And I am the user.”
○
Robert made a point of taking the Stranger’s gadget through the front hallway
bug trap. The small box triggered no alarms he could see. So betrayal was as
simple as walking into the first-floor bathroom and setting the box down among
the bags and aerosols and squeeze tubes that were already piled on the side
counter. Modern bed and bath products were a bastion of old-style physical
advertising. After all, even the most modern folks had to take off their clothes
and their contacts somewhere. But Alice and Bob had no style. They bought the
cheapest commodity products they could find. The devil box fit right in.

Robert took a long shower. It would be nice to feel clean. He heard no strange
sounds, saw nothing strange through the frosted glass. But when he came out of
the shower, he noticed that there was no mysterious gray box either. Even when
he pawed around the counter, touching every object there — there was no sign of
the intrusion. The bathroom door had been shut the whole time.
Someone knocked on the door, happily following the family rules about not
snooping through bathroom walls. “Robert, are you okay?” It was Miri. “Alice
says it’s dinnertime.”
○
Dinner was a nightmare.
It was always tense when the four of them ate together. Usually, Robert could
avoid such get-togethers, but Alice seemed determined to see him with the
whole family at least once a week. Robert knew what she was up to. She was
recalibrating, deciding if now she could lower the boom on her father-in-law.
Tonight she was steelier than ever, and it didn’t help that Robert had serious
things to hide. Maybe she had some special reason to be suspicious. He noticed
that Bob and Miri were doing all the running back and forth to the kitchen.
Usually Alice helped with that. Tonight she sat herself down in her usual place,
and grilled Robert in her merciless, casual way: how was school going, what
about the project with Juan. She even asked about his “old friends,” for God’s
sake! And Robert explained and smiled and prayed he was passing the test. The
old Robert never had trouble stringing people along!
Then Bob and Miri were sitting down to eat. Alice shifted her attention from her
villainous father-in-law. She chatted with Miri in the same friendly, interested
tones she had used with Robert. Miri replied with precision, a detailed summary
of just who and what was good and bad at school.
For a while Robert almost relaxed. After all, they were here to eat. Surely that
couldn’t give him away.
But something was up, and it wasn’t just his imagination. Bob and Alice got into
a discussion of San Diego politics, a school-bond issue. But there was an edgy
undercurrent; some couples really argue politics, but this was the first time
Robert had ever heard that from these two. And every so often Alice’s clothing

flickered. Around the house in the real world, Alice Gu wore a dumpy hausfrau
dress that wouldn’t have been out of place in the 1950s. When she flickered, it
was virtual imagery, nothing like Carlos’s old-fashioned smart T-shirts. The first
time it happened, Robert almost didn’t notice — partly because neither Bob or
Miri reacted. Half a minute later — as Alice gestured emphatically about some
outstandingly trivial election issue — there was another flicker. For an instant
she was dressed in something like naval whites, but the collar insignia said
“PHS.” PHS? There were lots of different Google hits on the abbreviation. A
minute or two passed, and she was briefly a USMC full colonel. That, Robert
had seen before, since it was her true rank.
Bob said mildly, “You’re emoting, dear.”
“It doesn’t matter,” Alice said curtly. “You know that. The point is” — and she
continued chewing on the school-bond issue. But her gaze wandered around the
room, eventually riveting on Robert. It was not a friendly gaze, and even though
her words were unrelated to Robert Gu there was a sharpness in her voice. Then,
for almost two seconds, she was wearing a civilian business suit with an old-
fashioned ID lanyard. The ID bore a familiar seal and the letters DHS. Robert
knew what that meant. It was all he could do not to flinch back. She can’t know
everything! He wondered if Alice and Bob were silently coordinating all the
scary signs, conspiring to panic him into confession. Somehow, he didn’t think
Bob was that adept.
So Robert just nodded and glanced casually around. Miri had been quieter than
usual. She was staring off into the distance, and looked as bored as a thirteen-
year-old can look when she’s trapped at home with her parents rattling on about
Things Not Important. But this was Miri Gu, and this was not the twentieth
century. Most likely she was surfing, though usually she disguised such absences
when she was at the dinner table.
Alice slapped the table, and Robert’s eyes jerked back to her. She was glaring at
him. “Don’t you agree, Robert?”
Even Louise Chumlig couldn’t glare more aggressively than that.
“Sorry. My mind wandered, Alice.”
She waved her hand abruptly. “It doesn’t matter.”

And then golden letters spread silently across the air. Miri → Robert:
Don’t worry. She’s not mad at you.
Miri was still gazing into nowhere. Her hands were in plain sight and
motionless. She was that good with her clothes. Okay, but what in hell is going
on here? That was the message he wanted to send back, but short of finger
tapping, the best he could do was give her a quizzical look.
Alice rattled on, interrupted occasionally by Bob, but now Robert was not living
in stark terror. He waited another three or four minutes, and then excused
himself.
Bob looked a little relieved. “We don’t have to talk so much about the bond
issue, Robert. There are other — “
“No, that’s okay. I’m the fellow with homework these days.” Robert pasted on a
smile and retreated up the stairs. He felt Alice’s rifled gaze following him every
step. If not for Miri’s silent message, he would have run up the stairs.
And so far, Alice hadn’t ventured near the front bathroom.
He did have homework. Juan came over and distracted him for almost half an
hour with his explanations of immersive outlines. Robert was supposed to have
such an outline ready for tomorrow’s progress report in Chumlig’s class. Juan
went away pleased. So was Robert; he had made up for several days of
inattention. He fooled around with Juan’s templates till he could implement
everything. By God, we should be getting an A for cross-support. The kid’s prose
had become almost serviceable — and this immersive he had constructed, it was
beautiful. He was aware of Miri helping to clean up after dinner and then coming
up to her room. Bob and Alice were just sitting in the living room. He set an
activity alarm on the first floor, and for a while he forgot himself in the making
of more and better refinements to his graphics.
Lord! An hour had passed! He took a quick glance downstairs. Nobody had been
to the front John. There was a pending message from Tommie Parker. The cabal
wanted to know when or if he was going to come through with his contribution.
He looked downstairs again. Strange. He couldn’t see into the living room
anymore. Normally that was on the house menu, but now it was as private as the

bedrooms. He stood and walked over to the door, quietly eased it open half an
inch, snooping the good old-fashioned way.
They were arguing! And Bob was white-hot. His voice grew louder and louder,
finally breaking into enraged shouting. “I don’t give a fuck if they do need you!
It’s always just one more time. But this time you’ve — “
Bob hesitated in midflame. Robert leaned forward, ear to the door. Nothing. Not
even the mumble of circumspect speech. Son and daughter-in-law had taken
their spat into ethereal realms. But Robert continued to listen. He could hear the
two moving around. At one point, there was the sound of a hand slapping down
like a pistol shot. Alice whacking the dinner table? There was half a minute of
silence and then a door slammed.
Vision returned a second after that. Bob was alone in the living room, staring at
the door of the ground-floor den. He stood there for a few moments, then circled
the living room and dropped himself down in his favorite chair. He pulled a book
off the coffee table. That was one of the three physical books downstairs — and
even it was a just-in-time fake.
Robert Gu quietly shut his bedroom door and returned to his chair. He thought a
moment, then tapped on his virtual keypad.
Robert → Miri:
What was that all about?
Miri was twenty feet down the hall. So why didn’t he just walk a few feet and
knock on her door? Or present virtually? Maybe it was the habit of staying out of
her way. Maybe it was easier to hide behind words.
Maybe he wasn’t the only one hiding. It was almost a minute before a reply
floated back.
Miri → Robert:
They’re not mad at you.
Robert → Miri:
Okay. But what is the problem?

Miri → Robert:
There is no problem. That was the whole message, but then Miri sent another.
Miri → Robert:
Alice is getting ready for some new job. That’s always hard on her.
And then Bob gets mad. There was another pause.
Miri → Robert:
This is Corps business, Robert. I’m not supposed to know about it.
You’re even more not. I’m sorry. EOR
EOR That was space cadet for “that’s all she wrote.” Robert waited; nothing
more came. But this had been more real conversation with Miri than he’d had in
two months. What did that little girl do with her secrets? They were surely more
significant than he had ever guessed. She had better communications facilities
than all of twentieth-century civilization, but her prissy standards kept her from
sharing her pain. Or maybe she has friends she can talk to?
Robert Gu, Sr., didn’t have any friends, but he didn’t need any; tonight he had
plenty of crisis and suspense to distract him. He kept an eye on the front
bathroom, and another on the door to the den. Bob was still reading, every so
often sliding a look of his own at the den.
“Is now a good time for us to talk, Professor?” The voice came from just behind
his shoulder.
The shock all but levitated Robert from his chair. He swung on the sound.
“Jeez!”
It was Zulfikar Sharif.
Sharif backed away, startlement in his face.
“You could have knocked,” Robert said.
“I did, Professor.” Sharif sounded faintly hurt.
“Yes, yes.” Robert still hadn’t figured out all the quirks of Epiphany’s “circle of

friends” feature. He gestured for Sharif to stay. “What’s on your mind?”
Sharif did a creditable job of sitting on a chair without sinking halfway through.
“Well, I was hoping we could just talk.” He thought a moment. “I mean, we
might continue with my questions about your Secrets of the Ages”
Still no action downstairs. “… Very well. Ask.” So who is this? True-Sharif?
Stranger-Sharif? SciFi-Sharif? Or some ungodly combination? Whatever, it was
too much coincidence that he showed up just now. Robert sat back to watch and
listen.
“um… I don’t know.” Miserably forgetful? But then Sharif abruptly perked up.
“Ah! One thing I’m hoping to get at in my thesis is the balance of worth between
the beauty of expression and the beauty of underlying truth. Are they separate?”
A question to be answered in cryptic depth. Robert paused significantly and then
launched into flimflam. “You should know by now, Zulfi, even if you can’t
create poetry yourself, that the issues can’t be separated. Beauty captures truth.
Read my essay in the Carolingian. …” blah blahblah
Sharif nodded earnestly. “Then do you ever expect an end to one and therefore
the other? Beauty and truth, I mean?”
Huh? Now, that was sufficiently bizarre to derail him. Robert parsed and
reparsed the stupidity. Will you run out of beauty? And the answer for me is yes;
I cant create beauty anymore. So maybe this was just Stranger-Sharif jerking
him around while they both waited for the little gray box to do its thing.
“I suppose… there could be an end.” And then he thought about the other half of
the question. “Hell, Sharif, truth — new truth — ended long ago. We artists sit
atop a midden ten thousand years deep. The diligent ones of us know everything
of significance that’s ever been done. We churn and churn, and some of us do it
brilliantly, but it’s just a glittering rehash.” Did I just say that?
“And if they’re linked, then beauty is gone too?” Sharif had leaned forward his
elbows on his legs, his chin cupped in his hands. His eyes were large and
serious.
Robert looked away. Finally, he choked out, “There is still beauty. I will bring it
back.” I will regain it.

Sharif smiled, mistaking Robert’s assertion for some general faith in humankind
in the future? “That’s wonderful, Professor. This goes beyond your essay in the
Carolingian.”
“Indeed.” Robert sat back, wondering just what in heaven’s name was going on.
Sharif hesitated a moment, as if uncertain where to go next. “At the UCSD
library, how has your project there progressed?”
Still no action downstairs. Robert said, “You see some connection between my
art and… the Librareome?”
“Well, yes. I don’t want to intrude, but ultimately what you do at UCSD seems to
be very much a statement about the position of art and literature in the modern
world.”
Maybe this was SciFi-Sharif, trying to figure out what Stranger-Sharif was up to.
If only I could use one against the other. He gave his visitor a judicious nod. “I’ll
talk to my friends about this. Maybe we can arrange something.”
That seemed to satisfy whoever-it-was. They set a time for another chat, and
then the visitor was gone.
Robert turned off circle-of-friends access. No more surprise visitations tonight.
And downstairs, there was still no action. He watched through the walls for
almost fifteen minutes. That was certainly a productive use of time. Think about
something else, damn it.
He blew off the top of the house and looked across West Fallbrook. Un-
enhanced, the place was very dark, more like an abandoned town than a living
suburb. The real San Diego had less skyglow than he remembered from the
1970s. But behind that real view were unending alternatives, all the cyberspace
fun Bob’s generation could have ever imagined. Hundreds of millions were
playing out there tonight. Robert could feel — Epiphany could make him feel —
the thrum of it, beckoning. Instead he tapped out a command Chumlig had
mentioned; here and there across North County, tiny lights glowed. Those were
the other students in his classes, at least the ones who were studying tonight and
had any interest in what the others were doing. Twenty little lights. That was
more than two-thirds of the class, a special kind of belief circle, one dedicated to

pushing up their cooperation scores as far as possible. He hadn’t appreciated
how hard these little third-raters were working.
Robert ghosted over the suburbs, toward the nearest of the lights. He hadn’t tried
Epiphany’s “out of body” feature before. There was no feeling of air flowing
past, or motion. It was just his synthetic viewpoint slewing across the landscape.
He could still feel his butt on the chair in his bedroom. And yet he understood
why the directions said to do this sitting down. The viewpoint swooped down
into a valley with a speed that was dizzying.
He drifted into a welcoming window. Juan Orozco and Mahmoud Kwon and a
couple of others were gathered in a family room, marking out possibilities for
tomorrow’s exchange with Capetown. They looked up and said hi, but Robert
could tell they weren’t seeing much more than his icon hovering in the room. He
could be present virtually, perhaps even look as “real” as Sharif usually did. But
Robert just hung in the air, listening to the talk for a few moments and —
Alarm notification!
He cut the connection and was back in his bedroom.
Downstairs, Bob had wandered out of the living room. He stood by Alice’s door
and knocked gently. As far as Robert could tell there was no answer. After a
moment, Bob tucked his chin in and turned away. Robert tracked him up the
stairs. The sounds of footsteps came down the hall. Bob knocked on Miri’s door,
the way he did most evenings. There was mumbled conversation, and Miri’s
voice saying, “G’night, Daddy.” It was the first Robert had heard her call Bob
that.
Bob’s footsteps came nearer; he paused at Robert’s door, but he didn’t say
anything. Robert watched him through the wall as Bob turned and was
swallowed up by the privacy of the master bedroom.
Robert hunched over his desk and stared into the downstairs. Alice hardly ever
stayed up much beyond Bob. Of course, tonight was not your usual night. Damn.
You screw your courage up to an act of family betrayal — and then fate dumps
problems all over your dishonorable intent. But even if Alice camped out in the
den, eventually she’d have to use the bathroom. Right?
Twenty minutes passed.

Alice’s door opened. She stepped out, turned toward the stairs. Use the ground-
floor bathroom, damn you. She turned again and paced angrily around the living
room. Paced? There was precision and power in every motion, like a dancer or a
martial-arts nut. Not like dumpy frumpy Alice Gong Gu, she of the mild round
face and the shapeless dress. And yet this was the real view. It was her real face,
even if it was tense with pain, and drenched in sweat. Huh? Robert tried to
follow her gliding dance in close-up. The woman was dripping sweat. Her dress
was soaked, as if she had just finished a long, frantic run.
Like Carlos Rivera.
It couldn’t be. Alice never got stuck in a foreign language, or in a particular
specialty. In any one particular specialty. But he remembered the web discussion
of JITT. What about the few strange people who could “train” more than once,
who became ever more multitalented, until the side effects finally destroyed
them? Where would such wretches get “stuck” if there were dozens of imprints
to fall into?
Alice’s gliding dance slowed, stopped. She stood for a moment with her head
bowed, her shoulders heaving. Then she turned and walked slowly into the front
bathroom.
Finally, finally. And now I should he overcome with relief. Instead, revelation
bounced back and forth in his mind. This explained so many little mysteries. It
contradicted several certainties. Maybe Alice hadn’t been gunning for him.
Maybe she was no more his enemy than anyone in this house.
Sometimes things are not as they seem.
It was very quiet. The old house in Palo Alto had had little squeaks and thumps,
and sometimes Bob’s PC playing stolen music. Here, tonight… yes, there were
occasional sounds, the house settling into the cool of the evening. Wait. In the
utility view, he saw that one of the water heaters had kicked in. He could hear
running water.
Not for the first time, Robert wondered what kind of magic that little gray box
was. It had not triggered the house watchdogs. Maybe it wasn’t electronic at all,
but nineteenth-century gears and cogs driven by a metal spring. Then it had
disappeared from Robert’s own naked eyesight. That was something new, not a
visual trick. Maybe the box had sprouted little legs and scurried off. But

whatever it was, what would it finally do? Maybe the Stranger didn’t need a little
blood. Maybe a lot of blood would suit him more. Robert sat stock-still for a
second and then bolted to his feet — and froze again. I was so desperate.
Credibility is not important if the victim wants to believe so hard that truth must
be what the liar claims. So the Stranger had mocked the notion that hurting Alice
would be worth such hugger-mugger. And I, desperate, smiled and was
convinced.
Robert was out of his room, and flying down the stairs. He dashed through the
living room and pounded on the bathroom door. “Alice! Al — “
The door opened. Alice was looking at him, a bit wide-eyed. He grabbed her arm
and dragged her into the hallway. Alice was not a large woman; she came easily
in his grasp. But then she turned, taking him off balance. Somehow his feet got
tangled in hers and he slammed into the doorjamb.
“What! Is it?” she said, sounding irritated.
“I — ” Robert looked over his shoulder, into the brightly lit bathroom, then back
at Alice. She was dressed in a robe now, and her short hair looked as though she
had washed it. And everybody is still in one piece. No pools of blood… except
maybe where my head hit the doorjamb.
“Are you okay, Robert?” Concern seemed to rise above her irritation.
Robert felt the back of his head. “Yeah, yes. I’m pretty robust these days.” He
thought about how he’d come down the stairs. Even when he was seventeen
years old, he had never skipped four steps at a time.
“But — ” Alice began. Clearly she was more concerned about his mental state
than anything else.
It’s okay, Daughter-in-Law. I thought I was stopping your murder, and now I find
it’s a false alarm. Somehow he didn’t think that would be a satisfactory
explanation. So why was he down here in the middle of the night, pounding on
the door? He looked into the bathroom again. “I, um, I just needed to use the
John.”
Her sympathy frosted over. “Don’t let me keep you, Robert.” She turned and
headed for the stairs.

“Are you okay, Alice?” Bob’s voice, from the top of the stairs. Robert didn’t
have the courage to look, but he could imagine Miri’s little face staring down,
too. As he stepped into the bathroom and shut the door, he heard his daughter-in-
law’s tired voice. “Not to worry. It was just Robert.”
○
Robert sat on the can for a few minutes and let the shakes die away. Maybe there
was still a bomb here, but if it exploded, none but the guilty would be blown
apart.
And neither did he have the little box that was the point of the comedy. When he
showed up at the library, he would be empty-handed. So? After a moment,
Robert stood, and looked into the real glass mirror. He favored his reflection
with a twisted smile. Maybe he should just bring them a fake; would Tommie
even notice? As for the Mysterious Stranger, perhaps his spell had been
broken… along with all hope.
His eyes strayed to the countertop. There, sitting away from the clutter, was a
small gray box. It hadn’t been there when Alice left. He reached down. His
fingers touched warm plastic. Not an illusion. A greater mystery than all the
flash and glitter that he was just becoming accustomed to.
He slipped the box into his pocket and quietly returned to his room.

Alfred Volunteers
Günberk Braun and Keiko Mitsuri: They were top officers in their respective
services. Vaz had tracked these two since their college days. He knew more
about them than they would ever guess. That was one of the benefits of being
very old and very well connected. In a sense, he had guided them into their intel
careers, though neither they nor their organizations suspected the fact. They
weren’t traitors to the EU or Japan, but Alfred understood them so well that he
could subtly guide them.
So he had thought, and so he still hoped. And yet his two young friends’
remorseless efforts to help had become the greatest threat to his plans. As today:
“Yes, yes. There are risks,” Vaz was saying. “We knew that from the beginning.
But letting a serious YGBM project escape detection would be much more
dangerous. We must find out what’s going on in the San Diego labs. Plan Rabbit
can do that.”
Keiko Mitsuri shook her head. “Alfred, I have contacts in U.S. intelligence that
go back years. These aren’t my agents, but they would not tolerate a rogue
weapons project. On that, I would trust them with my life. I say we should
contact them — very unofficially — and see what they can learn about the San
Diego labs.”
Alfred leaned forward. “Would you trust them with your country’s life? Because
that’s what we are talking about here. In the worst case, there is not only a
YGBM research effort going on in San Diego, but it is supported at the highest
levels of the U.S. government. In that case, your friends’ best efforts would
simply alert their superiors to our suspicions. The evidence would disappear.
When it comes to investigating a threat this serious we simply must do it
ourselves.”
In one form or another, this was an argument that dated from their Barcelona
meeting. Today’s installment could be decisive.
Keiko sat back and gave a frustrated shrug. She was presenting in more or less
her real appearance and location, a thirty-year-old woman sitting at her desk
somewhere in Tokyo. She had transformed one side of Vaz’s office with her

minimalist furniture and a picture-window view of Tokyo’s skyline.
Günberk Braun was less prepossessing. His image simply occupied one of
Alfred’s office chairs. No doubt Günberk figured that the EU swung enough
weight that he could afford a mild disposition. Günberk might be the real
problem today, but so far he was just listening.
Okay. Alfred spread his hands. “I truly think the course we set in Barcelona is
the most prudent one. Can you deny the progress we have made?” He waved at
the biographical reports scattered around the table. “We have hands and minds
on the scene — all deniable, and ignorant of what is manipulating them. In fact,
they totally misunderstand the significance of this operation. Do you doubt this?
Do you think that the Americans have any whiff of our investigation?”
Both youngsters shook their heads. Keiko even gave him a rueful smile. “No.
Your SHE-based compartmentalization is truly a revolution in military affairs.”
“Indeed, and our releasing those methods — even to sister services within the
Alliance — shows how seriously we at the EIA view the current necessities. So,
please. If we delay more than one hundred hours, we might as well start over.
What is your problem with giving the final go-ahead?”
Günberk glanced at his Japanese counterpart. She made an impatient gesture for
him to go ahead. “I assume your question is rhetorical, Alfred. The problem with
Plan Rabbit is Rabbit. Everything depends on him, and still we know almost
nothing about him.”
“And neither will the Americans. Deniability is the whole point. Rabbit is
everything we could want.”
“He is more, Alfred.” Günberk’s gaze was steady. For all his youth, Braun had
the stolid aspect of a turn-of-the-century German. He moved from point to point
slowly, inexorably. “In setting up this operation, Rabbit has performed miracles
on our behalf. His ability demonstrates that he himself is a threat.”
Vaz glanced at the results of Günberk’s latest investigation. “But you have
discovered critical weaknesses in Rabbit. However much he’s tried to disguise it,
you’ve traced all his certificate authority to a single apex.” Having a single CA
apex was not unusual; that Günberk had managed to discover Rabbit’s apex was
a triumph. For Alfred — given his own, ah, sensitive relationship with Rabbit —

it was miraculously good news.
Günberk nodded. “Credit Suisse. So what?”
“So if Rabbit turns out to be a nightmare, you could pull the plug on Credit
Suisse and put him out of business.”
“Pull the plug on Credit Suisse CA? Do you have any idea what that would do to
the European economy? I’m proud of my people, that they ferreted this secret
out — but it’s not something we can effectively use.”
“We should have dropped Rabbit after that first meeting in Barcelona,” said
Keiko. “He is too clever.”
Vaz raised a hand, “Perhaps, but how could we know?”
“Ja? Forgive me, Alfred, but we wonder if you know more about Mr. Rabbit
than we.”
Damn! “Not at all. Honestly.” Alfred leaned back in his chair and took in the
nervous postures of his colleagues. “You’ve been talking behind my back,
haven’t you?” He gave them a gentle smile. “Do you think Rabbit is really
American intelligence? Chinese?” They had spent a lot of time investigating
those possibilities. But now Keiko shook her head. “Then what is your theory,
my friends?”
“Well,” said Günberk, sounding a little embarrassed. “Maybe Mr. Rabbit is not
even human. Maybe it’s an Artificial Intelligence.”
Vaz laughed. He glanced at Keiko Mitsuri. “And you?”
“I think AI is a possibility we should consider. Rabbit’s talents are so broad, his
work is so effective — and his personality is so juvenile. That last was one of the
features the U.S. DARPA thought would be characteristic.” She saw the
incredulity on Vaz’s face. “Not every threat is a cult or conspiracy.”
“Of course. But AI monsters? That’s a bogeyman out of the twentieth century.
Who in the intelligence communities takes that seriously? Ah! That’s Pascal
Heriot’s hobbyhorse, isn’t it?” Alfred’s tone became low and serious. “Have you
been talking to Pascal about this project?”

“Of course not. But AI is a threat that’s been totally overlooked in recent years.”
“Correct, because nothing ever came of it. Before the Sino-American war, we
know DARPA spent billions on the Little Helper Project. It was almost as much
a fiasco as their Space Access Denial initiative.”
“Space Denial worked.”
Vaz laughed. “It worked against everybody, Keiko, the Americans most of all.
But you’re right, SAD is not a proper comparison. My point is that some of the
smartest people in the world tried to create AI and failed.”
“The researchers failed, but surely runnable code survived. The Internet is not
the cramped toy it once was. Maybe pieces of DARPA’s Little Helper are out
there, growing into what it could never be in the low-tech past.”
“That is science fiction! There was even a movie — “
“More than one, actually,” said Günberk. “Alfred, I don’t agree with Keiko that
programs from years ago could self-organize just because decent resources are
available now. But here at the IB, we have been tracking the possibilities. I think
Pascal Heriot has a point. Just because most people have dismissed the
possibility doesn’t mean that it is not real. We are certainly past the crossover
point when it comes to computer hardware. Pascal thinks that when it finally
happens, it will arise without institutional precursors. It will be like many
research developments, but rather more catastrophic.” Just another way
humankind might fail to survive the century.
“Whatever the explanation,” said Keiko, “Rabbit is simply too competent, too
anonymous… I’m sorry, Alfred, we think the operation should be shut down.
Let’s approach our American friends on this.”
“But equipment is in place. Our people are in place.”
She shrugged. “With Rabbit managing things? That could leave Rabbit with
whatever we discover in San Diego. Even if we agreed with you, our bosses
would never go along.”
She was serious. Alfred glanced at Braun. He was, too. This was bad. “Keiko,
Günberk, please. Just balance the risks.”

“We are,” said Keiko. “Rabbit loose within this grandiose scheme is a cosmic-
sized unsafety!” She could be quite full of modern Japanese bluntness.
Vaz said, “But we could arrange things so Rabbit receives operational
information just-in-time as the action evolves.”
Fortunately, Günberk shot that down immediately: “Ach, no. Such remote
micromanagement, it’s a guarantee of disaster.”
Vaz hesitated a long moment, tried to look as though he were thinking hard,
making some hard decision. “Maybe, maybe there’s a way we can have
everything — the, uh, ‘grandiose scheme’ and minimal risk from Rabbit.
Suppose we don’t supply Rabbit with the final details in advance. Suppose we
put one of our own people on the ground in Southern California the night of the
breakin?”
Mitsuri and Braun stared for a second. “But what about deniability then?” said
Keiko. “If we have our own agent breaking in — “
“Think, Keiko. My proposal risks tipping off the Americans, which is something
yours guarantees. And we can keep the risk low. We simply put our own agent
nearby, in a well-planned position with essentially zero latencies. What the
Americans call a Local Honcho.”
Günberk brightened. “Like Alice Gong at Ciudad General Ortiz!”
” — Yes. Exactly.” He hadn’t been thinking of Alice, but Günberk was right. It
had been Alice Gong on the ice at Ortiz, almost single-handedly discovering and
stopping the Free Water Front. Maybe the Front would have failed anyway. After
all, no one had ever tried to scale a Saturday-night special up to three hundred
megatons. But if the bomb had successfully detonated, their “statement of
principle” would have poisoned the freshwater mining industry off West
Antarctica. Gong remained unknown to the outside world, but she was
something of a legend within the intelligence communities. She was one of the
good guys.
Thank goodness, neither Braun nor Mitsuri seemed to notice Alfred’s discomfort
at her name.
“Inserting a Honcho now would be difficult,” said Keiko. “Are we talking a

credible tourist, or cargo-container roulette?” Truly black insertions looked like
WMD smuggling; they were hair-raising operations for all concerned. “None of
my agents-in-place are rated for this operation. It will take a special person,
special talents, special clearance.”
“I have some good people in California,” said Günberk, “but none of them are at
this level.”
“It doesn’t matter,” said Vaz, his voice filled with steely determination. “I’m
quite willing to go, myself.”
He had surprised them before, but this was a bombshell. Braun sat for a moment,
openmouthed. “Alfred!”
“It’s that important,” Vaz said. He gave them each his most direct and sincere
look.
“But you’re a desk jockey like us!”
Alfred shook his head. Today he would have to let a little bit of his background
story come unglued. Hopefully, it wouldn’t all tear apart. Alfred had spent years
“fitting in” as a midlevel bureaucrat at the External Intelligence Agency. If he
were unmasked, then at best he’d end up like the prime minister, forced back
into high-level political hackery. At worst… at worst, Günberk and Keiko might
figure out what he was really up to in San Diego.
Vaz → EIA Inner Office:
Clear Biographical Package 3 for joint intelligence viewing.
Aloud, he said, “I do have field experience. In the U.S. in fact, in the early
teens.”
Braun and Mitsuri both had a long stare. They were busy browsing. BioPack 3
would show them the operations. It was all consistent with what they had known
before, but revealed new depths to their Indian pal. Günberk was the first to
recover. “I… see.” He was silent for a moment, reading more. “You did well.
But that was some years ago, Alfred. This will be a heavily network-technical
assignment.”

Alfred nodded at the criticism. “True. I am not a young man.” Mitsuri and Braun
thought he was in his early fifties. “On the other hand, my specialty here at the
EIA is network issues, so I’m not really out of date.”
A surprised grin flashed across Keiko’s face. “And you do know this operation
better than anyone. So by being on-site you can supply the critical pieces without
giving them to Rabbit — “
“Correct.”
Günberk was still unhappy: “And yet this is an extraordinarily dangerous
operation. We Great Powers compete, that is true. But when it comes to the
threat of Weapons, we must stand together. This is the first time in my career that
that covenant has been broken.”
Alfred nodded solemnly. “We must find out the truth, Günberk. We could be
wrong about San Diego. Then we’ll thankfully and silently disengage. But
whatever the source of this weapon, we must discover it. And if that turns out to
be San Diego, the Americans will very likely thank us.”
Mitsuri and Braun looked at each other for a long moment. Finally they nodded,
and Keiko said, “We’ll support the insertion of a Local Honcho, presumably you.
I’ll put planners on fallback strategies in case you are exposed. We’ll provide
network and analyst support. It’ll be up to you to manage critical data on the
ground — “
” — and keep Mr. Rabbit from taking over the whole thing!” said Günberk.
○
Alfred sat in his office for some minutes after his friends departed. That had
been too close a thing.
When the stakes are highest, the threats always multiply. Plan Rabbit was the
most sensitive operation that the Indian government had ever (knowingly) been a
part of; getting the prime minister’s support had not been easy. Today Keiko and
Günberk had almost shut him down as thoroughly as the PM could have. As for
Rabbit — well, AI might be fantasy, but Rabbit was just as much a threat as
Günberk and Keiko feared.

Alfred relaxed slightly, allowed himself a smile. Yes, the threats had multiplied
like, well, like rabbits. But here today he had collided some of those threats and
neutralized them. For weeks he had been plotting his Local Honcho role. In the
end, Günberk and Keiko had provided him with the natural excuse to be present
on the ground in San Diego.

The Myasthenic Spelunker Society
The cabal still met on the sixth floor of the library, but that was a very different
place now. Robert came up in the elevator, avoiding the Hacekeans and their
Library Militant. Nevertheless, sticking to reality was difficult. Theodor Geisel
still held the lobby, but the administration was franchising mind and touch space
everywhere else. Scooch-a-mouti characters had infested the basement. H. P.
Lovecraft’s were said to lurk in the farther underground, in what had been
noncirculating storage.
And the sixth floor… was empty, stripped to the bare shelving. From the elevator
entrance at the middle of the floor, Robert could see through skeletal shelving all
the way to the windows. The book shredders had come and gone. In the
southeast corner, the conspirators were hunkered down like twentieth-century
socialists plotting empire in the midst of their obvious ruin.
“So what’s held up the Library Militant invasion?” Robert said, and waved at the
stark reality of the empty stacks.
Carlos replied, “A delay in finding the newest haptics is the official explanation.
In fact, it’s politics. The Scoochi partisans want this floor for their universe. The
Library Militant is resisting. The administration may disappoint them both and
make this floor a simulation of what libraries were like when they were real.”
“But with fake imagery of the books, right?”
“Yup.” Tommie was smiling. “What do you expect? Meantime we still have the
floor to ourselves.”
“We are not defeated, gentlemen.” Winnie’s face was stern. “We’ve known for
weeks now that this was inevitable. We’ve lost a major battle. But it is only the
first battle in the war.” He glanced at Tommie.
Parker pointed at the LED on his computer. “The deadzone is in place. It’s time
to resume our seriously criminal conspiratizing.” He was smiling, but his gaze
swept across them, catching each in the eye. “Okay. I’ve done my research. I can
get us into the steam tunnels. I’ve even arranged festivities that will get the lab
staff out of our way. I can get us to the shredda containers, and I have the aerosol

glue. We can cause the Librareome Project and Huertas in particular a whole lot
of pain. Of course, it won’t stop progress on this sort of thing, but it will — “
Winnie gave a grunt. “We’ve already agreed that a permanent stop is impossible.
But if we can block the jerks who use the most destructive methods — well, that
will have to suffice.”
“Righto, Dean. That’s exactly what we can do. It’s all set up, just missing one
critical ingredient.” His gaze slid across to Robert.
Such is the power of common sense that Robert hesitated almost a third of a
second. Then he reached into his pocket and retrieved the plastic box the
Stranger had provided. “Check this out, Tommie.”
Parker’s eyebrows went up. “Hey, I’m impressed. I expected a paper napkin or
something.” He glanced at his laptop’s display and then picked up the box. “This
looks like a biosample kit.” In fact, the box was now showing colorful labels
announcing just that function. “How did you do it?”
Yes, how? Robert couldn’t think of truth or lie that would make any sense.
Tommie mistook his silence. “No, no don’t tell me. I should be able to figure it
out for myself.” Tommie smiled down at the box for a moment. Then he slipped
it into his pocket.
“Okay. We’re all set then. Now we’ve got to decide on a time.” Rivera leaned
forward. “Soon. There’s too much lab construction between quarters.”
“Yup. And there are other constraints. You wouldn’t believe the prep I’ve had to
do. I’m netted to consultants up the yinyang. Don’t worry, Dean, none of them
see more than a small part of what I’m doing. I’m getting to be a real expert at
affiliance.” Tommie was having a hell of a good time. “I can make this work,
guys! Hey, it will be like the good old days — well, maybe not for you, Carlos;
you weren’t even born back then.” He grinned at Winnie and Robert. Robert had
gone on those hikes underground often, but they’d been impressive enough,
trekking through hundreds of feet of tunnel and then popping up in buildings that
were dark and empty and largely unfinished. Sometimes there had been stairs in
the stairwells, and sometimes not.
Winnie Blount was smiling a little now, too. “Yeah, the Myasthenic Spelunker

Society.” He frowned, remembering more. “We were lucky we didn’t break our
necks.” That comment was from the side of the desk where Winnie had lived
most of his life, the administrator with nightmares about liability and litigation.
“Yup. It was more fun than gaming, and a lot more dangerous. Anyway, that was
back before computers — at least as we understand the term now. Today things
are way different, but with my research and this bioprofile from Robert, I can get
us past all the watchdog automation. At least, if we get the timing right.” He
typed briefly on his laptop. “Okay, here’s the latest. There are three short time
slots in the next six weeks when all the security holes line up.”
“When is the first?” said Winnie.
“Real soon. A week from next Monday.” He spun his laptop around so the others
could see. “We’d go in through Pilchner Hall.” He launched into an extended
discussion of how he would manage the adventure. “… And here is where the
tunnel forks off campus. Once we get past that, we can walk almost half a mile,
out under the old General Genomics site.”
“Huertas’s labs are just north of that,” said Rivera.
“Yup. And ten-to-one odds we can get in there and do our stuff — and maybe
even get out!”
Neither Rivera nor Blount seemed discomfited by this prospectus. After a
moment, Winnie said, “We really can’t postpone things. I vote for a week from
Monday.”
“Yeah, me too,” said Robert.
“Wo tongyi. Yes.”
“Okay then!” Tommie spun his laptop back and made a notation. “Come
wearing, but I’ll supply new clothes and all necessary electronics. I — “
Winston Blount interrupted: “There’s one other thing, Tommie.”
“Uh, oh.”
“It’s not a big thing, but it could get us the right publicity.”

“Hmm.”
“I propose that we bring along a remote presence, that Sharif fellow.”
“That’s insane?” Tommie hopped to his feet and then abruptly sat down again.
“You want a remote presence? Don’t you understand? You won’t even be
wearing down there.”
Winnie smiled cajolingly. “But you’ll be bringing electronics, Tommie. Couldn’t
we support his presence through that?”
Parker gargled on his indignation. “How do you think remote presence works,
Dean?”
“um, it’s just a kind of overlay.”
“As far as display goes, that’s true. But it’s not local. Behind the pretty imagery,
there’s high-rate comm and forwarding through ambient micro-lasers. There are
no random networks down in the tunnels. Everything I’ve planned depends on us
being very quiet, in particular not using any lab nodes. What you want is — ” He
shook his head in disbelief.
Robert looked at Blount. “I don’t understand either. Just a couple of weeks ago
we shut Sharif out as a security risk.”
Winnie’s face reddened, just as in the old days when Robert nailed him in a
faculty meeting.
Robert raised his hand. “I’m just wondering, Winston. Honest.”
After a second, Winnie nodded. “Okay. Look, I was never down on the guy.
We’ve met him in person, right here at the library. He appears to be a sincere
student. He’s honestly interviewing you, right?”
When he’s not the Stranger or Mr. SciFi, yeah. Robert realized that just a word
from him now and the whole scheme might be abandoned. He had not imagined
that betrayal could be such a full-time job: “Yes. His questions are often foolish,
but they’re very academic.”
“There you are! My point is that if things do not go one hundred percent our

way, we want an outsider to present our view, ideally someone who has seen
exactly what we’re doing. It could mean the difference between going silently to
jail — and making an effective moral statement.”
“Yes,” said Rivera. “You’re a security genius, Professor Parker. But even the
best-laid plans can go awry. If you can accommodate Sharif, that would be a… a
kind of safety net.”
Tommie pounded his head gently on the table. “You guys don’t know what
you’re asking.”
But for all the histrionics, Tommie had not said no. After a moment, the little
guy sat up and glared at them. “You’re asking for a miracle. Maybe I can do it
and maybe not. Give me a day to think.”
“Sure, Professor.”
“No problem.” Blount was smiling with relief.
Tommie shook his head and hunched down behind his laptop. He seemed just as
happy when the other gang members adjourned the meeting and wandered off
toward the elevators.
Usually, there was an elevator waiting by the time they got there. Apparently
Tommie’s deadzone had left even the elevator software in the dark. After a
moment spent staring at closed doors, Carlos reached over and punched the
ground-floor button. “The virtue of maintaining antique controls,” he said with a
weak smile.
Winnie was grinning, but it had nothing to do with the elevator. “Don’t worry.
Tommie will come up with a solution.”
Robert nodded. “He always has, hasn’t he?”
” ‘Yup,’” said Winnie, and they all laughed. And suddenly Robert understood
why Winnie and Carlos wanted Sharif on board.
As the elevator doors opened and Rivera and Blount stepped in, Robert said,
“Catch you later. Maybe I should see the Library Militant again.”

Winnie rolled his eyes. “Suit yourself.” And they were gone.
Robert stood for a moment, listening to the sound of the departing elevator.
Beyond the stairway door on his left was the descent into the virtual library.
There had been no more faux earthquakes, but the Librarians Militant still
played with heavy amplifiers. He could hear the sounds of creeping masonry,
louder now than the elevator. The floor under his feet trembled to the tune of
Jerzy Hacek’s fantasies.
He waited a moment more, and then — instead of heading down the stairs — he
walked back around the sixth floor to Tommie Parker.
○
Tommie was leaning forward, his nose still buried in his computer. His deadzone
LED was still lit. In a very concrete way, he looked like a wizard with a book of
ancient lore. No virtual realities needed here. Robert slid into the opposite chair
and watched. It was quite possible the guy hadn’t even noticed his arrival. He
really could get totally absorbed by games and puzzles and cracking schemes.
“I am everywhere, and I appear however I wish, to produce the results that I
wish.” That was the Mysterious Stranger’s brag. After last night, after the
miracle in the front bathroom, Robert was willing to believe that whatever the
Stranger was, he might be nearly as powerful as he claimed. I wonder what he
has on Winnie and Carlos?
Finally, Robert broke the silence: “So, Tommie, how badly have we screwed
up?”
Blue eyes appeared over the top of the laptop. Tommie’s expression seemed to
say what are you doing here? His gaze turned back to his computer. “Dunno. I
just wish you guys would make up your minds.” A quick glance back Robert’s
way. “But you didn’t push for this change, did you?”
“I have… mixed feelings about it.” Now the Stranger would be on-site next
Monday, proving again his claim of ubiquity. “I’ve always believed in letting
you tech geniuses get the job done your own way.”
Tommie bobbed agreement. “Yup.”

Actually, the old Robert had never cared about technology one way or another.
Now things were very different. “I remember you were always good at pulling
miracles out of your hat, though. Are we asking too much this time, Tommie?”
Parker sat up and gave Robert all his attention. “I… I just don’t know, Robert. In
the old days, there’s no way I could swing something like this. I could design
super ASICs. I could hack protocols. I could do a dozen things outside my
narrow academic specialty. But that doesn’t count for so much now. It’s that — “
“It’s that you’re working on problems bigger than any set of specialties.”
“Yes! How did you know that?”
Ms. Chumlig told me. Aloud, Robert said, “Nowadays, you deal with completely
unrelated specialties.”
“Right. Some of my core skills are still important. In those I’m as effective as I
ever was. But… by the time I retired, I was almost an embarrassment to my
department. I was good in certain niche courses, but when I tried to teach the
new integrative stuff — well, all my life I’d been way ahead of the students,
even in new courses. But toward the end, I was floundering. I got through my
last semester by assigning weekly projects, and then having the kids critique
each other.” He looked seriously embarrassed. Nothing like this had ever
happened to the old Robert — but I could always define what quality and
performance meant.
“Anyway, after I retired, I went back to school — at least inside my head.
There’s a whole different way of looking at problem solving if you want to solve
large problems fast. It’s like learning to use power tools, except that nowadays
your tools aren’t just Google and symbolic math packages, they’re also the idea
boards and future speculations and — “
“And dealing with people?”
“Yup. People were never part of my equations — but that doesn’t matter
anymore. There are design bureaus that specialize in handling the nicey-nice.”
Tommie leaned forward, confiding. “Since I started working on this project,
everything has come together! Getting into the tunnels would be useless if the
staff were still in the labs. So I’ve turned the political maneuvering between the
Hacekeans and the Scoochis into the most spectacular media distraction — a

clash of belief circles. It’ll be so cool! I’ve found a design coordinator who
understands what I’m after. I make the overall concept and he farms it out all
over the planet. The detailed plans just grow into place!”
Tommie sat back, his frustration swept away by this vision of his new powers.
“And look at my computer!” His hand passed lovingly across the device. The
cabinet was nicked and scratched. It looked like it had hosted generations of
burglars. The LEDs along the top were set in little pits hacked into the metal. OF
Tommie didn’t believe in “no user-serviceable parts within.”
“Over the years, I’ve replaced everything inside. Too often the changes were to
satisfy new standards and the damned SHE. But now in the last couple of
months, I’ve put a revolution inside this box. It subverts nontrivial parts of the
Secure Hardware Environment. I swear, Robert, I’m hotter than DARPA and
CIA ever were in the twentieth century.”
Robert was silent for a moment. Then he said, “I’ll bet you will figure some way
to get Sharif in.”
“Ha. That would be the frosting on the cake. The obvious trick is straight out of
the twentieth century: We just lay our own cable. That would support decent data
rates — enough for Sharif, anyway — and we’d still be all dark and quiet.” He
glanced at Robert and apparently took his silence for incredulity. “I know, it’s a
long walk, and the tunnel security will be mostly live. But there’s a kind of
slimclad optical fiber… or there will be after I get done with my design
coordinator.”
“Yes. Your design coordinator.”
“I am everywhere, and I appear however I wish, to produce the results that I
wish.” The new world was a magical place, but there was a hierarchy of
miracles. There was what Juan and Robert could do. There was what Louise
Chumlig was trying to teach. There was what Tommie had taught himself. And
somewhere above it all, there was what the Mysterious Stranger could do.

Failure Is an Option
At Fairmont High, final exams were spread across several days. There were
some similarities with what he remembered of childhood. The kids were
distracted by the upcoming holidays. Worse, the Christmas movie season was
something that was beginning to pervade the various shared worlds they lived in.
But finals were different in one profound way from his experience in high
school. For Robert Gu, these new exams were hard. It was not a foregone
conclusion that he would max the tests and outdo everyone around him. The
only similar situation from his past was in undergraduate school, when he had
briefly been forced into real science courses. In those classes, he had finally met
students who were not automatically his inferiors — and he had also met
teachers who were not impressed by his genius. Once past the mandatory science
curriculum, Robert had avoided such humiliation.
Until now.
Math and formal common sense. Statistics and data mechanics. Search and
analysis. Even the S&A exam limited one’s opportunity to go out on the net and
use the intelligence of others. Though she taught collaboration, Chumlig had
always droned about the importance of core competencies. Now all her
mismatched platitudes were coming together in one hellweek of testing.
Right after the “common sense” exam, the Mysterious Stranger manifested
himself. He was just a voice and a greenish glow. “Having trouble with the
exams, my man?”
“I’ll get by.” In fact, the math had actually been interesting.
Miri → Juan, Xiu:
He’s talking to someone again.
Xiu → Juan, Miri:
What is he saying?
Miri → Juan, Xiu:

I don’t know. Local audio has gone private. Juan! Get out there.
Juan → Miri, Xiu:
You’re not the boss of me. I was going to talk to Robert now
anyway.
The Stranger chuckled. “At Fairmont High, they don’t give automatic A grades,
or even automatic passing grades. Failure is an option, but you — “
Relief was in sight. He saw Juan Orozco coming out of the class building,
heading his way. The stranger continued,” — and Juan Orozco are not certain
F’s. You’re on a simplified curriculum. You should see the exams they’re
planning for your granddaughter.”
“What about my granddaughter?” If the slimeball brought her into this —
But the voice did not reply.
Juan looked around questioningly. “Were you talking to someone, Robert?”
“Not about school things.”
“Because I didn’t see anybody.” He hesitated, and letters coursed across Robert’s
view. Juan → Robert:
It’s really important not to collaborate outside of the rules.
“I understand,” Robert replied out loud.
“Okay.” Clearly Juan didn’t think Robert could pass all the tests. Sometimes it
seemed like the poor kid was trying to protect him. “See,” Juan continued, “the
school uses a real good proctor service. Maybe there are some kids who can fool
it, but there’s a lot more who only think they can.”
And then there’s the Mysterious Stranger, who seems to have no trouble at all
with security. The Stranger was so powerful, yet he still got pleasure from
taunting Robert. Could it be some old enemy — someone a good deal brighter
than Winnie Blount?
“Anyway, I think we have a chance for an A in our semester demo, Robert.” The

boy launched into the latest plans for using his writing together with manual
music and Robert’s network algorithms. It was the blind leading the blind, but
after a few moments Robert was absorbed in it.
○
Things were very tense around the house, and it had nothing to do with final
exams. In point of fact, Robert’s midnight fracas at the front bathroom amounted
to a physical assault. Never mind that he’d been trying to protect Alice — that
was scarcely something he could claim. This time there were no threats, no
showdowns. But Robert could see an uneasiness in Bob’s eyes that hadn’t been
there before. It was the look of a fellow who begins to wonder if the snake he’s
been keeping might actually be a black mamba. That conclusion would get
Robert shipped to Rainbows End faster than any mere boorishness.
Miri gave him a clue as to why this hadn’t happened. She caught up with him
one afternoon as he wandered around West Fallbrook hoping for contact with
some friendly form of Sharif.
Miri rode her old bike along beside him for a few paces, matching his speed, and
wobbling wildly. Finally she hopped off and walked the bike. As usual, her
posture was schoolmarm straight. She looked at him sideways for a moment.
“How are your finals going, Robert?”
“Hi Miri. How are your finals going?”
“I asked first! Besides, you know my finals don’t start till after the break.” Her
ebullient bossiness seemed to collide with diplomacy. “So how are you doing?”
“It looks like I’m going to get a C in math.”
Her eyes widened. “Oh! I’m sorry.”
Robert laughed. “No. That’s good news. I wouldn’t have even understood the
problems, back before the Alzheimer’s.”
She gave him a sickly smile. “Well, that’s okay then.”
“Hmm. A… friend… of mine told me that the kids in your classes are really
good at these things.”

“We know the tools.”
“I think I could be a lot better in math,” said Robert, almost to himself. “It might
even be fun.” Of course, if his real plans for the next few days worked out, he
would have his poetry back and none of this would matter.
This time Miri’s smile was happier. “I’ll bet you could! You know… I could help
you on that. I really like math, and I have all sorts of custom heuristics. Between
semesters I could show you how to use them.” Her voice slipped into leader
mode as she planned out his vacation for him. That’s the Alice in her, thought
Robert. He almost smiled. “Hold on, there’s still finals to get through.” And he
thought about Juan’s latest demo plans. The boy was doing okay. It was Robert
who was having trouble with his part, the graphics and the interfaces. “That’s
where I really need help.”
Miri’s face snapped around, “I will not help you cheat, Robert!”
They both stopped and stared at each other. “That’s not what I meant, Miri!”
Then he thought about what he had actually said. Christ. In the old days I
insulted people all the time, but I knew when I was doing it. “Honest. I just
meant that finals are a problem, okay?”
Lena → Miri, Xiu:
Be cool, kiddo. Even I don’t think Robert’s messing with you.
Xiu → Lena, Miri:
This is a first for you then.
Miri glared at him for a second more. Then she made a strange sound that might
have been a giggle. “Okay. I should have known a Gu would not cheat. It’s just
that I get so mad at some of the kids in my study group. I tell them what to do. I
tell them not to cheat. And yet they are always chiseling at the collab protocols.”
She started walking again, and Robert followed along. “Actually,” she said, “I
was just making conversation. I have a mission, something I should tell you.”
“Oh?”
“Yes. Bob wants to send you out-of-state. He figures you tried to beat up Alice.”

She paused, as if waiting for some defense.
But Robert only nodded, remembering the look in Bob’s eyes. So Rainbows End
was too close by. “How long do I have?”
“That’s what I want to tell you, not to worry. You see — ” It turned out that his
rescue came from an unlikely source, namely Colonel Alice herself. Apparently,
she hadn’t felt the least bit threatened by him. “Alice knew you were just
desperate, I mean — ” Miri made a verbal dance of avoiding insult and gross
language: Basically, Alice already thought he was a crazy old man. Crazy old
men have to go to the bathroom all the time; they get overly focused on that
problem. Furthermore, Alice didn’t regard his manhandling of her as assault.
Robert remembered how sore his head was after he tripped over her feet and
slammed into the doorjamb. Black-belt whatever must be one of Alice’s myriad
JITTs. Alice was the dangerous one. Poor Alice, poor Bob. Poor Miri.
“Anyway, she told Bob that he was overreacting, and you really need your
schooling here. She says you can stay as long as your behavior is…” Her voice
dwindled into silence, and she looked up at him. She couldn’t figure how to pass
on the rest diplomatically: as long as you don’t blast my daughter again.
“… I understand, Miri. I’ll be good.”
“Well. Okay.” Miri looked around. “I, um, I guess that’s all I had to say. I’ll let
you get on with… whatever you’re doing. Good luck with finals.”
She swung back on her bike and pedaled industriously away. That old bike had
only three speeds. Robert shook his head, but he couldn’t help smiling.

The Officer of the Watch
Robert’s finals were over. He had earned a 2.6 average, and a B in Search and
Analysis. He had worked harder than he ever had in his life. If it weren’t for the
imminent irrelevance of it all, he would have been proud of himself.
Now it was Monday afternoon and Robert was counting the hours, almost down
to counting the minutes. The Mysterious Stranger had been very scarce lately.
The cabal had met a couple of times, with Tommie doling out information on a
need-to-know basis. Tommie had read too many spy novels. For now, all Robert
knew was that they were meeting at the library at 5:30 tonight.
○
Meantime, somewhere under Camp Pendleton…
In theory, being officer of the watch for Continental U.S. Southwest was no
different than running a snoop-and-swoop operation anywhere in the world. In
theory, there could be world-wrecking conspirators at work here. In fact, this was
home, in some of the best-connected real estate in the world. The chances they’d
have to swoop were near zero. Nevertheless, for the next four hours Lieutenant
Colonel Robert Gu, Jr., would be responsible for protecting about one hundred
million of his neighbors from mass destruction.
Gu arrived twenty minutes early, checked in with the current officer of the
watch, and then looked for DHS screwups. Those were usually the worst thing
about CONUS watches. Through the miracle of virtual bureaucracy, Gu’s
Marine Expeditionary Group was tonight a part of the Department of Homeland
Security. This was how DHS kept its budget so, ahem, small. “Like a modern
corporation, DHS seamlessly meshes with whatever organizations are needed at
the moment.” That was the hype. And tonight — well glory be — there was not
a single authorization glitch in sight.
Bob walked around the bunker, transformed the green plastic walls into windows
on the Southern California night. The air filled with abstractions, the status of his
people and his equipment, the reorganization of his share of the analyst pool. He
grabbed some coffee from the machine by the door and settled down at a very
ordinary desk just a few feet from the launch area.

“Patrick?”
His second-in-command appeared across the table. “Sir?”
“Who-all have we got tonight?” An unnecessary question, but Patrick Westin
produced the official list. The Marine Expeditionary Group consisted of four
twelve-marine maneuver teams. Call them squads; everyone else did. Back in
the twentieth century, Bob’s “command” would have rated a second lieutenant.
On the other hand, the MEG controlled thousands of vehicles (though most were
the size of model airplanes) and enough firepower to finish almost any war in
history. Most important to Bob Gu: Everyone in his group had been through
combat training as tough as any in the past. They were marines. Patrick called
them all in for a short meeting. The room stretched back from around Bob’s desk
and for a few moments pretended to be an auditorium. Everyone looked cool; it
had been a long time since anything had gone Really Wrong within CONUS.
And were a big part of the reason why.
“We’ll be here four hours,” said Bob. “Hopefully, the time will be a very boring
snoop. As long as that’s the case, you’re free to stay in staff areas adjacent to
your vehicles. But most of you have been on my watch before. You know I want
you to keep your eyes open. Keep up with the analysts.” He waved at the analyst
pool. For a CONUS Southwest watch, this amounted to about fifteen hundred
dedicated specialists, but with connections leading down to hundreds of
thousands of services and millions of embedded processors. Tonight, Alice was
in charge of the pool, and already the changes were evident, the three-
dimensional rat’s nest transformed with a clarity rarely seen outside of managers’
dreams. Aside from her marvelous reorganization, the display was completely
conventional. Between the humans who had clearance and could communicate
directly there were hundreds of color-coded associational threads. The mass of
the lower levels was constantly aflicker, weights and assessments and
connections shifting from second to second.
Bob pointed at the reddish threat wackos that were always part of the mix.
“What have we got to worry about for the next four hours?” The analysts behind
the red nodes spewed out their consensus list and supporting pointers.
But even the paranoids didn’t have much to say tonight:

Action issues
Possible Anti-Librareome protest at UCSD
Belief circle riot a near certainty
Possible organized participants
Jerzy Hacek belief circle
CIA assessment of Indo-European connection
Scooch-a-mout belief circle
CIA assessment of Central African connection
CIA assessment of Sub-Saharan connection
CIA assessment of Paraguay connection
RIAA report to Congress
Commercial entities
Possible threats to infrastructure
Proximity to Critical National Security Sites
General Genomics
Huertas International
Increased illegal computation imports
Orange County
Los Angeles County
Off-scale low probability estimate linking preceding items
Law enforcement issues
FBI vice raid at Las Vegas Splendor Farm, a near certain event
Possible request for intelligence support
DEA enhancement-drug raids in Kern County
Possible request for intelligence support
Possible out-of-area activity
Pacific Islander settlements in Alberta
Persons of Interest
Arizona
California
San Diego County
Increased short-term South Asian visitors
Others
Nevada
Recusal advisements
Bob let the list hang for a moment.

“Ha,” said one of the gunnies. “At least the policias won’t be a problem.”
Denying the law-enforcement requests should be easy tonight, not like for
kidnapping or murder prevention.
A tech sergeant flickered highlights across the UCSD event cluster. “This is what
will keep us busy.” Her light paused, expanding on definitions. “What? This is a
fight between belief circles? I never heard of such a thing.”
One of the youngest marines laughed. “You’re just getting old, Nancy. Cross-
belief strife is tragic new.”
Bob didn’t try to parse the slang, but he’d heard enough from Dad and Miri to
get the point. He expanded the description of the expected riot. “It looks like a
combination of twentieth-century protest and modern gaming. It should be as
safe as most public events. The problem is the location.” There was so much bio-
lab work near UCSD that any instability was a concern. “This is worth a lot of
your attention. Note the stats on foreign interest.” He moved on to the links in
Persons of Interest. As usual, those expanded into the tens of thousands. At one
point or another almost everyone — unless they were dead, in which case they
might still count for bioterror paranoia — came under scrutiny. “I’m not going to
ask you to dredge through the Pol or this watch will last all year. But follow
what the spooks throw up at you — and watch for real-time changes.” That last
was classic wisdom, proven in dozens of disasters and disasters-avoided so far
this century. The analysts always had a million suspicions, but when they hit the
hard cold world of real time, success depended on whether the operational folks
had been paying attention.
And then there was the item that stood a little down from all the others: Recusal
Advisements, that is, team members who might somehow compromise this
watch. Normally, that was the most paranoid list of all — but his crew would see
no cloud of detail here, not even links. Such advice was Eyes Only for himself
and his backups. In practice, if there had been any serious problems there, they
would have been taken care of well before this briefing.
“Questions?”
He looked around. There was a moment of silence, marines drinking in the
details of the moment, answering a lot of questions for themselves. Then the
young slang-slinger spoke up. “Sir, the equipment, is it the same as for a

technical-threat overseas mission?”
Bob looked back into the young eyes. “The boost gear is lighter than usual…
That’s the only difference, Corporal. We’re here to protect, but ultimately that
means to protect the whole country.” The whole world, some would say. “So,
yes, we’re carrying a full strategic load.” He leaned back and gave a look that
included all his marines. “I don’t expect any problems. If we pay attention and
do our jobs, this will be just another peaceful evening for the people of
California.”
He dismissed the crew, and the room shrank to its true dimensions. Patrick
Westin had a few follow-up questions about squad deployment, and then his
image departed, too. Bob Gu turned down his augmentation and for a brief
moment there was just his table and chair, sitting by the coffee machine. On his
right was the doorway that led to real hardware. With luck, he wouldn’t see any
of that tonight.
Bob → Alice:
Are you cool?
Alice → Bob:
Cool and clear. The UCSD thing will be good practice for my lab
audit. Talk to you after. That is, after the watch was complete. Tonight
Alice was top analyst; if she weren’t currently Trained for the audit, she might
have been the operational commander. She was one of only a handful of people
qualified for both jobs. In either role, she was a joy to work with — as long as he
didn’t have to think about the sacrifices that made her performance possible.
He finished his coffee and brought back his visuals, now fully customized. He
checked again with Cheryl Grant. She was ready to go. Okay, for the record:
Gu → Grant:
I take the watch, ma’am. He and Grant exchanged salutes. The clock was
started. His squads settled into total alertness. They would have to stay that way
for four hours — not a long time, but about the longest you could remain watch-
alert without drugs.

Bob’s job was different. He was like a sheepdog running around the outside of
the flock, skittering from topic to topic. He watched where marines and analysts
were spending their time. This was partly to stay ahead of hot spots, partly to
detect attentional holes. For a moment, he looked down from a popular-press
viewpoint over UCSD. This… event… was going to involve a lot of
demonstrators, many of them physically present. And network stats showed that
a flash crowd situation was possible on top of that. He wondered if Miri was
surfing this.
The thought brought him back to the moment. He looked again at the Recusal
Advisements. Half of his marines had relatives enrolled at UCSD. That was the
big problem with a local snoop. Three of his people were actually part-time
students at UCSD. The slang-slinger had a hobby of Scoochi decoration that
involved a number of Bangalore fans. If this hadn’t been the kid’s duty night,
he’d be down there on campus right now. But the analysts had done a minute-by-
minute on the young fellow, going back fourteen months. There were some
illegalities, some enhancement drug abuse, but nothing that would affect the
mission.
Bob had searched the entire recusal tree. Now he ran off its pointers, boring
deep. Dad didn’t show up. And I was sure he’d be mixed up in the Librareome
thing. Not that that would be serious grounds for recusal. He was skittering too
far afield, a common problem for commanders with latitude —
Xiu Xiang? The name was vaguely familiar, but it wouldn’t have popped out at
him if his own name hadn’t been in the item. Xiang was one of about three
hundred thousand people in CONUS Southwest who were currently of interest
for tinkering with hardware. Much of that was illegal, of course; such people
could be thrown to the FBI. But it was more productive simply to track them.
Most of these people were benign hobbyists or intellectual-property cheats.
Some were the hands for terrorist cults. And some were the analyst smarts
behind those cults. Xiang had the intelligence and training to be in this last
category, but so far the most interesting thing about her was the range of toys she
had built, a regular museum of oddball electronics. And she was in one of Dad’s
classes. That connection was marked “tenuous.”
But there was also a reference to Rainbows End Rest Home… This woman was
Mom’s roomie! And all this time he’d worried about how dull life must be for
Mom nowadays. What a team: the mad scientist and his mother the shrink and

— Whafs this? Weeks of do-it-yourself snooping that Miri and Mom and this
Xiang had run on Dad. A dozen surmises rose to mind, and — Mission, mission,
keep your eyes on the mission. He resolutely pushed all the personal issues aside.
The main thing this proved was the stupidity of running watches with local
personnel.
Bob grabbed another coffee and settled back to watch the views of UCSD and
the night’s other hot spots. In the modern military, losing concentration was
much the same sin as falling asleep on duty. It was time to get in the groove.
And still, a tiny internal voice did its best to distract: What in heaven’s name
have Miri and Mom been up to?
○
Monday, 5:00 p.m. Finally.
Twilight was still colorful in the sky over La Jolla Shores when Robert drove
into the traffic loop north of Warschawski Hall. He headed east on foot, toward
the Geisel Library.
“Ready for the big night, my man?” That was the Stranger-Sharif, walking
beside him. Passersby didn’t seem to see his green-faced companion.
Robert gave the Stranger a sour look. “I’m ready to see you deliver.”
“Don’t worry. If we succeed tonight, you’ll have your peculiar genius fully back,
my word on it.”
Robert grunted. Not for the first time he speculated on the lunacy of the
terminally desperate.
“And don’t look so discouraged, Professor. You’ve already done your hardest
part. Tonight it’s mainly Tommie Parker who has to get things straight.”
“Tommie? I wonder.”
“You wonder?” The Stranger’s smile broadened. “So you’ve identified
Tommie’s ‘miracle design bureau’? Poor Tommie. He’s the only one of you who
thinks he’s running free. In fact, he thinks I’m just one of his best collaborators.

See, I can be nice when that’s absolutely necessary.”
There were as many people here as Robert had ever seen on a campus evening in
his grad-school days. Up ahead, in the direction of the library, light hung in the
sky, brighter than the twilight behind them. Looking down from the tops of the
eucalyptus trees, Robert could see crowds along the esplanades south and east of
the library. There seemed to be several groups, not mixing. “What’s going on?”
That must be the distraction Tommie had promised; it was far larger than
Winnie’s Librareome demonstration.
“Heh. I’ve planned extraordinary festivities around the library tonight; almost
everybody’s invited, especially staff from General Genomics labs. But not you. I
suggest we detour around the library.”
“But that was the rendezvous point — “
“It’s already too busy. We’ll head for Pilchner Hall direct. This way, please.” The
Stranger pointed to the right, into dark eucalyptus trees.
○
Meantime, in the GenGen labs…
Sheila Hanson popped up half an hour into the night shift. “You ready, Tim?”
Tim Huynh sat back from his desk, and gestured up his little helpers. “We’re
ready, boss.” He stepped into the corridor and followed Hanson’s come-hither
arrows up the stairs. She and the rest of her lab techs were already gathered
round the surface entrance. Four or five were recent graduates. The rest — like
Timothy Huynh himself — were work-study students. “You’re sure this isn’t
going to lose us our jobs?” Belief-circle gaming was all very well outside of
work, but Huynh would never have considered this adventure if his own
supervisor hadn’t suggested it.
Hanson laughed. “I told you. GenGen regards this battle as a form of public
service. Besides, it will embarrass Huertas International.” Her glance took in all
of them, GenGen’s entire night crew except for regulomics. Sheila’s explanation
was enough for Tim. Once upon a time, he had really looked forward to working
at GenGen. How many people got to see — in person — the lab equipment that
their college majors were built upon? But more often than not, his job came

down to unwedging overenthusiastic cleaning robots, and hauling non-prepped
cargo. Yes, sometimes there were real problems, problems where you got to
consult with users and help customize their experiment setup. But then you spent
days devising automation so that wouldn’t happen again. Not one of the crew
members, even the ones who weren’t Scooch-a-moutis, looked unhappy about
tonight’s little diversion.
“Okay, everybody,” said Sheila, “let’s see you look properly formed.” They
slipped into their Scoochi characters. There were pofu-longs and dwelbs, and a
great big shima-ping. The shima-ping was Sheila. She glanced at Huynh. “You
can’t be the Scooch-a-mout, Tim. That’s reserved.”
“But I’m commanding the critters.” He waved at the helper bots that had
followed him up the stairs.
“You’re guiding them, Tim. You can be a Lesser Scooch-a-mout.”
“Okay.” He shifted form. These were all world-class designs, not seen before
tonight. He doubted very much that any of them would remain reserved for long,
but if Sheila wanted to play the beliefs strictly, he wasn’t going to be the one to
break the circle.
They trooped out the doors, into the evening twilight. There was still color in the
tops of the eucalyptus. South, across the ravines, their goal was a vast double
pyramid, glassy-faceted on top, dark and be-vined below. And that was the real,
naked-eye view! The Geisel Library. As they moved along, Sheila and others
were fitting their vision over the world. This hadn’t been rehearsed. It was
designed as a surprise for the Hacekeans, but even more as a surprise for the
world that would soon be coming down to watch. One by one, the eucs made
little popping noises and suddenly were transformed into moonflower trees, their
leaves fluorescent in the twilight.
“We have been noticed,” someone said.
“Of course. We’re all over. There are s’nice and got-a-runs coming from the Lit
Building.”
“There’s fweks and liba-loos flying from our basement at the library!”
And every appearance sent a tiny fraction of a penny winging back up the

Scoochi tree of creation. For once, Tim didn’t mind the rip-off. The Scooch-a-
mout affiliance was as broad as any. Even hardware illegals at the edge of the
world would benefit from the royalties.
Hanson → Night Crew;
Keep our gear out of sight, long as you can. The real view from local
cams would show that some of the Scoochi images wrapped real critters. So for
the moment, Sheila wanted all the privacy she could get on that. What the
Hacekeans learned would have to come from public viewpoints and their own
naked eyes. Huynh let Rick Smale and the others handle that. He concentrated
on running the critters: all the lab bots with enough range and flexibility to walk
to the library. These gadgets did routine cleaning and module swapouts. They
weren’t designed for running around in the wild out-of-doors.
But GenGen had cleared them to go, and Timothy Huynh was having a ball.
First, he laid down a consensus for the robots’ appearance. There were queeps
and chirps, spitting and shooting in all directions. In reality, these were his four
hundred mobile manipulators — known as “tweezer bots” in the business. They
were barely fast enough to keep up with the humans. But he also had mapped
megamunches and xoroshows and salsipueds — these onto his cleaner bots and
sample carriers. Behind them lurked the two largest mechs in Huynh’s lab,
combination forklifts and heavy-equipment installers; for now, they were tricked
out as gray-masted blue ionipods. He had supplied the physical specs two weeks
ago, when the prospect of this adventure had first floated around the labs. The
resulting visual designs were spectacular, and meshed with the reality of the
underlying robots and the touchy-feely gear that Huynh had attached to the bots’
hulls. If you patted the xoroshow on its haunches, you’d feel muscle sliding
lithely under silky fur, just what your eyes were telling you. As long as they
were confronted by only a few pairs of human hands, the haptics were fast
enough to maintain the illusion. They were better than anything he’d ever
touched on Pyramid Hill. Of course, the remote audience would benefit very
little from that, but it would boost the morale of the Scoochis here in person, and
undermine their opposite numbers among the Hacekeans.
And that enemy was already forming up. Five Knights Guardian stood on the
library’s east terrace, and a Librarian lurked by the Snake Path.
“That’s all they have?”

“So far,” said Sheila the shima-ping. “I’m just hoping we aren’t too fragmented.”
“Yeah.” That was the virtue and the weakness of the Scoochi worldview.
Scooch-a-mout was distributed in bits and pieces. It was customized to the
wishes of children, not just in the Great Powers, but also in the failed states at
the edge of the world. The Scoochis had so many different creations. The
Hacekeans had the notion of knowledge conquering outward, a vision that
claimed consistency over everything. And just now that fit their near-total
control of the library.
The shima-ping bounced up and down on its three feet. Sheila was shouting at
the enemy with what must have been an external speaker, since Huynh could feel
the loudness all over. “Get out of our way!”
“We want our floor space!”
“We want our Library!”
“And most of all, we want our REAL books!” That last demand made for a good
chant, even if it didn’t quite fit with Scoochi’s edge-of-the-world background.
Sheila’s gang raced forward with the battle cries. But now dozens of Hacekeans
joined the five Knights Guardian. Surely most were virtual, but the blending was
perfection. No surprise; both sides knew this was coming. This was a collision of
belief circles. The point was to convince the wider world by belief and images
that Scooch-a-mout’s was the greater vision.
Both sides thought they knew what was coming. In fact, Tim’s had something
special planned:
The Hacekeans roared their threats at the Scoochi army, at the chirps and queeps,
and the larger, vaguely seen things that lumbered along behind them. They
thought it was all clever imagery and human players. Then the first of the gray-
masted blue ionipods crunched onto asphalt, and the Hacek people realized that
the sound it made was real. At the same time one of the salsipueds — a sample
carrier — raced out and bit a Knight on the ankle. It was just a small electric
shock really, but the Hacekeans recoiled, wailing, “Cheaters! Cheaters!”
And it was cheating, really, but Huynh saw from the network stats that support
for his side had doubled. Besides, we’re doing it for a good cause. Timothy

Huynh never used the physical library that much, but what had happened there
rankled.
The terrace was clear for the moment, but Sheila hesitated.
Hanson → Night Crew:
I don’t like the straight run in. I think they have something
planned.
“Yes! See!” Smale shouted aloud, and pointed them to views from above the
library’s entrance. Those cams showed spiderlike somethings guarding the final
approach to the library doors. The creatures were so thick they almost hid the
stone mosaic. Then the views went offline.
“Jeez, were those critters real?”
“… I think some of them were,” said Sheila.
“Can’t be. Even Electrical Engineering doesn’t have that many robots. In this
contest, we are the ones with mechanical superiority!”
But what if the enemy had bought a mob of hobby bots? If even half of those
mechs were real —
Sheila paused, listening to advice that might be coming from anywhere on earth.
Then she roared, “Into the trees!”
They gave a ragged shout. What came out of the synthetics was an answering
roar, loud and baroque and totally Scoochi. They pounded off into the bushes
southeast of the library. Virtual imagery faded into an artful blur that disguised
the patchy network coverage.
The smaller mechs, the cleaners and sample carriers and tweezer bots, had little
trouble with the mulchy ground cover. It was the forklifts that were the problem.
They sank into the softness. Huynh ran around them, giving a push here and
moving a stone there. The monsters slowly shuffled forward. It was not so
different from some of the work he had to do down in the lab. But now was the
time for some out-of-band complaining:
Huynh → Hanson:

This doesn’t help, Sheila. The spider bots will just follow us
here.
Hanson → Huynh:
Bear with me. This detour will work. Watch what I
A little yip of surprise came from Sheila’s lips, and her sentence hung
uncompleted. The virtual Scoochis blundered on for a pace or two, depending on
their various latencies, but the GenGen night crew stumbled to an abrupt stop.
Everybody milled around for a moment, images coalescing as they threaded
routes out of the thicket.
But that was not the reason for the sudden stop. They were all staring at — a
man and a rabbit. The first real, the second virtual. The two weren’t exactly
hiding; they were standing in a clearing. But there was brush all around, and
until the Scoochis came stumbling in, there had been no camera viewpoint on
this spot.
The rabbit was nothing special, a toonish chimera. It had a nicely impudent leer,
you had to give it that.
Sheila the shima-ping hesitated a second, then took a couple of threatening steps
toward the rabbit. “You’re out of place.”
The critter took a chomp out of its carrot and waggled an ear. “What’s it to ya,
Doc?”
“I’m not a doctor — yet,” said the shima-ping.
The rabbit laughed. “In your dreams, then. I’m here to remind you that it’s not
just you and Hacek in collision tonight. There are other, greater powers at work.”
It wailed the last words and swept a carrot-clutching white-furred paw at the sky.
Huynh → Night Crew:
C’mon, Sheila, there are always bystanders.
Smale → Night Crew:
Stopping here just dilutes our reputation.

But Sheila ignored the objections. She sidled around the impudent rabbit and
stepped close to the physically present human. That guy… looked aggressively
normal: in his fifties, maybe Hispanic, dressed in dark work clothes. He was the
perfect picture of UCSD faculty, though a bit overdressed. He was wearing, but
very low-key, not even showing courtesy info. His eyes followed the shima-ping
with a sure calmness that — now that Huynh noticed — was a little unnerving.
Then Huynh saw what Sheila was seeing. The stranger was projecting imagery.
It was a subtle thing, the sort of far-lavender shades that you almost can’t see.
They were a mist that drifted up from the stranger’s shoes and seemed even
brighter as they flowed into the trees.
Hanson → Night Crew:
Switch to utility view.
GenGen’s utility diagnostics were tricky to use outside of a lab, but they were
much more sophisticated than what came with Epiphany outfits. In the utility
view… you could see that this guy was heavily equipped. The lavender hinted at
that, but now Huynh could see the scintillation of the high-rate laser links
coming from the guy’s clothes.
Without the lavender clue, they might never have noticed. Sometimes the highest
form of showmanship is to pretend at unsuccessfully pretending to be innocuous.
Smale -> Night Crew:
Hey! This guy — he’s hooked into the Bollywood people here on
campus.
They stared at each other with joyous surmise. This must be a genuine
Bollywood mogul. Belief circles were the fuel that sustained the movie industry.
Hanson → Night Crew:
I told you, battling the Hacekeans would mean big recognition.
Booting Hacekean ass out of the library was more important than ever.
“Onward!” shouted Hanson, now out loud and across all the world. “Down with
Hacek! Down with the Librareome Menace!”

The virtuals and almost all the night crew continued on through the forest.
Huynh stayed behind a few seconds, making sure that no queep or chirp was
stuck in the leaves, making sure that the forklifts had enough space between the
trees. And then they were all pounding along again.
“We want our floor space!”
“We want our library!”
“And most of all, we want our REAL books!”
Huynh did not expect that the spider bots would be caught by surprise. What did
Sheila have up her shima-ping sleeve?

When Belief Circles Collide
Alfred Vaz watched the departing crazies. Beside him, Rabbit swayed in time to
their battle cries. For once, the critter seemed impressed by someone other than
itself. Or maybe not. “Heh,” it said, giving a little carroty salute. “I can’t wait to
see their faces when they discover who’s fighting for the other side.”
Vaz looked down at the furry ears. “Turn off your public presence.” The goal
was to not attract attention.
“You worry too much.” But the rabbit took a last chomp and tossed the carrot
green aside. This one vanished before it hit the ground. “Okay, Doc. I’m for your
eyes only. What next?”
Vaz grunted and started off toward the south. In fact, he was more irritated than
worried by Rabbit’s impudence. If things went properly tonight, the Americans
would not connect the operation with Rabbit, much less with the Indo-European
Alliance. If the Americans started seriously looking, they would quickly pick out
Alfred’s role here — whether or not he and Rabbit were actually seen together.
Keiko’s people had worked out an elaborate decision program — a “contingency
tree” — that described just what could still be denied and what could still be
achieved in the face of various glitches. Twenty years ago, Alfred would have
laughed at such automated planning, but no more. His secret analyst teams had
developed his own contingency tree. It grew out from Keiko’s, reaching all the
way to ultimate worst cases — such as the unmasking of his YGBM project.
Alfred emerged from the densest part of the eucalyptus grove. All around him,
his tiny bots unobtrusively kept pace. Every one was in violation of local law,
containing not a single chip in thrall to the U.S. Department of Homeland
Security. While Vaz continued to play Bollywood exec through the public net,
these devices provided him with his own network and countermeasures. There
were places in the contingency tree where they could be very useful.
Meantime, a tiny stealthed aerobot followed along above, accepting his local
network’s traffic and flickering it at a thousand points in the westward sky. The
energy in any pulse would be undetectable except to someone very alert and very
close by, but the ensemble — correlated with the right time synch — should be
visible to Keiko’s antenna array out over the Pacific. It was their very own

military net. That was the theory. In fact, Alfred had been out of touch for nearly
three minutes. He knew Alice Gong was on watch tonight, probably as an
analyst. He had launched his attack on her just before he lost milnet access. Very
soon her surveillance duties would bring her to a lab file containing an
innocuous moire pattern — only the pattern would not be innocuous for her. Has
that happened yet? Maybe he should snoop it out via the public net.
“Come on, Doc, come ona come on.” Rabbit danced a little jig. Its voice had a
mocking lilt that Alfred had first heard some eighty years earlier. “Is there some
kinda problem?”
“No problem,” said Vaz. “Are your agents in place?”
“Never fear. All but Rivera and Gu are at the start point. I’m guiding them
around the riot even as we speak. But if you want to snoop the fiber, you better
hurry up.”
The ground was firm and level. There was a surfaced path. Now their speed was
limited by how fast his mechs could make their stealthy way.
There were crowds here, but almost everyone was walking toward the library.
He caught a glimpse of Rivera and Gu. And, once, he saw two children on
bicycles. Where did that fit with Hacekeans and Scoochis? He would have put
the question to his analyst pool — if only he had his milnet link.
○
The Mysterious Stranger hustled Robert off the surface path, down past where
administration bungalows used to be. Robert kept a virtual light on the rough
ground. The view was up-to-the-second and clearer than a flashlight might have
given him, but keeping up with the Stranger didn’t leave time to ghost around
the library. “Those are real lights back there,” he said. “Even more than before.
What — ?”
“The Hacek people got a little too enthusiastic. They’ve destroyed some camera
infrastructure. They need real light.” He was chuckling. “Don’t worry. No one
will be hurt, and it’s a diversion that will be… useful.”
The Stranger slowed. Robert looked away from the ground for a moment. Over
the hill, he got a look — from a point high in the trees — at the people on the

ground. In true view, they were students shouting at each other, a few involved
in real scuffles. But shift a little away from strict reality, and the imagery became
what one group or another wanted you to see. There were Hacek Knights and
Librarians tussling with fluffy, colorful critters that might have been big-eyed
mammals or — “Ah! So it’s the Scooch-a-mout fans going after the
Hacekeans?”
“Mostly.” The Stranger seemed to be listening for something. Somebody was
coming down the hill on an intercept course. A Librarian Militant. Carlos Rivera.
The chubby librarian nodded at Stranger-Sharif and Robert. “What a mess.”
“But a useful mess,” said the Stranger.
“Yeah.” Carlos dropped his costume: the Librarian’s hat reverted to an everyday
baseball cap worn backwards, and now his plate armor was just Bermuda shorts
and the Rivera standard T-shirt. “I just hope this fighting doesn’t become a
tradition.”
The Mysterious Stranger waved them on through the brush. “A tradition?” he
said. “But that would be a plus. Like panty raids and putting automobiles on top
of administration buildings. The sort of thing that made American universities
great.”
Rivera puffed along. “Maybe. We’ve had a lot more business since the library
went virtual, but — “
Robert was still watching the mobs beyond the hill. “I thought the whole point of
belief circles was that they can coexist in the same space.”
“In principle,” said Rivera. They took a big detour around a space that was dark
even in the virtual. Sharif’s image seemed to flicker and jerk. So few people
walked through this area that the random network was sparse and your wearable
had to make way too many guesses.
“But,” Rivera continued, “the library is a tight fit. In principle we can morph to
support the multiple beliefs, like on Pyramid Hill. In fact, our environment is
often too close for conflicting haptics. So the administration tried to satisfy the
Scoochis by giving them some space underground.” Rivera paused, and Robert
almost ran him over. “You knew that wouldn’t work, didn’t you?” Carlos was
looking at Stranger-Sharif, or what Robert saw as Stranger-Sharif.

The Stranger turned and smiled. “I gave you the best advice I had, dear boy.”
“Yeah.” Rivera sounded close to surly. He looked over his shoulder at Robert.
“What does he have on you, Professor?”
“I — — ”
“Ah, ah, ah!” interrupted the Stranger. “I think we’d all be more comfortable
without such revelations.”
“Okay,” said both victims.
“In any case,” said the Stranger, “I’m rather proud of how I’ve morphed the
Librareome controversy into this conflict between belief circles. This riot will
distract people who would otherwise be paying attention to other things — such
as what we’re doing.”
They were well south of the library now, out of the trees and coming down a
steep slope. Just ahead was Gilman Drive. Carlos walked heedlessly into the
street. The cars slowed or speeded up or changed lanes so there was always a
wide bubble of empty space around him. Robert hesitated, looking for a
crosswalk. Damn. Finally he scooted after Carlos, out into traffic.
○
Miri stopped ON the north side of Gilman Drive.
“So where are they going?” said Juan.
“They’re coming down to Gilman Drive.” Viewpoints in the eucalyptus showed
Robert and the librarian, Carlos Rivera, walking through deep brush. The
pictures were fragmentary, since there weren’t many cameras there, but Miri was
sure no one was pulling a swap on her. The two would reach the roadway in a
couple of minutes.
“But that’s true of anyone coming south.”
Miri stopped her bike, put a foot on the ground. “Look! You want me to say I
don’t know where they’re going, is that it?”

The Orozco kid stopped his wikiBay bike beside her. “Honest, I’m just
wondering.”
Xiu Xiang popped into existence, and a moment later, so did a young version of
Lena Gu. Their images were Barbie-doll stiff, but every day they got better. For
instance, Lena had mastered facial expressions — and right now her look was
stern. “Juan isn’t the only one with this question, young lady. If you don’t know,
you should say so.”
Xiu just sounded anxious. “Lena and I are driving around the north side of
campus. Maybe my research was all wrong. How can we help if the action is on
the south?”
Miri struggled to make her own voice serene. “I think you got it right, Dr. Xiang.
Juan and I have been following Robert closely, but now… I guess I don’t know
where he’s going. That makes it even more important that we stay spread out.
Please Dr. Xiang, if you and Lena can stay on the north side, that would be best.”
Over the last few days, Xiu had done some good detective work; she could be
really smart when she wasn’t doubting herself. They knew that Huertas kept the
Librareome shredda in his labs on the north side. If Robert’s friends planned a
“direct protest,” that would be the sensible place for them to break in. So why
aren’t Robert and the others heading that way? Big boogers of uncertainty were
beginning to form.
But Dr. Xiang nodded, and not even Juan Orozco asked the obvious
embarrassing questions. This was still the Miri Gang. For better or worse.
The treetop cams had lost sight of Robert and Mr. Rivera. Miri dropped those
viewpoints and glanced up the hillside, almost with a naked-eye perspective. The
other two were still out of sight. They could come out on Gilman Drive almost
anywhere.
Miri licked her lips. “The main thing is to keep these — “
” — crazy fools — ” said Lena.
” — from doing anything too destructive.”
“Yeah,” said Juan, nodding. “Who do you think that remote guy is, the one
who’s walking with them?”

“What?” Juan was a mostly clueless kid, but sometimes he was accidentally very
sharp. Miri played back her last images of Robert and Mr. Rivera. Those pics
were fragmentary, but Juan was right. The two were looking at a consistent
location that drifted along with them — and granting it a certain amount of open
space. So. A private presence.
Juan said, “I’ll bet they’re seeing Zulfi Sharif.”
“I’ll bet you’re right.” Not for the first time tonight, she tried to bring up her
Sharif control. Still no response.
So do something! “C’mon, Juan.” She walked her bike out onto Gilman Drive,
crossing the lanes slowly enough not to get a ticket.
Xiu and Lena drifted along. “Traffic is heavy,” said Lena.
“It’s the belief-circles clash. People are attending in person.” The gaming buzz
had come out of the blue, but Miri could not imagine that it was coincidence.
Setting this up must have involved deep coordination. Even though the clash was
still just rumor, there was a huge turnout. The cars around them were dropping
off passengers. People were laughing and shouting and talking, and walking
toward the library. The sidewalks on the other side of Gilman Drive were all but
empty.
She reached the far curb and looked back. “Come on, Juan!”
Now the sky above the library was twisting violet, a very nice fractal effect from
some art co-op in northern China. She glanced at network status… It wasn’t just
automobile traffic that was heavy. She could see network trunks lighting up all
over California. There were millions of viewpoints being exported from UCSD’s
campus. There were hundreds of thousands of virtual participants. As Juan
caught up with her, she said, “It’s a whirlwind. Like a big game first-day.”
The boy nodded, but he wasn’t paying attention. “Look what I found in the
street.”
The gadget was half crushed. Metal fibers hung from one side.
She waved for him to drop it. “Roadkill. So?” If a node lost connectivity and
then got into the street — well, something that small would get run over.

“I think it’s still online, but I can’t get a catalog match.”
Miri looked closer. There was spiky flickering, but no response. “It’s pingless
wreckage, Juan.”
Juan shrugged, then dropped the gadget into his bike bag. He had a blank look.
He was still searching. “It looks like a Cisco 33, but — “
Fortunately, Orozco had not distracted everyone. Lena said, “Miri. I’ve found
Robert and the Rivera fellow.” There was a pause while Lena got the camera ID.
There! Robert and Rivera were crossing the roadway a quarter mile west of
them.
“We’re on it, Lena!”
○
In Robert’s time, this side of Gilman Drive had been Quonset huts. In later years,
classic University of California concrete had housed the medical school. Now
there was Pilchner Hall, which like almost everything else on campus looked as
temporary as the old Quonsets.
The Mysterious Stranger led Robert and Carlos into the building. Real light
followed them in concentrated pools, while farther down the hall the view was
virtual. There might have been other people in the building, but the Stranger
avoided them. He headed down a stairway, into a warren of tiny rooms. In places
the floor was dusty. Elsewhere it was polished clean, or covered with streaky
scrape marks. “Heh,” said the Stranger, pointing at the scrapes. “Tommie has
been at work. This whole floor has been rearranged for tonight. And there are
parts that just won’t show on the university’s security plan.”
Their path was now a trek through the maze. Finally, the Mysterious Stranger
stopped at a closed door. He paused and spoke soberly. “As you may know,
Professor Parker is not fully on board. For the sake of your various goals, I
suggest you be careful not to enlighten him.”
Robert and Carlos nodded.
The Mysterious Stranger turned and mimed knocking on the plastic door. His
hand sounded like a hammer pounding heavy wood. After a moment, the door

opened and Winston Blount peered out. “Hello, Carlos.” His gaze passed less
favorably over Robert and the Stranger. He waved them in.
The room was a triangular wedge trapped between slanting walls. A concrete
caisson took up most of the floor space. Tommie Parker sat on the floor beside a
handcart that was filled with plastic bags and backpacks. “Hiya, guys. You’re
right on time.” He glanced at his laptop. “You’ll be pleased to know that press
and police did not notice your arrival. At the moment we’re standing in a room
that doesn’t even exist. This — ” he slapped the caisson ” — is still visible to the
university, but it will happily lie about what we’re doing.”
Robert edged round the blocky structure. “I remember this.” In the 1970s, the
caisson had been out-of-doors, covered with a wooden lid. He looked over the
edge. Yes, just as before: iron ladder rungs marched downward into darkness.
Tommie stood up. He had his laptop in a sling that left the keyboard and display
accessible, but also freed him to move about. In his own way, Tommie Parker
had arrived at wearable computing.
Tommie reached into the handcart and lifted out two plastic bags. “Time to leave
your Epiphanies behind, guys. I’ve got new clothes for you.”
“You really meant it,” said Rivera.
“Yup. Your old clothes will help me fake your location. Meantime the real you
will be with me, and using far better equipment.”
“Not laptops, I hope,” said Winnie, giving Parker’s laptop sling a doubtful look.
But he and the others shed shirts and pants and shoes. They still had their contact
lenses, but now there was nothing to drive them. The real lighting was bright
enough, but without external sound and vision, the room felt like a coffin.
Tommie seemed genuinely embarrassed by all the naked flab. But not for long.
He pulled open one of the plastic bags and passed around pants and shirts. They
looked like plain gray fabric, working clothes. Carlos held his new shirt up to the
light and peered at the weave. He folded it between his hands and rubbed the
sides together. “These clothes are dumb.”
“Yup. No infrared microlasers, no processor nodes. Just the good cotton as God
meant us to wear it.”

“But — “
“Don’t worry, I have processors.”
“I was joking about laptops, Tommie.”
Tommie shook his head. “No, not laptops, either. I have Hurd boxes.”
Huh? Without his wearable, Robert was stumped.
Carlos looked just as blank, but then some errant natural memory must have
popped up: “Oh! Hurd OS! But isn’t that obsolete?”
Tommie was rummaging in the second plastic bag. He did not look up. “Not
obsolete. Just illegal… Ah, here they are. Genuine Hecho en Paraguay” He
handed each of his co-conspirators a black plastic box about the size and shape
of a paperback book. There was a real keypad on one side and a metallic clip on
the other. “Just snap it on your waistband. Make sure the metal tab is actually
touching your skin.”
Robert’s new pants were too short, and the shirt fit like a tent. He slipped the
criminal computer on his waistband and felt the cold touch of metal on his skin.
He could see a faint overlay now. It was a picture of a keypad, and when his
hand rested on the box at his waist, he saw markers corresponding to his
fingertips. What a pitiful interface.
“Don’t cover the box with your shirt, Carlos. All the comm ports are on it.”
Winnie: “You mean we have to turn in just the right direction to make a
connection?”
“Yup. While we’re below, our only external routing will be through my laptop.
And my laptop’s only uplink will be through this.” Tommie held up something
that looked like a prayer wheel. He gave it a little spin. There was a glint in the
air, sliding along a thread too fine to see, to a connector Tommie held in his other
hand. He turned and plugged that into a box on the handcart. “Check it out.”
Robert pulled his shirt back from his waistband, and turned so the box had a
clear view of Tommie’s laptop. Nothing. He entered a simple command, and
now he could see through the walls again! North of Gilman Drive, there were

even more people heading toward the library. Indoors… he drifted back up the
hallway. Still deserted. No! There was a fellow walking purposefully down
toward their “secret” room. Then he lost the viewpoint.
“Hey, Tommie — “
“What?”
The Stranger’s voice sounded in Robert’s ear. The audio was as bad as his old
view-page, but he clearly heard: “You didn’t see a thing, my man.”
“I — ” Robert swallowed. “Your fiber link is working fine, Tommie.”
“Good, good.” Parker walked among them, making sure that everyone could
receive and transmit. “Okay. You’re all equipped. That was the fun part. Now
here’s the pack-mule part.” He pointed at the backpacks in the handcart.
Robert’s pack weighed something like forty pounds. Carlos’s looked about the
same. Tommie and Winnie had smaller packs. Even so, Blount struggled with his
load. Winnie’s like an old man. Yeah, Reed Weber’s heavenly minefield. Robert
looked away before Winnie could take offense. He shrugged his own pack into a
more comfortable position and complained, “I thought this was the future,
Tommie. Where’s the miniaturization? Or at least the automatic freight
handlers?”
“Where we’re going, the infrastructure ain’t friendly, Robert.” Tommie glanced
at his laptop’s display. “Hello, Mr. Sharif. Okay, it looks like we’re all ready to
go.” He bowed them toward the dark hole in the middle of the room. “After you,
gentlemen.”

The Bicycle Attack
Alfred waited a decent time before entering the room. No sense in making noise
that Rabbit’s stooges might hear.
“What did I tell you, Doc! We’re in. We’re in!” Rabbit danced a merry jig
around the caisson. The optical fiber that was giving Rabbit such joy was
invisibly thin except when the light caught it just right.
Vaz nodded. He had a different communications success to celebrate; he had
reestablished his milnet link across the Pacific.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
U.S. Homeland Security looks calm, Alfred. Alfred watched the stats
streaming by. They were from the Alliance’s listening posts. The national-
security scene was indeed calm, even though the library disturbance had brought
crowds to the UCSD campus. Rabbit had created the perfect paradoxical
distraction. Almost perfect; the affair was growing too large.
Vaz knelt beside the box that marked the termination point of Thomas Parker’s
fiber link. The box was a scamful bridge. On one side, it accepted the uncertified
data streams from Parker’s criminal computers. On the other, it was a “good
citizen,” running under the government-required Secure Hardware Environment.
It hid Parker’s data in innocent packages wrapped in all the licenses and
permissions needed to survive on the SHE of the Internet. Altogether it was not
as secure as Vaz’s milnet, but it would suffice for most regions of the
contingency tree.
Alfred tweaked the box, and now he was getting Parker’s video direct. At last, he
was truly a Local Honcho.
The video from Parker’s laptop bounced around without a bit of program
control. But Vaz recognized the equipment in the walls, and some of the physical
signage. Rabbit’s stooges had breached bio-lab security. Even more impressive,
the delicate game of fooling the lab’s automatic security was a continuing
success.
“How far are they from Goal A?” Alfred asked Rabbit. In fact, that was the site

of his private research program. He would pretend to inspect it along with the
others.
“Almost there.” Rabbit waved airily. “They’ll start dropping off equipment in
less than ten minutes. Don’t worry about a thing.”
Alfred looked out through his surface viewpoints. “Most of my mobiles are
trapped on the north side of Gilman Drive.” In conventional combat, his bots
would have simply seized the local infrastructure and come storming across.
Instead, they were balked by the human and automobile traffic along the
roadway. At least one had been struck by an auto.
Rabbit spread its paws in mock sympathy. At least it didn’t bring out another
carrot. “You can’t have everything. Hacek and Scoochi fans have done
everything we could pray for: The human staff is out of the labs. The riot is
sucking in the local comm resources. It’ll be a regular black hole by the time it
peaks. And it all looks totally innocent. Don’t tell me you could mask this
operation any better.”
Vaz let that brag go unanswered. He’d come to realize that irritation was the
kindliest emotion he could feel for Rabbit. He sat with his back to the concrete
caisson and tracked ongoing developments. He could see that the Department of
Homeland Security people were watching closely, but they were watching the
wrong places. Analyst consensus was that Rabbit had tuned things to match
DHS paranoia perfectly. Maybe Alice Gong had been taken down, but
undetected by Alliance monitors? Underground, Rabbit’s stooges had almost
reached Goal A. In ten minutes the “investigation” of that site would begin. In
another half hour, he could begin to report his doctored results… and after that it
was simply a matter of getting out and letting the stooges be captured. Things
were going so smoothly, he could have stayed back in Mumbai. Not that he was
complaining!
Analyst red flag. Someone reviewing stale video had noticed something. Alfred
brought up the flag report. It was a ten-second snippet from one of his mobiles
on the north side of Gilman Drive: Two children with bicycles. They were
standing by the roadway and looking at something that might have been a
crushed mech. Those are the two I saw earlier. Queries spread outward: Who
were the children? Was the mobile one of Alfred’s?

Ugly answers came back.
Rabbit didn’t have access to the Indo-European analysts, but suddenly the
creature sat up and gave an admiring whistle. “Well, I’ll be dipped! We’ve got
company, Doc.”
○
Miri left her bike in the rack outside Pilchner Hall. Juan insisted on bringing his
fancy foldup into the building. When Miri pointed out the absurdity of this, the
boy just shrugged. “My bike is special.”
Lena and Xiu were no longer visible, but Lena’s voice followed them through
the wide-open doors. “There should be better security, Miri. I don’t like this.”
“It’s the emergency overload behavior, Lena. Unoccupied rooms stay locked.
The others are open.”
Lena said, “And we can’t see you anymore.”
The sudden drop in data was very strange, but Miri wasn’t going to say that.
Instead: “I bet high-rate forwarding isn’t supported except for around the
library.”
Xiu said, “Yes, we still have spectacular views from there.” The main corridors
in Pilchner Hall had searchable viewpoints. There were glimpses of Robert’s
recent passage. That was enough to guide them downstairs. But now there were
places where Juan and Miri could talk only to each other.
“It’s like a haunted house.” Juan’s voice was hushed. His hand reached out and
grasped hers; she didn’t shake him loose. She needed him to keep cool. Certainly
losing connectivity in the middle of an office building was an eerie thing.
They came around a corner, and there was a glimmer of connectivity, enough for
sming:
Miri → Miri Gang:
I think we’re getting close.
Lena → Miri Gang:

First we lost video. Now we can barely talk. Get out of there.
Miri → Miri Gang:
It’s just temporary. I’m sure wikiBell is shifting extra coverage
into place. How bad could an entertainment riot get?
Miri imagined Lena was having a similar discussion with Dr. Xiang in a certain
car driving around the north side of campus. Grandmother seemed truly anxious.
Xiu → Miri Gang:
I agree with Miri. But give Lena and me regular reports.
Lena → Miri Gang:
Yes! Even if that means you have to backtrack. Where is Robert now?
Miri -> Miri Gang:
Real close. I can ping him direct.
The twisty hallway was brightly lit, just what you’d expect during a network
brownout. Juan’s bike coasted along almost silently, all folded up into portability
mode. He only had to give it a push every so often. Their footsteps and the faint
snicking of its tires were the only sounds. They took another corner. The hall
was narrower, with intersections every few feet. This was one of those temporary
makeovers that crazy architects-for-a-day liked to do.
For a few dozen feet they had high-rate connectivity. Ads and announcements
appeared on the walls; someone’s medical research project loomed like a
monster on the left. She gave Lena and Xiu a continuous video as they turned
another corner — and lost all outside connectivity.
Juan slowed, drew Miri to a stop. “This place is really dead.”
“Yeah,” said Miri. They walked forward a few more paces. Except for her point-
to-point link with Juan, she might as well have been on the far side of the moon.
And there was another corner ahead. She pulled Juan forward.
Around the corner, the corridor ended at a closed door. “I can’t ping your
grandpa anymore, Miri.”

Miri looked at the map she had cached. “This has to be where they are, Juan. If
we can’t get through, we’ll just pound on the door.” Suddenly she didn’t care too
much about embarrassing Robert and his friends. This was too strange.
But then the door opened and a man in dark clothes stepped out. He might have
been a janitor, or a professor. Either way, he didn’t look friendly. “May I help
you?” he said.
○
“How did they find us?”
Rabbit a made warning gesture. “Not out loud, Doc,” it hissed. “They might
actually hear you.” It seemed to look over Alfred’s shoulder. “I’d say they’re
following the girl’s grandfather.”
Vaz glanced at the heap of clothes that lay by the caisson. He sminged back,
voice format: “Those clothes are still transmitting?”
“Well, of course. To the outside, it looks like the old guys are just sitting around,
maybe playing cards. I’m faking everything, even their medicals.”
Alfred realized he was grinding his teeth.
“That Gu kid is such an pain,” Rabbit continued. “Sometimes I think she — “
Alfred waved his hand and the creature disappeared — along with all public
network communication. There was now a deep local silence, a hard deadzone.
But his milnet link was still in place, a fragile chain that led through his mobiles
to his stealthed areobot and thence across the Pacific. Alfred’s analyst pool in
Mumbai was estimating sixty seconds till the deadzone got serious attention
from the campus police and fire departments.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
This can’t be sustained, Alfred.
Vaz → Braun, Mitsuri:
I’ll clear the deadzone in a few seconds. This was why successful

missions had a Local Honcho. He probed the mobiles that had made it into the
building: the children were about thirty feet away, well inside the deadzone, and
still coming. He could hear them, right through the plastic wall. He glanced at
the door; it was locked. Maybe he could pretend to be empty air while they
pounded on the door. No they’d just back off and call the police.
Okay, time for direct action. Alfred set the twe nearest mobiles into motion.
These were network-superiority bots with essentially no antipersonnel capacity,
but they would be a distraction. Then he opened the door and stepped out into
the hall, confronting two children and a folded-up bicycle.
“May I help you?”
○
Miri tried to glare at the old fellow. Self-rightcous indignation came hard when
you were trespassing and trying to think of a good lie. And her link to the
outside world was still fully dead.
Juan stepped forward and just blathered out the truth. “We’re looking for Miri’s
grandfather. We ping him somewhere behind you.”
The janitor/professor/whatever shrugged. “There’s no one here but myself. As
you know, network connections are very unreliable this evening. The building
shouldn’t have allowed you down here. I’ll have to ask you to go back to the
public area.” There was a sign by the door now, one of the standard biohazard
symbols that covered a lot of the classrooms and labs in Pilchner Hall. You
might think the public net was coming back up — except that Miri still couldn’t
probe behind her line of sight.
Juan nodded as if the old man made perfect sense. He walked forward a couple
more steps, at the same time relaying what he saw back to Miri.
The room beyond was brightly lit. There was some kind of hole in the floor, and
she could see the top of a metal ladder.
“Okay,” said Juan agreeably. He was fiddling with something on his bike. But
point-to-point, his words were on fire:
Juan -> Mid:

See the clothes! piled on the floor beside the pit.
Miri → Juan:
Time to go. Get outside, get where they could call the cops. She shrugged, as
casually as she could, and said, “We’ll be on our way then.”
The stranger sighed. “No, it’s too late for that.” He started toward them. Behind
her there was the snick of something hard on the floor and she saw dark things
scuttling toward her.
There was no way back and no way forward.
And then Juan made a way forward. He bounced his bike toward the stranger.
There was a screech of rubber. The wheels spun up with all the power from the
regen brakes, and the bike exploded across the room, smashing into the stranger
and the equipment behind him. Miri ran forward, toward the pit. “C’mon, Juan!”
She knew where Robert must be, and how she could put out the alarm.
She scrambled over the edge, saw metal rungs. “Juan!”
Mr. Janitor/Professor was back on his feet and staggering forward. He had
something pointy in his hand. Miri was frozen for an instant, watching the pointy
thing swing toward her.
Orozco was such a runt. He couldn’t stop someone like that. But he tried. The
bad guy staggered back and the thing in his hand made a bright purple flash.
Miri felt a numbing tingle all across her side. She tipped over the edge of the pit,
managed to grab a ladder rung with the hand that still had feeling. But her feet
swung through emptiness. She pawed with her numb hand, missed, and fell onto
very hard concrete.
All her imagery was gone; maybe her Epiphany was fried. But she could see the
circle of light above, and she could hear.
“Run Miri! Run — ” Juan’s shout was cut off by a meaty crunching sound.
Miri ran.

In the Cathedral
The UCSD library riot was the news of the evening. No doubt it would be
echoing back and forth across the world for the next few weeks, a new twist in
the trajectory of public entertainment. It was also a bright spot on Bob Gu’s
situation board. Too bright. Bob watched the analysts — even people with
specialties as remote as forensic virology — cluster around that single locus in
Southern California.
There are other things going on tonight, guys. The DEA raid in Kern County had
triggered real violence in the Canadian North. That was outside of Bob’s watch
area — but it might indicate that something more than simple enhancement
drugs was involved. If not for the library riot, he’d be seeing dozens of theories
floating up: Maybe the Kern County business was a cover for immigrant
bashing. Maybe something more lethal than enhancements was involved.
Analysts were great at such wild conjectures, and equally great at feeding on
them, reducing them to rubble — or finding solid evidence and drawing in the
firepower that Bob Gu commanded.
But tonight — well, the UCSD riot did have the taint of a classic diversion,
covering something big and bad and elsewhere in CONUS Southwest. Alice had
doubled the size of the analyst pool. Now there were specialists from the Centers
for Disease Control, even folks from other watches. Normally, she would have
groomed her unruly mob of specialists; she had the breadth and the depth and the
charisma to bring even academic civilians into line. But tonight, Alice was part
of the problem. Every time he redirected the group into a wider view, she drew it
back. She was the one who had diverted the virologists. There was a tight little
cluster of bioscience types that grew brighter and closer, bandwidths rising.
Alice was not studying the riot per se, but its connections to the bioscience labs
that surrounded the school. Except for the diversion of their night staff, the labs
showed all green. And the harder she pounded on the lab network security, the
cleaner it looked.
It’s the damn JITT. Alice had just completed her Training for the bio-lab audit.
That had been the most extensive JITT she had ever undertaken. At this moment,
he’d guess there wasn’t anyone in the world with more knowledge of lab
automation and associated research. I should talk to her direct, no more polite
redirections…. Hell, if she won’t back off, I should relieve her! And those

thoughts were much too like their recent fights at home.
So it was Bob who drew back. He sat and watched the correlations, the statistical
outliers. He moved his group members away from San Diego issues. They would
be the tripwires if UCSD was a diversion.
The bioscience pool just got brighter. Alice had preempted CDC’s genomics
division. He would hear about that in the after-action meetings. He had a cold
intuition. Tonight could be the night. The thing he personally feared as much as
anything in the world, the possibility Alice always denied. Is she slipping away?
What would a full-sized JITT collapse be like for someone who had Trained a
dozen times more than the worst JITT-head in a VA hospital?
○
“Did you hear something?”
“Like what, Tommie?”
“You know, like a distant thump.”
They stopped and looked back. Winnie made an indignant noise. This was like
the old days, when Tommie was always working to increase the suspense of their
illicit expeditions.
Tommie hesitated. He was leading from behind so that the fine fiber he was
paying out wouldn’t get trampled by the others. He listened for a moment more,
and then turned to catch up. “Maybe it was nothing… but the fiber went dead for
moment, too.” He glanced down at his laptop. “It looks okay now.” He waved
them up the tunnel, into the dark beyond their little pool of light. “Keep going.”
The first part of the tunnel had been very familiar, an eerie walk down memory
lane. There was a time, now more than fifty years past, when all of them but
Carlos had explored the tunnels. Tommie Parker had been a smartass freshman
showing off to a couple of grad students who often wondered how they had been
inveigled into such harebrained expeditions.
As they walked farther on, things became less familiar. Glassy tubes ran along
the walls. Robert saw signs printed on the walls, cryptic physical backup for
nodes that wouldn’t respond to his computer box. Thunk. Something white and

the size of a volleyball whizzed by in one tube. Thunk, thunk. Similar traffic in
the opposite direction. Pneumatic tubes had once been a sign of the brave new
world. When Robert was a child, he’d seen such things in dying department
stores. “Why the pneumo tubes, Tommie?”
“Well, this is where theory meets reality. Proteomics, genomics, regulomics —
you name the ‘omic,’ and it’s here. These labs are huge. The local data traffic is a
million times what you have on a public trunk, with the latencies of a home
network. But they still need to look at real biologicals. Sometimes they gotta
move samples — transport trays for short moves, pneumos for longer ones.
GenGen even has its own UP/Express launcher, for shipping parcels to other labs
around the world.”
Now Robert heard sounds from the darkness ahead of them, voices that never
quite made recognizable words, clicking that might have been old-time
typewriters. This is science?
Carlos said, “When I try to probe the local net, all I see are the bare walls.”
“I told you. Talking to the labnet would make this scam way too complicated.”
“The tunnel must know we’re here.” They walked in a small pool of light.
Behind and ahead of them, the tunnel was dark.
“Yup. It knows we’re here. But you might say that’s only at a subconscious
level.”
Robert was in the lead. He pointed at the wall just at the front edge of the light.
“What about these signs?” The letters were physically painted on the wall:
PBps:Prot<->Geno. 1 OPBps:Multi
That brought Tommie forward. “Maybe it’s the General Genomics crossbar!” He
held his prayer wheel high, waving the fiber out and away from the others. The
Stranger was visible beside Tommie, but down here the monster couldn’t quite
locate itself. Its feet floated above the floor, and its gaze was wrong by ninety
degrees.
Tommie pointed his laptop so its camera could see the lettering. “I have to admit,
this fiber link is handy. I can send video out to my consultancy.” Invisible to

Tommie, the Mysterious Stranger jerked a thumb at itself and grinned. Tommie
studied his laptop’s display for a moment. “Yes! We have reached the GenGen
optical crossbar.” He pointed down the side tunnel. “This is where things get
tricky.”
Within fifty feet, the side tunnel had opened into something wider… something
cavernous. In the shadows, something slanted into the heights. “See that tower?”
said Tommie. “That’s GenGen’s private launcher. These guys don’t bother with
the launchers in East County.”
The clickety sound was all around them now. It came from the tops of equipment
cabinets; it had a pattern, like poetry scanned purely for stress. At the end of a
stanza, things actually moved. Light glittered from deep within matted crystals.
Some of the cabinets had a physical label:
Mus MCog.
The Stranger danced among them, a fantasy from Tommie’s laptop and the fiber
behind them. But the fantasy was watching through the laptop’s camera, and
talking — at least to Robert. The Stranger pointed in the general direction of the
crystals. “The wonders of nano-fluidics. A decade of old-time bioscience done in
every shifting of the lights. How do you represent a trillion samples, and a
billion trillion analyses? How can art deal with that?” It hesitated as if truly
anxious for an answer, and then it was gone again. But it left behind its own
labels and explanations.
Robert looked at the ranks of machines, the tower almost lost in the distant dark.
The place was a machine cathedral. But how to represent it, when it would take
him years to have even shallow understanding? The massed crystal was not
spectacularly colored; most of the fluid paths were microscopic and hidden
within appliances that might have been oversized refrigerators. The Stranger’s
labels floated randomly about, ghostly subtitles to some transcendent process.
And yet, it almost made him remember what he had lost; words burbled up
within his imagination, words striving to capture the awe he felt.
They walked down the narrow aisles, turning only when Tommie told them to
turn. Every minute or so, he would stop their progress and grab a few more
gadgets from the backpacks.
“We gotta install these just right, guys. Staying invisible here is a lot harder than

in the tunnel.” Tommie wanted the gadgets set near comm nodes, which turned
out to be way back within the fluidics crystals. Robert did most of the
“installing.” Carlos would boost him up over the top of the cabinet. Robert
would wiggle back, so near the glassworks that he could hear tiny, tiny clicks
and the fluid hissing so faintly it might have been seepage. In their millions,
those sounds added up to the larger atmosphere of the room.
In one case, Robert lingered, and noticed that the gadget itself took care of final
installation, sliding away from him, deeper into the glassworks — as if its
underside were a miniature transport tray.
“What are you laughing at, Gu?” Blount’s voice came from below.
“Nothing!” Robert crawled off the cabinet and dropped to the floor. “I just
figured out a little mystery.”
They continued on. Most of the cabinets were labeled Dros MCog now. They
were making faster progress, mainly because Carlos and Robert had figured out
the gymnastics of the operation.
“That’s the last of them, guys!” Tommie’s gaze shifted from his laptop to the
fluidics crystals. “You know, it’s really weird that all the node locations were so
deep in the lab equipment,” he said.
The Mysterious Stranger slipped in front of Tommie and waggled greenish
fingers at Robert and Carlos and Winnie Blount. “That’s not a mystery to follow
up on. Why doesn’t someone suggest that we get on with Tommie’s great plan,
eh?”
No one said anything for a moment, but Robert guessed two things about what
they had just done: It was what they had really come here for. It was how the
Stranger might make good on his promises. Maybe Carlos and Winnie realized
something similar, because suddenly all of them were talking. Blount waved the
others silent and turned to Parker. “Who knows, Tommie? You said this was
subtle. It might take weeks to figure out just how everything fits together.”
“Yup, yup,” Tommie nodded, oblivious of the Stranger’s satisfied look. “Time
for analysis later!” He glanced down at his laptop. “In any case this was the hard
part. Now we have a clear run to where Huertas stores the shredda.”

○
They didn’t set down any more gadgets. Tommie’s laptop advised speed, and
therefore so did Tommie. Whatever the Mysterious Stranger planned for GenGen
no longer needed them. Robert glanced back. Winnie was out of breath, almost
trotting. The Stranger must have given him some special encouragement. And
behind Carlos, Tommie spun his prayer wheel, drifting the spider thread out
behind them.
Suddenly the concrete floor gave way to something that bounced back against
their feet. And the sound of their steps was like tapping on a vast and tightly
fitted drum.
“When does a tunnel fly?” said Tommie. “When it’s really a tunnel in the sky!”
And suddenly, Robert realized where they were. This was one of the enclosed
walkways that came off the side of Rose Canyon, just north of campus. Right
now they were standing in a tube seventy feet above the brush-and manzanita-
covered hillside.
Then they were back on concrete. Ahead was another cavern, and this one was
almost empty. Huertas country.
○
Miri ran, but a spotlight followed. No, that was just normal tunnel lighting. She
slowed, stopped, slid up against the wall… and looked back. No human
followed. The entrance hole was the only other light, and now it was some
distance behind her. Juan!
She watched it and listened. If no one was coming after her, that might mean that
UCSD security was still working down here.
She tried to probe the walls. She called 911. Again. Nothing. Maybe the Badguy
had permanently zapped her Epiphany. She shrugged up some test routines. No,
it wasn’t dead. She could see her files, but every local node was ignoring her.
Then she noticed the pink flicker at the edge of the diagnostic, a wireless
response that her Epiphany would normally have discarded as too distant, too
erratic. A second passed, heaven knew how many retries, and she got an ID. It
was Juan, his wearable.

Miri → Juan:
Please answer!
No reply came back, and she couldn’t check his medicals without more access
rights. Abruptly Juan’s light flared, died. Miri sucked in a breath. Mr.
Janitor/Professor was still up there. He had whacked poor Juan again. No, be
precise: He had whacked Juan’s gear again, maybe just to prevent Miri from
forwarding out through it. For a moment, Miri drew in on herself. It was not a
good thing that all her planning and leadership could come to this. Alice never
seemed to have these problems. She always knew what to do next. Bob…
sometimes Bob made mistakes. He was the one who always seemed uneasy
about certainty. I wonder what Bob would think of all this?… I wonder what
Juan would do?
Miri looked down the tunnel, away from the entrance. It was dark, but it wasn’t
perfectly quiet. There might be voices, chatting conversationally, never quite
making words. Robert and his library friends were down here, surely being run
as cat’s-paws by Mr. Janitor/Professor. How can I wreck his plan? Miri got to her
feet and ran quietly up the tunnel, still trapped in her own private pool of light.
No sign of Robert, and none of the mumbled voices sounded quite right. She
passed occasional cross tunnels. Small things whizzed down transparent tubes.
○
Some minutes later, and still no sign of Robert.
Miri read as she ran along; she had cached plenty about UCSD and the biotechs.
There was proprietary and security stuff she couldn’t know, but… the cross
tunnels led off to particular labs. Three hundred acres in seventeen separate
chambers!
Miri’s run slowed to a walk, then came to a miserable stop. Robert could be
anywhere. How much control did the Badguys have down here? Maybe I should
just start shouting.
Faintly, behind her, there came a new kind of sound. Soft hammers pounding on
a metal drum. But the cadence was like footsteps. And suddenly she had a very
good idea of where the others were. Now if only she could match that to where
she was. Miri turned and headed back.

The Library Chooses
Sheila Hanson’s night crew came out of the forest on the path of the great snake
of knowledge, just east of the library. The Hacek spiders were already there, and
they had the high ground. Tim Huynh rolled and walked his bottish army right to
the edge of the enemy force.
Huynh → Night Crew:
Jeez. They’re all real! The spiders, that is. Most of the humans were real,
too. Hacekean Knights and Libarians were thick behind their robots.
Round the north side of the library came more Scoochi reinforcements,
supporters from the Oceanography Library at Scripps Institute. But the
Hacekeans had their own reinforcements. From cameras flying above the library,
Huynh could see those latest arrivals chasing the Scripps people. So far there had
been little property damage. The mechs looked sinister enough, and the humans
were mostly milling and shouting. Sheila was still doing pretty well with her
“We want our REAL books!” chant.
Something big and virtual came rushing out of the Hacekean side and onto the
bottish no-man’s-land. It was twelve feet tall, the best Dangerous Knowledge
that Timothy Huynh had ever seen. Half Librarian, half Knight Guardian, the
creature was Hacek’s central paradox. Now it capered almost to the edge of the
Scoochi lines and made a grotesque face, tongue long and pointy like a Maori
daemon. And when it shouted, every Scoochi heard, but the message was
customized to the listener:
“Hoy, Timothy Huynh, you think you’s a Lesser Scooch-a-mout. Lesser indeed!
All you Scoochi moppets be trashy children’s things, shallow and unworthy
before our Depth!” Dangerous Knowledge waved at the Hacek critters around
and behind it.
That was the usual slur against the Scooch-a-mout mythos, and it always made
the Scoochis mad, since naive outsiders might be deceived by the claim. There
were counterchants from the Scoochi ranks:
“Hacek is just counterfeit Pratchett!” And that set the Hacek people into a rage,

since of course it was only the simple truth.
Huynh pushed past Sheila and Smale and the rest of the night crew, till he stood
at the forward edge of his army. Up close, this Dangerous Knowledge was even
more spectacularly detailed. Its taloned boots were artfully sunk in the muck
beside the serpent’s path. Spider bots hummed and hopped around their patron.
The spider bots were real. Where had the Hacekeans gotten such clever things,
and on such short notice? He pinged them; not surprisingly, nothing came back.
There was an almost living suppleness about the way they scrambled over one
another, surging and retreating. The gadgets looked like custom melds of the
latest Intel and Legend models. GenGen regulomics was upgrading to something
like this. He pinged them again, this time with his GenGen technician’s
authority.
Holy shit!
“Hey!” Huynh shouted. “The Hacek bums have stolen GenGen equipment!”
And now that he looked closely at the other side, he recognized fellow
employees! There was Katie Rosenbaum. She waved her battle axe and leered at
him.
Rosenbaum → Huynh:
We just borrowed them, dearie!
He’d had lunch with Katie and her friends only yesterday. He knew there were
Hacek sympathizers in regulomics, so of course his crew had kept their plans
under wraps. And all the while the treacherous Hacekeans had been doing the
same!
Dangerous Knowledge continued its merry dance through the spider troops,
mocking the Scoochis’ surprise. It shouted, “Indignant, be ye now, wee
Huynhling? Could it be ye just cheated with too little imagination? What ye
brought is old and slow, well matched to the petty concept of your imagery!”
The art behind Dangerous Knowledge was astoundingly good, without
precursors. But whoever was pulling the strings was even more impressive,
certainly a world-class professional actor. For a moment the Scoochi ranks
wavered and their mob of virtual supporters began to melt away. In the view

from above, Huynh saw still more Hacekeans piling up around the other sides of
the library. If the balance shifted too far, the Scoochis would end in humiliation
and defeat.
Then Sheila Hanson’s voice came loud on the public venue, audible across the
entire participating world. “Look! The Greater Scooch-a-mout!”
Behind Huynh, one of the forklift mechs stirred to life. Ah! That was just the
thing Huynh should have thought to do. Thank goodness Sheila was on the ball.
The forklift stepped forward as delicately as could be imagined for a machine
that was twelve feet tall, with a center of gravity that now was over six feet up. It
certainly wasn’t running autonomously, but he hadn’t thought Sheila could drive
it this well.
Its foot-platters descended slowly, giving humans and chirps and salsipueds
plenty of time to clear out of the way. It was impressive, but it was just a forklift.
Then Huynh realized he was still watching it with his driver’s view. Meshing
with the belief-circle view it was —
Sheila had morphed the blue ioniped into something even more spectacular than
Dangerous Knowledge. Now it was the Greater Scooch-a-mout, the most
popular of the Scoochi critters. In its short career, the Greater Scooch had been
the subject of refurbishments, spinoffs, spinups, mergers, and attempted
government takeovers. It was the maximum hero to millions of schoolchildren
across the poorest lands of Africa and South America, the champion of little
people improving their place in the world. And this vision of it, tonight, topped
everything in sight.
What’s more, this vision, tonight, had four tons of haptic truth clunking along
inside.
The Greater Scooch-a-mout reached the edge of the Scoochi lines, and advanced
into spider-bot territory. Now it moved fast, as fast as its stabilizers and motors
would carry it. Whoa, who is driving that thing? It danced through the Hacek
robots and bellowed insults at Dangerous Knowledge.
Knights and Librarians, pofu-longs and dwelbs and baba llagas — everybody on
both sides went wild. Special effects blossomed in the air above them. And then
the shouting got even louder. The robots surged into combat. Huynh looked at

the melee of robotic special effects. Mega-munches and xoroshows were coming
out from the bushes; Sheila was throwing their reserves into the maw of battle.
This mech battle was real! When the Greater Scooch-a-mout tap-danced on the
backs of spider bots, fragments of carapace and leg flew into the air. In his
technician’s view he could see damage reports. Twenty regulomics spiders were
listed as “nonresponsive” on the lab’s real-time roster. Dozens of his tweezer
bots were destroyed. Three of the sample carriers had lost mobility.
Huynh → Hanson:
Borrowing robots is one thing, Sheila. But lots of these are going
back as junk.
Sheila was at the other end of the front. It looked like she was trying to get the
robots to advance into the Knights and Librarians. On Tim’s end, the Greater
Scooch-a-mout had already accomplished some of that by dancing toward the
edge of the real human players.
Hanson → Huynh:
Not to worry! Management is happy! Take a look at the publicity,
Tim.
His coworkers and the virtual thousands pushed forward. In the network view…
jeez, GenGen was getting coverage like you couldn’t pay for, better than in the
twentieth century when millions were forced to watch just what the few had
decided was Important. There were backbone routers in the UCSD area that had
run out of capacity! That wouldn’t last long, since there were endless ad hoc
routers and dark fiber everywhere. But the whole world was here tonight.
Step by step, the Scoochis advanced.
“We want our floor space!”
“We want our library!”
“And most of all, we want our REAL books!”
Belief circles normally competed from within, based on their own popularity.
Here, tonight, was a grand exception: belief circles fighting each other directly

for attention and respect. In minutes they might burn up months of creativity, but
reach an audience beyond all their earlier dreams.
And whoever was driving the Greater Scooch-a-mout chatted with Huynh
directly:
Greater Scooch-a-mout → Lesser Scooch-a-mout:
Your mechs are the thing, my man! Bring them on!
Okay! Huynh fired up the other forklift. He often dreamed of kicking ass with
one of these monsters. He walked carefully through friendly lines, drawing the
smaller robots along behind him. From somewhere across the world, Scoochi
artists draped the forklift every bit as brilliantly as the Greater Scooch-a-mout.
But this vision was mercurial as smoke: Huynh’s forklift was tricked out as
Mind Sum, the ambiguous spirit that sometimes helped Scooch-a-mout when
enemies were at their wiliest. Its vapors both lagged and led the real device.
Dozens of helpers and helper programs made sure that the effect was always in
place. The forklift’s hull was dark composite plastic. Unless you looked
carefully in the real view, you couldn’t be sure just where the robot might really
be.
Tim Huynh took advantage of all this, stomping like a steel mist across the
bottish battle zone, high-fiving the Greater Scooch-a-mout… and treading with
ambiguous location toward the Knights and Librarians. The Scoochi chant
boomed from the forklift’s speakers:
“We want our floor space!”
“We want our library!”
“And most of all, we want our REAL books!”
The advance was a combination of beauty, surprise, and physical intimidation.
The Hacek forces fell back and Huynh’s chirps and salsipueds hustled forward to
claim new ground. But Katie Rosenbaum’s critters still outnumbered them and
were far more agile. The spider bots raced backwards, keeping a battle zone
between the contending human forces.
Smale → Night Crew:

Keep after them!
As Huynh walked forward behind his forklift Mind Sum, he was also looking
down from above and tracking the reviews. There were more than a hundred
million people watching what the two belief circles had created. Not quite a
game, not quite a work of art, this was a contest where you won with
imagination and calculation and impudence. So far, the world thought that the
two sides were matched as to imagination, but the Scoochis were way ahead on
calculation and impudence. They had created real physical destruction — all
around and among real humans!
Yard by yard, the battle moved round the library. The Scoochis now occupied
parts of the south esplanade, the principal axis of the campus. On the roads
around campus, cars were bringing people from all over town, the physical
counterpart of the far more numerous virtuals. Forty percent of the backbone
routers were saturated. The audience had surged past two hundred million.
Hundreds of thousands were players, tricked out with new imagery from the
depths of Hacek and Scoochi design. The participants, real and virtual, spread
out around the central hub that was the university library. Seen from journalist
viewpoints a thousand feet up, the conflict looked like a strange spiral galaxy, its
arms glowing the brightest where the battle was the fiercest.
There were others present, invisible but for the reporting of the entertainment-
trade journalists: the movie and game people, maybe a hundred thousand
professionals. Some watched the watchers, sampling and polling. Others were
down in the bottish battles, collecting designs. He could see the spoor of
SpielbergRowling, GameHappenings, Rio Magic, and the big Bollywood
studios.
Tim Huynh could see more. After all, he was running GenGen equipment. He
could see nets that merged with the background, collecting and collecting —
then subtly affecting. Those must belong to the Fantasists Guild, the richest
artists’ cooperative in the world. (Their motto: “We don’t need no stinking
middlemen!”)
And of course the police were here, a half-dozen jurisdictions from campus cops
up to the FBI.
Greater Scooch-a-mout → Lesser Scooch-a-mout:

Hey, my man! We have ten minutes to win belief and decision. Then
they’re going to start shutting us down.
○
Alfred watched it all from under Pilchner Hall. Rabbit’s riot had emptied the bio
labs. The Indo-European inspection equipment was in place, and already sending
back results (faked results, but that was Alfred’s doing). The stooges who had
installed that equipment were now well away from the GenGen area, off where
their eventual arrest would provoke diversionary suspicions. But —
“We need at least fifteen minutes more,” said Alfred. The faked data stream from
the investigation would complete sooner than that, but cleaning up and getting
out would take additional time.
Rabbit shrugged. “Don’t worry, old fellow. I told Huynh ten minutes just to keep
him on his toes. Even after the campus police crack down, you’ll have another
half hour before the GenGen crew begins to trickle back underground.”
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
I think Rabbit is right about the timing. His library operation is
a masterpiece. We couldn’t have organized a distraction like this
without pressing every red button in the Americans’ security
apparatus.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
The riot has grown too large. The traffic still blocked their mobiles.
Without sufficient mechs on-site, they hadn’t been able to fully control Pilchner
Hall — and two unwelcome children had created the first real problem of the
evening. Now one of those children lay unconscious by the caisson, right where
Alfred had brought him down.
Vaz glanced at where Rabbit sat on the edge of the pit, its furry feet dangling
into the dark. “What about the girl, Rabbit? Right now she is running around in
the tunnels, out of control.”
Rabbit smiled broadly. “So call me the lord god of unintended consequences.
When things get complicated, there are side effects, and Miri Gu is just one of
them. You’re the Local Honcho. Why don’t you go after her?”

Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
No. That would put you well outside of our contingency plans.
In fact, Alfred was tempted. Instead, he had sent down just one mobile to track
the girl. It might be enough to distract her. And if she caught up with the stooges,
why then they had another option available, something that should surprise
Rabbit. Out loud, Vaz said, “I don’t think so. Do you have any other
suggestions?”
“The obvious, old fellow: Be flexible, like me. Who knows what opportunities
may develop? You can’t locate Miri Gu, but big deal. That must mean she’s
nowhere that interests you and your friends, right?” He waggled his ears
inquisitively.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
I want Mr. Rabbit out of there. He is trying to coopt us, and all
the time distracting us with his impudence.
And that could be very distracting. Rabbit had started on another carrot. The
creature grinned around large incisors as it chomped away, as if to say “Don’t
mind me; sming all you please!”
From far beyond the walls, Alfred could hear the sounds of Rabbit’s
diversionary riot. Counterforce analysts reported that Homeland Security was
watching UCSD with intense interest, but was otherwise calm. Günberk and
Keiko took that as good news. But does that mean Alice Gong is still
functioning? For Alfred, that was the question of the moment, far more
important than his run-in with the two children.
In any case, it was time to get the inquisitive rabbit out of here. It had to be done
without making Günberk and Keiko suspicious. Fortunately, Günberk was
already pushing in the right direction. Braun floated a needs-and-goals matrix
into view. The colors were shaded to reflect probability, but it was strikingly
pure: for the library riot, Rabbit-critical items glowed bright red, a hundred tasks
that only he could do if the diversion were to proceed. For the underground labs,
there were a dozen Rabbit-critical items, mainly involving getting the stooges
underground, guiding them around, and getting them out of the operational area.
And every one of those was some shade of green.

Vaz → Braun, Mitsuri:
Good point, Günberk.
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
Okay. Cut Rabbit loose, but gently. I suggest you blame this move
on your obnoxious remote colleagues <grin/>.
Alfred gave Rabbit a smile. “You are right, Mr. Rabbit. Some of us are sadly
inflexible.”
“Hey, no problem.” Rabbit waved magnanimously.
“In fact, you have made things so safe for us down here, my bosses want you to
concentrate on topside operations.”
“What are you doing — Hey!”
Vaz reached down and undipped the fiber-optic line from its scamful bridge.
For a moment the image of the Rabbit was frozen, like some dumb graphic that
had lost its remote source. Of course, Rabbit still had its Internet link to here;
this pause was a moment of simple astonishment. When it passed, the creature
hopped to its feet. “Why did you do that?” Its voice and facial expression were
almost without affect. Apparently, Rabbit had never conceived the possibility of
having to confront real surprise and embarrassment.
The fiber-optic plug dangled loose in Alfred’s hand. It took an effort of will not
to flash a gloating smile at the creature. He slipped the line into a transceiver on
his belt. What went in and out the fiber would now go through his private milnet.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
Bravo, Alfred!
Mitsuri -> Braun, Vaz:
Be nice! We still need him for the riot.
Rabbit paced along the edge of the hole, its paws waving in a blur that might
have been fists. “You are breaking our agreement.” The voice was still flat.

Alfred put on his kindliest expression and spoke without a hint of triumph.
“Please, Mr. Rabbit, look at our agreement. We both need the other to profit —
and we are each best in our own domain. The equipment is now inserted in the
labs. If you will maintain the riot environment for a few more minutes, you will
have everything we promised you.”
The Rabbit stared expressionlessly. “You need me down in the labs. Surely…”
He isn’t all-knowing! “Conceivably. I’ll keep you apprised of our situation. What
do you say?”
There was a sudden cascade of expression across Rabbit’s face: anger, then a
knowing smile quickly covered up as though the operator had not wanted it seen,
then an elaborate, overly patient sigh. Yes, the long-suffering Rabbit. “Ah,
paranoia triumphant. Very well, I will bow to your wishes — ” which it did
elaborately, dancing on the edge of the pit ” — and retreat to keeping you safe
from surface threats.” A flash of unherbivorous teeth: “But I do expect all the
agreed payoffs. You know my capabilities.”
“I do. And I realize there may still be complications,” and attempts by you to
create complications. “One of our people will run liaison with you and your
surface ops.”
Vaz → Braun, Mitsuri:
Keiko?
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
I’m on it.
Rabbit gave a last flippant wave, and suddenly the little room with the plastic
walls and the concrete floor was free of all taint of Rabbit. Alfred shut down the
remaining Internet links. Now there was just the pile of old clothes, the handcart,
the hole in the middle of the floor… and their one human casualty.
The comforting sounds of mayhem continued to waft down the hill from the
library.
Vaz → Braun:

How does the lab data look? The inspection equipment had been transmitting
for some minutes now. Were the lies being believed? Could Günberk give up his
precious theories?
Braun → Vaz:
They’re seventy percent complete. We have a lot of post-analysis to
do, but at first glance these labs look innocent.
Yes!
○
Greater Scooch-a-mout → Lesser Scooch-a-mout:
Forward, now, my man! The Hacek bastards are giving way!
And Hacekeans were falling back, at least in the area ahead of Timothy Huynh.
He walked his forklift into the gap, crushing what spider bots got in the way. The
arc of contention had shifted round till he was almost due south of the library’s
main entrance. Here the enemy was in retreat. The Scoochis had more real
people on the ground and that meant more backup for the visual effects. But the
Hacekeans had perhaps two hundred thousand folk from afar compared with half
that many virtual Scoochis. On the far side of the library, on the hill by the
loading dock, there was no room for a real human mob. Over there, Hacek — the
worldwide belief — was in ascendance. Dangerous Knowledge hung out there,
more spectacular than ever, orchestrating a sky show that boomed over the
north-side valley. His reinforcements swarmed downward on lances of light.
Tim did his best to follow the big picture, though just now he was very busy
stomping on every spider bot that he could lay a foot-platter on. He had seen
marvels on both sides tonight, things that their belief circles could feast on for at
least the next year. And yet there was still room for a clear win. Tonight Scooch-
a-mout could transcend what had been a fringe market and reach the same
worldwide big time as the Hacek and the Pratchett and the Bollywood empires.
They needed something awesome, something that would put clear sky between
them and the Hacekeans. He marched his Mind Sum, his being of mist and steel,
back and forth across the front, crushing all that remained of the spider bots. He
could think of nothing more spectacular to do. Damn.

But there was a world of Scoochis out there, and cleverness to match.
Greater Scooch-a-mout → Lesser Scooch-a-mout:
Release the overrides on my forklift.
Huynh did so.
The figure of the Greater Scooch-a-mout was motionless for a moment, but in
his technician’s view, Huynh could see its power cells charging capacitors well
into the burnout range.
And then the Greater Scooch-a-mout sprinted forward like a human athlete
and… by God broad-jumped thirty feet, to the lawn by the Snake Path. It looked
over the north-side valley and shouted down at Dangerous Knowledge in a voice
that was both virtual and real. And the real was noise unto pain.
“Hey there! Little Bitty Knowledge! We’re equally matched, don’t you think?”
From the valley by the loading dock, Dangerous Knowledge shook his fist at the
teetering forklift. “Too equally matched!”
“But one of us should clearly win, don’t you think?”
“Of course! And that would be meself, as all the world knows.” Dangerous
Knowledge waved at its virtual — millions! (But a big part of that count was
faked images, Tim could tell.)
“Maybe.” The Greater Scooch-a-mout jumped again, this time to the edge of the
drop-off over the loading dock. There was something awesome in the maneuver,
knowing the tons of real machine behind it. “But what is this whole conflict
about?” It waved its arms, a cheerleader god, and Scoochis screamed with all the
amplification they could muster:
“We want our floor space!”
“We want our library!”
“And most of all, we want our REAL books!”
“YES!” said the Scooch-a-mout. “It’s the Library we’re all fighting about. It’s

the Library that should decide!”
And with that all the Scoochi sound effects chopped to nothing. An uncertain
silence spread across the Scoochis. Sometimes the belief thing got caught in its
own metaphors and wound up spouting nonsense. Huynh looked back and forth,
gauging the reaction the Greater Scooch had provoked. It sounded good to enlist
the library itself, but what did that mean?
Down in the north-side valley, there was a flare of laughter. The enemy had
come to the same conclusion. We are screwed, thought Huynh. But then he
noticed that Dangerous Knowledge was not laughing. The creature came
partway up the hill, confronted the Greater Scooch-a-mout eye-to-eye. And now
there was eerie silence on all sides.
Somehow, Dangerous Knowledge knew what the Scooch-a-mout was talking
about. “So,” the Hacek godling said at last, and its voice had a silken tone even
though it echoed off the library and settled deep in the mind of every one in the
world who was watching. “Ye want the Library itself to decide who should care
for it and who should have its space?”
“And how real the books should really be,” the Greater Scooch-a-mout said,
with a smile that seemed almost friendly. “I propose that we put the question to
the library — and whichever of us it chooses will be deemed the blessed.”
“Ah!” Now Dangerous Knowledge was smiling, too, but it was a fierce
stretching of the face. The creature backed down the hillside, but grew with each
step so that its eyes stayed on a level with the Greater Scooch-a-mout.
Ordinarily, such a cheap visual wouldn’t have earned any respect, but the move
seemed to fit the moment. Besides, whoever was behind the creature’s design
had saved some marvelous fractal armor for just this extension of height.
Dangerous Knowledge turned to face the virtual millions behind him. “The
challenge is just. I say to all Followers of Knowledge: Join me in a final torque
upon the enemy. Show the Library that we are its future and its greatest
supporters. And let the Library show its choice to the world!”
The silence was ended as the millions discovered new amplifiers on campus —
or somehow usurped and reused the ones that the Scooch-a-mout had
appropriated.

The galaxy of players — mechs and humans, real and virtual — all came alive in
renewed conflict. Knights and Librarians dumped fire on the Scoochi side.
Huynh’s Mind Sum was once again stomping and kicking. The ensemble
resumed its vasty turn about the university library, and the spiral arms of the
battlefront flared even brighter than before. But now the battle cries were
appeals to the Library itself. And the library glowed in a light that seemed to
come from infinitely high above. That light was purely virtual, but it was seen in
every view.
As Huynh tromped along with the screaming multitudes, he was almost totally
taken by the moment. Almost. This had gone farther and higher than he had ever
imagined. Part of the success was simply the audience, a significant part of the
waking world. Part of it was the unexpected acquiescence of GenGen and the
UCSD administration, and the awesome possibility of future revenue that might
come streaming in from the various entertainment producers that now lurked all
around. And none of that would have happened if not for the content that had
suddenly appeared when they went to battle. Content from both sides, content
that was as artistic as new designs and as physical as what they had done with
their bottish legions.
But now everyone’s hopes, Hacek and Scoochi, were hostage to the impossible.
If the Library did not “reply,” or if the reply was simply more imagery, then in
about another thirty seconds, the momentum would begin to dissipate and a very
large number of people — among them Timothy Huynh — would begin to feel a
little foolish. It was the fate of many flash crowds, especially those that at first
seemed the most successful. Big promises earned big rewards, up to the point
that the promises had to come true.
What could the Greater Scooch-a-mout have in mind? Huynh used his
technician’s view and his artist’s. He looked out from Scoochi cams, from the
aerobots above, even GenGen utilities. The best he could imagine was some
pallid surprise, something to distract everyone from the promise that could not
be kept.
As the battlefronts tightened around the library, point and counterpoint came
from the opposing armies and together made a concerted rhythm. Music seeped
into the shouting. After a few moments, every local voice was synched to the
sound and everyone was swaying to the beat. It came louder and louder, and
Huynh noticed that the amplifiers included police and fire-department

equipment. Someone had committed real vandalism to make this even more
spectacular.
It would be for nothing without some definite result.
In fact, the singing held together just a few more seconds. Then it faltered as
nothing more happened, and no one could imagine anything more happening.
But… there was another sound, a trembling vibration that crept up from the
ground. Ten years ago, Timothy Huynh had felt something similar. The Rose
Canyon earthquake.
Huynh freaked, dropping all the fantasy overlays. He stared out in panic with his
own naked eyes. Real lights flashed back and forth, flickering across the faces of
the thousands of real rioters, picking out the angular bodies of the larger mechs.
Now there was no pillar of light from heaven. The library was occasionally lit,
but more often a silhouette against the lights on the other side.
The trembling in the earth grew stronger. The walls and overhanging floors of
the library seemed to shiver. The magnificent double pyramid that had survived
the decades, that had survived the Rose Canyon quake — it was shaking, all the
thousands of tons of real concrete.
In time to the rising music.
There were screams. Lots of people remembered Rose Canyon. But lots of
others were taken by the spectacle — and their singing resumed and was picked
up by the vision of the night and blasted out across the world.
The library swayed. Parts dipped; parts rose. It was not shaking as much as it
was dancing. Not a bouncy riverdance. The building was dancing like a man
with feet planted firmly in the ground. And Huynh realized there was no
earthquake; somebody had hijacked the building’s stabilization system. He had
once read that a well-powered building could survive almost any quake short of
a great crack opening up beneath it. But here that power was being turned upon
itself.
The rhythmic swaying became more pronounced, twelve feet left and right, and
up and down, with parts of the building shifting away and together. The
shrugging, swaying dance of the overhanging floors shifted to the outlying
pillars. There was a sound that might have been real and might have been

ingenious invention. It might have been both. It was the sound of mountains
being torn from their roots.
The pillars shifted and the library… walked. It was not as spectacular as fake
imagery could be, but Huynh was seeing it with his naked eyes. In halting
cadence, first one fifty-foot pillar and then another rose visibly from the ground,
moved several yards in the direction of the Greater Scooch-a-mout, and
descended with the sound of rock penetrating rock.
The rest of the building shifted with them, twisting on the utility core that was
the library’s central axis.
The Greater Scooch-a-mout stepped forward and embraced a corner of the
nearest pillar. The music became triumphal. Cheering blasted across the world,
wondering and still a bit frightened.
Hanson → Night Crew:
Hey is this an Event or is this an Event?
The Library had chosen.

You Can’t Ask Alice Anymore
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
By damn! Homeland Security will respond to this. Has Mr. Rabbit
gone mad?
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
He claims his ‘library dance’ will only trigger FBI intervention,
and all together give us more time.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
Okay. I have the complete dump from our inspection equipment. God
willing, that’s everything we need to prove what’s been going on in
these labs.
Alfred was already working through the exit checklist. He had fooled his friends,
but… what of his attack on Alice Gong? If she was still functioning, it might not
matter what he did.
○
“FBI requests clearance to take charge of the riot area.”
“On what grounds?” Bob Gu spoke without looking away from the library. Even
the unfudged video was remarkable. This was a 1900s concrete behemoth,
originally as dumb as snot. Yet it had moved without collapsing.
“The grounds are the frank evidence of violation of federal law, namely — “A
stream of legal references spewed across Bob’s vision. “FBI argues that this is
effectively an attack on a federal building.”
Bob hesitated. There were criminal violations here, though UCSD had made no
formal complaint. At this point, there was no watch-related service FBI could
render; they would simply be law enforcement. The watch priority — his
priority — was to snoop and swoop. Snoop, then swoop. What might this
disorder be a cover for? He glanced at the bio-lab status. Still all green. Finally
he replied, “Request denied. There is an ongoing Homeland Security

investigation here. However, give the first layer of our analysis to San Diego
Police and Rescue and the UCSD campus police. Be prepared to support
emergency networking.”
“Layer one to SDPD and campus police. Yes, sir.”
Bob’s eyes turned back to the library. It was still standing, but this was damn
dangerous foolishness.
His analyst pool certainly thought so. In the last thirty seconds, the node
structure had come close to turning inside out. For the moment, Alice let the
engineers dominate. The text clouds were full of gibber about how the library
“walk” had been accomplished and the dangers there might be for the people in
and around it. USMC nodes were lodged deep in the discussions, his own people
thoroughly caught up in the excitement. That was not acceptable.
Bob leaned forward and spoke: “All squads! Move to Launch Alert.” The
chances of an actual launch were still near zero, but this would get his people
into their assault craft. More important, it got their attention. The USMC nodes
moved away from all the speculation and into the tight coordination of marines
in a launch prep. Bob stared at the distracted analyst pool for a moment more.
Alice was already drawing them away from the library. The structural engineers
were no longer the center of the tangle. The library had walked. So what might
that be covering? His marines’ duty was to guard against the deadliest grand
surprises. For instance, were the bio labs still secure? What was going on in the
rest of CONUS Southwest?
He turned and jogged out of his bunker, into the narrow tunnel that led to his
own launcher. The analyst display followed along, hanging just to his right.
Alice had grabbed another fifteen hundred analysts, more bioscience and drug
research people.
The ceiling curved low at the end of the tunnel. His assault craft was a tiny
vehicle, its design a compromise between time to target and the desire to make
the local combat manager invisible. From the ingress tunnel all that was visible
of it was the open hatch and a portion of the dead black fuselage. He settled into
his place, but did not zip up.
What is Alice doing? He watched the analyst pool grow, now larger than for most
worldwide operations. But all the attention was on the bioscience labs around

UCSD. True, the situation there was strange. Even though lab security was in the
green, the staff was topside in the riot. That justified some attention, but it also
made lab surveillance even easier. Damn! Now Alice was stealing analysts
tasked with cargo tracking throughout all of CONUS Southwest.
Squelching your top analyst was a black mark on everyone, but there was no
help for it. Even in combat, this sort of monomania would be bizarre.
As it happened, Alice acted first. Emergency flags came up in every view. The
assault craft’s hatch slid shut and his acceleration pod zipped tight. LAUNCH
LAUNCH LAUNCH flashed in his eyes, and a launch clock appeared, counting
down from thirty seconds. This was analyst preemption, the sort of drama that
happens when analysts realize that their own forces are about to be nuked in
their bunkers. Everything would go at once and sort itself out in midnight.
But the analyst pool showed no such threat.
The launch target was UCSD.
The gee pod was inflating tight around him. The countdown clock showed
twenty-five seconds. He brought up a view of his top analyst. “Alice! Advise
reason for launch.”
Alice’s eyes were wide. “It’s very simple. Onset was slow, but now insight has
saturated. This one is undergoing threatful integration. Neuromodulator pathway
Gat77 has been subverted. Signaling cascade has too many control points for
MCog analysis, but reference” — some kind of arXiv pointer — “demonstrates
the progression.” She frowned at him, and suddenly she was shouting: “Don’t
you understand? This one is failing! Conformational changes are preventing
adaptive response! This one — “
Ten seconds to launch. Alice Gu’s medicals were off the chart.
Eight seconds to launch. Bob overrode the launch order and relieved his top
analyst: STANDDOWN STANDDOWN STANDDOWN. The gee pod relaxed
around him. He scarcely noticed. Alice’s head was down, but she was still
talking, desperate. Drool spattered her blouse. And he couldn’t notice that either.
He promoted her second-in-analysis, a CIA spook who’d been far too passive
tonight. But then what could one do when a star like Alice crashed?

The spook was trying her best. “I’ll have us up in two minutes, sir.”
In the meantime, Bob Gu was blinded and the watch was just a mob of bright
people watching a million data feeds. One of those feeds was medical: Alice had
suffered a JITT stick, the most violent and sudden of her career. Despite all her
desperation to communicate, she was stuck in molecular biology.
The CIA analyst was back. “Sir, are you all right?”
“I — I’m fine.” Bob considered the analyst display. The spook had hung the
operation off the rest of the CONUS watches. There was close backup now. Big
chunks of Alice’s network were improperly connected, but the spook was
healing it, forcing connections and possible correlations. Maybe she was still too
heavy on UCSD. She seemed to think that Alice’s last words pointed to enemy
action there. Okay, after everything else tonight, that had to be followed up. “I’m
fine.”
○
Over the past twelve weeks, Rabbit had learned a lot; he had grown, you might
say. Tonight it all came together. Topside, the riot was at climax — better than
sex could ever be, Rabbit was sure. I am the reality arm of the Scoochi belief
circles, yeah! There were surprises, too. The affair had called into existence (or
simply into his notice?) a creature who might be his equal. Rabbit had played
both sides through the first part of the riot… but now Dangerous Knowledge had
been taken over by something very creative, something who was having as much
fun tonight as Rabbit himself. So he had millions of new affiliates, some of them
as capable as a human could ever be. And he’d found a special new friend, to
boot.
His riot fully outclassed the espionage hugger-mugger it was designed to protect.
It was amusing that despite the carrot greens and all the other generous clues
Rabbit had provided, Alfred & Co had not realized whence his powers came, or
how great they were. But something told Rabbit that in the long run, what was
happening underground was important too. Alfred was playing out his
mysterious game down there. Now was the time Rabbit had planned to find out
just what Alfred was looking for — hey, and maybe get a piece of it.
Now was the time, but Rabbit was locked out. Damn Alfred. The fiber link was
behind Alfred’s milnet. Short of tipping off DHS — and destroying the

wonderful jape Rabbit had so carefully planned — Rabbit was balked. Heh! But
what did Alfred’s milnet talk to? Why, just a few thousand very clever Indo-
European analysts! And they didn’t get to be so clever by hiding in government
holes. They each had their own creative lives. Rabbit hopped from Brussels to
Nice, to Mumbai and Tokyo, and — natch — listened to his own inner self. Now
that he needed to think about it, he saw how the tricks he had used with
American security might be applied. Rabbit tweaked a thousand affiliances, and
he listened to a million conversations that he really had no intention of
consciously reviewing. One last piece of SHE magic, and viola:
Rabbit was into the milnet! He zipped down through Alfred’s stealthed aerobot
and… once again he was in Vaz’s glorious command center in Pilchner Hall.
Rabbit took a look at the medicals on the Orozco kid. Still alive. Ol’Alfred
wasn’t a monster, except when principle demanded it. What was he after? And
can I get some?
Rabbit tiptoed down Alfred’s connections into the labs. No surprise, Alfred Vaz
was making good use of the devices Rabbit’s little friends had planted in the
GenGen area, sending oodles of data out to his colleagues in Japan and the EU.
Rabbit watched quietly; one doesn’t ask pointed questions when one is trying to
be invisible. He captured the raw encryption, noted what was talking to what
within Alfred’s GenGen domain.
Even so… it didn’t make sense. The exported data did not match what was
locally observed. And then suddenly a big lightbulb went off in Rabbit’s mind.
Alfred was not searching for anything! He was making sure his Alliance friends
did not see what was already there! Alfred, you old devil, running your own
program on American equipment and keeping it secret from everybody. And
what could be worth such secrecy and such a wild-ass cover-up? Figuring that
out was still a guessing game — but Rabbit was the grand master of guessing,
better than any Indo-European analyst pool, better even than Alice Gu and all
her analysts.
Oops. Something told him Alice was in deep trouble. Rabbit had dutifully played
messenger boy for Alfred’s mysterious snooping on Alice. That must have been
the setup for Alice’s downfall. But how had he done it? Suddenly, the
underground was more intriguing than ever.
The heart of Alfred’s research empire was in a corner of the Molecular Biology

of Cognition area. The data from everywhere else was truthful reporting on
innocent proprietary research. Rabbit looked more carefully at the lies coming
out of the MCog area. The phrase “animal model” leaked from gaps in the
encryption. Animal model, animal model. The term usually referred to animals
possessing an analog of some human condition- — usually a disease to cure.
Somehow, Rabbit didn’t think Alfred was trying to cure anything. And there
were lots of animals in the MCog area. Of course most were bugs. Gallons of
fruit flies, and every itsy-bitsy one labeled and probed. Rabbit dipped into some
of the local databases. It looked like Alfred was messing with YGBM, but the
details were not easy to understand. Rabbit was not always fast. For hard
problems, he was like lesser beings; he had to sleep on the question. Then in the
morning, the old intuition would deliver remarkable insights.
In this case, tomorrow would be too late. Five minutes from now might be too
late. Alfred’s show was almost over, and with it access to the snooper nodes;
heck, the gadgets would probably fry themselves. Rabbit hesitated and listened
to his inner self. He had a gut feeling about this. Modern intelligence services
existed to prevent terrorism. But Alfred… with whatever he was creating here,
the dwit might proceed beyond Grand Terror into realms no man was meant to
go.
So maybe I should just call DHS. Even without Alice Gu, they could shut down
Alfred in five minutes. Rabbit gave the possibility the serious thought it
deserved… about two seconds’ worth. And then a big grin spread across his
concept of face.
Rabbit was full of ideas. And there was one that had been pounding on him since
the moment he’d broken into Alfred’s milnet. Besides having the greater
intellect, I now have the physical advantage! Alfred was on the scene with very
low latencies, very high bit rates, and more hard data. Nevertheless, he was stuck
in his little room and all but one of his mechs were topside. But the “Elder
Cabal” was still down in the labs. True, they were not in the GenGen area, but
they were still reachable at the end of a fiber link. And hello, what’s this? The
slightly-overweight-Chinese-ninja princess. She was definitely not part of the
original plan, but bless her, there she was. What a strange and marvelous girl.
Back to business. He was already preparing contingency plans, contingency
documents. And if I’m very careful, very quiet, I can sneak out along the fiber,
tell Robert and Winnie and Carlos and Tommie the right stories. And then I’ll

have my own physical hands.
What Alfred was planning might go beyond Grand Terror. But that same power
in my hands… well, that could be glorious fun!

How-to-Survive-the-Next-Thirty-Minutes.pdf
“I told you my planning would pay off! Didn’t I?” Tommie Parker stood knee-
deep in the remains of the library book collection. The shredda towered behind
him like dirty snow, flakes as big as your hand. They had found the Librareome
storage at the back of Max Huertas’s cavern, just where Tommie had said. It was
stored in rows of sturdy cargo containers labeled “Rescued Data.” The
containers had been no match for Tommie’s cutter. He had flooded the floor with
the contents of “A-BX.” This had been most of the fifth-floor stacks. It seems so
much smaller when it’s in shreds, thought Robert.
Tommie waved at the drifts of shredded paper. “You guys ready to start with the
glue? This will jam Huertas’s operation up the wazoo. And where’s your reporter
guy? I haven’t seen Sharif in a while.” He went around, handing out spray cans.
Finally, he seemed to notice his pals’ silence. “We don’t really need Sharif, do
we? I mean, we’ve got our own record.” He lifted the laptop in its sling.
Robert looked at Carlos and Winston. Winnie gave a little shake of his head. So
none of them had heard from the Mysterious Stranger. “Sure, Tommie,” Robert
said. “That’s — “
“That will be fine, Professor Parker.” Sharif’s voice from Tommie’s laptop.
“Perhaps you could have Professor Gu act as cameraman?”
They untangled the laptop from its sling, and the voice directed Robert around to
the side. The voice was very picky about where it wanted the laptop pointed,
across the edge of the shredda, almost in line with their path into this vacant hall.
Then Robert noticed letters painting silently across his field of view. It was
sming… and the letters were green.
Mysterious Stranger → Robert:
Hey, my man!
Mysterious Stranger → Robert:
Ah, ah, ah! Be discreet. We don’t want Alfred to know I’ve come

back to help you.
Alfred? thought Robert, but he kept quiet.
No one else seemed to notice the Stranger’s arrival. Tommie walked back into
the drifts of paper, tossing them up in the air, squirting them with his spray can.
“Is the camera getting this, Robert?”
Robert looked down at the laptop’s screen.”… Yes.”
Any other time, the effect of Tommie’s aerosol glue would have been a
showstopper. He threw another armful of loose shredda into the air, and sprayed
a mist of glue. Where mist and paper met, the page fragments were suddenly
tumbling as one. The mass drifted slowly to earth. Most of the frags never
actually touched the ground, but hung permanently in the air. Tommie laughed
and pushed at the hazy something. The ensemble of scattered papers rocked back
and forth, like bits of fruit in invisible Jell-O.
Tommie whooped. “Try it yourselves. Just don’t squirt each other.” He threw
another armful up, and another. Arches of paper and mist grew around him.
Robert hung back, playing cameraman.
Mysterious Stranger -> Robert:
Look where Alfred has you pointing the camera. See the light?
Coming out of the dark?
There was a tiny pool of light, someone running down the steps into the Huertas
cavern.
It was Miri. The girl came pounding across the floor shouting, “Robert! Robert!”
Tommie and the others turned to watch, openmouthed.
Miri came around the edge of the shredda. She was gasping for breath.
Winston looked her up and down and then looked at Robert. “This is another Gu,
isn’t it?”
“um, my granddaughter.”

“I thought we agreed to keep this among ourselves!” Winnie’s glare was as good
as any high-tech messaging: You’re going to ruin this for all of us.
But Tommie was more astounded than any of them. “How could she get through
security? The cops should be all over.”
“No, no.” Miri managed to speak between gasps for breath. “Must call police!”
The laptop had its say, too: “Pay no attention to this child. Remember why you
are here.”
Robert shoved the laptop at Winnie and reached for Miri. “How did you find us,
kiddo?”
Her arms went around his middle. “It was Juan and me, and — ” She hesitated,
looked up at him with her eyes wide. Gone was her usual assurance. Horror
looked out. ” — somebody’s using you, Robert. I think they maybe, maybe
killed Juan!”
“Not so,” said the laptop. “Uh — ” The voice hesitated.
Mysterious Stranger → Robert:
Heh. Alfred put ForgetIt gas ir your belt boxes, and now he’s
wondering why you’re still standing.
“Gentlemen,” the voice resumed, “I advise you to remember why you are really
here.”
Tommie had come out from his fountains of paper. His spray can dangled
unnoticed from his fingers. He looked at Carlos and Winston and Robert. “Yes,
what is it that we’re supposed to remember? Why are we really here?”
Carlos and Winnie wouldn’t look him in the eye. Carlos mumbled something in
Mandarin.
“We did what we thought was right,” Winston said.
Yes, each our own vision of what was right, but… Juan murdered? He looked
back at Tommie. “We tricked you, Tommie. Someone else is behind this.”

Tommie walked back to the pile, kicked aimlessly at his masterpiece. “But… I
thought I had my touch back.” He glanced at Miri and seemed to be putting
together all the inconsistencies. His shoulders slumped. “Okay. I was an old
idiot. Who was boosting me along, Robert?”
“I don’t know.”
Mysterious Stranger → Robert:
I could tell you. Maybe I will someday.
Apparently, Winnie and Carlos were not seeing the sming.
Miri’s chin came up. “We’ve got to get word out.”
And the laptop said, “It’s not safe to move. Stay where you are.”
Mysterious Stranger → Robert:
Actually, I would recommend the same. But right now I’m peeved with
Alfred. Do what you please, my man.
Tommie Parker looked off into the emptiness of the Huertas cavern. He was
shaking his spray can, almost an idle gesture. “The gear we planted in GenGen, I
thought I made that. Me, the big genius. It could be anything… bombs, poison,
some kind of takeover hardware. But we’re at the north edge of the complex.”
He waved at the wall that loomed from the dimness just beyond the shredda
containers. “That overlooks Sorrento Valley. There are some old entrances. We
could have used them instead, except my research said the alarms would be
harder to disable — but now I don’t care if busting through them sets off
alarms!”
“Stay where you are,” said the laptop. “You are surrounded by lethal weapons!”
Something small and black sidled out of the darkness.
“I saw one of those on Gilman Drive.” Miri took a step toward it. The robot
turned toward her. There was a metallic click that sounded very much like a
round being chambered.
“Miri — ” Robert held her arm, but Tommie was coming around from the other

side and the robot turned toward him.
Parker stopped about seven feet from the critter. Some of his old cockiness
returned. “I’ll bet it’s just a network-superiority bot. Most of the pay-load is
communications and counternode gear. It’s not much use all by itself.”
“There are hundreds on the floor,” said the laptop. “Don’t force us to act.”
Miri slipped loose of Robert. “I didn’t see any others,” she said, moving closer to
the robot.
Mysterious Stranger -> Robert:
There’s only the one, but
And then several things happened at once: Robert pulled Miri behind him.
Tommie stepped forward in a fencer’s lunge that brought his spray can within a
foot of the mech. The robot flipped up like a sprung rat trap. Tommie screamed
and fell forward.
Robert ran toward the robot and grabbed — hard air. The hardened froth was
barely visible, but it held the robot beyond his reach. He spun the gel around,
looking for some point closer to the enemy. There! He slammed the carapace
into the concrete floor. Again. It was in pieces now, each still embedded in the
mist. There was sound of tiny motors, whining to be free. Then Miri and Carlos
were stomping on what remained. Sparks flew within the mist, and Robert felt a
tingling that raised the hairs on his arms.
And then the robot was just dead composites, the pieces hanging motionless in
blocks of invisible fluff.
The only sound was Tommie gasping. Winnie had rolled the little guy on his
side. Tommie’s face was bluish, his mouth a gaping grimace of pain.
“What happened, Tommie?”
Parker’s back arched. “Bastard… fried… my pacemaker.”
Carlos was on his knees. He touched Tommie’s shoulder. “Wómen shāsi le nàgè
jīqìrén. We killed the robot, Dr. Parker.”

Tommie grunted acknowledgment, even as he rocked back and forth on the
ground.
“We’ll get you out of here, Tommie,” said Blount. He looked up at Robert. “No
more games.”
Mysterious Stranger → Robert:
Oh, damn. Parker was such an interesting wannabe. Okay, I’ll help
you get him out. And if you help me after that, I can still make
good on my part of the bargain. How’s that?
Robert looked past the greenish letters and nodded to Winston Blount. “No more
games.”
Tommie still lay twisting in pain. His voice came out between spasms.
“Keycard… in my pocket.”
Mysterious Stranger → Robert:
Heh. Magical me, that ancient keycard will actually work. My little
surprise present for Alfred.
The voice from the laptop — Alfred? — was silent.
Carlos looked down at where the laptop sat on the concrete floor. “We should
break this. It’s the eye of the enemy.”
Miri walked around the antique computer. “I think if we pull the plug on that
fiber, the bad guys are gone.”
“Yup… unplugit!”
Mysterious Stranger → Robert:
Hey wait. Where do you think I’m coming from! So what if Alfred can
still snoop? It’s me you need. If you cut me off then well damn
I’ll have to
Miri picked up the laptop and turned it on edge. She studied the unfamiliar
physical connectors for a moment, then reached down —

Mysterious Stranger → Robert:
I hate Miri.
— and popped the optical fiber out of the laptop.
For a moment they grinned at each other like idiots. Tommie squeezed out a
weak laugh. “We’re… off the leash.” He gasped for a few seconds. “Gotta carry
me, guys… Sorry. I’ll… show you the exit.”
Winnie looked down at Tommie. “We’ll get you out, Tommie. You’ll be okay.”
He lifted Parker under the shoulders, then reached to support him under the
knees. Parker didn’t weigh that much, but Blount was staggering.
Robert reached out. “I can carry him, Winnie.”
Blount glared back, and Robert shut up. Then Winnie’s hands slipped and
Tommie almost crashed to the ground. “I got him, I got him!”
Miri ran around Blount and slipped her hands under where he was holding
Tommie’s left arm. Winnie didn’t object; maybe it was because she didn’t ask.
Robert took both legs and they started off along the wall. Carlos followed,
carrying the cutter and what other gear might still be of use.
Nothing more followed, nothing they could see. For what it might be worth,
Robert’s dumb little waist box showed only utility glimmers in the empty
cavern.
Tommie’s breathing was a raspy wheeze. Every few paces he twisted within their
grasp. “About hundred yards more…” He shuddered and went limp.
“Tommie?” Winston hesitated, bringing them almost to a halt.
“Keep going… keep going.” And then after a moment, “So our Librareome
protest was… fraud from the beginning, huh?”
“I don’t know, Tommie. I knew it was silly, but it seemed worthwhile.” Blount
looked across at Robert. “I thought it would lead to something I really want.”
“Me too,” said Carlos, his voice faint. “In the end, Sharif-whoever got to all of
us, didn’t he?”

“All but Tommie.”
Miri was watching the back-and-forth silently, but her eyes were wide. Well, she
had earned the right to listen.
Robert said, “So what did he promise you, Winston?”
Winnie’s lips pulled back from his teeth. “I sure as hell won’t tell you.” He
hesitated and the snarl became a twisted smile. “But I bet I know what your deal-
with-the-devil was.” When Robert didn’t reply, Blount’s smile broadened and he
continued, “You tried to disguise it, Gu. All the times we met in the library, and
never once did you pull your old tricks. At first I just figured you were setting
me up for one of your extreme traps. After I learned about Sharif, I thought
maybe you were running him.” Winnie laughed. “But then I began to suspect the
truth. You’ve lost your killer edge, the way you could look inside people and see
what would hurt them the most, and then do it to them. You’ve lost that, haven’t
you, Robert?”
Robert lowered his head. “Yes.” The word came out softly, without anger, almost
a sigh.
“And I bet you can’t write poetry anymore, either.”
“It’s the poetry I want back, Winnie.”
“Oh.”
Tommie twisted in their grasp, trying to suck in breath. “Shut up… the north
gate should be in… next hundred feet.”
They walked in silence, eyes straining for some sign on the unmarked wall.
And now that Robert was looking, he saw something else. Not more green
lettering, but a blinking icon that meant pending mail. One last message before
Miri had cut the fiber link. Almost without thinking, he shifted his grip on
Tommie’s leg, and tapped a go-ahead on his waist box.
A pdf, by God. He hadn’t seen anything like this since his teaching days. The
table of contents floated in the air above him. The critic in him couldn’t resist
scanning down the page. The ToC was impeccably formatted, with perfect

spelling (at least, if you ignored context). The bullet headers were a mishmash of
unparallel constructions and grammatical infelicities. It looked as if it had been
thrown together by a gang of par-aliterates in a hell of a hurry.
But what it said was… important:
FIXME: This needs to be replaced with proper formatting, actually doable, but
not now.
While We are out of Touch
or
How to Survive and Prosper during the Next Thirty Minutes
by Your Friend, the Mysterious Stranger Dedication:
To the idiots among you who cut the fiber link. Now Alfred can’t see you, but
I’m cut off, too. Hence, I’m breaking my stealthy cover and shipping down this
bolus of bits before Miri pops the connector.
Executive Summary
[none provided]
Table of Contents
Introduction…page iv o How to use this document
Chapter 1, Saving Tommie Parker…page o The Huertas back door o The
keycard that should not work, but does!
Chapter 2, Your beknighted wearables…page o Not really hecho en Paraguay,
unfortunately for you o The knockout gas — ah, but I already told you about that
o What you can and cannot trust about these gadgets
Chapter 3, What Alfred is up to…page o And why you really don’t want Alfred
to succeed *The animal model — or, world domination out of little fruit flies
grows o Why calling 911 is not fast enough to stop him o If you don’t believe
me, just show this file to Miri!

Chapter 4, What you can do to help…page o Map of Huertas territory o Map of
GenGen MCog arrays. Alfred owns this territory, networkwise — but I’m there,
too o How to get back to the MCog arrays o What you can do to defeat Alfred o
Come be my hands in this glorious struggle!
Chapter 5, What’s in it for you?…page o Promises made and promises kept o
With your helping hands, I can still deliver
Appendix A…page o Neat stuff that will impress the Department of Homeland
Security and which may make life easier after your arrest
Appendix B…page o Why Scooch-a-mout should be the Library’s lord and
mascot
Robert looked at Miri. She was concentrating on holding up Tommie’s shoulder.
For the moment all her nerdly interests seemed far away. But we need the nerd as
much as ever.
Robert → Miri: <file type=‘pdf7> And he pushed the Stranger’s file across to
her.
○
Tommie did his best to count Winnie’s paces. But there were distractions. There
was this rock concert playing in Tommie’s chest, and every screech of the beat
sent fire across his shoulders and down his arms. This wasn’t a real heart attack.
This was just his pacemaker fallen into wild chaos. The last few years, Tommie
hadn’t been too envious of other people’s diddling medical miracles. So what if
his vascular system was falling apart; the pacemaker would keep him going till
classic science-fictional immortality arrived. But now all his plans for living
forever were in trouble. Count the paces. Count the paces!
And then there would be seconds when the pain would let up, and his heart was
a butterfly flutter in his chest. For a few seconds his thoughts would clear, and
then he would black out… They were carrying him still, though the ride was
bumpy. Ol’Robert was shifting around like he had business with the box on his
belt.
“Okay. Stop,” he whispered. He would have shouted, but the whisper was all he
had just now.

They heard him. And then he was lying on the cold, hard concrete.
Winston’s voice came down from high above him. “So where is the door?… I
see!” Sounds of Winston fumbling with the keycard. Something big slid aside
and there was a wall of faint light, maybe the night sky. He felt cool breeze on
his face. The sound of the freeway was like distant surf.
“No alarms,” said Winston.
“Maybe… silent alarms?” he managed to wheeze. This exit had been such a
wild-ass escape option in his original plan.
Winston was a shadow against the sky. He was tapping at his keypad. “I got 911,
Tommie!” Now he was talking to someone Tommie could not hear, telling them
about a man down with a heart attack.
“They’re on the way, Tommie! They want your med log.”
The rock concert was back, whacking a new tune in his chest. “Bet… med log…
is fried.” He twisted onto his elbows. There were more important things.
“Tell’em about the labs, Win!”
“I told them. I just called 911 myself.” That was Robert’s granddaughter. Her
feet were right beside his head. Now she stepped away, became a second
shadow, beside Winston. She turned this way and that, the way kids do when
they’re playing games with their wearables. “I don’t like this,” she said after a
moment.
“You heard the Highway Patrol, kid.” Winston’s voice was tight, like he was
worried as hell. “They’re sending a car. We just have to sit tight for a few
moments.”
Tommie’s pacemaker was working upward to the next crescendo. Okay, give it a
few seconds more and the pain would lessen — or maybe this time, his heart
would break.
The girl’s words floated in and out of hearing: ” — is an emergency. They
should airlift. And the net is screwy. I can’t route to my… friends, not even
sming. I think someone’s spoofed the local nodes and — ” Tommie rolled from
side to side, pain blotting out the rest of the sentence.

Someone was cradling his shoulders. Carlos? “It’ll be okay, Professor Parker.”
The voice turned away from him. “I’m having some access problems, too. But
the error messages make sense. I think the library riot is soaking up too much
resource.”
The little girl’s voice was scornful. “So much that I can’t even sming?”
“How about laser direct to the freeway?” That was Robert.
The girl’s shadow repeated the strange little dance. “I can’t quite reach it from
here.” She was silent for a moment. “We’re just playing into the Badguys’ hands.
Here. Take a look at this pdf.”
Winston again: “There will be a car! If one doesn’t show up in five minutes,
we’ll — we’ll carry Tommie down the hill ourselves.”
Tommie’s heart had stopped. No, it was back in butterfly mode. He’d have a few
seconds of clarity. The girl was probably right, but there was no way he was
going down that hill. The others should go, see if they could get far enough to
put out a real alarm. Or maybe they should go back into the labs and give the
enemy a big surprise. Darkness was rising inside him. In a moment or two this
would not be his problem. And his friends were too stupid to leave him here.
Maybe he could set some of them loose.
Listen to me! But Tommie’s words came out scarcely louder than a sigh:
“Guys… we gotta split up.” And then the darkness had him.

The Revocation Attack
Xiu Xiang looked out from their car, at the dark hillsides. “I feel pretty useless,
Lena.”
“You feel useless?” Lena Gu shifted irritably in her wheelchair.
Their plan had been to be a mobile presence across the places where Robert was
most likely to show up. Tonight they would be on the scene and no one could
balk them. Instead, all the action was elsewhere. Even the transportation was
uncooperative, operating under “special event rules” in all areas near UCSD.
Their car was moving as slowly as they could make it go, but in another thirty
seconds it would reach the south end of this old bit of asphalt, at which point —
no matter how loudly they demanded otherwise — it would turn left at the little
T-intersection, away from the hillside, and take them back to the freeway. Then,
if they wished, it would drive north to the Ted Williams Expressway, turn and
come down here still again.
Xiu stared into the dark of the hillside. And saw nothing. “I’ve practiced so
much, and still I can’t make my contacts work right.”
Lena said, “Actually, there isn’t a whole lot to see here. This hillside has to be
the dumbest public land near campus.”
There was some real light. It silhouetted the hilltops and lit the low overcast;
around the library, insanity still reigned. A few minutes earlier, Lena had guided
Xiu through some of the views. Celebration, riot, whatever it was, the network
stats were impressive. Now Xiu couldn’t see any of it.
Okay, I confess defeat. She reached into the backpack on the floor by her feet.
The pack contained her shop-class projects. She had told herself they might
come in handy tonight. How, she couldn’t really imagine, but the gadgets did
prove that X. Xiang could still create. There was something useful there, even if
it wasn’t one of her gadgets. She pulled out her view-page, sat back, and enjoyed
the clunky comfort of its old-fashioned inter-face. What a fall from grace this
was — but just now, she was too nervous for Epiphany.
Lena abruptly said, “We have more audio from Juan!”

The boy’s voice was almost a whisper: “We’re still in Pilchner Hall. We’re
waiting for Miri’s grandpa to come back from the basement.” Miri’s voice came
faintly to the microphone: “They’re not doing anything.”
“Lemme talk to Miri,” said Lena.
Xiu listened to the two for a moment. They couldn’t get any video, and Miri’s
Epiphany had suffered a 3030 error. (Xiu had looked that up; “3030” was a
catchall code for a system deadlock caused by licensing conflicts.) Meantime all
they had were these very occasional, very brief voice messages through Juan.
“Gotta go,” whispered Juan, and the session was ended.
Lena was silent a moment, just watching the familiar dark landscape slide by. “I
want to see those kids. They’re needing a smart grilling… Any chance the link
was faked?”
“Juan is a careful boy. It would be almost impossible to fake his Epiphany’s cert
— “
Lena harrumphed. “And as far as I can tell that was their voices, but talking in
whispers and not saying much except that everything is boringly safe.”
It was strange, if the children needed stealth and a low bit rate, that they had not
used silent messaging. Maybe someone thought they could fool a pair of old
ladies. In fact, with Juan’s wearable, I could fake sessions like this! She glanced
at Lena. “Maybe you should call in the marines.” Bob and Alice.
“Yes, but if it’s a small emergency, they can’t do anything more than you or I.
And if it’s a big emergency — well, they might have to do something awful.”
Lena hummed a few bars of something nervous. “And Miri says everything is
fine. Just fine.”
“Maybe we should call the police.”
“Ha! Nowadays you don’t have to call the police; they just happen to you.” Lena
was staring at the hillside, her fingers trembling against her lips.
The last couple of months, Lena Gu had been such a reliable source of certainty.
What if we both wimp out? Xiu thought. Now, that was a frightening idea. She

tried to think of something really forceful to say: “um, your ex has been ‘doing
nothing’ for almost half an hour. Don’t you think that’s too long?”
Lena’s head bowed, and she said softly, almost to herself, “Oh, Robert. You’re
up to something terribly stupid, aren’t you?” She stared into the dark. “Let’s give
Miri five more minutes. Then we’ll call 911.”
“Okay.” They tooled along the valley floor, slowly enough that the windows
could roll down. The resinous scent of manzanita drifted in. On their left was
southbound Highway 5, a lightless torrent of fast-moving vehicles, edged by the
blaze of the manual lanes. On their right were steep, dark hills, violet light
flickering along the ridgelines. Xiang brought up a local network view, looked
back and forth between that and the physical world.
Their little automobile was speeding up again. A pleasant male voice spoke
within the passenger cabin: “This portion of Valley Bottom Drive is
misfunctioning. You may return after ten a.m. tomorrow.”
“What? Now we can’t even circle back! There has to be some override, Xiu.”
Xiang shook her head. This would be their last drive through here tonight. Xiu
had helped design the hardware security layer. It solved so many problems. It
made the Internet a safe and workable system. Now she was its victim… She
thought again of the bag of tricks that sat on the floor beside her feet. She had
spent the whole semester building those gadgets, her mechanical daydreams.
Maybe —
“Xiu! Traffic!” Lena was pointing up the hillside.
Xiu leaned over and looked out Lena’s side. She saw two spears of light that just
now were turning away from them. “It looks like a car on manual,” or maybe it
was on automatic, but driving on unimproved roadway.
“It must be on the service road.” Lena paused, and a map appeared on Xiu’s
view-page, showing the road they hadn’t been able to get on. The road that led to
Huertas’s old back entrance.
The lights turned back toward them, then disappeared behind an outcropping.
Xiu’s view-page didn’t even show a nav marker for the other vehicle.

“What are they up to?” said Lena.
Their own car was almost to the T-intersection.
“Car!” said Lena. “Turn right.”
“Sorry. That’s not an existing road. The only legal turn is left.”
“Turn right! Turn right!”
“I’m sorry. I’ll have you in safe traffic in less than five minutes. Please think
about giving me an ultimate destination.” Xiu bet herself that company logic had
decided it was dealing with a DUI customer. If they didn’t come up with
something sensible, the vehicle would take them all the way back to Rainbows
End.
Lena sucked in a breath. “We’re so close. Wait. I got a ping response. It’s from
Thomas Parker’s outfit. They are up there!” And then much louder: “Hey, car, I
wanna speak to your supervisor — I mean a human beingf
“Certainly, twenty seconds please.” Twenty seconds would put them past the T-
intersection.
Lena Gu seemed to shrink down in her wheelchair. Her gaze swept back and
forth between the hillside and the approaching intersection. “We’ve got to stop
them, Xiu. I’ll wager they could tell us what’s going on.”
“You’d come out from cover? Let You-Know-Who see you?”
“I’d lurk in the background.”
But the question was moot. The intersection was just fifty yards ahead. In a few
seconds they’d turn left, and be conveyed ignominiously away.
Or… maybe not. Xiu lifted her backpack onto the seat beside her. She picked up
the curved tube with the can of diamond flakes; she had improved her first shop-
class project out of all resemblance to the original transport tray. This new model
was very much designed with destruction in mind; sometimes you needed to get
the machines’ attention. She knelt on the back-facing seat and set the tip of the
cutter against the dashboard. Given Robert Gu’s example, she had a good idea of

what to expect.
Oops. “Lena, scrunch down!”
Lena looked at the tube in Xiu’s hands. “Yes!” She laughed even as she tried to
flatten herself out of Xiang’s way.
Xiu pressed the start button — a real physical button! — and a roar ripped
through the cabin. Her transport tray, now a very fine accelerator, drove three
thousand diamond flecks into the dashboard every second. The recoil was a soft,
steady push. It was easy to keep the tip pointed. Some of the diamonds bounced
up, embedding in the acoustic ceiling, but most drove straight into the
dashboard. She wobbled the cutter’s tip and the hole widened. Now she was
drilling through drive internals.
The car slowed smoothly to a stop, parking itself just short of the intersection.
“System failure,” it said. “Emergency backup engaged. Please depart the vehicle
and await emergency assistance.”
The doors popped ajar on all sides.
“Hah!” said Lena. “I was hoping for a real crash, and you having to cut the doors
open.” But she was already backing out of the car.
Xiu was speechless. Did I really do this? Timid little X. Xiang? Lena wheeled
around to the front of the car. “We have a hill to climb,” she said.
○
For Alfred Vaz, there had been various pieces of good news. He had completed
his fake investigation of the GenGen labs and provided Günberk’s clever
analysts with evidence that would eventually lead them far away. And finally
Alice Gu had collapsed. That had come very late, but it was more spectacular
than Alfred had expected; Keiko’s people claimed that DHS surveillance was
blinded, in chaos. That chaos was unexplained good fortune to her and Günberk.
For Alfred, it could mean complete success. Give him a few more minutes and
his private research program would be safe not only from Günberk and Keiko,
but also from the inevitable American investigations.
And then things went very wrong:

Miri Gu had found the stooges. He had lost his one mech in the labs, and also his
fiber link to the stooges. And now —
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
Mr. Rabbit has penetrated our mil-net.
It was a fantastic claim — and manifestly true. For the last ten minutes there had
been minor comm glitches, error retry packets happening a little too often. The
statistics were well below the level of reasonable suspicion. But then in a grand
gesture — typical Rabbit madness — the creature had sent a two-megabyte
jumbogram straight through the milnet and off the end of the fiber.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
Just before we lost the fiber, it seemed the local stooges intended
on escape. How much time does that leave us?
Numerical estimates floated up for “Time till stooges can reach 911” and “Time
till DHS responds.” But Keiko’s people had an idea:
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
For the moment, DHS is distracted. I can be very crude. I can fool
the stooges into believing I’m the local police. Such a masquerade
would mean hijacking a significant part of the local net. Within the highly
regulated networks of the modern world, that was about as subtle as an infantry
assault. DHS was truly in disarray.
For several minutes, there was no manager-level traffic. Alfred was aware of
Keiko masquerading as the California Highway Patrol. His own attention was on
a number of tasks he hadn’t dared try while Alice Gong was still around.
Günberk’s analysts were assessing how deeply Rabbit’s intrusion had gone.
Their conclusions were tagged a soothing green.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
I wonder what Rabbit was doing? There were much easier ways of betraying
the operation than this. As far as the network analysts could tell, Rabbit had
managed little more than to rattle the metaphorical doorknobs of their milnet.
The psych people had their explanation: Rabbit was known for its childish ego.

It simply couldn’t pass up a chance to show off — hence the jumbogram. Such
antics could not be taken as a sign of overall betrayal. After all, Rabbit was still
doing a magnificent job with the library riot.
Some analysts had more paranoid theories. The current favorite was that Rabbit
was China; that would make tonight a perfect Keystone Kops comedy, all the
Great Powers chasing after each other. But there were also nightmare
speculations: Maybe Rabbit had fooled the network analysts and all the lesser
paranoids. After all, the jumbogram had been sent just before the fiberlink was
broken. Maybe Rabbit was a Grand Terrorist, who had used the Alliance as its
stooge, installing its own interests within the labs, a quick conversion of the
entire establishment into a death factory. And there was that UP/Ex launcher in
the GenGen area, what amounted to a delivery system.
Alfred sighed to himself. In the long run, he feared Rabbit as much as the
extreme paranoids did, but tonight — well, if they looked too closely, they might
see Alfred’s own operation lurking in the shadows. It was best to calm things
down.
Vaz → Braun, Mitsuri:
I’m with the greens on this. Yes, Rabbit has exceeded our worst
estimates. He has broken into our operation’s mil-net. But we have
hard limits on his bandwidth and my people still control the
changes being made. Just look at the consistency checks. Short of
having physical troops on the ground there, we own the MCog area.
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
We also have good control of the topside operation, no sign of
Rabbit funny business. The important <wait-on-message-pause/>
Red doubt was hemorrhaging across the analyst pool, spreading from a statistical
analysis team at Moscow-Capetown. These were the same chaps who had been
consistently right about the Soybean Futures Plot. They had credibility… and
they claimed that the views from the north side of the GenGen area were corrupt.
Those were not views Alfred had subverted. For better or worse, his colleagues
had discovered some other deception.
Now the signals and stat people in all the analyst pools had precedence. A
thousand specialists, who a second ago might have been looking at a dozen other

problems, were suddenly watching the same data. Computing resources shifted
from a myriad drudge tasks, began correlating data from the accessible sensors
in the labs. It was as if Indo-European intelligence were an immense cat
suddenly come alert, listening and watching for sign of its prey.
Only one of the area cams was offline, but others were subtly misregistered. The
inconsistencies were scattered all across the area that the Alliance controlled…
but analysis made the Moscow-Capetown guess more and more a certainty. A
blotch of deception was moving into the GenGen area at the speed of a fast walk.
There! A fleeting glimpse of the Gu child. The analysts pounced on the location,
dredged two sets of footsteps out of the lying silence. So Rabbit did have troops
on the ground.
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
That damned bunny. We can’t stop him. He just keeps coming and
coming and coming.
For a moment there was no conversation. Then:
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
I can stop him. I can pull the plug on Credit Suisse.
There was another long pause. Yes. Günberk’s discovery that Rabbit depended
on a single apex certificate authority. All power in the modern world, from flying
the largest aircraft to moving bytes between components in a single processor, it
all came down to the exchange of appropriate markers of trust, as enforced by
the Secure Hardware Environment. And far at the top of Rabbit’s operations, via
billions of unknown paths, there was a single source, Credit Suisse CA.
Revoking that authority would disarm Rabbit. It would likely destroy the
fellow’s access to his own most personal files, leaving nothing but what the
creature held in his natural mind (unless Rabbit really was an AI, in which case
nothing would be left). But the collateral damage would be enormous. Shutting
down a top-level certificate authority was a metaphorical weapon of mass
destruction. And now it was all that was left to them.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
Mr. Rabbit must be stopped… I have begun the proceedings. Credit

Suisse will begin issuing global revocations in fifteen seconds.
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
I’m sorry, Günberk. Ten percent of the trust apparatus of Europe would slide
into chaos in the next half hour. The aftershocks would rattle the world.
Whatever else came out of their mission here, for Günberk Braun it was a career-
ending failure.
Another kind of failure threatened Alfred Vaz. Shooting down Rabbit had been
one of his fondest hopes, but not just now! Alfred dipped back into the GenGen
viewpoints. Downing Rabbit had eliminated all the slack from the schedule. And
I need that time for my own cover-up. He was reduced to emergency measures:
Alfred brought two more secret teams online. One would use the fruit-fly scam
to divert what was left of Rabbit. The other would destroy his lab-within-a-lab,
destroy Alfred’s work of years. But they would also outship his secret lab’s
greatest prize through GenGen’s UP/Ex launcher.
For Alfred Vaz, some form of success was still possible.
○
Gu the Eldest and Gu the Youngest hiked southward out of the Huertas cavern.
Behind them the shredda containers and the north entrance were swallowed by
darkness. The light that traveled above them shone just a few yards in all
directions.
“How far till we’re in enemy territory?” said Robert.
Miri held a finger up to her lips. She gestured, and silent messaging paraded
across his vision.
Miri → Robert:
Your pdf says they only control a small part of GenGen. But I bet
they can hear a long ways. Stick with silent messaging.
Robert fumbled with the box at his belt. The keypad display helped, but typing
was tedious. All the tricks that Juan had taught him were nearly useless without
Epiphany.

Robert → Miri:
Ok.
Miri walked in almost perfect silence, and Robert tried to imitate her. In fact,
with Winston and the others gone, things were very quiet in Huertas country.
Maybe they were as alone as the Mysterious Stranger had claimed, shielded
from friends and enemies alike.
Miri must have been reading as they walked. More sming appeared.
Miri → Robert:
I didn’t know about “Alfred.”
It was curious that she didn’t wonder about the Mysterious Stranger.
He tapped a few cramped words. Robert → Miri:
Wht cn we do?
Miri → Robert:
Well, there’s Mr. Smart-Aleck’s list. She waved at the air, and a page of
the Stranger’s pdf popped into view.
Page 17 What you can do to defeat Alfred
First off, even I, your mysterious friend, am not sure exactly what Alfred is up to
(but I am afire with curiosity). Here are some possibilities.
(l)To blow up the bio labs, classic straightforward terrorism. But don’t you think
he went to rather a lot of trouble if that’s all he wants to do? It would be a gross
under-employment of everyone’s talent. If this is the scam, you will be the
heroes of the day, my hands in disabling those little boxes you and your friends
planted — but your fame will likely be posthumous. My condolences!
(2)To sabotage some component of the labs, maybe in a way that won’t become
evident till much later disasters. This is almost as stupid as (1).
(3)To install (or cover) some fiendishly clever Man-in-the-Middle software that

gives Alfred de facto ownership of research done in that part of lab that you,
Robert, infested for him. This would be cool, and it is my personal favorite (see
my discussion of fruit flies in Chapter 3). Unfortunately for Alfred, this caper is
so far blown that I doubt it will survive the audits that will surely come raining
down. In this case, you two can help by grabbing anything that Alfred has not
yet hidden.
(4)In the failure of case (3), or perhaps as his original plan, Alfred may take
advantage of your cabal’s efforts and outship biologically interesting materials
from the labs.
[Diagram of the pneumo tube transport system]
[Picture of GenGen’s UP/Ex launcher]
To what end? Oh, the usual terrorist possibilities — but more likely, something
weird and interesting. I’m confident I can identify such activity, and you — my
loyal hands — can physically prevent the loading and outshipment.
For the moment we are all in the dark about this. But once you enter the
perverted GenGen area, I should be able to contact you again. Be careful, be
quiet, and Watch for Me in Your Sky!
Miri’s words were overwriting the text even before Robert finished reading it.
Miri → Robert:
This guy is always so modest.
Robert grinned. Then he read her message a second time. And he thought back
to all his conversations with Sharif, to the mystery of True-Sharif and Stranger-
Sharif and… SciFi-Sharif. Oh, my God.
Robert → Miri:
How much of sharif ws u?
She glanced up at him and for instant her intensity was transformed into a
dazzling smile. Miri → Robert:
I’m not sure. Sometimes we were all mixed together with the real

Zulfi. That was almost fun, hearing what the others asked and what
you answered. But way too often, I was frozen out and it was just
Mr. Smart-Aleck.
Robert → Miri:
The Mysterious Stranger.
Miri → Robert:
Do you really call him that? Why?
Robert → Miri:
Yes.
Because of the magic he promised. But he didn’t type that out.
Miri → Robert:
Well, I think he’s nothing without us.
Everything was still dark beyond their little pool of light, but now the walls were
closer. They were almost back to the sky tunnel.
Robert → Miri:
Whn will yr mom and dad gt here? Kids spying on family members and
reporting to the government — that feature of tyranny is so much simpler when
the family itself is mainly government agents.
Miri → Robert:
I don’t know. I didn’t tell them.
Where is tyranny when you need it! For a moment, Robert couldn’t think of
anything to say.
Robert → Miri:
But why?
Miri stopped for a second, looked up at him with that patented stubborn stare.

Miri → Robert:
Because you’re my grandfather. I knew you never meant to hurt me. I
knew you must be hurting inside. I knew Bob must be wrong about
you. I figured that if I could help you out from a different
direction, you’d get better. And you did get better, didn’t you?
Robert managed a nod. Miri turned and marched on.
Miri → Robert:
But I messed up. I thought Smart-Aleck was all I had to worry
about. Wherever you broke in, I thought there’d be instant alarms —
and me and Juan being there might make things go better for you.
Now Juan is
She hesitated, then reached out to grasp his hand.
Miri → Robert:
Juan is hurt bad. Her hand trapped his fingers. No matter. Robert had no
sensible reply except to squeeze back.
Miri → Robert:
But Dr. Xiang is out there. She’ll call for help. And Mr. Blount
should be calling the real 911 by now. Meantime, it’s up to you and
me down here.
There were surprises in almost every one of Miri’s sentences, and if he could
have spoken aloud or typed freely he would have asked a hundred questions.
Juan? Xiu Xiang? Miri? So many friends, doing so much to save an incompetent
old fool and his fellow fools.
The ground bounced elastically against their feet. They were passing through the
sky tunnel, back into GenGen territory.

The Animal Model?
Even on a slow day, thousands of certificates got revoked every hour. It was a
messy process, but a necessary consequence of frauds detected, court orders
executed, and credit denied. All but a handful of revocations were short cascades
of denied transactions, involving a single individual and his/her immediate
certificate authority, or a small company and its CA. Perhaps once a year there
would be a significant cascade, usually when a large company ran into
uncompromising creditors and a court order was delivered to a midlevel CA.
Even more rarely, a revocation might be part of a military action, as in the fall of
South Ossetia. In theory, the revocation protocols worked with arbitrarily large
CAs… but until this night, no apex certificate authority had ever issued global
revocations. And Credit Suisse was one of the ten largest CAs in the world. Most
of its business was in Europe, but its certificates bound webs of unmeasured
complexity all over the planet, affecting the interactions of people who might
speak no European language.
Tonight all those unknowing customers would learn of their connection. The
failures spread as timeouts on certificates from intermediate CAs and — where
time-critical trust was involved — as direct notifications. In Europe, airplanes
and trains came smoothly to a stop, without a single accident or fatality. A billion
failures were noted, and emergency services moved — with varying success —
into action.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security noticed the failures and the growing
collateral damage. Analyst pools in the U.S. reached out to the other Great
Powers and conferred under emergency protocols established years ago. Chinese
Public Safety, the Indo-European intelligence services, the U.S. DHS — they all
agreed that a category-one disaster was in progress, a really bad software failure
or a novel terrorist attack.
In certain corners of Indo-European intelligence, understanding was more
precise. Considerably more precise.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
So I have done it. Has it had any effect on Rabbit?
So far there were only small failures at UCSD, just a few certificates timing out.

That was enough to make some projections: The crowds had not consciously
noticed the changes, but the library riot was due for an abrupt and ignominious
end. Even more than the analysts had guessed, Rabbit had been behind what they
had seen tonight, and now that support was rotting away.
Down in the labs, Rabbit had been an almost invisible intruder. Confirming the
absence of that intrusion was not easy, but Alfred’s analysts had a consensus:
Vaz → Braun, Mitsuri:
Communication failures are up, but not in our core operation.
Rabbit is still here, but he’s losing flexiblity.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
Losing flexibility? By damn, we need more than that. What about his
two agents? What are they doing?
Vaz → Braun, Mitsuri:
They’ve wandered out of our area. That wasn’t precisely true, but the Gus
and what remained of Rabbit were properly diverted. Now I just need a few more
minutes.
○
Rabbit was under pressure. He always told himself that he performed best under
pressure — though usually the pressure was not so immediate, nor his opponents
so powerful and humorless. Other than some of the low-ranking analysts, Rabbit
didn’t know anyone on the Indo-European side who could take a joke.
Rabbit looked out through a dozen cameras, everything that Alfred had suborned
in the MCog area. His hands had entered the area just a few moments before;
maybe that was what had panicked his enemies into their massive revocation
attack. With a small and dwindling part of his attention he followed the
wonderful riot around the library. Sigh. Alfred & Co had never guessed his
connection with Scooch-a-mout, and yet… Who’d’a thunk they’d detect his
affection for Credit Suisse CA? Or that the EU had such power over the
certificate authority of a sovereign country?… Or that his own dependence was
as broad as he was now discovering?

Rabbit had other apex CAs, though none so useful as Credit Suisse. They would
suffice for a few more minutes. Where they didn’t, he had legal programs
posting appeals against the most destructive of the revocations.
Meantime, focus on the fun things: What was Alfred trying do do? Sheer
destruction? Intellectual theft? Rabbit was beginning to feel mean. He had been
willing to settle for a secret back door into Alfred’s operation. Now, well, now he
meant to steal it all. Starting with the fruit flies.
Rabbit reached out for his hands.
○
Robert remembered this area. They were back in the heart of GenGen country,
the unending rows of gray cabinets, the crystal forests that connected them, the
pneumo tubes. But up ahead was a sound like cardboard boxes being crushed.
The Stranger’s pdf had explanations for the abbreviations that were printed on
the sides of the cabinets:
Dros MCog
Robert → Miri:
Fruit flies? This was where he had set down almost a third of the little boxes,
having to crawl over above and between the cabinets.
Miri → Robert:
Yes. Did you read what Smart-Aleck claims about this? I don’t
believe it.
“Hey, hey, my man!” And there was the Mysterious Stranger, Miri’s Mr. Smart-
Aleck. His skin was practically glowing green, even in the shadows. The face
was Sharif’s but the smile was inhumanly wide. “Talk as you please. Alfred
discovered us here several minutes ago.” The Stranger looked around, as if
expecting a visible enemy. “So now I don’t care if he hears you. Or me! What
can you do, Alfred? You’re shutting me down, but I wager I’ll last another
minute or two. Oh, I suppose you could shut down your own operation, too. I’d
be instantly gone then.” He glanced back at Miri and Robert, and continued sotto
voce. “If he does that, he’s truly desperate. And it won’t help him a bit, since you

still have my pdf. You’ll still be here to destroy his underhanded plans.”
The Mysterious Stranger waved for them to follow. “Did you get to this part of
my explanation?” He waved at the cabinets. “Molecular Biology of Cognition.
MCog. And Alfred’s people have created the ideal animal model for their
research.”
“Fruit flies?” said Robert.
“I don’t believe it,” said Miri. “Fruit flies can’t think. What could your ‘Alfred’
— or you — do with them?”
The Stranger gave out one of its dismissive laughs, and Robert noticed
Miri’s face jerk up. She might do better with this manipulator than Robert. After
all, she wasn’t desperate for his help.
“Ah, Miri, you read but you don’t understand. If you had access just now to the
wider net — and a few hundred hours of research — perhaps you’d understand
that molecular biology depends more on data depth and analysis than it does on
the particular class of organism. In his Drosophila melanogaster alfredü — is
that what you call them, Alfred? — we have the metabolic pathways that are the
basis for all animal cognition.”
Minus the editorial comments, this did look like some of the pdf.
They rounded a corner and saw the source of the sounds.
“Viola, Alfred’s three hundred thousand fruit flies, now being folded into
convenient shipping cartridges.” The Stranger’s face and body bore less and less
resemblance to the original Sharif. “But I must confess — I know what these
little bugs are, but I don’t really know what Alfred has planned for them. Surely
there are some marvelous diseases — cognitive diseases? — that might come out
of such research. Or maybe he wants to get a head start on all the enhancement-
drug people. Or maybe he’s into YGBM. But I do know — “
The fruit-fly arrays were being folded on a large transport table, much bigger
than anything in Ron Williams’s shop class. The shipping cylinders rolled across
the table, right through the Stranger’s body. The creature noticed this a half
second late, but did a creditable hop back from the table.

“But I do know that he’s trying to ship them off-site.”
“So you claim.”
“Hey, trust me, Miss Miri. You’ve met Alfred. He’s the fellow who tried to kill
Juan Orozco. The guy’s an evil loon. Ping the labels on these packages if you
don’t believe me.”
Yes. UP/Ex labels with an encrypted destination. The first of the cylinders was
sliding off the table, headed toward the nearest pneumo tube.
Now the Stranger was hopping from one foot to the other. “Only you can save
mankind! Just knock the cylinders onto the lower tray. Don’t let Alfred win!”
That seemed to convince Miri. She rushed to the table, grabbed the package out
of the pneumo tube lock, and tossed it to Robert. He caught it and the next and
the next and now his arms were full. The white cylinders were as light as foam.
The Stranger’s image froze for a second. Abruptly, animation returned.
“Heh! Excellently done.” He waved vaguely at the walls. “See that, Alfred? It
doesn’t pay to cross the Rabbit!” Rabbit? The creature turned back in their
general direction; by God, it did look a little bit like a rabbit. “That was a near
thing, but I won! I mean, we saved mankind.” It drew itself up, but its whole
body was tilted. “Damn Alfred. He is shutting me down a piece at time. Maybe I
should exit with my impression of the Wicked Witch of the West. Dying, that
is.”
The creature spun around, giving out melodramatic moans, its body dissolving
around it. It hesitated, and said offhandedly to Robert, “Oh, don’t let the
cylinders go untreated. Just drop them onto the lower tray.”
Robert didn’t move.
“I mean it!” said the Stranger, something like a serious tone creeping into its
voice. It flailed about — more dramatic dying, or looking for an explanation? “If
the bugs are disease vectors, you’re at ground zero! The lower tray will send
them to an incinerator, all safe and tidy.”
Miri shook her head. “No. That’s an alternate path to the UP/Ex launcher.”

“Look at my pdf, you fool. The map.”
“I looked at my map, the one I cached this afternoon.” Miri’s smile was
triumphant.
There was a two-second lag. Then the creature turned and looked almost straight
at Miri. “I hate you, Miri Gu. You evil thing. Everything was going so well till
you started meddling. I’ll get you for this.”
Then it was shouting. “Meantime, I’m gonna get you, Alfred. If I’m out of
action, so are you! I’m blowing the whistle on you. I’m — “
The figure stopped moving. There was a moment of silence; then Robert heard a
single word, faint and faraway:”… help.”
And the creature vanished. Robert and Miri stared at each other. It was just the
two of them, and the ranks of cabinets.
“Do you think he’s really gone, Miri?”
“I… don’t know.”
Miri → Robert:
But if Smart-Aleck wasn’t lying about everything, then this Alfred
guy is still around. Aloud, her words were timid. “Maybe we should stay
here and wait for the police.”
“Okay.”
Miri plunked herself down on the floor. She was very quiet for a moment, both
publicly and privately. Robert set the packages down and stared off into the dark,
looking this way and that. Supposedly there were no mon enemy robots. What
could “Alfred” do with the fruit flies now? What couk the fellow do to Miri and
Robert himself?
Miri → Robert:
Things don’t sound the same.
Robert looked a question at her. Miri drew a golden arrow at right angles to the

corridor they had arrived from.
Miri → Robert:
I kept track of everything I heard when I was following you.
There’s something new going on, most likely in the mouse arrays.
Did you do anything over that way? She quietly came back to her feet.
Robert tapped at his keypad:
Robert → Miri:
Thts whr we put most of our eqt.
Miri’s chin came up.
Miri -> Robert:
The sounds are like what we heard here. Someone’s packaging another
shipment out.

Dr. Xiang Takes Charge
Günberk and Keiko and Alfred each had their own analyst pools. Ten seconds
ago those analysts had agreed: As an active threat, Rabbit was gone, both topside
and in the operation’s milnet. Dissent clusters hung around the opinion, but they
were related to collateral-damage prediction.
Braun → Mitsuri, Vaz:
God willing, we’ve stopped the monster.
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
And we have the inspection data we came for. Now it’s time to get
the hell out! She brought up a zoomed picture of the contingency tree. They
were way out on a limb that led to full loss of deniability. And yet, until they
knew for sure the results of their investigation, they needed the Americans kept
ignorant.
Alfred presented his latest extraction schedule, the times padded just enough to
cover his outshipment activities.
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
Eight minutes! That much? Keiko still had things covered on the north side of
the labs. And the views of the riot showed the Bollywood team still in place by
the library… but that affair was descending into civil disorder, the sort of thing
that brings a direct police response. Meshing Alfred back into the Bollywood
people should be easy now; very soon it would be impossible.
Vaz → Braun, Mitsuri:
I’ll trim every second I can, Keiko.
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
You’d better! Five minutes is the most I can guarantee.
Alfred smiled at Keiko’s impolitely constrained panic. She and Günberk would
do their best. And in some ways, this chaos was helpful. Fooling Günberk and

Keiko had always been Alfred’s biggest problem. His outshipment would’ve
been impossible if they weren’t so distracted.
Two minutes passed. Three. His secret team had completed most of the fakery.
They had updated the logs to satisfy both Alliance and future U.S. investigators.
Now they were working with one small section of the Mus musculus arrays, his
true animal model. Alfred hopped from viewpoint to viewpoint, swooping over
cabinets that looked like office blocks in some bland, utilitarian city. He couldn’t
take more than a few of the mice, just a few of those conceived since the last
update. His team had already shut down the in-progress experiments and started
destruct operations. Now they detached the chosen arrays and began prepping
them for launch. Other members of the team were already sending shipping
cartridges to the pneumo port atop the cabinet. He could fit one twenty-by-thirty
array… six hundred mice — into each cartridge.
Mitsuri -> Braun, Vaz:
Alfred! The public net is failing.
Vaz swore and glanced at the topside analysis. This wasn’t even close to Keiko’s
deadline.
Braun -> Mitsuri, Vaz:
It’s a full system failure. Mr. Rabbit has screwed us.
The analysts were boiling with contrary opinions. Failures like this happened a
couple of times a year somewhere in the world, the price that civilization paid
for complexity. But here there was a more sinister suspicion, that this failure was
collateral damage from the revocation. Maybe Rabbit’s riot magic depended on
his commandeering the embedded computer systems of the public environment.
Now that his certificates were revoked, there was a cascade of failures working
through almost everything, just as fast as the certificates failed.
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
Alfred! Clean up and get out!
The second and third cartridges would be ready in a moment. Alfred glanced at
the UP/Ex status. The launcher was close to the MCog area. Most important, it
was locally managed, unaffected by the crash outside. He entered a destination

in Guatemala — and selected a launch vehicle that he’d emplaced some weeks
before. It ought to be stealthy enough to get out of U.S. airspace.
Vaz → Braun, Mitsuri:
One minute. Can you give me that?
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
I will try.
The topside analysts were hard into contingency planning and probability
estimates. A thousand little changes were being made across the UCSD
landscape, wherever the Indo-European operation had influence. The Bollywood
presence would survive as long as any up there.
Alfred forced his attention back into the labs. The second cartridge was loading.
The first cartridge was shooting down the pneumo, taking its little passengers to
the launcher.
Alfred froze. The Gus were gone from the fruit-fly area. There was movement in
another window, at the edge of the mice arrays. A girl and a man running toward
the camera. They hadn’t been fooled by the fruit flies.
Alfred leaned forward. Okay. One minute. What could his people cook up in that
time?
○
Lena’s wheelchair was no hiking machine. It did well enough on the asphalt,
even going uphill; Xiu had to trot to keep up. But where the asphalt was carved
by gullies, the chair had to walk. The going got very slow.
“Can you even see the road, Lena?” Her view-page was as dark as the natural
view.
“No. I think someone has turned off the hillside. Side effect of the riot, maybe.”
She moved to the middle of the road. “Sst! They’re still coming.” She waved at
Xiu to come forward. “How can we stop them? One way or another, we have to
find out what’s happening.”

“Robert will see you.”
“Damnation!” Lena dithered, caught in a dilemma.
“Go back to the side of the road. I can stop them more safely, anyway.”
“Hmph,” said Lena. But she retreated.
Xiu stood still for a moment. There were the distant sounds of the freeway. From
over the hilltop there were noises that might have been chanting. But nearby was
just insect sounds, the feel of air cooling in the night, the narrow roadway
jumbled and rocky under her feet. She saw light sweep across the outcroppings
above her.
“I can hear them, Xiu.”
Xiu could, too, the crunch of tires and now the faint whine of electric motors.
The mystery car came around a last, unseen bend in the road, and she tensed to
dive out of the way.
But on this road, cars could not speed. Its headlights slowly bore down on her.
“Make way, make way.” The words were loud, and the view-page in her hand
came alight with flashing warnings about the penalties for interfering with the
California Highway Patrol.
Xiu started to give way, and then she thought, But it’s the CHPI want to talk to.
She waved for the car to stop. The vehicle slowed still more, then turned and
tried to edge past her on the left. “Make way, make way.”
“No!” she shouted and hopped back in front of it. “You stop!”
The car moved even more slowly. “Make way, make way.” And it tried to pass
her on the other side. Xiu jumped in the way again, this time flailing her
backpack as though it could do some damage.
The auto backed up a yard or two, and turned slyly as if preparing an end run.
Xiu wondered if she really wanted to jump in front of what happened next.
○

With every heartbeat, pain spiked through Tommie. After a moment he realized
that was good news. He raised his head, saw that he was stretched out on the
backseat of a passenger car. That was Winston and Carlos in the facing seats.
“Where’s Robert and his little girl?”
Winston Blount shook his head. “They stayed behind.”
“We split up, Professor Parker.”
Scary memories were coming back. “Oh… yeah. Where’s my laptop? We gotta
call 911.”
“We called, Tommie. Everything’s okay now, this is a CHP vehicle.”
Despite his haziness, that didn’t make sense. “It sure doesn’t look like one.
“It’s got all the insignia, Tommie,” but there was dawning uncertainty in
Winston’s voice.
Tommie slid his legs from the seat and pushed himself into a half-sitting
position. The pain squeezed tight on his chest, clawed out along his arms. He
almost blacked out again, and would have fallen forward if not for Carlos.
“Hold… hold me up!” Tommie looked forward. The car’s headlights were on.
The road was steep and narrow, with scattered remnants of asphalt surfacing, the
sort of thing you might see in the East County, or in short stretches along the
coast, a disconnected remnant of lost roadway. They slowed, negotiating deeply
shadowed gullies. Bushes swept close around them. And now ahead he saw
someone standing in the middle of the road. The car slowed to a crawl just five
yards short of — it was a young woman.
“Make way, make way.” Their car said over and over, trying to get by on one
side and then the other.
The woman hopped from side to side, blocking them. She was shouting, and
swinging a good-sized backpack at them.
Their car backed up a few feet, and Tommie heard the faint squeal of a capacitor
preparing for something drastic. The wheels turned a few degrees — and the

woman jumped in front of them again. Her face was bright in the headlights. It
was a pretty Asian face… if you added thirty years to it, you got the face from
some very distasteful turn-of-the-century papers in Secure Computing. She was
the last person he’d ever expect to play “block the tanks at Tiananmen Square.”
The headlights went out. The car jolted forward. Then the brakes engaged and
they slid halfway into the ditch. There was a muffled explosion that might have
been that capacitor slagging itself. The doors on both sides of the vehicle popped
open and Tommie slid partway into the cool night air.
“You okay, Professor Parker?” That was Carlos’s voice, coming from close
behind his head.
“Not dead yet.” He heard footsteps on the roadway. A light flared in a small
hand, and the woman said loudly, “It’s Winston Blount and Carlos Rivera — ”
and then more conversationally, ” — and Thomas Parker. Y-You probably don’t
know me, Dr. Parker, but I have admired your work.”
Tommie didn’t know what to say to that.
“Let us pass,” said Winston. “This is an emergency.”
He was interrupted by the sound of wheels — but not from another car. A voice
spoke from the darkness: “Where’s Miri? Where’s Robert?”
Carlos said, “They’re still inside. They’re trying to stop the — We’re afraid that
someone is taking over the labs.”
Motors whined. It was a wheelchair, carrying someone all hunched over. But the
voice was strong and irritated. “Damn it. Lab security would prevent that.”
“Maybe not.” Winnie sounded like he was chewing on broken glass. “We think
that someone has… subverted security. We called 911. That’s what you’re
interfering with.” He waved at their car. It was halfway into the ditch, unmoving.
Tommie looked at the darkened passenger car. “No,” he said. “That’s a fake.
Please. You call 911.”
The wheelchair rolled nearer. “I’m trying to! But we’re in some kind of a
deadzone. We should go down the hill, find something we can latch on to.”

“Dull” said Carlos. He was staring all around, the way kids do when their
contacts fail.
The redoubtable Dr. Xiang waved her little handlight, light and shade sweeping
up around her. Strange. There was a kind of hesitancy about her. X. Xiang was
one of the true Bad Guys of the present era, at least one of the people who had
made the Bad Guy regimes possible. You could never tell it by looking at her.
She doused the light, and stood silently for a moment. “I-I don’t think we’re in a
local deadzone.”
“Sure it is!” said Winnie. “I’m wearing, and I can’t see a thing except the real
view. We have to get to the freeway, or at least get a line of sight on it.”
And now Tommie remembered what Gu’s granddaughter had said. Maybe the
local nodes were being spoofed. Xiang had another theory:
“I mean the deadzone is not just here. Listen.”
“I don’t hear a thing — oh.”
There were little sounds, insects maybe. There was faint shouting from over the
hills. Okay, that must be the belief-circle diversion. What else? The freeway
sounded… strange, not the constant, throbbing surf of wheels on road. Now
there was only the faintest sound, a dying sigh. Tommie had never heard such a
thing, but he knew how stuff worked. “Failure shutdown,” he said.
“Everything? Stopped?” said Carlos, horror climbing up into his voice.
“Yup!” Tommie’s chest pain beat toward a crescendo. But hey, let me live long
enough to learn what’s going on!
The voice from the wheelchair said, “Even if we can’t get word out, someone
will notice.”
“Maybe not,” Tommie gasped out. If the blackout was large and spotty, with the
appearance of natural disaster — why, it might cover something really big going
on underground.
“And there’s nothing we can do to help,” said Winston.

“Maybe not.” Xiang’s words echoed Tommie’s, but her voice was thoughtful,
distant. She flicked her light at the backpack. “I’ve had a lot of fun in shop class.
You can make so many interesting things now.”
Tommie managed, “Yeah. And they all obey the law.”
X. Xiang’s laugh was soft. “That fact can be used against itself, especially if the
parts don’t know the big picture.”
A lot of Tommie’s old friends talked that way; it was mostly idle talk. But this
was X. Xiang.
She pulled out a clunky-looking gadget. It looked like an old-time coffee can,
open at one end. She held the coffee can where it could see her view-page. “Lots
of gadgets are still working, they just can’t find enough nodes to get a route out.
But there’s a big military base just north of here.”
From the wheelchair: “Camp Pendleton is about thirty miles thataway.” Maybe
the speaker gestured, but Tommie couldn’t see.
Xiang scanned her coffee can across the starless sky.
“This is crazy,” said Winston. “How can you know there are nodes in your line
of sight?”
“I don’t. I’m going to shine signals off the sky haze. I’m calling in the marines.”
And then she was talking to her view-page.
○
Bob Gu and his marines logged more time in training systems than they ever did
in combat or on watch. Training managers were legendary for creating
impossible emergencies — and then topping them with something even more
unbelievable.
Tonight the real world was outdoing the craziest of the trainers.
Alice had been moved to Intensive Care. Bob would have gone with her —
except that whatever had taken her down was enemy action, and not the end of
it.

The analyst display had sprouted new nodes and a dozen long-shot associations:
Credit Suisse CA had just collapsed, a major disaster for Europe. The certificate
revocations would have effects even in California. Bob took a closer look. The
Credit Suisse collapse was so abrupt that it had to be a sophisticated attack. So
what was a distraction from what?
The DoD/DHS combined Earth Watch was involved now. Tonight’s action could
be something new, a Grand Terror that ran simultaneously through the U.S.A.
and the Indo-European Alliance, profiting from the gaps created by national
sovereignties. Looking at the analysis above him, Bob could see only the
broadest outlines, but it was evident that the intelligence agencies of the U.S.A.,
the Alliance, and China were collaborating to hunt down the source of the threat.
In CONUS Southwest, his new top analyst was doing her best. His analyst pool
was still crippled, but folks were talking productively. Their structures of
conjecture and conclusion were growing. The new top analyst took voice:
“Colonel, the revocation storm is very intense at UCSD.”
The traffic display showed that the demonstration around the library had ground
to a halt. The new failures were not due to backbone router saturation.
Participants were being decertified by the thousands. Millions of support
programs were balked. If nothing else, this showed that massive foreign
involvement in tonight’s festivities had not been some analyst pipe dream.
Whatever had hit Europe was intimately involved here.
But the bio labs still showed green. Even the participation of the night crews in
the library demonstrations had worked out for the best. Maybe productivity and
performance would be down for this shift, but that was a commercial issue. In
fact, the departure of the human crews had simplified the lab situation. There
was nothing there but automation — and it showed all was well.
“FBI again requests clearance to take over.”
Bob shook his head irritably. “Denied. As before.”
Hmm. More than riot participants were being decertified. Three analysts from
the Southern California utilities reported infrastructure failures in the campus
area. Why would local infrastructure depend on certs from Credit Suisse?
“Correlation of systems failures with the revocation storm is ninety-five percent,

Colonel.”
No kidding. Even if the labs were clean, there was some kind of deadly
interference here. Bob tapped the command he had been contemplating these last
few minutes:
LAUNCH ALERT
“Analysts update contingency nine and give me a launch mark,” he said.
There was a pause as the request was reviewed by the DoD/DHS combined
Earth Watch. His CONUS Southwest watch was on a very short leash since
Alice’s breakdown:
But clearance came back in just five seconds.
Bob scarcely noticed his gee pod inflate. He would be the last out of the barn, so
there was a lot to watch.
LAUNCH LAUNCH LAUNCH
“Uncrewed vehicles launched.”
His displays showed thirty canisters of combat network-munitions shot high into
the Southern California night. The uncrews were from the north side of the base,
twenty kilometers away. Farther north, from MCAS Edwards, more primitive
weapons rose into the heavens. Their manifest was a catalog of extreme
possibilities: rescue lances (500), damage-suppression fogs (100), HEIR lasers
(10), thermal flechettes/isolation variant (100)… and then the last three, the
nightmares — sterilization-fog dispensers (10 by 10), HERF area munitions (20
by 20 by 4), strategic nuclear munitions (10 by 10 by 2). Analysts are paid to
think worst-case… but Lord. The bio labs were the only excuse for these items.
But in truth — if you discounted the absence of follow-up equipment — this was
a fairly conventional load for a modern expeditionary force. Three times in
Bob’s career, such launches had ended in real combat. But those had been half a
world away, in Almaty, in Ciudad General Ortiz, and in Asuncion. The most
terrible weapons had never been used, though Asuncion had been a very near
thing.

Tonight he was aiming all this hardware at his own neighbors, just thirty miles
south of Camp Pendleton. Full force in an urban area was like going after rats in
your kitchen with a machine gun. Keep your head down, Miri.
“FBI again requests clearance to take over.”
“Denied. The situation has escalated.” For the moment, hopefully just for the
moment. If police and rescue could bring the system back up, then all the
hardware that Bob had just boosted over Southern California would simply be an
expensive exercise. But one good thing about being locked and loaded was that
he had lots more call on resources: Gu grabbed analyst teams from all across the
national workshift and pushed the intel and sensor backlog at them. Priority
questions: Are the San Diego labs secure? What is the prognosis for the current
system failures?
Meantime, Bob’s launches had soared to the top of their trajectories. He tweaked
the Edwards munitions still higher, delaying them behind the gear from
Pendleton. If nothing was resolved soon, he would have to light the uncrews’
jets. I need answers, guys!
But the analyst mob was still busy connecting a billion dots, looking for patterns
and conspiracies. Then a single observation changed everything. A weather-
service geek doing her monthly reserve duty grabbed a very high priority:
“Twenty seconds ago. I see ad hoc signaling in the backscatter above here” —
and she drew an ellipse over San Diego North
County, covering much of Camp Pendleton. Somebody was making their own
communications, simply blinking a light into the sky haze! The long axis of the
scatter ellipse pointed right back toward UCSD. The words of the intercepted
message streamed across Bob’s vision:
Xiu Xiang → anyone clever enough to notice me in the backscatter:
GenGen laboratory automation has been corrupted. The system is
attacking anyone opposing it. This is not a game. This is not a
joke. What? Yes, I’ll tell them. There are two people still in the
labs. They are good guys! They are trying to help.
The NOAA analyst spoke over the script display: “The message is a one-second
burst, retransmitted twelve times. What you’re seeing is the summed cleanup.”

It was clear enough. Bob Gu’s fingers tapped in their gloves, launching his
marines.
Then his own gee pod came tight and — — for a moment Bob Gu was not
paying attention. For a moment he could not pay attention. Battle commit put the
combat CO himself into the fray. In this case, launch took his landing dart almost
horizontally out of Pendleton. Maybe this is not a good idea, he thought muzzily.
But he always thought that coming out of a twenty-gee railgun launch.
Now he had to recollect his wits and context. His team and equipment were on
schedule. The unthinkable Last Resorts were still high overhead, flexible to the
last. The network munitions were already at UCSD. And the bio labs still
showed green, all secure and peaceful.
His own landing dart was seconds away from the UCSD.
There was something else that was important, something in the last few seconds.
Xiu Xiang? Bob’s recollection came unsquished just as a DHS analyst team
presented its own form of the insight: Xiu Xiang. A not uncommon name. But in
all of Southern California there probably weren’t more than three or four who
owned that name. And one lived at Rainbows End with Lena Gu.
Suddenly he had a good idea just who was in the crosshairs of all that he
commanded.

When the Network Stops
The Library had chosen. For an instant, Timothy Huynh and all the night crew
were silent. The crowds of real humans were quiet, and even the millions of
virtuals took part in a coordinated stillness.
The Library had chosen — and it had chosen the Scoochis.
On the Hacek side you could see the realization of defeat spreading. The triumph
was real. How would the Hacekeans take it? There had been a few debacles in
the late teens, when major belief structures had produced some awful art. Some
were so bad that the circles themselves had shriveled and died. Who heard of
Tines anymore, or the Zones of Thought? But tonight the Hacekeans had lost at
the hands of others; they must do something … maybe even something gracious.
The silent stillness of the mob continued a second more. Then Dangerous
Knowledge suddenly turned away from the library. Its gaze swept fiercely across
them all. After all, playing loser wasn’t in its repertoire. But whoever was behind
all the creativity was flexible: After a moment, Dangerous smiled gently and
turned back to the library. Its voice made concession sound like the granting of a
favor: “We bow to the wishes of the Library. Here you have won, O Scooch-a-
mout.”
Wails arose from the Hacek side, but Dangerous raised a hand and continued.
“We give up our claims here. We remain as guests only.”
Sheila → Night Crew:
The Hacek people are in heavy discussion with the university
administration. They’re begging for whatever scraps they can get.
And the Greater Scooch-a-mout was conciliatory in victory, though it didn’t step
away from its embrace of the library. “You are welcome as guests, in a library
with real books.”
Hanson → Night Crew:
Admin is squealing about that, but the publicity should pay for
extra floor space. We’ve won, gang!

○
For some minutes, everything was cool. Ending a riot without a police
confrontation or a physical debacle was a little bit anticlimactic, but the riot
designers had even more special effects to wind things down. Katie Rosenbaum
gathered the spider bots all together, then sent them out to Huynh’s mechs for a
bizarre “peace dance” — that incidentally cleaned up most of the night’s
garbage. Tim sensed negotiations going on between the two sides, things being
traded, promises made. Dangerous Knowledge retreated into the sky, and both
sides played with special effects that were new on this night.
But now, when things should have been getting smoother, there were network
problems. Here and there, service was unusably slow or all jittery. It made
everyone look bad. Scooch-a-mout still stood by the library, embracing the pillar
that had “walked.” You hold a heroic gesture that long and you just look stupid.
Huynh looked at his mech status board. There hadn’t been a Scoochi update for
almost seven seconds. That was no way to drive a mech.
Huynh → Hanson:
Hey, Sheila. Who’s driving the Greater Scooch-a-mout?
Hanson → Huynh:
Dunno. He was good, but now he’s dropped the ball. It’s okay, we’re
winding down now. Just take control and walk the robot out. No need
to look cool. Then she was messaging the whole night crew, trying to tidy up
and get all her GenGen people and gear back where they belonged.
Huynh drove his forklift toward the Greater Scooch-a-mout mech. He walked
along behind and tried to figure some nice way to get the two off the field. His
robot’s “Mind Sum” mists weren’t matching its movements anymore; they
looked like crap. Okay. He’d take control of the Greater Scooch-a-mout, and
have the two robots give a last high five, and then rumble out together. That
would be cool, if not fully so.
Maybe it didn’t matter. The network problems were getting a lot worse. There
were strange latencies, maybe real partitions. Blocks of the virtual audience were
being run on cache. Single-hop still mostly worked, but routed communication
was in trouble. Huynh stepped a few feet to the side and managed to find a good

diagnostic source. There were certificate failures at the lowest levels. He had
never seen that before.
Even the localizer mesh was failing’.
Like the holes in threadbare carpet, splotches of plain reality grew around him,
eating out the mists and crowds, revealing the armies of everyday lab mechs.
Where there had been hundreds of thousands of players, now there were open
stretches of dark lawn, and the crowds of real humans, standing in shock.
“Tim! Your forklift!” The shout was real sound, from Sheila Hanson, just a few
feet away.
Huynh turned back toward the library. He had lost contact with Mind Sum! He
ran toward the mech. The forklift had continued autonomously for just a couple
of steps. But this was not a flat lab floor, and the localizer mesh was failing
around it. The robot had tripped on one of the ornamental boulders that fringed
the terrace. It teetered off-balance, shrieking location queries in all directions.
But now the mesh was gone, and the forklift was in trouble. Its onboard systems
were designed to cope with instability: the failure mode consisted of stepping
quickly into the fall, lowering its center of gravity, and dropping stability limbs.
That would have worked down in the clean environment of the labs. Here, its
lunge took it to the edge of the north-side grade — and there was no localizer
mesh to alert it to the drop. The stability limb settled into thin air, and the forklift
tipped over the edge.
There were screams.
Huynh ran out onto the robot battlefield. All the epic imagery was gone, but the
robots still had local coordination. They rolled out of his way. He scarcely
noticed. All his attention was on his forklift. He had direct contact now. He
surfed across the forklift’s cameras… and felt sick. There was someone pinned
underneath. He climbed down the hillside and fell to his knees. The woman was
trapped there, still screaming. Her leg, up to above the knee, was crushed by
forklift composite.
Someone scrambled down beside him. Sheila. She wriggled under the blades of
the forklift, reached down to grasp the woman’s hand. “We’ll get you out. Don’t
worry. We’ll get you out.”

“Yes!” said Tim. He had full control now. Between his own vision and the
cameras, he could see how it had fallen, and where the woman was pinned. Be
cool and everything will be okay. The forklift put its weight on knees that didn’t
touch the woman. There was solid support, no surprises. From under the blades
he could hear Sheila comforting the woman.
Okay, just shift the weight back, push off into a low sitting posture. Easy…
But now there were other screams, and the sounds of people running.
Smale → Huynh:
Help us, Tim!
Huynh glanced through a camera on the other end of the forklift: The robot that
had been the Greater Scooch-a-mout was still standing by the library, but now its
center of gravity was absurdly high and someone had overridden all its safeties,
to push against the nearest pillar. The mech’s foot pads were grinding into the
concrete cladding of the terrace. There was the sound of motors on emergency
burn, but in an off/on/off rhythm that sounded almost musical. The robot looked
like a child trying to prop up a teetering bookcase.
Huynh turned the camera to look up and up… at the sixth-floor overhang, almost
directly overhead. There were gaps in the concrete, and places where the floors
tilted and swayed. It was a building that had the smarts to stabilize itself, even to
move a little. But now that intelligence was cut off from location information.
Like Timothy Huynh’s forklift, the library was doing its best to remain
standing… and on its own vast scale, it was failing.

Bob Contemplates Nuclear Carpet-Bombing
Bob coasted across the UCSD campus, his landing dart now as slow and quiet as
the network munitions that were raining out of the sky. This was a classic
network-superiority assault, absent significant defenses. There were many many
things to do and only seconds to do them, but for these few moments he had a
paradoxical sense of security. There weren’t many places in the modern world
where a human could be as self-sufficient — if only temporarily — as when in
command of such an assault. Bob Gu’s expeditionary group had its own
network, its own power supplies, its own sensors. Even if all his remote analysts
were to disappear, his marines would still be in business.
At the moment, thousands of assault nodes were nestling into trees and bushes,
fastening themselves to vehicles and ledges and the sides of buildings. Even
before they touched down, they asserted primacy over what civilian network
hardware still functioned. That takeover was almost complete. He already had
access to almost all the embedded controllers in the area. In combat, those local
systems were often unsalvageable. Here, there were a few seconds of intense
interrogation, DHS authority was asserted, and he had control. The cars and
wearables, the medicals, the viewpoints and financials and police systems, they
were all responding. Police and rescue workers were reconnecting via the
combat net. Already he could hear their voices picking up the operation. With
just a little luck, there would be no loss of life, just a very bad and strange
network outage. He would leave the combat net in place, just as in a foreign
operation. Over the coming days it would be replaced — not by administrative
forces but by the gradual reassertion of the civil system. None of that was really
important. “The labs. Have they responded?”
“Yes, sir,” came Patrick Westin’s reply. He was on the ground with the first
squad, near the GenGen main entrance. “We have access to the labs’ backup
security. It’s agreeing with the primary, claims the underground is secure, no sign
of perver — “
Civilian status alarm: Building Failure. The letters streamed across a corner of
Bob’s view. The university library was going down. In combat bad things
happen, but tonight the cause looked like stupidity plus bad luck — first the
rioters making their library “dance,” then network outage destroying its smarts.
Whatever the reason, people would end up just as dead.

Bob threw the problem to his reserve squad, which just now was four hundred
meters up, coming down with assorted hardware… including the rescue lances.
He was vaguely aware of the lance canisters popping their fins, turning to point
down into the library. There was the flash of a hundred tiny rockets, and as many
hardened nodes were rammed downward through the concrete and steel of the
elderly building. Inside, action would be faster than any human attention, the
composite flechettes guiding themselves between walls, doing their best to
minimize damage to old-style wired utilities. Once in place, they would displace
the control codes of the dead building system, and attempt to contact the stability
servos. Waves of compute and recompute flickered from the squad’s status
board. Success depended on just what had survived and how fast it could engage
the marines’ localizer mesh.
But rescue was not the mission. His attention was on Patrick Westin —
“Understood,” Gu said. “Make it clear to biotech management and automation:
They are to stand down and seal off the labs. Nothing goes in or out.”
“Warn and embargo. Yes, sir.”
Maybe the Xiang message was some bizarre fraud. Maybe, yeah. He gave
Westin another squad and engaged police backup. GDC inspectors would be
here from Denver in about thirty minutes and then they could contemplate
making a safe entrance into the labs.
Bob glided in a silent arc around the south side of the campus. It was time to
land himself and his third squad. Where?
If this was enemy action, there should be Local Honchos on the enemy side. He
popped up the suspect lists. There was the usual population of foreign students.
The interesting ones would be interviewed by the end of the evening. The library
festivities had been almost a total surprise to the press — so why had that
Bollywood contingent just happened to be in town and on-site? Surely the Indo-
European Alliance wouldn’t try anything really destructive. But the European
cert collapse seemed at the heart of the destruction here in San Diego. The
analysts and Bob’s own intuition put the Bollywood crew at the top of his
interest list.
He stalled his dart in a clearing among the eucs, and crunched down on a litter of
branches and dead leaves. The third squad dropped at twenty-meter intervals east

and west from his position. There were shouts and lights from up the hill toward
the library. The building was still out of plumb, but stability servos were engaged
and — if nothing else failed — it should maintain a standing state. Police
vehicles had come alive; direct loudspeakers were making calming
announcements. If things worked out, they might even be able to disguise the
fact that there had been a military response. Local public safety could pat itself
on the back for heading off one of those rare but inevitable system glitches…
Just ahead was the cluster of game and film people from Bollywood. They had
already received a hold notice. None of them were attempting to leave. Just a
few words with you, ladies and gentlemen, that’s all we want.
GenGen said the labs were sealed tight, ready for the proper authorities —
when? Ha! The CDC inspectors were ahead of schedule; somehow they had
gotten superballistic transport. They’d be on the ground in ten minutes. He had
support extending up the chain of command. And downward, too. Some very
large, very competent groups were reworking the odds that the labs had been
converted to factory-of-death mode. They agreed that the probability was less
than one percent — that is, science fiction.
Now his analyst pool was larger than Bob Gu had ever seen, perhaps fifteen
percent of the analytical power of the entire U.S. intelligence community. All
that support should have been comforting, yet there were places where the
connectivity looked thin. Maybe that was just the way the associations flowed
when a crisis was totally bizarre.
Others thought it strange, too. He saw lots of paranoid colors. Finally someone
got desperate:
<point-of-order>I have a sanity check. We’ve lost communication with five
percent of our original threat analysts since the revocation attack began. This
should be impossible.</point-of-order> All analysts were internal to the U.S.
intelligence community. If Credit Suisse certificates were necessary for any of
those participants to maintain connectivity, then there was at least a design
failure… and maybe the enemy had been part of Bob’s own support staff.
There was an immediate counterargument:
<point-of-order>You’re mistaking loss of connectivity for loss of trustability.
</point-of-order>

Then parts of the analyst pool got jammed in the controversy. It was the kind of
deadlock that only a miracle-worker could quickly untangle… and Alice is off in
some hospital ward.
Another alarm flashed across the lower part of his vision. His combat network
lay all across campus now, and it did more than manage communication.
Altogether, it was a two-thousand-meter-wide snooper-scope, and its report:
GenGens private UP/Ex launcher has just gone hot. A counter showed sixty
seconds till cargo boosted out of the labs.
Even as USMC sensed the launch capacitor charging up, GenGen’s own network
continued to assure the world that all was safely sealed.
Something was trying to break out of GenGen.
This is way too much like Asuncion.
Bob glanced at the nukes and death-fog dispensers and HERFs and HEIRs
floating down through 10,000 meters. To the journalists, those weapons should
look like random aerobots — but they gave Lieutenant Colonel Robert Gu, Jr.,
the physical power to annihilate any threat in this corner of the U.S.A.
So what was the Minimum Sufficient Response?
Thirty seconds till UP/Ex launch. Chaos still reigned in the land of the analysts.
Verified contact with DoD/DHS had been lost.
Sometimes decisions come down to one poor slob on the ground.

The Minimum Sufficient Response
Mus MCog
The Stranger’s pdf said that “Mus” was short for “Mus musculus.” Mice! The
mouse arrays stretched away into the dark. If anything, the place seemed even
bigger than it had the first time Robert had been here. So where to go?
Miri hesitated only a second, then ran in the direction of the loudest noises. They
trotted down two aisles and over one. Yes! Here was a cabinet with doors swung
wide. Pneumos were delivering white cylinders into the crystal forest on top.
Miri skidded to a stop in front of the opened doors. Inside the cabinet were
glassy racks; it was like some kind of old-time snack dispenser. The slots behind
the glass were a silvery honeycomb, hundreds of perfect hexagonal cells.
Hundreds of tiny faces looked out of the cabinet. Tiny faces with tiny pink eyes,
on tiny furry white heads. A high-pitched chittering came through the glass.
“They can’t move, they’re wedged in so tight,” said Miri. “Their rear ends must
be plugged into little — ” She paused, perhaps looking up background on her
local cache? ” — little sucking diapers.” For a little girl who had no interest in
pets, there was a strange sadness in her voice. “It’s a standard thing really.”
Miri tore her gaze away from the array of chittering faces. “Each of these
cabinets has mice cells arranged twenty by thirty by ten. So there are nine more
arrays behind this one we’re looking at. Hear the crunching noise? Smart-
Aleck’s friends are wrapping up some of them for shipment.”
“But where?” None of the mouse cells were moving.
“That must be in back — “
There was a sound like a goblet breaking. Colored mist floated down from the
crystal forest. It barely wet his face. But Miri was standing right beside the
cabinet. He reached out and drew her back. Above them, the rest of the fluidics
shattered. There was the faint scent of unwashed socks. Robert moved them
farther back, stepping on the broken glass. “Miri, that could be nerve gas.”
Miri was silent for a second and then her voice piped up confidently: “They’re

trying to scare us. This part of the lab isn’t designed for simple poisons.” But
Robert remembered the shipping cartridges just arriving here. We were suckered
into stopping at this cabinet.
Miri slipped out from behind him and ran around the cabinet. “Ha! There is a
transport tray back here.” By the time he caught up, she was hosing the tray with
aerosol glue. Tiny motors whined, unable to load from the cabinet. Miri reached
out, patted the almost invisible boundaries of the gel. After a moment the
crunching sounds within the cabinet came to an untidy stop. “Nothing’s going
out from here!”
They stood, listening… and now the familiar sound of cargo prep came from all
over the cavern.
“How many mouse arrays are there, Miri?”
“Eight hundred and seventeen when I cached the lab description.” She looked up
at him. “But there’s no way Smart-Aleck’s friends could be using more than a
few arrays. There’s too much security and too many other projects down here…”
The sounds of packaging grew louder. Dozens of cabinets were playing the game
of Come Stop Me. Miri stepped back and gazed into the distance. The lab was a
miniature city, its alleys laid out in a rectangular grid, stretching off into the dark
beyond their single street-lamp. “I’ve got a good map, but… what can we do,
Robert?”
Robert looked at her map. “I came through here with Tommie. We set down
gadgets by particular cabinets.”
“Yes! Which ones?”
Robert looked again at the map floating in the air before him. The place was a
maze, and the cabal had come in from a different direction. “I, uh — ” In 2010,
Robert had gotten lost in a shopping-mall parking lot. After an hour, he still
couldn’t find his car; he’d ended up at mall security. That had been the first
undeniable encounter with his mental decline. But the new me shouldn’t have
trouble remembering! “The nearest is two rows thataway, then jog right.”
They raced past two aisles, then over one to the right. Almost all the cabinet
doors were open, their transport trays working to prep cargo. Miri waved at the
pneumo tubes that branched above the cabinets. “But see, nothing is actually

shipping from here. Where’s the next place?”
And they were running again, off toward his best guess.
Ahead of them something loomed against the ceiling. The GenGen launcher.
Miri skittered to a stop, and began shaking her spray can. “Which one, Robert?”
All the cabinets around her were behaving like suspects.
“It’s still two more rows, then five cabinets down.”
“But I thought you said — never mind.” Miri walked past two more rows.
Robert followed.
She looked up at him.
“I… I’m not sure.” He glared over the tops of the cabinets, trying to orient on the
launcher, trying to force memory.
She hesitated and then touched his arm. “It’s okay, Robert. Sometimes, you can’t
remember. But things will get better for you.”
“Wait,” he said. “I’m sure this is right.” The pneumo tube behind the nearest had
just received a shipping cartridge. Mouse boxes were rolling on board.
“So that means, um” — and Miri’s hand slipped from his arm. She looked
around and then up at him: “Where are we?”
Maybe it hadn’t been nerve gas. Maybe it was something worse. And Miri got
the bigger dose. Above the cabinet the pneumo hatch had closed. There was a
pillowed thud and the cartridge sped away.
Another cartridge pulled into the siding above the cabinet. Another batch of
mice rolled to meet it. It was out of reach, But I still understand what has to be
done. Robert looked down at Miri and did his best to smile and lie. “Oh, we’re
just on a tour, Miri. How about it, would you like to climb on top of that
cabinet?”
She looked up past him. “I’m not a little girl, Robert. I don’t climb on other
people’s property.”

Robert nodded, and tried to hold his smile. “But Miri, this… this is just a game.
And… if we can stop the white thing with your, your game gun, then we win.
You want to win, right?”
Now that brought a smile, full of pert intelligence. “Of course. Why didn’t you
say it was a game. Huh. This looks like some kind of bioscience lab. Nice!” She
looked at where the transport was sliding the mouse boxes along. “So what do
you want me to do?”
Once she’s up there she’ll forget all over again. “I’ll tell you when you get up
there.” He lifted from beneath her arms. “Reach up! Grab the edge and I’ll
push.”
Miri giggled, but she did reach up, and Robert did push. She slid through the gap
beneath the siding. Her spray can was just inches from the transport tray.
“Now what?” her voice came down to him.
Yes, now what? You go to all the trouble to do something, and then you forget
the point. Only this time, he knew the point was something very important.
Robert flailed, beginning to panic. “Cara, I don’t know — “
“Hey, I’m not Cara. My name is Miri!”
Not my sister, my granddaughter. Robert stepped back from the cabinet and tried
to make sense: “Just shoot the spray can at the moving things, Miri.”
“Okay! No problem.”
A sound that was pain spiked into his head. Over the cabinet, he had a glimpse of
a strange hole that split the side of the UP/Ex launcher. Nothing to do with Miri!
The thought had barely registered when he was slammed backwards.
○
Array One was in the GenGen launcher! The stealthed launch vehicle had a good
chance of making it out of the the U.S. cordon. Array Two? Alfred’s cameras
showed that his strategy with the Gus was working. Somehow they had found
the one Mus cabinet that really mattered, but his improvised gas attack was
taking effect. The two were moving with a kind of aimless uncertainty.

He had time to prep the second load; he could get both out!
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
USMC elint has detected ballistic launcher power-up in the labs!
What can that be, Alfred?
Damn USMC. Alfred’s analysts hadn’t thought American electronic intelligence
would be so sensitive.
Vaz → Braun, Mitsuri:
It’s just bad luck. The GenGen launcher is cycling through its
nightly calibration. That was a lie, but Alfred had his story ready. He
launched a flurry of faked analysis, showering conclusions across Keiko and
Günberk’s teams. After the fact, he’d blame the launch on a resurrected Rabbit.
Mitsuri → Braun, Vaz:
But will the Americans believe that? She popped up some windows, her
best estimate of just when and how the USMC might respond to the launch prep.
No time for the third cartridge. The GenGen launcher was loaded, the capacitor
within forty-five seconds of launch. If only the Americans would just dither a
bit.
Vaz → Braun, Mitsuri:
I’m finished with cleanup. Heading for rendezvous. Alfred took a last
glance around. In fact, all his checklists were finally green. Across the room, the
Orozco boy was sleeping peacefully. He would remember nothing of tonight,
and his personal log had been artfully corrupted.
Alfred stepped out of the room, and proceeded down the hallway. There was lots
of area lighting, the sort of thing you’d expect in a major system failure. Ah! The
marines had finally detected his network. They had killed his stealthed aerobot.
He still had contact with half a dozen mobiles scattered in the brush to the north.
They were hunkered low, mainly trying to be very quiet and still maintain a net.
The American assault grid was sweeping the area, destroying them one by one.
The USMC mechs drifted down like a kind of black snow, unnoticed by the
crowds, and visible to his robots only in the last instant before their destruction.

He came out of the stairway, onto the first floor. Ahead was the main entrance.
Five seconds till UP/Ex launch! He could imagine the chaos on the American
side, losing their top analyst right at the crisis point. This was sniper warfare,
brought into modern times, and three more seconds’ delay would —
His milspec contacts lost transparency and he felt a flash of heat on his face.
Alfred dived for the floor. When the shock hit, the building swayed, barely stable
in its uncommunicating configuration. He lay still for a moment, watching.
That had been a High Energy Infra-Red laser, punching straight through the roof
of the GenGen lab some two thousand meters away. He had a single direct view,
a glimpse of trees silhouetted against a pearly glow, a rising cloud of steam and
fog. Part of the haze was zapped vegetation. Most was damage-suppression mist,
designed to soak up the knife edges of reflected death. The Americans had fired
thirty times in less than a second. Glints from those blasts would have splattered
kilometers in all directions, invisible to the naked eye, but potentially blinding
and blistering those same eyes.
A second viewpoint came online. The target hillside looked like a miniature
Mauna Loa, a river of flowing rock that slumped down into the hillside. Flashes
of light marked the ongoing work of thermal flechettes. Thunder pounded.
So the American response had been prompt and decisive, cauterizing and sealing
the launcher area, with minimum collateral damage. And all my dreams are
ashes.
His contacts had transparency again. Alfred came to his feet and ran out of
Pilchner Hall.
Ahead of him people swirled in panic, first stunned by network failure, now
dazzled by HEIR laser glints. Get into the crowd. Even though he was shoulder-
to-shoulder with humanity, for the first time this evening Alfred felt really alone.
Some people around him stared upward; some were temporarily blinded. People
were crying. Others were counseling the sensible thing: Get under cover, keep
your gaze down and away from reflectors. In the midst of network failure, these
people were reduced to literal word of mouth. But that word was spreading.
More and more people realized that for only the third or fourth time in recent
history, their own country was under a military assault. So far none of them had
guessed that it was their own military’s doing.

Alfred kept his head down, his face covered. It wasn’t a suspicious posture;
hundreds of others were cowering similarly. He shrank his communications
down to a fuzzy static that conveyed only a few bits per second and that routed
chaotically through his mechs. His ops gear was heavily shielded; to the USMC
probes it would seem like just another Epiphany unit struggling to cope with the
sudden failure of the public nets.
All that might buy him ten more minutes. Long before then, the DHS analyst
pool should recover from Alice’s collapse and run a retrospective surveillance of
the local video streams. Analysts obsessing on a dataset that small were deadly
effective. He could imagine their gleeful pursuit: See how the enemy mechs are
clumped across from Pilchner Hall? Scan back to early in the evening; who-all
has been near that building? Why, there’s Gu’s daughter going in, and a few
minutes earlier, an Indian-looking fellow doing the same. Scan forward; no
action till a minute ago, when that same Indian-looking fellow comes running
out. Track him forward to the present — and my, my, there he is, trying his
damnedest to seem an innocent bystander.
In any case, tonight’s Indo-European operation was beyond all deniability. And
that was the minor disaster. For a few seconds, Alfred Vaz drifted in
uncharacteristic despair. What about all my years of planning? What about
saving the world? He had heard enough to know that Rabbit’s accusations were
in the pdf sent to Parker’s laptop. Alfred would never complete his research
program. Indeed, Rabbit had been the Next Very Bad Thing. The carrot greens in
Mumbai had made the point, but I willfully ignored the evidence, so hoping I
was to win with my plan.
And yet… what of Rabbit now? Quite possibly its substantive evidence was
indecipherable garbage. Conceivably the minds behind Rabbit were reduced to
ignorance. Then maybe, maybe, with all my leverage at External Intelligence, I
can survive to try again.
Alfred moved back to the edge of the crowd and cautiously reached out to his
network. He’d lost his link into the labs. For half a minute there was nothing
except a deadly snick and snack that sounded privately in his ears, marking the
steady extermination of his little army.
There. A route through his surviving devices, back into Pilchner Hall. Tiny
windows popped up and… he found a viewpoint, a single lab camera that had

survived the HEIR attack and looked down upon the Mus array cabinet. The
camera had suffered glitter damage, swaths of stuck pixels, but he could see
enough.
Collateral damage could be your friend; there might be nothing here to prove
Rabbit’s accusations! The blast from the Americans’ attack on the launcher had
knocked over his very special cabinet. The last group of mice had fallen along
with it. Best of all, the Yanks’ thermal bombs had flooded the area around the
launcher with molten overburden. The lava had closed off the hole created by the
attack, just as intended, but it had not stopped there. The glowing, tarry tide had
pushed out along the aisles and piled almost two meters deep in places. Its
farthest extent lapped the fallen cabinet and covered all but a corner of that final
batch of mouse boxes.
There was no sign of the Gus. Before the laser attack, they had been standing
just beyond the current destruction. If he’d had more viewpoints, he might have
tracked them down — but would that matter? Their jumbled memories were a
still a threat, but that was now beyond his control. Suddenly, Alfred realized he
was smiling. Strange how in the midst of disaster, he could be pleased that his
two most persistent antagonists — not counting Rabbit, may he burn in hell —
had probably survived.
He was closer to the library now. Civilian rescue workers were in evidence,
though the network support was probably provided by the marines.
Interrogation teams were not yet in action. And he’d found a backup aerobot to
relay through! He got one fresh message before it was lost:
Mitsuri → Vaz:
Günberk’s analysis is almost complete. Please give us a few more
minutes’ cover, Alfred. USMC is still focused on the labs. You have
a clear run to your Bollywood team. She marked a map with the cinema
team’s current location, on the north edge of the crowds, in the eucalyptus. The
Bollywood crew and its automation were well prepared for tonight’s operation,
though the on-site people were not knowing participants.
Alfred took a final check all around himself. He walked a few paces through the
trees… and he was in midst of his Bollywood crew.

“Mr. Ramachandran! We have lost all connectivity.” The video tech’s eyes were
wide. “Everything was fine, but now it is so very terrible!” The crew were
experts on the spectacular, but not the real.
Alfred shifted into the persona of harried cinema exec. “You have your cached
videos, do you not? You forwarded the earlier contexts back home, did you not?”
“Yes, but — ” They wanted to rush out from the trees, to help the injured down
by the library. That was for the best; in moments, Vaz would be one of the group
again. Perhaps the DHS analysts were still in chaos. It would be amusing (and
amazing, too) if this cover got him past the USMC cordon and out of California.
As he followed his cinema crew out into the open space around the library, he
had only one remaining link to his mil-net. It was past time to drop that bit of
incrimination.
But there was still intelligence streaming in. Terrible, chilling words that Alfred
would never have been burdened with if he hadn’t still been linked.
“Please. Please don’t do this to her. She’s just a little girl.”
Gu. Alfred searched wildly in his only remaining view. Back in his physical
person, he stumbled.
The video tech grabbed his elbow, steadying him. “Mr. Ramachandran! Are you
quite well? Were you blinded in the attack?”
Alfred had the presence of mind not to shake her off. “I’m sorry, it’s just all this
destruction. We must help these poor people.”
“Yes! But you must stay safe yourself.” The tech guided him down to where the
rest of the Bollywood crew was already helping the emergency workers. Her aid
gave him cover to look carefully out from his underground viewpoint. The
damage to the camera had partially healed; some of the stuck pixels were
flickering, and now he could see a little beyond the left of the fallen cabinet…
The elder Gu was pinned beneath. Lord, where was the other one?
I didn’t mean for this. He should say nothing, but his body betrayed him:
Anonymous → Robert Gu:

Where is your little girl?
“Who is this?” the voice screamed in his ear, then continued more quietly, more
desperately. “She’s right here. Unconscious. And I can’t move her out of the
way”
Anonymous → Robert Gu:
I’m sorry. Alfred couldn’t think of anything more to say. Dead, these two
might marginally improve his own prospects. He looked angrily away from the
viewpoint. Damn me. He had accomplished nothing this night except destroy
good people. But how could he safely save them?
“Please. Just tell the police. Don’t let her burn.”
More spikes of overpressure, the sound of a thousand fragile things breaking, of
heavy plastic tearing, bones being crushed. Robert didn’t really hear it all. The
bones getting crushed, that was distracting. Even the follow-up explosions and
the heat went more or less unnoticed.
Robert surfaced from introspection that might as well have been
unconsciousness, except that it hurt a lot more. Miri was on her hands and knees.
She was wailing. “Grandpa! Grandpa! Say something, please. Grandpa!”
He twitched a hand, and she grabbed it. “I’m so sorry,” she said. “I didn’t mean
to knock things over. Are you hurt?”
It was one of those questions that had an easy answer. Agony the size of an
elephant was sitting on his right leg. “Yes,” but the rest of a clever answer was
lost in the pain.
Miri was crying, choking, very un-Miri-like. She turned and pushed at the
cabinet that had him pinned.
Robert took a deep breath, but that mainly made him dizzy. “The cabinet’s too
heavy, Miri. Stay back from it.” Why was the air so hot? The steady light was
gone. Something like an open furnace glowed beyond the fallen equipment,
where the sounds were all of popping and hissing.
“Cara — Miri! — come back from there!”

The little girl hesitated. Under the cabinet were the crushed remains of the
mouse array that had been about to load. It wasn’t going anywhere now. Miri
reached down into the broken glass. Robert cricked his neck and saw a tiny face
peering back into his, a mouse loose from its suction trap in the array.
“Oo,” Miri’s voice squeaked. “Hi, little guy.” A laugh mixed with a sob. “And
you, too. You each get a free pass.” Robert saw more tiny faces as she freed
other mice. The heads bobbed this way and that. They didn’t seem to see him,
and after a moment, they found something that was much more important in the
mousely order of things: freedom. They ran around the girl’s hands and away
from the heat.
Now Robert could see what caused the heat. A glowing white gob of syrup
dripped over the wreckage, hissed into redness as it oozed down the side of the
fallen cabinet.
Cara gave a panicked cry and came back to him. “What is that?”
The hissing and spattering. If it could make it over that barrier, it must be
dammed up several feet deep. “I don’t know, but you’ve got to get away.”
“Yes! Come on!” The girl pulled at his shoulders. He pushed with her, ignoring
the tearing pain in his leg. That moved him four or five inches; then he was stuck
more solidly than before. And now the heat was even more distracting than the
crushed leg. Robert’s mind hopped from one horror to the other, trying to keep
its sanity.
He looked across at his crying sister. “I’m sorry I made you cry, Cara.” She just
cried harder. “You’ve got to run now.”
She didn’t reply, but the crying stopped. She looked at him, uncomprehending,
then slid back from the furnace heat. Go! Go! But then she said, “I don’t feel
good,” and lay down just beyond his reach.
Robert looked back at the oozing rock. It had swamped the bottom of the
cabinet. Another inch or two and it would slop onto his little sister. He reached
out, snagged a long shard of — ceramic? — and wedged it against the glowing
tide.
There were more explosions, but not so loud. Up close there was just the smell

and sound of things cooking. He tried to remember how he had come to be here.
Someone had done this to him and Cara, and surely they must be listening now.
“Please,” he said into the glowing dark. “Please don’t do this to her. She’s just a
little girl.”
No reply, just the terrible sounds, and the pain. And then the strangest thing,
letters scrolling across his gaze:
Anonymous → Robert Gu:
Where is your little girl?
“Who is this? She’s right here. Unconscious. And I can’t move her out of the
way.”
Anonymous → Robert Gu:
I’m sorry.
He waited, saw nothing more.
“Please. Just tell the police. Don’t let her burn.”
But the silent watcher was gone. Cara lay unmoving. Can’t she feel the heat? It
took everything he had to hold the shard in place.
Then: “Professor Gu? Is that you?”
It was some pestering student! There were so many afterimages, he couldn’t be
sure, but someone was there, partly submerged in the molten ooze.
“It’s me, Zulfi Sharif, sir.”
That name was familiar, a weaselly arrogant student. But now his skin wasn’t
green. That meant something, didn’t it?
“I’ve been trying for some hours to call you, sir. It’s never been this bad before.
I… I fear I may have been truly hijacked. I’m so sorry.” He was mostly
submerged in the glowing rock. A ghost.

“You’re injured!” said the ghost.
“Call the police,” said Robert.
“Yes, sir! But where are you? Never mind, I see! I’ll get help straight — “
The glowing rock dribbled over Robert’s makeshift dam, onto his arm. He
descended into a pit of mindless pain.

Freedom on a Very Long Leash
The New Annex to Crick’s Clinic was less than five years old, but the spirit of
the place was straight out of the last century, when hospitals were great imposing
places where people had to go for a chance at survival. There was still some
need for such places: the most extreme intensive-care units were not something
you could pack into a first-aid box and sell to home users. And of course, there
were always tragic cases of incurable, debilitating diseases; some small portion
of humanity might always end up in extended-care nursing homes.
The New Annex satisfied certain other needs. Those occurred to Lieutenant
Colonel Robert Gu, Jr., every day when he drove onto the hospital grounds.
Every day since the debacle at UCSD, he’d pull into the Crick’s traffic circle, get
out, and look down along the cliffs and beaches toward La Jolla. The clinic was
just a short hike up the hill from some of the most fashionable resort properties
in the world. Just a few miles inland were the biotech labs that ringed UCSD,
perhaps the most prestigious source of medical magic in the world. Of course,
those labs could have been on the other side of the world for all that their
location made any real difference. But psychologically and traditionally, this
joint nearness to resort luxury and magical cure was a lure for the very richest of
the very ill.
Bob Gu’s wife, daughter, and father were not stuck here because they were rich.
Once you walked past the imposing — and totally real — main entrance, you
had privacy. In this case, the privacy was a combination of the clinic’s basic
design and the fact that Uncle Sam had taken a special interest in certain
patients.
What better place to keep sensitive cases hidden from contact than in a resort
hospital. The press flitted around beyond the walls and speculated — without
having grounds for a civil-liberties complaint. It could be a very good cover.
Bob hesitated just outside the main entrance.
Oh Alice! For years, he had lived in fear that JITT would take her. For years, he
and she had fought about the limits of duty and honor, and the meaning of
Chicago. Now the long-imagined worst had happened… and he found himself
quite unprepared. He visited her every day. The doctors were not encouraging.

Alice Gu was stuck under more layers of JITT than these guys had ever seen. So
what did they know? Alice was conscious. She talked to him, desperate
gibberish. He held her in his arms and begged her to come back. For unlike Dad
and Miri, Alice was not a federal detainee. Alice was a prisoner in her own
mind.
○
Today Bob had an official assignment at Crick’s. The last of the detainee
interrogations — that is, the last of the debriefings — were complete. Dad was
scheduled to be awake by noon, Miri an hour later. Bob could spend some time
with them, in the virtual company of Eve Mallory, a DHS officer who fronted for
the investigation teams.
At 1200 hours, Bob was standing in front of a very old-fashioned-looking
wooden door. By now he knew that such things were never faked at Crick’s. And
he’d have to turn the doorknob if he wanted to go in.
Eve → Bob:
We’re especially interested in this interview, Colonel. But keep it
short. Stick to the points in our memo.
Bob nodded. For a moment he didn’t know who he was most angry at, his father
or the jerks from DHS. He contented himself with pulling the door open without
knocking, and stepping abruptly into the hospital suite.
Robert Gu, Sr., was pacing the windowless room like a caged teenager. You’d
never guess he’d recently had one leg crushed and the other fractured; the docs
were good at fixing that kind of thing. As for the rest, well, his burns were
hidden by medical pajamas.
The old man’s gaze snapped up as Bob came in the room, but his words were
more desperate than angry. “Son! Is Miri okay?”
Eve → Bob:
Speak up, Colonel. You can tell him everything about your daughter.
“… Miri is fine, Dad.” He waved at the plush chairs by the table at the side of
the suite.

But the old man just kept bouncing around the room. “Thank God, thank God.
The last I remember was the heat and lava crawling toward her.” He looked
down at his pajamas, and suddenly seemed very distracted by what he saw.
“You’re at Crick’s in La Jolla, Dad. Miri wasn’t hurt in the fire. Your left arm
was pretty much destroyed.” The flesh had burned down to the bone in places,
burned all the way through the lower forearm.
Robert Senior touched the loose sleeve. “Yes, the doctors told me.” He turned
and dropped into one of the chairs. “That’s about all they’ve told me. You’re sure
Miri’s okay? You saw her?”
The old man never behaved like this. There was strain all around his eyes. Or
maybe he’s just reacting to the look on my face. Bob sat down across from this
father. “I’ve seen her. I’ll be talking to her later this afternoon. Her worst
problem is some mental confusion about what happened in the labs.”
“Oh.” Then more softly, “Oh.” He sat mulling the news, and then he was
fidgeting again. “How long have I been out? There’s so much you need to know,
Bob… Maybe you should get some of your law-enforcement buddies in here.”
Eve → Bob:
So he doesn’t remember the debrief? I didn’t think we were that
good.
“There’s no need, Dad. There maybe follow-up questioning about particular
points, but we’ve dredged up all the dirty little secrets. You’ve been under
interrogation for several days.”
His father’s eyes widened slightly. After a moment, he gave a nod. “Yeah, all
those weird dreams… So that means you know about, about my own problems?”
“Yes.”
Robert looked away. “There are strange bad guys out there, Bob. The Mysterious
Stranger — the one who hijacked Zulfi Sharif — he was on my case all the time.
I’ve never known anyone who could manipulate me as he did. Can you imagine
someone riding on your shoulder all the time, telling you what to do?”
Eve → Bob:

Just as well not to follow up on the Rabbit.
Bob nodded. Rabbit — that was the name they had pried out of the Indo-
Europeans — might be something new under the sun. Rabbit had compromised
the SHE. Scenario-building within the DHS and USMC had actually been in
support of Rabbit. The Indians and the Europeans and the Japanese had a lot to
answer for, but Rabbit’s scam might never have been detected if they hadn’t
launched their revocation attack against the creature. But how had Rabbit
managed its trick? What else could it do?
Those were burning questions, but not ones to discuss with your trai-torous
father. “We’re taking care of the loose ends, Dad. Meantime, you have results
and consequences to catch up on.”
“Yes. Consequences.” Robert’s right hand played nervously with the chair’s fine
upholstery. “Prison?” The words came out softly, almost a request.
Eve → Bob:
No way. We want this guy running loose.
“No jail time, Dad. Officially, you and your pals were part of a campus
demonstration that got wildly out of hand. Less officially — well, the rumor
we’re peddling is that you helped stop terrorist lab sabotage.” That would be
another job for the ever-useful Friends of Privacy.
Robert shook his head. “Stopping the bad guys, that part was Miri’s idea.”
“Yes, it was.” He gave his father a stony look. “I was officer of the watch that
night.”
Eve → Bob:
Careful, Colonel. But the warning was empty. The interrogation strategists
had agreed that Robert should learn part of this. The only problem was how to
tell Dad without putting a fist into his face.
“Here? In San Diego?”
Bob nodded. “For CONUS Southwest, but all our action was here. Alice was my

top analyst that night.” He hesitated, trying to hold down his rage. “Did you ever
guess that it was Alice who kept me from booting your ass out of the house?”
“I — ” He swept his hand through unruly hair. “She always seems so remote.”
“Do you know what JITT stick is, Dad?”
An abrupt nod: “Yes. Carlos Rivera gets stuck in Chinese. Is he okay?” The old
man looked up and his face turned ashen. “Alice?”
“Alice collapsed right in the middle of your adventure. We have good evidence
that the — “
Eve → Bob:
No details, please.
Bob continued with barely a hesitation, “She’s still stuck.”
“Bob… I never meant her any harm. I was just so desperate. But maybe, maybe I
set her up.” He looked into Bob’s eyes and then away.
“We know, Dad. It came out in your debrief. And yes, you did set her up.” DHS
had investigated the Gu home and personal logs as much as they had anything at
UCSD; they even had pictures of the bot Dad had used in the front bathroom.
But we still don’t know exactly what it did. India and Japan and Europe blamed
Rabbit, and Rabbit had been reduced to rumors and unreadable chunks of stale
cache.
Eve → Bob:
Heh. We’ll figure it out. A network attack on a bio-prepped victim
— that’s a technology that’s way too interesting to ignore.
Dad’s head was bowed. “I’m sorry. I’m so sorry.”
Bob stood up abruptly. It was something of an achievement that his voice came
out calm and steady. “You’ll be out of here later today. Meantime, get something
to wear and catch up with the outside world. For a while, you’ll still live with us
in Fallbrook. We want you to take up… right where you left off. I’ll tell Miri
about Alice — “

“Bob, it won’t work. Miri could never forgive — “
“That’s probably true. But she’s going to get the abbreviated version. After all,
your part in the attack on Alice is circumstantial. And it’s hidden behind security
that even Miri Gu is unlikely to penetrate. I… strongly suggest… that you don’t
spell things out for her.”
And so Lieutenant Colonel Robert Gu, Jr., had performed the duty that he’d been
assigned here. And now he could get out. He walked across the room, reached
for the door. Something made him turn and look back.
Robert Gu, Sr., was watching with anguish in his eyes. It was a look Bob had
seen before, on other faces. There had been times over the years, when
youngsters in his command had fucked totally up. Young people get desperate.
Young people do terrible, foolish, selfish things — sometimes with terrible
consequences.
But this is my old man! There was no desperation, no inexperience that could
excuse him.
And yet… Bob had watched the CDC team’s video as they followed Sharif’s
direction down into the labs. He had seen his father and daughter lying on the
floor, just beyond the UP/Ex crater. He had seen the way Robert’s arm was
extended, how it dammed the curdling stone just inches from Miri’s face. And
so, despite the old man’s monstrous fuckup, there was still something left to say:
“Thanks for saving her, Dad.”
○
“Take up just where you left off,” Bob had said. At Fairmont High, that was
almost feasible. Juan and Robert had already taken their written final exams,
then been out of action through Christmas and New Year’s. Now they were back,
and just in time for what most students considered the scariest part of the
semester: the Parents’ Night demonstration of their team projects. Problems of
life and death and horrid guilt devolved to worrying about making a fool of
oneself in front of some children and their parents.
Amazingly, Juan Orozco was still talking to him. Juan didn’t know quite what
had happened at UCSD. His memories had been gutted even more systematically

than Miri’s. Now he was piecing things together from the news, trying his best to
separate the truth from Friends of Privacy lies.
“I don’t remember anything after Miri and I got to campus. And the police are
still holding what I wore. I can’t even see the last few minutes of my diary!” The
kid waved his arms with the same desperation Robert had seen in him the first
day they met.
Robert patted his shoulder. “They still have Miri’s log, too.”
“I know! I asked her.” Tears welled up in the boy’s eyes. “She doesn’t remember
either. We were getting to be friends, Robert. We wouldn’t have gone after you
together if she couldn’t trust me.” Sure.
“Well, now she treats me like when we first met — pushing me away. She thinks
I must have chickened out and that’s why she had to find you by herself. And
maybe I was chicken. I don’t remember!”
Lena → Juan, Xiu:
Give her time, Juan. Miri’s distracted by what’s happened,
especially to her mother. I think she blames herself for that, and
maybe all of us. I know you wouldn’t chicken out.
Lena → Xiu:
But why he’s asking the SOB for comfort is beyond me.
Juan looked away from Robert for a moment, gradually seemed to get himself
back together.
Robert gave the boy an awkward pat on the back. Comforting others was
definitely not part of his former resume. “She’ll come around, Juan. She didn’t
call you a coward when we were underground. She was very worried about you.
Just give her some time.” He cast around for some distraction. “Meantime, do
you want to waste all the work we put in this semester? What about the kids in
Boston and down South? We have to catch up on our demo preparation.”
Lena → Xiu:
Can you believe this jerk? All he wants is to trick some more help
out of the boy.

Robert’s attempt at humor was feeble, but Juan looked up at Robert and gave a
creditable smile. “Yes. Gotta keep track of the important things!”
○
Bob and Miri didn’t come to Fairmont High for the vocational-track demos. At
least they weren’t physically visible — and Robert could tell that Juan Orozco
was searching hard.
“Miri’s at Crick’s Clinic tonight, Juan. Her mother should be coming home from
the hospital.” Bob had seemed just as happy that Robert had another
commitment this evening.
The boy brightened. “But maybe she’ll peek in here, right?”
In fact this was rather a big deal for Fairmont, but not for good reasons. The
popular press had built an enormous pile of speculation around the events at
UCSD, and Friends of Privacy lies surrounded and embedded those speculations
in conspiracies unending. The rumors contaminated everything and everyone
associated with that night. Robert had dredged the public record — first to try to
discover what had happened to him that night under UCSD, and then to see what
people thought had happened. Robert and the cabal showed up in most of the
theories, often as the picaresque heroes Bob had mentioned. But there were other
theories. Robert had never heard of Timothy Huynh, but there were journalists
who claimed that Huynh and Robert had engineered everything that happened in
the riot and the underground!
Robert had become very good at blocking paparazzi mail, but the notoriety was
blowing over; his ratings were declining with a half-life of about five days.
Nevertheless, he spent a lot of time at Fairmont High, where the school rules
banned the most intrusive visibles.
Tonight, at the demos, that ban was in force. The bleachers were jammed with
ticketed visitors — families of students and their guests, including virtual
presences. Most of these people had no interest in Robert Gu. But if you looked
at the network stats, a lot of people were invisibly watching.
The vocational program was not the gem of Fairmont High. Most of these kids
could not master the latest, cutting-edge applications (and most of the retread

students were even less competent). On the other hand, Chumlig had asserted in
an unguarded moment that parents preferred the vocational demos, mainly
because they made more sense to them than what other children were doing.
The teams were duos and trios, but they were allowed to use solutions dredged
from all over the world. Demo night didn’t begin until after sunset, so meshing
overlays with reality would be relatively easy. Chumlig wouldn’t have given the
regular students such a crutch. Those demos lasted two days — and would not
begin until a week after the vocational-track students had done their best. That
was a kindly interval, a week for the vocational students to bask in their
achievements.
Tonight, the audience sat on the west side of the soccer field, leaving the east
free for whatever grandiose imagery might be created.
Robert sat with Juan Orozco right down on the sidelines, with the other
performers. They all knew the order of their execution, er, performance. Their
private views hung little signs over the field showing how much time remained
in the current demo and who was up next. There had been no democratic
choosing of the performance order. Louise Chumlig and the other teachers had
their own ideas, and they ruled. Robert smiled to himself. In this, his old people-
sense hadn’t deserted him. Even without knowing the details of each project, he
knew who had a strong project and who did not. He knew who was the most
frightened of getting out in public and in person… So did Chumlig. Her play
order was an orchestration, exercising each kid to his or her limits.
Amazingly, that ordering also produced a pretty good show.
The Radner twins started out. For these two, the east side of the campus was not
enough. They had some kind of wacky suspension bridge — it looked like the
Firth of Forth Railway Bridge, but scaled up — that put down steel caissons on
each side of the bleachers, and then climbed higher and higher into the northeast
till it broke into the departing daylight. Seconds passed — and the construction
reappeared out of the southwest, their nineteenth-century masterpiece making a
virtual orbit of the Earth. The climax was the roaring passage of vast, steam-
powered trains across the sky. The bleachers shook with the apparent power of
the locomotives.
“Hey!” said Juan, and gave Robert a nudge. “That’s new. They must have

figured out some of the building maintenance protocols.” If the Radners had not
been targeted by the Library Riot rumor mill before, they were now. Robert
guessed that would please the twins just fine.
Most of the demos were arty, visual things. But there were also students who had
built gadgets. Doris Schley and Mahmoud Kwon had built a ground-effect
vehicle that could walk up the steps of the bleachers. They tipped it over the top;
there was an explosion of sound, and then it touched down without breaking
anything. Juan stood up from his place at the bottom of the bleachers to turn and
watch with his own eyes. He cheered Schley and Kwon, then plunked himself
back down. “Wow, a ground-effect parachute. But I bet Ms. Chumlig doesn’t
give’m more than a B.” His voice rose into a standard Louise Chumlig imitation:
” ‘What you did was scarcely more than off-the-shelf engineering.’” But he was
still grinning. They both knew that a B was better than what most of the image
plays were going to get.
There were even kids who tried for the cutting edge, projects that seemed a little
like what Miri said her friends did. There were two new-materials demos, an
extreme elastic band, and some kind of water filter. The elastic was not
spectacular — until you realized there was no trick imagery. Two boys that
Robert hardly knew did the demo. They stood twenty feet apart, swinging a large
doll between them. The mannikin was suspended from a strand of their magical
glop. The strand wasn’t simply a strong composite. Somehow the boys could
change its physical characteristics by the way they squeezed the ends.
Sometimes if behaved like a giant spring, whipping the doll back to the center
line. Other times, it stretched like taffy, and they swung the dummy in wide arcs.
Their demo got the biggest cheers of all.
On the other hand, the water-filter demo was just a magnified image of a garden
hose feeding into the filter. Above them, the students had floated an enormous
graphic that showed just how their programmable zeolite could search for user-
specified impurities. There were no sound effects, and the graphics were slow-
moving and crude. Robert looked up into the sky and then back at the girls.
“They’re going to get an A, aren’t they?”
Juan rocked back on his elbows. He was smiling, but enviously. “Yeah. It’s the
sort of thing Chumlig likes.” And then his basic honesty forced him to add, “Lisa
and Sandi never bother to polish their graphics, but I heard they’ve got a buyer
for that water filter. I bet they’re the only vocational kids who make real money

off their demo.”
○
“We’re next, kiddo,” said Robert.
The only evidence that Juan understood was the way his gaze fixed on their
private clock.
Xiu → Juan:
You’ll do fine, Juan.
Juan → Xiu:
Is Miri watching?
Juan and Robert were last, the only part of the schedule that was really beyond
Chumlig’s control. That had not been due to any Juan/Robert cleverness. It had
been a consequence of the fact that their demo involved outside groups who had
their own scheduling problems.
Juan hesitated a second more. Then he was running out onto the soccer field,
waving up a phantom stage parallel to and facing the bleachers. Their performers
filed in from both sides of the stage. The imagery was subdued, with no
impossibilities. These were real people and real musical instruments, as Juan’s
magnified voice explained to the audience.
“Hello, hello, hello!” Juan was huckster enthusiastic, and — to Robert’s ears —
clearly panicked out of his mind. Robert could have handled the emcee role, or
they could have recorded this spiel, maybe have had Juan lip-synch it — but that
was just another way to lose points with Chumlig. So Juan made do with his
live, cracking voice and words that came out with awkward pauses and forced
bravado. “Ladies and gentlemen! Meet the Orchestra of the Americas, created
especially for you this evening from the Charles River High School orchestra
and chorus, cheapnet live from Boston and — ” he waved to his left ” — the
Gimnasio Clasico de Magal-lanes, also cheapnet live but from Punta Arenas,
Chile!”
Both sides of the stage were full now, two hundred teenagers in school uniforms
of red on the north and checkered green on the south: students who had their

own “far cooperation” requirements to satisfy. Altogether they comprised parts
of two choruses and two orchestras, seven thousand miles apart, with only
cheapnet in between. Persuading them to try this scheme had been a miracle in
itself. Success would look mundane to outsiders, yet failure was a real
possibility. Well, things didn’t go too badly in rehearsal.
“And now — ” Juan grabbed for still greater import” — and now, ladies and
gentlemen, the Orchestra of the Americas will perform their very own adaptation
of Beethoven’s EU Anthem, with lyrics by Orozco and Gu, and network
synchrony by Gu and Orozco!” He gave a hammy bow and ran back to the
sidelines to sit by Robert. Sweat was streaming down his face, and he looked
pale.
“You did good, kid,” said Robert.
Juan just nodded, shaking.
The hybrid orchestra began to play. Now it was up to these kids and Robert’s
jitter algorithm. The sounds of cellos and basses rose from the young musicians
in Boston and from the other end of the world. The kids’ adaptation had a faster
beat than the usual EU style. And every note came across hundreds of hops of
randomly changing networkery, with delays that could vary by several hundred
milliseconds.
There was the same synchronization problem that had made Winnie’s choir at
the library such a noisy affair.
Juan’s lyrics climbed up, the chorus from the north singing his English version,
and the one from the south his Spanish. Their student collaborators had created a
flexible work with its own conductor interface; that helped some. Plus they were
surprisingly good musicians and singers. But the performance still needed the
magic of the adaptive delays that Robert’s scheme injected into the transmissions
(well, okay, and maybe also the far deeper magic that was Beethoven’s).
Robert listened. His contribution was not perfect. In fact, this was worse than the
rehearsals. Too many people were watching, and too suddenly. He’d been afraid
this might happen. The problem was not bandwidth. He glanced at the variance
plot he had put in his private view. It showed the presence of several million
people suddenly observing, grabbing resources so fast that they confused his
poor little prediction program — and changed the nature of what was observed.

And yet, the synch survived. The hybrid did not fragment.
Ten seconds to go. The performance hit some slightly ragged crescen-dos, and
then, by some miracle, everything came together for the last two seconds. Juan’s
lyrics ended, and the central melody swept into silence.
The joint orchestra/chorus looked out at the audience. They were smiling, some
perhaps a little embarrassed — but they had brought it off!
There was applause, wildly enthusiastic from some quarters.
Poor Juan looked absolutely drained. Fortunately, he didn’t have to venture out
on the field to wind things up. The performers were making their bows and
trooping to the north and south ends of the stage — back to their respective
corners of the world. Juan’s smile was a little sickly as he waved to the local
audience. His voice came sideways to Robert. “Hey, I don’t care what grade it
gets. We did it and we’re done!”

The British Museum and the British Library
The kids rushed off the bleachers, only slightly impeded by the fact that Chumlig
& Co could review the evening and determine just who had been unacceptably
bumptious. Juan and Robert were slower, hanging with the other demo students
and exchanging congratulations. Grades for the demos wouldn’t be available for
another twenty hours or so. They would have plenty of time to agonize over their
failings. Nevertheless, Louise Chumlig looked quite cheerful, giving each
student her congratulations — and deflecting all manner of questions about
whether this or that deficit should truly be of any grading significance.
Still no sign of Miri or Bob. Robert’s attention was filled with the kids and
Chumlig and Juan Orozco — this last person alternating between hysterical
relief and the conviction of failure.
So it was without forewarning that Robert found himself face-to-face — almost
nose-to-nose — with Winston Blount. Behind the former dean, Tommie Parker
was standing hand-in-hand with Xiu Xiang. Now, that was surely the strangest
pairing to come out of this adventure! The little guy was grinning ear-to-ear. He
flashed a thumbs-up at Robert.
But for the moment, Blount had all his attention. Robert had seen little of
Tommie and Winnie since that night at UCSD. They and Carlos had spent
several days at Crick’s Clinic. As far as Robert could tell, certain deals had been
made, much as in his own case. And now they were loose. The official story was
just what Bob had said: The cabal activity had been a protest that got out of
hand, but they had never intended to damage laboratory equipment and they
were all terribly sorry for that. The unofficial tales of heroic sacrifice helped
explain why the university and the bio labs seemed happy not to pursue the
matter. If the Elder Cabal kept its collective mouth shut, there would be no
Consequences.
Just now there was an odd smile on Winnie’s face. He nodded to Juan and
reached out to shake Robert’s hand. “Even though I’ve dropped out of Fairmont,
I still I have family here. Doris Schley is my great-grandniece.”
“Oh! She did well, Winston!”

“Thank you, thank you. And you — Winnie hesitated. In years past, praise for
Robert Gu came from all quarters and it had often been used as a club to beat
down Winston Blount. ” — you wrote something wonderful there, Robert. Those
lyrics. I would never have imagined such a thing riding on Beethoven and in
English and Spanish. It was… art.” He shrugged, as if waiting for a sarcastic
putdown.
“It wasn’t my work, Winston.” And maybe this is a putdown, but I don’t mean it
that way. “Juan here did the lyrics. We collaborated all through the semester, but
on this I let him go, just critiqued the final effort. Honestly — and this Chumlig
character is the death of lies — honestly, Juan is responsible.”
“Oh?” Winnie rocked back, then really seemed to notice Juan. He reached over
to shake the boy’s hand. “It was beautiful, son.” And a sideways, still
incredulous, glance at Robert. “Do you know, Robert, in its way, that was as
good as what you did in the old days?”
Robert thought a second, listening to Juan’s lyrics with his imagination the way
he used to listen to his own poetry. No, I was better than that. Much better. But
not better like being in a different world. If the old Robert could have seen these
lyrics… well, the old Robert couldn’t abide second-raters. Given half an excuse,
he would have made sure that Juan’s art died aborning. “You’re right. Juan made
a beautiful thing.” He hesitated. “I don’t know what… the years have done,
Winston.”
Juan looked back and forth between them. There was the beginning of shining
pride on his face, though he seemed to guess that there were words unspoken
going between Winnie and Robert.
Winnie nodded. “Yes. Lots of things have changed.” The crowd was
diminishing, but that just meant that some of the kids thought they could run
around even faster. They were getting jostled by the flow of bodies and the ever
louder shouting and laughter. “So if you didn’t do the lyrics, what was your
contribution, Robert?”
“Aha! I did the time-lag synchronization.” As much as it could be done.
“Really?” Winnie was trying to be polite, but even after his own choir
experience, he didn’t seem especially impressed. Well, it had been a bit ragged.

Xiu → Lena:
For God’s sake, say something to him, Lena!
Lena → Xiu:
Buzz off, you!
Xiu → Lena:
Then I will speak for you.
After a few more pleasantries, Winnie took off in the direction of the Schley
family, Tommie and Xiu Xiang in tow. But Robert noticed a line of golden text
drifting out behind Xiang.
Xiu → Robert:
That was great, Robert. Juan was oblivious of Xiang’s silent message. “Dean
Blount didn’t understand your part in our project, did he?”
“No. But he liked what he did understand. It doesn’t matter. You and I both did
better than we thought we could.”
“Yes, we really did.”
Juan led him back along the bleachers. Even if Bob and Miri weren’t here,
Juan’s own parents were. Greetings and congratulations all around, though the
Orozcos still didn’t know what to make of Robert Gu.
○
A clot OF family and friends remained on the soccer field for some time. More
than anything else, the parents seemed faintly surprised by their children. They
loved the little klutzes, but they thought they knew their limits. Somehow
Chumlig had transformed them — not into supermen, but into clever creatures
who could do things the parents themselves had never mastered. It was a time
for pride and a little uneasiness.
Miri was still out of sight. Poor Juan. And I hope Alice got home okay. One-
armed, he wasn’t quite good enough to check that in mid-flight.

Robert pressed into the densest part of the crowd, the folks swirling close around
Louise Chumlig. She looked happy and tired, and mostly she denied
responsibility. “I just showed my students how to use what they have and what
the world has.”
He reached across, managed to catch her hand. “Thanks.”
Chumlig looked up at him, a crooked smile on her face. She held on to his hand
for a moment. “You! My very strangest child. You were almost the reverse of the
problem I had with the others.”
“How’s that?”
“For everyone else, I had to make them reach out to learn what they were. But
you… first you had give up what you had been.” Her smile was fleetingly sad.
“Be sorry for what you lost, Robert, but be happy with what you are.”
All along, she knew! But someone else had her attention, and she was gaily
assuring them all that the rest of the school year would be even more exciting
than what had gone before.
○
Robert left Juan and the others when speculation turned to what the regular
demos would be like. The kids didn’t want to believe that they could be outdone,
not after tonight.
Robert spotted two familiar figures on his walk back to the traffic circle. “I
thought you were with Winston,” he said.
“We were,” said Tommie, “but we came back. Wanted to congratulate you on
your music-synch gimmick.”
Xiu Xiang nodded agreement. Of the two, only she was wearing. A Congrats
logo floated out from her. Poor Tommie was still lugging around his laptop,
though whatever remained inside surely belonged to the secret police.
“Thanks. I’m proud of it, but emphasize the word ‘gimmick.’ No one really
needs to synch manual music across thousands of miles of cheapnet. And
basically, I just took advantage of routing predictabilities plus knowledge of the

music being played.”
“Plus some timing analysis of the individual performers. Right, right?” said
Tommie.
“Yes.”
“Plus some counter-jitter you inserted,” said Xiu.
Robert hesitated. “You know, it was fun.”
Tommie laughed. “You should do some ego surfing. Your hack was noticed.
Back when I was young, you could have got a patent off it. Nowadays — “
Xiu patted Tommie’s shoulder. “Nowadays, it should be worth a decent grade in
a high-school class. You and I — we have things to learn, Thomas.”
Tommie made a grumbling noise. “She means I should be learning to wear.” He
glanced at the young-looking woman. “I never dreamed that X. Xiang would end
up saving my life. But of course she did it by getting us all arrested!”
Lena → Xiu:
Parker is afraid to try new things, even when he brags about the
future.
They walked in silence for a few steps. There were more golden words from
Xiang; she was getting better and better at silent messaging.
Xiu → Robert:
<sigh/>Tommie is old, and all the medicine hasn’t helped him that
much. He’s afraid to try new things.”
Robert stifled a startled glance at the woman. Since when had the geek become a
parlor shrink?… But she could be right about Tommie.
Tommie was surely oblivious of all the sming, but a familiar crafty grin was
spreading across his face.
“What?” Robert finally said.

“Just thinking. Our UCSD op was the biggest and most dangerous I’ve ever been
part of. We got used, yeah. But you know, it was like of lot of these modern
whatsits — these affiliances. We contributed, and in one way, we got what we
were aiming for.”
Robert thought of the Stranger’s promises. “How is that?”
“We nailed the Huertas Librareome Project.”
“But the library books are all consumed.”
Tommie shrugged. “I kind of like the Library Militant vision. The point is, we
terminally embarrassed Huertas.”
“That’s a triumph?”
They were walking along the traffic circle now, followed by a hopeful
automobile.
“Yup. You can’t stop progress, but we stopped Huertas long enough for other
events to come to our rescue.” He glanced at Robert. “You haven’t heard? You
wear all that fancy equipment and you can’t keep up with news.”
Tommie didn’t wait for a reply: “Y’see, Huertas was in such an awful rush for a
reason. It turns out, the Chinese were chewing up the British Museum and
Library faster than we ever guessed. And the Chinese have years of experience
in semi-nondestructive digitization. They’re positively gentle compared to
Huertas’s shredder operation. They made the San Diego effort look foolish, and
they even got haptic data off non-book exhibits. There’s clear sky between them
and everyone else, including the Google archives. Anyway, we stalled Huertas
by a few days, long enough that he can’t claim any sort of priority. And it was
long enough so that the Chinese were able to frost the cake.”
Tommie reached into his jacket and pulled out a three-inch-square piece of
plastic. “Here. A present for you, that cost me all of $19.99.”
Robert held up the dark plastic. It looked a lot like the diskettes he’d used on his
old PC at the turn of the century. He pointed a query at it. La-bels floated in the
air: Data Card. 128PB capacity. 97% in use. There was more, but Robert just
looked back at Tommie. “Do people still use removables like this?”

“Just paranoid propertarian old farts like me. It’s a nuisance to carry around, but
I have a reader right here in my laptop.” Of course. “The data is all online, along
with a lot of cross-analysis that the Chinese will be charging you extra for. But
even if you don’t have a card reader, I thought you’d be interested in holding this
in your own hot little hands.”
“Ah.” Robert peeked at the top directory. It was like standing on a very high
mountaintop. “So this is — ?”
“The British Museum and Library, as digitized and databased by the Chinese
Informagical Coalition. The haptics and artifact data are lo-res, to make it all fit
on one data card. But the library section is twenty times as big as what Max
Huertas sucked out of UCSD. Leaving aside things that never got into a library,
that’s essentially the record of humanity up through 2000. The whole premodern
world.”
Robert hefted the plastic card. “It doesn’t seem like very much.”
Tommie laughed. “Well, it’s not!”
Robert started to hand it back, but Tommie waved him off. “Like I said, it’s a
present. Put it on the wall where you can remind yourself that it’s all we ever
were. But if you really want to see it, just look on the net. The Chinese have it
pretty well meshed. And their special servers are really clever.”
Tommie stepped back and motioned to the car that was trailing them. The rear
door opened and he waved Xiu in ahead of him. For a weird instant Tommie
looked like an old rake with some sweet young thing. Just another image from
the past that had nothing to do with the truth.
“So Huertas is out of the shredding business, and the Chinese promise their
follow-ups will be even gentler than what they did to the British Library.
Imagine soft pinky robot hands, patiently picking over all the libraries and
museums of the world. They’ll be cross-checking, scanning for annotations —
giving whole new generations of academic types like Zulfi Sharif something to
hang their degrees on.” He waved at Robert. “Hi ho!”
○
It was almost midnight when Xiu Xiang got back to Rainbows End. Lena was

still up. She was in the kitchen, fixing some kind of snack. Lena’s osteoporosis
forced her to lean so far forward that her face was just a few inches off the table.
It looked strange, but the wheelchair and the kitchen’s design gave her plenty of
freedom to maneuver.
Xiu eased into the room, feeling entirely embarrassed. “Sorry for cutting you
out, Lena — “
The other twisted around to give her a direct look. There was a lopsided grin on
her face. “Hey, no problem. You young people need your privacy.” She waved
for Xiu to sit down and have something to eat.
“Yes. Well, Tommie isn’t really so young.” She felt a blush coming on. “I, um,
don’t mean physically. He wants to keep up with progress, but he just can’t cope
with everything that means.”
Lena shrugged. “Tommie’s mind is better than some.” She grabbed a sandwich
off her plate and gave it a munch.
“Do you think he’ll ever get his edge back?”
“Could be. Science marches on. And even if that doesn’t help in Parker’s case,
we can give him pushes in the right direction. A big part of his problem is that
life was too easy for him when he was young. He’s too ornery to try anything
that’s really hard for him.” She jabbed a hand in Xiu’s direction. “Eat up.”
Xiu nodded and reached for a sandwich. They had been over this before. In fact,
it had been such discussions that had made all the difference for a certain Dr. X.
Xiang. But maybe she had more on the ball than Tommie. Her chief problem in
the near future might be in avoiding government “job offers.”
Xiu bit into the sandwich. Peanut butter and jelly. But not bad really. “Have you
had a chance to do your thing with the various people we saw today?”
“Play shrink, you mean? Yeah, I reviewed your Epiphany log; I posted some
anonymous consults. The advice we gave Carlos Rivera was fine. He’s got an
ongoing problem, but that’s life. As for Juan, we’ve done our best there, at least
for the moment.”
Xiu smiled around a mouthful of peanut butter and jelly. It had taken her some

time to realize what a genius Lena was. After all, psychiatry was such a soft
specialty. Lena said little Miri loved to view her grandmother as a some kind of
female wizard. She claimed to know that even though the girl never announced
the fact. Now Xiu had realized Lena was everything Miri imagined, at least
metaphorically. I’ve never understood other people, but with Lena seeing out of
my eyes and chatting in my ear, I am learning.
There were still mysteries: “I don’t understand why your granddaughter is
pushing Juan away. Sure, the kids don’t remember what really happened in
Pilchner Hall, but we know they were coming to be friends. If we could only get
Miri’s logs” — what the government was still withholding.
Lena didn’t answer directly. “You know Alice is home from hospital?”
“Yes! I caught the fact from you, no details.”
“There won’t be any details. ‘Alice was sick and now she’s better.’ In fact, I’ve
known for a long time that Alice plays dice for her own soul. She nearly lost it
this time, and somehow that’s related to my ex-husband’s grand screwup at
UCSD. I think Alice will recover. That should help Juan with Miri.” Lena sat
back in her chair. Or rather, she let the chair tilt into a different posture. On her
own, Lena couldn’t really straighten up. “We’ve talked about this before. Miri
can be stubborn to the point of being an asshole. She inherited that trait from the
SOB, skipping a generation over Bob. And now that stubbornness has latched on
to some deep-down guilt: subconsciously Miri feels that she and Juan messed up
and did this terrible thing to Alice.”
“um, that doesn’t really sound like science, Lena.”
“I’m sparing you the technicalities.”
Xiu nodded. “You get results. There are people at Fairmont High who think I’m
some sort of human-relations genius. Me!”
Lena reached her hand a few inches across the table, as far as her twisted bones
could go. Xiu took the hand gently in her own. “We’ve made a good team,
haven’t we?” said Lena.
“Yes.” It wasn’t just Lena’s way with people. It wasn’t just saving Tom-mie and
his friends. There had been those dark days at the beginning of her time at

Fairmont, when she was sure she could never come back — and Lena wasn’t so
happy-go-lucky either. Together they had climbed into the daylight. Xiu looked
at the little old lady who was ten years younger than herself. Together, Lena and
I have become something rather remarkable. Apart… ?
“Lena, do you think I’ll ever be good at seeing into people the way you do?”
Lena shrugged and gave a little smile. “Oh, I don’t know.”
Xiu cocked her head, remembering little incidents here and there across the last
few months. Lena Gu almost never lied outright. She seemed to realize what that
would do to her credibility. But Lena could deceive, even in the face of a direct
question. “Do you know, Lena, when you say ‘oh, I don’t know’ and shrug —
that means you’re thinking ‘not in a million years?’”
Lena’s eyes widened. She gave Xiu’s hand a squeeze. “um. Well, there you go.
Maybe in this case it won’t take a million years!”
“Good. Because I want to tell you, Lena… I don’t think Robert is the SOB you
remember. I think he’s really changed.”
Lena’s hand slipped away from hers. “I take it back. In your case, a million years
may not be enough.”
Xiu reached out, but Lena’s hand was back in her lap. Never mind. There were
things that had to be said. “Robert was brutal in the beginning, but look how he
has helped Juan. I have a theory.” She flicked the Nature citation across the table
at Lena. This wasn’t really her own theory. “Robert has had the equivalent of
major trauma, the sort of thing that rebuilds a personality’s worldview.”
“You read too much crap science, Xiu. Leave that to us professionals.”
“It’s as if he’s been all unwound. He has his memories, but physically he’s just a
young man. He has a second chance to get things right. Can’t you see that,
Lena?”
Lena flinched at the words, then hunched forward even more. She was silent for
a long moment, staring down at her twisted body, her head swaying in gentle
negation. Finally she cranked her gaze up to Xiu’s. Something that might have
been a tear glinted in her eye. “You have a lot to learn, my girl.”

And with that Lena backed away from the table, her chair making an agile rise
and turn.” ‘Fraid I’m done for the evening.” She rolled off toward her bedroom.
Xiu took care of the dishes. Usually Lena insisted on doing the kitchen work.
“That’s something I can still do with my own hands,” she often said. Not tonight.
And if I were just a little more clever about people, thought Xiu, I might know
why.

The Missing Apostrophe
Zulfikar Sharif was no longer in the graduate program at Oregon State. Robert
encountered a very old-fashioned error message: “No longer a registered student,
no longer at OSU.” Even Sharif’s enum was a stub labeled “vacated.” That was a
little scary. Robert hunted around. Worldwide, there were about a thousand
matches for “Z* Sharif.” None of the accessible ones were a good match. The
rest were people trying with various degrees of competence to keep their privacy.
But the Zulfi Sharif whom Robert sought was still a techno-bumpkin. After an
hour or two, Robert had tracked him down to the University of Kolkata.
Sharif was very subdued. “Professor Blandings dimissed me.”
“From the OSU graduate program? In my time, we professors were not so
powerful.”
“Professor Blandings had help from your authorities. I spent several weeks
trying to explain myself to some very insistent U.S. government agents. They
couldn’t believe that I was an innocent who had succeeded in being multiply
hijacked.”
“Hmm.” Robert looked away from Zulfi Sharif, at the city all around them. The
day looked hot and muggy. Just beyond their small table, crowds swirled, young
people laughing and smiling. The skyline had its share of tall and ivory towers. It
was the Kolkata of modern Indian vision. For a moment he was tempted to open
a second, naysayer channel and try to figure out what was real and what was
hype. No, concentrate on figuring what part of Zulfi Sharif is real and what is
hype. “I suppose the best evidence the cops think you’re innocent is that they let
you return to India.”
“Indeed so, though sometimes I wonder if I’m not just a fish on a very long
line.” He gave a wan smile. “I really did want to do my thesis about you,
Professor Gu. In the beginning, it was academic desperation. You were the
trophy I could sell to Annie Blandings. But the more we talked, the more I — “
“How much was you, Sharif? How many — ?”
“I wondered that too! There were at least two besides myself. It was a most

frustrating experience, sir, especially at the beginning. I would be in the middle
of speaking with you, going through the questions that I knew would impress
Professor Blandings — and then at a whack I was a mere bystander!”
“So you could still hear and see?”
“Yes, often that was so! So often that I think the others were using me to
generate some questions for inspiration, and then warping them to their own
purposes. In the end — and my confessing this to your police was a great
mistake — in the end, I came to treasure these bizarre interventions. My dear
hijackers were asking questions I would never have conceived. So I hung around
throughout your Librareome conspiracy, and in the end I looked the perfect
foreign provocateur.”
“And if you hadn’t been there the night of the riot, my Miri would have died.
What did you see, Zulfi?”
“What? Well, I had been most thoroughly locked out that evening. The other
players on my persona had agendas that did not include any discussion of
literature. But I kept trying to get through. The police claimed I never would
have succeeded without terrorist assistance. In any case, for a few seconds I
could see you lying there on the floor. You asked for my help. The lava was
creeping up against your arm…” He shivered. “In truth, I couldn’t see any more
than that.”
Robert remembered that conversation. It was one of the sharpest fragments in
the jumble.
The two of them, eight thousand miles apart, sat in silence for a few moments.
Then Sharif cocked his head quizzically. “Now I am well quit of my perilous
literary research. And yet, I cannot resist asking: You are at the beginning of
your new life, Professor. Can we expect something new under the sun? For the
first time in human history, a new Secret of the Ages?”
Ah. “You’re right, there is room for something more. But you know — some
secrets are beyond the expression of those who experience them.”
“Not beyond you, sir!”
Robert found himself smiling back. Sharif deserved the truth. “I could write

something, but it would not be poetry. I got a new life, but the Alzheimer’s
cure… it destroyed my talent.”
“Oh no! I had heard of Alzheimer failures, but I honestly never suspected you.
Thinking there might be another canto of the Secrets was about the only good
thing I still hoped to come out of this adventure. I am so sorry.”
“Don’t be too sorry. I wasn’t… a very nice person.”
Sharif looked down and then back at Robert. “I had heard that. In the days I
couldn’t get through to you, I interviewed your former colleagues at Stanford,
even Winston Blount when he wasn’t making conspiracies.”
“But — “
“It doesn’t matter, sir. I eventually realized that you had lost your sadistic edge.”
“Then surely you would have guessed the rest!”
“Do you think so? Do you think your talent and your malevolence were a
package deal?” Sharif leaned forward, engaged in a way that Robert had not seen
since their interviews of weeks before. “I… doubt that. But researching the issue
would be intriguing. For that matter, I have long wondered — and been too timid
to ask — what really changed in you? Were you a decent fellow from the time of
your dementia cure? Or was the change as in Dickens’ ‘A Christmas Carol,’ with
new experience making you kindlier?” He rocked back. “I could make such a
splendid thesis out of this!” His eyes swept back to Robert, questioning.
“No way!”
“Yes, yes,” said Sharif, nodding. “It is such a great opportunity that I almost
forgot my resolutions. And the first of those resolutions is no more activities that
get me mixed up with the security authorities.” He looked up, as if at unseen
watchers. “Do you hear that? I am clean, clean in body and soul and even in my
fresh fried clothes!” And then addressing Robert once more: “In fact, I have a
new academic major.”
“Oh?”
“Yes. It will take several semesters of prerequisite fulfillment, but that will be

worth it. You see, the University of Kolkata is starting a new department with
new faculty, real go-getters. We have a long way to go considering the
competition from the universities in Mumbai — but the people here have
funding, and they’re willing to take on fresh faces such as myself.” He grinned
enthusiasm at Robert’s puzzled look. “It’s our new Institute of Bollywood
Studies! A combination of cinema and literature. I’ll be studying the influence of
twentieth-century lit on the latest Indian arts. And much as I regret our lost
opportunities, Professor Gu, I am so happy to be in a major that will keep me out
of further trouble with the authorities!”
○
Robert was actually busy between semesters. His contrived synch hack had
raised him to the lowest level of guru-hood. He’d been noticed by a small
company called Comms-R-Us. In a way it was a traditional firm. It was old (five
years old), and it had three full-time employees. So it wasn’t as nimble as some
operations, but it had managed several innovations in concurrent
communications. Comms-R-Us had paid Robert to consult for a period of three
weeks. And though it was clear that the “consult” was mainly an opportunity for
Comms-R-Us to decide if Robert Gu had any future, Robert jumped at the
chance.
For the first time since he lost his marbles, he was creating something that others
valued.
Otherwise, things were not going entirely smoothly. Juan Orozco was gone; his
parents had taken him on vacation to Puebla, where they were visiting his
mother’s grandfather. Juan still showed up occasionally, but Miri was not talking
to him.
“I’m trying not to care, Robert. Maybe if I stop bothering her, Miri will let me
start over with her.” Nevertheless, Robert had the feeling the boy might have
camped out on their front steps if his parents had not dragged him away.
“I’ll talk to her, Juan. I promise.”
Juan had looked at him doubtfully. “But don’t make her think I put you up to it!”
“I won’t. I’ll choose the time carefully.”

Robert had decades of experience in choosing the right time to strike. This
should have been easy. Miri had wangled an Incomplete grade on her demo
project. That meant that when she finally did perform, at the end of the next
semester, she would have even higher standards to meet. For now, she was a
busybody around the house, mainly taking care of her mother. Alice Gu was a
ghost of her former self. The steel of the last fifteen weeks of their acquaintance
had been torn out of her. The result was… charming. More evenings than not,
Alice and Miri were down in the kitchen, attempting to make hard work out of
modern cookery. His daughter-in-law was distant, but her smile wasn’t the
meaningless reflex it had often seemed before.
Then Bob was out of town again, and Miri seemed to be busier than ever. Every
day, she had some news for him about her searches on burns and limb
rehabilitation. Real soon now he should use that as an excuse to set her straight
about Juan… and about himself.
○
Maybe tonight was the right night. Bob was still out of town. Alice had retired to
the ground-floor den shortly after dinner. None of Miri’s “board games” tonight.
They were fun, one of the nicer things about life since that terrible night at
UCSD — but tonight Robert had finally seen his way through some of his
Comms-R-Us problems. Working on them, he lost track of the time. When he
came up for air, he had some results, maybe things worth showing his
employers. What a good night!
Downstairs, a door slammed. His eyes were still on his work, but he heard Miri
come pounding up the stairs. She raced down the hallway and into her bedroom.
A few minutes later she came out. There was a knock on his bedroom door. “Hi
Robert, can I show you some things I discovered today?”
“Sure.”
She bounced into the room and grabbed a chair. “I found three more projects that
could help your arm.”
In fact, the medical condition of Robert Gu’s left arm was best characterized by
its absence. It was completely burned off at the lower forearm. There were two
places near the shoulder where all that was left was a strip of flesh. His

“prosthesis” was more like an old-style plaster cast. But interestingly, the medics
had passed on the opportunity to whack the thing off and fit him with some
modern miracle. Reed Weber — the physician’s assistant had resurfaced now
that the MDs needed someone to front for them — had explained the situation,
though perhaps not in quite the way the doctors would like: “You’re a victim of
the new field of ‘prospective medicine,’ Robert. You see, we have prosthetics
with five-finger motor control, and with almost the durability of a natural arm.
But they’re a little heavy and the sensor system is nowhere near the real thing.
On the other hand, there are clear trends in nerve-and bone-regeneration tech.
Even though no one knows quite how it will happen — or if it will happen —
the odds are that in eighteen months they’ll be able to grow out from what you
have now, into an effective natural arm. And the MDs are afraid that debriding
what’s left of your arm for a prosthesis might make the later solution much more
expensive. So for a while you are stuck with a solution that wouldn’t have
impressed your own grandfather.”
And Robert had nodded and not complained. Every day with this dead weight on
his shoulder was a small penance, a reminder of how close his foolishness had
come to destroying lives.
Miri was oblivious of all that. In fact, she had dismissed “prospective medicine”
as stupidity. Miri believed in making her own medical solutions. “So there are
these three teams, Robert. One of them has grown a complete monkey’s paw,
another is into whole-limb prosthesis, but very lightweight, and the third has
some improvements in neurocoding. I bet your Comms-R-Us friends would put
you up as a fast-track guinea pig. What do you think?”
Robert touched the plastic shell that held the remains of his arm. “Ah, I think a
deal involving a monkey’s paw is too risky for me.”
“No, no, you wouldn’t have a monkey’s paw. The monkey’s paw was just — ”
Then she got a Googling look. “Robert! I’m not talking about some old story.
I’m trying to help you. I want to more than ever. I owe you.”
Yeah, tonight was definitely the night to set her straight. “You don’t owe me.”
“Hey, I can’t remember it, but Bob told me what he saw. You put your arm in the
way of molten rock. You held it there.” Her face twisted with imagined pain.
“You saved me, Robert.”

“I saved you, kiddo. Yes. But I created the problem. I played ball with something
evil.” Or something very strange.
“You were desperate. I knew that. I just didn’t know how deep things would get.
So we both made a mess.”
It really was time to get down on his knees and beg forgiveness. But first let her
know why this was beyond forgiveness. The words were hard to say: “Miri, you
made a mess trying to fix things. But I… I was the guy who set up your mother
for what practically killed her.” There. It was said.
Miri sat very still. After a moment, her gaze fell. She said softly, “I know.”
Now they both were very still. “Bob told you?”
“No. Alice did.” She looked up. “And she told me they still can’t figure out how
what you did could have brought her down. It’s okay, Robert.”
Then abruptly, she was crying. And Robert did get on his knees. His
granddaughter threw her arms around his neck. She was in full bawl now, her
body shaking. She pounded his back with her fists.
“I’m so sorry, Miri. I — “
Miri’s wail got even louder, but she stopped beating on him. After half a minute,
her weeping trailed off into choking sobs, and then silence. But she still held on
to him. Her words were halting and muffled. “I just found out that… Alice is…
Alice is back in Training.”
Oh.
“She’s not even recovered!” Miri was sobbing again.
“What does your father say?”
“Bob is out of touch tonight.”
“Out of touch?” In this day and age?
Miri pushed him back. She started to wipe her face on her sleeve, then grabbed

from the box of tissues he set beside her. “Really out of touch. Tactical blackout.
D-Don’t you follow the news, Robert?”
“um.”
“Read between the lines. Bob is off somewhere making places and things glow
in the dark.” She wiped energetically at her face, and her voice returned to
something like its usual tones. “Okay, maybe not literally. Bob talks that way
when he has to do things he really doesn’t want to do. But I watch the rumor
mills and I watch Bob and Alice. Between the three I’m a pretty good guesser.
Sometimes Bob is out of touch, and I read about something wonderful or
something terrible happening in another country. Sometimes Alice goes into
Training, and I know that somebody needs help or else very bad things may
happen. Right now Bob is away and Alice is back in Training.” She hid behind
her hands for a moment, then resumed wiping her face. “My g-guess is that the
top rumors are right. Something awful happened at the Library Riot, worse than
the GenGen takeover. Now all the superpowers are running scared. They think
someone has figured how to crack their security. A-Alice almost admitted that
tonight. That was her excuse!”
Robert sat down again, but on the edge of his chair. His great confession had
vanished into the abyss. “You should talk to Bob when he gets back.”
“I will. And he’ll argue with her. You’ve heard that yourself. But in the end he
can’t stop her.”
“This time, maybe he can go over her head, or get the doctors to back him up.”
Miri hesitated, seemed to relax a fraction. “Yes. This time is different… I-I’m
glad we can talk, Robert.”
“Any time, kiddo.”
But then she was quiet.
Finally, Robert said, “Are you conspiring, or just Googling?”
Miri shook her head. “N-Neither. I tried to call someone… but they’re not
answering.”

Ah! “You know, Miri, Juan is in Puebla visiting his great-grandfather. He may
not be wearing all the time.”
“Juan? I wouldn’t call him. He’s not very bright, and when the crunch came in
Pilchner Hall, he was useless.”
“You can’t know that!”
“I know I was down in the tunnels by myself.”
“Miri, I’ve talked to Juan almost every day since I started at Fairmont. He
wouldn’t let you down. Think back to the times you do remember. You two must
have conspired a lot to keep track of me. I’ll bet he played fair. He could be your
good friend, another person you could talk to.”
For once, Miri’s chin came down. “You know I can’t talk to him about these
things. I couldn’t talk to you, except you already know.”
“That’s true. There are things you can’t tell him. But… I think he deserves better
from you.”
Miri’s eyes flicked up to meet his, but she didn’t speak.
“Remember how I told you, you remind me of your great-aunt Cara?”
Miri nodded.
“You were happy to learn that. But I think you know how I treated Cara. It was
like the Ezra Pound Incident, over and over again, for years. I never had a
chance to make up for that; she died when she was not much older than Alice is
now.”
Tears were back in Miri’s eyes, but she held the tissues tight on her lap. “I went
through my whole life like that, Miri. I married a wonderful lady who loved me
very much. Lena put up with more than I ever dumped on Cara, and for years
longer. Even after I drove her away, you know how she helped me at Rainbows
End. And now she is dead, too.” Robert looked down, and for a moment all he
could think of was lost opportunities. Where was I? Oh: “So… I think you owe
Juan. Dumping on him isn’t in the same league as my screwups. But you still
have a chance to set things right.”

He looked at Miri. Her shoulders were hunched. She was shredding the tissues
she held in her hands. “Just think about it, okay, Miri? I didn’t mean to get
carried away.”
Finally, she spoke: “Have you ever broken a solemn promise, Robert?”
Where did that come from? But before he could get his mouth in gear, Miri
continued:
“Well, I just did!” And with that, she grabbed the box of tissues and ran from the
room.
“Miri!” By the time he got into the hall, Miri had disappeared into her room.
Robert dithered for a moment. He could go down and pound on her door. Or
maybe he should message her.
He stepped back into his room, turned — and saw the golden light on the table,
right beside where Miri had been sitting. It was an enum, granting some kind of
limited message capability. But he already had that and more for Miri. He
opened the golden enum and looked inside.
This one was for Lena Llewelyn Gu.
○
Robert sat beside the enum for almost half an hour. He studied it. He studied the
documentation. It was exactly what he thought. Lena lives.
There was no physical address, but he could write her a simple message. It took
him only two hours to do so. Less than two hundred words. They were the most
important words that Robert Gu had ever written.
Robert couldn’t sleep that night. Morning came, then afternoon.
There was no reply.
○

Epilogue
○
Six weeks passed. Robert was watching the news more now; he had learned that
the world can bite you. He and Miri compared notes on what they saw. The raids
at the edge of the world were allegedly over. Rumors held that little had been
discovered. Rumors — and some real news — spoke of scandals in the EU,
Indian, and Japanese intelligence services. All the Great Powers remained very
nervous about insert-your-favorite-crazyass-theory-here.
On the home front, Bob was back! Robert and Miri took that to mean that some
disaster theories were much less likely. Others remained scarily viable. Indeed,
Bob blew his stack when he learned about Alice. Things got very tense around
the house. Both Robert and Miri sensed heartbreaking battles hiding behind the
looks and silences. Miri had years of putting together the clues. Her best guess
was that Bob had appealed to the doctors, that he had complained far up the
chain of command. None of it mattered. Alice remained in Training.
Somewhere in all of this, Juan returned from Puebla. Miri didn’t have much to
say about him, but they were talking. The boy was smiling more.
From Lena there was… silence. She lived. His messages didn’t bounce and her
enum remained accessible. It was like talking into an infinite void. And Robert
did keep talking, a message every day — and wondering what more he should
do.
Xiu Xiang had left Rainbows End.
“Lena asked me to leave,” Xiu told him. “Maybe I pushed her too hard.” But I
know where she lives now! I could go there. I could make her see how much I’ve
changed. And maybe that would just prove that he had changed in all the ways
that didn’t matter. So Robert didn’t drive out to Rainbows End; he didn’t snoop
the public cams there. But he continued to write her. And when he was outside,
he often imagined that besides the 7-by-24 attention of the security authorities,
perhaps there was another watcher, one who would someday forgive him.
Meantime, he threw himself into schoolwork. There was so much to learn. And

the rest of his time was spent with Comms-R-Us. They liked his work.
Two months after the Great Library Riot, Robert returned to UCSD. He had lost
track of Winston and Carlos. It was strange when he thought about it. For a few
days the cabal had been such a tight conspiracy, but now they never spoke. The
easiest explanation was mutual shame. They had been used, and their various
agendas had come close to killing a lot of people. There was truth in all that, but
for Robert there was another explanation, something weirder and almost as
unsettling: the cabal was like a childhood clique, the animosities and closeness
now vanished as his childlike attention morphed in new directions. Sometimes
the desperation of the fall semester seemed almost as remote as his life in the
twentieth century. There were so many things he wanted to learn and do and be,
and they had so little do with what had previously consumed him.
In the end, it was his project with Comms-R-Us that brought him back to
campus. Jitter and latency were bad problems in video protocols, worse in voice,
and absolute death for touchy-feely interfaces. Haptic robots were getting better
and better — but they were almost useless when run over the net. Now, Comms-
R-Us wanted Robert to try his crazy synch schemes on haptics.
In the aftermath of the Librareome and the riot, the UCSD administration had
dumped further bushel-baskets of cash on the library. In some ways its touchy-
feely experience was better than commercial parks like Pyramid Hill. The
question was, how could you export that across the net? He had done plenty of
reading, studied the design of touchy-feely bots, but until the problem was
solved there would be no substitute for firsthand experience. He took a car down
to UCSD.
○
Two months. Not really a long time. The server shacks on the north side of
Warschawski Hall had merged. There was a soccer field where the Software
Engineering Department had been. Robert could see that this wasn’t destruction
related to the Library Riot or the marine landings; it was the normal churn of any
modern institution.
He took the footpath through the eucalyptus. As always, coming out of the trees
gave the naked eye a sudden vision across miles of tableland, into the mountains.
And there, standing before it all, was still the Geisel Library.

It was by far the oldest building at UCSD, one of the twenty percent that had
been rebuilt after the Rose Canyon quake. But that damage had been nothing
compared with what befell it during the riot, when the cabal’s sponsors literally
ripped the east side from its foundations. Any other building on campus would
have been razed after such trauma, perhaps restored if it was of sufficient
historical value. But neither had happened in the case of the Geisel Library.
Robert walked around the north side of the library, down past the loading dock.
He had seen views of the structure immediately after the riot, the floors sloping
and sagging, the ad hoc buttresses that the fire department had added as the
internal servos burned out, the chunks of twentieth-century concrete that littered
the terrace.
Those signs of destruction were gone. The overhanging floors were level once
more.
The university had not undertaken a simple restoration. On the west it looked
almost unchanged, but there was perceptible distortion above the loading dock,
and on the east there was a graceful twisting of the building’s great pillars.
Where those pillars had moved, where the library had “walked,” now the pillars
were set. At the base was grass and smooth concrete, the tiled path that was the
snake of knowledge. Looking upward, lush ivy followed the curving twist of the
concrete. Where the ivy ended, there were lines of colored pebbles set in the
pillars, making bands like stress fringes in illuminated crystal. And then above
that, the rectangle of each floor was slightly turned from the one beneath it.
From the building specifications, Robert could see that some of the pillars were
carbon fibers embedded in lightweight composite. Yet the building was as real
and solid as it looked to the naked eye; more than any building on campus, this
was real. This building lived.
○
He took the stairs, stopping at each floor to look around. He recognized the
Hacek domain. There were still Librarians Militant here. But I thought their
circle got booted out? In other places, there was craziness he recognized as
Scooch-a-mouti. The Scoochi mythos was eclectic nonsense that he had never
figured out. How it fit with library metaphors was beyond him. But the Scoochis
had “won” the riot and the library.

In other places, both belief circles were running in parallel. You could choose
which you wanted, or neither.
Robert concentrated on management and naked-eye views. After all, he was here
to study the touchy-feely support. There were haptic robots everywhere — not as
many as at Pyramid Hill, but the university had crammed almost as much
parallel variety into a few floors of a single building. UCSD had spent an
enormous amount of money on the gadgets. There were some free-running
models, but most were surface-mounted. These were fast. As quick as a
Librarian Militant could reach for the vision of a book, a robot would slide into
position, altering its surface just where it would meet the reacher’s hand.
Robert stood for a few moments, watching the action. The naked-eye view was
like nothing in his experience. When the student — that’s what she was without
her “Librarian Militant” cover — turned the book in her hands, the haptics
flipped in coordination, never losing contact or slipping in a way different from
the vision it was supporting. When she set it on a table, the haptics moved
instantly to another task — this supporting some Scoochi client in even more
unintelligible maneuvering.
He noticed that the girl was staring at him. “Sorry, sorry! I just haven’t seen all
this before.”
“Tragic, not?” and she gave him a wide grin.
“Yes, uh, tragic.” Somewhere on a high protocol layer, all this involved books
and the contents of books. At the physical layer it was even… more…
fascinating. He wandered along, his mind far away, trying to imagine how the
intricate dance of the haptics could be replicated on robots that were at some
distance on the network. If both sides had human players it would be infernally
hard. But if it was an asymmetric service, maybe —
“Hey, Professor Gu! Look up here.”
Robert looked in the direction of the voice. The ceiling above him had become
transparent, as had the one above that. His view had tunneled through to the
sixth floor. Carlos Rivera was looking back down at him, a happy smile on his
face. “Long time no see, Professor. Come on up, why don’t you?”
“Sure.” Robert found his way back to the stairwell. The stairs were free of haptic

diversions…
… as was the sixth floor. But there were no more books either. Someone had set
up some offices.
Rivera gave him a tour. He seemed to be just about the only one on the floor.
“Right now, the team is spread all over. Some of them are working on the new
extensions underground.”
“So what’s your job now? Still library staff, I assume?”
Carlos hesitated. “Well, I have several titles now. It’s a long story. Hey, come
into my office.”
His office was on the southeast corner, with windows overlooking the Snake
Path and the esplanades. In fact, this was just where the cabal had held its
meetings. Carlos waved him to a seat, and sat behind a wide desk. Carlos
himself… he was still overweight, still wore the bottle-glass spectacles and the
old-fashioned T-shirt. But there was a difference. This Carlos seemed relaxed,
energetic… happy with whatever he was doing. “I was hoping we could talk, but
things have just been so busy since — you know, since we almost fucked things
up beyond all recognition.”
“Yes, I know what you mean. We were… very lucky, Carlos.” He glanced
around the office. Nowadays, rank could be hard to see in visible things, but
much of the furniture and plants were really what they seemed. “You were going
to tell me about your job.”
“Yes! It’s a little embarrassing. I’m the new Director of Library Support. That’s
the title the university recognizes. In some circles that’s not the important title.
Downstairs and across the world, you’ll find that I’m other things — like
Dangerous Knowledge and the Greatest Lesser Scooch-a-mout.”
“But those are two different belief circles. I thought — “
“You read that the Scoochis won it all, right? Not quite. When the dust settled,
there was a very bizarre — well, ‘compromise’ isn’t quite the right word.
‘Alliance’ or ‘distanced merger’ might be better.” He leaned back in his chair.
“It’s scary how close we came to blowing up this end of San Diego. But we
stopped just short. And that crazy riot made more money than a new cinema

release. More important, it sucked money and creativity from all over, and the
school administration was smart enough to take advantage.” He hesitated, a little
sadness creeping into his voice. “So we failed in everything we told each other
we were trying to do. The books are gone. Physically gone. But the Geisel
Library lives, and these two crazy belief circles are driving its content all over
the world. But you’ve seen that, right? That’s why you came down here?”
“I came down to study your haptics, actually.” Robert explained his interest in
distanced interactive touch.
“Hey, that’s great! Both groups have been beating on me to extend our reach.
But at a higher level, what did you think of what they’re doing to the library
experience?”
“um, the Librarian Militants look the same as before, I guess. It’s an amusing
interface, if you like that sort of thing. The Scoochis… I tried to see what they’re
doing, but it doesn’t make sense. It’s so scattered, almost as if each individual
book is its own consensual reality.”
“Almost. The Scoochis have always been eclectic. Now that they have a
librareome, they’re building game consensus down to fine-grained topic levels,
often down to individual paragraphs. It’s much more subtle than the Hacek stuff,
though children pick up on it very quickly. Their real power is that Scoochis can
blend realities. That’s what’s happened with them and the Hacekeans. The
Scoochis come from all over, even from the failed states. Now they’re feeding
the digitizations back outwards. Wherever it fits, the Hacek people are running
things. Other places, other visions — but all with access to the entire body of the
library. If you can crack the problem of remote interactive touch, it should make
their attraction even greater.” Carlos looked around his office, where the cabal
had plotted for such very different ends. “An awful lot has changed in just two
months.”
“What do you think really happened that night, Carlos? Was the riot intended to
distract from what we four were doing — or was it the other way around?”
“I’ve thought about that a lot. I think the riot was a diversion, but one that got
way out of hand and ended up causing immense — what’s the opposite of
collateral damage? Collateral benefit? Sharif-whoever — he was more often a
rabbit to me — was a merry madman.”

Rabbit. That was what his interrogators had called the Mysterious Stranger. It
was also what the Stranger had called itself there at the end. “Well, our part of
the business was darker. Rabbit manipulated all of us, each according to our own
weaknesses.”
Carlos nodded. “Yes.”
“Rabbit promised each of us our secret wish, then defaulted after we had
committed the necessary treachery.” Though to be honest, Robert was pretty sure
the critter was kaput. Maybe things would have been different if it had survived.
His burning hope in the Stranger’s promise had powered Robert’s treason. That
was cold ashes now. Thank God.
Carlos leaned forward. Behind the bottle-glass specs, his eyes looked skeptical.
“Okay,” said Robert, “maybe Rabbit didn’t promise everyone something. I think
the power-assisted scheming was its own reward for Tommie.”
“That’s probably so.” But the librarian did not look convinced.
“Look, we’d know if any of the promises came true. It would be spectacular. I’ll
bet Winston wanted to — Where is Winnie these days?” He was looking up the
answer, but Carlos already had it:
“Dean Blount was hired by the university last month, in the Division of Arts and
Letters.”
Robert’s gaze skittered across his search result. “But as an entry-level
administrative assistant!”
“Yes, it’s bizarre. The current Dean of A and L is Jessica Laskowicz. She’s
another medical retread. Back in the oughts, she was a secretary in the division.
Nowadays, the career track for admin assistants doesn’t have any ceiling, but
Winston is starting awfully far down — and the best gossip is that he and
Laskowicz never got along.”
Oh my. “I guess maybe Winston finally made peace with his dreams.” Like me.
In any case, it meant the Mysterious Stranger was really gone, his extravagant
promises dead. He looked up at Carlos Rivera. And felt the stirring of a vast
surprise. Robert had very little of his old people-sense; nowadays, the obvious

had to beat him over the head with a club. “What… what about you?.”
“Do you notice anything different about me, Professor?”
Robert gave him a close look, then glanced again around the real-plush office.
Carlos had done well for himself, but Robert had never thought that worldly
success would be his demand of the Stranger. “You seem happier, more
confident, more articulate.” Bingo. “You haven’t said one word of Mandarin. Not
a single JITT slip!”
Carlos’s reply was a smile of purest joy.
“So you’ve lost the language?”
FIXME: Get this right.
“No. Qishiwo hdi keyishuo zhongwen, bugud buxidng yiqidn name liuli le. And I
haven’t had a seizure in more than six weeks! The JITT doesn’t rule me. Now I
can enjoy the language. It has been a great help in working with the Chinese
Informagical people. We’ll be merging their capture of the British Library with
what came out of Huertas’s default.”
Robert was silent for a long moment. Then he said, “Your cure, it could be
coincidence.”
“I’ve… wondered. This is a medical breakthrough that came out of groups in
Turkey and Indonesia. It had nothing to do with the Veterans Administration or
institutional research programs. But that’s the way of most medical
breakthroughs these days. And I’ve had no gloating messages from Rabbit.
Everything is in the open, even if the news hasn’t got much traction. You see,
this treatment for JITT syndrome isn’t effective for most victims. They contacted
me through Yellow Ribbons because I’m smack in the middle of the likeliest
genotypes.” He shrugged. “I guess that could be a coincidence.”
“Yes.” The heavenly minefield.
“But it’s an awfully big coincidence,” Rivera continued. “I got what I asked for,
just a few weeks after I did my part of the bargain. And some of my Scoochi
progress has been strange. I’ve made agreements in weeks that should have
taken a year. Somebody’s helping me along. I think you’re wrong about Rabbit.

Maybe he’s just lying low. Maybe he can’t do all the miracles at once —
Professor? Are you okay?”
Robert had turned away, and pressed his forehead against the cool window glass.
I don’t need this. I am happy with the new me! He opened his eyes and looked
out through tears. Down below was the familiar footpath, the snake of
knowledge wriggling up the hillside toward the library. Perhaps the Mysterious
Stranger really was a god, or had grown to be one. A trickster god.
“Professor?”
“I’m okay, Carlos. Maybe you’re right.”
They chatted a few minutes more. Robert wasn’t quite sure what they said,
though he remembered that Carlos seemed a little worried for him, perhaps
mistaking Robert’s raw confusion for some kind of medical emergency.
Then he was down the elevator and back on the sunny plaza. And hovering
immanent all around him were the worlds of art and science that humankind was
busy building. What if I can have it all?
The End
○
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
○
Vernor Vinge is a four-time Hugo Award winner (for novels A Deepness in the
Sky and A Fire Upon the Deep, and novellas “Fast Times at Fairmont High” and
“The Cookie Monster”) and a four-time Nebula Award finalist. He’s one of the
bestselling authors in the field and has been featured in such diverse venues as
Rolling Stone, Wired, The New York Times, Esquire, and NPR’s “Fresh Air.”
Highly regarded by scientists, journalists, and business leaders — as well as
readers — for his concept of the technological singularity, Vinge has spoken all
over the world on scientific subjects. For many years a mathematician and
computer-science professor at San Diego State University, he’s now a full-time

author. He lives in San Diego, California.

