Factored 3-Way Restricted Boltzmann Machines
For Modeling Natural Images
Marc’Aurelio Ranzato
Alex Krizhevsky
Geoffrey E. Hinton
Department of Computer Science - University of Toronto
Toronto, ON M5S 3G4, CANADA
Abstract
Deep belief nets have been successful in mod-
eling handwritten characters, but it has proved
more difﬁcult to apply them to real images. The
problem lies in the restricted Boltzmann machine
(RBM) which is used as a module for learn-
ing deep belief nets one layer at a time.
The
Gaussian-Binary RBMs that have been used to
model real-valued data are not a good way to
model the covariance structure of natural images.
We propose a factored 3-way RBM that uses the
states of its hidden units to represent abnormal-
ities in the local covariance structure of an im-
age.
This provides a probabilistic framework
for the widely used simple/complex cell architec-
ture. Our model learns binary features that work
very well for object recognition on the “tiny im-
ages” data set. Even better features are obtained
by then using standard binary RBM’s to learn a
deeper model.
1
Introduction
Deep belief nets (DBNs) (Hinton et al., 2006a) are gen-
erative models with multiple, densely connected layers of
non-linear latent variables. Unlike mixture models, many
of the variables in a layer can contribute simultaneously
when generating data, so DBN’s have exponentially more
representational power than mixture models. DBN’s are
relatively easy to learn from unlabeled data because it is
possible to learn one layer at a time and learning each layer
is relatively straightforward. After a DBN has been learned
it is very easy to sample fairly accurately from the posterior
over the latent variables.
The efﬁcient learning, fast inference and high representa-
Appearing in Proceedings of the 13th International Conference
on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) 2010, Chia La-
guna Resort, Sardinia, Italy. Volume 9 of JMLR: W&CP 9. Copy-
right 2010 by the authors.
tional power make DBNs very attractive for modeling per-
ceptual processes such as object recognition. The easiest
way to use a DBN for classiﬁcation is to ﬁrst learn multiple
layers of features on unlabeled data and then train a multi-
nomial logistic classiﬁer using the top layer of features as
input. After learning on unlabeled data, it is possible to
back-propagate through the layers of features (Hinton and
Salakhutdinov, 2006), though this can cause overﬁtting, es-
pecially when there is not much labeled data. In this paper
we do not use back-propagation to ﬁne tune the features
found by unsupervised learning.
DBNs were ﬁrst developed for binary data using a Re-
stricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) as the basic module
for learning each layer (Hinton et al., 2006a). A standard
RBM is an undirected graphical model with one layer of
binary visible units for representing a data-point and one
layer of binary hidden units that learn to extract stochas-
tic binary features which capture correlations in the data.
The hidden and visible biases and the matrix of weights
connecting the visible and hidden units are easy to train
using contrastive divergence learning which is a crude
but efﬁcient approximation to maximum likelihood learn-
ing (Carreira-Perpignan and Hinton, 2005). A simple in-
troduction to RBMs can be found at Hinton (2007).
For real-valued data, such as natural image patches, binary
units or their mean-ﬁeld approximations are inadequate but
it is possible to make the visible units of an RBM be Gaus-
sian variables (Lee et al., 2009), a model dubbed Gaussian
RBM. This is much slower to train (Krizhevsky, 2009) and
it is not a good model of the covariance structure of an im-
age because it does not capture the fact that the intensity of
a pixel is almost always almost exactly the average of its
neighbors. Also, it lacks a type of structure that has proved
very effective in vision applications: The outputs of lin-
ear ﬁlters are passed through a rectifying non-linearity and
then similar ﬁlters have their outputs pooled by a “com-
plex” cell which exhibits some local invariance due to the
pooling (Fukushima and Miyake, 1982, LeCun et al., 1998,
Serre et al., 2005). In this paper, we show that RBM’s with
real-valued visible units and binary hidden units can be
modiﬁed to incorporate 3-way interactions that allow the

Factored 3-Way Restricted Boltzmann Machines



	


Figure 1: A graphical representation of the factored 3-way
RBM. The triangular symbol represents a factor. Two iden-
tical copies of the visible units are shown in order to em-
phasize the relationship to a previous model (Memisevic
and Hinton, 2010) that learns to extract motion from a se-
quential pair of images. Our model is equivalent to con-
straining the images in the sequence to be identical.
hidden units to control the covariances of the visible units,
not just the biases as was done in Osindero and Hinton
(2008). To keep the number of parameters under control,
it is necessary to factor the 3-way interactions, and the fac-
tors turn out to look remarkably like simple cells: They act
as linear ﬁlters that send their squared outputs to the hidden
units, and they learn to be local, oriented edge detectors.
In section 2 we explain factored 3-way interactions assum-
ing that all of the units are binary. In section 3 we de-
scribe how the reconstruction phase of the contrastive di-
vergence learning procedure can be modiﬁed to deal with
real-valued visible units that are not independent given the
hidden states.
In section 6 we show the ﬁlters that are
learned on gray-level patches of natural images and also on
smaller patches of low-resolution color images harvested
from the web. We also show that the binary hidden units
learned by our model are good for object recognition and
that even better features can be obtained by stacking a num-
ber of standard RBM’s on top of these binary features to
produce a DBN.
2
A more powerful module for deep
learning
Restricted Boltzmann machines can be modiﬁed to allow
the states of the hidden units to modulate pairwise inter-
actions between the visible units. The energy function is
redeﬁned in terms of 3-way multiplicative interactions (Se-
jnowski, 1986) between two visible binary units, vi, vj, and
one hidden binary unit hk:
E(v, h) = −
X
i,j,k
vivjhkWijk
(1)
This way of allowing hidden units to modulate interactions
between visible units has far too many parameters. For
real images we expect the required lateral interactions to
have a lot of regular structure.
A hidden unit that rep-
resents a vertical occluding edge, for example, needs to
modulate the lateral interactions so as to eliminate hori-
zontal interpolation of intensities in the region of the edge.
This regular structure can be approximated by modeling the
three-way weights as a sum of “factors”, f, each of which
is a three-way outer product
Wijk = P
f BifCjfPkf,
where matrices B and C have as many rows as number of
pixels and as many columns as number of factors, and P
has as many rows as number of hidden units and as many
columns as number of factors. Since the factors are con-
nected twice to the same image through matrices B and
C, it is natural to tie their weights further reducing the
number of parameters, yielding the ﬁnal parameterization
Wijk = P
f CifCjfPkf. Thus Eq. 1 becomes:
−E(v, h)
=
X
f
 X
i
viCif
! 
X
j
vjCjf


 X
k
hkPkf
!
=
X
f
 X
i
viCif
!2  X
k
hkPkf
!
(2)
The parameters of the model can be learned by maximizing
the log likelihood, whose gradient is given by:
∂L
∂w
=
< ∂E
∂w >model −< ∂E
∂w >data
(3)
where w represents a generic parameter in the model and
the angle brackets represent expectations under the dis-
tribution speciﬁed by the subscript. Fortunately, the in-
tractable integral over the model distribution can be ap-
proximated by drawing samples from the distribution. We
can draw biased samples by running a Markov chain Monte
Carlo algorithm for a very short time starting at the data, as
proposed by Hinton (2002). This is called “contrastive di-
vergence” learning.
Given the states of the hidden units, the visible units
form a Markov Random Field in which the effec-
tive pairwise interaction weight between vi and vj is
P
k
P
f hkCifCjfPkf. The hidden units remain condi-
tionally independent given the states of the visible units and
their binary states can be sampled using:
p(hk = 1 | v) = σ

X
f
Pkf(
X
i
viCif)2 + bk

(4)
where σ is a logistic function and bk is the bias of the k-th
hidden unit. Given the hidden states, however, the visible
units are no longer independent so it is much more difﬁcult
to compute the reconstruction of the data from the hidden
states that is required for contrastive divergence learning.
However, in the binary case a mean ﬁeld approximation can
be used yielding to a message passing algorithm (Hinton,
2010) on the graph of ﬁg. 1.

Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey E. Hinton
3
Producing reconstructions using hybrid
Monte Carlo
In conditional 3-way factored models (Taylor and Hinton,
2009, Memisevic and Hinton, 2010), one of the two sets
of visible variables is held constant during reconstruction.
As a result, the visible variables in the other visible set are
all conditionally independent given the hidden variables,
so they can all be sampled independently from their exact
conditional distributions. In our joint 3-way model, both
copies of the visible variables need to be identically recon-
structed, and since the pixels interact it is harder to sample
from the exact distribution. It would be possible to invert
the inverse covariance matrix speciﬁed by the current states
of the hidden units and to sample from the true distribution,
but this is an expensive operation for the inner loop of a
learning algorithm.
Fortunately, the reconstruction does not need to be an ex-
act sample. For contrastive divergence learning to work all
that is required is that the reconstruction be closer than the
data to the joint distribution of the visibles given the cur-
rent state of the hiddens. This could be achieved by one or
more rounds of sequential Gibbs sampling of the visibles,
but it is more efﬁcient to integrate out the hidden units and
use the hybrid Monte Carlo algorithm (HMC) (Neal, 1996)
on the free energy:
F(v) = −
X
k
log(1 + exp(
X
f
Pkf(
X
i
Cifvi)2 + bk))
(5)
HMC draws a sample by simulating a particle moving on
this free energy surface. The particle starts at the data-point
and is given an initial random momentum sampled from a
spherical Gaussian with unit variance. It then moves over
the surface using the gradient of the free energy to deter-
mine its acceleration. If the simulation is accurate, the sum
of the potential and kinetic energies will not change and the
results of the simulation can be accepted. If the total en-
ergy rises during the simulation, the result is accepted with
a probability equal to the negative exponential of the total
energy increase. Numerical errors can be reduced by using
“leapfrog” steps (Neal, 1996). After simulating the trajec-
tory for a number of leapfrog steps, the current momentum
is discarded and a new momentum is sampled from a spher-
ical Gaussian. This Markov chain will eventually sample
from the correct distribution, but we only need to run it for
a small fraction of the time this would take.
4
Learning
We learn the factored 3-way model by maximizing the like-
lihood using stochastic gradient ascent on mini-batches and
contrastive divergence to approximate the derivative of the
log partition function. Samples are drawn by using HMC
as described in the previous section. The algorithm pro-
−2
−1.5
−1
−0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
−5
−4.5
−4
−3.5
−3
−2.5
−2
−1.5
−1
−0.5
Free Energy
 
 
Positive
Negative
Figure 2: Free energy of a factored 3-way RBM with only
one factor and one hidden unit as a function of the factor
input, using a positive (dashed line) or negative (continuous
line) factor-to-hidden matrix.
ceeds as follows:
1) compute the derivative of the free energy in Eq. 5 w.r.t. to
the parameters (visible-to-factor, factor-to-hidden weights
and hidden biases) at the training samples,
2) draw (approximate) samples from the distribution by us-
ing contrastive divergence with HMC,
3) compute the derivatives of the free energy w.r.t. the pa-
rameters at the samples given by HMC,
4) update the parameters by taking the difference of these
derivatives as shown in Eq. 3.
5
The sign of the factor-to-hidden weights
Consider a system with one factor, and one hidden unit.
If the factor-to-hidden weight is positive, there is no lower
bound to the energy that can be achieved by using extreme
values for the visible units (see Eq. 5 and the dashed curve
in ﬁg. 2).
Extreme values can be contained by using a
quadratic energy penalty on each visible value, as is done
in a Gaussian-binary RBM, but this makes it very hard
to model occasional extreme values if the representation
is overcomplete. If the factor-to-hidden weights are con-
strained to be negative, this problem disappears because
a hidden unit simply turns off when it receives extremely
negative total input (see Eq. 4). To allow a hidden unit
to model a constraint that is normally satisﬁed but occa-
sionally strongly violated, it is necessary to use negative
weights and a positive bias. The hidden unit then creates
negative energy when the constraint is satisﬁed and zero
energy when it is strongly violated as shown by the con-
tinuous line in ﬁg. 2. The similarity of the shape of this
energy with that of a heavy-tailed distribution is further in-
vestigated in sec. 7.
Our learning algorithm includes the negativity constraint
by simply setting positive factor-to-hidden weights to zero
after each weight update.

Factored 3-Way Restricted Boltzmann Machines
Figure 3:
256 ﬁlters of size 16x16 pixels (columns
of visible-to-factor matrix) learned on whitened image
patches sampled from the Berkeley data set.
6
Experiments
The factored 3-way model is speciﬁcally designed for
heavy-tailed distributions of the type that arise in low-
level vision (Simoncelli and Olshausen, 2001, Olshausen
and Field, 1997). We therefore applied our algorithm to a
data set of natural image patches to see whether the factors
learned ﬁlters that exhibited a heavy-tailed output distribu-
tion.
One way to evaluate the features learned by the 3-way
model is to use them for object recognition. We used the
features to classify images in the CIFAR-10 data set (Tor-
ralba et al., 2008a, Krizhevsky, 2009) and we achieved
signiﬁcantly higher accuracy than the carefully engineered
and widely used GIST descriptors (Oliva and Torralba,
2001). We also achieved slightly higher accuracy than the
features learned by a Gaussian-Binary RBM (Krizhevsky,
2009) which has the best published performance for this
data set.
6.1
Modelling Natural Image Patches
We randomly sampled 100,000 image patches of size
16x16 pixels from the images of the Berkeley segmenta-
tion data set 1. After gray-scale conversion, the patches
were ZCA whitened. Whitening is not necessary but speeds
up the convergence of the algorithm. We constrained the
factor-to-hidden matrix to be non-positive and with length-
1http://www.cs.berkeley.edu/projects/vision/grouping/segbench/
Figure 4: Location and size of ﬁlters learned on the Berke-
ley data set.
Figure 5: Grouping induced by the factor-to-hidden matrix:
visualization of a random subset of the rows of the matrix.
The red bar corresponds to the ﬁlter with largest weight to
a hidden unit, the blue bars are other ﬁlters with smaller
weight. Each hidden unit pools features placed at nearby
locations with similar orientations.
normalized columns by projecting after every parameter
update. Training is performed by approximating the max-
imum likelihood gradient with Contrastive Divergence, as
described in sec. 2, using the hybrid Monte Carlo method
described in section 3 to generate the required reconstruc-
tions. The hybrid Monte Carlo started at a data-point, chose
a random initial momentum and then ran for 20 leapfrog
steps to produce a reconstruction. The step size was dy-
namically adjusted to keep the rejection rate around 10%.
During the ﬁrst part of the training we learn only the
visible-to-factor matrix keeping the factor-to-hidden matrix
ﬁxed at the negative identity. After the ﬁlters converged,

Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey E. Hinton
Figure 6: Example of images in the CIFAR-10 data set;
each column shows examples belonging to the same class.
we then trained both the visible-to-factor matrix and the
factor-to-hidden matrix simultaneously, similarly to Osin-
dero et al. (2006), Koster and Hyvarinen (2007).
After training, each factor can be visualized with the corre-
sponding ﬁlter as shown in ﬁg. 3. As expected these ﬁlters
look like band-pass oriented and localized edge detectors,
reminiscent of simple cell receptive ﬁelds in area V1 of the
visual cortex. These features are strikingly similar to those
learned by ICA models (Hyvarinen et al., 2001) and other
sparse coding algorithms (Olshausen and Field, 1997, Teh
et al., 2003). These features are well described by Gabor
wavelets and ﬁg. 4 uses this ﬁt to show that they tile the
space nicely.
One way to look at the factor-to-hidden matrix is through
the non-zero weights in its rows. Each such weight cor-
responds to a factor and can be represented by its Gabor
ﬁt. Fig. 5 shows that each hidden unit pools features that
have similar orientation and position, achieving de facto
a more invariant representation. This result conﬁrms what
was found also by other authors (Osindero et al., 2006, Hin-
ton et al., 2006b, Karklin and Lewicki, 2009, Koster and
Hyvarinen, 2007, Kavukcuoglu et al., 2009) using related
models.
6.2
Recognition on CIFAR-10
The CIFAR-10 data set (Krizhevsky, 2009) is a hand-
labeled subset of a much larger data set of 80 million tiny
images (Torralba et al., 2008a), see ﬁg. 6. These images
were downloaded from the web and down-sampled to a
very low resolution, just 32x32 pixels. The CIFAR-10 sub-
set has ten object categories, namely airplane, car, bird, cat,
deer, dog, frog, horse, ship, and truck. The training set
has 5000 samples per class, the test set has 1000 samples
Figure 7: 400 ﬁlters in the visible-to-factor matrix learned
on 2 million tiny images. The factor-to-hidden matrix was
initialized to learn a one-dimensional topography enforc-
ing similarity between nearby ﬁlters (scan the ﬁgure from
bottom to top, and from left to right). This ﬁgure is best
viewed in color.
per class. The low resolution and extreme variability make
recognition very difﬁcult and a traditional method based
on features extracted at interest-points is unlikely to work
well. Moreover, extracting features from such images using
carefully engineered descriptors like SIFT (Lowe, 2004) or
GIST (Oliva and Torralba, 2001) is also likely to be sub-
optimal since these descriptors were designed to work well
on higher resolution images. Previous work on this data
set has used GIST (Torralba et al., 2008b) and Gaussian
RBM’s (Krizhevsky, 2009).
We follow a very simple protocol. We train the 3-way fac-
tor model on small 8x8 color image patches, and then we
apply the algorithm to extract features convolutionally over
the whole 32x32 image. After extracting the features, we
use a multinomial logistic regression classiﬁer to recognize
the object category in the image. Training the 3-way factor
model does not require labeled data, so we train the model
using a set of two million images from the TINY data set
that does not overlap with the labeled, CIFAR-10 subset.
This procedure prevents over-ﬁtting of models with lots of
parameters and improves generalization in data sets with
paucity of reliable labeled data (Hinton et al., 2006a, Ran-
zato et al., 2007, Raina et al., 2007).
In particular, we trained on ZCA whitened images as pro-
cessed by Krizhevsky (2009). We used the same set up
for HMC as described earlier, as well as the same con-

Factored 3-Way Restricted Boltzmann Machines
Figure 8: Confusion matrix produced by the third stage
4096 dimensional features on the CIFAR-10 data set.
straints on the factor-to-hidden matrix. In addition to that,
we found it beneﬁcial to normalize the length of the input
patch as well as the lengths of the ﬁlters in the visible-to-
factor matrix. The ﬁrst rescaling is analogous to a local
contrast normalization of the input (Pinto et al., 2008) and
avoids excessive saturation of hidden units for patches with
high contrast. The normalization of the ﬁlters also prevents
saturation of units and, in addition, it avoids the tendency
for some of them to become very small (Osindero et al.,
2006, Olshausen and Field, 1997). We trained 400 factors
with color ﬁlters of size 8x8, and we initialized the factor-
to-hidden matrix to form a one-dimensional topography.
Initially each hidden unit is connected to 9 factors through
a Gaussian weighting. If we imagine laying out the 400
factors on a line, these Gaussian windows are stepped by
2 producing 200 hidden units. We ﬁrst train the visible-to-
factor matrix and subsequently we let the factor-to-hidden
matrix adapt as done in the previous section. Fig. 7 shows
the learned ﬁlters in the visible-to-factor matrix. Although
the factor-to-hidden matrix is adapted, much of the 1 di-
mensional topography is left since nearby ﬁlters (by scan-
ning along the columns) tend to be similar. Notice how the
model learns a nice mix of high-frequency, gray-scale edge
detectors and lower frequency color derivative ﬁlters in dif-
ferent orientations and scales. All of the gray-scale detec-
tors were colored earlier in the learning, so they learned to
be exactly balanced in the RGB channels.
Our model encodes 8x8 color patches into a 200 dimen-
sional feature vector. In order to represent the whole 32x32
image, we apply the feature extractor on a 7x7 grid by step-
ping every 4 pixels in the horizontal and vertical direction.
This produces a 9,800 (200x7x7) dimensional feature vec-
tor for each image. By using this representation to train a
logistic regression classiﬁer on the CIFAR-10 training set,
Table 1: Recognition accuracy on the CIFAR-10 test and
training (in parenthesis) data sets varying depth and feature
dimensionality. The second stage is trained on the 9,800
hidden probabilities produced by the ﬁrst stage. Each sub-
sequent stage is trained on the 4096 hidden probabilities
from the previous stage.
Dimen.
1st stage
2nd stage
3rd stage
4th stage
9,800
62.8 (71.2)
4,096
64.7 (71.3)
65.3 (69.1)
63.2 (66.8)
1,024
61.2 (65.5)
62.8 (66.7)
61.9 (64.9)
384
56.8 (58.3)
58.7 (61.3)
58.2 (59.9)
Table 2: Test recognition accuracy on the CIFAR-10 data
set produced by different methods.
Features are fed to
a multinomial logistic regression classiﬁer for recogni-
tion. Results marked by (*) are obtained from Krizhevsky
(2009).
Method
Accuracy %
384 dimens. GIST
54.7
10,000 lin. random proj.
36.0
10K GRBM(*), 1 layer, ZCA’d images
59.6
10K GRBM(*), 1 layer
63.8
10K GRBM(*), 1 layer with ﬁne-tuning
64.8
10K GRBM(*), 2 layers
56.6
9,800 3-Way, 1 layer, ZCA’d images
62.8
4,096 3-Way, 3 layer, ZCA’d images
65.3
384 3 -Way, 3 layer, ZCA’d images
58.7
19,600 3-Way, 1 layer, ZCA’d images, no pool
62.3
we achieve a recognition rate equal to 62.3%. This result
should be compared to 59.6% achieved by a Gaussian RBM
trained on the same whitened data and 63.8% achieved by
a Gaussian RBM on unprocessed data (Krizhevsky, 2009).
Since the representation produced by the 3-way factor
model is binary, it is very easy to build a deep model (Hin-
ton et al., 2006a) by training standard binary RBM’s. We
have trained up to 4 stages as reported in table 1. The per-
formance on the test set and the generalization improve up
to the third stage. The third stage representation achieves
the best reported accuracy on this data set while using a
lower dimensional representation than Krizhevsky (2009),
65.3% with a 4096-dimensional feature vector. The cor-
responding confusion matrix is shown in ﬁg. 8. The most
common misclassiﬁcation is between dog and cat, and ani-
mal categories tend not to be confused with man-made ob-
ject categories (except for the category bird and airplane).
Compared to Gaussian RBM’s, our model not only
achieves better performance but also improves generaliza-
tion when used as ﬁrst stage in a deep hierarchical model.
This improved generalization is achieved thanks to the in-
variance that is gained by pooling and rectifying the in-

Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Alex Krizhevsky, Geoffrey E. Hinton
Figure 9: Factored 3-way RBM approximating a heavy-tailed distribution (empirical distribution of a Gabor response to
natural images, dashed line) by using hidden units that have different scaling of the factor-hidden matrix and different
biases (continuous line). The target distribution is approximated with a product of simpler distributions (a two component
mixture whose energy is given in Eq. 5). Left: least square ﬁt to the empirical distribution of a model with replicated
weights (three terms as in Eq. 5, each with a different bias and scaling); the ﬁt is not weighted by the number of data
points in each bin. Center: learning the empirical distribution with a single 3-way factor. Right: learning the empirical
distribution with a replicated 3-way factor having three biases and 3 scalings. The poor ﬁt on the tails is due to data scarcity.
put. The importance of pooling can be assessed by set-
ting the factor-to-hidden matrix to negative identity (which
eliminates the pooling operated by the factor-to-hidden ma-
trix); as reported in the last row of table 2 the accuracy gets
slightly worse even if the feature dimensionality is twice as
big. Table 2 shows also that our model consistently outper-
forms GIST at each layer by quite a large margin.
7
Relation to Previous Work and Extensions
The seminal work of Geman and Geman (1984) and fol-
lowing related methods (Black and Rangarajan, 1996, Hin-
ton and Teh, 2001) inspired this work in the way images
are interpreted. Images are assumed to be almost always
smooth, but rare violations of this constraint are allowed
as well. Like the Gaussian Scale Mixture model (Wain-
wright and Simoncelli, 2000), our model uses hidden vari-
ables that control the modeled covariance between pixels,
but our hidden variables are binary and the inference pro-
cess is simpler. Our model is very similar to the PoT (Prod-
uct of t-distributions) model (Osindero et al., 2006) but has
some important differences. The main advantage of our
model is that it uses binary hidden units which are ideal
for subsequent stacking of RBM’s to form a DBN. The
main advantage of the PoT model is that the negative log
of the heavy-tailed student t-distribution does not ﬂatten out
nearly as quickly as the free energy contributed by one of
our hidden units (see central panel in ﬁg.9). As a result,
the PoT model can cope better with a wide range of val-
ues of the ﬁlter output. In fact, for large ﬁlter outputs, the
derivative of the PoT energy function with respect to a ﬁl-
ter weight is invariant to scaling of all the intensities in the
image.
It is possible to approximate the energy function of the PoT
model by using several hidden units that differ only in their
biases and the scale of the weights connecting them to the
factors. The scale determines the slope of the energy func-
tion when the hidden unit is ﬁrmly on and the bias deter-
mines the vertical scale of the energy function. Figure 9
shows that hidden units differing only in scale and bias can
approximate a heavy-tailed distribution quite well.
8
Conclusion
We proposed a new model, a factored 3-way RBM, for the
joint statistics of pairs of input variables. This model maps
real-valued images into factor outputs that represent local
breakdowns in the normal covariance structure of an im-
age. The model learns how to pool these factor outputs to
produce a more invariant representation. Learning requires
sampling in order to approximate the derivative of the log
partition function, but this is relatively efﬁcient since we
can exactly integrate out the hidden variables and use HMC
sampling on the free energy. Results demonstrate that the
model learns the typical features of simple-complex cell
models of early vision, and that the complex features are
very suitable for use in DBNs. The learned feature hier-
archy achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on the challenging
CIFAR-10 data set beating Gaussian RBMs and GIST de-
scriptors.
Future avenues of work include extending this model to
capture structure in the mean of the data by adding direct
visible to hidden connections; scaling to full resolution im-
ages by pooling not only over different factors for the same
patch but also over factors for nearby patches; and using 3-
way factored binary RBMs for the higher levels of a DBN.

Factored 3-Way Restricted Boltzmann Machines
Acknowledgements
The authors thank H. Larochelle for his suggestions and
V. Mnih for making available his CUDA package for
GPU (Mnih, 2009).
References
M. Black and A. Rangarajan. On the uniﬁcation of line processes,
outlier rejection, and robust statistics with applications in early
vision. IJCV, 19(1):57–92, 1996.
M. A. Carreira-Perpignan and G. E. Hinton. On contrastive diver-
gence learning. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, 2005.
K. Fukushima and S. Miyake. Neocognitron: A new algorithm
for pattern recognition tolerant of deformations and shifts in
position. Pattern Recognition, 1982.
S. Geman and D. Geman. Stochastic relaxation, gibbs distribu-
tions, and the bayesian restoration of images. IEEE PAMI, 6:
721–741, 1984.
G. Hinton. Training products of experts by minimizing contrastive
divergence. Neural Computation, 14:1771–1800, 2002.
G. Hinton. Learning to represent visual input. Phil. Trans. R.
Soc., 365(1537):177–184, 2010.
G. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov. Reducing the dimensionality
of data with neural networks.
Science, 313(5786):504–507,
2006.
G. Hinton and Y. Teh. Discovering multiple constraints that are
frequently approximately satisﬁed. In UAI, 2001.
G. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y.-W. Teh.
A fast learning algo-
rithm for deep belief nets.
Neural Computation, 18:1527–
1554, 2006a.
G. E. Hinton.
Boltzmann machine, 2007.
Scholarpedia,
2(5):1668.
G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, M. Welling, and Y. Teh. Unsupervised
discovery of non-linear structure using contrastive backpropa-
gation. Cognitive Science, 30:725–731, 2006b.
A. Hyvarinen, J. Karhunen, and E. Oja. Independent Component
Analysis. John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
Y. Karklin and M. Lewicki. Emergence of complex cell properties
by learning to generalize in natural scenes. Nature, 457:83–86,
2009.
K. Kavukcuoglu, M. Ranzato, R. Fergus, and Y. LeCun. Learning
invariant features through topographic ﬁlter maps. In CVPR,
2009.
U. Koster and A. Hyvarinen. A two-layer ica-like model estimated
by score matching. In ICANN, 2007.
A. Krizhevsky.
Learning multiple layers of features from tiny
images, 2009. MSc Thesis, Dept. of Comp. Science, Univ. of
Toronto.
Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner. Gradient-based
learning applied to document recognition. Proc. of IEEE, 86
(11):2278–2324, 1998.
H. Lee, R. Grosse, R. Ranganath, and A. Y. Ng. Convolutional
deep belief networks for scalable unsupervised learning of hi-
erarchical representations. In Proc. ICML, 2009.
D. Lowe.
Distinctive image features from scale-invariant key-
points. IJCV, 2004.
R. Memisevic and G. Hinton. Learning to represent spatial trans-
formations with factored higher-order boltzmann machines.
Neural Comp., pages 1–20, 2010.
V. Mnih. Cudamat: a CUDA-based matrix class for python. Tech-
nical Report UTML TR 2009-004, Dept. Computer Science,
Univ. of Toronto, 2009.
R. Neal. Bayesian learning for neural networks. Springer-Verlag,
1996.
A. Oliva and A. Torralba. Modeling the shape of the scene: a
holistic representation of the spatial envelope. IJCV, 42:145–
175, 2001.
B. A. Olshausen and D. J. Field. Sparse coding with an overcom-
plete basis set: a strategy employed by v1? Vision Research,
37:3311–3325, 1997.
S. Osindero and G. E. Hinton. Modeling image patches with a
directed hierarchy of markov random ﬁelds. In NIPS, 2008.
S. Osindero, M. Welling, and G. E. Hinton. Topographic product
models applied to natural scene statistics. Neural Comp., 18:
344–381, 2006.
N. Pinto, D. D. Cox, and J. J. DiCarlo. Why is real-world visual
object recognition hard? PLoS Computational Biology, 4(1),
2008.
R. Raina, A. Battle, H. Lee, B. Packer, and A. Ng. Self-taught
learning: Transfer learning from unlabeled data.
In ICML,
2007.
M. Ranzato, F. Huang, Y. Boureau, and Y. LeCun. Unsupervised
learning of invariant feature hierarchies with applications to
object recognition. In CVPR, 2007.
T. Sejnowski. Higher-order boltzmann machines. In AIP Neural
networks for computing, 1986.
T. Serre, L. Wolf, and T. Poggio. Object recognition with features
inspired by visual cortex. In CVPR, 2005.
E. Simoncelli and B. A. Olshausen. Natural image statistics and
neural representation.
Annual Review of Neuroscience, 24:
1193–1216, 2001.
G. W. Taylor and G. E. Hinton. Factored conditional restricted
boltzmann machines for modeling motion style.
In ICML,
2009.
Y. W. Teh, M. Welling, S. Osindero, and G. E. Hinton. Energy-
based models for sparse overcomplete representations. JMLR,
4:1235–1260, 2003.
A. Torralba, R. Fergus, and W. Freeman. 80 million tiny images: a
large dataset for non-parametric object and scene recognition.
PAMI, 30:1958–1970, 2008a.
A. Torralba, R. Fergus, and Y. Weiss.
Small codes and large
databases for recognition.
In Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2008b.
M. Wainwright and E. Simoncelli. Scale mixtures of gaussians
and the statistics of natural images. In NIPS, 2000.

