Visions of Xanadu: Paul Otlet (186871944) and Hypertext 
W. Boyd Rayward 
School of Information, 
Library and Archive Studies, University of New South Wales P.O. Box 1, 
Kensington, 
NSW 2033, Australia 
The work of the Belgian 
internationalist 
and docu- 
mentalist, 
Paul Otlet (1868-1944), 
and his colleagues 
in Brussels, 
forms an important 
and neglected 
part 
of the history 
of information 
science. 
They devel- 
oped a complex 
of organizations 
that are similar 
in 
important 
respects functionally 
to contemporary 
hy- 
pertext/hypermedia 
systems. These organizations 
ef- 
fectively 
provided for the integration 
of bibliographic, 
image, and textual 
databases. 
Chunks 
of text on 
cards or separate sheets were created according 
to 
“the monographic 
principle” 
and their physical 
or- 
ganization 
managed by the Universal 
Decimal Classi- 
fication, 
created by the Belgians from Melvil Dewey’s 
Decimal Classification. 
This article, discusses 
Otlet’s 
concept of the Office of Documentation 
and, as ex- 
amples of an approach to actual hypertext 
systems, 
several special Offices of Documentation 
set up in 
the International 
Office of Bibliography. 
In his Trait6 
de Documentation 
of 1934, one of the first system- 
atic treatises 
on what today we would call informa- 
tion science, 
Otlet speculated 
imaginatively 
about 
telecommunications, 
text-voice 
conversion, 
and what 
is needed in computer workstations, 
though of course 
he does not use this terminology. 
By assessing 
how 
the intellectual 
paradigm of nineteenth 
century posi- 
tivism 
shaped Otlet’s thinking, 
this study suggests 
how, despite its apparent contemporaneity, 
what he 
proposed was in fact conceptually 
different from the 
hypertext 
systems that have been developed 
or spe- 
culated about today. Such as analysis 
paradoxically 
also suggests 
the irony that a “deconstructionist” 
reading of accounts 
of these systems might find em- 
bedded in them the positivist 
approach to knowledge 
that the system designers 
would seem on the face of 
it explicitly 
to have repudiated. 
Introduction 
The development of hypertext/hypermedia systems has 
generated great interest in the last decade. The descriptions 
of what hypertext can do and what its implications are or 
will be for learning, science, information retrieval, creative 
writing, and so on, have frequently been extravagant to say 
the least. Most of those who discuss hypertext/hypermedia 
Received June 1, 1993; revised October 29, 1993; accepted October 29, 
1993. 
0 1994 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
systems see the new functionality in information communi- 
cation and retrieval that these systems involve as originating 
conceptually in Vannevar Bush’s post World War II vision 
of an information storage and retrieval machine that he 
called “memex.” This article suggests that much of this 
functionality was anticipated by a Belgian lawyer, bibliog- 
rapher, and internationalist, Paul Otlet (1868-1944), 
and 
that his ideas and the systems to which they gave rise 
constitute an important chapter in the history of hypertext 
and in the history of information science more generally. 
Otlet wrote eloquently of the need for an international 
information handling system embracing everything from the 
creation of an entry in a catalogue to new forms of publica- 
tion, from the management of libraries, archives, and mu- 
seums as interrelated information agencies to the collabo- 
rative development of a universal encyclopedia codifying 
all of man’s hitherto unmanageable knowledge. Central to 
all of this were the Universal Decimal Classification, a new 
kind of information agency for information management 
called the Office of Documentation, a new principle of 
information indexing and storage, the “monographic princi- 
ple,” and microfilm. Ultimately he foresaw the creation of 
a Universal Network for Information and Documentation 
to which access would be had by multimedia workstations 
that lay waiting to be invented just beyond the technological 
capacity of his time. He developed these ideas in a large 
body of diffuse, repetitive writing dating from 1893. It will 
be seen that he is a precursor of Bush (1945), Englebart 
(1963), Nelson (1983, 1987), and others who have set the 
hypertext/hypermedia agenda in recent years and that he 
anticipated many of the features of Bush’s memex, Nelson’s 
Xanadu, and hypertext. 
Vannevar 
Bush and Macrotext 
Systems 
of Hypertext 
Discussions of hypertext and hypermedia tend to involve 
two levels, what Rada (1991) calls “macrotext” and “micro- 
text.” The former involves broad-based, networked systems 
involving many users and documents and document types, 
whereas the latter is highly focused and is concerned with a 
single system or document base. Most commentators place 
Vannevar Bush’s speculations about memex at the imagi- 
native source of hypertext. (e.g., Conklin, 1987; Eaves, 
ccc 0002-8231/94/040235-16 

1991; Ellis, 1991; Nyce & Kahn, 1991; Rada, 1991; Rada 
& Lunin, 1989). Bush was inspired by perceptions of need 
that are, as we shall see, similar to those that inspired Otlet 
and it is useful to examine Bush’s ideas as a background 
for Otlet’s. 
Following 
a period of expanding scientific 
activity 
around the time of World War II, Bush had come to 
believe that “our methods for transmitting and reviewing 
the results of research” were no longer adequate. As the 
scientific specialization needed for progress increased, “the 
investigator is staggered by the findings and conclusions 
of thousands of other workers-conclusions 
which he 
cannot find time to grasp, much less to remember, as 
they appear.” It seemed to him that “publication has been 
extended beyond our present ability to make real use of the 
record” (Bush, 194.5, p. 89). In his view, as an engineer 
and scientist, the answer was to be found in harnessing 
technology to provide a sophisticated mechanical solution 
to the problem. Extrapolating from the technology of his 
time, Bush described a new kind of device which was 
a “sort of mechanized file and library.” 
He called it a 
“memex. ” “A memex is a device in which an individual 
stores all his books, record, and communications, 
and 
which is mechanized so that it may be consulted with 
exceeding speed and flexibility. 
It is an enlarged intimate 
supplement to his memory” (Bush, 1945, p. 102). All of 
the documents used in the memex would be in the form 
of microfilm 
copy acquired as such or, in the case of 
personal records, transformed to microfilm. Memex would 
also employ new retrieval techniques based on a new 
kind of associative indexing “the basic idea of which is a 
provision whereby any item may be caused at will to select 
immediately and automatically another” to create personal 
“trails” 
through linked documents. The new procedures 
that Bush anticipated facilitating 
information storage and 
retrieval would lead to the development of “wholly 
new 
forms of encyclopedia” (p. 103). 
These ideas echo in subsequent statements. For Rada 
(1991) “the 
dream of hypertext 
is to connect text 
across more than one document boundary” 
(p. 108). 
For Conklin (1987) the desideratum is “macro literary 
systems. . . [which] support large online libraries in which 
interdocument links are machine-supported (that is, all 
publishing, reading, collaboration and criticism takes place 
within 
the network)” 
(p. 20). Rubens (1989) speaks of 
“optimistic 
scenarios for hypermedia [which] envision a 
world-wide network of hypermedia nodes which will allow 
users to research topics in various intellectual domains. 
The intent seems to be to create a platform that allows 
researchers to work together regardless of distance” (p. 19). 
Perhaps one of the most imaginative, although quirkily 
expressed, forms of these sorts of ideas is embodied in Ted 
Nelson’s Project Xanadu. “The Xanadu storage system,” 
he tells us (Nelson, 1987), “is a new form of software 
with potentially revolutionary implications . . . for personal 
computing, word processing, file management, the office 
of the future and its software, teleconferencing, electronic 
mail, electronic publishing, 
libraries of the future, and 
tomorrow’s education.” He sees it as offering “a plan for 
a world wide network, intended to generate hundreds of 
millions 
of users simultaneously for the corpus of the 
world’s stored writings, graphics and data . . . It is a design 
for a new literature, a system of order to make such a 
network understandable, useable, and readily expansible to 
any degree . . . The Xanadu system provides a universal data 
structure to which all other data structures will be mapped.” 
In what he calls a “medium-length 
description” of the 
XanaduTM hypertext System (Nelson, 1983), he suggests 
that it “is a fast linking electronic repository for the storage 
and publication of text, graphics and other digital infor- 
mation; permitting promiscuous linkage and windowing 
among all materials; with special features for alternative 
versions, historical backtrack and arbitrary collaging. 
.” 
(p. 312). Xanadu, like Bush’s vision of “memex,” 
has 
caught the imagination of commentators. As Rada and 
Lunin explain (1986): “It will provide for the deposit, 
delivery, and continued revision of linked electronic docu- 
ments, servicing hundreds of millions of simultaneous users 
with hypertext, graphics, audio, movies, and hypermedia” 
(p. 160). For Conklin (1987) it would be “an online system 
which would eventually hold all of the world’s literature” 
(p. 23); for Tsai (1988) a kind of “universal library of 
online text organized and indexed in new ways to facilitate 
the work of users” (p. 4). 
Microtext 
Systems 
At a different, “microtext” 
level of analysis, to use 
Rada’s terminology, are particular hypertext systems: “Hy- 
pertext (hypermedia) consists of chunks or fragments of 
text or other information. Nodes and associative links are 
the basic building blocks of all hypertext systems.. 
Rather 
than a continuous flow of text, hypertext breaks it up into 
units or modules of information.” The two essential features 
of hypertext are nodes and links. Because of the modulari- 
zation of text, “nodes may be accessed in any sequence that 
meets the information needs of the user.” Links connect the 
various chunks or nodes and “enable the user to determine 
the order in which information is presented. They enable 
the user to move around through hypertext.” Links also 
provide connections between documents which can be in 
different media-written 
text, graphic text of various kinds 
and sound. An important feature of hypertext is the way 
in which the user can create links to and between nodes 
to reflect his or her own interests, prior knowledge and 
associations (Jonnasen, 1989, pp. 67-68). 
Conklin (1987) has pointed out that the modulariza- 
tion of text involved in the creation of hypertext nodes 
correspond in some sense to the way in which we think 
of ideas, facts, and evidence and the way in which we 
break text into paragraphs. He comments on the way in 
which an idea in node form can become reified as a kind 
of manipulable object. He also relates nodes to semantic 
links: “Hypertext nodes can be thought of as representing 
single concepts or ideas, internode links as representing the 
semantic interdependencies among these, and the process 
236 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 

of building 
a hypertext network as a kind of informal 
knowledge engineering” (p. 36). He suggests that there are 
various types of nodes that can be identified according 
to their function. Links, too, are of various kinds. Some 
connect points in a dataset that can involve different media 
such as sound and film as well as text. Some are established 
by the system designer, others by the user. 
In Tsai’s view (1988) a central feature of the hypertext 
document is that users “can easily create personal browsing 
paths through the information 
space based on their own 
needs and interests” (Tsai, p. 4). This is an essential feature 
of hypertext. The system must provide a capability for 
nonsequential or nonlinear reading and writing. It allows 
readers to break away form the fixed linear sequence of 
conventional 
printed text. Movement through hypertexts 
does not depend on the original order of ideas imposed by 
authors on their texts according to their understanding of the 
subject at hand and their purpose in writing in the first place. 
It depends on the interests and purposes of the readers who 
are “navigating” 
the document according to the links that 
may be there already, having been provided by the system 
designer or other users, or created by themselves as they go 
along blazing their own “trails.” But because the “structure” 
of conventional documents is not available and hypertext 
documents essentially have no logical beginning, middle or 
end, the result can be that, as users jump back and forth and 
between nodes of the systems, they can become disoriented 
and lost in “hyperspace.” As a result, navigational systems 
of various kinds are needed to provide the kind of guidance 
implicit in the structure of conventional documents. 
All of this reflects a fundamental process: documents 
created in a non-hypertext form, such as ordinary printed 
documents, have to be modified for the hypertext environ- 
ment. What is to be identified as a node or a chunk and how 
this is to be done become important issues, especially if one 
moves from the creation of individual 
hyperdocuments to 
systems that will deal in new ways with the library’s tradi- 
tional information storage and retrieval problem involving 
many documents and document kinds. As Carlson (1989) 
puts it, the problem is that of resolving the complex relation 
of “rhetoric and knowledge structures,” of “meaning and 
form” (p. 63). 
We are not entirely inexperienced in dealing with the 
fundamental features of modern hypertext systems. Conklin 
(1987) suggests that a reference book such as a dictionary or 
encyclopedia is a kind of “manual hypertext”-“a 
graph of 
textual nodes joined by referential links” (p. 20). He also 
emphasises that the use of 3” X 5” card in note-taking 
leads to hypertext-like systems. Such cards are often given 
references to each other as well as arranged hierarchically. 
What is recorded is necessarily modularized into small 
chunks because of the size of the cards. The cards can 
be reorganized at will according to new systems or to 
include new information. It is presumably because the idea 
of the card is so apt as a metaphor for hypertext that the 
Xerox system, “the best known version of full hypertext” 
according to Conklin (p. 27), has been named Notecards, its 
designers explicitly inspired by Bush’s vision of the memex 
(Trigg, 1991, p. 356). The note card was not a metaphor for 
Paul Otlet, as we will see, but an essential aspect of system 
technology. 
“Something 
about 
Bibliography,” 
1892 
Otlet’s ideas go back to his desire as a relatively young 
man in his late twenties, not long out of college, and 
enjoying little success in the legal career for which his 
studies in Paris and Brussels had prepared him, to find 
ways of solving some of the problems created by the 
proliferation 
and disorderly state of the literature of the 
social sciences (Rayward, 1975, ch. 2). His first concern 
was with bibliography 
(Otlet, 1892). He was convinced 
that “the external makeup of a book, its format, the per- 
sonality of its author were unimportant provided that its 
substance, its sources and its conclusions” become part of 
the collaborative organization of knowledge (p. 17). Bibli- 
ography, whose function was to assist in the identification 
and organization of source material, was simply the first 
step in a more general system of what might be called 
documentary processing. Exploring the ramifications of this 
system would ultimately lead Otlet to formulate plans for 
an International Documentary Network. 
In this early work, Otlet suggested that literature could 
be analyzed so as to isolate four major categories of 
information: 
facts, interpretation of facts, statistics, and 
sources. An examination of each article or chapter of a book 
consistently along these lines, would reveal whatever in it 
that was a new contribution to knowledge. This information, 
essentially now in the form of “chunks,” should then be 
collected on cards which would be minutely subdivided 
according to the subject relationships involved. Separate 
cards were an essential feature of the system technology that 
Otlet was envisaging. They allowed “all the manipulations 
of classification and continuous interfiling.” 
In addition “a 
very detailed synoptic outline of knowledge” was needed as 
the basis for the arrangement of the catalogue that would 
be formed from the cards and to allow the coordination 
of collaborative work among scholars for its development 
(Otlet, 1892, p. 19). Eventually, 
the “detailed synoptic 
outline of knowledge” was to be provided by the expansions 
that Otlet and his colleagues would make to Melvil Dewey’s 
Decimal Classification. 
Trait4 de Documentation, 
1934 
In 1934, some ten years before Vannevar Bush pub- 
lished his ideas about a memex, some 35 or 40 years 
before Ted Nelson began to develop his ideas of a fa- 
bled information 
Xanadu, Paul Otlet published a mag- 
isterial work of synthesis, the Trait6 de Documentation 
(reprinted in 1989). This work culminated a lifetime’s 
thinking, begun for Otlet 40 years before with “Something 
about Bibliography,” 
about the problems of creating new, 
and improving 
existing, systems for organizing knowl- 
edge. The Trait6 is perhaps the first systematic, modern 
discussion of general problems of organizing information. 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 
237 

The term “documentation” 
is a neologism invented by 
Otlet to designate what today we tend to call Informa- 
tion Storage and Retrieval. In fact it is not too much to 
claim the Trait.6 as one of the first information 
science 
textbooks. 
The Trait6 begins with a long and exhausting general 
exposition about communication and information examined 
historically 
and from the point of view of various social 
and other sciences. It then proposes that new kinds of me- 
chanical, integrated information handling systems should be 
invented that would transform the work environments and 
practices of scholars. Otlet’s speculations, Like Bush’s were 
prompted by a concern to deal with the ever-expanding 
growth of literature and the realization that a technological 
innovation 
was at hand to help. In Otlet’s case it was 
perhaps a technology 
that today we might have diffi- 
culty recognizing as such, so ubiquitous-and 
in a sense 
passe-has 
it become. What fired his imagination was the 
realization of the bibliographical 
uses to which standard 
3” X 5” card and later loose sheets or leaves of standard 
sizes could be put. Here was a simple technology to be 
exploited by those who had the imagination 
to see the 
potential implicit 
in it. Cards permitted the “analytical” 
recording of single, separate pieces of information, 
be 
they bibliographical 
or substantive, and so effectively the 
creation of what in hypertext are nodes or chunks of text. 
Larger chunks of information could be recorded on sepa- 
rate sheets. Otlet called this the “Monographic 
Principle” 
(Otlet, 1918). 
The use 
of the term, monographic, was well chosen; 
etymologically 
it signifies a single or individual 
piece or 
unit of writing. It is possible that Otlet’s use of the term 
derives from his involvement in Die Briicke or the Bridge, 
a society for the study of the organization of knowledge set 
up in Munich in 1911 with the famous German chemist, 
Wilhelm Ostwald, in the Chair. Otlet was named Honorary 
President of the society. The reciprocities in the relationship 
between Otlet, the Institut International de Bibliographie 
(IIB), 
Ostwald, and Die Briicke are in need of much 
further investigation. But Otlet’s “Monographic 
Principle” 
echoes the Prizip der Monographisierung 
enunciated in the 
literature of Die Briike and which led in the long run to 
the emergence of the German standard, now internationally 
accepted, for the size of paper sheets (Satoh, 1987). For 
Otlet, if cards and sheets were standardized especially as to 
size and weight, the collaborative, continuous expansibility 
of databases that were created in these media according 
to the monographic principle became possible. In theory it 
was easy to excerpt items in the databases or to duplicate 
them in whole or in part simply by copying the cards 
or sheets comprising them. Otlet and his colleagues were 
also responsible for the development of what we would 
call a highly 
flexible 
database management system for 
databases created from cards and sheets. This was the 
Universal Decimal Classification (UDC), the first of the 
great modern faceted classification systems which grew out 
of Otlet’s discovery in 1895 of Melvil 
Dewey’s Decimal 
Classification and his recognition of its potential for map- 
ping knowledge domains and encoding complex subject 
descriptions. 
The Organizational 
Context-IIB, 
RBU, UDC, 
and the Palais Mondial 
The ideas expressed in Otlet’s early papers arose out of 
the experience Otlet and his colleague, Henri La Fontaine, 
had had in the period from 1892 to 1895 in creating a 
number of social science bibliographies under the aegis of 
the Socittt des Sciences sociales et politiques in Brussels. 
The acquisition of a copy of Melvil 
Dewey’s Decimal 
Classification in 1895 led them to explore the idea of devel- 
oping by means of international cooperation an international 
bibliography that would be compiled on cards and classified 
by the Decimal Classification. Dewey agreed that they be 
allowed to expand and modify the Decimal Classification so 
that it would be appropriate for the detailed, bibliographic 
purposes that they had in mind. His proviso was that their 
version of the classification was not to be made available in 
English (and it was not until the mid-1930s). In its expanded 
form Dewey’s Decimal Classification became known as the 
Universal Decimal Classification (UDC), the first complete 
edition of which was issued in the period 1904-1907. 
In the fall of 1895, with support of the Belgian gov- 
ernment, Otlet and La Fontaine summoned the first In- 
ternational Conference of Bibliography 
(there were to be 
five of these conferences before the First World War). 
The conference resolved to set up an International Institute 
of Bibliography 
(IIB), 
whose headquarters in Brussels 
would be known as the International Office of Bibliog- 
raphy (OIB), to which the Belgian government accorded 
a semiofficial 
status. Within the OIB would be assem- 
bled a great classified catalogue or database on cards. 
This was the Universal Bibliographic 
Repertory (RBU). 
In 1895 the two friends had compiled a sample database 
of 400,000 classified entries for the consideration of the 
International Conference of Bibliography. 
By April 1934 
Otlet (1934) noted that the number of cards in the data- 
base was 15,646,346 (p. 405). The RBU was followed by 
other kinds of databases. First, in 1906, came a Univer- 
sal Iconographic Repertory, an image database in which 
illustrative materials were assembled and mounted on cards 
or sheets of the standard size. By 1912 there were a 
quarter of a million items in this Repertory (Rayward, 1975, 
p. 154). Its purpose was to provide a pictorial dimension 
to the RBU. Like the RBU, items for the image file 
were classified and arranged by the Universal Decimal 
Classification in their special furniture. The next step was to 
observe that if textual materials were similarly assembled 
and classified, a substantive or what we might call a full 
text dimension would then be achieved in the repertories 
that were now bibliographical 
and pictorial. What was 
called the Encyclopedic Repertory of Dossiers (or files) 
was instituted in 1907. In it were assembled materials 
“relative to all the objects and all the facts which con- 
stitute human activity in its widest extension” (Rayward, 
238 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 

1975, p. 154). By 1914 it contained a million 
items in 
10,000 files. 
From the earliest days of setting up the Universal Bib- 
liographic Repertory, Otlet and his colleagues stressed for 
its rapid and comprehensive development the importance 
of international 
cooperation in publishing 
bibliographies 
in the standard format, preferably on one side of a sheet 
and with each entry containing 
its UDC number. The 
publications could then be cut up and pasted onto cards for 
interfiling 
in the RBU. Not surprisingly they also stressed 
the value of, and themselves experimented with, actually 
publishing 
bibliographies 
on cards (Otlet & Vanderveld, 
1906). Publications according to the various standardized 
requirements that they promulgated were considered to be 
part of a numbered series of Contributions to the Bibli- 
ographia Universalis. This actually reached considerable 
proportions in the period before the outbreak of the First 
World War (Rayward, 1975, ch. 6). 
Later, similar emphasis was placed on the publication of 
“encyclopedic” 
material for direct use in the encyclopedic 
repertory. The Belgian Sociological Society, for example, 
in the period before the First World War, published an 
anthropological 
directory of primitive 
tribes in a volume 
with pages perforated at the margins for just this cumulating 
encyclopedic purpose. Otlet (1918) makes a passing refer- 
ence to Nelson’s Perpetual Loose-leaf Encyclopedia which 
first began to appear in 1905 which may have served as a 
model or example for him. An intriguing reference was also 
made in 1913 by the Berlin correspondent of the Scientific 
American to the Belgian encyclopedia experiments. He 
reports on the idea floated in Berlin of developing “An 
encyclopedia on the Card-Index 
system” in connection 
with the microphotographic library of Robert Goldschmidt, 
an engineer with whose experiments in the bibliographic 
applications of microfilm Otlet had collaborated since at 
least 1906. This casual reference raises again the connection 
between Die Brticke and Otlet and his colleagues. What is 
reported suggests that the Germans were exploring the idea 
of creating a working encyclopedia on the model proposed 
by Otlet (Encyclopedia, 1913). 
The various databases actually set up by Otlet and 
his colleagues were all intended to be interrelated by 
their common standardized organizational methods, most 
especially by and through their arrangement by the UDC. 
Of course, explicit links between items in the repertories 
or databases were not made; each file had to be referred to 
separately for material on a given subject or in the course 
of a particular search. But the use of the UDC provided 
implicit, 
recognizable links between the files. A number 
assigned to an entry in one file automatically linked that 
entry to an entry bearing the same or a related number in 
another file. 
An international search service for these databases was 
set up in the OIB, which was widely 
advertised and 
drew considerable business (Masure, 1912). Rudimentary 
instructions for formulating searches were drawn up. The 
retrieval effects of search terms that were either too general 
or too specific were described and it was suggested that 
requests should be formulated in terms of UDC num- 
bers. In the Tables of the Classification “the degree of 
generality and specificity of each question is exactly de- 
termined by the context.” Use of the Tables would prompt 
enquirers to both bibliographic 
completeness as well as 
exactness in the use of terminology. 
However, it was 
OIB policy that if a request was likely to produce more 
than 50 items users would be notified of this “to obvi- 
ate surprise” (Communication des fiches, 1897). Searches 
continued to be made in the files-both 
bibliographic and 
image or iconographic-until 
the early 1970s when they 
became unavailable. 
The International Institute of Bibliography, its headquar- 
ters organization supported by the Belgian government as 
the International Office of Bibliography, 
underwent a fas- 
cinating process of organizational elaboration as these and 
other functions were added to it. In 1905, the International 
Institute of Photography was created within it to receive the 
collections of Ernest de Potter, the editor of the Revue befge 
de Photographie. These collections formed the basis of the 
International lconographic Repertory. In 1907, a Museum 
of the Press was also set up within the Institute under the 
joint sponsorship of the Union de la Presse pCriodique belge 
and the Cercle des Collectioneurs des Journaux. In that 
same year a number of learned societies in Brussels agreed 
to merge the collections of their libraries to form within 
the OIB what was at first called the Collective Library 
of Learned Societies and later, simply, the International 
Library. 
In 1910, Otlet and his colleague, Henri La Fontaine, 
organized a huge International Conference of International 
Associations which created the Union of International As- 
sociations (UIA). The conference was held on the occasion 
of a World’s Fair at Brussels and a number of the exhibits 
were acquired and centralized by Otlet and La Fontaine 
as the nucleus of an International 
Museum which they 
attempted to continue to develop over the years. The 
Belgian government provided new locations in 1910 in the 
Palais du Cinquantenaire for the Museum. In the next few 
years all of the components of the complex or organizations 
created by Otlet, La Fontaine and their colleagues were 
gradually centralized in these locations. Otlet named them 
the Palais Mondial (World Palace) or Mundaneum. For 
Otlet, conceptually, they were all interrelated aspects of 
what was required organizationally 
to develop effective 
international intellectual life. After the first World War the 
last of the components of the Palais Mondial or Mundaneum 
flickered into life, an International University. This was no 
more than a glorified summer school that met in the Palais 
Mondial three times in the early 1920s before disappearing 
from sight. 
A 1914 pamphlet in English describes what this new 
organization was intended to achieve: 
The International Centre organises collections of world- 
wide importance. These collections are the International 
Museum, the International Library, the International 
Bibliographic Catalogue and the Universal Documentary 
Archives. These collections are conceived as parts of one 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 
239 

universal body of documentation, as an encyclopedic 
survey of human knowledge, as an enormous intellec- 
tual warehouse of books, documents, catalogues and 
scientific objects. Established according to standardized 
methods, they are formed by assembling cooperatively 
everything that the participating associations may gather 
or classify. Closely consolidated and coordinated in 
all of their parts and enriched by duplicates of all 
private works wherever undertaken, these collections 
will tend progressively to constitute a permanent and 
complete representation of the entire world. (Union of 
International Associations, 1914, p. 116) 
Hypertext: 
Nodes, Chunks, 
and the 
Monographic 
Principle 
The databases or repertories, the collections of books 
and objects that were assembled within the OIB and later 
the Palais Mondial 
or Mundaneum were all related by 
common methods and a common “philosophy” 
of organ- 
ization. An examination of the ideas and procedures that 
governed their development suggests how similar what 
was intended was to hypertext systems. The repertories 
or databases consisted of nodes or chunks organized by 
a system of links and navigational devices that allowed 
the movement of the user from bibliographic 
reference 
to full text to image and object. Ultimately, 
as we will 
see, Otlet speculated about a new kind of technology that 
would make the kinds of prototype systems developed in 
the OIB available internationally 
using what we now call 
telecommunications. 
Recording information in separate chunks or units ac- 
cording to the “monographic principle,” 
could be applied 
to bibliographical 
references on cards and substantive in- 
formation on standardized separate sheets. The idea was 
to “detach what the book amalgamates, to reduce all 
that is complex to its elements and to devote a page 
to each. Pages here are leaves or cards according to 
the format adopted” (Otlet, 1918, p. 149). After all, at 
one level, a book was simply a “single continuous line 
which 
has initially 
been cut to the length of a page 
and then cut again to the size of a justified line.” Otlet 
suggested that the “repertories’‘-in 
modern terminology, 
the databases-that 
he and his colleagues were developing 
provided “a practical means of physically dividing the book 
according to the intellectual division of ideas” and obviating 
authorial peculiarities 
that obscured what was new and 
important in what was being presented. 
These databases had become necessary, he believed, for 
two reasons. First they responded to the need to provide 
a new kind of reference or consultation function that had 
arisen as a result of contemporary pressures of publishing, 
“Once one read; today one refers to, checks through, skims. 
vita brevis, ars longa! There is too much to read; the 
times are wrong; the trend is no longer slavishly to follow 
the author through the maze of a personal plan which he 
has outlined for himself and which in vain he attempts 
to impose on those who read him” (Otlet, 1903, p. 79). 
“It is necessary to be able to read a scholarly book by 
scanning it and easily eliminating from attention whatever 
is of no interest” (Otlet, 1989, p. 99). “The form of the 
book is distinct from its substance” (p. 94). The problem 
was how to release the substance from the particular 
bibliographic and literary forms in which it was expressed. 
In other words, the structure of conventional documents 
was too constraining and their content had to be, as it were, 
liberated by decomposing and recomposing them according 
to the monographic principle. This is the problem, to use 
Carlson’s words quoted above, of rhetoric and knowledge 
structures, of meaning and form. 
Second, these systems not only provided the new “con- 
sultation” 
function 
that Otlet saw as so important for 
contemporary retrieval systems, they also tended to high- 
light a range of inadequacies in existing systems. The new 
systems synthesized and allowed for the correction of what 
was increasingly fragmented and error prone. Consultation 
implied access to many sources, but these, in all their 
variety, were separate from one another, idiosyncratically 
organized and filled with error. They are, he declared in 
1903, “mixtures of what is repetitive, preliminary, and for 
reference.. .” (p. 84). Some 30 years later, when analyzing 
in the Trait6 de Documentation the problems presented by 
books, he observed (1934): 
(a) books present only some of the scientific data and 
so only a part of science (the incompleteness of books); 
(b) they present false as well as true knowledge (the 
errors of books); (c) they present the same thing more 
than once (repetitions); (d) they do not bring together 
information that is set out in several places, but divide it 
up and scatter it in innumerable volumes (fragmentation 
and dispersion); (e) they do not present the information 
set out according to its degree of importance (a mixture 
of the primary and secondary). (p. 373) 
Techniques of the kind he proposed would provide a 
solution to all of these problems. 
The idea of continuously, 
cooperatively 
elaborated 
databases growing from the decomposed texts of “the 
innumerable 
books on 
the subject matter 
of 
each 
discipline,” led Otlet (1903) to think that they could form 
what might be called the “Universal 
Book” 
for each 
discipline. 
This book, the ‘Biblion,’ the Source, the permanent En- 
cyclopedia, the Summa, . . . will constitute a systematic, 
complete, current registration of all the facts relating 
to a particular branch of knowledge. It will be formed 
by linking together materials and elements scattered in 
all relevant publications. It will comprise inventories 
of facts, catalogues of ideas and the nomenclatures of 
system and theories. It will condense various scientific 
data into tables, diagrams, maps, schemas. It will il- 
lustrate them by drawings, engravings, facsimiles and 
documentary photographs. (p. 83) 
In the Trait6 he described more systematically 
the 
several levels materials and information 
that this new 
kind of encyclopedia would 
contain. There would be 
“encyclopedic 
documentary files” which would be made 
240 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 

up of pamphlets and extracts or parts of publications 
without any further processing. Analogous to these files 
would be card files differing from the documentary files 
only in size and the extent of the otherwise unprocessed 
items of information 
recorded on them. A third kind 
of input would be encyclopedic cards or sheets which 
would contain information that had been published in such 
a way that the cards or sheets could be incorporated 
directly 
into the encyclopedia. A fourth kind of input 
would be “encyclopedic 
atlases” which were not atlases 
in the conventional 
sense, but rather tables and charts 
schematizing diagrammatically 
major components of the 
encyclopedia. They could be considered to form a kind of 
navigational system in and between the various databases 
involved. Otlet placed great importance both for educational 
purposes and for clarifying and stimulating thought on the 
use of schemas, diagrams, charts, and tables. They helped 
identify and visualize concepts and concept relationships. 
Otlet’s colleague with whom he worked closely over 
the years and with 
whom 
he shared this 
interest, 
the Scottish town planner and sociologist, 
Sir Patrick 
Geddes, called them “thinking 
machines” (Boardman, 
1978; Rayward, 1975). 
Finally, there was “the ultimate work of documentation” 
involving 
a process of “encyclopedic 
codification” 
that 
required “condensing, generalizing and synthesizing” data 
related to knowledge and action (p. 409). The new kind 
of universal encyclopedia in which all of these kinds of 
material would be incorporated would be collaboratively 
developed according to internationally 
adopted methods. It 
would be a great cadastral survey of learning in which 
all developments in knowledge would be reported and 
recorded day by day. It would be the culminating work of 
an international documentary network (Otlet, 1903, p. 83). 
Thus did Otlet early in the century envisage the kind 
of encyclopedia the idea of which independently attracted 
H. G. Wells’s interest in those last few fateful years before 
the outbreak of World War II (Rayward, 1992, 1994; Wells, 
1938). It was an idea of encyclopedia not greatly dissimilar 
form that about which Bush was to speculate in the context 
of memex during the war years. For Otlet, the origins of the 
idea lay in his “scientific” 
analysis of documentary forms, 
his identification 
of the intellectual and physical elements 
comprising books and other documents, and the poten- 
tial for the systematic organization and reorganization of 
knowledge inherent in the application of the monographic 
principle to standardized cards and sheets. 
Hypertext: 
Links, 
Navigational 
Systems, 
and the UDC 
The monographic principle applied to standardized cards 
and sheets represented one of the two major components of 
modern hypertext systems-nodes. 
The other, links and 
navigational systems, is reflected in the transformation by 
Otlet and his colleagues of Melvil Dewey’s Decimal Clas- 
sification system into the Universal Decimal Classification 
system. This was to become what Carlson (1989) has 
identified as one of the essential components of a hypertext 
information storage and retrieval system-“an 
assistance 
processor: a retrieval mechanism (or collection of retrieval 
mechanisms) for effective access to and management of 
the database” (p. 62-63). 
UDC numbers for classes and divisions formed numeric 
codes. In these codes, “the links, the genealogy even, of 
ideas and objects, their relationships of dependence and 
subordination, of similarity 
and difference, find suitable 
representation. . .” (La Fontaine & Otlet, 1895, p. 34). 
They thought that the numbers “constitute 
a veritable 
new language whose phrases, here numbers, are formed 
according to constant syntactical rules from words, here 
numerals. . . they translate ideas absolutely common to the 
entire scientific world and express them in universally 
understood signs-numbers. 
In this twofold way the Deci- 
mal Classification 
actually constitutes and international 
scientific language, a complete system for representing 
science.” The claim was even made that the numbers 
“followed the laws of scientific logic” (p. 34). 
While Otlet and La Fontaine made a clear distinction 
between the classification of knowledge and bibliographic 
classifications, the latter being used essentially for the 
location of documents, the linguistic potential of the UDC 
led Otlet and his colleagues to elaborate its synthetic 
or faceted features. “As a classification,” 
Otlet observed 
(1896) it must present a framework in which ideas can 
be successively subordinated to each other in different 
ways.. 
As a bibliographic notation, it must be a veritable 
pasigraphy able to interpret by numerals grouped into 
factors having a separate and permanent meaning, all the 
nuances of ideologico-bibliographical 
analysis” (p. 59). The 
factors could be derived from auxiliary 
tables or from 
elsewhere in the classification, their use being marked in 
every case by a particular sign of association. By describing 
the UDC as a “pasigraphy,” 
Otlet stressed its function 
as a system of knowledge representation designed for 
international use in which characters, such as numerals, 
represent ideas directly rather than standing for words. 
The UDC fulfilled 
the requirement that Otlet had for- 
mulated in 1893 for a “synoptic outline of knowledge” 
(P. 19) “an immense map of the domains of knowledge” 
(Otlet, 1918, p. 78). Conceived of in this way and subjected 
to the developments that made it one of the first faceted 
classifications, the UDC’s function was to encode what 
were essentially extended statements of what documents 
were about. Navigation in and between whatever special 
or general files or repertories were created from these 
documents or document descriptions required an under- 
standing of how these codes worked. The general structure 
of the numbers comprising the codes was readily intelli- 
gible-and 
memorizable-for 
orienting the user generally 
in the files. To use a contemporary example (La Fontaine 
& Otlet, 1895): 
All the works concerning electricity are numbered 537. 
The first numeral, 5, indicates that the subject is related 
to the fifth class of knowledge, that is to say, to 
science. The second numeral determines what division 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 
241 

of science is in question. Here it is the third division 
to which, conventionally, the number 3 is given. All the 
works of physics are, therefore, marked, 53. But physics 
itself is broken into different sections, of which the 
seventh is electricity, according to a uniform, previously 
established classification. When the numeral 7 is added 
to the number 53 it individualizes it and 537 indicates 
works which deal only with electricity. (p. 34) 
The basic subdivisions 
were clear: the one, two, or 
three numbers that came before the decimal point indicated 
major classes or divisions and it was relatively easy to 
follow the sequence of numbers after the decimal point, 
no matter the degree to which they were elaborated: they 
formed a simple numerical sequence until interrupted by 
a sign of association of some kind. A series of auxiliary 
tables was prepared to represent common subdivisions by 
bibliographic 
form, language, chronology, point of view, 
proper name, and place, each having its own distinctive 
sign or marker (Rayward, 1975, ch. V). Complex numbers 
were created by using the special signs of association 
and other signs of abbreviation 
with numbers derived 
from the auxiliary tables of the common subdivisions and 
subdivisions derived from the main Tables. The result could 
be very long and complex numbers. S. C. Bradford (1950), 
an ardent supporter of the UDC, declares that the creation 
of an expression such as 
526.9 : 336.211(431)“1927” 
= 
3 (Guide to Prussian cadastral surveying in 1927) 
is “justly described as ‘not classification but idle jesting’ ” 
(p. 39). But it is not untypical of UDC numbers that he and 
others habitually elaborated. 
Not only was there a problem in identifying 
and inter- 
preting the parts of numbers, as a whole they presented 
great filing 
difficulties. 
Filing order was necessarily ar- 
bitrary and hard to remember. It became a problem for 
extremely complex numbers comprising several “factors” 
at the point where these factors were attached to the 
basic number. The problem was compounded by several 
procedures for presenting long numbers in abbreviated 
form. In one of the earliest reports on this matter (Annuaire, 
1902), filing order is shown as: number to be subdivided 
followed by 0, “ “, ., =, :, --, A-Z, 0, 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9. 
In theory, the constituent elements of complex numbers, 
the factors, were intended themselves to be searchable 
individually 
so that numbers representing complex ideas 
could provide multiple 
points of entry to the database 
depending on the interests and needs of the enquirer. 
As John Metcalfe (1959) has demonstrated, taking up a 
comment of Bradford’s (1950) about “a small logical defect 
in the structure of the Decimal Classification” 
(p. 33), 
this sort of flexibility 
in searching was not possible in 
practice except for whole numbers reversible around the 
colon (:). This difficulty 
pointed up more clearly than 
anything else the limitations of the technology of cards and 
cabinets to which Otlet and his colleagues were restricted. 
Nowadays, in the computer age, the number-compounding 
and synthesizing conventions of the UDC can be used 
in searching in such a way that they actually fulfill 
the 
functions for which they were originally devised a century 
ago (e.g., Buxton, 1990). 
One further requirement had to be met for the databases 
to become operational and this led to the introduction of 
additional navigational aids for the guidance of potential 
users. It was necessary that the cards and sheets on which 
the chunks of text-bibliographic, 
substantive, graphic, or 
pictorial-were 
recorded, be housed or contained. Standard 
catalogue furniture and filing cabinets had to be designed 
and manufactured to “embody” 
the various repertories 
being assembled. This furniture was an essential part of 
the system. It was produced to specifications put out by the 
OIB by a Belgian manufacturing firm and was advertised 
for general use in many of the International Institute of 
Bibliography’s 
publications (e.g., Annuaire, 1902). 
As materials were added to the databases and accom- 
modated in the appropriate cabinets, divisionary cards of 
different heights and colors were introduced to indicate 
in a systematic way where major segments of the files 
fell-orange 
cards to indicate specific subjects and the 
relational subdivision, blue to indicate form divisions, green 
for divisions according to place, and so on. The numbers 
for the major classes and subclasses were recorded on 
lugs staggered along the edge of the divisionary 
cards 
protruding above the “content” cards. In effect the system 
of divisionary cards provided an important series of navi- 
gational devices for orienting users to the gross pattern 
of organization of what rapidly became large, complex, 
and related files. All of these matters are described in 
great detail in the Manual for the Universal Bibliographic 
Repertory, A huge volume of more than 2000 pages issued 
with varying dates in the period 1904-1907, it included the 
first complete edition of the UDC (Manuel, 1907; Rayward, 
1975, ch. V). 
Yet a third general navigational 
or mapping device 
consisted of the diagrams and schemas mentioned above. 
Such “atlases,” as we have seen, were to be a feature of 
the innovative form of encyclopedia that Otlet proposed 
as the culminating objective of the new information stor- 
age and retrieval discipline, Documentation, that he was 
formulating. Schemas displayed in simplified, visual form 
the intricate relationships of the concepts embraced within 
various subject areas. A number of these schemas and charts 
were actually drawn up to help the conceptual orientation 
of users and to encapsulate the relationships between the 
databases and collections that Otlet and his colleagues had 
created in Brussels. Some of the diagrams were reproduced 
in a number of IIB publications. 
Gresleri and Matteoni 
(1982) have also recently used a number of them as 
representing in striking summary form aspects of Otlet’s 
view of the organization of knowledge and the nature and 
relationships of international organizations and institutions. 
Offices 
of Documentation 
as Hypertext 
Systems 
Perhaps the nearest that Otlet and his colleagues came 
to developing working hypertext systems-microtext 
in 
242 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 

Rada’s terminology-of 
limited scope and special applica- 
tion were several documentary services created within the 
International Institute of Bibliography 
around 1908. These 
services were set up ostensibly under the sponsorship of 
the International Polar Institute, supported by the Belgian 
government, and the International Associations for Hunt- 
ing, Fishing, and Aeronautics. Mirroring 
the repertories in 
the International 
Institute of Bibliography, 
each of these 
International 
Offices of Documentation was to develop 
as complete a bibliographic 
repertory as possible in its 
specialist area. Each of the offices was to assemble a 
comprehensive library and a repertory of illustrative 
ma- 
terial-photographs, 
drawings, and prints. And each was 
also to develop a substantive repertory in which “documen- 
tary evidence will be classified on separate sheets.. [this 
repertory] will contain extracts of literary works, separate 
articles, cuttings from newspapers, parliamentary docu- 
ments, reports, prospectuses of industrial establishments 
and diverse manuscripts.. .” (Rayward, 1975, p. 155). A 
vast manual labor of indexing, transcription and excerpting 
was actually begun for these offices. Effectively the texts 
treated in this way were being modularized into nodes that 
would be recorded according to the requirements of the 
monographic principle. Searching in the various files in 
these documentation services was possible through the sys- 
tem of links implicit in the flexible, synthetic mechanisms 
provided by the UDC and by the other navigational devices 
described above. 
Louis Masure (1912), Secretary to the IIB, gives an 
account of the status of the work of these offices as of 1912. 
The International Office for Hunting, to take one example, 
was involved in the “the classification, preservation, and 
communication” 
of all of the publications 
received in 
the office-“books, 
brochures, periodicals, newspapers, 
documents, prints, engravings, maps and manuscripts.” 
Laws and regulations from various countries were to be 
translated; all hunt related periodicals were to be indexed; 
and information 
and copies of documents supplied upon 
request. By 1912 nearly 11,000 bibliographic 
entries had 
been prepared. Some 6,000 documentary items in a small 
card format had been created, mostly related to legisla- 
tion. There were, however, over 30,000 items in the large 
sheet format. The pictorial or iconographic documentation 
consisted of 3,000 items. In addition was a file of over 
21,000 entries derived from stock or stud books. Masure 
shows each of these major categories of documentation 
broken down into detailed subdivisions by UDC number. 
There were about 1,000 items in the small documentary 
format, presumably held in their own special filing cabinets, 
listed as being filed at 63.67.1, hunting dogs. There were 
slightly more than 1,700 items in the large documentary 
format at that number, again presumably in their own 
special filing cabinets. Some 300 pictorial items are listed 
as being at that number in the iconographic file. There 
would also have been 
in addition a set of bibliographic 
cards in the classified part of the catalogue at that number 
(these are not specified by category in the report) as well 
as books on the library shelves. The files derived from the 
stud books are for dogs in general at 63.67. A special 
section in the International Museum was also set up to 
receive objects of various kinds related to hunting. It is 
not clear that these special information services or Offices 
of Documentation had much life beyond the outbreak of 
the First World War. 
For Otlet, however, Offices of Documentation were a 
new organizational phenomenon for processing and dis- 
seminating information. 
Regardless of the short life and 
imperfect implementation 
of the actual offices that he 
and his colleagues had attempted to create, the idea of 
such offices was central to his speculations about the 
organization (and reorganization) of knowledge. Offices of 
Documentation, Otlet thought, might draw on, but would 
transcend, the inadequacies of contemporary libraries. As 
early as 1903 he suggested that they would “form annexes 
or organizations complementary to libraries” (Otlet, 1903, 
p. 84). Later he suggested that Offices of Documentation 
had arisen because libraries had become slow to acquire 
new kinds of documents that did not conform to con- 
ventional categories (Otlet, 1934). They had not adopted 
the most advanced technical processing methods, includ- 
ing new methods of classification and cataloguing. They 
were deficient in not providing the specialist information 
services their users needed. In the future, however, “now 
that the work of excitation, propulsion, and creation has 
been carried out” (p. 414), Otlet thought that libraries, no 
longer limited to traditional catalogues giving traditional 
access to books and periodicals arranged in straight lines 
on conventional 
shelves, would function 
as Offices of 
Documentation. 
What is distinctive about the Office of Documentation 
described by Otlet is the fact that its active informa- 
tion processing, reordering, restructuring functions were 
paramount. Over the years, Otlet (e.g., 1918) came back 
again and again to this idea, expressing it in different 
ways and in different contexts. Books were no more than 
raw materials that “must be developed more fully. This 
development consists in establishing the connections each 
individual book has with all the other books and forming 
from them what might be called the Universal Book.” The 
“dissection” and “redistribution” 
of the content of all sorts 
of documents, “chapters, articles and illustrations extracted 
from books, journals and newspapers, off-prints, ephemera, 
photographs, etc.,” were major functions of the Office of 
Documentation (Otlet, 1920). The creation of databases, or 
repertories in Otlet’s terminology, derived from this need to 
go beyond the externalities of documents. But the repertory 
had many forms-“bibliographic 
repertories, repertories 
of documentary dossiers gathering pamphlets and extracts 
together by subject, catalogues, chronological repertories of 
facts or alphabetical ones of names, encyclopedic reperto- 
ries of scientific data, laws, patents, physical and technical 
constants, statistics, etc.” (p. 154)-All 
of these kinds of 
repertories or files were to be created and correlated within 
the Office of Documentation. A first approximation to what 
was needed were the specialist offices of documentation 
for hunting, fishing, polar regions and aeronautics that 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 
243 

Otlet and his colleagues had experimented with before 
the war. 
The Universal Bibliographic 
Repertory can be consid- 
ered at a general level to be the catalogue of an ideal, 
universal library. At a more detailed level it becomes 
the table of contents or the highly detailed index of the 
contents of a universal library. But ultimately one more 
step is needed in what Otlet called the “documentary edi- 
fice.” This is the creation of the documentary encyclopedia 
from the indexed contents of the universal library. 
In 
essence, the encyclopedia is the Office. Within the Office 
of Documentation each of the databases, bibliographic, 
image, and textual, and each of the collections created 
by the application of the monographic principle, would be 
implicitly 
linked to each other through the use of the same 
database management system, UDC. Equally implicitly they 
would also be linked to relevant objects themselves for 
objects, too, must in an abstract sense be considered to be 
documents-hence, 
the imperative need for a museum to 
complement the bibliographic-bibliothecal 
components of 
the Palais Mondial or Mundaneum. The importance of this 
idea has recently been examined by Buckland (1991a, b). 
Responsive instantly and flexibly to the individual 
needs 
of clients, the Office Documentation, this revolutionized 
library, this future form of encyclopedia, is effectively a 
hypertext/hypermedia system. 
MultiMedia 
Substitutes 
for the Book 
So far this account of Otlet’s ideas has been restricted to 
his attempts to create working organizations and services 
that were limited by the card and filing cabinet-based 
technology of his time. Discussed in these terms, an 
effort of imagination is required to appreciate their rele- 
vance to contemporary systems that are under development 
in a computer-based environment. But over the years 
Otlet became very much aware of new possibilities 
for information organization and communication offered 
by new technology. In the Trait6 de Documentation he 
expresses a vision of the future that is as revolutionary as 
Ted Nelson’s Xanadu and not dissimilar. At the beginning 
of the century he had collaborated with the engineer, 
Robert Goldschmidt, in developing bibliographic 
appli- 
cations of microfilm 
and these experiments continued 
into the 1920s (Otlet & Goldschmidt, 
1906, 1925). In 
the late 1920s he and his colleagues attempted to use 
microfilm to create a new kind of information service and a 
version of the new kind of encyclopedia, the Encyclopaedia 
Microphotica Mundaneurn in the Palais Mondial (Rayward, 
1975, p. 297; Rayward, 1990, pi 208, 209). At about the 
same time, Otlet became aware of experimental attempts to 
establish commercial television (Rayward, 1990, p. 208). 
He understood that the emergence of television heralded 
something entirely new in the dissemination of information 
(Otlet, 1934). He believed that following 
the advent of 
the radio, “auditory documentation” should take its place 
alongside visual or graphic documentation, But this was 
only a beginning. He foresaw the emergence eventually 
of what he called tactile, gustatory, and olfactory docu- 
ments-the 
“sense-perception-document”-in 
association 
with the other kinds of document (p, 429). All were 
forms of documentation and were complementary. “One 
after another,” he observed, “marvellous inventions have 
immensely extended the possibilities of documentation.” 
Such media as “telegraph and telephone, radio, television, 
cinema, sound recordings,” as well as museum objects, 
all have similar aims to those of books-“information, 
communication”-but 
they achieve them differently. There 
was as yet, he believed, no collective name for them and 
so he proposed the term, “substitutes for the book.” He 
devoted a major section in the Trait& to an examination of 
their current state of technical development, their functional 
relationships 
and their implications 
for documentation 
(section 243, pp. 216-247). 
“The book,” he concluded, 
“is only a means to an end. Other means exist and as 
gradually they become more effective than the book, they 
are substituted for it.” 
The Scholar’s 
Work Station: 
a Hypermedia 
Memex 
In the Trait& Otlet is led from an analysis of multimedia 
substitutes for the book to speculate about the possibility 
of inventing new of kinds of intellectual machines and pro- 
cesses that he believed had now become both feasible and 
desirable. He identified a set of functions to be incorporated 
in one or more of these machines. The result was something 
akin to what today we would think of as the scholar’s 
workstation, though some of the functionality 
envisaged 
by Otlet is still only a utopian glint in the inventor’s 
eye. First, conventional work places needed improvements 
so that documents could be accessed and sorted more 
easily. There might be, for example, separate surfaces for 
different projects currently underway so that, as one task 
was interrupted when another was taken up, there need 
not be constant displacing and rearranging of materials. 
He suggested that this could be achieved by constructing a 
desk, following 
an eighteenth century model, in the form 
of a wheel the spokes of which would be hinged and 
would constitute freely movable writing surfaces. Moreover 
the desk should be surrounded by a great mobile filing 
cabinet which would always to open, at eye-level height, 
and within hand’s reach. Mounted on a straight or circular 
rail, its movement controlled electrically, this is a striking 
physical surrogate for the files and databases now available 
in electronic systems. 
Desks also needed to be fitted with “machines and 
auxiliary instruments of intellectual work.” There should be 
machines to transform speech into writing and vice versa. 
It should also be possible, he believed, as an application 
of television, to allow texts to be made available for 
remote reading. There should be a device that would allow 
individuals to know of texts publicly displayed in various 
locations for this purpose. An extension of this idea was 
the suggestion that books on the shelves of a library or 
the contents of files in filing cabinets ought to be able to 
be inspected remotely as well. He was thinking of reading 
244 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 

machines scanning the physical items, while for us this 
function is performed by online access to machine-readable 
files. Similarly he thought that it should be possible to add 
long distance, as it were, to existing texts held remotely 
and to do this in such a way that the original texts were not 
disturbed. This idea of texts cumulating readers’ annotation 
and commentary is seen as an important potential function 
of some hypertext systems (Davenport & Cronin, 1990; 
Landow, 1992). 
Otlet’s concern that the physical 
integrity 
of files 
subjected to these processes be maintained is revealing. 
It suggests that Otlet was very sensitive to one of the 
major limitations 
of the card-based systems he and his 
colleagues had introduced. To respond to requests for 
information, 
the staff of the search service in Brussels 
had to remove cards or other documents by hand from 
the files, copy them by hand and refile them by hand. 
This was a labor-intensive 
set of operations that was 
also liable to all sorts of errors of miscopying 
on 
the one hand and misfiling 
on the other. Moreover, 
materials sent in by collaborators from around the world 
had to be manually collated and filed in the databases 
by the OIB staff. Similarly, 
the information 
extracted 
from documents according to the monographic principle 
necessitated laborious transcription 
by hand or cutting 
and pasting. These last processes destroyed the integrity 
of the original 
and the possibility 
of other kinds of 
analysis, manipulation 
and reconstitution 
of the text 
that had not yet been anticipated. Online 
access to 
machine-held files or databases obviates all of these 
problems. It effectively meets the requirements that Otlet 
had formulated, 
but was unable to achieve, in the 
paper and card environment 
in which 
he functioned 
(Buckland, 1992). 
Eventually, 
Otlet suggested, on the work desk there 
might be no books or other documents at all, but only a 
screen and a telephone. Somewhere outside, regardless of 
distance, would be 
. . .an immense edifice containing all the books and the 
information, together with all the resources of space 
needed to record and manage them, with all of its appa- 
ratus of catalogues, bibliographies and indexes, with all 
the information redistributed on cards, sheets and files, 
and with search and retrieval [literally: selection and 
combination] performed by an appropriately qualified 
permanent staff (p. 428). 
The 
workstation 
would 
be connected to this 
cen- 
ter by telephone, wireless telegraphy, 
television, 
and 
telex (“tClCaugraphie”-elsewhere, 
p. 237, Otlet discusses 
“teltphotographie,” 
which seems to be kind of telefacsimile 
transmission). The user would simply automatically call 
up on the screen the document or documents he or 
she wanted. The machine itself would operate one or 
more screens-as 
many as were necessary-to 
allow 
the simultaneous consultation of as many documents as 
might be desirable. A loudspeaker would give an extra, 
auditory dimension to the system and would allow text 
to be accompanied or augmented by sound. Effective 
consecutive transmission of information 
in the system 
would depend on the materials on which it depended 
having been recorded analytically 
in such a way that 
they could be automatically 
manipulated by “selection 
machines” (p. 428). 
In another context, Otlet (1935) describes what he en- 
visages in such a way that it is clear he has in mind 
machines that could create a “virtual” 
reality. He foresees 
the emergence of 
. . .a machinery unaffected by distance which would 
combine at the same time radio, x-rays, cinema and 
microscopic photography. All the things of the universe 
and all those of man would be registered from afar as 
they were created. Thus the moving image of the world 
would be established-its 
memory, its true duplicate. 
From afar anyone would be able to read any passage, 
expanded or limited to the desired subject, that would 
be projected onto his individual screen, Thus in his 
armchair, anyone would be able to contemplate the 
whole of creation or particular parts of it. (pp. 390-391) 
The invention of machines with these capabilities would 
help realize the new kind of encyclopedia that was the 
ultimate desideratum of documentation and would make it 
“very approximately, an annexe to the brain, the substratum 
of memory, an exterior mechanism and instrument of the 
mind, but so close to it and so fitted to its use that is would 
truly be a sort of appended, exodermic organ” (Otlet, 1934). 
As early as 1903, long before the sorts of development 
he described in the Trait6 stimulated him to technological 
speculation of the kind reported above, Otlet spoke of the 
practical aim of the science of bibliography 
as bringing 
into being “a machine for exploring time and space” (Otlet, 
1903, p. 86). This image of a mechanical “brain” was to be 
echoed in his idea of a “World Brain” by H. G. Wells (1938) 
and by Bush in describing the functions of memex. 
Universal 
Network for Documentation-an 
Internet 
But the realization 
of these hypertext-hypermedia 
visions 
depended not only on the invention 
of new 
kinds of intellectual 
aparatus. They were predicated 
on a systematic organization 
of documentary 
work 
involving the cooperation of individual workers following 
standard practices for the creation, internal organiza- 
tion, publication, 
and processing of documents. These 
would 
facilitate 
the process of “division, 
dissection 
and redistribution 
of items of information” 
that was 
needed at the encyclopedic level or organization (Otlet, 
1934, p. 396). But beyond them would 
come inter- 
related networks of libraries, archives, museums, and 
offices of documentation all following the same standard- 
ized methods of collection development and information 
processing. These networks would rise through the local 
and national to the international levels. Associated with 
them would 
be “ancillary 
documentary organizations” 
(p. 414) by which 
Otlet meant academies, scientific 
societies, research institutes, universities, and international 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 
245 

associations, all of which were concerned with 
docu- 
mentation at some level of production, organization, or 
use. Ultimately, 
as this process of organization reached 
its apogee, a Universal 
Network 
for Information 
and 
Documentation would be formed which would link “centres 
of production, distribution, 
and use regardless of subject 
matter or place.” 
The creation of the network “will 
ensure that anyone will be able to obtain what is offered 
with the least effort and with the greatest promise of 
certainty and abundance” (p. 415). All around the globe 
scholars and others through the Universal Network for 
Documentation would be drawing on and contributing to 
an ever-expanding, carefully managed body of knowledge 
universally 
available to all. 
In this way Otlet envisaged the creation of “an enlarged 
supplement of [man’s] memory” (Bush, 1945), “a.. . system 
that would eventually hold all the world’s literature” (Con- 
klin, 1987) “a kind of universal library of. . . text organized 
and indexed in new ways to facilitate the work of the user” 
(Tsai, 1988), a system that would “provide for the deposit, 
delivery, and continued revision of linked.. . documents, 
servicing hundreds of millions 
of users with hypertext, 
graphics, audio, movies, and hypermedia” (Rada & Lunin, 
1986). (The words omitted are ‘online’ and ‘electronic’). 
Here, then, dating back to the turn of the twentieth century 
in its essentials, is a formidable conception of a world 
brain, an adumbration of memex and the Internet, a highly 
elaborated system for the augmentation of the intellect, a 
vision of Xanadu. 
But Is It Hypertext? 
Some of Otlet’s ideas are uncannily prescient of recent 
developments in the application of information technology. 
But, of course, Otlet was writing 
in a milieu that lay 
well outside the world of the computer and the ideas 
and speculations that it has generated, the social and 
“epistemological” 
developments that have gathered round 
it. It is important to understand the extent to which his 
thinking reflected and was inescapably determined by a 
social milieu and intellectual 
traditions that were quite 
different from those within which we operate today. He 
was not only not of our times, essentially he was not 
a twentieth century man at all; he was a conservative 
relic of the last quarter of the nineteenth. He identified 
a fundamental social problem. The problem is how most 
effectively 
to create, maintain, and change institutional 
arrangements for collecting, storing, preserving, organizing, 
retrieving, and disseminating all of the recorded information 
that is-or 
will be-needed 
within society. He dedicated 
himself throughout his long life with unflagging zeal to 
analyzing the dimensions of this problem and to exploring 
solutions to it. Yet he did this in ways that, from the point 
of view of those for whom there has been a paradigm shift, 
might well be described as ideologically 
doctrinaire and 
narrow minded. 
In contemporary systems of information 
retrieval, the 
user-an 
abstraction not easy to interpret-is 
placed, at 
least by rhetorical convention, at the center of the systems. 
Some guiding notion of the user and his or her information 
needs and behavior has provided a fundamental point of 
reference for system development. This is so no matter 
how unfriendly 
and inadequate the systems may be in 
fact, no matter how egregiously system designers may 
have ignored the needs and capabilities of those for whom 
the systems were ostensibly created. It has been so from 
the days of primitive 
library use surveys and studies of 
information needs to the current interest in the “cognitive 
approach” to information system design based on models 
of cognitive structures and processes (e.g., Belkin, 1990; 
de May 1980; Ellis 1991, 1992). Otlet, however, displayed 
little or no interest in the user, other than in an extremely 
generalized sense. He certainly gave little or no sign of 
having a concept of user needs as we now understand 
them. His orientation was, on the face of it, completely 
different. 
The modern primacy of the user in information systems 
comes out in a particularly 
interesting way in some of 
the general writing about hypertext systems. The text or 
document, is considered to be fluid, borderless, unbounded. 
It does not keep the form given to it by its author. In effect 
the modularization of the hypertext document is not only 
a form of decomposition of the document or documents 
on which the system is based, it may be construed as 
an act of repudiation of the authors’ intentions in, and 
responsibility 
for, producing the documents in the first 
place. To speak only a little hyperbolically, 
documents 
can be considered to be, as it were, free floating text re- 
ordered and altered at the will of the user or the system 
designer or both. The text has no final, pre-determined 
shape but is endlessly re-created and changed by the user as 
he or she interacts with the system. Moreover, comments 
and criticisms of a text may be linked directly to it and 
any one text may be linked in all sorts of predictable 
and unpredictable ways to any other in the system. In 
this way, what Landow (1992) calls the “separation and 
univocality” 
of printed texts (p. 63) is destroyed. Hypertext 
becomes “textuality 
without bounds, a world without end 
or beginning” (Felperin, 1985). It is this boundlessness that 
leads to the fear that users of the systems will become lost in 
“hyperspace” and prompts the development of navigational 
devices. 
In this way we may see hypertext as emblematic of the 
“deconstructionist” 
world of textuality and intertexuality of 
recent literary theory. In this world the trend to deal in 
“plural and deferred meanings” has led to the notion of 
the “endless interpretability 
of textuality” 
with the likely 
consequence for the author of being rendered “etiolated 
and anachronistic,” if not dead (Felperin, 198.5 p- 202). In 
effect, the traditional “status [of a text] as a transcription 
of experience and its author’s claim to control the mean- 
ing of that transcription,” 
says Felperin, “has now been 
undermined.” As Landow (1992) observes, “In reducing 
the autonomy of the text, hypertext reduces the autonomy 
of the author.” It reconceives “the figure and function of 
authorship” (p. 73). 
246 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 

User-Centeredness 
and Deconstructionism 
Perhaps hypertext users who “access” documents, like 
those who read texts “deconstructively,” 
may well be 
considered to engage something that is shifting, unstable, 
endlessly elusive as it transforms itself by what is brought 
to it in the very act of consultation. A request in Xanadu 
(Nelson, 1987) for example, “may bring back a shower of 
fragments from the separate documents of origin on differ- 
ent storage machines, which are assembled by the user’s 
front-end program” (p. 145). At another level of analysis 
of hypertext system capability, however, reconstruction is 
possible. Users request parts of “virtual” 
documents and 
“need not be aware (but may find out) what documents 
their fragments originally came from” (p. 145). That is to 
say in hypertext systems the original form of the text is not 
destroyed and may be recoverable and reconstitutable, just 
as the physical manifestation of a printed text undergoing 
a “deconstructive” reading remains available, “separate and 
univocal,” to other readers. Indeed, this recoverability is an 
essential feature of Xanadu. Here the system provision of 
a capability for “arbitrary collage” is balanced by the pro- 
vision of a capability for “historical backtracking” through 
document versions or states. The very notion of system 
navigation in hypertext must presumably also encompass 
return to a departure point. Whatever has been broken 
down or modularized and then connected by whatever 
associative links individual users have created for their own 
idiosyncratic purposes may be reconstituted, one assumes, 
into an “original” 
order and form. 
An Outmoded 
Paradigm: 
Nineteenth 
Century 
Positivism 
Landow (1992) is sympathetic but firm when he deals 
with those “who yearn to retain older conceptions of 
authorship or of the author function.” For him it is clear 
that “lack of textual autonomy, like lack of textual cen- 
teredness, immediately reverberates through conceptions of 
authorship as well. Similarly, 
the unboundedness of the 
new textuality disperses the author as well” (p. 74). But 
Otlet’s refusal to accept textual autonomy in his hypertext- 
like schemes, suggests an alternative outcome from that 
described by commentators such as Landow. He could only 
have been appalled by the deconstructionist, postmodern in- 
terpretations of text and hypertext. Otlet’s primary concern 
was not the document or the text or the author. It was 
also not the user of the system and his or her needs or 
purposes. Otlet’s concern was for the objective knowledge 
that was both contained in and hidden by documents. 
His view of knowledge was authoritarian, reductionist, 
positivist, simplistic-and 
optimistic! Documents are rep- 
etitious, confusingly 
expressed and filled with error as 
well as with what is factually true and, therefore, of use. 
But he betrays no doubt that what is factually true and 
likely to be useful can easily be identified. It is merely a 
question of institutionalizing 
certain processes for analyzing 
and organizing the content of documents. For him that 
aspect of the content of documents with which we must 
be concerned is facts. He speaks almost everywhere of 
facts. It is clear that for him a primary requirement of the 
new kind of systems that he believes must be developed 
is that they have the capability of securing the release of 
valuable information, what he would call facts, from the 
documents that hold and hide them. For Otlet it is not a 
case of how these new systems will respond adaptively 
to the incalculably 
various and idiosyncratic approaches 
of users. He is concerned with the way in which broad 
categories of users from various realms of intellectual and 
social endeavor will be able to use and benefit from what 
the systems provide. It is the user who must adapt to the 
systems not the systems to the user. 
What these systems provide are nuggets of information 
that have been purified of “all dross and foreign elements” 
(Otlet, 1903, p. 84) that accumulate around them as authors 
embed them in the documents that they create for a range of 
their own idiosyncratic purposes and with varying degrees 
of expository success. If authors would accept the kinds 
of discipline in producing documents represented by the 
procedures, the “rules and regulations,” recommended by 
Otlet (1920, p. 186), then all of what is original and 
a contribution 
to knowledge in what they wrote would 
become easily identifiable for assembly into a single, co- 
herent corpus, “the great body of the sciences” (p. 178). 
This would then contain all that has been established as 
true-and 
would constitute a new form of encyclopedia. In 
effect, Otlet suggests that we should be able to remove facts 
from documents rather like we shell peas from their pods. 
Otlet does not address the question of how what has been 
established as true is to be recognized. Presumably experts 
will be able to identify what is of value in the documents 
as they are processed in the Offices of Documentation. 
Ultimately 
the function of the offices in this process of 
assembling and integrating information in documents, as 
I have indicated above, is “codification.” 
This means not 
flexible, multiple expressiveness but simply “not saying 
something more than once.” It means organizing ideas in 
such a way that “principles, standards, laws and rules” are 
created (Otlet, 1934, p. 411). Through the new systems 
that he is proposing appropriate new knowledge will be 
“brought to the notice of those who must act so that 
their action will be more useful, more extensive, in better 
accord with the action of others, better subordinated to 
more general goals-in 
a word.. .more efficient” (p. 178). 
In this connection the synthetic qualities of the UDC and the 
flexibility 
that these qualities imply are important primarily 
for encoding complex subjects and subject relationships. 
Their value for database searching to meet complex and 
variable user needs is not a subject addressed directly at all. 
As a young student, Otlet was under the tutelage of Jesuit 
teachers and professors for most of his formative years, 
certainly more than the critical seven. As a teenager he 
saw himself engaged in the contest between science and 
religion. He committed himself finally and after a great 
spiritual crisis to the principles of positivism, progress, 
and evolution, to the grand theories of Herbert Spencer 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 
247 

and his contemporaries in which these traditions were 
fused and applied to social organization (Rayward, 1975, 
ch. 1). These early intellectual struggles marked Otlet for 
life. He never moved in his thinking from the positions 
he adopted as a young man and which were popular in 
the educated, upper middle class circles-tinged 
with a 
faintly 
iconoclastic socialism-in 
which he moved. He 
saw great, rational, generalizing, progressive organizational 
forces at work throughout society. He saw his work as 
harnessing these forces in institutions 
of ever-widening 
scope first in the International 
Institute of Bibliography, 
later in the Union of International Associations and later 
still, in the League of Nations. In the last case, however, 
he and his colleague, Henri La Fontaine, failed to secure 
any significant support for their schemes in the League’s 
International Committee, and later Institute on, Intellectual 
Cooperation. 
But there was nothing strange for him or, at least for a 
time, for his contemporaries, in suggesting-prescriptively 
and in an apriori way-how 
all of the forces in the world 
of books and knowledge might be organized rationally 
to facilitate the production and assembly of knowledge 
into a single, physical, “mechanically” 
accessible corpus. 
After all, he seems to suggest, science produces in a 
quite straightforward 
way discrete, objective elements of 
knowledge. These give rise in an equally straightforward 
way to laws and generalizations. The need to identify and 
manipulate the former in order to help produce the latter un- 
derpin Otlet’s conceptions of the functions of the Offices of 
Documentation. 
The metaphors that Otlet used are revealing (e.g., 1892). 
He wanted to “winnow” 
documents of their best grain 
and continuously “to map” all of the intellectual domains. 
“Mapping” 
assists exploration 
by reducing unnecessary 
voyages over already discovered terrain. And as “maps” 
of ever-decreasing scale are produced, they record and 
organize ever more detailed features of the landscape. 
“Winnowing” 
involves harvests in which nothing of value 
is lost and where the yield, the staple of intellectual life, is 
stored in an orderly, easily accessible granary for use. 
Otlet’s thinking 
must be placed within 
a nineteenth- 
century Kuhnian paradigm of positivist 
science, of the 
creation of dissemination of knowledge, that has long 
since been superseded. It can be argued that the solutions 
Otlet proposed for the problems of information 
storage 
and retrieval that were his almost obsessive concern failed 
because they reflected a naive view of the nature of knowl- 
edge and the dynamics of its growth. Otlet underestimated 
the complexity 
of the physical and social processes of 
scholarship and of the broader culture which supports these 
processes. The First World War marked the end of the 
intellectual 
as well as sociopolitical 
era in which Otlet 
had functioned 
hitherto with remarkable success. After 
the war, he and his schemes were never taken seriously 
except with the circle of his disciples. He quickly lost the 
support of the Belgian government. In the late 1920s he 
faced the defection of his followers in the International 
Institute of Documentation, as the International Institute of 
Bibliography 
became in 1931 (it is now the International 
Federation of Information 
and Documentation, FID). His 
frequently repetitive writing often took the form of lists of 
desiderata. These were intended to be adopted by and shape 
the objectives and procedures of international organizations 
but they tended simply to be declared rather than carefully 
argued and justified. The powerful individuals and groups 
over whom he had exerted a great deal of influence in Bel- 
gium and in the international arena before the War became, 
after it, unresponsive to prescriptive pronouncements that 
required sweeping reformist change in institutions and their 
practices. 
What Otlet was describing and publicizing 
so persis- 
tently for 40 years was similar in some respects to modern 
notions of hypertext. But it was quite different from a 
hypertext centered on assumptions about the user and his 
or her preeminence in driving the hypertext machinery. 
At first sight there is a startling contrast between what 
Otlet was writing 
about and what Landow and others 
who are interested in understanding hypertext in terms 
of modern critical theory are describing. But when posed 
in this way, the difference makes us look a little more 
closely at what some of the accounts of modern hypertext 
systems, especially in their grandiose, theoretical, “macro- 
text” manifestations, are actually saying. Is it possible 
that, despite the rhetorical flourishes, there is, deeply em- 
bedded in the accounts of some of these systems, what 
might be described as a “remainder” of nineteenth-century 
positivism? 
Is it possible that they imply an outlook on the nature of 
knowledge that, if one reads the texts “deconstructively,” 
suggests a irony at their center-a 
limited, essentially re- 
ductionist view of objective, “scientific” 
knowledge, rather 
than the endlessly various user constantly creating and 
recreating necessarily unstable texts? In describing the 
Xanadu Project, Nelson (1987) for example, in capital 
letters, says that it is “just one thing: a new form of in- 
terconnection for computer files-CORRESPONDING 
TO 
THE TRUE INTERCONNECTION 
OF IDEAS which can 
be refined and elaborated into a shared network” (p. 143). 
These words and the sentiments that they both express and 
seem to imply could be, except for the term “computer 
files,” Otlet’s own. They suggest an atavistic positivist 
perspective that takes one by surprise. And though one 
might describe Otlet’s views of the functions of Offices of 
Documentation in correlating and codifying knowledge as 
being couched in the conceptually antiquated terminology 
of an old paradigm, how easy is it to dismiss them in the 
light of the recent work of Don Swanson? Swanson has 
shown how what he has described as previously undis- 
covered public knowledge may be extracted from bodies 
of literature that are logically related but unconnected by 
citation (e.g., 1986, 1990)-processes 
that certainly would 
be appropriate to the Office of Documentation as conceived 
of by Otlet. 
Note: Some of the ideas in the first part of this article 
were the basis of a presentation by Professor Michael 
Buckland on behalf of both of us at the Fall 1992 meeting 
248 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 

of the American Society of International 
Science which 
I was unable to attend. I am indebted to Prof. Buckland 
for encouraging me to explore Otlet’s ideas in relation 
to hypertext. Prof. Buckland has himself been examining 
some of the implications of Otlet’s work as a pioneer of 
information science (e.g., Buckland, 1991a-c). 
References 
Annuaire (1902). Annuaire de l’lnstitut 
International 
de Bibliographic 
pour 
1’AnnCe 1902. IIB 
Publication 
No. 59. Bruxellcs: 
Institut 
International 
de Bibliographic. 
Belkin, N. J. (1990). The cognitive 
viewpoint 
in information 
science. 
Journal 
of Information 
Science, 16, ll- 
15. 
Bradford, 
S. C. (1950). Documentation. 
Washington, DC: Public Af- 
fairs Press. 
Boardman, P. (lY78). 
The worlds of Patrick 
Geddes, biologist, 
town 
planner, re-educator, peace-warrior. 
London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul. 
Buckland, M. (1991a). Information 
as thing. Journal 
of the American 
Society for Information 
Science, 42, 351-360. 
Buckland, M. (1991b). Information 
retrieval of more than text. Journal 
of the American 
Society for Information 
Science, 42, 586-588. 
Buckland, 
M. (1991~). Information 
and information 
systems. New 
York: Praegcr. 
Buckland, 
M. (1992). Redesigning 
library 
services for the future: A 
manifesto. 
Chicago: American 
Library 
Association. 
Bush, 
V. 
(lY45). 
As 
we 
may 
think. 
In 
J.M. 
Nyce 
and 
P.Kahn, 
(Eds., 
lYYl), 
From 
memex 
to hypertext: 
Vannevar 
Bush and the mind’s machine 
(pp. 85-107). 
Boston: 
Academic 
Press. 
Buxton, 
A. B. (1990). “Computer 
searching 
using UDC 
numbers. 
Journal 
of Documentation, 
46, 193-217. 
Carlson, P.A. (1989). “Hypertext 
and intelligent 
interfaces 
for text 
retrieval. 
In E. Barrett (Ed.), The social construction 
of information. 
Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Communication 
des fiches (1897). 
Communication 
des fiches du 
RCpertoire Bibliographique 
Universe], Institut Internationa/ 
de Bib- 
liographie 
Bull&n. 
2, 142-143. 
Conklin, J. (1987). Hypertext: 
an introduction 
and survery, Computer, 
20, 17-41. 
Davenport, 
L., & Cronin, 
B. (1990). Hypertext 
and the conduct of 
science. Journal 
of Documentation, 
46, 175-192. 
DeMcy, 
M. (1980). The relevance of the cognitive 
paradigm. In 0. 
Harbo and L. Kajberg (Eds.), 
Theory andApplication 
of Information 
Research (pp. 48-61). 
London: Mansell. 
Eaves, D. (199 1). Hypertext 
in myth and reality: a technology 
for the 
new alexandrine 
age. Australian 
Library 
Journal, 
40, 289-304. 
Ellis, D. (1991). New horizons in information 
retrieval. 
London: The 
Library 
Association. 
Ellis, D. (1992). The physical and cognitive 
paradigms in information 
retrieval 
research. Journal 
of Documentation, 
48, 45-64. 
Encyclopedia 
(1913). An encyclopedia 
on the Card-Index 
system. 
Scientific American, 
109, 213. 
Englcbard, D. C. (1963). A conceptual framework 
for the augmenta- 
tion of man’s intellect. In. P. Howerton 
(Ed.), !&tas in information 
handling 
(vol. 
1). The augmentation 
of man’s intellect by machine 
(pp. 11-29). 
Washington, 
DC: Spartan Books. 
Felpcrin, 
H. (1985). Beyond deconstruction: 
The uses and abuses of 
literary 
theory. Oxford: 
Clarendon 
Press. 
Greslcri, 
G., & Matteoni, 
D. (1986). La Citta’ 
Mondiale: 
Andersen, 
Hebard, Otlet and Le Corbusier. 
Milan: 
PolisiMarsilio 
Editori. 
Jonassen, D. H. (1989). Hypertext/hypermedia. 
Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: 
Educational 
Technology 
Publications. 
La 
Fontaine, 
H., 
& 
Otlet, 
P. 
(1895). 
Creation 
of 
a uni- 
versal 
bibliography: 
A 
preliminary 
note. 
In W. B. 
Rayward 
(Trans. 
and 
Ed., 
1990), 
The international 
organization 
and 
dissemination 
of knowledge: 
Selected 
essays 
of 
Paul 
Otlet. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
Landow, 
G. P. (1992). Hypertext: 
The convergence of contemporary 
critical 
theory 
and technology. 
Baltimore: 
The Johns Hopkins 
University 
Press. 
Manuel 
(1907). 
Manuel 
du rtpertoire 
bibliographique 
universe/. 
IIB 
Pub. No. 63. Bruxelles: 
lnstitut 
International 
de Biblio- 
graphie. 
Masure, L. (1912). Rapport pour L’annCe, 1912. Bruxelles: 
lnstitut 
International 
de Bibliographie. 
Metcalfe, 
J. (1959). Subject class&ing 
and indexing of libraries 
and 
[iterature. 
Sydney: 
Angus and Robertson. 
Nelson, T. (1987). The Xanadu paradigm 
[a poster]. San Antonio, 
TX: Theodor H. Nelson. 
Nelson, T. (1983). Literary 
machines. Swarthmore, 
PA: Author. 
Nyce, 
J.M.. 
& 
Kahn, 
P. (1991). 
From 
memex to hypertext: 
Vannevar Bush and the mind’s machine 
(pp. 85-107). 
Boston: 
Academic Press. 
Otlet, P. (1892). Something 
about bibliography. 
In W.B. Rayward 
(Trans. and Ed., 1990), The international 
organization 
and dis- 
semination of knowledge: Selected essays of Paul Otlet. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. 
Otlet, P. (1896). On the structure of classification 
numbers. In W. B. 
Rayward 
(Trans. and Ed., 1990), The international 
organization 
and dissemination 
of knowledge: 
Selected essays of Paul Otlet. 
Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. 
Otlet, P. (1903). The science of bibliography 
and documentation. 
In 
W. B. Rayward (Trans. and Ed., 1990), The international 
organiza- 
tion and dissemination 
of knowledge: selected essays of Paul Otlet. 
Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. 
Otlet, P. (1918). Transformations 
in the bibliographical 
apparatus of 
the sciences. In W.B. 
Rayward 
(Trans. and Ed., 
1990), 
The in- 
ternational 
organization 
and dissemination 
of Knowledge: 
Selected 
essays of Paul Otlet. Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
Otlet, P. (1920). The international 
organization 
of bibliography 
and 
documentation. 
In W.B. 
Rayward 
(Trans. and Ed.. 
1990). 
The 
I, 
international 
organization 
and dissemination ofknowledge: 
Selected 
essays of Paul Otlet. Amsterdam: Elsevier. 
Otlet, P. (1934). Trait& de documentation. Le livre sur le livre: Thtorie 
et pratique 
(1989 reprint) Liege: Centre de Lecture publique de la 
Communautt 
fran$aise. 
Otlct, 
P. (1935). 
Monde: 
Essai 
d’universalisme: 
Connaissances 
du monde. Sentiments 
du monde. Action 
organiste 
et plan 
du 
monde (Editiones 
Mundaneum). 
Bruxelles: 
D. Van Keerberghen 
et fils. 
Otlet, P., & Goldschmidt, 
R. (1906). On a new form of the book: The 
microphotographic 
book. In W. B. Rayward (Trans. and Ed., 1990), 
The international 
organization 
and dissemination 
of knowledge: 
Selected essays of Paul Otlet. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. 
Otlet, P., & Goldschmidt, 
R. (1925). The preservation 
and inter- 
national 
diffusion 
of thought: 
The microphotic 
book. In W.B. 
Rayward 
(Trans. and Ed., 1990), The international 
organization 
and dissemination 
of knowledge: 
Selected essays of Paul Otlet. 
Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. 
Otlet, P., & Vanderveld, 
E. (1906). The reform of national bibliogra- 
phies. In W.B. Rayward 
(Trans. and Ed., 1990), The international 
organization 
and dissemination 
of knowledge: 
Selected essays of 
Paul Otlet. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. 
Rada, R. (1991). Hypertext: 
Free text to expertext. London: McGraw- 
Hill. 
Rada, R., & Lunin, L. (1989). Perspectives on hypertext: Introduction 
and overview. 
Journal 
of the American 
Society for Information 
Science, 40, 159- 163. 
Rayward, W. B. (I 975). The Universe of information: 
The work ofPaul 
Otlet for documentation 
an international 
organization 
(FID520). 
Moscow: 
VINITI. 
Rayward, W. B. (Trans. and Ed., 1990). The internationalorganization 
and dissemination 
of knowledge: 
Selected essays 
of Paul Otlet. 
Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 
249 

Rayward, 
W. B. (1992). Restructuring 
and mobilising 
information 
in 
documents: a historical 
perspective. 
In P. Vakkari 
and B. Cronin 
(Eds.), Conceptions 
of library 
and information 
science: Histori- 
cal, empirical, 
and theoretical 
perspectives 
(pp. 50-68). 
London: 
Taylor 
Graham. 
Rayward, 
W. B. (in press). Some schemes for restructuring 
and 
mobilising 
information 
in documents: 
A historical 
perspective. 
information 
Processing 
and Management, 
30. 
Rubens, P. (1989). Online information, 
hypermedia, 
and the idea of 
literacy. 
In E. Barrett (Ed.), The social construction 
of information. 
Cambridge, 
MA: 
MIT Press. 
Satoh, T. (1987). The bridge movement 
in Munich 
and Ostwald’s 
treatise on the organisation 
of knowledge. 
Libri, 37, l-24. 
Swanson, 
D. R. (1986). 
Undiscovered 
public 
knowledge. 
Library 
Quarterly, 
56, 103 - 118. 
Swanson, 
D. R. (1990). 
Medical 
literature 
as a source 
of new 
knowledge. 
Bulletin 
of the Medical 
Library 
Association, 
78, 
29-37. 
Trigg, R. (1991). From trailblazing 
to guided tours: The legacy of 
Vannevar Bush’s vision of hypertext use. In J. M. Nyce and P. Kahn 
(Eds.), From memex to hypertext: 
Vannevar Bush and the mind’s 
machine (pp. 353-367). 
Boston: Academic Press. 
Tsai, C-J. (1988). Hypertext: 
Technology, 
applications 
and research 
issues. Journal 
of Educational 
Technology Systems, 17, 3 - 13. 
Union of International 
Associations 
(1914). The union of international 
Associations: 
A 
world 
centre. 
In 
W. B. 
Rayward 
(Trans. 
and Ed., 
1990), 
The international 
organization 
and dissemina- 
tion of knowledge: 
Selected essays of Paul 
Otlet. 
Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. 
Wells, H. G. (1938). World brain. London: Methuen. 
250 
JOURNAL 
OF THE 
AMERICAN 
SOCIETY 
FOR 
INFORMATION 
SCIENCE-May 
1994 

