"SUFFER THE LITTLE CHILDREN" 
The Aboriginal Residential School System 
1 8 3 0 - 1 9 9 2 
Submitted to: 
The Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples 
by J. S. Milloy 
May 1996 

TABLE of CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
1-7 
CHAPTER 1 - SAVAGE TO CIVILIZED: THE TUITION OF THOMAS MOORE, 1830-
1920, page 8-73 
Policy Development: The Imperial Heritage, 1830-1879, page 14 
The Vision of Residential School Education, 1879-1920, page 25 
CHAPTER 2 - "A NATIONAL CRIME" - THE INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL ERA, 1879 -
1923, page 74-156 
Building and Managing the System, page 76 
"The Charge of Manslaughter", page 107 
CHAPTER 3 - "WE ARE GOING TO TELL YOU HOW WE ARE TREATED" -
PERSISTENCE AND THE PARENTING PRESUMPTION, 1879-1944, 
page 157-285 
Persistence, 1923-1944, page 160 
The Parenting Presumption, 1879- 1944, page 171 
Food Clothes and "Parents", page 171 
Discipline and Abuse, page 199 
Teaching and Learning, pages 222 
CHAPTER 4 - INTEGRATION AND CLOSURE, 1948-1986, page 286-379 
From "Stone Age to "Atomic Age" - Northern and Arctic 
Assimilation, page 338-379 
CHAPTER 5 - THE FAILURE OF GUARDIANSHIP: NEGLECT AND ABUSE, 1944-
1992, page 380-449 
Neglect, page 382 
Abuse, page 416 
EPILOGUE - BEYOND CLOSURE, 1992, page 450-461 
APPENDIX 
page 4 62-463 
SOURCES 
page 464-474 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was undertaken for and supported by the Royal Comisssion 
on Aboriginal People and could not have been completed without the 
assistance and cooperation of many 
individuals. The project 
researchers, myself, F. McEvoy and S. Heard, owe thanks to staff 
and consultants at the Royal Commission: D. Culhane, M. Castellano, 
A. Reynolds, N. Schultz, N-A. Sutton, L. Forbotko, R. Chrisjohn, D. 
Reaume - all of whom provided generously much needed support, 
direction and invaluable advice. The archivists of the Oblate, 
Anglican, Presbyterian, United Church and the National Archives 
were most cooperative in identifying sources and making files 
available. At Indian Affairs, K. Douglas facilitated research on 
the closed INAC collection making a difficult situation manageable 
and productive and John Leslie, an expert on the history of the 
Department, generously provided advice and direction. 
Computer and editorial assistance were provided by K. Cannon, 
Managing Editor of the Journal of Canadian Studies, Carol Little at 
the Trent University History Department and M-J Milloy. 
M. Blyth and our children have given unstinting support and 
understanding in what has been, over the last three years, an all-
consuming and too often cheerless project. 
Finally, 
I am especially grateful to the Commissioners for having 
provided the opportunity to undertake this research and for their 
determination that the truth be found and clearly told. 

INTRODUCTION 
"I must tell of things as they were and really this 
is not my story but yours." 
In 1939, the Anglican Church published and circulated to its 
parishioners a pamphlet celebrating its work in "Indian and 
Eskimo Residential Schools." The pamphlet traced the history 
of the church's involvement in Aboriginal education from "the 
origins of these Institutions in Western Canada" thanks to the 
efforts of the Reverend John West in the Red River settlement 
in 1820. From that "small beginning this system of Indian 
education, under Divine Guidance and help, has gradually 
developed until we have at the present time nineteen schools 
of the residential class...." Individual Anglicans, the text 
continued, 
as well 
as 
"Sunday 
Schools, 
Bible 
Classes, 
A.Y.P.A's [Anglican Young Peoples' Associations], etc.," could 
follow in West's footsteps; they, too, could "help" if they 
would 
adopt' an Indian boy or girl in one of the Indian 
Boarding Schools." Only $30 a child was required. Contributors 
would "be sent the name of the child, age, school and a 
photo." 
As an inducement, no doubt, the pamphlet contained a variety 
of photographs of students and of the schools - each in its 
own way meant to be an illustration of the care given the 
children and the fine educational work being done. There were 
pictures of children dressed in neat, bright uniforms, smiling 
confidently at the camera, one of a "sewing class ... in which 
the girls are taught mending and plain sewing" and another of 
boys "sacking vegetables" in a field with the accompanying 
note: "meat, vegetables, butter and eggs are in most cases 
produced by the Schools for their own use . . . ." There were 
pictures of happy times - "A Christmas party in one of our 
Residential schools" and of healthful, carefree activities -
a "physical education class" and "The Scout Troop ... Typical 
of Troops in many of the Schools." 
There were, of course, pictures of the schools themselves 
described as "fine, new" and "modern" - impressive structures 
seemingly well-maintained. They were not only, the authors of 
the pamphlet claimed, "valuable ... as centres of education" 
but "for the help they give in saving the lives of children 
who would otherwise perish" if left in their communities 
marked by disease and poverty. The parents, the reader was 
1 

told, agreed. They had "already seen with . . . [their] own eyes 
.... that many of the Whiteman's ways of life are superior to 
[their] own," and appreciated the care the children 
received; they were "glad to have a good home for their 
children.11 
And, finally, as these were educational institutions, there 
were photographs of successful graduates - of "Redfern Louttit 
... who entered Wycliffe College [the University of Toronto] 
in 1935" and, at the other side of the employment spectrum, of 
boys "who are employed on a coasting schooner." These examples 
represented hundreds of graduates - who were employed, "a 
Dominion-wide investigation of the condition of... graduates" 
reported, in all walks of Canadian life and were, in almost 
all cases "making good progress." Only a "comparatively small 
number," it was explained, had "reverted to tribal standards." 
The "overwhelming" majority had "maintained the standards and 
traditions 
of 
their 
respective 
Schools" 
and 
were 
incontrovertible proof that "this system of education was 
conferring benefits of incalculable value on the Indian 
peoples of this country," and thus deserved "the fullest 
possible support from both Church and State." 
In the church's estimation their residential school mission 
which purportedly transformed Aboriginal boys and girls into 
useful Christian Canadian men and women was a most sublime 
Christian 
act. 
That 
presumption was 
underlined 
by 
the 
pamphlet's subtitle: "Jesus said: Suffer the little children 
to come unto me ... and he took them up in his arms ... and 
blessed them." Symbolically, the first picture in the pamphlet 
was of one of Christ' s representatives in this world - the 
Reverend T.B.R. Westgate D.D. - who had taken up in his arms 
an Aboriginal baby or as the caption said "a potential 
pupil.1,1 
In 1939, there were 9,027 such children in Canada's embrace; 
children, who were, that year, pupils in a nation-wide network 
of 
79 
residential 
schools 
conducted, 
under 
government 
auspices, by the Anglican, Catholic, Presbyterian and United 
Churches. Though the history of each church's involvement in 
residential education was different, the Anglican pamphlet 
reflected fairly the sentiments of the other churches and of 
Indian 
Affairs 
officials, 
too 
- 
reflected 
their 
representation of the beneficent character and circumstances 
of the schools, of the "benefits of incalculable value" being 
bestowed on the Aboriginal "peoples of this country" by 
residential education. 
That common representation has stood neither the test of time 
nor, in the pages that follow, of historical research. Indeed, 
it exists in sharp contrast to the historical record etched in 
the memories of students and set out in church and Indian 

Affair's files. By 1939, thousands of children, Indian, Inuit 
and Metis, had come to the schools and thousands more would 
follow in the four and half decades after 1939 that the system 
continued to operate. They came, or, more accurately, they 
were taken from their parents and communities, and they 
suffered: the system did not provide without exception either 
the education or the care that was the promise of Christ's 
call 
"to 
come 
unto 
me" 
nor 
of 
Canada's 
self-imposed 
"responsibility" for Aboriginal people. Instead, the system's 
history is marked by the persistent neglect and abuse of 
children and through them of Aboriginal 
communities in 
general. Residential schools have been, arguably, the most 
damaging of the many elements of Canada's colonization of this 
land's original peoples and, as their consequences still echo 
through the lives of Aboriginal people today, they remain so. 
How did this happen, how were responsibility and Christianity 
perverted? More than anything else this work is an attempt to 
answer that question, an attempt to trace and understand, by 
means of a reconstruction of the history of residential 
schools, the root, stem and dreadful blossoming of a system of 
persistent neglect and debilitating abuse coincident with the 
building of the schools and lasting beyond their closure in 
the 1980s. As that story unfolds, one conclusion becomes 
unavoidable: despite the discourse of civil and spiritual duty 
that framed the school system there never was invested in this 
project the financial or human resources required to ensure 
that the system achieved its "civilizing" ends or that 
children were cared for properly - nor was there ever brought 
to bear the moral resources necessary to respond to systemic 
neglect or to the many instances of stark abuse that were 
known 
to be 
occurring. 
Furthermore, 
it 
is 
clear 
that 
throughout 
the history of the system, 
the 
Church-State 
partners were aware of these sorrowful circumstances and, 
moreover, that by the 1960s they understood the detrimental 
repercussions for Aboriginal children of the residential 
school experience. 
This reconstruction begins with the thought that became the 
deed - with an exploration both of Canada's mid-l9th century 
assimilative ideology of civilization, official policy after 
1830, and of the rationale for residential schools, the felt 
need to separate 
"savage" parent 
from child. 
Together, 
ideology and rationale, constituted the justification for the 
concerted attack by Church and State upon Aboriginal culture 
making the schools sites of ontological struggle seen most 
clearly in the curriculum's attack on Aboriginal languages. 
The thought even before the deed - before the system took full 
physical shape across the country - was violent in its 
intention to "kill the Indian in the child"2 for the sake of 
Christian civilization. In that way, the system was, even as 
a concept, abusive. 
3 

Chapter 2 reviews the building and maintenance of the system 
in the Industrial School era, 1879-1923, and in that reveals 
the most persistent flaw in the system, chronic underfunding, 
which ensured that the quality of care and education remained 
constantly far below acceptable standards. The results of that 
troubling fiscal reality, recognized but never rectified by 
Indian Affairs or the churches, took the most horrifying form 
in those years. Underfunding, overcrowding in the schools, lax 
administration and poor hygiene and diet meant that children 
died in astonishing numbers, the victims of schools that 
hosted the white plague, tuberculosis. Over 50 per cent of 
pupils who passed through the schools in those days did not, 
Indian Affairs estimated, live to enjoy the "benefits of 
incalculable value"3 they had supposedly received in the 
schools. 
Chapter 3, as well as tracing the persistence of many of these 
formative administrative and financial factors after 1923, 
undertakes a closer examination of the treatment of the 
children in the period 1879-1944 - of the failure to provide 
safe living conditions, adequate food and clothing and to 
employ "parents", teachers and other school staff, capable of 
operating the schools effectively and caring for the children. 
It reviews the relationship between discipline in the schools 
and abuse and charts Indian Affair's inability to respond to 
the physical abuse of children it claimed were its wards. 
Finally, it outlines the failure of the schools to reach 
educational goals which were, in fact, unrealistic given the 
lack of trained teachers and the inappropriate nature of the 
curriculum. 
By 1944, senior Indian Affairs officials reviewing the state 
and record of residential schools were convinced that they 
should be closed, that segregated Aboriginal education should 
be replaced by integration into Provincial school systems. 
With Parliament's backing in 1948 and the support of most, 
though not all, of its church partners, 
Indian Affairs 
undertook a process of closure which lasted some four decades. 
Chapter 4 sets out what became a long and complex process 
which changed the character of residential education making it 
a supplementary service to a growing day school emphasis. Old 
residential schools often became hostels with the children 
going out each day to a nearby Provincial school. More 
significantly, 
the schools, hostel/residences, 
took on a 
social service function. Increasingly, they became catchments 
for children who could not be returned to their families to 
attend day schools because it was determined by Indian Affairs 
and Children Aid Societies that they came from neglectful 
homes. For such children, and there were many, the residential 
schools in this period were way-stations on the road to foster 
care and adoptions into non-Aboriginal families. 
4 

Unfortunately, 
the 
formulation after the war of a new 
Aboriginal education 
strategy and initiatives by 
Indian 
Affairs to make the management of the system more professional 
and more responsive to the needs of the children did not bring 
improvement in the quality of care children received. The 
fifth and final chapter establishes that the dwindling system 
remained underfunded, 
despite new financial 
arrangements 
brought forward in 1957. Thus the condition of many of the 
buildings in which children were forced to live and work and 
the food and clothing provided remained in this period, too, 
below the standards that had been set by Indian Affairs, 
itself. It is tragically clear, as well, from the numerous 
incidents in Indian Affair's files, that the pattern of abuse, 
formed 
before 
the war, 
was 
not 
disrupted 
by 
post-war 
regulations on punishment and continued on to the final 
closings in 1986. 
This history of the residential school system is a history 
written by a non-Aboriginal person - one who never experienced 
a residential school nor lived in a community whose children 
had been removed to such an institution; one who never felt 
racism or suffered the purposeful denigration of identity. 
There is, of course, a story of these schools that can only be 
told by people who have had those experiences, by ex-students, 
their families and communities whose lives have been shaped by 
that painful reality. Many are now doing just that - retelling 
their experience in print and, most importantly, at school 
reunions and community circles revealing that pain in a 
traumatic process of healing. 
This work does not presume to stand in the place of such vital 
histories, but only to supplement them, for, in important 
ways, this is an non-Aboriginal story, too. In 1965, Indian 
Affairs asked a number of residential school graduates to put 
in writing their memories of their school days. One, recalling 
his experiences at the Mohawk school, wrote: "When I was asked 
to do this paper I had some misgivings, for if I were to be 
honest, I must tell of things as they were and really this is 
not my story but yours."4 
I, too, began with misgivings, feelings of trespassing upon 
Aboriginal experience, but as I read through the documents in 
federal and church archives, it became obvious that the ex-
student was profoundly correct. The residential system was 
conceived, designed and managed by non-Aboriginal people. It 
represents in bricks and lumber, classroom and curriculum, the 
intolerance, presumption and pride that lay at the heart of 
Victorian Christianity and democracy, passed as social policy 
in the guise of a civilizing policy and persisted in the 
twentieth century as thoughtless insensitivity. The system is 
not someone else's history nor is it just a footnote or a 
paragraph, a preface or chapter in Canadian history, it is 
5 

that history. It is US in our "New World"; it is our 
swallowing of the land and its First Peoples and spitting them 
out as cities and farms and hydro projects and as strangers in 
their own land and communities. 
As such it is critical that non-Aboriginal people study and 
write about the schools, for not to do so on the premise that 
it is not our story, too, is to marginalize it as we did 
Aboriginal people themselves, to reserve it for them as a site 
of suffering and grievance and to refuse to make it a site of 
introspection, discovery and extirpation - a site of self-
knowledge from which we can understand not only who we have 
been as Canadians but who we must become if we are to deal 
justly with the Aboriginal people of this land. 
This then is just one of what is and, hopefully, will be the 
many attempts to tell this story. As a history, it is, itself, 
no more than a beginning for in answering the question - how 
did it happen?, this text only suggests the extent and context 
of neglect and abuse that were the indelible characteristics 
of the school system. It must fall to the reader, to all of 
us, to go further, to answer the question - why? 

1. "Indian and Eskimo Residential Schools", Popular Information 
Series, No. 12, Missionary Society, Church of England in Canada, 
September, 1939. 
2. D.A. Nock, A Victorian Missionary and Canadian Indian Policy 
(Waterloo, Wilfred Laurier University Press, 1988), page 4. 
3. D.C. Scott, "Indian Affairs 1867-1912" in A. Shortt ed., Canada 
and its Provinces (Toronto, University of Edinburgh Press, 1913), 
Vol. 7, page 615. 
4. INAC File 1/25-20-1, Vol. 1, To Miss ... 16 February, 1966 and 
attached correspondence. 

CHAPTER 1 
SAVAGE TO CIVILIZED: THE TUITION OF THOMAS MOORE 
1830 to 1920. 

THOMAS MOORE, AS 
HE APPEARED WHEN ADMITTED TO THE 
REMIXA I X D I A X I X D C S T R I A L SCHOOL. 

THOMAS MOORE. AFTER TUITION AT THE REG IN A INDIAN 
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL. 

In its Annual Report of 1904, the Department of Indian Affairs 
published the pictures of the young Thomas Moore of the Regina 
Industrial School, "before and after tuition." The images are 
a cogent expression of what Federal policy had been since 
Confederation and what it would remain for many decades. It 
was a policy of assimilation, a policy 
designed to move 
Aboriginal communities from their "savage" state to that of 
"civilization" and thus to make in Canada but one community -
a non-Aboriginal one.1 
At the core of the policy was education. It was, according to 
Duncan Campbell Scott "by far the most important of the many 
subdivisions of the most complicated Indian problem."2 In the 
education of the young lay the most potent power to effect 
cultural change - a power to be channelled through schools 
and, in particular, through residential schools. It would, 
Frank Oliver, the Minister of Indian Affairs, declared in 1908 
"elevate the Indian from his condition of savagery" and make 
"him a self-supporting member of the State, and eventually a 
citizen in good standing."3 
The pictures are, then, both images of what became in this 
period the primary object of that policy, the Aboriginal 
child, and an analogy of the relationship between the two 
cultures - Aboriginal and White, as it had been in the past 
and as it was to be in the future. There, in the first 
picture, is the young Thomas posed against a fur robe, in his 
beaded dress, his hair in long braids, clutching a gun. 
Displayed for the viewer are the symbols of the past - of 
Aboriginal costume and culture, of hunting, of the wild 
disorder and violence of warfare and of the cross-cultural 
partnerships of the fur trade and military alliances that had 
dominated life in Canada since the late 16th century. 
Those partnerships, anchored to Aboriginal knowledge and 
skills, had enabled the newcomers to find their way, to 
survive and to prosper. But they were now merely historic; 
they were not to be any part of the future as Canadians 
pictured it at the founding of their new nation in 1867. That 
future was one of settlement, agriculture, manufacturing, 
order, lawfulness and Christianity. In the view of politicians 
and civil servants in Ottawa whose gaze was fixed upon the 
horizon of national development, Aboriginal knowledge and 
skills were neither necessary or desirable in a land that was 
to be dominated by European industry and, therefore, by 
Europeans and their culture. 
That future was inscribed in the second picture. Thomas with 
his hair carefully barbered in his plain, humble suit, stands 
confidently, hand on hip, in a new context. Here he is framed 
by the horizontal and vertical lines of wall and pedestal -
the geometry of social and economic order: of place and class, 
9 

and of private property the foundation of industriousness, the 
cardinal virtue of late Victorian culture. But most telling of 
all, perhaps, is the potted plant. Elevated above him, it is 
the symbol of civilized life, agriculture. Like Thomas, the 
plant is cultivated nature no longer wild. Like it, Thomas has 
been, the Department suggests, reduced to civility in the 
confines of the Regina Industrial School. 
The assumptions that underlay the pictures also informed the 
designs of social reformers in Canada and abroad, inside the 
Indian Department and out. By these, Thomas and his classmates 
were to be assimilated; they were to become functioning 
members of Canadian society. Marching out from schools, they 
would be the vanguard of a magnificent metamorphosis: the 
"savage" were to be made civilized. For Victorians, it was an 
empire-wide task of heroic proportions and divine ordination 
encompassing the Maori, the Aborigine, the Hotentot and many 
other indigenous peoples. For Canadians, it was, at the level 
of rhetoric at least, a national duty - a "sacred trust with 
which Providence has invested the country in the charge of and 
care for the aborigines committed to it."4 In 1880, Alexander 
Morris, one of the primary government negotiators of the 
recently concluded western treaties looked back upon those 
agreements and then forward praying: 
Let us have Christianity and 
civilization 
among the Indian tribes; let us have a wise 
and paternal Government ... doing its utmost 
to help and elevate the Indian population, ... 
and Canada will be enabled to feel, that in a 
truly patriotic spirit our country has done 
its duty by the red men...."5 
In Canada's first century that "truly patriotic spirit" would 
be evident in the many individuals, like Father Lacombe, who 
would be willing to devote their "human capabilities to the 
good of the Indians of this country." For Lacombe, the "poor 
redman's redemption physically and morally" was "the dream of 
my days and nights."6 According to Canada's first Prime 
Minister, Sir John A. Macdonald, the nation too had a dream in 
the discharge of a benevolent duty. It would be a national 
goal, he informed Parliament, "... to do away with the tribal 
system and assimilate the Indian people in all respects with 
the inhabitants of the Dominion, as speedily as they are fit 
to change."7 
With 
the assistance 
of 
church and 
state, 
wandering hunters would take up a settled life, agriculture, 
useful trades and, of course, the Christian religion. 
Assimilation became, during Macdonald's first term, official 
policy. It was 
Canada's response to its "sacred trust" made 
even more alluring by the fact that supposedly selfless duty 
10 

was to have its reward. The Deputy Superintendent General of 
Indian Affairs, L. Vankoughnet, assured Macdonald in 1887 that 
Indian expenditures "would be a good investment" for, in due 
course, Aboriginal people "instead of being supported from the 
revenue of the country . . . would contribute largely to the 
same." 
Education, as Scott indicated, was the most critical element 
of this assimilative strategy. Vankoughnet, in his memo of 
1887 to the Prime Minister, was doing no more than reflecting 
the common wisdom of the day when he wrote, 
Give me the children and you may have the parents, 
or words to that effect, were uttered by a zealous 
divine in his anxiety to add to the number of whom 
his Church called her children. And the principle 
laid down by that astute reasoner is an excellent 
one on which to act in working out that most 
difficult problem - the intellectual emancipation 
of 
the 
Indian, 
and 
its 
natural 
sequel, 
his 
elevation to a status equal to that of his white 
brother. 
This 
can 
only 
be 
done 
through 
education.... Only by a persistent continuance in a 
thoroughly systematic course of educating (using 
the word in its fullest and most practical sense) 
the children, will the final hoped and long striven 
for result be attained....8 
"That most difficult problem" was to be solved not only 
through 
"persistent" 
tuition but, more specifically, 
by 
residential school education which would take two forms: 
"boarding" schools, which were on reserve or near reserve, 
were 
of 
moderate 
size, 
teaching 
reading, 
writing 
and 
arithmetic, agriculture and the simple manual skills required 
by farmers and their wives and "Industrial" schools such as 
Thomas's Regina Industrial School which were large, centrally 
located, urban associated trade schools which also provided a 
plain English education. "It would be highly desirable, if it 
were practicable," the Department wrote in its Annual Report 
of 1890 "... to obtain entire possession of all Indian 
children after they attain to the age of seven or eight years, 
and keep them at schools ... until they have had a thorough 
course of instruction." The Department was confident that if 
such a course was adopted " the solution of the problem 
designated "the Indian question1 would probably be effected 
sooner than it is under the present system" of day schools.9 
By 1890, the government had been committed for just over a 
decade to the development of a system of residential schools 
of "the industrial type."10 That commitment had sprung from the 
recommendations of the now famous Davin Report of 1879. 
11 

Nicholas Flood Davin, a journalist 
and a defeated Tory-
candidate, had been rewarded for his electoral effort by 
Macdonald with a commission to "report on the working of 
Industrial Schools 
... in the United States and on the 
advisability of establishing similar institutions in the 
North-West Territories of the Dominion." Senior American 
officials who Davin visited, Carl Schurtz, the Secretary of 
the Interior and E.A Hayt, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 
evinced the greatest 
confidence in the efficacy of the 
industrial 
school 
which 
was, 
Davin 
was 
informed, 
"the 
principal feature of the policy known as that of "aggressive 
civilization1," their policy of assimilation. Day schools had 
proven a failure "because the influence of the wigwam was 
stronger than the influence of the school." Indeed, support 
for this thesis came, he claimed, from Cherokee leaders he met 
in Washington. They described the "happy results of Industrial 
Schools" and convinced him "... that the chief thing to attend 
to in dealing with the less civilized or wholly barbarous 
tribes, was to separate the children from the parents." 
Next on Davin's agenda came a trip to the school at the White 
Earth Agency in Minnesota. He was obviously impressed. The 
school was "well attended and the answering of the children 
creditable... the 
dormitory 
was 
plainly 
but 
comfortably 
furnished, and the children ... were evidently well fed." The 
whole reserve had an air of progressive development traceable, 
in the opinion of the agent, to the school. 
Subsequent 
meetings in Winnipeg with "the leading men, clerical and lay, 
who could speak with authority on the subject" must have 
confirmed his American observations for Davin's report gave 
unqualified support to the "application of the principle of 
industrial 
boarding 
schools." He submitted, 
as well, 
a 
detailed plan for beginning an industrial school system in the 
west that he probably worked out with those authorities -
Bishop Tache, Father Lacombe, the Hon. James McKay and 
others .11 
While the Davin report may properly be credited with moving 
the Macdonald government to inaugurate industrial schools in 
the 
1880s, 
it 
is 
far 
from 
being, 
as 
it 
is 
often 
characterized,12 the genesis of the residential school system 
in Canada. Indeed, when Davin submitted his report, there were 
already in existence in Ontario four residential schools or 
manual labour schools, the Mohawk Institute, Wikwemikong, 
Mount Elgin and Shingwauk and a number of boarding schools 
were being planned by missionaries in the west. 
Furthermore, the report does not answer the most important 
questions about the beginning and intended character of the 
residential school system. Why did the Federal government 
adopt a policy of assimilation, and what was the relationship 
12 

between 
that 
policy, 
its 
ideology 
and 
structures, 
and 
education, particularly residential schools? Not only are the 
answers to such central questions not in the Davin report, 
they are not to be found in any single report in the early 
years of Confederation. Indeed, to discover the roots of the 
Canadian residential school system, recourse must be made to 
history for the assimilative education policy did not spring 
full 
blown 
from 
the 
considerations 
of 
the 
Fathers 
of 
Confederation. 
Rather, 
it was 
worked 
out 
in 
the 
pre-
Confederation period of Imperial control of Indian affairs. 
The policy first took shape with the design of programs for 
the "civilization" of the Indian population of Upper Canada 
and then was given a final and legislative form with the 
determination of the constitutional position of Indian First 
Nations expressed in the early Indian Acts of 1869 and 1876. 
The 
Imperial 
policy 
heritage 
of 
the 
1830s 
and 
40s, 
supplemented by Federal legislation and programming in the 
first two decades of Confederation, was both the context and 
rationale for the development of the residential 
school 
system, that in its turn constituted part of a most extensive 
and persistent colonial system 
- a system that marginalized 
Aboriginal communities within its constitutional, legislative 
and regulatory structure, stripped them of the power of self-
government and denied them any degree of self-determination. 
As a consequence, they became, in the course of Canada's first 
century, 
wards 
of 
the 
Indian 
Affairs 
Department 
and 
increasingly the objects of social welfare, police and justice 
agencies. 
The 
result 
of 
this 
marginalization, 
of 
the 
Federal 
government's colonization of First Nations, was sorrowful, 
indeed. When, in 1946, a Joint Committee of the House of 
Commons and Senate met "to examine and consider the Indian Act 
. 
and the record of Federal administration of Indian 
affairs, the members found not only a policy that had remained 
largely unchanged since the Confederation era, "an unwritten 
heritage of the past,"14 but one that had clearly fallen far 
short of its goal and showed no sign of imminent success. By 
every 
indicator, 
health, 
employment, 
income, 
education, 
housing, Aboriginal people, far from being assimilated, were 
yet separate and second class citizens. What was unfolded 
before those parliamentarians by Departmental 
officials, 
churchmen and Aboriginal leaders who gave evidence to the 
committee, was, within the shadow of a failed policy, a 
complex social, economic and political tapestry with a single 
unifying thread - growing Aboriginal poverty. 
One of the darkest hues in that tapestry came from the fact 
that the main thrust of the colonial system's assimilative 
strategy had concentrated on the young, on the thousands of 
Thomas Moores, boys and girls, Indian, Metis15 and Inuit, 
13 

across 
the 
land. 
They 
were 
the 
vulnerable 
future 
of 
communities and of Aboriginal culture and they had been 
removed from their homes and placed in the care of strangers 
who were hostile to their culture, beliefs and language. For 
the sake of civilization, in the discharge of a national duty, 
they were placed in the residential 
schools. For those 
children and their communities and, indeed, for all Canadians 
the consequence of those schools, of Thomas Moore's tuition, 
has been truly tragic. 
POLICY DEVELOPMENT: THE IMPERIAL HERITAGE, 1830-1879. 
As with the journey to many tragedies, this one, too, began 
with the single step of good intentions. In 1830, George 
Murray, the Secretary of State for the Colonies in the British 
Imperial government, announced a radical change in the long-
standing policy pertaining to the First Nations of Upper and 
Lower Canada. That traditional policy, 
initiated by the 
Imperial government with the Proclamation of 1763, had, he 
commented, 
reference to the advantage which might be derived 
from their [the tribes'] friendship in times of War 
rather than to any settled purpose of gradually 
reclaiming them from a state of barbarism and of 
introducing 
amongst 
them 
the 
industrious 
and 
peaceful habits of civilized life. 
In view of the relative distress of Abriginal communities in 
the southern part of the Upper Canadian colony caused by 
increasing settlement and the consequent decrease of game, 
Murray decided that it was a policy which in good conscience 
"ought not to be persisted in for the future." It would, 
therefore, be replaced by a "more enlightened course." To that 
end the Department of Indian Affairs was directed to the 
"settled purpose" of ameliorating the condition of Aboriginal 
communities "by encouraging in every possible manner the 
progress of religious knowledge and education 
generally 
amongst the Indian Tribes."16 
Specifically this "policy of civilization,"17 a cooperative 
effort combining protestant mission societies, the Indian 
Department and band councils, called for the tribes to be 
located on serviced 
settlement 
sites on their 
reserves 
complete with houses, barns, churches and schools and provided 
with training in agriculture and all the arts and crafts of 
settler life. Through agriculture and other developments, 
commercial fishing, grist and saw milling, communities would 
14 

achieve self-sufficiency on the basis of a modern economy. 
An important additional feature of the policy was that it was 
to be implemented within the constitutional framework that the 
British had adopted in the Proclamation of 1763. In the 
Proclamation, First Nations had been recognized as self-
governing entities within the empire. They were to remain even 
so after 1830 despite the Imperial government's newly found 
dedication to social engineering. It did not presume to 
override the right of self-government even in the service of 
"civilization." The Department was to function, as it always 
had since its founding in 1754, as a foreign office unable to 
command, needing rather to "persuade the Chiefs to give their 
consent"18 to all aspects of development. 
The continuation of this constitutional protocol meant that 
First Nations governments were more than equal partners in the 
implementation of the policy. They could and did control 
developments in their communities: whether there would be a 
reserve school, the type of resource development and the 
extent to which tribal funds would be employed for such 
purposes. "Civilization," for Imperial policy makers, was to 
result in the creation of both self-sufficient and yet self-
governing Aboriginal nations seated securely on their land, 
guaranteed quiet possession of their reserve by the terms of 
their treaty. 
Perhaps because of the constitutional character of the policy, 
as well as the enthusiasm of Departmental agents, missionaries 
and First Nations leaders, progress in the early years was 
rapid. Sir John Colborne, Upper Canadian governor, could 
report, on leaving the colony in 183 6, on nearly a dozen 
settlements and had considerable confidence in their success. 
The Indian was, in the opinion of one of his senior Indian 
Department 
agents, 
on his way to acquiring 
"sufficient 
knowledge of the arts of Civilized Life to avail himself of 
[its] Advantages . "19 
Unfortunately, over the next two decades assessments of the 
policy were not so optimistic. The Bagot Commission, set up in 
1842, asserted, after a two year review of reserve conditions, 
that communities were yet only in a "half-civilized state."20 
Similarly, the Head Commission of 1856 concluded that "any 
hope of raising the Indians as a body to the social and 
political level of their white neighbours, is yet a glimmering 
and distant spark."21 These conclusions were to have rather 
significant and negative consequences. They would be the basis 
for seemingly benign reformulations of the policy designed to 
improve 
its 
performance. 
However, 
those 
initiatives, 
particularly in the fields of education and landholding, would 
lead inexorably to the introduction, in 1857, of a new central 
dynamic for the policy - assimilation. 
15 

The 
recommendations 
of 
the 
Bagot 
Commission began 
the 
reformulations that brought forward the assimilative policy 
and eventually the residential school system. The central 
rationale of the commission's findings was that 
further 
progress by 
communities would only be realized 
if the 
civilizing system was amended to imbue Aboriginal people with 
the primary characteristics of civilization: industry and 
knowledge. 
In the commissioners' view, education was of all the elements 
of the civilizing system the most important - by it "Your 
Commissioners look to the future elevation of the Indian 
race." 
They proposed therefore, as well as the continuation 
of on reserve Common schools, the beginning of "as many manual 
labour or Industrial schools" as possible. These schools, 
centralized off-reserve boarding institutions, would provide 
training for boys in husbandry, agriculture and mechanical 
trades; and for girls in domestic arts and science - dairying, 
needlework and cooking. It was by such instruction that "the 
material and extensive change among the Indians of the rising 
generation may be hoped for." In such schools under the 
supervision of non-Aboriginal teachers and isolated from "the 
influence of their parents" pupils would 
"imperceptibly 
acquire the manners, habits and customs of civilized life."22 
It is not clear exactly what had brought the idea of "manual 
labour or Industrial schools" to the commissioners' attention. 
There is certainly no single root from which the Canadian 
residential school system can be seen to have grown. By the 
1840s, such schools were not uncommon institutions in Europe, 
in various parts of the British Empire and in the United 
States where they were conducted for both non-Aboriginal and 
Aboriginal children. They may have been introduced originally 
amongst the Cherokee in 1804 by the Presbyterian missionary 
Gideon Blackburn.23 
One of them, the Carisle school in 
Pennsylvania, became a reference point for the Department with 
several senior members paying official visits in the 1880s. 
Carisle, however, was neither the inspiration or model for the 
Canadian schools. Founded in 1879 by Captain Richard Henry 
Pratt and General Samuel Armstrong with the backing of Davin's 
hosts Ezra Hayt and Carl Schurz,24 it was as new as the 
Canadian 
schools 
and 
its more 
admirable 
and 
expensive 
features, while praised by such visitors as Hayter Reed, whose 
long career in the Department brought him to be Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, were never copied by 
the Department. 
In Canada, both a "civilization" policy and 
residential 
schools were introduced, initially, in the French Regime. By 
royal edict at the beginning of the 17th century, the French 
were "to seek to lead the natives ... to the profession of the 
Christian faith, to civilization of manners, an ordered life" 
and, of course, 
to a "submission to the authority 
and 
16 

domination of the crown of France." "Frenchification," as it 
has been called, looked to the creation of one race, at first 
through what was envisioned would be an amalgam of French 
immigrants with an acculturated Aboriginal population living 
in integrated villages. Later, the strategy was changed to one 
of reservations, segregated settlements or "reducciones" which 
under missionary supervision would preserve Indians from the 
moral contagion that came from contact with French traders and 
soldiers. Common to both phases of French assimilative policy 
were seminaries introduced by the Recollets and then taken up 
by the Jesuits. Schools such as Notre Dames des Anges outside 
Quebec city, which may well have been the first residential 
school for Aboriginal children in Canada, taught religion, 
reading, writing and the French language by which the children 
would be made French in heart and mind. These educational 
experiments were 
far from successful. 
Problems 
such as 
parental unwillingness to give up their children, runaways and 
student deaths by European diseases, which fed Aboriginal 
resistances 
to the schools, 
foreshadowed 
what would be 
elements of the Canadian experience with schools of this 
type .25 
After 1760, when the British picked up the reins of empire 
dropped by the French on the Plains of Abraham, they were not 
quick to launch a missionary campaign among the First Nations. 
Rather 
their 
attention 
was 
directed, 
as George 
Murray 
indicated in 1830, to the question of military alliances. In 
that light primarily, the government saw a use for churchmen. 
Plans were made to give the Department of Indian Affairs the 
authority to determine the placement of missionaries among the 
tribes. The Superintendent of Indian Affairs, William Johnson, 
forecast 
in 1767 that along with diplomatic 
instruments 
"instruction in religion and learning would create such a 
change in their [the tribes'] manners and sentiments" as to 
"promote the safety, extend the settlements and increase the 
commerce of this country."26 While such strategic appointments 
were made, particularly 
among the Six Nations27, 
little 
attention was paid by church or state to education of any sort 
until the 1820s. In 1821 the Methodists under the leadership 
of the Rev. W. Case, moved enthusiastically into the Indian 
mission field opening not only churches but day schools.28 The 
Anglican Church Missionary Society also became active in this 
decade primarily in the Grand River area and in the early 
1840s the Roman Catholics began a school on Manitoulin Island 
at Wikwemikong. 
The idea of residential schools was first brought forward in 
the British Imperial period by the Governor of Upper Canada, 
Sir Peregrine Maitland, within the context of a proposal he 
made in 1820 to the Colonial Office "for ameliorating the 
condition 
of 
the 
Indians 
in 
the 
neighbourhood 
of 
our 
settlements."29 Maitland's proposal contained most of the 
17 

civilizing concepts and techniques that would be adopted in 
the next three decades. While he called for the conversion of 
wandering hunters into settled agriculturalists under the 
supervision of the Indian Affairs Department and missionaries, 
the focus of his civilizing plan was very much on the 
children. It was his opinion that in "prosecuting such a plan, 
little perhaps can be expected from the grown up Indians, its 
success therefore will chiefly depend upon the influence which 
it may acquire over the young." 
In the Maitland proposal, it was "School Houses of instruction 
and industry" that would give the civilzers their "influence" 
over the young. The school was designed to prepare the child 
for life within an Aboriginal community which would itself be 
remodelled to approximate as nearly as possible a respectable, 
industrious settler community. All children would be boarders, 
divorced from the impediments of "savage" existence, plainly 
clothed and simply fed. They would be taught the precepts of 
religion, the social manners of a polite settler, and the 
basic skills of reading, writing and arithmetic. But more to 
the purpose, they would be instructed in the essential skills 
of settlement. The boys would be employed at "trades or on the 
farms and the girls in making clothes, taking care of Dairies 
etc....30" The graduates would be models of industry and 
correct deportment, enthusiastically and efficiently taking up 
their responsibilities in a new Aboriginal society they were 
helping to create. 
Maitland's plan remained a paper construction only. He did, 
however, go on to cooperate with the Methodists in the 
founding of one settlement - the River Credit settlement of 
the Mississaugas. According 
to the Chief, 
Peter Jones, 
Maitland "opened the hand of liberality to us." Specifically, 
"He has offered to build nearly twenty dwelling houses, and a 
school for us ... which will not cost a little."31 This turned 
out to be a significant initiative as River Credit became the 
model upon which the Murray policy of civilization of 1830 was 
based. 
When the Bagot commissioners published their recommendations 
there were two very influential supporters of residential 
education 
in 
the 
colony. 
Lord 
Elgin, 
the 
"Father 
of 
Responsible 
Government" 
had 
seen 
industrial 
schools 
in 
operation in the West 
Indies, had been most 
favourably 
impressed and pushed for their adoption in Upper Canada. The 
Rev. Egerton Ryerson, the Superintendent of Education for 
Upper Canada, seconded that sentiment: 
I suggest that they be called industrial schools; 
thy are not then schools of manual labour; they are 
schools of learning and religion; and industry is 
the great element of efficiency in each of these 
18 

... as to the objectives of these establishments I 
understand them not to contemplate anything more in 
respect to intellectual training that to give a 
plain English education adapted to the working 
farmer and mechanic ... but, in addition to this, 
pupils of the industrial schools are to be taught 
agriculture, kitchen gardening and mechanics so far 
as mechanics is concerned with making and repairing 
the most useful agricultural equipment.32 
He was less enthusiastic than others about teaching trades 
believing Indians were best suited to being "working farmers 
and agricultural labourers."33 In view of the support of the 
Methodists, the governor and the superintendent of education, 
the Bagot Commission's recommendation of manual labour schools 
was assured a warm reception. 
In the opinion of the commission, the next most important 
element requiring attention, after education, was that most 
emblematic Victorian virtue - industry. Increased knowledge 
would be useless, the commissioners reasoned, unless it was 
harnessed to industriousness, the well-spring of progress, 
which in turn flowed from the individual ownership of land. 
The First Nations, the commission pointed out, continued "as 
in their uncivilized state" to hold their land in common and 
this retarded 
any 
considerable 
advancement 
in 
industry 
and 
civilization; because no man will exert himself to 
improve his lands and procure their comforts of 
life unless his right to enjoy them is exclusive 
and secure. 
The necessary security could be afforded the Aboriginal 
farmer, and a considerable boost to his 
industriousness 
promoted, through the allotment of an 100 acre sub-division of 
the reserve with a title deed 
"protecting him in his 
possession in the event of the surrender of the reserve by the 
rest. "34 
In line with First Nations self-government, the Department 
took 
these 
recommendations 
to band 
councils 
for 
their 
appproval. They achieved but limited success. Sub-division was 
rejected firmly in each community. Holding land in common was 
an ancient custom, an essential part of their culture, which 
they were unwilling 
to forego despite 
the 
Department's 
argument that it fostered "idleness . . . particularly in the 
rising generation."35 
Whatever disappointment the Department may have felt from 
having to lay aside this technique to create industry, was 
more than offset by the success it had in education. Band 
19 

after band responded positively to the extent of setting aside 
one quarter of their annual treaty payments for an education 
fund. Between 1848 and 1851, with the assistance of the 
Governor, Lord Elgin, two schools under Methodist supervision, 
Alnwick at Alderville and Mount Elgin School at Muncey Town, 
were opened. As had been recommended,the schools were operated 
as a partnership. The government provided a yearly grant 
towards the lodging, clothing and education of the children. 
The church supplied the teachers, supervisors and necessary 
equipment. 
Together these two initiatives and the success and failure the 
Department 
experienced 
in 
implementing 
them brought 
an 
additional 
and 
important 
reformulation 
of 
the 
policy's 
civilizing system. While it retained its initial goal and its 
characteristic apparatus - settlement, agriculture, education 
and Christianization, the civilizers, Departmental officials 
and their missionary partners, saw the question of development 
with a greater degree of sophistication than they had in the 
1830s. Most significantly they became much more discriminating 
about 
the 
potential 
of 
Aboriginal 
people 
to 
achieve 
civilization. 
From 1830, the Department had advanced along the widest front 
in providing the infrastructure of settlement and training to 
communities. All could be civilized, men, woman and children, 
and so all were to receive ameliorative attention. From the 
report of the Bagot Commission forward, however, Departmental 
officials took the position that adults could make only 
limited progress. Thus by the end of the 1840s, they narrowed 
their approach to the young and residential 
education. 
Returned to the reserve upon graduation, those children would 
be the civilized Aboriginal people of the future: they "would 
recommend themselves to the confidence of ... their White 
Friends, and at the same time be rendered to occupy places of 
trust and profit."36 Moreover, they would be the leaven of 
civilization, moving their communities along to a fully 
civilized and self-sufficient state. 
Unfortunately, when the Head Commission passed judgement, in 
1856, on the reformulated system no doubt was left that even 
further amendment was required. The commissioners concluded 
"with great reluctance . .. that this benevolent experiment has 
been to a great extent a failure." It was the Department's 
reaction 
to 
that 
statement 
in 
the 
form 
of 
another 
reformulation of the system that brought the crisis of 
assimilation in 1857. 
What was no doubt most disturbing for the Department and the 
Churches was that the failure referred to by the commission 
was connected to the central developmental instrument - the 
manual labour school. There had been the expected difficulties 
20 

with enrolments and runaways. These had plagued the French 
schools of the 18th century and would remain difficulties 
throughout the history of the Canadian school system. Much 
more problematic, was the behaviour of the graduates. On 
returning to their communities, supposedly re-socialized as 
non-Aboriginal people, they became cultural backsliders. They 
were not 
infected with industriousness, 
which was most 
"discouraging in the extreme" and they did not take a leading 
role in community development. In short, they did not 
seem to carry back with them to their homes any 
desire to spread among their people the instruction 
which they have received. They are content as 
before to live in the same slovenly manner, the 
girls make no effort to improve the condition of 
the houses nor do the boys attempt to assist their 
parents steadily on the farm. 
It is true that improvement is perceptible in their 
own 
personal 
appearance 
but 
the 
amelioration 
extends no farther. The same apathy and indolence 
stamp all their actions as is apparent in the rest 
of the Indians.37 
"Apathy" and "indolence" were, indeed, the exact opposite of 
the sought after industriousness. The blame, however, did not 
rest, according to the civilizers, in the schools but in the 
conditions graduates returned to on the reserves. For a 
solution, therefore, they returned to an earlier logic - if 
graduates were to achieve their potential and become "useful 
members of their communities,"38 developmental catalysts, it 
was imperative that they receive individual allotments of 
land. This would be 
"greatly promotive 
of their good" 
anchoring knowledge to the foundation of industry - private 
property - and would "complete the plan which originally led 
to this enterprise."39 
Unfortunately, this reasoning was, on the surface at least, 
problematic. Any attempt to realise reform in the reserve 
landholding system was bound to be frustrated by the refusal 
of First Nations in the colony to sub-divide. On this point, 
they remained intransigent. The Department, however, was 
determined and was committed to the indispensability of 
individual tenure. Having the will, it found a way by securing 
passage, in June of 1857, of an Act to Encourage the Gradual 
Civilization of the Indian Tribes in the Province. 
The act was a straightforward solution to the developmental 
problem 
facing 
the 
Department 
in 
the 
mid-l850s. 
It 
circumvented 
the 
tribal 
position 
on 
reserve 
land 
and 
reformulated the civilizing system by providing a place for 
21 

Aboriginal people within colonial society. Any male, judged to 
be "sufficiently advanced in the elementary branches of 
education," to be of good character and free from debt could, 
on application, be awarded fifty acres of land "and the rights 
accompanying it." He would be enfranchised, relinquishing 
tribal affiliation and "any claim to any further share in the 
lands or moneys then belonging to or reserved for the use of 
his tribe and shall cease to have a voice in the proceeding 
thereof."40 He would be thereafter a full member of colonial 
society. 
This enfranchisement provision, allowing the assimilation of 
Aboriginal people into the colony, ensured, according to the 
logic of the civilizers, that manual labour school graduates 
and other progressive Aboriginal people, would be rescued from 
the regressive atmosphere of the reserve, their knowledge 
consolidated and their life animated with industry. Through 
this last reformulation of the civilizing system in the period 
of Imperial control of Indian Affairs that came to an end in 
1860, 
the 
Department 
envisioned 
increasing 
numbers 
of 
graduates abandoning their communities through enfranchisement 
and being placed on their own land. In this manner the dire 
prediction of the Head Commission would be reversed as the 
goal of civilization rather than being a "distant spark" would 
rush up to meet them. 
The impact of the act was profound. 
"Civilization" was 
redefined. 
The 
goal 
of 
community 
self-sufficiency 
was 
abandoned in favour of the assimilation of the individual. 
Tribal dissolution, to be pursued mainly through the corridors 
of residential schools was the Department's new goal. Progress 
towards that goal was to be measured in the reduction of the 
size of First Nations through enfranchisements. This new focus 
had one final consequence. It had a cataclysmic effect upon 
the participants in the process of development, upon the 
reciprocal attitudes of civilizers and Aboriginal leaders, and 
it had a most deleterious effect upon the course of reserve 
development. 
Reaction to the act from First Nation governments across the 
southern part of the colony was resolutely negative as they 
recognized immediately its implications for continued tribal 
existence. Surely, one leader commented, it was an attempt "to 
break them to pieces." It simply "did not meet their views" 
and thus they argued before the Department and petitioned 
Governor Head for the repeal of the act.41 In a general council 
that drew representatives from across the colony, leaders 
announced they would sell no more land and prepared to lobby 
the Queen's son, the Prince of Wales, who was then on a royal 
visit. The Six Nations Council declared its aversion "to their 
people taking the advantages offered" by the act. Some bands 
removed their children or financial support from the schools, 
22 

now seen as the primary mechanism of assimilation. Others 
refused to allow the annual census of their reserve.42 
On their part, missionaries 
and Departmental 
officials, 
convinced of the developmental and motivational power of 
assimilation, were totally out of sympathy with Aboriginal 
leaders. Lord Elgin's Civil Secretary, L. Oliphant, who was 
responsible for the operations of the Department, calculated 
that the 
prospect of one day sharing upon equal terms in 
those 
rights 
and 
liberties 
which 
the 
whole 
community now enjoy would operate as the highest 
stimulant to exertion, which could be held out to 
young Indians.43 
The Rev. W. MacMurray, one of Governor Head's advisors, agreed 
telling 
Head 
during 
the 
drafting 
of 
the 
act 
that 
enfranchisement was the necessary next step after fee simple 
tenure because 
experience has I think abundantly shown, that the 
longer the Indian is kept in a comparably helpless 
condition, 
and 
treated 
as 
a child, 
the 
less 
inclined he will be, to assume the responsibility 
for or taking care of himself.44 
It is no wonder then that civilizers, holding such a position, 
had 
little 
patience 
with 
First 
Nations' 
protests 
and 
petitions. 
Oliphant's 
successor, 
R. 
J. 
Pennefather, 
representing the sentiments of all of them no doubt, dismissed 
a petition from the Muncey Town community with the terse 
comment "the Civilization Act is no grievance to you."45 
In 1860, with the transfer of Indian Affairs to the colony, 
the philosophy and infrastructure of reserve development, 
serviced 
settlements 
and, 
most 
importantly, 
residential 
schools, were the core elements of civilizing policy passed on 
to the Canadians. As well, however, that heritage included the 
unresolved 
conflict 
centred 
on 
enfranchisement 
and 
assimilation. Canadians were then, of course, pre-occupied 
with their own conflicts, between French and English, and with 
threats to their survival posed by the over-bearing economy of 
the United States. Their attention would not be drawn to the 
question of Aboriginal policy, the impasse on the issue of 
assimilation, 
and 
thus 
to 
the 
question 
of 
residential 
education, until after Confederation. 
In the meantime, Departmental officials conducted a resolute 
campaign, initially before the colonial cabinet and then after 
1867 before the Federal government, against the continued 
independence of First Nations' governments. These latter 
23 

governments were to be held responsible for what had to be 
admitted was the failure of the Act. By 1863, despite the 
Department's prediction that many were "desirous 
... of 
sharing the privileges and responsibilities which would attend 
their incorporation with the great mass of the community, " 
only one man had volunteered for enfranchisement. It was 
concluded that the "object for which the act was passed is not 
likely to be attained - for all practical purposes, it is a 
dead letter."46 The government was pressed to abolish First 
Nations' governments which were represented as blocks on the 
road to civilization, opposed to their people taking advantage 
of the act, incapable of managing their own affairs or 
fostering indispensable conditions for development such as 
sub-division. They should be dealt with by the coercive force 
of law. "Petty Chieftainships" should be abolished and a 
"Governor and sufficient number of magistrates and officers" 
be put in charge of reserve communities."47 In the Department's 
opinion, self-government and civilization were incompatible. 
The Federal government did not hesitate over long in following 
such advice. In the blueprint of Confederation, the British 
North America Act 
of 1867, 
the Federal government 
was 
assigned, in Section 91:24, the power to legislate for Indians 
and their property. Macdonald took this to mean that his 
government had to undertake "the onerous duty of ... their 
[the Indians] guardianship as of persons underage, incapable 
of the management of their own affairs."48 To this end, in "An 
Act for the gradual enfranchisement of Indians, the better 
management of Indian affairs 
. . . 1869 "49 The government 
repeated the enfranchisement provisions of the act of 1857. 
But Macdonald's government went much further. Self-government 
was 
abolished. 
Traditional 
government 
was 
replaced 
by 
"municipal government"50 giving extensive control of reserves 
to the Federal government and its representative the Indian 
Affairs Department. In subsequent legislation, the Indian Acts 
of 1876, 1880 and the Indian Advancement Act of 1884, the 
government took for itself the power to mould, unilaterally, 
every aspect of life on the reserve and to create whatever 
infrastructure it deemed necessary to achieve the desired end 
- assimilation through enfranchisement and, as a consequence, 
the eventual disappearance of First Nations. It could, for 
example, and did in ensuing years, determine who was and who 
was not an Indian, control the election of band councils, the 
management of reserve resources and developmental initiatives, 
the expenditure of band funds and impose individual land 
holding through a ticket of location system. In addition, the 
Department had the power to make and enforce regulations under 
the acts with regards to the total spectrum of public and 
private life in communities. Aboriginal traditions, ritual 
life, social and political organization or economic practises 
could 
be 
proscribed 
as 
obstacles 
to 
Christianity 
and 
24 

civilization or could be declared by Parliament, as in the 
case of the Potlatch and Sun Dance, criminal behaviour. 
Agents, who were routinely made Justices of the Peace, were to 
regulate the behaviour of their Aboriginal wards according to 
the "Act Respecting Offenses against Public Morals and Public 
Convenience" bringing into play the alien Victorian morality 
encoded in that legislation.51 
While the Acts related solely to Indian First Nations, the 
assumption behind them 
was the same for all Aboriginal 
people. Men, women and children - Metis, "non-status and 
status" Indians and Inuit - each in their own time and place, 
as their homeland was encompassed by the expanding Canadian 
nation, would be expected to abandon their cherished life 
ways, to become "civilized" and thus to lose themselves and 
their culture among the mass of Canadians. This would be an 
unchanging Federal determination, justified in the minds of 
Confederation policy makers, and successive generations of 
politicians and Departmental officials by their sincere, 
christian certainty that the nation's duty to the original 
people 
of 
the 
land was 
"to prepare 
him 
for a higher 
civilization by encouraging him to assume the privileges and 
responsibilities of full citizenship."52 
Of all the initiatives that would be undertaken in the first 
century of Confederation none was more ambitious or central to 
the civilizing strategy of the Department, to its goal of 
assimilation, than the residential school system. In the 
vision of education developed by both church and state in the 
final decades of the 19th century, it was the residential 
school experience that would lead children most effectively 
out of their "savage" communities into "civilization" and 
"full citizenship." 
THE VISION of RESIDENTIAL SCHOOL EDUCATION, 1879-1920. 
In the last quarter of the 19th century, the officials of the 
Department and their church partners did not stray from the 
fundamentals 
of 
the 
civilizing 
logic 
of 
their 
pre-
Confederation experience. They did, however, build upon it 
extensively developing a full rational for, and a three part 
vision of, education in the service of assimilation. This 
vision included first a justification for disrupting the 
parenting process in Aboriginal communities, secondly, a 
detailed 
strategy 
for re-socializing Aboriginal 
children 
within the schools and, lastly, schemes for the assimilation 
of school graduates. 
The vision was anchored to the fundamental belief that the 
25 

central mechanism in the process of assimilation was education 
and that "the best method to adopt to secure to the pupils in 
after life the greatest possible benefit as the result of the 
education 
afforded 
them" 
was 
residential 
schools. 
That 
certainty, the belief that children would have to be separated 
from their families to be educated, was rooted in the 
Department's and churches' analysis of the failure of day 
schools. But it had a more profound source as well. It was the 
logical consequence of the European representation of the 
character and circumstances of the Indian "race." 
This formative representation can be reconstructed from the 
correspondence between church leaders, politicians and senior 
Indian affairs officials in the period from the Davin report 
until 
the 
First 
World 
War 
after 
which 
philosophic 
consideration of these questions and of Aboriginal education 
becomes rare. Of considerable use in this are the Annual 
reports 
of 
the 
Department. 
While 
these 
were 
produced 
consciously by Department officials to be their best face 
turned to Parliament and are at times not the whole truth, the 
reports were, in fact, subtly constructed by the discourse 
about Aboriginal 
culture 
that encompassed not only 
the 
Departmental "authors" and the Parliamentary "audience" but, 
indeed, all Canadians. It is the traces of that discourse in 
the Reports that are most instructive. 
The analysis of the failure of the day schools can come first, 
however. It was clear to the Department that day schools would 
not educate Aboriginal children. Officials believed they could 
be utilized only in a limited number of situations - in parts 
of southern Ontario and Quebec, for example, where the bands 
had been for sometime associated with settler communities and 
had, consequently, reached what was termed a more advanced 
level. In the main, however, for a litany of practical 
reasons, they were not at all useful. In some areas it was 
impossible to employ them at all. In communities, like many in 
British Columbia, the population was so sparse "that the 
number of children, of an age to attend school on each 
Reserve, would not justify the expense necessary to establish 
a 
school." 
Even, 
however, 
in areas 
where 
demographics 
permitted a school, there were serious difficulties. 
Vankoughnet's 1887 memo to Macdonald included a detailed 
briefing on day schools in which he noted that the children 
were "extremely irregular in their attendance." This arose 
"from several causes." Spread out on the reserve or involved 
with their families in traditional activities, they were 
simply too far to attend school on a daily basis. Many 
children, he claimed, had "such a want of sufficient clothing" 
that especially during the "inclement seasons of the year" 
they could not attend. And then there was the problem of "the 
children being fed while attending school." 
Imagine, he 
26 

continued, 
a child residing a considerable distance - say 3 or 
4 miles - from the school, leaves its home, say, at 
8 a.m. to attend school, and, with the well known 
improvidence of Indians, no luncheon or dinner has 
been prepared by its parents for the child to take 
with 
it. As 
a consequence 
the 
child 
remains 
fasting, if it stays the day through, and after 
repeating this process a few times it becomes 
discouraged and ceases to attend. 
He thought the schools could offer a hot lunch and proposed, 
perhaps optimistically, that a menu consisting of a "plate of 
oatmeal porridge with syrup and a couple of biscuits" would be 
"economical, nourishing" and an inducement to attendance. 
Realistically, he knew that the Department's hands were tied. 
As would be the case throughout the history of the Federal 
education 
system, 
it 
had, 
Vankoughnet 
admitted, 
but 
"inadequate means at its command" and could hardly afford 
inducements in the form of food when it could not provide 
equipment for the classrooms or repair the buildings or pay 
adequate salaries to the teachers. Indeed, teachers were a 
particular problem. The low salaries offered, the generally 
poor housing or lack thereof, which made it necessary "for the 
teacher to put up with very uncomfortable lodgings and 
indifferent board at Indian houses," made the Indian day 
school the "dernier resort" of a teacher. The Department, 
therefore, "has very often to put up with teachers who, while 
they may hold certificates of competency, are, for other 
reasons not desirable appointees." There were many "actuated 
by a missionary spirit" but normally anyone taking up an 
Indian 
school 
appointment 
"has 
generally 
the 
suspicion 
attached to him that he or she had not been a success as a 
teacher of a public school." Finally, whether the teacher was 
talented or not, their tenure was shortened by the fact that 
they and their families, underpaid and poorly housed, 
labour under the very serious disadvantage of being 
debarred of all these privileges, not the least 
among which is the society of white people, being 
obliged to associate wholly with Indians, as the 
reserves are generally situated at considerable 
distance from white settlements.53 
Vankoughnet's summary was no surprise to anyone involved in 
Indian affairs. Irregular attendance, buildings in bad repair 
and inferior teachers who had neither the equipment, talent 
nor staying power to affect the children in a positive fashion 
were the norm. So too was the belief that all of this could be 
improved by appropriate levels of funding, greater efforts by 
27 

teachers to ensure attendance and stricter supervision of each 
school. 
There was, however, an additional point of agreement which did 
not have an optimistic twist. There was a fatal impediment in 
the day school equation for which there was no easy remedy -
the Indian "race" itself. Davin had already noted that the 
"influence of the wigwam was stronger than the influence of 
the school."54 Throughout, this period the Department had 
abundant evidence from local agents, teachers and missionaries 
to support that contention. The annual round of traditional 
ecomonic activities was most disruptive. 
As soon as the Spring opens - the Children are 
engaged in assisting to make sugar - then planting 
succeeds. 
After 
that 
gathering 
berries 
ie 
strawberries, Raspberries, plums and Cranberries -
then comes husking and curing of Corn - so that the 
greater part of the year is occupied someway or 
other. And ... it is very difficult to keep the 
Indian Children in subordination. They are so much 
accustomed to move about and sail and have things 
their own way at home, that after all it is really 
wonderful that any of them know anything at all.55 
The children, in the natural order of things, learned from 
their parents and other adults in their communities - a 
situation which was, for agents and missionaries, far from 
desirable. The Indian Workers Association of the Presbyterian 
Church for Saskatchewan and Alberta warned that "half grown 
girls and boys" at day schools "even upon nominally Christian 
reserves are imbued with immoral ideals regarding sexual 
relations, that are a menace to their growing up to be pure 
minded men and women."56 Vankoughnet concluded that the main 
cause of low and irregular attendance was the indifference "of 
the parents in the matter of the education of their children 
and the absence of the exercise by the parents of proper 
authority over them to compel attendance."57 
To understand fully such comments, and how the attitudes they 
indicated led resolutely to the conclusion that residential 
schooling was the only way "of advancing the Indians in 
civilization, 1158 they must be framed in a wider context. 
Officials and missionaries, even if they operated in remote 
corners of the land, did not stand outside Canadian society. 
They shared with other Canadians a discourse about Aboriginal 
people that informed their activities and, in this case, their 
educational plans. The basic construct of that discourse, with 
due regard to the poetic and philosophic utility of "the 
noble," continued to be that of the uncomplimentary comparison 
of the "savage" and the "civilized." 
28 

Aboriginal people were, in Departmental and church texts, 
"sunk" in "ignorance and superstitious blindness," a well of 
darkness from which they were in need of "emancipation."59 
"Enlightened" Canadians would have "to elevate the Indian from 
his condition of savagery"60 from their "present state of 
ignorance, superstition and helplessness." They would then 
reach the state of civilized Canadians: one in which their 
"practical knowledge"61 and labour would make them "useful 
members 
of 
society,"62 
"intelligent, 
self-supporting"63 
citizens. 
Not all Indians could be liberated, however, from their 
culture; not all could undergo "the transformation from the 
natural condition to that of civilization."64 Adults might make 
some progress; they might, Davin suggested, "be taught to do 
a little at farming and at stock raising and to dress in a 
more civilized 
fashion, but that is all."65 They were J.A. 
Macrae, the Department's Inspector of Schools for the North 
West, explained, in his report of 1886, "Physically, mentally 
and 
morally 
. . . 
unfitted 
to 
bear 
such 
a 
complete 
metamorphosis...."66 
In one common Victorian analogy that 
illustrated popular ideas of cultural evolution, the Indian 
"race" 
was 
"in 
the period 
of 
infancy" 
while 
European 
civilization 
- 
with 
writing, 
commerce, 
industry 
and 
Christianity - was the high water mark of cultural maturity. 
Davin took this further arguing that there was in the adult 
Indian "the helplessness of mind of the child ... there is, 
too, the child's want of perspective; but there is little of 
the child's receptivity...."67 Adults, therefore, were, in the 
words of the Rev. E.F. Wilson, the founder of Shingwauk 
residential school, "the old unimprovable people."68 
Unfortunately, Indian adults were more than just irredeemable, 
lost to the process of civilization, they were a hindrance to 
it. For though they could learn but little, they did teach. 
Through 
them 
to 
their 
children, 
and 
on 
through 
the 
generations, ran the "influence of the wigwam," "superstition" 
and "helplessness." Thus the child who attended day school 
also "learned little and what little he learns is soon forgot 
while his tastes are formed at home, and his inherent aversion 
to toil is in no way combatted. "69 Aboriginal education, unlike 
the upbringing children received in Canadian homes, "teaches 
little that is beneficial," useful in a modern world: 
The white child may be educated in the affairs of 
life and life's duties to a great extent without 
ever entering the doors of a school. The examples 
and precepts of it elders, the contact of its 
fellows, all the circumstances of it existence are 
educational agencies, indeed, it is from these far 
more than from instruction in schools that it 
learns its duties to God, to the State and to 
29 

itself. All such circumstances of life equally 
educate the Indian child at home but its parents, 
fellows and existence being Indian, it is trained 
in Indian life not in the life of the white man 
upon a knowledge of which its future existence 
depends.70 
The adult population, continuing its traditional parenting 
role, and Aboriginal communities as political factors to be 
dealt with, were to church and state, stumbling blocks on the 
road to civilization. "The influences at work to prejudice 
Indians against having their children educated" were, the 
Department noted in its Annual Report of 1897, "many and 
powerful."71 James Smart, the deputy superintendant general of 
Indian Affairs, wrote, in 1900, of the "fear not unnaturally 
entertained by the parents that education would not only 
destroy sympathy between them and their offspring in this life 
but, through the inculcation of religion separate them in a 
future state of existence."72 For Vankoughnet, parents ran the 
gamut from merely incapable to grossly evil. He characterized 
some parents with sympathy as being unable, due to a norm of 
their culture, to exercise the authority necessary to ensure 
that children would attend school regularly. But others, as 
for instance the Indians of the south coast of mainland 
British Columbia, were beyond the moral pale - using their 
daughters "so soon as they arrive at puberty, for purposes of 
traffic of the worst description, and the boys by the terrible 
example set them by their parents ... would become as depraved 
as themselves notwithstanding all the instructions given them 
at a day school."73 
Communities 
in areas of 
settlement 
posed an unexpected 
difficulty. Many of them were favourable to schooling but had 
an educational agenda, which if allowed to predominate, would 
frustrate the intended assimilative function of schools. As 
with communities in pre-Confederation Upper Canada, bands in 
general attempted to use education as a tool of cultural 
revitalization, as a method of mediating between themselves 
and the white communities growing up around them. This 
resulted in a wholly different view of education than that of 
the Department and churches. The Department was aware of this 
and did not, of course, approve. Only "Up to a certain point," 
the Department reported in 1899, "in order to derive benefit 
for themselves from such contact as they must necessarily have 
with whitemen, and to save themselves from being overreached" 
did communities "show an increasing appreciation of the value 
of education."74 But that appreciation was limited; it was 
"regulated by the amount of practical assistance rendered 
thereby in dealings with the dominant race." Children needed 
to attend schools then only to the extent they could acquire 
skills that would aid the community in its struggle to 
continue to support itself. Beyond that point, few parents 
30 

"have any ambition" 
for education 
"on behalf of 
their 
offspring."75 They certainly could not be portrayed by the 
Department as being in any way interested in a curriculum 
designed to assimilate their children. 
These difficulties of Aboriginal character and circumstances, 
faced by the Department and Canadian churchmen and women were 
shared by social reformers throughout the world of empires as 
reformers all cast Aboriginal people in the same mould. 
Furthermore, in each colonial setting, as an indelible element 
of contact 
between the 
"superior" 
European culture 
and 
indigenous cultures in their "infancy," there was thought to 
be 
a 
severe 
and 
pressing 
crisis. 
Macrae 
sketched 
its 
manifestation in the western Canadian context: 
The circumstances of Indian existence prevents him 
following 
that 
course 
of 
evolution 
which 
has 
produced 
from 
the barbarian 
of 
the past 
the 
civilized man of today. It is not possible for him 
to be allowed slowly to pass through successive 
stages, from pastoral to an agricultural life and 
from and agricultural one, to one of manufacturing, 
commerce or trade as we have done. He has been 
called upon suddenly and without warning to enter 
upon a new existence. Without the assistance of the 
Government, 
he must 
have 
failed 
and 
perished 
miserably and he would have died hard entailing 
expense and disgrace upon the Country. 
With 
the 
rapid 
incursion 
of 
settlement 
and 
resource 
development, there was not time for some natural evolutionary 
course to be run. The Aboriginal population was destined, 
therefore, to die off unless "Special measures," were adopted 
"to force a change in his [the Indian's] condition."76 The need 
for such concerted intervention was obvious and compelling to 
Victorian Canadians. The point at which to strike so as to 
"kill the Indian in him and save the man"77 was equally obvious 
...."it is to the young that we must look for the complete 
change of condition."78 
In the minds of Departmental officials and missionaries, the 
young were the only ones who could be rescued and that could 
only be done if, as E. Dewdney, the Superintendent General of 
Indian affairs in Macdonald's second term as prime minister, 
wrote, 
children 
were 
removed 
from 
"deleterious 
home 
influences."79 The churches' agreement provided moral backing 
to Dewdney's resolute position. The Catholic Archbishop of St. 
Boniface and four other Bishops petitioned the government to 
take children as young as six for it was important that they 
be "caught young to be saved from what is on the whole the 
degenerating influence of their home environment".80 And the 
Methodists followed suit, in tones like Macrae's: 
31 

The Indian is the weak child in the family of our 
nation and for this reason presents 
the most 
earnest 
appeal 
for Christian 
sympathy and co-
operation ... we are convinced that the only hope 
of successfully discharging this obligation to our 
Indian brethren 
is through the medium of the 
children, therefore educational work must be given 
the foremost place.81 
The Superintendent General of Indian Affairs in 1908, Frank 
Oliver, was the only one to strike an ironically theological 
dissenting note in this chorus of agreement: 
I hope you will excuse me for so speaking but one 
of the most important commandments laid upon the 
human by the divine is love and respect by children 
for parents. It seems strange that in the name of 
religion a system of education should have been 
instituted, the foundation principle of which not 
only ignored but contradicted this command.82 
There were two models at hand for this educational work: 
"planting out" and residential schools. "Planting out" had 
been undertaken most notably in Pennsylvania. As Macrae 
described it in his report, it involved placing children "at 
the age character is formed" with "respectable white people" 
thus relieving them from "the influences of Indianism" and 
bringing them "under those of civilization."83 This form of 
fostering, often called "outing" or "farming out," would be 
employed by the Department in a limited fashion only and 
always in conjunction with the second more popular option -
the residential school. 
Almost no one involved in Indian Affairs, with perhaps the 
exception of Oliver, seemed to have any doubt that separation 
was justified and necessary or that residential schools were 
the most efficacious educational 
instrument. 
Residential 
school attendance would, E. Dewdney informed Parliament in 
1889, reclaim the child "from the uncivilized state in which 
he has been brought up" by bringing "him into contact from day 
to day with all that tends to affect a change in his views and 
habits of life." Through "precept and example he is taught" by 
Christian teachers "to endeavour to excel in what will be most 
useful to him." The desired result, assimilation, would be 
"more 
speedily and 
thoroughly 
accomplished by means of 
boarding and industrial schools."84 
Perhaps the best illustration of this confident conviction is 
another Departmental photograph of that time - 
parent and 
children at the Qu'Appelle Industrial School. The 
"weak 
child", the "influences of Indianism," the father, stooped and 
wrinkled, already a figure of the past having reached the 
32 


limit of evolution, appears to be decaying right in front of 
the camera, dying off as was his culture. In sharp contrast, 
his children, neatly attired in European clothing, the boy's 
cadet cap a symbol of citizenship, are, like Thomas Moore 
after 
tuition, 
exemplary 
of 
the 
future, 
of 
the 
great 
transformation to be wrought by separation and education in 
the residential school. 
To achieve this transformation, it was seen as necessary not 
only to remove children from parents and community and place 
them in the guardianship of "respectable white people," new 
parents in the form of the Department and the churches, but to 
maintain that separation for as long as possible. Effective 
socialization depended upon, in the words of the Anglican 
Bishop of Rupert's Land, "continual residence."85 Hayter Reed 
thought that the nature of the physical separation, aimed at 
the total isolation of the child, 
was important. "The more 
remote from the Institution and distant from each other are 
the points from which the pupils are collected, the better for 
their success."86 Where the school was in the vicinity of the 
community, as was the case with boarding schools, and parental 
visits too frequent and thus disruptive, the Department was 
prepared to take stern measures. In 1891, for example, Dewdney 
threatened "to authorize the employment of the Police to keep 
the visitors off the precincts" of the Qu'Appelle residential 
school if the Principal could not himself handle the problem.87 
Finally, the Department's 1889 "Rules and Regulations" for 
industrial schools included the directive that children were 
to write to their parents twice a year but that all-incoming 
and out-going mail "must be scrutinized by the Principal 
before transmission or delivery."88 
The importance of continual separation was such that the 
question of vacations became an issue early in the history of 
the school system. In general, senior officials of both the 
Department and the churches, 
leaned to disallowing them 
completely or restricting them as much as possible. According 
to 
Dewdney, 
"Our 
policy 
is 
to 
keep 
pupils 
in 
these 
institutions until trained to make their way in the world" and 
therefore "taking children in for short terms and letting them 
go again is regarded perhaps as worse than useless" as the 
"effect of allowing children to visit their Reserves is bad."89 
Father Lacombe opposed holidays and also visits from the 
parents "because their intercourse and influence demoralize 
the pupils very much."90 
For missionaries, local agents and school Principals, however, 
involved in the day to day operation of the residential school 
system, holidays were a necessary evil in the process of 
recruiting students. The Principal of Thomas Moore's school, 
pushing for a minimum three-week summer vacation, explained 
that 
33 

In trying to secure recruits we are met with the 
objection that if parents send their children to 
School, the children are not allowed to leave the 
School for a visit to their old home for many many 
years and that their children might as well be dead 
for all they see of 91 
Hardliners like Reed argued in return that holidays simply 
reopened the whole difficulty "originally made by the parents 
with regard to parting with their children" and "renders it 
difficult if not impossible to get them back again." He 
lobbied the Department to hold firm for unless parents could 
"be brought to recognize that the benefits are worth such 
sacrifice there would be no guarantee that they may not insist 
from some caprice or selfish motive, 
in removing their 
children at anytime."92 
The Department found itself caught on the horns of its own 
principles. 
Sustained 
separation 
was 
a 
developmental 
requirement but adequate recruitment was a necessity also. 
Driven between the two, it was not until the Department felt 
it had sufficient control over parents to ensure that children 
would be returned to the school that it approved, in 1920, a 
standard two-month summer vacation.93 
All of these difficulties over vacations, which will be 
revisited in terms of the question of compulsory education, 
could, of course, be obviated by recruiting children who, by 
European definitions, were orphans. It not surprising then to 
find a marked preference for such children. E. Dewdney writing 
in 1883 to the Rev. Thomas Clarke, the Principal of the 
Battleford school, ordered that "orphans and children without 
any persons to look after them should first be selected."94 
This preference 
remained 
throughout 
the history of the 
residential school system. 
Finally, it is important not to leave the impression that the 
rational developed in the period before the First World War 
for 
residential 
schools 
was 
wholly 
selfless, 
directed 
exclusively to the duty of saving the Indian "race" through 
the young. While children were to be taken into the bosom of 
the Canadian nation to dwell in equality with the other 
subjects of Her Majesty, it was as much for the benefit of the 
state as it was for the nourishment of the child. Below the 
rhetoric of duty and civilization ran another motivation which 
occasionally 
broke 
through 
the 
surface 
of 
church 
and 
Departmental texts. It bespoke not a feeling of self-assured 
superiority in the face of the "savage" but a fear of the 
unknown other and of its disruptive potential. 
At one level this concern related simply to the short-term 
challenge 
of 
transcontinental 
nation 
building 
faced 
by 
34 

Canadian 
leaders 
during 
the 
first 
three 
decades 
after 
Confederation. On more than one occasion the turmoil in the 
American west, the scene of an almost continuous battle 
between plains tribes and the American army after the mid-
18603, spilled over into Canadian territory. At the same time 
conditions 
among 
Canada's 
western 
First 
Nations 
were 
increasingly worrisome due to the beginning of settlement, the 
diminution of the great buffalo herds, the return of epidemic 
smallpox and the Riel "rebellion" in 1870. 
The Davin report was the first to make a link between the 
anticipation of disorder and the utility of a residential 
school system. During his stay in Winnipeg, Davin was briefed 
on the situation among the western Indian First Nations and 
Metis. He reported that the Metis were "thoughtful if not 
anxious regarding the Government's intentions regarding them, " 
that "among the Indians there is some discontent" and that the 
disappearance of the buffalo would cause extensive damage to 
Indian and Metis economies. It was the case, he continued, 
that "No race of men can be suddenly turned from one set of 
pursuits to another set of a wholly different nature without 
great attendant distress" and danger he could have added. The 
whole situation Davin warned in conclusion, required the 
"serious consideration of the Department." 
Davin's advice was that these problems could be solved neither 
by scrip payments to offset the loss of Aboriginal income or 
conservation legislation aimed at saving the buffalo but "only 
by educating Indians and mixed-bloods in self-reliance and 
industry." With a fair degree of foresight, given that the 
next western 
"rebellion" was just seven years away, he 
cautioned Macdonald 
that 
"There 
is now barely 
time to 
inaugurate a system of education," such a "large statesmanlike 
policy with bearing on immediate and remote issues cannot be 
entered on too earnestly or too soon." Doing so would bring 
substantial rewards. Through schools, the danger posed by 
Aboriginal distress would be neutralized as the tribes would 
be "prepared to meet the necessities of the not too distant 
future; to welcome and facilitate ... the settlement of the 
country; 
and 
to 
render 
its 
government 
easy 
and 
not 
expensive. "95 
In the heat of the ensuing crisis in 1885, the subtlety of 
Davin's position fell away. The Presbyterian church, lobbying 
the government in December of that year for what became Thomas 
Moore's residential school north of Regina, included on the 
list of anticipated benefits that, as Dewdney reported it, 
"the Indians would regard them [their children] as hostages 
given to the whites and would hesitate to commit any hostile 
acts that might endanger their children's well-being."96 Such 
a belief, though seemingly outlandish, was not rare. In the 
following year, for example, the Department received the same 
35 

opinion from one of its senior employees - J.A. Macrae "...it 
is unlikely that any Tribe or tribes would give trouble of a 
serious nature to the Government whose members had children 
completely under Government control."97 
This "real politic" rationale for education was not limited to 
this western crisis. Davin's suggestion that education was 
pacification, an economic part of the creation of conditions 
for the peaceful occupation of the west, reoccurred and was 
applied to the long-term development and condition of the 
nation in general. Residential schooling, it was argued, was 
not only a most useful imperial technique of pacification but 
a national tool of social control. In 1900, Macrae made such 
an argument and claimed that its supporters were many. 
All people in the north with whom the matter of 
Indian education has been discussed agreed as to 
its importance not only as an economical measure to 
be demanded for the welfare of the country and the 
Indians, themselves, but in order that crime may 
not spring up and peaceful conditions be disturbed, 
as 
that 
element 
which 
is 
the 
forerunner 
and 
companion of civilization penetrates the country 
and comes into close contact with the natives. That 
benefit 
will 
accrue 
to 
both 
the 
industrial 
occupants of the country covered by treaty and to 
the Indians by weaning a number from the chase and 
inclining them to industrial pursuits is patent to 
those who see that a growing need of intelligent 
labour must occur as development takes place . . . .98 
A sign of how serious the Department took such a function for 
the schools was given when Duncan Campbell Scott, who would be 
the 
most 
influential 
and 
long 
serving 
of 
the 
deputy 
superintendent generals, 
(he ran the Department from 1913 
until his retirement in 1933) subscribed to such sentiments. 
In 1910, when he was superintendent of Indian education, he 
commented in the Annual Report that "without education and 
with neglect the Indians would produce an undesirable and 
often dangerous element in society."99 
In this light the residential schools were part of a wide 
network of institutions meant to be servants ministering to 
industrial society's need for order, lawfulness, labour and 
most critically, security of property. Education in general, 
of course, had such a mandate.100 And, therefore, it is not 
surprising 
that 
residential 
schools 
had 
an 
instructive 
parallel in the industrial and correctional schools of the 
same era for incorrigible white children. B. Titley, an 
historian of education and a biographer of Scott, drew out 
this connection in reference to the non-Aboriginal Victoria 
36 

Industrial School founded in 1887. Such schools, he explained, 
were predicated upon the middle class's judgement that the 
"lower 
class 
family 
was 
failing 
in 
its 
perceived 
responsibility, and it was imperative to intervene in order to 
break the cycle of crime, poverty, depravity and disorder." 
For the safety of society, the white savage had to escape the 
influences of the slum wigwam. It was, as Titley put it, the 
"superior order of the industrial school" that "would save the 
children from their parent's folly." 
Both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal industrial schools, Titley 
concluded, were similar in that they belied the "mixture of 
contempt and fear that was apparent in the middle-class 
attitude towards the poor."101 Titley is not alone in this 
position. The Aboriginal leader, George Manuel, certainly 
shared it and recognized 
from his own experience as a 
residential school student the function of the schools as set 
out by Macrae and Scott. He wrote in his book, The Fourth 
World 
The residential schools were the laboratory and 
production line of the colonial system . . . the 
colonial system that was designed to make room for 
European expansion into a vast empty wilderness 
needed an Indian population that it could describe 
as lazy and shiftless 
. . . the colonial 
system 
required such an Indian for casual labour....102 
The first part of the vision of Aboriginal education developed 
in this period by leaders in the churches and the Department 
was erected on the pillars of selfless duty and the self-
interested needs of the state. As different as these motives 
may be, they both underpinned, in their own way, the single 
conclusion 
that 
children had 
to be 
removed 
from 
their 
families, "from evil surroundings,"103 and "kept constantly 
within the circle of civilized conditions" - residential 
schools.104 
This 
image of 
the school 
as the circle 
of 
civilization permeates the second part of the vision - the 
schools themselves and how it was assumed they would function. 
The school was a circle - an all-encompassing environment of 
re-socialization. The curriculum was not simply an academic 
schedule or practical trades training but comprised the whole 
life of the child in the school. One culture was to be 
replaced by another through the work of the surrogate parent, 
the teacher. The Indian child, in the words of Rev. Wilson of 
Shingwauk, 
. . . must be taught many things which come to the 
white child without the schoolmaster's aid. From 
the days of its birth, the child of civilized 
parents is constantly in contact with the modes of 
37 

civilized life, of action, thought, speech and 
dress; and is surrounded by a thousand beneficent 
influences .... He [the Indian child] must be led 
out from the conditions of ... birth, in his early 
years, into the environment of civilized domestic 
life; and he must be thus led by his teacher.105 
The teacher's concentration on "Action, thought, speech and 
dress," the encoded mores of civilized society, would be the 
catalyst of the great transformation. Teachers of quality, 
being both "competent and desirable persons"106 would, Reed 
thought, "devote themselves ... in and out of school to the 
improvement of the minds, morals, personal deportment and 
habits of their pupils".107 Teachers were to be numbered among 
those 
"thousand 
beneficent 
influences" 
and 
thus 
their 
character, wrote Davin, 
morally and intellectually, is a matter of vital 
importance. If he is morally weak, whatever his 
intellectual qualifications may be, he is worse 
than no teacher at all. If he is poorly instructed 
or feeble in brain, he only enacts every day an 
elaborate farce.... A teacher should have force of 
character.... The work requires not only energy but 
the patience of an enthusiast.108 
There was considerable concern over the moral character of 
teachers, 
in 
particular 
the 
males. 
Departmental-church 
correspondence 
contains 
normally 
only 
intriguing 
hints. 
Macrae, however, was open about this noting that the isolation 
of the schools from non-Aboriginal settlements, "the lax moral 
principles of the Indians, and their poverty which makes them 
prone to temptation" made it "absolutely essential that when 
male teachers are engaged they should be men of strict 
principle...." Married men were preferred.109 
The efforts of teachers 
would be guided, in the first 
instance, by a standard curriculum. In the beginning it was 
supplied by the Department and was based largely on an Ontario 
model. Soon, however, Principals were directed to follow the 
relevant provincial 
curriculum. 
In 1895, 
the Department 
published in the Annual Report a Programme of Studies for 
Indian Schools. Students applied themselves to geography, 
reading, recitation, history, vocal music, calisthenics and 
religious instruction. They were to move through six standards 
in each subject and, the programme dictated "Everything must 
be thoroughly understood before a pupil is advanced to other 
studies."110 Tabular statements contained in the Annual Reports 
indicated that students were also to learn spelling, writing, 
grammar, diction, history, drawing and arithmetic.111 
38 

The second major part 
of the curriculum was 
practical 
training. The Department was convinced that 
no system of Indian training is right that does not 
endeavour to develop all the abilities, 
remove 
prejudice 
against 
labour 
and 
give 
courage 
to 
compete with the rest of the world. The Indian 
problem exists owing to the fact that the Indian is 
untrained to take his place in the world. Once 
teach him to do this, and the solution is had.112 
In every residential 
school across the country, 
it was 
envisioned that there would be a daily regime of instruction 
in practical subjects. This was to be the case even in the 
modest boarding schools where it would include, at a minimum, 
gardening or agriculture, domestic skills and rudimentary 
carpentry. In the ambitious industrial schools there was to be 
a wide array of trades training. In 1891, the Department 
listed at its industrial schools at Battleford, Qu'Appelle, 
St. Joseph's, Regina, Ruperts Land, St Boniface, Elkhorn, 
Metlakahtla, 
Kuper 
Island and Kamloops activity 
in the 
following 
"industries": 
"carpentering," 
"blacksmithing," 
"agriculture," "shoemaking" or "bootmaking" and "printing". 
Female students received instruction in "sewing," "tailoring," 
"shirt-making," "mending," "knitting," "cooking and kitchen 
work," 
"baking", 
"laundry 
and 
dairy 
work," 
"ironing," 
"gardening" and "general household duties." 
Academic learning and practical training were balanced in the 
schedule by the half-day system. Students would spend one half 
of their day in the classroom and the other half involved in 
practical activities. These latter could be in the form of 
structured instruction in an industrial shop room or in learn-
by-doing 
chores. 
Instructive 
chores 
served not only as 
education but 
had an additional 
economic 
value in the 
operation of the school. The domestic science taught to girls, 
for example, amounted to the cooking, baking, 
dairying, 
cleaning, laundering and tailoring labour required to operate 
the school. The same held true for the boys' labour in 
carpentry, shoemaking, wood-cutting and harvesting so that 
"the efforts of those receiving instruction are, as far as 
practicable, made available 
. . . for the benefit of the 
institution 
and 
of 
the 
Indian 
reserves 
and 
agencies 
nearest....11113 
For both economic and educational reasons, the circle could be 
expanded to include placing the children under the "proper 
influences" 
of 
"suitable"114 
non-Aboriginal 
families with 
employment opportunities in domestic service for girls and 
farm labour for boys.115 This "outing system" became, Reed 
reported to Parliament in 1896, "one of the marked features of 
industrial institutions." For him and others that was a useful 
39 

development constituting one of the best methods "of educating 
the children in the habits and ideas of, and into sympathy 
with, the whites...."116 It was seen as a preparation for life 
after school as the wages the child earned created "a self 
respect and pride in contributing to self -maintenance.1,117 
While the academic and practical training of the school would 
cloth the pupil in the skills required to survive in a 
modernizing economy, the Department and churches realized that 
the child needed to undergo more profound change. Skills would 
be useless unless accompanied by the values of the civilized 
society in which the child was destined to live. Thus learning 
and life in the circle of civilization were suffused with 
those values. Students, the Anglican activist S.H. Blake 
advised the superintendent general of Indian Affairs, needed 
to be taught "honesty, truth, the beauty of a good, pure 
life. "118 
Of course, the curriculum itself carried the seed of the mores 
of civilization. In "Recitation" and "Vocal Music" in the 1895 
Programme of Studies the "Simple Songs" proscribed were to be 
not only "bright and cheerful" but "patriotic." The verses and 
prose to be memorized and recited by the children were to 
contain "the highest moral and patriotic maxims." 
Most of the teaching was to be rather more direct. The 
programme provided a six standards course in "Ethics." In the 
first 
year pupils were 
to be taught 
"the practice of 
cleanliness, obedience, respect, order, neatness." In Standard 
II they were to learn "Right and Wrong. Truth." and a 
"Continuance of proper appearance and behaviour." In Standard 
III they would "Develop the reasons for proper appearance and 
behaviour" in addition to "Independence and Self-respect." 
Standard 
IV 
was 
"Industry, 
Honesty, 
Thrift," 
while 
V 
introduced 
"Patriotism 
... 
Self-maintenance. 
Charity. 
Pauperism." The final standard was the most sophisticated and 
aggressive. 
Pupils were to be brought 
to confront 
the 
differences in "Indian and white life," the "Evils of Indian 
isolation," "Labour, the law of life," "Relations of the sexes 
as to labour" and "Home and Public duties."119 Many of these 
values, 
order, 
neatness, 
industry, 
thrift 
and 
self-
maintenance, 
for example, would also be a part of the 
substance of practical training. They were among the qualities 
necessary for the integration of a modern Aboriginal workman 
and workwoman into the productive life of Canadian society. 
Within a school that was to function as a home, it was life 
itself, however, that was to be the great teacher. Children on 
coming to the school would enter the white world in an act of 
transformation symbolized by the shearing of Aboriginal locks 
and the donning of European clothes and boots. Thereafter, 
they would live the life of white children within a round of 
40 

days, weeks, months and years punctuated by the rituals of 
European culture. The week began with the sabbath and the 
passage of the seasons was marked by the festivals of church 
and state: Christmas, Easter, the innumerable Saint's days, 
Victoria Day, Dominion Day, Hallowe'en and so forth. These 
rhythms would be imprinted on the child through appropriate 
celebration: presents, concerts, music with bright tunes and 
improving sentiments. 
Resetting 
the child's 
cultural 
clock 
from the 
"savage" 
seasonal round of hunting and gathering to the hourly and 
daily precision required by an industrial order was seen by 
the Department as an issue of primary consideration for 
"innate in him, [the Aboriginal child] has inherited from his 
parents ... an utter disregard of time and an ignorance of its 
value."120 E. Dewdney held that pupils had to be taught, 
that there should be an object for the employment 
of every moment; even, therefore, the routine of 
rising, dressing and washing themselves daily, 
reading the Word of God, receiving instruction in 
the great truths of Christianity, the recurrence of 
the hours for meals, classwork, outside duties, 
such as gardening, 
wood cutting, watering 
and 
feeding 
livestock, 
when 
any 
such 
are 
kept, 
recreation, studying their lessons for the next day 
- all are of great importance in training and 
education, with a view to future usefulness of 
children who would, as a rule, never have received 
the benefit of the same at their homes.121 
The temporal orchestration of life heard in the sounds of 
water breaking through spring ice and leaves rustling in 
freshening fall breezes was replaced by ticking clocks and 
ringing bells - the influence of the wigwam replaced by that 
of the factory. 
Equally essential, with qualified teachers and a curriculum 
and daily cycle of skills and values, was the influence of the 
Christian faith. There was at the beginning of this period 
some reluctance among a few of the senior staff of the 
Department about the participation of the churches in the 
operation of the schools. Reed, for example, thought a secular 
system might be best. But given the lead taken by churches in 
the development of schools for Aboriginal children and the 
force of their missionary convictions, to say nothing of the 
convictions of Victorian Canadians, he realized that "the day 
for making them [the schools] so has gone by" as "no hope need 
be entertained of the various denominations relinquishing the 
hold they already have upon the rising generation through the 
schools. "122 
41 

The role of the churches in the recruitment of students, the 
financing and management of the schools and many other issues 
which became the substance of fierce sectarian in-fighting 
throughout the history of the residential school system would 
drive many senior officials to dreams of ridding themselves of 
their church partners. However, at the same moment, all the 
senior officials, Vankoughnet, Dewdney, and Macrae, and the 
Davin report agreed that the role of religion in this process 
of cultural replacement was key. The Memorandum of the 
Convention of Catholic Principals held at Lebret at the end of 
this period spoke for all of them 
. . . all true civilization must be based on moral 
law, which christian religion alone can give. Pagan 
superstition could not . . . suffice to make the 
Indians practise the virtues of our civilization 
and avoid its attendant vices. Several people have 
desired us to countenance the dances of the Indians 
and to observe their festivals; but their habits, 
being the result of 
free and easy mode of life, 
cannot conform to the intense struggle for life 
which our social conditions require.123 
The Presbyterians echoed these sentiments almost exactly. "We 
aim at building and developing character on the foundation of 
Christian morality, making christian faith and love the spring 
and motive of conduct."124 
The school system, therefore, had to be denominational. It was 
not possible, as Dewdney construed it, to erase an Aboriginal 
"mythology without providing a better one" in which there 
"exists no question ... as to its perfect correctness." To do 
so would "rather tend to lower the Indian's mind than to 
elevate it consequently he must receive but one spiritual 
training unhampered by any other influence."125 
In school, in chapel, at work and even at play the children 
were to learn the Canadian way. Recreation was not leisure but 
re-creation. The games and activities would not be the 
"boisterous and unorganized of games" of "savage" youth. 
Rather the children would have glee clubs, calisthenics clubs, 
brass bands, boys cadet corps, football, cricket, soft and 
hardball, basketball and above all hockey with the "well-
regulated and ... strict rules that govern our modern games", 
that produce "prompt obedience to discipline, 11126 and thus move 
the child further toward the goal line of civilization. 
None 
of 
the 
foregoing 
could 
be 
accomplished, 
those 
indispensable values would not be inculcated, unless the 
children could be released from the shackles of "savage" 
culture they carried with them into the school. The civilizers 
in the church and the Department realized that that task was 
42 

not to be accomplished simply by separation from the parents 
or the change into European attire, or the influences teachers 
or games masters. Rather the profound prerequisite for re-
socialization was a concerted attacked on the ontology of the 
children. 
A child's ontology, its basic cultural patterning - "the 
symbolic ordering of the world" through which "actions and 
objects take on meaning"127 - is "inherited from [its] parents" 
and community from the moment of birth.128 Thus, for example, 
the child, parent and community exist in a landscape - a 
culture's translation of environment into a "meaning"-filled 
place. Parts of the programme of studies would disorient 
children and then attempt to reorient them in a place filled 
with European "meaning." The ethics course was a obvious 
attempt to have the child assimilate European values. The 
geography course and, indeed, mathematics and even theology, 
however, were insidiously disorienting. Children were to be 
taught 
the 
"science" and scientific methodology of the 
European world to understand the world as a European place 
within which only European values had meaning and thus the 
wisdom of their elders was no longer knowledge but the 
superstitions of the "savage" they could no longer understand. 
Such children would be separated forever for even if they went 
home they would, in the words of G. Manuel, bring "the 
generation gap with them."129 Socialized as non-Aboriginal 
people, knowing only the mores of that culture and thus 
behaving according to those norms, despite the fact that they 
"looked Aboriginal," they could be seen, from the communities 
cultural standpoint, as the "crazy people."130 Only in such a 
profound fashion could the separation from savagery and the 
re-orientation as civilized be assured. 
That the Department and churches understood consciously that 
culture or, more particularly, that the task of overturning 
one ontology in favour of another, was the challenge they 
faced is seen in their identification of language as the 
critical issue in the circle. It was through language that the 
child gained its ontological inheritance from its parents and 
community. The word bore the burden of the culture from one 
generation to the next. It was the vital connection. The 
civilizers knew it must be cut if any progress was to be made. 
Rev. Wilson in the Fourth Annual Report of the Shingwauk 
school informed the Department "We make a great point on 
insisting 
on 
the boys 
talking 
English, 
as, 
for 
their 
advancement in civilization, this is, of all things, the most 
necessary."131 He was, of course, preaching to the converted. 
The Programme of Studies of 1896 stated that "Every effort 
must be made to induce pupils to speak English and to teach 
them to understand it; unless they do, the whole work of the 
teacher is likely to be wasted."132 Without English, the 
Department announced in its Annual Report of 1895, 
the 
43 

Aboriginal person is "permanently disabled" beyond the pale of 
assimilation for "So long as he keeps his native tongue, so 
long will he remain a community apart."133 
The 
road 
to 
acculturation 
within 
the 
school 
and 
the 
assimilation of the graduate thereafter, was through the 
English language. That language alone carried the culture of 
civilization. It alone, and not Aboriginal languages, as the 
Deputy Superintendent General, James Smart, explained in 1900, 
can "impart ideas which, being entirely outside the experience 
and environment of the pupils and their parents, have no 
equivalent expression in their native tongue."134 Those ideas 
were the core concepts of European culture - its ontology, 
theology and values. 
The only effective road to English, however, and thus the 
necessary pre-condition that would facilitate the operation of 
the multi-faceted strategy of re-socialization, was to stamp 
out Aboriginal languages within the schools and in the 
children. Senior staff in the Department had no doubt that, as 
Reed advised, it would "be found best to rigorously exclude 
the use of Indian dialects."135 The deputy superintendent 
general was certainly of the same mind -replying emphatically 
that "the use of English in preference to the Indian dialect 
must be insisted upon."136 
Principals shouldered the task not only of English language 
training but of developing a pedagogy of prevention, rewards 
or punishments to make English "in and about all schools as 
far as possible the only allowed means of communication."137 
The range of ideas showed imagination. The Principal of 
Qu'Appelle in 1884 considered the idea of admitting a "few 
English boys" to be divided among the Indian children at 
recreation periods to encourage the use of English. They would 
"also be a great means for helping Indian boys lose their 
Indian habits."138 Wilson at Shingwauk considered the same 
technique but also developed a reward system. At the beginning 
of the week each boy was given a number of buttons. Every time 
they were caught speaking their language, they surrendered one 
button. At the end of the week, the boy with the most buttons 
received a prize - a bag of nuts.139 Almost universally school 
staff 
in addition to their other responsibilities 
were 
assigned the duty of preventing pupils from "using their own 
language."140 What the Principal did in that instance was what 
became, perhaps, the most common technique - punishment. 
Wilson admitted that he chastised "heavily any old pupil who 
presumes to break a rule"141 governing the use of Indian 
languages. Over the life of the school system many Principals, 
had they chosen to, could have made the same admission. 
The final part of the vision of residential education was 
devoted to the graduates, 
their future life among non-
44 

Aboriginals and their contribution to "the advancement of the 
Indian race." Again the churches and Department did not, at 
the outset at least, stray far from the initial plan of the 
pre-Confederation years - education, graduation and then 
enfranchisement. Reality, however, soon imposed upon them, as 
it 
had 
upon 
pre-Confederation 
civilizers, 
the need 
to 
reconsider and reform their ideas and even to redraft some of 
the elements of the process of socialization that was to go on 
within 
the 
schools. 
Unfortunately, 
these 
educational 
strategists could not develop a workable post-graduate plan 
and, unfortunately, the quality of education, and thereby 
Aboriginal children and communities were the losers because of 
it. 
The Department understood that its work did not cease with the 
graduation of students even if they had been transformed, 
according to the strategy, from savage to civilized. The 
children's education, the Annual Report of 1887 noted, 
must not cease with their school course, on the 
contrary that should be only the commencement; for 
as a matter of fact it is after its completion that 
the greatest 
care for those who have had the 
benefit of training at these schools, needs to be 
exercised, in order to prevent retrogression.142 
"Retrogression," cultural back-sliding, the return to savagery 
by graduates was, as it had been in the 1840s and 50s, a 
considerable worry to Department and church educators. The 
connection between parent, community and child once broken 
should not be re-established. The children should not be prey 
ever again to Indian "prejudices and traditions " and the 
"degradations of savage life."143 
It would 
"seem on the 
contrary advisable," the 1887 Report continued, 
"... to 
prevent those whose education at an industrial school ... has 
been completed from returning to the reserves." They should be 
placed in the non-Aboriginal world and secured there with 
employment in the trades they had learned "so as to cause them 
to reside in towns, or in the case of farmers, in settlements 
of white people, and thus become amalgamated with the general 
community."144 
Indeed, the industrial 
schools were to be 
constructed close to towns so that students could have the 
example of civilization always before them and so that they 
could be "apprenticed to local tradesmen" who would be, 
supposedly, "always glad to secure their services."145 Finally, 
graduates could avail themselves of enfranchisement provisions 
of the Indian Act. 
The overall strategy of life and learning within the schools 
had, of course, been devoted to this goal of "amalgamation." 
Pupils were to receive the knowledge, skills and values that 
would make assimilation a certainty. But two elements of that 
45 

strategy had been particularly mindful of the dangers of 
"retrogression." The first dealt with how long children needed 
to be at school. They were to be taken from their parents at 
the earliest possible age and had to be kept until "their 
characters have been sufficiently formed as to ensure as much 
as possible against their returning to the uncivilized mode of 
life."146 There was some debate as to what that meant. Thomas 
Moore's Principal wanted no age limits at all. Boys, he 
argued, should be kept at school until they were prepared to 
be responsible in the application of their training while the 
girls should be "under the guardianship of the school until 
they are married."147 The Department, however, calculated the 
necessary term as a span of 10 years from age six to 16. 
The second element of defense against retrogression concerned 
women, mothers and matrimony. Senior officials held that the 
education of girls was as necessary as that of boys for their 
goal was not only to produce civilized young men integrated 
into the non-Aboriginal labour force, but civilized families. 
In the Victorian view, women were the centre of that most 
important 
institution 
and motherhood 
was 
the 
formative 
socializing 
element. 
The 
education 
of 
girls 
therefore, 
Vankoughnet informed Macdonald, was key as "children are 
generally influenced to an important degree by the precept of 
the mother and the example set them by her at home." Female 
pupils, educated to be civilizing mothers, needed also to be 
civilizing wives. Unless male graduates 
obtain 
as wives 
women 
as 
intelligent 
and 
as 
advanced in civilization as themselves, they will 
of necessity have to select uneducated Indian women 
as partners and if they do not themselves relapse 
into savagery as a consequence the progeny from 
these marriages following the example and teaching 
of the mother will not improbably adopt the life 
and habits of the pure Indian.148 
The women graduates in turn needed similar protection. If they 
returned to the reserve and married "among the semi-civilized 
men of their tribe" then "...the all but universal law by 
which the woman assumes the status of her husband, will surely 
take its course."149 
Continued separation by integration in towns and farming 
communities and inter-marriage among the graduates would 
ensure that the work of the schools would not be frustrated. 
Further suggestions were made to support that calculation. 
Vankoughnet thought, in 1884, that a system of rewards could 
be instituted to entice graduates to integrate. They might be 
offered with their diploma a certificate entitling them to 
enfranchisement and "other privileges from the Government."150 
Reed's advice, given five years later, was somewhat more 
46 

aggressive. The Department must contemplate preventing the 
graduates 
returning to the reserves lest 
they 
"rapidly 
retrograde." He envisioned communities of graduates set up 
adjacent to the schools "to admit of continued supervision" on 
80 acre farms, operated by married graduates who had been 
automatically enfranchised.151 
Neither of these ideas were adopted for the whole post-
graduate strategy quickly had to be reworked in the face of 
economic realities particularly those in the west and British 
Columbia. Initially, the Department, had confidence in the 
capacity of non-Aboriginal communities to absorb ex-students, 
to offer them a context for integration. Though progress in 
that direction was slow in the early days of settlement, by 
1889 
Reed 
could 
report, 
as 
he 
did 
with 
respect 
to 
opportunities for outing, that "month by month the number of 
the desirable class of settlers is increasing and before many 
years, the difficulties will have disappeared."152 However, in 
1896, by which time he had become deputy 
superintendent 
general, 
Reed 
had 
to 
admit 
that 
this 
was 
a 
gross 
miscalculation. Employment was not readily available and, as 
one agent informed the Department, "Race prejudice is against 
them and I am afraid that it will take time, under the 
circumstances, before they can compete with their white 
brothers 
in the 
trades."153 
Thus 
"for the majority 
[of 
graduates], for the present at least, there appears to be no 
alternative"154 but to return to the reserves. That "present" 
stretched into the future; the situation did not improve. 
Early in the new century there were still but "few openings 
for graduates"155 and, with the exception of temporary labour 
shortages during the two wars, there would never be many. In 
ordinary times "no appreciable number of grauates of the 
Schools will be in a position to earn a livelihood by working 
as craftsmen among whites."156 
The Department had to face the troubling realization that its 
graduates were going back to their communities where, Reed 
predicted, "there will be a much stronger tendency for the few 
to merge into the many than to elevate them."157 Reports, 
throughout the period, confirmed this fear. The Principal of 
Regina Industrial School, for example, was exercised by the 
fact that when his graduates found "the restraint of the 
school suddenly thrown off" they were not spending their 
energy in the industrious application of their learning but in 
"moving from place to place, visiting etc." and "rapidly 
drifting back to the nomadic habits of his ancestors."158 Rev. 
McWhinney of Crowstand Boarding School gave a sense of the 
hoplessness of any struggle against those "habits" or against 
the influence of Indians who had not had the elevating 
experience of education: 
Someone may say that they [the graduates] should be 
47 

taught to stand firm. Anyone who knows the weakness 
of the average Indian character will know how hard 
it is to overcome this tendency to drift with the 
current that carries so many of their own people. A 
few generations hence it may be more easily done. 
On Cote's Reserve and I suppose to some extent on 
all Reserves there are a few idle useless fellows 
whose example and influence is a menace to everyone 
who leaves our Schools. They will not work the land 
nor will they settle down to any other definite 
work. If a graduate has any money or property they 
will try by one scheme or another to get it from 
him on the promise of paying him back, which they 
seldom do. These idlers are usually immoral and are 
nearly always at the bottom of every case of 
drunkeness .159 
The 
Indian Commissioner for Manitoba 
and the Northwest 
Territories, David Laird, was only a bit more positive. Some 
graduates, he reported, "are showing the benefits of their 
training in the industrial and boarding schools." Some were 
farming and a few working as carpenters and blacksmiths. "And 
perhaps in no respect is the result of good training more 
apparent than in the homes of those Indians who have married 
girls taught housekeeping under competent instructors .... 
Cleanliness, neatness, and fair skill in cooking are quite 
observable to the visitor." Quite observable to him also, 
however, was "the depressing influence of those whose habits 
still largely pertain to savage life." An unacceptably high 
proportion of "ex-pupils have gone back to the ways of the old 
teepee life."160 
There had to be, obviously, some new plan for graduates. 
Martin Benson an official in the education section of the 
Department, 
who 
would 
succeed 
Duncan 
Campell 
Scott 
as 
superintendent of education, stressed this in briefing the new 
minister, Clifford Sifton, in 1897. "A definite policy of 
dealing with ex-pupils still remains to be settled upon." He 
then laid out some of the options for Sifton's consideration 
indicating that each had supporters within the Department. 
Were the graduates "to remain Indians in the eyes of the law 
or is their graduation from an Industrial school to be 
recognized as a preliminary step towards their ultimate 
enfranchisement?" Should they return to their reserves or have 
crown lands assigned to them "either in a block to form an 
advanced Indian settlement or are they to be allowed to take 
up lands like white settlers?"161 
The new post graduate plans that were worked out in the next 
few years made a virtue of necessity. Students would always 
have the option of enfranchisement and a life within non-
Aboriginal settlements, but it was understood that most would 
48 

return home and it was soon postulated that this was, if 
properly construed, a beneficial development. In a remarkable 
change in educational strategy, Reed's successor as deputy 
superintendent general, James Smart, reasoned that if the 
residential system was to focus only, as it then did, on the 
rescue and re-socialization of individuals, on "improving 
their 
condition 
in life," 
it would 
always have to be 
restricted in number "to that for which there is reasonable 
expectation of being able to find openings for employment." 
Only in this way would it be justifiable in the eyes of 
treasury officials. But if 
the object be to have each pupil impart what he has 
gained to his less fortunate fellows, and in fact 
become a centre of improving influence for the 
elevation of his race, there would appear to be 
stronger reason for incurring the cost of their 
special training, and not the same necessity for so 
strictly limiting the number to whom it may be 
given. 
This concept, that graduates, and perhaps localized schools, 
would be an improving influence, was a return to the earliest 
civilizing 
logic 
which 
envisioned 
manual 
labour 
school 
graduates 
as 
the 
leaven 
of 
civilization 
in 
reserve 
communities. And it was, therefore, 
as Smart 
recognized 
readily, a return to the central worry - retrogression: 
To do this, however, it is obvious that the pupils 
must return to their reserves, and the danger at 
once 
confronts 
them, 
of 
becoming 
individually 
absorbed by the many and of being 
themselves 
affected 
by 
the degrading 
influence 
of 
their 
surroundings, in place of becoming a power for 
good.162 
This shift in focus, from the rescue of individuals to the 
development of the community, was championed outside the 
Department, as well. "Any scheme for the improvement of the 
race," the Principal of the Regina Industrial School wrote to 
the deputy superintendent general, "must include old as well 
as young." Graduates and schools located in the vicinity of, 
or even on, reserves would be "a great moral force in the 
uplift of the life of the reserve." providing "an object 
lesson" in farming, gardening, housekeeping, the care of the 
sick 
and 
"maintaining 
sanitary 
conditions 
about 
their 
homes. "163 
How was it then that graduates could return to those homes, 
remain impervious to the assault of "savage" influence and 
thus be able to act as "great moral force, " "a power for 
good," a civilizing agent in their communities? 
Fortunately, 
49 

the elements of a solution were already at hand in the ideas 
about marriage and motherhood and in Reed's suggestion of 
communities 
of 
graduates. 
That 
ideal 
solution 
was 
the 
"colony." 
The colony, 
"an experiment" begun as early as 1901 and 
heralded by the Department in its Report of the next year, 
recognized the inevitability of the return to the reserve 
while trying to preserve the separation of the graduates from 
the "down-pull of the daily contact" with their "savage" 
neighbours. The colony experiment, as a plan at least, 
involved setting aside for graduates, males with graduate 
wives being preferred, parts of the larger and more fertile 
reserves 
"some 
distance 
from 
the 
Indian 
villages 
or 
settlements, 
and under the immediate eye of a farming 
instructor and the almost daily visits of the agent himself." 
The first flagship colony was File Hills organized on a block 
of 12 square miles on the Peepeekeesis reserve in the 
Northwest Territories. Fifteen ex-pupils from the Regina, St. 
Boniface, Brandon and Qu'Appelle schools were each given 80 
acre lots, horses, farming equipment, lumber and hardware for 
houses. The expenses were to be recouped as "it is proposed 
they shall pay back to the department when their crops warrant 
it, the money to be used to help others make a start." 
It was clearly important for the Department to publicize the 
venture as a success it being the model upon which this new 
post-graduate policy was to rest. The 1902 Report, therefore, 
listed the accomplishments of Ben Stonechild, Fred Dieter, 
George Little Pine, Jose McNabb, John R. Thomas and other 
colony settlers who had broken their land and were growing 
"good wheat 
and oats." 
Such progress, 
credited 
to the 
enthusiasm of the graduates and the energetic supervision of 
the colony's founder, the Agent W.M. Graham, was proof enough 
for the Superintendent General to assert that the revised plan 
was working as students were already "beginning to exert an 
influence on the social tone of reserve life." Laird, who had 
written the section of the Report on the colony experiment, 
was equally optimistic and hoped, therefore, that similar 
colonies "will be organized soon on some other reserves."164 
That hope was not realized. Indeed, the tone of Departmental 
correspondence and Annual Reports when referring to graduates 
began to darken. In 1907 File Hills, described as being 
"hardly out of the experimental stage" was still the only 
colony. While it was yet "proving thus far very satisfactory," 
expectations for graduates in general seem to have become more 
limited. There was going to be retrogression; they were likely 
to "themselves backslide in the process" though some comfort 
could be taken from the fact that "the decline would be to a 
somewhat improved level."165 Agents reports in 1911 on the 
50 

performance of graduates ranged "all the way from "lazy and 
indifferent' to "making satisfactory progress'".166 Duncan 
Campbell Scott 
tried to put the best 
face on this by 
suggesting, in rather sour grapes fashion, that "It was never 
the policy nor the end or the aim of the endeavour to 
transform an Indian into a white man." This was neither the 
first nor the last occasion on which Scott would tamper with 
the facts to put the Department in a good light. He was, in 
fact, becoming pessimistic about the educational program 
itself because of the "forces that have conspired against 
their [the schools] complete success," One of the main ones 
was the "lack of control 
over the graduates." 
The post-graduate problem could only be overcome, 
Scott 
declared without a great deal of originality, "by supervision 
after the school term is completed and by some assistance in 
beginning life under the new conditions," that is back on 
their reserves. He then went on to announce not an extension 
of the colony experiment but a much more modest initiative. A 
circular of 1909 directed Principals and agents to correspond 
and coordinate the return of graduates to the reserve so that 
they "should not be thrown upon the reserve dependent entirely 
upon . . . [their] own resources."167 Essentially, all this meant 
was that some ex-pupils would receive "a gift of oxen and 
implements . . . and the granting of a loan which must be repaid 
within a certain time, and for which an agreement is signed by 
the pupil."168 
The "colony" concept remained alive but as an idea only. In 
1914, Scott, in a 
circular sent to agents on the subject of 
graduates returning home, counselled that there had to be 
careful planning for this "most important event in the life of 
a school pupil" and that they should, among other ideas, 
"consider the advisability of forming them into separate 
colonies or settlements removed from some extent from the 
older Indians."169 In the end, File Hills remained the first 
and only manifestation of the idea, probably because it was 
always, as the historian 0. Dickason has suggested, "too 
costly for the budget-minded department."170 
Whatever the reason for not extending the colony system, the 
Department was left with its rather unambitious solution of 
1909 which did not address, in any satisfactory way, either 
the problem of graduates "backsliding" or the challenge of 
elevating the reserve community. Still it was the last idea, 
the program the Department held to until after the Second 
World War when a new concept, integration into the provincial 
school system, was introduced. The Department held to the 1909 
program, perhaps because it could devise no other scheme, even 
though it was evident, early on, that it was not a great 
success. 
The 
1915 
Annual 
Report, 
for 
example, 
noted 
unenthusiastically the unchanged conditions and the very mixed 
51 

results : 
The difficulty of assimilating ex-pupils on the 
reserves is still the essence of the problem. The 
policy of granting assistance 
to graduates 
to 
encourage farming has been maintained. During the 
year, forty three males and twenty-three female ex-
pupils 
have 
been 
granted 
assistance, 
the 
expenditure being $6,934.23. It is felt that the 
assistance granted has been an incentive to many of 
the ex-pupils to do their best, and, although in 
some cases the results have not been all that could 
be desired, 
it must be considered 
that 
these 
graduates have many difficulties to contend with 
owing to the environment of the reserve life and 
the prejudices of the older Indians.171 
Finally, and perhaps of greatest significance, the change in 
post-graduate strategy rebounded upon the Department's vision 
of the residential schools or, more accurately, on both the 
content and focus of the curriculum. While there was no 
retreat from the basic principles of separation and profound 
cultural replacement, the fact that students would return to 
the reserves rather than live out their lives in what were 
conceived to be more progressive non-Aboriginal settlements, 
led the Department to the idea of children being prepared for 
"the requirements of the students future environment"172 on 
graduation. In terms of the curriculum, this meant the de-
emphasis 
of 
industrial 
training, 
and 
therefore 
of 
the 
industrial school model, and a stress on agriculture and the 
rudimentary carpentry skills of the boarding school. By 1904 
this had been initiated - "considerable modifications have 
been made from the original design ... now the efforts of all 
these schools are devoted to agriculture, and such trade 
instruction as they receive is merely to supplement this 
design and make them handy all round farmers...."173 The 
minister 
made 
it 
all 
official 
with 
a announcement 
in 
Parliament.174 These changes meant as well the the provision of 
a purposively second class education for Aboriginal children. 
The move away from the industrial schools' ambitious practical 
curriculum 
began 
as 
early 
as 
1897. Martin 
Benson 
was 
particularly outspoken. "The first thing to do is to teach 
them how to get their living from the soil." The Department, 
he added, "should go steadily to work with this end in view, 
instead of trying to overrun the country with a lot of half-
trained, and half-educated so called Industrial pupils."175 On 
Benson's prompting his superior, J. Maclean, informed the 
Minister, Sifton, that the training of tradesmen was not such 
a good idea as there was 
not much likelihood, for many years to come, of 
52 

Indians being so trained being capable of earning a 
livelihood at such trades 
in competition with 
others. The chief aim should be to train the Indian 
youths how to earn a livelihood when they return to 
the reserves, and it seems to be altogether out of 
the question for the Department to undertake to 
educate a large number of Indians with the idea of 
making them equal to whitemen by the process of 
education.176 
The Annual Report of 1897 even went so far as to carry a 
warning that the specialized trades training of the industrial 
school "might educate children above the possibilities of 
their station, and create a distaste for what is certain to be 
their environment in life." That would be "not only a waste of 
money but doing them an injury instead of conferring a benefit 
upon 
them."177 
Indeed, 
the 
idea 
of 
returning 
skilled 
tradesmen, "industrially trained mechanics," to the reserves 
was now seen as such an injury in that it was a step away from 
attaining the goal of assimilation. 
It would "tend to render 
[communities] more self-contained and self-sufficing," 
while 
"the intention of education 
is not 
to encourage 
isolation 
and 
self 
sufficiency 
at 
the 
expense 
of 
the 
amalgamation of the races."178 
The logic of all of this was particularly striking; the 
consequences 
of 
it would 
be 
tragic. 
For 
the 
sake 
of 
"amalgamation, " it was best for Indian youth to receive an 
education that was not too advanced, that would not equip them 
to compete with non-Aboriginal people, that while attempting 
to make them the same as non-Aboriginal people would not make 
them "equal" nor facilitate the self-sufficiency of their 
communities. The Deputy Superintendent General, Frank Pedley, 
was informed in a Departmental briefing memorandum of 1904 
that it had "never been the policy of the Department ... to 
turn Indian people out to compete with whites."179 
As the difficulties with graduate amalgamation mounted, the 
opinion of senior officials on the capability of Aboriginal 
people were reduced to be replaced at times by rather racist 
expressions that may have always lurked below the surface of 
Departmental 
rhetoric. 
Pedley's 
Departmental 
minister, 
Clifford Sifton, expressed his belief that the problems were 
rooted not in the system of education, nor even in the lack of 
opportunity in non-Aboriginal communities, as much as they 
were in the Indian who did not possess the "moral or mental 
get up" of the non-Aboriginal.180 They would do best to devote 
themselves, advised Benson, to farming or to employment as 
manual workers in local economies, in, using British Columbia 
as an example, the coastal fishing industry and in mines and 
stock-raising in the interior.181 In the same vein, S.H. Blake 
53 

called upon the deputy superintendent general to initiate 
"flexibililty" in the curriculum of the schools so that the 
graduates would be able to do "the appropriate work for the 
locality 
- whether it be agriculture, 
farming, pasture, 
lumbering, canning," not however as proprietors in those 
undertakings 
but 
only 
as 
"all-round 
workman 
in 
his 
neighbourhood.11182 
In this revised vision, Aboriginal graduates were not to take 
their place among their fellow Canadians able to compete as 
skilled tradesmen but would return to their communities. 
Though they might thereafter be affected, to a limited extent, 
by the old culture and traditions, they would leave the 
category "savage" to take on that of rural small holder or 
labourer in a working class attached to resource development. 
This was certainly not quite the same vision as it had been in 
the 1880s - one that had pictured the graduates as "artisans 
. . . commanding ... a high rate of wages"183 "amalgamated with 
the white population 
. . . independent and 
self-supporting 
members of the community."184 It was, however, all that the 
Department would be allowed for the original vision had been 
blurred permanently by being rubbed against hard realities, 
mainly that Aboriginal people would experience considerable 
difficulty in finding a positive place within the dominant 
society. Indeed, it is difficult to understand how this 
revision could be termed assimilation as graduates were simply 
to return to their reserves where they received minimal 
support and where little effort was made to integrate them or 
their communities into the flow of economic developments 
taking place around them. 
The questions of curriculum and specifically of the practical 
training that would be most appropriate for students and of a 
suitable "after care" or "follow up" system would constantly 
trouble church and Departmental officials 
in 
subsequent 
decades. There continued to be, as the United Church's 
Association of Indian Workers in Saskatchewan pointed out in 
1930, "a missing link that should be forged into the present 
system along the line of "Follow up work' .1,185 Throughout the 
1930s and 1940s, officials continued to search for that link 
in such amendments to the curriculum as "manual training" or 
"vocational training." But the central problem would persist 
unresolved 
in the case of almost every child and every 
community assimilation remained distant and unachievable. 
This broader reality, 
the fact that the Department 
had 
stumbled in planning the last step to assimilation, that the 
residential school system had not reached the goal of its 
founders was not, curiously, the subject of Departmental and 
church discussion. Rather, they simply persisted in their 
policy. Apparently, for them, the heart of the vision, that 
which pertained to the schools themselves and to the great 
54 

transformation that was to go on within them, remained very-
much 
intact. 
There 
were 
problems 
with 
funding 
and 
administration but fundamental questions were never directed 
to the rationale or basic logical structure of the system's 
philosophy. 
At the heart of the vision there was, however, a dark 
contradiction. Right from the outset, the "circle of civilized 
conditions" did not live up to its name. It did not because it 
could not. The correspondence and reports of this formative 
period reveal that there was, as an inherent element of the 
vision, a "savagery" in the mechanics of civilizing the 
children. 
The Department, of course, intended that the schools should be 
homes, sanctuaries where the children would be given, in 
Davin's description "the care of a mother."186 The Principal of 
the Regina school even warned against institutionalization, 
stressing the desirability of a "homelike" atmosphere in the 
school.187 These sentiments were formalized in Departmental 
regulations. In 1889, Vankoughnet forwarded to the Catholic 
Bishop of Westminster the "Rules and Regulations" for Kootenay 
Industrial School. Most of them were devoted to parenting 
concerns. On entering the school new pupils were to have their 
"heads and bodies" examined and "if the presence of vermin is 
discovered, effectual means should at once be taken to destroy 
them." All children were to be properly attired and not 
"allowed to wear clothes that are not in every respect in a 
good state of repair and clean". Clothes were to be inspected 
at least once a week and repairs "promptly made." Their 
underclothing and bed linen were to be changed weekly. They 
were to wash three times a day and be "washed all over at 
least once a week." The school building, the dorms and 
classrooms, were to be clean and well-ventilated and water 
closets kept "scrupulously clean . . . and disinfectants . . . 
should be used very liberally." Children who fell ill were to 
be cared for in a sick room - "an apartment light and airy, 
and as far removed from the other rooms as possible." All 
children were to receive training in what to do in case of a 
fire. Finally, they were to be well fed, in line with a 
Departmental "dietary," with "plain and well cooked" meals. In 
short, "The Principal and those under him should endeavour to 
make all the pupils as happy and the school as homelike as 
possible. "188 
Despite such regulations, the image of the school as home 
would be undercut 
and the Department's 
caring parental 
intentions 
frustrated 
by 
another 
set 
of 
realities 
principally by a funding system that reduced the quality of 
care, promoted overcrowding and the growth of schools to 
alienating sizes. But even without those realities, the vision 
itself, the language in which it was couched, revealed what 
55 

would have to be the essentially violent nature of the 
residential school system in its onslaught on child and 
culture. 
Schools could not be homelike as the basic premise of 
resocialization was violent. "To kill the Indian in the 
child," the Department and churches aimed at severing the 
artery of culture that ran between Aboriginal generations. In 
the end "all the Indian there is in the race should be 
dead."189 
This 
was more 
than 
a 
rhetorical 
flourish 
or 
figurative act as it took on a sharp and traumatic reality in 
the life of each child - separated from parents and community, 
often at the tender age of six, and isolated in a threatening 
world hostile to identity, traditional ritual and language. 
The system of transformation was suffused with a similar 
latent "savagery." Hayter Reed in a perfectly homelike tone 
counselled that teachers "while exercising firmness, shall 
endeavour to influence them [the pupils] by appealing to their 
reasons and affections, rather than to their fears." Yet, he 
described the purpose of the schools, the goal of those 
teachers, in very different terms "... every effort should be 
directed against anything calculated to keep fresh in the 
memories of children habits and associations which it is one 
of 
the 
main 
objects 
of 
industrial 
institutions 
to 
obliterate. "190 
"Firmness," 
as 
Reed 
called 
it, 
was, 
for 
the 
sake 
of 
obliteration, both a pedagogical technique and a civilizing 
influence. 
Others, 
like 
Macrae, 
substituted 
the 
word 
discipline and stressed its utility as opposed to the gentler 
appeal to reason and sentiment. Referring to the challenge of 
teaching English, he asserted that "Perhaps discipline will 
lead to its acquirement more quickly than direct teaching. 
Better 
still 
let 
discipline 
produce 
circumstances 
to 
supplement and aid direct teaching."191 Discipline and learning 
could, indeed, be subtly folded into each other. Rev. Wilson's 
description of how english was taught at Shingwauk stands as 
a fine example of that. 
The more advanced boys sit with their slates and 
write out definitions of English words; the rest of 
the boys . . . are taught vive voce, besides being 
put through manual exercises such as shutting the 
door, putting a slate on the bench, pulling down 
the blind etc.; the object being to teach them to 
understand, and obey promptly, directions given in 
English.192 
Prompt and persistent obedience to authority, order and 
discipline were virtues of civilization and in a civilized 
56 

society one of their servants was punishment. Again embedded 
in church and Department texts was that dichotomy between the 
"civilized" and the "savage" - between, in this case, "the 
restraints of civilization" as Davin characterized order and 
discipline and the wild, unrestrained behaviour of savagery. 
The children were taken from a "permissive" culture, from 
parents " and relatives who had never struck a child in their 
lives."193 Indeed, the failure to discipline-punish children 
was, as Vankoughnet had pointed out, one of the debilitating 
attributes of "savage" Indian parenting. Debilitating, of 
course, because, in his view, the day school initiative had 
been impaired by the inability of parents to "exercise . . . 
proper authority 
... to compel attendance."194 G. Manuel, 
contrasting the treatment of children at home and in the 
schools, illustrated this cultural difference and the supposed 
pedagogical value of punishment. "The priests taught us to 
respect 
them by whipping us..." while "our mothers and 
fathers, 
aunts 
and 
uncles 
and 
grandparents, 
failed 
to 
represent themselves as a threat, when that was the only thing 
we had been taught to understand."195 A child was to be brought 
to civilization through discipline and by punishment, if 
necessary, and would become 
therefore, a civilized parent, 
able naturally to "exercise proper authority" over the next 
generation of civilized children. 
In the vision of residential school education, discipline was 
curriculum and punishment was pedagogy. Both were agents of 
civilization; 
they were indispensable to the "circle of 
civilized conditions" where the struggle to move children 
across the cultural divide would play itself out in each 
school situation, child by child, teacher by teacher. If this 
was not known by the civilizers at the level of theory when 
planning the schools, it was soon only too obvious from the 
earliest 
experiences 
of 
running 
the 
post-Confederation 
schools. The most powerful evidence of that fact came from a 
most influential witness - Father A. Lacombe. Not only can he 
be counted as one of the founders of the industrial school 
system, having advised Davin, but he was, subsequently, the 
Principal 
of High River one of the government1s 
first 
Industrial school ventures, along with the Battleford and 
Qu'Appelle schools, after it accepted Davin1 s recommendations. 
He was a most influential proponent of the need for, as he 
called it, "coercion." 
Lacombe's experiences in his first year of running the school 
at High River in the Northwest Territories was a warning for 
all involved in the education endeavour that resocialization 
was to be a difficult struggle. High River was opened in 
October 1884. By the spring, it had lost almost all of its 25 
pupils. With the coming of the good weather "they began to get 
more 
uneasy 
and 
uncontrollable 
and 
finally 
left 
the 
institution, some by their own will, others taken and forced 
57 

away by their parents or guardians." Lacombe and his staff did 
their "best to prevent these departures" but to no avail. The 
constant "excuse to go, " rooted in the pain of separation, 
"was and is always the same - We are lonesome." Nothing would 
make them stay. Lacombe even reported that "I bought with my 
own money more than $100 worth of candies and toys etc. to 
make them pleased and fond of the place." They would not be 
placated, however. 
Those "departures" were not the only problem High River 
encountered. There had also been trouble throughout the fall 
and winter when the children had remained in the school -
trouble, which according to Lacombe, though he did not detail 
it, was rooted in the stubborn nature of savagery. The 
students were too "proud and set in their Indian ways." He 
signalled defeat in his admission "We have not succeeded yet 
to cut their hair." Treats, toys, comfortable surroundings, 
good food and clothes, what in essence amounted to a policy of 
sweet bribes, was a mistake, he concluded, and so too "It is 
a great mistake to have no kind of punishment 
in the 
Institution.... 
It 
is 
absurd 
to 
imagine 
that 
such 
an 
institution in any country could work properly without some 
form of coercion to enforce order and obedience."196 Lacombe's 
successor, E. Claude, followed in that opinion and listed a 
range of punishments he employed including confinement during 
recreation and deprivation of food when "the student shall 
stand in the center of the refectory." He tried to avoid 
"using too vigorous means with regard to the most rebellious 
tempers such as blows etc."197 
The 
Department 
agreed 
with 
both 
Lacombe 
and 
Claude. 
Punishment, even to the extent of "blows," though it was to 
have its limits, was to have an important role in the circle. 
Vankoughnet1s rules and regulations of 1889 stipulated that 
Obedience to rules and good behaviour should be 
enforced, but corporal punishment should only be 
resorted to in extreme cases. In ordinary cases the 
penalty might be solitary confinement for such time 
as the offence may warrant, or deprivation of 
certain articles of food allowed to other pupils.198 
Six years later, 
the deputy 
superintendent 
general 
was 
somewhat more specific on the nature of permissable corporal 
punishment: 
Instructions should be given, if not already sent 
to the Principals of the various schools, that 
children are not to be whipped by anyone save the 
Principal, 
and 
even 
when 
such 
a 
course 
is 
necessary, great discretion should be used and they 
should not be struck on the head, or punished so 
58 

severely that bodily harm might ensue. The practice 
of corporal punishment is considered unnecessary as 
a general measure of discipline and should only be 
resorted to for very grave offenses and as a 
deterrent example.199 
These directives seem to set out Departmental policy clearly 
enough. Punishment was necessary in the operation of the 
school to enforce obedience. 
However, corporal punishment 
should not be the norm, should be employed only in the last 
resort, in the face of "grave offenses," only as a "deterrent 
example" and when employed had to be restrained. 
This policy obviously violated Aboriginal norms but it was 
silent on the question of the violation of non-Aboriginal 
norms, on the adoption by schools "of methods of discipline to 
which fair exception might be taken by either the Government 
or the Indians." 200 There was no stipulation as to what would 
happen if there was not "great discretion," if a child was 
"struck on the head" or beaten "so severely" that "bodily 
harm" ensued. What action would the Department 
take if 
corporal punishment, slapping, hair pulling, strapping, rather 
than being the exception became "the general measure of 
discipline"? Such a situation was not unimaginable; 
the 
likelihood of both a pedagogy of punishment within the schools 
and of incidents of excessive punishment was not remote. Not 
every Principal, teacher or employee was of the desired moral 
calibre and schools were, normally, outside the gaze of public 
scrutiny, isolated from both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal 
communities. The circle was closed to all but the official 
outsider and even then visits and inspections were normally by 
appointment. Within the schools, conditions like those which 
had been experienced by Lacombe and which had brought Claude 
to resort 
to punishments would not be unusual. 
School 
authorities would always claim that it was "very difficult to 
keep the Indian Children in subordination"201 and thus an 
atmosphere would always exist that justified the use of force 
against children. Indeed, the atmosphere may well have been 
the critical factor in discipline. Even in the course of the 
ordinary operation of these institutions "where the work of 
the school is faithfully carried on the strain upon the 
teachers and the scholars is very considerable...."202 
Who was there then to defend the child if within "the circle 
of civilized conditions" there emerged a culture of violence? 
There was, obviously, no one prepared to protect the Indian in 
the child but was there not someone who would protect the 
child as a human creature, who would ensure that the "Rules 
and Regulations" were faithfully implemented - that children 
would be properly clothed and nourished, safely housed and 
educated; 
that 
they would 
not 
be 
abused. 
In 
ordinary 
circumstances, be it in Aboriginal or non-Aboriginal society, 
59 

this was the duty of the parents. As such, protection became 
the duty of the Department and the churches when they presumed 
to parent Aboriginal children in homes they called residential 
schools. 
In theory, at least, the answer was clear. Children like 
Thomas were to be taken into care, cherished, nurtured and 
educated. Upon graduation they would be prepared to take their 
place in their communities and lead them into Canada. That was 
the vision of the residential school system. It would be 
tested against that reality in the process of building and 
managing the system. Right from the beginning, it would fail 
that test. 
60 

1. For a review of Canadian policy see, for example: J.L. Tobias 
"Protection, Civlization, Assimilation: An Outline History of 
Canada's Indian Policy" in A.L. Getty and A.S. Lussier, ed., As 
Long as the Sun Shines and the Water Flows (Vancouver, University 
of British Columbia Press, 1983), J.R. Miller, Skyscrapers Hide the 
Heavans 
(Toronto, University of Toronto Press, 
1989) and 0. 
Dickason, Canada's First Nations (Toronto, McClelland & Stewart 
Inc., 1992). 
2. Annual Report of the Department of Indian Affairs [hereinafter 
referred to as the Annual Report], 1911, page 273. 
3. N.A. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1 MR C 8152, F. Oliver to Joint 
Church Delegation." 
4. Annual Report, 1891, page x. 
5. Alexander Morris, The Treaties of Canada with the Indians of 
Manitoba and the North-West Territories (Toronto, Belfords. Clarke 
and Co., 1880), page 278. 
6.N.A. MG 27 I C4, E. Dewdney Papers, To E. Dewdney from A. 
Lacombe, 25 November, 1889, page 2189-92. 
7. As quoted in Malcolm Montgomery, "The Six Nations and the 
Macdonald Franchise", Ontario History, LVII, March 1965, page 13. 
8. INAC File 1/25-1. Vol. 15, To Sir John A. Macdonald from L. 
Vankoughnet, 26 August, 1887. 
9. Annual Report, 1890, page xii. 
10. Ibid. 
11. N.A. MG 26A - Sir John A. Macdonald Papers. Vol. 91, "Report on 
Industrial Schools for Indians and Half-Breeds" [The Davin Report]. 
14 March, 1879. pages 35428-45. See: C.B. Koester, Mr. Davin, M.P. 
(Saskatoon, Western Producer Prairie Books, 1980) for biographical 
information. 
12. J. Barman, Y. Hebert and D. McCaskill, eds., Indian Education 
in Canada, Volume 1: The Legacy (Vancouver, University of British 
Columbia Press, 1986), page 6. 
13.J. Leslie and R. Macguire eds., The Historical Development of 
the Indian Act (Ottawa, Department of Indian and Norhtern Affairs 
Canada, 1979), page 133. 
61 

14. J. Taylor, Canadian Indian Policy During the Inter-War Years. 
1919-1939, (Ottawa, Indian and Northern Affairs Canada, 1983), page 
4 . 
15. At the outset the position taken on the education of Metis 
children in residential schools was rather ambiguous. The Deputy 
Superintendent General, J. Smart, noted in October, 1899 [see 
N.A.C. RG 10, Vol. 3931, File 116377, MR C 10163, To the Secretary 
from D. Laird, 27 August., 1900] that while he did not consider it 
appropriate "that the children of the Half-Breeds proper, of 
Manitoba and the Territories, 
should be admitted into Indian 
schools and be paid for by the Department ... all children, even 
those of mixed blood, whether legitimate or not, who live upon an 
Indian Reserve and whose parents on either side live as Indians 
upon a Reserve, even if they are not annuitants, should be eligible 
for admission to schools." There was, however, not any hard and 
fast policy until the 1911 contract [see Chapter 2] where in clause 
4.(b) it was stated "No Half-Breed child shall be admitted to the 
said school unless Indian children cannot be obtained to complete 
the number authorized 
[for any particular school]..., in which 
event the Superintendent General may in his discretion permit the 
admission of any Half-Breed child; but the Superintendent General 
will not pay any grant for any such Half-Breed pupil ... nor any 
part of the cost of its maintenance or education whatsoever." 
[Correspondence and Agreement relating to the Maintenance and 
Management of Indian Boarding Schools (Ottawa, Government Printing 
Bureau, 1911)]. This policy was maintained throughout the history 
of the Indian Affairs system. In the Northern Affairs system, begun 
in 1955, 
[see Chapter 4] Metis children were accepted in the 
schools equally with other Aboriginal and, indeed, non-Aboriginal 
children. 
16. C.O. 42/27, To J. Kempt from G. Murray (No. 95), 25 January, 
1830. 
17. For a full discussion of the policy see: J.S. Milloy, The Era 
of Civilization - British Policy for the Indians of Canada, 1830-
1860. (Unpublished D.Phil Thesis, Oxford, 1978). 
18. J.S. Milloy, "The Early Indian Acts: Developmental Strategy and 
Constitutional Change" in J.R. Miller ed., Sweet Promises, A Reader 
on Indian-White Relations in Canada (Toronto, University of Toronto 
Press, 1991) . 
19. N.A.C. C.O. 42/429, To J. Colborne from T.G. Anderson, 24 
September, 1835. 
20. N.A.C. RG 10, Vol.36, Section II, Report on the Affairs of the 
Indians of Canada. [The Bagot Report] 
21. "Report to the Special Commissioners appointed to Investigate 
Indian Affairs in Canada" in Journals of the Legislative Assembly 
62 

of th Province of Canada 
from 25th February to 1st June, 1858. 
Appendix no. 21, part III, [The Head Commission]. 
22. The Bagot Report. 
23. E. Brian Titley, "Indian Industrial Schools in Western Canada" 
in N. Sheehan, J.D. Wilson & D.C Jones eds., Schools in the West: 
Essays 
in 
Canadian 
Eductional 
History. 
(Calgary, 
Detselig 
Enterprise Ltd., 1986), page 133. 
24. The careers of all three men are discussed in R. A. Trennert 
"Educating Indian Girls at Non-Reservation Boarding Schools, 1878-
1920" in The Western Historical Quarterly, Volume XIII, July 1982, 
Number 3. 
25. Professor C. Jaenen has written extensively on French policy. 
Reference here is made to: "Education for Francization: The Case of 
New France in the Seventeenth Century" in J. Barman, Y. Hebert and 
D. McCaskill, eds., Indian Education in Canada, Volume 1: The 
Legacy (Vancouver, University of British Columbia Press, 1986), 
pages 45-64. 
26. As quoted in D.C. Scott, "Indian Affairs, 1763-1841," in A. 
Shortt & A.G. Doughty, eds., Canada and its Provinces, Vol. IV 
(Toronto, 1914), page 648. 
27. See: C. M. Johnston, ed., The Valley of the Six Nations, 
(Toronto, The Champlain Society, 1964), page 52. 
28. For the history of early Methodist activity in Canada, see: J. 
Carroll, Case and His Contemporaries, vols. I-IV (Toronto, Wesleyan 
Conference Office, 1867-1874) . 
29. P.R.O. - C.O. 42/365, To Lord Bathurst from P. Maitland, 11 
June, 1820. 
30. P.R.O. - C.O. 42/266, To Lord Bathurst from P. Maitland, 29 
November, 1821. 
31. P. Jones, Life and Journals of Kal-Ke-Wa-Quo-Na-By (Toronto, 
Anson Green, 1860), page 46. 
32. INAC File 601/25-2 Vol. 2, 
R.F. Davey, Residential Schools 
Past and Future. 8 March, 1968. 
33. E. B. Titley, "Indian Industrial Schools in Western Canada", 
page 134. 
34. The Bagot Report, Section III. 
63 

35. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 195, To Colonel Bruce from Chiefs and 
Councillors - Owen Sound, 8 March 1852. 
36. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 151, To T.G. Anderson from J, M. Higginson, 
n.d. 
37. The Head Commission. 
38. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 516, To T.G. Anderson from R. Bruce, 10 May, 
1854 . 
39. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 209, To Col. Bruce from Enoch Wood, 22 April, 
1854 . 
40. The Statutes of Canada, 1857, 20 Vic., 3rd Session, 5th 
Parliament, (Toronto, 1857). 
41. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 245, part I, To R. Pennefather from D. 
Thorburn, 13 October, 1858. 
42. For a full discussion and further sources on this see: J. S. 
Milloy 
"The 
Early 
Indian 
Acts: 
Developmental 
Strategy 
and 
Constitutional Change" in I Getty and A Lussier eds., As Long as te 
Sun Shines and the Water Flows (Vancouver, University of British 
Columbia Press, 1983), pages 60-61. 
43. N.A.C. C.O. 42/595, To Lord Elgin from L. Oliphant, 3 November, 
1854 . 
44. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 220, To Viscount Bury from Rev. W. MacMurray, 
22 August, 1855. 
45. N.A.C. 
RG 
10 Vol. 
519, 
To Rev. A. 
Sickles 
from R.J. 
Pennefather, 11 November, 1858. 
46. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 287, To the Chief Superintendent of Indian 
Affairs from J. Gilkison, 4 March, 1863. 
47. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 239 Part I, To R.J. Pennefather from Rev. T. 
Hurlburt, 22 December, 1857. 
48. House of Commons Debates from the Sith DAy of November, 1867 to 
the Twenty-Second Day of May, 1868, page 200. 
49. Statutes of Canada, 32-33 Vict., c.6, 22 June 1869. 
50. House of Commons Debates from the Fifteenth of April, 1869 to 
the Twenty-Second of June, 1869, page 83. 
51. For a discussion of this see: J.S. Milloy "A Partnership of 
Races" - Indian and White, Cross Cultural Relations and Criminal 
Justice in Manitoba, 1670-1949. A report for the Public Inquiry 
64 

into the Administration of Justice and Aboriginal People, Manitoba, 
pages 60-63. 
52. Annual Report, 1876. 
53. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 15 To Sir John A Macdonald from L. 
Vankoughnet, 26 August 1887. 
54. The Davin Report. 
55. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 331, MR C 9582, To C.J. Dupont from 
Rev. 
J.W. Sims, 30 July, 1869. 
56. INAC File 1/26-3 Brief of the Indain Workers Association, 25 
July 1919. 
57. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 15, To Sir John A Macdonald from L. 
Vankoughnet, 26 August, 1887. 
58. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3924, File 116823, To Sir John A. Macdonald 
from L. Vankoughnet, 10 December, 1885. 
59. Annual Report, 1891, page x. 
60. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Reverend and 
Dear Sirs from F. Oliver, 21 March 1908. 
61. Annual Report 1888, pages ix-x. 
62. Annual Report 1891, page x. 
63. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner, Regina from J. A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
64. Annual Report 1897, page xxvi. 
65. The Davin Report. 
66. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner, Regina, from J.A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
67. The Davin Report. 
68. As quoted in D.A. Nock, A Victorian Missionary and Canadian 
Indian Policy (Waterloo, Wilfred Laurier University Press, 1988), 
page 73. 
69. The Davin Report. 
70. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner, Regina, from J.A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
65 

71. Annual Report 1897, page xxvi. 
72. Annual Report 1900, page xxix. 
73. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 15, To Sir John A. Macdonald from 1. 
Vankoughnet, 26 August, 1887. 
74. Annual Report 1899, page xxix. 
75. Annual Report 1907, page xxxiii-xxxiv. 
76. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner, Regina, from J.A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
77. As quoted in D.A. Nock, A Victorian Missionary and Canadian 
Indian Policy, page 4. 
78. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner, Regina, from J.A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
79. Annual Report 1889, page xi. 
80. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1 MR C 8152, To Honourable Sir 
[R. Rogers] from the Archbishop of St. Boniface, November[?] 1912. 
81. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6040, File 160-3A, MR C 8153, T. Ferrier, 
Report of the Alberta Methodist Commission, 1911. 
82. General Synod Archives, GS 75-103, series 1-14, Box 15, MSCC 
Blake Correspondence, To S.H. Blake from F. Oliver, 28 January, 
1908 . 
83. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner, Regina, from J.A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
84. Annual Report 1889, page xi. 
85. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3836, File 68557, MR C 10146, To E. Dewdney 
from the Bishop of Ruperts Land, 7 August, 1891. 
86. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 
3836, File 68557, MR C 10146, Suggestions 
for the Government of Indian Schools, H. Reed, 27 January, 1890. 
87. N.A.C. Rg 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-4, MR C 10118, To Principal 
from E. Dewdney, 13 April, 1891. 
88. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6452, File 884-1 (1-3), MR C 8773-8774, To 
Bishop of Westminster from L Vankoughnet, 17 October, 1889. 
89. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol.3674, File 11422-4, MR C 10118, To Principal 
from E. Dewdney, 13 April, 1891. 
66 

90. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol 3674, File 11422-2, MR C 10118, To Indian 
Commissioner from Father Lacombe, 12 June, 1885. 
91. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3926, File 116836-1, MR C 10162, To Indian 
Commissioner, Winnipeg, from Rev. A.J. Mcleod, 12 May, 1897. 
92. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3764, File 32725-2, MR C 10134, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 24 February, 
1891. 
93. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6032, File 150-40A, MR C 8149, Memo for 
Minister, Compulsory Education, January, 1920. 
94. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-2, MR C 10118, To Rev. 
Thomas Clarke from E. Dewdney, 31 July, 1883. 
95. The Davin Report. 
96. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3925, File 116823-1A, MR C 10162, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from E. Dewdney, 14 
December,1885. 
97. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, to Indian 
Commissioner, Regina, from J. A. Macrae, 18, December, 1886. 
98. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3952, File 134858, To Superintendent General 
of Indian Affairs from J. A Macrae, 7 December, 1900. 
99. Annual Report 1911, page 273. 
100. See, for example: N. Sheehan "Education, the Society and the 
Curriculum in Alberta, 1905-1980: An Overview" in N. Sheehan, J.D. 
Wilson & D.C. Jones eds., Schools in the West: Essays in Canadian 
Educational History (Calgary, Detselig Enterprise Ltd., 1986). 
101. E.B. Titley "Indian Industrial Schools in Western Canada", 
page 149. 
102. G. Manuel and M. Posluns, The Fourth World 
(Don Mills, 
Collier-Macmillan Canada Ltd., 1974), page 63. 
103. Annual Report 1911, page 273. 
104. The Davin Report. 
105. D.A. Nock, A Victorian Missionary and Canadian Indian Policy, 
page 73. 
106. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol.15, To Sir John A. Macdonald from L. 
Vankoughnet, 26 August, 1887. The school was in Sault Ste. Marie. 
67 

107. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3836, File 68557, MR C 10146, Suggestions 
for the Government of Indian Schools, 27 January, 1890. 
108. The Davin Report. 
109. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner, Regina, from J.A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
110 . Annual Report 1895, page xxii. 
Ill. Annual Report 1892, page 287 . 
112 . Annual Report 1895, page xxii. 
113 . Annual Report 1891. 
114 . Annual Report 1895, page xxiv. 
115 . N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3836, File 68557, 
for the Government of Indian Schools, 27 January, 1890. 
116. Annual Report 1896, page xxxix. 
117. N.A.C. 
RG 
10 Vol. 
3818, 
File 57799, 
MR C 10143, 
To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 14 May 1889. 
118. General Synod Archives, series 2-14, Special Indian Committee 
Correspondence, To Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from 
S.H. Blake, 14 March, 1906. 
119. Annual Report 1895. 
120. Annual Report 1889, page xi. 
121. Annual Report 1891, page xiii. 
122. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3836, File 68557, MR C 10146, Suggestions 
for the Government of Indian Schools, H. Reed, 27 January, 1890. 
123. N.A.C. Rg 10 Vol. 6040, File 160-3A, MR C 8153, Memorandum of 
the Convention of the Catholic Principals of Indian Residential 
Schools held at Lebret Saskatchewan, 28 and 29 August, 1924. 
124. Presbyterian Archives, Women's Missionary Society, Annual 
Reports, 1988-7004-1-6, 1914-15, page 59. 
125. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-2, MR C 10118, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from E. Dewdney, 14 
February, 1884. 
68 

126. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-7, MR C 8153, Report of the 
Following Institutions Under the Management of the Home Board of 
Missions for the United Church of Canada, 31 March 1927. 
127. R. White, "The Cultural Landscape of the Pawnees" in Great 
Plains Quarterly, Winter 1982, Vol. 2, No.l., page 33. 
128. Annual Report 1889, page xi. 
129. G. Manuel and M. Posluns, The Fourth World, page 67. 
130. For a full discussion of this including comments by ex-
students see: Jean Goodwill and Norma Sluman, John Tootoosis 
(Winnipeg, Pemmican Publications, 1984), pages 94-104. 
131. D.A. Nock, A Victorian Missionary and Canadian Indian Policy, 
page 78. 
132. Annual Report 1896, page 398-399. 
133. Annual Report 1895, page xxii-xxiii. 
134. Annual Report 1900, page xxix. 
135. N.A.C. RG 
10 Vol. 
3818, 
File 
57799, 
MR C 10143, 
To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 14 May 1889. 
136. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-5, MR C 10118, To H. Reed 
from Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 24 August 
1890. 
137. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner, Regina, from J. A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
138. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-1, MR C 10118, To 
Lieutenant Governor from Rev. J. Hugonard, 18 October, 1884. 
139. D.A. Nock, A Victorian Missionary and Canadian Indian Policy, 
page 78. 
140. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-4, MR C 10118, To E. 
Dewdney from Rev. J. Hugonard, n.d. 
141. D.A. Nock, A Victorian Missionary and Canadian Indian Policy", 
page 78. See also: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6443, File 881 (1-3), MR C 
8767, To H. McGill from D. MacKay, 25 March, 1937. 
142. Annual Report 1887, page lxxix. 
143. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner, Regina, from J.A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
69 

144. Annual Report 1887, pages lxxix-lxxx. 
145. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, Memorandum for 
the Minister from Martin Benson, 3 July 1897. 
146. Annual Report 1896, page xxxviii. 
147. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Indian 
Commissioner from Principal Heron, 14 April, 1909. 
148. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, 
File 11422-2, 
MR C 1018, 
To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from L. Vankoughnet, 11 
November, 1884. 
149. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3920, File 116751-1B, MR C 10161, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 12 July 
1889 . 
150. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Sir John A. 
Macdonald from L. Vankoughnet, 29 December, 1884. 
151. N.A.C. 
RG 
10 Vol. 
3818, 
File 57799, 
MR C 10143, 
To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 14 May, 1889 
and RG 10 Vol. 3920, File 116751-1B, MR C 10161, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 12 July, 
1889 . 
152. N.A.C. 
RG 
10 Vol. 
3818, 
File 
57799, 
MR C 10143, 
To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 14 May, 
1889 . 
153. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, To the 
Secretary from Agent [unsigned], Birtle, Manitoba, 20 December, 
1907 . 
154. Annual Report 1896, page xxxviii. 
155. Annual Report 1901, page xxix. 
156. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3927, File 116836-1A, MR C 10162, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from R. MacKay and I. 
Menzies, 11 March, 1904. 
157. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3920, File 116751-1B, MR C 10161, To Deputy 
Superintendent General Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 12 July, 1889. 
158. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Indian 
Commissioner from Principal Heron, 14 April, 1909. 
159. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4072, File 432636, MR C 10183, To Assistant 
Deputy and Secretary from Rev. W. McWhinney, 26 February, 1913. 
70 

160. Annual Report 1902, page 189. 
161. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, Memorandum for 
the Minister from Martin Benson, 3 July, 1897. 
162. Annual Report 1898, page xxvii. 
163. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Indian 
Commissioner from Principal Heron, 14 April, 1909. 
164 . Annual Report 1902, page 189. 
165 . Annual Report 1907, page xxxii. 
166 . Annual Report 1912, page 296. 
167 . Annual Report 1911, pages 273-275 
168 . Annual Report 1913, page 302. 
169. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 10410, Shannon Box 35, MR T 10068, Circular. 
D.C. Scott, 12 March, 1914. 
170. 0. Dickason, Canada's First Nations, page 320. For more 
information on the colony see: E. Brass "The File Hills Ex-Pupils 
Colony" in Saskatchewan History, VI, 2 (1953). 
171. Annual Report 1915, page xxiii. 
172. Annual Report 1908, page xxxiii. 
173. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 10410, Shannon Box 35, Mr T 10068, 
Memorandum for the Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 
3 October, 1904. 
174. D.J. Hall, "Clifford Sifton and Canadian Indian Administration 
1896-1905" in I. Getty and A. Lussier eds. , As Long as the Sun 
Shines and Water Flows (Vancouver, University of British Columbia 
Press, 1983), page 127. 
175. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To J. Maclean 
from Martin Benson, 15 July, 1897. 
176. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, Memorandum for 
the Minister from J. Maclean, 20 July, 1897. 
177. Annual Report 1897, page xxvii. 
178. Annual Report 1907, page xxxii-xxxiii. 
179. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 10410, Shannon Box 35, MR T 10068, 
Memorandum fro the Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 
71 

3 October, 1904. 
180. As quoted in E.B. Titley, "Indian Industrial Schools in 
western Canada", page 146. 
181. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To J. Maclean 
from Martin Benson, 15 July, 1897. 
182. Anglican 
Church 
Archives, 
series 
2-14, 
Special 
Indian 
Committee Correspondence, To Superintendent General of Indian 
Affairs from S.H. Blake, 14 March, 1906. 
183. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-2, MR C 10118, To Indian 
Commissioners from T. Clarke, Principal, 31 July, 1884. 
184. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3920, File 116751-1B, MR C 10161, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 12 July, 
1889 . 
185. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-7 Part 1, MR C 8153, 
Resolution 
Passed 
by 
the Association 
of 
Indian Workers 
in 
Saskatchewan at their meeting held in May, 1930. 
186. The Davin Report. 
187. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Indian 
Commissioner from Principal Heron, 14 April, 1909. 
188. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6452, File 884-1 (1-3), MR C 8773-8774, To 
Bishop of Westminster from L. Vankoughnet, 17 October, 1889. 
189. D.A. Nock, A Victorian Missionary and Canadian Indian Policy, 
page 4. 
190. N.A.C. 
RG 
10 Vol. 
3818, 
File 
57799, 
MR C 10143, 
To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 14 May, 
1889 . 
191. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner, Regina, from J.A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
192. D.A. Nock, A Victorian Missionary and Canadian Indian Policy, 
page 78. 
193. G. Manuel and M. Posluns, The Fourth World, page 67. 
194. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 15, To Sir John A. Macdonald from L. 
Vankoughnet, 26 August, 1887. 
195. G. Manuel and M. Posluns, The Fourth World, page 67. 
72 

196. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-1, MR C 10118, To Indian 
Commissioner from Father A. Lacombe, 2 June 1885. High River 
Industrial school, also called St. Joseph's, was located near 
Davisburg Alberta. 
197. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-4, MR C 10118, To E. 
Dewdney from Rev. E. Claude, 29 October, 1887. 
198. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 884-1 (1-3), MR C 8773-8774, To Bishop of 
Westminster from L. Vankoughnet, 17 October, 1889. 
199. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3921, File 116818, MR C 10161, To Assistant 
Commissioner from Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 
28 June 1895. 
200. Presbyterian Archives, Foreign Mission Committee Reports, 
Vol.XX, 1988-1003-2-1, 1906-1908, Report of 17 September, 1907. 
201. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 331, MR C 9582, To C.J. Dupont from Rev. 
J.W. Sims, 30 July, 1869. 
202. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3764, File 32725-2, MR C 10134, To E. 
Dewdney from the Bishop of Ruperts Land, 27 November, 1890. 

CHAPTER 2 
"A NATIONAL CRIME" - THE INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL ERA 
1879 TO 1923 

In 1922, Father Lacombe's High River School, St. Joseph's 
Indian Industrial School, chronically unable to meet its 
expenses and its fabric worn beyond repair, was closed. The 
Principal reported that the building could not be properly 
heated and parts of it were 
"entirely unfit 
for human 
habitation"1 
In that 
same year, 
the Ontario 
Provincial 
Tuberculosis Commission published a pamphlet by P.H. Bryce, 
the former "Chief Medical Officer of the Indian Department," 
entitled: "The Story of a National Crime being An Appeal For 
Justice 
to 
the 
Indians 
of 
Canada." 
It was 
a 
ringing 
condemnation of the Department for its failure to act in the 
face of the white plague, tuberculosis. Bryce charged, as he 
had established 
in a previous 
report 
submitted 
to the 
Department in 1907, that in the schools a "trail of disease 
and death has gone on almost unchecked by any serious efforts 
on the part of the Department of Indian Affairs...."2 
These 
two 
seemingly 
separate 
events 
were 
not 
at 
all 
unconnected. The cause of that tragic "trail of disease and 
death" 
which 
had 
meant, 
according 
to one 
Departmental 
estimate, "that fifty per cent of the children who passed 
through these schools did not live to benefit from the 
education which they had received therein"3 
lay in the 
construction, administration and funding of the residential 
school system in what can be termed the industrial school era 
after 
1879. The opening of High River, 
Battleford 
and 
Qu'Appelle Industrial Schools had marked the beginning of the 
industrial school programme following on the recommendations 
of the Davin Report. In the year that High River closed, the 
Department 
was 
taking 
the 
final 
steps 
in ending 
that 
programme. In the tabular statements of the Annual Reports, 
beginning in 1923, the terms "Boarding" and "Industrial" 
disappeared. Thereafter, all schools were "Residential." 
By any evaluation of this period, the schools, both boarding 
and industrial, had failed to educate or cherish children that 
the Department and churches had presumed to parent. From 
Confederation in 1867, the school system had grown almost 
without planning or restraint and had been, as a whole, 
constantly underfunded. Moreover, 
the method of 
funding 
individual schools, the intricacies of the Department-church 
partnership in financing and managing schools and the failure 
of the Department to introduce adequate administrative and 
financial controls, or to exercise effective oversight of the 
schools, 
led directly 
to their rapid deterioration 
and 
overcrowding - conditions within which, as in urban slums of 
the time, tubercular disease became epidemic.4 Simply stated, 
maladministration of the residential school system, compounded 
by 
the 
failure 
of 
the 
federal 
government 
to 
respond 
effectively to dangerous health conditions in the schools, 
meant that there had been, as Bryce's pamphlet concluded, a 
"criminal disregard" of the responsibility placed on the 
75 

government by the British North America Act and by the "treaty 
pledges to guard the welfare of the Indian wards of the 
nation. "5 
BUILDING and MANAGING the SYSTEM 
In 1868, the Federal government in line with legislation, 
which authorized allocations from the Indian Fund "to schools 
frequented by ... Indians,"6 assumed the funding of some 57 
schools. Only two were residential schools, Mount Elgin and 
Mohawk. By 1879, the year of the Davin report, that number had 
grown to four with the addition of Shingwauk and Wikwemikong. 
All were in Ontario. Thereafter, the numbers mushroomed with 
an average of almost two schools commissioned each year. By 
1904, there were 64 schools, 24 industrial and 40 boarding, 
with an enrolment of 3,257 students. By 1923, there were 71 
schools, 16 industrial and 55 boarding, located in every part 
of the Dominion except the Maritimes and Quebec. Expenditure 
for the schools in that year was then $1,193,219; 5,347 
children were in residence.7 
This rapid and extensive growth, which continued well past 
1923, 
(at its height in 1931 there were 80 schools in 
operation8 with 8,213 children, in 1953 the number of children 
reached the high point of 11,090) was not evidence of the 
energetic application by the Department of a developmental 
strategy based upon careful forethought. There was almost none 
of that until education needs surveys were undertaken in the 
194 0s when the Department was bitten by the bug of social 
science research. In this era, the Davin report was one of the 
few planning documents produced under government auspices and 
its recommendations were quite modest calling for only three 
or four industrial schools. In fact, it was not until 1911 
that 
the Department 
exercised 
significant 
leadership 
in 
setting out, by means of contracts with the churches, a 
comprehensive management structure for the system. Rather, the 
system grew and was shaped, in the main, by federal reactions 
to the force of missionary efforts in the field and in 
response to persistent lobbying by church hierarchies for 
subsidies, especially for boarding schools they had already 
established, or for the funding of industrial schools they 
wanted to open. Party politics and patronage played a role, as 
well. 
While the Department was a believer in the utility of 
residential education and many enthusiasts among the senior 
76 

staff contributed to the vision of the "circle of civilized 
conditions," the churches led the way in building the system. 
None of the boarding schools that were opened in this era was 
a Departmental undertaking and of the 22 industrial schools 
which operated at one time or another during this period only 
6 were initiated in the first instance by the Department.9 No 
better summary of the process of building the system exists 
than that which was contained in a Departmental briefing given 
to the Minister, the Hon. Charles Stewart, in 1927. "It thus 
happens that Churches have been pioneers in the remote parts 
of the country, and with missionary funds have put up the 
buildings and induced the Department to provide funds for 
maintenance. "10 
The "remote parts of the country" which were the scene for 
laying the foundations of the system's post-Confederation 
development was the northwest. When the new nation entered 
Rupert's Land, which it acquired from the Hudson's Bay Company 
in 1870, those church "pioneers" had been active for 50 years. 
The 
Catholics, including the Oblates of Mary Immaculate who 
would operate most of that denominations residential schools, 
the Methodists, Presbyterians and the Anglicans, led by the 
Church Missionary Society, had established missions north to 
the Yukon and westward to the Pacific.11 
As had been the case in the east, the missionization strategy 
of all these churches involved more than just conversion to 
Christianity. The struggle against Aboriginal spirituality, 
its heathenish practises and superstitions, meant that a start 
had to be made on "civilization" through the introduction of 
agriculture, where such activity was possible, and schooling. 
Realistically, however, the dominance of the fur trade and the 
yet uninterrupted hunting and gathering economies of the 
region's First Nations dictated that civilizing initiatives 
would be effectively restrained. The Methodist missionary John 
McDougall admitted that "You cannot really civilize a hunter 
or a fisherman until you wean him from these modes of making 
a livelihood."12 Mission agriculture remained no more than 
gardening. 
Education also, though it was begun, fell far short of any 
grand design. The Church Missionary Society had been attracted 
to the area by one of the Directors of the Hudson's Bay 
Company who held out the prospect of developing a vast 
educational network.13 
The society made a rather modest 
beginning with one school - the Red River Academy.14 Catholics 
taught most effectively among the Metis settlements. And for 
the Protestants, Prince Albert became, in the 1860s and 1870s, 
a centre 
for education with a school 
operated 
by 
the 
Presbyterians and Emmanuel College by the Anglicans. 
77 

The restraints on church activities inherent in the old fur 
trade world were shattered in the region south of the 
Saskatchewan by the convergence of two events - the coming of 
Canadian authority to the west and the dreadful diminution of 
the buffalo herds in the 1860s and 1870s. These brought about 
the pre-conditions necessary for launching a western version 
of the policy of civilization and within that the development 
of the residential school system. 
The decline of the great herds brought an end to traditional 
Plains 
life and 
seemed 
to promise 
the missionary 
that 
Aboriginal independence would be replaced by dependence upon 
the churches and a reliance upon European lifeways and 
spirituality. One Anglican missionary claimed to have direct 
evidence of this. The Plains Cree, he asserted, "are beginning 
to apprehend the scarcity of buffalo, and many are most 
anxious to try agriculture."15 
If 
the precipitous 
decline 
in the 
herds 
provided 
the 
opportunity for "civilization, " the Canadian government was to 
provide the means through the treaties it negotiated between 
1870 and 1877. According to treaty promises - promises which 
stemmed from Aboriginal demands rather than government offers16 
- the region's Indian First Nations were to receive the 
training and technology necessary for them to move their 
communities onto a new economic foundation. By the terms of 
Treaty Six, for example, the Cree were to be given "reserves 
for farming lands" and, "for the encouragement of the practise 
of agriculture among the Indians," every type of agricultural 
implement, livestock and seed. 
By such instruments, the world of Aboriginal people was to be 
refashioned. Agricultural technology was a bridge from the old 
world to the new, but so too were schools and teachers, the 
technology of education. In each of the Treaties, One through 
Six, "Her Majesty agrees to maintain a school on each reserve 
hereby made, whenever the Indians should desire it." And in 
Treaty Seven "Her Majesty agrees to pay the salaries of such 
teachers to instruct the children of said Indians as to her 
Government of Canada may seem advisable, when said Indians are 
settled on their reserves and shall desire teachers."17 
Missionaries, Catholic and Protestant, were involved in the 
treaty-making 
process 
as 
facilitators, 
witnesses 
and 
interpreters but the degree of influence they may have had on 
the proceedings or on the determination of the terms is 
difficult to gauge. In view of the promises of agricultural 
assistance and education, historians might speculate that 
their presence was not inconsequential. The noted historian, 
H. Dempsey, has gone much further. In his most detailed 
description of the Treaty Six negotiations, he asserts that 
some leading chiefs and band elders like the venerable Sweet 
78 

Grass, were clearly "under Catholic influence," and that 
"Christian Indians had dominated the treaty proceeding" thus 
blocking the "concerns of the non-Christian buffalo hunters." 
Sweet Grass apparently was advised throughout the negotiations 
by Bishop Grandin and it was he, Sweet Grass, who asked for 
schools and that missionaries be assigned to the reserves. J. 
McDougall was equally active among the Methodist adherents.18 
Significantly, both Grandin and McDougall became involved 
almost immediately in the promotion of residential schools. 
Whatever may have been the churches' role in the making of 
Treaty Six, and in the other six treaties, there can be little 
doubt that they rejoiced at the government's new commitments. 
The treaty promises, in the area of education, gave them a 
lever to move the government to provide funding for schools 
and teachers. They did not hesitate to use it. The appointment 
of Davin in 1879, only two years after the last treaty was 
signed and one year after Prime Minister Macdonald's return to 
office in 1878, may have been one of the first fruits of their 
efforts. It was an opportunity at least that the Catholic 
church did not miss. Lacombe was in Winnipeg to meet Davin 
with Bishop Tache. They were, interestingly enough, the only 
clerics Davin 
lists among 
those 
"who could 
speak with 
authority on the subject."19 No doubt, they tried to guide his 
hand in framing his recommendations. Indeed, the Catholic 
hierarchy 
strove to steer the government 
after Davin's 
recommendations were submitted and Parliament aside $44,000 in 
the supplementary estimates of 1883-84 to implement them.20 The 
Archbishop of Quebec wrote directly to Macdonald requesting 
support for missionaries in the west and in particular for "a 
liberal sum towards the establishment amongst those Indians of 
Schools, workshops and above all farms under the management" 
of those same missionaries.21 
The Catholic church and the other denominations did not 
patiently wait on the government, however. They moved forward 
independently and tried, more often than not successfully, to 
drag the Department along behind them. The Bishop's letter to 
Macdonald was actually in support of a petition from Bishop 
Grandin requesting funds for a residential school at St. 
Albert, 
already 
constructed 
and 
accepting 
students. 
Subsequently, $1500 was placed in the Parliamentary estimates 
for that purpose.22 
McDougall, the other Treaty Six veteran, also petitioned in 
1883, and with equal success, for his McDougall Orphanage and 
Training Institution in Morley operating under the authority 
of the Missionary Society of the Canadian Methodist Church. 
[r8] Students were not a problem, they already had 14 with 
room for 40, however, "our great difficulty just now is want 
of means." McDougall hoped for a subsidy of between $100 and 
$150 per student 
leaving 
"a large margin for Voluntary 
79 

Subscription and Self Support."23 Here again, as in the St. 
Albert 
instance, 
the move 
was 
coordinated 
with 
church 
headquarters. The Rev. A. Sutherland, the general secretary of 
the society, had already approached Macdonald proposing a 
general partnership between government and churches to bring 
schools to the Aboriginal people of the region.24 
With the funding of Morley and St. Albert, the pattern by 
which the system would be built was set. As was explained to 
the Minister, Charles Stewart in 1927, the churches expanded 
the system according to the lights of their mission strategies 
and budgets and the Department followed as best it could. By 
1907, the year of Bryce's first report on tuberculosis, with 
55 boarding schools and 22 industrial schools on the books, an 
expenditure for that year of $206,000 and yet no sign that the 
flood of petitions was abating, Martin Benson proclaimed, with 
evident exasperation, "The clergy seem to be going wild on the 
subject of Indian education and it is time some limit should 
be fixed as to their demands."25 
At no point before 1907 was the Department able to fix limits 
on the number of schools or the expenditures for them and it 
had great difficulty doing so for a fair length of time after 
that 
date. 
Even 
with 
the 
implementation 
of 
Davin's 
recommendations which saw the opening by the government in 
1883-84 of three "undenominational" schools, that is schools 
built, owned and operated by the government but assigned to a 
particular denomination, the pattern was not disrupted, the 
Department did not capture the lead. While its three schools 
were being readied - Battleford an Anglican school to be 
housed in the converted government building26 and the Catholic 
High River and Qu'Appelle in newly constructed premises - the 
Department 
was 
entertaining 
Presbyterian 
plans 
for 
an 
Industrial school to be built at Long Lake outside Regina and 
in the 1886 estimates funds were set aside to support the 
project .27 
This was followed the very next year by a proposal from the E. 
Wilson the founder of Shingwauk, another school which had 
opened and then went in search of government support, for a 
network of schools, one every 2 00 miles, each with an initial 
$1,000 grant from the government.28 In a more practical vein, 
he proposed to open a school at Elkhorn, Manitoba. In fact, 
true to form, he informed Lawrence Vankoughnet that he had 
already proceeded having built a small establishment for 16 
pupils but had a target of 80 pupils. Some of his Shingwauk 
students would be transferred to this new school in the belief 
that they would have "a beneficial effect on the new pupils." 
Despite private fund raising, he could make no further 
progress without government support at the rate of $60 a 
student .29 
80 

At times the proposals even came in in batches. Emile Grouard, 
Catholic Bishop of the Mackenzie and Athabaska area, assured 
the Department, in 1895, that most of the Indians in the area 
were christians and were being served effectively by three 
Catholic boarding schools, one at Holy Angel's Convent, 
Nativity Mission, Fort Chipewyan, a second at Sacred Heart 
Convent, Fort Providence, Mackenzie River and the third at St. 
Bernard's Mission, Lesser Slave Lake. He begged support for 
all of them.30 
Denominational rivalry being what it was, the 
Bishop might not be expected to have reminded the Department 
of the fact that there was also an Anglican school at Lesser 
Slave Lake with government funding. 
The year after Grouard's petition, a Departmental accounting 
of funded boarding schools in Manitoba and the Northwest 
Territories showed there were already 23. As a result of the 
petition that number soon moved to 26. Many of them were sited 
outside the "cradle of civilization, " the treatied area of the 
west. 
Schools 
were 
being 
set 
up 
in 
territories 
where 
Aboriginal communities were and would remain for many decades 
yet living on the land in traditional ways and thus the 
enthusiasm for these schools brought the system 
to regions where the logic of assimilation did not meet the 
reality of life after school. 
It did not matter in what direction the Department turned, it 
was sure to discover schools which had been constructed and 
were holding classes for their Aboriginal residents. It was so 
in the west and the north and British Columbia was no 
exception to this phenomenon. In 1884, Vankoughnet announced 
that the Department intended opening three Industrial schools 
in that province. In fact, the Department would, in the early 
1890s, commission four: Metlakatla, an Anglican school, and 
three Catholic ones - Kuper Island, Kamloops and Kootenay. 
Vankoughnet made enquiries as to where they might be sited.31 
From the advice he received from local officials and the 
churches it became obvious that residential schools were 
already operating. The Church of England had a manual labour 
school, dating from 1872, at the famous Metlakatla mission. In 
addition there was a boarding school at Alert Bay with seven 
or eight pupils and another, All Hallows, serving the Yale 
district. The Roman Catholic Church supported a convent and 
co-educational boarding school at St. Mary's Mission in the 
Fraser River Agency. That school, founded by the Oblate 
Florimond Gendre originally with 42, had opened in 1863. There 
were also convent schools at Cowichan and Victoria. The 
Methodists, too, claimed to have had boarding schools in 
operation for many years - one for girls at Port Simpson and 
a boy's school in connection with the Greenville Mission, Naas 
River.32 Only the Presbyterians were not active in this mission 
field. 
81 

Many of these pre-Confederation schools, and newer ones 
constructed after 1884 without any prior consultation with the 
Department, soon joined the queue, hands outstretched for 
operating grants. In the late 1880s, Mrs. R. Burns of the 
Women's Missionary Society of the Methodist church made a case 
for the Port Simpson girls school. In 1877, the missionary, 
Thomas Crosby, had begun to take girls into the "mission home" 
which had since then, in her opinion at least, "been doing 
brilliant work in the civilization and education of the 
Indians." Recently, they had hired a matron, made sundry 
improvements and laid plans for a new building that would 
accommodate 50 pupils at a cost of $8,500. Naturally, Mrs. 
Burns wanted, and thought the school deserved, a subsidy for 
future maintenance. In 1893, Vankoughnet agreed recommending 
approval of the grant request to the Minister, T. Mayne Daly, 
after meeting another Methodist worthy, Mrs. James Gooderham.33 
The Catholic Squamish school at Burrard Inlet opposite the 
city of Vancouver, is another on the long list of such 
examples and illustrates, as well, the persistence of the 
churches. The initial suggestion that a school be funded was 
made in 1894. The Department for budgetary reasons temporized 
while Benson argued for a refusal. In 1898, the bishop of New 
Westminster appealed directly to the minister telling him that 
in anticipation of a grant the missionary responsible for the 
project had gone ahead and built a school large enough for 50 
pupils and would proceed to open it. "Surely," the bishop 
concluded "the government will not leave him exposed to the 
impossibility of opening the school for want of means to care 
for the intended pupils." The grant was approved in 1900.34 
Finally, if only for the sake of denominational balance, an 
Anglican example. The school at Alert Bay first came to the 
notice of the Department in Ottawa in 1893 when the Rev. 
Alfred Hall inquired about the possibility of a grant for a 
girl's home he had been conducting with his wife Elizabeth. By 
Elizabeth's account, the school had survived on charitable 
contributions. But recently it had attracted the notice and 
support of the Church Missionary Society. Soon it too, 
received the support of the government.35 
Given the missionary zeal of the churches, such a stream of 
persistent requests is not surprising. The system grew, 
however, not only because of church demands but because of the 
acquiesence of the federal government and Department. The 
Department had the authority under the Indian Act to refuse to 
accede to grant requests; it was only on the recommendation of 
the deputy superintendent general of Indian Affairs, or the 
Minister, the Superintendent General, that a grant could 
become an item in the estimates submitted to Parliament. The 
fact that at the end of the day, even with delays and 
sometimes outright opposition in the Department, the deputy 
82 

and minister rarely refused means that further explanation is 
required to more fully understand the role of the federal 
government 
and the Department 
in the initial stages of 
building the residential school system. 
The Department, of course, lived within the world of real 
politics - a world within which the church was a determined 
and notable player. The pulpit was a power in the home and 
thus in politics. And party politics, with its eye on church 
opinion, was a power within the civil service not only in the 
offices of senior officials but extending down to the lowest 
ranks. Party service and loyalty were still a road to 
appointment and preferment even with the limits placed on such 
factors by the professionalisation of the civil service. The 
Department 
of Indian Affairs was no exception and thus 
officials were wisely not only solicitous of the feelings of 
individual denominations but also strove to preserve the 
appearance of fair and equal dealings with them. Hayter Reed, 
in 
1887, 
justifying 
his 
support 
of 
a 
second 
Anglican 
industrial school in the Northwest, pointed out to Deputy 
Superintendent General Vankoughnet that the Anglicans had done 
more perhaps than any other denomination to Christianize the 
Indians of the region "and it must be remembered that they 
have only one Industrial school in the Territories under their 
influence."36 The Catholics, of course, had two, High River and 
Qu'Appelle, with plans in the works for a number of others. 
Not only was this fact "remembered" and acted upon, in this 
case with the opening in 1890 of St. Paul's, also known as 
Rupert's Land Industrial, in Manitoba,37 but there was a 
predilection to balance the "influence" of the two major 
denominations, 
Catholic 
and Anglican. This tendency was 
reinforced by the churches' protectiveness of their converts 
and their determination that their children could only be 
educated 
in 
their 
schools. 
This 
led unavoidably 
to a 
duplication of schools propelling the number of establishments 
and costs even higher. The school list published in the Annual 
Report of 1908 reveals that 25 per cent of the boarding 
schools 
in 
the 
old 
Northwest 
Territories 
(Alberta 
and 
Saskatchewan) were twins - that is two schools, Anglican and 
Catholic, serving the same or adjacent communities. These were 
at Onion Lake, the Blood and Peigan Reserves and Lesser Slave 
Lake.38 
This situation was reminiscent of the old days of fur trade 
rivalry with Hudson's Bay Company and Northwest Company posts 
leap frogging each other across the west and traders staring 
out at each other from behind their log battlements in quest 
of their harvest of fur. The quest for the souls and minds of 
Indian pupils was as hard and bitterly fought by the churches. 
An indispensable element in that quest was government funds. 
Members of the Baptist Ministerial Association of Toronto were 
83 

certainly the exception to the norm when they wrote to the 
Prime Minister, Sir J.J. Abbott, in 1892 claiming that the 
separation of church and state was a constitutional principle 
and thus demanding that the grants to Indian schools be 
cancelled immediately.39 All the other churches took the lower 
road and when they arrived at the Department they did not 
simply leave their petitions on the doorstep but crossed the 
threshold often in the company of members of Parliament. 
As well as church influence, party politics were another 
factor which determined the conduct of the Department. While 
members appeared at times to be acting simply as agents for a 
particular denomination, passing along their petitions to the 
Department with covering letters expressing support40 they had 
their own interests to serve also. In 1894, P.H. Macdowall, 
the M.P. for the Prince Albert region, promised the Anglicans 
that they would get a school in the area. He soon was 
complaining to the Minister, T. Mayne Daly, that an unnamed 
Quebec M.P. had made the same promise to the Catholic church 
and that there were rumours that the Catholics were to get 
their grant. He reminded Daly that "it certainly does not look 
well 
to one's 
constituents 
to 
see 
their 
own 
Member's 
recommendation overlooked while a stranger's is granted." 
MacDowall was doing no more, of course, than reminding the 
minister how the game was played.41 "One's constituent's" were 
obviously of critical importance and the methods of currying 
their favour, of assuring success at the next election, were 
well known. 
The Department, which on the change of government passed from 
the control of one political party 
to the other, and was 
used, as were most Departments, to solidify the ruling party's 
position in the country, could not keep the schools off the 
playing field and therefore, as with other public institutions 
and works, the construction and operation of the schools were 
spoils 
within 
the 
public 
domain. 
They 
might 
well 
be 
educational institutions to the missionary and dedicated 
civilizer within the Department but to members and to local 
politicians they were an opportunity for patronage because for 
merchants, builders and workers they meant contracts for 
supplies and construction and jobs. 
Some communities even entered bidding wars to secure a school 
and thereby the attendant plums. The Macleod Council in 
southern Alberta lobbied the Minister, T. Mayne Daly, in 1894 
to place the proposed Anglican industrial school, which was 
eventually built in Calgary, in their community. In this case 
Hatyer Reed tried to wring some benefit out of the situation 
for the Department's budget. Macleod, as an inducement, was 
offering $5000 to assist in the start up of the school, a 160 
acre site and was guaranteeing building materials at a reduced 
cost. Reed favoured Calgary as 
84 

it is a larger centre of settlement the students 
will 
come into more 
contact with the general 
improvements of civilized life, learn more and 
enjoy better opportunities for getting employment 
as they become sufficiently advanced to be farmed 
out. 
He did not proceed, however, without suggesting that Calgary 
should provide a 320 acre site and at least match the rest of 
the offer - "it would not seem to be expecting too much from 
the Calgary corporation to give an equal amount," he informed 
the bishop of Calgary and Saskatchewan and added, indicating 
that this was not an isolated example, "Brandon was glad 
enough to secure the establishment of the Methodist School 
there on the same terms!"42 
As Reed demonstrated, the Department was mindful of the value 
of schools as sources of patronage and thus of the inherent 
political 
character of building 
the system. 
In British 
Columbia 
when 
the Department 
moved 
to open 
the 
first 
Industrial 
schools, 
Vankoughnet 
assured 
Prime 
Minister 
Macdonald that the relevant members of Parliament had been 
canvassed for their advice on where schools were to be sited.43 
Local officials were instructed that the appointment of 
teachers would "be subject to the approval of the Department 
and of 
the Members of Parliament 
for the 
localities." 
Departmental files reveal that J. Mara, a powerful Tory M.P., 
was instrumental in choosing Kamloops as a school site, in 
supervising its erection and even in hiring the staff. It was 
Mara, suitably, who sent a telegram on 21 May, 1890 to another 
Tory from British Columbia, Edgar Dewdney, then the minister 
of the Department, "Everything ready - children are here and 
satisfactory arrangements made with the Sisters."44 
Seventeen years later the school was still receiving political 
attention. In 1907, Mara's Liberal successor, Duncan Ross, was 
badgering the Department, then itself led by the Liberal Frank 
Oliver for an increase in the annual grant provided to the 
school.45 
There was one additional element, perhaps more in the way of 
being an unknown quantity, in this mix of church and secular 
politics that may have influenced the Department - Aboriginal 
communities themselves. In the majority of cases, they were 
silent, or at least their voice was not often imprinted on the 
written record when churches strove to bring the blessings of 
a boarding or industrial school to them. There was certainly 
not a Departmental policy of consulting communities in any 
way. On the other hand there were instances in which a voice 
was heard. Some church petitions forwarded by members of 
Parliament were accompanied by community petitions.46 
85 

The question arises, however, of how "authentic" is that 
voice? It is clear from the text of such petitions, that they 
were not produced independent of missionaries. But, in turn, 
what that means is not easy to discern. Like the Upper 
Canadian communities before the Enfranchisement Act of 1857 
who approved 
and 
funded 
the schools and the 
so-called 
"Christian" 
chiefs of Treaty Six, they may have valued 
education as a mediator between the two cultures and employed 
the missionary as no more than a supportive community scribe. 
Or they may have been, as Dempsey suggests of Sweet Grass, 
under 
the 
"influence" 
of the church, 
compliant 
if not 
enthusiastic, and thus it is only the voice of the missionary 
that speaks out of those pages. And, of course, the existence 
of a multitude of meanings laying between these two extremes, 
varying from community to community, is equally plausible. 
Some cases, for example, suggest not independent or parallel 
but 
mutual 
interests 
expressed 
in 
a 
church-community 
partnership in the founding of the school. Such a partnership 
may not have lasted for long and would certainly have been 
disrupted as the 
general record of residential 
schools 
unfolded. But it is not impossible to believe that it was 
there in the beginning. Such a middle and cooperative path is 
certainly suggested by the events surrounding the beginning of 
the school at Sechelt. The Sechelt example also illustrates 
most of the elements involved in the creation of the school 
system in general and raises the issue of the final element in 
the development of the system - the contribution of the 
Department itself. 
On Christmas day, 1903, the Sechelt band directed a petition 
to the Minister, Clifford Sifton, drawn up, perhaps, after 
mass which would have brought the "Christians" together. The 
60 individuals whose signatures appeared on the petition, 
wanted a boarding school. The petition was witnessed by the 
community's Oblate missionary, E. Chirouse.47 It was, in fact, 
their third petition. Neither the first, submitted two years 
before with the support of the Superintendent of Indian 
Affairs for British Columbia, A. Vowell, or the second of 
April, 1903 48 made it any higher up the Departmental ladder 
than Martin Benson in the education section. In this third 
attempt, Sifton was informed that they had "to go pretty far 
away from our village to make a living, our children must be 
kept at school while we are away." They were determined to get 
their school, so "To show the Government we mean what we say 
we all combined last spring to get enough from our labor to 
have a school house put up."49 Three months later, the bishop 
of New Westminster wrote to the minister in support, made the 
obligatory request for a grant and indicated that he would 
supply nuns for the school.50 
At that point what was an ordinary set of events in opening a 
86 

school took an unusual turn. The bishop closed his letter with 
the information that the community was in debt owing to 
construction costs and thus needed to be bailed out. Duncan 
Campbell Scott, then the Department's accountant, and Martin 
Benson collected the details. The community had gone ahead and 
built a school to accommodate 50 residents. They now wanted to 
place it under the Catholic church and they also wanted the 
Department to authorize the expenditure of $1,000 from their 
band fund to equip the school. Finally, they applied for an 
annual grant to maintain the children at the school. 
On the main issue, the school construction debt, it appears 
they had attempted to raise funds through a forestry operation 
and were doing well enough selling the logs to a local 
merchant until the price fell by 50 per cent. As a result, 
they were left with only $3,000 of the $10,000 needed to pay 
off the building. 
It is clear that the situation made both Benson and Scott feel 
somewhat under the gun, and a church gun at that, and they did 
not like it. Benson advised the deputy against letting "priest 
or parson . . . dictate" to the Department and Scott was equally 
blunt - "the hand of the Department has been forced by 
ecclesiastical authorities." Educational policy 
and right to establish or discontinue schools must 
reside with the Department, and the most dangerous 
precedent which we could establish is the present 
that we should finally become responsible for the 
boarding school which we time and again refused to 
sanction.51 
Scott was being rather disingenuous for that "most dangerous 
precedent" had been set over and over again. It was about to 
be set again. In February, 1905, the school was operating with 
46 students, had received a good inspection report, and on the 
strength of that a conditional approval from Benson. It should 
have its maintenance grant, he suggested, but the Department 
should not accept liability for the debt. In March, this 
recommendation, condition and all, was accepted by the Deputy 
Superintendent General, Frank Pedley.52 Two years later, the 
Departmental Secretary, J. McLean, sent a note to Vowel1 
telling him that the Department had put into the estimates for 
1907-08 the amount required to retire the debt.53 
The fact that the school was eventually funded despite 
opposition within the Department, opposition that can be found 
in the early stages of the beginning of other schools and 
which focused, in those instances as well, on issues of 
funding and control, might leave the impression that a 
reluctant Department was simply driven forward by the whips of 
churches and politicians. That would be accurate only in part. 
87 

For it is clear that the Department was complicit in the rapid 
and extensive development of a system that it soon realized 
was inefficient and financially out of control. Moreover, 
Departmental attempts to bring financial order to the school 
system, by the adoption in 1892 of a funding arrangement that 
remained 
in 
force 
until 
1957, 
were 
ineffectual 
and 
a 
contribution to the problems of which Benson and Scott 
complained. More critically, they created the very conditions 
that produced the escalating death rate in the schools. 
There certainly was annoyance expressed in the corridors of 
the Department in Ottawa with the churches' behaviour. Civil 
servants universally feel that they have all the work and none 
of the authority and thus men like Scott and Benson were bound 
to resent those "priests and parsons" who trampled on the 
Departmental "right" to control Aboriginal education. There 
was also, however, a fair deal of cheering the churches on. 
Senior Departmental officials were unanimous in their support 
of residential education. None was more enthusiastic or 
influential with respect to building the system than Lawrence 
Vankoughnet. 
Vankoughnet spent his career with the Department joining in 
1861 and serving as deputy superintendent general from 1874 
until 1893. Particularly in the Macdonald years after 1878, he 
was allowed, as his biographer, Professor Douglas Leighton, 
has observed, to "manage the Department with a minimum of 
supervision."54 He earned such trust, and thus latitude, not 
only because he was a talented administrator but because he 
was a loyal Tory. His extensive control of the Department, 
even after it passed out of Macdonald's hands, was no doubt 
maintained by the fact he served only Tory ministers. During 
his term 60 per cent of the schools, boarding and industrial, 
that would be commissioned, that is awarded annual federal 
grants during this period to 1923, were opened. He was much 
more than a passive observer in this process, more than a 
servant of the churches. 
In a series of letters to Macdonald in 1885 and 1886, 
Vankoughnet set out his position on industrial and boarding 
schools. Taking Shingwauk as his model, he told the prime 
minister that residential education was the best way "of 
advancing the Indians in civilization" and therefore, "every 
encouragement should be given to persons undertaking the 
establishment of such institutions." In particular, "it would 
be well to give a grant of money annually to each School 
established by any Denomination for the industrial training of 
Indian children."55 
This "encouragement" came in a form based on the arrangements 
that had been made in pre-Confederation Ontario. Schools were 
given an annual per student grant up to an authorized number 
88 

of students. The amount of this "per capita" and exactly what 
it was meant to cover as well as the authorized number was set 
by the Department. The per capita arrangement was carried into 
the Northwest and British Columbia but applied initially only 
in the funding of the boarding schools. 
When it came to the industrial schools in the west, the 
Department, at first, deviated from that course taking on the 
whole cost of construction and thereafter of management of the 
"undenominational" schools - first Battleford, High River, 
Qu'Appelle, and then in addition Regina, assigned to the 
Presbyterians and Red Deer to the Methodists. 
It was a course that was soon regretted. The cost of these 
schools, 
and 
of 
education 
in 
general, 
grew 
during 
Vankoughnet's term at an alarming rate. In 1878-79, the 
education expenditure was $16,000, in 1888-89 it was $172,000. 
This was, however, not nearly the whole cost in that decade 
for, in addition, Indian First Nations had had deducted from 
their 
funds, 
managed 
by 
the 
Department, 
approximately 
$100, 000 .56 
By 1891, Vankoughnet was vigorously ringing the alarm bell and 
moving to put out a financial fire he and the churches had 
set. The per capita levels for the boarding schools had, as a 
result of church lobbying, gone up from $60 per student to 
$72. And there were serious difficulties with the cost and 
conduct of the industrial schools. They were being managed, 
Vankoughnet concluded, in an extravagant fashion. Costs had 
been "unnecessarily high, nor can . . . [we] find that any 
commensurate results are being obtained."57 Expenditures for 
these undenominational schools totalled $409,000 between 1884 
and 189058 and would continue to mount rapidly unless the 
Department introduced what Vankoughnet referred to as the 
"correct principal," per capita funding that allowed the 
Department to "know exactly where we stand."59 He was inclined, 
to the belief that when religious denominations or 
Benevolent Societies bring influence to bear on the 
Department to cause such institutions to be placed 
under 
their 
direct 
control, 
through 
officers 
approved by them, the Dept. should fix a rate per 
capita, 
beyond which 
it should decline to be 
further 
responsible 
for 
the 
expenses 
of 
the 
Institution.60 
Belief became policy. When the industrial schools were opened 
in British Columbia they were given per capita grants of "$130 
per annum per pupil on the annual attendance." St. Boniface 
and Brandon, new schools planned for Manitoba, were to have 
$100 grants. These represented a considerable reduction from 
the estimated per capita costs of $170 for Qu'Appelle, $224 
89 

for High River and $273 for Battleford.61 
In the early 1890s, it seemed increasingly clear that measures 
would have to be adopted to curb the rising cost of the school 
system. This may well have stemmed from the fact that 
Parliament's patience with Indian Affairs, never a favourite 
subject for consideration was wearing thin. In 1891, the 
estimate for the industrial schools in the Northwest was cut 
by over $16,000." In the following year the general education 
estimates were frozen while some elements of them were reduced 
by 50 per cent63 The increase from $60 to $72 was managed not 
by an increase 
in real 
funds but by manipulating 
the 
authorized number of students. That number was reduced so that 
the funds 
for each student 
could be increased 
without 
exceeding the total voted by Parliament.64 The bishop of 
Calgary was informed that the Department had managed to secure 
a grant to start work on the Calgary school only with the 
greatest difficulty, there being a strong feeling "that too 
much is already being spent on denominational schools of this 
class. "65 
Measures to take the situation in hand were initiated finally 
in October, 1892 through an Order in Council. It introduced 
per 
capita 
funding 
in 
the 
industrial 
school 
sector. 
Thereafter, 
so as to 
"relieve the pressure of present 
expenditure", 
the funding of all 
schools, 
boarding 
and 
industrial, would be by that "correct principle" because "the 
Minister considers that when the whole cost of an Institution 
is directly borne by the Government the same economy by those 
in immediate charge is not used as would be employed under 
other conditions." 
The government was determined that fiscal responsibility would 
be the primary dynamic in the management of the system. To 
that end, the Order introduced "a forced system of economy" 
first by the assignment of per capitas to the original 
Northwest industrial schools and then by the formulation of 
regulations for the more efficient operation of the schools. 
The per capita rates dictated by Cabinet were below the 
current level of expenditures - Qu'Appelle and High River, for 
example, were assigned $115 and $130 respectively while their 
expenses were listed at $134.67 and $185.55. This, it was 
assumed, would mean immediate savings and force the church to 
practise more "economical management."66 
The theory of all of this was, as Vankoughnet had said in 
1890, that a per capita arrangement enabled the Department to 
"know exactly where we stand"67 for all costs above the per 
capita grant would be borne by the churches. Unfortunately, 
the execution of the theory was very sloppy and contributed 
directly to continuing the growth of education expenditures. 
90 

The lines marking out financial responsibilities were not 
sharply drawn. The Order stipulated that "All charges for 
maintenance, salaries and expenses [were] to be paid by the 
management [the churches] out of the per capita grant" but 
that in addition, the Department would supply "All books and 
appliances ... for educational purposes." And finally, "the 
buildings were to be kept in repair jointly by the Government 
and the management, the former to furnish the material and the 
later to perform the labour".68 This was much more open ended 
than Vankoughnet's description of per capitas suggested. 
The Department was not going to have any sure sense of the 
costs it would face to repair the schools or to equip them 
until the bills sent in by the churches dropped through its 
letterbox in Ottawa. 
Moreover, even the per capitas themselves were potentially 
problematic. While they definitely threw a percentage of the 
expense onto the churches, at the same time, they made the 
Department dependent on high levels of church funding. In 
1908, the Department estimated that the churches had spent 
from 1877 to 1906 $435,000 on education.69 This added financial 
force to the political lever the church already had to move 
the Department and to maintain considerable control over the 
development and management of the system. It meant also that 
if the per capita rates did not meet the real cost of 
operation, and that would be very difficult to determine 
accurately school by school as it would depend upon so many 
variables 
- the location of the school, 
its access to 
supplies, the availability of students and so forth - that the 
churches might well find their own funds over subscribed and 
thus end up with deficits. These they would take to the 
Department, cap in hand, member of Parliament in tow. In that 
event, the whole unpredictable and increasingly expensive 
process would begin all over again despite the Order. 
In fact, what became a ritual in church-government relations 
had begun even before the Order was submitted for Cabinet's 
approval. First, the bishop of Rupert's Land approached the 
Minister, E. Dewdney, in the fall 1890, informing him that the 
financial condition of his diocese was declining owing to the 
withdrawal of the Church Missionary Society from the region 
and thus he would need an increase in the number of pupils 
authorized for St Paul's or an increase in the grant to $125. 
Not surprisingly, the year after the Order was passed the 
school had a deficit of $2 , 0 0 0 . 70 Secondly, by an Order in 
Council of 27 March, 1893, the Department was authorized to 
pay off deficits of $1,431.09 at Qu'Appelle, $1,616.58 at St 
Josephs and $880.44 at Regina. The argument made to Cabinet 
was 
that 
these 
requests 
should be acceded 
to for the 
management had taken steps, by reducing salaries and by other 
economies, to ensure that it would not occur again. Of course, 
it would happen again and this, therefore, was to be only the 
91 

first of many rationales the Department would have to develop 
to pay off the tide of deficits that would roll eastward to 
Ottawa.71 
The second aspect of the 1892 Order's "forced system of 
economy" was the declaration that the Department had the 
authority to institute "rules . . . laid down from time to time 
... to keep the schools at a certain standard of instruction, 
dietary and domestic comfort."72 The rules, the "Regulations 
Governing the Per Capita Grant to Industrial Schools" were 
produced from drafts developed by Hayter Reed, circulated to 
the churches for comment, and then formalized as a second 
Order in Council in 1894.73 
These Regulations, filled in the details of the financial 
relationship set out by the Order of 1892. First came the 
division 
of 
responsibility 
for 
the physical 
plant 
and 
ancillary services. The government, 
in the case of new 
industrial schools, was to provide the building complete with 
a heating system. Repairs were a joint responsibility as set 
out in the body of the 1892 Order. The government would 
provide the land and the fencing and thereafter the church 
would be responsible for the upkeep of the fences. Educational 
equipment, plus account books and stationery fell on the 
government list. Paying the cost of the transportation of the 
students to the school was in the first instance a charge on 
the government but the cost of keeping student numbers up to 
the authorized level was put on the church account. Medical 
attendance was a Departmental responsibility but the churches 
were to provide the medicine.74 
These 
stipulations 
were 
followed 
by 
a 
section 
of 
the 
regulations relating more directly to the administrative 
operation of the school system. The Department would determine 
who worked in the school including all Principals, teachers 
and staff, which children got into the school, how long they 
stayed 
and 
under 
what 
circumstances 
they 
were 
to 
be 
discharged. The churches' role in all of that was paperwork. 
They had to maintain records of attendance and discharge and, 
of course, the requisite financial records. 
In addition, the churches in their general management of the 
school would have to conform to standards of care instituted 
by the Department.75 Those standards, however, were not purely 
expressions of concern for the residents. They were also 
financial 
tools 
which 
would 
act 
as 
restraints 
against 
overexpenditure. Indeed, the regulations were so characterized 
by the Department in 1895 when a copy was transmitted to A. 
Forget, the assistant Indian commissioner in Regina. The 
regulations, he was told, were "for the close control of the 
per capita allowance placed in the hands of the various 
religious denominations for the conduct and maintenance of 
92 

such schools as will ensure their application to the best 
possible advantage."76 Even more telling, perhaps, the Anglican 
Archdeacon J.A. Mackay was informed, in the letter which 
accompanied 
his 
copy 
of 
the 
regulations, 
that 
"the 
Department's scale of food, clothing, and other necessaries 
[could not] be exceeded without permission, even should funds 
at the time appear to justify it."77 
The Orders in Council of 1892 and 1894 were obviously intended 
to be statements of Departmental authority. Initially, the 
instructions which had been sent out, for example, 
to the 
Industrial schools in 1883-84 had given the Principals a 
degree of latitude and a participatory role with local 
officials 
in 
determining 
example 
the 
furnishings 
and 
equipment. That was considered appropriate for it was believed 
that Principals would know what "will be best adapted for the 
children's convenience and comfort." In fact, the Principal 
was allowed "to draw up a code of regulations to be observed 
in the School and to be approved by the Department."78 
These two Orders swept away any such latitude. The 1892 Order 
declared that in consideration of the federal funds it 
received, the school management "would conform to the rules of 
the 
Indian Department 
as 
laid 
down." 
Furthermore, 
the 
Department had the authority to amend and supplement those 
rules from "time to time".79 Principals then would receive a 
constant flow of directives making Departmental control even 
more pervasive. The directive began to be issued almost 
immediately following the publication of the 1894 Order. In 
November, the Department sent out detailed instructions on how 
attendance registers were to be kept and attendance calculated 
to determine, with the certification of the local agent, the 
size of the quarterly payment of the grant earned by each 
school. Included was the stipulation, a supposedly handy 
accounting technique, that 
A number should be assigned to each pupil when 
entered on the books off the Institution, numbering 
from l upwards in the case of the boys and 01 in 
the case of the girls - such numbers to be used on 
all occasions when a pupil is referred to as well 
as the pupils name, and a number once given to a 
pupil should not be changed or used for another 
pupil ,80 
To ensure that the Principals did "conform to the rules, " they 
were reminded that there would be rigorous oversight, that the 
Department "may at any time inspect and report upon the 
Institutions"81 and that is was expected "that every facility 
be afforded its authorized officers for the inspection of 
schools, buildings, pupils, diet, clothing etc." 
93 

This attempt to bring order, Departmental authority, economy 
and financial control to the system, was over the next decade, 
a total failure. This blanket condemnation was issued by no 
less an authority than Duncan Campbell Scott. In considering 
the deficit at the Regina Industrial School, which by 1904 had 
risen to just over $9 , 0 0 0 , 82 he zeroed in on the "loose and 
indeterminate" character of the arrangements, on the lack of 
authority the Department had actually realized in 1892 and on 
the woeful financial consequences. The churches had been 
persuaded to accept the per capita grants. 
but the acceptance was merely tentative and they 
refused to be bound by any terms of contract 
whatever. 
No 
contract 
was 
implied 
in 
the 
arrangement and [this] is not the first time that 
the Department has been appealed to under like 
circumstances as the final relief. This has been 
the position of the religious bodies interested in 
the schools, and it has been recognized by the 
payment of deficits. The procedure all along the 
line in the treatment of these Indian schools has 
been to pay deficits, to increase the per capita 
grants, to extend more favourable terms and, in 
effect, to accept full financial responsibilities 
for the conduct of these institutions.83 
Laying in front of Scott was the record of a decade of failure 
etched in red ink. Industrial schools ran deficits despite the 
considerable intrusion of the Department in the internal 
operation of many schools. By 1904, the collective debt was 
$50,000,84 an amount equal to 35 per cent of the government's 
expenditure for industrial schools in that year. And it would 
continue to grow. Regina was a particular trouble spot, though 
far from the only one. A year after the Department paid off 
its debt, in 1904, the school had a new deficit of nearly 
$3 , 0 0 0 . 85 In view of the commonality of deficits, the Auditor 
General demanded that "A rigid inspection of financial affairs 
of each school should be made on behalf of the government at 
least once a year."86 
While 
some of 
the debt 
could be ascribed 
to bad 
and 
extravagant management, as Departmental officials were more 
than likely to charge87, it came also from "many unforseen 
circumstances"88 factors which could not be modified by "rigid" 
inspections. 
In 
1912-13, 
the 
Red 
Deer 
and 
Battleford 
Principals explained that their deficits, $5,000 and $2,500 
respectively, had arisen from multiple crop failures due to 
hail and rain. Nearly all the industrial schools when they set 
their budgets included as income the produce from their farms 
operated by student labour. Crop failures forced them to 
purchase more expensive supplies on the local market.89 The 
Principal of Mount Elgin Industrial rejected outright the idea 
94 

that his debt was traceable to mismanagement. His school's per 
capita of $60 was simply not large enough. He needed up to 
double that level of funding to reduce the arrears and to 
"lessen the amount of manual labor to the pupils."90 
It was not only the Department's balance sheet that was 
stained red. The churches' books were also effected. When, for 
example, the Methodists approached the Department with the 
$5,000 Red Deer Industrial debt, they were quick to point out 
that they had had to spend $16,000 of their own funds over and 
above the per capita allowance.91 The per capita rate for 
boarding schools of $72 remained frozen until 1911 despite the 
fact that churches found the rate inadequate and thus the 
system underfunded. The Deputy Superintendent General F. 
Pedley confirmed that that had indeed been the case when he 
briefed the Minister, Frank Oliver before Oliver met the 
Church of England hierarchy in the fall of 1910 to hear what 
would be another in a long list of church requests for 
boarding school increases.92 
Until 1911 the Liberal government, which had been in power 
since 1896, had turned a deaf ear to such requests. On taking 
office, the Liberals had proceeded to slash budgets and 
proved, 
with 
regards 
to 
Indian 
affairs, 
to 
have 
"an 
unvaryingly parsimonious attitude."93 Thus per capita rates 
remained unchanged in the boarding sector until 1911 and were 
only slightly modified for some of the industrial schools.94 
Like the Tories before them, however, the Grits were sensitive 
to the opportunities of office and the power of the churches. 
The Minister, Clifford Sifton, quickly replaced the Deputy 
Superintendent General, Hayter Reed, with his friend, fellow 
Manitoban and long-time political associate, James Smart. 
Smart left the day-to-day administration to others and "dealt 
with only the more politically sensitive matters of general 
policy or patronage."95 Under his tenure, in response to the 
churches, both the number of schools and, therefore, the total 
budget increased. Expansion even continued in the way it had 
before 1896, though the rate of growth was slowed a bit. 
Benson noted that it was still the practice of the churches 
"to extend their work beyond their means which finds them in 
financial straits and sends them to the Department 
for 
assistance.96 Once in Ottawa, the churches found that Liberal 
ministers were, like their Tory predecessors, not above bowing 
to the wishes of priest or parson. That, for example, was the 
experience of the bishop of the Mackenzie region who had 
opened and was running a boarding school at Hay River and then 
wanted, and received from Clifford Sifton, a grant for its 
continued operation.97 
At the beginning of the Liberal administration there were 27 
boarding schools and 20 industrial. On the eve of the per 
95 

capita increases, the figures respectively were 54 and 20. In 
line with this increase the total budget went up - from 
$253,259 to $305,761. But the party managed to have its cake 
and eat it too, for while the increases were there, the actual 
rate being spent on each school remained almost the same. The 
average rate spent on each boarding school went from $2,303 to 
$2,660 while for the industrial schools it actually declined 
from $9,548 to $8,104. In effect, a larger system was being 
underfunded by about the same margin.98 
Clearly, by these figures, without even taking into account 
inflation over the period, the per capita rates paid were far 
too low and underfunding was a characteristic of the system as 
a whole. When looking at the financial condition of the 
individual 
school, 
it becomes obvious that there was a 
fundamental impediment in Vankoughnet's "correct principle" 
which made 
the situation even more deplorable 
and 
the 
underfunding quite chronic. The funding mechanism rested on 
the weakest link in the educational chain - the ability of the 
schools 
to 
acquire 
and 
retain 
pupils 
from 
Aboriginal 
communities. It was on the basis of the number of pupils a 
school had, counted quarterly, that the total grant was 
calculated. In too many cases, the Department realized, there 
were predictable factors "that may prevent a school from 
drawing the full grant allowed, in which case deficits are 
bound to occur."99 The decline, noted above, in per school 
expenditures for industrial schools illustrates this for it 
was, in fact, caused directly by falling industrial school 
enrolments after 1898. In 1898 there were 1994 pupils and in 
1910, 1612.100 
The most common of those factors restraining enrolment was the 
reluctance of parents to send their children to the schools. 
Scott reflected in 1919, when briefing the Minister, A. 
Meighen, that "There is no lack of children of school age but 
the apathy or hostility of the Indians defeats the object of 
the 
Department."101 
The 
most 
common 
and 
certainly 
understandable reason for those feelings was the bond between 
parents and their children. A petition in 1910 from Beardy's 
community in Saskatchewan written by Joseph Seesequasis, an 
ex-student of the Regina Industrial School, requesting a day 
rather than a boarding school expressed those sentiments well: 
We think we are capable of taking care of our 
children when not at school. The whiteman loves his 
children and likes to have them round him in the 
evenings and on the days in which school is not 
open. We also love our children with just as warm 
an affection as the whiteman and we want to keep 
them round us.102 
In areas beyond settlement, where communities were still 
living 
on 
the 
land, 
practical 
considerations 
probably 
96 

supplemented sentiment. For such parents there would be no 
apparent need to send their children as there was no need for 
them to "appreciate" the value of the skills children were to 
be taught. 
The Department, however, felt that there were additional 
reasons why parents held their children back which had to do 
with the treatment of children who had actually been in the 
schools. In 1893, Hayter Reed went so far as to postulate the 
idea that 
The truth of the matter is that parents have to be 
influenced through the children much more than the 
children through the parents. If you can make 
children happy and contented at these schools, 
experience proves that parents very seldom make any 
strong effort to take them away. 
Reed was trying to make a point with the Anglican authorities 
in charge of St. Paul's Industrial who had just had five 
pupils removed by their parents because they had been beaten 
which "they say they will not stand." One girl "had her 
clothes taken up and had been whipped in that state ...[her 
father] would not take her back as she was almost a woman and 
that was disgraceful." One of the boys had his shirt "taken 
off and he was thrashed on the bare back." Reed, himself, 
noted, when he visited the school, "the depressed bearing of 
the pupils who seem to lack the cheerful demeanour and 
alacrity 
of 
friendly 
response 
met 
with 
in 
kindred 
Institutions." Such "harshness and severity of punishment" 
reflected in the student body, were, he contended, ill-
advised, "fatal to prospects of success" and had a most 
negative impact on recruitment.103 
Benson provided another equally instructive example. He agreed 
with the Mount Elgin Principal' s claim that his grant was much 
too small and noted that to make up for the revenue shortfall 
the Principal ran an extensive livestock operation. The labour 
fell to the boys to the detriment of their education. The 
"boys of this school are not only working they are being 
worked, and they as well as their parents see the difference, 
hence the numerous complaints which reach the Department of 
ill-treatment of the pupils."104 
At Mount Elgin and even at those "kindred Institutions" where 
the children were, according to Reed's observations, being 
well-treated, there was a pervasive disability depressing 
enrolments. The Indian Commissioner for Manitoba and the 
Northwest Territories, David Laird, in 1903, was not alone in 
the belief that "Poor education in the past is responsible for 
all the trouble in getting children. There have been no 
results in the past to encourage other Indians to send their 
97 

children to school." Benson laid the blame for this at church 
doors arguing that parents did not appreciate "instruction in 
religion and manners" and would be much more impressed if 
their children were given "practical education that would fit 
them to earn their own living and assist them to better their 
condition." To support his case, he advanced comments from a 
local agent who worked among the Blood: 
Any lad who has never left the reserve, is at the 
age of 18, far better off than a lad who has been 
in school for years, and what is more is very much 
more self-reliant and able to make his living as 
easy again as any of these school lads, and the 
older Indians are not slow to see that. 
When the schools, Benson concluded on another occasion, 
"improve their methods and impart useful instruction the 
repugnance of parents and pupils will disappear."105 
Industrial school enrolments were affected by all of those 
factors and by an additional one - the boarding schools. As 
these were always built close to or on a reserve, the parents, 
if they felt compelled to send their children away, often 
found boarding schools preferable. The Rolling River community 
in Manitoba actually asked their agent J. Markle to press the 
Department to enlarge the Birtle Boarding school so that they 
could place their children there. They thought the Department 
was unreasonable in demanding them to send their 
children so far away from home as Regina where in 
cases of sickness it was impossible for the parents 
... to see them whereas if placed at the Birtle 
school they could get to them and also be able to 
visit them at least once a year.106 
This was not an isolated case. It was understood both in the 
Department and the churches that "the sentiment of Indians on 
all reserves is so largely in favour of having boarding 
schools on the Reserves."107 
Moreover, 
industrial 
school 
Principals realized that they were being undercut not only by 
parental sentiment but by boarding school Principals who, 
facing their own budget difficulties, were reluctant to see 
any of their students sent on to the industrial school even if 
it meant supposedly superior academic opportunity.108 
There 
was little they could do about it. The Catholic church, in 
fact, in the case of St. Boniface Industrial School in 
Manitoba wanted to throw in the towel and replace it with 
boarding schools. This was approved and four boarding schools, 
Sandy Bay, Fort Francis, Fort Pelly and Fort Alexander took 
its place.109 The Anglicans took part in a similar development 
with the closure of Battleford in 1914 and the opening of 
boarding schools at The Pas and Montreal Lake.110 
98 

While recruitment was obviously vital to attain the goal of 
civilization, and critical within that for the financial well-
being of the schools, there was little cooperation between the 
church and Department. Recruitment was the responsibility of 
the school management as the Department felt that missionaries 
had more influence in the communities than anyone else.111 
Agents were to assist but as a class, they appeared apathetic 
towards the schools.112 Benson recognized that agents did not 
actively promote residential education, saw recruitment as 
extra work and "performed it in a perfunctory manner . . . 
especially 
in 
cases 
of 
schools 
conducted 
by 
religious 
bodies."113 Some agents made no secret of their feelings 
claiming that children returned to their communites without 
the skills needed to forge a new life, less prepared in some 
cases than children who had never gone to school.114 
Principals then were left on their own to conduct what were 
expensive and often fruitless recruiting trips. Given the 
financial and religious pressure to get students, recruiting 
techniques included bizarre and questionable practises. In 
1902, 
a 
three-man 
Departmental 
inquiry, 
informed 
the 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, Clifford Sifton, 
that the fact "That Principals of Schools should tramp the 
country, at great expense, competing with each other, and even 
bribing parents to secure students for their Schools is 
humiliating and demoralizing."115 In 1908 the Principal of Red 
Deer Industrial, Mr. Barner, was described as an exception to 
the rule. "His methods are coaxing and persuading instead of 
bribery and kidnapping."116 
The performance of senior officials of the Department was 
notably similar to that of the agents. While they encouraged 
agents 
to 
cooperate, 
they 
were 
unwilling 
to push 
the 
recruitment 
issue 
further. 
Consistently 
throughout 
this 
period, they resisted church demands for the initiation of 
compulsory attendance regulations at boarding and industrial 
schools.117 It was not a question of principle but of safety. 
Vankoughnet, in 1892, believed that Aboriginal communities in 
the Northwest Territories were not "sufficiently advanced in 
civilization to render such drastic measures advisable."118 
Reed in 1889 agreed advising "great caution." One needed only 
to remember, 
how 
recently 
compulsory 
education 
had 
been 
introduced among people of the old civilization and 
the hostility so frequently exhibited by them to 
the measure [and] it becomes at once apparent that 
it cannot be rashly attempted with our Indians.119 
Caution, indeed, marked the Departmental approach to the 
issue. 
Regulations 
adopted 
in 
1894 
fell 
far 
short 
of 
compulsion empowering an agent or Justice of the Peace to 
99 

place by force if necessary, only a neglected child in a 
school but giving parents the right of appeal.120 This was far 
from meeting church demands for a "policy of compulsory 
education" but as the Minister, Frank Oliver told them in 
1908, the government had gone "as far as is deemed advisable" 
and he would not countenance any law "which would provide for 
the arbitrary separation of parents and children.1,121 
The fact was, however, that the Department did not go even as 
far as the regulation allowed. The provision was not generally 
applied. 
David Laird, the Indian Commissioner for Manitoba 
and 
the 
Northwest 
Territories, 
set 
the 
standard 
when 
responding to a query from the Touchwood Hills Agent. Laird 
thought "it inadvisable in our present circumstances" to 
employ the power of seizing neglected children but rather "to 
use your personal influence and explain the advantages to be 
derived from attendance at school". In particularly stubborn 
cases, the agent might consider witholding "from unwilling 
parents all help that you have at your disposal, provisions, 
tea, tobacco, etc...."122 
The issue was finally resolved in 1919 when Duncan Campbell 
Scott, who had earlier opposed compulsion on the basis that 
such a law could not be enforced,123 decided for it. It was, he 
concluded impossible to effectively "recruit for the schools 
under the present voluntary system."124 An amendment to the 
Indian Act in 192 0 made it mandatory for every child between 
the ages of seven and 15 to attend school and set out the 
mechanics of enforcement - truant officers, and penalties of 
fines or imprisonment for non-compliance. 
Any parent, guardian, or person with whom an Indian 
child is residing who fails to cause such child ... 
to attend school as required 
. . . after having 
received three days' notice so to do by a truant 
officer shall ... be liable on summary conviction 
before a justice of the peace or Indian agent to a 
fine of not more than two dollars and costs, or 
imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten days or 
both, and such child may be arrested without a 
warrant and conveyed to school....125 
Scott's conversion and this aggressive amendment were all part 
of 
an 
apparent 
Departmental 
resolve 
to 
solve 
the 
administrative and financial difficulties of the schools and 
to make residential education work. That resolve had in 1911 
brought about the revamping of the school system through a two 
pronged approach: the adoption of formal contracts between the 
government and the churches for the operation of boarding 
schools and, second, the decision to bring an end to the 
Industrial school Programme. 
100 

That such reform was urgently required had become obvious 
quite early in the life of the system. It had been indicated 
not only by the deficits which were symptomatic of financial 
mismanagement but also by the growing conviction that the 
schools were not reaching their goal of civilizing the 
children. 
Dewdney 
observed, 
in 
1891, 
that 
despite 
the 
considerable investments being made in the schools, 
the 
Department could not discover "that any commensurate results 
are being obtained."126 His pessimistic opinion was related to 
more than the fact that, owing to recruitment problems, 
student numbers were not adequate or that graduates were 
having to return to their communities as they were not finding 
places in the non-Aboriginal economy. Rather, the schools were 
not providing training up to the expected standards. 
Martin Benson, who joined the education section of the 
Department in 1897, was particularly critical of the quality 
of education being delivered by the churches and he took it 
upon himself to "impress on the Department the fact that our 
present 
school 
system 
was 
defective 
and 
requires 
remodelling.1,127 
Even at the risk of being considered too insistent 
I cannot help again expressing the opinion that the 
system of training pursued at this [Mount Elgin] 
and other schools requires careful revisions as it 
is little less than a waste of time and money to 
follow the present method as there is little use in 
our educating any Indians if in our endeavour to we 
spoil a horn and fail to make a spoon. That our 
schools have failed in their object is generally 
admitted. I think I can point out why they have 
failed and make some practical suggestions as to 
their improvement if called upon to do so.128 
The churches, he argued, "seem to strive more to make converts 
of their pupils than to give them a good english education and 
proper manual training." Every opportunity that came to hand, 
he exploited. When the Catholics despaired of making a go of 
St. Boniface Industrial, he reviewed its 10 year history for 
the deputy superintendent general. From 1890 to 1901, it had 
admitted 309 pupils and discharged 217 - 
74 of whom were 
reported to be doing well by the Principal "the remaining 143 
have turned out badly, died or been lost sight of." Even the 
74 had not been well-served having "received no industrial 
training at the school for no trades had ever been taught 
there."129 Benson claimed that the school's record was not all 
that unusual - "it is in no worse position than the others 
which 
have 
failed 
to 
meet 
the 
expectation 
of 
the 
department. "13C 
Benson, though he may have led the charge, was not alone in 
101 

his critique of education or his call for reforming the 
system. Laird and others pointed out how substandard education 
had been affecting recruitment. From the financial flank, the 
auditor general in 1904 threw in his weight131 and Scott, in a 
comprehensive memorandum on financial relations with the 
churches, recommended that "the time has come to look the 
facts boldly in the face, and reconstruct the whole school 
system.1,132 
The Minister, Clifford Sifton, was easily brought on side. As 
early as 1899, he had informed Parliament that he doubted the 
wisdom of the expenditures which had been made on industrial 
schools.133 In 1903, he wanted to put a brake on further 
development through a moratorium on the commissioning of new 
boarding schools until, according to Benson's notes, "the 
whole school question has been gone into."134 This was quickly 
accomplished and a new approach was announced in the House in 
1904. Sifton's speech heralded the end of the Industrial 
schools which had not been "the best, or most effective, or 
most economic way of improving the condition of the Indians", 
and the abandonment of the goal of absorbing graduates into 
Canadian society. In their place 
We have substituted a less elaborate system of what 
we call boarding schools where a larger number of 
children can for a shorter time be educated more 
economically and generally more effectively. What 
we desire to do is ... to distribute over the whole 
band 
a 
moderate 
amount 
of 
education 
and 
intelligence, so that the general status of the 
band would be raised.135 
Sifton's 
successor 
in 1905, 
Frank Oliver, 
was left 
to 
implement 
the policy of 
"closing the larger 
Industrial 
schools...."136 In 1906, St. Paul's was the first to go, it 
burnt 
and 
was 
not 
rebuilt, 
followed 
by 
St. 
Boniface, 
Metlakatla, Calgary, Regina, Battleford, Elkhorn, Red Deer 
and, in 1922, High River. 
Much more, however, was to follow. The push for reform was far 
from the sole province of Benson, Sifton and Oliver and it 
would involve more than the end of the emphasis on the 
industrial school model. The churches were very much in the 
field with their own goals and to them the reforms of 1904 
were merely a beginning. They kept up constant pressure 
particularly with regards to their considerable contribution 
to the costs of boarding schools - a burden on them which they 
could not long endure. Most significantly, the Protestant 
churches came together at a conference on Indian Education in 
Winnipeg in December of 1906, drew up a set of resolutions and 
presented them to the government in April, 1907. 
102 

The Winnipeg Resolutions revealed that there was at the outset 
little common ground with the government. The churches agreed 
that "it might be a wise policy to reduce the number [of 
schools] or to transfer some to more needy localities."137 But 
then 
they 
returned 
to 
their 
usual 
demands: 
compulsory 
education, increased per capita rates of $100 in Ontario and 
$130 west of the Great Lakes which would amount to a $900,000 
addition 
to the budget136, 
the upgrading 
of 
schools at 
government expense, increases in teachers salaries, and the 
provision of adequate medical services including sanatoriums 
"in central locations for the treatment of tubercular and 
other contagious diseases."139 
Negotiations were carried on from 1908 to 1910 with one of the 
most troublesome elements being not the terms but the politics 
of the situation. The Catholic church had to be brought into 
the discussions as the church was initially unwilling to make 
common cause with the Protestants and was not, on its own, 
seeking 
"more 
favourable 
terms."140 
And 
of 
course, 
the 
Department 
had 
to struggle 
to get 
approval 
for 
larger 
appropriations. 
When the churches and the government signed the 1911 contracts 
for the operation of boarding schools, they agreed, as well, 
to a programme of reduction in the number of boarding and 
industrial 
schools. 
Some 
schools 
would 
be 
replaced 
by 
"improved day schools" - schools conducted by a married couple 
who would provide a noon meal and tuition "specially designed 
for the localities where they are situated." As well as 
educationg the children the school would play a role in the 
development of the reserve. The woman, a "field matron", would 
instruct women in the community "in the simplest domestic arts 
- the making of good bread, the preparation of the ordinary 
articles of diet, the cleanliness of the houses." The man 
would tend a demonstration garden.141 
In the contracts themselves, as the minister explained to a 
delegation of church representatives in a final negotiating 
session held in his office on 8 November, 1910, 
the whole conduct and management of these schools 
would be covered ... the responsibilities of each 
toward the other would be definitely fixed and the 
financial 
straits 
in which the churches 
found 
themselves . . . would in a measure be relieved by 
the Government.1,142 
That relief came in the form of new per capita rates which 
related, broadly, to the regional differences in costs of 
operation. Thus Ontario rates were to be between $80-$100, 
Western rates between $100-$125 and Northern rates were pegged 
at $125.143 Most of the schools would receive the $100 per 
103 

capita. 
The "responsibilities each toward the other" were set out in 
detail in the contract. They constituted, without major 
amendments, the structure of the relationship between the 
churches and the Department for the next three decades. In 
accepting government funding, the church would be required: to 
admit students between the ages of seven and 18, only on the 
approval of the superintendent general, and only after the 
children had been given a certificate of good health from a 
physician, to operate the school according to regulations made 
by the Department, to teach the children according to the 
curriculum set out in the contract combining a good English 
education with the skills of agricultural life "or other 
industries as are suitable to their local requirements, " to 
provide 
training in the moral and civic codes of civilized 
life, to manage the school at staffing levels set by the 
Department 
and 
to hire 
only 
teachers 
approved 
by 
the 
Department who met approved training standards and to dismiss 
those 
staff 
or 
teachers 
found 
unsatisfactory 
by 
the 
Department, to supply food, clothing, lodging and equipment 
according to standards set by the Department, to keep the 
buildings in a sanitary condition and the children "clean and 
free from vermin both in their clothes and person, " to 
maintain the school in good repair if owned by the church, 
and to hold the school ready for inspection by any agent 
appointed by the Department. 
As well as providing a per capita grant to each school, which 
supposedly would fix absolutely and finally the government's 
financial commitment, the government was bound: to provide 
medicine, school books, stationery and school appliances, and 
to maintain in good repair and sanitary condition those school 
buildings it owned. It reserved the right, of course, to 
cancel the contract pertaining to any school that, in its 
judgement, was not being operated by a church according to the 
terms of the contract. 
These reforms, comprising the decision to phase out Industrial 
schools and the contracts with increased funding, would 
suggest that the government was taking hold of the system and 
making a break with the past. Interestingly, in that vein, the 
negotiators agreed that the old practice of first opening a 
school and then turning to the government for support would no 
longer be countenanced. The Departmental Secretary J.D. McLean 
certainly wanted it to appear that a new administrative and 
financial day had dawned. He noted that as the government was 
to pay "a much larger proportion of the total cost of Indian 
education 
than 
before" 
it 
is 
"compelled 
to 
assume 
a 
proportionately larger measure of responsibility as to the 
conduct of these schools." And he was certain that this 
initiative, as well as the "improved relations" between the 
104 

Department and the churches, would result "in benefit to the 
physical condition and the intellectual advancement of the 
Indian children." 
Hopeful 
sentiments, 
however, 
were not 
the substance of 
effective reform. The system did not so easily escape its 
past; 
it 
soon 
fell 
back 
into 
funding 
and 
management 
difficulties. The 1911 contracts were to be reviewed and 
renewed at the end of 5 years - they never were. And thus the 
strict management arrangements of the contracts soon had no 
basis in any enforceable agreement between the two parties and 
the 
parties 
drifted 
into 
an 
"unbusinesslike 
lack 
of 
arrangement"144 and into discord over who was responsible for 
what and who was to have the last word on particular issues. 
On the financial front circumstances as usual intervened and 
the Department was unable to respond appropriately. The First 
World War brought 
steep price 
increases and 
channelled 
government funds away to military purposes.145 Churches then 
saw, as in the past, their proportion of the cost of the 
system rising. By the summer of 1917, none of the churches 
could live within the limits of their per capita grants.146 
And the Department, recognizing that the churches were indeed 
in financial difficulty, managed, in 1917, a $10 increase in 
the per capita rates. But it did so by taking money out of 
funds 
allocated 
for 
the 
sorely 
needed 
upgrading 
of 
buildings.147 
But even if it could be said that the reforms of 1911 were 
efficacious, that the system's future would show a marked 
improvement, 
it was all much 
too late. The weight 
of 
inefficiency and underfunding that had pressed down on church 
and Departmental budgets and had driven the schools into debt 
was nothing compared to the consequences of that seen in the 
deplorable condition of so many of the schools themselves. 
Badly built, and ill-maintained, they were a dreadful weight 
which had pressed down on the thousands of children who 
attended the schools in that period. For many of those 
children, it had proven to be a mortal weight. 
The provisions of the contract and the discussions during the 
negotiating sessions made it clear that all the participants 
knew that there was a crisis in conditions, sanitation and 
health in the schools. They could not have pretended otherwise 
as Dr. Bryce's 
1907 report 
was published 
just as 
the 
discussions were to get underway and another report, by F.H. 
Paget, a Departmental accountant, came to hand in 1908. The 
lawyer, the Hon. S.H. Blake, who was conducting a review for 
the Church of England of its missionary work and would be an 
influential force in the negotiations, brought the issue 
before Oliver, in January of that year, in the most blunt 
fashion: 
105 

If you seek to draw the Indian from the wigwam and 
out-of-door life, you must educate him in the 
ordinary hygienic rules - the non-observance of 
which 
cultivates 
tuberculosis 
and 
scrofulous 
affections - principal causes in the high death 
rate. The appalling number of deaths among the 
younger children appeals loudly to the guardians of 
our 
Indians. 
In doing nothing 
to obviate 
the 
preventable causes of death, brings the Department 
within 
unpleasant 
nearness 
to 
the 
charge 
of 
manslaughter.148 
The contract was drawn in such a way, in terms of the 
maintenance, funding and enrolment provisions, so as to deal 
with the issues of health and sanitation. This was all laid 
out in a memorandum of agreement sent by the Departmental 
Secretary, J.D. McLean, to the church representatives who had 
met with Oliver in November 1910. The contract embodied the 
conditions upon which the increased grant was to be paid. 
Those conditions require that the school buildings 
shall be sanitary and that the school management 
shall be such as to conduce to the physical, moral 
and mental well-being of the children. 
The per capita rates were designed to assist in that. Whether 
a particular school was assigned the minimum or maximum of its 
regional rate (whether, for example, it got $100 or $125 in 
the Western region) was based on the "recognition that the 
standard of comfort and sanitation is much higher to-day than 
it was twenty years ago and that the condition of the Indian 
children is such that they should have the benefit of the best 
sanitary arrangements." Churches that were in possession of, 
or put up in the future, what were termed "Class A" buildings, 
those which "met specified modern conditions" would qualify 
for the full rate. School buildings that were built or 
continued as "Class C," that is they "did not provide modern 
improvements," received the minimum. There was supposedly an 
incentive and financial room within the rate to improve 
buildings and maintain them at high levels. In terms of its 
own buildings, Class B, the government was pledged to the same 
principles. 
Similarly, 
the contract dealt with the authorized enrolment 
for each school with an eye primarily to considerations of 
health. The number of children to be accommodated in each 
school was limited by the contract. That limit in turn 
was 
fixed 
by 
consideration 
of 
air 
space 
and 
ventilating systems, and floor space in class-
rooms . In the dormitories the air space must be at 
least 500 cubic feet for each child. In the class-
106 

rooms the limit is to be fixed by floor space for 
seats and the air space for pupils, the latter to 
be not less than 250 cubic feet for each pupil, and 
the former 16 square feet for each pupil.149 
Unfortunately, the concern for the children reflected in those 
provisions did not give any inviolable priority to the plans 
for the improvement of the condition of the schools. By the 
end of the Great War, it was business as usual, business 
as 
it had been since the 1880s. In 1918, Duncan Campbell Scott 
briefed the Superintendent General, Arthur Meighen, who would 
in two years become the prime minister, on the state of Indian 
education. He reviewed the contract system pointing out that 
one of its central purposes had been to deal with the 
"inadequate" buildings which "were unsanitary and . . . were 
undoubtedly chargeable with a very high death rate among the 
pupils." For a few years after 1911, the Department, he 
continued, "had been able to do its share" towards improving 
conditions that is "until the outbreak of the war." Then "as 
the war continued all new projects were abandoned." The result 
of that was reflected in a dramatic decline in expenditures. 
In 1914, the Department spent on average $8,684 on each 
boarding school and $16,146 on each industrial school. In 
1918, 
those 
figures 
had 
fallen 
to 
$5,738 
and 
$12,338 
respectively. Total expenditures fell by 33 per cent from 
$811,764 to $542,568.150 
It is evident from these figures that while the Department was 
able to hold the line in terms of per capita rates, and even 
managed a $10 advance in 1917, it was going backwards in so 
far as funding improvements in the physical condition of the 
schools. Increasingly, the "circle of civilized conditions" 
was a crumbling edifice. If it had been Blake who briefed 
Meighen, he may well have added to Scott's commentary a 
sobering reflection - as the Department was still "doing 
nothing to obviate the preventable causes of death" it 
continued to be "within the unpleasant nearness to the charge 
of manslaughter."151 
"The Charge of Manslaughter" 
The deplorable and tragic conditions which made the schools, 
in Scott's words, "chargeable with a very high death rate 
among the pupils"152 were, in many cases, the consequence of 
the construction of the school buildings themselves made worse 
107 

overtime by neglectful and inadequately funded maintenance 
programs. Those many schools that were opened by the churches 
in advance of government grants were routinely "erected on 
very primitive plans"153 by amateurs without the guidance of 
professional architects.154 They received grants sight unseen, 
without any Departmental inspection, and despite the fact that 
senior 
officials, 
like 
Scott, 
admitted 
that 
they 
were 
"intensely apprehensive" about the quality and safety of 
church built structures.155 This was such a common concern that 
Hayter Reed, when drafting the 1894 regulations, included a 
proposal that the Department, before any grant was authorized, 
should have the right to inspect the plans or, if already 
built, the school premises.156 This may well have been useful 
for when 
schools 
were 
finally 
visited, 
the 
Department 
discovered, in some instances, that their decision to proceed 
had not been wise. The Squamish school was a case in point. 
Built by the Catholic missionary and funded in 1900 after a 
direct appeal to Clifford Sifton by the local member of 
Parliament and the Catholic bishop it was, when inspected by 
the Assistant Indian Commissioner of British Columbia, C. 
Perry, shortly after its opening, in such ramshackle condition 
that Perry thought it should be closed immediately.157 
The Department's own record was not a great deal better. 
Benson, in a general assessment of the school system made 
shortly after joining the Department's education section in 
1897, pulled no punches: 
The 
buildings 
have 
been 
put 
up 
without 
due 
consideration for the purpose for which they would 
be 
required, 
hurriedly 
constructed 
of 
poor 
materials, badly laid out without due provision for 
lighting, heating or ventilating.158 
From the outset, they had been built with an eye to economy. 
E. Dewdney, who supervised the construction of the first three 
Industrial schools in the west, insisted that they be of the 
"simplest and cheapest 
construction." 
Putting them near 
railway lines would facilitate the acquisition of construction 
materials and supplies. In the course of time, he reasoned, 
with the growth of settlement, construction costs would drop 
and the schools could be upgraded.159 That was, it turned out, 
a foolish assumption. The trains, when they came, brought 
settlers, but certainly no federal funds for reconstructing 
schools. 
These schools were not only cheaply built, they were in some 
cases, as Benson charged, badly constructed even though 
professionals were employed. Father Lacombe visited the just 
opened Kamloops Industrial School in 1890. It had been 
designed by an architect and constructed under the supervision 
of a "Dominion Government Engineer" of the Public Works 
108 

Department. Lacombe was shocked. 
The Architect and contractors, I suppose, never saw 
or never heard about an institution of the kind. It 
is a pity to see the inside. For instance consider 
that there is not a little space for a chapel, not 
a small room for laundry, for bakery when the 
matrons are obliged to bake three times a day in 
the 
cooking 
stove 
and 
imagine 
what 
kind 
of 
temperature it will be during summer, no place for 
a stove, no bathroom for girls! 
The Inspector of Schools, J.A. Macrae, who was dispatched to 
check on Lacombe's complaints, seconded all of them and added 
one of his own - one that became a universal concern linking 
building design and the health of the pupils. "All the 
emanations from the cellar which is unventilated now flow into 
dining room and main building." 
These, however, were not the only problems and they were not 
unique to the Kamloops school. An article in the Toronto 
Empire revealed "The hospital room opening out of the school 
room and therefore calculated to spread infection and to kill 
the patient with the noise of the school beside him . . . ." 
There was also the danger of "the same breakneck stairs." 
When the Department investigated these charges, it became 
apparent that the Kamloops school had been built to the same 
design as Elkhorn in Manitoba and thus had the same defects, 
stairs and all. The local agent found them "steep and narrow" 
and suggested that they "were probably made so to save 
material and expenses and are by no means of the safest kind." 
There was, he advised, nothing that could be done. "They 
cannot now be altered without spoiling the building." 
Beside evidence of considerable incompetence that led to a 
structure that was unsafe, potentially unhealthy and did not 
provide adequately for the functions of such an institution, 
there was the mark of political patronage on the project -
overseen by the Tory M.P. J. Mara. Lacombe's discovery of 
"three beds the size of those in hotels for ladies and 
gentlemen occupying the place of ten good iron beds etc" . . 
sparked the comment that " As long as merchants can make money 
with the Government they think that's alright."160 
Kamloops, of course, was far from being the only object of 
patronage and Lacombe was not the only person who thought he 
saw the mercantile hand in the political glove to the 
detriment of the pupils. A not unusual phenomenon, an angry 
western 
voter, 
protested 
anonymously, 
under 
the 
title 
"Taxpayer". 
Its a damn shame to let Govt. schools be run as 
109 

they are. You have a College [Emmanuel College, 
Prince Albert] here that is a disgrace to anybody. 
Ignorant teachers, pigsty boarding, poor clothing 
everything cheap and nasty, tax payers money is not 
paid for frauds of this kind. The whole business 
should be ventilated before Parliament. It should 
be inquired into now. There is enough boodling 
without allowing people to make money out of poor 
Indian lads.161 
The "Taxpayer" was not far from the mark. Many schools were a 
"disgrace 
to anybody." 
The Department's 
files 
chart 
a 
catalogue of industrial school ills as the defects in their 
construction or subsequent deterioration became 
obvious. 
Battleford opened and took students into a government building 
that was only partially renovated and that was still two years 
later, in 1885, unfinished and in "danger from fire ... owing 
to the large number of stoves necessary to keep the building 
sufficiently heated." At night when the fires were allowed to 
go out "the temperature in the rooms differs from that outside 
by only a few degrees ... the coldness of the rooms has been 
intensely felt." The cellar needed frost-proofing and the 
bathroom was too small for the number of students. "Owing to 
the number of people in the building it is very desirable that 
the premises be properly drained." Five years later, after 
having been damaged by troops who occupied the building during 
the Riel 
rebellion, 
it was still 
"totally without 
any 
protection from fire" and continued without a proper drainage 
system that would "obviate the possibility of epidemic."162 
With Regina's persistent deficit, it would not be surprising 
to find that the management was unable to keep the buildings 
up to standard. A report in 1904 concluded that considerable 
funds would have to be set aside to enable it "to properly 
meet the purpose for which it was established." The floors and 
ceilings 
were 
in a 
"wretched 
condition 
and 
should 
be 
replaced." And as usual "many of the stairs are really 
dangerous and require immediate attention."163 
When funds were finally set aside for building improvements 
after the 1911 contracts, it was too late for a school like 
Red Deer. The Methodist church itself took the position that 
"Expenses for repairs to the present Red Deer school would be 
wasted" as the state of the school was "most unsatisfactory 
and discreditable." It should be closed for all the buildings 
were "in a most dilapidated and unsanitary condition."164 
At Qu'Appelle Industrial it was not sanitation but heating 
problems that endangered the occupants. The Principal, Father 
Hugonard, petitioned yearly for improvement to the school's 
heating system which was "a serious menace to health." The 
gym, he wrote in 1895 a decade after the school was first 
110 

opened, can be so cold that "hands become so numb as to render 
the exercises themselves dangerous."165 
Elkhorn, constructed 
with government assistance, was equipped with a boiler that 
was too small so that there was, according to E. Hay. 
Machinists and Boilermakers, not enough radiation "to keep the 
building warm in cold weather, particularly the girls and boys 
school rooms."166 At Brandon, 
and at most of the other 
industrial school, according to Benson's 1897 review, the 
problem was too much heat. He informed the departmental 
secretary that "When Lord Aberdeen [the Governor General] 
visited Brandon in the fall of '95 he had complained of the 
excessive heat of the rooms and recommended that thermometers 
be supplied, six of which were sent to the school." 
The 
problem 
with 
some 
schools 
came 
not 
so much 
from 
construction, equipment or maintenance faults as from the site 
chosen for the school. Benson's review was scathing about 
Industrial schools in this respect. In general, they did not 
have enough farming, grazing or wood lands. Unable, therefore, 
to produce sufficient food and firewood, they were compelled 
to purchase supplies thus driving up both their operating 
costs and their debt levels. There was more in this than just 
financial implications. The placement of the building often 
"evinced a 
great want of judgement." They had been put up 
"where drainage is well nigh impossible and without any 
consideration being had for ordinary sanitary laws, and in the 
most exposed situations."167 
At one time or another Regina, 
Brandon, Elkhorn and St. Paul's all were listed as having 
serious drainage and therefore sanitary problems.168 
The Calgary Industrial school, for which Hayter Reed had taken 
such care to secure every financial advantage possible, 
was 
a graphic example of Benson's critique of the schools. The 
school had a short and difficult history typical of all the 
worst aspects of the industrial experience. It opened in 1896 
with 20 students and a per capita of $130. Five years later, 
it was in financial crisis. It could not sustain an adequate 
enrolment, undercut the Principal, H. Hogbin, complained by 
boarding schools in the region, so that its actual costs were 
$265 per capita.169 The Department was most reluctant to bail 
it out. Benson informed the secretary of the Department that 
they had built a irretrievable disaster. It had serious 
heating problems and the "site of the present school is 
unsuitable, there being no drainage and constant danger from 
floods and it would be extremely risky to spend more money in 
enlarging 
it." 
On 
the 
schools 
tenth 
anniversary, 
the 
Inspector, J. Markle was recommending closure as the main 
building was in need of extensive repairs.170 Dr. Bryce, 
however, proposed renovations so that it could be turned into 
a sanatorium. The "beauty of the situation leaves little to be 
desired" he wrote, but there were difficulties associated with 
the "situation" that had to be remedied: 
ill 

The site of the school and the buildings is on the 
river bank and well chosen except that at high 
water in the Bow the water forces itself up the 
house sewer preventing the use of the closets and 
sinks, while the ground water rises in the lowest 
basement some two feet.171 
The Bryce proposal was not 
implemented 
and the 
school 
continued to deteriorate. In 1907, the Deputy Superintendent 
General, F. Pedley, told the minister that though built in 
1896, the school "was never completely finished" and had 
needed constant repairs. It was now impossible for the staff 
to remain in the buildings for another winter "without great 
discomfort." It had been a terrible waste; the "results have 
been almost nil." A few months later the decision was taken to 
close the school.172 
It is important, as well as illustrating the range of problems 
and their causes, to give some indication of the degree of 
crisis that existed in the fabric of the residential school 
system as a whole, of how wide spread that crisis was owing to 
construction deficiencies, siting and short budgets. Moreover, 
it is also critical to have some sense of how conscious 
officials in the Department were, or could have been, of the 
situation. It might be possible to argue that senior officials 
had no clear overview. Information on the condition of the 
schools normally came into the Department in fragmented 
correspondence and was filed away separately, 
school by 
school, 
or under 
agency 
headings. 
Without 
reading 
the 
correspondence as it arrived or without having regular or 
systematic reviews (Benson's 1897 report was the first of its 
kind) senior officials, it could be suggested as unlikely as 
it was, may have had no feeling for the scope or proportion of 
the problem. 
A single report, submitted in 1908 by F.H. Paget, can, 
however, give some sense both of the scope of the problem and 
senior staff's awareness of it. The report was commissioned by 
the Department during the negotiations for the contracts when 
information on the condition of the system was vital and it 
amounted to a review of a cross-section of nearly one-third of 
the system including both industrial and boarding schools. 
Paget was an accountant with the Department sent to western 
Canada to "give agents etc. instructions in how accounts are 
to be kept." As well, he was to visit schools "look into the 
methods of keeping accounts" and to inspect "the general work 
of the school" 
and the manner in which "pupils are fed, 
clothed and lodged." Finally, he was "to report whether the 
methods of education 
carried out 
at these 
schools 
are 
consistent with the Department's policy and with the future 
life of the pupils on Indian Reserves."173 Paget spent the 
112 

summer of 1908 on tour. He visited 15 boarding schools and six 
industrial schools in Saskatchewan and Alberta. 
Paget's report revealed that the schools ran the gamut from 
good to deplorable with the vast majority, 15 out of the 21, 
in the latter category. He was impressed with Qu'Appelle 
rebuilt after its fire "with all the modern conveniences." It 
did, however, still have its original laundry which was then 
"unsanitary and unfit for further use." Lacombe's High River, 
"was splendidly 
conducted 
... neat 
and clean." He was 
impressed most with the Duck Lake boarding school - "excellent 
order, neat and clean throughout" and "very much a 
self-
contained institution, all clothing being made, and meats, 
roots, grains and vegetable raised." 
All of this was overshadowed by his descriptions of schools 
that did not pass muster. Not surprisingly, Regina and Red 
Deer topped the industrial school list. Regina was a sorrowful 
school - "...driving up it looked more like a deserted place 
than a Government Institution." The "building is old and the 
floors are worn, the plaster broken and marked in places and 
the paint worn off..." The children "did not have that clean 
and neat appearance that was in evidence at other schools." 
Red Deer was "not modern in any respect" and Paget was 
particularly worried that it did not have a system for hot and 
cold baths "which is a great drawback, baths especially being 
a great necessity in such an Institution." His treatment of 
Brandon 
was 
rather 
ambivalent. 
It was 
an 
"excellently 
conducted institution" but it needed extensive remodelling. 
One wing was in danger of collapsing as its "foundation is 
poor and it is gradually sinking and falling away from the 
main building." 
The boarding schools were certainly no better and some were 
much worse. St. Paul's boarding, a Church of England school on 
the Blood reserve, was 
an old 
log building of two stories with 
low 
ceilings, 
unplastered 
and quite unfit 
for the 
purpose 
it 
is being used 
for. 
It is without 
exception the worst building I was in on my travels 
and no time should be lost in replacing it with a 
modern structure. 
At File Hills, the dormitories were too small, Cowessess 
needed brick cladding, Crowfoot was too small and badly 
ventilated, Sarcee could not be heated, was unfit to be used 
as a school and could not be modernized, Round Lake had to be 
completely replaced, Old Sun's was unsanitary and unsuitable 
and Blue Quills had to be modernized. The Onion Lake Catholic 
school was in desperate need of fire escapes. It was a three-
storey frame building heated by stoves and lit by coal oil 
113 

lamps. Paget feared that in case of fire the "staircases may 
become filled with smoke and the pupils would be smothered 
before they could reach the open air." 
The Blood reserve 
school also had no outside fire escapes but, as well, its roof 
leaked, its ventilation was deficient, the adjacent river 
regularly flooded the basement and had on one previous 
occasion washed away the garden. "The Principal of the school 
is much exercised over the danger that is imminent every 
spring." 
Finally, the report indicated what was by 1908 a commonplace -
the connection between the condition of the schools and the 
ill-health of children. Though Paget covered much of the same 
ground as Bryce's report of the year before, he had not been 
directed to check the doctor's findings many of which came 
from Saskatchewan and Alberta data. He was, however, certainly 
familiar with the Bryce report and even referred to it 
obliquely in his description of Old Sun's boarding school 
which he "found to be all that had been said of it by others 
in regard to being unsanitary and the building unsuitable in 
every way for such an institution." In addition, he brought 
forward some similar observations of other schools.174 
The Department, of course, was fully aware, before either the 
Bryce or Paget 
reports, 
of the plague of 
tuberculosis 
affecting the Aboriginal population and the fact that it had 
insinuated itself into the schools. The tubercular epidemic, 
which 
had 
moved 
across 
the 
country 
with 
the 
tide 
of 
settlement, was the result not only of white presence and the 
Aboriginal community's lack of immunity to infectious diseases 
but also of the process of colonization, of the forces that 
marginalized communities divorcing them from their traditional 
lifeways. Confinement to reserves and overcrowded European-
style lodgings provided the fertile ground with malnutrition, 
lack 
of 
sanitation, 
despair, 
alcoholism 
and 
government 
parsimony, from which the infection ran its mortal course 
through communities. 
The impact of tuberculosis, statistically expressed, was out 
of all proportion to the size of the Aboriginal population. 
Bryce, in 1922, illustrated this baleful phenomenon. A study 
he had conducted in 1906 showed the rate of tubercular 
infection for Indians was one in seven 
and the death rates in several large bands 81.8, 
81.2, and in a third 86.1 per thousand while the 
ordinary death rate for 115,000 in the city of 
Hamilton was 10.6 in 1921.175 
Just over a decade later at the annual meeting of the Canadian 
Tuberculosis Association figures were circulated that detailed 
the percentage of Aboriginal tuberculosis deaths by province 
114 

compared to their percentage of the population. In Manitoba of 
the 
total 
deaths, 
41 per 
cent 
were Aboriginal 
though 
Aboriginal people made up only 2.2 per cent of the population, 
in Saskatchewan it was 27 per cent of the deaths and 1.6 per 
cent of the population, in Alberta it was 34 per cent of the 
deaths and 2.1 per cent of the population and in British 
Columbia it was 35 per cent of the deaths and 3.7 per cent of 
the population.176 
The tubercular bacilli infested the body in a multitude of 
manifestations. "Contracted in infancy [it] creates diseases 
of the brain [tubercular meningitis], joints, bones and to a 
less degree the lungs [pulmonary tuberculosis or consumption] 
and 
... if not fatal till adolescence it then usually 
progresses rapidly to a fatal termination in consumption of 
the lungs."177 This list by 
Bryce is only partial as the 
disease invaded almost any part of the body and was signalled 
by a wide range of symptoms - head and joint aches, pain in 
breathing and glandular swelling and eruption (scrofula) being 
some of the more common ones. In its most contagious phase, 
consumption, coughing and spitting blood or sputum spread the 
infection to others and fever, weakness and wasting led to 
death. 
One mode of transmission 
that particulary affected 
the 
children in the schools was drinking milk infected with bovine 
tuberculosis.178 Industrial and boarding schools kept cows and 
the children routinely drank unpasteurised milk. As with the 
school buildings, the outbuilding for livestock were often the 
problem. The Principal of St. George's school in Lytton, for 
example, was told by the Department of Agriculture that he 
would have to pull down his barn as it was a log structure and 
could not be disinfected. The school had lost 18 head of 
cattle in the last three years. 
Not only was it impossible to isolate the schools from the 
epidemic but the schools themselves were expeditors; they 
aggravated the problem by simulating in an exaggerated fashion 
many of those problematic conditions which affected reserve 
communities - confinement, overcrowding, per capitas that were 
inadequate to the task of properly caring for the pupils, lack 
of sanitation and stress and anxiety among the children.179 
Reports on the ill effect of schooling on the health of the 
children began to come into Ottawa quite early in the history 
of the system tracing out, by the time Benson submitted his 
summary review of the schools in 1897, a pattern of interwoven 
factors: overcrowding, lack of care and cleanliness, and poor 
ventilation and drainage, all contributing to rising rates of 
tubercular infection. In 1891, following a visit to Battleford 
Industrial, Reed commented on the high number of sick children 
in the school and the absence of adequate medical services and 
115 

facilities.180 The Agent J. Day submitted a report on the death 
of the Battleford student William Thorn adding 
This makes three deaths at the Industrial School 
this past month and it is quite a heavy death rate. 
.... Although the Industrial School is splendidly 
situated with regard to having a high dry and 
healthy site; yet the building itself is placed in 
such a position that nearly all the sunlight is 
excluded from the classroom and dormitories, which 
fact is very favourable for the propagation of the 
germs of tuberculosis. 
He closed with a request that the Department insist on monthly 
medical visits.181 
When such visits became more common, doctors began to send in 
warning signals. Dr. T. Patrick's 1893 and 1894 reports on 
Crowstand boarding school were forwarded to Reed detailing a 
drainage system and water system that were threatening the 
pupils' health. The next year he appealed for improvements to 
the heating and ventilation of the boys dorms and concluded 
with the dire observation that the pupils were neglected in 
that "the sores &c on some of the Children had not been 
attended to."182 
Dr. M. Seymour's report on Qu'Appelle was both more graphic 
and pointedly instructive. He calculated that the boys dorm 
was four times too small for the number of children assigned 
to it. Out of necessity, the 
beds are packed in as closely as they can be and 
the ceiling only being about eight feet [high], and 
from 
the deficient 
ventilation 
the boys 
have 
consequently to breathe and rebreathe the same air 
during the night. 
Before morning, the air in the dorm "is simply awful." 
Overcrowding and the breathing of "vitiated air" constituted 
the main factors which facilitated the spread of tuberculosis 
and there would be little hope of "lessening the present very 
high death rate from this disease" until the children were 
"provided with such room as it will allow them to be in a 
healthy atmosphere both day and night." Renovations to the 
dorms were essential as they would be the most immediate 
"means of saving a number of lives." Adequate ventilation was 
a requirement of all accommodation but it was, he concluded 
forcefully, "all the more important when dealing with Indian 
children who do not bear confinement well being all more or 
less disposed through hereditary taints to tuberculosis."183 
None of these points were lost on Benson who took these and 
similar reports, added them to his own research on public 
116 

institutions in Ottawa and the Alexandra Industrial School for 
Girls in Toronto and sketched, as part of his 1897 review, a 
damning portrayal of the system's health care and conditions. 
From a stand point of health the buildings were ill-designed: 
In all modern school architecture, great stress is 
laid on lighting, heating and ventilation, as it is 
recognized that the health of the students is to a 
great extent dependent upon good light, equable 
temperature and pure air, the last of which is of 
the greatest importance. What do we find in our 
schools? Ventilation wholly disregarded, or in a 
few instances where any attempt has been made to 
provide for it, that an entire disregard of all 
scientific principles has been shown. Outlets for 
the escape of foul air are provided in some rooms 
at a few schools but without adequate provision for 
the admission of fresh air and it is scarcely any 
wonder 
that 
our 
Indian 
pupils 
who 
have 
an 
hereditary 
tendency 
to phthisis 
[consumption], 
should develop alarming symptoms after a short 
residence in some of our schools, brought on by 
exposure to drafts in school rooms and sleeping in 
over-crowded, 
over-heated 
and 
unventilated 
dormitories. 
The expense of the critically necessary upgrading would be, he 
cautioned, considerable. His recommendations gave priority to 
the "proper ventilation of over-crowded sleeping rooms" which 
were "absolutely essential to the health of the inmates" and 
then to the renovation of those areas that would see the large 
dorms divided to provide rooms "for smaller numbers and more 
isolation." Lacombe's double ladies and gentlemen's beds were 
apparently not uncommon. Benson wanted them all replaced so 
that particularly the very young children, who he considered 
especially vulnerable, could be kept separate. Water closets, 
based on the Smead Dowd system, had "proved 
... to be a 
failure and a menace to the health of the students." They, and 
many of the water supply systems, simply had to be torn out 
and replaced."184 
Realistically, 
of course, very little of this could be 
undertaken. The tide of Parliamentary appropriations had run 
out in the early 1890's leaving the system high and dry. It 
would not turn until 1911 only to go out again with the war 
carrying overseas in the form of troops, ships and armaments 
what might have been renovations for the schools. It is 
ironic, perhaps, that only a fraction of those funds which 
took so many to their deaths in Europe, including Aboriginal 
soldiers, could have been, as Dr. Seymour suggested, the 
"means of saving a number of lives"185 of Aboriginal children. 
117 

In 
the 
years 
after 
Benson's 
review 
and 
still-born 
recommendations, the reports of illness in the schools came in 
unabated. Dr. H. Denovan, in 1903, reported on the unhealthy 
buildings at Red Deer. That same year the school's new 
Principal, Dr. J.P. Rice, was so upset by the institution 
that he wrote directly to Clifford Sifton. On his arrival at 
the school from a comfortable Toronto parish "the sight of the 
ragged ill-kempt and sickly looking children was sufficient to 
make me sick at heart." Enrolment was down due to deaths and 
the removal of children by their parents and the "sanitary 
conditions of the buildings are exceedingly bad."186 
Indian Agent Macarthur appeared equally troubled by the record 
of the Duck Lake boarding school. Some, he said, may believe 
that the students get tuberculosis from their parents, but in 
his mind home conditions, particularly when the children lived 
in tents, were more sanitary. No one "responsible can get 
beyond the fact that those children catch the disease while at 
school" confined for eight months "in a building whose every 
seam and crevice is, doubtless, burdened with Tuberculosis 
Baccilli." The result, he concluded, has been and will 
continue to be in the future that a full 50 per cent of the 
children sent to the school will die.187 
One of the more unusual letters contained a complaint from a 
day school teacher in the Qu'Appelle region, Mrs. W. Tucker. 
She informed the Department that students were returning home 
from the industrial school to die of tuberculosis. Moreover, 
"I consider it a crime to send a pupil sick with a contagious 
disease from the Industrial school to a reserve and spread 
disease. To say the least it is a very effectual way of 
solving the Indian problem." She received a polite reply from 
the 
departmental 
secretary. 
Her 
concerns 
would 
be 
investigated.188 But not, perhaps, by Benson for whom the 
phenomenon that "should be particularly looked into"189 most 
urgently was overcrowding. It was, with the physical failings 
of the buildings, the main cause of the spread of tuberculosis 
among the students. 
Curiously, the Department maintained contradictory statistics 
that seemed to deny the problem of overcrowding. In 1901, for 
example, a table was compiled listing 40 boarding schools and 
21 industrial schools, their "Provision" (funding rate and 
authorized number of students) "Accommodation" (school size 
expressed 
in 
a 
maximum 
allowable 
student 
number) 
and 
"Attendance" (the number of students actually in the school). 
Only four of the boarding schools had more in attendance than 
their accommodation number allowed. And of those, the highest 
number was only seven. Most were far below the limit. In fact, 
the total accommodation figure, that is the size of all the 
boarding 
schools 
combined, 
was 
1,845 
while 
the 
total 
attendance was only 1,426. In the industrial school 
118 

category only one school, St. Paul's, was over its limit and 
that was by one student. The disparity in total space and 
attendance was again in favour of roominess. The total 
accommodation was 2,280, the total attendance 1,863. 
Given the surfeit of qualitative, anecdotal data from doctors 
and senior officials like Benson (who actually compiled the 
above data), which insists on widespread overcrowding, these 
figures must be understood to bear little relation to actual 
conditions in the schools. In fact, there had never been any 
standard set determining healthy "Accommodation" or, indeed, 
even a standard by which "Accommodation" was to be calculated. 
It is likely that what was being measured to arrive at the 
"Accommodation" figure was the total space of the school 
rather than the space where the students lived and where 
tuberculosis was most likely to be spread - in classrooms and 
dorms. Schools then may not have been overcrowded but those 
vital living areas must have been. That reality was confirmed 
by the Department and the churches when they introduced in the 
1911 contracts "scientific" limits on enrolments based on the 
provision of 500 cubic feet for each child in a dorm and 250 
cubic feet in the classrooms.190 
The root of overcrowded dorms and classrooms, as with the 
deteriorating condition of school buildings, could be traced 
back to funding arrangements and particularly to the per 
capita system. The critical need Principals had to maintain 
high levels of enrolment to qualify for the full grant that 
had been assigned to their school led to practises that 
contributed directly to the health problem. Pushing enrolments 
to and past the point of overcrowding was one of these. 
Qu'Appelle Industrial and Crowfoot boarding schools provided 
striking examples of this. The Deputy Superintendent General, 
in commenting to Hayter Reed on a request from Qu'Appelle's 
Principal 
for 
an 
increased 
authorization, 
noted, 
with 
reference to Dr. Seymour's report, that he "was unable to 
reconcile the statements made about the insufficiency of 
existing accommodation with the application for a considerable 
increase in the number of pupils for next year."191 
In 1909, the Department's Chief Accountant, Duncan Campbell 
Scott, had no difficulty reconciling a request from the 
Principal of the Crowfoot school with information supplied by 
Benson 
that 
the 
dormitories 
were 
overcrowded 
and 
the 
ventilation was poor. He told the deputy superintendent, 
rather angrily, that of the 52 pupils that had been in the 
school since it had been in receipt of grants eight years 
earlier, eight had died, seven of those in the school and the 
other within a month of leaving. Of the 39 children in the 
school who had been examined recently by Dr. J.D. Lafferty, 22 
were infected with tuberculosis in the lungs: 
119 

This is what we have to show for an expenditure of 
$15,611. The outlook for the remaining pupils in 
attendance is not very bright and there is very 
little hope that the graduates of the School will 
attain 
maturity 
and 
be 
able 
to exercise 
any 
civilizing influence.... The accommodation at the 
School is inadequate for the number of pupils in 
residence, 
and the unhealthy pupils 
should be 
discharged.192 
Principals, of course, were contending with problems flowing 
directly from just the sort of funding Scott referred to and 
which the Crowfoot Principal no doubt saw as inadequate. As 
the per capita ceiling remained stubbornly unchanged at $72 
until 1911, they could only increase their grant by having 
their 
authorized 
student 
number 
raised. 
Annually, 
the 
Department was beseiged with such requests. Additionally, 
Principals had to strive to recruit up to the maximum number 
authorized which might already have been a figure that 
permitted the overcrowding of the living spaces of the school, 
as was evident in the Qu'Appelle and Crowfoot examples. 
The pressure that Principals worked under meant that there was 
a tendency to be less than careful both about overcrowding and 
the condition of the children they brought into the school. In 
1907, the Anglican bishop of Caledonia in British Columbia 
wanted to turn over Metlakatla to government control because 
of the anxiety, and perhaps the moral disquiet, he felt over 
recruitment. He admitted candidly "The per capita grant system 
encourages 
the 
taking 
in 
of 
those 
physically 
and 
intellectually unfit simply to keep up numbers."193 
Such recruiting, coupled with the high death rates at the 
schools, made the job of the Principals even more difficult. 
MacArthur, the Duck Lake agent closed his abovementioned 
report with a note that the community was resisting pressure 
to send their children off to one of the residential schools 
and wanted a day school. "While they cannot very well get up 
and tell you just why, I know it is because so many of their 
children die at the Boarding school, or come home from the 
boarding school to die."194 
Neither the Agent's information about the community's attitude 
nor 
the 
Bishop's 
confession 
was 
new 
knowledge 
in 
the 
Department. It was known that schools routinely admitted 
unhealthy students without any medical check as "it is felt 
that the children would not pass the examination at the time 
or the children are under school age." Often these children 
were not seen by a doctor for months after admittance to the 
school. This was at times put down to the charitable notion 
that the children were given a space "in the hope that good 
food and warm clothing will effect a cure."195 Whether it was 
120 

charity or fiscal expediency, however, the fact was that 
healthy children would be soon infected by occupying too 
little space as they slept or studied with the carriers of 
tuberculosis. 
Of course, neither the Principals nor the churches were solely 
responsible for the schools. If school administrators were 
driven 
into excess by 
funding needs and 
led there 
by 
missionary zeal, they were not restrained in any effective way 
by 
the Department. The 
1892 and 94 Orders 
in Council 
established the government's responsibility for providing 
medical services to the industrial schools and, by the 1911 
contracts, 
to the boarding schools. In both cases, 
the 
Department's right to inspect the schools was made a condition 
of the grant. Regulations were issued in 1894 and retained, 
throughout the period, stipulating that children had to have 
a medical certificate signed by a doctor before admission.196 
Unfortunately, the implementation left much to be desired. 
There was no regular inspection of the schools nor any 
guarantee 
that 
forms 
were 
being 
filled 
in or 
doctors 
consulted. In 1909, the departmental secretary sent out new 
admission and certificate of health forms which he thought 
were "sufficiently stringent to guard against 
tubercular 
children being taken into the school." They were not enough, 
however, to keep Louise Plaited Hair out of St. Mary's 
boarding school on the Blood reserve. Her form was signed by 
Dr. 
0. 
Edwards 
and 
accepted 
without 
question 
by 
the 
Department, in 1911, despite the fact that there was evidence 
she had contracted tuberculosis. To a question which asked if 
there were signs of scrofula or other forms of tubercular 
disease, Edwards had written - "Glands on right neck slightly 
enlarged. "197 
According to Scott, when he reviewed the situation with other 
senior officials 
in the Department 
at the end of 
the 
industrial school period, Louise represented hundreds who had 
been 
admitted 
despite 
regulations 
and 
even 
then 
the 
"indiscriminate admission of children without first passing a 
medical 
examination" 
continued. 
It 
was 
not 
only 
the 
Principals, he realized, but "our own officers who are picking 
up orphans, delinquents and others, that are causing the 
difficulty, 
as 
occasionally 
no 
application 
forms 
are 
forwarded." There had to be as well "more careful checking of 
the 
medical 
officers' 
remarks 
in 
the 
case 
of 
all 
applicants.1,198 
Another set of instructions which were then sent out elicited 
a most instructive reply from the agent at Grouard in Alberta. 
The children could not be checked during the summer as they 
were "wandering" with their parents. And then when they 
121 

arrived at school it was impossible, given the shortage of 
doctors in remote areas, for the doctor to examine them with 
any despatch as the schools were too far apart. Infected 
children were bound, therefore, to gain admission and once in 
the school as grant earners it might have been less likely 
that the Principal would send them off.199 
The administrative difficulties identified in Scott's review 
encompassed more, 
obviously, 
than lax implementation of 
regulations 
by 
officials 
or 
attempts 
to 
evade 
those 
regulations by Principals desperate to keep up enrolments. The 
system simply did not have the medical support that the 
Department was pledged to provide and that was required to 
properly protect the children and attend to their health needs 
- a tragic omission that had to be laid on the Department's 
doorstep. 
The scope of this tragedy was measured in 1907 by Dr. P.H. 
Bryce, the Medical Inspector to the Department of the Interior 
and Indian Affairs. He had been appointed to that position in 
1904 after a career in public health with the Ontario 
government. In February 1907, the Deputy Superintendent, F. 
Pedley, directed him to inspect the schools in the west 
reporting particularly on "the sanitary conditions at each of 
these schools." 200 After visiting 35 schools, he submitted his 
report in November. It was printed and distributed to members 
of Parliament and to the churches. 
Bryce's 
report 
was 
compelling 
reading. 
It brought 
the 
consequences for the children of all the health issues, 
overcrowding, the lack of proper sanitation and ventilation, 
and the failure of administrative controls, into horrifying 
focus. More than anything else it propelled health onto the 
agenda of the contract negotiations of 1908-1910 and even made 
the issue of financing the schools a health issue. 
The report set out the history of the schools 
and then the 
incursion of tuberculosis - how, because of "the accidental 
circumstances under which especially" the boarding schools 
were founded, and "owing to the lack of any system under which 
they came under government inspection, ... cases of scrofula 
and other forms of constitutional disease were admitted into 
the school" by Principals who did "not exercise any fine 
discrimination as to the degree of health of those admitted to 
school." It then spread "through direct infection person to 
person" or "indirectly through the infected dust of floors, 
school rooms and dormitories." The situation was compounded by 
school staffs who were ignorant of the "actual situation" and 
who not uncommonly, Bryce maintained, made light of the 
epidemic: 
This fact was fully borne out by my own experience 
122 

during 
the 
recent 
inspection. 
Principals 
and 
teachers and even physicians were at time inclined 
to question or minimize the dangers of infection 
from scrofulous or consumptive pupils and nothing 
less than peremptory instructions as to how to deal 
with cases of disease existing in the schools will 
eliminate this ever present danger of infection. 
In some schools, he conducted scientific tests zeroing in, 
naturally, on ventilation. In almost all cases there had been 
"no serious attempt at the ventilation of dormitories". Pure 
air became polluted in 15 minutes so as to be detectable "by 
ordinary chemical tests." 
It is apparent that general ill health from the 
continued inspiration of air of increasing foulness 
is 
inevitable; 
but 
when 
sometimes 
consumptive 
pupils and very frequently others with discharging 
scrofulous glands are present to add an infective 
quality 
to the atmosphere, 
we have created a 
situation so dangerous to health that I was often 
surprised at the results were not even worse than 
they have been shown statistically to be. 
Statistics, indeed, were what mattered. The impact of the 
report lay not in his narrative of the disease, much of that 
was already known within the Department, nor in its scientific 
tone, the product of his "ordinary chemical tests." It was the 
statistical profile of the extent of the white plague among 
the children that projected the stunning gravity of his 
findings.201 It was the stuff of headlines and so it became. 
The Ottawa Citizen on 16 November ran its story of the report 
under the banner: 
SCHOOLS AID WHITE PLAGUE - STARTLING DEATH ROLLS REVEALED 
AMONG INDIANS - ABSOLUTE INATTENTION TO BARE NECESSITIES OF 
HEALTH 
The article published by Saturday Night on the 23rd of that 
same month screamed just as loudly. The report should "startle 
the country" and "compel the attention of Parliament." "Indian 
boys and girls are dying like flies in these situations or 
shortly after leaving them.... Even war seldom shows as large 
a percentage of fatalities as does the education system we 
have imposed on our Indian wards." It revealed "a situation 
disgraceful to the country."202 
Bryce's 
statistics 
were 
based 
upon 
questionnaires 
he 
distributed to all 35 schools eliciting the health history of 
the children who were then, or had been, in the schools. He 
received only 15 replies, all from boarding schools founded 
between 1888 and 1905, but still had what he considered 
123 

"valuable information and food for thought." The information 
related to the history of 1,537 children. Of these, 24 per 
cent had died. Invariably, the cause of death is given as 
"consumption or tuberculosis" and just as regularly whenever 
an answer was given to the question "Condition of the child on 
entry," it is "given as good." 
The situation was bound to get even worse. The death rate 
would move beyond the 24 per cent mark. Close analysis by 
Bryce 
of 
some 
of 
the 
returns 
revealed 
"an 
intimate 
relationship between the health of the pupils while in the 
school and their early death subsequent to discharge." Of the 
31 pupils who had been discharged from the File Hills boarding 
school, 15 left in coffins. An additional seven died from 
within a few months to three years after returning home. In 
total, 75 per cent of those on the discharge roll were 
actually dead. When the File Hills ratios are applied to 
Bryce's sample of 1,53 7 children, it results in an increase 
from 24 per cent to 42 per cent as the percentage of those 
children who would die from their school experience. Assuming 
that these ratios were constant and projecting them throughout 
the system in 1907, when there were 3,755 students in the 
schools, would mean that some 1,614 of those children would 
die prematurely. And every year more children came into the 
schools and more became infected.203 
In 1909, the Departmental Secretary, J. McLean, in support of 
a second western trip made by Bryce, in association with Dr. 
J.D. Lafferty, collected information from an additional 13 
schools 
of 
the 
35 
Bryce 
had 
originally 
targeted. 
The 
statistics, again relating to children then in the school or 
children who had been discharged up to three years previously, 
matched the original findings. Twenty-three per cent of the 
children had died. The statistics for individual schools 
revealed 
higher 
percentages, 
particularly, 
as would 
be 
expected, for the schools that had been in existence for 
longer periods. At Keeseehousee school, opened only since 
1905, only one child had died. However, at Old Sun's, founded 
in 1890, and the Church of England boarding school on the 
Peigan reserve (1892) 65 and 64 children respectively had died 
giving those schools a death rate of 47 per cent. 204 Comments, 
which accompanied some of the reports, suggested that the 
figures could actually be higher. The Agent A. Mcmillan warned 
that the Round Lake report was not accurate as "Many other 
students [other than those identified in the report] have gone 
through this school ... and I fear that a full investigation 
would disclose that many of them have died."205 
McLean also received a fair number of comments from local 
officials on Bryce's report, itself, which on the whole 
substantiated the doctor's findings. For the Agent T. Eastwood 
Jackson "the mortality rate amongst children sent to those 
124 

establishments . . . has in the past been deplorably large" and, 
he added, it had "contributed not a little to cause the 
reluctance of the Indian parents to send their children to 
Boarding 
& Industrial 
schools." 206 Others understood 
the 
relationship between the condition of the schools and the 
spread of the disease. The inspector of Indian agencies in the 
Kenora region told McLean that 
Some schools which I have visited tolerate the most 
unwholesome basements. Dust is allowed to gather as 
if it were a harmless factor in the Health of the 
School. Putrid water lies hidden under the floors. 
Vegetables are allowed to pollute the air where 
children play in cold weather. Drains are not 
flushed frequently. Bathing of sick and well in the 
same tub and on the same day and in the same small 
room is permitted. Disinfectants 
are used 
too 
sparingly. There is room for a general awakening on 
the question of sanitary arrangements.207 
Some few were willing to defend the record of the schools. S. 
Swinford, an Inspector of Indian Agencies, attacked Bryce as 
a medical "faddist" and described the "jolly, healthy children 
fairly bubbling over with vitality" to be found in Manitoba 
boarding 
schools. 208 
One 
of 
the 
local 
Manitoba 
agents 
contradicted him suggesting that Bryce was "pretty near the 
mark." 209 David Laird was angered that Bryce's report had had 
such wide circulation and had led to "sensational headlines" 
that had brought the schools "into undeserved disrepute." The 
best he could do in their defense, however, was to tender his 
opinion that the health of the children had improved in recent 
years and that the sanitary condition of the schools was every 
bit as good as that of other public buildings in the region210 
- a contention that might not have been comforting to any of 
the civil servants working in those buildings who were 
familiar with Bryce's report. Father Hugonard at Qu'Appelle 
asserted that the success of Indian education was "something 
to be proud of." He, at least, was far from being ashamed of 
his school's record, in the period 1884 to 1905, 795 children 
had been pupils - 153 had died in the school or within two 
years after leaving. This meant that only 19 per cent of the 
children who had come to him had died under his care.211 
Despite the gravity of the situation, no full investigation 
was ever launched. Surveys were not undertaken in British 
Columbia or Ontario and the industrial schools did not produce 
statistical reports. It would be either a herculean or 
foolhardy task, if not both, to try to reconstruct statistical 
profiles for the schools from admission and discharge records 
which are not complete. What is available is qualitative 
evidence with limited statistical references. These, however, 
are suggestive, pointing in the same tragic direction as 
125 

Bryce's findings. The Principal of Calgary Industrial wrote 
that "a large percentage (much too large) of the pupils die 
either during their school life or soon afterwards."212 In the 
11-year history of the school, 10 of the 32 Blackfoot pupils 
had died. Scott noted, in 1910, that the latest medical report 
on High River by Bryce and Lafferty showed that nearly every 
child suffered from tuberculosis.213 Benson reported on the 
boarding school at Chapleau in northeastern Ontario where 
seven of the 31 children died in one three month period. 
Parents were so frightened that they were no longer willing to 
let their children go off to school.214 
Kuper Island Industrial school in British Columbia was an 
exception but not, however, 
from the doleful impact of 
tuberculosis. Fortuitously, the Principal, Father Lemmens, 
submitted a full survey in 1915 when the school was 25 years 
old and had just moved into new premises. Since 1907, his 
predecessor, Father Classen, had campaigned for a new school, 
with the support of the local doctor, 
as the original 
buildings were "both unsanitary and unhygienic to a high 
degree, as well as being impregnated with the germs of 
infectious diseases." The buildings were badly sited at the 
bottom of a steep hill so that there was no room for a 
playground. They were in an advanced state of decay. The 
heating 
system did not work effectively, 
"most of 
the 
buildings are so shaken up by the wind that the plaster comes 
down in patches" while "the boys main building has been 
sinking for more than six inches at one side." On the occasion 
of the opening of the new buildings, Principal Lemmens sent in 
the names of the students, 193 boys and 128 girls, who had 
been in the school since its founding. He was able to supply 
information on 165 of the boys and 99 of the girls. Of the 
total, 264, 107 were dead. The future may not have been all 
that bright either. He added as a final comment. "From a 
sanitary point of view our [new] buildings are far from 
perfect, but we always try to keep them scrupulously clean and 
well ventilated."215 
With the Bryce report in hand, comments from agents and 
remarks 
such as Blake's 
about manslaughter, 
it is not 
surprising that the negotiations of 1908-10 turned to the 
question of the tuberculosis epidemic. In fact, the report had 
carried forward recommendations for the reformulation of the 
school system. These urged the government to press on with 
residential education with the stress on reserve boarding 
schools, to place the management of the schools wholly in 
Departmental hands, relegating the churches to an advisory 
capacity, and to insure that 
... the health interests of the pupils be guarded 
by a proper medical inspection and that the local 
physicians be encouraged through the provision at 
126 

each school of fresh air methods in the care and 
treatment of cases of tuberculosis.216 
The contracts approached the problem in different ways with 
regulations aimed at improving the medical screening of 
children entering the schools and at ending overcrowding and 
revisions 
to 
the 
funding 
system 
to 
facilitate 
better 
maintenance and improvements in the vital areas of ventilation 
and sanitation. These may have been chosen for reasons of cost 
rather than efficacy. Bryce's recommendation of "fresh air 
methods" for each school was shorthand for sanatoria which 
would have been a very expensive approach to the problem 
necessitating considerable remodelling of buildings and high 
levels of medical staffing to care for the children. That may 
have been politically beyond reach, as well. The Catholic 
church was opposed to many of the reforms, Bryce's and those 
eventually included in the contracts. The schools, the church 
charged, were being "submitted to vexatious requirements by 
physicians, whose interests therein appear to have been in 
large 
measure 
confined 
to making 
unnecessary 
demands." 
Moreover, in what may have been a reference to Bryce, "it has 
been painfully evident that the Department's medical policy 
has been inspired by faddism."217 
There seemed to be on the part of most parties, however, a 
determination to fashion and use the contracts as a weapon in 
the struggle to eradicate the scourge of tuberculosis.218 
Unfortunately, that determination evaporated rapidly and the 
conditions in the schools went on unchanged and that is what 
drew the public ire of Dr. Bryce in 1922. 
When Bryce took up his pen in vitriolic exasperation and 
composed "The Story of a National Crime," he laid the blame 
for the continuing death of children squarely on the shoulders 
of "the dominating influence" Duncan Campbell Scott who had 
become "the reactionary" deputy superintendent general in 1913 
and prevented "even the simplest effective efforts to deal 
with the health problem of the Indians along modern scientific 
lines." "Owing to Scott's active opposition ... no action was 
taken by the Department to give effect to the recommendations 
made." Within a year, Scott shouldered Bryce out of the 
Department and replaced him with a man, Dr. 0.1. Grain, "since 
retired for good cause, quite inexperienced in dealing with 
Indian disease problems 
[which]... showed how little the 
Minister 
cared 
for 
the 
solution 
of 
the 
tuberculosis 
problem."219 Grain, indeed, was certainly not energetic in his 
new position. He spent much of his time during the War 
inspecting 
military 
recruits 
and 
neglecting 
his 
Indian 
responsibilities with the approval of the Department.220 
Though much of Bryce's narrative is the self-interested tale 
of his 
failed ambitions 
in the Department 
and of 
his 
127 

unsuccessful attempt to secure the appointment as the first 
deputy minister of the department of health when it was formed 
in 1919, the core of his charges were undeniable. Scott was in 
charge and nothing was accomplished. The evidence and the 
causes for that were close at hand. 
Obviously, as Scott himself admitted, the war forced the 
cancellation of building projects that were intended to 
improve the schools and the health regulations were still not, 
as he discovered when he reviewed the situation with senior 
officials in 1925, preventing the recruitment of infected 
children.221 
But 
economies 
in 
other 
areas, 
based 
on 
Departmental rather than Parliamentary decisions, 
further 
reduced the ability of the Department to care properly for the 
children. The budget for medical services was not protected 
from wartime measures of economy and it declined throughout 
the period. Bryce estimated that only $10,000 a year was put 
into 
the budget 
to discharge 
the government's 
medical 
responsibility to some 105,000 people spread across the 
country in 300 bands while in the City of Ottawa with a 
similar population, the Province spent three times that amount 
on tuberculosis patients alone. 222 In fact, the Department did 
not have doctors of its own in the field. It contracted 
medical services from local physicians so that Aboriginal 
communities and the school shared the practitioner's time and 
energy with the non-Aboriginal population. In this arrangement 
there was no guarantee that the health needs of the children 
would be met. 
Certainly, through the war years and after, the Department was 
progressively less capable of dealing with the white plague 
and it was completely unarmed in the face of the Spanish flu 
that struck the country in 1918-19. At the war's end an 
influenza pandemic killed some 20 million people around the 
world. 223 It was brought to Canada from Europe by repatriated 
soldiers and spread across the nation as they returned to 
their homes. It killed an estimated 30,000 Canadians, 4,000 of 
whom were Aboriginal people. 224 As with tuberculosis, 
the 
mortality rate was higher for Aboriginal than for non-
Aboriginal communities. Maureen Lux, an historian who has 
studied the epidemic among "Prairie Indians," argues that that 
rate was the result not "of a so-called "biological invasion' 
of non-immune people" but of "poor living conditions, poor 
nutrition and lack of access to medical care." 225 All of those 
factors pertained to the schools. 
The children in some schools were clearly defenceless. From 
Onion Lake Catholic boarding Agent W. Sibbald reported that in 
November 1918, 45 children, all but one, were "laid up with 
the sickness" along with eight of the 10 Sisters. They were in 
a "precarious condition" as "help was not obtainable either 
from the Indian or white inhabitants" nor from Dr. Eacret who 
128 

gave "the whole Institution as much attention as he could 
afford to give, he had so many other calls to answer." Finally 
four Sisters came to their assistance from St. Paul des Metis 
yet, in the course of the sickness, "seven Indian and two non-
treaty children died."226 
There had been no doctor at all to visit the sick at Red Deer 
Industrial School that November. The Principal, J. Woodsworth, 
who had been ill along with the students and staff, sent along 
word to the Departmental Secretary, J. McLean, that five 
children had perished - Georgina House, Jane Baptiste, Sarah 
Secsay, David Lightning and William Cardinal who had died of 
the sickness "as a runaway from the school." Conditions were 
"nothing less than criminal." "We have no isolation ward and 
no hospital equipment of any kind." At the height of the 
sickness, without medical attention, "The dead, the dying, the 
sick and convalescent, were all together" in the same room. 
You must, he pleaded, "put this school in shape to fulfil its 
function as an educational institution. At present it is a 
disgrace." 
It was not the only disgrace. As no one had recovered 
sufficiently to bury the children in the school cemetery, the 
Red Deer undertaker had to be summoned. Woodsworth assured 
McLean, however, that he had kept a watchful eye on expenses. 
"I directed the undertaker to be as careful as possible in his 
charge, so he gave them a burial as near as possible to that 
of a pauper. They are buried two in a grave."227 
There 
was one further disgrace. In the year that the flu 
struck down so many of the Department's wards in the schools 
and the communities, Scott decided to dispense with the 
position of Medical Inspector - "for reasons of economy."228 
The evidence which most effectively supports Bryce's Story, 
his charge "that there had been a criminal disregard for ... 
the welfare of the Indian wards of the nation, " 229 resides in 
documents in Departmental files that Bryce never saw. These 
reports, some gathered on Scott's initiative, not only chart 
the persistence of all the conditions that were known to 
undermine the health of the children but reveal, in some 
cases, the neglect, the lack of love, for those suffering and 
dying in the careless arms of school authorities.230 
It was not only the schools but schooling, the standard of 
care and the rhythm of life, that led the children down 
Bryce's "trail of disease and death."231 A study undertaken 
jointly by the prestigious Bureau of American Ethnology and 
the Office of Indian Affairs of Tuberculosis Among Certain 
Indian Tribes of the United States, published 
in 1909, 
asserted that the cause of the disease among children in non-
reservation schools 
129 

is the depressing effect on the newly arrived 
child, of a radically different environment. A 
child taken from a reservation where it has become 
accustomed to almost unrestricted freedom of will 
and motion, is subjected to discipline for at least 
four-fifths of its waking hours. In addition, there 
are the exertion of studying in a strange language, 
the change of associations, the homesickness, the 
lack of sufficient diversified exercise out of 
doors, 
and 
(to 
it) 
unusual 
food. 
All 
these 
influences 
can not but have a depressing 
and 
physically exhausting effect, which makes the pupil 
an easier prey to consumption. 
The mental condition of a victim of tuberculosis, as well as 
the physical surroundings, was a critical factor influencing 
the course of the disease. Here again, the study suggested, 
the pupil, far from home and the comfort of parental sympathy, 
was at a disadvantage. Often "the patient utterly gives up the 
fight against the disease as soon as he fully understands that 
he is infected. This is particularly true of the young . . . .1,232 
Catholic 
schools 
in Canada certainly 
substantiated 
that 
observation. Duncan Campbell Scott, though he felt it "a shame 
to have to draw invidious comparisons between the religious 
bodies," held, and there was a fair deal of evidence on his 
side, that Catholic schools were in better physical condition 
than Protestant and especially Anglican ones. 233 While that was 
not disputed by the Inspector of Indian Agencies in British 
Columbia, W. Ditchburn, he argued in his report on Catholic 
schools in 1920 that the mode of conducting the school was an 
equally important factor in the children's health. He had 
witnessed "apparently robust children weaken shortly after 
admission and eventually become so sick that they have to be 
sent home on sick leave." This could "be accounted for by any 
of the following reasons and possibly all of them" 
(A) Lack of proper rest occasioned by early rising 
to attend religious services. (B) Manual labour 
performed by the students to severe for them. (C) 
Lack of nourishing food containing the necessary 
fats to build up the body. Remedy: - In Catholic 
schools children should be allowed to remain in bed 
until at least 6:30 A.M. in the summer months and 
7:00 A.M. in the winter and the hours for early 
religious service and study should be advanced. As 
regards food I am of the opinion that a dietary 
should be determined upon by the Department after 
consultation with authorities on this subject and 
all residential schools should be forced to provide 
the same.234 
130 

Both of these strands of disease etiology, the physical 
context of the children's life at school and the psychological 
impact of schooling, were brought together powerfully for the 
Department by Dr. F.A. Corbett. The impact of his reports came 
not from another round of statistics but from descriptions of 
the children which seemed to shock even the doctor, himself. 
Corbett was a Regina physician Scott commissioned, in 1920 and 
again in 1922 , 235 to survey the western boarding schools - the 
same ground that Bryce had covered in 1907 and 1909. He found 
that little had changed. At Ermineskins school, Hobbema, 50 
per cent of the children were infected and the school 
overcrowded. Old Sun's was the Church of England school on the 
Blackfoot reserve. Bryce had condemned it in 1907 and it still 
deserved that fate. The buildings were "far short of ideal," 
the "dormitories are overcrowded" and 
there was "no proper 
playroom" or "infirmary in the building." The ventilation was 
poor as "the ceilings are low" and the children did not have 
access to the balconies "which constitutes a very serious 
defect ... for an abundance of fresh air is essential for the 
health of all children." 
Those conditions had left their indelible and mortal mark on 
the children who Corbett found to be "below par in health and 
appearance." Seventy per cent of them were infected. They had 
"enlarged 
lymphatic 
glands, 
many 
with 
scrofulous 
sores 
requiring prompt medical attention." "One little girl", Emma 
Big Old Man, had "a large tuberculous abscess of the neck and 
jaw", 
another, 
Mary 
Red 
Morning, 
"is 
suffering 
from 
tuberculous ulcers of the chest and neck and requires equally 
urgent treatment." A boy, William Calfrobe, had consumption 
"and should not be in the school, as he is a danger to the 
other pupils as well as in a precarious state of health 
himself." 
But it was the discovery that 60 per cent of the children had 
"scabies or itch ... in an aggravated form" which most upset 
Corbett for this was unnecessary and a sign of gross neglect. 
This skin infection caused by the itch mite and usually found 
amongst 
children 
living 
in 
overcrowded 
and 
unhygienic 
conditions had "been neglected or unrecognized and had plainly 
gone on for months." 
The hands and arms, and in fact the whole bodies of 
many of the children being covered with crusts and 
sores from this disgusting disease. Two of the 
girls [Jean Spotted One and Elsie Many Goods], have 
sores on the back of their heads fully three inches 
across and heaped up with crusts nearly a half inch 
deep. The condition requires active treatment.... 
The remedy was simple cleanliness. Scabies could be eradicated 
131 

"in a short time with efficient treatment." The childrens' 
clothing and bedding and "all articles coming into contact 
with the affected parts will require sterilization by boiling 
or being well washed with antiseptic." 
As bad as the situation was at old Sun's, it was worse at the 
Sarcee boarding school outside Calgary, another Anglican 
establishment. 
The school was 
"neither clean, 
tidy nor 
sanitary." 
There were 33 pupils "much below even a passable 
standard 
of health." 
"All but 
four were 
infected 
with 
tuberculosis, were in "a condition bad in the extreme" and 
were "fighting a losing battle with this disease." 
Corbett 
expected that their health would deteriorate further through 
the winter when the children were "kept more closely housed." 
On entering the classroom, he found a lesson in progress - 16 
of the children had "suppurating glands or open ulcers and 
many sit at their desks with unsightly bandages around their 
necks to cover up their large swellings and foul sores." They 
might not live for long but it seemed that the Principal was 
determined that slates and chalk in hand, they would die on 
the road to civilization. In the infirmary Corbett found a 
child who did not have much farther to travel. 
The condition of one little girl found in the 
infirmary is pitiable indeed. She lies curled up in 
a bed that is filthy, in a room that is untidy, 
dirty and dilapidated, in the northwest corner of 
the building with no provision of balcony, sunshine 
or fresh air. Both sides of her neck and chest are 
swollen and five foul ulcers are discovered when we 
lift the bandages. This gives her pain, and her 
tears from her fear of being touched, intensifies 
the picture of her misery.236 
Two years later Corbett made another tour for the Department. 
This time he was not a passive observer but the agent of a 
remarkable course of treatment. In January, 1922 Dr. A.H. 
Kennedy, who had done some work for the Department in the two 
boarding schools on the Blood reserve, proposed that a surgeon 
from Calgary be engaged to remove the tonsils, the suspected 
source of infection, from 68 children who showed signs of 
tuberculosis. He could accomplish the task within two or three 
days and for good measure, "while the children are under 
anaesthetic, the teeth that require extracting [would] be 
taken out." The Indian commissioner thought that the 
idea of asking the Department to send "in a Doctor to remove 
the tonsils and adenoids of 60% of the pupils ... is unusual 
to say the least". 237 He was not aware, perhaps, that the 
procedure had previously been approved and carried out at the 
Kamloops Industrial school.238 
It was approved again. Corbett took up the task in the spring. 
132 

At Crowfoot, the Blackfoot school at Cluny, at Old Sun's, 
where "the sanitary conditions are no better than last year," 
at Sarcee, where thanks to the work of a Dr. Murray the health 
of the children had improved but the building still lacked the 
"most essential requirements" for good health, at Hobbema and 
on to St. Albert's in Edmonton, children were laid out on 
tables and he removed glands, teeth, adenoids and tonsils, at 
times with parental consent, but often without. He completed 
60 multiple operations saving the Department, the commissioner 
estimated, between $1,000 and $1,500 by doing the operations 
in the schools rather than in hospitals.239 
Corbett's reports revealed one final dynamic of the situation 
-it did not have to be quite so deplorable. Even within the 
budgetary limits imposed on the Department, throughout the 
industrial school era, by a Parliament whose priorities were 
placed elsewhere and despite the overwhelming force of the 
plague which was sure to find its way into the schools to some 
degree given the rudimentary diagnostic techniques available 
in this period, greater and more effective care could have 
been 
taken 
of 
the 
children. 
Church 
and 
Departmental 
determination and soap, fresh air, sunlight and Christian love 
could work against the tide of suffering. When he visited 
Crowfoot Catholic boarding school which had been severely 
criticized by both Dr. J.D. Lafferty and Scott in 1909 , 240 the 
children Corbett encountered were, in the main, "fully up to 
a high standard of health and appearance." They were "plainly 
well fed and clothed, clean and wholesome standing erect and 
soldierly, strong and vigorous and would compare well with the 
children of any school." As he travelled through the system, 
there 
were 
other 
examples 
speaking 
of 
the efforts 
of 
Principals and their staffs.241 
The Department too had it within its power to make a greater 
effort, if not through improved funding than through muscle -
by insisting its own officials carry out inspections and that 
the churches follow regulations directed to the care of the 
children. In only one case did it use the lever the contracts 
placed in its hands, its right to cancel grants and take 
children out of a school, to move a Principal into compliance. 
In 1912, St. Cyprians, the Church of England school on the 
Peigan reserve, was "not being conducted according to the 
contract.... the whole standard of the institution is very 
much below what the Department has a right to expect." Scott 
had discovered when he visited the western schools that the 
Principals of both St. Cyprians and Old Sun's did not even 
have copies of the contracts and were, therefore, "ignorant to 
a certain extent of their responsibilities." Over the next two 
years the Department brought pressure to bear on the school 
staff and church officials, threatening that "unless the terms 
of the contracts are lived up to" it would be "compelled to 
withhold the grant." In 1914, the school received a good 
133 

report and so the grant was continued. Almost immediately, it 
slid back and the Department returned to threats of closure 
without result. In 1925, it was still well below par. W. 
Graham, the Indian Commissioner, commented to Ottawa 
just imagine at the present day a school having the 
windows nailed down and no means of ventilating the 
dormitories. It is almost criminal and it shows the 
class of men we have in charge of that institution 
.... The Indians have good grounds for complaint 
here and some decisive action should be taken by 
the Department to remedy this state of affairs at 
once.242 
The Department did not have to rely on its imagination - there 
were too many on-going St. Cyprians for that to be necessary. 
And in this case too, nothing was done. The Departmental watch 
dog was far from vigilant; it rarely barked and as at St. 
Cyprians, to say nothing of Old Sun's or so many other schools 
over which Bryce, Paget, Corbett, local doctors and even 
senior Departmental officials had shaken their heads, 243 it 
certainly did not bite. The Orders in Council of 1892 and 1894 
and the contracts of 1911 were in fact administrative fictions 
- powers, authorities and agreements that did not facilitate 
effective, efficient, or even what seemed the most constant 
goal, economical management. 
The reality was that from the moment the school system was 
launched in the 1880s and 1890s, it drifted without a firm 
hand, without concerted intervention. And this was despite the 
knowledge 
that 
many 
children 
were 
held 
in 
dangerous 
circumstances and that the death rate was not only of tragic 
proportions but was, in addition, undercutting the whole 
purpose and 
strategy of the system - many, many children, 
perhaps as high as 50 per cent according to the Department's 
estimate would not "attain maturity and be able to exercise 
any civilizing influence" in their communities.244 
A significant 
cause of this lay with personnel 
in the 
Department and in the churches involved directly in the 
management of the system: with such as the careless "class of 
men" and women at places like St. Cyprians, with officials 
like W. Graham who admitted on the receipt of Corbett's 
reports that he was ignorant of the condition of the schools 
in an area for which he held primary responsibility245 , with 
senior clerics who thought 
"the requirement of isolated 
hospital accommodation . . . excessive" 246 and whose reaction to 
Corbett's report on Old Sun's was to suggest that it was " 
somewhat overemphasized" 247 and, of course, with Bryce's bete 
noir, Scott, whose biographer, Brian Titley, puts much of the 
system's 
crisis 
down 
to 
the 
deputy 
superintendent's 
"economizing attitude."248 
134 

These many men and women failed to act decisively in the face 
of the suffering and death of so many children. But they were 
joined in complicity and insensitivity by non-Aboriginal 
society as a whole. The devastation that the white plague 
brought to the children in the schools and through their 
deaths 
to 
their parents 
and 
communities 
drew 
out 
the 
fundamental contradiction between the persistent cruelty of 
the system and the discourse of duty - of the "sacred trust 
with which Providence has invested the country in the charge 
of and care for the aborigines committed to it." 249 It was a 
contradiction that the country was not prepared to face. The 
editor of Saturday Night seemed to sense that from the very 
moment of the publication of the Bryce report: 
His report is printed, many people will scan the 
title on the cover, some will open it, a few will 
read it and so the thing will drift along another 
year. And so with the next year and the year after. 
So will be the course of events ... unless public 
opinion takes the question up and forces it to the 
front. Then Parliament will show a quick interest, 
pigeon holes will give up their dusty contents, 
medical officers will have a wealth of suggestions 
and the scandalous procession of Indian children to 
school and on to the cemetery may possibly be 
stopped.250 
Of course, none of those conditions were fulfilled. There was 
no "public opinion," Parliament showed no interest quick or 
otherwise and the children continued to go to the schools and 
to the schools' cemeteries. By 1907, and certainly by 1923, 
the issue of Aboriginal people had long since been swept into 
the darker reaches of national consciousness. The deaths, and 
the condition of the schools pricked no collective conscience, 
wrought no revolution in policy or even any significant 
reformulation. Sir George Murray's comment in 1830 about the 
old Imperial policy was just as true nearly one century later 
This federal policy "was persisted in .... as a matter of 
routine, than upon any considered grounds of preference."251 
There 
was 
no 
reconsideration, 
no 
second 
thoughts, 
no 
questioning 
of 
the 
assumptions 
of 
assimilation 
or 
of 
residential schools as an appropriate method of achieving that 
end. There appeared to be no thought or reaction at all. 
The "routine" of residential education persisted. Unlike so 
many children, 
it survived the tubercular infection. It 
survived, as well, the fact that throughout the industrial 
school era the parenting presumption of the Department and the 
churches, the cornerstone of the school system, was a forlorn 
hypocrisy. The vision of life and learning in the "circle of 
civilized conditions" had not become a reality. The promise 
that children would receive the "care of a mother" 252 and an 
135 

education that would elevate the child "to a status equal to 
that of his white brother" 253 remained unfulfilled. As a second 
review of this period will demonstrate, the children were not 
cherished or nurtured, not adequately clothed or fed or even 
educated according to the system's curriculum. Some sense of 
that is given by the Rev. A. Lett who became the Principal of 
St. George's Residential school in 1923 and found on arrival 
in Lytton that 
The Children were lean and anaemic and T.B. glands 
were running in many cases. Energy was at its 
lowest ebb. Five minutes leap frog was the most I 
could get out of the boys at once. In examining the 
Bill of Fare I found that here lay a great deal of 
the trouble in the health and welfare of the 
children. They were not getting enough to eat. . . ,254 
In 1923 that was the system's history. It was also its future. 
After Bryce, the circle, closed and silent, 
ignored by 
Parliament and impervious both to the occasional critique from 
without 
and 
to 
the 
constant 
evidence 
of 
neglect 
and 
mistreatment of children coming from local officials, carried 
those children helplessly forward for another two decades. Not 
until the middle of the next war, 
in which Aboriginal 
soldiers, some of them young men from residential schools, 
again played 
a heroic 
role, 
would 
the preference 
for 
residential schools begin to be eroded. 
136 

1. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3933, File 117657-1A, MR C 10164, To D.C. 
Scott from Rev. J. Guy, 16 May, 1922. 
2. P.H. Bryce, The Story of a National Crime Being an Appeal 
for Justice to the Indians of Canada (Ottawa, James Hope & 
Sons, Limited, 1922), page 14. 
3. D.C. Scott "Indian Affairs 1867-1912" in A. Shortt ed., 
Canada and its Provinces (Toronto, University of Edinburgh 
Press, 1913), Vol. 7, page 615. 
4. G.J. Wherrit, The Miracle of Empty Beds: A History of 
Tuberculosis in Canada (Toronto, University of Toronto Press, 
1977), pages 11-13. 
5. P.H. Bryce, The Story of a National Crime, page 14. 
6. Statutes of Canada, 1868, c.42 (31 Vict). 
7. It is impossible to determine the number of Aboriginal 
children who attended the schools over the life of the system. 
Estimates have been given. T. Lascelles, O.M.I, in "Indian 
Residential Schools" in the Canadian Catholic Review, May 
1992, suggests that less than one in six attended. James 
Redford in his study - "Attendance at Indian Residential 
Schools in British Columbia, 1890-1920" in B.C. Studies, 
Number 44, Winter 1979-80, concluded that only 17.6% of 
children aged 6 to 15 attended residential schools in British 
Columbia in 1901 and that the number rose to 22.3% in 1920. 
J.R. Miller in "Owen Glendower, Hotspur and Canadian Indian 
Policy, Ethnohistory, 37, no. 4, 1990, concluded that "the 
system never reached more than a minority of young Indians and 
Inuit." In fact, the extant school records for the system as 
a whole are not complete enough to allow useful calculations 
to be made. Given that fact, this text relies upon enrolment 
lists found in N.A.C. RG 10 Files, INAC Files and the Tabular 
Statements of the Annual Reports. These, however, give only 
total enrolments per year and cannot be used to determine the 
number of children who had a residential school experience. 
Any figures including the minorities mentioned in Lascelles, 
Redford and Miller, are dangerously misleading unless they are 
fully contextualized. An important part of that context is the 
realization that the impact of the system was felt not only by 
the children who attended the schools but by their families 
and communities who were deprived of their children and had to 
137 

deal subsequently with children who returned damaged from the 
schools. In that sense, communities, parents and, indeed 
children who would be born to the ex-students of 
the 
residential schools, were all enrolled. 
8. See Appendix 1. 
9. Those were: Kuper Island, Kootenay and Kamloops in British 
Columbia and Battleford, Qu'Appelle and High River in the 
Northwest. 
10. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-7-1, MR C 9696, 
Memorandum to the Hon. Charles Stewart, 31 October, 1927. 
11. J. W. Grant, The Moon of Wintertime: Missionaries and 
Indians 
of 
Canada 
in 
Encounters 
since 
1534 
(Toronto, 
University of Toronto Press, 1984) pages 98-105. 
12. As quoted in J.S. Milloy, The Plains Cree ( Winnipeg, 
University of Manitoba Press, 1988), page 104. 
13. J.W. Grant, The Moon of Wintertime, page 99. 
14. W. Stevenson, "The Red River Indian Mission School and 
John West's "Little Charges', 1820-1833" in Native Studies 
Review, Vol. 4, Nos. 1 & 2, 1988. 
15. J.S. Milloy, The Plains Cree, page 109. 
16. J.L. Taylor "Canada's Northwest Indian Policy in the 
1870s: Traditional Premises amd Necessary Innovations" in R. 
Price 
ed., 
The 
Spirit 
of 
the Alberta 
Indian 
Treaties 
(Montreal, Institute for Research on Public Policy, 1980). 
17. A. Morris, The Treaties of Canada, pages 354 and 371. 
18. H. Dempsey, Big Bear (Lincoln, University of Nebraska 
Press, 1984), pages 71-73. 
19. The Davin Report. 
20. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-2, MR C 10118, Report 
of a Committee of the Privy Council Approved by the Governor 
in Council, 13 July, 1883. 
21. N.A. C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-2, MR C 10118, To Sir 
John A. Macdonald from the Archbishop of Quebec, February, 
1883 . 
22. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-2, MR C 10118, To Sir 
John A. Macdonald from L. Vankoughnet, 11 June, 1883. 
138 

23. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422, MR C 10118, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from J. McDougall, 2 8 
October, 1883. 
24. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from A. Sutherland, 
30 July, 1883. 
25. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol.6436, File 878-1 (1-3), MR C 8762, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
Benson, 23 October, 1907. 
26. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422, MR C 10118, To Father 
Lacombe from E. Dewdney, 23 July, 1883. See for a history of 
the school: W. Wasylow, History of Battleford Industrial 
School for Indians, Unpublished Thesis, M.Ed., University of 
Saskatchewan, 1972. 
27. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3927, File 116836-1A, MR C 10162, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from E. Dewdney, 14 
December, 1885. 
28. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3924, File 116823, MR C 10162, To Sir 
John A. Macdonald from L. Vankoughnet, 15 March, 1886. 
29. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3924, File 116823, MR C 10162, see: To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from E. Wilson, 25 
June 1887, To Minister of the Interior from E. Wilson, 20 
October, 1887 and To Deputy Superintendent General of Indian 
Affairs from E. Wilson n.d., 1888. 
30. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3952, File 134858, MR C 10166, To Indian 
Commissioner from Rev. E. Grouard, 16 December, 1895. 
31. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3694, File 14676, MR C 10121, To J. 
Powell from L. Vankoughnet, 2 August, 1884 and To J. Powell 
from L. Vankoughnet, 29 November, 1884. 
32. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3743, 
File 30614, MR 10132, 
To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from J. Powell, 26 
November, 1886, Vol. 3694, File 14676, MR C 10121, To E. 
Dewdney from L. Vankoughnet, 8 July, 1890 and To Sir John A. 
Macdonald 
from D. Jennings, 
20 June, 
1885, J. Barman, 
"Separate and Unequal: Indian and White Girls at All Hallows 
School, 1884-1920" in J. Barman, Y. Hebert and D. McCaskill, 
eds., 
Indian Education in Canada, Volume 1: The Legacy 
(Vancouver, University of British Columbia Press, 1986), page 
111 and INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 51, "Education". 
33. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3853, File 77025. To ? M.P. from Mrs. S. 
Burns, 13 February, 1892, To A.W. Powell from M.J. Cartmell, 
23 March, 1892 and To T. Mayne Daly from L. VAnkoughnet, 24 
139 

April, 1893. 
34. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6467, File 889-1 (1-2), MR C 8785, To T. 
Mayne Daly from Chiefs of Squamish, Sechelt 
. . . Tribes, 
December, 1894, Memorandum for the Minister from Martin 
Benson, 9 March, 1897 
and To C. Sifton from Bishop of Westminster, 26 Novembr, 1898. 
35. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6426, File 875-1-2-3-5, MR C 8756, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from Rev. A. Hall, 18 
June 1894, To A. Vowell from Elizabeth Hall, September, 1894, 
To Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from A. 
Vowell, 
27 
December 
1895 
and 
To 
Vowell 
from 
Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 23 May, 1895. 
36. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3764, File 32725-1, Mr C 10134, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 
19 April, 1887. 
37. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3764, File 32725-1, MR C 10134, To E. 
Dewdney from Bishop of Rupert's Land, 24 March, 1890. 
38. Annual Report 1908, Tabular Statements. Is it merely a 
statistical coincidence that the list reveals that there were 
then 7 Catholic industrial schools and 7 Anglican ones across 
the country? 
39. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Sir J.J. 
Abbott from Members of the Baptist Ministerial Association of 
Toronto, 27 May, 1892. 
40. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6422, File 869-1 (1-3), MR C 8754, To 
Thomas Earle M.P. from E. Dewdney, 10 March, 1890, Vol. 6267, 
File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, To Superintendent General of 
Indian Affairs from T. Davis M.P. 8 August, 1903 and Vol. 
6467, File 889-1 (1-2), MR C 8785, To C. Corbould Q.C. M.P. 
from T. Mayne Daly, 21 December, 1894. 
41. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3844, File 73320, MR C 10148, To T. 
Mayne Daly from D. H. Macdowall M.P., 6 July, 1894. 
42. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3866, File 87071-1, MR C 10153, 
Memorandum for the Information of the Minister from H. Reed 
and To Bishop of Calgary, 12 May, 1894. 
43. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3799, File 48432-1, MR C 10139, To Sir 
John A. Macdonald from L. Vankoughnet, 7 July, 1887. 
44. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3799, File 48432-1, MR C 10139, To A. 
Vowell from E. Dewdney and To J.A. Macrae from E. Dewdney, 
June 1890. 
140 

45. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6436, File 878-1 (1-3), MR C 8762, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from Martin 
Benson, 23 October, 1907. 
46. See for example: N.A.C. Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 
8656, Petition to Superintendent General of Indian Affairs 
from The Pas Band 8 August, 1903 and Vol. 6467, File 889-1 (1-
2) , MR C 8785, 
Petition to T. Mayne Daly from the Squamish, 1894. 
47. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6459, File 887-1 (1-2), MR C 8779, To 
Hon. Clifford Sifton from Sechelt Band, 25 December, 1903. 
48. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6459, File 887-1 (1-2), MR C 8779, To 
Deputy Superintendent General from Martin Benson, 10 February, 
1904 . 
49. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6459, File 887-1 (1-2), MR C 8779, To 
Hon. Clifford Sifton from the Sechelt Band, 25 December, 1903. 
50. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6459, File 887-1 (1-2), MR C 8779, To 
Clifford Sifton from Bishop of New Westminster, 25 March, 
1904. 
51. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6459, File 887-1 (1-2), MR C 8779, To 
Deputy Superintendent General from M. Benson, 28 March, 1904, 
To Deputy Superintendent General from D.C. Scott, 10 May, 
1904. 
52. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6459, File 887-1 (1-2), MR C 8779, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
Benson, 19 February, 1905 and To R. McDonald from F. Pedley, 
3 March, 1905. 
53. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6459, File 887-1 (1-2), MR C 8779, To A. 
Vowell from J. McLean, 23 June, 1907. 
54. D. Leighton, "A Victorian Civil Servant at Work: Lawrence 
Vankoughnet and the Canadian Indian Department, 1874-1893" in 
L. Getty and A. Lussier eds., As Long as the Sun Shines and 
the Water Flows (Vancouver, University of British Columbia 
Press, 1983), page 105. 
55. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3924, File 116823, To Sir John A. 
Macdonald from L. Vankoughnet, 10 December, 1885 and To Sir 
John A. Macdonald from L. Vankoughnet, 15 March, 1886. 
56. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Reverend 
and Dear Sirs from F. Oliver, 21 March, 1908. 
57. N.A.C. RG 10, Vol. 3674, File 11422-4, MR C 10118, To 
Principal of Qu'Appelle from Deputy Superintendent General of 
141 

Indian Affairs, April, 1891. 
58. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3933, File 117657-1, MR C 10164, 
Memorandum for the Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 
17 September, 1891. 
59. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3927, File 116836-1A, MR C 10162, To E. 
Dewdney from L. Vankoughnet, 2 June, 1890. 
60. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3926, File 116836-1, MR C 10162, To E. 
Dewdney from L. Vankoughnet, 10 June 1989. 
61. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3799, File 48432-1, MR C 10139, To L. 
Vankoughnet from E. Dewdney, 15 September, 1891, Vol. 3919, 
File 116751-1, MR C 10161, To E. Dewdney from L. Vankoughnet, 
28 March, 1890 and Vol. 3674, File 11422-4, MR C 10118, To E. 
Dewdney from Rev. J. Hugonard, 5 May, 1891. 
62. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-5, MR C 10118, 
Memorandum for the Deputy Minister, 11 September, 1891. 
63. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3918, File 116659-1, MR C 10161, To A. 
Vowell from L. Vankoughnet, 6 February, 1893 and Vol. 3853, 
File 77025, MR C 10150, To T. Mayne Daly from L. Vankoughnet, 
24 April, 1893 . 
64. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3844, File 72929, MR C 10148, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 3 
December, 1891. 
65. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3866, File 87071, MR C 10153, To Bishop 
of Calgary from Deputy Superintendent General of Indian 
Affairs, 18 August, 1892. 
66. INAC File 600-1, Vol. 2., Report of the Honourable the 
Privy Council, approved by the Governor General in Council, on 
the 22nd October, 1892. 
67. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. File 116836-1A, MR C 10162, To E. 
Dewdney from L Vankoughnet, 2 June 1890. 
68. INAC File 600-1, Vol. 2., Report of the Committee of the 
Privy Council ... 22 October, 1892. 
69. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Reverend 
and Dear Sirs from F. Oliver, 21 March, 1908. 
70. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3930, File 117377-1A, MR C 10163, To 
Indian Commissioner from Chair, Board of Management, 1893 and 
To T. Mayne Daly from L. Vankoughnet, 23 May, 1893. 
142 

71. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6001 File 1-1-1 (1), MR C 8134, Order in 
Council no. P.C. 792, 27 March, 1893. 
72. INAC File 600-1, Vol. 2., Report of the Committee of the 
Honourable the Privy Council ... 22 October, 1892. 
73. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3922, File 118820-1, MR C 10162, To 
Archdeacon J.A. Mackay from H. Reed, 1 March, 1895, Vol. 3938, 
File 121607, MR C 10164, To Superintendent General of Indian 
Affairs from H. Reed, 1894, Draft, Vol. 3836, File 68557, MR 
C 10146, To H. Reed from L. Vankoughnet, 15 August, 1891, To 
E. Dewdney from the Bishop of Ruperts Land, 7 August, 1891, 
Vol. 6032, File 150-40A, MR C 8149, Regulations Relating to 
the Education of Indian Children, 1894. 
74. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6032, 
File 150-40A, MR C 8149, 
Regulations Relating to the Education of Indian Children, 
1894 . 
75. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6032, 
File 150-40A, MR C 8149, 
Regulations Relating to the Education of Indian Children, 
1894 . 
76. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3938, File 121607, Mr C 10164, To A. 
Forget from Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 
18 January, 1895. 
77. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3922, File 116820-1, MR C 10162, To 
Archdeacon J. A. Mackay, from H. Reed, 1 March, 1895. 
78. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422, MR C 10118, To Sir 
John A. Macdonald from L. Vankoughnet, 20 July, 1884. 
79. INAC File 600-1, Vol. 2., Report of the Committee of the 
Honourable the Privy Council ... 22nd October, 1892. 
80. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6210, File 46901 (1-3), MR C 7941, To J. 
Lawlor from Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 
8 November, 1894. 
81. INAC File 600-1, Vol. 2, Report of the Committee of the 
Honourable the Privy Council ... 22nd October, 1892. 
82. The whole Regina episode is outlined in E. B. Titley, A 
Narrow Vision: Duncan Campbell Scott and the Administration of 
Indian Affairs in Canada (Vancouver, University of British 
Columbia Press, 1986), pages 80-82. 
83. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3927, File 116836-1A, MR C 10163, 
Memorandum for the Deputy Superintendent General of Indian 
Affairs from D.C. Scott, 29 April, 1904. 
143 

84. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3927, File 1156836-1A, MR C 10162, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from 
Martin 
Benson, 19 March, 1904. 
85. E.B. Titley, Narrow Vision, page 81. 
86. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from Auditor General, 
7 December, 1904. 
87. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3921, MR C 10161, To Secretary from S. 
Swinford, 26 May, 1913. 
88. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. Benson, 16 
December, 1904. 
89. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3921, File 116818-1B, MR C 10161, To 
Secretary of Indian Affairs from Rev. T. Ferrier, 21 August, 
1913 and Vol. 3922, File 116820-1, MR C 10162, To Secretary of 
Indian Affairs from E. Mattheson, 29 January, 1912. 
90. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6205, File 468-1 (1-3), MR C 7937, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from W. Shepard, 21 
November, 1902. 
91. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3921, File 116818-,IB MR C 10161, To 
Secretary of Indian Affairs from Rev. T. Ferrier, 21 August, 
1913 . 
92. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6730, File 160-2 (1-3), MR C 8092, 
Memorandum for the Minister from F. Pedley, 13 September, 
1910 . 
93. 
D.J. 
Hall, 
"Clifford 
Sifton 
and 
Canadian 
Indian 
Administration 1896-1905, page 121. 
94. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, Statement 
of industrial Schools Showing the Number of Pupils Provided 
for, the Accomodation and the Attendance at each School. This 
includes a note of the per capita rate at each school. 
95. 
D.J. 
Hall, 
"Clifford 
Sifton 
and 
Canadian 
Indian 
Administration 1896-1905", page 122. 
96. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6431, File 877-1 (1-2,4) MR C 8759, To 
Deputy Superintnedent General from M. Benson, 17 November, 
1903 . 
97. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6472, File 905-1 (1-2) MR C 8788-9, 
Bishop of Mackenzie from J. McLean, 21 November, 1901. 
144 

98. These figures have been generated from calculations based 
on figures in the Tabular Statements of the Annual Reports. 
99. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. Benson, 16 
December, 1904. 
100. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3933, File 117657-1, 
MR C 10164, To Rev. T. Ferrier from J. McLean, 14 November, 
1906. 
101. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3933, File 117657-1A, MR C 10164, To A. 
Meighen from D.C. Scott, 11 December, 1919. 
102. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3929, File 117056-1, MR C 10163, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affaris from J. Seesequasis, 
20 May, 1910. 
103. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3930, File 117377-1A, To Bishop of 
Rupert's Land from H. Reed, 31 May, 1893. 
104. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6205, File 468-1 (1-3) MR C 7937, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
Benson, 26 November, 1902. 
105. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3919, File 116751-1A, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. Benson, 23 
June, 1903. As well as his own opinions, Benson forwarded 
those of others in the Department including David Laird's. 
106. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3990, File 175581, MR C 10169, To 
Indian Commissioner, Regina, from J. Markle, 19 March, 1896. 
107. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3924, File 116823, MR C 10162, To J. 
McLean from Bishop [C.E.], 31 March, 1910. 
108. See, for example, comments from various Principals: 
N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3927, File 116836-1A, MR C 10162, To 
Superintendent 
General 
of 
Indian Affairs 
from 
from 
J. 
Sinclair, n.d. 1902, Vol. 3866, File 87071-1, MR C 10153, To 
J, McLean from G. Hogbin, July, 1901, and for Departmental 
acknowledgement - Vol. 6337, File 663-1, MR C 8694, To Bishop 
Pascal from J. McKenna, 9 March, 1900. 
109. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3919, File 11675-1, MR C 10161, To D. 
Laird from J. P. Magnan, O.M.I. 10 December, 1902 and File 
11675-1A, To F. Pedley from D. Laird, 30 April, 1903. 
110. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3922, File 116820-1A, MR C 10162, To F. 
Pedley from D.C. Scott, 19 February, 1912. 
145 

111. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3930, File 117377-1A, MR C 10163, To 
Bishop of Rupert's Land from H. Reed, 31 May, 1893. 
112. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3927, File 116836-1A, MR C 10162, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from R. MacKay and J. 
Menzies, 11 March, 1904. 
113. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, Memorandum 
for the Minister from M. Benson, 3 July, 1897. 
114. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3933, File 117657-1, MR C 10164, To 
Assistant Deputy Superintnedent General of Indian Affairs from 
Agent on the Blood Reserve [name not given], 28 July, 1917. 
115. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3927, File 116836-1A, MR C 10163, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from R. MacKay and J. 
Menzies, 11 March, 1904. 
116. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4041, File 334503, MR C 10178, To F. 
Pedley from F.H. Paget, 25 November, 1908. 
117. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3818, File 57799, MR C 10143, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 14 May 
1889 . 
See also: Vol. 3947, File 123764, MR C 10166, To E. Dewdney 
from L. Vankoughnet, 13 April, 1892, Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR 
C 10113, To H. Reed from E. McColl, 21 March 1884, 21 March, 
1884, Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Reverend and Dear 
Sirs from F. Oliver, 21 March, 1908 and Vol. 6730, File 160-2 
(1-3) MR C 8092, To Rev. J. Lofthouse from D.C. Scott, 16 
June, 1909. 
118. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3947, File 123764, MR C 10166, To E. 
Dewdney from L. Vankoughnet, 13 April, 1892. 
119. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3818, File 57799, MR C 10143, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 14 May, 
1889 . 
120. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6032, File 150-40A, MR C 8149, 
Regulations Relating to the Education of Indian Children, 
1894 . 
121. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To 
Reverend and Dear Sirs from F. Oliver, 21 March, 1908. 
122. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6032, File 150-40A, MR C 8149, To Agent 
Touchwood Hills from D. Laird, 29 April, 1904. 
123. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6730, File 160-2 (1-3), MR C 8092, To 
Rev. James Lofthouse from D.C. Scott, 16 June, 1909. 
146 

124. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3933, File 117657-1A, MR C 10164, To A. 
Meighen from D.C. Scott, 11 December, 1919. 
125. Statues of Canada, 1919-20, c. 50. (10-11 Geo. V.). 
126. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-4, MR C 10118, To 
Principal of Qu'Appelle from E. Dewdney, n.d. April, 1891. 
127. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3919, File 116751-1A, MR C 10161, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from Martin 
Benson, 9 June, 1903. 
128. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6205, File 468-1 (1-3), MR C 7937, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
Benson, 26 November, 1902. 
129. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3919, File 116751-1A, MR C 10161, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
Benson, 4 February, 1903. 
130. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3919, File 116751-1A, MR C 10161, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
Benson, 23 June, 1903. 
131. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from the Auditor 
General, 
7 December, 1904. 
132. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3927, File 116836-1A, MR C 10163, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from D.C. 
Scott, 29 April, 1904. 
133. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3919, File 116751-1A, MR C 10161, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
Benson, 9 June 1903. 
134. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3919, File 116751-1, MR C 10161, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
Benson, 4 February, 1903. 
135. 
D.J. 
Hall, 
"Clifford 
Sifton 
and 
Canadian 
Indian 
Administration 1896-1905", page 127. 
136. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, To 
F. Oliver from D.C. Scott, 18 October, 1910, 
137. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To F. 
Pedley from A.E. Armstrong, 1 February, 1907. 
See attached 
Memo of Resolutions. 
147 

138. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To 
Reverend and Dear Sirs from F. Oliver, 21 March, 1908. 
139. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from A.E. Armstrong, 
1 February, 1907. 
140. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To 
Reverend and Dear Sirs from F. Oliver, 21 March, 1908. 
141. N.A.C. Rg 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To 
Reverend and Dear Sirs from F. Oliver, 21 March, 1908 and To 
S.H. Blake from F. Pedley, 24 April, 1908. 
142. N.A.C, RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, Memorandum 
on Conference in Minister1 
Office with the Churches, 8 
November, 1910. 
143. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, List of 
Divisions and Per Capitas introduced in 1910. 
144. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Sirs 
[the representatives of the churches] from J.D McLean, 25 
November, 1910. This has attached a copy of the contract to be 
signed by the churches. 
145. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6040, File 160-3A Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
D.C. Scott from T. Ferrier, 2 July, 1917. 
146. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6730, File 160-2 (1-3), MR C 8092, To 
the Minister, Dr. Roche from D.C. Scott, 27 June 1917 and Vol. 
6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Rev. C. Bouillet, O.M.I, from 
J. T Ross, n.d. 1919. 
147. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To D.C. 
Scott from M. Benson, 25 June, 1917, 27 June 1917 and To Dr. 
Roche from D.C. Scott, 27 June, 1917. 
148. Anglican Archives, M.S.C.C., Series 2-14, Special Indian 
Committee, 1905-1910, To the Honourable Frank Oliver, Minister 
of the Interior, from S.H. Blake, Sunday Morning, 27 January, 
1907 printed in To the Members of the Board of Management of 
the Missionary Society of the Church of England in Canada, by 
The Hon. S.H. Blake, K.C., page 21. 
149. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Sir 
from J. D. McLean, 25 November, 1910. A copy of the contract 
is attached. 
150. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6001, File 1-1-1 (1), MR C 8134, To A. 
Meighen from D.C. Scott, n.d. January, 1918. 
148 

151. Anglican Archives, M.S.C.C., Series 2-14, Special Indian 
Committee, 1905-1910, To the Honourable Frank Oliver, Minister 
of the Interior, from S.H. Blake, Sunday Morning, 27 January, 
1907 printed in To the Members of the Board of Management of 
the Missionary Society of the Church of England in Canada, by 
The Hon. S.H. Blake, K.C., page 21. 
152. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6001, File 1-1-1 (1), MR C 8134, To A. 
Meighen from D.C. Scott, n.d. January, 1918. 
153. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-7-1, To Hon. Charles 
Stewart from D.C. Scott, 31 October, 1927. 
154. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, To 
Secretary of Indian Affairs from D. Laird, 7 December, 1907. 
155. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-7-1, To Hon. Charles 
Stewart from D.C. Scott, 31 October, 1927. 
156. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3836, File 68557, MR C 10146, 
Suggestions for the Government of Indian Schools, H. Reed, 27 
January, 1890. 
157. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6467, File 889-1 (1-2) MR C 8785, To 
Dr. H. McGill from C. Perry, 25 May, 1900. 
158. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To J.D. 
McLean from M.Benson, 15 July, 1897. 
159. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422, MR C 10118, To Father 
Lacombe from E. Dewdney, 22 July, 1883 and To Superintendent 
General of Indian Affairs from E. Dewdney, 16 Aprl, 1883. 
160. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3799, File 48432-1, MR C 10139, To E. 
Dewdney from Rev. A. Lacombe, 21 June 1890, To A. Vowell from 
J. A. Macrae, 30 July, 1890, To A. Vowell from L. Vankoughnet, 
20 October, 1890 and To A. Vowell from J. W. Mackay, 3 
November, 1890. 
161. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3932, File 117504-1, To E. Dewdney from 
a Taxpayer, n.d. 1902. 
162. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-5, MR C 10118, To 
Indian Commissioner from T. Clarke, 13 February, 1885 and To 
Indian Commissoner from T. Clarke, 31 July, 1884. 
163. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3927, File 116836-1A, To Superintendent 
General of Indian Affairs from R. MacKay and I. Menzies, 11 
March 1904. 
164. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6040, File 160-3A Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Hon. R. Rogers from G.E. Shore, 17 January, 1912. 
149 

165. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3917, File 116575-5, To 
Indian 
Commissioner from Rev. J. Hugonard, 25 September, 1895. 
166. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3924, File 116823, MR C 10162, To D. 
Laird from E. Hay Machinists and Boilermakers, 22 July, 1903. 
167. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To J.D. 
McLean fom M. Benson, 15 July, 1897. 
168. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3922, File 116836-1A, MR C 10162, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. Benson 
[?], 25 April, 1905 and Vol. 3931, File 117377-1C, MR C 10163, 
To J. Smart from D. McKenna, 2 April, 1902. 
169. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3866, 87071-1A, To G. Hogbin from J. 
Mclean, 5 June, 1901 and To J. McLean from G. Hogbin, n.d. 
July, 1901. 
170. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3866, File 8707-1A, MR C 10153, To 
Secretary from M. Benson, 29 October, 1902 and To F. Pedley 
from J. Markle, 3 March, 1906. 
171. N.A.C. Rg 10 Vol. 3866, File 87071-1A, MR C 10153, To C. 
Sifton from P. Bryce, 8 January, 1905. 
172. N.A.C. Rg 10 Vol. 3866, File 87071-1A, MR C 10153, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from F. Pedley, 13 
October, 1907 and to F. Oliver from F. Pedley, 2 December, 
1907 . 
173. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4041, File 334503, MR C 10178, To 
Secretary 
from Deputy 
Superintendent 
General 
of 
Indian 
Affairs, 18 July, 1908. 
174. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4041, File 334503, MR C 10178, To F. 
Pedley from F.H. Paget, 25 November, 1908. 
175. P. Bryce, The Story of a National Crime, page 11. 
176. G.J. Wherrit, The Miracle of Empty Beds: A History of 
Tuberculosis in Canada (Toronto, the University of Toronto 
Press, 1977), page 110. 
177. P. Bryce, The Story of a National Crime, page 11. 
178. G.J. Wherrit, The Miracle of Empty Beds: A History of 
Tuberculosis in Canada (Toronto, the University of Toronto 
Press, 1977), pages 16-17. 
179. G.J. Wherrit, The Miracle of Empty Beds, pages 16-17 and 
100-103. 
150 

180. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-5, MR C 10118, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 
13 May, 1891. 
181. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3922, File 116820-1A, MR C 10162, To 
Secretary from J. Day, n.d. 1891. 
182. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6027, File 117-1-1, MR C 8147, To W. 
Jones from H. Reed, n.d. November, 1893 and To Assistant 
Commissioner from A. Baird, 24 December, 1894. 
183. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3917, File 116575-5, MR C 10161, To 
Indian Commissioner from M.M. Seymour M.D., 17 September, 
1895 . 
184. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To J. 
McLean from M. Benson, 15 July, 1897. 
185. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3917, File 116575-5, MR C 10161, To 
Indian Commissioner from M.M. Seymour M.D., 17 September, 
1895 . 
186. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3920, File 116818, MR C 10161, To C. 
Sifton from Dr. J.P. Rice, 3 August, 1903 and To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. Benson, 9 
September, 1903. 
187. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6305, File 652-1, MR C 8682, To 
Secretary from Agent Macarthur, 27 December, 1910. 
188. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6327, File 660-1 (1-3), MR C 9807, To 
Secretary from Mrs. W. Tucker, 26 May, 1904. 
189. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To J. 
McLean from M. Benson, 15 July, 1897. 
190. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, Statement 
of Boarding Schools Showing the Number Provided For, the 
Accomodation and the Attendance at Each School, February 1901 
and To Sir from J.D. McLean, 25 November, 1910. See attached 
contract. 
191. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3917, File 116575-5, MR C 10161, To H. 
Reed from Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 14 
November, 1895. 
192. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6348, File 752-1, MR C 8705, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from D. C. Scott, 23 
April, 1909. 
151 

193. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3937, File 120048-1, MR C 10164, To A. 
Vowell from Bishop of Caledonia, 11 November, 1907. 
194. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6305, File 652-1, MR C 8682, To 
Secretary from Agent Macarthur, 27 December, 1910. 
195. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To 
Secretary, Department of Indian Affairs from W. Graham, 1 
January, 1911. 
196. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6210, File 469-1 (1-
3) , MR C 7941, To J. Lawlor from Deputy Superintendent General 
of Indian Affairs, 8 November, 1894. 
197. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 1543 [no File Number], MR C 14839, To 
R. Wilson from J.D. Mclean, 2 October, 1909 and Application 
for Admission attached to R. Wilson from D. Laird, 7 March, 
1911. 
198. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6015, File 1-1-13, MR C 8141, To W. 
Graham from D.C. Scott, 16 February, 1925. 
199. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6015, File 1-1-13, MR C 8141, To R. 
Ferrier from Acting Agent, 9 March, 1925. 
200. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, To J.D. 
McLean from Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 
14 February, 1907. 
201. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, P. 
Bryce, Report on the Indian Schools of Manitoba and the 
Northwest Territories, Ottawa, Government Printing Bureau, 
1907 . 
202. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, Copies 
of stories in the Citizen, 16 November, 1907 and Saturday 
Night, 23 November, 1907 as well as the Montreal Star, 15 
November, 1907, are in this file. 
203. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, P. 
Bryce, Report on the Indian Schools ... 1907. 
204. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3965, File 150000-4, MR C 10168, To 
Principals ... from J.D. McLean, 17 March, 1909 and Vol. 3966, 
File 150000-14, See statistics compiled in 1909 from responses 
by Principals to McLean's request of 17 March. The deaths 
listed are minimum totals for it is clear that the Principals 
have lost track of many ex-students. 
205. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3966, File 150000-14, MR C 10168, To 
Secretary from A. McMillan, n.d. September, 1909. 
152 

206. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, To 
Secretary from T. Eastwood Jackson, 15 December, 1907. 
207. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, To 
Secretary from J. Semmens [?], 10 December, 1907. 
208. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, To 
Secretary from S. Swinford, 4 December, 1907. 
209. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, To 
Secretary from Agent, Birtle, Manitoba, 20 December, 1907. 
210. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, To 
Secretary from D. Laird, 7 December, 1907. 
211. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, To 
Secretary from Rev. J. Hugonard, 17 December, 1907. 
212. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, Mr c 10177, To 
Secretary from Principal, Calgary Industrial School, n.d. 
1907 . 
213. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3933, File 117657-1, MR C 10164, To 
Deputy Minister from D.C. Scott, 19 January, 1910. 
214. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6191, File 462-1, MR C 7926, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. Benson, 2 
September, 1908 and To J. D. McLean from H. West, 13 October, 
1908 . 
215. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 1346-7, [no file number], MR C 13916, 
To W. Robertson from H.B. Rogers M.D., 30 November, 1907, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from Father 
Classen, 15 November, 1907, To W. Robertson from Father 
Classen, 12 December, 1909, To F. Pedley from Father Classen, 
1 April, 1910, To W. Robertson from Father Lemmens, 31 March, 
1915 . 
216. P. Bryce, The Story of a National Crime, page 4. 
217. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To R. 
Rogers from Bishop of St. Boniface et al., 24 November 1911 
and 15 
November, 1912. 
218. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To 
Reverend and Dear Sirs from F. Oliver, 21 March, 1908. See 
particularly Oliver's discussion of Winnipeg Resolution no.7. 
219. P. Bryce, The Story of a National Crime, page 5. 
220. E.B. Titley, A Narrow Vision, page 87. 
153 

221. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6001, File 1-1-1 (1), MR C 8134, 
Memorandum on Indian Education for A. Meighen from D.C. Scott, 
n.d. January, 1918 and Vol. 6015, File 1-1-13, C 8141, To W. 
Graham from D.C. Scott, 16 February, 1925. 
222. P. Bryce, The Story of a National Crime, page 13. 
223. D.A. Herring, "There Were Young People and old People and 
Babies Dying Every Week: The 1918-1919 Influenza Epidemic at 
Norway House, in Ethnohistroy. Vol. 41. No. 1. Winter, 1993. 
There is a general outline of the epidemic given in the 
article. 
224. E.B. Titley, A Narrow Vision, page 57. 
225. M. Lux, "Prairie Indians an the 1918 Influenza Epidemic" 
in Native Studies Review, Vol. 8 No.l, 1992. 
226. INAC File 671/23-5-025, Vol. 1, Agents Report ... 1 
February, 1919, W. Sibbald. 
227. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3921, File 116818-1B, MR C 10161, To 
Secretary from Rev. J. Woodsworth, 25 November, 1918. 
228. E.B. Titley, A Narrow Vision, page 87. 
229. P. Bryce, The Story of a National Crime, page 14. 
230. See for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6255, File 576-1 (1-
2), Inspection Report Brandon School, 4 May, 1918, To Rev. T. 
Ferrier from J.D. McLean, 21 May, 1918, and Vol. 3933, File 
117657-1A, MR C 10164, To D.C. Scott from Rev.J. Guy, 16 May, 
1922 . 
231. P. Bryce, The Story of a National Crime, page 14. 
232. Ales Hrdlicka, Tuberculosis Among Certain Indian Tribes 
of 
the 
United 
States 
(Washington, 
Bureau 
of 
American 
Ethnology, Bulletin 42, 1909), page 32. 
233. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4092, File 546898, MR C 10087, To Sir 
James Lougheed from D.C. Scott, 1 December, 1920. 
234. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7182, File 1/25-1-1-1, MR C 9695, To 
Sir from W. Ditchburn, 12 October, 1920. 
235. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4092, File 546898, MR C 10187, To Hon. 
Sir James Lougheed, 1 December, 1920 and To W. Graham from 
F.A. Corbett, n.d. [Spring], 1922. 
154 

236. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4092, File 546898, To W. Graham from 
F.A. Corbett, 7 December, 1920. 
237. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4092, File 546898, MR C 10187, To W. 
Graham from A.H. Kennedy, 7 January, 1922. 
238. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3918, File 116659-1, MR C 10161, To J. 
Smith from Assistant Deputy and Secretary, 6 April, 1918. 
239. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4092, File 546898, MR C 10187, To W. 
Graham from F .A. Corbett, n.d [Spring] , 1922 and To D.C. Scott 
from W. Graham, 24 June, 1922. 
240. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6348, File 752-1, MR C 8705, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from D.C. Scott, 23 
April, 1909. Scott reviews a recent report from Dr. Lafferty. 
241. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4092, File 546898, MR C 10187, To W. 
Graham from F.A. Corbett, 7 December, 1920. 
242. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6368, File 763-1, MR C 8720, To E. 
Yoemans from Assistant Deputy and Secretary, n.d. 1911, To 
Archdeacon J. Tims from S. Stewart, n.d. 1911, To Archdeacon 
J. Tims from J.D. McLean, 22 January, 1913, To Archdeacon J. 
Tims from J.D. Mclean, 15 February, 1913, To A. Gunn from J.D. 
McLean, 15 February, 1914 and To Secretary from W. Graham, 21 
July, 1925. 
243. See, for example, correspondence on the Chapleau school: 
N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6191, File 462-1, MR C 7926, To Rev. J. 
Anderson from J.D. McLean 29 December, 1914, Extract of 
Inspection Report by W. Hamilton, 3 May, 1915 and To J.D. 
McLean from J. Sheahan M.D., 2 July, 1917. 
244. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6348, File 752-1, MR C 8705, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from D.C. Scott, 23 
April, 1909. 
245. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4092, File 546898, MR C 10187, To D.C. 
Scott from W. Graham, 7 December, 1920. 
246. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To R. 
Rogers from Bishop of St Boniface et al., 15 November, 1912. 
247. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4092, File 546898, MR C 10187, To D.C. 
Scott from Canon Gould, General Secretary of the M.S.C.C., 17 
January, 1921. 
248. E.B. Titley, A Narrow Vision, page 57. 
249. Annual Report 1891, page x. 
155 

250. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, Saturday Night, 23 
November, 1907. 
251. N.A.C. C.0.42/27, To J. Kempt from Sir G. Murray (No. 
95). 25 January, 1830. 
252. The Davin Report. 
253. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 15, To Sir John A. Macdonald from 
L. Vankoughnet, 26 August, 1887. 
254 N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-1), MR C 8774, 
To the New England Company from Rev. A. Lett, 10 April, 1923. 
156 

CHAPTER 3 
ARE GOING TO TELL YOU HOW WE ARE TREATED" 
PERSISTENCE AND THE PARENTING PRESUMPTION 
1879-1944 

During the Christmas season of 1923, a House of Commons Press 
Gallery reporter, F. Mears, forwarded to Duncan Campbell Scott 
a letter to our "Dear Parents" from a young boy, "Edward B.," 
at the Onion Lake residential school: 
We are going to tell you how we are treated. I am 
always hungry. We only get two slices of bread and 
one plate of porridge. Seven children ran away 
because there [sic] hungry ... I am not sick. I 
hope you are same too. I am going to hit the 
teacher if she is cruel to me again. We are treated 
like pigs, some of the boys always eat cats and 
wheat. I never ask anyone to give me anything to 
eat. Some of the boys cried because they are 
hungry. Once I cry to [sic] because I was very 
hungry."1 
Mears wondered if this was an accurate picture of conditions 
in this and other Departmental schools. Scott took time to 
consider his answer. The Onion Lake school had come before him 
in the past. In the previous two years, the Department had 
received negative reports on the quality and amount of food, 
the care of the children and the condition of the Onion Lake 
school building. Local officials had noted particularly that 
the children did not get enough milk, that indeed, the 
"practise they had been following was for the children to 
drink from the well either before or after eating." The 
visiting nurse found the children dirty and the building "very-
unsafe for children." It was known, as well, that the Onion 
Lake Band Council had threatened to petition to have the 
Principal removed.2 Despite these reports, Scott advised that 
Edward's letter was libellous and should not be published. The 
boy was just looking for sympathy; he was not trustworthy. 
Children were well cared for and, in fact, he concluded, 
"Ninety-nine percent of the Indian children at these schools 
are too fat."3 
As fleeting as it was, the briefest of moments in the history 
of 
the 
school 
system, 
this episode now has a 
lasting 
significance as a resolute symbol of the treatment of the 
children in the schools and of the operation of the school 
system over the period from 1879 to 1944. Many children at too 
many schools, like Edward and his schoolmates, lived out their 
lives, as Scott had known for years and had been reminded as 
recently as March, 1923 by Rev. A. Lett of St. George's "ill-
fed and ill-clothed and turned out into the cold to work." 
They were trapped, "unhappy with a feeling of slavery existing 
in their minds, no aims, no feelings" and no way to escape 
except in "thought" - in their imagination and their memories 
of home.4 In the face of similar conditions, of neglect and 
abuse, at many of the schools, most, though not all, officials 
in the churches and the Department responded as a matter of 
158 

course, like Scott, with a mixture of denial and disdain. In 
the Onion Lake case, the Anglican church had, even before the 
incident, laid out its defense. Conditions at the school might 
not 
be 
exemplary 
but 
the 
Principal, 
"Mr. 
Ellis 
is 
a 
satisfactory man; he has been under the very great difficulty 
of trying to make ends meet with insufficient means."5 A 
church inspection in May, 1923, gave the school a clean bill 
except for the fact that it lacked utensils. The children, the 
band council and the Department were supposed to be satisfied 
with that. In many cases, including this one, the Department 
was. The matter was dropped. 
Throughout the history of the school system in this period, 
sensitivity to the plight of the children was rare. And so too 
was any sense that the voluminous catalogue of mistreatment, 
of which the Onion Lake example is only one of thousands, was 
creating a sorrowful and difficult legacy. The partners of the 
era of fur trade and "discovery" were not becoming brothers 
and sisters of a new nation as it was envisioned they would at 
the beginning of the system. Rather in the schools and, 
indeed, across the face of the relationship where settlement 
and development were pushing communities off their land, 
Aboriginal 
and 
non-Aboriginal 
people 
were 
increasingly 
distanced by a gulf of disbelief, frustration, anger and 
mistrust. When some sense of this did surface, it was apparent 
that somewhere in the consciousness and conscience of the 
churches and the Department there was the knowledge that what 
was being done was dreadfully wrong. 
In June of 1942, the Rev. Charles Hives, Lett's successor, 
sent along to the Department's Superintendent of Welfare and 
Training, R.A. Hoey, a souvenir, a "memory of days gone by" -
a set of shackles. These, the Principal had been told by a 
former student, had been used "to chain runaways to the bed." 
In one instance "two girls ran away and they were chained 
together and driven home in front of the Principal." Hives did 
not, of course, send along the stocks that stood in the 
playground. But he assured Hoey that "they were used." "I am 
telling you this because, I want you to know how very much has 
to be irradicated [sic] from the memories of these people 
before 
they 
will 
develope 
[sic] 
confidence 
in 
the 
administration of this school." Hoey understood this in a 
still wider context: 
I can understand now why there appears to be such a 
widespread prejudice on the part of the Indians 
against residential schools. Such memories do not 
fade out of the human consciousness very rapidly. 
You and I may not be able to do much but we can at 
least be humane and kindly in our treatment of 
these underprivileged and unfortunate people.6 
159 

During this long period from 1879 to 1944, the Department and 
the churches failed to "be humane and kindly," to meet their 
"parental" responsibilities to these many children. They did 
not ensure, throughout the system, that children were well-fed 
and clothed, safely housed and provided with the education 
that was the fundamental justification for removing them from 
their parents and communities. Nor did they ensure that those 
who actually parented the children, the staff of the schools, 
were of the requisite quality for such a difficult task. These 
failures sprang, no doubt, from the fact that the task 
overwhelmed the Department and the churches. As with the story 
of tuberculosis in the schools, they had neither the necessary 
financial or administrative resources. But more seriously, 
they lacked, even by their own standards, moral resources and 
thus neglect became a thoughtless habit, harsh discipline and 
excessive cruelty unexceptional events that were routinely 
excused or ignored. 
Despite the fact that some like Hives and Hoey may have known 
that there was something rotten at the heart of the system and 
were sensitive to the plight of the children, no one called 
for, or seemed to think, it could be halted. The school system 
seemed to have a life and trajectory of its own. Notably even 
Hoey, who was responsible for the operation of the schools, 
felt he was "not able to do much." What Inspector A. Hamilton 
said of Elkhorn school in 1944 was emblematic of the whole 
system - It "is not being operated, it is just running."7 
Thoughtless persistence not sympathy, nor intervention by the 
Department on behalf of those "unfortunate people,"8 was the 
hallmark of this deplorable institution - it simply continued. 
PERSISTENCE, 1923-1944. 
In these last 20 years of the larger period before the 
Department and then Parliament began to question the sense and 
the utility of residential education, there was a net increase 
of three schools. At the outset, in 1923, there were 72 
Residential schools as they were thereafter to be called. That 
number grew to a high of 80 in 1931. There was then one school 
in Nova Scotia, 
13 in Ontario, 
10 in Manitoba, 
14 in 
Saskatchewan, 20 in Alberta, 16 in British Columbia, four in 
the Northwest Territories, two in the Yukon and plans for two 
schools in Quebec. That number then gradually fell through 
closures, many because of fires, to 75 in 1943. The much 
slower post World War I rate of growth did not indicate any 
waning in the enthusiasm for expansion. Churches continued to 
push to open schools in the few remaining untapped educational 
areas.9 And the Department cooperated. Scott, himself, led the 
way in moving the system into one of those areas, the East -
160 

Quebec and Nova Scotia. The first school commissioned in 
Quebec was the Anglican Fort George followed by Fort George 
Roman Catholic School, both at Moosenee, and in Nova Scotia 
the 
first 
and only 
school was the Catholic 
School at 
Shubenacadie. Scott was particularly dedicated to this latter 
project. "When we have this school established," he wrote to 
the Catholic church in 1926, sounding more like Vankoughnet 
than himself, "one of the desires of my official life will 
have been accomplished."10 
As well as there being but limited horizons by the 1920s, 
finance 
continued 
to be 
a 
restraint 
on growth 
and 
a 
detrimental factor in the condition of existing schools. 
Wartime 
reductions which had blighted 
the programme of 
improvements of 1911 ushered in yet another era of under 
funding. Initially, after the war there were advances in the 
level of per capitas. Recognizing the justice of the churches' 
claim that "on account of war conditions," the "prices of food 
and clothing have greatly increased, so much so that we are 
finding it impossible to run our schools on the present per 
capita...."11 a $10 increase was authorized in 1919.12 Other 
increases followed in 1921, 1924, 1926 and 1931 moving the 
average per capita to $172.13 These increases were never 
enough, 
however, 
to satisfy 
the Churches' 
appetite 
for 
government funds nor to prevent them from again "encountering 
huge deficits".14 
In the Depression, the situation got worse as the "financial 
condition of the country is such that economies" were then 
"imposed on" the government.15 In 1932, it was "found necessary 
... to make a flat decrease in per capita grants." The first 
reduction was 10 per cent.16 In 1936, there was "a drastic cut 
in appropriations" and thus another 5 per cent reduction.17 
T.A. Crerar, the Minister for the Department of Mines and 
Resources, which became responsible for Indian Affairs in 
1936, managed to have some of the funds restored. Thereafter, 
by rather contorted financial reasoning, Hoey argued, in 
response to angry church comments, that the actual reduction 
between 1933 and 1938 was only 5 per cent.18 The churches' 
analysis was dramatically different. In 1938, the Committee of 
Churches Co-operating with the Department of Indian Affairs 
calculated that between 1932 and 193 8 the reduction was well 
beyond 5 per cent and had amounted to a $840,000 loss to the 
churches.19 
The Department's position was rather hollow. Privately, senior 
staff knew that the per capita average, claimed to be still 
about $180 in 1938, was "exceptionally low" and inadequate 
particularly in relation to the funding available to other 
residential child care facilities. Hoey gave H. McGill, the 
deputy 
superintendent 
general, 
a 
detailed 
financial 
comparison. The government of Manitoba provided per capita 
161 

grants of $642 and $550 respectively to the Manitoba School 
for the Deaf and the School for Boys. Private institutions in 
that Province were also more generously funded. The Knowles 
School for Boys in North Kildonan was sponsored by the 
Community Chest at $362 per boy. The Catholic church provided 
St. Norbert's Orphanage with $294 and St. Joseph's Orphanage 
with a $320 per capita grant. The Children's Aid Society of 
Alberta estimated that the minimum per day maintenance cost 
for a neglected child was $1.00. The Ontario figure was 
slightly lower at 75 cents, Manitoba was between 72 and 63 
cents, B.C. was 57 and Saskatchewan 50 cents. This worked out 
to an average of 70 cents. The Department's national average, 
using its $180 figure, was 49 cents and it was supposed to 
cover 
more 
than 
just 
food 
and 
clothes. 
Finally, 
an 
international comparison was not in the Department's favour 
either. The Child Welfare League of America estimated that the 
average per capita grant in the United Staes of large child 
care institutions was $541 with the smaller ones running only 
as low as $313.20 
The Second World War pulled the country out of the deep 
economic trough of the Depression but it brought no benefits 
to the school system. Wartime military expenditures meant 
reductions "to almost every appropriation"21 for the Department 
and a building freeze. In the face of this, Hoey realized that 
it would be 
"exceedingly difficult 
to secure the funds 
necessary 
... at 
any 
time 
during 
the years 
that 
lie 
immediately ahead of us."22 
Not only was the level of per capita funding a problem but 
that 
other 
congenital 
difficulty 
which 
determined 
the 
financial condition of individual schools, the struggle to 
acquire students, continued throughout most of these decades. 
On the surface that did not appear to be the case. The number 
of students increased, from 5,347 in 1923 to 8,729 in 1943, 
and, more significantly, the average number of children per 
school grew from 74 to 116 which was the highest it had ever 
been since the Department kept such statistics. However, given 
church and Departmental comments these figures are somewhat 
misleading. It would appear that throughout the system, and, 
of course, at some schools more than others, 
recruiting 
difficulties continued to produce budget shortfalls.23 
Agents, in his period, did not seem to exhibit any greater 
enthusiasm for recruitment than they did in the industrial 
school era. Not only was it extra work, as Benson had noted, 
but church rivalry made it both controversial and difficult. 
Agents, 
particularly 
on 
reserves 
served 
by 
schools 
of 
different denominations, could spend countless frustrating 
hours and even days attempting to work out the correct 
religious affiliation of a child being fought over by feuding 
Principals.24 In a letter drafted for the minister's signature 
162 

in 1931, Scott explained, using the Blood reserve where there 
was a Catholic 
(St. Mary's) and an Anglican school 
(St. 
Paul's) as his example, how complex the task was; 
Some of the Indians on the reserve do not take the 
whiteman's religion very seriously, and when they 
have a pupil old enough for school they have been 
known to play one principal against the other and 
to accept church rites from both. Then there is the 
vexed question of Indian marriages. A mother will 
remove herself with her young children from her 
first husband and will take another who is perhaps 
a communicant of another church. In a year or two 
we 
find 
both 
schools 
claiming 
the 
children. 
Further, the adoption of children is common in 
Indian communities and, 
sometimes, 
it is very 
difficult to decide between the rights of the 
natural and the foster parents. To 
complicate 
matters 
still 
further, 
very 
often, 
the 
ecclesiastical law does not harmonize with civil 
law and, of course, the Department, when making 
decisions, must be guided by the Canadian courts. 
In case Brigadier-General J.S. Stewart M.P., to whom the 
letter was to be sent, needed further enlightenment, Scott 
then turned to specific, bewildering cases. 
There was the 
case of Annie Chief Moon. Her father "on his death bed 
received the last rites of both churches and, consequently, 
both principals 
are claiming his children." After 
some 
deliberation the Department had decided, in view of the fact 
that the widow had gone to live with a Catholic man and her 
sister was already in a Catholic school, "to approve her 
admission to the Catholic school." This only served to even up 
the score for in another case two girls were admitted to the 
Anglican school over the protest of the Catholic Principal. In 
this latter case, the Principal took the matter to his 
provincial superior and from there it went to the head of the 
Oblate Order in Edmonton who placed it in the hands of a firm 
of lawyers. Their "protest which was in considerable detail, 
was duly received and carefully considered, but the Department 
did not change its decision." 
Finally, there was the story of Irene Chief Mountain who was 
left at the Roman Catholic hospital when her mother died. She 
was raised by the nuns but when she became old enough to go to 
school her father "refused to relinquish his paternal right to 
direct her education." She was placed in the Anglican school. 
The whole process was, Scott concluded wearily, a no-win 
situation for the Department: 
Whenever a religious case is really difficult of 
163 

solution, one or other of the Reverend principals 
of the Indian residential schools is sure to be 
dissatisfied with the Department's decision.25 
The best evidence, however, of a persistent enrolment problem 
is in the 
issue of compulsory 
education. The 
churches 
continued to insist upon the need for coercion. A joint 
Catholic and Protestant delegation when lobbying for higher 
per capitas rehearsed for the Minister, Charles Stewart, in 
1921, their traditional argument for the rigorous enforcement 
of the compulsory attendance section of the Indian Act. They 
resolved 
That since financial deficits in the maintenance of 
Indian residential 
Schools frequently arise in 
large part from the fact that although the church 
is compelled to organize and maintain the schools 
on the basis of an attendance of the maximum number 
of pupils for which the school has accommodation, a 
lesser number of pupils are actually in attendance, 
- the Government put into force the Compulsory 
clause of the revised Indian Act and secure an 
attendance of the maximum number of pupils at each 
and all Indian Residentiary Schools.26 
The Principals of Catholic schools pushed Scott for the 
"appointment of a special officer of full authority" to order 
the police to "uphold the authority of the law and have it 
respected." They found it 
really provoking to see people of so inferior a 
condition as the Indians who for the most part are 
ignorant of the first word about education, dictate 
laws to us and raise all possible difficulties when 
they place their children at school.27 
Scott was, however, still as reluctant as he had been before 
the 1920 compulsory amendment to the act and his response was 
laconic at best. "I may say that from time to time, as the 
Indian communities in different provinces are ready for such 
action, Section 10 of the Indian Act will be enforced."28 It 
was only after Scott retired that serious steps were taken to 
bring agents, Principals and the RCMP to cooperate in an 
aggressive enforcement of the law.29 
The second, persistent category of underfunding pertained to 
the maintenance and repair of the buildings. Under the terms 
of the 1911 contracts, the Department had been charged with 
that expense and even after the contracts lapsed, it agreed to 
continue. In 1922, Stewart, having been informed that the 
upkeep of buildings was a "serious drain on church funds,"30 
164 

promised the churches the he "would endeavour to keep the 
church-owned buildings in a state of good repair." Indeed, in 
the relatively optimistic days following the First World War, 
the policy of the Department was to buy up the church schools 
and then to be responsible for all capital costs including 
repairs and new construction.31 Scott went so far as to propose 
that the cost of purchasing all of the church-owned schools be 
placed in the supplementary estimates in order that the whole 
matter 
"may 
receive 
the 
careful 
consideration 
of 
the 
government."32 This would have meant acquiring 43 of the 75 
schools then operating in 1922: 27 Catholic, 10 Anglican, four 
Presbyterian 
and 
two Methodist. 
The 
remaining 
32 
were 
undenominational schools: 13 Catholic, 11 Anglican, 
five 
Methodist and three Presbyterian. 
Stewart's 
promise 
and 
Scott's 
proposal 
remained 
good 
intentions 
only. 
In the early years of the 
Depression 
expenditures (combining the per capita grants and capital 
funds) fell from an average of $28,000 per school to $16,000. 
By the Second World War, the Department was so far behind that 
Hoey and P. Phelan, chief of the training division, estimated 
that they had less than half the funds necessary to meet 
repair commitments.33 McGill, admitted, in fact, that they had 
"been experiencing for the last 10 or 12 years the utmost 
difficulty in securing the funds necessary to keep our schools 
in a state of repair. . . . "34 They were not, he concluded, being 
maintained "in a reasonable state...."35 
As in the industrial school era the net result of underfunding 
could be seen in the condition of the schools and the care 
given to the children. The building stock was in poor shape at 
the outset. A Departmental survey in 1922 concluded that of 
the 75 schools the great majority were not "modern up to date 
buildings in good condition" nor were they "adequate for the 
purpose of Indian education." A small number were condemned as 
"dilapidated and inadequate." The value of the 10 Anglican 
owned schools was "nil, because of the poor condition of the 
buildings or their situation" and the two owned by the 
Methodists needed to be completely rebuilt. Catholic schools, 
which had the reputation for being the best built 
and 
maintained, were not above reproach. Squamish owned by the 
Sisters of the Holy Infant, Christie Residential school owned 
by the Basilians and the Jesuit school at Spanish were listed 
as being entirely inadequate. The Presbyterian schools came 
off the best. Of the four only one was worth "nothing" while 
the others were described as modern and well designed.36 
Needless to say the condition of the system was not improved 
by the reductions in funding in the 1930s and the wartime 
freeze. 
In 
1931 
one 
of 
the 
systems 
flagship 
schools, 
Shingwauk, was condemned.37 Long lists of repairs from every 
corner of the system were submitted and ignored as were pleas 
165 

for urgent assistance. Bishop J. Guy O.M.I, informed the 
Department in 1936 that the situation at the Sturgeon Lake 
school in Alberta had 
reached a very serious point as buildings are 
caving in with constant danger to lives of staff 
and children. The buildings are very old and worn 
out. They have outlived their utility by many 
years. 
Four years later Hoey replied that it was still "impossible to 
consider including in the estimates the amount requested..." 
for the Sturgeon Lake school.38 
In the 
industrial 
school era bad and badly 
maintained 
buildings translated into bad health. That, too, continued to 
be the case. In February, 1927 a report from Dr. P. Wilson on 
St. George's, Lytton, detailed graphically overcrowded dorms 
and both a heating and ventilation system that were defective. 
Water pails had to be used to flush the toilets that at times 
overflowed spilling their contents into the basement. The 
laundry room was not fit for anyone to work in as "the 
building is in such a state of dilapidation that the wind 
blows through it. The children working in the building are 
cold, while breathing in damp steamy air." Not surprisingly, 
he concluded, there were numerous cases of tuberculosis. Three 
months later, the agent reported that 13 children had died 
from flu and mumps. He thought it was because the buildings 
were so cold.39 
The extent of the tuberculosis problem in the schools in the 
1920s and 1930s is hard to assess. There were no reports of 
the scope or calibre of the Bryce or Corbett reports. Routine 
agents' reports, which are the most common documentation, are 
of limited value. Appearances of improvement in the health of 
the children, particularly to the untrained eye, could be 
deceiving. The Inspector of Indian Agencies for the Alberta 
Inspectorate, M. Christianson, in January, 1935, reported that 
the children at Crowfoot 
school 
seemed healthy but 
he 
cautioned that he had made the same comment the pervious June 
only to be told by the doctor who was examining the children 
that 11 of them were so infected with tuberculosis that they 
had to be immediately sent to hospital.40 
In some cases, however, the condition of the children was 
sorrowfully obvious. In 1930, Ditchburn forwarded a report on 
Kootenay school compiled by Assistant Commissioner C.C. Perry 
which charged that the extent of tuberculosis was a "serious 
indictment of past administration at this school. A deplorable 
condition exists here, in fact, a worse condition than I have 
seen in my twenty-three years experience with the Indians." He 
noted that some parents had beseeched the local physician, Dr. 
166 

Coy of Invermere, to give their children certificates of 
health so that they might not be sent off to be "contaminated 
by tubercular pupils known to be in the school." He estimated 
that 50 per cent of the children were infected and that they 
were knowingly kept in the school and only discharged so that 
they would die in their homes. Dr. Green the medical officer 
from Cranbrook gave it as his opinion that if all the children 
who were ill were removed from the school, it would have to 
close.41 
It was obvious from Wilson's and Perry's reports that the 
Department's 
administrative 
system 
regarding 
health 
certificates was still far from watertight. Dr. C. Pitts, who 
attended the children at Lejac in British Columbia certainly 
agreed. He claimed special knowledge of the school system as 
his father was a long serving Principal and he had friends who 
were also school doctors. He went so far, in 1935, to suggest 
that the regulations were a farce and their enforcement a 
practical impossibility: 
As for the general medical examination ... this is 
not done in any other school that I have any 
knowledge 
of.... 
Where 
is 
the point 
of 
this 
[examination] , when I know that were I to apply the 
standards of health to them that is applied to 
children of the white schools that I should have to 
discharge 90% of them and there would be no school 
left.42 
Moreover, the Department was still faced with opposition from 
the Catholic church. Its Principals' conventions in 1924 and 
1925 formally petitioned Scott not to employ sanatoria, more 
"faddism" 
perhaps, 
but 
to 
leave 
children 
with 
school 
authorities or to return them to their homes with instructions 
on how they were to be nursed.43 They were opposed as well to 
nurses being sent into the schools. Nurses were, in accordance 
it seemed with some yet surviving pre-Nightingale perception, 
dangerously immoral. In "their manners, their dress and their 
language, they have often forgotten certain requirements 
essential to the proper training and disciplining of Indian 
children. "44 
An even more serious impediment to any attempt to care for the 
health of the children was the inability of the Department to 
acquire funds to underwrite attacks on tuberculosis in the 
schools. In 1932, for example, Dr. R.G. Ferguson, the medical 
director of the Qu'Appelle Sanatorium, recommended that one 
Catholic and one Protestant school in Saskatchewan be set 
aside to accommodate infected pupils who did not yet require 
a sanatorium place thus removing the threat they posed to 
their non-infected classmates. The two schools would be 
specially 
equipped 
and 
staffed. 
The 
proposal 
was 
167 

enthusiastically supported by Dr. E. L. Stone, the director of 
medical services appointed on Scott's recommendation in 1927, 
as it "provides a means whereby the Residential school may be 
made tuberculosis free, and whereby the children selected from 
them may be given a good chance of recovery." Stone admitted, 
however, that though tuberculosis was still a major problem in 
the province, the death rate being 20 times higher for Indians 
who 
constituted 
only 
two 
per 
cent 
of 
the 
province's 
population, they simply could not afford the idea. In fact, he 
added, when briefing McGill, another medical doctor, the 
Depression era cutbacks were 
severely effecting 
medical 
services in general. "All tuberculosis work is at a standstill 
for lack of funds, and there are . . . other provinces to be 
considered. "45 
McGill, himself, gave evidence of the impact of Depression era 
restraint on health services in a directive he circulated to 
agents in January, 1937. Noting that health expenditures were 
still too heavy, he directed that "substantial reduction in 
cost be made immediately and maintained." In the last part of 
the decade funding for sanatoria treatment, largely owing to 
pressure from the Canadian Tuberculosis Association, 
was 
improved but there were no funds set aside especially for the 
schools and their care was less than it could have been.46 
These first two decades of the "Residential" school era had 
more in common with the "Industrial" era that preceded it 
than underfunding, the woeful condition of the buildings and 
the infection and death of children 
from 
tuberculosis. 
Connected to each of these issues, nested in reports on them, 
is another persistence - constant evidence of the failure of 
the churches and the Department to parent adequately these 
children, to operate institutions that were above reproach as 
homes and as schools. In part this was again due to the issue 
of finance. Whenever the per capitas were reduced or seen to 
be too low or even when maintenance funds were not available 
someone was bound to point out that this effected the children 
- that it "will render almost superhuman the task of feeding, 
clothing and treating the children in the manner required by 
the Department."47 And there were numerous reports from schools 
confirming this. In 1932, the Principal of Christie school in 
British Columbia, Victor Rassier O.S.B., travelled to Ottawa 
to present the "deplorable " condition of his school to the 
Department "... something simply had to be done about them." 
I was made to realize the financial crises existing 
precluded for some years hope of assistance in any 
form. Taking counsel with myself on returning to 
the school, I decided that the only course left for 
me to pursue was to strive for a solution of my 
problems by directing to the task every available 
bit of energy on the premises, and by economizing 
168 

to the bone in every department.48 
This was certainly not a phenomenon of recent years. Agent J. 
Smith reporting on Kamloops in 1918 asserted that it was "more 
than clear that the School cannot be run on its present 
income." 
After a careful review of the whole situation a 
most stubborn conviction is forced on me, that if 
the Institution is to continue, some radical as 
well as practical assistance must be forthcoming or 
its doors will have to be closed. The farm is 
useless as it is not irrigated, the horses are too 
old to do the work .... If the children are to be 
kept they ought to be reasonably clothed and fed, 
and this is utterly impossible to do from the 
present per capita grant . . .49 
School doors were rarely closed. Rather the Principals were, 
indeed, throughout the larger period from 1879 to 1944, forced 
to economize to the detriment of the children. Benson, in 
1903, when forwarding, with a supportive recommendation, a 
request from the Principal of Qu'Appelle for an increased 
level of funding warned the deputy superintendent "that there 
is almost too much economy exercised at this school as regards 
the clothing and diet of the pupils - this having been 
rendered necessary by the increase of supplies, fuel and labor 
and the difficulty of recruiting pupils."50 Furthermore, in 
these straightened conditions, the labour of the children 
became an overly exploited resource for the schools. They were 
constantly overworked. Benson, of course, had criticised the 
management of Mount Elgin where to supplement the budget, the 
"boys of this school are not only working they are being 
worked and they and their parents see the difference...."51 
But the failure to care properly for the children was rooted 
in more than the issue of funding. The "manner required by the 
Department," 
for 
"feeding 
clothing 
and 
treating 
the 
children, 1152 a standard of care, was both an ill-defined and 
a rarely achieved goal. If Bryce and Paget and Corbett stand 
as witnesses to the inherent structural flaws in the system, 
the Rev. Thompson 
Ferrier comes forward to add to that the 
human failings and the resultant suffering of the children who 
were neglected by Departmental-church "parents", cruel or 
incompetent, who presumed that they should and could supplant 
the childrens' natural Aboriginal parents but who did not 
consistently carry out their parenting responsibilities. 
Just three years after Bryce's story, in July 1925, Ferrier, 
who had then been in charge of Methodist industrial and 
boarding schools and hospitals for 25 years set down on paper 
his memory of a cross country tour of those schools when he 
169 

first took up his position. Only Coqualeetza in British 
Columbia was, in his opinion, in good order. The others were 
not circles of civilized conditions but circuses of chaos: 
Mount Elgin Institute at Muncey looms up in memory 
with its untidy yard and a lot of old sheds, 
outbuildings and dilapidated barns that had passed 
their day all unconscious of their need of repairs 
and paint. The main building had accommodation for 
about one hundred pupils who were receiving such 
harsh 
treatment 
as 
to 
call 
forth 
numerous 
complaints from the Indian people and the Indian 
department. Several attempts were made on the part 
of the pupils to burn up the whole business all 
because it was under the management of a man who 
had the idea that physical strength was to take the 
place of what ought to be done by the heart and 
head in educating and training young life, who 
believed that it was safer to deal with the hide 
than the honor of the pupil and a man who took more 
interest in hydraulics than hygiene. 
When he got to Brandon, he found 90 children who seemed to 
have the upper hand. They were 
destructive, untrained young men and women from 
thirteen to twenty-three years of age. They were 
having their own way, smashing everything they 
could not eat or wear and running roughshod over a 
discouraged 
staff. 
It 
looked 
as 
though 
the 
institution had fallen into a pit and was waiting 
for someone to come and give it a decent burial. 
At Norway House 
we had a poor barn shaped building with broken 
doors, worn out floors, no modern conveniences of 
plumbing, heating or lighting, a cold shell of a 
place with partial accommodation for about thirty-
five pupils who were obliged to live without a 
balanced ration as there was no garden, poultry or 
stock. 
An 
incompetent 
staff 
were 
trying 
to 
penetrate the stronghold of heathenism with the 
belief that the problem would never be solved. 
Red Deer was no better. The school comprised 
a miserable lot of buildings, the boys home being 
very dark and unsanitary. There was a stable for 
horses but none for stock. The management was 
unconscious of the great possibilities of the rich 
fertile land of the 
farm and the 
opportunity 
170 

presented as a training school for farmers and 
stockmen. For many reasons the whole institution 
was very unpopular with 
the Indian people of 
Alberta. The office appeared to be used more for a 
real estate business than to make a contribution 
toward civilizing and educating the people. 
Finally, he came to the west coast and to Port Simpson where 
"we had twenty boys housed in a building and under a 
management that was a disgrace to the Methodist church."53 
As had been the case with all those previous reports, Bryce 
Paget and Corbett, none of this was news to the Department or 
to the churches. They already had a flood of evidence, a spate 
that continued through to and beyond 1944, that indicated that 
in too many cases the children were not being adequately fed, 
clothed or taught and that discipline often crossed the line 
into abuse. This should have allowed all of them, as it did 
Hoey, to "understand now why there appears to be such a 
widespread prejudice on the part of the Indians against 
residential schools"54 and prompted them to take corrective 
action. 
THE PARENTING PRESUMPTION, 1879-1944. 
FOOD, CLOTHES AND "PARENTS" 
"Education has no charms for the hungry" - Martin Benson, 
1897 .55 
Edward B. and his school mates were far from the only children 
who cried in vain for food. Hunger was a common companion. The 
struggle for nourishment by the children and by the management 
of schools was in some cases a more pressing occupation than 
the struggle to teach or to learn. Edward and his mates not 
only cried, but in extreme cases they ate what they could 
find, "cats and wheat." And often children ate what they could 
steal. At St. George's Industrial School when Lett arrived in 
1923, it was a way of life. "Stealing was chronic and from all 
this was done without hesitancy"56 as it was necessary for 
survival. At Elkhorn, the Superintendent of Reserves, D.J. 
Allan, reported to Hoey that the boys had been stealing lard 
"to assist in making rabbit stew which formed the piece de 
171 

resistance [sic] at a feast they held in the bush utilizing 
rabbits snared by some of the boys".57 Ironically, real life 
at the school and thus the need for both such a traditional 
skill and for thievery undercut the practical and moral 
lessons the children were supposed to be learning in their 
classroom. 
Furthermore, hunger and the resultant disorder and dishonesty 
were at times the nexus around which further mistreatment and 
abuse clustered. Not every Principal was like Lett at St. 
George's who, to combat stealing, "immediately increased the 
fare and varied it as much as possible."58 H. Grant at Carcross 
school in the Yukon in 1940 employed punishment. Students, he 
admitted, were strapped on various parts of their bodies so 
severely that they had to be held down. When this proved 
futile, he regularly resorted to a tactic that one of the 
teachers assured him had worked at another school - cutting 
off the child's hair. When one girl stole a loaf of bread, she 
was given what he termed was a "close haircut."59 
Of course, not every child went hungry nor can every school 
and administrator be faulted. Departmental files contain 
numerous positive reports as one, for example, on the Morley 
Indian Residential School on the Stoney reserve which was 
submitted to McGill in 1935 by Inspector M. Christianson: 
As far as I could ascertain in my visit to this 
school the children are well cared for and they are 
not overworked. They receive good food, and in fact 
no school I know of feeds the children better than 
this one. They get plenty of milk and butter and in 
general have an abundance of good food. They are 
well clad and looked after in every way.60 
That Christianson knew that he must look to see if the 
children were "overworked" and his cautionary note, "As far as 
I could ascertain, " highlight the fact that it is not easy to 
determine how common hunger was throughout the system over 
this long period. The Department did not at any point 
undertake a food survey parallel to Paget's 1908 building 
survey or the 1922 accounting of the physical condition of the 
system. What comes most regularly to hand in Departmental 
files are reports by local officials of the Department and of 
the churches on the conditions in individual schools or at 
best some regional comments. 
Reports on school food, and indeed on clothing, discipline and 
abuse, 
need 
to 
be 
handled 
with 
care 
for 
they 
were 
controversial even in their day. To some, evidence in them 
from the children made them suspect. Scott was not unique in 
suggesting that pupils, like Edward B., were untrustworthy, 
were playing for sympathy. Others did, as well. Father P. 
172 

Bosquet of Fort Francis school in Ontario in 1934 opposed an 
inspection of the school by the "Chief and Council of 
Kootchicing Reserve", who for some reason he called "Soviets," 
because of the effect such a visit would have on the children 
and the potential negative effect on the reputation of the 
school. The children become, he charged 
excited and unruly, so that the task is an arduous 
one to those in charge of the School. In the dining 
room, the children pretend not to eat such and such 
food for the purpose of complaining in the presence 
of the parents. In the classroom the pupils might 
act in a stupid way so as to make these inspectors 
believe that they - the pupils - learn nothing.61 
Such supposed childish duplicity could work the exact opposite 
way, however. On 8 February, 1918, J. Smith, the local agent, 
took his dinner with the children at Kamloops school. He found 
the food far from acceptable, "it looked from where I sat to 
be very slim for growing boys." 
At 
the conclusion 
of the meal, 
I asked 
them 
collectively in the presence of the Principal and 
teaching staff before they left the dining room if 
they had had enough to eat, they all answered in 
the affirmative.62 
The agent at Kitamaat, Ivor Foughner, was even more direct 
noting that when the children at that school were asked about 
the food: "As could be expected they remained silent. Indian 
children, in such circumstances, from diffidence, seldom or 
never speak, when questioned by white people."63 
This is not the only evidence that children were silenced by 
the presence of the staff or acted on direct orders to mislead 
an inspector. An employee of the auditor general's staff when 
delivering a copy of the 1911 contract to the Principal of 
Carcross school found that the children were neither well-fed 
or clothed. The school kept hens and a cow but the milk and 
eggs were sold as the children supposedly did not care for 
such food: 
This however was not borne out by my investigation, 
as 
I found 
that 
the 
children 
were 
given 
to 
understand that they could not have these things, 
and that they must say that they did not care for 
them. This, to my mind, is not very creditable to 
the management.64 
There is evidence as well that either by the Department or 
churches some community complaints were effectively silenced. 
Chief Bignell representing the "Band Council of The Pas and 
173 

the Halfbreed Association" admitted to D.J. Allan that they 
had withheld their concern over the treatment of the children 
in Elkhorn and that still they "were afraid to press their 
complaints too strongly to the Principal as they were sure 
that he would take it out on the youngsters...."65 Complaints 
from communities were often roughly rejected, met with the 
riposte from the school, as in the case of concerns expressed 
at Mistawasis about Battleford, that they "were of a most 
frivolous nature" and that in the face of them "some action 
should be taken to bring the guilty person to justice."66 
Finally, as the Carcross example suggests, children were not 
the only source of problematic evidence. Not all Principals 
were fully cooperative or candid about the adequacy of the 
diet in their school. What has become known as the Simes 
report, compiled for the Department by Dr. A.B. Simes, medical 
superintendent of the Qu'Appelle Indian Hospital, on Elkhorn 
school in 1943-44 is only the most blatant example of this 
phenomenon. Sparked initially by Bignell's and then Allan's 
complaints about the school, Simes concluded that "nothing 
favourable can be said for the recent administration of this 
institution."67 While the Anglican church admitted that not 
every thing about the school was above question, it claimed 
that conditions were not unacceptable.68 Sime's descriptions 
of the school indicated that he differed strongly: 
On 
approaching 
the 
school 
one 
received 
the 
impression that there was a lack of organization, 
supervision and interest. The grounds were very 
untidy, articles of clothing and other wearing 
apparel 
were 
scattered 
over 
the yard, 
school 
entrances and steps. Many window panes were broken. 
The unbroken panes had the appearance of having 
been treated for a BLACKOUT, [his emphasis] they 
were 
so 
dirty. 
Inside 
the 
building 
these 
impressions were confirmed by findings wherever you 
went. Filthy is the only word and even that does 
not 
adequately 
describe 
the 
condition 
of 
the 
mattresses, pillows and bedding.... Not a single 
toilet bowl in the whole school had a seat. The 
majority of bowls were badly stained, and had an 
uncared for appearance. 
The children had the same uncared for appearance "... they 
were dirty and their clothes were disgraceful." 
In the midst of and despite these chaotic conditions, the 
school tried to convince Simes that the children were well 
fed. He could not be fooled. "A copy of the menu SUPPOSED to 
be in use is attached hereto." The evidence of malnutrition 
was there before his eyes - "28% of the girls and 69% of the 
boys are underweight." When surveying what was actually served 
174 

and comparing it to the menu "it was apparent there were more 
OMISSIONS than SUBSTITUTIONS." 
There was not enough milk, no 
potatoes or other vegetables on stock and, as at Carcross, the 
children never received eggs.69 
Departmental officials, who under the 1894 regulations and the 
1911 contracts held the right of inspection, could have 
difficulty seeing into the schools. It seemed to be well-known 
in the Department that school administrators readied the 
school for a forthcoming visit. This was so common that when 
a local official wished to add weight to his report, he would 
often write, as did W. Graham of his trip to St. Joseph's in 
1914 - "There was no preparation made for my visit as I was 
quite unexpected."70 A teacher at Round Lake school, Miss L. 
Affleck, who was fired by her Principal for disloyalty - she 
had 
written 
to 
the 
church 
headquarters 
revealing 
the 
conditions in the school - charged bluntly that such deception 
was conscious and well-organized. 
To almost everything at Round Lake there are two 
sides, the side that goes in the report and that 
inspectors see, and the side that exists from day 
to day. . . .71 
As well, the power of the churches radiated out from their 
missionary headquarters into every corner of the system and 
could intimidate inquisitive agents. F. Ball, the agent at 
Squamish, reported that he suspected that the children were 
not being fed properly. But that 
It is difficult to keep a close check on the food 
supply as officials are courteously but none the 
less 
effectively 
prevented 
from 
any 
close 
investigation and one is naturally desirous of 
avoiding 
any 
unpleasantness 
with 
the 
reverend 
principal who has been in charge so long. The only 
meal that I have actually seen was one at mid-day 
which consisted of a piece of bread and a raw 
carrot. It may have been a fast day, and I have not 
since been successful in actually seeing a meal on 
the table.72 
Despite these reservations about the character of evidence, 
there are a surfeit of frank reports from school officials 
themselves and clearly valid reports from local officials at 
times prompted by parental and community protests. While these 
do not allow quantification, a measurement of the extent of 
hunger across the system, they do establish the fact that the 
operation of the system did not begin to guarantee that all 
children would be in every 
instance 
fed properly, 
and 
moreover, that hunger was a continual and systemic problem: 
that "the food given" to boys and girls was too often "too 
175 

meagre"73 that agents were not satisfied with the diet "neither 
as to quantity or quality, "74 that the children "were not given 
enough to eat, especially meat,"75 "the food supply has been 
inadequate for the needs of the children," that "the vitality 
of the children is not sufficiently sustained from a lack of 
nutritious food, or enough of the same for vigorous growing 
children."76 They reveal, as well, congenital inaction on the 
Department's part in the face of hunger, a neglect rooted in 
administrative 
and 
financial 
considerations, 
in 
the 
application of Departmental regulations and, of course, in the 
issue of the per capita grants. 
According 
to 
Departmental 
regulations, 
adopted 
at 
the 
beginning of the Industrial school era, schools were to follow 
a Departmental 
"dietary" 
or scale of rations 
including 
amounts, to be provided weekly to the children. This was 
reaffirmed in 1892 and 1894 and in the 1911 contracts which 
stipulated that all schools receiving a government grant had 
"to be kept up to a certain dietary."77 As with health 
regulations, these were honoured more in the breach than in 
the observance resulting in confusion and finger pointing. 
In what may be the earliest scale, Dewdney, in 1883, set out 
for Lacombe the rations on a per diem basis. Students were to 
receive lib. of flour, l/21b. of bacon, lib. of beef, 1/8 oz 
of tea, 2 ozs of sugar, 1/2 oz. of rice, l oz. of dried 
apples, 3 ozs of oatmeal, 1/2 oz. of pepper and syrup at 3 
gallons a month per student.78 Whether the students actually 
were given such food in the proscribed amounts is a moot point 
and one which remained a point of difference between the 
schools and the Department for years. In the first decade of 
the history of the system, the Department began complaining 
that school administrators did not adhere strictly to the 
scales even purchasing items "which might be regarded as 
luxuries."79 This was unnecessary according to Benson, who 
concluded in his 1897 review of the school system that the 
scale provided for adequate amounts of wholesome if plain 
food.80 
On 
their 
part, 
churches 
replied 
that 
the 
scales 
were 
unrealistic, even if they could be followed faithfully, and 
thus Principals had to go their own way. Father Hugonard at 
Qu'Appelle 
spoke 
for 
many 
when 
he 
explained 
to 
the 
Superintendent General, E. Dewdney, in 1891, that while "the 
present ration scale may be good for children" in general 
it is not suitable for the majority of our pupils 
one third of whom eat more than men and women and 
another third eat fully as much. I have seen them 
at the end of a meal complain that they had not had 
enough to eat and upon enquiry have found that it 
was never without good reason.81 
176 

This difference was never resolved. Some sense, however, may-
be had of how adequately the children were being fed through 
data revealed by an inquiry into the Regina school deficit in 
1904. A 
report 
submitted by J. McKenna, 
the 
assistant 
commissioner, J. Menzies, a chartered accountant with a 
Winnipeg firm which represented the Presbyterian church and R. 
MacKay, another Presbyterian official, set out the allowances 
according to an 1894 dietary and compared them to the amounts 
actually 
consumed. 
In most 
instances the children 
were 
underfed. 
For basic foodstuffs, the 1894 allowances provided per child, 
per annum: 1821bs. of beef, 511bs. of cheese, 211bs. of 
currants, 121bs. of beans, 121bs. of rice, 3601bs. of flour 
and lllbs. of raisins. The investigative team discovered that 
for 1900, for the 90 children and the 13 staff then in the 
school, this worked out as follows: 
Allowance[lbs] 
Actual Consumption 
Beef 
21,580 
13,866 
Cheese 
515 
73 
Currants 
206 
456 
Beans 
1236 
700 
Rice 
1236 
730 
Raisins 
102 
200 
An interesting sidelight was the note that the scales for 
teachers were higher in some instances. For example, teachers 
were allocated 540 rather than 360 lbs. of flour. It is hard 
to believe, however, that such variances could have added up 
to the dollar differences the auditors put in their report. It 
cost, they estimated, $26 to feed each child for the year and 
$52 each adult.82 Perhaps on the adult bill went a whole series 
of 
additional 
commodities 
purchased 
regularly 
by 
the 
Principal, Rev. Mr. Sinclair - purchases which shocked Martin 
Benson as they were obviously not just plain, wholesome food. 
Benson described how the Principal went along to the Regina 
Trading Company "as frequently as to the ordinary corner 
grocery store" where he procured, 
marmalade, 
sardines, 
lemons, 
oranges, 
shelled 
walnuts, icing sugar, lunch tongue, canned salmon, 
toilet cream, bananas, Fry's chocolate, olives, 
candies, 
tobacco, 
jelly 
powder, 
canned 
peas 
(French?). 
To this amazing list Benson then added 
In enumerating the luxuries indulged in, I forgot 
to mention Mr. Williamson's account. He keeps a 
fruit exchange at Regina and supplied the oysters 
177 

and grapes needed by the school. 
Finally, as if this was not enough, Sinclair regularly had 
shipped in from the wholesaler, A.J. Macdonald Co., Winnipeg 
syrup, 
strawberries, 
raspberries, 
blueberries, 
peaches, plums, red cherries, pears, pineapples, 
apricots, raisins, figs, tomatoes, corn, macaroni, 
kippered herrings, dates, honey and tooth picks by 
the case, monthly.83 
Such fare stood in sharp contrast to Benson's own description 
of a "regulation school meal" of "bread and drippings or 
boiled beef and potatoes."84 
The argument over the scale, its adequacy or the schools 
deviance from it, was rather academic for the overriding 
dynamic which determined the quality of the dietary was the 
funds that were available to the schools. Even had the 
Department regularly inspected the schools and insisted on 
compliance with all the regulations including the dietary, 
which according to Benson, it did not do,85 many Principals 
could not have complied for they found either that the per 
capita level was too low or that they did not have a large 
enough student authorization. Thus, as the Principal at 
Kamloops stated bluntly, "food could not be provided to the 
scale of rations furnished by the Department, because I had 
not sufficient means to do so." He claimed, ironically, that 
if he was to feed the students he had in the school, he had to 
have more students in the school.86 This, of course, was the 
usual plea made here for the sake of the food budget and in so 
many other letters for repairs, or teachers salaries or 
general overhead. There was never "sufficient means" for any 
of these things. 
The cuts in grants which came in 1914 and again during the 
Depression and the Second World War made the task of feeding 
the children even more difficult. J.T. Ross, the Principal of 
Cecilia Jeffrey school (Presbyterian), Kenora, writing on his 
own and on behalf of Father C. Bouillet, who operated the 
Catholic school in Kenora, 
informed the Department 
that 
despite the across the board $10 increase in 1917, the "per 
capita grant is not sufficient to meet our needs in buying 
food for the children." It is "absurd to imagine that an 
Indian child can be properly fed on 40 cents per day leaving 
clothing out of the question.87 Food prices climbed during the 
war - up in his region, the Principal of Brandon estimated, 40 
per cent - leaving him unable to keep up.88 
After the First World War, the Department appears to have 
thrown in the regulatory towel. According to a remark made by 
Benson in 1904 this would not have been a great change. He 
178 

explained to the deputy superintendent that the dietary had 
been to a great degree a fiction. 
Such a scale was prepared many years ago but it was 
never intended to apply to schools on the per 
capita basis and it is not now and was never 
enforced by the schools.... It was prepared as a 
guide some years ago to arrive at the cost of 
feeding 
pupils 
when 
the 
schools 
were 
first 
established and were under Departmental management 
and also to assist 
in the preparation of the 
estimates for Industrial schools while carried on 
by the Department.89 
In 1922, whatever its status, the "dietary" was virtually 
handed over to the churches. R. Ferrier, then the Department's 
superintendent of education, asked each school to submit their 
own scale to the Department. This was to list the food and the 
quantity served to the children each day. The local agent 
would then use this as a guide when visiting the school. Some 
of the scales were to be submitted to the "Health Department 
at Ottawa for their criticism."90 Only a very small number of 
schools responded to this call and there appears to be no 
record of any consultation with the Department of Health. Some 
school menus were collected, as a matter of course, during 
inspections but they are mute; they say nothing about what was 
actually served and in what amounts. As Simes realized at 
Elkhorn such menus could be no more than culinary creations. 
From another perspective, however, the 1922 non-policy based 
on school by school scales more realistically addressed the 
question of feeding the children. Centrally set food policy, 
given the widely differing circumstances of the schools, could 
not work. For Agent W. Halliday, who in 1926 reviewed the 
Alert Bay school menu, it was obvious that the members of the 
Anglican committee in Winnipeg who dictated it "apparently 
know nothing whatever about the climatic conditions and what 
is best for this particular place."91 Furthermore, the method 
of setting per capita rates was not at all sensitive to those 
local and different school circumstances. The Department 
itself, admitted that fact. In 1937, Hoey set out 
the 
drawbacks of the "very unsatisfactory" per capita system. 
The payments now allowed appear to have been agreed 
upon as a result of negotiations carried on between 
the 
Indian 
Affairs 
Branch 
and 
the 
church 
authorities. Increases are usually the result of 
appeals from those charged with the operation of 
the 
school 
for 
sufficient 
money 
to keep 
the 
institutions in operation. We do not appear to have 
on file anything to guide us in determining what 
should 
constitute 
an 
economic 
enrolment 
at 
a 
179 

residential school in an outlying section of the 
Dominion, nor have we authorative information to 
guide us in our attempts to discover the actual 
costs of operation - which costs are influenced by 
inaccessibility, freight rates, lack of food supply 
in the territory, etc. Certain representatives of 
the churches, who have interviewed me since I 
entered the Department, assure me that they have, 
for 
a 
number 
of 
years, 
persuaded 
certain 
merchandising 
concerns 
to give a cut rate on 
supplies, without which they would have been unable 
to maintain their school in a state of efficiency. 
The policy that had been followed since 1892 was too "rigid." 
No allowance had ever been made for the "violent fluctuations 
in the purchasing power of the dollar." Hoey thought it would 
be possible to arrive at "a more or less scientific formula on 
which our payments could be based." It would need to have "a 
measure of elasticity" enabling "bonuses when the cost of 
commodities were at their peak" and withdrawing them "when the 
cost of living went down. In other words, there should be some 
relationship between our payments and the cost of feeding and 
clothing pupils from year to year." 
That was what Hoey hoped might be the future. In the past, 
however, that "relationship between our payments and the cost" 
had not existed and thus Principals had been left on their own 
to deal with "the actual costs of operation" in their area 
influenced by such factors as "inaccessibility, freight rates, 
lack of food supply in the territory, etc."92 They had to do 
so within the persistent context of underfunding. As a general 
rule, the response, school by school, was what Father Victor 
Rassier had determined 
at Christie 
- 
a programme of 
"economizing to the bone in every department1,93 and striving 
to produce food and revenue from their land and stock. This 
way forward proved particularly rocky for the children who 
might expect shorter rations and whose "manpower" would be the 
main energy in the effort to produce revenue. 
Aboriginal 
people 
knew 
that 
to 
attempt 
to 
concentrate 
significant numbers of people for any length of time in most 
areas of Canada, with the exception of the British Columbia 
coast and the St. Lawrence valley, was to court disastrous 
food shortages. Fur companies, such as the Hudson's Bay 
Company, had overcome this difficulty only by post gardening 
where possible, the employment of Aboriginal hunters and 
fishermen 
and 
the 
organization 
of 
an 
extensive 
and 
sophisticated supply system to distribute plains produced 
pemmican or other foodstuffs acquired in settled areas of the 
country. Schools, therefore, built, as Hoey said, in an 
"outlying section of the Dominion" and larger in every case 
than any fur post took on a considerable and, perhaps, 
180 

irresponsible challenge. There was no government supply system 
and thus schools in the north and even those along the Pacific 
coast, found themselves in difficulty procuring essential 
supplies.94 The Western schools had had the same problem as 
they had been opened in the 1880s and early 1890s in advance 
of 
heavy 
concentrations 
of 
prairie 
settlement 
and 
the 
accompanying accommodating infrastructure. 
Even settlement, the development of urban centres, however, 
was not an unmixed blessing. While it guaranteed 
local 
sources, demand often outstripped supply and thus schools 
could find themselves priced out of the market.95 Moreover, 
always with an eye on the political utility of its schools, 
the Department directed Principals "in fairness to the dealers 
of the town" to buy locally even if it was less expensive to 
bring in supplies from distant wholesalers.96 As Hoey's church 
informants 
told 
him 
this 
was 
a political 
luxury 
they 
determined 
they could not afford and thus some entered 
agreements, persuading "certain merchandising concerns to give 
a cut rate on supplies."97 On the plus side, the local non-
Aboriginal population did represent a market opportunity for 
school produce. Here again, however, the Department set up a 
road block. It would not countenance interference with local 
producers 
or 
tradesmen. 
When 
it 
occurred, 
Scott, 
in 
particular, 
was 
emphatic. 
He 
lectured 
Father 
Hugonard, 
Principal of Qu'Appelle, who frequently transgressed, "not to 
undertake work for the public, and again to direct you not to 
enter into competition with the business community."98 
The only 
answer 
schools could adopt 
to the persistent 
underfunding by the government and churches and the vagaries 
of local markets was school production for consumption or 
sale. Children under the direction of the Principal, or at 
times a farm instructor, ran farming and dairying operations 
as well as producing wood for fuel used in cooking meals and 
heating the schools before the introduction of oil, gas and 
electric. And, of course, the children carried on the general 
housework of the school. In 1893, Hayter Reed described the 
labour of the young girls at St Paul's Industrial School. 
I would draw your attention to the tender age of 
the girls set to work in the laundry and although 
there is a laundress I observed that the girls only 
were at the wash-tubs; no less than nine of the 
staff have their washing done in the School, and 
this entails almost more work than the washing for 
all the children there being no starched clothes 
for the latter. ... I would recommend that the 
benches be stained and the tables covered with zinc 
so as to reduce the household labor of the children 
as much as possible. 
181 

Reed feared that the girls would become "drudges to the 
staff."99 All the children, in fact, became drudges to their 
schools. Duncan Campbell Scott's comment on Qu'Appelle, that 
it "has been constantly represented that they [the children] 
are simply used as so much manual power to produce revenue for 
the school" could have been applied throughout the system.100 
Rising early, the boys and girls were to spend half their day 
in the classroom and the rest of the day in barns and coops or 
field and woodlots, in the laundry and bake house. The daily 
grind was arduous and exhausting. Benson calculated that the 
school day was 15 hours long. It was "a wearisome grind for 
teacher and pupil ... the half day system ... is very tiring 
for any but the grown up pupils."101 
There was, unfortunately, no guarantee in any of this that the 
children would be fed adequately at the end of the day and 
considerable evidence that the commercialization of the school 
operation contributed to malnutrition. Inspector A.E. Green 
informed the Department in 1905, with reference to Port 
Simpson, that the children "were treated harshly, that the 
boys were not given sufficient food."102 The sale of dairy 
products, milk, cream and butter was common throughout the 
system and a good revenue source. It meant in many cases, 
however, 
that 
the children were denied these 
important 
foods.103 Assistant Commissioner C.C. Perry's 1930 report on 
Kootenay was particularly critical on this point, charging, 
that during the regime of these Sisters it was 
their practise to sell most of the milk and eggs 
and other produce in order to augment maintenance 
funds, disposing of these products at a rate of 
about $250.00 a month; that the children were given 
skim milk and very badly fed. . . .104 
Inspector P.H. Cairns noted that this practise was widespread 
in British Columbia schools. He was particularly concerned by 
milk skimming. "If I had my way I would banish every separator 
from these Industrial and Boarding Schools. The pupils need 
the butter fat so much."105 
No doubt, as Benson suggested, children who were overworked, 
overtired and underfed had little interest in school work. 
They 
were 
also 
more 
susceptible 
to 
disease 
including 
tuberculosis. Poor diets, and indeed unfamiliar food as the 
Smithsonian study asserted, were yet another factor with 
insufficient ventilation and overcrowding which created the 
tuberculosis catastrophe. The Department was well aware of 
this. In 1915, Dr. Norquay at the Norway House hospital warned 
the Inspector of Indian Agencies, J.R. Bunns, who passed the 
information directly to Scott, that the children from the 
Methodist residential school he was seeing who were infected 
with tuberculosis were in every case under-nourished. The food 
182 

at the school was not up to standard. The bread was bad, there 
was not enough beef or fish and the Principal admitted he 
could not grow enough vegetables.106 At the other end of the 
country and at the end of this period that link between poor 
diets and poor health was still in evidence. In 1938 Inspector 
G.H. Barry, following conversations with Dr. R. Dick, who 
provided medical services to the children of Kuper Island 
school, admitted that 
in the absence of some improvement in the variety 
and quantity of food served to the children at 
Kuper Island and the provision for a somewhat 
longer time for meals, I am somewhat apprehensive 
with 
regard 
to 
the 
health 
of 
the 
pupils 
particularly those now stated to be infected with 
T. B.107 
The reality of the economics of the schools did not change 
between 
1915 and 1938. Food 
shortages, 
therefore, 
were 
persistent and it was the childrens1 labour which fulfilled 
what in fact was a duty of their new "parents" to them. The 
final irony in this was that in all areas of the country, 
except the high plains after the disappearance of the buffalo, 
children on entering the schools likely left behind a better 
diet, provided by communities that were yet living on the 
land, 
than that which was provided 
to them by 
school 
authorities. This had in fact been Cornellius Bignell's main 
point about Elkhorn - that living conditions in the community 
were better than in the school.108 After the Second World War, 
with the prof essionalization of the supervision of food 
services in the school system, it would be possible to have 
surer insights into the quality of school diets but even in 
this period there are hints that the move from a "savage" 
Aboriginal diet to an inferior "civilized" non-Aboriginal diet 
was problematic. In this light, Benson probably did not 
realize the profound nature of his 1897 critique of school 
food. 
The bill of fare is decidedly monotonous and makes 
no 
allowance 
for 
peculiarities 
of 
taste 
or 
constitution. What is one man's meat is another 
man's poison, but at our schools it is die dog or 
eat the hatchet.109 
Cultural 
practises, 
the 
"peculiarities 
of 
taste," 
were 
certainly not replicated in the schools. There are constant 
references in the reports by local officials that school 
dietaries lacked adequate amounts of meat or fish.110 Such 
protein sources were the major component of the traditional 
diet. Unlike vegetables or grains which could be produced in 
bulk and had a long shelf life, fresh meat and fish were 
difficult to procure in quantity or to store. The Principal at 
183 

Prince Albert raised the ire of the "James Roberts band" 
because as the school had no proper facilities for storing or 
cleaning the fish, it was often spoiled when it was served to 
the children. The agent R.S. Davis, who investigated the 
complaint, reported that "at present they are cleaned outside 
in the bush along the lake, this draws many flies. The fish 
are held over from one meal to another and cannot be of the 
best on a hot day when the evening meal is served."111 
The community at Kitamaat was equally exercised over the diet 
of that school and again the agent noted that "she [the 
Principal, 
Ida Clarke] cannot always get fresh meat or 
fish."112 Clarke's claim that despite this the children "always 
have enough to eat" did not satisfy the community and may not 
have satisfied a dietician either who may have pointed out 
that a diet without meat or fish, or a legume substitute, 
(beans, peanut butter and so forth), would fulfil the child's 
carbohydrate needs only. 
The Department was aware that another nutritional component, 
often identified as a lack of "fat," was missing from many 
diets.113 This was the basis of Cairns' s campaign against cream 
separators114 and the concern expressed by others that children 
received few dairy products. Halliday, at Alert Bay, even drew 
the connection between health, Aboriginal food culture and 
that school's diet. He noted the shortage of meat and fish and 
what he thought was an unusual amount of sickness among the 
children. It had been pointed out to him, he told the 
Department, 
that in their native habitat Indians live on more 
or less oily foods, they use large quantities of 
fish and use very largely fish oil and also eat a 
great many hair seals which are very fat indeed. I 
found at the school that there was a very small 
quantity of fish on the diet list. It must be 
admitted however that at times it is difficult to 
get fresh fish, but it would appear from the 
quantity 
that 
would 
be 
used 
there 
that 
an 
arrangement might be made to get a good weekly 
allowance.115 
While Halliday and others may well have been concerned about 
the dietary, at no time in this period did the Department make 
any sustained attempt to ensure that "an arrangement might be 
made to get a good weekly allowance" of food to the children. 
At times, as at Elkhorn, the Department responded to community 
protests. But the result was never anything more than a report 
over which senior staff might, at best, have shaken their 
heads in dismay, unless it is to t>e believed that they 
discounted not only the evidence of "Edward B." but that from 
their own agents and visiting physicians. They certainly did 
184 

not shake their fists in indignation and they were not moved 
to sympathy or action even by the warning that lay in Simes's 
report. 
To permit present circumstances to continue will 
eventually not only bring severe public criticism 
on Indian Affairs Branch, but serve no useful 
purpose in uplifting or helping the Indians.116 
Without a concerted national effort by the Department to 
ensure adequate diets and against the force of fluctuating 
local conditions and the rise and fall of per capita rates, 
efforts by Principals to feed the children, or by agents to 
rectify particularly bad situations, seemed doomed to failure. 
At the heart of this failure lay the fact that Ottawa did not 
intervene though officials in the field, from the earliest 
days of the system, argued for it. Dewdney, in 1888, pointed 
out 
to the deputy 
superintendent 
general 
that as 
"the 
Department is the legal guardian of the Indian children" and 
the senior financial partner in the system that "in a matter 
considered by it [the Department], to be of serious importance 
[it should] reserve the right of withholding such assistance 
pending effect being given to its expressed views."117 There 
was to be, however, no such forceful administration. The 
Department did not use its power to suspend per capitas, even 
after the 1911 contracts, or to remove children from a school 
as a way of levering churches into compliance with any 
suitable dietary. Thus the system was allowed to drift and 
local problems continued unresolved. A brief episode at 
Kitamaat sufficiently illustrates what was the norm throughout 
the system. 
At Kitamaat Girls School in 1922, the community, angered over 
the death of one of the girls and the "ill-treatment" of the 
children, refused to let any child return to the school after 
a holiday. The agent, the Principal and "two Constables" of 
the RCMP held a public meeting to air community grievances. 
Parents complained that the children were not well-fed or 
clothed and that the school was injurious to their health. 
"One made the statement that of all the girls who had attended 
the school 49 have died, and 30 are alive." Once the agent 
promised that a doctor would visit and check on the condition 
of the children and the sanitary condition of the school: 
The Indians at last agreed to return the children 
to the school, if the principal would sign a paper 
that the children would be well fed. Miss Clarke 
signed a paper to this effect; and, on behalf of 
the Indians two of them signed a statement that 
they would give the school proper support.118 
The parents remained watchful or as the local missionary 
185 

reported, they exhibited a "belligerent attitude" that had a 
"disturbing influence on the workers in the Residential 
school."119 The community's attitude was justified for four 
years later when the school was visited by Inspector Cairns, 
he was not satisfied with the general condition of the school, 
the schoolwork or the food "neither as to the quantity or 
quality." In defense of the children, parents resorted to 
resisting their enrolment in the school.120 In defense of the 
children, the Department did nothing. 
The Kitamaat community and others who protested that their 
children were not being well fed or cared for may have felt, 
as did Chief Bignell at The Pas, that "it was the duty of the 
Department rather than that of the Indians to see that the 
conditions in the school were remedied".121 If that was, 
indeed, the case, it was, throughout this period, a vain hope 
for the Department's inaction in the face of hungry children 
was part of a pattern of irresponsibility, writ even larger 
and more tragically in the physical abuse of the children. It 
amounted to complicity in the mistreatment of its wards. 
CLOTHES 
"In fairness I want to add that all the children have good 
clothes but these are kept for Sundays and when the children 
go downtown - in other words when out where they can be seen, 
they are well dressed."122 A. Hamilton, 1936. 
Inspector Hamilton's comment about the clothes of the children 
of Birtle school in Manitoba disrupts the image of the 
residential school child that the Department displayed in its 
Annual Report photographs - Thomas Moore in his neat suit and 
the pretty dresses and straw hats of the young Qu'Appelle 
girls posed with their shabby savage father. Daily, behind the 
school walls, after the posing or the trip downtown, the 
children returned to a reality that did not reflect that 
published ideal. Many children sat down, poorly dressed, to 
meagre meals. The reasons for both of these facts were the 
same. 
European clothes were the outward manifestation of 
the 
transformation from the "savage" to the civilized state. In 
the early optimistic days in the life of most schools "good 
clothes," were purchased or, in the case of the industrial 
schools, run up from material, duck, blanket cloth and linen, 
provided by the Department. In 1884, a list was issued of what 
was "Required for the use of the Industrial Schools about to 
186 

be opened in the NW Territories at Qu'Appelle, Battleford in 
Treaty 7." 
Each school was to be issued 
200 yds brown duck lined with cloth for winter wear 
200 yds brown duck for summer suits 
100 pairs woolen mitts 
100 grey flannel shirts 
16 hides for buckskin moccasins 
100 sinews for sewing 
20 needles 
20 balls thread, black & white, different sizes 
100 pairs woollen socks 
30 yds duffel for winter wear 
40 prs assorted sizes of brogans for boys between 7 & 17 
35 comforters 
35 fur caps 
140 blankets 
175 yds ticking 
3 0 white blankets to make great coats 
100 yds linen123 
The clothes made from these supplies were to be the first 
outward sign of what was assumed would soon be the inner grace 
of civilization. 
For school administrators, school uniforms were especially 
significant 
- countering what 
had always been seen by 
Europeans 
as 
the 
dangerous, 
excessive 
individuality 
of 
Aboriginal 
society. Unbridled 
individualism, manifest 
in 
boisterous, decorative display, which broke the bounds of 
decorum and thus signalled the potentiality of lawlessness, 
was the core of savagery. In the schools, it could be 
moderated by uniforms which reduced the children to sameness, 
to regularity, 
to order and were, therefore, 
agents of 
discipline and thus of civilization. 
The link between order, discipline and obedience to authority, 
woven symbolically into the fabric of the school uniform was 
often picked out approvingly by the churches as a military 
analogy. In 1925, T. Westgate, the field secretary of the 
Missionary Society of the Church of England, lobbied the 
Department for a system-wide uniform to be adapted from that 
used by Canada's naval cadets. The idea was not received with 
enthusiasm by R. Ferrier, the superintendent of education. He 
balked at the administrative difficulties of such a task and 
added cryptically "that there was much to be said for and 
against a uniform for boys at Indian residential schools."124 
For the churches, however, there was no room for debate. In 
193 8, a submission to the minister from a joint delegation of 
all the churches laying out the "URGENT NEEDS" of the system 
187 

requested the government provide a uniform. They had 
always considered uniforms to be essential to such 
work as this. The value of a uniform in the 
Services need not be dwelt upon. There would be no 
true cohesion without a uniform. Further if modern 
Dictators [Hitler, Mussolini] find that a coloured 
shirt assists in implanting political doctrines and 
even racial and theological ideas, it should be 
obvious 
that 
the 
adoption 
of 
a 
bright 
and 
attractive uniform would assist in implanting all 
that we desire in the children under our care. 
There was, however, more to this issue than the ideological 
importance of attire, of school uniforms and proper Sunday 
clothes. In the submission, the churches wanted the uniforms 
provided by the government for they admitted that they had not 
routinely had funds to purchase proper clothes for the 
children.125 
As in almost everything about the schools, the 
considerable distance between the vision of the schooling-
civilizing process and the actual treatment of the children 
measured 
the breadth 
of the churches' 
and 
governments' 
hypocrisy. Many a first-time Principal, like Lett at St. 
George's, or the Rev. J. Salles at Kamloops, was shocked when 
first arriving at school to find how wide that gap was. In the 
spring of 1917, Salles found on his arrival that the Kamloops 
buildings were "very old and have been patched up so often 
that it costs more to repair them than it would to build an up 
to 
date 
school." 
The 
farm, 
needing 
irrigation, 
was 
unproductive and the "horses and cattle being too old, 
everything should be replaced." 
However, 
What struck me most when I came here is the ragged 
condition of the boys' clothes. None had been 
bought since September and I could not buy any as 
we had not a cent in the bank and I will not buy 
any until July as we will be without cash and I 
cannot get any credit.... Half of the boys have 
only one pair of stockings, they repaired their own 
shoes, but these are too old to last long and their 
uniform is so old and so worn out that we do not 
dare to show them to anyone. 
Agent J. Smith, when he visited the school in the following 
year, supported Salles assessment in every detail adding that 
the girls too were poorly clothed including the fact that the 
"present supply of underwear for the girls is shockingly low." 
He agreed, too, that all of the failings were rooted, not 
surprisingly, in that universal reality - inadequate per 
capita grants.126 
That fiscal reality and its effect on care generally and here 
188 

on the quality of the clothing provided to the children had 
and continued to echo throughout the system. More examples 
piled up in Departmental files spanning the period. In 1908, 
at Chapleau, Ontario, the agent, in a surprise visit, saw the 
school "in an ordinary state." The building was "not suited to 
the needs of a residential school," it was overcrowded and 
there were hardly any washing facilities. Some of the 40 
children had tuberculosis and there was considerable eczema 
against which 
apparently no steps had been taken to stop the 
spread of the disease and unless proper provision 
is made for washing and the cleanliness of the 
pupils, this disease is likely to spread through 
the whole school.... 
The Department admitted that funding was the problem, that the 
Principal was "doing his best to carry on on the government 
grant and in his anxiety to make ends meet he has taken in 
more pupils than the school will accommodate and has pushed 
economy to the limit." Such economy had led to the fact that 
there was neither adequate clothes nor bedding for the 
children.127 
Again, in 1908, but this time at Cecilia Jeffrey School, the 
Inspector found that 
although this is a comparatively new school, it is 
badly in need of repairs for lack of attention. 
They have no systematic water supply; the daily 
needs are dependent on what is brought in in pails 
and barrels. 
The building was cold as "no proper precaution [is] taken to 
retain the heat" and amidst this litany was the notation that 
the children were not warmly clad and the bedding was 
insufficient and unclean.128 
In 1910, the Kamloops Principal frankly stated that he had to 
reduce the amount of food and that he could not afford to 
provide "decent clothing" for his pupils.129 In 1914, parents 
of children at St. Joseph's complained to the Dominion Land 
agent, C. Stockdale, that "the children up there are not being 
treated at all good, nothing on their feet etc."130 In 1929, W. 
Graham was informed by Agent Murison, after a visit to Round 
Lake 
school, 
"I was 
oppressed 
with 
an 
atmosphere 
of 
listlessness in everything." The boys "looked fairly healthy 
but in all my experience I never before saw such patched and 
ragged clothing as worn by the boys."131 
Round Lake was, indeed, a mess. Miss Affleck, in a long letter 
to W. Graham, sketched out the consequences for the children. 
189 

"In all my 18 years experience as a teacher, I never had in my 
school a dirtier, more ill-clad or more likeable class of 
little folk." Washing facilities, sanitation, and, of course, 
food and clothes - the "attractiveness" and adequacy of the 
food and the supply of clothes - were wanting. "Breakfast," 
she wrote, 
always means porridge, bread and lard and tea -
nothing else. When I asked the cook why so little 
porridge for each child (about 3 tbsp) she said 
"The children don't like it and besides the pot 
isn't big enough to make more.' 
The clothes were equally comic and sad. The Principal, Mr. 
Ross, himself 
has complete charge of the footwear for both boys 
and girls and he gives them the most ridiculous 
outfits. The little girls go teetering around in 
pumps with outlandish heels, or those old fashioned 
very high boots with high heels, sizes to large, or 
silly little sandals that won't stay on their feet 
-cheap lots that he buys for next to nothing, or 
second hand misfits that come in bales.132 
At the end of the period, in 1944, Bignell, Allan and Simes at 
Elkhorn added deplorable clothes and shoes to the list of 
everything 
else 
at 
the 
school 
which 
was 
wholly 
"unsatisfactory" - the children's 
clothes were disgraceful, The clothing was not only 
dirty but torn and ragged. Their stockings were 
full of holes. Not a single child was observed to 
be wearing a good pair of boots.133 
In the absence of adequate funding from either government or 
church headquarters, Principals could only fall back on the 
school's revenue producing potential or, particularly in the 
case of clothes, on charity. "Second hand misfits which come 
in bales" 
- charity 
clothes, 
outlandish 
"pumps," 
"old 
fashioned ... boots," "silly ... sandals," miles of mufflers, 
mitts, disused duffle coats, tee shirts, sweaters, shirts, 
dresses, socks came from women's auxiliaries. They were 
collected in church foyers, packed and shipped from church 
basements to cover the indecencies of the "savages" around the 
world and the children in residential schools. 
"PARENTS" 
Obviously, 
financial 
factors, 
chronic 
underfunding 
in 
190 

particular, was a major dynamic in the manner in which 
Principals and their staff attended to the care, clothing and 
feeding of the children and the upkeep of the fabric of the 
school. To a degree their behaviour in this regard was pre-
determined - programmed by the relatively limited options 
available - overcrowding the school to acquire larger grants, 
overworking 
the children 
to augment 
school budgets 
and 
practising economy in every sector. However, the fact that 
some 
schools 
were 
better 
than 
others, 
which 
was 
how 
Christianson, for example, had characterized the treatment of 
children at Morley or, indeed, how Scott had characterized the 
physical condition of Catholic schools in general, speaks to 
another universal reality - school administrators had some 
latitude as well. There was scope for a Principal and staff to 
exercise initiative and what talents they had to benefit the 
children. Here again, in too many cases, the system was 
wanting, the churches and the Department, which under the 
Order in Council of 1892 and the contracts of 1911, retained 
authority over appointments to the schools, did not guarantee 
that the people employed, those who were the daily "parents" 
of the children in the schools, were appropriate to the task 
or worked in conditions which were conducive to the well-being 
of the children and their proper treatment. In the quality of 
those "parents" and in the conditions in which they toiled lay 
not only the roots of the neglect but of the abuse of the 
children. 
Operating a school was a complex task for the institution was 
not only a school, but, of course, a residence and in most 
cases a farm. The expertise required of a Principal and the 
effort required of the staff, both teaching and non-teaching, 
was considerable. All of this was made more onerous by the 
fact that the children came from another culture and were to 
be cared for without adequate provision from the government. 
Unfortunately, all too often, the staff were not up to this 
difficult challenge. The evidence of this, according to senior 
staff of the Department, was readily evident in the condition 
of the school and the care of the children. In 1916, Scott 
received a report on Old Sun's school detailing the "entire 
want of discipline and order." The floors and walls were 
unclean, the bake house was filthy, there were "indications of 
mice in the flour" and pails were used for toilets in the 
dormitories and then emptied in the lavatories where they were 
left and "smell horribly." It was all, Scott concluded, 
because of "the principal and his wife" who "are said to be 
very nice people but without the faintest idea of managing an 
institution of this sort."134 They were far from the only such 
people put in charge. At the Whitehorse school in 1912, the 
Principal, a "navy man" was also to do the farming and his 
wife, the Matron, was to be the cook. Neither had any 
experience whatsoever in running a school.135 
191 

This was the case, too, at the Alberni school in 1910. Agent 
A. Neill announced to the Department, with 
considerable 
exasperation, the arrival of Mr. H.B. Currie and his wife: 
They appear to be very nice and well-intentioned, 
but they have absolutely no knowledge of school 
management, or of nursing or of handling Indians; 
they do not appear to have been fully informed of 
the conditions under which they will have to work. 
I repeat that personally, I think they are people 
of fine character, but it is not fair to them, it 
is not fair to the school, it is not fair to the 
Department for the church to send out people so 
entirely inexperienced in the work.136 
He was particularly exercised not only because the school had 
just lost, through retirement, a highly experienced Principal 
but because he was frustrated by the way in which the 
appointment system worked. He had the year before pushed for 
the introduction of strict qualifications for Principals and, 
indeed, teachers, only to have the ABC's of the financing of 
the residential school system pointed out to him by his 
superior in British Columbia, A. Vowel1. Neill, in fact, 
wanted a college degree as a prerequisite for Principalship. 
The fact that the vast majority of the Principals came from 
the ranks of the churches was no guarantee of quality. 
Graduation from a divinity school, ordination as a priest or 
the taking of holy vows did not in any significant fashion 
prepare a person for the multiple responsibilities entailed in 
the management of a school. Vowell explained, however, that 
school positions were not attractive to qualified people. The 
schools were, in most instances, isolated and did not offer 
salaries competitive with those of urban provincial schools. 
To recruit university trained Principals was not only a near 
impossibility but would inevitably lead to requests from the 
churches for larger grants to meet the increased salary 
expenditure. In Vowell's opinion, and he was correct then and 
would be throughout the period 
from the tenor of the Department's letters on the 
subject from time to time received of late years it 
is understood that it is not at present disposed to 
entertain requests for increased grants to Indian 
boarding and industrial schools.137 
The Department, of course, realized that its access to mission 
workers, 
allowed 
it 
to 
operate 
the 
system 
much 
more 
economically than would be the case if it had to compete for 
staff with provincial 
educational 
systems. Without 
such 
people, moved, as Davin described them, "by a motive power 
beyond 
anything pecuniary, "13B costs would 
"mount 
to an 
alarming figure." There was, however, a down side to this in 
192 

the quality of those employees. To Vowell's suggestion that 
the system could not readily attract first rate people some 
senior staff added a darker suspicion - the schools were a 
dumping ground for less competent church staff. R.T. Ferrier 
commented in 1932 on the "proness of Church officials to 
assign to Indian work Reverend gentlemen and instructors who 
have not been too successful in other fields of activity."139 
The system routinely employed those who had not been "too 
successful," people like the Currie's, 
and the children 
suffered 
for 
it. 
Bryce 
noted 
in his 
1907 
report 
the 
consequences for the health of the children. The staff in 
general were ignorant of, and unimpressed with, the idea of a 
tubercular epidemic. Furthermore, in the schools he surveyed, 
there was no provision for "physical drill." In ordinary 
circumstances, "the need for such exercise would be looked 
upon as an elementary necessity." 
Perhaps, however 
remembering the very varied types of teachers, 
difficulty often experienced in obtaining permanent 
ones of high quality, and the sources from which 
they are drawn, it may be expecting too much to 
suppose that so elementary a necessity of school 
hygiene as physical exercises should have been a 
regular part of the course in these schools.140 
Neill's fear that Currie would be quite unsatisfactory was 
unfortunately, borne out. The Principal was unaware apparently 
of the "elemental" necessities and thus the school rapidly 
declined. But Currie, of course, was allowed to stay on. 
According to Ditchburn, he spent most of his time building up 
a livestock business in the interest of the school and devoted 
little effort to the school itself. When R. Ferrier visited in 
1921, he recorded his impressions of the Principal and his 
wife. 
Mr. Currie is a hardworker, of unprepossessing 
appearance, is petulant and quick tempered. Mrs. 
Currie is a splendid type. My personal opinion of 
the principal is that he is hardly big enough for 
his job.141 
While just such a statement might have been made about many 
men and women who found employment in the schools that is not 
to say that the school system did not attract any dedicated 
administrators and staff of talent. It did, but often they 
worked under conditions of such difficulty that even skill and 
missionary zeal could fail them. They would find themselves 
unable to properly care for the children they wished to 
parent. Some frank and detailed letters from Rev. Lett to the 
New England Company, the English charity which operated St. 
George's in conjunction with the Department, attest to this 
giving a glimpse into the difficult life of a Principal and 
193 

the personal toll running a school could take. 
Lett arrived with his wife and baby at St. George's in 1923. 
The school buildings were in an advanced state of decay, the 
children badly 
fed and clothed, 
the 
farm and 
orchards 
neglected. The agent thought that if radical action was not 
taken quickly, the institution should be closed. Lett tackled 
the problems with energy and optimism. But within two years 
the strain of the work and their living conditions brought his 
wife, who had taken on the duties of matron, to the verge of 
a breakdown. Lett, himself, was increasingly troubled. While 
he struggled to get the farm and orchard back into efficient 
operation and cope with a fractious staff, he faced a serious 
moral crisis in the school. 
In the dormitory we have a moral problem, which 
owing to the arrangement of that part of the 
building, we are unable to combat. We had one of 
the boys run away two weeks ago, and questioning 
him on his return, found out that the bigger boys 
were 
using 
him 
to 
commit 
sodomy, 
hence, 
his 
getaway, afraid to come to me. I suspected this for 
sometime, but myself and the supervisors had not 
been able to check up on it. It at least will be an 
impossibility to eradicate it, until we have proper 
accommodations where we can separate the older boys 
from the mediums and youngsters. 
Living in the main school building, the Letts experienced some 
of the same conditions that were endured by the children. 
As mentioned, or touched upon, our own situation is 
by no means ideal. We have at the present time, nor 
have we had since coming, any home life. Mrs. Lett, 
baby and myself occupy one bedroom, not even having 
a spare room for visitors. The living and dining 
rooms are so public that we dare [not] talk over 
business affairs and repair to our bedroom, but 
then must confine ourselves to whispers. 
They lived side by side with the staff even sharing a bath and 
toilet with three others. Thus, Lett wrote, we enjoy 
no privacy, which is so much needed under such 
strenuous conditions of work. We long for sometime 
and place where we could be separate, for at least 
a time and could enjoy home by ourselves. With the 
children's dining room on one side, dormitories 
overhead, 
playroom below, we cannot have much 
peace. Our little girl is now growing up, and the 
constant contact with tubercular and syphilitic 
children, and immorality does not make our feelings 
194 

any brighter. To the above I attribute Mrs. Lett's 
condition.142 
The effort of running the school without adequate means and 
realising that he was not succeeding was bringing him to his 
own crisis. In November 1924, the Agent, G. Pagnell, found him 
"almost in despair."143 Scott was shown Lett's letters and 
promised to meet the Anglican church, which was commissioned 
to operate the school by the New England Company, a missionary 
charity based in England, to discuss his situation.144 Lett 
wrote to Scott that he and his wife "cannot allow ourselves to 
go on in this way indefinitely, and finally emerge broken. No 
use in Indian work or anywhere else." Rightly, he laid the 
blame for it all at the door of the Department 
In conclusion, I might say that I am at the present 
time, feeling rather upset, in mind, because of the 
fact, that I am unable to pick up owing to the 
financial strain, the financial end of the school 
work .... I go with my hands tied the work becomes 
more and more burdensome, and I feel it is time 
the Department was placing the institution on a 
permanent businesslike basis so that I will be 
enabled to relief 
[sic] the burden and strain 
carried.145 
He soldiered on regardless as he had no other choice. Scott, 
on his part, despite Lett's plea and reports from agents and 
the visiting doctor, P. Wilson, that showed that without 
substantial capital expenditures the condition of the school, 
the health of the children and the level of care would 
continue to deteriorate146, did nothing for another four years. 
Finally, 
a grant 
for a new building was 
secured 
from 
Parliament.147 
Lett and St. George's were, of course, far from the only case 
of urgent need. The whole system was tugging at Scott's 
sleeve, was crying out for funding for critical improvements 
and per capitas that would provide adequate meals and clothes. 
Many Principals and matrons had to struggle under the load and 
raise 
their children 
in the same deplorable 
conditions 
suffered by the students. In terms of quality most were 
probably somewhere between the pronounced dedication of Lett 
and the obvious incompetence of Currie. For all there was a 
unifying experience - what enthusiasm they brought with them 
and their talents were no doubt submerged by the waves of 
responsibility, overwork, anxiety and frustration that soon 
overwhelmed them. 
If the strain told on Lett and his wife, it was no less so for 
the staff of the schools - the teachers, cooks and stockmen 
and labourers where they were employed. As Bryce noted in his 
195 

comment, there was, throughout the system, a high turnover 
rate which the Department understood was due not only to its 
low level of salaries but to the working conditions in the 
schools - "to constant strain and overwork."148 
Much of the work of the school that was not done by the 
children themselves, was attended to by the teachers who as 
well as teaching in the classrooms, or in the shops and fields 
if they taught trades, were supervisors of the childrens' 
work, play and personal care. Their hours were long, the 
remuneration small and the working conditions irksome, owing 
to the conditions of the buildings and particularly to the 
management structure of the school. 
It is difficult to peer into the Catholic schools where the 
nuns' vows of obedience enforced loyalty to the Principal and 
thus silence and where vows of poverty may well have obviated 
any concern about the physical shortcomings of their and the 
children's lot. Departmental files do, however, reveal some 
details, slight nevertheless, about the lives of staff in 
Protestant schools. It was not an easy life. An appointment to 
a school took a person out of the normal round of social 
intercourse and the opportunities available in non-Aboriginal 
communities and placed 
them 
in an isolated and 
closed 
community of co-workers. The potential for strained inter-
personal relations, heightened by fatigue and the lack of 
privacy, was too often realized.149 
Strangely enough in a number of recorded cases, stress was 
compounded by fear - a fear of the children, a dangerous 
current of emotion which may have coursed below the surface 
and broken through in torrents of abuse at many schools. In 
1896, the Principal at Brandon, John Semmens, reported three 
occasions on which the staff had either been struck or 
threatened by male pupils. In each case, there had been a 
resolution including an apology by the boy. Semmens, however, 
saw in this darker forebodings: 
The point of the trouble lies in the disobedience 
and the insubordination involved. The boys may 
repeat this and what protection have we, or what 
guarantee that they will not combine and give 
trouble to all concerned? It may be necessary to 
handcuff or imprison if the ordinary corrective 
influences fail us.150 
Whether Semmens disquiet over a combination of young men 
rising against the school was rooted simply in fear of the 
physical strength of 16 to 18 year olds or was motivated 
additionally by feelings of anxiety over how badly the 
children were being treated is impossible to determine. What 
is clear is that he was not alone in this fear. Thomas Ross, 
196 

a teacher at Red Deer, frantically telegrammed Clifford 
Sifton, in 1902, "Boys Industrial school have knives - beyond 
control - principal ladies badly fear hourly - kindly take 
steps immediately."151 The Principal of Mackay, Rev. E. Bird 
was, in 1924, also concerned about the violent nature of the 
older boys who, he claimed, had at times attacked the staff. 
The "ladies" wanted strong measures taken against them.152 Some 
years later at Mackay Principal Conlin, worrying about the yet 
threatening behaviour of the boys, thought the solution 
actually lay in replacing his ladies with employees who could 
effectively 
intimidate 
the boys. 
"I would 
not 
suggest 
replacing them with matrons from a jail or rough people of any 
sort, but in future it would be well to supply good Husky 
[sic] ladies for the school, a light weight one is out of 
place here."153 
The Department had apparently no opinion on the appropriate 
size of female employees. However, in response to Semmens, it 
did not entirely dismiss the perceived danger to the staff. 
Concerning your conjecture that the boys 
may 
combine 
in 
their 
opposition 
to 
constituted 
authority, I would say that while there is nothing 
in your letter to indicate that you will ever be 
called upon to meet a crisis of the above nature, 
yet should such an occasion arise there would 
apparently be no practical course open to you other 
than to call in a policeman.154 
To all of these factors must be added the dynamics of school 
organization. Schools were mini-monarchies. They were normally 
run by a Principal and a matron. The Principal was in absolute 
charge having overall responsibility and particular charge of 
academics, the hiring and firing of staff, the recruitment of 
students, the general operation and upkeep of the school and 
budgets. The matron supervised the housekeeping, cooking, 
laundering and the general care of the children. Often the 
Principal and matron were man and wife and that could be 
problematic for the staff. 
J.D. McLean, the departmental 
secretary, informed J. Edmison, the secretary of the board of 
Home Missions of the Presbyterian church, with regards to an 
inspection report on Cecilia Jeffrey School 
There was not the harmony between the Matron and 
the 
subordinate 
officers 
which 
we 
could 
have 
desired to find. This raises the question as to 
whether it is best to have the Principal and his 
wife in command in the same institution. Sympathies 
may be so strong between them that a sort of family 
compact appears. In this case others may for the 
sake of self-protection criticize freely as to 
awaken secret dislike which later manifests itself 
197 

in opposition. So often this kind of thing grows 
from more to more until someone must go to preserve 
the peace.155 
Working conditions for staff which destroyed their morale and 
drove them to opposition and resignation and the failure of 
Principals, 
whether 
it was 
due 
to 
incompetence 
or 
to 
overwhelming odds, could in no way benefit the children. Nor 
could the fact that the schools were not peaceful, rewarding 
places to work, not havens of civilization. Rather, they were 
sites of struggle against poverty, the result of underfunding, 
and, of course, against cultural difference and, therefore, 
against the children themselves. 
Locked away in a distant establishment, beyond or impenetrable 
to the gaze of almost everyone in Canada, this struggle 
against the children and their culture, within an atmosphere 
of considerable stress, fatigue and anxiety may well have 
dulled the staffs' sensitivity to the childrens' hunger, ill-
kempt look and illness and often, perhaps inevitably, pushed 
the application of discipline over the line into abuse, 
transformed what was to be a culture of care into one of 
violence. Certainly, while there is evidence of christian love 
for Miss Affleck's "likeable class of little folk,"156 clear 
traces of an emotion that stood against neglectful and harsh 
treatment, there was also evidence that links those conditions 
with the neglect and abuse of the children. 
Letters of complaint from staff to the Department, "disloyal" 
letters like that sent in by Miss Affleck, often dealt with 
both the treatment of the staff and of the children. Worn 
beyond their tolerance by onerous duties and at odds with 
their superiors, the writers broke the seal on the closed 
"circle of civilized conditions" revealing the great secret -
the mistreatment of the children. 
In 1902, Abbie Gordon wrote directly to the Minister, Clifford 
Sifton. Conditions at St. Paul's school were unsupportable. 
The staff was "cooped up in an unsanitary school building that 
does not tend to the contentment of the officers or even their 
health." But it was Miss Lang, the matron, who made life 
wholly intolerable: 
She treats the officers especially the ladies in a 
supremely arrogant manner. It is so much so, that a 
couple or three months is as long as they can 
tolerate her abuse. 
She immediately turned to the treatment of the children. 
Beatrice Mark was 
very ill and when the least pressure is put on her 
198 

Lac LaRonge School 
1909 

breast blood oozes out. Nothing was done for her 
until Miss Kayll who is at present acting as 
principal 
ordered 
her 
to 
the 
sick 
dormitory. 
Another delicate girl, Emily Grey, is forced to 
sleep in an unsanitary bed. It is known as the 
fatal bed because every girl who sleeps in it takes 
sick. Another girl, Margaret Umfreville, who has a 
strong tendency to consumption and is at present 
sick has to sleep with her head up against the hot 
air register that heats the dormitory.... Other 
instances 
could 
be 
mentioned 
of 
careless 
indifference 
shown 
to 
sick 
children 
in 
this 
school.157 
And 
there were 
certainly 
innumerable 
other examples of 
"careless indifference" to children, sick and well, and of 
outright abuse by staff throughout the school system. There is 
also a clear record of neglect on the part of the Department 
in that even when senior officials became aware of cases of 
abuse, they routinely failed to come to the rescue of children 
for whom they were "the legal guardian" and who they had, 
supposedly for their own good and for the good of their 
communities, removed from their real parents. 
DISCIPLINE and ABUSE 
The picture of the boys and girls standing in front of the 
Anglican school at Lac La Ronge in 1909 symbolizes their lives 
and learning. The right angles of windows, roof and doors 
intersecting the straight rows of vegetable plants makes a 
unity of building and garden as architecture and agriculture 
frame civilization. At the centre of the frame are the 
children arranged in some Linnaean order -in straight rows, 
divided by sex and arranged by size. The whole effect 
emphasizes the goal of re-socializing the children by a 
movement from circle to square: from a world to be navigated 
by belief, dreams and spirit guidance to one of secular logic 
and reasoning, from rhythms which came from the body and needs 
of the child to those in which the child was to respond to the 
corporate needs of the school and from learning by living, 
observing and doing, to living and learning by discipline in 
preparation for a life governed by the dictates of an alien 
society. 
Behind those windows and doors, the children's lives were to 
be meticulously arranged in a disciplined regimen of rising, 
working, 
learning and resting - the ebb and flow of a 
ceaseless tide of industriousness. At Qu'Appelle, for example, 
199 

the weekday schedule proscribed -
12 :40-2: 00 
2:00-4:00 
4:45-6:00 
6:00-6:10 
6:10-6:40 
6:40-8:00 
8:00 
5:30 
6:00 
6:30-7:15 
7:15-7:30 
7:30-8:00 
8 : 00 
7:30 
9 : 00-12 : 00 
12 : 00-12 : 40 
Rise 
Chapel 
Bed making, milking, and pumping 
Inspection to see children are clean 
and well 
Breakfast 
Fatigue [chores] for small boys 
Trade boys at work 
School, with a 15 minute morning recess 
Dinner 
Recreation 
School and Trades for older Pupils 
Fatigues, sweeping, pumping and so forth 
Preparing for supper 
Supper 
Recreation 
Prayer and retire 
Then on Sundays: Usual Fatigues, morning church parade to 
Lebret Parish Church: 2:30 p.m. Vespers with Choir: 5:00 to 
6:00 p.m. 
Principal 
gives 
talk on behaviour 
and 
moral 
instruction - in winter he does this for an hour a day.158 
One girl who attended the Kamloops school in the 1930s recalls 
that from the moment of rising, the codes of discipline 
governed minutely every activity. 
In the morning, we had to get up at six o'clock, 
perfect silence. We all took turns going to the 
bathroom: we'd fill our basin full of water and 
we'd take it to our bedside. We'd wash, take that 
basin, empty it, clean it out, put it back, fix our 
bed, get dressed and as soon as you're finished -
you only had half an hour to do all this - brush 
your teeth, get in line and stand in line in 
perfect silence. 
"And then we marched from there down to the chapel" where the 
ideology of the system which imbued every activity not only in 
chapel but in classroom, shop, field and barn, was laid out by 
the priest yet again. 
...there they interrogated us on what it was all 
about being an Indian. ... He would just get so 
carried away; he was punching away at that old 
altar rail ... to hammer into our heads that we 
were not to think or act or speak like an Indian. 
And that we would go to hell and burn for eternity 
of we did not listen to their way of teaching.159 
200 

The 
consequence 
of 
not 
listening, 
of 
deviance, 
of 
"insubordination"160 
as 
it 
was 
normally 
termed, 
of 
transgressing the authority of the schoolmasters and thus 
challenging in some way the pedagogy of civilization, was more 
immediate than some future hell. It was earthly punishment. 
"If you're caught ever speaking one word", in one of those 
lines, she continued, "boy, you got cuffed around."161 
Discipline, regimentation and punishment, in the service of 
cultural change, were the context of the children's lives. It 
was pervasive in the system and, to some observers, poisonous. 
G. Barry, the district 
inspector of schools in British 
Columbia, described the situation at Ahousaht school "where 
every member of staff carried a strap" and where "children 
have never learned to work without punishment."162 Another 
critic, who saw the same negative implications of this tyranny 
of routinization charged that at Mt. Elgin 
... their whole life day in and day out is planned 
for them. They learn to work under direction which 
doesn't 
require, 
and 
indeed 
discourages, 
any 
individual 
acting 
or 
thinking 
on 
their 
part. 
Punishment goes to those who don't keep in line.163 
To keep them in line, children could be deprived of food, or 
strapped, or confined or lectured. 
In what way, however, did the Department mark out abuse, when 
punishment became excessive, the point at which deprivation 
verged on starvation, strapping became beating, confinement 
became 
imprisonment 
and 
lecturing 
the verbal 
abuse 
of 
ridicule, sarcasm and public indignity? While there was never 
any detailed directive on this matter, pronouncements by 
deputy superintendents general, by Vankoughnet in 1889 and 
Reed in 1895, did at least appear to lay out a position on 
corporal punishment. Corporal punishment 
"should only be 
resorted to in extreme cases" and could only be employed "with 
great discretion" and certainly never so "severly that bodily 
harm might ensue."164 
In ensuing years this position was echoed as individual cases 
came 
forward. 
Commissioner, 
A. E. 
Forget, 
for 
example, 
responded to Principal Semmen's fear of a general uprising at 
Brandon and his request for guidance with the directive that 
corporal punishment should be a last resort and 
... it should not be more severe than a strapping 
on the hand, which should be administered in the 
presence of the whole school, and after such a full 
explanation of the case as will leave no doubt in 
the minds of anyone as to the justice and necessity 
of the course pursued.165 
201 

It was Duncan Campbell Scott, however, who in 1921 underlined 
most emphatically this policy. He proclaimed the Department's 
right and duty to care for and protect children against ill-
treatment. This pronouncement was sparked by a report on 
Crowfoot 
school he received from Nurse Ramage. She had 
discovered, when entering the dining room to investigate a 
complaint of bad food: 
Four boys in chains and chained to the benches. 
Later returned to the dining room to examine one of 
the girls who was reported marked badly by a strap. 
Several marks were found on her right lower limb. 
Five girls were in chains.166 
Scott appeared incensed and sent out a sharp letter to the 
Principal, the Rev. Rioui. O.M.I.: 
I wish to state that the Department will not 
countenance such corrective measures as chaining 
pupils to benches and corporal punishment that 
leaves a boy or girl marked. Treatment that might 
be considered pitiless or jail-like in character 
will not be permitted. The Indian children are 
wards of this Department and we exercise our right 
to 
ensure 
proper 
treatment 
whether 
they 
are 
resident in our schools or not.167 
Unfortunately, Scott's word was not given efect by him or the 
Department. Not before, during or after his term as deputy 
superintendent did senior members of the Department make 
effective 
their right 
and obligation 
"to ensure 
proper 
treatment" of the children and thus Principals and staff, by 
and large, behaved as they saw fit with impunity. 
As with the dietary and the health regulations these dicta on 
punishment verged on administrative fiction. In 1895, the 
Deputy 
Superintendent 
General, 
Hayter 
Reed, 
thought 
it 
necessary that "Instructions should be given, if not already 
sent to the Principals of the various schools" on the subject 
of punishment.168 
Nevertheless, 
a dozen years 
later 
the 
Commissioner, David Laird, was still looking for and stressing 
the need for just such a directive from Ottawa. He was then 
dealing with the case of a boy at Norway House school. Charlie 
Clines had been beaten and run away "and as a consequence was 
badly frozen." 
The local agent was outraged. 
The result of the punishment is shocking. That a 
boy should so feel the injustice and severity of 
his punishment as to run away from school and sleep 
out in weather so severe that his toes were frozen 
and that he will lose them, is certainly a most 
serious matter. 
202 

Laird discovered that the boy had been in the school for eight 
years and was a persistent bedwetter and for that reason the 
object, more than the other children, of severe treatment. He 
"lived 
in constant 
dread of the lash." 
Perhaps, 
Laird 
suggested, "careful medical treatment might have obviated the 
painful necessity of frequent whippings, and it might have 
been more in accordance with Christian methods." All of this 
went to prove to Laird that the Department had to develop 
guidelines for the staff of all the schools. In cases of 
incorrigible boys, he advised that a policy of expulsion 
should be adopted rather than them being "repeatedly severely 
punished when it does not prove a restraining discipline."169 
Laird's advice when it arrived in Ottawa was supported by 
Benson170 but still it fell on deaf ears. It was not until 
after Scott retired that a circular was supposedly distributed 
governing the proper procedure of strapping students171 and 
there never was, in this period, any comprehensive guidelines 
on permissable forms of discipline. Without such guidelines 
governing the behaviour of the staff, promulgated and strictly 
enforced by the Department, and without any serious response 
by the Department and the churches to dozens of incidents of 
severe punishment or neglect that caused injury or death172 
and, finally, without any attention to one of the root causes 
of abuse, the working conditions of the staff, abuse like 
tuberculosis flourished in the schools. 
There can be no doubt that abuse was a constant phenomenon in 
the system. Head office, regional, school and church files are 
replete with incidents. Of course, it could be argued that 
abuse can only be recognized as such within the context of 
community standards of the period. According to such a 
position, characterizing incidents of punishment as abuse can 
be, at any time, a difficult process complicated further when 
such judgements have to be made across time and from documents 
only. Fortunately, in the case of the schools, people involved 
in the system, the staff and Departmental employees of that 
time, individuals with that period's sensibilities, 
have 
already identified many incidents as abusive by selecting them 
from the normal course of discipline in the schools and 
reporting them as unacceptable treatment to more responsible 
authorities often requesting that immediate, resolute action 
be taken against the abuser. 
In some cases, staff went so far as to make an explicit 
comparison with standards of treatment in non-Aboriginal 
schools. One such case took place early in the history of the 
system at Red Deer school. It is a particularly valuable 
example as it also illustrates many of the other elements in 
the story of abuse in the schools that need to be addressed 
including the complicity of the Department and the churches. 
In June of 1896, Agent D.L. Clink reported that he had 
203 

returned some children to the school including one David 
Baptiste who had absconded some time ago. Principal Nelson 
said he would take the boy back "but he would make him toe the 
mark, that he had been severe with him before but he would be 
more severe with him now." Clink removed David from the 
school. "I felt if I left the boy he would be abused." 
Clink had grounds for his concern. In his view, one of the 
teachers, a Mr. Skinner, was clearly abusing pupils. Skinner 
had without warning, struck John Bull for disobedience -
picking up a book he had been told not to touch. Bull 
without taking time to think, grabbed the stick 
from the teacher and struck him back with it; Mr. 
Skinner regained the stick and struck the boy a 
sharp blow over the head with it. 
The boy, three months later, still had a large lump on his 
head which eventually required surgery. Skinner went on to 
threaten the boy telling him the next time he would beat him 
with his fists. 
There was more. Skinner had "in a passion gave [sic] one of 
the larger girls a violent shove throwing her the whole length 
of the floor. The girl cried half an hour afterwards." As 
well, "he fought with another of the big girls over a slop 
bucket exchanging blows several times." These incidents, Clink 
concluded, were part of a general pattern of mistreatment, of 
abuse, of the children "... such brutality as has been going 
on there should not be tolerated for a moment." Skinner's 
"actions ... would not be tolerated in a white school for a 
single day in any part of Canada." 
Clink would find, however, that he was alone in his outrage, 
that these acts would be tolerated in an Aboriginal school. He 
could 
get 
no 
justice 
in 
the 
school. 
The 
Principal's 
intervention in the Bull incident had been to force the boy to 
apologize. And when Clink mentioned the lump on Bull's head, 
the Principal replied "... the lump was alright there" and 
warned him off from making further inquiries with the claim 
"we run the school".173 
There 
was 
little 
hope 
outside 
the 
school 
either. 
The 
Methodists, in the persons of Rev. A. Sutherland, the general 
secretary, and Rev. John McDougall, had that winter reviewed 
the operation of the school and found that it was "not 
altogether satisfactory" in a number of ways. They had even 
noted that the Principal was difficult being "arbitrary alike 
with the pupils and the employees." Yet they used the review 
only as a spring board for an attack on the Department 
complaining that all the school's faults, including a staff 
that was not of the desired quality, could be put down to the 
204 

too small per capita grant.174 
Clink, of course, turned to his superiors writing to the 
Commissioner in Regina: 
Now if the Department forces the parents of these 
children to send them to school then they should 
see that they are properly cared for and not 
abused. The Indians have frequently complained to 
me about their children being improperly treated at 
this school, and I think that the time has come 
when the Department let them see that they will get 
fair treatment.175 
No such reassuring action was taken by the Department. When 
Clink's reports found their way to the Deputy Superintendent, 
Hayter Reed, it was the occasion for his abortive suggestion 
that "Instructions should be given..."that would include a 
proviso that children "should not be struck on the head."176 
Actions might have spoken louder than these intended words. 
But, despite the fact that the Department would always be 
quick to counsel Principals to employ police and judicial 
authorities in the case of difficult children, Clink's hint 
that Skinner could be taken before the magistrate was ignored. 
Reed used the opportunity of Nelson's retirement to do no more 
than declare "The Department thinks it would be well to call 
the new Principal's attention to what Mr. Clink has said in 
reference to Mr. Skinner's treatment of pupils."177 
One of the most reliable indicators of abuse was the runaway. 
Hundreds of children, like Charlie Clines and David Baptiste, 
fled because, as the assistant deputy of the Department 
explained in 1917, of "frequent punishments" and "too much 
hardwork and travelled through all sorts of hardships to reach 
their distant homes."178 Many however, did not make it home to 
their communities and when the trail was followed back to the 
school from where searchers found an injured or dead child,179 
it 
led, 
almost 
inevitably, 
to 
conditions 
of 
neglect, 
mistreatment and abuse. It was commonplace within the system 
that, in the words of one local agent, "there is certainly 
something wrong as children are running away most of the 
time." 
Subsequent 
investigations 
would 
discover, 
not 
surprisingly, that "conditions at the school are not what they 
should be."180 
The connection between punishment and running away was at the 
heart 
of two quite representative 
tragedies 
in British 
Columbia. On the 10th of February, 1902, just as it was 
getting dark, Johnny Sticks viewed the body of his eight-year-
old son, Duncan, dead from exposure having fled from the 
William's Lake Industrial School. He lay, Mr. Sticks recalled 
for the coroner, "75 yards off the road in the snow - he was 
205 

quite dead but not frozen." Duncan's blood-stained hat was 
laying about one yard away, and "he had marks of blood on his 
nose and forehead - the left side of his face had been 
partially eaten by some animal." 
Sticks took his son home in 
a sleigh regretting all the while that the school had not 
notified him immediately that his son had run off for "I 
should have gone at once and looked for him - he ran away from 
the Mission about one o'clock on Saturday and must have been 
dead for nearly two days when found."181 
Nearly four decades later, on New Year's Day, 1937, at the 
Lejac School, four boys, Allen Willie, Andrew Paul, Maurice 
Justin and Johnny Michael, ran away and were found frozen to 
death on the lake within half a mile of their village. When 
Harry Paul saw his son on the ice he was wearing summer 
clothes, "no hat and one rubber missing and his foot bare." 
Another found his boy "lying face down with his coat under 
him. ... He was the only one with a cap on. He had running 
shoes on with no rubbers." The boys, "only little tots" was 
how Police Constable Jennings described them, had set out for 
home in 30 below weather. They had gone some eight miles, 
"straight to the light that was at the Village," before they 
perished.182 
In both cases, investigators uncovered, in evidence given by 
staff, children, parents and some graduates, a history of 
neglect and violence. At the William's Lake inquest, Christine 
Haines explained why she had run off twice in the past: 
. . .the Sisters didn't treat me good - they gave me rotten 
food to eat and punished me for not eating it - the meat 
and soup were rotten and tasted so bad they made the 
girls sick sometime. I have been sick from eating it... 
I used to hide the meat in my pocket and throw it away. 
I told the Sisters to look at the meat as it was rotten, 
and they said it was not rotten and we must eat it. The 
Sisters did not eat the same kind of food as they gave 
the girls. If we didn't eat our porridge at breakfast, it 
was given to us for our dinner, and even for supper, and 
we got nothing else till it was eaten. 
For her disobedience, Christine claimed she had been locked in 
a "cold and dark" room, fed bread and water and beaten "with 
a strap, sometime on the face, and sometimes [they] took my 
clothes off and beat me - this is the reason I ran away." 
Other children, like Ellen Charlie whose experience had been 
remarkably similar to Christine's, made the same charges. 
Duncan's sister, Mary, told the coroner that as a punishment 
the nuns "tied my hands and blindfolded me and gave me nothing 
to eat 
for a day." 
She 
could not, 
however, 
give 
any 
information about Duncan for at the school, as was common 
throughout the system, boys and girls were separated. "I was 
206 

never allowed to speak to my brother at the school, and I 
don't know how he was treated." 
The staff was unanimous in rejecting the children's charges. 
The Sister responsible 
for the girls denied any brutal 
treatment but admitted that "sometimes girls are shut up in a 
room for serious faults for periods varying from a few hours 
to 10 to 12 days - this is the longest time - this latter has 
happened only once. . . ." The evidence of one of the male 
teachers, J. Fahey, was just as curious. After assuring the 
coroner that the children were well treated, he admitted that 
he used a saddle whip on children guilty of "immorality."183 
At Lejac, a graduate, Mrs. S. Patrick, recalled "Even when we 
just smiled at one of the boys they gave us that much," 30 
strokes with the strap on each hand, and when they spoke their 
own language, the Sister "made us take down our drawers and 
she strapped us on the backside with a big strap." At this 
school, too, food was an issue. She told the Department's 
investigator, Indian Commissioner D. MacKay, "sometimes we ate 
worms in the meat, just beans sometimes and sometimes just 
barley." The new Principal admitted that there had been a 
regime of severe punishment at the school but that he would in 
future bring the school in line with community norms, operate 
it, in regards to punishment, 
"along the lines of the 
provincial public schools."184 
MacKay's central recommendation to Dr. McGill, then the 
Director of the Indian Affairs Branch, was appropriate not 
only to the Lejac case but to the whole school system. "My 
investigation leads me to the conclusion that the Department 
should take steps to strengthen it administrative control of 
our Indian Residential Schools through the full use of the 
privilege which it reserves of approving the more important 
appointments of these schools."185 In 1937, this was a long 
overdue suggestion. The system was out of control; despite 
Scott's stern pronouncement in 1921, it had not effectively 
protected the children and thus the record of abuse had grown 
more sorrowful each decade. It was, as MacKay implied, a 
problem the Department had not dealt with. 
There was more to this Departmental irresponsibility than 
simply a failure to ensure that appropriate staff were hired. 
There was a pronounced and persistent reluctance on the part 
of the Department to deal forcefully with the incidents of 
abuse, to dismiss, as was its right, or lay charges against, 
school staff who abused the children. Part of the pattern was 
an abrogation of responsibility, 
the abandonment of the 
children who were "wards of the Department," to the churches 
who in their turn failed to defend them from the action of 
members of their own organisations. That was, indeed, what 
transpired at the William's Lake and Lejac even after the 
207 

investigations. The church was left to do what it would to 
prevent the abuse and neglect of the children from continuing. 
Lejac and William's Lake were far from isolated incidents of 
abuse by staff and derogation of duty by the Department. A 
series of cases in western Canada, brought to the attention of 
the Department by W. Graham, beginning with an incident at the 
the Crowstand school in 1907, further illustrate this pattern, 
the dynamics of the mismanagement of the issue of abuse within 
the system. Graham, then an inspector of Indian agencies, 
reported that Principal McWhinney had, when retrieving a 
number of runaway boys, "tied ropes about their arms and made 
them run behind the buggy from their houses to the school."186 
The Department Secretary, J.D. McLean, when he referred the 
matter to a senior member of 
the Presbyterian 
church, 
suggested that the Principal be dismissed as his conduct had 
been "to put it mildly, most indiscreet."187 
The church refused as its investigation had found that the 
Principal's action could not be faulted for he had, it was 
claimed, only tied the boys to the wagon because there was no 
room inside, the distance had only been some eight miles and 
the boys did not have to run the whole way as "the horses 
trotted 
slowly 
when 
they 
did 
trot 
and 
they walked 
a 
considerable part of the way." Even when the horses trotted 
the boys "could, and did help themselves along by clinging to 
the buggy."188 The Department greeted the church's explanation 
with the cynicism 
it deserved. Benson 
saw these 
"lame 
arguments" as an attempt to "whitewash McWhinney."189 The 
church, however, held firm though privately it extracted a 
promise from McWhinney that "he will not in the future again 
adopt methods of discipline to which fair exception might be 
taken by either the Government or the Indians."190 McWhinney 
was kept on despite a continuing record of ill-treatment of 
the children, including his failure to act when the farm 
instructor in 1914 took two girls into a room where he had 
"sexual intercourse with them". 
Scott, newly appointed as 
deputy superintendent general, did no more than suggest that 
McWhinney be transferred and let the matter drop.191 
Left unattended by the Department, the situation did not 
improve. Indeed, Benson soon informed Scott "Things seem to be 
going from bad to worse ... and it does not seem fair that the 
Presbyterian church should wish to saddle the Department with 
Mr. McWhinney." The Department's Medical Inspector, 0. Grain, 
added his 
opinion. The school, he told Scott, is "the worst 
residential school I have had to visit." The buildings were 
dilapidated, the washrooms unsanitary, the dorms were not up 
to standard and the rooms were full of flies as there were no 
screens on the windows. The children looked uncared for. "I 
would like to suggest that the whole boarding school be 
entirely done away with."192 The school remained open and 
McWhinney carried on. 
208 

While such a failure to respond forcefully to incidents of 
abuse and neglect would be standard behaviour for Scott during 
his term as deputy superintendent general, he was just 
following what was already an established Departmental habit -
so ingrained as to have become unofficial procedure. Indeed, 
two years earlier he had experienced how immutable that 
"procedure" was. In November, 1912, Graham had reported the 
drowning of a seven-year-old boy, Archie Feather, at the File 
Hills school. He and other boys had been left unsupervised 
playing beside a lake on which the ice was just forming. 
Graham was adamant that the school staff were at fault but so 
too was the church, again the Presbyterian church, for not 
hiring enough staff to care properly for the children.193 
Scott, then the Departmental accountant, agreed. It is, he 
wrote, "pretty clear that negligence has resulted in the loss 
of life." Referring to the newly signed 1911 contracts, he 
advised the deputy superintendent general to use this incident 
to establish fully Departmental authority: 
I think we should let them [the churches] see that 
the Department is determined to have the management 
comply with the terms of the contract, and I would, 
therefore, advise that the Presbyterian Authorities 
be told that the we cannot continue to pay the 
grant for the File Hills Boarding School until 
there is proper staff and necessary supervision.194 
After discussions with the church, the deputy decided not to 
follow 
Scott's 
lead. 
"For 
the moment 
the question 
of 
withholding the grant may stand."195 That "moment" was to 
encompass the future as well, for not Scott, when he assumed 
the mantle 
of Departmental 
leadership, 
nor any of his 
successors, used the power of the purse to ensure that the 
churches maintained adequate levels of care or to punish 
school management for abusing the children. 
In 1919, Graham alerted Departmental headquarters to yet 
another case of abuse. Reports forwarded from a local agent 
and a police constable set out the case of George Baptiste who 
had run away from the Anglican Old Sun's school. On being 
brought back, the boy was shackled to a bed, had his hands 
tied, was stripped and was "most brutally and unmercifully 
beaten with a horse quirt until his back was bleeding."196 The 
accused, P.H. Gentleman, in the course of his explanation, 
admitted using a whip and shackles and that the boy "might 
have been marked".197 Graham advised that "Gentleman should be 
relieved of his duties at once."198 Scott, however, turned to 
the church for its "advice."199 Canon S. Gould, the general 
secretary of the Missionary Society, mounted a most curious 
defence - such a beating was the norm, "more or less, in every 
boarding school in the country." 200 Scott accepted this and 
Gentleman remained at the school. Graham was irate writing to 
209 

Scott that "instead of placing this man in a position of 
responsibility, where he might repeat his disgraceful acts, he 
should have been relieved of his duties."201 
Graham's frustrations would only increase as he dealt with 
more cases and failed each time to bring the Department to 
initiate corrective measures. In the fall of 1922, he began to 
submit critical reports on the Catholic Muscowequan school in 
Saskatchewan. The visiting nurse found the children dirty and 
neglected, the school full of flies and the "floor thick with 
mud, could hardly tell it from the outside." The next year, 
another nurse reported that the building was not fit to be a 
school and that the diet was inadequate with the children 
receiving no milk and no vegetables except potatoes and very 
little of those. 202 Finally, in 1924, Cortland Starnes, the 
Commissioner of the RCMP sent on to Scott a "Crime Report" in 
which one of the girls charged that "improper proposals were 
made to her by Father Poulette ... when she was working in his 
office at the school." 203 Graham pushed Scott to deal at least 
"with the serious part of the Constable's report ie. - the 
charge against Father Poulette." 204 Scott, however, would not 
be moved. 
In the same year, 
1924, Graham brought 
forward another 
incident - the beating of Arthur Dorion until he "was black 
from his neck to his buttocks" at the Anglican MacKay school 
in Manitoba. The cause of such punishment was, according to J. 
Waddy, the agent, the fact that "the boy could not work as he 
had blistered hands from handling a hay fork or some other 
tool, and he got trimmed for this." The boy had "fought back 
I understand when he was getting strapped and made the 
Principal lose his temper." 205 Graham's reaction when he 
learned that the Department had yet again turned over the 
investigation of the case to the church showed just how 
ingrained and corrosive the practice had become. "Chances 
are," he wrote, "it will end like all the other cases" with no 
action being taken against the Principal and thus will 
undermine the vigilance of the local Departmental staff: 
I think the Department ought to look at it from 
their own officer's 
side of the question. No 
officer likes to write a report and feel that 
nothing will result from it, and you can understand 
why they hesitate to report on inefficient members 
of staff, under the circumstances. The Inspectors 
feel that where the churches are concerned there is 
practically no use in sending in an adverse report, 
as the Department will listen to excuses from 
incompetent Principals of the school more readily 
than to a report from our inspectors based on acts 
as they find them."206 
210 

Unfortunately, 
Graham 
was 
proven 
right; 
"excuses 
from 
incompetent Principals" backed by their churches would have 
the greater priority. In this case, Waddy confirmed that the 
punishment of the boy, and indeed of others, by the Principal, 
Rev. E. Bird, had been excessive. 207 Bird admitted that he had 
marked the boy but the church exonerated him claiming the 
punishment had been warranted.206 The Department let the matter 
drop. But this was not the end of it. The very next year 
another boy fled from the school "almost naked and barefoot" 
and was found by non-Aboriginal men after a week in the bush 
"nearly out of his mind" from being "whaled black and blue." 
One of the men who saw the boy before he was taken to the 
hospital warned that if the Department did nothing he would 
contact the "SPCA like he would if a dog were abused." Waddy 
reminded the Department that this was a repeat of the Dorion 
incident and tried, 
as Graham always did, to push 
the 
Department into action: 
One of these times a pupil will starve to death in 
the bush after running away from school, this boy 
was away for a week and nearly made a nice case of 
publicity against the Department, as in the final 
analysis we are responsible.209 
Graham supported his subordinate suggesting that finally, 
perhaps, "the time has arrived when the services of this 
Principal should be dispensed with."210 Scott, however, loyal 
to the tradition of having the church investigate itself, 
asked 
Gould 
to give 
the 
case 
"your 
customary 
careful 
attention." The result was that Bird was exonerated again211 
and when Graham attacked the church's investigation for having 
ignored the men who found the boy and gave evidence as to his 
physical condition, he was put in his place by the secretary 
of the Department. "I have to assure you that the Department 
has dealt with this question seriously and I feel that no 
further action is advisable at present."212 
In these and in dozens of other cases, not only in the west 
and British Columbia but throughout the system, "no further 
action" was ever taken and thus at many schools abusive 
situations remained unresolved. In 1931, Graham was still 
writing to Scott about conditions at MacKay school. "I have 
not had good reports on this school for the past ten years, 
and it seems that there is no improvement. I think the time 
has come that the Department should have the whole matter 
cleared up."213 Departmental inactivity continued even after 
Scott's retirement. A. Hamilton, referring to conditions at 
Elkhorn school warned, in 1944, that so long as the Department 
did not intervene aggressively in the "present management" of 
the school "the children will continue to run away [and] 
someone will be frozen to death or killed riding trains."214 
211 

That 
the 
Department 
seemed 
congenitally 
incapable 
of 
responding to the prompting of men like Laird, Clink, Waddy, 
Hamilton and Graham was part of the long-established habit of 
neglect. But that tragic lethargy stemmed also from the fact 
that the Department did not think it "advisable at present" to 
contradict the churches in these matters. The church was still 
a force to be reckoned with within the national political 
arena and therefore within the school system. Benson in his 
1897 report, when calling for a tightening of the regulatory 
guidelines, complained that the churches "had too much power." 
In that light, he noted, in 1903, the Department had a 
"certain hesitancy in insisting on the church authorities 
taking the necessary action."215 
Some officials certainly feared church influence and thought 
the Department should as well. Agent A. O'Daunt who, in 1920, 
conducted an inquiry into an incident at William's Lake that 
involved the suicide of one boy from eating "poison hemlock" 
and the attempted suicide of eight others, admitted that he 
found it unwise to accept the uncorroborated evidence of 
children for "to take evidence on that will bring a religious 
hornets nest around the ears of the Department, unless the 
reverence in which the missionaries are held in the East has 
undergone a change since I lived there." As well, he found his 
way forward blocked by two other factors. First, even if it 
was wise to believe the children, "it will be quite impossible 
to obtain any evidence as the fear of the Church would keep 
any youngsters from coming forward." Additionally, 
without in any way impugning the character of the 
school authorities, 
it is a matter of common 
knowledge that religious bodies carry what may be 
termed "Esprit de Corps" to the extent that would 
make it very difficult to place the guilt on one of 
their members.216 
While Scott may not have feared those spirited clerical 
hornets, he certainly carried froward Benson's "hesitancy" by 
paying persistent deference to church advice throughout his 
long career as deputy superintendent general from 1913 to 
1933 . 
The 
Department 
was 
not, 
however, 
simply 
overawed 
by 
influential churches which refused to accept criticism of 
their treatment of the children or disciplining of their 
staff. It also acted defensively. Witnessing, throughout this 
long period the persistent mis-treatment of children, the 
Department felt most immediately not compassion for its wards 
but only its own vulnerability. Edward's cries of neglect and 
abuse were threatening and thus they, and those from other 
children and parents, had to be silenced and the conversations 
of criticism among officials had to be carefully managed and 
212 

sealed in the tomb of Departmental records within the strong-
walled bounds of the "circle of civilized conditions." Always, 
as in the case of two young girls who had been sexually 
"polluted" at Kuper Island school in 1912, "it has been kept 
from the public, and I trust", wrote Inspector W. Ditchburn, 
"in the interest of the Department's educational system, that 
it will remain so."217 In a similar vein G.H. Barry, the 
Department's inspector of schools in British Columbia, worried 
that at Christie school "the Principal may be rather rough in 
his treatment of the boys", warned the Indian Commissioner in 
1937 : 
It would be as well to avoid any chance of ill-
treatment 
of pupils 
in any Indian 
Residential 
School, as the general public is rather inclined to 
be very critical at the present time, and any 
incident 
of 
harsh 
treatment 
may 
be 
highly 
exaggerated in the press, and give a very false 
idea of the work we are trying to carry out in this 
Province for our Indian children.218 
The "educational system, " the "work we are trying to carry 
out," its goal of civilization, had the highest priority. In 
the minds of Alexander Morris, Davin, Vankoughnet and almost 
every other senior Departmental official, the schools were 
concrete proof that Canada was carrying out its duty to 
Aboriginal people. Scott was no exception. When he formulated 
plans in 1926 for opening the Shubenacadie school in Nova 
Scotia, he told the Catholic church that it should be "located 
within full view of the railway and highway, so that the 
passing people will see in it an indication that our country 
is not unmindful of the interest of these Indian children."219 
While the "passing people" might be able to see the schools, 
they were rarely able to see in them, to see the children in 
their suffering, 
deaths, 
and the damage done to 
their 
identities. Nevertheless, Scott was sensitive to even the 
little the public could know from the outside. In a note he 
made in the margin of a 1930 report on Gordon's school, which 
underlined its filthy condition and dilapidated exterior, he 
commented "This country is overrun with tourists since the 
automobile has come into general use and it is not right that 
our institutions should come in for criticism that they do 
from time to time."220 
In the face of such criticism, when neglect or abuse was 
revealed or suggested, senior staff of the Department, despite 
the 
knowledge 
of 
the 
real 
conditions 
in the 
schools, 
routinely, and often aggressively, protected the system and 
thus the Department's reputation - at times by trying to 
demean the reputation of others. During Scott's term this was 
a marked style being applied with particular force in dealing 
with opposition to Departmental policies emanating from Indian 
213 

political 
organizations. 
Scott's 
letter of 
1921 to the 
Superintendent General, Sir James Lougheed, attempting to 
discredit F.O. Loft, a Mohawk, World War I veteran and founder 
of the "League of Indians of Canada," is typical of his own 
aggressive behaviour in this regard. Loft, who had the same 
level of education as Scott, had volunteered for war service 
but had not been allowed, because of his age, to enter combat. 
Scott did not trouble to present these facts accurately: 
He has some education, has rather an attractive 
personal appearance, but he is a shallow talkative 
individual. He is one of a few Indians who are 
endeavouring 
to 
live 
off 
their 
brethren 
by 
organizing an Indian society, and collecting fees 
from them .... What he ought to get is a good snub. 
He volunteered for the war and looked very well in 
a uniform, but he was cunning enough to evade any 
active service, and I do not think his record in 
that regard is a very good one.221 
In the case of those "few Indians," Scott tried to draw 
attention to their supposed character flaws and thus away from 
the issues Aboriginal reformers were attempting to highlight. 
In the residential school sector, too, offense, focusing on 
the complainant, was, the Department sensed, the best defense. 
Round Lake School in the 1920s was a case in point. Throughout 
the decade, Graham had submitted negative reports from local 
officials on the operation of the school which had been 
ignored. The place was unsanitary and often unheated. By the 
middle of the decade, he had begun to lose his patience. 
"Although an adverse report has been sent in ... I have heard 
nothing at all from the Department with reference to it ... it 
seems to me that a report of this kind requires action on the 
part of the Department." In 1926, he wrote to Scott -
The classrooms are reported to be untidy, and the 
children are sitting with heavy coats on in their 
seats. I can just picture this Indian School. I 
have seen them before. 
Finally, in 1929, when he submitted the most extensive and 
damning review of the school, of its inadequate diet, ragged 
clothing and unsanitary conditions, 222 he got a response. Scott 
discounted the reports as this latest critique was based upon 
information supplied by Miss Affleck who had been dismissed by 
her Principal, Mr. Ross, for the disloyal act of reporting 
what she considered his is incompetence to United church 
headquarters. She was not to be believed because, according to 
Scott, she was obviously a "troublemaker."223 
Trouble, of course, did not have to be made; it was real and 
214 

was rooted in the actions of the Principal. But that was to be 
dealt with in private, at the highest level, between Scott and 
the church without the agency of a troublesome woman supported 
by local Departmental officials. In 1930, after yet another 
bad report, this one by A. Hamilton, Scott consulted the 
United 
church. 
Church 
officials 
seemed, 
he 
recorded, 
"satisfied with Mr. Ross's work on the whole" and were "not 
desirous of taking any drastic action." Scott was further 
informed "that it is probable that Mr Ross will leave Indian 
work in another year or so" and thus he "promised that the 
Department would be patient." That patience did not pay any 
dividends for the children. The next report on file came from 
the church, itself, looking for a new building as the existing 
one was "a disgrace both to the Department and the United 
Church. "224 
Miss Affleck: and other women who wrote of their concern for 
the children325 did not have to be believed or their reports 
acted upon, for they were powerless against the solid church-
Department front. In fact, critical reports from former staff 
members were at times not even "placed on fyle1,226 so that the 
extent of criticism from this source will never be known. 
Complaints from solitary parents could receive the same cold 
reception. In 1924, Louise Pinsonault from "Caughnawaga" wrote 
to inform Scott that children who had returned home from 
Spanish residential school said that they had been "mistreated 
reason being they are savages, given food not fit to eat." 
They were, as well, she charged, abused. In one case the 
Christian brothers who ran the 
school undressed 
a boy 
"whipping him naked until he became unconscious." She realized 
that "of course it will be denied by the Christian brothers 
but I am very sure that the boys back home are to be 
believed." Despite the fact that this was typical of the 
severe punishments which were reported regularly (1924 was the 
year that Graham reported the beatings by Principal Bird) the 
Department secretary indicated that he was not prepared to 
investigate the school as he was confident the children were 
well-treated by a devoted staff.227 
Some parents, rather than being ignored, were warned off. 
Sergius Bruyere, introduced to the Department by Agent J. Bunn 
as a man whose "energy is directed along the complaining 
line," a "busybody with wrong ideals as to the functioning of 
the school, criticised the management of the Fort Alexander 
school for working the children too hard in the fields and for 
not exercising proper discipline - allowing the children "to 
swear and us very bad language at persons who pass by the 
school." For his pains, Bruyere was lectured, told that he 
could best "help the school by helping the staff maintain good 
discipline."228 
Others 
parents 
were 
intimidated. 
Charlie 
Johnson told the coroner at the Duncan Sticks inquest that his 
215 

son, too, had run away several times complaining of the bad 
food and beatings but that each time he had taken him back: "I 
did not complain to the Fathers about my boys treatment 
because I was scared."229 
The Department, however, was prepared to defend the system 
even when the opposition was more formidable. In 1921, 20 
parents with children at the Chapleau school petitioned Henry 
Jackson, the president of the "Grand General Indian Council" 
of Ontario, to investigate "acts of cruelty and unkindness to 
as well as mismanagement of our children." Jackson secured the 
services of a lawyer from London, A. Chisholm, who visited the 
parents and took affidavits. These charged that, as well as 
numerous acts of cruelty, the school was filthy and the boys, 
rather than being in class, spent their time chopping wood and 
peddling it and milk door to door in Chapleau. Chisholm 
counselled Scott to act quickly to save the Department 
considerable embarrassment. "In case of delay, so sure as the 
Sun rises Henry Jackson will have the matter brought before 
Parliament and there is no use having a stink over it."230 
Scott took Chisholm1s advice, but not as it was intended. In 
less than a week, R.T. Ferrier, a man who was, Scott informed 
Chisholm, "quite capable of dealing with the issue there [at 
Chapleau] and in Parliament," arrived "unannounced" to inspect 
the school. He found the children fairly clean with not too 
great an incidence of scabies or too much illness. They sold 
wood by order and thus did not peddle it door to door. They 
were paid to sell the milk and worked only moderate hours. The 
Principal's punishments were "severe" but not cruel.231 
While Ferrier's review of the school was clearly mixed, he was 
in no doubt as to the course the Department should take -
everyone criticising the school was to be discredited. The 
affidavits 
were 
a 
"tissue 
of 
lies" 
and 
the 
Indians' 
"testimony" was "largely false." The Indians, however, were 
only dupes being "unaware of what they were signing." At the 
bottom of the episode were the real troublemakers - Jacob 
Candeese, 
fired by the Principal, 
it was claimed, 
for 
misappropriation of funds and Chisholm, himself, who "used 
extravagant 
language 
in 
the 
affidavits" 
and 
thus 
had 
"aggravated the trouble by his cupidity." He was in fact the 
main "troublemaker, by magnifying in the eyes of the Indians 
their own fancied wrongs."232 
Again, as at Round Lake, the "wrongs" were not "fancied" but 
real and the Department was fully aware of it. Shortly after 
Ferrier submitted his report, Scott wrote to the Principal, 
Rev. G. Prewer, warning him that his management of the school 
was not above reproach, that he should curtail his use of 
corporal punishment, rearrange the daily schedule so that the 
children did not have to rise each day at 5:30, give them more 
216 

class time, replace the sale of wood and milk with practical 
training in the school and, finally, call upon the services of 
the doctor more often. At the same time, Scott instructed the 
local agent, T. Godfrey, that in light of conditions at the 
school, he should monitor the situation.233 
Some local officials did not need direction from head office; 
they acted instinctively "in the interests of the Department's 
educational system." 234 One of the most remarkable examples 
came in the aftermath of the Sticks inquest. The coroner's 
jury recommended a government inquiry into the operation of 
the 
school 
especially 
the 
charges 
of 
physical 
abuse, 
inadequate 
diet 
and 
the 
high 
number 
of 
runaways. 
The 
Department complied feeling, perhaps, as did A. Vowell, one of 
its senior British Columbia officials who was assigned the 
task, that "the trouble at the school having assumed such 
serious proportions and having been, more or less, brought to 
the notice of the public, it is highly necessary, in the 
interests of all concerned, that the inquiry be made."235 
Vowell held private meetings with the children questioning, in 
particular, those who had testified at the inquest. Augustin 
told him they were only ever whipped, and then only on the 
legs, for not knowing their lessons. "When I asked him if he 
was much hurt he laughingly said he was not." Louis admitted 
that he had run off after being beaten but not so severely 
that he was hurt and, indeed, "he had plenty to eat but that 
a long time ago he was sometimes hungry." The only general 
complaint was that they did not get enough bread. That 
problem, Vowell told them, they could solve themselves. They 
just had to ask for more and the staff, reasonable and good-
hearted people, would undoubtedly provide it. 
Following on his description of the student meetings, the 
conclusions he made in his report were not surprising. The 
school was given a clean bill. The food was adequate and the 
discipline judicious. Neither were grounds for the children 
running away. That was rooted in the children themselves. The 
older boys left because they wanted jobs and the younger boys 
emulated them as a right of passage into maturity. The same 
could be said for the girls. 
There was no more to the situation than that. None of the 
complaints were valid. No one who criticised the school could 
be believed. The children rarely understood the questions they 
were asked and when they did, they tended to give the answers 
they thought the questioner wanted. Their testimony at the 
inquest, therefore, had to be discounted. Their meekness made 
them untrustworthy. Two other inquest witnesses, Ellen Charlie 
and Christine Haines, though far from meek, were no more 
believable. Vowell tracked them down in the village of Alkali 
Lake. When they staunchly maintained their stories of abuse, 
217 

Vowell commented pointedly, "it must be remembered that they 
were discharged from the school for bad conduct." Parental 
complaints were equally groundless. They, apparently, were 
under a mysterious influence that was jealous of the school's 
success in crop and stock raising "fancying that the school 
had in some way an advantage over outsiders." 
Before Vowell left William's Lake, he took steps to cure the 
runaway problem. Again he met privately with the children and 
he told them to stop. Running away only brought shame on 
themselves and to their parents and to those who had their 
best interests at heart, their "instructors and guardians, at 
the school, and also the Government which was doing so much 
for them." 
Vowell had one final private meeting - with the Principal. The 
tenor of this one was not unlike the one with the students. He 
told him to stop. He was to cease corporal punishment in the 
school unless it was absolutely necessary. 236 It appears that 
there was, after all, a connection between the treatment of 
the children and running away. The Department Secretary, J. 
McLean, put his finger on it too. When acknowledging Vowell's 
report, he hoped that Vowell's corporal punishment prohibition 
"will have the effect of preventing any irregularities at this 
institution in the future." 237 It did not. Over the next two 
decades, 
reports 
continued 
to 
come 
in of 
truancy 
and 
beatings. 238 In 1920, A. 0'Daunt was sent to investigate what, 
it was claimed, was the aftermath of another episode of severe 
beatings - the suicide of one boy and the attempted suicide of 
eight others.239 
Protests over conditions in schools and the treatment of 
children were not always easily turned aside or covered up, 
nor did they all conveniently evaporate as in the Chapleau 
case. There were instances when pressure from communities 
brought to bear at the local level, sometimes literally on the 
front porch of the school, did bring remedial action. The 
parents at Kitamaat who withdrew their children en masse and, 
through the intervention of the local agent, forced the 
Principal to promise to improve the food served to the 
children, 
a promise 
that was not kept 
for very 
long, 
admittedly, provide a cogent example. 
There are others. Some parents refused to let their children 
be taken off to school despite the law or the urging of the 
Department 
"because 
their 
boys 
were 
not 
treated 
well 
before." 240 Others, it was thought, persuaded children to run 
away241 
and 
"encouraged 
disobedience" 242 
In addition, 
the 
Department 
suspected that as the "parents and guardians 
sympathize too deeply with the juniors . . . they encourage them 
to resent all forms of punishment." 243 Certainly, in response 
to severe punishments, parents protested; they even wrote 
218 

letters244 and hired lawyers245 , who remonstrated on their 
behalf assuring the Department "that these people have real 
grounds for complaints" 246 and, in one case, advising 
that the cutting of the hair of children is not 
proper punishment, and in the case of girls I 
consider it constitutes an assault; and unless this 
practise is stopped, at any rate in the case of 
girls, my advice must be to lay information against 
the principal for assault.247 
There are, indeed, enough of these examples to make it 
important to assess their implication for the character of the 
system and the treatment of the children. 
The historian J.R. Miller has done just that. He has published 
research which attempts to measure the actual impact of 
assimilative policies - the pass system, the sun dance 
prohibition and others, in particular, residential schools. In 
this work, he has detailed further cases of 
resistance 
including even some which led to the removal by the church of 
an unpopular member of staff. By such acts, he concludes, "by 
means ranging from evasion to resistance . . . parents made 
their children's educational experience tolerable." While 
successful acts of resistance 
"were not typical of all 
residential schools," they do serve the purpose, he argues, of 
suggesting "that the conventional picture of residential 
schools as totalitarian institutions run arbitrarily by all-
powerful missionaries and bureaucrats is not also universally 
accurate." 248 
Though Miller's research is valuable, his corrective to the 
"conventional picture" is a minor one. To suggest that some 
parents had a momentary degree of agency is one thing but to 
posit 
subsequently 
that 
this 
made 
the 
system 
less 
"totalitarian" is quite another. In any general picture of the 
relationship between Aboriginal people and the dominant 
society, it can be safely said that in no significant fashion 
was decision-making 
shared with parents. In areas which 
concerned the funding and management of the schools, the 
levels of care of the children and the nature of the 
curriculum, missionary and bureaucrats were "arbitrarily" "all 
powerful." The system was not in any real sense democratized. 
Nor, indeed, did resistance from any quarter change the 
overall pattern of habitual neglect and persistent abuse. For 
the children, 
the school was meant 
to be a totalizing 
experience and again the resistance of parents did not make it 
less so. Nor could the children, themselves, who absconded, 
sometimes so frequently that "one could almost designate it a 
continual in and out" 249 who wrote letters like "Edward B.," 
hid rotten food in their pockets or stole food, attacked their 
219 

abuser or, who, as happened quite often, set fires250 "to 
destroy the school so they could all go home."251 Despite such 
acts of defiance that may have temporarily moderated the 
treatment of a few, there were always thousands of children 
trapped within the "circle of civilized conditions" which was 
impervious both to criticism from without and to the constant 
evidence of abuse witnessed by officials in the Department and 
by sympathetic staff. 
It is, of course, important to recognize that Aboriginal 
people's resistance to colonization was general, persistent 
and, as George Manuel noted, immediate: 
The fact of the matter is that there was never a 
time since the beginning of the colonial conquest 
when the Indian people were not resisting the four 
destructive forces besetting us: the state through 
the Indian agent; the church through the priests; 
the church and state through the schools; the state 
and industry through the traders.252 
And thus Miller is right in saying that Aboriginal people 
should not be pictured only "as objects rather than agents, 
victims rather than creators of their history." 253 Parents 
struggled to protect their children from harm and victories 
were won in the cultural struggle conducted in the field of 
education. But certainly those individual victories did not 
make 
the 
school 
experience 
in any way 
"tolerable" 
for 
generations of children. 
The residential 
school experience was, beyond 
question, 
intolerable. That inescapable reality was determined by the 
system's fundamental logic that called for the disruption of 
Aboriginal families and by the government's and churches' 
failure 
to parent 
the children 
in accordance with 
the 
standards of the day or to be vigilant guardians so that all 
too often "wards of the Department" were neglected and abused 
- overworked, underfed, badly clothed, housed in unsanitary 
quarters, beaten with whips, rods and fists, chained and 
shackled, bound hand and foot, locked in closets, basements 
and bathrooms and had their heads shaved or hair closely 
cropped. 254 As well, there were torments, which, while not 
physical, were equally hurtful ranging from the general 
loneliness that came with the children's prolonged separation 
from parents to individual acts of profound cruelty. Rev. W. 
Moore, a Methodist missionary on Mistiwasis reserve, reported, 
in 1903, that at the Regina school, where he sent children 
from his community, one of the teachers, Mr. Gilmour, had 
handed a revolver to a young girl who announced that she 
wanted to commit suicide telling her to go ahead and pull the 
trigger. She did - but the gun was empty.255 
220 

In the face of so many incidents of abuse and of the 
pervasively abusive character of the system, itself, there can 
be no question that in the operation of the schools, children, 
and 
through 
them 
their 
families 
and 
communities, 
were 
"objects" and "victims" and in a recounting of the system, in 
any 
"conventional picture," they cannot in any fashion be 
construed as "creators of their history." 
Those in the Department whose interventions on behalf of the 
children were deflected by the intransigent habit of neglect, 
or the Department's inability to confront the churches, who 
found it, as Graham wrote, in 1930, "discouraging ... to go 
back year after year and find no improvement [in the schools] , 
although suggestions have been made to the Department"256 
witnessed 
the 
results 
of 
that 
victimization 
and 
knew, 
moreover, that such treatment was unacceptable, that it was, 
as Inspector McGibbon warned in 1897, "more calculated to 
bring contempt on a school than to accomplish any lasting 
good. "257 
The record of abuse that was compiled by the action of some 
and the persistent inaction of the Department, decade by 
decade, would do more than "bring contempt" on the schools 
creating for contemporary Canadians a sorrowful history that 
will "not fade out of the human consciousness very rapidly."258 
Abuse had long term consequences for the children and their 
communities and immediate consequences for the educational 
function of the system. Abuse was self-defeating. It was more 
than a moral failure; it was a tactical mistake as it 
disrupted the context in which the cultural transformation was 
to take place. "Thrashing in the school [Rupert's Land] which 
is a remnant of the dark ages has caused", an agent commented 
to Hayter Reed, 
"nearly all the trouble at the school." 
"When", the agent continued, 
"did an Indian ever learn 
anything good by being thrashed." He understood, as did Reed, 
that the educational venture was balanced delicately on the 
treatment of the children by the staff. Without care, it could 
tip the wrong way. "Teachers of Indian children," Reed advised 
the Bishop of Rupert's Land, 
However gifted in other respects and thoroughly 
earnest [they] may be, the lack of what may perhaps 
be described as the personal magnetism required to 
secure 
their 
[the 
student's] 
confidence 
and 
consequent 
inability 
to 
govern 
through 
the 
affections necessitates a harshness and severity of 
punishment fatal to prospects of success.259 
"It must be obvious," wrote Davin, "that to teach semi-
civilized children is a more difficult task than to teach 
children with an inherited 
aptitude, 
whose training 
is 
moreover carried on at home.... The work requires not only 
221 

energy but the patience of an enthusiast." 260 That "difficult 
task" must 
have been even more difficult 
when it was 
undertaken by unqualified teachers in what was often an 
atmosphere 
of 
hunger, 
ill-health, 
neglect, 
overriding 
discipline and violence. All these factors were, as a review 
of the educational record of the system discloses, "fatal to 
the prospects of success." 
TEACHING and LEARNING 
On the 23rd of March, 1923, W. Graham composed yet another 
letter to Duncan Campbell Scott. In this instance, the subject 
was not abuse; it was education. His observations were, 
however, no less critical: 
Particularly during the last two years I have been 
repeatedly told that ex-pupils are more careless of 
their property 
and less able to manage 
their 
affairs and work than those Indians who have not 
attended 
school. 
In most 
instances 
where 
the 
graduates make good on their farms it is as a 
result 
of careful and helpful 
supervision 
and 
instruction by the Farm Instructors and Agents and 
not because of the training they have received at 
school.... In many cases the comments of the Public 
School Inspectors would lead one to believe that we 
are neglecting 
the children; wasting time and 
spending 
large 
sums 
of money 
and 
getting 
no 
results. Many times I have complained that our 
graduates 
on 
leaving 
school 
can 
hardly 
speak 
English, 
certainly many of them could not be 
employed as interpreters because of this lack of 
knowledge. 
Graham's remarks were far from original. Scott had heard them 
from every quarter, not only from "Public School Inspectors" 
and Departmental employees but from parents who objected to 
the fact that their children were receiving but a "poor 
education."261 Even the churches and their school 
staff, 
normally so sensitive to criticism, were critical of the state 
of education. Within six months of Graham's letter, the Rev. 
J. Edmison, the President of the Presbyterian Board of Home 
Missions, forwarded to Scott a copy of an address that had 
been given by Principal R. B. Heron to the Regina Presbytery. 
Coincidently, Heron began where Graham had left off - with the 
central issue of language. 
222 

The ex-pupils of our Indian schools have such 
faulty education that very few of them are capable 
of interpreting Cree into English, or vice versa. A 
story is told of a clergyman who attempted to 
preach 
to 
an 
Indian 
congregation 
through 
an 
interpreter, from the text (Math. 14-27) "It is I 
be not afraid." When this came to the ears of the 
congregation in their own language, it was; "Hit 
him in the eyes, don't be afraid." One has only to 
attempt a conversation with these ex-pupils to find 
how very meagre is their English vocabulary, and 
how painfully limited is their knowledge. This is 
further emphasised by the fact that very few of 
them subscribe for a newspaper or magazine of any 
kind. Any system that leaves young men and women 
without a desire to read, is open to criticism.262 
Throughout 
the pre-World War II period, 
the educational 
component of the residential system was certainly "open to 
criticism" - criticism that had been, according to Hoey in 
1941, 
"constant 
and, at times, very bitter." 263 It was, 
furthermore, justified. The system's vision had not been 
realized in any substantive way. The schools had not graduated 
a generation of educated children who had been re-socialized 
and 
subsequently 
enfranchised. 
Rather, 
the majority 
of 
children on returning to their families were wholly unprepared 
to lead their communities into a new Canadian future. The 
agent assigned to Muscowequan's Reserve concluded of the ex-
pupils, in 1909, that they were "no better than the ordinary 
Indian; and although they have not gone back to the blanket, 
their manner of living is in no respect superior. I do not 
think that their education has made them any worse...."264 
Others would think that even this conclusion was too much 
praise. 
The failure of the residential school system to reach the 
goals set out in the 1880s was rooted, as were the other 
profound deficiencies of the system - the deplorable physical 
condition of so many of the facilities and the low standards 
of care of the children - in those persistent characteristics 
of the system: inadequate funding and the Department's lack of 
oversight and regulation of the operation of the schools. 
Moreover, the Department did not manage its partnership with 
the churches so as to ensure that the children were indeed 
receiving the sort of education called for by its assimilative 
design nor did it initiate reforms despite a clear delineation 
by educators of serious curricular and pedagogical problems 
which beset the system. 
That severe problems existed in the particular areas of skill 
and language 
training, 
in the content 
of the 
literary 
curriculum and in the quality of the teaching corps was 
223 

constantly brought to the notice of the Department. In 
addition to specific critiques there developed a more general 
discourse of dissent that was, potentially at least, at odds 
with the fundamental logic of residential schools. An argument 
evolved, which, though not fully articulated in this period, 
held 
that 
Aboriginal 
culture 
and 
education 
in 
western 
knowledge and skills were not mutually exclusive and, indeed, 
that children would only learn within a program that took heed 
of 
the 
persistence 
of Aboriginal 
culture. 
This was 
a 
profoundly revolutionary message delivered to the Department 
by both outside educational experts and its own employees. It 
was, however, a message largely ignored by the Department 
until the 1970s. 
Measured against its assimilative goal, the school system's 
failure was complete; it was also immediate. The very act of 
creating the system after the Davin report brought the schools 
into contradiction with their founding vision. Senior staff 
recognized that the rapid, uncontrolled and irreversible 
spread of the system across the land, driven by the churches' 
missionary zeal, not only pushed the system past the limit of 
available financial resources, but also quickly outstripped 
the logic of the system's proposed industrial curriculum. In 
too many cases, the education offered by the schools was out 
of step with the thrust of regional development or the reality 
of Aboriginal life. 
It was assumed by the Department, 
with respect to the 
assimilative force of the major constituent elements of the 
curriculum - skill training, language training and literacy -
that, in Reed's words, "instruction in industries is of much 
greater value to Indian children than in literary subjects."265 
It was understood just as clearly that failing the integration 
of 
the 
graduate 
into 
non-Aboriginal 
urban 
or 
farming 
settlements, 
that 
that practical 
instruction had to be 
appropriate 
to 
the 
afterlife 
of 
the 
pupils 
in 
their 
communities. Training must have, Hoey declared in 1941, "a 
direct and vital relationship to the tasks the pupils are to 
undertake 
immediately 
following 
their 
departure 
from 
school." 266 More often than not, no thought was given to that 
at all; 
schools were opened 
in areas in which only a 
traditional lifestyle was possible, where there had been no 
significant Canadian intervention, outside of the fur trade, 
and thus schools were "in advance of what was required to 
educate Indian children" 267 and remained so for decades. It 
was, therefore, the fate of many an Aboriginal child, B. 
Warkentin, a provincial school inspector, concluded, to be 
made "miserable by confining him within the narrow walls of 
the whiteman's school, and asking him to do silly things for 
which he sees no practical use."268 
Even schools in settled areas were not above criticism in this 
224 

regard. In the scramble for needed per capitas, they often 
recruited children from territories beyond the limits of 
Canadian development. J.D. McLean noted that Elkhorn school 
brought 
in children from northern 
"hunting and 
fishing 
districts." That, he thought, was not "advisable ... as the 
industrial training they receive is not such as enables them 
under present conditions to better earn a livelihood as 
hunters, freighters etc...." 269 - the only employment open to 
them when 
they 
returned 
home. Graham 
was 
in 
complete 
agreement. 
For 
those 
children 
education 
could 
only 
be 
justified if on graduation they could be induced to remain 
"out on the prairies, which gives them a chance to assimilate 
with white people or to settle on reserves where they can make 
a living".270 
In the early history of the school system, no one pressed 
harder than Martin Benson to highlight and rectify this 
situation, 
to restrict growth to sensible financial and 
educational limits and to bring the vision of education for 
assimilation in line with the realities of life in the 
different regions across the country. The Department, he 
counselled, should not "forget wisdom in the teaching of 
knowledge"271 and thus he argued constantly, but unsuccessfully 
in every case in the 1890s and early 1900s, against the 
funding 
of 
remote 
schools 
"especially 
as 
their 
[the 
children's] residence from eight to ten years in the school 
will 
totally 
unfit 
them 
to earn 
their 
living 
in 
the 
surroundings 
in which they would be placed on leaving 
school." 272 Instead, he wanted a more measured approach in 
which formal education came not first but second, following on 
the heels of significant community development. In the West, 
he wrote in 1897, where "the education and civilization" of 
the Indians is 
still in its infancy ... we should be content to 
let them creep for a time before they attempt to 
walk. It is only a few years since they were wild 
untamed savages living by the chase, hunting in 
small bands, or families. Now that game is not to 
be had, they must of necessity, turn to the soil 
for their subsistence. Necessity will be their best 
civilizer. The Government is assisting in every way 
to make them farmers first, then citizens. Then 
they can do what they like with their children. If 
the Government 
succeeds 
in making 
farmers and 
settlers of the rising generation, it will have 
carried out its obligations. I do not see that it 
is 
called 
upon 
to 
make 
them 
all 
mechanics, 
merchants, teachers or clerks. The first thing to 
do is teach them how to get their living from the 
soil, give them locations and assistance at the 
start. When they have learned all this the rest 
225 

will be easy.273 
In opposing an application from the Presbyterian church for 
funding a proposed school on the British Columbia coast, 
Benson went 
so far as to argue that education by the 
children's parents, in this and in many other instances, would 
be more efficacious. The children for the new school were to 
be taken from a small community and would on their return have 
to support themselves by fishing and sealing "and it seems to 
me that they will be better fitted to follow these pursuits 
which are taught them by their parents while they are young, 
than after several years residence in a boarding school." 
Indeed, throughout the coastal region, residential education 
would be, he thought, inappropriate and, more than that, 
harmful - a drag on community development and damaging to the 
character of the children themselves. 
The West Coast Indians are said to be industrious 
and fond of earning money and if it were not for 
the 
competition 
of 
Chinamen 
and 
Japs 
in 
the 
canneries, they would be well-off, as it is they 
are independent and provide for their own wants and 
the feeling of dependence and unreliance that life 
in a boarding school engenders, would be a set-back 
to the civilization 
they are working out 
for 
themselves through necessity.274 
While no one in the Department, not even Graham, carried their 
critique of the system to the length that Benson did, his 
ideas did not go without support. Many, some even before him, 
saw the sense of a localized curriculum. When in the late 
1880s, the Department was preparing to introduce industrial 
schools 
in 
British 
Columbia, 
J. 
Powell, 
the 
Indian 
Commissioner, advised that the standard curriculum based on 
agricultural training be revised in favour of "improved 
methods of developing the immense "Sea Farm' which is and will 
prove a source of great wealth to the country at large." 
He wanted one school to operate out of a cannery where the 
children could be taught deep sea fishing, curing and not only 
Canadian culture but "fish culture", too.275 
Even the Minister, Frank Oliver, preparing for negotiations 
with the churches for what would be the 1911 contracts, 
indicated that he, too, had taken to heart one of Benson's 
central points - one, indeed, that had the potential of 
radically re-aligning the Department's civilizing strategy. He 
admitted that Davin's industrial model was, in the west 
in advance of the real needs of the case; that a 
more permanent influence for good would have been 
exerted by industrial education carried on upon the 
226 

reserves and made up not only of tuition at day 
schools but of the generally civilizing influence 
of instruction given to adults in agriculture, 
ranching, and domestic pursuits. It must not be 
lost sight of that in several districts of the 
provinces of Saskatchewan, and Alberta the Indians 
are practically self-supporting, and as a basis of 
material 
progress 
is 
always 
necessary 
before 
education can have any lasting value, it may be 
said that the best interests of the Indians have 
been served by instruction carried out upon the 
reserves 
and 
not 
by 
the 
elaborate 
system 
of 
education. It would seem to be advisable to get 
back to these first principles 
and to expend 
whatever appropriations are placed at the disposal 
of 
the 
department 
largely 
in 
improving 
the 
conditions on the reserves.276 
Such support for Benson's position did not, however, translate 
into reform. Like the other proposals that emerged at that 
time 
from 
the 
Paget 
and 
Bryce 
reports, 
the 
Winnipeg 
resolutions 
and 
the 
Department's 
involvement 
in 
the 
contracting process, reform remained an intention only. There 
was no greater investment of thought or energetic action in 
tailoring the curriculum's practical training to regional 
employment opportunities or development trends than there was 
an investment of funds in the improvement of the physical 
condition of the system or the health care of the children. 
And there was, of course, no restructuring of the system along 
the lines of 
"first principles." 
Community development, 
Benson's and Oliver's idea of "improving the conditions on the 
reserves" in advance of education, was not accorded a higher 
priority than immediate formal education. 
Throughout the period, the Department kept the stress on 
education, 
on residential 
schools, 
as the core of 
its 
developmental and assimilative strategy and maintained and 
even extended the unreformed status quo of the system, in 
192 6, at the Alberni school in British Columbia, for example, 
the local agent reported that the training children received 
still related solely to agriculture which "is practically 
useless to them as the West Coast Indians do not follow 
farming and efforts to induce them to do so have met with very 
poor success." As had Benson and Powell so many years before, 
he called for training that would allow the graduates to 
secure jobs in canneries and on commercial fishing vessels.277 
Similarly at Joussard school in 1941, the Provincial School 
Inspector, E.C. Stehelin, was able to praise the teachers for 
the energy they put into skill training but regretted that the 
practical curriculum at that school, and at "many Indian 
schools which I have inspected," 
227 

has been developed without much regard for the 
vocational needs of the area served by the school. 
In the case of this particular school it is a 
mixture of the Ontario curriculum with ours of 
Alberta. As a result, 
pupils who have passed 
through these schools possess a certain amount of 
skills 
for 
which 
there 
is 
no 
demand, 
and 
opportunities 
for economic self-sufficiency are 
neglected 
for 
want 
of 
adequate 
educational 
training.278 
As well, the commissioning of new schools was not restricted 
to areas that were within the bounds of Canadian development. 
The system continued to grow in exactly those areas where 
industrial education made the least sense. The Department's 
first two Quebec schools, opened on James Bay, are perfect 
examples of that fact. 
Criticism of the system along Benson's lines continued as 
well. As late as 1942, Warkentin, in calling on Hoey to revise 
school 
curricula 
felt 
the 
need 
to 
return 
to 
Benson's 
sentiments: 
It is an open question whether we should even try 
and teach the children who live 
in the more 
primitive 
sections of Canada according to the 
formula accepted 
in the ordinary 
school. This 
formula may be acceptable on the reserve, where 
conditions 
are 
slowly 
but 
imperceptively 
approaching that of the whiteman. On the outskirts 
of so-called civilization it might be enough to 
teach them to sew, to knit, to use a hammer and 
saw, 
to 
speak 
English, 
to 
avoid 
infectious 
diseases, etc.279 
The lack of reforming measures, 
despite the persistent 
critique from Benson and others, can be attributed to more 
than just the chronic lethargy of the Department in moving 
past analysis to action. Departmental officials pointed an 
accusing 
finger 
at 
the 
churches 
and 
the 
Department's 
relationship with them. 
The tension between Departmental officials and the churches 
was not restricted to the issues of building and funding the 
system. It extended to the curriculum, as well. Benson's and 
Scott's, complaint that the development of the school system 
was 
in 
fact 
controlled 
by 
the 
churches, 
usurping 
a 
Departmental right, was accompanied by a suspicion that the 
churches' purpose was not so much the education of Aboriginal 
children for assimilation as it was conversion for salvation 
and denominational glory, that they "strive more to make 
converts of their pupils than to give them a good english 
228 

education and proper manual training." 280 In the face of this, 
the Department, as was the case with incidents of abuse, 
exhibited 
its 
habit 
of 
"hesitancy" 
in 
challenging 
and 
controlling the conduct of the churches. Consequently, there 
were, particularly among local officials, the same feelings of 
powerlessness and frustration that Graham had articulated 
borne of the overriding influence of the church and the belief 
that that influence was not always a force for good. In terms 
of the state of education, itself, the conviction that the 
church had the whip hand and drove the school system down the 
road of self-interest without due regard for the quality of 
education and its role in the overall civilizing strategy was 
best expressed by Dr. T. Robertson, the inspector of Indian 
agencies in Saskatchewan. He wrote to Hoey in 1939: 
I am not at all opposed to religious instruction, 
in fact I am strongly in favour of it and consider 
it absolutely necessary. But it makes my blood boil 
to go out on our reserves and find I can do little 
to rectify conditions owing to lack of funds, and 
at the sametime see thousands of dollars spent by 
our Department under guise of educating the Indians 
when 
it 
is 
actually 
being 
spent 
on 
teaching 
denominational 
religion. 
The 
churches 
pride 
themselves on what they have done for the Indians 
and shout it from the housetops. They advocate 
higher education and ask the Department to pay for 
it. They want the spending of the money, but when 
it comes to placing those Indians, after they have 
received the higher education, they look to the 
Department 
to 
do 
it. 
In 
their 
work 
in 
the 
residential schools, they have to a large extent 
forgotten what Christianity means. They are simply 
seeking ways and means of taking every opportunity 
to pay the expense of their missionaries, in order 
that 
they 
may 
increase 
the 
number 
of 
their 
particular denomination. If they were honest with 
people, 
a 
great 
many 
of 
them 
would 
openly 
acknowledge 
that 
it 
is 
not 
Christianity, 
but 
denominationalism, 
they are teaching, and would 
substitute the word "church' for "God1 .281 
It is not easy to discern whether, in general, Robertson's 
characterization of church motives was unfair or overblown or 
whether it was the churches or the Department that was 
actually in control and thus responsible for the shape and 
character of the system. There were, 
after all, 
church 
officials who appeared serious about the educational intention 
of the school system and some of those even shared Benson's 
ideas. S.H. Blake, when he began to lobby the Department in 
1906 at the beginning of the campaign that led to the 
contracts called for "flexibility in these schools. . . let them 
229 

be so manned as that the time of the student can be turned to 
the appropriate work for the locality" and so that they could 
be given training that "will make him an all-round workman in 
his neighbourhood." Blake was joined by the Bishop of Moosonee 
who agreed that the church's aim should be "to train them with 
a view to their future usefulness in ... [their] particular 
part of the country."282 
What is evident at least in all of this was that what 
Robertson and other local officials and school inspectors 
witnessed in the school classrooms would lead many to conclude 
that 
the 
system was 
simply not 
operating as 
intended. 
Futhermore, a review of the performance of the schools, 
particularly of the key elements of teaching and learning -
instruction in practical skills, the nature of the "literary" 
curriculum, the quality of the teaching staff and language 
training - not only substantiates that conclusion but reveals 
that the many defects were a result of the actions of 
Department and churches alike. 
Benson's critique of the practical curriculum - that it was 
inappropriate in remote regions or needed to be tailored to 
local circumstances and employment opportunities if it was to 
be at all useful - while it was valid on a philosophic level 
did not address the school system's even more fundamental 
difficulty with regards to skill training. In general, across 
the system, the Department and churches did not ensure, even 
in the industrial schools located in areas of non-Aboriginal 
development, that all children received the practical training 
that was such a critical element of the educational strategy. 
In terms of the time and energy devoted to it, practical 
instruction probably ranked third in a curriculum comprised 
also of religious instruction and "literary" subjects. 
The schools were not, of course, without merit; there was a 
degree of educational success. Children received instruction 
and no doubt inculcated a modicum of the arts and crafts of 
"civilized" life and some children progressed far beyond that. 
Paget provided some evidence of this. As well as surveying the 
physical and financial condition of the schools, he had been 
directed to consider "whether the methods of education carried 
out at these schools are consistent with the Department's 
policy and with the future life of the pupils on Indian 
Reserves." While he did not devote much attention to this 
section of his charge, he did, as he travelled from school to 
school, note accomplishments. At High River the girls were so 
proficient at needle work that they had "carried off a diploma 
at the Dominion Exhibition at Calgary." He seems not to have 
remembered that this was a traditional Aboriginal art. There 
was, however, what appeared to be unquestionable progress at 
Red Deer. Students had written essays of such quality that 
"some of them were published in the local newspaper and might 
230 

have brought credit to many white pupils" and at Ermineskin's 
Boarding School, he encountered a "novelty in the music line 
... 15 girls performing on as many mandolins in a most 
credible manner." Brass bands were the usual order of the day. 
They could even give the school a presence in the local 
community making 
that 
desirable 
connection 
between 
the 
students and the non-Aboriginal 
immigrant community. At 
Qu'Appelle school Paget enjoyed "an excellent brass band ... 
which is much in demand at the adjoining towns during the time 
the fairs are held. They have nice uniforms and dispense good 
lively music." 
After inspecting Battleford Industrial school, Paget came 
closest to forming a general conclusion on the matter of 
greatest importance - practical training and its carry over 
to life after school. He observed that "ex-pupils [are] ... 
meeting with a fair success and all of them better for their 
school training." 283 One of them, "Joseph Laronde," (actually 
it was Louis not Joseph) had gone on and "graduated recently 
from Manitoba University with highest honours . . . ." and became 
a missionary. 
Such a positive conclusion, if Paget meant it to apply to the 
system as a whole, ran counter to the general tenor of 
opinion. Bryce, who saw the 
western schools at almost the 
same time as Paget, had little good to say about 
the 
industrial schools finding that in comparison there was in the 
boarding schools "some strong essentially vital forces which 
have enabled them to force their way into their present 
dominant 
position" which 
included a greater 
success 
in 
teaching agriculture and "practical outdoor work."284 
Before Paget or Bryce, Benson had provided an even 
more 
critical picture of the industrial schools. In his 1897 
review, he pointed out that the level of training was well 
below what might have been expected. Of the 700 boys then 
enrolled in the 10 western industrial schools only half were 
involved in trades training. At other schools the record was 
even worse. 285 In all, it was, he claimed, "generally admitted" 
that the schools were not providing "such education"286 as 
would equip children with the desirable range of skills and 
thus, as with Hamilton's Sunday clothes, there was for Benson 
in the great Industrial school program a pronounced element of 
duplicity in the conduct of the children's education. "The 
chief 
ambition 
of 
an 
Industrial 
school" 
he 
charged, 
sarcastically, 
is to possess a Brass Band and a printing press. 
Music has charms but enough money has been expended 
on brass bands to place a musical instrument, such 
as a piano or organ in every school in this 
country. The brass band and the newspaper are for 
231 

outward show and help advertise the school. More 
solid comfort and enjoyment could be had with the 
other kind of music in which all could join.287 
The boarding schools and the residential schools after them, 
even with their less ambitious training regimen - by and large 
agriculture, carpentry and domestic skills - were not spared 
critical comment either. Inspector M. Christianson reported in 
1923 that the situation at Crowfoot was typical of that he 
encountered in many schools in the prairie region - an area 
most suitable, obviously, for this type of training: 
By this you will see that the boys on leaving 
school have had practically no experience along 
lines of farming or stock raising and are placed 
upon a reserve where they are supposed to make 
their 
living 
from 
this 
source, 
without 
any 
experience.288 
Graham, on reading Christianson's report, noted that it 
certainly applied to Old Sun's whose graduates were "very much 
less capable as farmers and stockmen than Indians who have not 
received any school training." It was obvious, he concluded, 
that "unless Indian boys receive an education which they can 
put to practical use . . . the time spent by them at school 
represents a waste of time and money."289 
Aboriginal parents, who looked to the schools to equip their 
children with skills that could aid in forging a new life for 
their communities, were equally critical. "Many parents," the 
agent J. Markle wrote in 1918, are not pleased with the lack 
of progress that the children are making."290 and thus they 
resisted sending their children291 Parents protested as well. 
In 1938, parents from a number of reserves in Manitoba came 
together to voice their concerns about Birtle school. Their 
children received instruction in arithmetic, reading and 
writing but they returned home with neither farming knowledge 
or any practical skills. They sent forward their complaints 
through a lawyer who informed Hoey that "it seems to me that 
these people have real grounds for complaints as to the 
results of their school education."292 
The problem was not restricted obviously to Scott's period of 
tenure. His successors, Hoey and P. Phelan, chief of the 
training division, and other senior staff, faced the fact that 
children in the 1930s and 1940s were still not necessarily 
getting training "suitable to their needs after graduation."293 
School by school this meant a range of scenarios from "no 
systematic instruction has been given in Manual Training",294 
to a moderate amount295 to the situation at Moscowequan school 
in 
1932-34. In February 1932, the local agent, J. Waddy, 
noted in his report under the title "manual training" that 
232 

"The boys skate just now. They have beaten all the junior 
teams within one hundred miles in hockey, including city 
teams." In May, it changed to "Outdoor sports at present." In 
June 1933, it was "Soft ball at present." In January, 1934, it 
was, of course, "Skating just now." When October of that year 
came, the training changed to "Football at present." And then 
in December the seasonal round of sport that stood in for 
practical training went back to "Hockey at present is the main 
training.1,296 
For Hoey, the state of training was, as he wrote of Alberni 
school, "on the whole rather disturbing, particularly so, in 
view of the big investment we have...." 297 and he acted, on 
paper, at least, to rectify it with the support of the 
Minister, T.A. Crerar, and the churches who also now "stressed 
the 
importance 
of 
vocational 
training." 298 
Crerar 
was, 
apparently, quite insistent, constantly reminding Hoey, as he 
informed Miss Lang of the Women's Missionary Society of the 
Presbyterian Church, "that the course of study at residential 
schools must become steadily more practical and vocational in 
character." 299 In 1937, that message was passed on to the 
Principals. They were told that a minimum of one third of the 
time set aside for instruction had to be dedicated to 
vocational 
training 
- elementary agriculture, 
gardening, 
blacksmithing, carpentry and auto mechanics for boys and hand 
loom weaving, dress making, fruit preserving, crochet work and 
other domestic skills for the girls. 300 Agents were directed to 
follow this up by surveying what was actually being done in 
the schools in their area301 and Hoey announced his intention 
of instituting a "follow up system" designed and adopted "in 
cooperation with the churches" which would ensure that the 
students were placed in situations that would enhance their 
use of the skills and knowledge that they had acquired at 
school.1,302 
Most significantly, the failure of the schools to provide high 
quality training, brought Hoey to re-consider the whole 
question of education. His first thoughts were a curious 
mixture - one part re-invention of the industrial school wheel 
and another a radical new element, a sign of what would come 
after the war: 
It is my personal opinion that the policy of the 
Government with respect to the education of the 
Indian population will move gradually toward the 
multiplication of Indian day schools on reserves, 
and it is just possible that in future a number of 
residential schools may be organized to provide 
vocational instruction for senior pupils.303 
Hoey wanted to prepare the way. He planned to appoint a 
professional vocational arts teacher at Mohawk, or at another 
233 

Ontario residential school, "by way of an experiment." 304 This 
move was stymied owing to that perennial problem 
- the lack 
of funds, then made worse by the war. By 1942, interest from 
school administrators in improving their vocational training, 
just the sort of development Hoey had hoped for, was met with 
the 
dispiriting 
reply 
"At 
the present 
time, 
with 
the 
Appropriation cut to a minimum, it is impossible for the 
Department to give favourable consideration to your request." 
Schools were now expected to do what they had always done - to 
make due with what they had. At Mount Elgin the Principal's 
request for funding for a special domestic science course for 
older girls was turned aside with the curt response - "The 
Department expects the officer in charge of the kitchen at our 
institutions to give to the older girls whatever instruction 
in this that is considered desirable."305 
These remarks highlight what had been the most formative 
reality in this period. More than any other factor, it was 
underfunding, the actual economic situation of schools, that 
determined the fate of the practical curriculum. Finance 
rather than curricular philosophy born of the Davin report, or 
directives from Ottawa, or frustrated Departmental reform 
impulses, or even the supposedly narrow religious agenda of 
the 
churches 
was 
the 
hand 
that 
moulded 
each 
school's 
curriculum. At the most basic level, this meant simply that 
schools which lacked funds for food, clothes and decent living 
conditions often, not surprisingly, went without necessary 
academic equipment and qualified staff. At Brandon school in 
1941, for example, the school inspector George Robertson 
underlined the "need of material for practical work." In 
Manitoba, he continued, "we are pressing for a program that 
will direct the work of the pupil along lines of a more 
practical nature. We can conduct an activity program, only, 
when there is something with which to work."306 
Schools administrators, who became supplicants when they found 
that their grants did not stretch to cover their requirements 
for food, clothing and building repairs, had no choice but to 
add educational equipment of every kind to their begging list. 
In 1905, one Principal took the unusual approach of speaking 
through the children sending a letter, clearly dictated by 
him, to the local agent R. Wilson: 
Dear Sir - Trusting in your kindness, that is well 
known to us by what our kind teacher tells us we 
take the liberty of asking you a favour today; 
convinced that in doing so we will not be refused. 
Garden time is coming and we have neither hoes nor 
rakes for this purpose, if you could let us have a 
few, it would render us a great service, and we 
would work like little men with them. Hoping that 
our letter will please you, and that you will find 
234 

us cute enough to be worthy of this favour. We 
remain, kind Sir - Yours very respectfully - James 
Back-Looking and the boys of St. Mary's school, the 
Blood Reserve.307 
Underfunding had a further, more insidious and pervasive 
impact on education than problems administrators had in 
acquiring 
equipment. 
Practical 
training 
had 
a 
two-fold 
purpose. One was educational and the other, as Principal 
Clarke of Battleford school envisioned it in 1884, was in 
making "the school in the near future self-supporting by the 
labour of its pupils." 308 Work as education and as a much 
needed subsidy to the school budget had from the beginning 
been institutionalized in the half-day system. This division 
of the educational day was, according to Reed, critical to the 
success of the assimilative process - "unless it is intended 
to train children to earn their bread by brain work, rather 
than by manual labour, at least half of the day should be 
devoted to acquiring skill in the latter." 309 But within the 
half-day devoted to skill training, any balance between 
learning and labour was rarely maintained; labour easily 
overwhelmed education - children were, Benson charged in 1918, 
"worked too hard and taught too little."310 Years later that 
had not changed as Hamilton's remark about Birtle school in 
1936 indicated - "The farm should be operated for the school -
not the school for the farm."311 
All too often, the needs of the school rather than those of 
the children were paramount to the extent that, as Graham 
wrote in 1930 of the St. Mary's and St. Paul's school farms on 
the Blood reserve, "the boys are being made slaves of working 
too long hours and not receiving the close supervision they 
should have." While he thought it could "not be the intention 
of the Department to have these growing boys working on the 
land from morning until night,"312 that was the difficult 
experience of most children. They did, indeed, "work like 
little men"313 and women. Ironically, for the sake of training, 
the Department refused to intervene. Graham was told that as 
there 
"has been difficulty in having some schools give 
adequate training in farming" the Department, 
"therefore 
hesitates to criticize a school management in this regard 
without giving very careful consideration to the matter."314 
The Department did not react either when an ex-student 
complained that the young boys at Kootenay were made to work 
so hard and for so long "it makes one think of the days of 
slavery. "315 
Parents, too, objected to such treatment and they acted. 
Children at the Kamloops school who had been put to work 
clearing 
the fields were removed because their parents 
preferred "having their children occupied in learning useful 
trades when not at their lessons," a sentiment shared by the 
235 

agent, J. Mackay, who suggested that "it would be advisable to 
introduce some useful trade among the pupils."316 In 1911, the 
Department faced a delegation from a number of Saskatchewan 
communities making the same complaint and J.D. McLean had to 
admit 
"that 
in some cases there is foundation for the 
complaint. "317 
Not only the time devoted to chores but the sheer drudgery of 
them reduced the educational potential of the children's 
labour. The Inspector of Schools, H. McArthur, who on the 
occasion of his first visit took an especially close look at 
St. George's in 1943, found there what was the case at so many 
other institutions, that training meant little more than a 
"rather monotonous and dreary" regimen of "household and farm 
tasks": 
Children, like adults, are nor interested in doing 
work for work's sake. They are not interested in 
treadmill tasks. And where interest is lacking 
energy is low and learning is likely to be slow or 
wholly absent.... This is not mere opinion. It has 
been 
established 
by 
careful 
research 
and 
is 
uniformly accepted by informed educationists. 
I am not questioning the sincerity, devotion and, 
in many respects, the 
competence of the Principal 
of St. George's and of his staff. But I do question 
whether the system of vocational training which I 
saw 
is 
likely 
to 
achieve 
more 
than 
mediocre 
results. 
McArthur acknowledged the pressure on Principals to make 
budgetary ends meet and that the necessity of doing so on the 
backs of the children was so inexorable that they were 
"unlikely 
to 
take 
any 
active 
measures 
to prevent 
the 
submergence of educational aims in considerations of financial 
and utilitarian expediency."318 Children were routinely forced 
to do chores to the detriment of their education, tasks which 
"should rightly be done by hired help," Warkentin, told the 
Department in 1943, and which had little "value 
... as 
educational 
training." 
Adequate 
instruction 
would, 
he 
advised, involve "shop training for the boys and home making 
for the girls on a full half-day basis under qualified 
instructors.1,319 
"Adequate instruction" never was the norm. Rather, according 
to a review of the educational performance of the system up to 
1950, conducted in 1968 by R.F. Davey, the director of 
educational services, McArthur and Warkentin were correct, the 
practical training which had been in place "contained very 
little of instructional value but consisted mainly of the 
236 

performance of repetitive, routine chores of little or no 
educational value."320 
The negative impact of labour was not restricted to the 
practical part of the curriculum. The half day devoted to 
chores too often and too readily swelled to encompass a much 
greater part of the children's school room time. In 1916, 
Graham alerted Scott to the situation at Qu'Appelle. When 
reviewing school records he had discovered that the children 
were spending little time in the classroom. In a 42-day 
stretch the boys had only been in class for nine days. For 
Graham "the main idea and object of the school is being 
entirely neglected" and the school was coming close to being 
turned 
into 
a 
"workhouse."321 
Across 
the 
system, 
scant 
progress, or "retardation" as it was termed, in the arts of 
reading, writing, arithmetic and the other components of the 
"literary" curriculum was, agents and school inspectors told 
the Department, all that could be "expected when only a 
portion of the day is devoted to classroom activities, 1, 322 when 
students 
consistently 
got 
"too 
little 
time 
at 
their 
studies. "323 
Because of the half day system, progress in learning was, 
Davey concluded, virtually impossible. In what is perhaps the 
only statistical analysis carried out by the Department which 
reflected the situation in the pre-war period, he noted that 
in 1945, a year in which there were 9,149 residential school 
students, there were only "slightly over 100 students enrolled 
in grades above grade VIII and ... there was no record of any 
students beyond the grade IX level."32'1 Research conducted in 
the 1980s by J. Barman, Y. Hebert and D. McCaskill has added 
much greater definition to this Departmental sketch. They 
estimate that in the period 1890 to 1950 at least 60 per cent 
and in some decades over 80 per cent of children in federal 
schools, day and residential, failed to advance past grade 
three. They acquired no more than a "basic literacy." This did 
not compare at all favourably to the progress of non-
Aboriginal children in the provincial school systems. In 1930, 
for example, 
three quarters of the Indian pupils across Canada 
were in grades 1 to 3, receiving only a very basic 
literary education. Only three in every hundred 
went past grade 6. By comparison, well over half 
the children in provincial public schools in 1930 
were ... past grade 3; almost a third were beyond 
grade 6. The formal education being offered young 
Indians was not only separate but unequal to that 
provided their non-Indian contemporaries.325 
Given that the Department's mandate was to prepare children 
for assimilation 
- to live in equality with their non-
237 

Aboriginal 
neighbours 
- 
this 
provincial 
comparison 
is 
particularly apt and illuminating. Moreover, 
residential 
schools were to follow "the programme of studies laid down by 
the various Provincial Department's of Education" and, through 
agreements with the provinces, were inspected by provincial 
officials "in an effort" J.D. McLean explained, "to bring the 
Indian Schools, 
from an academic standpoint, up to the 
standard of the public schools."326 
As with almost everything else about the system, provincial 
involvement was the subject of debate and dissension within 
the Department. Benson, in this instance supported by Reed, 
had his critique at hand. The inspection reports, they felt, 
were of "slight value" for such information had not led to 
reform, and would not do so, as "improvement can only be 
looked for from the exercise of vigilance and energy on the 
part of the Department and its officials not from paid 
officials over whom the Department has no control." Control 
was actually the sore point at the bottom of this issue. 
Benson was exercised in particular by the Ontario government 
which routinely published its inspection reports much to the 
embarrassment of the Department whose schools should not be 
expected, he felt, to be as good as provincial ones. There was 
a feeling also that the inspectors were outsiders unable to 
understand the ethos of the residential system and thus their 
recommendations 
were 
"wholly 
impracticable 
for 
Indian 
schools." 
On this issue Benson was unable to move the Minister, T. Mayne 
Daly. He wanted the provincial tie cut and inspections carried 
out solely by Departmental employees. He was confident that 
"any of our agents of ordinary intelligence are competent on 
hearing the school children go through their exercises to give 
an opinion as to whether they are deriving any benefit from 
their attendance or not...." 
The minister, however, refused 
feeling "the necessity of our affairs not being conducted as 
a 
closed 
corporation." 327 
Scott, 
when 
he 
was 
deputy 
superintendent 
general, 
concurred 
believing 
that 
the 
inspections gave the Department the benefit of "independent 
criticism 
of 
our 
work" 
and 
were 
"productive 
of 
good 
results."328 Provincial school inspectors remained, therefore, 
part of the system and thus they have to be added to the list 
of officials who witnessed not only the defects in the 
educational program but the substandard living conditions and 
deplorable treatment of the children. 
The fact that the schools did not come "up to the standard of 
the public schools," 329 as the evidence of the marked grade 
"retardation" 
reveals, 
was 
due, 
in 
addition 
to 
"considerations of financial and utilitarian expediency, "33 to 
two further factors: the poor quality of the teachers and the 
nature of the literary curriculum. 
238 

In the overall strategy of the residential school policy, the 
curriculum, literary and practical, was meant to be that 
bridge from savagery to civilization over which the children 
would be led by caring and talented staff. While the efficacy 
of the practical training was undercut by financial need, the 
literary curriculum, itself, was the problem. Ironically, in 
view of Benson's castigation of outside inspectors, it was, in 
the main, 
those 
officials 
who, 
with 
some 
Departmental 
employees, recognized that the very nature of that part of the 
curriculum was the most significant impediment to learning 
and, therefore, to the much longed for cultural transformation 
of the children. It was so because while the system's strategy 
was rooted in an insistence on dramatic cultural difference, 
the "savage" as opposed to the civilised, the educational 
process, both in terms of the content of the curriculum and 
the pedagogy, never in any way addressed that issue. In short, 
as the Department was told on numerous occasions, because 
there was "very often a very wide difference in the life 
experiences of Indian children and white children"... that 
"difference ...should be reflected in courses of study,"331 in 
the general curriculum. In this period, it never was nor was 
there any attempt to introduce reform 
despite suggestions 
that "this is a problem that should be given serious study. 
There should be a clear definition of objectives and a 
definite appraisal of the means of reaching them." 
Inspector Warkentin whose critique of the curriculum was in 
this period the most extensive, while still representative of 
the positions taken by others, began with the assumption then 
current in educational circles that the curriculum had to be 
child-based. There was, he told the Department, in 1940, 
"still in progress a considerable revision of [provincial] 
school curricula." The "basis of this revision seems to be, by 
and large, the adaptation of the curriculum to the life needs 
of the child; we seem to have given up the idea of fitting the 
child to the curriculum." 332 That provincial trend immediately 
raised for him 
"the question whether the curriculum as 
prescribed for white children is at all suitable for Indian 
children" and suggested to him, just as readily, that the 
"curriculum 
in 
use 
in 
the 
various 
provinces 
are 
not 
necessarily the courses of study adapted for use in Indian 
schools, that probably they are anything but suitable for such 
use.""3 
What Warkentin and others called for was the development of "a 
curriculum 
specially 
aimed 
at 
instruction 
of 
Indian 
children" 334 one that 
reflected, 
rather than 
ignored 
or 
denigrated, the fact of the children's cultural heritage, one 
that perhaps even included in its aims "giving the students an 
understanding of their own tribal law, art and music." 335 There 
were clear curricular implications which flowed from that 
cultural fact. School Inspector J. Boyce, in 1923, when 
239 

"offering suggestions for improvement" at Old Sun's school, 
was 
mindful of the fact that Indian children have no 
literary background . . . and as a consequence it 
would not be fair to the Indian children to expect 
the same degree of attainment in classroom work as 
in a 
foreign 
school 
of 
say 
Finns, 
Slavs 
or 
Ruthenians. These people have a background of 
literature and an inheritance with regard to school 
work which is practically lacking among the Indian 
tribes of Western Canada. The handicap under which 
Indian 
children 
are 
labouring 
is 
therefore 
apparent .336 
Hamilton, in his 1934 inspection report on Qu'Appelle, had 
observed similarly that the "experience of the children were 
not closely related to the learnings which the teachers were 
endeavouring to impart." 337 And even earlier in the history of 
the system, in 1914, Markle recounted his experience at St. 
Paul's where he witnessed "the most advanced class" struggling 
"to read a poem entitled The Curate and the Mulberry Tree." 
"It seems a pity", he wrote, "that a book or books, containing 
subjects of interest, or information, to the Indian youths 
were not provided for the use of Indian schools."338 
These various reports provided not only comment on the 
existing curriculum but suggestions for moving the system 
toward greater success. The cultural "handicap under which 
Indian children are labouring" could be alleviated through a 
classroom strategy, books and pedagogy which were relevant to 
the children's experience, were "adapted to the needs and 
capacities of the pupils" 339 and would, therefore, make "a 
stronger appeal to the native interests of the Indian child" 
resulting in "more enthusiasm for school studies." 340 Concrete 
examples 
and 
proposed 
techniques 
were 
brought 
forward. 
Inspector Sigvaldason proposed that social studies could be 
better "taught by a due recognition of Indian background" and 
by using "story telling," an Aboriginal teaching technique, to 
"more effectively ... arouse interest."341 Christianson took 
the same tack when he observed, on a visit to Crowfoot school, 
that "Grade 5 covered the section on Indians in exactly the 
same way that it is taken up in the public schools. A brief 
history 
of 
the 
tribe 
might 
be 
substituted 
here 
to 
advantage." 342 McArthur thought that interest in learning could 
be heightened "through a well planned program of craft work -
particularly work based on Indian arts and crafts." 
McArthur's further recommendation of a wholly new curriculum 
comprising a "programme partly based on Indian traditions, 
social life and arts," and his rationale for it, brought to 
the surface a profound implication that underlay all the 
240 

suggestions for curricular reform emanating from provincial 
and Departmental inspectors - the need for, and effective 
utility of, tolerating some degree of Aboriginal culture. 
On visiting 
St. George's 
classrooms, 
McArthur had been 
"surprised to observe the absence of teaching of any kind 
based on Indian life," on what was a "rich store" of "Indian 
art, and Indian culture generally...." I think, he told the 
Department, 
that those responsible for this omission have made 
a profound error. All admit that Indians are under 
severe handicaps in Canada - and indeed in all 
parts of America. One trait that is traceable to 
these 
handicaps 
is 
a 
sense 
of 
racial 
inferiority.... 
To 
give 
confidence 
to 
Indian 
children to enable them to look others in the eye 
in the knowledge that they, too, are Canadians and 
that in natural capacity they are not inferior to 
white children - those should, I think, be the 
primary aims of all Indian schools. To accomplish 
these aims I think that they must be given a pride 
in their racial heritage and a knowledge of their 
racial history and culture. To cut Indians off from 
their origins - to try to make whitemen of them -
is I believe both futile and undesirable.343 
Most surprisingly, similar proposals had already been made by 
the churches. In 1938, a "Joint Delegation" submitted to 
Crerar 
suggestions 
for improvement based upon a rather 
astounding principle: 
...nothing 
in 
indigenous 
culture 
should 
be 
destroyed or condemned unless it can be proved that 
it does in fact obstruct the progress of culture. 
In so far as the preservation or even revival of 
Indian 
culture 
and 
customs 
contribute 
to 
a 
wholesome 
coordination of their life with the 
national life of which they must become a part such 
preservation and revival should be promoted. 
While 
this 
certainly 
was 
a 
first 
step 
away 
from 
the 
traditional church position which gave no quarter at all to 
Aboriginal culture, it was not quite as radical as it looked 
on the surface. The aspects of "culture and customs" that were 
valuable for adaptation to "national life," loyalty to family 
and 
friends, 
deep 
love 
of 
children, 
generosity 
and 
hospitality, courage and admiration of brave leadership and 
the dignity and serenity of leaders, 344 [282] seemed not to be 
exclusively Aboriginal traits and those that were the core of 
Aboriginal culture, and were at the heart of the cultural 
struggle in the schools, language and spirituality, were not 
241 

mentioned. And there certainly continued to be voices in the 
church that would give no quarter to Aboriginal spirituality 
which "hampers the work of physician, missionary and school. 
It fosters superstition, degradation, and a certain distrust 
of the whiteman. "345 
Of the senior staff of the Department only Hoey made any 
contribution to these ideas. In a statement, recalled by 
Warkentin, he suggested that the curriculum should concentrate 
largely on the "training of his [the child's] hands in a 
creative and constructive sense" and that such training would 
"require and produce mental and spiritual qualities and that 
we need not worry about saving his soul."346 
These ideas, in proposing to maintain rather than destroy, for 
the sake of assimilation, the connection between Aboriginal 
people and "their origins" even to the extent of facilitating 
"a pride in their racial heritage and a knowledge of their 
racial history and culture, " 347 were one of the roots of a 
discourse that would by the 1970s effectively undermine the 
traditional dichotomy between "savage" culture and what some 
began, significantly, to term "so-called civilization." 348 As 
that trend progressed from initial questioning to full blown 
cultural relativism among non-Aboriginal Canadians, it would 
be a critical 
factor 
in changing 
the long 
established 
relationship between Canada and Aboriginal peoples. With 
respect 
to the residential 
school 
system, 
however, 
the 
revolutionary potential of this discourse was never realized; 
it never was integrated into the Department's educational 
philosophy. Even when the government, the Department and most 
of the churches turned their backs on the schools after the 
war in favour of a day school system, it was not the hinge 
upon which 
that dramatic 
change 
in policy 
turned. The 
Department 
did not 
start 
from a new educational 
first 
principle to fashion a new system. And within the residential 
school system there would never be any mitigation of the 
hostile attitude to Aboriginal culture, language, spirituality 
and traditions. 
The significance of this discourse then lays in another 
direction. 
It 
simply 
indicates 
that 
some, 
including 
professional 
eduactionalists, 
understood 
and 
that 
the 
Department was told on a number of occasions, though this was 
another message it heard but did not react to, that any 
attempt "to make whitemen of them" by methods predicated on 
the destruction of Aboriginal culture through a wholly non-
Aboriginal education was, even if yet "desirable," quite 
"futile." 349 The retention of an unreformed curriculum which 
reflected 
that 
original vision and 
strategy would 
only 
telegraph the school system's failure, so evident in 1944, 
farther into the future. 
242 

The curriculum was education's own worst enemy. But it had its 
allies. The text books which were no different than those used 
in provincial schools were, Warkentin noted, "particularly 
unsuitable." "Devoted teachers with imagination can make some 
use of them, [but] ... in the hands of uninspired teachers 
they are deadly." 350 Unfortunately, though many teachers were 
unquestionably inspired by missionary enthusiasm, and some 
indeed could even be given high marks for "making a good job 
of adapting ... the curriculum to the needs of their pupils" 
and for modifying their teaching methods "to suit the type of 
pupil with which she has to deal"351 in general, they lacked 
full qualifications and were unable to respond to what Scott 
referred to as the unique "difficulties under which our 
teachers are labouring." 352 And there was a recognition that 
the challenge posed by the attempt to teach Aboriginal 
children called for special teachers, men and women of 
superior skills, the best that teacher training could produce. 
Provincial Inspector, J. Boyce wrote in 1923, 
With regard to the teacher of an Indian school it 
is quite evident that a special type is required. 
As I size up instruction for Indian children the 
problem is very much more difficult than in the 
average school of foreign speaking children. Normal 
training, wide experience, broad human sympathy and 
missionary zeal are very desirable but in addition 
an investigative and experimental turn of mind is 
the most necessary qualification in order that 
special study and special tests be made of the 
problem of the education of Indian children.353 
In 
1948, 
"a 
[Departmental] 
study 
conducted 
of 
the 
qualifications of the teachers in the residential schools . . . 
disclosed that over 40 per cent of the teaching staff had no 
professional training. Indeed some had not even graduated from 
high school." 354 This was a long way from the stated official 
policy 
of 
appointing 
"only 
those 
with 
provincial 
certificates." 355 Realistically, however, the system never 
could afford such quality. Paget concluded, in his 1908 
survey, that churches could not, within the restrictive limit 
of their per capita grants, easily secure qualified people.356 
That situation did not change in this period. 357 The isolated 
location of the schools, the availability of other forms of 
employment and, most critically, the fact that "the salaries 
paid are not as high as are paid in other public institutions" 
added up to "frequent changes of staff," 358 
unqualified 
staff and staff shortages creating poor teacher student 
ratios359 all of which was "not productive of rapid advancement 
of the pupils."360 
The problem of shortages was compounded by the Department's 
refusal to train or hire Aboriginal teachers, men and women 
243 

who may very well have had an affinity for staffing these 
schools. Davin had recommended the training of children with 
the aptitude to be teachers. And the Methodists did, in fact, 
propose 
that 
Mount 
Elgin 
school 
be 
converted 
into 
an 
Aboriginal residential teacher training facility. But the 
Department did not think it was "advisable to favourably 
entertain the proposal" because, it replied mysteriously, "the 
experience ... with Indian teachers has not been very happy 
. . . .1,361 Perhaps, the reason was the same as it was in the case 
of the Rev. Louis Laronde, Paget's example of success. Benson 
argued against appointing Laronde to the Principalship of 
McKay school in 1914. 
So far as his educational 
attainments go Mr. 
Laronde is fully qualified, but it is a question 
for you [Scott] to decide whether you would be 
willing to intrust the success of a new school to a 
half-breed. I think our past experience goes to 
show that we would be taking great risks in putting 
a school of this class in charge of a half-breed.362 
Scott appointed Laronde, not because he disagreed with Benson, 
but because the church, rather than waiting for Departmental 
approval, had gone ahead and told Laronde he had the job. As 
ever, Scott was not prepared to contradict the church. Laronde 
was hired on a trial basis and when the school, like so many 
others, ran up a deficit because its grant, as even Benson 
admitted was too small, the church let him go.363 
During the Second World War, the shortages became especially 
acute. As manpower was drained away by the war effort and 
employment was nationalized, it was even more difficult "to 
find exceptionally good and experienced persons" 364 to the 
extent that thought was given to closing some of the schools 
for the duration. 365 The Rev. G. Dorey, secretary of the board 
of Home Missions of the United Church, wrote with considerable 
exasperation 
to Hoey complaining of the requirement 
of 
advertising for staff through the National Selective Service 
system. 
I want to say that the results that our principals 
are getting from this are simply phenomenal in 
their crass stupidity. You put in an ad. for some 
kind of assistance and you get possibly for one of 
our Schools a woman of 65, who is suffering from 
arthritis and general debility, and in addition has 
absolutely no interest in the work of the School, 
and has never had anything to do with children, 
Indian or otherwise.366 
In the face of what was at best in this period a second rate 
244 

teaching corps, there was a recurrent litany of complaint 
which, in the absence of detailed statistical profiles of 
teacher qualifications, gives some sense of how deplorable the 
situation was and how resistant it was to calls for reform. 
The litany came from a predictable cast of characters. J. A. 
Macrae, 
the first 
specially trained Departmental 
school 
inspector declared, in his very first report on western 
schools in 1886, that many of the teachers were not only 
untrained but were "illiterate persons, ignorant of the first 
elements of teaching and powerless to impart any ideas that 
they may have possessed regarding the most simple subjects."367 
They were "not as a rule well fitted to the work" Benson 
charged in 1897.368 Improvement could come, Paget advised in 
1908, only by the Department paying "the teachers, over and 
above 
the 
grant" 
giving, 
therefore, 
some 
assurance 
of 
"qualified ones being employed."369 
Not only was Paget's specific suggestion ignored but nothing 
else was done either. Markle complained in 1914 that the 
Department had not taken the opportunity offered by the 1911 
contract negotiations to address the problem, along Paget's or 
any other line, and that, indeed, when the churches and 
Department 
were arranging terms and additional per capita 
grants I feared at the time that some of the 
schools would suffer from the want of efficient 
teachers if no such provision was made and the 
result has been about what I predicted.370 
Graham made the blanket charge in 1923 that not "some" but the 
majority of teachers in western schools were not qualified and 
would not in fact be able to find employment in the provincial 
school systems. He called as evidence the testimony of 
provincial 
school 
inspectors who 
"invariably 
stress the 
necessity for employing as teachers . . . only men and women who 
have received Normal [school] training."371 He was supported in 
this by Inspector Ditchburn who cast similar aspersions on the 
teachers 
in 
British 
Columbia 
residential 
schools 
and 
encouraged Scott to set "a standard for teachers" throughout 
the system and to no longer tolerate the churches' practise of 
"sending persons to teach Indians just because they want a 
position. "372 
At the end of Scott' s term, the Department' s Superintendent of 
Education, R.T. Ferrier, admitted, in comments he wanted kept 
confidential, that the churches still exhibited "a proneness 
... 
to 
assign 
to 
Indian 
work 
reverend 
gentlemen 
and 
instructors who have not been too successful in other fields 
of activity" and too often gave in to the "temptation to 
emphasize 
religious 
zeal 
and 
business 
efficiency 
when 
selecting principals and instructors." 373 In some of the 
245 

western Catholic schools conducted in English by French 
priests and nuns, classroom work was "greatly handicapped by 
the fact that the teachers do not speak the English language 
proficiently and also by their not having had adequate 
professional training." 374 And in many of their schools proper 
practical training could not be carried out, a senior Oblate 
priest 
admitted 
in 1939, because 
"the 
staff 
is either 
insufficient or not qualified for this purpose."375 
At the end of his 1923 critique, Graham claimed that he was 
confident that the question of teacher qualifications "will 
receive earnest consideration from the Department". 376 If that 
was not simply sarcasm, it certainly was naive given the 
Department's record on reform of any kind. Not surprisingly, 
the period came to an end without any improvement in sight 
and thus McArthur's comment on teaching in his 1943 St. 
George's report stands as its hallmark: 
Missionary zeal in a teacher is important, but it 
is not enough. It should be reinforced by other 
desirable 
personality 
qualifications, 
and 
by 
knowledge and skill. It is knowledge and skill that 
these teachers appear to lack.377 
Obviously poor teachers taught badly and could achieve no more 
than the poor results set out in the Barman, McCaskill, Hebert 
research findings. For some Inspectors, L. Hutchinson in 1922 
in Alberta for example, what they discovered in that regard 
shocked them. 
These Indian schools are the biggest farce to be 
called schools I have ever seen. They appear to be 
all pretty much the same. The teachers who are 
about the poorest of their class are in charge, and 
the waste of time is painful to witness, what crime 
have these children committed that they should be 
imprisoned from nine o'clock until four with little 
else to do but suck their thumbs the major portion 
of the time. Any good teacher should teach these 
children as much in half an hour as under present 
conditions they are taught all day. With eight 
years experience in the normal school in helping to 
fashion teachers out of every possible variation in 
the raw material that came to us there, I have seen 
some very crude teaching; but I think I can safely 
say that I have never before seen in the finished 
product 
anything put 
forward as teaching 
that 
touched quite a low level as that which is to be 
seen in these Indian schools.378 
Referring to British Columbia reports, Hoey identified a 
246 

similar situation. There was little in the way of thoughtful, 
energetic teaching which engaged the children. "The pupils ... 
are not given responsibility and hence are not developing. 
Lack of objectives and coordination is very apparent. There 
seems to be a certain amount of stagnation in classroom 
activities" 379 - a system wide condition in which "there is a 
tendency for actual teaching by question and answer to give 
place to telling by the teacher and of hearing lessons rather 
than teaching them." 
In the minds of some inspectors the lack of progress was was 
rooted in the students themselves - in the "nature of the 
Indian children. "3BC Not only were they different from non-
Aboriginal children but in some ways they were not equal. 
According to a portrait of the system's student body drawn by 
many of the same officials who contributed to the collective 
critique of the curriculum, the children's culture, which on 
the one hand had to be to a degree recognized and integrated 
into the curriculum, was, on the other hand, a drag upon their 
progress in school. Their "home environment" and "inherited 
racial characteristics produced an attitude in the children 
not found elsewhere," 
Warkentin concluded, and he "found 
them particularly lacking in intellectual curiosity. There 
seems to be no wish to explore further in the particular 
subject they are studying."381 Sigvaldason, and others, noted 
a common difficulty with complex math problems and put it down 
to "native weakness" 382 and Hoey, always biased in favour of 
"practical" work, wondered whether the children had any 
facility for anything "theoretical and abstract."383 
There were in these characterizations the shadows of the 
mysterious, brooding, "savage" child, the influence of the 
tepee, making it "very difficult to impart the rudiments of 
knowledge" 
to 
them. 384 
These 
children, 
it was 
reported 
frequently, would not look the teacher in the eye, could not 
easily be made to answer direct questions and when reading or 
reciting invariably did so in a "low and monotonous tone."385 
They "are not interested. You can't treat them like white 
children. They are sullen, irresponsible and won't speak up 
like 
white 
children 
and 
many 
others." 386 
The boys, 
in 
particular, 
were 
unpredictable 
having 
"as 
a 
rule 
changeable and variable dispositions." 387 A surprising number 
of officials shared the belief that many children had severely 
limited intellectual capacity an observation that apparently 
did not have to be established by any scientific means, 
according to Boyce, for "as one looks into the faces of 
children in Indian schools he feels there is a larger 
percentage of sub-normals than in White schools." 388 Such 
opinions which surfaced in the teachers' lack of "confidence 
that the pupils have ability to finish the Public School 
course," helped limit achievement and no doubt re-enforced the 
negative stereo-typing of the children.389 
247 

For other observers, all of this was nonsense. While they 
recognized 
cultural 
differences 
and 
differences 
in 
the 
experiences of the children, 
they rejected the idea of 
intellectual barriers born of "racial characteristics." The 
blame for the failure of the system to keep pace with 
provincial schools was not to be shared between poor teachers 
and children with supposedly limited potential. The teaching 
alone was at fault; it was. H. McArthur concluded, "mainly 
responsible for this condition."390 
Experience 
goes 
to 
show 
that 
where 
competent 
teachers are so employed good progress is made by 
the pupils. On the other hand, where teachers of 
mediocre qualifications are supplied, the progress 
along educational lines is poor.391 
At St. George's, where the children's progress did not deviate 
one way or another from the system's norm, McArthur collected 
a surfeit of evidence in support of that conclusion. He 
discovered that "none of the persons who are supervising 
vocational work has had teacher training or seems familiar 
with 
modern 
educational 
aims 
and 
procedures." 
As 
a 
consequence, the already limited vocational value of labour 
was lost as the instructors "in their eagerness to get the 
routine work of the institution done, almost wholly lose sight 
of why it is being done." Rather than carrying out a teaching 
role they "become mere taskmasters who are interested only in 
finishing tasks with as little effort, worry and expense as 
possible." In field, pasture, or orchard, the children worked 
extremely hard but learned little or nothing at all. 
Similarly dismal results were achieved in the classroom 
setting. 
In his analysis, McArthur discounted the "racial" 
factor. He had certainly encountered Aboriginal students who 
were "comparatively listless, silent and inactive." While he 
was not prepared to dispute whether "this condition results 
from certain traits of Indian character" or not, he noted that 
the same children were "active and communicative when they are 
outside the classroom" and, more critically, that "even white 
students show these traits in schools where the teaching is 
defective." 
He had, as well, seen considerable "stagnation in classroom 
activities" - students "kept sitting silently in their seats" 
- which curtailed learning and in so doing severely impeded 
progress towards the transformation of the children - their 
re-socialization. That process, "socialization," McArthur told 
the Department, "which is of fundamental importance in an 
Indian school cannot be carried on by means of a passive 
program." A pedagogy in which students were lectured at rather 
than being actively involved in learning or were forced to 
248 

"learn" by rote, was not only "relatively ineffective; it is 
positively cruel."392 
Cruelty, in general, had not, of course, been a rare commodity 
in the system nor, indeed, was it in the specific form of 
"ineffective" teaching. The pedagogical norm at the end of the 
period was apparently not a great advance over what it had 
been at the beginning. In 1886, Macrae, fresh from his own 
teacher training courses, found the pedagogical style in 
western schools "old fashioned" and "useless so far as Indian 
schools are concerned...." 393 At St. George's in 1943, the 
teaching was still behind the times. In the gentlest tone, 
McArthur pointed out that Principal Hives "had no specific 
training in education," was "slightly out of touch with 
educational trends" and was "therefore somewhat handicapped in 
giving guidance to inexperienced teachers and supervisors." It 
would "be advisable for Mr. Hives and his staff to read a few 
carefully chosen books on modern aims and techniques in 
education." They should hold regular meetings "to discuss 
their particular problems" during which a "discussion of a 
chapter of a book on education should usually form part of an 
agenda." Hives indicated how very much adrift he was by asking 
McArthur "to suggest the names of suitable books."394 
Between those two critics, Macrae at the beginning and 
McArthur at the end of the period, there were others calling 
for the hiring of knowledgeable teachers and Principals, men 
and women who could deliver effectively the practical and 
literary curriculum so that the schools, in Graham's words, 
could at last "function as they should."395 
Macrae's 1886 report had been critical of much more than just 
the quality of teaching. He cut a wide arc across the whole 
system - its lax administration, lack of supervision of 
school classrooms and its failure to set standards for 
teachers and teaching methods, 
for student 
testing 
and 
academic reporting. The situation was largely unchanged by 
McArthur's day. Throughout the lacklustre tenure of Duncan 
Campbell Scott and thereafter, the educational system drifted 
without 
any corrective measures 
taken to solve obvious 
problems 
- 
the 
continued 
spread 
of 
the 
system 
into 
inappropriate regions, low teacher salaries, text books that 
were barriers to learning rather than bridges to knowledge and 
a half-day system that corrupted both classroom and skill 
training. After Scott's retirement, senior staff, like Hoey, 
seemed to take more cognizance of the difficulties but they 
moved no more quickly to reform them, and realistically, to 
the extent that some were caused by funding problems, they had 
no greater resources at their disposal to attend to them than 
had ever been the case. 
Of all the problems that marked the performance record of the 
249 

schools and sat unresolved on Hoey's plate at the end of the 
period none was of greater consequence than language training. 
The fact that graduates "talk in exactly the same way when 
they leave schools after eight years' training, 1, 396 could 
"hardly speak English, 1, 397 and had but "a very meagre English 
vocabulary, 1, 398 the core of Graham's and Edmison's letters to 
Scott, in 1923, were charges that resounded throughout the 
period. In 1938, Inspector Connolly still found it necessary 
to recommend, after an inspection of Sandy Bay school, that 
the imperative thing with these children is much 
practise in good conversational English. Their own 
language 
should 
not 
be 
permitted 
even 
in 
explanations, during classroom periods at least. 
They will only learn English by using it, and using 
it as continuously as possible. This could be done 
on the playgrounds, and at their meals. The young 
man in charge of the boys during their recreation 
periods could attend to this as well as seeing that 
they participate 
freely and vigorously 
in the 
various sports and games. 
At that 
school the problem had been continuous and it 
continued unrelieved. In previous years other inspectors had 
concluded repetitively that "the work in English is still not 
as good as it should be," that the children did not "at play 
on the playground" or "at meals" speak English, that it was 
imperative that "more effort be put forth to induce the pupils 
to express themselves in English and that practice be given in 
following written and oral instruction in English."399 
Not only at Sandy Bay but throughout the system, schools 
deviated considerably from the initial language strategy. The 
Department 
and 
churches 
had 
set 
out 
with 
considerable 
resolution determined that only English would be employed, 
that "The native tongue should in no instance be taught" 400 and 
that, as at the Carlisle school in Pennsylvania, which in 
Reed's opinion was the model the Department needed to adopt, 
"all orders and explanations of the subjects of instruction, 
from the very first ... [be] given in English, repeated again 
and 
again, 
if 
necessary, 
with 
patience."401 
But 
almost 
immediately, certainly by 1890, on the evidence which came 
from the early western schools, that resolve was weakened and 
any consistent system wide approach was destroyed by the 
struggle to meet the challenges inherent in the attempt to 
follow the system's cultural agenda. 
Simply put, given the teaching resources the system had, or 
more accurately did not have, what was a herculean task, the 
re-socialization and education of the children, became even 
more impossible when language was added to the equation. The 
fact was, as Graham was told by an inspector, "With a half-day 
250 

devoted to housework and only half a day in school together 
with the handicap of having to learn a new language, only the 
most carefully planned program and the most skilful teaching 
will 
show 
satisfactory 
results."402 
Those 
elements, 
the 
"skilful 
teaching" 
of 
a 
carefully 
designed 
curriculum 
accompanied by a growing language facility on the part of the 
children, were rarely at hand. 
The issue of language, as Macrae and many other Departmental 
educators stressed, made the task of educating Aboriginal 
children much more difficult than teaching "white children" 
for 
the 
English 
that 
is 
necessary 
to 
a 
proper 
understanding of what is being studied, has to be 
taught 
concurrently 
with 
other 
subjects 
that 
instruction is being given in.403 
There was no parallel here with schools with predominantly 
non-English speaking immigrant pupils for those children were 
motivated, 
encouraged by family and community, to learn 
English, while Aboriginal children persisted in an affinity 
for their own tongue. With the opening of a school's doors 
Principals 
invariably discovered, 
as Rev. T. Clarke of 
Battleford Industrial School reported in 1887, that "In common 
with other schools of a similar nature, we have experienced a 
great difficulty in inducing the boys and girls to speak 
English amongst themselves in everyday life." 404 They had a 
stubborn "preference ...[for] their own language in daily 
intercourse." That preference was, Clarke felt, and other 
Principals 
and teachers no doubt 
agreed, 
"the greatest 
difficulty against which I have to contend."405 
The resistance of the children, their refusal to abandon 
readily their own language, compounded by the dearth of 
teaching talent, led to considerable variation in approach 
being adopted. There were attempts to find ways to induce 
children to speak English, or French in the case of the Quebec 
schools, other than by punishment. Gentler inducements were 
developed by Wilson in the late 1870s at Shingwauk and Lacombe 
during his first year, 1884, at High River and the Rev. 
Hugonard at Qu'Appelle suggested in the same year "that it 
would be an excellent plan if only a few English boys were 
admitted for a short period so as to give a start" to using 
the English language. 406 In the absence, however, of such 
imaginative measures, or the general replication of the 
situation at Carlisle where, according to Reed, English served 
as the popular lingua franca amongst the 600 boys from over 
forty different dialect groups rendering it "comparatively 
easy to put down the use of native tongues," 407 administrators 
fell back on what was the most common technique - punishment, 
or coercion as Lacombe termed it, in an attempt to "exclude 
251 

the use of Indian dialects" and to make English "in and about 
all schools ... the only allowed means of communication."408 
Only one case appears to have been recorded in this period in 
which English found a place as it had at Carlisle. Principal 
Clarke at Battleford explained to the Department in 1887 that 
he was having some success in the language field because he 
had a mix of Cree and Assiniboine pupils and as there was, in 
his estimation, "no similarity between the languages spoken by 
these two tribes - the English language therefore becomes, as 
the knowledge of it increases, the natural, in fact the only 
medium of communication in daily intercourse: the older pupils 
all speak English fluently." 409 No one, of course, despite the 
difficulties being registered with the Department, pursued 
this phenomenon, proposed that students be deliberately mixed 
to achieve similar results at other schools. 
In some instances Principals and teachers gave up the struggle 
altogether or, at least, were accused of having done so. At 
Qu'Appelle, in 1890, Reed noted "a marked lack of endeavour on 
the part of the officials to see that they [the children] used 
English in preference to the vernacular."410 In other cases 
this was part of a constructive teaching strategy. Teachers, 
trying to make a connection with the children that might be 
the beginning of their journey into Canadian culture were 
found using the vernacular to give "orders and explanations of 
the subjects of instruction"411 and some clerics routinely 
conducted religious services in Indian dialects.412 
The lack of early success in excluding Indian languages from 
the schools and making the children unilingual in either of 
the languages of civilization, French or English, brought some 
senior staff at least to the realization that their initial 
position on language could not be enforced. Reed himself gave 
evidence of what seemed a softening of that position when, in 
1890, he compiled a set of proposed regulations for the 
operation of the schools. "The vernacular is not to be taught 
in any schools. At most the native language is only to be used 
as a vehicle for teaching and should be discontinued as soon 
as possible."413 It is difficult, however, to ascertain exactly 
what headquarters policy was, at that point or thereafter, for 
Ottawa was silent. Following the first policy pronouncements 
in the 1880s, there was never again any direct comment on the 
subject, no recapitulation of the original prohibition, and no 
reaction to the evidence of deviance, or to the general 
failure reported by Graham and others. Even the 1911 contract, 
in which the churches pledged "to support, maintain and 
educate" the children 
"in a manner satisfactory to the 
Superintendent General" and which detailed, in Section 9, 
educational goals and the principal parts of the curriculum, 
was silent on the language question.414 
252 

Section 8, which was subsequently opposed by the Catholic 
church/15 did mandate that teachers should, within six months 
of being employed, submit 
"evidence satisfactory to the 
Superintendent General" of their being "able to converse with 
the pupils under his charge in English" and "able to speak and 
write the English language fluently and correctly." Exactly 
what standard of fluency was expected was not set out and, as 
with the accompanying provision that teachers "possess . . . 
qualifications,"416 there never was any enforcement. There is 
no record of any of the many teachers who Inspectors charged 
did not have an adequate facility with English ever being 
dismissed just as the many unqualified teachers hired by the 
church were not discharged by the Department. 
As with all of the central issues in the school system, which 
touched on how the children were supported, maintained and 
educated, there was with respect to language training no 
concerted, 
consistent 
oversight 
and 
management 
by 
the 
Department's senior staff in Ottawa and thus the normative 
policy on language was set in the field, by individual school 
administrators themselves. As a result, a system-wide picture 
of language instruction is a patchwork of differing approaches 
shifting decade by decade, Principal by Principal. 
Within that shifting pattern there was, however, at least one 
arresting constant. Whatever policy was adopted in a school, 
constructive permissiveness, neglect or, as was all too often 
the case, violent repression, the result was the same - a 
level of language proficiency far below the desired standard. 
This had disastrous consequences for the whole assimilative 
undertaking. The fact that many in the Department felt that 
the use of English and French remained at best nor more than 
"a classroom exercise, and quite unnatural to them"417 was the 
most profound critique that was made of the educational 
performance of the system for it revealed that with respect to 
what was after all the most critical part of the strategy of 
cultural transformation, the element that was to erase and 
replace the children's "savage" cosmology, the schools were 
falling far short of their goal. 
Though 
children 
were 
removed 
from 
their 
parents 
and 
communities, divorced from direct involvement in their own 
culture for many years, English and French and thus western 
culture yet remained quite "unnatural to them." They had not 
been civilized, Canadianized, when they left school. They had 
not been prepared to live a new life, indeed, in many cases, 
as studies in the 1960s would reveal, because of their 
extended isolation from their families, the persistent denial 
of their culture and the abuse, many returned unable to lead 
any sort of productive life, old or new. Many school staff may 
well have shared the sentiments of Miss Eden Corbett, who 
resigned her teaching position at the Aklavik Anglican school 
253 

in 1944, that the educational process in which they were 
participating, 
was 
not 
just 
ineffective 
but 
morally 
questionable. On resigning Corbett was "grieved to think that 
I must leave these children in the same condition I found 
them." 
I consider that the system as it is now in force, 
definitely does not meet the requirements of the 
native. Where, in a ten month academic period, does 
a child get any contact with its practical life? 
How is a child, after a four to ten year period in 
a 
school, 
supposed 
to 
adapt 
itself 
to 
the 
environment of its parents, when the language, 
habits and arts have been severed, for such a 
length of time. The child is an alien and the 
situation 
is 
pitiful. 
Is 
that 
practical 
Christianity? A strong indictment you say against 
my own church, Definitely yes, for I fail to see 
how the segregation from all family bonds, where 
language habits and arts are not fostered can be 
called practicing Christianity. It is contrary to 
the ideals of Christ's teachings.418 
Senior officials 
of the Department 
did not 
cast 
their 
assessments in theological terms but it was obvious to many of 
them by the Second World War that Graham's 1923 suggestion to 
Scott was correct - the Department and the churches were 
"wasting time and spending large sums of money and getting no 
results."419 The system as structured, managed, financed and 
staffed was unable to produce the re-socialized individual who 
had always been represented as the the key to the progressive 
assimilation 
of Aboriginal people. 
Every aspect of the 
system's care and education of the children cried out for 
attention. Reform, according to Hoey, could no longer be 
delayed. 
"The time has come 
for the Churches and 
the 
Government," he concluded in the fall of 1944, "to undertake 
a very careful survey of our whole Indian education setup."420 
While on the surface Hoey's conclusion was nothing more than 
yet another in the long line of reform impulses, it did, in 
fact, 
signal not 
only the beginning 
of change 
in the 
"education setup" but radical change predicated on dismantling 
the whole residential school project. Tragically, however, as 
Hoey said on another occasion "The present policy cannot be 
changed overnight".421 Closing the residential school system 
would be a long process. It would continue for four more 
decades during which time there would be little progress in 
reaching it goals and no significant improvement in the way 
"we are treated."422 The patterns of neglect and abuse rooted 
in the very bones of the system and the dynamics that animated 
it, the dearth of financial and moral resources, would not 
254 

change throughout those next four decades. There would be 
hundreds of new stories of neglect and abuse, school by-
school, but only that one old persistent narrative. 
255 

1. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6320, File 658-1, MR C 9802, To F. Mears 
from D.C. Scott, 11 January, 1924. Edwards letter, dated 14 
December, 1923, is attached. 
2. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6320, File 658-1, MR C 9802, To Secretary 
from L. Turner [?] Agent, 23 March, 1921, Report of Travelling 
Nurse, n.d January, 1925. 
3. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6320, File 658-1, MR C 9802, To F. Mears 
from D.C. Scott, 11 January, 1924. 
4. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6452, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), MR C 8781, 
To New England Company from Rev. A. Lett, 10 April, 1923. A 
copy of this seems to have been sent to the Department. 
5. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6320, File 658-1, MR C 9802, To D.C. 
Scott from Canon S. Gould, 5 April, 1921 and Church Inspection 
Report, May, 1923. 
6. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), MR C 8781, 
To R.A. Hoey from Rev. C. Hives, 21 June, 1942 and To Rev. C. 
Hives from R. Hoey, 29 June, 1942. 
7. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6262, File 578-1 (4-5), MR C 8653, To 
Indian Affairs Branch from A. Hamilton, 22 September, 1944. 
8. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), MR C 8781, 
To Rev. C. Hives from R. Hoey, 2 9 June, 1942. 
9. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6040, File 160-3A Part 
1, MR C 8153, To D.C. Scott from Rev. T. Ferrier, 8 July, 
1920 . 
10. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, To J. Guy from 
D.C. Scott, 11 July, 1926. See Appendix A for school list, 
1931. 
11. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6730, File 160-2 (1-3), MR C 8092, To 
Dr. Roche from D.C. Scott, 27 June, 1917 and Vol. 6040, File 
160-3A Part 1, MR C 8153, To D.C. Scott from Rev. T. Ferrier, 
28 March, 1918 . 
12. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Sir 
James Lougheed from J.D. McLean, 24 August, 1920. 
13. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6040, File 160-3 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
D.C. Scott from Rev. T. Ferrier, 6 December, 1921 and Vol. 
7185, File 1/25-1-7-1, Memorandum to File, R.T. Ferrier, 
Superintendent of Education, 5 April, 1932. 
14. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6040, File 160-3A Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Minister of the Interior from Joint Church Delegation, 7 
256 

January, 
1921, 
To D.C. 
Scott 
from Canon S. Gould, 
23 
September, 1924, To C. Stewart from D.C. Scott, 7 March, 1927 
and Memorandum to File, 8 
February, 192 6. 
15. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6730, File 160-2 (1-3), MR C 8092, To 
Canon S. Gould from T. Murphy, 26 April, 1931. 
16. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-7-1, Memorandum to 
File, R.T. Ferrier, 5 April, 1932. 
17. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Rev. J. Scannell, O.M.I, from H. McGill, 17 February, 1936 and 
Vol. 
7185, 
File 
1/25-1-7-1, 
Circular 
from 
Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 26 March, 1936. 
18. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-7-1, To H. McGill from 
R. Hoey, 4 November, 1938. In 1936, Indian Affairs was made a 
part of the new Department of Mines and Resources. The senior 
civil servant in charge was no longer titled the Deputy 
Superintendent General but the Director of Indian Affairs. 
19. United Church Archives, WMS Fonds, Accession 83.058C. File 
3, Memorandum of the Committee of Churches Cooperating with 
the Department of Indian Affairs in Indian Education, 8 
February, 1938. 
20. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-7-1, To H. McGill from 
R. Hoey, 4 November, 1938. 
21. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Rev. J. Plourde from R. Hoey, 15 October, 1940. 
22. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6730, File 160-2 (1-3) MR C 8092, To 
Rev. T. Westgate from Director of Indian Affairs, n.d., 1940. 
23. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6475, File 918-1, MR 
C 8791, To Secretary from Rev. J. Plourde, 21 October, 1941, 
Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, To T.A. Crerar from Rev. J. 
Plourde, 12 June, 1940 and To R. Hoey from Rev. J. Plourde, 11 
October, 1940. 
24. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 1543, [no file number] 
There are a whole series of letters by the Agent who was 
constantly struggling to sort out what child should go to 
which school. 
25. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6371, File 764-1, MR C 8722, To General 
Stewart drafted by D.C. Scott for the Minister's signature, 2 7 
April, 1931. 
257 

26. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6040, File 160-3A Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Minister of the Interior from Joint Delegation, 7 January, 
1921. 
27. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
D.C. Scott from Rev. J. Guy O.M.I., n.d. 1925. 
28. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Rev. J. Guy from D.C. Scott, 17 April, 1926. 
29. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6475, File 918-1, MR 
C 8791, To Dr. J. Riopel from R. Hoey, 3 November, 1941. 
30. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Charles Stewart from D.C. Scott, 7 March, 1922. 
31. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, Memorandum 
-Impression of the Interview Between Church Representatives 
and the Superintendent General, 13 April, 1922, by R.F. 
Ferrier. 
32. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Charles Stewart from D.C. Scott, 7 March, 1922. 
33. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6479, File 940-1 (1-2), MR C 8794, To H. 
McGill from R. Hoey, 16 November, 1942. 
34. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6479, File 940-1 (1-2), To Rev. W. 
Geddes from H. McGill, 21 November, 1942. 
35. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6482, File 941-2, MR C 8796, To Rev. J. 
Plourde from H. McGill, 15 February, 1940. 
36. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Charles 
Stewart from R.F. Ferrier, 12 May, 1922. 
37. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6730, File 160-2 (1-3), MR C 8092, To 
Secretary from Rev. T. Westgate, 29 October, 1931. 
38. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Secretary of Indian Affairs from Bishop J. Guy, 10 October, 
1936 and to Father Plourde from R. Hoey, 16 October, 1940. 
39. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), MR C 8781, 
To H. Graham from Dr. P. Wilson, 23 February, 1927 and To 
Secretary from C. Perry, 6 May, 1927. 
40. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8451, File 655/23-5, MR C 13801, To H. 
McGill from M. Christianson, 25 January, 1925. 
41. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6452, File 884-1 (1-3), MR C 8773-8774, 
Extracts of a Report by C. Perry attached to W. Ditchburn, 16 
258 

June 1930. 
42. N.A.C. Rg 10 Vol. 6443, File 881-1 (1-3), MR C 8767, To 
R.H. Moore from C. Pitts M.D., 22 October, 1935. 
43. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
D.C. Scott from Catholic Principals, 26 October, 1925. 
44. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 160-3A Part 1, MR C 8153, Memorandum of 
the 
Convention 
of 
the 
Catholic 
Principals 
of 
Indian 
Residential Schools held at Lebret, Saskatchewan, 28 and 29 
August, 1924. 
45. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6015, File 1-1-13, MR C 8141, To Dr. H. 
McGill from E.L. Stone M.D., 27 November, 1933. 
46. See: G.J. Wherrit, The Miracle of Empty Beds, pages 107 
and 111-114, for a discussios of these events and INAC File 
961/23-5, Vol. 1, To Major D. M. Mackay from G.H. Barry. This 
Inspection Report notes the opinion of Dr. R.N. Dick who 
claims that the children's health, at Kuper Island school, is 
threatened by budget restrictions. 
47. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
H. McGill from Rev. U. Langlois O.M.I., 28 April, 1936. 
48. INAC File 951/23-5, Vol. 1, To The Secretary from V. 
Rassier O.S.B., 15 April, 1934. 
49. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3918, File 116659-1, MR C 10161, To 
Assistant Deputy and Secretary from J. Smith, 8 February, 
1918 . 
50. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6327, File 660-1 (1-3), MR C 9807, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
Benson, 23 December, 1903. 
51. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6205, File 468-1 (1-3), MR C 7937, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
Benson, 26 November, 1902. 
52. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
H. McGill from Rev. U. Langlois O.M.I., 28 April, 1936. 
53. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6040, File 160-3A Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
C.E. Manning from Rev. T. Ferrier, 1 July, 1925. 
54. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), Mr C 8781, 
To Rev. C. Hives from R. Hoey, 29 June, 1942. 
55. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, Memorandum 
for the Minister from M. Benson, 3 July, 1897. 
259 

56. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), MR C 8781, 
To New England Company from Rev. A. Lett, 10 April, 1923. 
57. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6262, File 578-1 (4-5), MR C 8653, To R. 
Hoey from D.J. Allan, 4 March, 1944. 
58. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), MR C 8781, 
To New England Company from Rev. A. Lett, 10 April, 1923. 
59. N.A. C. RG 10 Vol. 6479, File 940-1 (1-2), MR C 8794, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Grant, 5 
February, 1940. 
60. INAC File 772/23-5-010 Vol. 1, To Dr. McGill from M. 
Christianson, 23 March, 1935. 
61. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6194, File 463-1, MR C 7928, To 
Secretary from Rev. P. Bousquet O.M.I., 27 January, 1934. 
62. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3918, File 116659-1, MR C 10161, To 
Assistant Deputy and Secretary from J. Smith, 8 February, 
1918 . 
63. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6451, File 883-1 (1-2), MR C 8773, To 
Secretary from I. Foughner, 15 June, 1922. 
64. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6479, File 940-1 (1-2), MR C 8794, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from E. 
Stockton, 23 June, 1912. 
65. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6262, File 578-1 (4-5), MR C 8653, To 
D.J. Allan from Chief and Band Council of The Pas and the 
Half-Breed Association of The Pas, 31 January, 1944 and To R. 
Hoey from D.J. Allan, 4 March, 1944. 
66. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-5, MR C 10118, To H. 
Reed from T. Clarke, 8 July, 1891. 
67. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6262, File 578-1 (4-5), MR C 8653, To H. 
McGill from A.B. Simes, 19 October, 1944. 
68. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6262, File 578-1 (4-5), MR C 8653, To R. 
Hoey from Rev. Alderwood, 5 October, 1944. 
69. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6262, File 578-1 (4-5), MR C 8653, To H. 
McGill from A.B. Simes, 19 October, 1944. 
70. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3933, File 117657-1, MR C 10164, To D.C. 
Scott from W. Graham, 10 October, 1914. 
260 

71. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6332, File 661-1 (1-2), MR C 9809, To W. 
Graham from L. Affleck, 15 November, 1929. 
72. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6467, File 889-1 (1-7), MR C 8785, To R. 
Ferrier from F. Ball, 20 July, 1931. 
73. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6426, File 875-1-2-3-5, MR C 8756, To 
Assistant Deputy and Secretary from W. Halliday, 13 February, 
1918 . 
74. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6451, File 883-1 (1-2), MR C 8773, 
Extract from a Report [on Kitamat school] by Inspector Cairns, 
9 April, 
1926 . 
75. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6309, File 654-1, MR C 8685, To W. 
Graham from J. Waddy, 15 October, 1930. 
76. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3917, File 116659-1, MR C 10161, To 
Department of Indian Affairs from F. Vere Agnew M.D., 18 June, 
1918 and To Assistant Deputy and Secretary from J. Smith, 29 
March, 1918. 
77. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3922, File 116820-1, MR C 10162, To 
Archdeacon J.A. Mackay from Secretary, 1 March, 1895. 
78. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422, MR C 10118, To Father 
Lacombe from E. Dewdney, 23 July, 1883. 
79. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3938, File 121607, MR C 10164, To A. 
Forget from Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs, 
18 January, 1895. 
80. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To J.D. 
McLean from M. Benson, 15 July, 1897. 
81. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422, MR C 10118, To E. 
Dewdney from Rev. J. Hugonard, 5 May, 1891. 
82. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3927, File 16836-1A, MR C 10162, To F. 
Pedley from J. McKenna, J. Menzies and R. Mackay, 11 March, 
1904 . 
83. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3927, File 16836-1A, MR C 10162, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian 
Affairs from M. 
Benson, 30 December, 1904. 
84. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 10152, To J. 
Maclean from M. Benson, 15 July, 1897. 
85. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3920, File 116818, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
261 

Benson, 12 August, 1903 and Vol. 3927, File 116836-1A, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
Benson, 1 June 1903.N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 
8152, To J.D. McLean from M. Benson, 15 July, 1897. 
86. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3918, File 116659-1, MR C 10161, To 
Secretary from Rev. Carion, 27 June, 1910. 
87. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Rev. C. 
Bouillet O.M.I, from John T. Ross. 
88. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6040, File 160-2 Part 4, MR C 8153, To 
D.C. Scott from Rev. T. Ferrier, 2 July, 1917. 
89. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3927, File 16836-1A, MR C 10162, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
Benson, 17 March, 1904. 
90. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 10411, Shannon Box 36, MR T 10068, 
Circular to Agents from R. Ferrier, 19 January, 1922. 
91. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6426, File 875-1-2-3-5, MR C 8756, To 
Secretary from W. Halliday, 11 June, 1926. 
92. INAC File 6-37-1 Vol. 1, Memorandum to Dr. McGill from R. 
Hoey, 13 February, 1937. 
93. INAC File 951/23-5, Vol. 1, To The Secretary from V. 
Rassier O.S.B., 15 April, 1934. 
94. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6426, File 875-1-2-3-
5, MR C 8756, To Secretary from W. Halliday, 11 June, 1926 and 
Vol. 6451, File 883-1 (1-2) MR C 8773, To Secretary from I. 
Foughner, 15 June, 1922. 
95. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3918, File 116659-1, 
MR C 10161, To D.C. Scott from J. Salles, 2 April, 1917. 
96. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6251, File 575-1 (1,3), MR C 8645, To 
Rev. W. McLaren from Assistant Deputy and Secretary, 12 
February, 1912. 
97. INAC File 6-37-1 Vol. 1, Memorandum to Dr. McGill from R. 
Hoey, 13 February, 1937. 
98. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6327, File 660-1 (1-3), MR C 9807, To 
Rev. J. Hugonard from D.C. Scott, 22 May, 1915. 
99. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3930, File 117377-1A, MR C 10163, To 
Bishop of Rupert's Land from H. Reed, 31 May, 1893. 
262 

100. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6327, File 660-1 (1-3), MR C 9807, To 
Rev. J. Hugonard from D.C. Scott, 22 May, 1915. 
101. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To J.D. 
McLean from M. Benson, 15 July, 1897. 
102. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol.3984, File 167793-1, To A. Vowell from 
A.E. Green, 2 May, 1905. 
103. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6309, File 654-1, MR 
C 8685, Inspection Report on Gordon's school, 14 May, 1930 and 
Vol 
6479, 
File 
940-1 
(1-2), 
MR 
C 
8794, 
To 
Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from E. Stockton, 23 
June, 1912. 
104. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6452, File 884-1 (1-3), MR C 8773-8774, 
Extract of Report by C.C. Perry, 16 June, 1930. 
105. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6455, File 885-1 (1-2), MR C 8775, 
Extract from Report by Inspector Cairns, 9 November, 1922. 
106. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6268, File 581-1 (1-2), MR C 8657, To 
D.C. Scott from J.R. Bunns, 24 September, 1915. 
107. INAC File 961/23-5, Vol. 1, To Major D.M. MacKay from 
G.H. Barry, 27 March, 1938. 
108. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6262, File 578-1 (4-5), MR C 8653, To 
R. Hoey from D.J. Allan, 4 March, 1944. 
109. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To J.D. 
McLean from M. Benson, 15 July, 1897. 
110. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3918, File 116659-1, MR C 10161, To 
Secretary from Rev. Carion, 27 June, 1910, Vol. 8754, File 
651/25-1, MR C 9701, To Indian Affairs Branch from R. Davis, 
n.d. 1943, Vol. 6268, File 581-1 (1-2), MR C 8657, To D.C. 
Scott from J.R. Bunns, 24 September, 1915, Vol. 6451, File 
883-1 (1-2), MR c 8773, Memorandum to File, 27 April, 1926, by 
R. Ferrier. 
111. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 651/25-1, MR C 9701, To Sir 
from R.S. Davis, 15 July, 1942. 
112. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6451, File 883-1 (1-2), MR C 8773, To 
Secretary from I. Foughner, 15 June, 1922. 
113. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 651/25-1, MR C 9701, To Sir 
from R.S. Davis, 15 July, 1942. 
114. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6455, File 885-1 (1-2), MR C 8775, 
Extract from Report by Inspector Cairns, 9 November, 1922. 
263 

115. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6426, File 875-1-2-3-5, MR C 8756, To 
Secretary from W. Halliday, 11 June, 1926. 
116. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6262, File 578-1 (4-5), MR C 8653, To 
Dr. H. McGill from A.B. Simes M.D., 19 October, 1944. 
117. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3924, File 116823, MR C 10162, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from E. Dewdney, 17 
July, 1888. 
118. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6451, 883-1 (1-2) MR C 8773, To 
Secretary from I. Foughner, 15 June, 1922. 
119. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6451, File 883-1 (1-2) MR C 8773, 
Memorandum to File from R. Ferrier, 27 April, 1926. 
120. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6451, File 883-1 (1-2), MR C 8773, 
Extract from an Inspection Report by Inspector Cairns, 19 
April, 1926. 
121. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6262, File 578-1 (4-5), MR C 8653, To 
R. Hoey from D.J. Allan, 4 March, 1944. 
122. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8449, File 511/23-5-014, MR C 13800, 
Inspection 
Report, 
Birtle 
School, 
by A.G. 
Hamilton, 
4 
December, 1936. 
123. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422, MR C 10118, Required 
for the use of the Industrial Schools to be opened in the NW 
Territories at Qu'Appelle, Battleford in Treaty 7. 
124. N.A.C. Rg 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To R. 
Ferrier from Rev. T. Westgate, n.d. and To Rev. T. Westgate 
from R. Ferrier, 10 August, 1925. 
125. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 160-2 
(1-3), MR C 8092, 
Joint 
Delegation Submission to T.A. Crerar, n.d. November, 1938. 
126. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3918, File 116659-1, MR C 10161, To 
D.C. Scott from J. Salles, 2 April, 1917 and To Assistant 
Deputy and Secretary from J. Smith, 8 February, 1918. 
127. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6191, File 462-1, MR C 7926, To Rev, 
John Anderson, from J.D. McLean, 29 December, 1914. 
128. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6187, File 462-1, MR C 7926, To Rev. R. 
McKay from J.D. McLean, 4 June, 1908. 
129. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3918, File 116659-1, MR C 10161, To 
Secretary from Rev. Carion, 27 June, 1910. 
264 

130. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3933, File 117657-1, MR C 10164, To W. 
Graham from C. Stockdale, n.d. July, 1914. 
131. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6332, File 661-1 (1-2), MR C 9809, To 
W. Graham from Mr. Murison, 29 June, 1929. 
132. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6332, File 661-1 (1-2), MR C 9809, To 
W. Graham from L. Affleck, 15 November, 1929. 
133. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6262, File 578-1 (4-5), MR C 8653, To 
H. McGill from A.B. Simes, 19 October, 1944. 
134. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8451, File 655/23-5, MR C 13801, To 
Archdeacon Tims from D.C. Scott [?] 19 October, 1916. 
135. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6479, File 940-1 (1-2), MR C 8794, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from E. 
Stockton, 23 June, 1912. 
136. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6431, File 877-1 (1-2, 4), MR C 8758, 
Extract from Agent Neil's Report, n.d. March, 1910. 
137. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6431, File 877-1 (1-2, 4) MR C 8759, To 
Secretary from A. Vowell, 14 July, 1909. 
138. The Davin Report. 
139. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-7-1, To C.E. Silcox 
from R. Ferrier, 7 April, 1932. 
140. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, P. 
Bryce, Report on the Indian Schools of Manitoba and the 
Northwest Territories, Ottawa Government Printing Bureau, 
1907 . 
141. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6431, File 877-1 (1-2, 4), MR C 8758, 
Extract from a Report by R. Ferrier, n.d 1921. 
142. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), To 
New 
England Company from Rev. A Lett, 10 April, 1923 and To D.C. 
Scott from Rev. A Lett, 15 October, 1924. 
143. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), MR C 8781, 
To D.C. Scott from G. Pagnell, 5 November, 1924. 
144. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), MR C 8781, 
To Rev. J. Roper, Bishop of Ottawa, from D.C. Scott, 29 
October, 1924. 
145. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), MR C 8781, 
To D.C. Scott from Rev. A. Lett, 15 October, 1924. 
265 

146. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), MR C 8781, 
To H. Graham from Dr. P. Wilson, 23 February, 1927. 
147. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), MR C 8781, 
See correspondence for 192 8 on construction of new a building. 
148. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6187, File 461-1 (1-2), MR C 7922, A. 
Grant from Deputy and Secretary of Indian Affairs, 11 April, 
1916 . 
149. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6251, File 575-1 (1-
3) , MR C 8645, To Rev. A. Grant from J.D. McLean, 12 December, 
1912 and Presbyterian Church Archives, 1988-7004-7-2, WMS 
Correspondence with Principal of Birtle School, To Miss Lang 
from Mary Begg, 25 March, 1940. 
150. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol 6255, File 576-1 (1-2) MR C 8647-8648, 
To Indian Commissioner from J. Semmens, 14 April, 1896. 
151. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3921, File 116818, Telegram - To C. 
Sifton from T. Ross, 21 April, 1902. 
152. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3) MR C 8656, To 
the Commission from Rev. E Bird, 26 September, 1924. 
153. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267. Filw 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, 
Report on MacKay school by J. Waddy, 28 November, 1928. 
154. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6255, File 576-1 (1-2), MR C 8647-8648, 
To J. Semmens from A. Forget, 17 April, 1896. 
155. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6187, File 461-1 (1-2), MR C 7922, To 
J. Edmison from J.D. McLean, 4 August, 1917. 
156. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6332, File 661-1 (1-2), MR C 9809, To 
W. Graham from L. Affleck, 15 November, 1929. 
157. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3931, File 117377-1C, MR C 10163, To C. 
Sifton from A. Gordon, 18 January, 1920. 
158. 
J. Gresko, 
"Creating 
Little 
Dominions 
Within 
the 
Dominion: Early Catholic Indian Schools in Saskatchewan and 
British Columbia" in J. Barman, Y. Hebert and D. McCaskill, 
eds., 
Indian Education in Canada, Volume 1: The Legacy 
(Vancouver, University of British Columbia Press, 1986), page 
93 . 
159. C. Haig-Brown, Resistance and Renewal: Surviving the 
Indian Residential School (Vancouver, Tillacum Library, 1988) , 
page 59. 
266 

160. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3920, File 116818, MR 
C 10161, To Indian Commissioner from C. Somerset. 
161. C. Haig-Brown, Resistance and Renewal, page 59. 
162. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6430, File 876-1, MR C 8759, Report on 
Ahousaht school, 1936, by G. Barry. 
163. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6205, File 468-1 (1-3), MR C 7937, To 
A. Moore from A. McKenzie, 9 January, 1934. 
164. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6452, File 884-1 (1-3), MR C 8773-8774, 
To Bishop of Westminster from L. Vankoughnet, 17 October and 
164.Vol. 
3920, 
File 
116818, 
MR 
C 
10161, 
To 
Assistant 
Commissioner from H. Reed, 28 June, 1895. 
165. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6255, File 576-1 (1-2), MR C 8647-8648, 
To J. Semmens from A.E. Forget, 17 April, 1896. 
166. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6348, File 752-1, MR C 8705, Extract 
from Nurse Ramage's Report, November, 1921 attached to - To 
D.C. Scott from W. Graham, 3 December, 1921. 
167. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6348, File 752-1, MR C 8705, To Rev. J. 
Rioui O.M.I, from D.C. Scott, 16 December, 1921. 
168. N.A.C. RG 10 
Vol. 3920, File 116818, MR C 10161, To 
Assistant Commissioner from H. Reed, 28 June, 1895. 
169. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6268, File 581-1 (1-2), MR C 8657, To 
Inspector of Indian Agencies from Assistant Commissioner, n.d. 
July, 1907, To Secretary from Assistant Commissioner, 30 June, 
1907 and To Secretary from D. Laird, 11 September, 1907. 
170. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6268, File 581-1 (1-2), MR C 8657, 28 
September, 1907. 
171. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6200, File 466-1 (1-5), MR C 7933, To 
Rev. H. Snell from R. Hoey, 3 September, 1937. Interestingly, 
Hoey says that a circular on discipline had been sent out a 
few years previously, but that he could not find a copy to 
send on to Principal Snell. 
172. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3930, File 117377-1A, To E. McColl from 
J. Ashby, 21 October, 1895. See this letter and attachment for 
a case of "apparent carelessness which caused the painful 
death of 
this child" 
- Maggie Thomas 
- who was 
left 
unsupervised and died by falling into an unattended rubbish 
fire. 
173. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3920, File 116818, MR C 10161, To 
Indian Commissioner from D.L. Clink, 4 June, 1896. 
267 

174. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3920, File 116818, MR C 10161, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from A. Sutherland, 
3 January, 1896. 
175. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3920, File 116818, MR C 10161, To 
Indian Commissioner from D.L. Clink, 4 June, 1896. 
176. N.A.C. RG 10 
Vol. 3920, File 116818, MR C 10161, To 
Assistant Commissioner from H. Reed, 28 June, 1895. 
177. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3920, File 116818, MR C 10161, To 
Assistant Commissioner from H. Reed, 28 June, 1895. 
178. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6187, File 461-1 (1-2), MR C 7922, To 
J. Edmison from J. D. McLean, 4 August, 1917. 
179. See, for example, N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 1-A, File 630/119-2, 
To R. Hoey from G. Castledon, 19 February, 1941 and associated 
documents in the file which set out the case of a boy at 
Gordon's school who fled and died of exposure, according to 
Castledon, because of his "deathly fear" of the Principal. It 
was, he concluded, a "glaring case of neglect". There are 
other such incidents in Departmental files. 
180. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7194, File 511/25-1-015, MR C 9700, To 
P. Phelan from R.S. Davis, 1 November, 1951 and To Phelan from 
R.S. Davis, 25 
October, 1951. 
181. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6436, 878-1 (1-3), MR C 8762, To 
Secretary from A. Vowell, 17 March, 1902 and attached sworn 
testimony. For a fuller discussion of this tragedy see: E. 
Furniss, Victims of Benevolence: Discipline and Death at the 
Williams Lake Indian Residential School, 1891-1920 (Wiliams 
Lake, B.C., Cariboo Tribal Council, 1992). 
182. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6443, File 881-1 (1-3) MR C 8767, See 
transcripts of interviews, 2 and 3 March, 193 7. 
183. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6436, 878-1 (1-3), MR C 8762, To 
Secretary from A. Vowell, 17 March, 1902 and attached sworn 
testimony. 
184. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6443, File 881-1 (1-3) MR C 8767, See 
transcripts of interviews, 2 and 3 March, 1937. 
185. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6443, File 881-1 (1-3) MR C 8767, 
Confidential To Dr. H. McGill from D. MacKay, 25 March, 1937. 
186. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6027, File 117-1-1, MR C 8147, Extract 
from a Report on Crowstand school, W. Graham, 4 July, 1907. 
268 

187. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6027, File 117-1-1, MR C 8147, To Rev. 
R. McKay from J.D. McLean, 15 July, 1907. 
188. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6027, File 117-1-1, MR C 8147, See 
church investigation report dated, 9 August, 1907. 
189. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6027, File 117-1-1, MR C 8147, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M.Benson, 
27 August, 1907. 
190. Presbyterian Church Archives, 1988-1003-2-1, 1906-1908, 
Foreign Mission Committee Reports, Vol. XX, 17 September, 
1907 . 
191. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6027, File 117-1-1, MR C 8147, To 
Secretary from Agent Blewitt, 21 July, 1914, To A. Grant from 
D.C. Scott, 19 September, 1914. 
192. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6027, File 117-1-1, MR C 8147, To D.C. 
Scott from M. Benson, 21 November, 1914 and To D.C. Scott from 
0. Grain M.D., 5 November, 1914. 
193. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6307, File 653-1, MR C 8683, To 
Secretary from W. Graham, 4 November, 1912. 
194. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6307, File 653-1, MR C 8683, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from D.C. Scott, 11 
November, 1912. 
195. 
N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6307, File 653-1, MR C 8683, To 
Accounts Branch from Deputy Superintendent General of Indian 
Affairs, 14 November, 1912. 
196. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6358, File 758 (1-2), MR C 8713, To 
D.C. Scott from W. Graham, 25 December, 1919 and attached 
correspondence: To W. Graham from T. Graham, 1 December, 1919 
which forwards the police report. 
197. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6358, File 758 (1-2), MR C 8713, To 
Canon S. Gould from P. Gentleman, 12 January, 1920. 
198. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6358, File 758 (1-2), MR C 8713, To 
D.C. Scott from W. Graham, 25 December, 1919. 
199. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6358, File 758 (1-2), MR C 8713, To 
Canon S. Gould from D.C. Scott, 5 January, 192 0. 
200. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6358, File 758 (1-2), MR C 8713, To 
D.C. Scott from Canon S. Gould, 26 January, 1920. 
269 

201. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6358, File 758 (1-2), MR C 8713, To W. 
Graham from D.C. Scott, 18 May, 192 0 and To D.C. Scott from W. 
Graham, 10 June, 1920. 
202. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6318, File 657-1, MR C 8692, To Sir 
from W. Graham, 13 September, 1922. This forwards 
a report 
from Nurse LeDrew. See also: Extract of a Report from I.M. 
Lucas [nurse], 11 August, 1923. 
203. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6318, File 657-1, MR C 8692, To D.C. 
Scott from Cortland Starnes and attached report dated 25 July, 
1924 . 
204. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6318, File 657-1, MR C 8692, To D.C. 
Scott from W. Graham, 13 August, 1924. 
205. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, To 
W. Graham from J. Waddy, 1 September, 1924. 
206. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, see 
Graham's comment attached to To Dr. T. Westgate from J. D. 
McLean, 16 September, 1924. 
207. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, To 
D.C. Scott from J. Waddy, 4 November, 1924. 
208. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, To 
the Commission from Rev. E. Bird, 26 September, 1924 and To 
Secretary from Rev. T. Westgate, 28 November, 1924. 
209. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, To 
W. Graham from P. Constant, 1 October, 1925 and To W. Graham 
from J. Waddy, 5 October, 1925. 
210. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, To 
Secretary from W. Graham, 12 October, 1925. 
211. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, To 
Canon S. Gould from D.C. Scott, 31 October, 1925 and To D.C. 
Scott from Canon S. Gould, 7 December, 1925. 
212. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, To 
W. Graham from J.D. McLean, 16 February, 1926. 
213. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, To 
D.C. Scott from W. Graham, 
30 November, 
1931. Graham's 
relationship with Scott deteriorated badly over the years; the 
became bitter rivals -see for a full discussion of this: E.B. 
Titley, 
A Narrow Vision, 
Chapter 
10, The Ambitions of 
Commissioner Graham. 
270 

214. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6262, File 578-1 (4-5), MR C 8653, To 
Indian Affairs Branch from A. Hamilton, 22 September, 1944. 
215. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, Memorandum 
for the Minister from M. Benson, 3 July, 1897 and Vol. 3920, 
File 116818, MR C 10161, To Deputy Superintendent General of 
Indian Affairs from M. Benson, 12 August, 1903. 
216. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6436, File 878-1 (1-3) MR C 8762, To 
Assistant Secretary and Deputy from A. O'Daunt, 1 August, 1920 
and 16 August, 1920. For a full discussion of the event see: 
E. Furniss, Victims of Benevolence, pages 37-42. 
217. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6455, File 885-1 (1-2), MR C 8777, To 
Secretary from W. Ditchburn, 31 October, 1912. 
218. INAC File 951/23-5, Vol. 1, Confidential, To Major MacKay 
from G.H. Barry, 16 April, 1937. 
219. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Rev, J. Guy, 11 July, 1926. 
220. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6309, File 654-1, MR C 8685, Inspection 
Report on Gordon's school, 14 May, 1930. 
221. E.B. Titley, A Narrow Vision, page 105. 
222. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6332, File 661-1 (1-2), MR C 9809, To 
Secretary from W. Graham, 11 December, 1925, To Sir from W. 
Graham, 8 January, 1926, and To D.C. Scott from W. Graham, 25 
September, 1929. 
223. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6332, File 661-1 (1-2), MR C 9809, To 
W. Graham from D.C. Scott, 27 November, 1929. 
224. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6332, File 661-1 (1-2), MR C 9809, To 
D.C. Scott from W. Graham, 11 July, 1930, D.C. Scott note on 
file, 20 November, 1930 and To Mr. Sutherland from K. Beaton, 
2 December, 1936. 
225. For other examples, see: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3931, File 
117377-lC, MR C 10163, To C. Sifton from A. Gordon, 18 
January, 1902 and Vol. 6476, File 919-1, MR C 8792, To Hon I. 
MacKenzie from E. Corlett, 18 March, 1944. 
226. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3931, File 117377-lC, MR C 10163, To 
Secretary from M. Benson, 24 January, 1902. 
227. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7190, File 411/25-1-010, MR C 9698, To 
D.C. Scott from L. Pinsonault, n.d. July, 1924 and to L. 
Pinsonault from J.D. McLean, 11 July, 1924. 
271 

228. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6264, File 579-1 (1), MR C 8654, To 
J.D. 
McLean 
from 
J.R. 
Bunn 
21 
October, 
1920 
and 
To 
Superintendent, Department of Indian Affairs from J. Ross, 6 
October, 1920. 
229. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6436, File 878-1 (1-3), MR C 8762, To 
Secretary from A. Vowell, 
17 March, 
1902, see attached 
testimony, and, for another example, see: Vol. 6262, File 578-
1 (4-5), MR C 8653, To R. Hoey from D.J. Allan, 4 March, 1944. 
230. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6191, File 462-1, MR C 7926, Petition 
... 
to 
Henry 
Jackson, 
25 
September, 
1921, 
To 
Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Afairs from A. Chisholm 14 
January, 1922, and To D.C. Scott from A. Chisholm, 14 January, 
1922 . 
231. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6191, File 462-1, MR C 7926, To A. 
Chisholm from D.C. Scott, 18 January, 1922 and To D.C. Scott 
from R. Ferrier, 23 January, 1922. 
232. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6191, File 462-1, MR C 7926, To D.C. 
Scott from R. Ferrier, 23 January, 1922. 
233. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6191, File 462-1, MR C 7926, To Rev. G. 
Prewer from D.C. Scott, 2 February, 1922 and To T. Godfrey 
from D. C. Scott, 2 February, 1922. 
234. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6455, File 885-1 (1-2), MR C 8777, To 
Secretary from W. Ditchburn, 31 October, 1912. 
235. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6436, File 878-1 (1-3), MR C 8762, To 
Secretary from A. Vowell, 18 March 1902 and 14 April, 1902. 
236. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6436, File 878-1 (1-3), MR C 8762, To 
Secretary from A. Vowell, 18 March 1902 and 14 April, 1902. 
237. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6436, File 878-1 (1-3), MR C 8762, To 
A. Vowell from J.D. McLean, 31 May, 1902. 
238. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6436, File 878-1 (1-3), MR C 8762, To 
I. Odgen from Secretary, 16 September, 1910 and To A. O'Daunt 
from A. MacKenzie, 5 October, 1920. 
239. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6436, File 878-1 (1-3), MR C 8762, See: 
To A. Mackenzie from R.H. Cairns, n.d, 1920 and To Assistant 
Secretary and Deputy from A. O'Daunt, 16 August, 1920. 
240. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3767, File 33170, MR C 10135, To 
Assistant Indian Commissioner from G. Mann, 22 October, 1886. 
241. N.A.C. Rg 10 Vol. 3984, File 167793-1, MR C 10169, To 
A.E. Green from Chas. Richards, 27 April, 1905. 
272 

242. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6187, File 461-1 (1-2), MR C 7922, 
Inspection Report on Cecilia Jeffrey school by Inspector 
Semmens, April, 1916. 
243. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6187, File 461-1 (1-2), MR C 7922, To 
J. Edmison from J. McLean, 4 August, 1917. 
244. N.A.C. RG 10 3918, File 116659-1, MR C 10161, To 
Assistant Deputy and Secretary from J. Smith, 8 February, 
1918 . 
245. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3933, File 117657-1, MR C 10164, To W. 
Graham from A. Burnett, 19 August, 1914 and Vol. 6200, File 
466-1 (1-5), MR C 7933, To Rev. H. Snell from H. Craig, 29 
July, 1937. 
246. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6251, File 575-1 (1-3), MR C 8645, To 
Miss J.F. Lang from R. Hoey, 17 November, 1938. 
247. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6309, File 654-1, MR C 8685, To 
Secretary from T. Robertson, 10 November, 1938. 
248. J.R. Miller, "Owen Glendower, Hotspur and Canadian Indian 
Policy" in Ethnohistory, Vol. 37, No. 4, Fall 1990. 
249. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 1543, [no file number], MR C 14839, To 
W. Graham from J. Pugh, 14 December, 1928. 
250. See for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6307, File 654-1, MR 
C 8685, To Secretary from M. Christianson, 17 April, 1942, 
Vol. 6345, File 751-1, MR C 8701, To Secretary from W. Graham, 
27 September, 1929, Vol. 6426, File 875-1-2-3-5, MR C 8756, To 
Assistant Deputy and Secretary from W. Halliday, 13 February, 
1918 . 
251. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6027, File 117-1-1, MR C 8147, To 
Principal McWhinney from Agent Blewett, 18 March, 1913. 
252. G. Manuel and M. Posluns, The Fourth World, page 67. 
253. J.R. Miller, "Owen Glendower, Hotspur, and Canadian 
Indian Policy", page 386. 
254. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-
3, 6-7), Mr C 8781, To R.A. Hoey from Rev. C. Hives, 21 June, 
1943, Vol. 6200, File 466-1 (1-5), MR C 7633, To Rev. H. Snell 
from H. Craig, 29 July, 1937 and attached correspondence, Vol. 
6187, File 461-1 (1-2), MR C 7922, To Rev. A. Grant from 
Secretary, 11 April, 1916, Vol. 6342, File 750-1, MR C 8699, 
To D.C. Scott from J. Pugh, 25 January, 1928 and attached 
correspondence, Vol. 6309, File 654-1, MR C 8685, To Secretary 
from 
T. 
Robertson, 
10 
November, 
1938 
and 
attached 
273 

correspondence and Vol. 6479, File 940-1 (1-2), MR C 8794, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from Rev. H. Grant, 
5 February, 1940. 
255. United Church Archives, Accession 79.199C, 
79.200C, 
Records pertaining to missions ..., 1876-1923, To Mackay from 
Moojre, 11 March, 1903. 
256. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6332, File 661-1 (1-2), MR C 9809, To 
D.C. Scott from W. Graham, 11 July, 1930. 
257. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3879, 
File 92449, MR C 10155, 
Memorandum by H. Reed, 1897, see attached Report on Battleford 
school by Inspector McGibbon. 
258. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), MR C 8781, 
To Rev. C. Hives from R. Hoey, 2 9 June, 1942. 
259. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3930, File 117377-1A, MR C 10163, To 
Bishop of Rupert's Land from H. Reed, 31 May, 1893. 
260. The Davin Report. 
261. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To D.C. 
Scott from W. Graham, 23 March, 1923. 
262. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6040, File 160-4 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
D.C. Scott from J. Edmison, 17 October, 1923. 
263. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7190, File 493/25-1-001, MR C 9698, To 
Rev. T. Westgate, From R. Hoey, n.d. April, 1942. 
264. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3966, File 150000-14, MR C 10168, To 
J.D. McLean from W. Morrison, n.d. 1909. 
265. N.A.C. Rg 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-4, MR C 10118, To L. 
Vankoughnet from H. Reed, 20 May, 1891. 
266. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6001, File 1-1-1 (1), MR C 8134, To 
A.J. Hatcher from R. Hoey, 6 August, 1941. 
267. N.A.C. RG 10 
Vol. 4037, File 317021, MR C 10177, To 
Secretary from Agent, Birtle Manitoba, 20 December, 1907. 
268. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8448, File 506/23-5-019, MR C 13800, 
Fort Alexander Inspection Report by B. Warkentin, 28 June, 
1943 . 
269. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3925, File 116823-1A, MR C 10162, To 
Rev. S.P. Matheson from J.D. McLean, 15 February, 1909. 
274 

270. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-7-1, To Secretary 
from W. Graham, 11 September, 193 0. 
271. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6430, File 876-1, MR C 8759, To 
Secretary from M. Benson, 29 November, 1901. 
272. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3952, File 134858, MR C 10166, To 
Secretary from M. Benson, 29 November, 1900. 
273. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To J.D. 
McLean from M. Benson, 15 July, 1897. 
274. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6430, File 876-1, MR C 8759, To 
Secretary from M. Benson, 2 9 November, 1901. 
275. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3753, File 30614, MR C 10132, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from J. Powell, 26 
November, 1886. 
276. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To 
Reverend and Dear Sirs from F. Oliver, 21 March, 1908. 
277. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8453, File 985/23-5, MR C 13802, 
Agent's Report, Alberni school, 1926. 
278. INAC File 777/23-5-007, Vol. 1, Inspector's Report, St 
Bruno school by E. C. Stehelin, 3 December, 1940. 
279. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8448, File 506/23-5-019, MR C 13800, 
Fort Alexander Inspection Report by B. Warkentin, 15 June, 
1942 . 
280. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3919, File 116751-1A, To Deputy 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from M. Benson, 4 
February, 1903. See also: Vol. 3952, File 134858, MR C 10166, 
To Secretary from M. Benson, 29 November, 1900. 
281. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 651/25-1, MR C 9701, To R. 
Hoey from Dr. T. Robertson, 26 January, 1939. 
282. Anglican Church Archives, M.S.C.C., Series 2-14, Special 
Indian Committee, 1905-1910, Memorandum to Superintendent 
General of Indian Affairs from S.H. Blake, 14 March, 1906 and 
Memorandum by Bishop of Moosonee, 14 June, 1906. 
283. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4041, File 334503, To F. Pedley from 
F.H. Paget, 25 November, 1908. 
284. N.A.C. RG 20 Vol. 4037, File 317021, P.H. Bryce, Report 
on 
the 
Indian 
Schools 
of 
Manitoba 
and 
the 
Northwest 
Terrritories. 
275 

285. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To J.D. 
McLean from M. Benson, 15 July, 1897. see also: Vol. 3578, 
File 548, MR C 10102, Report on Qu'Appelle school, 1882. 
286. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3919, File 116751-1A, MR C 10161, To 
Deputy Superintnedent General of Indian Affairs from M. 
Benson, 23 June, 1903. 
287. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To J.D. 
McLean from M. Benson, 15 July, 1897. See also: Vol. 3931, 
File 117377-1C, MR C 10163, To J. Smart from D. McKenna, 2 
April, 1902. 
288. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6348, File 752-1, MR C 8705, Report on 
Crowfoot school by M. Christianson, 1 April, 1923. 
289. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6348, File 752-1, MR C 8705, Extract of 
a Report by W. Graham, 16 April, 1923. 
290. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 772/23-5-002, MR C 13801, 
Old Sun's Inspection Report by J. Markle, 1918. 
291. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3918, 116659-1, MR C 
10161, To A. Vowell from J. Mackay, 29 May, 1892 and Vol. 
3919, File 116751-1A, MR C 10161, To Deputy Superintendent 
General of Indian Affairs from M. Benson, 23 June, 1903. 
292. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6251, File 575-1 (1,3), MR C 8645, To 
J.F. Lang from R. Hoey, 17 November, 1938 and attached 
correspondence. 
293. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8453, File 985/23-5, MR C 13802, To 
D.M. Mackay from P. Ashbridge, 9 April, 1945. 
294. INAC File 951/23-5, Vol. 1, Inspector's Report on 
Christie school, by R.H. Cairns 24 August, 1925. 
295. INAC File 772/23-5-010, Vol. 1, To Dr. McGill from M. 
Christianson, 23 March, 1935. 
296. INAC File 675/23-5-020, Vol. 1, Agent's Reports on 
Muscowequan school by J. Waddy: February, 1932, May, 1932, 
June, 1933, January, 1934, October, 1934 and December, 1934. 
297. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8453, File 985/23-5, MR C 13802, To D. 
Mackay from R. Hoey, 16 July, 1943. 
298. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8760, File 901/25-1, MR C 9702, To D.M. 
Mackay from R. Hoey, 4 December, 1940 and Vol. 8452, File 
772/23-5-002, MR C 13801, To G.H. Gooderham from P. Phelan, 5 
December, 1938. 
276 

299. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8449, File 511/23-5-014, MR C 13800, To 
F. Lang from R. Hoey, 4 January, 1939. 
300. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6251, File 575-1 (1,3), MR C 8645, To 
C. St. John, K.C., from R. Hoey, 17 November, 1938. 
301. See, for example: N.A.C. Rg 10 Vol. 8452, File 772/23-5-
002, MR C 13801, To G.H. Gooderham from P. Phelan, 15 
December, 1938. 
302. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Mr. Maclnnes from R. Hoey 3 March, 1937. 
303. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6251, File 575-1 (1,3), MR C 8645, To 
C. St. John, K.C., from R. Hoey, 17 November, 1938. 
304. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8605, File 451/1-13, To Rev. H. Snell 
from R. Hoey, 8 May, 1938. 
305. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6205, File 468-1 (1-3), MR C 7937, To 
Rev. S. McVitty from R. Ferrier, 14 June, 1942. 
306. INAC File 501/23-5-065, Vol. 1, Inspector's Report, 
Brandon school by G. Robertson, 5 & 6 March, 1941. 
307. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 1543, [no file number], MR C 14839, To 
R.N. Wilson from the Boy Pupils of the Boarding School, Blood 
Reserve, by James Black-Looking, 25 March, 1905. 
308. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-2, MR C 10118, To 
Indian Commissioner from T. Clarke, 31 July, 1884. 
309. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3818, File 57799, MR C 10143, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 14 May, 
1889 . 
310. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3933, File 117657-1A, To D.C. Scott 
from M. Benson, 12 January, 1918. 
311. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8449, File 511/23-5-014, MR C 13800, 
Report on Birtle school by A. Hamiliton, 4 December, 1936. 
312. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 773/23-5-003, MR C 14234, To 
Secretary from W. Graham, 9 June, 1950. 
313. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 1543, [no file number], MR C 14839, To 
R.N. Wilson from the Boy Pupils of the Boarding School, Blood 
Reserve, by James Black-Looking, 25 March, 1905. 
314. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 773/23-5-003, MR C 14234, To 
W. Graham from R. Ferrier, 14 June, 1930. 
277 

315. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6452, File 884-1 (1-3), MR C 8773-
8774), To Indian Affairs Department from E. Stanley, 14 
February, 1918. 
316. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3918, File 116659-1, MR C 10161, To A. 
Vowell from J. Mackay, 29 May, 1892. See also: Vol. 1543, [no 
file number], To J. Pugh from W. Graham, 14 December, 1928 and 
Vol. 8452, File 773/23-5-004, MR C 13802, Inspection Report, 
St. Paul's school by L. Waller, January, 1952. 
317. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6632, File 661-1 (1-2), MR C 9809, To 
Rev. R. Mackay from J. D. McLean, 17 February, 1911. 
318. INAC File 956/23-5, Vol. 1, General Report, St. George's 
Indian Residential, by H. McArthur, 12 February, 1943. 
319. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8449, File 511/23-5-017, MR C 13800, To 
Secretary from B. Warkentin, 25 January, 1940. 
320. INAC File 601/25-2, Vol. 2, R.F. Davey, Residential 
Schools Past and Future, 8 March, 1968. 
321. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6327, File 660-1 (1-3), MR C 9807, To 
D.C. Scott from W. Graham, 18 October, 1916. 
322. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8451, File 772/23-5-001, MR C 13801, 
Inspection Reports Crowfoot and Old Sun's, 1940. 
323. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 772/23-5-002, MR C 13801, 
Provincial Inspection Report, Old Sun's school by W. Frame, 
1935 . 
324. INAC File 601/25-2, Vol. 2, R.F. Davey, Residential 
Schools Past and Future, 8 March, 1968. 
325. J. Barman, Y. Hebert & D. McCaskill, eds., 
Indian 
Education in Canada, page 9. 
326. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Buffalo 
Child Long Lance from J.D. McLean, 6 January, 1923. For 
information on Provincial agreements see: Vol. 3679, File 
12046, MR C 10119, Memorandum to Council, from John A. 
Macdonald, 19 October, 1880, Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, 
Memorandum for the Minister from M. Benson, 3 July, 1897, Vol. 
6014, File 1-1-6 Man., MR C 8141, To 
Hon. A. Meighen from D.C. Scott, 1 June, 1920, 
and MG 26A, 
Macdonald Papers, Vol. 150 Part 22, MR C 1564, To Sir John A 
Macdonald from L. Vankoughnet, 14 March, 1885. 
327. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, Memorandum 
for the Minister from M. Benson, 3 July, 1897. He quotes for 
support 
memorandum written by H. Reed on 13 July, 1895. See 
278 

the comment in the margin by T. Mayne Daly. 
328. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Archbishop Sinnot from D.C. Scott, 4 November, 1926. 
329. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Buffalo 
Child Long Lance from J.D. McLean, 6 January, 1923. 
330. INAC File 956/23-5, Vol. 1, General Report, St. George's 
Indian Residential, by H. McArthur, 12 February, 1943. 
331. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8448, File 06/23-5-019, MR C 13800, 
Inspection Report Fort Alexander school by B. Warkentin, 1951. 
332. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8449, File 511/23-5-017, MR C 13800, To 
Secretary from B. Warkentin, 25 January, 1940. 
333. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8448, File 06/23-5-019, MR C 13800, 
Fort Alexander Inspection Report by B. Warkentin, 15 June, 
1942 . 
334. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8449, File 511/23-5-017, MR C 13800, To 
Secretary from B. Warkentin, 25 January, 1940. See also: 
similar suggestions from, M. Christianson in Vol. 8451, File 
772/23-5-001, MR C 13801, Inspection Report, Crowfoot school 
by M. Christianson, 
1934 and 
from a Provincial 
School 
Inspector, Mr. Sigvaldason in Vol. 8449, File 511/23-5-014, MR 
C 13800, To R. Hoey from Sigvaldason, 25 November, 1938. 
335. INAC File 777/23-5-007, Vol. 1, Inspector's Report, St 
Bruno school by E. Stehelin, 3 December, 1940. 
336. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 772/23-5-002, MR C 13801, 
Old Sun's Inspection Report by J. Boyce, 1923. 
337. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8451, File 655/23-5, MR C 13801, 
Inspection Report, Qu'Appelle school by A. Hamilton, 1934. 
338. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 773/23-5-004, MR C 13802, To 
Sir from J. Markle, 10 February, 1914. 
339. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 772/23-5-002, MR C 13801, 
Inspection Report, Old Sun's school by W. Frame, 1934. 
340. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8451, File 655/23-5, MR C 13801, 
Inspection Report, Qu'Appelle school by A. Hamilton, 1934. 
341. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8449, File 511/23-5-014, MR C 13800, 
Inspection Report, Birtle school by Mr Sigvaldason, 1939. 
342. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8451, File 772/23-5-001, MR C 13801, 
Inspection Report, Crowfoot school by M. Christianson, 1934. 
279 

343. INAC File 956/23-5, Vol. 1, General Report, St. George's 
Indian Residential, by H. McArthur, 12 February, 1943. 
344. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6730, File 160-2 (1-3), MR C 8092, To 
T.A. Crerar from Rev. T. Westgate, on behalf of the Joint 
Delegation, 21 November, 1938. 
345. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), 
MR C 
8781, To P. Phalen from Rev. C. Hives, 26 December, 1944. 
346. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8448, File 506/23-5-019, MR C 13800, To 
R. Hoey from B. Warkentin, 23 June, 1942. 
347. INAC File 956/23-5, Vol. 1, General Report, St. George's 
Indian Residential, by H. McArthur, 12 February, 1943. 
348. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8448, File 506/23-5-019, MR C 13800, 
Inspection Report, Fort Alexander school by B. Warkentin, 15 
June, 1942. 
349. INAC File 956/23-5, Vol. 1, General Report, St. George's 
Indian Residential, by H. McArthur, 12 February, 1943. 
350. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8448, File 506/23-5-019, MR C 13800, 
Inspection Report, Fort Alexander school by B. Warkentin, 15 
June, 1942. 
351. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 772/23-5-002, MR C 13801, 
Inspection Report, Old Sun's school by W. Frame, 1937. 
352. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Rev. F. Blanchin from D.C. Scott, 17 April, 1924. 
353. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 772/23-5-002, MR C 13801, 
Inspection Report, Old Sun's school by J. Boyce, 1923. 
354. INAC File 601/25-2, Vol. 2, R.F. Davey, Residential 
Schools - Past and Future, 8 March, 1968. 
355. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Archbishop Sinnot from D.C. Scott, 4 November, 1926. 
356. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4041, File 334503, MR C 10178, To F. 
Pedley from F.H. Paget, 25 November, 1908. 
357. See, for example: INAC File 956/23-5, Vol. 1, General 
Report, St. George's Indian Residential, by H. McArthur, 12 
February, 1943. 
280 

358. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4041, File 334503, MR C 10178, To F. 
Pedley from F.H. Paget, 25 November, 1908. 
359. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4041, File 334503, MR C 10178, To F. 
Pedley from F.H. Paget, 25 November, 1908. 
360. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6358, File 758 (1-2), MR C 8713, To Sir 
from J. Markle, 20 January, 1914. 
361. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6205, File 468-1 (1-3), MR C 7937, To 
Indian Affairs Department from Rev. T Ferrier, 25 May, 1911 
and To Rev. T. Shore from Assistant Deputy and Secretary, 20 
June, 1911. 
362. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, To 
D.C. Scott from M. Benson, 19 August, 1914. 
363. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6267, File 580-1 (1-3), MR C 8656, To 
Rev. J. Newnham from J.D. McLean, 25 August, 1914, To Rev, J, 
Newnham from J.D. McLean, 22 September, 1914 and To D.C. Scott 
from M. Benson, 27 August, 1917. 
364. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8760, File 901/25-1, MR C 9702, To 
Major D. Mackay from G. Barry, 30 September, 1940. 
365. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6355, File 751-1, MR C 8711, To Rev. G. 
Dorey from R. Hoey, 17 August, 1943. 
366. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6355, File 751-1, MR C 8711, To R. Hoey 
from Rev. G. Dorey, 14 August, 1943. 
367. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner from J.A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
368. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, Memorandum 
for the Minister from M. Benson, 3 July, 1897. 
369. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4041, File 334503, MR C 10178, To F. 
Pedley from F.H. Paget, 25 November, 1908. 
370. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6358, File 758 (1-2), MR C 8713, To Sir 
from J. Markle, 20 January, 1914. 
371. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6348, File 752-1, MR C 8705, Extract of 
a Report by W. Graham, 16 April, 1923. 
372. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7182, File 1/25-1-1-1, MR C 9695, To 
Sir from W. Ditchburn, 12 October, 1920. 
373. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-7-1, To C.E. Silcox 
from R.T. Ferrier, 7 April, 1932. 
281 

374. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 773/23-5-003, MR C 14234, To 
Rev. R. Rioux from R.T. Ferrier, 5 November, 1923. 
375. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
R. Hoey from Rev. J. Plourde, O.M.I., 3 0 May, 193 9. 
376. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6348, File 752-1, MR C 8705, Extract of 
a Report by W. Graham, 16 April, 1923. 
377. INAC File 956/23-5, Vol. 1, General Report, St. George's 
Indian Residential, by H. McArthur, 12 February, 1943. 
378. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 773/23-5-003, MR C 14234, 
Inspection Report, St. Mary's school by L. Hutchinson, 5 
October, 1922. 
379. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7190, File 411/25-1-010, MR C 9698, To 
Rev. T. Westgate from R. Hoey, 30 April, 1942. 
380. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 772/23-5-002, Inspection 
Report, Old Sun's school by J. Boyce, 1923. 
381. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8449, File 511/23-5-017, MR C 13800, To 
Secretary from B. Warkentin, 25 January, 1940. 
382. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8449, File 511/23-5-014, MR C 13800, 
Inspection Report, Birtle school by Mr. Sigvaldason, 1939. 
383. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8603, File 451/1-13, MR C 14229, To 
Rev. H. Snell from R. Hoey, 3 January, 1938. 
384. INAC File 777/23-5-007, Vol. 1, Inspector's Report, St 
Bruno school by E. Stehelin, 3 December, 1940. 
385. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 772/23-5-002, Inspection 
Report, Old Sun's school by J. Boyce, 1923. 
386. INAC File 777/23-5-007, Vol. 1, Inspector's Report, St 
Bruno school by E. Stehelin, 3 December, 1940. 
387. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3966, File 150000-26, MR C 10168, To 
Secretary from C. Thornell [?] n.d. 1916-17 [?]. 
388. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 772/23-5-002, Inspection 
Report, Old Sun's school by J. Boyce, 1923. 
389. INAC File 951/23-5, Vol. 1, Inspector's Report, Christie 
school by R.H. Cairns, 24 August, 1924. 
390. INAC File 956/23-5, Vol. 1, General Report, St. George's 
Indian Residential, by H. McArthur, 12 February, 1943. 
282 

391. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7182, File 1/25-1-1-1, MR C 9695, To 
Sir from W. Ditchburn, 12 October, 1920. 
392. INAC File 956/23-5, Vol. 1, General Report, St. George's 
Indian Residential, by H. McArthur, 12 February, 1943. 
393. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner from J.A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
394. 394. INAC File 956/23-5, Vol. 1, General Report, St. 
George's 
Indian Residential, by H. McArthur, 12 February, 1943. 
395. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6348, File 752-1, MR C 8705, Extract of 
a Report by W. Graham, 16 April, 1923. 
396. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8451, File 655/23-5, MR C 13801, To 
D.C. Scott from W. Graham, 17 November, 1922. 
397. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To D.C. 
Scott from W. Graham, 23 March, 1923. 
398. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6040, File 160-4 Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
D.C. Scott from J. Edmison, 17 October, 1923. 
399. INAC File 501/23-5-076, Vol. 1, To Rev. 0. Chagnon, 
O.M.I, from P. Phelan, 6 June, 1938, To Rev. 0. Chagnon 0.M.I. 
from J.D. Sutherland, 13 May, 1936, To Rev. 0. Chagnon O.M.I, 
from J.D. Sutherland, 30 May, 1934 and To Rev. 0. Chagnon 
O.M.I, from R.T. Ferrier, 23 May, 1929. 
400. N.A.C. MG 26A, Macdonald Papers, Vol. 211, MR C 1597, To 
Sir John A. Macdonald from E. Dewdney, 29 December, 1883. See 
also: RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To H. Reed from 
E. McColl, 21 March, 1884. 
401. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3818, File 57799, MR C 10143, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 14 May, 
1889 . 
402. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8451, File 655/23-5, MR C 13801, 
Inspection Report, Qu'Appelle school, 1924. 
403. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner from J.A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
404. Annual Report 1888, page 102. 
405. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-2, MR C 10118, To 
Indian Commissioners from T. Clarke, 31 July, 1884. 
283 

406. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 11422-2, MR C 10118, To Lieutenant 
Governor from Rev. J. Hugonard, 18 October, 1884. 
407. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3818, File 57799, MR C 10143, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 14 May, 
1889 . 
408. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3647, File 8128, MR C 10113, To Indian 
Commissioner from J.A. Macrae, 18 December, 1886. 
409. Annual Report 1888, page 102. All Hallows School in 
British Columbia was an interesting variant. There Aboriginal 
and non-Aboriginal girls, while educated on the same premises, 
were in fact held separate. See: J. Barman, "Separate and 
Unequal" Indian and White Girls at All Hallows School, 1884-
1920" in J. Barman, Y. Hebert and D. McCaskill, eds., Indian 
Education 
in Canada, 
Volume 
1: The 
Legacy 
(Vancouver, 
University of British Columbia Press, 1986). 
410. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3674, File 11422-5, MR C 10118, To 
Deputy Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 
4 August, 1890. 
411. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3818, File 57799, MR C 10143, To 
Superintendent General of Indian Affairs from H. Reed, 14 May, 
1889 . 
412. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6348, File 752-1, MR 
C 8705, Extract of Agent G.H. Graham's Report, August, 1923. 
413. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3836, 
File 68557, MR C 10146, 
Suggestions for the Government of Indian Schools, H. Reed, 27 
January, 1890. 
414. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Sir 
from J.D. McLean, 25 November, 1910. 
415. For Catholic comment on the contracts see: N.A.C. RG 10 
Vol. 603 9, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To R. Rogers from Catholic 
Bishops, 24 November, 1911 and 15 November, 1912. 
416. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Sir 
from J.D. McLean, 25 November, 1910. 
417. INAC File 501/23-5-076, 
Vol. 1, To 
... from J.D. 
Sutherland, 13 May, 1936. 
418. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6476, File 919-1, MR C 8792, To Hon. I. 
MacKenzie from Miss E. Corbett, 18 March, 1944. 
419. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To D.C. 
Scott from W. Graham, 23 March, 1923. 
284 

420. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6262, File 578-1 (4-5), MR C 8653, To 
Rev. Alderwood from R. Hoey, 13 November, 1944. 
421. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6251, File 575-1 (1-3), MR C 8645, To 
C. St. John, K.C., from R. Hoey, 17 November, 1938. 
422. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6320, File 658-1, MR C 9802, To F. 
Mears fromD.C. Scott, 11 January, 1924. Edwards letter, dated 
14 December, 1923, is attached. 
285 

CHAPTER 4 
INTEGRATION and CLOSURE - 1948 to 1986 
"It is the firm opinion of this Department that the 
children will receive better care in their own 
homes under the guidance of their parents than they 
would in residence." 
286 

In May, 1946, a Joint Committee of the House of Commons and 
the Senate began an extensive review of Indian affairs for the 
purpose of preparing amendments to the Indian Act. After two 
years of public hearings and having considered some "400 
briefs from Indian bands, organizations, other groups and 
individuals" 
it 
issued, 
in 
June 
1948, 
12 
major 
recommendations. These revealed a continued loyalty on the 
part of Parliamentarians to the belief that assimilation was 
yet an unavoidable and a desirable end to the 
"Indian 
problem." But they were also "relatively sympathetic to, and 
supportive of, Indian aspirations" including making rather 
surprising proposals for granting a degree of self-government 
to communities and for the establishment of a commission to 
investigate treaty violations and land claims. 
Most of the recommendations did not, however, live to see the 
light of any legislative day. The revised 1951 Act, drafted 
not by the committee, itself, but by Departmental officials 
and Justice Department lawyers was "rightly criticized as 
essentially a restatement" of earlier Indian Acts. In the 
main, it upheld the status quo. It certainly did not reflect 
Aboriginal "aspirations." What few changes were made in Indian 
Affairs were "limited to simply revising current practises 
inherited from the nineteenth century."1 
The education sector appeared, on the surface at least, to be 
an exception. Here the Department and Parliament were in 
complete agreement with the committee's central recommendation 
- "that wherever and whenever possible Indian children should 
be educated in association with other children."2 Thereafter, 
Departmental efforts and resources were re-directed from the 
residential system and devoted to a new policy - the creation 
of a day school system and, more significantly, to integration 
by "transferring Indian children to provincial schools, and 
federal schools to provincial administrative school units."3 
Integration was both the rationale and the process for ending 
the residential school system. Yet even when that policy, in 
concert with the whole spectrum of federal policies, was 
thrown into confusion by the rejection, led by Aboriginal 
people, of the White Paper of 1969, the most 
complete 
expression 
of 
Canada's 
traditional 
assimilative 
intent, 
progress toward the complete and final dismantling of the 
residential system continued. There was certainly no place for 
these educational relics in the evolving system that was to be 
based on the principles enunciated by Aboriginal people 
themselves in the National Indian Brotherhood's Indian Control 
of Indian Education submitted to and accepted by the Liberal 
government in 1972.4 
287 

Progress, nevertheless, in closing schools before and after 
1969 was difficult and slow. In the integration era, after 
1948, the Department had not only to fashion a new future 
dealing with the intricacies of a program which linked 
Aboriginal communities with local non-Aboriginal school boards 
and Provincial ministries of education but it had to deal as 
well with the past. It had to contend with its old ally the 
churches all of whom had defended their participation in 
Indian Affairs and the continuing importance of denominational 
education in their submissions to the Joint Committee. And the 
Department had to struggle with the consequences of its 
assimilative policies and what had been the damaging impact of 
regional development 
- dysfunctional 
families and 
their 
"neglected" children who had become, in the post war years, a 
significant portion of the residential school population. 
Integration and closure would be a long and difficult process, 
nearly four decades long - decades in which children still 
left their homes and communities bound for a residential 
school. And as had been the case before the war, many of them 
would never return and many who did would be unable, because 
of their residential school experience to contribute to the 
life and health of their communities. 
According to a Departmental retelling of the history of the 
Joint Committee, its education recommendation was a response 
to strong representations from some Indian associations for 
"an end to the policy and practise of segregated education."5 
Indian witnesses, who, R.F. Davey, the superintendent of 
education, 
recalled, 
"were 
almost 
unanimous 
in 
their 
condemnation 
of 
residential 
schools,"6 
may 
well 
have 
influenced the Committee. 
Indian interventions during the Joint Committee hearings were 
the culmination of the remarkable nation-wide development, 
beginning in the late 19th century, of modern Indian political 
organizations. These had a resolute de-colonizing purpose, an 
"Indian agenda" aimed at regaining "control and authority" 
over their communities' 
affairs.7 
More 
immediately, 
the 
submissions to the Committee that argued for the replacement 
of church-run residential by day schools, and, despite Davey's 
recollection, only about half of them did,8 were an extension 
of a wartime campaign which was often powerfully frank about 
the residential school experience. In June, 1940, for example, 
the 
Indian 
Speaking 
Leaf, 
the 
journal 
of 
the 
Indian 
Association of America, published an article by the Metis 
organizer Malcolm Norris which traced the historic refusal of 
the government to respond to requests from Cree communities in 
Alberta for day schools. Instead, he wrote, they had gotten 
subsidized 
Religious 
Institutions 
as 
Boarding 
Schools.... The conditions prevailing 
in these 
288 

schools 
are 
common 
knowledge 
throughout 
the 
Province. 
Inferior 
staffs, 
inadequate 
food, 
constant overwork, military and religious routine, 
together with genuine cruelty, have caused those 
who have attended 
them to term these 
schools 
"Penitentiaries." This is the manner in which the 
provision of Treaty re Education has been provided, 
and it is to such schools that Cree children are 
compelled to attend FOR THE CRIME OF BEING BORN AN 
INDIAN. 
Norris was prepared to back up his charges. He told the 
Department privately that there were a "hundred [ex-pupils] 
... he could bring to testify, under oath, [that] there is 
cruelty meted out to pupils" and ample evidence "that the 
proper academic education, for which the Indian Department was 
paying sound Canadian cash had been and still is being 
neglected."9 
Whatever the effect Aboriginal lobbyists may have had on the 
members of the Joint Committee, the Department was not moved 
by any "Indian agenda," concern over cruel treatment or 
recognition of the rights of treatied 
communities. And 
activists like Norris surely cannot be considered at all. In 
true Departmental fashion, he was written off. He was "hot-
tempered, " a "Red," a man who was no doubt "reading the wrong 
class of literature."10 Rather, the dynamics that moved the 
Department away from residential schools were, ironically, the 
persistence of an assimilative strategy and, as always, 
mundane financial considerations that transformed Departmental 
thinking during the war years. 
R. Hoey signalled that transformation as early as 1943 during 
an 
appearance 
before 
Parliament's 
Special 
Committee 
on 
Reconstruction and Re-Establishment. Reacting to statements by 
one of the committee members - that residential schools as 
they "segregate the children" from their community "lose a 
great deal of the value of education" and that if the children 
were educated in a day school "you would educate the parents 
and the children together" - he admitted that he too had 
serious doubts about the efficacy of residential schools in 
any process of community development. In fact, his personal 
preference 
was 
"to 
see 
residential 
schools 
slowly 
and 
gradually closed."11 
Hoey spoke from more than personal preference. He had behind 
him the support of the senior staff of the Department who 
agreed, 
especially 
in light 
of the 
financial 
facts of 
Departmental life, that "the time has come when a definite 
decision should be reached regarding our policy in respect to 
residential schools." They were equally clear, as H. McGill, 
the director of the Indian Affairs Branch, had informed the 
289 

deputy minister in 1942, what that decision should be. "I 
hold, and have long held the opinion that the educational 
requirements of the great majority of the Indians could be met 
by day schools to the decided benefit of the Indians and to 
the financial benefit of the taxpayer."12 
The "financial benefit" of a day school emphasis within a 
revised 
educational 
strategy 
was 
the 
most 
compelling 
consideration for the Department. The financial situation of 
the system had not, of course, improved in the 1940s and 
officials had come to realize that the system had reached a 
point of crisis. Hoey had been shocked by a visit he made to 
the Mount Elgin school in 1942. Imposing from the outside, it 
was on closer look the most "dilapidated structure that I have 
ever inspected." Parts of it were "literally alive with 
cockroaches" and the "odours ... throughout the buildings were 
so offensive" he "could scarcely endure them." He was certain 
that "if this was not a government-operated institution ... it 
would be closed by the municipal health authorities." The 
school reflected "no credit on either the Department or the 
United Church." As bad as it was, it was not, however, an 
exception as the constant stream of negative school inspection 
reports 
flowing 
into 
Ottawa 
reminded 
Hoey 
and 
other 
headquarters's officials. 
Dr. Cochrane, a medical officer, 
told Hoey that Mount Elgin was "a model of sanitary perfection 
when compared with the United Church school at Round Lake, 
Saskatchewan."13 The Simes report soon put Elkhorn in the same 
category and similar conditions encountered at Alberni tended, 
Hoey commented, to "shake ones faith in the whole residential 
school set up."14 
Chronic underfunding was the culprit. As "our vote," McGill 
told the deputy minister, "has not been sufficient to keep 
these buildings in a proper state of repair ... a steady 
deterioration is taking place in our physical equipment." 
Something had to be done; a decision had to be made whether we 
should "go forward in developing a residential school system" 
or "direct our efforts in another direction."15 In Hoey's mind, 
the Department had no such choice. Any idea of further 
development, even any attempt to replace the nine schools that 
had been destroyed by fire in the last decade, was "sheer 
folly" 
in 
the 
continuing 
climate 
of 
"economy 
and 
retrenchment.1116 
The crisis the Department faced was deepened by an additional 
complicating 
factor. 
Demand 
for 
education 
was 
rising. 
Increasingly, the churches were lobbying for the beginning of 
high school education within the residential system for the 
few children who progressed past grade eight. More critically, 
the Aboriginal population was beginning to rebound from the 
shock of tuberculosis. Hoey estimated that there were an 
additional 300 school age children each year. That translated 
290 

into an annual requirement for five new day schools and one 
residential school.17 
In the face of the pressure to expand education in general and 
the urgent need to deal with the deplorable condition of so 
many of the residential schools, the Department determined 
that day schools, because they were cheaper, were the only 
realistic solution. In 1941, the Minister, T. Crerar, drew 
this to the attention of the churches in a preamble to what he 
proposed might be an acceptable preliminary reworking of the 
residential school system. In that year there were 8,774 
residential school students at a per capita cost of $159 (and 
this did not include the outstanding deferred maintenance 
bills) and almost the same number of day school students, 
8,651, at a cost of only $47 per capita. Crerar held that it 
would not be possible to keep the newer residential schools 
"in a high state of repair and efficiency" except 
by closing some of the older or more dilapidated 
buildings .... if the churches were agreeable to 
abandoning a limited number of these schools, the 
savings effected by this policy might be very well 
used to pay the per capita grants in full at other 
schools and for the repair and general upkeep of 
our modern school buildings."18 
For Crerar, no matter how the churches might respond, the days 
of unrestricted residential school growth were over. The 
repair and upkeep of the existing residential system could 
only be accomplished by down-sizing and the demand for 
additional school places would have to be met by day schools 
exclusively. In 1942, the deputy minister ordered that "as 
soon as war regulations regarding building materials permit, 
the building of day schools and the closing of certain 
residential schools [should] be proceeded with."19 
The substitution of day for residential schools at the centre 
of the education program was not the whole compass, nor the 
most important part, of the Department's scheme. Nor was the 
Department's internal reasoning the only well-spring. Again, 
as had Davin in 1879, the Department found a model in the 
United States where there was also a marked increase in the 
number of school age children. In 1939, Hoey circulated a 
report of the Department of the Interior in Washington which 
outlined progress in closing boarding schools, some of which 
were set aside for children from "broken and problem homes," 
and 
in 
constructing 
"community day 
schools." 
The 
most 
intriguing part of the report, however, noted that most of the 
new day school places were being found "in public schools, 
through cooperation with [the] states in Indian education."20 
The American federal system of Indian education was being 
desegregated as children were integrated into schools run by 
291 

the States. On financial grounds alone, this was immediately-
attractive to the Department. Hoey believed that integration 
"would in the end be substantially less than the cost of 
establishing" and operating an exclusively federal system of 
residential and day schools.21 
Desegregation by integration into Provincial school systems 
was the full sense of the conversation Hoey had had with the 
members of the Special Committee on Reconstruction and Re-
Establishment in 1943. He left that meeting with the clear 
impression that there had been a meeting of minds, that 
committee members opposed continued segregation - "Indians, in 
the judgement of the members of the Committee, should be 
encouraged to attend white schools and white vocational 
schools." To him this seemed to "indicate to some extent and 
in a small way the policy that governments may adopt in the 
future.1,22 
The opportunity to influence future policy in that direction 
came with the appointment of the joint committee. Departmental 
representatives did not miss the opportunity; they supported 
strongly the integration concept. Outside the hearings, the 
Department took another step toward a day school emphasis by 
initiating a number of surveys "designed to determine the 
educational needs of Indians . . . and to determine also how 
these needs can be most effectively met, particularly by the 
establishment of improved Indian day schools."23 These surveys 
would be the basis for a five year program of day school 
construction begun in the late 1940s which was to concentrate 
on the "erection of Indian day schools on all reserves upon 
which our inspectors report that conditions will permit of 
such schools."24 At the same time, the Department 
froze 
residential school enrolments and refused any increase in 
authorizations solicited by the churches.25 
Throughout the joint committee's hearing it was obvious that 
the Department was prepared to move in the direction of 
complete integration and was anxious for the consequent 
closure of residential schools. In his brief history of those 
days, Davey wrote that when the committee's recommendation was 
published "the attitude 
[in the Department] was that the 
sooner the residential 
schools were done away with the 
better.1,26 The Minister, J.A. MacKinnon, immediately encouraged 
Cabinet to place integration on the agenda of the next 
Dominion Provincial Conference. Each subsequent Minister took 
the position that the Federal Government could "discharge its 
responsibilities towards the Indian people with respect to 
education 
... 
only 
with 
the 
full 
cooperation 
of 
the 
provinces"27 - or as the Liberal Minister, J. Pickersgill, more 
bluntly informed his senior staff in 1955, it was imperative 
"that the Provinces take over more of our work."28 
292 

Increasingly, however, Pickersgill and other ministers did not 
mean 
"more," 
they meant 
all. The clear implication of 
integration was that at some point Aboriginal education would 
in fact, if not in law, be a wholly provincial matter. To 
facilitate that an amendment to the Indian Act was prepared 
"to enable the Department or the parents of Indian children to 
take advantage of the facilities provided by the Provinces, 
School Boards and other institutions to white children"29 by 
authorizing "the Federal Government to participate in the 
financing of public and private schools in which Indian 
children would be accommodated." Departmental staff was given 
the mandate to ensure that in the future the "provision of 
educational service will be by agencies operating under 
provincial jurisdiction.1,30 
But for Aboriginal children, their parents and communities 
what sort of future was it, exactly? Had there been any 
substantive break with the past; was the intended abandonment 
of residential schools the end of the campaign of cultural 
destruction 
that 
had 
animated 
educational 
strategy 
and 
pedagogy since Davin or was it a matter of "simply revising 
current practises inherited from the nineteenth century"?31 Had 
there been some new vision, a fundamental shift in the 
philosophy of Aboriginal education? 
The answer is no. While taking what was admittedly a 
surprising step, turning their backs on residential schools, 
neither the Department nor Parliament penned any visionary 
preamble to their proposed integrated system which had been, 
at least in the Department's case, inspired by financial 
rather than philosophic first principles. Philosophy there was 
but it came as an after-thought; it was backfilling; it was 
vision by default. As such it was incomplete and at times its 
rhetoric was contradicted by the very details of the new 
education policy. 
Education was assimilation and it continued so. The joint 
committee held to that course though the operative word, the 
new 
hallmark 
of 
post 
war 
assimilative 
rhetoric, 
was 
"citizenship." 
Integrated education would, 
the committee 
reasoned, "prepare Indian children to take their place as 
citizens."32 Symbolically, perhaps, the Indian Affairs Branch 
was transferred to the new Department of Citizenship and 
Immigration in 1950. 
Education 
for 
citizenship 
by 
integration 
was 
in 
the 
Department's view a superior assimilative vehicle - "the best 
hope of giving the Indians an equal chance with other Canadian 
citizens to improve their lot and to become fully self-
respecting, is to educate their children in the same schools 
with other Canadian children."33 The desegregated classroom 
experience, 
providing 
the 
children 
the 
"opportunity 
of 
293 

associating 
with white 
children 
during 
their 
formative 
years,"34 would "quicken and give meaning to the acculturative 
process through which they are passing."35 
There were other continuities with the old policy. This 
supposedly more effective educational strategy remained the 
servant of the larger Aboriginal policy rooted in the 19th 
century which still saw enfranchisement, preserved and even 
expanded by the Act of 1951, as the final confirmation of 
citizenship. And though the Department might tout its on-
reserve or local provincial day school model as a significant 
and original addition to that policy, the fact was that it was 
no more than the long delayed acceptance of the concept of 
community development that had been championed sporadically 
and unsuccessfully in the Department for decades by men like 
Smart, Benson and Oliver. They had wanted, in Oliver's words, 
a 
return 
to 
"first 
principles" 
by 
concentrating 
the 
expenditure of funds on "improving conditions on the reserves" 
rather than the overwhelming and narrow emphasis on education 
alone.36 Davey now took up the cry, explaining why he opposed 
increasing enrolments at one Quebec school. "To send all the 
children to a residential school commits the department to an 
ever expanding residential school and the neglect of community 
development, which past experience has proved hinders rather 
than helps 
the social and economic 
development 
of 
the 
Indian."37 Day schools, the Department asserted, would be but 
one initiative among others that would collectively address 
those community conditions. The schools would, by training 
children "in basic skills required by a variety of occupations 
... 
go a long way in solving the economic problems" on the 
reserves. Deplorable social conditions could be mediated by 
the schools linked to the "institution of leadership and 
homemakers 
courses, 
the 
encouragement 
of 
4H 
clubs 
and 
community programmes [that] have been directed towards this 
end" and that would address the needs of children and their 
parents simultaneously.38 
It was in the connection between Aboriginal adults and 
children, an inescapable consequence of day schools, and the 
implications of that for cultural persistence, that the new 
policy broke radically with one of the central assumptions of 
the residential school's civilizing logic - the necessary-
separation of the child from parents and community. This 
reversal was, however, never directly addressed. Indeed, the 
Department went forward assigning an active part in education 
to parents whose dangerously "savage" character and baleful 
influence appears to have mysteriously and 
conveniently 
disappeared. 
Parents were no longer a hindrance. They were an asset and 
thus "rather than separate children from parents we endeavour" 
declared the Minister, Ellen Fairclough, in 1962, "to assist 
294 

parents to improve home conditions and to assume their proper 
parental responsibilities."39 Progress, the Director of the 
Indian Affairs Branch, Col. H.M. Jones, asserted in what must 
be one of the most ironic statements in the history of the 
residential school system, would only be made when 
these people 
. . . assume the responsibility for 
bringing up their families, for providing decent 
homes 
and 
a good 
home 
environment 
for 
their 
children. 
At 
present 
the 
residential 
schools 
relieve them of this responsibility. Day school 
attendance would give stability to the community 
without hindering the parent from seeking work.40 
It was only common sense Chief D. Ahenakew of the Federation 
of Saskatchewan Indians was told in 1970 that the child-parent 
connection was key, that "there can be no complete substitute 
for the care and concern of parents and the security which 
children feel when living at home."41 Therefore 
It is considered that the parents wherever possible 
should assume the responsibility for the care of 
their children, and that the interests of the 
children are best served by leaving them with their 
parents when home circumstances and other factors 
are favourable.42 
This 
now 
valued 
parental 
involvement 
was 
even 
given 
institutional 
form 
in Departmental 
day 
and 
residential 
schools. In 1956, the Department set up a number of "school 
committees" in order "to stimulate parental and community 
interest, 
and 
to 
provide 
experience 
for 
the 
further 
involvement of Indians in the management of education." The 
committees, made up of band members, were to act as "advisory 
boards to departmental staff" and were to be "involved in the 
operation of the schools" being given authority for the 
"school lunch program, daily school transportation, repairs 
and maintenance of school buildings ... and they also present 
the annual operating budget to the district superintendent of 
education." While the Department expanded this initiative 
establishing 184 such committees by 1971 , 43 there was no 
increase in their authority. Most noticeably, they were given 
no control over curricular issues and thus, as the Minister, 
Jean Chretien, noted in 1972, parents "remained on the fringe, 
powerless to influence policy ... helpless witnesses to the 
failure of their children."44 Parents and through them the 
"influence of the wigwam" were still officially marginalized. 
That issue, however, - the status of Aboriginal culture within 
the educational system 
- was certainly less clear than had 
been the case with the original vision in which unquestionably 
it had been given no quarter, whatsoever. Parliament seemed to 
295 

put some space between itself and that implacable past by-
quiet ly dropping the anti-potlatch and sun dance sections from 
the 1951 Indian Act and granting the federal vote to status 
Indians in 1960. Departmental and church correspondence too 
reflected what seemed to be a more circumspect approach to the 
issue. The word "savage" was no longer in evidence. A Joint 
Delegation 
of protestant 
churches 
in 
1951 
lobbied 
the 
Minister, W.E. Harris, for a "Special Indian Curriculum." It 
had been pointed out frequently, the Delegation asserted 
that in the field of education the peculiar and 
characteristic background of the Indian militates 
against 
uniformity 
of 
curriculum 
or 
academic 
standard at the primary level. There is therefore 
need 
for the development 
of a special 
Indian 
curriculum of studies for primary grades.45 
Various school inspectors, Warkentin most notably, had taken 
the same line when calling for curricular reform. 
The Department was not far behind in assuming the stance that 
citizenship and aboriginality were not mutually exclusive. In 
1956, Col. Jones, told that year's Regional 
Inspectors' 
Conference that integration and community economic development 
would enable "the Indian ... to take his place as an Indian 
with other citizens of the country."46 It would be "Indian ... 
individuals and communities", R.F. Davey forecast in 1963, 
that became "members of the Canadian Federation."47 
There was, however, very little substance to this discourse, 
no thoughtful consideration of what "Indian" meant or the 
implications of that across the face of Departmental policy. 
Certainly there was little in the way of framing educational 
reforms to facilitate the movement of Aboriginal people as 
Aboriginal people into the federation. Responding perhaps to 
Warkentin's persistence throughout the late 1940s and into the 
1950s, there was a recognition of the pedagogical value of a 
more culturally sensitive curriculum. A "national survey" was 
undertaken "to identify textbooks that the Indian people 
considered offensive and steps were taken to remove these 
books from the schools" operated by the Department and the 
Provinces. 
Research 
was 
commissioned 
from 
a number 
of 
universities 
to 
address 
"the 
absence 
from 
the 
school 
curriculum of an Indian cultural component."48 None of it was 
of the scope, however, that would ever have met Warkentin's 
suggestion that a comprehensive "curriculum specially aimed at 
the instruction of Indian children should be drawn up"49 and 
none of it found its way into the classrooms of residential 
schools. 
The Department did receive one rather special warning about 
the Saskatchewan curriculum. In 1948, Neary, in a confidential 
296 

memo, informed the Director that he had had a visit from Mr,. 
Davis and Mr. Humphries from Prince Albert, delegates to the 
recent Liberal convention. They 
viewed with alarm certain educational policies of 
the present C.C.F. government.... It was their 
feeling that there had been a tendency to introduce 
socialist doctrines, particularly in the teaching 
of Social Studies in Grade IX.... They were aware 
of 
the 
recommendations 
of 
the 
Parliamentary 
Commmittee with regard to the cooperation with the 
Provinces in the matter of Indian education. 
Neary was not willing to dismiss this out of hand. He 
requested "that a firm direction be given to me by our 
Minister's office."50 
Overall, the Department in re-organizing its educational 
system was, besides it financial preoccupation, focused on 
pedagogical benefit not cultural preservation. In reality, if 
not in rhetoric, those two goals were as sharply antithetical 
as they always had been. Indeed, rather than mitigating the 
corrosive impact of education on the culture of the children, 
the integration-day 
school policy, 
even though 
children 
maintained 
contact 
with 
their 
families, 
may well 
have 
increased 
it. That was unquestionably the case for the 
thousands of children after the war who were consigned to the 
residential schools. In this, language training was the key. 
Again, as with the original vision, the question of language 
was the essential template on which the shape and character of 
the pedagogy 
and curriculum were cut. With regards 
to 
integration, the Department realized that "the most formidable 
handicap that faces the Indian child entering [the provincial] 
school" was the requirement of being able to function in the 
English language or in French in Quebec. To that end, it laid 
the greatest emphasis on the development of a "language arts"51 
programme for day and residential 
schools and employed 
regional language supervisors who were to help the children 
"overcome any language difficulties"52 in the belief that "much 
of the progress in Indian education" was to be realized by 
these "improved methods of language instruction."53 
The Branch Director, H. Jones, was quite explicit about the 
cultural role of language training: 
Basically, our educational policy is to assist the 
process of acculturaltion in which the Indian has 
voluntarily or involuntarily been caught up. Even 
in the most remote areas the lives of the Indians 
are influenced, and possibly dominated, by Canadian 
culture and the technological advances of our time. 
297 

Education was, 
in his mind, the most positive way for 
Aboriginal people to deal with the dominant influence of 
Canadian 
culture. And, 
"To benefit by such 
educational 
services the Indian child needs a sound education in the 
English language and a great deal of encouragement."54 A 
circular bringing these sentiments before all teachers in 
Departmental day and residential schools, in 1962 instructed 
them to devote an additional half-hour each day to language 
training.55 Such additional instruction Davey explained was 
needed "in order to prepare Indian pupils for the transfer to 
non-Indian or provincial schools."56 
As well, the Department moved, in the late 1950s, to introduce 
kindergarten classes in Indian day schools on the basis that 
such a development would "greatly improve the chances of 
Indian children to acquire a good education on terms equal 
with that of non-Indian children." The rational was centred in 
language training. "Earlier school entrance" for children 
would 
ensure a full year of oral English or French, 
socializing and developmental training that will 
prepare the child for admission to Indian and non-
Indian schools and offset the results of lack of 
home training.57 
It is not necessary, however, to infer from such program 
initiatives that the narrowly assimilative past was still very 
much in control of chalk and blackboard. The Department was 
well aware of the fact that integration brought no real change 
to the educational experience of Indian children. In 1972, 
when Jean Chretien appeared before the Council of Ministers of 
Education and reviewed the state of Aboriginal education he 
admitted that it continued to be "a whitewash ... a process to 
equip him [the Aboriginal student] with white values, goals, 
language, skills needed to succeed in the dominant society." 
There had been "very little recognition of the importance of 
cultural heritage in the learning process." Children had "had 
to endure a cookie-cutter education from well-intentioned 
teachers, who were determined to turn out functional and 
identical Canadians." 
Respect for Aboriginal culture was still a thing of the 
future. 
The 
Department's 
education 
program, 
Chretien 
continued, would have to "be revised to recognize the unique 
contribution which Indian culture and language have made to 
the Canadian way of life . . . [to] protect and foster the 
Indian identity and the personal dignity of each child." As 
the 
residential 
schools 
had 
and 
continued 
to do, 
the 
integrated school "of the whitewash variety ... can serve no 
purpose in a child's world.... Rather it alienates him from 
his own people."58 
298 

In terms of the history of the residential school system, the 
significance of the introduction of the integration policy was 
not primarily the retention of the assimilative thrust of the 
Department's education strategy. Integration was to be, as the 
joint committee and the Department intended, the beginning of 
the end. It meant, in the first stage, the repositioning the 
residential school system. From being the main instrument of 
that assimilative strategy, it became, as the Department 
described it, "a supplementary service" for children "who for 
very special reasons, cannot commute to federal day schools or 
provincial schools from their homes." The new organizing 
principle of the policy was "that in educational services, 
everything possible will be done to enable families to stay 
together, so children will not have to be separated from their 
parents needlessly."59 
The educational system could not, of course, be remodelled 
overnight to conform to this new dictum. The Department's 
euphoria on learning of the joint committee's recommendation 
was immediately tempered by the realization "that there has to 
be residential schools"60 in what would be, necessarily, the 
long transition to a new system. The integration timetable 
would be determined more by local circumstances than by the 
will of the Department - by the need to develop a supportive 
infrastructure: rural and reserve roads that allowed the 
busing of children to central day schools, the construction of 
schools close to communities and the negotiation of local 
school board and provincial agreements which in turn were 
predicated on the identification of boards "sympathetic to our 
Indian people." Davey's 1956 summary of the process gives some 
idea of how complicated and thus drawn out integration would 
be: 
Starting with children who have had some schooling 
on the reserve and who are physically able to stand 
the bus ride to the public school, we enlist the 
interest of the public school in these children, we 
watch 
the 
experiment 
closely 
exploiting 
our 
successes and meeting problems as they arise and 
year by year we expand our integrated programme by 
sending more children to public school and reducing 
the grade enrolment at the Indian day school, by 
building roads on the reserve to improve the bus 
route, and by educating Band Council members to the 
benefit of the integrated programme.61 
Departmental determination would not be dampened by those many 
difficulties. 
Immediately, 
in 
the 
wake 
of 
the 
joint 
committee's recommendation "a drive was started to secure the 
admission of as many 
Indians to non-Indian 
schools 
as 
possible."62 This occasioned a round of Departmental expansion 
and re-organization. The integration effort was placed in the 
299 

hands of a cadre of newly appointed Regional School Inspectors 
who, under Davey's supervision for much of this period, made 
the "concerted effort ... to work out a joint educational 
programme" with local school board and provincial officials."63 
Initially, arrangements were made by the Department directly 
with local school boards. The first agreement, in 1949, 
provided spaces for children from the South Indian Lake Band 
in Manitoba.64 By 1952 there were 14 more completed65 and on 
the basis of that experience a set of procedures were drawn up 
for the "Negotiation of Integrated School Programs and Joint 
Agreements." 
These 
set out how to sell 
integration 
by 
stressing the "economic advantages to the school board" and 
the "cultural advantages to both sides of such a program."66 
Many boards found this "sell" attractive. B. Neary, the 
superintendent of education, characterized their cooperation 
as an indication that board members were conscious of "their 
duty as Canadians to assist in the assimilation of the Indian 
population.1167 It is likely that there existed as well less 
altruistic motives. Boards found that integration spoke to 
their self-interests, in particular to the challenge they 
faced in providing spaces for the increasing post-war non-
Aboriginal student population. The Department was prepared not 
only to pay tuition for Aboriginal students but to contribute 
through a capital cost subsidy to the construction of wholly 
new joint schools or the expansion of existing provincial 
schools.68 Through joint school agreements, spaces could be 
made for non-Aboriginal and Aboriginal students with less 
recourse to the mill rate than would be the case if the board 
proceeded on its own.69 
Joint schools were favoured by the Department, as well, and 
again the major consideration was budgetary. In 1950, the 
government raised the financial red flag. Expenditures had to 
be restrained "in light of defense requirements"70 - the Korean 
War - and they remained restricted through the austerity 
budgets of the Diefenbaker government in the late 1950s. In 
these not unfamiliar circumstances, the Department found that 
it was more economic to share in the cost of provincial 
classrooms than to build and operate separate Departmental 
ones. Rather than impeding progress towards integration, 
budget limitations actually accelerated it. It was ironic, 
Col. Jones noted in 1963, that cut backs have "resulted in an 
unprecedented expansion of the integration program."71 
Not surprisingly, the joint school programme option, given its 
financial utility, became the most popular approach. Indeed, 
in a summary review of progress to 1961, the Department 
reported that integration "has been extended largely through 
the construction of joint schools." There had been 128 
contracts signed by that date, 84 of them since 19 5 7 . 72 In the 
300 

next 15 years that number grew to 550.73 
The proportion 
of 
students 
in provincial 
schools 
rose 
impressively, as well. In 1947, the Department estimated that 
there were some 137 children in provincial classrooms.74 By 
1961 there were 10,822 equalling 25 per cent of "the Indian 
school population" with that "number increasing annually"75 
reaching "40 per cent"76 by 1963. The consequence of such 
momentum was a dramatic change in the management of the 
integration program. Provincial governments became directly 
involved. 
In the early stages of the programme, "when there were only a 
few Indians in each school, the provincial governments paid 
little attention to it." As it expanded "and as the movement 
began 
to 
attract 
more 
public 
attention," 
Provincial 
politicians "began to see the significance of the contracts 
that were being negotiated between the local school officials 
and the Indian Affairs Branch" and to take an active interest 
in integration. And the contracts did have considerable 
"significance." Through them change was being instituted in an 
area of undoubted provincial jurisdiction, education, from the 
bottom up and with little consultation with 
Provincial 
ministries of education.77 
Early in the 1960s, the Department moved to take advantage of 
provincial interest through "the creation of an overall 
agreement respecting the education of Indian children in the 
public schools"78 which "would permit the province to accept 
the responsibility of the integration program in return for 
certain financial guarantees from the Federal government."79 
Preliminary talks with provincial ministers of education led 
to an agreement in principle on integration at a Federal-
Provincial Conference on Indian Affairs in 1965 followed by 
negotiations "with all provincial governments for general 
agreements outlining the terms under which Indian children may 
be accepted in provincial schools." In 1968, when Davey 
reviewed the 20-year history of integration and the current 
state of the Department's education system, contracts had been 
signed with British Columbia, Manitoba and New Brunswick and 
were "under active consideration by provincial governments in 
Alberta, Saskatchewan, Ontario and Nova Scotia." Additionally, 
"all field officials in the Education Branch" . . . [were] 
engaged in an active program to transfer educational services 
to the provincial jurisdiction with the cooperation of Indian 
parents.1,80 
These 
agreements 
make 
it 
clear 
that 
the 
Department's 
educational policy was 
in the vanguard 
of the Liberal 
government's general approach to Indian Affairs. In the White 
Paper of 1969, P.E. Trudeau's cabinet reasoned that the final 
solution to the economic and social problems that beset so 
301 

many communities could only be achieved by the immediate 
across the board integration of communities into the whole 
range of provincial services and the concomitant parting of 
the ways between the Federal government and Indian First 
Nations - a parting to be signalled by the repeal of the 
Indian Act and the search for means by which treaties "can be 
equitably ended."81 
The education agreements modelled just 
such a jurisdictional transfer. The agreements, a confidential 
Departmental memorandum explained, would allow "the Department 
to 
relinquish 
the 
responsibility 
of 
actively 
providing 
educational services to Indians."82 
How complete a relinquishment of responsibility was intended 
is set out in the agreements themselves. The Saskatchewan 
agreement, executed in 1969, can stand for the others. By its 
terms the province would have complete control not only of the 
"schools in which Indian children are enrolled" and of "the 
employment and supervision of teaching personnel" but of "all 
matters relating to the curriculum, methods of instruction and 
materials used for instruction in such schools." The federal 
government was pledged to meet the costs of all Indian 
children enrolled "in kindergarten to grade 12 inclusive." 
Provision was made for the continuation of the joint school 
program. Additionally, the agreements made it possible for 
provinces and local boards "to assume the administration, 
operation and maintenance of a school building owned by 
Canada"83 - namely existing Departmental day schools. 
Parents and communities were also to be integrated. All the 
provinces 
were 
asked 
to 
"broaden 
the 
terms 
of 
school 
legislation to give Indian communities representation on 
public school boards." By 1968, Ontario, British Columbia, New 
Brunswick and Saskatchewan had amended their legislation not 
only to permit such representation but to make "provision for 
the establishment 
of provincial 
school units on 
Indian 
reserves.1184 
These agreements and legislative enactments mark the high 
point in the development of the process of integration. In the 
two decades following the joint committee's recommendation, 
many children had been moved into Provincial classrooms. As 
well, as Davey observed in his 1968 review, there had been "a 
profound effect upon the operation of residential schools." 
Profound as it may have been, that effect, in terms of the 
character of individual schools and, more particularly, the 
rate at which the Department was able to proceed to its goal 
of shutting down the residential school system was extremely 
variable and complex owing to the fact that "each region ... 
[had] its own special features and problems imposed by 
geography, human relations and the economy of the region." The 
result was that at any point in time, the system comprised a 
spectrum of different sorts of residential schools from those 
302 

which due to community isolation remained classic residential 
schools, to those which combined "residential and day school 
with a preponderance of day students," to those which became 
hostels or student residences for children who were brought in 
from distant communities and went daily to provincial schools. 
There were even some that 
combined 
hostel, 
residential 
and 
day 
school, 
providing boarding facilities only for those pupils 
attending a nearby provincial 
school, 
boarding 
facilities and classroom instruction for others and 
classroom instruction only for day pupils.85 
And, of course, schools whose enrolment was undercut by 
integration were closed with the buildings normally, though 
not always, being "turned over to Crown Assets for disposal."86 
The process of transforming the system into a "supplementary 
service" as the first stage in its eventual closure and the 
history of each school in that process is much too involved to 
detail. But it is possible, with examples, to give a general 
sense of how it worked. 
Ideally, the process leading to the closure of a residential 
school could be straight forward. As students were integrated 
from their homes into a local Provincial day school, or 
failing that into a local Departmental school which would 
eventually 
become 
part 
of 
the 
provincial 
system, 
the 
residential school which had served those children became 
obsolete. That direct and simple chain of events was the case, 
for example, at the Jesuit-run Spanish school in Ontario. In 
1965, the director of education recalled the steps that had 
brought about its closure. 
Because of our acceleration of the Day School 
building programs 
. . . and the development of a 
transportation 
system which enables us to bus 
children to nearby schools rather than to enrol 
them in Spanish because of a lack of facilities 
near their home, the need for the facilities at 
Spanish have, since 1945, gradually diminished.87 
The story was the same in Manitoba. Throughout the 1960s the 
enrolments at Birtle school declined until its September 1970 
intake was but five students and it was decided to place the 
"few students requiring accommodation ... in private homes or 
in another residence" rather than reopening the school.88 
Birtle was not the only closure in the province that year. The 
Regional Superintendent, J. Slobodzian, informed a Manitoba 
M.P., the Hon. Walter Dinsdale, that 
as a result of construction of school facilities on 
303 

reserves and in adjacent provincial areas, many-
students were discharged from residence to attend 
day 
school 
in 
their 
local 
communities. 
This 
decrease was so great that it was possible to close 
residences at Pine Creek and Cross Lake and will 
result 
in the closing of Sandy Bay and Fort 
Alexander at the end of June 1970.89 
In most instances, however, the process was much more involved 
combining a number of intermediate steps that prolonged the 
utility 
and thus the life of the residential school. While 
schools might lose their traditional source of students, those 
from communities relatively close by, the vacancies could be 
filled with students brought in from remote and distant 
locations who had not previously been the target of the 
Department's educational design and where integration or 
Departmental day schooling was not yet a possibility because 
of the lack of non-Aboriginal settlement or transportation 
facilities or because families still spent their time on the 
land with no permanent village where a day school could be 
sited. These children would be taken to a residential school 
where they would board and receive instruction or, preferably, 
would be transported each day to nearby schools.90 
Shingwauk and Mohawk schools are examples of that more complex 
and more common nation-wide scenario. Originally, the Mohawk 
Institute, located close to Brantford, had operated "solely 
for the purposes of the Six Nations Indian people." With the 
integration of children from that community, its student body 
changed. By 1965, it had "only approximately 15 from that 
agency and over one hundred from the Province of Quebec." Four 
years later, "due to the construction of day schools in 
isolated communities" in Quebec and northern Ontario, its 
enrolment plummeted and as a consequence it experienced such 
"an exceptionally high per pupil cost" the "decision was taken 
to close out the operation."91 Of the remaining students, 60 
were to be returned to the North "where classrooms will be 
made available, thus permitting them to live with their 
parents" and 12 would return to Quebec "where classroom 
accommodation has been located." The school buildings were to 
be "turned over to the Band." 
As a sign of how the educational world had changed, the 
Department walked away from Mohawk, one of the oldest schools 
in the system, without the least regret. G.D. Cromb, the 
director of the education branch, left a note on the Mohawk 
file: 
It is the firm opinion of this Department that the 
children will receive better care in their own 
homes under the guidance of their parents than they 
would in residence.92 
304 

Administratively, residential schools which had been held 
separate not only from each other but from existing day 
schools, managed in "isolation and independence" was how Davey 
described it, became "an integral part of our school system" 
in the post-war period. Schools were to be an element of the 
larger administrative region, their enrolments no longer in 
the 
hands 
of 
recruiting 
Principals 
but 
in 
those 
of 
Departmental regional superintendents who were "to ensure that 
the residential school accommodation is utilized in the most 
efficient manner" by coordinating "all proposals involving 
residential schools" with "local school boards, principals, 
provincial school superintendents, etc."93 To that end, they 
had in their hands a new recruitment 
tool, the Family 
Allowance, which certainly was an advance on those pre-war 
techniques that had been employed by Principals - gentle 
reason, threats and bribery. 
The Family Allowance, introduced in 1935 (though not directed 
to Indians until 1945) was a monthly income supplement issued 
to parents by the Federal government on various conditions 
including compliance with Provincial education regulations. 
The Department was quick to appreciate its potential for 
"encouraging Indian parents to send their children to school 
regularly" 
given 
that 
it would 
represent 
an 
important 
supplement for Aboriginal families. It, in fact, recognized 
and exploited the family's vulnerability. Local staff were 
reminded in 1947 that failure to attend meant that the 
Department 
could 
suspend 
the allowance. 
If the parents 
subsequently 
cooperated, 
the 
Agents 
were 
directed 
to 
"recommend reinstatement of Allowances IMMEDIATELY ... as a 
recognition of satisfactory school attendance."94 That, too, 
would be a valuable lesson. 
The effectiveness of this tool, either as a carrot or stick, 
including the extent to which local officials wanted to use it 
and did so, is difficult to determine without specific, 
extensive research. As was the case with so many of the 
regulations that governed the operation of the schools, there 
seems to have been no golden mean. Some field staff "were 
reluctant to cut off Family Allowance because this would only 
result in an increase in relief costs" which would fall then 
on the Department's budget. Davey, himself, thought the best 
approach to parents whose children were not at school was "to 
explain to the parents the importance of regular attendance." 
In his opinion officials should resort to suspension of the 
Allowance only "in particularly stubborn cases."95 Others 
certainly used it as a threat to force reluctant parents to 
send children to a residential school.96 And many parents did 
have their Allowance discontinued.97 
No matter what tools regional superintendents used, each 
residential school was to be tailored by them to evolving 
305 

regional requirements until integration provided day places 
for all students. As early as 1950, and officially by 1956, 
arrangements were made with the Sault Ste. Marie school board 
to integrate, through Shingwauk residential school, pupils in 
grades four, five and six. Eventually, a joint school was 
constructed 
and 
by 
1961, 
125 Aboriginal 
students 
were 
attending it. As well, through the intervention of Davey and 
others, Shingwauk took on "a larger role ... as a hostel for 
high school pupils."98 High school, and grammar school children 
too, were brought in from Sioux Lookout and Moose Fort 
Residential Schools and when the Shingwauk's capacity was 
overreached, students were placed in local private homes or 
"were transferred to homes in North Bay where they continue 
their 
[high 
school] 
courses."99 
Indeed, 
the 
Department 
developed 
a 
boarding 
program 
quite 
separate 
from 
the 
residential schools which involved the placement of students 
"in carefully selected homes."100 This was a popular initiative 
in the Department because it was of all alternatives the most 
economic method of educating children who could not be 
integrated.101 By 1969 when there were 7,704 children in 
residential schools there were an additional 4,000 students in 
the boarding program.102 
The Shingwauk operation was further coordinated with Sioux 
Lookout. In 1959 "an interlocking system" between the two 
schools was "established whereby primary school children will 
be admitted to the Sioux Lookout School, which means that this 
school will specialize in Grades I, II and III and children 
from Grade IV up will be admitted to the Shingwauk School and 
will receive their classroom instruction at the Ste. Marie 
[joint] school." The Department was particularly pleased with 
such arrangements which had not only, in its opinion, "greatly 
improved educational services . . . provided for Protestant 
children living in Northern Ontario...." and, indeed, for 
children from as far away as the James Bay communities of 
Waswanipi and Mistassini, but for which the "cost to the 
Government has been relatively small when we consider that one 
hundred and twenty pupils are involved."103 
Throughout 
the 
educational 
system 
similarly 
economic 
arrangements 
were 
made 
linking 
a 
number 
of 
existing 
residential schools to each other and to joint schools in 
urban centres. To those who championed integration, and not 
everyone 
did, 
these 
arrangements 
did 
much 
"by 
[the] 
intermingling of the races socially in the Public schools and 
in community sport ... to accelerate the assimilation of the 
Indian people and to contribute to their acceptance in 
business and society by the "whites' on an equal basis."104 
There was another, 
less esoteric, 
benefit 
of 
immediate 
interest 
to 
the 
Department. 
Inter-school 
coordination 
contributed greatly to moving the overall system closer to 
final closure. By "consolidating present and future enrolments 
306 

in such a way as to ensure maximum utilization of student 
residences" the "phasing out" of some institutions could be 
realized.105 The closure, for example, of Cross Lake, Pine 
Creek, Sandy Bay and Fort Alexander was made possible in part 
by the fact that the Department utilized Brandon Residence 
"for those students from the closed residences and those 
requiring institutional care."106 
Regional coordination to serve integration and the old goal of 
assimilation 
did not preclude 
the commissioning of new 
residential schools and thus the system grew marginally on the 
way to becoming obsolete. In the late 1950s, the Department 
acquired and renovated, in association with the Catholic 
church, 
the 
Veterans 
Home 
in 
Winnipeg 
christening 
it 
Assiniboia school. This, it was calculated, was more economic 
than repairing 
two other 
schools, 
Pine Falls and 
Fort 
Alexander, 
which were 
in 
"a deplorable condition." 
The 
strategy had more to do with integration, however. According 
to the plan developed by the Department, students of high 
school age were to be taken from those schools and from 
residential schools at The Pas and Camperville, boarded at 
Assiniboia and placed in Winnipeg schools.107 This initiative, 
accompanied by the expansion of the day school program, was to 
allow, in due course, the closure of all of those old 
residential schools.108 
Wholly new schools were also constructed as the Department 
moved after the war to extend educational services to "Indians 
living in areas which are on the "fringe of civilization' . "109 
But these too fell under the shadow of integration. When, for 
example, it was determined in 1956 that there was a need for 
a school in the Abitibi agency in Quebec its placement was to 
be determined principally by "the availability of a provincial 
school of the kind required which could offer courses of a 
technical nature for the older Indian boys and girls." As so 
many local politicians had done throughout the history of the 
residential school system, the Cochrane mayor lobbied for this 
potential "asset to our community." La Tuque was not far 
behind. The town clerk let the minister know that the council 
looked forward to building such a structure as "work would 
favour a good number of our jobless people and partly relieve 
local unemployment." Eventually, La Tuque was chosen because 
the site selection committee "was influenced considerably by 
what appeared to be good opportunities for integration." Even 
the design of the new school reflected the 
integration 
priority. 
Both 
the 
Anglican 
church's 
Indian 
School 
Administration, which was to manage the school, and the 
Department agreed that the major consideration in planning the 
school was to have "as many pupils as possible being taught in 
local community classrooms."110 
On balance Shingwauk and Mohawk were more representative of 
307 

the history of the system in this period than Spanish or 
Birtle. The Department found it could rarely achieve the 
direct and immediate closure of a residential school by day 
school integration and thus the "tendency" the Department 
actively "fostered" was the transformation of residential 
schools from educational institutions to "more and more 
boarding places,"111 hostels as at La Tuque. In 1968, that 
evolving transformation was given formal expression in the re-
organization of the management structure of the residential 
system. As of 1 August, 1968 the schools were to be called 
student residences rather than residential schools and as of 
l September of the same year 
"a policy of a separate 
administration for residences and classrooms" at the schools 
which still combined both functions was introduced with "all 
matters 
concerning 
classroom 
teaching 
and 
school 
room 
discipline 
... under the authority of the 
[Department's] 
District 
School Superintendent" 
and the school's 
senior 
teacher who became Principal. The Residence was to be managed 
by an "Administrator ... responsible for all aspects of the 
child care program when the child is not in the classroom or 
is not engaging in after-school activities directed by the 
Principal.11112 
These administrative changes certainly reflected what Davey in 
his 1968 review had characterized as the "profound effect"113 
of integration on the residential school system. But he meant 
more than that. The Department had also managed to reduce the 
stock of schools despite the tortured administrative path it 
had to follow in tailoring the old schools to new and 
regionally variable educational requirements. Indeed, by 1965 
when the number of schools in operation had been reduced to 66 
there was considerable confidence that the task might be 
completed soon. "We hope," the director of the branch told the 
assistant deputy minister, "that most, if not all, of these 
schools will be closed in the foreseeable future."114 In the 
next four years with the closure of a dozen more schools his 
prediction seemed well on the way to being realized. 
But accounts of the system by Davey in 1968 and 1969 indicated 
that overall since the war closures had not kept pace with the 
rate of integration. In 1948, 60 per cent of the Indian school 
population was enrolled in residential schools. In 1969, 60 
per cent were in provincial schools.115 But the number of 
residential schools and hostels had only been reduced in those 
two decades from the 72 schools that were operating in 1948 
with 9,368 students to 52 schools with 7,704 students. That 
the 
number 
of 
schools 
and 
students 
had 
not 
fallen 
proportionately was due not only to those difficult regional 
circumstances but to two further considerations with which the 
Department had had to contend - opposition to closures, 
mainly, though not exclusively, from the Catholic church and 
the emergence of a new role for the schools, that of social 
308 

welfare institutions. 
In the years after the war, the "primary role" of many 
residential 
schools 
changed 
"from 
one 
of 
providing 
opportunities for academic learning to that of a child caring 
institution.11116 This constituted a serious and stubbornly 
persistent impediment in the Department's education strategy, 
a bottle-neck in the process of reducing enrolments towards 
closure. Senior officials recognized that some parents would 
not be able to "assume the responsibility for the care of 
their children" upon which the integration/closure policy 
depended because of "such things as alcoholism in the home, 
lack 
of 
supervision, 
[and] 
serious 
immaturity"117 
Their 
children would continue to need Departmental supervision of 
some kind. And there were, in the Department's estimation, 
many 
such 
children 
"whose 
family 
situations 
were 
precarious.1,118 
The development 
of a dominant 
welfare 
function in the 
residential school system was not a completely unforseen 
implication of the new integration policy. Hoey had warned the 
Reconstruction and Re-Establishment Committee in 1943 that 
there would continue to be a need for residential places for 
"orphans and 
children 
from disrupted 
homes."119 And 
the 
Department 
realized, 
after 
the 
joint 
committees' 
recommendation was published in 1948, that some schools would 
have 
to be maintained 
not 
only 
for 
"orphans and part 
orphans"120 but for children "who come from homes in which 
competent welfare workers decide that institutional care is 
needed."121 Indeed, as available residential school places were 
reduced through integration, such children were to be given, 
the Department directed in 1954, "first priority in admission 
to residential schools."122 "Neglected children," "orphans for 
whom foster homes could not be found" and "children from 
broken homes" were all given preference in advance even of 
candidates for integration.123 
In order to reflect that preference and at the same time in an 
attempt to control and reduce residential school enrolments, 
the Department, 
beginning 
in 
1959, 
developed 
admission 
regulations "based upon the circumstances of the student's 
family."124 
In the most well-developed version, that of 1969, 
local officials were to assign school-age-children to one of 
six categories. Those in Categories l and 2 were normally to 
be prevented from gaining admission to student residences as 
they could be integrated with moderate effort. Children in the 
other four categories, from those with "a health problem that 
is controllable within a residential setting"(Category 4), to 
others for whom "suitable boarding homes are not available" 
immediately (Category 6) could be given admission but only 
those in Category 3 had an unquestionable priority. These were 
"students from a family where a serious problem leading to 
309 

neglect of children exists .11 
Neglect was, 
of course, measured against 
non-Aboriginal 
concepts. Officially, it was to be "understood as defined in 
the provincial statute of the province in which the family 
resides." In general, however, Category 3 children "would 
include children who were abandoned or orphaned and there are 
no 
immediate 
relatives 
willing 
or 
able 
to 
provide 
guardianship" and children whose home circumstances gave 
"evidence that serious neglect is occurring."125 Such "neglect" 
had to be described briefly on the child's "Application for 
Admission to Residential 
School" to justify his or her 
placement in a school. 
Batches of application forms, many thousands of them stored in 
the Department in Ottawa, paint child by child, miniature 
portraits of families in crisis - the result, ironically, of 
generations of congenital Departmental neglect of Aboriginal 
communities and, probably in many instances, of the impact of 
residential schools on children who now as parents were 
represented by Departmental officials as unable to cope -
unfit parents who deserved to have their children sent off to 
residential school where the tragic cycle of official neglect 
and abuse would begin again with a new generation. 
Both parents excessive drinkers - now separated. 
Child kept by grandmother who is 64 years of age 
and finds she can no longer care for this child. 
Father shiftless - parents drink excessively and 
child would not attend Prov. school regularly. 
Three other children now in Residential school. 
Unmarried mother - very poor home conditions. Two 
other children now in Residential School. 
Mr. and Mrs ... have difficulty getting along with 
each other. The mother took off several times last 
winter and the children were either left on their 
own or taken by relatives. This confusion upsets 
the children considerably. 
Very large family, father in jail, mother unable to 
support children. Very poor home. 
Mrs. 
... 
has 
a 
chronic 
heart 
condition, 
is 
separated from her husband on recommendation of 
Children's Aid Society because of abuse. She is not 
physically able to look after this child properly. 
Mother is mentally incompetent & living with [a 
310 

man] who is also of the same calibre. 
[He] is 
constantly beating [the child]. This child is quite 
bright and I strongly recommend [admission]. 
The mother and two older children were killed in a 
house fire last spring. The father is unable to 
care for these children due to ill health. They are 
staying with relatives as their home was completely 
demolished. 
Mother deserted children. Living common law with 
another man. Children were being housed 
in a 
station wagon, but were recently living with a 
large family 
at .... Father does a great deal of 
drinking, and the result of the above I consider 
this an urgent case. 
[The mother], unmarried, has four children. She 
lives with her parents ... along with some of her 
unmarried 
sisters 
and 
their 
children, 
and 
consequently this home is very crowded - 18 to 22 
people at times. Recommend admission.126 
As suggested by this last description, there were reasons 
other than neglect for children ending up in the schools. 
There were economic ones, the result of unemployment, a 
general lack of opportunity and access to resources, marking 
the poverty of families which undercut only the material 
quality of care they afforded their children. In 1965, the 
Superintendent of the Blood Indian Agency, J. R. Tully, laid 
out such difficult facts of community life and the implication 
of them for Departmental policy: 
If we are going to do an adequate job of reducing 
Residential 
School enrolment, 
we will have to 
provide welfare assistance to many families who 
would otherwise have their children in Residential 
School. The main reason for the majority of younger 
children being 
in Residential 
Schools here is 
because 
their 
parents 
just 
cannot 
afford 
to 
properly feed and clothe them for part of the 
school year. There are months of the year when 
these families can adequately provide for their 
children, but because, for instance, four months 
out of the ten they cannot adequately provide for 
them, we place them in Residential School for the 
full ten months of the year. This does not, in my 
opinion, make for good administration. Yet, from 
the practical point of view, it is the only way 
that we can ensure that the children can be assured 
of an education. If they were attending school from 
311 

home with no welfare assistance, they would be 
underfed and poorly clothed and as a result, this 
would have an adverse effect on their education. 
His final comment was applicable to many families across the 
country. "The way matters now stand, large families in the low 
income bracket ... are discriminated against because there is 
no alternative but Residential Schools for them...."127 
This was old news to some in the Department. G.H. Gooderham, 
Alberta regional supervisor of Indian agencies, had understood 
all along that integration was imperilled by the poverty of 
parents and this necessitated intervention by the Department. 
In 1954, he warned the birector of the branch that 
It is not easy for parents who have relied entirely 
on the residential school to clothe and feed their 
children 
for 
ten 
months, 
to 
take 
over 
this 
responsibility.... The Family Allowance helps but 
it does not, and is not intended to, replace the 
relief provided by the residential school. They do 
need some added assistance during this transition 
period .... Inasmuch as the success of our efforts 
to 
implement 
day 
school 
attendance, 
thereby 
strengthening the home and encouraging parental 
responsibility, is dependent on the ability of the 
Indian to meet this new situation, I would urge 
that we give them all the support we can.128 
Gooderham and Tully may well have been in the minority. 
Ordinarily, the Department saw the need for welfare and 
residential placement not as a problem of economics but one of 
parental shortcomings. Indeed, there seems to have been a 
feeling that neglect escalated in the post-war years even as 
economic conditions supposedly improved. N.J. McLeod, the 
Department's 
regional 
supervisor 
in 
Saskatchewan, 
was 
confident that by 1960 progress had been made in solving 
"housing and nutrition problems" in his area through the 
extension 
of 
"increased 
welfare 
benefits." 
But 
in 
his 
estimation little advance was evident in the "social and moral 
ills of broken homes, parental indifference and negligence 
etc." which indeed "would appear to be on the upswing" 
exacerbated by a "staggering birth rate" in communities.129 
Certainly, 
in 
southern 
Canada 
where 
the 
progress 
of 
integration 
was most 
extensive, 
effectively 
redirecting 
Category 1 and 2 children into day schools, many residential 
schools became, to a degree alarming to the Department, 
catchments for these "neglected" children. Increasingly, the 
schools, the Minister, Ellen Fairclough suggested in 1962, 
were "operated essentially [for] orphans, children from broken 
homes 
and 
for 
children 
remote 
from 
day 
schools."130 
312 

Establishments 
like 
Shubenacadie 
bore 
her 
out. 
The 
Department's 
Maritime 
Regional 
Director, 
F.B. 
McKinnon, 
reported in 1967 that "practically all the children now in 
residence have been placed there mainly for reasons other than 
to facilitate school attendance." One church official said 
that the school had become "a welfare institution."131 
As was usual for the Department, there was no systematic 
tracking of this phenomenon. There was one survey completed in 
1953. It disclosed that 4,313 of the 10,112 children then in 
residential schools were either orphans or came from broken 
homes.132 In subsequent surveys of the composition of the 
residential school population, similar information was not 
collected. But some disparate figures do exist in Departmental 
files that give a sense of the magnitude of the development. 
An "Analysis of Residential Schools - British Columbia" in 
1961 calculated that fully 50 per cent of the children were 
enrolled 
"because 
home 
conditions 
have 
been 
judged 
inadequate." It further suggested that that figure was "likely 
a reasonable guide to the situation in other regions."133 Five 
years later when there were 9,778 children enrolled 
in 
residential schools a confidential report estimated that 
throughout the system 75 per cent of the children were "from 
homes which by reasons of overcrowding and parental neglect or 
indifference are considered unfit for school children."134 
McLeod's belief that "neglect" was a growing problem in his 
region, was supported by estimates from Gordon's school. In 
1960 some 50 per cent of the children were from "broken homes 
... [and] immoral conditions." By 1974, the number had risen 
to 83 per cent.135 The numbers from other schools in the region 
were also high. Muscowequan registered 64 per cent in 1974136 
and Marieval in 1975 was at 80 per cent.137 
In a significant way the character of these Saskatchewan 
schools, and others across the country, was changed. From 
educational institutions they became "a sort of foster home 
which endeavours to cater to the social and emotional needs of 
the child whose privation of a normal home's security renders 
him a Welfare problem."138 This did not result in the best 
child care situation. The Principal of one Ontario school 
confessed in 1956 that he had "qualms of conscience" over 
children from Walpole Island, who traditionally went to his 
school, being sent to Mohawk. He had been given to understand 
that Mohawk was no more than a "welfare shelter" for children 
"from broken and/or unsatisfactory homes" many of whom had 
"been in serious trouble" or had had "unhappy experiences." He 
"worried about the effect of their [the Walpole children's] 
mixing with those children, who through no fault of their own, 
are a different type." He did not want the Walpole children 
"to deteriorate 
through association with less 
fortunate 
children such as constitutes the majority at Mohawk."139 A 
decade later, the Principal at another school expressed 
313 

similar concerns. He worried about the impact of his school on 
his students many of whom "showed signs of being disturbed."140 
Throughout the system there certainly were grounds for 
concern. The schools, "normally staffed and organized to serve 
educational purposes" only, now had responsibilities thrust 
upon them for which they were not equipped. Officials in the 
Department were well aware that schools, as had reported in 
the British Columbia study, had "few resources available to 
identify the problems or to provide remedial services" for the 
"relatively 
high 
proportion 
of 
the 
residential 
school 
population 
[who] 
are 
disturbed 
children 
who 
require 
specialized attention."141 Again Shubenacadie was a particular 
example of what appears to have been the general system-wide 
case. In 1967, F.B. McKinnon, the regional director, felt that 
many children "were exhibiting serious psycho-social problems 
which require treatment" beyond the capability of the school. 
It was fitted out, he noted as "an educational facility and 
not a child caring institution." The school had "neither the 
appropriate resources nor staff to meet the needs of child 
caring problems." He was convinced that "suitable foster home 
care would be more advantageous to the children than the 
present institutionalized way of life."142 
In Ottawa, Davey was in complete agreement. It had long been 
his view that foster "home placement" was "preferable to 
institutional care for the proper development of the child."143 
In the case of Shubenacadie, and indeed for schools across the 
country, he was well disposed to the advice of the Maritime 
Indian Advisory Council that the Department must "locate good 
foster homes for those children at the school who are unable 
to return to their homes."144 This was easier said than done, 
however. In every region, 
"good foster homes for Indian 
children", 
as McLeod noted, were 
"difficult 
to secure, 
especially 
those 
which 
will 
discharge 
their 
complex 
responsibilities fully."145 
Furthermore, the existence of a 
ready placement for Category 3 children, the school itself, 
was an enticing alternative which prolonged the problem. In 
its campaign to close the Alberni Student Residence, the West 
Coast Council of Indian Chiefs charged that children in need 
of care outside their homes routinely "were dumped into 
A.S.R." by the Provincial Department of Human Resources. That 
Department, the council continued, took no "responsibility for 
foster placements where these are needed. After all, there is 
always the good old residence!" Shubenacadie too appeared to 
be a "convenient dumping ground."146 There, according to a 
senior local official, "suitable alternatives for placement 
were not pursued either before or after admissions to the 
school were recorded."147 
Provincial welfare agencies who saw in the residences "a 
resource for Indian children from the reserves in our area,1,148 
314 

and who took "the view that once a seriously neglected student 
is admitted to a residence he is no longer in need of child 
welfare services"149 
were part of the problem impeding 
residential school closure but they were also the means to a 
solution. The Department, in line with its wider assimilative 
agenda, had since the war looked to the Provinces, and indeed 
to other Federal Departments, to provide general welfare 
services to communities. In this way it could avoid both 
"exclusive welfare services for Indians which would tend to 
set Indians apart from other Canadians" and the "costly 
duplication of provincial programs." Through various Federal 
programmes, 
"social 
assistance 
in 
the 
form 
of 
Family 
Allowances, Old Age Security, Old Age Assistance, 
Blind 
Person's Allowances 
and Disability 
Pensions 
[were] paid 
Indians on the same basis as others." 
The opportunity for a connection with existing Provincial 
welfare services came initially through Section 87 of the 
Indian Act of 1951. It made provision for the general 
application of Provincial law to Indian people. This made it 
possible to extend Provincial "legislation for the protection 
of dependent, delinquent and neglected" children to Indian 
children and necessitated, in terms of enforcement, "action by 
child welfare authorities." 
The Province of Ontario was the first to respond positively to 
this opening. Following the report of a Provincial select 
committee entitled "Civil Liberties and Rights of Indians" and 
an agreement 
with the Federal Government 
in 1956, 
the 
Province, with federal funding, established child welfare 
services on reserves.150 On the basis of that arrangement, the 
Minister, Ellen Fairclough, informed the House of Commons in 
1960 that it was her intention to enter into negotiations with 
the other Provinces so as to make all Indians "eligible for 
the same range of welfare services as any other Canadians." 
Subsequently, under that aegis, the Department, in its own 
estimation at least, made "substantial progress ... in the 
child welfare field", providing all "Indian children the same 
care and protection as non-Indians ."151 
For the Department the most critical consequence of these 
arrangements in relation to the residential schools was that 
it gained an indispensable partner - provincial Children's Aid 
Societies. With their cooperation and the strict application 
by local Departmental officials of the category admission 
rules,152 the Department was equipped in the 1960s to dissolve 
the resistant residue of welfare students in the system and 
achieve the closure of schools more easily. 
There were at least two ways for the Department and the 
Children's Aid Societies to proceed. "Care and protection" 
could be provided at the source - in the home and community -
315 

allowing the child to attend a day school. Steps could be 
taken to "alleviate the situations where children are year in 
and year out being removed from their homes and the home 
situations remaining practically the same."153 There were some 
officials, even senior ones, who preferred that approach. The 
Deputy Minister, H. Robinson, when proposing in 1971 an 
increase 
in the Department's 
financial 
contribution 
to 
Manitoba under the existing Child Welfare Agreement held "that 
the expenditure of larger sums on services to strengthen 
families 
is 
more 
constructive 
than 
the 
provision 
of 
institutional care for children."154 In the main, however, 
children requiring care were referred "to a child welfare 
agency for foster home service" for adoption or, in the case 
of "incorrigible" children, for placement by "an officer of a 
correctional or welfare agency."155 
Davey, using Mohawk as his example, explained how this 
referral process effected the residential schools: 
Several years ago this unit, the Mohawk Institute, 
was filled to capacity and could not serve all the 
children who required special care. However, as a 
result 
of arrangements made with a number of 
Children's 
Aid 
Societies 
the 
needs 
of 
these 
youngsters are met almost entirely through the use 
of foster home placements. Less than half of the 
space in Mohawk Institute is required to serve 
children resident in Southern Ontario. 
Fostering was seen as a most effective method of breaking 
through the welfare bottleneck and ultimately, in tandem with 
integration, of closing schools. It had, as did the closure of 
schools themselves, the added allure of a financial reward -
freeing up funds in the overall Departmental budget that could 
be pushed 
into 
the 
day 
and 
joint 
school 
construction 
programmes. Children in foster homes, Davey believed, could 
"be cared for less expensively since the maintenance costs are 
on the average less than for residential school placement, but 
in addition the tremendous capital cost of these large 
institutions is avoided."156 Admittedly, this was not realized 
in every instance. One of Davey's successors, D.K.F. Wattie, 
noted in 1976, that "in some cases closing a residence is a 
redirection of funds to foster home care or boarding homes 
rather than a saving."157 Either way schools could be and were 
closed. 
The Department-Children's Aid Society partnership played a 
critical role in the campaign to eliminate the residential 
school system. The Societies were positioned by the Department 
to be the authoritative first contact with crisis families and 
in cases of "neglect" they were charged with placing children 
"from unstable homes ... in foster homes" thus blocking, as 
316 

far as possible, the entrance to the schools. The Department 
took a determined supporting role. In 1969, it directed that 
even the residential placement of Category 3 children was only 
to be "considered when all other avenues had failed"158 and in 
1974, it further tightened the admission regulations. From 
that point on, the fact that there were "such things as 
alcoholism 
in 
the 
home, 
lack 
of 
supervision, 
serious 
immaturity on the part of the parents" did not in themselves 
constitute "sufficient grounds for admission. These problems 
must be seen as causes of neglect."159 
The societies were called on again when integration drove a 
school's enrolment below an economic level. As institutions 
were broken up, a proportion of the children "were referred to 
Provincial Welfare."160 At the closure of Shubenacadie in 1967, 
some children, the Department determined, "can and will be 
returned 
to 
their 
homes"; 
others, 
however, 
being 
the 
"responsibility of child caring agencies" would be "placed in 
foster homes."161 In 1970, at Mohawk, in addition to the 72 
children who travelled back to their homes in Quebec and 
northern Ontario, 20 students, the Department announced, "from 
the immediate area of Brantford will be placed in foster 
homes.1,162 
In the post-war period, the residential schools became way 
stations on the road either to integration or, for children 
declared "neglected," to foster or adoptive homes. These 
latter destinations were even further removed from family and 
community and perhaps, as a fostered child was isolated even 
from other Aboriginal children, were more distant from culture 
than the old residential schools had been. Eventually, those 
schools, "no longer fulfilling the role for which [they] were 
originally intended" and no longer needed as an adjunct to 
integration, could "be entirely abandoned."163 
With the disappearance of hundreds of children into care and 
the closure of each additional school, the Department moved 
one step closer to the goal set for it by the joint committee 
in 1948. In the meantime, however, as it worked its way 
through the welfare bottle-neck, it found itself, as it was 
characterized in 1966, in 
the anomalous position of having to administer a 
group of [residential] schools which have a degree 
of independence of operation permitting them to 
pursue policies which are diametrically opposed to 
those of the Federal Government, particularly with 
respect to segregation and welfare. The tension 
created by this internal conflict is damaging to 
the Indian education program and confusing to the 
Canadian public.164 
317 

This 
problematic 
conflict 
flowed 
from 
opposition 
to 
integration - opposition that the Department had, in fact, 
anticipated from its partner in education, the churches and, 
to a lesser degree, from "some Indian associations who dislike 
working with provincial governments, and from individuals, 
both Indian and non-Indian, who, for personal reasons, wish to 
keep the federal schools open."165 There was even a suspicion 
in 
the Department 
that 
some 
churchmen 
and 
sympathetic 
officials 
were 
arranging 
the 
admission 
of 
children 
to 
residential schools from "so represented unsatisfactory homes" 
- children who in actual fact were not neglected in any sense 
- "for the sake of keeping it [a residential school] open."166 
From 
the 
inception 
of 
the 
integration 
policy, 
senior 
Departmental officials understood that they would have to deal 
with the churches and that that could be difficult. Their 
initial position did not, however, suggest the building of a 
consensus around the new policy. Rather, it appears a stand 
would have to be taken against the churches' continuing 
demands for the expansion of the residential system. In 1949, 
B. Neary, waved the flag so often run up by Martin Benson. In 
"the past the various denominations have taken the initiative 
with regard to the establishment of the residential schools 
and have pressed the Department into making decisions with 
regard to their construction." This must change, Neary advised 
D. Mackay, the director of the Indian Affairs branch. A "new 
policy should be instituted in which the department decides on 
the basis of professional surveys and reports, as to the 
necessity of erecting this type of school."167 
Neary's claim to controlling the future shape of the system 
would not, of course, be the last word on the subject. The 
churches would have their say and would make their influence 
felt in the years to come. But there would not be the 
traditional conversation in which the insistent voices of the 
churches carried the day. In the mid-1950s there was a 
noticeable change in the tenor of the relationship between the 
Department and the churches. Through the administrative and 
financial reorganization of the system in 1957, including the 
development of stricter management controls for individual 
schools,168 the Department established itself in the dominant 
position. It was able to do so for a variety of reasons. Key 
among them was the fact that the role of the churches was 
extensively undermined by Parliament's backing of integration 
which made 
Provincial 
educational 
authorities 
the 
more 
critical partner in the future of Indian education. 
After 1948, as the clock ran out on segregated residential 
education, it ran out too on the old partnership. That their 
position 
in 
Indian 
affairs 
was 
undergoing 
extensive 
transformation was readily evident to the churches. In 1959, 
the Anglican Indian School Administration, responsible for the 
318 

management of the church's residential schools, while lauding 
the Department 
for many of the recent 
developments 
in 
education, lamented the fact that 
The old 
spirit of co-operation 
of Church and 
Government working together for the good of the 
Indians [sic] children has been lost .... more and 
more, Indian Affairs Branch is beginning to control 
a greater amount of detail in school operations, 
with the result that our Principals are tending to 
become simply servants of the Government.... 
In the church's mind, the partnership was out of balance -
"the pendulum, " the brief continued, had "now swung too far in 
the opposite direction." It prayed, in conclusion, for a 
return to past practice, to the era when it had had "more 
freedom in the making of decisions as they effect individual 
schools. "169 
There was not in any of this, however, fundamental opposition 
to 
the Department's 
post-war 
integration 
strategy. 
The 
Anglican church, and the other Protestant churches for that 
matter, 
were 
relatively 
compliant. 
There 
were 
concerns 
expressed about whether the children would thrive in the 
Provincial school world.170 But it went no further than that. 
The Anglicans' 1959 brief was blunt and unequivocal. "This 
practise 
[integration] has the wholehearted 
support 
and 
approval of the Anglican Church. It aids Indian education and 
does much to educate the white pupils in tolerance."171 It was, 
a senior clergyman asserted, "a definite step forward in 
Indian education and tend[s] to the more speedy assimilation 
of the Indian into full Canadian citizenship."172 
In subsequent decades, amidst the shifting character, form and 
purpose of the residential system, Protestant authorities held 
firmly to one traditional principle only - sectarianism. They 
continued to object strenuously "to the assignment of their 
adherents to schools operated under the auspices of other than 
those 
of 
their 
own 
particular 
denomination."173 
This 
insistence, while it did not effect integration directly, 
worked 
against 
the 
Department's 
need 
to 
consolidate 
residential school populations as part of any regional closure 
strategy and thus it was a factor, if a minor one, in slowing 
progress toward the complete shut down of the residential 
system. 
Major church opposition to integration came almost exclusively 
from the Catholic church in western Canada where, as the 
Department noted, perhaps cynically, Provinces "do not provide 
for separate schools."174 Cynical or not, there was some sense 
in this analysis. In Ontario and Quebec where Catholic 
children 
could 
be 
integrated 
into 
Catholic 
day 
school 
319 

facilities, there was no campaign to block the closure of 
residential schools. It was also the case, however, in British 
Columbia where there were "no schools established for Roman 
Catholic non-Indian children which are supported by the 
Province"175 that there was also no opposition to integration. 
Instead, the church responded to this situation by entering 
into agreements with the Department for the construction of 
joint parochial schools. What heistation there was, and it was 
slight, was expressed not by the church but by a Departmental 
official in British Columbia - a worry that "the value of 
integration to our Indian children would be lessened" because 
of the likelihood that many of the non-Aboriginal students 
would be "new Canadians" recent post-war immigrants from Asia 
and eastern Europe.176 
It was an entirely different matter on the prairies where the 
Department's attempt to establish "a firm policy requiring all 
Indian students of any religion to attend Provincial schools" 
was not at all well received. The church was not helpful; "I 
can not say" R.F Battle, the Alberta regional supervisor 
reported in 1960, "that we have had their cooperation in this 
matter.1,177 
The Catholic church on its part claimed that while "the ideal 
would be an integrated educational system . .. local conditions 
would have to be carefully considered before embarking on such 
a programme at any particular locality." In the church's view, 
it was not any lack of cooperation that slowed progress in 
integration so much as it was geography and settlement 
patterns. 
A 
senior 
church 
official 
in a meeting 
with 
Departmental officials 
expressed 
the 
opinion 
that 
in 
some 
areas 
particularly where the Indians are located in areas 
close 
to non-Indian 
communities, 
it might 
be 
possible to proceed fairly rapidly with integrated 
education whereas in other areas such as are found 
in many parts of the Prairies where the Indians are 
far 
removed 
from 
non-Indian 
communities, 
the 
programme would have to be much slower.178 
Isolation might have been a consideration for the church but 
there were other, more formative, inter-related factors: the 
question of high school education and opposition in principle 
to integrated education. 
Much of this opposition was mounted by Father A. Renaud, the 
Director General of the Oblate [O.M.I.] Order. In 1958, he 
hosted a conference in Ottawa attended by senior church 
officials and by nearly all of the church's residential school 
Principals. In a subsequent report, "Residential Education for 
Indian Acculturation," Renaud argued that separate on-reserve 
320 

education in day schools or separate residential school 
education provided greater educational benefits and had 
greater "efficiency towards acculturation". 
The report's 
attempt 
to 
substantiate 
such 
a 
proposition, 
its 
characterization of the virtues and vices of integrated and 
segregated education, was nothing if not self-serving. But 
there was truth there as well: 
Integrated education was, Renaud maintained, a dangerous 
gamble, a long shot at best. Attendance at a non-Aboriginal 
school would be effective under certain conditions only. "The 
members of the "non-Indian school ... must accept the Indians 
as their equals." Teachers would have to be "acquainted with 
the Indian mentality and culture" and be prepared "to help the 
Indian student to understand himself or herself and to 
interpret for them the culture of our Canadian society." 
Moreover, the non-Aboriginal pupils "must be ready to accept 
freely their Indian school mates in their recreational and 
social activities." If such relationships did not prevail and 
if the Department did not deal with the fact that integrated 
classrooms brought into immediate and stark contrast the vast 
differences in the socio-economic circumstances of Aboriginal 
and non-Aboriginal children, assimilation would in fact be set 
back as 
. . . the Indian pupil will withdraw within himself 
and foster feelings of bitterness and hostility 
towards our Canadian society. He will adhere more 
closely to his own culture and shun those who deny 
him understanding, recognition and sympathy. In 
such a case; 
instead of favouring 
the pupils 
acculturation 
towards 
our 
Canadian 
society, 
attendance at the non-Indian school will, on the 
contrary, add to his sense of separatness. 
On-reserve day schools or residential schools, on the other 
hand, offered "advantages for the acculturation of Indians"; 
they were superior learning environments. In these schools no 
child is "a stranger or an outsider, " teachers were more 
likely "to familiarize themselves with the Indian culture and 
mentality" and thus the school would "cultivate in the minds 
and hearts of its pupils an enlightened pride in their ethnic 
decent ... essential to the resurgence of native leadership." 
Residential schools, in addition, provided 
healthier 
living 
conditions, 
more 
appropriate 
supervision, better grouping by grades and more 
vocational training possibilities than the average 
day school. It is also usually in a better position 
to offer a wider range of social and recreational 
activities including those with non-Indians through 
various recreational, athletic, social, artistic 
321 

and religious activities.179 
Laying aside for the moment the fact that residential schools 
had rarely in their long history lived up to this description, 
Renaud had put his finger on some of integration's sorer 
points - points that were known to the Department. The 
Catholic church was able to claim that "at recent meetings 
held [by the church] in the West a number of Indians had 
expressed a strong objection to sending their children to non-
Indian schools" for the very reason that their "children did 
not feel at ease among non-Indians. "180 It had ample evidence 
that such unease was rooted in the negative social and 
educational experiences of children in integrated schools. 
Those experiences, plus loyalty to the Catholic faith, would 
allow the church in western Canada to add the legitimacy of 
parental voices to its campaign against the closure of 
segregated schools. 
The Department was certainly aware of that unease and of those 
critical parental voices. It recognized that integration was 
not without Aboriginal and even non-Aboriginal critics. But it 
rarely 
responded 
to 
them 
or publicly 
acknowledged 
the 
drawbacks of integrated education. Its official position was 
that integration had "been built up and expanded ... with the 
willing cooperation and acceptance of the Indian parents." At 
the sametime it knew that it had "not been accepted in all 
quarters"181 As well, reports from integrated schools were far 
from unanimous in praise of the educational performance of 
those schools. Indeed, the Department, in the course of its 
educational planning, actually identified areas as being 
suitable or not for integration. Dauphin, Manitoba, 
for 
example, was ideal. There was "a complete absence of racial 
intolerance owing to the area's "mixed population composed of 
a large variety of ethnic groups." At Devine, a British 
Columbia milltown, Indian children were, according to the 
school Principal, "more popular with the white students than 
the Japanese, and are treated by them as equals."182 The Pas 
was at the opposite end of the spectrum; there was little 
respect across ethnic boundaries. The Department judged that 
the "atmosphere of the town ... would be detrimental to the 
integration of Indian children into the normal Canadian 
life...."183 In 1954, Davey put down the slow progress of 
integration in Kenora and in other areas to that 
historic factor that until comparatively recently 
and unfortunately still in some districts, the non-
Indian community is not prepared to accept the 
Indian children into their schools.184 
To a certain extent these characterizations were beside the 
point for the Department had reason enough to know that 
integration was not an unquestioned success in any area. Even 
322 

in places like Dauphin, life in an integrated school was a 
painful experience, one that would, as the church suggested, 
work against its assimilative intent by heightening a child's 
sense of isolation rather than facilitating acculturation. 
"The child from a poor Indian home" Davey wrote, and it is 
hard to imagine that that did not cover the vast majority of 
children, "entering an urban non-Indian school has a severe 
adjustment 
to 
make."185 
That 
adjustment 
was 
not 
only 
challenging 
in itself, 
it was hampered 
further by 
the 
consequences of a "cookie cutter" curriculum that was as 
alienating as that of the residential school and by the 
children's Indianness which to other children might seem 
synonymous with their poverty: worn clothes, poor school 
lunches and what was described often as a "personal lack of 
cleanliness. "186 
Perceived and imputed differences were regularized within 
integrated schools. Behind a facade of acceptance in which 
Aboriginal children had "adjusted themselves very well to our 
school", were seemingly "happy and contented ... polite and 
courteous at all times,"187 and were "eager to please and 
amenable to discipline"188 was, as the Oblates warned, the 
immutable fact of "separateness" - a fact which sometimes 
poked through the glossy descriptions of school life forwarded 
to the Department by integrated school administrators. In 
1953, the Principal of a catholic school on Vancouver Island 
explained to the local Departmental Superintendent that "our 
Indian 
students 
have 
entered 
wholeheartedly 
into 
the 
activities and games at the College, and have been accepted by 
the white boys in the same spirit." He had not "detected the 
least 
sign 
of 
discrimination." 
Yet, 
they 
were, 
he 
acknowledged, still a group apart - "they tend to form their 
closest friends among their own and to group together at lunch 
time, etc." and "up to the present ... have avoided the school 
dances." He had not "the faintest notion how this will work 
out" but felt "confident that they will figure it out."189 
Other Principals were not so hopeful. In their reports, 
reminiscent of those of pre-war residential school inspectors, 
appeared a child firmly bound by Aboriginal culture and 
circumstance. The children themselves were, somehow, "the 
chief 
obstacle 
to 
optimum 
progress." 
They 
were 
"psychologically ... inclined towards inferiority feelings" 
and 
were, 
"temperamentally, " 
"receptive 
rather 
than 
demonstrative" accepting "aid or neglect, praise or blame, and 
sympathy, apathy, or antipathy with equal apparent stoicism." 
They lacked "motivation specifically directed toward future 
vocational activities." And they were "hard to reach."190 
It was obvious, moreover, that these children had been ill-
served by their pre-integration 
schooling. 
In too many 
instances they arrived at school from home or residential 
323 

school without "adequate preparation for their grades"191 their 
progress initially "retarded through truancy and sickness and 
home conditions."192 As a consequence, a good number of the 
children were "very much overage for their grades [age-grade 
retardation] and consequently do not seem as interested as the 
pupil whose age is more in keeping with the grade."193 They 
dropped out of school in alarming numbers making a mockery of 
the Department's claim that where integrated education had 
"taken hold, there is plenty of evidence to show that it has 
given impetus to education amongst the Indians and has helped 
to instill respect for the benefits of education amongst 
Indian children."194 
The worst experience for children was without a doubt the 
integrated residential school - the hostel. Here they were 
caught between the past and the future, the old policy and 
new. Separated from their parents and communities, they were 
then immersed daily in the demoralizing atmosphere of a non-
Aboriginal school. The devastating consequences of such a 
situation, common throughout the country as the residential 
system was increasingly tied to integration, was graphically 
illustrated in what was perhaps the most perceptive report the 
Department received on integration - a "Report ... on the 
Experiment with Integration of Indian Students (R.C.) . . . 1960-
61." In this instance, the students, 47 of them brought into 
an urban catholic run hostel from isolated communities and 
from 
another 
non-integrated 
residential 
school, 
were 
integrated into Grades VII through XII in grammar and high 
schools. 
According to the report's author, the Principal of the hostel, 
the "experiment" had gone badly wrong right from the outset. 
Within the first quarter of the school year, the majority of 
the children were found to be failing. Initially, it was 
assumed that this would be temporary, that 
time would be required 
for them to make 
the 
emotional adjustment to their new home here at the 
Hostel, to their new school, to new teachers and an 
almost totally new environment, as well as the 
handicap of much subconscious tension and fear 
arising out of their first experience with life in 
the White Man's world. 
But half way through the year and despite conferences with the 
day school teachers and an "emergency tutoring program," "very 
few students had shown any noticeable improvement in their 
studies." Though many of them were "set back" a grade, it was 
apparent that they "simply did not have the fundamentals for 
completing" their year successfully. The consequence of this 
for the children was devastating: 
324 

The deteriorating academic situation presented a 
grave threat to the very stability and life of our 
new hostel, causing us much concern. By mid-year 
the great majority of our students were in a state 
of profound frustration from their inability to 
cope with the academic program. They manifested a 
general dissatisfaction with school and very great 
insecurity. This seemed to be a dominant factor in 
aggravating their already deep inferiority complex, 
hostility and other neurotic tendencies. 
This "emotional conflict" caused many children to abandon 
their education. "Full of misery, discontent and hostility, 
their presence in the Hostel tended to have an adverse effect 
on the general morale of all." By the end of the school year 
"they continued to manifest a lack of interest in school, 
distaste for study, general apathy and frustration." As 
Lacombe had experienced at High River in 1884, here too "with 
the coming of spring [the students'] restlessness increased." 
Several ran away, one "had a nervous collapse and others 
requested that they be permitted to terminate their schooling 
and return home." One young girl "was taken home by her 
parents in a state of near-collapse from nervous tension 
bordering on hysteria." Final exams reduced the numbers even 
further. The school ended the year with only 18 students; 29 
had dropped out. 
In the summer the Principal had time to reflect, to try to 
make some sense of the experiment. His conclusions added 
considerable 
substance 
to 
Renaud's 
1958 
argument-in-
principle: integration was not the way to go. He saw a 
pertinent message in the high drop out rate of his students 
"so pronounced after Grade VIII as to represent an almost 
total rejection of high school academic studies." When placed 
beside the similarity deplorable drop out figures of non-
Aboriginal high school students in Canada, which in 1958 saw 
50 per cent of non-Aboriginal students dropping out at grade 
10, 67 per cent at grade 11 and 86 per cent at grade 12, 
anyone who 
will do some honest thinking, cannot escape the 
paradox that, in making integration the goal of our 
efforts, we are leading our Indian youth into a way 
of thinking and a way of life that is itself 
rejecting more and more its own traditional system 
of education. The paradox, over-simply stated, is 
that we are educating Indian youth for uneducation. 
The integration drive, he concluded, had meant that in his 
region, "despite the expenditure of millions of dollars" and 
the 
coordination 
of 
educational 
services 
among 
day, 
residential schools and hostel, "the lot of the ...Indians has 
325 

not improved during the past twenty years: it has worsened." 
At the heart of his analysis was the simple proposition that 
integrated education was not, as segregated education could 
be, culturally sensitive and supportive, and thus it was 
unerringly cruel and, as an assimilative tool, self-defeating. 
The Department he suggested should return to the drawing 
board: 
Careful 
research 
might 
even 
reveal 
that 
the 
educational system which has been rigidly imposed 
on the natives of the North, based largely as it is 
on American norms and mores is unsuited to the 
temperament of the Northern Indian and [is] itself 
a contributing factor in the spawning of sub-
conscious tensions, frustrations and inferiority 
feelings that once adolescence arrives, explode 
into violent distaste for school, and even hatred 
of all that the Whiteman stands for - including 
morality and religion.195 
In the prairie 
region, 
this Principal's experience 
and 
observations 
were 
particularly 
relevant 
for 
there 
the 
opposition to integration and closure sprang not only from a 
debate over the merits and otherwise of segregation, within 
the context of powerful Catholic sectarianism, but from the 
question of high school education in residential schools. 
After the war the number of high school students increased 
rapidly. Neary put the increase down to "improvements in our 
school system," which led "naturally" to more pupils . . . 
reaching the upper grades."196 He was right that there had been 
and would be reforms in this period. Additional educational 
supervisory staff were employed,197 the half-day system was 
abandoned officially in 1951 (though it would continue for 
some years yet at some schools198) the Department assumed 
direct responsibility for the hiring and remuneration of 
teachers in 1954 and, in an attempt to attract more competent 
staff, teachers were "placed on salary scales which bore some 
relationship to the salaries paid across the country."199 
In this latter area the Department was able to achieve 
considerable 
success 
quickly. 
By 
1957, 
the 
number 
of 
unqualified teachers in the residential schools had been 
reduced by 50 per cent and in 1962 the Department reported 
that just over 90 per cent of the teachers it employed were 
fully qualified. 200 It was not easy, however, to keep the 
percentage up so that even in the early 1980s, the Department 
had to admit that it still had "difficulty in recruiting and 
retaining educational staff."201 There was a congenital problem 
keeping teachers in the service. Many left within months of 
326 

their 
apppointments 
not 
even 
completing 
a 
full 
year. 
Routinely, 
teachers were hired without 
an interview by 
Departmental 
educational 
staff 
and thus they were, 
the 
minister was infomed in a briefing note, 
appointed to schools without their being fully 
aware of what our educational work entails. As a 
result, we have resignations in October, November 
and throughout the academic year from teachers who 
are not qualified mentally and physically to face 
the problems which daily beset an Indian teacher.202 
The frequent turnover of classrom staff and the persistence of 
many of the pre-war difficulties noted by inspectors placed 
the 
Department's 
claims 
to 
improvements, 
though 
not 
unwarranted, in a less positive light. 
Nevertheless, 
the 
Department 
could 
track 
advances 
in 
educational attainment. By 1959, the number of children in 
grades IX to XIII had increased from none in 1945 to 2,144 and 
in the next decade it rose even more rapidly to 6,834 or just 
over 10 per cent of the total school (day and residential) 
population.203 
There was another factor which contributed to this success but 
tended 
to 
disrupt 
the 
connection 
Neary 
made 
between 
improvements and high numbers and cast doubt upon the implied 
increase in learning of the children. This was continuous 
promotion 
- a practice of 
"promoting pupils each year 
irrespective of whether or not their work is of a standard 
which would justify their advancement." In 1954, Davey saw 
this as a troubling nationwide phenomenon. While it meant that 
more "of our youngsters get into high school" it ensured 
failure for many of them. They found they were "unable to do 
the work, which results in frustration and disappointment and 
dropouts which would have been avoided had the pupil repeated 
a year or more."204 
Nevertheless, continuous promotion continued and even became 
official policy in federal schools in an effort to deal with 
dramatic age-grade retardation rates. In 1966, the Department 
calculated that in grades K2 to eight, 55 per cent of the 
children were overage. In grade five and above the percentage 
was as high a 76 per cent with some students over the age of 
19. Davey, in a circular to school superintendents that year, 
the purpose of which was "to enlarge on some aspects of the 
supervision of continuous promotion," now justified it on the 
basis that it was "a practical and humane approach recognizing 
pupil effort and removing fear of failure. Non-promotion by 
weakening learning initiative warps the child's personality 
development."205 He made no mention of what was likely to 
happen to the personality development of these children when 
327 

they entered an integrated classroom. 
No matter how children arrived at high school, whether their 
promotions were deserved or not, it was a fact that they were 
there in increasing numbers and that the Department had to 
deal with them. 
It might 
have been expected 
that 
the 
Department's position on high school education, guided by the 
integration 
rubric, 
would 
have 
been perfectly 
straight 
forward. But it was not. In 1949, the Chief of the Education 
Division, P. Phelan, in response to the news that a grade nine 
class had been opened at Old Sun's, issued instructions to W. 
Pugh, the superintendent of Indian Agencies in Alberta, which 
were consistent with the new integration strategy: 
It is the practise wherever possible, to encourage 
the attendance of pupils above Grade eight at well 
organized High Schools rather than to attempt their 
instruction 
in 
residential 
schools 
which 
must 
necessarily be staffed and equipped with emphasis 
placed upon elementary education.206 
B. Neary, Phelan's successor, was equally unequivocal. "Our 
policy is of course that these children be educated in 
provincial high schools." This could be accomplished, he 
continued, in one of two ways if a daily bus connection with 
a Provincial school was not possible. Children could be placed 
in the boarding home programme or some of the old residential 
schools contiguous to urban centres could be converted to 
hostels for those children.207 
At the same time, however, a second, conflicting message was 
sent out which actually condoned the evolution of segregated 
high 
school 
education. 
The 
Department's 
Supervisor 
of 
Vocational Training in 1949, A.J. Doucet, concerned over the 
lack of such training generally available to Aboriginal 
people, adults and children, proposed the formation of a 
junior technical school at Qu'Appelle Residential School. This 
was well in line with the post war education-for-development 
strategy that the Department had adopted. Technical education 
would, Doucet believed, "fill a need; it could prepare a 
nucleus 
for 
each 
reserve 
that 
could 
give 
impetus 
to 
progress. "208 
Davey's response, in 1953, to the technical school proposal 
and to the church's persistent push for the expansion of the 
residential school curriculum to include high school training 
added a third option to Neary's list. It would be possible, he 
suggested, to "centralize our high school programme at a 
residential school, and if this can be done in such a way as 
to enable our high school students to attend in association 
with non-Indians, so much the better."209 Ou'Appelle, in fact, 
was nominated to fulfil such a role and went on, with official 
328 

sanction, to develop its high school offerings while remaining 
a purely segregated school as did six other Catholic schools 
which had independently gone forward adding high school grades 
to their 
traditional 
offerings: 
Kenora, 
Kamloops, 
Fort 
Alexander, Qu'Appelle, Blood, Crowfoot and Ermineskin.210 The 
last five were western schools. 
To this list must be added the Assiniboia Hostel. Despite the 
original 
plan, 
the 
idea 
that 
this 
establishment 
would 
integrate children into Winnipeg schools, the Oblates who 
operated it, continued to offer, from 1958 on, high school 
courses in what the Department viewed was "a segregated 
sheltered educational program.11211 The Department was given to 
understand 
that 
the 
children 
were 
"not 
yet 
ready 
for 
integration" and that a segregated school would "give better 
and more personal service to the Indian students."212 
The Department justified its sanctioning of these segregated 
alternatives with the claim that they were stop gap measures 
forced on the Department by a shortage of Provincial high 
school places.213 But Col. Jones acknowledged, as well, that he 
had 
taken note of 
the 
"theory expressed 
... 
[in] 
Residential Education for Indian Acculturation".214 Indeed, the 
Department's apparent ambivalence, which continued throughout 
most of the 1950s, was reflective of a what might have been a 
degree of unofficial unease among senior Departmental staff 
like Davey and some non-Catholic residential school Principals 
over integration in general and, more specifically, over 
integrated high school education. At a conference hosted by 
Davey in North Bay in 1958, which included some of the 
system's Principals there was support for the boarding home 
and the hostel approach and, indeed, for the idea of a number 
of centralized, segregated high school programmes. There was 
debate as well. Segregationists argued that separate high 
school education would allow the Department and churches "to 
cater to [the] special needs of the Indian student and to 
shelter him from the problem of adjustment to society while 
absorbing his education." Others feared that such sheltering 
was an unwarranted prolongation 
of 
segregation; 
it was 
particularly problematic "during a period when it is necessary 
for them [the children] to become familiar with and to be 
integrated with non-Indians 
to assist with their 
later 
adjustments....1,215 
Two competing high school models - hostels/residences like 
Shingwauk connected to Provincial facilities and centralized 
separate 
programs 
like 
Qu'Appelle 
- emerged 
from 
the 
conference. When summing up the proceedings, Davey was unable, 
or unwilling, to chose one over the other - "we are not in a 
position at present to make a recommendation" and thus he 
"advised further study of the situation."216 
329 

Within a year, in January 1959, the Department ended the 
confusion. Segregated high schools in residential schools 
were, indeed, to be temporary. This conclusion had not been 
reached by the avenue of "further study" but rather, as was so 
often the case at major decision points in the history of the 
residential system, financial elements, coated in statements 
of principle, may have been the decisive consideration. Unease 
and therein concern for the children was set aside. R.F. 
Battle, who as assistant deputy minister in 1965 reviewed the 
issue, noted that Departmental high schools, given available 
funds, would be but "a pale shadow of Provincial schools and 
a ... waste of funds."217 
This decision was taken against a background of growing 
dissent in the west over integration. A Catholic Indian 
organization with branches on most western reserves, the 
Catholic Indian League, at a conference held at Hobbema on 
August 5th and 6th, 1958 set out its position in resolutions 
sent on to the Minister, Ellen Fairclough. It called for the 
expansion of the residential system, the building of at least 
two new schools. Three of the eight resolutions were of 
particular interest. Number two requested 
that 
our 
children 
receive 
their 
education 
especially at the High School level, in all Indian 
schools on the reservations, unless the parents 
desire to send them elsewhere. 
And the fifth - "that vocational and technical training be 
further pursued and facilities be provided in Residential 
schools." Number 7 asked that Blue Quills Residential school 
"be granted High School standing."218 
These resolutions were a warning of the political blaze the 
church could ignite. Indeed, their worrisome potential was not 
lost on the minister. Wisely, she took the precaution of 
bringing the issue before her Conservative cabinet colleagues. 
On the 22 th of January, 1959, the Cabinet reaffirmed the 
government's loyalty to integration, to the principle that 
"children receive their education in appropriate non-Indian 
schools" and stated further that "this policy should apply 
particularly to high school education." On the fate of the 
seven Catholic high schools, the cabinet declared that "Such 
segregated high schools be operated only until suitable joint 
education can be arranged."219 
With the cabinet decision a line was drawn in the sand between 
the Department and the church. An attempt was made at a 
special "Conference Re High School Education in the Prairie 
Provinces" in January, 1960 to effect a compromise between the 
two sides. It failed. Each gave a little. The church conceded 
that "there should not be a multiplicity of small Indian high 
330 

schools." Some of the existing ones, Blood Residential School, 
Crowfoot and Ermineskin which had average enrolments of only 
48, were, according to the Department, "small poorly operated 
units." In discussions that included Father Renaud, 
the 
Department agreed to recognize Assiniboia as a high school for 
five 
years 
while 
it 
investigated 
the 
possibility 
of 
integrating the children into Winnipeg schools. But the main 
points of contention remained unresolved; neither gave up its 
basic position. The church, despite an apparent willingness to 
scale back its demands, the number of high school programs it 
would operate, still wanted segregated high schools that would 
offer 
"academic 
subjects 
and 
... 
commercial 
options," 
vocational training. The Department, with cabinet's backing, 
remained adamant; it would in time, Col. Jones asserted, 
"arrange for joint education" for all school age children. 
Nevertheless, the two sides parted amicably even agreeing to 
further studies being conducted by Davey on the issue and 
Renaud receiving a promise from Jones that there might be a 
future more inclusive meeting that would include "School 
Inspectors and Provincial Educationalists."220 
But again it was not study, nor quiet rational consideration 
and discussion, that dominated the discourse on the western 
schools over the next decade but political struggles over the 
fate of each school. The Department was put on the alert. 
Davey warned G.H. Gooderham, that they must be circumspect in 
regards to "any change in the organization of a residential 
school ... As you know, my superiors expect me to keep them 
informed 
on 
all 
matters 
of 
political 
importance 
and 
residential schools are political "hot potatoes'."221 
It would seem from the extant files that the Department saw 
the church's hand behind every incident of opposition, every 
protest of a planned closure and saw these as signs of a wider 
contest 
over 
who 
would 
control 
Indian 
communities. 
A 
confidential Departmental report represented the Catholic 
Indian League as an Oblate puppet whose branches "parrot 
Oblate policy on education and segregation" exhorting "people 
to stay on the reserve and resist integrated education." The 
Oblate 
Order, 
the 
report 
concluded, 
has 
"resisted 
and 
continues to resist any curtailment of their authority in 
Indian education .... In so many communities, the Oblates have 
come between the 
[Indian Affairs] Branch and the Indian 
people, obstructing our efforts to deal democratically with 
education. "222 
The Department faced the scrutiny of more than the Catholic 
Indian League. Fairclough and her successor, the Liberal 
Minister, John Nicholson, found themselves defending the 
government's decision on all fronts - against band councils 
whose petitions for the preservation of segregated high school 
education were at times drafted openly, it was reputed, by 
331 

local Oblate priests, 223 and against concerned western members 
of Parliament. Both ministers refused to move holding firmly 
to the moral high ground of duty to the Indian. Fairclough 
informed her Conservative colleague, Eldon Wooliams M.P., that 
As far as the education of the Indian is concerned, 
it 
is evident 
that 
the 
facilities 
of 
small, 
segregated reserve schools cannot be expected to 
give 
Indian 
youth 
the 
advanced 
academic 
or 
vocational training they require to become self-
supporting, useful citizens. It is essential that 
we utilize provincial facilities which in some 
cases we have subsidized by Federal funds.224 
Nicholson, when his time came at the head of the Department in 
1965, took the same tact. He assured Prime Minister Pearson, 
in a briefing note on the situation at Qu'Appelle school, that 
the Department had "ample evidence to prove" that segregated 
education "is of a very low standard and merely gives the 
Indian a false sense of security." The old educational policy 
now being defended by the church had failed; it "had not 
prepared the student socially or intellectually for further 
education in a non-Indian environment." 
It was at the Qu'Appelle Residential school, that "last 
bastion of a very unsatisfactory 
system of high school 
instruction" was how Nicholson described it to Pearson, 225 that 
one of the most virulent political battles was waged. The 
campaign, headed by the school's Principal, was characterized 
as the best "example of how far the Catholic church would go 
in defending the outworn residential school system." 226 It was, 
at the very least, the most energetic campaign conducted by 
the church. 
The Principal's purpose was not only to defend the existing 
high school programme but to bring the Department to approve 
its 
expansion 
to 
include 
the 
provincial 
vocational 
curriculum. 227 To that end, he left no stone unturned. Indian 
League branches on reserves served by the school rained 
petitions down on the minister. 228 He appealed successfully to 
the Premier of Saskatchewan, W. Ross Thatcher, for support. He 
kept the newspapers, the Regina Leader Post and others, 
abreast of the debate and ensured, as he described it, that 
"flash reports also were heard over radio and T.V."229 
When, in June 1965, Davey announced that the Department would 
not 
sanction 
any expansion of the curriculum and had, 
furthermore, determined that the high school students should 
be prepared "for further education in provincial schools, 1,230 
the Principal worked to galvanize the students and parents for 
a final fight. They were exhorted by him to "keep 
332 

yourself posted on the news, and when asked to give your 
opinion voice it strongly." This was, he continued in a letter 
of July, 1965 to all the students, an issue of supreme 
political importance: 
Do you want the Government to dictate to you or do 
you want a peaceful understanding with the Indian's 
Nation's 
rights 
safeguarded? 
It 
is a 
serious 
choice. Make sure you decide on what is best for 
the Nation as a whole. 
The approach of one of the Principal' s associates in his 
"Pastor's Message" was even headier. He cast the battle over 
the school as a religious war -a part of a wider satanic 
campaign 
against 
religion 
in which 
the Department 
and 
government were allies: 
Satan and his legion, making a review of their 
positions came to the conclusion that they were 
losing 
ground 
the world 
over 
and 
the 
Indian 
population was not exempt, therefore they changed 
their strategy, adopted modern tools and went on 
the attack seven times stronger. What is this 
strategy? or, to put it in modern words, what is 
this policy? To them religion must be done away 
with in all schools. A formula had to be found to 
lure 
the 
Indians 
away 
from 
denominational 
schools.... Now what are the tools the devil uses 
to implement this policy? He hides himself behind 
the faces and hypocritical views of some whitemen 
with influential positions within the educational 
channels of our society. 
There was, however, to be no "peaceful understanding" with the 
devils minions - the officials of the Department. The last act 
took place on the 14th of September. That evening, John 
McGilp, the regional director of Indian Affairs, attended a 
meeting at the school to inform parents that the closure of 
the high school section of the school was unavoidable and 
would proceed in phases over the next three years. The meeting 
ended in a shouting match with parents and students blocking 
the exits. McGilp effected his retreat only when he promised 
to contact Ottawa and advise them of the results. All the next 
day there were meetings with local RCMP officers in Fort 
Qu'Appelle in response to a rumour that a huge protest of 
perhaps 500 people was being organized and might bring 
violence to the streets.231 
Not in this case, nor eventually in any of the other cases of 
church opposition, 
did Ottawa budge notwithstanding 
the 
protests 
from 
church 
supporters, 
parents 
and 
children. 
Segregated high school education, the Department maintained, 
333 

was second rate education. And any suggestion that separate 
vocational 
training 
should 
be 
encouraged 
was 
equally 
ridiculous especially when "federal funds are being poured 
into well-equipped vocational training centres to which Indian 
students are freely admitted. 1, 232 There could be no defense, no 
justification for anything but the most temporary continuation 
of residential schools. The Department remained determined and 
though each closure of a western school or elimination a high 
school 
program 
was 
a 
battle 
by 
"pulpit, 
press 
and 
politicians"233 
they were carried out, school by school, 
through that complicated process of closing residences with 
low enrolments and transferring the remaining children to 
other schools, or to foster homes, all the while carefully 
retaining the single denominational 
affiliation of 
each 
remaining school. 
On 1 April, 1969, any official church roadblock on the road to 
full integration and the final elimination of the residential 
system was removed when the government formally ended the 
partnership with the churches in the management of residential 
schools effectively secularizing this element of Aboriginal 
education. 234 Indeed, this event might be represented as a 
product of growing secularism in western culture in the 1960s 
and, 
within 
Canada, 
of 
the 
particularly 
anti-clerical 
tradition of the Quebec wing of the national Liberal party. In 
fact, while such a spirit of the age may have been the context 
of this change, the mechanics of it were much more prosaic. 
The government was in effect forced to take exclusive control 
of the schools because of a decision of the Canadian Labour 
Relations Board of 7 September, 1966 that "the domestic 
employees of the Fort Frances Residential School in Fort 
Frances, Ontario were employees of Her Majesty in Right of 
Canada." 235 In line with that finding, the Treasury Board 
determined that "the employees of the Student Residences were 
to be brought under the Public Service Employment Act." 236 This 
necessitated their joining 
the 
Public 
Service 
Alliance 
of 
Canada, 
an 
employees' 
union 
which 
gave 
them 
collective 
bargaining rights with the Government of Canada and 
which necessitated their becoming public servants. 
Consequently, the Department of Indian Affairs was 
obliged to accept the transfer of the residences 
and 
to 
assume 
direct 
responsibility 
for 
the 
standard of residential services in terms of child 
care, health, food, clothing and facilities.237 
The connection between the churches and the residential 
system, while radically reduced, was not completely dissolved. 
Churches, if they wished, could retain an advisory role in the 
hiring of administrators of the residences and could provide 
pastoral services in residences "affiliated with a religious 
334 

organization. "238 
The effective passing of the "auld alliance" of church and 
state, though occasioned by a quasi-judicial decision, was in 
reality the final consequence of the growing irrelevance of 
the church as Federal-Provincial education and child welfare 
agreements were brought on-line. The historic event was marked 
by kind words from the Minister, Jean Chretien. "I would like 
to take this opportunity," he told the Anglican Church in the 
spring of 1969 
to extend ... my deep and sincere thanks for the 
contribution it 
[the Church] has made over the 
years 
to 
the 
education 
of 
Indian 
and 
Eskimo 
children, particularly through the historic role it 
has played in the management of Residences for 
Indian and Eskimo students.239 
These sentiments may not have been fully shared in all 
quarters of the Department. Relations with the churches had 
never been easy and they had been particularly difficult with 
regards to the Catholic church in the last decade. The 
departure did mean, however, that the Department had finally 
achieved almost unrestrained control of residential schools 
and could proceed more expeditiously toward their final 
elimination. The rate of closures in the next decade bore 
witness to that. By 1979, the number of schools had fallen 
from 52 with 7,704 students to 12 with 1,899. 
The withdrawal of the churches in 1969 did not completely 
clear the way forward, however. The defeat of the White Paper 
proposals in that same year signalled the beginning of new 
political realities that quickly imposed restraints on the 
Department's 
latitude 
in education. One of the central 
elements in the new political world was the formation of 
alliances between the churches and Aboriginal leaders and 
organizations - alliances made powerful by a growing public 
sensitivity to the "Indian problem" and sympathy for the goals 
of 
self-government 
and 
self-determination. 
While 
these 
structural changes took place, the central issue over which 
the Department and the Catholic church had struggled did not 
disappear. It was, in fact, magnified. Aboriginal political 
leaders who had opposed the White Paper naturally rejected 
"Provincial jurisdiction over Indian education," 
opposed 
integrated education as it was in many minds "ill-equipped if 
not totally unprepared to cope with the special learning 
problems of native children" 240 and saw segregated education 
under community control as the only hope for Aboriginal 
children, community development and cultural survival. They 
would find success where the church had failed - managing to 
prevent the closure of some of the remaining schools. 
335 

With respect to the schools, the goals of self-government and 
self-determination were articulated in many different demands 
from bands and political associations across the country - in 
demands for: consultation when school closures were planned241 
for 
the 
building 
of 
separate 
high 
school 
residential 
facilities, for the use of residences as orphanages242 and for 
"increased 
responsibility 
in 
the management 
of 
student 
residences."243 In that latter vein, in 1971, the National 
Indian Brotherhood (NIB) brought forward a sweeping revision 
of 
the 
system 
wherein 
"residence 
services 
[would] 
be 
contracted to Indian groups having the approval of the bands 
served by the respective residences."244 
While this NIB proposal was not adopted generally, 
some 
communities pushed hard to realize it with respect to the 
residential school with which they had been traditionally 
associated. They were not prepared to lose their school. They 
saw in it an opportunity to provide to children, who still 
needed care, "a Home away from Home," and to rescue children 
from temptations that seemed to come with integration -
"alcohol, sniffing and bright lights." With a segregated 
school, controlled by the community, they were confident they 
could "ensure a sense of physical well-being and emotional 
security for our students" 245 and combat the astoundingly high 
drop-out rates.246 
One of the first and perhaps the most important of these 
community campaigns involved the Blue Quills school located at 
St. Paul, Alberta. 247 The 12 communities connected with the 
school, with the backing of the Alberta Indian Association, 
not only prevented its closure but forced the government in 
January, 1971, to turn it over to the people of the Saddle 
Lake-Athabaska district by means of a contract with the Blue 
Quills Native Education Council.248 
It was a hard fought battle. At stake was not only the school 
but the integration policy itself. The Council wanted the 
school "transferred to Indian administration and supervision 
while still 
remaining under 
federal 
jurisdiction." 249 
in 
negotiations that dragged on for over eight months, the 
Department tried to hold to what was now traditional policy 
insisting that the transfer would be possible only if the 
Council became a school board under provincial jurisdiction. 
Following a stormy meeting at the school in July, 1970 at 
which that Departmental demand was once again firmly rejected, 
the school was occupied. The old buildings were ringed with 
tents, hunting parties were sent out for deer, saskatoon 
berries and rhubarb and children went fishing. The elders 
moved into the gym supported over the course of the occupation 
by perhaps as many as 1,000 people not only from Alberta but 
from Saskatchewan as well: 
336 

There were rarely less than 200 Indians in the 
school at any given time . . . tribal elders led 
prayer chants . . . three Indian-appointed reserve 
police officers kept order and there were cooking 
committees, 
clean-up 
committees, 
recreation 
committees - committees for just about everything. 
One week was succeeded by another and what began as a 
"straight political act" evolved "into an unofficial Indian 
cultural festival." 250 It grew in national notoriety, as well, 
attracting support from T.C. Douglas and D. Lewis, the leaders 
of the New Democratic 
Party, 
from the National 
Indian 
Brotherhood, area tribal leaders and members of Parliament.251 
Finally, the phone rang at the school. The leader who took the 
call returned with the triumphant announcement - "That was 
Ottawa .... They want to talk. It looks like we've won."252 And 
they had. Chretien capitulated completely. 253 Indeed, when the 
transfer agreement was forwarded to the Secretary of the 
Treasury Board by the Deputy Minister, H. Robinson, 
in 
December 1970, he alerted the Secretary to the fact that the 
Department was "prepared to negotiate the transfer of the 
management 
of 
23 
departmental 
residences 
to 
properly 
constituted 
Indian groups during the next two or three 
years." 254 All of the remaining schools could, in that fashion, 
pass out of the government's control. 
After the Blue Quills incident, the Department was to operate 
obviously under different assumptions. And, with regards to 
residential schools at least, it did. When the Qu'Appelle 
Indian Residential School Council255 representing 24 bands 
assumed "the financial responsibility and care of all the 
children and staff who live and work in this Residence" on l 
April, 1973 it did so, according to the council, not by 
"militancy" or "confrontation" but by "negotiation and hard 
work" 256 
and 
with 
the 
"generous 
cooperation" 
of 
the 
Department. "257 
This "cooperation" had become paramount following two major 
events which signalled the formal change of the government's 
educational policy. The first came in 1971 with the Watson 
Report of the Fifth Standing Parliamentary Committee on Indian 
and Northern Affairs "which stressed the concept of Indian 
parental control of their children's education." The second, 
in 1972, was the government's acceptance of the National 
Indian Brotherhood's position paper Indian Control of Indian 
Education 
which 
greatly 
expanded 
that 
concept. 
The 
government's adoption of the concept of "Indian Control" would 
"permit," 
Irvin Goodleaf, 
a 
Special 
Assistant 
to 
Jean 
Chretien, explained, "the transfer in whole or part, of the 
337 

administration of education programs ... to band councils or 
their 
delegated 
education 
authorities." 258 There 
was 
no 
suggestion that such band controlled schools would become in 
any way part of a Provincial education system. 
Thereafter, residential school policy proceeded along two 
tracks - one led to closure through integration or the return 
of children to band controlled day schools, the other to local 
control of the residential school itself. In the end many 
fewer than the proposed 23 were transferred to community 
administration. Only five schools, 
all in Saskatchewan, 
followed the Blue Quills-Qu'Appelle lead. The rest were closed 
so that besides a continued funding responsibility for locally 
controlled schools, the Department at that point virtually 
came to the end of the residential school road by 1986. 
From "Stone Age" to "Atomic Age" - Northern and Arctic 
Assimilation: 
Integration, the context for the closure and transfer of the 
schools, was not the only significant development in the post-
war period. As the nation moved north, further penetrating the 
homelands of Aboriginal communities, a whole new tier of 
schools was created, beginning in 1955, in the Northwest 
Territories. The rhetoric that heralded the creation of this 
system and explained its operation suggested that it had 
escaped the past, had moved beyond assimilation to 
a 
sophisticated and accepting approach to Aboriginal culture. 
Unfortunately, that proved not to be the case. 
Northern Aboriginal people, including the Inuit, had not been 
untouched by the old residential school system in the pre-war 
period. Schools in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, 
Ontario and Quebec had taken in children from far northern 
communities. Yukon Indians were served by the Anglican school 
begun at Carcross in 1902 by Bishop Bompas after his initial 
Forty Mile mission school259 and eventually by the Catholic 
Lower Post school 
(opened in 1951) in northern British 
Columbia, the Anglican residential school at Shingle Point 
(1927) and, late in the period, a residential school was 
operated in Whitehorse by the Gospel Mission Society. Schools, 
primarily for residents of the Northwest Territories, were 
operated at Fort Providence (Catholic - 1867), Aklavik (a 
Catholic school was opened in 1925 and an Anglican school in 
1936), Hay River 
(Anglican - 1894) and Fort Resolution 
(Catholic - 1903). There were, as well, federal and missionary 
full-time and part-time day schools. 
338 

In the 1950s and 1960s, education in the Yukon underwent 
revisions consistent with the integration program. In 1956, 
Indian Affairs decided to open two hostels, Courdet (Catholic) 
and Yukon (Protestant) in Whitehorse to bring children into 
day schools and thereby to superse the old residential 
schools. 260 In 1968, it made arrangements to transfer the 
hostels to the control of the Yukon government.261 
Inuit children, before the war, had been sent to Shingle Point 
school, to the Roman Catholic and Anglican residential schools 
at Aklavik and to Fort George on the eastern coast of James 
Bay in Quebec. Others, however, were placed in the residential 
schools at Fort Providence, Fort Resolution and Moose Factory 
and a small number were even sent far to the south to 
Edmonton, Sturgeon Lake, Portage, Shingwauk, Fort Francis, 
Birtle and Joussard. 262 In 1953, the Catholic church with 
government cooperation and funding built a hostel, Turquetil 
Hall, at Chesterfield Inlet especially if not exclusively for 
Inuit children. 263 It was to be more than a school as it would 
"tie in with the problem of welfare as an institution ...[it 
was] needed to take care of indigent and orphan children."264 
As in the south, the churches, which were Anglican and 
Catholic, (with only one exception - the Baptist school in 
Whitehorse) led the way supplementing their regular mission 
activity with the introduction of formal education. While day 
schools were built and maintained throughout the pre-war 
period, the preference was for boarding establishments because 
again it was found, for the classic reason - the influence of 
traditional culture - that day schools would not suffice. The 
children, 
it 
was 
argued, 
were 
so 
"very 
irregular 
in 
attendance" at day schools that "progress made during the 
periods of attendance" was "eliminated during the periods when 
they are away from school." Clearly, as J. Ross, the Yukon 
Superintendent of Schools, reported missionary opinion in 
1904, "no satisfactory work can be done until there is a small 
boarding school established where the children will be kept 
during the time that the older Indians are out camping.11265 
Again following the southern model, the churches looked to the 
government for a financial partner. No sooner had a church 
independently built a school and taken in students than it 
turned to Ottawa for funding. And there, federal funding was 
forthcoming despite delays caused by the objections of some 
Departmental officials, on occasion even by Duncan Campbell 
Scott, that such schools defied logic as no thought was being 
given to "what sort of education is to be imparted and how 
this education can be useful to pupils in after life" when 
that life, in such an isolated region, would be almost 
exclusively a traditional one.266 
There was, in general, throughout this period a considerable 
339 

hesitancy on the part of government to intervene in the 
traditional life of far northern communities. One historian, 
A. Webster, who has studied this period, which he refers to, 
significantly, as the "rise of the Reluctant Northern Welfare 
State," notes that 
Until 
well 
after 
WW2 
the 
government 
was 
uninterested 
in 
eliminating 
the 
hunting 
and 
trapping lifestyles of Natives in the North. It 
knew that the fur trade - unstable as it was - was 
the 
only 
insulation 
against 
total 
welfare 
dependency. The provisions of Treaties 8 and 11 
therefore 
included 
an 
annual 
allowance 
for 
subsistence items to help Indians to survive the 
periodic slumps in the fur trade.267 
It was hoped that Aboriginal people would, in part for the 
sake of the Federal treasury, continue to support themselves. 
In hard times relief might, perhaps, be had from the RCMP. It 
was in fact the police who introduced the first Federal social 
program - a "baby bounty" given in an effort to reduce the 
incidence of infanticide among the Inuit. 268 But even this 
bounty, a collection of goods that supported hunting activity, 
was designed to keep people on the land. 
Support for social service initiatives and for education, when 
it existed at all, was at best luke warm and, of course, was 
not generously funded. Webster ended his study of the Indian 
Affairs northern ration system with the conclusion that "The 
actual scale of ration issued varied from the minimal to the 
deplorable and was well below relief entitlements to non-
Indians." Even some local officials were uncomfortable with 
what was being offered. The joint committee was told in 1947 
by an inspector of agencies that 
To the destitute Indians we offer rations. We who 
have the job of handing out those rations were not 
very proud of the quantities, or the quality either 
. . . rations ought to be more generous, much more 
generous and varied.269 
Aboriginal people during those "periodic slumps" in the fur 
trade had, more often than not, no alternative but to rely on 
the credit-relief offerings of the trading companies - credit 
which of course tied them to those concerns, creating a 
dependency on private interests which the federal government 
was reluctant to assume. It maintained, until well after the 
war, a" leave-them-be approach."270 
There was not a great deal more enthusiasm for education. As 
late as 1950, Northern officials still had to be convinced 
that education, particularly residential education, was a good 
340 

idea. 
The 
Sub-Committee 
on 
Education 
of 
the 
Northwest 
Territories 
Council, 
considering a Catholic 
request 
for 
financial support for a new school, what would eventually be 
the Chesterfield Inlet hostel, concluded that 
While a year round or long-term residential school 
education is undoubtedly not the best for native 
children, arguments could be advanced in favour of 
a residential school education which provided for 
the return of the children to the parent and the 
native way of life for substantial periods. 
It might be possible to operate such a school in sessions 
giving the children six months in residence and six months 
with their parents. This "would afford maximum utilization of 
school facilities and adequate contact with the parents and 
native life."271 
Funding for the northern schools came in the form of per 
capita grants provided not only by Indian Affairs but by the 
Department of the Interior, responsible for the Territories. 
In the 1930s, it paid $200 per annum "for Eskimo children who 
are taken into residential schools" 272 and for Metis children 
who were destitute or orphaned. 
The involvement of the Department of the Interior was not 
limited to such grants. It allocated $10,000 to the "Eskimo 
Residential School at Shingle Point" and subsequently found 
itself the target of building grant requests when, in 1934, 
the church moved to replace Shingle Point, reputed to be 
"badly overcrowded," with a new establishment at Aklavik that 
would also cater to Inuit children.273 
Funding by the Department of the Interior pointed to the fact 
that the Inuit were a special case and that the jurisdictional 
responsibility for them was not easily or quickly arrived at. 
For a brief period in the early 1920s, they were assigned by 
Parliament to Indian Affairs.274 There was even a question, 
which began as a squabble between Ottawa and Quebec over Inuit 
welfare, 
whether 
or 
not 
the 
Inuit 
were 
a 
federal 
responsibility at all. 275 That was settled by a reference to 
the Supreme Court in 1935 which resulted in a judgement that 
the power to legislate respecting Inuit resided with the 
federal government - that "the term "Indians' as used in the 
British North America Act included Inuit." 276 Nevertheless, the 
responsibility for them was given not to Indian Affairs but to 
the Northern Affairs Branch of the Department of Mines and 
Resources which had taken over from the Department of the 
Interior in 1936. Eventually, in 1953, the responsibility was 
given to the Department of Northern Affairs and National 
Resources. By World War Two, and until 1955, two separate 
federal establishments, Northern Affairs and Indian Affairs, 
341 

were involved in educational services for Aboriginal people -
one for Indian and one for Inuit and Metis. They acted in 
concert 
sometimes, 
sometimes 
not 
and 
almost 
always 
in 
cooperation with the churches.277 
There was a second notable departure from the southern 
pattern. 
These 
residential 
schools 
drew 
students 
from 
Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal communities. The Department of 
the Interior, and its Northern Affairs successors, paid a per 
capita grant not only for destitute Metis but for white 
children between the ages of seven and 15 who were placed in 
a school because, as the admission form attested, "said child 
is a bona fide resident of the North West Territories, that he 
or she is an orphan, destitute or neglected child and not 
eligible for admission under the Indian Act." Children could 
be so assigned, having been "declared destitute by the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police."278 
It is difficult to give any definite indication of the 
proportion of total enrolment in this period that was made up 
of non-Aboriginal children. In 1954, figures pertaining to the 
Fort Providence, Aklavik, and Fort Resolution schools reveal 
that there was a total enrolment of 344 of which 55 were white 
children, 130 Inuit and 159 were Indian. For these same 
schools, however, there is a 1953 monthly attendance count 
which indicates that there were, in one month in the last 
quarter of that year, 236 Aboriginal children and 201 non-
Aboriginal children.279 
In 1955, this multi-cultural tradition was maintained when the 
Liberal government of Louis St. Laurent, incorporated these 
largely church initiated educational developments within a new 
and comprehensive educational strategy for the North under 
which 
the Department 
of 
Northern 
Affairs 
and 
National 
Resources alone was charged with the responsibility "for 
Indian, 
as well 
as 
other, 
education 
in 
the 
Northwest 
Territories." 280 That approach had been favoured, the Deputy 
Minister R.G. Robertson explained, because it allowed for 
"universal education" - 
"a single system of schools for 
children of all races," Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal - with 
potential economic and ideological pay-offs given, he wrote, 
that it facilitated "greater economy of effort and more 
efficiency in a region of very sparse and mixed population" 
and removed "any element of segregation on a racial basis."281 
There would still be segregation on a religious basis under 
this scheme. 282 It was clear to Northern Affairs in 1955 that 
the churches did not have the financial resources to maintain 
satisfactorily their northern schools. This was particularly 
so in the residential sector. They lacked the funds, the 
Northern Affairs Minister, Jean Lesage, informed cabinet in 
342 

his submission of 4 March, 1955 which brought forward the new 
scheme, "to replace the worn out facilities" nor were they 
"remotely able ... to expand the residential facilities to 
cope with the present or future needs."283 The condition of 
schools such as Fort Providence and Resolution which were "in 
a state of collapse" and the two at Aklavik which were in 
similar condition, was, Robertson recalled, "one of the major 
reasons 
for 
developing 
a 
program 
of 
expansion 
and 
replacement....11284 
A 1947 inspection report on Fort Resolution found that the 
"building [was] inadequate and should be replaced as soon as 
possible. It was "a real fire hazard. The foundation is 
decayed and heaved. The classrooms are small and unhealthy."285 
Fort Providence was a particularly stark example of the 
condition of the system in general286 and the root cause of its 
decay may well have been what it had always been in the south 
- a lack of adequate funding. According to John Parker, a 
member of the Northwest Territories Council, the school was 
not only in deplorable condition it was extremely over-
crowded. The just over 100 children slept in two rooms: 
To me this is a little short of appalling. Between 
the centre of each bed and each neighbouring bed 
there is a distance of less than four feet. An 
adult 
can 
move 
between 
the 
beds 
only 
with 
difficulty. I had rather thought these conditions 
disappeared soon after the Industrial Revolution. I 
feel that we have been remiss in tolerating this 
situation for so long. A less charitable person 
than I might infer that the persons running the 
school were cramming in as many bodies as possible 
in order to reap the greatest revenue.287 
At 
the same time, 
however, 
the churches 
could not 
be 
shouldered aside. In the light "of the vested interest which 
churches had acquired in the field of education," Robertson 
continued, "a compromise had to be made in the Northwest 
Territories between the secular and religious 
attitudes 
towards education". The result of such a compromise was not 
only the continuation of church participation in Aboriginal 
education but 
the placing 
of 
limits on the degree of 
"secularization" that Northern Affairs could achieve within 
the schools themselves. The religious composition of staff, 
student body and curriculum all remained denominational in 
significant ways. 288 In settling the details of its plan in 
1955, Northern Affairs felt it had no option but to set as one 
objective 
... a situation in which it will be possible to 
provide 
education 
for 
all 
Eskimo 
and 
Indian 
343 

children 
requiring 
schooling 
without 
Anglican 
children having to attend a Catholic school or 
Catholic children having to attend an Anglican 
school .289 
In some instances, as at the Fort Simpson residence for 
example, this resulted in the construction of a most curious 
contrivance - a "combined school." This was a school composed 
of a single administrative facility and "two instructional 
wings" one being Catholic and the other Anglican or non-
sectarian .290 
The 
official 
presumptive 
scenario 
of 
the 
1955 
cabinet 
submission for the introduction of a general system of 
education for northern people, its expressed educational 
philosophy, its vision and attitudes towards Aboriginal people 
were much like the southern civilizing logic of the latter 
half of the 19th century. The premise of this initiative was 
that regional developments had, in the government's view, 
brought an anticipated crisis to Aboriginal communities and 
new opportunities. "Several factors," Jean Lesage explained, 
had "been at work." In the last few decades, the Indian and 
Inuit population had grown rapidly, the "natural result of 
increased medical services and better food and clothing made 
available for children by family allowances." This increase 
had placed "a greater demand on the supply of game and fur 
bearing animals" making it "increasingly difficult for the 
Indians and Eskimos to gain a living in their accustomed way." 
Their viability had been further undercut by a "sharp fall in 
fur prices." Many families had been thrown on relief, the 
effect of which was "demoralizing" and if their reliance on 
government aid was "prolonged and extensive" it would, Lesage 
worried, "become increasingly difficult to make the people 
self-supporting." 
There was, however, Lesage claimed, "at the same time that 
changing conditions are making it progressively harder for the 
native population to rely on their traditional way of life" 
some light ahead. There were, increasingly, opportunities for 
employment connected with "economic activity" created by the 
incursion of western resource projects into the region and by 
"defense activity." In addition, the Department had its own 
plans "for the stimulation of small industries, such as boat 
building; local agriculture; etc." Jobs created by these 
diverse ventures would go to southern migrants, brought in 
"usually at great cost", unless the Inuit and Indian were 
"equipped to take advantage of them" by the 
"necessary 
training and education." There could be, through "schooling," 
a prosperous new future for all northern people.291 This was in 
fact unavoidable - an echo of similar sentiments expressed 
with regard to the old North West in the 1880s - because as 
344 

Civilization is now advancing into the Arctic areas 
at such a rapid pace .... It is therefore essential 
that they [Aboriginal people] be assisted in every 
possible way to face the future in a realistic 
manner - in a way which will result in their 
becoming 
true 
Canadian 
citizens 
while 
at 
the 
sametime 
maintaining 
their 
racial 
pride 
and 
independence of spirit. 
That 
"assistance" 
was to come, 
of 
course, 
through 
"an 
extensive program of schools and hostels to provide better 
education." 292 The 1955 cabinet submission began the process 
setting out a plan for a six-year construction programme for 
hostels - mainly at sites in the Mackenzie area where day 
schools already existed - at Fort Smith, Fort Simpson, Fort 
McPherson and Aklavik. The only exception to this was the 
intention of erecting a hostel and school in the Eastern 
Arctic, 
initially 
for 
100, 
"entirely 
for 
Eskimos", 
at 
Frobisher Bay, Baffin Island. It was calculated that it would 
meet that areas educational needs for sometime though it was 
possible that "a further day school and hostel may be required 
for Anglican Eskimos in the Keewatin area, especially if the 
D.E.W. line has substantial effect on their way of life." 293 As 
it evolved, funding for the Frobisher Bay complex was not 
brought forward for another 10 years when it became an element 
of a "Five Year Education Plan for the Northwest Territories 
and Northern Quebec"294 approved by cabinet in November, 1965 
specifically for the construction of "pupil residences and 
vocational and academic high schools to serve the Eastern 
Arctic." In the intervening years, Inuit children from the 
Eastern Arctic, who qualified for "secondary level education", 
up to 180 a year, were flown to and boarded at the "temporary 
vocational training centre at Churchill, Manitoba."295 
The 1955 cabinet submission also set out what would be the 
financial 
relationship 
between 
the 
government 
and 
the 
churches. For those of the new residences they managed, 
churches would receive "per pupil grants established on a 
basis calculated to cover the full costs of maintenance of 
children." That was, it was pointed out, "in accordance with 
the basis on which grants are paid for pupils in residential 
schools [operated by Indian Affairs] at the present time."296 
By 1969-70, as plans were finalized to transfer education to 
the government of the Northwest Territories, part of a wider 
process of government decentralization that was to set the 
Territories on the path to representative and responsible 
government if not full provincial status, 297 Northern Affairs 
had completed a network of schools that then included, as well 
as day schools, eight "large pupil residences": Fleming Hall 
at Fort Mcpherson, Bompas Hall and Lapointe Hall-Fort Simpson, 
Breyant Hall-Fort Smith, Grollier and Stringer Halls-Inuvik, 
Akaitcho 
Hall-Yellowknife 
(a Composite 
High 
School 
and 
345 

Vocational School), and Turquetil Hall-Chesterfield Inlet. 
These had a combined average attendance of 1,200 children.298 
They were named "Halls" for it was felt that the word "hostel" 
was routinely confused with "hospital" and "hotel" and that 
"Hall" 
was 
"more 
euphonius" 
and 
had 
a more 
"homelike 
connotation." There was also concern that the "term hostel is 
very easily prostituted to hostile...."299 
There were, in addition, a series of some 12 "small hostels", 
mainly though not exclusively, in the Eastern Arctic. Some had 
as few as 11 children with the largest having accommodation 
for up to 25 .300 
Small hostels, a unique northern initiative, were not part of 
the original 1955 plan. Departmental officials credited John 
Parker with this idea - one that they, too, saw as having 
"obvious advantages." They could, 
they reasoned, 
gather 
together from 10 to 20 children 
at a place where there is a [day] school which is 
not now fully utilized . . . and house them in the 
care of a female housekeeper or married couple at a 
low cost for boarding and housing. It would enable 
them to remain in a small settlement in closer 
proximity to their parents.301 
This option was attractive not only because it was inexpensive 
to construct and thereafter to maintain but because the 
associated day schools "would operate much more efficiently as 
regular attendance would be assured." 302 Small hostels were 
also a solution to the limitations placed on the expansion of 
a boarding program by the lack of available, suitable private 
homes. 303 The Department claimed that "most Eskimo homes are 
usually already congested without the addition of extra 
boarders. "304 
Further than finance and very much connected to attendance, 
there was another factor - the attitude of inuit parents -
that may have led to a surprising innovation with regards to 
the way small hostels were managed. The Department was open to 
the idea that the housekeeper or married couple in charge 
could well be Aboriginal people. 305 And in some cases, in the 
Great Whale River hostel in 1960 for example, they were. In 
that case there was even a suggestion of democratization. The 
area administrator reported that the woman hired had been 
"unanimously chosen as the person preferred and best qualified 
to look after their children by a group of Eskimos who have 
left for camping."306 Though there was in that case no 
explanation for why the Department supposedly acquiesced to 
community wishes, 
it may have been because of parental 
opposition to placing their children in the care of outsiders. 
At Cape Dorset and Frobisher Bay the area administrators 
346 

struggled against what was characterized as the "extremely-
strong and consistent resistance by camp Eskimos towards the 
hostel program." The Inuit's affection for their children was 
so strong that they would not, it was reasoned, cooperate 
unless their children could be boarded with relatives or 
placed in a hostel run by a housemother respected in the 
community.307 
The continued existence of "camp Eskimo," of traditional life, 
of "camping" as it was often called, in what was after all 
still a frontier region and the Department's realization, 
despite Lesage's prediction otherwise - that there had been no 
sharp break between the northern past and the present, and 
indeed, that "camping and "modern" life would co-exist for 
some indeterminant 
time - played a significant role in 
determining the character of the 1955 scheme and the shape it 
took in subsequent years. Without any doubt, the new system, 
as had been the case with southern educational strategy, 
stressed the value of residential complexes as cultural 
bridges, institutions in-between. Or, as it was explained in 
a Departmental review of educational plans in 1954, because 
most of the region's Aboriginal people were "constantly on the 
move," then the "residential school is perhaps the most 
effective way of giving children from primitive environments, 
experience in education along the lines of civilization 
leading to vocational training to fit them for occupations in 
the white man's economy." 308 And true to residential school 
logic, the schools' transformative process, the way in which 
it would make children "fit," would encompass more than 
classroom education. With respect to Inuit children, for 
example, the residences would have the advantage of removing 
children from homes that lacked "all the more desirable habits 
of sanitation, cleanliness and health since the tents and snow 
houses in which they live are so small and their way of life 
is so primitive." In the hostels, it would be possible to 
carry out "adequate health education programmes" which, with 
improvements on the traditional diet, would "make them [the 
children] better able to carry on with their schooling" which 
would in turn ensure their "orderly integration into the white 
economy. "309 
The 1955 scheme seemed to strive, however, to be more than a 
just a replication of the Indian Affairs system. Northern 
Affairs was not marching into the future without having gained 
any wisdom from residential education's history. The old 
Northwest 
Territories' 
residential 
schools were dreadful 
monuments; they were cautionary tales to be read and their 
mistakes avoided. Northern officials were not unmindful of 
this and they acted upon it. Their policy pronouncements, and 
even some of their educational 
strategy and 
curricular 
content, bear witness to that fact. 
Most notably their 
rhetoric of assimilation was undercut by their understanding 
347 

of that past and the continuing realities of the frontier 
north. 
As it prepared the 1955 submission to cabinet, the Department 
was under no illusions about either the physical condition or 
the 
efficacy 
of 
the 
existing 
residential 
schools. 
The 
discussions with the Catholic church for the Chesterfield 
Inlet school had been held against a back drop of considerable 
criticism. The NWT Council's Sub-Committee on Education felt 
that the old mission residential schools had 
up to the moment, been rather ineffective largely 
because teachers were not qualified, no curriculum 
was laid down, no standards were set up, and there 
was little supervision, guidance or inspection by 
an independent authority . . . .310 
Northern Affairs was determined, in the operation of its new 
large hostels, to overcome "the deficiencies in the type of 
education given in the residential schools by the missions."311 
And it intended to treat its wards differently avoiding, for 
example, 
"the extensive regimentation of children" which 
resulted in the "sublimation of the individual personality in 
the mass." 
R.A.J. 
Phillips, 
the Department's 
assistant 
director of plans and policy, cautioned the staff of the 
education division that they would have to be alert to the 
"external manifestations" of that kind of discipline, to "such 
practises as the "lock step' used when children move from 
place to place," practises that would have to be "struggled 
against" continually.312 
Symbolically, at least, the Department signalled its intention 
of separating itself from that past, "of making a radical 
change in policy with regard to residential schools" by the 
decision, a part of the 1955 scheme, that the old residences 
would be "systematically replaced."313 
But realistically, it would take more than symbols, the 
replacement of old residences by new ones, to obviate what had 
been in the history of residential schools one of the key 
ingredients in their failure to be either cultural bridges, or 
to contribute positively to the development of Aboriginal 
communities - both of which had been, sequentially, the goals 
of the old Indian Affairs residences. Northern Affairs was 
alive to this, in particular to the critical question of after 
life - to what had been the destabilizing conflict between 
training and socialization for "integration into the white 
economy"314 and the fact that many children on leaving schools 
would return to an Aboriginal economy. Once at home, they 
would revert to that culture or find, Northern Affairs 
recognized, 
that 
their 
"years 
in a 
residential 
school 
sometimes makes it difficult for them to readjust."315 
348 

In view of the historic, double-edged failure of southern 
residential 
education, 
its 
policy, 
as 
the 
Department 
characterized it in its review of education in 1954, had been 
and would continue to be in a sense bi-cultural. For example, 
the 
approach 
to 
the 
Inuit 
of 
"Eskimoland" 
had 
been, 
supposedly, to provide the "degree and kind of education" 
which allowed them "to live a fuller life in their own 
environment" and simultaneously to enable them "to take 
advantage 
of 
opportunities 
which 
may 
arise 
from 
the 
encroachment of outside civilization." This approach, with its 
inherent recognition of the importance of Aboriginal and non-
Aboriginal 
training 
for 
the 
children, 
called 
for 
the 
integration 
of 
school 
and 
life. 
Therefore, 
the 
review 
continued, amongst such initiatives as an experiment with 
itinerant teaching - instructing children in "native camps" -
the 
school term for both residential and day schools is 
being revised in order that the children themselves 
may be free to travel with their parents during the 
hunting and trapping season in order that that 
portion of their education may not be neglected 
.... In most parts of the world the children look 
forward to summertime and holidays. School 
is 
closed and homework is forgotten. But in some parts 
of the Canadian North, children beg their teacher 
to teach school throughout the summer in order that 
they may learn to read and write. This is not as 
strange as it may seem, for during the winter time 
the children attend a different kind of school. 
They 
learn 
to 
fish, 
to 
trap 
foxes, 
to 
hunt 
walruses, 
and 
to make 
skin 
garments 
to 
keep 
themselves warm at temperatures far below freezing. 
All of this may be fun for the children but it is 
hard on school attendance, so during the short 
Arctic summer the youngsters attend a more formal 
kind of school when it is the teacher who goes 
without his summer holidays. 
There was here a recognition of the children's difference and 
even of the implications of it for pedagogy and curriculum. 
"The problem of instruction," the review continued, "results 
from the fact that the learner is finding his way from one 
culture to another" - a journey that could easily be made even 
more difficult 
"if his school environment and his home 
surroundings differ too widely and if either is too insistent 
in its demand upon him." Teachers on their part were faced 
with children who in almost every case had no knowledge of the 
English language and "with the problems of spanning a period 
of progress and culture ranging from that of the late Stone 
Age to that of the present Atomic Age." 
349 

For the Department the way forward to achieving its goal of 
the modernization rather than the elimination of northern 
Aboriginal 
culture lay 
in developing 
"a new 
curriculum 
particularly 
suited to the needs and conditions of the 
Northwest Territories." A localized curriculum would require 
research "on the general features of native life which have a 
bearing on the educational programme" so that "instruction . . . 
[could] be closely related to the native way of life." 
Aboriginal children needed, "in their own interests, " to know 
how to read and write, to do simple arithmetic, "to learn how 
to keep healthy" and "to acquire certain skills which will be 
of assistance to them in their own native way of life" through 
vocational instruction, manual training and domestic science," 
and "to learn to understand the nature of their immediate 
social world." The end result, the "ultimate aim in the 
education of the native people," was not to make them "fall 
into the pattern of the whiteman's way of life but to help 
them 
become 
better 
Indians 
and 
Eskimos."316 
Progress, 
assimilation and Aboriginal culture were, apparently, to be 
balanced and blended. 
Lesage championed all these ideas before cabinet: the "special 
curriculum" and the "mingling of pupils - whether Indian, 
Eskimo, part-blood or white - in common schools" which would 
"have important social and psychological advantages in the 
north." Most critically, not only in terms of the education 
but of the care of the children, "teachers and curricula would 
be more completely under government control" (allowing the 
Department to steer its difficult bi-cultural course) and 
meaning that "standards could be established and maintained 
more effectively." Finally, he assured cabinet members that 
the proposals they had before them 
have been discussed fully with Bishop Marsh of the 
Church of England and Bishop Trocellier of the 
Roman Catholic Church. Both agree that it is the 
programme best designed to meet the special needs 
of the north and to remove difficulties that have 
been increasing in recent years because of the 
inadequacy 
of 
school 
facilities 
in 
various 
locations for children of one faith or the other.317 
Unfortunately, Lesage's plan shared the fate of many of the 
southern schemes for reforms in residential education. In 
important ways, it was to be no more than an insightful 
intention. Certainly, with the construction of the large and 
small hostels a new and improved infrastructure was created 
and it can even be argued that small hostels represented an 
advance on previous models. There was also a continuing 
interest in tailoring school terms to hunting seasons and in 
that way to do "everything in our power to maintain the native 
way of life, provided it does not jeopardize our educational 
350 

programme."318 And the system was multi-cultural. In 1964 there 
were, in the eight large hostels, 957 Indian and Inuit 
children and 195 white and Metis.319 
But in the operation of the system no effective balance was 
struck between cultural preservation, the rather ill-defined 
idea of modernization, 
of producing 
"better Indians and 
Eskimos," 320 and assimilation - between the goals of making 
Aboriginal children "true Canadian citizens while at the 
sametime maintaining their racial pride...."321 Within the 
northern system, in its classrooms and residence halls, 
assimilation 
was 
the 
norm. 
The 
rhetoric 
of 
cultural 
sensitivity and preservation was not in the end matched by the 
reality of the system, itself, nor could it ever have been 
given the wider policy and developmental context in which the 
system functioned and which it served. 
This negative assessment would certainly have been disputed by 
the Department, itself. Indeed, a decade after Lesage's plan 
was given cabinet approval, the Deputy Minister, E.A. Cote, in 
a memo to the Minister, A. Laing, defended the Department's 
record ticking off its accomplishments. They had developed, he 
argued, the most "decentralized curriculum" in use anywhere in 
Canada based upon the belief that "the content of learning is 
best developed from the local setting where learning takes 
place." As well, because the "process in learning must involve 
the learner in some real and meaningful sense to him, and, 
therefore, should be related to his everyday activities" the 
standard 
literary 
curriculum had been supplemented 
with 
courses "in practical fields . . . related to the mode of 
living" of Aboriginal communities: "the care of firearms," 
"the operation and repair of outboard motors, " "resource 
harvesting," "fur treatment and use," "nutrition and the care 
of food" and so forth - "all this in the context of the 
immediate environment." 
The deputy minister also pointed to 
advances in the development of a new "Eskimo orthography" 
based on the Roman letter script to replace the existing 
Syllabic system. 
When completed, it would be the means by 
which 
the 
"Eskimo 
language 
would 
be 
more 
effectively 
preserved" and through which "a literature may be developed." 
Overall, he was confident that the Department had remained 
faithful to the Lesage vision uniting "citizenship" with 
"pride of race." The education being provided was of "use to 
those people who remain on the land and pursue the traditional 
activities of their forbearers." Equally, it broadened the 
"scope for those who seek opportunity elsewhere." He was in no 
doubt of its value and he had little time for any concerns on 
the cultural front. His short discourse for the minister on 
that head, specifically on Inuit culture, suggested, however, 
that 
others 
should 
be 
concerned 
for 
he 
revealed 
an 
assimilationist 
iron hand concealed within a culturally 
351 

sensitive glove based upon the assumption that the future for 
all in the North was a non-Aboriginal one: 
As attractive and as quaint as any aspect of 
culture may be, this does not justify an effort of 
freezing it into a state of perpetuity. It would 
indeed constitute an anachronism in this age and in 
this setting if we sought to maintain a stone-age 
culture, 
for 
example, 
among 
people 
who 
find 
themselves impinged on every side by wave upon wave 
of modern technology. Our main hope is to reconcile 
into 
one whole 
an 
educational 
offering 
which 
reflects on the one hand those aspects of culture 
which are still a part of the Eskimo way of life 
and to introduce, on the other hand, those skills 
that are the common heritage of all mankind. Our 
efforts in offering training for job opportunity to 
the indigenous people and our success in placing 
those trained, lends good support to our view that 
many Eskimo will in due time be gainfully employed. 
There would be, he admitted in concluding, difficulties but 
the prize was well worth the struggle. "It is inevitable that 
in the acculturative process there will be upheavals of one 
kind or another because the path that has been set is an 
irrevocable one." 322 Those "inevitable... upheavals" would be 
in Aboriginal culture, of course. 
An assessment of the curriculum, based in part upon the 
Department's own files and particularly on a briefing given 
the Northwest Territories Council in 1965, leads to the 
conclusion that the Department's educational system, despite 
its curricular initiatives, was only a more subtle form of 
assimilation whether it realized it or not - or, 
indeed, 
whether it intended it to be so. "Upheaval" would be, more 
than just a by-product of this system. It was the main product 
if the impact of residential education in the North was the 
same as it was in the south. 
Cote's ministerial briefing was, in some ways, overstated. The 
curriculum in use in 1965, the year of his report, was not a 
wholly made-to-northern-measure educational suit. It was, 
depending on the location of the school, based upon either the 
Alberta, Manitoba or Ontario curriculum. There were, to be 
sure, "modifications and adaptations .... to suit the northern 
environment." These included, as well as the courses Cote had 
noted, "books, pictures, tapes and other visual aids suitable 
for northern schools." The adaptations were, however, limited 
effectively to primary schools. It was pointed out to Council 
that "The territorial pupils write the Grade XII provincial 
examinations and therefore, must follow the provincial texts 
and curricula in much greater detail." This curricular and 
352 

pedagogical division between primary and secondary education 
gives the impression that northern adaptations were loss 
leaders, educational sweeteners to socialize the children to 
school for the purpose of introducing them more easily as they 
grew older to a standard Canadianized education. Certainly, 
high school students were expected to be capable of passing 
tests based upon a southern curriculum with its southern 
constructs. 
It has to be remembered, moreover, that the system was multi-
cultural, that it had the task of educating non-Aboriginal 
children too and thus it fell under the scrutiny of non-
Aboriginal parents who had cultural expectations of their own 
and were more likely to move between southern and northern 
Canada. These facts tended to strengthen the assimilationist 
elements in the curriculum. The Department admitted that the 
curriculum could not be wholly northern for it had to connect 
meaningfully with southern education: 
learning must 
include much content 
from other 
contexts and as a consequence many books prescribed 
for use in southern schools are also prescribed in 
the north. It is also necessary to keep in mind 
that the transfer of pupils does occur from time to 
time and, consequently, the sequence in learning as 
well as the content needs to bear some resemblance 
to the situation in southern schools.323 
Curiously, the issue of language, though the most critical 
vehicle 
of 
cultural 
transmission, 
was 
given 
almost 
no 
attention. Cote went out of his way to congratulate the 
Department on the work it was doing to preserve the Inuit 
language. But he failed to underline the fact that the schools 
were not bilingual and the language of instruction was 
certainly not Aboriginal. As in Indian Affairs' schools, the 
children were expected to function in a foreign tongue, one 
spoken only by the teachers and the minority of non-Aboriginal 
students in the school. More than any other factor, non-
Aboriginal language training would have produced "upheaval", 
disrupted the children's ontology, and undercut their progress 
through the school system. To be fair to the Department, it 
had plans once the Inuit orthography was completed to teach it 
to adults who would in turn teach it to their children and 
then in due course to introduce it into the schools. Yet the 
minister acknowledged that this would already have to be an 
act of recuperation - placing adults "back in the cultural 
role of elders teaching the child their own language." There 
was no plan for the development of similar programs for other 
Aboriginal languages. He revealed, too, that in his opinion 
there was not going to be the sort of fusion of the culture of 
mankind and elements of Inuit culture that Cote had described. 
"Personally, I feel" that children will "eventually have to 
353 

choose their ultimate way of life just as southern children" 
have to "decide whether they follow the way of their father or 
choose some other vocation which may take them beyond their 
home surroundings. "324 
The assimilative cast of the educational policy is thrown into 
even shaper relief when it is seen in its wider policy 
context. It was nested in a Departmental developmental policy 
that included not only the encouragement of southern economic 
interventions 
into 
the 
region but 
the 
construction 
of 
permanent communities, with schools, to bring the people off 
the land and into contact with those anticipated industrial 
developments and job opportunities. In the rationale for small 
hostels, for example, there lurked the logic of separation 
even if it was toned down. Children were to be divorced from 
parents and from their parent's life on the land. Thus through 
education a people's connection with their culture, which was 
the land, their physical health and spiritual balance was to 
be ruptured: 
It is now a generally established policy that 
wherever possible children from ages 6 to 10 years 
should be kept as close as possible to their 
parents during their school career. Also, for many 
years 
to come many of the families 
... will 
continue to rely for most of their livelihood on 
hunting and trapping. This means that for a good 
part of each year these families will be away from 
the settlement making the regular attendance of 
their children at school impossible without some 
means of keeping them in the settlement.325 
As had been the case in the old Northwest in the 1880s, that 
"means" 
was 
a 
school 
- 
a 
valuable 
"instrument 
of 
colonization." At times indeed, schools led the way being 
often the "first permanent government presence and ... a 
central part of federal efforts to encourage settlement life." 
Despite the rhetoric of "promoting cultural respect" 326 schools 
became, in the hands of teachers who themselves came from the 
south, 
handmaidens 
of 
development 
serving 
the 
labour 
requirements of the new northern economy... if that economy 
ever fully materialized and if those schools could actually 
prepare children for such a future. 
This criticism of the northern curriculum is more than 
academic hindsight. No matter what Departmental head office 
staff might say about the form, content and intentions of 
their educational strategy, it would appear that in its 
delivery, once the children were taken inside the classroom 
and the door closed, it was just as intolerant of Aboriginal 
culture 
as 
old mission 
and 
Indian Affairs 
policy 
had 
intentionally been. That, at least, was the position taken by 
354 

no less an authority than one of the original partners in the 
Lesage plan - Anglican Bishop Marsh, Donald of the Arctic. 
The bishop's assessment of the northern system's educational 
performance differed significantly from Cote's. Marsh was 
willing to credit those in the "upper echelon" with a good 
deal of sincerity when they claimed that "preservation of the 
pride of race" was "one of our major tasks." But "this is 
anything but true amongst those who are teaching the children 
... right across the North." Ottawa, he charged, was out of 
touch for in the schools a quite different ethos operated. "I 
have been repeatedly told by the teaching personnel, that 
their aim is to make the children "white'and able only to take 
their place in the outside system."327 
Apparently, the teachers in the north were armed with same 
cookie cutter that was in the hands of teachers in the Indian 
Affairs system. Marsh was convinced that the text material 
prepared 
by 
the 
Department 
reinforced 
the 
teachers 
assimilationist pedagogy. The texts did, he admitted, contain 
information about "their old way of life" but "nothing which 
would make a child feel that this way of life was of any 
value." The cultural information was no more than a preface, 
a nod to the past as the child was steered toward a non-
Aboriginal future. From reading such texts, the child, he 
thought, would conclude that "this was the past life with 
which we are now done, and we need a new outlook which we are 
getting in school and which has nothing to do with our old 
way." He felt it rather ironic that Departmental efforts to 
create a written Inuit literature in an effort to preserve 
elements of culture was proceeding at the very time that the 
teaching of English in the school was effectively cutting the 
tie 
between 
the 
children 
their 
culture, 
parents 
and 
communities - "the events and the stories of the Eskimo people 
will have been lost for ever; for almost all young people now 
simply don't know them...." A language in written form without 
daily oral use would not survive and certainly would never 
serve as the vital inter-generational container of culture. 
Minority languages could flourish and contribute to the 
success of a people even if their world was dominated by the 
language of others. The Department, Marsh advised, could learn 
from the Welsh experience. It would "give room for thought as 
to the Eskimo language and its loss or retention": 
The Welsh language has been spoken since childhood 
in almost every family .... the Welsh language is 
vitally alive and of importance, for it is not only 
taught and used in school, but is the language of 
the people, and they are proud to be Welsh. 
The Department's education system was no respecter of race. It 
355 

was, simply, assimilation. There was need for fundamental 
reform. The Department must "emphasize and re-emphasize" to 
teachers the necessity "of inculcating a pride of race in the 
children as a most important factor and indeed chief of the 
problems which they face in teaching." 328 To Marsh, having 
visited "Eskimo" and Indian children at the Churchill complex 
in the spring of 1965, it was 
obvious that unless they have a pride in their own 
race 
and 
their 
own 
people, 
they 
will 
feel 
themselves second class citizens, and this will be 
a direct result of the educational system. That 
they have to live among their own people later is 
obvious, and there would seem to be no future for 
them anywhere in numbers. What they have a real 
need to feel is to be one with and to have a great 
respect for their parents and elders. It seems to 
me that we face the task of making the Eskimo feel 
that 
the 
very 
wonderful 
quality 
of 
their 
forefathers 
are 
things 
to 
be 
treasured 
and 
practised. To do this it is vitally necessary that 
there should be some presentation of their parents 
qualities and old way of life during school hours 
and through school channels.329 
In the schools, as they then were, there was little to re-
inforce the children's culture. They were propelled along a 
corridor towards a non-Aboriginal destination. Marsh scoffed 
at Laing's suggestion that children could decide to follow 
either the way of their fathers or some other vocation. That 
had not been, he asserted, the historical experience of "our 
Indian friends and their children" in the south. It was naive 
to pretend that education was somehow neutral that it was 
doing no more than preparing 
children, 
"giving them a 
background", so that they could "decide for the best." The 
Department, he charged, had "already chosen the background 
that they shall be given by sending them to school and by 
giving them a curriculum of the white man's way of life." 
What he wondered would the Department do with these children 
now - "what of their future?" 
What do you intend to do for them to make sure that 
they can get a job and live on the standards of a 
white person? They have been wrested from their way 
of life, and whether they like it or not, have been 
thrust into modern life .... It became to them a 
compulsory 
thing, 
and 
we 
as 
a 
nation 
are 
responsible for having done this, and as such are 
responsible for the future of these people. 
The course the Department was pursuing, Marsh warned, was 
356 

unwise, indeed. If the Department held to it "we will have 
done to them [the Inuit] the same injustice which we practised 
on all to many of our Indian people, of making them second 
class citizens." 330 He did well in this to point his accusatory 
finger at the churches as well. All of them, church, state and 
industry were part of a colonizing project which had been 
"thrust" on Aboriginal communities of the North. Not Marsh's 
gainsaying, nor Laing and Cote's protestations of good intent 
and respect for the old "way of life" could mask the fact that 
northern Aboriginal communities were to be forced to the wall 
in the service of non-Aboriginal interests as had so many 
communities across the land over the last century. And as a 
part of that process, their children would continue to be 
"wrested" away from them and sent off to hostels and schools 
where they were to be made a useful part of this new world and 
where they could be pointed to as proof of Canada's concern 
for the care of its Aboriginal charges. 
In this so familiar process there was, tragically, one further 
factor that drew together the northern and southern school 
experience. In neither school system in the post-war period 
was there much evidence of effective concern, concern that 
moved past intentions and rhetoric, for the care and treatment 
of children who were taken into the schools. Despite Northern 
Affair's determination to eliminate the "deficiencies" in the 
pre-1955 system and despite a complete reformulation by Indian 
Affairs in 1957 of the financial structure of its system aimed 
specifically at improving the level of care in its schools, 
both would leave behind a sorrowful record of neglect and 
abuse - abuse that would echo in the lives of the student's, 
their families and communities. And thus, as the government 
washed its hands of residential education in the north and in 
the south, it would not be able to wash away one important 
fact that, 
as Marsh had written, 
"we as a nation are 
responsible for having done this. . . "331 and will indeed "rue to 
our sorrow and in turn to the sorrow of the Eskimo people"332 
and all Aboriginal people. 
357 

1. 
J. 
Leslie, 
Vision 
Versus 
Revision: 
Native 
People, 
Government Officials, and the Joint Senate/House of Commons 
Committees on Indian Affairs, 1946-1948 and 1959-61 (Ottawa, 
Treaties and Historical Research Centre, INAC). See also: Ian 
V.B. Johnson, Helping Indians Help Themselves - A Committee to 
Investigate Itself, The 1951 Indian Act Consultation Process 
(Ottawa, Treaties and Historical Research Centre, INAC, 1984) . 
2. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8233, File 1/6-1 (1), MR C 14160, 
Memorandum to the Director from B. Neary, 29 November, 1949. 
3. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 35, Educational Services for 
Indians, 24 March, 1969. 
4. INAC File 958/25-13, Vol. 3, To L. Wight from G. Watts, 3 
July, 1973. 
5. INAC File E4974-1, Vol. 3, Historical Trends in Indian 
Education, 1982. 
6. INAC File 601/25-2, Vol. 2, R.F. Davey, Residential Schools 
- Past and Future, 8 March, 1968. 
7. J. Leslie, Vision Versus Revision, page 10. 
8. N. Gull, The "Indian Policy of the Anglican Church of 
Canada from 1945 to the 1970s", unpublished M. A. Thesis 
(Peterborough, Trent University, 1992), page 64. 
9. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-7-1, The Indian 
Speaking Leaf, May/June, 1940. 
10. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-7-1, To Secretary from 
C. Schmidt, 14 September, 1940. 
11. Parliament of Canada, Special Committee on Reconstruction 
and Re-establishment, Minutes of Proceedings and Evidence, No. 
9, 24 May, 1944, page 306. 
12. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6479, File 940-1 (1-2), MR C 8794, To 
Deputy Minister from H. McGill, 25 November, 1942. 
13. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6205, File 468-1 (1-3), MR C 7937, To 
Dr. McGill from R. Hoey, 9 November, 1942. 
14. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8453, File 985/23-5, MR C 13802, To D. 
Mackay from R. Hoey, 16 July, 1943. 
15. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6479, File 940-1 (1-2), MR C 8794, To 
Deputy Minister from H. McGill, 25 November, 1942. 
358 

16. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6479, File 940-1 (1-2), MR C 8794, To 
Dr. McGill from R. Hoey, 16 November, 1942. 
17. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6205, File 468-1, MR C 7937, To Dr. 
Dorey from R. Hoey, 29 May, 1944. See also: INAC File 6-21-1, 
Vol. 2, The Growth of High School Education and Memorandum to 
the Deputy Minister from H.M. Jones, 22 December, 1958 with 
attached Progress in Indian Education. 
18. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-7-3 Part 1, To Rev. G. 
Dorsey from T.A. Crerar, 20 October, 1941. 
19. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6479, File 940-1 (1-2), MR C 8794, To 
Deputy Minister from H. McGill, 25 November, 1942. See the 
Deputy's authorization in the margin. 
20. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 651/25-1, MR C 9701, To 
Bishop W. Bird from R. Hoey, 23 January, 1939. 
21. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6205, File 468-1, MR C 7937, To the 
Deputy Mnisiter from R.A. Hoey, 7 June, 1944. 
22. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6205, File 468-1 (1-3), Mr C 7937, To 
Dr. G. Dorey from R. Hoey, 29 May, 1944. 
23. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6334, File 662-1 (1-2), MR C 9811, To 
Rev. J. Plourde O.M.I, from Deputy Minister, 27 September, 
1946 . 
24. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8621, File 506/6-1-018, MR C 14238, 
Memorandum to the Director from B. Neary, 29 November, 1949. 
25. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6334, File 662-1 (1-2), MR C 9811, To 
Rev. J. Plourde O.M.I, from Deputy Minister, 27 September, 
1946 . 
26. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8576, File 1/1-2-21, MR C 14215, 
Regional School Inspectors Conference 10-11 April, 1958. See 
R. Davey's remarks. 
27. INAC File 601/25-2, Vol. 2, R.F. Davey, Residential 
Schools - Past and Present, 8 March, 1968. 
28. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8753, File 601/25-1, MR C 9701, To 
Deputy Minister from H. Jones, 7 November, 1955. 
29. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-5-4, Memorandum to 
Cabinet from C. Gibson, 28 September, 1949. 
30. INAC File 601/25-2, Vol. 2, R.F. Davey, Residential 
Schools - Past and Present, 8 March, 1968. 
359 

31. J. Leslie, Vision Versus Revision, page 1. 
32. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8233, File 1/6-1 (1), MR C 14160, 
Memorandum to the Director from B. Neary, 29 November, 1949. 
33. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7185, File 1/25-1-7-1, To Rev. R. Reed 
from J. Pickersgill, 5 July, 1956. 
34. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6205, File 468-1, MR C 7937, To the 
Deputy Minister from R.A. Hoey, 7 June, 1944. 
35. INAC File 6-2-21, Vol. 3, Statement Presented by Mr. R.F. 
Davey on Behalf of Indian Affairs Branch To the Standing 
Committee of Ministers of Education, 25 September, 1963. 
36. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-1, MR C 8152, To Reverend 
and Dear Sirs from F. Oliver, 21 March, 1908. 
37. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8244, File 377/6-1-006 
(1-4), To 
Regional Supervisor, Quebec, from R. Davey, 4 March, 1958. 
38. N.A.C. RG 10 8576, File 1/1-2-21, MR C 14215, Regionl 
School Inspectors Conference, 1956. See remarks by H. Jones. 
39. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8758, File 772/25-1, MR C 9702, To E. 
Wooliams. M.P. from E. Fairclough, 13 March, 1962. 
40. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8758, File 773/25-1, MR C 9702, 
Memorandum to the Deputy Minister from H. Jones, 2 October, 
1957 . 
41. INAC File 601/25-1, Vol. 6, To Chief D. Ahenakew from J.G 
McGilp, 24 February, 1970. 
42. INAC File 501/25-1-019, Vol. 1, To A.B. WeselakM.P. from 
H.M. Jones, 4 June, 1954. 
43. INAC File 4745-1, Vol. 1, Indian Education Program, 1972. 
44. INAC File 501/25-1, Vol. 9, Minister's Address to the 
Council of Ministers of Education, 23 June, 1972. 
45. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 1, Memorandum for Major MacKay from 
L. Fortier, 26 January, 1951 with attached Memorandum for 
Presentation to the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration, 
23 January, 1951. 
46. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8576, File 1/1-2-2-21, MR C 14215, 
Regional School Inspectors Conference, 21-23 November, 1956. 
See remarks by H. Jones. 
360 

47. INAC File 6-2-21, Vol. 3, Statement Presented by MR. R.F. 
Davey on Behalf of Indian Affairs Branch To the Standing 
Committee of Ministers of Education, 25 September, 1963. 
48. INAC File 4745-1 Vol. 1, Indian Education Program, 1972. 
49. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8448, File 506/23-5-019, MR C 13800, 
Fort Alexander Inspection Report by B. Warkentin, 15 June, 
1943 . 
50. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 651/25-1, MR C 9701, To 
Director from B. Neary, 20 August, 1948. 
51. INAC File l/25-l, Vol. 22, Memorandum on Education, R.F. 
Davey, 15 September, 1969. 
52. INAC File 4745-1, Vol. l. Indian Education Program, 1972. 
53. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 22, Memorandum on Education, R.F. 
Davey, 15 September, 1969. 
54. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7180, File 1/25-1 (9), To the Deputy 
Minister from H. Jones, 13 December, 1960. 
55. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7180, File 1/25-1 
(9), To Quebec 
Regional Office from A.R. Jolicoeur, 26 February, 1962. 
56. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7182, File 1/25-1 (13), To E. Walter 
from R. Davey, 19 February, 1964. 
57. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 2, To D.M. Watters from L. Fortier, 
22 July, 1958. 
58. INAC File 501/25-1, Vol. 9, Minister's Address to the 
Council of Ministers of Education, 23 June, 1972. 
59. INAC File 301/25-13, Vol. 4, To R.L. Boulanger from D. 
Kogawa, 25 January, 1973. 
60. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8576, File 1/1-2-21, MR C 14215, 
Regional School Inspectors Conference, 10-11 April, 1958. See 
remarks by R. Davey. 
61. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 876, File 673/25-1, To H. Chapman from 
R. Davey, 12 December, 1956. 
62. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7180, File 1/25-1 (7), To R.W. Dunning 
from R. Davey, 10 February, 1959. 
63. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8596, File 1/1-13, MR C 14226, To 
Director from B. Neary, 28, September, 1950. 
361 

64. INAC File E4974-1, Vol. 3, Historical Trends in Indian 
Education, 1982. 
65. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7182, File 1/25-1-1-1, MR C 9695, Answer 
to Parliamentary Question, 1952. 
66. INAC File 901/25-11, Vol. 1, To All Regional Supervisors 
... from R. Davey, 25 January, 1957. 
67. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8233, File 1/6-1, MR C 14160, To 
Secretary, Treasury Board, from B. Neary, 1 August, 1950. 
68. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7180, File l/25-l (7), To R.W. Dunning 
from R. Davey, 10 February, 1959. 
69. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8233, File 1/6-1, MR C 14160, To 
Secretary, Treasury Board, from B. Neary, 1 August, 1950. 
70. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8233, File 1/6-1, MR C 14160, Memorandum 
to Deputy Minister, 7 October, 1950. 
71. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8576, File 1/1-2-2-21, MR C 14215, 
Conference of Regional School Superintnedents, 25-27, March, 
1963. See remarks by H. Jones. 
72. INAC File 6-37-1, Vol. 2, Memorandum to the Deputy 
Minister from H. Jones, 4 January, 1962. See attached Notes on 
Highlights of Indian Affairs Operation 1957 to Date. 
73. INAC File 4745-1, Vol. 1, Indian Education Program, 1972. 
74. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7180, File 1/25-1 (7), To R.W. Dunning 
from R. Davey, 10 February, 1959. 
75. INAC File 6-37-1, Vol. 2, Memorandum to the Deputy 
Minister from H. Jones, 4 January, 1962. See attached Notes on 
Highlights of Indian Affairs Operation 1957 to Date. 
76. INAC File 81/25-1, Vol. 2, Statement Presented by Mr. R.F. 
Davey on Behalf of Indian Affairs Branch to the Standing 
Committee of Ministers of Education, 25 September, 1963. 
77. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 3, Memorandum to the Minister Re: 
Integration from H. Jones, 16 May, 1963. 
78. INAC File 6-21-7, Vol. 1, Memorandum to the Minister from 
H. Jones, 7 May, 1963. 
79. INAC File 6-21-7, Vol. l, Memorandum to the Acting Deputy 
Minister, 7 June, 1963. See also: To Dr. W.H. Swift from H. 
Jones, 19 June, 1963. 
362 

80. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 35, Educational Services for 
Indians, 24 March, 1969. 
81. Statement of the Government of Canada on Indian Policy, 
(Ottawa, INAC, 1969), page 11. 
82. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 35, Educational Services for 
Indians, 24 March, 1969. 
83. INAC File 601/1, Vol. 4, Memorandum of Agreement ... ,15 
December, 1969. 
84. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 35, Educational Services for 
Indians, 24 March, 1969. 
85. INAC File 601/25-2, Vol. 2, R.F. Davey, Residential 
Schools - Past and Future, 8 March, 1968. 
86. INAC File 211/6-1-010, Vol. 6, To Maritime Regional Office 
from R. Davey, 20 July, 1967. 
87. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7190, File 411/25-1-010, MR C 9698, To 
Assistant Deputy Minister, Indian Affairs, from R. Davey, 9 
March, 1965. See, for other examples: Vol. 6859, File 494/25-
2-014, MR C 13727, To Regional School Superintendent from D. 
MacBeath, 12 February, 1962, INAC File 211/6-1-010, Vol. 6, To 
... from R.F. Davey, 10 March, 1967 and INAC File 853/25-2, 
Vol. 1, To Indian Commissioner for B.C. from W.E. Grant, 9 
August, 1962. 
88. INAC File 1/25-1-7-3, Vol. 2, To ... from J.B. Bergevin, 
2 July, 1970. 
89. INAC File 501/25-13-083, Vol. 11, To Hon. W. Dinsdale from 
J. Slobodzian, 19 June, 1970. 
90. See for example: INAC File 501/25-1-008, Vol. 1, To J. 
Slobodzian from R. Davey, 19 May, 1966 and To Director, 
Education Services from J. Slobodzian, 17 May, 1966. 
91. INAC File 451/1-18, Vol. 2, To D.P. Nigra from W. McKim, 
18 April, 1972. 
92. INAC File 479/1-1, Memorandum to File from G.D. Cromb, 6 
March, 1970. 
93. INAC File 80-25-2, To H.B. Rodine from R. Davey, 8 March, 
1965 . 
94. INAC File 116/25-4, Vol. 1, To All Indian Agents ..., 23 
April, 1947. 
363 

95. INAC File 501/25-1-105, Vol. 1, Circular No. 42, To All 
Superintendents ..., 6 October, 1958. 
96. See, 
for example: 
INAC File 25-2-764, 
Vol. 
6, 27 
September, 1962. 
97. For examples of how this was accomplished see: INAC File 
501/1, Vol. 1, 18 January, 1968, INAC File 116/23-16-737, 10 
February, 1959 and INAC File 773/25-2-004, Family Allowances -
Unsatisfactory School Report, 14 November, 1966. 
98. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7190, File 493/25-1-001, MR C 9698, To 
Canon H. Cook from R. Davey, 19 June, 1957. 
99. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7190, File 493/25-1-001, MR C 9698, To 
R. Davey from Regional Supervisor, North Bay, 6 March, 1961. 
100. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 22, Memorandum on Education, R.F. 
Davey, 15 September, 1969. 
101. See, for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7182, File 1/25-1 
(13), To Assistant Director, Education from L. Jampolsky, 24 
February, 1964 and INAC File 958/25-13, 3 July, 1973. 
102. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 22, To Mr. Bergevin from R.F. 
Davey, 15 September, 1969. 
103. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7190, File 493/25-1-001, MR C 9698, 
Memorandum to the Deputy Minister, 26 January, 1959. 
104. INAC File 958/25-1, Vol. 1, 13 October, 1950. See also: 
INAC File 853/25-2, Vol. 1, 9 August, 1962. 
105. INAC File 501/25-3, Vol. 4, 16 May, 1977. 
106. INAC File 501/25-13-083, Vol. 11, 5 May, 1970. 
107. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8621, File 506/6-1-018, MR C 14238, To 
H. Green, Minister of Public Works, 3 April, 1958, Memorandum 
to the Deputy Minister from H. Jones, 27 February, 1958 and 
Memorandum to the Deputy Minister from L. Brown, 19 March, 
1958 . 
108. For the closures see: INAC File 501/1, Vol. 2, To 
Assistant Deputy Minister from R.F. Davey, 18 August, 1969. 
109. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7187, File 371/25-1-021, MR C 9697, 
Memorandum to the Deputy Minister, 22 October, 1948. 
110. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8244, File 377/6-1-006 (1-4) MR C 
13842-13843, To Rev. C.C. Robinson from R. Davey, 3 December, 
1956 
[see attached minutes], To Bishop Robinson from C. 
364 

Sunstrum, Mayor of Cochrane, 24 April, 1957, To Minister of 
Citizenship and Immigration from A. Dupont, Clerk of the Town 
of La Tuque, 7 November, 1958, To Canon H. Cook from R. Davey, 
9 January, 1958 and to R. Davey from Canon H. Cook, 14 
January, 1958. 
111. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8576, File 1/1-2-2-21, MR C 14215, 
Regional School Inspectors Conference, 10-11 April, 1958. See 
remarks by R. 
Davey. 
112. 
INAC 
File 
1/25-1-5-2. 
Vol. 
1, 
Circular 
No. 
832, 
Separation 
of 
Classroom 
and 
Residence 
Administration 
Residential Schools, 29 July, 1968. For Guidelines for Student 
Residences [Draft] 5 June, 1970, see: INAC File 601/25-13, 
Vol. 2. 
113. INAC File 601/25-2, Vol. 2, R.F. Davey, Residential 
Schools - Past and Future, 8 March, 1968. 
114. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7190, File 411/25-1-010, MR C 9698, To 
Assistant Deputy Minister from R. Davey, 9 March, 1965. 
115. INAC File 601/25-2, Vol. 2, R.F. Davey, Residential 
Schools - Past and Future, 8 March, 1968 and INAC File 1/25-1 
Vol. 35, Eduational Services for Indians, 24 March, 1969. 
116. INAC File 211/6-1-010, Vol. 6, To All Superintendents 30, 
January, 1967. 
117. INAC File 601/25-1, Vol. 6, To Chief Ahenakew from J.D. 
McGilp, 24 February, 1970. 
118. INAC File 501/1, Vol. 5, 29 April, 1971. 
119. Parliament of Canada, Special Committee on Reconstruction 
and Re-establishment, Minutes of Proceedings and Evidence, No. 
9, 24 May, 1944, page 306. 
120. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8576, File 1/1-2-2-21, MR C 14215, 
Regional School Inspectors Conference, 10-11 April, 1958. See 
remarks by R. Davey. 
121. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8233, File 1/6-1 (1), MR C 14160, 
Memorandum to the Director from B. Neary, 29 November, 1949. 
122. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7190, File 411/25-1-010, MR C 9698, To 
Rev. L. Burns SJ from R. Davey, 18 May, 1954. 
123. INAC File 116/25-2-763, 17 August, 1959. 
365 

124. INAC File 601/25-2, Vol. 2, R. Davey, Residential Schools 
- Past and Future, 8 March, 1968. For the evolution of 
categories see: INAC File 1/25-2, Vol. 4, To Social Program 
Division from R. Davey, 10 March, 1965 and INAC File 116/25-2-
763, 17 August, 1959. 
125. INAC File 577/25-2, Vol. 1968, Circular No. 37, To Chiefs 
..., 9 June, 1969, see attached: Admissions Policy for Indian 
Student Residences. 
126. INAC File 501/25-2-065, Vol. 5, See the Application for 
Admission to Residential School forms on file. 
127. INAC File 773/29-1, Vol. 1, To Regional Supervisor from 
J.R. Tully, 21 May, 1965. 
128. INAC File 772/3-6-1, Vol. 1, To Director from G.H. 
Gooderham, 14 January, 1954. 
129. INAC File 675/25-1-018, Vol. 2, To R. Davey from N.J. 
Mcleod, 8 December, 1960. 
130. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8758, File 772/25-1, MR C 9702, To E. 
Wooliams M.P. from E. Fairclough, 12 March, 1962. 
131. INAC File 211/6-1-010, Vol. 6, To All Superintendents 
from F.B. McKinnon, 30 January, 1967 and 10 March, 1967. 
132. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 2, 13 December, 1956. 
133. INAC File 901/29-4, Analysis of Residential Schools -
British Columbia, 8 December, 1961. 
134. INAC File 40-2-185, Vol. 1, Relationships Between Church 
and State in Indian Education, 26 September, 1966. See also: 
File 671/25-2, Vol. 3, 24 January, 1974 and File 675/25-13, 
Vol. 2, 16 June, 1975 and from R. Martin 24 March, 1975. 
135. INAC File 675/25-1-018, Vol. 2, To Chief Education 
Division from N.J. McLeod, 8 December, 1960 and File 675/25-
13, Vol. 1, 18 January. 
136. INAC File 675/25-13, Vol. 1, 29 March, 1974. 
137. INAC File 673/25-13, Vol. 2, 30 June, 1975. In 1960 
Shubenacadie was at 67 per cent - see: File 201/29-16, Vol. 1, 
To Indian Affairs Branch from F.B. McKinnon, 15 November, 
1960 . 
366 

138. INAC File 675/25-1-018, Vol. 2, To Chief Education 
Division from N.J. McLeod, 8 December, 1960. 
139. INAC File 13/25-2, To Mr. Matters from [a Principal], 2 
August, 1956. 
140. INAC File 211/6-1-010, Vol. 6, 10 March, 1967. 
141. INAC File 901/29-4, Analysis of Residential Schools -
British Columbia, 8 December, 1961. 
142. INAC File 211/6-1-010, Vol. 6, To All Superintendents 
from F.B. McKinnon, 30 January, 1967, To P. Fleming from F.B. 
McKinnon, 
1 March, 1967 and 10 March, 1967. 
143. INAC File 501/25-1-075, Vol. 1, To W. Rudnicki from R. 
Davey, 5 September, 1963. 
144. INAC File 211/6-1-010, Vol. 6, To ... from R. Davey, 10 
March, 1967. 
145. INAC File 675/25-1-018, Vol. 2, To Chief Education 
Division from N.J. McLeod, 8 December, 1960. 
146. INAC File 958/25-13, Vol. 3, To L. Wight from G. Watts, 
3 July, 1973. 
147. INAC File 211/6-1-010, Vol. 6, 30 January, 1967. 
148. INAC File 451/25-2-004, Vol. 2, 26 August, 1968. 
149. INAC File 601/25-13, Vol. l, To Regional Director -
Social Affairs, 10 June, 1969 and attached Admissions Policy 
for Indian Student Residences, Preface. 
150. INAC File 6-37-1, Vol. 2, Indian Welfare Services 1952-
1957. 
151. INAC File 6-37-1, Vol. 1, Memorandum To The Deputy 
Minister, 4 January, 1962 and attached Notes on Highlights of 
Indian Affairs Operation 1957 to Date. 
152. INAC File 577/25-2, To All Guidance Counsellors, 23 
September, 1969. 
153. INAC File 671/25-2, Vol. 3, 
To 
W. Grant from F. 
Misiurski, 24 January, 1974. 
154. INAC File 501/1, Vol. 5, To Minister from H.B. Robinson, 
29 April, 1971. 
367 

155. INAC File 601/25-1, Vol. 6, To Chief D. Ahenakew from J. 
McGilp, 24 February, 1970. 
156. INAC File 501/25-1-075, Vol. 1, To W. Rudnicki from R. 
Davey, 5 September, 1963. 
157. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 69, To Dr. M. Richer from D.K..F. 
Wattie, 13 April, 1976. 
158. INAC File 577/25-2, To All Guidance Counsellors, 23 
September, 1969. 
159. INAC 773/25-2-003, Vol. 8, 30 October, 1974. 
160. INAC File 1/25-13, 13 April, 1971. 
161. INAC File 211/6-1-010, Vol. 6, 1 March, 1967. 
162. INAC File 479/1-1, Memorandum to File from G.D Cromb, 6 
March, 1970. 
163. INAC File 211/6-1-010, Vol. 6, 1 March, 1967. 
164. INAC File 40-2-185, Vol. 1, Relationships Between Church 
and State in Indian Education, 26 September, 1966. 
165. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 35, Educational Services for 
Indians, 24 March, 1996. 
166. INAC File 42/25-2-464, Vol. 2, To District 
School 
Superintendent, Port Arthur, 31 October, 1960. 
167. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8621, File 506/6-1-018, MR C 14238, To 
Director from B. Neary, 29 November, 1949. 
168. See Chapter 5. 
169. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 2, Brief to the Minister of 
Citizenship 
and 
Immigration 
in reference 
to a 
Special 
Deputation of the Anglican Church of Canada, November 20th, 
1959. For similar sentiments from a Catholic church official 
see: INAC File 1/25-1-7-6, Vol. 1, 4 November, 1954. 
170. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8445, File 1/23-5 (2), MR C 13798, 
Residential School Principal's Conference, 17 April, 1958. 
171. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 2, Brief to the Minister of 
Citizenship 
and 
Immigration 
in 
reference 
to a 
Special 
Deputation of the Anglican Church of Canada, November 20th, 
1959 . 
368 

172. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 651/25-1, MR C 9701, To R. 
Hoey from Canon H. Cook, 25 January, 1948. 
173. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 2, Memorandum to the Deputy 
Minister, 25 May, 1959. 
174. INAC File 40-2-185, Vol. 1, Relationships Between Church 
and State in Indian Education, 26 September, 1966. 
175. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7180, File l/25-l (8), Memorandum to 
the Deputy Minister from H.M. Jones, 12 November, 1959. 
176. INAC File 901/25-11, Vol. 1, 22 September, 1956 and 9 
November, 1956. 
177. INAC File 773/23-5-003, Vol. 2, To Chief Education 
Division from R.F. Battle, 20 January, 1960. 
178. INAC File 1/25-1-7-6, Vol. l, Minutes of Conference re 
Indian High School Education in the Priarie Provinces -
January 26th and 27th, 1960. 
179. 
Deschateletes 
Archives, 
HR 
8005, 
C73R, 
Doc. 
4, 
Residential Education for Indian Acculturation, Indian and 
Eskimo Welfare Commission (Ottawa, Oblate Fathers in Canada, 
1958), pages 4-15. 
180. INAC File 1/25-1-7-6, Vol. 1, Minutes of Conference re 
Indian High School Education in the Priarie Provinces -
January 26th and 27th, 1960. 
181. INAC File 6-2-21, Vol. 3, Memorandum to the Minister, 16 
May, 1963. 
182. INAC File 901/225-11, Vol. 1, 8 June, 1953. 
183. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8632, File 511/6-1-024, MR C 14247, To 
R. Davey from R. Davis, 2 July, 1954. 
184. INAC File 487/25-1-014, Vol. 1, Memorandum to Mr.C. 
Fairholm from R. Davey, 23 April, 1954. 
185. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 876, File 673/25-1, To H. Chapman from 
R. Davey, 12 December, 1956. 
186. INAC File 901/25-11, Vol. 1, 8 June, 1953, 21 May, 1953 
and 23 April, 1953. 
187. INAC File 901/25-11, Vol. 1, 26 February, 1953. 
188. INAC File 901/25-11, Vol. 1, 25 February, 1953 and 18 
February, 1953. 
369 

189 . INAC File 901/25 -11, vol. 1, 23 February, 1953 
190 . INAC File 901/25 -11, Vol. 1, 18 February, 1953 
191. INAC File 901/25 -11, Vol . 1, 21 April, 1954. 
192 . INAC File 901/25 -11, Vol . 1, 10 March, 1953. 
193 . INAC File 901/25 -11, vol. 1, 25 February, 1953 
194. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 3, Memorandum to the Minister, 16 
May, 1963. 
195. INAC File 853/25-1, Vol. 2, Report to the Chief of the 
Education Division, Indian Affairs Branch on the Experiment 
with 
Integration of Indian Students (R.C.) ... 1960-61. 
196. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8233, File 1/6-1 (1), MR C 14160, 
Memorandum to the Director from B. Neary, 29 November, 1949. 
197. INAC File 6-37-1, Vol. 2, Notes on Highlights of Indian 
Affairs Operation 1957 to Date. 
198. INAC File 958/25-1, Vol. 1, 13 October, 1950. 
199. INAC File 6-37-1, Vol. 2, Notes on Highlights of Indian 
Affairs Operation 1957 to Date and File 601/25-2, Vol. 2 R.F. 
Davey, Residential Schools- Past and Present, 8 March, 1968. 
200. INAC File 6-37-1, Vol. 2, Notes on Highlights of Indian 
Affairs Operation from 1957 to Date. 
201. 
INAC 
File 
D4700-1, 
Vol. 
2, 
Economic 
and 
Social 
Development - Indian Education, Discussion Paper, 22 July, 
1981. 
202. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8596, File 1/1-13, MR C 14226, To 
Deputy Minister from B. Neary, 13 June, 1950. 
203. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 22, Memorandum on Education, R.F. 
Davey, 15 September, 1969. 
204. INAC File958/25-l, Vol. 1, To W.S. Arneil from R.F. 
Davey, 13 July, 1954. 
205. INAC File 23-16, Vol. 1, To All School Superintendents, 
May, 1966. 
206. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 772/23-5-002, To W. Pugh 
from P. Phelan, 9 September, 1949. 
370 

207. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8233, 
File 1/6-1, MR C 14160, 
Memorandum to Director from B. Neary, 29 November, 1949. 
208. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 655/25-1, MR C 9701, 
Vocational Training Memorandum from A. J. Doucet, 29 January, 
1949. 
209. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 655/25-1, MR C 9701, To J. 
Warden from R. Davey, 1 December, 1953. 
210. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 2, Memorandum for the Deputy 
Minister, 18 July, 1958. 
211. INAC File 501/25-1-018, 21, June, 1965. 
212. INAC File, 6-21-7, Vol. l, Confidential, Memorandum to 
the Minister, 12 March, 1959. 
213. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 2, Memorandum for the Deputy 
Minister from H.M. Jones, 18 July, 1958 and Memorandum to 
Cabinet: High School Instruction for Indian Students from E. 
Fairclough, 22 January, 1959. 
214. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 2, Memorandum for the Deputy 
Minister from H. Jones, 18 July, 1958. 
215. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8445, File 1/23-5 (2), MR C 13798, 
Principal's Conference, 17 April, 1958. See also Deschatelets 
Archives, HR 8538, C73L, Doc. 44, To J. Melling from A. Renaud 
O.M.I., 3 February, 1961. 
216. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8445, File 1/23-5 (2), MR C 13798, 
Principal's Conference, 17 April, 1958. 
217. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 655/25-1, MR C 9701, 
Memorandum to the Deputy Minister from R.F. Battle, 25 May, 
1965 . 
218. INAC File 6-21-7, Vol. l, 22 December, 1959. 
219. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 2, Memorandum to Cabinet: High 
School Instruction for Indian Students from E. Fairclough, 22 
January, 1959. 
220. INAC File 1/25-1-7-6, Vol. l, Minutes of Conference re 
Indian High School Education in the Priarie Provinces -
January 26th and 27th, 1960. 
221. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8614, File 777/1-13-009, MR C 14234, To 
K. Gooderham from R. Davey, 29 April, 1964. 
371 

222. INAC File 40-2-185, Vol. l, Relationship Between Church 
and State in Indian Education, 26 September, 1966. 
223. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 2, To Regional Supervisor from 
K.R. Brown, 5 January, 1960. 
224. N.A.C. Rg 10 Vol. 8758, File 772/25-1, MR C 9702, To E. 
Wooliams M.P. from E. Fairclough, 13 March, 1962. 
225. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 655/25-1, MR C 9701, To L.B. 
Pearson from J.R. Nicholson, 30 August, 1965. 
226. INAC File 40-2-185, Vol. l, Relationship Between Church 
and State in Indian Education, 26 September, 1966. 
227. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 655/25-1, MR C 9701, 
Memorandum to the Deputy Minister from R.F. Battle, 25 May, 
1965. 
228. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 655/25-1, Mr C 9701, See 
petitions on this file. 
229. INAC File 675/23-5-019, Vol. 2, To Deputy Minister from 
Assistant Deputy Minister (Indian Affairs), 9 July, 1965 and 
To Assistant Deputy Minister from M. Dube, Insp., 6 October, 
1965. See the attached police report. 
230. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 655/25-1, MR C 9701, To the 
Principal from R. Davey, 3 June, 1965. 
231. INAC File 675/23-5-019, Vol. 2, To Deputy Minister from 
M. Dube, Insp., 6 October, 1965. See the attached police 
report. 
232. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 655/25-1, MR C 9701, 
Memorandum to the Deputy Minister from R.F. Battle, 25 May, 
1965. 
233. INAC File 40-2-185, Vol. l, Relationships Between Church 
and State in Indian Education, 26 September, 1966. 
234. INAC File 6-15-3, Vol. 2, To ... from J. Chretien, 28 
February, 1969. 
235. INAC Control Number 300-1, Position Paper - Indian 
Residential Schools, 1968. 
236. INAC File 6-15-3, Vol. 1, To ... from J. Chretien, 24 
February, 1969. 
372 

237. INAC File 501,25-13-083, 
Vol. 11, To 
... from R. 
Connelly, 19 November, 1969. 
23 8. INAC File 6-15-3, Vol. l, To W. Thompson from R. Davey, 
20 February, 1969. 
239. INAC File 6-15-3, Vol. 2, To ... from J. Chretien, 28 
February, 1969. 
240. INAC File 779/25-1-009, Vol. 1, Telegram to Hon. John 
Turner, 20 July, 1970. 
241. INAC File 501/25013-083, Vol. 12, 17 April, 1972. 
242. INAC File 779/25-1-009, Vol. 1, See notes on meetings 
with various Indian Associations and Bands on educational 
issues 
243. INAC File 853/25-13, Vol. 3, To ... from J. Chretien, 8 
January, 1971. 
244. INAC File 601/25-13, Vol. 3, A Proposal to Transfer the 
Control and Management of Student Residences to Indian People, 
January, 1971. 
245. INAC File S156/66, The Honourable Chretien .... remarks 
by the Qu'Appelle Indian Residential School Council on the 
transfer of the school from DIAND, 1973. 
246. INAC File 779/25-1-009, Vol. 1, Wire copy, 22 September, 
1970 . 
247. For details of this event see: D. Persson, "The Changing 
Experience of Indian Residential Schooling: Blue Quills, 1931-
1970" in J. Barman, Y Hebert and D. McCaskill, eds., Indian 
Education 
in 
Canada, 
Volume 
1: The 
Legacy 
(Vancouver, 
University of British Columbia Press, 1986). Also see: INAC 
File 779/25-1-009 for further documentation. 
248. INAC File 779/25-1-009, Vol.1 Treasury Board Submission -
Authority to Enter into Contract, 14 December, 1970. 
249. INAC File 779/25-1-009, Vol. 1, Telegram to J. Chretien, 
22 July, 1970. 
250. INAC File 779/25-1-009, Vol. 1, Wire copy, 22 September, 
1970 . 
251. INAC File 779/2, Vol. 2, To Hon. J. Chretien from David 
Lewis M.P., 27, July, 1970, To Hon. J. Chretien from T.C. 
373 

Douglas, 24 July, 1970, Telegram to Prime Minister Trudeau, 22 
December, 1970, Telex to Hon. J. Chretien, 28 July, 1970, To 
J. Chretien from D.C. Rowland, M.P, 21 July, 1970 and To Hon. 
J. Chretien from Paul Yewcuk M.P, 20 July, 1970. 
252. INAC File 779/25-1-009, Vol. 1, Wire copy, 22 September, 
1970 . 
253. INAC File 779/2, Vol. 2, To ... from J. Chretien, 31 
July, 1970. 
254. INAC File 779/2, Vol. 2, To A.W. Johnson from H.B. 
Robinson, 30 December, 1970. 
255. INAC File S156/66, 27 September, 1973. 
256. INAC File S156/66, The Honourable Chretien .... remarks 
by the Qu'Appelle Indian Residential School Council on the 
transfer of the school from DIAND, 1973. 
257. INAC File S156/66, 27 September, 1973. 
258. INAC File 1/25-1-0, To ... from I. Goodleaf, 27 February, 
1974. 
259. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3962, File 147654-1 (2), MR C 10167, To 
Commissioner Dawson from W. Bompas, 8 November, 1904. See also 
K. Coates, ""Betwixt and Between' : The Anglican Church and the 
Children of the Carcross (Chooutla) Residential School, 1911-
1954" in BC Studies, Number 64, Winter 1984-85. 
260. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8760, File 853/25-1, To. W. Arneil from 
M. Jutras, 6 April, 1956 and Memorandum to the Minister from 
H. Jones, 5 June 1956. 
261. INAC File 801/25-1, To Director of Operations from A.H. 
Friesen, 13 November, 1968. See attached document - General 
Policy Statement. 
262. N.A.C. RG 85, Vol. 222, File 630/110-3 (IB), To Bishop J. 
Trocellier from R. Gibson, 7 November, 1947 and, Vol. 532, 
File 600-1-4 (2), Education of Eskimos 1949-1957, Department 
of Northern Affairs and National Resources, 8 April 1958. 
263. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 325, File 630/158-9, To Major General 
H. Young from M. Lacroix, Vicar General Hudsons Bay, 18 April, 
1953 and attached correspondence. 
264. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 532, File 600-1-4 (2), Precis of Sub-
Committee on Education for NWT Council - Proposed Residential 
School, Chesterfield NWT, 9 June, 1950. 
374 

265. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3962, File 147654-1 (2), MR C 10167, To 
F. Congdon from J. Ross, n.d, 1904. 
266. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol 3962, File 1477654-1 (2), MR C 10167, To 
A. Vowell from J.D. McLean, 4 April, 1904 with attached 
correspondence and To Deputy Superintendent General of Indian 
Affairs from D.C. Scott, 20 February, 1908. 
267. A. Webster, They are impossible people, really: Social 
administration 
and 
Aboriginal 
social 
welfare 
in 
the 
Territorial Norths, 1927-1993 (Ottawa,[Unpublished] Research 
Report to The Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, 1993), 
page l-8. 
268. A. Webster, They are impossible people, really, page 1-9. 
269. A. Webster, They are impossible people, really, page l-
16. 
270. A. Webster, They are impossible people, really, page 2-1. 
271. N.A.C. RG 85, Vol. 532, File 600-1-4 (2), Agenda, Meeting 
of Sub-Committee on Education, 18 April, 1950. See attached 
note on Item 5. 
272. N.A.C. RG 85, Vol. 1882, File 630/119-3 (2), Memorandum 
for J. Wardle from J. L o m e Turner, 23 March, 1936. 
273. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 1881, File 630/119-2 (1), Memorandum by 
J. L o m e Turner, 5 October, 1934 and Memorandum to J. L o m e 
Turner, 17 October, 1934. 
274. S. Grant, Sovereignty or Security (Vancouver, University 
of British Columbia Press, 1988), page 17. 
275. A. Webster, They are impossible people, really, page l-
12. 
276. R. Diabaldo, "The Absurd Little Mouse: When Eskimos 
Became Indians" in Journal of Canadian Studies, Vol. xvi, 
1981, page 34. 
277. INAC File 630-101-1, Vol. 4, Memorandum for the Minister 
from R.G. Robertson, 12 August, 1957. 
278. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 223, File 630-1 
(3), Form 77 -
Application for Admission to Residential School and To 0. 
Finnie from J. Moran, 4 May, 1927. 
279. INAC File 6-21-8 Vol. 1, Memorandum for Mr. C.w. Jackson 
from F.J.G. Cunningham, 
23 February, 
1954 with attached 
375 

Assistance to Mission Schools and Memorandum to the Minister 
from L. Fortier, 14 January, 1954 with attached Schools for 
Indians, N.W.T. 
280. INAC File 600-1, Vol. 2, Press Release, New Education 
Programme in the Northwest Territories, 20 March, 1955. For 
other 
relevant 
northern 
developments 
see: 
S. 
Grant, 
Sovereignty or Security?: Government Policy in the Canadian 
North, 1936-1950 (Vancouver, University of British Columbia 
Press, 1988), Richard Finnie, Canada Moves North (Toronto, 
MacMillan Co. of Canada, Ltd. 1948), M. zaslow, The Northward 
Expansion of Canada, 1914-1967 (Toronto, McClelland & Stewart, 
1988) and M.J. Macpherson, Dreams & Visions, Education in the 
Northwest Territories from Early Days to 1984 (Yellowknife, 
Government of the Northwest Territories, 1991) . 
281. INAC File 630-101-1, Vol. 4, Memorandum for the Minister 
from R.G. Robertson, 12 August, 1957. 
282. INAC File 250-9-20, Vol. l, To J.A. MacDonald from S.M. 
Hodgson, 18 December, 1968. 
283. INAC File 40-2-185, Vol. l, Memorandum for the Cabinet, 
Education in the Northwest Territories, from J. Lesage, 4 
March, 1955. 
284. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 1224, File 630/110-3 (6), To J. Parker 
from R.G. Robertson, 14 November, 1957. 
285. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 221, File 630/101-3, To Mr. Meikle from 
J. McKinnon, 9 August, 1947. 
286. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 1224, File 630/110-3 (6), Memorandum 
for the Director from C. Merrill, 
l October, 
1957 and 
Memorandum for the Deputy Minister from R.A.J. Phillips, 5 
November, 1957. 
287. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 1224, File 630/110-3 (6), To R.G. 
Robertson from J. Parker, 19 November, 1957. 
288. INAC File 630-101-1, Vol. 4, Memorandum for the Minister 
from R.G. Robertson, 12 August, 1957. 
289. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 540, File 630/118-8, Memorandum for Mr. 
Fraser from R.G. Robertson, 9 February, 1955. 
290. INAC File 630-101-1, Vol. 4, Memorandum for the Minister, 
12 August, 1957. 
291. INAC File 40-2-185, Vol. 1, Memorandum for the Cabinet, 
Education in the Northwest Territories, from J. Lesage, 4 
March, 1955. 
376 

292. INAC File 600-1, Vol. 2, Press Release, New Education 
Programme in the Northwest Territories, 20 March, 1955. 
293. INAC File 40-2-185, Vol. l, Memorandum for the Cabinet, 
Education in the Northwest Territories, from J. Lesage, 4 
March, 1955. 
294. INAC File 40-2-17, Vol. 10, Memorandum to Cabinet, A 
Five-Year Education Plan for the Northwest Territories and 
Northern Quebec - 1965-70, from the Minister of Northern 
Affairs and National Resources. 
295. INAC File 250-22-17, Vol. l, Frobisher Bay School to Open 
in 1971 and Treasury Board Submission, 151-2. 
296. INAC File 40-2-185, Vol. l, Memorandum for the Cabinet, 
Education in the Northwest Territories, from J. Lesage, 4 
March, 1955. 
297. INAC File 250-9-20, Vol. 1, To J. MacDonald from S.M. 
Hodgson, 18 December, 1968 and File 1/25-13-2, Vol. 1, To R. 
Davey from F.A.G. Carter, 24 April, 1968. For a history of 
these events see: M.O. Dickerson, Whose North - Political 
Change, Political Development, and Self-Government in the 
Northwest 
Territories 
(Vancouver, 
University 
of 
British 
Columbia Press and The Arctic Institute of North America, 
1992), Chapters 4 and 5. 
298. INAC File 600-1-6, Vol. 5, Memorandum for the Deputy 
Minister, 11 October, 1963. 
299. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 709, File 630/105-10, To W. Booth from 
D. Wattie, 5 December, 1958 and To Deputy Minister from B. 
Sivertz, 12 January, 1959. 
300. INAC File 600-1-6, Vol. 5, Memorandum for the Deputy 
Minister, 11 October, 1963. 
301. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 709, File 630/105-10, To B. Sivertz 
from F. Cunningham, 19 September, 1957. 
302. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 709, File 630/105-10, Memorandum for 
the Assistant Deputy Minister from B. Sivertz, 26 September, 
1957 . 
303. N.A.C. RG 85, Vol. 1261, File 600-1-5, Memorandum for the 
Commissioner from B, Sivertz, 3 January, 1958. 
304. INAC File 600-1-6, Vol. 1, 24 November, 1959. 
305. INAC File 600-1-6, Vol. 1, 22 June, 1959. 
377 

306. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 1375, File 630/302-11, Memorandum for 
the Administrator of the Arctic, 19 October, 1960. 
307. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol 1469, File 630/302-11, Memorandum for R. 
Kennedy, 
8 
November, 
1963 
and 
To 
Assistant 
Regional 
Administrator from J. Hughes, 17 May, 1965. 
308. 
INAC File 
600-1, 
Vol. 2, Education's 
in Canada's 
Northland, 12 December, 1954. 
309. INAC File 603-2, Vol. l, Education of Eskimos, 5 March, 
1957. 
310. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 532, File 600-1-4 (2), Sub-Committee on 
Education for NWT Council - Proposed Residential School, 
Chesterfield, 9 June 1950. 
311. INAC File 630-101, Vol. 4, Memorandum for the Minister 
from R. G. Robertson, 12 August, 1957. 
312. INAC File 600-1-6, Vol. 1, Memorandum for Education 
Division from R.A.J. Phillips, 1 October, 1959. 
313. INAC File 630-101, Vol. 4, Memorandum for the Minister 
from R. G. Robertson, 12 August, 1957. 
314. INAC File 603-2, Vol. 1, Education of Eskimos, 5 March, 
1957. 
315. 
INAC File 
600-1, 
Vol. 2, Education's 
in Canada's 
Northland, 12 December, 1954. 
316. 
INAC File 
600-1, 
Vol. 2, Education's 
in Canada's 
Northland, 12 December, 1954. 
317. INAC File 40-2-185, Vol. l, Memorandum for the Cabinet, 
Education in the Northwest Territories, from J. Lesage, 4 
March, 1955. 
318. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 710, File 630/118-8, Memorandum for 
Administrator 
of the Mackenzie 
from R.A.J. Phillips, 
7 
November, 
1959 and subsequent correspondence on this subject in the 
file. 
319. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 15, Responsibility for Education 
in the Northwest Territories, 1964-65. See attached Table 
Showing Cost of Operating Large Pupil Residences - 1963-64. 
320. 
INAC File 
600-1, 
Vol. 
2, Education's 
in Canada's 
Northland, 12 December, 1954. 
378 

321. INAC File 600-1, Vol. 2, Education in Canada's Northland, 
12 December, 1954. 
322. INAC File 250-25-23, Vol. 1, To Minister from E.A. Cote, 
2 September, 1965. 
323. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 15, Responsibility for Education 
in the Northwest Territories, 1964-65. 
324. INAC File 250-25-23, Vol. 1, To The Right Reverend Donald 
B. Marsh, D.D. from A. Laing, 22 May, 1965. 
325. INAC File 600-1-6, 24 November, 1959. 
326. A. Webster, They are imposssible people, really, pages 2-
7 and 2-17. 
327. INAC File 250-25-23, Vol. 1, To Hon A Laing from Donald 
of the Arctic, 10 June 1965. 
328. INAC File 250-25-23, Vol. 1, To Hon A Laing from Donald 
of the Arctic, 10 June 1965. 
329. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 1444, File 630/500-10, To Hon. A. Laing 
from Donald of the Arctic, 1 April, 1965. 
330. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 1444, File 630/500-10, To Hon. A. Laing 
from Donald of the Arctic, 1 April, 1965. 
331. INAC File 250-25-23, Vol. 1, To Hon A Laing from Donald 
of the Arctic, 10 June 1965. 
332. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 1444, File 630/500-10, To Hon. A. Laing 
from Donald of the Arctic, 1 April, 1965. 
379 

CHAPTER 5 
THE FAILURE OF GUARDIANSHIP: NEGLECT AND ABUSE 
1944-1992 
The 
"failure 
to 
treat 
the 
children as persons capable of 
responding to love...." 
380 

The Department of Citizenship and Immigration 
Indian Affairs Branch 
Norlyn Bldg., 
309 Hargrave St., 
Winnipeg Manitoba 
October 21, 1953 
Memo to Mr. R.S. Davis 
I visited the school on October 19th and 20th and found the 
following situation: 
From the front entrance to the corridor of the basement one 
was subjected to an unbearable odor, [sic] The floor of the 
boiler room was covered with a liquid from the sewage system 
to a depth of 6 to 8 inches, some of this liquid was seeping 
into the boy's recreation room. At the other end of the 
building, in the girl's recreation room, there are a number of 
trap openings on the floor. Upon opening these traps one could 
see the same kind of liquid containing raw sewage, direct from 
toilets, almost to the level of the floor. 
It looks as if the entire sewage piping under the floor had 
collapsed and that the sewage piping leading to the outside 
has been blocked by some obstruction. 
On Monday, October 19th, the smell in the building was 
unbearable and no human being should be asked to live under 
such conditions. There is no doubt in my mind that such 
drastic action must be taken to remedy the situation and make 
sure it does not re-occur in the future. I, therefore, 
strongly recommend that the school be closed until such time 
as the necessary repairs are made. Should this condition 
continue or happen again at a later date, the health of the 
pupils and the members of the staff can be seriously affected. 
Furthermore, should there be an outbreak of diseases in a 
school like this one, the Indian parents would blame the 
school and refuse to send their children there. This would be 
a ten year set back in the education plan. 
The Principal . . . has been made aware of my recommendation and 
agrees with them. However, he is worried for fear that if the 
grant is not continued during the period the school would be 
closed, he would not be able to retain his staff. I further 
recommend that, if the school is closed, at least part of the 
grant be continued. 
This is respectfully submitted in the hope that the Department 
be advised of the situation and that immediate appropriate 
action be taken. 
G.H. Marcoux, Regional Inspector of Indian Schools.1 
381 

After 
the 
war, 
as 
the Department 
concentrated 
on 
its 
"education plan," directing its attention and efforts to the 
mandate handed down to it by the Joint Committee in 1948, the 
often "unbearable" condition of the schools and the neglectful 
and too often abusive treatment of children which had marked 
the residential 
school system's pre-war history was not 
mitigated. There was, after all, nothing in the process of 
integration, itself, which would "remedy the situation" and 
ensure that "it does not re-occur in the future." While the 
Department concentrated on integration, turning its back as it 
were on the residential system, thousands of children remained 
trapped in the web of excessive punishment, poor building 
conditions, 
inadequate food and clothing, incompetent or 
overworked staff and underfunding which together threatened 
their safety and undermined "the health of the pupils." 
There was, moreover, no "immediate appropriate action" taken. 
Significant measures to address these systemic problems were 
not adopted until 1957 and these reforms, which involved 
abandoning the per capita grant system, proved far from 
effective. The chronic neglect of the fabric of the system 
which forced children to live in conditions and endure levels 
of care that too often fell far short of acceptable standards 
persisted. When, in 1968, the "residential schools" were 
renamed "residences" there was nothing in the children's 
surroundings they would have recognized as new further than 
the change of name. Neglect and abuse, rooted still in those 
pre-war characteristics of the system - underfunding and 
administrative carelessness - remained the common reality 
through to the final closing of the schools. 
NEGLECT 
In the first decade of this post-war period, through to the 
reforms of 1957, reports, like Marcoux's, were an all too 
common barometer of the condition of an aging and poorly 
maintained system.2 R. Hoey's "faith in the whole residential 
school set up, "3 badly shaken by his own visit to Mount Elgin 
in 
1942, 
was, 
in 
the years 
that 
followed, 
constantly 
undermined by news from other schools - those referred to by 
Col. H. Jones, the director of Indian Affairs, in 1954 as "our 
problem establishments."4 And there were many such schools, 
poorly constructed and neglected in the previous decades, that 
deserved that tag. Indeed, all of the old voices of critique 
and dissent could still be heard echoing through the pages of 
the post-war files. They were amplified in this period by new 
critics within the system - not only by Aboriginal people and 
Departmental and church staff at all levels but by dietitians, 
doctors and nurses employed by other federal agencies. Many 
382 

found the system wanting, reported it as such and pushed for 
reforms. 
The roll call of problems, of the "emergency nature"5 of the 
physical plant of schools like that one reported on by Marcoux 
recalled Paget's 1908 survey of western schools. Classes at 
St. Michael's, Alert Bay, were, in 1949, being held in a 
condemned building.6 At Fort Vermillion, they were conducted 
in rooms too small for the number of children who had, 
moreover, to contend with "stifle or freeze ventilation" and 
poor lighting.7 The children at Round Lake school lived and 
studied in a building described by Col. Jones as "one of the 
most dilapidated residential school buildings in existence" -
buildings that had been, the year before, in 1949, "condemned 
by the Saskatchewan Fire Commissioner."8 At Morley the problem 
was with "the pole fire escapes from the dormitories" which an 
inspector felt were "hazardous for all children." They were, 
obviously, very high as the "girls are very reluctant to use 
them and the boys risk broken ankles by dropping down too 
quickly."9 Guy School, 
in 1951, 
combined both of those 
deficiencies. In the opinion of Dr. R.F. Yule, the medical 
superintendent of The Pas Agency, the school, an old three-
storey building with electric wiring that had been "changed 
and augmented by amateurs," was "a real fire hazard." Its fire 
escapes, in part constructed of wood, were so few in number 
and so badly placed that in the event of a fire "the loss of 
life ... might easily be appalling." J.P. Ostrander, the 
regional 
supervisor 
of 
Indian agencies, 
noted that 
the 
situation was further complicated by the fact that there were, 
needlessly, too many children in the school. It would be, he 
suggested, "difficult to make excuses to parents if this 
wooden building burned and many children's lives were lost 
because of the difficulty of evacuating them from the building 
due to the extreme over-crowding."10 In the case of some 
schools the rot was systemic. In 1948, Prince Albert school 
was, according to a senior official of the Anglican church, 
in plain language, a DEPLORABLE MESS 
and is most 
distressing to anyone who has the interest of 
Indian 
children 
at 
heart.... 
At 
present 
the 
conditions are nothing short of disgraceful.11 
St. Anthony's, the Catholic residential school at Onion Lake, 
was a typical example of such "mess." When a new Principal 
arrived, 
he 
found 
that 
it 
was 
in 
need 
of 
thorough 
"rehabilitation." His description of the school is an eerie 
memory of Rev. Lett's first impressions of the buildings and 
students of St. George's in 1923. All of St. Anthony's major 
systems had been condemned by local Departmental officials 
that spring. Apparently, everything was full of holes. "One of 
the furnaces was leaking ... all the [hot water] pipes were 
leaking at all the joints." The staff hung a "series of cans 
383 

... at every joint" throughout the school to collect the 
water. Most of the radiators had burst the previous winter. 
The firebox of the school's second furnace was so pitted "that 
only the rust scale at the bottom keeps the water from seeping 
out all over." It certainly would "not last very long." 
The state of affairs in other departments of the school was 
not much better. Sewer pipes were leaking, toilets were broken 
and "as for the septic tanks, they are useless." For the last 
two years "sewerage is coming out of the top of the tanks and 
flowing down the hill ... something no Health Inspector would 
tolerate." 
A fire inspector would have been equally displeased with the 
school's 
electrics. 
One 
day 
the 
firebells 
"rang 
by 
themselves." 
An 
investigation 
revealed 
uncovered 
wires 
conducting current "through the tin sheeting of the ceiling." 
The wiring had been installed by amateurs who had run 
"uncovered wires 
. . . through walls and floors and in some 
cases without even switch boxes." Fortunately, perhaps, the 
diesel plant was too small to produce much power. It finally 
broke down completely and as a result the school had "no 
refrigeration whatsoever." All the out-buildings, except the 
forge, 
"were in need of major repair." And there were 
innumerable smaller repairs required: "some two hundred panes 
of glass to replace, just about every storm window to repair, 
window sills which had rotted to be replaced, etc., etc." 
The educational component of the school was in considerable 
disarray. There was not enough classroom space, and "none of 
the four teachers have normal school training." There were 
almost no extra-curricular activities, "sports had been sadly 
neglected" with "the result that morale was very poor." That, 
he believed, had been the reason why the year before he 
arrived "some thirty children had run away from the school 
within two months." 
Despite these conditions, the Principal, like Lett had been 
initially, remained energetic and optimistic - confident that 
with "the cooperation from the staff that I have been getting 
and 
the 
wonderful 
cooperation 
and 
approval" 
of 
local 
Departmental 
officials 
"we 
can 
have 
a very 
successful 
school."12 He may in the long run have been correct, but in the 
case of other schools no amount of energy or cooperation could 
bring effective remedial action. Father Lacombe's and J. 
Macrae's complaint in 1890 that the newly opened Kamloops 
school was designed without any knowledge of the requirements 
of residential education was echoed by J. R. McCurdy, a 
Provincial school inspector, when he visited Guy school in 
Manitoba in 1958: 
From the outside Guy Residential School is a very 
384 

imposing structure. A cursory tour of the building 
might even leave the same impression about the 
interior but a serious study of the layout leaves 
an altogether different impression. I would say 
frankly that the building being an architect's 
dream is a nightmare. 
His point, or "thesis" as he called it, beyond the fact that 
there were some of the usual deficiencies - not enough toilet 
or washing facilities, no library and "unhygienic" practices -
was "that, basically, a residential school for boys and girls 
should be designed to offer instruction in as homelike an 
atmosphere as is possible under the artificial circumstances." 
To that end, and therefore undercutting its educational 
function, the Guy building was "quite inadequate - a defect 
arising out of poor design and planning." The quarters were 
cramped and the dining room, the only public room, had to 
double as a parlour, recreation room and study.13 
McCurdy missed a rather significant point. Whether they were 
in good condition or not, schools could be nothing but 
"artificial." No amount of planning or design could have made 
them "homelike." Their size and shape, the very bricks and 
mortar, emphasized the purposeful estrangement of the child 
from his community and his culture. One young student from 
Lesser Slave Lake, whose memories have found their way into a 
Departmental file, recalled her first day in the residential 
school classroom: 
I never saw running water, I never saw electricity 
and here we were stuck in this class with electric 
lights. There was no way I could concentrate trying 
to learn English and look at 
the light. 
Its 
presence there was like, I don't know, a spirit I 
guess or at least that is what I thought. I thought 
it was kind of good because at least 
it was 
warm.... How was it possible to have that light? So 
I couldn't learn as I was constantly wondering and 
looking at the lights for fear that they would blow 
up and burn the place down. . . ,14 
The historian Carroll Van West in a study of the architecture 
of American boarding schools for Indian children in the 
western plains termed them appropriately "acculturation by 
design" 
- "the introduction 
of 
squared and 
rectangular 
structures on the landscape was a disturbing intrusion to the 
shape of the built environment 
as envisioned by plains 
people."15 School buildings for Plains children and for other 
Aboriginal children (whose image of structures was of human 
size) were huge and threatening. To cross the threshold was to 
journey far beyond the boundaries of home. 
385 

Leaving home for the residential school was, tragically, still 
for many a journey into sickness. For many others, it was a 
journey to death. The past clung stubbornly to the school 
buildings and the children who entered them. The war years 
brought no end to the connection between the condition of 
those structures, the too often poor quality of care given by 
the staff and the ill-health of the children. The Anglican Old 
Sun's school in Alberta provides a striking example. It had 
been condemned out of hand by Paget in 1908 as "unsuitable in 
everyway for such an institution" and declared "far short of 
ideal" by Dr. Corbett in 1920 
- a sink hole of tubercular 
infection and scabies, the result of the staff's neglect of 
the children's hygiene.16 It was again before the 
Department 
"in a very unhygienic condition" in 1956. Once more the staff 
was at fault. Local nurses had alerted the Indian Health 
Services (a division of the Department of National Health and 
Welfare created in 1944 out of the Medical Services section of 
Indian Affairs) to the "numerous skin lesions occurring in the 
pupils and their general unclean condition." Some 57 students 
had been taken to hospital, 32 were admitted for treatment. 
Dr. B.J. Orford, who conducted a subsequent investigation, was 
shocked by what he found: 
To be quite frank with you, I cannot recall, ever 
before, finding a school so unkempt and unclean. 
The 
floors 
were 
dirty; 
the 
dining 
room 
was 
particularly bad; the dormitories were untidy .... 
There was a single wash basin in each of the four 
dormitories and not one was in operation. All were 
an unsightly mess. There was a toilet cubicle in 
each dormitory, only one of which was working. All 
the bowls were badly stained.... The boys' washroom 
and toilet facilities beggar description. The wash 
basins give the impression of not having been 
cleaned in weeks. The toilet room was absolutely 
filthy and foul smelling. The appearance of the 
pupils was untidy and unclean. 
Orford, 
charitably, 
attached 
some of the blame to the 
structure itself - "I realize that the physical set up is not 
ideal" - but in the end "The only conclusion at which I can 
arrive is that the students lack direction and training which 
is, after all, an essential part of their education."17 
At Gordon's school, too, what was termed the staff's lack of 
adequate "organization and management," caused by the all too 
familiar fact that "while the Principals who have been at the 
school are Ministers, they are not trained for the work of 
Principal of a Boarding school," was the road that led to the 
ill-health of the children. In 1945, "Dr. Golfman ... advised 
... that the children he examined were not clean and some had 
386 

lice in their hair." Ostrander's and Golfman's follow-up the 
next year revealed that conditions had not improved: "We found 
the children's bodies anything but clean and their underwear 
the same." The school was "very cold," the water supply 
problematic, the plumbing inadequate and "the whole building 
was in a filthy, unsanitary condition." They informed the 
Principal that they were "not satisfied with the meals which 
the children are receiving and that he must make an effort to 
improve their meals and provide them with a more balanced 
diet." 
It was, they feared, increasingly an unsupportable 
burden for the new matron, Miss Edwards. She had been, 
Ostrander reported, 
at the school for about three months. I think she 
has the ability and training to fit her for work of 
this kind but I believe that the troubles in the 
last three months in connection with water supply, 
disease, and uncleanliness have almost been too 
much for her and she appears on the verge of a 
nervous breakdown. 
The whole set up was unacceptable to them, though they 
contradicted the local agent's recommendation that the school 
be closed.18 
Tuberculosis, too, the great scourge of the system, was still 
not just a memory; it remained a significant problem in some 
of the schools even though the rate of infection had declined 
nationally 
in 
the 
last 
two 
decades. 
Instructions 
for 
"preventative measures" issued in 1948 by Dr. P.S. Tennant, 
another Health Services physician, to the staff of Kuper 
Island school, "to avoid the further spread of T.B.," point to 
the fact that many of the old contributing factors, evident at 
Gordon's and Old Sun's, were still common in the system. The 
staff had to provide "more heat and bedding," improve the 
ventilation and ensure that rooms used by the children were 
"swept and kept free of dust at all times" so that "dust laden 
particles" which "carry T.B. germs and contribute towards the 
spread of tuberculosis" were eliminated.19 
Other physicians chronicled the most classic and 
pernicious 
expeditor of infection - 
"overcrowding" in the dormitories. 
It was, Dr. Yule reported from Guy school in 1950, a constant 
"danger to the health of the children." He had found "smaller 
children ... sleeping two in a narrow single bed." They were, 
E. Jones, the Superintendent of the Carlton Agency added, 
"breathing in each others faces."20 An inspection report on St. 
Mary's in British Columbia carried the same warning - "The 
distance that the beds are apart is definitely a menace to the 
health of the boys."21 
The likelihood of infection was pushed even higher by the fact 
387 

that many children were still taken in with "no entrance 
medical examination" and thus they remained in the school to 
become ill and infect others. Yule reminded his superiors in 
the Indian Health Service that "One active case of T.B. can do 
alot [sic] of damage in crowded quarters such as we have 
here" [Guy school] and that such damage could be done "in a 
short time."22 
Orford, in 1946, on reporting the death of a 
boy from meningitis at St. Philip's School, Fort George, gave 
it as his opinion, as he had "on more than one occasion" that 
"residential schools in isolated areas constitute a health 
hazard" not only because of the lack of exams but because of 
the unavailability of modern medical technology - "no physical 
examination will discover tuberculosis in a child unless it is 
a gross lesion." Children would remain at risk "until we can 
gather sufficient personnel to carry out immunization and an 
x-ray survey."23 
Higher 
standards 
of cleanliness, 
the proper loading of 
sleeping 
areas, 
stringent 
application 
of 
medical 
exam 
regulations, 
the 
transfer 
of 
infected 
children 
to 
a 
sanatorium24 and the use of modern diagnostic technology, all 
of which were predicated on the active care and oversight by 
the Department, were not the only measures at hand for dealing 
with the threat of a tubercular outbreak and other diseases. 
There is some evidence that the more dramatic technique - mass 
operations carried out in the schools - was still employed. On 
the 29th of August, 1949, Yule flew to Guy school with his 
wife and Mrs. Dalman "the usual assistance I have taken in for 
the last several years to enable me to do any Tonsil work 
found necessary among the new pupils." 
We started this work on the morning of the 30th. 
After we had done 25 pair we decided to call it a 
day and left the other five for another time. As 
there is now a yearly visit by our Dentist, no 
teeth extractions were done. 
The following fall Yule was back at the school for more "T. 
and A. [adenoids] work." This time he operated on 28 children.25 
The 
routine 
fashion 
of 
his 
report 
suggests 
that 
such 
operations 
were 
probably 
a 
frequent 
and 
unremarkable 
occurrence in the system. 
Not 
everyone, 
however, 
was 
so matter-of-fact 
about 
the 
infectious nature of the system as it was and as it was being 
managed. In 1948, Departmental Superintendent 
Neil Walker, 
newly appointed to the Fort Vermillion area, launched a 
campaign against all residential schools. In this, he was even 
slightly in advance of the Joint Committee. For him the 
introduction of day schools was "the only solution for Indian 
health and education." He bluntly told P. Phelan, the chief of 
the Indian Affair's Education Division, that "if I were 
388 

appointed by the Dominion Government for the express purpose 
of spreading tuberculosis, there is nothing finer in existence 
than the average Indian Residential School." 
For Walker, the Fort Vermillion school readily bore out his 
contention. When he and the Regional Superintendent of Indian 
Health Services, Dr. E. L. Stone, first visited the school, 
they found a "general mess." The school was overcrowded. The 
part-time doctor, nurses' aids in the local hospital and "many 
of the children also had tuberculosis." Those conditions, 
which he felt were "very much the same as in every other 
Residential School throughout Canada," and the fact that "the 
death rate from T.B. in Alberta," the province with the 
greatest number of residential schools, "was the highest in 
Canada" should lead anyone, he suggested to Phelan, to an 
obvious conclusion: 
If you put two and two together you will find that 
if all of those schools were discontinued and the 
Indians given the right to send their children to 
day schools, that in very few years this dread 
disease would at least be under control. 
In September, the schools were "filled up and overcrowded.... 
no interest [was] shown as to whether the children are healthy 
or not. It has been a case of getting them into school...." 
The result at Fort Vermillion was that, "eighty per cent of 
the children attending school are sick."26 
Walkers's critique took on additional urgency and resolution 
in the face of the Catholic 
church's lobbying for the 
construction of a new school in the region - at Hay Lakes. The 
whole episode seemed a replay of the way in which the system 
had been built in the first instance. The request came 
complete with a supporting petition "for a boarding school for 
our children and some kind of hospital, right here at Hay 
Lakes" signed by over 50 members of the band. The rationale 
provided by the attendant missionary was as old as the system 
itself. The school would rescue band members from their 
deplorable circumstances and through the education of their 
children 
deposit 
them 
in 
a 
safe, 
prosperous, 
healthy, 
Christian future: 
These [Slave] Indians ... may be the most abandoned 
Indians 
of 
all 
Canada, 
poor, 
dirty, 
lousy, 
ignorant.... They make a poor living trapping. 
During the war, with plenty of fur, and good 
prices, their needs were not so bad, but now fur-
bearing animals are getting scarce. Prices are low, 
the cost of living going up. It is getting hard for 
them. Some do not have enough to eat and offer no 
resistance to T.B. germs. 
389 

Reason, he supplemented with obligation. Schools, he noted, 
had 
been 
promised 
"when 
on June 
23rd, 
1900, 
... 
the 
representation of the Government of Canada signed Treaty with 
these Indians . . . . "27 
Walker was not impressed by any of this. The education these 
people needed was "very much different than what can be 
expected from any residential school." It was, as Martin 
Benson had so often argued with respect to residential schools 
in isolated areas, out of place and out of time. Band members 
could benefit most from instruction "along the lines of 
improving their homes, cleanliness - in short an intensive 
programme of Health education for children and grown-ups." 
That could "only be accomplished by a system of day schools." 
Walker ended with a warning. If the residential school was 
built and if the parents "allow their children to go ... 
Indian Health Services, can expect more Tuberculosis, as I 
feel 
convinced 
that 
this 
school 
will 
(like all 
other 
residential 
schools) be a breeding spot for this dread 
disease. "28 
The Department did not share Walker's reservations or refused 
to heed his warning. Northern Alberta was one of those 
frontier regions into which the Department was beginning to 
move after the war and it was yet far too remote and under-
developed to be part of the newly consecrated integration 
policy. The old policy then would be dutifully applied - the 
school, eventually named Assumption Indian School, was built.29 
Walker's other recommendations were not adopted either - that 
"schools should be closed down at the end of the present term" 
when 
"dormitories 
and 
classrooms 
should 
be 
thoroughly 
disinfected" and that "no child should be admitted unless the 
child is perfectly healthy." Not only was the old policy 
extended but it would be carried out with the same, often 
unfortunate, results. 
Walker, having met and been defeated by the determination of 
the church and Department, resigned. He ended his service 
declaring, as had Dr. Bryce in his pamphlet in 1922, that the 
schools were "a very sad story and I think the only solution 
is to get public opinion aroused throughout Canada so that 
this great injustice will be discontinued."30 
When it came to other considerations with respect to the care 
of children - how well they were clothed and fed - the 
immediate postwar files saw no diminution of "injustice." 
There were, in terms of the food and clothes provided, good 
schools but there was still no guarantee that standards were 
regularly met across the face of the system. Furthermore, as 
in the area of health, here too it is evident that the 
390 

Department was no more vigilant nor insistent on the proper 
care and treatment of its wards then had been the case in 
earlier decades even though it began to receive, at the end of 
the war, by way of scientific assessments of school diets, an 
indication of how critically deplorable the situation was and 
had at is disposal professional advice to remedy it. 
Off-hand remarks from concerned local officials and teachers 
"that the quantity and quality of food served is not very 
desirable" and even, on occasion, complaints from parents, "up 
in arms over the treatment of their children, "31 continued 
throughout and after the war without a break. More formally, 
official school inspection reports by agents highlighted that 
thick and yet unbroken line of ill-treatment stretching back 
to the beginning of the system. In his report on Gordon's 
school in October, 1945, R.S. Davis, then an agent, gave ample 
evidence of neglect. The children were not well-clothed. They 
"had no winter coats on hand" and the clothes they did have 
"do not fit the children well". They were, of course, charity 
clothes, "things sent in by the church authorities." The boys 
shoes were "in terrible condition". He "checked 6 boy's feet 
and 5 of them had no soles in their shoes at all and their 
feet were on the bare ground." 
Davis attended meals for two days. He watched children "put up 
their plates for more, but did not get a second helping." At 
one meal they were served only "one ladle of a mixture of 
beans, a small sprinkling of corn, potatoes and very little 
meat, in fact some children did not get meat at all." What 
bread was served was "on the stale side, without butter or any 
fats." They received "half a mug of milk, which looked very 
thin. No dessert whatsoever." 
In Davis's "opinion these 
children are not getting a balanced diet 
. . . they are 
certainly not getting enough meat." 
The Department had already received complaints from the 
children's parents. Our children, they told Dr. Camsell, 
do not get enough to eat, when we visit our 
children they want us to take some food to them, 
because they are so hungry all the time, all the 
children are like that. They suffer from lack of 
food .... If we, the parents, do not cloth our 
children 
... they would go bare 
.... So we, 
parents, dealing with the school feel that it is 
really mean to our children and other children as 
well.32 
Parental protest played a role in another and an even more 
bizarre episode. The Superintendent of the Abitibi Agency, H. 
Lariviere, visiting the Mistassini community was told by one 
of the band's leaders that nearly all of the children who 
391 

attended the Moose Fort Indian Residential School "complained 
of ill-treatment and that all of them came back from the 
school very thin and hungry." Lariviere reported to R.F. Davey 
that the children told him about frequent physical abuse and 
that they got so hungry at school that, in desperation, they 
"went to garbage can to get food." After moving from "tent to 
tent" he was able to secure "certain informations" which to 
him revealed "that the complaints are justified." 
School authorities, of course, denied it all - it was "nothing 
short of ridiculous." It was possible that the children had 
looked "a little unhealthy on arrival" because they "were all 
violently air-sick when returning home by Canso." It certainly 
could not be put down to the food at school. The meals were 
wholly adequate, indeed, "the amount of food served at each 
meal has been substantially increased...." Another local 
Departmental official, W.J Harvey, concurred. The children 
went to the cans not to eat but to play. He, himself, had had 
to chase children away from the dump where they insisted on 
going in "search of any bits and pieces of materials such as 
bottle caps and tin cans, for throwing sticks and rocks at." 
He was amazed that Lariviere would retail such "pure fiction" 
would "submit such petty information on paper, and further 
state that the complaints were justified.1,33 
At All Saints school in Aklavik, an alarm over "the welfare of 
the Eskimo and Indian children" was set off by a teacher who 
wrote directly to the minister of Pensions and National 
Health. She was "appalled at the health conditions" and at the 
fact that "those in charge of the children did not seem to 
consider hygienic conditions, as a part of their welfare." To 
illustrate her point, she recounted the familiar litany of 
conditions - unsanitary toilet and washing facilities: "the 
drinking pail, is a container rimmed in dirt and lying 
anywhere on the playroom floor," "containers were always 
provided in the dormitories for excretion purposes .. . mostly 
left uncovered and the air became foul, the children breath it 
in while sleeping," "the toilets were smelly.... At Christmas 
I saw the children tearing up their paint books in effort to 
be clean." 
She was also troubled by the food. With remarkable industry 
she had gone through all the invoices and calculated that only 
$20.52 per annum was spent on food for each child compared to 
$162.19 for the adults. The children were undernourished; the 
"essential products of milk, butter, eggs and cheese are 
denied these children." She attached sample menus. For their 
dinner children regularly had either a "piece of boiled fish," 
with "beans on a plate" or with "one slice of bread with 
tallow" and a "cup of water" or they were served a "bowl of 
soup" accompanied by "1 slice of bread with jam". 
392 

The matter was passed along to Indian Affairs who then 
commissioned the local Department of Health doctor, D.L. 
Livingston, whose duties included caring for the children and 
staff 
in the school, 
to investigate. 
The building, 
he 
concluded, was unsanitary and it would take considerable 
reconstruction to make it right. "The food has no doubt been 
inadequate." This was particularly so with respect to fresh 
fruit and vegetables. "I am sure that I personally in my own 
house have at least as much fresh fruit shipped in as they use 
in the school for about ninety children and a staff of about 
ten." 
Interestingly, 
Livingston, 
found the staff's diet 
problematic. "I frequently have had to treat them [the female 
staff] for neurosis no doubt due to environment and diet." 
Women, he advised, could not endure such isolation and thus 
should not be posted to the north for periods over two years. 
Neurosis was not Livingston's only medical challenge. He was 
struggling against tuberculosis and he was using a familiar 
weapon. In his first year attending the children, there had 
been "a large number of deaths...." This he attributed "to a 
large extent to infective tonsils which undermined their 
general health and also was a source of continuous infection 
among the pupils." Since then he had "removed the tonsils of 
most of the children on admission or shortly thereafter."34 
There was evidence, 
as well, 
that the old practice of 
separating milk was still carried on in some schools to the 
detriment of the children's diet and, no doubt, their health. 
One teacher at Morely school reported that 
Last year the authorities of this school began to 
separate the milk which they gave to the Children. 
This year, when I came to teach, I expressed some 
surprise; especially since we of the staff always 
have whole milk and thick cream on the table. I was 
promptly told that whole milk is not as good for 
the children as the skimmed, since it contained too 
much fat; and that the move was for the health of 
the children, This piece of medical wisdom is 
contrary to what I was taught in school; and I 
would appreciate it very much if you would tell me 
whether it is a new discovery, or whether our 
matron is merely misinformed. 
I have been quite concerned about the diet of these 
growing children, who do not get what the staff 
does either in quantity or quality. I am not a 
dietitian, and therefore hae no right to criticize; 
but if there is some way that it could be inspected 
to appear as routine, I would feel more at east. 
[sic]35 
393 

In the post-war years, if there was not marked improvement in 
the treatment of the children, there was in the fact that the 
Department did not have to rely for "wisdom" exclusively on 
the amateur opinions of field and school staff, nor on those 
of parents it always tended to discount, for an indication of 
how "balanced" school meals were - for an appreciation of how 
serious the situation was in school kitchens and dining rooms. 
Beginning in 1944, it had access not only to the opinions of 
doctors like Livingston, Yule, Orford and others but to 
analysis by nutritionists and dietitians. It had thereby a 
means by which officials like Davey could steer through 
conflicting testimony, between "pure fiction" and fact, and 
arrive at the best interests of the students. In the years 
that followed, the Department, however, did not in any general 
or consistent fashion take advantage of that expertise. 
The first professional studies of school diets were instigated 
by Dr. P.E. Moore, the Department's director of medical 
services. Like Hoey he was troubled by what he observed during 
the war and by reports that reached his desk. The studies he 
initiated were carried out in 1944 and 1945 by the Nutritional 
Services section of the Red Cross under the direction of Mrs. 
A. Stevenson employing laboratories in Toronto for analysing 
the food samples collected. It was decided to survey three 
schools - one Anglican, Chapleau, one Catholic, Spanish, and, 
not surprisingly as R. Hoey was consulted on the final choice, 
Mount Elgin, a United Church school. The results at all three 
were, as Stevenson summarized the Mount Elgin study, for Hoey, 
"simply appalling."36 
St. John's, Chapleau, a school that had a difficult record in 
Scott's day, was not greatly improved. The Red Cross found 
"the standard of all food preparation was very low and the 
meals were distinctly unpalatable." The bread, for example, 
was 
"heavy, 
solid, 
tough 
and 
tasteless 
except 
for 
an 
unpleasant flavour." Every thing about the kitchen and dining 
room was dirty and there was a "lack of cleanliness and 
sanitary care in the handling of the food." The place was full 
of flies - "it was not uncommon to see the food particularly 
black with them. One day about forty or fifty flies were 
counted on one slice of bread. Cockroaches were everywhere." 
The results 
of the laboratory 
analysis were even more 
disturbing: 
In general it may be noted that during the period 
of stress when the demand of the body for these 
nutrients 
is 
greatest, 
the 
school 
diet 
is 
startlingly low in ascorbic acid and Vitamin A and 
to a lesser degree 
is deficient 
in 
thiamine, 
calcium and niacin, and in calories for boys 13-15 
years of age.... By mid-winter the value of the 
394 

dietary will drop still lower because 
(a) the 
supply of home grown vegetables other than potatoes 
will be nearly exhausted, (b) the commission lists 
from which all other food is ordered does not 
include any canned vegetables or tomatoes, 
(c) 
ascorbic acid (vitamin c) content of potatoes or 
other vegetables on hand will be much lower.37 
The Spanish school fared a bit better. On the day of 
inspection the school was very clean. What could not be hidden 
by any last minute effort on the eve of inspection, however, 
was the nutritional content of the meals. Vitamin A and 
ascorbic acid amounts were 25-75 per cent below requirements 
but the children did receive adequate iron, 
riboflavin, 
thiamine and protein from the "unusually large quantities of 
beans which they consumed every other day." Beans aside, the 
total calories offered were far less than needed by the older 
children.38 
Unfortunately, the details of the Mount Elgin survey are not 
in Departmental files in the National Archives. Beside the 
comment that conditions in general were appalling only one 
other remark has survived - "no one on the staff had even 
elementary knowledge of sanitation and hygiene."39 
Dr. 
Moore, 
and 
his 
Medical 
Services 
unit, 
were 
soon 
transferred to National Health and Welfare [NHW], becoming the 
Indian Health Services, but he did not drop his interest in 
the schools. He enlisted the services of Dr. L.B. Lett, chief 
of NHW1s Nutrition Division, who in 1946 agreed to undertake 
a wider study to set out "the scope of the problem" and to 
determine "what type of establishment we would need in order 
to provide 
continuous 
assistance 
in 
regard 
to 
serving 
nutritious meals at low costs in different parts of Canada." 
In the meantime, he was prepared to offer to those schools who 
requested it a skeleton inspection service made up of two 
dieticians who had given "similar service to canteens and 
kitchens in war factories and plants."40 
A part of Dr. Lett's wider study was a detailed review, in 
1946, of eight schools: Kenora, Fort Frances, Sioux Lookout 
and Macintosh in Ontario, Portage La Prairie 
Elkhorn and 
Brandon in Manitoba and Qu'Appelle in Saskatchewan by a 
nutritionist - Miss A. McCready. Though Indian Affairs, when 
the 
results 
were 
in, 
characterized 
them 
as 
"fairly 
satisfactory" 
the report 
itself did not support such a 
conclusion. 
McCready 
found 
that 
in 
Protestant 
schools 
"mediocre" 
salaries 
secured 
kitchen 
staff 
who 
were 
"unqualified (often elderly)," carried out their "work in a 
careless and uninterested fashion" and thus "the food quality 
was not good". In Catholic schools, where the staff consisted 
of unpaid nuns, who were "therefore ... genuinely interested 
395 

in their work, 11 the "quality was good, 
cleanliness was 
evident." On the whole, however, in all schools poor menu 
planning in which the nutritional value of certain foods was 
not 
fully 
appreciated", 
equipment 
that 
was 
"unfit," 
"antiquated cooking facilities" and bad cooking practices 
contributed to the "nutritional inadequacy of the children's 
diet" which lacked sufficient amounts of vitamins A, B and C. 
The 
children, 
moreover, 
received 
too 
little 
of 
nearly 
everything - not enough green vegetables, whole grains, fruit, 
juices, milk, iodized salt and eggs."41 
Despite the seriousness of the situation revealed by the Red 
Cross and by McCready's report, and despite Moore's and Lett's 
enthusiasm 
and 
continuing 
willingness 
to 
cooperate, 
to 
construct 
a permanent 
working 
relationship 
with 
Indian 
Affairs, there was no reciprocal energy coming from either the 
Department 
or the churches. Lett's hope of working out 
standards for nutritious and affordable meals and a regular 
rotar of inspections came to nought. In 1954, in a letter to 
the Department he summarized the history of what had been for 
him a disappointing, on-again, off-again and largely one-sided 
consultation over nearly a decade: 
During the last couple of years we have almost lost 
touch with most of the residential schools due to 
the 
lack 
of 
requests 
for 
our 
services. 
This 
highlights 
a 
difficulty 
which 
I 
have 
noted 
personally and have had reported to me by my staff 
in visiting these schools. We have never felt that 
we had the authority to arrange visits to schools 
on a systematic basis. While there has never been 
any rudeness from the schools, there have been many 
occasions when the reception made it clear that our 
position in relation to the Indian Affairs Branch 
... was not sufficient in the eyes of the school to 
justify our intrusion. In contrast to this when 
there had been specific concerns brought to our 
attention usually by your Branch, these have been 
attended to as rapidly as we could arrange to do 
it .42 
It was not only Principals who paid little heed to Nutritional 
Services but the Department itself. In December, 1953 a 
proposal Moore sent along to the Department that he (Moore) 
would include additional capacity in his plans "to establish 
dietitians positions to provide a consultation and inspection 
service to our hospitals" that would enable them to "extend 
our coverage to include the Indian schools" was not met with 
great enthusiasm.43 As of old, the Department continued in its 
pattern of hesitancy 
- allowing even egregious situations, 
which were 
far from 
"fairly 
satisfactory", 
to drag 
on 
unresolved for years. Old Sun's, for example, remained a 
396 

problem despite Orford's report. Dr. L.H. Mason, the medical 
superintendent at the Blackfoot Indian Hospital, reported at 
the end of 1957 that the "burning question" of Old Sun's was 
even more inflamed. "The children are dirty. The building is 
dirty, dingy and is actually going backward rather than 
forward. "44 
It was, however, the situation at the Brandon school in the 
late 1940s and 1950s that stands as the symbol of the 
continuation of this pre-war system-wide characteristic - of 
children too often left by the Department in the insensitive 
care of school staff under questionable leadership who in turn 
tried to manage schools that were not properly maintained or 
funded. 
Information that there were severe problems with the care of 
children at Brandon came to the Department from a surprising 
source. In December, 1946, the Minister, J. A. Glen, received 
a letter from T.C. Douglas, the premier of Saskatchewan. 
Douglas was concerned that children from Moose Mountain 
reserve, near Carlyle, Saskatchewan, who had run off from the 
school complaining of the food and of mistreatment, might, if 
they ran off again, injure themselves. In fact, on Douglas's 
behalf the RCMP visited the school. Not unexpectedly, perhaps, 
both the Department and the church lined up behind the school. 
When the premier's letter was passed on to the Rev. G. Dorey 
of the United Church's Board of Home Missions, it got far from 
a sympathetic reception. 
If Mr. Douglas accepts 
the statements 
of the 
Carlyle 
Indians 
at 
their 
face value, 
without 
further investigation, all I can say is that he 
will have plenty to do looking after the Indians of 
Saskatchewan without being able to give much time 
to his duties as Premier. 
The minister's response was more polite but none the less 
supportive. Inspection reports, he assured Douglas, proved 
that the school was well-managed and provided the children a 
good diet.45 
Such a statement certainly did not reflect the conclusions of 
J. Ostrander, the regional inspector of Indian agencies, who 
visited the school on the heels of the RCMP. He informed the 
Department, before the minister's reply was drafted, that the 
runaway problem was real and had to be laid at the door of the 
Principal: "A residential school under good management does 
not usually have a great deal of trouble with the boys. 
Teaching the boys to like the school and the school staff by 
making their spare time a little more pleasant seems to be the 
only answer." This apparently did not happen for according to 
police reports, the children continued to run off over the 
397 

next two years.46 
The situation was brought to a head in 1950 when the local 
agent, J. Waite, submitted a negative evaluation chronicling 
continuing deficiencies which, he thought, were rooted, in the 
character and behaviour of the Principal - "an aggressive 
type" who stood "a little aloof from the children ... a strict 
disciplinarian in school." R.S. Davis lent his support and 
called for a full-scale investigation because that most 
telltale of signs of mistreatment was there in abundance. 
"There is certainly something wrong," he told P. Phelan, who 
had moved up to the position of superintendent of education, 
"as children are running away most of the time." "Conditions 
at this school are not what they should be. The sooner we make 
a change the better."47 
Change would not come very soon, however, for G.H. Marcoux, 
the regional inspector of Indian schools, was not dispatched 
to investigate until the fall of 1951. He did not find it an 
easy task. The Principal refused to allow him to interview the 
staff in private and would only let him talk in private to one 
boy and one girl - hand-picked by the Principal, himself. 
Nevertheless, Marcoux concluded that the children were not 
well-treated, they were expected to do too much work, had not 
enough opportunity to play, their clothing was "much too 
scanty at times" and the attitude of staff and Principal to 
the children was not at all positive - in short "drastic 
changes will have to be made" to solve the runaway problem.48 
The diet received separate attention. Marcoux was accompanied 
by Mrs. Anna Swaile, the nursing supervisor for the district. 
She reported that "the overall picture of the institution is 
pretty grim." The dining room was overcrowded and dark: "The 
enamel ware used on the table is battered and chipped, the 
porridge bowls are stainless steel, the cups and silverware 
came out of Noah's ark I am sure." The meal she attended was 
a "serving of cold, badly mashed potatoes, two carrots without 
either butter or sauce, one small piece of cold roast beef, 
one slice of greased bread and a serving of cornstarch 
pudding, 
and 
a 
battered 
tin 
mug 
of 
milk." 
It 
was 
"unattractive, badly served, and insufficient in quantity for 
growing children with meal hours so far apart." She went 
through the menus and calculated that the children received 
only 1,500 calories a day and most of that was from potatoes 
and bread. The cook was untrained "knows little or nothing 
about balanced meals and has not the provisions to prepare 
them even if she did." Except for the cockroaches, the kitchen 
was clean.49 
The Marcoux-Swaile inspection produced no results, whatsoever. 
Nothing happened. In the spring of 1952 Marcoux inspected the 
school for a second time. Nothing had really improved and 
398 

other than writing to the Principal for information, the 
Department did nothing. When in 1953, R.F. Davey took over 
from Phelan, the same man was Principal.50 
The investigative process began again, however, in the fall of 
1953, after Davey received what he termed a "report from a 
reliable source." Davis was notified that Marcoux, along with 
"Miss [Nan] Chapman, the Dietitian of the Sanatorium Board of 
Manitoba," should inspect the school - its third inspection in 
as many years. This directive came, Davis wrote in reply to 
Davey, 
as 
"no 
surprise 
to us" 
as 
"this 
complaint 
is 
longstanding.1,51 
The Chapman report was a replay of Swaile's. The nutritional 
picture was, she concluded, "not a happy one." Again after 
recording general observations: that the staff was fed much 
better than the children, that the food was cold, no seconds 
were allowed and so forth, she got down to science. In this 
instance the assessment of the diet came not in the form of 
calories but cents. She calculated that the Principal was 
spending "the startling figure" of 14.8 cents a day per child 
on food rather than what was a more reasonable figure of 34 
cents. She ended her report with recommendations for a system 
of centralized food purchasing to lower the cost of food for 
schools and for a menu reporting system that would allow the 
close monitoring of meal quality.52 
In his report Marcoux stressed the negative effect 
the 
school1s reputation was having on educational progress in the 
region. Parents had heard stories of mistreatment and balked -
they would not contemplate education for their children "the 
minute Brandon Residential school is mentioned." He laid all 
the blame at the Principal's feet.53 
Chapman's report got into the hands of Dr. Moore in Ottawa who 
let Col. Jones, know that he and the Sanatorium Board were 
"gravely 
concerned 
over 
these 
findings." 
If, 
he 
added 
pointedly, 
"this deplorable 
condition 
is true it will, 
undoubtedly be reflected in the health and well being of the 
children." Jones assured him that the Department was "taking 
steps to correct this very disturbing situation."54 
The Department did not, however, take any steps on its own. 
Indeed, it rejected Chapman's recommendations, particularly 
the centralized purchasing idea as "not workable."55 Rather, 
it reverted to Scott' s technique - the one that had driven 
Graham to exasperation. In December 1953, the Department 
turned the matter over to the church suggesting that it might 
contemplate removing or transferring the Principal because he 
was damaging the school' s reputation and that in turn was 
making the Department's integration scheme, based in part upon 
the centralization of children, more difficult to execute. 
399 

True to the old pattern, 
the church then defended 
the 
Principal. Rev. G. Dorey claimed that the Principal had not 
been given the opportunity to defend himself against charges 
which were very likely suspect.56 
The result - the Principal remained at the school until the 
fall of 1955 when he left - not fired but transferred. Five 
years later Davey was writing to him at Edmonton Residential 
School where he was the Principal admonishing him over the 
poor diet 
the children were receiving. 
The church was 
concerned as well with his treatment of students there. There 
were reports of "corporal punishment being meted out with the 
buckle ends of belts, sever enough to raise welts on bodies." 
The Principal protested that he had "put a stop to that" but 
the feeling in the church persisted "that there is too much 
slapping and physical force in his punishments." The church's 
new appointment to the Brandon principalship, a man who had 
been previously Principal at Morley, was made over Davey's 
objections ,57 
In five years, other than constant inspections and hand 
wringing by officials, 
the Department 
had done 
nothing 
concrete about Brandon and nothing improved. In the fall of 
1956, Davey on a trip out from Ottawa, visited the school and 
found that still the food was not adequate. He lectured the 
new Principal, who had claimed he had not the financial 
resources to care for the children, that the "welfare of the 
children should be the primary consideration rather than the 
financial status of the school." A month later, R. Ragan, who 
succeeded to Davis's position as the regional supervisor of 
Indian Agencies, reported that the Principal had not listened, 
the food had not been increased. "The whole premises as well 
as the inmates were horribly dirty and certainly something 
must be done."58 
Again the report ran up the Department's organizational chart 
and like so many reports before it throughout the history of 
the system, it elicited as much worry over the Department's 
reputation as it did concern 
for the children. 
Davey, 
commenting to Col. Jones, was "disturbed about the serious 
danger of the adverse publicity which is likely to arise from 
the unsatisfactory operation of the Brandon school."59 
The unsatisfactory operation at Brandon, which had been an 
open and running sore for most of the decade, and similar 
circumstances in many other schools in the system, attested to 
by reports from agents, teachers and dietitians, led Col. 
Jones in 1956 to write what now seems a rather ironic letter 
to Moore: 
As you know it is very difficult for the officials 
of this Branch to assess the diet offered in our 
400 

residential schools and I believe it would be most 
desirous to have dieticians make periodic visits to 
each of these institutions. No doubt you have some 
such service 
for your hospitals. Would 
it be 
possible for you to extend this service so that we 
would 
have 
regular 
visits 
to 
the 
residential 
schools of a frequency not less than once a year.60 
A year later Indian Affairs, Indian Health Services and the 
Treasury Board started to put in place a system that would 
"provide a Public Health Nursing Service which would not only 
encompass nursing in the schools but the provision of public 
health instruction for the students" in schools which had 200 
or more children. Smaller schools, it was eventually decided, 
might have nurses' aids or practical nurses for "when pupils 
are ill, and are placed in the school infirmary they need 
mothering, ie care and attention similar to that that a mildly 
ill child would receive in its own home."61 
Departmental hesitancy in the face of church neglect, its 
persistent failure to act decisively in defense of children in 
the schools, as at Brandon, was not the only factor that 
determined the character and circumstances of the children's 
care. Miss McCready in 1946 laid much of the blame for the 
conditions 
she described in her eight school review on 
"financial limitations" - the same limitations that had in the 
decades before the war plagued every other aspect of the 
system and had always led to the neglect of the children. 
Davey's review of the residential school system, written in 
1968, summed up these early post-war years without disguise or 
apology. Neither the churches or the Department, he charged 
appeared to have had any real understanding of the 
needs of the children.... The method of financing 
these institutions by per capita grants was an 
iniquitous system which made no provision for the 
establishment and maintenance of standards, even in 
such basic elements as staffing and clothing.62 
Underfunding was the universal tag line in descriptions of the 
system's shortcomings. Churches often claimed that because the 
per capita grants were too small, they could not compete with 
Provincial schools and thus they suffered chronic shortages of 
teachers, along with maintenance staff, meaning that in some 
schools, despite the abandonment of the half-day system, "the 
bulk of "chores' must fall on the shoulders of the few older 
boys and girls."63 
In fact, the residential system did not even compete with 
other 
federal 
Departments. 
It paid 
lower 
salaries 
for 
comparable jobs. At NHW's Indian Hospital in one community, 
for example, in 1956, the cook received twice the salary as 
the cook at the nearby residential school, cooked for fewer 
401 

people and received "a yearly increment plus civil servants 
benefits [sic] ." The school's United Church staff had to work 
6 days a week, pay their transportation from Winnipeg ... and 
face isolation, for much lower salaries than they would be 
getting otherwise." While they had "a conviction for the 
work", they also had "financial obligations to meet and 
security to think of" and thus the "yearly staff turnover" 
could always "be expected to be high."64 It is little wonder 
that Indian Affair's officials routinely observed that those 
who were hired were too often of questionable competence -
that "the crying need of Residential Schools is qualified 
personnel."65 W.J. Harvey, while siding with school authorities 
in the dispute over conditions at Moose Fort School, reminded 
the Department that as he had "previously reported": 
the staff at this school is very inadequate in 
numbers and types. They are usually old, broken 
down and decrepit, or too young and inexperienced. 
This same trouble exists in most of the schools 
under Anglican Administration. They simply get the 
type of labour they pay for.66 
Dietitians, 
too, 
recognized 
that 
funding was often 
the 
underlying problem. In 1947, McCready, who had extended her 
school visits into Alberta, drew together the issues of 
funding, staff competence and student diets. As a general 
rule, she concluded, "the goodness or badness of feeding 
corresponds to the quality of management of the several 
schools in other respects." She rarely found either "goodness" 
or "quality." In her experience, nowhere did the "diet meet 
the requirements in respect to vitamin content" and "no school 
principal has sufficient revenue to enable him to provide a 
wholly 
satisfactory 
diet." 
The 
challenge 
of 
properly 
nourishing the children could only be met "by the Department 
laying down scales of food issues, providing the school with 
menus, carrying out effective inspection, and paying the cost 
of food."67 
Church officials and Principals had no argument with McCready 
in so far as the adequacy of funding was concerned. It had 
always been the church's position that the responsibility for 
any neglect could be found in the government's penurious 
approach to residential education. The issue of proper diets 
was just another occasion to rehearse that charge. In the 
opinion of the Anglican church in 1950 the levels of support 
provided by the annual grant combined with post-war increases 
in food costs, "the biggest item in the operation" of schools, 
"makes it physically impossible to come anywhere near making 
ends meet on the present Per Capita rates."68 The church 
realized 
that 
it 
was 
performing 
well 
below 
par, 
that 
"undernutrition, 
malnutrition 
and 
monotony 
of 
diet 
are 
becoming prevalent in some of our schools."69 The Catholic 
402 

position was certainly not very far removed. An official of 
the Oblate Indian Welfare and Training Commission, carried out 
a detailed financial analysis of the cost of menus suggested 
by a NHW dietician who had visited the Kenora school. He came 
to "a daily average of 55.5 cents per child." If the school, 
he concluded, were "to carry out the recommendation of your 
dietitian" then "a further substantial increase in the per 
capita would seem quite necessary.1,70 At Cecilia Jeffrey School 
in 1951, the Principal R.S. MacCallum, found an imaginative if 
not a wholly appetizing solution - horse meat which he was 
able to purchase at half the price of beef.71 
The size of per capitas, their adequacy, whether the funds 
made available by the Department were "used in the wisest 
manner"72 by Principals and the need for increases continued 
to shape the core of the discussions between the Department 
and the churches. 
"Due to war conditions" 
Departmental 
appropriations had been reduced and along with them per 
capitas had fallen and limits were placed on student numbers.73 
Almost immediately after the war, the Department managed a 
series of increases and in 1954 took over the payment of 
salaries for teachers.74 
The churches, without exception, maintained that those grant 
adjustments were never large enough to bring the system into 
line with prices. The Joint Delegation of Protestant churches 
which visited the Minister, W.E. Harris, on 23, January 1951, 
had as it primary purpose delivering just such a message 
that 
"the present 
system of grants is proving entirely 
unsatisfactory to the cooperating churches."75 Over the decade, 
the Anglican church was particularly astute in using the 
Dominion Bureau of Statistics "Price Movement" circulars to 
monitor the gap between grants and actual school costs.76 By 
1956, the church's patience had begun to run out. A senior 
official with the Anglican Indian School Administration, at 
the end of a long letter responding to Dr. Orford's Old Sun's 
report in which he acknowledged that conditions were every bit 
as bad as the doctor suggested, warned R.F. Davey that 
a strong feeling now exists in High places in our 
Church that, unless I.A.B. [Indian Affairs Branch] 
soon places some of these schools in condition so 
that we can maintain adequate standards for the 
pupils and decent working and living conditions for 
staff, our partnership with Government ought to be 
dissolved. This is not meant as a threat in any way 
but I thought you ought to know that such thoughts 
exist and when some of our Bishops and other senior 
Clergymen think in such terms it is most difficult 
to get their aid in recruiting staff members for 
our schools.77 
403 

The financial picture sketched by the churches was familiar in 
other ways too. Inadequate per capitas not only meant poor 
child care but mounting deficits78 and the continuance of that 
traditional method of compensating for grants that were too 
low - overcrowding - a technique known by the churches and the 
Department to be directly injurious to the children's health -
creating situations where there was, 
Col. Jones told the 
Deputy Minister, Laval Fortier, in 1956 "serious hazard in 
case of a fire or the outbreak of an epidemic." Jones noted 
further that "for many years the actual enrolment in some of 
the 
residential 
schools 
has 
exceeded 
the 
authorized 
enrolment." In that year "some" meant 34 of the 66 schools 
then operating. Before the war the Department refused to pay 
grants beyond the authorized number for any school all the 
while realizing that that 
penalized the pupils because the school managements 
attempted to provide services for a larger number 
of students than for whom the grant was paid, with 
the result that some schools got into debt while 
others adjusted the budget for food, clothing, and 
staff 
requirements 
to 
fit 
into 
the 
general 
earnings. 
After the war, the Department said it paid for all students 
irrespective of the authorized number - a policy, Col. Jones 
explained, which led to over-expenditure and recourse to 
supplementary estimates.79 In the spring of 1956, that policy 
led, to a mini-financial crisis according to Davey. So many 
residential schools had been "running over their authorized 
enrolment," he told one Principal it was inevitable "that it 
would eventually place me in a difficult financial position. 
For some time now the per capita grant expenditures have been 
exceeding the allotment, and this has finally caught up with 
me."80 
The Department, despite its over-expenditures, was well aware 
that underfunding was a fact and that it and overcrowding 
constituted much more than a potential menace to children in 
case of "fire" or "epidemic" - that the funds put into the 
system simply did not allow it to operate up to desired 
standards. In 1958, at a conference of the Department's 
regional school inspectors, Paul Dezeil of the Education 
Division observed that senior staff in Ottawa had "long 
recognized that the inefficient operation of some of the 
schools was due to the low paid, unqualified staff employed by 
the schools." Furthermore, "I might state that the department 
recognizes that a good many of the residential schools are in 
a deplorable condition." They had been allowed "during the 
half-century prior to the Second World War ... to fall into a 
serious state of neglect and disrepair." The consequences of 
neglect had been compounded by the churches' routine practice 
404 

of 
undertaking 
improvements 
without 
reference 
to 
the 
Department so that "in many cases the work would not pass 
engineering standards." 
Dezeil closed the first part of his presentation asking that 
the inspectors, who had so far been told nothing that they had 
not already told Ottawa over the years, "be patient with us." 
Headquarters's staff was doing "the best we can" and would do 
much better in the future as they were initiating "a radical 
change in a system which has been in effect for sixty five 
years," ever since the 1892 Order in Council.81 
This "radical change, " developed in consultative meetings with 
the churches in 1956-57 and approved by Treasury Board in 
October 1957, brought an end to the per capita system and 
placed the schools on a "controlled cost basis" geared to 
achieving "greater efficiency in their operation" as well as 
assuring proper "standards of food, clothing and supervision 
at all schools." The government was prepared to "reimburse 
each 
school 
for 
actual 
expenditures 
within 
certain 
limitations." 
Those 
"limitations" 
were 
translated 
into 
allowances - maximum rates set for salaries, transportation, 
extra-curricular activities, rental costs, building repairs 
and maintenance, and capital costs. 
In terms of standards of care, the Department strove to make 
the budgeting process more sensitive to the children's needs 
and regional cost differentials. In particular, with regards 
to food and clothing, it attempted "to make special provision 
for the requirements of older children." Thus in calculating 
the allowances for food and clothes, the children were divided 
into two groups, those in or below grade six and those in or 
above grade seven, with appropriate rates assigned to each.82 
Across the board, the new allowances represented a 40 per cent 
increase over the per capita budget. The largest part of that 
increase, 25 per cent, was devoted to salaries. Parents, the 
Department thought, should, when they were able, contribute to 
the cost of their children's clothing.83 
In addition, the Department began to issue directives to the 
schools on issues of care and more detailed monthly and 
quarterly reporting procedures were developed for Principals 
to assist them "in keeping track of the finances." And there 
was an expansion of Departmental staff to administer and more 
closely monitor the residential system.84 
The 
new 
financial 
system 
and 
associated 
administrative 
reforms, which together held the promise of making the 
residential system more businesslike, were formalized in a new 
set of contracts, replacing those long defunct agreements 
executed in 1911. These were negotiated in 1961 by Jones, 
Davey, S.W. Kaiser, the eduction Division's finance officer 
405 

and 
J.E. 
Hodges, 
a 
Departmental 
legal 
adviser, 
with 
representatives of the churches.85 The contracts clearly placed 
Indian Affairs in the commanding position - "the management 
[the churches] shall be responsible to the Minister...." The 
churches agreed: to operate the schools and school finances, 
to "keep records and submit reports," to hire or fire teachers 
and other staff, to admit, suspend or discharge students, to 
"maintain 
the 
school 
in an orderly, 
neat 
and 
sanitary 
condition" and to provide the children the "standard of food, 
clothing, accommodation, supervision and other requirements 
and necessities" always in "accordance with such rules, 
regulations, directives and instructions that may be made or 
issued by the Minister...." The minister, most critically, 
agreed, on behalf of the government, "to advance . . . such 
funds which ... are required for the operation and management 
of the school" and to be "responsible for the cost of repairs, 
erections, 
renovations, 
alterations or additions to the 
schools." The minister, as well, held the right to "enter and 
inspect the school" and to "cause the books of account to be 
audited. "86 
By 1961, Indian Affairs appeared ready and fully equipped to 
finally and firmly take the system in hand. There seemed to be 
a new air of professional management in the Education Division 
brought 
about by Davey, Dezeil, 
Kaiser and others. Its 
authority was renewed and recognized in the lines laid out in 
the contracts and the government had given it a new financial 
system that took seriously the duty of child care. It had new 
partners in National Health and Welfare and the Dominion 
Bureau of Statistics who could, respectively, set standards 
and monitor conditions and help cost them realistically. 
None of this was enough, however, to prevent a continuation of 
the problems that were endemic in the system. The post-1957 
record of the controlled cost system fell short of its 
promise; 
the 
new 
financial 
system 
did 
not 
achieve 
a 
significant improvement over the previous decades. There was 
in fact an underlying contradiction between the policy of 
closing down the system and that of keeping the schools in 
peak physical condition. Davey, himself, signalled this when 
observing that "expenditures should be limited to emergency 
repairs which are basic to the health and safety of the 
children" in cases "where closure is anticipated, due to 
integration.1,87 Budgeting favoured integration which was at the 
centre of the educational strategy. In a detailed brief to the 
Department in 1968, the National Association of Principals and 
Administrators of Indian Residences pointed out that in the 
allocation of funds the integration program received a much 
greater proportion resulting in a situation in which "our 
Federal schools are sadly neglected when compared with the 
Provincial schools."88 Indeed, a report commissioned by the 
Department from an outside consultant established in 1967 that 
406 

the funding level was very "low in comparison with more 
progressive programs" both in the United States and in the 
Provincial sector.89 
The Principal's and Administrator's Association went on in 
their brief to detail the effect of what they charged was yet 
another decade of underfunding in a school by school survey -
a lengthy system-wide catalogue of deferred maintenance, 
hazardous fire conditions, inadequate wiring, heating and 
plumbing and much needed capital construction to replace 
structures that were "totally unsuitable and a disgrace to 
Indian affairs." Some Principals had reached the limits of 
their patience for at school after school "Nothing has been 
done, and to our knowledge, nothing is planned." 
Even some of the newer schools built since the war gave 
evidence of faulty construction ("cracking and moving walls," 
bricks "deteriorating in the rain") and inadequate recreation, 
residence and classroom space. At Assumption School it was 
reported, amongst other shortcomings, that the Oblates had 
"spent many hundreds of their own dollars to convert a chicken 
coop into two classrooms.... This emergency still exists and 
we have to use these seven foot ceiling classrooms for the 
third consecutive year." The Department, it was noted, then 
had a day school in the works for the community and the plans 
provided facilities far in advance of those of the residence. 
In conclusion, the association tried to impress upon the 
Department the seriousness of the situation. It wanted answers 
and action; it was not prepared to accept the "old cliche: 
lack of funds." That was "not an excuse, nor an explanation 
for we know that funds do exist."90 
The association found very little disagreement with it views 
in the Department. In a memo Davey forwarded to Assistant 
Deputy Minister R.F. Battle along with the association's 
brief, he concluded that 
Although I can take exception to some of the 
examples given in the brief, the fact remains that 
we are not meeting requirements as we should nor 
have we provided the facilities which are required 
for the appropriate functioning of a residential 
school system. 
It was impossible to do so for there were simply "too 
many of these units" and the Department was too heavily 
committed in other areas of higher priority - integration, 
"the 
development 
of 
the 
physical 
aspects 
of 
Indian 
communities" and "giving welfare assistance at provincial 
rates". Nor did he think it was wise to devote effort to 
achieving 
increased 
appropriations 
for, 
with 
"the 
best 
407 

interests of the Indian children" in mind, it was more 
sensible to close the system down."91 
Davey, was of course, preaching to the converted. Battle was 
well aware that the Department's plans for "construction and 
maintenance needs" that had followed on the adoption of the 
controlled cost system had been thrown into disarray not only 
by other priorities but by the fact that it had "never been 
given the funds to carry out the plans in spite of repeated 
warnings 
[to 
Treasury 
Board] 
that 
the 
situation 
is 
deteriorating." The Department had in fact obtained Treasury 
Board approval for a five-year programme (1960-65) "to cover 
major 
capital 
renovations, 
federal 
and 
joint 
school 
construction." The program was assigned an $8,000,000 budget 
but "the [Indian Affairs] Branch was never able to secure all 
the funds ... because cuts to the extent of $4,000,000 were 
imposed." 
This had severe consequences for the residential system. 
Within the five-year plan, it had been estimated by the 
Department's 
Engineering 
and 
Construction 
Division 
that 
$1,000,000 a year would have to "be spent to bring the 
residential schools up to reasonable standards." The cuts 
meant that the Department had been "unable to allot more than 
half of this amount in any one year."92 
In the official Departmental reply to the association, the 
Deputy Minister, J.A. MacDonald, did not attempt to defend the 
Department 
nor 
to 
refute 
in 
anyway 
the 
association's 
characterization 
of 
the 
condition 
of 
the 
system. 
The 
Department, had failed, he observed, to carry out "necessary 
repairs and renovations and capital projects." This "has been 
simply due to financial limitations" which he thought, taking 
refuge in the "old cliche," might not improve in the future.93 
He was correct. Over the next five years at least, the 
financial situation would not improve. In what was then the 
current 
five-year 
programme 
(1968-69 
to 
1972-73), 
the 
Department's request for funds for capital projects had been 
cut by just over 50 per cent. That meant that there was no 
advance over the funds in the previous program for the 
Department 
was 
left 
with 
"only 
$512,000 
for 
capital 
improvements to residential schools" each year, if indeed 
there were not further reductions. These funds had to be 
devoted in the main to "Fire Marshall's recommendations." "We 
can attempt," Battle concluded, "very little in the way of a 
preventative program and must deal almost exclusively with 
work that can no longer be postponed."94 
Amidst 
a 
bewildering 
blizzard 
of 
shifting 
figures 
appropriations, 
estimates, 
forecasts, 
cuts, 
reductions, 
shortfalls - generated by the discussion in Indian Affairs of 
408 

the association's brief, there was one immutable certainty. In 
the final analysis, as the Principals and Administrators 
asserted, it was always the children who were "the first to 
feel the pinch of departmental economy."95 This was certainly 
true in all the other sectors of the system. 
The record of Indian Affairs' post-1957 determination to 
ensure high standards of care in each school was no brighter 
than its record of repair and maintenance. At the end of the 
very first year of the operation of the controlled cost 
system, the Department, on the advice of the churches and NHW, 
had to amend the food cost estimates - raising rates from 34 
cents a day for children in grade six and below and 38 cents 
for 
children in grade seven and above to 38 cents for 
children up to age 12 and 53 cents for children 12 and older. 
The switch from a grade division to an age division was made 
because so many older children were in grades lower than their 
age would suggest. The same sort of division was then 
introduced with respect to clothing: "$51.00 per annum per 
pupil up to 12 years of age and $75.00 per annum per pupil 
over 
12 years 
of 
age." 
As 
well, 
there 
was 
to be 
a 
supplementary clothing allowance "in those areas of Canada 
where climatic conditions necessitate special clothing." It 
was all very scientific. 
In order to establish which school should receive 
this allowance, reference was made to the Isotherm 
Chart prepared jointly by the National Research 
Council and the Department of Transport, for use in 
estimating fuel consumption in a building. For the 
purpose of applying this allowance, the 12,000 
degree-day line was applied, as this most equitably 
establishes the schools for which it is considered 
such an allowance is necessary.96 
Such fine tuning, always preceded by church lobbying and 
complaints 
from 
Principals 
that 
"the 
sums 
allowed 
are 
insufficient,"97 became a permanent feature of the 1957 system. 
It was very reminiscent of the church-Department discourse in 
the per capita era. Increases were made in 1962, 1966 and 
again in 1969.98 
Indian Affairs, however, always seemed to be playing catch-up. 
The 
funds 
it provided 
or 
the 
size 
of 
the 
allowances 
continually lagged behind increases in cost or were not 
accurately tailored to local circumstances. Even when Indian 
Affairs agreed with the churches, when it was, as Davey 
expressed it in 1962, 
"concerned at this aspect of our 
operations," it could not always act for it would find itself 
hemmed in by the same short budgeting that effected capital 
expenditures, 
repairs 
and 
maintenance. 
"Our 
financial 
position," Davey continued, "will not permit us to provide a 
409 

general revision in the food budget."99 
Principals were constantly challenged to meet the needs of 
children with what at times the churches and the Department 
knew were inadequate resources. It was, one Principal said, 
"like walking a tight rope. There is no margin of error at 
all."100 Though the dietitians' reports now in Departmental 
files suggest a general rise in the quality of school diets, 
many erred, unfortunately, and thus the sorrowful consequences 
for the children in those schools that were to have been 
resolved by the new budgeting system went unresolved.101 In the 
dozen years after 1957, years that marked the end of the 
churches' participation 
in the system, 
there was ample 
evidence of this failure. The list of "problem establishments" 
was both long and familiar with all of the listed schools 
having shortfalls either in funds or in the quality of the 
food or clothing provided to the children.102 
The reasons for failure at those and other schools were many 
and 
many 
of 
them 
were 
familiar 
persistent 
factors: 
incompetent, untrained staff, lack of funds and, according to 
some Principals, inherent flaws in the controlled cost system 
itself. One argued that the food and clothes allowances had 
been "based on a false premise." In his experience children 
under 12 ate more than those over 12. And certainly clothing 
costs for the younger child was higher than that for older 
ones. "Little boys do not take care of their clothing. The 
older boys do.... Little boys destroy their clothing with 
remarkable consistency and are much harder on foot wear." The 
menus 
supplied 
by 
NHW 
dietitians 
he 
found 
at 
times 
"unrealistic." 
One menu card recommended 8.5 lbs. of minced 
meat for 50 children meaning less than 3oz. per child "... and 
less than 3 oz. is hardly even a good drink of Scotch. One 
cannot imagine a family of four ordering eleven onzes of meat 
for dinner."103 Others also believed that the "difference in 
allowance between the under 12 group and the over 12 group . . . 
[was] unrealistic."104 It was difficult, Miss A. Campbell, a 
dietitian, concluded after a school visit in the spring of 
1969, "to produce interesting meals on a limited budget." She 
noted "that macaroni or spaghetti was served four times in one 
week; bologna is mentioned five times."105 
Isolation which engendered higher costs because of long 
distance transportation also played a role in undermining the 
diets in some schools. At Norway House, the dietitian found 
that food purchasing was a "constant problem . . . before freeze 
up they had to have good supplies in." "Mistakes in planning," 
it was noted by a staff member, "have to wait to the following 
year for correction."106 Given that the food allowance was a 
national figure (there was no differential built in for this 
item as there was for clothes) these northern schools could 
find themselves at a disadvantage. They could not easily 
410 

offset purchasing requirements by growing much of their own 
food. At one of the Whitehorse Hostels in 1967, the staff had 
to restrict what "should be given to the students" in the way 
of "fresh fruits and juices." They had been brought to that 
decision by the full range of factors that effected the 
operation of a far northern school. 
In all this we have to consider the fact that the 
cost of living in the Yukon is considerably higher 
than the average place in Canada. It is true we 
have a different budget for freight, but ... food 
is still very dear on account of freight paid by 
shippers and the packing involved. There are no 
farms in the district which could supply us with 
milk, fresh vegetables and meat. These are the 
things that are most expensive. In Southern B.C. 
for example, it is easy to get apples and other 
fruits at very low prices. In this part of the 
country we must not think of having our own gardens 
on account of the land and short warm summer 
periods.107 
In the face of high freight rates for isolated schools, the 
Department allowed the use of vitamin supplements to replace 
costly shipments of citrus fruits and juices. This may not 
have been a wise policy in terms of the children's nutrition. 
Col. Jones asked Moore, in 1960, whether, "in view of the 
prohibitive cost of air freight ... it would be possible to 
overcome the dietary deficiencies of Vitamin C through the use 
of vitamin capsules or pills." 
Even though Moore was not 
favourable, suggesting that such capsules were "not intended 
to, and in fact will not, replace normal dietary intake," the 
Department pushed ahead - but not to a decision. Principals, 
it was decided, could consult local nurses and decide for 
themselves .108 
There were other factors which influenced how balanced the 
diet was that the child actually ate without regard to what 
was on the menu or what was served. Appropriate foods could be 
"included in the daily menu, but there was no assurance that 
the students would eat them and so the purpose is defeated for 
some students. "109 
It was apparent to some Principals and dietitians that in the 
process of feeding the children, it was necessary to take into 
consideration cultural factors. Some of these had to do with 
the culture of childhood. It was much easier to get children 
to eat foods of "high carbohydrate value," 
(buns, bread, 
cookies, jam) "because these are the foods the children like" 
rather than vegetables. At some schools the staff, according 
to dietitians, gave up the battle too easily - indeed, one 
commented, "it may prove harmful to the children to feed them 
411 

foods they like and not attempting to teach them new food 
habits."110 Resignation, in some cases at least, was driven by 
economic considerations. At the Pensionniat Indien de Sept-
Isles one staff member defended such lapses in the menu on the 
basis that "since everything has to be imported food cost is 
high so when they serve something to children they want to be 
sure it will be eaten and not wasted."111 
That phrase - "new food habits" - was a marker of a much more 
profound cultural fact. Indian Affair's assimilative intention 
insinuated itself into all aspects of life in the school. Food 
was no exception. The dining room table was every bit as much 
a site of cultural struggle as was the class room desk. There 
was order, there was discipline according to non-Aboriginal 
norms and there was, for the newcomer, strange Canadian food. 
At all the schools there was a routine of eating - set times 
and set places. In February, 
1960, Miss K. Ann Feyrer 
described Norway House dining in her notes: 
The dining room is beside the kitchen. Before the 
children go to school in the morning the tables are 
set ready for dinner. At each place is a fork, a 
spoon and a glass. The desserts (butterscotch blanc 
mange) were set out in saucers at each place by the 
kitchen staff. Dinner plates and spoons were at the 
end of the table. Two plates of spread bread are on 
the table, and a jug of milk. 
At each table of 12 or 14, is a "Section Leader" 
and his assistant, a "little chief." These two pick 
up the hot food in oblong covered white enamel pans 
and put it at their table. After grace, the food is 
served to their group. There were no leftovers to 
put away. The section leader is responsible for 
stacking and sorting dishes and delivering them to 
the dish washing crew.112 
Children came to the school dining room with their language, 
beliefs and a food culture, too. Davey was aware "that the 
food habits 
of the children" were 
"influenced by 
food 
preparation habits at home and that this has a particular 
effect on their likes and dislikes."113 Miss S. Saint-Hilaire 
commented on this in her first inspection of the Pensionniat 
Indien de Sept-Isles in 1954. 
Many of these children had never gone to school up 
to the opening of this one in September 1952. 
Native food habits still predominate. Basic diet 
consists primarily of meat and fish (although they 
will not eat fish at school). They are very fond of 
412 

bread and lard, potatoes and tea. Fruits are well 
accepted but vegetables are not popular. Many of 
the children have never seen or heard of vegetables 
before since no gardening is possible in the area. 
Most of the children smoke at home and many (among 
the older ones) still do at school.114 
Almost universally throughout the system, children were "fond 
of lard as a spread" on bannock or bread 
and were "not used 
to eating vegetables",115 as non-Aboriginal people knew them, 
or chicken's eggs or products made from cow's milk. "Bush 
Indians," Canon H.G. Cook told Davey, "do not like cheese and 
even though cheese is disguised in the preparation of such 
items as macaroni and cheese the youngsters leave it on their 
plates."116 At Lejac school, in 1960, Miss F.E. Latimer, an 
Indian Health Services dietitian, charted the influence of 
home on standard non-Aboriginal meals: 
The students here prefer stew cooked without the 
addition 
of 
vegetables. 
Carrots, 
turnips 
and 
cabbage are served raw because most of the children 
will not eat them cooked. However hot canned corn 
is well liked and also cold canned tomatoes. 
It is also likely because of home food habits that 
the children want coffee for breakfast, tea for 
noon, and milk for supper. The group does not seem 
to care for cocoa.117 
The fact that children amended the meals to the extent that 
they could, or were allowed, cannot hide the fact that second 
perhaps to leaving home and family what was set before the 
child - macaroni and cheese, bologna, citrus fruit and juices, 
peanut butter and so forth - and what was not there, was an 
absence that was tactile, one that could be tasted and smelled 
in the same way that the sound of English or French adult 
voices was a reminder to the children that they were not among 
parents and elders. G. Manuel wrote of how powerful a memory 
country food remained for a boy whose main memory was that 
"every student smelled of hunger." He was to receive a visit 
from his grandparents: 
For weeks before they would come I could not think 
of anything beside the food they would bring with 
them. The food always crowded out the people. It 
was not my grandfather who was coming. It was meat, 
dried fruit and roots. Hunger like that numbs your 
mind. That was industrial training. 118 
By meat he did not mean bologna, the staple of so many school 
meals - but game. It rarely found its way into school dining 
rooms. Occasionally at some northern schools, as at Norway 
413 

House in 1960, the children got "a great treat" when the cook 
was "given a beaver or a couple of roasts of moose." 
"The 
game laws" the dietitian thought "prevent them from enjoying 
such delicacies often."119 
But the fact was that it was not 
laws but rules that determined this. The dining rooms were the 
domain of the Canada Food Rules, of the sacred four food 
groups, based not upon the old Aboriginal economy but upon 
western science. The Aboriginal graduates, according to the 
strategy of the residential system, were to be taken up into 
that western world equipped with its skills and naturally its 
"food habits." They were to be not only producers but 
consumers like all other Canadians. 
There were still problems in "the standards of food clothing 
and supervision"120 after 1969, when the government and the 
churches parted ways and the Department took direct control of 
the system. Principals and Administrators still found it 
difficult 
and 
at 
times 
impossible 
to 
live within 
the 
allowances set out. A subsequent survey in the Saskatchewan 
region revealed that allowances were not high enough to 
provide, on a consistent basis, proper clothes, especially for 
children in hostels who were attending provincial schools, or 
food or recreational activities. One administrator reported 
that he had to serve "more often than we should food such as 
hot dogs, bologna, garlic sausages, macaroni etc.... the 
cheapest food on the market and still I can hardly make it. 
Lack of funds meant that he bought the "cheapest clothes" and 
kept a seamstress working hard "doing all the mending and 
unfortunately at times we have to accept to see our children 
not being too neat at times." Most of the others in the 
survey, and by statistical implication most administrators 
and, therefore, most of the children throughout the system, 
were having the same experience.121 
No matter how widespread or how limited to specific schools 
problems of care may have been at any particular time, one 
element remained constant. Departmental oversight of the 
system after 
1957, 
though 
it was much more 
extensive, 
certainly 
was 
not 
universally 
effective. 
There 
were 
improvements. Indian Health Service's dietitians inspected the 
schools more regularly than had ever been the case before. 
They gave detailed menu planning advice with a view to 
providing "a standard equivalent to the diet recommended by 
Canada's Food Rules, "122 conducted on-site training for kitchen 
staff, and taught older girls "basic food handling practises" 
often starting off their teaching sessions with a viewing of 
the film "Kitchen Habits."123 Section 132 of the agent's 
References and Regulations directed agents to make a monthly 
visit to each school in their agency and, subsequently, to 
complete a report taking into particular "account the care and 
well-being of the children. 124 
414 

What did not change however, was the manner in which the 
Department responded to the recommendations contained in 
inspection reports. As with the dietary reports of the first 
half of the century, they were not enforced but routinely 
passed along to Principals with no more than a suggestion that 
everything be done "that can be done to live up to the 
recommendations of the dietitian." Problems were thrown back 
into the laps of Principals who were to "see what can be done 
about them in a constructive way."125 No one, however, was let 
go if they could not manage so it was always only the children 
who felt the consequnes of Departmental economy and inaction, 
staff incompetence and carelessness. 
Schools that were part of the Northern Affairs system after 
1955 had their own doleful history and were not above the 
critique 
made 
by 
the 
Principal's 
and 
Administrator's 
Association even though many of the buildings were generally 
much newer. A harsh review of the conditions and operation of 
Fort Providence school concluded with a remark certainly 
familiar in a southern context: "I would sooner have a child 
of 
mine 
in 
a 
reform 
school 
than 
in 
this 
dreadful 
institution."126 Also as in the south, the system did not 
ensure that adequate food and clothing, safe and healthy 
conditions were provided to all of the children all of the 
time. There was always, as at a Tent Hostel for example, some 
considerable distance between intention and reality. One of 
the teachers there submitted a remarkable report on the 
"hostel term" during which the staff and Inuit children had 
had a "satisfactory and happy experience" despite the fact 
that the accommodation was "very cold because all the heat 
escaped through the chimneys, there was a constant fire 
hazard", the children's clothes were "unsatisfactory" and the 
children received a most non-traditional diet of corned beef 
and cabbage at the majority of dinners while the staff ate 
their "monthly fresh food supply" at the same table so as to 
give "the youngsters an opportunity to model their table 
manners from those of the staff."127 
An even more revealing and worrisome report was submitted by 
a consultant psychologist after a northern tour which began at 
the Churchill Vocational Centre. It was housed in an "army 
barracks." "I know what a rat must feel when it is placed in 
a maze," he commented. When he moved on to two schools in the 
Keewatin area, he found the buildings equally unsuitable. Had 
he travelled farther throughout the Northern Affair's system 
he would have encountered not only similar conditions, but 
perhaps, as he had already discovered, more children who were 
being seriously damaged by their residential 
experience. 
Having interviewed and tested Inuit students, he concluded 
that "the educational problems encountered in the Keewatin 
Area are there because the Southern white educational system, 
with all its "hangups' has been transported to the North". 
415 

Those educational problems included "a range of emotional 
problems" 
including 
"anxious kids, 
fearful kids, 
mildly 
depressed kids, kids with poor self-images . . .11128 In this most 
important way, the Indian Affair's and Northern Affair's 
systems, 
despite 
their 
different 
histories, 
were 
indistinguishable. They were neglectful in terms of ensuring 
that appropriate standards of care were maintained without 
exception and they were, as a review of the issue reveals, 
abusive to individual children and through those children to 
Aboriginal communities in general. 
ABUSE 
In the post-war era, as a part of the reorganization of the 
residential system marked by integration and the 1957 funding 
arrangement, 
Indian 
Affairs 
circulated 
directives 
on 
punishment. As early as 1947, guidelines 
for 
strapping 
children were distributed to Principals. These were issued by 
the Department following an incident at Morley school in which 
charges were made that "capital punishment was meted out," 
including beating "pupils on the head." 
One official, on 
searching Departmental files for guidance, gave evidence of 
the faulty corporate memory of the system. He was able to find 
"no instance of similar regulations having been prepared but 
from personal experience I feel that in such instances . . . the 
situation can best be clarified by clearly instructing the 
principal in this matter." These 1947 instructions, similar to 
those which guided staff in public schools across the country, 
were the basis for subsequent directives in 1953 and 1962: 
1. That corporal punishment will be used only where 
all other methods of disciplining a pupil have 
failed. 
2. That corporal punishment will be administered 
only 
on 
the 
hands 
with 
a 
proper 
school 
strap.(regulation 15" rubber) 
3. That the maximum number of strokes on each hand 
in no instance exceed four in number for male 
pupils 
of over 
fourteen years of age and 
in 
proportion for boys under that age. 
4. 
That 
all 
such 
corporal 
punishment 
be 
administered in the presence of the principal or by 
the principal. 
5. 
That 
a 
Corporal 
Punishment 
Register 
be 
maintained at the school containing the following 
headings: 
a) Date 
b) Reason for Punishment 
c) By whom administered 
416 

d) Witness 
e) Signature of pupil punished 
6. That 
this 
register 
be made 
available 
for 
inspection by all Indian Affairs Branch officials 
visiting the above. 
If a regulation strap was not available, information was 
provided on which school suppliers stocked them.129 
Local officials and school staff had to put interpretive meat 
on those regulatory bones. As one Principal was told when he 
was sent the above regulations, "it is almost impossible to 
lay down rigid rules concerning the administration of corporal 
punishment as so much depends on the personality of the pupil 
and the teacher concerned," on the circumstances of each 
situation.130 
In 1953, the Department expanded it 1947 directive identifying 
a wide range of unacceptable disciplinary practises: 
Any form of punishment tending to humiliate a pupil 
is to be avoided. This policy applies alike to the 
use of sarcasm or to the employment of practises 
calculated 
to 
produce 
distinctive 
changes 
in 
appearance or dress. It is a generally approved 
practise for teachers to abstain from physical 
contacts with pupils either in anger or affection. 
Children's reports of such contacts have sometimes 
been 
so exaggerated 
as to make the 
teacher's 
position untenable. In any event there is to be no 
corporal punishment of a pupil who is suspected to 
be suffering from any physical or mental ailment 
which corporal punishment may aggravate. Before 
resorting to the use of corporal punishment, the 
principal or teacher in charge must be convinced 
that no other approved form of punishment will have 
the necessary punitive and corrective effects.131 
Regulations similar to those of 1947 were issued in the north. 
J. McKinnon, the superintendent of education in the Mackenzie 
District added further specificity to them when responding to 
the case of an Inuit boy who had been harshly strapped in the 
Anglican school at Aklavik in 1948. When absolutely necessary, 
resort could be had to strapping according to regulations but, 
he cautioned, "all such methods of punishment as pulling or 
boxing the ear, slapping with the hand, striking with a book 
or pointer, shaking a pupil or hitting him are strictly 
forbidden." McKinnon's superior, the Deputy Commissioner of 
the Northwest Territories, R. Gibson, certainly agreed. That 
sort of treatement he held was not only excessive but counter-
productive - "We will certainly get nowhere by condoning the 
417 

strapping of native children by teachers who cannot maintain 
discipline otherwise." 
Unfortunately, such intentions, the need as McKinnon expressed 
it, of maintaining discipline in the manner of a "judicious 
parent," of avoiding "corporal punishment in all cases where 
good order can be preserved by milder measures,1,132 have to be 
set against a too often contradictory reality, one of abuse -
of confinement, deprivation of food, head shaving, group 
public beatings 
and even other more 
cruel and bizarre 
punishments. These many recurring incidents demonstrate that, 
consistent 
with 
other 
areas 
of 
care, 
here 
too 
those 
intentions, inscribed in Departmental regulations, were not 
nearly enough to ensure the humane treatment of the children. 
In southern schools, and in the Northern Affairs system too, 
children continued to be abused in this long post-war period. 
From Turquetil Hall, Chesterfield Inlet, to Kamloops School 
and across the country to Shubenacadie, the voices of Inuit, 
Indian and Metis adults who were children in those or other 
schools can now be heard describing publicly, in all media, 
their dreadful experiences suffered at the hands of church or 
Departmental staff.133 Mary Carpenter, writing in 1974, in 
Inuktitut Magazine of her time in both Anglican and Catholic 
schools told what is now a familiar story: 
After 
a 
lifetime 
of 
beatings, 
going 
hungry, 
standing in a corner on one leg, and walking in the 
snow with no shoes for speaking Inuvialuktun, and 
having a stinging paste rubbed on my face, which 
they did to stop us from expressing our Eskimo 
custom of raising our eyebrows 
for 
"yes1 
and 
wrinkling our noses for "no' , I soon lost the 
ability to speak my mother tongue. When a language 
dies, the world dies, the world it was generated 
from breaks down too.134 
For the Department and the churches these narratives of the 
1970s and 1980s were old news. Many of them, or at least ones 
like them, were already known within the system. They were the 
painful pulse of abuse that had reverberated, unchanged and 
unending, through the system and throughout its history. 
Many times in any given year, Ottawa was notified of abuse -
punishment which did not follow the letter or spirit of the 
discipline directives and was identified as such by officials. 
It is impossible, of course, to give here a sense of the 
considerable volume and gravity of the abuse. But it is 
possible to establish that the Department and the churches 
were apprized of it in its many forms. 
418 

Reports came from across the system - abuse was not an 
isolated phenomenon occurring only in the more distant and 
darker corners. The Departmental inspector of schools in 
Alberta, recorded parental complaints of excessive strapping 
at one school. They were, he thought, "not unfounded." Nor 
according to the regional inspector of Indian schools in 
Saskatchewan, were reports that at a school in that Province 
"heads were cropped or clipped, " that a "very ill girl" had to 
be removed from the school and hospitalized, likely as result 
of punishment by the Principal, and that "certainly bullying 
[of the children] is quite prevalent."135 
Across 
the 
mountains 
in 
British 
Columbia, 
the 
Indian 
commissioner reported on the behaviour of a Principal which, 
though 
"church 
authorities 
have 
disagreed 
with 
our 
evaluation, " suggested that he had not "the good judgement to 
qualify him for this position." "At morning assembly, he 
strapped thirteen students, 9 boys and 4 girls, giving each 
"4-5 strokes on their seats." He then "threatened that 
Christmas holiday privileges might be suspended for all 
students." This was, the commissioner wrote in conclusion, 
only one of "the episodes of unusual behaviour" which had come 
to his notice. At a school further north, the Principal 
revealed that he disciplined the children in the same way "in 
which he was disciplined as a child." Therefore, he thought it 
perfectly acceptable to administer "punishment to a girl in 
the front of a class." This "had been done by taking down the 
girls 
[sic] 
pants 
and 
striking 
the 
child 
across 
her 
buttocks.1,136 
At another school, the Principal chose to beat girls in 
private. Two of them, at the urgings of the "Medium Girls' 
Supervisor" who was too frightened to confront the Principal 
herself as he "might seek revenge", wrote directly to the 
Department. 
He called me to his room. He says he'd strap me. He 
went into the other room to get the strap. He told 
me to take off my jeans and my panty. Instead I 
pulled it down to the knees. He tells me to kneel 
down. So I do. He gave me thirteen straps. He also 
waits 
a 
little moment 
every 
time 
I had 
the 
strap.... He puts his feet or I should say I had my 
body between his legs. That was kneeling down. Then 
he lets me go. He waits a little while after giving 
me the strap. 
First thing Father wanted me to go to his office so 
I did. He asks me a few questions. And then he 
brought me to the other office. He told me to kneel 
and then he pulled my skirt up and then pulled my 
pants down. He put my head between his legs and he 
419 

started to give me the strap. I had the strap a 
9:00 p.m. I had around 10 straps or over.137 
At one western school a Departmental official had to deal with 
a case in which one of the staff was accused by members of the 
Blackfoot band council of having 
administered corporal punishment to numerous girl 
pupils and had subjected them to other forms of 
punishment 
which 
were 
physically 
harmful 
to 
them.... she had shown little or no sympathy and 
was 
relentless 
in 
the 
punishment 
which 
she 
administered on little provocation. 
One of those "forms of punishment" included compelling "a 
pupil to eat her own vomit." The Principal denied it all. Band 
members, he claimed, had nothing better to do but complain: 
When the stampedes are in full swing the Blackfoot 
Indian is happy, he is happy and grumbles not at 
all; but during the winter when time hangs heavily 
on his hands ... he is inclined to meditate over 
his troubles, real or imaginary, and eventually 
convinces himself that he has a grouch. 
The charges were never proven. But the Principal let the 
Department know that while he would not be "dismissing her 
summarily" she would be "moved in due course."138 
A staff member at a Saskatchewan school for some unknown 
reason burnt two boys on their hands, arm and neck with his 
cigarette lighter and tried to burn a third boy. The nurse 
thought the burns were at least second degree and that perhaps 
six boys in all had been burnt in a similar fashion in the 
past week. He was relieved of his duties with the local agency 
office where he also worked but was told that "he may apply 
for employment to our Regional Offices at Saskatoon and 
Winnipeg." 
within a month, the agent was sent back into the school to 
investigate a report received by the regional supervisor, that 
several children on returning to school after having run away 
"were punished by having their hair cut very short" and that 
they "sidle from classrooms with eyes downcast and then 
quickly put caps on to cover their shorn heads." The report, 
the agent replied, "was partially correct." No one "sidled" 
and no one, indeed, had "been wearing caps at the School since 
early in May of this year." But it was a fact that six 
children had been shaved. The fault lay with the parents it 
seemed. The "real cause of the truancy problem . . . stems from 
the parents due to lack of interest, guidance and supervision 
by the parents." The Principal could not be blamed. "We have 
420 

checked the school file containing school regulations and find 
that this school has not been supplied with regulations 
regarding discipline in a residential school." 
Senior regional staff were not reassured by the agent's report 
nor did they excuse the Principal. The acting regional 
superintendent of Indian schools wondered "how many other acts 
of sadism the students may have been subjected to that went 
unreported." He was particularly shocked by the hair cutting 
by "what this form of punishment means to the child, what it 
says about the person who would authorize it or what the 
reaction would be if the general public were aware of it." 
This practice, he noted, had even been abandoned "in penal 
institutions quite some time ago." Finally, he "respectfully" 
suggested to the church that the Principal "should be removed 
from this area of work." The senior regional church official 
who then conducted his own investigation disagreed. He could 
not bring himself "to impose upon him [the Principal] a 
resignation of his office at present." He would be kept on 
under "close supervision."139 
It was 
not 
just 
individual 
acts 
of 
abuse by 
wayward 
individuals that officials encountered but persistent abuse by 
chronic abusers that suffused life at the school. At a 
Manitoba school, for example, an inquiry set off by four girls 
who "froze their feet" having run away, revealed what local 
officials felt was a disciplinary reign of terror. "To my 
mind", one of the officials concluded, "these children are not 
being treated in a manner in which children should be 
treated." They had all the evidence they needed for that 
conclusion from the mouths of staff members who seemed to feel 
that their actions were wholly within the bounds of acceptable 
behaviour. As one teacher allowed - "Anyone on the staff is 
allowed to strap the children." She admitted that she would 
"pull their hair once in awhile, not as a punishment but more 
as a reminder." Another woman asserted that "as a staff member 
on duty I have a right to punish the children." They seemed to 
be following the matron's lead. She sometimes gave "their hair 
a pull" but did not think "I hurt them at all" and she told 
how she "hit the girls on the head with my knuckles." 
According to the children, whose testimony local officials 
considered "true," these admissions were mild approximations 
of the real situation. The matron "hit us on the head with her 
fists." While they scrubbed the floors "she stands there with 
stick or a strap in her hand." One of the officials in fact 
characterized her as a "slave driver." She also, a student 
complained, "garbs us by the hair and shakes us. If she sees 
us smiling at the table she thinks we are talking and hits us 
on the head with anything she can get a hold off." She "teases 
the girls and if they get mad she takes them in the hall and 
straps them." They were locked in their dorm at night in order 
421 

to keep the boys and girls apart. That was a standard practice 
throughout 
the 
system, 
which 
in 
the 
officials 
opinion 
constituted "a very dangerous fire hazard." The children were 
kept separated during the day, too. The matron refused to let 
them converse with their siblings of the opposite sex - "we 
only can speak to them when we see them when no one is 
around." She admitted, although the Principal contradicted 
her, that "Boys and girls are kept separate and are only 
allowed to talk in the visiting room." 
The Principal, himself, was not above reproach. He refused to 
keep the mandatory punishment register. One young woman told 
how he "had cut her hair off last year because I ran away." 
That 
charge and another 
that had him reading all 
the 
children's incoming and outgoing mail, (a common practise) he 
readily admitted. Some of the mail was simply stopped. He was 
not shy in defending himself. Discipline and supervision had 
to be strict, he felt, because Indian children were more 
cunning than white children of the same age - "quick to size 
up ... anyone of a weak personality" and take advantage of 
them. The children, in the official's estimation, seemed cowed 
by the Principal; they "seemed to be afraid to talk." He was 
not 
a proper type of person to run one of these 
schools. While he may be efficient in some lines, 
in my opinion, he has no idea of bringing children 
up and making good citizens of them. 
These reports, like those from Marcoux and the dietitians who 
visited Brandon in the early 1950s, demonstrated that abuse 
was often nested in neglect and was persistent. On entering 
this particular school, one of the two officials wrote, "one 
finds the most dismal and unkempt building, badly in need of 
repairs and certainly not a place in which children can be 
cared for and happy."140 
That pattern, the conjunction of neglect and abuse, was 
repeated at other schools. A report by an inspector revealed 
overcrowding at a British Columbia school kept clean only 
because 
it was 
"well 
scrubbed by the pupils" 
and 
the 
continuation of the half-day system long after it had been 
dispensed with generally throughout the rest of the system 
with the result that the "academic work" was "just not being 
done to the degree that it should." One ex-teacher and a staff 
member, in letters to the Department, began their critique at 
that point but then went on to paint a much darker picture. 
The teacher charged that the children were "kept out of class 
for cheap labor." 
But it was abuse she concentrated on, providing the Department 
with a catalogue of examples: 
422 

Corporal punishment. Children's faces are slapped, 
hit on the head, struck across the nose causing 
nose bleeds.... One teacher said a boy in her 
classroom had a swollen face for two days from 
being slapped. Another teacher reported that one of 
her pupils was slapped on the face because he 
couldn't read the small print in the hymn books. 
One of my grade 8 boys was slapped on the head 
until he was pale, he staggered, complained of 
feeling dizzy and his nose bled profusely. This was 
witnessed by most of the school boys. He fainted 
five 
days 
later 
in prayers 
and 
again 
in my 
classroom. 
The staff member provided further information. The children 
were overworked - rightly complaining of being "tired and 
hungry." 
"The food was very poor." There was no fruit juice 
served even to children who were ill and there was a good deal 
of illness particularly "skin troubles through lack of proper 
diet." Both women agreed that children were abused mainly by 
the Principal's daughter "who is rude and domineering toward 
the children" and by the son-in-law, who "himself admitted 
that the children were slapped over the ears and head when 
asked what 
punishment 
was given little boys who 
stole 
cookies." There was 
"Therefore no redress made by 
the 
Principal." 
There was none by the Department either. The situation dragged 
on for years with more complaints coming from the children, 
the Principal of the Provincial school where the children 
attended classes, the teaching and non-teaching staff of the 
school, 
a 
Provincial 
government 
social 
worker 
and 
the 
Department's local staff. They focused, 
largely, on the 
Principal - on his "unwholesome attitude towards Indians, 
improper treatment of the children and failure to cooperate 
with Provincial School authorities." The minister in a most 
diplomatic fashion, told a local member of Parliament, who had 
sought information on the situation, that "because of his [the 
Principal's] many years of faithful and valuable service the 
officials of the Education Division have overlooked a number 
of recent 
difficulties but 
it seems 
from reports 
that 
conditions at the school have reached a point where the 
Department can no longer ignore them." 
Education Division 
officials were saved from doing anything by the news that the 
Principal, a rather elderly man by then, had decided to 
retire.141 
The most powerful testimony about the abuse of children came 
from six ex-residential school students. Their testimony could 
not be characterized as some "grouch" from the unemployed 
meditating on imaginary troubles. These ex-students were men 
and 
women 
of 
impeccable 
authority 
and 
character 
with 
423 

successful careers in education, public service, broadcasting 
and the church. In 1965, at the Department's request, they 
supplied 
written 
evaluations 
of 
the 
school 
system 
for 
circulation at what was billed as the first ever Residential 
School Principal's Conference. None of them had much to say 
that was positive and two were brutally frank, describing the 
school experience "as an insult to human dignity." 
One of these men, the Principal of a vocational school, 
described conditions at Brandon during his 7.5 years residence 
there and experiences that "I and hundreds of others had to 
endure as children." They ate food "prepared in the crudest of 
ways" and "served in very unsanitary conditions." It included 
"bread dipped in grease and hardened," "green liver," "milk 
that had manure in the bottom of the cans and homemade 
porridge that had grasshopper legs and bird droppings in it." 
None of this had ever appeared in dietitians' reports. They 
endured "cruel disciplinary measures . . . such as being tied to 
a flag pole, sent to bed with no food, literally beaten and 
slapped by staff." 
The second of the two men, a broadcaster and federal civil 
servant, described the neglect and listed the punishments 
meted out at the "mushole," the Mohawk Institute at Brantford, 
Ontario. There "90% of the children" suffered "from diet 
deficiency and this was evident in the number of boils, warts 
and the general malaise that existed within the school 
population." He had seen "children eating from the swill 
barrel, picking out soggy bits of food that was intended for 
the pigs." Heads were routinely shaved because of lice - "lice 
... was an accepted part of being an Indian at the Mohawk." 
Besides the usual beatings, "I have seen Indian children 
having their faces rubbed in human excrement, ... the normal 
punishment for bedwetters ... was to have his face rubbed in 
his own urine." And for those who tried to escape "nearly all 
were caught and brought back to face the music." They were 
forced to run a gauntlet when they were "struck with anything 
that was at hand." "I have seen boys crying in the most abject 
misery and pain with not a soul to care - the dignity of 
man! "142 
Some children did get away, however, and a disturbing number 
met their deaths in doing so. Truancy, L.G.P. Waller remarked 
in 1952, "exists at most of our residential schools."143 His 
observation remained apt as the decades passed. Children ran 
off constantly, sometimes en masse. On the 7th of May 1953 
"All 32 boys in the school [a school in Saskatchewan] were 
truant ... following disciplinary action. "144 In June, 1963 the 
Children's Aid Society of Fort Frances informed the Department 
that 12 boys had run away from an Ontario school in May and 
that on the 15th of that month two of them had been discovered 
424 

clinging to "the top of a box car in the middle of the night 
as the train was going from Fort Frances to Atikokan." The 
boys had been jailed in Atikokan, retrieved by one of the 
society's social workers and returned safely to the school.145 
Other children were not so lucky; they did not return at all. 
In 1967, the Assistant Deputy Minister, R.F. Battle, in a 
briefing for the minister after the death of a boy, Charlie 
Wenjack, admitted "that it is not uncommon for Indian children 
to run away" but he claimed that "rarely do accidents result 
while they are absent from the schools."146 In fact, within the 
last decade, 1957-67, at least four children had died and two 
more would die within the next five years. 
Children had, of course, run off and perished throughout the 
history of the system. In June, 1941, three boys John Kicki, 
Michel Sutherland and Michel Matinas left St. Anne's school at 
Fort Albany during the spring break up. They took a little 
food - bread they had hoarded. But one had his bow and arrows 
and "he was reported by his brother to have said: I do not 
care to take much grub; I have my arrows and I will kill birds 
on the way." Months later, when they had still not been 
located, the RCMP concluded they had "drowned or perished from 
starvation." It was likely, the deputy minister was told, that 
their bodies had been "carried into Hudson Bay."147 
In another instance, at the Round Lake school in Saskatchewan 
in 1935, three young boys ran away. Two made it to their 
homes; the third lost his way in a blizzard and froze to death 
when the temperature dropped to 25 [f] below zero. His body was 
found four days later: 
His foot tracks could be followed into the bush 
where he had lay down, he then had crawled on his 
hands and knees for about 
15 yards into some 
willows. Here the snow had been partly scraped out 
and he lay in the hollow, face down. His hands were 
held up under his face with his mitts off under his 
hands. He was frozen solid. He was dressed in a 
pair of blue bib overalls, black and red sweater, 
fleece lined underwear, one pair of grey socks, gum 
rubber boots size six, and no overcoat. The rubbers 
appeared to be too large for him and the snow had 
packed in around the tops of them, making his feet 
wet. 
The boy's father retained an attorney who wrote the minister, 
soliciting a third party inquiry to determine whether there 
had been "any culpable or criminal negligence 
involved" 
especially since this was "the fourth death to have taken 
place on the ... Agency since 1918" - none of which had been 
investigated. Noting that the RCMP and the local Indian agent 
425 

had made inquiries, the minister determined that "no further 
action is considered necessary." A subsequent appeal to the 
minister of justice, met with a similar reply.148 
The first deaths of run aways in this post-war period came in 
January, 1959 when two sisters (the Department could not quite 
figure out their names), who had fled Kuper Island school, 
were 
found 
drowned. 
The 
"accident 
was 
particularly 
regrettable" the Indian Commissioner, W.S. Arneil, telexed 
Ottawa "as tone [sic] management ... tremendously improved in 
last year."149 
Later that year, on 2 September, 1959 two brothers, Rocky and 
Joseph Commanda, ran away from Mohawk. The next day Rocky was 
caught. Nothing was heard of Joseph until the 5th when the 
Toronto Metro Police contacted the school. They had a body. 
There was a number on the undershirt - 60, Joseph's number. He 
had been struck by a train as he was being chased by some 
police officers. In the article in the Globe and Mail 
published the next day, the school was referred to as "a 
juvenile 
detention 
home." 
According 
to 
the Globe, 
the 
"engineer . . . saw what he thought was a man running north 
across the train tracks by the Sunnyside Station." He told the 
police "he saw the figure stumble and fall between two sets of 
tracks, get up and continue running directly into the path of 
his engine." The figure, a boy of 13 rather than a man, "did 
not appear to hear the three-car Railiner bearing down on 
him.150 
The death of 12 year old Charlie Wenjack in 1966, made famous 
by the coverage it received in the Maclean's Magazine article 
"The Lonely Death of Charlie Wenjack, " was a much more private 
act. He left Cecilia Jeffrey Residence bound for his home 
community, Ogoki Post on the Martin Falls reserve, 
and 
"collapsed and died of hunger" beside the railroad tracks he 
thought would lead him home. "He was lying on his back . . . his 
thin cotton 
clothing 
... obviously 
soaked." He had no 
identification; he was carrying nothing but "a little glass 
jar with a screw top. Inside a half dozen wooden matches." 
From where he lay, "he had more than half of northern Ontario 
to cross." 
The Department shipped his body home accompanied 
by his three little sisters who had also been students. 
The 
writer, Ian Adams, commented that "Charlie was 12. He was an 
Indian. He died as the white world's rules had forced him to 
live - cut off from his people."151 
On the 28th or 29th of November, 1970 two more boys ran off. 
They were from the Kenora school and both of them died. Their 
death, a coroner's jury determined, was caused "by exposure to 
cold, when the children ran away from school and became lost 
trying to walk home." The jury members did not become involved 
in any inquiry into the boys' motivation. They took a rather 
426 

more practical bent refusing, in effect, to cross the line of 
Departmental authority. They recommended 
"The residences 
initiate 
survival 
courses 
for all 
students." 
It was a 
recommendation that G.D. Cromb, then the director of the 
education branch, thought had considerable merit.152 
As a result of this incident, the Department did develop, in 
1971, a policy on running away directed, in the main, to 
reducing the possibility of injury and fatalities. Ways were 
explored of improving cooperation between school, field staff 
and community officials that would lead to more effective 
search capabilities. Regional directors across the country 
were directed to notify "Residence Staff to be very alert 
during times of severe weather and to take immediate emergency 
steps when a student is missing." They were also to emphasize 
"the need for discussion of the problems of runaways ... as 
part of in-service-training for counsellors, administrators 
and child care workers." And finally, staff were "urged to 
consider the implementation of a regular program of survival 
training for students who must live away from home to attend 
school."153 Chronic runaways could be and in some cases were 
discharged. In at least one case, a very different and perhaps 
dangerous technique was adopted. Three children from the Fort 
Frances 
school who were 
"constantly 
running away" 
were 
"transferred to residential schools which are further away 
from home."154 
These directives, as important as they undoubtedly were, were 
also very much by way of closing the school door after a child 
had bolted. The phenomenon of running away, itself, of what 
pushed children into a decision that could prove fatal, was 
not the subject of any in-depth study. The Department came 
closest to an investigation of the issue after Charlie 
Wenjack's death. R.F. Battle announced that he would be 
"making an immediate check covering all residential schools 
and 
hostels 
across 
Canada 
to determine 
accurately 
the 
incidence of accidents causing injury during the interval 
between their running away and the time they are returned to 
the schools or to their parents."155 No such "check," which 
might have been an instigator of more in-depth probing, seems 
to have been carried out and thus the Department proceeded on 
the basis of what might be called institutional 
common 
knowledge. Children ran off because they were lonely, because 
they were encouraged to do so by their parents, because of 
peer pressure - it was a "popular" thing to do and "those who 
do not are ridiculed and referred to as teacher's pets."156 One 
Principal put it all down to intelligence: 
It is a fact that all of our truancy and most of 
our troubles, comes from the pupils who are very 
dull and are clearly not going to get anywhere in 
class. In talking with some of these children; most 
427 

of them come from very poor homes; it is clear that 
they feel frustrated because they realize that they 
are poor students, and I think this frustration 
fosters an attitude of rebellion since they are 
constantly in hot water with their teacher.157 
An Anglican bishop laid some of the blame at the door of 
integration which in its implementation, as a "Mass . . . rather 
than a Selective" process, had not been careful in "dealing 
with children who have been wrested from a cultural background 
and security and forced into one that they do not understand 
nor appreciate." He noted the escalation of incidents of 
running away soon after the residential school with which he 
was most familiar was connected to a Provincial day school. 
That development, he felt, represented 
something deplorable in the policy ... in dealing 
with 
children 
who 
have 
been 
thrust 
into 
a 
departmental experiment in the nature of "guinea-
pigs" and who have not been able to accept the 
terms governing 
the experiment. 
It is a very 
difficult situation for the children, many of whom 
are without recourse to anyone who is to them a 
"confident". 
Truancy would have been even higher, the bishop claimed, had 
not school authorities resorted to the preventative measure of 
expelling those who looked like they "could not accept the 
rigour of Integration in Schools."158 
And, of course, some would admit, children fled schools in 
fear of further abuse. L.G.P. Waller in his 1952 discussion of 
truancy concluded that it would persist for only "Improved 
conditions within the schools ... can do something to rectify 
the situation."159 
Some children tried to find escape from those "conditions 
within the schools" in death itself. In 192 0, nine boys had 
attempted suicide by eating hemlock. One had died.160 In 1930, 
two boys had "died after ten days of sickness, of which the 
doctor could not find the symptoms." It was "only after they 
had passed away that the other boys told that they had seen 
them with HEMLOCK in their hands."161 In this period, in June 
1981, at Muscowequan Residential School, "five or six girls 
between the ages of 8 and 10 years had tied socks and towels 
together and tried to hang themselves." Earlier that year, a 
15 year old at the school had been successful 
in her 
attempt .162 
The many violations by school authorities of the 1947, 1953 
and 1962 regulations were not necessarily met by stern 
428 

reference to Departmental directives. As in the pre-war priod, 
the Department remained reluctant to act in the face of 
transgressions by school staff, despite the authority given to 
it by the 1961 contracts. Nor did it abandon its tendency in 
the face of allegations of mistreatment to move to the attack 
to protect the reputation of the system over and against the 
welfare of the children. Actions then, even those clearly 
beyond the disciplinary pale, would be recognized as such -
that had been the case in all the examples above and was so in 
many more incidents on file - but in the end disciplinary 
action against the staff would not be taken. At Birtle school 
two boys were beaten by the Principal leaving "marks all over 
the boys bodies, back, front genitals etcetera." Sweeping 
aside confirmation by a doctor, the Department's regional 
inspector of schools for Manitoba, conceded only that such 
punishment had "overstepped the mark a little" but as the boys 
had been caught trying to run away "he had to make an example 
of them."163 
The old Departmental habit of attacking the messenger which 
had been such a prominent style of defense in Scott's days was 
still in evidence in this period. In 1949, a mother complained 
about the nuns at her daughter's school whipping the children, 
slandering their parents and, specifically, that a staff 
member, an Aboriginal woman, had grabbed her daughter "by the 
back of her hair and kept bumping her face against the wall 
till her nose was bleeding and her face was all bruised up." 
The response was not an investigation but the marginalization 
of all of the women involved. The regional supervisor of 
Indian agencies concluded that "... as in all cases of Indian 
women having rows, truth is thrown out the window and the row 
reaches a low level."164 
Another woman, an employee of a school in British Columbia in 
1960, having reported on abusive treatment, poor conditions 
and an inadequate diet, was fired 
by the Principal "on the 
charge of 
"not being loyal to the school.'" Boys, 
she 
reported, would come to the dispensary at night wanting 
aspirins for headaches "because they were hungry." As there 
were no drinking taps in any of the dorms, children would 
"drink out of the toilet bowls and tanks when thirsty enough." 
None of this was to be believed because she "had become quite 
active in leftist organizations and "peace movements.'"165 
In 1965, the motives of Ian Adams, who the next year wrote the 
Charlie Wenjack article for Macleans, became the target of a 
particularly pointed commentary on his character and motives. 
The occasion was an article he published in the Weekend 
Magazine - "The Indians: An Abandoned and Dispossessed People" 
- which dealt with the discrimination faced by Aboriginal 
people in the Kenora area. Within it was a frank critique of 
the operation of Cecilia Jeffrey school which, he wrote, "has 
429 

an atmosphere of unutterable loneliness, desolate enough to 
stop time in a child's heart." Children, he charged, who ran 
away were brought back "locked in a room with just a mattress 
on the floor, left only their underclothes, and put on a 
bread-and-milk diet." Two girls had been "humiliated by being 
made to come down and eat in the dining hall dressed only in 
their underwear." The Principal, S.T. Robinson, on being 
questioned admitted, according to the article, 
(though he 
subsequently claimed in a letter to the Kenora Miner News, 14 
August 1965, that the children had been locked away with their 
parents permission) , that he had employed such disciplinary 
measures in his battle against runaways.166 
Despite 
Robinson's 
admission 
that 
he 
had 
violated 
the 
punishment regulations, local officials saved their ire for 
Adams in what seemed to be an attempt to undercut the article 
by questioning his experience and motives. He was referred to 
as a "cub reporter" allied with a known Aboriginal "political 
activist" 
who 
had 
written 
the 
article 
"to 
create 
sensationalism" ,167 
The Charlie Wenjack article in Maclean's was the occasion for 
a most interesting defense of the Department and the school 
system. As soon as the article reached the newsstands, a 
briefing text was provided for the minister's office in 
anticipation of questions in the House. The note found neither 
blame nor mystery in the tragic event - certainly none that 
would attach to the Department or to the school which like the 
58 other schools then operating "served the Indian people with 
care and concern." "That Charles Wenjack became lonely and ran 
away is not exceptional, for other children regardless of 
their origin, have the same feelings and reactions when 
separated from family and familiar surroundings...." It was in 
fact all so unnecessary: 
Had he confided in his Principal or the counsellor 
he could have been returned home. The residential 
schools are not detention institutions. They are 
operated for the welfare and education of Indian 
children. 
The Department was not, however, "satisfied or complacent 
about the operation of these units." Every year conferences of 
Principals and supervisors were held "to exchange views on 
successful experiments in dealing with institutional problems" 
and "to develop improved services for children...." In this 
vein, the minister should inform the House that "at the 
request of the Department, a study was begun nearly a year ago 
by the Canadian Welfare Council to ensure that the best 
possible care should be given to these young people."168 
Standing back from this sketch of a caring and carefully 
430 

managed residential school system, which would be thrown into 
sharp relief in 1967 by that Welfare Council report and by the 
Principal and Administrators' brief of 1968, it is evident 
from the incidents of abuse that are embedded in Departmental 
files, and the testimony of ex-students that multiply those 
exponentially, that the pattern of neglect and abuse that was 
inherent in the building and operation of the system from its 
earliest days was not disrupted in the decades immediately 
before the final closure of the schools. Father Lacombe's 
dictum - the necessity of "Coercion to enforce order and 
obedience" - to the degree that it constituted a reign of 
disciplinary terror, punctuated by incidents of stark abuse, 
continued to be the ordinary tenor of life in many schools 
throughout the system. There can be no better summary comment 
on the system and the experience of the children than the 
rather diplomatic description of an Ontario school given by an 
Anglican Bishop in 1960: 
The ... [school] has over the past years suffered a 
somewhat unhappy household atmosphere. Too rigid 
regimentation, a lack of homelike surroundings and 
the failure to regard the children as persons 
capable of responding to love, have contributed at 
time to that condition. Children unhappy at their 
treatment were continually running away.169 
As this description implies, and other evidence attests more 
directly, the Department and the churches knew something else 
about the system and again they knew it years before the 
voices of ex-students made the schools, their history and 
consequences, 
such 
a part 
of 
the public 
discourse 
on 
Aboriginal-government relations. They knew that the record of 
the school system comprised more than the sum of innumerable 
acts of violence against individual children. There were in 
addition, pervasive and equally insidious consequences for all 
the children - for those who had been "marked," like the two 
boys beaten at Birtle for attempting to run away, and for 
those whose scars were less visible but, perhaps, no less 
damaging. 
From early in the history of the school system, it was 
apparent that the great majority of children on leaving 
school, unlike those few successes the Department was able to 
consult 
in 1965, rarely fit the vision's model of the 
enfranchiseable individual. In some manner, the educational 
process, 
an 
integral 
part 
of 
which 
was 
the 
system's 
overweening discipline, the "regimentation" so often noted, 
was counter productive, undercutting the very qualities which 
were the prerequisites for assimilation - "individual acting 
and thinking," the development of "individuality and self 
control" so that "children are prepared to take their place in 
our democratic way of life."170 
431 

There was at the sametime darker hues to this phenomenon. 
Local agents gave notice that not only did children not 
undergo the great transformation, but they became stranded 
between cultures, deviants from the norms of both. One agent, 
in 1913, reviewing the record of children who had come home 
from Crowstand school commented that there were "far too many 
girls graduates ... turning out prostitutes, and boys becoming 
drunken loafers." Another agent in 1918, opposed the schools 
because a much greater number of ex-students than children who 
had remained in the community were "useless" unable to get on 
with life on the reserve, and fell foul of the law. It would 
be, he concluded, "far better that they never go to school 
than turn out as the ex-pupils ... have done." Davey himself 
held the view that 
students who were 
"problem 
cases", 
uncontrollable, habitual transgressors of school rules, were 
"victims of the residential school system." He thought it 
unlikely that keeping them in school would have any remedial 
value. 
"Can 
we", 
he 
wondered, 
"reasonably 
expect 
any 
improvement in their behaviour or attitude by giving them more 
of the treatment which has brought about their condition?" 
[r389] In 1960, a Catholic bishop informed the Department that 
the "general complaint made by our Indian Youth brought up to 
court shortly after leaving school for various reasons is that 
they cannot make a decent living nor have a steady job because 
they 
have 
not 
education 
to 
compete 
with 
their 
white 
neighbours. "171 
Whether the bishop was correct, that those youth ended in 
trouble because they did not have enough education, or because 
it was the wrong sort of education and a severely debilitating 
experience, was not normally a matter for enquiry. However, in 
the late 1960s, the Department and the churches were forced to 
face the fact that there were severe defects in the system. 
Those ex-students consulted in 1965, were unanimous in the 
opinion that for most children the school experience was 
"really detrimental to the development of the human being." 
The one woman in the 1965 group, then a guidance counsellor 
and later a leader in Aboriginal education, underlined how 
corruptive the school experience was. The size of schools 
which necessitated rigid, authoritarian management led, she 
argued, to "the most detrimental aspect of a residential 
school program" - the fact that children were not "given the 
opportunity to make choices." There was, springing from that 
single source, a range of problems. "Responsibility for self-
discipline 
and 
decision 
making 
[was] 
not 
exercised 
by 
students," they did "not learn personal care of clothing," and 
thus "take little pride in personal belongings and "tend to 
feel nothing is really theirs." "Everything is done in mass, 
therefore 
it 
is difficult 
for any 
student 
to exercise 
individualism." The system did not prepare children for life 
after school. Isolated from both the Aboriginal and non-
432 

Aboriginal communities, schools were "inclined to make robots 
of their students" who were quite incapable of facing "a world 
almost unknown to him."172 
This ex-student perspective was amplified by George Caldwell's 
Canadian Welfare Council report. In 1967, Caldwell submitted 
a scathing evaluation of nine schools in Saskatchewan: 
The residential school system is geared to the 
academic training of the child and fails to meet 
the total needs of the child because it fails to 
individualize; rather it treats him en masse in 
every significant 
activity of daily life. His 
sleeping, eating, recreation, academic training, 
spiritual training and discipline are all handled 
in such a regimented way as to force conformity to 
the institutional pattern. The absence of emphasis 
on the development of the individual child as a 
unique person is the most disturbing result of the 
whole system. The schools are providing a custodial 
service rather than a child development service. 
The physical 
environment 
of 
the 
daily 
living 
aspects of the residential school is overcrowded, 
poorly designed, highly regimented and forces a 
mass approach to children. The residential school 
reflects a pattern of child care which was dominant 
in the early decades of the 20th century, 
a 
combined shelter and education at the least public 
expense. 
Not surprisingly, Caldwell's central recommendation was that 
Indian Affairs should concern itself "primarily with the 
education of Indian children and remove itself from the 
operation of children's institutions such as the present 
residential schools." 
While the preponderance of the report looked at the failure of 
the schools to achieve the goal of socialization, Caldwell did 
devote some attention to the consequences of that failure for 
children after they left school. Therein lay an even more 
"disturbing result." Caldwell confirmed what those agents had 
observed decades before - that not only were children ill-
prepared for life and work in Canadian society but that they 
were unable to deal with the unique reality that faced an ex-
student. A product of both worlds, they were caught in "the 
conflicting pulls between the two cultures" - the "white 
culture of the residential school" and subsequently "the need 
to readapt and readjust to the Indian culture." Central to the 
"resolution of the impact of the cultural clash for the ... 
child is an integration of these major forces in his life." 
Unfortunately, 
"few children are equipped to handle this 
struggle on their own"173 though they would be left to do just 
433 

that 
- to deal alone with the trauma of their 
school 
experience. He did not say, and the Department did not ask, 
how that struggle might be, or had been for generations, 
playing itself out in the lives of children, the families they 
returned to, the families and children they gave birth to, and 
their communities. What Caldwell's did venture was that his 
Saskatchewan 
findings 
could 
be 
replicated 
in 
schools 
throughout the system.174 
On its part, the Department, far from being prepared to 
dispute Caldwell's conclusions, welcomed and even amplified 
them in what amounted to its own serious critique of the 
system. Finally and categorically, it closed the door on 
Davin, 
on the belief 
in the 
importance of 
separation. 
Officials 
in 
the 
regions 
and 
in 
Ottawa 
declared 
authoritatively, sometimes referring to "the belief of social 
workers and others who deal with children" that "more injury 
is done to the children by requiring them to leave their homes 
to attend Residential schools than if they are permitted to 
remain at home and not receive formal education."175 There can 
be "no question but that the admission of a child to such an 
institution, when he does not need to be there, is harmful to 
both the child and the family from which he is withdrawn."176 
It 
"is 
a 
proven 
and 
universally 
accepted 
fact 
that 
institutional living for adolescents is to be discouraged."177 
Cast in more positive phrasing, these sentiments became the 
official Departmental position. In 1968, the Minister, Jean 
Chretien, wrote to the G.R. Baldwin MP indicating that 
Assumption school, in his riding would continue, like the 62 
other 
schools 
still 
operating, 
to experience 
enrolment 
reductions 
as 
the 
introduction 
of welfare 
services 
in 
communities and integration progressed. This, the Department 
considered, was all for the best as 
It has been found that for the average Indian 
child, remaining a member of the family unit can be 
more beneficial than the best residential school 
care.178 
Such a position was all suspiciously self-serving, however, 
for the Department, pushing integration, used Caldwell's view 
that the schools were not an "environment to foster healthy 
growth and development, " as a counter-weight against those who 
argued for the retention of a particular school or, more 
broadly, for the continuation of separate and residential 
education. In what is perhaps the darkest irony in the history 
of the school system, the Department acted vigorously on its 
failure never having acted vigorously in the past to prevent 
such a failure inscribed in the decades of "injury . . . done to 
children by requiring them to leave their homes".179 Soon, 
however, the Department and the churches, had to begin to face 
the issue of "injury" - the product of the long unbroken 
434 

history of abuse, mistreatment and the neglect of children and 
of the sustained 
attack on Aboriginal 
culture. 
It is, 
tragically, that "injury" that lives on beyond the closure of 
the schools. 
435 

1. INAC File 501/25-1-019, Vol. l, Memorandum to Mr. R.S. 
Davis from G.H. Marcoux, 21 October, 1953. 
2. Most of 72 schools operating in 1948 had been built prior 
to 1908. 
3. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8453, File 985/23-5, MR C 13802, To D. 
Mackay from R. Hoey, 16 July, 1943. 
4. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 651/25-1, MR C 9701, To D. 
Knight from J. Jones, 27 October, 1954. 
5. INAC File 671/25-1-025, Vol. 1, 2 April, 1952. 
6. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6426, File 875-1-2-3-5, MR C 8756, To 
Indian Commissioner from R.F. Davey, 15 October, 1949. 
7. INAC File 775/23-5-005, Vol. 1, Inspection Report, Fort 
Vermillion School, 16-17 January, 1953. 
8. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8757, File 673/25-1-010, MR C 9701, 
Memorandum to Deputy Minister from Director, 24 October, 1950. 
9. INAC File 772/23-5-010, Vol. 1, Inspection Report, Morley 
Residential School 31 October, 1952. 
10. INAC File 501/25-1-088, Vol. 1, To Director from Robt. F. 
Yule, M.D., 11 September, 1951 and To Indian Affairs Branch 
from J.P. Ostrander, 7 Januuary, 1952. 
11. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 651/25-1, MR C 9701, To B. 
Neary from Canon H. Cook, 20 December, 1948. 
12. INAC File 671/25-1-025, Vol. 1, 2 April, 1952. 
13. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8774, File 501/25-8 (1-3), MR C 9708, To 
the Department from J.R. McCurdy, n.d., 1958. 
436 

14. INAC File 701/25-1, Vol. 16, See transcript of interview 
with Louise ... 1975-76. 
15. Carroll Van West, "Acculturation by Design - Architectural 
Determinism and the Montana Indian Reservations, 1870-1930" in 
Great Plains Quarterly, Vol. 7 No. 2, Spring 1987, page 91. 
16. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 4041, File 334503, MR C 10178, To F. 
Pedley from F.H. Paget, 25 November, 1908 and Vol. 4092, File 
546898, MR C 10187, To W. Graham from Dr. F.A. Corbett, 7 
December, 1920. 
17. INAC File 772/25-1-002, Vol. l, To Director Indian Health 
Services from W. Falconer, M.D., 13 March, 1956 and To R.F. 
Battle from B.J. Orford, 14 June, 1956. 
18. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6309, File 654-1 (3), To Indian Affairs 
Branch from R. Davis, 17 October, 1945 and To Indian Affairs 
Branch from J. Ostrander, 5 March, 1946. 
19. INAC File 961/25-1, Vol. 1, 24 September, 1948. 
20. INAC File 501/25-1-008, Vol. 1, To Director, Indian Health 
Services, from Robt. F. Yule, M.D., 4 September, 1950 and To 
J. Ostrander from E. Jones, 3 January, 1952. 
21. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8596, File 1/1-13, MR C 14226, 
Inspection Report on St. Mary's school, 15 November, 1948. 
22. INAC File 501/25-1-088, Vol. 1, To Director, Indian Health 
Services, from Robt. F. Yule, M.D., 4 September, 1950, To 
Director, Indian Health Services, from Robt. F. Yule, M.D., 10 
September, 1949 and File 116/25-2-763, To Indian Commissioner 
for B.C. from P. Phelan, 23 July, 1952 which reiterates the 
necessity of a health check prior to the admission of a child. 
23. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6054, File 350-23 MR C 8159, To Dr. 
Moore from B. Orford, M.D., 16 February, 1946. 
24. INAC File 501/25-1-088, Vol. 1, 3 Janaury, 1952. 
25. INAC File 501/25-1-088, Vol. 1, To Director, Indian Health 
Services, from Robt. F. Yule, M.D., 10 September, 1949 and To 
Director, Indian Health Services, from Robt. F. Yule, 4 
September, 1950. 
26. INAC File 775/25-1-005, Vol. 1, To P. Phelan from Neil 
Walker, 20 June, 1949. 
27. INAC File 775/25-1-006, Vol. 1, To Minister of Landes 
[sic] and Mines from ..., 17 July, 1948 and Extracts from 
a 
letter from ... [the] Missionary at Hay 
437 

Lakes. 
28. INAC File 775/25-1-006, Vol. 1, To Dr. E.L. Stone from 
Neil Walker, 19 April, 1949. 
29. INAC File 775/25-1-006, Vol. 1, To ... from H. Jones, 5 
Janaury, 1954. 
30. INAC File 775/25-1-005, Vol. 1, To P. Phelan from Neil 
Walker, 20 June, 1949. 
31. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 654/25-1, To Indian Affairs 
Branch from V.M. Gran, 10 November, 1953 amd To V. M. Gran 
from J. Davis, 7 November, 1953. 
32. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6309, File 654-1 (3), To Indian Affairs 
Branch from R. Davis, 17 October, 1945 and To Dr. Camsell from 
[parent], 24 September, 1945. 
33. INAC File 486/25-1-001, Vol. 1, To R.F. Davey from H. 
Lariviere, 13 July, 1956, Confidential to W.J. Harvey from 
[the school] , 25 July, 1956 and To F. Matters from W.J. 
Harvey, 30 July, 1956. 
34. INAC File C8792 V6476 919-1 Part 1, To The Honourable I. 
A. Mackenzie from [a teacher] 13 March, 1944 and To H.W. 
McGill from D.L. Livingston, M.D.C.M., 22 May, 1944. 
35. INAC File 1/25-1-4-1, Vol. 2, To W.L. Falconer, M.D. from 
[a teacher] 14, October, 1953. 
36. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6033, File 150-44 (2), MR C 8149, To 
Mrs. A. Stevenson from R. Hoey, 15 September, 1945 and To R. 
Hoey from Mrs. A. Stevenson, 8 March, 1946. 
37. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6033, File 150-44 (2), MR C 8149, Red 
Cross Survey, 
St. John's, 
Chapleau, Mrs. A. 
Stevenson, 
October, 1944. 
38. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6033, File 150-44 (2), MR C 8149, Report 
of Food Survey at Spanish school, 11-15 March, 1945. 
39. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6033, File 150-44 (2), MR C 8149, To R. 
Hoey from Mrs. A. Stevenson, 6 March, 1946. 
40. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6033, File 150-44 (2), To Dr. Moore from 
L.B. Lett, M.D., 1 March, 1946 and To Dr. Moore from, L.B. 
Lett, M.D., n.d. 1946. 
41. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6033, File 150-44 (2), MR C 8149, Health 
Aspects in Relation to Food Service, 
Indian Residential 
Schools, November, 1946. 
438 

42. INAC File 1/25-1-4-1, Vol. 2, 7 January, 1954. 
43. INAC File 1/25-1-4-1, Vol. 2, 8 December, 1953 and 23 
December, 1953. 
44. INAC File 772/25-1-002, Vol. 1, To Zone Superintendent 
from L.H. Mason, 
M.D., 
4 December, 
1957 with 
attached 
correspondence. 
45. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6258, File 576-10, MR C 8650, To J.A. 
Glen from T.C. Douglas, 11 December, 1946, To J. Ostrander 
from A. Hamilton [?], 24 December, 1946 see attached note on 
police visit to the school by W. Kerley, To B. Neary from Rev. 
G. Dorey, 27 December, 1946 and To T.C. Douglas from J.A. Glen 
[Draft], 2 January, 1947. 
46. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6258, File 576-10, MR C 8650, To Indian 
Affairs Branch from J. Ostrander, 28 December, 1946. See also 
Police Reports: 3 September, 1949 and 6 November, 1949. 
47. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7194, File 511/25-1-015, MR C 9700, 
Agents Report, Brandon School, by J. Waite, 1950, To P. Phelan 
from R.S. Davis, 1 November, 1950 and To P. Phelan from R.S. 
Davis, 25 October, 1951. 
48. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7194, File 511/25-1-015, MR C 9700, To 
R.S. Davis from G. Marcoux, 12 October, 1951. 
49. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7194, File 511/25-1-015, MR C 9700, To 
R.S. Davis from Mrs. A. Swaile, 6 October, 1951. 
50. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7194, File 511/25-1-015, MR C 9700, To 
P. Phelan from G. Marcoux, 2 May, 1952 and To [the Principal] 
from P. Phelan, 10 June, 1952. 
51. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7194, File 511/25-1-015, MR C 9700, To 
R.S. Davis from R.F. Davey, 18 September, 1953 and To R.F. 
Davey from R.S. Davis, 23 September, 1953. 
52. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7194, File 511/25-1-015, MR C 9700, N. 
Chapman Report, 8 October, 1953. 
53. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7194, File 511/25-1-015, MR C 9700, To 
R.S. Davis from G. Marcoux, 5 November, 1953. 
54. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7194, File 511/25-1-015, MR C 9700, To 
Col. Jones from Dr. P. Moore, 22 October, 1953 and To Dr. 
Moore from H.M. Jones, 29 October, 1953. 
55. INAC File 1/25-1-4-1, Vol. 2, To Dr. L.B. Pett [sic] from 
R.F. Davey, 7 January, 1954. 
439 

56. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7194, File 511/25-1-015, MR C 9700, 3 
December, 1953 and 22 February, 1954. 
57. United Church Archives, Board of Home Missions Fonds, 
General Files, 
[Section II] Box 110, File 17, To 
[the 
Principal] from R. Davey, 27 January, 1960, Box 112, File 17, 
To Joblin from Powell, 25, November, 1960 and N.A.C. RG 10 
Vol. 7194, File 511/25-1-015, MR C 9700, To Director from R. 
F. Davey, 12 December, 1956. 
58. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7194, File 511/25-1-015, MR C 9700, To 
P. Dezeil from R.F. Davey, 15 November, 1956 and To R.F. Davey 
from R. Ragan, 6 December, 1956. 
59. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 7194, File 511/25-1-015, MR C 9700, To 
H. Jones from R.F. Davey, 12 December, 1956. 
60. INAC File 1/25-1-4-1, Vol. 2, To Dr. P.E. Moore from H.M. 
Jones, 17 August, 1956. 
61. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8576, File 1/1-2-2-23, MR C 14215, 
Memorandum to File from R.F. Davey, 1 August, 1958 and Vol. 
8795-6, File 1/25-13 (10), Mr C 6917, To J. Gordon from Dr. P. 
Moore, 23 November, 1963. 
62. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6033, File 150-44 (2), MR C 8149, Health 
Aspects in Relation to Food Service, 
Indian Residential 
Schools, November, 1946 and INAC File 601/25-2, Vol. 2, R.F. 
Davey, Residential Schools - Past and Future, 8 March, 1968. 
63. INAC File 772/25-1-002, Vol. 1, 22 October, 1956. 
64. INAC File 501/25-1-105, Excerpts from Letter ... dated 
Dec. 3rd, 1956. 
65. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5, Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
P. Phelan from A.J. Doucet, n.d. [November?], 1945. 
66. INAC File 486/25-1-001, Vol. l, To F. Matters from W.J. 
Harvey, 30 July, 1956. 
67. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6033, File 150-44 (2), MR C 8149, To 
Director from E. Stone, M.D. n.d. March, 1947. 
68. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-2, Part 4, MR C 8152, To 
B. Neary from Canon H. Cook, 5 July, 1950. 
69. 
Anglican 
Church 
Archives, 
M.S.C.C., 
Series 
2-15, 
Superintendent's 
Report 
to 
the 
Executive 
Committee, 
20 
November, 1951. 
440 

70. INAC File 487/25-1-015, Vol. 1, To The Secretary ..., 27 
February, 1948. 
71. 
Presbyterian 
Church 
Archives, 
1988-7004-15-1, 
Correspondence with Principal, Cecilia Jeffrey School, To F. 
Matthews from R.S. MacCallum, 12 December, 1951. 
72. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8576, File 1/1-2-2-21, MR C 14215, 
Regional School Inspectors Conference, 10-11 April, 1958. See 
the remarks of P. Dezeil. 
73. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6041, File 160-5, Part 1, MR C 8153, To 
Bishop Jennings from P. Phelan, 10 December, 1941. 
74. INAC File 6-37-1, Vol. 1, Memorandum to Deputy Minister 
from D. MacKay, 31 December, 1948. See attached: Important 
Developments - Indian Affairs Branch Since April 1, 1947. See 
also for funding information: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 
160-2, Part 4, MR C 8152, To Director from Canon Dixon, 26 
March, 1951, Vol. 6041, File 160-5, Part 1, To J. Birch O.M.I, 
from P. Phelan, 6 April, 1951, To Rev. A. Renaud O.M.I, from 
P. Phelan, 29 February, 1952 and Vol. 8795-6, File 1/25-13 
(10), MR C 6917, To Minister from H. Jones, 1 May, 1956. 
75. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 1, Memorandum for presentation to 
Minister of Citizenship and Immigration, 23rd January, 1951. 
76. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-2, part 4, MR C 8152, To 
B. Neary from Canon Cook, 5 May, 1950 and To B. Neary from 
Canon Cook, 5 July, 1950. 
77. INAC File 772/25-1-002, Vol. 1, 22 October, 1956. 
78. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6039, File 160-2, Part 4, MR C 8152, To 
Director from B. Neary, 4 May, 1950, Vol. 8795, File 1/25-13 
(10), MR C 6917, To Deputy Minister from H.M. Jones, 17 April 
1956 and INAC File 772/25-1-002, Vol. 1, Memorandum to the 
Deputy Minister, 2 January, 1957. 
79. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8795-6, File 1/25-13 (10), Mr C 6917, To 
Deputy Minister from H.M. Jones, 17 April, 1956. 
80. INAC File 961/25-13, Vol. 1, To [the Principal] from R. 
Davey, 13 March, 1956. 
81. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8576, File 1/1-2-1-21, MR C 14215, 
Regional School Inspectors Conference, 10-11 April, 1958. See 
remarks of P. Dezeil. 
82. 
INAC 
File 
116/25-13, 
Operation 
of 
Government-Owned 
Residential Schools on a Controlled Cost Basis, April, 1958 
and INAC File 1/1-18, Vol. 1, To The Secretary from L. 
441 

Fortier, 25 November, 1958. 
83. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8576, File 1/1-2-2-23, To Deputy 
Minister from H.M. Jones, 27 May, 1957 and Minutes of Meeting 
with the 
Churches, 31 May, 1957. 
84. 
INAC 
File 
600-1-6, 
Vol. 
l, 
Meeting 
with 
Church 
Representatives RE Operation of Government Owned Residential 
Schools, May 11, 1959 and File 87/23-5, Vol. 1, 29 April, 
1957 . 
85. See for example, INAC File 6-15-3, Vol. 1, Meeting with 
Church Representatives Re Operation of Government 
Owned 
Residential Schools, May l, 1961. 
86. See, for example: INAC File 501/25-13-065, Vol. 2, 
Memorandum of Agreement ... 22, June, 1962. 
87. INAC File 601/25-2 Vol. 2. R.F. Davey, Residential Schools 
- Past and Future, 8 March, 1968. 
88. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 4, The National Association of 
Principals and Administrators of Indian Residences, Brief 
Presented to the Department of Indian Affairs ..., 1968. 
89. INAC File E4974-1, Indian Residential Schools - A research 
study of child care programs of nine residential schools in 
Saskatchewan, 
[The Caldwell Report]. The Canadian Welfare 
Council, G. Caldwell, Project Director, 31 Janaury, 1967, page 
91. 
90. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 4, The National Association of 
Principals and Administrators of Indian Residences, Brief 
Presented to the Department of Indian Affairs ..., 1968. 
91. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 4, Memorandum on the Brief -
National Association of Principals, R.F. Davey, 11 January, 
1968 . 
92. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 4, To Deputy Minister from R.F. 
Battle, 8 January, 1968. See attached Comments on the Brief of 
the National Association of Principals and Administrators of 
Indian Residences. 
93. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 4, To ... from J.A. MacDonald, 28 
May, 1968. 
94. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 4, To Deputy Minister from R.F. 
Battle, 8 January, 1968. See attached Comments on the Brief of 
the National Association of Principals and Administrators of 
Indian Residences. 
442 

95. INAC File 6-21-1, Vol. 4, The National Association of 
Principals and Administrators of Indian Residences, Brief 
Presented to the Department of Indian Affairs ..., 1968. 
96. INAC File 1/1-18, Vol. 1, To The Secretary from Laval 
Fortier, 25 November, 1958. For information on age grade 
distribution see: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8576, File 1/1-2-2-23, MR 
C 14215, To R. Davey from Canon H. Cook, 27 August, 1958. 
97. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8576, File 1/1-2-2-23, MR C 14215, To R. 
Davey from Canon H. Cook, 27 August, 1958. See also: Vol. 
8799, File 511/25-13-017, MR C 9718, To R. Davey from E. 
Joblin, 20 September, 1962 and INAC File 600-1-6, Vol. 1, 
Meeting with Church Representatives Re Operation of Government 
Owned Residential 
Schools May 11, 1959. 
98. INAC File 1/25-13, Vol. 12, Treasury Board Submission, 
Food and Clothing Allowances, 25 July, 1966 and 1/25-1-4-1, 
Vol. 2, To R.F. Battle from H.A. Proctor, M.D., 5 May, 1969. 
99. INAC File 501/25-13-065, Vol. 2, To [a Principal] from 
R.F. Davey, 20 November, 1962. 
100. INAC File 961/25-13, Vol. 1, To R.F. Davey from [a 
Principal], 6 December, 1961. 
101. See, for example: INAC File 501/25-13-067, Vol. 3, 
Memorandum to File from Mr. Chappie, 11 May, 1967, File 1/25-
13, Vol. 12, To R.F. Davey from ... 28 September, 1966 and 
Treasury Board Submission, Food and Clothing Allowances, 
Indian Residential Schools, 25 July, 1966 and File 676/75-13-
005, Vol. 
2, Food 
Services Report, 
Beauval 
School, 
20 
September, 1962. 
102. INAC File 961/25-3, Vol. 1, 6 December, 1961, File 44/25-
2, 10 July, 1964 and File 501/25-1-065, To Regional Supervisor 
from R.F. Davey, 28 June, 1961. See File 1/25-1-4-1, Vol. 2, 
for a good selection of Food Service Reports. 
103. INAC 961/25-13, Vol. 1, 6 December, 1961. 
104. INAC File 501/25-1, Vol. 1, 1 March, 1960. 
105. INAC File 1/35-1-4-1, Vol. 2, Report of Visit of Regional 
Nutritionist [Miss Anges L. Campbell] April 29 & 30, 1969. 
106. INAC File 501/25-1-105, Vol. 1, To Colonel H.M. Jones 
from P.E. Moore, M.D., 1 March, 1960 with attached Norway 
House Indian Residential School operated by the United Church 
of Canada and To Miss C. Hoey from [a staff member], 10 
443 

November, 1959. 
107. INAC File 853/25-13, Vol. 3, To R.F. Davey from [staff 
member], 16 February, 1967. 
108. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8798, File 371/25-13-019 (2), MR C 
9717, To Dr. Moore from H.M. Jones, 20 September, 1960 and To 
H.M. Jones from P.E. Moore, M.D., 11 October, 1960. 
109. INAC File 501/25-13-067, Vol. 3, 31 October, 1969. 
110. INAC File 676/25-13-005, Vol. 2, Food Services Report, 
Beauval School, 20 September, 1962. 
111. INAC File 1/25-1-4-1, Vol. 2, Inspection of Food Service 
Indian Residential Schools [Pensionniat Indian de Sept-Isles], 
May 18 to 20, 1954. 
112. INAC File 501/25-1-105, Vol. l, To Colonel H.M. Jones 
from P.E. Moore, M.D., 1 March, 1960 with attached Norway 
House Indian Residential School operated by the United Church 
of Canada. 
113. INAC File 965/25-13, Vol. 1, R.F. Davey, 11 July, 1960. 
114. INAC File 1/25-1-4-1, Vol. 2, Inspection of Food Service 
Indian Residential Schools [Pensionniat Indian de Sept-Isles] , 
May 18 to 20, 1954. 
115. INAC File 501-25-1-104, Vol. 1, Inspection of Food 
Services, Cross Lake Indian Residential School, n.d. [1962]. 
116. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8798, File 371/25-13-019 (2), MR C 
9717, To R. Davey from Canon H. Cook, 4 July, 1960. 
117. INAC File 965/25-13, Vol. 1, Narrative, Survey of Food 
Service - Le Jac Residential School, F.E. Latimer, 9 June, 
1960 . 
118. G. Manuel and M. Posluns, The Fourth World, page 66. 
119. INAC File 501-25-1-104, Vol. 1, Inspection of Food 
Services, Cross Lake Indian Residential School, n.d. [1962]. 
120. See, for example: INAC File 501/25-13-065, Vol. 2, 
Memorandum of Agreement ... 22, June, 1962. 
121. INAC File 601/25-13, Vol. 2, To I. Robson from ... 17 
November, 1969. For a similar situation see: File 1/25-1-4-1, 
To J. Boys from R.F. Davey, 15 August, 1969. 
444 

122. INAC File 501/25-13-075, Vol. 2, To ... fromR.F. Davey, 
6 November, 1962. 
123. INAC File 1/25-1-4-1, Vol. 2, To R.F. Battle from H.A. 
Proctor, M.D., 2 January 1969, File 501/25-1-105, Vol. 1, To 
R.F. Davey from [a staff member], 10 January, 1963 and To 
Colonel H.M. Jones from P.E. Moore, M.D., 1 March 1960. 
124. INAC File 956/25-1, Vol. 1, To W.S. Arneil from P. 
Phelan, 24 June, 1954. 
125. INAC File 701/25-1-4-1, Vol. l, To ... fromR.F. Davey, 
7 March, 1966. For other examples see: File 799/25-13-012, 
Vol. 1, To Dr. P.E. Moore from H. Jones, 30 October, 1961, 
File 772/25-1-002, Vol. 1, To ... from R.F. Davey, 19 June, 
1961. File 775/25-1-006, Vol. 1, ...from P. Dezeil, 13 July, 
1961. 
126. N.A.C. RG 85, Vol. 1224, File 630/110-3 (6) To R.G. 
Robertson from ..., 19 November, 1957. 
127. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 1338, File 600-1-5, Report on ... Tent 
Hostel, 1 August, 1959. 
128. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 22, To R.F. Davie [sic] from ... 
Consultant Psychologist, 10 April, 1969. See attached Report 
on Psychological Consultation Trip to Keewatin Area, January 
8-22, 1969. 
129. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6355, File 757-1, MR C 8711, To Indian 
Affairs Branch from G. H. Gooderham, 29 January, 1947 and To 
R. Hoey from B. Neary, 5 February, 1947 with attached To G.H. 
Gooderham from B. Neary, 5 February, 1947. See also: INAC File 
501/25-1-067, Vol. 1, To ... from A. Hamilton, n.d., 1949 and 
Manual 
of 
Instructions 
for Use in Government-Owned 
and 
Operated Student Residences, 1 January, 1962. 
130. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol 8757, File 673/25-1-010, MR C 9701, To 
J. Card from B. Neary, 7 February, 1950. 
131. Presbyterian Church Archives, Women's Missionary Society 
1988-7004-19-5, To All Teachers ... 14 April, 1953. 
132. N.A.C. RG 85 Vol. 1881, File 630/119-2 (Vol.2), To Mr. 
Meikle from J. Mckinnon, 4 December, 1948 and To Mr. Meikle 
from R. Gibson, 22 December, 1922. 
133. There is an ever-increasing number of works published 
which are memoirs by ex-students or are based on interviews 
with students. For a representative selection of these see: C. 
445 

with students. For a representative selection of these see: C. 
Haig-Brown, Resistance and Renewal: Surviving the Indian 
Residential School (Vancouver, Tillacum Library, 1987), I. 
Knockwood, Out of the Depths (Lockeport, Roseway Publishing, 
1992), B. Johnson, Indian School Days (Toronto, Key Porter 
Books, 1988), G. Manuel and M. Posluns, The Fourth World (Don 
Mills, Collier-Macmillan Canada Ltd, 1974), L. Jaine ed., 
Residential Schools: The Stolen Years (Saskatoon, University 
[of Saskatchewan] Extension Press, 1993), The Assembly of 
First Nations, Breaking the Silence - An Interpretive Study of 
Residential School Impact and Healing as Illustrated by the 
Stories of First Nations Individuals (Ottawa, First Nations 
Health Commission, 1994) . See also the transcripts of the 
Royal Commission which contain the most disturbing testimony 
from ex-students on their school experience and subsequent 
lives. 
134. Mary Carpenter, 
"Recolections and Comments: No More 
Denials Please", Inuktitut (74: 56-61, 1991). 
135. INAC File 773/23-5-004, Vol. 2, 22 February, 1954 and 
File 675/25-018, Vol. 2, 12 July, 1957. 
136. INAC File 959/1-13, Vol. 1, 17 January, 1964 and File 
906/1-13-011, Vol. 1, 27 March, 1962. 
137. INAC File 774/25-1-016, Vol. 2, 24 May, 1965. 
138. INAC File 772/25-1-002, Vol. 1, 18 February, 1950 and 
attached correspondence. 
139. INAC File C9805 V6324 659-1. 
140. INAC File 501/25-1-067, 4 March, 1949 and attached 
investigation report. 
141. INAC File 956/1-13, Vol. 1, 8 August, 1958 and attached 
correspondence. 
142. INAC File 1/25-20-1, Vol. 1, To Miss ... 16 February, 
1966 and attached correspondence. The student opinions were 
circulated at the Conference in an unpublished pamphlet 
Indian Viewpoints Submitted for the Consideration of the 
Principals' Workshop, Elliot Lake, Ontario. Copies of this 
exist in Church Archives. 
143. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 773/23-5-004, MR C 13802, 
Inspection Report St Paul's School, January, 1952. 
144. INAC File 772/23-16-010, Vol. 1, 2 May, 1953. 
446 

145. INAC File 485/25-1-001, Vol. 1, 27 August, 1963 and 
attached correspondence. 
146. INAc File 487/25-1-014, Vol. 1, To The Acting Minister 
from R.F. Battle, 26 January, 1967. 
147. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6186, File 460-23, Part 1, 14 June, 
1941 and attached correspondence and police reports. 
148. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6332, File 661-1 Part 2, MR C 9810, To 
Sir 
from 
J. 
Ostrander, 
19 January, 
1935 
and 
attached 
correspondence. 
149. INAC File 961/25-1, Vol. 1, Attention Indian Affairs ... 
sgd W.S. Arneil. 
150. INAC File 451/25-2-004, Vol. 2, 9 September, 1968 with 
attached correspondence and the Globe and Mail, 6 September, 
1968. 
151. Macleans Magazine, Vol. 80, no.2, February, 1967. 
152. INAC File 377/25-13, Vol. 1, Verdict of Coroner's Jury, 
17 December, 1970 and To Regional Director from G.D. Cromb, 6 
January, 1971. 
153. INAC File 377/25-13, Vol. 1, To H.B. Cotnam, M.D. from 
J.B. Bergevin, 1 March, 1971. 
154. INAC File 116/25-2-763, 18 November, 23 September, 
15 
November, 8 November 1954, and 11 August, 1953 and File 
431/25-2-485, 25 February, 1965. 
155. INAC File 487/25-1-014, Vol. 1, To the Acting Minister 
from R.F. Battle, 26 January, 1967. 
156. INAC File 485/25-1-001, Vol. 1, Runaways - Fort Frances, 
I.R.S., 27 August, 1963. 
157. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 654/25-1 [ATIP] , To J. 
Cairns from Rev. A. Southard, 2 June, 1956. 
158. INAC File 494/25-1-014, Vol. 2, To R.F. Davey from [an 
Anglican Bishop], 12 December, 1961. 
159. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8452, File 773/23-5-004, MR C 13802, 
Inspection Report St Paul's School, January, 1952. 
160. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6436, File 878-1 (1-3), MR C 8762, To 
Assistant Deputy and Secretary from A. Daunt, 1 August, 1920. 
447 

162. INAC File E4974-2018, Vol. 1, To G. Sinclair from H. 
Lammer, 22 June, 1981. 
163. INAC File 501/25-1-064, Vol. 1, To D. Neild from R.F. 
Davey, 19 November, 1953 and attached correspondence. 
164. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 655/25-1, MR C 9701, 
Memorandum to Indian Affairs Branch, 20 June, 1950. 
165. INAC File 959/1-13, Vol. 1, 3 March, 1960 and attached 
correspondence. 
166. Weekend Magazine, 31 July, 1965 and Kenora Miner News, 14 
August, 1965. 
167. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8799, File 25-13-014, MR C 9718, To 
Head of the Secretariat from Regional Supervisor, 9 August, 
1965 . 
168. INAC File 487/25-1-014, Vol. 1, Maclean's Story of Death 
of Charles Wenjack, 26 January, 1967. 
169. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol.6859, File 494/25-2-014, MR C 13727, To 
F. Foss from [Bishop], 31 October, 1960. 
170. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6205, File 468-1 (1-3), MR C 7937, To 
A. Moore from A. Mackenzie, 9 January, 1934 and INAC File 
777/23-5-007, Vol. 1, To ... from P. Phelan, 24 April, 1945. 
171. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6027, File 117-1-1, MR C 8147, To the 
Secretary from R. Blewett, 21 May, 1913, Vol. 3933, File 
117657-1, MR C 10164, To Assistant Deputy Superintendent 
General from the Agent, Blood reserve, 18 July, 1918, Vol. 
8614, File 777/1-13-009, MR C 14234, To K. Gooderham from R.F. 
Davey, 29 April, 1964 and INAC File 853/25-1, Vol. 2, To the 
Honourable J.W. Pickersgill 
from a Catholic Bishop, 
12 
November, 1956. 
172. INAC File 1/25-20-1, Vol. l, To Miss ... 16 February, 
1966 and attached correspondence. Copies of this exist in 
Church Archives. 
173. INAC File E4974-1 Vol. 1, The Caldwell Report, 31 
January, 1967, pages 151 and 61. 
174. INAC File 1/25-13-2, Vol. 1, To ... from G. Caldwell, 18 
July, 1967. 
175. INAC File 81/25-1, Vol. 1, To T.A. Turner fromG.S. Lapp, 
28 August, 1964. See also: File 1/25-1, Vol. 35, Memorandum on 
Education for J.B. Bergevin, 15 September, 1969. 
448 

175. INAC File 81/25-1, Vol. 1, To T.A. Turner fromG.S. Lapp, 
28 August, 1964. See also: File 1/25-1, Vol. 35, Memorandum on 
Education for J.B. Bergevin, 15 September, 1969. 
176. INAC File 1/25-1, Vol. 35, Memorandum on Education for 
J.B. Bergevin, 15 September, 1969. 
177. INAC File 501/25-13-083, Vol. 11, Role of Brandon Student 
Residence, 19 June, 1970. 
178. INAC File 775/25-2-006, Vol. 3, To G. Baldwin from Jean 
Chretien, 4 October, 1968. 
179. INAC File 81/25-1, Vol. 1, To T.A. Turner fromG.S. Lapp, 
28 August, 1964. 
449 

EPILOGUE 
BEYOND CLOSURE, 1992 
"like a disease ripping through our communities" 

In December, 1992, Grand Chief Edward John of the First 
Nations Task Force Group forwarded to the Minister of Justice, 
Kim Campbell, "a statement prepared and approved by B.C. First 
Nations Chiefs and Leaders." In it they pointed out that 
The federal government established the system of 
Indian residential schools which was operated by 
various church denominations. Therefore, both the 
federal 
government 
and 
churches 
must 
be 
held 
accountable for the pain inflicted upon our people. 
We are hurt, devastated and outraged. The effect of 
the Indian residential school system is like a 
disease ripping through our communities. 
The Chief's conclusion was not a rhetorical flourish; it was 
literally true. By the mid-1980s, it was widely and publicly 
recognized that the residential school experience in the north 
and in the south, like smallpox and tuberculosis in earlier 
decades, had and continued to decimate communities. The 
schools were, with the agents and agencies of economic and 
political 
marginalization, 
part 
of 
the 
contagion 
of 
colonization. In their direct attack on language, beliefs and 
spirituality, the schools had been a particularly virulent 
strain of that imperial epidemic sapping the children's bodies 
and beings. In after life, many adult survivors, the families 
and communities to which they returned, all manifest a tragic 
range of symptoms emblematic of "the silent tortures that 
continue in our communities."1 A Chief of the Albany First 
Nation told the Minister, Tom Siddon, in 1990 that 
Social maladjustment, abuse of self and others and 
family breakdown are some of the symptoms prevalent 
among First Nation Babyboomers. The "Graduates" of 
the "Ste. Anne's Residential School" era are now 
trying and often failing to come to grips with life 
as adults after being raised as children in an 
atmosphere of fear, loneliness and loathing. 
Fear of caretakers. Loneliness, knowing that elders 
and family were far away. Loathing from learning to 
hate oneself, because of repeated physical, verbal 
or sexual abuse suffered at the hands of various 
adult caretakers. This is only a small part of the 
story.2 
What had finally broken the seal on the residential school 
system affixed by Duncan Campbell Scott and made the story of 
neglect, physical and cultural abuse, public, was ironically, 
the deepest secret of all - the pervasive sexual abuse of the 
children. 
The 
official 
files 
efface 
the 
issue 
almost 
completely. What explicit references exist focus on the sexual 
behavior of the children, on a concern for intercourse among 
451 

the children - boys sneaking into the girls' dorm or, with 
greater frequency, reports of homosexual behaviour among the 
boys.3 In many quarters such a concern emanated from a belief 
that Aboriginal children were sexually abnormal. A report, for 
example, in 1948, that at Prince Albert school three small 
boys had to be accommodated in the girls' dorm included the 
notation - "the behaviour patterns of primitive people in 
respect to sex are unfortunately too predictable to make this 
arrangement a wise one." For one Principal Indians were simply 
"unmoral" -"nature is very strong in them." "The problem of 
course is that these people with regard to sex mature much 
earlier than the whites." Therefore, it was necessary "to 
guide that part of their emotional make-up along sound and 
safe channels."4 
In 
contrast 
references 
regarding 
the behavior 
of 
non-
Aboriginal staff were encoded normally in the language of 
repression that marked the Canadian discourse on sexual 
matters. An agent at Red Deer commented that the "moral aspect 
of affairs is deplorable," others wrote of "questions of 
immorality," of "the breaking of the Seventh Commandment." 
Only very occasionally is there a reference to a charge or to 
a conviction of a staff member for sexual molestation.5 
This dearth of recorded information became, when the issue of 
sexual abuse emerged, the first block in the foundation of a 
Departmental response. In 1990, the director of education in 
the 
British 
Columbia 
region 
formulated 
an 
answer 
to 
perspective questions about past sexual abuse: 
The sad thing is that we did not know it was 
occurring. 
Students were too reticent 
to come 
forward. And it now appears that the school staff 
likely did not know, and if they did, the morality 
of the day dictated that they, too, remain silent. 
DIAND [Department of Indian Affairs and Northern 
Development] staff have no recollection or record 
of reports - either verbal or written.6 
None of the major reports, Paget, Bryce or Caldwell, that 
dealt critically with almost every aspect of the system 
mentioned the issue at all - that fell to Aboriginal people 
themselves. Responding to abusive conditions in their own 
lives and in their communities, "hundreds of individuals have 
stepped 
forward with accounts of abuse in at least 
16 
schools."7 Women and men - like Phil Fontaine, the leader of 
the Assembly of Manitoba 
Chiefs who attended 
the Fort 
Alexander school - "went out on the limb to talk ... because 
they wanted to make things better."8 They did more than just 
talk, more than just speak their pain and anguish; they and 
their communities acted. Steps were taken to form support 
groups and healing circles. Beginning in 1989-90, abusers, 
452 

including ex-residential school staff were exposed, taken into 
court in British Columbia and in the Yukon, and convicted in 
each case of multiple counts of gross indecency and sexual 
assault. 
This 
set 
off 
a 
chain 
reaction 
of 
police 
investigations and further prosecutions.9 
The 
trials, 
though 
far 
from being 
the 
first 
acts 
of 
resistance, may have had their greatest impact in validating 
the general critique of the system. In the long history of the 
schools, 
protests 
from 
parents 
and 
communities 
about 
conditions in the schools and the care of children had not 
been uncommon. Many parents who were silent were so because 
they were unaware, deceived by men and women they trusted; 
many others, realizing the dangers to their children, had 
struggled to protect them, to prevent them being taken to 
schools or petitioned for their return. More often than not, 
however, they had been brushed aside by the churches and 
government. Even those initiatives which secured an immediate 
goal, securing better food or calling for an inspection of the 
school, for example, never amounted to a serious challenge to 
the manner in which the system operated and thus they fell on 
stony ground.10 
Times changed, however. In the 1980s, that public ground was 
well-watered by a growing concern for the safety of women and 
children in Canada and was harrowed by reports of sexual abuse 
of non-Aboriginal children at orphanages like Mount Cashel in 
Newfoundland and at the Alfred reform school in Ontario. 
Reflecting such concern, the government set up a Family 
Violence and Child Abuse Initiative allocating funds for 
community-based projects dealing with sexual abuse and family 
violence.11 Non-Aboriginal Canadians found that Aboriginal 
revelations and their attack on the schools, and on the 
disastrous consequences of federal policy in general, fell 
within the parameters of their own social concerns and thus 
non-Aboriginal voices joined the chorus of condemnation. 
"Experts" working for government and Aboriginal organizations 
confirmed the connections made by Aboriginal people between 
the schools' corrosive effect on culture and the dysfunction 
in their communities. Experiential testimony combined with 
"professional" analysis that charted the scope and pathology 
of abuse put that reality beyond any doubt or dispute. In 
1990, the Globe and Mail reported that Rix Rogers, the special 
advisor to the minister of National Health and Welfare on 
child sexual abuse, had commented at a meeting of the Canadian 
Psychological Association that the abuse revealed to date was 
"just the tip of the iceberg" and that "closer scrutiny of 
past treatment of native children at Indian residential 
schools would show 100% of children at some schools were 
sexually abused."12 
453 

Sexual abuse was not simply visited on the individual child in 
school; it spilled back into communities so that even after 
the schools were closed it echoed in the lives of subsequent 
generations of children. A 1989 study sponsored by the Native 
Women's Association of the Northwest Territories found that 
eight out of 10 girls under the age eight were victims of 
sexual abuse and 50 per cent of boys the same age had been 
sexually molested as well.13 The cause was no mystery to social 
scientists. Researchers with the Child Advocacy Project of the 
Winnipeg Children's Hospital, who investigated child sexual 
abuse on the Sandy Bay reserve and other reserves in Manitoba, 
concluded 
in 
their 
report, 
"A New 
Justice 
for 
Indian 
Children," that while the "roots of the problem are complex" 
it is "apparent that the destruction of traditional Indian 
culture has contributed greatly to the incidence of child 
sexual abuse and other deviant behaviour."14 
Consultants 
working for the Assembly of First Nations amplified this 
behaviour detailing the "social pathologies" that had been 
produced by the school system: 
The survivors of the Indian residential 
school 
system have, in many cases, continued to have their 
lives shaped by the experiences in these schools. 
Persons who attended these schools continue to 
struggle with their identity after years of being 
taught to hate themselves and their culture. The 
residential school led to a disruption in the 
transference 
of 
parenting 
skills 
from 
one 
generation to the next. Without these skills, many 
survivors had had difficulties in raising their own 
children. In residential schools they learned that 
adults often exert power and control through abuse. 
The lessons learned in childhood are often repeated 
in adulthood with the result that many survivors of 
the residential school system often inflict abuse 
on their own children. These children in turn use 
the same tools on their own children.15 
A central catalyst of that cycle of abuse were those powerful 
adults, men and women, employees of the churches and of the 
Department. In the years after 1969, when the church-state 
partnership in education was dissolved, the churches boxed the 
political compass so that at the highest levels and in most 
public forums, they supported Aboriginal aspirations. In 1975, 
the Catholic, Anglican and United churches formed Project 
North (the Aboriginal Rights Coalition) to coordinate their 
efforts in Aboriginal campaigns for justice and were later 
joined by the Presbyterian church and other denominations. All 
of them, however, continued at community levels their historic 
missionization within a new-found but still limited tolerance 
for Aboriginal spirituality. 
454 

By 1992, most of the churches had apologized, and would 
continue to do so in various forums, regretting, in the words 
of one of the Catholic texts, 
"the pain, suffering and 
alienation that so many had experienced."16 However, as they 
told the minister in a joint communication through the 
Aboriginal Rights Coalition in August 1992, they wanted it 
recognized that they "share responsibility with government for 
the consequences of residential schools" which included not 
only individual cases of physical and sexual abuse" but also 
"the broader issues of cultural impacts": 
. . . the loss of language through forced English 
speaking, the loss of traditional ways of being on 
the land, the loss of parenting skills through the 
absence of four or five generations of children 
from Native communities, and the learned behaviour 
of despising Native identity. 
They ended with an offer of fellowship, a recreation of the 
old alliance. "We as churches encourage you, Mr. Siddon, to 
address 
the legacy of residential 
schools with 
greater 
vigour." In any such undertaking, they assured him their 
"moral support and . . . any experience we gain in responding to 
this legacy as churches."17 
Having only just brought an end to the residential school era, 
the federal government found that the "disclosures, criminal 
convictions and civil actions related to sexual abuse" forced 
it to consider that "legacy" and to "determine a course of 
action."18 It was not lacking advice on the direction it should 
take. From all quarters, Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal, it was 
encouraged to institute a public enquiry. A private citizen 
warned the minister that a refusal would be an "indication of 
your gross insensitivity to the staggering effect on its 
victims of the crime of sexual abuse." He went on to argue 
passionately that more so than in the case of other crimes 
sexual 
abuse 
of 
children 
thrives 
on 
the 
unwillingness of society to deal with it out in the 
open. So long as we as a society permit "past 
events" to remain buried, no matter how painful, we 
cannot hope to halt the shocking epidemic that we 
are facing.19 
In the House of Commons, R. Murphy, the member for Churchill, 
rose in November, 1990 to "urge the government to commission 
an independent inquiry" which, he was confident, would "assist 
the healing process for the victims of this abuse." R. Belair, 
the member for Cochrane-Superior, in a letter to the minister, 
struck the same note. "How can the healing process begin 
without those who were responsible for these 
injustices 
publicly acknowledging the wrongs that were done to these 
455 

children?"20 
Within the Department, Mr. Murphy's sentiments and the call 
for an inquiry found no apparent support. There was certainly 
no suggestion that full public disclosure would have any 
therapeutic value. It would appear from correspondence that 
circulated among officials in the years 1990-92 dealing with 
the facts of abuse and the possible range of Departmental 
responses that the Department, in some unofficial discourse, 
accepted the basic premise that the schools' extensive record 
of 
abuse meant 
that 
"many young 
innocent 
people 
have 
suffered," that the system had contributed to the "loss of 
culture 
and 
familial 
disruption," 
that 
the 
"serious 
psychological, emotional and social sequelae of child sexual 
abuse are well established" and that now "there was a need to 
address these problems among former victims . . . their families 
and communities." On the question of how that should be done 
it was first suggested that "Although much of the abuse has 
happened 
in 
the 
past, 
the 
Department 
must 
take 
some 
responsibility and offer some solutions to this very serious 
problem." This was superseded by the more characteristically 
cautious "framework to respond to incidence[s] of abuse and 
the resultant effect on Indian communities". On what "is a 
major issue for DIAND ... It is important that DIAND be seen 
as responding in a way that liability is not admitted, but 
that it is recognizing the sequelae of these events."21 
By December, 1992 when Tom Siddon replied to the August 
communication from the Aboriginal Rights Coalition, 
the 
government had for sometime developed fully its response. It 
would not launch a public inquiry. Suggestions that it do so 
were met with a standard reply. "I am deeply disturbed by the 
recent disclosures of physical and sexual abuse in the 
residential schools. However, I do not believe that a public 
inquiry is the best approach at this time." If the letter was 
being sent to an Aboriginal community it would have the 
additional sentence. "Instead we would like to work closely 
with First Nations to address this problem at the community 
level and to begin the healing process."22 
Nor did the government follow the churches' lead in extending 
an apology for the residential school system. To anyone who 
might suggest such a course, the Minister was prepared to 
point out that in June, 1991, at the First Canadian Conference 
on Residential schools a former Assistant Deputy Minister, 
Bill Van Iterson, had "expressed on behalf of all public 
servants in the Department a sincere regret over the negative 
impacts of the residential schools and the pain they have 
caused to many people." There would be no Ministerial apology, 
no apology on behalf of Canadians. And there were no plans for 
compensation.23 
456 

The strategy the government appeared to take was a simple one. 
Essentially, it tried to externalize the issue throwing it 
back on the shoulders of Aboriginal people themselves. Under 
the guise of being "strongly committed to the principles of 
self-government", as Tom Siddon informed the Aboriginal Rights 
Coalition, in December 1992, the government would concentrate 
its efforts on "enabling First Nations to design and develop 
their own programs according to their own needs."24 It was 
committed "to working with Indian and Inuit communities, to 
finding ways to address this problem at the community level 
and to begin the healing of these wounds."25 Money and effort 
could be put into psychological counselling, healing circles 
and so forth. To facilitate such programs the government, in 
1991, 
supplemented 
its Family Violence and Child Abuse 
Initiative with provisions and funds directed specifically to 
Aboriginal concerns.26 In what was an echo of the old per 
capita debates, the Coalition, when it reviewed the funding, 
informed the minister "that the amounts are still relatively 
modest when looking at the deep and widespread nature of the 
problems. "27 
The approach to legal issues, particularly the identification 
and prosecution of purported abusers, was equally diffuse. 
There was no consideration that the system, itself, was a 
"crime." Rather, the focus was placed on individual acts that 
violated the criminal code. Again, the government would not 
take the lead. There would be no inquiry, no search of 
Departmental files. "DIAND will not without specific cause, 
initiate an investigation of all former student residence 
employees."28 It would be the task of those who had been abused 
to take action. They would be directed to "the appropriate law 
enforcement agency, and DIAND will continue to cooperate fully 
with any police investigation."29 The assistance they might 
receive from the Department would be "as open as possible" 
with due respect to "the privacy rights of individuals."30 
Such policies may well have been dictated by the norms of the 
criminal justice system and may even be appropriate in terms 
of community demands for funding and control. But there is in 
this a cynical slight of hand. Along with the refusal to 
apologize or to institute a special public inquiry came a 
focus on the "now" of the problem, Aboriginal people now 
"sick," not savage, in need of psychological, rather than 
theological, 
salvation. Having at the inception 
of the 
system, in the 1880s, plotted to take control of Aboriginal 
peoples' future by securing their children, the government 
seemed in the early 1990s, determined to kill the past. 
Conscious or not, this constituted an attempt to efface the 
history 
of 
the 
system, 
the 
"then" 
which, 
if 
it 
were 
considered, would inevitably turn the light of inquiry back 
onto the source of the contagion 
- on the "civilized" - on 
Canadian society, on Christian evangelism and on the racist 
457 

policies 
of 
its 
institutional 
expressions 
in 
church, 
government and Department. Those are the sites which produced 
the residential schools. In thought and deed this school 
system was an act of profound cruelty rooted in non-Aboriginal 
pride and intolerance and in the certitude and insularity of 
purported cultural superiority. 
Rather than attempting to close the door on the past, looking 
only to the future of communities, the terrible facts of the 
residential school system, along with its companion policies 
-community removal, the Indian Act, systemic discrimination in 
the justice system - must be made a part of a new sense of 
what Canada has been and will continue to be for as long as 
that record is not officially recognized and repudiated. Only 
by such an act of recognition and repudiation, an act which 
must entail a realization that Canada and Canadians need to 
consider transformations in their society in an effort to 
discover ways of living in harmony with the original people of 
the land, can a start be made on a very different future. 
That future must include making a place for those who have 
been affected by the schools to stand in dignity, to remember, 
to voice their sorrow and anger and to be listened to with 
respect. With them Canada needs to pursue justice and mutual 
healing; it must build a relationship, as the Manitoba leader 
and much decorated veteran Thomas Prince encouraged the 
government to do in his appearance before the Joint Committee 
of the House of Commons and the Senate in 1947, that will bind 
Aboriginal people and non-Aboriginal people "so that they can 
trust each other and ... can walk together side by side and 
face this world having faith and confidence in one another."31 
458 

1. 
INAC 
File 
E6575-18-2, 
Vol. 
01 
(Protected), 
To 
the 
Honourable K. Campbell from Grand Chief Edward John, 18 
December, 1992 and the attached First Nations Leaders in B.C. 
Call for Specific Actions Following the Bishop O'Connor Case. 
2. INAC File E6575-18-2, Vol. 4, To the Honourable Tom Siddon 
from [a chief], 15 November, 1990. 
3. See for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3711, File 19850, Mr C 
10125, To L. Vankoughnet from E. Dewdney, 12 July, 1888 and 
INAC File 1/25-20-1, Vol. 1 To L. Jampolsky from [ex-student] , 
24 December, 1965. 
4. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 8754, File 651/25-1, MR C 9701, 4 
November, 1948 and Vol. 6462, File 888-1 (2-3, 6-7), MR C 
8781, 26 December, 1944. 
5. N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 3920, File 116818, MR C 10161, 4 June, 
1896, Vol. 3922, File 116820-1, MR C 10162, 25 February, 1905, 
Vol. 6251, File 575-1 (1-3), MR C 8645, 1 February, 1915, Vol. 
6318, File 657-1, MR C 8692, Crime Report, 25 July, 1924 and 
Vol. 6309, File 654-1 (3), Police report and affidavits, 6 
February, 1947. 
6. INAC File E6575-18, Vol. 10, To J. Fleury, Jr. from J. 
Tupper, 19 June, 1990. 
7. INAC File E6575-18, Vol. 13, House Response, 24 April, 
1992. This was a Departmental estimate. 
8. "Abuse report too hot, shelved - Author says study revealed 
epidemic", Winnipeg Free Press, 24 July, 1992. The story 
refers to a report, A New Justice for Indian Children, 
compiled by the Child Advocacy Project of the Children's 
Hospital, 
Winnipeg. 
It 
studied 
conditions 
on 
Manitoba 
reserves. 
9. See for example: INAC File E6575-18-2, To C. Belleau from 
R. Frizell, 1 June, 1989 and attached correspondence, To J. 
Cochrane from M. Sims, 16 April, 1993, To D. Mullins from R. 
Frizell, 2 June, 1989 and File E6575-18, Vol. 10, To H. Swain 
from 
N.D. 
Inkster, 
10 
December, 
1990 
and 
attached 
correspondence, To J. Bray from H. McCue, Communications 
Strategy and Press Line, 2 0 July, 1990 and attached Frappier 
Case in the Yukon and Memorandum - Examples of First Nations 
Communities 
Responding 
to Residual 
Effect 
of Abuse 
in 
Residential Schools, 21 June, 1990, "Angliacn Priest faces sex 
counts in new trial", The Vancouver Sun, 29 May, 1989. 
10. See for example: N.A.C. RG 10 Vol. 6262, File 578-1 (4-5), 
MR C 8653, To R.A. Hoey from D.J. Allan, 4 March, 1944 and 
attached correspondence and Vol. 6451, File 883-1 (1-2), MR C 
459 

8773, To the Secretary from I. Foughner, 15 June, 1922 and 
attached correspondence. 
11. INAC File E6575-18, Vol. 10, Press Line - Child Sexual 
Abuse in Indian REsidential Schools, 20 July, 1990. 
12. "Reports of sexual abuse may be low, expert says", Globe 
and Mail, 1 June, 1990. 
13. The report is noted in INAC File E6575-18, Vol. 10, 
Communications Strategy, Child Sexual Abuse in Residential 
Schools n.d. 
14. INAC File E6757-18, Vol. 13, A New Justice for Indian 
Children, 
Child 
Advocacy 
Project, 
Children's 
Hospital, 
Winnipeg, 1987, page 24. 
15. INAC File E6757-18, Vol. 13, Memorandum for the Deputy 
Minister, 6 June, 1992 and the attached First Nations Health 
Commission - May 1992 - Proposal Indian Residential School 
Study Draft No. 4. For a further discussion of the effects, 
see also: L. Bull, "Indian Residential Schooling: The Native 
Perspective", in the Canadian Journal of Native Education, 
Vol. 18 Supplement 
(Alberta, University of Alberta Press, 
1991) and N.R. Ing, "The Effects of Residential Schools on 
Native Child Rearing Practises", in the Canadain Journal of 
Education, Vol. 18 Supplement. 
16. The Canadian Conference of Bishops, Let Justice Flow Like 
a Mighty River (Ottawa, The Canadian Conference of Catholic 
Bishops, 1995), page 16. 
17. INAC File E6575-18-2, Vol. 4, To The Honourable Tom Siddon 
from John Siebert et al. Aboriginal Rights Coalition, August, 
1992 . 
18. INAC File E6575-18, Vol. 10, 21 June, 1990. 
19. INAC File E6575-18-2, Vol. 04, To Mr. T. Siddon from ... 
1 November, 1990. 
20. 
INAC 
File 
E4974-1, 
Vol. 
1, 
Unedited 
Transcripts, 
Statements by Members - R Murphy (Churchill), 19 November 1990 
and File E6575-18-2, Vol. 04, To S. Martin from R. Belair, 8 
February, 1991. 
21. INAC File 6575-18-2, Vol. 01 (Protected). 
22. INAC File E6575-18-2, Vol. 04 To ... from Tom Siddon 
M.P., 14 December, 1990 and To Chief Ed. Metatawabin from S. 
Martin, 23 January 1991. 
460 

23. INAC File E6575-18, House Response, 24 April, 1992. 
24. INAC File E6575-18-2, Vol. 04, To John Siebert from T. 
Siddon, M.P., 15 December, 1992. 
25. INAC File E6575-18, Vol. 10, Briefing Card - Will the 
Minister of the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern 
Development call an inquiry into sexual abuse of Indian 
children by teachers and clergymen at boarding schools? 
26. INAC File E6575-18-2, Vol. 04, To R. Belair, M.P. from S. 
Martin, 12 March, 1991. 
27. 
INAC File E6575-18-2, 
Vol. 
18-2, 
Vol. 
04, To 
the 
Honourable Tom Siddon from John Siebert, et al., Aboriginal 
Rights Coalition, August, 1992. 
28. INAC File E6575-18, Vol. 10, Communications Strategy Child 
Sexual Abuse in Residential Schools, Draft, 1990. 
29. INAC File E6575-18, Vol. 13, House Response, 24 April, 
1992 . 
30. INAC File E6575-18, Vol. 10, Communications Strategy Child 
Sexual Abuse in Residential Schools, Draft, 1990. 
31. Canada Parliament, Special Joint Committee of the Senate 
and House of Commons appointed to continue and complete the 
examination of the Indan Act, Minutes and Proceedings of 
Evidence, No. 30, Select and Standing Committees of the Senate 
and House of Commons, Ottawa, 1947, page 1609. 
461 

Appendix A - Residential Schools 
1931 
NOVA SCOTIA: 
Shubenacadie (RC) 
ONTARIO: 
Albany Mission (RC) 
Fort Frances (RC) 
Mcintosh (RC) 
Mount Elgin (UC) 
Spanish (RC) 
MANITOBA: 
Brittle (Pres) 
Elkhorn (CE) 
Norway House (UC) 
Portage la Prarie (UC) 
SASKATCHEWAN: 
Beauval (RC) 
File Hills (UC) 
Lac La Ronge (CE) 
Onion Lake R.C. (RC) 
St. Phillips (RC) 
ALBERTA: 
Blood (RC) 
Edmonton (UC) 
Lesser Slave Lake (CE) 
St. Albert (RC) 
St. Cyprian (CE) 
Sturgeon Lake (RC) 
Wabasca R.C. (RC) 
NORTHWEST TERRITORIES: 
Aklavik (RC) 
Providence Mission (RC) 
BRITISH COLUMBIA: 
Ahousaht (UC) 
Cariboo (RC) 
Kamloops (RC) 
Kuper Island (RC) 
St. George's (CE) 
Squamish (RC) 
YUKON: 
Carcross (CE) 
Cecilia Jeffrey (Pres) 
Fort William (RC) 
Mohawk (CE) 
Shingwauk Home (CE) 
Brandon (UC) 
Fort Alexander (RC) 
Pine Creek (RC) 
Sandy Bay (RC) 
Cowessess (RC) 
Gordon's (CE) 
Muscowequan (RC) 
Qu'Appelle (RC) 
Thunderchild (RC) 
Blue Quills (RC) 
Ermineskins (RC) 
Morley (UC) 
St. Bernard (RC) 
St. Paul's (CE) 
Vermilion (RC) 
Whitefish Lake (CE) 
Fort Resolution (RC) 
Alberni (UC) 
Christie (RC) 
Kitamaat (UC) 
Lejac (RC) 
St. Mary's Mission (RC) 
St. Paul's Hostel (CE) 
Chapleau (CE) 
Kenora (RC) 
Moose Fort (CE) 
Sioux Lookout (CE) 
Cross Lake (RC) 
MacKay (CE) 
Duck Lake (RC) 
Guy (RC) 
Onion Lake C.E. (CE) 
Round Lake (UC) 
Crowfoot (RC) 
Holy Angels (RC) 
Old Sun's (CE) 
St. Bruno (RC) 
Sacred Heart (RC) 
Wabasca C.E. (CE) 
Hay River (CE) 
Alert Bay (CE) 
Coqualeetza (UC) 
Kootenay (RC) 
Port Simpson (UC) 
Sechelt (RC) 
462 

There were in that year 44 Catholic (RC), 21 Church of England (CE), 13 United Church (UC) 
and 2 Presbyterian (pres) schools. These proportions amongst the denominations were constant 
throughout the history of the system. 
In Quebec two schools, Fort George RC and Fort George CE, were opened before the Second 
World War. Four more were added after the war: Amos, Pointe Bleue, Sept Isles and La 
Tuque. 
463 

NOTES on SOURCES 
Research on the school system was conducted in a number of 
archives: The National Archives in Ottawa, the Presbyterian, 
Anglican and United Church Archives in Toronto and the 
Deschatelets Archives of the Oblates of Mary Immaculate in 
Ottawa. These represent the most significant public 
documentary collections .for the history of the school 
system. There are, however, other records in regional, 
provincial, diocesan archives and private holdings 
throughout Canada. 
Research was also conducted at the Department of Indian 
Affairs on approximately 8,000 residential school files 
which are held by the Department. The Royal Commission 
secured access to this documentation only after protracted 
and difficult negotiations which, while in the end 
successful, seriously delayed the completion of the project. 
Only one member of the research team was allowed to review 
the material and then only after signing an agreement 
setting out a detailed research protocol and obtaining an 
"enhanced reliability" security clearance. 
Information which the Department determined fell within the 
bounds of Solicitor-Client Priviledge or Confidences of the 
Queen's Privy Council within the last twenty years was not 
made available. All other files, including those carrying 
access restrictions ("Confidential" or "Protected", for 
example) were to be made available. Most critically, access 
to the Departmental collection was granted under the 
provisions of the Privacy Act which stipulates that no 
disclosure of personal information, in the meaning of the 
Act, may be made in a form that could reasonably be expected 
to identify the individual to whom it relates. The foregoing 
text and endnotes have been written to comply with that 
stipulation. 
Another research restriction which has determined the form 
and character of this study was taken by the research team 
and staff at the Commission involved in the planning of the 
project. It was decided not to organize an oral history 
component - not to conduct interviews with ex-residential 
school students because it would have been impossible to 
provide interviewees with any post - interview support. To 
have done so without such support was felt to be unethical. 
PRIMARY SOURCES 
464 

RG 10 Indian Affairs [held by the National Archives -
N.A.C.] 
RG 85 Nothern Affairs [held by the National Archives] 
MG 26A The Macdonald Papers [held by the National Archives] 
MG 271 The E. Dewdney Papers [held by the National Archives] 
INAC-Diand Files [stored at the Department's Headquarter's 
in Hull, Quebec] which come under the Privacy Act 
Restrictions. 
Anglican Archives. 
Presbyterian Archives. 
United Church Archives. 
Deschatelets Archives. 
PUBLISHED PRIMARY SOURCES and SECONDARY SOURCES 
Adams, D. "Before Canada: Toward an Ethnohistory of Indian 
Education." History of Education Quarterly 28, no. 1. 1988. 
Adams, I. "The Lonley Death of Charlie Wenjack." Macleans 
Magazine, Vol. 80 No. 2, February, 1967. 
Annual Reports - Indian Affairs. 
Assembly of First Nations. Breaking the Silence: An 
Interpretive Study of Residential School Impact and Healing 
as Illustrated by the Stories of First Nations Individuals. 
Ottawa: The Assembly of First Nations, 1994. 
Barman, J. and Y. Hebert and D. McCaskill. Indian Education 
in Canada, vol 1: the Legacy. Vancouver: University of 
British Columbia Press, 1987. 
Barman, J. "Separate and Unequal: Indian and White Girls aat 
All Hallows School, 1884-1920", J. Barman, Y. Hebert and D. 
McCaskill, eds., Indian Education in Canada, Vol. 1.: The 
Legacy. Vancouver: The University of British Colunmbia 
Press, 1986. 
Benham, W. J.,jr."Residential Schools at the Crossroads". 
465 

Journal of American Indian Education 16, no. 2. 1977. 
Billingsley, A. "School Desegregation and Residential 
Segregation" Society 16, no. 5 1979. 
Brass, E. I Walk in Two Worlds. Calgary: Glenbow Museum, 
1987 . 
Brass, E. "Recollections and Reminiscences: The File Hills 
ex-pupil colony". Saskatchewan History 6, no. 2 1953. 
Brown, J.S. "The Short Life of St. Dunstan's Calgary Indian 
Industrial School, 1896-1907." Canadian Journal of Indian 
Education, 1987. 
Bryce, The Story of a National Crime Being an Appeal for 
Justice to the Indians of Canada. Ottawa: James Hope & Sons, 
Limited, 1922. 
Bull, L. R. "Indian Residential Schooling: The Native 
Perspective," Canadian Journal of Native Education 18, 
Supplemental (1987) . 
Caldwell, G. Indian Residential Schools: A Research Study of 
the Child Care Programmes for Nine Residential schools in 
Saskatchewan - Prepared for the Department of Indian Affairs 
and Northern Development. Ottawa: Canadian Welfare Council, 
1967 . 
Canada Parliament. Special Committee on Reconstruction and 
Re-establishment, Minutes and Proceedings of Evidence, No. 
9, 1944. 
Canada Parliament. Special Joint Committee of the Senate and 
House of Commons appointed to continue and complete the 
examination of the Indian Act, Minutes and Proceedings o 
Evidence, No. 30, Select and Standing Committees of the 
Senate and House of Commons. Ottawa: 1947. 
Canadian Conference of Bishops. Let Justice Flow Like a 
Mighty River. Ottawa: The Canadian Conference of Catholic 
Bishops, 1995. 
Cannon, K. A. Indian Control of Indian Education: The 
evolution of primary and secondary education for native 
students in Ontario, 1972-1993. Peterborough: Trent 
University, Unpublished M.A. Thesis. 1993. 
Cariboo Tribal Council. "Faith Misplaced: The Lasting 
effects of Abuse in a First Nations Community." Canadian 
Journal of Native Education 18, no. 2 1991. 
466 

Carpenter, M. "Recollection and Comments: No More Denials 
Please." Inukitut, 74:55-61, 1991. 
Carter, S. "Demonstrating Success: The File Hills Farm 
Colony". Prairie Forum 16, no. 2, 1991. 
Carroll, J. Case and His Contemporaries, Vols. I-IV. 
Toronto: Wesleyan Conference Office, 1867-1874. 
Chalmers, J.W. 
"Northland: The Founding of a Wilderness 
School System." Canadian Journal of Native Education 12, no. 
2, 1985. 
Child Advocacy Project of the Children's Hospital. A New 
Justice for Indian Children. Winnipeg: Children's Hospital, 
1987 . 
Chrisjohn, R. D. and S.L. Young and M. Maraun. The Circle 
Game: Shadows and Substances in the Indian Residential 
School Experience in Canada. Ottawa: Royal Commission on 
Aboriginal Peoples, 1994. 
Coates, Kenneth. "Betwixt and Between: The Anglican Church 
and the Children of the Carcross 
(Choutla) Residential 
School, 1911-1954." B.C. Studies 64. Winter, 1984-1985. 
Connelly, R.M. "Missionaries and Indian Education" in The 
Education of Indian Children in Canada, edited by L.G.P. 
Waller. Toronto: Ryerson Press, 1965. 
Dempsey. H. Big Bear. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 
1984 . 
Diabaldo, R. "The Absurd Little Mouse: When Eskimos Became 
Indians." Journal of Canadian Studies, Vol. xvi, 1981 
Dickason, 0. Canada's First Nations: A History of Founding 
Peoples from earliest times. Toronto: McClelland and 
Stewart, 1992. 
Dickerson, M.O. Whose North - Political Change, Political 
Development, and Self-Government in the Northwest 
Territories. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press 
and the Arctic Institute of North America, 1992. 
Engelstad, D. and J. Bird, "Rebuilding Community after the 
Residential School Experience." Nation to Nation: 
Aboriginal Sovereignty and the Future of Canada, edited by 
Engelstad, D. and J. Bird. Concord, Ontario: House of Anansi 
Press. 1992. 
467 

Ferrier, 
Rev. T. Indian Education in the Northwest. 
Toronto: Department of Missionary Literature of the 
Methodist Church, 1906. 
Ferrier, Rev. T. Our Indians and their training for 
citizenship. Toronto: Methodist Mission Rooms, 1913. 
Finnie, R. Canada Moves North. Toronto: MacMillan Co. of 
Canada, Ltd., 1948. 
Fulton, H.J.M. The Melting Snowman: the Canadian Indian 
Residence as a place for Children to Live and Grow. Ottawa: 
Student Residence Service, Education Branch, 1972. 
Furniss, E.M. A Conspiracy of Silence: The care of Native 
Students at St. Joseph's Residential School, William's Lake, 
B.C. William's Lake, B.C.: Cariboo Tribal Council, 1991. 
Furniss, E. M. Victims of Benevolence: Discipline and Death 
at the Williams Lake Indian Residential School, 1891-1920. 
Williams Lake, British Columbia: Cariboo Tribal Council, 
1992 . 
Getty, L. and Lussier, A., eds., As Long as the Sun Shines 
and the Water Flows. Vancouver: University of British 
Columbia Press, 1983. 
Goodwill, J and N. Sluman. John Tootosis. Winnipeg: 
Pemmican Publications, 1984. 
Graham, W. Treaty Days: Reflections of an Indian 
Commissioner. Calgary: Glenbow Museum, 1991. 
Grant, J.W. Moon of Wintertime: Missionaries and the Indians 
of Canada in encounter since 1534. Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press, 1984. 
Grant, S.D. "Indian Affairs under Duncan Campbell Scott: The 
Plains Cree of Saskatchewan 1913-1931." Journal of Canadian 
Studies 18, no. 3 (1983) . 
Grant, S.D. Sovereignty or Security. Vancouver: University 
of British Columbia Press, 1988. 
Gresko, Jacqueline. "Creating little Dominions within the 
Dominion: Early Catholic Indian schools in Saskatchewan and 
British Columbia" in Indian Education in Canada, vol 1: The 
Legacy, J. Barman, Y. Hebert and D. McCaskill, eds. 
Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1986. 
468 

Gresko, J. Shaping the Schools of the Canadian West. 
Calgary: Detselig Enterprises Ltd., 1979. 
Gull, N. The "Indian Policy' of the Anglican Church of 
Canada from 1945 to the 1970's. Peterborough: Trent 
University, Unpublished M.A. Thesis. 
Haig-Brown, C. Resistance and Renewal: Surviving the Indian 
Residential School. Vancouver: Tillicum Library, 1993. 
Hall, D.J. "Clifford Sifton and Canadian Indian 
Administration, 1896-1905. Prairie Forum 2, no. 2, 1977. 
Herring, D.A. "There Were Young People and Babies Dying 
Every Week: 1918-1919 Influenza Epidemic at Norway House." 
Ethnohistory, Vol. 41. No. 1, Winter, 1993. 
Hobart, 
C.W. 
"Some Consequences of Residential 
Schooling." 
R. Martin and A. Willard eds., American Indian 
Education. Tempe: Arizona State University, 1974. 
Hodgson, M. Impact of Residential Schools and other root 
causes of poor mental health. Edmonton: Nechi Institute on 
Alcohol and Drug Education, 1990. 
Hrdlicka, A. Tuberculosis Among Certain Indian Tribes of the 
United States. Washington: Bureau of American Ethnology, 
Bulletin 42, 1909. 
Indian View Points Submitted for the Consideration of the 
Residential School Principls' Workshop. Elliot Lake, 
Ontario. 1965. 
Indian and Eskimo Residential Schools. Popular Information 
Series, No. 12, Missionary Society , Church of England in 
Canada, 1939. 
Ing, N.R. "The Effects of Residential Schools on Native 
Child Rearing Practices." Canadian Journal of Native 
Education 
18, Supplemental 1991. 
Jaenen, C. "Education for Francization: The Case of New 
France in the Seventeenth Century". J. Barman, Y. Hebert and 
D. McCaskill, eds., Indian Education in Canada, Volume 1: 
The Legacy. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 
1986 . 
Jaine, L. "Industrial and Residential School Administration: 
The Attempt to Undermine Indigenous Self-Determination". 
Journal of Indigenous Studies 2, no. 2, 1991. 
469 
,

Jaine, L. ed. Residential Schools: The Stolen Years. 
Saskatoon: University Extension Press, 1993. 
Johnson, I. Helping Indians Help Themselves - A Committee to 
Investigate Itself, The 1951 Indian Act Process. Ottawa: 
Treaties and Historical Research Centre, INAC, 1984. 
Johnston, B. Indian School Days. Toronto: Key Porter Books 
Limited, 1988. 
Johnston, C.M. The Valley of the Six Nations. Toronto: The 
Champlain Society, 1964. 
Jones, P. Life and Journals of Kal-Ke-Wa-Quo-Na-By. Toronto: 
Anson Green, 1860. 
Kennedy, J. "White 'rites' and Indian 'rites"' in Western 
Canada Past and Present, edited by A.W. Rasporich. Calgary: 
McClelland and Stewart West, 1975. 
King, A.R. The School at Mopass: A Problem of Identity. 
Toronto: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1967. 
Kirkness, V.J. First Nations and Schools: Triumphs and 
Struggles. Ottawa: Canadian Education Association, 1992. 
Knockwood, I. Out of the Depths: The Experiences of Ni'kmaw 
at the Indian Residential School at Shubenacadie, Nova 
Scotia. Lockport, Nova Scotia: Roseway Publishing, 1992. 
Lascelle, T.A. "Indian Residential Schools". Canadian 
Catholic Review, 1992. 
LaViolette, F.E. The Struggle for Survival: Indian Cultures 
and the Protestant Ethic in British Columbia. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 1973. 
Leighton, D. "A Victorian Civil Servant at Work: Lawrence 
Vankoughnet and the Canadian Indian Department, 1874-1893." 
I. Getty and A. Lussier eds., As Long as the Sun Shines and 
the Water Flows. Vancouver: University of British Columbia 
Press, 1983. 
Leslie, J. and Macguire, R. eds., The Historical Development 
of the Indian Act. Ottawa: Department of Indian And Northern 
Affairs Canada, 1979. 
Leslie, J. Vision Versus Revision: Native People, Government 
Officials, and the Joint Senate/House of Commons Committee 
on Indian Affairs, 1946-1948 and 1959-1961. Ottawa: Treaties 
and Historical Research Centre, INAC. 
470 

Long, J.S. "Education in the James Bay Region during the 
HordenYears." Ontario History 70, 1987. 
Lux, M. "Prairie Indians and the 1918 Influenza Epidemic." 
Native Studies Review, Vol. 8 No. 1, 1992. 
Macpherson, M.J. Dreams & Visions, Education in the 
Northwest Territories from Early Days to 1984. Yellowknife: 
Government of the Northwest Territories, 1991. 
Manuel, G. and Posluns, M. The Fourth World: An Indian 
Reality. Toronto: Collier MacMillan Canada Ltd, 1974. 
Martin, V. Overview of 
Institutional/Residential/Foster 
Care. Edmonton: Nechi Institute on Alcohol and Drug Abuse, 
McLeod, J.R. "Missionaries and Indian Education." The 
Education of Indian Children in Canada: A symposium written 
by members of Indian Affairs education division, with 
comments by the Indian people. Toronto: The Ryerson Press, 
1965 . 
Miller, J.R. "The Irony of Residential Schooling." Canadian 
Journal of Native Education 14, no. 2 1987. 
Miller, J.R. "Owen Glendower, Hotspur, and Canadian Indian 
Policy." J.R. Miller ed., The First Ones: Readings in 
Indian/Native Studies. Craven, 
Saskatchewan: 
Saskatchewan 
Federated Indian College, 1992. 
Miller, J.R. Skyscrapers Hide the Heavens: A History of 
Indian/ White Relations in Canada. Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press, 1989. 
Miller, J.R. Sweet Promises, A Reader on Indian-White 
Relations in Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 
1991. 
Milloy, J.S. The Era of Civilization - British Policy for 
the Indians of Canada, 1830-1860. Oxford: Unpublished D.Phil 
Thesis, 1978. 
Milloy, J.S. "The Early Indian Acts: Developmental Strategy 
and Constitutional Change" in J.R. Miller ed., Sweet 
Promises, A Reader on Indian-White Relations in Canada. 
Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1991. 
Milloy, J.S. "A Partnership of Races"-Indian and White, 
Cross Cultural Relations and Criminal Justice in Manitoba, 
1670-1949. A report for the Public Inquiry into the 
Administration of Justice and Aboriginal People, Manitoba. 
471 

Milloy, J.S. The Plains Cree. Winnipeg: University of 
Manitoba Press, 1988. 
Montgomery, M. "The Six Nations and the Macdonald 
Franchise." Ontario History, LVII, March 1965. 
Morris, A. The Treaties of Canada with the Indians of 
Manitoba and the North-West Territories. Toronto: Belfords, 
Clarke & Co., MDCCCLXXX. 
National Indian Brotherhood, Indian Control of Indian 
Education: Practical Applications. 
Winnipeg: 
National 
Indian Brotherhood. 1980. 
Nock, D.A. "The Social Effects of Missionary Education: A 
Victorian Case Study." in Reading, Writing and Riches: 
Education and Socio Economic Order in North /America, edited 
by R.W. Nelson and D.A. Nock. Kitchener: Between the Lines, 
1978 . 
Nock, D.A. A Victorian Missionary and Canadian Policy: 
Cultural Synthesis vs. Cultural Replacement. Waterloo: 
Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1988. 
Oblates of Mary Immaculate. Residental Education for Indian 
Acculturation. Ottawa: s.n, 1958. 
Persson, D.I. "The Changing Experience of Residential 
Schooling: Blue Quills, 1931-1970." J. Barman, Y. Hebert and 
D. McCaskill eds., Indian Education in Canada Volume 1: The 
Legacy. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 
1986 . 
Porter, E. The Anglican Church and Native Education: 
Residential Schools 
and Assimilation. 
Toronto: University 
of Toronto, Unpublished Phd. Thesis, 1981. 
Peake, F. "From the Red River to the Arctic: Essays on 
Anglican Missionary Expansion in the Nineteenth Century". 
Journal of the Canadian Church Historical Society xxxi, no. 
2, 1989. 
Redford, J. "Attendance at Indian Residential Schools in 
British Columbia, 1890-1920". BC Studies 44, 1979-1980. 
Scott, D.C. "Indian Affairs, 1763-1841." A. Shortt and A. 
Doughty, eds., Canada and its Provinces, Vol. IV. Toronto: 
University of Edinburgh Press, 1914. 
Scott, D.C. "Indian Affairs, 1867-1912." A. Shortt and A. 
Doughty, eds., Canada and its Provinces, Vol. VII. Toronto: 
472 

University of Edinburgh Press, 1913. 
Sheehan, N. "Education, the Society and the Curriculum in 
Alberta, 1905-1980: An Overview." N. Sheehan, J.D. Wilson 
and D.C. Jones eds., Schools in the West: Essays in Canadian 
Educational History. Calgary: Detselig Enterpise Ltd., 1986. 
Sindell, P.S. and R.M. Winthrob. "Cross Cultural Education 
in the North and its Implications for Personal Identity: The 
Canadian Case." F. Darrell ed., Education in the North. 
Anchorage: Arctic Institute of North America, 1972. 
St. Anne's Residential 
School Principals. 
We Live at 
School. Ottawa: Education Division, Department of Indian 
Affairs, 1972. 
Stevenson, W. "The Red River Indian Mission School and John 
West's Little Charges, 1820-1833. Native Studies Review, 
Vol. 4, Nos. 1&2, 1988. 
Taylor, J. Canadian Indian Policy During the Inter-War 
Years, 1919-1939. Ottawa: Indian and Northern Affairs 
Canada, 1983. 
Taylor, J. "Canada's Northwest Indian Policy in the 1870s: 
Traditional Premises and Necessary Innovations." R. Price 
ed., The Spirit of the Alberta Indian Treaties. Montreal: 
Institute for Research on Public Policy, 1980. 
Titley, E.B. "Duncan Campbell Scott and Indian Educational 
Policy." J.D. Wilson ed., An Imperfect Past: Education and 
Society in Canadian History. Vancouver: Centre 
for the 
Study of Curriculum and Instruction, University of British 
Columbia, 1984. 
Titley, E.B. "Indian Industrial Schools in Western Canada" 
in N. Sheehan, ed., Essays in Canadian Educational History, 
Calgary: Detselig Enterprises Ltd., 1986. 
Titley, 
E.B. A Narrow vision: Duncan Campbell Scott and 
the Administration of Indian Affairs in Canada. Vancouver: 
University of British Columbia Press, 1986. 
Titley, E.B. "W.M. Graham: Indian Agent Extraordinaire". 
Prarie Forum 8, no. 1, 1983. 
Tobias, J. "Protection, Civilization, Assimilation: An 
Outline History of Canada's Indian Policy." Western Canadian 
Journal of Anthropology 6, 1976. 
Trennert, R.A. "Educating Indian Girls at Non-reservation 
Boarding Schools, 1878-1920." Western Historical Quarterly 
473 

13, no. 3 (1982) . 
Upton, L.F.S. "The Origins of Canadian Indian Policy." 
Journal of Canadian Studies 8, no. 4 November 1973. 
Usher, J. "Duncan of Metlakatla: The Victorian Origins of a 
Model Indian Community." W.L. Morton ed., The Shields of 
Achilles: Aspects of Canada in the Victorian Age. Toronto: 
McClelland and Stewart, 1986. 
Van West, C. "Acculturation by Design - Architectural 
Determinism and the Montana Indian Reservations, 1870-1930." 
Great Plains Quarterly, Vol. 7 No. 2, Spring 1987. 
Waller, L.G.P. ed. The Education of Indian Children in 
Canada. Toronto: Ryerson Press, 1965. 
Weaver, S.M. Making Canadian Indian Policy: The Hidden 
Agenda 1968 1970. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 
1972 . 
Webster, A. They are impossible people, really: Social 
administration and Aboriginal social welfare in the 
Territorial Norths, 1927-1993. Ottawa: Research Report to 
the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples, 1993. 
White, R. "The Cultural Landscape of the Pawnees." Great 
Plains Quarterly, Winter 1982, Vol. 2, No.1. 
Wherrit, G.J. The Miracle of Empty Beds: A History of 
Tuberculosis in Canada. Toronto: University of Toronto 
Press, 1977. 
Wilson, D.J. "A Note on the Shingwauk Industrial Home for 
Indians" Journal of the Canadian Church Historical Society 
16. no.4. 1974. 
Wilson, S.D. "No blanket to be worn in school" J. Barman Y. 
Hebert and D. McCaskill eds., Indian Education in Canada, 
Volume l: The Legacy. Vancouver: University of British 
Columbia Press, 1986. 
Zaslow, M. The Northward Expansion of Canada, 1914-1967. 
Toronto: McClelland & Stewart, 1968. 
474 

