
At Strategic Studies Group we make strategy games for your 
computer .. with a difference! 
Our games incorporate powerfui Design Kits which allow you 
to vary the historical scenarios or create entirely new ones of 
your own choosing. 
Run 5 magazine is our way of further supporting our 
customers. 
Each issue of the magazine contains new scenarios, design 
features, scenario notes, updates on projects in development, 
gossip, reviews, letters and clorifications, 
Scenarios appearinQ in previous issues include. .. Relief of 
Wake Island, Japan Sweeps South and Leyte Gulf for Carriers 
at War; The Blitz, Case White, Zitadelle and Flying Tigers for 
Europe Ablaze; Guadalcanal, Task Force South, Gallipali, 
Arnhem and Anzia for Battlefront. 
Run 5 is published four times per year. Singie issues are 
$4.00. Subscription rates are shown beiow. 
IN AUSTRALIA 
ELSEWHERE (Airmail) 
Magazine/DiSK Suo. '" $AUD 65.00 
Magazine/Disk Sub. '" SAUD 85.00 
Magazine Only Sub. '" SAUD 15.00 
Magazine Only SuD. '" $AUO 35.00 
IN NORTH AMERICA 
(Surface Post) 
Magazine Disk Sub. "" SUSO 65.00 
MagaZine/Disk Sub "" SAUD 7500 
Magazine Only Sub. "" $USD 15.00 
MagaZine Only Sub '" SAUD 25 00 
Disk subscription holders receive all the magazine scenarios in 
disk form. For those of you who don't wont to spend the extra 
money ... don路t worry. All the data necessary to build the scenarios 
will be provided in the magazine. 
North American subscribers should send a cheque or money 
order (in US funds) to our US Office. Everyone else shouid send 
their cheque, money order, Visa or Mastercard to our Australian 
Office. 
Individual scenario disks may be purchased for $15.00 
each. 
Run 5 is available wherever you buy our games or 
you can order it direct from SSG. 
In the USA 
Strategic Studies Group Inc. 
1747 Orleans Ct, Walnut Creek, 
CA. 94598 (415) 932-3019 
In Australia 
StrategiC Studies Group Pty Ltd 
P.O, Box 261, Drummoyne. NSW 2047 (02) 819-7199 
MANUAL 
Amiga, ngs and Macintosh 
Versions 

This software program and all the documentation associated with it is 
Copyright (c) 1987 by Strategic Studies Group Pty Limited. All rights 
are reserved worldwide. No part of the documentation may be repro-
duced, transmitted, stored in a retrieval system or translated into any 
language, in any form or by any means, without the prior written 
consent of Strategic Studies Group Pty Limited. 
Typeset in 9 pt Bookman Condensed on an Apple Macintosh and Laserwrtter. 
Printed in Australia by Maxwell Printing Co. Fty Ltd, Sydney, for the publishers, 
Strategic Studies Group Ply Limited, P.O. Box261 Drumrnoyne, 2047. AUSTRALIA. 
2 
PART ONE 
THE GAME ROUTINES 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Reachfor the Stars is a game of galactic exploration, colonization and conquest. 
Throughout the game you must explore new star systems and colonize the most 
promising planets: Your colonies produce resources which you must allocate to 
defence. research and development, environmental and social factors, consumer 
contentment and industrial expansion. You must also develop a (military) policy to 
deal effectively with the alien threats which are certain to arise. 
Part One ofthis manual, The Game Routines, contains an introductory tutorial and 
explains all you need to know to play the game. Part Two, The Game Options, 
describes the options that maybe applied to vary the rules of play. You may begin 
a game of Reachfor the Stars immediately by following the instructions in the 
tutorial chapter (Chapter 3), although it would be advisable to read Chapter 2 fIrst 
in order to get a little background information. 
The complete package consists of one 3.5" disk, a map card, an instruction sheet 
for your computer type, an album and this player's manual. If this isn't the case, 
let us know about missing components, or return defective ones, and we'll replace 
them immediately. If you live in Nort,h America. send defective components to our 
US Office; if you live elsewhere, send them to our Australian Office. 
Please address any questions you may have relating to the play of the game to our 
Australian Office, regardless of where you live. 
Note that the game disk is not copy protected. We recommend you make a backup 
before playing the game. The instruction sheet for your computer type will tell you 
how to do this. 
3 

2. WHAT'S IT ALL ABOUT 
The following information describes the standard game. Information about the 
advanced game can be found in Part Two. 
The galaxy is a 34 by 23 hexagonal grid as displayed on the map card. It is important 
to note that the map is also wrap around (a toroid). so movement off one edge results 
in a return on the opposite edge. This would mean, for example, that Pollux is 4 
hexes from Capella and that Saiph is 9 hexes from Zosma. 
There are always four empires in the game. Any number of these may be controlled 
by human players and the rest will be controlled by computer players. 
In each turn, every empire is given orders by its controlling player. Every odd 
numbered turn is a production and movement turn. even numbered turns are 
movement only. Production orders are given and executed fIrst (if it is a production 
tum), and then movement orders can be given. 
While giVing your orders. you can examine a number of reports given by the Status 
Menu. These show a summary of explored star systems, the current status of all 
task forces, current Victory pOints and the status of alI game options including all 
production and movement costs and your current spending on technology. 
When alJfourplayers have completed giving orders, the computer then executes the 
movement of ships. Vlhenships of different empires end up in the same star system, 
combat will occur. Each player is given the option of withdrawing his ships after 
each round. Combat continues until there are only ships belonging to a single player 
left in the system. When warships are in a system containing an enemy planet, and 
no enemy ships, the warships may attack the planet's defenses. If they destroy all 
the defenses on the planet, or there were none on the planet to begin with, then the 
population in any transport ships may be used to invade and conquer the planet. 
After all combat is resolved the next turn begins. This process repeats until the last 
game turn is executed or an overwhelming victory has occurred. The player with the 
highest victory point score is the winner. 
3. PLAYING YOUR FIRST GAME 
Starting the Game 
Following the instructions in this section will take you through a tutorial game for 
the fIrst nine turns; enough to get your space empire started. You must enter the 
items exactly as shown, otherwise the tutorial will diverge from the script with 
undefined results. 
Turn on your computer and place the disk in the drive. You will see the Reachfor 
the Stars icon. Use the mouse to double click this and the program will start. You 
4 
will be presented with a start up window which allows you to change the names of 
the four empires, select each as a human controlled empire or one of the three levels 
of computer controlled empire, a slide control for the length of game you wish to play 
and some buttons that will open various option dialogues. 
Player one is highlighted and set as human so select this as your empire. Begin by . 
typing in a name for yourself. When this is done, click on each of the other empires' 
name fields and after you highlight each, type in a name. For this tutorial, name the 
empires as follows; 1) Esesgees 2) Esesions 3) Gadawr 4) The Forth. Being your first 
game you don'twantto get wiped out so, for players 2, 3 and 4, click on the Beginner 
options. 
The only thing left to do is to turn on the Tutorial option. Use the mouse to select 
the Optional Rules button and the options Window will open. Select the Tutorial 
option, at the top of the window, by clicking on it. The option name wiIl be 
highlighted to show that it is active. Then put the window away by clicking on the 
go-away box on the left hand side of the window's title bar. 
That's it. You're ready to go. Pull down the File menu and select the New Game item 
to start a new game with the parameters you have just set. 
Turn 1 
You now see before you the space background and the player select Window. Since 
you are the only human player, only the Esesgee button is highlighted. Press it to 
begin your turn .. 
You now see the production set up for your home planet. On the space window your 
home star system, Furud, is indicated by the special colony world icon, the star 
system window is open giving details路 of your planet and the production Window has 
also opened. 
Select the Advice option found under the Production menu. The computer will fiIl 
in its recommendations for production. Note the order for four scout vessels, a good 
idea for the beginning of a game. For now accept the computer's advice. The End 
Production command is the last option under the Production menu. SeJect it to end 
the Production phase. You will see a ship symbol appear on the space screen to 
indicate the scouts that have just been built and the stardisplaywiII update to show 
any improvements made to your planet. The Task Force Control window also opens 
to allow you to give orders to your scouts. At the moment in shows 4 scouts in orbit; 
I.e. without a destination. 
Again, let's get the computer to do the work for us. Choose Auto Explore from the 
Control menu. After a moment you will see that each of your scouts has been placed 
in a separate task force, each has its own different destination and has an ETA of 
one turn. That's all you need to do for this turn so select Normal from the End Turn 
menu. 
5 

As each computer controlled empire is given orders you will see a message 
indicating which empire is active. After all orders are entered you will see ship 
symbols come and go on the space display. indicating the arrival of task forces at 
star systems. and then you will be prompted to start your next turn. 
Turn 2 
This is a movement only turn so no production windows open; instead the Task 
Force Control window is open for your scout at Phaeda. Before giving any orders 
select Explored Systems from the status menu. The Window that opens is a 
summary report for information on star systems. Use the scroll bar on the side to 
scroll down the report and you will see data for the star systems you have just 
explored with your scouts as well as your home system. At this point it may be best 
to explain what data is available to you in the star System display. 
The star system window shows the name of the star system in the title followed by 
it spectral class. Under this is the data area for each planet. The owner Hne will show 
which empire controls the planet and. ifitis conquered. the 1D of the original owner 
to the right of this. The number to the left ofthe slash for Population and Industry 
is the actual level whilst the number to the right is the maximum level. The two 
values for Environment are. from left to right. social and planetary. The last Hne 
shows the planet's defenses. normally the number of PDBs. The Size of the local 
army is shown to the right of this in the advanced rules. 
The Task Force Control will open ifthere are any ships on which to report. and will 
show any enemy ships as a separate task force at the top of the window. 
These complete details are only visible to a player who has a colony or ships in the 
system. Otherwise only the factors of maximum population. maximum industry 
and planetary environment can be seen and the ship display will not open. 
O.K. It's time you gave a direct order to a starship. Ftrst. close the Explored Systems 
window. The scout at Phaeda has no destination. and is considered in orbit around 
the system. Click in the title bar ofthe Task Force Control window to make it active. 
Click on the destination location of the scout at Phaeda. Now click once at the 
bottom of the screen and you will see space scroll up one hex. Do that until the star 
Megrez is visible. Point at Megrez and click. you will see the Task Force window 
update the destination to say Megrez and give the distance to it as 7 hexes. 
Note that while reviewing space you just click near the edge to scroll it. double click 
near the edge to move that hex to the centre. Hold the button down for a continuous 
scroll. Clicking on a star will open the star display. Double clicks will open 
production and/or task force control Windows for that system if valid. 
Now select Auto Explore from the Control Menu to assign the other three scouts and 
Normal from the End Turn menu. or use their keyboard equivalents if you ltke. You 
will again be informed as each computer controlled empire has its turn and then 
6 
you will see ship symbols moving around. Including the arrival of your scout at 
Megrez. 
Turn 3 
After pressing the Esesgee button to start your turn you will again see the 
production Windows open for Furud. It's time to start building a space armada to 
go and conquer the first alien you find. Type 1 and press enter. You have ordered 
one more industry factor to be built on Furud. Now point at the units column on 
the Mark 1 line and click. The field should highlight. Type in 12 and press enter. 
Choose End Production from the Production Menu. The beginnings of your starlleet 
are constructed and appear on the screen. Click on the bottom of the space screen 
to scroll Megrez up into view and click on Megrez to see what your scout there has 
discovered. 
Look at the star system display; you have come across the Esesions home world! 
What a co-incidencel Your current lIeet of 12 Mark Is is no match for the Esesions' 
PDBs at this time. and you have no invading troops. but that can be remedied over 
the next two production cycles. Again select Auto Explore and then End Turn 
Normal. 
Turn 4 
This is a movement only turn and you will only be moving the scouts. First. select 
the Victory Conditions item to see how things are going. You will see that all the VP 
scores are very close. That's normal this early in the game. Select Auto Explore and 
End Turn Normal again. 
Turn 5 
Production again. This time click on the Mark I field and type in 15. That will use 
up almost all of your resources; the few remaining may as well be saved fornm tum 
so end production now. 
Since you are planning an invasion ofMegrez and it will take two turns for slow Mark 
Is and Transports to reach there, it may be an idea to send one warship to spy on 
and harass the system. blocking the Esesions off from their global resource points. 
Select the New Task Force (TF) command from the Movement menu. Click on the 
Mark I field of the new task force and type 1. Select Full Map from the control menu. 
You will now see the strategic display of the game map. Your home system. Furud 
is highlighted. Ftnd Megrez toward the top. right corner. Click on it and you will see 
the Mark 1 task force is assigned Megrez as a destination. 
Once more select Auto Explore and Normal end tum. You may see brief moments 
of combat as other computer players fight amongst themselves. It's likely that one 
7 

of your enemies just lost a scout to enemy action but you have no way of knoWing 
for sure. 
TurnS 
Open the Task Forces display (Select it from the Status Menu). You will see the 
locations of your scouts, the 26 Mark Is in orbit about Furud, and one Mark 1 In 
Flight to Megrez. The Mark 1 In Flight is still in hyperspace: it has not completed 
its voyage. You will not see it on the map and you cannot give it any new orders until 
it arrives at Megrez. For now, send your scouts off automatically and then pick End 
Turn Normal. 
As the turn is executed you wlll be notified that your lone Mark 1 has arrived at 
Megrez and is in a position to attack the planet. What you see is the Star System 
window for Megrez and the Task Force Control Window for your lone Mark 1. One 
Mark 1 against all those planetary defense bases is not a good idea. It is better to 
hold off in orbit, blockading the planet so choose Cancel from the Attack Menu and 
allow the turn to fmish executing. 
Turn 7 
This production tum your Mark 1 at Megrez is causing the Esesions a few financial 
problems while you complete the construction of your grand fleet. Order the 
construction of 10 colonists and 14 Mark Is and end production. You are now 
prepared to launch your invasion. Select the desiination fleld on the TF Control 
Window. Now begin to type in the name of the destination, Megrez. The computer 
will recognize the name before you fmish typing and flnish it off for you. All your 
ships should now be on their way to Megrez. 
End the turn with automatic scout exploration and select Normal from the End Turn 
menu. 
There is again the sound oflaser fire but this time it's bad news. The combat window 
opens and you see that some newly constructed Esesion Mark Is have just 
eliminated your Esesgeean "peace mission", With your fleet on the way you know 
they must pay for this outrage! Press the Continue button on the combat screen to 
resume play. 
TurnS 
Select Task Forces from the status menu. You wlll see your /leetIn Flight to Megrez. 
Their ETA shows they will arrive during the execution of this turn. Select Auto 
Explore and Normal end turn. 
The moment you have been waiting for arrives; the combat screen opens and you 
see that your fleet's initial encounter was a success, the Essessions have lost their 
8 
entire fleet! Press coniinue. Your shipS are now poised to attack the defenses on the 
Esesion planet. 
Form a new Task Force and allocate all your Mark Is but none of your transports 
to it. The destination will be shown as the enemy Planet and the ETA will read Attack 
(A'IK). Select Attack from the Attack Menu. You could abort the attack by selecting 
cancel from the Attack Menu but you show no fear. Order the attack! 
Notice that you are the only one with the option to withdraw as the EseSion defence 
bases cannot flee. Victory is guarantied so press continue until the PDBs are all 
eliminated. 
You will then be given the option to bombard the planet. A good idea since you do 
not have enough troops to easily control a planet with such a large population, and 
you can get a few victory points for colony destruction. Choose the option and you 
will see any damage reflected in the star system display. 
Now itis time to invade. You should send all ten transports down to plant your flag 
on allen soil. Type 10 in the invade window and hit the Done button. Your flag is 
now planted on alien soil. 
Turn 9 
A production tum. This time you may give production orders for the planet at 
Megrez as well. The best advice here is to create the maximum number of colonists 
at Megrez in order to reduce the population and, after production is over use the 
transports to colonise Megrez. This will add those transports to your current 
garrison and improve your control of the planet (Remember you need 1 garrison per 
2 population to hold a conquered world securely). The Production Menu now has 
Prev Planet and Next Planet buttons highlighted to allow you to cycle through your 
planets. 
Select Victory Conditions from the status menu and you will see how many Victory 
points you have gained from all this activity. You have now mastered the basics of 
Reachfor the Stars. Play on from here and enjoy the game! 
4. THE GAME FUNCTIONS DESCRIBED 
(a). Building Your Forces 
Resource pOints are the crux of the game. Throughout the game your planetary 
economies produce RPs; the better developed a planet is, the more RPs it will 
produce. The player who makes the most of the productive capacity of his planets 
WiIllnvariablywin. Production occurs on every second tum of the game, beginning 
with turn 1. Each populated planet produces RPs according to the following 
formula. 
9 

Note that population in excess of the maximwn population capacity for the planet 
do not contrtbute to this formula. 
Each player is then presented with the production Window which shows the 
production units ordered and resource pOints available for the current planet. 
Orders are given for each planet under the empire's control, including conquered 
planets, and no order is pennanent until End Production is chosen. 
RPs not consumed in a particular prodUction phase are transferred to Global RPs 
and become available on subsequent production turns to other planets of the 
empire. This represents interstellar trade and Global RPs eam interest at the rate 
of 6.25% per production phase. 
The production order entry window gives a list of items that may be ordered. The 
fIrst column, under Units, is where the number of units required are entered by the 
player. The column under the heading RP will show how many RPs that quantity 
will cost to manufacture. As RPs are spent, they are taken first from RPs produced 
on the planet this turn, then from Global RPs. 
"When enemy warships are present in a star system. the planets in that system are 
interdicted. This means there is a blockade on all interstellar trade to those planets 
so they have no access to Global RPs during the production phase. 
The Production Window identifles the planet currently being given orders, shows 
available Global and Planet RPs. The GPP (Gross Planetary Product, the total RPs 
produced by this planet at the beginning of the turn) is shown in the star Window. 
The total RPs spent on research and development since the beginning of the game 
are shown in the Technology option under the Status Menu. 
The Next Planet/Prev Planet option under the Production Menu will cycle through 
all of the empire's planets. It Will probably be easier to use the keyboard eqUivalents 
for these commands. When all planets have at least been inspected the End ' 
Production option Will highlight. Choosing this will cause all production orders for 
your empire to be carried out and then place you into the movement routines. 
The following items may be ordered for production. Note that the RPs necessary for 
Servicing Population and Maintaining PDBs are automatically entered by the 
computer. You may, of course, chang" these but you should be aware of the dire 
consequences of so doing. 
Industry. Each unit of industry ordered will increase the planet's actual industrial 
capacity. The number of units that may be ordered is limited to the available RPs 
10 
and the planet's industrial maximum. 
Social Environment. The Social Env level is a factor in determining planetary RP 
production and population growth. If the Social Env is less then 40. the population 
Will decrease, if greater than 40 then the population will increase. The social level 
Will tend to move towards the Planetary Environment from tum to tum and may 
also be affected by riots, natural disasters and warfare. An uninhabited planet 
always has a social environment of O. 
Planetary Environment. The Planet Env strongly influences the level of the Social 
Env and thus, indirectly, production and population growth. BuUding up planetary 
envrronment may well be of greater value than continual investment in the more 
cheaply improved social level. Planet Env is only increased by ordering units in 
production but may be decreased by riots. natural disasters and warfare. 
Service Popn. This represents the provision of consumer goods and services to your 
populations. Each unit of population serviced costs 1 RP. You cannot service more 
than the existing population but if you service less you may cause riots and unrest 
proportional to the extent of your tyranny. This will manifest itself in a lower 
birthrate, industrial sabotage and pollution of the environment, possibly reducing 
a once profltable economy to a worthless junk-pile. 
pDI! Maint. EveryPDB requires maintenance and will be eliminated without it. The 
cost is dependant on the current ship tech level. 
pDIl New. A maximum of 5 PDBs may be constructed per tum for each planet. 
Again, the cost of a new PDB is determined by the current ship tech level. The 
maximum number of PDBs that may be constructed on each planet is 50. 
Colonists. These are the population that are to be embarked on transports to 
become colonists or invading troops. The population unit and transport are 
constructed together and become inseparable until put down on a planet, at which 
time the transport is permanently destroyed. Up to 25% of a planet's population will 
be aVallable for emigration each turn as well as all population in excess of the 
planet's population capacity. In combat, transports have no fire power but, if 
escorted by warships, will take on the defensive capability of the highest tech level 
warships present. Unescorted transports are sure to be atomized in droves during 
combat. 
Other Starships. Scouts are unarmed, exploratory vessels, the Mark I through 
Mark IV series are warships with progressively greater offensive and defensive 
strengths as well as higher movement allowances. The total number of these ships 
that a planet may construct in a turn is limited to the current industrial capacity. 
Further more, Mark II to Mark Nwarships cannot be constructed until the research 
and development costs have been paid for the appropriate ship tech level. 
Ship Tech. All players begin the game with the technology to produce Mark I 
warships. To reach Mark II technology, and thus be able to construct Mark II 
warships, an investment of 400 RPs is necessary. The computer keeps track of your 
11 

instalments and displays the accumulated amount in the Technology window 
under the Status Menu. The investment of a further 1000 RPs and 2000 RPs 
respectively, will develop Mark III and Mark IV technology. In addition to enabling 
the construction of better starships, ship development investment improves the 
fighting capability (and increases the cost) of all ofyourPDBs. Note that, regardless 
of technological development. the maximum rating for PDBs is a Mark III equiva-
lent. 
(b). Moving Your Ships 
Every turn you may give orders to some, none or all of your ships. They can form 
Task Forces and travel from star to star or colonize a planet orbiting their current 
star. 
At the beginning of your turn all ships are unassigned. By double clicking on a star 
where you have ships, the Task Force Control window will open. The leftmost 
column displays a task force destination, the others detail the number of ships of 
each type present and the Estimated TIme of Arrival at the destination. To get your 
ships moving you must form some or all of them into a task force and give it a 
destination. No orders given are permanent until you choose to end the turn. 
Once a task force is in路flight it is out of contact until the turn it arrives at its 
destination. so ships cannot be reassigned once they are on their way. 
(c). The Task Force Controls 
The task force controls are found under the Movement Menu. Most have keyboard 
eqUivalents. At the start of the turn the computer consolidates all ships present in 
the system into a single task force without a destination. This may be considered 
as the pool of ships from which you draw ships for your task forces. 
Prey Star/Next Star. This will change the TaskForce Control window to show ships 
about another star system. Repeated selection will eventually bring you full circle 
to the onginal system. You may go to another system directly by double clicking on 
it. 
New Task Force. This will create a new line in the Task Force Control Window 
without ships or a destination. Ships are added to a new task force by moving the 
cursor to the appropnate column and typing in the number of ships desired. The 
ships will be subtracted from the pool and added to your new new task force. Do 
this for each type of ship that you wish to include. 
A destination is specified by moving the cursor to the destination column. You may 
then click on a star or type the star name of your destination. Any task forces 
without a destination at the end of a tum are considered in orbit, and will be 
consolidated into the system pool for the next turn. 
Reform. ThiS will de-allocate the highlighted task force and return all its ships to 
the pooL It will combine any existing task forces which are without destinations. 
12 
Colonize. If you have transport ships present these may be assigned to colonizing 
uninhabited planets or planets you own within the current star system. Colonize 
is found under the Movement Menu. Choosing it will open the Colonize Form 
window which allows you to select how many of your transports you wish to land 
on each planet. 
When you press the Done button. the transports will be placed in a task force for 
each planet specified with a destination of "Colonize". This is also a method for 
adding to a garrison on a conquered planet as all colonists put down on such a 
planet automatically join the garrison. 
The Task Force Control window Will also show the presence of enemy task forces 
overyour system. These will be highlighted and their destination will read "Enemy". 
Regrettably, it is not possible to edit an enemy task force. 
(d). Starship Battles 
(i). Ship to Ship 
Vlhenever ships belonging to different empires are in the same star system and at 
least one warship is present (Mark Is through Mark IVs). then a round of combat 
will occur. 
Scouts are automatically wiped out on encountering enemy warships and no 
combat report is given other than to quickly highlight the star where the battle took 
place and bring you the sound of atomizing metal as the scout is vaporized. 
If ships other than scouts are involved and anyofthe controlling players are human 
the combat screen will open. For each player it shows how many of each type of ship 
are still operational under the OP heading and how many ships were destroyed last 
round under the KIA heading. 
At this point players may elect to withdraw some or all of their ships by pressing the 
appropriate withdraw button. This will enter the nonnal ship movement system. 
You are not forced to withdraw all of your ships at once or in the same IT. Once you 
close the Task Force Control window the Combat screen will then be re-opened. You 
may continue combat by pressing the Continue button or make further withdraw-
also 
Withdrawn ships move normally to their destination in the next movement phase. 
The winner of a ship to ship combat (i.e. the last player to have ships left in the star 
system) will receive victory pOints for all destroyed enemy ships. If you withdraw 
from a combat, or are eliminated, you receive no points for any ships you may have 
killed. 
The combat system is heavily weighted in favour of the side with the most ships, 
assuming equal ship types. A fight between a force of 1 00 ships and one of75 fought 
to the finish, should result in the extinction of the 75. with losses of about 50 to 60 
for the larger side. 
13 
-----------------------------------------------
---

CU). Ship to Planet 
When warships are in a star system containing one or more enemy planets and no 
enemy ships are present, they may attack the enemy planets. The player will be 
presented with a display of the star system and a window stmilar to the Task Force 
Control window. The attack may be canceled by selecting Cancel from the Attack 
Menu. 
For attacks on more than one planet in the same star system. all Task Forces must 
be assigned to those attacks before selecting Attack from the menu. 
If proceeding with the attack, warships are formed into Task Forces in the normal 
manner. A default target planet is indicated. If there are several planets that may 
be attacked use the Prev Planet/Next Planet item in the Attack Menu to select the 
target world. 
To initiate all attacks in a star system, choose Attack from the Attack Menu. The 
Combat window will open in tum for each attack. The planetary defence bases will 
appear as warships of the appropriate level and combat proceeds as normal, 
although only the attacking ships may withdraw. 
If all the PDBs are wiped out, the attacking warships may then bombard the planet 
for one round in an attempt to damage industry and reduce the population. Victory 
points are awarded for colony destruction. 
(el. Conquering Worlds 
Colonies undefended by PDBs may be invaded if transport ships are present. The 
Invade window (similar to the Colonize Form window) will open. Enter the number 
oftransports you wish to use as storm troopers for each valid planet and then press 
Done. Invasion takes place tmmediately. 
Conquered planets are important both in terms of the additional RP production and 
the Victory points awarded. To keep hold of a conquered planet, a gamson equal in 
size to at least half the population is required. That garrison then acts as PDBs in 
defense of the planet. If the garrison is not large enough you will see the rebellion 
marker in the star system display and the planet will suffer a loss ofPDBs due to 
guerilla activity. Iffor any reason the PDB garrison is reduced to zero the population 
has successfully rebelled and the planet rejoins its original empire. 
Transports built on a conquered planet are identical to your own transports. 
5. VICTORY CONDITIONS 
Each player's performance throughout the game is assessed by the accumulation 
of victory pOints. There are four categories for which victory pOints are awarded, 
namely colony development, starship battles, planetary conquest and colony 
14 
destruction. Appendix A details the exact point awards. The computer keeps a 
running total of the VPs awarded to each player and this total may be reviewed by 
calling up the victory point display. 
At the end of every game, the computer will break in with the final compilation of 
VPs and declare the winner. You have the option of continuing the game which will 
extend itforanother 100 turns. This means the game could be extended indefmitely 
for those of you with a desire to try and colonize every planet. 
Overwhelming Victory occurs if, at any time, one player's VP total is greater than 
all other players combined (Ifvariablevictory conditions are in effect this means the 
true VP totals, not the displayed ones). 
6. SAVING GAMES 
Games maybe easily saved to any disk using the standard file saving system, stmply 
select Save As ... from the File menu, fill in the name you Wish to save the game 
under, and follow the instructions in the window. 
Ifthe game has been previously saved or was loaded from disk you may also pick 
the Save option from the menu which automatically saves the game to its file 
without asking any questions. 
Loading a saved game is just as simple. Select Restore Game ... from the file menu. 
This may be done either from the start up screen or while another game is in 
progress. A dialogue box appears with instructions. The game will return to the 
same tum in which it was saved, allow any human players who had not finished 
their turns to enter orders and then proceed as normal. 
7. THE MENU BAR 
Cal. Control 
Full Map. This item will open the strategiC map. It indicates your colonies as solid 
markers and other stars as open markers. It also indicates the presence of ships in 
the correct corner of the marker for the owning player, starting with player one at 
top left and then moving clockwise through to plaYer four at bottom left (The same 
order as used for displaying icons on the space screen and locating combat reports 
in the combat display). 
Auto Explore. Upon choosing this item all currently unassigned scout ships will 
be placed into individual task forces and given an unexplored star as a destination. 
The auto explore feature is then disabled until your next tum. The choices made 
are, as usual, not permanent. You may go to the newly created task forces and alter 
their destinations or reform them if you wish. 
15 

(b). Status 
Victory Conditions. This will open the victory point display. It shows the VPs 
accumulated by each player for each of the four categories and the total of these. 
It also shows the true victory pOints for your empire under the normal VP line for 
your empire. When the variable victory point rules are notin effect, the true VP total 
will be the same as the one shown. When the game ends this screen is displayed with 
all player's true victory pOints visible. 
Explored Systems. The explored systems list allows you to review all the star 
systems with details for all planets in systems that have been explored, with the 
normal visibility restrictions. 
Task Forces. A list of all unassigned ships and fanned task forces is given showing 
the number of each ship type present, their location, destination (if any) and ETA 
to that destination. 
Technology. This item shows current spending on technologies, with the RPs left 
to the next tech level. 
Options. This menu item will open the options display to show you what options 
are currently in effect and the movement and production costs in use for this game. 
Production Costs. This item shows the production costs of all elements in the 
game. 
Movement Points. Shows the movement pOints of all ships in the game. 
(el. Production 
Advice. This enters the computer's figures for what it would produce this this turn. 
You can easily edit this, so it is recommended that you check this from time to time 
when you are still learning the game, especially in the early game turns. 
Next Planet/Previous Planet. Moves you forward or back along the list of planets 
for which you have production. 
End Production. Causes all your deCisions to be implemented and advances you 
to the movement phase. There is no going back, so the command is not active until 
all planets have at least been inspected. 
(d). Movement 
New Task Force. Creates a new task force entry in the Task Force Control Window. 
You may create as many empty task forces as you "Wish using this command and 
fIll in the details in the Task Force Control window. 
Next Star/Previous Star. Moves you forward or back along the list of systems at 
which you have ships. 
Reform. De-allocates the current Task Force and returns all ships to the pool. All 
Task Forces without a destination are consolidated. 
16 
} 
1 
Colonize. Brings up a colonise window which allows selection of the target planet 
and the number of colonists. lransports in a Task Force which has a destination 
other than the current system are not eligible for colonization. 
(e). End Turn 
Normal. This ends your tum and allows other players to enter their orders. Once 
this is selected you may make no further changes until next tum. 
Automatic. This item also ends the turn but before doing so the computer will give 
any production orders that seem necessary. if the prod ucHon phase is still in effect, 
and will give move orders to any unassigned ships that it feels should be moved or 
assigned to colonization. In effect you may playas a computer player by choosing 
this item Without giving any orders in your tum, or use it to take care of trivial details 
you are not concerned "With. 
o 
17 

PARTTWO 
THE GAME OPTIONS 
1. BASIC OPTIONS 
Tutorial. Selecting the tutorial option causes the random number component of the 
game to follow a predictable sequence. This means that once the game is started. 
if you perform precisely the same actions each time you will get preCisely the same 
results. The tutorial game in Chapter 3 uses this option. ]fplayingWith the Tutorial 
option on you must enter items exactly as they are listed in the example. Theresults 
of not doing so are unpredictable. 
Novas. This option allows stars to become unstable and means that a few of them 
Will probably go novain the course of a game. The risk becomes greater as the higher 
starship technologies are achieved because of their effect on the fabric of time-
space. You Will usually get some notice of the impending disaster in the star system 
display and you Will be permitted to emigrate most of your population. In addition 
there is a chance that the star's outer atmosphere Will restabilize and the star Will 
revert to normal. 
If the star does go nova all planets and ships in the system are obliterated and any 
ships dropping in from hyperspace in this system on subsequent turns will meet 
a similar fate. 
Natural Disasters. Plague, earthquakes. pollution and other natural and techno-
logical disasters can visit a planet in the course of a thousand years. At any time 
a disaster may hit a planet, damaging population. industry and environment. 
Plague may linger on a planet for two or three generations. 
When a planet has suffered from a disaster the type of disaster is indicated on the 
star system display. 
18 
Xenophobes. Xenophobes are a miasmic life form which drift in clouds from system 
to system. Their effect on all known forms of life is to cause extreme xenophobia and 
interstellar trade with such infested star systems becomes impossible; the planets 
are. in effect, interdicted. Furthermore. combat in such a system results in a battle 
frenzy of unparalleled proportions. and losses from combat are greatly increased. 
Xenophobes can not be attacked or manipulated in any way. They may be seen in 
deep space as well as in a star system, but have no effect there. 
Solar Debris. Solar debris hexes represent navigational hazards and limit faster 
than light travel. Whenever a task force enters such a hex it will end its move 
immediately and continue on next turn. 
Random Star Map. The 54 star systems Will be scattered about the galaxy. A 
challenging alternative With the advanced rules since it produces interesting 
territorial problems in conjunction With the navigation limits. 
Task Force Setup. Rather than begin the game established on a planet, each player 
begins randomly in orbit about a star With no habitable planets. The players each 
have a fleet of 4 Mark Is, 4 scouts and 60 transports, as well as 400 Global RPs that 
will become available when there路 is a colony to use them. 
Note that this option is not compatible With the Advanced Scenario option. 
Automatic Scout Movement. At the beginning of every player's move phase all 
scouts Will automatically be assigned destinations. This option can really speed up 
the game. Note that there are no scouts in the Advanced Game. 
Hidden Victory Conditions. This Will make the Victory display inaccessible until 
the game is over so everyone is in the dark as to how well they are doing. 
2. ADVANCED OPTIONS 
Enhanced Veterans. If you ever feel that the computer veteran players aren't 
presenting you with enough of a challenge try a game or two With these good 'ole 
boys. Remember. fmd them early and clobber them or you could be In for a 
resounding defeat! 
Variable Victory Conditions. The actual VPs awarded for the various goals do not 
change with this option. Rather a multiplier is introduced to allow each player to 
emphasize some goals at the cost of others. During a normal game the VPs for all 
four categories have a multiplier of two. You may change any or all of these 
multipliers as long as the total is equal to eight and no multiplier is reduced below 
one. 
When this option is selected the Victol}' Conditions button becomes active. Press 
it and then each human player selects the VP Adjust Window by pressing the button 
for their empire. 
19 

Slide the VP multipliers back and forth and you will see that you may only press 
Done when the total is eight. The computer will assign multipliers for its players 
Vlithout needing access to these windows. 
During the game a player will always see his own multipliers and true VP total on 
the Victory Condition display but must wait until the game is over to see those of 
the other players. 
The Advanced Scenario 
Selecting this option will cause a number of additions and changes to the normal 
game mechanics and options. It is recommended that you playa few games with the 
normal rules before trying these. Here are the changes. 
Armies, Each planet may now support an army, drawn from the population duIing 
prodUction. The army comes from the same pool of population as colonlsts so every 
population put in a transport will reduce those available for recruitment and vice 
versa. Up to one eighth of the population will be available for colonisation and 
recruitment. The army will appear as a value to the right of the PDB value on the 
star system display. 
Armies must be maintained but this is no longer true ofPDBs, instead 1 anny unit 
is required in order to support every 2 PDBs. 
When a planet is invaded the landing troops must now fight and defeat the local 
army in the: combat system before the planet is conquered. If successful the 
invading troops become a local garrison. 
PDBs, The maximum number of new PDBs that may be purchased dunng 
production is altered to one eighth of the planet's industry level. PDBs are not 
maintained and their production cost is fixed independent of current Ship Tech 
level. There is no maximum to the number of PDBs that may be constructed, 
provided they are supported. PDBs will fight at the current ship tech level. 
Starships. First, there are no scout vessels in the advanced rules. Next, the 
maximum number of space vessels that may be ordered during production is 
limited to one eighth of the current industry level. 
Navigation Technology. Each empire has a maximum navigation range based on 
the current navigation tech level. All players start at Nav Tech 1. This means that 
no ship can be given a destination outside of navigation range from afIiendly colony_ 
When assigning a destination to a task force stars th;3.t canno! be reached are 
highlighted, on the strategic map their names are blanked out. RPs may be allocated 
to R&D for Nav Tech just as with Ship Tech. Each new level of Nav Tech increases 
the radius from 3 to 4, then 5 and fmally 7. All computer players get a bonus of one 
hex to their navigation range at each Nav Tech level except level four. 
Industrial Technology. Each empire begins with an Ind Tech level of 1. RPs may 
be allocated to R&D for Ind Tech just as with Ship Tech. Each level of industrial 
20 
technology gives planets in the empire a bonus to their GPP (Gross Planetary 
Product). This can be very important due to the high production costs with the 
advanced rules. The bonus at each tech level is; 2 - 25%, 3 - 50%, 4 - 100%. 
Overpopulation. There is no overpopulation in the advanced scenario. At the end 
of each turn excess population are simply removed. Excess population may be 
placed in transports duIing the production phase as with the basic game but it is 
no longer an urgent problem. 
Servicing the Population. The cost of providing consumer goods to the population 
increases as the social environment gets higher. For a Soc Env of 0 to 60 the service 
cost is still only 1 RP jPopulation, for 61 to 75 it becomes 2 RP jPopulation, for 76 
to 90 it is 3 RPs and for 91 and higher it becomes 4 RPs. 
Conquered Planets. These become much harder to maintain, here are the changes. 
To hold on to a conquered planet you must maintain an army equal to at least one 
quarter of the population. You may not recnrit conquered population into this anny 
but must land more troops if you do not have sufficient for a garrison. 
The following items have their production cost doubled on conquered planets; 
Industry. PDBs, starships. social and planetaty environment, anny maintenance, 
Ship and Nav technology. 
Conquered planets may not contribute to Ind Tech R&D. 
planet Improvement. Once a planet's social and planetary environments are both 
at 80 or higher the planet's maximum population and industry both begin to 
increase. This is more likely for primary class planets and becomes less likely in 
order for secondary, tertiary and hostile planets. The ultimate maximum for 
Population and Environment is 100 , and for Industry is 200. 
Production Costs, Many of these are altered. Consult the variable production cost 
screen with the advanced rules option turned on to see the full list or consult 
Appendix A Be warned that major changes to the production costs can have a 
profound on the game. There is no interest on saved RPs in the advanced game. 
Varying the Production Costs 
Just press the button and you will be presented with a window with slide controls 
for the level ofRP expenditure for the production items. Experiment with changing 
these and record combinations that you find satisfying. 
Varying the Movement Factors 
Again, just press the button to get a window with slide controls for the different ship 
class movement allowances. Remember that the game is often limited to the speed 
of the transport vessels, so a game with I MP for transports will be very long ... and 
very interesting! 
21 

3. WINNING STRATEGIES 
Preparation 
It is useful to have a copy of the map on which to scribble notes and make plans. 
Your computer may also have a screen dump or print function. 
If playing With other humans then it is never too early to begin making treaties, 
secret or otherWise, planning double crosses and playing Machiavelli in general. 
The Basic Game 
The fIrst key to the economics of the basic game is population control. Each point 
of population produces 2 RPs but costs I RPto maintain for anet gain of I RP per 
point of population. The rate of population growth increases With Social Level and 
also With the absolute population level. Social Levelis one of the maln determinants 
ofRP production so it has to be made as high as possible. The problem is that your 
subjects respond to the good life by breeding like rabbits, leading to the disaster of 
over-population. 
The only solutions are to ship 'volunteers' off planet or to not malntaln your 
population. It is possible to create enough transports In each prodUction tum to get 
rid of excess population, however each transport costs 10 RPs, so unless your 
pioneers are actually needed for starting another colony, this procedure is wasteful 
of RPs. Your Initial colony Will stari With a population of 50 and should not be 
allowed to rise too much above this level. Some players like to keep the pop1J.\ation 
even lower. 
The act of not maintaining your population is a desperate one. The ungrateful 
populace will riot, reducing industry and social level and possibly (hopefully) killing 
some of them selves off in the process. If economic circumstances are such that you 
must deny your subjects some of the necessities oflife, keep the shortfall small. A 
large deficit could see the population go ape and the planet back in the stone age. 
Once you've sorted out your home world, it's time to deal With the rest of the 
universe. You should have had your explorers scouting out likely spots. You want 
something With a reasonable Industry and environment that is not too far away. 
Soon after starting your second colony you should think about moving to Mark II 
technology, something you should achieve around tum 20. 
In order to have the luxury of continuing to run an economy, you will need a long 
term military plan. This will depend on the type of opponent you are facing. We Will 
deSCribe the behaviour of veterans, as the others are lesser opponents. In fact 
beginners deliberately make mistakes, in order to make themselves easier to beat. 
Veterans work from a hate index. All veterans hate human players simply because 
they exist (for which you can't blame them). They also hate any player who takes 
a colony from them (very sensible) and the player coming first (quite human really). 
22 
If you are a human player, coming first, who takes a colony from a veteran, you have 
just guarantied retribution. In such circumstances. veteran computer players will 
hunt you down mercilessly. 
Conceivably you could do this to more than one computer player. This is what we 
call a high risk (or certaln death!) option. The best way to win is to come from behind. 
Sometimes the burden of choosing an opponent will be lifted from you, as an 
Invasion lIeet pays a courtesy call. Sometimes you might be left alone for a while but, 
as Clark Kent continually discovers, being inoffensive yourself is no guarantee of 
a peaceful existence. Choice of opponents is an art and depends on a number of 
factors. 
Your flrst task is to locate them. The disappearance of explorers as they are 
vaporized by real warships over a star system is one clue. As your economy 
progresses you can start sending MK Is on lone recon missions. 
These will force a real space battle and at least reveal the number of enemy ships 
before they are valiantly but Inevitably reduced to their component atoms. If there 
are no enemy warships you will get a report on the star system and interdict it, 
cutting it offfrom all GlobalRPs. (This is whyyou should always malntain a standing 
patrol over all of your planets). 
There are many other ways to flnd the enemy. The location of space battles between 
other players should always be noted, as there is almost certainly a colony there. 
Finding home planets is not diffIcult If you take Into account the start-up 
conditions. All players, computer or human, start on a system With one and only 
one planet, relatively high population and industry between 30 and 45. There are 
not many systems in the universe that will fit the bill. Simply send a Mk 1 to all of 
the candidates and observe the results. 
If the enemy is malntalning a space patrol you will still not see the planet but will 
force a battle. If you are using Auto Explore then by Tum 20 all of the galaxy should 
have been explored. The only stars not explored are probably those pulverislngyour 
scouts. This caIls for a reconnaissance in force. 
When it comes to space battles. the overwhelmingly important principle is that of 
concentration. As the range of warships increases markedly at higher technologies 
it becomes impossible to defend all paris of your empire at all times. Your opponents 
Will simply concentrate and crush your detachments. You cannot stop this. You 
must be able to respond In kind or you are doomed. 
The basic game moves very quickiy so all actions must be adjusted to the game 
length. The usual winner in a basic game against three veterans keeps out of trouble 
for as long as possible, building an economic base. He then comes from behind In 
a Withering burst, gaining enough points to leap into the lead just at the very end 
of the game. Sometimes this can be done at the expense of the weakest of the 
computer players, who may have already suffered at the hands of the others. 
23 

The Advanced Game 
The Advanced Game has a slower and more strategiC feel. The restrictions on 
movement and the higher production costs combine to make a game where pOSition 
is much more important. Moreover, the new rules for PDBs and Annies mean that 
planets can be made much more resistant to attack. 
Classic Opening. Resource points are, as always, the key to winning the game. In 
the advanced game a problem occurs as the planet's social environment climbs, 
increasing the cost for maintaining your population. As a result it is important that 
you do not spend RPs to increase the planefs social level, as it will drtft up towards 
the planetary environment anyway. Your first priority is to increase industrial tech-
nology as early as possible to level two and to maximize the planet's industry. 
After reaching the second level of induslrtal technology, increase the planetary 
environment to 85 or 90. The social environment will again climb towards this new 
level although you may choose to push it along a bit. Once both the social and 
planetary environments cross the 80 mark the planefs industrial capaci1y will 
begin to increase and you will rapidly climb out of the "resource hole". 
Note that once you start paying three or more resource pOints per population your 
inhabitants are consuming more RPs than they produce in the RP formula. 
At most, build one Mark I for initial exploration purposes. This should be delayed 
until turn ten. The cost of such a vessel whilst still struggling with your initial 
resource problems can be prohibitive. 
The Trout Variant. This variation on the Classic Opening involves eliminating your 
initial planetary army on the first production round. This means you wlIl also lose 
the twelve PDBs that the army is supporting. The advantage is that you save on the 
army's maintenance cost (four RPs apiece) at an early stage of the game, giving you 
that extra edge on initial development. It is unlikely that you will find yourself in 
need of planetary defences until turn 20 or later in the advanced game, due to the 
navigation limitation placed on space travel. 
Gilligan's Island. Once in a while you may begin a game in a star system that has 
no neighbours wlthin range for navigation technology one. Don't Panic! This is an 
excellent position from which to use the Trout Vartant with a Classic Opening, 
based on the assumption that if you can't get to them, they can't get to you. Do be 
aware of the fact that computer players, presumably through the employment of 
fiendish cybernetic technology, have a one hex bonus on all NavTech levels except 
level four. Once you have acquired the second level ofindustrtal technology, switch 
your R&D efforts to attaining navigation technology two. 
The Bell Colonisation Technique, When picklng early colonisation targets, 
conSider the fact that population becomes a drag on the economy. It is often best 
to choose a planet that has a population capaci1y of between 15 and 20 with a high 
industrial capaci1y. 
24 
A planetaIy environment as low as 35 will suffice, as long as you land with enough 
global resource points allotted to increase this to a minimum of 40, give a quick 
boost to the social environment and perhaps some initial industrtal development. 
Unless you wish to force the population or industrial capaci1y up, by going over 80 
in both social and planetary environments, do not increase the planetary environ-
ment above 59. Your social level will then remain low enough so as not to increase 
your population consumption reqUirements. 
The Picket Play, Unlike basic Reachfor the Stars there is a great emphasis on 
territory. based on navigation range and colony location. This means it is possible 
to place patrol ships in a cloud about your own territory that can detect and perhaps 
repel alien interlopers. This is achieved by placing one or two Mark I vessels about 
each star system Within range. If any aliens Wish to colomse in your region of space. 
or bUild up for an attack on one of your worlds, you are then likely to know about 
it. 
Beware, the cost in setting up your picket is minimal once you have three or four 
planets fully industrialized but setting up a picket early in the game can be 
detrimental to your economic foundation. 
A more complicated variation on this is to create patrol squadrons of around six 
ships, each squadron moving continuously around three star systems assigned to 
it. This reqUires much more administration on your part but such patrols are more 
effective when they come across enemy fleets. 
Fortress Whiley. The object of this game play is to detelTIline where your nearest 
opponents are and then colonise away from them. The planets closest to your 
opponents, initially your oldest worlds and later in the game worlds around the edge 
of your empire, become fortress planets, heavily armoured and patroIled while your 
inner worlds may be significantly free of defence spending. Thus your inner worlds 
become efficient RP producers that subsidize all your other colonisation and 
conquest efforts. 
The danger with this strategy is the potential for an alien break through when one 
of your fortress worlds is conquered, allowing a strtke into the soft intertor. Be 
prepared for this and respond qUickly ifit occurs. The premise behind this strategy 
is that the RPs saved by not fortUying all planets will allow a larger space navy to 
be built when your system is finaIly threatened. 
The Isolationist. Occasionally it is possible to avoid contact with the other players 
for a considerable time. You may then choose to "lay low" for a while, colonising and 
bUIlding up your space fleets whilst keeping an eye on the Victory points. 
There is a danger that your opponents, having found each other will generate huge 
victory points by going to war, and will quickly outdistance you, so timing and 
control is important. When playing computer opponents especially, the idea is to 
keep your own victory points from placing you in the first place position until you 
are ready to make a major push from which you hope your opponents will not have 
25 

time to recover. This will often involve knowing where your opponents have their 
best worlds and leaving them alone for some time. watching them across the gulf 
of space with envious eyes. and slowly but surely drawing your plans against them. 
ANote on Invasions. To successfully invade a planet you must have enough ships 
to survive all four stages of such a task. First you must defeat any space fleet in the 
star system. This will result in losses to your warships and transports. Secondlyyou 
must defeat the planetary defence bases. This will only involve warship loses and 
these ships are not needed after this. 
It may be an idea to hold back a few ships to ensure cover for the planet if you 
succeed. and interdict vessels if you fail. Thirdly. you must invade the planet with 
your transports and overcome the native anny. This will involve losses in the troops 
that you will need for the fmal stage. 
Once the enemy army is defeated you must have enough remaining troops to hold 
the planets population in check. 
Such a conquered colony can be hard to hold. Be prepared to send back-up 
colonists to the planet to increase the garrison because you can't conscript the 
locals. 
In general you want slightly more warships than the expected number ofPDBs and 
a number of transports greater than the defending army size plus one quarter of the 
planet"s population. 
Note, also, that to rescue your own planet from the clutches of some conquering 
space slime you will need not only to wipe out any PDBs they may have built but 
also land troops to take on their garrison (You may just bombard the planet from 
space but you are more likely to decimate your own population than damage the 
conquering garrison). 
The End Game. As that last tum approaches you may already know whether you 
have won or lost. It is only when the pOints are close that you can do much about 
the outcome. Remember, now is the time for the Isolationist to strike, beware, look 
to consolidating and holding what you have got if you are the winner, consider mad 
and ambitious schemes worthy of Ming The Merciless if you are not. 
The Long Game. 150 turns is the maximum game length that you may select when 
playingReachfor the Stars but there is no theoretical limit on the number oftums 
you may play by striking the continue game button on the last tum. Many of the 
game testers have found it enjoyable to set themselves the task of eliminating all 
opposition and colonising the entire universe. When playing agalnst computer 
opponents, if you are at least holding your own by tum 150 you will probably 
succeed in an indefinlte length game. 
When playing the Long Game the game itselfbecomes more of a lifestyle than a past-
time, one game on record having gone on for several weeks. up to a record 405 turns, 
before victory was assured. Try it... you'll love it. 
26 
4. WHO'S DONE WHAT? 
Reachfor the Stars is thefirst game published by Roger Keating and myself; back 
m the days when SSG was Just Roger and 1... and whichever of our luckless friends 
we could rope in for some help. 
Now, some fi~? years and two major revisions later, the game is still going strong. 
Th,s thlrd ed,t1on has been mulling around in our heads for nearly two years. A lot 
of thmgs have been done to make it more enjoyable than its predecessors. 
The advanced scenario is a demanding test of your ability to manage and develop 
~dyn~c economym agalax;rwhere space is at a premium, budget surpluses seem 
nnpo~s'ble to generate andyour populations grow ever more greedy as the years go 
by. It s almost arehefto bwld a few warships and embark on a Simple head-kicking 
mISSIon. 
One thing is for certain. The advanced scenario has had plenty of testing. It's 
addictive! The superior graphics ability of the larger machines and their friendlier 
interfaces make the Amiga, IIGS and Macintosh versions a delight to play. IBM users, 
especially in EGA mode, will enjoy most of these advantages. 
For Apple II and C64/128 users, the interface has been radically improved, 
speedmg up game play conSiderably. 
No matter which computer type you own, you're in for a treat. 
Some vexy talented people have worked With us on the conversions. 
Danny Stevens created the Macintosh version as well as providing the C code for 
the Amiga, IBM and IIGS versions. 
Mark Twigg created the Amiga version. 
Alan Bell created the !IGS verSion. 
Gregor Whiley had the invidious job of co-ordinating the project. 
Roger and I did the work on the Apple II and C64/128 revisions. 
Ian Trout 
Sydney 
January, 1988 
27 

APPENDIX路A 
Advanced Scenario Development Costs 
In.cl'UstriaJ Capacity" 
''J:riuls~o~ts 
MI\l"k: ~Star::;hips 
路.路路MarkIIStarships 
.. ' MatkIn Stll4"shll>S 
. Mark. IV Starshlps 
PDB::; 
~IIl(!ls. 
~YMafut. 
S()c!aj/i,eveUne, '. 
'10> . ?~t~Mt~ff~Ilvt#~I~~.<lO路 
25l\[arkIl 'f~Ch . i 
.'. 
~i();~;;. 
~() 路>~a,i,k路Ill>rr~ch;. 
路路⑩ ⑩..... 路 
.⑩. : 
. 路 ... E 
......  
.. Qo 
. i 
... oooo ............ . 
90~rk:!fViF~~h{; . 
T" 
21)d 
'.~ar.JIr~~~;路;路f;;j;/路~4&8 
51)() 
N'avlI('l'echi路 .. 路 '~i;~()() 
~~~.~T~~~; .. 5ii路 ... . !i~4:000路' 
50 
'.' Iltdusfu'feeh. ..' '!i+~OO 
..... 
路4.路路路路路路;.xiid.J~~路fui5J~hn:. 
);l:~()O 
路4i;.路~cfJ~~~i~6~UL >.+~;500 
Victory Point Awards 
C.Ql~J~IYeyel0pmen.t .... :... 
路 ⑩⑩ 路路路路.;路路 .⑩⑩ 路路路路路>! 
⑩⑩⑩⑩⑩ 路!.i!路i/;.D.0?(~;';路 
iEaqhplayeJ; receives.l VI'fore'lerY.l6.R~JlUI;iiti?n,Pll~?A~~stri,~,.;l:uF:S';路. 
'0Ir i;:ontrollednatJ,ve. planets;'I'h~se. iPorntSate; aW'~ded;路~yeIW;'ttJ.J,ti\'l.; ⑩.... 
路路路.st~lliIl.Bi!,ttles/.路路路 ........ iFiJg路!.U路!i!.;J.Jf路路!r路i;'i(f;);;;iNNi~D 
路路.onrytb,e\Vinne)'.o~a battleT(;Gi~e~.~~fOl'.d~$tr6y;ingegemY~]:liPS;; 
'I)::anspprts=.lO, Mll:Is ",4,j\1k,J1s5'$,Mk. III$5'>~~;Mk,.IV$=.~(),/ .' ." 
~Jl\net!lo/.conque~t .....  .. 路 ..⑩⑩ \t>路 ⑩⑩ U;/i.i路.路.;.;路.i>.路'路i.路}路 . :.i.: 
路.路 .. 路lDaqhplaYe'r~Qei~ys.~VF'路fq,eve!"Y4p?puJ.<l.ti0fl . ~.1l(.<:l~~~~pltsa#d? 
路路X6g;wisp;ns<.m QO)lCJllere<:l.~neIJ;l.ypli3)J,et~,.~\!~~il?Q~tsJ~垄aw~q,~ctr 
\ilVt''i'yt ... m:路 
. 
" 
. '. 
.' . 
.... 
. 
路.路.g61Q!lYDe~tk~c:~ion路.路路路 .. 路ii ........ y ⑩.⑩⑩⑩⑩⑩ 路 
... 路路 ... 路x.路i .... 路JJ)) .. ⒙封⑩ . 路; 路.r . 路.:?" 
.. ~aGI;r playell"~eive~ 4yP~. f(}r:tll(j~~!?tFQt~~:s'1~r~~rblt.ftA\/of垄J,ep~r路 
 p.o.P. ... ~<itXqniip,c;tustrYi!ndQ(lG:\i}P~g.~~SQi;t;< / .'. .. ". .' '" 
........ . 
';,-",; ',' ,,' "-;"',>" 
",:--;" j,' ',',; ': /-
' 'j > :;', 
f,,;: 
,';'i"', ,,>:":;' ,>";,ii: ":/i, , ;'>':" ;; 
28 
Colony Record Sheets 
I OWN '~m POP IND 
SOC 
1 
2 
POP IND 
SOC 
2 
3 
⑩.............................. ; .. 
\) OWN PDBs POP IND SOC 
1 
2 
3 
OWN PDBs POP IND 
SOC 
1 
2 
3 
POP IND SOC 
I 
r 
1 
1路 
2 
~~2--4-~--~--~~路路路路 
3 
3 
SOC' 
2 
2 
3 
\ 
........... . 
3 
:'< . ~ ~7j~j7====:============lli2拢搂y 
29 

, 
I 
, 
Distribution of Planet Types 
SPECTRAL 
CLASS 
PLANET TYPE (%) 
Tert. 
Planetary Characteristics 
30 
PLANETARY 
CHARAC. 
Prim. 
PLANET TYPE 
Sec. 
Tert. 
Notes 
Host. 
Host. 
31 

Notes 
32 
Battlefront is the first release of SSG's revolutionary game system. No other 
game makes giving orders so easy! No other game requires them to be so 
rightl Battlefront recreates the feel of land warfare as never before. 
presenTIng you with all the decisions of a Corps Commander, Naturally ... you 
also get all the ptoblems. 
You must deal with the supply, organisation and fatigue of your men and 
issue your combat orders. Then watch as your subordinates try valiantly to 
carry them out. Be wamedl The computer opponent is not easily fooled and 
is smart enough to toke advantage of your mistakes, 
BaHlefront comes with four complete scenarios, Saipan, Bastogne, Crete 
and stallngrad. Solttoire playing times vary from one to three hours. 
depending on scenario Ie:ngth. Taking on a humon opponent tokes a little 
longer. 
The Baffiefront Game System gives you real command. The design kit 
Included with every game allows you to vary the parameters of scenarios 
or create entirety original games. Only SSG delivers this unique form of 
military power. 
Read what the critics have said about Battlefront ... 
'Saffle/ronfis easily the finest wargame currently available for any 
computer system: Ahoyl 
"Sofflefrontis one of the most exciting new wargames. It captures the 
feel for corps-level command as few other wargames have." Compute! 
'BatlJefrontts an excellent game; fast, interesting, well..cJesigned and 
well-presented.路 Breakout. 
'More like a movie ... a simulation of World War 11 that the avid historian and the 
casual gamester can enjoy and understand.' Il Computing. 
Battles in Normandy is the much demanded sequel to Battlefront. Using the 
Battlefront Game System it covers the two months of fighting that followed the 
Allied invasion of Normandy in 1944. No seaborne invasion of this scale had -
ever been attempted before. When the Allies landed. nobody was quite 
sure what would happen. The iastthing they expected was to be pinned 
down for two months in Normandy. 
The Battlefront Game System gives you a unique opportuniiy to examine 
a part of miHtary history. Battles in Normandy contains a large colour mop 
of the entire Normandy Peninsular and eight scenarios. Those scenarios 
recreate the bottles of Omaha, Utah, Sword, Cherbourg, Carentan, 
Villers Socage, Goodwood and Epsom. Each scenario is 
accompanied by on historical article. There are suggested variations to 
each scenario, examining various military alternatives. 
Of course, our comprehensive design kit is again included. providing you 
with the tools to create scenarios and variants of your choice. 
If you liked Bott1efront... you'll be delighted with Battles in Normandy! 
In North America - ELECTRONIC ARTS 
1820 Gateway Drive, $on Mateo. CA. 94404. (415) 571-7171. 
How to Order: Visit your retailer or ca118QO..245--4525 (in CA call 800-562-1112) for Visa or Mastercard. orders. 
In Australia - STRATEGIC STUDIES GROUP 
P.O. Box261, Drummoyne. 2047, (02) 819-7199. 
How to Order: Send cheque or money order or dial direct for Bankcard, Visa or Mastercard orders. 
SSG publish a quarterly journal. Run 5, which contains extra scenarios and features for all our historical simulations. 
For more details, please write foro catalog to our Australian or American Office. 
SSG Inc., 1747 Orleans ct., Walnut Creek, CA. 94598. (415) 932~30J9 

